Welcome back.
To me, a cave is a wonderful place.
You think about especially a cave in the tropics, where you've got, you know, hot, steamy
environment outside, you've got tremendous green everywhere around, and you go inside
of this dark hole, but once you're inside, there's a large gallery open above you.
And as your eyes sort of adjust to the dark, you have this tremendous greenness outside
that cave's opening, because that's what's out there.
But inside the cave, it's cool, it's different.
I really love those places, and that kind of description really fits nowhere better
than Liangboa Cave, which is on the island of Flores, and is the site of one of the most
exciting fossil discoveries, certainly, of the past 20 years.
This fossil that was found at this site is the remains of a kind of hominin that is really
unexpected, very different from what anybody would have predicted would be found there.
It's a skeleton that stands, or that stood during its life, something like three and
a half feet tall, something like the height of Lucy's skeleton, for example.
But this skeleton is not an australopithecine, or at least it doesn't seem like it ought
to have been, because this skeleton is only around 18,000 years old.
In other words, it dates to the very recent past, in terms of our overall evolution.
It's uncharacteristic of what we would have expected of any kind of human that existed
at that time.
It's really fundamentally different.
And this skeleton, and the other remains that are found on Flores, have given rise to what
is really one of the most intense debates going on in paleoanthropology today, and that debate
is, is this skeleton representing a real ancient population that existed and was highly different
from populations of humans other places in the world?
That is to say, is it a new species of human that occurs on this island?
Or is this skeleton actually the remains of a modern human that has some sort of abnormality
in terms of its development that gave it a very different kind of anatomy than we might
have expected for an ordinary human, but that doesn't represent its own distinct species.
It represents what we would consider a pathological variant of a modern human.
That debate, is it a new species, or is it a pathological variant of the humans that
we have already?
That debate has ignited intense acrimony between scientists who are on both sides of
this.
I've been to scientific meetings where these guys stand up and yell at each other.
I mean, they really fundamentally disagree about the standards of evidence that we use
in human evolution, about the importance of one skeleton, and how relatively important
it is to find other evidence that confirms it from other skeletons, and about the role
of individual explanations versus population explanations in science.
So it's a tremendously interesting debate, because it really reflects on the way that
we approach the archaeological fossil record, the way that we use this evidence to build
hypotheses and test them.
Well, to understand why it is that an unusual kind of thing might be expected on the island
of Flores, we have to consider what the geography of this part of the world is.
Flores is an island in the Indonesian island chain.
If we look at Indonesia as it sort of trails away from Southeast Asia, well Southeast Asia
has Thailand, Burma, Vietnam, and a long peninsula that's part of the Mele Peninsula.
And then next to the Mele Peninsula is Sumatra.
That's the first of the islands in this chain.
Next to Sumatra, Java.
Next to Java is a little island, Bali, Bali Great Vacation Spot.
It's an island many people have heard of.
Las Ad Strait from Bali is the island of Lombok.
Lombok and Bali, that strait that separates them, is a deep water strait.
During the Pleistocene, whenever glaciers advanced over the northern continents, the
sea level would fall, because much of the water in the ocean was being bound up in glaciers
that were covering Asia and North America.
So as sea levels fell, the ocean in some parts of the world exposed ocean bottom that
became land, and animals and plants were able to spread across that land.
In Southeast Asia, this is one of the parts of the world where the exposure of the sea
floor was most extensive.
During parts of the Pleistocene, Sumatra was connected to Malaysia.
During parts of the Pleistocene, Java was connected to Sumatra, and Borneo, the other
large island which lies north of both of those, was connected to all of them.
All of those islands today have Afana, an animal population that's predominantly Asian
in character.
There are orangutans, an Asian variety of ape, there are gibbons, other Asian apes.
There are all kinds of Asian animals, tigers, so on, that have dispersed into these islands
and live there because they were able to move back and forth during the Pleistocene.
They're not obviously able to move back and forth today, and at many times in the past
they would have been isolated from each other.
But the fossil record of those islands and the present day record of animals in those
islands is connected to Asia.
By contrast, when we go across the strait from Bali to Lombok, now that deep water straight
was never exposed seafloor, animals couldn't just walk across it.
The only animals that could get from Bali to Lombok were animals that could swim.
If we go further east from Lombok, we cross to ultimately Komodo, another little island
and from Komodo we cross to Flores.
Flores is a large island.
It has a lot of potential for animals to colonize it and establish large populations, but it
was never connected to the Asian mainland.
Likewise, it was never connected to the Australian continent.
Australia and New Guinea at the very easternmost end of this island chain also were connected
to each other during the Pleistocene.
The land that lies today at the seafloor was exposed and connected those so that the marsupial
species of Australia, many of them found in New Guinea as well, those species could disperse
to a certain degree to the west.
But in between those provinces, the Australian province, the Asian province, are a number
of islands that were never connected by land to either of these and that have a variable
set of species that are determined by whether or not the species could swim there.
And so that area of the world, it's an area of the world that we call Wallacea, the line
that separates Bali and Lombok and that extends northwards between Borneo and Sulawesi and
ultimately to the south of the Philippines, that line has become known as Wallacea's line.
It was Alfred Russell Wallace, the contemporary of Darwin who also thought of the idea of
natural selection, who at the same time was studying intensively the fauna that occur
on these Indonesian islands.
His book, The Mele Archipelago, describes his work.
And it's this division that he noticed.
He was the first to really point it out, that division named after him today that has become
so influential in our understanding of how and why hominids might have gotten to flores.
So Wallacea's line, hugely important in terms of biogeography.
When we look at the island of flores, we have to think over what time period are we looking
at.
The time period that we're really going to cover today begins as early as a million
years ago and extends really up to the past few thousand years.
It's that time period that we're going to see that there are archaeological remains and
ultimately skeletal remains on flores.
That time period is one across which for that entire time flores was isolated.
It was never connected to any island other than Komodo.
Komodo, the island which today it shares the characteristic species, the Komodo dragon,
the largest of the monitor lizards in the world.
Well those islands in the past have shared quite a number of other species.
They have a very distinct fauna and that will come into the story of what these ancient
humans who reached this island might have been doing.
But first let's consider the skeleton itself.
What is it about this skeleton that has driven us so crazy?
When we think about the contrast between Homo and Australopithecus, contrast that really
emerged more than two million years ago in the fossil record, that contrast is one that
as we saw involved body size.
Australopithecus was small, Homo was bigger, especially Homo erectus.
It's one that involved the teeth.
Australopithecus had very large molars and premolars.
Homo has smaller molars and premolars.
And it was one that involved tool making.
We know that all species of Homo that have existed recently are tool makers and Australopithecus
is not clear the extent to which any of them made tools.
So there's a cultural difference, there's a dietary difference, there's a body size
difference.
When we look at this skeleton from Liangbois Cave, it's a skeleton called LB1.
This skeleton, it's Australopithecus-like in size, it's very short.
It's shorter than the size that would be expected for females in the smallest human populations.
So it's an outlier in terms of humans for size.
In terms of its teeth, the molars and the premolar teeth are not the size and shape
of Australopithecin teeth.
They're much more human-like.
The first molar, for example, is the largest of the three molars.
The third molar is the smallest.
That's a pattern that occurs in living people.
It's not a pattern that occurs in Homo erectus, much less Australopithecus.
The premolars, they're human-like.
They're not molar-like in the Australopithecus case.
So that's a case in which this skeleton looks sort of human-like.
If we look at its pelvis, the hip bones have a much smaller size, obviously, than the hip
bones of most living people.
But in addition to that, the hip has a projection in the front of it that's very strong, called
the anterior superior iliac spine.
That projection is distinct in Australopithecus as well.
It's not quite as distinct in living in recent people.
So here's something where it doesn't look quite human-like.
If we look up and down at skeleton, we're going to see features that, in some cases,
this looks basically like a human, except small.
In other cases, it looks sort of like some earlier kind of hominin, or it's something
else.
Because of its overall pattern of morphology, its small size, and as it turns out, it's
relatively big feet, it got a nickname really early on.
People started calling it a hobbit.
And so today, when we talk about the population that might have existed on this island, we
tend to say the hobbits.
Hobbits just like in The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien's fantasy series with the little creatures
with big feet.
That's the hobbits.
But the scientific name for this skeleton is Homo floresiensis.
And the people who found it erected this species to recognize that this might be a really distinctly
new kind of human.
Well, think about the island ecology that it lives on.
Most of the humans in the Pleistocene were living on Asia, in Europe, in Africa, in places
where they encountered sort of a similar set of species.
There were elephants.
There were large bovids, antelopes, cattle ancestors.
There were rhinoceros.
There were carnivores of various kinds.
You had sabertooths.
You had lions.
You had leopards.
And that's the familiar kind of ecology that people evolved in.
But on flores, the ecology was quite different.
There were no large carnivores at all.
There were no leopards, no lions, no sabertooths.
The largest carnivore was, in fact, the lizard, the Komodo dragon.
And so that, just to begin with, it's a very different kind of ecology.
There were elephants.
These elephants got to flores in the way that elephants have reached many islands throughout
the Pleistocene by swimming.
Elephants are excellent swimmers.
They'll cross relatively very long water crossings.
And when people initially encountered islands in many parts of the world, they found elephants
there.
There were elephants on Malta in the middle of the Mediterranean Ocean.
There were elephants in Crete.
There were elephants in roads.
There were elephants in all kinds of places.
And all of these places, the elephants were small.
When elephants get to an island, where the resources are limited because it's a small
space, and where there are no natural carnivores, so there's no predators to keep their size
up, elephants shrink.
We see this kind of phenomenon again and again.
When mammoths reach Rangel Island in the Arctic Ocean, they shrink.
When mammoths reach the Channel Islands off the coast of California, they shrink.
When elephants reach the Mediterranean Islands, they shrink.
And when mastodons, a relative of elephants, reached flores, they shrunk.
So there were these shrunken mastodons on flores, elephants that people would have encountered
when they reached the island.
There were giant storks on flores, storks that stood up to six feet tall.
This is really a unique kind of ecology.
It's something that no longer exists.
These animals that once made up the flores ecology, they're not there anymore.
So it's hard for us to reconstruct what it was like.
Today, the unique animals that are left are a giant species of rat that also probably
reached the island by swimming, the Komodo dragon, of course, and mostly import animals.
There are monkeys.
Those are imported.
There are pigs.
Those are imported.
Now, these are creatures that reached the islands because modern humans carried them
there within the recent past.
The ecology today is very different than the past.
Probably no example of how the ecology is different today than in the past is more poignant
than the example of the giant tortoise.
In the world today, giant tortoises exist in two island chains, the Galapagos Islands
off the coast of South America and Aldabra Island in the Indian Ocean.
Those two places are very widespread.
If you think about it, it's sort of a mystery.
Why would you have a very similar kind of creature in these two island chains that exist
really halfway around the world from each other?
There's a clear answer to this.
The answer is that those tortoises got there by floating.
Tortoise dispersal for these giant tortoises, they can survive for a long time floating
in the ocean.
You can imagine that this is not a winning strategy for the average tortoise.
You don't want to be carried down a river and float out to sea and expect that that's
going to work out well for you, but once in a while it does.
When the tortoise gets to an island where there aren't any tortoises, well, they're
naturally able to succeed.
Those giant tortoises are the remnants of what once was a very extensive population
of giant tortoises that existed almost everywhere in the world.
Tortises are a perfect animal for resisting predation.
They're carrying with them their protection.
The only animal that they can't resist is us, because humans will use our big tools to
bash into those shells or even more economically will just turn them over and build a fire
under them.
Tortises can't survive if people are their predators.
What we've seen in the human archaeological record is whenever humans show up somewhere
new, they kill the giant tortoises.
There are tortoises in Africa before humans evolve.
By the time humans show up, they're gone.
There are tortoises in India.
By the time humans show up, they're gone.
There are tortoises in North and South America.
Humans show up, they're gone.
There are tortoises in Australia.
Humans show up, they're gone.
The tortoises that we have left in those places are different species of much smaller tortoises,
and during the course of the late Pleistocene, as human populations grew during the last
100,000 years, the tortoises got smaller and smaller and smaller, because people were
eating the big ones.
This is such a clear case where humans have adjusted the ecology by removing species from
it.
And that's what happened on Flores.
About 900,000 years ago, the giant tortoises become extinct.
Why do they become extinct?
Because that, shortly after the time when we find the first archaeological remains on Flores.
Those archaeological remains come from the Soa Basin, which is a volcanic basin in the
center part of the island.
Those deposits that were ultimately volcanic deposits, inter-stratified with ash layers,
and then later eroded as rivers came down through them.
Those deposits have preserved artifacts that we now know date to as early as a million
years ago.
So humans got to this island a million years ago.
This is the time frame well before the Zhekuchen fossils, the Peking fossils from China.
This is when people were first reaching China.
This is not so very long after people had reached Java for the first time.
It's a time of intense dispersal.
But what's different between the dispersal to Flores and the dispersal to other parts
of the world is that in order to get to Flores, the humans had to cross water.
They had to get across the channels that separate Flores from Southeast Asia, even during low
water times.
It's not clear how they managed this dispersal.
People, archaeologists have gone back and built primitive rafts to see if they can get
across these channels.
It's possible.
It's very plausible that as sea levels were rising and falling, Homo erectus or something
like it sort of noticed that, oh, I used to be able to walk over there, but now there's
water between.
But if I had a boat, I could get across.
If there was some way for me to visit my relatives that are now across the water, it's plausible
that they would have had the ability to do this.
But the only clear demonstration that they had the ability to do it is the fact that
we find them on this island that was never connected to anywhere else.
Well, on Flores, these tools are quite primitive that we find.
They're sort of equivalent to the older one type flaking technology.
They're very simple.
In some cases, the flakes are what an archaeologist would call retouched.
That is, a flake is knocked off, and then additional very small flakes are removed to
alter that cutting edge, either to accentuate it.
In some cases, they make a kind of tool called a perforator, which has sort of a sharp point
to it that's been accentuated by additional flaking, or to straighten it.
So they are altering these things, but it's an alteration that we see broadly across East
Asia.
It's the kind of technology that is very characteristic of the eastern part of the
Asian mainland, and here it is on Flores.
That technology we know existed on Flores a million years ago.
We know that it occurs in several sites over the next few hundred thousand years.
It's not obvious how it connects to the skeletal remains that are found in a much more recent
archaeological interval.
The skeletal remains from Liangbois Cave, those skeletal remains all are less than a
hundred thousand years old.
The major skeleton, the hobbit skeleton, is only eighteen thousand years old.
There are tools in the archaeological deposits in this cave, and those tools are sort of
similar to the earlier tools on Flores.
So there's an argument to be made that there's a continuity here.
That argument, however, has to face the fact that within the past hundred thousand years,
it's certain that modern humans were already dispersing into this part of the world.
We know that it's certain because modern humans first colonize Australia before forty
thousand years ago.
They first get to the island chains of Melanesia before thirty thousand years ago.
So we know that modern humans are in this area.
They're dispersing by boat from island to island, and they're there very early in time
within the span of fifty thousand or so years ago.
Eighteen thousand years ago, when this skeleton is living, modern humans would have been nearby.
And so that raises a question.
We can't imagine that there's a population of people that wasn't in some sense encountering
modern humans.
Maybe this is a modern human.
There's some evidence on the skeleton to indicate that it might be a pathological specimen
in some way.
For example, when we look at its skull and we look at the right side and the left side,
they're a little different from each other.
Now it's normal for humans to have differences right to left, but in this case, those differences
are a little more extreme than we might otherwise expect.
It could be that some of them are because it was buried in the ground and distorted,
but that kind of asymmetry has pointed many anthropologists to the possibility that it's
developing in a strange way.
There are other kinds of developmental, what we might call oddities.
For example, one of the premolars, it's instead of coming in straight, it's rotated.
The tibias, the lower limb bones, are a little bit curved.
The muscle attachments on some of the bones are a little bit strange.
When you look at those and fit them into a pattern, what you'd say is, well, it's not
a typical skeleton.
It's not exactly what you'd expect, but does it push you over the edge?
The one aspect of this skeleton that makes it so very strange is the size of its brain.
Its brain, in comparison to the brains of you and I, which are, on average, something
like 1,300 cubic centimeters, the brain of this skeleton is under 420 cubic centimeters.
It's a very, very small brain.
It's more like a chimpanzee in size than it is like a human.
It's within the size range of Australopithecus.
That's really the thing that has driven people crazy about it, because what you've got on
this island is a skeleton that looks odd in many ways, but most prominently, it has this
very small brain.
How does a skeleton end up with a brain that's a third the size of the brain of a living
person?
Well, one possibility is pathology, that there's a developmental disorder called microcephaly,
one that would make its brain small because it had an abnormal development curve.
That's the explanation that's favored by a number of anthropologists.
They look at it and say, well, if we look at the endocast inside of this skull, the inner
skull surface, it looks a little strange compared to a modern human.
But other people who've studied the endocast look at this and say, well, yeah, it's small,
but it's basically the same shape as the endocast of Homo erectus, except smaller.
What we're looking at is an individual that represents a population that has shrunken
in size, a population that once had larger brains, but in the course of shrinking has
gotten much smaller brains.
Looking at the skeleton in that way, it becomes very difficult to say that there's any kind
of developmental disorder that occurs in living people now that could explain all of the characteristics
of this skeleton.
That's by itself not so odd because every pathology that's as extensive in its effects
on the skeleton is going to manifest somewhat differently in every individual.
When we look at a stone age type individual who wasn't living the lifespan or the kind
of childhood that anybody would get today, that means that there are very much more possibilities
for things to develop in what might be a very idiosyncratic, a very odd kind of way.
But at the same time, many of the features that this skeleton has actually do seem to
match earlier kinds of hominins.
For example, the upper arm bone, the humerus of this skeleton, the humerus has a head which
attaches it to the shoulder joint.
The head usually is rotated about 90 degrees from the shaft, but in this skeleton, it's
not rotated quite as much.
It has what we call a humeral torsion, and that's a characteristic that it shares with
some fossil skeletons.
For example, the naryocotomy skeleton, the Homo erectus skeleton from East Africa has
this same pattern.
When we look at the wrist bones of this skeleton, now in evolutionary, in human evolution, we
don't focus on the wrist too terribly much, but there are differences in the wrist between
humans and apes.
And those differences emerged sometime after OH7, the type specimen of Homo habilis which
remember had a wrist in the rest of its hand.
It has an ape-like wrist morphology in some respects.
That morphology is shared by the LB1 skeleton, by the hobbits.
It's not shared with living humans.
And so when we look at these kinds of features and say that, well, it looks like some earlier
kind of hominin, it doesn't look like a human in those respects, it lends credence to the
possibility that what we've got going on is Homo erectus, some earlier kind of hominin
reaching this island a million years ago, existing there for a long time, and over the
course of time, just like the elephants did, shrinking in size.
The only remaining problem is explaining the extent of this shrinking.
Can you shrink in body size by roughly half, and in brain size by much more?
This is a real fundamental problem.
You see, the brain and the body are related by a regular pattern of allometry.
That's the pattern of size difference.
As you scale in size, brain size scales at a different rate.
Human pygmies are the smallest of today's human populations.
They're sometimes about two-thirds of the mass of people in other populations, reduced
by a lot.
But their brains are not two-thirds the size.
Their brains reduce less as things become smaller and smaller, that smallness is more
expressed in the size of the body than it is in the size of the brain.
For the hobbit, what it looks like is that the size of the brain has reduced more than
the size of the body.
Now there are other skeletal remains from flores.
There is another second small jaw that's about the same size as the hobbit's jaw.
There is another small tibia and a small radius, the lower arm bone.
We know that this was a small population because we've got multiple small individuals.
What we don't have is multiple small brains.
And so that's really what has become the key aspect of this debate.
Is it possible for brain size to have reduced much more than we expect?
Everybody agrees that we could have a very small population.
But could you have a small population that had evolved this distinctive pattern of brain
size?
Well if not, what's the other alternative?
We've got to derive it from some earlier kind of hominin.
It could be that hominins reached Africa, reached Asia much earlier than we would have
expected and were actually Australopithecines when they got there.
And so Australopithecines got to this island.
But that seems unlikely.
First, we've never found an Australopithecine outside of Africa yet.
And second, the anatomy of this skeleton isn't really a perfect match for Australopithecus.
There are many more human-like aspects of it.
The Domenici hominins, the first known people outside of Africa, are relatively smaller
bodied than many of the African fossils.
So it could be that the early dispersing population was a little bit smaller.
It doesn't explain how the brain could have shrunk disproportionately, but it does give
us that kind of angle on why it has the size that it does.
If you ask me about this, I really haven't decided what I think about it.
I mean, I would really like to see more evidence.
I'd like to see a second brain because that possibility of pathology is just hanging out
there.
But if we think about why the brain would shrink, there are logical reasons for it.
The brain is an expensive organ.
It's using a lot of protein.
It's using a lot of development time.
And if you're on an island where resources are easier to get because predators aren't
competing with you, it's plausible to me that the brain would reduce disproportionately
in size.
What remains to be demonstrated is whether that actually happened, whether this particular
island was the right context for humans to become something that's quite different.
Twelve thousand years ago, the archaeological record on Flores begins to change.
After that point, we have no more evidence of the hobbits.
We have a clear change in the archaeology.
This seems to be around the time, 12,000 and 10,000 years ago, that modern humans drive
whatever was there to extinction.
And so the legacy of these people is gone.
We haven't yet recovered any DNA that would tell us clearly what their relationship to
us might be.
But it does give us a really good clue about the kind of potential that humans might have
had as they dispersed into new environments to adapt in really surprising ways.
