Rock de Marceau is a cave situated high up at the base of a cliff overlooking the Vizier
Valley in southern France.
It's a really scenic spot.
It's exactly the place that you might have expected a Neanderthal who lived 75,000 years
ago to hang out at the entrance of the cave, looking at the valley floor below, watching
out for game animals so that he could get his next meal.
And that's what it seems that Neanderthals were doing there.
They did it there for tens of thousands of years.
And in this cave was accumulated a very dense strata of stone tools, the bones of animals
that the Neanderthals were hunting, and ash from their fires.
And at the base of the cave, at the very bottom, in almost what seems to have been a natural
pit, was the skeleton of a three-year-old child, one of the earliest known burials in
the human paleontological record.
So it's a hugely important site.
This site, outside of Laise-Z, France, it's the capital of prehistory because of the number
of Paleolithic sites that are around it.
We'll see it again in a later lecture as the place where many of the painted caves are
found in later time periods.
But the Neanderthals were active in this valley tens of thousands of years earlier than the
people who painted caves.
And they were living there, leaving their refuse, their animal bone remains from meals
that they'd eaten, their fires, their stone tools, and archaeologists have been finding
them now for more than 150 years.
Roctemarsal was dug by an amateur archaeologist, Jean-Lafey, who worked there for dozens of
years.
And in 1961, he found the child skeleton at the base of the site.
Later archaeologists, including Harold Dibble and Shannon McFerrin, returned to the site,
laid out the stratigraphy in greater detail, and began to apply more sophisticated methods
to understand this place.
When we have a place like Roctemarsal, with what apparently are jumbles of bones and rocks,
stone tools, and the chips left by the people who made stone tools, ashes from fires, dirt
that had come in, rocks falling from the top of the cave, when you have a place like this,
how do you make sense of it?
How do you straighten out when and where people lived there, and what they were doing when
they were leaving those things in the cave?
That's the job of archaeology.
And this lecture is about the way that we interpret the archaeological record.
In particular, as applied to the Neanderthals, there has been, and especially in the 1970s,
a very focused debate about the nature of interpretation of the archaeological remains.
This debate was most notably between two of the giant figures in the field, Francois
Borde, the French prehistorian, who was the master of all of these sites, and laid out
in great detail the relationships of the stone tool industries in different sites throughout
southern France.
And Louis Binford, the American, who at the time of this debate was young, brash, headstrong.
He attracted many followers, but also acquired lots of detractors.
That debate, really about the fundamental nature of the archaeological record, was between
two sides.
Borde, who was the mature prehistorian, wanted to interpret stone tools as evidence of ancient
cultures.
He believed that when he found different sets of artifacts, he was finding information about
the cultures of people that had existed in the past, and that different cultures of people
were leaving different kinds of stone tools.
On the other hand, Binford argued that the assumption that these are different cultures
is just an assumption, and that there's another scenario that's equally likely, that these
different stone tool assemblages were left by people who were doing different activities,
so that the stone tools were information about why and how people were using sites, not necessarily
about the cultures that they lived in.
So the board Binford debate, a really fundamental aspect of the history of archaeology.
When we look at the stone tool record, we're looking into the distant past, and in the
realm of stone tools, we can think about things that are relatively recent.
Those things are called neolithic, and neolithic dates to something like 5,000 years ago, up
to about 3,000 years ago in Europe.
That time period is a time period of early agriculture.
People are farming.
They're making stone implements, but those stone implements are ground so that they have
a polished edge.
Before the neolithic is the mesolithic.
Neo means new, meso means middle.
The mesolithic is characterized by tiny little artifacts called microliths, and these microliths,
which means tiny stones, were set into more complicated artifacts.
They made almost like a cutting edge when you set them into a wooden handle.
Going further back is the paleolithic, paleolithic old stone age.
All of the archaeological record that we've referred to so far in the course and in today's
lecture is in the paleolithic.
The paleolithic is divided itself into different stages because it encompasses so much of the
history.
The mesolithic from 5,000 or 6,000 years ago back to about 10,000, paleolithic goes from
10,000 years ago back to the dawn of stone tool manufacture, 2.6 million years ago.
It's a long enough time that it's really heterogeneous.
There are different things going on in different stages of that time.
So we have divisions within the paleolithic.
Lower paleolithic is the first of those divisions, 2.6 million years ago, the earliest known stone
tools up to around 300,000 years ago.
That early element of the paleolithic is devoted to relatively simple tools, simple tools like
the oldewan tools where we have core tools and flakes and those are used primarily for
cutting or for bashing into bone.
Or in the later stages, the ashulean.
We saw the ashulean in the lecture about the Movias line.
Ashulean includes core tools that are more finely shaped, that are bifacially flaked,
the handaxe or the cleaver.
So all of those industries called lower paleolithic.
Upper paleolithic, the latest part of the old stone age, well, upper paleolithic tools
really occur within the last 30,000 to 40,000 years.
And the upper paleolithic itself is a time of great sophistication of stone tool manufacture.
People aren't grinding tools and making polished edges, but they are using very sophisticated
manufacturing methods to make finely crafted tools.
Some of those tools are so finely crafted that they look almost like works of art.
When you look at a salutrian leaf point, this is from about 20,000 years ago in Western
Europe, France and Spain.
And they're points that are sort of shaped like a laurel leaf, but quite large and finely
flaked around the entire edge.
They're so nicely made that it's almost hard to imagine some of them could have been used.
But they were used, and they were used as points on spears and other kinds of artifacts.
Well if upper paleolithic tools are very finely crafted and lower paleolithic tools are very
crude in many respects, you might expect that middle paleolithic is somewhere in between,
and it is.
And in between in the context of these stone tools means something interesting.
When we look at upper paleolithic tools, we're looking at things where people have made them
to a shape, and they intended that.
We get that to some extent with the lower paleolithic, hand axes for example, but in
the upper paleolithic they're making many, many different types of things.
In the middle paleolithic, by contrast, they're beginning to make these many different types
of things, and those types sort of grade into each other.
You might get the picture that when we look at these definitions of the time periods, those
definitions are themselves based on archaeologists' ability to identify these types.
And that's exactly right.
The initial categorization of these things, neolithic, mesolithic, lower middle, upper,
that initial categorization was based on archaeologists learning and recognizing different
types of artifacts, types of artifacts like points, and scrapers, and blades, things that
were made in a different way, and that apparently had a different sort of purpose, but might
also have meant something different to the minds of the people who are making them.
The board-binford debate is really about the middle paleolithic, and specifically it's
about the type of the middle paleolithic found in France and Europe broadly called the musterian.
The musterian is the stone tool industry made by most of the Neanderthals, but it's not
just in the Neanderthal industry.
Musterian people included some of the early modern humans who are found in West Asia.
The early modern humans from school in Kaffsa, for example, were making musterian artifacts.
Other kinds of musterian artifacts are found in North Africa and are found as far to the
east as India.
So musterian as a kind of tool industry is spread over a broad space.
Musterians also spread over a relatively broad time.
The earliest musterian assemblages are somewhere over 120,000 years old, the youngest as recent
as 30,000 years ago.
So they span across the time period of the Neanderthals, but some Neanderthals are making
other kinds of industries, and some modern humans are making musterian industries.
What makes something musterian?
When we look at musterian tool assemblages, the initial definition was from a site.
A site called Le Moustier, a site just on the outskirts of Lays-A-Z in southern France.
Like many tool industries, the name of this comes from the initial place where archaeologists
found it and characterized it.
So when we say musterian, we're really saying that we're looking at tools that are in the
style of Le Moustier.
The stone tool artifacts that are made by Neanderthals, who were living there 50,000
years ago.
But musterian is much broader.
We find it all over the place.
And when we call something musterian, what we mean is that it has a large frequency of
points, and this is one of the first stone tool industries that's really point dominated.
You're looking at points that are meant to go on the end of spears, that are meant to
be hafted on so that you've got a weapon that has a stone point on it, and scrapers.
Now scrapers are flint artifacts or stone artifacts that have a long, sharp edge.
That long, sharp edge can be on what appears to be the side of the flake.
If it's on the side, we call that a side scraper.
Or it could be on one end of the flake so that the thing almost looks like sort of a
chisel or something, that we call an end scraper.
Or it could be a sharp edge that goes right around, partly on one side, partly on the
other side, sometimes called those convergent scrapers.
So when we see these scrapers, we have a pretty good picture of what they're used for.
They're meant to be held in a hand and to make a scraping motion, for example, like
you would make for cutting meat off of a piece of bone or cutting flesh off of a hide.
Scrapers, points, tools that are made on flakes, not especially core tools.
That's the basis of the musterian.
It was Francois Bourd who took up the topic of what makes different assemblages of musterian
tools different from each other.
It had been recognized for a long time that sometimes you saw these points and scrapers
and lots of flake tools in one kind of assemblage, and sometimes you saw them added to other
kinds of stuff.
And Bourd got really interested in this.
Sometimes you find scrapers along with hand axes.
It seems like the technology is sort of the same, but the mix of different tool types
is a little different.
Sometimes you find these along with other kinds of artifacts.
And so Bourd set upon finding out how and why these different groups of tools were different
from each other.
There were some old ideas about this.
For example, one idea was that if you find a musterian with hand axes in it, that's probably
close to the Ashulean because the Ashulean has hand axes.
And so if you look at the progression of tool manufacture, you might believe that it had
evolved from one early stone industry, Ashulean, hand axe dominated, to a slightly more sophisticated
musterian with Ashulean influences.
This became called the musterian of Ashulean tradition.
Bourd looked at this somewhat differently.
You're going to see that he quantified the differences between these stone tool assemblages,
but then he thought very deeply about whether this evolutionary scenario could explain them.
Bourd is an interesting character.
He was in the French resistance during World War II, so he really showed a lot of heroism
before entering the field of prehistory.
But as a prehistorian, he also developed a hobby of writing novels.
He wrote novels under a pen name, Francis Karsak.
Karsak is a small village near this area where the stone tool industries that he studied are
found.
Karsak isn't super well known as a novelist in most of the world, but did become rather
popular in Russia, so you can find Karsak novels translated into different languages.
Bourd thought about these stone tools differently from anybody had thought about them before.
He thought that the way that we should study an assemblage of these musterian tools was
to divide it up into all of the recognizable types of artifacts that were in it.
So he would go to an assemblage of thousands of tools that had been excavated from a site
and he would see if he could figure out what types were there.
This is a point, this is a triangular point, here's a side scraper, here's a end scraper,
here's a convergent end scraper, and in all he had 63 different types that he felt like
he could recognize.
And what Bourd would do is to plot how many tools of each type he found, and he would
make out of this a sort of a curve, and the curve represented the types of the different
artifacts that he found and the proportions that he found in a site.
The shape of that curve gave him a way to compare different assemblages with each other
in terms of the tools that were represented.
So when we look at an artifact tradition like the musterian of Ashulean tradition, the MTA,
it has its own distinctive frequencies of the different kinds of artifacts.
And if we sort of lump them together, we can see that it's got something like 8 to as much
as 40% hand axes.
So if you're digging in a musterian site and you've got a lot of musterian artifacts
and a lot of those are hand axes, you say, wow, these are MTA.
This is a musterian of Ashulean tradition.
It's TA because it's tradition, Ashulean in French.
But within that, there's also 20 to 40% side scrapers.
There are 10 to 15% tools that have sort of a serrated edge, like a tooth-like edge.
And those are called denticulate tools.
So that characteristic mix of tools characterizes an industry.
By contrast, Bord was able to show that some levels in some sites didn't have the hand
axes and didn't have a kind of artifact called a backed knife.
A backed knife is a stone flake that has a sharp edge on one side that's just one edge.
And on the other edge, it's been chipped away so that it's not sharp on the opposite side
from what we would call the blade, so that you could put your hand on the back of it
and not cut yourself.
So this backed knife, it's a very distinctive kind of artifact.
The typical musterian, as he called it, didn't have those.
There was a kind of musterian assemblage called denticulate musterian, which, as you might
guess, had 40% or 50% denticulate tools, those toothy ones.
And what Bord saw is that these could really be differentiated from each other.
You would have a site and you'd have a bunch of denticulates in the layer.
And wow, this is denticulate musterian.
But then above that layer, at the same site, you might have a very different kind of assemblage.
You might, for example, have an assemblage that was really dominated by side scrapers
that had rounded edges, convex edges, all the way around, and a very distinctive kind
of chipping on the edge, retouch, an archaeologist would call it, retouch that overlapped like
fish scales.
That kind of assemblage, he said, this is at first the site of Laquina, is where he found
it, so he called it quina musterian.
And you would go through sites like this and you would have levels that actually had different
kinds of tools.
For Bord, he had to explain why you would have these different types of tools mixed into
sites this way, a level of one thing, a level of another thing.
An obvious explanation would be the evolutionary explanation, that we had started out with
archaeolean, and then you got musterian of archaeolean tradition, and then you went to
more complicated or different kinds of things as you went through the site.
But what Bord was able to show is that there were sites where you'd have typical musterian
at the bottom, and then musterian of archaeolean tradition next, and then denticulate musterian,
and then typical musterian again, and then MTA again, so that they were interleaved with
each other.
That didn't make any sense if these were evolving one thing from another.
Now Bord adopted another scenario, the scenario that these were really different groups of
people that had interacted and had occupied these sites at different times, so that what
you were looking at when you looked at a site like this was the record of all of the people
who lived there and their cultures.
One aspect of musterian tools that's very interesting from the standpoint of developing
our technology and thinking about the way that humans adapted is a unique form of tool
manufacture that they used called the Levelois technique.
A Levelois technique uses a core, a piece of rock, and then removes flakes from that rock
in a distinctive way to make a shape that's very standardized.
That shape is itself not a tool, it looks like a rock that has a standardized shape.
But what it has on one end of it is a striking platform, a place where if you hit it in the
right way, you will knock off a very distinctively shaped flake.
That flake's called a Levelois flake, and a Levelois flake is easily recognizable because
on one side of it it's got scars where the core was prepared, and on the other side it's
perfectly smooth, except insofar as the surface of the stone has been shaped by the impact.
So you've got this very recognizable kind of artifact in musterian assemblages, but
Board noticed that it was different in frequency in different musterian assemblages.
And Board puzzled over this, why should it be that you have a lot of Levelois in one place
and less of it in another place when the things are otherwise sort of similar?
This was a topic that was taken up by the man who became Board's big debate partner,
Louis Binford.
Louis Binford was an American, and as he learned prehistory, he started thinking very much
in lines of how do you bring the archaeological record and invoke within it a scene of what
people were doing, the anthropology of the people as they were interacting with those
artifacts and leaving them on the landscape.
In a very famous article, Binford uses an Eskimo-derived analogy, says the Eskimo have
a name, a way of saying what their way of life is.
It's all willow smoke and dog's tails.
Willow smoke, because when they're in camp, they have fires and the smoke of willow branches
is around, but when they're moving from one place to another, they're looking at the backs
of their dogs, so they see the dog's tails.
For Binford, that was a really powerful sort of analogy, because when you think about hunting
and gathering peoples moving widely over the landscape, but setting up camp once in a while,
you start thinking about the different ways that they're using the area that they're in.
They'll have places where they're only there for maybe a couple of hours, and the artifacts
that they leave are the one thing that they were doing when they were there, so you've
got some sort of trace of what they were doing.
And then you've got other places where they camped, and they might have been for a long
time, and you have the traces of many kinds of behavior gathered together.
It was Binford's goal to try to integrate these different activities and separate them,
so you could tell what different kinds of activities were going on.
He called his study of the archaeological record Middle Range Theory.
The idea was that you were going to find out what lay in between the artifacts that you
find and the people who'd made them.
Well, Binford had an alternate explanation for what Bored had found in terms of the frequencies
of tools and the different types of artifacts.
For Binford, he was interested in looking at these artifact types and seeing which ones
occurred together.
When he looked at Bored's records of which things are found where, he evaluated, Binford
evaluated which tools are found coincident with each other, and he found that some kinds
of scrapers were found a lot of the time with points.
For Binford, the interpretation was that these were likely places where men were working
and hunting and working directly with the animals that they got, so that you have a
work area that was devoted around the activities related to meat acquisition, whereas other
parts of the archaeological record would have different balances of artifacts, other kinds
of scrapers associated with tools with points on the end that were used for graving into
bone and other kinds of artifacts.
For Binford, this is probably a site that has other kinds of activities going on, maybe
a campsite where many different kinds of people are doing lots of things.
So Binford tried to explain the different types of musterion as different faces that
are related to different functions.
The debate between Bored and Binford, which went on for several years in sparring publications,
one side and the other side, that debate was hugely formative to the way that archaeologists
think about the archaeological record.
What's going on when you have different kinds of artifacts?
Can you take those as a record of what the people were doing?
Or do you have to filter in your knowledge that those people might have different information
at hand?
They might be making things in a different way.
Over the course of the subsequent 40 years, archaeologists have become more and more sophisticated.
One of the means of sophistication is studying not only the stone tools, but also the animal
bones themselves, a process called zooarchaeology, study the archaeology of the animals that
are left by the hunters and the Neanderthals in this case.
One way of looking at zooarchaeology is to work out the ages of the animals that the
Neanderthals, in this case, were hunting.
A really cool observation that we can make about Neanderthal sites is that they're hunting
prime age animals, reindeer, horses, bison, that are mature adults, not the real old,
not the real young.
That tells us a lot about the way that their activities must have been structured.
When we find that, we know that they're deliberately involved in meat acquisition.
Another way of looking at things is to look at the process of tool manufacture itself,
to think about the different ways that tools are related to other tools.
One of the leaders in this field has been Harold Dibble.
Dibble had the idea that when you looked at a musterian assemblage, many of the different
artifact types are actually the same kind of thing in different stages of its lifespan.
Because people use a tool and it gets worn out, it becomes dull, it's not useful anymore,
and so then they'll resharpen it, which means that they'll remove more stone from it, which,
if they remove it on one end more than the other, or make it thinner, will make it into
a different kind of artifact according to Board's classification.
You could really look at the 63 different types of artifacts and actually sort them
down into a number of things that begin as one thing and gradually get smaller and smaller
and smaller.
Dibble used the analogy of a pencil, which begins real long and then you sharpen it and
it gets shorter and shorter so that when you're looking at different pencils of different
lengths, you're looking at the same thing, even though they visually look quite different
from each other.
That kind of analysis is called a reduction sequence analysis, and many archaeologists
today take it even more broadly, going from the place where they first find the stone
and the activities that people are engaged in when they're quarrying out the stone or
gathering it together to the initial stages of reduction, making blanks that they can
then process further into different kinds of artifacts.
They call this, in French, the chien opératoire, or what we might say the entire way of working
with a stone tool industry.
It turns out that when you begin with a blank of a certain kind, you really, really tend
to end up with a similar kind of artifact at the end.
And this is something that Board recognized.
He said when you start to make a side scraper on a thick flake, odds are you're going to
end up with a Chiena-type tool.
That is to say that it's the initial starting point that makes a big difference to how your
finished tool ends up.
And when we integrate the information that these stone tools themselves vary because
people reduce them further with more and more intensity, then suddenly you have a picture
that different kinds of sites are actually recording things like the availability of
raw materials.
How easy was it to get the flint to the place?
And if flint's less available, the amount to which people will continue to work with
the worn out tools that they have at hand.
So that kind of analysis, looking at the entire process of reduction, looking at the animal
bones that accompany the site, has really increased the sophistication of archaeology.
Thinking to Roctemarsal and thinking about the way that all of those stones and bones
and ash layers are accumulated and deposited, you really get a detailed picture of the different
groups of people that would have lived there.
Sometimes you've got really clear evidence of different groups.
For example, Roctemarsal has some layers where ash is very thick and where we have evidence
of hearths, the fires themselves that were laid there by the Neanderthals.
But in a denticulate musterian layer, there are no ash or hearths at all.
And so you know that something was going on differently at this site.
There really were different groups of people that had different kinds of activities that
they were doing.
Modern archaeologists have really come in some ways to a view that's very similar to
boards.
We are able to look at the cultures of people that existed, but we do so by taking a very
skeptical view of the science, looking at the science in a very binferty way.
And that is really the lesson of this debate.
When we think about the ways that archaeologists really sharpened their arguments by this interaction,
it led to more developments in the science and a greater sophistication of our understanding
of Neanderthal behavior.
