Welcome back.
As you've seen in some other lectures, we're often in the position where paleoanthropologists
would like very much to be able to study the origin of some kind of human characteristic,
but the fossil record just doesn't cooperate.
There is no human characteristic that is as central to our understanding of how humans
interact with each other than language, and yet language is a behavior that doesn't fossilize.
We can't tell before the invention of writing anything about what other people may have
talked to each other about, and what's most troubling about it from the perspective of
a paleontologist is that when we look at the skeleton, there is almost no sign at all of
any of the structures that are related to language in what we can see externally.
Well, that problem, we want to understand the origin of language, something that's so human
distinctive, something that other kinds of primates just don't have, but at the same time
we have almost no skeletal evidence that's going to help us do it.
That has given rise to a very long debate in this history of paleoanthropology.
To illustrate where we're going, I think the subject of the lecture, did Neanderthals
speak, really encompasses the question.
Here's a group of people who lived a relatively short time ago, only a few tens of thousands
of years since the last of them lived on the earth.
And yet, there is a gulf between us in terms of the record that they left and what we know
that living people are capable of.
And so the question is, is that gulf explained by the interactions of those people with each
other?
When we look at these people, Neanderthals, who lived so recently, could we really be
looking at people who interacted with each other in a fundamentally different way than
we do?
Should we be looking at people who didn't have the kind of language that we use today?
The archaeological record gives us a few clues.
When we look at the sites that Neanderthals occupied, sometimes we find things that would
seem puzzling if they didn't have some sort of aesthetic, some sort of cultural sense.
For example, on coastal sites, we've found a couple of places in Spain where Neanderthals
were accumulating shells from the seashore.
But it wasn't just any shells, they were particularly shells that had been drilled at the corner
by a marine organism, a kind of snail that's a predator of clams.
They drilled those holes naturally.
So the Neanderthals weren't drilling them, but they were accumulating the ones that had
the holes in them and taking them back to their cave where we find them.
We know that they were accumulating them deliberately because when we look at the beach, it's not
just a random assortment of shells that the Neanderthals got, it's the shells that consistently
have these holes in them.
So they're doing something.
In some sense, communicating in some way by using materials.
We find things that have been altered by the Neanderthals by having pigment added to them,
and that tells us that they were communicating in a visual way with each other.
We find the evidence of the crayons that they used, crayons made of natural mineral that
they used to color on things.
So now that the Neanderthals were sophisticated in many ways, that they were in some sense
communicative organisms, but did they have language in the form that we have it?
This from the standpoint of archaeology is sort of an insoluble question.
So to frame the debate, we can look at this question and say, here's ancient people that
we can look at their behavior, we can look at their anatomy.
They still can't tell for sure whether they could talk.
Was talking something that emerged early in our evolution, that gave rise to the kind
of archaeological complexity that we're seeing in the Neanderthals and other early humans?
Or is language something that occurred very late in our evolution?
Something that makes modern humans really different from our ancient ancestors?
Something that may have been essential to our success as a modern population, but that
separates us from earlier humans?
Studying language by studying skeletons was really the only way to try to do it until
the very recent past.
And the master of studying the skeleton and trying to determine hints about our evolution
and language evolution from it was Philip Lieberman.
Philip Lieberman looked at fossil crania and tried to interpret the base of the skull
in terms of how it would relate to the anatomy of the throat.
If you think about your skull and how it's attached to your body, obviously language,
we use our throat to do it.
Our larynx is positioned in such a way that we can control it in a fine manner.
It has a chamber above it that we can alter the shape of to make different sounds.
And it's separated from our esophagus in such a way that it's easier for us to continually
make language and keep that separated from our swallowing and breathing processes.
So that's a real change that happened in our evolution, but it's a change that doesn't
involve the spine and doesn't involve most of the skull in any particular way.
And yet those are the only bony parts that we're likely to have access to.
So Lieberman spent much of his career trying to figure out how the anatomy of the throat
might relate to the base of the skull.
The tendons and ligaments that connect the muscles and structures of the throat to the
skull might give clues about the way that this was formed.
For Lieberman, this came down to a question of the angulation of the base of the skull.
When you look at a human skull today, our brain case is quite large and it's above
our face.
Our face is low and it's tucked underneath our skull.
That change is different from most earlier kinds of humans.
As we've seen, many early humans have long, low brow ridges and faces that are actually
in front of the brain case to a substantial extent because the brow ridge is hoisting
it up in front.
If you've got a face that's in front, that means that the angulation of the base of the
skull is going to be relatively shallow so that your skull is making a shallow angle
underneath it.
If on the other hand you have, as most of us do, a face that's tucked in underneath
the skull, then you have a more sharp angle underneath the brain case.
And so that angulation has the potential to inform us about the relationship of the skull,
the brain, and the face.
What Lieberman realized was that it might also tell you about the shape of the throat
because if you have a face that's tucked in underneath your brain case, then your mouth
is relatively backward in your skull and that means that your throat has to have more of
an angle to it.
If your throat is angled, then the larynx has to be low in order to accommodate the
angulation.
So if the position of the larynx is connected to the position of the base of the skull,
that'll tell you something about the language capacities, or at least the speech abilities
of the hominins that had those skulls.
Lieberman interpreted those skulls and believed that when he looked at Neanderthal skulls,
they had a shallow angle and therefore had more ape-like speech patterns and humans would
have had more obviously human-like speech patterns.
Now apes don't talk.
Their larynx is positioned in such a way that it actually gives them greater flexibility
in terms of swallowing and breathing, but less flexibility in terms of vocalization.
So in Lieberman's point of view, the Neanderthals weren't capable of language because they didn't
have the structures that would produce language in the throat.
That was where matters stood for a very long time.
The throat is not the ideal source of evidence about language, because although it's quite
true that chimpanzees and other kinds of primates can't produce the kinds of vocalizations
that we do, the vocalization part of this is not necessarily the most essential element.
After all, there are many people today who communicate really well without talking at
all.
And if we imagine that there was a possible gestural origin of language that integrated
our ability to use our hands and our ability to make vocal communication, it's very clear
what the essential organ is to making speech.
It's not the throat.
It's the brain.
But as we've seen already, interpreting the structure of the brain is very difficult.
Ralph Holloway, studying the ER-1470 skull, noticed that Broca's area was more prominent
than that skull on the left side, and that was a hint that language abilities might have
been changing as early as Homo habilis.
But that's really the only thing that we have from the brain, a hint, at least in terms
of anatomy.
But nowadays we have genetics, and we can learn quite a bit about the structure of speech
in the brain by studying the genes that are involved in brain development.
The most important of those genes, as we now know it, is a gene called FoxP2.
Now, FoxP2 has nothing to do with the foxes, the animal.
Fox is short in genetic terms for a forkhead box, and it has to do with the way that this
gene, its product, interacts with DNA.
It binds to DNA and helps to regulate the action of other genes during development.
FoxP2 is active during the development of the brain, and in particular the development
of the speech areas of the left side of the brain.
That gene has been shown in some living people to be essential for speech in the respect
that people who have a mutated version of the gene who don't make the normal gene product
have trouble speaking.
So it's a gene that we know is connected to speech because of its effect in some living
people, in rare people who have mutated versions of it.
But what's most interesting about this gene from the evolutionary perspective is that
humans have two changes in this gene that aren't present in any other kinds of mammals.
In fact, this gene, just like many genes that are related to the development of the body
and the brain, is very conserved in the evolution of mammals.
These mammals have precisely the same sequence, presumably because changes to that sequence
are generally bad and natural selection takes them out.
There are some species that have variations in this gene.
For example, bats are a group of species that can have variations in FoxP2.
That's a very interesting comparison because bats, of course, are using vocalizations
in their navigation abilities.
They're using them to get around in the dark.
The idea that there's an integration between hearing and brain processing that involves
this gene, it's very interesting when we consider humans and our communication abilities.
Well, as I mentioned, we have two changes to this gene that aren't in other mammals.
They're not in chimpanzees.
They're not in other primates.
Those two changes, therefore, look like they should be really interesting.
It turns out that these same two changes are also present in the genomes of Neanderthals.
We actually know that Neanderthals share with us this change, which might very well be the
best change that we know of in the brain that's related to language.
It's a hint in favor of the idea that whatever changes humans have that start to underlie
language are changes that Neanderthals share with us.
Looking at the speech apparatus and the hearing apparatus has really taken strides in the
last several years.
That's because the fossil record has developed to a point, and our technology for getting
more information out of fossils has developed to the point where we can actually study things
that I would never have guessed that we would find in the fossil record.
The most obvious of those things is a tiny bone in the throat called the hyoid bone.
The hyoid bone is not connected by bone to your skull, and it's not connected by bone
to your jaw, and it's not connected by bone to your chest.
It's floating in the tissues of your throat.
It's an essential support.
It supports the ligaments that keep your larynx in the right place, and so it's really important.
It helps to reflect the shape of the throat, but because it's a small, thin bone, because
it's not normally connected to the rest of the skeleton, it is incredibly rare to find
this in any kind of fossil context.
I can tell you that it's very rare to find hyoid bones when we're looking at recent
archaeological remains of people.
People who have their entire skeleton buried and the rest of the skeleton is preserved
often don't find the hyoid bone.
It's just that difficult.
So what's really, really important is that over the past several years, we've recovered
several hyoid bones from fossil hominins of different kinds.
One of those comes from a child's skeleton of Australopithecus operensis.
This skeleton, from a site in Ethiopia called Dikika, this skeleton represents a child of
something like two or three years of age.
That child had a well-preserved spine and throat area and had a well-preserved hyoid
bone in the throat.
This hyoid bone is not very much like the hyoid bones of recent people.
It is quite a bit like the hyoid bones of chimpanzees and gorillas.
To understand why, you have to sort of envision the shape of this bone.
The hyoid, because it is sort of like a sling supporting the anatomy of the throat, it's
shaped like a U. It has two branches that attach to ligaments that connect to the skull and
the mandible, and it has a central part that fits around the front of the throat.
That anatomy in humans is very simplified.
So you're looking at basically a simple U, but in some other kinds of primates, including
most apes, it has a thickening in the central part, and that thickening has clear signs that
it's there to support air sacs that exist in the throat.
You see, those kinds of primates use a resonation that comes from air sacs to give them greater
volume, higher pitch to their vocalizations.
That adaptation is not something that we share.
In other kinds of primates, it can be very extreme.
For example, howler monkeys, who live in South America, have hyoid bones that look like large
cup-shaped structures because they're supporting an immense amount of air sac and resonation
because they have very long-distance communications.
Gibbons also use very large air sacs to have calls that extend over long distances.
Chimpanzees and gorillas are less so than those primates, but they're still quite distinct
compared to humans.
The dikeka hyoid bone, the hyoid bone of Australopithecus afarensis, was ape-like in this respect.
When we look at the throat of afarensis, we can say that that throat appears to have been
adapted to make vocalizations that were chimpanzee-like, not especially human-like.
Later in the fossil record, we have some hyoid bones also.
We have, right now, three hyoid bones that come from our genus, Homo.
Two of those come from the site of adipuerca, the cema de los huesos, the pit of the bones.
A place where there are thousands and thousands of fragmentary bones of humans, well, a couple
of those bones are pieces of hyoid bones.
They contrast with the anatomy of the hyoid bone in the dikeka skeleton.
Unlike that earlier Australopithecine skeleton, these human skeletons from around 600,000
years ago have a very simplified hyoid bone that doesn't look like it was supporting air
sacs.
It has a human-like anatomy, in other words.
By the time we get into this example of early Homo, which was living within 600,000 years
ago, so not necessarily the earliest Homo, but certainly long before Neanderthals, we're
looking at a human-like speech apparatus, at least with respect to the position of the
larynx and the shape of the throat.
That's such an important find.
It supplements something that we already knew from Neanderthals, which is that the one hyoid
bone that we had in the fossil record up until 10 years ago was a hyoid bone that came from
a Neanderthal that lived in Israel about 50,000 or 60,000 years ago.
That hyoid bone from a skeleton at a site called Kibara, that hyoid bone was also human-like
in its anatomy.
When it's one hyoid bone, you look at it and you say, wow, I'm not sure if I really know.
But when you've got multiple hyoid bones and you've got a clear contrast between our genus,
as we understand it, and Australopithecus, it's very clear that something happened to
make this change, and that something is probably related to vocal communication.
We can't say on the basis of the throat that these guys were talking in the same way that
we do, but it does seem likely that they were at least starting to communicate with their
speech in a way that was similar to the way that we do it.
Well the other aspect of the vocal auditory channel, the channel that we use for speaking
and listening, is the ear.
And studying ears in the fossil record is not so simple.
The structures in the ear that are relevant for language are structures that lie inside
of the temporal bone in a part that anatomists call the petrus portion of the temporal bone.
Petrus is Latin for rock.
The reason why we call this the petrus portion is because this is one of the hardest bones
in the body.
It's hard.
It encases the apparatus of hearing, and that means that if you want to study the tiny
middle ear bones that actually conduct sound from the outside to the inside, and if you
want to study the cochlea and the structures that actually receive the sound and transduce
sound waves into electrical impulses that go through your nerves, if you want to study
those things, you've got to find a way to get inside of a petrus bone.
And that is something that with fossils we haven't been able to do until very recently.
Well nowadays we can scan inside of the temporal bone using micro CT scanners, and we can reconstruct
the shape of the middle ear bones.
And so to explain how we've learned about this, I have to give you a little bit of information
about the anatomy of these, right?
Inside of your ear there's an eardrum.
That eardrum is a flexible membrane that vibrates when sound waves come into your ear canal.
That vibration is channeled through three separate tiny bones.
These tiny bones, the Malleus, the Incas, and the Stapes, this Latin for the hammer,
the anvil, and the stirrup.
And that's generally speaking the shape of these things, that's why they're named that.
But each of them is very, very tiny.
The shape of those bones, in conjunction with the connections between them and the soft
tissue that ultimately channels those into the oval window of the cochlea of the inner
ear, the shape of those bones is an amplifier.
It's taking sound waves from the vibrations of the eardrum and channeling those into the
cochlea.
Once those sound waves enter the cochlea, the cochlea has a spiral fluid-filled chamber,
and that fluid moves a little bit.
And inside of that fluid-filled chamber are a pair of membranes.
One of those membranes, the basilar membrane, encases a number of cells that are called
hair cells.
Those hair cells have tiny structures on top that connect with the other membrane, the
other membrane called the tectorial membrane.
It's the movement of the fluid that sort of shakes those membranes relative to each other.
It flexes the tiny structures on the tops of the hair cells.
And that makes tiny electrical impulses that are conducted into nerves that ultimately
go into the auditory processing in your brain.
That's the process of hearing.
It's a process that involves an anatomical element of sound waves being channeled as
vibrations through bones, and that involves ultimately an electrical component.
You've got movement that cells are translating into nerve impulses.
You've got to have the entire system working right in order to get sound waves where they're
going.
Well, as you can imagine, with any kind of amplification device, you could tune it in
different ways.
And it turns out that the human ear is tuned slightly differently than chimpanzee ears
are.
If we give chimpanzee's hearing tests, you should imagine the difficulty of training
chimpanzees to do the standard hearing test, where you're putting tones in and you're
going to get the chimpanzee to respond accurately.
Well, we can do it.
Chimpanzees can be trained to do this, and in fact, they've been trained to do this
since the 1930s.
And it was realized very early on that chimpanzees can hear higher frequencies than the ordinary
human can hear.
We think about human frequency response going down to about zero at something like 20,000
Hertz.
So the very highest pitch sounds that we can hear are sounds that have a frequency of
20,000 or so.
This varies with age in humans, it gets a little lower as you get older, and also varies
among people.
Some people hear higher sounds than others.
But the sounds that have incredibly high pitches in dog whistle areas, this is something
that humans don't typically hear.
But chimpanzees can.
They can hear higher frequencies than we do.
It's because their hair cells and their middle ear bones are tuned slightly differently than
ours are.
They're channeling those frequencies differently.
In contrast to the highest frequencies, in middle frequencies, the frequencies that are
around 2,000 to 8,000 Hertz, humans do substantially better in hearing response than chimpanzees
do.
These are the frequencies that human ears are tuned for these kinds of frequencies in
a greater way than chimpanzee ears are.
Those are the frequencies that humans use to differentiate speech sounds from each other.
We think about the channel that's constituted by speech.
Of course, we're making all kinds of minor sounds as we're talking.
Some of those sounds, like s's, involve incredibly high frequency sounds.
You've got to hear the highest frequencies to get that accurately.
But a's, s's, o's, o's, those are differentiated by their role in the middle frequencies.
If we want to tell human speech and interpret it accurately, we've got to have a very good
frequency response in that area.
Well, it turns out that when we study the middle ear bones of the adipuerca fossils,
those fossils from Spain, which are 600,000 years old, put the temporal bones into a scanner
and find out the morphology of the middle ear bones, well, you can take that morphology
and you can make a computer model of it and you can figure out what kinds of sounds will
be transmitted effectively by them.
It turns out that in contrast to chimpanzee-like middle ear bones, the adipuerca middle ear
bones are better able to conduct those middle frequency sounds.
The amplifier in the ears of early Homo was made for telling apart speech sounds.
It wasn't quite as good at it as the average human in terms of where the frequency response
seems to be, but it was much more human-like in this pattern than any chimpanzees are now.
So that's evidence in favor of the idea that both speech and sound response, hearing, are
evolving in parallel.
But we actually have genetic evidence of this as well.
When we think about the hair cells in the inner ear, those hair cells, we understand
a lot about the genetics of them.
The reason why is that any kind of mutation that makes those hair cells stop working properly
is a mutation that is going to cause some form of hearing loss or deafness, and identifying
the genes involved in hearing loss and deafness has been a real priority for medical science.
So we know a lot about the inheritable causes of deafness, and every gene, and there are
more than 100 of them, that can affect this is a candidate to look at if we're going
to compare humans and chimpanzees because some of those genes might well be different
between these species and might correlate with our hearing abilities.
It turns out that the intimate structures involved in those hair cells are affected
by genes that actually do differ between humans and chimpanzees.
One of the most interesting of those genes is a gene called alpha-tecturin.
Alpha-tecturin, if you have a broken version of this, you're deaf because the tectorial
membrane, the membrane that lies on top of the hair cells and interacts with them to
make the sound transduced, that membrane doesn't form right if you don't have a working version
of alpha-tecturin, and so the system doesn't work because the hair cells aren't receiving
their input.
Alpha-tecturin has 17 changes between chimpanzees and humans.
Most of those changes have occurred on the human lineage, so it's a case where this gene
appears to have been evolving relatively rapidly in our evolution.
Does that mean that we can definitely say that there's a functional change here?
It's a really, really good candidate for it.
We don't know yet what the key change might have been in this gene, but it's not alone.
There are a number of other genes that have been evolving in the human lineage involved
in this hair cell response.
Neanderthals, I've been comparing their genome with ours, and Neanderthals have the human
version of this gene with just one exception.
So it's a case where most of the changes in this system were definitely occurring earlier
in our evolution than our divergence from Neanderthals.
Neanderthals seem to have had the right equipment in the ears and the right equipment in the
throat to manage speech.
FoxP2 gives us a clue that they also may have had some of the right equipment in the brain
to manage speech.
Put those things together, it starts to seem like Neanderthals should have been talking.
So this is a case that is really interesting in our study of paleoanthropology because
we've got a system that actually, in functional terms, we understand really, really well.
We know how speech is made, and we know how speech is interpreted, at least at the ear
level.
The brain remains a real problem.
And so the outstanding issues about language are not, could earlier humans have used some
sort of speech to communicate with each other.
The outstanding issues are, was their speech as resolved?
Was their speech as complex?
Could they make sentences that conveyed as much information as we can?
In other words, could their brains construct speech and decipher it in a way that allowed
as much information to be communicated as we do today?
My opinion about this is probably that they were not as adapted at this as we are.
They probably couldn't do it quite as well because why should we imagine that they would
be identical to us?
This process must have evolved over time.
But the kinds of differences between them and us are differences that I think that we could
probably bridge across if we were in the same room as them.
Learning a Neanderthal language would be something that humans today could probably have done.
Vice versa, learning the elements at least, learning to become a basic speaker of human
languages today is probably something that Neanderthals could have done.
The differences between us, such as they might have existed, probably differences of degree
and not differences of kind.
