Welcome back. Charles Darwin held in his hands a Neanderthal skull. When I think about that,
I just think it's amazing that the primary evidence for our evolution was unearthed at
just almost exactly the same time that the primary architect of the theory of evolution
was thinking of his ideas. But he wasn't thinking about humans when he was detailing the way
that different organisms were related to each other. It wasn't until much later in
his writing that he really took up the topic of human evolution. Nevertheless, those early
fossil evidences of early humans were being unearthed and being publicized and being spread
around Europe and people realized that there was something genuinely ancient that was going
on in Europe that was outside of the ordinary when it came to what they understood about
human variability. The Neanderthals were the first example where people were able to look
into the fossil record and say, this is something that doesn't exist anymore and yet it's related
to us. And so the Neanderthals really create a problem, a problem of explanation. If we
have this kind of ancient human that isn't here anymore and we can't look around us and
find any evidence that there's anybody who looks like that, well, what happened to them?
Did they become extinct in the distant past? Was this somebody who lived before a time
when the current kind of humans had existed in the world at all or at least before the
time when the current inhabitants of Europe had entered that continent? Is it something
that's old that's been replaced? Or was there a transformation? Is this a kind of ancient
human that we once were like and since that time we've changed to become more like the
modern type of people that we are? That's been a basic debate since the very beginnings
of paleoanthropology. The first fossil hominids known were the Neanderthals. We have today
still more evidence about them than we have about any other kind of ancient archaic human.
This question has remained with us consistently. Did these Neanderthals survive? Did they contribute
to our population? Are we their descendants or are they extinct? Are they a population
that doesn't exist anymore, had no offspring, no living descendants and we came from somewhere
else? It may be hard to sort of envision the depth of this debate and I've tried to
put it into context by showing that it is really the first debate of paleoanthropology
but I like the Neanderthals. I love studying them. I like going to the places where we
have evidence of them. As somebody who has a real sympathy for what their challenges
were and what their lifestyle was, I look at them and I say, what's the problem? Why
shouldn't we accept that we could have some input from this ancient population, this population
that was so ingenious in some respects but that was overcome by many challenges throughout
their lives? What's the problem with Neanderthals? But when we think about the way that Neanderthals
have been depicted, the way that they stand in for a representation of what it means to
be not modern, what it means to be primitive, what it means to be a lower kind of human,
they've really stood in for many of the biases and prejudices that humans have about each
other today. Neanderthal is the only word from paleoanthropology that has entered the
English language and that people are likely to know and what does it mean? It doesn't
mean intellectual. Neanderthal means somebody that you don't want to be, somebody that's
an evolutionary throwback and people really have a stereotype about what these ancient
people are like. In some sense, it's a harmless stereotype because if you're calling Neanderthals
something terrible, then you're not calling your neighbors something terrible. But in
other respects, it does shape the way that we conceive of our evolution. If we were simpler
in the past, if we were different in the past, but we've changed since then or we've replaced
the things that were different and simpler, then that says something about where we've
come as a species. And so our ideas of progress, which are very much tied into our notion
of how evolution happens, they're tied together with the Neanderthals. Well, Neanderthals
existed in Europe from around 200,000 years ago up to the very latest Neanderthals who
lived about 30,000 years ago. So in the context of our evolution, this is really the final
end of it. This is the last kind of archaic human to exist before the appearance of more
modern looking people throughout the world. That time period is a period of really rapid
change, change in climate terms and change in human biological terms. Humans were inventing
new technologies throughout this period. They were spreading into areas of the world where
they hadn't lived before. And the Neanderthals are the last of the archaic looking humans
that are known to have survived. The very last of them, found in Spain and in Croatia
at around 30,000 years ago, that's the last of a pre-modern type of human. And so when
we look at them, we have to consider very carefully. They would have been encountering what we
now would call more modern looking people, people who had anatomies that were much more
like living Europeans, people who don't have brow ridges like the Neanderthals had, people
who have much higher, more rounded brain cases, people who don't have the skeletal proportions
that Neanderthals had. And so when we think about how to compare them and later people,
we really have to lay out what are the anatomies that we're looking at, and can we find any
sign from an anatomical perspective that this population, the Neanderthals, had contributed
anything to the later people who followed them? Well, Neanderthals are a sample of ancient
humans for which we have vastly more specimens than for any other population of ancient people.
When I think of a site like Krapina, Krapina is in Croatia. It's a site that dates to the
last interglacial, the last time the world was warm as it is right now, the ice had receded.
Krapina is about 120,000 years old. It was a rock shelter, and in the rock shelter were
buried at least a dozen and probably more than 20 individuals. Those individuals' bones
were broken up into little pieces. Some of the parts of the skeleton we have a tremendous
representation of. Others we have relatively few of. There's only a couple of femoral fragments,
a couple of fragments of thigh bone, but there's lots of pieces of crania, there's lots of
mandibular fragments. We understand a lot about the anatomy and variation in the Neanderthal
population because of sites like this. We also, for Neanderthals, have a number of relatively
complete skeletons because Neanderthals did something that earlier humans had never done.
Neanderthals buried their dead, and so we can find evidence of entire skeletons that are
laid out where we have great preservation of most of the skeletal elements. That gives
us the ability to look at their adaptations in a much more sophisticated way. For example,
when we look at the crania, we find that their skulls have a number of features that are
distinct compared to living humans. I've mentioned the brow ridge, but what's maybe more distinctive
because lots of ancient humans have brow ridges is the projection on the back of the skull
called the occipital bun. That projection is not a thickening of the bone, it's actually
a place where the skull is inflated outwards, giving it a very different shape. If we look
at a Neanderthal skull from the top, it has sort of a teardrop shape. It's wider at the
back, a little narrower at the front, but very rounded around the back contour. Likewise,
if we look at it from behind, it has a very circular outline. We call that a barrel shape
because its maximum breadth, the point where it's widest, is right halfway up. A modern
human skull is wider as we go higher, so it's angling outwards towards the top before it
arches back together. Neanderthal skulls have a number of other distinctive characteristics.
For example, their mastoid processes, this piece of bone that's right behind the ear,
and if you sort of feel behind your ear, that bone that you feel, that's part of the mastoid
process. Their mastoid processes were short, and that indicates something different about
the attachment of the muscles of the neck, which are attaching to the base of the skull
at that point. Even more so than the skull, their climatic adaptation, their adaptation
to where they lived, which really influences the way that they were able to adapt to the
European climate, that adaptation is evident in their skeleton. When we look at their bones
of the legs and of the arms, what we discover is that those bones are thick. They have thick
bone around their surfaces and they're curved. The ends of the bones, the parts that attach
for the thigh bone to the hip and to the knee, the ends of the bones are very broad, so that
Neanderthals were putting a lot of force through those bones. The force that they're putting
through means that their activity level was very high, but the proportions of those bones,
the fact that their legs are relatively short, that their shin bones are short relative to
their thigh bones, that their lower arms are short relative to their upper arms, those
are all indicative of an adaptation to cold. Europe was the coldest place at their time
that humans were living, and so Neanderthals were adapting to this climate by changing their
body proportions. In all these ways, they looked like they were specialized, and specialization,
as we've heard in a couple of lectures, is an argument in favor of the idea that they
had evolved in their own independent direction. If humans today lack those specializations,
if we don't have these special characteristics that Neanderthals were using, either to adapt
themselves to the cold, or to adapt themselves to their activity pattern, or the cranial
characteristics, which might be useful for them in various ways, but there are certainly
things that we don't have anymore. If we look at those characteristics and say that this
is evidence that they had their own evolutionary direction, then that's a fairly compelling
argument that we don't have a lot of genetic input from them, and that's an argument that
a lot of people have put a lot of credit in. Really, the first person who set out the idea
that Neanderthals are going to be quite different from us in an evolutionary sense was Ernst
Heckel. Heckel, we've seen before, he had the theory that humans had originated in
Lemuria, and had spread through the rest of the world from there. He was a German contemporary
of Darwin, and he had his own evolutionary ideas, very Darwinian in mechanism, but with
different implications for the pattern of our evolution. Heckel laid out a scheme in
which the Neanderthals were related to us. He called them homostupidus, and when we think
about stereotypes of Neanderthals, they're there right from the very beginning, right
after they're found. Heckel was out in front on this issue. The people who had found the
first Neanderthal skeleton to be recognized at Feltover Cave in Germany in 1856, when
they found the skull and described it. Rudolf Virchow, who was the most famous doctor in
Germany at the time, examined the skeleton and said, this isn't a genuine ancient kind
of human, this is a diseased person. He had very much the same attitude that many anthropologists
today look at homophoresiensis, the hobbits from Flores, a singular specimen, it's outside
the norm, they look at it and say, might be strange. Virchow looked at Neanderthals the
same way, but there were others, including Heckel, including Gustav Schwalbe, who was
a famous theorist from Germany looking at the possible relations of Neanderthals with
us. Schwalbe laid out two schemes, a scheme in which the Neanderthals were our ancestors,
and a scheme in which the Neanderthals had branched off from us and had their own evolutionary
trajectory. That laid the groundwork for our consideration of the Neanderthals ever since
that day. It's one scenario or the other, and which depends on how you interpret the
evidence.
Well to look at Neanderthals' relationships to us, one of the most fruitful places we
could look is the people who followed the Neanderthals in Europe, the people who got
there as the Neanderthals were disappearing. Those people we call the early upper Paleolithic
people of Europe. They first occur in Eastern and Central Europe, the earliest site where
we have dated modern human remains in Europe today is in Romania. It's about 35 to 36,000
years ago. At Mladic, in the Czech Republic, there's a series of fossils that were unearthed
in the early 20th century that date to over 30,000 years ago. So this is a very early
sample of early modern humans. The Mladic sample was one of the most tragic cases in
Paleoanthropology. We saw how the Peking Man fossils had been lost at the outset of
World War II. The Mladic fossils were also lost. They were among the pillaged pieces
of cultural artifacts in history that the Nazis had taken from across Central Europe.
They had stashed many of these things, famous paintings, masterworks, lots and lots of really
expensive antiques, and the Mladic fossils. They stashed them in the Mikolov Castle. At
the end of the war, the Mikolov Castle burned. All of that stuff was lost, including most
of the Mladic specimens. But we have good descriptions of Mladic, and we have some surviving specimens.
They were studied by a number of anthropologists, including my friend Dave Freyer. They went
looking at Mladic for evidence that what we were looking at was possibly Neanderthal mixture
with these fossils. You see, some of the Mladic specimens have Neanderthal-looking characteristics.
One of the skulls has an occipital bun from the back of the skull. Some of them have brow
ridges that look almost complete, almost going out to the outer edge of the orbit. When you
look at those crania, and you think they're the earliest representatives of modern humans
that we have samples of in Europe, and they're the most like Neanderthals, there's a real
argument there that this is a sample that is reflecting genetic input from Neanderthals.
That was Freyer's argument, and that's an argument that's been made by other people
over the years. Dave did one thing that is maybe a little more sophisticated than you
might have expected. He looked at features where they're not really big, overall arching
features that are real obvious to the eye. They're things that are very small, very subtle,
but that are represented in many fragments of bones, so that they constitute a bigger
sample for us. He looked in particular at a feature called the mandibular foramen. If
we look at the inside, it's the mouth side of the jaw bone, there's going up where the
jaw comes to connect with the rest of the skull. That's called the ramus of the mandible.
There's a hole on the inside of it. That hole accommodates an artery, and a vein, and a
nerve. If you go to the dentist and have worked on on your lower teeth, they're likely to
take an anesthetic shot and put it right at that point so that it didn't the nerve.
This mandibular foramen in most people is shaped like a very long groove, but in some
neanderthals there's a bridge of bone that goes across that groove, and that bridge happens
in about a half of the neanderthal sample. Well, that bridge is very, very rare today.
It's found in fewer than 2% of living Europeans, but in the first people who followed the neanderthals
in Europe, the early upper paleolithic people, that occurs at a frequency of about 18%. So
it's a case where these early modern humans seem to have the genetic input that is a signature
of maybe neanderthal contribution. Well, today we have a much more direct source
of evidence about neanderthal relationships with us. We have genetic material from neanderthals,
and to explain how genes are extracted from these ancient fossils, it helps to go through
a little bit of the technology and how we understand this as the field has unfolded.
Neanderthals lived across a broad range, including Europe, including parts of West Asia. There's
a very famous site in Iraq, which is a neanderthal site, Shenadar, and there are a couple of
sites in Central Asia where specimens have been found that aren't morphologically real
complete and so people questioned whether they're neanderthals or not. One of the first
things that people did when they started extracting DNA was to start testing individual fossils
to see if they could find evidence that these things really were neanderthals. And so they
extracted bone powder from fossils from Europe. These skeletal remains that still preserve
the organic material, bone powder contains DNA, and with the right chemical steps and
with the right kind of purification, you can reconstruct parts of that DNA. The first target
of reconstruction was a part of the DNA called the mitochondrial DNA. The mitochondrial
DNA, it's important to us if we think about genealogy, because mitochondrial DNA is a
special part that exists outside of the nucleus of each cell. A cell has a nucleus that contains
most of the DNA in chromosomes, our 23 pairs of chromosomes, they all reside there. And
that's most of our DNA, 23 pairs of chromosomes has 3 billion base pairs repeated twice, so
6 billion base pairs of DNA in every cell. The mitochondrion is a little organelle that
exists outside of the nucleus of the cell that has its own little loop of DNA. And that
little loop is only 16,000 base pairs, it's very tiny compared to what most of your genome
is. But that tiny loop mutates more quickly than most of our DNA, and it's only inherited
from the mother, because mitochondria in the sperm are ejected when a conception happens,
and the only mitochondria that you have were in the egg that you were conceived with. So
mitochondrial DNA is genealogically unique. That gives it a couple of useful characteristics.
One is it's much more distinctive. The other is that it can reflect some evolutionary events
more quickly than others. And so comparing the mitochondrial DNA of humans and Neanderthals,
we found that there were lots and lots of differences between us. So much so that all
living people today share one basic type of mitochondria compared to Neanderthals, and
all of the Neanderthals that we have sampled share a different type. Those two types, based
on a molecular clock, look like they diverged from each other sometime before 400,000 years
ago. And so when we look at today's humans, and look for evidence that any of us have
this Neanderthal type of mitochondrial DNA, it's just not there. And that, starting in
the late 1990s, extending through most of the first decade of this century, that was
such an important observation. Because Neanderthals, if they had survived, you would expect that
their DNA would survive at least in some small fraction. You would at least expect to find
a few people who carried this Neanderthal mitochondrial variant. In fact, after sampling
thousands and thousands and thousands of living people, nobody was found that had this. So
this seemed like, A, really convincing evidence that the Neanderthals were extinct, and B,
a really good way to look at fossils and identify whether they're Neanderthal or not, because
if they carry this type, they're relatives of the Neanderthals. Well, some of us, considering
the skeletal evidence, which seemed to show some evidence of genetic input from Neanderthals,
yet faced with the mitochondrial evidence, showing that it didn't look like we had any
of their genes at all, said, well, is there any way to resolve this problem? And what
we turned to was the idea that different genes, of course, have different functions. And when
populations mix with each other, they don't necessarily inherit all of the genes that
would have come from both of the ancestors. For some parts of their genome, they might
get it for one, but from other parts of their genome, they might get it from the other.
We see this situation in nature quite frequently. When species of animals or populations of
animals mixed with each other, the mixture isn't a perfect blending of the two. Sometimes
one gene will over-dominate over the genes from another population, whereas for a different
gene locus, you'll see the other population having more of an effect. That kind of population
mixture is one way that we might have looked at Neanderthals and said, well, we really
need to sample the rest of their genome. Well, in 2010, we got a sample of the rest of the
Neanderthal genome. That sample came from one exceptional bone and a number of other
bone fragments from a site called Vindia. Vindia is in Croatia, and it is, to my mind,
the most perfect site where fossil humans have ever been found. This site, it's beautiful,
green landscape outside. This part of Europe, it's very much like the driftless area, the
hills of southeastern Wisconsin, where I've lived many years. That area is so pretty and
this cave is so arching and so cool. There are strawberries that grow outside of it.
I just think it's just a wonderful place. Vindia produced a number of human skeletal
remains, but the most important of them wasn't recognized at the time that it was found.
It was a little piece of a shin bone that was broken and irregular, and the excavators
threw it in a box with the animal bones. They didn't recognize it as being human. It was
Tim White, the man whose team found the original Ardipithecus skeleton, who was going through
the collection of Vindia looking for evidences of bones that had been missed, and he found
this one and he said, I think this is a human bone. DNA extraction from this bone turned
out to be the most successful DNA extraction from any of the Neanderthals that had ever
been attempted. This little piece of bone that was almost lost and ignored, that has
no evidence of Neanderthal anatomy on it at all, is today the most important evidence
that we have about Neanderthal evolution. It's such a great irony that when we look
at the fossil and skeletal record, we can't always predict where the most important observations
will happen. Whenever we deal with ancient bone and try to get DNA out of it, we have
to understand that ancient bones have been in the ground for tens of thousands of years.
The DNA is broken into little tiny parts and this would not be possible at all if it weren't
for the human genome project and the follow-ons that have added to our knowledge of our genetic
map. Because the way that we can reconstruct a genome today is by sequencing every little
piece of DNA and then using computers to figure out their location on the genetic map. With
the genetic map, we're able to reconstruct a genome by building it out of tiny parts.
We're also able to sort out the human elements, the ones that are similar to the human genome,
the ones that aren't human-ish at all. You think about an ancient skeleton, it's full
of fungus and bacteria, things that are growing in the soil, and the worst of all is the contamination
that's happened as people dug it out of the ground. That contamination adds long pieces
of human DNA. Today, we can be very successful sorting these things apart, taking the genuinely
small fragments that have come from the bone, sorting them out from the fungus, the bacterial
DNA, the potential other contaminants, and the human contaminants. This process has advanced
tremendously in technological terms. In the initial finds, there was a high contamination
rate, but in today's Neanderthal genome, there's a contamination rate that's running
less than a quarter of a percent. It's just an amazing technological feat to be able to
automatically sort these tiny fragments of DNA. When we look at the overall Neanderthal
genome, the three billion base pairs of DNA, and compare it to human genomes today, it's
more divergent from us, it's more different from us than we are from each other. If we
put it on average as a branch that's branching off from our population and ask, how long
ago did the Neanderthals share an ancestor with the average person? That answer for Neanderthals
is around about 800,000 years ago, long before the Neanderthals existed. But that answer
for humans today is around about 600,000 years ago, also long before we think the origin
of modern human anatomy. These genealogical branches are stretching back into populations
of the past. As we'll see in another lecture, they're related to the size of the population
and the migrations that that population has undergone. The key question for the Neanderthal
genome to answer, are they closely related to any of us today, is to compare Neanderthals
with more than one person. Because if we discover that the Neanderthals are equally related to
everybody living today, that means that their population diverged from our population distantly
in the past, and that our variation today is variation that was not derived from Neanderthals
in any living person. If in contrast, we compare the Neanderthal genome with different people
today and we discover that it's more like some of us than others, then that's evidence
that the Neanderthals contributed DNA to our population, and the reason why some of us
look more like Neanderthals than others is because we actually have more of their DNA.
So that basic comparison, take the Neanderthal genome and take two humans and see if the
Neanderthal is closer to one of the humans than the other. That comparison is the key
comparison that was carried out to see if we have any Neanderthal DNA today. Turns out
that when you compare Neanderthals with a person who lives in Europe and a person who
lives in China, they're equally related. And when you compare Neanderthals with a person
who lives in South Africa, a Bushman, and a person who lives in West Africa, they're
equally related. So those comparisons showing that there's no Africans that are specially
related to Neanderthals, there's no Eurasians who are specially related to Neanderthals.
But the very key comparison is when you compare one African and one person who lives outside
of Africa, either in Europe or in China or as it turns out in New Guinea or in the New
World, if you compare anybody who lives outside of Africa within the Neanderthal, they're
more similar to the Neanderthals than any of the Africans are. And so there really is
a Neanderthal bonus that's occurring in some human populations. It's occurring outside
of Africa, just the place where Neanderthals, of course, existed. But it's a little bit
strange. When we estimate how much of the genome of living people has to have come from
Neanderthals to make this happen, our estimate is it's about 3%. So we've got something
like one part in 30 of our genome has come from Neanderthals. But it's the same everywhere
outside of Africa. How could this be? The best hypothesis for this is that the mixture
that happened, the Neanderthal contribution to our population, wasn't happening when modern
humans entered Europe, which was relatively late, as late as 35,000 years ago. It happened
much earlier when humans first left Africa and encountered Neanderthals, probably in
West Asia. That population mixed and then dispersed throughout the rest of the world.
So today, we can really answer this question. It's one of the debates that I can give a
really satisfying answer to, because we know that we have some DNA from Neanderthals. They
weren't most of our ancestry, but they were a small and significant fraction of it. In
the next lecture, we're going to consider what kinds of things we might have gotten
from them. Is there anything useful in the Neanderthal genome that we still have? Is
there anything that we can learn about their biology by considering what they share with
us?
