As you know, I study Neanderthal genes, and this lecture is directly related to my work.
Did we get anything useful from the Neanderthals, or is the stuff that we got from Neanderthals
just sort of not very useful, or just random stuff?
This debate is almost as old as paleoanthropology.
The Neanderthals were the first group of people that we knew about in the distant past, and
there was a debate through the last hundred and fifty years or more about whether they
were our ancestors at all.
But even those scientists who accepted that we might have some ancestry from this ancient
group of people disagreed about its importance.
If you have an ancestor, it's easy to imagine this in sort of a genealogical context.
I mean, you think about the ancestors in your family tree.
You have parents and grandparents, great-grandparents, and from some of those ancestors, you could
trace some traits that you might share with them.
Maybe you've got your mother's chin, or your father's eyes, or maybe that uncle on
your mother's side has a lack of hair, like you do, or like I do.
When you think about traits like that, it's easy to look at your family tree and say,
oh, wow, this is where I got that trait from.
Here are the people who are my ancestors who are similar to me.
It's tempting to do that when we look at the fossil record and say, here's this ancient
hominin, and I have some of its genes, it may be an ancestor of mine, what do I have
that I've inherited from this?
When we do this with earlier parts of the fossil record, it's sort of straightforward
to say, well, when we look at the earliest hominins, what do we have from them?
We don't know that a particular fossil, like Lucy, is necessarily our direct ancestor,
but we do know that we share common ancestors with her, and that those ancestors were bipeds.
They walked upright, and so there are many aspects of the skeleton that we derive from
those ancestors.
But with the Neanderthals, it's a somewhat different question.
We know that we have common ancestors with Neanderthals, but in addition to that, we
know that we have Neanderthal ancestors, because our genetic makeup is in part their genes,
with about 3% contribution to everybody living today outside of Africa, and possibly a smaller
contribution inside of Africa.
So we know that we've got their genes.
What we don't know is whether those genes do anything interesting.
Is there something that we got from them that we wouldn't have gotten if they weren't
our ancestors, or are the things that we share with them mostly stuff that we would have
gotten from some other source anyway?
The first way that we might think about this question is by thinking about the one gene
that we know the most about, and that's the mitochondrial DNA.
Mitochondrial DNA, it's carried outside of a cell's nucleus, inside the tiny organelles
called mitochondria.
It's copied from parent to child, but not inherited from father to son, or father to
daughter.
It's only inherited from mother to daughter, or mother to son, which means that your mitochondria
come from your mother, and from her mother, and from her mother's mother, and so on.
Well, that unique form of inheritance means that we can trace the ancestry of mitochondrial
DNA with some great accuracy, because the DNA doesn't recombine generation to generation,
scrambling up its order, and thereby confusing our study of its genealogy.
But because it's only inherited along the maternal line, it's only telling us about
a small fraction of our ancestry, and that fraction gets smaller and smaller as we go
further back in time.
That's generally true when we think about the ancestry of any one gene.
If we're looking at one tiny part of the genome, that tiny part could be inherited from the
mother or from the father, from his mother or father, from her mother or father, and
it's tracing its way back as a zigzag through your family tree, as opposed to as a straight
line through your family tree, but it represents only that small fraction that it actually
passed down.
That fraction is potentially different for every part of your genome, and every part
of your genome thereby represents a somewhat different viewpoint on your complete genealogy.
By the time we get back to Neanderthals, most of those different pathways have become so
scrambled that they're difficult for us to sort out from each other.
But the mitochondrial DNA, and potentially the Y chromosome, but I'll focus first on
the mitochondria, are only inherited along one line.
And so that gives you at least a very distinct view of the inheritance of this gene.
It's a representative view, potentially, but it's a distinct view.
We can see one thing.
Well, as I mentioned, we know more about the mitochondrial DNA in Neanderthals than we
do about the rest of the genome, because we have a larger sample of individuals.
We have more than a dozen Neanderthals, from whom we've got complete mitochondrial DNA
sequences.
And those sequences tell us something about the relationships of the Neanderthals.
They tell us that the Neanderthal mitochondrial DNA was itself very limited in variation.
It came from a relatively small number of ancestors within the last 150,000 years.
That's sort of cool as an anthropologist to discover this, because it's telling us something
about the ancestry of this ancient group of people.
They're extinct now, and we wouldn't be able to estimate their numbers if it weren't for
this kind of information.
But we can look at that evidence about their limited mitochondrial variation and get a
picture of how their population must have emerged relatively recently in the Pleistocene.
But their mitochondrial sequences are all distinct from ours.
No living person carries, as far as we know, a mitochondrial sequence that looks like it
came from a Neanderthal.
So when we talk about the Neanderthal contribution to our DNA, this is a contribution that we've
evaluated by looking at other parts of the genome, the nuclear genome.
We don't see the signal of our inheritance from them in the mitochondrial genome.
That used to be really, really, really significant, but two things have changed our point of view
on this.
One thing that's changed our point of view is the availability of a mitochondrial DNA
from another specimen very distant from most of the Neanderthals, a specimen from the southern
end of Siberia.
That specimen from Denisovacave has a mitochondrial DNA, which is distinct from humans, but also
distinct from Neanderthals, and in fact the mitochondrial DNA of this specimen is an
out group to both humans and Neanderthals.
What's that telling us?
It's telling us that the Denisovacave specimen has at least some ancestry that comes from
a much more distant time period than we had a common ancestor with Neanderthals.
But the interesting thing about this is that the rest of its genome, the nuclear genome
of this specimen, which has been recovered, is much more similar to Neanderthals than
that mitochondrial DNA is.
The mismatch between those two pieces of evidence, the very, very distant relation of Neanderthal
and Denisovac mitochondrial DNA, and the close relation of Neanderthal and Denisovac nuclear
DNA, that's a mismatch.
It's telling us that the mitochondrial DNA is in some sense following a different kind
of history than most of the genome.
If it can follow a different kind of history between those two ancient specimens, and we
can show that it follows a different kind of history between humans and Neanderthals,
well that's telling us that the mitochondrial DNA must itself have been affected in its
evolution by its function.
It must have been under natural selection in these ancient populations.
And when we compare the actual gene sequence of the mitochondrial DNA, one of the coding
loci, one of the genes that has a function which lies on this DNA is cox2.
Cox2 is essential for oxidative metabolism in your cells.
It's one of the things that makes energy for your body, and that gene with mutations between
the human and Neanderthal version apparently had a somewhat different function in Neanderthals.
It looks like the mitochondria of Neanderthals may have been adapted to a different energy
environment than the mitochondria of living people.
That's probably not surprising because if we think about Neanderthals living in a Pleistocene
environment in the cold, temperate, and subpolar parts of human habitation at that time with
a very limited technology in terms of clothing, and tight clothing in particular, they didn't
have that stuff, and they did eat a somewhat different diet from recent Europeans.
Put all those things together and you can imagine that their mitochondria might have
been adapted to a very different energy scenario than the mitochondria of more recent people.
There may be a reason why they're gone.
That reason may be that those mitochondria did something.
Well that's pretty inconvenient for us if what we're interested in is the genealogical
relations of Neanderthals and humans.
Because when we show that the Neanderthal mitochondrial DNA is gone, that really limits
our ability to trace the relationships back along this line.
If you today have your genes tested so that you've sent your DNA away to a company and
they've given you results about this, one of the primary things that they're likely
to tell you about is where in the world people who have similar mitochondria to you live
today?
Where did your mitochondria come from is sort of the question that they're likely to be
able to address.
And so you may be looking at a map and that map will show you that your mitochondrial
haplotype is found in a number of different areas of the world.
Some of them it's really common.
Other areas it may be more rare.
But there will be a distribution where you've got your mitochondrial type shared in people
that are living in the world now.
That can be exciting to look at.
If we did this exercise for Neanderthals, the map would be blank.
There's nobody living in the world today who has their mitochondrial type.
So that avenue is a dead end.
Right now the other major marker, the Y chromosome, is also a dead end.
It happens to be because the Neanderthals that we have genome sequences of thus far
are all females.
They don't have Y chromosomes.
And so we're as yet to understand the relationship fully of the Y chromosome in the Neanderthals
to humans today.
That means that our two big pieces of genealogical information, well, they're missing.
And so we need to look at genealogy in a somewhat different way.
That's exactly the kind of thing that my lab today is engaged in.
We're looking at the genealogy of different parts of the genome and trying to connect
people with each other to see when the ancestors of different parts of their genome lived.
And also trying to connect them to these archaic hominids.
When did the ancestors of humans and Neanderthals live?
What parts of the genome are derived from Neanderthals?
And what parts today have no sign of Neanderthal contribution?
That's an ongoing study.
And I can describe to you some of what we do, but I'm going to try to give you an impression
of how this science is done so that you can see some of the challenges in identifying
what Neanderthal genes might have been good for.
If you look across your complete genome today using a sample of genotypes, what you'll get
is a picture of, in a broad sense, where your ancestors lived.
You can develop that picture by comparing different segments of your genome to other
people.
And when you compare them broadly to people who live in different parts of the world,
you'll discover that some segments of the genome have a copy that is very common in
Sub-Saharan Africa, or maybe in a small region of Sub-Saharan Africa.
A gene like that is the Duffy blood type, where there's a type called type O, Duffy,
that is common in Sub-Saharan Africa, up to 95% of people there carry it, and rare in
other parts of the world.
So that if you're looking at that blood type, you get a clear picture of geography.
Either somebody is likely to have an origin in Sub-Saharan Africa for that part, or the
person's unlikely to have that origin.
You never say 100%, because these genes are not, it's either there or it's not there.
But you sometimes have a very clear picture, it's very likely to be there, or unlikely
to be there.
If you look across my genome and carry out this exercise, it turns out that almost everything
in my genome is common in Europe.
I don't have a lot of ancestors recently who've come from other parts of the world.
But of course your results will vary based on where you're from.
Now when we compare a human genome and a Neanderthal genome, well the simple sort of
thing to do is to go down the entire genome and just count all the places where they're
the same, and all the places where they're different.
And in fact, when we talk about humans today having some ancestry from Neanderthals, that's
precisely the comparison that we've carried out.
The reason why we know that some people have Neanderthal ancestors is that there are people
living today who are more like Neanderthals than other people living today are.
Now if we only had genes that we share with Neanderthals because we have a distant ancestor
in common with Neanderthals, then everybody living today would be equally like or unlike
the Neanderthals.
You wouldn't have one person carrying a lot more Neanderthal similarities than somebody
else.
It turns out that the people who have more Neanderthal in them are people who live outside
of Africa today.
And so that's geographically consistent with the idea that Neanderthals who lived outside
Africa were interacting with people and contributed some of their genes to those people.
And by counting the similarities and differences, we can estimate just how much Neanderthal the
average person carries.
It's about 3%.
But what that doesn't tell us is which parts of the genome are especially Neanderthal like
and which parts of the genome aren't.
And maybe even more interesting, whether it's the same parts of the genome in different
people.
For answering that question, we have to look at a bigger sample of people.
The first thing that you might do is look at parts of the genome where you know what
the function is, and to evaluate what the genotype in Neanderthals is for those parts
of the genome and which people today carry those parts of the genome.
A very simple example would be the ABO blood group.
Whether your blood type is A, B, AB, or O, that's determined by the alleles that you
carry of a gene called, creatively, ABO.
The ABO gene has these three variations in living people, and which of those three that
you carry determines what your blood type is.
When we look at Neanderthals, we find that some Neanderthals have the A allele, and some
Neanderthals have the O allele.
So Neanderthals, we now know, have the same polymorphism that's different forms of the
gene that humans today have.
We haven't yet found a type B Neanderthal.
I wouldn't be surprised if we did.
We haven't tested all that many yet.
But the fact that we found A and O tells us that that polymorphism is present in this
ancient group of people.
But that's limited in its ability to inform us about what we got from Neanderthals, because
the A and O alleles for the ABO gene are themselves quite old.
O emerged from the ancestral A version of the gene more than two and a half million years
ago.
And so when we look at the Neanderthals carrying type A and O, and humans carrying type A and
O, it's not a demonstration that the Neanderthals gave us type A or type O. We both got A and
O because we both came from common ancestors that had A and O. This is a case where we
have genes because of our distant ancestors.
That's also probably true of the gene called Foxp2.
Now we talked about this gene in the context of language.
And humans and Neanderthals share a version of this gene that's not found in chimpanzees
or other kinds of primates.
That evolutionary change might be related to the evolution of speech in humans.
But the fact that humans and Neanderthals both share this, right now it doesn't look
like that indicates that we got this gene from Neanderthals, or that they got it from
us.
It looks likely that this gene came from the distant ancestors of humans and Neanderthals.
So these are both cases where humans and Neanderthals are similar to each other, but that similarity
isn't necessarily telling us about what we got from them.
We also have some pretty clear cases where humans and Neanderthals are similar to each
other, and where the Denisava genome is different from both of us.
One of those areas that's very interesting is an area of the genome called HR1.
HR stands for Human Accelerated Region, and this, along with a number of other human accelerated
regions, is a part of the genome where almost every kind of mammal has basically the same
sequence, but humans have a different sequence.
When that happens, in evolution, it's sort of odd, because what it's telling us is that
this part of the genome does something important, so important that mutations are always selected
against in every other kind of mammal, but somehow in humans, mutations were encouraged.
It probably tells us that whatever the function of this area is, that function has changed
during the course of our evolution, so that it's advantageous to have a different kind
of sequence here than the ancestral kind of sequence shared by most other kinds of mammals.
For HR1, this is an area of the genome that's active during the transcription of genes during
brain development, so it looks like a really interesting part of the genome from the standpoint
of human evolution.
It's probably telling us something about how our brains evolved.
The Denisova genome has two differences in this area, where that genome is similar to
other primates, but different from humans.
Neanderthals lack one of those differences from us.
They're like us in this gene, different from the Denisova genome.
So that tells us something very interesting.
It tells us that the evolution of this part of the genome was going on during the time
that humans, Neanderthals, and Denisovans were differentiating from each other, and
that our shared nature with Neanderthals, in one aspect, is being illustrated by their
shared sequence with us.
So that's pretty exciting, but it still doesn't tell us what we got from the Neanderthals.
We can look at many aspects of the human genome that Neanderthals lack that they don't have
and talk about the things that all of us have in common.
The mitochondrial DNA is one of them, but in fact there are several parts of the genome
where everybody that's been sampled today has one kind of sequence, and Neanderthals
have a different kind of sequence.
Some of those parts of the genome correlate with or create small pieces of RNA that interfere
with or encourage the transcription of genes.
These microRNAs seem to be important in determining how cells function, how the genome is transcribed
to create the protein environment of a cell, and there are a few of them where Neanderthals
are different from us.
So it looks like these are cases where the Neanderthal cells are operating in a slightly
different way from human cells.
There are, in protein coding genes, 88 amino acid changes that humans today all share that
Neanderthals lack.
When I think of a number like that, 88, like the keys on a piano, it seems so small for
things that everybody today in the world shares that Neanderthals don't share.
And to be quite practical, it's very likely that if we sampled everybody in the world,
we would find that every one of those was different in at least some people, just because
of the sheer number of people.
So these are cases where humans have evolved since the Neanderthals existed.
I wouldn't expect that we've all evolved simultaneously, that we all necessarily share all of these
things, but when we look at a good broad sample of people, we discover that there are these
differences that emerge during our evolution.
But when we think about the genes that we got directly from Neanderthals, finding those
genes is a real challenge.
This is what we've been working on by comparing different people with each other and by comparing
the different people's genomes with the Neanderthal genome.
One means of comparison is by taking two people for whom you have the whole genome sequence
and lining them up next to each other and seeing where those two people are different
from each other, because if one person carries some things from Neanderthals, those things
will show up as cases where a person might be very different from another person, but
more similar to a Neanderthal.
That process has really just begun.
So we can show that when we compare two people from Europe, their whole genomes will have
certain elements in them that are quite different from each other, where one person is identical
to the Neanderthals genome, and the other person is basically like people who today
live in Sub-Saharan Africa.
So that's the direct sign of this integration of genes from Neanderthals.
But how do we look for it?
What do we actually see when we look at the functional parts of genes?
My idea from before we had Neanderthal genetics was that it was likely that we would get genes
from Neanderthals just as a function of them being relatively closely related to us and
the possibility of interbreeding happening.
And it turns out that that idea has been carried out.
We did get something from Neanderthals, but when we look at the way that this transfer
of genes has been studied in the history of biology, it's a process called introgression.
You're getting genes from one population and introgressing them into another population.
This was studied during the 1940s and 50s in great detail by looking at plant breeding.
The idea was that there were traits in plants that might be adaptive that were spreading
from one population to another.
Edgar Anderson, the botanist who studied this in the most detail, said that introgression
from one population to another is something of a paradox.
It's a paradox because the more important it is, the less likely you are to notice it.
If you think of this, if you're looking at two kinds of plants and you could really differentiate
them very clearly, but you noticed that once in a while there was a flower color in this
population of plants that was actually from the other population, or that there was a
seed shape that had transferred, you would notice it because it sticks out, it doesn't
belong there.
But when you look at things that are much more widespread across the genome, introgression
might be more important, but it wouldn't be nearly as noticeable to you.
Well, one thing that we've really considered a lot as to whether we would have gotten it
from Neanderthals is pigmentation.
During the early days of studying the genes that correlate with pigment in humans, it
was believed that red hair might be old enough to have come in from Neanderthals.
It turned out that today's red hair didn't come from Neanderthals.
All of the red hair alleles that we have, and there are several of them in human populations,
at least three that are quite common in Europe today, all of those seem to be relatively
young.
They all seem to date to within the past 20,000 years, and we'll hear in a later lecture
about why that evolutionary change in the recent past has happened.
But if these genes are really that recent, it means that we didn't get them from Neanderthals.
We do know that Neanderthals carried at least one version of this gene, the gene called
MC1R, that was different in its sequence from ours, and that version, which hasn't been
found in any living people yet, that version looks like it would have changed the function
of that gene in a way that's consistent with them, maybe having red hair.
So today, when you go to a museum and you see a recent reconstruction of a Neanderthal,
you're likely to see a red-headed Neanderthal, and it's because of this finding.
We know something about their pigmentation, but unfortunately, that's not one of the things
that we got from them.
So I've been studying what parts of the genome do human populations derive from Neanderthals,
and can we make any sense out of what they do?
And I will say that this work is really just beginning, and we're learning new things almost
every day about it.
One of the things that's highly as significant about Neanderthal genes in human populations
now is that different populations of people outside of Africa, for example, Europeans
and Chinese people, have different Neanderthal genes.
There's some overlap.
There are a few things that are relatively common in Europe and in China and in India
and in Japan and in other places, but for the most part, things that are relatively common
in Europe are rare in China, and things that are common in China are rare in Europe.
It seems that when the mixture took place between humans and Neanderthals, that mixture
was before a time that human populations began to separate and become isolated from one another.
So the mix that they ended up with is about the same fraction.
Look at any person, and he's likely to have about 3% Neanderthal, but the fraction is
representing different genes.
Most of the genes that came in from Neanderthals are vanishingly rare, only in 1% of people
are fewer, and there's only a few things that are common.
So we're beginning to understand the paleobiology that gave rise to our current distribution
of Neanderthal genes.
Still doesn't tell us what interesting things we might have gotten, but we do know because
we can compare which parts of the genome there are, we do know which genes are involved.
So being a curious anthropologist, I took my own genome and compared it with Neanderthals.
It turns out that at a first glance, there are a number of things that I have that came
from Neanderthals.
It's not yet clear whether the things that I have make any difference to my phenotype
because I'm not looking at the sequence level, and I can't predict when I have a change whether
it does something to my anatomical or my behavioral makeup.
But I can say that one of the things that I have that has a gene region that's identical
to Neanderthals is a part of the androgen receptor.
Androgen receptor on the X chromosome is the receptor for testosterone, and that has a huge
effect on different elements of the body, both in men and in women.
One of the things that it does is it, for some people, increases the likelihood of baldness.
So my version of the androgen receptor I know, it's likely to correlate with hair loss after
age about 25 as it turns out.
This is the part of my genome that I share with Neanderthals, among many others.
Does that mean that Neanderthals, maybe like me, had hair loss?
It could be, but we can't yet say because we can't look yet at that phenotypic level.
In order to do that, it's going to take comparing how different people with different copies
of these actually map out.
And so this process, as I'll say, is just beginning.
And I can't now say the great things that Neanderthals gave to us.
But I can say that this part of paleoanthropology is a science that is building rapidly.
And it's likely that we'll have many answers to this within the next few years.
