Welcome back.
If I was giving this lecture in 1994, when I started graduate school, there is no question
that the biggest debate in paleoanthropology would be the subject of this lecture, the
debate between multi-regional evolution and the out-of-Africa theory.
Happily, I'm not giving this lecture in 1994, so I have a lot more to say about it than
I would have had then, but when I was really starting in the field and I decided what I
wanted to study, it was this debate that captivated me more than anything else.
To give you the flavor of what it's like to really participate in paleoanthropology
and to witness the events that have really increased our knowledge about our recent
evolution, I'm going to run you through this debate from its very historical beginnings
up until the present day when we have a lot that we can say about it and we have what
may be a pretty clear resolution of it.
Paleoanthropical evolution was the idea that humans today originated in different populations
that lived in different parts of the world in the past, that there was a multi-regional
contribution to our ancestry as living people.
In other words, it's the idea that Neanderthals and archaic people in China and archaic people
in Southeast Asia, in Java, contributed to our ancestry just as did archaic people who
lived in Africa.
It was a mixture of those populations that gave rise to our current diversity.
The other theory, the out of Africa theory, was that these ancient people who lived outside
of Africa, Neanderthals, Chinese, Java and fossil people, didn't contribute to the ancestry
of more recent people, that today's population derived from a small population that lived
in Africa and grew and dispersed through the rest of the world.
In other words, today's population is the result of a new species originating and spreading
and replacing other people throughout most of the old world.
The basic debate did living people originate in a small population that lived in Africa
within the last few hundred thousand years, or do living people have ancestors in other
populations in addition to Africa?
It seems like it wouldn't be such a difficult question to settle, but in fact, these two
theories vied with each other for dominance for years and years and years because every
piece of evidence that was found could be interpreted one way or another way depending
on how it fit together with the rest of the evidence.
So this was really a maddening question to work on.
I know that many of us were frustrated thinking, will we ever find the key piece of evidence
that's going to decide this debate?
Let's go back to the history.
How did this really start?
If you think about our process of discovering fossil humans, which began in the mid-19th
century and proceeded up into the 20th century relatively slowly, people were building a
picture of ancient man that was a picture that had different little jigsaw pieces in
different parts of the world.
They knew about the Neanderthals, and the Neanderthals were then the most classic example
of what it was to be an ancient person.
But the Neanderthals looked different from us in many ways, and so there was the idea
that maybe there was some other population of people that existed somewhere that was
more closely related to us than the Neanderthals, that would have been more likely to be our
ancestors than the Neanderthals were.
That was the main ammunition behind the idea of a presapiens population, a presapiens population
first as people conceived of it inside of Europe, but later more broadly in other parts
of the world.
They also knew that there were archaic people who had brow ridges and low smaller cranial
capacities, who had long low skulls, who had anatomy that's not very much like living people.
They knew that these archaic people lived in Asia, they had in China fossil evidence
of Peking Man, and in Java, evidence of Java Man, both specimens today we'd recognize
as part of a sample that we call Homo erectus.
It was an earlier kind of human.
It doesn't have all of the characteristics that more modern people have.
They had a very basic idea by around 1940 of diversity within Africa, but that diversity
was very, very ancient compared to any of the fossils that we now know from outside of
Africa.
We were talking about Australopithecus.
They didn't have a really good representation of what humans looked like who lived in Africa
at the same time that the Neanderthals lived in Europe, and at the same time that Homo
erectus had been found in East Asia.
It was at this time as people started to try to put together this fossil record into a
worldwide picture that the ideas of out of Africa and multi-regional evolution really
originated.
They weren't called that at the beginning.
The first person who thought about evolution of humans in a multi-regional sort of sense
was Franz Weidenreich.
Weidenreich we saw as the discoverer and describer of many of the Chinese fossils that became
known as Peking Man.
Weidenreich studying those fossils was impressed at the degree to which they showed similar
kinds of characteristics to Pithocanthropus, the fossils from Java, but he was also struck
by the fact that the regional differences between those two, the things that they didn't
share, were similar in pattern to the kinds of differences that occur between people in
different populations today.
Weidenreich, looking at that evidence, thought about it in terms of races of ancient people
and races of living people, and he asked whether these might have connections over time with
each other.
Right around the same time, William W. Howells, who became a famous anthropologist centered
at Harvard, was also trying to systematize the fossil record, put it together into a
worldwide picture.
Howells had a very different point of view about the way that these fossils should go
together.
He looked at the skeletal variation in living people throughout the world, and he said,
These people who are living today are much, much more similar to each other than they
are to any of the people that we have as fossils who lived in the past, and if we see that
kind of similarity among people today, we should probably think that they had a common
origin that they don't share with these other ancient fossil people.
So for Howells, he believed that modern people must have an origin that was centered at some
point in the past that was different from most of the fossil populations that had been
found.
For Howells, populations like the Neanderthals, populations like the Chinese fossil record,
those should be peripheral, those should be outside of the mainstream of our evolution.
Now at that time, the best known samples of fossil humans of around the right antiquity
to be ancestors of modern humans came from Mount Carmel in Israel.
This was the sample that included the school cave specimens and the taboon cave skeleton.
Those fossils had been unearthed and described in the 1930s, and they were at the sort of
tip of the tongues of every paleoanthropologist at the time.
As we saw when we considered the presapiens idea, these skeletons looked like they had
a mixture of characteristics, things that were a little bit Neanderthal like, and things
that were much more human like.
And different anthropologists interpreted these fossils in different ways.
Some of them looked at that mixture and said, this is a population that mixed.
It was a hybrid population.
There were humans, there were Neanderthals, they mixed with each other.
Other anthropologists thought that they must be in the process of change from one thing
to the other.
As we saw, the process of change from Neanderthals to humans was one possibility, but the process
of change of something more ancient, a pre-Neanderthal form, into Neanderthals was another possibility.
Howells looked at this sample and said, well, you know, this is a logical place.
It's central in its location compared to where humans live throughout most of the recent
past in the old world, and so maybe we should look for an origin of living people in a population
like this.
It was the first real conception that not only was there a central source for humanity,
but also that the argument for there being a central source was our commonality in anatomical
terms compared to our differences from the known fossil varieties of humans.
Those two viewpoints, Weidenreich's viewpoint that maybe these are connected over time in
these different parts of the world, and Howells' viewpoint, maybe they're not connected through
time and there's a distinct source that living people derive their ancestry from, that was
really the basis of the initial debate between multi-regional and out-of-Africa theories.
Weidenreich didn't call his theory multi-regional, however.
He called it polycentric, and his idea was that there were centers of evolution, centers
that in some cases we'd found.
When he looked at the fossil record of Java, he looked for features that were similar to
other more recent people living in the same part of the world, and he found many of them.
So if we consider the original, oldest inhabitants of Java that we have fossil evidence of, the
people that lived there at the same time as the Trinial specimen, the Pythocanthropus
specimen, those fossils are distinguished by having a low frontal bone, a sloping forehead,
a forehead that is continuous with the brow ridge on the front of the skull so that there's
no groove in between them, and a brow ridge that's relatively flat.
On the back of the skull, there's a distinct angulation that occurs on the back of those
skulls, and there's a large bar of bone called the occipital torus that projects outwards.
That's an attachment point for muscles, but it's thickened far beyond as necessary for
the muscle attachment.
It seems to be buttressed in some way against the forces of the skull.
Looking at those characteristics, he traced those through time.
He looked at some later specimens from Java, specimens that today we understand are around
about a half million years old, and he said these later specimens also share similar kinds
of characteristics.
They're not totally the same.
In fact, they're different in some ways that we would expect.
They have bigger brains, for one thing, and that increases the size of their skull.
But this skull at a bigger size, nevertheless, has the same sloping forehead, the same brow
ridge that's straight across, the same angulation and occipital torus on the back of the skull.
He looked at those and said, there's a connection.
This is a continuity.
What Weidenreich did was take it an additional step and said, well, today's people in Java
do not look like this.
They have much more rounded skulls.
They look very much like the inhabitants of South China in some respects, and Weidenreich
knew for a fact that that was probably the case, because there was a large migration
of people from China, South China, agricultural peoples into Southeast Asia that had gone
on through late prehistory.
But Weidenreich conceived of Australia as being a place that was more isolated from
this Asian population movement, and he looked at the skeletal remains of Australians, Australian
aboriginal peoples, and thought, you know, there are some similarities here with these
ancient people in Java.
When we look at people in Australia today, some of them by no means all, but some of
them do have this robust characteristic of sloping forehead and a brow ridge.
It's a population in the world today where brow ridges are actually relatively common.
Brow ridge is extending across the entire side to side of the skull.
Weidenreich looked at their morphology, looked at the occipital torus that occurs in some
of those skulls, and said, I think this is a connection over time.
These are in fact similar in shape in some respects, and so it indicates not that today's
Australians only evolved from these earlier people in Java, but instead that one of the
genealogical ties in their ancestry came from that place, and with it came some of those
features.
But at the same time, many of the features, most notably of course the size of the skull,
had changed so that there was an evolution that had happened, but it was an evolution
that involved movement of people between populations.
Well that point of view is a difficult one to understand if you're entering evolutionary
biology in around 1945.
If you think about where evolutionary biology had come from, Darwin was the first to reconstruct
some sort of diagram of branching between species, and Darwin was very powerful in his
argument that humans and other kinds of creatures had common ancestors, that there was one origin
for all of these things, but if we consider different species, the pattern of this evolution
is a pattern of divergence.
Those go away from each other, and you can draw a tree that shows how they diverged from
each other and how their ancestors are shared.
That kind of tree was applied by many scientists to human races.
Their idea was that if we look at humans today, we have a common origin, and if we look at
the varieties of humans, Europeans, Africans, Asians, and look within those places into
Europe.
We've divided Europeans into Nordic, Mediterranean, Alpine.
There were different races that they talked about, and they tried to draw trees that would
connect those races with each other in an ancestry.
It was very much the same pattern that people tried to apply to species, but in the case
of species, that pattern is actually true.
Species diverge from each other because they establish isolation between them.
In the case of human populations, it's not true.
Human populations aren't isolated.
We've continued to exchange mates over the course of our history.
So Weidenreich was introducing an idea for how that pattern of evolution might happen.
The idea that there were distinct populations that had occurred in different places in the
past, but those populations had continually been connected by a series of networks of
genetic movements.
The network he drew as a diagram that looks like a trellis.
It has lines that go up, that connect the past to the present, but it also has lines
that go diagonally, connecting different vertical lines with each other.
Well, as you might imagine, this was a difficult hypothesis to really come to grips with, and
it tended, by other anthropologists, to be simplified.
They accentuated the vertical lines and didn't draw the diagonal ones.
Weidenreich died untimely in the late 1940s, didn't have students, and didn't convey this
model forward.
It became caricatured in many ways.
William Howells was, in some respects, the worst because he was the first to draw Weidenreich's
diagram with just the vertical lines, connecting the races of the past with the races of the
present, and without the diagonal lines showing how they were connected to each other.
That caricature of the idea is one that became very influential in anthropology.
He opposed it with his own idea that there was a single origin of humans recently, that
the divergence that happened in humans that separates different races from each other
is very new, and that the fossil people of the past had become extinct.
Well, it was my advisor, Milford Walpuff, who was most responsible for reviving Weidenreich's
idea.
In the mid-1980s, Milford had gone to many parts of the world to study directly the fossil
evidence, and as of today, he is the person who has studied more fossils from more different
sites than anybody else, so he's somebody who has an encyclopedic knowledge of the fossil
record.
I'm always impressed with Milford because I have a pretty good memory, and I've studied
these fossils, and I know their anatomy, and if you tell me a catalog number of a fossil,
SK3155, I know where it's from and I know what it looks like, but Milford knows this
much better than me.
He knows things that nobody else in the world knows.
As he was developing this picture, a really mental view of how things go together, Milford
was thinking that, you know, Weidenreich's idea has a lot of promise.
If you go through the fossil record and consider the most complete skeletons and the most complete
skulls and think, how do you draw lines between these things?
You come to one picture that is a picture of diversification, but if you look at the
tiny fragments of bone, the pieces that are sort of junk but might have one key part of
anatomy, you build a much bigger picture of variation that way, and as Milford was building
that picture of variation, he noticed that there are traits that occur early in time
that also occur in living people that live in the same areas.
One of those traits that is maybe real obvious is a trait that Weidenreich had noticed, shovel
shaped incisors.
The incisors are the very front teeth, and in some parts of the world today, especially
in East Asia and in some Native Americans, those incisors on the top have a shape in
which there is a flat blade and two ridges on each side.
That shapes them like a coal shovel, and that shape is called shovel shaping.
That can occur in the middle incisors and also in the second ones, the lateral incisors.
Those teeth are pretty distinctive, they are easy to recognize.
That feature is shared by ancient Chinese fossils, Chinese fossils that date to as early
as Yoko Chen, and even earlier.
So it's a feature that seems to be established in China very early, and it's still found
in East Asia today.
It looks like the sort of thing that is a regional characteristic that's been carried
forward through time.
Milford developed the idea that this was very much like Weidenreich's model of evolution,
but what it depended on was the flow of genes from one population to another under selection,
so that the adaptive things would spread throughout the world, and the things that made regions
relatively more distinctive were probably non-adaptive.
They probably didn't have any importance in terms of what you adapted to your climate
or habitat with.
They probably were just established early on as a founder effect in these different places.
That meant that all regional continuity was in some sense ephemeral.
It couldn't last forever.
When I was a student, we studied a fossil called WLH-50, a fossil from Australia, and
showed that the anatomical similarities of this fossil, the sloping brow ridge, the brow
ridge that goes right continuously across from left to right of the skull, the lack of a
groove between the brow ridge and the rest of the frontal bone, the occipital torus on
the back of the skull, those things were apparently very similar to the fossils that
occurred in Java a half million years before.
We showed that similarity statistically was very clear, but with these kinds of statistical
observations, you always have to consider the possibility that maybe these things evolved
in parallel in these populations.
Maybe they're just there by chance.
That was always a difficult problem for us to resolve.
With the evidence that was available to us in the fossils, we had some signs that there
were continuities, but those signs were possibly contradicted by other sources of evidence.
The out of Africa model emerged indirectly from Howells' model of a single origin.
It really got going in the 1970s as people began to systematize the archaeological record
of Europe and how it had changed from Neanderthals to upper Paleolithic Europeans.
The Neanderthals last existed around 30,000 years ago, and their technologies were different
in many respects than the technologies that people brought into Europe after that time.
The very fact that I can say that people brought the technologies into Europe, it gives you
sort of an indication that something really happened here, and what really happened was
the spread of a technology called orignation.
The orignation technology was based on blade tools.
Blade tools are stone flakes that are longer, about twice as long, as they are wide.
What they're useful for is the same sorts of things that other kinds of stone tools
But they're associated with technologies that involve systematic removal of hides, needles
to stitch things together to make clothing, as we now understand it, the invention of
string so that you can make fabric so that you can make nets.
More complicated weapons, including atlattles, that are compound and allow killing at a distance.
Those things had come into Europe and really fundamentally changed the way that humans
interacted with their environment.
Humans began to live in tighter, bigger concentrations.
We find villages of people in the Upper Paleolithic.
But in addition to that, they began to really be more effective in their use of open habitat.
Those changes seem so important in a European context, and they raise the question, if Neanderthals
were not doing that stuff, and it looks like these people came in and were doing it differently,
maybe that's an event that happens in other places.
So people tied the changes in Europe about 30,000 years ago to the first colonization
of the Arctic, which happens around 25,000 to 30,000 years ago, to the movement of people
into Northeastern Asia, which ultimately they're able to disperse into the New World across
the Bering Land Bridge, to the first movement of people into Ireland, Indonesia, and Australia
beyond when they were homeorectis.
That colonization beyond, the colonization that involved not only getting onto a raft
and crossing a small strait, but crossing water distances of many kilometers, that change
seemed to be coincident with these other kinds of changes.
At the same time, people were looking for the ancestors of modern humans who would have
shared the anatomical features that we call modern.
They were looking for fossils that had high rounded foreheads, that had faces that had
been reduced in size without a clear brow ridge above the top of it, that were tucked
underneath their brain case a little bit.
Those kinds of characteristics which really distinguish living people from Neanderthals
and other archaic people, those kinds of features began to be unearthed in Africa.
People started to find fossils that looked more modern like, but were African and existed
before 100,000 years ago.
They found fossil mandibles that have chins on them.
Chin is a characteristic in humans, of course, projects out away from the front of your jaw.
Neanderthals didn't have that.
When we look at a chin, you might not think that this is the sign of humanity, but when
we find fossils with chins, this is a different kind of phenomenon than we see with archaic
people elsewhere in the world.
We find them in Africa.
We find them in the Near East early in time, around 100,000 years ago.
People were clarifying the chronology, and so they were looking at this and saying, this
looks like it fits a simple picture.
The simple picture is humans originate in Africa, and they dispersed from there to the
rest of the world.
What they had going for them in addition to this anatomical evidence and archaeological
evidence was genetic evidence.
They were sampling DNA from people around the world, and they discovered that that DNA
was, in many cases, very similar.
Just as Howells had observed that the anatomy of people in the world today is more similar
to each other than to fossils in the past, people began to confirm that the DNA was quite
similar between people today.
Much more similar than between two randomly chosen chimpanzees, for example.
It indicates that our species went through some special sort of history.
Now, in the next lecture, we're going to talk about that history in terms of how we interpret
population size from this DNA diversity.
But for the purposes of the Out of Africa theory, the real importance of this observation
was that it was tending to make people think that there really was a small population that
had given rise to humans elsewhere in the world.
Well, that's where matters really stood.
There's a disagreement, a disagreement that there's some kinds of evidence that point
in the direction of an anatomical continuity, but there were a lot of characteristics of
the fossil, archaeological, and genetic records that made it look like humans mostly share
one origin.
Africa was believed to be the origin for anatomical reasons, also for genetic reasons,
because human genetic variation is highest in Africa today.
And tying those pieces of evidence together was very convincing.
It was really my work in the 1990s and early 2000s that was, in some senses, alone, challenging
this point of view, looking for genetic variation that would show that humans didn't have to
all originate in one place, that there was more possibilities of origination of some
other places.
So I feel like this is really something I'm very closely tied to.
In 2010, this situation really fundamentally changed.
It changed because of the recovery of the Neanderthal DNA from the complete Neanderthal
genome.
It also changed because of the recovery of another complete genome from a site in Central
Asia, a site called Denisovacave.
These two ancient genomes have really revolutionized the way that we look at human origins.
And today we have a much clearer picture of what has happened because we can directly
compare the genes of living people with the genes of people that lived in the past.
In many senses, this is exactly what we wanted to do with fossils all along.
We wanted to look at fossils in the past and show the features that persisted through
time.
But fossils are very rare and fragmentary, and there's always the possibility that things
evolved in common in two places, not that there's a continuity.
With genes, we have three billion base pairs.
There's a lot of evidence.
And we can show very tight similarities that are unlikely to evolve in common.
The Neanderthal genome, as we saw in the last lecture, shows that people outside of Africa
do have a fraction of Neanderthal genes, about 3%.
That fraction isn't most of our DNA.
It's a small part of our DNA, but it resolves the question.
It shows that what's going on was that there was a population in Africa that did expand
and did spread its genes throughout the world, but that when it got there, it mixed with
the people who were already there.
That picture has been confirmed by the Denisova DNA genome.
The Denisova specimen isn't a Neanderthal.
We know it's not a Neanderthal for a curious reason.
It's not anatomically.
It's, in fact, a piece of a pinky bone that we got the genome from.
It's that its genome separates it from Neanderthals.
It is, in fact, divergent at a very deep level.
But that genome also shares similarities with some living people.
Living people today who live in Papua New Guinea and who live in Melanesia near New Guinea,
the very southeasternmost corner of habitation for ancient people in the old world, those
people share the genomes of the Denisova people at about a level of 4%.
It looks like what happened was that there was a population that existed in the west
of Eurasia, Neanderthals, that mixed with emerging Africans in West Asia.
There was a population that existed in the east, represented by this specimen, Denisova,
that was spread across easternmost India, southeast Asia, that people mixed with as
they went along the southern boundary of those areas to their easternmost extreme.
This mixture of people and the course of migration shows that there is a multi-regional
contribution to today's population.
We can settle the debate in that sense, but we also resolve it in the sense that most
of our genome does reflect an African origin and its African populations into which we
have to look to understand how today's diversity has come about.
That diversity that exists outside of Africa now is a fragment of the diversity that occurs
inside of Africa now.
A fragment to which has been added components from ancient people like Neanderthals, but
a fragment that reflects only a portion of our overall diversity as a species.
