Welcome back.
Seventy-four thousand years ago, a volcano on the island of Sumatra, a volcano called
Mount Toba, erupted.
This was the largest volcanic eruption that occurred any time during human evolution.
It probably had catastrophic effects on the Earth's climate.
It probably cooled the Earth substantially, and we've got some evidence for the amount
of cooling that was initiated by this eruption.
The question is, when a massive event like this happens, what effect does it have on
human populations?
Some geologists who have studied the Toba eruption and have talked about its global
extent in terms of climate change and its possible effects on different regions of the
world suspect that it had a catastrophic effect on human populations.
That as the world's climate deteriorated, human populations had a challenge to survive,
and many of them didn't meet that challenge.
Maybe this has something to do with the origin of modern humans and their diversification
in the world after the period of time represented by the Toba eruption.
So this historical phenomenon, this massive catastrophic event which affected the Earth's
climate, here's a hypothesis that connects it to our evolution in a very direct way.
The question of today's lecture is, are there these sorts of climate events that have massive
effects on humans?
Was the evolution of modern humans, for example, caused in any substantial way by massive changes
to climate during the last 200,000 years?
Or did climate have more subtle effects?
No one can deny that we live in the Earth's environment, and so when the climate changes,
there's going to have some impact on our populations, but is it possible that those
impacts were relatively minor, that they're not cases where we can identify clear connections
between climate changes and effects on human biology?
So here's a debate, what's the importance of climate in our evolution?
The way that we address climate hypotheses has to do both with our understanding of human
biology and with our understanding of the Earth's environment.
And so for this lecture, I'm going to concentrate on the kinds of climate changes that have
been common in the past 200,000 years during the span of the origin and dispersal of modern
humans.
I'm going to do this because most of the evidence we have about human biology is denser at this
time, and in particular, our evidence about the genetics of living people and how those
genetics might reflect our populations in the past, that's especially most powerful
during the course of this modern human origin and differentiation.
As we saw in the last lecture, modern humans trace most of their genetic material today
back to Africa, and our genetic heritage is therefore a question of largely the population
interactions that were occurring within Africa during the past few hundred thousand years.
We have a smaller genetic component that has come in from other populations, the Neanderthals
and the Denisova population of Central and possibly Southeast Asia.
Those populations are contributing some of our genes, but most of our genes are representing
the genetic variability within ancient Africans.
We know a substantial amount about African population variation today.
We know so much about them genetically that we can talk about the regional differentiation
within Africa.
We can talk about today's hunter-gatherer populations, the Pygmies of Central Africa,
the Bushmen of South Africa, the Hadza of East Africa.
These are all people who live traditional hunting and gathering lifestyles, and they
represent, in some sense, the ancestral life ways that humans all would have undergone
before the invention of agriculture only ten thousand years ago.
Their genetic diversity reflects the diversity that once was more expansive across Africa,
but in the intervening time has been affected by the growth and dispersal of farming populations,
farming populations that originated in West Africa and spread across most of the continent
from there.
That kind of event, the origin of a new kind of subsistence pattern, farming, the expansion
of the population of people that are using that new subsistence pattern and their migration
and dispersal to other parts of the world, just gives you a clue of some of the kinds
of ways that history can affect genetics.
Today most Africans living across the continent can trace at least some of their ancestry
back to the original West African agriculturalists, people that originally spoke a Bantu ancestral
language and that spread that language and its descendants around the rest of Africa.
That kind of genetic event is very massive.
It shifts the variation of genes across the continent, but it doesn't tend to reduce
the variation of genes, it shifts it in a particular way.
When we look past that kind of event into the more distant past, it's our goal to try
to connect the genealogies of people so that we can trace their ancestors back into those
more ancient populations.
To understand how that happens, we have to consider something about the way that genealogies
work in a population.
If you think about your genealogy, everybody living today has two parents, a mother and
a father, in a biological sense.
The people that contributed their genes to you, there are two of them.
Every one of your parents has two parents.
Every one of your grandparents has two parents.
And so as we go back each generation into the past, your genealogy expands.
In the first generation, you go from you to two parents, then you go to four grandparents,
to eight great-grandparents, to sixteen great-great-grandparents.
With every generation, the number of ancestors in terms of genealogical lines increases by
a factor of two.
Well we can track that going back farther into the past.
If you think about the number of lines of your genealogy that go back five generations,
well there's 32 of them.
And six generations, 64, seven generations, 128, and it keeps going, 256, 512, 1024.
Every generation, we double the number of potential ancestors.
Now I keep saying potential ancestors because as you can start to see, there's got to be
some limit on this process.
If we go back 10 generations, and we have therefore 1,024 potential lines of ancestry
for every living person, that doesn't sound so bad.
Some of those are going to be shared between people, and so obviously you'll have distant
cousins in the population, cousins at the fifth or sixth generation that you might not recognize,
but cousins that share most of their ancestry with you at some point.
But if we start going back further, from 1024, and I'm just going to abbreviate that to
a thousand, it's a little more than a thousand.
If we go 10 generations, it's a little more than a thousand.
If we go 20 generations, it's a little more than a million.
If we go 30 generations, this is now more than a billion lines of ancestry.
30 generations ago is not all that long ago.
If we think about the length of a human generation, which is something between 20 and 25 years,
a length of a generation on that order means that 20 generations is something like 400
to 500 years.
30 generations is only something like 750 years.
We keep going up in ancestry much, much faster than we're going up in generations into the
past.
750 years ago, there were not a billion people in the world.
If you have a billion lines of potential ancestry, there's only one conclusion that we can make.
Generations have to trace back, in many cases, to the same relatively smaller number of people.
If we go back 40 generations, the lines of genealogy predict that you'll have a trillion
ancestors.
That's 10 to the 12th power.
There were never, there couldn't be a trillion people in the world.
We have to be, in other words, inbred at that level of time.
If we go 40 generations into the past, something only like 1,000 years, our lines of genealogy
have to overwhelmingly trace back to the same relatively small number of people.
Now, a basic question is, how many people is that?
If we're tracing back to a small number of people, what is really the limit on the small
number of people?
There's one way that we could look at this.
We could say that the limit in the number of people that are our actual ancestors is
simply the number of people that existed.
But that's not strictly true.
If you think about it, probably everybody living in the world today who lives somewhere
in Europe, or has European ancestry within the last 1,000 years, can trace their ancestry
back to Charlemagne.
Charlemagne, one of the most famous kings in the post-Roman era, a real dark age figure,
lived more than 1,000 years ago, 1,300 years ago, established his rule throughout much
of Western Europe, had several offspring, those offspring established themselves as
heads of state in different parts of his reign, and they had successful lines that we know
continue to the present.
If you take somebody like that, where we know that the genealogical lines have survived,
we can predict pretty accurately that everybody who has any genes at all that come from this
part of the world probably traced them back to him at some point.
But there were lots of people who lived in the days of Charlemagne who didn't have
any children.
Those people aren't potential ancestors for anybody living today.
And if we look at a human population that's existing at a stable size, so that the population's
size isn't growing, well then we know that the average number of surviving children is
2, because that's how many it takes to continue the population at the same size.
That's surviving children, that's saying that they're going to make it, they're going
to potentially reproduce.
But if the average is 2, there are always some people who have 3, or 4, or even 8.
There are many people who have 0, and on expectation it's more than a third of people in that population
that have no children at all.
So that kind of division between people, some people having offspring, some people not,
that creates the opportunity for genealogies to trace back not to the total number of people
that existed, but to a much smaller number of people.
If we also look at the question of where did people live, how likely is it that somebody
living in the New World 1,000 years ago would have ancestors that lived in Europe 1,200
years ago, the answer is 0, there was no interchange between those populations.
So that there are distinct clumps and clusters of people that are more likely to share ancestors
with each other than others.
These are inbred, in other words, on many levels.
They're inbred as a species because the lines of our genealogy go back so fast that it's
just impossible that they can't trace back to the same number of people.
We're also inbred regionally, we're more likely to share ancestors with each other
if we live nearby than we are to share ancestors with people that live distant from us.
Those aspects, the distance aspect and the population size aspect in recent history are
both important and independent of each other.
So when we look at something like the spread of farming in Africa and the contraction of
originally hunting and gathering populations, the genetic diversity between those populations
now reflects the regions where they lived in the past and the expansion of one region
at the expense of others.
But if we go back before farming, when we consider how our genes originated in more
ancient and ancient human populations, those regional populations have the opportunity
to mix with each other.
When we go back within Africa far enough in time, it becomes more and more likely that
our genes will trace back to that population and will behave like they're mating randomly
with respect to where people lived in that relatively small part of the world.
So when we look into the distant past, the population size aspect of our genetic variation
becomes dominant.
We can ask a very simple question, how long does it take in this population for two genes
taken at random to have a common ancestor?
It's a different kind of a question because in this case we know that the people who carry
those genes will trace their genealogies back to common ancestors and there will be many
lines that trace back to many different common ancestors.
We won't be able to predict exactly which of those ancestors any two genes in those
people will trace back to.
But if we consider the possibility from the genes perspective, this becomes a very simple
question.
In one generation, it's impossible for two copies of a gene to trace back to the same
original copy unless the two people that carry them are siblings.
In two generations, well the people who carry them have to be cousins.
Three generations, they have to be second cousins and so on further back in time.
So if we ask what's the likelihood that two genes taken randomly from the population will
trace back to one ancestor at some time in the past, it's a likelihood that emerges from
the genealogies of the people.
How likely is it that different genealogical lines trace back to single ancestors at different
times?
That relationship in populations is quite regular.
The more you go back into the past, the more likely it is that two genes will share an
ancestor, but if we look at any particular generation in the past, this is very much
like a decay function.
It's a high likelihood now and it gets smaller and smaller and smaller with every generation
that we go back.
And this is necessarily true because the probability in this generation, if we compare the previous
generation, it's the same chance, but subtracting out the chance that it already happened.
So it gets a little smaller, smaller and smaller and smaller as you go very, very far back
in the past, which means that if we look at genes, one gene will trace its ancestry back
to a time, another gene will trace its ancestry back to another time, a third gene will be
a different time, and if we look at all of those times, those times will form a relationship
where many of the times are sort of recent in the past.
Some of the times are very, very old and in between there's a range of times that reflects
the size of the population, the probability that people share ancestors at given times.
From this relationship, we can estimate the size of ancient populations.
And when we carry out that estimate for humans, we estimate that the size of the ancient human
population was on the order not of a billion individuals, not even of millions of individuals.
The size of the human population in the distant past in the scope of hundreds of thousands
of years was something like 10,000 individuals.
Now that's a lot smaller than the human population now.
And so this raises an immediate question and a hypothesis.
Are we looking at the actual size of the human population?
And if so, was this a bottleneck?
Was this a time when humans crashed down to a small population size, existed for some
time, and then later started to grow so that we have today's very large human population?
This logic, connecting genetic variation in the population now, looking at it in genealogical
terms and relating that to the number of ancestors that people had, that logic was really key
to developing the out of Africa hypothesis in the first place.
Why is it that humans today have low genetic variability?
The answer, with respect to other primates, is because our populations were more inbred.
We had more ancestors tracing back to a smaller number of them.
And that kind of relationship has been just key in importance to understanding the dispersal
of people through the world and the growth of the human population.
But from the standpoint of the origination of modern humans, we have a mystery.
Why was the population apparently so small?
What was the limit to our genetic variation?
One clear hypothesis that comes to mind is climate.
When we think about the really intensive climate changes that have gone on in Africa, in Europe,
and in Asia in the past, there's a clear expectation that things are changing and that humans had
to endure those changes.
Maybe we didn't endure them as well as we might have.
Maybe we were constrained to a small population size.
The study of ancient climate is done with ice cores and with other kinds of deep cores,
deep ocean cores, deep lake cores, ways of studying how things have changed in particular
places in the past.
From these sources of evidence, we've gained a pretty clear understanding of the way that
Earth's climate has fluctuated over the course of the last million years or more.
During the last million years, there have been several distinct glacial cycles, times
when the glaciers advanced over the northern continents covering large parts of northern
Europe and large parts of North America, and times when the glaciers receded because the
Earth's climate was warmer.
Those cycles, which are quite distinct and run about 110,000 years long apiece, those
cycles are driven by changes in the amount of sunlight that the Earth receives because
of changes in the shape of the Earth's orbit.
As the Earth becomes more elliptical in its orbit, it has relatively less sunlight, and
as the shape becomes more circular, it has relatively more sunlight, and that change
alters the balance of Earth's climate.
It creates the opportunity for glaciers to advance and then glaciers to recede.
The four climate cycles that the Earth has gone through in the last million years have
been hugely important in the way that we understand the physiography of the kinds of rock that
we find and the kinds of sediments that we find in the northern continents, but also in
terms of how we expect people were able to move.
For example, high sea levels are accompanying low levels of glaciations.
High sea levels make islands more isolated from each other.
Low sea levels make people able to disperse onto some islands that are connected to each
other.
Well, the effects of Earth's climate on human populations are sort of obvious on one level,
and that is, when there's ice in the way, you can't live there.
When we consider human populations that were in Europe during the last glaciation, those
human populations, the Neanderthals first, and then, at the height of the last glaciation,
modern humans of the Upper Paleolithic, those populations were highly influenced by climate
in their distributions.
The Neanderthals, when the glaciers advanced, were increasingly limited to the southern
parts of Europe.
So when it's relatively warmer during the last interglacial, around 120,000 years ago,
we find Neanderthals in northern Germany.
We find evidence of Neanderthal occupation in Britain, but when the glaciers advanced,
Neanderthals recede to the southern part of Europe, Spain, southern France, Italy, Greece,
so that that climate shift ultimately contracts populations.
And then later, when the climate releases, populations of all kinds rebound.
We see the evidence of this rebounding in animal populations.
They're limited in southern Europe during the glaciation, and their genetic variation
today tells us that they expanded after that glaciation out of distinct refuges in southern
Europe.
We also see some of this in the archaeological record.
When we look at the evidence of the European climate and modern human occupation after
the Neanderthals, we see that there's a kind of people called the Magdalenean people that
originate in southern France, northern Spain, that are well known for the cave paintings
that they make.
And over the course of the last part of the last glaciation, from about 15,000 to about
10,000 years ago, those people expand first out of southern France into northern France
and Belgium, then into Germany, ultimately as far as Poland.
So there's an expansion that comes in the wake of the receding glaciers.
People are really responding to this climate in a very direct way.
What's less clear is the extent to which large, earlier climate shocks might have affected
people.
Toba eruption is the best example of a massive shock to the climate.
Toba is in the very northern part of Sumatra.
Today, the mountain is an island, which is very much like Crater Lake in Oregon.
It's an island in a circular lake, so that you can see that the circular lake is what
remains of the giant caldera that was blown out by the volcanic eruption, which happened
74,000 years ago.
This lake reflects the enormous event.
And when I say that the Toba eruption was an enormous event, you've got to understand.
All of us have seen volcanic eruptions, at least pictures or videos of volcanic eruptions.
When you think of the eruption of Mount St. Helens, which was a catastrophic event, it
spread ash across a large part of the western United States.
When you think about that event, the Toba eruption was 2800 times bigger than that.
We're not talking about 100 times bigger, we're talking about more than 2000 times as
great in terms of the amount of material that was cast into the atmosphere.
The biggest volcanic event in historic times was the eruption of Mount Tambora, which is
also an Indonesian volcano.
What happened in 1815?
When Tambora erupted, an eruption that was many tens of times greater than Mount St. Helens,
it had a huge impact on the Earth's climate.
In Europe, they called the next year the year without a summer, because the Earth's climate
was literally cooled and there was a brown fog that occurred in the eastern United States.
It was just an enormous event in terms of its impact on people.
It was nothing like Toba.
When we look at the Toba eruption and compare it with the climate records that we find in
ice cores, what we discover is that that eruption coincides with the time of greatest
intensification of the worm glaciation, the last major ice age.
That great intensification probably did have catastrophic impacts on human populations.
The question is, though, does it match what we're seeing in terms of the restriction and
size of the human population?
One way to address that question is archaeologically.
Look for evidence of people in different parts of the world and see if Toba had a big impact
on them.
Of course, with the Neanderthals, we know that they moved out of northern Europe whenever
the glacier is advanced, so we can say that there is a direct relationship of climate
on their distribution.
When we look at the Neanderthals as a population, it's very clear that this eruption didn't
wipe them out.
The Neanderthals existed in Europe before that.
They existed in Europe after that.
Their genetic diversity wasn't gone.
It survived.
Of course, we know that today we carry some of that genetic diversity, so whatever makes
us look like a very small population, it wasn't this particular event that did it.
It has to be something that goes much, much further back in time, that can influence both
our variation and the Neanderthal variation that many of us carry.
We can also address the question of the Toba eruption by looking at particular archaeological
sites that are within what you'd call the fallout zone of the Toba eruption.
One of these is in India at a site called Jawalla Puram, which has been dug by Mike
Petrolia of Oxford University.
His excavations have shown that there's a distinct level that corresponds to the Toba
ash layer.
If you think about India, it's just downwind of the Toba eruption.
This is the part of the world that would have had the most massive effects next to the area
right around Toba itself.
Yet, in this archaeological site, there are stone tools under the ash layer and stone
tools above the ash layer that are both very similar to each other.
It shows that the population seems to have been persisting at this point without an apparent
large impact from the Toba eruption.
That's pretty direct evidence that human populations were resilient in the face of these kinds
of massive population, potentially climate-changing population-affecting events.
They were able to adapt to the change in climate, at least in the sense that they persisted
in different parts of the world and lasted there.
That's not to say that climate didn't have really important impacts on them.
For example, one way of looking at climate change that isn't so much about temperature
is by looking at evidence of rainfall.
We have a lot of evidence from cores taken out of, in many cases, dry lakes, in some
cases still liquid lakes, and in a couple of cases, what you'd call geological lakes,
places where there was a lake in the past, but today this is a sediment column.
Well, when we look at those sediment columns, we can talk about rainfall by looking at the
levels of the lake, by looking at the species of diatoms and other organisms that are living
them, and by looking at the amount of different isotopes of oxygen that are preserved in them.
Because oxygen 18, oxygen 16, different in atomic weight, are evaporating differently
at different times of high and low temperature, high and low rainfall.
Looking at those isotopes gives you a way of talking about lake levels in the past,
that gives you a way of talking about aridity, how dry is it?
In Africa, around 70,000 years ago and earlier, there was a period of massive drying.
Just at the time when modern human populations are establishing their diversity within Africa,
this is the time of maximum drying of the continent.
And so looking at that climate record into the past gives you the idea that this is a
challenging environment that people are existing in.
Basically they need to change their adaptations in various ways to fit this environment.
Now we can't connect in a straightforward way the evidence of this drying and the evidence
of human diversification, but it does give you the hint that there's a context going
on, that humans are connected to climate, that we're not isolated from it, we're affected
by it.
And that context seems to be the way that climate lays the groundwork for our evolution.
There aren't a catastrophic explanation for any particular event in our evolution, but
there is a continuing whittling away of variation because we have to adapt to the climates
that we're faced with.
