Language is such an important aspect of human behavior, and it's something that is pretty
novel in our evolution.
There's no other species that communicates in the way that we do, and some aspects of
language are completely unique.
So it's a big mystery in our evolution how language emerged.
It's a mystery to which I've devoted two lectures in the course.
One lecture covered Neanderthals, and the evolution of the Vocal Auditory Channel in
Neanderthals especially, to evaluate whether we could find fossil evidence about language
in ancient hominids.
But this lecture covers a somewhat more philosophical issue.
Can we unravel the way that a complicated function like language would have evolved in
a population like the population of ancient humans?
Are there constraints that would have operated on our brains or on our cognition that might
give us some clues about the method by which language emerged?
In the context of psychology and biology, there has been a long-running debate about
the manner in which language evolved in humans.
That debate is between two camps, one camp that sees language itself as the primary target
of natural selection in the emergence of the human brain.
So that language is somehow the driver, and the rest of the brain is following along because
of selection on communication.
The other camp sees language as a side effect of the evolution of other kinds of cognitive
skills in humans, so that when we look at language, it may have features that emerged
not because of natural selection for communication, but because of natural selection for other
kinds of cognitive skills that humans have.
That debate is one for which we really have to look beyond the fossil record to try to
enlighten ourselves about the manners in which things might have happened.
When we think about language as a system, well, language is of course a form of communication,
but it's a very distinctive form of communication because unlike visual communication, which
is multimodal, language is a form of communication that is serial.
It has to follow an order because an individual is making sounds using his or her vocal tract,
the throat, the mouth, and those sounds are transmitted, and a listener will hear those
sounds with the listener's ears.
That channel means that language has to be structured in a very special way so that
ideas, thoughts, and relationships which are fundamentally multimodal because they involve
different kinds of sensory information and different kinds of concepts, those multimodal
forms of information have to be encoded into the serial form of communication that's transmitted
from one individual to another.
In human language, this encoding is done on a dual system.
One element of that dual system is the element that determines which sounds we actually choose
to use as part of a human language.
When you think about the sounds that are in a language, sounds like, well, in English,
the consonant sounds that you're familiar with, B, D, G, H, F, those kinds of sounds,
and the vowel sounds, A, A, E, E. Each of those distinct sounds is called a phoneme,
and different languages in humans today have different sets of phonemes.
Some languages have lots and lots of sets, lots and lots of phonemes, other languages
have relatively fewer, but all languages use a distinctive combination of phonemes,
and the phonemes that different languages use are different from each other.
So when a speaker of English tries to learn a different language, you may have challenges
in making the sounds that the other language speakers make quite naturally.
I remember for me learning French as a native English speaker, some of the sounds in French
really don't have very clear English equivalents.
Even though they're spelled with the same letters in many cases, they sound quite different.
The phonemes that make up a language are a coherent system, and phonemes are learned
by children early in their development, so that they're being surrounded with the sounds
that other speakers of their language make, and they're picking up the appropriate sounds
for their language, and as they grow and develop, they're becoming masters of recognizing
those phonemes.
Humans can recognize speech sounds at a very rapid rate as part of natural speech, up to
30 or more phonemes per second in rapid speech, whereas with other kinds of sounds, you have
a much more limited ability to be able to pick those out very rapidly, sometimes six
or fewer sounds in a second.
So that system, the vocal auditory channel, the sounds that you make as a limited set
of all of the sounds that your mouth could make, and the sounds that people receive because
they're highly practiced in receiving the sounds of their language, that's what we were
looking for when we looked at Neanderthals and other fossil hominids to see if they had
the adaptations in the vocal auditory channel that we do, when we looked at the hyoid bones
of ancient hominids, and when we looked in the middle ears of those hominids to try to
determine how their ears were able to receive sounds, that was that aspect of the system.
But language involves another level of patterning.
That level of patterning is above the sounds that are used.
The sounds form a basis, but those sounds are grouped into words, and the words are
grouped into sentences and longer utterances.
And the pattern of grouping of sounds into words, and the pattern of grouping of words
into sentences, those patterns are accomplished not by the vocal auditory channel, those patterns
are accomplished by the brain.
And of course, in the fossil record, we have very little evidence about the structure of
the brain, and in particular the structure of the brain areas that may be related to
language.
And so to learn about this level of structuring of language, one that turns out to be highly
important in distinguishing human language from other forms of communication, to learn
about that, we have to depend on what we can understand from human development, how do
kids learn languages as they grow, and in comparing humans with other kinds of animals,
the way that they naturally communicate, and the ways that they might be trained to replicate
some kinds of human communication.
Some of the best examples of animals encountering human language are cases where psychologists
have attempted to teach chimpanzees or bonobos how to use language.
And of course, chimps and bonobos don't have the vocal channel that we do, so they can't
produce human speech sounds, but they can learn how to sign.
One chimpanzee, Washoe, born in 1965 and who died in 2007, as a very young chimp, began
to be taught by the psychologist Alan Gardner, some signs of American sign language.
So Washoe, as a young chimp, was picking up signs.
When Washoe was five years old, Roger and Deborah Fouts, another pair of researchers,
took up his care and began to teach him more signs.
Washoe, by the end of his life, had learned more than 300 signs.
So that was an impressive accomplishment.
But there were limits on Washoe's ability to use these signs.
Learning a sign and using it in the right context, Washoe could do.
But putting signs together into more complicated sentences, something that comes naturally
to signers in American sign language and other forms of human sign language, Washoe wasn't
able to do that for more than two or three signs at a time.
It was this patterning of signs at a higher level that Washoe couldn't manage.
Kanzi, the famous bonobo, who we've seen earlier in the course in terms of tool manufacture.
Kanzi was taught to manufacture some flaked stone tools.
Kanzi also is very well known as one of the best language learners among bonobos and chimpanzees.
Kanzi has mastered a series of hundreds of logograms, picture symbols that relate to things in Kanzi's environment.
Kanzi can use those very effectively and has had some success teaching them to others.
But what Kanzi hasn't been able to do is master this combining signs into longer utterances,
something that humans can manage by age two or three.
And so there seems to be a real difference in chimpanzees compared to humans
in their ability to generate this higher level of structure.
That higher level of structure is called grammar.
And grammar has been one of the central focuses of linguists since the early days of linguistics and certainly since the 1950s.
The most famous figure in the study of grammar is a linguist named Noam Chomsky.
Chomsky became famous in linguistics because of his opposition to the School of Psychology called behaviorism.
Behaviorists believed that the way to study psychological mechanisms was to set up experiments where the inputs to an animal were strictly controlled.
If the inputs were controlled and the psychologist studied the behavioral outputs,
then the psychologist could structure the experiments in such a way that they could understand the workings of the animal.
Behaviorism was based on the idea that inputs were almost everything,
so that you could train an animal or a person to carry out almost any series of behaviors if you gave them the appropriate inputs.
It was the study of chimpanzees and their abilities to learn sign language
that put one spin on behaviorism by showing that no matter how much you structured the environment to be like the environment of a human child,
something that the fouts did with Washoe. They tried to raise Washoe just as if it was a human child.
No matter how you structured that environment, you were not able to get the chimpanzee to learn the grammatical skills that children have.
It's a case where when you look at chimpanzees, it looks like there's something going on in their minds that's fundamentally different from a human mind,
something that's innate. Chomsky made an innate argument in the context of language,
but one that didn't depend on this work with chimpanzees, which had yet to be done, one that instead was based on logic.
Chomsky argued that there are patterns that occur in human languages that you can't learn only by listening to what other people say.
As a child is growing up, the child is surrounded by other people talking,
and the speech of those other people makes a kind of positive evidence about what language is and how you use language.
So children are very good at hearing the words and sentences that are said around them and repeating them.
But there are some patterns that are characteristic of language that children can't learn by only getting positive evidence.
If children are therefore able to master those kinds of patterns, that mastery must not come from the evidence that's around them in people's speech.
That evidence must instead come from something innate.
They have to have been born with something that gives them the ability to sift out these patterns that aren't obvious from the speech around them so that they can make them.
Chomsky called this argument the argument of the poverty of the stimulus.
The idea was that the stimuli that are around in the environment just aren't enough to master a natural language.
If we want a real example of the poverty of the stimulus, we can think of the way that English forms questions out of statements.
If we start with a very simple statement like, I am a professor, and we want to make that into a question,
the way that we naturally would do it is by reversing the order of the subject and the verb to say, am I a professor?
So I am a professor because it becomes, am I a professor?
But if we try to do that with a more complicated sentence, we're going to start to run into trouble.
So if we say something like, anyone who likes this lecture can watch it again later, that's a slightly more complicated sentence.
And if we want to turn that into a question, it's fairly clear that we have a number of options.
If we do the simple thing and reverse the order of the subject and the verb, we will end up with something that turns out to be nonsensical,
such as, is anyone who likes this lecture can watch it later?
And that doesn't work.
Instead, we need to take the chunks of that and keep certain ones together and rearrange other ones,
making it, can anyone who likes this lecture watch it again later?
So we have an inability to generalize from a very simple sentence where we reverse word order to a somewhat more complicated sentence.
And in Chomsky's argument, the poverty of the stimulus argument, that ability to generalize can't be gotten just by listening to these kinds of simple sentences.
It has to depend on some sort of grammatical abilities that are internal to the mind.
A second kind of argument about the poverty of the stimulus comes from the recursion ability of language.
We can make linguistic utterances arbitrarily complicated by just adding on things that are recursive.
By recursive, what we mean is adding on something that adds an entire phrase to modify something that's already in a sentence.
So if I say, this is the lecture where I came up with the most complicated utterance I could think of,
because it was a good example in this context where I was talking about language and Chomsky's ideas that are not universally believed among linguists,
but this becomes more and more and more complicated, and we can carry that on indefinitely.
That's infinite recursion.
But if a language is infinitely recursive, it becomes very difficult to see how anybody could learn it.
There are clearly rules that the people speaking a language are carrying out,
and it's not obvious how you would generalize those kinds of rules from the environment that you have around you,
which involves sentences which are not infinitely long.
Well, it's clear that the positive evidence approach is something that does occur in other kinds of primates.
So for example, vervet monkeys.
Vervet monkeys are small terrestrial monkeys.
They live in Africa, and because they live on the ground with retreating into trees only when they are in trouble,
they are highly subject to predators.
And vervet monkeys have warning signals so that they warn each other when different predators are approaching.
And when an eagle is circling above, they'll use one kind of call,
and when a leopard is approaching, they use a different call.
And in fact, they have six different calls for different types of predators.
It's a really complicated and clever system so that these calls, which all sound different from each other,
they're almost like words.
It's almost like the monkeys are saying, eagle, leopard, baboon.
But they don't learn this by being corrected when they make the wrong call.
Instead, the juvenile monkeys, they spontaneously make these different calls, and the adults just ignore them.
It's not like a juvenile monkey will say, eagle, eagle at the wrong time,
and the juvenile's mother will say, stop that, stop saying eagle.
I mean, they don't behave like humans in this way.
Instead, the juveniles are just ignored, and they learn only through positive association the right context in which to make the calls.
So if human language was learned in this way, it's clear that we would have a real problem with the poverty of the stimulus.
Chomsky generalized his argument to say that if we have the ability to learn these infinite series of things,
how could we do that by a process of natural selection?
Natural selection can only operate on what actually occurs in a population,
but language is so much more in its potential than has ever occurred in any population.
There was no population in the past that had an equivalent of war and peace except for Russia.
There was no population in the distant past that had Shakespeare except for England.
There's no way that these complicated things could have themselves been subject of natural selection.
And so Chomsky says they weren't.
Instead, the complicated abilities that we have may be side effects, side effects of our evolution of other kinds of cognitive behaviors.
So that if we look at social behaviors interacting with other people, or if we look at manipulative behaviors working with stone tools,
those might have given us some of the groundwork for language,
and language might have emerged when the brain got to be complicated enough that it was able to generalize those into communication.
I used to be driven crazy by reading Chomsky because for me, as a student of evolution,
I'm reading this linguist who's saying that language couldn't have evolved.
It has to be a side effect of something else.
And it just, I've got to tell you, as a student reading this and I'm studying evolution and I like linguistics, this was really frustrating.
Well, this argument was taken up by a very prominent evolutionary biologist, Stephen J. Gould.
Gould became famous for his work in paleontology, and he had many productive ideas,
but one collaboration that he had with the geneticist Richard Lewinton has become famous in biology
because it has given us a way of talking about the adaptation of things as a side effect of other kinds of evolutionary constraints.
Their example was based on a cathedral, a cathedral in Venice called St. Mark's Cathedral.
Their paper titled The Spandrels of San Marco, a critique of the Panglossian paradigm,
their paper has become famous in biology for laying out this example of the way that constraints can be built on in evolution,
elaborated to do other things.
To explain why a cathedral is relevant to this, we have to think about a cathedral with a dome.
A dome on top is a round structure, and in very rare cases are there round walls supporting the dome.
Instead, most cathedrals with a dome support the dome with arches.
Those arches are architecturally very strong, but they have a curved shape, and the dome itself has a different curved shape.
And so when a dome is sitting on top of a series of arches, there will be triangular spaces in between the arches that support the dome.
Those triangular spaces are called spandrels.
Spandrels are an architectural necessity.
Spandrels have to be there for the dome to be supported by the arches.
But in many cathedrals, including St. Mark's, the spandrels are elaborately decorated.
They have frescoes or mosaics on them that illustrate religious scenes and become important in the life of the religious community that worships inside the church.
So the spandrels have a function.
And if you ask somebody coming into the church, what's that spandrel for?
They will tell you about the story of the resurrection or the story of the nativity, the things that are on the spandrels.
But the spandrels aren't there because of that purpose.
The spandrels are there because they have to hold up the dome.
Gould's insight and Lewenton's insight was that some things in biology were this way.
For example, snails.
Snails have a coiled shell, and in some species of snails, the coil in that shell encloses a space.
The space is there just because the shell is coiled.
That's the only reason. It's an architectural element of the shell.
But some species of snails use that space to keep their eggs in.
They're called brood spaces.
The keeping the eggs there, we might imagine to be a purpose of the space in the coil of the shell.
But in fact, the space in the coil of the shell is there just because of the fact that it's coiled.
It's, in other words, very much like a spandrel.
And so when Gould took Chomsky's ideas, he said,
maybe language is like a spandrel.
Maybe it's there because of the adaptation of other cognitive abilities.
But those cognitive abilities that evolved for other purposes were built upon for communication purposes.
So that the cognitive complexity of humans underlies language,
and the particular elaboration of language might itself be innate because of these other things.
Well, that view of language met heavy opposition on the part of some linguists and biologists.
One in particular, Stephen Pinker, was in many respects a follower of Chomsky.
Pinker also believed that language is basically innate in our ability to learn language
and to develop as speaking adults was something that was determined by our genes working with our environment.
But Pinker thought that this could be a straightforward product of natural selection.
If you imagine kids who are born and then developing as language speakers,
well, when they're born, they can't speak a language, but they're exposed to the language around them.
And before they're six months old, they're beginning to pick up the speech sounds, the phonemes in their community.
And by the time they're one year old, they're beginning to learn words.
And it's a characteristic set of words that they're likely to learn first, words like mama, milk.
And as they grow to be three years old, they've begun to be able to string words together into simple and then complex utterances.
And between three and five, they begin to make a characteristic set of errors.
Kids do things like instead of saying go and went as a past tense of go, they'll say go and goad
because they're generalizing the fact that you can make a past tense by adding an ed to the end of verbs.
And there are irregular verbs where that's not appropriate to do.
And then that gets fixed later in their development.
So Pinker looks at that sequence and says, this is such a complicated series of things.
It seems to be so intricately designed in a way to learn language that I can't imagine that this is just a side effect of other cognitive abilities.
Instead, this seems like it has evolved for that purpose.
Natural selection must have made kids able to learn language.
The way that Pinker dealt with the poverty of the stimulus argument was to say that, look, this is a problem that you have to solve learning these things.
But the problem actually is a problem that has emerged through a series of steps.
And each step was slightly better at learning language than the step before
so that language can become complicated as a system by adding discrete steps through the evolutionary process.
For Pinker, the fact that language is learned was actually a bonus to this
because learning gives you some wiggle room.
If you have the sort of genetic firepower to get up to a certain level of language learning
and then learning can take you a little bit higher, it means that you can master slightly more complexity.
And then natural selection will favor those genes that make it ordinary to get to that level of complexity.
This pattern of evolution is called the Baldwin effect.
And Pinker's argument was that this was fundamental to the evolution of language,
that learning any kind of complexity would require selection on the genes that influence learning
and that allow you to pick up the rules in your native language.
However, today's linguists sometimes disagree with Pinker and Chomsky
about the extent to which language is innate.
Many linguists today believe that language is largely learned
so that it doesn't really take a lot of innateness in babies
and development in terms of the same genes in the same places in the same parts of the brain
to end up with adult language speakers.
One argument in favor of the idea that language is learned uniquely and differently by everybody
is that the brain appears to be very plastic.
There are well-known cases where a person has had her left hemisphere removed
usually because of a severe kind of seizure disorder.
Removing a hemisphere of the brain is a very extreme treatment
but it's something that has regrettably to be carried out for some people.
But when you do this to kids, they can instantiate language on the opposite side of their brain
and learn to be facile adult speakers of language.
That ability to learn language and instantiate it in a different part of the brain
shows that the brain is highly plastic in terms of how language is learned.
Blind people who aren't using their visual cortexes for visual information
sometimes develop their visual cortexes as an adjunct to the language parts of their brain.
That plasticity, the fact that a part of the brain that in ordinary people would never be used for language
can be used for language in the right developmental context
shows that language is actually very pervasive in its effects on learning in the brain
and that argues for the idea that it's learned uniquely and differently by different kinds of people.
Probably the biggest figure today in favor of this point of view
that language is largely shared and learned rather than being mainly innate is Michael Tomasello.
And Michael Tomasello is famous for his work with chimpanzees.
His psychological work in chimpanzees has focused on the question of how early life learning takes place.
And what Tomasello has demonstrated again and again is that learning takes place in humans
when children and their caregiver, their mother or their father or other adults,
are focusing their attention on the same object.
And that's clearly the context in which word learning is taking place in young children.
A mother holding up an object, getting the child's attention on it and saying the name of the object,
banana or ball, and the child repeating, learning the word.
That takes a shared attention on the same object.
Chimpanzees do this very poorly.
Chimpanzee infants don't really easily master getting the same attention on an object that's being presented to them.
And chimpanzee mothers don't typically devote the attention to getting the attention shared on that object.
So there seems to be an aspect of learning which has relatively little to do with communication
but has a lot to do with the ability to focus on the same object
and get that same object in an attention span between two individuals.
That's a skill that's fundamental to language in humans.
We may not be able to learn language without it,
but it's something that seems to have emerged sometime during our evolution.
It seems to be a uniquely human aspect of behavior.
And so when we look at the question, did language emerge as a product of selection?
Or did language emerge as a side effect of selection on other kinds of things?
Is language a spandrel or is it the target of adaptation in our evolution?
Today's linguistics gives us a range of answers.
There's really a disagreement about the extent to which natural selection was involved in the acquisition of language,
whether language draws upon other cognitive resources that are there for other reasons,
and whether it's leading the brain or whether it instead is following other skills.
This is an active debate.
We don't have a really clear answer right now as to how these parts of language evolved.
But you can see that the stakes of this debate are very important when we consider other aspects of our evolution.
Why did we get the skills that we have in terms of tool manufacture?
How did we develop our complex social networks?
All of those things are cases in which learning and genetics are both intricately involved with the development of our brains.
And so the stakes in this debate are really higher than language, if this language weren't high enough.
And it will be interesting to see how further experimentation denotes the parts of this language learning process
that are really key in our evolutionary history.
