Welcome back.
The origin of farming is a relatively recent event in human evolution.
It's something that initiates really only around 10,000 years ago, at the very end of
the last Ice Age.
And yet, farming is such a fundamental shift in the human subsistence pattern, our ability
to extract resources from our environments, that it imposes many other kinds of changes
on human societies.
For one thing, humans begin to live more sedentary in their living structures.
They're living in one place.
They're not as mobile.
They're not moving around as much.
They defend territories, because if you're going to invest in farming in a particular
patch of ground, you want to make sure that you still have that patch of ground when it
comes time to harvest the crops.
You have to store foods for longer periods of time if you're a farmer, because you've
got to survive the winter on the foods that you've farmed during the growing season.
All of those changes, and many others, induced many changes in human biology.
This lecture is going to deal with some of the more fundamental aspects of farming.
When and where did it originate, and from there, how did it spread throughout the rest
of the world?
Was it mainly a process of people moving along with the crops that they grew, bringing agriculture
with them?
In other words, was this something where ancient people migrated from the centers of agriculture
into other places, or was it a process in which people learned how to grow crops from
their neighbors and adopted that whole sale?
That process is a process that we would call diffusion.
The idea of agriculture originated in one place, and then began to spread from there.
This debate about migration versus diffusion is, again, one of the oldest ones in anthropology.
When we look at the evidence for early farmers, this fundamental question has constantly arisen.
When farming shows up, did the people come in bringing it with them, or did the people
who already lived there learn it by watching the people who live next door?
Is it moving by migration, or is it moving by diffusion?
To give a good example, in the central part of Europe, in the Danube Valley, and further
north into Germany, and further south, there's a culture that existed around 5,000 years
ago called the linear-bond ceramic culture.
A linear-bond ceramic, which is often abbreviated LBK for the German term for it, is a farming
culture.
It's one of the earliest agricultural cultures in Europe.
It's also, as we now understand it, a dairying culture.
They're keeping some domesticated cattle, and they're milking them.
We have some evidence from the pots that they used, the pots that are decorated with lines
in a band around them, the linear-bond ceramic decoration.
We have evidence from inside of those pots that they're keeping dairy animals and milking
them.
We know that this is a culture that's really fundamentally sharing an agricultural
subsistence base that much earlier had originated in West Asia and the Near East.
Agriculture in Europe isn't original to Europe.
It's using ideas that have come from West Asia.
The question with the LBK culture is, is this local people who have adopted this idea of
agriculture and have maybe gotten the cattle from the Near East, ultimately, but are using
them themselves, or are these people who came from the Near East bringing those things
with them?
LBK culture was one of the first for which archaeologists really addressed this question.
When we look at the skeletal record, which could potentially tell us about where the
people came from, are these people who are like the original Europeans who had lived there
during the Upper Paleolithic and succeeding Mesolithic time periods before 8,000 years
ago?
Or are they people who look biologically like the people who lived in West Asia before 8,000
years ago?
They look like they came from somewhere else, in other words.
Well, this is a topic that really occupied physical anthropologists and archaeologists
for many years, beginning in the late 19th century and extending through around the 1940s.
They studied the skulls of these people to try to get a picture of whether they were
biologically related to earlier Europeans or whether they had come from somewhere else.
I've studied those skulls myself, and I can tell you that it's a really difficult enterprise
to take a skull from an archaeological deposit and try to reconstruct it and get a clear
picture of what it's like, what it's related to.
Some of the aspects of them that are interesting are that when we go back to these early farmers
in Europe, people who lived in what we would call the Neolithic era, that's Neolithic
New Stone Age, it's because they were using ground stone artifacts, stone that had been
ground on a grindstone to make it into a usable tool as opposed to flaking it as a usable
tool.
These Neolithic people are different from living people in lots of ways.
For example, you go to this sample of skeletons and you discover that there are some people
there that have great cranial robusticity.
People who once in a while have a brow ridge that goes all the way across, just as we would
find in the earlier Upper Paleolithic time period, but something that's quite rare in
the same area today.
When we look at those people, they do stand apart from us a little bit and studying them
and trying to get a clear picture of what their relationships are, it means that we
have to look at the features that they have, but also we have to consider how those features
have changed in the intervening time period.
Well, one thing that changes about them very clearly is that over time in Europe, their
brains got smaller and that's a maximum that occurs in the Mesolithic about 10,000 years
ago.
Men have a brain size that's a little over 1,500 cubic centimeters on average, women
a little over 1,400, that reduces when we go into the Neolithic.
They've changed, in other words.
It continues to reduce right up to the present, so our brains have actually shrunk compared
to what they were at their maximum point about 10,000 years ago.
That shrinking, we now understand, probably genuine, it seems to be shrinking more than
you would predict from body size, understand that the hunter-gatherers who lived in Europe
at the end of the Ice Age, they had a very robust adaptation.
They were able to collect wild foods that were nutritionally very good and when people
moved to agriculture, that was nutritionally poorer in many respects.
If you're depending on crops like wheat, like iron corn wheat, and when we get to northern
Europe where wheat isn't growing early on, barley and oats, when you're depending on
crops like that, they're not as nutritionally complete as the wild foods that you would
have eaten.
They're poorer in several respects.
They're better in terms of predictability.
You might be able to predict more that you're going to have food over the winter, but they're
not as good in terms of your overall health.
People do shrink.
They get smaller in body size and that's probably partly nutritional shrinking.
Some of that nutritional change has rebounded, of course, in the last couple of hundred years
as people have grown in body size in industrialized societies because they're eating a better
diet.
Well, shrinking continued and it's a little bit more in the brain than we would predict
from the shrinking in the body size.
In other words, the population was changing biologically at the same time we have this
question of whether people are migrating from somewhere else.
That's certainly an argument in favor of the idea that there is a biological shift, maybe
it's a biological shift that's related to actually people moving in from somewhere else.
It's not just the size of the skull that changes, it's also the morphology of the skull.
For example, it gets thinner and thinner over time, but even more radically, it changes
in its proportion of length to width.
If we look at skulls in the present day, they're relatively wide compared to their length.
In other words, they're short-skilled and broad-skilled.
But if we go back to the Mesolithic era 10,000 years ago, people's skulls are longer and
narrower compared to ours.
So there's been a shift in the relationship of how long the skull is to how broad it is.
That's a shift that was recognized during the 19th century.
People saw that in Europe, over time, the skulls were getting broader.
They referred to this as a change from dollicosephaly to brachycephaly.
Those long words just mean long-skilled versus broad-skilled.
That's exactly what was happening.
The skulls did get smaller.
At the same time, they got shorter and relatively broader.
So it was clear from the earliest days of physical anthropology that there was a biological
change in this population.
The first explanation for that change was migration.
The idea was that there had originally been broad-headed and long-headed races of people
that lived in different places, and that the long heads moved in to Europe from somewhere
else, and that later the broad heads were expanding their population from the south
into the north.
And so you had this explanation of the variability within Europe today, and also the shift over
time from the past to the present, and explanation in terms of movements of people.
This was really the root of the idea of migration in anthropology, the idea that when farming
shows up in Europe, which is where people were examining this very closely, when farming
shows up, it's because people bring it in from somewhere else, and those people have
different proportions, and that's what we see in the skeletal record.
This would all be helped if, in fact, the phenomenon was unique to Europe.
But actually, we now know that this trend toward broader heads occurs basically everywhere
that people lived.
It occurs in East Asia, it occurs in Australia, it occurs in Southern Africa.
It's a shift that's worldwide in its scope, in other words.
It's not exactly the same everywhere, and it does seem to go more in agricultural places,
and that raises the possibility as to whether this is not a shift that's due to migration
of people, but it's a shift that's due to evolution of people, that the people have
changed and they've changed where they've lived.
If this skeletal change is reflecting evolution changing in one place, then there's no need
to posit the idea that people are migrating from somewhere else, you could have them changing
where they lived.
So geneticists began to consider how we could relate the pattern of genetic changes to the
skeletal changes, if it was possible, and how we could compare genetic changes to other
kinds of changes.
The most prominent kind of change that people were really interested in explaining was language
change.
You see, it turns out that today's languages are related to each other.
We can trace them back to common ancestors.
To understand this, think about the Romance languages.
Languages like French, Spanish, Italian, Romanian.
Those languages are related to each other.
They're related to each other because they all descend, in some sense, from Latin.
Every one of those languages has similar words in it that are actually derived from Latin
words.
And those present-day languages have similar grammatical patterns and sound patterns that
come from Latin grammatical patterns and sound patterns.
They're not all the same.
If they were, they would still be Latin.
They've changed over time.
The way that word sound has changed and the way that sentences are put together has changed.
But they've changed in ways that linguists are able to reconstruct.
They can show that medieval French was a little different from modern-day French.
And that if you go back before medieval French to look at vulgar Latin, the Latin spoken
by the common people, it's a little bit different.
And if you go back further to classical Latin, the Latin that was spoken at the foundations
of Rome, it's a little different.
You can trace those shifts over time and you can show how the languages have diversified.
Well, historical linguists, as they are called, have become really, really successful at this.
They showed in the 19th century, not only, of course, that the Romance languages are
connected and they're related to Latin, but also that languages like English and German
and Dutch are related.
And they can be traced back to an earlier form of Germanic.
It was the Brothers Grimm, the ones who are famous for the children's stories, who worked
out the sound changes responsible for shifting the Germanic languages over time.
It's such an interesting history to look at the way that people investigated languages.
The difference between Latin and an ancient form of Germanic is that Latin is a written
language.
You've got a record of it.
The Germanic that today's English and German and Dutch and so on descend from isn't written.
The only thing that we know about it is the way that we reconstruct the history of how
today's languages have originated.
When we go back before Germanic, we can connect languages at even deeper levels.
We can connect, for example, Latin with the ancient Celtic languages, some of which are
still spoken by people in Ireland, in Wales.
So those languages that still exist trace back to an even more distant ancestor that
shared with Latin.
And those languages trace back to a more distant language that was related to German.
And as we go farther and farther back, it turns out that most of the languages of Europe
can be traced back to a common ancestry.
In Europe today, the languages that are exceptions to this really stand out.
Languages like Basque, which is spoken in the Pyrenees Mountains between France and Spain,
and Fin, which is spoken in Finland, and Hungarian.
Those are languages that are exceptions to this.
They don't trace back very closely to the other European languages.
But what was noticed in the 19th century was that Latin and Greek had similar linguistic
structures to ancient Sanskrit, a language that was spoken in the ancient times in Northern
India.
And those have connections to ancient Persian, which was spoken in Iran in ancient times.
And all of those languages, from Central Asia right across to the western part of Europe,
are related to each other in one large family.
That family is called Indo-European.
When we think about how Indo-European came to be distributed across most of West Asia
and most of Europe, you have to think that there's some history to this.
We know today that the reason why Romance languages are spoken in Spain and France and
Romania and Italy is because the Romans conquered France and Spain and Italy and Romania.
That there were Romans that explained why this is.
And so when we look at Indo-European as a very much older language family, it's natural
to think that there were people who spoke that language.
And the reason why that language has descendants today that have come to occupy India and Iran
and the western part of Russia and most of Europe.
Why is it that those languages are there now?
It's because there were Indo-Europeans that spread across this area.
This was also a real boost in the arm for the idea that ancient migrations explained
this.
And today it has become the basis of a hypothesis that connects language shifts, the spread
of these ancient languages with farming.
The idea being that if you're going to push a language over a very, very large amount
of space, it's because the people who spoke the language must have had a great demographic
growth.
They were able to grow their population and disperse across large areas of a continent.
We could imagine what is it that over the course of the last few thousand years would
be strong enough to give those people such an advantage.
And farming stands out as something that would be strong enough to bring people, grow their
population, cause them to move and establish themselves in new places.
So the hypothesis that languages and farming are connected, that hypothesis presents itself
as being something that is definitely worth investigating.
Geneticists have taken on this challenge.
The idea is that if you look at people today, their genes will trace their ancestry back
in time.
We saw in a previous lecture how genes can give you a sign of the size of ancient populations
and how when we go back to the most distant part of our ancestry, going back to hundreds
of thousands of years, it's the size of the population that really accounts for people's
relationships to each other genetically.
But we also saw that over the course of the last few thousand years, when people are dispersed
over a wide geographic area, it's not only the size of the population, but also where
the people lived that has a big influence on whether they're related to each other.
And when we asked this question, how did farming move into Europe?
It's very much the same kind of question that we were looking at genetically in Africa when
people were moving.
It's a question of can we show that the people trace ancestors into a relatively smaller
and smaller and smaller space back in time?
For example, when we look across Europe today, there's a climb of variation.
That's a gradient of variation where things are more variable in genetic terms in the
easternmost part of Europe and less variable in the westernmost part of Europe.
For example, if we look at the Y chromosome, that's the part of DNA that's carried only
by men.
It makes you a man.
If we look at the Y chromosome, there are many different Y chromosome types, Y chromosomes
that have their own distinct ancestry back to some point in the past where they branch
apart.
Those types are more variable in eastern Europe and less variable in western Europe, so much
so that if we consider how many types are shared from one part of Europe with the easternmost
end of Europe, that continually gets lower and lower and lower and lower as you go farther
west.
Luca Cavalli-Sforza, a famous Italian geneticist, considered this pattern and said, if I look
at many kinds of genetic markers, I get a similar kind of answer.
If I look at blood types, I can get a similar answer.
If I look at the serology of the HLA types in the blood, types that are immune important
and that you would have tested if you were going to have a kidney transplant, if you
look at those, they become less and less variable.
He drew a map that shows how this gradient goes over the course of the continent.
That map shows a maximum degree of variation pretty much in Mesopotamia, the part of the
population that farming originated in some 10,000 years ago.
His idea was that this spread was responsible for the spread of agriculture, that people
had genes and they were dispersing through Europe and that they were bringing with them
the agricultural technology, but that they were then mixing with the people who were
already there.
He called the idea demic diffusion, that there was a growth of a population, but that it
sort of accommodated its neighbors as it went.
As you got to the end of Europe, on the westernmost side, you had gotten to the maximum extent
of this trend and had the minimum amount of genes that had come from the east.
That was a really provocative theory, the idea that it's a mixture of migration and diffusion
that are responsible for this.
There were a lot of genetic data that seemed to be real consistent with this.
For example, when we look at the mitochondrial genome, that genome that's inherited only
from the mother through the female line, we could see that there were some mitochondrial
types in Europe that dated to really the earliest stages of modern humanity entering Europe,
as old as 40,000 years ago.
But there were other types that seemed to cluster around 10,000 years ago.
My mitochondrial type, type H, is a type that originated about 13,000 years ago.
It looks like it came from West Asia and spread into Europe from there after that time.
That type is a type that would presumably have come along with early agriculturalists
into Europe if this scenario were correct.
Whereas older types, like type U, must have been in Europe much earlier in time.
They must have been there with the upper Paleolithic people that came in after the Neanderthals.
Europe is not alone in this.
Other parts of the world also saw their population movements and the founding of new populations
after agriculture was invented.
And in many senses, some other parts of the world are even clearer.
For example, in Southeast Asia, there's a movement of people who originated in South
China as rice agriculturalists.
And from that early point, about 8,000 years ago, they dispersed onto Taiwan, the island
off of the south coast of China.
They dispersed from there into island Southeast Asia, the Philippines, Java, Borneo, ultimately
going further to the east into New Guinea and Melanesia.
They're spreading into a population where hunter-gatherers already lived, where we've
seen that people reached those islands before 30,000 years ago.
And yet these farmers were bringing with them a package of farmed species, like rice, like
breadfruit, like bananas.
They're bringing them into these islands.
They're spreading with pigs and with rats.
They're bringing with them a whole package of stuff.
And when they get to Melanesia, they farm there for a while on the coasts of Melanesia.
And then they start moving further.
About 6,000 years ago, they're making a distinctive kind of pottery, which is called by archaeologists
today, the Lapida culture.
The Lapida culture begins to spread out further into what we call Polynesia.
So they're spreading, ultimately, to Vanuatu and to Fiji.
They spread as far as Tahiti, and then they go north and spread to Hawaii.
And this dispersal is happening as a farming population, a farming population that has
a more and more sophisticated ability to move across water, to navigate between these islands
that are hundreds or thousands of miles apart.
They reach Easter Island, which is closest to South America.
And then we think they reach South America.
And we think this because they brought back with them the sweet potato.
And the sweet potato begins to move back across Polynesia.
These trading networks are so extensive, and they're established with such an ability
to move accurately from place to place, that the farming culture has spread across an area
that was previously uninhabited by people.
But it did so by initiating its movement in an area where people, hunter-gatherers, had
already lived, and with some mixture with those local hunter-gatherers.
So this idea of diffusion of people is one that seems to be pretty important in the early
establishment of migrations, but of course explosive movement from one part of the world
to another becomes possible when you can put together a package and disperse really rapidly
and effectively with it.
We can return to this question of Europe at this point.
In the Polynesian area, the dispersal of farmers seems quite clear.
There's initially some mixture, and then there's a straightforward dispersal of people.
It's a straightforward migration.
In Europe, recently, the situation has become somewhat more clouded, because we've gone
and sampled ancient skeletons looking for their DNA.
Now there's a clear prediction.
If there's a diffusion of agriculture into Europe, then the ancient people who lived
before farming ought to be genetically like the people who lived there when farming is
introduced.
Presumably those people ought to look like us.
They ought to be the same genes all the way.
As we've seen already, there's evidence that the mitochondrial diversity seems to start
coming into Europe and mixing, so that some mitochondrial genes are there early, but others
are coming from West Asia sometime around 10,000 years ago or later, presumably spreading
along with agriculture.
And we've seen that linguists think that some of that movement is explaining the movement
of languages into Europe and the relationships of languages with each other.
In Polynesia, that's the case.
Everybody in Polynesia speaks a series of closely related languages.
They belong to a language family called Austronesian, which dispersed from Taiwan across much of
the Pacific.
But in Europe, the situation has become more complex because the sampling of the genes
of these ancient people shows that they're different from the people who were there before
them, and the LBK people, the first farmers that we're finding in Central Europe, are
different from the people who live there after them.
They have mitochondrial lineages that today are not very common in Europe.
They have mitochondrial lineages that were not very common before they got there.
In other words, it's not one movement of people.
It seems to be two movements of people.
That complexity is so fascinating because when we think about, you know, would we have
predicted that this is actually a number of different events that take place, I don't
think we'd have predicted it.
It seems that the populations have the ability to grow and shift and replace each other much
more quickly than we might have imagined.
It's not just one factor, like the introduction of farming that can influence this.
It's multiple factors, possibly the language shift, the shift to Indo-European is something
that happened long after farming is introduced into Europe.
Probably other factors like warfare or the introduction of new crops and new animals
are also responsible for moving new people into Europe.
In retrospect, that might not seem so surprising because when we think about ancient history,
for example the Greeks who successfully established colonies across the entire coast of the southern
coast of Europe along the Mediterranean, when we think about the ability of people to move
to new places, to start new colonies, it seems to be really, really important to the
history of Europe.
And so when we look at the earliest farming Europeans, we may be seeing a similar kind
of scenario.
People are moving into Europe, they're establishing colonies, they're mixing to some extent,
and then later on somebody else comes along.
And that history of movement and re-movement, waves of people, that's the history that's
given rise to the current pattern of diversity.
