Lecture 32, The South African Miracle
Hello again. There were many remarkable stories of democratic transition in the late 1980s
and 1990s, certainly the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, in Latin America, and in several countries
in Africa as we saw in our last lecture, but it's hard to top South Africa. In 1990 Nelson
Mandela was in prison and no black South African could vote. Four years later he was elected
president of the nation. When we last focused on South Africa we ended by noting that in
the late 1960s and early 1970s, apartheid appeared to be in the saddle. The active opposition
had been silenced. Mandela and a great number of his peers and cohorts jailed for life, his
and other movements banned operating in exile if operating at all. The government was pursuing
its grand apartheid scheme of separate development based in the so-called homelands. The white
population was prospering, but beneath the surface trouble was brewing for the rulers.
A number of key factors and key steps led to South Africa's transformation let us examine
them in turn. We can start with that period of the late 60s and early 70s, perhaps through
the mid 70s, and observe that the quiet on the surface was deceptive. Black anger certainly
was not diminishing, had not diminished, but it needed channeling in the place of resignation.
A crucial development in this regard, especially among the younger black population, was the
movement usually called black consciousness. It bears some comparison with the black power
movement of the 1960s and 70s in the United States, though bear in mind always, not just
in this case, but in looking at history and politics in these countries in general, that
we're talking, of course, about a black minority in one case and a majority in South Africa.
Black consciousness, in many respects, was first and foremost a psychological movement.
It called on black South Africans to free their minds first, to utterly reject the notions
of inferiority, the system handed them, to respect themselves and take pride in themselves,
and pride in their capacity to change things themselves. There's a way in which there's
an eerie echo in the black consciousness movement with certain features of Afrikaner nationalism
in, say, the 1920s, 30s, 40s. Afrikaner nationalists in those days had looked to their population,
and of course I'm referring to the Dutch-descended white settlers in South Africa, and again said,
have some respect for yourself. Don't let the stereotypes of, you know, the bumpkin created
by the British, in this case, saddle you with a perceived self-hatred or sense of inferiority.
Stand up, be men and women, realize your pride in your capacity to change things, and of
course change things they did, particularly symbolized by the 1948 election. So black
consciousness and Afrikaner nationalism in some respects are at completely opposite ends
of the spectrum, and yet in this emphasis on psychological self-strengthening, they
do bear certain similarities. Now the preeminent spokesman of the black consciousness movement
was a brilliant and charismatic medical student named Bantu Stephen Biko, Steve Biko. It was
Biko who looked at the average black South African around him and called him a hollow
shell, and he called upon people to change that, to not allow the system to fill that
hollowness with these senses of self-hatred and self-accepted versions of inferiority.
Harassed by the authorities, Biko, with his biting incisive analyses and his not least
steadfast humor, struck a chord with many, particularly the young. Let me give you an
example of this. I'm going to paraphrase a scene which occurred in a courtroom during
one of Biko's numerous trials on a variety of offenses. It was later brilliantly reenacted
by Denzel Washington, no less, in the film Cry Freedom, based on the book by Donald Woods
entitled Biko, and obviously about him. The screenplay was taken directly from the court
transcript. Again, I'm going to paraphrase it a bit. Biko is on the stand, and the white
South African judge at one point addresses him and says, Mr. Biko, why do you people
refer to yourselves as black? You're not black, you're brown, and Biko quite calmly replies,
and why do you people refer to yourselves as white? You're not white, you're sort of
off pink. Now, his point was that, of course, people distort and manipulate reality to construct
so-called races. But his further point was, if you can proclaim white supremacy, don't
tell me that I can't proclaim black consciousness. Now, in 1976, the Cokshore government of
South Africa made a classic blunder. It ordered that certain subjects be taught in Africans
in the secondary schools. Many objected to this proclamation on many grounds, but to
the students themselves in the high schools, this was having the so-called the quote, the
language of the oppressor crammed down their throats. The outrage over the new policy led
students in Soweto, South Africa's biggest township, to organize a rally in March. Large,
but peaceful. You may recall the dichotomy which I put forward in lecture 18, born really
at the Diamond Mining town of Kimberley, between the mine and the compound initially. In other
words, the point of production, if you like, and the place over there set apart and easily
controlled representing the black workforce. And I suggested at that point in that lecture
that that dichotomy really was enlarged and transposed and becomes a feature of virtually
every urban place in South Africa, larger, small. The town center, the city, and then
over there, some distance away, easily surrounded, if not any more actually fenced, was the township.
The largest township in South Africa then was Soweto, which was actually an acronym and
stood for Southwest townships, lying about 6 to 10 miles southwest of downtown Johannesburg.
Well, this was June 16th of 1976, when the rally against the new policy of classes being
conducted in Afrikaans was held. The police responded to the students gathering as they
had in Sharpeville in 1960 with gunfire. But this time it was not a one-off affair. In the days,
the weeks, the months to come, the conflagration which began at Soweto spread throughout South
Africa. Police battled defiant students, hundreds, if not thousands, were killed. Townships were
in flames. Well, something like order eventually returned. But a bit more than a year later,
Steve Biko himself was arrested at a roadblock. In the next several days, he was beaten unconscious,
thrown in the back of a land rover, a police land rover, and transported in the night over 600 miles
up to Pretoria, where he died of brain damage. He'd been essentially murdered by the security forces.
As you can imagine, his martyrdom had the result that South Africa erupted once again.
Now, we've spoken before at several junctures in this course of watersheds, turning points, periods.
Again, this is one of the great games that historians play. For my money, 1976 marks a
watershed. From that date forward, I think it is a matter of when and not if the apartheid system
will fall. Meanwhile, the African National Congress had been intensifying its military
campaign against the regime, directed from exile, from bases abroad in Zambia, Angola, and Tanzania
above all. Many young people from the so-called generation of 76, a reference to this,
Soweto, and accompanying demonstrations, the generation of 76, showing a spirit of 76,
if you like. Many of them slipped across the borders, and this had the effect of greatly
revitalizing the guerrilla forces. We recall that Mandela in 1960, 61, in the wake of the
bannings of the ANC, the Sharpeville massacre, et cetera, had, of course, led the turn of the
oldest nationalist organization, the African National Congress, towards an embrace of armed warfare.
And the organization on Konto with Sezue, or Spirit of the Nation, was the military arm
that I'm referring to when I talk about these attacks from exile. The ANC forces, again, bolstered by
these new recruits, if you like, created by the events of 1976, a number of them, an increasing
number of them, slipped back into South Africa, organizing attacks on police stations, on the
Air Force headquarters, most dramatically, in 1983, and on other targets, like very posh, high-end
shopping centers along the lush Florida-like Natal coastline. Now, this aspect, this armed struggle
aspect, if you'd like, was important in the South African transition. However, I think it's
accurate to state, and I think it's important to state, that at no time did the ANC, let alone any
other organization, have the strictly military capacity to, say, ride into Pretoria on tanks the
way that, as we all know, in 1975, the North Vietnamese slash Viet Cong did in Vietnam. So,
this is certainly an aspect, the military aspect, but it would have to be accompanied by a number of
others to produce the change that eventually would come. Much more important than this low-level
guerrilla conflict, in my view, was a state of, I would call it, civil insurrection, which
eventually enveloped most of the townships, and indeed, occasionally, more than occasionally,
slipped over into the legally whites-only town centers, or city centers, of South Africa.
A state of civil insurrection driven by the so-called young comrades, that was their word for
themselves. The youth activists, who in name, might be attached to the ANC, but often operated
completely independently of it. The ANC, from its exile basis, had called for the comrades to make
South Africa ungovernable, and in a lot of respects they did, but that doesn't mean that they did so
at the direct instigation of, and let alone the direction of, the ANC itself. Indeed, they operated
largely on their own, and developed a momentum on their own. And let me say that the
comrades' activities in creating civil insurrection were not always positive. They set up, for instance,
so-called people's courts on their own, and in some cases, more than a few cases,
what happened was that they hauled people whom they wanted to settle a score with,
someone suspected on the slightest evidence of being a sellout, or a stooge, or what have you.
Vendettas, in other words, they particularly enraged some of their elders, middle-class people,
or elderly people who were shocked at the notion that people who, in many cases, were teenagers,
were bringing them in and charging them with this or that violation.
Now, for a moment, as I continue to put together some of these forces that lead to the dramatic
transition, let me look again, look back to the government policy unfolding in the 1980s.
In a lot of respects, the 1980s can be referred to in South Africa, I would say, as the decade of
neo-apartite, of new apartheid. It was symbolized by the premiership of South Africa's penultimate,
next-to-last white leader, and that was Peter Bota, P.W. Bota, who, when he was elected president in,
it was actually Prime Minister at that point, but when he was elected the leader of South Africa
in 1978, one of his first pronouncements was that South Africa, in his words, must adapt or die.
So, Bota initiated a series of cautious reforms, some of them a bit more significant than others.
He, in essence, did eliminate the hated passes, these identity booklets, which, of course,
Black South Africans had to carry to prove their right to be in a particular area,
particularly an urban area at any time. But the hollowness of Bota's attempts at a reform
and the ridicule with which they were greeted by a great number of the majority of the country
is seen, perhaps, in his constitutional reforms of 1983. He put forth a new constitution with
great fanfare and campaigned vigorously for it to obtain its passage in a whites-only referendum,
and eventually it was passed by a margin of something like 60 percent. Now, his constitutional
revision of 1983 would end the white, exclusively white, parliaments that South Africa had had
since 1910 and the creation of the country. Bota's new parliament would have three wings.
It would have a white house of parliament. It would have a so-called colored white house of
parliament. And remember that colored has a different meaning in South African history from
Black. This applied to approximately nine percent of the population at that time. And it would have
a third house for the Asian or Indian population, predominantly Indian population in South Africa,
which constituted about 3 percent of the total. In other words, you now have a tripartite still
segregated parliament open for the first time to people of color, if you like, but still excluding
75 percent of the population, which was comprised, of course, by the Bantu-descended
Black South Africans. They, as before, were to find their political destiny in the so-called
homelands. Now, one of Bota's reforms was to legalize Black labor unions. And this was probably
undertaken in the hope of ending what were increasing numbers of wildcat strikes and
unannounced walk-offs and so forth. The notion of legalizing them in the hope, perhaps, of
obtaining some greater structure and control over them. Like so many reforms we've seen in other
contexts in this course, it backfired. The labor movement increasingly flexed its muscle. And,
of course, this was an enormous amount of power precisely because South Africa at no time had
ever ended its great dependency upon Black labor. Okay. Finally, the international community
increasingly stepped up the pressure on South Africa. The 1980s was the time when popular songs like
Biko by Peter Gabriel, or We Don't Do Sun City, a reference to the
casinos located in one of the so-called homelands and so on. All over the world, there were free
Mandela festivals, often employing music and performance, as well as a variety of high-profile
participants. More seriously, perhaps, or at least more substantively, this was the age of
sanctions. And by sanctions, I mean the application of economic pressure above all. In other words,
sanctions can take many, many forms. But the notion of the boycott, either voluntary or imposed and
required by government laws. For instance, the notion that Krugerans, the one ounce coins made of
pure gold, that it would become illegal to purchase those and so forth. So, again, sanctions could
take a whole variety of forms. This was the time when students in American universities often called
upon their boards of trustees to withdraw the university's endowments from companies that did
business in South Africa. It was the time when banks quite on their own would often begin to
withdraw capital because of their fears of an impending blow-up and a loss of order in South
Africa. The sanctions began to take a toll. One crucial turning point came in 1985-86 when the
United States Congress overrode President Reagan's veto. And the United States added its muscle then
to a whole variety of countries around the globe applying these sanctions, which again began to
actually be felt inside South Africa itself. So, I've isolated four basic factors that I think
coalesce in the 1980s and propel us towards the enormous changes that begin to unfold at the end
of that decade. A low-level guerrilla war, a state of civil insurrection in and around the townships,
a rapidly increasing exhibition of power, application of power on the part of trade
unionists and black labor unions, and finally an international application of pressure in the
form of sanctions. All of these factors together began to convince certain figures in the inner
circle of South African power, rather like it had in the old Soviet Union, that the system could not
go on like this. They began to advocate, reaching out and forging some sort of compromise. And who
better to seek out than the symbol of the opposition residing in one of their prisons, of course,
and that was Mandela. Now, for his part, Mandela had been thinking along similar lines. You might say
better gain without war than more war without gain. So, he began to accept the notion of negotiation
and compromise more than his colleagues, at least publicly, embraced from their exile bases.
He cultivated several reformist figures in the inside of the power structure, and he did so from
inside his different and steadily more conducive prison environs. He was actually shifted from
Robin Island to a second and eventually to a third prison under far better conditions. And
it was from there that he began these negotiations. Now, PW Botha, the president in 1989, invited him
that year to at tea at townhouse, the place where the president stays when he's in
the city of Cape Town, just next to the parliament there. I was in South Africa when this occurred,
and it was an electrifying moment. The notion that the president of South Africa would sit down
for a talk with Nelson Mandela was indeed a very substantial and hugely symbolic departure.
Now, shortly later, Botha suffered a stroke, and he was replaced by FW DeClaire, Frederick DeClaire,
precisely one of the inner circle reformists that we mentioned a moment ago. DeClaire, I think,
actually can be compared at a number of places, at a number of points, with Mikhail Gorbachev of
the old Soviet Union. After all, both of them had been sort of loyal party members and party
servants, party officials. They had worked themselves up by showing competence within the
older structures of the state and party, but both were exceptionally perceptive men, and,
again, as I put it before, they realized that the system could not go on the way that it had.
Now, in his unforgettable speech of February 1990, DeClaire, in his opening of parliament
at that point, freed Mandela, legalized all political parties, including the ANC,
the Pan-Africanist Congress, the Communist Party, and so forth, and with that speech,
he forever changed South African politics. I think it's important to realize that Mandela took a very
considerable risk in doing what he did from prison with only sporadic and incomplete communication
with the exile leadership of the ANC. Many in the ANC opposed this course. They wanted to continue
and step up the pressures that we've mentioned before, and it's quite conceivable that Mandela
could have wound up marginalized in this whole transitional story as opposed to
occupying the place at its very center. Now, South Africa was hardly out of the woods after
the legalization of political parties, the freeing of Mandela, and other political prisoners.
They're ensued in incredibly tense and, indeed, very violent period, preceding the general elections
of April 1994. It seemed at various stages like this whole process of transition was a bit like
a very old train on a very old set of tracks in that it wobbled from side to side, and at any
moment might, indeed, tip over and produce a complete stop to the whole process. There were
rumors and possibilities of military coups on the part of the White South African military.
There was a huge conflict between, essentially, the followers of the ANC and the followers of
what I would call a Zulu nationalist movement in Kata, later known as the In Kata Freedom Party,
and this resulted in a tremendous amount of carnage, particularly in what is now
Kwa Zulu at Natal, the areas around Durban, South Africa, and so forth. So there were a lot of ways
in which this thing could have been derailed and which would have raised a whole different kind of
future and reality in South Africa. Now, as the whole world knows, though, the elections did come
in April of 1994. The images of it are still striking, you know, the lines
snaking around many blocks where you see whites and blacks standing next to each other
in a line to vote, the old women and men showing up in wheelchairs who were, you know, 80 or 90
years of age and voting for the first time in their life. It's still a moment that packs a great deal
of emotive power. As we know, Mandela and his party won that election and became the ruling
party, the government of the new South Africa. Since that time, South Africa has certainly
been beset by its share of problems. Millions of its people suffer from the HIV AIDS virus.
It has a very serious problem with violent crime. Some suggest that South Africa's old racial
structure has simply been replaced with a class structure. Nonetheless, among other things,
South Africa has enjoyed essential and basic stability. It has conducted more
open and peaceful elections. It has experienced positive economic growth.
There are those who scoff at the term South African miracle. I don't. If you want an alternative
possibility, consider that represented by Israel slash Palestine. Is it conceivable that we could
have seen in South Africa a seemingly endless cycle of rocket attacks, draconian government sweeps
and crackdowns, suicide bombings from the perspective of the 1980s that was entirely conceivable?
What did happen was something very different that still strikes me as miraculous.
Thank you.
