Lecture 27, The Armed Struggles for Independence
Welcome.
The case of South Africa, which we examined in the last lecture, demonstrates that the
winds of change sweeping Africa in the 1950s and 60s were not, after all, irresistible,
at least in the shorter or even medium run.
South Africa was not alone.
The march of majority rule independence, beginning in West Africa, moving east, then eventually
wheeling south, came to a halt.
The Zambezi River might serve as a symbolic barrier, as we mentioned in lecture 24.
The Zambezi separating Northern Rhodesia from Southern Rhodesia, Zambia becoming independent
under African rule in 1964, Southern Rhodesia pursuing a very different course as we will
describe in a few minutes.
The all of the African territories, which resisted rule by Africans, were what we have
defined as settler colonies.
Those were substantial numbers of Europeans of whites.
Came to take up land and livelihoods with the expectation that they and their descendants
would stay, that they were a permanently immigrant, a permanently transplanted fraction from the
mother country.
It should hardly surprise us that most European or white settlers had rather little sympathy
for majority rule.
There were certainly exceptions.
But typically they enjoyed a far better lifestyle than they could have dreamed of back in the
metropole.
The weather was better.
I sometimes ask my students, imagine or go better yet, spend a winter in London, then
spend one in, oh say, Harari, capital of Zimbabwe, and see which you prefer.
Now on a more substantive level, the large yard, the veranda, the swimming pool, and
maybe best of all, the servants, the housekeeper, the gardener, all of this was possible in
the settler colonies and available not just to the upper or middle classes.
The semi-skilled, the artisanal people could enjoy some of the amenities, some of the lifestyle
that I just described, again, under quite sunny skies very often.
So this was something that was a possibility for the mechanic, for the builder, the guy
who lays concrete, the telephone repairman, things that would hardly have been dreamed
of in the colonial, yes, in the metropolitan capitals.
So these people, understandably, felt that they had something to hold on to.
And increasingly they concluded in the face of what was happening in many parts of Africa,
all over Africa, really, in the middle of the 20th century, they increasingly concluded
that they, or their metropolitan sponsors, both perhaps, or preferably, would have to
fight for it.
Now the territories of Angola and Mozambique were, of course, settler colonies.
In fact, they became more settler after the Second World War when tens of thousands of
additional settlers from Portugal came there to live.
But as I just implied, they were also the colonies of Portugal.
And this fact made a difference.
I mean of Portugal vis-à-vis France and Britain, for instance.
You can argue that it was the fact of Portuguese possession equally important, perhaps more
important, than the realities of settler rule.
I think both were very important.
But why is it the, why is the factor of Portuguese possession important in understanding these
cases of the so-called delayed decolonizations?
First of all, Portugal, back in Portugal, was ruled in quite authoritarian, some would
say dictatorial fashion, for a very substantial portion of the early, middle, and into the
late years of the 20th century.
The rulers of Portugal, such as Salazar, showed very considerable sympathy, and I'm not putting
words in their mouths, for fascism.
And could be described, I think, fairly described as at least quasi-fascist in their methods
of rule.
The significance of this is that compared to Britain or France, there was an absence
of even a theoretical commitment, as it were, to the virtues of democracy, for instance.
There was not the rhetoric of democracy, at the very least, in the case of Portugal and
its colonies.
There was no pretense of the sort of thing that Britain and France certainly claimed
they were doing, and in some respects were doing, certainly by the 1950s, at least late
in the day, of the colonial regimes, in the case of the French and the British.
That is bequeathing parliamentary institutions, bequeathing the best of ideas and practices
of Western democracy to the colonies, which they increasingly knew they were going to
be departing.
There's no pretense of doing that sort of thing, of leaving that sort of legacy of colonialism
behind in the Portuguese colonies, and that, in turn, perhaps even more important, meant
that the ability of African nationalists to exploit that rhetoric, to exploit that commitment
to democracy, was absent.
When we looked at decolonization, the nationalist movements in the French Empire, for instance,
the way in which politicians from West Africa, like Senghor or Huffway, would seize upon
the French talk whenever it arose about citizenship, for instance, a greater citizenship for a
greater France and so on, and in a sense challenge them to match their words with their actions,
to put their money where their mouth was.
There were no such spaces for the utilization of the colonizer's own superficial, at least
stance, to exploit.
Now unlike England or France, again, Portugal, to turn to the economic side of this, was
itself a poor country.
And this meant that unlike England or France, or indeed even like Belgium, Portugal did
not have the benefit of what someone like Kwame Nkrumah from Ghana would have called,
with some accuracy perhaps, the neocolonial option.
That is, go ahead, grant independence, and depend on your economic power, at least hope
that your economic power can continue to permit you, allow you, to gain at least some
benefits from the resources and markets of your former colonies.
So Portugal concluded, unlike these more economically muscular colonizing powers in Africa, that
it could not relinquish its empire.
It couldn't even loosen the reins on its colonies in response to African nationalism.
This line of thought went, lose the empire, and you lose everything.
We don't have that option of turning to other means of getting the things we may want or
need.
Needless to say, Portuguese settlers, and again, increasing numbers of settlers, concurred
in this view, that to give up the empire, of course, threatened everything that they
had gone to Africa for in the first place.
So whereas earlier we made an assertion, a judgment, that the yoke, the burden of colonialism
in comparative terms was relatively heavy in the Portuguese territories, in terms of
the longevity of forced cultivation or forced labor or what have you, it's also true that
they were particularly heavy handed on nascent African political movements when this emerged
in the very late 50s and early 60s.
To put it bluntly, those movements were crushed and banned.
And early on, certainly by the early 1960s, the nationalists had decided to take up arms
against the colonists, the Portuguese, and against the settlers.
Now there are echoes in that dynamic with what we saw in the last lecture in South Africa,
of course, of this polarization and the embrace, essentially, of very militant approaches on
both sides.
But in a sense, there was never the phase in the Portuguese colonies of the open constitutional
protests, mass demonstrations, and so forth that was a feature of South African life in
the 1950s.
We go very quickly to the completely polarized situation.
Rather like the Belgian Congo, both Angola and Mozambique were huge territories.
They were vast.
Like Belgian Congo, they had been parceled out to various concessionaires, private companies
which were responsible and given the exclusive rights very often to take out the cotton or
tin or what have you.
Like the Belgian Congo and a feature of the tremendous size here, they contained a multitude
of ethnicities with little in common, except for perhaps their common suffering.
In light of all this, it's slightly surprising that in Mozambique, a single liberation movement
known as Frelimo, the front for the liberation of Mozambique in Portuguese, the acronym for
limo, in Mozambique, a single liberation movement came to dominate the anti-Portuguese struggle.
This was not the case in Angola, where three different armed movements emerged each with
its own ethnic base and also showing considerable ideological differences.
They were the FNLA in the north based on the old Congo ethnicity and led by Holden Roberto.
The MPLA, the popular movement for the liberation of Angola around the capital city of Luanda
and in the central barrel based ethnically on the Kimbundu or Imbundu peoples, but also
drawing a lot of support from the tiny category class in Angola known as the assimiladas,
that is highly educated, intellectual, the intelligentsia if you like.
Some of those in turn were drawn from the mestizos, those of mixed Portuguese and African descent,
a fact that in some cases was a sort of easy target for the rival nationalist movements
and certainly the MPLA was the one which gave its greatest embrace to a more radical approaches
and indeed called itself a Marxist movement.
And then based in the central highlands, the eastern portions of the country and in the
south was the UNITA movement, the Union for Total Independence in Angola, led by a very
charismatic figure, a large man with a tremendous amount of command and charm in the view of
many, Jonas Savimbi, the ethnic base here of the Ovenbundu people in both Mozambique
and Angola, beginning in the 1960s war ensued.
By 1974, however, the tide was turned not by events which unfolded in Africa itself,
but back in Portugal.
Young Portuguese military officers had concluded, had decided that these wars were endless
and unwinnable as they looked at the rest of the 20th century and that perhaps equally
may be more important, that Portugal's future ought to lie with Europe.
They looked at things like the burgeoning common market and of course that has developed
into the European Union and stressed that the new Portugal should find its economic
and indeed its political destiny there.
That empires after all were outdated, out of vistic remnant of the past.
They staged a military coup in Portugal itself and very quickly, within 12 months or so,
moved to end something over 400 years, at least at the coastal areas, 400 years of Portuguese
colonialism.
In Mozambique at first, certainly at the time of these actions in 1974 and 1975, the Portuguese
coup and within a year or so of that the withdrawal of Portuguese political power.
In Mozambique that transition went quite smoothly.
After all, as we know before, Franimo was the clear heir apparent and came to power
under another very charismatic figure, although his ideology was very different from Jonas
of Embiis in the other side of the continent in the sense that Machel also was a self-styled
socialist.
Now the transition did not go smoothly in Angola and again we see a distinction between
these two territories.
As Independence Day approached in November of 1975, a veritable free-for-all broke out.
I remember these days very clearly, I was working actually on Capitol Hill and trying
to avoid doing my dissertation at that point and working for a Washington, let's call
the Washington office on Africa, an information center there on Capitol Hill.
There were these late night sessions of Congress and reports from the UN and so forth.
All of this focusing on the coming Independence Day in Angola and nobody really frankly sure
what was going to happen.
These three rivals were still very much at it at this point, not so much with the departing
Portuguese of course as with each other and it's at this point that we must introduce
again as we did in the lecture number 25 on the Belgian Congo the all important context
of the Cold War.
This ongoing competition for world prestige power etc. between the Western powers and
the Soviet Union and its satellite powers.
In the weeks, months leading up to the Independence days set for November of 1975, several foreign
powers quite clearly and openly backed their favorite movements and the most visible examples
of this were an invasion from South Africa in support of UNITA and Jonas Savimbi's at
least alleged conservatism.
Cuba on the other hand intervened with thousands of troops in support of the MPLA, their fellow
Marxist.
The Soviet Union played a supporting role in that and finally the United States certainly
provided financial assistance and material also at first in favor of the FNLA but later
also with South Africa on the same side as South Africa on behalf of UNITA.
In the short run the socialist MPLA came out on top but its position was exceedingly
shaky.
Alas in neither Angola or Mozambique did independence signal the end of conflict.
Remember that apartheid South Africa had regarded the Portuguese colonies as buffers against
the southward tide of majority rule.
After all, the Portuguese territories, which in one case Mozambique bordered South Africa
and the other bordered the South African control territory of South West Africa, these were
indeed seen as buffers against this tide rolling southward of majority rule.
If anything the Portuguese exit then prompted a much greater South African intervention
again the first indication of a South African willingness to play a much expanded role in
these former buffer states was the entry into Angola in 1975 which was not successful
in the shorter run or in the long run for that matter but nonetheless it was echoed
soon enough in Mozambique.
In Mozambique a movement which drew support both ethnically and from resentment over radical
measures instituted by Frelimo such as collective farms and so forth, very Soviet block style
measures in some cases carried out or attempted to be carried out by Samora Michele and his
ruling Frelimo party.
The movement entitled Renamo or MNR, the Mozambique National Resistance developed again
and capitalized on certain perceived to be excluded ethnic bases alienated from the
Frelimo government and also tapped into resentment over these radical measures.
South Africa began to back Renamo quite heavily as well and after a further decade of war
essentially the 1980s the end of South African participation in 1990 the sides negotiated
a settlement.
Since then Mozambique has forged a rather remarkable recovery after all this was a country that
certainly was one of the poorest countries in the world and in some respects remains that
but nonetheless is often cited today as one of Africa's success stories.
Once again it was considerably worse.
With hardly a break after independence in 1975 civil war continued for another quarter
of a century.
There are many Angolans today who have never known peace until the last couple of years
when finally with the capture and killing of Jonas Savimbi something like a ceasefire
and truce ensued.
Perhaps Mozambique will serve as an inspiration for the rebuilding of Angola.
Let us now turn to southern Rhodesia which is of course now known as Zimbabwe.
From 1953 to 1963 southern Rhodesia had been joined with northern Rhodesia and Nyasalan
which are now Zambia and Malawi in the Central African Federation.
The Federation experiment driven by the region's white settlers most of whom were in southern
Rhodesia created an economically advantageous block certainly and it also advertised itself
as an alternative to either majority rule to the north or the rigidity of apartheid to
its to itself.
It is fair to say I do think this is fair to say however that most Africans in the Federation
saw the official policy of so-called partnership as a form of moderated form but a moderated
form of white supremacy.
The Federation broke apart as we saw in an earlier lecture on the shoals of African nationalism.
The British acceded to African demands and granted independence to Malawi in 1963, Zambia
in 1964 and might well have done the same in southern Rhodesia.
However, southern Rhodesia's settlers had other ideas.
If you recall for a moment the case in Kenya where there were white settlers but not nearly
of the numbers that we find in southern Rhodesia, the settlers in Kenya lacked the power to
defy Great Britain when the moment came that Britain decided that it would negotiate with
African nationalists and grant independence.
In southern Rhodesia things took a very different turn.
Led by the redoubtable Ian Smith, a former RAF pilot, a cattle rancher in the southern
part of the country and a guy with a very considerable streak of defiant toughness to
him, the settler government in southern Rhodesia declared so-called unilateral declaration of
independence, UDI, in 1965.
And I'd like to read you a couple of phrases from the UDI, the Unilateral Declaration of
Independence issued on the 11th of November of 1965.
It begins this way, whereas in the course of human affairs history has shown that it
may be necessary for a people to resolve the political affiliations which have connected
them with another people and to assume among other nations the separate and equal status
to which they're entitled.
And whereas in such event a respect for the opinions of mankind requires them to declare
to other nations the causes which impel them to assume full responsibility for their own
affairs, goes on, we now sever our connection with Britain.
The language, I'm sure, rings a bell with you.
It is borrowed very directly from the U.S. Declaration of Independence.
And despite the fact that it's two centuries later, and of course the context is completely
different, structurally speaking there is some similarity here.
You have prominent settlers or descendants of settlers in a colonial situation declaring
that they're going to sever their connections with the old empire.
Now, in the aftermath of the U.S. Declaration, of course, there was a war, the Revolutionary
War.
We know that.
This was threatened in the case of Rhodesia, but it never materialized.
What did materialize were international sanctions proposed by Britain and eventually adopted
by the United Nations and so forth.
Economic sanctions.
It was essentially a boycott or a cordon, if you like, around Rhodesia.
In the aftermath of UDI, soon the major African nationalist parties, which were Zanus and
the Bhabo-African National Union and Zappu, these Bhabo-African Peoples Union, were banned.
The leadership imprisoned.
That leadership included Robert Mugabe, who was put into jail in 1965 where he stayed
for a decade.
For a time, Ian Smith enjoyed a honeymoon and indeed the sort of self-sufficiency which
sanctions imposed on Rhodesia, as it now called itself.
There was no need to call it Southern Rhodesia anymore, since Northern Rhodesia had become
Zambia.
Rhodesia actually did rather well economically in the early years.
This was not to last.
In the early 70s, a genuine guerrilla war.
This came to be known as the second Shimmeringa, the second struggle in the Shauna language.
The first, of course, was the rebellion against Rhodesia's British South Africa Company in
the 1890s.
That war picked up steam after 1975, and it did so especially on the part of Zanu, Mugabe's
movement, because they were now able to take advantage of Mozambique's independence from
Portugal.
The ways in which all of these processes, all of these stories are unfolded in a regional
context and indeed in a global context is something that I think we need to emphasize
here.
These are not simply internal processes in any case.
They are increasingly regional cross-border internationalized cases of politics and decolonization.
The two liberation movements in Zimbabwe forged a paper alliance, the patriotic front, but
in fact they never cooperated.
The war deepened, and it was a terrible war.
Atrocities were committed on all sides in this war.
Some people were put in impossible positions.
Village headmen or chief approached by the government forces from Smith's government
during the day and asked and challenged if they were giving support to the guerrillas.
If the evidence were not forthcoming that they were refusing to do so, the punishments
could be very severe indeed in terms of torture and killing.
The same night you could be visited by the emissaries from the local guerrillas operating
in the bush.
This is what they were called in the capital, the boys in the bush, the Baguamanah, who
would literally pull the entire village out of their homes and announce a punggwe.
Today this means an all night party with music and everything.
But at that time it was musical, but these were enforced sessions where people were
forced to sing the liberation songs and so on and so on.
And again, this man in the middle, the notion of you better not deny, you better not provide
support to the guerrillas or we may shoot you and being approached from the other side
by Zanu or Zappu and being told that if you don't provide us support, we may shoot you.
Now this war resulted ultimately in 30,000 dead and a million refugees.
Eventually Smith negotiated an agreement and to some people's surprise, Zanu.
Robert Mugabe's movement won an impressive victory in what is generally considered to
be a free and fair election and assumed the leadership, the premiership of what was renamed
in April of 1980 Zimbabwe.
And that of course is where he remains today.
We will look at the Zimbabwean situation in lecture 35, but I think we can see some of
the important roots of the contemporary crisis in what we've just been talking about.
Finally we should mention Southwest Africa, now known as Namibia.
South Africa after all had run the place under a League of Nations mandate originally since
the German defeat in 1918.
Not surprisingly a protracted low-level liberation war developed in this country as well, although
it was low-level partly because the population in this largely desert country is slight.
The Namibian or Southwestern African struggle overlapped very much with the Angolan one
and the interpenetration around the border between Angola and Namibia was almost inexplicable
and in some instances.
The United Nations, which had inherited the old League of Nations mandate, which considered
South Africa's occupation illegal, they had declared it illegal at various points since
the 1960s, eventually supervised elections leading to independence in 1990.
But there's no doubt that the big shift that brought that about as well as, in some respects,
what brought the accommodation in Mozambique were the shifts in South Africa itself centered
around Mandela's release, the legalization of the ANC and other changes in South Africa.
So once again we see this regional context how what happens in one country affects another,
what happens on the global level is played out in these examples of decolonization.
All of these former settlers then, eventually won their, excuse me, all of these former
settler colonies then, eventually won their independence.
But the scars left by their struggles run particularly deep, are especially painful,
and have ongoing relevance.
We will see that, I think, very clearly in our penultimate lecture in this course, our
look at Zimbabwe's current crisis.
Thank you.
