Lecture 26, Segregation to Apartheid in South Africa
If the history of the Congo, which we surveyed in the last lecture, seems to represent some
of the great themes of 20th century African history in magnified form and inversions writ
large, themes like colonial conquest, the realities of colonial rule, decolonization,
and the disappointments of independence.
In this lecture, we're going to turn to a different case altogether, a country whose
history in the 20th century seems to run in quite different trajectory.
We know that even before the 20th century, South Africa's history was exceptional in
Africa, especially in the very early establishment of substantial European, that is Dutch and
British settlement, and a subsequent frontier history quite reminiscent of that of the United
States.
We last touched South Africa at a stage where colonial conquest was complete.
The country unified and mining-based modernization well underway in a context of white supremacy.
This was the beginnings of what we can call today the age of segregation.
To move slightly forward, in the years following the Second World War, when the sun began to
set on colonial rule in places like the French and British empires in Africa, and when the
colonies of the French and the British, along with other parts of the world, like the United
States, began to move with some seriousness towards an end to formalized white supremacy,
the country of South Africa moved with great seriousness in the opposite direction.
We can call this the transition from segregation to apartheid.
The word from Afrikaans literally meaning apartness, I'm sure that you've seen it and
heard it many times, often pronounced apartheid or what have you, technically apartheid, but
in any case it was apartheid of course, which made South Africa notorious and eventually
something of an international pariah in the late 20th century.
Now, let me turn back a bit and begin by offering what may be a rather different perspective
on segregation, at least one that I think you may find stimulating.
I will rely here largely on the work, in my view brilliant work, of the late John Sel,
and in particular his book entitled, The Highest Stage of White Supremacy, The Origins
of Segregation in South Africa and the American South.
So a work of comparative history.
Now let me confess here to a certain personal bias.
John Sel was my teacher at my undergraduate institution and the supervisor of my senior
thesis, etc.
He certainly remained my friend, teacher and critic and believe me he could be a critic
until his unfortunate and premature death in 2001.
It turns out that I have a more direct connection with Sel, which I hope will also have some
relevance here.
I teach at North Carolina State University and if you go two floors up in my building,
I didn't know this until I took the job there, I can find or you will find a library which
says the John W. Sel Library.
Now it is in fact not created in honor of the man I'm drawing on today, his work, but
that of his father who was a mathematics professor for 30 years or so at North Carolina State.
Now here's where I think this may have some relevance.
My point is simply that Sel grew up in Raleigh, North Carolina.
He grew up in the American South.
He was a son of the South.
He grew up during the age when segregation went from being very much in the saddle of
course to being dismantled certainly in the legal sense.
He himself was a historian predominantly of British colonial administration, but he found
himself partly because of his own background drawn to the subjects that I mentioned in
the title of his book.
Even as a young man, Sel was questioning things.
He was a fine athlete and at one point in the 1950s found himself playing for the high
school basketball championship in North Carolina against the team.
I have to mention this, which included Sonny Juergens, and the reason I have to mention
is because I grew up in Northern Virginia and I'm quite fond of the Washington football
team.
But even then, after they had lost to Juergens' team, Sel was asking himself, at least in
his reminiscences to me, why it was that the high school champions, so-called, of North
Carolina were the winners of course of games played entirely by white North Carolina high
school students.
He wondered then about segregation because he grew up in it and because he had the kind
of mind that wondered and was curious about a lot of things.
He wondered first of all, before he began this study, about the word itself.
The word segregation does not appear in dictionaries, for instance, before approximately the first
decade of the 20th century.
It's a new coinage, in other words, and that struck Sel as slightly curious.
He wondered why it emerged not only at that time, but particularly, some would say almost
exclusively, in two great places, in two particular places, in the American South and in the newly
formed country of South Africa.
Now, Sel had assumed, growing up and even later, assumed like I had assumed, like perhaps
many of you had assumed, that segregation, what he called the highest stage of white
supremacy, was the product of a rural past created by ignorant, backward people, if you
make, that it was the legacy of a left behind by slavery and by that frontier past, that
it was the opposite of anything like progress, the opposite of progressive.
Modernization, development, progress were fundamentally at odds with such irrationality,
so the arguments seemed to him and would gradually erode segregation, and indeed these were the
arguments made by liberals, if you will, in both South Africa and in the United States,
in the early to mid-years of the 20th century.
Now, his research and his reading, particularly his reading of a younger generation of South
African historians, beginning to publish their material in the very late 60s, into the 70s
and 80s, his research and reading led him in a quite different direction.
Sel began to conclude that segregation was not, after all, just a throwback, a leftover
from a frontier past, but rather a response, indeed an innovative, even creative response,
to conditions of turbulent social, economic and political change, spurred in both the
cases, in both the South African case and the Southern American case, by the onset of
substantial urbanization and industrialization.
Now, again, I don't want to suggest that Sel overstated this. He states quite clearly
in the first pages of the book that it was the ideology of white supremacy, of white
racism, if you like, which was the driving force of segregation, but he wondered why
it didn't result in other kinds of alternatives that might have been entertained after the
ending of slavery, for instance, such as deportation. At one point he even wondered about genocide
and when his editors, he told me, questioned that this was really not something remotely
conceivable. In the case of the U.S. case, for instance, he had an answer, I think, born
from the 20th century, and that was, how many did Hitler kill?
In other words, segregation represented one path which white supremacy might take, and
it was his association or his discovery that it seems to emerge and be identified not so
much with these cultural adivisms, with these throwbacks, these leftovers, but rather with
the emergence of cities, the emergence of factories, with modern infrastructure, even
with progressive politics in many cases. Segregation then, he concluded, represented
in a nutshell the modernization of white supremacy. Racial discrimination was not necessarily
incompatible. It was not necessarily any rationality that would be eroded by economic development.
Not incompatible with that. Indeed, it might actually contribute to economic growth and
development, and this was an idea that he definitely did take from the South African scholars I
mentioned a moment ago. For instance, through the creation of an inexpensive supply of labor
as a factor fueling economic growth and development at the macro level.
Now, segregation, of course, often meant, often taken to be separation. Again, he asked
himself, and I ask you to ask yourselves why it is that there was a coinage of a different
word then, if it was simply separation. Now, don't get me wrong or get so wrong. There
was obviously separation in many and numerous spheres. There was clearly separation in legal
ownership of land, in residential life, in education, and so on. But his argument is
that, again, at the macro level, in the overall view of these societies, in the stages of
history that they were going through, that these societies were actually being nicked
together more closely than they had been in the past. That they were becoming more,
not less, intertwined. That there were greater levels of mutual dependency, particularly
in South Africa, perhaps, with its dependence on labor, than had been the case in the past.
More intertwined, more, if I can use the word, more integrated, if you like. But integrated
unequally. He asked us to think of segregation then as unequal integration. And at one point
he puts it this way, if the groups that compose society, these societies, were truly separate,
if they really lived their lives apart, if economy and society were truly plural or dual,
there would be no need for segregation. Now, in the South African case, the racial pillars
of the segregated society, a society, again, in the aftermath of the discoveries of gold
and diamonds, societies increasingly driven by an urban industrial dynamic, the racial
pillars were, I would suggest, three. Or, erratically unequal division of land, yes.
And that is a form of separation. But what flows from that? The second pillar is a resultant
low wage migrant labor system, which we examined in lecture number 18. The necessity for oscillating
migrancy out of the limited amounts of space and land reserved under the segregation division
of land, the land laws in South Africa of 1913 and 1936, for instance, the resultant cheap
labor migrancy system is a direct consequence of that division of land. The third pillar
of course is a white monopoly on political power. Again, in the Constitution of 1910,
although in a couple of exceptional cases, in the old Cape Colony, now part of this unified
country, they still had a colorblind franchise, that was not the case in the other provinces
of South Africa, except very theoretically in Natal. In the Orange Free State and in
the Transfollows, a straightforward racial exclusion on voting. Even if you could vote
for members of parliament, let's say, and you were an African or a so-called colored,
and if you could, for a number of years still, based on income, education and so forth, you
could vote only for white candidates. Again, by law in that 1910, you could vote only for
candidates. Again, by law in that 1910 Constitution, all members of parliament were required to
be white. So three pillars of segregation, the unequal division of land, the migrant
labor system and the white monopoly on political power. Now, if that's the case of segregation,
or if that is a capsule characterization of segregation, what then is the significance
of the move from segregation to apartheid? The shift is usually marked with the South
African election of 1948, which brought the so-called purified Afrikaner Nationalist Party
to power, and marks the onset of apartheid as the official policy of the Union of South
Africa. It is common to refer to that election of 1948 and to that year of 1948. In many
analyses I have heard and read as a watershed in South African history. I do not accept
the watershed metaphor. After all, the watershed metaphor is based on the assertion that the
water, if you like, that is events, ideas, the tide of history, trends, you know, call
it what you like, that the water in those senses is running in a fundamentally different
direction on one side of the divide compared to the other. It's obviously an image drawn
from geography and ridges and watersheds and so forth. So again, the notion of a watershed
that the tide of history, events, ideas running in a fundamentally one direction on one side
of the watershed event or year or marker running in a fundamentally different way on
the other. But I would argue that the trend in South Africa after 1948 was not fundamentally
different from before that time. The pillars of apartheid, the land, labor and power features
I just mentioned, were the same pillars of segregation and had been solidly erected in
the segregation era. I would like to try to demonstrate that by going back to the segregation
era to a speech by Jan Christian Smuts, who was the loser in the 1948 election. That is,
he lost to those who were interested in imposing apartheid. But this is a speech that Smuts
made a long, long ago. Smuts had a very long and distinguished career. He first made a
name fighting the British in the Boer War back in 1899 to 1902. He went on to become
a distinguished philosopher of science and eventually a world statesman. This is from
a speech he made in 1917 in London while on a visit there. He outlined the future South
Africa towards which they were working. His words, you will have large areas cultivated
by blacks and governed by blacks, where they will look after themselves and all their forms
of living and development, while in the rest of the country you will have your white communities
which will govern themselves separately according to the accepted European principles. The natives
will of course be free to go and work in the white areas, but as far as possible the administration
and white and black areas will be separated such that each will be satisfied and developed
according to its own proper lines. And this notion of the development along your own lines
is very typical of the language of segregation. But of course the crucial sentence there is,
the natives will of course be free to go and work in the white areas. By the million, these
were societies that were becoming more interdependent, more intertwined, and again at the macro
level being integrated, though obviously unequally. Sel commented that not even Dr. Hendrik
Fervort, who was considered the great theorist of apartheid in the 1950s and 60s, really improved
upon General Smutze's formulation. So I think that the pillars are there, we can ask then
what is the significance of 1948? I would say that what was different was the deadly
serious effort by South Africa's new rulers to intensify every form of the development
of racial discrimination. But more important, in my view, most important to make white supremacy
permanent. This was a project to seal off the future, as it were, to craft a final solution.
Now I'm aware of the gravity of that term, final solution, and I'm obviously not discussing
genocide here. Again, that's not the name of the game here under, under the name of
under segregation or apartheid in anything like the literal sense, precisely because of
the mutual dependency. But I do mean it was intended to seal off the future to create
a final bearing, a final parameters, a set of final parameters, if you'd like, in which
South African life and history would go forward. Now to these ends, the National Party government
passed an avalanche of new legislation in the 1950s designed to regulate every aspect
of race relations. Misogynation and intermarriage were outlawed. There was to be total separation
of every form of public amenity and in urban residential areas. So this is the era when
the park benches began to be painted over, or the signs pointing people to toilets or
the water fountains, let alone the buses and restaurants, et cetera, et cetera, with, you
know, literally whites only, blonks only in Afrikaans or knee blocks, non-whites only,
Bantu colored in Asian only. This is the apartheid of the signs. That is what some analysts
call petty apartheid. Not that it's unimportant, although its importance is less than what
I'll call grand apartheid in a moment. In the education sphere, so-called Bantu education,
under the new rulers in the 1950s, emasculated the mission-based, but quite open-ended. That
is no ceiling for the rise of black students under those mission-based systems. Emasculated
that schooling available to blacks and imposed what one critic, Trevor Huddleston, the Anglican
Bishop, there in the 1950s called education for servitude. Under Prime Minister's Fair
Fort, who served from 1958 to 1966, when he was assassinated, actually, dramatically,
by a stabbing in parliament by a deranged white, seemed to have very little to do with
his politics, the great theorist, under Fair Fort and under his successor, J.B. Forster,
who ruled from 66 to 78, the government pursued its vision of grand apartheid. Each of South
Africa's 10 major Bantu ethnic groups or tribes, if you like, the Zulu, the Kosa, the Venda,
in Debelli, et cetera, et cetera, would ultimately find its political destiny in its own homeland.
That is, its portion of the land originally set aside as reserves for blacks in the land
laws of 1913 and 1936. The terminology here went from reserves to so-called Bantu stands,
and ultimately, to homelands. Again, you can hear the echoes there from Smuts's formulation
much, much earlier of the ultimate political destiny being devolved away from South Africa
proper into these homelands. Indeed, four of the homelands eventually were declared
to be independent by the South African government. No other country in the world recognized them,
but they literally, South Africans, literally lost their citizenship, including millions
of people who had never actually seen the homelands because they and their parents and grandparents
had lived in the cities. This was divide and rule with a vengeance. Again, I repeat, there
was to be no common political future. Since all 10 homelands combined constituted only
13% of South Africa's total land area, designed in theory to accommodate 75% of the population,
there was in fact no actual possibility that all of the tribe's people, so-called, assigned
to a given homeland could actually make a living there. They would need to continue to migrate
and work in so-called white South Africa. The architects of apartheid therefore never
entertained the notion of ending their dependence on black labor. This was not true total separation,
but an elaboration on continued unequal integration.
Now, needless to say, South Africa's non-white population, the so-called blacks, so-called
colors and Asians did not take all of this lying down. A new generation of black activists
coming of age in the 1940s and 1950s injected a new strain of militants, and understandably
as apartheid set in, a new tone of urgency to protests in the name of equality. Within
the African National Congress, which had been founded way back in 1912, and was part of
that first generation of petitioning, elite style of protest, within the A and C, this
change was symbolized by the mass party, but nonviolent vision of the youth league and
of one of its founders. And at this point, I'd like to quote Mandela, speaking of this
point of his life when he became politicized at some length, and this is from his autobiography.
He says, I cannot pinpoint a moment when I became politicized, when I knew that I would
spend my life in the liberation struggle. To be an African in South Africa means that
one is politicized from the moment of one's birth, whether one acknowledges it or not.
An African child is born in an Africans-only hospital, taken home in an Africans-only bus,
lives in an Africans-only area and attends Africans-only schools if he attends schools
at all. When he grows up, he can hold Africans-only jobs, rent a house in Africans-only townships,
ride Africans-only trains and be stopped at any time of the day or night and be ordered
to produce a pass, failing which he will be arrested and thrown in jail. His life is circumscribed
by racist laws and regulations that cripple his growth, dim his potential and stunt his
life. This was the reality and one could deal with it in myriad ways. I had no epiphany,
no singular revelation, no moment of truth, but a steady accumulation of a thousand slights,
a thousand indignities, a thousand unremembered moments produced in me an anger, a rebelliousness,
a desire to fight the system that imprisoned my people. There was no particular day on
which I said, from henceforth I will devote myself to the liberation of my people. Instead,
I simply found myself doing so and could not do otherwise.
Throughout the 1950s, these activists constantly escalated their own campaigns in response
to the government measures. They had names like the Program of Action, the Defiance Campaign.
In 1955, the ANC and allied organizations adopted the Freedom Charter, a virtual constitution
for a future non-racial egalitarian South Africa. The dialectic going on here of move
and counter-move, government moves, protesters' response, opposition moves, government response,
and so on. This dialectic reached a climax at a place called Sharpville, south of Johannesburg
in 1960, where police opened fire on armed protesters of the hated past laws. This was
the identity booklet that all South Africans had to carry, giving them the right to be
in a city, for instance, or not. Open fire and shot 69 dead, many of them in the back.
In the aftermath, the government took all gloves off, banning the ANC and many other
movements, the PAC, the Communist Party, and so on, and moved with a great deal of firmness
towards tactics they had not utilized before, detention without trial, increasing use of
interrogation involving torture, and so on. For their part, Mandela and his peers concluded
that they had closed a chapter on the question of non-violence. And indeed, I'll turn again
to his own explanation of this. He said they'd, quote, come to the conclusion that as violence
in this country was inevitable, it would be unrealistic and wrong for African leaders
to continue preaching peace and non-violence at a time when the government met our peaceful
demands with force. This conclusion was not easily arrived at. It was only when all else
had failed, when all channels of peaceful protest had been barred to us, that the decision was
made to embark on violent forms of political struggle, and to form Omkonto Wessizue. Now
Omkonto Wessizue means the spear of the nation, MK for short, in its abbreviations. Omkonto
Wessizue became the military arm, the military wing, if you like, of the ANC from the early
60s on, and this obviously represented a very sharp turn indeed for that historic organization.
There was now then a very thorough going polarization in Southern. The notion that non-violent or
constitutional or peaceful avenues of protest might get anywhere seem to have reached a
dead end. Again, both sides shift their tactics and their strategies quite dramatically at
this turning point around 1960 or so. Again, compare that to what's going on in so much
else of Africa to the north around 1960 or so. Polarization. After some initial successes
in a sabotage campaign, Mandela and other top leaders were caught, tried for treason,
and sentenced to life in 1964. And again, I'll just quote him one more time, his statement
at the time of his sentencing. During my lifetime, I have dedicated myself to this struggle of
the African people. I have fought against white domination. I have fought against black
domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all
persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which
I hope to live for and to achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared
to die. And in fact, it was very possible that he and his fellow ANC members on trial
could have been sentenced to death. With the imprisonment of Mandela and others, with the
banning of the ANC and so on, white supremacy seemed securely in the saddle. Indeed, in
the rest of the 1960s and 70s, things were eerily quiet. I started this with a comparison
between the United States and South Africa. But if you compare them in the late 60s and
early 70s, they're completely different. This is the era of a very strident protest,
for instance, in the U.S. and very little up front in South Africa. Economically, South
Africa prospered as never before, demonstrating again, perhaps, that racial oppression could
be quite compatible with economic growth in one form or another. And I think that
there is one difference between the United States and one form of development. Thank you.
