Lecture 23, The Lion Awakens, The Rise of Nationalism
Welcome.
In the last couple of lectures, we have been looking at the history of colonialism in Africa,
at the colonies established by Europe around the turn of the 20th century.
Now it is hardly surprising that Africans began to protest to oppose European rule in
various fashion.
This requires little explanation, it seems to me.
What does require description and explanation are the tactics, the strategies, the dynamics,
the phases, the timing of the successes and failures of movements organized in protest
or opposition to the colonial realities.
In a sense there were two kinds of protest against colonial rule.
The first we might describe as the kind which looked back, which looked back and sought
to re-establish the independence which Africans had previously enjoyed.
The second kind was the kind which looked forward to a new Africa, an Africa different
from both the pre-colonial and the colonial models.
Now it's a useful analytical distinction, but I must caution that the interface between
these two types of anti-colonial protest is complex, was complex.
They overlapped and coexisted for many people.
Nonetheless, in the first category of this backward looking anti-colonialism, we might
place the numerous rebellions which broke out in the early colonial period, the first
phase of the colonial period.
That is the phase marked by its consolidation prior to World War I.
We could put in that category, for instance, the first Shimmeringa in the territory of
southern Rhodesia in 1896 and 1897, when peoples relatively recently brought into the colonial
fold by Cecil Rhodes as British South Africa Company, rose up in an 18-month long rebellion
of an attempt, as it turned out, to cast off that colonial imposition.
There were other examples in the East African territory held by the Germans before World
War I, the so-called Maji Maji Rebellion.
This word comes from the Swahili word for water.
The name for the rebellion comes from the Swahili word for water.
It certainly was a military revolt, but it was shot through with religious ideas and
spiritual symbolism.
The name actually comes from the belief, the hope, again, vain, as it turned out, that
the bullets of the German colonial occupiers would turn to water in the battles of that
rebellion.
Now, the genealogy of what is usually called African nationalism, on the other hand, goes
back to the second, the forward-looking mode, which I just described.
Nonetheless, to illustrate again that the lines between these two are quite blurred,
some have argued for more direct linkages between so-called primary resistance, that
is the sort in my first category, and the later forward-looking movements.
And the later nationalists undoubtedly invoked the imagery of pre-colonial greatness to
mobilize their own supporters.
And I think one can see this illustrated very directly in the renaming, which took place
as African colonies became independent of colonial rule.
To get the Gold Coast, shifting its name to Ghana, named after, of course, a major kingdom
we looked at in the early phases of the Sudanese belt.
In the case of southern Rhodesia, of course, in 1980, taking the name of Zimbabwe, drawn
from the old kingdom, Empire, and the largest ruins south of the Nile River in all of Africa,
represented by the old city of Great Zimbabwe.
So again and again, we see that at least there is the evocation of the African past, even
on the part of those who very firmly wish to move into the future.
Now the first generation of these forward-looking nationalists, perhaps we should call them
proto-nationalists, were then modernizers.
And I'm talking about a generation which comes into its age, its adulthood, around the time
of the First World War, and really flowers in the years following that.
They were modernizers.
They tended to accept quite a number of the premises of so-called Western civilization,
certainly a faith in education, a scientific worldview, and maybe most important of all
the notion of progress.
After all, progress is perhaps the most fundamental idea of the whole modernization project anywhere.
Now these men, and the most visible figures were, overwhelmingly, male, were an elite
by virtue of possessing an unusually high degree of Western-style education.
So the first voices in protest of Western colonialism were, in fact, often the most
westernized themselves.
There were exceptions, but many of them were Christians.
They wore Western suits.
They were fond of their afternoon tea.
They were the clerks, the teachers, the clergymen, the journalists, the lawyers of the colonialists.
Now very few of these figures called at this point for an end of colonial rule per se.
Rather they exposed repeatedly and opposed what they saw as the hollow promises offered
in the name of the civilizing mission, if you will.
They saw shortcomings of two main types.
The first was a shortcoming which applied to themselves, to people like themselves,
for fellow members of the elite.
They protested against the ceilings placed upon their upward mobility.
Now we saw in the last lecture that these ceilings were lower in some empires than in
others, in general lower in the British Empire and higher in the French, for instance.
But even in the French Empire, where some Africans could live in Paris, be part of the
Café and Salon Society to some degree, there was a sense of hypocrisy concerning the imperial
promise.
Again, even in the French case where some of these persons were members of the French
parliament, I returned to that word hypocrisy concerning the imperial promise.
The second kind of shortcoming which was articulated by this generation of proto-nationalists were
shortcomings of the colonial enterprise which had a much wider application.
These men, after all, were not blind to and they were often genuinely and sincerely outraged
by the abuses they saw occurring around them in the name of colonialism, the abuses of forced
labor and taxation and corporal punishment, et cetera, visited on their fellow less privileged
Africans.
Their style at this stage was the letter, the petition, the delegation, the polite and
respectful, again almost always well-dressed, but firm and reasoned case being made that
justice and fairness, virtues extolled by the colonizers, demanded better treatment
for all and not least a recognized voice for themselves.
In some respects they wanted to call the bluff, if you want to put it that way, of those who
came into Africa in the name of the civilizing mission.
These men were often in contact with sympathizers, with allies abroad and the forging of international
links in the interwar period in particular is very striking development.
They were in touch with socialists inside the metropoles themselves in places like London,
the Fabian Society, with the Communist Party in Paris. They were certainly in touch with
Pan-Africanists from the West Indies and from the United States.
Not a great many were what we might consider true revolutionaries, but they certainly articulated
regularly a vision of a better world.
I mentioned Pan-Africanism and in a sense Pan-Africanism really reaches its heyday,
which may be slightly surprising in the interwar period, the period of high colonialism, when
perhaps the very commonality of the colonial experience seemed to be shared and felt by
so many.
The degrees of success realized or enjoyed by this first generation of proto-nationalists
varied widely. For every Blaise Johnny or Lamine Guy working out of their bases in Dakar
and San Louis in Senegal, and able to obtain legal status of citizen rather than subject
a legal distinction in the French Empire for thousands in French West Africa.
For every success like that, there was a Harry Thucke in Kenya jailed at the time of the First
World War for his articulation of protests, or a DDT Djibabu, the son of a famous African
journalist and educated African in South Africa, a real visionary full of hope at the time
of the First World War, by the time of the second, a man who had retreated into a very
bitterly felt exile, internal exile, though it was in South Africa.
For the nationalist movements to really take off, they needed, forgive my imagery here,
my metaphor, but they needed to join ahead, that is the elite that we've been discussing,
with a body, with mass participation by ordinary persons unhappy with the colonial situation.
It was precisely that possibility of the joining of the elite with mass participation, the
construction of mass opposition movements, which colonial authorities, understandably, feared
the most. They feared, of course, a fear which led them to endless complaints of so-called
agitators trying to stir up the otherwise content, so-called natives.
Now, this take-off, if you like, this creation of the elite body joined to the, excuse me,
the elite had joined to the body of mass protest. This take-off to successful, momentum-building
nationalist movements is really the subject of our next lecture.
But we can note here that the preconditions emerge, the storm gathers, most definitely,
in the decade centered around the Second World War.
In the rural sphere, African peasant farmers, small-scale farmers, but involved in the cash-crop
nexus, the cash-crop connection, increasingly chafed under colonial institutions like marketing
boards. Marketing boards are worth mentioning. We'll come back to them in our look at post-colonial
Africa, in a place like Ghana, where ordinarily the marketing board, which was a monopsynistic
institution, that is a sole buyer institution, it bought all the cocoa to be marketed, bought
it at a particular producer price, but sold it on the world market, of course, at a different
price, with a quite considerable margin. And the margin, of course, as it became clear
and realized to those producers, was not something that they were terribly fond of.
And they acted in some cases against the marketing board monopolies. The most dramatic example
did indeed come in the Gold Coast, we call it Ghana now. And again, that's an example
of the reaching back to the would-be glorious past.
In a so-called hold-up, it was a boycott. It was a holding of the cocoa off the market
until the producer price was raised. And it came in 1938, the year, of course, before
the Second World War breaks out.
Now, the real action, however, developed in the urban areas. In Africa's cities, after
all, these were the places which tended to emerge precisely as part of that intensification
of export production, which tended to be built around the mining areas, or nearby the places
where the cash crops would be produced or marketed. And this, as I say, is really where
the energy emerging in this decade around the Second World War finds its focus.
In the whole continent of Africa, the length and the breadth of it, the decade or so, some
really closer to about a dozen years or so, involving a few years on either side of the
Second World War, was a time of labor unrest never seen before in African history and never
seen since. The list of major work stoppages that took place precisely at the time that
there was this enormous mobilization of resources for the war effort was remarkable. In 1935,
the copper belt of Zambia, again, producing the one great product of that monoeconomy
constructed by the British in Northern Rhodesia, major strike in 1935. And another one in 1940,
as the wars actually underway, and again, copper, a critical material useful to the allies,
in many respects, in the war effort. In Mombasa and Dar es Salaam, and again, these, of course,
are the crucial port cities. These are the gateways from the pathways leading from the
points of production into the wider world. Mombasa and Dar es Salaam, major harbor strikes
in 1939 and 1947. In the Gold Coast, we mentioned the rural action of the cocoa holdup, but
the Gold Coast sees strikes in its railways and in its mines in 1939 and again in 1948. And
again, look at the particular kinds of industries I'm getting at here, the railways, mines, the
primary products, the critical, sensual parts of the colonial economic project. In both
Rhodesias, a major railway strike in 1945, which I myself have done a great deal of research
on, and again, a kind of pan-Africanist movement in itself. There was a single railway line,
the Rhodesia Railways, which served both of those territories, and the workers all over
the world. A man went out on strike literally 50 days after the ending of the Second World
War. That's followed by a general strike in 1948 in southern Rhodesia, which starts in
the cities among a whole variety of industries, but spreads to virtually every sphere of the
entire economy. In South Africa, in many respects, a special case, but very much part of this
explosive urban unrest trend of the decade of the 40s. In 1946, 70,000 African miners
come out on strike in, where else? The gold mines, the commodity which, in a lot of respects,
as we argued in previous lectures, built modern South Africa. And in some ways, most dramatic
of all, and the entire French-West African, the entire French-West African railway system
in 1947 and 1948 comes to a halt, again, as a part of one of these urban-based work stoppages.
Never a period like that before, and frankly, never a period like that since. In a number
of respects, and partly to keep the war effort going, significant concessions were made. The
railway strike people, struck just after the war, ended in the Rhodesias, but the needs
for a recovering Britain at that point were such, in the immediate post-war era, that
significant concessions were won. Needed to say, this inspired further actions of the
itself. And finally, we have to bring into this picture the African soldiers themselves. After
all, they had, to the tune of something like half million, 500,000 or so of them, had left
their homes, in many cases, gone overseas. They had fought, a good number of them had died, for
causes that they were told included anti-racism and self-determination. If one looks at something
like the Atlantic Charter, signed by Roosevelt and Churchill, in the middle of the war years,
it is, of course, a very ennobling document. In some respects, it represents a sort of first draft
of the United Nations Charter, which comes at the war's end. But it embodies these, again, promises,
is almost the only word that can be used here, of things like human dignity, of universal human
rights, of self-determination, and so on. The fight against Nazi Germany, of course, articulated
and enunciated, in many respects, as a fight against the kind of narrowness of an almost perverse
form of racist ideology, in the case of Nazi Germany. Again, these were some of the motivators
put out there to recruit and draft these soldiers. That is what they fought in the name of the
and yet, of course, they returned to colonial situations, which to so many of them, and so many
people whom they communicated with, seem to contradict these very principles. If you look at a
novel like Ngugi Watyongo's novel Weep Not Child, which is really about the Mao Mao
rebellion of the 1950s in Kenya, but in the early phases of that novel, one of the several brothers
who are part of the crucial family there, is exactly what I've just described, a soldier who's
returned from service overseas in the name of these noble principles during the Second World War,
and is coming back to a Kenya which, as I say, seems to contradict so many of those elements.
So, from a whole variety of arenas, from a whole variety of directions, from the rural sphere,
from the urban sphere, from the sphere of returning soldiers, we seem to see the elements
gathering here. Again, this storm, if you're looking at it from the colonial perspective,
these storm clouds are definitely rolling in as the 1940s moved towards the 1950s.
Now, this is perhaps a good moment to step back and to theorize a bit, perhaps make a
comparative point concerning African nationalism. The word nationalism, the root of the word
nationalism, of course, and obviously is nation. That in turn begs the question of what a nation is,
after all, and how nationalism is related to it. Now, if we consider these terms in their
sort of classic European historical context, nation and nationalism, the nations were populations
united by a perception of, let's call it, fellowness, by a common identity based on a common language,
in most cases, common cultural traditions, and so on. To use one memorable phrase of a great
student of European nationalism, these were communities emboldened by imagination.
They were imagined communities which, if anything, perhaps exaggerated their common identity, common traditions, etc.
But it was the self-perception of a common identity, a common fate, a common destiny, which drove them.
Now, nationalism most often referred then to the pursuit by these nations, these populations
feeling this fellowness, I just outlined, the pursuit by these nations of historical self-determination,
specifically in their own state, and hence the term that we hear so often of nation-state.
Now, again, it's worth repeating here that in the classic instances of European nationalism,
and I mean things like Italian nationalism, I mean things like Irish nationalism, I mean things like German nationalism,
places which for very long periods of time had consisted of quite numerous, different, for instance, feudal many states, if you like,
the notion of constructing a state specifically on the basis of this shared or imagined community of nationhood, of fellowness,
is largely what drove those classic European nationalist movements with which we are so familiar.
A nation in search then of its political destiny in the form of its own state, the nation-state.
Now, the definition of nation, which I just proffered here, that is common language, traditions, and so on,
is extremely close to the one I used early on in this course to refer and attempt to define, to get at the reality of ethnic groups in Africa,
so-called tribe, at least as that term tribe is used in Africa itself, and we used criteria like common language, common traditions,
the imagination of fellowness, the perception of fellowness as part of the ways to construct an identity around ethnicity.
Indeed, I often use in my lectures like this one and those I give normally at my home institution,
I often use the term nation as a virtual synonym for ethnic group along with so-called a people, a tribe in quotation marks usually, but nonetheless.
If that's true then, we must make, it seems to me, a quite crucial distinction between nationalism as it develops in modern history in Europe
in the 19th and 20th century in particular and nationalism as it's usually called as it develops in the middle of the 20th century in Africa.
In Africa, as we know, almost every colonial territory included within its borders, not a single, but many nations, as I've just defined that term,
usually referred to as ethnic groups or tribes.
We know that the colonial borders were arbitrary, that they reflected the rivalries between the colonizing powers, the participants in the scramble for Africa,
and again, in almost every case they encompassed within those borders numerous nations as I've been using that term.
Now, although there were certainly instances in Africa of single ethnic groups seeking their own independence, and I mean early in the century,
classic African nationalists, those of who we identify, the great names of African nationalism which we get much more specific on in the coming lectures,
in Krumah of Ghana, Kenyatta of Kenya, Nyerere of Tanzania, Kaunda of Zambia, Senghor of Senegal, and so on.
Those classic African nationalists, in a sense, expanded their vision of nation upward from the tribe or the ethnic group to accept the borders
of the state as created during the imposition of colonial rule, while eventually, as we'll see, they narrowed their vision away from the broader pan-Africanist heyday of the 1920s and 30s.
What I'm getting at is that the classic African nationalists generally came to accept the colonial territorial units.
They accepted as the boundaries of the field where the game would be played, if you like, the boundaries established during the scramble for Africa.
Therefore, whereas European nationalists sought a state for their single nation, African nationalists faced from the start,
a formidable task of pursuing a state which embodied and included many nations.
Or, let me put it differently, and perhaps it's an even more formidable task, they faced the challenge of forging a sense of single nationhood,
a greater imagination of fellowness amongst populations which were linguistically diverse, culturally diverse, religiously diverse, and so forth.
Now, what are the implications of this for the future?
It's a axiom, it's a common place to observe that common enemies serve as unifiers.
While the colonial ruler is there, it easily becomes or can be transformed through the articulations of the nationalists into the common enemy.
But the implications of the future, what happens when the unifying common enemy, the colonial ruler, is gone?
Thank you.
Thank you.
