Lecture 2 Africa's Many Natural Environments
Hello again.
In our last lecture, which was our first lecture, we made reference to history as drama.
What that analogy holds, it behooves us at this point to take a look at the stage.
In the first instance, to examine the ultimate, the original stage, Africa's natural environment.
Now, like so much else about Africa, the landscape itself has often been the stuff of stereotype.
To an older generation, such as my own, raised on Tarzan, raised on his numerous imitators
on the TV screen, the landscape of Africa, the environment of Africa could be summed
up in one word, jungle.
What's Africa like?
Well, it's jungle.
Well, who lives there?
The natives.
What are they like?
Oh, they're primitive.
They seem to be bound up in a whole ball of stereotypical mythology.
Now, to younger folks, raised on the Discovery Channel, raised on Animal Planet, at least
that's what you hope they're watching, if you're a parent, Africa was endless grassland.
I frequently find this perception among my young undergraduate students.
You know, this endless grassland where, in fact, in terms of who lived there, it was
mostly animals, where the beasts outnumbered the people, if you will.
And finally, I just might mention a third to a lot of people in the Western world used
to and newer to what seemed to be constant, tragic stories of hunger and famine and real
enough stories, true enough stories God knows.
Africa may simply seem to be barren, to be a God-forsaken wasteland.
Now, let's develop a more realistic appreciation in this lecture and the next, I think, of
what is, in fact, an incredibly varied set of environments, and I intentionally pluralize
that.
Africa, first of all, has room for variety.
The place to begin this discussion, it seems to me, is with the sheer size of the continent.
There are a lot of ways to get at this.
Africa is the second largest of the continents.
It occupies something like 25%, about a quarter of the Earth's total land mass.
But a little differently, Africa is three times the size of the continental United States.
And to put it differently again, and perhaps internationalize it a bit, if we take Europe,
China, India, Argentina, New Zealand, and the continental United States, Africa is larger
than all of those combined, than all of Europe, all of China, India, Argentina, New Zealand,
and the continental United States.
Now, in many parts of Africa, this sense of vastness, of enormity is almost palpable.
It hits the visitor in particular.
It can have the look and feel in a number of places in Africa of big sky country, rather
like the American West, and that's an analogy that I'll return to in the following lecture
when we get a bit more specific.
I'd like to suggest then that our sort of catch words for today would be immensity and
variety.
Immensity and variety, room for a variety of quite different environments on this single
continent.
Now I think some feel for this immensity and variety can be drawn from an excerpt I'd
like to read you from a book.
It's a book called Venture to the Interior.
It was written by Lawrence Vander Post, who was a South African born writer with a great
many skills and great many interests.
He has written some well-known books, The Lost World of the Kalahari or Kalagati Desert,
etc.
I later wrote a book about the noted psychotherapist or psychological theorist Carl Jung.
In 1949, Vander Post, for reasons that don't concern us here, was commissioned by the British
government to undertake a journey over a portion of what we could call South Central
Africa.
He wound up in the modern-day countries of Malawi and Zambia, and he wrote an account
of it, which at one point I think conveys this feel of immensity and variety rather well
to me.
This is what Vander Post had to say.
You'll notice, by the way, that he also uses my favorite analogy here of drama and also
that he adds another, and that is a comparison of land in this case with the sea, Vander
Post.
For it is a drama of great and absorbing interest, this continent of Africa, as we saw it that
morning after the storm.
It is a drama in the sense that the sea is one.
I do not know of any country, except perhaps the far interior of Asia, which is in terms
of Earth, in terms of solid matter, so nearly the equivalent of the sea.
There seems to be no end to it.
One goes on for thousands of miles.
One goes on until one's eyes and limbs ache with the sight and the bulk of it, dazzled
by this inexhaustible repetition of desert, lake, escarpment, plateau, plain, snow-capped
mountain, plateau, plain, escarpment, lake, and desert again.
And one almost thinks and hopes that there will be no more of it, but in the morning
across the next horizon there is more.
For some, indeed, the scale of Africa and the great differences between its regions,
these things defy any effort to generalize.
Consider the words of another writer, Reichard Kapuczynski.
Now Kapuczynski is a Polish journalist by trade who has made a career of injecting himself
into trouble spots.
He is drawn to civil wars, he's drawn to military coups, and so forth.
In Africa and elsewhere, I read on the jacket of his latest book that he's been sentenced
to death four times, but still very much with it.
In the forward of that very brief forward to his collection of short pieces on Africa
called Shadow of the Sun, Kapuczynski shows his frustration with this generalizations
on Africa.
He says, I'm not writing a book about it, I'm writing a book about some people from
Africa whom I had encounters with.
And I want to give you his own words.
Again, you'll hear an analogy with the sea, but he adds a couple more in there, which
increased the scale even more.
The continent is too large to describe.
It is a veritable ocean, a separate planet, a varied immensely rich cosmos.
Only the greatest simplification, only with the greatest simplification can we say Africa.
In reality, except as a geographical appellation, Africa does not exist.
Well, I hope that it does exist since it's my subject.
I think I would amend perhaps Kapuczynski's statement there to say maybe there's not
one Africa that there are many.
So let's look at some of them.
Now common sense in your own knowledge tells you, as you know, that many factors go into
the making of an environment.
Factors like latitude, temperature, rainfall, elevation, soil type, topography, vegetation,
all of these contribute.
They combine in different ways to give us that useful generalization we are using of
an environment or an ecological zone, if you like.
What I'd like to do is to consider each of these kinds of factors and to make some basic
statements about them in Africa, about elevation and rainfall and so forth.
And then in the second part of the lecture to combine them, indeed, in different ways
and come up with some categories of environment that I hope will be useful down the road.
Now a phrase like tropical Africa practically rolls off the tongue.
This may be wrapped up with the whole jungle thing, I'm not sure there, but tropical Africa
and indeed, technically speaking, most of Africa is tropical.
It lies between the tropics of cancer in the north, the tropics of Capricorn in the south.
Most, but not all.
In North Africa, it largely lies outside of our purview, but most of all of North Africa
is coast with the Mediterranean, lies north of the tropic of cancer.
In South Africa, one of our key countries, the Republic of South Africa, modern-day South
Africa, that country, lies almost entirely south of the tropic of Capricorn.
It's therefore in the temperate zone of the southern hemisphere and not in the tropics.
If you go to South Africa in the southern hemisphere's winter, and of course that's the opposite
of ours, in June or July, I mean you'd best take some warm clothes or at best you're going
to have to purchase them from the many women you'll see knitting quite heavy wool sweaters
in June, July, August on the street corners of places like Johannesburg and Durban and
Harari.
It's quite possible to get not just snowfall, but blizzards in the Dragonsburg mountains
of South Africa during those months.
Now I mentioned mountains and of course that leads us to another of these key elements
and that is elevation.
As we all know, elevation cuts, it counteracts the effect of latitude on temperature.
So much so that places that lie directly on the equator or very near to it, if they're
high enough, can indeed have permanent snow and ice packs.
And two examples from our region, from our continent, are Mount Kenya which lies almost
exactly on the equator, but it's 17,000 feet permanently glaciated at the top.
Only three degrees south of the equator, the nearby peak which we'll talk about in the
next lecture.
Of course, Africa's highest mountain, Kilimanjaro, and again permanent ice and snow on those
places.
Now even aside from these great mountains, if we're on Africa's high plateau, or I'm
going to be non-French here and say plateaus when I'm speaking in the plural, but on these
high plateaus of Africa again, they're far cooler than one might think from the mere
latitude lying in the tropics.
And plateaus, we have.
I'm going to suggest an image here.
If you went to your cupboard and took out a cereal bowl and then took that to a counter
or a table and turned it, overturned it so that it was lying upside down, you'd have
a piece of ceramic or what have you that rises quite quickly from its edges and then flattens
out of course across the bottom.
For a lot of the African continent, that image works fairly well, particularly not
just southern Africa, but the whole southern half of the continent really, as well as substantial
portions elsewhere, again that works pretty well.
What I mean is that from the ocean, the land mass tends to rise rather quickly and then
tends to flatten out into these large plateau which give us Africa's great, great plains.
One effect of that is that in the southern half of the continent in particular, the great
rivers, great as they are, I mean the Congo River carries more water to the sea than any
river on earth, but they do not serve as conduits.
They do not serve as avenues for communication or transportation into the interior.
And the reason of course is that they fall over great rapids on their way to the sea.
They fall from these plateau in the interior to the low-lying coastal plains before reaching
their mouths.
Now having said that about how elevation cuts the effects of being in the tropics, nonetheless
we are in the tropics.
Much of Africa is tropical indeed and it is warm, year round.
Now why do I emphasize that?
Year round warmth.
I do so because that fact along with another one, the enormous age, the great longevity
of the African land mass, of Africa's soils and originally the rocks from which those
soils came from.
These are among the oldest land masses on earth.
The year round warmth combined with the age of the African land mass means that Africa's
soils have been exposed for a long time.
Africa's soils are old, exposed, they are weathered, they are leached.
The year round warmth, the significance of that is that the decomposition of organic
matter does not take a break in winter.
You want some decomposition of organic matter, that's what provides so-called humus in the
soil, but if it continues it breaks down completely and you're left with a relatively low fertility.
Most of Africa's soils are indeed relatively poor.
Only about 8% of Africa's land mass is cultivable and only about 3% could really be described
as fertile.
Those areas tend to be in the volcanic mountainous areas such as Ethiopia, the lower bases of
Kilimanjaro, and so forth.
Year round warmth means something else.
It means, of course, that this climate, these environments where we have this year round
warmth, have a quite hospitable climate for microbes and the diseases that they can cause.
Again, we don't get that break provided by a freeze in winter that one gets in more
northerly or more southerly climes.
We can mention three of Africa's, I suppose we'd call them legendary diseases, just for
sake of illustration, malaria, mosquito-borne as we all know, malaria, almost certainly
the greatest killer of Africa's children, particularly Africa's children under five.
Yellow fever, also mosquito-borne, and again, a malady with a long and damaging history on
the continent.
Finally, I'll mention tropanosomiasis.
That's a long word, but it's usually referred to as sleeping sickness.
There are two strains of this.
There is a form of tropanosomiasis that can affect humans, and that's really where the
popular name of sleeping sickness comes from.
Actually, tropanosomiasis, which is not carried by mosquitoes, but by a different insect that
sets a fly, is actually far more devastating to animals, and in particular to livestock.
In that sense, it can be debilitating not directly to humans, but limiting to humans'
economy in the sense that where the sets a fly is found, it's almost impossible to keep,
for instance, the supreme domestic beast, and that is the cow.
The relative poverty of soils and the virulence of disease has meant that life has been a
struggle for many Africans past and present.
In a sense, it makes the long-haul mastering of the continent, if you will, by humankind
all the more impressive.
And it may also help to explain why, even though humans emerged here, first, why Africa's
population growth has been relatively slow compared to the other continents.
Now, back to our key elements for a moment, our key factors.
What about rainfall?
Water obviously is critical to all life, yours, mine, plants, animals, et cetera.
It's got to either come from above or come from below.
Rainfall, crucial certainly for most forms of Africa, most of Africa's agriculture, is
rain-fed and therefore absolutely essential for certain kinds of lifestyles.
Again, here's my generalization.
Africa is a relatively dry place, as we'll see in just a minute.
There are certainly exceptions to that, places with very heavy rainfall and so on.
But in general, it is quite possible, it is a genuine question year after year in many
parts of Africa, whether there will in fact be enough rainfall to sustain agricultural
production, et cetera.
What rain there is, is often seasonal.
That is, it is compressed into a period of a few months, four or five months, typically.
These are caused by movements of the so-called intertropical convergence zone, which I won't
attempt to explain.
In a place like Zambia, when people are looking skyward in November, it's for good reason.
If it doesn't start in November, it's not going to have time enough to mature that crop
of maize or what have you.
By the time it stops in April or early May, seasonal rainfall.
Now, combining these elements in different ways, let's do that then.
I'm going to propose to you a framework.
I'm going to propose a typology.
I'm going to suggest three primary or major kinds of African environments and then suggest
some secondary ones as well.
What are our three primary African environments?
The first one is indeed jungle, or more properly put, tropical rainforest.
We certainly have it in Africa, although we certainly have far less of it than a lot
of people assume, certainly than I would have assumed in my earlier years.
Well less than 10%, some would put it these days less than 5% of the African surface area
covered by tropical rainforest.
A tropical rainforest, of course, will get a more detailed description of it next time
from an authority on it, but it's dense, it's deep, it's very green, it's shaded, it's
layered.
A whole world's going on up there at the level between 90 and 120 feet in a tropical rainforest
that very few humans are ever able to encounter.
Now, rainforests have supported considerable populations in African history and not simply
those who hunt and gather inside the forest, such as the well-known Aturi pygmies of the
Congo rainforest, but agricultural populations as well.
It's just good to note, I think, at this point that the difficulty and the exertion
of clearing rainforest in order to make space for either cropland or for pasture can be
a limiting feature.
Now, a second of my three major environments would be desert.
We all know, coming in, that the world's largest desert, the world's greatest desert,
the Sahara, obviously dominates much of the northern half of the entire continent.
Just in passing at this point, I would note that although the Sahara is the world's largest
desert, it is also one of the world's youngest deserts.
Only about 6,000 years ago or so rivers flowed in what is now the Sahara.
There was certainly considerable pastoralism.
Some argued that there was indeed cultivation.
In fact, this was one of the places where pastoralism, livestock keeping, and cultivation
actually began in Africa.
Now, almost by definition, deserts, of course, support very low population densities.
One is either dependent on hunting and gathering or at the very best, nomadic pastoralism,
such as the Tuareg, a very tough people indeed of the Sahara in West Africa practice.
Now, beyond the Sahara, I put it this way.
Think of the corners.
One corner to look for desert is the so-called Horn of Africa.
If you look at the map of Africa on the eastern Africa coast, you can see a protrusion of land
which looks a bit like a rhinos horn or what have you.
This horn of Africa dominated by the modern countries of Somalia, southern Ethiopia, Eritrea,
northern Kenya, again, very desert or semi-desert conditions applying over much of that horn
of Africa.
Now, the other corner I had in mind, that sort of caddy cornered, is the southwestern
portion of the African continent.
Here we can find two great deserts.
One would be the Namib, which is a, this is a desert's desert.
This is a desert with a capital D. This is a desert of the real sand dunes and so forth.
It runs in a fairly narrow strip along the West African coast, again, the southwestern
African coast.
Of course, from Namib, it comes the name of the modern country of Namibia.
Now, next door, a bit further east, and Africa's second largest desert would be the Kalagati
or Kalahari.
It's the same word.
It's just alternate spellings.
Dominating, again, most of the modern country of Botswana, Namibia, portions of the northern
part of the Republic of South Africa.
Now, the third of my primary environments, and this one I really want to emphasize, is
savanna.
High in elevation, gently rolling to flattish, alternately wooded and grassed.
These are our plateaus.
These are Africa's great, great plains.
And again, the savanna is the place where we find seasonal rainfall, almost the rule.
Usually one rainy season, some variations on that in Kenya or East Africa, you'll find
the short rains and long rains and so forth, but very definitely seasonal rainfall as a
pattern.
Now, the reason I emphasize it is because savanna environments, for our purposes, human
history, our focus, have probably been the most important environment in the sense that
savanna has probably been home to more people and to more people's history than any other
single kind of environment.
Not many people, but it seems it's states, kingdoms, empires, flourish in savanna environments.
Is that because of the openness of the country where agricultural people find it necessary
to organize for defense against the possibility of relatively sudden attack, some are theorized.
Whatever the reason is we'll see in subsequent lectures, savanna empires in West Africa have
grown and flourished for something like 1,500 years.
The great African historian Jan Fonsina, the book that made his name, was one called Kingdoms
of the Savanna.
In other words, the political fact interacting with the environmental fact in a very different
savanna belt running south of the great rainforest of Central Africa.
Now, in addition to these three major ecological zones, I'm going to suggest a few what I've
called secondary ones.
Now, of course, there's nothing secondary to the people who are living around them.
Their lives are often dominated by these features.
The secondary environments, these additional environments I want to emphasize are particularly
affected by elevation or by proximity to water.
The first one I would say is montaigne or mountainous.
We've made some reference to it already, encompassing both the kind of freestanding volcanic peaks
like Kilimanjaro or major ranges like the Ruinzori or mountains of the moon in Uganda,
the Drakensburg mountains of South Africa, Mount Cameroon in West Africa, the Fudajalon
Highlands, and of course the Ethiopian Highlands of Northeast Africa.
A second of these other secondary environments that I would emphasize would be lacustrine,
which is a fancy way of saying lakeside.
People's lives obviously are affected by the resources, fish most obviously, that these
lakes provide.
East Africa's great lakes region, and we'll make reference to that at numerous junctures
in our subsequent lectures, and certainly an example of this.
A third type, again, affected by proximity to water or river and or river valley environments,
and I don't have to tell you that this often is the dominating fact.
We can't imagine ancient Egypt without the Nile, and peoples living along the Zambezi
or the Congo or the Niger, what have you, very much find their lives dominated by that.
Now a point that many people have made, but it's worth emphasizing, is that of course
rivers often wind up marking political boundaries between nations, etc.
In reality, of course, they more often, in actual history, attract people to them, and
therefore bring them together as opposed to serving as the barrier between them.
Now finally on these other environments, to say a place is coastal speaks for itself.
All over the world, nearness to the sea has been a major determinant of economy and culture.
Now North Africa's Mediterranean coast, for instance, lies largely outside of our purview
in this course.
But think the other end of the continent, and almost exactly the same distance.
If you look at the southern latitude at virtually the same latitude south as the Mediterranean
shore of North Africa is north, we come, of course, to the Cape region of South Africa,
and as we'll see in our next lecture, this is a very Mediterranean kind of environment,
indeed dominated by the wheat, the wines, etc.
Now in closing, I would emphasize one further point, and it's again perhaps one that's obvious.
Environments are not static, they change.
They change both on their own, if you like, that is the endless and almost unimaginably
long atmospheric and geological histories of the earth.
I have, of course, produced ice ages and desertifications, etc., etc.
And finally, of course, humans change these environments as well.
And I said in the first lecture that the interaction and the effects of humans on the environment
would be one of our recurring themes.
Now we're not going to explore that at this moment, but I would just note in passing that
things like desertification, like deforestation, like global warming are having impacts with
consequences on people's lives today.
The Sahara Desert is expanding, it's young, and it's still growing.
The great rainforests of the central, middle parts of Africa are shrinking, and that probably
largely due to humankind's activities.
The warming has been associated with everything from floods in Mozambique to the decrease
in the glacial snowpack, a top Kilimanjaro.
All these things, again, quite real consequences for people in Africa today.
Okay, I hope in this lecture that we've established a framework, a series of stages, if you'd
like, for the unfolding of this human history, which we'll follow, and I hope it'll prove
useful to us in our subsequent lectures.
Thank you.
