Howdy! The goal of this series of classes is to make you fall in love with bioinformatics.
Whatever you are studying now, computer science or biology or mathematics, we want you to
consider bioinformatics as well. Why? Because bioinformatics is a new frontier in all these
disciplines and because it is built on all of them. I first learned about bioinformatics
when I was completing my PhD in discrete mathematics a quarter-century ago. And the
moment I heard about this futuristic new discipline on the interface of computing and biology,
I instantly switched and never looked back. At that time, bioinformatics was an obscure
discipline, but today it is a huge field that is making a digital revolution in biology
and that opened the era of personalized medicine. But one thing has not changed. Bioinformatics
remains the same frontier, the same wild west as it was a quarter-century ago. And that
is why we are wearing this crazy outfit. You mean apart from the fact that they look
good on us? Sure. In this specialization, we're going to discuss many questions that
are asked in modern biology and medicine, such as which animal gave us SARS? Or do we
have a clock gene? Or how is it that we find disease-causing mutations? After we ask each
of these biological questions, we'll then learn about the computational approaches
that are used to solve them, from clustering algorithms to evolutionary tree construction
to machine learning approaches. Along the way, we're going to travel back in time to
solve a 300-year-old mathematical problem. Wander around Manhattan as tourists. We'll
even get lost in a Japanese casino run by Yakuza. All of these adventures may sound like risky
propositions, but we hope that you will join us to see what they have to do with bioinformatics.
Although these instructors may appear crazy, they are not quite as mad as they look. Dr.
Pavel Pevzner is a distinguished professor of computer science at the University of
California, San Diego, and a leading authority on bioinformatics. He's dressed this way
because he sometimes thinks that he's a sheriff of bioinformatics, a frontier discipline underpinning
the digital revolution in biology and personalized medicine. Dr. Philip Campo is an assistant
professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University. To learn why he is dressed
this way, you'll need to take this course or read the textbook by bioinformatics algorithms
and active learning approach co-authored by the two speakers.
