In this video, I'm going to revisit a topic that I talked about in the past. In the past,
I made a video called Sticking Spinners in General Relativity, where I explained how to
derive the curved Dirac equation and how to couple spinners to the gravity field, despite the fact
that there are no finite dimensional spinorial representations of the general covariance group.
And there was nothing factually wrong with this video, but I thought the quality could be better,
and it's an important video. So what I'm going to do is make a new version.
The basic idea of sticking spinners in general relativity is that you can circumvent this problem
of there not being a finite dimensional spinorial representation of the general covariance group
by sticking flat Lorentz spinners in the tangent space. Because you're dealing with
Lorentzian manifolds, the tangent spaces are going to be Minkowski space, and Minkowski space is
Lorentz isometric, and the Lorentz group does have finite dimensional spinorial representation.
So you can just stick Lorentz spinners in the tangent space at every point on the manifold,
the so-called local Lorentz frame. So really, the key is just to stick the spinners in the local
Lorentz frame, and that bypasses the problem of there not being an obvious way to stick spinners
in general relativity. So here follows the math section where I actually explain how to do that.
It is somewhat intricate, it turns out. There are no finite dimensional spinorial
representations of the gravitational gauge group GL4. This is a problem because it is
therefore not obvious how to introduce spinners into general relativity, which is necessary for
quantum gravity. On account of the fact that it would be difficult to make a phenomenologically
sensible quantum gravity theory that does not include spinners coupled to the gravity field.
The solution to this problem is as follows. Consider only one single point on a curved
manifold. At exactly just this point, the manifold is exactly approximated by its tangent space at
that point. Also, if one is using a Lorentzian curved metric, the tangent space at every point
will be Minkowski space. One can then define a field at this point on the curved manifold
that is a scalar under GL4 in the curved manifold, but a spinner under O31 in the tangent space.
Since the curved manifold at this point and the tangent space at this point are identical,
one has just constructed a Lorentz spinner at one point on a curved manifold. One can then construct
such an object at any point on the curved manifold. However, each point on the curved manifold has
its own independent tangent space in which it can transform under an arbitrary Lorentz group
transformation. Therefore, to simultaneously define a Lorentz spinner at all points on the
curved manifold, one must let it transform under local Lorentz transformations so that it can
transform independently under an arbitrary Lorentz transformation in each independent tangent space
at each point. Therefore, the first step to incorporating Lorentz spinners into GR is to
construct an O31 gauge theory for spinners, where spinners here transform into the Lorentz group
via the same transformation as they usually do, except the parameters are now allowed to vary
with space and time. We have the Lagrangian here, where we've got this gauge covariant derivative
with this gauge field and these generators. Specifically, the generators are these matrices
times one of these factors of a half over here, where A and B are the O31 isospin indices. However,
the story is not complete. This is the necessary spinorial O31 gauge theory, but to turn it into
a theory that defines a Lorentz spinner in the tangent space at every point on an arbitrary
curved manifold, one must interpret the elements of this theory in terms of curved manifolds
and their associated flat tangent spaces. Specifically, one must mathematically identify
a space of O31 gauge transformations with the set of Lorentz transformations on the spaces
tangent to the curved manifold at each point. The obvious consequence is that the isospin indices
are interpreted as flat tangent space vector Lorentz indices, and one must interpret the
Greek vector index as a curved space tensor index. Also, as stated above, one must take the spinner
to transform as a scalar in the curved manifold under GL4, but a Lorentz spinner in the local tangent
space under O31. Inspection of the above Lagrangian density shows that if these steps are mathematically
implemented, the Lagrangian density would transform like a GL4 and tangent space O31 scalar. Therefore,
the only remaining step would be to multiply the Lagrangian density by a factor of root negative g,
where g is the determinant of the metric, to make the Lagrangian density transform like a scalar
density so that the action is GL4 invariant. Thus, one would arrive at a theory that has a GL4
invariant action and includes the Lorentz spinner defined at every point. To identify the space of
O31 gauge transformations with the space tangent to the manifold at each point, one must do three
separate things. First, as stated above, one must identify the O31 isospin indices with the tangent
space Lorentz vector indices, meaning that they are now interpreted as tangent space Lorentz indices.
Second, one must find a way to define an independent set of gamma matrices at each
point on the curved manifold which act in the tangent space at that point. And third, one must
find a way to relate the spin connection to the geometry of the curved manifold such that a tangent
space Lorentz transformation under which the theory must be invariant simply translates to an O31 gauge
transformation on the spinner field under which it is already invariant. The first task is easy to
take care of. One simply takes the isospin indices to be flat Lorentz vector indices. The other two
tasks are not so trivial. It turns out that the first step towards tackling both of them is to
introduce a new field that behaves much like a shift tensor, but instead of relating the metric of
an embedded manifold with the metric of the space in which the object is embedded, it relates the
curved metric with the tangent space metric. It is called the tetrad. From the definition just
given in words, one can conclude these relations. Naturally, we have that they shift the indices
of the flat tangent space metric to yield the curved metric and that you can raise and lower
the corresponding flat and curved indices on the tetrad with the corresponding metric. This
uniquely determines the tetrad in terms of the curved metric and vice versa. Now we are in the
position to handle the gamma matrix problem. The gamma matrices as they are typically defined by
the Dirac-Clifford algebra that they satisfy carry a flat Lorentz vector index. The problem here is
that each point on the curved manifold carries an independent flat Lorentzian tangent space.
What is needed therefore is a set of matrix valued functions of the coordinates on the
curved manifold that evaluate to the correct gamma matrices for the tangent space at that point.
The way to find the values of these matrix functions is to curve the Dirac-Clifford algebra.
If one defines a new set of gamma matrices that anticommute to yield the curved metric,
then one has a Clifford algebra that evaluates to the flat Clifford algebra corresponding to the
flat space that lies tangent to the specific point on the curved manifold at which the curved
algebra was evaluated. This is because a specific point on the curved manifold and its associated
tangent space are identical at that point. One can then solve the curved Clifford algebra for
gamma matrix functions that act in the tangent space properly at each point on the manifold.
So the curved Dirac-Clifford algebra is just this as described. The tetrad is relevant here because
the solution to this anticommutation relation can be simply written in terms of the ordinary flat
gamma matrices using the tetrad. We see that if we write this particular value for the curved
gamma matrices, we get the right answer. These new gamma matrices are fittingly called the curved
gamma matrices. This finally fulfills the second requirement. Now on to the third and final key
task, which is to write the spin connection in terms of the geometry of the curved manifold
so that the tangent space Lorentz transformations under which the theory must be invariant simply
translate to 031 gauge transformations under which it is already invariant. It is not immediately
obvious how to do this. The answer it turns out is given to us by the metronilic property. First,
as mentioned above, given the form of the gauge covariant derivative and the nature of the field
theory we are trying to build, we are forced to interpret the non-isospin index on the spin
connection as a curved vector index. With this, if one considers how the curved indices transform,
how the flat Lorentz vector indices transform under local Lorentz transformations,
and how the tetrad is related to the curved metric, one finds that the metronilic property
implies this. Solving this for the spin connection simply gives this right here. Given the symmetries
of the spin connection, there are just enough equations to solve for it in terms of the tetrad.
With this formula, the third requirement is fulfilled. Therefore, the generally covariant
Dirac action coupled to general relativity is simply this, or rather this is the Lagrangian
density, not technically the action, but whatever. With these equations in motion, where this gauge
covariant derivative is defined as it was given above, where the spin connection is given by this
in terms of the tetrad. So now you have actually seen all the mathematical technical details of
sticking spinners into general relativity. You've seen exactly what it means to stick spinners in
the local Lorentz frame, and you've seen exactly what technical details really are involved in
doing that. You've seen the complete formalism. I hope this helped you understand general relativity
and field theory, and possibly applications in quantum gravity a little bit better. I hope it
helped you love field theory more. If it did, please give it a thumbs up, and don't forget to
subscribe. Detrick out.
