Hello, everybody. Welcome.
I'm going to just straight up. I don't usually go in for this kind of thing.
But I'm going to straight up.
I'm going to warn you that the topics I'm about to explore here
are so profoundly controversial, so provocative,
that if you're not up for some serious provocation,
feel free to turn aside.
And I know my audience well enough to know that that will have no effect on nearly all of you.
But for those people who haven't listened to me before,
and I'm also going to say that I'm going to be holding back.
In fact, that's normally what I do, because if I were to talk openly about what I have seen
and come to know as a human being,
yeah, people would not probably, it would not be allowed for one thing. I would be shut down
very quickly. And, you know, other collectives or whatever might actually hunt me down.
I don't talk about what I've seen and what I've known, what I've come to know.
I talk about the wrapping paper around the surface of that stuff that I can get away with
speaking about in public. Even in private, if there's even such a thing anymore,
I would be extremely hesitant to delve directly into the incredibly shocking implications
of what I've been shown by non-human intelligences that are not demonic. I'm pretty damn sure.
What I've seen and what I've experienced and what I've come to understand in my own
walk as a human being, and as not merely human being.
So, over the past couple weeks, I've been listening to Amon Hillman.
And, you know, I would argue that Amon himself doesn't understand what he has clearly discovered
in ancient texts about religion, magic, and knowledge.
I was listening to him today talk on a podcast, I think it's number 63, interesting number,
of The Sacred Speaks. And, he's talking about before the stories of Odysseus and Achilles
and so forth, there was a woman named Medea, who is essentially the origin of magic.
And, the origin of magic has to do with a mixture of basically, okay, this is going to go way out
there, people, but get ready for this. So, the idea of Christos is a medicine that is put in
people's eyes. It's not Jesus, and whatever Jesus might have been up to, it's probably
nothing like what we are trained to think, if Jesus actually existed.
And, in fact, most people will literally go out of their minds and say,
if they even try to understand some of the things that Amon
is saying exist in the primary sources, what does he mean by this? He said, you know,
I had a great advisor in my early education, this guy has a PhD in classicism,
he reads Greek like pretty much no one on earth can. There might be a few people that are close
to his skill level, from what I understand. I'm going to wait till this monstrosity ceases its
overhead, fundamental disturbance of all beings.
You know, in antiquity, if something like a helicopter went over and just disturbed everything,
people would think that was a God, because how could you have such universal effect? You'd have
to be a mountain or, you know, thunder or something like, there's no way, how could you project such
incredibly generalized and universal effect from on high, if you weren't a God.
And this is part of why I say that the humans essentially invent demons,
and they think these are conveniences or powerful.
Yeah, here it comes again, maybe, utterly disturbing.
They don't understand that the dog is disturbed by the helicopter, but it is.
Their dogs just stopped moving when the helicopter flew over.
And it's the same principle I was trying to explain, and I'll bet now that it's, yep,
now that it's gone, the dog is totally fine. And the humans were confused, they couldn't
figure out what was frightening the dog, even though something in the sky was dominating
everything around it universally. And the dog naturally felt unsafe to move. It would not move,
they tried to drag it, it wouldn't move. And let me be really clear, what I'm talking about right
now, and much of what I talk about, is forbidden knowledge. You're not supposed to be able to
know these things. And this is part of what Amon Hillman's game is, except that Amon himself
doesn't actually understand, I think. If he does, he gives little evidence of it,
because he presents his perspective as opposed to what he has learned about the ancients,
the topics of magic, medicine, visionary experience, the non-ordinary, all of these things.
This man has seen a universe that moderns know nothing of, and it has blown his mind.
You know, what he actually said was, I thought, kind of hilarious. He wrote a dissertation
on what was going on in Roman Athens. And, oh my god, the poor. Every naive human is subject
at some point to this kind of catastrophe. I'm going to get back to the whole thing I was talking
about with Medea. Yeah, this is going to go way, way into outer space. So,
he wrote a dissertation, and his advisor said, he wants you to remove all references
to anything that we could imagine to meet recreational drug use by the ancients,
which was probably, you know, I don't know, wild guess here, 70% of the material,
except that they didn't have the idea of recreation related to drugs at all. It was
it was pharmacopia, right, was the use of poisons. You need to understand this, this pharma,
it doesn't mean medicine in the way we imagine. It means the titration of poisons.
And there are two primary sources of poison, maybe three, if the human body is the third.
The first is plants. The second is animals. The third is humans, and the fourth is
just take those first three and put a make a concentric rings around them, and then take that
and put a plus symbol next to it. It's that plus. It's anything that's beyond those first three.
And the whole history of medicine is the titration of poisons, right, meaning the dosage,
and not just the curing, not the idea of curing, but actually of rebalancing,
right, of rebalancing the body. So what the ancients were doing in many cases is,
you know, something incredible to our minds. They are going to the edge of death while embodied.
They die, and then they are resurrected from this state by the administration of an antidote.
Do these people actually not even know that I exist? It's so funny.
Some moderns, particularly younger people, they have no concept of personal space.
They'll walk right within, you know, like a half an inch of my body as if I'm not even there.
And not just when they're looking at their phones, but I want to be really clear about something.
Anyone who is walking around in the world with a phone in their hand is disoriented.
And if they're looking at that phone, they are completely disoriented. They might as well be
unconscious. Okay, no, it's not possible to pay attention to their environment or their body
or anything when they're looking at that phone. That thing is an energetic and attentional black hole.
And people say, well, I've seen you, you know, walking. Yes, how do you think I figured it out?
I had to first resist what they did for many years and then eventually give in and try it myself.
It's terrifyingly dissociative. You might as well just take like a shot of ketamine right to the brain.
It's totally dissociative, except it's worse because at least with the ketamine, you might have
something like a dream or a vision, but with the phone, you just have game empty.
It's like a cartoon where your brain just starts producing square waves like a synthesizer with
a bad LFO or something. Yeah, a bad oscillator is just nothing in there. The whole brain activity
goes to poop, zip-o, this is nothing. Or it goes to like the opposite of anything resembling
attentional or relational coherence. In any case, all right, so the thing with Ammon is that he,
he, okay, I'll put this, people have the wrong idea about him. They think he's,
they think he's demonic, right? And weird things happen all around him very regularly,
which that is not surprising at all. Also, if you look at the guy, he's basically like a walking
psychedelic. So that's a third problem, right, is that ordinary people are going to freak out
in his presence for nine different kinds of reasons that he himself probably can't even
understand. He probably thinks there's some. I mean, I think he has an idea about it.
I don't know what those ideas are. Perhaps I may reach out to this guy and see.
Okay, what the hell is going on here?
The geese are gathered. There's a bunch of feathers on the ground. Have they pulled them out themselves?
This is so weird.
That's a huge lot of feathers, but there's no blood on them, which implies that
the geese pulled the feathers themselves in their preening behavior, which they're doing very
attentively at the moment.
If those feathers had been pulled by a predator, there'd be blood on them.
What is that Greek word for hymen? That's the Greek word for blood hymen,
according to what I heard from Ammon.
Yeah, these quills would make excellent pens for ink.
So I'm sure Ammon doesn't really know why people get really freaked out by him,
although if you look at him, he's thoroughly tattooed with Greek
phrases and words. I'd love to know what the Greek word for my body has become a book is,
or my body is a papyri. This would be great to know about.
Okay, so things are going to get much weirder here just to be clear.
What he's talking about are the intentional use of extremely complex pharmacological
substances. Often aphrodisiacal,
substances introduced during rites of orgiastic
flagrancy, often into the rectum or the eyes or the mouth, almost invariably by women or
a male officiant who are not merely priests.
And many of the substances involved came from the bodies of children.
We've heard nonsense, probably hopefully nonsense, but not necessarily about this
in our modern situation with extremely wealthy people or powerful people.
There's myths, I think, I hope, about some substance called adenochrome or something, adrenochrome.
But I haven't heard Ammon say anything about the sacrificing of children. Rather, he speaks about
getting substances, initiates, taking substances from the bodies of
prepubescent boys and girls, mixing these substances with the venoms from snakes
and substances that are botanical, and also possibly substances that are cathonic
or from the earth. In other words, very specific soils or dusts.
I haven't heard him mention that specifically, but from my own knowledge I would be shocked if
there's none of that going on. And then the ceremonial introduction of these substances
into the eyes, noses, mouths, vaginas, rectums of people who either are undergoing
a spiritual transformation or are being healed. He talks of, in what I was hearing him talk about
today, he was speaking about Medea and how she became sort of the origin of the idea of magic.
And he also talks about, in the Bible, a segment where I suspect he's talking about the horror
of Babylon, quote unquote, and that's the English. I'm sure the Greek is vastly different.
That's funny. People are trying to balance a rock on a rock. If only they could balance their mind
on their mind, things would go much better. So wildly unlikely. All right, so Medea became,
and also almost certainly Cleopatra, they became adepts with the use of various toxins,
which they kept in their hair often. This is where you get the idea of a Medusa,
a woman whose hair looks like snakes, right? What that means is she has dreads, and the dreads are
thick with substances that can either be, you could apply moisture to them and get them on your
fingertips and then fling them into the eyes of a person in front of you, similarly to what a cobra
does, right? Or you could twist a spine or an arrow, some sort of projectile into the dread
with a substance on it that would cause the concentrated toxins in the hair to
both become liquefied and to then be absorbed onto the surface of the projectile. You could
then shoot that into someone and it would paralyze them. A mirror basically keeps the gaze
of something from touching you, and this is the concept I think, though I haven't read the original
Greek, which you know would certainly be useful and helpful. A mirror would keep the gaze of
someone from touching you, and it's the idea that it's the gaze of the Medusa that paralyzes.
Not entirely impossible, but I'm going to wildly guess here that Amma would tell us
there's no evidence of that in the primary sources, and what his first counselor told him,
I'm circling back now, was you need to keep three things in mind as you pursue your academic
passions. The first thing is primary sources. The second thing is primary sources.
You can probably imagine what the third thing is. It's primary sources. What his advisor is saying
is give no credence to anything that has to do with someone discussing their opinions or perspectives
as a classicist, as a Greek scholar. You can only rely on primary sources. You must always rely
on the first texts and never mind what other people think, say, because what you'll find is that
very quickly beyond the primary sources, political and religious and military and
what philosophical orientations rapidly warp the originals, which is why we are catastrophically
confused according to Ammon about who Jesus was and what he was actually up to.
I'm not going to get much into that today. You can check out Ammon yourself if you want
his views on that, but let me just say this. It has nothing to do with what we are thinking.
Jesus was, in Ammon's view, a, what is the right word, a lasia? I can't remember,
lasie, lasia, lasia. Essentially, a trafficker in young children. If you can imagine anything
more provocative than that. And as Ammon will tell you, the sources that we have for the Torah
are not in Hebrew or Aramaic. They are in Greek. We don't have sources for written,
the written Torah is translated from ancient Greek into Hebrew, which is insanely ridiculous
to imagine. I had heard this elsewhere. I had heard this from a scholar,
God. I was eventually able to find the source. I heard this from a scholar who was writing on
Korah, a brilliant author actually, who was doing something very, very dangerous on Korah,
for which he eventually got banned because he was masquerading as a woman
and had written some astonishing sort of memoirs of things that had happened to him
as a her, which of course didn't actually happen in the way that he
so artfully wrote at all. But one of the things he was writing about was a day when he was studying
the history of the actual origin of the Torah and why there were, why it was that
the original sources were all in Greek. I mean, can you imagine how provocative that is?
And I'm sure there are people who will want to yell at me and go like, oh, you're an idiot.
Of course, they were in Hebrew or Aramaic. But I challenged them to produce the dated
material that shows that the Hebrew or Aramaic predates the Greek from which the Torah was
certainly translated into Hebrew, which is, again, staggeringly unexpected.
But this is the kind of thing we will consistently discover when we look into
not just history as a record of what happened, history is the mysterious origin of our present
circumstances. History as that first tone that's being echoed cyclically, recursively in a spiral
that rhymes with its previous arcs. History is that. So basically, his advisors told him,
you have to take out everything that we would understand is related to recreational drug use
among the Romans. And he said, why would I do that? And they said, because it's obvious that
the Romans would not neither do that nor put up with it. And he thought to himself two things,
I think. The first one is, how the fuck would you know that? What, you just have some moralistic
predictor of what you think the Romans would or would not have done? But the second thing he thought,
which I think is hilarious, was, okay, I'm going to take all this stuff out so that I can at least
publish my dissertation. But for the rest of my life, I'll find all the things that the Romans
wouldn't do. My job from now on is I will be the human who knows all the things that you think the
Romans wouldn't do, wouldn't allow. And he cites, knownness, primarily. Galen,
Escalus, not sure if I'm pronouncing that right. Some of these things are hard to pronounce,
but knownness and Galen aren't. And a big shout out to my friend who's actually named Galen.
Here. Because he's almost like the, no one would ever believe it, but he's almost like the rebirth
of one of the Greek scholars in the modern times. And wow, what a problem that is for him.
And you know, those who love him, and I'm one of those people.
So yeah, he cites the actual Greek in the New Testament, from which the New Testament is derived
in English. And he points out all kinds of catastrophic mistranslations, which are endemic
to the Bible that we read. I mean, the idea that you could translate Hebrew into English
is pretty nearly insane if it's biblical Hebrew, or you know, Torah Hebrew. But again,
you have the same problem, right? There's no such thing as biblical Hebrew. Biblical Hebrew is a
derivation of biblical Greek. And the chances of you translating a language is sophisticated in
its connotative and technical features into English. I don't even know. It would be like trying to
translate Romanian geometry into basic arithmetic. It's just not going to ever happen.
And this is part of the problem that we face
with our historical documents in general, and anything that where we can't go to the original
source with, you know, arm in arm with a scholar of significant educational and linguistic depth,
right? And clearly, Ammon is one of a few such scholars that exist. He's not the only one.
But uh,
there's so much going on here that it's really hard to remain focused. All right, so
so they made him remove everything that that they thought might possibly indicate what they
call the recreational use of drugs by the Romans and the Athenians. And this is the birthplace
of the idea of democracy in so much as we moderns understand it in the West. Obviously, there were
experiments long before this, and there were things more like liquid democracy than formal
democracy. By the time you have to formalize a system, you've lost most of its essence and
origin completely, right? By the time you have to formalize relationships, you have a problem where
the concept of the individual has achieved an unjustified primacy. You follow me? It should
never be this ultimate. This idea of individual should never be this ultimate. So um,
I'm going to carefully skirt the, oh god, what a pun. I'm going to skirt the topics
that are related to what I have said, which is the ceremonial use of substances produced
by the bodies of prepubescent humans. I'm going to skirt that topic, but I'm going to circle it
and highlight it just so that it remains in the orbit of what we are here trying to understand.
Medea became a master of the uses, both of snake venom and the mixtures, the careful mixture,
like as if, as if, as if each venom. So the substances that a human body produces can be
understood as elixirs, right? The sweat, the tears, the saliva, the, oh my god, dare I even say these
things? I, no, I'm not going to say it. Sexual exudations and a couple of other things that
I'm going to leave out. If you're really imaginative, you'll figure out what I'm pointing at. Most of
you won't, probably for everyone's best interest that you don't. And these topics are so forbidden,
right? They're, they're so forbidden that you will be killed for considering them in many cases,
but certainly you will be, you know, obliterated for publicly discussing them.
And so I'm taking a lot of risks here, even though I'm being relatively circumspect.
This guy looks like he's aware of principles related to
interior martial arts. He's using hand gestures that are evocative of the manipulation of chi,
which is a related topic here, okay? But things are going to get really weird in a moment.
So Amon decided, I'm going to find out everything that those, those Greeks wouldn't have been doing.
And he did. I mean, he's, you know, and he's been accused of strange
things that I think people have him entirely backwards. If they think he's interested,
for example, in summoning demons or opening portals. I mean, the problem with Amon
is that if you're walking around on earth with the knowledge that he has,
you might, you are a portal. You don't have to go opening them. You are one.
And, and this is a problem for him that I think he'll hopefully artfully
negotiate, right? Mitigate or work with. All right. So remember, this is a, this is a topic that
other things down here. This is a topic that has fascinated me and I've had some brand new insights
today based on what Amon was talking about that are staggering to me and wildly unexpected
because I felt like I mostly knew what was going on because I had been shown
stories, but the stories omitted certain things. And Amon's
discussion has illuminated something fundamental. Okay, I'm going to take a couple of these quills
because these quills are seriously great. So I want, I want this one.
This one.
So, long ago,
an on-ordinary being offered me a wish and had I been intelligent,
I would have perhaps wished differently. And I now for the first time understand something about
why that being seemed very surprised by what I had selected.
But the fundamental wish was help me understand how my species got broken and if there's any
medicine for that. And what it did was it dripped insight into the eye of my mind
very delicately so it would not destroy me. And so that I would understand the origins
of what I refer to as representational cognition in our species
and the histories and mysteries of how that very problematical feature of we moderns originated.
But I also asked specifically, talk to me about the tree incident in Genesis
because this seems to be at least for some people or in some way a crucial origin story
where the problems apparently get started. And I'm going to spoil the charade here because,
okay, so what I was first shown was that the serpent, quote unquote, was an angel
in a sense and it was the angel of the knowledge of dividing things, one from another,
the knowledge of distinguishing. And so it made divisions in the minds
of first of Eve and then of Adam by giving them the fruit of the tree of knowledge.
And certainly,
this can be thought of in a variety of ways. I've had many perspectives on what that
concept of the fruit might refer to. And it's much better to have three to five good
perspectives than it is to have one. If you have one, it will blind you. And some of us,
some people will think, well, there's a difference between things that are actually
true and those that aren't. Yes, there are, but insight is not always forged from the facts.
Often it's forged from the dreaming, which is the intelligent,
what, reambiguation of the facts. The intelligent reamb, getting the facts
is useful. The intelligently reambiguating them is profound. And this is what happens
when we dream. This is part of what happens when we use certain substances, pharmacoya.
And what I've seen today for the first time is, okay, let me go back to Medea.
So, Ammon was saying that Medea became a master of the, not just the application
of substances derived from vipers and snakes. Oh my God. I can't believe I can see so many
problems in me sharing this recording. I can't, I'm going to be surprised if the recording even
survives. Am I still actually recording? Yes, apparently I am. Okay. Wow. So,
Medea became
supra humanly adept, not merely at the acquisition of venoms from snakes and possibly other creatures
and possibly
botanical and perhaps cathonic substances as well, the mixing of them.
This, in a sense, he's saying she is, at least in some historical lines or traditions,
the first pharmacologist, the one who mixes toxins and also understands them probably in a kind of
a spiritual way that results in the capacity to produce antidotes, which are not merely curatives.
They can rebalance
and possibly even resurrect. So, what is being implied here by Ammon,
and I don't think he's going to agree with me about this if he even becomes aware of my theory,
is that the viper at the tree in Genesis, the serpent, which in my, in the stories I was shown,
is essentially an angel. It's like the first angel. It's the angel that divides.
It's the angel with the gift of cutting, essentially cutting in the mind. So, it's
the angel that allows for the possibility of distinguishing and thus the beginning of the
concept of naming and thus the beginning of concepts themselves and the tree of nomenclature,
reference, representation, tokenization and consciousness, commodities, all these things.
You can see, in a sense, it could be understood as the origin of evil,
because all of these departures from unity and communion are necessary for the idea of knowledge,
right? And knowledge is so often, if not always, the death of participation. It's the knife that the
waking awareness brings to the bubbles of dreaming, collapsing them into awakening,
where identity is declarative rather than connotative or relational. It is declared rather
than suggested, which is what happens in moonlight. Sunlight is declarative, moonlight is suggestive,
invocative, invitational, connotational, associational, more like the imagination
than the denotation or the dictionary. And so, the implication here is that the serpent, both
the amonic, I'm going to call it the amonic implication for me, is that the serpent gave
Eve the toxin that brought her to the verge of death, to the liminal space between worlds,
the hypnagogic, pompic space. The serpent injected her with this venom and gave her the
knowledge of the venom and how to use it and also how to comprise the antidote.
And then she died and was resurrected and thus had knowledge, because the whole idea of knowledge
is equated with death in the Hebrew. The tree, the sephiroth in the center of it that isn't
numbered is doth, which is knowledge. And this doth and death are closely related. So the concept
here is that Eve was brought to the verge of death, essentially killed by the serpent, resurrected,
given the knowledge of the antidotes. She communicated this knowledge to the males, to Adam,
by producing the same series of events in his body and consciousness. They both were awakened
to the reality of death, which before had been perhaps impossible for them. And now that they
were no longer immortal in the sense of a rising moment to moment from the communal essence of
being, now they have become subject to mortality and physical death. And this is the
implication of the Ammonic knowledge that Ammon himself seems very resistant to. He claims that
this is the Canaanite path that he associates with all kinds of apparent ethical
deviation. I'm going to go check out this music, but we're going to come back to this. And the place
we'll come back to is Medea and how we get to the idea of Medusae from there. All right, so
I walked into the concourse between the museums here in San Francisco. There's a bunch of people
with spacesuits on the stage of the amphitheater, and they're playing a jazz version of Hallelujah
while I'm making this recording, which I think is fairly ridiculously
synchronistic and trippy and bizarre. All right, so Medea became one of the first
masters of the formulation and applications of venoms from serpents.
We must imagine particularly vipers, but probably also
cobras, and there are a variety of, okay,
ophi, let's see, what was he talking about?
I cannot recall the genus name that refers to the serpents, but it's OPH, right? It's like
ophiologists study serpents. So he talks about, in the book of Revelation, a reference,
it's insane people, unfortunately. He talks about
people referred to as essentially devotees of both this woman who
distributes elixirs that are derived both from serpents and her sexual exudations.
The ophians, ophidians, something like this. I can't quite find the word. In any case, Medea ends up in
what later becomes Sicily. I can't remember the other s name it had previously, which turns out to be
the birthplace of my direct paternal ancestors. Syracuse, I think, is what he called it.
And there's a man who's been bitten by a marsh viper, and she reaches, and this is in the original
sources, right? This is in the ancient Greek, probably in Nonos or Galen or something. She reaches
beneath her undergarments, produces a substance from her vagina with which she resurrects the sky.
And, you know, moderns, you poor, benighted folks, you can think whatever you feel comfortable about
thinking. You can think people are just making this stuff up. This is wildly improbable. Of course,
we know what's actually true about Jesus and pharmacology and molecular chemistry and all
of these things. Yeah, we know the mechanics to some degree. We know nothing of that plus.
And very, very little, we don't. We stopped mixing snake venom, you know, 8,000 years ago,
but there were people all over the world who knew that what could kill you could heal you,
and that particularly the energies and the capacities of the human spirit when driven into
either ecstatic modes. And when I say this word mode, I want you to think of both the
frequency and an array of shapes, a progressing array of shapes like you might see on a drum head
with sand or another substance on it when frequencies are being played on speakers
underneath the drum head so that geometric figures arise in the sand on the surface of the drum
head. This is what I'm, the human soul is capable of producing an array of iterative transformations,
right, that can be recursively self-amplifying and can produce staggering forms of healing.
In someone who is sick or poisoned. And what these ancients were often concerned with
was something, you know, when you hear, no one would think when they hear the psalm,
yea, though I walk through the shadow, you know, through I walk, yea, though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear no evil. And they think this means you will not
fear evil because the holy ones are with you. But what it actually means is I will not fear dying
because the people of the antidote are with me. No one will think this. And yet the actual texts
almost certainly refer to something like this rather than what we are trained to think.
Now I have seen and was shown histories that are much more shocking and staggering than anything
Ammon has even hinted at. I don't speak of them to humans ever, not even in private.
I was shown
modes of relation that led to abilities that are wildly non-ordinary and unexpectedly profound.
I don't practice these things. I am simply aware that we are very confused about what it means to be
human. And actually we are extremely confused about what knowledge is because it has almost
nothing to do with the capacity to form mechanical tools. Actual knowledge is insight. And insight
means knowing the span from origin to the present, intimately and amnoetically recalling it
as if you are doing a sort of spiritual and or genetic
and amnoetic, right? Unforgetting archaeology within the depths of our bodies and being
and relationships. This is what real knowledge is. It's not mechanical knowledge. It's not physics.
It's not math. It's not mere geometry. Though geometry is strangely profoundly
related to all of these topics.
To concentrate on surviving the street crossing there.
So somehow today, for the first time, I've become capable of imagining
a gloss on the tree story that had never occurred to me before. That the serpent
took Eve to the brink of death or actually into death, right? And then gave her the antidotes,
revived her, resurrected her, and then she in turn led Adam through the same initiatory
process. I don't know, I may never know what Ammon actually thinks because I suspect that
if he's intelligent, like me, he won't share with, he won't say anything about this
to anyone ever. Or he might say something about it in private. I don't know what he
actually thinks or believes. One of the things he said when Danny Jones asked him if he was religious at all,
because he often apparently says the phrase, Hail Satan. And Danny asked him,
you know, why do you do that? Are you Satanist? He says, no, I don't like those people.
And Danny says, so why are you doing that? Who's Satan? And he says, he talks about Satan as
the Morning Star, the Lightbringer, the Enlightener, who was lied about because Zeus was a liar and so
projected, if I understand, this is very spooky and sketchy, but Zeus projected his own failings
and perhaps flailings onto Lucifer. And these are matters I inquired into during my own experience.
And I'm happy to communicate about privately, but I don't want to make clumsy abstractions about,
clumsy abstract generalizations. In effect, that is a form of sin. It's
sin by generalization and sin by abstraction.
In order to speak meaningfully about such matters, we must inquire together. We must begin with the
spirit of inquiry, not the spirit of dissertation or locution, has to start with inquiry together.
Then we have a chance to speak intelligently and learn intelligently together. So I will resist
the urge to speak about that matter abstractly at the moment. And I want to be clear that
for those of you who may have a desire to actually drink the waters
together, that's a wedding that doesn't happen in the invitation.
That's something that happens one on one. If we both agree that we want to cleanse our eyes
of the anciently complicated obstructions that language, concept, religion, policy, expectation,
tradition have imposed on us so unjustly, so terrifyingly. And yet some of the jungles,
you know, there are portions of the jungles of insight that are at least as terrifying to our
common expectation of meaning, identity, relationship, origin. They have nothing to,
they don't care a whit about what we prefer to believe or what we think is sane,
what we think is clean. There's no, you know, it's like dumping a bucket of water on the sun's surface,
if you could transport one there somehow. There's no respect for that.
There, it cannot be preserved there.
Huh. Okay, I'll try that.
There's a little library here on my street where a woman puts her books out and I saw her yesterday,
she came home and it's the first time I've seen who it is that's putting the books in here.
And I said, you know, you have some very interesting books and she looked at me
like I was an insane person, like I was a dangerous person, like I was someone she would
prefer to have no Congress whatsoever with. And it was really weird. She definitely
both refused the compliment. I feel like, yeah, you can keep that compliment to yourself, buddy.
I don't care. And I don't want to know you. And your mother was a conigate and your father
smelled of elderberries, et cetera, et cetera. But yeah, I've just found a book called the Child
Garden, which has extraordinary praise written all over it by Geoff Reiman. So maybe I'll read
some science fiction again instead of living it. But yeah, if you think what I present in my
recordings is deep, you should get a taste of what you're actually carrying, where you come from,
where we come from, where our minds, by what parents, our minds and souls were forged,
and for what purposes. And when we breach or broach the topics that I've been playing with
today, which were masterfully introduced by Amon Hillman, we're at least closing in on the vicinity
of stuff that really matters. We're closing in on the outskirts of the gardens of infinity
that are the origins of not just the lights in the sky, but the sky itself, and that from which
it emerges as a reflective embodiment of this thing, the living waters,
which Amon, a phrase that Amon actually mentions in relationship to
what he calls the third ventricle, which is a capacious space inside the brain
where a liquid circulates, an elixir. And what he talks about is women learning how to produce
drugs in their own bodies, so that their bodies became a pharmacopia. He says that the sources speak
of Medea and other women, Medusa, she calls giants not meaning huge, in size meaning huge,
in knowledge, gigantus. It's lovely to hear the reverence and terror with which he sometimes
pronounces Greek words. He claims that small serpents were treated with oils and stored
in the vaginal cavities of these women. I know how the moderns are just going to
like squinch up their faces and go like, okay, this dude's nuts, or maybe Darren's nuts.
But neither of those things are true. What's actually true is we moderns are completely broken
because we have
absolutely wrong ideas inculcated by nonsensical absurdities.
About matters related to medicine, origin, spirit,
Christ, the meanings of these ideas, all of these things are completely delusional.
We have this weirdly puritanical opposition to anything that might actually resemble understanding.
And if we are to have understanding, we must divest ourselves of the obstacles between us and that.
And some of that divestment is profoundly uncomfortable and conceptually unimaginable
to we who have grown up in a world divorced from these original stories.
So, as usual, I'm grateful for this time we've had together. I have arrived home.
I'm going to wash some feather quills that I retrieved and listen to more Ammon
and probably regret that I didn't speak further and longer on this topic,
which is so fascinating to me because for the first time I've started to see what
the possible relationship is between the snake in the tree in the garden and insight,
and also possibly a mystery in the black foot lore where the moon falls in love
with something that is referred to in the English translation
as a many-legged snake that lives in a hollow log.
Oh, God, this is so... I'm not even going to start to elucidate my concerns and thoughts about that
matter, which has been a primordial question that I and Ryan Firstiver have been chasing together
for many joyful years now. Thank you for joining me. I wish you all blessings, a beautiful path in
your life and day and moment. I wish you the wonders of actual insight. May the
may the plank in your eye be removed and may you resist
the compulsions of judgment so that you may taste the nectar.
Of liberation and insight. Bye-bye for now. Thank you for joining me.
