Hello everybody. Welcome. It is Saturday, 1st of June, 2024, the year when
schizogenic insanity was normalized when understanding became its opposite. Where ignorance and the polarity
of abject opinionated ignorance and the light of the origins of intelligence and insight
flipped over so that the former took the throne of the latter in our cultures and consciousness
and thought and language as I've been seeing many examples of today. And yet there are
bastions of insight and awareness, learning, discovery, growth, self-correction, and the mutual
encompassment of inquiry. Amen Hillman recently said something so right. He's like, you're not
going to believe me, bro, but this word history, it comes from a Greek root that means asking a
question of an oracle, an oracle, the living spirit of insight, divine wisdom embodied in a young
woman in ancient Greece, an oracle. History was a question, not a declaration, not a record of the
authorized version of what had been a dream. I was listening this morning to messages
from my friend, Tim Sanderson, brilliantly embodied, soulful, heartful, more than human being. His
voice is so soft. And, you know, he complains that he was never really an intellectual, never truly an
academic, but was lost instead in the reveries of his fervent imaginings. I was like, the whole, you
know, 78% of the amphitheater of my ancestors stood up in their graves, like, yes, wild cheering ensued.
Though, you know, both paths, the intellect is profound when it's funded by its origins, when it
reveres its origins in dreaming and emotion and passion. And part of that passion is the quest
the quest for the superposition above the concept of justice. If the concept of justice means,
or is taken to mean, is clumsily and crudely taken to mean, a kind of accounting where transgressors
must be called to task and made to pay, because apparently wrongdoing is a banking system. This
sort of insanity, this, this branch on the upside down burning tree of ignorance, flagrantly
masquerading as propriety, purity is perennially horrifying. We see the results today in specific
conflicts, I will not hear name. We see this reenacted, devastating, nonsense masquerading as
justification, wherever that may happen. And it happens in me. I'm familiar with the stink of
this, the fingerprint, the poison, yeah, the poisoned fingerprint of my own thumb at the
beginning of some crime scene where I decide vengeance will be mine. Retribution will be the
spirit of the day, you know. And it's not that there's no place for that. Rather, its place should
be rare at best, at most, and funded by brilliant insight, not regimented ignorance, structured
into rules and laws and things. You know, the quest is for understanding exceptionally profuse
throat clearing, apparently. Honking in the interception. And throwing the children off the
bridge into the river to teach them to swim. Just had to get the little ones in there because,
you know, apparently everyone forgets they're alive or pretends that something else is going on.
Not everyone, but the collectives definitely. Just like children who cares, boom, guns, blow it up.
Destroy those mothers for the sake of some declaration. Bliterate them, blood and gore,
fields of broken bones, chaos. Yeah, if that's the mark of sanity or intelligence among the humans,
then get me off this planet, please. Which, you know, for many sensitive and intelligent children is
the slogan they'd wear on their t-shirt. How could I have been born on a planet where the humans
treat each other like a lawn that just needs a good mowing? And yet, at the same time, there's
clearly some truth behind that delusion. The idea of harrowing that we find in certain
misconstrued biblical texts is nonetheless important. We do actually not eat the chaff of the wheat.
We eat the tender seed inside it and are thus nourished and our generations are rejuvenated by the
magic they're in. Meanwhile, the highly sensitive person sees the box of cream of wheat as cream of
wheat. The screaming of the plants as they're sited in the fields, back when we used to actually have
to manually harvest food for grain. Meanwhile, these people are feeding ducks bread, which, you know,
maybe I'm misunderstanding something here. Pretty sure that those straight-up carbs are
poisoned to waterfowl, but these are city waterfowl, so who knows? And why should I trust my own biases
and judgments? The world is complicated. It's like a million spiderwebs intersecting and you try to,
what? Determine the value of the intersections via some combination of emotional valence and rational
thought. Okay. Hopefully the emotional valence is actually there and veritable and not just the
result of doubling down on previous biases and resentments and triggerings and so forth.
The dopamine ratchet, right? The neurochemical ratcheting that we undergo via media and spectacle
Facebook, Twitter. I mean, what a more ironic, you know, the collective mangling of intelligence
of many twits. A crowd of twits. Of course, there are brilliant voices in the morass. There are
those of us who, well, I counted myself among them. Did you see, see what I did there? There are those
of us who courageously and steadfastly hold the line in the cataclysm of ignorance and
opinionation we call social media today. I'm actually trying to understand that one of the
things that became clear to me when I listened to the dulcet tones of my friend Tim this morning
was just how that he doesn't stray from his embodiment when he speaks. And when he says I
couldn't, you know, I appreciated and sort of, he doesn't say I'm putting words in his mouth,
but he meant something that resembles I revered beautiful examples of intellectualism and
in academia, but I couldn't, I couldn't, I'm not, I'm not a library of Alexandria. I'm a dreamer.
And what's so beautiful about that is that comes to mind for me that I take from it is a couple
of things right away, a couple of things immediately. And the first is that the origin of the possibility
of memory and intelligence lies in dreaming dreaming.
It is the
the activity of angels in our minds that tend the gardens of memory so that they
flourish and thrive and blossom and fruit.
That imagination he speaks of is primordially fundamental. And there's no such thing as
intellect without it. So what he's really saying is in my view is I revere
the primordial origins from which the possibilities of intellect spring. I remain true to these.
I adore these. I belong to these, to them, to their spirit, to their action, to their bodies.
I am theirs. They are mine. We are one. And that's profound. Beautiful. I agree. I contrasted myself.
I was like, after singing the praises of his failure to dissociate into his intellect,
I talked about my own weaknesses of such a form where
my intellect is like a UFO and I wake up in the morning and it's glowing there in the center
of the room. And I trace the sigils on the unbroken surface of this egg-shaped sphere.
A door appears with blinding light surrounding it.
It becomes a portal. I step in and, fume, I'm out of my body. I'm in wild, transcendental,
dissociative ecstasies far above my mundane soma, my flesh, my nervous system, my bones,
my organs. And they're like, wait, what just happened here? Darren is already dead?
Because that's sort of what's going on. I'm, in a way, untransported.
I'm in the spirit world before my passing. I'm seeing from after my death back into my life.
And it doesn't require drugs. It just requires ideas and language and my passionate fascination
with focus and my adoration of their mystery and horror and splendor and potential.
In a way, I long ago and without really the use of drugs. In fact, in the most sober
epochs of my life as a young adult and in my 30s, I knew the kisses of the muses.
And I didn't know what to call it, because this is the true state of blissful naivete,
where you haven't been separated from it. It hasn't been taken from you. So you have no way
to refer to it, because there's no need to refer to it. It's not separate, right?
Right? The reference comes after the divorce, after the abstraction, after the loss, after the fall.
I mean, any of us who have sought wisdom, oh my god, what an ironic,
what an ironic situation we will find ourselves in. Any of us who have sought wisdom
and tasted of the nectars of her mouth. Thilo, so kissing, kissing. That saliva,
the trophallaxis, which is the transmission of hormones and nutrients among hymenoptera,
the ants, the bees, the wasps, often between species, not often, sometimes.
Right? Sometimes ants and wasps may exchange trophallactic
nectars, and they call them. There's no word in English.
They are trans-sigenic. They come before the generation of minds. They're primordial,
and there's nectars, elixirs, filters, P-H-I-L, T-R-E-S, I think. They're sometimes spelled, E-R-S.
Yeah, I was having congress with the muses before I understood they existed formally,
before I knew how to speak of it, and they were reforging my mind and my dreaming,
resurrecting them moment to moment in my waking life, in my creative life, in my writing,
and my creative play, my music, literally music,
my quests.
And so, you know, I learned to kind of look down on ceremonial magic,
because there's feral enchantments that seem to me to far exceed the possibilities of structured
representation, ritual, and so forth. And when you have those, you would never trade them for
the bones of the thing.
But these days, that magic is much more rare than it was in my youth. And so,
I know, intimately, the body and wings of my intellect, and
I will gladly depart the graveyard of my waking mind for the skies beyond it.
Though I only fairly recently came to understand I was doing this, it was so natural, my trepidation
of incarnate existence and somato-emotional
hystericity.
Yeah, like a layered archaia, a layered archaia of my
confusions, losses, injuries, sufferings, subjugations, enslavements,
all inflected, inflected with by, with and by the peculiarly weird
perspective from outside the personal, the
bizarre perspective that generates some of the branches on the trees of psychosis, paranoia,
self-criticism, the possibility of social critique, of public critique, of how others
might have seen me, of how the others of myself might direct the cruel illuminations of critical
judgment. And this is part of why I say that is not now and never shall be justice.
Condemnation and justice have nearly nothing in common. For justice, it seems to me, must be
the, now I'm going to get in trouble here because I'm going to make structured language about
something that has to be fluidly transcendent in its natures and in actions. It must have a body
that isn't conceptual, that isn't linguistic.
All right, but I'll dare. I mean, it's the first part of my name, right? Dare in.
Don't get named this. If you want to get born as a human, don't go here. I was actually named
for Bobby Darin, a singer, one of Melodious Voice. And when I was little, I used to sing all the
time and my parents would constantly try to make me stop, but I was actually fairly good at it.
These days, I'm older and unpracticed, but I would love, I used to sing in a choir, singing is really,
that's so funny, a choir. In any case, where I'm going here is that
actual justice uses the problems that emerge in what we might think of as criminal behavior
that we would hold some individual god to account for. Okay, wow. Now, there's sort of at least
two different meanings of account here. One is to explain to us, right? Help us understand
your motivations. That's one kind of an account. But the other kind is we will
debit to you. We will debit your life. We will, we will subtract from you relationships, time,
freedom, as if what we have in our modern societies even slightly resembles freedom.
But it does compared to being in a, you know, a stone box.
So yeah, this debiting, this accounting, which is
the very absence of humanity, intelligence, insight, awareness, justice, truth, the virtues.
It is a catastrophic abeyance of virtue and understanding.
So as I've said many times before,
what we ache for when injustice has taken place is not punishment.
We ache for the subtraction from the world of the forces, ideas, and situations, the traps
that led what we call the perpetrator to enact the quote crime,
unquote. And we've been confused
to desire further poison. We've been poisoned. The poison killed our heart.
And now we want to make a small poison and poison a million hearts. Poison the future,
poison history. Just lay waste
to the origins of our humanity, our souls, virtue, understanding, awareness. What we really want
is the context to be healed so that such crimes become not nearly unnecessary,
but impossible. Right? That's what justice looks like. It looks like using the intelligence we
can derive from the perpetrator as the symptom of something wrong in the water of our communal
identity or failure to establish it, to sustain it, truly.
Wow. These people are making floral reeds. I'm so jealous. It's awesome.
Oh my god, what's the, uh, is this a Greek symbol on the blanket? Sure looks like it.
It's amazing. They're actually being human together. It's fucking awesome. I love this.
By the way, you know, one form of justice is, doesn't concern itself with history at all.
It concerns itself with re-beautifying the present in such a way that the, that the integrity
and profound beauty of the future becomes repossibilized, right? Resurrected from its,
you know, cascade of falling off 19 different cliffs of vengeful stupidity and ignorance.
Yeah, that's what they're doing up there. That's celebration. I don't know the etymology
of the word justice or the word crime or perpetrator or celebration.
Um, I understand alphabetically some things about these words, but I'm not going to, uh,
descend into that labyrinth at the moment. Rather, I will stay in the path. But what those humans up
there are doing with their laughter, amituality and joyful, communality and floral, you know,
breathing each other's, literally their heads, right? They're breathing each other's heads with
flowers. Think about what this actually means, all right? It's very astonishing because on the one
hand they are breathing their heads with magical substances comprised over trillions and trillions
of lifetimes of these plants, without which we would not exist. So these plants are the progenitors.
In a sense, the fairies are, the fairies and the elves are the spirits of these plants and their
relationships and their histories with the land and the mountains and the skies and the waters. Okay?
Um, so they are breathing each other's heads just for a moment in joyful, mutual celebration
and promotion, right? They are raising each other up in the light of the sun on the top of the
Strawberry Hill in San Francisco, the place, you know, named after Francis of Assisi,
who probably actually was amazingly virtuous and brilliant and perhaps even wholly human being,
regardless of, you know, the fact, yeah, has nothing to do with the fact of the association,
the, the cohort, yeah, what, which cohorts we would associate him with and why, right? I mean,
it could have a little to do with it, but yeah, it's just, so yeah, they're up there
breathing each other's heads and drinking wine and celebrating and laughing and loving each other
and being human together. Wow, what a healing moment and notice that it's not
formal, it's not a ritual that they're enacting. It's spontaneous, it's improvised
and, you know, it's probably someone's birthday or maybe someone was just married or maybe someone
had a child or maybe they were just like, hey, you know, it's Saturday, it's Saturn,
it's the day of Saturn, that S, S-T-R, right? Sigma Tau Rho, as Amu would say, yeah, Sigma Tau Rho.
Yeah, so beautiful and inspiring and evocative of memory. They are breathing each other's
foreheads with flowers and one of them knows how to do this in an expert way. They have probably
hemp vines or strings that are being soaked in a liquid to make them especially pliable
and they had just baskets of flowers to weave into the vines. So brilliant.
So one of the kinds of justice is that we go forward from here in remembrance of mutual beauty
and origin. Think about that, right? No historical damnations, indictments, because think about
this. If you have to preserve the history of wrongdoing as you walk forward into life and
the potentials of your more than merely human life, if you have to preserve all those indictments and
you know, equivocate over them and punish them and wow, the problem with that is there are certain
kinds of burden that get heavier by a matter of, you know, geometric expansion, right? Like
exponential, they get exponentially heavier each moment that you continue to preserve them.
And we don't notice this because the urge to preserve them is one of the lethal games that
smuggled into our consciousness along with the process, you know, during the processes of
in-languaging and in-culturation as children. We think that English comes with no baggage.
Nothing like that is even possibly true. The opposite is true. There are, you know,
there are vast warehouses of lethal
tropes, right? Figures of speech, metaphor, simile.
I was trying to think of some, but I'm not, I'm not dwelling in the warehouses at the moment.
I'm dwelling above them, so it's hard for me to dip down and grab exemplars.
All kinds of courtroom mine tropes,
war mine tropes, vengeance tropes, but just think of how
metabolically, energetically, and spiritually expensive it is to preserve harms. And some will
say, well, you can't just ignore them. Okay, maybe, maybe, sometimes. But actually, you can do this
thing that's transcendentally useful, which is not to take offense in the first place.
And if you've noticed you've taken offense, you're going to have to carry that. You sure you want
that? Do you go to the store ever? Did you ever once go to the mall or the grocery store and find
the most disgusting, heaviest thing you could find, right? A box of rotten, dead rat corpses or
something, right? Huge box, weighs like three tons, and you carry that thing home and you drag it
along with you for the rest of your, not once, ever did you do this, right? So why do we do this
psycho-emotionally? Why do we decide to take offense? It's the most expensive thing you could take,
and it grows catastrophically more expensive the longer you preserve it.
And I hear, you know, in the background, the voices of those of us who have suffered actual
indignities and catastrophic harms or rape or, you know, horrifying violence or murder.
I hear their voices saying, what shall we just forget it? No. But what are we going to do with it?
What will we make of it? The fact that I got,
the fact that something that happened to me was horrifyingly bad. I mean, recently something
happened that I definitely took offense to. A doctor, specifically a doctor at Ocean Park Health
Center, Chan, overtly denied that an episode in my medical history ever took place. This didn't
happen. And I was like, first of all, who are you again? It'd be like someone saying, you know,
that a mother didn't give birth to her child or, but she never had a child or something. Not that
my injury is my child. I'm not trying to make that association. I'm just saying that it actually
took place that I was treated for a specific illness by a specific doctor at a specific time.
And she's overtly said, nope, never happened. Can't have happened. There's no such diagnosis,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. I found it very offensive. I wrote her a letter saying, you know,
this is alarming your behavior. I'm not sure that a doctor, I mean, you can see why, you know,
why I was offended. But in this moment as I'm remembering this experience, which I conceive
of as a violation, right, the whole of my identity begins to collapse into something that can be
violated. Is that liberty? Is that virtue? Is that intelligence? Is that insight? Is that truth?
Why would I even take the time to take offense? Now, in some cases,
it's reasonable for us to assert what we today talk about as boundaries.
But if this becomes our fascination, whoa, W-O-E be unto us. If our fascination
and our obsession becomes the maintenance of boundaries in a world of real and imagined
violations, our humanity will collapse into an uninhabitable skeleton of
a doubt, confusion, despair. We must live beyond what happens to us and our possible
interpretations. And we also must speak up when a violation is tangibly real and not just imagined
or a projection. But again, the obsession with, I'm just a magnet for the violation of, you know,
whatever it may be, isn't a livable identity. There's not enough there, inside there, to dwell in it.
So I certainly recognize
the urge.
In some cases, for something resembling redress of wrongdoing,
but it's a very, very dangerous
balancing game. And most often in modern society, that game becomes malignant quickly.
We have the wrong idea. We think there are individuals.
There's all kinds of ridiculous, pre-existing
conditionality that is nonsensical. And as the result of the terrifying reflections of
isolation, which could be literally understood as meaning, I am so late.
I am behind time. Time is way ahead of me. Relation is way ahead of me. I am alone.
And my cohort is far, it's so far ahead of me that I don't belong to it anymore.
I so late, I on. That I on means a self and also a particle and possibly a particle that
transmits or preserves something in the sense that I am here highlighting creatively.
There's so much for us to learn and recover and celebrate. We should be very careful.
Life is short. Existence is brief. We should make it beautiful together,
within for each other in the history and future of life and our peoples.
Fundamentally, these are one people, one family. It's all there is on this tiny little rock.
It's moist rock floating around in time space. This is our home. This is our body. These are
our people. There's no other people. And the idea of the individual as we ridiculously are
tortured by it today. People are like, oh, he's a fucking communist. No. Like, how many of your
cells in your body are individuals? Let me ask you this. Does it matter at all?
Does their individuality matter at all if the body dies? What are you going to make of their individuality then?
It's funny, the photograph I've just taken will probably become the photo I use
for this recording later.
This idea of individuals and their rights is exemplary of the loss of communal meat,
of the context, of the meaningful context of our humanity over time.
As our context became abstract, representational, commercial, domineering, viral,
frisbee, falsifications of the possibility of communal, meaningful communal experience,
roles, identity, behavior. So one of the things I saw up on top of the mountain
or the little hill, Strawberry Hill, was a reenaction of that possibility.
However brief and ephemeral, not even more powerful for all of its brevity,
even more powerful for its inability to fundamentally change. It's like
it's one droplet in an ocean, but that droplet shines so brightly that the entire ocean is
transformed in its spirit, if not its physical activity. So those droplets matter. That's
what I call real. It's easy to forget this because we look in our modernity and we see
a trillion, I'm going to stop saying my pause phrase, we see a trillion violations.
I'll just pick one, microplastics. Trillion violations per second. What can we do?
Is there even a we to do things? No, there isn't. And if we form a we to do things,
it's going to be like attempting to eat the moon or swallow the ocean, won't it?
And so it seems that the possibility of enacting change is pre-prohibited.
There's no real way. And a number of my friends have spoken to me about this.
I'll mention particularly Sean, who is working with PAWS AI
and express his despair. What can we do? We can't stop it.
And I explained to him the principle that I was orbiting here, which is that
when we live beautiful lives and we witness and speak together for each other for the history
and future of life on our world and of beings of all beings, when this is done with authenticity
and passion and love, that always matters. It's not necessarily that the gods, that the victors
in a situation are favored of the gods as we might imagine.
And there's something above the gods, above the gods. There's something beyond the gods,
that even they must obey. And this is the principle for which they executed Socrates.
But he dared, they used him of atheism because he said something resembling
that even the gods must obey the spirit of truth. Even the gods are subject to this.
And this was the spear point they used for his indictment and prosecution.
He was an oracle.
He was a male oracle. But instead of declaring wisdom, he fomented it.
He fermented it among the people. He would bring them together in the Quora and ferment
the nectar of wisdom from within their hearts and spirits.
And this made him lethal to the fictions that then ruled Athens.
The warmongers, the weapon makers, Plato's parents, Plato's father, his brothers, his family.
We should take these matters gravely with grave seriousness and attend them carefully.
The possibilities of the spirit of democracy, the spirits from which democracy originated,
those possibilities still exist today. Unenacted, overlooked, falsified, counterfeited.
And democracy doesn't just mean the voting of idiots. It's not the idea at all.
It's, I don't actually know what it is, but I can say how I conceive of it, which is the communal
preservation and purification of the context of our relationships, such that it becomes possible
to not merely know what is true and good and do that, but also to avoid
what is lethal and malignant and destroys history in the future and falsifies it and counterfeits
it and sells us the remains of it at ever-increasing prices, destroying the mothers and the children
and the fathers and the ancestors and the progeny. That must be avoided.
So these are my thoughts for the day. I'm grateful to have this opportunity to speak them
and share them with you. I hope you find them inspiring and that you are inspired enough to
become historical, perhaps to learn the ancient Greek and other ancient languages,
but particularly the Greek, and to ask questions of the oracles, to ask the imperative questions that
you brought to your human incarnation and your more than human existence, your more than merely
human existence, that is precious and noble in its essence, that is beautiful in its origin
and transcendental in its natures. May your paths and relations, questions and dreams be blessed.
Alive for now.
