Hello everybody. Welcome. So part of how I learn, I'm sorry to say, is by being intellectually
impetuous, precocious, and naive. And what that usually turns out to mean, or what that
commonly often turns out to mean, is that I'm going to make bold mistakes in my first
essays of an idea that will sort of fertilize the garden of my mind if I'm lucky. If I'm
unlucky, those bold mistakes become doctrine, dogma, or my pet theory. And that happens too.
This is part of the danger of trying to chase insight alone, right? So that I don't have to
fight anyone powerful who's got an objection or a contrary perspective. This is part of why
I've been willing to put up with my scientist friend Kevin for 15 years or something, 20 years,
because he only fights me. He nearly never agrees with anything I've thought, believed,
perceived, and so forth. And he's very adept in the intellectual confines of argument or debate.
I wonder if we'll hear some coyotes because of the siren. Sorry about that devastating
oral attack. I suppose I could edit it out, but it seems useful. I'm seeing something really
interesting here. Okay, so there's a there's a three pronged pine needle floating in midair,
and moving around on the breeze. And the closest branch it could be connected to is probably a
minimum of 15 feet away. And the branch it's probably connected to is 20, 25 feet away. Oh shit.
Oh yeah, there it is. Wow. Okay, so oh, huh. All right, this is even weirder than I thought.
Because the branch it actually appears to be connected to is not above it. That's funny.
Maybe a friend just flew right past my face to wake me up to the fact that it's here.
All right, so what's actually going on isn't what is apparent. And this is the problem with ideas.
It certainly looked, I'm gonna have to test this, which is sort of frightening because I don't want
to change. I want to understand something about the situation without modifying the situation.
And this is the problem with knowledge and perspective is that often it is impossible to
determine what is the case without so severely disturbing the case quote unquote,
that we cannot, our first moves wrong foot us for all future moves. So I'm trying to understand
this what I'm looking at, which is a triad of dry pine needles floating apparently floating in the
atmosphere. And what I'm trying to understand is, and it seems very unlikely that this is the case,
but it is possible. Because spiders are crazy, amazing in their abilities to forge what I call
anchor strands for webs. And that's what this is is a spider kite. It's an anchor strand kite.
So a spider at some point in very recent history has attached a web.
And originally, I thought the web that was attached was from the kite up.
But I can see that there's a web from the kite sideways. What I can't tell is if there are two
webs, because the kite is behaving as if there are two. And I don't really want to disturb it.
But I'm going to try to determine the movement of the kite
is so counterintuitive.
I can't understand what is lofting the kite. If the only web is to the side,
because when the wind is reduced, the kite should fall. And it does fall some, but not enough.
And so it appears when I'm looking at it just doesn't seem possible, but it is.
I don't think there's a second strand attached above it. But the way the kite is flying,
it appears that there would have to be two strands. I don't think there is. I tried to test it.
Again, the problem with something this delicate, well, first of all,
it might be safer to test than I thought, because it's most likely that the web strand
is not sticky. Ah, okay, I've just figured it out. There are two strands. One is invisible.
Okay, that makes sense. Now the behavior of the kite makes sense. I cannot see the second strand,
but I could interfere with it. Wow. So now,
now I really don't understand how the object was formed, because I can understand the spider
attaching. Ah, there's the second strand. I can see it now. But from the opposite angle,
I can see it. Okay, and both of them go to the side. But what I can't understand,
what seems impossible to me, is how the spider got this kite in the middle of what appears to be
two strands. Yeah, no idea. It just seems impossible. I can imagine the spider attaching the kite,
you know, dumping the strand from a high branch. I have no idea how the kite could be in the middle
of two strands. No idea. I'm going to take a picture of this just for kicks, so I'm going to,
oh wait, I can take a picture without stopping the recording.
Huh, effectively invisible in the photograph.
Very blurry in that one.
A little, yeah, useless. All right.
Forgive my throat clearing.
Yeah, it seems impossible. I'm looking at it. I'm sure there was a method that produced this
seemingly absurd impossibility.
And I've seen stuff like this before. Spider kites are amazing.
And if you actually look at large webs, particularly those of orb weavers,
and it turns out that this topic is covalent
to the topic I'm going to stumble into with great impetuous ignorance in a little bit,
um, if you look at the large webs, particularly of orb weavers,
and you actually try to understand,
it's not too hard to understand how the web is constructed
once the anchor strands are in place. But if you try to understand how the anchor strands were forged,
whoo, good luck. You're going to have to see it happen or, you know, have an entomologist.
I don't know if there are arachnologists, there probably are, study arachnids.
But yeah, you're going to have to have someone explain it to you.
And until you actually see it happen, if you carefully think about the web and you look at it,
it's going to look impossible to produce many of the anchor strands,
and especially to connect them at tension in the center of the web.
And this turns out to be
correlated with the topic that I intend to pursue here, as soon as I manage to effectively
clear my throat, which I will not do in your ear.
Let's see. Okay.
So,
I think before I even get to the topic, I'm going to talk about the web some more.
The world line of an organism
can be imagined as the size, shape, spacetime tunnel
that an organism traverses during its lifetime.
Now, it should be obvious that the world lines of other similar organisms
are productive of the world line of a single organism, i.e., a human baby has two parents,
two immediate parents.
It's unclear. There's a problem with trying to compute the number of progenitors of a human,
because there's a problem where, and even the common answers to the problem don't actually
solve the problem. As far as I understand it, I'd love to be corrected about that,
because this is something that has bothered me for a long time. It looks like,
as you go backward in time with two ancestors, you know, my dad had two ancestors,
my mom had two ancestors, so that's four. They each had two ancestors, so that's eight.
Sixteen, et cetera. You have the chessboard problem of one grain of sand on each, you know,
N plus one grains of rice on each. Is that it? Is it N plus one? No, you double the grains of rice,
so it's N to the X, N to the 1, 2, 3, 4 powers as you traverse the chessboard.
Long time ago some, it is claimed. Some astute mathematician was offered a reward by a king or
queen for having solved the problem, and they requested one grain of rice on the first square
of a chessboard, two on the next, four on the next, and so forth. At first glance, this looks
like a paltry sum, but if you understand the nature of powers, you realize that on the final
square you'll have, I don't know, more of grains of rice than there are on earth or something,
a ridiculously large amount of grain of rice. So organisms have a world line, and for the purposes
of our discussion, and I may even be misunderstanding the world line, because I often do misunderstand
complex principles from science, not having had to mathematically validate them myself.
So I can have a naive understanding of things, and it's not uncommon for me to do so.
It is uncommon for me to notice in real time that my understanding is or is likely naive,
but, okay, where am I going here? So imagine
that an ovum in my mother's womb has a world line, and it is the size and shape of an ovum,
and it is traveling inside my mother's womb, so it's tracing. Imagine that we light it up and we
make a tracer backward and forward in time. It appears sometime during or after her embryo
genesis, probably after, I would guess. There's a light, and it's the size of an ovum,
and it makes a tunnel as it travels through time, and then eventually it meets another light,
the size of a sperm, which has been doing some traveling in my father's testicles,
and it meets these two lights that make a tunneled shape, a tunnel of their shape
in time space, right? So wherever my mom goes on the surface of the earth, that changes the tunnel's
trajectories. The earth is spinning, so that changes the trajectories. The earth is orbiting
the sun, so we're going to follow it inside my dad's body on the surface of the earth,
around the surface of the earth's spin, around the earth's orbit of the sun, and then around the sun's
orbit in the galaxy, and then around the galaxy's orbit, orbits, or movements in the universe,
and you'll get exactly one tunnel, sperm size shaped, and ovum size shaped, and then these two
meet, and my world line begins there. So at first I am the size of an ovum with an embedded sperm head
in it, and then it becomes a multicellular blastocyst, and so forth, and becomes Darren.
So first I'm baby-shaped, and my world line is baby-shaped and sized, and then as I get older,
it gets bigger and more complex, more numbers of cells, and actually each of those cells has a
world line, each of the bacteria in me, each of the viruses, so I'm kind of a galaxy of world lines
if we're taking my components. Okay, so why am I saying all this? Because the spider is insanely
brilliant. What the spider does with its own body, with no, no, with no artificial technology,
the spider extends its world line so that in time space the world line of the spider is always
extended by any web it is presently occupying or connected to, and that means that the world line
the world line of a spider has a secondary element, the web, and the web is literally
at least where the web is not. Spiders do all kinds of things with webs, they don't just make
they don't just make the webs the capture webs, they also make various kinds of travel webs,
and they probably make and discard webs as they're attempting to forge a capture web.
All right, so
the world line of a spider
has two components at minimum,
the spider and the web. Now notice that what the web does is it literally filters time space
to capture the world lines of other insects
which it then consumes.
It probably doesn't consume all of the insects that intersect with its web,
but the spider has two world lines, the spider-shaped one extended by the web-shaped one.
And that's pretty astonishing.
Okay, so here comes the more complicated thing.
The spider web
is an object with an organismal origin.
There's no chance you will encounter one
that has neither an organismal origin nor a mechanical origin.
And a mechanical origin in the way that I'm going to use this word
has an organismal origin because it means something built robots to build spider webs.
Now I differ with many scientists,
particularly Lex Fridman,
in that
I have a limited definition of the word machine.
And because I haven't had to refine it in careful argument, it's probably fairly clumsy.
But it goes something like
a non-organic tool or device forged by humans.
Many scientists, particularly physicists and neuroscientists,
I think they're making a monumental category error
when they claim
that organisms and biologies are machines, that neurons are machines.
Now I understand something of how they come to that,
but the humans have a problem in which we transfer, we, devastatingly ignorantly,
we transfer metaphors from technology back onto organisms.
Thus we say, for example, your heart is a pump, your lungs are bellows.
Both of these things are impossible, formally impossible.
You will not have ideas without your heart, right?
There will be no arguments, no science, no religion, no nothing.
There is no pump that produces such effects in time space.
There is no pump that causes ideas, although
large language models, some might argue, I think we're getting close, Darren, with LLMs.
But LLMs are built by humans, right?
So the humans exist in the causal chain of origination necessary to LLMs.
So LLMs don't just arise out of the nature of time space, you have to have,
apparently, you have to have humans on earth so far as we know.
All right, so
when I imagine organisms, when I think of organisms, I think of
unimaginable complexity, single cell, to simulate it properly at, say, the level of the atom,
to fully simulate it, would require much more than all the computation humans have ever done,
would require something like 400 million years of the fastest computer we have pinned
at its top operating capacity. The Fugaku, I think, is the name of that computer.
And again, I'd like to be corrected if I've got this wrong.
I think accurately simulating the, oh, by the way, that's accurately simulating
the activity of a cell over one second. Okay, so you're talking about
truly monumental in actions of intelligence and physical complexity.
And as we attempt to understand how best to simulate a cell,
our knowledge of the cell's complexity is increasing very rapidly. So
the thing that's increasing more rapidly
is the complexity we're facing, not our capacity to simulate it.
So when I think of organisms,
I think of living beings, we could call them systems, but I prefer to call them relationships,
or relational hyperstructures or biorelational hyperstructures. And by hyperstructures, I mean
a multi-dimensional structure that entangles and complexifies temporalities,
not just one temporality, webs of temporality.
So that is nothing like a machine. In fact, that might, if we were going to attempt to
define the opposite of a machine, organisms and minds would be likely candidates because
organisms, so far as we understand them, contribute to and sustain negentropic
relationships on the surface of living planets, whereas machines dump death into that system
in the form of entropy. So machines offload entropy into living systems, living systems
levitate, in a sense. If entropy is gravity, organisms are,
can be imagined as anti-gravity.
They do something that should be impossible, or that seems impossible at first glance,
and maybe there are biologists who can explain this in such a way as to satisfy
my troubled mind about this matter. Then correct me.
I haven't seen evidence of negentropy in machines,
and on any planet where those begin to show up, where you have an organism complex enough to
produce mechanical objects. It looks to me like, unless that organism is vastly more intelligent
than humans, in terms of knowing what not to do with technology, you will get a dead world there
right quick, geologically speaking, a few thousand years at most.
So, unlike Lex Fridman and his ilk, who I respect and admire, and I want his voice at the table,
I just don't agree, and I love his podcasts. In fact, the reason I'm making this recording
is due to one of them. It's due to his podcast with Lee Cronin and Sarah Walker.
Who are producing theoretical children if they have not produced physical children.
I can't tell if they're a couple or not, and I haven't done the research to figure it out,
but listening to them part of me is just like, oh please let these two humans
mate and produce offspring. I've rarely felt that, though I did feel it with
Gene Wilder and Gilda Radner. They would have produced an offspring capable of just laying
waste to human consciousness with humor. It would have been like the atomic bomb of comedians.
So, Lex seems to think that if you get a complex enough machine, it's alive,
and if you build a robot, that's your baby. Thus, he projects his own essence into his
mechanical creations in a way that he defines as lifelike enough to qualify as life.
I think this is a ridiculous misapprehension of the nature of organisms, but again,
I'm excited. I would love to sit down and talk about this with him. Never happen. I'm a nobody.
Lex is famous. All right, so let me explain partly why I don't think machines
have the same mode of world line that organisms have.
It is that they cannot inherit or participate in directly the world line complexity of origination,
relation, heredity, and lineage that the simplest organism has more of than all the numbers you
could ever make. The simplest organism has an infinite historical relational web
of trillions of endless amounts of numbers of transformations and relationships per
instant, whatever interval you want, billionth of a second.
And so, in a sense, the organism's historical body is transcendentally vast and intimate,
and the transactions that the organism, that that body has participated in,
are monumentally vast and supportive generally of nearly all other organisms.
Machines, on the other hand, by existing end the world lines of organisms.
Many, many organisms must die to support the existence of any machine, at least around here.
And so machines look like, to me,
a sort of deadly plague for organisms, generally speaking. They look like the opposite of life.
They put an end to organismal lineages. Any automobile is a perfect example of this
that will kill nearly everything it touches, and many things it never touches. In the past,
and in the future. How does it kill things in the past by ending the lineages of living beings
today? That, effectively, can be understood to travel back in time and destroy the entire lineage
of relationships that produce and exist as, say, a duck run over by a car.
All right, so where am I going here?
Now, Lex seems to believe that what I will call simulacra are
as vital, as potent, as alive as organisms, particularly as we approach the churning limit
of our incapacity to distinguish them.
So, if I simulate a philodendron, and you can't tell the difference between that philodendron
and an actual philodendron, a living one, it inherits the property alive.
This is the argument for touring tests in artificial cognitive systems,
and I never bought it. I'm sure that Lex could table some very fierce objections to my objections.
I don't know what they are yet.
It has never seemed to me that if you can't tell the difference, they're the same thing. Sure,
they're the same thing in terms of the lexical category we are likely to use to refer to them,
and yes, if I'm looking at the plants I am walking past, and 87% of them are simulations,
and I am unaware of that, then they will seem to me to be plants, but if I discover,
okay, then it comes down to
is there any way to determine the distinction? Is there any way to notice the distinction,
to experimentally observe the distinction between a simulation and an organism?
And I will argue that I don't believe it's possible to produce simulations as complex as organisms
at all. There may be exceptions to this, and I'm open to changing my mind.
But to me, and one of the things I like about the topic that I'm going to start to blather on about
here is that it looks like we may have found a way to measure,
to reliably determine the developmental complexity of anything we may observe or interact with.
And this is an incredible thing. Now, it may turn out, this is early days for this theory,
it may turn out that the theory is falsifiable, or it may turn out that the theory becomes falsified,
is what I meant. It's incredibly bold, but of course, like any good scientist,
Lee Cronin and his teams, and Sarah Walker, and so forth,
who I imagine to be among the parents of assembly theory,
like any good scientist, if they're wrong,
and the theory is formally falsified somehow, we'll get smarter. So,
build the boat, float the boat, if it sinks, okay, we'll make better boats thereafter,
because of what we learned from this one that sank. But
the arguments and data, as I understand, the arguments and the arrangement,
arrangements of data that comprise assembly theory presently look
provocatively convincing. And this is where I'm going to get into trouble, and being naive and stupid,
because I've only just, I've only accidentally stumbled onto this topic
over the past few weeks. I've listened to a couple of long interviews with Lee Cronin.
I'm not mathematically sophisticated enough to understand it the way a scientist understands it.
I believe their paper on this theory
was published against all odds, right? I think it was published in nature.
And I heard the story of its publication, and I work in that field. I work in the field of
editing biomedical manuscripts for publication in what are referred to as high impact journals,
such as Nature Cell, so forth. So, let me see if I can encapsulate, meaningfully,
what I imagine to be the core positions of assembly theory is something like this.
Instead of proposing a new physics, assembly theory originating,
Lee Cronin, I believe is a chemist, assembly theory posits a new definition of objects.
And so, instead of positing that point particles, electrons, photons, etc., are fundamental,
it posits that objects are fundamental and provides a definition of objects.
By the way, I'm not reading this. I should be.
It provides a definition of objects based on their, on decomposing them and determining
the index of complexity required to produce the objects.
And this produces models such as causal graphs
that are empirical measurements of
historically, of timelines, of world lines, of objects,
that are determinative
and produce a metric for the complexity of any given object, say a molecule,
or an organism, or a machine.
And this discovery is absolutely mind-blowing.
The number of technologies and ways of knowing that are likely to emerge
quickly, if this theory is further validated, obviously it's fairly well validated to appear in nature,
are staggering.
But the thing that I find particularly surprising about it is that it will give us
an empirical measure of various features of organisms
that I argue it will give me a way to prove that machines can't participate.
In
how to put it.
It is as if there is a living water inside the organisms that is made of their origin
and lineage relationships that is carried forward in time and comprises a dimension of its own.
Not only do machines not participate in that specific dimension, they tend to tear it apart
and replace it with something that's dead inside, in my view.
And, you know, am I an ideologue about this?
Partly.
I certainly want to learn and be convinced otherwise, if
if that's the direction toward greater insight and intelligence.
I fiercely doubt it.
I am a biofile, not a technophile.
If you wanted to rip the entire history of life on earth to shreds,
all you have to do is give humans machines.
They don't have societies intelligent enough to survive that.
I would liken it to
finding a, okay this is a very abstract analogy, but imagine I have a two and a half year old male infant.
I abuse it in a variety of ways.
This is no, not suggesting we abuse infants here,
but I've used the infant in a variety of ways that make it very angry.
Stop feeding it, give it no attention, yell at it, whatever.
And then once it's thoroughly spun up,
I give it a thermos with no lid, and the thermos contains, I don't know,
molten steel, but it's so well insulated you can't tell it's hot on the outside.
And then I just give the infant the thermos and leave.
What is going to happen is going to be really bad for that infant.
And similarly, giving humans any kind of technology, this goes to my argument that
actually ethical scientists would nearly never publish.
Well that's not going to help the worm.
I'm not sure what to do about that poor creature.
Yeah, actually ethical scientists would nearly never publish because
there are no intelligent systems of humans competitive enough
to prevail against the lethally oriented organizations of humans
that will certainly end life on earth or, at the very least, produce an extinction event
of staggering scope. Some will argue, yes, extinction events are good.
By extinguishing vast rays of organisms previously, we ourselves arose.
Okay, great, but I'm actually concerned about the agently conserved ecologies.
Those things are rare.
And there's also a timeline. Just like a human being, a planet has a lifespan,
and as it gets nearer to the probable end of its lifespan,
the sudden effusive generation of new forms becomes less likely,
and the ability to sustain those forms over time becomes less likely.
In a sense, it looks to me like the earth is bio-evolutionarily old enough
that it has cancer, and the cancer on the earth is the appearance of machines.
Right, these are tumors. They are highly structured modes of time-space artificially
produced that kill everything so that they can be sustained and reproduced.
There's something similar in human cognition that I call thrips.
So I would argue that human cognition has become elderly in the sense that
it's no longer producing.
It produces far more artifacted structure than it does useful intelligent novelty
and relational novelty.
Now, assembly theory gives us a variety of metrics and perspectives
that would allow us to determine, and by the way, Cronin himself says,
I certainly am suffering from the hammer-nail problem.
Got a hammer, everything looks like a nail.
Vis-a-vis assembly theory.
And naturally so, because I've never seen a model that could give us the ability
to empirically determine so many, like literally to observe that, which was previously unobservable.
It's almost like assembly theory is a kind of a cognitive lamp that sheds light
on features of the universe that we have previously understood to exist,
but had no way to formalize. That's incredible.
So I'm going to try to make a future recording about this in which I am vastly more capable
of reiterating some of the root concepts
associated with assembly theory. And I have to say that
I've been a, what, a scientophile. I've loved science since childhood because
it looked like one of the ways of knowing
that the humans propagate that is relatively likely to produce
intelligent understanding, behavior, societies, and so forth. Turns out, not the case.
At least not in my lifetime. Turns out, science is the way of knowing most likely to produce
absolute devastation on earth. And by absolute, I mean the capacity to snuff the biosphere,
shut it off like a fucking light switch. And everyone says, oh, there's no way to do that.
They're wrong. I could show them five ways to do it now. Once you have a certain array of technologies,
you will have the capacity to combine them in relatively accessible to single humans or
small group ways. This is what Daniel Schmockenberger is on about with,
let's call it, multi-polar threats. He's got some other nomenclature that's also very useful,
race to the bottom. So yeah, life on, you know, the earth is very similar to a cell
in certain respects. And its robust resilience is absolutely dependent on
the continuation of the organs that produce the possibility of homeostasis
in the atmosphere and environment. Much like a cell, if you lies the membrane,
you penetrate the membrane of the cell in the right kind of way, the membrane collapses,
that planet will die. You'll end up with something not dissimilar to Mars. Now, some will argue that
the continuous existence of liquid water on the surface
is sufficient to guarantee the continuance of organismal complexification on earth.
Could be right.
But for myself, I'm bonded with the anciently conserved ecologies in my heart, mind, and spirit.
Science turns out to be the way of knowing that will allow humans to dispose of those,
and in a sense causes them to dispose of them by continuously producing new technologies
that, in factively,
in other words, the continuously penetrate new dimensions of the organs of the biosphere
and offload entropy into them.
This doesn't mean I'm anti-science.
Science is one of the most reliable ways of knowing that we have.
However, science is also heavily compromised
by malignant imperatives
that propagate like a kind of mold in human culture.
And then those imperatives capture ways of knowing
and weaponize them for the sake of profit, power, or
decimation, obliterating things, crushing the opponent zero-sum games.
So science is still half noble, or a tenth noble,
but most of what science will actually produce is likely to further human
technological development, which looks to me lethal to both humans and the history and future
of life on earth. And whether or not it completely obliterates life on earth
sort of doesn't matter, right? If I murder your entire family and one of your children
manages somehow to survive,
this doesn't validate my murder or the murder of the entire family.
I guess there was some Russian royal family that was essentially
captured up, taken somewhere and just executed. I can't remember who the Romanovs may be.
And the fact that some janitor
survived in no way reduces the atrocity index of the slaughter of the family
and their children and everybody. And I think it's funny that we, it's natural,
but it's also peculiar that we pretend that, well, it's relatively okay to kill the adults.
They, they had some life, just don't kill the children and keep some women around.
That's in, you know, that kind of moral relativism doesn't fly well with me. I think all of the
beings, all of the adults, arch still children too. There's very few, if any,
statuses that ameliorate the moral or ethical imperatives that orbit do not kill
and especially do not murder, do not slaughter.
So back to assembly theory.
So there are two particular forms of data that, and by the way, I deeply encourage you to listen
to Lee Cronin describing the origins and publication of the assembly theory paper.
I may be able to produce a link in the description later.
But the two primary forms of data that emerge that I, that I understand to some degree at this point
are what's called the assembly index, which is a measure of the necessary extant complexity
required for an object to become possible in the universe. Now that, by the way, Cronin says that
time turns out to be fundamental to anything relating to analyzing objects. And I agree with him
that at least through the lens of assembly theory and a number of lenses familiar and preferable to me,
time is something far different from tick tock, tick tock, tick tock.
In fact, organisms and their relationships create modes of time. I refer to these as
temporal hyper, biorelational hyper structures or biotemporal hyper structures. And when idiots,
or when people make idiotic statements, and I've heard both Neil deGrasse Tyson
and Sabine Hossenfelder, I'm not sure if I got her last name right,
make bold and idiotic claims such as,
there's no reason for aliens to travel, you know, millions of light years, thousands of light years
to visit the earth because humans are boring. That is the epitome,
hi, nice to see you. That is the epitome of egoic anthropocentric stupidity,
in my view. And maybe they're stirring the pot, right? Maybe they're trying to,
they're just trying to produce trigger bait. But the earth
is a vast library of biorelational hyper structures. These must be incredibly rare
in time space by volume, even if they are common in number, right? Even if there are billions
of living worlds as complex as ours, as stable as ours, stable enough to produce hands,
eyes, wings, tentacles, minds, so forth, embodied minds.
Those things are not merely interesting. They are producing modes of time space that if you,
it's like looking for diamonds or looking for gold, right? Walk all over the place,
you'll find nearly no gold. In the entire history of me walking around on the earth,
the only diamonds I've seen are on women's fingers, generally, or men's. Or unfortunately,
in the latter part of my life, inside people's teeth, come on people. Are you guys nuts?
Apparently. So yeah, living worlds produce forms of biotemporal complexity
that are unimaginably uncommon in time space, even if there are lots of them. And each one of them
will have incredibly unique features. So for shame, Tyson, you are acting the public idiot here
in an anthropocentric and egoic way that is truly embarrassing, not just to you, but to the idea
that you're a scientist. And similarly, Sabine, what the hell are you thinking? You think the humans
are the only reason to visit earth? I mean, as a human, are you only interested in the humans?
The fuck are you thinking? And again, maybe these people are just trying to produce trigger bait.
They certainly succeeded in my case. Because honestly,
if I was capable of publicly slapping them in the face for such a comment,
I might be willing to descend to that.
Yeah, I find that just ridiculous. And it does stir me up if I'm willing to be stirred up that way.
So the two concepts in assembly theory are the assembly index of an object,
which is an empirical measure of, it's like a graph, I guess, or there's actually a second concept,
which is the causal graph. And I think I sort of understand the assembly index
as a measure of the complexity necessary in the temporal historical context of the universe
to produce for an object to be constructed somehow. And then the causal graph is a bit more obscure
Let me see if I can find the definition for that.
I suppose the causal graph is a way of encoding
propositions about the paths of origination of an object. Now again, assembly theory is very new.
A lot of scientists are quite upset about its existence.
I mean, there's a vast population of haters already for this theory, because it,
in some senses, if properly validated,
it might comprise a super science, something that steals the foundations
from many other branches of research. It just captures those foundations.
And it's very early days. There remains a great deal of work to do.
However, one problem with
sir, your dog, it's having trouble. It has, yeah, there you go.
Yeah, it was just walking funny because it was trying to
So whether or not assembly theory is validated, it's already producing
uncommonly useful results.
And in listening to cronin,
I've spent some time listening to intelligent humans, and particularly intelligent males.
I guess just because the media puts more of them in front of me, generally speaking.
However, Sarah Walker is a wonderful example of an absolutely brilliant intellectual female.
I'm not even sure if I'm allowed to use explicit gender terms in 2024.
I may, I may end up canceled or beheaded for having done so.
But yeah, Lee is one of the most intelligent minds I've ever had the pleasure of listening to.
This doesn't mean that I agree with everything he says or believes.
And in fact, one of the reasons I find him intelligent is you will very commonly hear him say,
I've just changed my mind about this. This is something I've nearly never heard out of the
mouths of anyone. And even in the interview with Lex Fridman, where he and Sarah Walker,
you know, the interview is ostensibly about aliens. There's, I don't know,
like eight minutes of talk about aliens in the interview, and it's four hours long,
which is awesome. As most of you know, I'm down with long form. Let's do it long form, you know.
Let's have the foreplay for hours, and then, you know, all the other stuff, and then the meal,
and then the bath, and then, you know, the dreaming, and then, yeah, everything. Let's have it all.
Of course, I'm not getting any of that stuff. That's all pure fantasy at this,
in my present circumstances. And has long been that way. Maybe that's why I'm,
maybe that's why I have changed my perspective. But my point was just that,
yeah, I can see if you can give Lee an argument that allows him to visualize, particularly
to visualize experiments that can be done to determine, qualitatively, quantitatively,
empirically, ideologically, the validity of an argument, or the power of an argument,
the conclusiveness of an argument. He will immediately change his mind if he can see
and understand the structure. And I've rarely seen this quality. I'm not sure I have it.
I am very, I'm very likely to be committed to my pet theories. And I encounter so few
intelligent people to explore with that it's uncommon for me to
be presented with something I find.
Wow, coughing child, death knell. The child will probably survive.
But who else will?
Yeah, I just don't, I don't encounter anyone intelligent enough, or motivated to push against
commonly. There are, there are a few such people in my circle.
Hmm.
The most profound tree that I know is in this little part of the garden.
I'm going to pause for a moment. I hope I will return.
So I've noticed that some one, I can't recall the guy's name, just saw it briefly,
has published an essay on medium called The Eight Fallacies of Assembly Theory.
Definitely people are going to be highly motivated to attack this thing,
which is probably good. I mean, I think Cronin himself and Sarah Walker would,
and they have other associates, Sharma at all. You can see their team on the primary paper.
So the thing is going to undergo a radical evolutionary process by furious objection.
People are going to be very highly motivated to attack this thing, primarily because
if it turns out to be valid or useful, which it seems extremely likely
to be profoundly useful in the sense that
it gives us ways to detect the existence of stuff that we've never been able to see before, like
it's not merely a new language.
It's a new method of considering the nature of identity, what things are.
And this is incredibly provocative and profound.
I mean, literally my mind is so blown by what I've heard from Cronin
that I mean, one analogy would be
if
so in some ways, as someone who has reason to suspect that I've had
long-term contact over some interval of my life with a non-human intelligence of extremely exotic
and profound nature and ability. It's not just similar to someone who says,
you know, not only did one day out in the field at night, my family and I encountered
what appeared to us to be a vehicle from time space.
But they took me with them in
their vehicle and they taught me some of their ways of knowing
right over many months and showed me
how they perceive the universe, organisms, time space, all these things. So in a sense,
compared to the minds of common others around me,
my mind is a bit like a UFO landing in their backyard
because I'm attempting to convey some of the things that I, some of the perspectives and
orientations that I have acquired over my lifetime, but particularly during my contact
experience. And there's lots of different ways to conceive of that experience other than
the contact with a non-human intelligence, though I would argue that most of what's
going on is precisely that because nature is a non-human intelligence of unimaginable sophistication.
You know, a library of such intelligences that upscale form a unity. And by the way,
it looks like a assembly theory might allow,
might endow the possibility of proving empirically
that the earth and the biosphere comprise a unity, an accessible to humans' unity.
And many other things that are important, philosophically, ethically, morally,
and intellectually to me, perhaps even spiritually. I will admit that I associate my
biofilia, my adoration of living beings and their relationships and origins,
that does feel to me like a spiritual faculty,
or an expression of my soul, of the nature of my soul, which I imagine is a much more
complex entity than is commonly supposed. Yeah, that thing's got a lot of different
features depending on how and why we may be referring to it in language or making models
in language concepts and so on. I'm going to pause for a bit because I'm coming to a place
of a lot of noise. With luck, I will return shortly. So I hope in the future to be able to produce
a concise
description of assembly theory
and its primary propositions.
But it looks like we may get a grasp on an entirely new form of knowledge
with the power to produce otherwise impossible insights about a broad array of features of
biology and particularly some of the most confusing problems
in science is concerned with origin of life.
I have recently been listening to some debates on this topic and they are profoundly contentious
primarily because
the common models
in play in biology are ridiculous
and avoid nearly all of the fundamental questions necessary
to produce reasonable scientific arguments.
So assembly theory may give us
both a foundation for reasonable arguments and a path to evaluate them in the laboratory.
Right?
Cronin has a variety of radical and I think trustworthy ideas
about what we might do
to
produce both the precursors and perhaps actual life in the lab.
Again for my view, Lee if he's correct and his team and Sarah and her team
or their teams are giving the humans again something very likely to produce
incredibly lethal technologies.
Scientists often
inhabit the role of the villain in Frederick Brown's story The Weapon
in which a journalist comes to visit a scientist who is about to give the humans
something similarly deadly to nuclear weapons. The journalist argues against this.
The scientist just says, you know, it's not my job to determine whether or not something
should be done. My job is to do what can be done. I can do this. I'm going to do it.
It turns out that the scientist has a developmentally
inhibited child.
I'm not sure what the right nomenclature for that is these days.
A child who is 12 that has the mental age of that might be associated with a three-year-old
and the journalist manages to give the child a loaded gun
surreptitiously which the scientist later finds him with in his bed.
It's a powerful refutation of the argument. We should do what we can. Whatever can be done
should be done.
No, absolutely it should not be done. There are all kinds of things we can't do that we must
never do. In fact, it turns out that much of what is productive and
supportive and crucial to what I mean when I use the word intelligence,
much of that is prohibitive. It's what must not be done for it to continue to be possible
for us to be intelligent
or to exist at all. Obviously, if you're not existing, you can't be intelligent anymore.
I hope to return with a more educated perspective on assembly theory, but I want to encourage my
listeners to explore it because honestly, it looks like a discovery with the potential
to have more impact than relativity did or at least a discovery of a similar degree of impact.
If it isn't defeated, it will change the face of science as far as I can see
from my current understandings of it.
So for example, there's a degree of demonstrable complexity in a system
that is demonstrative of the activity, interference, or origination by an intelligent being or system.
In a sense,
here we might find proof of God, but we might also be able to just look
at nearly anything in the universe and look, God is in quotes. I think it's my perspective that
time space itself is, while not being fundamental, something productive of time space,
it is the result of a transcendent,
a layered array of transcendences in nature, in existence.
So assembly theory may give us the ability to empirically determine
whether it is possible
for most of what exists or any specific element
to have originated without the interference or creative engagement
of some intelligence or transcendence.
Now I may be misunderstanding that, but from what I can tell from what I heard,
there's a specific sort of cutoff point in the assembly index or the causal graph of an object
that is determinate, empirically determinate of whether or not it could
have come into existence without being purposefully or
or purposefully or tangentially resulting from purposeful activity.
And there may be some overlap here with other ideas. For example,
Cronin sneers at Scheldrake's morphogenesis, and yet there seems to be some
conceptual overlap. It may be very minimal, but there seems to be some conceptual overlap
between assembly theory and Scheldrake's concepts to me.
Because it may well turn out, for example, that in a given possibility space,
once you assemble the first salt crystal locally, it now becomes easy to, in Cronin's language,
teleport the properties to other objects. And that resembles the results of
Scheldrake's theory of morphogenesis.
So there's much more to learn here. I'm going to be spending some time digesting
more about assembly theory, and I encourage those of you who are interested to explore it.
It looks either it's going to get defeated completely, in which case it will produce no
useful results, which seems impossible to me, by the way, or it will get partially defeated in that
it is not, its scope will undergo radical limitation, or we have a new way of understanding
objects, identity, interactions, and historical development of such matters.
And it looks pretty likely that that's what's actually going to happen so far. So
thank you all for joining me. I look forward to learning and growing and seeing better together.
Again, sometime in the very near future, may your ways and lives be beautiful,
blessed, insightful, playful, and joyful. Bye-bye for now.
