Hello everybody. Welcome.
I'm very grateful to all of you who pay attention to my posts.
And especially those of you who like or share them.
And particularly my patrons.
Few though they are.
You make a lot of light in my life and
help me to have the freedom to keep doing
this work. This joyful creativity.
This explorations.
So I'm really grateful.
Particularly to my longtime supporter H.
And my new supporter C.
And you know if you have a little
something that you can spare each month.
One, two bucks. It's fine.
Whatever you've got.
That will help me keep producing this content.
Keeping it real.
On the internet.
Circa 2024.
So for this year is that 2024 isn't
a year. The last year we will ever have
as human beings around here for the foreseeable future
was 2023.
And this dumpster fire of insanity that we are presently
experiencing is actually not
a year at all. In fact
you know your mileage may vary.
I'm pretty sure that things aren't things anymore.
All that stuff we used to think we knew what that was or what was going on
or what would happen next or who was
who or all of that knowledge thing and knowing stuff.
That's all gone.
Mushroom cloud of over the
horizon of identity.
And in some ways that's wonderful.
Because a lot of the whatness
and the isness and all that
was broken. But in other ways
we don't have any kind of
ship that we can ride in together because we really never forged a
we in the first place except on very small
scales.
And we didn't go around building ships
and you know by that I just mean
a trustworthy
vehicle
of purposeive
orientation together.
Almost all of the
potentials of our communal
relationships and behavior
has been
thoroughly
recursively recolonized
by the
thrisplike dead inside infinitely
hungry processes
that establish themselves
in the human cognisium, the network of human minds.
If we don't do
the necessary bonding
If we don't do the necessary engineering
of our relationships
with history, the sky, nature, the living places
the plants, animals and insects, the ancestors
are dreaming.
And what I will loosely refer to is the angels
the non-human intelligences
the accessible non-human
intelligences above the human cognisium.
That have been lost to us
lost to our direct
contact and experience for so long
even though most of us probably
were born
with these relationships intact
and they may have stayed intact briefly during our
earliest phases of our human
incarnation, childhood, inconsistency and stuff.
But that stuff gets
well, what does it get?
It rarely survives
the processes of in-languaging and in-culturation
which our parents and peers
impose on us believing that to be
some wonderful
inheritance.
And the problem there is that it could be.
If it were rich and veritable
and ancient and true
the processes of in-languaging and in-culturation would not
be so violent
so dissociative
malignly dissociative
so isolating, so terrifying
so confusing
but unfortunately
as moderns
with very few exceptions I mean the world
let's be clear about something when I make very general statements about the
humans I'm making a bad mistake
and it's one that I've pointed out many times. I am
making a mistake I would call generalizing
the worst common denominator over the manifold.
So the manifold is all the different living places and humans
presently alive on earth
and the generalization is that they're all modern.
Well a lot of them aren't and
each of the cohorts we might
explore or contact
their actual relationship with rather than just thinking about them
and this is the problem with abstract thought
we can dissociatively pretend to be in relationships we don't have
and then from there
we can evaluate the resulting abstractions
and this obliterates our intelligence
it's like a snuff film of the possibilities of
or relating with
the children
little children are painting and their paintings are amazing
so beautiful and colorful
and see in those little children
all of this worst common denominator stuff is not yet
established. They are still
alive inside
and there are many exceptions
beautiful exceptions
to this worst common denominator
evaluative behavior
misbehavior
that I'm concerned about
and we should celebrate
and recognize the exceptions
yes the bell curve, yes the averages
and yes they're
devastating because
their defection, the capacity to
defect from our humanity
to colonize and recolonize
to devastate
to
I'm looking for a neologism here
what it means to cause
to viciously impose forgetting
to amnese
it's funny
the terrible weapons
of colonization
and this word gets overused
these days for all kinds of things
but what I'm talking about is when
the possibility of human
of coherent human relation, intelligence
conservation of ancestral
land, places, living places
intimate symbiosis
of humans with the earth
and the waters and the sky
which is rarely
approaches perfection
and these places
actually became coherent and beautiful
and was sustained over time
and colonization is sort of
I remember
a bad cartoon
maybe from the early 80s called Godzilla meets Bambi
and then suddenly boom there's a footprint
and Bambi's smushed in the bottom of that footprint
and that's
that's a cartoonish
image
but the forces of
colonization rose
in peoples
and cohorts in societies and nations
that were
self-colonizing
and this is part of the problem that is overlooked
when we blame
history
on bad people
and particularly when we take the convenient
exit door and think
oh yeah it's patriarchy
it's those males
who are dominating things
slapping them with their generative organ
crushing them
and while that's not untrue
the secret
origins of these problems are
preserved against our discovery
of our convenient
indictments
because if we want to understand how it might be possible
for us in our time and our children's time
to establish actually coherent
intelligent human societies worthy of survival
never mind capable of self-sustainment
but virtuously beautiful
in spirit and purpose and behavior
then we're going to need a much better array of toys
array of perspectival toys with which to examine
what led to the problems we face today
and you know the common
common
the common figurines
that we like to
that are often selected for
admonition and
enlightenment and
elevation in our awareness
to the status of culprits
our
monotheism
patriarchy
commerce
commodity commerce
class
hierarchical class dichotomies
the
the one percent
the wealthy
the kings and queens particularly
in various phases of the development of Europe
and the Middle East
I don't know
I don't know
you know personally I'm not well educated enough
historically to understand
the real birthplaces of
the colonizing
countries
I love the cadences of
German it's wonderful to hear people enthusiastically speaking German
as they walk past me
and you know we might think oh what synchronicity
yeah go ahead think what you like
but try to understand that what I'm saying is
we don't have the formula yet
that stuff we're exchanging around
like a new kind of poison
in the atmosphere of what we have ironically called social
justice
is not the elixir
nor is it the intoxicant that will give us insight
if you want insight
we're going to have to authentically go back
not merely into the history of our species
but very carefully into the history of our own lives
your life my life our childhood
the transitions
the phases of colonization
that we ourselves underwent as little children
that our parents underwent
that our grandparents underwent because
I
I would like you to
suspect with me
that not only
is the key to the cage hidden
you know the keys to the cages
not only is it hidden in our
in the arc of our developmental experience individually and collectively
uniquely keys in each one of us
we've been secreted
obscured occulted
but something even stranger
is real and accessible to us
which is that through a process
that resembles something we don't have a good word for
and I'm disinclined to forge
a convenient neologism here
because I want a really good one
so I'll describe instead of label
in the same way that
geologists look at the
strata the layers
in places where they have been laid bare to
access on the land
the only really good example
I have at hand easily accessible is the Grand Canyon
a place where a furrow has been dug
by a river into
the physical body of geologic time
and so the strata
are laid bare and I guess the other
more destructive and I think
confusing way to try to get at this information
or these recordings if you will these memories
is with core samples
carefully
drill a tube
of earth and stone and ice and stuff
in a sequence going down
and then you can lay them out in a linear fashion
and examine the record but what I'm trying to say
what I'm implying here is that
and similarly
with the origin of life
in the branch of sciences where
where we look in the various strata for
I'd love to know the etymology
of this word right now
we look for evidence of the previously existing
phases of life and development
that we imagine took place linearly
because we are
addicted to
one thing mind we are addicted to linear perspectives
we don't have to be we can break out of that one of the things we need to
we need the experience of being liberated from
so there are these strata
in the stone in the earth
that are like memorial
dreaming traces in a way
and what I'm suggesting is that in each one of us
and in our cohorts in our cultures
in our ethnicities in our ancestors in our progeny
there's a layered
richness of interiority that actually contains
the entire history of our species
there's a way of doing
a kind of archaeology
that isn't
merely objective
isn't merely empirical
that is partly magical
or partly transcendental
and when you hear stories for example
of
either accidental enlightenment
where you have some young child who at six just starts
sitting still and won't move and has to be fed
and some good who comes and says
this one has gone beyond and when you hear stories of intentional enlightenment
where quote unquote right where someone
very committed to the meditation path
mostly you will hear similar stories
where in fact what I'm speaking about
surfaces in consciousness
thus we hear the Buddha saying
something I don't know what the Buddha actually said
but we hear stories that the Buddha said
I have been billions of lives
I have been all of the beings in a way
this might be translated as
past lives
I strongly suspect that the actual situation
is much weirder than past lives
and is not
linear in the ways we would imagine
so that for example
imagine
just as an example that you are
alive locally to your consciousness right now
but
like a constellation
in the sky imagine for example
the big dipper as seen from earth
those stars
the shape of the big dipper
is seen
from a point in space
now I would like to know
the names of those stars
and how distant in space time they are from each other
because let's be clear if you saw it from another angle outside of it
it would not form a dipper
some of the stars might be invisible
or there might be other stars that were visible
in the arrangement
the illusion
it's not actually an illusion is it
the figuration of the big dipper
is we experience it because of
where we are looking from in time space
and so to us it's a little bit as if
there's a dot to dot drawing
there which over time has
undergone semantic degradation
so that we think of it as a ladle cup
because I promise you
long ago they were not thinking that's a ladle cup
they probably didn't think that
what was seen in the sky
resembled objects
appliances or tools
that would be a very unlikely
derivation I think
so we should take that seriously the unlikeliness of such a derivation
I mean hilariously a couple nights ago I woke up from
dreaming to give you a sort of related example
and I don't really know what was going on
and it was sort of hilarious
but not merely funny
I got the impression
of my refrigerator
I hopefully I'll come back to this later because I want to stay on point here but
I got the impression of my refrigerator it's a white refrigerator
vinyl surfaced
many refrigerators and it was
deified it was like this
angelic choirs and rays of divine light
coming off the refrigerator
which is a very ridiculous seeming to my rational mind anyway
completely ridiculous and even to my
the Luddite in me that abhors machines
it doesn't merely abhore machines
I don't merely abhore them I recognize that
coupled with the insensate
war and prison hearing
monsters that have captured and
colonized and are recolonizing our existing societies
and nations and populations and so forth those things are
death sign
those are the flags of a coming apocalypse and not just
an ever coming apocalypse right an apocalypse is happening now has been happening
for a good depending on how you want to count it
thousand years but much more so in the past 500
and much more so in the past one and so forth
a sort of title a tide a heartbeat of doom
where the humans just are ripping the foundations
of their own minds to shreds in terms of
the origins of the possibility of intelligence and
consciousness in the anciently conserved ecologies of the
planet which are the most precious thing around here
not us our origins the womb this planetary
womb that ever renews itself
and hopefully doesn't really need to be
penetrated in order to be fertilized right light
the divine virginal penetration
of light sunlight and time spaces
the water of time space penetrated by sunlight
coupled with the physical hypostasis of these
primordial more than merely beings
generates life here
and it is truly holy but as I was saying those stars in the
sky they are not
coherently related to one another
except by the angle of our perspective they don't
belong to some family of local
anatomy
local stellar anatomy I don't think I suspect they're wildly
distant from each other and would be seen completely
differently from another distant angle
say if we drew a circle around them
if we circled actually if we made a sphere
around the big dipper at the same distance
from which our perspective arises
we made a sphere then we just traveled to different perspectives on that sphere
very different things would emerge to our perspective and what I'm trying to say
is that imagine that although your sort of spirit
or soul however you want to think about it
and there's much better ways to think about it than a spirit or soul
your
your the localization that you think of as yourself
is probably similar to that big dipper
imagine that there are many many
beings we could start with a small number to make it easy
there's 12 just for kicks
and a couple of those beings are living in the Pleistus
the earliest time of the humans
and not all those beings are human but we're going to pretend they are for a minute
and they're living in all different times
and places of the earth
we're going to keep them on earth for the moment though that's not actually necessary either
so there's beings all throughout
the historical phases of the humans
and let's say half of them are before you and half of them are after you
so six before you and then you in the middle that you're the 13th one so to speak
and then there's six after you in the future
and those beings are all simultaneously existing
the Eunus, the me, the meanness, Darren, hopefully not the meanness
but the meanness
you perceive
yourself as localized in this
temporal spatial manifold of relationships
when actually you're a constellation of beings
with a nucleus much like
what we think of as the solar system
and sometimes you're the sun
in that family
sometimes you're
Saturn, it's funny we have this system where we
establish your relationship between each of the planets and everyone thinks oh that's a bunch of hokey
well those people who think that are very confused but also the people
who reify the system
of astrology are just as confused
because it's neither false nor fact
both of those extremes lose
the fragrance of insight
that is accessible to us as human beings
once things become explicit and we start trying to say what is a fact
and unless we're in a very limited
sort of cone of purpose of orientation
and behavior there are
applicable there's an applicable scope
to what we think of as empiricism but let's be really clear
what the moderns mostly do with empiricism is kill
I use that to kill stuff now remember my friend
Fernanda
from Brazil
she wanted to become a marine biologist until she discovered that what that meant was collecting
living creatures from the sea and killing them
taking them apart, studying the bits
of course there are other ways to do it but the classes that she was taking
she was magically in love with the sea creatures
as I am
until she discovered what empiricism is about
and what we do with it which is really the wrong thing
and you can see again here the terrifying
jagged pointy fingerprint of colonization
this is what I mean by colonization I don't mean
necessarily bad people mostly men
are the execution body of colonization because
historically primarily at least in the large
cohorts men were the
disposable soldier class
and there's so much, wow there's so much here
to look at
so yeah men were the inaction body
and
sometimes men, often perhaps men
were the
what, the infected
disassociated
orienteering
measureers, rulers
measures of value
measures of
history and futurity
and what will we make
of this potential of our lives and moment
of our cooperative potential
one of my new friends
Roger T. who I'm not sure how to pronounce his last name is why I'm not
doing it
who has this brilliant
sort of matrilineally communicated from his
wife method of alignment
producing alignment in human cohorts particularly in business but not
not necessarily merely in business
apex cooperators
it's a brilliant phrase, I'm not sure if he coined that phrase
or who coined it
but so yeah it looks like it was men and I'm not denying that there's a problem
with
I'm gonna make a joke here
with having the external three part flower downstairs
historically
but this measuring and what
the problem is that the males who perpetrated
and executed
iterations of recursive colonization
were first themselves colonized
this is the actual, this is the thing we need to see
and we know, we have some
we, I don't even know who I mean by we, let's just say that
culturally and sociologically we are, we have become aware as
moderns that
many of the people
who perpetrate violence
and subjugation
and murder and rape
and violation
were themselves subjected
to these
deprivations and impoverishments and terrors
in their developmental
arcs
and it's not clear
to me anyway
that in a coherent
or small scale
coherent human family,
tribe, culture
it's probably extremely uncommon
that these behaviors emerge
and some will say things like, well we've seen behavior like this in primates
okay
but did you see primates before humans invaded the jungle
and before
what is the human effect on the context in which the primates are developing
what is the effect
of the humans on, of the human behavior in the world
on the primate population
these features of that which exists are connected
they're not merely
we would ordinarily think rationally
that if the monkeys are in a jungle
in Africa where there are no humans, presuming there was such a jungle
that humans are somewhere else doing things like making war and going insane together
killing up everything that moves and most of what doesn't
it wouldn't affect the primates until
and unless the humans showed up in the jungle
because we presume that there's no way to communicate
the malignancy
from the humans to the primates unless they're proximal
because there's always a dimension
of the context where everything's proximal
the planet is a unified
manifold of historical
relational, futorial
what
transmissions, communication
so whenever I hear people saying
oh it's just natural for humans to be, I don't believe it
I don't believe that at all
it's conceivable
but what it looks more like to me is an infection most of the time
and maybe I prefer to see it this way, maybe I'm biased
Graeber and his writing companion in the dawn of everything
push back against the idea that humans
have been
catastrophically misbehaving toward each other
in life in general for thousands of years and it's the law of the
land and so forth, that myth needs to come down
I just don't trust it at all
but what I'm trying to get at is that the origins of the problems we face
not in the men, it's not merely patriarchy
and what has happened that's terrifying is that
the features
of our humanity
that are vulnerable to colonization
have been being colonized by something
and we can think of this something in a variety of different ways
for eons
and these colonizing
contagions
these colonizing pathological processes
oh wow here's the dog man
with so many dogs and yet he can keep them
all coherent
so
huh
an
huh
a chat with him at some point. Because he's really profoundly skillful at managing a large
group of unrelated dogs. Nearly certain those dogs don't come from one family, one household.
So we have to look carefully into the history, the histories, and not just the written histories,
the histories that are submerged within us. It's my direct experience that not just the
history of life on earth and not just the history of the humans, but the history of
what we think of as the universe and the history of its origins, the origin places and origin beings
is encoded in the strata of our being. And this is recoverable to us when so ever and to whatever
degree we may agree to recover it, to seek it, to quest for it, to inquire as Amen Hillman,
the half mad prophet, tells us he in his linguistic neuromorphosis tells us that the ancient language
is, are actually doorways into other, into lost potentials of our humanity. And for the moment,
at least, I'm not a big fan, what does that even mean? I have a large fan in my hand and I keep
waiting it. No, I find his playful and hilarious and terrifying, manic, manistic, prophetic, genius,
inspiring and nourishing and propelling. But one of the things he says is that, and I may have this
wrong, but he's saying something like the original idea that becomes in our time the word history,
actually comes from bringing a question to the probably adolescent symbols at the oracle places
in the ancient world. And he's talking specifically about places in Europe and what we think of now
maybe as the Middle East and Greece and so forth. Greece primarily, but also it's surrounding like
the Empire, I guess. I don't know where all the symbols were. I don't know where we have records
of them being, but what he was saying is that this idea of history, it's not stories about what
happened, it's to become pregnant with the urgency of a question and pursue that question beyond
our common inclinations to answer it, to declare some, oh, here's what happened. No, no. It's to become
the re-happening, the living an amnesis of the question. And this is the kind of potential we
are born to experience the exultation of. And there's nearly no one like Amen.
Other biblical scholars or classicists may criticize him and say things like, oh, he's taking a specific
sense of a specific word and he's promoting it to the primordial sense over all instances of this
word in such a way as to twist the perspective to produce the truly bizarre narrative that he wants us
to swallow about ancient Greece, the origins of Christianity, Christos, the Medusa, Medea,
medicine, all these things.
And hilariously, some of those critics, Dan McClellan among them,
might be technically, linguistically,
and perhaps even cognitively quote unquote correct, they're missing the point.
I'm missing the point.
Amen's unique and, you know, intoxicated.
The elixir that Amen is making is sygenic, generative of mind states, otherwise inaccessible.
And they're looking at something, it's just like people who've only seen airplanes or jet aircraft,
which are made for war or passenger or cargo, transit, they're looking at,
basically they're looking at a UFO, they're looking at something from outside. It wasn't even made by
humans. And it doesn't do the things that the human made aircraft do at all. It has no concern
about those things. It's concerned with transporting us to insight and re-establishing
anciently lost relationships and correcting nonsensical histories that for us have become prisons
of ignorance and blindness.
A time will tell
whether the elixir of Amen's performative, and I don't mean that in the derogatory modern
critical sense at all, the elixirs of Amen's performances are truly generative
of an amnesis and re-membering.
However, personally I find them profound and brilliant in an admittedly iconoclastic and provocative way.
So let's see if I can recover my threads here.
The colonized colonizers, the re-colonization. So now what's going on in modernly, okay,
we have the rise of the internet, which starts out looking pretty virtuous. It resembles in
potential the Agora of ancient Greece, where Socrates and other philosophers,
Rhapsodes and Sophists perhaps, gathered the common people day to day to pursue wisdom and
insight, but also to pursue convincing condemnation, indictment, judgment, opinionaring.
And the internet began this way, but it was colonized, and it colonized us.
And what was it colonized by? It was colonized by forces that advertise themselves as protectors.
The NSA, the National Security Administration, the ridiculous enforcement arms of the government
that rose in the wake of 9-11, as if 9-11 were produced specifically to generate those recursively
colonizing lethal organizations, and to create a future of panopticon-like
surveillance that would collapse not merely the possibility of a free society, whatever that
might mean, whatever it's possible for that to mean, but it would turn our own homes and
relationships into prisons, weapons that we could be threatened with.
And then with the rise of social media, which again in the beginning was a way to bring people
together and to celebrate our potentials for intelligence and creativity and insight and
play, quickly again became colonized by corporate agendas, driven primarily by two forces,
advertising the absolute, I mean, one of the most malignant demons of our modern world,
and governmental surveillance of citizens, these twin,
cyclopean, I mean, that's probably insulting the cyclops, but yeah, these monsters,
straight-up monsters that will eat our lives, minds, and children and sell the bones to the highest
bidder. So you can see this recursive, iterative, recolonization
of our relationships, our interiority, our thought, our dreaming, our bodies, our metabolism,
right? And it's as if it's a layered, it's a layered antithesis to an amnesis. It's a layered,
like an acid that just eats the foundations of memory and produces structured skeletal remains
that are commoditized and turned into the fuel for future iterations of new forms of recolonization.
You know, it's easy to distract us with indictments
that make little sense.
If we're actually concerned about the injustice of the histories of colonization, slavery, misogyny,
misanthropy,
misbiorelation, abiotic, omniside, then we need not so much to indict and prosecute the histories.
We need to understand the origins and we must establish coherent vessels
for our communal development, education, an amnesis, healing, enrichment,
and something, you know, what does decolonization mean?
But we can imagine, it means something like, well, you know, when the children have lice,
you put medicine in their hair. No, we need to do the opposite of, well, both things, maybe.
We need a very enlightened idea and direction for any such project, and it must be self,
it must iteratively decolonize itself.
That was really beautiful what that guy was saying, so he was saying like,
this guy's really interesting. He's clearly a not-ordinarily-minded person
because he has an enthusiasm that's far beyond what ordinary people would usually have, right?
And he was saying, you know, the last few, few times I told myself as I was out on my walk,
I'm going to pick up five pieces of litter. Each time I found like a pair of expensive
ray bands, or one I found $100, every time I found something valuable.
This is kind of what I'm, this is a strange sort of synchronicity.
We, if our orientation is indictment and prosecution,
it's the path is too expensive and will continue to colonize itself.
One of the ways that we'll do this is with nomenclature, actually two of the ways.
No, it's like the Spanish Inquisition. Every time you look, there's more ways, right?
But yeah, it's with nomenclature, in other words, jargon, and it's with ideology, ideological fanaticism.
So we have to be aware of those, we have to be aware of the way
that a purpose of orientation that starts out virtuous and altruistic
in a trustworthy sense is easily captured even by its own,
by the threads of its own origins. And so we have to find a way to preserve
the possibilities of virtue, insight, learning, healing, growth, so forth.
There's the terrifying machine signal
and then the horrible noise of death. Every animal that ever heard that was soon to die.
Our cells know this is the, you know, this is the bell of doom when you hear the engines.
Almost, I mean, there are a few exceptions. There's a few exceptions. I guess
the engines of the ships of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, for example,
are an unusual inversion of that paradigm. So what I'm trying to get us to remember here is that
all of the executors of colonization
were almost certainly victims of colonization first. They were infected with the thrisp-like
structure of processes that would convert them, their lives, their children, their ancestors,
the meaning of their origins and the shape of their future to omniside, dead terrain,
the production of commodities, the collection of commodities in the coffers of the powerful
and the wealthy who are themselves, sort of the seed bed, the dead inside seed bed of the pathologies
that become
the inaction body of the colonizing forces. And we must discover, and I mean, I think I have
some keys to this, which I have spoken of in the past, but we must discover and recover
the origins of the problem and clearly
Okay, I think we just got a clue here.
So these geese are flipping out and the males are getting all spun up and they're getting spun up
because a human gave a couple of them some crackers.
It'd be hilarious to discover that like the one of the origins of the problem of colonization
and I think there's probably a lot of evidence quote unquote for this is simply the introduction
of carbohydrates. Once you can store up huge amounts of carbohydrates, it's sort of like
what happens when you put a nectar bottle, you know, a bottle of dyed sugar water
in a population of hummingbirds. They might have been a little bit provocative before,
but once you put all those commodities in one place, now you got two problems. You've got to
protect them from people who might want to take them and it's a really attractive prize
because it represents what? Convenience. Okay, so we're going to see two things here fuel
and convenience and there's a third thing which is essentially
metals
particularly what we think of as precious metals and jewels, crystals, diamonds
gold, silver, platinum, copper, bronze, iron, diamonds, emeralds, rubies, sapphires.
So and I'm not even getting close to what is actually going on. These are the later stage
catalysts of devastation. What did they really want when they sent ships to the new world quote
unquote? Well, they wanted gold. What were they after? Gold. They might have been thinking land
but mostly they were thinking gold. Did those savages have gold stored up somewhere? Let's get
that gold or at least this is the story we tell and that story is probably three quarters wrong but
it maybe resembles our own projections
and projection is a large part of the problem because
if you think your opponent is up to something various then you have to get there first. This is
the race to the bottom the perverse incentive incentivization
elucidated by Daniel Schmockdenberger and others of the Game B or new civilization project.
You know what has to happen obviously is that we have to establish some options that are so much
more compelling than the zero-sum competitive pathologies we're currently enacting and being
conscripted to and punished by and devastated for.
We aren't the people of the lie. We are the generation of lying. It's different.
The context is so catastrophically multi-layeredly toxic counterfeit
projective. Everywhere we see presentations that advertise virtue and underneath are
essentially self-purifying disease vectors and this is you know the concept that I use.
This is the origin. My quest to understand this resulted in a series of visions one of which
introduced the concepts of the Cognition which is the network of human minds, the Mimula which is
all the features of connection in that network and Thryps which compete for dominance of that
network under conditions in which the organic and natural orienteering principles that would guide
and nourish and protect our collective insight, memory, intelligence, altruism, virtue when those
breakdown boom, drifts everywhere. It's similar to certain biological processes like those that
burn down our neural networks with prion proteins for example. One of the things
Kurzfeld Jacobs disease or otherwise known as mad cow disease and similar prion protein
disorders. As I understand it, the prions are essential to the differentiation
of our nervous systems and neural networks in the brain in early development.
Similarly to how something kills off the flesh between our fingers so that you get these differentiated
very useful articulate appendages. Something resembling that happens in the brain in our early
developmental arcs with neurons. A lot of them have to be burned off and what that means is that's
one of the things that makes us each unique because we all undergo this kind of interior
extinction event and usually we think oh extinction is bad and it certainly is if we're burning down
anciently conserved ecologies to make more machines and stuff. That's insane. That's not
there's nothing coherent or biorelationally integral about that. That's just madness and
wrongness. And yeah you can take the bigger picture. Sure. You can say things like oh life is resilient
earth is resilient.
But I'd love to see where that perspective is arising from because if it's arising from some kind
of empirical or materialistic perspective based on what you think is the historical data and so
forth that's dissociative. That's dissociated. You're not connecting with nature at all. You're just
you're just being a disembodied grasping rationalist. So you're almost certainly going to be wrong
about nearly everything having to do with organisms if that's your that's your anchor in consciousness
and concern. A mother's concerns much more trustworthy. She bears children. She has to fund them
fund just to build their bodies from her own biology right the calcium of her bones
the metabolic products of her body her heartbeat
is becomes the context in which life emerges and while our planet is only metaphorically
feminine in this sense that metaphor goes very deep and is very powerful. It's not merely a figure of speech.
So we must recover the origins of the problem that led to our defection
from memory humanity insight virtue mutual intelligence mutual concern awareness
our real cooperative abilities and we must find ways to establish vehicles to conserve develop
enact
and and transmit communicate these potentials into the existing bodies of anti-culture
that largely own our species at this time our children and perhaps we may be so lucky as to
stumble into ways of being human that please our ancestors by fulfilling their dreams
and what they hoped for and worked for in the deepest recesses of their hearts minds and spirits
all of us moderns and for you know millions of lifetimes we have been slaves
to things that don't even exist we have been slaves to ghosts and shadows in the human cognisium
presenting as virtues or progress and delivering omniside amnesia torture despair
devastation of our our spirit our commonality the replacement of that with
prison-eering panopticon like surveillance systems that aren't killing us off directly at the moment
and this is this is actually part of the problem with the weird results of technology
there are fates worse than death and some of them involve the slow erosion
of our interior assets and potentials and if you can get at the thing with which we tell the
difference the thing with which we would otherwise notice what is happening then anything that gets
at that anything that gets at the fundamental basis of our capacity to discern change if you can
co-opt that then the entire bank of the history and future of life on earth of human beings of
our interiority is now open for rape and you can get away with anything you can imagine
you just have to go slowly enough you just have to turn the heat up in the water slowly enough
that it doesn't overcome the disabled senses that would alert us to we must oppose this
that would cattle that would organize and galvanize us into communal
into heroic communal
organization intelligence resilience and activity
so these are a few of the things that are in my awareness today or have risen in my awareness
while I muse with you my listeners in the hope of better ways of seeing in the hope of an amnesis
in the hope of pleasing the ancestors and the muses and perhaps the angels
I'm so grateful to have this time together and for your kind attention your enthusiasm your wonder
your curiosity the spirit within you of heroic questing recovery and rescue
that is innate to our human nature may your ways and minds and dreams be beautiful and healing
and profound and may you find joyful relation with all the aspects of yourself your histories your
futures your ancestors your progeny and all of the beings who are in fact a single family
thank you for joining me I look forward to learning together again very soon bye bye for now
