Hello, everybody.
Welcome.
It's sometime on a Gregorian Monday afternoon in March of 2024.
This is the weirdest year in the history of my life.
I'm out for a wander.
I'm by tracks on the path.
I don't know if any of my ancestors were skillful trackers,
but there is a kind of a genetic predisposition I suspect.
I suspect this from knowing members of my family
and watching them in various situational contexts.
My mother used to have an annoying habit,
and I recently discovered some letters from him to my mother in his teenage, late teens.
I think they were 17 or something.
There were some letters from him that I haven't actually read.
I've only seen the beginning of one of them.
He was about to launch into a dissertation on a system that he had stumbled on in his observational mind.
A system for getting a perspective on people and situations that might be understood as preternatural.
He implies that in the following letters he will encode a system.
A system of seeing.
He never spoke of this during my life,
but he did seem to have an uncanny influence among humans,
and sometimes with dogs.
But the annoying habit that he had was he understood the language of film,
and he could see very quickly from the observation of subtle cues what was about to take place,
and I thought to myself, I remember thinking to myself as a kid,
of course my mother would become very angry with this.
You're ruining it.
My dad would sort of chuckle.
It's obvious, but I thought this was very peculiar.
I didn't know anyone else at the time, had no experience of others with this skill,
and sometimes his predictions would be uncanny, right?
He was a bit of a detective.
Similarly, other members of my family, particularly my sister,
display an almost dangerous awareness of tiny details that others cannot see,
or do not notice.
With most of my male friends, I can quickly predict where they're going to go conversationally,
and this is perhaps part of the experience of being intimate as human beings.
In a sense, we form a kind of a shared mind space that includes both of us, but is beyond ourselves.
An in-between mind.
Last night I had a very strong experience of the texting equivalent of telephone telepathy.
A picture of my friend whose name begins with J came into my mind,
and immediately I then was doing something on my phone after that,
and he had just sent me a text.
I don't use notifications on my phone, and I've had a number of situations like that.
A long time ago, I'd had a very enthusiastic and profound conversation with a friend in Morocco.
This is one of the most peculiar examples of it.
When we closed the call, a few minutes later I got an effusive text from her about how wonderful our conversation was,
and how it makes her feel really happy.
It was quite, this is actually so blatant as to seem ridiculous.
She described tasting a peach flavor in her mouth that was so delicious,
and all these went on for two or three sentences effusively.
After the call, I was eating a piece of peach gum, a very strongly flavored peach gum from Japan.
Naturally, if we don't find a good reason to form up against one another,
to object or to play domination games,
then I think we as humans generally, and I'll speak only from my own experience,
but I've watched other people doing it.
We get into a situation where we can complete other sentences,
and there are circumstances under which non-ordinary communication takes place.
I wouldn't argue that the cell phone is separate from that communication.
In fact, though it's not the kind I want, it provides a physical link.
There's a physical link that extends to many, many humans in that phone.
And like many of our technologies, I don't think the humans have reflected carefully enough
upon what that actually turns out to mean.
Because it means that if human minds naturally form networks,
they're now going to form networks in spite of or as a result of technologies
that restructure our networks according to mechanical principles.
For organisms, that doesn't usually go well.
For disembodied humans imagining some kind of eternal life in the body of a robot or something,
maybe it goes well, but it tends to end organismal development on living planets.
As we can see from our own behavior, we don't even need a second example yet.
So the smartphones do, our technologies, affect what I call the Cognizium.
And what I mean by this is a topology that isn't merely physical and is like an environment
in that certain kinds of things can undergo developmental, quote, competition,
unquote, within that environment and be transmitted.
This is a bit, this resembles slightly, or perhaps more than slightly,
Sheldrake's theories of morphic resonance.
Excuse me, resonance.
That's interesting, resonance.
Amorphic resonance.
I guess maybe that's what a mind is like.
Amorphic resonance.
But I'm not trying to explain what I think is the case, right?
What I think is true.
I'm not sure what is true.
If someone says, you know, what are the facts?
We could probably do studies that would validate or invalidate the idea
if our science has advanced enough to chase such matters.
And if our perspectival orientations are heuristically sound, right?
They will teach us for sure.
They won't mislead us by causing us to misconstrue the results of data acquisition
or data gathering and analysis.
So, in my family, it's common for us,
and honestly, I think my mother had a similar array of senses,
whereas my father's were relatively, almost mechanically empirical seeming.
He had a method, right?
He was running a protocol or a series of them,
and possibly parallel.
My mother was more of an intuitive person,
but also could see...
She was, in a way, the sort of perfect match for my dad's strange intelligence,
because she could see into the emotional spectrum of humans and animals
and living places and things.
And she had long ago learned not to talk much about it.
As any person who wants to survive in the relatively harsh climate of human culture,
most of us do learn to shut a lot of that down
or at least hide it from common perv, right?
We save it for conversations with trusted people
who either share our values and the urgencies of our interiority
and our ethical concerns and our moral concerns and our relational concerns.
We may save it for those usually rare situations,
unless we form a group, right?
If we form a group or if we join an existing group,
then we may find ourselves in the company, generally speaking,
of others of, quote, like-mind, unquote,
which I'm not sure that really means like-mind.
I don't know what those principles shining in our hearts and bones
and ancestors and lineages, what are those principles?
Are those mind?
I find it confusing.
But that may be.
It's funny, the gentleman I just saw resembles a guy who was in my dream last night
or actually this morning.
Yeah, it looks like my family, my core family,
they all have a peculiarity about noticing tiny divergences from that
which is expected or the ordinary.
And I also tend to pay attention to the ground when I am walking.
So I will see occasionally something that stands out.
I never really learned to track.
I had little opportunity to do so.
But I did pursue a slightly similar discipline.
I learned to interpret, I learned to diagnose problems with computers
which usually aren't hardware.
It can be.
But almost all of the problems I was diagnosing were problems with the operating system
or the software is installed or an associated file on the computer that had become corrupted
or problems with the directory of the disk.
And I became quite skillful at intuiting.
Even if I couldn't find the problem which most of the time I tried to do.
I wanted a theory.
I think it's this.
And then test it.
Nope, wasn't that.
Okay, next.
And just go through a sort of decision tree which by the way if you call Apple this is what they do.
The text have a book.
But I was that book for a long time.
So I'm really good with Apple stuff.
Generally, having affinity for it.
And preferred that OS over the other extant OSs.
Each of which has their unique benefits, whatever.
And of course this exposure and the exposure to computer programming
got me to think in very unique ways about the mind.
Now rather than like many technologists deciding like,
oh the mind is a computer.
When I was a teenager I had already, and I was first exposed to computers
and fascinated with their possibilities.
Kind of in love with them as a device.
I became interested in artificial intelligence.
I was reading Ray Kurzweil and stuff in my late teens.
And as a science fiction reader I had long, right, in the,
in what the 60s we saw examples in on TV.
Of computers that we could speak to.
And they would respond and do data analysis
and suggest solutions to various things
and eliminate theories of identity or cause.
No, it's not that.
And so forth.
So, you know, by the time I was a teenager
the idea of artificial intelligence was quite well seeded in my awareness.
Now back then it never occurred to me that human minds form networks.
This is something that's obvious whether you believe my cognizium model or not.
I'm not asking you to believe the model that I call the cognizium.
Which is a model that was shown to me by another intelligence as an example.
Look at it like this for a moment. See it like this.
And as I've commonly said lately there are perspectives that are very profound.
They're not profound based on whether they are true or not.
They're profound based on whether they deliver useful intelligence,
opportunity, protections, so forth.
It's challenging when, for me,
when another human being enters what I consider my personal space, right?
Sort of the bubble within, I don't know, a foot of the surface of my skin.
As if I'm not there.
Or as if the fact that they're moving quickly
liberates them from the respect of other people's sort of private body space.
That's quite challenging.
Most of the time I don't bristle, but sometimes I do.
And I wonder what that's all about.
I mean, I get some of the basic stuff, right?
And occasionally it seems as though this is being done on purpose.
A sort of gleeful entitlement to intrude on the space of others who are moving more slowly.
Hopefully that's rarely going on.
And for the sake of not, what?
Not fomenting conflict, physical conflict?
I normally ignore it.
At least I don't respond, right?
I don't say, hey, blah, blah, blah, what are you doing?
There might be exceptions.
I haven't come across any yet.
But I don't enjoy it.
So when I was walking on the path earlier, I noticed splash pattern.
This loops back to where I began.
I'm recursing on the topic that led to the filial awareness of little details,
which, by the way, can become really problematic for human cognition.
Primarily because if you have this proclivity, if you enact this inclination to observe details,
then hypervigilance and its dangers are not too far away.
Now you start to see a pattern in the tiny details.
And thinking that no one else sees these details,
this pattern-matching aspect of consciousness tends to acquire a unique form of authority in consciousness.
And this can lead to lots of trouble, delusions, megalomania, paranoia, schizophrenia.
These are just labels, but they are useful in broadly circumscribing various kinds of human experience,
even though I understand the modern concern with diagnostic labels
and to some degree share it.
The way that I generally cope with that for myself is I distinguish between clinical, casual, analytical,
and various kinds of conversation or purpose.
Certainly, for example, if something is wrong with us and we can take two very different examples,
we can imagine someone going to a Western doctor, let's take three.
And the Western doctor has an algorithmic chart in their mind.
They're a bit of a detective, they're meant to be clinical, not personal.
This is how this branch of medicine functions.
I can't remember the technical term.
There's allopaths, osteopaths, homeopaths.
I think there's one more. It might be allopaths that I'm talking about.
Anyway, we go to the doctor and we tell them something about what's going on with us.
I was listening to a doctor talk about this, actually.
He said that people come and they want a diagnosis.
He was saying that to diagnose a human being's condition, unless it's something very obvious right away,
where you run down a few algorithms and you can run a test.
You can try something and see if it affects the condition, and if so, how?
But he said people come and they want a diagnosis right away.
Well, if you're going to a doctor, categories kind of matter, don't they?
The doctor takes a nose swab and says, okay, you have an infection of X
and it's moving to another part of your body or something like this, right?
And they may want to prescribe antibiotics or whatever they do.
And some of that stuff is devastating.
Humans aren't all the same thing and diseases aren't all the same thing and just health problems.
But you kind of do want a categorical answer, right?
So if you hurt your limb, if one of your limbs is somehow injured, may you be protected from injury?
Then you want to know, you know, in one of the four or five ways that I can imagine that it can be hurt,
which one is it hurt?
For example, does it need to be immobilized?
Immobilization is a category.
A broken bone is a category.
A broken bone is empirically demonstrable via X-ray.
Very unlikely that something affects the X-ray machine to produce a visible break in the anatomy of a bone
and there's actually no problem with the bone.
It probably has happened with humans attempting to deceive each other on purpose or something,
but probably extremely unlikely in other cases.
So when we go to the doctor, that doctor, we want categories.
And another person goes to a practitioner of traditional Chinese medicine.
This person is more osteopathic and they tend to treat the whole person.
That's the idea of osteopathic medicine, I believe, treat the whole person.
TCM is similar but very old and involves things like humors, heat and cold, moist and dry,
fluid or stagnant, dynamic or stagnant.
These kinds of principles and it examines sort of the energetic body of the person.
And thus includes treatments such as herbs and acupuncture and sometimes cupping or acupressure
or the stimulation of Qi, life energy in a specific, along a specific meridian
and perhaps centering on one or more organs.
But still, when you go to the TCM doctor, she will say,
you know, your liver Qi is very weak and your heart Qi is too much.
We have to balance them.
And here's what I recommend and then we'll try this.
They are also somewhat experimental.
And then you could go, now I don't actually know what a session with an indigenous medicine healer
would be likely to look at, to look like.
I can imagine, I imagine things.
And so what I'm talking about here are just my imaginings.
And in case someone ever says to us something that resembles,
you don't have the right to imagine or speak of your imaginings.
Well, I'm not going to agree with that probably ever.
And if there are highly motivated individuals who want to come to me and say like,
you know, accusations of appropriation or whatever the violation is,
I will listen for a time and I will reflect on what they say.
But the urge to take that kind of offense is problematical.
I mistrust it in many of its common implementations.
That said, if you went to an indigenous person,
they might say many different things.
And it almost, in this case, the category will also be discussed.
It's this kind of a problem.
I'm going to make something up here out of whole cloth.
When you cross that stream to get to the place where you got your food,
you did not take time to recognize the stream, the waters there, the living waters there.
And they're not used to that.
So they are angry at you.
We must appease them.
Now, this might sound like nonsense to an empiricist.
Nonetheless, the often astonishing efficacy of non-ordinary interventions
granted that many of them are in our world and in our time, many of them are fake, right?
Or possibly delusional, the ones that we are likely to encounter in western culture and so forth.
Commonly fake.
Or often, sometimes delusional.
But there are lots of diseases that are not merely physical.
And the allopath can't do doodly squat about that.
The homeopath, well, that's basically a religion.
It's very difficult to disambiguate that.
An empiricist, materialist, you know, person who is very upset about the idea that there are metaphysical models at all
will certainly point out the many studies that have failed to show any effect.
I'm not here to comment on that.
What I'm actually concerned with is just that when we go to see a healer,
there will probably, and it's almost certainly better if there isn't in some ways, particularly if they're very skillful, right?
If they're really skillful, it might be better not to say anything about what the actual problem is and just to deal with it.
But we expect, you know, categories.
And when you go to the store, there are no products there.
There are precisely zero products that don't belong to any category.
It's a, it's a metaproduct, right?
It doesn't belong to any category.
It's not food.
It's not pet supplies.
It's not kitchen gear.
It's not some branch of food, vegetable, animal, you know.
There's, you will never buy at the grocery store something that you don't understand what category of thing it is.
And now that I've introduced the topic that preceded my beginning of this recording,
I'm going to go back again and circle back to the beginning.
I was walking on the path and, you know, I do notice details and frankly this detail is fairly, it's not subtle.
There's some splash marks on the asphalt.
They are darker than they should be.
They're clearly not something that is being tracked, right?
They're not something stuck to the bottom of someone's shoe making an impression every step or every other step or something.
And the, the Stellar's Jay family is here.
I recognize their filial chatter.
Another network intelligence, right?
Tightly, intimately filial, a little pod of Stellar's Jay's.
They're adventuring together, protecting one another, looking out for one another, sharing knowledge, skillfulness.
So I was walking along the path and I saw splash marks and they're dark and they had a reddish tint even though it was very,
that was modestly subtle.
And they occurred at intervals of approximately perhaps six to eight feet and sometimes longer and sometimes shorter.
They went on for quite some time, they disappeared, they started up again, they disappeared.
And, you know, it looks like blood.
Now, there are people, perhaps wisely, who would say something resembling, do not interact with such things.
They don't even concern your mind with them, right?
This will tarnish your mind.
But you will get some of it on you in a way so as to become unclean, right?
And there are many ancient traditions and spiritual traditions.
That are, that contain very complex systems of what must be avoided, when to avoid it, when not to avoid it.
And also some things that are declarative commandments, you know, you must do this.
But a lot of avoidances, right?
There are vast books of such things that seem to arise perennially throughout the, what comes down to us in written form of older peoples.
And I suspect about these books that, while sometimes intelligent, right?
Some of this stuff, there's traditional knowledge encoded in it.
But the encoding normally is handed down family to family, tribe to tribe and so on.
I mean, within a given people.
And sometimes exchanged, perhaps, that maybe there's some crosstalk between peoples about this.
But this looks to me like the evidence of a problem.
A problem where the corpus of the traditions within the people has been lost.
And someone's trying to forge a sort of a counterfeit or a replacement for it.
And thus it is that, for example, it's a well-known, I suppose it's a well-known tradition among Blackfoot people, according to my friend, Ryan First-Diver,
that if a bird flies into your house, you have to kill it.
Otherwise bad things will happen.
Now this looks to me like the remnant of something that somehow got promoted to first a principal, right?
And then a law.
Obviously this is not so.
And also obviously, just thinking rationally, any event can produce.
Any event can be causally linked to some future result.
And we can get really busy analyzing the opposite, right?
It didn't fall down on the path today and that led to me losing my wallet later.
Because I left my wallet somewhere and it disappeared.
It's funny, you know, there's a problem in English for me as someone who's aware of human psychies and cognition.
There's a problem.
And the attempt to avoid it is really confusing because to properly avoid it one has to kind of avoid certain purposes in speech.
And one of them is to alert others to a flaw or a danger.
By doing this, inadvertently, there's psyche, there's features of the psyche that invert what we're saying.
So I'm really not sure what to do about that.
It's a very peculiar feature of human cognition and psychology that involves problems with prohibitions and taboos.
It doesn't merely make them more interesting, though, you know, there is a natural proclivity.
If someone says, don't do this, there's some, you know, however modest aspect of ourselves that sees that as a challenge or,
well, I need to do that and find out why they said that or, you know, whatever, right? Something like this.
We're really strangely self-conflicting and some of us more than others and under certain, you know, situations or under stress or whatever it more so.
I'm going to leave off on that topic because it's not crucially important, but you can see the problem, right?
If the bird comes in the house and has to kill it or bad things happen, this has to do probably with a bird coming into a house in a story
that is fundamentally traditional.
I don't really mean a story because it's not really what they are, nor are they the same thing as myths,
but maybe cultural, hmm, I wish my friend Ryan were here, he could tell me, he could help me see better anyway.
They often involve origins and histories and specific characters who are often both human and somehow primordial at the same time
or are primarily primordial, like the sun, for example.
These stories have in them principles of a kind of knowledge that has been mostly lost because nature is not understood by western minds, so to speak.
So I saw the splashes and you can see already in my mind, there's a category thing going on here.
Well, first is what is that and then what's the frequency and then how old is it, how old does it look and was someone hurt here?
Did somebody suffer?
Was there, you know, this is near a street, there are many animals here.
Animals can get hit by cars, especially at night here, so I'm looking and I'm tracking the shape, the splash patterns, color, trying to figure out how old it is.
Now, even I am aware of two principles, similitude and contagion.
These are the words that my friend Ryan uses and I was aware of them in my own way before he spoke of how pervasive they are in the Blackfoot way of life.
What we might think of as tradition, but we'd be half wrong at least.
A way of thinking about relationships and transformation, a way of thinking about safety and taking care of one another and the living places and the living beings.
Two fundamental principles in the topic that might slightly equate to the topic of magic or one of the dumbest words the humans ever made, which is nonetheless still useful, the supernatural.
The mysterious relational exchanges that happen outside our efficacious model systems.
So I'm approaching where the splashes begin and I'm not so OCD about it that I counted them or anything.
The first splashes here, the next one is six and a half feet, then inches, then three feet, then two feet, then inches, then two feet, and so forth.
And the splashes point east. Creatures traveling eastward. Whatever's making the splashes is traveling eastward.
And they begin in a specific spot and they continue. They acquire relative regularity, which is mostly more than what an average person's gate would connect.
If someone were running, if a human were running, for example, and had either cut themselves or had a nosebleed, but then they stopped for quite some time and, you know, it's hard for me to imagine what it could be if it isn't blood.
But even I do not interact with such things directly. Like, I'm not unaware of the principle of contagion, but neither do I.
And here there's a lot and there's a short, yeah, here they're almost a pace, they're a pace apart and there's more.
And it's a long sequence, right? We're talking about like 100, 150 yards.
No, I don't know what happened and I'm not trying to disturb my listeners at the same time.
I mean, this is just part of my experience that, you know, I'm experiencing today.
But I am curious. I have an aspect of my intelligence that when it sees things tries to reconstruct them from evidence.
And obviously there's only certain kinds of things that arouse this interest in me, but tracks arouse this interest.
And I guess anything having to do with blood would certainly ring that little bell in my consciousness.
I don't know what I make of that. I think it's probably blood, but it also looks a little pinkish, like anemic if it's blood.
And I don't think it could be spilling. I mean, that's not true.
I think it's plausible that it's at least possible that somebody was like carrying something and spilling it every few feet for 150 yards.
It just seems wildly unlikely to me. It looks like something got hurt.
And I don't know. But you can see that my concern begins not with, oh, there's some marks on the pavement, but with the categorical concern.
Are these marks blood? What is it? What are these?
The geese are signaling. I mean, it's a display.
And it's probably a lot more complex than what I'm inclined to think is a human, because we're inclined to think things like, oh, it's a territorial incursion.
The males are, you know, got their hackles up, because it does appear that one of the groups is pursuing the other one from the shore to far away.
And the other group appears to be sort of trying to get out of eye shot, but these are human interpretations.
Now where I'm going to go from here is quite complicated.
Because I'm going to talk a little bit about how it is both true that categories can be used in tyrannical ways by humans with untrustworthy motives.
But also, it's unreasonable to suppose that we can just do away with them at will. Very unreasonable to suppose this.
There are purposes for which the intelligent suspension of categories turns out to be very useful.
And there are other purposes, especially if anyone should go around declaring aggressively that categories are some...
The active categorization in human consciousness descends or arises from colonizing patriarchal, authoritarian,
traditions. Are they involved? Yes, they are involved. Is our category tree screwy? Yes, it is screwy.
Do we get stuff wrong with it all the time?
We are in our time faced with very strange situations that are profoundly confusing to attempt to understand or amend.
Involving the intentional weaponization of a variety of features of conceptual thought.
And it's clear to me, at least it seems relatively clear, that a goodly portion of this is intentional sci-opping made contagious by social media.
And media in general.
I know for certain that there exist companies that sell these services as a weapon to countries with military agendas.
Again, one of the ways that I manage to deal with my own exposure.
I view media. I use the internet. I have a Facebook account, a Twitter account I nearly never use.
Someone has been very energetically attempting to hack my Facebook account for some time now.
I have exposure and part of how I deal with that exposure is compartmentalization.
You can think of it in a similar way as if you had to be really concerned about contagion at your house.
You might respond to the necessity in various ways. You might have staging areas where, for example, when we come home, there is a specific area where we put things that are going to be brought into the home.
If we don't take our shoes off at the door, we take them off near the street and there is a staging area.
So we had quite a pause there.
I'm going to change the topic a bit. I'm going to bookmark where I was. It was categories and how their intentional distortion.
The usefulness and dangers underneath the common behaviors that we see in various cohorts, primarily in the United States or in the western nations.
I'll come back to that.
When you grow up in the same city, you live in one city most or all of your life for a long time, long ago anyway, and I don't know how common it is these days, it seems less common.
But there are certain kinds of people or certain instances of humans that are quite eccentric and also what you might think of as local color.
They tend to not be wealthy people.
The wealthy people can be eccentric.
And they tend to form a bit of a following, right? Their characters.
I am one of them.
I remember in Santa Rosa there was a pair of twin women, older women, they were elderly by the time I knew them, and clearly they had been famous there and their youth were very well known.
There was also a woman named Pepper who always wore all red.
There is an older woman in my neighborhood who I've known actually for quite some time, who almost always wears only white, but sometimes red on top of it.
And then there's the woman that I just met, Nancy DeStefanis, who is well known here as the Heron Lady.
Now this lake has just been renamed Blue Heron Lake, and for many years in a dead tree on one of the islands, it's a man-made lake here.
It used to be called Stow Lake.
Five to seven, it was a social tree, right? Five to seven Heron nests every season.
But storms broke a lot of the old dead trees' extensions off, and so the Herons have moved around.
And I ran into Nancy and we know each other for many years. She knows that I pay close attention to the birds.
And she was talking about how the Herons will sun themselves on the top of this pine that they're currently nesting in on the other side of the lake.
And I mentioned that I think I noticed that many water birds use sunbathing, and I theorize that perhaps it's assisting their metabolism in digesting food.
Of course, this is true of many animals, right?
All the animals pay attention to heat gradients. They pay very careful attention to them.
Survival often depends on this.
The cats, given the opportunity to share bio-warming, will usually want to do so. The dogs too.
It makes everything better, right? We hitchhike on each other's heat gradients and on the heat gradients of the sun and also these days of machines.
This is a lesson I learned in a very difficult way that I will keep to myself at the moment when I was a young man.
So, I had some time with Nancy, and I could have just left the recorder on, but it seemed indelicate to do so.
But she's a fascinating, brilliant, elderly person who I care for.
Now, I could just say she's a person. Why do I have to say she's elderly?
Well, I say that she's elderly with great reverence.
Should I refrain from saying anything about...
Should I refrain from categorizing her?
Am I committing an injustice by categorizing her as elderly?
Now, certainly much like all the people I know, very, very few people I know are old inside.
Most of them, they're just like children or like they're 20 or 30 inside. Their body is elderly.
And many elderly people walk this lake. It's a pretty safe place.
Also, people would probably come to your aid if something went wrong.
I revere the elderly people.
I'm sure someone could make some kind of accusation about this. Were they thusly motivated?
I want to know what motivation should encourage them or even require them to indict me for categorizing Nancy as an elderly woman.
Now, when I was speaking to her, I asked deferentially how she prefers to be called.
I said, what do you mean? I said, if I see you, which name should I use?
She said, you can just call me Nancy. I was like, yes, great. But it's nice to ask.
She said, if there are children around, then it's Mrs. D.
I said, oh, because it's your last name. She's like, yes, yes.
So we had some negotiated, you know, I mean, negotiated monikers.
But what she probably prefers to be known as is the Heron Lady.
And that's a pretty unusual category. There's only one of them around here or they ain't two.
It was just one. Just as there was only one pepper in Santa Rosa.
And there were characters around the city at various times, too.
There was an African man who was the mayor of one of the little districts or something for many years.
I don't think I met him. And there are lesser and greater characters.
It seems much less common these days that the goodwill of the people supports the peculiar characters who, you know, they're not doing anyone any harm.
I don't think, generally. And they're contributing something profound to the local culture.
I have great admiration and respect for Mrs. D.
She runs a website about the Herons here.
And often you will see her driving her car with a large plastic Heron sticking up through the sunroof.
But people know that, you know, this is all about Herons.
It's funny she said, and speaking of certain nests, she said, you know, I just pray that I don't think she's religious.
And if she is religious, she's Heron religious.
I never got the sense of her to speak as if she believes in God.
She seems much more like a pragmatic atheist or someone who's willing to pray but isn't really religious, right?
I don't think everyone that hedges their bets is wrong.
Obviously, the atheists, just kind of a peculiar position to have.
It's not peculiar to have atheist leanings in the face of some of the ridiculous nonsense that modern religion promulgates.
But we should also be careful of similarly forged weapons.
So let's go back to the category thing.
It's funny her fascination with just one of the birds.
All of her attention has gone to Herons for a long time, such that she is identified with them.
Perhaps she thinks of herself as belonging to the Heron people, though I would be shocked to hear such a declaration from her.
And there might be private things, there must be both private things and secret things about who she is.
And some portion of the secret things are secret even to herself.
And this is the matter with being human.
Now, can I say anything useful about this category problem?
First of all, it is important to occasionally invent or repair categories.
Because our lexicon, its categorical structure, which I'm sure there's technical language about,
the library of categories native to English, for example, is missing all kinds of things.
Lots and lots of things are missing.
And if they're missing, we're inclined to overlook them because the language doesn't direct our attention in that way
and thoroughly does direct our attention in other ways.
It's a sunset crow call, raven call.
I often wonder what that call means.
It seems a communal.
I always get the sense that it's a remembering of some kind when I hear this particular double call.
Something like this, except it's got tremolo in it.
What can I say about the category?
So I was listening, I was briefly exposed early this afternoon.
I was working on getting a video up and YouTube presented me with some shorts.
And unlike my ordinary inclination, which is to completely ignore all such things,
I think there is a contagion problem there.
But I suspended my ordinary disinclinations and watched a few.
Some of them were artistic performances or musical performances, some of them were martial performances.
Some of them were wow.
And I watched maybe 10 or 11, most of them were less than a minute long, kind of short attention span theater stuff.
And in one of them, one particular male, you know, white male, was arguing with proponents of critical theory or critical race theory or stuff we might associate with the derogatory label Wokeist.
That would be a little bit too aggressive.
Categories are fundamental to conceptual awareness.
And certainly the linguistic apperception of identity.
But most of what's actually going on doesn't fit in them, right?
So in that sense, you know, over time we've become subject to a variety of modern, if I want to be friendly about it, I'll call it linguistic transformations.
And if I want to be diagnostic, I might call it contagions.
It was not very long ago that precisely zero people used the filler word like.
And the contagiousness of that linguistic habit had to do probably with a disaffinity for the declaration.
Of explicit identity, situation, relationship, transformation, and so on.
Because there's a natural disinclination.
Our psyche, our dreaming mind, our emotional self.
We have many features that resist the sort of boxy cages that categories, perhaps particularly or peculiarly in English, forces into.
So there's a kind of a natural pushback against that explicit declaration of history, situation, identity, relationship, transformation.
And when we say, when we use this filler word, it's a way of retreating from both the onus of declaration for which we can later be indicted.
Yeah, it's funny.
If I say explicitly what I did, then someone else can catch me out on that either right away or in the future.
It can be used as evidence against me, I can be judged by it.
So this like word blurs features of identity and category.
And we're seeing a similar blurring or rejection.
And I was watching the YouTube videos.
I don't know who the man, I don't know who the guy I was watching was who's probably 26.
He had kind of a broad face and a young white guy he was arguing with in one clip.
In both clips, he basically tabled a demand for a definition.
And in both cases, the people he was arguing with were poorly equipped to support whatever their or even declare whatever their position might have been.
I'm sure he's quite, you know, anyone who's rhetorically trained or anyone who's practiced debate with any degree of regularity.
Having arguments with ordinary people is like using a tank to swap flies or something, not that the people are fly like or I'm not meaning to denigrate them.
I'm just saying like it's overkill, profound overkill.
And I suspect that, you know, he's carefully, he's probably fought many battles, won many battles.
If winning is the goal, really insight should be the goal.
Mutual understanding and insight when we get together.
Not winning.
But in both cases, he asked that I saw.
He asked a very simple question.
What is a woman?
And in my own thought, there is a place where I can entertain linguistic deconstructionist, postmodernist, neo, what, neo what?
Neo put any word you want after neo, but also neo ideological constructs.
There's a, there's a compartment where I can play that.
And there's another compartment where I'm clinical.
And there's another part compartment where I experiment.
And there's another compartment where I'm actually fascinated by the existence of categories and what's missing from them.
And part of my mind is familiar with the dangers and tribulations
around the propagation of viral, sci-fi human linguistic behavior.
So I have these many different facets and I can play well with others in most fields.
I am going to say, however, to declare openly that I believe in the biological categories of gender, however poorly I may understand them.
And I'm going to take a break and have some food and then we'll see how much intelligence is left in me when I have to both digest and make allocutions.
As someone who has the joy of sometimes engaging in creative activity, I've noticed something that I've heard before.
But like most of what can be said, it's very different to hear it and experience it directly.
And I'm speaking of the difference between being hungry, which is a statement of state.
Being hungry, I'm rarely as inspired when I'm full as I am when I'm hungry.
And if I'm writing and I'm sort of on a roll or something, or whatever I might be creating music or my recordings or whatnot, it's just a radically different experience when there's food in my tummy.
Much less impetus and inspiration and motivation.
Of course, probably slightly depending on what kind of food I eat and perhaps the company I'm keeping.
So for me, as someone who studies language and semantics and has long been curious about how language affects our minds and psyches and societies, if we dare call them that,
there are situations which look to me more like diseases than development.
It's pretty similar with my physical health.
I might notice a slight catch where my nasal passages meet my throat.
A tiny bit of post-nasal drip or slight irritation.
And often I get over it most of the time, but sometimes that turns into illness.
It's much more difficult to understand mimetic and linguistic contagions, and all of us are surely exposed to mimetic pathogens.
I'm very concerned when I see the kinds of things.
Nearly every psyop raises the flag of virtue, of liberation, of unity.
And it's very common for the language to transform dramatically when the principles of democratic coexistence
and mutual concern and so forth begin to be captured and or weaponized.
Generally what is common when some kind of psyop is going on, one of the key signals that you can see when you sort of take the pulse of the linguistic situation,
particularly as it surrounds cohorts of humans, groups of humans, tribes, so forth, whether they're ideological or genetic or based on some feature of gender.
When something attacks the roots of our lexicons and makes the claim of heroic revision, whether that claim is overt or covert,
we want to be extremely cautious and look very carefully both at the ploys, the methods, the techniques, the protocols, and their actual results,
not what they claim to be doing. What's actually going on as the transformation of categories becomes prominent.
And on the one hand we should together be willing and capable and trained to intelligently for each other for the sake of insight,
question the nature of categories, and perhaps repair our lexicons.
That's an important part of my goal as a cognitive activist. At the same time we should have watchful concern about certain kinds of transformations.
Our capacity to be rational, to weigh evidence, to think clearly, to revise our thinking in the face of new data, to attend the authority of facts without becoming entranced by them.
There is a compartment within which I understand that conceptual facts, linguistic facts, there's a compartment in which I can play as if they are in fact an authority ploy.
And there are certainly situations in our culture, relationships, societies, and so on where this is so. The facts are not actually facts.
For example, the fact that the CDC promoted the COVID vaccines as safe and effective. Not fucking true.
We may have needed vaccines. There might have been a real fire where our infrastructure of society was at risk, which was the primary argument, or one of them.
But even that, you don't get facts about complex situations immediately. Data never catches up to what's actually going on unless what's going on is so simple, like is the water boiling?
That's a fact you can get a relatively clear grasp on because it's very simple. Where did COVID originate? Not facts. That's speculation and data and research and analysis and so on.
And wherever the humans don't do the data or research or analysis, then the data never reaches the common people. And the common people don't get much clarity of data at all unless they're connected with somebody who's professional, like a scientist or something.
It's actually doing the research or gathering data. Data is always partial, never complete, and it takes a long time for it. It can never catch up to what's actually going on now.
So it's always post facto, right after the fact. In its hindsight, what we get is mostly from data unless the analyses are very simple or temporally accessible rapidly. We don't get good data.
And our data is always partial and it's biased, and all of that is true, but that doesn't entitle us to just dismiss, pretend that the data isn't there, or that all facts are really just, for example, a result of the agendas of colonizing patriarchy or this kind of thing.
That's ridiculously nonsensical. And if we say, it's not that there's no truth in it. There's a little bit of truth there. There's a branch of factfulness that is emerging from colonizing entities and perhaps even patriarchal motivations.
True. The whole thing, impossible. Cannot be so.
And when you see in the common people the signal that we're going to blur, doubt, and erase fundamental categories,
I strongly suggest that we recoil, become very studious and cautious about what the fuck might be going on, because on the one hand, anything that damages fundamental categories, these are things that I call holophores in English.
These are root concepts that if you change them, all other concepts inherit the changes you've applied, each concept somewhat uniquely, but you cannot change, for example, the meaning of male or female without affecting all other concepts.
And in a situation where the fundamental basic elements of the sort of primitives of our lexicons, the categories, if these come under attack and the attack is successful, our people will go nuts. It will cause insanity.
It's possible to produce waves of transformation in the lexicon and in the categories, that it's not possible for humans to keep up with cognitively, and it's also possible to destabilize the basis of human identity this way.
There's so much trouble going on here, and this is a very sophisticated topic, which I'm giving a fairly superficial treatment to at the moment. I'm merely speaking of some of my concerns.
No matter how many people try to tell me that their transformation of a fundamental category feature is true, good, appropriate, noble, reflective of actual understanding,
and so forth. I'm willing to have the discussion. I'm not willing to be threatened into categorical changes that I fundamentally don't agree with.
I've read works that question the common human gender categories, male and female. I'm well aware, for example,
that if we want to use gender to talk about bacteria, there's probably seven or more genders, and there's different ways they can connect.
I am aware of what has been called hermaphrodism in nature and humans. I am unwilling to submit my mind and my lexicon to the whims
of people or groups of people whose motivations may appear superficially humanistic, but whose activity largely creates very...
It inverts the problems of racism and genderism and then points those back at the people who it wants to frame as oppressors, many of whom have never actively oppressed anyone or anything much.
There has been colonialism real, patriarchal dismissal of women, children, living place, absolutely. There has been chauvinism.
There has been unjustifiable suffering visited on peoples and groups, all through. The resolution for those matters is clearly not being woke.
And this nation that I live in, which I do not identify closely with, is clearly suffering a series of assaults from various bad actors, other nations, factions and so forth,
that are intent on fomenting schizogenesis. And one of the best ways to do that is to attack basic categories. It just so happens that these primordial features of our lexicon
are both vulnerable to capture and distortion and very rewarding, rapidly rewarding in terms of schizogenesis of populations and cognition.
So, I'm not trying to call anyone out. I'm saying I don't trust this situation. I've watched it carefully from its origins. I was reading post-modernist texts in the 1980s.
And already I developed not exactly an allergy, but a significant concern about that direction in intellectual development.
Some will claim that the wakest concerns don't start there, but that's not their origin or parentage. I find it a bit difficult to believe.
So, there's much more to say on this topic. Perhaps I am trying to say that I'm very skeptical of particular transformations
in our lexicons that look to me more like the result of weaponization than they do of insight or humanitarianism, person-terrainism, whatever you wish to call it.
In the shorts that I saw earlier today, I just saw this guy asking one question to a couple different people.
And the question was, what is a woman? And none of those people answered. They made various claims like that he was grandstanding or that he's found a pivot point around which he can dance and sort of score points.
And one of them said, I just don't think categories are that important in human relationships or something to this degree.
Well, I'm not judging the person. Again, the guy on the stage was clearly rhetorically trained and prepared for actual debate, and the people that were approaching him were not.
This is a typical gambit, also sort of what disingenuous, right? Fake.
Typical gambit in videos that are intended by their creators to capture audiences via outrage and other dangerous purposes.
But I do think the question is relevant.
I don't know the answer to the questions that arise in the wake of the methods that allow people to modify their bodies.
Identify their gender or perhaps even what is it, right? What is it that gets identified?
Sometimes it's gender, sometimes it's sexuality, sometimes it's public face.
I wish to be known in the public as masculine or feminine or neither. I'm not binary. I'm not plus or minus. I'm not boy or girl. I'm beyond.
Now again, there's this problem in the background, which is that we can all sense that there's an issue with categories and their explicit declarations of identity.
And this can be the source of injustice for sure, but so can the other side of it, right?
So for now, I really just want to highlight the questions and I'm pretty sure I know how I would answer. I'm not going to try to do it here at the moment.
The question, what is a woman? What do we mean by the word woman? This is always a question of who we are and what we intend to mean rather than what does the word mean?
Biologically, though there are outliers, there are outliers in every category, right? There are things that cross over into other categories.
Think about the idea of food, right? There's food that you know to be food and there's also food that you know not to eat.
The rotting apple is rarely consumed by humans. An apple is a fruit. A fruit is food.
But there's all kinds of edge cases. We don't then decide there's no such thing as apples.
I mean, unless, you know, we're really advanced philosophically or something and we realize that language is a game.
But unfortunately for us, that game has very profound social and historical and what? Future repercussions.
How humans play with categories is fundamentally determinative of many aspects of thought, relation, behavior, expectation, objection, vehemence, anger, fear, all these things, right?
So if we're going to just mess with fundamental categories at the root of our lexicons, we had better be prepared to ask the really hard questions there.
And not come to the table with standing presuppositions on either side.
The question of what is a woman? Does biological gender actually exist?
Is delicate and sophisticated in measured, almost in like a kind of mathematical relation to our purposes in asking the question and our purposes in pursuing the question.
I don't think, in the same way that I don't think that machines qualifies intelligences at this point, that doesn't mean intelligences couldn't hitchhike on them.
Ours do. Ours does.
In the same way that I don't think machines are intelligences and we should call artificial intelligence something like human assisted computational heuristics.
I don't think, I'm certainly willing to call my friend who I knew was born male, she, if my friend really presses me and says this is important to me, this is what I want, I will do it.
But I will not be thinking of that person as a woman.
I still believe in gender as, at least in the bubble of biology, right, in the compartment of my mind where I think about biological situations.
I believe in genders. The concept makes sense to me, it's familiar to me. I'm not going to try to rationalize it here.
And in another bubble, a different one, I'm willing to acknowledge the concerns of someone I care for or am in relation with.
But there's a limit.
If they want to police my lexicon for the sake of some ideology they've come under the sway of, we're going to have some very serious discussions over long periods of time.
And I would expect the same thing if I demanded they change their lexicon or be indicted.
That's not going to fly, that creates a disproportionate power dynamic in the relational envelope that I don't agree with generally.
There's much more to learn here and much more to explore.
For now I'm going to wrap up just because it's getting late, not because I have a full tummy.
Thank you for joining me.
I wish you every beautiful thing and I would love to hear your comments, thoughts and concerns on anything I've been sharing here today.
Please feel free to speak up in the channel on YouTube.
I look forward to learning again together very soon and I wish you every beautiful way and relation.
May you be healthy, joyful and well loved.
Bye bye for now.
