Non-fungible tokens or NFTs are one of the biggest things to happen so far in 2021.
Artists and musicians have crowded into the space. Everybody started creating their own
works of art and selling their music and all kinds of stuff. And as someone who is fascinated by
crypto and music, I've been paying close attention to what's been happening with NFTs.
And so last week, I decided to test my hand at this and I made a few of my very own NFTs.
And in this video, I'm going to show you exactly how I did it.
What's up, guys? It's Tom. Welcome back to the lab and welcome back to my life.
Last week, I decided to make my very own NFTs. I made a series of trading cards based off of
the artwork from all of my releases that I've released so far. And I made several versions
of them and uploaded them to a platform called OpenSea. And so in today's video,
I'm going to walk you through the exact process I took to make and upload those NFTs and then
ultimately put them for sale. Now, before we dive into this, I want to remind you that every
Friday on YouTube, we go live for an hour at 1pm central time. We talk about music marketing,
branding, business, and anything else you guys want to jam on. We can even talk about non-fungible
tokens. You can ask me questions directly or you can talk to all the other cool people who are in
the community around this channel. Everybody is helpful, nice, super cool, and working hard to
build their career as an independent artist. So if you do have questions or if that just
sounds like the kind of community you would like to be a part of, I hope you'll join us this Friday
at 1pm. All right, non-fungible tokens. I made my own. Let's talk about how we did it. Well,
first of all, you have to create a file that you want to sell. Now, people are selling all kinds
of things. People are selling original works of art. They're selling videos. Some people are
selling the exclusive rights to songs. I decided to sell trading cards. I wanted to create a series
of trading cards based off of the cover art for my releases, and I'm making a limited set of each
one. So I've created seven custom trading cards with the ultimate goal of creating a series of 10.
And there are only 100 copies of each card that will ever be available in circulation. And you
can make all these rules when you upload your file and create, actually, Mint, that's what it's
called, Mint your token. So here's an example of one of the cards that I made. This is based off
of my most recent release holding on. And as you can see, the file is just a GIF file of this trading
card style GIF, just bouncing up and down. And it's got a little animation to it. So it looks
cool and catches your eye. And I made one for each of my releases that has vocals in it that I
have dropped so far on Spotify. So here's one for Lions, and so on and so forth. Now before you
can upload anything to OpenC, you're gonna have to have a wallet. What I chose to use is a wallet
called MetaMask. MetaMask is a great Ethereum wallet. It connects to everything and it has a
Chrome extension. So what you want to do is go to MetaMask's website, download the mobile app for
your phone, get everything set up there. And then if you're using Chrome, which I suggest that you
do for this, I'm using Chrome, go to the Chrome web store and download the MetaMask extension
for Chrome. This is going to allow you to connect directly to the NFT marketplace platform and get
everything organized through there. This is kind of like it's both your wallet to hold your currency
in that you're going to have to pay some fees in. And it's also what you use to authorize transactions
and sign in essentially. So once you've created a piece of art or a song or whatever it is you
want to sell, for me it was a gift. And then you've downloaded your MetaMask wallet and you've
installed the MetaMask Chrome extension, you're going to have to get your hands on some ETH and
put it into your wallet because you're going to need it to pay for transactions. I recommend
starting with about a hundred bucks worth. That should be plenty to cover everything that you need
to pay for to mint stuff and sign up and all that. So I can put out another video on that later on
how to actually get it into your wallet if you want me to. But for now, I'm just going to assume
that you kind of know how this works. So download your wallet, fill it up with ETH, and then you're
going to need to go to a platform to actually sell and mint or mint than sell your NFTs. And I used
a platform called OpenSea. So OpenSea.io bills itself as the largest NFT marketplace. And I've
heard it compared to eBay. And I think that's a pretty app comparison. You can buy non-fungible
tokens on here and you can resell them. You can trade them. You can mint your own and sell them,
which is what I've done. But you don't have to mint anything. You can just buy something from
somebody else and then flip it. It's actually a pretty great way to earn a few extra bucks if you
have the time. You go to OpenSea and in the top right corner, you're going to log in with your
MetaMask wallet. Now I'm already logged in, but what you'll do is you'll click on this and a MetaMask
pop-up will pop up and you'll sign in using your MetaMask wallet and then your profile will be
created. And then you can go in and you can customize your profile. You can add your name.
You can update your picture and stuff like that. As you can see, I've added my pictures in here,
the same ones I use on everything else. So you know it's me. I've got a little bio here. I've
got my public address for the profile. And then I've got all the NFTs that I have minted so far.
And when you start, you're not going to have anything here, obviously, but we're going to get
to that. So once you have signed in using your wallet, you'll go to Create. And when you go to
Create, hover over that and go to My Collections. When you get to My Collections, you'll create a
new collection. As you can see, I've already got My Collection, Tonya Presley III digital
collectibles, but you can go to Create. When you click Create, you'll add an image for it. You'll
call it something, and then you'll give it a description. And you'll click Create from there.
And once you click Create, if we go into my little store here, basically, I'll go to Edit,
and you'll be able to see kind of... So here's a great example. I clicked Edit, and I'm going to
need to sign into this section of OpenSea just to make these edits. So if I click Sign, I can go in
here, and now I can edit my collection. And this is where you can add all the different customizable
things for your actual collection. You can customize your URL, update your images, your profile image,
things like that. You can add a description. You can add other links that go to other stuff
where you're represented. You can enter a commission fee, which is really cool. So if I sell a non-fungible
token, and then you resell it, I get 10% of that sale and every subsequent sale. So every time
anything I've created, if I'm the originator, anytime any of that changes hands, I get a
percentage off of every sale. So that's pretty dope that you can do that through this stuff.
And because everything is kept track of on blockchain, everything is issued by smart
contract. Nobody has to do anything. It just happens automatically, which is rad. Going through,
like you can see, you know, there's my public address for my wallet, anybody wants to send me
money, that's fine. And you can kind of update everything. And then once you've got your collection
all set up, you've got NFTs minted and stuff, you can submit it for review. And that will allow you
to send it to OpenSea and they can look through it and then decide whether or not your profile is
visible. Mine still isn't visible yet. It's still under review, but eventually hopefully it will
become visible and then it's searchable and all kinds of other stuff. You can drive traffic to
it directly before it's visible, but you can't search for it on OpenSea. Now I'm going to show
you how to mint an actual NFT. But before we do that, let's recap the steps real quick. You've
created a piece of art, a digital piece of art, you have downloaded an Ethereum wallet, preferably
MetaMask, you have connected the MetaMask extension to your browser, you've signed into OpenSea,
you've created your profile, you've created your collection. And now it's time to create a
non fungible token to sell as part of your collection. So if you go to your collection page,
or you can go up to create at the top and you can put go to submit NFTs,
you're going to be taken back to your collection page. So you end up at your collection page,
you're going to go to add new items. And this is where we create our NFT. So in this case,
we will drag and drop a file, or upload one rather. So we'll start with the holding on
GIF. So we'll upload the same GIF for holding on, we'll give it a name, call this holding on
trading card. You can add an external link so that somebody can learn more about your NFT.
I don't have one in any of mine, but it is an option you can put in. And then you can give
it a description, we'll put this trading card is one of seven, only 100 minted there. And once
you've added your description, your title, all that stuff, you can add additional properties to
this that show up as different things. So like if these were actual like game trading cards,
you can add which character this is like what are the stats of the character, all kinds of really
cool like kind of collectible type of features, you can add different levels like you know,
what powers does this character have and what level out of how many is that,
and all kinds of different stuff, which is really neat. And then after that, another thing you can
do is you can add unlockable content to your non fungible tokens. So for example, as musicians,
if you wanted to add like an additional piece of downloadable content to accompany your token. So
if I like wanted to give you a free download of my song, if you buy this card, this is where I can
do that I can click the little box here next to unlockable content. And then I can drop like a
Dropbox link in here or Google Drive link that has my song in it so that when you buy this card,
you get exclusive access to a free download of the song. Or maybe I can add like an exclusive
version like an acoustic version of the song that nobody has heard before that's not posted anywhere.
So if you buy this card, you and only the people who buy this card will ever hear that song unless
one of you post it on the internet, which you know, would probably happen. But you get exclusive
access to it by buying this, which is a really cool feature. And then the last thing you can do is
you can actually create multiple copies of your token. So right now I have it at one for all the
cards I've created already, I have 100 copies of them. So it's a capped limit of 100 that will
ever be made. But because they're trading cards, I thought, well, we should make multiple versions
of them, right? One thing on supply, they've got this question mark here, it says supply,
the number of copies that can be minted, no gas cost you quantities above one coming soon. I don't
know why it's like that I created 100 of each. If we click on that, and we go to how does the token
supply work, it's going to give you this rundown of basically what this means. Unique items have a
maximum supply of one meeting only one copy can ever be minted. This is what a non fungible token
NFT usually refers to. What is minting? Minting is an action that brings an item into existence on
the blockchain and costs gas to do so. Minting on open C is lazy, meaning it only occurs when
necessary. And this is one of the reasons I chose open C is because you can mint multiple tokens
for free, as opposed to other platforms, you have to pay every time you do it. So on open C,
when you transfer an item to another account, something gets minted, when someone buys an item
from you, it gets minted. This means you can create as much as you want here for free. And then
we go to how is supply enforced, the maximum supply hard cap of your token will be encoded in its ID.
This allows the smart contract to check whether any more are allowed to be minted. So basically
when I set this maximum number, that is it for all time, it's algorithmically and cryptographically
set so that it can't be changed. And once you've done all of this, you'll click create. Now the
first time you click create on this, you are going to have to pay a fee. Now I did this step on
my phone. So I have a screenshot of it, it ended up costing me about $57 to create my collection.
And it's a one time fee to create the collection. And then you can add as many NFTs to the collection
as you want, which is clearly what I did. I just kept going and added seven trading cards with
100 copies of each. And I did all of that for free, or basically one flat rate of 57 bucks. Now
every time one of these things sells, I will have to pay a gas fee, which is why they're priced higher
than like five bucks, because I'm going to have to pay fees in ETH. And right now it's a little
pricier than you might want it to be. So you have to cover your costs of actually minting the thing
for real when somebody actually buys it. And then there's one last step that you have to take
once you have minted your non fungible token, you actually have to list it for sale. So if I
go to the profile of it, you can see I have one that is currently listed. But if I want to sell
another one, I'll click sell. And here under the sell page, you can set a price or you can bundle
it together with a bunch of them. So I can create a bundle of all these trading cards and sell that
or I can sell one at a time. So selling one at a time, I can put like, you know, 0.1 of ETH,
we'll start there. And then it will list it as 0.1 ETH, which is what it's listed as right now.
And I can schedule it for a future time, I can keep it private and do whatever.
And then I'll click post my listing. And once you post your listing, it's for sale. And it'll
stay up until somebody buys it or until somebody bids on it. So somebody can make an offer for
your NFT as well. They don't have to buy the product at the buy now price. Somebody can offer
you $5 for it or whatever. You want to take it? Take it. Cool. Why not?
So that's it. That's how I made my non fungible tokens. That's how I made all these NFTs,
just a one flat fee paid in ETH through your wallet. And after that, you can make as many as you want
to. It's a little daunting at first, but once you get the hang of it, you can fly through,
you can create as much as you want. And through OpenSea, you can do it all for free, which is
awesome. I know I breezed through a lot of stuff in this video. I'm aware of that. There's a lot
to cover and I wanted to kind of hit all the main points. If you want me to dig deeper into any
specific step of this stuff, let me know in the comments. And specifically, I really kind of
skipped over how I actually made the file itself, how I made the trading card, made it animate and
all that stuff. If you want me to make a video about that, please let me know in the comments.
I'll be happy to do so. And if you want me to make a follow up video to this kind of digging
into some of the particulars a little bit further about the whole like minting process,
I'm happy to do that as well. Now, before I let you go, I want to remind you if you don't subscribe
to the channel, hit that subscribe button, like this video if you dig it, share it with your
friends if you really liked it. And make sure you turn on notifications so you don't miss
any videos in the future. Now at the end here, got a couple things you can check out. And as
always, I appreciate you being here. And I will catch you on the next one. Peace.
