Please see my screen, all right.
OK, yeah.
So thanks.
First, I would like to thank Michael for inviting me here
today.
And for this group meeting, I thought
I'll share with you my work on the odd dynamics of living
Cairo crystal.
And seeing, I think, most part of what I'm going to present to you
has been published.
I think maybe it is more fruitful if you can ask questions.
So please feel free to interrupt along the way
for any questions that you might have.
So before I begin, I thought maybe I
would first put this work in the larger context of what
I'm interested in.
So broadly speaking, what I'm interested in
is trying to understand biological matter
as a kind of active matter.
And what I mean by that is that these are systems
where you get these constituent particles that consume energy,
which break details balance at the microscopic level.
And this typically will lead to spontaneous organization
of emergent structures and novel material properties
that you don't typically get in equilibrium materials.
And so in particular, in the past decades or so,
a lot of work has been done to try
to understand how we can describe and characterize
some kind of biological system using polar and pneumatic
order.
And the most prominent example is probably
how cells in tissues can actually behave like liquid crystals.
And using this kind of framework,
people are able to understand how spontaneous flows can arise
in cells and tissues, especially in the context
of morphogenesis.
In the context of bacterial suspensions,
people have shown that if you push the system hard enough
in terms of how active they are, you can actually
get into a regime of active turbulence
with some interesting parallels with what
people have known for many, many decades
in fluid dynamics turbulence.
And more recently, there's a lot of interest
in trying to understand how topological defects in this
polar or pneumatic fields in tissues, for example,
in this work from Keeneret-Karrens group, HYDRA,
they show that actually defects in this polar or pneumatic field
actually correspond to biologically significant
organization centers.
And so this is really a very active area of research.
But for today, I wanted to focus on another kind of order
that can arise in biology, and that is chirality.
And of course, as we know, chirality
is a very common features that we see around us.
So the most prominent example is probably
our left hand and right hand.
Those are chiral because you cannot superimpose them
by just purely rotation or translation.
You have to have a mirror before you can superimpose them
on themselves.
And this gives it a very interesting physical properties
that when you get collective behavior in self-organization
of many, many of such particles, you
get a new type of material properties.
And so this chirality in synthetic or biological active
matter has recently attracted a lot of attention.
And one example here that I'm going to show you
is the work from William Irvine's group at Chicago.
And what they have here is that they have a spinning colloidal
magnet.
So basically, they have this tiny colloidal magnet
that put that they assemble thousands and thousands of them.
And then they apply a magnetic field across it.
And because of the setup, this colloidal particle actually
all started spinning in the same direction.
And what they found was that using this setup,
they can assemble this chiral fluid,
whereby you get a lot of very non-trivial,
non-equilibrium physical properties,
including topological edge effects, as well as
odd viscosity, which I will go into more details in a moment.
And this type of behavior really comes
from the fact of each of these individual particle
breaks chirality at the particle level.
And this type of property has also
been recently reported in a biological system.
So a group in Japan, Yamaguchi, and all,
they show that if you culture this neuroprogenitor cells
in micro-pattern devices, they start showing this rotation
behavior.
And at the boundary, you get chiral H-flows,
which are signatures of chiral fluid.
So by now, there has been quite a few examples
of how systems can behave as chiral fluid.
And in our project, we wanted to address this question
in the context of a solid and ask whether we can find
an odd response in biological active solid material.
So to do that, we are going to use our favorite model
organism, which is the starfish embryo.
So here is a picture of a starfish embryo
at about 48 hours post fertilization.
So there are about 200 microns in diameter.
So can people see my cursor?
OK.
Yes.
OK, so there are about 200 microns in diameter
and 300 microns in length.
And on their surface, they are covered
with this carpet of cilia, as with many marine invertebrates
larva.
And of course, the cilias will beat
and they start generating this hydrodynamic flows, which
will allow them to swim in water.
And what we found by accident, actually,
was that if you culture enough of this embryo
in, let's say, a six well plate, what happens
is that sometimes some of these embryos
will swim towards the water-air interface.
And because of the hydrodynamic interactions
with the water-air interface, they
will actually form a stable bound states
so that they will remain perpendicular to the air
water interface stably.
And then again, because of the hydrodynamic interactions,
they will start attracting more and more embryos
to itself.
And because of these basic interactions, what you get
is that you get this spontaneous self-organization
of thousands and thousands of starfish embryos.
They will swim towards the surface.
They will start attracting one another.
And then they will self-assemble into these very regular
crystalline structures.
So I'm just going to let the video play one or twice
and point out a few things about this.
So one thing is that we're talking about millimeter-sized
crystals, so you can actually see this by eye.
The time scale is of the older tens of hours.
So this crystal, actually, from the time it starts to assemble
to its complete disassembly took about 30-plus hours.
And as you can see, this crystal actually
has very clear six-fold symmetry.
This is a very beautiful hexagonal symmetry.
It has all the features of what you would expect
from a 2D isotropic crystals where you get five-fold and seven-fold
defects.
You can get line of disclinations and et cetera.
And of course, the most fascinating aspect about this system
is that each of these embryos actually
rotate in a chiral manner, meaning
to say, if you look from the top of this video,
all of them are actually rotating in a clockwise direction.
So that's where the chiral symmetry breaking comes in,
that all of this particle rotate in the same way they are chiral.
And because of that, we expect the crystal
to actually show elasticity that is distinct from what you
expect from just a plain old isotropic 2D crystal.
So there's just a lot that you can ask and do with the system.
But initially, we thought we just
wanted to focus on three questions.
The first one is, how does this crystal self-assemble?
What are the kind of emergent dynamics
that you get from this chirally interacting particle?
And what is driving this dissolution process of the crystal?
So to address these questions of self-assembly,
the first thing we thought was that it must come from a hydrodynamics
because the embryos are firmly embedded in this water.
So to measure the flow field around the embryo,
what we do is this very standard PIB experiments.
We just put beads around the embryos.
I hope the video is clear enough that you can see
that these beads are clearly moving towards the embryo.
And because the water is incompressible,
this flow field, if the water gets
expelled down towards the bulk, like this blue arrow
that we are showing right here.
But near the top of the air-water interface,
you get a net inflow of particles.
And if we make this measure quantitative, what we found
is that this can be easily described
by what is called a stock-slip flow.
Essentially, it's the flow that is generated
by a point force in a fluid.
And you can see that we get very nice agreement
between theory experiments.
And of course, when we talk about self-assembly,
we are talking about the interactions
between pairs of embryos.
And this is where things start to become interesting.
So if you put just two embryos in the water
and just look at how they interact,
the first thing you notice is that, of course,
each of these embryos, again, are spinning clockwise
from our point of view.
There's a net inflow of fluid flow.
But on top of that, because of the rotation,
they also started to show this orbital motion.
It's almost like two planets spinning around one another.
And to first order, there are actually two types
of interactions that is going on.
One is that there's a transverse force interaction,
which allows each of these embryos
to start rolling on one another, essentially.
The other kind of effect is actually,
you can think of it as a kind of a friction effect,
because these two embryos are spinning in the same direction.
At the point of contact,
they are actually moving in the opposite direction.
So this embryo, at this point, they are spinning this way,
but at this point, they're spinning that way.
And because of that, they start to slow down one another
through a non-respirical torque exchange.
And from that, we are able to, essentially,
experimentally, again, experimentally,
measure this flow field and show that it fits well
into this description where you can,
with a point force and a point torque,
you can explain the flow field that we observe experimentally.
So through that, we come out with a very minimal model
for this chirocrystal formation.
So, essentially, we assume that each of these
starfish embryos is a 2D disk.
And in this 2D disk, the equation of motion,
essentially involves only three type of forces.
One is that you get this Stokeslet attraction
that is coming from the hydrodynamic interaction.
You get a short-range repulsion,
because the embryos, once they get close enough,
they cannot get closer anymore.
And then you get this force from chiral interaction,
which is essentially this transverse force interaction
that I was telling you about earlier.
And this transverse force interaction
or this orbital motion around one another
will depend on their rotation frequency omega here.
To close this model, we have the equation
for the individual rotation speed of the embryo.
And this equation essentially says that the embryo likes
to rotate in some fixed free rotation speed,
but then you need to subtract away a net reduction
in the torque that is dependent again
on the embryo and its neighbor.
So with this minimal model,
what my collaborator, a theory collaborator,
Alex has been able to do was that he's able
to recapitulate qualitatively the feature
that we see in experiments.
You start getting this small clusters
that fuse together to form this big, big chiral crystals.
And on top of that, we are able to quantitatively match
what we measure in experiments
in terms of embryos spinning frequency,
as well as the large cluster rotation frequency
as a function of a number of embryos.
So that's all, that's sort of where we are
in terms of trying to understand
how this self-assembly process happens.
And the next thing we wanted to understand
is whether we get any emergent dynamics
from the chiral interaction.
So here, I have to bring you through a little bit
of a coarse-grained continuum elasticity theory.
So usually, typical, when we talk about an elastic material
and we talk about an elasticity of material,
we usually have two modulus to describe them,
how they are so-called the shear modulus
and the compression modulus,
meaning to say, if I piece a material, if I squeeze it,
how hard do I need to squeeze to produce some strain
that is compression modulus?
The other modulus is the shear modulus.
It characterizes how hard I need to shear the material
before it actually goes out of shape.
But, and that typically, so here the compression modulus
and the shear modulus, at the microscopic level,
this is because of the longitudinal force
between the atoms.
So you have atoms that attract and repel each other.
That, how strong that interaction is,
is roughly proportional.
Well, in linear elasticity theory,
it's roughly proportional to your compression modulus
and your shear modulus.
But in our material, it is more interesting
because we have, on top of this longitudinal interaction,
we have transverse interaction.
And that should, in theory, give rise
to two more additional elasticity moduli.
And this has been worked out, in theory,
by Scheibner and All in this paper right here.
And what it means is that this type of transverse interaction
should give rise to an odd compression modulus
and an odd shear modulus.
So the odd compression modulus essentially
described this properly whereby, if I squeeze the material
from the boundary, this material will actually
show a net torque in the middle, which
is something that is very non-intuitive
because it doesn't happen usually
in our typical material.
And odd shear modulus is essentially
described this material property whereby,
if I shear this material, let's say, in the vertical direction,
the response of the material is that it
gets sheared in 45 degrees.
Again, the response of the material
is rotated somehow by this chiral interactions
in the particle level.
So if you put this all, what I described to you
in this matrix form, what it means
is that in a typical isotropic passive solid,
we get two modulus, which is the bulk modulus
and the shear modulus, right here.
But if you have a chiral material,
you get two additional modulus, which
is a and k0, that appears at the off-diagonal terms.
And this kind of material properties
you can only get if you have energy injection
into the system, meaning to say your solid is out
of equilibrium.
Because once you have this kind of moduli in the off-diagonal,
it means that you can extract energy from the system.
And one thing that is predicted in this study right here
is that if you have this type of material,
you should be able to get strain cycles from the material.
And this is exactly what we are able to observe
in our experiments.
So what we found is that through many, many iterations
of the experiments, sometimes we see
this spontaneous vibrational mode in our living chiral crystal.
So I hope this video plays, but let me just show you.
So essentially, at about three hours' time point,
you can see, even by eye, is that there
is this very pronounced jiggling behavior in the crystal.
So right about now, you should be
able to see this vibration that propagates through the crystal.
And to sort of first quantify that, what we did
was that we do a particle tracking of each of this embryo.
So each of the circle right here represents a single embryo.
We are able to track their displacement,
so that is what this little black arrow is showing.
And the color code of these circles
is essentially the angle at which the instantaneous displacement
vector is showing with respect to the x-axis.
And so once we have done that analysis,
what we found is that you can very clearly
see that the displacement of each of these embryos
show this very cyclic behavior, meaning
to say you get this chiral active wave that
is propagating through the crystal.
And if you look at the phase, the propagation also
shows some cyclic behavior.
If we look at a single embryo and just track this displacement,
you can see that the periodicity of this displacement
is of the order 240 seconds.
So remember that these are embryos that
is embedded in a fluid.
So meaning to say, the embryos are definitely
in an overdamped regime.
So meaning to say, this kind of excitation
cannot be thermal in nature and must come
from the non-equilibrium dynamics.
And as I've mentioned previously,
once you have a material that has odd modulus,
in principle, you should be able to get strain cycles
from the material that is where we can extract energy from it.
And indeed, if we did the analysis for this curl
and divergence, as well as shear 1 and shear 2,
we see this counterclockwise cycle in the strain space,
which is very reminiscent of what the theory predicts.
And so now that we have seen signatures of odd elasticity
in our material, the next thing that we want to ask
is whether we can actually infer what the value of this odd
can we measure the odd elastic moduli.
So usually, when we want to measure elastic modulus
from materials, we apply a stress, we measure the strain,
and then we find out how they are correlated.
In our system, because it's rotating
and is in this 6-well, 24-well plate structure,
it's a little bit hard to perform the experiments.
So in state, we try to infer these odd modulus
from the defect strain field.
So the math is a bit long and technical,
but I just want to explain to you the idea behind it.
And basically, the idea is as follows.
If you have a solid and the solid has a topological defect,
this defect will induce a displacement, a strain
field around the defect.
And depending on how the strain field looks like,
we can actually infer whether the material is just
isotropic solid or whether there's a chiral component to it.
And the theory behind it has been worked out
in this PRL paper that was published in 2021.
To cut a very long story short, what we are able to do here
is that we are able to find the relative A and K0 modulus
from this fit by going through this fitting procedure.
And we found that both of the numbers are positive.
And this is consistent with what we would get
if we took our model from the hydrodynamic modeling earlier
and caused great need from the spring constants.
And we found that the values differ by quite a bit,
but then at least the signs are correct.
And what it means is that given that the cycles that we see
are counterclockwise, it means that the material is actually
doing work on the environment, which is consistent with what
we would expect.
So in this second part of the talk, what we found
was that we are able to see signatures of elasticity
in our material.
And this is consistent with what you would expect
if you have chiral interactions between the embryo.
So in the last part of our work, we
wanted to address this question of the spontaneous dissolution
of our crystal.
So if you look at this crystal information,
you see that towards the dissolution process,
the embryos are actually fluctuating more and more.
And there is actually more disorder in the system.
One way that we can quantify this disorder
is that we can calculate this so-called local bond
orientational order parameter.
This is the mathematical definition of it.
But then the intuitive explanation
is that this size 6 parameter has two components.
There is the real part of it, the magnitude and the phase.
So the magnitude of size 6 actually
tells you how hexagonal like locally an atom is.
So if you are a perfect hexagon, then everything
would be colored white.
But then as you deviate more and more
from this hexagon picture, you become more and more black
in this color code.
And then the phase of size 6 indicates
the orientation of this hexagonal order.
So essentially, the color tells you
what is the relative angle of this local hexagonal order
with respect to the x-axis.
So what we found was that if you just
look at this magnitude of the size 6, which
quantifies local hexagonal order,
initially the crystals are relatively white,
meaning to say they have a very high hexagonal order.
But then towards the end, you see
that they get more and more of these hot spots
before the crystals dissolve away,
meaning to say this order develops as the crystal dissolves.
And if you look at this phase of the size 6, which
is the orientation, initially you
see that the crystals is largely just blue or meaning
to say all the crystal is a single piece of crystal.
They have the crystal axis along some direction.
But then as the crystal dissolves,
you see more and more dispatches of color,
meaning to say the crystal is breaking into small pieces.
There's more green boundaries.
And this is because you get more disorder in the system.
We can be more quantitative with that
by plotting this code called a probability time
timeograph.
So this timeograph, the vertical axis
is the magnitude of size 6.
So remember, 1 indicates that the crystal is highly ordered.
0 means that the crystal is completely disordered.
The x-axis is a time axis.
The crystal goes from 0 hours to 36 plus hours.
And each of this vertical slice gives you
the probability distribution of this magnitude of size 6.
So initially, when the crystals is highly ordered,
you see that the distribution is highly
picked near 1, meaning to say the crystal is highly ordered.
But then as time goes by, you see this order
develops towards the end, whereby you get a very long flat 2.
So usually, again, if we compare this to an equilibrium
system, what you get is that you get this kind of disorder
to develop if you crank up some physical parameter.
For example, if you increase the temperature as the ice is
dissolving, you get more and more disorder
in your crystalline structure.
But what is remarkable in our system
is that we are not changing any physical norm.
We are not changing temperature, norm viscosity.
What we are doing is that we are just letting the system run.
I'll explain this plot in a moment.
And so what really is happening here
is that, of course, we have a living system.
So over the course of 30 hours, these embryos
are not just sitting there at the individual level.
They are also developing and changing
both their morphology as well as their flow field.
And this actually introduces additional noise, effectively
introduce additional noise into the system,
which is driving this order-disorder transition.
So essentially, what we have is that we
have symmetry breaking at a particle level
that leads to this order-disorder transition
at the crystalline level.
And we can quantify this a bit further through two metrics.
One is that we can quantify the shape inisotropy.
These are three snapshots of the crystal, again,
when looking from the top.
And what you will see is that initially, at about 10 hours
time point, the embryos look roughly circular,
if you view from the top.
But then they become increasingly elliptical
because the embryos developing and they're
breaking more and more symmetry at a single embryo level.
And in addition to that, because of this shape asymmetry
at the embryo level, the embryo at the boundary
becomes actually less and less stable.
So for example, if you look at this 10-hour time point,
you can see that this embryos at the boundary
actually are really standing almost vertically.
But then towards the end, near the 33 hours,
a lot of the embryos are actually toppling sideways.
So you are able to see the side view of these embryos.
And then they started swimming away,
and that's what's leading the crystal to dissolve.
So basically, what we have here is that essentially,
this dissolution process is really
driven by the development of this embryo
and not by any physical parameter.
So that's basically what we have shown in our paper.
But then of course, as you can see, it's a very rich system.
And actually, there are many things
that we can do with it, including many open question.
One of which is that I show you that there's
this vibrational wave that propagates through the crystal.
But then the question is, why is it that we see it sometimes?
But then why do we not see it at other times?
And so one thing that we did notice
was that this wave dynamics seems to have something
to do with the topological defects in our crystal.
So if you look at this video on the right here,
the defects in the 6-4 crystals basically,
so usually in a 2D isotropic crystal,
each atom will have a 6-neighbor arranged hexagonally.
But when you get defects, it means that instead of 6
neighbors, you get either 5 or 7 neighbors.
I mean, you can get 8 or 9, but then those are very atypical.
What we found was that if we count the number of such defects,
we see that and then we plot it as a function of time.
So that is a blue curve.
And then we can quantify the degree of vibration
that we see as the magnitude of this cycling.
And that is the yellow plot that I'm showing right here.
And what you see is that there's this interesting correlation
between this optic, a small optic in the cycling magnitude
with this optic in the number of defects,
as well as when we get this very pronounced cycling
behavior that corresponds slightly afterwards,
after when we have this establishment of defects
in the crystal, suggesting that this defect somehow
is providing the kicking that is needed to allow the wave
to propagate.
And that's something that we are actively investigating.
Another question that we get a lot when we present this work
is whether does this self-assembly behavior
have any biological relevance?
So I mean, the short answer to that is that we don't know.
Because if we want to investigate any biological function,
then it would mean that we have to go out to the open ocean
during when the embryos are developing
and try to look for this millimeter-sized crystal
in an open ocean, which is not very visible.
But we took another route and asked
if the salvage embryo does this, does
other species of marine invertebrate did it as well.
So we check.
So this is the species of salvage
we work with, Pateria minata.
This is a west coast species.
Asteria for Bessie is an east coast species.
This is, I think, the purple sea urchin, of course,
is a very fluid.
It's an Echinoderm species, which
is a close relative of the starfish.
And then we also look at this platinumis, which
is a sea annulet.
So it's actually in the worm family,
but then it's also marine life.
So it's an outgroup in our comparisons.
And in all the species that we have checked,
they all have this ability at some point
during their early development, whereby
they can go to the air-water interface
and spontaneously form this crystalline behavior.
So then it begs the question of, if true, this different.
So I guess what we can say based on this data
is that it appears that many marine invertebrate species
can do it, and whether this is purely
or epiphenomenal from their hydrodynamics,
or whether they really do serve some function as something
to think about.
But from a physics perspective, it
does opens up another door of opportunity,
because now we have this different type of atoms
that we can play with and build different kind of living
chirocrystals and see how the different shape
and hydrodynamic properties can lead
to different kind of material properties.
And one thing that I'm interested in doing in my new lab at UCSD
is that we are going to use a platinum race
to build a chirocrystal.
And the exciting part about the platinum race
is that they are actually phototactic.
So this is a sort of a schematic of this platinum race
embryo through the first 24 to 30 hours.
Unlike starfish, they have, instead of a cupboard of cilia,
they actually have a ciliary band near their equator.
And around beginning at about 24 hours,
they start developing these eye spots at the tip,
well, at the anterior side of their embryo.
And this light spot actually allows phototactic behavior.
So the hope is that we can somehow
use light to actually manipulate rotation
rate of the swimming behavior of this individual embryos
and maybe create patterns on this crystal.
And first thing that we check is whether they do form,
whether they form this crystalline structure.
And what we found is that they do,
although as this video, you can clearly see in this video,
the crystal is not as stable as what we see
in starfish species, but we suspect that we can probably
tune this by changing maybe the viscosity
or the buoyancy of the embryo.
And when we measure the flow field around each of this embryo,
you can see that the first order,
well, this is very preliminary data,
but then to first order, you can see that they do show
this dipole-like flow field that is very similar to starfish.
Could I ask a quick question?
Yes.
This is really cool.
Thank you.
Do you see a difference between the way they move
between like the 13 hour and 24 hour like that?
Formations like when the eye spot appears or before?
Oh, so this is really very early work.
The window we're still trying to pin down,
where is the window where they form a crystal most robustly?
But one thing that we can say is that
it's not as robust as the starfish.
So the starfish, you know, you can,
I showed you this 30 hour crystal, you know,
but at any point, if you disrupt the crystal,
they will reform again very easily.
But then in the case of the platinum race,
it seems that they are more sensitive.
There's only one window, a very,
a tiny window where you can form this crystal.
In this particular video is about 24 hours.
So it is at about the time point
in which the eye spot has formed.
But I suspect the ability to form crystal has more to do
with the hydrodynamics rather than the eye spot.
But it is also true that, you know,
if they are phototactic, then it means
that we have to be a lot more careful
about the light that we have in the lab
because that would affect their behavior
in terms would affect their crystal.
So it's something that we are working on.
Thank you.
Yeah.
So that's, I think, one very interesting,
exciting direction that we can take by, you know,
going to this toolbox that evolution has given us
and look at different kind of marine species.
But then, of course, we also,
we are also interested in a lot of the physics question.
And one of which is the most, you know,
a stable of statistical mechanics,
which is that if you have a material,
they typically go through phase transitions.
In equilibrium type system, if you tune the temperature,
you can get a material to go from solid to liquid to gas.
In our embryo system, the starfish embryo system,
we think that what the process,
the dissolution process that we're seeing
is actually more a sublimation process
than a fluidization process.
And the reason why I say this is because it is true
that the crystal is getting more disorganized in the bulk.
But then the reason why the crystal is dissolving
is because the embryos are leaving from the boundary.
So it's almost like it's evaporating from the boundary
before our material completely fluidized.
So one thing that we're hoping to do
is that we are actually, we are able to keep the embryo
still at the air water interface,
but then completely fluidized,
meaning to say they're still maintain themselves
at the air water interface,
but able to exchange neighbor completely and freely flow around.
And what happens is that then you can ask what happens,
what happens when this phase transition happens.
And in 2D crystal melting theory,
there's this idea that, no, not idea,
there's this, people have shown that you are able
to get this hexatic phase.
And what I mean by that is that you get into this phase
where you break translational order,
but then you still have a long range of orientational order.
And we wanted to ask whether that still happens in a system
where you have individual atom
that is rotating in a chiral fashion.
And of course, as with all physicists,
what we are interested is the phase diagram,
except that now we have a non-equilibrium phase diagram
where our axis is something like developmental time
or buoyancy on viscosity and ask where,
whether we can get solid liquid or gas
in our chiral crystal and what happens at the bottom.
The other interesting thing that we can do
is to look at the cluster dynamics.
So, so far, if you notice,
the experiments that I've shown you
show you a single crystal in the center of the camera.
And that is because we are using a small well
where you get this steep surface curvature
which creates a potential and push all the embryo
to the center of the well,
and you get only a single crystal at the end.
But if you use a bigger well,
so it basically means that instead of doing an experiments
in a 24 well plate, you do it in a six well plate,
you get a much flatter surface curvature
and what you get is something in this video right here.
So you still, you get nucleation of multiple clusters,
but then because you no longer have this steep potential,
these clusters can remain by themselves.
They don't all nucleate into a single crystal,
but then you see that there's a lot more cluster dynamics
that are available.
So let me let the video loop once more.
You see that now you have this multiple cluster,
some of that rotate, some of them translate.
Some of them has this very interesting,
very long type of structure
rather than clustering into a more isotropic structure.
They merge, they separate,
and then towards the end of the video,
you will see this very pronounced jiggling behavior again.
So right now, and that jiggling behavior
is exactly the wave propagation that I was referring to.
So I think by simply changing the geometry
of our experimental system,
we can ask many more interesting questions like,
why is it that some cluster rotate,
some translate and some both rotate and translate?
What happens during this merger and separation events?
And one thing that you might have noticed
is that there's this very dynamic reorganization process.
And indeed, if you take a pipette tip
and try to disturb the crystal,
they quickly fold back onto themselves
and have this sort of self-healing properties.
And this is one way that you can, yeah, go ahead.
Yeah, just a quick question.
So if these things are living in the ocean,
then there's gonna be waves.
So have you tried putting it basically a wave pool?
Ah, okay, so that's a good point.
So what we found was that these are not very stable,
meaning to say, if you just jiggle the well,
this crystals break apart quite easily.
Okay.
Yeah.
Right, as I was saying,
this idea of self-healing properties,
it's interesting because if you just think about it,
if you have a bunch of particles
that are just attracting and repelling from one another,
then if you break it,
then the only way it can come back
is to start attracting one another.
But then right now, what we have is that a set of particles
that can attract one another
and on top of that, they can roll on one another.
And that gives us an additional ability
whereby if you form along crystals,
it is able to fold back onto itself.
So there's an additional degree of freedom
that allows these crystals to add one more dimension
to their dynamics.
And this is sort of where this idea of cluster dynamic
and reorganization is going.
And maybe one last thing that I want to mention is that,
of course, so far, all that I've shown you
is at the macroscopic crystalline level.
There are also interesting questions to ask
at what happens at a single embryo level.
So I've shown you earlier that on the surface of this embryo,
you have this ciliary structure and in this video,
I mean, people have said many decades
trying to study more of cilia and biophysics of cilia.
But I think perhaps maybe not as much is known
about how this cilia arranged themselves
in a collective context.
And one question is that,
I told you that the secret ingredient in our system
is that each of this embryo is rotating in a chiral fashion.
So how is it that the beating of this individual cilia
coordinate with one another
to make sure that all the embryos rotate
in the same handedness is an open question?
And of course, if you imagine that a cilia
is just beating in a single plane
and we want to generate a rotating machine
from a cilia that beats in a single plane,
then one way that you would do it
is that you can arrange it at a certain angle
with respect to the axis of rotation
and that would give you a rotation.
But that still doesn't answer a question of why is it
that how do they know that they need to slant
leftwards or rightwards to give you this chiral?
So I mean, this goes back to this big question
in development of biology of,
a left-right symmetry breaking in different type of organism.
And the other more physics inspired question
is that if you have this cilia being arranged
on a closed surface atmosphere,
it's known that you must have topological defects.
So does the placement of topological defects
actually give effect how chirality is the rise?
So, and in fact, this is exactly what we have shown
in a completely different study.
So now I don't have to switch gear a little bit.
And what I'm showing you is not an embryo,
it's an organoid.
So this is a pancreas organoid, a single epithelial layer.
I just want to give you a very,
let me just give you a punchline of the study.
What we found in this study is that if you get this,
form this a single epithelial like pancreas organoid,
they do show a spontaneous rotation.
But then these are cells that cross on extracellular matrix.
So there's no cilia involved.
This really just cell motility on an extracellular matrix.
And we found that they do a spontaneous rotation.
On top of that, if you looked at the cell shape
and measure the cell elongation axis,
this cell elongation actually appears to make a preferred angle
with expect to the axis of rotation.
They show either a 45 degrees slant
or a 135 degrees slant.
And if we screen your eye and look at this,
this cell orientation configuration
is essentially mirror image of one another.
Meaning to say spontaneously rotating organoids
actually show a chiral symmetry breaking.
And to cut a long story short,
what we are able to show is that using theory
with experimental evidence,
we found that it's really the topological defects
of the cell polarity that breaks this chiral symmetry.
Again, on a sphere,
you always get topological defects in the orientation.
And depending on whether you get an aster
or a star-like defects or a spiral-like defects
at the north and the south pole,
you get either one of the chiral symmetry.
So if you're interested, I'm happy to chat more offline.
And this work is actually on BioArchive now.
But coming back to this question of chirality
in our Starfish embryo,
I think there's a lot of interesting question
that you can ask in terms of cilia patterning,
how it couples to development
and how that leads to chiral rotation.
And just a side note is that one thing that I've been asking
around to see if people have tried to keep track
of whether embryos radiate clockwise and anticlockwise.
And it seems that most of them,
I mean, in fact, I haven't found an example
in which they rotate in a different direction.
So that suggests some evolutionary constraint or reason
that gives all this marine invertebrate embryos
the same handedness of rotation,
which I suspect has to do with the cilia,
which we know is definitely chiral.
So with that, the last bit of self-advertisement.
So I've just started my lab UCSD physics department.
And the lab will focus on two things.
One is this continuing on this road
of chiral active matter that I talk about today.
And the other part of the lab will be interested
in organoid morphogenesis,
where we use organoid to study collective cell behavior,
morphogenesis and tissue mechanics.
So if you guys have,
and of course the lab is actively recruiting.
So if you know of your friends
who might be interested in some of this work,
I would be very appreciate it very much
if you could spread the word.
And with that, I would like to thank all my collaborators
for this work, especially Alexander Mikker,
who now has a lab who is starting his own group
at University of Oxford.
And he's responsible for all the theory in the talk.
And yeah, that's all.
I thank you for your attention
and I'm happy to take any more questions.
Excellent, thanks so much.
That was really interesting.
I also have questions.
I have a couple of things, but anybody else?
Yeah, I had a question.
Cool talk.
So on the last part of what you were basically looking at
the overall corallia patterns on a sphere
and breaking off a symmetry on the sphere.
Could you hypothesize what would constitute,
like how would you have to break the symmetry
and any kind of mechanism?
So you would get something like a flow pattern,
like imagine like the Earth's midnight fields right
where like flow lines go from the North Pole
to the South Pole all around the sphere.
Could you get something like that based on your model?
Yeah, so one thing is that,
so there's sort of two parts to your question.
One is that whether the cells starts to flow.
And in our case, we are actually more of in a solid regime
meaning to say the cells do not exchange neighbor.
So if you talk about self-flow,
then the cells has to exchange neighbor.
No, sorry, I'd like to pull out,
I'd like to pull out of you off this.
Celia, I'm thinking about like,
Celia inducing movement of like flow of liquid around it.
So the flow, I mean like the flow induced by the Celia around.
Okay, so in this context of the organoid,
there's no Celia.
The Celia, okay, I should explain this a bit more.
What we are seeing here is an organoid
that grows in an extracellular matrix, the matri gel.
So the matri gel is the tissue
has a apical basal polarity, of course.
The basal side faces outwards
and crawls onto the extracellular matrix.
The apical side faces inwards
and inside is just a fluid field lumen.
And these cells do have Celia,
but the Celia is facing inwards
and the Celia is not mortal.
So the motility that we see here
is purely from the basal side.
So focal adhesion like cell crawling
on the extracellular matrix.
Okay.
And just in terms of the cell polarity itself,
same questions for the polarity,
like having the polarity arranged
kind of like these longitudinal lines.
Yeah, so for the cell polarity,
we suspect that there's probably no
this hydrodynamic-like interaction,
although you could hypothesize that maybe there is the,
of course they are crawling on an elastic material
and this elasticity could transmit
the long range information for cell polarity alignment.
But at least in our model,
we kept things simple and say
that this polarity only align with the neighbors.
And of course, I suspect if you add
this long range component to it,
you, I'll have to think about
whether there's any qualitatively
different kind of a mechanism
that would allow chirosymmetry.
Cool, thank you.
Can I ask a quick question?
So it seems like the sort of forming of the crystal
and the breakdown of the crystal are dependent on,
the merge of properties of the spendenomics
of the starfish embryos.
And so I'm wondering if you had a mixture
with hetero-chronic starfish,
so I have some of the older ones
when they're starting to break down
mixed with the younger ones,
what will happen there?
Or what if I have,
most of the embryos are kind of normal,
but then one or two of them are forming abnormally,
they're sort of malformed,
so they're gonna rotate incorrectly.
Would you expect those to kind of break the crystal
or get extruded or?
Right, so if you,
so for your first question,
what happens when you mix this old embryos
with young embryos?
Some of my previous lab mates,
they are trying exactly these experiments.
The answer is that you get sort of a mix of behavior,
in the sense that, you know,
the old embryos is less stable,
the young embryos are more stable,
so they affect their own stability.
It looks like they like to face separate,
meaning to say the old ones like to go with the old ones,
and the young ones like to stick to the young ones.
But there is no,
I mean, so far it's not clear yet.
It becomes a bit more uncontrolled
and it's not clear how they affect the properties,
except to say that they are roughly an average
of what you would expect from a purely old
and purely young crystal.
But your questions of what happens when you have
a few embryos that rotate in a different direction,
that's definitely, that definitely happens,
and what we see, if you have enough of them,
these systems become no longer chiral
and you lose this elasticity behavior.
So basically, yeah.
Cool, thank you.
I have the similar question as Patrick.
I don't know if you're familiar with linear
and particle linear.
It's a simulated system that each particle
have attraction power and attraction power
when they are having certain distance.
So yeah, so I saw some experiments show that
if you put different kind of particle linear
or called linear particle together,
they will form a cell, I mean, an emergent scale cell.
So I don't know if you observe similar thing,
like you saw these crystals having a behavior
like a single cell.
So I'm not familiar with the simulation platform,
but what kind of cell do they form?
As in what kind of properties do they have?
I mean, it's like the collection of these cells,
collection of these particles behave like a single cell.
They move, they translate in this space.
Right, so the translation part is sort of what I show you
in this video towards the end
that we do sometimes see that when you get these clusters,
sometimes they rotate, sometimes they translate
and sometimes they rotate and translate.
And that's something that we are still looking into.
And I suspect it has, it's probably quite geometry dependent
that depending on the history of how the cluster
is being assembled, then you might get different of geometry
and that actually dictates a lot what happens next
to that cluster, but we haven't looked too much into it yet.
Okay, thank you.
Two quick things.
One is, have you ever looked at any of the,
let's say robustness properties?
Like if you've got the phenomena that you showed today,
you try to interfere with it right manually,
you go in and you sort of do anything.
To what extent is it able to come back
from those kind of perturbations back into the shape
that it had, anything like that?
Yeah, so it depends on what kind of perturbation that you do.
So what we have done was that if you completely disassemble it,
so you know, you start a well completely
so that these embryos fall apart,
then actually very quickly they will spontaneously reform
again, meaning to say,
because the embryos will again soon to the surface,
it's almost like you're resetting the system
and then they start making new crystals.
If it is a more gentle kind of perturbation,
like for example, if I take a pipette tip
and sort of draw a line and break the crystal apart,
then actually they do have quite,
they're able to heal quite well,
meaning to say very quickly they come back together
and then sort of reorganize a little bit
but then reform the crystal.
So I would say they are, in that sense,
they are quite robust.
And on top of that, I think they are more robust
and say crystals, you know, if you have passive crystals
and you break them apart and you try to stitch them together,
typically you will have dislocation lines near the boundary.
But then because these embryos are rotating,
I think it gives them an additional degrees of freedom
to fall back into their low energy barrier.
So I think they heal better in that sense.
Cool, okay.
And another thing, if you sort of take a step back
and think about in the system,
you have some initial properties
that each of the elements have.
And then there's this collective behavior
that you've shown us today.
What do you think is the evolvability of this system?
If you were gonna either try to design
for specific system level outcomes
or you try to evolve,
so basically some kind of evolutionary search
for some specific large-scale properties,
how rough do you think that space is?
Do you think that would be an easy transition to make, right?
So design the low-level properties
to get a particular system level outcome?
Or do you think it's a super rugged space
that's gonna be hard to engineer through?
Right, so I would have to think about
how rugged this landscape would look like.
But then in terms of the parameters that you can tune
to get different system level outcome,
I would say there's a lot of parameters that you can tune.
So for example, the morphology, the hydrodynamics are,
essentially it's almost like,
if you can change the morphology,
then you change the interaction strengths with it.
And if you can imagine designing more complex shapes,
then you can also sort of program
in what kind of cluster geometry that you would like,
for example.
And this is sort of what we wanted,
or the hope is that what we wanted to do with this
platinum race because then we have different,
we were able to poke each embryo at a time
to see how that affect things.
And the other thing is that,
then we can mix different species together,
which has different morphology and hydrodynamic flow
of you to see how different things would do.
But at this point, it's hard for me to predict
how rugged this is going to be.
Yeah.
Got you, okay.
Okay, well, thank you so much.
Yeah, that was really cool.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah, thanks.
See you, everybody.
Thanks, have a good day.
