Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Stephen Seber.
I'm Jess Dickey.
And we have a patron tier at the $10 level.
People are allowed to choose a topic for us to talk about, which is a thing that we're
going to do now because we have, what's his name?
Emilio Alvarez.
Emilio Alvarez is actually donating at the $24 level, which, Jesus, thanks man, that
is awesome.
That's really nice of you.
And like I mentioned today, when I was PMing you on Discord, you also get to co-host at
those levels.
Yes.
You can hang out.
You totally can.
And I went through recently and PMed the backlog of patrons, and one thing I tried to emphasize
with everybody is that like our rewards for the first couple tiers aren't all that interesting.
So if there's any small thing that you want, we're more than willing to try and find something
that we can do for you in exchange for generosity.
So.
But anyway.
You know, we could do a thing like the Adventure Zone, where if like somebody posts their name
on Twitter, then they'll like mention, they'll use their Twitter name as a character in the
show.
Maybe we could just do it like, if we're making an analogy, it'll be like an analogy about
Christie Snow, who gave us $5.
So say Christie Snow had, I don't know.
They do that on the Doofcast's Weaver Dice as well.
Oh, really?
Did they start doing that?
Yeah.
If you mention them on Twitter, then they'll put your name in the next Weaver Dice episode.
I find that really delightful, actually.
Like, I'm glad that there's people that like, first of all, will pay for something like
that, and I could totally see why they would, because that would be hilarious to have your
name.
I won't tweet about it.
Show them anything that you like.
But how about this, Matt?
I will just shout out that Weaver Dice is something that you guys occasionally do on
the We've Got War, We've Got War podcast.
And so I'm still broadcasting this to people.
I would love for a villain or a hero named The Stevenator to show up in the show.
I think that'd be hilarious.
What would its power be?
You guys decide that.
You guys decide how quickly you want them to die.
I think that'll be really funny, but The Stevenator would be a hilarious cape name.
Just saying.
Okay.
Cape or what is the villain's?
Capes still.
Oh, they're also capes.
Okay.
Cool.
Yeah.
So Emilio Alvarez wanted us to talk about the Anthropic Principle, which is what we
are going to talk about due to this awesome request.
And I guess only for as long as we can.
We've got some other stuff we want to hit, but because I asked for some clarification
on it, and there's some that we can try and hit, but basically the Anthropic Principle
is...
I have perfect intro to this.
Go for it.
Okay.
I was going to say the Anthropic Principle, like most things in reality, all started when
God created the world and everything within it.
Because the first place I encountered the Anthropic Principle and probably a lot of other people,
or at least a version of it, was the question, you know, why are humans perfectly suited
to live on this planet if God didn't create us to live on this planet?
And look, he made the world just right for us.
The temperature is just where it should be, the humidity is just where it should be to
support human life.
Obviously, this was created for humans.
Can I retort?
Are you finishing your...
Please retort.
So a couple of things.
So I guess we'll daisy change the definition of Anthropic Principle from that, but I'll
just retort very quickly that if God wanted to, he could have made us able to survive on
the surface of the sun in a vacuum if he felt like it.
Oh, hush.
Now you're just being too logical about things.
Another thing is that I'd never found that argument to be very compelling because people
are like, look at this world.
It's great.
It's perfect for us.
I was like, wait, have you seen the world?
It's terrible.
It's got all kinds of diseases and sharp objects.
It's a shit-ass argument just on its face.
You drop a snake at it mostly anywhere on the planet and we'll die within, you know,
a few days to a few hours.
But I mean, just saying that if you were an all-powerful God, you could have made us
be able to survive in a vacuum in space.
I never found that compelling.
So that's like the strong anthropic principle.
The weak anthropic principle is more, there's actually more fine-tune definitions than the
ones that I'm going to hit on, so forget that I mentioned strong and weak, but you can just
point out that the fact that the universe exists with constants that could hypothetically
be different.
Well, that's the next step.
Okay, cool.
I was just going to say the most natural objection, the easiest objection, I don't know.
Is that saying, look, it's not that the world was suited for us, it's that we are suited
for this world.
The world was here first and we evolved into it to evolve, to live on it.
And if the world had been radically different, we would have evolved to be radically different.
Oh, but Inyash, if the strong nuclear force was a little less strong, stars wouldn't last
long enough for planets to sustain life.
That's the next level.
Of sophistication, once people know a little bit more about physics, they're like, you
know, well, yeah, the if the electromagnetic force was a little different, there would
be no atoms at all, you know, all these things, if the gravitational constant was different,
then we would either be expanding too fast for molecules to form or all crushed down
into a supermassive tiny thing at the center of everything.
And the anthropic principle reply to that is, if that was the case, there wouldn't be
anyone around to ask what is happening.
Why, you know, why are we here to see this?
So the only universes where an intelligence could exist to ask this question is a universe
where the conditions are right.
The the constants are set at levels somewhere approximating this so that something intelligent
can evolve to ask.
I don't even get why, like, there's so many things that never have made sense to me about
this argument.
Like, it's always like everything around us was made just right for us.
And I'm like, well, no, we were an evolved thing.
We made ourselves, we like developed the ability to exist in these circumstances.
But it wasn't like it was like set up exactly right because they knew that eventually humans
who needed like this temperature and this level of electromagneticity and this like
it, we dragged our way into existence.
The analogy I always heard was that was probably stupid.
We did a lot of hard work to survive in these conditions, millions and millions of years
of it. The analogy I always heard was that a puddle woke up and it says, holy crap, look
at this hole I'm in.
That is perfectly shaped to fit exactly me.
It must have been designed by someone not realizing that the puddle was fit into the
hole, not the other way around.
The sun was coming up and soon it was.
And the sun is called unfriendly AI.
Just keep the analogy going.
What does the grass represent?
But then the question is, why isn't the gravitational constant something other than
what it is? Because that one's actually a decent question.
Yeah, I think the anthropic principle is more cosmological than it is anything else.
Or like, yeah, it's more physics than it is biology, where biology at its root is
physics, but like it's not so much of, hey, look, we have eyes that are adapted to
see within a range of a range of the electromagnetic excuse me, the electromagnetic
spectrum that lets us see various things like, you know, be able to detect food and
stuff at a distance.
It's like, no, that's not an accident because that's the evolved thing.
Like the question behind that is like, how come light works at these wavelengths?
How come how come atoms bonded this strength or whatever?
I almost feel like that starts to get into the hole.
Why does something exist as opposed to nothing?
And like the question where it's like, that's not even like, I see why you can phrase
that as a question, like why, why grammatically that can make sense as a question.
But like, it doesn't it's not even really a thing to ask.
Like, why is there something rather than nothing?
But like, do those concepts even make sense?
Something and nothing?
Well, no, that maybe I got two thoughts on that.
Go for it.
One is that some some physical constants, like the speed of light, aren't constants
in the sense of like, couldn't be otherwise.
Like planks constant just happens to be like the smallest measurable distance
between what, two subatomic particles or something.
This speed of light is just is the measured observation of how fast light goes.
Light could go faster, slower.
And then that would be the speed of light.
So like that one is an observed measurement.
So like that constant, the fact that it happens to be the same everywhere.
Maybe that's a question that you could ask.
But what its speed is, is something that you observe by looking at reality
and then finding that it's like one that.
Like you're saying, like, so some of the answer to some of this
is because that's the way you're interpreting it.
Well, because yeah, because that's what you've measured.
Like there was somebody there was a funny, I forget what separate I saw this on.
But it was like, oh, yeah, you know, and then the sound so obvious,
something like might have been a troll.
But you tell me that the universe isn't beautifully designed.
Why does water freeze at zero degrees Celsius and boil at 100 degrees Celsius?
You're going to tell me that that's not like on purpose.
And it's just like that is on purpose.
That's why we built Celsius around those two those two things, those two properties of water.
So like, oh, yeah, the melting point of water with regard to Celsius
isn't a isn't like a constant that you're like trying to explain.
It's like the banana man thing.
Yes, we're like, why is a banana so perfectly designed to fit into the human hand?
It's like clearly had never seen a banana before to be cultivated by humans
or any animal or plant that we eat currently.
They're all like they've been warped over time by by genetic engineering.
Let's just call it what it is.
I get so mad when people are like, CRISPR is like evil and scary.
But like horticulture is fine and natural because we're using viruses to do it.
But we can't see that or radiation, radiation, so delicious.
There is like a non religious approach to the anthropic principle,
which like in the things we were talking about was the anthropic argument,
which is slightly different from the anthropic principle.
That's right.
The anthropic argument is more of like a more theology trying to like kind of
shoehorn its way into a science like argument, right?
And how do we feel about the answer that if life, if conditions for life were impossible,
there wouldn't be life here asking these questions.
So that's more of like addressing the principle than it is like.
So the argument, I just as long as we're bifurcating those things,
I feel like the proper response to the anthropic argument for something
intelligent designing the universe or something is like, this is not that well
designed for people.
Almost all of the universe is super bad for us.
Right.
Hence the universe isn't designed for us.
The universe is designed in a way that we can exist.
And assuming that these constants could be different,
which is not a thing we know for sure, but we don't see any reason
why they couldn't be different.
There is a vastly huge space of possible universes.
And in almost all of them, life could not even possibly exist.
And so then to me, the anthropic perspective is to say,
yes, we don't exist in those universes.
Right. Right.
So like that is the anthropic principle.
Also, like life as we know it, we still don't know a lot
about the different forms life might be able to take.
Totally. But but us specifically, we happen to exist in the universe that can
sustain humans where it's happened to be as kind of tongue in cheek,
because like we wouldn't be we wouldn't be wondering this if we weren't
in one of those universes. Right.
And this. So basically, this presumes that this is not the only universe.
Right.
Like the biggest thing that comes out of this is Max Tecmark's different
levels of existence where, you know, what in his opinion,
he's a mathematician, it boils down to basically any universe that can be
described by math does exist.
And so we just happen to be in one of them where the conditions are right
for us to exist in, but all potential universes do exist.
Yeah, I have no trouble granting that.
I mean, I don't see why that's necessarily the case,
but it makes a lot more sense than ours is the only one that exists.
So it just happens to have these properties.
Like we, since we don't know about the other universes,
because they're inaccessible to us, either in principle or just in fact,
right now, we're working from a sample size of one,
but we have no reason to believe that we're the only one.
Like I remember when I was a kid, I used to wonder why and like without
even a good scope of or scale of like where the earth was in the in the
galaxy or something, I used to wonder like I had like this in my head.
It was like this big thought when I was like nine and I'm like,
why is the earth like over here when it could be way over there?
Right.
Yeah.
And it's like, well, I do ask the same question from over there.
Yeah, yeah.
Like it, it, and if that sounds stupid, that's because I was thinking
it 25 years ago, doesn't sound stupid.
So something that kids think.
Well, it sounds like a pretty smart thing for a kid to be thinking about
honestly, but most kids don't think about stuff that deep.
Well, I mean, I don't know how deep I got with it.
I'm not giving myself too much credit, but the, I think it's the same sort
of just like realization that like, okay, yeah, we're having this conversation
from here, which means that this is the kind of place that we either can be
or where we in fact are.
So, well, again, it sounds funny because it sounds like it's almost dismissive,
but it is just that's why I see it less of like a principle of understanding
things, I guess that kind of is it's just more like a lens to which to answer
these confusing questions.
And it's like, well, why don't, what if we lived in the universe where, you
know, if the, if you went up 10 feet from the surface of the earth, you'd
burn to a crisp and like, well, because the earth varies more than 10 feet in
height across the globe and the winds that we wouldn't survive there, right?
Like, why does life seem fine tuned?
Because it happens to be where we are tuned by evolution for, yeah.
Yeah, I, for me, the fact that this is such a tiny space.
That we happened of possibilities that we happen to hit in our universe for me
personally is strong evidence that either there were no real other options for
these constants, they had to be this for some underlying mathematical reason
that we do not know, or that there is in fact a near infantude of universes.
And we, you know, obviously are in one where this is possible.
Um, because if it was possible for there to be any of these constants and
there's only one universe and it happens to be this one, I find that extremely
unlikely.
That said, if that was the case, and this was a one in a 10 trillion shot, we
still wouldn't like the factory mains that we're still here having that.
So if we won the one in one trillion lottery, like we just did.
Yes, but that is, that is unlikely.
That is very unlikely.
I can't say that it's likely or not.
We only have one piece of evidence.
Yes.
Like, you can't, you can't use statistics on it if you don't have any priors.
That's a good point.
We also don't really know like where universes come from or the
circumstances that can set them up.
So like maybe the, maybe the life cycle of a universe is that it just runs
through one set of constants, then everything collapses or expands into
not into pointless, you know, heat death.
Yeah.
And then for some magic reason, they start over with a tweaked
fundamental constants or maybe they don't.
But then that means over an infinite time period, eventually you get
through every type of universe.
Exactly.
So we're currently the one that support that is capable of supporting
this kind of conversation.
That's why that's why I say my, my, my guess now is that we either have a
almost no possibility of there being constants other than this or we have
infinite universes because it just being this by coincidence is so
extremely unlikely that as a good Bayesian, I should adjust my probabilities
of that happening by coincidence to very small.
Well, and there are like, there are some things that you know, not impossible
that we do understand that you can tweak that if you tweaked it, then it
would tweak other things like, um, so one place where I read about this
sort of discussion was more in the like fighting the fine tuning argument,
which is the other name for the anthropic argument.
The universe is fine tuned for life.
Their form was on purpose.
Um, what's his name?
Victor Stenger used to teach, uh, physics and Boulder.
Actually he died a few years ago, but he wrote some atheism books in atheisms.
Hey, they, and I'm 95% sure he's dead.
Um, in any case, one of his books was God, the failed hypothesis.
Very, uh, not subtle title.
Um, but it nicely popular book.
Yeah.
And it nicely explains, uh, what his thesis is, is that this is a scientific
hypothesis that we're going to look at and I don't think it checks out.
Um, so he talks about the anthropic principle in there a little bit.
And, uh, Victor Stenger was also on the team responsible for measuring
the mass of neutrinos, uh, successfully the first time.
And so like one of the things was like, well, if there was one 10th or excuse me,
one order of magnitude less than a number of neutrinos than there was in the
universe, um, then everything would expand much more faster or much, much, much,
much faster than it currently is.
And he's like, yes.
Time to coalesce and to matter.
Right.
But he's like, yes.
But if there was, I think it's like what, 10 to the 36th you treat neutrinos or
something in the universe.
If there was 10 to the 35th, but also be that much less, uh, um, or what was
it dark matter or whatever the fuck it was like, basically gravity, uh, what's
like, whatever, for some reason, I'm not a physicist.
It was his understanding that if you tweak the number of neutrinos, you also
tweaked the amount of constant gravity in the universe.
And thus you could tweak it a bit and those numbers would just kind of
balance out on the other side of the scale.
So like that particular one does relate to other things.
Um, so like some of these constants, you can tweak some of them.
You can't, uh, yeah, but I'm with you.
Like I, I, I'm kind of fine with like the multiverse interpretation of it.
I'm fine with the like, I don't know.
That's not a very good question.
Like why are things like it's, it almost isn't really coherent as a question
as far as I'm concerned.
And I feel like a bit frustrated having to try to come up with a coherent answer
to what seems to me to be kind of an incoherent question.
That's like my main reaction to the anthropic principle or argument.
You don't find it unusual that, that, uh, the constants are at the level
they are and not different.
I would find it more unusual if they are, but I would find it more unusual
if we happens to discover that the constants of like physical stuff
in the universe were incompatible with life as we know.
Right.
Then I would be surprised.
The fact that we happen to find them to be consistent with where we're at
is not surprising.
It just strikes me as like a frog sitting there going, why am I a frog?
I could have been, I could have been a horse or a blade of crap, but I'm a frog.
Why am I a frog?
I need to know the answer to why I'm a frog and not something else.
And I'm just like, no, you don't actually, you could worry about other things
because that doesn't seem like it's, first of all, a valid like route of inquiry.
Like, well, I'm not sure what it's going to teach you at the end.
I think, um, I don't know.
I'm not sure if my, like the way I'm trying to protest this is making any sense.
No, it, it, because it, it puts it more in that, that anthropocentric
anthrop, that's hard to say.
Also egocentric perspective where it's like, you're answering it for like, well,
I'm, I'm, I'm right here having these thoughts.
Like, why aren't I somewhere else, something else, some time else having
these thoughts, like, because I'm not.
Do you feel the same way about the, um, God, what is it?
The, why aren't they here yet?
Question.
The Fermi paradox.
Yes.
Do you feel the same way about the Fermi paradox?
What the, it's weird that we haven't found life yet.
It's weird that, um, we can't exist at all and that we haven't already
been colonized before we began to evolve.
Um, no, I don't think so.
I mean, it's all, it's very hard to, I don't know.
Um, so it seems like at least a thousand years or so.
If we don't wipe ourselves out, we're probably going to be colonizing
the galaxy or starting to, right?
Maybe we don't know.
Again, this is another thing where we have no priors except for us.
Uh, so there's no way of saying, like, isn't it weird that things are like this
and, and not like this other thing that they might have been?
Cause like, is it weird?
I don't know.
I don't know how rare this is for things to be like this.
We, maybe it's not.
I think the Fermi paradox is, is confusing because like the ingredients
for life are abundant throughout the cosmos.
And, uh, I mean, like what?
Carbon is one of the most common elements in the universe.
Oxygen, another very common one.
Hydrogen is fucking everywhere.
The most common element in the universe.
From what we've seen from exoplanets, there's actually plenty of exoplanets
out there that could harbor life that are in the same position we are.
That are in the Goldilocks zone.
We are on their sons.
So like, I think the Fermi paradox would be more troubling to me if we were in
year 28 billion of the universe, rather than 14 billion.
Yeah, we haven't been like sentient for very long.
No, we haven't been, but there's been a lot of planets that have been around
for a long time.
Yeah, maybe they had whole sentient civilizations that have arisen and
fallen and there will go find ruins floating around someday.
Or maybe we won't.
I don't know.
Like, so I think there's a lot of pretty good, I forget what some of them are,
but there were some pretty good explanations for why if life does exist.
We haven't seen it yet.
One of them just being, we haven't been looking for very long.
We're very young compared to everything.
I mean, Robin Hansen specifically uses this, calls it the Great Filter,
that the fact that we haven't seen any alien life already colonizing us is
probably a good sign that almost all civilizations collapse at some point
before they start.
Yeah, or something happens.
We don't know.
Something happens where they don't go out and start colonizing the galaxy.
This strikes me as a baby, like laying in their cradle, being like,
am I the only thing in the universe?
Like, I've never seen another human being before because like you've been alive
for like a few minutes.
No, exactly.
So you, but there's like so much other shit going on around you that you can't
comprehend yet and you have no sense of the scale and what you should even measure.
There is lots of other stuff around them.
Yeah.
I mean, that's what I feel like.
I'm like, there's probably like, we're asking questions that don't feel very
productive to me where it's not so much of a like, here's the thing that I'm,
I wonder why it's, I don't know.
There's some things that I think that this is worth asking this question
because we have ways of actually trying to do experiments on it.
Whereas like this sounds like the, I'm a baby trying to ask adult questions
right now, like we need to know much smaller things first before we could
start asking those big things because we still don't know what the hell is going on.
Like to do, but we understand that we can colonize other planets.
Like it is within our personal grasp technologically within the next coming decades.
We don't know that.
I'd be willing to bet that we could.
Yeah.
I think that like right now we can visit other planets.
Can we settle them?
Maybe not yet, but I'd be, I'd be very surprised if the century wore out
where we were unable to settle Mars.
Yeah.
Maybe we wouldn't do it, but we would have the capability.
Yeah.
Like we're almost there right now.
We might destroy ourselves in the next 10 years.
You know what I'm saying?
Well, that's, that's the great filter problem.
Like does everyone destroy themselves before they start colonizing?
We don't have anything to like base this against.
We don't know how rare or common things are.
So it doesn't make any sense to start trying to say that things are weird.
I think the fact that it looks like it should be pretty darn common
and that it's absolutely not common at all to have, you know,
colonizing life forms in the galaxy.
We don't know if it is uncommon.
We don't know if we just haven't seen any of them yet
because we've been alive for two seconds.
Well, we know for sure we haven't seen them.
I mean, we don't like, we don't know if they're not there
and we just haven't found evidence of them yet.
Right.
We have found no evidence of people colonizing the galaxy.
And we would expect to have found it if they were.
I wouldn't have like, I'm just saying that again,
we haven't been around for very long where these might be things
that happen really frequently over very long scales.
Right. And if they happen really frequently, then like maybe there was
just one species that super colonized the galaxy right before we evolved.
And then like they all destroyed themselves.
And then we're at that period of that kind of thing arising again
and then colonizing the whole universe again.
And then in them dying again.
Right. That is the great filter problem.
Like if things didn't destroy themselves, we would expect to see them.
So and we're not seeing the radio waves.
We're not seeing their technology.
We're not seeing Dyson spheres.
Yeah, we're not seeing them.
There's some pretty good explanations for why we might not be seeing those things.
And again, I'm I don't remember what they are, but I heard some very plausible
like reasons that for why we haven't picked up anything.
But it might still be out there.
And in that like that.
So they could be, I think they what's I think the
and probably Hansen put it this way.
Meat is a wonderful, wonderful story about why we may not be seeing them.
We'll have to wait. What was it?
They're made out of meat.
It's a super short short story.
Do you want to spoil it?
Because I think I've interfered this actually, but I'm forgetting.
Yeah, they actually made a short YouTube video out of it during the writer strike
with some actors were out of work.
It was it's fucking great.
But yeah, the short story is two aliens talking to each other
about this new life form they found.
And they're like, yeah, the life form on this planet.
They're made out of meat.
And the other one's like, what are you talking about made out of meat?
And they just they go back and forth for like two, two and a half pages,
like trying to get it through this guy's head that these aliens are made out of meat.
And finally he's like, let's let's just put in the official records
that this planet is uninhabited and move on, because no one wants to meet meat.
Well, it's it's a great story, man.
But yeah, that would be like if we, you know, put a lot of effort into exploring
the universe, then we found a planet that was just bed bugs.
And we're like, maybe not.
Going to go ahead and write this one off as a, I don't know, whatever.
You know, if we had anything in the backlog of our science books,
like I wonder if this will destroy a planet.
Let's try it on that one.
It's better that future generations just not know that we found this.
This doesn't need to be keeping people up.
And I let's just pretend that that's that doesn't exist.
So like the fact that you exist is evidence of some things.
That things can exist.
Yes. Exactly.
That is that is it.
And the that might be surprising based on your priors.
Like if you think that these constants could be anything that might be surprising.
If you think that it's not terribly difficult for life to get started
and to evolve up to our level, then the fact that there isn't
other life around might be surprising.
And so you use the fact that you're around and that you're not seeing evidence
you think you would see to draw some sort of conclusion, right?
No, I still don't think that we we haven't enough knowledge
to even be able to start generating like questions about these sorts of things.
Because again, we don't know you keep saying it might be surprising.
And I'm like, we don't know if it's surprising because we don't have priors.
Like that's still my answer to this.
I'm not like worried about any of these things yet, because I feel like
we don't have enough basis with which to even start thinking about them.
I think if you aren't worried that we might be approaching
something that wipes out our civilization, don't worry about that.
But you just you weren't worried about it.
I'm not worried about
the the questions of like, why do things exist versus not?
I'm worried about whether we could wipe out our civilization
because we do have priors of civilizations wiping themselves or others out.
Well, I mean, that's one of the things the anthropic principle tells us
that we would expect to not see ourselves existing,
that we would have this planet would have been colonized already, but it hasn't.
And we do exist.
So that is worrisome because it tells us things about
what happens to life before it starts getting to the galaxy colonizing phase.
And since we're touching on like Fermi Paradox stuff,
part of it is that with the admittedly low priors we have,
but the reasonable deductions we can make about the abundance of
of organic matter or organic building material in the universe
and how easy it is to build self replicating molecules here on Earth.
And then the number of Earth like planets in the cosmos.
Why aren't they sending out radio signals?
Why aren't we seeing their spaceships?
Why aren't they, you know, if they were why do we exist at all?
They should have colonized the Earth
and we would have never gotten a chance to evolve.
Well, so that one you can enter on it
dropically because they in fact haven't been here yet.
Yeah. But the other one of like,
if they've had 10,000 more years to do stuff,
you'd think to be doing some pretty interesting things
that one could observe from light years away.
Since we're not seeing those things,
it seems to indicate that either they're for some reason.
Maybe one of the first things that species do is make cloaking shields
it could be that no one can see him.
That's also a not uncommon answer to that that species hide
because the universe is dangerous.
And if you start sending out lasers and radio signals saying,
Hey, we're here. Is there anybody home?
Somebody comes around and eats you,
which like wouldn't be good for us.
Because I think right now we're waving around the hay.
That is another reason to maybe be worried
about the fact that we haven't seen other aliens.
Is everyone else staying silent for some very good reason?
I mean, so there's the filter of life getting started in the first place.
There's the filter of life getting complicated,
which doesn't necessarily have to once you've got self replicating molecules.
Those could be all over the universe,
but you just see nothing more complicated than like sludge.
Right. It's entirely possible that the filter is behind us,
in which case we are set and we know why the galaxy is empty
because there was some great big filter, which we got lucky and got through.
I think it's fun to at least more informative for me to view it as multiple filters
where like one of them is life getting started,
one of them is life getting complicated, like in the eukaryotic sense of,
you know, complicated cells and then cell organelles, that sort of stuff.
And then organisms is another another whole step involved.
I could think of at least two or three more,
but like intelligence isn't a requisite for or isn't a intelligence or sentience?
Or I guess they're a little bit correlated.
Yeah, I think they're correlated at least here on earth.
And I imagine they're correlated elsewhere, but that's purely on speculation.
Like intelligence doesn't necessarily seem mandated by the fact
that there's pre that there's conditions for replicating molecules in that life,
right, or on that planet.
So like you could have a whole planet with nothing smarter than dogs running around, right?
It seems like kind of an accident in history that things as smart as humans
got around on our planet, a whole planet of dogs.
That'd be great, right?
I want to go there and pet all the good boys.
If the universe is big enough, there's probably a planet just full of puppies,
gold retrieval puppies and another one for the planet.
Oh, man.
So like intelligence evolving in the first place is another another filter, I think.
And then another filter, one that we're coming up against next is can you get,
you know, to the point where you can,
you know, what star fare as a species without blowing up the planet first?
Right. Maybe that never happens.
It would be the first five, you know,
happen every 50 years across the cosmos.
We just never see it, but the the last one, you know,
no species so far has made it to the technological stage
where they can travel the galaxy without blowing themselves up.
Maybe faster than light travel is actually impossible
and nobody actually just gets very far.
I got a question for Justin,
because trying to bring it back to the anthropic principle,
basically you're saying that the fact that there's intelligent life exists
shouldn't be surprising because intelligent life does exist.
Because the word surprising doesn't make any sense in this context,
because we don't know how common or uncommon that is.
Yeah. So this is this comes from a post
about the anthropic principle back on all the less wrong stuff.
Nuclear war, obviously a bad thing.
And we should try hard to prevent it.
And we as rationalists all celebrate Stanislav Petrov day
on September 26th for one of the guys who helped prevent the human race
from being wiped out by deciding not to launch nukes when he could have.
And should have, according to operational procedures at the time.
Thanks for not destroying the world.
Yay.
But.
The.
The story that we tell about that and about several other nuclear incidents
makes it seem that the human race came really freaking close
to wiping itself out on at least a number of occasions.
And it's there for somewhat unlikely that we are where we are.
We just managed to get lucky a few times.
The anthropic principle counter to that would be
if we had gotten unlucky and the human race had been wiped out,
we wouldn't be here having this conversation.
Yep.
What? Oh, sorry, finish it.
No, go ahead. Go ahead.
No, if you're going to ask me a question, then I'm going to wait and see
if this was going to be the question before I say something.
OK, well, since that means we can only exist in a world
that didn't dissolve into flames, as this post says, then
then it shouldn't be surprising that the Cold War didn't end because
or that the Cold War.
Didn't like turn into a lot.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
That since since we're here, it's entirely possible that there is
many universes where the Cold War did erupt and all of humanity is dead.
But we are here to observe this.
So we're in one of the few universes where that didn't happen, obviously.
We are also in the universe where I don't know, like maybe there's a parallel
universe where somebody discovered the cure to all diseases accidentally.
And they're like there's really fucking great stuff happening in this other
universe and we're in the shitty timeline.
We just don't know it. Yeah.
Well, we're not in the shittiest timeline because we're not dead.
Right. Like assuming that you take that as a requisite for shittiness.
There's a related thought that I tossed around my head for like 10 years
and then eventually was able to articulate enough to Google and define
that this actually has some stupid name like quantum immortality or something.
I might have mentioned this before.
Oh, I know this.
I found this actually very like comforting to think about when I was first
de-converting. Nice. Yeah, for me, it was just like I've come close
to dying a ton of times, probably more times than I'm aware of,
which is actually scary, right?
I didn't see every bullet that I missed or that I dodged, right?
And yet I'm in none of the timelines where I got killed.
So. Like optimistically, I might.
The consciousness that's in my head between my ears right now might make it
to some, you know, at least, so I guess how to extrapolate is confusing.
If every universe exists, the universe where your immortal exists,
and that means you're immortal, that's actually very reassuring.
Almost no chance of working.
Eventually you'll wake up in the universe where it does work.
Exactly. So that part is pretty cool.
But there's also this is another just anthropocentric bias thing,
anthropocentric framework in that I currently live in none of the timelines
where I was killed, which is a like almost useless
tautology, except the fact that it is also true.
Is this the thing you agree with since you seem to be this anthropic skeptic here?
I mean, you can't disagree with that.
I think it is logically true.
Yeah. Well, right.
But are there other universes?
I don't know. We've died.
I don't know if there are other universes.
OK, so in that case, is it extremely surprising that we that
like Stevens alive?
Is it extremely surprising that the human race is still around?
You keep using the word surprising.
No, because again, we don't we if we don't know,
you can't do statistics on something if you don't know like
or Bayesian statistics, if you don't have priors, I might say rather than
the priors on what the chances are that we made it through the Cold War, though,
right? And we have priors on what the chances are that Stephen is still alive.
We don't know what the odds of not
surviving the Cold War were because we only had one or something, right?
So like that those might be hard to get numbers on.
But like for me, what's more fun to get numbers on?
Well, then it would be somebody else sitting here having this conversation.
But like this is also one of my big problems with the movie Us,
which I really loved large parts of it.
If they had said like to spoil the whole ending, the it's just magic, Stephen.
Yes, but they didn't say that in the movie.
They tried to explicitly say it wasn't.
OK, and so it's a horror movie.
Everything is magic and horror movies.
If they had said this is purgatory, this is hell.
I'd be like, oh, of course, this is the real world.
So it's the horror.
It's the real, yes, horror magic, but they try not to say horror magic.
We try to say science experiment.
You never say horror magic in a horror movie.
You just have your horror movie.
All right. So you say like hand wavies, maybe plausible reason
why this is happening.
But don't don't worry about that, though.
It's not for that relevant.
My thing is that when two organisms mate, the any any chance
of any individual sperm fertilizing the egg is fairly slim.
You know, much of the sperm will never make it there.
Some of them some of them do and not of any one getting in there
is pretty low, right?
You're like, take a bet, you know, in advance at the moment
of ejaculation and say, I'm betting all my all my all my horses
on that one, you'll lose, right?
Yeah. So in the movie us, there are like genetic identical copies
going back generations of people.
And so not only are the people mating at the exact same second
because their kids are all the same age, but it happens to be
the same sperm and eggs being fertilized at the same time.
So that whole thing that's not science.
It is a mirror world.
All right. So of course, everything is the same in the mirror world
because it's a mirror in the mirror dimension.
Great. Perfect. Just say that.
Just say that.
So I will say that.
What is there not to get?
It's the mirror dimension that's in the tunnels underground
because they're pretending it's not the mirror dimension.
They're pretending it's a place that you can just walk to.
You can walk to the mirror dimension.
All right. It's in the tunnels underground, leaving us aside.
I also agree with you that I hate when
fantasies try to be like, this is a science thing.
It's not actually magic.
It's quantum stuff.
It doesn't matter.
But the only time it matters is when it's like Deepak Chopra
and he's trying to sell something, then it's like, shut the fuck up.
Well, I mean, it doesn't matter to the audience what the explanation is.
It like I nobody is sitting there going, wait a minute,
but like monsters aren't real.
So this movie makes no sense.
Like it's like, OK, you know, you're going to see a horror movie.
You can be like, science stuff happened.
Now we got a monster anyway. Now the plot.
OK, so that works in movies where there are like random monsters,
like a quiet place.
Like that was great.
They came from space.
They came from underground. Who knows who cares?
That was awesome.
There was a movie that was a complete rip off of that
that's on Netflix that I forget what it's called,
where it's like these bird monsters instead.
They look like little pterodactyls and they're attracted to noise
and they come peck your eyes out and rip you apart if you make it.
If you make it sounds less cute.
Yes. Oh, is that the bird box?
No, that's where if you see something, it never shows it, you kill yourself.
You probably see what you probably see in Bird Box is this terrible movie
that's a rip off of a quiet place.
And then you then you have this
unresistible impulse to play your brains out.
Point is, isn't that movie the quiet place rip off that I can't vote it's called?
The monsters come from this whole underground.
They're like just mining or something.
And all these birds come swarming out of there.
So to say it's just monsters.
Well, these things are said in the movie to have somehow evolved
because they must have.
And it's unclear what they were eating or how they like how they how they
how they were there in numbers enough to decimate life on earth.
My thing is, I don't care like about the specifics of your backstory,
unless you thought of something really cool.
If you're like just trying to say, but people are going to be like,
oh, man, where are these bird monsters coming from?
And oh, but that explanation doesn't make sense.
Like, you know, it's not right.
I think that like as even as a rationalist,
yeah, exactly, going into a movie, there's a certain higher level
of disbelief that I'm willing to suspend.
And I'm OK if they don't spend too long on trying to make fake explanations for stuff.
They just go like, I don't know.
The science lab exploded, chemicals leaked.
Now you've got this thing.
And then now now there's the cool stuff that goes on with the plot.
But the premise is there's a big monster.
But when they take like a really big amount of time and they did
like maybe 40 minutes of Wikipedia research on a couple of science terms,
and then they try to spin it into a like, this is a plausible thing
that could happen if quantum things do this thing.
And they've got like doctors in lab coats for some reason,
even though they're physicists and they don't need a lab coat.
Like. And that's the reason I liked us because they didn't do that.
It was just mere dimension underground.
You're just going to make yourself look like an idiot if you try to like
like I keep remembering Prometheus when it was like, this is how biologists work.
Right. Yeah.
Hey, look, I found I think I found life.
I'm going to poke it.
Dude, and Prometheus were like primordial earth.
They seed the earth with these these genes.
And that is why we're so look just like the aliens on the other planet.
And it's been 10 million years of, you know, divergent evolution.
I love when non science people like do again, 10 minutes of Wikipedia research.
And they think that they understand a concept enough to be like,
it would be so cool if my backstory was this thing that actually,
if you did 20 minutes of Wikipedia research, you would know, made no sense.
Like just stop doing that.
We'd be closer related genetically to strawberries
than we would be to those aliens after that much time.
Consult a scientist if you're going to put if you're going to put science
in your thing and then make it a big deal like part of your movie.
And if you're not willing to do that, then just be like,
I don't know, science stuff happened, hand wavy things.
Now, now there's a monster.
Yes, I didn't finish my I didn't actually finish my thought.
I got I got sidetracked on on us.
And that's it. I'm told I love the movie and I'm fine with science magic in movies.
I just didn't like how they pretended like it wasn't magic.
Yes, exactly. Like in in Get Out, it was magic.
And it was like that was awesome. It was scary. It was great.
It wasn't magic.
They used a science chair with like a surgery and a laser.
If they had said this is how if they had said this is how it works.
And I knew for a fact that there's no possible way could work that way.
Then it would take me out of the movie like it did with us.
That's all. So the reason I brought up
us in the first place was that because I brought up how unlikely it was
that the parents would copulate the exact time, even if they're mirroring
the emotions of the people on the surface and copulating at the same time.
Again, you're thinking that they're different people that the same.
It's a mirror dimension. They're the same.
Let me finish my thought.
OK, my point is that the odds of me personally existing are infinitesimal.
That's the point I was trying to make.
OK, and I was making that through the point that us is impossible.
Oh, OK.
So the movie us makes no sense because the odds of any
fertilized combination coming about is very small.
And that's true going back generations.
Yeah. And so if, you know, if we were on the clock and.
Yeah, a lot of causality stuff on a very micro scale
that you wouldn't be able to replicate like the butterfly effect thing.
Like just molecules flying around the area slightly differently
in this other universe would make things significantly different.
So there's no way a mirror where it could actually exist
unless it was magic.
There could be literally a butterfly involved that ruined
the intercom that like that slightly delayed or prolonged the intercourse
of my great, great, great, great, great grandparents.
And then I would be a different combination of genes, right?
And I hate when that happens.
Butterfly landed on a stick just at the right time.
No. So slow motion, butterfly.
It leaves flapping.
My point is, is that the anthropic principle would like I could ask
why am I me and not somebody else?
But that is the sort of question that you can ask from anybody.
I'll any anybody's point of view.
Yeah, I think. Well, I think that's a dumb question.
That's not the anthropic principle question.
No, that is. It is the question.
All right. Well, here I have.
Why are things question work?
I have an anthropic lens to view history through,
whether or not it's the wikipedia page on of Antwerp principle or not.
It's the same for me.
It's the same sort of of lens of understanding the universe.
Like things are this way because they haven't to be this way.
I have a fairy tale from Les wrong,
which I think will hopefully clear up things because I think
I've done a very poor job of describing the anthropic principle.
Then let's do it. OK, this is an anthropic principle fairy tale.
Thank you to nominal on August 28th of 2012 for posting this.
A robot is going on a one shot mission to a distant world
to collect important data needed to research a cure for a plague
that is devastating the earth.
When the robot enters hyperspace,
it notices some anomalies in the engine's output,
but it's too late to get the engines fixed.
The anomalies are the sort that when similar anomalies
have been observed in other engines,
25 percent of the time it indicates a fatal problem,
such that the engine will explode virtually every time it tries to jump.
25 percent of the time it has been a false positive
and the engine doesn't explode at all.
It's a perfectly fine engine and 50 percent of the time
it's a serious problem, but not a automatically lethal one
so that each time there's a jump, there's a 50 50 chance
the engine will explode.
Anyway, the robot goes through the 10 jumps
to reach the distant world and the engine does not explode.
The look, sorry.
Unfortunately, the jump coordinates for the mission were a little off
and the robot is in a bad position for collecting data.
It could try another jump.
If the engines don't explode,
the extra data it collects will save many lives.
If the engine does explode, though,
the earth will get no data at all
because this FTL radio that they're using only works one time.
So how do you program the robot?
Do you program your robot to believe that since it worked 10 times,
the anomaly was probably false positive and it should make the jump?
Or should it send the data back that it has right now?
Do you make it believe that due to the anthropic principle,
it should disregard the evidence of the other 10 jumps
because obviously the universes were the robot blew up.
Those it's not here to make this decision.
And it still has a good chance of blowing up.
People's lives are in the balance.
I don't think the anthropic principle applies here.
Why not?
Because you have prayers.
Yeah, but the only evidence that he has
is that he's still alive after 10 jump or it.
I guess I don't know why I gendered the robot.
Sorry.
But you have the evidence of how often this kind of failure causes the engine.
So you just crunch the math on the 25, 25 versus 50.
The importance of delivering the data you have now versus the no data
versus the goal and then you calculate based on that.
And decide like squinting at it with your values is the risk worth it.
So basically you completely abandoned the anthropic principle.
Yeah, just say because the anthropic principle isn't like it's not a thing.
It's not it's not a I still don't think that it's a question that you can actually ask.
I think that we as humans care about causality
in a way that doesn't actually make sense in the way that physics works
because we are things that do things that cause things.
And we've got some kind of machinery that crunches so hard
to try to figure out the root cause of everything that we look at.
But some things don't have root causes in the way that like matters to us
or that matters at all or that even makes sense.
That's my long, weird answer to that.
OK, I feel like disregarding the anthropic principle for the
for a limit phrase that for the for the robot to make the decision to say,
you know what, anthropically, I've made it so far.
I'm probably good to do as many times as I want
because I'll continue to persist in the universe where I don't blow up.
Um, that seems like with me running with my observation
that I haven't been killed yet to, like, I don't know,
try and dodge bullets like Neo and the Matrix and be like, well,
I'll be the one that makes it out.
Yeah, like that sounds like a really bad idea.
OK, so you would not jump.
Um, I the only thing that's different is that
like from my analogy of trying to, I don't know, whatever, dodge bullets
or do something else like that has a one in a thousand chance of me surviving.
I like, I don't take those risks because I don't want to die.
Despite my weird, I don't not even believe
just like this weird idea in my head that I might never die.
Right. You've never died yet.
All evidence points to the fact that you never will.
So far, so good. Yeah.
That's not how you think.
Right. And that's definitely not how I operate, but I also don't have numbers.
So then that's also not how you think about the universe.
And so you should put a much higher prior probability
on the fact that God exists to create, have created the universe exactly how it is.
Well, let me just have I actually answer the robot thing.
It sounds like it's because if you wait, wait, wait,
both of you are trying to talk at the same time.
Yeah, let me let me answer the robot thing first.
I think if I was the robot, I would conclude after 10 jumps that I'm probably
on, I'm probably in the 25 percent probability zone
where I had a false positive, OK, that's a lot of coin flips to come up right.
Right. So I'm assuming like, OK, cool.
My engines are probably fine.
That's where I'd probably end up.
OK. And that that kind of reasoning makes sense.
And you add the probability that the engines are probably fine to that
calculation and you disregard the anthropic principle because it doesn't apply.
And what are you going to say?
How does God come into this picture?
Well, God comes into this picture because then if you're discarding
the anthropic principle entirely, you can't use it to explain why the universe.
But there's so many other like really compelling reasons why God seems to not exist.
Well, yes, but it's still it would maybe just taking away
one of my negative evidences for God would raise me from like, you know,
seven thousand six hundred billion, like for some
something decided that these constants should be the way they are in this universe
for a specific reason, as opposed to random chance.
And I don't know what.
And that says nothing about whether it was God.
But you're willing to bite that bullet to say that something
designed these constants to be what they are. No.
Oh, I thought you just said, yeah. No, I like.
I'm saying that I don't think that the anthropic principle makes any sense as a question.
I don't think that the why are things?
Question mark is that you can make it into a grammatically correct sentence.
And then it seems like because it's a question, it should have an answer.
But I think that that's just a glitch in our brain and our way of thinking
about things in terms of causality.
I don't think that I think that we're poorly equipped to think about physics
in ways that we probably should be thinking about physics.
And this one is just you're trying to anthropomorphize like physics.
And then.
Yeah. OK.
I think that.
The quote, fine tuning argument is very weak evidence for some sort of intelligent creation.
Yes. So like it sounds not.
It doesn't sound like evidence in favor of.
Well, I guess it is, but very like nothing that I'd ever.
It's one of the hypotheses for why are things like this?
Right. Yeah. So like I could say, OK, cool.
Maybe there exists a reality above ours, where they have computer simulations running,
where they've tweaked cosmological constants that everyone's concerned
about in all of these anthropic questions and or in these fine tuning questions.
And this is one of those universes that can sustain life.
That that sounds not impossible.
It's not high on my expectation list, but yeah.
All right. Can I hit two more bullet points before we move on? Please. OK.
OK. The first one is a fairy tale that's not actually a fairy tale
because it actually happened in real life history.
The I'm assuming you're both familiar with the Large Hadron Collider.
Yes. At the time it was being built.
And I think still to this day is the largest super collider ever created.
And they change its name, if not.
Well, then they just make a larger Hadron Collider.
Side note that is like the naming convention in a lot of physics and astrophysics things.
Yeah. And it's like, yeah, we have that we have the large array of telescopes.
Well, now we have the very large array because it's bigger.
Big fucking array. Yeah.
What's that? Do we actually have that?
No, I wish we did. OK.
I know there's an XKCD with this.
What's that big black hole?
We want to call it. Well, black hole.
It's not like a good name for it. Perfect.
Yeah. I believe it was black hole.
I know Big Bang was originally like used as a derisive term by someone who didn't.
We thought it was poppycock.
I'm not sure if black hole feel went that way, too.
I'm not sure.
I just love how that seems to be a theme and naming things in physics.
Yeah. Physicists are very much like, let's just get to the point.
Yeah. So we've got the LHC.
We got the LHC, yes.
And at the time it was being built, there were a few people who said,
you know, we don't actually know what's going to happen when we smash these particles together.
It's a tiny, almost infinitesimal, but nonzero probability that we could create
strangelets, which are a type of particle that when they touch a different particle,
turn that particle into themselves.
So it would create a change reaction that would turn all of matter into just
strangelets and basically all life and everything would cease to exist,
because everything is now this one type of particle or this one type of
subatomic thing that doesn't interact with things like the corks were used to interact.
When you say there were some people concerned about this,
is this the same group of people that was worried that we'd accidentally
make a black hole, like the non-scientist idiots?
Well, let me phrase that, because that's totally variable.
The non-scientist, the non-subatomic particle physics.
The late person.
How about that?
The late people who were also like of the mindset of these highly trained
scientists don't know what they're doing and they're endangering all of us.
There were. Or was this a scientifically informed concern?
No, but there were a few, this was a scientifically informed concern
because there were a few subatomical experts who said this is a nonzero
possibility, but it's so unlikely we're not taking it seriously at all.
It just seems ridiculous.
OK.
I would go with their consensus, because I don't know.
Yeah, right.
But then, like, weird things started happening where the large
Hadron Collider kept not being turned on when it was supposed to be turned on.
Oh, yeah. Oh, it's they've invented time travel in the future
and they're going back to be like, don't use the time collider.
Well, not even necessarily that time travel doesn't have to exist
for the anthropic principle to work, because I think one of the things
that happened is like a squirrel found its way inside or some kind of small
environment or bird died just in the right spot inside.
I know what that was. What was it?
That was when all humans got wiped out from the large Hadron Collider.
The squirrels became sentient and then they developed time travel
and they sent their squirrel ambassador back in time.
No, no, no, no, no, no. There's no time travel involved.
The thing is there's an absolutely infinitesimal chance
that a squirrel would get into the large Hadron Collider and chew on this one
little thing and short it out for months on end.
So it didn't happen in almost all universes and they turned on the large
Hadron Collider and it destroyed the earth.
The one that we live in is the one where the squirrel managed to get in
and stop the large Hadron Collider from being turned on.
And, you know, when that happened, OK, that's a coincidence.
Guess we're down several million dollars while we fix this shit
and wait a few more months.
But like this happened three times in a row.
And at what like really ridiculous, insanely unlikely coincidences.
And at what point do you say,
maybe we shouldn't turn this fucker on?
I don't know. I've worked with technology and really insane, crazy coincidences
that break your technology happen a lot.
I agree. And I mean, they did eventually turn it on and the world did not end.
But the question is, how many of those would have to happen
before you would say, let's not turn it on?
Like if we got to the point where 20 times really stupidly ridiculous
thing happens, I'd start being worried at that point. OK.
Yeah, that that that at least confused.
Because it happened three times.
I would notice confusion if something seemed like
it happened three times.
And after three times, a few people started saying, hey, guys.
But again, that's also because we do have priors
of how often these kinds of weird things happen.
Well, we don't have priors and how often scrolls break into
the lighters, right?
So like maybe that happens one hundred percent of the time
we build super colliders.
We have some amount of data for how often,
like there are ways that we could actually run Bayesian analysis on this
and be like, how likely was this to have happened
because we have data on similar things happening or not happening?
Counterfactually speaking, if the fourth time had been like someone
dropped their hot dog and slipped on it and managed any health themes
started playing, right?
If something ridiculous happened and it got delayed for another few months
of fourth time, at that point, would you have all given credence
to the anthropic principle and being like, gosh, I'm really worried
about the number of universes we've destroyed now.
See that at that point, I might keep trying to turn it on.
But to like I'm like, OK, so if someone's doing something to
interrupt this, then like keep sending them like
let's let's really push this.
Like if something is going to consistently like keep happening
in order for us to stop doing this, it's not like they're going to be like,
ah, they they keep they flip the switch three times.
Now they're about to flip it a fourth.
I guess we tried to warn them three times.
But no one's trying to warn anyone.
It is entirely just a matter of luck and which universes survive.
The more weird times that happened that would up my
expectation that we're living in a simulation or there's some intelligent
hand making things like imagine if, you know, we had squirrel proofed it.
We had said no food allowed.
Someone could trip and die or choke on their food or whatever.
And then the two people go to start it and they both have aneurysms.
Like at that point, I'm like, OK, cool.
It's something intentional is happening or something.
Yeah, I mean, like some people have aneurysms.
That happens. I'm curious to happen like the fifth thing.
Yeah. Yeah. So I'm curious, why would you go to it is someone is coordinating
this rather than there are human that causes are made by causes like us.
Yeah, but OK, that's maybe my intuition that's generating it.
I haven't finished your question.
I'll see if I can answer it.
Well, my question was just, yeah, why is there a cause or rather
than there's an infinite number of universes and we are killing ourselves
in almost all of them and the only ones that are still around to wonder
how weird this thing is are the ones where some stupid, crazy, ridiculous accident happened.
The last time I spent any time, like any measurable amount of time
up until today, thinking about the I get if it is called quantum immortality,
I'm not sure, but that idea that like I like my my own egocentric
aliveness chain of causality two or three years ago, it's downtown.
Somebody dropped their like reflective vest crossing a street
and I don't want to get run over.
I saw the light change.
I ran out and grabbed it.
And as I turn around the truck on the other side of the intersection,
I decided just to punch it.
And as I turn, I see their their mirror go right past my face.
If I had moved while turning instead of just turned,
I would have been knocked over by this thing and it's going something
like 25 miles an hour, but it was as tall as I was.
It would have killed me. Right. Yeah.
So in that sense, I am like diminished in the number of universes
that I exist in because now there's one less Steven because in some number
of universes, I did get creamed by that truck.
Steven bottleneck. Yes. Yeah.
So the Stevenators superpower.
Sorry, I think we were talking about this before.
So was there started recording?
But what Steven said?
Oh, no, that's going in.
What is what? What should they make the Stevenators?
Kate, power Steven was saying that, like, he wanted there to be a villain
called the Stevenator.
And Kate, power is the same luck.
I said, what power would he have?
But then we didn't think about it.
I think that it's like to undo the Steven bottleneck and just gather
all the Stevens from all the universes.
But they're all dead.
But but to like pull them back and then coordinate them in just the right way.
Like, OK, this one from this universe does this, which interacts with this.
So there's just a chain of Stevens causing things to happen that he wants to happen.
All right, Matt, you heard that a reverse scapegoat level seven.
That's what I want. Perfect.
By pulling Stevens for a bunch of other universes.
You happen to be on the ladder who dropped the thing, who caught the thing.
When that when that the guy was trying to punch you in the face.
When that happened to you, where you were almost hit by the mirror thing.
Why did you think, wow, think of all the universes where the Stevens died,
as opposed to, wow, there is some cause or that just saved me from being hit by that?
Because it's the exact opposite reaction you had to the LHC.
Because getting hit by a truck is a fairly frequent thing that happens, I guess.
OK. But it was a coincidence, basically, that saved you.
Yes. So.
And it would have been a coincidence that saved the human race in the LHC.
But five or six bizarre coincidences in a row.
You've had five or six times that you almost died in your life, right?
Yeah, but not doing the same thing.
I don't know. One of them seems more intentional,
but that's probably me just being like applying too much intentionality to it.
So and it's easier from my perspective or like, obviously,
I'm able to ask the question because I didn't die.
So the the the the thought the thought experiment with the with the LHC
is that every time they tried to turn it on or every time that they did,
they destroyed a timeline, basically.
Every time they did, they destroyed almost all timelines.
The only ones that didn't get destroyed were ones where stupid rare coincidences happened.
That's really funny. I.
I'm just going to let that intuition pump for a while and have fun with it.
I don't. OK. Is there a question I'm answering?
This is a much more fun topic that I was expecting because I thought
I was just going to be rolling eyes and talking about how much
I hate the anthropic principle.
Well, my question was going to be why you went with the coincidence,
saved you as opposed to a cause or saved you for the truck thing.
How many times have causes saved you?
It's hard to say, right?
If there is if there is subtle as as putting squirrels in in particle colliders,
or a subtle as making you not move forward when you turn for some reason.
Does it seem like this was a thing that could never have happened?
And it's really confusing as to why this thing might have hit you,
but then you moved and it didn't.
Or has that kind of thing happened in your life before?
No, that's the thing.
It's not something that is extremely like it's not impossible to happen.
Like whether Stephen moved forward as he turned or not is basically luck.
So it it doesn't need a cause or no.
But whether the squirrel got stuck in this tube or not was also basically luck.
It doesn't need a cause or either.
And probably didn't have one.
I guess I can I can view it from the other way on the LHC one, which is just saying,
yes, we happen to live in all the universes where the LHC didn't destroy the planet.
Yeah. Or we happen to live in at least one of those.
Well, we live in one of the dark lords of the matrix explanation first.
Because there were a bunch of unusual.
And like I said, at 20, it sounds like it's it's conspiring to make this not.
It sounds like the universe itself, like time itself is folding in a way
that makes it don't let this thing turn on, right?
Well, I would be at that point is noticing confusion.
It looks that way.
But that's just because all the other universes where something crazy happened
didn't happen or destroyed.
So you're only you're getting the illusion of somebody conspiring to make this
not happen just by the fact that every time it did happen, that universe is gone now.
So there's no one left to observe the evidence.
That's a fun head scratcher.
OK, I like I said, I I'm not in any real way.
I'm not attributing any causality or intentionality to any of these things
because we're now talking in something too distantly hypothetical.
I guess at that point, it makes me kind of wonder, no, it doesn't.
It just raised the question differently.
Like what it would take?
What would count as evidence of, you know, some intelligence for striving the universe?
But that could just I mean, the universe behaving in a way that we haven't observed
that confuses us would be like some evidence towards that.
But there could also be a bunch of other hypotheses other than there's like an
intelligent thing like maybe like us that's doing things for some reason.
Yeah, like if the stars at night were to rewrite themselves into a message
that said, hey, look under your pillow, there's a hundred dollars.
And everybody saw it had a hundred dollars to the pillow.
That'd be super weird, right?
Would that be that?
I mean, that's not that sounds like what they would do is it would be written
in in Arabic and it would be a Quran under your bed.
Right. Yes, that was my there was there was a joke about
Mel Nonjiani like that, where he was raised Muslim and he had said that,
you know, because in Pakistan, women can't drive.
He's like, you know, it says in the Quran, women can't drive cars.
And he's like, OK, so if if it said in the Quran, which was written
fourteen hundred years ago, that women can't drive cars, I know two things.
One, I would be at the mosque right now and so would you and that women shouldn't drive cars.
If it said that if it said that in a thousand and fifteen hundred years
will invent these boxes that you can push the pedal down and drive around in.
So the thing is, I'd still be like, oh, I guess a lot maybe exists and also he's a dick.
So like that's what I think about.
If God exists, then I'm still like if some like weird coincidence thing happened
that like I was like, oh, it looks like the Christian God exists.
I still wouldn't go to church because I'd be like someone made the world like this.
Someone made the world like this.
Excuse me. I have some complaints.
Where's the line?
I want to see your manager.
Like, first of all, germs.
I like that your first go to is where's the line?
I want to see the manager, whereas my first go to was murder.
Yeah, I mean, honestly, like, I really love this is going to be a weird tangent.
The like, what was it?
The bewitching tales of Sabrina, whatever the fuck, the new Sabrina thing is on Netflix.
There were a bunch of people that didn't like it for various reasons.
And a lot of the people that I knew that didn't like it were people
that identified as Wiccans or Pagans and they were like, they're getting it wrong.
It's I was like, OK, it's fiction, whatever.
They're they're misrepresenting wishes.
And I'm just like, OK, whatever.
But like another thing was I was like, first of all, this this clearly
like if you look at the structure of this show, it's like this girl discovers
that it's it's this like wacky alternate universe where
everybody seems to be kind of fundamentalist Christians, but they're actually
fundamentalist Satanists and the society is structured pretty much the same way
except their witches and the worship Satan.
But they still like have black mass and they have arguments with their aunts about
like, oh, but we can't do the baby sacrifice tonight.
I have to date with Harvey and like, but like Sabrina at some point realizes that
like, hey, wait a minute, Satan says that like, these are his values.
But then the way he actually acts, it's like, these are his values.
You know what?
Satan's a dick and I'm going to become a stronger witch and find him and kill him.
And it was basically like, so I love the idea of the fact that the show exists.
You could never make a show where you find out that God is literally real and like
the little kid who was a Christian their whole life looks at what the world is
actually like versus what the Bible is like frowns and is like, I'm going to go
kill God, I'm going to go get like, go on a quest, level up, find some magic
angel swords and shit and then like go kill God.
Like that would be the show that I want to exist because that would be my
conclusion if I was like, oh, someone made this like this.
What a dick like this person shouldn't be in charge.
Two quick questions.
One is the new Sabrina show any good?
Like, is it fun watching?
It's, um, it's, I'll say that it's got things about it that are problematic
and I'm okay with that.
Like, I really hate the mentality that a lot of people have, which is like, if
any of my media has things that are problematic, then I boycott it.
I'm like, you're also allowed to like other things about it and say, these
parts were cool.
That part could have been better.
I also hate the word problematic.
It sounds like I want to find something to complain about, but I'm going to be
super vague and be like, this is, this is.
It has the suggestion that it has a problem that probably relates to
social justice, aligned concerns.
Right.
And they're the ones who use the word problematic.
Like if someone says something is problematic and makes a cringy face, I
assume I'm like, okay, is it racist, sexist, ableist or some otherist?
If they say it's problematic and makes a cringy face, I can almost
guarantee that I'll have no problem with what they're talking about.
I mean, like no, no one says like, oh yeah, this, this, this person raped
a bunch of people.
That was so problematic.
That's true.
Okay, I see what you're saying.
You don't say something problematic if it's actually bad.
I see what you're saying.
So, but anyway, I will also say that like real Wiccans complaining, quote,
real Wiccans, whatever.
That's like when they made the Lady Thor comics and people were like, oh my God,
Thor is like an actual like, you know, deity.
And when it's like, Thor is not real either, you fucking nerds.
Like the, and, and to be, if we're going to nitpick the Thor of the Marvel
comics is not the same deity that was worshiped 500 years ago.
And wouldn't you think that if he was real, just the fact that they're still
telling stories about him would be like, oh, they still care about me.
It depends on, it depends on how, uh, why do you think these gods are, right?
I think that the Thor of the Norse mythology, if he were real, would probably
like still be touched that people were making stuff in his honor.
He'd chug a beer, smash it on the ground and yell, another.
I mean, Odin was apparently in the, uh, the, whatever, um, the religious
version of Odin is kind of an asshole, right?
So he might not have.
Oh my God's are assholes.
That's what I like about the old gods is that they were
they might not appreciate being misgendered.
So I will leave all that aside and then I'll just do a quick skip.
30 seconds.
If you haven't seen the good place, but want to, do you want me to spoil it for
you or do you want me not to, uh, I haven't seen the last season.
Do you want me to spoil it?
If you've made it through the first three, the fourth one's actually kind of fun.
So I'm not going to say anything.
Oh yeah.
I'm totally going to watch it.
Okay.
Then never mind.
Okay.
Um, well, something happens in the good place that relates to this.
It has the good place.
I will say that I'm not going to spoil the ending.
I'll just say that it has a fun problem that I think it solves weekly,
but it still makes the show fun.
I think it ended fun in a good way.
Um, it raises when you watch it, we'll have an interesting
conversation about utopias and see the, yeah.
Okay.
All right.
It's not available on Hulu yet.
Is it?
Yes.
It is available on Hulu.
No, it's not available on Netflix.
No, that's the problem.
It's available on piracy.
Probably like a year.
Hmm.
Maybe I should just, just part it.
Just part it.
I don't like pirating.
We would never pirate anything.
We're good copyright-bearing patriots.
Yeah.
Wait, I wouldn't go so far.
I absolutely would.
I love my nation and its laws.
If you feel bad about it, pirate it and then like, send some money
to the creators of the show.
That's what I, as long as I'm on that note, like I, I downloaded all of,
um, I never would actually, I never download anything.
That's a crime, but.
You paid for it and then downloaded all of.
The, uh, it's called Mythic Quest Ravens Banquet.
It's a show by Rob McElhaney.
He plays a Mac on It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia.
He runs a game studio where they like make this basic world of
Warcraft style game and it's fucking hilarious.
It was like nine episodes long.
It's on Apple TV plus whatever.
I don't want to pay for a subscription to watch this show,
but the first two episodes are available for free.
And like what I'd love to be able to do is Venmo, Rob McElhaney, 20 bucks
and be like, I really enjoyed your show.
Um, there's probably more money than, and granted, other people worked on it.
They should get a cut too.
I was going to say that's kind of fucked up because a lot of people work
on big group projects like that.
But I could theoretically have watched this for $5.99 for like one month
subscription and that's if it took me a month to watch it, right?
So like, if I could, I would rather just be able to give them 20 bucks and
say, Hey, can I have this?
Great.
Thanks.
But how do you split up that 20 bucks among everyone?
That's the problem.
They need split up to $6 among everyone.
Like when you pay for say Netflix, then some of the money you pay is going
to the creators of the show.
And then a bunch of the money is going to the creators of Netflix who have
created a platform and then limited your access to this thing that was created
unless you pay for their whole platform.
So at what point do you draw that line?
That's a good question.
Keep it alive.
And that makes sense.
Like, you know, specifically how can you like, you'd have to know the name
and PayPal address or Venmo name of every single person that worked on the project.
It'd be nice if they had like a shared Bitcoin wallet or something that I
could just, you know, shoot five bucks into my point is to be nice.
Like my other version of this is I think that it was available after the
season came out, but like, I don't like to be able to spend three bucks per
episode of Game of Thrones to just watch that.
I've got a reply to that kind of, um, maybe the way to do that is private the thing
and then tell everyone you know, to watch the thing.
I've been doing that.
Yeah.
And so that helps because you're being free advertising for them.
And maybe one of them will actually pay for it.
Maybe two of them will.
And then it'll be like I paid for it too.
As, as someone who occasionally tries to sell words, there is nothing as
infuriating as a publisher, publisher saying, but we pay you an exposure.
It's like fucking exposure doesn't pay for my food, homie.
That's fair.
You can pay me with money.
Don't get me wrong.
I totally agree.
And I don't, that's why I think that there's no ethical, like light side to
pirating things.
Like I, I shouldn't do it.
What I'm saying is that if there was an option to go buy it for approximately
what I'd pay to rent it from Amazon or to watch it on Apple TV, I would have.
Yeah.
Like I would pay 10 bucks for the DVD box.
May I suggest libraries who usually have up to date, like recent copies of books
and music and other media.
The thing is that you have to borrow it for a certain amount of time, maybe stay
on a wait list if it's really popular and that's it.
And libraries do always make sure at least a little bit of money gets
back to the creators.
Cool.
Not as much as if you would have bought it directly, but better than
pirate libraries are one of the major sources of income for people that make
things like particularly books, but you know, they, they buy a large
amounts of the DVD or copies of yeah, whatever your book is that you published.
We don't live in a universe right now.
Unfortunately, where I'm trying to make it anthropic again for fun.
Where I can like direct support content that I like when there's more than a
few people involved.
Like I like some podcasts and some other online created stuff where I can shoot
them a few bucks a month and enjoy their things and guilt free.
Being like, you know what, that's absolutely worth 10 bucks a month.
Let me send Doof Media some money so I can keep, make sure they keep doing what
they do because I really enjoy consuming it.
But I can't do that for, like I said, I don't want to pay for HBO and be locked
in for some stupid contract.
I want to watch Game of Thrones and nothing else, right?
So it would be nice if I could just buy them for three bucks an episode.
Well, part of the problem is that a show like Game of Thrones takes a huge
amount of upfront capital for all the, I mean, not just the cameras, but also
the sets, the costumes, the writers, you got to pay all the actors, all the
people working, you know, behind the cameras, the grips, that's a lot of money.
And you can put out a Patreon for when you have already created something and
people are like, Hey, I like this thing.
I'll give you money.
But if it takes like a million dollars to get the thing going before you even
have the first episode, it's going to be really hard getting people to sign up for.
Yeah, I'll give you some money now for something that maybe I'll see that might
be good in the future, or maybe it's going to turn out to be another one of those.
What's a shitty show?
The Friends has spinoffed Joey.
Yeah, maybe it's another Joey.
Uh, this is a really good topic, and we could probably keep talking about it for
a pretty long time, and we should probably get back on our other topic.
I tried to, I tried to veer us back by saying we don't live in a universe where
I can direct, consume guilt free things.
But yeah, you needed to put more emphasis on we don't live in a universe where
like this is a segue.
Let's hard steer back, back on track.
Yes, back track you turn.
So I guess basically the anthropic principle is asking how much evidence can
we take from the fact that we are here to observe something.
Um, and I think just has come down very solidly on the side of that is almost
no evidence at all.
That was exactly one piece of evidence.
Would you say in a rational sense that's asking a wrong question?
Like this isn't a question where you can even imagine a coherent answer.
I think a question of how likely is the human race to survive the cold war is
partially answered by the fact that we did survive it.
Maybe like everyone keeps saying how unlikely it is that we made it through
the cold war and maybe it was really unlikely, but maybe based on human
psychology, actually usually when put in these situations, most human races
would make it through the cold war because most people don't want to
wipe out the entire human race.
And who knows, maybe it's, we should have lots of nuclear weapons because
it's really unlikely anyone's ever going to use them in a, in a large
enough capacity to wipe out the world.
You had me at the first half.
I wouldn't say that we should make it easier and lower the bar for someone
who's not afraid to destroy the world to do it.
Um, but there were other almost end of world scenarios like the Cuban
missile crisis could have been, could have ended in a large scale war.
Um, it turns out that however unlikely it was to survive the last century, it
wasn't impossible because we did.
Do we, should we not necessarily venerate people like Stanislaw Petrov as much?
I mean, uh, if it was pretty likely we were going to make it through anyway.
The thing that we do is we have a near miss.
We notice the near miss, take a moment to celebrate the fact that there was a
near miss and people who are involved and then say, okay, now this could have
gone badly.
Let's think of the ways it could have gone badly and then come up with
strategies for how to mitigate that in the future.
And based on stuff, we do have evidence for probabilities that we can calculate.
Like how the, it's a better question of like, you know, how likely was the cold,
how were we to have survived the cold war?
Because there have been other wars and other types of crises that we can look
at, get data from and then actually do statistics on the, those are the relevant
parts of that question, the like, how likely is this specific event in a bunch
of other universes, this exact, like, you know, that it starts to get into like,
this isn't good math, like this, this isn't going to solve the problem.
This will maybe be like really, really super extra meta thing that we can do
thought experiments on.
But the fact is that we survived the cold war.
There were factors involved.
We can look at those factors and, and if we actually care about trying to like
pre-mortem future conflicts, then we should be doing this more than we are, I
think, I think this stretches the usefulness, at least of my capabilities as a
Bayesian, um, like how likely are we to survive, uh, fast AI takeoff?
We have, we have no answer for that, right?
Because we don't have any priors.
That doesn't mean that we shouldn't be careful.
That doesn't mean that we shouldn't make some certain safeguards, but like to
say I have no priors, I can't answer that question.
I could still say it's probably low.
Like, I think there are way more ways to get it wrong than there are to get it
right, and therefore if you're just throwing a dart at random, you're more
likely to miss than you are to get it, than you are to, are to hit it.
Also a small caveat.
There's a George Carlin joke that near misses are misnomers.
They should be called near hits.
It's like, oh, look at that car accident.
They nearly missed, but they didn't.
Um, like a third of his comedy for like 15 years is just word play.
Um, so like, I, I, I struggle with the fact that just because we don't
have priors doesn't mean that we can't make reasonable, um,
no, I definitely think when we're thinking about potential crises that
could happen, that we should look into how likely is this crisis based on
like what other similar sorts of data we can observe.
And then regardless of that, like the fact that this might happen and how bad it
would be if it did happen means that we should try to come up with like strategies
around it.
That's definitely like, I'm not going to say that because the anthropic
principle is not a valid question, then we should just throw out worrying about
AI or anything ever.
I didn't think you were saying that I was more just trying to solve it myself
because like a century ago, there was no concern of nuclear war wiping out the
species, right?
Um, right now, at least as of the time of recording at 428 on Sunday, the 23rd,
there's no chance, let me, let me rephrase that as a five minutes ago,
there was no chance of AI wiping out the planet in the next five minutes.
Um, that doesn't mean that there's a, that it's the kind of thing that we
can't worry about, but it is the kind of thing that I can't put a probability
on going smoothly or poorly.
Um, so like trying to find statistics on how much to be concerned about this.
It doesn't seem valuable.
How many, I guess one of my big questions would be how many crazy
coincidences do you have to see before you start getting worried?
Like how many times would you personally have to come very close to dying before
you start saying, maybe, uh, maybe I should change what I'm doing.
One, because I want to live forever.
You know, I definitely have been more careful about crossing streets since I
was going to buy that car a few years ago.
And that wasn't my first time almost getting hit, but it was the oldest I was,
I think almost getting hit, right?
Like when you're a teenager, you're not worried about that sort of thing.
So like I, you know, if I saw the exact same thing next time I'm on the
intersection downtown, if somebody's leaving something in the street, I'll
let it get run over.
But you turned on the LHC three times or tried to anyway.
And the chances of you getting hit are much higher than the
chance of the LHC not turning on.
How about, uh, you can, you can conceive of events that might be harmful to you.
And you can then think about how bad is it going to be if this happens and
then kind of run, make a decision on what things you need to prioritize
caring about.
Like I look at, okay, what things are likely to kill me and I worry about
car accidents and like the things that are the most common things that kill
people.
I worry about those before I start worrying about getting eaten by a shark
when I swim in the ocean.
And most people are more worried about getting eaten by a shark in the ocean
than they are dying every time they drive because we're bad at statistics.
Um, something like AI takeoff is like, okay, how many times have people
again killed by rogue AI in the past?
Well, not because we don't have any evidence, but how bad would it be if it
happened?
It would be really bad.
So maybe that is worth, you know, escalating up the chain of things to worry
about.
Um, the, a lot of people have died from being hit on the head by coconuts.
It's statistically one of the more likely ways that people die.
Do I have to worry about that?
I mean, there's definitely a bunch of other things that are higher on that
list.
Uh, also, I don't live anywhere near a coconut tree.
So, you know, there's other, there's definitely ways you can think of things
that might be dangerous and might kill you and then try to decide how important
is it that I come up with counter strategies for this thing or worry
about it?
And I don't think the anthropic principle has to come into play.
But what if Google was like turning on a new server farm or something that
had some of their, they were like making alpha Starcraft or something, right?
An AI to play Starcraft really, really well, uh, the newest version, but
every time they tried to turn it on, some really crazy wacky shit would happen
where it didn't turn on.
At some point, would you start to think maybe they shouldn't turn this on
because anthropic principle says it's extremely unlikely this would have
kept happening.
So we must be in some.
Yeah.
Um, in that case, like, if it's useful sometime, if it's something like where
I'm noticing confusion about the, like the universe seems to be behaving in a
way that I wouldn't expect, um, then you start to be like, okay, something is
happening.
I notice I'm confused.
I'm going to generate hypotheses for why this might be and then decide what to
do from there.
So it's once the universe is behaving in ways you wouldn't expect.
Yes.
So in short, once you're surprised by how events are going, yes, but you're not
surprised that the cosmological constants are exactly what they are.
Why do I have a cause to be surprised about that?
I know how.
Because unless there is no other option for them to be what, besides what they
are, then it's extremely likely they would be just what they are.
Intuition about how likely it is for something to delay Google server
fires to like turn on over and over and over.
And like the more like unlikely and the more common that is, the more you can
be like, this is not the way the universe behaves, but I don't know anything
about how often life evolves or something like that.
Or about what states look like.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, we have no idea what the constants can be, but seeing that there's no
reason they couldn't be something else.
Is that not at all anything that influences your thinking?
I know enough about how the universe works to be confused when it's not working.
I don't know anything about how often life evolves or any of the big cosmological
questions.
So I don't think that that I can be surprised or not surprised by it.
I think that's a succinct way of putting it for me too.
Like I don't find the cosmological constants, I don't find the mind tuning
of the universe surprising for some reason.
Because again, we haven't delivered the universe where that didn't happen.
Right.
I guess I'm failing to make the thing click into place if there is one.
I think I'm with right now I'm like, just saying that if I'm trying to
paraphrase just to put this in my own head correctly as well, like I have some
expectation of what it looks like for this machine to keep failing to turn on.
Like because I have a model of the universe where, you know, when you hit
this switch, things happen and if things keep stopping that from happening,
that is surprising because I have already an understanding about those things work.
What I don't have is an understanding of how universes are started or stopped or
whatever.
Right.
Yeah.
How the constants are determined.
Right.
Yeah.
So like one of them, I can't find surprising because I have good reason for priors.
The other one I can find interesting, but I'm able to dismiss it.
Dismiss it anthropically without losing any sleeve because it's like, well, yep,
we live in a universe that allows life.
Yeah.
Um, I don't like, do I find that answer satisfying?
I'd be another kind of question.
Like, do I find it satisfying that?
Well, we live in a universe where that's the case.
I find not knowing things unsatisfying and I want to know more about them.
I mean, I don't find it all surprising that we live in a universe where that's
the case because obviously topologically we could only live in a universe that
supports us.
Tautologies are tight.
The question is, is there infinite universes with infinite constants or is
there only one where that just happened to have these constants?
So that, if that's the question, um, I mean, that's basically the
anthropic principle question, right?
Cause if there's infinite universes, then the anthropic principle is in effect.
There's almost infinite universes where you are dead now.
I think maybe we have no way to go about starting to find
out the answer.
So right now I can be like, huh, that's a question.
Yeah.
Right.
But what do you think is more likely that there's infinite universes?
I don't know.
I literally can't tell you which thing I think is more likely
because I have no evidence.
I think multiverse theory is more likely because a lot of other smart
people think it's likely for other, for also other reasons.
And so it sounds like the scientific consensus is either already or is
moving towards a direction where multiverse theory will be the predominant
view of the multi cosmos.
And I also think that's the most logical explanation because for
there to be only one universe seems absolutely ridiculous to me.
It would be weird.
Yes.
It would be, it would seem counterintuitive, maybe.
But if there's only one, but if there is an infinite number of universes
and we're in just one of them, then the anthropic principle comes into
effect in everything you do.
You're running off of the anthropic thing of like, or the, I don't know,
that you're a human and you're thinking about things in terms of the way
humans think of things as causes and causes and it being important to
discover why this thing is like that.
So you can determine the strategies of your enemies or friends and do
political things because that's how they, we evolved and what we do.
I'm not thinking about causes at all.
I'm thinking about, is there infinite universes or just one?
And I mean, like, but, but the fact that that's the thing that bothers
you, um, that you can't just say, I don't know, I don't have enough evidence
yet.
And then like, there's other questions that we could be working on in the
meantime, means that you're obsessed about this idea of causality.
I very much don't know, but I don't think it's a 50-50 coin toss.
Why not?
Because I think the, it is extremely unlikely that there is only one universe
with these constants, if the constants can be anything.
But how do you know that?
How do you know that it's unlikely you don't have any evidence that it is or isn't?
If the constants can be anything, then it is unlikely just because they can be
anything.
And for them to be these particular numbers is, you know,
but unlikely things happen all the time.
Yeah, of course.
It's the whole like, I'm just saying it's incredibly unlikely.
So like pretending that there's like 36 knobs that can be tuned to any one of
a hundred values, they are, every, every knob happens to be turned somewhere on
the scale of one to 100 that allows for the universe as we know it.
Right.
So just per that, if that's just a complete dice roll, that sounds unlikely.
You've got one in a hundred, 36 times.
Um, so I see, what is the likelihood that those dials would be somewhere?
Exactly.
That had to be somewhere.
I think for me, maybe I, I never did any formal research on anthropic principle
or then like coming across it in the form of fine tuning arguments and stuff.
Um, I've never seen anyone trying to leverage it to do actual work, the way
that we've been doing for the last hour.
Oh, I've seen that a lot.
Oh, see, I, I think that's, I'm finding it really interesting, but I'm unprepared for it.
So like, I, I've always just seen it as this like, oh yeah, I guess that, um, again,
so like using the example of the Celsius scale.
You know, if someone's surprised by that, they're wrong to be surprised
because this was on purpose or it is actually like, oh, okay.
Yeah.
I wonder what that would be like.
Right.
Um, we happen to live in a universe where, uh, um, I mean, it's possible that
there's some underlying physical law that makes it so all constants have to be
exactly what they are in any universe, in which case having only one universe is fine.
But there, I don't see any reason to believe that.
And given that the constants, assuming that the constants could have been anything,
it's extremely unlikely that we're not in an infinite universe scenario.
I think since I already thought we're in an infinite universe scenario, that's sort
of my, my fine, that's why I'm fine with that sort of assumption.
And maybe that's because that was put forward as a, one of the possible answers
to this in a book I read in 2004 or something.
But I feel like, I feel like there was a short part of a chapter in the God
illusion on the anthropic principle.
And if you already believe in an infinite universe's hypothesis, that should change
your, um, change at least some of your thinking.
Like you should think that cryonics is a wonderful idea because no matter how
unlikely it is in at least one universe, it'll happen.
I'm, and you might even want to be depending on how much you care about other
universes and your loved ones and other universes, you might be willing to take
extravagant risks for big payoffs because, well, in most universes, you'll die,
but in the one that you actually remember and keep living in, you have a huge payout.
Yeah.
I'm hopeful that I live in a universe where chronics ends up working and I'm
preserved correctly.
Right.
Like the fact that I'm signed up increases my chances of being cryo reversed at
some point, right?
From zero to not zero.
Right.
I mean, so like I could still get burned in a fire, in which case, even the fact
that I'm signed up won't save me.
So like I could still die in a way that keeps me from being put on ice, which is
a drag.
I certainly don't want that to happen.
I mean, you've thought of one of the things that could harm you, death, and
then you've taken one of the steps that you could to possibly mitigate it.
So you've adjusted things slightly more in your favor, but you don't know how
much because you don't know, you don't know what you don't know.
Yeah.
I try to tweak the knobs in a way that lean towards me living forever, um, to
the extent, especially to the extent that it's very easy.
That's the best you can do for now.
You don't know it.
You don't know.
So you just try to mitigate against the forces that you do know, and that you
have some evidence for and don't worry about it.
And like arguably cryonics isn't easy compared to like, you know, more people
are killed by vending machines every year than sharks.
And so because of that, I don't rock vending machines.
Like that's a lot.
It's a lot easier to not rock.
It's a lot easier to not rock vending machines than it is to sign up for cryonics.
Right.
Um, so like I have taken that somewhat not, uh, easy step towards trying
to increase my longevity, um, it's not as hard as people think it is.
That said, I should plug.
If I haven't before Rudy Hoffman wrote a book called the affordable immortal,
which you can find on Amazon.
And he was nice enough to send me a copy of when I changed my policy with him,
which I don't know if I ever properly thanked him for.
So I'll send an email saying, I thank you and told all my listeners on my
podcast that I do to check out this book.
Um, we will link the book, but also you don't necessarily need the book.
A lot of times you can just follow a few instructions online.
I know both the cryonics Institute and Alcor have instructions online, but
you can follow and get signed up.
Oh yeah.
This isn't necessarily an instruction manual.
It's also just a case.
It's more information about it.
Yeah.
It's just more information.
Like if you think that, oh, well, no, it's way, it's way too expensive.
It's way out of my, my, my ability to do this.
It might not be.
Gotcha.
Um, I mean, generally, if you can, if you can spare 30 bucks a month, you can
totally afford to sign up for cryonics, um, depending on how healthy you are.
Unfortunately, my parents are older and not super healthy.
Getting them a life insurance policy that would pay out for a
cryonics will be substantially expensive.
Um, that said, it would probably be easier to get them to save up $110,000 each, uh,
in cash and just, you know, have this ready to pay for out of their
estate rather than out of their life insurance.
Yeah.
Um, wouldn't be easy, easy, but it might be easier than getting them on a $700
a month life insurance policy or something.
Right.
So.
So real quick, given that you, I thought about this sometimes given that you
believe in infinite universes and therefore you believe there are many
universes where you are dead due to the truck hitting you in the head or whatever.
How do you feel about those other universes?
I generally don't feel about them.
Like I, I'm not trying to dodge the question.
Like in the, in the circumstances where I actually think about it and I'm
confronted with it, like I said, I do feel diminished in the, uh, the multi
dimensional light cone of that crosses the, whatever you call the thing, the
multiverse is a part, you know, the universes are a part of multiverse is fine.
Um, the number of Stevens across times went down.
Yeah.
Um, that's a bomber.
Yeah.
I mean, it's kind of fun in that sense, like a fun, like fuck you sort of
thing to like the utilitarian perspective.
Like I can, I can make the universe an amazing place here locally.
Um, like it, it would be a drag.
I, and I'm sure Peter Singer's written on this, having been a philosopher, but
like if you solve animal welfare, the universe is still the multiverse is
still aggregately full of suffering.
Even if you save every cow on earth, um, that doesn't mean that you shouldn't do
it, right?
Like the multiverse is somehow still a slightly happier place because you've
done that you could even like, I mean, I lean utilitarian still.
So I tend to catch my, I tend to frame my arguments that way, but you don't
even have to think about it in terms of like the amount of happiness in the
universe, right?
Yeah.
Um, I, I think that the kinds of societies with people that are caring
about those sorts of things also are people that it all comes back on
happiness, like whether you're utilitarian or not, like.
I believe the term for how many, just to interject quickly, that how many
use there are across the multiverse is measure that your measure was decreased
in that incident, even though you personally lived, your measure across
the multiverse has was decreased.
There was a movie in nearly 2000s called the one.
Yeah, I remember that with Jet Lee.
Yeah.
And that was fun.
So whenever there were some 30 something universes, it wasn't, it was
far from infinite.
It was in the, it was in the dozens.
And whenever one version was at least hundreds, because at the very end, we
see hundreds of him all fighting it out.
Oh, I thought it was only like 36 or something.
That was all that we saw, but at the end we saw, yeah, a lot of hymns.
Nice.
Yes.
So the premise is that whenever one of you dies across the multiverse, the
like essence slash power slash literal physical strength is transferred to the
survivors.
Maybe that was other, maybe that was other criminals and not hymns.
That might have been other criminals.
Yeah, yeah.
Cause I vaguely remember because the one was he killed off everyone else.
Yeah, to get all the power.
And I think at the end, so like then it's basically one guy universe hopping,
killing himself in other universes.
And then like it's down to him and the other version of him that doesn't really
know why he's a lot stronger and faster than he used to be.
And then this guy's trying to kill him.
And I think it ends with him like shutting that guy down in a non-lethal way.
Um, spoiler alert, maybe 20 years old.
So.
Got a question.
Since.
Oh, wait, I just let me finish that thought.
Yes.
The downside is it doesn't seem like I absorbed all those dead Stevens powers.
Great fight did.
Well, if there's an almost infinite amount, you got to kill a lot of Stevens.
That could also be the Stevenators power.
So, dude, what you got to do is go out there and take an insanely risky thing
where you die 99.99% of the time and the you that survives is going to be
ultra powerful and you can take over your universe.
Or more cheaply, I could just buy a gun and just do Russian roulette
all weekend, every weekend.
Yeah, that works too.
Yeah, no, I think I'm good.
So somewhere along the line, like this might be a thing that like
anthropically, historically, I live in a universe where I haven't died yet.
That doesn't mean I want to test my luck.
I don't know why it doesn't mean that, but it does.
That's a good question because it's called quantum suicide.
And it's a thing people have proposed.
Like if you if you really want a lot of money, set up some sort of quantum
random number generator, it would have to be quantum because if it's just
mechanical random number generator, we have the same numbers in every universe.
But quantum effects are truly random.
So quantum random number generator, play that lotto with those numbers.
If you lose, you shoot yourself.
The only universe where you survive is the one where you won the lotto.
So basically what you do is you buy a lotto ticket, you go to bed, you wake up
the next morning and you're like, oh, hey, I want the lotto.
I'm so glad I don't have to shoot myself.
That is all you see from your perspective.
OK, so what would it mean if tomorrow we saw a news headline?
I'm going to propose two different headlines.
One, somebody wins the lottery and they explain that's how they won.
The other the other version is that we see on the news that somebody killed
themselves and their suicide notes that here's what I was trying to do.
They tried to do a quantum suicide if anything really awesome ever happens to
me that gets me on the news or if like really unfortunate things happen
and I end up committing suicide in both cases.
I think I'm going to write that letter just to fuck with people.
So that would be my my theory as to what would be going on.
There's that the person thought of that joke.
Yeah, that makes sense.
I think the idea of being joked with is a higher probability of.
Actually happening.
Right. Yeah.
And the fact is you you're trading away almost all of your measure
across all the multi universes for a ton of money in one.
I wouldn't do it because I don't know that whether there's a multiverse or not.
And that's another thing that I have no way of knowing what the probability
of being a multiverse or not is.
Yeah, it would be cool if it were like it generates cool thought
experience like thinking about it.
If you're totally selfish, if you're the kind of person
who defect against yourself in a prisoner's dilemma,
then this sounds like a great gamble for you.
Right. Why fuck all those other Stevens.
I get to win the money.
They're all dead. Yeah, exactly.
So it also fuck all of your family and loved ones and all those other universes.
I don't I'm never going to meet them anyway.
Right. I actually have a thing to play in this universe.
It's the Steven gravy train.
There's a graphic novel.
I think it's called The Infinite Vacation that had some kind of.
I'm trying to remember what the plot was.
I can't exactly remember it was.
But it's something to do with multiverses and multiple versions of a guy
being part of just like really trying to remember.
I don't know. There was this convoluted thing that happened
and it was one of them trying to switch lives. Oh, that was it.
Yeah, they were like there was
interdimensional payment system for if you want to switch lives with one of your other selves.
Does someone else in one of your other selves also have to sign up for that service?
Yeah, like it has to be like a mutual agreement.
That sounds like a shit deal then, basically,
because they're like what's sucking up.
What if you were like, Steven, what if you're you now,
except like maybe you're having some kind of financial crisis and then like you from
a universe where everything's exactly the same, except for there's a lot more mosquitoes comes
and is like, hey, I'll give you the amount of money you need in order to deal with your car
accident or whatever. If you switch universes with me where everything will be the same,
but there will be more mosquitoes.
Do I get to know what I'm signing up for before I click yes?
Or do I just have to know that some other Steven
and another timeline wanted to switch universes?
I don't know, like I don't think the graphic novel goes into
because that actually drastically adjusts how much I'd be willing to do this.
Because if I got to know and I'm like, you know what,
I'm okay with more mosquitoes, I'd rather have $10 million than I would do that.
If all I knew is that another Steven also wanted out of their universe,
oh god, I would think now fuck that.
Because of quantum differences that Steven might be different than you have different values.
What if the universe was exactly the same, except this other Steven had no back trouble,
perfectly healthy back, except he was in a lot of financial debt.
At what level of financial debt would you not make that trade?
I mean, how disastrous to my life is the financial.
Is it like, say, student loan debt?
That's the question.
But is it like student loan debt where I get 30 years to pay it off
and it's like something I can live with?
Or is it just like you're going to be homeless forever?
Probably not homeless homeless, but maybe living out of your car
and working 14 hours a day.
The car stuff sounds like a drag.
If it was like student loan debt where it's like you're paying this horrible deal for you
interest, I would say $200,000 at least as a quick guess because that's
an upper end of what people spend on school and it gets them fuck all.
I mean, you get credentials, don't get it wrong, go to school if you want to.
I'm moderately against this is super tangential.
I think depending on your industry that you're pursuing,
you can trade school your way there a lot faster and cheaper.
And you certainly don't need a credential from an Ivy League school to like,
I don't know, I'll poke fun at Brian, my co-host and if we want more, he was an English major.
I don't know where he went to school.
If he got an English major from Harvard, I think that's super funny.
Like to imagine him right now still paying off Harvard student loan debt.
Well, actually it wouldn't be because he went to school when school is more affordable.
But let's pretend you had $200,000 worth of student loan debt to pay off an English major.
For an English major, yeah.
Or you know, we don't need to make fun of someone who maybe didn't do that.
John Mulaney I think was $120,000 in student loan debt, the comedian.
Getting an English major.
So we've already had the school talk discussion,
but I think it's an interesting way to phrase,
to rethink about how much you're willing to pay for something.
Like if I could swap into a universe where I didn't have this problem,
how much financial debt would I still be willing to make that trade?
And at what point is the debt so crushing that I wouldn't make that trade?
That is a good intuition pump actually.
I think it could be crushing for me at the level where I'm homeless.
Like that's a big drag.
What if you had to just live in a really shitty neighborhood?
Where there's, you know, gunshots.
There's often cockroaches in your house,
but it's all you can afford because you got all this debt.
John Mulaney I feel like I could cockroach proof my place.
John Mulaney Those fuckers there.
John Mulaney I've lived in places that are adjacent to like, you know,
not base, I don't know, to higher than what I'm comfortable with,
base levels of violence running around.
John Mulaney Okay.
John Mulaney And it's crazy cheap.
It's dope.
John Mulaney Yeah.
John Mulaney $370 a month for rent.
Man, those were the days.
John Mulaney I am no longer willing to live in a place where I have to worry about my stuff.
Like, I always lock my doors just because it's a good habit.
But if my door were to not be locked, I wouldn't be worried because
no one in this neighborhood needs money so badly,
they would risk jail time to walk into my house and steal things.
John Mulaney On the plus side, if you're broke as fuck,
you don't have any stuff worth taking.
Man, that's true.
John Mulaney So people will be breaking your deal.
John Mulaney Have you had stuff stolen before?
Man, that's true.
John Mulaney Me?
John Mulaney Yeah.
Man, that's true.
John Mulaney It's just something that bothers you about having to have that paranoia in the background.
Man, that's true.
John Mulaney Yes.
I don't want to live in that constant.
John Mulaney I feel you on that.
That would be stressful.
Man, my childhood growing up, we used to just not lock the doors to our house ever.
John Mulaney Oh, really?
Man, I get a little bit frustrated now with having to lock doors and worry about my stuff
being stolen in the background, both because A, now I live in an area where I live in an apartment.
It's maybe not the best area.
It's more likely people might take my stuff.
By the way, not the best area in Denver is one of the nicer areas in a lot of other cities.
It's like there might be a tattooed person smoking on a street corner
or like a piece of litter blowing by in the wind and you're like, oh man, this is a bad area.
There's gum stuck to that bench.
John Mulaney I mean, I was in Denver for like a month before I saw my first needle on the sidewalk.
I mean, and I almost, you know, I could have stepped on it.
That would have been uncomfortable.
Man, John Mulaney There's some places in the area that are much worse,
but they're not downtown.
Man, they're still not bad.
When I visited you, when I was visiting to see if I wanted to move here for the first time and
I crashed at your place and I was driving around a bunch of different areas, I remember people
saying, I think West Colfax is the area with a reputation.
And I like went there and I'm thinking about Atlantic City level bad.
I'm walking around like this is the bad area of Denver.
Like you guys are spoiled as fuck.
We got a pretty good compared to a lot of other places.
You know, certainly not as bad as Gotham in any of the movies I've seen recently.
That's right.
Yeah, it doesn't have Batman.
So I don't know how bad would you want your city to be
if it meant that you also got to have a Batman?
I don't know.
I mean, about as bad as Denver.
Batman doesn't seem to have done all that much good for Gotham
considering how shitty Gotham still is.
I also never got why like everyone stayed in Gotham.
The muggles I get, like they get before to move.
I mean, the supervillains.
Why not go two towns over where there is no mass crusader
and just go commit crimes, you know, two states over.
That would be a good Batman thing.
Maybe they're in it for the challenge.
They want to fight Batman.
Yeah, they're all insane, which is why they exist.
Has anyone written a rationalist Batman yet?
Have you read The Masculine Mongoose?
Yeah.
Okay, it's not a rationalist Batman, but it's really fun.
I remember Alexander Wales at one point said that he was thinking
about doing a rationalist Batman, but never got there.
Alexander, if you ever get the impulse,
I will support you on Patreon to do that.
I keep occasionally thinking about doing a rationalist Dragon Ball.
Oh, that could be fun.
Not like, I mean, there's still going to be magic and stuff in it,
but more of just like give all the characters a level up in intelligence
because it's a show that most of the plot is driven forward
by somebody holding the idiot ball.
And basically all characters kind of holding the idiot ball at all times.
Like they're just, you know, solution to everything is punch it harder.
What do you expect?
Even when like the...
It's a show about punching things hard.
So the thing that I would do is, and if anyone also wants to steal this idea,
it might have even been done, like I might do it someday.
But Bulma, the Dragon Ball show is like, for people that aren't familiar,
there's like a little kid with magic powers and a girl who's like the scientist,
the daughter of the scientist who invented capsule technologies,
basically like you can stick stuff into a pokeball or whatever and some other shit.
And she's really intelligent too.
And she meets this kid and they go on adventures
and they eventually like levels up to the scale of universes,
fighting universes in martial arts tournaments.
But like the fact that Bulma's a genius scientist is never used.
And like the fact that, yeah, there's any other solution to anything
other than punching things hard enough that you start glowing in your hair
turns a different color because you've punched things hard enough
that you can now punch things harder.
It's a cool power.
I'm picturing like Superman throwing a baseball like relatively at six speeds.
And is that what makes them change colors in Dragon Ball Z?
Or is that just like literally the magic powers?
It's part of magic powers.
It's the color of their cheat or whatever.
It's funny that like, I do like that the author is self aware sometimes
and will make fun of himself while writing it.
Like, I've discovered Super Saiyan Blue.
What does it do?
It makes you blue.
Is that it?
I think of more powerful too, but mostly look at my hair.
Like it's almost like word for word kind of one of the things that happened in the show.
They will occasionally also point out that the main character, the good guy Goku,
who's like the adult, the little kid in original Dragon Ball grew up to be,
like one of his defining characteristics is happy, go lucky.
And other is just constantly needs to be challenged in battle.
And that like he has also been responsible for probably causing a lot of the conflict
in the show because other people are wandering around the universe looking for somebody strong
to fight and conquer.
And the fact that he's there on earth means that like earth is getting targeted to be destroyed
more often.
So like they actually address that in universe.
And like they're like, hey, Goku, like maybe it would be cool if you didn't like just care
so much about fighting evil things that you sometimes get bored and pick a fight with
like evil space warlords.
And he's like, haha, nah, I can't not do that.
Has anyone suggested that he live on a planet without a large population?
Like he likes living on earth and he's okay.
He's like, I can punch things.
So what does it matter?
So far he's had a pretty good track record of being able to punch everything.
Fucking anthropic principle.
He's punched everything so far.
And no one's strong enough to coerce him to live on another planet.
They're like, hey, why don't you fuck off for a while?
Because we're sick of almost being killed every other month.
Another really great joke.
We didn't see the anime of all the universes where he died.
No, another really great joke that the show does is also that earth has the most delicious food
in the universe.
So there's a lot of allies who have incentive to keep earth around because earth like has ramen,
for example.
And a bunch of other planets have like just really boring food.
And they're like, oh man, that's that planet that has the really strong guy.
But and it's also got instant ramen and like fruit salad.
Have you tried fruit salad?
Is it that hard to grow fruit trees?
Like I'm not I'm not a I'm not a scientist, but I got to think ramen is not that hard to make
in the scale of like, you know, universal technology.
Well, it definitely is like playing, you know, it's laugh shading that.
It sounds like a really funny show, but aren't there like 900 episodes?
Oh, God, they're yeah, it's it's been most of them are filler.
My entire life at this thing has been ongoing.
And I like, oh my God.
Yeah, it sounds great.
I don't think I'll be able to get into it.
Maybe I'll watch like an hour long appreciation video that summarizes more of this stuff later.
Definitely.
It drags that some of the movies in the more recent show are kind of worth watching,
but even they are like very slow paced.
I've got a quick plug.
Oh, so we're gonna say I was just gonna say we should wrap up and move on.
Oh, yeah.
Then before we do that.
Okay, this is this is a rationally adjacent subject.
Okay.
There was like a one off sequel chapter to Death Note that came out,
I think just like in the last month.
Did you by chance read it?
Not the one off.
No, you should.
Okay.
I actually didn't read the manga either.
I just saw the anime.
Yeah.
If you saw that, you're close enough.
The manga is a lot better.
But it always is.
I mean, but I really liked the anime a lot.
Maybe it's because I saw it first,
but also like seeing it with color and music was actually a lot of fun.
Yeah.
The only thing you get more of in the manga is their intro theme in the second season.
It's always an art downgrade from manga to animation.
Yeah.
But I mean, the art.
Yeah.
I mean, the art downgrade is there too.
But like as far as just I liked the the shading, like again,
the different color cells they could do for different things.
They did like the five minutes of just a character thinking.
I think somewhat engaging.
All you get in the manga is more.
I kind of refuse to say manga.
I will, but I can.
It's like you go to a Mexican restaurant in order a quesadilla or quesadilla, right?
Like if you like, or if you go to a French restaurant in order,
in order a croissant and not a croissant, right?
Do you also call it Japan animation?
No, I call it anime.
Okay.
Yeah.
I find for it what I.
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
Anime.
I'm fine calling it either way,
but I'm not is that if someone were to correct me,
how would bring up my like,
hold do you do order a croissant when you go to a pastry shop?
No, you order a croissant.
You say it how you say it in your dialect.
But I'm fine with anyone saying it with a soft A or a long A.
We have an interesting listener feedback about that same topic.
Oh, no.
I just I'd never heard man, manga.
Manga, manga, manga.
I'd never heard manga before.
I'd always heard people say manga.
So that's because that's how that's how if you're phonetically saying it,
that's how it's A said in Japanese.
And Japanese written in English is awesomely consistent,
where a single A is pronounced every time.
So like, it's not like in English where it's like guess or fuck you
when you're trying to figure out the rules or like other languages
which have those sounds,
but then have some kind of like signifier that this is a soft E
like two dots over it or under it.
Like, yeah, in English is just like,
I don't know.
You just got to memorize how words you said.
Exactly.
I'm so glad it was my first language.
I said manga growing up or I guess as my first introduction to it
because it's spelled a lot like mango.
And that's how you say mango.
That said, all you get more of in the manga,
manga is longer thought out stretches.
But there's plenty of those in the shot.
They're possibly different too.
They sped it up a bit for they did.
Slowed it down a bit.
Yeah, the they did some, you know, adaptations for animation
that made sense during that.
Yeah, no, I'm only saying that.
That's great.
I want to check it out in either format.
It's better than it's better written down, but it never isn't.
So that said, there's a one off chapter that has basically the setup is.
I don't want to spoil it, but it's another it's almost like a fun.
I could put it to this way.
If you had the death note and you wanted to find a way to make it to use it to make your life a lot
better, how would you do it without killing anybody?
Isn't the only thing it does kill people?
Oh, no, it was other things.
So don't don't spoil it if you've read this.
I haven't read it.
But my like, well, the one thing I know is that not only does it only kill people,
but you can tell them what they do before they die.
And that's the way that they will die.
And I wonder if there's a way that you could set it up to
write something that's like, this is the way this person dies.
And you talk about like, here's how Elon Musk dies.
First he, you know, invents as many things as you could think of.
And then like he like solves world hunger and then and then he dies as an old man in his bed.
To get around that, the one of the rules is that you can only control someone's actions
up to 23 days before they die.
Oh, I forgot about that.
So yeah, there's the 23 day limit.
But you could find people who are probably going to die with them next 23 days anyway.
So kind of terminal illness.
You could try to do something like that.
But it wouldn't be it wouldn't be bad if you didn't mind killing them to say like,
all right, cool.
So this asshole, you know, who might whatever this Wall Street prick or whatever,
I've determined that I'm okay killing them.
I'm going to have them send me $10 million in cryptocurrency, you know, in a hidden way
before they die.
Like, so that would be one way to do it.
If you're going to kill somebody.
If you're sounds like you have chosen to rob and murder someone.
It does.
Okay.
So my but what's fun about this is that the one off chapter is kind of like,
like I said, if the problem to you posed was, say if you,
you didn't want to kill people, but you didn't want to pass up the opportunity to,
you know, not use this for your own personal benefit.
How would you do it?
It's a really fun thing.
It took me 10 minutes to read.
I think it'll have a great time with it.
Sounds super interesting.
So I will put this in the show notes too.
There is a a one off.
It's important to note that it's a sequel to death note.
Like it takes place.
Is it written by the original author or is this like a fan work?
I think it's the original author.
Oh, cool.
If it's not, it is very compellingly done in the exact same art format.
Yeah.
That art style is very attractive.
Yeah.
I've always admired that one.
I wish, I mean, to go off on a quick tangent,
my complaint about a lot of anime and manga and why I haven't kept up with it
is that it's so derivative, very infrequently.
Do you find new types of stories, new character archetypes, new art styles?
That's true.
Basically all media though.
Yeah.
Not less so.
And like, like Western film tends to keep evolving,
whereas because of Japanese culture and people liking the same thing over and over again,
like a lot of it tends to say the same more than it does in cultures that prefer more novelty.
But you know, you still occasionally get the one punch man's and like the unique stuff,
Osamatsu-san, what the heck is that one with the weird anime girls?
Madoka Madoka?
Well, no, that was good too.
Art style is derivative, but new kind of story that was cool.
I'm thinking of the one with like the two high school girls who are shaped like
anatomically very strange and it's a bizarre parody show.
Oh, Pop Team Epic.
It's actually on Netflix.
I don't know if I recommend it or not.
I would recommend skipping around a little bit and watching some of it to get an idea of what it is,
but it was a style of humor that it's so Japanese that it doesn't translate well,
even to somebody like me who's a big weeb and has been pretty immersed in Japanese culture,
like that there's some like specific jokes about stuff that are just like,
first of all, for people in their 30s, probably.
And secondly, like something that maybe like a TV commercial you might have seen on TV when you were a kid,
if you lived in Japan.
And I'm like, I bet that's funny if you know that context.
So there's a lot of that.
But then there's also a lot of just very strange deconstruction of anime archetypes,
things going on that are pretty enjoyable.
As long as we're pitching this, everyone needs to read not watch Berserk.
It's a long read.
It's like at 37 volumes.
It's been going on for over 30 years, but there was like several long year hiatuses.
If you have to watch anything, watch the 1997 anime, but know that only encompasses like
six volumes of the 37 volumes that are out.
Isn't the new Berserk anime one of those ones where they did it in CGI and they tried to make it look drawn,
but it still looks terrible?
It looks at parts of it kind of look like South Park.
But I wish that's like it's getting better.
That technology is getting better.
I'm holding out my hopes that eventually there's a few things that we're done.
And this is such a tangent.
We should get back to talk.
I will just say that the new that the two new seasons finally did stuff.
They also made movies in early 2000s that covered the same arc as the 1997 anime.
What the new movies did or the new seasons did was finally cover after that stuff.
We've been waiting 20 years for it.
And I was just loving seeing things with music and motion again in color.
But everyone hated it so much that they canceled it.
So fuck those guys.
Just learn to enjoy what you get.
I'd rather see it not exist and see it like this.
It's like, no, fuck you.
All right.
As long as we're recommending things, I recommend a really short thing.
I absolutely love Birds of Prey and the fantabulous emancipation of one Harley Quinn.
It was like, okay.
So first of all, you have to already love the character of Harley Quinn or people like her.
Which everyone does.
Not everyone.
I've met quite a few people that don't.
But I am absolutely the fan of like the crazy Genki Riot girl that is just
carefree as fuck, murderous people, lots of violence, doesn't care, doesn't matter.
Right.
And this is that kind of movie.
It's cartoonish slapstick comedy all over the place with fucking ultra violence thrown in
constantly.
And it was so much fun.
I loved it.
I loved it for the same reason.
I love Tank Girl because Tank Girls got the same kind of thing.
And I just, I had the most fun I've had in a movie in a long time.
Cool.
I really want to see it.
There's movies I like better for artistic reasons, but in terms of just fun, oh my god, so good.
In terms of exceeding my expectations, I can endorse it as strongly.
Okay.
Because you were expecting Suicide Squad 2.
Well, so I was expecting Suicide Squad 2 and the trailer looks terrible.
Okay.
You see the trailer and you're like, none of this makes sense.
Even if you'd like Harley Quinn, this looks like a shit movie.
That's how we went and saw it on opening weekend and I loved it.
Awesome.
I thought it was great.
I didn't want to sell you on it too hard, lest you, lest it fall short.
Like I did.
Shit.
What I meant to say is this is a pretty good movie.
You should think about seeing it.
I think it's for a specific person.
I think for many people, it'll surpass expectations.
Okay.
Especially if you're bar or Suicide Squad.
I know.
Go in there and enjoy it.
The person I went to see with Charlie didn't like it, but that's because she doesn't,
she doesn't like the Harley Quinn character type.
Then what was she doing seeing a Harley Quinn movie?
She was seeing it mainly for me.
Oh, man.
But she doesn't like crazy people who are just crazy for the hell of it.
And I do.
So it worked out.
Yeah.
People have, I mean, I also really enjoy movies that are just fun in a way that appeals to me.
But surprisingly enough, some people don't think that just like fun, jolly, ultra violence
is really fun to watch.
They're weird.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I agree.
Should we go on to the next part of our podcast that's going on for quite a while?
No, we should wrap it up.
I'm really disappointed because I wanted to get to the less wrong posts.
We haven't done those in a long time.
I wanted to get the feedback because there's a few good things of feedback.
Should our next episode just be feedback and less wrong posts?
Or will that make everybody sad?
No, that would make everyone sad.
It probably would.
Okay.
Well, how about whatever our next episode is, we really try hard to keep it
like time boxed so we can actually get to the other things that we sometimes do.
We should like have a timer or something with an alarm that goes off.
I mean, that's up to you guys.
Also, it's worth noting that this is the first time we sat down to record with each other
since the live episode, I think.
Sorry for more tangency than usual.
We're enjoying each other's company again.
So hopefully you're enjoying it too.
And you guys did like remote at that point.
And then there was another remote one and yeah, it's been a while.
I really don't like recording remote as much as being in the room with people.
I've been really digging into my phone phobia recently.
I found out that one of the reasons that I hate phone calls is that I lose a lot of
context with tone of voice, facial expression and body language.
And I have such a hard time with those things anyway being on the spectrum that when you take
away more data that I need to figure out what people are saying and what the context is,
then it's and probably most people also feel like this.
Phones are terrible.
They used to not be as terrible like in the 90s where people had landlines.
Yeah, I heard that landline.
Like the quality was a major selling point and like you could hear someone like
just slightly intake their breath like they're about to say something, you know,
it was it was almost like being there in the room except you couldn't see them and not
seeing them.
That is a big deal.
Like being face to face with someone is much better than phones.
But and you were more dedicated to the call having to be in the room with the phone.
Yes, rather than just have the phone with you wherever you happen to be.
Yeah, yeah, you were paying attention to the phone because you couldn't do much else.
Right.
Yeah, it was it was very different phones nowadays suck get together with people.
That said, there's a great keen peel sketch which we'll also throw in the show notes
about how easy it is to misinterpret the messages of somebody via text.
You read into it wrong.
Sorry, we're just recommending so many things.
But Malcolm Gladwell's new book Talking to Strangers like the whole book is about this
and it's so good.
I kind of want to do a review of it at some point.
Let's do that for our next episode.
Oh, sure.
I'd like to do that.
I got to finish it first though.
Okay.
I'll be done by then.
I got to I got to give it back to the library.
Okay, cool.
I have to finish it.
We have our tap buck for in two weeks.
Perfect.
Hell yeah.
So this time for real in two weeks, we will be talking about the less wrong posts.
Lana sec update yourself incrementally and one argument against an army.
Which oh man, and these tie in with the things we talked about today too.
Yeah, so it's okay.
We can find ways to tie them into other things.
We happen not to live in a new verse where we got around to listening to these or to
to getting to these.
What we really got to do is set a bomb at every single one of our recordings.
And if we don't get to our things that explodes, so the only universes where podcasts come out
are the ones where we got to them.
If you think that's a good idea, write in on the subreddit or email us or comment on this
episode at the Bayesian Conspiracy podcast or excuse me at BayesianConspiracyPodcast.com.
Or if you, what should we make our reward limit be?
If you want us to set a bomb in the room for the next episode, donate to us on Patreon
at the $1,000 level.
Yeah.
And we will buy a small bomb to put in the room for episodes.
I wouldn't say every episode.
One episode.
I'd be willing to do it for one.
Yeah, yeah.
For every $1,000 that you give us, we'll record an episode of the bomb in the room.
Yeah.
An idea key we'll get to our feedback and shit.
If you don't want to donate at that level, you can donate at a more humane level to us
at patreon.com.
I really hope that we don't have any rich fans now.
I used to not worry about that.
The money will have to come in first for us to record the materials.
I will commit to doing an episode of the bomb in the room if we get $1,000.
Would you?
Hold on.
We got to get buying from all three hosts.
Considering, yeah, hell, sure.
Okay.
All right.
Because.
I'll roll that dice.
Yeah.
Yeah, me too.
I don't think anyone's going to waste that money.
So, but if you want to do it at the smaller level, we also have those options on the
Patreon website as well.
I am willing to trade a tiny bit of measure in the tiny percent of universes where the
bomb explodes on accident for $1,000 and all the other universes where it doesn't.
If anyone at this point is unaware, I'm also like 20, wait, I guess, 16 episodes into a
podcast called We Want More as a read through with a non-rationalist person who has an already
read Harry Potter and Methods of Rationality where I'm doing sort of a, we've got worm ripoff
with them where basically we're going through it a couple chapters at a time and getting reactions
and discussing chapters every episode that airs weekly on Mondays.
It's really fun, guys.
You get to hear about how a non-rationalist reads the stuff and you get to like go through
the whole HPM war again, which I haven't done in years.
I'm really enjoying it now because I mean, as a rationalist, I was listening to it.
I realized how much bias I have in favor of it because I kept having the reaction.
I think I actually texted you once or twice that was like, man, Brian just doesn't get it.
And then I was like, wait a minute, a couple of things Brian said I actually agree with.
And now I'm like, oh, I realize I'm getting defensive about things that he has a good point
about occasionally.
I still do that.
I will say a couple things about it.
One, while I don't know if he's drinking the rationalist Kool-Aid yet, he is enjoying the
story more.
It only took three months, but he's having more fun.
So if you find that his constant shitting on it in the first episodes is turning you off,
that stops.
And that is a Doof Media podcast production.
So you can check out our website on doofmedia.com and find us over there or currently still on
Enya's HPMOR podcast feed, but we're moving it over because it's going to be way too confusing.
So this outro took us only seven minutes.
Excellent.
All right.
Yay.
And yeah, tell people about this podcast, leave comments and reviews that helps get out to
more people.
If you would like to donate a buck a month for this thing, we'd really appreciate that too.
And that won't risk our lives.
And that will not risk our lives.
Yeah.
Ooh, maybe we should have a competing thing.
I was just thinking that.
Like if 100 people donate $10, then the bomb gets taken out again, so there's no risk to our
life.
And that way we get $2,000.
We will discuss the details of the bomb situation should that ever come up.
Okay.
All right.
Cool.
We'll set up like a new reward system where it's like, if you want us to not have a bomb in the room.
Yeah.
Oh, you're so fast.
Perfect.
Okay.
Like we should leave.
Yes.
So we have to thank the Patreon as always.
We would like to once again thank Emilio Alvarez for making this podcast available to everybody
in a general sense and this specific episode to everyone with the request for us to discuss the
anthropic principle.
It was a lot of fun.
And anyone else who wants us to discuss something can donate $10 and we will do that.
And also just wanted to say that I hope we didn't mangle the discussion too badly.
I hope Emilio feels like he got at least a little bit of his money's worth.
Let us know if you got your money's worth.
If you didn't, we'll touch the topic again.
And also, yeah, I think he's got hosting co-host level.
Yeah, he can always come on.
So yeah, you can come tell us why we're wrong.
Yep, please do.
That'd be awesome.
Yeah.
Great.
All right.
Thanks everybody.
We'll see you in a couple of weeks.
Good night, everybody.
