Hi and welcome. I am Victor Gijsbers and I teach philosophy at Leiden University
in the Netherlands. In this video I want to take a look at the article Two
Dogmas of Empiricism written by the American philosopher Willard van
Almen Quine. Two Dogmas of Empiricism is a famous article. Indeed it has often
been said to be the most important or most influential article written in
20th century philosophy or at least 20th century analytic or 20th century
anglophone philosophy. So what we want to do when we take a look at Two Dogmas
of Empiricism is of course we want to understand what Quine is saying but we
also want to understand why it is so famous, why it had such an enormous
influence. Even though Quine himself, when he wrote it, you know, thought of it
as like definitely not his best work as kind of hasty, kind of sketchy.
Nevertheless, despite that Two Dogmas of Empiricism was seen as a sea change in
20th century philosophy. Okay, so let's look at that. I want to start out by
reading the first few sentences of the article because it gives us a very good
overview of what Quine is going to do. Modern Empiricism has been conditioned
in large part by Two Dogmas. Now when Quine talks about Modern Empiricism I
think he is talking about basically his own 20th century precursors but we will
say a bit more about that later. Modern Empiricism has been conditioned in
large part by Two Dogmas. One is a belief in some fundamental cleavage between
truths which are analytic or grounded in meanings independently of matters of
fact and truths which are synthetic or grounded in fact. The other dogma is
reductionism, the belief that each meaningful statement is equivalent to
some logical construct upon terms which refer to immediate experience. Both
Dogmas I shall argue are ill-founded. One effect of abandoning them is, as we
shall see, a blurring of the supposed boundary between speculative metaphysics
and natural science. Another effect is a shift towards pragmatism. So what Quine
does is he sets the context. The context is Modern Empiricism and again I'm going
to come back to that. Then he tells us that he is going to attack two ideas.
The first idea is this distinction between analytic and synthetic truths. The
second idea is what he calls reductionism and specifically it's the idea
that every sentence or at least every meaningful sentence I suppose, that every
meaningful sentence can be sort of reconstructed in terms of a pure
observation language. So it can be reconstructed in terms that have only to
do with things that we can observe and don't have anything to do with things
that we can't observe or that we could only sort of partially observe. So no
sort of theoretical terms which would be maybe things like electron or supernova
but I guess also even things like table maybe. When I say that there's a
table here then at least one way of understanding that sentence is to claim
that it says something not about like fundamentally it says something not
about a physical object but about certain observations that I could make,
certain sense experiences that I could have. That's the kind of idea that is
Quine's second dogma. The idea that any sentence can be translated into a
sentence that talks only about direct observations. So that's what Quine is
going to attack and what is that going to lead to? It's going to lead to two
things. It's going to lead to first of all something that Quine is going to call
not in this article but that he is going to call at some point a naturalized
epistemology. So the idea that philosophy is actually sort of much closer to the
natural sciences, much more apart even of the natural sciences maybe than we
use to think and a shift towards pragmatism and we're going to look at
that too. Okay so I think the right way to proceed is to focus first on this
analytic synthetic distinction because that's what most of the article is
about and that is mostly also what people think of when they think of two
dogmas of empiricism. When you ask people well what does Quine do in two
dogmas of empiricism they say that he attacks or even that he defeats the
analytic synthetic distinction. So we're going to focus on the analytic
synthetic distinction. I first want to say something about what it is and then
I want to consider how you could attack a distinction and then we're going to
look in a little bit more detail at what Quine is doing and what sort of the
overall shape of the article is because it is in many ways a very strange
shape. It's a shape that actually doesn't fit the canonical idea of how to
write good analytic philosophy very well at all. Okay so what are analytic and
synthetic statements? Well here Quine is in a little bit of a bind because he
needs to explain to us like briefly what analytic and synthetic are supposed to
mean even though he's going to attack this distinction and sort of ask us to
reject it later on. Well roughly speaking we could think of something like this
an analytic statement is true just because of the meaning of the terms and
a synthetic statement is true because of the way the world is. So not
just because of the meaning of the terms that is sort of the rough first
sketch of what this distinction is supposed to be. Now Quine then brings
in Kant and he tells us that Kant gives a definition in terms of
containment and he says well that's not really helpful that that only works for
a very particular kind of statement but Kant's intent can be restated thus right
and I'm in the beginning of section one now. Kant's intent can be restated thus.
A statement is analytic when it is true by virtue of meanings and independently
of fact. Okay that's basically what I just said. I want to emphasize at this
point that that Quine's encounter with Kant here is not really in any sense a
serious encounter with Kant and actually I think that Quine would agree. I think
that Quine would agree that he hasn't really done the work on Kant and I
think we can and that he doesn't even really desire to do the work on Kant
and I think we can see that from three things which all of which are
actually kind of important to point out. So I want to take a little bit of time
explaining why Quine and Kant aren't really sort of talking to each other
here not in order to tell you that Quine should have read Kant better or
something like that but because it illuminates what Quine is doing and what
Quine isn't doing it. Illuminates the background. So here's the first sign that
Quine isn't really talking to Kant in this article. It's the title two dogmas
of empiricism. Now whatever Kant is, Kant is definitely not an empiricist. Right
so immediately we can sort of see that that the philosophers that Quine has in
mind, well Kant is not really going to be one of them. Okay here's the second sign
very important for understanding the Quine's article. Kant famously introduces
the distinction between analytic and synthetic to give an extra and independent
dimension to a discussion that already has the terms a priori and a posteriori.
Right so already people are talking about the a priori and the a posteriori
that which I can know independently of experience and that which I can only
know based on experience or justify independently of experience and justify
based on experience and Kant adds the analytic synthetic distinction in order
to create sort of four possibilities and thereby create the possibility to talk
about the synthetic a priori. So claims that we can know independently of
experience but that do have real content that are not just about meanings
that don't follow from the principle of non-contradiction as Kant might tell
us. This is absolutely crucial for understanding Kant, it is not in the
Quine article. Right Quine does not make a distinction between on the one hand
the a priori and the a posteriori and on the other hand the analytic and the
synthetic. Right for Quine to be analytic is to be knowable independently of
experience and to be synthetic is to be true well it depends on fact. Right a
synthetic statement is something that depends on the facts and of course the
facts are things that we can only find out through experience. That's not what
Kant would say at all. Right I mean for Kant the most important synthetic
truths the synthetic a priori truths can be known independently of experience
they're not based on any facts in any you know sort of sort of normal sense of
the word fact at the very least. So this is something to keep in mind for Quine
analytic synthetic is basically the same as a priori a posteriori and it's also
basically the same as necessary and contingent. Right all of those
distinctions sort of run together in the way that Quine is thinking here and of
course that has to do with the fact that the philosophers that he has in mind
the empiricists that he's talking about and that will be people like the logical
positivists people like Karnab that they agree that there is no such thing as
the synthetic a priori. Okay so that's important. Third thing that I want to say
about Kant and Quine is that Kant actually doesn't say the kinds of things
that that Quine makes him say here. Right Kant conceived of an analytic
statement as one that blah blah blah blah. Kant thinks that a statement is
analytic when blah blah blah blah. Kant isn't talking about statements. When
Kant introduces the analytic synthetic distinction he talks about analytic and
synthetic judgments. Right and a statement you know that's some kind of
verbal utterance or maybe it's a sentence. A judgment you know the most
reasonable way maybe to think of that is to think of it as some kind of mental act.
Right so it's not really the same thing and I think this is important and I
think this is important. I want to say a little bit about why I think it is
important. So Quine is going to end up saying at the very end of the article
that we can keep that we can you know believe the truth or sort of keep
affirming the truth of any claim we want provided that we are willing to make
changes in our beliefs elsewhere. So Quine is going to end up and that is sort
of one of the pragmatist elements I guess. He's gonna wind up saying that you
know based on what works for us we have a choice in which statements we want
to sort of make immune to criticism and which we want to be open to criticism
by experience. So there's a sort of choice in a sense about what are the
analytic statements and what are the synthetic statements. And Kant doesn't
think that at all and so it might seem that Kant and Quine are sort of in
conflict right fundamentally in conflict. But let's think about this
example here is Kant and Kant says that it is a synthetic a priori truth that
all events have causes right and the a priori part is not so important for us
now it's synthetic right all events have a cause that's a synthetic claim
according to Kant. So it doesn't follow from the meaning of the terms alone and
Kant emphasizes that it's not part of the meaning of the term event that it is
caused. Okay and so it's a synthetic statement and so if it's true you know I
can't see that from the concepts alone I've got to sort of show it and Kant goes
to great length to show it. Now here is what Aquinean might say. Aquinean might say
no no no Kant that's not the way this works. I mean you can also take this to
be an analytic statement or at least you can take this to be a statement that
is immune I mean that that that you can just hold on to without having to do
any kind of of investigation. Basically by making it sort of the definition of an
event right I can always hold on to the claim that all events are caused even if
let's say an experience I find a lot of things that are not caused if I'm
willing to say well then those are not events right there's something else
they're happenings so I can always do that but it's always possible to keep a
hold of any claim and allow any kind of experience to come in as long as you are
willing to make changes elsewhere. So there is a sense in which Aquinean
could say well all events have a cause you know that could be something that is
you know just true in a sense by virtue of meaning in the sense that we can choose
to keep it true no matter what happens or we can also choose to sort of make it
respondent to new evidence. Now why do I bring in this example because I think it
illustrates the difference between a statement and a judgment right I mean
yes you can keep the same statement the statement all events have a cause and
either treat it as immune to revision or as not immune to revision but it's not
immediately clear that in those two scenarios you are using the statement
to express the same judgment right if I say something like all events have a
cause that's true because that's my definition of event well then when I'm
claiming that all events have a cause I'm probably making a different judgment
than the judgment I'm making when I say all events have a cause and not treating
that as a merely sort of verbal truth. Okay so so there are some complications
here and I think we need to keep this in mind I mean Aquine is a philosopher who
is beyond the linguistic term so to speak I mean he is conceiving all of this
in deeply linguistic terms and Kant doesn't and so one of the things that
that one would have to wonder is whether thinking about the relation between
statements and beliefs or statements and judgments is going to sort of change
the way that we approach Aquine's story. Aquine doesn't think so for Aquine the
linguistic items are sort of the fundamental thing and you know we
don't have a hold of our things like beliefs unless we tie them to verbal
behavior and statements in some way but we don't have to agree with that.
Alright okay so what is Quine going to do? Quine is going to attack this
analytic synthetic distinction. Now what I would like to do is I would like to
walk you through a couple of ways in which you could attack a distinction and
then ask what Quine is actually doing. Okay so I have a couple of examples of
ways in which you can attack a distinction because this can mean so
many things. So here's one thing suppose that somebody says there are two
kinds of books good books and bad books. Well that's a distinction that you could
attack by saying no no look there's a whole spectrum between good and bad
there are also kind of okay books and so so books and slightly bad books and so
you are making this sort of false claim because you well I mean there's
nothing sort of fundamentally wrong with the distinction as long as we keep in
mind that there's a whole spectrum between the good and the bad. But that's
one way to attack a distinction to point out that there's a spectrum and that
people have been ignoring that. Here's the second way of attacking a
distinction you could say that actually there's just a false dichotomy so if
somebody says you are either for us or against us then I'm gonna say no I'm
I'm not for you and I'm not against you I just don't care about you at all right
that seems possible so that would be to convict the distinction of being a
false dichotomy. A third term or maybe more terms need to be added. Okay now
both of these two ways of attacking a distinction actually just keep the
distinction they accept it but they add more stuff. Here's a third way maybe to
attack a distinction it is to say that it's in a sense arbitrary how things are
classified according to the distinction. So suppose that we take the distinction
between the fashionable and the unfashionable. I mean that's a real
distinction some things are fashionable my clothes are super fashionable. So it's
a real distinction but of course it's also kind of arbitrary in ten years
time people will say what was that Gheisver's guy wearing. That's a way to
attack a distinction to say that it's sort of arbitrary and thereby maybe of
little use for philosophy. Could do that something like that. We could also say
that you know we can attack a distinction by suggesting that we can never really
use it because we are unable to classify things we don't have the right
knowledge. So a skeptic attacks the distinction between true statements and
false statements on precisely that grounds right. A skeptic will say that we
don't know which of the statements are the true ones and which are the false ones
and that makes us sort of unable to apply this distinction. That is that is
already a little bit more fundamental right. I mean to say that that there's a
spectrum or that a third or fourth term needs to be added that keeps the
distinction firmly in place. To say that it is either you know just sort of
contingent and therefore not much use or that we can't actually apply it because
we don't have the right knowledge or the right skills that sort of suggests that
maybe we're better off without using it. That's more fundamental.
Finally I would like to look at two ways of attacking a distinction that that would sort
of destroy it if that's if that's the right word to use. You could for instance say that
the classes distinguished by the distinction don't even exist. So somebody says there are
two kinds of people. There are the saved and the damned. Well if I don't believe in an afterlife
then I'm going to say no. There are no saved and there are no damned right. I mean this distinction
is it doesn't apply because the distinction doesn't actually exist in reality. That's a very
fundamental way of trying to get rid of a distinction or I could say that although you
know I understand the terms and they do apply there's actually no distinction because it's the
same thing. So if somebody says it's very important to make a distinction between on the one hand
racists and on the other hand ethno-nationalists then I might be tempted to say that no it's
not important to make a distinction between racists and ethno-nationalists because ethno-nationalist
is just a nice word for racist. I mean there's no real distinction there. Okay so we have seen
six ways of trying to attack a distinction. Two of them that sort of accept it but want to add more
stuff. Two of them that say that we can't actually use it or it's useless and two of them that say
that either there is no distinction because of the way that reality is or there is no distinction
because these terms kind of mean the same thing and so it's totally inapplicable to our description
of reality. What is Quine going to do with the analytic synthetic distinction? Well he is going
to end up doing something that's a little bit like saying that it's useless or that we can't apply it
and a little bit like saying that it doesn't apply that there are no such things
and I think he sort of wavers between those options a little bit right so at some points
Quine seems to be saying that he doesn't really know how to apply it that for instance he doesn't
know whether all green things are extended whether that is a synthetic synthetic or an
analytic statement and so he seems to suggest that we don't don't really know how to apply it
that maybe there's something useless about it because of our our skill maybe in applying it.
At other points though Quine seems to suggest that it actually like there's nothing in reality
like when we look at statements there's nothing about statements that cuts them up
into analytic and synthetic and I think maybe that more radical reading is the better reading
right though what Quine wants to end up saying is that objectively speaking there is no distinction
between the statements of a language such that some of them are the analytic statements and some
of them are the synthetic statements right we just thought there was but there isn't
okay so that is what Quine in the end wants to say right he wants to say something like
that distinction that you thought there was between the analytic and the synthetic statement
statements if you think about it it's not really there right it's not really there
how does Quine argue for that and now I'm going coming to the point where I want to talk about
the structure of the article how is Quine going to argue for that well maybe somewhat surprisingly
sections one two three and four are Quine trying to elucidate the distinction or between analytic
and synthetic statements by tying it to other concepts to other distinctions maybe or you
know tying it to synonymy tying it to definition tying it to interchangeability and truth
so Quine is going to try to sort of elucidate the analytic synthetic distinction
well trying to elucidate something and that may be failing because that is what's going to happen
Quine is going to fail at least he's going to tell us that you know all the terms that he
if he uses them you know all the terms that allow him to make the analytic synthetic distinction
are in just as much need of clarification as the analytic synthetic distinction itself
trying to do that kind of analysis and even failing that kind of analysis
is something that is very familiar to philosophers right in fact it is something that philosophers
do all the time right I try to make the distinction between good and bad actions
that is what ethicists and meta ethicists I guess try to do all the time right and they tend to fail
I'm trying to make the distinction between the causal relations and the non-causal relations
that's what people who create theories of causation try to do and they tend to fail right
there tend to be these counter arguments these cases that don't fit the theory
or they tend to come up with theories that use the same kinds of terms that they were starting from
so in order to explain the difference between good and bad actions I'm going to explain good
and bad in terms of other ethical vocabulary that's also kind of common
so suppose that that this is what a philosopher does a philosopher tries to explain a particular
concept or pair of concepts and preferably in a sort of reductionist way right without
staying within the same circle of concepts so I want to try to explain analytic and synthetic
without ending up talking about meanings and synonymy and and necessity and you know all
the kinds of concepts that client things are in just as much need of clarification so suppose
I tried to do that and suppose that I fail what then well nothing right try again let somebody
else try again it is not very common for a philosopher to end up saying oh well if I fail
at clarifying this distinction in a sort of reductive way in totally different kinds of terms
then it doesn't exist right you you never do that um you would do one of two things normally
either you have some reason to believe that a reductive analysis must be possible and then
you keep trying or you have some reason to maybe the failure itself is the reason to believe that
a reductive analysis is not possible and so you say well you know there's something primitive
about the idea of who knows the idea of meaning or the idea of synonymy or the idea of analyticity
itself or the idea of of necessity right I'm going to take one of these as one of my primitive terms
and that seems kind of okay right there's there's nothing in a failed attempt to give a reductive
analysis of a concept that would imply that the concept has no content or can't be applied
or anything like that so how could anything that quine does in sections one two three and four of
this paper lead up to the conclusion that the analytic synthetic distinction doesn't match
a real distinction among the statements
well my answer to that is that it leads up to it only in a sort of rhetorical way
one two three and four do not I would say even conceivably form an argument
for what happens at the end of the article in section six rather one two three and four
sort of create the psychological state in which we are extra you know interested and extra open
towards the new ideas that quine is going to present to us in section six
I believe it was Pascal who said somewhere that if you want to convert a man to Christianity
you first have to make him unhappy because if you're happy you have no interest in being saved
and so you have no interest in listening to this person who is telling you about Christianity
um something like that is happening in two dogmas of empiricism right one two three and four
and maybe five um our quine trying to make us unhappy and then six is quine's own original vision
which wow we are you know much more interested in and much more likely to embrace if we are unhappy
so how does making us unhappy work well making us unhappy works in such a way that quine is going
to point out to us that although we might have thought that it's not so hard to give an analysis
of the analytic and synthetic of the analytic synthetic distinction um actually it is hard
to do this in a non-circular way right maybe we can only do this in a non-circular way again that's
not not not terrible but suppose that you are already a little bit worried about all of these
terms you are already a little bit worried about meanings and you are already a little bit worried
about intentional languages and i'm going to say a bit more about what that is later on a little
bit worried about terms like necessarily and you are going to be a bit worried about all of those
things if you are a contemporary empiricist well then seeing that all these terms sort of hang
together in such a way that you can't really get out of get out of the circle makes you feel a little
bit worried about it all and then when quine in section six comes with his own vision like this
web of belief and this this pragmatism you might think oh that is actually maybe a better way of
thinking about this and you've been convinced not so much by an argument that shows that the
analytic synthetic distinction is is wrong and therefore we have to think about it in this way
but sort of you know you've you've been reading several pages of of the kind of mood music
that plays on your pre-existing anxieties and puts you in the mood for a radical new vision
which quine then supplies at the end so i would say that that is roughly the structure of the argument
and there's something kind of funny or ironic about that because usually people working in
analytic philosophy would say that analytic philosophy works by argumentation right you
have the premises and you get to the conclusion and it's it's the rational argumentation that
that does all the work into dogmas of empiricism you know it doesn't seem to be the rational
argumentation that does the work it seems to be the mood music and then the metaphors and
the vision at the end when quine has his web of belief um that is what does the work that would
be actually pretty germane to a philosopher like like richard roti who says that you know all the
great philosophers introduce new metaphors um but their roti is precisely kind of
not conforming to the self-image of analytic philosophy so i think there's something
deliciously ironic about the fact that two dogmas of empiricism has this very non-argumentative
structure like fundamentally it has a very non-argumentative structure um and that is
ironic because it is seen as the greatest example maybe even of a form of philosophy that claims
to be based on argumentation okay so having said all of that
let us look a little bit more at what quine is doing in these first sections um
and i'll get back by the way to the question of why all of this is important
right it's not just a new vision but it's also supposed to be important i'll get back to that
a little bit later on okay so what is happening in these first sections well um basically quine
is going to say okay i don't really understand analyticity what is it let's try to define it
in other terms let's try to understand it in terms of synonymy there's actually something
interesting going on there right quine has this distinction between sentence one and two no unmarried
man is married and no bachelor is married and both of those are supposed to be analytic um
and quine actually accepts that number one is true by virtue of the meaning of the terms
right so he actually accepts here he seems to accept at least that sort of this logical
vocabulary is pretty unproblematic so at least some analytic statements are unproblematic um
and then he's going to focus on on the problematic ones the number two
i mean that's not bad right i mean if if the idea of analyticity has any use then it should be a
different idea from the idea of being a logical tautology so we get through synonymy we get through
definition and basically again and again quine is going to say that um either you have to
presuppose analyticity in the definition or you and end up with a term that is just as obscure as
analyticity is the one that maybe maybe requires some explanation on my part um is what happens
in section three when quine talks about interchangeability salva veritate so the idea would be that
you could maybe define analyticity in terms of truth right you could make the distinction between
analytic and synthetic statements once you have in place the distinction between true and false
statements and surely quine doesn't want to be skeptical about true and false statements right
he doesn't want to get rid of that distinction no he doesn't want to get rid of that distinction
so how can you base analyticity on um truth and falsehood well quine says maybe maybe it's like
this if i have a phrase a and a phrase b and i can always put phrase a in place of phrase b
and whatever sentence i do that in will remain true if it was true or it will remain false if
it was false then these two phrases mean the same thing right and that's what i need to explain
analyticity sameness of meaning so here's an example um take quine and take the author of
two dogmas of empiricism those are the same person right so we might expect that we can
always put quine and the author of two dogmas of empiricism in the same sentences right we can
always replace one with the other i am talking about quine that's true i am talking about the
author of two dogmas of empiricism well that's also true right sure um and so the idea is if you
can always do this for every sentence and the truth or falsity of the sentence will always remain the
same then those two phrases mean the same thing and now quine is going to ask us whether this is
good enough right if we can always interchange two terms salva veritate right saving truth
without making a difference in truth does that mean that they have the same meaning
does that mean that you know they can ground analytic sentences and quine says yes and this
is where we find these sentences three four and five in the text quine says well yes i mean take
a sentence like necessarily all and only bachelors are bachelors if i can without check that's true
right if without a change in truth value i can put unmarried man in place of bachelors so i get
necessarily all and only bachelors are unmarried men um if we can exchange these two terms without
changing truth value then this is true too and if this is true if it's true that necessarily all
and only bachelors are unmarried men then all and only bachelors are unmarried men is a necessary
statement and therefore again quine thinks that necessity analyticity and a priority are the same
thing and therefore all and only bachelors are unmarried men is analytic so we can actually
get to analytic truths if we have interchangeability salva veritate
and then quine says that this is hocus pocus why is it hocus pocus
well in order to understand why quine thinks this is hocus pocus we have to make the distinction
that he makes between an extensional language and an intentional language so an extensional
language is a language that does not have any phrases or terms or concepts that allow us to
make a difference between two concepts that apply to the same actual things so take quine
and take the author of two dogmas of empiricism those apply to the same thing
in a purely extensional language there would be no sentence in which you exchange one of them
for the other and you know get from a truth through a falsehood or from a falsehood to a truth
two terms with the same extension can always be replaced with one another in an extensional
language without changing truth value in an intentional language that's not true in an
intentional language in a language that for instance can talk about necessities that would
make it intentional in an intent or meanings that would also make it intentional or analyticity
that would always also make it intentional and in a language that can speak about any of those
things the fact that two terms have the same extension that they apply to the same thing
the same objects doesn't necessarily mean that you can always interchange them
so here's an example barack obama and the first black president of the united states
in fact apply to the same person and so in an extensional language i could always change one
for the other but in an intentional language that's not true if i were to say barack obama
barack obama means the first black president of the united states
that's a very strange statement even though the first black president of the united states
means the first black president of the united states seems you know pretty okay or or what about
this barack obama could also not have become the first black president of the united states
could, right? We're talking about possibilities and necessities. Barack Obama could not have
become the first black president of the United States. Maybe he, you know, thought about running
for president and then he thought, ah, no, never mind. Okay. In that sentence, you can't really
change Barack Obama with the first black president of the United States. Because the first black
president of the United States could also not have become the first black president of the United
States. Sounds a bit dubious. That sounds a bit dubious. Now, and in fact, this, this example,
I mean, there are different ways of thinking about such instances, but this example becomes much,
much clearer when we think not about like singular terms, but when we think about general terms.
So an example that Quine uses, I can't remember whether he uses it here or somewhere else. Oh,
yeah, he uses it here. It's creature with a heart and creature with kidneys, right? Suppose that
it's true that all the animals in the world that have a heart also have kidneys and the animals
that have kidneys also have a heart, right? Suppose that that's true. And those two concepts have
the same extension. But of course, it's not true that we can change them in an intentional language
in every sentence and have the truth value remain the same. Because it's true that it's possible
that a creature with a heart is not a creature with kidneys. That's true. It's possible that a
creature with a heart is not a creature with kidneys. That's true. What about it's possible
that a creature with a heart is not a creature with a heart? That's not true. So in an intentional
language, we cannot change terms that have the same extension, but a different intention.
Okay, what do we learn from this? What we learn from this is that
basing analyticity on truth is only possible if we have an intentional language. Because
we need sameness of meaning and we only get sameness of meaning in this intentional language.
So basing analyticity on truth only works in an intentional language. But to talk about true
and false statements in an intentional language, to believe that there is a distinction between
true and false statements in an intentional language, is to believe that there is a distinction
between analytic and synthetic statements. Because for something like necessarily a to be true,
a has to be analytic. So truth in an intentional language already presupposes
that the analytic synthetic distinction can be applied. And so it can't be used to
sort of ground it or reductively analyze it. Alright, so that is what I wanted to say about
section three. And roughly that is all I want to say about the first four sections of the paper.
Section five introduces a new idea.
It introduces the verification theory and reductionism. So Quine basically says that the
analytic synthetic distinction seems to make a lot of sense. If you hold the idea that there are
that any sentence really can be for any sentence, you can say which observations are the ones that
would make it true, and which are the ones that will make it false. Right, if you can do that for
any sentence, well any sentence where you have something to say is a synthetic sentence. And
any sentence where you end up saying, well actually it doesn't matter what the observations are,
it's true anyway, or it doesn't matter what the observations are, it's false anyway,
any sentence like that is going to be an analytic sentence. So the kind of reductionism that Quine
talks about implies the analytic synthetic distinction. And Quine thinks that it is equally
hopeless and for more or less the same reasons. The dogma of reductionism survives in the supposition
that each statement taken in isolation from its fellows can admit of confirmation or information
at all. My counter suggestion is that our statements about the external world face the tribunal of
sense experience not individually but only as a corporate body. What Quine is going to do here
is he's going to make a counter suggestion. A counter suggestion is that statements do not
face the tribunal of sense experience individually but only as a corporate body. And this is then
going to be sort of worked out in the metaphor of section six. What is Quine doing and what is he
reacting against? Well really this is the crux, right, this is where we find out why to dogmasal
empiricism could be seen as such an important paper. Analytic philosophy at the time of Quine
comes from people like Russell Wittgenstein but especially the Vienna circle, the logical
positivists, people like Karnab, who start out by making this distinction between statements that
are based in sense experience and therefore statements of the sciences and statements that
are not based on sense experience, statements that are true or false independently of sense
experience and those are supposed to be the analytic statements. And since philosophy is not,
you know, in the business of science, philosophy is supposedly, at least this is what some of these
people, some of the people working this tradition think, philosophy is supposedly in the business of
analyzing sentences, right, of taking the analytic sentences, analyzing, you know, them,
well really analyzing concepts and thereby arriving at analytic truths about those concepts,
and thereby clarifying the structure of our language, right, that is what philosophy is supposed
to be doing. We take concepts, we analyze them, that is, we set out analytic truths involving
those concepts, they're analytic truths, that's why we don't need a laboratory. And then once we
have done that, you know, we show it to people and we have clarified our language. That's nice.
That kind of vision of philosophy obviously requires a distinction between the analytic and
the synthetic. So what Kain is doing here is he's going to give us a counter vision
that immediately impacts the self-description of philosophy. It immediately impacts how we can
think about philosophy, about what philosophy is, about what the domain of philosophy is.
If there is no analytic synthetic distinction, then there is no special domain for philosophy.
There are lots of complications here and one complication that I want to briefly mention
is that at least many of the early adherents of the analytic, or I should maybe say the
positivist tradition, many of the early adherents would actually say that philosophy
doesn't make any statements at all, that it's a kind of activity. But I'm going to leave that aside.
I hope that it's clear why the analytic synthetic distinction, the idea that some truths can be found
from the armchair and other truths can only be found by doing science, is going to be absolutely
crucial to the self-image of a philosophy that is supposedly an armchair discipline.
If the analytic synthetic distinction doesn't exist, then we have to rethink what philosophy is
and rethink what its relation to natural science is. And that's what Kain is going to do, and that's
what Kain is setting into motion here. And that is why two dogmas of empiricism could become such a
famous and influential article, because it cuts at the heart of a self-image of philosophy.
Now to briefly return to Kant, I mean Kant of course thought that philosophy was in the business of
finding not analytic statements, but synthetic a priori statements. And so I mean part of the
part of the dichotomy, like the way that Kain sets this up, right? Either you are finding,
either you're doing analysis, or you are doing something empirical, is something that requires
requires us to see the analytic synthetic distinction and the a priori,
a posteriori distinction as the same thing, right? So that's always in the background here.
But again, that is something that all these early analytic philosophers agree about.
So what do we end up? What is the counter suggestion? Well, the counter suggestion is
that statements face the tribunal sense experience as a corporate body. This is sort of the
Duham Kain thesis, it has become known. Here is the beginning of section six.
The totality of our so-called knowledge or beliefs, from the most casual matters of Greek
geography and history, to the profoundest laws of atomic physics, and even of pure mathematics
and logic, is a man-made fabric which impinges on experience only along the edges. Or to change
the figure, total science is like a field of force whose boundary conditions are experienced.
So the basic idea is that if I find something in reality in observation that doesn't fit my beliefs,
which of my beliefs is false? That is a wrong question according to Kain, right? That is the
question that can only be asked if you embrace reductionism. What we should ask is, what changes
plural could I make in order to make my beliefs consistent with the observations again?
Well, there's always multiple options. Here's a very trivial example. Suppose that I believe
that there is an elephant behind me. I now had a recalcitrant experience. I didn't see an elephant.
What can I do? Well, of course, I can give up the belief that there's an elephant behind me,
but I could also give up the belief that my eyes are working correctly. Or I could adopt the belief
that this elephant behind me has cunningly disguised himself as a bunch of bookshelves
containing philosophy books. You know, that's possible. Now, that's kind of a toy example,
but in real life situations, you very often have very real choices. What's going on?
I, you know, one person said to me that he, I don't know, let's say, cleaned my house. I come into
the house and it's completely dirty. What went on? Maybe this person lied, or somebody came into
my house and dirty did after he cleaned it up. One of those two things, maybe even more possibilities.
Those are very real choices, very real things that we have to deal with.
And so according to Quine, and this, of course, goes a step further than anything we've just said,
any statement can be held true come with me if we make drastic enough adjustments elsewhere in the
system. But if I'm willing, if I really want to believe some truth, I can do it by making
wild adjustments elsewhere. I think maybe the best example of that would be conspiracy theorists,
right? A conspiracy theorist really wants to believe some really wants to believe that the earth
is flat. Let's say that a flat earth theory really wants to believe that the earth is flat.
Now you find all kinds of evidence that don't fit this idea. And so you change your beliefs,
right? Okay, although scientists say that the earth is round, well, they're being paid off by
large corporations. The shadow of the earth on the moon is always circular. Well, that's, I mean,
you know, you can, you can think of some wild theory to adopt that is going to allow you to
keep your idea that the earth is flat. Doesn't sound very rational. How could any of those choices
be rational? Well, says Quine. Basically, it is, you don't want to change too much about your beliefs,
but you don't want to change too much about your beliefs. And you want to keep sort of your core
beliefs intact. It's a pragmatic choice. It's a choice about, you know, finding the theories that
make the easiest sense with the least changes, and so on and so forth. I don't know. I mean,
I don't know whether that's really an intelligible criterion, but okay, that's the criterion that
Quine gives us. Each man is given a scientific heritage plus a continuing barrage of sensory
stimulation. And the considerations which guide him in warping a scientific heritage to fit his
continuing sensory promptings are, where rational, pragmatic. So this is a completely new way of
thinking. And it's a way of thinking that that seems to obliterate the distinction between science
and philosophy. Right? You can't say science is empirical, philosophy is not empirical, because
there is no distinction between the empirical and the non empirical. That's always a pragmatic choice.
And so whatever I'm going to do as a philosopher, it's going to be the same kind of thing, maybe in
a slightly different way as what the natural scientist is engaged in. So ontological questions
are on a par with questions of natural science. And we're already well on the way towards Quine's
naturalized philosophy. Final thing I want to say about this is that
Quine's metaphor of the web of belief is not too precise. Right? If you really start thinking
about that, it doesn't even make much sense. Why are some statements more on the edge and others
more at the core? Well, they're supposed to have something to do with whether they could be shown
false by experience, but how does experience even get into it? Right? Is experience sentence shaped?
Probably not. So how don't we need some sentences that tie immediately to experience?
Quine doesn't say anything about that. Here's maybe a more fundamental worry. Quine tells us
that even the laws of logic are just elements of this web of belief, which can be changed if that's
useful. But then what are the strands between the elements of the web? Right? What makes it the case
that the web is coherent or incoherent? Right? What makes it the case that if I believe A and I
believe not A, that then there is a tension, a problem in my web of belief? Well, that's surely
the laws of logic. But if they themselves are merely further elements in the web, then they seem
to play a sort of impossible dual role in the metaphor, being elements that can be changed and
being the standards that we use to judge whether the web is coherent or not. So that, I don't know.
I mean, again, Quine doesn't say much about that. Now, I don't think that we need to criticize Quine
for that too harshly here because he's merely offering us a metaphor and it's sort of a promise
that maybe in his later philosophy is going to do more. He's going to tell us more. He's going to
work this out and he is going to work this out. Okay. But it's good to be aware of that, you know,
this web metaphor by itself maybe generates a lot more questions than it answers.
All right. So I've tried to tell you why people think that this is such an important paper,
how it could have a big impact on the history of 20th century philosophy.
It's strange non-argumentative nature, the historical background against which it makes sense,
and some of these sort of promissory notes that Quine is singing at the end of this paper.
Does Quine defeat the analytic synthetic distinction? Well, I would say in no way,
you already need to have Quine's empiricists anxieties in order to be very impressed with
anything that goes on in sections one, two, three, and four. And if you think they're talking about
meanings and necessity and so on, it's perfectly all right and perfectly intelligible, there's
nothing in this paper that is going to suggest you that you're wrong. There's nothing in this
paper that's going to suggest you that there's anything problematic about analytic and synthetic
statements. So I think that is also good to keep in mind. So it's important, certainly from the
point of view of the self-image of philosophy, this is an important paper, had a lot of influence.
I wouldn't say that it's a paper that shows us that the analytic synthetic distinction doesn't
exist because it only shows that to people in a very, very specific philosophical state of mind.
Thank you.
