I'm just going to share my screen as well.
Excellent.
Well, thank you so much for joining me today.
My name is Amber Daines.
If you haven't heard of me on the podcast waves before or worked with me, I've got a
few clients here today.
My podcast actually launched just over five years ago.
It's called The Politics of Everything.
And despite its title, it's actually not about politics.
If you look at the true definition of politics, that is, in fact, the nuances and the things
that make it work in society.
So I've been a journalist, so I understood, I guess, how to have a catchy title.
Some people, the hardest thing is thinking, I've got an idea.
I'd like to have a podcast, but how do I how do I have the name?
So I kind of got the name very early, but then didn't know how to do any of it.
So my podcast is about five and a bit years old.
I have had a couple of breaks from it as well.
And we'll talk about how you manage that around your other commitments as well.
But it's actually a passion project.
I love it.
I don't really make lots of money out of it.
I have a small sponsor that covers costs, but certainly it's something I love to do.
So if you don't love doing podcasting like anything, it will become a chore.
That's how I felt about my blog.
So I stopped blogging and started podcasting.
Just an quick acknowledgement of country for anyone that is in Australia today.
You'll understand what this is.
We do have some overseas audience members with us today as well.
But I just like to acknowledge the traditional custodians of the land
in which I'm running this webinar today and pay my respects to elders past, present and emerging.
OK, what we are going to cover in our time today, and we obviously have a limited amount of time together.
And I want to get to some of your questions is, I guess, the technical basics for a lot of people.
This is the biggest, I guess, roadblock or barrier for you to actually kick off your podcast.
What do you need to do?
And the reality is when I started my podcast in 2017, it was a very opaque process.
There wasn't a million platforms.
Zoom barely existed.
So we didn't think about using that.
Maybe people were talking about podcasting on Skype and working out how that might all go together.
The editing process was either having to hire a studio and getting somebody else to kind of edit it for you
or perhaps having to buy some equipment, if you like, literally some equipment to actually edit your podcast.
So it sounded OK.
And of course, buying all the bits and pieces.
I've got my podcasting earphones on today and I also have a road microphone,
which I've had for the entire time just because it's so simple, it's plug and play.
So we'll go through some of the technical stuff, including your room set up.
So you certainly don't want to be sitting in a concrete bunker doing a podcast.
Sound is everything when it comes to this particular medium.
The second thing we're going to have a little think about.
And if you don't have your laptop with you or you prefer pen and paper,
maybe just pull that together, a bit of a heads up that we're going to get you to start to think about your actual podcast idea,
if that's where you're at, how to plan your podcast niche, if you like, why you're doing a podcast and I guess your goals for the podcast.
So we only do what we measure.
So if you have a goal of what you'd like to do, it might even be the deadline to start and record your first episode by the end of the year.
Actually, having that written down by the end of this session will help you get started.
And then I guess the final bit is the bits that I guess I've learned the hard way when I've made all the rookie errors that you possibly can,
including not pressing record when you have a guest on the line and having to ask them to come back and record all those bits and pieces.
But also a bit of a VIP offer for you today.
If you do want to work with me, I'm going to be launching a new online course, which gives you kind of all the templates and the details.
So this is very much the what and then the how would be something which we could talk about after this particular session today.
So hopefully that meets your expectations.
And if you've got any questions, as I mentioned, we can cover those in the chat box.
Otherwise, we might do some questions at the end where you can unmute yourself and ask me.
OK, this was my first podcast image.
I've evolved it since then, but the graphics are very much the same.
It's called the Politics of Everything, as I mentioned.
I have had a career in journalism, so I probably have a slight content advantage
when it comes to understanding how to interview people because I interview guests on my show.
I am the solo host, but I have guests from all walks of life, all ages and stages and all industries.
And that was really important to me because I wanted to be really enjoy the conversations I was having.
So I wanted to be able to curate, I guess, guests and topics, which I thought other people wanted to hear about,
but also that I would enjoy actually speaking to people about.
I spent a number of years in journalism about a decade.
I started off my career in Australia in newspapers when those existed.
There's not so many of those around today.
But then I worked in Hong Kong and London as a correspondent in the business space.
I've also had a brief career in TV journalism and have never actually been a radio journalist.
So even though I understood journalism, I wasn't a broadcast radio journalist.
So that's why the tech stuff for me was probably my biggest barrier to getting started,
even though I had an idea for a show.
I now run a couple of agencies in PR and communications,
anything from ASX listed companies through to small startups and entrepreneurs.
I helped them with reputation or management, crisis comms and media training work.
So my podcast was really just a seed of an idea, literally thought of just driving along in the car,
listening to other podcasts.
But I guess what it did for me reflected my areas of interest.
And this is what I would encourage everyone to do.
I could have done a podcast about PR and communications, but that would have bored me senseless.
And I figured, you know what, I'm not doing this to purely attract clients.
In fact, I rarely interview clients on my show.
There's a little bit of a kind of decision I made that if you're great, what you do,
I will have you on.
But it's certainly not something that I offer to my clients that I do PR work for.
But I really love business.
I love economics.
I love modern society and I love people.
So putting all of that together really made my show sing.
So one of the things you need to think about is what do you love to talk about
or do you like to find out about?
Because at the end of the day, your podcast is not about you.
It's very much about your audience and finding an audience.
So making sure what you've got to share and what questions you're asking people,
illicit answers that other people are going to get something from is really, really important.
It's important not to just have it as opinion, but very much as a conversation where possible.
If you want to kind of keep going with a particular podcast idea.
This is my show now.
So I sort of I took an 18 month break.
I was working full time in a in a government role and didn't have that flexibility to record
because, of course, you've got to find time to actually record.
And all my recording is done remotely.
I don't go into a studio.
My guests could be anywhere from Sydney, me, where I live, to New York,
to I've had guests in Germany, Israel, all around the world.
So that means different time zones.
So you do need flexibility if you want to have a global show.
But the idea being that if you do have that time commitment,
you can actually produce a show in less than an hour a week if you are very organized
and you know exactly what you're doing, which is what I'm here to help you to do today.
So I launched in May 2017 and I went IRL as the kids say in real life to visit my guests.
Because back then, I guess we didn't really do all that Zoom stuff.
It was all a bit nerve wracking for the guests as well to go, what do I need?
Do I need your phones?
How do I am I going to sound making sure that they didn't have to worry about that?
So I would actually schlep around to guest offices or before work or wherever they wanted to meet me
and actually go in there and record on my laptop with Zencaster,
which is the program I've used since the beginning.
And it's come a long way and we'll have a little chat about that when we get to the technical stuff.
But the sound quality was awful.
I'm going to tell you if you listen to my first episode, episode one May 2017,
I do sound like I'm in a concrete bunker.
And that's because the office that we recorded in where my guest worked was a very echoey, cool warehouse environment.
But it had that sort of reverberating sound and in journalism, we call that live sound.
So if you clap your hands and you can hear echoing, that means it's not the right room to do that in.
But I couldn't control the environment.
And so I just went with it.
But I'm very much aware that that my early episodes do not sound as good as my ones do now.
The other mistake I made was not having my sound quality volume at the right level.
So in my earphones, it sounded fine, but then it was either too soft or too loud.
And that's when you get kind of variations between you and your guests.
So I might be really loudly asking the questions and then they are kind of really softly speaking.
Now, my audio team could fix that to an extent, but it's much better to have fantastic, you know, sound from the beginning.
You know, you can get your editor to do what you like, but they can only make it sound so good.
And I had very few downloads.
So I knew this would be a little bit of a long process that I also really didn't know what I was in for.
So I think I had an average of 10 downloads, which is a little bit disheartening.
And over time, of course, with my guest sharing the show with, you know, obviously getting good ratings on iTunes and things like that.
I have between 10,000, 25,000 downloads per episode.
It interestingly depends on not only the guest, but the topic.
So people often ask me, you know, do you have someone famous?
Is that the biggest downloads?
Often it's not.
Often it's just the topic.
So something like cryptocurrency, if it's really topical, might attract a lot of listeners,
even if that person is not the most famous person in that space.
So I think it just depends where we are at the time when we're listening to the show.
And I get a lot of historical listens as well.
So that week, I might get 10,000 downloads.
But then if I look back at the the recording a month or two later, there's people who've gone back and listened to episodes.
So even though I released them once a week on a Wednesday, I actually know that people aren't, you know, necessarily binge listening to my show the day it launches.
But maybe finding time to listen to it at a later period or searching for the topic or the guest name and it comes up in their feed as well.
And it's very organic, my show.
So I've had up to three million downloads, I think just over three million this week.
It's all organic.
So what I mean by that is I don't charge my guests to come on the show.
They don't pay me to be on the show.
And I haven't taken out Facebook ads or LinkedIn ads or any of those things.
This is just purely through doing it in many ways, the hard way, but the way in which I think was a good sort of investment of my time
and limited money when I when I started and the show has kind of gone from strength to strength in that regard.
OK, this is the bit where I want you to grab your pen and paper, your laptops or your notes on your phone, whatever it would be.
And if you are thinking about doing a podcast or you have started one and you just want to really, I guess, spend this this mindful time we have together today actually focusing on how that could be better.
These are the things I would want you to answer for yourself.
And you don't have to put them in the chat, although you can, if you want to.
What is a topic you could talk about for at least a year?
So my show, I record 44 episodes a year and I have an eight week break over the Australian summer.
So I need enough topics and ideas to sustain that.
Now, people often change their podcast show.
They might do it for a year.
Then they have a different podcast or multiple podcasts, if that's kind of the thing they want to be doing.
But for me and my show, that's partly why I didn't do a communications and PR show.
Because I probably can think of 20 episodes and then it's going to get really boring and repetitive.
So thinking about what could I talk about once a week for a year?
If you just want to do one year and see what it's like, that's fine.
But you do need some longevity in your podcast.
It's kind of like posting on social.
You can't just do five episodes and think that's going to be enough.
What is your unique selling proposition and does your show title reflect that?
So I feel a little bit lucky in some ways that I got into podcasting quite early
because there are so many shows now and I have a catalogue of content.
But if you have a show title, making sure that you sound a little bit different
or very specific to what you want to talk about.
It can be cheeky, it can be quirky, whatever.
But I always encourage you to be relatively short and brief.
It's kind of like a headline.
And then obviously your guests and so forth will define some of that content.
So have a think about that.
And who is your audience?
Who do you want to speak to?
Now, I have a podcast information pack, I send all my guests and I.
My audience has kind of found me.
So I've probably done it the wrong way.
But the way I thought of it was, well, I'm not doing this to create client base.
So I'm not talking to, you know, clients who necessarily want communications,
expertise and in a higher me in my day job.
But I very much thought, well, who do I want to speak to?
And I think it was kind of people like me.
But then I realized I actually want to talk to people who were older,
who were younger, who were different parts of the world, who had different experiences.
So my audience has kind of evolved as my guest catalogue has evolved, if that makes sense.
So I would definitely say for the first two years in my show,
80 percent of my guests and the audience that listened to them were in Australia
because that's where the show is is done.
And that's where most of my guests came from.
As I've attracted or sought guests from around the world, obviously, that's grown.
So at the moment, I think about 35 percent of my audience is actually from the United States,
which kind of blows my mind a bit because a lot of the topics and the guests
that we speak to are still predominantly in this this part of the world.
But I do have a number of US guests I've had on the last year or so.
And I think it's great to have a global perspective and it keeps the show fresh
and interesting and relevant to more than people that just would be my everyday circle.
Also do a little bit of research of who your competitor shows.
And when I say competitor, I don't mean, well, you need to try and outrank them,
although I'm sure that would be one of your goals, but much more.
Who else is doing something similar?
So the inspiration for my show initially, despite the fact I had an idea,
the style of interview that I wanted to elicit, but in a much shorter form.
And not all people would necessarily know the show was an ABC radio in Sydney.
There's an interviewer called Richard Fidler, who does a show called Conversations with Richard Fidler.
It's it's very much, you know, a middle class, middle age show,
reflecting, I guess, my own demographic.
But in many ways, the style of interview is what I wanted to elicit.
So have a little bit of depth, have some consistency to some of the questions in the style.
And then obviously, other questions will be dependent on that guest's experience
or things that I think the audience want to hear about.
Maybe their top three tips on a particular topic or the biggest lesson
that they might have learned from perhaps a business failure,
if that's something that they've experienced.
So I listened to his show a lot.
I try to think about how I could inject my own style into that.
And there was another show in the US that used to have a similar format,
but on a TV show where it was called the Actors Studio.
It doesn't exist anymore.
And the host would get actors on famous actors to come in
and answer very detailed questions over an hour or so.
My show is a bit less than that's about 30 minutes
and then actually have some consistency in the question.
So that particular show, it would ask a question, which I don't ask in my show
to give you an example.
It would say, you know, if you if you were to pass away today
and you were to go to the pearly gates of heaven,
what would you what would you imagine God would say to you?
And I just thought that was so playful and fun and and deep,
but something that people in the audience would actually always want to hear
because you don't often hear that kind of thing.
So I think a little bit about when I say competitors,
maybe complimentary and competitor shows.
And I guess the style of interview you want to come across.
Are you trying to, I guess, be quirky and funny?
Are you trying to be deep?
Is it always going to be serious topics?
Or can you do things that are a little bit fun as well?
And having a think about who else you love listening to and why?
So do some research before you get started.
The other questions to ask yourself is,
are you going to be the only host on the show?
Or are you going to have alternative hosts?
And that frequency and consistency matters.
So I've always hosted my show myself.
I've never had a co-host.
I've had duo guests on the show because sometimes that's really important
because the type of business that they have, it means that they, you know,
they they're a duo and they work together.
And it's important to have both people on that program
and I guess alternate questions.
But deciding if you're going to do that, or are you going to rotate hosts?
So sometimes some of the clients that I work with,
they might actually have seasons where a particular people in their company
for example, if they're doing a business podcast will host the show
for that season and then they'll move on to somebody else.
But a little bit of frequency and consistency matters.
And what I mean by that is my show is always under 30 minutes.
The former journalist to me is very good at that.
I just know how to wrap it up and also guide the question
so that the depth of question is not so so much that, you know,
one answer is taking 10 minutes of the show,
but allowing you to the audience to know what to expect in the show.
And the other thing is really important just to think about
is that podcasts do not make you lots of money.
OK, it's like books.
If you produce a business book, it's like an expensive business card.
I know I've written a couple, but it gives you a platform.
So to give you a ballpark idea, each episode to produce,
and that includes all the tech bits that I need to have it happen,
is around one hundred and fifty US dollars a week.
And I have a 44 week show.
So you can do the maths up and after, you know, a period of time,
you might get sponsors and ways in which you can cut those costs down.
I don't edit my own show because I love content and I don't want to do that.
And I figure my time is spent better any money in my day job.
So that's not something I fiddle around with.
I have a team that do that for me.
But generally speaking, there are some things,
subscription things that you need to sign up for to actually host your platform
to record on, to be able to actually get it into iTunes, Spotify
and all the places that you need it to be.
But as I said, you can monetize them as as you go along,
but you can't monetize them in the beginning.
OK, so most, you know, organisations like Zencast is my sponsor,
who's who I use and I have used since the beginning of my show to record on
is now kind of expanded its offering.
It it very much, you know, has a fixed subscription model,
which you have to subscribe to for a year.
So just just be aware there are a few set up costs regardless.
OK, have you all had a couple of minutes
to think about what some of these things are for you?
Does anyone want to chuck anything in the chat about maybe an idea that they've got
or, you know, something that they want to ask about how to get started?
No, just happy to hear. OK, great.
I'll keep going.
These are the tech bits. OK, so these are the basics.
This is the minimum stuff you are probably going to have to invest in
if you haven't already.
And these are ballpark figures.
So it's kind of like buying a new car.
You could buy the Toyota, you could buy the BMW.
So I would just start off with something pretty basic if and that's easy to use.
I'm not the most technical person.
And as I said, I love content, but I don't want to sit there editing
soundbites and putting my intros in every week.
It's not doesn't spark joy for me.
And it's not something I do.
But my microphone and headset combination, I think, was about four hundred dollars
at the time.
I've only had to replace the headset once.
So that's a pretty good investment.
And I use road just because they really are designed for newbies
and are very easy and compatible with all sorts of systems.
You can buy a bundle.
You can buy them individually.
You might have to buy them secondhand if you go to Gumtree or something like that.
A laptop, you need to record on something.
As I mentioned to you in the beginning, when I started podcasting,
it was so very opaque.
People would actually say to me, oh, you need to hire a studio
and you need to like have all the sound equipment and all the stuff
which obviously it's going to add to your expenses.
But it also reduces your flexibility because you then you wedded to one place
and you have to get guests to try and come in and and people still do that.
But that also limits, I guess, how and when you can actually podcast.
The other thing to invest in if you haven't already in the past couple of years
of work from home for most of us during the pandemic is a standing desk.
So I'm seated today to present this to you because I'm recording with video on
but a standing desk.
I would never record my podcast sitting down.
OK, so even though I haven't been a broadcast radio journalist,
if you looked at any radio studio today, you would have all the presenters standing
and there's some very good reasons for that.
It's very much about how you access light and shade in your voice.
It's about breathing.
It's about mindfulness, being very present in your body and not distracted
when we're seated, we're a little bit sedentary, obviously.
So being able to, you know, actually stand and feel in that moment is great.
But for me, it's just a bit of a habit and I've got used to doing it that way.
So I don't know if my guests are standing or seated
because I don't record them with video on.
But I very much find the standing desk helps me.
The other thing is just being able to test the sound in your room.
So if you're going to record, you know, we're all limited.
Some people might live in an apartment that has wooden floors, for example.
But you might actually have to, initially,
and I know guests that have had to do this because I've had flatmates
or they've had something else happening is actually sit in the cupboard
and actually record in there.
It's pretty uncomfortable. It's pretty hot.
But what you will get is great sound.
You will get fully directional sound
that will make sure that we're not getting, you know, the sound of the birds chirping
or, you know, your flatmate vacuuming or the doorbell ringing.
So that's kind of what I encourage people to make sure you sound as good.
And if you can see in this little setup here, what they've got on the walls
and I've seen people do this in their home studios is sound barriers.
So they're just literally foam, but curtains and rugs
and things like that can actually help as well.
You just don't want that as I showed you before with the clapping,
that alive sound and that some of the mistakes that I made in the beginning
when I wasn't so in control of my environment.
So just record yourself and see what it sounds like.
But of course, the headphones and the mic really, really help you.
The other question I often get from people is,
does it do you guess need to have all that stuff?
Well, I just give them some tips of how to sound great.
But at the end of the day, they can actually when they are recording,
you know, they can just use their normal earbuds that they would would use.
I'd never let them record just with the laptop mic.
My laptop mic is pretty echoey
and also means all that non directional sound will pick up as well.
So if you do have the guy next door suddenly designed to mow the lawns,
that's going to be just as loud as their voice.
So just try and encourage your guests to always have some earbuds
and, you know, be able to actually block out the other sounds as best as possible
because you want them to sound as good as you sound as well.
Any questions on that?
Great. OK, so here we get into the platform stuff.
So we all know, right, you could record your podcast tomorrow on Zoom.
I've never done that, as I said, I use Encaster,
but you could technically speaking.
But what you really need to do is find a way to get that to then be edited
and then get into what we call the RSS feed.
Now, this is a little graphic of the RSS feed.
So that's the RSS feed. There you are. You've recorded.
That's great. You've got your RSS feed.
So you kind of have to get that set up.
I use something called Libsyn, which is probably one of the early ways to do that.
There are probably others out there as well.
And it's kind of what we call your hosting platform.
So it's where your edited product, if you like, your finished podcast
with its intro, its outro, its level has been checked, all bits and pieces
goes and lives forever.
So I can go back and have a look on Libsyn, for example, statistically,
you know, what's been my most downloaded episode?
What's been my longest episode?
Which weeks did that episode peak historically over the last five years?
But then what Libsyn also does is it says, you know, hey, there's podcasts here.
These are all the details.
And I get it out there to all of these platforms, Apple podcasts,
you know, Spotify, Castro, Breaker, Google Podcast, whatever it might be.
And it does that for you.
You need somebody to host it.
It can't live on your computer because that is just yours.
This is kind of like taking it, you know, down to Grand Central Station
in New York and actually blasting it everywhere.
So that allows those other platforms to actually pick up on that.
I've just done a screenshot there.
That's on iTunes, kind of what my podcast will look like.
It'll have the guests kind of title episode and then how long it was.
And it just it just feeds it every week.
And I kind of don't even have to think about it.
It's it's semi magic.
But Libsyn subscriptions, I think mine's about 20 US dollars a month.
And it's all based on storage levels like a lot of those programs are.
So if you're going to record a show every day, you'll belt through your storage.
So you might need a more expensive package
because I only do one show once a week.
That's half an hour over a year.
It's not not as much storage to actually host that show over time.
So there's just some ideas of how that that actually might work.
As I mentioned, there probably are others out there.
I'm a little bit of a it works for me.
And it's it's the right price and my team know how to use it.
So I just kind of have stuck with Libsyn from the beginning.
And they're the ones I think that most platforms will interact with as well.
So you just need to check out, you know, for example,
can I get this on Spotify and iTunes and everywhere else
that this needs to be downloaded from?
So there's some pricing.
But I think I use the twenty dollar one, which is the most popular
because I just like the flexibility of additional storage.
And also, I don't like to delete any episodes.
I want to make sure that the catalog can't kind of live there
for as long as it needs to as well.
So that's Libsyn for you.
Have a look at that.
So some of my hacks, which I, as I mentioned to you,
I made all the rookie mistakes of terrible sound.
How am I going to find guests?
Will people say yes to a show where, you know, I literally have an audience
of 10 or maybe an audience of one some weeks.
But very much when I started, I kind of knew from my broadcast
journalism days that if something's not breaking news, which my story,
my podcast isn't, I'm not doing a daily show about what's happening
in the world of politics in Australia today.
That would have to be recorded, you know, every day at a certain time.
But I batch my shows.
So I can tell you today, I have either scheduled or finished
every single episode of my podcast for the rest of the year.
And it's the second of September.
So I never without a show every week.
And that is because things happen.
People get the flu, they get covered, their planes are late, I get sick.
Something happens. My internet.
