All right, I have some new tour dates to let you know about. I'll be in Norfolk VA, Virginia on November 9
I'll be Roanoke VA November 10 Huntington, West Virginia November 11th over there at the Mountain Health Arena
formerly known as the Big Sandy
I'll be in Evansville, Indiana on November 1 5 at the Ford Center and
Winston-Salem, North Carolina November 17th as well as New Orleans, Louisiana on November 24th at the UNO
Lakefront Arena all tickets are available at theovon.com
slash
To you are
We have been moving into some bigger venues really grateful for it
and
We'll do a mix of bigger and smaller ones at the time and
Just because we don't want to be on tour forever, you know, we want to be on tour for a while
We just don't want to be on
You know until
We're deceased or whatever. So thank you guys for your support theovon.com slash
To you are and if tickets are too high price just wait, we'll come back through sometime gang
Dr. John Vervecchi is a professor of psychology at the University of Toronto
He currently teaches courses on thinking and reasoning
with a focus on
cognitive development intelligence
Mindfulness and the psychology of wisdom. He is a smarter guy. He's an information man, you know
He's also an expert in Buddhist
Psychology he has a 50-part lecture series on YouTube called awakening from the meaning crisis
I've personally been thinking a lot about meaning and what it what
Just meaning of life meaning of self
Things like that, you know, we had a call about it on the last solo episode and and and that's one of the things that
Dr. Vervecchi is
Is highly informed about so we're gonna spend some time today with him and delve into that and some other things
I'm very grateful that he's here today. Today's guest is dr. John Vervecchi
John Vervecchi, thank you so much for being here. It's great pleasure. Yeah. Yeah, it's really exciting man
I a lot of my friends have been turned on to you and just like your ability to like
share your
thoughts like in a concise and
Informative enough way where I guess people are able to absorb them and they don't sound too monotonous where it sounds too much
Like you're studying kind of yeah, you know, well, I mean I really
Well, I'm I really believe in I don't just believe I really believe in the work. I'm doing. It's it's like it's a calling for me
and so
and it's something that I live and I I
Part of I mean, I've been a teacher for a very long time and I think part of
Being a good teacher is to always be yourself learning and so I try to teach by sharing the enthusiasm of the learning
I'm going through like even when I'm doing a lecture
I'll learn something will come up and that moment will jazz me and that's
That's the style. I've tried to develop and it seems to work at least for the material
I've been privileged to get to teach. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and you teach all I guess
I mean a lot of people like I guess that a lot of things that I get shared for about yours are
About meaning and looking into meaning. Yes, and especially at a time where it feels like people are
Oh for me, even if I mean it feels like we're getting into this cul-de-sac
In America where it's like, is there a lot of value to my life? Do I am I just a cog in the wheel?
Am I just a consumer? Is there any?
You know, what is their purpose for me? I think a lot of people are starting to ask themselves that yeah
Yeah, I call that the meaning crisis and I think there's good
Evidence that it's becoming
Very prevalent in the West whatever that means these days, but you know sort of North America, Europe, you know, yeah
Japan Hawaii. Yeah, Australia, you know things like that
And the symptoms are you can sort of see symptoms of it
all through the culture and
and I've also seen a
significant increase
In in the work I'm doing both academically and in the public sphere
Especially since COVID COVID really ramped a lot of these issues up for people in a powerful way
What the pet what the issues of like
Questioning themselves. What's going on? Yeah, so the thing the thing that one of the interesting things that
COVID did is it threw people back onto their inner life?
And what's interesting is our culture, especially North American culture
Right, I'm not the first to observe it, you know, it has a high preponderance of a tendency towards narcissism being very like, you know
so people have
Oriented their lives in a very self-centered way, but and but they thought that
Right or they can maybe better way of putting it
They confuse that with having deep rich inner
Resources and when everything sort of stopped and they couldn't focus the world on them
And they had to focus on themselves in order to find resources and what you found was a bifurcation
Like a division some people were like whoa that like that really threw them
So I I'll say I'll say something to you and I'm of two of two minds of it
Because I'm happy about it as a scientist could I made a prediction and I'm sad about it as a human being
Because it's not a good prediction
So just as the pandemic was hitting I said what you're gonna get is you're gonna get a rise
In a term that Julian Evans made famous called
Conspiratuality this mixture of conspiracy theories and spirituality and that took off
And then I said as we come out of the pandemic
We'll get a mental health spike and then a little bit later sort of an increase in crime and all of these things are
Coming to pass because what had happened is many people are thrown into the interior life only to realize
for all of the
Self-centeredness they've actually not given any wise attention to their inner life
And they were suddenly without resources other people saw this as
an
Opportunity and they framed it that way and so what's been springing up where all of these online
communities where people
Not to sound too highfalutin or anything, but people started to say I know I really want to cultivate
Wisdom I mean there's tons of information. There's a lot of bullshit mixed up with it
There's you know, and there's all this stuff and then there's science now
But I want wisdom and so and I get an I've gotten involved with quite a few of these communities
So that was that was there's there's both you saw both negative and positive symptoms in the culture
like you know
The number of close friends people have is reliably declining even for all of our social net internet connections
Loneliness is becoming
Epidemic and loneliness is like it's very unhealthy. We are we are
We are naturally social cultural beings right loneliness is was becoming a hobby too for some people in a way
It's becoming almost so common that it's like
Are not common, but it's
Well, I guess common I guess and once you start to become something you
There's a part of you that will want to find the most organized way to be it and to engage in it
Yes, even in loneliness it's almost becoming a culture, you know, it is but it's a culture with great cost
I mean we have weird things happening like the uk has set up a ministry of loneliness
Which sounds like something out of orwell, right like the ministry of loneliness. Yeah, and it's like, oh, how did we get there?
Yeah, it sounds like an ozzy osbourne album. Oh, yeah, maybe
Yeah, I wonder how he would say that
I don't know. He might he probably would get one of his kids is I don't even know if he can talk anymore, but um
But yeah, well, so so to go back
So you're looking at so when you look at like so covet you're saying had a was an opportunity or caused a lot of us to like
Interflat look inside of ourselves. Yes. Yes. Okay. And some people did it like in a healthy way
Where they kind of looked inside of themselves and like wow, I haven't looked in here in a while
I'm going to find ways to challenge myself and see what's going on here. I'm going to join other groups
and uh people that are curious about
Their inner self. Yes, and then other and then what the other group what happened?
Well, I mean they a lot of them sort of fell into
The things that were already at work in the culture the meaning crisis predates
Covid by like centuries
but
You know, you saw a rise in mental health issues
So depression and anxiety have gone up and they have continued to increase
and this is
quite independent of how
affluent
So silicon valley has a tremendous problem
With depression and here are the people who are supposed to be at the pinnacle of our society
We we idolize them right and then yet they're
They're their their kids are in trouble and they're in trouble in certain ways
Have we always throughout time have people always searched for meaning in their life? Yes always been like, um, are we at like a
Because we were like you're saying that covid kind of put us in this place where
It kind of put us in a fast forward of people really going to started to look at that because the the fabric of society kind of stopped
And paused and so you're left with yourself really. Um, but people have always looked for meaning. That's exactly right
I mean, so in the series I did and in the book on zombies
The book is in the book is the idea that zombies are a myth that arose to try and give
Like give people an image of the meaninglessness in their lives
Uh, uh, but we talked about two kinds of issues one are what we call like perennial problems
Like you said, there's issues that human beings always have confronted and we can get into why that might be the case
And then there's also historical factors that are now have been growing since the late middle ages and accelerating and things have
You know, there's been a lot of major things
That are accelerants on those historical forces and what happens is the historical forces sort of undermine the
Like you said the cultural fabric
That normally helps people to address the perennial problems
And then what happens is you get a vicious cycle the perennial problems get worse
The social fabric tears more the perennial problems get and you start to spiral
And that's where it feels like kind of like we're at. Yes. Yes. That's that's and and and that's that's amazing
So when when I I didn't I didn't
How the awakening from the meeting crisis came up was actually a former student of mine took a class with me and said
You should turn this into a youtube series and the awakening for the meeting crisis is your youtube series
Yeah, I have two major youtube series. I have awakening for the meeting crisis
Which is about what we're talking about and then there's after socrates, which is an attempt to do an in-depth
Reconstruction
reverse engineering of a socratic way of life
As a way of cultivating wisdom both individually and collectively. What does that mean a socratic way of life?
We're not going to know what that means
Right. So the unexamined life is worth living. So this is a socratic quote. He says this on at his trial
Uh, and they basically say to him
Uh, stop doing philosophy. We'll let you go
And he said or or if not, we'll kill you, right? Oh, wow. And he says, uh,
Well, the unexamined life is not worth living. I'd rather rather die
and so
Socrates socrates is very very interesting
He has he has two sort of influences
One influence he's influenced by the sort of the first scientists that are emerging in ancient Greece
He takes a look at the natural science and it's a it's a breakthrough
Like as opposed to a mythological way of thinking these early thinkers are using observation and reason to try and understand the world
He thinks that's powerful
But he finds that the site and this is relevant for us
He finds that the scientific information
Isn't existentially relevant. It doesn't lead to personal transformation
It doesn't tell him how to become a better person
So it gives him a lot of information and it makes him understand things
But it's not helping him as a person as a in his soul
And you see and that's what how a lot of people feel about our scientific worldview
We have a scientific worldview that explains everything except how we generate science and how we have live
Live how we should live meaningful lives within that worldview. So socrates says that's not good enough
The truth seeking is good, but it's it's not giving me any relevance
And then there's the sophists and that that that literally means sort of the wise guys
And these are the people that invent rhetoric, you know, the first sort of
First good use of bullshit in in in a technical sense in harry frankford sense
You know the liar tries to manipulate you because you care about the truth and they try to convince you that something is
Truth but the bullshit artists does something different
They try to get you unconcerned about whether or not something is the truth and just caught up in how catchy it is
Advertising all advertising works this way, you know, you watch you watch the alcohol commercial, right?
Here's a bar and somebody gets a drink and there's gorgeous people and happy music and everybody's well-dressed and smiling
Go into a bar, right? That's not that's not and we all know it's not it's not the same in there. No, but
It's catchy
It triggers all kind, you know sexuality and vibrancy and sociality
Yeah, possibility. Yeah and all that and it's so it gets very catchy and you don't care about the truth
And you get caught up in how catchy it is and this is and this is what the sophists discovered
They had they knew they they learned how to make things catchy
So they would really go deep into people and change them now
They did it in a manipulative fashion now. Socrates said well, they're the opposite
They're giving me lots of relevance transformative power, but no truth and what he did is basically said I want the two together
I want transformative truths. I want to I want to go on a quest
To find those truths that catch. Wow. He was like a gangster, huh? Yeah, he was
Well, he's a hero. He's a hero to me. Yeah. Well, it sounds like that's what I'm saying
It sounds like he was like a John Wayne of like
Let's do we're gonna do this a new way and this is the way that it needs to be
It just sounds like he was a real pioneer kind of he is. I mean, it's called the Socratic Revolution
I mean, he's an astonishing individual
Like he was extremely brave. He had a reputation like he was a soldier
And at several times in battle, he showed tremendous courage and presence of mind when everybody else is panicking
He could he could stand in one's
place
Like in like in profound meditation for like 24 48 hours
Uh, he uh, he was he was his life was threatened several times and he never sort of
capitulated to
Uh, to the forces. Um, he's brave. He's brave
um
He I mean he creative it sounds like yeah, and he's and he he invented this way of interacting with people
Um, he would ask them questions and he would try try and draw out
um
Like what he compared himself to a midwife. I help I help people to give birth to themselves
And so he he wasn't he wasn't like he would often show people that
Their their claims to being wise or to knowledge
Didn't work. He would get them into this state. People said it was like being stung by uh, like by a stingray or a spell cast on
You'd get into this state and he did this for a particular reason
So the the Athenians had oracles like the oracle at delphi. Have you ever been to delphi? I know. Oh, I don't think so. I have is it
Um, no, I haven't it puts the zap on you man
Yeah, yeah, like like you stand in front of the omphalus the navel of the world
And and this this chasm drops away and and then there's in front of you and this mountain goes up
And you know and this woman she would sit in a cave and there's some
Speculation that she was getting intoxicated and then she would she would speak
Answer people's questions. Now when you're an oracle, right? If you want to stay in business as an oracle
You don't give really clear answers to people like right, right because you need them to come back
You need them to come back. So, you know, you know, should I marry Cassandra? Well, sometimes the squirrels don't gather nuts
Okay, what it was. So what there was so a friend of socrates went
To the oracle and I I always I have no basis for saying but I always picture them sort of like sort of
Smirking and nudging each other. We're gonna ask you this really cool question, right?
Yeah, yeah, are you ready?
And so she goes up and they go up and they and they and they they say to her is
Is there anyone wiser than socrates and they're expecting this really cryptic and and she said no
No human being is wiser than socrates
straight answer. Wow
So the she went back
So he went back and they tell socrates no you and I we're honest if they said
We got that message from the gods. We go. Yeah. Yeah, I always knew it, right? I always know
He does he does this other thing and this tells you how Socratic is he says
Well, the gods can't lie. That's by the way, that's one way and he's revolutionary
The gods aren't like the ancient gods just superheroes. The gods are like moral exemplars for socrates
So they can't lie, but he also says but I know I'm not wise
How can those both be true?
What and he turns it into this quest so he goes and he keeps asking people
Right, so somebody claims to know something or they they know what a particular virtue is they know what courage is and
He'll ask like two generals and no and no and he'll he'll constantly question them
And it's and he's trying to draw it out and he's trying to find out
And what typically happens is
The the this what's called a dialogue played a role it ends with no clear answer no clear definition
But socrates isn't a skeptic so the the the
So so he so he doesn't get a clear answer
But he that's okay
The goal is is the goal to get a clear answer just to create conversation
Beyond that seems that the goal is to get people to take up his quest
See so if you look at so he's talking to these two generals and the two generals about courage
One of them does the I just know he just speaks from his intuition and socrates destroys that with
So is him with the contradictions the problem the other quotes
So the first person speaks from like a first person perspective. Well, I just know
And socrates destroys that and the other person speaks you know speaks from this third person
Well, here's a technical definition. I got from the sophist and blah blah blah
Yeah, yeah, and and socrates destroys that and then there's and socrates can't offer definition
And you think what was this all for
But you have to see in a dialogue you have to pay attention to the drama not just the argument
Because what the two generals say is we want our sons to come and spend time with you and live with you socrates
Because our sons are going to get courage from you
Socrates can't explain he can't define courage courage if you think you can put courage into a definition you don't get it
Right, you have to get into this not the first person this or the third person the second person you ask together
Right, you catch it, but it has but it's a it's just caught truth. Remember we were talking about and what happens is socrates
exemplifies
What it is and he he he lives it in conversation with people so that they start to catch that orientation
And catch his quest wow
And was that a new thing at the time to have that sort of energy to have that like
For people to really start to question things like that
So as far as we can tell and that's why they call this a ecstatic revolution
Then there doesn't seem to be any of the ancient sources that contradict this socrates
Socrates invents discovers we don't have to there's a latin word that's much better
Inventio it means to discover or or invent right he he inventios right this way
Of helping people to give birth to themselves
So so the people I work with we've we've tried to reverse engineer this
Practice we call it dialectic into the logos and we have workshops that sort of get people to take this up and and so
What we do is we'll have them do these practices around a virtue like courage
More honesty authenticity
And it's and we and and what happens is
They they and we tell them this but they also realize it
Right, you're not the point isn't to be right about this
The point is to come into right relationship with the virtue and that's what happens when they do these practices
People come out and go i'm kind of experiencing something like ah
and a love
For I thought I always knew what honesty was like the technical definition or the intuition like the two generals
But but now I I don't but I like I'm like socrates
So you get this right orientation
And now we go back to socrates
Because he finally resolved that paradox that he had from the gods
He realized that he was wise
In that he knew when he did not know something
But not in the shallow sense that I you know, I don't know about albanian tin production or something like that
But in this sense we're talking about was it which is like I really don't know what honesty is
I have a I have a love for it and I'm orient. I want to be in the right relationship. I want to open myself up
I want to learn more about it. Hmm
Football is back in full swing with another week of epic games
And who's got you covered on the action every single one of them
Draft king sports book and official sports betting partner of the nfl
New customers can bet five dollars on football and get 200 dollars instantly in bonus bets
Nobody's missing out on the action this season
All draft kings customers can take advantage of two new offers every game day this september
Get in on the nfl week two action with draft kings sports book
Download the app now and use code theo to sign up
New customers can bet just five dollars and take home
200 instantly
in bonus bets
Only on draft king sports book with code theo the crown is yours
You got to keep that hair, baby. You got to maintain that fleece. That's important. That's right and keeps
Can help you do it. You shouldn't do it alone. No
Keeps is an online subscription service
That makes it easy and more to more affordable for men to treat their male pattern baldness from the comfort of their home
Mm-hmm with keeps you can get clinically proven treatments to address hair loss and boost hair regrowth
Delivered right to your door in discrete packaging. Hmm. What's he getting? I don't know
Keeps offers both of the FDA approved hair loss treatment options
As well as a two-in-one gel that combines both treatments hair loss stops with keeps
For a special offer to get started go to keeps.com
Slash theo or click in the link in the description. That's keeps.com
Slash teo
When it comes to like searching for like meaning right like as a person, you know, do we do it?
Is it something that we do?
As
Individuals like are we do is there any value in finding meaning as an individual?
It feels like to me sometimes more like the value is finding
Meaning as like a species or like a group right like I guess when I think about meaning. I don't think like
What is my what is the meaning for me? What is the purpose of my life?
I find my brain often thinks more like what is our purpose, right? What is our meaning?
um
So the the individual poll is you need to
Cultivate wisdom
But what's the collective poll and you put your finger on it?
So what is this meaning thing?
So a lot if you do research on it, there's four dimensions to it
Uh
And the one that people think it's synonymous with is having a purpose. That's only one of the dimension
It's actually not the most important one of the dimensions of meaning
Yeah, meaning in life. So we're not talking about like the meaning of a sentence. We're talking about
What makes your life worth living even though it has all the frustrations?
And failures and faults and flaws in it
Right because I think especially you get to like a middle of your life kind of or ballpark, you know
And you start that really starts to at home. You're like, oh, well my youth is disappearing
Yeah, what is the what is my purpose here?
And then is it the purpose of just me or am I part of a group?
And we have a purpose those are the questions. Yeah, that I've really kind of right see us getting hit with a lot
So purpose is important, but there's other factors
One was it was in the literature was called coherence
But some of the original experiments have fell to replicate and so it's a broader notion
It's more like your world has to make sense to you. It can't be absurd
Right because if the world becomes absurd then then you start to really feel that reality is meaningless
Well, that's starting. That's another thing that's starting to happen. I mean, we can go into that
Yeah, we can we can and that's very different people can people can act on purpose
Even within an absurd world. Well, a lot of my meaning I've noticed like recently like it seemed like um
Recently it seemed a lot like
The the texture or the fabric of society is kind of eroding in america, right?
Like a lot of traditions are being yeah, yeah said that they're no good. We're like
Um trying to renegotiate our past to make it look a certain way
Um, everything's in question. Yeah, a lot of things are in question a lot of
People are saying that's even like the pledge of allegiance for just things that gave us all commonality seem to be
Um, disappearing, right? Yeah, and so I realized that that started to hurt me because I was like man
A lot of my meaning as a person. Yes, I had attached to
Excellent a lot of these commonalities and I didn't realize that until they started to go away. I'm like well if this stuff doesn't mean anything
Like then do I mean anything? Okay, so notice that notice that so there's two that's the two missing dimensions
one is people right
And one is they the the the reality can't be flat. It has to have a depth
They have to they have to be able to point to something to say this is really real
Right if you like if everything feels sort of illusory, then you're also in a kind of a nightmare situation, right?
But the one you just pointed to this is the crucial one and this is the one and i'm going to punt a little bit here
This is the one that matters. It's called mattering. There's the one that matters the most and mattering is
this
you
There's a really good book by susan wolf called meaning in life and why it matters
And you know when you what the metaphor people use is I want to feel connected to something larger than myself
Something bigger than myself
And here's a way of seeing if you have this in your life
And why it might have come into question like you were just talking about ask yourself
What do you want to exist even if you don't?
And how much of a difference do you make to it now?
Okay, so take me through an example of that. So let me think what do I want to exist even if you don't even if I don't exist
Yeah, um
Probably families. Yeah, so these are people you want them to exist even if you don't yeah, yeah
And happy children. Yes happy families. Maybe would be something I would say and do you think you make much of a difference to them right now?
Not a ton right so you need a good answer for both of those to have a strong sense of meaning in life
Okay, so take me through an example of somebody that would have a good ant like that
What would be an answer that would probably leave somebody feeling fulfilled after they ask themselves those questions
Well, I want to I want to point to something that you put your finger on
um
there's a decline
The bigger picture a worldview
Um, and it off the worldviews that we we experienced them
And I'm trying to use this term very broadly religiously. So I don't mean just like Christianity
Or judeism or something like that
But I also mean what used to be called American civil religion
Like you have their heroes and things are sacred like the flag and you pledge allegiance, which is a kind of prayer
Right and so and both of those religious frameworks and even though they're tearing each other apart about it right now
They're falling right and so people used to say
They would die for their country. Mm-hmm people did it in world war two
They right they want the us the united states to continue existing
They think the universe is a better place if the us is in it and they are making a difference
They're in like they're in
Germany and they're liberating the world from tyranny. And so they're making a real difference
Right to this overarching
worldview
American democracy americanism
They had meaning so much meaning in life like socrates. They're willing to die for it. I mean they must have
I mean to think like yes, I mean I mean they had people
That were
Lying to get into the draft. Yes
Like I want to go serve my country. I will die for my country. They believe that much in it
it feels like we're
Further from that now for sure. So that the idea of your country being that thing
Is probably less right. So that's the other poll now remember we talked about the individual poll
Then there's the worldview the the right the the poll that we
No one you didn't invent english did I right right?
These are the things we invent together and we evolve together and we participate in together and one is like there was a great metaphor by
An academic called peter berger. He called it the sacred canopy where you had this worldview that basically gave you
It told you how to be an agent in the world
And it it made the world a meaningful arena. So there was an agent arena relationship and they were attuned to each other
So you knew what to do you knew how to fit in and and so you had this worldview
That grounded things and this is the bigger picture and then people could could connect
their personal
Wisdom cultivation to this bigger thing and enhance their meaning in life. And this is what religions both civil and
You know, uh religious. Sorry. We don't have we need another sacred I suppose civil and sacred
Religions they were both doing for people and these have been breaking down right for a whole so those are the historical factors
and when they break down people's ability to find purpose and depth
and clarity and mattering gets undermined and their self-deception
Exacerbates because they get isolated like we were talking about in kovat. They get
Disconnected from a shared worldview that gives them these these ecologies of practices
You can't do them on your own, right? You'll you'll fall prey to sort of, you know
If you're just an autodidact like a self-learner you'll fall prey to all your biases and all your egocentrisms and your
Unrealized comfort zones you need other people to be so we need each other to have meaning
Yeah, we transcend each other through each other
Like I try like this is Socrates. You know how I can most transcend myself and overcome my bias and my narrow frame
Is you challenging you? Yeah, we're the keys to each other's locks. Yes. Yes. Yes. And so what happened is
Right, you need that worldview to home
Those ecologies of practice right give them legitimacy give them tradition
Right, which is not the same thing as nostalgia. And then what we've done is we've undermined
That worldview we've we've torn apart the ecologies of practices
Because and people are like they've largely abandoned the legacy religions. They're now abandoning abandoning the civil religions
Even the the the very weak religion of popular culture is breaking down
Oh, there's more fortnite players and there are protestants probably right right. Yes, you know
But but look at how look at how those like a symptom of the meaning crisis is an attempt to create world views
That have a myth I when I say mythological, I don't mean that negatively. I don't mean like a lie
I mean myths aren't ancient stories about the past
They're they're they're they're stories about perennial problems and patterns, right?
And so like think about the whole mc universe and we call it a universe
We're trying to create this entire worldview in which basically we have bronze age gods who nevertheless are socratic heroes and
Pursue virtue and they fly around and do all this stuff and it's falling apart. We can't even keep that running
Yeah, right like this is how bad things are and so the perennial problems start
They start to get worse they tear at what's left of the worldview the worldview can't home the ecology
People get more foolish more self and the whole thing just spirals
And so if that was that a good answer by the way to the two poles. Yeah, I think it was really good, man
Yeah, I think it was really good. I'm you know, I'm doing I'm doing a decent job. I think I'm keeping up good
I'm trying to make it accessible for listeners at the same time. I think you're doing a great job at that. Thank you
Oh, thanks, man. Yeah, I appreciate it. Um, so what happens historically in a time where we get to a place like this
Is there have this happened before in time? Yes, okay
So we don't need to be alarmed at the point like humans have never been through this. That's right. We have been through it before
now
There's a like there's two there's two
Uh
Stances on this that are both sort of wrong because they're extreme one is oh, this is human beings have always said the meanings and
And they and that's a dismissive thing and then the other one is no, this is completely absolutely unique
And there's truth to both
What's unique is we face a set of problems that are global in a way
There was never global problems that were this
Like this, you know
Complex and and growing like we face an interconnection of the advent of you know
agi
We're already fast. We're already facing, you know, growing the growing impact of social media
You know, people are looking at issues around the environment
energy
as you said
Our political economic system is breaking down is gridlocking and people are losing faith in it
And I use that word deliberately in in in a deep way. And so those are
I think unique things we're facing and they I
I think
When we're in a meeting crisis, it's sort of
hamstrings us
It really
Weakens our ability to turn our best wisdom towards these problems because when we're in a meeting crisis, right?
So oh, it's best enough. We're all isolated and we're isolated and it's not our best. It's very self-motivated. It's not our like group
conscience
We're we're acting out of fear a lot of people
Yeah, and we're acting out of like an our ability to cut through the bullshit
And to realize when we're in self-deception is you know being seriously challenged. Oh, yeah
So our ability to handle this is is very weak
But it is also the case that there have been other points in time in which there have been like not globally
but
like in the ancient west at the Hellenistic period there was
A a meaning crisis at that time too. What was that about?
So it's basic. So there's alexander the great. Mm-hmm. So socrates was he great or not?
Oh, it depends
so
Um, because that's a straight. I mean, that's like you're not even
leaving any
You know, you're saying hey
so he he changes the
Course of the history of western civilization in a profound way
And if that's what you mean by great just sort of changing the course of things, he's great
Okay, I'll give it to him then. Well, but but but I also want to say like that's some of my partner like she's persian
And the alexander great is the bad guy in the persian world, right?
You ask, huh? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so he's like
Right, but what he does is like he he conquers most of
You know the silk road
and you know
The some of the major civilizations in asia europe and africa
And then he dies at a young age
um
And so his empire breaks up into his jet. First of all, there's a period of fighting
And and and and and and and and and and the generals carve up his empire and then there there's just ongoing warfare
Now I just want to compare
Two people somebody living at the time just before alexander the time of Aristotle who taught alexander, by the way, right?
This is their life
They live in a like a polis a city
They've lived there and their ancestors have lived there for all their life
Everybody around them speaks the same language and everybody practices the same religion
If you're an athens you participate. Well, if you're a male
So it's all right. You participate directly in the government, right?
You know, you know, but in person the leaders. So right this is like
After alexander
You're now
in
A world in which the people you might have been uprooted people have been uprooted moved around a little more global than at that point
Kind of exactly, but that's exactly the parallel, right?
Right. So people around you speak a different language. They haven't been there for years
You might not have your ancestors might not have been there. They have different religions
Right, you've conquered. There's an area's been conquered. So now there's more of you to can consider whenever you're making laws and rules
And and these kingdoms are constantly shifting
So you may go to sleep in the Ptolemaic empire and wake up in the Seleucid empire and you don't know
And that's the thing the government is thousands of kilometers away from you. So people felt
Um, there's a term for this. It's called domicile, which is the killing of home
They felt they didn't feel at home
In the world anymore. So this has been called an age of anxiety
And now what happened at that time?
And in some ways, this is the project I'm trying to do now
What happened at the time is philosophy changed in order to address
In order to address this meaning crisis
So before with Socrates and Plato, you already have these questions about meaning and wisdom
But what gets added to this existential ethical dimension is what you might call a therapeutic dimension
Epicurus who's one of the prototypical philosophers from this time said
Call no man a philosopher who has not alleviated the suffering of others
The philosopher became the physician of the soul
And what happened is philosophy took on this dimension of how to alleviate
Anxiety how to increase people's sense of meaning and connectedness and we got epicurianism
And stoicism and then eventually we got neoplatonism that drew them all together and we got and you also had the
The emergence of new religions that we're trying to right
There was syncretic religions in which people were merging gods
Like or or the mother goddess is because when you don't have a home a mother goddess becomes a really big thing
Isis becomes a big deal and of course christianity emerges in this mix too. Wow. So that's interesting because it's kind of where we are
I see that where we've been now for a little bit like people are
Gathering around
Speakers are men and women who are able to share a message of hope or give them
Make them feel like they have meaning or purpose why people listen to
Are sorry have started to listen to people like um
I mean at jordan peterson's an easy win because he's been very popular
Guys like you who are able to converse uh, or just you're able to put into words
What a lot of people can't that's one of the problems that a lot of us have we can't put certain things into words
So we start to
Especially in times like this you start to look to somebody who seems to have it together
I think yeah, does that make any sense or no? It does and it lands
It lands very well, but it lands with a sort of
A very strong sense of responsibility
That's true. Maybe it's putting too much responsibility on those people
I guess i'm not looking at it from that perspective. I'm looking at it more from like
the people in the
In the polis in the city or whatever who were like, what do we do now and and you know and like um
Like as other things start to fall as the fabric of our society the traditions and stuff start to like
Get more opaque or whatever. There's opaque. Let me know. Take like va like you can't see him as well. Yeah
What do we do?
You know and so you go to somebody who I think sounds like they know what they're doing, right?
So it's again, there's there's a risk there, right?
There's a tremendous risk of and there's risk both ways. There's a risk of the person the figure
Being wrong. Well being wrong or or not caring if there's wrong. There's a lot of bullshit, right and
um, and and then and then there's also risk for the person they might be sincere, but
You know for every myth we have in the greek tradition of the hero
We have an equal myth of hubris hubris is when you try to be the gods and the god like icarus
you try to fly to the sun and
The right you try to or fate on you try to steer the chariot of the sun and you right and zeus has to kill you right
All that's right humility basically great rate and socratic humility, right? Um
Yeah, I mean one way of understanding the human task is to keep a
Keep a hit hold on both the fact
That we're finite
We're prone to error or self deception and and unforeseen fate
But we're not just animals. We're also called to virtue. We have a capacity to transcend and we have to hold
The finitude and the transcendence together. We just did the transcendence
We we can fall pray to thinking we're gods and then the hubris falls and that's what a lot of these thought leaders do
And then on the other hand, but if we don't give people something
They can just they can just collapse into their finitude and and then they're they're they're subject to tyranny and servitude and despair
And plato is all about trying and he uses socrates to represent somebody who
Socrates described himself as metaxu between he was always holding those two together
and so I try to my
I try to
Take on the responsibility. You've put your finger on in and I try to live it that way
um
And and so I mean one of the things
people say to me
And it's really a profound compliment for me. There's a lot of people say
John you gave me the vocabulary like you were talking about a few minutes ago to talk about this to think about it to talk to other people about it
But I have to balance that off
with a tendency to get
Too self-absorbed in my in my own terminology and that's the fallacy. It's one of the I get
I don't know if the fallacy is a word but not wiener. I'm talking about the other thing the
Which one the
Like a like a confusion fallacy and I'm talking about. Yeah. Yes. Okay
um
Yeah, that's one of the fallacies of just being human. It's like you can
If you if when things start to go well, this happened to me before in my life
I started to get some popularity and things seemed like they were going good and I thought there was a moment where I was like
Well, I started asking myself does god have some special plan for me, you know
Which is a dangerous thing to start asking yourself. It's it's okay to ask
To be curious and see if you know what the how I can be of service
But part of that gets real tricky because
Then you start thinking you have some special power and that's where it can just get scary and I think there's
It's just being human. It's part of the it's you know, it's
That's what that fulcrum is right there. It's just trying to keep that even, you know, and teo. I think about this daily
I think about this daily
I I have I have an amazing team of people around me
I have a non-for-profit organization the vervecky foundation that keeps the money
And the power at an arm's length for me. I'm not I'm not in charge of it
Uh, um, I have a bunch of people around me who have been given ongoing
non-negotiable permission to tell me if I'm starting to believe my own bullshit
Um, hey, you don't strike me as that person at all. Well, I wasn't trying to say that. No, no, no
I'm just trying to examine this. It's really interesting
I examine it for myself sometimes because I have people that like will say man
You really helped me with this or you've helped me like that's good. Think about those things, right?
It makes me feel like I'm being of service, right? Yeah, but then it's okay. I have to be careful like
That I don't let that leave the room with me. Yeah in a
In it's like beautiful music, right? Yeah, you you you you joy in it while it's happening
Because somebody is sharing with you, right, right?
And you don't want it
You don't want to rain on somebody when they're sharing with you because they need that
But then but it's like music when the song's done the song's done. Don't keep hymning
yourself as you leave, right? Yeah
John is great. John is great. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, exactly
Today's episode is brought to you by better help
Indeed better help they can help
They'll do it. They help me. I tried them out. I needed help. I called them
And I've gotten help. That's it. You can do it over your phone. It's easiest discreet
You can do it on FaceTime
Especially if you live in an area or in a place where you're just
You don't you know, if you go see the therapist, they're gonna tell their body
They you go on a day on every time you go down
The 7-11 or the Casey's they're gonna know when you walk in. Oh, that's him. He needs ill
You can prevent all that if you're thinking of starting therapy give better help a try
It's entirely online. It's designed to be convenient flexible and suited to your schedule
Just fill out a brief questionnaire to get matched with a licensed therapist
And switch therapists anytime for no additional charge
There's no shame in that game, baby. Take care of your brain and your heart
Get a break from your thoughts with better help
Visit betterhelp.com
Slash
th e o today to get 10 off your first month. That's better
hel p dot com
Slash the o this episode is sponsored by better help
I want to let you know that morgan and morgan has teamed up with richard
Childress racing to support kyle busch and austin dillon
And are offering one
Lucky this past weekend listener the opportunity to attend race day in los vegas
On october 1 5. That's right
They are giving one lucky winner two thousand dollars in two tickets to see kyle busch
Race live in los vegas this october
Entering to win is easy. Just go to morgan vegas dot com slash this past weekend
That's morgan vegas
Dot com slash this past weekend
No purchase necessary open a legal residence of the 48 contiguous
united states and dc who are 18 and over sweepstakes ends 10 1
2023 for entry and official rules visit morgan vegas dot sweep p
Dot com
Also, if you're ever injured you can check out morgan and morgan their fee is free unless they win
For more information go to for the people dot com slash this past weekend or dial pound law pound 529
From your cell phone. That's f or the people dot com slash this past weekend
Or pound law from your cell
This is a paid advertisement and we are grateful to morgan and morgan
It's the calm right now before the holiday storm and i hate to say it that the holidays are coming
But you can hear them you can hear them holidays are coming
They're humming around the bend
You know that but you can prepare your e-commerce business for the holiday rush now
Just by using ship station. Oh god. It sounds good
Whether you're shipping from your house or a warehouse
Ship station can help increase your profitability
Save time
Automating your shipping and returns in the ship station dashboard and keep costs down with industry leading carrier discounts
While your holiday orders roll in so set your business up for success this holiday season with ship station
Simply go to ship station dot com and use code theo today
And sign up for your free 60 day trial. That's two months
That's ship station dot com
Code theo
So one thing that I think about when I think about meaning is like
If you look at like some past cultures they had um
They would give their when people were dying they would give them like weapons to go to in the afterlife with like
Medallions, maybe a couple, you know, chocolates or freaking. I don't know if they had butterscotchers or whatever back then
But a couple little candies for the road, you know, they would put that in their bear in their casket, right?
Yeah, so imagine what life was like when you thought that
Death like there was a whole like you this was just a preparation
That must have added so much. I feel like that would have added so much meaning
It can to being alive whereas now that doesn't seem
It's not as prevalent. I mean nobody, you know, I was at a place one time
Somebody maybe put a couple quailudes or something in a dude's pocket in a casket
But I've never been there where they're, you know, armoring them up and putting them in like, you know
Underarmor or anything, you know
So I that's a really important thing. There's a really
Great book. I'm teaching an online course for the halki and kamaak academy on beyond
Analysm and we started it with Tillich's book the courage to be which is
A really great book the courage to be by Tillich. You said Paul Tillich. Yeah
And he talks about that these different these things that can really take people into spare
And he talks about them analytically, but he's very aware that they can interpenetrate and you can have multiple ones at the same time
And one is the one you just mentioned
It's mortality
But you have to you have to broaden it
If I understand mortality think we have the we talk about a fatality
But that the base of that is not death the base word in there is fate
This is the idea your death is just an example
of how
The universe is perpetually profoundly beyond your control
You can have met the woman of your life and you both know it and you're gonna have and you step into traffic and the truck hits you
And right and it's not the case
Like in a romantic comedy. Yeah that the great narrative that is unfolding like me joe black. That's what happened
I think in that yes, so we we we we we confront
We confront fatality which ultimately in our mortality
um
That's one one is the one we've been talking about meaninglessness
Though the world can just suddenly seem flat and futile and we can feel alienated and anxious
And then the other one is
guilt
Not just in the everyday sense of like, oh, you know, I shouldn't have said that to peter
It's in a more profound sense of
I think i'm just a bad person
Right. I like
In not necessarily evil. I just you the weight
of your flaws and your
Failings and your faults
Can be magnified especially if you if you're very honest
I mean
Theo I don't want to live forever because I don't want to try and carry that boulder
That will get larger and larger of my flaws and my fates. I my finitude
Right and that can weigh you down and so I think
I think one of the things that
I think you're right one of the things that most people have lost although not as many as you might think so
although
participation in
The legacy religions the world religions is declining
Even in america now america was always the weird exception, but now it's starting to decline. So in a couple generations
Most people in america won't be religious adherents. Wow. That's scary feeling
Well, that's domicite. So welcome to it. Sorry. That's domicite the loss of home loss of home
Oh, the loss of feeling at home loss of feeling at home in the universe
Right. We used to call it a cosmos cosmos was like cosmetic
Beautiful and now we call it universe, right? It's flat. Uh, we don't there's no depth to it
So those all three of those intersect now
One of the things and I want to go back to remember I mentioned like
The Hellenistic philosophers like epicurus even socrates they tried to address the problem
Of morta socrates said all the philosophy is a preparation for death
Right. Um, and they tried to address it in a different way
Can I try just just to give people
First of all one thing other cultures. So I have a lot. I've been practicing within daoism and buddhist practices also for three decades
So, uh, see so if you look in even in vedanta, if you're looking within hinduism at least important
I mean, I don't want to talk about them as they're homogeneous
But at least large swaths of hinduism buddhism, right? Immortality is a curse
Like immortality living forever is a curse. They all viewed it like that. You're saying yes, okay?
because the idea is
Reincarnation you come back again and again and again and again and like I said
The like this is kind of like karma the the the faults and the flaws and the failings pile up
And right and and it just and it becomes it becomes just horrible
Um, and and what you seek for is moksha. You seek for liberation from rebirth or reincarnation
Or you seek nirvana. You're seeking you. I don't want to be
Reborn oh, so when there's in some of those religions where there's reincarnation
They seek to be freed from that that is the core of vedanta. You want to you want to realize
Moksha by realizing that the ground of your being
Your soul and the ground of reality are one and that liberates you from being attached to I want this
I want this to survive
I want this to survive and let go of that and buddhism has something similar
It tries to convince you that the idea that you have a substantial soul atman is an alt is ultimately false
And if you can really truly not just as an idea
But like we were talking about earlier if you can let go of it all the way through then you'll be liberated from that
So it's a different response
Now the hellenistic philosophers did something very similar in the west epicurus. He was famous for this he
He didn't try and convince people that they were immortal
He's he he he tried to get people to change the way they frame their mortality
So he famously said where death is I am not where I am death is not
What he's trying what what what what's he's doing there? Is he playing games?
What he's saying is you can't actually experience being dead
Because if you're dead
You're not there. Hmm. There's no experience and as long as you're experiencing you're not dead
You can never have the experience of being dead
And so what do you know and people say that's not good enough? That's not the point
The point is so he's trying to get you to be more discerning. What is it? You are afraid of you're afraid of dying
you're afraid of going through the process of losing your vitality
Losing your relationships
Losing your body you're not afraid of death. You're afraid like you're not afraid of all the time before your birth when you didn't
Didn't exist right right so right so what is it? You're afraid of dying you're afraid of losing losing
So here's what we could do
find the things
That you can keep up until the very last moment of consciousness and he said the one thing the two things that you can always have
our wisdom and friendship
Cultivate wise friendships and friendships that support wisdom and he was he was suffering horrible illness as he was dying
And he took that right through any right and he also taught people how to not fear the gods
right and and and and so
That was one response the stoics, you know
Marcus Aurelius people all know Marcus Aurelius from the movies right
And Marcus Aurelius what the stoic said is look the problem we are is what what we set our hearts on what we what we identify with
Right like we're always assuming and assigning identities for example right now
I'm assuming the identity of like you know this academic person
I'm assigning an identity to you, but this isn't the identity
I would have with my partner when I go home at night that would be weird right and I wouldn't assign the
Well, sorry you're going to interview me now right right that's weird right
And so we're always assuming and assigning identities and we're doing this in this interlocking manner that agent arena
But here's the thing most of the time we do this unconsciously we do it mindlessly
Yeah, automatically reactively and so we set our we identify with the wrong things
And so what the stoic said is I'm going to use I'm going to I know your viewers can't see I'm drawing a horizontal line
We identify with horizontal things we identify with trying to extend our life have more fame
Have more power and they said that's ultimately doomed. You're pitting yourself against the universe. You're very the universe is going to crush it
Yeah
Instead go vertical
Seneca said even when you're painted into a corner you can jump into the sky
So the vertical is don't try and get the most extension of your life
Try and get the greatest depth
There's a there's a book. Wow. That's so pal. That's really really cool
Yeah, and so you live that and you try and realize that now they did this in uh, even when you're painting a corner
You can jump into the sky. Yeah, and so things people can do when they feel like they're painting into a corner
They can help somebody else that will that creates probably some
And they can get more in touch they can and this is helping other people's services definitely a way to do this
You what they can get
Think about they think about this is the I mentioned earlier people don't want a flat world
They want a world with depth and height to it and you can you can you can touch the depths of reality and the heights
Of reality and you know, of course you can do this with mindfulness practices and other kinds of practices
And I'm just thinking I get a lot of questions people asking like hey, man. I'm in a tough spot right now
I feel like there's no way out. What do I do right now?
So that's what and a lot of times I'll say to the people, you know, try and be of service try and help someone else
It is um get out of yourself. You know, we get we get trapped in in ourselves. Definitely. That's that's very that's very much the case
So that's what I'm thinking. What other things would you recommend you think? Well, so let's talk about this. Let's let's talk about and um
I think this will have personal relevance to you too and and if I don't want to push any buttons inappropriately
But uh, let's talk about when people do one of the worst versions of that which is addiction
Okay, and so my friend and colleague
Mark Lewis has one of the best theories of addiction. It's basically a reciprocal narrowing theory
so
So your world is like getting really problematic. So you take a substance to
alter your state of consciousness so that
It doesn't seem to be so threatening at least for a bit the problem you pay for that
Is you weaken your cognitive abilities now when you come when you when you weaken your cognitive abilities
Your ability to solve problems in the world goes down. So now the world's more threatening
So now you got to take the substance and now you got to take more of it and then you weaken your
Cognitive abilities more and you see what's happening the world is getting more and more oppressive fewer and fewer options
And there's you have less and less cognitive flexibility
You less have less and less ability to move maneuver in your mind to change until you can't be any different
And the world has no future and that's addiction
You've reciprocally narrowed your way all the way yourself all the way down
Now I was having dinner with mark lunch with mark lewis
And I said to him and play does in the back of my mind because I got this from play though
I said to mark I said
Well, if you can reciprocally narrow, can't you reciprocally open?
Can't you
Bring some flexibility to your mind and that opens up the world
You start to see the world in more depth and then that
Actually opens you up into the depths of yourself and and the world and you can reciprocally open
It would make sense
Yeah, and that's what play to talked about when he talked about the the myth of the cave, you know
And we turn that into the movie the matrix
So right you can you can you can wake up you can reciprocally open up
And what's what's important about that is that's jumping into the sky
That's like a set the word for that is in greek is anagoge
It means a scent like like when they're the people are in the cave, right?
And they ascend out into the into the real world and so you can you can open up and what's interesting about that is
Like when you do that
This was Plato's great insight
Three things are happening that are really really important
To well i'm going to use met again to meta desires
So in addition to whatever you desire you desire that what is satisfying your desires
You have peace of mind you have you're not at war with yourself. You're not in conflict with yourself. Okay, the other is
You desire that what is satisfying in your desires is real you may say well, that doesn't seem right
Well, let me let me let me let me let me give me just one clear example of this
So we've tried to take
everything that used to be carried by god and
civic and sacred religion and culture and tradition and heritage and legacy and put it into our romantic relationships
They're going to do all of that for us. This is the weird messed up. We're oh, yeah, we we make someone our power higher power
That's right. That's right. And we and we'd say to one person you're going to do all that for me and they can't and so
The relationships break inevitably because our expectations were insane your relationship
Shouldn't be your ultimate right your relationship should be nourished by what is ultimate
There's a different thing
Right, so you ask people I do this with my students
I'll say how many of you are in deeply satisfying romantic relationships that so certain number put up their hands
and I say
Of the ones that have their hands up right now
Keep your hands up
If you would want to know if your partner was cheating on you even if that would destroy the relationship
And almost all of them keep their hands up
And then you ask them well, why do you keep your hands up?
And they said because it's not real
I want it to be real. I don't want it to be a fake. I don't want to be fraud. I want it to be real
Now what's happening with this reciprocal opening the opposite of the addict in which everything's becoming unreal
Is they're getting more and more integrated as a person the world is making more sense
It's getting more real. They're getting more at peace and these open
Those are the two things you're satisfying those two things in a joint way
And here's the third thing when you do this with a person or with reality
So mutually accelerating disclosure is the technical term
But if I open up to you and then you open up to me and then that
Enables me to open up more to you and we do this reciprocal opening with each other. That's love
That's what and it doesn't I'm not talking about romantic love. It can be friendship love
Right, so buddies. Yeah reciprocal opening
Gives you peace of mind
Gives you a deep reality and it causes you to love that's leaping into the sky
Yeah, you notice I get that a lot when I go so I'm I go to recovery meetings
And so I'll go to meetings and like one of the things that's nice about it is
I sit in a room a lot of times and people just share what's going on with them, right?
And everybody just listens. You just listen. You don't even
No one replies to that person. No one judges them. No one
It's just this place where somebody can share
And whatever their feelings were with that they can just
Be in the room and there's no you start to create this sense of comfort in people
That you can share this that the world is a safe place to share
Which probably was got closed up if they were really, you know, like narrowing in it does and isolating
It's like so this thing starts to grow and it's just like it's almost a comfort
It's just a comfort that grows
But then it it it becomes like a
Positive algae on other things and then everything starts to grow a little bit. Yeah, and it really is it's expansive though
It is very expansive is what it feels like and it expands out and in is that is that fair to do?
Yeah, I agree. That's really what's interesting about it
You're like before you know it you're kind of feeling okay a little and it's uh, but it grows on itself, you know
So imagine if you're siddhartha gautama the buddha
Right or perhaps socrates and that is how you were always living and you you so the the the prop the answer to the problem
Nihilism is not some argument
The answer is to fall in love with being with reality again in this way. We're talking about and when you do that
like
You get that vertical dimension
Well, let me tell you a story right so this is uh, julian barnes wrote a book
History of the world in ten and a half chapters. This is one story about this guy
He dies and there's an afterlife and goes to heaven st. Peter's is there. Oh, yeah
Do whatever you want and and and and the good place
Made use of this, but I won't do any spoilers, but but anyways
um
Great ending they made use of this and he you know
He wants to play and he gets and he plays golf and he gets the place where he can play golf
Absolutely the best every single day all the time then tennis and then any painting
And then after a while he comes and it's like
You know, I'm kind of done
And he's like and st. Peter goes good
good
What good is the point of heaven is not for you to live forever
I always think of the line from obi-dick. What is man that he should want to live out the lifetime of his god, right?
The point of heaven is for you to be ready to die
To ready for it to cease to be because you're immortal you shouldn't be forever
And then stoicism is can you live now so vertically?
That you're ready to die not I'm like in some stiff upper lip. We misuse the word stoic
We think it's about being stiff stoicism is about joy not pleasure. It's about joy. It's about this vertical jump
It's about this vertical like deep depth, right? Can you?
have
Such joy in this way we're talking about that you're ready to die
Wow, it's a great question
It's interesting and then how would people get there, you know
And how does a man like, you know, how do people get to that place today the responsibility?
I think men are feeling a ton of responsibility right now. Yes, it's very hard and that's okay. It's interesting
It's that's what that's what's being brought on by the world and by society. I think
men are realizing that they have to be the uh
I don't know if it's the ruler of their kingdom
But they have to really start to step up and be a leader in their home and in their environment
I think it's really I mean for me
somebody that's been of help for me
is
Marcus realist, I mean
So he's a great stoic philosopher
But he was also the the the roman roman empire. He runs the whole roman empire
He's the last and perhaps the greatest of the five good emperors
And he said something that you have to really let it reverberate inside of you
Uh, because it really it he said many things if you read his the meditate the meditation chatty kind of yeah
Thank god
Yes, well the meditations aren't written to anybody else. They're actually
If you the latin to him, you know, they're written to himself
So he's doing a spiritual practice and this is a practice you can do by the way and it it starts to work
But one of the things he wrote to himself. He said it's possible to be happy even in a palace
Hmm
Right and that that's so interesting because you think the last sentence is going to be even in a prison
Or even in a desert island or something, right desert island and it's like no, it's possibly happy even in a palace
And it's like there's a way in which all the all those things that are catchy, but don't have depth
We can we can we can learn
And we can help each other
Tic-toc Han said the next buddha is actually the sangha the community, right? We can we can
learn to discern
Through all of that and get to where we can find that vertical
Such that we can leap into this guy
I love that man. I love that feeling when you're stuck
You're painting in a corner that you can still leap into this guy. There's a way to find fascinating reciprocal opening
There's a way and and and let's let's be clear
I mean you have marcus rillius on on one. I'm not saying so I have criticisms of stoicism
But you know marcus rillius is an emperor
Epictetus is a slave the the the two poles of and they're both saying you can do this
You both they're both saying at the extremes
You can you can find this
And and they're not saying they're not doing it like at a hallmark card. Yeah, right?
They're like you you have to you have to practice a lot of practice
You have to do a complex ecology of practices that you not only do by yourself, but deeply with other people
Homed properly and then you can make progress
on
Doing this what we're talking about
Where did we start to lose that? I mean obviously religion was something that was big that kept people in like a common out
Like a common practice, right? That was a and that was bigger in the past centuries
I feel like that has been here in in america
Yeah, well, I mean and that provided a place where you would go together
You would there were certain practices that you guys did each week and there were you know
Religious get-togethers and and and people thinking about their god and thinking with their god
um
And singing together. Yes singing together stuff like that's powerful man
I've been in a I've been in a church where people will start even in an audience with a band sometimes and
But it's specifically at a church and people start singing. It's like it'll open up
You know, it'll make you feel connected, you know, your feelings will just start crying just start emoting, you know, or feeling something
yeah, um
So there's something about that the doing something as a community and feeling as a group
yeah
And also there's the horizontal and like in some of the practices that that we do
Um, there's the horizontal like you and I reciprocally open to each other
But there's also the vertical you and I sort of we're not only opening this way. We're opening vertically
as well
And it's really interesting when you do some of these
Socratic practices
Uh dialectic and the deologos philosophical fellowship things like that people who are often not religious at all secular
They'll get into this and they'll start to feel that
Collective flow state and that sense of oh reciprocally opening to each other
And then they all start talking about like the the third the the we space like the the the collective intelligence that
Neither it's not coming just from you or for me
But it's being co-created and emerging and taking on another life of its own
Yeah, right and and then they start to talk about this
in in religious language
and
We we lost that I mean so
And that feels like as close as we can get to god a lot of times
I feel like there's the best people start saying things like that it might
Be god for them and I want to be really careful here. I'm very respectful of people's religious adherents
I'm not anti religious by any means
But um, no neither
But people well what happens is right and this is a platonic point a neoplatonic point. So what happens is
Initially when they're doing these they get an intimacy with each other that reciprocal opening. They fall in love. It's philia love
It's not right, but that's in the word philosophy
It's fellowship love of wisdom right they get that and then they start to feel intimate
with
This the geist the spirit we call it the logos the the right this this thing
This emerging collective intelligence that is making everything more intelligible and people start to reciprocally open with it
Right and then they start to reciprocally open through each other and through that logos
To the depths of reality. Yeah, and then they start to feel like they're in relationship to what is ultimate
and some people think about that as god
and and some and some people think about god personally some people think about god impersonally
Some people think about it more like the ground of being or ultimate reality
But what everybody starts well all the people that talk this what they're doing is they're trying to express
a connection to something that's
profoundly
Transformatively real and meaningful and we have a word for that. It's sacred to them
Now and there's a deep connection between having a sacred canopy and the cultivation of wisdom
So another thing I'll ask my students where do you go for information without thinking they hold up their
Smartphones because we're all cyborgs now
Yeah, right and I say where do you go for knowledge and they'll sort of like oh, how well science the university but
Yeah, something right
But then I'll say and this is where it's really interesting. Where do you go for wisdom?
And there's an anxious silence
Now if you'd asked people that 200 years ago, they'd say oh my church my temple
my mosque
Right, right, right, right my sangha
Those answers don't come out
occasionally
Very rarely somebody will say like my church, but they'll sometimes they'll they'll say kind of like but not really
and what's happened is
it's
Most so the the the largest
Growing up demographic are the nuns the no nes. They have no affiliate official religious identity
Now that doesn't mean they're overwhelmingly atheist
Most of them are spiritual but not religious or seekers or they have weird supernatural beliefs, but so but
What's happened is most people are abandoning religion
Not primarily because they've come to some deep conclusion that it's false
Although religion has a problem the religions generally have a problem with the scientific worldview
At least some versions of them, but it's much more. It's it's it's it's a little bit of a truth issue
You know, but it's much more a relevance issue. Most people feel that these institutions are no longer
Like relevant to them. They're they're not they're not vibrant. They're not vital
Yeah, they they don't speak to them. They don't call them to their better selves. They don't call them into
like these these
These these experiences in fact the ecology of practices has generally withered and we've tended to emphasize
like
giving each other propositions and reciting them to each other as opposed to
This complex set of rituals and colleges of practices
So, yeah, we as we lost and i'm not and i'm not nestled
You can put this on my tombstone neither nostalgia nor utopia. I'm not nostalgia. I'm not saying we need to go back
Right, right. No, we're just looking at it. Right. We're looking at it
But when we lost that sacred canopy
We we lost a lot, you know Nietzsche said it really well
He said he runs into the marketplace the madman
And he's he doesn't confront christians
He confronts the atheists who are all sort of tittering about the death of god
And he said you don't know what and Nietzsche is the guy who pronounces the death of god
So he's not he's not there to argue against them as atheists. He said you don't realize what you've done
You've taken a sponge and you've wiped out the sky
Right, you've unchained us like we're no we're forever falling. We have to become worthy of this
We like killing god. We have not
Like to put it in affective terms
We have not grieved to the depths we need to and in a healthy way in order to be worthy of that
That's what he's basically saying
Well, yeah, it's like if you when you take that type of thing away, right?
I mean and then you take away the religion of the family, right?
Like a lot of families have evolved you see a lot of single parent families
Both parents have to work, you know, the kids are being raised by
You know by their smartphones and by whatever of the first thing you can get into them
And then you take away also, you know, there was a time like in the 90s where like
Uh, everything kind of like and this is a smaller version, but everything is like
You can watch or consume whatever you want when you want it. Yeah, there used to be like sure
We would shared experiences they were called networks for a reason, right?
We were a network together
Yeah, we would all watch a show and then we would go out in the street and like impersonate the characters from it
We would uh, like you were excited as soon as the show went
It was over especially in the summer because it was still light outside
We go outside and like impersonate our favorite acts from it
We'd all laugh and have like a shared experience whereas now everybody is fragmented. Yeah, everybody's just like watching whatever when they want
It's all separate. You don't really feel a connection. I think that's that's profoundly right. That's what I meant earlier about how
popular
Culture used to have a religious religious to bind together
It's we it used to do that and now we've even lost that dimension
I think I think so. How do we get back from there? Do we get back from there? Or is this like an evolutionary time where
how we
meet
and the things that the glues
that connect us or make us feel like part of a society
or part of a universe or existence
That they're just being challenged like
I mean, they're always being challenged
But do you think there's a way out of this kind of space or do you think we're in like a never before?
I do think there's a way out
and I like so
A big chunk of my scientific work my work as a scientist is to try and figure out what is this meaning making machinery?
What is wisdom?
How can we
get
A better understanding so we can cultivate it better but also working with
Communities of practice practitioners leaders of these communities. I've done a lot of participant observation. I've done a lot of participant
experimentation. I did a
Raphic Kelly's return to the source last July
Is that a series is that a
You go out it's an ecology of practice evolve move play
He's been very influenced first by Jordan Peterson's work and then
more so
More recently and I think you would say more in depth by my work
um
And we'll put links to all of these things that he's mentioning and talking about we're going to put links to those in the
In the information on youtube so you guys will be able to access these different things go on. Sorry so so
You know and what what you have is you you have
um
So we say there's a father or mother out there, right?
They're in charge of their home, right? How and they want to have a different future. They want their you know
What can what do they do? What do they start to do like auto like as a person?
Or as a leader of a home that can help. Yeah, so good. Good. Here's the answer
Uh, uh, sorry
I'm enthusiastic. Don't misread my my energy for like I know like I I hope I have no
Look, we're waiting job. Okay. So like and where this comes from work
I've done with Nathan van der Poel and and other people like like I said, I've done a boat
I've I've been in the room virtually or
In person with all of the scientists when we're all sat in a room and we what is wisdom and we really
We produce the consensus paper and then I've done I've go, you know
Lots of participant observation and we got all the a lot of the leaders of the community together in one room
And we did a bunch of
Like discussion and practice and we're gonna I'm going to go to another one
next week in
France or same thing and and and so what's coming out of it is like there's
Sort of three dimensions you want to pay attention to you want to pay attention to view care and action
You want to pay remember that framing you want to do a you want to really become aware of how you're framing
And you want to become really aware of that process of how you're assuming and assigning identities
Stop letting all of that go on mindlessly automatically
reactively try and
You got to bring it more into your awareness. Mm-hmm. Right. That's view
care
Reciprocal opening you got to learn how to reciprocally open how to
You know what communicate share information accept information. Is that what you mean by that?
But also reciprocally open you need you need
One of the defining features of wisdom is an ability to take other people's perspective in a way that makes a difference to how you're behaving
Like
I don't understand
So you and I right you can know that you can know as a set of facts
John's different. He thinks differently than me
But you can have this kind of moment. Let's say it's not me
Where you go? Oh
I thought she was angry, but she's actually afraid
You have to you have to cultivate that kind of
Daniel Siegel calls it mind site like insight into other people's minds and not just facts about their mind
But the ability to get
Their world and where they're coming from so that you can be responsive and responsible to it
Hmm
You care and then that automatically those two you can now see why they lead to the third thing action
How are you interacting and you want to be doing that so you can tune in?
to
Connections
How are you connected to yourself?
How are you connected to other people?
How are you connected to the world and how are you connected to something ultimate that gives a verticality?
to your existence and then you want to cultivate an ecology of practices in four
domains
Call it dying you want dialogical practices this dialectic into deologous and we run workshops on that and there's a whole bunch
There's circling practices
There's this is all over the place or people are trying to get back
This kind what's happening between you and I where it takes on a life of its own
And we both get to a place we couldn't get to on our own and it's emergent and it's transformative. Yeah
Then you want the imaginal you have to remember we talked about the experiment with you have to learn how to properly use your
Imagination again
Yeah, that's disappearing. Huh? Yeah, it's an extinct animal the imagination and we're also what and we've also we've also
relegated it to something that where we're looking
I want to compare two different senses of imagination
One is the imaginary. This is Henri Corbett. He's uh, he was a philosopher
And that's like when I you picture something in your mind like picture a sailboat. Yeah
Okay, does it have or the sails up or down?
It's an ally in a shop. Okay. So there you go. Now. That's one thing now
I want you to consider that in comparison to this
So a kid picks up a stick ties a blanket around them and says i'm zoro
You're not picturing anything in their mind
What they're doing is they're trying to take the perspective and the identity the stuff we were talking about earlier of zoro
They're trying on what it's like to be zoro in order to see if they can catch any of his virtues
That's a serious play. That's what you do in ritual. You do that. Imaginally augmented
awareness
So when i'm teaching people tai chi
Right and their novices and you have to teach them how to inhabit their body differently. You say to them
Okay, I want you to imagine you're standing in a shallow river and your knees to your feet are sinking into the mud
You want to have that sinking feeling there your knees to
Your your navel are like the flowing water. You want this to feel like flowing water, right?
And then from your navel up, this is like the air you want it to feel as insubstantial as possible
And when people are doing that they're imaginably augmenting so they can become aware of very subtle patterns
Sensory motor patterns that they were would otherwise be unaware of and they can re inhabit themselves in a new way
And a new possibility a new developmental pathway opens for them
That's the imaginal. You have to and that's what ritual properly does
Right. So you need the dialogical you need the imaginal you need mindfulness practices
You need meditative practices and contemplative practices. They're not the same thing. You need sited versions
You need moving versions. You got to create that ecology, right? And then you need embodiment in practices
You need practices that involve you
Right knowing through your body being embedded in your environment
Negotiating with the world. So rave kelly you evolve move play you go you do parkour
In the wilderness so you get nature connection and you're also moving your body and
Having it be challenged. So it's not a postcard that you sit back like i'm a nape painting. Oh, isn't that lovely?
I just really like no, it's challenging you it's forcing you to transcend
I when I was there, I'm like I'm like 60 and I'm there with all these 20-somethings, right?
and like
Right and and and I talked about every day you went to the horizon of horror you take and they they're so good at
Like taking you to this place where it's like, oh, I'm really scared. I made a vow to myself
I said no matter what it is
There's a couple things I can't do because of my many years and I took I said other than those things
Anything that's presented to me. I'm gonna do it and the more afraid I am the more I'm gonna do. Oh, yeah
I did that today. I went I got in the ice. I have an ice bath here and I got in I didn't really want to
But I was like I need something. I just want to alter. I just want to challenge my perception today
I want to do something. I don't want to do it's something small
But it's like doing that thing that you don't want to do or putting yourself up just committing to it, you know
Do you think we used to get so much more out of that just in our system?
Because if it seems like these things that you're speaking of are things that seem like necessities to our soul
You know they are like nothing seems more thirsty these days than like our soul like whatever there's like some
I almost can feel this part of underneath me all a lot of times just
Almost like my soul is trying to order per like
Oxycons or something's like dude. What am I like? What am I even doing here anymore?
If these are the practices we're doing a lot of times. It's like you can start to feel it feels bored
You know or it feels like thirsty. That's a better word. It doesn't feel bored. It feels thirsty. Well, it yeah thirsty and
But it can vacillate between profound boredom and extreme anxiety
Like so you get the and by the way thirst that's the
That's the the the word that's actually used in the buddhist scriptures for what's usually translated as desire
It's it's more like thirst and craving. It's not simple desire. Yeah, so yeah
and that that craving
When it's that reciprocal narrowing it's identifying in a mindless fact. It's all that stuff we talk about
and
I like
I like the contrast that I'm playing around with it in my mind. It's like we have to learn to not thirst
Because we properly nourish our souls and when you get people to do these
For like these three dimensions of u-care action and do dime, you know
Dialogical imaginal mindfulness embodied embedded extended enacted all that stuff emotional to all these
Right, right and they do it not only individually but collectively
right
Then people start to talk about that nourishment and that nourishment
That's where the the language your your
Your soul is sort of your vehicle your way of being profoundly connected, right?
Well in some times people make a distinction between your souls are sort of how you're
profoundly connected
Like to your body and to and you're grounded and then your spirit is how you're
Profoundly connected to that capacity for leaping into the sky, right and and and then yourself
Yourself is paradoxically how you're profoundly connected to other we only become selves through other people
If you're if you're raised in isolation, you don't become a self. You don't become a person
We become selves
We become selves by I I'm taking a perspective right now, right and you're taking a perspective on my perspective
What a kid does and this this is like the Zorro the imaginal the kid
Imaginally not imagine imagine it but imagine Lee right
The kid will try and take on the perspective of the teacher or the parent
That's what and they'll imitate them, right and eventually they can imitate them to the point
They indwell that that parent's perspective and then they imitate it more and more and more
And what that means is they start to be able to do that for themselves
They start to internalize that and what what does the parent's perspective have that the kid's perspective doesn't
The parent's perspective can see the biases that the kid's perspective has the kid can't see it because they're in the bio
They're in the perspective and the parent's perspective can also see broader deeper goals that the kid's perspective can't see
And so this is by bagotsky and other people's notions by internalizing the perspective of the parent
They get a capacity to take a perspective on their own perspective taking
And that's how they start to become a self-aware
Agent if you ask a three-year-old even a three and a half year old. What's going on in your head right now. They'll say blood
Blood they can't introspect. Oh, yeah
But and I kept I kept track of this with my younger son. It must be bad if your father's a cognitive scientist, but
Oh, yeah, the kid's not gonna
But I kept track of the first time the first two times he introspected he was four in a bit
And we were driving in the car and he said daddy it's snowing outside, but only in my head
And he oh, he's imagining it right and he's he can introspect
He's got that interior imaginal space because there's no literal space inside your head
Yeah, and then the other time is he came up to me. He said
I have a backwards camera in my head and I went what what does that mean?
And then I realized he was saying
He has autobiographical memory. He can go he can remember his past
And then I this is great. I said to him does anybody else have that and he said no only me
Right, so we become capable of
introspecting
Reflecting on ourselves correcting ourselves for pretending ourselves through other people we become selves
through each other
And so the soul is perhaps I mean i'm i'm trying to rehabilitate these terms so we can
Reinhabit them and there's a connection between those two words
Rehabilitate reinhabit right i'm trying to rehabilitate the notion of soul. This is how we right
This is our deep connectedness to our embodiment to our groundedness
Ourself is our deep connectedness
To each other and our spirit is our deep connectedness
To the vertical to what is ultimate and if we could bring those back
So that they can be simultaneously scientifically understood
member socrates and
Transformatively real for us again, then we can do that nourishment you were talking about
And I think it's going to become it's a necessity. I think it is that's what I think
I don't know if that part of us can die the part of us that is
Desperate
for
These just like this understanding or this comfort or this peace not even like the comfort of a blanket or of
But the comfort of just some connection to this greater energy that we're supposed to be
Like
working with
you know
So we're just talking about like how that that we need each other right? Yeah, we need each other
and what's interesting I noticed about
Time recently especially since like social media that and the computer really the sense of smartphone is
We almost
I started to notice this with reality television, right? Like
So people would watch
a show
That was on reality television. Do they have it in canada reality? Yes. Yes. So people would watch we pretty much have everything you have
Okay
Well, you don't want everything we have so no no and we also get some of the stuff that we don't want to have but we still get it
Anyway, sorry, and I want to apologize about that. Yeah
um
But like people were originally where they would watch a reality show because the shows were like trying to capture like
People in their real lives behaving a certain way
But then after like a generation had gone on for some of those shows that were still on and all became bullshit
Yeah, well the people were now
They'd seen people behave a certain way. So they were now just
Being the characters that they'd already seen they went on script. Yeah, right and they don't even do it by by
They well, you couldn't really have reality tv anymore because the people that grew up watching it were now just impersonate
They were impersonating what they'd seen. Yeah. So now the next contestant a generation later on these same shows
We're just impersonating what they so I just
And I noticed it even with like trends like they'll have on social media people be like, okay, we'll do this dance
Do this thing
I just wonder do we start to get in this
Because of the mirror of social media and of our cell phone where we're just impersonating. Yeah, where we're not even
Like how far are we getting from like original ideas and thoughts if of if generation over generation?
We just start to impersonate what we've already seen. Yeah, I mean and that's a problem
Plato actually starts worrying about that problem way back just really with the invention of writing
Uh an alphabetic writing. Yeah, I mean
What one of the things that happens is
Like Baudrillard and the you know similar crowd we we hyper reality
We start to get we start to get our capacity for abstract
Imaginary symbolic thought which is one of our great gifts. Yeah is also it's adaptive
So it is also something that can be a vehicle of tremendous
Self-deception it can cut us off
in powerful ways and one of the ways in which
that ability can
Get sort of twisted and hijacked is um
It's an idea from eric from
That he got from the stoics. We were talking about this. So it's earlier. Um, and so remember what I was talking about
You know, we're always
Assuming identities and assigning identities and then I have an agent arena relationship. That's my existential mode
Is oh just that's the that's the language we use for talking about that. Okay, that's you say agent arena
What does that mean? Just that means that means I I'm assuming a certain identity so I can act as an agent
I can pursue goals solve problems. So right and the arena is the world has the world makes sense and is shaped
So I don't go I don't go in with a tennis racket with my tennis skills into a football stadium
Right, I think you're saying like when I go into a gas station
Going there and I I'm a patron. So I don't act like a police officer when I'm exactly
It's like a patron in a gas station because that's what fits the world that I'm in
So that's the agent in the arena and we can often forget that
uh, and so one of the
personal problems
I've wrestled with and I'm still wrestling with it
Is I will tend to carry the professor persona into areas where it doesn't belong. I see right and so
We that's what I mean of when we're doing it unconsciously, right?
Okay, so that's your existential mode when you're doing all that. Is that okay?
Okay, and so from talked about sort of two modes we have and the modes are both
needed
Uh, and they're and they're both organized around different kinds of needs
So one mode he called the having mode. This is the mode
The in which you need to have something you need to have water you need to have oxygen
And it means you need to control it consume it and you you need to have a categorical relationship with it like
Like water it just has to be water. It doesn't have to be like this particular water
It just has to be healthy water, right?
And so what I what I do is I'm manipulating and I'm using my intelligence and I'm manipulating and controlling the world
And I I have what buber would call an I it relationship
I'm only relating to this as an it as as a as a member of a category, right?
and that's important because
Like if you don't if you don't have that mode, you're dead. Okay. Now. There's another mode. He called it the being mode
I'm not totally thrilled with that. This is the mode
These are the needs that are met not by having something but by becoming something. So you need to be mature
You need to be in love. Notice how we say we have sex but you want to be in love, right?
And and and that's a different mode
So in that mode, I'm not trying to control and manipulate the world. I'm trying to reciprocally open it
So I I strive to have that relationship with my friends and most importantly with my best friend and partner
Sara, right? If I if I treated sara like a member of a category
Well, sara the reason I'm with you is you remind me of all the other women
I've been with I know how to manipulate and control you and use you to satisfy my needs
That just ended the relationship. What she wants is
No, no, you're not a problem that I'm going to solve. You're a mystery that I'm going to constantly be faithful to
Hmm, right
And and that and that's where I'm using not my intelligence. I'm using from means
Reason but in Plato's sense not in the modern logical sense. He means that capacity to
Challenge self deception and to try and reciprocally open with something. So those are your being needs, right?
And those are important too
And you need both right because you you want to have water and you want to be mature
You want food you want to be honest, right?
The problem we get from says especially if we're not paying attention to our existential mode is we will pursue
The needs in the wrong frame
so for example
Being need maturity
Instead of I'm going to become mature. I'm going to have a car
Instead of being in love. I'm going to have lots of sex
Mmm, I see right and this this is modal confusion your existential modes are confused
And when that happens
We confuse so quantity on equality kind of yes. Yes kind of a blanket statement, but yes
So let's back to your point social media
What you want is you have a being need you need to be in relationship with people, but now you have connections
You need to be real
But now you have a script. Do you see what keeps happening?
What happens and and Fram's point is our culture
Right is is largely he called it like
Fram's a marxist. I'm not a marxist, but he he called it the market character, right? He said what what happens is
We we are increasingly led
to
Trying to pursue
Not only our having modes, but all of our being needs from within the having mode
Because if I can get you to pursue your being needs within the having mode, I can sell you stuff
I can sell you stuff. I can sell you ideas. I can manipulate you with political ideas
So there's a lot to be gained by bullshitting you
right constantly keeping you
With salience, but you don't ever pursue the truth of what your needs really are right
But constantly giving you the salience and drawing you in
But but there's a we benefit that in a way because if I continue to bite at the
Fool's gold bait
Yes of those types of things if I continue to
It keeps me away from really having to look at myself
Yes, so because it can be very painful
Yes to really sit and look at myself in my history in my past if I'm not doing it in a loving way
In an accepting way and think about how that's made even worse
That's that's astute what you just said
So there's a there's an outer dimension of how we're being misled
And then there's the inner dimension of how we're avoidant and think about how hard it is for you to confront pain
If you don't have a sacred canopy an ecology is a practice that can give meaning to the pain people can undergo
Tremendous pain it is if it is made meaningful to them. I'm working with somebody right now. She's done interventions
around pain men and like
Like people like people think about here. Let me give you a
So what are the things people? I want money and I want to feel comfortable. I want to feel sort of good
You know, I want good sleep good health
And you know, I want my partner and I had to get along really well
You know what will destroy all of those have a kid
Yeah
Have a child your health goes down your finances go down
Right, you're sick all the time you're wet for some reason all the time
There's alarms going off. You don't sleep each partner each partners
Each partner is convinced the other one's not doing enough work and you ask people
Why do you do that?
Why do you give up on all of those things?
And they'll say because having a kid is so meaningful
Remember I'm connected to something that has a reality and a value beyond my egocentric concerns
I want it to exist even if I don't and I want to care for it
I want to make a difference to and it's magical. You're like if you love a child, right you turn this
Being I mean, they're morally person people right from the beginning, but you cognitively they're not people
Yeah, and you it's it's like magic you love them and they turn into persons
Right and like it's just right and so
When people can go they will sacrifice a lot if they have a reasonable hope that they'll be meaning in it
But if we're in a meaning crisis and meaning scarcity, they won't make any of those sacrifices
They won't face pain
Don't tell somebody face your pain feel your emotions if they can't bring meaning to it
If they can't have practices to confront it and and bring wise discernment. So you're right
It makes it even worse. So not only are they being bullshitted from without
They're being starved your nourishment metaphor
They're being starved within of the meaning that would allow them to make that
Confrontation and you're right those two things feed on each other and we get really
Reciprocally narrow we get really bound into this profound modal confusion and like you said it's fool's goal
It's not actually satisfying it. So we pursue. I need more cars. I need more sex
I need more drugs whatever it is and then we get lost in a profound way
Well, we're at the end of the line with it. It feels like I mean we're watching there's television shows up called american greed
It's like, yeah, we're sitting here watching the you know
We're watching like every hero becomes a villain because they fall to their own
devices of
Addictions or small things it whatever little things that they let faster while they were
Trying to achieve grandeur. It's like
We're just realizing that there's no
I think the avenue of this
Capitalistic, I don't know what it is. I can't figure out what it is
That's led us so astray though sometimes
But I think we are as a group are realizing
That it's that we are astray. It feels like I think so too. And you know and from predicted he predicted that eventually
Are in him
He made the argument that when we're in profound modal confusion what we would eventually do
He was part of the person that inspired me when I made that prediction. I talked about earlier
Is we will seek the last connection we have with reality, which is violent destructiveness
If I can't connect to it the last connection I can have is at least I will be the one that destroys it
Wow
Hmm. Really? Yes
Think of movie joker, right and just that movies just it's almost like a hymn to that
Yeah, I mean think a look at schools people walking into schools and shooting piece
That's a symptom of the meaning crisis. Look at suicide. Look at um, you know, we had a corner on and he was saying the number one cause of death and
Black communities is gun violence and I'm willing cause of death and white communities is uh, overdosing. Yes
It's like people are just finding a mean, you know, there's
We're at it feels like we're in a cul-de-sac
See of hope in a way. Yeah, I think so. We're in a place where
Like we're really we're we're narrowed down. We're locked in
But like I said, there's also those are all the negative symptoms, right, right?
And I know and I hate to be now. I don't want to try to be too negative either
No, there's positive symptoms too, right? Yeah, and like if you look I'm just using an analogy
If you look at a disease you look not at only the negative symptoms
You look at how the body's trying to heal itself
How it's trying to repair because that might give you
Hope rational hope for how you could actually cure the disease
But you see other things happening you like and and even in those things you'll see the mixture
So the mindfulness revolution
Is like I think I was the first person to teach about mindfulness academically at the University of Toronto
And I had to sort of introduce it like within the middle of another lecture and just talk about mindfulness
There's actually a lot of experimental work and right now everybody talks about it. There's journals
And but the mindfulness revolution is an attempt to start bringing back the cultivation now
It's also getting commodified
We have what's now called mick mindfulness
mindfulness if you look in in the cultures like if you look in buddhist cultures
Or you even look back into christian neoplatonism the monastic traditions
Mindfulness is this rich ecology of practices. There's meditative practices contemplative practices, right?
There's sitted practices. There's there's all this right and then what we did is we took one practice meditation
Sitted me meditation and we said that's all mindfulness is and then we took it out of that rich thing
We took it out of the broader framework of ethical practices and philosophical practices
So it's not about transforming you in the world
It's about making you contented with being a corporate being a corporate drone, right?
And so but still
There's a positive you see what I mean
There's a positive and negative in there the stoicism is going through a huge revival right now, right?
There's there's like there's a revival of interest in eastern orthodox christianity because I think one of the reasons
I've had great conversations with both jonathan pageau and bishop bishop maximus both good friends of mine
because
Eastern orth christianity has the imaginal in it and has neoplatonism in it
So imagine if you took play dough and Aristotle and the stoics and you integrated them together
So not only was it a great philosophical system. It was a profound ecology of practices. That's neoplatonism
And that's what's coming back. I consider myself a neoplatonist, right? And so there's there's lots of there's all these
Dialogical communities emerging. There's things like raves of all move play. There's guys send stocks circling
There's the work that taylor barrett does like all the stuff we're doing and we're just one amongst many
Yeah, well, it's interesting to hear people, you know, yeah people are thirsty for something
They're thirsty for something new I think
Or they're just a new being and they're thirsty for something
Well, you know, that's the thing and play don't have this weird thing where he said you don't really learn
It's you're just always remembering something you didn't know but you did know it's
And people have sort of struggled with this
But here's something that people say when we're doing it like the dialectic into the logos or the philosophical fellowship
They'll say things like
That's a form of intimacy I never knew about but I realized I've always been looking for
That's what they say and it's so and that's so paradoxical to hear
But when you're in it, you you understand perfectly what they're talking about
They broke that modal confusion
They break through it dirk brook. They break, you know, my striker. They break through it
Right. He's a christian neil plainus. They break through and they break through the modal confusion
And so they were hungry for it, but they're framing hadn't been well
That's one of the things I love about going to a lot of different recovery meetings
Sometimes you sit in there. You're just waiting for somebody to say something
the way that you
I've always wanted to say it, but you couldn't put like the seven or eight words. Isn't that a gift when that happens?
It's unbelievable
And I'll go three or four times a week. Just hoping to hear one guy says something and I will literally feel like
My body will do that and you can hear someone's hear other people in the room. It's almost like that's the important
Sigh. Yes, that's amazing. Yes. That's the embodiment, right?
And that's the soul, right? And there's also the spirit you're both getting to a place
You couldn't get to on your and and I'm going to use this word and I and I don't I mean it positively
And I'm not trying to slot you but you know, those are the recovery meetings and I've done
You know, I've I've attended a and some other things
but
And many of them are explicitly at least were born in a religious frame
But they're religious practices in the way we've been talking about you're cultivating wisdom and transformation
How to face yourself how to cultivate connection, right?
This is and you're doing it individually and collectively, right? And yes, and and and and I notice
And this is not this is an observation. It's not a criticism
Like you keep returning to this as a lived example in your body lived example of what we're talking about
Right. And so but that's what I'm asking you to now consider is there's lots of possible
There's lots of variations on this theme that are are rising everywhere and they're getting scientific understanding
They're networking into a a subculture and that gives me rational hope
Yeah, well, I mean, I think it's it's the it's the thing like when things get bad they're always
throughout time it seems like there's always been like, uh
In every story
There's the moment where you think things are where things get bad
And they get good. It's like
It's that feeling inside of you that this has to end well
I think that that little pilot light of that. Yeah, it feels like it it perseveres no matter what, you know, um
Well, it can get blown out
Like we do some work with I agree with you by that pilot light
By the way, think of it not just as a pilot light
But like what a pilot used to be a pilot of airplane or pilot of a ship, right? It's a guiding light
Right. Well, I think and it's not even my own pilot light, but I think it's the collective pilot light that that's the one that I feel
Like wins in the end. Yeah, I don't know if us as individuals if we win
That's an excellent distinction because we're doing some work myself and some of my colleagues
graduate students of vats who have post-traumatic stress disorder and their internal
Light in some sense been blown out, but I like what you said
One of the things we're trying to do is see if they can catch it from each other again
And try and bring about interventions that can bring that about
So remember I mentioned paul tillic the courage to be here. There's a greek word for this and it's from the christian tradition
It's kairos and it means it means the right timing that we're the the time we're time where the course of things turns
and the kairos is always a place in which
Multiple opportunities. So like, you know, the you know, the bronze age collapse civilizations can collapse too, right?
and so
Right. Yeah, we're at this very crucial time now the the it's a dangerous time
But the advantage of a kairos is okay when everything is going really well
A system is really stable and it has a lot of inertia and it's hard to make a difference
But when things are breaking up, this is called self-organizing criticality
Then individuals can make a difference that they can't you normally make when things so don't look at like well
Things have always been this way because if we're actually in a crisis a kairos
Then your capacity is an individual to make a difference has been increased. Wow man. That's awesome
You know, that's really awesome, man. And that's something that I think yeah, I'm grateful to hear that today
You know and I think and not to give us the insight that we are gods or that we but just that you kid
This is never has the road been set more when you can have an impact
That's right, you know, because that's just the way that the chips are stacked
So what a blessing for you to be able to have an impact right now if you do something good
If you do something positive if you choose to take the road that builds up your um
self-worth more than the the the just
Feeling good in the moment, you know
That's that's inspiring man
when you think of like
What about like love like people look at love a lot, you know, have you been in love before I'm in love right now
Okay, so you have a partner now and you'll have children
No, I I've I have children from a previous marriage. She has children from a previous marriage and we're we're done
We've raised children her children's children who to her two children are adults my two children are now adults
Okay, but y'all have you've had children now. Yeah, and there's
Yeah, yeah, yeah
And but I am in love now
And I also love
Like
My kids and I love my friends
But but I've also been learning to love the world
and reality
and being
And in that sense
Like agape, you know, the love that makes us like we're talking about earlier the love that turns us into human being
You know the the bible i'm not a christian, but the bible said, you know
God is agape like finding that reciprocal opening that sacredness finding the deep connections between
logos that spirit of
Making sense of things that emerges between people the agape by which we make each other into people
But it also connects us deeper to reality
The deep within is calling to the deep without and they they call to each other
I'm in love with all of that. Yeah
Did you um
Do you think that uh
You know, I think I think if if you ask me in the elevator john, you have 20 seconds. Mm-hmm
This is what I would say learn to love wisely
That's it
Like it's really hard
Most of my failings have become that I did not love wisely. Hmm. I love foolish
I think you could understand sin as a failure to love wisely. Hmm
Sorry, I interrupted you, but I just wanted I just wanted to express that. No, I appreciate you expressing that
Yeah, I think I've done that a lot of times
I think sometimes it's there's things that are easier to love and it's not even love
It's not even love. It's like a lust even of your imagination
Yeah, or even if you can anything can lust it doesn't have to be just like of your groin or whatever, you know
It can be of of any you can fame fame. Yeah fame food food sugar
Yeah, I went through that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh god, dude. I eat a whole bag of damn dove dark chocolates
And I'll do it again sometimes. I miss the chocolate
It's one of the things I had to give up when I was diagnosed with diabetes. Oh god, dude. They get you
Um, yeah, how crucial is that to people to to the success of their survival? Do you think?
Love
Well, I mean again
Lust it lust is when we're pursuing
Love from the having mode, right? Okay. So you you you need to have sex
Like I mean we we got into the mistake of thinking. No, no, we don't need that that and that mess that messes people up
Yeah, right and then we do the other thing. No, no, no, no, you need like you'll get love by just having lots of sex
And that that now we're in that the other we saw in the other way breaking, right? And so I mean love is
Love is like love the thing is we're really confused. First of all, love isn't a feeling
um, you know, uh
I'm in love with sarah right now and until I mentioned those words. I wasn't feeling anything right right love isn't an emotion
I'm in love with sarah and sometimes that makes me sad. I miss her right now a lot
Right. Sometimes it makes me angry. You're threatening sarah. I'm no, you're not going to do that
Right, and sometimes it makes me really happy. Sometimes it makes me very thoughtful. Oh
I I just realized I really don't know her and that's wonderful. So love isn't even an emotion. Love is an existential stance
It's I am you and I we're going to religio
We're going to bind ourselves so we reciprocally open so you
Draw the best out in me. I draw the best out in you
You transcend yourself through me and I transcend myself through you and we keep realizing that that is such amazing
Mystery that keeps happening. We're going to be faithful to it. It's a commitment
Yeah, it's a commitment
But it's it's not a commit like the greeks had the greeks not a prison. No, but and the greeks had the greeks have two words
Right. There's in kratia
Like democracy kratia power. So in kratia is when you
You commit by like i'm not gonna i'm not gonna eat the chocolate or i'm not gonna do it. I'm not gonna do it
I'm not gonna do it. That's in kratia
softerson softerson is different
softerson's like this
St paul talks about what he does the hindu agape when I was when I was a child
I thought like a child I acted like a child
But then when I became an adult I put childish things behind me as the child is to the adult the adult is to the sage
Right. So when when you're a kid you have two gods candy and toys
In fact, one of the greatest things I did philosophically with one
When white with my younger son is I came to him one day and I said
Which is more important toys or candy?
And he looked at me like finally dad is asking me something intelligent
And he even he even said like he even did like give me a moment. I want to think right? I was like, okay
And then he came back to me and he said
Toys because you can get sick of candy and I thought oh, that's my son
All right, there's a philosopher in there somewhere
And so right but notice what I used to play with him all the time
And it's a weird thing when you're an adult because like I remember one of my friends told me
He remembered the day when the toys died when like because what happens is when you're when you're a kid toys are super
salient to you
Right my my son when he was young he used to have like a toy tower all the mc figurines are there and everything
Like and like to get him to he would forego urinating and eating to play right with his toys
right
Now I would play with him, but I don't have that you know because I'm
I hope I'm an adult. I'm a man and I don't have to sort of resist. I don't have to go. No
I won't play with the toys. No, I won't I've matured what I find salient
We call that a salience landscape
I've matured what I find salient how I connect to things and salient means just to make it clear how things grab your attention
How they stand out for you how they catch you got it right and so
Like I know logically I could pick up the toys and play the this is mark, but it doesn't it doesn't draw me
See soft for a son
That's soft for son
You you you want it? You want to commit not incredibly. I'm not going to cheat on my partner
You want to you want to commit soft for son? It's like I'm constantly tempted by the good
I'm constantly flowing it it comes like second nature to me to to to have this commitment
Like frankfort called love love a voluntary necessity, which is a brilliant way of putting you see what I mean because we have the
The problem we've we have
is we can
And this this messes people up is what this is why I wanted to speak to this we people
I think commitments are right words
The problem is we often
When we hear commitment we think of duty and then we fall into a cruddy and we I'm going to force myself to stay with this person
Right now you have to tough it out at times
but
Right in the end you want to mature in a relationship so that the commitment is soft for son
Right in right so it's reciprocal. Yeah, and it's opening and you're being drawn into it rather than
Forcing yourself. It's like it's like when you're meditating initially
You're sort of constantly trying to keep your attention on the breath and it's like concentrate like the word you're forcing things into the center
Right, but what you get is you get to the where it flips and instead of doing that
You're constantly instead being
Reinterested and being drawn into what you're focusing your attention on entering the stream as they talk about
You want to enter the stream in your come what love it like infatuation?
Is the the the momentary madness that gives us a foretaste that we can properly play with of how that can happen
But the problem is we can't stay in infatuation. You have to what infatuation does is it says
Okay, see how you could get into this reciprocal opening with somebody now. This is candy
Find out how to make it food
Basically
That's the other problem. We have in our culture
The romantic comedies have told us that the most important not only do they tell us that this weird
Bullshit story that the universe will conspire to bring you the person you should be with no, it won't
No, yeah, the universe is not like one of the it's not like a lazy susan
No, exactly and and the other thing it tells you is right the best part of love is the is the falling in love part
No, it's not infatuation, right infatuation is to shake your world up enough
Right so that you could cultivate
That commitment so that it becomes you're constantly tempted to fall in love with the person again and again
And that's what I thought was interesting as you said in the beginning was
When you were talking about your partner about your wife
That you said
If there's something new I see about her or that she's a mystery, you know
Continuing to perceive that person as a mystery really
Or to look at them as a mystery
It just makes it it's going to make every day or every week whatever like a new episode
It's not gonna you're not going to just be playing the same episode over and over giving you you're giving your
Framework your framing is as a perspective to oh, let me see what else new I could learn or see about this person
Or a new way that I can relate to them. That's pretty fascinating
Well, so confronting a mystery here confronting a mystery rather than
Here here
This is what will this is this is how you know your relationship is doomed
If you turn your partner into a problem to be solved
Rather than a mystery to constantly face and be faithful to
Wow to be faithful to a mystery too. That's a pretty brave thing, you know, it's exciting. It's cool. It's cool though
I think it's neat. I think that's the what I again try to rehabilitate the notion of faith instead of faith being
Asserting propositions pretending that you have certainty even though you don't have
Evidence, what about we reconsider faith as faithfulness to the mystery of being so that we continually fall in love with reality
In increasing depths within and without why don't we make faith faithfulness as opposed to I'm going to say things that have no
Evidence and I'm going to pretend that I'm certain about them. I think that's a that's a really modern
And it's not the ancient notion of faith and that's one of the things again. We lost we've lost faith as a profound faithfulness
Do you think because you're a smart guy? Do you think it is which is okay? Maybe maybe some people are smart and that's okay
I'm not saying you're good at volleyball. You know, you might not be might be bad at volleyball
I don't know but but some but some things are certain people are some are certain things you appear smart, right?
Okay, to a pretty regular person like myself
Is it harder to be in love when you're smart like because smart makes it so you kind of look at things a lot, you know
So intelligent people
Generally have a harder time
um
And the problem and this is the work of stanovich and others the problem
We've also gotten into is we've confused being intelligent with being rational and we've confused being rational with being logical
And so we get all messed up about this
Intelligence is your capacity to solve problems
Rationality is ultimately I would argue and this is the ancient notion. This is play does notion
It's not about being logical rationality is about using your intelligence to become aware of the self deception and the bias
So that you can overcome it. That's what so mindfulness is a way of being rational
Even though you're not running any arguments in your head. Okay, so if you and play though play though was deep about
Reason in that sense reason we still carried around when we talk about somebody being reasonable, right?
Reason in that sense and love they're interwoven because reason in that sense is the profound
Love and faithfulness to what is true. What is good and beautiful?
and I think if you're intelligent and you're not and you haven't cultivated
rationality and it's accompanying virtues then
You are more and more tempted to problematize
Your relationship just because you have the intelligence machinery to
But if you could so
But if you start making hurdles because your brain, that's what it's it just it likes to solve problems
So it'll just make problems right and and what your brain will also do right is your brain
So your brain is a powerful prediction machine. It's a relevance real remember we talked about anticipating the future
So your your brain is
Constantly also science trying to solve problems. You didn't solve in the past
and so you
So in a bit of a slogan your brain actually prefers familiar unhappiness to unexpected happiness
Because it likes organization, right? It likes it likes it likes familiarity because familiarity at least initially seems that you're predicting things
So the problem with familiarity is and you know this you know
You see you see this in your friends and they see it in you
And the the great the great gift is if you could come to see it in yourself
You're doing that thing bill. You're doing that thing. You always doing your relationships. You're doing it again
Right and and you seem so wise from the outside except, you know two years later bill comes to you and says, you know
You're doing that you're doing that thing again, right?
Now you're doing that
I know it's so interesting. So you you have to your intelligence not only is
Problematizing things by looking for problems. It's also trying to solve
Previous relationships, but in often in a maladaptive way
But if you can bring
Rationality in the platonic sense rationality love virtue
Into faithfulness
And they're all interdependent if you can bring that in then I think then
It shifts and that actually that makes gives you a greater capacity to enter deeply
into
A loving relationship. I I I like I want everybody to understand
I'm like 61 almost 62 and I've like screwed up young man. Well, thank you. I've screwed up a lot
um, and I continue I continue to make sense. So so
I want to give credit to a lot of the people that helped me along the way
And I want to give credit to my friends and also to my my beloved partner for like for anything I'm saying here
I I owe it profoundly to them
Yeah, and we're just trying our best, you know, it's like it doesn't mean that you know everything
No, and I don't want to come across that way
But I I do want but I so but okay good
But I also but I also feel your questions deserve
You know the best most responsible answer I can give them. No, and I appreciate that. Yeah, that's what I'm hoping for
um
Yeah, because I think that's a challenging thing these days. I mean especially, you know
We've let so much
Like
We've let so much and I don't know if it's capitalism or what we let
When in our country we let those things become more important like, you know, we let like uh
I mean, I use pornography as an example to see how it killed. It's killed a lot of the libido in the world
Yes, I feel like and so there's no it makes salient as opposed to offering depth
See that and hawn talks about this in saving beauty
He talks about how pornography
Makes he talks about how we've we've tried to make everything smooth
We've instead of see if you read the ancients or even rilke beauty is almost terrifying because it shocks you it wakes you up
It makes you oh, I didn't realize the world could be like this. Oh, I remember I saw a hot chick
I couldn't even handle it, dude. Right. Right. Yeah
I tried to almost bury myself in the dirt one time because I couldn't handle it the first time I saw a beautiful girl
It's overwhelmingly powerful and you know like 11 inches of dirt out and fucking sad and
It's not crazy though, but it well like it's it's
it's
It's something that we've done everything else to we've tried to like
What did what did rilke say beauty is the angel that almost threatens to kill you but doesn't
Right and and then what what pornography does according to hawn is it just makes everything there's no challenge
And what that and we think that's great because now it's easily accessible
I can have it but there's no confrontation with mystery. There's no calling to go beyond oneself
There's no calling to challenge when so everything is now smooth for us
And we've we've adopted an aesthetic of the smooth and the easy and the comfortable. I think you're right pornography is
You know a clear symptom of just how and then we and and it's that hyperbolic discounting
We get the the the momentary thing and we lose the long-term project
Yeah, the long-term project of relationship of cultivating sexuality between yourself and a partner
Yes, it's like, okay
Do I want to go out and meet someone and try to fall in love and try to covet them and respect them?
and create sensuality
And make this long dire tribe of a relationship that has value to both me and them
Or do I just want to go squeeze one out over here?
You know, yeah, and a lot of times you'll just choose that easier when you're you'll just buy a new vape or something
Choose that easier when instead of go that longer road where there's going to be more value
You know, and it's almost become so prevalent that some people don't even know that there is the longer road anymore
You de facto that's the scary part. Yeah. Yeah, we're growing up in a generation who has never been without screens
and
Where pornography is available all the time everywhere and everything is if you want to laugh now
This is kind of an interesting one
But if you want to laugh you can go find you a laugh, you know, you can find a laugh pretty quick
But if you wanted to be out like
We had to make each other like you had to you had to be the videos you're watching in a way you had to
Use your imagination to iterate what had happened before like you had you felt like a cog in the
in the in the wheel of um entertainment
Just by being a human being and some of that has disappeared, you know, um
I mean conversation is people are listening to people have conversations. That's how archaic they're becoming
That people are listening to podcasts to hear people
Talk freely. So one
By the way, I'd love to see you that animated that was really powerful. So thank you for sharing that with me
Oh, thanks, man. That was really yeah, I didn't know it was going to be so powerful to me
But I think it does I think I've felt fallen victims so much to pornography, especially in my 20s that like
Dude, it just makes me mad, you know the time wasted
Yeah, time wasted and the ability to love wasted and the ability to learn about love, you know
I didn't have any other choice, you know, but um, I mean, I maybe had a choice, but I wasn't aware
Yeah, yeah for sure. But um, anyway go on. I was just going to say that
Um
One of the things that I'm trying to do with the
Going with the podcast and the videos, but I'm also building in person things is build a bridge between those
So that when people see these because I get comments all the time
It's like, I wish I could be part of that con those kind of conversation that kind of dia logo
So I use the greek word. Yeah, right and then we say well you can and here's a place you can come
Where you can start to practice it
You know and either we can do it through a zoom room and that still works by the way
Which is really fascinating because it's a scientist. I wonder what it would work
But it still does
But we can also do it in person and trying to build that bridge so people can once they see I want to be part of that
I want to participate in that like you were just talking about with so much so much life
There's a place they can go
where they can there's a bridge between
Witnessing and wanting to be in such a conversation and actually practicing on participating in it. Yeah
Yeah, well, there's also there's I mean, there's 12 step programs for everything
Which is great
And you know, I go to some of the meetings for they have like intimacy and love addiction and
Some of the names of the groups are a little bit off sometimes
But you can go in there and listen to people talk about their struggles with
relationships and
Sometimes pornography all different types of stuff. I met a buddy that was a flasher in there
So you get all type mean, you know, some of it's kind of cool kind of yeah, I mean not cool
You know, but it is kind of neat, you know, you know a flasher, you know, you know one. Yeah, you know, you know them
You know, that's great
and
So yeah, I think some of that's just the the rooms that are out there that people are sharing like what their life is like and
And getting better and recovering from those things are pretty fascinating
It's also at a time where it's like, yeah, if you're willing to share what's going on with you, there's a ton of value to that
Yeah, I mean as long as it doesn't turn into that thing
We were talking about earlier like the reality shows where it just becomes something that we can modify in order to put another trophy
Of narcissism on our wall, right and see how special I am I can disclose more than you can and
That's why I think that's why I really strongly challenge
Don't
Don't find don't think that there's one thing you can do that will be a panacea
You need a whole bunch of practices all doing this checks and balance
You need to do it with a bunch of different people coming from different perspectives, right?
And only then do you have the chance that it might not degenerate in that that fashion?
Yeah, because I do worry that we
We're getting kind of like therapy porn starting to emerge in our culture where what you know
What i'm going to do is i'm going to just open up and share my feelings, right and it's like toward what end are you cultivating virtue?
Are you overcoming self deception? Are you helping the other person to grow like no?
It's just i'm going to expose myself
So and that's you know, right and it's like the flasher, right? Yeah, yeah
And it's like i'm going to expose myself and and and and then what we'll do is I got to see deeply into somebody in it
Oh, it was so smooth. It was so easy. It's a pornography. It doesn't take any commitment or challenge
I don't have to make myself responsible to that person
They'll just gush and all just drink it in and I'm worried that that's growing right now. Wow, that's fascinating, man
Yeah, because I worry about that sometimes like not only in my own life, but
Yeah, you see stuff like that. I have some friends that are vloggers
And they vlog every minute of their lives. Yeah, and you can see they start to get
Like they don't even remember what they're doing anymore. They're performing for constantly for an audience
And they're they start doing strange things and almost become trapped in this. Yeah manic episode
You know, it's that reciprocal narrowing and that right and and and they're trying to have something instead of become someone
Like yeah, and the fact that I mean that's another symptom of the meaning crisis the fact as you noted
This kind of stuff is spreading like a disease like yeah, right? Yeah
But there's always been diseases, right? There's always been things that have come along
We've always gotten through them
Well, yeah, I mean sometimes
We got through it like things like the bronze age collapse, you know
1177 bce
right we've had
Bronze age civilizations ancient Egypt as Syria Babylon the Hittite empire the Mycenaean civilization they all collapsed all collapsed
All except for Egypt as Syria almost collapses. It shrinks
Um, Egypt survives because one of my favorite people of history. I just got a book on him Ramesses the third
He's uh, he's a military genius
And he defeats the invading people to see peoples in two great battles
And he's he's like he's trying to hold up the whole bronze age world on his shoulders
But uh, even Egypt once he he gets assassinated
And once he's gone even Egypt goes into clients
So most of the civil more still more cities went out of existence
More trade is lost more literacy is lost that in any other time in the western world
Even the fall of the roman west the western roman empire was not as great as the bronze age collapse
Wow, so things can really collapse now and then there's like there's several centuries
And you don't want to be alive in the centuries after the bronze age collapse. They're really really bad time to be a lot
Oh, it gets pretty sketchy. It gets really bad, but it opens up
Possibilities and people start to experiment they create new psychotechnology's alphabetic literacy numeracy
And that gives birth to the actual age to people like Socrates and buddha and uh, loutse
Yeah, it's almost like you just needed it over time. It's like that's the cycle
Yeah, there's some people who think that that that uh, that
Complex organizations go through what's called self-organizing criticality
They organize and they build and they get very complex and then they get they can't they get too top heavy like a like a pile of sand
And then it avalanches it at all collapses
But that provides a broader base and then it can build again even higher than before
And it oscillates in that way. Yeah, some people have argued that the human cognition seems to work in in that way too
Yeah, yeah
so, um
You know what you you you can't solve this problem and you you got a sense
But you can't you're just framing it the wrong way, but you can't break out of the wrong frame
um
And and what often has to happen is you have to break that frame you have to like and sometimes breaking
It's really really really hard. Sometimes it's easy like you'll do things like you'll say to people, you know
What's the gray stuff that comes from fire and they say smoke and what's what am I doing with my hand right now?
My arm. Oh, that's a stroke
And what am I doing right now? Oh, that's a choke and what kind of tree grows from an acorn?
That's an oak and what do you call the white of an egg and they'll say oh yoke
Of course, it's not it's the white of the egg
You fall into a frame and you get locked right and sometimes the frames are fairly easy
Sometimes the frames are really really hard like you're you're deep in modal confusion, right? Oh, yeah, right?
And so breaking that frame is like that that avalanche you have to break that frame
But if you if you don't break it to the point of trauma if you break it in the right way
What it does is it it allows the brain's capacity to self organize to
Reorganize from like a broader or different base got and then you get a new frame and then you get that aha moment
And typically what happens at least that's uh a significant theory is
The activity is predominantly in the left hemisphere, which is your logical sort of step by step fine grain well-defined problem
So I and you realize oh, I can't solve this problem and it goes into the right hemisphere
Which was for like predation parties at well. Well, it's predation. It's wide open attention
You you're trying to get a wide picture of the big perspective
And what you do is you you go over there get a new bigger perspective and bring it back in yeah, yeah
Oh, that's cool
um
Do you think sometimes like?
you know
Say if you put like you took
A bunch of sand right and just poured it into this
This glass right here, right?
This it would fill it up, right? Yeah, do you ever think that there's a lot more going on in the world?
But that us as a vet like a vessel only can come can understand so much
So that there could be so much more happening out here, but our ability to understand is only
It's this glass right so
I I I would say I know that's the case because of what we rely on
Um, we so most of our problem solving is not done as individuals
Uh, you didn't invent english. I didn't invent english. You're not managing the electric grid
I'm not a manager managing you didn't invent these microphones. I didn't invent them, right?
You didn't make these chairs. You didn't build this building
Blah blah blah blah blah blah like we forget that most of our problem
No, one person can run an airline or a railroad, right?
And so what what what you can show what actually what what we seem to do
I've done work on this with Dan Ciappi. We've investigated the the scientists moving the rovers around on mars
but what our primary
adaptivity is
We plug into that collective intelligence and that collective intelligence can often
grasp
Objects that we can't individually so it could be bigger than this right
So like to give you a clear example
No one and i'm not trying to get into political controversies right now
But like no one person can perceive or even measure or track global warming
It takes a whole bunch of scientists with a whole bunch of equipment all around the world
Yeah, totally can't just be a some dude guessing right and no one person
This is at Hutchins property. No one person steer navigates a ship
It's a bunch of people and a bunch of equipment and they navigate the ship, right? Yeah, and so
So we plug into
Right the the intelligence of civilization basically, but the problem is there are things that can even exceed that because civilizations
Probably face what's called
General systems collapse what that means is
So here's a civilization and it's it's dealing it's growing and what it's doing is it's solving problems and
Every every time a new problem emerges
It adds a it adds a new piece on itself
You know and it grows and it grows and it grows and initially it just it's good at growing and it's solving more and more problem
The problem is as it grows more and more and more think about a
bureaucracy or government bureaucracy as it grows more and more and more it starts to become as
Complicated as anything. It's trying to solve in the world. Does that make sense? Yeah, and eventually
It gets so big that it can't manage itself well enough to solve any unexpected new problems
And then you get general systems collapse and it's making its own problems
And it's making its own problems and and it starts to be and you can you can tell when an institution is
cussing on that
And I think the universities are suffering this problem is when the when when when like the bureaucracy
Starts to become for its own sake
Rather than for solving problems because it's much more about managing and maintaining its own existence, right?
And the civil services of some countries
Go down that route too
So I think we have an individual limit and then we we deal with that by plugging into the civilization
But the civilizations also have a threshold
Man
Frickin existing bro. It's complicated
Yeah, it's well the thing is it's complicated, but reality is actually complex
complicated is we we we
We we can manage all the variables
But there's there's just a lot of them complexes
We have real uncertainty and there and there are new emergent variables and they're dynamically shifting the relationship to each other
Reality is actually complex and we create complicated systems within and without in between us to drill with that complexity
But at some point we get challenged and part of what I think we need to face
That was a distinction from snowden
part of what we need to
Face and I this is comes out in my conversations with jordan hall and others and this is something we're now discovering in biology. So
You can evolve a trait like this creature is going to be faster or right or taller or something like that
But what we're now realizing it and this is oh and gilbert. Yeah, I always get the names the wrong way around, right?
You can also evolve your evolvability
Which is you can you can evolve so you can evolve faster or better than other species
Really? So you can mate with someone who evolves well and make a hyper?
Well, let's just you just brought something up there
Okay for millions billions of years
Organisms are single-celled and they reproduce asexually they just divide right?
human beings reproduce
sexually sexuality
reshuffles the genetic deck so we get more variation
And with more variation evolution speeds up
so one of the reasons
sex becomes
pervasive is it because it makes you more
Evolvable as a species and now using that analogy
We have to learn to become we not we have to stop just i'm gonna i'm gonna i'm no sorry
We don't have we shouldn't stop i'm gonna become stronger or braver traits. We have to keep doing that, but we have to do this
Higher order thing
We have to we have to evolve our evolvability right now because the the the way things are
Complexifying is accelerating. Yeah, well, especially in the u.s. I mean, it's like we've become, you know, it's a very I mean America's always been kind of a
It's always been like a diversifying landscape, you know, I think a lot of people
I know it's been tough for my mother
And for people of her generation because they had like this idea of America
Yes, yeah, and like of what it stood for and the things we fought for and the things that our
Brothers and sisters died, you know, those are all of that
Yeah, and those things a lot of those things now people look at them and the the news will scoff at those or sneer
Yes, yes, even sneer not even take into account that some of these people died died or that their loved ones
Had to witness them die like yeah, you know
And a lot of those people start to lose their
Uh hope, you know, yeah, they become they they lose orientation, right? I mean completely lose orientation, which is crazy. Like that's how much
a comfortable landscape or common
The commonalities mean to people see the landscape doesn't have to be comfortable. They were willing to go to war
They were it will the landscape has to be navigatable
And navigation is not something you can do primarily on your own, right?
You have to do you have to obviously move yourself around, right?
But you have to be oriented and other people have to cooperate in the orientation with you and you help each other
and that's how you navigate a landscape and
Because of what you just said
We're losing another way of talking about the meeting crisis
Not being at home domicile is people are feeling increasingly disoriented. They don't know which way to go
Yeah, they don't know what they should be doing and so what they do is they fall into things by default and I'm not criticizing anybody
No, no, this is normal. They fall in safety mechanisms. I just keep on keeping on and I just do what I've been doing
That's where I think a lot of people are right now. Yeah, you know, not only older folks, but younger folks as well
um
They're just wondering what
I used to think I was part of something
Now I don't feel like that anymore
Looking out for just myself feels
Doesn't feel good. It's very small. Yeah, it's very very small. Yeah feels really small
I mean, I think there's moments of it where it's
It's it's nice in a way where you're like, oh, I'm gonna have some self-confidence. Yeah, yeah, of course
I'm going to achieve you have to have self-care. Yeah, man. It feels very lonely
You know, and I think a lot of people are kind of wondering that so I wonder if that will lead people back to
Religion looking for purpose and I wonder why in America we've gone to like
Canadians, I mean you're Canadian. Yeah, you know and thank you for being Canadian. I like them
Well, uh, John Oliver is right about Canada, right? I don't like John Oliver, uh, like a lot
But when he said that, you know, uh, it's as if the united states and great britain had a child that they abandoned in the snow
Right, right. Um, so
Yeah, we I mean we lived under
A superpower great britain and we slowly negotiated a way out. We didn't have a revolution
We slowly negotiate. We don't have life liberty in the pursuit of happiness. We have peace order a good government
That's our that's our constitution. We slowly negotiated our way out, right? And
You can't point to a point in history and say that's when canada was completely not a colony anymore
It's there. Maybe the statue to west mister in 1931, but I get it's a gradual thing
Right and and and as we slowly did that the superpower emerged to the south of us that went on to conquer
I mean, the america is a titanic entity
I mean like the second world war they take on the japanese empire almost single-handedly while
Manning most of the western front and like it's titanic
It's huge and and they're just overwhelming and they continue to be so like even militarily
You know, you you take all of the other nato countries and pit them against the american military
The american military will destroy them in three days
Like america is like like and canada is like
Imagine this there was a superpower and we slowly managed to get out of a shadow
Who are you very carefully negotiate only to have this other one emerge, right that overshadows us
Powerfully and and completely so we're always we're always in between
We've always been in between and we're always much more about because we don't we can't
Enforce our way on the world. We're more much more about perspective and negotiating
We negotiate with we negotiate with great britain and we negotiate with the united states and thankfully both great britain and the united states
Are willing and have been have been
willing
To negotiate with us and to ally with us
Yeah, and you're willing and you get you get to be right there net you you kind of have to have a
Canada has always been a very peaceful place. I feel like a lot of my friends. They're good listeners. Yes
um
You know, I think people are like
with like
I'm surprised. There's not a max a mass exodus to canada
um
But great posture too. I don't feel you've ever seen the posture in toronto
You've seen it. Well, yeah, I mean
Part of it is because you can't slouch in winter when you're wearing 10,000 layers of clothing
Point on you gotta you gotta bury yourself well. Yeah. Oh and they do it. You can barely
People just you could barely see them. They're so straight sometimes
Yeah, just like watching something go by
um
But yeah, I find that uh, that it's interesting that we're finding like guys like you jordan peterson
Um, and you guys work together
We were colleagues jordan was just down the hallway for me. Uh, we continue to keep in communication
Because he doesn't teach anymore now. Does he no, I mean, he had a very he had a very fraught relationship with the university
Oh, we did. Yeah, uh, and uh
Yeah, um, and I think there was fault on both sides in that issue
I mean, but I want to be very clear. I have a really good relationship
With the university of toronto. They've treated me
Well, the psychology department at least has treated me extremely extremely well. Yeah, right?
But jordan and I were we're colleagues. We were very friendly colleagues
We shared students
We we were we would frequently find ourselves at the same conference at same conference talking about stuff
That's fun. Was it fun to discuss things with him and be able to communicate? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
and
I want to say this very carefully because whatever you say about jordan peterson, it'll bite you in the ass no matter what you say
Uh, is jordan jordan's a very divisive person, but um
Jordan
And it's reciprocated jordan respects me and when jordan respects you
He interacts with you differently that if he doesn't respect you or he doesn't know if he should respect you
Then he interacts that this is at least to my mind
It could be a safety mechanism too. It could be a safety mechanism. It could also be that
That's the kind of teacher he was very care. There were three life changing professors at the university of toronto
One I won't mention his name
and the other two were myself and jordan peterson and
and
So we often
shared students
Like I said, I've always had I've always had and I've appreciated
Very good relationships with jordan. I don't agree with jordan on certain things, especially political things
um
but
you see
Like when when when some of the stuff dropped initially, I would send I would send him an email and I'd say here's my arguments against your position
Um, but I think they should treat you with respect. You're making a point
You should be treated with like the way he shouldn't have just been sneered out or yelled at they should have like they should have
They should he deserved to be given a good
Hearing a good counter argument. Yeah, I think once you get once you get to a certain level kind of a popularity
And once you're in the social media sphere
In some sense
You don't it becomes more of like a
Mad max beyond thunderdome out there and not as much of probably the grounds you guys are used to where people communicate
Yeah, and so the thing is like when I would write him that email
He would say thank you like he was appreciative or like, you know, I'll be on his
You know channel with him and he'll you know, he'll criticize postmodernism and I'll say well
I think there's value to postmodernism and here's the value and here's like, you know
Foucault was saying this and you know, and Derrida was saying
And you know, and he'll be responsive and respect respectful. Yeah, right and so but but
The the the thing about that is is
like
it's
I want to maintain a good relationship with like when he somehow he found out I had diabetes and he sent me a like
A supportive email and I appreciate that like
I believe and this will get me in hot water with some people
But I believe that Jordan is fundamentally a good person and I think he has very good intent and I think he's
terrifically talented
but
Well, the things that make you adaptive make you prone to self deception and there's things that he also
We fundamentally don't agree on. Yeah, but but
right
I think if people if we could get out of
Polarization around him and to be fair. I think he contributes to it. I don't think he's I think by his own admission
He's not very good on twitter. Yeah, right. Yeah, right. No, I think he would admit that
I'm trying to think of what we talked about when I was with it when I chatted with him
If we could if we could get out of polarizing and if he could get out of being caught up in that
Like what's really impressive is like like when I've talked to him or jonathan and jonathan and paojo and I talked to him
He'll get a lot of comments like do more of those jordan do more of those
Yeah, right because for me, I feel like that's the jordan
That I really respect and I have affection for coming to the fore and then there's this other
Aspect of him that I I can't
I can't connect to him. Uh, yeah, maybe he likes to get into the fracas of it, you know
Well, see we that's a philosophical difference between us. I think trying to solve
the meaning crisis at the adversarial level of
Propositional just ideas and ideologies and that kind. I don't think it can be solved there
We've been talking about a much different level
Much different ways in which the meaning crisis has to be solved. I think I
And I don't this isn't a this isn't a scapegoat. I did this costs me. So this isn't this doesn't come for free
This isn't a cop out. I met a political
I think that trying to get engaged with this problem in a political framing
Is fundamentally a modal confusion. It is to make that kind of profound mistake
I think the left at its best reminds us that we're finite animals subject to fate and we have to show compassion to each other
And the right at its best reminds us that we're also
Called to transcendence and the cultivation of virtue and when they worked where they were correcting each other
And helping each other emerge and were committed to democracy
Then we have something wonderful when they break that up into winner take all the other side is evil
And I have to destroy them then that society that democracy is doomed and over
And I think that's where our political situation is. So I refuse like Socrates
I refuse and Plato I refuse to participate in the political remain because for me
I do not and see jordan
wants to go in there
Guns blazing and that's a fundamental difference between us. And so we've come to understand that we won't talk about those things
Right. Those are just ways you guys are and I'm glad we probably need people to be both ways
I think I think some of the online stuff gets like, um
It gets uh addictive probably, you know, it is. Yeah, I think once you get into that world
There's people that their whole lives are that world, you know, and he loves to argue points
So I think if you want to argue stuff, yeah, you can do it all day there. You know, but it's argument it's argument for
Uh, Plato made a distinction between phylo Sophia the love of wisdom and phylo nikea the love of victory
And when it's the love of victory, then you've lost the Socratic spirit, right? Right? I will disagree with people
Bishop maxipus and I we disagree. He's he is a committed
And I think profound and virtuous christian
I'm not we know this and yet
But so we disagree and profound and yet he's one of my dearest friends and we draw each other out and we contribute to each other
Right, you can disagree. You can argue you can challenge
But you don't have to pursue demonization destruction. You don't have to pursue confirmation porn
You don't have to pursue narrative porn. You know what the narrative bias if narrative is
This is a real but I can tell a story about that. So I must mean I know what's going on
Right. And so we get simplistic narratives. We get confirmation porn. We get this
We get this sort of self this self-righteous
Adversarial I'm going to destroy the other and I'll see it shows how good and it's
Ultimately narcissistic. I I don't want to participate in any of that crap. Right, right? And and
You can see I'm getting very animated. Oh, it's okay. It's interesting. I feel I feel I feel very strongly
That
Sorry, I I want to make it clear that I'm not arguing against Jordan in his absence
He I would welcome if he was here and could defend his position. Yeah. Yeah, I don't think that we are
I think I have a decent enough relationship with and I'm sure you have a great relationship
So it's like I would understand if he wouldn't be upset. I don't think so. I think I think he understands that we're like
Yeah, he he's invited me to do things like to uh, he's putting together a new course peterson academy
And I've taught it. I've I've already done one course for him on intelligence rationality wisdom and spirituality
Uh, but when he when he came to when he made the offer to me, he said well, I said Jordan
I'm not a conservative. I'm not a christian
And I have ideas other than yours. He said first of all you can criticize me if you want you have complete academic freedom
And you don't have to be a christian and you don't have to toe the conservative line
I just want you to come in and give the best possible course you could give
And I said, okay under those conditions
I'll do it because why wouldn't I that's a completely virtuous context. Yeah, and I hate guilt by associating. Well, you're associating with
Really, that's become a huge problem. Well, the politics overall and in society you you you can't do that
You right you like like it's so funny like people don't even realize like the guilt by association
And then the little spouse sort of Foucault and postmodernism who are deeply influenced
Profoundly influenced by Heidegger who was literally a nazi, right? And it's like what what where is your guilt?
How does your guilt by association metric work, right? It doesn't work consistently. It doesn't work coherently
um, and you know, I think that
It's important that we give
people a chance
to enter into
Genuine theologous with us that we don't you know
Part of understanding
Forgiveness, which is an important part of agape. That's Jesus of Nazareth. If forgiveness isn't
Like mercy. I let you off the hook. Forgiveness is
I'm giving you the chance to enter into relationship with me
And even giving myself to enter in a chance into relationship with you
before it has been earned
Because something has happened that I can't earn it until like I'm in a catch 22
Unless you give me the chance to enter into the relationship
I can't do the things that will allow me to re-earn your trust, right?
And so you need to give me that right you need to forgive
I'm playing with the word a little bit, right? You you need to forgive
And and make the so that we're not bound in reciprocal narrowing. So there's a chance for reciprocal opening
I think we've lost
We've lost the commitment to that we've
America used to I mean I'm a canadian and I only get it through the media popular media
But america used to be a place at least it seemed to me
Where people were initially given the benefit of the doubt because you were all americans and you all believed in democracy
As far as I can tell now, I mean there's research to show this, you know
Republicans are more afraid of democrats than they are of china and and vice versa
Yeah, right and nobody believes in democracy anymore. Everybody's convinced on both sides this like I'm in this to win
Not to make america better, right? And so I mean
I have a great point
Well, you're on america and I'm glad you're nodding to that because I feel a little bit weird here commenting
Oh, well, I think that's a great point. I hadn't really thought about that. Everybody's in it to win
They're not in it for how do we get out of this?
How do we get to a better place?
How can we all get to a place together that we could not possibly get to on our own?
That was the proposal of democracy. Yeah
The proposal of democracy is we will all engage in self-deception
But we
It but if you have a different point of view and I'm willing to enter into genuine deal logos with you
You can help me correct mine and I can help you correct yours
And we can get to a place together that we couldn't get to on our own. That is the great promise of democracy
It's also the great promise of science john dewey one of your great philosophers said those two when they're both working
They work together profoundly. That's what america was
Well, at least to my mind. Yeah
And did he do the dewey decimal system? Yes, that's that john dewey. I knew it dude. I knew he frickin did it
God, I can't believe some weirdo would do that, but I'm grateful. He did it. Yeah, me too because I needed to get those books
um
I don't know if you saw this john. It says the moon is open for business entrepreneurs are racing to make billions
That they're gonna basically they're planning on opening the moon where people can go there and have like a little colony
hmm
that's
Like as if the moon's gonna become the new like
You know, we're heading we're the mayflower. You know, yeah, well, I mean
The that's that's I mean that's part of what's happened
to the american mythos, right
Is the the the frontier?
The new world the frontier when it's gone now
I mean, there's no where left to go right and and we try and star track tried to propose that space would be the final frontier
And we're still playing with that but the problem is space isn't the same way as another continent, right?
and yeah, I think
america is
I hadn't thought about this. Sorry. This is just coming to me. No, it's okay. It's just the news it says
Uh
With its Artemis missions the u.s. Space Agency aims to lay the foundations for the first human settlements beyond earth
And pave the way for extra planetary colonization
Uh, and that business is at the core of its strategy
So I've wondered about this
That maybe there's a hunger and america for another frontier
I could see that. Yeah, and maybe trying to make that happen
I I yeah
they
There's been some historians who talked about that and how the frontier kept moving until they hit sort of the pacific ocean
and then there was a problem because
This is oversimplistic, but generally what happened is people who
Were relatively more stable and were more sociable stayed and people that were a little bit fringe
Would move to the frontier and then they kept moving and they kept moving and then they end up in california kind of yeah
Australia
Yeah, or australia right and then the problem is right that we lost
We we lost that
Or the united the canada didn't grow up that way, but the united states lost that ability it lost that vision
Yeah, maybe that maybe maybe there's even like a bit of a spiritual dimension
Uh to this there's a a try to attempt to get a sense of
Well, we there's a frontier we can open up
We can orient towards
I hadn't made that's interesting. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it just makes me wonder like
You know what if it's just a money thing so that rich people could look cool and take pictures on the moon
Like what big vow? I mean, I guess you could open up maybe a nice restaurant there that only really rich people could go to
Yeah, I mean if it if it's just a business thing and all we're doing is sort of flinging fallacies into the sky like we've been doing recently
Um, yeah, that's just having that's just modal confusion
It's just trying like they sort of trying to have sort of have sex with the universe
Yeah, that's what it feels like to me. Yeah a little bit of like a weird kind of like let's
Inflict ourselves onto the world because we can afford it one of the rockets even looked like a penis
It was really embarrassing really somebody with psychological training. I'm looking at this and going like that's a penis
Yeah, and you're thrusting it into the sky
Right, and it's like, uh, it's really weird. Uh, so yeah, you're right. It could become that
but you know if it becomes if it becomes
Plymouth like if it becomes if it becomes a stepping stone to
maybe
Opening up colonization of other planets then that could become something other. I don't know there it is right there blue origin
There you go. See what I mean? Yeah that thing
Somebody's just slinging a wiener out in the space homie. Well, it's it's you know, my my dick's bigger than yours kind of thing
Yes, yeah, who doesn't want to just rip their wiener off and just hum it into the damn ether
You know
um
I remember at one point I hated my penis for some reason really and I remember I wanted to cut it off and mail it to
Africa to like a starving country and they could use it for a food. Isn't that crazy to think that?
um
Well, maybe but I mean a lot of people get into
um a very ambivalent relationships to their
uh sexuality and to
You know their genitals
um
Is that happened over time you think a lot of folks? I think it's always I think it's a perennial thing about human beings
I think human beings
right
Sex sex pulls us in the two directions sex pulls us
Towards the animal
Finite we're having sex because we're finite. We're limited. We're trying to make more kids
Right, but sex can also call us and you you talked about this
There's a possibility of ecstasy. There's a possibility like and you have like tantra, which is
right
people understanding that
Sex is a powerful way to reciprocally open with another human being and if you frame it the right way you can go into ecstasy
You can go into self-transcendence. You can you can you can
touch aspects of your psyche
that are otherwise inaccessible and so
We've always understood. I think that sex is a
powerful
thing and
It's it's it's got this tension in it and one of the ways we try to just alleviate that tension is just
Well, I'm just going to collapse to one side or the other. We'll we'll just right. We'll just yeah do the one or we'll just do the other
And again, it's it's play-doh to my mind like the toughest thing for me to be
to do
Loving wisely in so far as I have
Is to hold those two together about my sexuality, right is to acknowledge
The animal part but don't identify with it
And to acknowledge the ecstatic part, but don't think i'm a god and identify with it
But try and keep the two talking to each other
all the time
Yeah, I think I had just gotten so disappointed like I think because in my 20s I was looking at pornography a lot, you know
Choose that. Oh, I could see that. Yeah over going on a date or something like because it was less
Committal it was way less scary than like possibly disappointing a woman or possibly getting into a relationship even like
Like even if I had appeased a woman and then things got closer that was
Very scary and I remember yeah at one point. I was just so sick of myself. I was like
I will just
Just mail my penis and I guess I thought Africa because it was like a starving country or something
They could use it as like a soup meat or whatever, but just to put you in some august company
You know, uh, you know, uh, same paul talked about cutting off your left hand
And jesus did too if it offends you right
We can we can
Misidentify with our body or parts of our body in a way like you just described and thank you for sharing that
That can really narrow us down reciprocally bind us get us locked in and we can feel trapped
And we feel like the only way out member eric from is to destroy. Wow. It's just destroy right
Yeah, I I'm glad I'm glad you're not there and I'm I'm really glad
You're you got out of that without having to damage yourself. Yeah me too
I think there were just time girls like I'm gonna fucking hum this thing over the fence
Yeah, you know just because you just wanted to get rid of it. It felt like the cause of your
Oh, I remember I remember saying something
Not quite as self mutilating is that but I remember saying for the longest time
If there was a button I could push and it would turn off my sexuality and leave everything else in place
I'd push that button. Oh, yeah, I won't push that button now. Yeah, I won't push that button now
It's different and that's again the gift that has been given to me
By other people, especially by my my my my my this wonderful woman that I'm with
And so
Yeah, uh, I I can understand that I can understand how you can get to that place
But I think you know the rocket is also just a projected version
Of oh, it's like us just trying to show off. Yeah, and it seems like rich people are doing a lot of their own space
It's like everything has become very privatized. That's one thing that kind of scared me
Well, yeah, and then we're losing we're losing the we we're losing
What can we do together and get to a place that we could get on our own and you know
Flinging the phallus into the sky is a way of saying I can get there on my own
And the problem is I bet you can but so what right the the price you pay for that is
You haven't brought everyone else along and then once you get there
You've lost that capacity that only civilization has yeah, you're there by yourself
You're there by yourself and and and you and you lose all of all of what?
All the often frustrating but also the wonderful ways in which human beings challenge just beyond ourselves other human beings. Yeah
it's like even um
Yeah, it's like even like the olympics and stuff everybody's like it takes different sides and points of views
It used to just be we'd you cheer for your team, you know, I wonder if it's like that in other countries
Or if it's just america doing all this bullshit. Well, I mean the problem was the the the olympics also
I mean they they got corrupted by politics
All right, I mean it's even back, you know 36 olympics and they're in
Berlin and hitlers they're run the nazis are running the olympics
Right, and then you and then you got the the olympics got corrupted by the cold war
Right and they've always been pretty fallible to uh
somebody taking them out like
Yeah, I mean whenever whenever there's an arena in which human excellence could come to the fore
There are also people who want to grab the shiny thing and bullshit you with it and manipulate you around it
Um, that's always that's always going to be the case
um, and that's a perennial problem and so
Again, the the answer to that is not let's win that game
To my mind the answer is let's stop playing that game together. Hmm
Yeah, it seemed like that's a thing that's really
been
That's gotten rough in america is I mean for one our news the faith in our news dissolved
You know the legacy media has no legitimacy and I mean it happened like that. I felt like maybe I'm wrong
But it felt like it happened. Well the cable the cable knew like you said a long time ago the cable fragmented the networks
Right, and so when you don't have a consensus out there when you don't have a listening consensus
That doesn't get reflected back as a consensus authority figure when you're Walter Cronkite and so many people are listening to you
They right and they're all sharing that together a lot of trust gets placed in you by a lot of people
When you're on some little cable thing, right? Then that's 24 hours a day. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and then it so you know
CNN changed things
I remember what I was watching cnn when it first came on and I got like a shiver went through me
I was watching it and I realized
The journalists are interviewing each other
I grew up with journalism when the journalists went to where the story was and interviewed the people that the story was
Happening to and I'm watching cnn and it's they're talking to each other and I go. Oh, no
This this is real. This is really bad. This is this is going to isolate itself
More and more and more and become more and more about itself very very rapidly kind of thing
And it has I used to watch cnn and I thought it was like the place I would go for news
And then like I think five years ago or something. I just I was like, I don't this just isn't news anymore
I don't know but the news lost itself and so then conspiracy theories grew they feel the vacuum
Because of course people are trying to figure out the reality of news. They're trying to figure out real information
So I guess people are searching for real information
You know, they're trying to figure it out. Well, what the conspiratoriality shows you though
At least I would argue this is they're not just searching for information for facts
They're they're searching for meaning. They're searching for belonging. They're searching for connection
Like socrates. They don't want just empty truths. They want transformative truths and that's what like if like like
If you watch like a q and on meeting
you know
Yeah, they'll they'll they'll be the conspiracy language
But it looks like a church service there
They have like there's songs and then there's somebody gives like a sermon and then they're supporting each other
And they're offering childcare
And it's like
And like it's like like I'm not condoning anything here, but it's like as a scientist. I look at that and I go
You know, they're they're creating a new religion
Yeah, because what people want is they don't just want the facts
Right. They want the facts that connect them to themselves to each other to the world into what's ultimate
In a lot of cultures are in a lot of like, you know, america's become
Extremely diverse, you know, you have a lot of diversity issues like in france right now like where canada too. Yeah. Yeah, is it
Is that just a phase that we go through as
Places diversify like schools of thought changing like are we eroding sometimes or are we evolving?
Do you feel like that's where I sometimes wonder like
You know is diversification
Is it too soon in some of these places? Is it yeah, not is it right or is it wrong because it's it is what it is, you know
Um, but it what is the byproducts of that and because some of it seems to be kind of scary in some spots, you know
Yeah, I mean the and it may be too big of a fish to fry, you know
Well, I mean calm community common unity
The the problem we're facing is we've
I think for a good reason we've decided we've we've realized that we've marginalized groups of people unfairly
We've disenfranchised them. They haven't been included. They have valuable things to say
Somebody I'm recording some episodes wish
Uh, greg thomas. He's been he's a he's a black man and he's been teaching me
How much jazz and the blues contributed to american culture to american democracy?
It's been really that series is going to come out eventually. This has been yeah, we just went to graceland the other day
So yeah, and so right and and he talks about being an omni american
And being a radical moderate like and talking about
Uh, a cultural worldview rather than a racialized worldview
Um, and you know, I I I applaud his courage because you know, it's difficult to make these things and uh
Make these kinds of statements
But I I think what he's putting his finger on is yet we we have to do this thing
We we we have to stop hurting people just because of who they are and I firmly agree with that
but
We haven't been we haven't been remember the ecology of practices. We haven't been counter balancing that with
Okay, good. Let's do that. But what we need to do is we need to balance that with what are we doing to strengthen community
This is called complexification. So let me let me give you a biological example of this
You and I started out as zygote a fertilized egg initially the egg just
The cells just reproduced, but you know, then then they start to do something they start to differentiate
They start to become skin cells and lung scales cells and hearts. Oh wow, right?
Fight a little or not. Well, here's the thing
But that's the thing while they are
Differentiating they are simultaneously literally self-organ self-organizing. They're also organizing into organs. And so
A living thing is simultaneously differentiating
And integrating and when I am some look at my hand my hand is very differentiated
But it's also integrated when it when and when it does both of those it
Complexifies it gets emergent abilities emergent powers. And if you only integrate you get stultifying
Stillness and if you only diversify you get frustrating fragmentation
You need to have them properly integrated, right? So that you get
Complexification. I think we should be I'm not saying we should stop
pursuing
The diversification that we're doing there are good moral
Arguments for doing this and there's even good cultural arguments, right?
But what we actually should be pursuing is
Complexification of our culture, which means we should also be countering balancing that with yes
But what binds us together and simple liberal tolerance doesn't do it. It's not enough
It's thin soup and we've lost we've lost the civic religions. We've lost the sacred religions
We've even lost a shared popular culture and just being taught, you know, well, let's just all be nice
That's not that that's not realistic. It's not enough. It's not enough. You need a shared vision
Again, I want everybody to hear what I'm saying pursue the diversification. This is I hear it. That's right
But it also needs to be counterbalanced with also pursue the integration so that we
Complexify so that we literally grow and have emergent abilities to deal with the problems that we're all
Collectively sharing. Yeah, I think that's right. I mean, you know, I'm a my father's from Nicaragua
I'm mostly viewed as just a white guy, you know
But it's been like
It definitely feels like they've made just why a lot of times the media it feels like I'm not saying this is real
Right, but it feels like
And I have friends that feel like that the that like white christian men are just made to be like the enemy
You know and that they've never done anything good
Demonizing people will will always end up it's been horrible because there's so many good people that now start to
Say, okay, you want to make me the enemy? Then that's what I'll be you it's almost like
Not that's what I'll be but then
I'm gonna separate myself from this society because I'm not even respected in it
Yeah, does that make any sense? Yeah, it makes direct sense to me as a father
Um, my son was in a program in which he he would come home and he would feel
Dejected because he was demonized that way
And at one point he said well, you know what?
And this is the effect this had on him
I'm gonna join the right because at least they'll
Work on my behalf and they'll stop demonizing it and I had to sit him down. I said son
Don't do that like you're giving in to like the shadow side of what's happening to you is coming out
But I like I had empathy like it like if you're demonizing somebody
Do we really like do we really think that?
Oh, you've made me feel really horrible and guilty about myself for like all a long time
I I'm just gonna join your cause. No
Some people will do that because they'll give in but a lot of people are gonna give that the finger and they're gonna fight back
Yeah, because like like you you can't do that with people
So we again, we've got to get the balance. How can we take responsibility for what has happened?
Without just transferring the group that we're going to hate right and and this is a really tricky problem
And and yes very complex. It's it's very hard and um
Like I applaud people like Greg. I'm mostly on this issue. I feel that I'm
I don't have the requisite education or expertise
And I also feel that you know, I'm not the right person to so I'm trying to really really
Listen to people who I think do have the proper
Place and role to try and wrestle with this and learn from them as best I can. Yeah
Yeah, well, I think that's always a good idea, you know, I mean, it's just it's just
It's nice to think about and talk about, you know, it's like it's nice to be able to share that thought and
and uh,
Just have it be
Discussed or heard or whatever, you know, and I think we should I don't think I think I think making things
Uh topics that we can't discuss that we need to discuss is really problematizing
Things for a lot of people their problems don't go away by talking about them as if they don't exist
Right. Yeah, and you create you create people that are have then you get people into fear
So I I know an increasing number of people who
Are you I can see that
The fires of resentment are building in them. Yeah, and it's dangerous
It's like this is like the what like the Weimar Republic
Right the Versailles treaty will crush the enemy into the dust because they're demons
And you just you end up breeding a demon that's 10 times worse
um
So I like
I hope that we can get to a place where we can do that
We can do the kind of thing that you and I are trying to do here where we can do this
like
You know
This dea logos conversation where we wrestle with things
Um, and we do it honestly and and people are allowed to make mistakes without immediately being condemned
Like people are so afraid to make a mistake. You can't
Learn if you can't make mistakes like people have to be able to make mistakes and say oh, I'm sorry
I didn't realize like oh, yeah, maybe that was a racist thing. I didn't know right
I really honestly didn't know can you accept that? I didn't know and then can you help me
Right, but if we get to a place where you can't make mistakes
Then you can't learn and like it feels in a lot of places people are walking on eggshells and everybody's terrified about making a mistake
And then everything gets this chilly superficial
Kind of conversation and then and then we can't solve any of these problems
Well, I think it's kind of where hollywood has kind of pigeonholed itself with some of its
Creations these and they're paying the price. I mean so they're they're claiming that this is what everybody believes
And then the box office is repeatedly telling them. No, they don't and they resent it
And they're not listening. Well, it's almost like they have like like they're trying to create Stockholm syndrome
with uh
With their audiences, you know, not the not that they need to be one way or the other
But just that can we have some reality because what gets to be scary is as a regular person
You start to question your own fucking reality. You're like, am I there's no way that I'm insane suddenly, you know
What we should go back
to
Making great stories that are a great myth that afford people being imaginal
Yeah, that call them to wisdom and virtue and then within that
Ask them to consider
issues of race
and gender and economic status rather than
Hating people over the head with uh condemning messages or very superficial representation
So that people watch this and they say this is boring
Or i'm tired of getting preached at like again
like
Here's a here's like right here. There's a point. I want to make
We should be able to criticize the method without automatically being
Told that we are criticizing the goal
I think there's a goal like should we reduce
Racism and racial tensions should we make things more fair between like the sexes and the genders? Yes
And because I really believe that I think there are there are good and bad ways of doing that
And we should be able to work together and I could be wrong and you could be wrong and we should be able to criticize the methods
If we actually believed in the goal if we didn't believe if we actually believe in the goal
We actually believe in helping the people we should be able to criticize the methods
like science does
In order it right instead of like right i'm no actually i'm just want to plant my flag right right
And so like it's
No, it's a it's a great point
We should be able to criticize the methods without saying we're criticizing the goal
Yes, and it's gotten to the point now where you can't even raise your hand and ask a question
Without being lambasted so much in society or online that it gets
debilitating to
To any real conversation. Yeah, and again, I would I would say that
I think I can honestly say that I would say that equally to the left and the right
Let me criticize the methods and it doesn't mean i'm necessarily criticizing the goal
I agree with the left your goals of making the world more
Compassionate not making people the victims of fate the fate of race or the fate of the economic class
Yeah, they keep doing that right keep doing that, but also I get they keep doing that over and it's like come on
I've heard this story a million times
Well, but but when are people going to start to live a new truth unless you start to tell them a new story
But that's it the the it's like
That should never stop because that's a perennial thing human beings are all
But you have to have the method that doesn't dull people to it
And I also want to say this to the right you're supposed to be calling people
To personal responsibility and virtue are your leaders exemplars
Of virtue and personal responsibility. They don't seem to be
Right. Yeah
I agree with your goals
Are your methods like you know how you convince people to pursue your virtue
Be as virtuous as you can
Exemplify it be like Socrates be like Sonata be like Jesus
Right. Yeah, so I'm sorry. I'm probably pissing everybody off because I'm criticizing both the left and the right
No, I don't think look. I think those are challenges that everybody faces, you know
And when your backs against the wall or you feel like your back is against the wall
Whoever that may be you're going to
You're going to retaliate more than you are
Like uh entertain. Yes, that makes sense. Yeah, it does, you know, so I think and a lot of people are feeling that way
It's interesting how so many groups at the same time can feel that way
That's what's kind of interesting to me
They can have opposite beliefs and be almost exactly in their behavior
And that is like as a psychologist and cognitive scientist
I like that is
I'm sorry. This sounds arrogant. I don't mean it to me, but it's so apparent to me
It's like you're both acting the exact same way and both sides will like oh, no
They're reeling right now at me. But it's like you you you you're saying opposite
I hear you saying and shouting opposite things, but you seem to be acting in this almost the exact same way
and
And so that for me, that's that's that's a sign that like
Well, that's a sign that we're in trouble. That's an a sign that that
like
We we don't even have debate. We've lost the logos. We've even lost debate
We we we've just got like sort of verbal rugby or something going on. I don't know
Yeah, it is I think it really is, you know
Um, I saw in some of your work you talk about psychedelics and psychedelic
Yes, you know and the value of that
in um, yeah, like uh getting people to be able to access and
Help solve issues that are inside of them trauma. Yes. Yes, right. Yes. Yes. Have you had experience with it?
I've done psychedelics in my past. Um, I can't like a party or to learn
to learn
So this was a long time ago. Um
I was about three or four years into
Doing Tai Chi Chuan. I was doing it religiously in both senses of the word
I was doing it like hours every day. I was going to the dojo three or four times
I was getting all the you know where you're a hot like lava and cold like ice and all those
Woo experiences and everything
And then something happened that sort of
Twaked me
um
so
Some people came to me. I was in graduate school and they said, uh, you've changed. What's different about you?
You're much more balanced and flexible and I realized all the Tai Chi is
Changing me. I'm so concentrated on all the wonderful bizarre experience and I'm not paying attention to how my character
My cognition my con like how I'm showing up how I'm how I'm you know comporting myself to that was being changed
Other people were noticing that and I and I and I and that's that's been something I've been looking for
I keep looking for when when somebody recommends a practice
Does it transfer broadly deeply and effectively into their many domains of their life?
Does it percolate between different layers of their psyche?
And so it's like, oh, oh, oh and so
And I had a very good friend
And I won't out that person of course because of course these things are still technically illegal
But that that's going to change soon too
And they offered to uh
Do magic mushrooms and I said to myself
And this is explicitly how I framed it. I said I want to
Go on magic mushrooms and I want to do tai chi chuan
on
When I'm when I'm high because I want to know what it's like
What it what's the what what it feels like what the what the phenomenology is like?
When because the psychedelics reduce your egocentrism, right? Yeah, and they and they open up that connectedness
You're falling in love with reality. I want to know what it's like to do tai chi like that
Because if I do what I can do is I can remember it
Right and what I can and I can use that like a touchstone. And so what I can do is right
I can practice and I'll have this deep felt memory of what it was like
And I can keep calibrating the practice so that I can get into that state without having to use the drug
And so that's how I did it
And was it helpful? Yes
Yes, it worked. Yeah, that worked as a strategy now that that brings me to something like
So remember the processes that make you adaptive make you self deceptive real quick
So it works as a strategy in the sense that it helped you get deeper and then in subsequent experiences
You was able to still get deeper. Yeah because of that
I can I can get to that state now and tai chi chuan without having to be on mushrooms. Dang boy. You're saving money
You know
Well and other things and other things
Yeah, I mean I can't I I couldn't do it now if I wanted to because
I have mineers in my left ear. So mineers. Yeah, it's a
They don't know what causes it, but my inner ear can and I can't talk about it too long because it can trigger an attack
My what a freaking crazy?
Yeah, it's a bad disease
Oh, yeah, my my inner ear will suddenly fill with liquid and I'll get the worst vertigo you can possibly imagine
Oh, my buddy gets out if you say his ex-wife's name around it. Yeah. Yeah that I can I can start running in a circle
But psychedelics right psychedelics what they do is
We and and we're not we're not
You know and I work with I talked to I was
Alex Benier. He's got his new book out the bigger picture. I was on when he released it. I I talked to people who do psychedelic
work
And you know and I've read people like robin carhart harris and others
The idea is you when you're dreaming you're basically doing what psychedelics do. So the idea is
Your brain is always taking a sample of information from the world and it's trying to predict
Like we've talked about this right now you face two problems in that
one is
you can
Call you can do what's called overfitting to the data you can get all lucked into the
Patterns that are in the sample, but don't actually aren't in the world. Okay, right? Right? Does that make sense?
Yeah, it makes sense. It's called overfitting to the data
You can also underfit to the data, which is you don't pick up on patterns that are that are in the sample that are also
That are actually in the world
So you there's two kinds of errors you can make the problem
You face is that they're in a trade-off relationship as you try to solve one you make the other worse
And so you're constantly caught between them and so what you do machine learning like like deep learning
These machines that are ai and stuff. Yeah. Oh, yes
Like yeah, yeah
So they face this problem and what they periodically do is they will throw noise into the system
They will shut off half the nodes or they're putting static information
And that what that does is it prevents the system from overfitting to the data
It breaks up the frame enough so that the machine will go to a wider framing like we were talking about earlier
And that looks like that's what you're doing in dreaming
That's what psychedelics
do so psychedelics basically
Get parts of the brain that normally don't talk to each other to talk to each other
Oh, yeah, right like the in-laws dinner or whatever something like that. Yeah, and so
the thing is
You they have to be put in the right context because when you are when you're sort of unmooring your salience landscape, right?
That could possibly lead to insight or you could also rabbit hole and get into your own personal bullshit really really powerfully
So, you know back in the 60s people talked about set and setting that's still true
You got to have set and setting but you also have to have, you know
I'll two two more s's one of the words is a multi-select. It's sapiential
That means having to do with wisdom
You need you need to set if you if you're going to do
Psychedelics you need to make sure you're doing lots of other practices
That challenge your proclivity your pronus to self deception
That's what I mean by a sapiential context and then like how indigenous people itch need in which they do that
They have the shamans usually
Right and you also have to have it in a sacred context, right where there's a context in which
Your altered states of consciousness are not just
Running around free. They have a worldview that can properly home them and integrate them in
Yeah, I went to I did an ayahuasca ceremony, right, right man. I didn't
And it helped me so much
It was unbelievable. Yes, you know, and I'd had I'd been sober for a few years and
I got and I'd done a ton of therapy
But I'd never been able to put
I couldn't I couldn't adjust my perspective, right? I couldn't adjust the framework that I was looking at this
Exactly and when it
When it helped me to the immense it did I feel like it literally did
A thousand sessions of therapy in two days. That's what the research shows the research shows
Unbelievable if put in the right context and that's what we were in. I mean, we were in a place
They had a shaman. They had all these little like uh, like candles and all these and this there was a lot of music
That really put you in a special space. Yeah, everybody was wearing white gowns and robes were in there
There's a lot of symbolism. Yes. Yes. There was a ton of symbolism. So you
There was a lot of like um traditional like moments that we went through before and throughout the experience
it was like a nine hour experience and
And also like a day there was this time where we would get up with these
Maracas or shakas or whatever. Yeah chakras and we have to shake like these little thing with the
Sand in them. Yeah. Yeah, and you'd have to shake them and do this like dance ritual like
There was a lot of rituals. Yes that made it very made the whole experience more powerful and more transferable
So you you can integrate it. You can transfer it bleeds to different levels of your psyche
Bleeds into different domains of your life like I was talking about that's exactly it the problem with that now too
Though is that's becoming a business. Well, it's becoming a business. It's becoming commodified and you know
An ayahuasca tourism is oh, yeah, totally
Yeah, like come on down here. You have your experience that you can go back and tell your friends about
Yeah, how to think and there are some of the flowers even there's like a sexy woman on the flower
Like what does this have to do with it? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, like it just but yeah
It's scary that that's how everything becomes. I do you think down the road
We will look back at society like thousands of years from now. I'm like what a
Poor left turn that society took you think we'll be back in like villages and looking back
Like what do you think it the long game looks like if you have any
Predictions, I don't know about predictions. I know about a possibility
My good friend Jordan Hall talks about a possibility that we haven't had before
So until recently in order to get the benefits of civilization
We had to live close to each other and then that gives us all the noxious side effects
But the the force multiplication of civilization was worth it, right?
But now what we can do is we can we can do all the civilization stuff virtually and then we could live
In small-scale communities
It calls this the civium project so we could live in you know groups of 150 people growing our own food
We could live in this way that is psychologically physiologically healthy and yet we could still benefit from you know that
That massive collective agency that collective wisdom the collective intelligence that civilization affords and we could
Now we we don't have to physically live like with right right
We could and so we now have the possibility
Where we could turn to we could live
psychologically physiologically physically as we evolved to
well participating in
a hyper technological civilization with all of the force multiplication that that gives you and it's this is a real possibility and
You know, he's done stuff to try and make it happen. But you know, it's like a
You know the lone voice crying in the wilderness kind of thing until he isn't until he is it and I hope he keeps coming back to it
Um
That's a real possibility. We could take that turn
For me if we could take that turn while building up
You know the these kinds of colleges of practices both individually and collectively are talking about
And he and I talked about how those would integrate and support each other
That could you know that could that could be a turn away from
Some of the the darkness that many of us feel we're we're entering into. Yeah
Cool, man. I don't think I have anything else to think about
I mean, I could probably think about more, but I don't know if I could do it. You know, yeah
Yeah, sometimes it's a lot to think, you know, yeah, yeah whenever you get burned out from thinking. What do you like to do?
When I get burned out from thinking, um
Sometimes I like to do embodied stuff like tai chi chuan or meditate
Sometimes I like to read some very good literature
Uh where I'm putting myself sort of into somebody else's
Thinking do you read fiction ever? Yeah, I'm reading
Uh, I'm reading the last of the wine, which is a really wonderful historical fiction
about
Athens and the Peloponnesian war and we're following these two characters as they form a profound
Platonic relationship, but platonic actually means also sexual at that time. So
But but um, I'll do it but but they're encountering
Like you they're like they meet they meet
Socrates is there. Oh, wow. So for me, it's like I get to meet Socrates and like and hang around with him play
Do I just I was read to a chapter and I I sort of stopped and I savor the moment and I read it again
And you know, they're in they're in they go to the gymnasium and aristocles is there and he's a wrestler
And that's actually Plato's real name. He's aristocles Plato
Plato means broad shoulders because he was a wrestler that was his nickname and I said to myself, I just met Plato
That's cool. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, dude the Delphi. That was like your wwf, huh?
Yeah, it was uh
I I I used to be a big fan of like science fiction and occasionally there's some good science fiction, but now
Um, like maybe just because I'm older. Um, I'm finding
a history really good historical fiction to be
a friend of mine
One of my most important friends christopher master pietro my co-author and so much work
Um, he's works for the revaki foundation. He's also recommended
Hey, what is it?
Hadrian's memoirs, I believe it's called. I've got that book. Uh, it's about hadrian writing to the young marcus aurelius trying to
Educate him and how to be a great stoic
Uh emperor
Um, and so I find that kind of literature when it's not hackney when it's really well researched and well written
I find that very inspiring
It helps me to ask
Aspire to be the kind of person I want to be and I find that
It I find because it's inspiring and it's beautiful. I find it very
Healing and restorative
I was just reading um
This book. I think it's called the library. You look it up by this guy matt haig haig
And it's about this lady. She thinks her life is like horrible, right? So she wants to take her own life
But the second she does she like wakes up in a library and every book on the shelf
Is um the midnight library. That's what it's called and every book on the shelf is a different possibility of her life
If she had made different choices and there's a billion books. It's an endless library
Of course, so she can take one and open it and she'll be in that life
And it's really interesting because it's like it
The author just kind of takes you on the journey where no
Every life you think oh if I just stayed and done this thing
But there's a million other things that are different about that life
That's right. You didn't realize oh when I get to this life like my father had passed away early or
Um, my partner had left me or I was cheating on
There's just uh, it's just pretty fascinating to see all the different
Like the broader view instead of just being like very specific like oh if this one thing
Changes I would be awesome, but if that one thing changed and so many things would change that that's excellent
I think I I think I would like to read that book. It's really cool
Is it easy to read it blew my mind how just what a creative idea it was but it's a really good idea
That's what good literature can do right? Yeah, it can it can it can persuade you
Like it without making an argument, but nevertheless it it rationally persuade you to really consider and reflect on things
Yeah, it kind of made me excited
It was like I hadn't read something that had like kind of a new idea or something
I'd never thought I've ever heard seen before you know and I was like oh this is exciting
It felt promising, you know new ideas that have both truth and relevance. See like you said, they're so nourishing
Yeah, right they feed your mind in a way that in for information. You know doesn't uh, yeah
We're at a place now where everyone has access to the same information
So the the value of information
Itself has kind of diminished unless you can iterate that information or share that information to people
concisely
And effectively and in ways that they can digest it. I think that's one of the reasons why people are going
To a lot of like orders and speakers and stoics and yeah, um, yes different like, uh
just different
I don't know what they'd be called but
Evangelist maybe but that's but non-christian non non religious evangelists. Yeah, yeah because they they
They need you know, I don't know what I'm saying. I don't know. I think what you're saying is like people
have a sense
Of the you know
Of something that will open them up in that way you were talking about and they see that possibility and they're hungry for it
Yeah, yeah, they're hungry for it and some of the old mediums of it have um
Proven to be non valuable right recently and so I think they're looking for new mediums of it
So yeah tsl it said where's all the wisdom we've lost and knowledge?
Where's all the knowledge we've lost in the information?
And so yeah, it's like that very much and and and good literature can
Take you back
Like it take you from the information into the knowledge and if it's really great literature from the knowledge back into the wisdom
John Revekey, thanks so much, man
Thank you. You know, there's this I really enjoyed this. I mean
You you you drew a lot out for me and it was really wonderful
You shared a lot which was really wonderful and I feel like one of my criteria of genuine deal logos
Is we both got to a place we couldn't have got to
On our own. It wasn't just a dialogue. We like there was something a life
Took shape between us and and grew for a while and we sort of followed it
And I really the aesthetics and and the and the meaning of that I find that very very powerful
Thanks, man
Yeah, I think I was afraid sometimes I get afraid to talk to people that are
A lot of education, you know and and are good at sharing information
So I felt you know, I feel I guess pretty happy about myself that uh, you know
I planned ahead and so I had somewhat of a plan so that was nice
But I didn't feel like I had to like stick to it too much
And I felt like I was able to like
You know communicate and learn and ask questions that I think myself and my listeners are curious about you know and be um
Just like a voice for our little group of uh of listeners. So yeah, man. Thanks so much, dude. And um,
Yeah, I got to come check you. I don't want to come see us
A class or something when I get up there to toronto. You're welcome. Let me know
Yeah, can people come sit in there like they ride along with a cop?
Uh
You there's uh, you can you can audit it because the universities are publicly funded in canada
Um, you can audit any course you want as long as it does as long as you get permission of the instructor
And it doesn't violate the fire code. Sometimes I'm in a room
And we have that there's it's seating for 35 and there's 35 people. Oh, yeah
Oh, I won't and I won't wear nothing flammable either. I won't wear
You think I won't wear wool or something. I probably won't so but thank you for letting me know
John verveke. Thank you so much for your time. Thank you so much
