When we continue our new history of the English language, our next step is the development
from Proto-Germanic, which we saw in the last lecture, to Old English, or Anglo-Saxon, at
which point we're in English itself, but a very different English than the one that
we're used to.
What's interesting about the development from Proto-Germanic, the Old English, is that
we see a lot of lessons that can teach us new ways of looking at the English that we
already speak.
What we see is that the journey from Proto-Germanic to Old English was a matter of mixture.
It was a matter of constant change, and it was a matter of the creation of aspects of
the language which we've lost since and don't necessarily mourn, which gives us a perspective
on how we might feel about some of the distinctions that we're losing in English today as we gain
others.
So, in this lecture, we're going to take a quick tour of some of the particularities
that distinguished Old English from other Germanic languages of its time, such as Old
Norse, which became the Scandinavian languages and Icelandic, and also Gothic, that East
Germanic branch that has since disappeared.
The first element of this story is that Old English was very much a hybrid language.
There's a traditional story of Old English, which is told by the venerable bead, and then
St. Gildus, and that's that English was brought to England by the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes
in the 5th century AD.
These people came from today, what is Denmark and the part of Germany, just beneath.
The idea is that those were the three founders.
That story is gradually being proven to have been vastly oversimplified, and we can see
it by comparing English with different Germanic languages past and present.
So, for example, the modern Germanic language in that area, where the Angles and the Saxons
came from in particular, is Low German, and that is the rather inconvenient term for dialects
of German, actually spoken not in the lowly part of Germany, but in northern Germany.
So what's interesting is that today, what English most resembles is not Low German,
which is what you would expect if the whole story of English being seeded from that area
were the simple truth.
Rather English, as we've seen before in this course already, is most similar to Frisian,
which is spoken over westward, mostly in Holland.
So we saw that Frisian and English can even be in a cute way matched up in terms of sentences.
And that's always been true.
And so, for example, we actually have written evidence of what the Saxons who came over
to England would have spoken.
Their language is what we call Old Saxon.
But Old English, where you would expect it to be most like Old Saxon, if we're going
to compare it to the earlier descendants of proto-Germanic, is actually more like another
preserved written language, Old Frisian.
And so there's a strange circumstance that we see in terms of the history of Old English,
which is that there are two kinks.
There's a Frisian kink, and that's what I'm talking about right now, and then there's
also a Saxon kink, which we'll get to.
But the Frisian one is that English is much more like Frisian when the people who spoke
that language are not the ones who are supposed to have ceded England.
And so, for example, today, it's only English and Frisian in Germanic languages that have
the sound a.
If you ever thought about what an odd sound a is, if you've learned any other language,
probably a was not in it.
It is a sound which is present in many languages in the world, but it's not one that you see
a whole lot in languages of Europe.
English and Frisian both have that peculiar sound a of cat.
We think of it as an English sound that's also in Frisian.
And genetic evidence, which we're seeing more and more of, especially over the past 10 or
15 years, has shown that in terms of people living in Great Britain today, specifically
British people, their genes are actually much closer to Frisian's genes than we would expect.
We would wait for the genes to match up with those of people who now live more eastward,
but instead there's this Frisian imprint on the genes of people in Great Britain that
you wouldn't expect if the story were really just about these angles, Saxons, and Jutes.
And finally, you see things that are little hairs out of place in historical sources.
It's the kind of thing that you ignore because it's human to generalize and you can't pay
attention to every little detail.
But you'll find that, for example, a Byzantine Roman Empire historian in Asia Minor, what's
today Turkey, Procopius, is talking about how he met a delegation of angles.
As he calls them, as people could still be called who were coming from Britain.
And Procopius casually describes Britain as inhabited by angles, yes, and then Britons,
Britons, and by that he means the original inhabitants of the islands who spoke Celtic
languages like Welsh, and then he doesn't say Saxons, he says Anfrisians.
So this is something different from this story of the angles and the Saxons and the Jutes.
There are also these Frisians, and so despite these historical accounts that we have, which
of course are very general and are written before history as we know it exists and are
really in themselves rather sparse, which talk about angles, Saxons, and Jutes, that
takes on an almost fabulistic appearance when we look at the fact that Frisians were just
as important in the mix.
And so Old English was about something besides the angles, Saxons, and Jutes, there was this
other language group, the Frisians.
So that's the Frisian kink, and then there's something really odd going on with the Saxons
to the extent that they did have something to do with the birth of this language.
And that is that there is increasing evidence that when angles, Saxons, Jutes, and certainly
Frisians came to England, they weren't the first of those peoples to be on the island.
And so the general idea is that there were the Celtic original inhabitants speaking languages
like Welsh, and in the southwest Cornish, and further north Gaelic, which comes in Irish
and Scottish flavors, we'll talk more about Celts soon.
The idea is that they were the original inhabitants, and that they were overrun by these speakers
of Germanic languages from across the North Sea.
But it seems that that story is oversimplified, too.
And here's how we know.
There was something called, down on the southeastern coast of England, the Saxon shore, and it
consisted of a number of settlements.
It's a whole scattering of settlements.
The Romans, who had been occupying Britain for centuries, called this the Saxon shore.
So we have this Germanic invasion in the 400s AD.
Before that, it's a Roman colony, and there's something they're calling the Saxon shore.
Now for a long time, talk about the hairs out of place.
For a long time, it was customary to think of these settlements as being forts to defend
against possible invasion by Saxons from across the sea.
And if you think about it, that doesn't make a wit of sense.
Why would you name a shoreline after the people who you're hoping won't invade it?
I mean, imagine if the Native Americans in what is today Newfoundland were worried about
Norwegian Vikings coming to the shore, so they had forts set up.
Why would these Native Americans call it the Norwegian shore?
They would probably call it, you know, the us shore, or something.
It doesn't really make sense, and we can't attend to everything that doesn't make sense,
because we're all busy.
But the fact of the matter is, couldn't it have been that instead of the Saxon shore
being called that because every now and then Saxons tried to invade it, that it was because,
well, there are some Saxons living there.
No one happens to mention it, but then no one happens to mention most things when history
is documented so sparsely.
And there are other things that suggest that that's exactly what was going on.
For example, if you were dealing with early Britain, then when people write things on
stones before you have Anglo-Saxon taking over as a language, inscriptions are generally
in Celtic language.
That is the language that gave birth to what is today modern Welsh, as well as modern Cornish.
And that's what you would expect, because those are the people who lived there, and that was
their language.
It's interesting.
In southeastern England, in Roman times, there is a strange dearth of these Celtic language
inscriptions, which suggests that Celtic had not been spoken in this area for a long time,
and that's further evidence that these Saxons may have taken over linguistically as well.
And what's most interesting is that the idea that the Saxons were already there on a shore
that's called the Saxon shore, which would seem to have already indicated it already,
is that it would explain something that is otherwise a deliciously peculiar puzzle about
the Germanic invasion of Britain.
Think about it.
Britain has got these Celtic people, and they are all over the island, and they've got their
culture and their architecture and their agriculture, and they're there in the millions and millions
and millions.
And then a group of Germanic-speaking invaders comes from across the North Sea.
As far as we know, there are about 250,000 of them.
There are whole cities that have more people than that, just 250,000 mostly guys who come
over, and somehow they impose their language on the whole island such that today Welsh
is spoken by a minority, and Gaelic is hanging on by a thread, as is Cornish.
How exactly did they pull that off?
Because really, the way these things are supposed to go is that the invaders come over, and
because there are many fewer of them than the people who are being invaded, then even
if the invaders become powerful, the language that is learned is the language that was already
spoken there, especially by children.
How is it that it went the other way around?
In other words, why is a Germanic language spoken in England today?
Because think about the Goths that you hear about when you study history.
The Goths are famous for pillaging, the classic phrase raping and pillaging across Europe
during the time of the Roman Empire.
Those people spoke Germanic languages, and so remember Gothic is the lost Eastern branch
of Germanic.
Goths spoke languages related now to German, and yet linguistically, no matter what the
Goths did to a region, including the Grand Old Roman Empire, the Empire didn't end up
speaking Goth languages, these Germanic languages.
And so Goths had an awful lot to do with what went on in France.
There was the Frankish language, that was a Germanic language.
Charlemagne, we're almost sure, spoke Frankish, but there's no Germanic language spoken in
France, or Spain, Lombardic was the Gothic language, i.e. the German-like language, spoken
by the ones who penetrated down to the Roman Empire, i.e. Italy.
There's no Germanic language spoken in Italy, that's not how things work.
But somehow, when it came to these Anglo-Saxons, Jutes, and certainly Frisians who came over
the North Sea, everybody in England ended up speaking Germanic languages.
That has never made any sense.
I would say that since I wrote my book on the history of English, Our Magnificent Bastard
Tongue, that wasn't a plug, it was.
One of the letters that I get most often about that book is people asking, well, why is it
that people ended up speaking the language of the Germanic invaders?
And my answer used to be basically a very kind of smooth version of, I don't know, but
now it's that I talk about this whole Saxon shore hypothesis, and the idea that there
were already people long established speaking Germanic on this island such that when this
Germanic invasion happened, which it did, they only went alongside a long tradition
of this language being spoken, all of which is to say that increasing evidence from archaeology
and genetics and linguistic comparison, not to mention common sense, suggests that Old
English represented more than one stream of migration.
There was this Frisian business, then there were the Saxons that were already there, and
next thing you know, you've got this Anglo-Saxon stew, which consists of the results of various
threads.
And Old English came in four main dialects that we are aware of, and they're pretty
different from each other.
West Saxon is the one that most of the writing is in, and if you say our father, then that's
Fadar-Ura, but then in Northumbrian, which was the northern variety, then it isn't Fadar-Ura,
and then in Mersion, which was in between those two, you have Fadar-Ura.
These are different dialects, and they are about as different from each other as Norwegian,
Swedish, and Danish are different from one another today.
So there were many threads.
So what was going on with Old English was not just that Anglo-Saxons and Jutes came
over and brought one language, and then that became modern English.
What happened was there were apparently various threads, in particular something like Old
Frisian met probably on the island, something like Old Saxon, and the two coexisted and
mixed together.
So English is born in what was a mixture, a blending of various threads.
It was neither fish nor fowl.
Call that dynamic, call it odd, call it what it was, that was something that was already
going on in the birth of English, the meeting of various things rather than a continuation
of just one.
Something else about Old English.
Old English was a language where small things going on with sounds had major effects.
Old English was all about proto-Germanic having undergone certain changes that must have sounded
rather peculiar to proto-Germanic speakers at the time in creating something that now
we just think of as Old English and rather ordinary.
But what it was was English being born in the profound kind of change that now can sound
a little peculiar to us and sometimes even irritates us, but we have to think about it.
So for example, a common example, there's a word nuclear.
Many person, people, are known for saying nuclear, and we think, well, why does it have to
change?
Or I will openly admit this, February is an annoying thing for me to say.
I don't like the word February, and I suspect this is completely random.
I suspect I'm not alone.
It should be February.
That's what I really want to say.
Now talk about appropriate.
One will not say February, but it should be February.
It feels better to say I'm feeling a relief right now.
You could put electrodes in my head, and it would be kind of like drinking watermelon
Kool-Aid or something like that.
February.
February.
Library, come on.
It feels better.
Library, we learn to say it, just like we learn to put our legs together when we feel
food falling into our laps.
It's the way it should go.
It's easier to say, but we don't because we feel that the sounds are not supposed to
move along.
That sort of prescriptive influence was not as strong when languages weren't written,
and so things happened, and well, they just did.
An example, umlaut.
I think many of us know of umlaut as the name of a diacritic symbol that you have.
You have the two dots, for example, in German, there's u and i, and that's the umlaut.
Umlaut is actually a process, and it's what happens when a vowel is on the end of a word,
and it ends up having a kind of a pulling effect on the vowel in the middle of the word
and changing it.
So, for example, take the word for man, the original Germanic word for man, man.
Now, plural ending, i, so, men would be mani, that's how you do it.
Now, this is how umlaut works.
I is a sound that's in the front of the mouth, ah, if you think about it, make the sound,
do it.
Ah is in the back.
But if you say mani, and if you keep doing that, then there's an anticipation.
Speaking the language is all about anticipation, you're making me wait, anticipation.
I hope we can quote that.
And so, mani, and so, when you have that e coming up at the end, then the e has a way
of pulling the ah frontward, so notice this, ah, eh, the eh is closer up to the front.
So, step one, man, step two, make it plural, mani.
Step three is that people start saying many, because the ah gets pulled forward because
they're anticipating, making me wait with that e.
But then, sounds have a way of dropping off the ends of words.
So, step one, man, step two, the plural is mani.
Step three, many, step four, go some generations later, people are dropping the e, men.
And so, you have man as the singular, men as the plural, that's how that happens.
So, that's umlaut, right there.
Now, it didn't only happen with man and men, that umlaut, where you have an e at the end
of the word and it kind of screws things up, is something that was the soul of how you
got from proto-Germanic to Anglo-Saxon.
So for example, ghost in proto-Germanic, geista, so ghost, geista, like that.
Now, ghostly, geist lique, so lique started out as lique, geist lique, but lique is important
because lique has an e in it.
Now, when you get an e at the end of a word in proto-Germanic, you know something's going
to happen, it's that man-men thing that's going to start up again.
So if you've got geist lique, then that e is going to pull that vowel before it, the
i, forward.
So, a, well, one thing that might happen is that the a, if you imagine somebody saying
a, now grab their tongue until they yell.
They're going to go a, if you do that, that you make an a front word, it becomes an a.
And so, that's what happened in Old English.
So you start with geist, and then you have geist lique.
And so you have ghost in Old English, geist, that's from the original geista.
And then you don't have geist lique, you have geist lique because the e pulled the tongue
forward in that way.
Geist lique became geistli.
And so that's why you have ghost and then geistli.
That happened in many different places.
And this, and it's called i umlaut, ended up creating some really quirky etymologies.
And so, for example, god in Proto-Germanic was guða, that's how you said it, guða.
Now, if you're a god-fearing person, then you're kind of godic.
Imagine if that were a word.
He's godly.
Well, he could also be godic, and that's what you said in Proto-Germanic.
And so the ic was ija.
And so if you are a godic person, a godly person, then you are a guðika person.
That in itself, who cares?
But notice ija has that e in it.
And that e was a kind of a spray, it had an effect upon a word.
And so after a while, if you took somebody's tongue and they're saying u, and you yank
it forward, then the first thing that you might get is an i, and so guðika, and then
guðika, and then an i, that's the sound of the u in French's moon.
If you're pronouncing it badly, lun, but no, the way you pronounce it in French is lun,
and so guði.
And then that sound, and so you have guða, and then you have guði.
That sound, i, then can become just an i, if you want to make it a little bit easier.
And so you go, oddly enough, from guðika, in which is godic, to what became giddy in
modern English.
What happened was that if you're a person who has god in you, then god might just fill
you up and you're jumping up and down with god in you.
And so as time goes on, the meaning might change.
And so pretty soon, you are a giddy person, you're jumping up and down, which means that
the word giddy originates in the word god, and the reason that the vowel is í is because
of this odd thing called i, umlaut.
Now imagine that happening throughout a language.
Imagine that happening to word after word after word.
The way that you get something like giddy is not because there's a verb to gid.
You don't talk about somebody getting about, but because it starts with the word god and
then this umlaut process.
And so Old English was the product of the kind of change, step by step, in sound as
well as in meaning, which, if you watch it happening in a language, you often think of
as some sort of decay, especially these days, but actually what it did was create English.
And finally, there was something interesting about plurals in Old English.
And that is that plurals in Old English were something of a nightmare.
The kinds of sound changes that I'm talking about can have vast effects, especially when
there are other kinds of sound changes.
And so, for example, the plural in Old English of book was bake.
The plural of goat was gat.
The plural of oak, ac.
The plural of turf, doof.
The plural of egg, adu.
Irregular plurals like this just went on and on.
Some of it was umlaut.
Some of it was other processes.
And those were the irregular ones.
But in general, even with regular plurals in Old English, the pathway from Proto-Germanic
to Old English had created many more than just our boring vanilla s.
And so, in Old English, you have a stone, a staun.
If you have stones, staun us.
Okay, good.
But if you have a head, then you have a half-foot.
Now is the plural of head in Old English half-foot us?
No.
If you had said that, they would have laughed at you.
It was half-foot, doof.
Now word, ward, not heard.
Is there such thing as two words?
No.
Word was just word in the plural.
And this went on and on.
The word for mead was mad.
The word for meads was mad-dois.
And the word for lamb, lomb.
The word for lambs, lombru.
Just the other night, I was telling my wife that the plural of lamb was lamb, the plural
of lamb was lombru in Old English, and she kept telling me I was making it up.
It sounds completely counterintuitive.
She said, how are you going to prove it, as if I can't just go on the internet?
But it really was true.
There were all of these processes.
Today we have only remnants of that.
So for example, it does seem odd that lomb and lombru would be related words, that there
would be a plural of lamb that's kind of like lambru.
But then again, notice that we have child, children.
That's the only remaining one that preserves that pattern.
Or the plural of ox was oxon in Old English, and there were many words like that.
Shoes was another one.
You had shoe-in.
You didn't have shoes.
But today we just have oxen, and let's face it, most of us don't even talk about oxen much.
I'm not really sure I know exactly what an ox is, just like I don't really know what a
fowl is, nor do I know what a blackjack is, but we won't talk about that.
Anyway, that is something else about Old English, which is that it had these complicated plurals.
Now there are languages like that today.
There are languages where you think that learning the plural is going to be something simple,
and well, it just isn't.
For example, there's a language spoken by about negative six people in the Caucasus
Mountains called archi.
And archi is so complicated that I wonder how people speak it without having a stroke.
And one of the reasons for it is that it's got some plurals that just seem like they're
on some sort of drug.
The word for pea, as in the little green underrated vegetable, is chak.
And then the plural is chakmul, so you think that mul must be the plural.
But then the word for cheek is el.
Now what I just did not do properly is that the consonant involves trilling your uvula,
and that's something that I have never been very good at.
I was only so popular in college, and so I'm roughly like that.
Now if mul is the plural ending, then elmul, no, no, it's elut.
And then the word for knee is pomp, with a little catch, pomp.
And then the plural of knee is pomp, and this just goes on and on.
The plurals very often just make no sense whatsoever.
The word for potato is oop, roughly like that.
The plural for potato is obor.
You just have to know.
Well, actually Anglo-Saxon was a language rather like that, with a lot of the plurals
you just had to know.
And here we are in modern English where that has been regularized.
So for us, the plural, 99.99% of the time, is just with the s.
That's a simplification that happened from Old English to Modern English, and we're going
to see more of that.
And I don't think that any of us necessarily miss those Old English plurals.
Proto-Germanic to Old English created a kind of complication.
And then here, today in Modern English, we have lost that complication.
And I don't think that any of us feel the weaker for it.
And yet, and we will get back to this, we feel that if we don't use whom, then we're
losing something despite the fact that when we lose whom, we are not sacrificing any kind
of clarity.
It's just something to think about.
So the lesson of this lecture, Proto-Germanic to Old English, has simply been that all sorts
of things went on from that earlier language, Proto-Germanic, just Old English, not to Modern
English, but to Old English that shed light on aspects of how we think about our language
in these times.
Old English was never one thing.
Old English was a language that was the product of the kinds of sound changes which we resist,
including me, when we don't say library, even though it feels as good to say it as it feels
to chew on steak from the Texas Roundhouse.
And we also have in Old English some delightfully hideous complications, which we sense lost,
and we think of it as just a matter of the march of time, which leads me to think that
we could also consider ourselves to be amidst the march of time now in the same way as people
then were.
And when we do, that will bring us to something else very interesting about the history of
the English language once it was settled upon the island.
