What happened to English?
Something happened to it.
We've established that in previous lectures.
When a language is oddly less complex than the language is closely related to it, it's
a sign that something unusual happened to it in its social history.
And we've seen that specifically it is a sign that there is a period when as many people
who were learning it were adults, when their language learning capabilities had ossified
as were children.
And this is what happened to this wonderful language called English.
And it played its crucial role in making it what it is as the Celtic encounter did.
English is, to put it in a dramatic but apt way, a broken language compared to its ancestor.
Now if I ask you in a general sense, why is English less grammatically complex than German
and Dutch and that Horde?
And you might think, well English has encountered so many foreign speakers during the colonial
period and with all of the migration to, for example, England and to America.
And all of that intuitively makes sense, except there's a timing issue which is that English
becomes strangely simple long before England is England.
And so that's what we're going to discuss in this lecture.
What happened to English and when?
What made it the way it was?
It's actually a rather interesting story.
So first, the change itself.
What happened to English?
And what did happen is that after the Battle of Hastings, 1066, French as we've seen in
a previous lecture was the written language in England for a good 150 years in particular.
In the 1200s, quite early on in the 1200s, Middle English starts appearing in documents
and it's a vastly more stripped down language than Old English.
And to see what I mean, we can take a small segment of the Luke version of the Lord's
Prayer in which it's a matter of, we forgive our debtors.
That's the phrase.
So Old English, we forgive our debtors.
We forgive our debtors.
All you need to know from that, which is not our language, is that it's forgive.
There's an ending.
So not just we forgive, forgive.
That's Old English.
That is normal Old English.
Then our debtors, the um, is endings.
And it's very specific.
It's a dative, plural ending.
That is, it's about forgiving to, in earlier English, you forgave to, to our debtors.
So, and it's the plural.
So this is Latin like Old English.
In other words, normal.
Now then you go down to Middle English and it's just we forgive to our debtors.
And we've got a much more streamlined language.
We have a we without an ending on forgive.
And there is no such thing as a dative, plural ending on our debtors.
We just have our plural with our S that we're used to.
Or lead us not into temptation.
In Old English, temptation cost nun ge.
Now that wasn't the mute sort of silent E that we think about.
That was an ending.
And so on cost nun ge.
That was something that indicated that we're dealing with the prepositional.
That is not there with temptation.
It's just temptation.
So Middle English is stripped down and we don't see an intermediate phase of Old English
becoming this bit by bit.
Rather, Old English is largely the way it is with some changes that we'll talk about.
But then Middle English is suddenly a whole new world.
Now there's a short step from Middle English to the early modern English of Shakespeare
and then to the English familiar to us.
So the question is, what happened?
Why did this happen?
And the reason that we have to ask that question is because the normal state of things is that
language changes all the time, but not that it just hits the pavement and starts breaking
apart.
That's not the normal thing that languages do.
It reminds me of something that I'm told actually happened, although I remember it in
a way that suggested it was a cartoon.
A friend of mine got on my bike, and this is probably about 1973, gets on my bike and
he starts riding it.
If you were a young, certain kind of high-spirited boy in 1973, I don't know if kids are still
doing this, but you like to do something called popping a wheelie.
I don't remember precisely what it involved, but it involved the bike going up in the air
and then coming down with a thud.
Boys liked doing that.
So he popped various wheelies and then he rode up on a hill and he slid down and he
went and came to a stop and popped another wheelie and bam.
And then right under him, as if it was in a loony tune, the bike just fell apart.
Just the seat went, then some screw and then all of a sudden he was on the ground and we
all just laughed and laughed and laughed because it was so funny.
In some time space continuum layer, we little boys are still laughing.
We laughed so long.
That was abnormal.
Clearly something was wrong with that bike already.
I got a new one the next day.
In the same way, languages just kind of keep going.
So for example, there was a language Old Norse.
Old Norse was akin to Old English.
It was in that early Germanic brood.
And Old Norse was very complicated.
Old Norse's direct descendant today is Icelandic.
They speak it in Iceland.
Icelandic is just as complicated as Old Norse.
It hasn't lost all of its screws and seats and handlebars.
It's kept going.
It's different, but it's still just as complex.
It stayed that way for centuries and centuries and millennia.
So who was responsible for this?
Some people have thought that it was les Français.
Specifically, by that I meant the French.
Specifically it be the Norman French who took over England and they administrated the country
to put it mildly.
And they took over its states for their own residents and youths.
And so they were around.
And so many have thought that maybe the reason that English got so much less complex was
because it was overrun by these French people who were learning English badly.
That is a thoroughly reasonable speculation, but it fails.
And so the French takeover certainly left a lot of words in our language, as we'll discuss
in the next lecture.
And it even left suffixes such as et ette.
That was very important.
But in terms of making the language simpler, couldn't abandon the French, and here's why.
There are only about 10,000 French people in England at the time.
And 10,000 really is not very many people.
If you wanted to be really cruel, you, I presume, could squeeze 10,000 people into a modestly
sized ex-urban office complex building.
That's just not very many people.
And the truth is that when you've got a modest bunch of people often keeping to their cells
in particular in their estates, it can have no effect whatsoever on the local language.
So for example, in China, the occupiers were the Manchu from 1644 to 1911.
This is a very long time, centuries of occupation by the Manchu.
The Manchu language is one distantly related to Turkish, suffice it to say it has nothing
to do with Chinese.
And the Manchu were there.
They were writing things, they were speaking their Manchu in their castles.
But that's the thing, they were in their castles.
The Manchu ruled from their isolated settlements, and they rarely interacted with their subjects.
You don't have to hang around and go native in order to run a country, especially a long
time ago.
And so basically if you were a Manchu speaker, you may well have never conversed in any real
way with any Chinese person.
And certainly the vast majority of people living in China at the time would never have
encountered a Manchu person, the Manchu were keeping to themselves.
And so Chinese evolved completely independently of this Manchu language.
You would barely know that it had ever been there in terms of the standard Chinese language.
And so given that, it seems almost predictable that even evidence on the ground suggests
that the French went to England and they learned to speak English.
There was a poet, he was a proctor and he was a poet, his name was William of Nassington.
And he wrote a poem in the early 1300s that was a kind of a look back on what effect the
French had had on the language.
And it's a poem and the crucial part of it goes, and some understand the well English
that can neither Latin nor Frankish, that's French, and both Lerid and Lyuid, Older and
Gonga, all understand an English Tonga.
Now I really shouldn't be making it sound like he has a speech disorder, I'm trying
to go in between Middle English and Modern English.
What that last couplet meant was Lerid or Lyuid, Lerid meant learned, and Lyuid, which
has become our lude, actually just meant unlearned at the time.
So the idea was that you are not erudite, and that through a series of gradual semantic
associations has come to mean that your lack of erudition means that you have peculiar sexual
proclivities.
Language is interesting, but so whether you're learned or lewd, whether you're old or
Gonga, which became young, all understood the English Tonga.
So that seems to have been that scenario.
So it wasn't the French, they didn't have anything to do with it, they left a lot of
words, that's what people will do, but they didn't change the structure.
So who else was hanging around getting on people's nerves in England, who would have
been in a better position to affect the way the language's grammar was passed on to children?
Well you know what it was, it was the people who were responsible for so much else, it
was those Vikings.
It starts in 787, you have Danes and Norwegians, Scandinavians, and they start invading the
island and staying to the point that the north-eastern quadrant of the island was called
the Dane Law, because the laws there were created by Danes.
Now what did they speak?
They spoke the Old Norse that I mentioned, and so proto-Germanic is one thing, and today
we have its twelve surviving kittens, but there was an intermediate time when you had
older Germanic languages, such as Old English, and there was a time when today's Icelandic,
Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish didn't exist, and there was something called Old Norse,
that's what the grand old eddas are written in.
Now Old English and Old Norse, which these invaders were speaking, were similar, it's
often said that they were mutually intelligible, I frankly doubt that, but close enough.
And so Old English, do you have a horse to sell?
You would say Haas fu horse to selena, that's Old English.
Now Haas fu horse to selena, in Old Norse it would have been Haas fu horse to selena.
Now even if you don't know those languages, they certainly don't seem as different as
Hebrew and Chinese.
So Haas fu horse to selena says the Old Englishman, and then the Old Norseman says Haas
fu horse to selena, they could break bread together.
But the bread might not taste very good, because these languages were different enough to cause
confusion.
And this would have been the beginning of a new story for English.
The endings, for example, tended not to match.
And so if you want to talk about judging or deeming, well in Old English, I deme, you
demeast he or she, demej, okay that's fine.
But then that same verb in Old Norse, it's related, but instead of deme, demej, demej,
you have doomir, doomir, doomir.
So they're different.
And multiply that by all of the different conjugation tables, not to mention the cases
on the nouns.
And you have something going on.
And what was going on was that you have a whole large group of adults, and as I've mentioned
it was probably about 250,000 people.
And they're encountering this new language, it's different enough from their language
that you have to learn something new, but they're only going to learn it so well.
Because remember, this is an oral society.
Writing is scripture, it's something done by an elite few, it is not part of general
life.
Language is something that you speak.
There's barely as such thing as school, and to the extent that there is, it's only for
a high elite, these people who are stumbling around, hurting people, and knocking down
buildings are not elite.
And so they're not going to school.
So how do you learn English?
Is there a Berlitz book teaching you to say things like, have you a book?
No, that doesn't exist yet.
There are barely any books at all.
Is anybody going to say, so, Hager, I'm going to teach you the English language?
No, that's not really what was going on.
They had other things to do.
So you're just going to learn English orally on the fly, not being corrected much, and
you're grown up, and so you're probably not going to do it well, even if you're fairly
good at these things because you're grown up and you are busy knocking things down anyway.
So Vikings and English.
Now of course, we want a social situation that's plausible.
So with the French, they're going out to the country and living in estates and Frenching
with each other.
That's what they did.
And so how much of an effect is that going to have on an English speaking population
chopping potatoes and living and dying?
The Vikings were different.
They didn't rule from afar.
They settled among the locals, and they were marrying them.
And they were men.
It's from the genetic evidence.
This was mostly men.
This wasn't families coming along.
So Hager's wife, Helga, I'm taking this from the comic strip.
She didn't come.
It was just Hager, and so he's looking for a wife.
And so marrying.
And next thing you know, Hager and his wife, I don't know, Myrtle, they have a child, and
the child is listening to a whole new linguistic scene.
But in some places, most people were Danes.
And this means that children in this new England would grow up in this England which
is new, not talking about Maine and Carousel.
In this England that is new, you would have these children listening to a world where
many people would be speaking normal English, many people would be speaking old English.
Just as many people, though, grown-ups, they would hear speaking old English that was a
skew, that was kind of like heritage old English, or old English that really just wasn't good,
like me speaking Indonesian.
This would have been something very different because you would have heard this all over
the place.
But what would have happened in a situation like this is that what was considered proper
English, what was considered normal English, which is about as far as you can take it at
this time, this is an oral world, but what was considered normal English would have changed.
After a while, this English with fewer endings than anybody had ever heard before, this English
with a simpler grammar than anybody would have imagined, such as here instead of marking
the hither and things like that, that would start to seem normal.
And it's a detective story in its way.
And the evidence all fits beautifully when we take a look at it with, and here's one
of my favorite expressions, the camera held back.
So for example, the Dane Law is where you had by far the heaviest concentration of Viking
settlement.
And if you look at documents of old English, it's exactly there in the North Umbrian dialect
specifically, where you start to see conjugations in particular becoming oddly simpler than
they are anywhere else in England.
Now we don't have evidence of anyone saying these Vikings are not learning the language
completely, and therefore the verb conjugations are becoming more transparent isn't that interesting.
No one would have written anything like that down.
But you do see interesting things.
So talking about that judge verb that I mentioned, where you have different endings for I and
you and he, just like you would expect of a normal Indo-European language, that starts
changing in the North Umbrian dialect up in the north.
So quote unquote, normal old English, you have dama, damas, damas, and that's what you would
expect.
And then in the North Umbrian you get to the point where there's damo for I, I judge,
and then in every other person, including the plurals, it's just damas.
And so damas, damas, damas, damas, damas, damas.
That's odd.
That is the kind of language that is becoming something that we think of as English, something
where verb conjugation is very light, but that's very odd back then.
Another example of this kind of thing is Orm Gammelsen Sundial.
Orm Gammelsen was some person, we don't really know anything about him, and he would be surprised
that anybody would be standing somewhere over across the Atlantic Ocean and talking about
something that he inscribed so long ago.
But he put on a sundial, Orm Gammelsen bought St. Gregory's Minster.
Here is in a building, not a minister, Minster.
Orm Gammelsen bought St. Gregory's Minster, broken and fallen down.
He has to put that, that it was in that state, in King Edward's days.
But what's interesting is that he doesn't write King Edward's days.
He writes in Edward Dagum.
Now that looks to us just like Old English, but actually it's faulty.
It's supposed to be Edward's Dagum, Edward's days.
Here's the genitive.
He just leaves it off.
Orm Gammelsen seems to be writing improper Old English, and Orm Gammelsen, presumably
from the makeup of his name, he's a Scandi.
And so it means that he is somebody who has learned Old English well enough, well enough
that he feels confident to flintstone it into this rock, but he doesn't speak the language
perfectly and he makes a little slip and he puts it in for posterity.
He dies, we dig it up and we can see what happened to the English language.
So it's evidence of that kind.
You can learn a lot from in Edward Dagum.
Now of course, this is about as far as it goes in terms of the Old English transformation.
It's just like with the Celtic.
We don't see complete breakdown within the Old English documents, because this would
have been processed by many people as that weird, screwed up way that Vikings speak English.
Not anything that you would want to put down on paper.
So there's no meaningless do.
There's no obsessive, progressive, love saying that.
And there is very little broken Viking Old English.
That's not in the writings yet.
That pops up in Middle English.
So it's that same situation, but the implications of all of this are such that the normal situation
in terms of how a language works is Iceland.
And so today in Iceland, people can actually still read the eddas and not with as much
ease as I think is often said, but they can pull it off.
Their language is transformed from what Old Norse was because times have changed, language
changes, but there's a basic stability.
Language stays complex.
Now then there's an intermediate kind of situation with the other Germanic languages.
So Icelandic is notoriously conservative as we put it in terms of keeping the original
kind of complexity very similar to the original materials.
But German and Dutch and Yiddish and Frisian and Swedish, Norwegian and Danish, the ones
down on the continent are less conservative than Icelandic.
And although this hasn't been studied as much, it's generally supposed by people who are
interested in the subject that the reason that, for example, Dutch, while not as streamlined
as English, is certainly in that direction compared to Icelandic is because of all the
movements that went on down on the continent.
The Germans sometimes call them the Folkervandeln, the Great Migrations is the way it comes
out in English, in Anglophone sources.
You have the Germanic-speaking Goths who were invading not only Rome but a great many other
places.
The Goths were wandering around.
They needed space and there were encounters between them and then Latin slash Romance
language-speaking people.
The whole history of particularly post-Roman Europe is full of all of these wanderings.
It can make your eyes roll back in your head to keep up with who all these people were
and what their movements were.
But what that created was modestly streamlined languages like, for example, French, which
is a little oddly streamlined compared to Latin, or Dutch, which is a little oddly
streamlined compared to, for example, proto-Germanic.
But with English, you had a process that was completely different.
English became what I sometimes call Germanic-Junior and this was because of the Viking invasions.
This makes English a highly unusual language, both in being a mongrel because of its Celtic
influence and then also in being uniquely stripped down because of the Viking influence.
So its history has been quite transformative and chaotic.
Now from this, there are two take-home points to be made about what's happened to English
and what could have and what its implications are of how we see the language.
One of them is that in terms of our sense of the specialness of English, often we're
told that what's special about English is that we have a highly rich vocabulary because
of all of the various languages that have contributed to it.
And we are going to discuss that in the next lecture.
That is something that is definitive about English, but there's actually more.
And so, for example, there are people who praise their language for being mighty, Russians
in particular have a phrase about their language being mighty.
Our language, if we're going to have pride in it, is one where we could think of it as
being rather markedly exoteric rather than esoteric and therefore being a lingua franca,
which is streamlined.
If one wants to be metaphorical about it, then the McCrum version is direct.
You could also call it muscular.
My sense of it is that there's a certain cleanness about it.
All of those are metaphors that cannot really be linked to anything scientific about the
language itself, but this is a language which, unlike many languages, is uniquely uncluttered.
This is a language that's had a particular kind of history that the vast majority of
languages in the world have not had or haven't had to this extent.
Typical language, Navajo.
A certain few languages have had what you can call their needless complexities stripped
away because of being learned by many adults, such that these are languages that are uniquely
unencumbered or unaccreted compared to the vast majority of languages around the globe.
So that's one thing about English that we see based on this Viking experience that the
language underwent.
And then there's also something else that we want to think about, which is that it certainly
isn't that the English language is maximally stripped down.
And so this stripping down that we're talking about is a gradated process.
So the extreme would be, for example, Navajo.
And then you'll have a language like German, which certainly underwent the effects of the
great migrations.
And so German is not as nightmarefully complicated as Navajo, but for any of us who've taken
German, we understand that German is, as some people will say, a bear.
Then you have English, where things became Germanic junior.
And of course, you might say, well, how simple can things get?
And the fact is, a lot simpler than that.
And so not much longer after this in this course, we'll talk about black English of
all things.
Black English is more streamlined than standard English in many ways, for reasons similar to
why modern English is streamlined compared to old English.
And then something that we won't be discussing in this course, but that I've discussed in
other courses I've done for the teaching company, is that you can have language stripped down
to a maximal point.
And so you are talking about language as Tonto the Indian and the Lone Ranger spoke it, which
is then built up again into a brand new language.
That's a Creole language.
Creole languages have their complexities, but less of it than any actual full human
languages in the world.
So it's all along continuum.
English is a language which has undergone a robust, but hardly extreme amount of that
kind of simplification.
But it's enough that English's history is delightfully eccentric.
And it's all about the grammar rather than the words that we can say that.
That's not to say the words aren't interesting.
And so let's talk about them.
