It's 1997, I'm on a date, and the person who I'm on a date with said at one point, I still
remember how depressing this was.
She was pretty not as pretty as my wife, but she was pretty, and I was enjoying that.
And she said at one point, was that correct?
And she hadn't said anything that was incorrect in any sense, but she was thinking that because
I was a linguist, that there is a correct way of speaking, and that people are always
walking around not speaking correctly by accident, and that if you're a linguist, you're aware
of these rules, and you've somehow gotten good at them, and that you're judging a person
on whether or not their grammar is correct.
Now that is a perfectly natural way to think about using this language, using language
in general, but what's interesting is that a lot of the things that we're taught are
not correct, have been taught to us that way, not because of any self-standing science.
There is a science of language, not to advertise the last course that I did for the teaching
company, there is, but a lot of the things that were taught as what I sometimes call
Blackboard Grammar, are not based on anything self-standing.
A lot of it is based on some delightfully arbitrary notions that were created by people
a very long time ago who thought differently from the way we think, and in some ways didn't
know as much as we do.
And so our job is to figure out how to cherry pick from the sorts of things that those people
taught, and to figure out which of those things are really useful, and which of them are perhaps
historical curios, and we all love history, but it's important to know what is history
as opposed to what is modern and real.
So in this course I want to examine the roots of what that woman, who I was on the date
with, was thinking of as speaking wrong.
Where do we get that?
Because it doesn't go back to the beginning of the history of the language, it's actually
rather recent, it's an interesting history in itself.
It goes back to, if we're going to oversimplify and trace it to one figure, and we're going
to because one must in order to process these things, the main figure that this traces back
to is a man named Robert Loth, and he's an 18th century man, so he's 1700s, he's born
in 1710.
His main occupation was religious official, there's no such thing as a linguist in 1710.
He's a religious man, he was the Bishop of Oxford, and then he was the Bishop of London,
and actually at the end of his life, i.e. if that life hadn't ended, he would have become
the Archbishop of Canterbury.
And so this is the kind of person that Robert Loth was, and he was in particular a biblical
Hebrew scholar, and we talked about Hebrew in the last lecture.
He wrote a whole treatise on biblical Hebrew, and he also wrote a treatise on Hebrew poetry.
So this is what Robert Loth does.
And Robert Loth also was interested in something else.
He was interested in this English language, and his most famous work was called A Short
Introduction to English Grammar, and it's not as if at this point there were hundreds
or thousands or even dozens of books like that.
He was doing something which rather surprisingly as late as 1762 was a rather novel effort.
And the reason that it was novel was because English at this time was not yet the standardized
language that we're used to it being.
It was not yet a language of the world in the way that we almost assumed that it must
have been as far back as old English, but it wasn't.
English was a language which people just at this time were beginning to think of as one
that needed to be dressed up and taken out.
So he writes this short introduction to English grammar, and this short introduction to English
grammar has had a remarkable amount of influence, especially because it was largely the basis
of a second book written by a Lindley Murray, who was another early version of what we would
now call a grammarian.
Lindley Murray wrote English grammar, and English grammar ended up being the book that
was used on both sides of the Atlantic to teach the way English was supposed to be as
it was thought.
And so through the heritage of Robert Loth's book, we had Murray's book.
And Murray's book had this influence on generations and generations of people as to what English
was supposed to be like.
And so it was kind of like Walter Cronkite.
Walter Cronkite was a great guy.
I miss him still.
But the fact that Walter Cronkite was the person who would say, and that's the way it
is at the end of that broadcast, and took on this certain Solonic presence.
The fact that it was him was chance.
It could have been any number of other people who fell into that particular slot.
He had a certain history.
He happened to get there at a certain point in time.
A lot of why Walter Cronkite was so famous was chance.
For those of you who have had the benefit of very long lives, it really could have been
H.V. Kaltenborn, or Hugh Downs, or if Chet Huntley had lived, but it was Walter Cronkite.
In the same way, Lindley Murray's book sort of claimed it, so to speak, and became the
model of what we think of as proper English grammar.
Now what Loth was doing was he was trying to fashion a way of using English that would
be worthy of what someone in his time and place thought of as a real language.
England had only recently become a world power, and until then, it's almost counterintuitive
to think that English was just one branch of this Germanic language family.
It was just this peculiar language that had been beaten up by Vikings, spoken on this
windy, rainy, yet magnificent island.
And so, for example, Isaac Newton wrote in Latin.
Isaac Newton spoke English all day long, but he wrote in Latin because the idea was that
that's what serious work was written in, and certainly the way you would communicate with
other scholars throughout Europe, not in English of all things, some humble potato chopping
kind of language.
The biblical Hebrew treatise that Loth wrote was in Latin, for example.
And there are those of you who will remember that until not all that long ago, Latin was
very commonly taught in schools.
One of the quaintest things about reading about someone a hundred years ago is how it's
considered the mark of their education to learn Latin and also Greek, rather than to
learn French.
And certainly Spanish is not really even part of it at that point.
Until 1928, Latin was the most commonly taught foreign language in America.
And Latin and Greek, Latin and ancient Greek, were thought of as ideals, partly because
they had long written histories.
It's very easy to think that if there's a lot of writing in a language, then it's kind
of a language language compared to all these other dialects, idioms, tongues, et cetera.
And also because of this writing, it looked like Latin and Greek somehow were unchanging.
So other idioms, kind of like Old English becoming Middle English becoming Early Modern
English, it looks like they're changeable.
They keep on twinkling and wrinkling, whereas with Latin and Greek, it looks like they just
kind of stayed back to hundle again.
And finally, Latin and ancient Greek, by chance, happened to be languages that have a lot of
case endings on their nouns and a lot of suffixes for conjugational classes in their verbs.
Now, there's 6,000 languages.
There are many, many ways that languages can pattern, as we'll see in a second.
But Latin and ancient Greek happened to have that.
And that's a rather dazzling way for a language to be.
It looks complicated.
And it's easy to think that in comparison to something like English, therefore, those
languages are somehow weightier.
And so, for example, in Latin, if you're going to talk about a road, via, well, that's vanilla
road, nominative road.
If it's of the road, then like the bend of the road, vi.
If you're talking about to the road, vi again, but you have to know that.
If you're talking about doing something to the road, such as, you know, I built a road,
well, vi am for the accusative.
And if you're talking about the ablative, something like, you know, she stopped and
had a picnic by the road, then that's vi ah, with a long ah.
So you have these endings and you memorize them if you learn Latin.
And so, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, or you have that, but that's just one class of nouns.
And if you're talking about people, then you have populus, populi, populo, pulum, pulum,
that sort of thing for the nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, and ablative.
And then there are three more classes like that in Latin, plus the nouns that are just
crazy exceptions.
That's what it means to learn Latin, and of course, that's just the nouns.
Whereas in English, it can look like things are less impressive somehow.
And so, we have case in English, but a lot of it is about these prepositions.
You certainly don't have five different classes.
And so, if you're talking about a road, if something belongs to it, it's the roads.
If you're talking about something to the road, then you say what I just said.
And if you're talking about the accusative, we don't have an accusative form of road.
It's just the same old road.
And if you're by a road, then, well, you're just by that road.
We don't have an ending like by a road, or something like that.
Wouldn't it be cute if we did, but we don't?
So, Loth had a kind of a B in his bonnet.
He thought that that simplicity, if you want to call it that, of Englishes, suggested just
by appearance that English didn't have any rules.
And his idea was to show that English had rules and to lay that out on the page in order
that English be presentable as a real language.
His idea was that it could be shown that English, like Latin, was based on what he thought of
as what he called universal grammar.
The idea was that all languages have nominativeness and genitiveness and dativeness, which is
a proposition that linguists would largely agree with today, depending on your categories.
All languages have this.
It's universal grammar.
English looks like it doesn't because it doesn't have these declension classes, as all of those
endings on the nouns are called, dividing into different classes.
But that English does have those things.
And there was something else that Loth was interested in.
He wanted it to be easier for people to learn Latin through English.
So this is a man for whom Latin is the language.
So his idea is that he's going to teach his son, for example, to understand Latin through
English categories.
So that's what Loth was doing.
Now Loth was not the first writer to take this perspective.
So when I say that I'm oversimplifying, of course there were people who had had this
kind of idea before.
Loth was very influential, and he also wrote what in itself was the best treatise of this
kind.
It was a Hugh Jones, 1724.
And his idea was that people needed to learn to handle English better, with the idea being
that there had to be this relationship with Latin, that all this would help you with Latin.
He wrote one book, and he subtitled it as, chiefly for the use of such boys and men as
have never learned Latin perfectly, and for the benefit of the female sex, also for the
Welsh, Scotch, Irish, and foreigners.
And the funny thing is that Welsh was spelled C-H, which just makes it look more quaint,
so the welch.
So that sort of thing had happened before.
But the grand question is, and this is how this all starts to tie back to the woman asking
me, what's that right, and where we get the idea of what right is.
What is this universal grammar?
So okay, all languages have objects over, say, subjects, yeah, that does seem to be universal.
But what do we mean by something that all languages are based on?
Now, Loth couldn't really know.
He's in England.
And of course, transportation is limited with the technology back then, in order to travel
two yards, it took you seven days, and that's of course just a slight exaggeration.
He's wearing stockings, he's got a peri-wig, it's hard to get around.
And more to the point, exploration had not been as complete.
No one knew.
There were 6,000 different languages.
A person like Loth probably knew a little bit about Chinese, knew that was pretty different,
but he had no way of knowing that there are thousands of languages that are more like
Chinese than they are like Latin and Ancient Greek.
So one only knew so much, and it was easy to think that language language is the way European
languages work.
And Semitic, someone like him knew of Arabic and Hebrew, he knew his Hebrew very well,
and people of his sort also tended to know Aramaic for various reasons.
And so he knew that, but in terms of what language really did, how would you know?
How would he know, for example, that in Siberia, where he never traveled, there was, and now
hanging on the margins is, a language called Ket, and it has a short name, which is ironic
given what it's like.
It's spoken today really only by about a few hundred people.
Talk about universal grammar.
How does Ket work?
You can take one word, batondar.
Now what is, is I'm trying to trill my uvula.
The uvula is that piece of flesh that hangs in the back of the throat that gets a workout
in a lot of old cartoons.
I don't know how to trill my uvula.
It's the kind of thing which it's easier to get when you're a baby.
And so I'm just kind of gurgling back there.
But batondar, and then the, it's not un, it's just un.
So that means they were letting me go.
So if you're saying, well, they were letting me go, except you're in Siberia in this village,
then you say batondar.
Just that one word.
Now universal grammar.
What does batondar mean?
The d alone, just the d, that means third person, not they, but just that it's not I,
you or yo.
Now the ba, batondar.
The ba means third person, again, for no reason.
You just have to know, and you're cold, and you're probably drinking very strong alcohol.
Then batondar, the t, just t alone, means the ing.
So they were letting me go.
The ing is the t.
Now batondar, the all, is the past marker.
So if you're a ket, you're wearing a parka, and they're letting you go, the way that you
know that you're talking about something in the past is just that alt that's crammed
in the middle of the word.
So baton, the n, that's me.
So they were letting me go.
All this is one word.
The word for to free, or to let go, roughly is dah.
Hear that uvula trill?
So dah, so batondar, that dah is the to free.
And the un at the end, that's what makes it they instead of he.
It's a plural marker.
And so they in this language is you put he at the front, and then se at the end, so to
speak, if we're on the English plan.
So batondar, that means they were letting me go.
Now that's cute and all.
The point of it, though, is that it has nothing universal about it.
And ket is a language like any other.
Kets got relative languages that work just like that.
So English and Latin and Greek are just one plan, which leads you to see what Loth was
doing was a thing that he didn't know was peculiar.
Robert Loth was modeling English usage on Latin when the simple fact is that English
isn't Latin, and Latin is not the language of languages.
Now he couldn't know that, but the fact of the matter is that Latin is not the language
of languages.
It just happened to be one of a great many languages in the world that hit the page at
an early point.
And then there had been a renaissance, and people like Robert Loth were raised reading
this language upon which we, and I'm glad I put it that way because what I want to talk
about now is upon which we will discuss.
Could we end sentences with a preposition?
One gets questions about that all the time, or at least some ones.
And the idea that you shouldn't is due in considerable part to Robert Loth.
And one of the most famous sentences in his book is when he discusses ending sentences
with prepositions, and he actually writes, this is an idiom which our language is strongly
inclined to.
So he ended the sentence with a preposition.
Now it's easy to make that a kind of a nya-nya thing, and that actually wouldn't be fair.
Because he understood that there was a difference between formal and informal here.
And so Loth actually says in the book, and this doesn't get quoted as much as the, this
is an idiom line.
He actually said, it prevails in common conversation, he's referring to putting prepositions at
the end of sentences, and suits very well with the familiar style in writing, but the
placing of the preposition before the relative is more graceful, as well as more perspicuous,
and agrees much better with the solemn and elevated style.
All right, that's sensible counsel.
But for one thing, the tradition has been passed down more as just this rule where we're
supposed to feel like we've got a hole in our sock if we put a preposition at the end
of a sentence, especially in writing.
But really the question is, even in the formal, where does he get this idea?
Why is it more perspicuous?
And what he's thinking about is Latin, and God bless Latin, where the preposition does
have to come before the relative.
And so if we're talking about the Bible, and we're going to use the Vulgate translation,
and we're talking about Latin, and we have Peter, this is in John, and he's asking, Lord,
to whom shall we go?
So Lord is Domine, and you've got your invocative ending, A, that's how Latin works.
So Domine, Lord.
And then after that, adquam ibimus, and that is, to whom shall we go?
So even if you don't know Latin, so to whom adquam ibimus shall we go?
So Domine, adquam ibimus, I have been in place.
So that is the way it goes in Latin.
Now in Latin, you have to say, Domine adquam, to whom ibimus.
You cannot say, as you can in English, Domine queme ibimus ad, Lord, you know, who we go
to.
You can't stick the preposition at the end.
In Latin, that sounds as unpleasant as a drawer of silverware bouncing down the steps.
You can't do it.
But in English, when you say, who shall we go to?
It sounds natural, because English isn't Latin.
And so Loth was well-intentioned, because in his world, there did seem to be something
kind of prime about Latin, and then English is this wind-blown language that needs to
be tamed or described better.
But why do we have to put it before?
Can it actually be that that was an imitation of Latin, which has a certain flavor?
But did we have to think about that particular thing?
It's just a big question.
It's really just Loth's idea of how English should be, because he liked that in the same
way as I like green.
I think green is nice for random and probably uninteresting reasons having to do with DNA.
It's my impression that most people like red and blue better.
I have no idea why.
That doesn't mean, though, that there's something logical about my like for green, even though
to me, I would be very happy in a world where nothing was red or blue at all.
Green should be green.
That's just me.
That's not going to get around in the same way in an alternate universe.
It's questionable that the whole preposition thing would have been as influential as it
has been.
Another example that's useful for different reasons.
Whom.
This word, whom, it sounds like a womb.
Never liked the word whom.
Whom is something that we're supposed to retain, and a lot of that is Loth, again.
And so he would criticize even big dudes.
So Jonathan Swift had his problem with people saying rebuked, instead of rebuked.
Well in Tale of a Tub, Jonathan Swift writes, he knows who it is proper to expose foremost.
Who it is proper to expose foremost.
Not whom.
And Loth, now that's not good.
His idea was that even people who were fine writers, esteemed writers, were making mistakes.
But the question with whom is, sure, you can say it's nice to have a form of who that
marks the object.
It is.
But in the grand scheme of things, why are we holding on to that other than that at the
time that Loth happened to be writing whom happened to be holding on by a thread as opposed
to other stuff?
And so for example, if you go back to Old English, then the word for who was wha.
That was your normal who.
And then for who's, you had whas.
And then for dative, like to who, it was wham.
And then for what we think of as whom now, it was whona.
So you had wha, whas, wham, whona.
That's what there was.
Now, if those forms had survived, if they hadn't, it's the Vikings, most people suspect.
If the Vikings had left the language alone, then today we would have, well, who went nominative?
Genitive, whose book is this?
Then for the dative, i.e., who are you listening to in natural English, it would be whom are
you listening?
That's what that form, wham, would have become.
Whom are you listening?
And then in the accusative, whona would have probably become whon.
And so whon, is it proper to expose?
So who went, whose book is this?
Whom are you listening?
And whon, is it proper to expose?
That's what we would have had.
Do we miss any of that?
I don't want to say whon, for example.
And as far as whom being the dative form, well, that just didn't happen, and I still
like the color green.
And so we have to ask, why do we have to hold on to whom when the language is perfectly clear
without it, when really it's just a matter of chance that a loath didn't come along when
we still had the dative one and other forms?
Well, I'm not even getting into the plural, little arbitrary.
Kind of like the raspberry in the bowl.
You've got a bowl of raspberries, and if they've gone a little bad, you turn the bowl over
to get rid of the raspberries, and then you turn the bowl back over and there's this one
raspberry still sitting there, and you flick that one away.
Whom is that raspberry, really?
Why do we cherish that raspberry so much?
So that's just something to think about with whom.
In general, loath had a problem that we all have, including me, which is that it's hard
to watch the language change, and there's a sense that the language is supposed to stay
the way it is.
And it's one of those things where when you pull the camera back, you can see how it really
is just a human foible.
So if it's a language that we probably don't know, then we can kind of look at ourselves.
So in Russian today, there are various plural markers.
One of them is ʊ, an incredible, it says if Russian is deliberately hard, that sound.
And then there's also a neuter one, a.
The neuter one, a, is getting around.
It's kind of a virus.
And so years originally in Russian, like more than one year, is gold, and with the ʊ.
Nowadays often it's not ʊ, that ʊ is on the end.
Tractor is ʃ, now you make the plural and the quote-unquote proper way ʃ, but often
people today say ʃ.
Now to many Russians, that sounds like something's wrong.
To us, frankly, if we're going to be subjective about it, it sounds like Russian is becoming
easier and thank God for that.
And so there are no actual value judgments to be placed on these sorts of things, but
then in English, just like with all of us, and I'm hardly immune, Loth was a little bit
less happy.
And one thing that sheds light on how we make our peace with the Lothian ideas, despite
the fact that he was a sensible person making sense of things within the context that he
knew, is that this man spoke a very different English than us, even with just 200 years
move.
And so, for example, Loth's idea of how we were going to preserve this language meant
that we were supposed to be preserving a certain second person subjunctive form over another
one.
And so, for example, you were supposed to say, lest you weren't sick, and the idea
was that this was supposed to be proper English.
Now, his idea was that that was preferable to saying this vulgar, lest you was't sick.
Of course, we say neither one of them, but to him, the idea was all these people running
around using this past subjunctive, well, they better be using the right one.
And so he actually writes at one point, shall we, in deference to these great authorities,
allow word to be the same with wast and common to the indicative and subjunctive mode, or
rather, abide by the practice of our best ancient writers.
Well, we've let that go.
I don't think we missed that.
And so therefore, you end up thinking about the other sorts of things.
Or talk about the past tenses in Scots.
They're always changing.
They're always squishing around like the blob in a lava lamp in any Germanic language.
Loth, and this is him walking around talking to his son, you know, snuffing out candles,
facing moles out of his garden, whatever he did.
He had different past tenses.
So I'm seething.
For him, if you talk about seething in the past, you sod.
And so I sod when my little girl knocked those tomatoes over.
That was just what he had.
The past participle of sit was sitting.
And so I have sitting on this chair.
And yes, in case you're wondering, for him, I have spittin' yesterday.
That was just the language for him.
He didn't make this up.
It's that the language has changed.
If something had been baked, then for him it had been bacon.
And my favorite, Lothism, this just shows how different the language has become since
him with nobody batting in high, is that for him, if you saw a little, let's call it an
immature hand or rooster, then it's a chick, chick, chick, chick.
But if there was more than one, then they were chicken.
And so for him, chicken was the plural of chick.
And so grab up those chicken and put them into the coop.
Well, that's kind of gone by the wayside.
All of which is to say that English has kept changing since Loth in ways that he couldn't
control because he ceased to be alive.
And we think of that as just normal change, and it's just a certain light on the things
that he wished would not change within his lifetime.
So the lesson that Robert Loth teaches us in all of his sense and sensibility is that
the idea that English is something that needs to be repaired or maintained is a historical
contingency.
It's something that happened.
It hadn't happened before.
If Loth hadn't gotten to it, then somebody else with his education and his passion for
order would have.
That's what happened there.
But what the people who came up with this notion at that time based these ideas on were things
which hardly stand as something as ineffably real and unquestionable as, for example, the
relationship between the elements in the periodic table or something that's definitely true
about languages, which is that all languages have subjects, all languages have objects,
or that all languages have, if not prepositions, then post-positions.
We call all of those things ad positions.
All languages have ad positions.
But the idea that we must maintain a whom or that there's something preferable even
on any level in English about putting the preposition before the relative instead of
having it at the end of the sentence, these things are historically interesting.
But in terms of the present, we have to come up with our relationship with those things
ourselves.
As we move on in this module of our course, we're going to find further ways to forge
a personal relationship with this kind of prescriptivist grammar.
