So, after we've looked at Strunk and White and Fowler and seen what we could get out
of them, the question that arises at this point in the course is, is grammar really
only a matter of the rules that people are thought to break?
So, thinking about our Miss Brooks from the lecture before last, is grammar a matter of
somebody telling you not to do things that it feels natural to do, no matter how friendly
a fashion they may do this in?
Or you may be quite justifiably wondering, is it that linguists think anything goes?
My step-grandmother has said lovingly, of course.
It seems that whenever I ask John about grammar, he thinks that the bad thing is okay.
I know exactly what she means.
And in this lecture, what I want to do to address that legitimate question is give us
a broader look at what grammar is, because if there's some questions about this chalkboard
don't do this or your unsophisticated brand of grammar, then we want to show what grammar
can actually be considered to be, because we linguists think of grammar as a wild, wet,
and wonderful realm of things that we hear very little about in columns about what's
often called usage.
Most of these things are not things you'd actually think about, especially coming from
a European language and especially an odd one like English.
And so, let's look at what grammar is in a general sense to get us away from certain
myths that we've been quite lovingly given.
One of those myths is the Latin myth, and God bless Latin.
But Latin has a lot of endings, and those endings lend themselves to a conception such
as Robert Loth's, that that's grammar.
And so Robert Loth had the idea that Latin was uniquely posed to demonstrate some sort
of universal grammar that was less clearly demonstrated in English.
So universal grammar, for example, would be the Latin nouns we've seen.
And so for road, via, nominative is via, genitive vi, dative is vi too, accusative, if you make
it an object, it's viam, ablative via.
And so there's supposed to be all of these tables, and there's supposed to be those particular
classes, and that other languages are just departures from that.
So ancient Greek is as good as Latin, because it's just like Latin.
And then, well, English, it's got to be rested into shape.
There's a different way of looking at grammar.
Grammar is a lot more than just lists of endings to be memorized.
And a language that actually really doesn't have endings at all does not have less grammar
than a Latin or an ancient Greek.
And I know of no better way to indicate this than by giving you a very quick introduction
to one of my favorite languages nobody knows, except the people who speak it.
It's called Acha.
Acha, which is not a call for a sneeze, but a wonderful language, is spoken in southern
China and in various Southeast Asian countries.
It is not the language of any one country, and it's spoken in several.
Acha has nothing you could call an ending.
And so if you look at how Acha works, or if you ever met a person who spoke it, which
you almost certainly won't, but if you did, you would come away from that person, having
been given Spanish conjugations and the like, thinking that Acha doesn't have any grammar.
I was once at a party where someone had learned a language rather like Acha.
And this person, very intelligent person, was saying, well, one of the nicest things
about this language is it doesn't really have any grammar.
And they meant because it was built like Acha.
But you know, not having any grammar is an interesting notion because we wonder what
that would mean about how people thought if they were using the language without grammar.
And grammar can take many guises.
So for example, imagine a very simple sentence.
Let's say, I gave him one fruit in Acha.
So you're in Acha land, you're sitting in a chair, and you're trying to learn how to
say things because they don't speak English.
I give him one fruit.
Now, I give him is, That's how you say, I give him.
So I'm going to say that again.
I give him, and then one fruit, the words for one and fruit are, one fruit.
So if you're speaking Acha, well this language has no endings, and so of course there's no
grammar.
That means that the way to say, I give him one fruit would be just a matter of learning
those words.
And so you would say, la be a yo ti asit, right?
No.
Actually that in Acha is probably even more primitive than any Acha-speaking child would
produce that sentence.
That is hideous Acha.
And that's because Acha is actually full to bursting with grammar that is unfamiliar
to us, but is just as intricate as ours.
So for example, this is a language where if we're talking about fruit, and one will
find oneself talking about fruit, then you have to indicate that you're talking about
fruit instead of long, thin things or flat things or things that walk around and have
mental processes.
It's something that you have to do.
It is as senseless as the gender marking in European languages, but actually much richer
because there are a whole lot of these markers.
Now if you're talking about a fruit, if you're talking about a round thing, kind of like
a baseball, but if you're in Acha it's more likely to be a fruit, then that word is si.
So I gave him one fruit, if we think of it will be something like la be a yo ti asit.
But no, you can't say ti asit.
You have to say ti si asit, and that si is just there to indicate that it's something
that is round.
You can't translate it, but it has to be there.
Now there's another word like that if it were an animal, if it were a pile of something,
the word is actually bum, isn't that cute?
But you have to have those.
So that's one piece of grammar.
Now if that were all, then yeah, Acha would seem like it had very little grammar.
But no, actually there's something else about Acha.
It's very European.
They mark that things are objects.
So if the word for I is not, and the word for gave is bi, and the word for he is ayo,
I gave him is not going to be in Acha, la be ayo, because that's I gave he.
And that sounds as primitive in Acha, despite it not having any endings, as it would to
us.
They have a word that you put after he to make it mean him.
And so you mark it as an object.
And so la be ayo ang, and notice that this language has tones.
And so la be ayo ang, I'm not just imitating somebody unfamiliar to me.
You have to have those levels.
So la be ayo ang means I gave him, as opposed to I gave he, which is as moronic in Acha
as it sounds to us in a European language.
So the object, and then, well, there's another marker.
And here's where we kind of get away from a European way of doing it at all.
In Acha, you have to mark that a subject is a subject, and in a specific case that something
happened to the objects.
Don't think too hard about that, but just know that that means you have to have another
word.
And so ng is I, but if it's a subject, then you have to say ngane.
And so now we have ngane be ayo ang, and then di si asi.
So all of that.
And then on top of that, you have different word order in Acha.
So in good old Acha, you're thinking, well, it's going to be one fruit.
And so I have given you this ti si asi.
But actually, you say fruit one.
That's a different word order, and you have to know that for them, saying one fruit sounds
as backwards as fruit one sounds to us.
And so it's ngane ayo ang asi, and then ti si.
That's what you have to say.
So asi ti si.
And then finally, this is a language.
We think of German as being the weirdo, machine language where you've got the verb at the
end.
Acha, with its endingless primitive self, puts the verb at the end too.
And so really the way it goes is ngane ayo ang asi ti si, bi at the end.
And then finally, that's incomplete.
That Acha is what I would speak if I were sitting there in Burma, not able to use my
beloved illogical English.
They would be saying an acha to themselves.
He doesn't talk right.
Because I didn't put the little marker at the end, which indicates that I am sure that
I did give somebody one fruit.
That marker happens to be ma.
And so you have to say ngane ayo ang asi ti si bi ma.
That's an Acha sentence.
And what I mean by all that, I want you to right now forget everything I just said.
That was not actually a lesson in Acha.
But that was just to show that this language, which has no endings, barely anything you
could call a prefix, and so you think, well, there's no grammar in that one, actually,
it's full of grammar.
Imagine learning to speak that language in a way that would get people to stop saying,
oh, you speak pretty well, and patting you on the head and giving you a piece of fruit.
It would be really difficult, all of which is to say grammar is more than just tables
of endings when it comes to how languages work in the world.
Tables of endings is one thing, and that's dandy, but there are other ways of being
hideously complicated.
Or well, actually, what you could tell them is that how much is what goes with a mass
noun, and how many is what goes with a count noun, because how many water, no, that's nobody
would say that, how much water, your luggage, how much luggage, but how many beans, not
how many water, how many beans, how many acrobats, acrobat is a count noun.
There's no such thing as opening a door and finding a room full of acrobat, or that would
be kind of disgusting.
So how many acrobats, not how much acrobats, because once again, that makes it seem like
acrobat is a substance as if various acrobats were put through a shredder and put into a
can for usage somehow, and that would not happen.
But also, to speak English is to know intuitively that with mass nouns, you have to use what
are called measure words, and it's kind of like with acha, where you have to know that
if you've got a number and an object, you have to use one of those little words.
And so, for example, you would say two books, that's fine, you'd say two monkeys, to refer
to highly overrated animals.
I don't know why people like monkeys so much, I've always found them quite off-putting,
I find them failed humans.
But in any case, two books, two monkeys, but then two grams of water, two tons of luggage,
not two water, now yes, two waters, but then that's a different kind of water.
You're talking about discrete objects and you're probably a waiter or waitress.
Two luggages, I can wrap my mind around why somebody might say two luggages, but they
probably shouldn't.
You have to specify two tons of luggage, but that's because those are mass nouns.
So mass and count, and you know those things without being told, nobody puts it on the
board because nobody makes the mistakes, but that's part of English's grammar.
Now, you'll run into things such as in French, whenever you try to talk about hair in French,
it gets a little hairy, because they have les cheveux, the hairs.
And so a French person is talking in their language about, I'm going to comb my hairs.
Whereas for us, that sounds like the hairs are being individuated, whenever a French
person says les cheveux and I think about what they mean, I think they're combing their
hairs and we think of taking a tiny little comb and combing out our nostril hairs, or
hairs that seem to be more individually discernible.
But that's because it's not just, well, in French, les cheveux is different.
It's that in French, hair is a count noun, rather than the mass noun that it is in English.
How much hair, not how many hair, we kind of giggle at the thought, because you don't
see a single hair very much, or you don't want to.
And so languages differ in how they assign nouns to the mass count class.
And that's one of many ways in which if you know things about English grammar that were
not taught in a strunk and white, it can make foreign languages easier to learn because
you have categories like this to put things into.
Another example of this kind of thing is about the difference between transitive and intransitive.
Remember that?
You may have been taught in schools there's a difference between the transitive verb,
which takes an object, and then the intransitive ones, which don't.
So prototypical transitive verbs, I drank the juice.
I ate the corns.
I played the English horn.
It's an oboe, but bigger and kind of odd looking.
I destroyed the pile.
So those are transitive verbs because we're using them with objects.
Now then intransitive is the kind of verb where it doesn't have to take an object, it
can just be there itself.
So I fell, I ran, I melted, as in I'm melting.
I melted, I shouted, like, oh, that's a shout.
So yes, you can use some of those verbs transitively.
So I ran the race or I melted the snow, but you can also use them in the intransitive way.
And so when you say I melted, it doesn't mean that you melted a shovel down because you
needed some metal.
It means if anything you melted yourself, but that's getting a little more abstract
than we need to be.
So they're the transitive verbs and the intransitive verbs.
Now sometimes a Connie Brooks might teach that sometimes, but I can't believe how often
I have mentioned this Eve Arden character.
What a salute.
I've always liked Eve Arden for some reason.
There were sandwiches named after her, at least in one eatery in Great Barrington in
the early 80s, people would order the Eve Arden.
I did, it had cheese in it.
Anyway, intransitive verbs actually split into two classes within that class.
They don't all behave the same way.
And these two classes, and as geeky as we're getting, these two classes are useful.
And so, for example, it comes to noticing the things that you can and can't do again.
So melt.
You can say the melted snow or even molten if you want to get all poetic.
And then with fall, you can say, now we don't say anymore, but the point is that it works
grammatically.
If you're talking about a very old book, if you're talking about the Scarlet Letter,
the Fallen Woman, and so, good.
Now, this is one of those things which in isolation, good Lord, who cares?
But the melted snow, the Fallen Woman, but we have run and we have shout as our other
intransitive verbs.
The runned man, no, it's hopeless.
That's not something anybody would say.
Or shout.
So you can say, I shout, and not like shout out my lines, but you're using it intransitively
as in you're just bellowing like a seal.
I shout.
But then the shouted gentleman, no, you can't do that.
Some intransitive verbs allow that kind of thing.
Other ones don't.
It's not random.
Think about it.
Running and shouting are different from melting and falling, and this is how.
Running and shouting are things that you do on purpose.
You've got the control.
It's like Alexander Haig, the vice president after Ronald Reagan was shot and he came on
TV and he said, I'm in control.
He was a running, shouting kind of man.
So you have the control.
You do it on purpose.
Melting and falling are things that just happen to you.
So melting and falling are probably a bad day.
If one day you melt, you weren't hoping that that's the way it was going to go.
It wasn't something that you willed most likely.
The wicked witch didn't like that at all.
And so what this means is that all of these verbs are intransitive, but run and shout,
the ones where you've got some control are different from melt and fall, where intransitive
though they are, you don't have any control.
Now of course linguists have names for these two classes, and it's less important to remember
the names or to even listen to me uttering the names as I'm about to.
So get ready.
But it's less important to remember those names than to just know that they're these
two different classes of intransitive verb, and that this is something that linguists
think about and have identified, and this is true of languages around the world.
The kind where the Alexander Haig ones where you've got some control, like run and shout,
are unurgative.
I'm sorry, it's called that.
And then the ones with melt and fall, the kind of verb where you don't have any control,
that kind of intransitive verb, and what this is called is even worse.
It's called unaccusative.
So I said those terms in case you want to remember it, and they'll be in the glossary
for this set.
But more to the point, they're the ones where you're doing it, and then the ones where it's
just happening to you.
Now this is why that's important.
If you know that there are unurgative verbs and unaccusative verbs, then immediately,
and this is something that I really enjoyed when I found out about these classes, something
about the romance languages and the Germanic languages suddenly becomes much easier.
Here in French, where you had some verbs that in the past take avoir, and then some that
take etra, and you have to learn which ones, there's this list of the ones that take etra,
and they don't really seem to have a whole lot in common, well the thing is, they actually
do.
It's very simple.
The ones that take avoir in the past are unurgative, and the ones that take etra are
unaccusative.
And this isn't just about French.
This is about languages all over the world.
That's the way intransitive verbs are.
And so, running, you've got the control, that's avoir, vous avez couru, fine.
Then falling, like, ayy, poosh, like the coyote, you fell, that's, vous êtes tombe, it's something
that you are.
All of a sudden, all those annoying verb classes that you have to deal with in French
and in Italian and in German, smacks you with that too, all of a sudden, it's crystal clear.
You have no problem with it because you've learned a kind of grammar.
So not, well, you're not supposed to use me in subject position, that doesn't really
take you anywhere.
If you learn unurgative and unaccusative, or if you even know what that is, even if you
don't happen to retain those terms, then it can make learning a lot of European languages
easier, and there are other things in other languages around the world that pivot on that
little distinction that, gosh darn it, we don't get taught enough in the schools.
So there's that one.
There's something else that's grammar, passive.
What we're generally taught about the passive, as we've seen, is not to use it that much,
and so Strunk and White have taught us to feel guilty about using it, and we're supposed
to start thinking about mistakes were made, and what a weasley, we're doing a lot of 80s
politics in this one, aren't we, and what a weasley statement that was, but really there's
more about the passive, much more.
So think about this, I was hit, linguists use hit a lot in talking about the passive.
I wonder if that has something to do with the fact that it was men who established the
paradigm.
Anyway, I was hit, I got hit.
Now you can be told that those things mean the same thing.
Actually foreigners learning the language are often told that at first, so the idea could
be that I was hit and I got hit are alternates.
But really, if you think about it, there is a difference in those meanings.
It's not as simple as there just being alternate ways of saying it.
If you think about it, the got one, and linguists call this the get passive, the got one has
a certain kind of meaning all of its own.
If you talk about something that you got in that way, it tends to mean that something
bad happened to you.
And so notice, I was told to go, that's relatively neutral, I got told to go, immediately you
think about the person having been hurt in some way.
Or notice, I got laid off, I got hurt, I got confused.
Now by extension, the get passive doesn't only convey that something bad happened to
you, it tends to be the unexpected because for most of us, including me, the unexpected
is unpleasant.
And so the meat has come to hang over the edges of the seat with the get passive.
And so you have this unexpected.
So think about what it means to say the grass got cut.
The grass was cut.
That indicates that somebody has a lawn mower and they're mowing that grass.
The grass got cut.
What that means is that there was some question as to whether or not the grass was going to
be cut.
And finally, gosh darn it, the grass got cut.
Or yay, I got promoted when I wasn't sure I was going to.
Or hooray, last night I got paid and I wasn't expecting to a boy I needed to.
And then there's another I got that you may be thinking of and will move on, but it fits
under the exact same analysis that I'm talking about.
Now this is why, given that we have these two passives, the be passive, sometimes you
can't use it at all.
In other words, the difference between the be passive and the get passive is grammar.
We have grammar we don't think about.
So there's a new expression.
I think I'm too old to use it, but he got schooled or he got served.
And that means that a person was decisively bested in some activity, typically associated
with youth and being of the cool sort of thing.
So he got schooled.
He got served.
You don't say he was schooled or if you do, you're talking about something else.
He was served.
Today, my son Justin was served.
No, that doesn't work.
You have to say got because this business of being schooled and served is considered
unpleasant or considered something that is unexpected.
And so that means that if you speak English, not only do you know this mass count down
distinction, not only do you know how to handle your unurgative and your unaccusative verbs
of all things, but it means that you have two kinds of passive markers.
If you encountered a foreign language where you were learning that there was a vanilla
passive and then a passive of misfortune, then you would think, well, this is a strange
language.
This must mean that these people think differently, which is the sort of thing the media often
tell you.
And for Vietnamese is one of those languages.
And so you could say, Nam was praised.
And then you can say, Nam was punished.
And all you have to know is that the was equivalent, but in those two sentences, is different
between praised and punished.
The one with punished is different because there's a passive marker of misfortune.
Well, you know, English has a passive marker of misfortune.
It's a wonderful thing.
It isn't put that way because we're told that grammar is a matter of being told that
you can't do things that you want to do, when in fact grammar is all of these wonderful
things that we do, that we often only notice as interesting when we're shown people doing
it off in some rainforest somewhere.
We're in the rainforest, and that's a lot of fun.
So the general lesson here is that the passive is something, for example, that's much more
interesting than just the fact that strunk and whites say not to use it, which as we
saw they don't anyway.
A mistake made by a foreigner who's learning English is often not just one mistake, but
it's a matter of them not having yet mastered a whole system within our grammar that we're
often not told about, and that's actually pretty interesting, everybody's interesting
as the systems in their grammar that we probably control worse than they control any of ours.
So it's one thing for somebody to say, and her meat was hanging over the seat, that's
just isolated, that's not part of a system, that's just joyously funny.
But if someone says, well I love corns, then what's really going on is that they haven't
mastered our count mass distinction yet because their language marks it in a different way,
or doesn't mark it really in any real way at all, which some languages really have been
argued to not do.
As a matter of fact, the same person who said I love corns actually did at a different point
use bean as a mass noun.
The idea being that well, it must be because they are all, they are these granular things
and you rarely encounter one bean, it must be that you could say let's get bean.
And of course that's not really English, but it was a matter of her not having mastered
something that we in our way can be proud of having mastered because it's part of English
grammar.
And so the grand lesson from all of this before we move on to the next lecture in which we're
going to look further at what linguists consider grammar to be with a particular focus upon
English, and probably the most magnificent linguist grammatical description of English
that there is, our basic lesson is who knew that you have right now in your brain a principal
differentiation between of all things, and you get to hear these words one more time,
unurgativity and unaccusativity.
