You've probably noticed that economists have a somewhat specific and specialized professional
vocabulary.
I've had a lot of students tell me over the years that learning economics is a lot like
learning a foreign language.
Just like when you're learning a foreign language, there's a moment when you stop translating
in and out of the foreign language every time you read or speak, and instead your brain
just starts thinking in the foreign language.
Some of my students like to call this brainwashing.
I like to think of it as learning, but you know, you say tomato, I say tomato.
It's useful to know the terms in some basic sense because it helps you understand what
economists are talking about.
It helps you avoid being deceived by economists.
As that terminology of economics begins to make sense and your brain starts using it,
you know that you're beginning to really absorb the topic.
This lecture introduces and explains and applies the terminology that economists use when analyzing
when a change in price causes a change in quantity demanded or supplied.
And what happens if that change in price causes a bigger change in quantity demanded
or supplied or a smaller change in quantity demanded or supplied?
This is the terminology of elasticity.
Let's start by explaining what elasticity means to economists and then discuss why this
concept is really so very useful.
In ordinary usage, if you say something is elastic or has high elasticity, it usually
would mean it has a lot of stretchiness.
Something is very elastic if it stretches or changes a lot.
And the economic terminology is related.
The elasticity of demand is defined as the percentage change in quantity divided by the
percentage change in price.
Now when we talked about how economists see demand back in lecture three, we explained
that demand was a relationship between price and quantity.
The relationship was as price went up, the quantity demanded went down.
Now the reasons were, if you recall, individuals would buy less when the price was higher,
they would substitute toward other goods where possible.
But elasticity of demand is a way of answering the question, well, just how much did the
increase in price cause the quantity demanded to change?
For example, if price went up 10%, would that cause the quantity demanded to fall by 50%
or if price went up 10%, would it cause the quantity demanded to fall by only 2%?
Is there a lot of change away from the good or the service where the price is going up
or is there not so much?
Now of course, in one case, quantity demanded changes a lot as the price rises, and the
other, it might change barely at all.
Now a market where elasticity of demand is a large number, where the quantity demanded
changes a lot in response to changes of price, is likely to look rather different than a
market where it's a relatively small number.
Similarly, the elasticity of supply is defined as the percentage change in quantity supplied
divided by the percentage change in price.
And once again, when we talked about how economists see supply back in lecture three, we explained
that supply was a relationship between price and quantity.
And the relationship was, as price went up, quantity supplied went up too.
Now remember, the reason for that was firms would gain a higher profit as the price went
higher and that would encourage them to supply a greater quantity.
Well, elasticity of supply is a way of answering the question, well, just how much did an increase
in price cause the quantity supplied to change?
If the price went up, say, 10%, does the quantity supplied rise 50% or if the price
went up 10%, does the quantity supplied only go up by maybe 2%?
In one case, the quantity supplied rises a lot as the price goes up.
In the other case, it barely rises at all.
And again, a market with a high elasticity of supply is likely to look quite a bit different
from a market with a low elasticity of supply.
And when we think about elasticity and we think about measuring elasticity, you can
calculate a numerical figure for elasticity, but it's more useful to think about it sort
of in terms of broad categories.
So let me talk about three broad categories for thinking about elasticity, which are sort
of the common ways in which economists use the term.
Inelastic refers to a situation where the elasticity is less than 1.
What that means is, if you think about the formula, a given percentage change in price
causes a smaller percentage change in the quantity demanded.
So for example, a 10% rise in price might cause the quantity demanded to fall by only
5% or only 1%.
Now what's a classic example of a good where demand is highly inelastic?
An example would be something like, how much does a diabetic demand insulate?
Someone with a sickness that has a certain product that really treats that quite well
knows that even with a higher price, they may trim back a little bit.
They might try and reduce their dosage a little bit as the price goes way up, but they're
not going to trim back very much.
Their demand is inelastic in that way.
It's not very stretchy.
Or you could imagine someone who is addicted to cigarettes, a smoker who's got a big, big
habit.
Now even with a higher price, that person might trim back a little, but if their demand
is really inelastic, they're not going to trim back too much in response to the higher
price.
So demand tends to be inelastic when it's hard for people to substitute to another
good very easily.
Now the flip side from inelastic would be something that is very elastic.
Refers to a situation where the elasticity is greater than one.
And again, if you think about that in terms of the formula, what that means is that a
given percentage change in price will cause a larger percentage change in the quantity
demanded.
So for example, a 10% rise in price might cause a 20 or a 30% fall in the quantity demanded.
To put it a different way, the quantity demanded is highly stretchy when it's highly elastic.
It moves a lot in response to changes in price.
A classic example might be something like orange juice.
If the price of orange juice went up quite sharply, people will shift to other juices,
they'll shift to other fruits, they'll shift to vitamin C pills, but it's not hard to shift
away from orange juice for most people.
And so demand for orange juice will adjust quite a lot in response to changes in price.
Now the third example is the in-between case.
It's right between inelastic and elastic, and it's called unitary elasticity.
It's called unitary elasticity because elasticity is one.
And again, in terms of that formula, it means that a given percentage change in price causes
an equal percentage change in quantity demanded.
If the price went up 10%, the quantity demanded falls 10%.
And so the elasticity would be equal to one in that case.
Now these ideas of elastic, inelastic, unitary elasticity also apply to supply, they don't
just apply to demand.
So let's think them through just in terms of supply and also try and sort of nail down
these concepts.
Inelastic supply refers to a situation where elasticity is less than one.
So a given percentage change in price will bring a smaller percentage change in the quantity
supplied.
For example, the price goes up 10%, but the quantity supplied only goes up maybe 5% or
perhaps 1%.
A classic example of a good where supply is highly inelastic would be, say, paintings
by Pablo Picasso.
No matter how much the price goes up, we are not getting any more paintings by Pablo Picasso.
There is what there is.
The quantity supplied is not going to move.
In general, anything where it's difficult for firms to expand their supply easily or
to expand their supply in an unbounded way is going to have a situation where it will
be a fairly inelastic supply.
The other side, elastic supply refers to a situation where the elasticity is greater
than one.
And in that situation, a given percentage change in price will bring a larger percentage
change in the quantity supplied.
So for example, a 10% rise in price might cause a 20% or 30% rise in the quantity supplied.
That the quantity supplied is highly stretchy again.
A classic example would be any product where it's pretty easy to ramp up production very
quickly.
For example, if the economy was in a situation or an industry was in a situation where a lot
of factories in that industry were only running at about 50% capacity, then those factories
in that industry could ramp up production very, very quickly if they needed to do so.
Or if it's a service that's pretty easy for existing firms to shift toward providing more
of, then the elasticity of supply will be high.
For example, say that there's a convention happening in a certain city, a big political
convention or the Super Bowl or some big event like that, and a lot more people are
going to want to rent cars in that city.
Well, if the price of renting a car in that city is going up, rental car companies can
shift a lot more rental cars into that city fairly quickly.
And so the elasticity of supply of providing more rental cars in a certain city is likely
to be pretty high.
And again, the in-between case in between inelastic and elastic is called unitary elasticity.
That's where elasticity is one.
What that would mean in terms of the formula would be that a given percentage change in
price would cause an equal percentage change in the quantity supplied.
So a 10% rise in the price would bring a 10% rise in the quantity supplied.
Now why do we use these percentages?
Why is elasticity calculated in terms of why do I keep saying percent change in price,
change in quantity supplied and demanded?
The reason is because elasticity can be compared much more easily across a variety of different
markets where quantities might be measured in different units or prices might be measured
in different currencies if we use the percentage formula.
Imagine, for example, that you were trying to compare how quantity demanded of gasoline
responds to price, but you were comparing the United States versus, say, Europe or Latin
America.
Now, if you said for every dollar increase in the U.S., the result is 6 million gallons
less gasoline demanded, and you start trying to compare that to for every euro increase,
how many liters of gasoline less are demanded, you're going to get all mixed up in the different
units.
You can't directly compare dollars per gallon in the U.S. to euros per liter in other places,
not to mention all the other currencies in the world.
And so if we're going to try and compare things at different times in different places, we
need a measure that gets past different currencies, we need a measure that gets past different
units, and we need to start looking at percentage change because percentage change allows us
to say, well, the percent change in the price doesn't matter what currency was used, the
percent change in quantity doesn't matter how quantity was measured, and it lets us
have a measure which is essentially universal.
Not only can we compare, say, gasoline in two different markets, but we can compare a
wide variety of different goods.
We can compare the elasticity of demand for gasoline with the elasticity of demand for
beef with the elasticity of demand for haircuts.
We're all going to be percentage change in price, percentage change in quantity.
And since it's all percentage change, we can compare elastic, inelastic, unitary elasticity
across every market that's out there.
So the use of percentage is actually a really functional, useful way of tackling the problem
of coming up with a number which can be compared across a lot of different markets.
Now, knowing whether demand or supply is elastic or inelastic is not just sort of an academic
point, it has a wide, wide range of applications for how prices should be set and how markets
are going to react to shifts in demand and supply.
Let me try and give you a few of those different implications.
One example is that raising price will bring in more revenue if demand is inelastic, but
raising price will not bring in more revenue if demand is elastic.
Now, there was a lot of jargon there I know in that sentence, so let me sort of unpack
it and try and give you a concrete example.
Imagine that we're talking about a band, and it's on tour going from city to city, and
it's playing in an indoor arena that has 15,000 seats.
Now let's keep this problem simple and sort of assume that the band keeps all the money
it gets from ticket sales, and the band has to pay all the costs for its appearance.
But the costs are things like travel and setting up the stage and stuff like that, so the costs
are the same regardless of how many people are in the audience, and you have to get to
the city and set up the stage and all that regardless of how big the crowd is.
And let's also assume that all the tickets have the same price, you know, just to make
life simple.
The band knows that if it raises the price of tickets, it will sell fewer tickets.
Now, the band wants to make the highest possible profits, so the band has to decide, should
it have a really high price, but not sell so many tickets, or should it have a lower
price and sell a lot of tickets?
Under the assumptions of this problem, the band is going to make the highest profit whenever
it earns the highest revenue, because the costs of the band don't change according to how
many people attend.
Now, total revenue for the band will be the price times the quantity of tickets sold.
Imagine the band starts thinking about this problem in concrete terms, it sets a certain
price, and it expects that that price will result in the sale of a certain quantity of
tickets.
Imagine the band is only moderately popular, so it's not just going to sell out no matter
what happens.
If demand is elastic at that price level, then the band should cut the price from what
it was thinking, because a percentage drop in price will result in an even larger percentage
increase in the quantity sold.
And if revenue is price times quantity, and price drops by some percentage, but quantity
rises by an even bigger percentage, then total revenue will go up.
Now let's think about a super popular band.
If the band is super popular, it's probably true that demand is somewhat inelastic.
Then the band might want to keep raising the price of tickets, because in that case, a
certain percentage increase in the price will result in a smaller percentage decrease in
the quantity sold.
And again, if you think about total revenue, price times quantity, if price goes up by
some percentage, but quantity drops by a smaller percentage, then the total revenue the band
gets will rise as it raises the price.
And in fact, one of the interesting things, if you look at the concert industry over the
last 10 or 15 years, is that lots and lots of bands have started charging much, much
more for tickets than they did before.
They've been following a strategy of trying to earn higher profits in their concerts.
Now if demand has a unitary elasticity at that quantity, then whatever the band does,
a certain percentage change in the price would be offset by an equal percentage change in
the quantity.
And so in that case, the band makes essentially the same revenue, whether it increases or
decreases the price of tickets, and it could just choose a bigger crowd or a smaller crowd.
Now of course, the real world problem is more complex than the one I've given you here.
It seems likely, for example, that some bands might start off charging a high price, and
then if they don't fill up the space, maybe they offer special deals to try and fill up
the space later on, or some buyers might wait for the special deals, and so they don't buy
at the high price, but they would be willing to if the price didn't go down, and tickets
can be scalped, and there are all sorts of issues about how the pricing might happen
over time.
There's also a theory that some concerts, the bands may underpriced the tickets a little
bit because they want to encourage people to spend money on things like recordings and
t-shirts and other kinds of paraphernalia, and they feel like if you get a good deal
on the ticket, you're more likely to buy some of the other goods that might go along at
the concert.
But here's the key lesson.
The key lesson from elasticity is that when a firm is thinking about setting its price,
it can't just charge as much as possible.
It shouldn't.
It won't make sense for a firm just to charge as much as possible.
Instead, the firm needs to consider what the elasticity of demand it faces is, and it needs
to think about if it's inelastic or elastic.
If it's inelastic, the firm might want to raise the price because it won't lose that
much in sales.
On the other side of it, if it's elastic, the firm will probably want to cut its price.
Even a monopoly, even if no one else is selling the product, it won't simply raise the price
as high as possible, unless you've got to be some point where as it raises price, people
just aren't going to buy the product.
Here's another lesson.
Demand and supply are often both more inelastic in the short run and more elastic in the long
run.
Again, let me try and unpack what that means.
Think about demand for a concrete product like gasoline.
In the short run, as the price of gasoline goes up, what can you really do?
You pay more on your heating bill.
You pay more to fill up the tank of your car.
Maybe you can do some stuff like turn your thermostat down a little bit lower in the
winter or try to bunch your car errands together so you can drive a few or miles, but the elasticity
of your demand in response to that price change is going to be pretty limited in the short
turn.
It'll be inelastic.
In the long run, if the price of energy or gasoline stays really high, you have a lot
more options.
Think about driving, for example, over a period of years, you can buy a car that has better
gas mileage.
You can think about a permanent sort of carpool arrangement.
In the 1970s, when oil prices and gasoline prices go way, way up, you see that kind of
a shift from people driving big gas guzzlers to much smaller cars.
Over time, people make choices about where to live and where to work, and if the price
of transportation is high, many people will tend to live a little bit closer to where they
work.
They can set up carpools, vanpools, different ways of getting to work.
There can also be political pressure for things like better bus service or better mass transit
if the price of gasoline is really high.
In your house, you could hold down your energy bills by putting in better insulation, by
buying energy saving appliances.
You might get used to wearing sweaters indoors all winter.
U.S. economy has a lot of options for investing in energy saving stuff, too, over time.
Just to give you a concrete example here, in 1983, U.S. petroleum consumption was 15.3
million barrels a day.
Now that was actually less than the 17 million barrels per day that the U.S. economy consumed
in 1973.
It was even less than the 16 million barrels per day that the U.S. economy consumed in
1975, when oil exports to the U.S. were cut off for a time by OPEC.
U.S. petroleum consumption was way down from 1973 to 1983, even though the U.S. economy
was about one quarter larger.
And a lot of the reason was, with higher gasoline prices, people figured out ways to conserve
on the energy they were using.
Now, on the long term, on the supply side, producers of goods and services often find
it easier to expand production in the long term of several years, rather than in the
short term of a few months.
After all, if you're running a business in the short term, it can be pretty costly or
pretty difficult to build a new factory, hire a bunch of new workers, open a bunch of new
stores, all those kinds of big decisions.
But over a few years, all of these things are possible.
So in the short run, the response of quantity supplied to price might be fairly inelastic,
but over time, as firms have a chance to adjust, it can be quite elastic indeed.
Now, as a result of this sort of situation, what tends to happen in the economy is that
prices jump up and down in the short run because demand and supply are both somewhat inelastic.
But in the long run, the quantities adjust.
The quantity demanded and the quantity supplied tend to move.
And so the price might jump up and down, but it won't jump up and down as much in the long
run.
Let's try one more lesson.
When demand is inelastic, increases in the cost of production can be passed along to
consumers.
But when demand is elastic, then increases in the cost of production have to be carried
by the producers.
Now, think about what this means for a moment.
Again, we need to unpack some terminology here.
Remember, an increase in the price of an input makes supply shift back, it makes it decrease,
so the new equilibrium will have higher prices and lower output.
But here's the question.
Say if the price of gasoline goes up, we know there'll be higher prices and lower quantity
produced for all the things that use gasoline and energy prices.
But will it be mostly higher prices?
In other words, can that higher price of gasoline be passed along to consumers, or will it be
mostly lower output where the producers can't pass that along to consumers?
Let me try and give you again some concrete examples to talk this through.
Coffee shops use coffee as a key input, but they don't control the world market price
of coffee.
If the cost of coffee goes up, can they charge more to consumers in the form of higher prices?
Well, if elasticity of demand for coffee is inelastic, then yes, they can just pass that
price along to consumers.
But if the elasticity of demand is very elastic, then no, if they try and charge more to consumers,
people will just buy a lower quantity of coffee, and the firms have to just deal with
that fact.
Now let's think about a slightly different example with some public policy implications.
What would be the result of increasing a tax on cigarettes?
You can think of a tax as like an input price.
It's a price that's charged the producer as they make the product.
Now let's think about the demand for cigarettes, and in all probability, the demand for cigarettes
is pretty inelastic among regular smokers who are somewhat addicted.
In fact, the evidence on this says that increasing the price of cigarettes by about 10% will
lead to only about a 3% reduction in the quantity of cigarettes smoked.
So the elasticity of demand for cigarettes is something like 0.3.
If society increases taxes on companies that make cigarettes, then the companies can pass
these taxes along to consumers in the form of higher prices.
Higher taxes on cigarettes raise money for the government, but they don't affect the
quantity of smoking by a huge amount.
On the other side, there's some evidence that demand for cigarettes is more elastic
among teenagers and those who aren't yet addicted are heavy smokers.
So for that group, a tax on cigarettes might discourage them from continuing, or from
building up a cigarette habit, but it won't collect a whole lot of money for the government
because they won't be smoking with a higher price.
The enforcement of laws against the production or sale of illegal drugs offers another interesting
application.
Laws against illegal drugs can be viewed as raising the cost of producing and distributing
those drugs.
And many of the arguments over legalization of drugs are essentially arguments about elasticity.
Like some people say, strict enforcement will cut drug use.
What they're basically saying is strict enforcement will push up the price, and since demand for
drugs is elastic, fewer people will use them.
Other people say, no, strict enforcement only puts more money in the pockets of drug dealers.
Well, what they're saying is strict enforcement will push up the price, they'll be able to
pass that along to consumers, and they'll be more money for drug dealers.
So those sorts of arguments are really assertions about elasticity of demand for illegal drugs.
Now the hard part about illegal drugs is we honestly don't have really good evidence on
elasticities of supply and demand for illegal drugs, and so we don't honestly know how elastic
or inelastic demand is.
A few years ago in 2001, the prestigious National Research Council published a report on policy
about illegal drugs, and this committee, which included some academic economists, concluded
viewing the unending public debate about drug policy, the committee became painfully aware
that what we don't know keeps hurting us.
And since then, there's a little evidence that actually demand for drugs is somewhat
elastic, and so greater enforcement might discourage use, but the evidence is not especially
strong, and until we know more, it's hard to know what the right policy would be for
discouraging use of illegal drugs.
The general concept of elasticity can be stretched to cover a lot of different situations where
behavior is changing in response to changes in price.
That includes situations involving how the quantity of labor responds to changes in income
or how the quantity of saving responds to changes in rate of return and many other examples.
So for example, imagine you're interested in the question of, if we trim back on social
security payments, will that encourage some elderly people to work rather than retire?
So in terms of elasticity, the question is, what is the percentage change in hours worked
that would result from a certain percentage change in social security payments?
It's a question about elasticities and elasticities for a specific age group, and it might be
for specific levels of worker skill and so on.
An awful lot of the social security reform debate is really an argument about elasticities
to which there isn't a real clear answer.
Sometimes laws are proposed to increase the quantity of saving by offering tax breaks
for saving, like through IRA accounts or something like that, individual retirement accounts.
Well accounts like that increase saving.
Well in elasticity terms, the question is, what is the percentage increase in saving
that would result from a certain percentage increase in the rate of return?
The evidence on supply curve of financial capital is somewhat controversial, but at least
in the short run, the elasticity of saving with respect to interest rates and rates of
return is pretty inelastic.
What that means in day to day English is, tax breaks for saving cause people to move
their existing saving into the tax free accounts, but they don't seem to increase overall levels
of saving by very much.
Or imagine studying whether the IRS should spend more money auditing tax returns.
In elasticity terms, what is the percentage change in tax collections derived from a percentage
change in spending on tax enforcement?
The evidence seems to be that if we audited more taxpayers, we'd collect more money, but
it wouldn't particularly be a very popular choice.
I hope that with all of these examples, you're getting sort of an underlying message.
And like many of the messages in this course, it's not a lesson about the right policy or
the wrong policy, it's a lesson about how to think about a certain kind of question
and what the framework and structure should be for thinking about that kind of question.
The message in this case is that a lot of confident assertions you hear all the time
about what will happen in various contexts, like what will happen if we've tightened enforcement
regarding illegal drugs, or what would happen if we fixed social security payments to encourage
work, or what would happen if gasoline prices went up, really are all assertions about whether
demand and supply in that particular situation are elastic or inelastic.
Now in social settings, this gives you something wise to say.
For example, if someone says, a tax on gasoline would be a good way of encouraging people
to drive unless you nod understandingly and you say, perhaps so, but of course, it all
depends on the elasticity of demand for gasoline.
And then you can shake your head thoughtfully in a sort of a wise, balanced kind of way.
Or someone might say, this country really needs tax-free savings accounts to encourage
people to increase their saving.
Well, you nod understandably and you say, perhaps so, but of course, it all depends
on the elasticity of supply of savings.
And you shake your head thoughtfully like you're weighing the issues in your brain.
I should warn you though from personal experience that comments like this can either lead to
a really much more intelligent and informed conversation or they can lead the conversation
to an abrupt and uncomfortable halt.
