This lecture is not intended to provide financial or investment advice.
All investments involve risk. Past performance does not guarantee future success.
You acknowledge that any reliance on any information from the materials contained in this lecture shall be at your own risk.
People who save and make financial investments are the supply side of the financial capital market.
Thus, the supply side of the capital market is in ornate name for a more basic question.
Can I get rich through financial investments?
And the answer is yes, as I will explain in this lecture, but not necessarily quickly.
The magic ingredient is compound interest.
Interest or rate of return is calculated based on the amount in the account at the start of the year.
So, if the money has been saved up for a number of years, interest for the current year is paid not only on whatever the original amount was invested,
but interest is also paid on previously accumulated interest.
That's what compound interest means.
It's interest which is paid both on the original amount saved and also interest paid on other interest that has accumulated over time.
The formula for showing what a present value will turn into over a number of years at a certain interest rate
is you take whatever the amount you start with, call it the present value, multiply it times one plus the interest rate,
raise to the power of however many years it's saved, and that will give you the future value.
When you think about this future value, the rate off in the future, then you need to think about what will happen over a sustained period of time,
because over that period of time, compound interest can lead to extremely large returns on saving.
Think about this, for example.
Let's start off with $1,000 that you're putting into some sort of an account, and let's think about what it can produce over different periods of time
with different annual rates of return using this basic formula.
If you start off, for example, with $1,000 and you put it in an account that earns 5% a year over 10 years,
at the end of that time you would have $1,628.
So, that's nice money, but it's not going to make you rich.
If you took $1,000 at a 5% return over 25 years, it would be $3,386,
and $1,000 at a 5% rate of return over 40 years would be a little over $7,000.
So, think of that for a moment in terms of your life.
If you took $1,000 and you put it aside at age 25, you earned 5% a year.
At retirement at age 65, that $1,000 would have increased sevenfold.
Now, a 5% annual return would be nice, but let's think about a little more aggressive return.
Let's think about a 10% annual return.
And a 10% annual return is, roughly speaking, what the stock market has delivered over time.
So, if you got a 10% annual return, you put aside $1,000,
then after 10 years, that's up to about $2,600.
After 25 years, it would be almost $11,000.
And $1,000, 10% annual return over 40 years works out to $45,000.
In other words, that original $1,000 would multiply by a factor of 45 over 40 years leading up to retirement.
Finally, let's take sort of an aggressive rate of return assumption just for fun.
Let's take a rate of return of 15%.
If you get a 15% annual return, which would require some luck,
over 10 years, that would increase your original $1,000 up to $4,000.
So, it would quadruple in a period of just 10 years.
Over a period of 25 years, your original 1,000 builds up to $33,000 at an annual return of 15% a year.
And the big number, if you took a 15% annual return over 40 years,
your original $1,000 works out to $267,863, an almost unbelievable multiple of several hundred times.
Now, my point here is not so much that everyone can get a 15% rate of return.
My point is that allowing money, even $1,000 saved one time to accumulate over time,
can add up to quite a large amount.
Now, this is a good time horizon because, again, it's roughly the length of an average working life.
If you start putting money aside at, say, 25 years of age and you retire at 65,
you put some aside at age 26 for age 66, you put some aside at age 30 for age 70,
the money you save each year through your working life, you're in effect using or planning to spend 40 years later.
It's not at all implausible that if you can put aside $5,000 per year starting at around age 25 or 30
and let it accumulate over time, you will have several million dollars accumulated at retirement.
Albert Einstein is once reputed to have said,
the most powerful force in the universe is compound interest.
Now, I confess that waiting 40 years is not getting rich quick, but I didn't promise anything about getting rich quick.
What I promised is these particularly 10% returns are reasonably available returns over time to people who invest in the stock market.
Paul Samuelson, the great economist and Nobel laureate, once said that successful investing should be like watching paint dry.
It should be like just watching that interest accumulate over and over and over again.
Not exciting, but effective.
I personally can say with some confidence, given where I am in my mid 40s,
that two or three decades from now with the additional saving I'll be doing through my retirement plan
and with the compound interest I'll be earning, my wife and I will have more than a million dollars in financial wealth.
I'm not talking about equity in a house here.
I'm not talking about the value of social security.
I'm talking about the value of my retirement account in financial terms and other saving that we do.
Now, I'm not paid a huge amount of money.
I'm an academic.
I get paid an academic salary, but I've had money going into a retirement account steadily every year since I was 25,
and that builds up over time.
So when you look at an investment, you need to think about not just the rate of return, not just this 5%, 10% or 15%,
but you need to think about other characteristics.
So let me sort of list these quickly and then we'll come back and talk about each of them in more detail.
The different investments that are available to you as a financial investor can be described according to four main sets of characteristics.
If an investment is especially good in one characteristic, there's usually some trade off with other characteristics.
For example, a high rate of return, which is a good thing, might also involve higher risk or some other sorts of problem.
So first of all, let's think about rate of return.
Rate of return is the first thing most people look at in an investment, and it's usually expressed in terms of percent per year.
For some investments, like bonds, the rate of return is a fixed nominal rate each year.
For other investments, like stocks, the rate of return might jump around from year to year.
Remember that seemingly small differences in rate of return, if you compound them over 25 years or 40 years,
will turn into extremely large differences.
The second characteristic is risk.
The risk of an investment expresses the amount by which the return for a certain investment could be higher or lower than its average expected value.
Or to put it a little more concretely, risk is the probability and the extent by which the actual result could be different from the expected result.
It could be a lot higher, it could be a lot lower.
Investments like, say, bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury have a very low risk.
You pretty much know you're going to get the nominal interest that was promised.
Investments in new technology companies or junk bonds have a higher risk.
That is, they might on average have a high rate of return over a long period of time,
but some years that return might be transcendentally high, and in other years it might be very low or negative.
Other things equal more risk is a bad thing.
That is, if two investments were equal in what you expect them to pay on average,
and in all their other characteristics, typically you should choose the one which doesn't have as much variation.
Investments with a higher level of risk, with a higher level of variation,
typically have to pay a higher rate of return to compensate for that large fluctuation that they're asking you to endure.
The risk of investing in any specific company or any specific bond can be reduced by diversifying your investments.
Diversification means buying a large number of different investments to reduce the overall risk.
Diversification works because those investments that do unexpectedly badly will be offset to some extent by the investments doing unexpectedly well.
And so if you don't put all your eggs in one basket, as the old saying goes,
then you can spread out the risk over a lot of different eggs and a lot of different baskets.
It's easy for individual investors to diversify by investing in a mutual fund,
a fund that combines a stock in a lot of different companies or bonds in a lot of different companies.
We'll talk more about mutual funds in a minute or two.
Liquidity is the third big trait of any investment, and it refers to how easy it is to sell an investment.
A bank account is quite liquid. It's easy to get your money out.
A house is not very liquid because it takes some time and energy to sell the house.
A financial investment like stocks and bonds are sort of in between.
They're not as liquid as a bank account, but they're certainly more liquid than trying to sell a house.
In general, liquidity is a good thing. Other things equal, you'd like to have a liquid investment.
The fourth key characteristic I want to talk about is how some investments are favored by the tax code.
For example, if a state or city government issues bonds as a way of borrowing money,
the bond payments, the interest payments that they make on those bonds are exempt from federal income tax.
When you borrow money to buy a house, the interest payments you make on your home mortgage are deductible from your taxable income
when you do your federal income tax.
Taxes on capital gains, that is gains from the value of stock going up, gains from the value of your house going up,
are typically postponed until the stock or the house is actually sold,
so you don't have to pay the taxes until later on in the future.
Now, tax breaks are obviously a good thing, but in a world of trade-offs,
a higher tax break usually means less of something else.
For example, if you get a tax-free bond that was issued by a state or local government,
that tends to pay a lower rate of return than a taxable bond,
and those two tend to sort of balance each other out.
You avoid the tax, but your rate of return isn't quite as good.
So people with high incomes and high tax bills should care more about tax breaks,
and so they should look more for investments with high tax breaks.
Those who don't have high incomes or high tax bills really shouldn't care very much about whether they're tax breaks
because they don't pay much in taxes.
So when you think about tax breaks, you have to think about sort of where you are in life.
For example, a lot of people after retirement aren't earning a lot of income,
they don't have a lot of taxes, and the tax break doesn't matter much to them.
But in your main earning years, say sort of age 30 up to 55,
you have fairly high income, fairly high taxes, and tax breaks will matter more to you.
Now, take those sort of four main categories,
that is rate of return, risk, liquidity, and tax status,
and kind of hold those in your mind with thought there's going to be trade-offs between them in one way or another.
I'll focus especially on the trade-off between return and risk,
and to help dramatize that trade-off,
I'm going to rely on some judgments from a classic book on investing and the stock market,
which is called a Random Walk Down Wall Street by a Yale economics professor named Burton Malkiel.
Malkiel created what he called the sleeping scale to judge risk.
That is, if your money is in a certain investment, how well do you sleep at night?
It's one way of judging risk anyway.
A wide variety of financial investment choices are available.
They include bank accounts, stock market mutual funds, and lots and lots of others.
In choosing how to allocate your money between these investment choices,
you need to think about how they rank on these different characteristics.
You need to think about the expected rate of return, the risk, the liquidity, and the tax status.
Let's go through sort of a menu of possible investment choices
and see how they rank in these different categories.
Bank accounts, for example.
Bank accounts have very low return and they don't give you any tax break on the interest,
but they're extremely safe.
The federal government guarantees your money won't be lost and they're very, very liquid.
In fact, the rate of return is low in part because they're very, very safe and very, very liquid.
So you don't need to be compensated for high risk.
You don't need to be compensated for a lack of liquidity.
On Burton Molecule's sleeping scale of risk, if all your money is in a bank account,
you can be semi-comatose.
You can sleep as much as you want because the level of risk is pretty close to zero.
Going up one step from bank accounts, the next step might be a money market fund.
A money market fund is a fund that invests in a lot of very low risk bonds.
They might be like bonds issued by the federal government or bonds issued by very large companies.
That will get you a better return than a bank account.
It's still pretty liquid, although not quite as liquid as a bank account,
and it's pretty safe, although not quite as safe as a bank account.
It's not federally guaranteed.
It's not quite as easy to access your money.
So putting your money in a money market fund on Molecule's sleeping scale of risk,
you can have long afternoon naps and a sound night's sleep.
Next category of investment, certificates of deposit.
A certificate of deposit is a certificate where you buy money or you borrow money
and you get a certificate.
And what you do is you agree to leave the money usually with a bank or some financial institution
for a preset period of time.
You might leave it there for six months or a year or more than a year.
And in exchange for your promising to leave it there,
the bank in exchange pays you a somewhat higher interest rate.
Now, that gets you a better rate of return than a money market fund,
and it's still very low risk.
It's not especially liquid, however,
because you have to promise to leave the money there for perhaps, you know,
six months or 12 months or more.
And like the advertisements for certificates of deposit say,
there is a substantial penalty for early withdrawal.
So the level of risk should still let you have a sound night's sleep.
Although since your money is locked up, you need to worry a little bit about it.
What about a diversified portfolio of corporate bonds?
A mutual fund that buys lots and lots of different corporate bonds.
And remember what a bond is.
A bond is when a corporation uses a financial instrument like a bond to borrow money
and promises to pay some rate of return.
Now, investing in a fund that buys a lot of bonds from corporations
will get you a better return than certificates of deposit.
And if you buy it through a mutual fund, usually it's fairly easy to buy and sell.
However, the risk is somewhat higher.
There are lots of different kinds of bonds,
but typically the most common kind of bond has a fixed nominal rate of interest.
What that means is if inflation goes up and nominal interest rates go up,
you're locked into that lower rate of interest,
and you're going to suffer financially as a result.
So you're bearing a little more risk when you start getting locked into these bond funds.
The sleeping scale of risk would say that you're still sleeping all night,
but now you're having an occasional dream or two, some of those dreams possibly unpleasant.
Another financial option, to get a diversified portfolio of corporate blue chip stocks.
And by blue chip stocks, I mean big, well-known companies,
General Electric, Walmart, ExxonMobil, companies like that.
A mutual fund that buys a lot of these well-established and historically profitable firms
will be a better return than a bond portfolio.
It'll be better because, in a fair, you're taking more risk.
These could go up, they could go down,
but you're taking more risk because we're not talking about investing in stocks of these companies
rather than in their bonds.
There's some tax advantage here
because you don't usually have to pay taxes on your capital gains until you sell.
So if you hold on to this for a long time,
you have some ability to delay your taxes
and delaying taxes paying later is better than paying in the present.
You're also pretty diversified
because if the fund has bought a whole range of different companies,
then any one company is not likely to hurt you too much or help you too much on the other side.
If you buy through a mutual fund that's a fairly liquid investment,
it's fairly easy to get your money out.
But the rest is somewhat higher
because company stock is not a guaranteed investment.
They don't have to promise to pay you any money.
In the stock market crash of 1987, for example,
the stock market lost 20% of its value in a day.
That's a bad negative return if you're invested in stocks.
Or in the slower crash of the year 2000 and 2001,
the average of the stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange fell 18%
over the unlucky 13 months from August 2000 to September 2001.
So if you're investing in a mutual fund that buys a lot of stocks,
according to the sleeping scale of risk,
you would have some tossing and turning before you doze,
and you might have vivid dreams before awakening.
Another option would be instead of buying blue chip well-established companies
to buy a diversified portfolio of more risky growth stocks.
Now, these risky growth stocks will tend on average to pay a higher return
than a portfolio of big companies.
You might even be able to get that 15% I was talking about
for a number of years if you're a little bit lucky.
If you buy that portfolio of growth companies for your mutual fund,
it's a fairly liquid investment.
It's fairly easy to get your money out,
and the risk is reduced somewhat by diversifying.
But the companies themselves are riskier.
Now we're talking about smaller, less established companies.
Over those unlucky 13 months from August 2000 to September 2001,
when the big established stocks on the New York Stock Exchange
were losing 18% of their value,
the small growth companies that tend to be listed on the Nasdaq Stock Exchange
were losing an average of 60% of their value.
That's not just a loss, that's close to a meltdown.
So in terms of the sleeping scale,
if you're in a mutual fund which is all growth companies,
you have nightmares.
Nightmares are not uncommon,
but if you can hold on for the long run
and you can hold on through the ups and downs and backs and forths,
over the long run, you'll still be pretty well rested.
For most people, their main real estate investment is their home.
And buying a home is sort of a mixture, really,
of a financial investment and buying a house to live in,
that is buying housing services if you want to think of it in that way.
The return of homes on the investment side can be highly variable.
Over long periods of time, it's tended to be somewhat positive,
but that can sometimes take a long period of time.
Liquidity is low for houses,
and there are certain tax breaks available for buying houses.
I mentioned before that the mortgage interest you pay,
the interest you pay on your loan to buy the house is deductible from your taxes,
and also the gain on the value of your house is not taxed
if you roll it over into the purchase of a new house.
In fact, there's also an exemption from some capital gains taxes
that you can take as you get on in life and you're looking toward retirement.
So buying a home gives you a return in a variety of different ways,
both this financial investment and also a place to live.
It's a little tricky to talk about the return,
but it's fair to say that the returns on the investment side can be highly variable.
There was a housing boom, for example,
when the housing prices went way up in the late 1980s,
peaked somewhat in the late 1980s and then dropped off into the early 1990s.
Then in the late 1990s and into the early 2000s,
the returns on housing have looked very good.
In fact, they've looked sort of too good to be sustained over the long term,
and my guess is that they will taper off somewhat, if not plummet outright,
but just taper off somewhat in the years to come.
But it's worth remembering at different times in different local housing markets,
people who lived in California or Texas or parts of New England
will remember housing prices don't rise forever.
They can be flat or falling for a period of years,
even if they are typically positive over extremely long periods of time.
A final set of investments would be to think about buying precious metals,
buying gold, buying different things like that.
And if you buy gold and precious metals,
I'm not going to talk much about this because I think for the individual investor,
these kinds of things are a gamble that it just may not be worth the risk of taking.
There's a lot of risk if you're buying those things,
and you have to accept the possible that there could be very sharp movements in prices.
If you time it just right, you can make a lot of money.
If you time it just wrong, you can lose a lot of money in a hurry.
On the sleeping scale, we would be talking about bouts of insomnia here.
And my own sense is that those are probably investments that are better left to true professionals.
Now, with this menu of choices in mind, what's a good strategy for investing?
How should you get rich? How should you structure your investments?
And the difficult thing about answering this question
is that there's really no one-size-fits-all approach.
There's no one answer that works for everyone.
Picking an investment strategy does need to be an individual choice.
It's based on considerations like, where are you in your life?
Are you relatively young? Are you in the middle of your work life?
Are you near retirement? It needs to be based on your tolerance for risk.
Are you really somebody who is not going to be able to sleep well at night
if your money is in the stock market and the stock market bounces up and down?
Or are you going to be able to say to yourself,
well, over time this is all going to work out all right.
And those are individual gut-level choices that I can't really say,
one is right and one is wrong. It's worth something to be able to sleep at night.
But one basic question you need to ask yourself,
and everyone needs to ask themselves about investing,
is what is your time horizon?
A lot of the time when we talk about risks,
risks may be higher or lower in the short term,
but over time the ups and downs kind of cancel out,
and over time you're compensated for being willing to put up with those ups and downs.
So when you think about money, you need to think about what's the time horizon?
If you're looking at the money for groceries,
or the money for paying your college tuition three months in the future,
then your risk tolerance is probably not very high.
You need to take that money and put it someplace really safe
and the heck with the rate of return you're getting,
after all the rate of return over three months is just not very high anyway.
I've occasionally had students come to me and say,
my parents gave me all the money for my college tuition,
and I was thinking about putting it in the stock market,
and you sort of want to grab them by the front of their shirt and just say,
don't do that. You need the money in the near term.
Don't take that risk.
If you're looking at something in the medium term,
like maybe money you'll need in three years or five years,
maybe you're saving up because you're going to buy a car,
or because there's a big trip you want to make,
well then you need to think about what your tolerance is for risks.
It might be more sense to put it into certificates of deposit or bonds,
where you're pretty confident of the interest rate that you're going to get.
You might not be comfortable with saying,
well I'm saving up for this big trip, but if the stock market drops then I can't go.
And so you have to think about the time horizon
and think about that willingness to accept risk.
If you're looking at the long term though,
if you're looking at retirement,
the right answer I think is to put a large share of your money in stocks.
Sure, you're going to have some really bad years.
There's going to be experiences like the stock market
really dropping off a table in 2000 and 2001.
But when you're saving for retirement,
you're saving with a time horizon that's several decades off in the future.
And history says that on that time horizon,
you will be compensated for the extra risk you're taking
with a higher average annual rate of return.
And remember, if you can get just a few percentage points more year after year after year,
over several decades,
that makes just an extraordinary difference in the rate of return you've accumulated.
I'd say the biggest mistake most people wake with their retirement money
is that they don't take enough risk.
They're so concerned about safety that they put too much of the money in bonds
or in bank accounts or money market funds.
And they sort of say, well I feel like it's really safe.
It's maybe a little bit counterintuitive.
But when your time horizon is longer,
when your time horizon is several decades off in the future,
you can afford to take more risk.
I sometimes think about it in terms of flipping a dice or something like that.
Imagine that if you were rolling a dice,
you'd get a high return if one comes up,
but you get a low return five out of six times.
Well, if you can flip that dice 30 or 40 times,
then you really want to take that risk.
You want to take the risk of flipping a dice
because those high returns are going to come up often enough
to really make it worth doing.
Even people who are, say, into that 50 and 60 age bracket
often may have a lot more time than they think.
It's true that as you begin to get toward retirement,
it makes sense for your time horizon to be a little shorter
to shift away from stocks and shift toward bonds.
But if you're 50 years old,
you may still have a life expectancy of 30 or 40 years.
That's a long time for compound interest to be accumulating.
Why not just pick the stock that has the highest rate of return?
Why mess around with all this compound interest stuff?
Well, the problem, of course, is nobody knows what stock this is.
If I knew what stock would pay the highest rate of return,
I wouldn't tell you.
I would be playing with my children on a beach somewhere
and not giving these lectures.
In fact, there's good reason to believe that no one knows
which stocks are going to pay the highest rate of return.
After all, if people did know, they would buy those stocks
and push up the price of those stocks to the point
where they no longer were as good a deal.
One implication of this insight
is what's called the random walk theory of stock prices.
In general, the notion of the random walk theory
is that the price of a stock is going to be determined
by the future profits the company earns.
And so it's an estimate of that.
The current stock price of a company incorporates
all the information that is available about future profits.
And that's already part of the stock price.
So what makes a stock price go up is new information.
And new information is, by its nature, unpredictable.
Since you can't predict the new information,
the movement of a stock price
will be an unpredictable random walk as well.
In effect, the problem of buying stocks is
you want to stock that everyone else thinks it'll do poorly,
but in the future everybody's going to change their minds
and think it does really well.
Well, trying to find that is nearly impossible.
There's a lot of controversy on this subject,
but maybe a sophisticated professional investor
who's working 60 or 80 hours a week
can pick those kinds of stocks.
But if you're sitting at home looking at the Wall Street Journal,
which was written yesterday
and which has news that happened the day before that,
people in the know knew that information weeks ago.
You're not going to out-guess the market
based on that kind of information.
And if you start trying to buy and sell and buy and sell and buy and sell
and you have to pay a little bit every time you do that,
you can end up losing money overall
even when the stock market is going up.
In fact, the Forbes, the big financial magazine,
once did a dartboard fund.
The dartboard fund was literally take darts,
throw them across the room at the newspaper
and buy whatever stock gets hit by the dart.
And then they compared the dartboard fund
to what professional investors were doing.
And yeah, in any given year, some investors do better,
but year in and year out,
some investors do better and some do worse.
As they say, a past performance is no guarantee
of future performance.
All personal investment advice is ultimately based
on one starting point.
You need to start saving some money.
You need to put some money aside
sooner in your life rather than later.
Too many people just don't put enough money aside.
And then they get to be 55 or 60
and suddenly they think, well, what am I going to retire on?
There are always a million reasons not to save
when you're in your 20s and in your 30s
and in your 40s and in your 50s.
But if you don't steadily put money aside,
there's no clever strategy you can deploy at age 65
to suddenly become rich.
Thank you.
