It's a hard reality that some industries don't seem especially well suited to competition.
Either the firms repeatedly push each other into suffering large losses, or the production
technology of the industry makes competition difficult to imagine.
Let me give you a couple of examples where this often comes up.
One is railroads in the late 19th century, another is airlines in the late 20th century.
Let's talk about railroads for a moment.
It seemed at first like there were huge profits to be made in the railroad industry in the
late 19th century, and vast amounts of track were laid.
But once the track was laid, the additional marginal cost of shipping over that track
was relatively low.
So once that had happened, some railroad firms without much competition could charge high-high
prices, make high profits, pay large dividends, and then build more rail.
So for example, between 1880 and 1882, there were 29,000 miles of railroad track laid in
the U.S., which increased the total track in the U.S. by one-third in just those three
years.
Then competition between all those railroads drove the prices way, way, way down.
So firms were unable to pay for the track they'd laid.
In fact, half of the railroad track built by private firms before 1900 was being run
by the bankruptcy courts in 1900.
Now sure, in any dynamic market, some firms will do well and some firms will do poorly,
but what happens when an entire industry seems to run itself into the ground?
For a more modern example, let's think about the situation of the big airlines in the United
States.
Remember back in the 1970s, when the airline industry was deregulated and there was a burst
of competition from new firms like People Express?
But more recently, big airlines like United and American, Northwest, Delta seem to be
losing money almost every year, and a lot of money.
Older firms like Pan Am and Braneth and TWA have gone broke.
Southwest has consistently made money, and some regional niche airlines have done all
right a few years now and then.
But what happens when an entire industry, at least most of the industry's firms, seem
to be running itself into the ground?
To many people, in the late 1800s, it seemed obvious that we needed to have government
regulation of railroads to prevent the railroads from driving themselves into the bankruptcy
courts.
And we did do that for most of the 20th century.
In fact, for most of the 20th century, the U.S. regulated both railroads and airlines.
Another example of a firm where competition doesn't work very well is public utilities.
A public utility is a firm that is technically privately owned, but is closely regulated
by the government in terms of the prices that it charges and the kinds of services it provides.
It provides a commodity used by almost every home, like water or electricity or phone service.
Indeed, for much of the 20th century, these private utilities, water companies, electricity
companies, the phone company, had prices, and in many cases the level of service set by
government regulators.
Why is it that competition isn't working well in some of these industries?
Why is it that government regulations seem so useful in some of these industries?
Well, if you think about the water company for a moment and think what it would mean
to have competition among water companies.
Imagine that you had four or five water companies and they each had their own pipes, so you
had four or five identical sets of pipes under the city, one for every company, so every
household could choose its own provider of water.
It would be terribly costly to install all those duplicative systems of pipes.
In fact, all of these industries, railroads, airlines, the others I've mentioned, where
competition seems not to be working very well, have a common underlying economic characteristic.
They involve networks of some kind, either transportation networks, in the case of railroads
and airlines, or networks for distributing water and electricity.
They tend to have a high cost of building the network, and then, once the network is
built, a relatively low cost of running the network.
In the term that we used before in an earlier lecture, they form a natural monopoly.
Remember, a natural monopoly exists when an industry has large economies of scale, so
that a big large established firm can produce at a lower average cost than any new entrants
that come into the market.
After all, the larger firm already has its network in place, it's paid for its network,
and so now it can provide service at a fairly low cost.
It's going to be very hard for a new entrant to come in.
If that entrant comes in at a very small size, it won't have the big network, it won't be
able to compete effectively.
But if you just let the big company alone, then you're going to end up with a monopoly.
Or alternatively, if you get a big entrant, if another water company tried to enter to
compete with the water companies, or big airlines tried to enter, you end up with this scenario
of ruinous competition, where the two really large firms both have very high fixed costs
of providing their network, and when they charge low prices, they run each other into
the ground.
The result of this kind of tough competition is that both firms can end up driving each
other into bankruptcy, or else they merged into a single firm, and then were back to
monopoly again.
Some of you who saw the popular 2004 movie, The Aviator, will recognize this argument
as what the senator, played by Alan Alda, says to the Howard Hughes character, played
by Leonardo DiCaprio, basically says, look, Pan Am needs to have a monopoly over international
air flights, because monopoly will serve the consumer better than having competition
with TWA.
That argument sounds like a bad guy argument in the movie, but there's some economic logic
behind it.
Now society has various options for regulating an industry where competition doesn't seem
to work well, or where a natural monopoly might exist.
And these different types of regulation will have different incentives for producers.
So let me try and discuss some of the possible regulatory options.
One option would be, take the large company and break it into multiple competitors.
But in the particular case we're discussing here, that isn't going to work very well.
Remember, the reason that you have the big company in the first place is that the big
company can produce at a low average cost.
If you break it into small pieces, then each piece is going to be produced at a higher
average cost.
The small competitors can't take advantage of the same economies of scale.
Those small competitors will either collude together as a monopoly, which isn't good,
or they'll viciously compete and drive each other into bankruptcy, which is the problem
we're sort of trying to avoid.
So let me put this in a little more intuitive terms.
If you're worried about the water company being a monopoly, setting up a duplicate water
company is going to be wasteful, and the eventual result will either be back to monopoly again
or ruin its competition between these two networks of water companies.
So if we're not going to try and break up these big companies, what's the next possibility?
A possibility is called cost plus regulation.
And cost plus regulation is more or less what it sounds like.
It is setting a regulated price that the firm is allowed to charge by first calculating
its cost of production, allowing for sort of the low normal level of profit that a competitive
firm would make, and then setting the price to cover that cost plus a little bit of profit
amount.
This has been historically the most common method of setting prices for public utilities.
It was also the method in which prices were set for the airlines and for the railroads
for a long time.
State commissions set these prices.
And in fact, if you go back to 1887, which was the interstate commerce act that first
started regulating railroads, that's how they set the price for what would be carried on
railroads from the late 1800s for almost a century up until the 1970s.
When the airline industry was regulated by the Civil Aeronautics Board, that was how
the Civil Aeronautics Board set prices for the airline industry through this cost plus
regulation.
Now what incentives does cost plus regulation provide?
Imagine that you're a producer and you're reimbursed for your costs plus a little bit
more.
Well at a minimum, you have less reason to be concerned with your high costs, because
if you have high costs, you have cost plus regulation.
Those costs get passed along in the form of higher prices.
Even worse, firms under cost plus regulation have an incentive to generate high costs.
An electrical company that's being regulated by cost plus regulation might want to build
huge electrical plants or employ lots and lots of staff, because what they can charge
is linked to the costs that they incur.
Moreover, you've got essentially no reason to innovate.
After all, if you innovate in a way that saves a lot of money, what's going to happen?
Well cost plus regulation, your costs are lower, you're going to charge less, you don't
come out ahead.
So cost plus regulation sort of sounds like a reasonable way to regulate.
In practice, the incentives it provides are not very attractive.
What's the alternative?
The best alternative right now is probably something called price cap regulation.
The idea of price cap regulation is that the regulator sets a price that the regulated
firm can charge that extends out several years into the future.
If the firm can cut costs by more than it predicts, then it could earn profits, because
it's guaranteed that it can charge that price for several years into the future.
I first became aware of price cap regulation when they began trying it out in the California
telephone market in the 1980s.
What they did there was they sort of set the price cap by saying, let's look at what everyone
is charging for phone service in other places.
We're expecting the price of phone service to drop over time, because of technological
developments in the telecommunications industry.
So we're going to look at other firms, we're going to look at the technology, and we're
going to say, OK, we expect the phone price to drop over time, and your price cap is actually
declining over time.
In a way, we're going to create a kind of virtual competition.
We're going to say what our expectation is of lower prices, and then we're going to force
you to try and meet that expectation of lower prices over time.
In that case, you can force a declining price of phone service over time, and the regulated
firm is OK with that, because if it has the freedom to cut its costs and earn profit,
it can actually still make a profit even with the price going down over time.
So the incentives of price cap regulation, where you set the price cap based on other
firms and based on expectations of technological improvement, can actually be much better than
the cost plus approach.
But any method of regulation faces the danger of what's called regulatory capture.
The regulatory capture is the danger that regulators will start believing their job
is to protect the industry profits and the industry workers rather than to protect competition
and consumers.
Now, if public utilities were all regulated by economist saints, then some form of price
cap regulation with benchmarking might work pretty well.
But government regulators are appointed by politicians.
So you have to say to yourself, who's going to get appointed?
Who's actually going to be the regulator?
Who is going to obsessively follow every action of the Public Utility Commission, every tiny
little bit of fine print, every twist and turn and rule, and keep track of who's likely
to be appointed, who's going to make friends with the people on the commission, who's going
to provide those people on the commission with information and background, and maybe
a nice trip now and then, and maybe even a well-paid job after they leave the regulatory
commission?
Of course, the firms being regulated are the ones who are going to focus on all of those
things.
In a way, a regulatory commission is a little bit like those people who get kidnapped and
then they begin to sympathize with their kidnappers, the Stockholm syndrome, I think they call
it.
Even if the regulators start off saying, I'm really determined to get the best possible
deal for consumers, it's very easy over time for regulators to start sympathizing with the
people they're regulating.
After all, if you're a regulator and you start off from the belief that unfettered competition
is just not likely to work very well in this market, it's likely to be vicious and unrestrained
leading to disruptions of key services and you really need regulation, then it's only
a tiny short step to feeling like it's your public duty to make sure that firms get safe
and steady profits.
Now, of course, you could say, well, the profits shouldn't be bloated or exorbitant and there
should be nice public service advertisements and that sort of thing, but regulators almost
always end up providing nice, steady, almost guaranteed profits.
If you're going to regulate, you need to feel like the industry is important and so you
can't drive it into bankruptcy, right?
If you feel that way, it gets very hard to be a tough price cap regulator who sets tough
price caps over time.
The other option, when you think about how to regulate an industry, is not to regulate
it, to deregulate it, to remove the regulations and the US economy experienced a wave of deregulation
in a number of industries in the late 1970s and into the early 1980s.
Some of the industries that were deregulated at that time included airlines, banking, trucking,
oil, intercity bus travel, phone equipment, long distance phone service and the railroads
too.
Now when these industries were deregulated, they definitely stopped being nice, neat,
orderly markets where the firms got a certain level of profit year in and year out.
But it's also true that consumers benefited greatly from deregulation, both in lower prices
and in terms of new goods and services.
The number of choices for consumers mushroomed.
The airlines reorganized themselves after deregulation into these hub and spoke systems
where people flew into one airport and flew out again.
The result was that it was much more easy for people to connect to a bunch of different
places than it had been before and the number of airline connections went way up.
Trucks set up similar hub and spoke delivery systems where trucks collected stuff and took
them to a hub and then reloaded and sent them out to other places again.
Think about deregulation and banking which brought with it this wide range of automatic
teller machines and flexible financial services.
Think about deregulation of telecommunications and the incredible explosion in telecommunications
technology.
Now it's of course really easy to say, well, you know, that's just technology.
I mean, you know, the new technology would have happened anyway.
You know, we would have gotten mobile phones anyway.
We would have gotten automatic teller machines anyway.
It was the technology was on the way.
But are you really so sure?
I mean, after all, AT&T had kept pretty much one style of phone and one color black for
many, many, many decades.
It's not obvious to me that they would have suddenly expanded into a whole bunch of different
kinds of telephone service.
I mean, after all, what reasons did a regulated company like AT&T have to try and produce radical
innovations that it wasn't even clear consumers wanted?
Only profit seeking firms take those big chances to try to please consumers.
Regulated monopolies really don't try those things quite so often.
When planes were deregulated, when airlines were deregulated, they flew much fuller most
of the time.
A result was there were lower costs and lower consumer prices, prices that are on average
about one third lower as a result of deregulation.
When trucking was deregulated, the trucks now drive many fewer empty miles and the cost
to shippers fell by about a third.
When railroads were deregulated, they shut down a lot of track that was barely being
used.
The cost to shippers over railroads fell by almost half.
If you add these kinds of examples to the other industries that were deregulated, by
the end of the 1990s, the U.S. Great Deregulation Experiment of the 1970s was saving consumers
about $50 billion a year in lower prices.
Now yes, deregulation made the business environment less stable for regulated firms, but they
had to worry about whether or not they were going to go out of business.
They didn't have those assured profits anymore.
Some executives and workers of those firms who had pretty nice, comfortable positions
in the old regulated industries have really suffered and I would say I have sympathy for
the people who suffered in the aftermath of deregulation.
Their suffering was real, but to be a little bit tough-minded about it, it's not clear
to me why the rest of society owed people in those regulated industries $50 billion a
year in higher prices so they could have more secure and higher paid jobs.
Indeed, often jobs in some of those regulated industries like airlines paid wages that were
well above the average wage for a worker, so the redistribution was going from those
with average incomes or below average incomes to those with above average incomes.
Now I'm very comfortable with the idea that the government should help the poor, should
help the unemployed, should help those who lose their jobs with some combination of income
assistance and healthcare and training, but I am not comfortable with the idea that the
government owes a group of high income workers some set of rules on pricing that will restrict
competition and force everyone to pay higher prices so the lucky few people in that industry
can have high income jobs forever.
Every time the government reduces a subsidy after all, the person formerly receiving the
subsidy suffers, but that doesn't mean subsidies should never be cut off.
In the case of deregulation, some of those receiving the benefits of regulation did suffer,
but that doesn't mean deregulation shouldn't have happened.
Can these lessons of deregulation be extended to other industries?
Even in cases where some regulation is needed, regulated industries might have one or more
parts that could be carved off and left competitive market forces.
Maybe the best example of carving off some competitive pieces is the breakup of the former
telephone monopolist AT&T.
Remember it was broken up into a long distance firm, a telephone equipment firm and several
local phone companies.
AT&T had a bunch of different pieces and in that breakup of AT&T, when it turned into
seven different local phone companies across the regions of the US, a long distance company,
an equipment company and a research company, all those firms became more competitive and
more innovative as a result.
The hope at the time was that the local phone companies would start competing with each
other, but that's been relatively slow to happen.
Now, however, with cell phones and wireless phone service, we're beginning to see a lot
more competition even in the local phone market, which has brought down prices in the phone
market and had a huge growth of new technology.
There have been all sorts of new innovations.
You can imagine other settings where an infusion of competition might help.
In a large city, which has been providing its own garbage service for a long time.
Now, garbage service is something where the network kind of kicks in.
When a garbage truck goes down a street, it's cost effective to pick up everyone's garbage
on the same day.
And it might be cost effective to have only one or two big garbage dumps or big recycling
plants.
Still, what you can do in garbage collection is split the city into regions, have firms
bid on garbage collection for each region, then after a few years, check on the performance
and the cost and encourage competition as these firms would compete for collecting garbage
in different parts of the city.
Another way you could carve off some of city services.
You can carve off things like cleaning services or repair services or cafeteria services,
office supply services, building maintenance, laundry, renting of office space.
Those are all things that don't need to be provided by one government provider, but instead
could be provided in a more competitive way by a lot of local governments.
Electricity has long been thought of as a natural monopoly and regulated as a public
utility.
But the argument there is essentially that there's a grid of wires that brings electricity
to homes and that grid creates one big network that makes sense to be owned centrally by
one company.
But that argument about the grid doesn't focus on how the electrical power is generated.
The idea of deregulating electricity is the electrical grid would continue to be regulated
or publicly owned, but the business of producing electrical energy would become more competitive.
This concern often has something of an environmentalist tinge, since the idea might be that wind
power or solar power could be sold to the big electricity grid.
Since 1989, the United Kingdom has tried out a variety of market arrangements for having
electricity generators compete with each other.
A number of U.S. states have also experimented with electricity deregulation in the 1990s.
Some have had a lot of success, Pennsylvania is an example.
And some have had near disastrous consequences, California being the example.
In fact, California had a true devicle with deregulating electricity in the early 2000s,
which was so heavily publicized and so terrible that it's probably poisoned the water for
major electricity deregulation in the next few years.
Economists can explain until they're blue in the face that the regulatory system California
set up, which basically required state power utilities to buy electricity at the market
rate, but to sell to consumers at a regulated rate, was extraordinarily foolish.
If the purchase price went way up, the selling price didn't, they were all going to go broke.
The system lacked safeguards against being gamed by the electricity producers, who could
find ways to allow or encourage the market price to rise, then sell at that high price.
But what California really proves is that foolish regulation can be really, really costly,
which is not exactly a new lesson.
The answer is smarter deregulation.
Broadband internet access has some of the traits of a natural monopoly.
Again, it can be provided by setting up a network that has high fixed costs, running
cable into everybody's home.
This trait has led some cities in particular to argue that it should be provided by a regulated
monopoly.
But you know, the broadband internet industry also has some potential for competition.
In many areas, you could get your internet service, your home internet service from the
cable TV company, that cable, or over the phone from various providers.
There are even wireless phones now, which could provide high speed internet.
In many areas, electricity in the water companies also own fiber optic cables that, at least
in theory, could provide internet service to an awful lot of people.
And of course, the wireless internet networks that have been made up of many local nodes
are happening in a lot of areas now.
I've even seen suggestions for what are essentially high flying blimps that would hover over a
metro area and act sort of like a low flying satellite to provide high speed internet to
everyone in a city.
Now, I'm certainly not foolish enough to make some firm prediction about the future of
broadband internet technology and what should be the right way to provide it.
But I do want to say that some people, especially politicians in certain cities, are really very
darn quick to assume that public provision or a regulated monopoly with one provider
fits all is the best answer.
Now, maybe they'll turn out to be right, maybe the technology will go that way, but I'm really
not at all sure that that argument that we have to have one local provider to provide
all the internet service is justified in economic terms.
When it comes to a rapidly evolving future technology, it's often better to encourage
a multiplicity of technologies that can compete against each other rather than locking into
one and saying this is the one that's going to be followed.
Government has a necessary role as a referee of economic competition.
The forces of competition accomplish a great, great deal that is socially beneficial.
They provide new products and innovation with pressure to produce those things at low costs
and in a way that consumers are going to like.
But in certain well-defined circumstances when competition isn't working well or can't
work well, government can have a useful role to play.
I should emphasize though that when I talk about deregulation, I don't mean no regulation
at all.
After all, when government allows firms to set their own prices and set their own quantities
produced, it can still set standards that involve things like safety or accuracy or open disclosure.
For example, just because you deregulate the airlines, you can still regulate the airlines
in terms of safety and inspections for safety.
Just because you allow banks to charge whatever or pay and charge whatever interest rates
they want, you can still regulate the banks and make sure the banks are being run in a
financially prudent manner and audit their books and all those kinds of things.
If the issue is to help the poor in some cases, for example, if the issue is to assure that
there's no digital divide, as they sometimes call it, that low-income folks all have home
access to broadband internet, I'm open to discussion on the best way to do that.
But it's not obvious to me that requiring everyone to sign up with a regulated monopoly
is the best answer.
The best answer might be that if you really believe that's an important public service,
provide income to poor people or pay for their broadband internet from a selection of providers
who compete against each other.
The real trick here is that when the outcomes of market forces seem undesirable, it's important
to identify the underlying problem in a specific way and to design the policy response accordingly.
For example, is the problem that there is a competitive industry or an industry that
would be competitive except that the firms in that industry have formed a cartel?
Well, if that's the problem, then go after the cartel and break it up.
Use your antitrust laws.
Is the problem that it's a restrictive business practice and it seems to be blocking competition?
Well, go after that particular practice.
Again, use your antitrust laws, your laws against restrictive competition.
Is the problem that something is a natural monopoly in the sense that there's a big
network and this big network is going to be able to produce at a very low average cost?
It's going to be very hard for anyone else to compete.
Well, in that case, if you do have to regulate, at least regulate prices using price cap regulation
rather than cost plus regulation.
Is the problem that you have a regulated industry or a legal monopoly, like maybe the post office,
whose time really has passed for being a legal monopoly?
Or like the airline industry, whose time has really passed for being a regulated industry?
Then the answer may be to deregulate it.
Is it a case where we're worried about some regulation for safety or security, like in
the case of airlines and banks, but we're not worried about regulation in terms of overall
price and quantity?
Well, go after the regulation that you're worried about.
Go after the concerns about safety.
Go after the concerns about whether financially prudent rules are being followed.
But you don't need to regulate all the prices and quantities in the industry in order to
do that.
Most of all, it's important to recognize that when you have a market, it's reacting
to supply and demand and it's always going to be true in these kinds of markets that
suppliers would like a higher price and demanders would like a lower price.
Regulation can't fix that problem.
Regulation is not going to be able to make sure that every consumer can have a low electricity
bill, but electricity producers for solar power and wind power can get high prices to
help encourage the supply of alternative energy.
Regulation is always going to have to face the reality that some people are going to
be unhappy with whatever price exists.
Now, these lectures have focused on lack of competition and how, when there's a lack
of competition, firms can take advantage of consumers.
Future issues in the next few lectures will focus on other policy issues like pollution
and poverty and many other issues as well.
But ultimately, as we move on to those other issues, there's going to be one lesson that
continues and that is the study of economics is always going to offer us a reminder to
respect the power of market forces.
When those forces are producing socially beneficial results, of course, it's not hard to respect
them.
We just let them roam free.
But when market forces are producing undesirable outcomes, it's important for the economic
policy to recognize those forces and to work with the market forces even as it seeks to
come up with socially preferred outcomes.
