The previous lecture focused on negative externalities where the market produces too much of a negative item like pollution.
This lecture turns the tables and discusses positive externalities where the market produces too little of some good thing like scientific research and innovation.
Many people tend to identify free markets with innovation, but in a truly free market it's possible that very little innovation would exist.
Conflict between markets and innovation arises because of what you can think of as a heads you win, tails I lose kind of problem.
Let's imagine a company that's planning to invest a lot of money in research and development on some new invention.
There's two possibilities.
First, maybe the project fails.
If it fails, then the company will have lower profits than its competitors and maybe it'll even have losses and be driven out of business.
Now, the other possibility is the project succeeds.
And if the project succeeds in developing the new innovation, well, in a perfectly free market competitors will just steal the idea.
The result will be that the innovating company had higher expenses because it had to develop the new innovation, but it has no special gain in revenues.
It'll still have lower profits than all of its competitors and it may still be driven out of business.
Heads you lose, tails I win.
Thus, the key element is a company's ability to appropriate a substantial share of the economic gains from its investment in research and development.
If a company innovates, how much of the profit can it keep?
Economists have a term for this, economists have a term for everything, right?
There's appropriability.
An appropriability is the ability of a producer to reap the benefits of an investment or an innovation.
If there's no appropriability, then businesses won't invest in new products because they'll fear that they won't be able to get a reasonable rate of return.
There are a lot of famous examples of where appropriability didn't work out very well.
Thomas Edison's very first invention was an automatic vote counting machine, but although it seemed to work perfectly well, he found that he couldn't sell it.
And the story is that he then vowed only in the future to make inventions that people would actually buy.
A more recent example is the invention of the laser.
A man named Gordon Gould came up with the idea behind the laser in 1957, and we know he came up with the idea because Gould actually had his research notebooks for November 1957 notarized,
so he could prove when the idea had come to him and that he had actually written it down, and he knew he had it.
But Gould put off applying for a patent on the laser because he mistakenly believed that you needed to have a working prototype before you could apply for a patent.
That's not true, but by the time Gould did apply for a patent on a laser, other scientists had some laser inventions of their own,
and a long, long legal battle resulted in which Gould spent more than $100,000 of his own money on lawyers and stuff before he eventually did get a patent for the laser in 1977,
about 20 years later, and even then he didn't get very much for his patent.
I mean, if you think about it, the laser has had just an enormous range of uses, and think about it.
It's used in manufacturing compact discs, it's used in eye surgery and in removing tumors.
It's used for precision scientific measurement.
The laser is used in navigational instruments, in chemical research and spectroscopy for laser printers.
Laser use are used as cutting tools in textiles and metalworking industries.
Perhaps most of all, the laser was revolutionized telecommunications and computer networks
by allowing so much more information to be carried over fiber optic cable than could have been carried over the old copper wires.
So, compared to the enormous social benefits of the laser, Gould received really relatively little financial reward.
Of course, Gould wasn't the only one working on the laser.
Many of the other scientists who worked on the science that led up to lasers in the 1940s and 1950s,
as well as scientists who've worked on the practical development of how to use lasers since then,
have received essentially no special benefit other than their normal salaries.
In conceptual terms, new technology is just the opposite of pollution.
In the case of pollution, those who were external to the transaction,
not involved in buying or selling the good, suffered the costs of pollution.
But in the case of new inventions, like the automatic vote counting machine or the laser,
those who were external to the transaction between the firm that invented the product and the consumer use
are benefiting without needing to compensate the inventor.
A positive externality means that some economic actor, some firm or inventor,
is providing benefits for third parties and not being compensated for those benefits.
And because the inventor is not being compensated fully, the firm will provide less innovation than it otherwise would.
In the situation of negative externalities like pollution,
the appropriate policy response was to find a way to make someone pay the social costs of pollution.
In the case of positive externalities, like developing new technologies and new innovation,
the appropriate policy response is to help those who provide the social benefits of innovation
get compensated for those benefits.
So how do you do this? How do you provide appropriability?
How do you allow inventors to be compensated for their innovations?
Well, intellectual property rights are a mechanism that society uses to give inventors some exclusive right
to use their invention, at least for a period of time.
And since they have an exclusive right and can avoid market competition,
they'll be able to earn higher than normal profits for a while and get a rate of return on their invention.
The whole notion of intellectual property rights goes way back in U.S. history.
In fact, it goes to the Constitution of the United States, which specifies in Article 1, Section 8, and I quote,
The Congress shall have the power to promote the progress of science and useful arts
by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their writings and discoveries.
Congress took that power in the U.S. Constitution and used that power to create the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office,
as well as the U.S. Copyright Office.
So let's talk about these patents and copyrights in more concrete terms and what they mean.
A patent is an exclusive legal right granted by the government to make, sell, or use an invention for a specific and limited time.
In the United States, the exclusive patent right typically lasts for 20 years,
although there are some specialized rules for particular industries in the fine print.
Copyright, on the other hand, is a form of legal protection against copying an original work of authorship,
which includes literary, musical, and other kinds of works.
Or, more specifically, according to the U.S. Copyright Office, copyright protects dramatic, musical, architectural, cartographic,
choreographic, pantomimic, pictorial, graphic, sculptural, and audio-visual creations.
It protects all the stuff that people could be authors of.
When you have copyright, what that essentially means is no one can reproduce or display the work
or perform the copyrighted work without the permission of the creator of the author.
And copyright protection now ordinarily lasts for the life of the author plus 70 years.
Roughly speaking, patent law covers inventions, and copyright protects books and songs and art.
But in certain areas, like the invention of new software, it's been unclear over time
whether that was an invention so that patent law should apply,
or whether it was a work of authorship, in which case copyright protection ought to apply,
and the law has gone back and forth on how to apply those two.
There are other kinds of intellectual property protection besides patents and copyrights.
A trademark, for example, is a word or a name or a symbol or a device that indicates the source of a good,
and thus helps the seller establish a reputation.
A common example of trademarks would be like Chiquita Bananas or Chevrolet Cars
or the Nike Swoosh that appears on shoes and athletic gear.
There are nearly 800,000 trademarks registered with the U.S. government.
The notion behind trademarks is that they help to build and facilitate competition,
because it helps firms build a reputation for a certain kind of product,
and then consumers can react to that reputation, and firms can compete more easily
because their reputation is out front.
A firm is allowed to renew its trademark over and over again for an unlimited period of time,
as long as the trademark remains in active use.
If whatever the product is stopped being used, then the trademark eventually could expire over time.
And a final form of intellectual property rights is called trade secrets.
A trade secret is more or less what it sounds like.
A trade secret is a formula, a process, a device, or an item of information
that gives a business an advantage over its competitors,
that is not generally known or easily discovered,
and where the business makes a reasonable effort to keep it secret.
So what would be some good examples of a trade secret?
Probably the most famous trade secret is the formula for Coca-Cola,
which is not protected under copyright law, is not protected under patent law,
but is simply kept more or less secret by the company,
although actually in a couple of books they've published the formula for Coca-Cola
if you look back in the appendices, but it's still thought of as a trade secret.
Let me give you a couple of famous cases of trade secrets to give you a sense of how they work.
In 1995, out in Silicon Valley, a number of employees left a software firm
that was called Cadence Design Systems, and they started a new competing software firm
that was called Avant.
Did these employees leaving the one firm and starting another firm violate trade secret law?
Well, as the court case evolved, the answer turned out to be yes,
and the key evidence was that experts testified in court
that the software from Avant contained in various places
the exact same error messages as the Cadence software did.
In 2001, Avant actually pleaded no contest to stealing trade secrets.
Apparently the departing employees had more or less taken the Cadence software out the door with them,
and they ended up paying millions of dollars in fines and served jail time for doing that.
A more famous case, at least among economists, is in 1969,
there were two photographers in Beaumont, Texas.
They hired a plane and flew over a chemical plant that DuPont was building
to produce a methanol with a new industrial process.
Does hiring a plane and flying over a construction site and taking photographs violate trade secret law?
And the answer the court found was yes.
The court found that DuPont had taken reasonable precautions to protect its new manufacturing process.
It had built a fence around the construction site, that sort of thing.
And that taking photos from the airplane was an improper method of discovering the trade secrets,
even if the flight itself was at a perfectly legal height and a perfectly legal distance.
And the court wrote, this is a case of industrial espionage in which an airplane is the cloak
and a camera is the dagger.
Even with patents and copyrights and trademarks and trade secret law all in place,
it is commonly estimated that an innovating company manages to get only 30 or 40% of the new value of what it creates.
The rest of that value is captured by consumers or by other firms who buy its products.
Perhaps the most famous story of a firm not being able to capture what it created is the story of Eli Whitney.
As many of you probably learned long ago, Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin for separating seeds out of cotton.
And he patented it. It was one of the first patents issued by the U.S. Patent Office.
But as it turned out, Whitney's patent was not enforced by the southern courts in all the cotton states.
Other people just made cotton gins based on his patent and then they used them.
And when he sued in the court in Georgia or Alabama or different places,
the southern court basically said, we're not going to pay you vast sums of money just because you invented the cotton gin.
Whitney's comment was, an invention can be so valuable as to be worthless to the inventor.
The cotton gin was such an important invention that in effect society decided or southern courts decided
that they just weren't going to enforce his patent rights.
In fact, Whitney never attempted to patent any of his later inventions.
He just gave up on the patent process.
Even though later on, Whitney essentially reinvented American manufacturing as a whole by inventing the idea of mass production.
The notion was that even if you had unskilled workers, if you had lots of interchangeable parts,
unskilled workers could assemble those interchangeable parts and make some product like rifles.
You can only imagine what would the patent right be to own the right for everything that's made with interchangeable parts.
But Whitney didn't even try. It just didn't seem worth it.
So basic bottom line here.
The incentive to innovate even with all of the intellectual property rights in place is typically less than the social value of the innovation.
So if we want to encourage innovation and encourage people to provide the amount of innovation that would benefit society,
we need to think of other policies beyond intellectual property rights that we might use to encourage research and development and innovation.
And indeed, government has a range of other policies beyond intellectual property rights that are available to subsidize innovation more directly.
One example is direct government funding of scientific research that can happen through universities or private research organizations or through businesses.
The National Science Foundation each year collects data on spending for research and development for the economy as a whole.
And according to the NSF data in 2003, the U.S. economy as a whole spent $284 billion on research and development.
63% of that was spent by industry. 30% of it was spent by the federal government.
And the remaining 7% was universities and colleges and other nonprofits.
Many of that would be state level support through state universities and colleges.
So it's fair to say that for the economy right now, most R&D is being paid for by private industry.
Now, I don't know what the obviously right proportion is of how much R&D should be paid by private industry and how much should be paid by the government.
But I do know that over time, the government share of total R&D spending has been gradually sliding lower and lower and lower.
Back in the 1960s, the federal government funded about two-thirds of all research and development in the U.S. economy.
But toward the end of the 1960s and early 1970s, there's the end of the space program, which involved a lot of R&D spending.
And there's a big slowdown in military budgets at the end of the Vietnam War, which drags down a lot of aerospace and defense-related R&D spending.
And as the government level of R&D spending went down and down, the private industry share began to rise and rise.
So it used to be two-thirds government, now it's almost two-thirds industry.
The concern here is that firms focus on a particular kind of research and development.
They're going to focus on applied research and development that has a real short-term or near-term payoff.
Government, on the other hand, is going to focus on sort of big-picture, basic research that might provide fundamental changes that stretch across the entire economy,
like research on particles or research on things like the laser, where the payoff to really understanding those things might be extremely large,
but it isn't going to be even figured out for perhaps several decades into the future.
Another rule about government research is often that if the government paid for the research, then the results should be broadly available throughout the economy.
So when you have research which is all financed by firms and the firms are patenting that research, then the firms are locking up that research inside the firm
for whatever the 20 years is until the patent runs out.
If the government funds more research, then a lot of that research disseminates through the economy more quickly,
which can certainly be more helpful in terms of encouraging economic growth.
So one possibility for encouraging research is how the government pay for it directly.
Another approach is to provide tax credits for businesses for research and development,
and there's actually something in the tax code called the R&D tax credit, how it works is a little bit complex,
but basically it's a tax credit which says, for every dollar a firm spends on research and development, which is above a certain base amount,
the firm gets to take 20 cents off its tax bill.
Now, the nice thing about an R&D tax credit is that it's relatively flexible.
One of the concerns about government spending money on R&D directly is that government also determines what the projects are,
and government's going to sit down and say, you get a grant for this, you get a grant for that,
but there's no reason to believe that the government knows exactly what all the right research projects are.
If you just give firms a tax credit for R&D, that lets firms track down things that perhaps the government research panel
or the National Science Foundation wouldn't necessarily have given tax money for.
The R&D tax credit has been a funny part of the tax code.
It was originally put in place in 1981, but it keeps being put in place for just a few years at a time,
which seems odd if you think about it, because you would like businesses to be able to plan on it for the long term.
I've heard some cynics say that actually that Congress likes having it in place for just a few years at a time,
because then firms have to lobby for it to be reenacted again, which means more contributions for political campaigns every few years.
But it's not a very pricey tax break.
It reduces the taxes paid by corporations by a total of about $5 billion a year.
So that's real money, but not in federal government terms.
Another way that the government can support R&D is to subsidize the spread of information,
to subsidize the spread of information across organizations and even across the country,
through methods like helping build the internet or across international boundaries as well.
Let me try and give you a couple of examples.
In 1993 there was something called the National Cooperative Research and Production Act,
and what it allowed companies to do was to form jointly funded research and development institutions.
Now, the problem for companies in the past had been that if they all got together and did common research and development,
they might get attacked under the antitrust laws for getting together and acting like a cartel.
But when companies work together in one of these collaborative research and development things,
they share the expenses of research and development, and they also share any discoveries that result.
Such joint agencies offer a way for firms to share the risks of R&D and also to share the benefits of research and development,
rather than facing the risk that one winner-take-all innovator will discover the patent and lock up the market for the next 20 years.
Before this law passed, antitrust authorities might have challenged joint research efforts on antitrust grounds,
but the new 1993 law removed that threat, and since then there have been a bunch of these joint research and development organizations
that have been set up. Two of the ones I'm most familiar with are one doing semiconductor research,
one doing research on new batteries, and especially in Japan there are a whole bunch of these organizations for doing jointly shared research.
The U.S. government has tried to come up with a lot of other ways going beyond patents and copyrights
and intellectual property to subsidize research and development in a direct way.
In fact, there is some controversy over whether, in some cases at least, inventors might be receiving too much protection
and might be receiving too large a benefit from this combination of tax breaks and government spending and intellectual property law.
After all, it's worth remembering here the ultimate goal of subsidizing innovation is to benefit consumers.
It's to benefit the economy as a whole. It's not to make it easier for firms to earn really large profits for a long time.
So let's think about how it might be possible that inventors could receive too much protection.
Let's first of all just talk about some nuts and bolts of how patents are granted.
The U.S. Patent Office grants about 200,000 patents a year.
Think of that for a moment. They grant 200,000 patents a year and many of them after relatively little consideration.
It usually takes on average about three years to get a patent.
And the patent examiner, the person in the office that's looking at whether or not to grant the patent,
on average spends about 18 hours deciding whether to grant a patent.
Still, in the mid-2000s, there was a backlog of about 750,000 patent applications that was piling up,
even though people are taking sort of two working days to decide whether to grant one.
Something like 85% of all patent applications eventually result in a patent,
even if they have to sort of change the patent or change what was being applied for along the way.
But when you think about how many of those patents are important,
one measure is that only about one-tenth of 1% of the patents that are granted are ever actually litigated in trial.
The overwhelming majority of patents that are granted end up having essentially zero economic value,
but a very small number of them end up having extremely large economic value.
Now this process ends up with some weird patents being granted,
some patents that you look back on in retrospect and think,
I'm just not sure how much sense that made.
For example, the firm called priceline.com that they sell airline tickets and travel items and a lot of other stuff,
they actually got a patent on the idea that people could buy items by submitting bids over the internet.
Now it's just not clear, at least to me, that that is an invention that should be patented somehow,
the idea of submitting bids over the internet.
The online retailer Amazon.com got a patent for the idea of being able to buy something on the internet by clicking a mouse one time.
I don't know, I'm just not sure that that's an idea that deserves a patent,
as opposed to just a way of doing business.
One firm even got a patent that seemed to cover peanut butter and jelly sandwiches with their crusts cut off.
They were producing a product that was peanut butter and jelly sandwich with the crusts cut off
and they managed to get a patent on it and they actually sued some other small sandwich shops
for making peanut butter and jelly sandwiches with the crusts cut off.
Patents block competition, but is it really necessary to block competition in these kinds of ways?
In some cases, if a patent is blocking competition, it can become a large and even in some cases a permanent block to other competitors,
as well as a hindrance to additional innovation.
Let me give you an example of a real problem with patents.
In the early 1970s, Xerox had received over 1700 patents on various elements of the photocopy machine.
What happened was, every time Xerox improved the photocopier by just a little bit,
it would go get a patent on whatever that tiny little improvement was.
So your standard photocopy machine had literally 1700 patents.
As the old patents ran out, Xerox was of course continually improving the machine,
so they were continually getting new patents and no one could enter the photocopy market,
no other firms, because no one could get through this hedge of 1700 patents.
Even if you could figure out different ways to do a few things,
it was very hard to think of a photocopier that wouldn't infringe on some of Xerox's patents.
So in the early 1970s, the US government, the antitrust folks, went to Xerox and said,
basically, you're abusing the patent process.
You're abusing the patent process by using this possibly everlasting stream of patents
to block the entry of other firms into the photocopier market.
And you're essentially using the patent process, not for a temporary gain,
but to create a permanent monopoly.
Well, in 1975, Xerox of course didn't admit it had done anything wrong,
but it did agree to allow all other companies to use its patents
and to drop all of its outstanding lawsuits against other companies for violating its patents
and to provide competitors with access to certain future patents.
Perhaps not as a big surprise, a flood of new competition opened up in the photocopier market.
And Xerox's market shared the photocopier market,
which had been, you know, 95% of the US photocopier market in the early 1970s
fell to less than half of the photocopier market by 1980.
This problem of many interlocking patents is sometimes called a patent thicket,
and it still can be a real problem in lots of industries,
particularly in some technical industries like pharmaceuticals or in semiconductors
and certain kinds of electronic products,
where any given product may rely on a whole bunch of different patents.
What often happens, in fact, is that established firms all get together in a room
and sort of trade access to their patents.
They literally all go in, they're patent lawyers, they're business people,
and they all sit down and say, look, these are the patents we've got,
what are the patents you've got, what are you willing to trade?
We'll give you, you can use ours if we can use yours.
But if you're a new firm trying to get into the market,
that doesn't help you much because you don't necessarily have any patents to trade.
And so it can be a real problem for preventing entry of new firms into those industries.
Copyright extensions can also be extended in a way
which doesn't make a lot of sense from the standpoint of helping innovators.
In 1998, something was passed called the Sunny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act,
and it increased the length of copyright terms,
which used to be the life of the creator plus 50 years,
and now it became the life of the creator plus 70 years.
Now, it's hard to believe that extending copyright for extra 20 years
after the death of the person who created it
is really going to have a big impact on their incentives to innovate.
But that 20-year extension mattered a lot to firms
that were worried that certain long-time images that they owned
might be about to go off of copyright and into the public domain.
The sort of scuttlebutt was that one big concern was that Mickey Mouse
was just about to go into the public domain,
and Disney wanted to protect Mickey Mouse.
In the physical world, too,
new innovations often build on old ones.
And if you give current inventors a lot of power to protect their inventions,
the result can be that you block later inventors.
This is especially a problem if groups of innovations all work together,
and any one of the current patent holders can block the new invention.
Remember again, the ultimate goal here is not being nice to innovators.
It's not just being sweet to people who invent stuff.
The goal is to encourage a steady stream of new innovations
that will increase the standard of living in the U.S. economy.
Indeed, it's been common for a long time for people to say
that one of the interesting things about the U.S. economy
is that it was built so much on invention.
One reason that the U.S. economy went from a small backwoods country in 1800
to being on the verge of being the richest country in the world in 1900
was the way in which there were all sorts of new inventions.
Now, some people said,
well, look, it's just a big, empty country without a lot of labor,
so people were forced to invent.
Other people have said, well, it's sort of a cultural thing.
But a lot of economists would say it's because in the United States,
the U.S. Constitution recognized the importance of property rights early on.
And by recognizing the importance of property rights early on
and rewarding inventors,
we created a society where innovation and invention would be rewarded.
