It's a tough contest to determine what economic statistic is most misunderstood.
There are a lot of deep misunderstandings out there, but I think there's a clear winner
for the most misunderstood economic statistic, and it's the balance of trade.
That's going to be our fourth macroeconomic goal to talk about what's meant by a sustainable
balance of trade.
A useful starting point here, most people's starting point, is to talk about what economists
call the merchandise trade balance.
The merchandise trade balance refers to the gap between exports and imports of goods,
but goods only, not services, not other payments between countries.
Most people see the trade balance, and they think about goods, they think about cars and
computers and those kinds of imports and exports.
If exports are bigger than imports, then a country has a trade surplus.
If imports are bigger than exports, then a country has a trade deficit.
And in the good old days, which might mean like 20 years ago, international trade really
was ships and planes filled with cargo, filled with goods.
But now, telephone call centers and software design can happen in India or Ireland, just
as if the person was down the hall or in the next building or in the next town.
The same can happen with medical and legal transcription services, lots of back office
records like those relating to accounting, finance, health, insurance, personnel.
And of course, we know that movies and music and software can be shipped around the world
on the internet at almost zero cost.
In that kind of a world, the merchandise trade deficit alone is a pretty limited description
of the overall balance of international trade.
The current account balance is the single statistic that captures the most comprehensive
picture of a nation's balance of trade.
The current account balance builds upon the merchandise trade deficit, and it captures
just a more comprehensive picture of what happens in a nation's trade.
It includes trading goods, it includes trade and services.
It also includes investment income received from past investments in other countries and
unilateral transfers of resources between countries.
I'll say that all the data here is easily available, updated as you like, at the website
of the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Let me walk through the four parts of the U.S. current account balance.
The first part is merchandise trade.
The merchandise trade balance we talked about a moment ago, which is trade in goods.
So in 2003, for example, the U.S. exported $713 billion in goods and imported $1,261
billion, $1.2 trillion in goods.
So the overall trade balance in merchandise trade was a deficit, a negative number, of
$548 billion.
In services trade, which is the second big part of the current account balance, the U.S.
exported $307 billion worth of goods in 2003 and imported $256 billion of goods for an
overall balance of positive $51 billion.
The U.S. ran a trade surplus in trade with services.
In terms of investment income, investment income is the category where a country or
a firm has made an investment in some other country, and having made an investment in
some other country, now it's receiving a rate of return on that investment.
So that also represents a flow of money that's being passed back and forth, and the exports
in terms of exports, that is, money which was sent out of the country by the U.S., the
U.S. received $294 billion in investment income and imported $261 billion.
So the U.S. actually had a surplus of $33 billion in investment income.
And a final category called unilateral transfers just refers to money which is sent overseas
for any particular reason.
It could be foreign aid money.
It could be that there's a guest worker in the United States who is looking at that
money and is earning something in the United States and then sending it back overseas.
And so when they do that, that counts as a unilateral transfer.
And unilateral transfers in 2003 ran about $67 billion negative.
That is, it was money flowing out of the country, going out to other countries from
the United States.
So you take these four categories together.
The deficit in merchandise trade, the surpluses in services trade, the surplus in investment
income, and the deficit in unilateral transfers.
And for 2003, the overall current account balance for the U.S. economy was a deficit
of $531 billion.
That number seems to be going up and up.
By 2004, it looked certain that the U.S. would have a current account trade deficit of over
$600 billion, which is really a pretty large number, even relative to the enormous U.S.
economy.
Let's think a little bit about U.S. trade experience with trade deficits.
And when I say trade deficits, I'm really going to mean current account deficits since
World War II.
If you look at a graph that shows U.S. trade deficits and trade surpluses going back to
about 1950, what you see is from the late 1940s up until about 1970, the U.S. trade
deficit is really close to balance in most years.
It's usually the surplus or the deficit is usually less than 1% of GDP, and typically
it's a small surplus rather than a small deficit.
In the 1970s, the trade balance remains small, typically less than 1% of GDP, but instead
of usually being surpluses, in the 1970s, usually it's small trade deficits.
But starting in the early 1980s, the U.S. trade deficit explodes.
It goes up to over 3% of GDP, much higher than it's been at any time in the preceding
years.
And then after a little bit of a sag in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the trade deficit
begins exploding again in the late 1990s and into the first decade of the 2000s.
By the mid-2000s, the annual trade deficits, like the ones for 2003 and 2004 I mentioned
before, are running at something like 4% and 5% of GDP, really very large numbers for the
size of an economy.
Now something to notice here.
Something happened in both the mid-1980s and again in the mid or early 2000s that made
U.S. trade deficits really large.
Now stick that thought in the back of your mind so we can call back on it later.
From a macroeconomic point of view, the balance of trade is intimately related to national
saving and national investment.
And to understand how economists look at the trade balance as a macroeconomic fact, you
need to notice this sort of key relationship.
Everything on the surplus side of the trade balance involves money flowing into a country.
For example, on the surplus side of the trade balance is when the U.S. economy exports goods
or services.
When we export goods or services, the U.S. economy gets money from abroad.
The surplus involves money from abroad coming to the U.S.
With investment income, it involves money coming from abroad to the U.S.
With services trade, exports of services money coming from abroad to the U.S.
Everything on the negative side of the trade balance represents money flowing out of the
U.S. economy.
So for example, if the U.S. economy imports goods or services, then that's U.S. spending
power being sent to producers somewhere else.
With investment income, we're talking about foreign owners of assets in the U.S. sending
money somewhere else.
With unilateral transfers, we're talking about U.S. aid or payments from workers in the U.S.
being sent somewhere else.
So when we think about trade and we think about trade surpluses and deficits, when there's
trade balance, the flow of funds coming into the country from all the goods and services
that we export, and the flow of funds going out of the country from all the imports and
other parts of the current account balance, those two things balance out if the trade
deficit is zero.
The flows of funds balance out.
When there's a trade deficit, like what the United States has, the trade deficit means
that on balance, dollars were flowing out of the United States.
For example, we were importing lots and lots of things, the imported money were flowing
out of the United States, and there wasn't a corresponding flow coming back.
So what happened?
What happened to these extra dollars?
What happens to the extra dollars flowing out of the U.S. economy that are not coming
back?
Well, we know what's not happening to them.
We know those dollars were not used to purchase U.S. goods and services.
We know they were not used as payment of investment income to U.S. owners who own foreign assets.
We know they didn't come back as unilateral transfers.
Those are already counted in the current account balance.
So what happened to, say, a dollar that was earned by a Japanese automobile manufacturer
when they sold something in the United States?
What happened to that money?
It's possible that the money went into a bank somewhere in Japan and was deposited
as dollars, but there's a really important thing here to remember.
An old professor of mine used to make a big point of saying, you got to remember, U.S.
dollars are only legal tender in the United States.
That's of course not literally true.
There's a few little Caribbean countries where you can spend dollars pretty easily.
But basically, it's true, U.S. dollars are not legal tender in Japan.
If a Japanese firm earns U.S. dollars by exporting to the United States, it doesn't put those
U.S. dollars, usually doesn't put those U.S. dollars in a bank in Japan because it doesn't
want U.S. dollars.
The Japanese firm wants yen.
It wants yen to pay its workers and its suppliers and to pay its shareholders.
The Japanese firm is in the Japanese economy, so it wants to trade the dollars to someone
who has yen in the foreign exchange market.
When the Japanese firm trades those dollars, what happens to them?
In one way or another, they end up invested in U.S. assets.
Either it goes to someone who buys stocks and bonds directly or property or who somehow
puts it in a bank account, and if you put it in a bank account, of course, then the
bank will loan out the money to borrow or who wants to buy or invest in the United States.
These extra dollars that flow overseas are not coming back as goods or services, but
they're coming back as a flow of investment.
They're coming back in terms of the U.S. economy as a whole, borrowing from foreigners who
have earned dollars in the United States and, in one way or another, are investing them
back in the U.S. economy.
To economists, a trade deficit literally means the same thing as a nation that on net is
borrowing from abroad and receiving an inflow of investment from abroad.
For exactly the same reasons, a trade surplus literally means the same thing as saying that
a nation on balance is lending money abroad or having an outflow of foreign investment.
A trade surplus and a trade deficit aren't just about the flow of goods.
In fact, to most economists, they aren't primarily about the flow of goods.
They're about this flow of money and whether the flow is bigger going one direction or
another.
Now, how do we think about this flow of money across international borders and put it in
some kind of an overall macroeconomic context?
I'm going to introduce a tool here, a tool that's useful to thinking about these flows
and that we'll be using throughout many of these macroeconomics lectures.
This is, in mathematical terms, an identity.
All an identity means is this is a statement which is true by definition.
This is the national savings and investment identity.
What it says is that if you take domestic savings of capital plus all the inflows of
foreign capital, those have to equal domestic investment plus government borrowing.
Now why must those be equal to each other?
Well, the left hand side of that equation, that is to say domestic saving and the inflow
of foreign money represent sources of a supply of financial capital.
People's savings are a supply of financial capital.
The investment coming in from foreign investors is a supply of financial capital.
On the other part of the equation, investment in the government deficit, those both represent
demand for financial capital.
Business investment demands financial capital so they can build new plant and equipment
and the federal government is borrowing, that's what government budget deficits tell you,
and so they're borrowing money and that represents a demand for financial capital as well.
Now we know that in the market for financial capital at any point, the quantity actually
supplied must equal the quantity actually demanded.
So all this identity, all this statement is telling us is that a macroeconomy has two
big sources of capital, the U.S. economy right now, its own savings and foreign investment.
And those two big sources of capital have to equal the two big demands for capital, which
are from private firms and from the government.
So what a trade deficit ends up meaning is that it's an extra source of money flowing
into the economy.
It's an extra source of capital which can in turn be borrowed by firms or by the U.S.
government.
Now an identity is true by definition.
This one is true because quantity supplied of financial capital has to equal quantity
demanded.
And as a result, since it always has to hold true by definition, a change in one part of
the equation must lead to changes in at least one other part of the equation.
So for example, let's say that the U.S. government borrows more money.
So the demand, the quantity demanded of financial capital goes up.
Now somehow this needs to balance out.
So where is the extra money coming from when the U.S. government borrows more?
Other three possibilities based on this national income, national savings and investment identity.
It could be, for example, that the U.S. government borrows more and domestic firms have less
money available for private investment.
It could be that the U.S. government borrows more and people save more.
And so that extra savings means there's more money available for the government to borrow.
Or it could be that as the U.S. government borrows more, there's more inflow of capital
from other countries, more borrowing and investment from abroad.
My point is that it has to be some combination of these three factors.
Exactly which one happens can vary, but it has to be some combination.
The result of having an inflow of financial capital each year into the economy is that
the U.S. economy, taken as a whole, becomes a net debtor to the rest of the world.
Now what exactly do I mean by net debtor?
At the end of 2003, if you took U.S. individuals and firms and the government, they owned,
if you add it all up, $7.9 trillion in foreign assets.
But if you take foreign firms, foreign investors and foreign governments, at the end of 2003,
they owned $10.5 trillion in U.S. assets in the United States.
So do the subtraction, the U.S. economy owns $2.6 trillion less of the rest of the world
than the rest of the world owns of the U.S. economy.
Now whenever you own assets, stocks, bonds, property, whatever, you own those expecting
to get some kind of a rate of return.
And in the current account balance, that investment income category tells you what the rates of
return are, the actual flows of money going back and forth across national borders.
Now relying on foreign capital, relying on foreign capital to come in for investment
purposes may be better in some ways than not having that capital at all.
I don't want to say that borrowing from abroad and having an inflow of international capital
is always bad by any means.
For example, the U.S. economy in the 19th century ran trade deficits year after year
after year.
It experienced very large inflows of international financial capital, and in fact a lot of that
international financial capital financed the railroads and a lot of U.S. industry in a way
that really helped the U.S. economy to grow in the 19th century.
Similarly, if you look at say Korea's economy in the 1960s and 1970s, it was running big
trade deficits year after year, having a big inflow of capital from abroad, and investing
that money wisely, helping Korea's very rapid economic growth rate.
So sometimes borrowing from abroad can make perfect sense as long as there's sufficient
growth to pay back the loan.
Of course, there are other examples where borrowing from abroad can go very bad.
And in recent years, looking back through the 1990s and into the 2000s, countries like
Argentina and Russia have found themselves in situations where they were running very
large trade deficits, having very large inflows of capital, and then finding they couldn't
repay, that the money wasn't being invested in some way that was generating enough productivity
to repay.
With any borrowing, whether it's at the national level or the individual level, the challenge
is to borrow in a way that generates sufficient benefits or returns so you can pay back the
borrowing over time.
Like when you borrow for education, you're borrowing for education with the thought that
you'll earn higher wages and you can pay back over time and still come out ahead.
Or if a firm borrows money to build a factory, they're hoping to borrow money over time,
pay back and come out ahead.
The problem with borrowing is if you borrow a large sum of money to go on vacation or
buy groceries, then that can be a real problem because you're not going to be able to get
some gain in income that will allow you to repay that borrowing in the future.
When you think about whether borrowing is out of control or too high or too low, a useful
way to think about it is, is the borrowing generating some future stream of income which
is going to help in the future to pay it back or is it not?
Well, my own view at least is that US trade deficits are large enough by the mid 2000s
that it would be better if the US could rely more heavily on domestic sources of capital,
on its own private savings.
Because then the gains from investment are going to be flowing to inside the US economy
instead of outside.
If you become a debtor nation as the US economy has and you owe several trillion dollars to
the rest of the world, that means that in the future we need to be generating pretty
good returns so that we can provide rates of return to the rest of the world that those
investors are going to expect.
Now, when we think about the trade deficit in these macroeconomic terms that I'm using
here, I think there are some sort of interesting and somewhat unexpected implications.
We can turn around the national savings and investment identity to ask ourselves, what
are the possible causes of a large trade deficit?
Remember, this, this equation has to balance at all times.
And so if the trade deficit goes way, way up, it must be that something else went up
as well.
So if trade deficits went way, way up, for example, and there's a lot more money flowing
into the US economy, what could be going on?
Well, one possibility is that the US economy would be running large budget deficits.
And in effect, the large amount of money flowing in with the big trade deficit is being sucked
into the economy by very large government borrowing.
Another possibility is that there's a big surge of investment in the US economy.
And foreign investment is being pulled into the US economy by a surge of domestic investment.
Another possibility is that there's a sharp drop in private savings rates.
And if private saving goes way down, then foreign saving comes sort of flooding in to
fill the gap.
And any of those three are possible.
Any of those three could happen.
Again, at least one of the three has to happen for the national savings and investment identity
to hold.
Remember now, trade deficits got very large in the 1980s and in the early 2000s.
This is also at times, we'll discuss in more detail later on, when US federal budget deficits
are very, very large.
Now in some cases, the federal government was borrowing from abroad directly.
In other cases, what was happening was that the federal government was sort of soaking
up the available US financial capital.
And so when firms wanted money, they were turning to foreign investors.
But trade deficits are not always caused by budget deficits.
In the late 1990s, for example, the US budget deficits were small, and in fact, the US economy
had budget surpluses for a few years.
But at that point, private investment was booming during the dot-com years, and private
saving was low.
So in effect, the US economy financed that boom in investment in the late 1990s with
a large inflow of foreign financial capital and with large trade deficits.
This pattern suggests some commonality between the agenda for fixing trade deficits and the
agenda for helping long-term economic growth.
After all, reducing the trade deficit, if we're going to try and keep domestic investment
high, is going to require higher domestic savings.
Raising the US growth rate, as discussed earlier, also wants to keep investment high by having
higher savings.
Thus, the policy response to addressing two of these main macroeconomic goals is actually
going to be somewhat similar.
It's going to relate to encouraging national saving.
We'll come back to that thought in a later lecture.
If the trade deficits are macroeconomic in nature, and there are about national savings
rates, national investment rates, government budget deficits, and the like, then many of
the most common arguments you hear about trade deficits are just flatly misguided.
For example, it's common to hear people say, the US trade deficit happens because of unfair
foreign trade practices shutting out US products, unfair exports to the US.
From this perspective, those kinds of unfair trade practices have literally nothing to
do with US trade deficits.
Again, think about the pattern of US trade deficits in the last few decades.
They were small in the 1970s, up in the mid-80s, down in the early 90s, and then expanding
in the mid-90s and very large in the first half of the 2000s.
If unfair foreign trade practices are the cause of trade deficits, you need to believe
foreign trade was really fair in the 1970s, then got really unfair in the mid-1980s, then
got pretty fair in the early 90s, then got unfair in the late 1990s, and even more unfair
in the 2000s.
Now, some foreign trade practices are pretty unfair, but there's absolutely no evidence
that the unfairness is fluctuating up and down according to this kind of a pattern.
The general pattern is probably that foreign trade has become slightly less unfair in a
gradual kind of way since the 1970s.
Again, it's macroeconomic factors driving the trade deficit, not these unfair trade
rules or complaints.
Similar reasons, the whole idea of protectionism that is restricting imports from abroad isn't
going to either cause or fix trade deficits.
Yes, you can restrict imports from abroad, but if there's a big gap between national
saving and national investment, it's going to show up somehow in a trade imbalance.
Protectionism is also viewed by most economists as a poor idea because it deprives the nation
of the benefits of international trade.
But this argument is discussed in more detail in Lectures 33 and 34.
My point here is just that protectionism is not likely to solve the trade deficit either
because it doesn't deal with these macroeconomic imbalances.
In addition, trade deficits are not primarily determined by a higher level of trade or by
greater exposure to the world economy.
In the world economy as a whole, world exports are about 25% of world GDP.
So question, do countries that export a lot more than 25% of GDP have bigger trade deficits
than surplus and countries that export less than 25% of GDP and are less exposed to the
global economy, do they have smaller trade deficits or surplus?
Well, there's no such pattern observed in the data.
The trade deficit is not about the level of trade.
As I keep saying, it's about an imbalance between domestic saving and domestic investment.
Think about the U.S. economy, for example.
In the U.S. economy, exports are actually a fairly low share of the U.S. economy by
global standards.
U.S. exports in recent years are about 10% or 12% of GDP.
But nonetheless, despite the fact that the U.S. economy is somewhat less exposed to the
global economy, it still has humongous trade deficits.
Or take Japan.
Exports are actually a fairly low share of the huge Japanese economy by world standards.
They're about 8-10% of Japan's GDP.
But Japan has extremely large trade surpluses because it has an astonishingly high private
savings rate and somewhat lower levels of domestic investment.
That money has to flow somewhere and it flows out of the country in the form of trade surpluses.
Get another thought.
You hear a lot about bilateral trade deficits.
That is, the trade deficit the U.S. has with one other country, like China or like Japan.
But bilateral trade deficits have literally no macroeconomic importance.
I mean, in economic terms, you would expect some U.S. to have trade surpluses with some
countries and trade deficits with some other countries.
You would expect those two to more or less balance out.
You don't necessarily expect them to balance out with each individual country, though.
There are a lot of reasons to worry about an overall trade balance that a nation has.
But that overall trade balance can easily have surpluses with some countries and deficits
with other countries.
There's just no economic reason to strive for balance with every single separate country.
High-income countries over time have tended to run trade surpluses and thus been net
investors abroad investing in low-income countries.
But in recent decades, the rest of the world is investing in the U.S. economy on net.
There is no precedent for a situation of the rest of the world investing in the richest
economy in the world on net, and it just doesn't seem likely to continue in the long run.
The historical pattern makes sense.
I mean, after all, it's usually rich countries and rich people who have money to lend.
And they're the ones who then can lend to the poor.
So that historical pattern of rich countries lending to poor ones makes perfect sense.
I mean, the U.S. economy is like a rich person.
It can certainly afford to loan to the rest of the world.
But at some point, it's not doing so.
Instead, it's borrowing money, and at some point, those bills are going to need to be
paid.
The key question is whether enough domestic investment is happening to produce the economic
growth that will let the U.S. pay off all the foreign investors without having to reduce
its own standard of consumption.
But since the late 1990s, the U.S. has been just drawing in enormous volumes of foreign
investment from abroad, and it just doesn't seem likely that that's going to last forever.
Ultimately, the question is, for the rest of the world, how much in U.S. assets are you
willing to hold?
And at some point, when the rest of the world isn't willing to keep adding and adding to
how many U.S. assets it's holding in its financial portfolios, something is going to
adjust.
Either there will have to be a lower budget deficit, and lower budget deficits, remember,
mean higher taxes or less spending.
Or there'll have to be higher domestic savings, which means less consumption.
Or there'll have to be lower investment by firms in plant and equipment.
None of these options are attractive ones.
Some of them don't even seem very likely, like a much lower budget deficit.
But if the U.S. keeps running a high trade deficit, one of those options, at least, and
maybe all three, are going to have to come to pass.
