The previous three lectures have focused on one of the main tools of macroeconomic policy,
the fiscal policies that involve taxing and spending.
In this lecture, the discussion shifts to the second main tool of macroeconomics, the
monetary policies that involve money, banking, and interest rates.
Let's start with a question of what money is, which can actually be surprisingly difficult.
Money isn't just bills and coins in your pocketbook.
After all, many items have been used as money by different cultures.
Native Americans and early American settlers used streams of beads called wampum as money.
In the islands of Fiji, in the South Pacific Ocean several centuries ago, islanders exchanged
the teeth of the sperm whale as money.
People have used cattle as money over the centuries.
In certain areas of what was now Russia, horses were the main form of money well into the
20th century, and sheepskins and lamskins were used for small change.
Metal forms of money have included not only coins, but also metal anklets and bracelets
as a sort of wearable money, especially in West Africa.
In prisons and prisoner of war camps in the 20th century, cigarettes have sometimes served
as money.
Here's a trivia question for that next dinner party.
In the history of the world, what item was used for money over the broadest geographic
area and the longest period of time?
What item was used as money for the longest period of time in the broadest geographic
area?
Hint, the answer is not gold or silver and it is not any precious metal.
The answer is, it's the cowrie.
The cowrie is a mollusk shell that's found mainly off the coast of the Maldive Islands
in the Indian Ocean.
Cowries served as money as early as 700 BC in China.
By the 1500s, they were in widespread use across India and Africa, and for several centuries
after that, cowries were used in markets including Southern Europe, West Africa, India and China
for a wide range of purchases.
Everything from small purchases like buying lunch or a ferry ride to large business deals
like paying for a shipload of silk or rice were all used with cowrie money.
Cowries were still acceptable as a way of paying taxes in certain African nations well
into the early 20th century.
What made cowries work so well as money?
Well, they're extremely durable, they last a century or more.
As one writer said, they can be poured, sacked, shoveled and hoarded in heaps while remaining
clean, dainty, stainless polished and milk white.
Another thing is that parties could use cowries either by counting up the cowrie shells of
a certain size or for very large purposes, they just measured the weight or the volume
of the total number of shells that was going to be exchanged.
It was also impossible to counterfeit a cowrie shell, but gold or silver coins could be counterfitted
by making copies where you mixed in some cheaper metals.
And finally, in the real heyday of cowrie money from the 1500s into the 1800s, the collection
of cowries was tightly controlled, first by the Portuguese and later by the Dutch and
the English.
As a result, the supply of cowries in the market was allowed to grow quickly enough
to serve the needs of commerce, but not so quickly that cowrie shells no longer became
scarce and inflation would have driven them out of business.
So when we think about money, we clearly don't want to think about bills and coins.
Economists instead define money not by its form, which can be widely different, but we
define money as whatever in an economy performs three functions, and those three functions
are the medium of exchange, store of value, and unit of account.
So let me talk about each of these three functions in turn.
The medium of exchange function means that money helps serve in exchanges.
Money can be exchanged for almost everything that's for sale.
US paper money, for example, has a statement on it.
This note is legal tender for all debts, public and private.
In other words, if you owe a debt, legally speaking, you can pay that debt with money.
The American writer and humorist Ambrose Bierce wrote in 1911 that money is a blessing that
is of no advantage to us except when we part with it.
Money is a medium of exchange.
It benefits us when we trade it.
But Bierce wasn't quite right.
This isn't literally true.
Money has these two other functions.
Money as a store of value means that money can be held for a time without losing much
of its purchasing power.
When you receive money, you know you don't need to spend it immediately because it will
still hold some value the next day or the next year.
And in fact, holding money is a much better way of storing value than trying to purchase
physical goods like, say, canned goods or refrigerators and storing those in your garage
and trying to exchange them at some point in the future.
This idea of money as a store of value does not require that money be a perfect store
of value.
In an economy with inflation, for example, money does lose some buying power each year.
But it still remains money as long as it's in widespread use as the way of storing value.
If you have hyperinflation, money almost ceases to be money because it doesn't store
value anymore.
Finally, the third purpose of money is as a unit of account.
A unit of account means that the price of different items is measured with the unit
of money.
Money is the yardstick of value across the economy.
So money offers this practical advantage for people in exchange, a practical advantage
for businesses, a practical advantage for economists and government statisticians, too.
Because we can measure everything as money.
Now, for something to be money in an economy, it has to fulfill all three of these examples,
all three of these functions.
For example, a house can serve as a store of value in the sense that it builds up value
and you can sell it later.
But houses do not serve as a medium of exchange or a unit of account.
And so houses aren't money.
In a casino, chips might serve as money within the four walls of the casino.
Because within the four walls of the casino, chips can function as a medium of exchange
for food and drink and shelter and the souvenir shop.
They can serve as a unit of account for everything you're doing within the casino.
They can serve as a store of value as long as you're within the casino.
But once you left the casino, they're not money anymore.
But money is what it does.
Money is not what it is.
Money is what it does.
The great advantage of money is that it avoids the need for barter in an economy.
And barter would be trading one glitter service for another without the use of money.
Barter is just an inadequate mechanism for trying to coordinate the wide, wide range
of trades that happen in a modern advanced economy with a highly specialized division
of labor.
In an economy without money, an exchange between two people requires what economists
call a double coincidence of wants.
And a double coincidence of wants is just a situation where each person wants a good
or service that the other person can provide.
For example, if an accountant wants a pair of shoes, the accountant has to find someone
who has a pair of shoes in the correct size and who is willing to exchange the shoes for
some hours of accounting services.
Now just think for a moment about the complexity of such trades in a modern economy with thousands
upon thousands of different jobs, thousands upon thousands, millions of different goods.
If you wanted around trying to look for trades in everything you wanted, it would be extraordinarily
difficult.
The double coincidence of wants is difficult to seek out.
So when money fulfills its different functions, it allows an economy to avoid the problems
of barter.
And it opens up a far wider range of division of labor and specialization and exchange.
John Stuart Mill, a famous economist of the 19th century, described this sort of interesting
property of money as facilitating exchange.
This is Mill's description from 1848.
Mill wrote,
When government statisticians think about money, they have their own
way of measuring it.
They use a series of definitions, which we refer to as M1, M2, and M3.
And you can think of these definitions of money as kind of a series of expanding circles,
where going from a narrow definition to a broader definition.
The M1 definition of money includes currency, which is the coins and bills that circulate
in the economy.
It includes travelers checks, which you purchase from a bank or financial company.
You sign them, and then you can redeem them with an additional signature when you want
to spend them.
And it also includes checking accounts.
If you look at statistics for 2004, the total amount of M1 money stock in the U.S. economy
was about $1.3 trillion.
And most of that, about half and half, was currency or checking accounts, with just a
little bit being travelers checks.
Now what would be a broader definition of money?
A broader definition, the M2 definition of money, includes everything that's in M1, but
then added to that, it would also include savings deposits in banks.
Now savings deposits are sort of loosely defined as bank accounts on which you can't write
a check directly, but you could easily withdraw the money at an automatic teller machine or
bank, and maybe you could write an occasional check.
M2 also includes money market funds.
We talked about those in the earlier lecture, where the deposits of many investors are pooled
together and invested in some very safe way like short-term government bonds.
M2 also includes relatively small, that is in this context, less than $100,000, certificates
of deposit or time deposits.
A CD or a time deposit are the accounts that a depositor commits to leaving in the bank
for a certain period of time, ranging from a few months to a few years in exchange for
a higher interest rate.
The point being here, you can withdraw and spend the money in M2, but it requires a greater
effort and perhaps some penalty, whereas M1 can be spent very easily.
If you look at the U.S. economy for 2004, the total amount in M2 is roughly $6 trillion
compared to $1.3 trillion for M1.
And then M3 is a still broader definition of money.
That includes everything in M1 and M2, but when you add on M3, you add on the large time
deposits, the large certificates of deposit, which typically exceed $100,000.
Now remember, of course, when you put your money in a certificate of deposit, there's
a substantial penalty for early withdrawal, and so pulling the money out sooner is difficult
and in some places costly.
Another large portion of M3 is made up of institutional investments, which are like
those big pension funds make in money market funds.
So these ingredients of M3, these large time deposits, these institutional investments in
money market funds, are typically held by very large investors with somewhat long-term
time horizons.
While they could be spent in theory, there's still sort of one more step away from the
highly spendable, easily available money that was defined under M1.
And if we look at the U.S. economy for 2004, total M3 that year was $8.9 trillion as compared
to the $6 trillion for M2 and the $1.3 trillion for M1.
Now I'll just say the lines between these different categories can be a little bit blurry.
For example, some of the funds that are listed under M2, you can write checks or at least
some checks against those funds, which would kind of make them like M1.
But as always, just remember, economic statistics are not defined as cleanly as temperature
or height or weight, we just sort of need to draw the lines and do the best we can.
While here, notice that currency, bills and coins, is actually a fairly small slice of
the total money that's in an economy.
Bills and coins are only about half of M1, the narrow definition of money, and they're
less than a tenth of M3, the broad definition of money.
So when you're thinking about money in a modern economy, you shouldn't be thinking about bills
and coins, you should be thinking about bank accounts.
Common question people have is, well, what about credit cards and debit cards?
How do they fit into the picture?
And the short answer is, they're not money.
Just to be clear here, what do I mean by a credit card?
A credit card is a way of borrowing in the short term and paying later when the bill
comes.
A debit card is a card which is linked to your checking account, so it pulls money out
immediately.
But those are methods of payment that don't directly alter the amount of money in an economy.
I mean, to understand why credit cards and debit cards aren't money, imagine that you
ordered out for more personal checks.
So instead of, I keep my checks in the sock drawer, instead of having 100 checks in the
sock drawer, now you've got 300 checks in the sock drawer.
Has your money increased?
Well, of course not.
I mean, more checks doesn't mean you've got more money.
More credit cards or debit cards doesn't mean you've got more money either.
They're just ways of facilitating payment, which is something different.
Now money is clearly intertwined with the banking system.
Most of money is in the form of bank accounts in a modern economy.
And that means that to understand money, we really need to understand banks as well.
What exactly is a bank?
And this may be a little elementary, but it's important to get it nailed down because it's
going to lay the basis for what's going to follow.
A bank in economic terms is a financial intermediary.
Intermediary is someone who stands between others.
A bank accepts deposits from depositors and makes loans.
So it stands between those who make deposits and those who receive loans.
A bank receives income from making loans, makes a loan and gets interest payments, but it
also must pay interest to its depositors as well as cover its expenses.
So you can imagine the bank sort of standing in the middle with depositors putting money
in on one hand and getting interest payments back.
And on the other hand, the bank is passing money out to borrowers and getting interest
payments back from those borrowers.
From the depositors' point of view, they're depositing money in the bank, which they can
withdraw when they like, and in the meantime, they're getting interest payments.
From the borrowers' point of view, they're receiving loans from the bank, and they need
to repay those loans with interest over time and often to repay various fees that are attached
to the loans as well.
To give you a sense of how this works for the U.S. banking industry, let me sort of
describe the overall financial balance sheet for the banking industry in 2003.
In round numbers, the bank industry had about $600 billion of total revenue in 2003.
Now of that revenue, about $400 billion, about two-thirds of the total, came from interest
that was paid to banks by those who had borrowed money, and about one-third came from fees
and charges.
Those fees and charges are actually a growing part of bank income.
More and more banks are making their money from fees and charges, especially the really
big banks that are arranging complex loans, maybe international loans, that have complicated
terms for repayment.
In round numbers, the banks had about $500 billion in costs in 2003.
Now more than half of that was operating expenses.
That was salaries to people who worked in banks, office, space, and equipment.
Only about a quarter of the expenditures of banks are interest payments.
So if it ever seemed to you that the interest rate you're getting from the bank is a lot
lower than the interest rate you're paying the bank for your bank loan, you are right
about that.
The banks are making a gap between those two.
The rest of the money is essentially what is reserved for bad loans, that is loans that
don't get repaid, and also for tax payments that the banks need to make.
Now if you take the total costs of about $500 billion, total revenues of $600 billion, that
would mean the bank industry as a whole in the United States made roughly $100 billion
in profits in 2003.
Now I won't try to judge whether this is too much or too little.
If you have some of your pension funds stored up in bank stocks, then you probably like
the concept that the banks are doing pretty well.
I will say that it's a good thing for an economy as a whole to have a financially healthy banking
sector.
That doesn't mean of course that every bank needs to make money all the time.
Badly run banks ought to go out of business just like other badly run firms.
But when many banks are in financial trouble all at once, that's not a good thing for
an economy because it becomes difficult for the banks to facilitate the process of making
loans and spreading money throughout the economy.
You might say, you know, how can a bank ever go broke?
I mean, how can the system go wrong?
It sounds like the bank can always make money.
But there are a lot of reasons why a bank could go broke.
A bank will be bankrupt if the value of its loans drops substantially.
For example, the value of a bank's loans will decline if an unexpectedly large number of
its loans aren't repaid.
Maybe in the Great Depression, for example, the whole economy slows down.
Loads of loans aren't repaid, and banks, as a result, their loans are worth very little.
Banks can also suffer if they've made a bunch of loans at a fixed rate of interest, like
most home loans are made, and then the nominal interest rate rises.
So banks are locked into these lower interest rate loans at a time when all the other interest
rates in the economy are quite high.
That makes their loans worth less.
Remember, a bank owes people money.
It owes people their deposits.
Those depositors the money they put in the bank.
In theory, if everyone came to a bank at once and said, I want my money back, the bank could
sell off its loans to other banks and pay back all the depositors.
Selling a loan just means the bank gets money up front and then some other bank would collect
the interest and principal payments on that loan.
As many of you probably know, if you borrow for a home mortgage, the mortgage might be
issued by one bank, but then it's often sold to another bank or some kind of financial
institution who collects the payments after that.
But if the value of the loans has declined, then the bank could not sell its loans and
pay off its depositors.
The money that the bank owes to depositors would be greater than the assets the bank
has.
And so in that situation, when the value of the loans goes down, the bank is essentially
bankrupt.
So banks can go broke and they do.
The fact that they were doing well in 2003 doesn't prove that they always will do well
in the future.
Now how do banks link together with money?
Economists like to say banks actually create money.
They create money by the process of making loans.
After all, if you get a bank loan, say for a car loan or a house loan, what do you do
with that loan?
Well what you usually do is it's in the form of a check and you hand it to the person you're
buying the house from or buying the car from.
You give it to someone else and they take that money and they deposit it in their bank.
Well what does that bank do with the money that was deposited?
Well they take it and they make a loan to someone else.
Someone else gets the loan and they hand it over for something else and that's deposited
in another bank.
So there's this web of loans and deposits where loans are forming the basis for deposits.
Deposits are forming the basis for loans and so on and so on.
Each bank has a certain quantity of deposits.
Each bank uses those deposits to make loans.
And banks are actually required by law not to lend out absolutely everything they have
but to keep a certain reserve and we'll call it the reserve requirement, a certain reserve
that they can't lend out.
So when the bank makes the loan to you, you give the money to the seller of a product,
they put it in their bank and as that process goes on and on, that process creates money.
Remember money is what is in bank accounts.
Money is what serves a function and so when the money is loaned and re-loaned and loaned
and re-loaned, there's actually more of it in the economy.
What limits this process?
What stops banks from loaning sort of an infinite amount?
Well what limits it ultimately is that each bank is holding out a little bit as reserves
and each person is often holding out a little bit of what they borrowed as money that they've
got in their own hands in one way or another.
So not literally all of the money is re-deposited in the next bank.
Some is spent, some is held in other ways, some is held at the bank.
So the question for banks really, when we think about banks creating money is, do banks
loan right up to the maximum possible or do they loan some but not all the way up to the
theoretical maximum?
After all, if economic conditions are weak, if the economy is in a recession, if a certain
business or local economy isn't doing well, banks may well say, you know, we're just not
eager to lend here because we're afraid we're not going to be repaid.
We don't think this is a good time to be making business loans.
So imagine this web of money and lending and how far that web expands depends to a large
extent on how banks feel about making additional loans.
When banks are sort of enthusiastically lending money, getting deposits, re-lending money,
lending up to the maximum, there's going to be substantial aggregate demand in the economy,
lots of buying power, and especially lots of buying power for physical and capital investment
by firms and by houses and cars for consumers, the sorts of things where you need a loan
before you go and get them.
But if banks are financially shaky or for some reason like a weak economy, they're unwilling
to lend, then this entire web of money and loans can begin contracting, and if it all
begins contracting, then aggregate demand in the economy, the buying power of the economy
will be decreased.
And as it decreases, that can cause difficulties for the entire rest of the economy.
Now since money and banking and lending and borrowing are also tightly interrelated with
each other, the government is going to exert some influence over the quantity of money
and lending in an economy.
It's going to exert that influence through its regulation and its interactions with
the banking system.
If the policies affecting money supply and aggregate demand are done poorly, then it
can cause recessions.
There'll be too little aggregate demand.
Or if they're done poorly and too much money supply is created and that web of lending
expands beyond reason and beyond what the economy can produce, the result can be too
much aggregate demand.
As John Stuart Mill said earlier, money doesn't matter at all except when it's done badly.
If it's done badly, that control over the money supply, the expansion and contraction
through the web of banking can either lead to recessions or to inflation.
On the other side, if government manages the money supply well and manages this environment
of lending and borrowing and the web of aggregate demand and money, then that can help aggregate
demand grow at the same pace as aggregate supply.
And as potential GDP expands with long run economic growth, aggregate demand can track
right along.
The macro economy can stay in balance.
You can sort of steer between too much aggregate demand from the great expansion of money and
too little aggregate demand.
You can get to that Goldilocks economy where everything works out just right.
Let me give you one last example of money.
One of my favorites is money from the island of Lap.
Money from the island of Lap takes a very peculiar form and this is all a true story
just so you know.
Lap is one of the South Sea islands and on that island, the money supply is giant stones,
giant cartwheel stones, which are far too heavy to carry.
But it works as money nonetheless because ownership over all of those stones is perfectly
clear.
If you say, well, I'm going to buy this house over there, I'm going to pay you in giant
cartwheel stones, everyone keeps track and says, OK, well, that's fine.
That stone used to be my stone and now it's your stone.
We don't physically need to move the stone.
We can just leave it right where it is because we can buy and sell just keeping track of
of who owns these large stones.
There is even a case in the economy of Lap where they tried to transport some of these
extremely large stones across a bay and the boat sunk to the bottom.
So the money was at the bottom of the bay.
Well, at first they seemed like a terrible catastrophe.
But as they thought about it, they sort of thought, you know, it frankly doesn't even
matter if we can see the money, right?
We don't need to see it because we know it's down there and we can just say, well, you
know, now you used to own that stone and now I own that stone and we've traded the stone.
We don't physically need to move it.
It's fine if it's at the bottom of the bay, right?
So this entire economy of this small South Sea island operated on the basis of these
stones that didn't actually need to be moved around.
Now when you hear that kind of a story, you think to yourself, I think to myself, well,
that's crazy.
You know, how can you do that?
But you know, that's actually exactly how the U.S. economy worked for a long, long time.
Remember all the gold in Fort Knox?
All the gold in Fort Knox wasn't getting shipped from place to place to place.
Instead, like the giant stones on the island of Lap, people were just walking down there
with little pieces of paper and saying, well, this pile of gold used to be belonging to
this bank, but now it's all been belonging to a different bank.
This used to be gold that belonged to France.
Now it's gold that belongs to the United Kingdom.
Now it's gold that belongs to the United States.
And there was a willingness to realize that it didn't matter whether the gold actually
moved one place or another.
All that mattered was we kept track of the buying power.
We kept track of who it belonged to.
And at some point, not that long ago, we realized that real money, what we now think of as real
money, doesn't need to have a pile of stones somewhere.
And it doesn't need to have a pile of gold somewhere.
Real money can function perfectly well, just keeping track of who owes what to whom.
It doesn't have to have some physical asset sitting behind it anymore.
So when we manage money and we think about the relationship of money, we don't need
to think about stones, gold, cattle, calorie shells, any physical asset.
We just need to think about this pattern of the ability to buy and sell and borrow throughout
the economy, which can work perfectly well.
The next lecture will introduce the institution of the central bank.
The central bank has primary responsibility for monitoring banks and encouraging them to
borrow and lend more or less.
