Well, here's a question for you. What individual is the most powerful economic actor in the
world? Well, the United States has the largest economy of any country in the world, so you
might think maybe the President of the United States. But, you know, the President of the
United States has a lot of control over foreign policy in a very direct sense, but all tax
and spending bills have to go through Congress before the President makes a choice about
signing them. Maybe it's someone like the leader of Saudi Arabia for the amount of impact
that person can have over world oil prices, or maybe it's someone in China with that rapidly
growing economy. But even in those non-democratic countries, individual leaders are often constrained
in various ways by the different groups to which they belong and owe allegiance. Well,
in the United States, Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution gives Congress the
power to coin money and to regulate the value thereof. In 1913, Congress created the Federal
Reserve Bank and delegated these powers to the Fed. The Chairman of the Federal Reserve
has great power over the money supply and interest rates, and in the day-to-day basis,
a year-to-year basis, that power is not directly limited by Congress or by the President. In
some ways, you can make a case that the head of the Federal Reserve, the head of the Central
Bank of the United States, is the most powerful economic actor in the world.
The previous lecture focused on the concept of money and how money was interrelated with
the nation's banking system. In this lecture, we want to focus on what is a central bank,
like the Federal Reserve Bank in the United States, and what powers does it have. Then
the next lecture will be, how does a central bank choose which policies to follow and why
do we give such powers to a central bank rather than to elected officials?
The Federal Reserve, like most central banks, is run with a mix of public and private elements.
In the jargon, we call it a quasi-public corporation. Quasi-public meaning it's a
private corporation technically, but it has some very strong public elements. Officially,
the Federal Reserve Bank is a corporation, a corporation which is owned by all of the
federally chartered banks. So, while it's officially a company, in that sense, officially
a private company, it's not a company you can buy stock in. It's not listed on the Fortune
500 and you can't invest your pension in the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve is a
peculiar organization because of the way it mixes government appointees with representation
and ownership, ultimately, of private sector banks. At the national level, the Federal Reserve
is run by what's called a Board of Governors. The Board of Governors consists of seven members.
Each member is appointed by the President and then has to go through confirmation by
the U.S. Senate. These Board of Governors terms are structured in such a way to try
and create some political independence. The Board of Governor appointments are for fourteen
year terms, which means once you're appointed, you would outlast the President to appoint
you. And the terms are arranged so that one term expires on January 31st of every even
numbered year, so over fourteen years the entire Board would rotate. A person can serve
only one full term on the Board of Governors. However, these fourteen year terms are so
long that Board members often leave before their term is completed. And if a person is
appointed to fill out the remainder of someone else's term, then that person could still
be appointed to a full fourteen year term of their own. One member of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve is designated as the Chairman. And from 1987 up through 2006 the
Federal Reserve Chairman has been Alan Greenspan. Greenspan was originally appointed in 1987
to fill out someone else's term, but then he was appointed to his own fourteen year
term in 1992, and that's why his term lasts through 2006. Again, the point of this structure
is to ensure some degree of political independence. Yes, you have to be appointed by the President
and confirmed by the Senate, but once you're in the Federal Reserve system, once you're
Governor of the Federal Reserve, then on a day-to-day basis you're quite insulated
from day-to-day politics. Now, how does the Federal Reserve or how does the Central Bank
in general enact its monetary policy? In other words, monetary policy as we talked about
is the policy of expanding or contracting the money supply, of encouraging or discouraging
a greater amount of aggregate demand or a lesser amount of aggregate demand in the economy.
Well, a Central Bank has three main tools for working with the web of banking and money
to expand or contract how much money is out there. And the three main tools are reserve
requirements, the discount rate, and open market operations. So let's walk through
these three main tools one by one. The first tool, the reserve requirement. The reserve
requirement is a requirement that banks are not allowed to loan out a certain percentage
of their deposits. Now, what does that mean exactly? Remember that banks get deposits,
they lend out the deposits to other banks, those banks, they're lending out the deposits
to people, people deposit the money in other banks, the banks then have those deposits
and they can lend out and this web of depositing and lending keeps going on and on. Now, every
bank is required to keep some of its deposits on reserve at the central bank. And what on
reserve at the central bank means is, in effect, they have to deposit that money with the central
bank. There's no payment of interest in exchange for that reserve requirement. It's just money
that they have to hold aside kind of as a safety reserve. Now, if this reserve requirement
gets higher, then each individual bank has less money to lend out. If each individual
bank has less money to lend out and then the quantity of loans available in the economy
diminishes, one would expect that interest rates will rise. The price of borrowing money
would get somewhat higher. On the other side, if the reserve requirement is reduced, then
all the banks in the economy can hold less money with the Federal Reserve. Banks have
more money to lend out, they can expand the supply of lending and aggregate demand in
the economy, and as more funds become available to lend out and the supply of loanable funds
expands, then the interest rate should decline a little bit. In 2003, just to give you a
sense of how this works, the Federal Reserve required that banks hold reserves equal to
3% of the first $41.3 million deposited in checking and savings accounts for the bank
as a whole, and for any amounts deposited above $41.3 million, the bank had to hold
reserves equal to 10% of that amount, so that was the reserve requirement in 2003. Now,
almost every year, small changes are made in the reserve requirement. For example, that
$41.3 million dividing line is sometimes bumped up by a few million dollars or bumped down
by a few million dollars, and of course, bank's role is inventing these new kinds of accounts,
and so the question of whether something is in a savings account or a checking account
or exactly how these different accounts work requires some different technical rulings,
but changes in reserve requirements that have a large effect on bank reserves are actually
quite rare. This tool of monetary policy, at least in the United States, is not used
all that often.
Second way in which a Fed could think about controlling and encouraging banks to lend
or not lend out money. Let's imagine a situation where the bank has loaned out most or perhaps
all of the funds it can possibly loan out, right up to the edge of the reserve requirement,
and of course, banks can't be sure at the very end of the day if they're right on the
edge, have they gone a little too far in lending, not quite far enough, or what if someone comes
and gets deposits and pulls some money out, then unexpectedly they might find that they
don't quite have enough deposited with the central bank to meet the reserve requirement.
Now, in that situation, the reserve requirement has to be met, so what the bank does in the
short term, if they get into the situation where they're right on the edge, is they borrow
from the central bank. They borrow short term just for long enough to get their accounts
straightened out to adjust their balance of loans and deposits, so they've got enough
money stored for the reserve requirement. When that happens, when you borrow from the
central bank, then the interest rate that is charged to an individual bank for borrowing
from the central bank is called the discount rate. So just to be clear on the definition
there, the discount rate is the interest rate charged by the central bank on loans that
it makes to individual banks, and that discount rate is the second big tool of monetary policy.
Let's think for a moment about how the discount rate would work. In fact, the central bank
raises the discount rate. It charges a higher discount rate to individual banks. When the
central bank does that, it's going to encourage banks to keep money on hand, because they
know that if they run over and they do need to borrow from the central bank, they need
to pay a high interest rate, and so banks will be encouraged to leave as sort of an extra
margin, not just the reserve requirement, but some extra margin to make sure they don't
bump into that reserve requirement, and that extra margin means banks would loan out a
little bit less than they otherwise would. So a higher discount rate from the central
bank discourages banks from loaning a little bit will reduce the amount of money that's
out there in the economy. Conversely, what if the central bank reduces the discount
rate? Well, if it reduces the discount rate, then banks are going to be less concerned
that they don't have enough on reserve at the central bank, and if they're less concerned
that they don't have enough, then they're going to be more willing to lend right up
to the maximum possible, because they know that if they need to borrow money from the
central bank, it's not a big deal. It's not going to be a high rate of interest that they
need to pay, and these are extremely short-term loans, often they're literally overnight,
so a low rate of interest overnight isn't going to be a big deal.
Now in practice, although this is a perfectly good theoretical tool of monetary policy,
the Federal Reserve most of the time lends relatively little money at the discount rate.
Before a bank borrows from the Federal Reserve to fill out its needed reserves, the bank
is expected to first try and borrow from other available sources, like other banks. So this
discount rate, which is the rate charged from the central bank to individual member
banks, doesn't have as much of an effect as you might think, because not very much is
borrowed at that rate. Instead, the key interest rate is probably the rate at which banks charge
each other for these overnight loans, and we'll get to that rate interest rate in a moment.
So ultimately, the discount rate doesn't get moved up and down a whole lot, it does in
some cases, but it's not a very commonly used tool of monetary policy.
So third tool, I've just given you two tools and said neither was used very much, and you
can intuit that the third tool is really the main tool of monetary policy. The third tool
is referred to as open market operations. And open market operations occur when a central
bank buys or sells bonds with the goal of decreasing or increasing the money supply.
Now let's think about how this works. Banks, remember, are holding assets. They've got
these deposits that people have given them, and they need to invest those deposits one
way or another. Some of the deposits, banks, in effect, loan out to people, and they get
interest rates in that way, but most banks also hold a certain amount of money in bonds,
usually in government bonds, and they receive some interest just from holding those bonds.
So the Federal Reserve can buy and sell bonds with banks. Let's say, first of all, the Federal
Reserve goes to banks and buys bonds, and particularly here we're talking about bonds
issued by the U.S. government. So the Federal Reserve goes to the banks. The Federal Reserve
gives the banks money. The banks give bonds to the Federal Reserve. In that situation,
the banks now have more money to lend, while the Federal Reserve is holding the bonds.
So when the Fed buys bonds from the banks, the banks end up with more money to lend out.
Remember, bonds are not money. They're not part of M1 or M2 or M3. A bank which is holding
bonds, which is invested depositors' money in treasury bonds, can't lend out the bonds.
That money is in effect tied up. And so when the Federal Reserve buys the bonds, it loosens
up that money, provides money to the bank, and then the bank can lend out more than it
otherwise would. What's the intuition on the other side? What if the Federal Reserve
takes some of the treasury bonds that it's built up over time, and it sells those bonds
to banks? Then the banks have more bonds, and the Federal Reserve has more money. The
banks have handed over money in the sense of M1 or M2 or M3 to the Federal Reserve,
and now the assets of the bank are tied up in these bonds, which they can't lend out.
So when that happens, then the bank is going to have less money to lend out. The quantity
of loans in the economy will be smaller, and aggregate demand will be diminished as well.
Open market operations are the most primary and direct and commonly used tool of monetary
policy. The real reason for that is that the reserve requirement and the discount rate
require sort of thinking about how will banks react to a change in rules, and how will banks
react and think about what they're going to do if this interest rate goes up or this reserve
requirement goes up. That's a bit of a sketchy thing to try and think about. One can never
be entirely sure. But with an open market operation, you can order a specific quantity
of bonds to be bought or sold, you can see the result, and if you want to do more, you
can do more. So it's a fairly direct and predictable lever that really seems to work.
The open market decisions about buying and selling bonds are made by something called
the Federal Open Market Committee, the FOMC. And the Fed Open Market Committee actually
is made up of 12 members rather than just the seven on the Board of Governors. It includes
the seven people on the Board of Governors, but it also includes five representatives
from bank districts all around the country, and that group sort of rotates over time.
So decisions about open market operations are not just made by these presidential appointees,
although they do have a majority of the group of 12 on the Fed Open Market Committee. There
also is input from people who are actually involved in banking all around the country.
Remember from the discussion of banks and money in the previous chapter that banks create
money through this web of interconnected loans. One bank makes a loan, it's deposited in another
bank, it provides the basis for an additional loan, and so on. Essentially, these tools
of monetary policy all work because they make banks either more or less eager to lend,
or put it a little differently, more or less able to lend. Now to nail down this point,
let's talk about how monetary policy directly influences lending, aggregate demand, and interest
rates. If you want money supply to be larger, what can you do? Well, you could either have
a lower reserve requirement, the lower reserve requirement means banks willing to lend out
more, a lower discount rate means banks are willing to lend out more, or you can have
an open market operation of buying bonds from the banks, so the banks would have more money
and fewer bonds. All these steps to expand the money supply can be referred to as expansionary
policy, a term we use for fiscal policy, or looser monetary policy. They all tend to
reduce interest rates, and they all encourage more lending and more overall demand in the
economy. In terms of our aggregate supply and demand model, they increase the amount
of aggregate demand that's out there in the economy. On the flip side, what would steps
be to reduce the growth in the money supply, or at least to restrain the rate of growth
in the money supply that might otherwise have happened? What would be involved with an expansionary
or a tight monetary policy? Well, it would be a higher discount rate to discourage banks
from lending, it would be open market operations of selling bonds, so banks have more bonds
and less money, or it could be a higher reserve requirement. All of these would tend to change
the money supply in such a way that you would have tighter money supply, you would have
higher interest rates, and there would be less lending and overall demand in the economy.
In terms of our aggregate supply and demand model, all of these steps would reduce aggregate
demand or limit the rise in aggregate demand. When you hear news reports about the Federal
Reserve, you typically hear something like, the Fed has increased or decreased interest
rates, and at this point it should be more clear on what is actually happening. The Fed
doesn't have dictatorial powers, where it just says, we want interest rates to rise,
we want interest rates to fall. Instead, the Federal Reserve, the central bank, affects
the supply of funds that banks are willing to lend. With expansionary policy, more banks
are willing to lend, with an increased supply of funds, interest rates fall. If the Fed
uses contractionary monetary policy, banks lend less, with a decreased supply of loanable
funds, interest rates rise. More specifically, the Fed actually targets or aims at one specific
interest rate, called the Federal Funds Rate. The Federal Funds Rate is the interest rate
at which banks make short-term loans to other banks, which is the interest rate for those
specific loans we were talking about before. As this interest rate goes up or down, the
Federal Funds Interest Rate, other interest rates, like the rate on your car loan or your
home loan, more or less move up and down with that rate.
Although monetary policy in having interest rates rise or fall is the main task of the
central bank, and the one that gets the most media attention, it's worth noting that the
government faces a number of other important tasks to help money and credit function smoothly
in the economy. Let me give you some of the other tasks that a central bank has. A central
bank must ensure that enough currency and coins are circulating through the financial
system to meet all the demands of the public. So, for example, each year the Federal Reserve
has the responsibility of increasing the amount of currency available in banks around the
Christmas shopping season, and then reducing that amount of currency again in January.
Or, do you remember the months before January 1st, 2000, when there was fear that because
of the Y2K problem, there would be computer breakdowns all over the U.S. economy that
might affect businesses like banks? Well, it turned out when Y2K hit that there were
a number of minor computer mishaps that happened. For example, the U.S. government lost touch
with a set of spy satellites for about four days. A number of airports experienced short-term
glitches in the computers that run their air traffic control systems. There were seven
nuclear power plants that experienced problems with their computer systems, and about 4,000
small businesses around the country found their systems for processing credit cards
didn't work. But before that all happened, the Federal Reserve announced that it was
going to have $200 billion in currency on hand, just in case the financial system crashed
and everything needed to run on cash for a little while. In the banking system, people's
demand for currency did surge right around January 1st, 2000, probably out of fear that
something might happen. But the increase in the demand for currency was only about $20
billion. It was far less than the Federal Reserve had on hand and was ready to hand
out. By the end of January, 2001, that extra $20 billion in cash had been deposited back
into the banking system. But the Fed's job, part of its job is to be ready for things
like that to happen. Another task for the Central Bank or the Federal Reserve. The Federal
Reserve is a bank for banks, and so it plays a central role in clearing checks, so that
if you write a check on one bank, it can get deposited in another bank. When you write a
check, say to buy a pizza, the pizza restaurant deposits the check in its bank, but then the
check needs to be returned to your bank. Actually, these days it's a digital image of the check
that gets returned to your bank. And then payments need to be made from your bank over to the
pizza company's bank. The Federal Reserve actually contracts out a substantial amount
of the work of collecting and sorting and photographing and transmitting checks to different
private firms. But the Fed does act as a bank for the banks. It transfers funds as needed
between banks to reflect the flow of checks that happens. Another task for the Federal
Reserve, and more generally for the financial regulatory system. Banks pay into a system
of deposit insurance. Deposit insurance is insurance to assure that all your deposits
are protected, at least up to $100,000, even if the bank goes broke. Now, this is not run
directly by the Federal Reserve or by the Central Bank in the United States, although
in some other countries deposit insurance is run by central banks. In the United States,
there's something called the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the FDIC. Banks pay
an insurance premium into the FDIC, and then if the bank goes broke, there's a fund to
pay off the depositors. The insurance premium is based on a bank's level of deposits, but
it's adjusted according to the riskiness of a bank's financial situation. In 2002, for
example, a fairly safe bank might have paid about $0.03 in deposit insurance premiums
for every $100 in bank deposits. A risky bank might have paid $0.27 for every $100 in bank
deposits. Now, what exactly do I mean here by safe and risky banks? Well, bank examiners
from the FDIC look at banks. They look at the value of their loans, how many of the
loans are being paid off, what the conditions are of those loans, how much the bank owes,
and in general, the overall bank's financial situation. And they rank whether the bank
is in very good financial shape or not so good and all the way down. So it's those rankings
which determine whether or not a bank should pay a higher or a lower level on its deposit
insurance. The FDIC provides deposit insurance for about 5,300 banks in the United States.
Even if a bank goes broke and the executives of the bank lose their jobs and the bank vanishes,
the government guarantees depositors will get their money up to $100,000, which is obviously
enough for almost all individuals, not for some businesses. But this deposit insurance
is not just an empty promise. You remember when the savings loan institutions went broke
in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The federal government ended up paying out $150 billion
because there wasn't enough money stored up in the deposit insurance fund. Another task
for central banks. The Federal Reserve, along with the U.S. Department of the Treasury,
plays a key role in auditing the banks to make sure they have sufficient financial assets
and they're not making overly risky loans. I mean, after all, part of the deal is if
you're going to provide deposit insurance, you darn well also better guarantee that banks
are being operated in a prudent manner. Within the U.S. Department of the Treasury,
there's something called the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. It has a national
staff of bank examiners who conduct on-site reviews of the 2,600 or so largest national
banks. There's another office called the Office of Thrift Supervision that monitors and regulates
about 950 savings loan institutions. And there's another organization called the National Credit
Union Administration that looks at credit unions, which are non-profit banks that are owned
and technically run by their members. The Federal Reserve also has some responsibility
for supervising financial institutions in a direct way. Right now, there are a lot of
firms that own banks and they also own other financial companies, like insurance firms
or brokerage companies. Those are called bank holding companies. And the Federal Reserve
oversees bank holding companies somewhat directly. So for those of you who like alphabet soup,
here's how it all comes together. There's something called the Federal Financial
Institutions Examination Council, the FFIEC. It includes the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, the FDIC. It includes the National Credit Union Administration, the NCUA, the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the OCC, the Office of Thrift Supervision,
the OTS, and the Federal Reserve, which we'll just call the Fed. Basically, the FFIEC, the
overall umbrella organization, tries to make sure that all of these bank regulators all
communicate with each other and use similar standards when they're evaluating the riskiness
of the banks. A central bank like the Fed also has a role as what's called a lender
of last resort. That is, when a financial system is actually or potentially endangered
by a major financial crash, the central bank provides short-term loans so the financial
system doesn't explode or implode. Financial panics can sort of build on themselves and
create a kind of an avalanche of panic. This idea has entered the plot of a lot of different
well-known movies. In Mary Poppins, for example, you may remember a scene where the little
boy Michael wants his tuppence back, and when someone overhears that the bank director who's
played by Dick Van Dyke won't give back his money, then everyone rushes to the bank and
tries to get their money out and the bank shuts down. Or in another movie, and it's
a wonderful life, the bank manager who was played by Jimmy Stewart faces a mob of worried
bank depositors who all want to withdraw their money, and he has to reach into his pockets
and pull out the money that was supposed to pay for his honeymoon and say, you know, we
just take some of it, we just take some of it. Those are examples of what are called
bank runs. People ran to the bank so as not to lose their money. That was before the time
of deposit insurance. Mary Poppins is set in 1910. It's a wonderful life is set during
the Depression. So we don't have these bank runs anymore. People know their money is safe.
But there's still a chance for various reasons the financial system could go into a kind
of gridlock. During the panic of the stock market crash in October 1987, when the value
of U.S. stocks fell by 25% in a single day, no one quite knew where they stood. What if
you were a financial institution that had a relationship with another institution that
held a lot of stock? You knew that other institution had absorbed a lot of losses. Was that institution
broke? Were you broke? If you were broke, then were all the firms dealing with broke?
Where were the losses? How were they distributed? No one quite knew. So on that day, the Federal
Reserve was out there saying, anyone who needs money, we will loan short term at the discount
rate of interest, and we will loan an almost unlimited amount, just so the system can keep
working, doesn't grind to a halt, and we can sort everything out next week or the week
after when things become more clear. In a situation of extreme financial distress, the
fear that other institutions might be bankrupt can lead to a situation where the entire financial
system enters a kind of gridlock and almost shuts down. And in that situation, the job
of a central bank, like the Federal Reserve, is to go out there and make lots and lots
of short term emergency loans so the system can keep functioning, not go into gridlock,
and then we can just sort it all out later. All large economies have a central bank and
most small economies too. Along with the Federal Reserve, some of the other better known ones
are the European Central Bank, which replaced many national banks across Europe when the
European Union adopted the Euro. The Bank of England is another big one since the British
Pound is not in the Euro. The Bank of Japan, Bank of China. All of these central banks
have both the power and the responsibility to conduct monetary policy and to participate
in the soundness and safety of the banking system. In the next lecture, we'll focus on
the actual policy choices in the conduct of monetary policy, which can be a source of
considerable controversy.
