At this point, I'm hoping you've got a firm grip on how economists think about money,
how banks work, what a central bank is, and how a central bank has the power to expand
or contract the supply of money in an economy.
What we now want to do is talk about how monetary policy is actually conducted, how
monetary policy actually pursues the four main goals of overall macroeconomic policy
that is the goals of lower unemployment, lower inflation, economic growth, and a sustainable
balance of trade.
We also want to talk about some other possible goals of monetary policy like whether monetary
policy should pay attention to the possibility that bubbles are occurring in financial markets.
A term we'll talk about a little more later on.
Now, I'll just say up front that monetary policy can have effects on the trade balance,
but those primarily happen through the exchange rate.
So I'm going to defer this discussion of exchange rates and monetary policy in the balance
of trade until the exchange rate lecture, which is lecture 34.
A first possible goal of monetary policy is to help reduce cyclical unemployment, and
monetary policy could accomplish that goal by helping to make recessions shorter.
During a recession, a looser monetary policy will reduce interest rates, stimulate aggregate
demand in the economy, and thus reduce cyclical unemployment.
It will help aggregate demand go up toward the potential GDP level of output.
Thus, the standard prescription is that during a recession, the Fed should cut interest rates,
should have an expansionary or a loose monetary policy.
We have a vivid example of this in recent years.
The Federal Reserve actually cut interest rates 11 times in 2001 during the recession.
It cut interest rates again in November 2002 and again in June 2003.
That federal funds interest rate we talked about in the previous lecture, the interest
rate that banks make loans to other banks on an overnight basis, fell from 6.2% in the
year 2000 to 1.7% by 2002.
So the Fed clearly was willing to act aggressively in the face of a recession to try and encourage
more aggregate demand.
However, monetary policy does not reduce the natural rate of unemployment.
Remember, the natural rate of unemployment is determined by the incentives for working
and the incentives for hiring.
Cyclical unemployment is due to recessions.
The natural rate of unemployment is due to the outcome of supply and demand for labor
in a dynamic marketplace where people are looking for jobs and losing jobs, and where
the incentives for looking for jobs involve the possible welfare benefits and unemployment
benefits that you might get if you're out of a job.
Also the incentives to hire will be affected by the rules and regulations that might potentially
increase the costs of hiring a worker.
So when an economy is at or near potential GDP, at a situation where the natural rate
of unemployment is basically all the unemployment that remains in the economy because cyclical
unemployment is down to zero or almost zero, monetary policy can't do anything to reduce
unemployment further.
So monetary policy can go after cyclical unemployment, but it can't go after the natural rate of
unemployment.
A tighter monetary policy can fight inflation.
It can fight inflation by raising interest rates and reducing aggregate demand in the
economy.
Let's walk through this in a little more detail.
A tighter monetary policy fights inflation by reducing the amount of money supply that's
out there in the economy, reducing the willingness of banks to lend.
As that happens and there's less loanable funds in the economy, the interest rate is
going to be higher.
A higher interest rate means less aggregate demand, less borrowing for things like cars
and houses and plant and equipment by industry, and that means fewer dollars chasing goods
and a lower inflation rate.
A classic example of this would be the U.S. economy in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
That time inflation is running into double digits.
The Federal Reserve under Chairman Paul Volcker was determined to break that inflation.
So they ran a very tight monetary policy.
They pushed interest rates up and up and up into double digits.
They pushed interest rates so high and the fall in aggregate demand was so severe that
the U.S. economy actually suffered back-to-back recessions over a three-year period from
1980 to 1982.
But by the mid-1980s, they had slain the inflation monster.
It hasn't really come back since.
Nonetheless, the Fed keeps up a vigil against the return of inflation.
In 1999 and 2000, for example, there was some fear that inflation might be heating up.
And the inflation rate sort of crept up from 1.6 percent in 1998 to 3.4 percent by 2000.
So the Fed reacted.
It raised the federal funds interest rate from 4.6 percent in December 1998 to 6.5 percent
in June 2000.
The worry about inflation has at some points been worried about a concern over deflation.
Now deflation occurs when the rate of inflation is negative, that is, instead of money having
less purchasing power over time because it's eaten away by inflation, money is actually
worth more over time.
Now, having money be worth more may not sound so bad, but when deflation interacts with
interest rates, it can cause recessions that are difficult for monetary policy to address.
Let's remember that the real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the rate
of inflation.
So if the nominal interest rate is 7 percent, the rate of inflation is 3 percent, then the
borrower is effectively paying a 4 percent real interest rate.
But now let's imagine that the nominal interest rate is 7 percent, and there's deflation
of 2 percent.
Inflation is negative 2 percent.
Then the real interest rate is actually 9 percent.
The real interest rate becomes higher than the nominal rate.
In this way, if there's an unexpected deflation, it raises the real interest payments for
all borrowers everywhere in the economy.
Now these borrowers presumably weren't expecting the deflation, they weren't expecting their
interest payments to be this high.
So an unexpected deflation can lead to a situation where an unexpectedly high number
of loans are not repaid.
Banks find that their net worth is decreasing or negative because their loans aren't being
repaid in the way they expect it.
When banks start suffering losses because those loans aren't being repaid, they become
less able and less eager to make new loans.
That web of money and demand begins to contract.
As aggregate demand declines, you can easily end up in a recession.
And here comes the double whammy.
After deflation causes a recession, deflation can then make it difficult for monetary policy
to work.
Let's say the central bank, the Federal Reserve, sees that a recession is happening and they
want to use expansionary monetary policy.
They cut the nominal interest rate, they cut it and cut it and cut it all the way down
to zero.
But if an economy has 5% deflation, then even if the nominal interest rate is zero, the
real interest rate is 5%.
The central bank can't make the nominal interest rate negative.
And as a result, even the most aggressive possible expansionary policy can't reduce the
real interest rate below zero if there's a situation of deflation.
In the US economy during the early 1930s, deflation was 6.7% per year from 1930 to 1933.
In a large part, this is what made the depression so terrible.
Many borrowers had to default on their loans, many banks ended up bankrupt, and that cycle
of less and less banks, less and less loans, less and less aggregate demand contributed
substantially to making the Great Depression so very terrible.
But it's also worth noting that not all episodes of deflation end in depression.
Japan, for example, experienced deflation of slightly less than 1% per year from 1999
to 2002.
And while Japan's economy didn't do especially well over that time period, it did grow by
about 9 tenths of 1% per year over that period.
So it didn't bring on a depression.
Indeed, there are even some historical examples of deflation coexisting with rapid growth.
The US economy, for example, experienced deflation of about 1.1% per year over the quarter century
from 1876 to 1900.
Deflation was the normal state of affairs in that quarter century.
But during that time, real GDP also was expanding at a rapid clip of about 4% per year over
that time.
Even though there were some severe recessions, the average growth rate was quite high.
Now, the central bank obviously needs to be on guard against deflation.
If necessary, it can try and use expansionary monetary policy to prevent any long-lasting
or extreme deflation from occurring.
In fact, many central banks aim at an inflation rate of about 2%, rather than 0%, because
they want a little wiggle room to avoid a possible deflation.
Except in severe cases like the Great Depression, where everything went wrong all at once, deflation
is not some guarantee of economic disaster.
Monetary policy can also be used to try and encourage economic growth.
Low and stable inflation, low and stable interest rates provide a good framework for long-term
investment decisions.
As we've discussed, the main determinants of economic growth are greater investment
between human capital and physical capital and technology, all operating in a market-oriented
environment.
But part of that stable market-oriented environment is low and stable inflation and low and stable
interest rates.
When you provide a good framework for making long-term investment decisions, you're also
providing a good framework for long-term economic growth.
Essentially, the central bank wants to have a situation where firms need to make profits
by greater productivity and innovation, not by sort of playing games with inflation or
trying to out-guess whether the financial market is going up or down.
Several economists, as I pointed out earlier, have noticed that the great productivity slowdown
that started in the 1970s happened at about the same time as the great inflation buildup
of the 1970s.
And while it's proven difficult to draw a really nice, tight statistical connection between
the two,
there is a deep suspicion that in a developed market economy, inflation is just a distraction
from the kinds of efforts and investments that lead to long-term growth.
There's also controversy over whether monetary policy should be used to address financial
bubbles, like the buildup in the U.S. stock market in the late 1990s or the buildup in
Japan's stock market and housing market in the late 1980s.
And it's probably useful to take half a step back here and say what a bubble is to an economist
and why a bubble is worrisome.
A bubble occurs when prices are going up not because of fundamental values, like we're
really expecting rapid economic growth in the future, but prices are only going up because
investors expect prices to keep rising.
And if you're only buying because you think prices will rise and you'll sell in the future,
rather than buying because of some fundamental factor, like real growth that's going to happen,
there's going to be some momentum that gets created and that momentum can't go on forever.
That's a bubble which eventually has to burst.
It can be very difficult to spot a bubble.
In the U.S. stock market in the late 1990s, for example, some people said, well, why are
stock prices rising?
It's because the internet and new technologies have created these possibilities for enormous
future profits.
That would be a fundamental reason.
Other people said, well, stock prices are rising mainly because people just assume they're
going to keep going up and they're just buying based on the momentum that they think exists.
Turned out, I think, to be a little bit of a mix of the two.
The stock market bubble did pop, but it didn't pop all the way down to loss of 90% value
or something like that.
But sooner or later, something that's based on momentum is going to pop and it can be
difficult for an economy when that happens.
However, central banks do not currently pay much attention to asset bubbles for several
reasons.
One is that it's hard to say when something is a bubble and when it isn't.
I mean, do we really want the Federal Reserve saying, well, we think stock prices went up
high enough and now we need to make them go down some?
It's a lot of power to give the Fed.
Moreover, popping a bubble requires contractionary monetary policy, requires higher interest
rates.
It might even cause a recession.
Is it really worth having a recession in the economy, slower growth, higher unemployment
to pop a bubble?
I mean, after all, the economy might continue growing through the bubble otherwise.
If the bubble pops and it seems like there's a recession as happened in the U.S. economy
in 2001, then the Federal Reserve can use monetary policy at that time to fight the
recession.
It doesn't have to try and pop the bubble in advance.
So in general, central banks have steered away from that task, but some people think
they should be more aggressive.
When we did fiscal policy, we talked about a difference between automatic fiscal policy
and discretionary fiscal policy.
There's a similar policy dispute that goes on with monetary policy.
Given these goals of monetary policy that I've talked about, should monetary policy
be conducted at the discretion of the central bank or should it be guided by specific rules?
The case for discretionary monetary policy is that the economy is unpredictable.
A different problem has come up.
Sometimes there's unemployment recession, sometimes there's inflation, maybe sometimes
there's even deflation or an asset bubble that looks unsustainable.
There can be exchange rate issues we'll talk about in a later lecture.
The central bank has experts who study these issues 24-7.
So the argument goes the central bank should have the flexibility to diagnose the problem
and to react to it as it sees fit.
But discretionary monetary policy has some practical problems.
There are time lags, risks of overshooting, and what we call the problem of pushing on
a string.
Let me talk about those in turn.
The time lag problem is remember monetary policy involves a chain of events.
A central bank must perceive a situation in the economy, hold a meeting, and make a decision
to tighten or loosen monetary policy.
That change then has to percolate through the banking system, changing the quantity
of loans, affecting interest rates, affecting aggregate demand.
Then when interest rates change, businesses and consumers must change their investment
levels and their borrowing patterns, and it takes time for these changes in buying power
to filter through the whole rest of the economy.
As a result of this chain of events, monetary policy doesn't have an immediate effect.
Instead, the primary effects of cutting interest rates or raising interest rates are felt sometimes
maybe one to three years in the future, maybe sometimes even longer than that.
So remember the U.S. had a recession in 2001, the Federal Reserve slashed interest rates.
The recession did end in 2001 in the sense that the economy stopped shrinking, but it
really took until 2004, almost three years later, before employment growth and economic
growth really started picking up again in a strong way.
So there are time lag problems.
A second problem with monetary policy is a risk of overshooting, where monetary policy
creates more economic fluctuations than it resolves.
Alan Blinder, a Princeton economics professor who served on the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors, gives a useful analogy here.
He says, say you go to a hotel room in the evening and the room feels really cold.
So what do you do?
You turn the thermostat up a little bit, nothing seems to be happening.
So you want to go to bed, you turn up the thermostat really high and you go to sleep.
Well you wake up in the middle of the night and your room is like a sauna, I mean you're
just sweating with how hot it is.
So you stagger out of bed and you sort of whack the switch on the thermostat, you wake
up in the morning and the room is like a refrigerator, it's just icy.
Now what's the lesson there?
The lesson is that when things take some time to react, it's easy to go too far.
It's easy to push way too far toward heat and way too far toward cold because you're
impatient for something to happen.
Now in your hotel room, this isn't a tragedy, it's just uncomfortable.
But if the Federal Reserve reacts in that way and it drives the economy through cycles
of inflation and recession and back and forth, that is not a good outcome at all.
A third issue is that monetary policy might be better at contracting an economy that it's
stimulating it.
There's an old proverb that says, you can lead a horse to water but you can't make
him drink.
Similarly, a central bank can buy bonds from individual banks, so the banks have more money
to lend.
But the central bank can't force the banks to lend out that money.
Maybe the banks think the economy is going badly and they think it's a bad time to be
making loans.
They are worried a high percentage of their customers might default.
If banks want to hold extra reserves and not loan out right up to the maximum, they're
perfectly free to do so.
You can lead them up to water but you can't make them drink.
In this setting, using monetary policy to fight a recession might not work especially
well because the banks don't want to lend out the money that you give them.
Japan experienced the situation in the 1990s and the early 2000s.
Bank's economy had entered a period of very slow growth, dipping in and out of recession
in the early 1990s.
By February 1999, the Bank of Japan actually lowered its federal funds interest rate or
its equivalent in Japan to 0%.
And it kept that rate at 0% most of the time through 2003.
Moreover, in the two years from March 2001 to March 2003, the Bank of Japan expanded
the money supply at Japan by about 50%, which is an enormous increase over two years.
But even this amazingly expansionary monetary policy had no substantial impact in stimulating
aggregate demand.
Japanese banks didn't want to lend out the money.
Central bankers have an old saying that monetary policy can be like pulling and pushing on
a string.
When a central bank pulls on the string and uses contractionary monetary policy, it can
definitely raise interest rates and reduce aggregate demand.
But when a central bank tries to push on a string of expansionary monetary policy, sometimes
when you push on a string, the string just folds up and becomes limp, doesn't really
have any effect because banks decide not to lend out their extra reserves.
Now, that's not an absolute rule that banks can never stimulate an economy, but it can
be a concern in certain situations.
Finally, it's worth pointing out that a central bank can have different priorities than politicians
or citizens.
There will sometimes be disagreements over what's most important or how aggressive policy
should be.
A policy of discretion means the central bank has the freedom to make those choices rather
than someone else.
This mixture of difficult practical issues, especially the risk of overshooting, has led
to some interest in whether we might be able to develop a rule that central banks could
follow.
Let me describe some of the possible rules.
One possible rule for a central bank is that it should increase the money supply by a fixed
percentage rate each year, which would reflect the average rate of real economic growth over
time.
So, if the economies grow growing at a real rate of 3%, the money supply would also grow
at a real rate of 3% each year.
The advantage of this kind of a rule would avoid the problem of overshooting or undershooting.
On average, over time, money would grow about as quickly as the economy.
For a time in the 1960s and 1970s, this kind of rule where the money supply would grow
at a fixed rate of time was very popular.
These rules have the advantage that inflation would be kept low over time.
The Fed wouldn't be trying to guess what's going to happen with the economy.
The Fed wouldn't overreact and make matters worse rather than better.
The intellectual godfather of this movement was Milton Friedman, the great economist who
wrote in 1967 that the first and most important lesson that history teaches about what monetary
policy can do, and it is a lesson of the most profound importance, is that monetary policy
can prevent money itself from being a major source of economic disturbance.
That idea was to just have monetary money supply grow at a fixed rate.
That idea works well if the ratio of the gross domestic product to the money supply is constant
so that the money supply and the economy grow together, or at least in a predictable way.
But in the 1980s, the ratio between money and GDP began to vary substantially.
If you look at a graph, GDP divided by the money supply, which is what economists call
velocity, how much money circulates through the economy.
From 1960 up to about 1980, you get this very stable relationship, so it's very easy to
look at that and say, well, money is circulating in the economy at a steady pace.
It's easy to think about things growing in a steady way.
But in the early 1980s, you do that same calculation, GDP divided by M1, and all of a sudden your
graph begins to bounce up and down, and up and down, it becomes quite variable.
Now the reason why this relationship between M1 and GDP changed so sharply remains something
of a puzzle.
Economists suspect that it has something to do with the innovations in banking and finance,
which have changed how money is used in making economic transactions.
The growth of electronic payments arise in personal borrowing and credit card usage.
The accounts that make it easy for people to hold money in a savings account, or it's
counted as M2, write up to the moment where they want to write a check and they transfer
it over to M1, so these lines about what money is blurred.
But whatever the reason, these dramatic and variable changes in the relationship between
money and GDP mean that having a fixed growth rate of the money supply won't work very well.
Perhaps the preferred method of setting monetary policy today is called inflation targeting,
and many countries actually rewrote their central banking laws in the 1990s to use this
policy.
Inflation targeting means the central bank is legally required to focus on one goal,
keeping inflation low.
And by the early 2000s, about 20 countries from all over the world, their central banks
have a legal requirement to target the inflation rate.
These countries include Austria, Brazil, Canada, Israel, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand,
Spain, Sweden, Thailand and the United Kingdom.
Indeed, the legislation that established the European central bank, which controls the
euro, set price stability as its primary goal and defined it as an inflation rate of 2%
per year.
Now the advantage of inflation targeting is that it makes the central bank accountable
and transparent.
It avoids the risk of some discretionary boom and bust economic cycle driven by the central
bank.
But under law, the U.S. Federal Reserve is required to pay attention to both unemployment
and inflation.
In practice what this seems to mean is that the Fed should reduce interest rates during
recessions and raise interest rates if inflation appears to threaten.
But what if there is both high unemployment and high inflation like the 1970s?
Since the late 1970s and early 80s, the Fed policy seems to be make sure inflation is
low first and foremost and then worry about unemployment after that.
But in 2001, when there was a recession, clearly the Fed aggressively moved against cyclical
unemployment.
No nation with a developed economy at least, conducts its monetary policy through the legislative
or the executive branch of government.
Instead, they all set up a sort of quasi-public agency that's somewhat independent of politics.
Why is monetary policy conducted in so undemocratic a manner?
Well, let me give you the case for having monetary policy made through a more democratic
process.
It goes something like this.
I mean, after all, elected representatives in Congress and in Presidency conduct fiscal
policy by passing tax and spending bills.
They could handle monetary policy that way.
And let's remember, this argument goes, the people appointed to the top governing positions
at the Federal Reserve and most central banks around the world are bankers and economists.
They are not representative borrowers.
They don't understand the needs of small businesses or farmers or labor unions.
If central banks had more democratic representation, they might not be so quick to raise interest
rates if they had to pay attention to the firms and the people who are borrowing money
in the real economy.
Sure, this argument continues, democratic monetary policy will sometimes make mistakes.
But after all, we're in a democracy.
It is better to have mistakes made by elected officials accountable to voters than by these
insulated political appointees who might not be representative of voters.
So that's the case for more democracy in monetary policy.
What's the case for more independent central banks?
The case would be that because the central bank has some insulation from day to day politics,
its members can act in a somewhat nonpartisan way and they can make tough, immediate decisions
when they need to.
After all, a central bank does act according to laws passed by elected officials.
But it can respond far more quickly than a legislature.
The U.S. budget takes months to get passed and to be debated and passed and signed.
But monetary policy decisions can be made much more rapidly.
They can call a meeting and decide to change monetary policy every month or more often
if they want to.
The argument for a more independent central bank is that day to day democratic control
of monetary policy is impractical and also it seems likely to lead to an overly expansionary
monetary policy and higher inflation where people are always trying to provide more loans
at lower interest rates.
Countries are reluctant to trust politicians with the power to make borrowing easier.
And they're reluctant to trust politicians with the responsibility for raising interest
rates when necessary.
It may be that politicians have sort of a short run horizon for monetary policy.
And they'll be more likely to say, well, we need to act now to get interest rates down.
And they'll be more likely to overreact in a way which would cause monetary policy to
contribute to big fluctuations in the economy rather than helping resolve those fluctuations.
Politicians may also not be very willing to respect the idea of a natural rate of unemployment.
They might say, well, you know, unemployment is 5%, let's get it to 4%, 3%, 2%, 1%.
And as they try and push unemployment unsustainably low, they're going to create both an unstable
macroeconomy and one that has a built-in bias toward inflation.
Now when you get the inflation, you'll need a recession to fix that inflation later on.
So bottom line here is that no nation uses a democratic vote to make monetary policy
decisions.
The fear is that elected representatives would find it nearly impossible to vote for
higher interest rates.
And the result would be the economy had a bias toward letting inflation get established
and get stronger and stronger.
When I think about this issue of central banks being democratic or not democratic, I think
it's useful to think about judges.
And central banks aren't democratic, but judges aren't democratic either.
After all, America's judicial system is run by judges who are presidential appointees
and the judges interpret the laws made by elected officials.
Few people think that the legislature should be voting on every legal case.
And many of the same arguments apply to a central bank.
Sure, laws are made democratically and judges in some cases interpret the law.
But if judges are really messing up in a big way, then the law can change or in extreme
cases judges get changed too.
Similarly, the rules that guide monetary policy are set democratically, like an inflation
target or a money growth rule or a rule that you have to balance unemployment and inflation.
The central bank then applies and interprets that rule.
This debate over democratic control of monetary policy isn't going away, but the most common
trend in the first decade of the 2000s is countries around the world are moving toward
writing specific rules for central banks to follow, like targeting inflation and then
leaving it up to the central bank to achieve that goal, instead of moving toward greater
democratic control of the central bank.
