If you read the newspaper headlines on a regular basis, you're used to every few years seeing
a headline about how an entire nation has been stricken by an international financial
crisis.
Some of the examples I have in mind here are Argentina being struck by such a crisis
in 2001 and 2002, Turkey in 2001 and a threatened crisis again in 2005, Russia in 1998, countries
across East Asia in 1997, Mexico in 1994 and 1995.
If you go back to the 1980s, there's another flock of these examples.
That happened in these situations where a nation is stricken by an international financial
crisis.
As you'll see, the problem here, the issue, combines a number of elements that we've talked
about in previous lectures.
It combines the growing size of international flows of financial capital.
It combines changes in exchange rates and how difficult it can be to fix exchange rates
in one place.
It combines issues of bank safety and what happens to an economy when its banking system
collapses.
And it combines all of these factors with an extra twist that really it's a nation
which is defaulting, a government, not just a person or a firm.
Could such international financial crashes be prevented?
Is the United States with its looming trade deficits and its enormous inflows of international
financial capital in danger of risking such a crash?
These are the sort of questions we want to investigate in this lecture.
Countries that have experienced financial crashes have typically suffered extremely
large drops in gross domestic product, much deeper than a typical United States recession.
For example, when Mexico experienced a crash in 1995, its economy contracted by 6 percent
in that year.
Indonesia's economy during its crash in 1998 contracted by 13 percent in a year.
Argentina's economy in 2002 contracted by 11 percent in a year.
For comparison, the U.S. recession in 2001 involved a decline of about 1 percent of GDP.
So what happened that caused these financial crashes?
Well, big picture.
The countries that experienced these financial crashes were typically running substantial
trade deficits before the crisis occurred.
And as we know, a trade deficit means that they were experiencing a large net inflow
of foreign financial capital.
This trade deficit or the inflow of foreign financial capital was often about 4 to 7 percent
of GDP.
So that's really quite substantial.
You can see in these economies that they had become very popular destinations for foreign
financial investment.
And so money was kind of flooding into their economies.
As it flooded into their banking system and their financial system, bank lending in these
countries was expanding substantially.
It was rising as much as 20 percent per year.
In fact, bank lending had become so loose in many of these economies, and banks were
so willing to give a loan to almost anyone who had asked that they'd reached a point
where something like 10 to 15 percent of all bank loans were not being repaid on schedule
in those countries.
And since bank accounting in many of the countries we're talking about here is not exactly airtight,
the situation was probably even worse than that.
Now, this sort of overall situation makes some sense if you think about it.
These economies of Argentina and Mexico and Russia and East Asia are really not all that
large by world standards.
If they experienced huge inflows of financial capital with very favorable interest rates,
banks were in effect relaxing their standards.
They were making a larger number of imprudent loans than one might have otherwise expected.
You also could see in these economies a similar effect in the stock markets.
That is, the inflow of foreign investment capital, the much greater demand for stocks
in their markets, was driving up stock market values very quickly.
You're often seeing increases in their stock markets of 20 percent up to 50 percent over
fairly short time horizons of maybe a year or two.
Then this inflow of foreign financial capital, which was driving the extra bank lending,
which was driving the higher stock markets, stopped or reversed itself and turned into
an outflow very quickly.
Now, it's hard to know just what causes a cycle like this to turn.
It's sort of like asking what caused an avalanche.
Sometimes it can be a small, small cause which triggers a big, big event.
But when the cycle does turn, when the money stops coming in so fast, it can turn hard
and fast.
Financial markets, as we've talked about, have some tendency to chase trends.
When the stock market in these little countries is rising, it looks like a good idea to lend
to that country, money just floods in.
Really, it's too much money for the local economy to handle in a useful way.
In the term economists sometimes use, the process overshoots, goes too far.
Then at some point, it becomes apparent the local economy can't actually handle this amount
of money.
Lots of bank loans aren't being repaid.
The prices of companies in the stock market look extraordinarily high, and at that point
the money starts going out, and then all of a sudden it floods out again, and it overshoots
in the opposite direction.
I sometimes say that for a small country, a small economy, the international capital
markets can feel something like this.
You say, well, I'm a little bit hungry, and someone takes a bathtub full of spaghetti
and dumps it on your head, and you say, whoa, that's way too much food.
Then they take away all the food in your house and you starve for six months.
You get these large amounts of overshooting that occur.
As the money floods into these economies and then floods out, there are also sharp shifts
in exchange rate markets.
As the money floods into the economy, lots and lots of people are wanting to buy that
currency so they can invest in that economy, and as a result, the currency gets stronger
and stronger in a big hurry.
Then when everyone pulls out, international investors decide to leave, everyone is trying
to sell the currency to escape from that economy, and that drives the currency, the foreign
exchange rate, way, way down.
One example, in Argentina, the Argentinian peso was worth about a dollar in U.S. currency
on January 1, 2002.
Only six months later, after the money flooded out, it was worth 28 cents in U.S. currency.
So the exchange rate fell by almost three quarters in a period of six months.
It was common in these international financial crises for the exchange rate of the country
to fall by half or even more.
And remember, exchange rates have that dynamic of self-fulfilling expectations, too.
When exchange rates are rising, then foreign investors like to buy into that country and
figure, hey, the rising exchange rate is going to give me higher returns by going into that
country.
But when the exchange rate starts falling, international investors had little desire
to hold, say, Argentinian pesos when they were plummeting in value.
And in that situation, the international investors quickly pull their funds out of the country.
That change from a large net inflow of financial capital to a large net outflow causes that
sharp and violent change in the country's exchange rate.
And exchange rates also have this tendency to overshoot, to fluctuate violently.
These big movements in exchange rates can greatly disrupt an economy.
After all, if you're importing and exporting and there's enormous swings in exchange rates,
it really changes what your entire business is doing.
But there's an even bigger problem.
In developing economies, most borrowing in the international market is done in a major
currency, typically US dollars, but sometimes European euros or Japanese yen.
So when Argentina is borrowing money, the borrowing originally happens in US dollars.
However, in the country itself, they aren't using that currency.
They don't use US dollars in Argentina.
So the bank will borrow funds in US dollars or in some other currency, but then they will
lend out in their own domestic currency.
Now, this creates a difficulty for the bank, sitting between the domestic currency and
the global currency, like the US dollar.
Let's walk through the problem here by thinking about what would happen to a bank in Thailand.
If a bank in Thailand borrowed a million in US dollars, but borrows one million US dollars,
then the bank converts the currency to its domestic currency.
In the case of Thailand, the currency is the bought, and let's say it converts at a rate
of 40 bought to the dollar.
Then the bank lends the bought to a firm in Thailand.
The business, this is what would usually happen, then the business repays the loan in bought
in Thailand.
The bank converts back to US dollars and repays the original US dollar loan.
Now, what happens if the local currency, the Thai bought in this example, suddenly loses
half its value?
Instead of it being 40 bought to the dollar, it's now 80 bought to the dollar.
Now when the local firm repays the loan in bought, the bank is not going to have nearly
enough bought to repay the US dollar loan.
Remember the bank started off converting each dollar into 40 bought, but to convert
back from bought into dollars, now it would need 80 bought to the dollar.
And there's no way the bank got back twice as many bought as it was expecting.
So the bank is broke, the bank can't repay the money it borrowed.
Now remember, banks play a vital role in facilitating transactions, in making loans
to firms and consumers, in helping aggregate demand spread through the economy.
When essentially all of a country's largest banks become bankrupt simultaneously, which
is what happens when they've borrowed abroad in dollars and their exchange rate sinks, then
there is a sharp decline in aggregate demand and a deep recession can result.
And it gets worse.
Moreover, imagine that the government of that country has deposit insurance, as most countries
around the world do.
Then when the bank is broke, the government is responsible for repaying everyone's deposits
in that bank.
And the payments involved here can be huge, they could be 10% of GDP or more.
So what have we got here with these international financial crashes?
We've got a bankrupt banking system driven into bankruptcy by borrowing in US dollars
by lending out in local currency and then having the exchange rate drop sharply.
We've got a sharp drop in the stock market.
We've got a huge drop in the exchange rate.
We've got huge government budget deficits from paying off all the deposits.
We've got no new inflow of foreign financial capital and yep, that pattern pretty much
sums up what happened in the countries that have experienced these large financial crises.
Remember, many low income and middle income countries really hope to experience a steady
inflow of foreign financial investment.
After all, from their point of view, foreign financial investment not only brings money
for physical capital investment in the country, but it's often accompanied by management
expertise and international business contacts, improved training for workers, transfers of
technology of certain kinds.
So these low and middle income countries need to ask, is there a way that we can get
this inflow of foreign financial capital and everything that comes along with it, but reduce
the risk that we're at risk of one of these financial crises, where the money all floods
in and then all floods out.
What policy options might limit the likelihood or the costs of this kind of an international
financial crash?
And remember, the underlying fact of investment capital flowing to low and middle income countries
of the world is a good thing.
So we don't want to cut it off altogether.
We just don't want it to have destructive effects sometimes.
Well, one possible policy.
The International Monetary Fund could give loans to countries that are experiencing a
financial crash to soften the blow.
Well, what exactly is the International Monetary Fund?
We talked about it a little bit before, was founded in 1945.
It's officially an agency of the United Nations, but the International Monetary Fund encourages
stable exchange rates.
If there's a financial crisis where money is fleeing out of a country and its exchange
rate is falling, the International Monetary Fund stands ready to make loans, not just
temporary loans or very short term loans, but to help with the process of long term adjustment
to that change.
At the International Monetary Fund, there's a board of governors, and it meets once a
year with representatives from all the countries of the world.
There's also a 24 person executive board at the IMF, which meets several times a week.
That 24 person board always includes the United States, Japan, Germany, France, the United
Kingdom, China, Russia and Saudi Arabia.
They all have one seat.
And the other 16 seats are elected by the members of the International Monetary Fund.
Technically, votes are always by size of economy, so the US would have a lot more votes, but
most day to day decisions are effectively made by consensus.
The difficulty is that once the IMF shows up, the crisis has really already happened.
The IMF shows up and says, well, you know, there's a lot of advice here for what your
country needs to do to get its economy back in order.
You need to get rid of this huge budget deficit.
You need to get your money supply under control.
You need to think about trade.
They have lots and lots of advice.
And in some cases, historically, the IMF has probably gone too far in telling economies
and telling countries exactly what they needed to do to shape up.
I think the IMF has recognized that and backed away a little bit from that kind of intensive
advice.
But the IMF is kind of like the fire department.
I mean, it's good to have a fire department, but when you're fighting a fire, you can actually
cause a lot of damage in the process, trying to put the fire out.
Is there a way to avoid needing to call in the fire department in the first place?
Is there a way to prevent the likelihood of the crisis, not just having the IMF come in
after the crisis has already occurred?
Well, for those kinds of people whose thoughts immediately jump to government controls and
an obvious answer is, well, let's just have the government pass a law that stops all that
foreign money from flowing out of the country.
Then it won't flow out and there won't be a financial crash.
How exactly though is this to be done?
Remember, if a country is involved in the global economy, if it's importing and exporting,
then it needs to be able to send money in and out of the country at any given time.
It's very, very hard to examine every financial transaction and figure out whether it's a
good transaction that should be allowed because it's linked to trade or whether it involves
money trying to escape the country.
Accountants are very good at concealing those sorts of differences.
In a world of international bank accounts, if a government even hints that it might prevent
money from leaving the country, well, money floods out immediately, thus creating or worsening
the problem that you are trying to avoid.
After all, people don't want to have their money locked up in a country against their
will.
Perhaps the best kind of government control is an example of this work to all write for
Chile in the 1980s, is to worry less about money leaving and worry more about what kind
of money comes in in the first place.
Broadly, you can break investment that comes into a country into two different kinds of
investment.
Direct investment is when a firm comes in and it buys a firm or a factory.
It buys something solid.
Portfolio investment is when an investor comes in and buys a financial instrument like a bond.
The general argument is that direct investment, when you come in and bought a firm, is probably
less likely to flee the country in a hurry.
The investors are more committed.
They're kind of expecting that there's not going to be necessarily a short-term payoff
and so they're not likely to sort of take their money and run quite as quickly.
So if you put rules in place that require a certain amount of direct investment and try
and limit portfolio investment, well, that has costs.
You're limiting a certain kind of inflow of capital.
There are ways to get around it with tricky accountants and so on, since this line between
direct and portfolio investment isn't exactly ironclad, but you might be able, with a policy
like that, to reduce your exposure to the risk that all of a sudden all the foreign financial
capital is going to flee your country.
Another thing countries could do to reduce the risks of a financial crash would be to
do a better job of regulating their banking and financial systems.
So banks do a better job of recognizing that they face some big foreign exchange risks
and they can take steps in financial markets to hedge those risks and reduce the size of
the risk they face.
And at least some of the crisis countries, as we talked about at the end of the previous
lecture, governments had for some time been keeping the exchange rate at pretty much the
same level.
It wasn't actually quite an official policy that the exchange rate would never move, but
over time, banks and firms had begun to assume, sort of based on the experience of the last
five or 10 or 15 years, that the exchange rate wasn't going to move by very much.
When they did move, they were completely unprepared.
Government can be more clear that the exchange rate can move and indeed let it move some
from time to time.
When the government is doing financial examinations of banks, it can say they have to take the
foreign exchange risk into account and do something about it, limit the amount of risk
that they face.
They can also be able to structure deposit insurance so that it really only protects
individuals.
That would be saying to firms, if you're investing a lot of money in a bank, you need to look
after yourselves, you need to worry about the possibility of foreign exchange risk.
Because if the bank goes broke, you, the firm, are responsible.
And then firms would hedge some of those risks as well.
Some people have proposed an international mechanism that would work as a sort of bankruptcy
court for countries that go through this kind of situation.
The hope is that if foreign investors knew they would be treated fairly with some predictable
procedure, they wouldn't be quite so quick just to pull all their funds out of the country
right away.
It could be in some sense a literal international bankruptcy court, but boy, that would require
a whole lot of treaties and it's not quite clear that the international bankruptcy court
could enforce its findings on countries who maybe wouldn't be so willing.
A sort of milder alternative would be to write into the fine print of these international
bond agreements more details about exactly what will happen if a country is unable to
repay.
So the process becomes more clear and transparent and people can start taking it into account.
And that's beginning to happen now in the mid-2000s.
There are a lot of possible suggestions here for how you might have a better international
structure for dealing with these financial crashes.
These are getting smarter about holding more reserves of international currency.
They're getting smarter about recognizing the risks of exchange rates.
They're getting smarter about writing more detailed debt contracts.
And so I think that maybe, just maybe, but maybe this is a situation where we have learned
something from the financial crashes that have occurred and maybe we can avoid or minimize
the risk of the worst of such financial crashes in the future.
We'll see.
I may look like a fool for saying that.
How vulnerable is the United States to an international financial crash?
After all, the U.S. economy is running very large trade deficits in the early and mid-2000s,
which reflect large net inflows of international financial capital to the U.S. economy.
Trade deficits in the mid-2000s have been in the range of 4 to 5 percent of GDP, numbers
like $500 billion a year, $600 billion a year.
Especially those in Japan and China and some of the countries of East Asia have been building
up their reserves of U.S. dollar assets.
Essentially, they're holding the U.S. dollars and we're borrowing from them.
But foreign investors are not going to hold a rising share of U.S. assets in their portfolios
forever.
The ratio of total U.S. debt, foreign debt to GDP is rising and rising, but it's not
going to rise forever.
The total accumulated debts of the U.S. economy to other countries are increasing.
In 2003, the total debts for the U.S. economy to other countries were about 25 percent of
U.S. GDP.
This is roughly where Mexico was in 1980, which is not a great sign given what happened
to the Mexican economy in that decade.
However, we're not quite as high as Argentina.
In 2001, Argentina's foreign debts were 35 percent of Argentina's GDP.
From the current trajectory, though, in the mid-2000s, total U.S. foreign debt is headed
for about 50 percent of GDP by about 2014, and after that, higher still.
Now, the share of foreign investors are willing to hold some U.S. assets, but they're not
going to keep holding more and more and more.
You can look at, for example, international investments of large portfolio managers in
other countries.
In 1995, those international investors in other countries had about 35 percent of their
investments in U.S. assets.
By 2001, those same folks had about 57 percent of their foreign investments in U.S. assets.
Now, it wasn't crazy for them to expand somewhat, because after all, the U.S. economy had very
high stock market returns available in the late 1990s, but there's a limit to how high
they can go.
These are international portfolio managers.
They're not going to put 100 percent of their money in U.S. assets.
But even given this concern that at some point, central banks, at some point, foreign investors
are likely to put less of their money into the U.S. economy, it remains true that the
U.S. economy is less vulnerable to an international financial crash than many of these other countries
like Argentina or Russia or Mexico or Turkey.
What are some of the reasons?
Much of the inflow of foreign financial capital to the U.S. is in the form of assets with
a variable return, like stock in companies or real estate.
And since there's no guaranteed rate of return, like there would be with bonds, the foreign
investors are exposed to risk that the return could be higher or lower.
And the U.S. economy has less risk that they won't be able to pay interest payments that
have been promised.
As we noticed earlier, direct investment can be safer for a country because the foreigners
are sort of taking this risk that the return could be higher or lower.
Bonds can be less safe because of the promise that you're going to pay no matter what.
It's also true that U.S. firms and banks can largely borrow in U.S. dollars, which is their
own currency.
If the U.S. dollar drops in value, U.S. banks don't suffer this mismatch between borrowing
in one currency and lending out in a domestic currency.
And so the U.S. financial system and banking system is less vulnerable than in countries
where they're borrowing in a foreign currency and loaning in a domestic currency.
In fact, if the U.S. dollar does fall, as it has been doing some in the mid-2000s, this
actually reduces the value of the debts that U.S. companies owe to foreign investors.
Those debts are owed in dollars.
And if the dollar is worthless, the debt is also automatically worthless.
The U.S. economy has handled substantial falls in the value of the U.S. dollar in the past
without dramatic ill-effect.
In the 1980s, remember, the U.S. dollar ran up and then down by something like 30%.
That was surely a matter of some concern at the time, but looking back, it didn't seem
to stagger the U.S. economy or create a deep recession or a depression.
That doesn't prove, of course, that the U.S. economy can adjust painlessly now.
But remember, that as a share of GDP, the U.S. economy is somewhat less exposed to foreign
trade than other countries, and it's somewhat less exposed to exchange rate risk than other
countries.
Those who are exposed tend to be big banks, big firms, and they're more likely to have
thought through what could happen and to have some financial hedges in place.
If the balance of trade does fall for the U.S. economy, if money stopped flowing in
and the balance of trade fell so that we didn't have these huge deficits, we know that the
U.S. economy would have to adjust in certain ways.
Back to our old friend here, the national savings and investment identity.
We know that if the trade deficit goes down, it will have to go down along with lower government
budget deficits, less domestic investment, or more private savings.
And this is true whether or not the U.S. economy experiences any kind of a crash.
We know it has to be one of those three outcomes, and in a way, none of them are really all
that attractive.
I mean, for example, government budget deficits going down sounds good.
I mean, I like the sound, but we know that lower budget deficits either means higher
taxes or less spending, and neither of those is very attractive.
We also know the long run outlook is for really, really high budget deficits.
So predicting they fall is just not very likely.
Less domestic investment is clearly a poor option.
That's one of the things that drives domestic growth.
And we could hope for a lot more private saving.
I kind of hope that will happen, but it's worth remembering.
A lot more private saving necessarily means less private consumption, and a reduction
in consumption is not something that a lot of people hope for either.
Even if the United States manages to escape a financial crash as a result of its large
trade deficits, the issues of this disruption caused by international capital flows are
likely to continue over time.
International flows of financial capital are already very large, but they appear likely
to become even larger in the future.
Let me give you a couple of reasons why I think that's true.
There's something called home bias in international investment, which is the tendency of investors
to invest in their own country, rather than being internationally diversified.
It's really very easy these days to invest in a firm in Japan or Germany, almost as easy
it is as it is to invest in a firm in, say, New York or California.
It's very easy to buy government bonds in Germany or Japan or in Thailand.
But although this has become much, much easier in our internet economy, and you can buy
mutual funds over the internet, there's strong evidence that people still tend to buy mainly
their own home country's investments.
There's a home bias in investments.
Now why is this a problem?
Most people understand, as we talked about in an earlier lecture, that it makes sense
not just to invest in one company, but to invest in a diversified portfolio.
You don't want to have all the risk of putting all your money in one country.
Well by the same logic, why put all your money in one economy?
If the US is 25% of the world economy, just put 25% of your money in the US.
But in the 1990s, US investors had about 90% of their money in US firms.
Japanese investors had 94% of their stock market money in Japanese firms.
Canadians had about 88% of their money in Canadian firms.
And this is a long way from the diversification you would expect in a borderless financial
world.
It's also true that most countries still rely primarily on their own domestic saving rather
than on inflows of foreign capital to fund their domestic investments of physical capital.
And I mean we do have a large trade deficit in the US, some other countries have had large
trade deficits, but most countries are much closer to balance.
And at some point, money really might begin moving back and forth across international
borders in much the same way that it moves within countries, say from the northern part
of the United States to the southern part of the United States.
Or in the US international economy, we haven't seen so much of this yet, but it could get
much larger over time.
So my expectation is that what we have seen so far in terms of flows of international
financial capital across borders is only the beginning.
As home bias diminishes, as financial capital begins to slosh around the world with more
forcefulness, it will in some cases do great good.
But without better national and international institutions to manage that flow of financial
capital, sometimes it will cause economic disaster too.
