Lecture 15 Degrees of Suspensiveness
In the last lecture I suggested that the two primary kinds of sentences aren't really two different kinds at all,
but represent the opposite ends of a continuum of degrees of suspense.
In other words, instead of saying all sentences are either loose or periodic,
it's actually more useful and more accurate to think of all sentences as making different demands on the reader's concentration and patience.
Some sentences delivering the goods of their messages as quickly as possible,
others dragging out the process, finding any number of ways to delay the completion of the sentence.
Well, I cheerfully admit to taking more than a little delight in finding pressure points
where traditional grammatical definitions, explanations, and classifications long passed down to us
as the received wisdom of writing where they don't seem to work as advertised,
where received wisdom in fact turns out to be a lot of hooey.
I don't want to take too much pleasure in doing so.
I don't want to be mistaken for the grammatical or rhetorical oriented version of the Star Trek continuity buffs
who gloat when they point out that Scotty was holding his drink in his left hand just before the Klingon attack,
but aha, the drink is in his right hand the very next shot.
My interest in exploding rigid definitions and categories is in redirecting our attention to things that matter.
Far too much thinking and traditional texts devoted to writing is obsessed with identifying or classifying language structures
without ever wondering what those structures actually do, how they work.
For example, I can point to dozens of grammar and writing texts that identify adversative conjunctions
such as but or however or nevertheless,
but I don't know of any discussions in writing books that consider the conceptual implications.
When a reader is given information that seems to be headed toward one destination only to be undercut or reversed,
its initial information effectively erased and replaced by information that is quite different,
if not antithetical to the original propositional content of the sentence.
For example, we were excited about the chance to go to see a Hawkeye tennis match at our new tennis center
and had planned our entire weekend around watching the Iowa women's team play Northwestern,
but it rained and the match was canceled.
Bump!
Likewise, grammar and writing texts all faithfully note the differences among simple, compound and complex sentences,
but none of them consider the different demands these kind of sentences make upon readers
or consider the affective difference between, say, two closely related simple sentences
and a compound sentence that puts together the propositions in both.
Most grammar and writing texts are much more interested, in John Steinbeck's terms,
in spine counting than in exploring relational realities,
yet it is precisely the relational reality between writer and reader that determines affective prose.
And one of my goals in this course has been to question, whenever possible, the utility of pure categories of sentences,
as Richard Lanham reminds us, prose styles rarely come in pure forms,
and purity being usually a tacit assumption to ignore complications for the sake of analysis.
One of the things that most fascinates me about suspense of syntax is that it can be achieved in so many different ways
that any attempt to create rigid or pure categories of suspense of sentences would be a hopeless waste of time.
There are as many ways to suspend or delay the completion of a sentences message
as there are ways of putting off something we don't want to do.
And in this sense of finding new reasons to delay what we don't want to do,
we procrastinators are the most innovative and imaginative folks around.
Fortunately, suspense of syntax gives us the opportunity to turn a vice into a virtue
as delay in a sentence can be a very good thing.
Accordingly, in this lecture I want to survey some of the resting points along the continuum of suspense
along which all sentences fall.
This survey will be somewhat haphazard as many of these sentences defy categorization,
having in common only their discovery of a way to delay the end of the sentence
and provide the end with some sort of surprise.
My goal here is to free suspense of syntax from the long-standing assumption that periodic sentences,
while marks of the writer's control and sophistication,
are usually, if not inevitably, long and difficult to follow.
Remember H.J. Rose's description of the periodic sentence as
the long and frequently involved type of sentence needing skill to handle it properly
in which the construction begun with the first word is not completed until the last.
Powerfully suspensive sentences do not have to be all that long or all that complicated,
but they do need skillful handling and they generally are most effective when consciously planned.
Short suspensive sentences are all around us.
It's not just a job, it's an adventure.
It's not just footwear, it's equipment.
Read my lips, no new taxes.
I was, perhaps, stalling.
I came, I saw, I conquered.
Where she comes from, it turns out, is Arkansas.
When the going gets tough, the tough get going.
Or this from Anthony Bourdain in his Cook's tour,
Cambodia is a dream come true for international losers.
And somewhat longer suspensive sentences are also bountiful.
Excuse me while I wipe the tears of laughter from my eyes
and put a small but powerful handgun to my temple.
And while we're on the subject of guns,
notice the almost perverse turn taken by this sentence from William Kittridge in his book
Who Owns the West?
After half a mile in soft rain on the slick hayfield stubble,
I would crouch behind the levee and listen to the gentle clatter of the water birds
and surprise them into flight, maybe a half dozen mallard hens
and three green-headed drakes lifting in silhouetted loveliness against the November twilight,
hanging only yards from the end of my shotgun.
End of quote.
Two somewhat opposite patterns frequently found in mid-length suspensive sentences
are the post-colonic drumbeat of a final word to which the sentence has been building
and the completely unexpected appearance at the end of the sentence of a word or phrase
no one could have predicted.
A classic New York Times article about political consultant Mark Penn illustrates the first of these patterns.
He remained for the second Clinton term and through Mr. Clinton's impeachment trial
demonstrating, among other things, one of the virtues that the Clintons prized most, Colin, loyalty.
And the opposite pattern can be seen in a sentence from William C. Martin's essay on the inimitable Reverend Ike.
Quote,
Reverend Ike has come a long way, honey.
End of quote.
That honey comes out of nowhere and completely recast all that has come before it in the sentence,
adding a touch of aggressive emphasis to the comment suggesting a quite unexpected attitude toward the reader.
Many of us raised in the south will quickly associate this rhetorical pattern with the insidious southern practice
of erasing or mitigating a very critical, if not ugly, comment with the trailing phrase,
bless her soul or bless his soul.
She dresses like a homeless person, bless her soul.
And Gordon Parks gives us yet another variation on this pattern of slightly unsettling ending words or phrases
when he tells us in an essay on Duke Ellington,
Edward Kennedy Ellington counted on going to heaven, have no doubt.
And we need to remember that the surprise at the end of a sentence that has been seemingly building to some dramatic conclusion
may simply be anti-climactic, as we see in this sentence from Annie Dillard.
Late one night while all this had been going on and while the library was dark and locked as it had been all summer
and I had accustomed myself to the eeriness of it, I left my carol to cross the darkness and get a drink of water.
Alexander Theroux managed to find a way to make a sentence featuring the Marquis de Sade in with a whimper rather than with a bang
when he wrote,
The notorious Marquis de Sade ruminating on the subject of man's greatest torment
perversely concluded that it was the impossibility of offending nature.
Suspensive sentences lend themselves to cataloging as a means of delaying the completion of the sentence
and cataloging seems to lend itself to kicking off autobiographies
as we see in the celebrated first sentence of The Education of Henry Adams.
Under the shadow of Boston State House turning its back on the House of John Hancock,
the little passage called Hancock Avenue runs or ran from Beacon Street
skirting the State House grounds to Mount Vernon Street on the summit of Beacon Hill
and there in the third house below Mount Vernon Place, February 16, 1838,
a child was born and christened later by his uncle, the minister of the first church
after the tenets of Boston Unitarianism as Henry Brooks Adams.
By the time Adams gets around to announcing his own birth, he's located his home in an enviable
and eminently historical section of Boston, touched several geographical bases with iconic names
and identified not only his religion but also revealed that his uncle was a Unitarian minister.
Talk about your auspicious beginnings.
Now Leonard Wolfe struck a very different tone in opening his autobiography, but like Adams,
he chose a highly suspensive sentence with which to begin his story.
Looking back at the age of 88 over the 57 years of my political work in England,
knowing what I aimed at and the results meditating on the history of Britain and the world since 1914,
I see clearly that I achieved practically nothing.
And Christopher Hitchens singles out a wonderfully suspensive sentence by another famous writer
to explain how he had chronicled his own life, quote,
In his 1991 memoirs, Kingsley Amos stated roundly,
I have already written an account of myself in 20 or more volumes, most of them called novels.
The point of these examples is that suspensive sentences do indeed align themselves along a continuum
that runs from the very unsurprising to the very surprising from the anticlimactic to the climactic.
Suspensives can seem rambling, continuously digressing through interruption after interruption,
parenthetical comment after parenthetical comment, finally reminding us of Mark Twain's celebrated story
and roughing it of the old ram, a story that never really starts and certainly never ends.
Or suspensives may just sound incredibly fussy, exacting, determined to get things exactly right before proceeding to the end of the sentence,
a quality famously associated with Henry James' later style.
It's also interesting to note that suspensive syntax sometimes requires more than a single sentence to create its effect.
The critical discourse concerning periodic sentences notes that periodic style can be distributed across several sentences
as long as delay or suspense is the goal and the completion of the point of the period is suspended to the very end of the sequence of sentences it covers.
We can see this in a two-sentence combination from Art Buchwald in an essay about acid indigestion.
Buchwald writes, America is an abundant land that seems to have more of everything than anybody else.
And he adds, and if one were to ask what we have the most of, the answer would be acid indigestion.
In the same collection of essays on great American things, MFK Fisher opens her essay on apple pie with a similar two-sentence one-two punch.
It is as meaningless to say that something is as American as apple pie as it is to assert proudly that a Swedish or Irish grandfather who immigrated to Minnesota was a first American.
Both the pie and the parent sprang from other cultures and neither got here before the Indian.
And Edwin Newman also utilizes this two-sentence suspensive pattern to powerful effect in his essay on viable solutions.
The day is not far off when someone about to join his family will excuse himself by saying that he does not want to keep his microcluster of structured role expectations waiting.
True, I came upon this gym of social scientific jargon in London, but that only shows how far our influence has spread and how determined the British are to join the Americans at the kill
when the English language finally is done to death.
And the mother of all two-sentence suspensive combos must surely be the following pair of sentences by Ernest Hemingway in death in the afternoon.
If you could make the yellow flames of candles in the sun that shines on the steel of bayonets freshly oiled and yellow patent leather belts of those who guard the host,
or hunt in pairs through the scrub oak and the mountains for the ones who fell into the trap at Diva,
it was a bad long way to come from the Café Routon to be grotted in a drafty room with a consolation of the church at order of the state,
acquitted once and held until the Captain General of the Burgos reversed the finding of the court,
and in the same town where Loyola got his wound that made him think,
the bravest of those who were betrayed that year dove from the balcony onto the paving of the court head first because he had sworn they would not kill him.
His mother tried to make him promise not to take his life because she worried most about his soul,
but he dove well and cleanly with his hands tied while they walked with him praying.
If I could make him, make a bishop, make Candido T. Abos and Toron,
make clouds come fast in shadows moving over wheat and the small careful stepping horses,
the smell of olive oil, the feel of leather, ropes old shoes, the loops of twisted garlics, earthen pots, saddlebags carried across the shoulder,
wineskins, the pitchforks made of natural wood, the tines were branches,
the early morning smells, the cold mountain nights and long hot days of summer with always trees and shade under the trees,
then you would have a little of Navara, but it's not in this book.
That first humongous and almost unreadable suspense of sentence from the acclaimed master of short sentences
weighs in with no fewer than 272 words, all of which really just set up that short second punch, but it's not in this book.
A variation on the one-two punch suspense of combo is simply to create a cascade of suspense of sentences.
Each building on the previous sentence creating an atmosphere or climate in which delay and parenthetical digressions
seem to become a kind of natural order of things as Gene Stafford illustrates in an essay on Coca-Cola.
At one time there was a widely held belief among edgy mothers that Coca-Cola derived its name from cocaine,
which was one of its principal ingredients in the vernacular of the south and the west, it was referred to as dope,
and that it was habit-forming.
The pause that refreshes could lead quicker than you might think to the big sleep.
My own mother had it on good authority, never mind who told me,
that an aspirin tablet pulverized and added to a glass of Coca-Cola produced the same effect as a Mickey Finn.
Under the influence of this witch's brew, many unwitting girls had been despoiled, stripped was the way my mother put it,
by concupiscent mount-a-banks posing as fuller brushmen.
Suspensive syntax can delay our perception of the nature of the sentence as well as delaying our perception of the sentence's propositional content,
as when the final step taken by the sentence reveals that it is asking a question.
Renaissance scholar and clergyman Richard Hooker, a frequently cited master of suspensive syntax,
provides a memorable example of this strategy in his 1593 work of the laws of ecclesiastical polity.
Concerning faith, the principal object whereof is that eternal verity which hath discovered the treasures of hidden wisdom in Christ.
Concerning hope, the highest object whereof is that everlasting goodness which in Christ doth quicken the dead.
Concerning charity, the final object whereof is that incomprehensible beauty which shineth in the countenance of Christ the Son of the Living God.
Concerning these virtues, the first of which, beginning here with a weak apprehension of things not seen,
endeth with the intuitive vision of God in the world to come.
The second, beginning here with a trembling expectation of things far removed and as yet but only heard of,
endeth with real and actual fruition of that which no tongue can express.
The third, beginning here with a weak inclination of the heart towards him unto whom we are not able to approach,
endeth with endless union, the mystery whereof is higher than the reach of the thoughts of men.
Concerning that faith, hope, and charity without which there can be no salvation,
was there ever any mention made saving only that in law which God himself hath from heaven revealed?
A couple of somewhat less antique examples of this pattern of turning the suspended sentence into a question at the very last moment might read.
As I watched in horror the news clips of protesting students, the government called them rioters and hooligans,
defiantly but hopelessly standing their ground against line after line of advancing soldiers faces hidden by visors,
their interlocked plastic shields reminding me of the battle tactics of Roman legions,
I could only silently murmur again and again, what have we done?
Here's another.
Although I am perhaps overly fond of footnotes, although I tend to weigh the value of authority,
not by the rigor of argument as much as by the writer's pedigree and the prestige of her publisher,
does this make me a pedant?
In the same way that I earlier wondered what the affective impact of a sentence that reverses course after an adversitive conjunction,
I wonder about the conceptual impact of a sentence that delays not only perception of the propositional goods that delivers,
but also suspends realization until the end of the sentence that it will ask a question rather than make a statement.
In the preceding examples, we've seen that suspense comes in more shades than a certain ice cream chain has flavors,
and we've seen that suspense created by syntactical delaying strategies can be put to many uses.
Winston Weathers and Otis Winchester and their well-respected rhetorically grounded writing texts The Strategy of Style
suggest three main reasons for employing suspensive syntax.
Number one, for varying your predominantly loose style and emphasizing your more important ideas.
Number two, for putting the important ideas at the end of the sentence.
And number three, for sustaining interest in a long sentence.
Richard Lanham shifts focus from the purposes of using suspensive style to its primary rhetorical strategies in the service of delay,
identifying them as a suspension over a number of complex statements,
parallelism of phrases and clauses, balance, climax, and what Lanham terms virtuoso display.
Joan Didion touches all of these bases in her essay Some Dreamers of the Golden Dream
with her suspensive account of a perplexing murder investigation.
They set out to find it in accountants ledgers and double indemnity clauses and motel registers.
Set out to determine what might move a woman who believed in all the promises of the middle class,
a woman who had been chairman of the heart fund and who always knew a reasonable little dressmaker,
and who had come out of the bleak wild of prairie fundamentalism to find what she imagined to be the good life.
What should drive such a woman to sit on a street called Bella Vista and look out her new picture window into the empty California sun
and calculate how to burn her husband alive in a Volkswagen?
To these suggestions of characteristic purpose and rhetorical strategies,
we should probably add a brief summary of the broad moves involved in creating suspensive syntax.
If the sentence suspends completion of its message, whether by delaying its main clause until the very end,
by splitting the subject from the verb with qualifying material,
or by using any construction that refines, sharpens, or adds to initial information before putting it to final use,
it has been historically termed a periodic sentence, but I think it more accurate to refer to it as a suspensive sentence.
To be a complete stylist, to be able to display the syntactic versatility of the accomplished writer,
to be able to control the rhythm of the sentence's delivery of information or shaping of affective impact,
writers must have at their command each of the basic sentence patterns,
that the periodic slash suspensive sentence reverses most of the qualities of most cumulative sentences,
that it seems to suggest a greater degree of control, architectonic mastery over the material it presents,
that it almost always requires quite a few words before its rhythm is clear,
and that it almost always slows the reader down should be fairly obvious.
What is not so obvious is the fact that when used effectively,
the periodic suspensive sentence can actually generate interest combining conceptual complexity with syntactic suspense.
On the other hand, as Professor Carl Klaus has playfully noted,
if you're a no-nonsense person, if you're a straightforward writer and you expect the same of others,
if you don't have any patience with long-winded people, people that is who never come directly to the point,
but instead waste your time in seemingly endless digressions,
as if they were mentally incapable of putting first things first,
then you will probably consider periodic sentences such as the one you are reading right now,
which looks like it may never come to an end to be an exasperating waste of time.
As we'll explore in much greater detail in the next lecture, various delaying tactics mark the periodic suspensive sentence,
giving it a suspenseful quality, a sense of its constituent parts being juggled or scrambled until the very last moment,
the shot at the buzzer finally falling into place at the very end of the sentence,
resolved by the verb or modifier that allows us to process the information that has come before.
Four broad tactics prevail, two of them relying on modifiers to delay completion of the base clause,
the other two using initial clauses or phrases, either as modifiers or as extended subjects.
Here's the first pattern. An inverted cumulative works periodically forestalling the base clause by a number of modifying levels,
keeping the distinctive cumulative rhythm, but putting it to suspensive effect.
Now, forestalling the base clause by a number of modifying levels, keeping the distinctive cumulative rhythm,
but putting it to suspense of effect, an inverted cumulative works periodically.
Secondly, completion of the base clause can also be delayed interposing, modifying or
qualifying material between the subject and the verb of the sentence, a splitting tactic
that runs the risk of losing or alienating the reader easily the least controlled or focused
of the pattern of the periodic form.
Third pattern, initial qualifying constructions lead to more complicated periodic structures
presenting information that becomes complete, safe to accept as final, only when joined with
a reassessed in light of information in the base clause, a process signaled by opening words such
as although, even, or if.
And fourth pattern, an extended subject produces similar results, initially offering an infinitive
or relative clause, then bringing the sentence into focus only when it becomes clear that
what at first may have looked like a complete sentence is actually no more than the subject
of a much, much longer sentence, as I've done with the sentence I've quoted before from
the Great Gatsby, designing my sentence to end on the same climactic word as did Fitzgerald's.
Even when the East excited me most, even when I was most keenly aware of its superiority
to the board sprawling swollen towns beyond the Ohio with their interminable inquisitions,
which spared only the children and the very old, even then it had always for me a quality
of distortion was Fitzgerald's way of suspending his message to the very end of his sentence,
a tantalizing way of foregrounding a word that functions on two levels, reminding us
first of Nick's ambivalence toward the world around him, then handing us on a rhetorical
silver platter, the one word that most accurately also characterizes Nick's own narration,
distortion.
I'm proud of that sentence.
In fact, it may be the best sentence I've ever written that it is suspensive rather
than cumulative, both amazes and delights me.
Experiment with suspensive syntax and I bet you'll generate sentences you will find incredibly
satisfying and of which you will be equally proud.
Lecture 16, The Mechanics of Delay I wish I could open this lecture by fully
sharing with you a remarkable essay by John DeGotta.
The essay notes toward the making of a whole human being appears in DeGotta's collection
of essays Halls of Fame published in 2001.
I even wish I could just share with you the first sentence of this essay, but I can't.
You see, the first sentence is the entire essay, or to put this another way, the entire
essay consists of a single marvelous suspensive sentence.
On page 151 DeGotta jumps right into that sentence, actually offering it as a continuation
of his title, notes toward the making of a whole human being or Deep Springs being the
incredible true story of 25 boys and their struggles to attain both bodies and souls
at a small desert college in the American West, considered by some the best in the US,
for which young men at 18 are plucked from the east and delivered to a campus surrounded
by mountains the size of Manhattan.
On page 155 DeGotta finally brings the many digressive flights of this monster sentence
back to earth.
Like holes in a map that is used too much, opened and folded, worn slowly down, torn
and shredded, sinking continents along creases, draining whole seas, postponing America's
great myth of frontier as observed by the author, a former student and friend assigned
to tend the garden in this desert is strange.
Got it?
Four pages of subject finally allow the reader, after interminable delay to get to the verb
is strange.
Boil that sentence down to a base clause and it reads, the incredible true story of 25
boys is strange.
Of course that base clause reveals almost nothing of the real concerns of this suspense
of essay, among which is its own extended form.
Noting that the boys at the school tend to favor long sentences in their writing and
in their speeches, DeGotta suggests that the experience of this odd school may itself somehow
resemble the experience of the periodic sentence.
In DeGotta's contemplation of the affective dimensions of suspensive syntax, I find exactly
the kind of thoughtful, meaningful consideration that has so long been missing from the discourse
of sentence structure in writing texts.
Indeed, DeGotta's self-reflexive experiment with a massive periodic sentence should serve
as an exciting model for taking suspensive syntax seriously.
Or exploring what it actually does rather than for the thought-stopping normative claims
that simply tell us it is a sign of a writer's mastery and sophistication.
All of DeGotta's essays are interesting.
This one is fascinating.
But for now, we need to return to more mechanical concerns to survey some of the nuts and bolts
strategies that actually produce suspensive sentences.
In the last lecture, I noted that various delaying tactics mark the periodic slash suspensive
sentence giving it a dramatic quality, a sense of its constituent parts being juggled or
scrambled until the very last moment, finally falling into place at the very end of the
sentence, resolved by the verb or modifier that allows us to process the information
that has come before.
If broad tactics prevail, two of them relying on modifiers to delay completion of the base
clause, two using initial clauses or phrases either as modifiers or as extended subjects,
and one balancing a second clause against a first, the two clauses linked by a semicolon,
the classic structure of the balanced sentence.
First tactic.
An inverted cumulative works periodically, forestalling the base clause by a number of
modifying levels, keeping the distinctive cumulative rhythm, but putting it to suspensive effect.
Here's an example.
His eyes weary from the road, his clothes tattered and dusty, his beard long and unkempt, looking
as if not only insects but small animals might be nesting within its scraggly strands, Robert
Coover's Wayfarer, the enigmatic protagonist of one of the many narratives in seven exemplary
fictions, is hardly a character designed to attract our sympathy.
Second tactic.
Completion of the base clause can also be delayed by interposing modifying or qualifying material
between the subject and the verb of the sentence, a splitting tactic that runs the risk of losing
or alienating the reader.
This is easily the least controlled or focused periodic form.
This strategy, splitting the subject from the verb by interposing everything but the kitchen
sink between them, bears more than a passing resemblance to Mark Twain's description of
the way the German language works, or doesn't work, as Twain put it in one of his speeches.
A verb has a hard enough time of it in this world when it is all together.
It's downright inhuman to split it up, but that's what those Germans do.
They take part of a verb and put it down here like a stake, and they take the other part
of it and put it away over yonder like another stake, and between these two limits they just
shovel in German.
Well, that's pretty much what this kind of suspensive strategy calls for, shoveling in
anything and everything between the subject and the verb.
Consider this example.
The old mayor, after waving to the assembled reporters a small crowd of harried, cynical-looking
men and one stunningly calm-looking young woman, after whispering something in the ear
of his sickly grinning administrative assistant, and after flashing a hollow version of his
famed triumphant smile, a smile clearly patterned after that of Franklin Roosevelt's, and his
equally well-known circle the wagon's wave of his index finger, strode into the courtroom
to play out the final act of his personal tragedy.
In a room of one's own, Virginia Woolf turns this process on its head by inverting the subject
and verb of the following sentence, but still keeping the verb apart from the subject by
interposing all manner of exquisitely precise delaying information.
And thus by degrees was lit halfway down the spine, which is the seat of the soul, not
that hard little electric light, which we call brilliance as it pops in and out upon
our lips, but the more profound, subtle, and subterranean glow, which is the rich yellow
flame of rational discourse.
Here's another inversion.
In a small tarpaper shack, a forlornly leaning eyesore on the edge of the city dump, farthest
from the fly-guarded entrance, lives a curiously dignified, almost majestically independent,
80-year-old retired garbage man, the unlikely hero of this story.
Third tactic.
Initial qualifying constructions lead to more complicated periodic structures, presenting
information that becomes complete, safe to accept as final, only when joined with or
reassessed in light of information in the base clause, a process signaled by opening
words such as although, even, or if.
Now there are a number of conditional constructions that lead to suspensive sentences.
The most obvious of these is the conditional sentence that opens with the word if.
Here's Texas Monthly Writer, Joe Nick Patoskey's conditional suspensive.
If you're at Big Bend Ranch State Park, you look for David Allaway quick.
It turns out that Allaway is the survival skills ranger, and Big Bend is a place where
survival skills are more than an academic concern.
And that final quick should also remind us of the suspensive phenomenon where the final
word of the sentence receives extra emphasis either from a colon or from a totally unexpected
final turn that serves to put in a new light what has come before.
Here's another example.
If it can be proved that UFOs exist, and if it is revealed that the U.S. government has
indeed hidden evidence of extraterrestrial visitors, and even if it turns out that Big
Foot and Elvis do not live outside its lurid pages, the contribution of the weekly world
news to the history of journalism may have to be reassessed.
And here's an impressive use of conditionals to add emphasis to a feminist critique.
If I mow the lawn every Saturday, edge it to perfection, and celebrate my victory over
nature with a beer.
If I stay on the pot for 20 minutes reading Sports Illustrated and return to the world
bellowing a warning to stay clear of that end of the house, if I cuss and smoke and embarrass
my friends with dirty jokes, then laugh uproariously, if I play baseball in the park and spit out
the car window two or three times on my way home without hitting my own car, I still won't
be treated as an equal.
Starting a sentence with either sense or because will also always create some degree of suspense.
Here's a wonderful example from Virginia Woolf.
Since he belonged even at the age of six to that great clan which cannot keep this feeling
separate from that, but must let future prospects with their joys and sorrows cloud what is
actually at hand.
Since to such people, even in earliest childhood, any turn in the wheel of sensation has the
power to crystallize and transfix the moment upon which its gloom or radiance rests, James
Ramsey, sitting on the floor cutting out pictures from the illustrated catalog of the army and
navy stores, endowed the picture of a refrigerator, as his mother spoke, with heavenly bliss.
That of course from Woolf's to the lighthouse.
Although and when, if used to indicate the satisfaction of a condition, also create suspense
of sentences.
Although I'm not disposed to maintain that being born in a workhouse is in itself the
most fortunate and enviable circumstance that can possibly befall a human being, I do mean
to say that in this particular instance it was the best thing for Oliver Twist that could
by possibility have occurred.
And then we have another set of conditionals that are preceded by elaborations on the word
even, even when, even while, even if.
Here's an example.
Even while I was trying to plug up the leak, desperately trying to wrap the ruptured pipe
with duct tape and towels yelling for my son to cut the water off to the house, wildly
looking around for any container that might catch at least some of the spurting water,
I knew that my efforts were doomed to fail and that soon my basement would become Iowa
City's newest waiting pool.
Another even example.
Even if I sort my mail into efficient piles based on the importance of the letter and
the degree of urgency and deadlines for response, even if I tell myself to open mail at once
and then put it in piles, even if I keep my mail in ever larger plastic bins, I simply
cannot keep from losing bills, never opening invitations, and generally proving myself hopelessly
inept in what should be one of life's less demanding responsibilities.
Indeed, there are any number of left branching sentences that open with qualifying phrases
or just plain prepositional phrases that will produce significant degrees of suspense, as
we might remember as the case with the lyrics to My Darling Clementine, which begins in
a cavern, in a canyon, excavating for a mine, and Michael Chabon's first sentence and the
amazing adventures of Cavalier and Clay offers a somewhat more literary example.
In later years, holding forth to an interviewer or to an audience of aging fans at a comic
book convention, Sam Clay liked to declare apropos of his and Joe Cavalier's creation
that back when he was a boy sealed in hog tide inside the airtight vessel known as Brooklyn,
New York, he had been haunted by dreams of Harry Houdini.
Fourth tactic. An extended subject produces similar results, initially offering an infinitive
or relative clause, bringing the sentence into focus only when it becomes clear that
what at first may have looked like a complete sentence is actually no more than the subject
of a much, much longer sentence. Herbert Reed includes in his chapter on the sentence in
his study, English prose style, a suspensive sentence of this kind from William Wordsworth's
Convention of Centrum. It opens with, the history of all ages and then seems to proceed
to inventory all historical phenomena for some 280 words before completing a base clause
that finally reads, the history of all ages demonstrates incontestably, that the passions
of men do immeasurably transcend their objects. I know that description doesn't give you a
very clear sense of the sentence, but believe me, you should thank me for not making you
listen to what a 280 words subject sounds like and that from a poet. But I will remind
you of the much longer sentence I made by taking Nick Caroway's wonderfully suspended
description of the East as having a quality of distortion and simply making Nick's sentence
the subject of my sentence with my last word coming full circle and also emphasizing distortion
just as did Fitzgerald's original sentence. I suspect Aristotle had something like this
in mind when he claimed that the periodic sentence was characterized by some form of
turning about.
Somewhat similarly, starting a sentence with an infinitive as a subject will always produce
some degree of suspense, as Hamlet reminds us with his to be or not to be, that is the
question. Caroway's gives us a slightly less weighty example. To come all this way, to
arrive after dark, to find the village completely abandoned, tarzan nowhere in sight, and the
banana trees stripped bare left Cheetah feeling completely non-plussed. As does Jim Velas,
who uses a second one word sentence in place of the colon we previously noted as an intensifying
device at the end of the sentence. Here's his sentence, two sentences actually. To know
about fried chicken, you have to have been weaned and reared on it in the South, period.
Final tactic. A possible fifth category of suspense of sentence must be recognized. The
sentence whose message is interrupted by a colon or a semicolon, but inexorably deflating
inverting or otherwise recasting that message by the one that follows the colon or semicolon,
often waiting until the very last word of the second clause to spring the sentence's
rhetorical trap. This is the classical form of the balanced sentence. The inherent vice
of capitalism is the unequal sharing of blessings. The inherent virtue of socialism is the equal
sharing of miseries, intoned Churchill, pausing no doubt to let that final word sink in. We'll
consider balanced sentences and balanced form more in the next lecture.
This fifth and final strategy with its specification of the importance of the semicolon and the
colon brings us face to face with a subject I've so far neglected, punctuation, more
specifically the confusion, complexity, and anxiety surrounding the use of colons and
semicolons. Unless you have specifically researched the topic, unless you have googled
punctuation from every imaginable angle, unless you have wandered through the stacks of a
large university library noting title after title offering definitive guidance for correct
usage, you have absolutely no idea how many books have been published on the subject of
punctuation. Just a few of the currently available books on punctuation are Linda
M. Truss's bestselling Eats, Shoots, and Leaves, Bill Walsh's Lapsing Into a Comma,
and Karen Elizabeth Gordon's The New Well-Tempered Sentence, a punctuation handbook for the innocent,
the eager, and the doomed. These books specifically devoted to punctuation are joined by a whole
raft of books devoted to English usage in general but that also contain long sections on punctuation.
Representative of this category would be Theodore M. Bernstein's Mithistle Bottom's
Hobgoblins, the Careful Writers' Guide to the Taboos, Bug Bears, and Outmoded Rules
of English Usage. Bernstein's More Sober, the Careful Writer, a Modern Guide to English
Usage. Bill Walsh's The Elephants of Style, a trunkload of tips on the big issues and
gray areas of contemporary American English. Constance Hale's Sin and Syntax, How to Craft
Wickedly Effective Pros, Karen Elizabeth Gordon's Other Popular Writing Guide, The Deluxe Transitive
Vampire, the Ultimate Handbook of Grammar for the Innocent, the Eager, and the Doomed,
and Patricia T. O'Connor's Woe is I, the Grammar Phobes Guide to Better English.
Tips and comments on punctuation can even be found in such unexpected places as Lewis
Thomas' The Medusa and the Snail, More Notes of a Biology Watcher, which contains a brief
essay entitled, Notes on Punctuation. Now punctuation may not exactly be big business,
but it apparently is a large enough source of anxiety for enough of us to support a cottage
industry of punctuation guides. Okay, you may be thinking, all that may be so, but why
are we being asked to think about punctuation now? The answer is pretty simple. While the
cumulative sentence makes crucial use of commas, commas are pretty easy to use and pretty hard
to misuse. Suspensive sentences, particularly long-suspensive sentences, also make extensive
use of commas, but the great majority of longer suspensive sentences would be impossible
to parse without relying heavily on the semicolon and the colon. And semicolons and colons are
not pretty easy to use and are distressingly easy to misuse. So a short digression. I think
Lynn Truss has it exactly right in her eats, shoots and leaves when she says, using the
comma well announces that you have an ear for sense and rhythm, confidence in your style
and a proper respect for your reader, but it does not mark you out as a master of your
craft. But colons and semicolons, well, they are in a different league, my dear.
First, the semicolon. My favorite description of the semicolon comes from Bill Walsh, copy
desk chief at the Washington Post, who simply says, the semicolon is an ugly bastard and
thus I tend to avoid it. Possibly echoing novelist Donald Barfamy's feeling that the
semicolon is ugly, ugly as a tick on a dog's belly. I'm not quite sure what Walsh and Barfamy
find ugly about the semicolon, but those of us who aspire to write lengthy, suspensive
sentences or balanced sentences of any length don't have the luxury of avoiding semicolons.
Remember the long, suspensive sentence I used in the last lecture from Richard Hooker on
Faith, Hope and Charity? It used five semicolons, in great part, to separate clauses that contained
a total of twelve commas. We realize that this is one of the easiest to understand uses
of the semicolon. It helps avoid confusion in sentences that contain numerous commas.
And remember that Hemingway Suspensive Sentence about Navarra? It contained seventeen semicolons.
In direct opposition to Walsh and Barfamy, celebrated biologist Lewis Thomas, author
of the bestselling and highly respected The Lives of a Cell, explains his appreciation
for the semicolon and his sequel collection of essays, The Medusa and the Snail. Here's
what he says, I have grown fond of semicolons in recent years. The semicolon tells you that
there's still some question about the preceding full sentence. Something needs to be added.
It's almost always a greater pleasure to come across a semicolon than a period. The period
tells you that that is that. If you didn't get all the meaning you wanted or expected,
anyway you got all the writer intended to parcel out and now you have to move along.
But with a semicolon, there you get a pleasant little feeling of expectancy. There's more
to come. To read on, it will get clearer. Basically, a semicolon signals that some connection
exists between what precedes it and what follows it and pretty much leaves it to the reader
to figure out the exact nature of that relationship. Generally, when used between clauses and a
compound sentence, a semicolon suggests a more complicated relationship than do conjunctions
such as and. Cymicolon signals the kind of conceptual reversal that follows adversitive
conjunctions such as however or nonetheless. And finally, a semicolon also signals a degree
of relationship indicated by conjunctions such as moreover or similarly. For our purposes
in writing suspensive sentences, the semicolon serves to mark divisions in the sentence among
syntactic units within which commas are used. As Karen Elizabeth Gordon sums up things
and her the new well-timbered sentence. A semicolon comes between closely related independent
clauses that are not linked by a coordinating conjunction. Extended clauses that contain
commas certainly need a semicolon if a period is not wanted. But brief independent clauses
might also be most appropriately separated with the soft pause this symbol holds. And
for our purpose in writing the specific type of suspensive sentence that is the formally
balanced sentence, the semicolon is that hinge in the middle of the sentence, a kind
of mirror that reverses some important part of what comes before. Ask not what your country
can do for you, semicolon. Ask what you can do for your country. To err is human, semicolon.
To forgive divine. Now the colon. Colons may have gotten a bad reputation as almost required
components in the titles of academic publications. A phenomenon sometimes disparagingly referred
to as the post-colonics surge. But the colon is a surprisingly emotional mark of punctuation.
Lewis Thomas for instance doesn't like colons because he finds them bossy. Pointing your
nose in a direction you might not be inclined to take if left to yourself or he finds them
condescending suggesting you need help to keep track of the writer's points. We've already
seen how the colon can add emphasis to the final word in a suspensive sentence. As in
what worried me most was this colon dying. We also know that the colon signals that some
sort of explanation or enumeration is coming that what follows the colon will break down
or inventory something announced before the colon. They brought strange gifts colon, spice
from the east, gold from the new world and a thirst for revenge from the depths of their
savage hearts. As Fowler puts it in modern English usage, his own prose and punctuation
paralleling his explanation. The colon quote has acquired a special function colon that
of delivering the goods that have been invoiced in the preceding words. Karen Elizabeth Gordon
devotes more thought to the affective promise of the colon observing there's something assertively
expected about a colon setting up both the reader and the sentence. It would be heartless
and unfaithful to let either one down. She goes on to say, this is what I mean. What
follows the colon further explains illustrates or restates with precise embellished or loquacious
variation. The words leading up to the colon. This is so often the case that if the goods
are not delivered, you deserve to feel betrayed. Forthcoming is the colon's middle name.
Also describing the colon in starkly emotional terms, Lynn Truss suggests that the colon
rather theatrically announces what is to come. She adds quote, like a well trained magician's
assistant, it pauses slightly to give you time to get a bit worried and then efficiently
whisks away the cloth and reveals the trick complete. For now, I simply wanted to note
that suspensive or periodic sentences make heavy use of semicolons and colons and as
is the case with syntax in general, they deserve and reward so much more serious thought than
most of us have ever given them.
In a previous lecture, I made the largely unsupported
but quite confident claim that most prose examples and most guidebooks devoted to grammar,
writing or prose style come from writers who lived before the 20th century and many cases
long before the 20th century. Now, there's nothing wrong with that since those examples
generally do offer very useful models of classic sentence patterns. However, there is every
reason for us to remember that 21st century readers may have very different expectations
and values than did their counterparts in earlier centuries. Cultural factors and the
dominant cultural atmosphere are just as important today for the shaping of prose style as were
attitudes towards science and the Renaissance or attitudes toward reason in the Enlightenment.
While it may still be too early to say with any confidence how prose style has changed
in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, make no mistake, it has changed most obviously.
We need to note the 800 pound digital gorilla that now sits in those 19th century drawing
rooms where readers engaged in the prose of their day. I am of course referring to the
fact that computers in general and computer enabled if not computer driven writing protocols
are almost certainly in the process of changing the way we experience and think about prose
style. More specifically, the worldwide web has accustomed us to the hypertext link where
any word or phrase in a sentence can be hot linked to a back text that can add detail or
examples to or even just explore loose associations with material in the front text we are reading
on a web page. And of course, email, the web, the blogosphere, and computer presentation
programs such as the ubiquitous PowerPoint encourage us to embellish our prose with graphics
and to animate it, making our pages and even our sentences appear and disappear on the
screen, employing all the transitional effects of cinema, jump cuts, fades, dissolves, etc.
Indeed, digital artist Eric Lawyer in flash driven online work such as Chroma, Lair of
the Marrow Monkey and most strikingly in his hollow bound book has literally animated language
itself giving sentences a kinetic dimension as the words on the screen display numerous
kinds of motion. I'm going to reserve extended consideration of the effect of computers on
prose style for a future lecture, but I wanted to raise the topic of electronic textuality
here as part of a reminder that the prose we write and read the sentences we craft reflect
larger cultural changes that may at first seem far removed from nuts and bolts writing
concerns. For instance, the sentences we write and read today have been shaped at least in
part by their participation in or resistance to the cultural dominance of first modernism
and then postmodernism. I opened this course with a reference to Gertrude Stein and while
few of us aspire to write like Gertrude Stein, her experiments with language along with those
of her fellow modernists such as James Joyce, D.H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, Ernest Hemingway,
William Faulkner, F. Scott Fitzgerald, and many, many other modernist pioneers have radically
changed our expectations for literary narrative right down to the level of the sentence where
Hemingway and Faulkner give us striking examples. And now we are 80 to 100 years past the heroic
days of modernism and possibly even past postmodernism. Postmodernism would be a subject for a lecture
series in its own right, so I mentioned it only briefly and in passing here, but I want
to suggest that this cultural dominant has also had an impact on language use. Postmodernism
has been shaped in great part by developments in technology, particularly media technologies
such as film and television and computers. Unlike modernism or romanticism, postmodernism
is an era or a set of prevailing cultural values and assumptions rather than being an
organized movement. In fact, it's not even a monolithic set of beliefs or attitudes, but
a combination of trends in a broad range of areas including art, literature, architecture,
pop culture, and many other endeavors that reflect the time in which they unfold. I define
postmodernism as the culture of the easy edit, suggesting the extent to which advances in
science and technology make it seem as if anything can be almost effortlessly edited,
reshaped, recombined from the prose we write on computers to the mixes and mashups of popular
music to wildly eclectic combinations of architectural styles to the human body itself now subject
to genetic modification. In literature, postmodernism has been associated with a heightened sense
of self-reflexivity with literature turning back on itself to explore the vagaries of
language and fiction as much or more as human experience, the self-conscious recognition
if not celebration of the ways in which language constructs reality, our words more and more
doing our thinking for us as opposed to being tools with which we express our thought. One
of the most persistent themes in postmodern fiction is that the media have so saturated
our consciousness that we find ourselves speaking, writing, and thinking in terms of language
and formulas so ubiquitous in the media that we find ourselves more and more describing
our own situations in terms of situations depicted over and over in the media, in effect
scripting our lives to follow the scripts made so familiar in news, film, and television.
Fiction writers who've explored this idea would include John Barth, Robert Coover,
Thomas Pension, Stephen Wright, Mark Lainer, Doug Copeland, to mention just a few. Just
think for a moment how many situations we negotiate with language that is not our own
but that language that has become ubiquitous from repeated use on television. Consider
just a few prefabricated phrases that will probably sound familiar to most of us and
would certainly be part of the vocabularies of our children. How's that working out for
you? Not so much. I have even seen that phrase not so much in print in a New York Times editorial.
Other, other phrases like this. Good to go. That went well. I get that a lot. That's going
to leave a mark. True that. That's what I'm saying. Get her done. Keep it real. Sounds
like a plan and so on. This is certainly not a new phenomenon as earlier phrases such
as 23 skadoo don't take any wooden nickels or the more polemical don't trust anyone over
30 or turn on, tune in, drop out of the 60s or John Deans at that point in time during
Watergate remind us how easily we appropriate prefab or formulaic phrases for our own use.
But the fact that we increasingly live in a mediated world in which the language of
others cascades around us 24 seven to borrow another of those prefab terms means that more
and more of us use these expressions without being conscious of how much of our thinking
and speaking and writing we are outsourcing to Hollywood writers, political speech writers
and popular celebrities. I mentioned this not to rail against it but merely to suggest
one of the fairly obvious and fairly harmless examples of scripting. Of much greater concern
of course is the danger of scripting our lives in terms of media scape narratives thinking
that our human relationships follow the patterns we see on reality shows on sitcoms on videos
and video games and here in popular music. But that's also a topic for another course.
Here I'm mentioning the broad idea of postmodern scripting to provide a larger context for
and to move us closer to the sentence level phenomenon I want to explore in this lecture.
A phenomenon we might think of as many scripting yet another way in which we lengthen our sentences
to give them a greater degree of suspensiveness. In the last lecture I detailed a range of
sentence openers that promote to greater or lesser extent degrees of suspensiveness in
a sentence. Primarily these were conditional constructions such as those opening a sentence
with words such as if, sense, because, although, when, even and numerous combinations of those
words deposit conditions that must be met before something can happen, combinations such as
even when and even if. Likewise time markers such as until or before or after or during
when used to specify a temporal or chronological condition will introduce phrases that ensure
some degree of suspensiveness in a sentence. Here's an example. Before I enter another
tennis tournament, before I risk another embarrassing first round defeat and before
I add to the mounting evidence that my athletic days are over, I need to develop a dependable
topspin backhand. In addition to the formal and largely conceptual strategies described
in the previous lecture, suspensive sentences can be generated simply by starting sentences
with certain words. This lecture will review those initial prompts that forces to think
in suspensive terms and it will also consider a number of other generally overlooked and
certainly unremarked phrases and patterns that will automatically delay completion of
the sentence's message or purpose until near its end or until its very last word. This
new category of suspensive structures consists largely of fatic expressions whose functions
are more social than discursive. I'll explain what I mean by that in just a moment. First,
however, I want to briefly review the conditional words and phrases that generate suspensiveness
whenever they open a sentence. If a sentence opens by positing some condition that must
be met or avoided before something else can occur, then that sentence will create some
degree of suspense. If the initial if clause is then followed by one or more other if clauses,
if the number of preconditions grows, and if the completion of the sentence is delayed
more and more by a cascade of if clauses, the degree of suspensiveness can become quite
pronounced. Since there can be a veritable list of these initial conditions, one conditional
clause leading to another and then another, and since even a single if clause can be stretched
out to considerable length by increasing the detail of its specification, the degree of
suspense or the degree of delay in sentences introduced by opening conditionals indicated
by words such as if, since, because, or although can be extended to and past the point where
a reader's curiosity begins to turn to impatience. Because a sentence that begins with a conditional
always kicks a bit further down the road, the can of the sentence is completion. Writers
who understand the appeal and emphasis of suspensive syntax may deliberately extend
the conditional just to make the sentence unmistakably suspensive.
Okay, you get the picture, and I'll spare you suspensive examples starting with although
and even clauses. But here's one starting with when used as a conditional that's simply
too good for me not to share. This from Winston Churchill and his prescient 1935 assessment
of Adolf Hitler.
When the terrible German armies which had held half Europe in their grip recoiled on every
front and sought armistice from those upon whose lands even then they still stood as
invaders. When the pride and willpower of the Prussian race broke into surrender and revolution
behind the fighting lines, when then that imperial government which had been for more
than 50 fearful months the terror of almost all nations collapsed ignominiously leaving
its loyal faithful subjects defenseless and disarmed before the wrath of the sorely wounded
victorious allies, then it was that one corporal, a former Austrian house painter, set out to
regain all.
As Churchill's deliciously suspended sentence reminds us, conditional opening constructions
serve much more important functions than just delaying the end of the sentence. As they
specify the conditional relationships that govern much of our experience of the world,
boiled down to its propositional core, Churchill's sentence specifies when these conditions prevailed
and Adolf Hitler became possible.
In similar fashion, suspensive sentences that result from other prefab structures such as
initial infinitives used as subjects to be or not to be, that is the question, to know
him as to love him or any form of extended noun phrase subject serve important logical
functions quite apart from creating degrees of suspensiveness. As we can see in this sentence
from Macaulay's essay, actually it's a review, the Puritans in which he strives to give quote
the most remarkable body of men perhaps, which the world has ever produced, end quote, their
rightful due whatever the odious and ridiculous parts of their character. Here's the quote.
Those who roused the people to resistance, who directed their measures through a long
series of eventful years, who formed out of the most unpromising materials the finest
army that Europe had ever seen, who trampled down King, Church, and aristocracy, who in
the short intervals of domestic sedition and rebellion made the name of England terrible
to every nation on the face of the earth, were no vulgar fanatics.
But now I want to move from the quite meaningful, suspensive structures built by conditionals
and illustrated by Churchill and Macaulay to consider a very different set of prefab
structures that frequently add little or no propositional meaning to the sentences they
extend. These are the structures of many scripting. They can be found almost anywhere within a
sentence, but are most frequently used to open sentences or to interrupt their flow.
These are the prefab words and phrases we drop into our sentences like styrofoam packing
peanuts, not so much to protect something fragile as to discourage readers from handling
the goods. These are prefab words and phrases that go bump in our sentences, serving as
syntactic speed bumps to slow our sentences down, inevitably making them a bit longer,
inevitably making them a bit more suspensive. As unlikely as it may seem, these are words
and phrases that, amazingly enough, add no discursive meaning to the sentence, in a way
just marking time and taking up space. As we can see in this sentence, with its gratuitous
use of as unlikely as it may seem, amazingly enough, in a way, and as we can see, some of
these phrases have very little serious propositional content. Some take on what meaning they have
from the context of the sentence in which they appear, and some are virtually nonsensical.
For instance, we may plop down at the outset of a sentence the phrase, It Goes Without
Saying. Here's an example. It goes without saying that Kinky Friedman, semi-serious detective
novelist, sometime idiosyncratic country western singer, and full-time cornpone pundit, was
not a particularly viable political candidate. Or Kinky Friedman, semi-serious detective
novelist, sometime idiosyncratic country western singer, and full-time cornpone pundit, it
goes without saying, was not a particularly viable political candidate. No matter where
it appears in the sentence, it goes without saying could be removed from the sentence with
no loss of propositional content, but suggesting, as it does, that what is being said did not
really need to be said, a somewhat paradoxical acknowledgement that just perhaps it did need
to be said, after all. Clearly, this phrase adds emphasis to the end of the sentence when
placed just before its predicate was not a particularly viable candidate, and clearly
it prepares us for some impending truth when it's placed at the beginning of the sentence,
and clearly in both positions, it delays the completion of the sentence by four words, thus
adding slightly to the sentence's suspensiveness when used at its beginning, and serving as
a more distinct speed bump when used near its end. But in the final analysis, after all is
said and done, if truth be known, this phrase, much like in the final analysis, after all
is said and done, and if truth be known, adds little or no meaning to the sentence. It is
in fact a primarily fatic utterance, a step the sentence takes that marches in place rather
than going anywhere. We get the concept of a fatic, P-H-A-T-I-C, a fatic utterance from
pioneering anthropologist and ethnographer Bronislaw Malinowski, who advanced his description
of fatic communion in his essay The Problem of Meaning in Primitive Languages, published
in 1923 in Ogden's and Richards' groundbreaking book The Meaning of Meaning. While Malinowski's
essay refers to primitive languages and his research focused on natives in the Trobriand
Islands in New Guinea, he specifies at several points in his discussion of fatic utterances
that they function in essentially the same way whether in savage or highly civilized cultures.
As he explains, quote, though the examples discussed were taken from savage life, we
could find among ourselves exact parallels to every type of linguistic use so far discussed.
End of quote. What savage and civilized cultures have in common are traditions of fatic communion,
which Malinowski describes as, quote, a type of speech in which ties of union are created
by a mere exchange of words. End of quote. This is language used in free, aimless social
intercourse deprived of any context of situation. Fatic utterances such as formulas of greeting
and we all know these. Hi, how are you? How's it going? Are not intended to inform. They're
not intended to connect people in action, not intended to express a thought, but as Malinowski
says, but serve to establish a common sentiment, an atmosphere of sociability. Fatic utterances
frequently affirm, again in Malinowski's words, some supremely obvious state of things. Nice
day, isn't it? And begin to serve a social function just by breaking silence. Since as
Malinowski also explains, the communion of words is the first act to establish links
of fellowship. However, fatic utterances proceed beyond just breaking silence or invoking formulas
of greeting to sustain the flow of language with purposeless expressions of preference
or aversion, accounts of irrelevant happenings, comments on what is perfectly obvious. These
fatic utterances may be nearly devoid of meaning. Again, in Malinowski's words, they fulfill
a social function and that is their principal aim, but they are neither the result of intellectual
reflection nor do they necessarily arouse reflection in the listener. Instead of serving
the purpose of reflection, these fatic utterances constitute a mode of action just in their
being voiced. Each utterance, Malinowski states, is an act serving the direct aim of binding
hearer to speaker by a tie of some social sentiment or other. Or, as we might illustrate
this phenomenon in Iowa City, how about those Hawkeyes? In short, a fatic utterance communicates
not ideas, but attitude, the speaker's presence and the speaker's intention of being sociable.
Now, if we extend Malinowski's discussion of fatic speech to writing, we can see written
fatic utterances as nearly content-free examples of the kind of processing I've championed
in earlier lectures, a way of reminding readers they are in contact with a mind, a person,
a personality, rather than with some mindlessly objective recording or reporting of data.
If classical rhetoric discusses tropes that serve this exact function, I'm not aware of
it, but it strikes me as a significant rhetorical and or stylistic phenomenon that certainly
deserves our attention. I've been trying to list examples of this fatic phenomenon and
my list just keeps growing. Some of the phrases it currently identifies are, as it happens,
it turns out, in point of fact, when all is said and done, my Lord, for God's sake, for
that matter, in the final analysis and whatnot, believe it or not, if you know what I mean,
of course, for some reason, just between us, just between you and me, you know, to no one's
surprise, as I believe is the case, it occurs to me, I suppose, to my dismay, to my relief,
to my way of thinking, it's important to note, it's important to remember. To everyone's
surprise, I might add, I am reminded, we should remember, and I agree that it is, and I believe
that it is, in my mind, to my way of thinking, after all, in spite of everything. It seems
to me, I can't help but wonder, let's face it, if truth be known, just between us, if
conditions are favorable, if time permits, after a fashion, if you must know, it goes
without saying, almost inevitably, fittingly enough, curiously enough, amazingly enough,
that is to say, I suppose, as unlikely as it may seem, one might ask, as we can see,
as I pointed out, in a way, in a sense, not to mention, to some extent, to a certain extent,
as is widely known, as everybody knows, you know what, let me tell you, make no mistake,
in a jingoistic moment, I titled my list, things that go bump in the senate's, syntactic
speed bumps, spacers, and pacers, and intensity makers. I believe that in much the same way
that phatic utterances function in oral discourse, phatic words and phrases in written discourse
serve to strengthen the connection between writer and reader. While these phatic phrases
can function differently in different contexts, they all seem to imply a closer relationship
between writer and reader than would be the case, were they not there. Most obviously,
what we might call phatic connectors promote a confidential tone that suggests the writer
is letting the reader in on information that's private or privileged, or that the writer
is trying to affect and ingratiating honesty. To be honest, let's face it, just between
us, if truth be known, if you must know, if you get right down to it, if I may call it
that, I can't help but wonder, to my way of thinking, it seems to me, shall we say, phatic
phrases can both raise or lower the dramatic emphasis of a senate's propositional content,
interrupting the flow of the senate's either to highlight what follows the intensifying
phrase or to tone down or qualify following information. Intensifiers would be interjections
such as, my Lord, for God's sake, for goodness sake, amazingly enough, and that perennial
favorite of course. Qualifiers would include phrases such as, for that matter, for some
reason, I suppose, after all, after a fashion, in a way, in a sense, and to some extent.
In a sequence of sentences remarkable for their suspensiveness, Thomas Berger illustrates
the use of a couple of different phatic intensifiers in this description of Candy Darling, the
transvestite hero-heroine of several Andy Warhol films. A vulnerable maiden being brutalized
by a sadistic male, this may be why the scene is actually very moving in more ways than
one, natural like my hair. But to put kinkiness aside for a moment, if that can be done when
talking about, my God, a man who is girlier than many contemporary women, what one feels
most here is the old moral shock of seeing an imposter in whatever realm unmasked.
Phatic phrases can be used as senate's openers. As it happens, it turns out, it occurs to
be, at any rate, or these phrases can be used later in the sentence as interrupters. Phatic
phrases can be used to signpost important information or claims, in point of fact, in
fact, it's important to note, and they can be used to clinch a conclusion in the final
analysis. When all is said and done, they can be used to certify content or to undermine
or decertify it. Certifying phrases might include, and I agree that it is, to no one's
surprise, it goes without saying, and as everybody knows, undermining phrases might include, believe
it or not, to everyone's surprise, curiously enough, one might ask, or as unlikely as it
may seem. These, and countless similar examples of what I'm calling mini-scripting, might be
thought of as functioning in much the same way as the ever more ubiquitous emoticons do
on the web and in text messaging. While these phatic phrases may not really carry any content,
they help signal to the reader both the writer's individuality and the writer's attitude toward
the information delivered by the sentence. They also inevitably slow the sentence down
and delay its completion, increasing at least to some extent its degree of suspensiveness.
Of course, to some extent, you know you'll have some degree of suspensiveness in any
sentence you open with or interrupt with to some extent. I don't call attention to these
usually overlooked phatic phrases with the same conviction that William James and his
student Gertrude Stein tried to call attention to usually overlooked words. But these mini-scripted
phatic phrases are so prevalent in our writing that it makes no sense to ignore them, and
we will revisit this concept of prefab phatic phrases in a future lecture when we'll also
consider the many, many duple rhythm phrases we drop into our speaking and writing, paired
words such as willy-nilly, hocus-pocus, wishy-washy, flip-flop, ticky-tacky, doom and gloom, rough
and tumble, and so on. I'm not quite sure what to call these itsy-bitsy balances, but
they are, dare I say it, near and dear to my heart.
Lecture 18, Balanced Sentences and Balanced Forms
Recently I asked the students in my prose style class to think of memorable first sentences
from novels. The results were actually a little disappointing as almost everyone in the class
came up with the same two or three first sentences, but only a couple of students could think
of more than that. Of course, Call Me Ishmael made almost everyone's list. This is the saddest
story I have ever heard, the very revealing sentence with which John Dowell opens Ford
Maddox Ford's The Good Soldier popped up on several lists. As Gregor Samsa awoke one morning
from uneasy dreams, he found himself transformed into a giant insect. That was mentioned by
a student who was also taking my modern fiction class, in which we were then studying the
metamorphosis. Another student remembered most of the words to Tolstoy's happy families
are all alike, every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way, and that was pretty much it.
To my surprise, no one mentioned, last night I dreamt I went to Manderley again, no one
mentioned it was a bright cold day in April and the clocks were striking thirteen, no
one mentioned I am an invisible man, and no one remembered the telling first line of
Slaughterhouse Five. All this happened, more or less, and no one mentioned the tone setting
cyberpunk launching first sentence from William Gibson's Neuromancer, the sky above the port
was the color of television tuned to a dead channel. Not surprisingly, the one opening
line everyone in the class remembered was, it was the best of times, it was the worst
of times, that supremely balanced sentence that begins a tale of two cities. Dickens
made that opening so memorable by exploiting in just a few words almost all the strategies
of syntactic balance. It was the before the comma is mirrored by it was the after the
comma, and the fact that each clause starts with the same words exploits the classical
rhetorical trope of anaphora. The first clause ends with times as does the second clause
exploiting the classical rhetorical trope of epistrophe, and that both first and last
words of these two clauses are the same makes it an example of yet another rhetorical trope
simplicity. The only difference between the first clause and the second is that the word
best before the comma is changed to worst after the comma, creating a simple but effective
antithesis. In fact, it's hard to imagine a more perfectly balanced sentence. Only what
my students did not remember is that it was the best of times, it was the worst of times
is not the first sentence of a tale of two cities, but is instead only the first of a
string of balanced clauses and conceptual balances that combine to form a first sentence
that keeps on going for some 118 words. It was the best of times, it was the worst of
times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief,
it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of light, it was the season of darkness,
it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we
had nothing before us, we were all going direct to heaven, we were all going direct the other
way. In short, the period was so far like the present period that some of its noisiest
authorities insisted on its being received for good or for evil in the superlative degree
of comparison only. And Dickens doesn't stop there following this superbly balanced long
sentence with even more balances. There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a
plain face on the throne of England. There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with
a fair face on the throne of France. In both countries it was clearer than crystal to the
lords of the state preserves of loaves and fishes that things in general were settled
forever. Dickens balances the English king with a large
jaw against the French king with a large jaw, the English queen with a plain face against
the French queen with a fair face, the throne of England against the throne of France. Then
in the next sentence he exploits the duple rhythm of clearer than crystal and the pairing
of loaves and fishes and creates a subtle parallel between the three-word phrase things
in general and the three-word phrase settled forever. One can almost imagine Dickens performing
these sentences, emphasizing their, on the one hand, on the other hand, structure with
the regularity of a metronome, this, that, this, that, this, that.
What makes this famous opening of Dickens' novel so memorable is variously referred to
as its balanced form or its extended parallelism. These two concepts exist in a kind of chicken
and egg relationship. Either balances the heart of parallelism or parallelism is the
heart of balance. It is easy to specify what makes a formerly balanced sentence, a balanced
sentence, hinges in the middle, usually split by a semicolon, the second half of the sentence
paralleling the first half, but changing one or two key words or altering word order.
Dickens' first sentence in a tale of two cities doesn't exactly fit the bill for a
formerly balanced sentence, but each of its seven initial paired clauses could, reminding
us that sometimes a comma does the work of a semicolon in these constructions. But while
this sentence strings together a sequence of parallel balances, there are so many of
them that we become more focused on the sentence's parallels than on each of its binary oppositions.
Edward Everett Hale, Jr., descendant of American patriot Nathan Hale and son of the famous orator
and author of the short story The Man Without a Country, drew this distinction between balance
and parallelism and his constructive rhetoric, published in 1896. Offering as an example
of balance the sentence, his ambition impelled him in one direction, but his diffidence dragged
him in the other. Hale explained, in its arrangement of clauses balance resembles parallel construction,
but parallel construction usually arranges several clauses as if side by side, connected
by the punctuation while a balance, as it were, hangs to clauses one on each side of
a conjunction or its equivalent. His enthusiasm for balance, obviously waning, Hale continues,
the reason why the balanced sentence was selected from a great number of typical sentence structures
was, I take it, that it had been a favorite with the writers of the 18th century and that
it was used with excellent effect by Macaulay. In itself, the balanced sentence has its advantages,
but in spite of them all, it is not much used at the present. Hale's view, however, may
have been more accurate in 1896 than it would be today, since the intervening years have
seen Winston Churchill, John F. Kennedy and even Barry Goldwater reintroduce balance to
public discourse, to considerable effect. Few of us will ever forget JFK's ask not what
your country can do for you, line in his inaugural address, and while it did not lead to his
inauguration, Barry Goldwater's extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice, moderation
in the pursuit of justice is no virtue, is also well remembered, if somewhat balefully.
Writing specifically about Samuel Johnson, W.K. Wimsat Jr. offers a further distinction
between balance and parallelism. Wimsat refers to Johnson's, quote, parallelism of meaning,
end quote, as opposed to his, quote, parallelism of sound, end quote, suggesting that critics
who refer to Johnson's balance are actually more aware of the latter kind of parallelism
than of the former. He adds that references to cadence and to rhythm generally have more
to do with balance than with parallelism and concludes that, quote, we may begin to form
an opinion of Johnson's parallelism when we consider that of sound as auxiliary to and
made significant by that of meaning, end quote. I mention these distinctions only to establish
that while some discussions treat parallelism and balance as the same thing, others insist
that these terms refer to distinct phenomena. Most writing texts today focus on parallelism,
balance having apparently fallen out of favor as too arbitrary or too artificial a writing
trope. It's masters John Lilly and Samuel Johnson having also fallen a bit out of favor
for prose styles that forced all experience into neatly ordered binary structures. We
get a pretty good idea of this technique in Dr. Johnson's celebrated pronouncement in
the Rambler. We are all prompted by the same motives all deceived by the same fallacies
all animated by hope obstructed by danger entangled by desire and seduced by pleasure.
I'll talk more about both Lilly and Dr. Johnson in a moment, but first I want to sketch out
the way I present these two important syntaxes or rhythms in my writing classes where I tell
my students that parallelism is the foundation that underlies both the double beats of balance
and the three part rhythms of serial construction. The writing structures that present the world
in terms of dividing it into twos and threes fascinate me since double and triple rhythms
are really the only rhythms the writer of prose can consistently employ to any significant
effect. So I see parallelism as the building blocks from which we construct both crucial
rhythms. And parallelism has already been prominently featured in this series of lectures
even if I have not specifically called attention to it. Parallelism largely accounts for the
ebb and flow rhythm of the cumulative sentence. Some coordinate cumulative sentences foreground
parallelism as we can see in a sentence such as, the movie was a terrible disappointment.
Its plot ridiculous, its dialogue insulting, its acting amateurish, and even its cinematography
substandard. Or this was the moment he had been so eagerly awaiting, the moment when
he could step out from under the shadow of his more famous brother, the moment when he
could finally show the world his own talent, the moment when all of his planning and preparation
would finally pay off. Or in Ulysses, James Joyce may have written the first novel with
the soundtrack, song lyrics continuously running through the thoughts of Leopold Bloom, actual
songs frequently being heard by Bloom as he makes it through the day, the musical form
of the fugue actually accounting for the odd structure of the sirens chapter. Indeed,
parallelism contributes to the power of the cumulative syntax even when the parallels
are less obvious, as when the final word or phrase of a base clause is matched by starting
the next modifying level with a similar kind of word, adjective leading to adjective adverb
to adverb noun to noun, for example. His coat was tattered, frayed from daily wear. Or,
I returned to my studies with new dedication, concentration replacing my previous carelessness.
Or, she wanted to be loved, to be respected. And, of course, the parallelism somewhat camouflaged
in these examples is made unavoidably obvious if the final word of the base clause is simply
repeated as the first word of the cumulative modifying phrase. His coat was tattered, tattered
beyond all hope of repair. I returned to my studies with new dedication, dedication that
was eventually to result in my graduating with highest honors. She wanted to be loved,
loved for all the reasons that were so clear to her. But these quite modest examples of
parallelism and cumulative syntax can be heightened and extended to produce sentences with phrases
as elaborately parallel as, Thomas Berger is an American novelist whose career defies
easy description. His 23 novels arguably representing 23 different novel forms. His
subjects ranging from the Old West to Arthurian England to a robotic artificial woman. His
highly praised Reinhardt series featuring a single protagonist but following that protagonist's
misadventures in four novels of distinctly different styles. His reputation well established
as one of our best known and most celebrated neglected authors. Or, even more so, as in,
the concepts of metempsychosis and parallax account for almost all of the structure and
style of Joyce's Ulysses. Metempsychosis best described as reincarnation providing both
the tie to earlier narratives such as the Odyssey and the rationale for the way words and themes
are continuously reborn in the text popping up again and again. Parallax best described
as the alternation of point of view providing both the explanation of Leopold Bloom's dominant
characteristic and the rationale for the way Joyce's great novel shifts prose style from
chapter to chapter challenging us again and again to learn a new way to read. And, of
course, parallelism also figures prominently in a number of the patterns that produce suspensive
sentences. Any sentence that opens with a cascade of conditionals, whether if phrases,
because phrases, even or when phrases, or which open with a string of infinitive phrases
serving as an extended subject, will possibly display as much parallelism as suspensiveness.
Indeed, while I'm not exactly sure what the analytical payoff for such an observation
might be, it seems clear that parallelism like suspensiveness is always a matter of
degree ranging from the most minute parallels of syllable count and sound through parallels
of length and parts of speech to conceptual parallels so broad or abstract as to initially
escape our notice. To me, parallelism is the starting point for both powerful and playful
prose, but most writing texts present parallelism in terms of rules of correctness as something
we must get right or certainly should never get wrong as opposed to something we should
celebrate. For example, Professor Strunk informed his writing students that they should, quote,
express coordinate ideas in similar form, end of quote, explaining that the principle of
parallel construction requires that expressions similar in content and function be outwardly
similar. While Strunk cites the Beatitudes, blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven, blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, blessed
are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth, he cites this as an illustration of the virtue
of parallel construction. He's actually more interested in having his students avoid the
vice of failing to maintain proper parallelism. Even then, he seems reluctant to over praise
the form. When he notes that the sentence, quote, formerly science was taught by the
textbook method while now the laboratory method is employed, fails to maintain the parallelism
reflected in the sentence, formerly science was taught by the textbook method, now it
is taught by the laboratory method, he only makes the somewhat tepid claim that in the
latter version, quote, the writer has at least made a choice and abided by it, end of quote.
The majority of his discussion of parallelism is devoted to suggesting how to avoid failures
of parallelism and the use of prepositions and correlatives such as both and not only
but also and so on. One can only wonder whether Professor Strunk's little remembered earlier
edition of Macaulay's and Carlile's essays on Samuel Johnson had given him a fatal overdose
of parallel and balanced constructions. In similar fashion, the Little Brown Essential
Handbook fifth edition offers this restrained and somewhat redundant definition. Parallelism
matches the form of your sentence to its meaning, when your ideas are equally important or parallel
you express them in similar or parallel grammatical form, and it offers the understated example,
the air is dirtied by factories belching smoke and vehicles spewing exhaust. The only advantage
for parallelism cited in the Little Brown Handbook is that, quote, it can work like
glue to link the sentences of a paragraph as well as the parts of a sentence, end of quote,
and it devotes equal attention to warning that computer grammar and style checkers cannot
recognize faulty parallelism because they cannot recognize the relations among ideas.
My trusty old Harbrace College Handbook seventh edition is slightly more enthusiastic about
parallelism, citing linguist Simeon Potter's view that, quote, balanced sentences, note
the interchangeability of terms I previously mentioned, balance sentences satisfy a profound
human desire for equipoise and symmetry, end of quote. But the handbook follows that provocative
claim with only the pedestrian advice, use parallel form especially with coordinating
conjunctions in order to express your ideas simply and logically. The Harbrace Handbook
does go on to instruct that to create parallel structure the writer should balance a word
with a word, a phrase with a phrase, a clause with a clause, a sentence with a sentence,
followed by examples of awkward failures of parallelism and their improved parallel versions,
once again placing more emphasis on error avoidance than on the rhetorical benefits
of parallelism. Washington Post copy desk chief Bill Walsh continues this practice in
his book, Lapsing into a Comma, a curmudgeon's guide to the many things that can go wrong
in print and how to avoid them, where true to his title he offers the sentence, quote,
there are reports that the boy was beaten, molested, and is now a drug addict as a classic
non-parallel construction because its first verb, was beaten, is not parallel with its
second verb, is now a drug addict, with molested ambiguously hanging between the two.
Walsh only prescribes fixing this error either by placing the conjunction and, before molested,
the boy was beaten and molested, or repeating was before molested, the boy was beaten, was
molested, and is now a drug addict, with absolutely no consideration to reasons why parallelism
might add value to pro-style as well as to correct mistakes. The general tenor of these
constructions of parallelism as something not to be gotten wrong is perfectly captured
in W.K. Wimsatz's highly ironic praise, quote, the resourcefulness of student writers in obscuring
and avoiding parallels is boundless, end of quote. I call attention to these discussions
of parallelism because they are so restrained, while parallelism is so cool. At what point
I wonder did this most memorable of rhetorical strategies fall on hard times? And if the
broad concept of parallelism is now viewed in such restrained, if not cautionary terms,
what of the more intense rhetorical protocols of balance? I'm glad to report that parallelism
still has at least one effective champion in Virginia Tufty, who devotes a chapter to
it in her artful sentences, syntaxes style. Tufty prefaces her chapter on parallelism
with a cheering quotation from Richard D. Altick. The matching of phrase against phrase,
clause against clause lends an unmistakable eloquence to prose. That indeed is one of
the principal glories of the King James Bible, and to some extent in reminiscence and imitation
of the Bible, English prose all the way down to our time has tended toward balanced structure
for the sake of contrast or antithesis or climax. Parallelism, Tufty quite reasonably
explains, is saying like things in like ways. It is accomplished by repetition of words
and syntactic structures in planned symmetrical arrangements and, if not overdone, has a place
in day-to-day writing. Tufty acknowledges what most writing guidebooks fail to say,
that deliberately faulty parallelism, the frustration of our expectation that a structure
will be repeated, can sometimes be seen as a syntactic strength rather than a weakness
or an error, offering as an example a sentence from John Steinbeck, Sweet Thursday. Here
was himself young, good-looking snappy dresser and making dough, and she notes that the repetition
called for to achieve parallelism can sometimes be understood through ellipsis as in a sentence
from Bradford Smith, for love is stronger than hate and peace than war. She presents balance
as a subset of parallelism, and offers an extended discussion of strategies which produce
balance, a number of which I'll return to in the next lecture. For now, I simply want
to applaud Virginia Tufty for her celebration of parallelism and balance, a celebration
that has grown far too rare in contemporary considerations of writing style.
Earlier, I wondered when parallelism and balance fell on hard times in the teaching
of writing, and while I can't pinpoint a date for that, I think I can offer an explanation
tied to and possibly stuck in history. The problem is that the great majority of examples
of sustained parallelism and extended balance are taken in almost every writing guidebook
from Samuel Johnson and John Lilly. Now Lilly was a Renaissance writer very successful in
his time who lived during the last 50 years of the 16th century, and is best known for
his Euphuis, the Anatomy of Witt, and Euphuis and his England, the second book published
a couple of years later. Samuel Johnson, who has achieved celebrities' single name status
as Dr. Johnson, lived in and wrote across much of the 18th century, and while he authored
a prodigious number of works, he's perhaps best known for his a Dictionary of the English
Language published in 1755, and his three volume Lives of the Most Imminent Poets, 1781,
I'll turn to a discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of Dr. Johnson in my next lecture.
For now, I'll close my brief discussion of balance and parallelism with a few words about
Lilly. I'll admit, a little Lilly goes a long way. Here's a brief excerpt from his
dedication of Euphuis to his patron Sir William West. Lilly is making the case for the essential
honesty of his depiction of the youth Euphuis.
Whereby I gather that in all perfect works, as well the fault as the face is to be shown.
The fairest leopard is set down with his spots, the sweetest rose with his prickles, the finest
velvet with his brach. Seeing then that in every counterfeit, as well the blemish as the
beauty is colored, I hope I shall not incur the displeasure of the wise, in that in the
discourse of Euphuis, I have as well touched the vanities of his love as the virtue of
his life.
If then, the first sight of Euphuis shall seem too light to be read of the wise, or
too foolish to be regarded of the learned, they ought not to impute it to the iniquity
of the author, but to the necessity of the history. Or, in a selection from the novel
itself that is even a bit more true to Lilly's wording and spelling.
True it is, Philotus, that he which toucheth the nettle tenderly as soon as stung, that
the fly which playeth with the fire is singed in the flame, that he that dallyeth with women
is drawn to his woe, and as the adamant draweth the heavy iron, the harp, the fleet dolphin,
though beauty allureth the chaste mind to live, and the wisest wit to lust. The example
whereof I would it were no less profitable than the experience to me is like to be perilous.
The vine watered with wine is soon withered, the blossom in the fattest ground is quickly
blasted, the goat the fatter she is, the less fertile she is, yea man the more witty he
is, the less happy he is. So patterned and so mannered, paralleled and balanced, was
the prose in Lilly's euphuies, that it has given us the rhetorical term euphuism, terming
euphuism, the rhetorical prose style per excellence. Richard Lanham explains in his a hand list
of rhetorical terms that it emphasizes the figures of words that create balance and makes
frequent use of antithesis, paradox, repetitive patterns with single words, sound plays of
various sorts, amplification of every kind, cententei, and especially the unnatural, natural
history or simile from traditional natural history. Somewhat discouragingly, Lanham
adds, Lilly's style has been studied largely to be deplored. And yet, as Lanham also notes,
Lilly's reputation has been to some extent rehabilitated in recent years by scholars
who credit him with making some significant contributions to English prose. I call attention
to what I freely admit is the excessive balance in parallelism in Lilly's writing, only to
remind us that the extreme limit his prose represents does not have to discourage us
from occasional excursions along the continuum of parallelism, as long as we remember to
stop short of the degrees of parallelism crafted by Lilly. The problem is that we have been
discouraged by writing text after writing text from playing with balance and parallelism,
and there are few contemporary and effective examples of these forms for us to follow. In
the next lecture, however, I'll provide such an example in the wonderfully balanced prose
of philosopher, essayist, and novelist William Gass, one of our most exciting and rewarding
masters of prose style.
Science fiction in the cinema often turns out to be, turns round to be, the fictional or
fictive science of the cinema itself, the future feats it may achieve scanned in line
with the technical feat that conceives them right now and before our eyes. I love the
sentence from my colleague Garrett Stewart, who also happens to be one of the most superb
prose stylists I know. This is not so surprising when we learn that a much younger Garrett
Stewart collaborated with Virginia Tufty on her first two books, Grammar S Style and
Grammar S Style, Exercises and Creativity. Indeed, many of the sentence examples I've
drawn from Tufty's third book, Artful Sentences, Syntaxes Style, were originally brought to
her attention by Garrett Stewart. Garrett's often cited sentence about science fiction
film appears in his essay, The Vidiology of Science Fiction, and it would not be inaccurate
to say that this single sentence was the inspiration for an entire book I wrote about science fiction
film. I love the sentence because it succinctly captures a crucial truth about the relationship
of the subject matter of SF film to the production technologies that make that subject matter
come alive on the screen, the amazing technologies that allow us to make science fiction films
every bit as interesting, if not more so, than the stories about technology those films
tell. I also love the sentence and I couldn't get it out of my mind once I read it because
of its masterful exploitation of balanced form. With that somewhat gratuitous but marvelous
sounding turns round to be that follows the initial turns out to be, Garrett signals the
reader that this sentence will do more than present propositional content. Indeed it paves
the way for a cascade of balances. Science fiction in the cinema is soon balanced against
the fictional or fictive science of the cinema itself, and that pairing of fictional or fictive
intensifies even further the sentences commitment to balance, future feats that the cinema may
depict are balanced by the technical feat that conceives them, and the time right now
is balanced by the place before our eyes. While this sentence gives voice to a stunning
critical insight, that insight is made more powerful indeed unforgettable by a voice that
insistently draws authority from the duple rhythms of balanced form. Garrett's sentence
may lack some of the dramatic force of Conrad's. She was savage and superb, wild-eyed and
magnificent, there was something ominous and stately in her deliberate progress. But my
great appreciation for that wonderfully balanced sentence from Conrad owes more than a little
to another of Garrett's brilliant essays, this one on the significance of Marlowe's
lie and Conrad's masterpiece. It is tellingly titled with balanced brio, lying as dying
in a heart of darkness. But I'll defer the brief for Garrett Stewart Fan Club until another
day. Right now I want to get back to the consideration of balance I started in the last lecture.
As I've noted, balance and parallelism are often discussed as if they were interchangeable
terms and in a sense they are. However, I'm going to reserve parallelism to describe similarities
that are maintained in prose beyond the duple sound and sense of balance which focuses our
eyes and our ears on pairs of things. My reasons for trying to maintain this distinction will,
I hope, become more evident in a future lecture when I consider serial constructions generally
identified by their division of the world into threes, but sometimes extending parallel
constructions to catalogues of four or even more terms. For now, I want to discuss balance
first as a formal sentence syntax and then as a form or rhythm that can appear within
or among sentences whenever there is some pairing, whether of sound of vowels and consonants
of words of the same length or syllable count, phrases of the same construction, words or
phrases linked by conjunctions, concepts that are similar or antithetical or any use of
language that foregrounds two of anything. Balanced form can range from the obvious syntactic
pairing of chiasmus, when the going gets tough the tough get going, to more subtle oppositional
pairing against the iceberg of her smile I sail the Titanic of my hopes. As I previously
specified, a balanced sentence hinges in the middle, usually split by a semicolon, the
second half of the sentence paralleling the first half, but changing one or two key words
or altering word order. In this sense, the second half of the sentence can be thought
of as a kind of mirror image of the first half, the reflection reversing the original
image. One of the best known examples of the balanced sentence comes from John F. Kennedy's
inaugural address, ask not what your country can do for you, ask what you can do for your
country. Kennedy or his speech writers had an ear for parallelism as well as for balance
as we can see in another less memorable but equally well crafted excerpt from his inaugural
address. All this will not be finished in the first 100 days, nor will it be finished
in the first 1000 days, nor in the life of this administration, nor even perhaps in our
lifetime on this planet, but let us begin. And Winston Churchill would certainly have
to be acknowledged a modern master of balance I previously mentioned as classically balanced
dismissal of socialism. The inherent vice of capitalism is the unequal sharing of blessings,
the inherent virtue of socialism is the equal sharing of miseries. A more effective way
of stressing his point is hard to imagine, since his balanced sentence also gains emphasis
from the fact that it is highly suspensive, delaying completion of his message until the
final word of the sentence. But Churchill was also fond of smaller balanced forms, particularly
when speaking of language. Short words are best in the old words when short are best
of all, he said. He liked to pair words. Writing a long and substantial book is like having
a friend and companion at your side to whom you can always turn for comfort and amusement
and whose society becomes more attractive as a new and widening field of interest is
lighted in the mind. And his speeches are peppered with prefab balanced pairings such
as black and blue, brass and bluff, facts and figures, forgive and forget, hemmed and
hawed, by hook or crook, life and limb, live and learn, rough and ready, part and parcel,
thick and thin, wear and tear and so on. Balance sentences really call attention to
themselves and they stick in the mind, drawing their power from the tension set up between
repetition and variation. Since the real power of the balanced sentence comes only at its
end, it can be thought of as another form of periodic sentence, perhaps the most intense
form. In an odd way, the balanced sentence also works generatively or heuristically as
does the cumulative. Since you can set the balance in motion without really knowing where
you want the sentence to go, for instance, given an informal definition, those who talk
when you wish them to listen are boars. You can insert a semicolon, switch terms, those
who listen when you wish them to talk are, and you can choose almost any word to fill
in that final blank. Indeed, this fill in the blank phenomenon suggests that the form
of the balanced sentence may be more memorable than the meaning conveyed by and through that
form, like having a humongous stretch limo drive up and deliver a perfectly nondescript
rider. I can only remember the balance of Barry Goldwater's famous infamous battle cry
of 1964, extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice, moderation in the pursuit of justice
is no virtue. I can always remember the balance between extremism and moderation and between
vice and virtue. But for the life of me, I can never remember that this sentence balanced
liberty against justice, two terms usually paired as in with liberty and justice for
all. While the most rhetorically polished balance sentences do tend to be divided by
a semicolon, the balance sentence does not demand a semicolon, as in the case I previously
mentioned with the chiasmic when the going gets tough, the tough get going. Another example
of balance without the semicolon would be Fitzgerald's, there are only the pursued,
the pursuing, the busy and the tired. Apart from its aphoristic nature, and anyone who
wants to start a bumper sticker business had better know how to construct balances. The
balanced sentence offers an obvious advantage to any rider who must compare two subjects.
Such a comparison can be made by treating first one subject and then the other through
splitting the comparison into two halves, each half focusing on one of the subjects,
or by alternating paragraphs, each paragraph focusing on one of the subjects, or it can
be made sentence by sentence with each balanced sentence matching the two subjects on a point
by point basis. This kind of comparison or contrast can really profit from the use of
balanced sentences. Balance is the specific syntactic tool ready made for comparisons.
Samuel Johnson, Dr. Johnson is probably the greatest master of the balanced form, as we
can see in his comparison of Dryden with Pope. Pope had perhaps the judgment of Dryden,
but Dryden certainly wanted the diligence of Pope, and acquired knowledge the superiority
must be allowed to Dryden, whose education was more scholastic and who before he became
an author had been allowed more time for study with better means of information. His mind
has a larger range and he collects his images and illustrations from a more extensive circumference
of science. Dryden knew more of man and his general nature and Pope in his local manners.
There is more dignity in the knowledge of Dryden and more certainty in that of Pope.
The style of Dryden is capricious and varied. That of Pope is cautious and uniform. Dryden
obeys the motions of his own mind. Pope constrains his mind to his own rules of composition.
Dryden is sometimes vehement and rapid. Pope is always smooth, uniform and gentle. Dryden's
page is a natural field rising into inequalities and diversified by the varied exuberance of
abundant vegetation. Pope's is a velvet lawn shaven by the scythe and leveled by the
roller. Of genius, that power which constitutes a poet, that quality without which judgment
is cold and knowledge is inert, that energy which collects, combines, amplifies and animates,
the superiority must with some hesitation be allowed to Dryden.
Dryden's performances were always hasty, either excited by some external occasion or
extorted by domestic necessity. He composed without consideration and published without
correction. What his mind could supply at call or gather in one excursion was all that
he sought and all that he gave. The dilatory caution of Pope enabled him to convince his
sentiments to multiply his images and to accumulate all that study might produce or
chance might supply. If the flights of Dryden therefore are higher, Pope continues longer
on the wing. If of Dryden's fire the blaze is brighter, of Pope's the heat is more regular
and constant. Dryden often surpasses expectation and Pope never falls below it. Dryden is red
with frequent astonishment and Pope with perpetual delight. Even if you read the above
passage so quickly that you don't get much of its meaning, you'll notice that it has
a distinct rhythm or cadence. It sounds balanced, alternating between similar sounds or beats
as well as between Pope and Dryden. And remember that a balanced view of things is a comment
on fairness and even handedness, a mental trait to be desired and valorized as well
as a form or a syntax. Johnson's comparison then displays a second kind or degree of balance
that of smaller forms within the sentence and of those forms between and among sentences.
Any time that a sentence, part of a sentence or groups of sentences makes us aware of pairs
of things, whether objects, sounds, words, syntactic structures that reveal some degree
of balanced form. This kind of balance can take almost any shape or form, can appear
at almost any time. It may come from the insinuating insistence of alliteration, assonance or consonance
or from the pronounced parallelism of phrases and modifiers, metaphors and the larger syntax
of the sentence. Balance may even come from a conceptual dualism, a thought that focuses
our thinking inexorably on two subjects, entities, ideas, images, as in, she starved so that
he could eat, or in Shelley's aphorism, imagination means individuation. Dr. Johnson's comparison
of the two poets contains almost all of these forms of balance.
And here with Dr. Johnson is the second place, John Lilly's example being the first, where
balance fell at least a bit into disrepute. Before we consider some of Johnson's detractors,
however, let's look at a few more examples of the prose style with which he is so closely
associated, this from his preface to a dictionary of the English language.
Among these unhappy mortals is the writer of dictionaries whom mankind have considered
not as a pupil, but the slave of science, the pioneer of literature, doomed only to
remove rubbish and clear obstructions from the paths of learning and genius, who press
forward to conquest and glory without bestowing a smile on the humble drudge that facilitates
their progress. Every other author may aspire to praise, the lexicographer can only hope
to escape reproach, and even this negative recompense has been yet granted to very few.
When I took the first survey of my undertaking, I found our speech copious without order and
energetic without rules. Wherever I turned my view, there was perplexity to be disentangled
and confusion to be regulated. Choice was to be made out of boundless variety without
any established principle of selection. Adulterations were to be detected without a
subtle test of purity, and modes of expression to be rejected or received without the suffrages
of any writers of classical reputation or acknowledged authority.
The question we aspiring students of the sentence must answer for ourselves before we decide
whether in your face balance will be a feature of our own syntactic arsenal is simply this.
Does Dr. Johnson's prose strike us as impressive or obsessive, well-crafted to positive affect
or overdone to the point of putting readers off? And of course, what we're really doing
here is trying to decide what we feel about balance than about Dr. Johnson. The problem
with balance, as is the problem with any syntax pushed too hard, is that it levels reality,
forcing everything into binary agreement or opposition. In an essay on Johnson's parallelism,
W.K. Wimpsett Jr. has outlined the case against balance, citing Hazlett's criticism of Johnson's
style. All his periods are cast in the same mold or of the same size and shape, and consequently
have little fitness to the variety of things he professes to treat of. Wimpsett observes
that Johnson runs the risk of preferring the meaning of parallel to a more relevant meaning
of variety. He explains in his characteristically abstract but balanced fashion. A writer may
insist by explicit or implicit means on the equality or on the opposite, the difference
of the members within their frame of equality or on the opposite, the difference of the
members within their frame of equality or parallel. He may exploit one kind of meaning
or the other. If he recurrently gives to his multiplied phrases or clauses a turn toward
equality, then the relations of member to member of premise to premise and to conclusion
will be strengthened and plain. The whole sequence of meaning will have a high degree
of coherence and regularity, but this will be at the expense of modulation of individuality
of premise of variety. Hazlett advances much the same critique of
pronounced balanced form using Edmund Burke as his target. The words are not fitted to
the things but the things to the words. Everything is seen through a false medium. It is putting
a mask on the face of nature which may indeed hide some specs and blemishes but takes away
all beauty, delicacy and variety. And if you think that sounds like a serious indictment,
wait until you hear Macaulay's critique of Dr. Johnson. In his review of Boswell's
Life of Johnson, Thomas Babington Macaulay, who it should be remembered was himself known
for his use of balanced form, accused Johnson of writing in Johnsonese a style which he
called systematically vicious and famously opined. His constant practice of padding out
a sentence with useless epithets till it became as stiff as the bust of an exquisite. His
antithetical forms of expression constantly employed even where there is no opposition
in the ideas expressed. His big words wasted on little things, his harsh inversions so
widely different from those graceful and easy inversions which give variety, spirit and
sweetness to the expression of our great old writers. All these peculiarities have been
imitated by his admirers and parodied by his assailants till the public has become sick
of the subject. Not so fast, rebutted George Sainsbury in 1916 who termed Macaulay's description
of Johnson's style, quote, one of the worst parts of his essay, and then used the term
tessellation to describe Johnson's rhetorical strategy in which, quote, clauses and sentences
were balanced against each other and built up into larger sentences and paragraphs on
a system of almost mathematical or military exactitude. File being drawn up against file
and squadron against squadron, well, both the constituent clause members and their constituents
of substantive adjective and verb were balanced or dressed against each other in pairs, triplets,
even quaternions of strictness, equilibrium and rhythm and thought.
While Sainsbury acknowledges that this Palladian architecture of style is no doubt more imposing
than delectable, he insists that it is, quote, by no means omnipresent nor is it ever very
conspicuous in Johnson's really best passages. Okay, maybe that's not a rousing defense,
but it is a much more accurate description of what Johnson does than Macaulay offers
in his condemnation. I suspect that today we might be tempted to describe Johnson's
style as fractal rather than tessellated, but both terms suggest the way that his balances
contain balances which contain balances, giving his writing a balanced texture that is unmatched.
What's missing so far in these discussions of balance is the fact that they are so much
fun for the writer to construct and for the reader to recognize. Matthew Clark touches
on this underreported aspect in his book A Matter of Style on Writing and Technique,
where he recognizes that for modern taste the example of sustained balance and parallelism
may be excessive, but notes that there is a great vigor and pleasure in the writing,
he adds. This passage must have been fun to compose, and for the reader in the right frame
of mind it's still a lot of fun to read. In this sort of style, the figure doesn't merely
serve the idea. It becomes an end in itself and ideas are sought to provide an occasion
for the figure. Clark offers an excerpt from George Bernard Shaw's Man and Superman as
further evidence of the ludic potential of balanced form. Shaw's Don Juan is replying
to the devil's charge that he has been uncivil with a delicious blowout of balance.
Poo! Why should I be civil to them or to you? In this palace of lies a truth or two will
not hurt you. Your friends are all the dullest dogs I know. They are not beautiful, they
are only decorated, they are not clean, they are only shaved and starched, they are not
dignified, they are only fashionably dressed, they are not moral, they are only conventional,
they are not virtuous, they are only cowardly, they are not loyal, they are only servile,
not beautiful, only sheepish, not public-spirited, only patriotic, not courageous, only quarrelsome,
not determined, only obstinate, not masterful, only domineering, not self-controlled, only
obtuse, not self-respecting, only vain, not kind, only sentimental, not social, only gregarious,
not considerate, only polite, not intelligent, only opinionated, not progressive, only factious,
not imaginative, only superstitious, not just only vindictive and not truthful at all, lies
and shares every one of them to the very backbone of their souls. And in the writing
of William Gass, we find an even more effective brief for the use of balance. As Gass goes
for balances at every opportunity, seemingly delighting in the rhythm, America has no more
innovative approach stylist than Gass, and it is his example, not Dr. Johnson's, I follow,
when I champion the use of balanced forms and effective writing. In his novels such
as The Tunnel, Oman Sutter's Luck, and Willie Masters' Lonesome Wife, in his short fiction
collected in the heart of the country, but particularly in his collections of essays on
being blue, the world within the word, fiction in the figures of life, the habitations of
the word, and a temple of texts, Gass does more breathtaking things with sentences, gets
more energy and excitement from his prose than does any other living American writer.
Even wrenched from the context that give them so much added impact, his sentences stand
as monuments to his mastery of language and to his fascination with balance. Here are
just a few examples, dispersed from an essay on suicide.
Poetry is cathartic only for the unserious, for in front of the rush of expressive need
stands the barrier of form, and when the hurdler's scissored legs and outstretched arms carry
him over the bars, the limp in his life, the headache in his heart, the emptiness he's
full of are as absent as his street shoes, which will pinch and scrape his feet in all
the old leathery ways once the race is over, and he has to walk through the front door
of his future like a brushman with some feckless pattern and a chintzy plastic prize.
This about Malcolm Lowry's Under the Volcano. There's a cantina at every corner of the
consul's world. Sin and innocence, guilt and salvation, shape Lowry's private square
of opposition, and if sanctuary and special knowledge are its gifts in one guy's and
gaiety and relaxation its gifts in another, catter corner from church and gym or brothel
and prison. This one I love on Samuel Beckett. He writes equally well in two languages, nitty
and gritty. He is a minimalist because he compresses and puts everything in by leaving
most of it out. Joyce wished to rescue the world by getting it back into his book, Beckett
Wishes to Save Our Souls by Purging Us Impossibly of Matter.
This on Borges. Borges is a fine poet too, but he revolutionized our conception of both
the story and the essay by blending and bewildering them. He will not be forgiven or forgotten
for that. This about the tale of one thousand and one nights. In its nearly thousand and
one year journey to our time, these Arabian cons drew additions, endured omissions, submitted
to revisions, suffered expurgations, were betrayed by translations, fussed over by
annotations and stuffed into additions aimed at special interests while experiencing normal
negligence in the customary incompetence of sellers, scribes, scholars and consumers,
the tattering dispersal and destruction of copies, the corruption of the text, the misunderstanding
of its meaning, the exploitation of its exotic scenes and settings, as well as the decline
of its importance into what's so ironic for the nights, we call bedtime stories.
And oh yes, in a fitting close to our consideration of balance, here's gas on Dr. Johnson in the
company of other noteworthy preface writers. In the preface to his dictionary, Dr. Johnson
wines, another persistent feature of the genre. It is the fate of those who toil at the lower
employments of life to be rather driven by the fear of evil than attracted by the prospect
of good, to be exposed to censure without hope of praise, to be disgraced by miscarriage
or punished for neglect where success would have been without applause and diligence without
reward. A wine, yes, but how perfectly composed.
Balance is the rhythm of twos, series is the rhythm of threes, and parallel serial constructions
echo, invoke, and build upon our penchant for measuring, describing and constructing
reality in units of threes. In the next lecture, I'm going to explore further the idea that
balance in three-part serials are much more than just syntactic patterns and are deeply
imbricated in our understanding of the world, but for now, I just want to call attention
to the three-part series as the obvious counterpart and complement to the two-part rhythms and
constructions of balance. Three phrases of parallel construction, three-part predicates,
three attempts to say exactly the right thing all invoke serial form. A series, however,
is more than just a list with three or more items in it. At the heart of this form is
some kind of unity, some kind of progression, some kind of intensification. What distinguishes
the series is that its elements build on each other, add to each other's impact, restate
and refine each other's information. For example, can we imagine a more effective explanation
than Nabokov's three-part series Reasons for Granting Interviews Only in Writing? I think
like a genius, I write like a distinguished author, I speak like a child, or the series
may mark a temporal progression, establish a chronology, outline a process. In a way,
the series is a kind of balance that has been extended since the more parallel the elements
of the series, whether elements of syntax, diction, sound or concept, the more pronounced
the serial construction. As Caesar put it, in perhaps the most famous three-part series
we have, waney, weedy, wiki, I came, I saw, I conquered. The most pronounced serial construction
has three parts, although a series can be extended beyond three elements or reduced
to two. Winston Weathers in a pioneering essay on the rhetoric of the series notes that the
writer can write the two-part series and create an aura of certainty, confidence, didacticism
and dogmatism, or can write the three-part series and create the effect of the normal,
the reasonable, the believable and the logical, or can write the four or more part series
and suggest the human, emotional, diffuse and inexplicable. Weather sees the choice
a writer makes between creating the two-beat rhythm of balance, or the three-beat rhythm
of the three-part parallel series, as a choice between the almost authoritarian implications
of balance, with its implications of finality and totality, a sense that there is nothing
more to be said, or a sense of massive, abrupt and final summary, and the aura of the true
and believable sample offered by the three-part series, referring to the fact that the syllogism
has three parts, major premise, minor premise, conclusion. Weather suggests that the three-part
series offers a, quote, sense of the reasonable and even the logical, end quote. To him, and
I certainly agree, the series, in going one step beyond the binary oppositions of balance,
achieves the rhetorical effect of something more reasonable, ordinary, and more truly
representative, and it clenches his argument with the balance claim that the series has
the touch of the common and understandable. Tellingly, Weather's himself employs balanced
form to describe the series, and three-part serial constructions to describe balance.
As the example of his own prose suggests, the ties among kinds of serial constructions
are quite complex. Since one three-part series balances quite effectively against another,
a three-part series may be composed of three two-part balances, and the four-part series
can easily be shaped to lend its catalog to either two or three-part rhythm. Furthermore,
serial constructions invite acendenton, the omitting of conjunctions, or polycendenton,
the foregrounded excessive use of conjunctions. I came, I saw, I conquered, could have been
said I came, and I saw, and I conquered, which would be polycendenton, or I came, saw, conquered,
acendenton. Sounds to me like Caesar got it right, even if he did crib the general form
from the ending of Aristotle's rhetoric. Acendenton seems to suggest simultaneity and
speed. Aristotle suggested it had the added effect of seeming to say many things at the
same time, while polycendenton seems to suggest distinct stages or differences and deliberate
intensity. He has had his intuition. He has made his discovery. He is eager to explore
it, to reveal it, to fix it down. It was a hot day, and the sky was very bright and
blue, and the road was white and dusty, that last one from Hemingway, of course. Another
rhetorical device invited by serial constructions is anaphora, beginning each element in the
series with the same word or words. The reason why I object to Dr. Johnson's style is that
there is no discrimination, no selection, no variety in it, or art for most Americans
is a very queer fish. It can't be reasoned with, it can't be bribed, it can't be doped
out or duplicated. Above all, it can't be cashed in on. Of course, the opposite of anaphora
is epistrophe, ending each item in a series with the same word or words. To the good American,
many subjects are sacred, sex is sacred, women are sacred, children are sacred, business
is sacred, America is sacred, masonic lodges and college clubs are sacred. Here's another
one. Raphael paints wisdom, Handel sings it, Phidias carves it, Shakespeare writes it,
men bills it, Columbus sails it, Luther preaches it, Washington arms it, Watt mechanizes it.
That one from Emerson. Combine anaphora and epistrophe and you get simplicity. I was born
an American, I will live an American, I shall die an American. That from Daniel Webster.
Just as was the case with balance, three-part serials can be overdone. Of course, this is
true of all of the syntactical patterns we've been working with and for that matter, it's
true of just about everything in general. However, for reasons I'll try to explain shortly,
modern readers probably have a much greater tolerance for pronounced serial constructions
than they have for pronounced balance and the three-part series does not seem as tied
to the rhetoric of earlier centuries as does balance. In a word, it sounds more reasonable.
Indeed, its evocation of logic and reason seems to be one of the great sources of the
rhetorical effectiveness of three-part serials. Whenever I write serial constructions, it's
a little bit like taking a long plane flight with a couple of connections, a couple of
stops that actually help me reach my destination, a couple of brief layovers during which I
can rethink my itinerary, remind myself of what remains to be done, and redouble my efforts
to ensure that the trip accomplishes its purpose, gets me where I need to go, or at least provides
the satisfying illusion that I'm going somewhere. This analogy doesn't bear too much scrutiny,
however, since my reasons for taking plane flights are almost always generated from without,
required by some clear need to get to a specific destination, driven by events to which I may
choose to respond or not, but which I never completely control. Writing a series, on the
other hand, simply seems to come out of the blue, an opportunity that just presents itself
as my sentence unfolds, generated from somewhere within my understanding of syntactic options,
required by some amorphous sense that three tries are better than one, driven only by
some internal metronome that is deaf to the appeal of a waltz, but that longs for the
rhythm of threes in my writing, the narrative rhythm of beginning, middle, and end, the
progressive rhythm of going, going, gone, the conceptual rhythm of a world that conforms
itself to the debaters confidently raised three fingers, the syllogisms, three parts,
the three elements themselves, earth, fire, and water. When I begin to write, I rarely
have a destination in mind for each sentence, much less a plan for marching the steps of
the sentence according to some specific cadence, but somewhere after my first word, it must
occur to me that I haven't said exactly what I wanted to say, haven't gotten the words
quite right, haven't painted the picture for my reader that I see so clearly, or, as
I suspect is more often the case, haven't clearly painted the picture that still remains
stubbornly fuzzy to my straining imagination. In these cases, I usually try again, but
something about two efforts at getting the words right often feels incomplete, unsatisfying,
awkward, so I run through my options searching for the third word, third phrase, third sound
that will release me from the apparent need to sound more reasonable, ordinary, and understandable,
that will free me from the compulsion to offer a reasonable sample, and that will let me
start a new sentence in which, against all odds, I just might say exactly what I want
to say, might get the words precisely right, might paint the masterpiece of my dreams, or
failing that, might content myself with the belligerence of the balance, the sprawl of
the catalog, or any prose rhythm that startles the eye and ear, some rude reggae in place
of the walls. And here's another example of my own attempt to tap the power of serial
construction. Each of us has experienced moments in which, for some unfathomable reason, we
have done exactly the inappropriate thing, made the perfectly inane remark, responded
to a person's statement or event with no sense of proportion whatsoever, no sense of
self-awareness, no sense of how fatal our lack of judgment will immediately seem. In
such moments of incredible awkwardness, time stops. We see puzzled or shocked expressions
creep across the faces of those around us, the sudden silence crashes in our ears, and
we desperately want the fatal word or action back. Want a second take in the movie of life?
Pray for a second chance. We cannot believe what we have done, cannot escape our burning
embarrassment, and finally, we can only face the bleak prospect of trying to gloss over
or undo the damage, knowing full well we have no chance. These are moments of rarest paranoia
and despair, moments frozen in humiliation, a time when, if life itself does not seem
hopelessly absurd, we certainly do. Usually these moments of acute ego-shattering embarrassment
come from nowhere, randomly, exploding into miserable being when a maverick thought eludes
our normally vigilant censoring codes of conduct and social survival, moments when our carefully
constructed defensive shields drop for the briefest moment, when for a horrifying instant
we shock and dismay ourselves with a totally honest, uncalculated and wildly free reaction
to the world around us.
Just as Dr. Johnson is the exemplum par excellence of balance, Francis Bacon is the triple crown
winner of three-part serial form with his of studies, possibly the most intense example
we have of sustained serial construction.
Studies serve for delight, for ornament, and for ability. Their chief use for delight
is in privateness and retiring, for ornament is in discourse, and for ability is in the
judgment and disposition of business. For expert men can execute and perhaps judge in
particulars one by one, but the general counsels and the plots and marshalling of affairs
come best from those that are learned. To spend too much time in studies is sloth to
use them too much for ornament is affectation. To make judgment wholly by their rules is
the humor of a scholar. They perfect nature and are perfected by experience.
Easy men contend studies. Simple men admire them, and wise men use them, for they teach
not their own use, but that is a wisdom without them and above them one by observation. Read
not to contradict and confute, nor to believe and take for granted, nor to find talk and
discourse, but to weigh and consider. Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed,
and some few to be chewed and digested. Reading maketh a full man, conference a ready man,
and writing an exact man. Or consider the following triple treat paragraph by Carl Klaus,
my colleague at Iowa and along with novelist Thomas Berger, one of my two great mentors
in matters having to do with prose style. This from Carl.
I am fascinated by parallel series. I spend hours probing their mysteries. I worship their
ideal form. I look for them in my reading. I strive for them in my writing. I contrive
them even when I am talking. So obsessed am I by them that my thoughts are forever upon
them. Whether I am brushing my teeth, washing my car, hoeing my garden, eating my dinner,
tying my shoes, grooming my dog, myself or my fly line. So bacon is my master, my idol,
my bane. I study him, I imitate him, I envy him. I require my students to read him, to
analyze him, to emulate him. I ask no more of them than of myself, no less of them than
they are capable as much of them as they can produce and the language will bear. I wonder
how this obsession will end in mastery, in mockery or in madness. I cannot predict, but
I know I cannot continue as I am at present, working to create, laboring to contrive, struggling
to perfect the Baconian style. Doing so has led me to defy my master to mar his masterpieces
to mend his mastery. Thus I am committed to a single form, one style, the syntax of a
perfect series, hoping to excel him and so to be free of him forever.
I should take just a moment here to recommend to you the remarkable range of nonfiction
essays and contemplations of Carl Klaus. Carl has written and edited prolifically in
the fields of writing and stylistic theory, and his work on composition and prose style
has shaped much of my thinking and that of writing teachers across the nation. A particular
value are his elements of writing co-authored with Robert Scholes, his style in English
prose, his award-winning courses for change and writing co-authored with Nancy Jones,
and his in-depth essays for our time co-authored with Chris Anderson and Rebecca Ferry. But
Carl's greatest appeal to those of us trying to improve the effectiveness of our own writing
is in his own justly celebrated creative non-fiction. He's the author of My Vegetable Love, a journal
of a growing season, a memoir that celebrates Carl's love of gardening and all of the things
that touch upon his gardening, including reflections on everything from the weather to his wife
with grandchildren, academe, and dogs, cats, and neighbors in between. This book, in what
might be considered its sequel, Weathering Winter, a gardener's daybook, remind us that
elegant prose exploiting all of the syntactic devices in the history of the English language
not only need not sound artificial or strained, but can make the most natural of subjects
come alive. Carl's taking retirement, a beginner's diary, contemplates the losses and the gains
of retiring from a lifetime of passionate teaching, and as a book I am certain, I will
reread again and again as I approach my own retirement. And his letters to Kate, life
after life, is Carl's moving at times heart-breaking and always insightful exploration of loss and
grief following the sudden death in 2002 of his wife.
No, this unabashed plug for Carl Klaus' writing is not a new low-end product placement, nor
do I own stock in Carl's literary enterprises. What I do find and want to celebrate in his
works is writing reminiscent of the wisdom we find in A.B. White, but with more joy in
and crafting of language than we normally encounter in White's wonderful letters and
essays. And besides, you already knew about A.B. White. It's my pleasure to introduce
you to the syntactic mastery and the delicious sentences of Carl Klaus. Not incidentally,
Carl is also the visionary founder of Iowa's MFA and nonfiction program, and both directly
and indirectly his influence on several generations of award-winning nonfiction writers has simply
been huge.
But more to the point of this lecture. From Carl Klaus, we can learn that the basic patterns
for serial construction can be categorized in terms of those for, and first of all, Carl
talks about those for the phrasal series, an example. The lake is crystal clear, dead
calm and freezing cold, or another. Aerobic exercise helps one lose weight safely, improve
muscle tone and reduce stress. Another. Rain drips through the trees and no hurry to meet
the earth, trickles down the trunk, seeps into the ground, percolates down and reaches
its goal to merge with the aquifer. And then there are those for the clausal or elliptical
series, another way of achieving parallel series. Hearing their parents' car drive
up one teen, hid the Jack Daniels, another turned off the X-rated movie, and a third
shoot their friends out the back door. Traditional classrooms can foster boredom, televised classes,
isolation, correspondence classes, guilt. Another. Assume nothing, appropriate nothing,
assign, ascribe, associate nothing, repeat not a word until you ascertain the truth
of it for yourself. And then there are those rhetorical tropes, several of which we've
already noted, in which Carl reminds us of. There are schemes of omission. As I've mentioned
before, ascendeton, to omit the conjunctions that usually link the final items in a series
of coordinate words, phrases or clauses. I came, I saw, I conquered. Here's an example.
He was 10 inches long, thin as a curve, a muscled ribbon, brown as fruit wood, soft
furred, alert. I think that from Annie Dillard. Aristotle ends his rhetoric with the confident
ascendeton. I have done. You have heard me. The facts are before you. I ask for your judgment.
Another trope is ellipsis to omit one or more words that are obviously necessary, but must
be inferred to make a construction grammatically complete. As we saw in Bacon's reading, maketh
a full man conference, a ready man and writing an exact man. Or as we can see in Nabokov's,
I prefer the specific detail to the generalization, images to ideas, obscure facts to clear symbols
and the discovered wild fruit to the synthetic jam. Then there are schemes of repetition.
We're very familiar with the most obvious of these, alliteration, to repeat the initial
consonants in neighboring or in grammatically corresponding words. Spiro Agnew's description
of the press as nattering Nabobs of negativism gives us an example of this serial technique
used as a bludgeon. And then, as I've already mentioned, there's anaphora to repeat a word
or phrase at the beginning of successive sentences, clauses, phrases. I should have gone for the
throat. I should have lunged for that streak of white under the weasel's chin and held
on, held on through mud and into the wild rose, held on for a dearer life, that from
Annie Dillard's living like a weasel. Eldridge Cleaver revealed his control of both anaphora
and ellipsis in his striking declaration in Sol on Ice. I'm perfectly aware that I'm
in prison, that I'm a negro, that I've been a rapist, and that I have a higher uneducation.
And then there's anadeplosis, which always sounds like a bovine disease to me. Anadeplosis
is to repeat a word that ends one phrase, clause, or sentence at the beginning of the
next. Learn as though you would live forever, live as though you would die tomorrow. Then
there's assonance. To repeat similar vowel sounds in neighboring or in grammatically corresponding
words. His journal is tracks and clay, a spray of feathers, mouse blood and bone, uncollected,
unconnected, loose leaf and blown, that also from Annie Dillard. And then one of my favorite
constructions of all, chiasmus, to repeat a grammatical structure and the words it contains,
but to reverse the order of the key words in the second phrase, clause, or sentence.
We've seen the bumper sticker example of chiasmus when the going gets tough, the tough
get going. And I'm particularly fond of Hunter Thompson's variation when the going gets weird,
the weird turn pro. But chiasmus can be a very effective and memorable persuasive device.
The press is so powerful in its image making role that it can make a criminal look like
he's the victim and make the victim look like he's the criminal, that also from Eldridge
Cleaver. Then there's a panel lepsis to repeat the same word or phrase at the beginning and
end of a clause or sentence. Tribe follows tribe, nation follows nation like the waves
of the sea, that from Chief Seattle. We've already seen examples of epistrophe. To repeat
the same word or phrase at the end of successive phrases, clauses, or sentences. They loved
football, they ate football, they slept football. Of course, probably the most familiar examples
we have of epistrophe are the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, and government
of the people, by the people, and for the people. Then there's a larger scheme called
icicolon, a form of parallelism that stresses corresponding words, phrases, clauses, and
sentences of equal length and similar structure. Churchill's famous, never in the history of
mankind have so many odes, so much to so few, illustrates the form. He is asked to stand,
he wants to sit, and he is expected to lie, reveals some of its potential for pointed
humor. And then there's polyptoton, to repeat words with the same root, but different forms
of endings. Poverty and isolation produce impoverished and isolated minds, as an example
of polyptoton, at the start of a much longer sentence in William Gasses on Being Blue.
Matthew Clark points to Nabokov's fondness for polyptoton and ADA, where he refers to
a specular and hence speculatory phenomenon, divinities and divines, and the collected
works of uncollected authors. And then another one we're familiar with by now, polysyndeton,
to repeat conjunctions between coordinate words, phrases, or clauses in a series. Joan
Didion frequently relies on polysyndeton in her writing, as she does in Some Dreamers
of the Golden Dream, that opens with the almost polysyndeton of, this is a story about love
and death and the golden land, and begins with the country. Then it quickly gets down
to the real thing. It is the season of suicide and divorce and prickly dread whenever the
wind blows. Yates gives us a wonderful example of the calming, slowing effect of polysyndeton
in the opening lines of his poem, When You Were Old, When You Were Old and Gray and Full
of Sleep. And I bet more than a few of us can supply the next phrase, and nodding by
the fire. Then, simplicity. This is a two-fer scheme in which the combination and a sequence
of phrases, clauses, or sentences of anaphora, repeating the first word and epistrophe, repeating
the final word, creates simplicity. As William Blake employed this scheme and his proverbs
of hell, the pride of the peacock is the glory of God, the lust of the goat is the bounty
of God, the wrath of the lion is the wisdom of God, the nakedness of woman is the work
of God. And then another large scheme, tricholon. Matthew Clarke, reminding us of the human tendency
to compose groups of three, specifies that a tripling of phrases, clauses, or sentences
is called tricholon and adds, quote, if the phrases are arranged so that they progressively
increase in length, the figure is called tricholon crescendo, offering Nabokov's reference in
Ada to a character's long, too long, never too long life as an example. Obviously, most,
if not all, of our examples of three-part parallel series display some form of tricholon.
These are but a few of the rhetorical schemes and tropes that can create and intensify parallelism
in general and three-part serials in particular. There's some disagreement about the difference
between a trope and a scheme, but generally tropes have primarily to do with meaning,
either of a word whose meaning is changed or extended, while schemes have to do with
the ordering of words and sounds. Accordingly, we might think of a metaphor as a trope, while
repetition or alliteration would be a scheme. Let's just call both rhetorical moves. Richard
Lanham specifies some 34 different rhetorical moves associated with the creation of balance
or antithesis, and some 36 associated with parallelism of letters, syllables, sounds,
words, clauses, phrases, sentences, and ideas. So this small sampling only begins to suggest
the care with which ancient orators and writers constructed their discourse. To be effective
writers, we certainly don't need to command even all of the relatively few forms I've
just mentioned, but just knowing that these forms exist increases the likelihood that we
will find some occasion in which it makes sense to tap some of their power.
Lecture 21 Balanced Series and Serial Balances
Balance one three-part series against another, or construct a three-part series of balanced
forms, and the sentence can become a pinball machine of sounds, rhythms, images, and ideas,
twos bouncing off of threes, threes combining balances, balances containing series of balance,
and so on. I can't think of any modern writer who does a better job of constructing verbal
pinball machines than William Gass. Gass is the David May Distinguished University Professor
of the University of the United States of America, and he is one of the most famous writers
of the United States of the United States of the United States of the United States of
the United States of the United States of the United States of the United States of
the state of the United States of the United States of America.
His first career is 2 years in a row as achuckling student of the University of the
United States of America. The approximately 1.3 million�만 is the
number 1 in the United States of America of any university professor emeritus and the
humanities at Washington University in St. Louis, where for many years he taught philosophy
life, on being blue, a philosophical inquiry, the world within the word, finding a form,
and a temple of texts. Among several other honors, his collections
of essays have twice won National Book Critics Circle Awards, and he was the first winner
of the Penn Nabokov Award, quote, for celebrating the accomplishments of an author whose body
of work represents achievement in a variety of literary genres and is of enduring originality
and consummate craftsmanship, end of quote. His novels are Oman Setter's Luck, Willie
Master's Lonesome Wife, and The Tunnel, and he's published two collections of short stories
in the heart of the country and other stories in Cartesian Sonata. If you have never read
William Gass, it's high time you start, and you're in for nothing less than a take the
top off your head treat. If you have read Gass, revisit him. The treat is still there.
There is no other writer in America who combines Gass's stylistic verve and panache with his
philosophical rigor, nor is there any writer in America who has devoted more serious thought
to language, to writing, and most important, for our purposes, to the sentence. Gass has
famously claimed that, quote, Gertrude Stein did more with sentences and understood them
better than any writer ever has, end of quote. But this is one of the only areas I can think
of where William Gass is flat out wrong, since his contemplation of the sentence builds on
and easily surpasses Stein's. Indeed, his essay, The Ontology of the Sentence, or How
to Make a World of Words, is the most wise and the most useful contemplation of the sentence
that we have. Here's a sample of Gass, as he's just getting warmed up to his subject
in an essay on the music of prose. For prose has a pace. It is dotted with stops and pauses,
frequent rests, inflections rise and fall, like a low range of hills. Certain tones are
prolonged, there are patterns of stress and harmonious measures. There is a proper method
of pronunciation, even if it is rarely observed. Alliteration will trouble the tongue, consonants
ease its sounds out so that any mouth making that music will feel its performance even to
the back of the teeth and to the glottal stop. Malifluousness is not impossible and harshness
is easy. Drumroll and clanger can be confidently called for, lisp, slur and growl, so there
will be a syllabic beat and imitation of the heart. While rhyme will recall a word we passed
perhaps too indifferently, vowels will open and consonants close like blooming plants,
repetitive schemes will act as refrains and there will be phrases, little motifs to return
to like the tonic, clauses will be balanced by other clauses, the way a waiter carries
trays, parallel lines will nevertheless meet in their common subject, clots of concepts
will dissolve and then recombine so we shall find endless variations on the same theme,
a central idea along with its many modifications like soloist and chorus will take their turns
until suddenly all sing at once the same sound. Of course that's one marvelous single sentence.
And here's Gass's exultant reminder from On Being Blue that sentences do things, they
are alive, are closely tied to the body's basic rhythms and when in the hands of a masterful
writer can be taught steps that dance across the lips and across the page. So sentences
are copied, constructed or created, they are uttered, mentioned or used, each says, means,
implies, reveals, connects, each titillates, invites, conceals, suggests and each is eventually
either consumed or conserved. Nevertheless the lines in Stevens are the sentences of
Joyce and James pressed by one another into being as though the words before and the words
after were those reverent hands both Rilke and Rodin have celebrated, clay calling to
clay like mating birds, concept responding to concept the way passionate flesh congests
every note a nipple on the breast that wants a triumphant pinnacle and perfect conclusion
like pelted water, I think I said. Yet at the same time only another anonymous cell
and selfless in its service to the shaping skin as lost forgotten matter is in all walls.
These lines, these sentences are not quite uttered, not quite mentioned, peculiarly employed,
strangely listed, oddly used as though a shadow where the leaves, limbs, trunk of a new tree
and the shade itself were thrust like a dark torch into the grassy air in the same slow
and forceful way as its own roots entering the earth, roughened the darkness there till
all its freshly shattered facets shine against themselves as teeth do in the clenched jaw,
for rabble was wrong, blue is the color of the mind in borrow of the body, it is the color
consciousness becomes when caressed, it is the dark inside of sentences, sentences which
follow their own turnings inward out of sight like the whirls of a shell and which we follow
warily as Alice after that rabbit nervous and white till suddenly there climbing down
clauses and passing through A and D as it opens there, there, we're here in time for
tea and tantrums, such are the sentences we should like to love, the ones which love
us and themselves as well, incestuous sentences, sentences which make an imaginary speaker
speak the imagination loudly to the reading eye that have a kind of orality transmogrified,
not the tongue touching the genital tip but the idea of the tongue, the thought of the
tongue, word wet to part wet, public mouth to private, seed to speech and speech, ah,
after exclamations, groans with order gone, disorder on the way, we subside through sentences
like these, the risk of senselessness like this to float like leaves on the restful surface
of that world of words to come and there in peace, patiently to dream of the sensuous
imagined and mindful sublime. That's the most exciting and the most excited sentence
I know of, it's counterpointed rhythms, rhymes and alliterations rising to a climax that
is sensual if not sexual, it's very being a refutation to the prose prudes who claim
that overly designed and structured sentences are artificial and unnatural, it's orgasmic
progression, a celebration of language that lives, that is as organic and natural as nature
itself and for the moment, that's the last contemporary example, at least from William
Gas that I'll offer to suggest the uncharted power a writer can tap when combining duple
and triple rhythms, the sounds and sense of two and three part serials, but I wanted
you to experience the unpredictable energies of Gas's prose before offering more traditional
and less lively examples. In the last lecture, I gave a brief overview of the attempt by
Winston Weathers to theorize the rhetorical affect and impact of two and three part serial
constructions. You'll remember that in a nutshell, Weathers suggested that the two part series
which we've been calling balance or balanced form has connotations of authority and expertise,
if not of authoritarianism. In contrast, the three part series, according to Weathers,
has connotations of the reasonable, the believable and even the logical. I did not mention what
Weathers had to say about serial constructions of four or more parts which he saw as suggesting
the human, emotional, diffuse and inexplicable, because while these longer constructions clearly
invoke the affective power of parallelism, I'm not sure readers can really process in
any meaningful way four or more sound patterns or conceptual units without simply thinking
of them as a list. A test example might be James Baldwin's sentence from Notes of a
Native Son in which he describes the aftermath of throwing a glass at a waitress in an all
white restaurant. And with that sound, my frozen blood abruptly thawed. I returned from
wherever I had been, I saw for the first time the restaurant, the people with their mouths
open already as it seemed to me rising as one man and I realized what I had done and
where I was and I was frightened. And the samples I just read from William Guess may
also, in their extended serials that seem to inventory reality, evoke an impression of
the human, emotional, diffuse and inexplicable impact of the four or more part series. However,
as Weathers suggests with his own prose, which both employs the authority of balance
to discuss the reasonability of the three part series and the reasonability of the three
part series to bolster his account of balance, the ties among kinds of serial constructions
are quite complex. Weathers published his rhetoric of the series essay in College Composition
and Communication in 1966, offering it essay prologomenon to the rigorous study of serial
constructions. While this essay has been subsequently reprinted in stylistic studies,
such as Glenn Loves and Michael Payne's important contemporary essays on style, rhetoric, linguistics
and criticism, and you have to be fond of an anthology you can refer to as the love
and pain anthology, I'm not aware of any critical efforts to accept the challenge of
the Weathers prologomenon and to extend his study of the series. That's a shame. It's
a shame because I think two and three beat constructions may reveal something quite important
about the relationship between our writing syntax and our understanding of the world.
And even if I'm wrong about that, it's a shame because the interplay of two and three
part beats and constructions and writing is so prominent that no serious writer can afford
not to give these patterns some serious thought.
Before we consider the possible sources and implications of the patterns of balance and
three part serial constructions, however, let's get a better structured sense of how
these rhythms can be put together and to what effect. We can find numerous examples of the
interplay of two and three beat rhythms and the lush style associated with Lilly and other
euthelistic writers of the 16th century, such as Robert Greene, whose prose in the following
passage suggests that use of balance and serial form can indeed reach a point of diminishing
returns.
But let their love be never so slight in their fancy never so fickle yet they will be counted
as constant if vows may cloak their vanity or tears be taken for truth. If prayers protest
stations and pilgrimages might be performances of promises, then the maid should have mountains
that hath but molehills, treasure that hath but trash, faith that hath but flattery, truth
that hath but trifles, yea, she should enjoy a trusty lover that is glad of a trothless
letcher.
But the curt or pointed style of Francis Bacon, so well known for its three part serials,
also contains a striking number of balances, as we've seen in the selections from his
of studies, where the drum like beat of three part serial constructions is counter pointed
and possibly foregrounded even more by balances between Bacon's opening claim that studies
serve for delight, for ornament and for ability, and his summing up that reading maketh a full
man conference a ready man and writing an exact man, we find expert men balanced against
those that are learned, the chiasmic claim that studies perfect nature and are perfected
by experience, and two beat pairs such as execute and perhaps judge without them and
above them, contradict and confute, believe and take for granted, weigh and consider
and chewed and digested. On the other hand, the fabled balances of Dr. Johnson and as we
shall soon see of Macaulay, regularly employ three part serials. While my own examples
of the interplay of balance in series are relatively crude, they illustrate the basic
options for balancing one series against another. Here are the basic patterns, bruised, bleeding
and exhausted, the boxer stumbled back to his corner at the end of the fifth round, desperately
in need of attention to the cut over his left eye, desperately in need of the encouragement
of his trainer and desperately in need of the unlikely arrival of a miracle.
Here's another one, a way of creating three part serials from balances. As excited as I
was nervous, as hopeful as I was hapless, as thankful for the opportunity as I was aware
of the odds against me, I walked into the interview. And here's a way of just weaving
together balance in series without a clear blueprint for what we're doing. The more
imaginative and inspired the instructor, the more inspiring and effective will be her instruction,
the longer lasting her impact and the more grateful her students. Or a pattern even for
playing with more complicated schemes such as polyptoton, the use of a second word derived
from the same root as the first. A walking talking caricature of the inept politician,
the silver haired and silky voiced senator was a functionary whose legislative proposals
were rarely functional. A would be back room operator whose attempts at being effective
usually turned out to be spectacularly ineffectual. A cut rate visionary whose initiatives consistently
failed to initiate significant change. We've seen how gas weaves these rhythms together
in patterns that are unexpected. But we should remember that they have much more frequently
been combined in patterns that were almost diagrammatic. Macaulay denounced Dr. Johnson
for the artificiality of his over designed prose, but Macaulay is himself regarded as
a master of balanced form and his balances frequently employ or or employed by three
parts serial constructions. Consider these examples from his literary criticism which
was itself balanced between critiquing books about prominent historical and literary figures
and reassessments of those figures themselves and in many cases drew the further distinction
between the writing and the personal lives of those figures. Here's Macaulay on Machiavelli.
The terms in which he is commonly described would seem to import that he was the tempter,
the evil principal, the discoverer of ambition and revenge, the original inventor of perjury
and that before the publication of his fatal prints there had never been a hypocrite, a
tyrant or a traitor, a simulated virtue or a convenient crime. Another take on Machiavelli.
The whole man seems to be an enigma, a grotesque assemblage of incongruous qualities, selfishness
generosity, cruelty and benevolence, craft and simplicity, abject villainy and romantic
heroism. Here's an excerpt from Macaulay's review of Boswell's life of Johnson. First
of all he didn't much like the edition. He said this edition is ill compiled, ill arranged,
ill written and ill printed. Here's his comments on Boswell. All the caprices of his, Boswell's
temper, all the illusions of his vanity, all his hypochondriac whimsies, all his castles
in the air, he displayed with a cool self complacency, a perfect unconsciousness that
he was making a fool of himself to which it is impossible to find a parallel in the whole
history of mankind. He has used many people ill but assuredly he has used nobody so ill
as himself. And another knock. He had indeed a quick observation and a retentive memory.
These qualities, if he had been a man of sense and virtue, would scarcely have suffice
to make him conspicuous. But because he was a dunce, a parasite and a coxcomb, they have
bade him immortal. Here's Macaulay's take on Bacon. His faults were, we write it with
pain, coldness of heart and meanness of spirit. He seems to have been incapable of feeling
strong affection of facing great dangers of making great sacrifices.
The difference between gas and Macaulay is much greater than the difference between a
carefully controlled manipulation of prose rhythms and an exuberant gush. It is the
difference between what we might call a classical view of rhetoric and what we might call a
postmodern view. Macaulay, much like rhetoricians for a couple of thousand years before him,
saw his control of tropes and schemes, syntax and other structures as a supporting adjunct
to his arguments, moves that clarified and emphasized the propositional and logical content
of his claims. Gas also presents his celebrations of sound and syntax in support of claims about
the subject matter of his sentences. But for Gas, as for Gertrude Stein before him, his
sentences themselves are always part of the point of his writing, if not the main point.
In keeping with his place in the forefront of postmodern writers, Gas always sees language
as a subject, every bit as interesting and as important as is the referential world his
language points to, invokes or stands for. For Gas, the instance of his discourse is
always center stage. His writing always about writing, just as surely as it is about the
people, the prose or whatever phenomena it seems to put forward as his subjects. As I
previously noted, postmodernism would itself be the subject of a lecture series in its
own right, so I mention this aspect of Gas's prose here only to suggest that his use of
sound and syntax, even when it seems to parallel or echo that of classical rhetoricians such
as Macaulay, is significantly different. And we write in the context of that difference
whether or not it concerns us in the propositional sense, it concerns Gas. Like it or not, our
writing, our prose style, takes its place in a world that has been reconfigured by the
aesthetics and assumptions of postmodernism, just as surely as postmodernism has been configured
and constituted by the progress of technology, particularly media technology.
In this and previous lectures, we've now seen numerous examples of balanced three-part serials
in ways in which these two basic rhythms can be made to work together, each intensifying
the other. Now it's time to consider for a few moments just why these rhythms are so
prominent in English prose. I have previously discussed prefab, phatic phrases such as after
all or in a way or of course, that act as syntactic speed bumps and sentences, slowing
them down and drawing them out. Now I want to mention a very different kind of phatic
prefab construction that, if anything, may serve to speed a sentence up. Moreover, these
prefab phrases so intensely invoke balanced rhythm that they accentuate any other balances
that may have been constructed within or between sentences. I'm thinking of an amazing number
of phrases that remind us just how prevalent balanced rhythm is in our speech and in our
writing. Just a small sample of these phrases would include Nambi Pambi, Helter Skelter,
Wishy Washy, Flip Flop, Moldy Oldy, Flim Flam, Meat and Greet, Hip Hop, Town and Gown,
Surf and Turf, Herky Jerky, Topsy Turvy, Hurley Burley, Razzle Dazzle, Itsy Bitsy, Teeny Weenie,
I bet you thought I was going to say yellow polka dot bikini in there, Hotsy Totsy, Doom
and Gloom, Wear and Tear, Rough and Tough, Tit for Tat, Thrills and Chills, Rough and
Tumble, Rough and Ready, Lean and Mean, Wild and Woolly, Ticky Tacky, Shilly Shallow, Bump
and Grind, Ebb and Flow, Rise and Fall, Boom and Bus, Near and Deer, Whipper Snapper,
Harrem Skerrem, Slippy Slidy, Splish Splash, Super Dupre, Eager Beaver, Super Saver, Pooper
Scooper, Fixer Upper, Daily Double, Hour of Power, Oopsy Daisy, Wheeler Dealer, Rinky
Dink, Dipsy Doodle, and to represent the end of the alphabet, Zig Zag.
Believe me, I could go on and on. We have a million zillion of these prefab mini balances,
and once you start thinking of them, it's hard to stop. Now these mini balances can
themselves be used to create the collision of two and three beat rhythms we've been looking
at and listening to in this lecture, as in the sentence, tall and tan, lean and mean,
rested and ready, the mercenaries restlessly awaited their next mission, fit and itching
for a fight, feared for their ferocity, armored by their amorality. But such a sentence has
a certain unfortunate, dare I say it, sing song quality.
My purpose in calling attention to these phrases, apart from the fact that they are really fun
to read aloud, is to suggest as they do that balance is no artificially constructed or
carefully architected rhetorical phenomenon, but that balance speaks to something far more
basic and vigorous in our lives. Binary oppositions, such as up, down, in, out, good, bad, day,
night, hot, cold, happy, sad, young, old, rich, poor, sweet, salty, regularly divide the world
of our experience into twos, and we build from these basic binaries ever larger balanced
explanations of the way things are. It's not the heat, it's the humidity. What goes
around comes around. What sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander, until we find ourselves
more and more assenting to philosophies reduced to balanced forms. If you can't walk the
walk, don't talk the talk. No taxation without representation.
Indeed, it seems likely to me that our binging on balance has a visceral antecedent in the
bilateral symmetry of our bodies, the inhalation and exhalation of our life breath, the lub-dub
rhythm of the human heart, connotations of certainty and authority, you bet, because
balance has to do with the very rhythms that keep us going.
Then what of the power of three? How do we account for the almost irresistible impulse
to make our tales about not one, not two, but three little pigs, three blind mice? Why
must the genie grant us three wishes? Must the argument rest on three contentions? Why
do we get three strikes before we're out? Against binaries such as past and present,
the three-part series reminds us to expand our view to consider the future. When we consider
the age-old dichotomy of mind and body, the three-part serial reminds us to add soul and
so on. A syllogism consists of three parts, major premise, minor premise, and conclusion.
And for the rhetorician, the three appeals are to pathos, ethos, and logos. The color
wheel suggests that all colors come from the basic trio of red, yellow, and blue. Matter
divides into solid, liquid, and gas. Indeed, that basic building block of matter, the atom,
is made up of electron, neutron, and proton. Three dimensions, a calendar divided into
days, months, and years, a school system divided into elementary, middle, and high schools.
Our food divided into carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. All these are the three-part constructions
we have chosen to make sense of our world. So is the appeal of three-part serial constructions
really very much of a mystery? My point is simply that these artificial rhythms of rhetoric,
the balance of duple rhythm and the three-beat form of serial construction, are not artificial
at all, but merely extend the central organizing constructs of human consciousness into language.
Whitman knew what he was talking about when he claimed of his poetry that it was singing
the body electric, and we should do no less in our prose. I think William Gass is on
to something very important in his wild celebrations of balance in serials, and of all the other
rhetorical schemes and tropes he can stuff in the suitcase of his writing, sometime needing
to sit on that overstuffed bag to snap it closed, but always traveling with everything
he needs. Of all the wisdom I find in Gass's electric prose, what impresses me most is
that his syntacticals showing off, the unexpected metaphors and sometimes silly similes, the
obvious attention he lavishes on every word, all always remind us that words matter, that
sentences matter, that there is nothing artificial in artifice, as he observes in his essay Gertrude
Stein and the Geography of the Sentence. Words are therefore weapons, like the jaws
of the crocodile or the claws of the cat. We use them to hold our thought as we hold
a bone. We use them to communicate with the pack, dupe our enemies, manipulate our friends.
We use them to club the living into food.
In the summer of 1978, my wife and I were driving through the British countryside in
Wilshire when we topped a small hill and suddenly, there before us, in all its enigmatic glory
under what I rightly or wrongly remember as a brooding sky, was Stonehenge. I've read
accounts that acknowledge that no one is completely certain of the original purpose this massive
architectural wonder served. However, one site of the circular design of those giant stone
slabs, and most of us would instantly agree with the understated comment on one British
History website that, quote, only something very important to the ancients would have
been worth the effort and investment that it took to construct Stonehenge, end of quote.
I feel much the same way about the massive, monumental, and enigmatic super sentences
I sometimes unexpectedly come across in my reading. Their construction probably not quite
the equal of the engineering feat that produced Stonehenge, but in its own way, always incredibly
striking. This lecture will examine self-conscious sentences that practically scream for our
attention by virtue of their excessiveness. Very long sentences, or sentences that function
in remarkable ways, might be called master sentences, a nod at once to their originality
and to their control. I call these linguistic and syntactic Stonehenge's master sentences,
and they call attention to their mastery in more different ways than I or anyone else
could enumerate, much less prescribed. However, while no formula can anticipate the context
and purpose that call forth a master sentence, an effective one can only be constructed by
combining a number of the syntactic moves that have so far been the subject of this course.
I've already admitted that I don't know how to teach anyone how to write really short
sentences. Those one and two word kernels must rise from the writer's situation and
present themselves unexpectedly as syntactic and rhetorical opportunities that could not
have been predicted, could not have been prepared for, could not have been part of the writer's
strategy, even moments before they appear on the page, and yet, and yet. Ah, there we
have one tiny exception to this general principle. There are a very few one, two and three word
sentences we all have filed away in our memories of striking prose, prefab wonders designed
by others before us, but that just might fit our needs as perfectly as a prefabricated
door unit in which the door is already hung in a modular frame may fit our carpentry needs
better than anything we could hammer out ourselves. And yet, is one of those sentences, so it
goes is another, and I think not still another. Indeed, any exclamation such as indeed or
absolutely or thank goodness, or even okay may offer us the dramatic punch of the very
short sentence, and we all have an informal and uninventoryed arsenal of these expressions
we may trot out at appropriate moments in our writing. So, maybe there is just a little
we can do to prepare for writing very short kernel sentences, but so varied our sentences
are the forms in which master sentences suddenly appear that I can't think about any way to
teach this phenomenon as a sentence form. And yet, that kernel once again, and yet we
can prepare ourselves for the possibility that a sentence we are writing will take on
a life of its own and insist on its own development far past the normal limits of our composition.
In some ways, we have already begun this preparation with our work on suspensive sentences. In other
ways, we have already begun to prepare for it simply by looking at striking sentences
written by a wide range of writers who obviously believed the sentence itself is worthy of
careful design and rewarding when thought of as a thing in itself rather than as just
another brick and a wall of words, just another item and a long list of sentences. In her
essay, Inviting the Muses, poet essayist and noted writing teacher Marguerite Young describes
one of the first exercises she assigns in her writing classes, a requirement that her
students compose a sentence of at least three pages long. She further specifies that this
monster sentence should not be monstrous since it should also be grammatically logical,
pleasingly rhythmical, and closely documented, by which I believe she means precise. Noting
that these requirements compel the writer to put into the sentence exactly the things
that are usually absent in short sentences, Young terms the result a drag net sentence
since it hauls into the sentence everything the writer's net catches and she explains
its value this way. Surely also, anyone who can master the architectonics of a long sentence
learns what its validity and uses are and can master a short sentence thereafter, has
learned also the beauties of variation, has learned something of the oceanic swells, pearly
combers breaking upon the shores of consciousness, his own and the readers, ripplings, ebbings,
whispers of ghostly surf, reverberations which should go on in many consciousnesses forever
afterward and in the unconscious life of man, for literature is that which is memorable.
Notwithstanding the lyric exuberance of Marguerite Young's celebration of the long
sentence, I'm reluctant to adopt her terminology as richly descriptive as is her metaphor of
the drag net. Recent years have made us more and more aware that Fisherman's nets also
bring in more than a few dolphins and endangered sea turtles, unintended victims of an undiscriminating
process. I prefer to call very long sentences or sentences that function in remarkable ways
master sentences, a nod at once to their originality and then again to their control. Master sentences
call attention to their mastery whether it's mastery of length, precision, syntactical moves,
prose rhythms or cognitive or dramatic effect. They stick out, they demand attention, they
slow readers down and urge them to consider the writer's purpose and the writer's skill.
Master sentences exist at the opposite end of the syntactical continuum from kernel sentences.
They tend to be much longer than readers normally expect although length is not in itself a sign
of either a master sentence or of a writer's mastery. Once more I'll invoke that old cigarette
ad, it's not how long you make it, it's how you make it long. Master sentences are by
nature loners. When they form a crowd they lose most of their impact and can actually
reach a point of diminished returns where they signal a writer's weakness rather than
strength. In this sense a master sentence that works will always be a form of a suspensive
sentence. If it manages to hold the reader's interest to the end of a sentence that clearly
is invested in extending itself there must be some sense that the sentence still has
something important to disclose or that there is some good reason for it simply to keep going.
The end point of a master sentence may not be a surprise in the classic sense of coming
down to the very last word before the sense or purpose of the sentence is clear but there
is usually some sense of discovery inherent in the fact that the sentence extended itself
to such a degree whether to suggest a process that involved twists and turns, reversals
and new directions or to parallel or suggest the duration of a process that itself did
not easily end or to suggest a situation involving complexities that could not easily be boiled
down to a clear sense of the relationships among underlying propositions.
Consider this master sentence from Lauren Isley. It's a sentence we've previously discussed
but previously we looked at it for its cumulative structure. It is with the coming of man that
a vast hole seems to open in nature, a vast black whirlpool spinning faster and faster
consuming flesh, stones, soil, minerals, sucking down the lightning, wrenching power from the
atom until the ancient sounds of nature are drowned out in the cacophony of something
which is no longer nature, something instead which is loose and knocking at the world's
heart, something demonic and no longer planned, escaped it may be spewed out of nature, contending
in a final giant's game against its master.
The 91 words of this sentence narrate a process in which man, a part of nature, wrestles with
the natural order, unleashing the atom, another part of nature, to act in a way possibly never
anticipated, a way that ultimately may mean the end of nature itself. And this process
is characterized by the metaphor of a whirlpool sucking down everything it touches, spiraling
towards some apocalyptic end point, the spiral itself invoked by and embodied in the cumulative
phrases that spin this sentence through six levels of generality to a dramatic final image
of conflict between nature and atomic power set free by man. Or consider this master sentence
by Thomas Berger, one of many in his distinctive novels, but note where they for its vernacular
tone, a reminder that the American colloquial style frequently produces sentences that are
stories in themselves. In this sentence from the return of little big man, Jack Crab has
just been reunited with his faithful dog, Pard, a dog he has not seen for several years
and feared dead. Now if you know only the kind of pets ladies
keep indoors or even sporting hounds and so on, you might expect old Pard to make a greater
display than he done when he seen me for the first time in more than three years, having
tracked me over hundreds of miles. But just as he weren't the type to bear a grudge, thank
goodness, he had lived the sort of life in which the interest of survival tended to hold
down emotional demonstrations, in which he reminded me of myself, so he never hugged
or anything, but I was real glad to see him, a feeling which alternated with amazement
at his feet, which exceeded anything I had heard of at the time, though in the many years
since, now and again, dogs have somehow followed their families at greater distances on foot.
While the humans use the motor car, so when I tell about Pard, it might be easier to believe
than the experiences I relate concerning historical personages, though all are equally true.
I previously suggested that a sentence function like a hand, a master sentence is like the
very remarkable hand of a skilled surgeon or painter or magician, a hand capable of performing
extraordinary tasks, capable of forming itself into shapes dictated by the need of the moment,
distinguished by what it does. A hand can point, grasp, stroke, make a fist, it can
wave, pinch, scratch, it's functioning determined by the occasion, by what needs to be done
that a hand can do. Unlike a normal, unskilled hand, however, the master sentence is always
doing more than needs to be done. Apart from the contextual purpose it serves, conveying
information as it creates an affective impact, a master sentence is also always a reminder
to readers that they are in the hands of a skilled writer, someone who wants their attention
to matters of language and style as well as to information, someone who wants their recognition
that they are in the hands of a writer, not just someone who is disseminating information.
So any attempt to classify or categorize master sentences is doomed to failure. Still, there
are some functions or patterns we can observe and keep in the backs of our minds for situations
in our own writing where those functions or patterns may be useful. Some master sentences
simply seem to meander, almost marking time, waiting for something else to occur to the
writer or to happen in the prose. Here's a pretty good example. To the great delight
of Sid Liftoff, who's known her since their days as regulars at Musso and Franks, and
a senior gaffer who'd worked with hubs, Sasha had come wheeling into the valet parking at
the Vineland Palace in a Cadillac the size of a Winnebago and painted some vivid fingernail
polished color, alighting and sweeping into the lobby a step and a half ahead of her companion,
Derek, considerably younger and paler, with a buzz cut that nearly matched the car, an
English accent, and a guitar case he was never seen to open, picked up on the highway between
here and the Grand Canyon, where she'd parted from her current romantic interest, Tex Weiner,
after an epic screaming exchange right at the edge and on impulse, decided to attend
that year's Traverse Becker get-together up in Vineland, leaving Tex on foot among the
still bouncing echoes of their encounter, which had brought tourist helicopters nudging
in for a closer look, distracted ordinarily sure-footed mules on the trail below, and
the quick shuffleball changes along the rim of eternity proceeded through a sunset that
was the closest we get to seeing God's own jaundiced and bloodshot eyeball looking back
at us without much enthusiasm, then on into the night arena of a parking lot so dangerously
tilted that even with your handbrake set and your wheels chopped, your short could still
end up a mile straight down, its trade-in value seriously diminished, that of course
from Thomas Pension's Vineland. Some master sentences seem to twist and turn like a snake,
going through syntactical moves that we might call serpentine. Here are two more sentences
from Thomas Berger, this time from his first novel, Crazy in Berlin, also the first novel
in his celebrated Reinhardt series.
The ride on the new car Reinhardt forgot, even as it was in progress, for he had now
reached that secondary state of inebriation, in which the mind is one vast sweep of summer
sky and there is no limit to the altitude a kite may go, the condition in which one
can repair intricate mechanisms at other times mysterious, solve equations, craft epigrams,
make otherwise invulnerable women and bluff formidable men, when people say why Reinhardt
and rivals wax bitter.
Only a few pages later, Reinhardt after a drunken fight in defense of one of his army
buddies encounters the first German girl he meets after being stationed in a Berlin devastated
by the recently ended war.
She extended her hand in the genuine enthusiasm displayed by all Europeans, not just the French,
upon arrivals and departures, as if for all their hatreds they love one another or do
for the moment at making and breaking contact, and at this first touch in ten minutes not
motivated by hostility, Reinhardt suddenly felt drunken again and feared that he might
weep for the sore opponent vanished alone in the night for his friend who did not understand
fighting fair, for the girl now under his compulsion and for the material things and
waste all about them, all the poor, weak, assaulted and assaulting people and things
and of course for himself isolated by a power he didn't want.
Some master sentences display an almost dogged sense of honing in on a final piece of information
or a conclusion with radar guided precision.
Martin Luther King was a master of this technique as we can see in this powerful excerpt from
his letter from a Birmingham jail.
After three brief sentences that set the stage, Dr. King delivers a massive, suspensive sentence
few readers will ever be able to forget.
But when you have seen vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at will and drown
your sisters and brothers at whim, when you have seen hate-filled policemen curse, kick
and even kill your black brothers and sisters, when you see the vast majority of your twenty
million Negro brothers smothering in an airtight cage of poverty in the midst of an affluent
society, when you suddenly find your tongue twisted and your speech stammering as you
seek to explain to your six-year-old daughter why she can't go to the public amusement
park that has just been advertised on television and see tears welling up in her eyes when
she's told that fun town is closed to colored children and see ominous clouds of inferiority
beginning to form in her little mental sky and see her beginning to distort her personality
by developing an unconscious bitterness toward white people.
When you have to concoct an answer for a five-year-old son who is asking, Daddy, why do white people
treat colored people so mean?
When you take a cross-country drive and find it necessary to sleep night after night in
the uncomfortable corners of your automobile because no motel will accept you, when you
are humiliated day in and day out by nagging signs reading white and colored, when your
first name becomes nigger, your middle name becomes boy, however old you are, and your
last name becomes John and your wife and mother are never given the respected title
Mrs. When you are harried by day and haunted by night by the fact that you are a Negro
living constantly at tiptoe stance, never quite knowing what to expect next, and are
plagued with inner fears and outer resentments, when you are forever fighting a degenerating
sense of nobidiness, then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait.
And while I have not yet read the celebrated novels of Chilean writer Roberto Bellanio,
this sentence following the deadly attack of a raptor named Tagal, isolated in a review
of his By Night in Chile, gives me more than enough reason to start reading.
Tagal appeared again like a lightning bolt, or the abstract idea of a lightning bolt,
and stooped on the huge flocks of starlings coming out of the west like swarms of flies,
darkening the sky with their erratic fluttering, and after a few minutes the fluttering of the
starlings was bloodied, scattered and bloodied, and afternoon on the outskirts of Avignon took
a deep red hue like the color of sunset seen from an airplane, or the color of dawns when
the passenger is woken gently by the engines whistling in his ears, and lifts up the little
blind and sees the horizon marked with a red line, like the planet's femoral artery, or
the planet's aorta, gradually swelling, and I saw that swelling blood vessel in the sky
over Avignon, the bloodstained flight of the starlings, Tagal splashing color like an abstract
expressionist painter, nor do master sentences have to be long or particularly intricate,
as we can see in Frank de Ford's 1983 description of Howard Cassell.
He is not the one with the golden locks or the golden tan, but the one shaking, sallow,
and hunched with a chin whose purpose is not to exist as a chin, but only to fade so that
his face may, as the bow of a ship, break the waves and not get in the way of that voice,
or this from Joan Didion.
This is my attempt to make sense of the period that followed, weeks and then months that
cut loose any fixed idea I had ever had about death, about illness, about probability and
luck, about good fortune and bad, about marriage and children and memory, about grief, about
the ways in which people do and do not deal with the fact that life ends, about the shallowness
of sanity, about life itself.
Some master sentences clearly build to a climax, using various delaying tactics to increase
the suspense of power of what the sentence finally reveals as we have previously seen
in this almost paradigmatic master sentence from Joan Didion.
They set out to find it in accountants ledgers and double indemnity clauses and motel registers
set out to determine what might move a woman who believed in all the promises of the middle
class, a woman who had been chairman of the heart fund and who always knew a reasonable
little dressmaker and who had come out of the bleak wild of prairie fundamentalism to
find what she imagined to be the good life.
What should drive such a woman to sit on a street called Bella Vista and look out her
new picture window into the empty California sun and calculate how to burn her husband
alive in a Volkswagen?
Or, as we can see in the celebrated climactic two-sentence sequence from Hemingway's short
happy life of Francis Macomber, he's dead in there, Wilson said, good work, and he turned
to grip Macomber's hand and as they shook hands, grinning at each other, the gunbearers
shouted wildly, and they saw him coming out of the brush sideways, fast as a crab, and
the bull coming nose out, mouth tight, closed, blood dripping, massive head straight out,
coming in a charge, his little pig eyes bloodshot, as he looked at them, Wilson, who was ahead
was kneeling, shooting, and Macomber, as he fired, unhearing his shot in the roaring of
Wilson's gun, saw fragments like slate burst from the huge boss of the horns, and the head
shot again at the wide nostrils, and saw the horns jolt again, and fragments fly, and he
did not see Wilson now, and aiming carefully shot again with a buffalo's huge bulk almost
on him, and his rifle almost leveled with the oncoming head, nose out, and he could
see the little wicked eyes, and the head started to lower, and he felt a sudden white hot, blinding
flash explode inside his head, and that was all he ever felt.
Some master sentences simply seem reluctant, hesitant, unsure of where they will finally go,
or unwilling to get there, as if delaying bad news, this from Joan Didion.
Nine months and five days ago, at approximately nine o'clock on the evening of December 30th, 2003,
my husband, John Gregory Dunn, appeared to, or did, experience at the table where he and I
had just sat down to dinner in the living room of our apartment in New York,
a sudden massive coronary event that caused his death.
Or in another sentence we previously seen from Leonard Wolfe's autobiography,
Looking back at the age of 88 over the 57 years of my political work in England,
knowing what I aimed at and the results, meditating on the history of Britain and the
world since 1914, I see clearly that I achieved practically nothing.
Some master sentences simply invoke or mirror some kind of remarkable excess,
associated with their ostensible subject or focus. They seem almost inventories.
Here's an example from John Leonard. To what other literary figure in our time would it occur
to go to Thailand, Colombia, Yemen, China, Vietnam, Japan, Russia, Burma, Afghanistan,
Pakistan, India, Hungary, the Philippines, Ireland, England, Serbia, Congo, Syria, Kenya, Bosnia,
Mexico, and Kazakhstan to chat up and even sometimes to subsidize beggars, cleaning women,
campesinos, prostitutes, tuna fishermen, the homeless, and the feckless.
And here's one from John McPhee.
Then on came the Cretaceous with its flying reptiles, its rudisted clams, its titanosaurs,
dromyosaurs, elasmosaurs, duck-billed and ostrich dinosaurs, and introductory flowering
plants, not to mention triceratops, tyrannosaurus rex, and all the marine invertebrates that
disappeared in the Cretaceous extinction 65 million years ago, a date better known to
modern school children than 1492.
And there is Dylan Thomas' lyrical inventory of aspects of his birthplace found in his
reminiscences of childhood and under milkwood. I don't have time to quote the entire
magnificent rambling sentence, but it famously begins with Thomas describing,
An ugly, lovely town or so it was and is to me, Crawling, sprawling by a long and splendid curving
shore, Where truant boys and sand field boys and old men from nowhere, beachcombed, idled,
and paddled, Watched the dockbound ships or the ships steaming away into wonder and India,
magic and China, Countries bright with oranges and loud with lions.
And the sentence ends with Thomas' memory of listening to religious speakers on Sunday
afternoons, whose excited anger seemed to accuse the very sea, quote, as though it were wicked
and wrong to roll in and out like that, whitehorst and full of fishes, end quote.
A master's sentence indeed.
Lecture 23 Sentences in Sequence
While I really want to maintain the focus of this course on the sentence,
since that is the basic unit of writing, we can most easily control and improve.
I suppose it's time to openly acknowledge what has already been evident for some time in the
examples I've used in previous lectures. Occasions for writing single sentences with no
surrounding context are exceedingly rare. Single sentences may be in great demand
if you're in the business of writing copy for a bumper sticker company, but most writing
situations call for more than a sentence. Indeed, many, if not most of the sentences we write have
trouble standing alone since they contain and sometimes their effective functioning depends
upon cohesive links to surrounding sentences. These links can range from pronouns whose
reference appear in other sentences to extension and elaboration of similes and metaphors that
appeared in earlier sentences to offering numerical or chronological references that
make sense only in the context of a larger numbering system or history. Examples of this
cohesion phenomenon are too numerous to mention, but my use of this cohesion phenomenon in this
sentence would be a start on such an inventory of context-related, if not context-dependent
aspects of sentences. And of course, there are logical cohesive cues such as on the other hand,
or finally, or along these lines that remind us that sentences while important and sometimes
magnificent in standalone isolation are usually team players getting help from and lending help to
surrounding sentences. Indeed, M.A.K. Halliday and Rukhaya Hassan had pretty much both the first
and the last word to say about the ways in which sentences velcro together in their groundbreaking
and their massively authoritative 1976 study, Cohesion in English. Including, but also above
and beyond the crude kinds of cohesion I've just mentioned, Halliday and Hassan identified five
major categories of cohesive ties among sentences, 19 subcategories, and even a number of sub subcategories.
They're five primary categories for Cohesion, or reference, substitution, ellipsis, conjunction,
and lexical reiteration and collocation. I won't try to give more than a brief indication of each,
but substitution, for example, might include my own use of each to refer to any one of the five
categories I mentioned in the previous sentence. Reference includes pronouns, conjunction covers
situations such as starting a sentence with and or however, and lexical reiteration and collocation
refers to using words that are closely associated due to their sharing reference to a common subject,
as we might see in words all having something to do with, say, fires, flames, or burning.
Cohesion in English remains the foundational work on the ways sentences stick together,
and it certainly rewards reading, but if you find yourself interested, but not quite that interested
in this phenomenon, you might find Stephen P. Whitties and Lester Fagley's essay,
Coherence, Cohesion, and Writing Quality, published in College Composition and Communication in May 1981,
are more than adequate, but mercifully much shorter, overview of the subject.
The complexities identified in Cohesion in English remind us why our primary concern
in this course has been with single sentences, as the number of considerations that shape our
writing multiply so dramatically when we move beyond the sentence to larger units of discourse
that any suggestion of how to develop a sequence of sentences would be arbitrarily prescriptive,
mechanical, and ultimately pretty much useless. Indeed, it would be impossible to anticipate
more than a tiny fraction of the situations and purposes which would shape any sequence of sentences
we might write. Nevertheless, it is the case that some of the syntactic features we've been working
with at the level of the sentence also transcend the individual sentence to work in similar fashion
in sequences of sentences. Sentences in sequence can function in paragraphs,
much as cumulative modifying phrases function in the individual sentence, and sentence rhythms,
particularly those associated with cumulative and balanced syntax, seem to generate clumps or
clusters of sentences, all displaying those rhythms. Accordingly, this lecture will consider from
several angles sentences in sequence, in clumps and clusters. Some of these clumps and clusters,
we call paragraphs, and that's where we will start. But the paragraph is a unit of discourse we don't
actually know that much about, or at least don't much agree on what it is we do know.
Furthermore, as the graph part of paragraph reminds us, there's an important visual component
we should acknowledge when we write sentences in sequence. We don't speak in paragraphs,
we write in paragraphs, and we know the boundaries of a paragraph not by any prescriptive standards
based on logic or syntax or sound, but by the simple fact that paragraphs are those sequences
of sentences we see on the page as being set off by indentations. What we see between two
indentations from the left hand margin of the page, that's a paragraph, and we have no better
definition of a paragraph that will stand up under rigorous scrutiny. And in much the same way that
the graph in paragraph alerts us to the visual aspect of this writing form, we need to remember
that writing is first and foremost and always itself a technological phenomenon. Whether the
inscribing technology is the end of a burned stick or appointed rock used to scratch symbols on the
wall of a cave, or the most advanced computer and authoring software. We don't have time to do more
than very briefly consider the likely impact of technology on our sentences, whether alone or
in sequence. But this lecture will conclude with a few remarks about what is now being called
electronic textuality or multimedia writing. But now back to the concept of the paragraph,
the unit of organization most of us see as the next structure our sentences combine to build
on their way to becoming much larger units of discourse such as reports, proposals, essays,
memoirs, novels, and all of the other forms our writing can take.
And here's what may come as a surprise. The paragraph as a form is every bit as artificial,
every bit as unnatural, as are the most extreme examples of euphoistic balance and serial construction.
The sentence has been an object of critical interrogation for a couple thousand years,
but the paragraph as a codified unit of discourse is a concept probably first introduced as late as
1795 by Lindley Murray and his English grammar, a textbook that was hugely influential in the
19th century, going through some 65 editions in England and America. But most of what we think
of as the definition of and rules for the paragraph, we owe to one brilliant but eccentric
Scottish polymath, Alexander Bain, who in his 1866 book English composition and rhetoric
made up the rules for the paragraph we now generally treat as if Moses had brought them
down from the mountain engraved in a second set of stone tablets only slightly less authoritative
than the Ten Commandments. I'll have more to say about Alexander Bain shortly. For now,
let me just list his prescriptions for a proper paragraph. According to Bain, the paragraph
is the division of discourse next higher than the sentence, and it is a collection of sentences with
unity of purpose, each paragraph handling and exhausting a distinct topic. He then offers
six certain principles that govern the structure of the paragraph for all kinds of composition.
Number one, the first requisite of the paragraph is that the bearing of each
sentence upon what precedes shall be explicit and unmistakable. Number two, when several
consecutive sentences iterate or illustrate the same idea, they should as far as possible be formed
alike. This may be called the rule of parallel construction. Number three, the opening sentence
unless so constructed as to be obviously preparatory is expected to indicate with prominence the
subject of the paragraph. Number four, a paragraph should be consecutive or free from dislocation.
Number five, the paragraph is understood to possess unity, which implies a definite purpose
and forbids digressions and irrelevant matter. And number six, s in the sentence, so in the
paragraph a due proportion should obtain between principle and subordinate statements.
Compare Bain's specifications with those offered by the Harbrace Handbook Seventh Edition
some 106 years later, and you'll notice a remarkable similarity. The Harbrace Handbook
defines a paragraph as a distinct unit of thought, usually a group of related sentences
though occasionally no more than one sentence in a written or a printed composition.
Noting that the form of the paragraph distinctively signals itself with a first line that is indented,
the handbook continues. The content of a unified paragraph deals with one central idea.
Each sentence fits into a logical pattern of organization and is therefore carefully related
to other sentences in the paragraph. So the Harbrace prescription for the paragraph is that it
should be unified, coherent, adequately developed. A paragraph is said to have unity when each sentence
contributes to the central thought. Any sentence that violates the unity of the paragraph should
be deleted. In expository writing the main idea of a paragraph is most often stated in the first
sentence. However the statement of the controlling idea often called the topic sentence may appear
anywhere in the paragraph, for example after an introductory transitional sentence or at the end
of the paragraph. A paragraph is said to have coherence when the relationship between sentences
is clear and when the transition from one sentence to the next is easy and natural.
An adequate development in the paragraph results in part from the arrangement of sentences in the
paragraph according to time order, space order, order of climax or according to movement from
particular to general, general to the particular or from the familiar to the unfamiliar.
What has happened here and in almost every other writing text with a chapter or section devoted
to the paragraph is that Alexander Bain's six principles have been boiled down to three, unity,
coherence, and emphasis, but his starting assumption that the paragraph was just the sentence writ
large, its sentences, the equivalent of phrases and subordinate clauses in the sentence, remain
one of the central assumptions underlying most contemporary theories of the paragraph.
And Bain's belief that the paragraph developed the idea initially posited by what he called
the opening sentence and what is known today as the topic sentence remains one of the,
if not the most dearly held assumptions about paragraphs.
Only Bain got a lot of this wrong and his errors have been mechanically, if not mindlessly, passed
down to us as the received truths of paragraph theory. Let's start with his faith in the topic
sentence as the indispensable sentence that presents the subject of the paragraph.
In 1974, pioneering writing teacher and theorist Richard Braddock, after whom the conference on
college composition and communication is named one of its most important annual awards,
decided to put two of Bain's assumptions to the test. Braddock put together a representative
selection of essays from major magazines such as the Atlantic Harper Saturday Review in the New
Yorker, and he set about looking for topic sentences in the paragraphs in his selection.
He immediately ran into trouble in the first place when he was able to identify a topic
sentence by stretching Bain's idea to cover a number of variations, including the idea of a
topic distributed over two sentences, or one implied by parts of several sentences,
or one that could be inferred but was not actually present in the paragraph.
He still could only find some semblance of a topic sentence and fewer than half of the
paragraphs he examined, and in only 13% of the paragraphs did the topic sentence appear where
promised at the start of the paragraph. Publishing his findings in a frequently cited article in
the winter 1974 research in the teaching of English, Braddock concluded both, quote,
the notion of what a topic sentence is is not at all clear, end of quote, and he concluded that
the evidence simply, quote, did not support the claims of textbook writers about the frequency
and location of topic sentences, end of quote. Possibly even more damaging to Bain's largely
deductive pronouncements about paragraphs are reports by Arthur A. Stern of Teachers College
at Columbia and Edgar H. Schuster, a writing teacher who taught for 40 years in venues ranging
from secondary schools to the Graduate School of Education at Harvard, of experiments they
conducted in which they had respondents try to figure out how pieces of writing had been
originally divided into paragraphs. Stern conducted his experiments in the mid 1970s
by asking English teachers to paragraph a 500 word passage with no paragraph indentation
taken from Cleont Brooks's and Robert Penn Warren's fundamentals of good writing.
This paragraphing exercise asked the teachers to decide how many paragraphs
that 500 word block of prose should be divided into and where the paragraph breaks should be.
Stern got responses suggesting the block should be divided into either two, three, four, or five
paragraphs with only five out of 100 respondents paragraphing the piece as had Brooks and Warren.
Reasonably enough, this result led Stern to ask if, as the handbooks declare,
a paragraph represents a distinct unit of thought, why is it that we can't recognize
a unit of thought when we see one? If every paragraph contains an identifiable topic sentence,
then why don't all of us identify the same topic sentence?
Much earlier, Herbert Reed reached much the same conclusion about the cherished but apparently
mistaken notion that some form of logical unity binds the sentences of a paragraph
and his English prose style as revised for the 1952 edition, he notes,
it is nearer the truth to say that a writer seizes upon some particular aspect of his subject
and holds that aspect in his mind until he has seen it in all profitable lights.
This process may take two or it may take 20 paragraphs, there is no rule,
and whatever unity may govern the paragraph, it is not the unity of the development of a single idea.
Edgar H. Schuster has conducted a similar experiment handing out at a teacher's convention
an unparagraphed United States Supreme Court order consisting of 38 sentences.
He reports his findings in his wonderfully transgressive 2003 textbook,
Breaking the Rules, Liberating Writers Through Innovative Grammar Instruction.
Tellingly, each one of those 38 sentences was selected by at least one respondent as the
appropriate beginning of a new paragraph. No one in his sample replicated the original
paragraph by the Supreme Court. What's more, when Schuster later tried the exercise himself
for a second time, he found that his paragraphing choice did not agree with the first choices he
had made, leading him to exclaim, I disagreed with myself. The point Schuster makes about
the outcome of his experiment, however, is much more important than its clear support of the idea
that paragraphing is a subjective rather than logical process. As Schuster asks us to think
what those results really mean. That Supreme Court order said what it said and said it cohesively
or incohesively, logically or illogically, regardless of whether it contained three,
six, ten, or even no paragraphs. Since emphasis would be affected, it's likely that a five-paragraph
version would be easier to read and would be preferred by most readers. But apart from emphasis,
it would be the same piece of work. My point is that most contemporary instruction concerning
paragraphing is almost ridiculously normative and arbitrary rather than reflective of the myriad
ways in which we actually write our paragraphs. Sure, follow the advice offered by Bain in 1866
or the echoes of his advice that persists in most writing guidebooks today, and you may well get a
unified, coherent, and well-developed paragraph, and there's nothing wrong with that. Other than
the fact that it will be an artificial structure that forces your writing, your style, into a box
made long ago by one self-trained reticent at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland.
And if you go looking for examples that will fit this prescriptive model, you're almost certain
to find them since this model has been forced on writing students for nearly 150 years. But the
odds are you won't find paragraphs by celebrated or even by just your favorite writers that fit this
mold. However, having said that, I should mention one variation on the Bain paragraph you may want
to add to the options open to you when you build your own paragraphs. Francis Christensen, whose
theories of the cumulative sentence I championed so unreservedly, has also advanced a generative
rhetoric of the paragraph about which I have more than a few reservations. Basically Christensen
openly takes Bain as his guide, particularly insofar as Bain saw the paragraph as a scaled-up
analog of the sentence, each paragraph organized by a topic sentence. But Christensen adds the
claim that, quote, there is a precise structural analogy not with just any sentence, but with the
cumulative sentence, end of quote. He argues, the topic sentence of a paragraph is analogous to the
base clause of such a sentence, and the supporting sentences of a paragraph are analogous to the
added levels of the sentence. Christensen then claims that the four principles that guide his
theory of the cumulative sentence, addition, direction, and modification levels of generality
and texture, apply equally well to constructing paragraphs and can be equally generative for
the writer who needs guidance in developing an idea through sentences in a paragraph.
While Christensen finds a number of paragraphs that do indeed seem to reflect the coordinate,
subordinate, and mixed patterns of cumulative sentences, and while it is possible to write
paragraphs by thinking of each of its sentences as analogous to either the base clause or modifying
phrases of the cumulative sentence, this model is, like Bain's, original prescription for the
sentence, quite arbitrary and limiting. In focusing on the ways in which many writing texts
offer subjective, inaccurate, and ultimately misleading norms for writing paragraphs,
just as I previously suggested, ways in which conventional received truths about writing
sentences so often missed the mark, and in celebrating the maverick stylistic theories
of scholars such as Richard Lanham or the marvelously maverick prose of a writer and scholar
such as William Gass, I'm warming up to the pitch I'll make in the next lecture for a maverick
philosophy of composition. Actually, it's not my pitch, but it's been made a number of times before,
both in writing scholarship and in the compelling examples offered by writers we regularly celebrate,
while somehow failing to notice that we celebrate their writing precisely for the kinds of things
we have again and again been warned not to do in our own. The most famous articulation of such a
maverick philosophy of composition was made back in 1976 by Winston Weathers and his essay Grammars
of Style, New Options in Composition. His famous argument for what he termed a grammar B to compliment
the traditional hegemonic, highly regulated, and largely subjective grammar A offered in
most writing classes and peddled as indisputable norm in most writing texts. The idea of grammar
B deserves a lecture in its own right, and it is an idea to which I'll return. For now, I introduce
the idea of grammar B only to leapfrog over it for a moment to suggest that we may now need to be
turning our attention to the possibility, if not the emerging certainty, of a grammar C, with that
C specifically invoking the new looks and capabilities of prose made possible by computers.
Most of our writing textbooks, discussions of prose style, and celebrations of the sentence
assume that we are talking about words on a printed page, while more and more of our engagement
with language is actually an increasingly interactive interface with pixelated words
on a computer screen. In this way, the materiality of writing is undergoing far-reaching changes,
just as it has previously been changed by the invention of the printing press and then of the
typewriter. In some ways that I will discuss in the next lecture, Winston Weathers' idea of grammar
B presciently anticipates the new world of sentences on the screen in its identification of new
shorter and more striking blocks of prose, which Weathers, after a suggestion made by Tom Wolfe,
calls the crot, and in its discussion of double voice as a forerunner of the kind of meta-commentary
available to contemporary writers and readers through the simple device of the hypertext hotlink.
More to the specific issue of what computers mean for contemporary prose style, building on Walter
J. Ong's study of the move from oral to literary to secondary oral culture, J. David Bolter and
Richard Lanham have considered what happens to language when it moves from page to screen.
It was Father Ong who persuasively argued in his famous study Orality and Literacy
the technologizing of the word that writing was a technology and that technologies are not mere
exterior aids but also interior transformations of consciousness and never more than when they
affect the word. Moreover, as Ong traced the human development from oral to literary culture from
speaking to writing, he also argued that human consciousness evolved and that writing in general
and specific writing technologies in particular played crucial roles in consciousness raising.
While Ong devoted little attention specifically to computers, he dismissed or diffused some of the
common criticisms lodged against the effects computers might have on consciousness and included
them in the broad array of technologies that he saw as promoting a resurgence of many of the positive
aspects of oral culture and what he saw as an age of secondary orality.
Bolter and Lanham then picked up on Ong's theorizing of writing as a technology and
applied it more directly to computers and computer writing. J. Bolter brought unique credentials to
his highly influential 1991 study, Writing Space, the computer hypertext and the history of writing
as he was a classics professor who also had a degree in computer science. Almost all subsequent
studies of hypertext, hypermedia and multimedia writing build on Bolter's pioneering work with
hypertext theory and with hypertext technology as he was also one of the authors of Story Space,
a hypertext authoring program that preceded the widespread development of HTML as the
authoring language that underlay the features of the worldwide web.
Bolter's Writing Space largely theorizes hypertext, the ability to link any word and a foreground
text so that it will take the reader to a background text at the level of the book or at the level of
literature rather than at the level of the sentence or paragraph. But a number of his speculations
would seem to be obvious starting points for our thinking about what a grammar C might mean,
even at the most basic levels of composition. Noting that electronic writing such as we now
take for granted on the web develops networks rather than the linear progression of book pages
that computer screens favor the use of short self-contained units of discourse and that the
fact that electronic networks would almost certainly be navigated differently by different
readers, calling for a radically new understanding of what we mean when we refer to the unity of a
text. Bolter also suggested that electronic writing resisted traditional forms of closure
since there were always further hypertext links that could be established,
expanding connections without limit. Electronic writing will probably be aphoristic rather than
periodic, he mused. Richard Lanham, whose authority as a rhetorician I've already repeatedly invoked,
also brought an interesting background to his book, The Electronic Word, Democracy,
Technology and the Arts, since he was a recognized authority on classical rhetoric who welcomes
the new technologies of electronic writing. Lanham views electronic textuality largely
in terms of what he sees in it as a convergence of rhetorical values rather than with the logical
values usually associated with computers, with the visual syntaxes of contemporary art.
He sees print as a philosophic medium while the electronic text is a deeply rhetorical one
and this new rhetoric makes use both of the graphic and typographic versatility and innovation
offered by the computer, shifting Bolter's focus on hypertext to a focus on multimedia writing.
Print, he suggests, asked us to look through the words on the page to the ideas and objects they
represent, while electronic text invites us to toggle back and forth between looking through
the words on the screen and looking at those words in all the ways they can be made more
interesting by the computer. As he puts it, the computer screen makes text into a painting,
frames it in a new way, asks for a new act of attention and smiles at the seriousness that
the text calls forth from us.
Lecture 24 Sentences and Pro Style
I've been rereading a fascinating article that has everything to do with this course
and that has reminded me of something I really need to do before I complete my lectures for a
course with Building Great Sentences and its title. The article by the late Robert J. Connors,
a professor of English at the University of New Hampshire and an influential expert in the area
of rhetoric and composition, is starkly titled The Erasure of the Sentence, and it was published
in the September 2000 issue of College Composition and Communication. The bio note, which I assume
was written by Professor Connors himself, ends with the tongue-in-cheek description of the author,
quote, now in his dotage he strives vainly for crumbs of dignity as he watches everything he
holds dear swept into the dustbin of history, end of quote. Tongue-in-cheek? Yes, but I suspect
there's more than a rueful grain or two of passive-aggressive truth in that sentiment.
As Professor Connors has been detailing in his article, the somewhat hard to explain
disappearances of courses such as this one I'm offering that focus primarily on the syntax
of the sentence. Early on in his essay, Connors offers this beautifully balanced sentence,
summarizing developments in composition theory since the 1980s. Some elements of the older field
of composition teaching became approved and burgeoned, while others were tacitly declared dead
ends, lore-based and therefore uninteresting, scientific and therefore suspect, mechanistic
and therefore destructive. From that moment on, I knew I was in good hands, respecting as I do,
writing that shows care in its own composition, particularly when that writing is in an essay
on the ways in which we care about writing. The gist of this article is that sentence or
syntax-based approaches to writing, a famous example of which would be Christensen's theory
of the cumulative sentence, have pretty much died out or been driven underground despite
their proven effectiveness by larger theoretical currents in composition theory and by theory-centered
developments in the broader field of English studies. Since another anything but famous example
of a sentence or syntax-based approach to writing instruction would be the course I am teaching
at this moment, I have more than a passing interest as should you in what Connors has to say.
Sentence-based pedagogies were much the rage when I was a graduate student in the 1970s and
Connors does a great job of describing both their rise and their subsequent fall. He divides writing
instruction based on the sentence into three broad categories, starting with Christensen's
advocacy of the benefits of the cumulative sentence, making Christensen a category unto himself.
Significant portions of this course have been devoted to Christensen's rhetoric of the cumulative
sentence, so you're already familiar with its contours. The next category Connors identifies
consists of writing approaches that have at their center the rather precise imitation of
sentence patterns, forms, schemes, and he mentions Edward P. J. Corbett's 1965 textbook Classical
Rhetoric for the Modern Student as a flagship text for this approach with two books by Winston
Weathers and Otis Winchester, their 1967 The New Strategy of Style and their 1969 Copy and Compose
as also adopting an approach to writing based largely on imitating identified forms.
He also includes Weathers' 1980 book An Alternate Style, Options and Composition,
the book where Weathers developed his notion of Grammar B as a work which recommends the value
of imitation. Now, in earlier lectures I've repeatedly drawn from the New Strategy of Style
and later in this lecture I'll have more to say about the Weathers' notion of a somewhat transgressive
Grammar B. And the third category Connors describes consists of pedagogical approaches
to writing centered on strategies for sentence combining. While my course has not specifically
drawn from any codified theories of sentence combining, my discussion of the surface of the
sentence as the tip of an iceberg of underlying propositions shares many of the assumptions
of sentence combining. And my invocation of that invisible God created the visible world
sentence to show how propositions get combined in sentences is right out of the sentence
combining playbook. Likewise, my enthusiasm for the Josephine Miles notion of the sentence
as a progression of syntactic steps taken by strategies of conjunction, subordination,
or adjectival modification owes much to sentence combining theory. So, while it was never my
conscious attempt, I've introduced you in this course to the three primary categories of sentence
based writing instruction that are the subject of Connors' essay. And what Connors reports
has a bit of the feel of a good news, bad news joke. The good news is that he cites a number
of empirical studies that seem to validate the assumption that sentence based writing pedagogies
do indeed improve writing and do so rather dramatically. The bad news is that they have
fallen out of fashion precisely in part because of a larger suspicion in English studies of
empirical studies as anti-humanist and a suspicion that these successful teaching techniques
stifle creativity, that they are not themselves located in larger theories of discourse,
and that they might actually be demeaning to students with exercises far removed from actual
writing situations that boil down to as mere servile copying. More bad news is that by the
mid-80s, quote, the result of all these lines of criticism of syntactic methods was that they were
stopped almost dead in their tracks as a research program and ceased being a popular teaching project
just a little later, end of quote. The good news, however, is that Connors concludes that, quote,
it really does seem that the current perception that somehow sentence rhetorics
don't work exists as a massive piece of wish fulfillment, end of quote. As Connors explains,
more good news and a sentence that is as carefully suspensive as his earlier sentence was balanced.
In other words, if people believe that research has shown that sentence rhetorics don't work,
their belief exists not because the record bears it out, but because it is what people
want to believe. Wow, that's a relief. I should explain that while I have a pretty solid foundation
in writing pedagogy, I'm a trained writing teacher but not a composition theorist or formal
rhetorician. I go with what works for me in the writing classroom, aware of, but not overly
concerned with the broad cultural and sociological implications of my approach to writing sentences.
Indeed, if I'm so bold as to refer to my theory of writing, it should probably be described as
magpie eclectic. Since like that curious bird, if I come across a bright or shiny theory or writing
exercise, I bring it back to the nest of my classroom. I was in graduate school during the
heady days in the 1970s when sentence-centered approaches to writing and more holistic approaches,
such as those advanced by Peter Elbow and Ken McCrory, high priests of free writing,
and Donald Murray, who extended our focus and composition to the revision process,
seemed like they could not only coexist in the same classroom,
but might even complement each other. I was in graduate school during the days when rhetorical
theory, even in its most formalistic articulations, seemed compatible with the much broader concerns
of discourse theory, as proposed by James Moffat and James Canavy. Indeed, one of my teachers at
the University of Texas was Dr. Canavy, a noted discourse theorist who was also well trained in
rhetorical traditions, and above all else, who was a man who simply loved to teach. To this day,
Canavy's influential 1971 work, A Theory of Discourse, provides the broader context in which
I think of all of my work with sentences. I mention all of this as a background for my
heartfelt reminder that these lectures are investigations, interrogations, explorations,
and celebrations of the sentence and of prose style. They are not meant as a verbal textbook
that sets forth yet another set of guidelines or rules for good writing. So much that is wrong
with writing instruction is wrong because a single person's beliefs have somehow been elevated to
ex-cathedra pronouncements and passed along from teacher to teacher and from teacher to student
through generation after generation without ever being challenged, without ever being tested against
experience, without ever really being thought about. In these lectures, I have tried to do some
serious thinking about the received truths that have so largely guided our efforts to teach writing,
all of which is just to say that in these lectures, I have consistently advocated rule-breaking,
but I'm no grammatical or syntactical or rhetorical anarchist. While I believe there are many rules we
should break, there are also many rules we should not break. The distinction can get tricky,
but Edgar H. Schuster makes it much easier for us to tell which is which in his deliciously naughty
book, Breaking the Rules, liberating writers through innovative grammar instruction. Schuster
gives us a revealing history of how a very few men and a very few books have gained so much
unwarranted influence and authority in the discourse of writing. He is particularly good at
identifying what he calls myth rules, quote, rules that rule no one other than perhaps a handful
of pop grammarians and hardened purists who look for their authority somewhere in the sky rather
than here on earth, end of quote. He then proposes a simple test for deciding whether a rule
deserves its authority. Here's the test. Choose a favorite writer, preferably a modern writer and
preferably a non-fiction writer, then check to see whether the rule being tested, whether it has to
do with grammar, usage, or punctuation, is followed by that writer. If it isn't, it is almost certainly
a myth rule. Okay, so much for my focus on the sentence. Now, what final words do I have to offer
about style? Pros style is determined by an almost infinite number of variables. Some a matter of
choices and decisions made by the writer, many more beyond the writer's control. Pros style manifests
itself at an almost infinite number of levels in our use of language, making it very difficult to use
one term to describe phenomena associated with subjects as different as the sentence, the essay,
the novel, the writer, the period and culture in which the writer writes, and so on. We can speak
of style at the level of the word, at the level of the sentence, at the level of larger prose units
such as the paragraph, at the level of the completed piece of prose, at the level of a particular
writer, at the level of a particular movement embraced by writers, at the level of a particular
genre or form of writing, at the level of a century, at the level of a particular nation,
and so on. This course has been built on the assumption that some of the basic building blocks
of prose style can be examined closely and described precisely, particularly as those
building blocks or moves appear at the level of the sentence. The best attempt I know of to
consider all the factors that determine prose style is that of my colleague and mentor in
most things stylistic, Carl Klaus, in his well-known essay, Reflections on Prose Style, which serves
to introduce his style in English prose, and has been reprinted in several major collections of
essays on style, including, and I never get tired of saying this, the Love and Pain anthology,
Contemporary Essays on Style. Klaus considers the factors that complicate our thinking about
style, most obviously the fact that we use this one term to refer to many different aspects of
language use, and he works his way through the different approaches to style offered by commentators
such as Putnam, author of the famous aphorism, Style is the Man, Chesterfield, Haslett, Thoreau,
Franklin, Asham, Burton, Bunyan, and Orwell, whose politics and the English language is quite
possibly the most important essay on the subject we have or could ever have. As Klaus contemplates
the nature of style, he both complicates and confirms Putnam's claim that style is the man,
noting that if style is the man, it is only so in a fairly complicated sense, and it may well be
that style is always, to some extent, an invention of the writer, a fiction that conceals the man
as surely as it reveals him. I should note that Putnam's gender-limiting use of man is itself
a reminder of the way style continuously evolves, and Klaus's continuing references to the writer
Always Essaman both reflects the date of his writing, pre-1968, and his need to maintain
parallelism with Putnam's famous aphorism. Of course, as Klaus points out, style may also
describe the deliberate use of language, the self-conscious process of composing, to achieve
specific purposes and calculated effects, and, quote, having chosen a purpose, the writer has
also chosen a style, or has had a style chosen for him, end of quote. He explains, style is
formative then, it determines the man as much as he determines it. Most important, Klaus insists
on the influential nature of our stylistic heritage, for as he says, language is the basis of thought,
and it follows from this truth that inherited forms of expression will inevitably perpetuate
the forms of thought associated with them. Thus, he concludes, the most profound reason
for studying prose style is that, quote, when we recognize that it can ultimately shape our beliefs,
we assume the responsibility of mastering style lest we be mastered by it.
If from Carl Klaus we get our best explanation of the importance of prose style, it is from Richard
Lanham that we get the strongest argument that our characteristic approach to the importance of style
is horribly wrong-headed. In one of the most radical, most enjoyable, and most compelling
educational polemics I have ever read, Lanham charges in his 1974 book, Style, an anti-text book,
that not only is our inattention to prose style in most writing classrooms a shame,
but our valorization in writing instruction of clarity at the expense of style is nothing less
than a disaster. Boiled down to its simplest form, Lanham's eloquent argument is that contemporary
writing instruction, with its hyper-emphasis on clarity, drains all the pleasure out of writing.
Quote, we pair away all the sense of verbal play of self-satisfying joy and language,
then wonder why American students have a motivation problem and don't want to write. End of quote.
As he also argues, prose written without joy can only be read in the same spirit.
The pervasive emphasis on clarity on the simple and direct in American writing instruction,
Lanham calls the fallacy of normative prose. All prose style, he says, as taught in most classrooms,
cherishes a single goal and that goal is to disappear. The aim is the same for all, clarity,
denotation, conceptual fidelity. The imperative of imperatives in the books, his term for most
writing text is be clear. The best style is the never noticed. Ideally, prose style should,
like the state under Marxism, wither away, leaving the plain facts shining unto themselves.
As Lanham sums things up, the books do not teach style, they abolish it.
To rectify this dismal state of stylistic affairs, Lanham proposes an alternative goal,
not clarity, but a self-conscious pleasure in words, arguing that, quote,
such self-consciousness is the only stylistic attitude likely to last beyond the classroom. End of quote.
Style, Lanham insists, must be taught for and ask what it is, a pleasure, a grace, a joy, a delight.
Lanham makes some provocative suggestions for how we can bring this self-conscious
pleasure and words into our writing practice. In what remains one of his most surprising
turns in a book full of surprises is a chapter in defense of jargon, which he calls the fun
of a special language. Whether we agree or disagree with Lanham's radical and controversial stance,
as you might guess, and as you might guess, I love it, every serious student of writing
should know this contrarian masterpiece. A perfect companion to Lanham's style and anti-text book
is Winston Weathers' An Alternate Style, Options and Composition, published in 1980.
This book expands and provides numerous examples for the idea of grammar B
that Weathers first set forth in his Freshman English News article, Grammars of Style,
New Options and Composition. Writing almost as if in direct response to Lanham's critique
of joyless writing instruction, Weathers, in the persona of a Professor X, complains,
I write for many reasons to communicate many things, and yet much of what I wish to communicate
does not seem to be expressible within the ordinary conventions of composition as I have
learned them and mastered them in the long years of my education. What I've been taught to construct
is the well-made box. I have been taught to put what I have to say
into a container that is always remarkably the same, that in spite of varying decorations,
keeps to a basically conventional form, a solid bottom, four upright sides, a fine-fitting lid.
Indeed, I may be free to put what I have to say in the plain box or in the ornate box,
in the large box or in the small box, in the fragile box or in the sturdy box,
but always the box, squarish or rectangular. And I begin to wonder if there isn't somewhere
a round box or oval box or tubular box, if somewhere there isn't some sort of container,
one that will allow me to package what I have to say without trimming my
content to fit into a particular compositional mode, two that will actually encourage me to
discover new things to say because of the very opportunity a newly shaped container gives me,
three that will be more suitable perhaps to my own mental processes, and four that will
provide me with a greater rhetorical flexibility, allowing me to package what I have to say in
more ways than one, and thus reach more audiences than one.
Urging us to be alert to emerging options and to participate in creating options that do not
yet exist, but which would be beneficial if they did, Professor X calls for writing instruction
that identifies or creates more stylistic options, quote, in all areas, in vocabulary, usage,
sentence forms, dictional levels, paragraph types, ways of organizing material into whole
compositions, options in all that we mean by style, end of quote. Professor X suggests that these
new options would constitute an entirely new grammar of style, many of the features of which
are already in use in not only experimental writing, but also in our more mundane efforts,
but are usually not recognized and are almost never approved of by conventional writing instruction.
Against the established rules petrified in what Lanham referred to as the books, rules that Professor
X dubs grammar A, he proposes that we recognize and when appropriate, embrace an alternate grammar
B, whose characteristics of variegation, synchronicity, discontinuity, ambiguity, and the like.
This would be an alternate grammar no longer an experiment, but a mature grammar used by
competent writers and offering students of writing a well-tested set of options that added to the
traditional grammar of style will give them a much more flexible voice, a much greater communication
capacity, a much greater opportunity to put into effective language all the things they have to say.
The idea of a grammar B emerged coterminously with the innovations of the new journalism
and with some of the experiments of meta-fiction. I don't have time to describe all of the major
characteristics of grammar B, but three are of particular relevance to us, from Tom Wolf's
introduction of and then codifications of the techniques of new journalism.
Grammar B borrowed the notion of the crot, a short, somewhat paragraph-like chunk of prose
that functioned more like a stanza in poetry. The crot, as described by Professor X, can range
from one to 20 or even 30 sentences and is a new unit of prose organization, quote,
fundamentally an autonomous unit characterized by the absence of any transitional devices
that might relate it to preceding or subsequent crots. And because of this independent and discrete
nature of crots, they create a general effect of metastasis and rhetoric, the quick dismissal
or passing over of an issue, used in this context to suggest rapid transition from one point of view
to another. As Tom Wolf explained the crot, in the hands of a writer who really understands
the device, it will have you making crazy leaps of logic, leaps you never dreamed of before.
Now both Wolfson, Professor X's explanation of the crot, although made some 20 years before
the internet, strike me as nearly perfect descriptions of the units of prose we have
already become used to on web pages, a reminder that a grammar C for electronic text may already
be developing beyond Grammar B. A second intriguing feature of Grammar B is what Professor X terms
the labyrinthine sentence and the sentence fragment. We've already discussed labyrinthine sentences,
which I called master sentences, and sentence fragments really don't need any further description.
Professor X uses an example given from John Barth to help illustrate the third feature of
Grammar B, I want to mention, double voice. The example is from Barth's Lost in the Funhouse,
and it's a self-reflexive and meta-critical commentary on the text, which interrupts the
description of a character's thoughts represented by italics with a brief tutorial on manuscript
preparation, and weathers lists several other techniques for achieving this double voice effect.
Not only has meta-commentary of this form become a norm in postmodern fiction and non-fiction alike,
but also once again can easily be achieved and regularly is by now familiar web page devices
such as the hotlink or mouseover animation of selected pieces of text.
Other primary characteristics of Grammar B, such as repetition, repetens, refrains, the list,
collage, montage, and synchronicity would also seem to have obvious analogs and electronic
textuality. And indeed, Grammar B did a marvelous job of anticipating many of the features we now
take for granted when we surf the web or when we suffer through interminable PowerPoint presentations.
Having come out from behind the persona of Professor X, Weathers ends his initial description
of Grammar B with a passionate plea. Even if we believe our commitment to the traditional
grammar is so strong that we must give our full time to teaching it, we should at least
acknowledge the alternate grammar, say something about it, point out its existence. Even if we
exclude it from our daily work in the classroom, even if we say to the student,
we can't deal with such matters here and tell him he must wait before he can try such things,
we will at least have been honest with him and not left him with the impression that traditional
grammar is all there is. We can at least avoid in our profession the conspiracy of silence
that is tantamount to restriction and suppression. In these lectures, I hope I've introduced
both a number of practical approaches to crafting more effective and more enjoyable sentences.
I hope I've also been able to touch on some of the fascinating issues involved in understanding
how our sentences fit into the larger concerns of prose style. Oddly enough, both formal and
informal references to prose style frequently form an implicit balance. Some approaching style
as a problem, some approaching style as a gift. We've seen how Richard Lanham responds to the
construction of prose style as a problem. Now I'd like to offer a very, very brief gloss on
the construction of style as a gift. In a primer for teaching style, published in the May 1974
College Composition and Communication, Richard Graves, now Professor Emeritus of Curriculum
and Teaching at Auburn, describes style as, quote, a way of finding and explaining what is true.
I love that description and I completely agree with Graves when he adds that the purpose of
style is not to impress, but to express. Looking at style as Graves does is an important first step
toward thinking of style, not as a gift that some writers have, something they can show off,
but as a gift that they can give away by passing the truth of their style and the expression of
their selves along to readers. In this sense, style is itself the gift, passing the truth
style is itself the gift, passed from writer to writer, from writer to reader, age to age,
as Lewis Hyde has so brilliantly explained the process of gifting in his The Gift.
Most indigenous peoples believe that the essence of gift giving is that the gift must remain in
motion, that it must keep moving as it is given again and again, passed from hand to hand. And
this important sense, style is indeed a gift that keeps on giving, just as it is a gift that can
and must be passed along. That is the sense in which I offer this course to you, and if you
have found in it anything of value, I hope you will pass it along to others through your writing.
We hope you have enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series. Our courses
are now available to order online. Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer
care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12. That's 1-800-TEACH-12. Thank you very much.
