Look, let's be honest, I said I was going to release a document, and clearly we haven't.
Okay, April Fools, April Fools.
We're talking about universal theories of everything, perhaps a new one created by
today's guest, Eric Weinstein, and that goes by the moniker Geometric Unity.
What we're talking about is crazy. I think it's really important to just own up to the fact that
for people who want sober physics, this is probably not the channel for you today.
If you look at our history, everybody who's proposed new physical law and gotten it right
had errors. The problem is that we're not in an adult phase where we've faced up to the fact
that we have almost 50 years of stagnation, and what you're seeing with this proliferation of
new claimants to have fundamental theories is in part that string theory has finally weakened
itself and the aging of the particular cohort, which is baby boomers who are the string theory
proponents that gotten weak enough that effectively other people feel emboldened.
And I think, you know, Stephen Wolfram said this recently that in a previous area he would have
expected to have been attacked. But we've been waiting around for so long that perhaps
the political economy of unification and wild ideas has changed somewhat.
What are the inputs? There are the players, the matter players, there are the gauge bosons,
there are new predictions, there are new concepts. There's a lot of weirdness. Why the
Lorenz group? Why SU3 cross SU2 cross U1 for the internal symmetries generating the forces?
Why three families? And I thought that something that many younger viewers may not be aware of
is that things really changed around 1983-84. And if you think about the original anomaly
cancellation of Green and Schwartz in 1984, I believe, you could ask what was physics like
right before that moment. And I think it's absolutely shocking because we don't realize
the extent to which the string theorists really redefined what the major problems in physics
were. I think most people in the post-string era somehow believe that the major issue is quantum
gravity. And I don't really, I just find it astounding because that's really what the string
theorists were selling. So I think that a lot of things got done to shore up what we do to mature
input into a quantum theory. It just, it wasn't physics per se, it was sort of the mathematics
of physics. And I think that that was very frustrating, which is, you know, it's sort of,
to physicists, it's Yeoman's work. They wanted to go to Stockholm and they ended up, you know,
winning the first Fields Medal won by a physicist. And I think it's weird. It's like,
what is your time? Your time is whatever it is that can be done. And they thought their time
was to quantize gravity. Well, guess again, nature said, we have something incredibly important.
So I feel like I'm trying to rescue their legacy. They want to go down as string theorists, for the
most part. And they want to say that string theory was the most successful of any claimant.
Maybe that structure ultimately carries the day. But I do think that the idea that they're entitled
to this many pivots without having to become self-reflective is preposterous. What do you say
to the younger people who say they can't understand it? They can't comprehend geometric unity?
We can say what geometric unity actually is. We can draw pictures. People can get it. In fact,
I was talking to my good buddy Joe Rogan earlier today and a particular group of people who listened
to my podcast put up a site for Joe called pull that up Jamie.com. Jamie, could you bring up
something called Boskin Wild vs. Mild? I know what you're saying. Because I want to be joyous.
I want to produce positive things that uplift us, that give us a hope of breaking the Einsteinian
speed limit. If this is wrong, I want to know. We've had insufferable members of our community
for a very long time and we should not be getting rid of insufferable people. The problem is what
happens when people become insufferable and they don't constantly check in with the unforgiving
nature of the universe. We have a problem that sociologically nobody wants to say that the Institute
for Advanced Study is like the smartest guys around and a lot of what they do isn't physics.
In standard terms, it's the mathematics of physics. These are uncomfortable truths just the same way
that it's uncomfortable that we're taking seriously somebody who's been out of the field for 27 years.
But these are end times. We're having end time conversations and I think that we don't need
to be mean about it. I think it just needs to be more honest. That ship that you're seeing
is called curvature and it has three masts because it has three irreducible components usually.
One mast is called vile curvature, one mast is called traceless Ricci curvature,
and one mast is called Ricci scalar. The first greatest insight maybe of the 20th century was
the way in which we could feedback the curvature of the Levy-Chimita connection into being a covector
field on the space of all metrics. This is depicted as a boat going into a bottle that has a rather
wide opening. We've got a metric. The metric has a connection. The connection produces curvature
that is Ramanian. We find that by identities it's got three components. It tries to go towards
metrics and the vile curvature is snapped off. Afterwards the scalar curvature is lowered somewhat
or adjusted by scalar curvature over two times g mu nu. And so symbolically what we've done is we've
said Einstein threw away the vile curvature, readjusted the Ricci scalar curvature and fed
metric information through to the Levy-Chimita connection through to the Raman curvature tensor
and then played these projection games to feed it back to the space of metrics and that particular
combination is perpendicular to the action of the diffumorphism group on the space of all metrics
leading to a divergence-free condition via our friend the Bianchi identity. So let's see whether
general relativity and gauge theory have an incompatibility problem as we try to play the
same game. We start off with the Raman curvature tensor but now the neck is narrower and what's
really going on is that this is kind of evocative of trying to feed it into the space of connections
but the gauge group acts differently on two different factors namely if connections
are add-valued one-forms and curvature is an add or le algebra value two-form.
The problem here is the gauge transformations act on the le algebra component and don't touch the
form component but Einsteinian projection or contraction or summing over g mu nu indices
is democratic it deals simultaneously with the form piece and the le algebra piece. So if you treat
only the le algebra piece under a gauge transformation and you don't touch the form piece
then contraction followed by gauge transformation will never be the same thing as gauge transformation
followed by contraction. So here's a g u approach how do you get geometric harmony between general
relativity and gauge theory when you have the ship in a bottle problem and this is kind of almost
a tight analogy you've got the curvature tensor you apply a gauge transformation to two of the
masts and you pass them through into add-valued d-1 forms and then you do an inverse gauge
transformation which is exactly how you do the ship in the bottle trick by the way Brian gave me
a wonderful ship involved thank you very much raising the masts inside and then you can potentially
if need be adjust one of the two masts again in order to get agreement. So in part the idea is
how do you get harmony? Let's imagine that we have a salary that is constant in dollar terms over time
that somebody is facing inflationary pressures on their basket of goods what we now have is a
ten dollar an hour salary and if we claim that it's constant constant means derivative equals zero yes
but we know that it's not constant purchasing power so we have two notions of constancy how
are they related we do a gauge transformation you now see that these little hash lines are the reference
levels that we call a connection and we decide that rise over run should not be measured from a
naive horizontal but should be measured instead from a custom reference level represented by the
hash mark that situation is actually an application of gauge theory to a very simple problem in
economics completely depicted by stretching the fibers in the x y plane
toy model of spacetime so going around through the center is like groundhog day you come back
to the same place and it's a repeating time cycle and space is simply a circle and what you're
seeing here is something that's very hard to picture because it's five-dimensional but one trick
here is because the torus has a property called parallelizability the object on the right is a
potential metric at any given point on the torus so in other words if a metric is a symmetric
non-degenerate two tensor if you think of it as a matrix it would be of the form
x z z y and the non-degenerate means that x y minus z squared is not equal to zero so that's
what's cutting out that variety if you will the zeros of the determinant would be points given
that there are three degrees of freedom in the metric and so instead of actually having a metric
spacetime gu would say replace the torus by the entire space in that sort of our glassy region
so the top region would be like space space metrics the bottom region below that sort of weird
diaphanous scarf is time time metrics and the weird middle region which is sort of around that
singularity would be spacetime metrics every way you can stick that donut into that middle
region without touching one of those two sheets is a valid spacetime metric and what gu would do
is to say don't only dance on the points of the two-dimensional torus you should actually have
fields that are dancing on all of the points of the torus and simultaneously all of the points in
that middle region now notice that thing up in the top left which is a ruler protractor combination
those two sliders are recalibrations of what it means to be one unit and that protractor is a
recalibration of what you're going to define to be 90 degrees so every way of keeping that bottom
arm in a single horizontal position moving the top arm and moving the two sliders that's one of
that's three degrees of freedom in the space of metrics so that's a different depiction of the
space of metrics so the big take home from the restrictive version of gu that we're exploring
here is that if you allow fields to dance on the space of metric apparatus measurement apparatus
then the kind of the paradoxes of measurement start to make a lot more sense so the point is
is that spinners on 14 look like spinners on four tensor spinners on some version of 10 yeah and
whether you're talking about spin 10 models su5 models or su4 cross su2 cross su2 which is spin
six cross spin four isn't that exactly what we see in the standard model a particularly intriguing
feature of so 10 which is really spin 10 or could be spin six comma spin four is it spinner
representation used to house the quarks and leptons in which the states have a simple representation
in terms of basis states labeled by a set of plus and minus signs perhaps this suggests composite
structure now here's the sentence that just floored me alternatively one could wonder whether the
occurrence of spinners both in internal space and in spacetime is more than a coincidence
and then he pulls back immediately these are just intriguing facts they are not presently
incorporated in any compelling theoretical framework as far as i know geometric unity is that
compelling framework and one of the things i'm looking to do is i'm looking to get constructive
feedback from people who want to help me succeed as opposed to people who just want to be dicks and
what i would love is to bring your positive energy reveal go to go to geometric unity dot org
physics is the most honest way to ask the most grand questions in the universe
absolutely physics is grand those then we've got real problems and grand doesn't exist and if grand
doesn't exist then grandiose doesn't exist so my feeling is no this is the actual grand quest and
we're not going to back off it and be pussies about it
