If we go back through the history of evolutionary thinking, and actually it goes back to the
Greeks, but let's just go as far back as the 18th century, we find that basically there
have been only three real theories of evolution.
The first one is transmutationism, which is the essentialistic answer to the problem
of evolution, which means that all changes, evolution or changes, are due to mutations,
hence the name transmutationist.
Mutations that is big chunks, big saltations, the creation of new types, because transmutationism
is based on essentialism, on typology, and any change that can happen only through the
production of new types.
Now that's the first concept of evolution, and that didn't die with the proposal of
the origin of species in 1859.
For instance, D. H. Huxley, a Darwin's friend, was a transmutationist, and the last three
representatives were the German geneticist, German-American geneticist Goldschmidt, who
believed in major steps, what he called hopeful monsters.
The botanist Willis, who said that all new species originate by a single step, and finally
the paleontologist Schindelwald, who based the whole paleontological history on transmutationism.
That's the first one of the three.
The second one is transformationism, that means the gradual change.
This was, so to speak, a softening of typological thinking.
Yes, at any one given time, a type is constant, but in the course of time, a type can change.
And of course, this is where the word evolution was first used.
It was used for the development of an egg into an adult.
It is evolving.
It's transforming from the egg, the fertilized egg, to the adult individual.
And so the definition of transformationism is, it is a belief in evolution based on the
gradual change of a particular object, of a particular entity.
Such transformations, of course, we have an astronomy, changes in stars from one kind
of star to another kind.
We have it in a somewhat broader sense of the word, in geology, with the building up
of a mountain range by tectonic forces and under gradual erosion again by subsequent
thing.
So transformationism, the typical example, of course, is Lamarck's evolutionary theory,
for his little infrasurions, gradually evolved into the higher organism, plants, and mammals,
and ultimately man.
Now, that's the second of the evolutionary theories.
And the third one was Darwin's variational evolution, which said that at any given time,
you have variable populations and by the forces of selection and the genetic forces
of mutation and so forth, these variable populations gradually change from generation
to generation, and that is the evolution that Darwin believes in, and that is the evolution
which the modern evolutionist has accepted.
