Okay, well, let's get started.
So for people who are disjoining,
if you have clarification questions, ask it anytime.
It's even urgent to ask them
if you need to understand something better.
And otherwise, feel free to also interrupt
if you have other questions.
This is Andrea.
Mention that I'm unlikely to be paying
much attention to chat.
So if questions come up in the chat,
somebody alert me automatically.
Great, we'll do.
So, great.
So thanks everyone for coming.
Today we are delighted to have Andreas Blass,
a frequent contributor to our colloquium here
and on the other side,
but finally talking to us about a topos view
of axioms of choice for finite sets.
So take it away, Andrew.
Okay, thank you.
Okay, so I wanna talk about axioms of choice
for finite sets.
So the first thing I better clarify is
the axiom of choice says,
given a family of inhabited sets,
there is a function that chooses one element from each.
There's the index set of the family,
though the individual sets in the family.
Finite sets here refers to the individual sets
in the family.
Choosing from a finite family of sets
is something that can be done
in somerophonical set theory
without any use of the axiom of choice.
Finite and many choices don't require the axiom of choice
for the sake of constructivists.
If the index set is k finite with decidable equality,
then choice functions automatically exist.
So I'm gonna be talking about axioms that say,
given a, in general, infinite family of finite sets
under what circumstances can we expect a choice function?
And as far as I know, the study of this sort of thing
began with a result of Tarski, which he never published.
I think it dates from some time in the late 1920s,
but I'm not actually sure about that.
So he proved, without any use of the axiom of choice,
that if you assume that all families of two element sets
have choice functions,
then you can prove the same for every family
of four element sets.
Now, I should point out that the converse of this
is really easy, because if I know how to choose
from four element sets,
and you give me a bunch of two element sets,
I make each of them into a four element set
by taking its Cartesian product
with some fixed two element set, say zero or one.
Now I have a family of four element sets,
pick an element from each of those,
and then just take the first component
in that Cartesian product.
So in general, if I can choose from families of sets
of some cardinality,
then I can do the same for any divisor of that cardinality.
So I'm not just from four to two,
but divide by whatever number you like.
But this direction, the direction that Tarski proved
is non-trivial.
Excuse me, just a minute.
I need to, I neglected to tell my phone not to interrupt me.
You can interrupt me, but the phone shouldn't.
So let me indicate, since a colloquium should have
at least one proof,
and I might as well get it over with right away.
So let me indicate how Tarski's proof goes.
So we're given a family of four element sets.
We want to choose an element from each.
There's no loss of generality in assuming that those sets,
those four element sets are pairwise disjoint
because I can tag them with indices and so on.
I don't think I'm actually going to use that assumption,
but I'm gonna wave my hands and say this set,
that set and that set without going that set
and like that.
So given a family of four element sets,
here's what I'm going to do.
In each four element set,
choose from each of the six two element subsets
one of its elements.
I can do that by assumption.
I'm choosing from a bunch of two element sets.
Okay, choosing the element.
So from each pair within one of these four element sets,
I've made a choice.
Now let's look at what happens inside
one of these four element sets.
I've made six choices.
And I'll even wrote that on the slide.
You've made six choices.
So the four elements in the set
were not all chosen equally often
because by great good fortune four does not divide six.
So consider those elements in the four element set
that were chosen most often.
There might be just one of them.
That can happen.
You can have one element that was chosen
from all three of the pairs that contain it
and then each of the other elements
was chosen only once.
If there's a unique element chosen most often,
that picks out that one element from your four element set.
So that's your choice from that four element set.
Another easy case is a three way tie.
Three chosen equally often.
That can happen also.
Three elements can be chosen twice each
and the remaining element not chosen at all.
Well, in that case, take that remaining element.
Take the loser.
If there's a three way tie for winner, take the loser.
And let that be your chosen element
from that four element set.
The last option is that there's a two way tie
which also can happen.
You could have two elements that were chosen twice each
and the other two elements were chosen once each.
In that case, take the two winners.
That's one of the two element sets
from which you chose an element way back at the beginning.
So you just take the one you chose.
So in all cases, however the distribution of choices
works within any one four element set,
one of those four elements is singled out
and that's how you get your choice function.
Andreas, can I ask you a question?
It's not quite clarification,
but here another strategy that I just want to understand
why it's not, it doesn't work,
is I take my family F and I replace it with a family two F.
It has two F many elements
and each one is one of the original.
So I take my four element sets
and I think of them all as products of two times two.
And now I have twice as a big family of two element sets
and I just choose from each of them
using my choice function in any pair.
Each of the four element sets
to sort of tear it apart into a couple of pairs.
Yeah.
And then choose from those.
That's right.
Okay, so the first difficulty is
you need to choose how to tear it apart.
There are several ways to tear a four element set apart
into two pairs.
You can take any two elements
and the complementary two elements.
So there's some choice involved in that,
which in fact we'll see again in a couple of slides.
And so if I have a proof that they're four element sets,
can't I, isn't that an isomorphism to the number four?
And if I have a proof that they are all four element sets,
isn't that proof giving me an isomorphism to four?
If you have explicit bijections
between all of these sets and the number four,
zero, one, two, three, or one, two, three, four,
or however you want to identify the number four,
if you have those explicit bijections,
then you're in great shape
because then I just take the bijection
and apply it to one.
And that's what I'm talking about.
Okay, great.
Thank you.
Thank you.
That tells everything.
Yep, thank you.
Let me point out even after solving everything,
there's still another issue.
If suppose I had those each four element set
torn into two two element subsets.
So now I have a twice as big family of two element sets.
By assumption, I can choose an element from each.
So what used to be a four element set is now two pairs
and I've chosen one here and one there,
but I need to know which of those two, sorry.
Yeah, I've chosen one here and one there,
but I need to know which of those two chosen elements
is the one that I want from my original four element set.
I was factoring it, not separating it.
So this is, so there are a bunch of things going on here
with essentially it's a quest,
let me get ahead of myself a bit.
The real issue is what kind of structure is available
on these four element sets?
And a bijection to standard numeral four
is sort of the most structure you could possibly hope for.
Somewhat less than that would be a partition
into two two element subsets.
Somewhat less than that would be,
not somewhat more than that,
would be an ordered partition,
a two element set followed by another two element set.
And for all of these things,
one has to be rather careful to see what's actually,
how much information is really there.
As long as we're being careful,
let me, I've still got some room on the slide.
So there's some more carefulness coming.
Suppose I change the hypothesis in Tarski's theorem
just a little.
Instead of every family of two element sets,
I'm assuming it's for every countable family
of two element sets.
And I'd like to get the corresponding conclusion.
Every countable family of four element sets
has a choice function.
I claim I haven't actually proved that
or Tarski hasn't actually proved that.
That looks a little weird.
I mean, so let's go to proof.
If you have, suppose this family F
is a countable family of four element sets.
First one's an countable family,
I can assume it's actually enumerated.
First one, second one, third one,
lined up.
Now I want to choose,
I want to take all the two element subsets
and make choices from those.
Each of the four element sets gives rise
to six two element subsets.
So the number of six,
the number of two element subsets
that I need to choose from is countable times six,
which is countable.
So countable family of two element sets.
Well, no.
Unfortunately,
countably many six element sets
do not necessarily add up to a countable set.
How would you count it?
Well, you count the six things in the first one
and then you count the six elements of the second
and then the six elements of the third and so on.
But in what order are you going to count?
Well, those six elements,
you can count them one, two, three, four, five, six.
Big deal.
Yeah, but you have to choose an ordering
in which to count them
for each of those countably many sets.
So you would be using another bit of axiom of choice there
in order to say that you're dealing
with only countably many two element sets.
So Tarski with this proof
did not actually prove the countably indexed version
of the theorem.
And that's a good thing because it's false.
Not only not proved by Tarski's proof,
it's not provable in Zermelo-Franco-Sett theory.
Maybe I should say something about not provable.
Oh, Zoom says participants can now see your application.
I've been assuming you can see the slide all along.
But you can see anything else?
I'm not seeing anything else.
Okay, maybe Zoom is just slowly noticing
that you're seeing my slides.
Okay, so how does one know that something like this
can be false?
Well, one constructs models of set theory
in which it's true that every countable family
of two elements sets has a choice function.
And it's not true that every countable family
of four elements sets has a choice function.
How does one construct models of set theory
where weird stuff happens?
Well, since the 1960s, we've had this forcing technique
due to Cohen, which we used to get the independence
of continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice, it's fine.
But I'm talking about Tarski in the 1920s,
what would he have done?
I'm not sure he actually checked that it can be false,
but the methods were available.
And then with the method of permutation models,
strictly speaking, it doesn't apply to ZF.
It applies to ZF modified to allow for atoms,
things that are not sets, but can be elements of sets.
Well, the natural set theory, you know,
there's lots of stuff here like my COVID mask
and my pen and my nose and so on that are not sets,
but can be elements of sets.
In that context, it's much easier
to get independence results.
And in fact, Franco had already proved the independence
of the axiom of choice under those circumstances back in 1922.
So the notion at the bottom of the slide here
of something like this can be false.
There were methods available
to show that such things can be false.
They may not have been well known yet,
but they had been developed in particular by Franco.
Okay, the next bit of the story,
moving ahead to the 1930s,
Mostofsky analyzed the situation in more generality,
implications between axiom of choice
for sets of specified finite sizes.
I might add that in this 1937 paper of Mostofsky,
he actually did present Tarski's theorem
with Tarski's proof with correct attribution.
He says that this is a theorem of Tarski.
He presented it in the fine print.
And I really do mean fine print, literally.
I mean, it's a paper in fundamental
and this result and the proof of Tarski's
are printed in smaller type.
It's not a footnote, it's in the main text,
but it's smaller than everything else in the paper.
So this is sort of the fine print of Mostofsky's paper.
So what did Mostofsky do?
By the way, those of you who know about models
with atoms that violate the axiom of choice,
probably know them as Franco-Mostofsky models,
sometimes Franco-Mostofsky-Speccher models.
This paper and some others around the same time
are Mostofsky's contribution,
essentially generalizing Franco's method
to get a lot more independence results.
So Mostofsky obtained some number theoretic
and group theoretic conditions for proofability.
We've already seen that number of theoretic things,
at least some very simple number theory,
is relevant in Tarski's proof,
the fact that six isn't divisible by four was important,
that we don't have a four-way tie
between all the elements as to how often they get chosen.
Group theory also shows up in the idea that,
well, the amount of structure on these sets can matter.
Like, can I split them into pairs?
Do I have any structure at all on them and so on?
And this can be described in terms of
automorphism groups and so on.
So it's not, and also group theoretic ideas are involved
in the Franco-Mostofsky method
for building independence results.
So it's not surprising that he got conditions of this sort.
He had some necessary conditions
and he had some sufficient conditions,
but he didn't prove that any of his conditions
were simultaneously necessary and sufficient.
So he didn't get complete information about implications
between these various choice from finite sets principles.
Okay, so his conditions were enough
to settle a lot of cases, but not quite all.
The first question that was not settled,
and he mentions this explicitly
toward the end of the paper, is this.
Assume that you have choice from families
of three element sets, five element sets,
and 13 element sets.
Before I finish stating the question,
let me point something out.
There is an ambiguity here,
which fortunately doesn't matter,
but I should point out that it doesn't matter.
Is this three separate assumptions,
choice from three element sets,
choice from five element sets,
choice from 13 element sets,
or is it an assumption that you can choose
from any family of sets whose sizes
are among three, five, and 13,
even if they're all sort of mixed together in one family?
And the answer is it doesn't matter
because if you had them all mixed together,
you could take the subfamily of three element sets,
the subfamily of five element sets,
the subfamily of 13 element sets.
If you get choice functions for each of those subfamilies,
you could just pick one choice function for each
and glue them together to make a choice function
for the original family.
I emphasize the word pick.
Sounds dangerously like axiom of choice,
but I'm only making three choices.
And three, thank goodness, it's finite.
Okay, so it doesn't matter
which side of the ambiguity you interpret this as.
It's the same assumption in any case.
The question is, does it follow that all families
of 15 element sets have choice functions?
So this, it looks like a totally random question.
Why three, five, 13, 15?
But the answer is that essentially anything simpler than this
was settled by Mostovsky's necessary conditions
or Mostovsky's sufficient conditions.
So this was the remaining open,
well, the first remaining open problem.
And all of this was settled by Robert Gaunt
in 1970, showing that one of Mostovsky's group
theoretic sufficient conditions
is also a necessary condition.
And I'll put that condition,
I think it's on the very next slide.
Unless I inserted some intermediate groups.
In particular, choice from three element,
five element and 13 element sets
does not imply choice from 15 element sets.
Gaunt's publication record on this is somewhat sketchy.
So following in the tradition of Tarsky
with his original result,
Gaunt wrote a PhD thesis dated 1969
in which he got a lot of results
about these finite axioms of choice,
but not the sort of final solution
of Mostovsky's questions.
So that came a bit later.
I'll sit here in 1970.
His thesis results were already announced
in an abstract in the notices of the AMS in 1968.
The result I'm citing here was also announced
in the notices of the AMS in an abstract in 1970.
As far as I know, Gaunt never published us.
I think he wrote it up.
I've heard references to his preprint,
but I've never actually seen it.
Fortunately, John Truss wrote in, I think, 1973,
a rather extensive paper
in the annals of mathematical logic.
In those days, it was annals of pure and applied,
no, back then annals of mathematical logic,
now pure and applied logic.
Well, an extensive paper giving Gaunt's results
and some considerable extensions of them also.
So these results are available,
but Gaunt himself never published them.
Okay.
What did I do next?
Oh, notation, terminology, good.
So I can abbreviate stuff.
Notation choice from N element sets indexed by I.
Every I indexed family of N element sets
as a choice function.
And as you saw in the Mostovsky's 3, 5, 13, 15 problem,
will sometimes have hypotheses that say choice like this
for several ends at a time.
So I have an abbreviation for that.
If I have a set Z,
then putting that in place of N
just means same choice principle for any N in Z.
Okay.
So Tarski's theorem, for instance,
says that if you have for all I C2I,
in other words, choice from pairs,
no matter what the index that is,
then you also have for all index sets choice
from four element sets.
The result that I said earlier is false.
I said it's false if you only work
with countable things.
It's even false if you make this stronger statement
that for each individual index set,
choice from I indexed many pairs implies choice
from I indexed many four element sets.
So this is not part of Tarski's claim.
It is, however, true.
And I think this is also due to Tarski, but I'm not sure.
So if you assume for any particular index set,
choice from I indexed pairs and I indexed triples,
then you get choice from I indexed four element sets.
Okay.
And I think I actually gave a proof of that.
Oh, no, before I go to proofs,
insert some terminology here.
I refer to this last version where you do it
for each index set individually.
Get the result for this index set
from the hypotheses for the same index set.
This I call the local implication
between those choice axioms.
The sort of thing up above
where you get the result for any index set,
but assume the hypotheses
for possibly different index sets.
That I'm calling global
because you're making an assumption
about all the index sets
to get the result even for one index set.
So the local version is the stronger of the two.
Okay.
Now I think I have a proof, yeah.
So this is the proof of the local implication.
If you can choose from I indexed pairs and triples,
then also quadruples.
And the good thing about this proof is it's nice and short.
You can tell because it begins in the middle of the slide
and Beamer makes them symmetric.
So if there's that much space above,
there's going to be similarly much space below
and not much proof.
So given a family of four element sets,
whatever the index set is,
each one can be partitioned into two, two element sets.
This is what David was going to do,
but it can be done in three ways, right?
This way, this way,
and something I don't want to try with my hand.
Line the four elements up in a square
and you can cut it this way, cut it this way,
or use the two diagonals.
But of course, you can't really line them up in a square
because that picks a linear ordering of the elements.
So this is your picture.
It's how you see that there are three partitions.
But we can choose from triples as part of the assumption.
So we choose one such partition
for each of the given sets.
Now each of these, in each set,
we have the chosen partition.
It has two pieces.
We can choose from pairs.
So choose one of the two pieces of that partition.
Now we got one piece, two element subset.
We can choose from pairs, it says.
So choose an element from the chosen piece
of the chosen partition.
That's the end of the proof.
Just as well because I don't want to run out of time.
So I promised you the Mstovsky-Ghant permutation group
criteria.
So these are of when can you prove,
oops, I don't want that yet.
This is the local theorem.
So I'm trying to prove a local implication
for each index set separately.
Choice from sets of cardinality in Z
implies choice from sets of cardinality N.
And the criterion is, in group theoretic terms,
any group that can act without fixed points on N,
meaning on an N element set,
can also act without fixed points on some Z.
A fixed point is just a point that's fixed
by all the elements of the group action.
Okay.
I should be a little bit careful here.
That criterion, the group theoretic criterion,
shows up in Mstovsky's work,
shows up especially in Gantz's work.
They presented not specifically as a criterion
for this local implication.
They have it as a criterion for, say,
the implication when I is countably infinite.
And I think Truss has it more generally
when I is any well-ordered set and so on.
Andrea, someone in the chat is asking what ZFA is.
Oh, yes, good point.
ZFA is ZF with an extra A on the end for atoms.
So it's ZF modified to allow for atoms.
In fact, I should make an additional comment about that
now that it's out in the open.
I said a moment ago that,
although we now have forcing methods
to prove independence results,
back in the days of Tarsky and Mstovsky,
all that was available were these Franco-Mstovsky methods
that involved, that required actually having atoms available,
which is why they do this work in ZFA.
We're talking now also about Gantz's results, 1970.
Forcing was available and I think Gantz did use forcing.
But in fact, for the sorts of implications
that I'm talking about here,
it doesn't matter, it turns out in the end,
that whatever you can do with the easier methods
of Franco and Mstovsky could also be done
with forcing to get models that don't use atoms.
This is not entirely, no,
this is not even anywhere near trivial.
There are transfer results from models of set theory
with atoms to models of set theory
of the standard sort, pure sets, no atoms.
And the transfer, the original transfer result
is a theorem of Yech and Sochor,
which I don't think will quite cover these implications.
But David Pinkus in his PhD thesis,
which I think is around 1969,
established more general transfer results
which do cover these things.
So in fact, I could have left off the A
and avoided the question,
but since the question actually leads
to interesting information,
I'm kind of glad I left the A in there.
I should add that the actual proofs
that I end up doing whenever I do any of this stuff,
I just use the atoms
and then rely on Pinkus' transfer theorems.
Okay, it may very well be
that the first place where literally this theorem is proved
is in a paper of mine on interaction
between set theory and category theory from 1983.
But the ideas are the same
as in the work of Mostofsky and Gaunt.
It's just specializing it down to the specific local case
rather than countable sets, well-ordered sets, whatever.
There is a similar result for the global case.
So again, N and Z are arbitrary.
Z is a finite set of natural numbers here.
Finite is important to avoid that ambiguity
I talked about earlier.
So the first board item here is the global implication.
If choice holds from Z element sets, no matter how indexed,
then it also holds from N element sets,
no matter how indexed.
So this is a weaker statement than the local version.
And the group theoretic criterion is very similar.
Group that can act without fixed points on N
can also act, no, not can also act,
has a subgroup that can act
without fixed points on some number in Z.
So the difference between the local and the global
is that in the local group theoretic criterion,
the group itself that acts without fixed points on N
should act without fixed points on something in Z,
whereas in the global, it's a subgroup that does the job.
Okay, so those are the theorems of Mostofsky and Gaunt.
I promise to say something about topoi
in the topos colloquium.
So I think that would be a good idea.
Fortunately, I don't need much information about topoi.
So I'm gonna say some generalities.
I'm not even gonna define what they are.
Can I, sorry, can I ask a small question
before you continue, please?
So just on the previous slide, I was wondering like,
can you give, so you've already told us that like the,
sorry, let me get this right,
that the local statement for two and four isn't true, right?
This is, can you give like an example of a group?
Maybe it's obvious and I'm missing it.
What is the group that like is that?
It's not entirely obvious.
So I need to give you a group that can act
without fixed points on a four element set,
but cannot act without fixed points on a two element set.
And I'm gonna say the group,
but the natural group that does this
is the alternating group on four points.
It acts, in fact, transitively on the four points.
So it's about fixed points.
But the crucial thing is that it has no subgroup of index two.
It's a group of order 12
with no subgroup of order six.
So it has no quotient of order two.
And if you're gonna act on a two element set
without fixed points,
you have to have,
that's a homomorphism onto the permutations of the two elements.
Okay.
And just to finish that train of thought
before I derail onto something else,
the construction of the Trankel-Mostowski model,
where choice holds from say,
countably many two element sets,
but not countably many four element sets,
that Trankel-Mostowski model is built
using a set of atoms that is countable union
of some four element sets
and a group of permutations that's essentially
the direct product of the alternating groups
in each of those four element sets.
So the same group that goes into the second bullet item
ends up being used also in the first bullet item.
Just in a slight way.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
Okay.
Oh, now that I'm looking at chat,
I see that there are questions there.
Is there, take a look, what's in chat?
CFA, must the subgroup be non-trivial?
If you're gonna act without fixed points on a set,
then you have to be non-trivial,
except for degenerate cases, right?
When can a trivial group act on a set
by not moving anything?
So everything is a fixed point.
So if it's gonna act without fixed points on a set,
that set is going to be empty.
And that's just as well,
because we don't want N to be,
we don't wanna do choice from zero element sets,
nor do we wanna do choice from one element sets.
The former is always false, the latter is always true.
So forget those.
Yeah, fixes every element.
Okay, yeah.
All right, so I am out of chat again.
What's a tuples?
So this is how we should think of a tuples
for the purpose of this talk.
It's a category that's like the category
of sets and functions.
And it lets you do most of the constructions
that you do in ordinary set theory.
Unions, power sets, Cartesian products,
sets of functions, all kinds of stuff like that.
So similar that it makes sense to speak of structures.
Structures in the usual sense of logic,
a set with a bunch of relations and functions, all right?
And to interpret first order
and even higher order formulas in such structures.
So first order formulas,
you wanna know that you can interpret equality,
interpret relations holding of some elements,
interpret functions applied to elements.
For higher order,
you might have power sets and spaces of functions and so on.
A tuples gives you all of that, okay?
Higher order, intuitionistic logic
is sound for these interpretations in any tuples.
In some tuples, but not all,
classical logic is sound.
Those are called Boolean tuples,
in honor of George Boole who invented classical logic.
Well, that's an interesting one, I guess.
The most important tuples in this talk
will in fact be Boolean,
but the general theorems are going to be
about arbitrary tuples.
So higher order, intuitionistic logic is sound.
I don't want to say anything else.
Oh yeah, a small convention.
I wanna use tuples.
A tuples can be an elementary tuples,
I don't need growth and decay or anything like that,
but I do want to have a natural number object.
I do want, I did want,
I'm not sure I really need it,
but I've written out the proofs carefully
only in the case when there is a natural number object.
I think they can be transported
even when there isn't one.
Just to cover myself in case I mess something up,
assume there's a, assume the axiom of infinity.
Let me point out also that
interpretations of sentences
in this so-called internal logic
or the interpretation of sentences in a tuples
may not look exactly like
what one would sometimes think of
even in category theoretic terms.
And maybe I will postpone saying any more about that
until I get to some examples.
So here are some things about topology.
I'll start with the important examples for this talk.
Well, I guess the first important example
is the category of sets.
I'm doing set theory.
But there's a variant of that.
Given any set i,
I can form the tuples of i-indexed families of sets,
which has two standard names, sets to the i,
that's reasonable.
I indexed family of sets as a function
from the index set i to sets.
Another name set slash i or set over i
refers to a standard way of representing a family of sets
within the universe of sets as a single object,
not just as a function.
You think of the index set as laid out horizontally
and stacked up over each index
is the set that it indexes.
So you're sort of thinking of this joint union
of all the sets in the indexed family.
This is a tuples.
Its whole structure sort of works index by index.
So a structure, let's say a group in this tuples
would consist of an i-indexed family of groups.
And a statement about the groups,
like say this group is abelian,
would be, well, might be true
for some indices and false in others.
Its truth value would be the set
of those indices where it's true.
So the truth values in this tuples
are subsets of the index set.
There are variants of this.
You can take a model of ZF
rather than the standard category of sets.
And it doesn't have to be real ZF.
You can allow atoms so you could use ZFA.
You don't need the axiom of replacement.
You don't need the axiom of regularity.
So there's a good deal.
A model of a reasonable set theory
is going to be a tuples.
And in fact, the Boolean tuples.
Also you could do M over i for any object
that would consist of the object
in this so-called sliced tuples would be i.
And something with a map to i,
the idea being that the fibers of the map
are supposed to represent the sets indexed
by the elements of i.
So this is one of the important examples.
And we'll see in a minute why it's important.
Another important example, fix a group G.
There is a tuples whose objects are sets
with a specified action of G.
So the same set with different actions
is a different object.
The morphisms in this tuples
are functions that commute with the action.
Okay, this is another nice example of a Boolean tuples.
So these are the important examples.
I think the next slide is an important example.
I didn't say it that way, more examples.
But this is just there to indicate
that there are a lot of tuples around.
Instead of using a group in that last example,
you could use a monoid.
That would not be a Boolean tuples anymore
unless the monoid happened to be a group.
You can get intuitionistic logic,
Kripke models constitute a tuples,
a generalization of that pre-sheaves on a small category,
further generalization sheaves
on topological spaces or sites.
There are realizability tuples.
For category, no, these are good for category theorists.
For set theorists, here's one to two one.
Take some model of set theory
and look at the sub-universe of ordinal definable sets.
And I did not say hereditary ordinal definable.
I mean ordinal definable.
You can have an ordinal definable non-empty set
that doesn't have any ordinal definable elements.
So in this tuples, it could be internally true,
true in the internal logic
that this particular object has members,
but it may not have any maps to it from one in the tuples
because they're no ordinal definable members.
Strange things can happen between the internal logic
and what you see actually present in the category.
Okay, back to the important examples.
I wanna say a little bit about
these I indexed families of sets.
So this is a tuples, my first important example.
An object is an indexed family of sets.
It is in the internal sense,
in the logic of that tuples, an n-element set,
just in case each of the sets in the family
is an n-element set.
It's about the simplest you could hope for.
A point, well, in general,
a point of an object in any tuples
is a morphism from the terminal object one,
into X.
A point, in this example,
is therefore for each index,
a map from standard one element set into X sub i,
that's a choice function.
Points are choice functions.
The internal logic didn't ask about choices.
It just said each one individually is an n-element set.
There's no guarantee that in general,
without choice, that that implies
the existence of a point.
And that's the first crucial thing.
Okay, I'm gonna gloss over that.
Put other models of set theory in there, it still works.
So to say choice from i-indexed families of n-element sets
is just to say that in this tuples,
every n-element set in the sense of internal logic
has a point.
I think I have an abbreviation for that.
Yes, to say that in this tuples,
e, every n-element set in the sense of internal logic
has a point.
I'm going to abbreviate as e-p
for existence of points in n-element objects in e.
And same as before with the choice principles.
If I put a z in there, a set of numbers,
I mean for each of those numbers individually.
Back to the second of the important examples.
A g-set, so we're looking at the tuples of sets
with a left action of g.
Under what circumstances is that an n-element object
in the sense of the internal logic?
Well, you have to do a little computation
and it turns out that it just means the set has n elements
and don't care how the group acts.
Again, about as simple as you could hope for it.
A point, however, in a g-set is an element
that's fixed by all the group elements.
It's a fixed point of the group action.
So my existence of points principles
for when interpreted in the sense of tuples g-set
says every action of g on an n-element set has a fixed point.
And the same with z in place of n, big deal.
Those observations on the previous slides,
let me state the local version of the Moustavsky-Gunk results
in the tuples language and they come out
with a remarkably uniform.
The choice principle says if you take a tuples
of the form slice of a model of zf over an object i,
e-p existence of points for z implies existence of points for n.
And the group theoretic condition says same implication,
e-p-z-e implies e-p-n-e,
but now for tuples of the form g-set.
The two equivalent conditions of Moustavsky and Gunt
are tuples theoretically saying the same thing,
but for two very different looking classes of tuples.
So it is reasonable to ask, well,
what is there anything like this,
are there equivalences for other classes of tuples?
Is there anything like this going on more generally?
What other sorts of tuples does this apply to?
Or maybe there are two other classes
that are equivalent in the same way,
but not equivalent to these classes.
What's going on?
And that's the first of the main theorems,
since I have like two minutes,
that's one minute worth theorem.
This is the general local theorem.
The first two bullet points are what was on the previous slide.
And the third one is the new result for every tuples.
Take seven more minutes.
Okay.
You can have seven more minutes, yeah.
Okay.
All right, I'll talk slower.
As you wish.
The point is that for this to happen
in slices of models of set theory
and for this to happen in sets with a group action,
if that happens,
it's gonna happen in absolutely every tuples,
not even necessarily bullier.
Monoid actions, sheaves, all kinds of stuff.
Of course, one implication is trivial.
If it happens in all tuples,
then it happens in these examples.
The essential part of the proof is to get from,
well, the way the proof works is you start
with the group fixed point,
the Mostoski Gaunt criterion in terms of groups,
and you try to prove this in an arbitrary tuples.
The argument is similar to what was done
in going from the group criterion
to the choice functions principle by Mostoski
and later by Gaunt.
But of course, it has to be adapted
and manipulated a little, let's say,
to apply to arbitrary tuples.
The global theorem, well, that's a long one, isn't it?
So let me pick out the important stuff.
But what number one is global implication.
The Z-choice principle for all index sets
implies the N-choice principle for all index sets.
It's the global implication
of the sort that Mostoski was looking at originally.
The second board is translating that
into tuples theoretic terms
and the globalization shows up here.
That the assumption, to get the conclusion
about the tuples E, you need the assumption
not only for E, but for indexed families from E.
You don't need very big indexed families.
Indexed set can be a finite decidable object in E,
but you do need something.
This is like back in the original Tarski story
to prove something about countably many four element sets.
You needed something for not so countably many
two element sets, but the not so countably many
were only like six times more than the countably many.
It was a set of pairs from these four element sets
had a six to one map
onto the original family of four element sets.
So it's that six to one family
that's being abstracted here into this F.
Bullet item three is the Mostoski Gaunt criteria
for global implications.
Bullet item four is a tuples theoretic translation of that
into G sets.
And again, it differs from what we had in the local theorem
by having here not just E itself,
but all its slices over finite decidable objects.
And then the last bullet item is not just observing results
from before, but getting new information
that justice in the local theorem works for every tuples.
Okay, so those are the two theorems.
I'm certainly not going to try to prove them,
but I will say something,
I think all that's left here is about expected extensions.
There should be more theorems.
Let me describe what I think is going to be low hanging fruit,
but I haven't actually plucked it off the tree yet.
Choice principles like, before I put the choice principle,
let me wave my hands.
The choice principles we've been talking about
are given a bunch of sets and elements,
but no particular structure at all on them.
We got a choice function,
which is putting a very particular structure,
namely particular point.
Oh, okay.
I guess Paul has a question,
but let me just finish one slide
and then I'll shut up and thank you.
I was wondering where it meant to be asked you at the end.
Okay, you're getting first in line, huh?
Okay, what I'm going to do now
is work with, I'll use the magic word,
other species of structures.
Instead of having something completely unstructured
and trying to get a structure consisting
of a single chosen point in it,
you could do a lot of other things.
Here's a random example.
Given a family of seven element sets
with specified orientations,
any seven element setters or six simplex,
it has two orientations.
Suppose I picked one truth.
I'm giving these seven element sets,
but I'm also giving an orientation on each.
Might there be a function picking
for each of them a three element subset?
So this is a randomly chosen example
of a choice principle involving some structures
other than the usual ones.
In this case, orientations, three element subsets.
There should be group theoretic criteria.
They will concern groups that act on a seven element set
preserving an orientation,
but not preserving any three elements subset.
That's the analog of acting on a set
without any fixed points.
And the topos theoretic versions will be about objects
which in the sense of internal logic
have seven elements and an orientation.
And then asking whether there was a point
in the object of three element sub-objects,
which I think is just asking,
is there monomorphism from three into one?
No, I take that back.
That would be an ordering.
A monomorphism from a family of three element sub-objects.
Three element objects.
There should be equivalences
for the set theoretic and group theoretic things,
I believe this is already in John Truss's paper from 1973.
And I am reasonably convinced
that it should be straightforward
to generalize that to arbitrary toe point.
Okay, and I think that is exactly where I should stop.
So I know Paul has a question.
And I see-
But first, let's first thank Andrea.
So everyone can unmute and or just clap your emojis.
You can have friends.
Okay, I don't mind.
But yes, Paul would you like to ask a question?
Yeah, it's not often I say to a set theory
that's a lovely talk.
It's a lovely talk.
Thank you.
So I was thinking,
so my,
that the natural example of where you would,
you would, you would not accept choice would be something like
choosing square roots on the on the unit circle of the complex plane.
Ah, correct.
Right, so in other words, I'm think, so I, being more technical, I'm generalising your
your your results to sheaves over some in some gimmicks.
I wonder whether whether the arguments continue to work and
and perhaps you could even put a number theoretic interpretation on the theorem.
This is, no, I'm not sure we can get a number theoretic interpretation but the
results should, unless I made a mistake, the results, I should make a comment on that,
but that can come later.
So let's see, if you take, let's pick square roots of points on, so we're going to take
the unit circle on the complex plane, and we would like to pick a square root for each one,
but when we do that continuously, we find ourselves at the antipodes.
Okay, so that means, what does that mean in in chief terms?
It means that we've got the double cover of the circle, something which in that
chief topos, in the internal logic, has two elements.
It is internally isomorphic to the set zero one, but it has no point.
There's no continuous map from one, which is the circle, to two, which is this
W-ound circle.
So what I called EP2 for the topos of sheaves over the circle fails.
Now Tarski will come along and say, well, if it held, then we could also do tries from four
elements.
We have to work a bit to think of geometrical interpretations of the George principle.
Geometrical interpretations are going to be things where,
let me see, let me go out on a limb here because I haven't thought about this, but
it seems to me that what would be important in cases like this, at least the following would
be important, maybe other things too.
But what would be important would be things about the fundamental group of the space that
you're taking sheaves over, because choice principles like this, see, what's happening
here is that the fundamental group of that circle has a quotient of order two, and that's
why there's a two-fold covering.
And what one would want, I guess a better way to say it, is that quote, that fundamental group
acts on a two-element set without fixed points.
And I would expect that the one relevant thing for merging sheaf pictures with their
toe point, my results apply allegedly to them, but to see the connection, I think one will
end up with having at least the fundamental groups of those spaces connecting with the
groups in the Mostovsky-Gant characterizations and probably also with the groups involved
in building the Franco-Mostovsky models.
So I claim, without any solid evidence, without having thought about it very much,
that there should be a connection between all of this, all the group theoretic things I ever
mentioned in this talk, and the fundamental groups of the spaces over which you want to take
sheaves. And I think this fits reasonably well with Grottenbeek's ideas of fundamental groups
being essentially defined in terms of covering spaces,
rather than in terms of loops in the space and so on, because here we're dealing with
coverings with sheaves over this thing and so on. So, okay, I should, I've talked enough about
what I don't know. You claim that your results were general, were the whole thing. My results,
if correct, they say for all toe point, that includes the topos of sheaves over the circle.
Yeah, okay, well, very nice. Let me digress for a moment as to whether these results are correct.
So far, I have followed the great tradition of Tarsky and Gant in that, although I first talked
about these results at a conference almost two years ago, I haven't yet written up the paper,
and I've got a few pages done, but not much. So Tarsky didn't publish his stuff, Gant didn't
publish his stuff, and there's some danger here, continuation of the tradition.
This last slide is my current excuse for not having things written up, because I think there are some
extensions that should be fairly easily proved by the same methods, and I would want to check that
they in fact do work and can be included in the paper. Okay, well, thanks for the question, Paul,
and the answer, Andreas. And I think we should stop the live stream and thank Andreas again.
And then, yeah, let's do that. Thanks again.
