Okay, so yes, I'm going to give a little introduction to some of the ideas from categorical logic.
So I would say this talk will be in a similar spirit to the one by David Jazz Meyers where
the goal is to just introduce you to a mathematical abstraction that is powerful and broadly useful.
So this set of ideas has influenced me a lot.
So I hope you find something interesting in it.
I should also say that categorical logic is now a pretty big subject.
So I'm just going to introduce certain aspects of it and mainly focus on examples.
But first I want to start by trying to motivate why one might want an approach to logic that
while no longer young is still considered fairly unconventional in the broader sort of
math and world.
So most mathematicians and philosophers and computer scientists will know something about
first order logic or it has these familiar connectives.
So if everyone knows about this, shouldn't that be good enough for everyone?
And I want to argue that no, it's not.
And there's actually several reasons why this is the case.
One reason is that in many settings, it's too general for its own good.
So that if you have certain kinds of theories that have a more kind of constrained structure,
for example, the algebraic theories are equational in nature, then this structure is sort of
obscured by the formalism of first order logic.
But there's a more important reason than this to that it's too general, which is that
the richer the logic, your logical system is the fewer kinds of semantics that you can
assign to it.
So that the fewer types of models you can have for its theories.
And we'll see very concretely this idea later.
But yet for all that, it also manages to not be general enough for certain purposes.
So it doesn't easily accommodate unconventional semantics.
So for example, one thing which I hope to get to at the end if there's time is non-determinism
or probabilistic aspects.
So one can encode probability theory into first order logic, but first one has to sort
of write down a whole lot of the theory of real analysis to even get there.
So if you want to have sort of more of a first class view on non-determinism, you want to
sort of if you want to sort of bake that into your logical system, then categorical logic
gives you tools to approach that.
And so for all these reasons, I argue that we should take a pluralistic view of logic
rather than having one logical system to rule them all.
We should have a flexible framework for constructing logical systems.
And so how might one go about doing that?
I mean, after all, you can always just, you can always, if you think of logical systems
as just sets of rules for manipulating symbols, you can always write down some rules.
But how do you know whether they're any good or how do you know whether they relate to
other systems?
And so this is where we can draw on a broad tradition in modern mathematics, which is
something that's called mathematical structuralism.
So rather than studying specific objects in their properties, such as the natural numbers
or other certain number systems, we're going to study abstract structures, the axiomatized
aspects of those systems, and we're going to study the relations of those structures
to each other.
So, you know, for example, in classical abstract algebra, we would study groups and rings.
And algebra has played a central role in this approach to mathematics.
And so one way to think about categorical logic is that it's a way of being structuralist
about logic itself.
We're going to apply the structuralist philosophy to study logic itself.
And in this sense, I think there's something sort of anti-reductionist about categorical
logic.
So in the traditional conception of the role of logic in mathematics, the logical system
is at the foundation, and mathematics is this great edifice built on top of it.
But categorical logic sort of turns that on its head a bit, because now we're going
to make logic into just a part of mathematics itself.
It's not going to have any really special status, and moreover, we're going to study
it using the same methods that we study other things in mathematics, in particular, we're
going to use algebra.
And within that, we're going to use methods of category theory.
OK, so there's a lot more that can be said about these sort of philosophical ideas, but
I'll leave it at that, and now I want to try to get into some of the basic ideas here.
So here is a, to the first approximation, categorical logic establishes the following
dictionary between category theory and logic.
Right, so to a rough approximation, categorical logic establishes this dictionary.
So we're going to think of logical theories as corresponding to small categories, and
we're going to think of functors out of those categories into some category S, which for
now we can just think of this usual category of sets and functions.
Those will be models of the theories, and then natural transformations between those
functors will play the role of model homomorphisms, and so I'll make this bit more concrete shortly.
But first I should say that this table's a bit misleading, and that usually we're going
to want the categories to have some extra structure.
And it's precisely this choice of extra structure that will give us different logical systems.
So by kind of equipping our categories with various kinds of extra gadgets, that was what
allows us to have different logics.
And then once we've done that, we'll want the functors and natural transformations to
preserve this additional structure.
I'll skip this last remark.
Okay, so I'm going to begin with algebraic theories, which is appropriate because that's
where categorical logic began with Lawyer's study of algebraic theories.
And so a Lawyer's theory is a certain kind of category, in this case a Cartesian category,
whose objects are freely generated by one distinguished object.
And that last condition sounds a little odd, but the purpose of it is to essentially make
this represent a single-sorted algebraic theory.
So to give an example of this, the theory of monoids is going to be a Cartesian category,
which is generated by two morphisms that look like this.
So these are drawing these as string diagrams, so you read them from top to bottom.
So this first one is like the monoid multiplication, and it has two inputs and one output, and
the second one is the monoid unit, and it has a single output.
And then it's subject to these equations, which the first one is associativity, and
the second one is unitality.
But the point I want to make here is that Lawyer's theories represent single-sorted
algebraic theories in a syntax invariant way.
So I'm drawing these using string diagrams.
I could also draw them using just like symbols, and that would represent the same thing.
So this is already a departure from conventional logic, where logical theories are fundamentally
syntactical objects.
That is not quite the case anymore.
And we'll see more about this idea.
Okay, but first I want to give one more example.
So the theory of groups basically is what you get by taking this theory of monoids and
adding another generating morphism, this thing I, which is supposed to represent the inverse
operation in the group, and then these two equations asserting that this thing acts as
a left and a right inverse on every element.
And so this black thing at the top of the diagram is representing the operation of copying.
So it's copying the input and then applying the inverse to it in the identity and then
checking that once you apply the multiplication, you get back the original element.
And so in accordance with the general dictionary, a model of a Lawyer's theory will be a Cartesian
functor out of this category C and to the category of sets and functions.
And so as you would expect, a model of the theory of groups is indeed a group.
And moreover, the monoidal natural transformations between these models are the group homomorphisms.
So this is just a sanity check that this is reproducing the right thing.
Evan, can I interrupt?
I think there's a typo on this because it shouldn't the middle thing be like it stops
and then puts out the identity element every time.
The middle thing?
The middle?
Yeah, shouldn't that be like a black dot stopping it and then like a unit?
No, because this is the law that...
Isn't this A times A inverse is E?
Is the identity?
Oh, good point.
Let's see.
You're right.
Yeah.
Sorry.
That's a typo.
That's a typo.
Sorry about that.
I'll fix that in those slides.
Thank you.
Okay.
Okay.
So we've seen one way in which Lawyer theories are sort of invariant, but there's a deeper
sense of this.
So let's explain that.
So what I just gave a module of that typo is the sort of standard presentation of the
theory of groups.
But actually there are lots of different equivalent ways to axiomatize a group that may be less
familiar, but some of them are actually kind of interesting.
So here's one where we...
It turns out an equivalent way to define a group is as a set.
Equipped with a binary operation, which represents division and a constant E, satisfying some
equations.
And so we interpret this as like G divided by H is supposed to be G times H inverse.
And so we could write down a Lawyer theory that is presented by morphisms corresponding
these operations and subject to the three corresponding equations.
And that will give me another category.
And these categories aren't equal, but they are isomorphic.
And the isomorphism between them is what's going to basically map these operations and
one into the corresponding thing and together.
And so the point here is that theories and categorical logic are not the same.
They're not syntactical things.
They're algebraic ones, and hence they're invariant to differences of presentation.
So let me note the long shift involved here.
So if you've learned about groups and abstract algebra, you learned that there are different
ways of presenting a group, but they all define the same mathematical object up to isomorphism.
Well, here, you know, the theory of groups is now being presented by generators and relations
effectively in different ways of presenting it gives rise to the same mathematical object.
I'm confused by this notation.
Should the prime be on the inside of the parentheses on the right side?
Yeah, the notation's a little loose there because I'm sort of writing theory of groups as if
this.
Are you changing the theory functor or are you changing the yeah so what I'm saying here is that you should just think of rather than thinking of this as a mapping from the category groups to some kind of theory just
is the category group and not a representation.
Yeah, so, so just think of both. Yeah, so don't read. Yeah, that is a little.
Is there a variable here for the presentation itself.
No, so yeah, so to this theory, this theory groups just represents the, the law of your theory, their Cartesian category presented by those things. And so, and the prime here is the one corresponding to this other way of maximizing it.
Okay, so you could instead of said, there's some theory operation, and then you've got two different presentations and the theory of the first presentation is isomorphic to the theory of the second presentation.
Yeah, I could.
Okay, so, so now we come to another powerful aspect of categorical logic, which is the idea of functorial semantics.
So so far we've been considering semantics in this category on the category of sets and functions which is certainly sort of the default setup, but the semantics category can be replaced with any category that has the needed structure.
But the semantics category can be replaced with any category that has the needed structure. So in the case of law of your theories, we can say that by give you any Cartesian category s, I can say that a model of a law of your theory in that category is just a Cartesian
C to S. And this is a pretty distinctive feature of categorical logic and it allows you to interpret theories in other kinds of settings. So here's sort of some classic examples like you can say that a group object is going to be in a particular Cartesian
category, which is going to be a model of the theory of groups in that category. And, you know, so we've seen that a group object and set is, of course, a group, and you can also recover some other famous mathematical concepts by just saying, oh wait, what's a group object in this
category so a group object in category of topological spaces or topological group, a group object in the category of smooth manifolds is a lead group.
So it turns out that you unpack what's going on a group object in the category of group actions by some fixed group G turns out to be a group that is a semi direct product by by G.
So it's a favorite hobby of category theorists to, you know, look for group objects and monitor objects as we'll see in various places and see what you get.
But so having arrived at this point of view, though, we can start to understand why it's useful to not have a single logical system but to have ones that are also weaker.
Because the less structure your logical system has, the more categories s you can choose to take semantics in and this is a very powerful thing.
So, you know, we've been considering while your theories, these are Cartesian monotone categories, and what's shown above here are some are some successive sort of weakening of the structure involved.
So we can look at various kinds of what are some is called like my noodle theories.
In the single sort of case they correspond to these things called props and pros.
And so I won't fully unpack this table.
There's a lot going on here but what I will say is that we saw previously the theory of monoids.
And it turns out that, you know, we don't actually need the full structure of a library theory to express that we can express the theory of monoids and in any, any pro.
The advantage of this is that we can look at models of the theory of monoids called monoid objects in any old monotone category.
So I couldn't resist putting this in here so it's sort of a notorious joke about category theory that oh a monad on a category is a monoid in this category of endofunctors well that is a true statement.
But it's, it's also just an instance of this principle of, of functorial semantics and I want to make the point that I'm not terribly interested in monads in this talk but what I do want to make is the point that the theories of
commutative monoids can't be expressed in this category because this category of endofunctors isn't symmetric monoidal.
So, so this really shows why it's useful to be able to fit, fit logical theories into sort of their the weakest sort of system that can accommodate them.
Okay, so to zoom out a little bit. Here's what you might call a family tree of some of the sort of most studied parts of categorical logic. So I just want to include this to give you a flavor so we've sort of seen that.
So this project began with algebraic theories with lobby of theories and we've seen that you can successfully remove structure and there's value in doing that. You can also sort of success, successfully add structure.
So there's sort of a progression from Cartesian categories to regular categories which corresponds to a fragment of first order logic called regular logic on to coherent logic and finally to elementary topos is which are formalizing
basically a kind of intuitionistic first order logic and there's also a sort of branch of the family tree here which is more traditionally associated with computer science involving lambda calculus and Cartesian closed categories.
So, I'm not going to get into this here but it this is it is a bit useful to have this is sort of a lay of some of the land.
It's on time.
You're doing okay. We're near the end but don't feel too rushed. Okay, so I'll wrap up pretty soon. So just to conclude, I want to kind of explore a more non conventional branch of the family tree.
And so this this is kind of getting closer to things that I've worked on myself.
And, and so this is the idea of a weakening of Cartesian categories to these things called Markov categories which believe Toby already mentioned in his, his talk.
So by, and this will allow us to accommodate non determinism in a way that that doesn't really fit into the lobby theories and their more expressive systems very well.
So, one of the things that did.
So, the objective here is to try to upgrade our dictionary to include also some ideas from statistics now so.
It's actually a quite a tradition in the philosophy of science and statistics of thinking of statistical models as being somehow actually related to the idea of models and logic but but the purpose of this is to actually try to try to make that precise and put some mathematical
thinking on that idea. And so, we're going to.
So, so these Markov categories, I feel like I feel like I'm missing a slide but but the idea here is that a Markov category.
It weakens the copying axiom in a Cartesian category to accommodate non determinism and at this point I'm just giving a very sort of broad sketch. But the idea here is that within this logical system and you upgrade it further with some linear algebraic ideas, which are needed to talk
about a lot of kind of everyday statistical models you can you can start to express a variety of common statistical models in it within this sort of framework.
And that simple one at the bottom is the theory of what you might call ID samples so any statistical model which you get by just taking an ID sample from some distribution say in times, it will be a model of this theory, but you can put on more structure,
so a more structured thing. This is sort of a classic model right this is the, the linear model on in observations and if this doesn't make sense, that's okay I'm just trying to just to sketch the, the, the flavor here so we can represent, we can also present this.
And we can see here the repeated structure so the coefficients, so in these diagrams at the top we have the, we have the parameters of the model the regression coefficients beta and the variant sigma squared, and at the bottom are the samples coming out of this this thing.
Okay, so I will, I will stop there.
Here's some references and I did, I somehow I, I seem to have lost a slide that had some more references about Markov categories.
I'm not sure how that happened, but at least the references are here so a number of people have have worked on these ideas and some of them are included.
Okay, so thank you.
