All right, so this talk is called the Universal Library,
a novel approach to teaching category theory.
So my name is Paul Danstep.
I was an educator at a science museum called
the Exploratorium for about 17 years.
So I'm really interested in public communication
around science.
And I started learning category theory about four or five
years ago.
I'm very much an amateur.
I think I take a journalistic interest in category theory.
But what was really fascinating to me in learning it
was that it was difficult in a way
that no other mathematics I had struggled to learn
before had been.
It felt like it was really hinged around a shift
in perspective or paradigmatic psychological move.
And I'm really curious to understand that better.
And I think as a pedagogical strategy
to try and come up with ways of assisting people
and scaffolding them through that transition.
So I want to present, I think, a pretty experimental idea
for how you might approach trying to explain category
theory and how I think it might help
with some of the typical problems a person encounters.
So one way to characterize it, or the difficulty of learning
category theory, this is from the beginning of Emily Reels'
textbook.
It is difficult to preview the main theorems of category
theory before developing fluency in the language needed
to state them.
And I think this is very true.
Like the early stages, you're being
given a lot of abstractions, which
aren't even necessarily complicated.
They're just really peculiar relative to what you're used to.
And you've got to get through a pretty long onboarding
of these abstractions.
So in terms of learning category theory,
you have books like Emily's and these other ones.
And I would consider these hard introductions
to categories just in the sense that they presume,
the presumptive audience is mathematicians.
You're expected to know a good deal about algebraic topology
and logic and abstract algebra.
And then this language is going to be explained to you
in terms of those subjects.
And that is an excellent way to show category theory off
at its best, because it's showing exactly how powerful
and versatile it is.
There are some other more friendly introductions,
conceptual mathematics by Laverre and David's book,
I feel, take a somewhat broader sense of who their audience is
and really do try to do more to equip the learner with what
they need as they go along.
And then I was saying, the only real general audience book
I know that really treats category theory is Eugenia
Chang's How to Bake a Pie.
And this book is kind of amazing because it
is a totally great, adequate explanation of what category
theory is, but it doesn't explain anything
about the contents of category theory.
You don't learn what a functor is.
You don't learn what a natural transformation is.
I would say it's a category theorist's explanation
of her subject, which is that she doesn't reveal
any of the contents.
She just specifies it by saying how
it's related to everything else, like math and logic
and cooking.
So what I'm proposing today is that I
think there's room for another sort of class
of instructional material that's somewhere between these
that, on the one hand, is not really
trying to make a mathematician out of the reader
or the person interacting with it, whatever it is,
but is really just trying to inform them
about the big ideas of an important subject.
And really, more like the books on the right
does really take the abstracts or the structures
of elementary category theory, like limits and co-limits
and adjoinness as the objective to try and give people
some meaningful contact with.
Some books that I think go in this category,
there's a book by Raymond Smollion called
To Mock a Mockingbird, and it's basically
a toy treatment of combinatorial logic.
The story is you're going through a forest
and there's all these birds, which are technically
combinators, and they have a way when they hear
one bird call, they have another bird call that they say.
And with the benefit of this toy model,
Smollion is able to go through all kinds of stuff
from computability theory and like Gertl's theorem
and other things.
Another one I really like is that is also similar
to what I'm going to present today
is Serial Numbers by Don Knuth.
Supposedly John Horton Conway came up with Serial Numbers
while studying mathematics and he told the axioms
to Don Knuth who then like went into a reverie
and like got a hotel room and like wrote this book
in a few weeks, and the whole thing is just a dialogue
between a man and a woman who find the axioms
of Serial Numbers etched in stone and then spend the book
like problem solving and figuring it out together.
So this is kind of bespoke, self-contained strategies
for dealing with a technically sophisticated subject
in a fun kind of recreational way.
So the model I want to propose for trying to explain
elementary category theory, I first learned about
from a story by Jorge Luis Borges called
the Library of Babel.
The premise of this story is that the universe
is just this seemingly endless series of rooms
filled with books, it's a big library.
And if you look at any of the books, they're all just
your brish, it's just like random letters.
And what they gradually figure out in the story
is that they're sitting on like every
combinatorially possible book that could be written.
So somewhere out there there's AAAAA and somewhere else
there's AAAAA with just a B at the end and so on.
So the story kind of trips out on all the weird stuff
that must be in there, there's a detailed history
of the future, a faithful catalog of the library,
thousands and thousands of false catalogs,
the proof of the falsity of those false catalogs,
the true story of your death, the translation
of every book into every language, the interpolations
of every book into all books.
So it's a great little philosophical object,
it's a beautiful story, but it also has a lot of
sort of mathematical value.
There's a lot of people who have taken this up
in different ways, the logician, Willard von Ormann-Quine
has a really nice little essay in this book
where he sort of stages a mock discovery
of binary notation by thinking about how to make
the library smaller.
This book has a explanation of the Banach-Tarski paradox
which is kind of a paradox from set theoretic geometry
where you can take a sphere and divide it
into a finite number of parts and reassemble it
into two spheres of the same volume as the first.
Ian Stewart kind of takes the library
and describes a dissection method based on the letters
that sort of matches the Banach-Tarski dissection.
There's actually a whole book by the mathematician
William Block which just goes through
or his library from the perspective of number theory,
topology I think.
Anyway, you can make a little mathematical meal
out of all of the different ways of looking at this library.
And what I've been thinking about for the last year or so
is that there actually is a way to look at the library
and embellish it a little bit and turn it
into the category Fin set.
So it's the category of finite sets and functions.
And kind of my claim is that I think that this metaphor,
this analogy is actually an adequate setting
within which to kind of characterize
basic category theory.
So the plan for this talk is I'm just gonna explain
how to think of the universal library as Fin set
and that's actually the whole talk it took me.
It's gonna take me as many slides.
As much talking as I can do in one sitting
is what it's gonna take.
So at the end I'll just make some overtures
about where I think this could go.
I have some outline about how you might be able
to show limits and co-limits, adjointness
and representables using this mental model.
I should say that my motive in bringing,
I've just kind of had this thought to myself
for the last year or so and I thought it was mature enough
that it would be interesting to put in front
of some actual category theorists to see what they would say.
But I also appreciate that this might be a highly idiosyncratic
way of thinking about it or that it may be totally
overextending this metaphor.
So I'm mostly interested in honest feedback.
But it is also kind of an invitation.
I have gotten a lot out of thinking about this
has helped me in my own understanding a great deal.
So if anyone finds this amusing,
I'd love to have people to talk to
about how to stage these sections
which are still kind of under development.
Okay, so we're going to be given every book
of every length written in every alphabet.
So this is the main object we're gonna be working with
is a book.
Book is characterized by two ingredients.
Every book has an alphabet of letters that it draws from
and every book also has a specific length.
So a certain number of those letters
that it contains in sequence.
Well, Borges book had all the books were a fixed length.
They were all 410 pages and they all used
a single alphabet of 25 letters.
We are gonna be a little bit more expansive
in that we are going to have books of every length
and alphabets of every length as well.
So we actually have an alphabet with no letters.
We have an alphabet with one letter
and alphabet with two letters
and alphabet with three letters and so on.
So these are the first eight,
but we have an infinite sequence of integer length
alphabets to choose from.
The important thing is that the symbols representing
each letter need to all be distinct
so that we can tell them all apart.
And it's actually nice if you have one letter
from a given alphabet that it bears some family resemblance
to the other letters in that alphabet
just so we can know what we're looking at when we see one.
And the other thing is that these don't come
with any sense of order.
So these are non-ordered alphabets.
So they're just basically sets of letters.
And so that's what our books will be written in.
And then on the other end of things
we have books of every length.
So we have a kind of format or a template
for each book length.
This is a book with no spaces
so it can contain no letters.
This one you can see has available space for one letter.
We have two letter books, three letter books.
So these are empty book templates that we will fill
in order to make a real book.
So if I take a full, sorry, is that a question?
It was a bit of a trick to figure out how to depict this
without having to have animated pages turning.
So let's write a book using this alphabet of this length.
Basically each space freely chooses one of these letters.
So we have triangle, square, triangle, circle is our book.
So this is an example of a four space, three alphabet book.
There are several others.
In fact, there are 81 different combinations you can make
with this particular type signature.
So we'll call this a collection.
This is the collection of all books
that can be written the four space length,
three space alphabet.
And we're gonna keep,
when we receive the library for investigation
it's gonna come to us separated into these collections.
So each collection is gonna be housed
in a big rectangular warehouse like this.
So imagine this is a big chamber you can walk into
and it's full of books.
We're gonna have infinitely many of these
laid out in a big array.
And the logic of it is that we have our various alphabets
in sequence along the right and our various books
of various lengths associated along the left.
So every chamber in this aisle is gonna be filled
with books that have been written in a three letter alphabet
and every chamber in this aisle is going to consist
of books that are two spaces long.
So if we zoom in on the intersection, for example,
we can see that in the two space, three alphabet collection
we have nine books.
We don't have an order on the alphabet.
So there's therefore no presumptive order
on these books either.
So when we go into these chambers,
the books are just kind of like in a pile on the floor.
But in the back of every chamber,
there is a shelving unit and it has exactly as many slots
as there are books in that chamber.
So we could put these books into some kind of order
if we chose to.
That seems to be kind of the expectation.
And this is the situation in every one of these chambers.
We got a big pile of books.
The piles get quite big as you go off in a direction.
And what we wanna do is try and figure out
a way of shelving them.
So the way to do this systematically
is we're gonna go back to our set of alphabets
and we're just gonna go through them one by one
and we're gonna choose an alphabetical order on these sets.
And it turns out it really doesn't matter
what order we choose.
In the end, we'll figure something out
and we'll be able to look back at this moment
and realize that we would have discovered the same thing
no matter what we did here.
But in order to make that discovery,
it does appear to be necessary at this point
to make a provisional commitment about what order
we imagine these symbols are coming in.
And then to make it a little more legible,
I'm gonna swap out these letter forms
with something a little bit more consistent.
So we'll just say, if an alphabet has a first letter,
it'll be shaped like an A.
If it has a second, it'll be a B.
And we'll just use color to distinguish
between the different alphabets.
So like these two books both contain all As,
but this one's clearly written from the Singleton alphabet.
Where's this one's from?
Think that one.
So what do we get from alphabetical order?
So we actually get three kinds of organizational principle
from having made these choices.
The first thing is it allows us to put the books
on the shelves in a consistent way.
So here we are back in that two space three alphabet library.
It's no longer circles, squares, and triangles.
We've changed it to yellow, A, B, and C.
So these just contain pairs of A, B, or C.
And the contents of this one is A, A.
That's alphabetically the first volume.
And that followed by A, B, A, C, and so on.
So any books which use this as their content alphabet
now have a natural alphabetization
for how they should be put on those shelves.
The second thing we get is an internal coordinate system.
So we don't just organize the books
relative to others in the same collection.
We actually have a labeling system
for the contents of each book.
So this book has four spaces and they're presented
in order, so I could say that's the first space,
that's the second space, and so on.
But I also have a handy set of four ordered elements
that I can use as a labeling system for these spaces.
So I can say that's the green eighth letter of this book,
the green B, the green C, the green D, and so on.
So one thing this does is, well, I should say,
okay, so we basically now have two alphabets
associated with each book.
There's the content alphabet, and we think of that
as the content that the book came with, right?
It's indelibly printed into the page.
And then we have this labeling alphabet,
and this is really something we've imposed on this book.
So we've come up with an order,
maybe we wrote it into the books,
or maybe it's in the eye of the beholder,
like this is just a notion of literacy.
But anyway, each book combines now two alphabets.
Here's six books from that chamber.
It's all still gibberish,
but it's now consistently indexed gibberish.
But the main thing is that this setup
is associating each letter in the labeling alphabet
with some letter in the content alphabet,
which is the definition of a function between finite sets.
So each book really is a function.
And I wanna emphasize how this library-based model of set
is kind of psychologically different
from a traditional bag of dots characterization of set,
which is that when you're learning set theory this way,
the things in question,
the things you handle and think about primarily
are the elements and the sets.
And the functions are these kind of more abstract,
structured relationships between those things.
And so when you're going to category theory,
you have to make this transition
from what is a like objects first example
to amorphism's first formalism that you're trying to get to.
So if you think about these books,
there's almost a perfect like figure ground switch
in terms of thinking of a fin set in this way.
Now the thing you're handling is a book
and the book by its structure
like contains all the data for a function.
And meanwhile, the objects, the alphabets in question,
these are a little bit more like subsidiary structures.
You know, it's a little ambiguous.
It might be a labeling alphabet or a content alphabet
depending on how it's being used in a given book.
So the foreground thing you have to think about
is the books, which are the morphisms.
So I think it kind of puts you on a better footing
for a discourse that's gonna head into category theory.
So you just wanted to hear saying
that with that book would be in the aisle for the next one.
Which one?
Forward.
That book is in the aisle four
because it has four left spaces
and it's in six, row six.
Yes.
Yeah, it's four space, six alphabets
and this is the six letter alphabet that it's drawing from.
So does that make sense?
Can I keep moving?
Okay, so the third thing you get
is a law of composition on these books.
And this brings it to another thing
that I think is perhaps useful about this metaphor
because books are common objects.
So there's lots of storytelling
or motivated narration you can do
around things you would do with books.
So this is a decoder ring.
There's a kind of activity where you can encrypt stuff,
codes are fun to play with.
So you can kind of tell a story
where I'm gonna take this book
and maybe I'm gonna apply a letter substitution code
using some kind of decoder ring
that takes it from the green four letter alphabet
to the purple seven letter alphabet.
So some setting of that ring would take A to G
and B to D and C to F and so on.
But actually once again,
this data is precisely a way of associating
a labeling alphabet with a content alphabet.
That is, we can take the book GDFA
and use it as a letter substitution code
for books which have this content alphabet
in common with this labeling alphabet.
So what that substitution looks like is
I've got B in that first slot.
So my substitution code tells me
to replace it with a purple D.
I've got green D gets replaced with purple A
and green A gets replaced with purple G.
So this book turns that book into that book
but if we look at it on an elements and sets level,
this is just function composition.
So we have now a kind of code based way
of introducing function composition
and now we have fin set, right?
And we have all possible functions
and a notion of what it means to compose them.
One thing you can do with this is now you can start to talk
about what the different kinds of morphisms
in a category on the basis of this metaphor.
So like an identity morphism is one
that has every labeling letter
as its content letter as well.
But with the benefit of thinking about it
in terms of codes, you can also say this is
letter substitution code that doesn't do anything
or that is unaffected by any other letter substitution code.
Things like isomorphisms are excellent codes.
They can only be decoded one way
and the decoder can be used as the code
and the code can be used to decode that.
There's some other things you can get into
about monomorphisms and epomorphisms and things
but I think the main thing that's actually really interesting
to me is that this model of fin set gives you a way
of thinking about composition in two different ways.
So let me take these two books.
I'm gonna just apply the letter substitution.
So the A's get F's and the B's get C's.
And so now we have three books
in a compositional relationship.
And the question is, is this actually
an important relationship?
It might seem like it isn't because it actually
seems to depend critically on what choices
of alphabetical order I've made.
So I've chosen to imagine that A is the first letter
and B is the second letter of this content alphabet
and this labeling alphabet.
But if I changed my mind, if I decide that maybe B
is the first letter and A is the second,
then what changes is that now I have to reconsider
how I've labeled the contents of my letter substitution code.
Now I'm thinking the first slot is B
and the second slot is A.
And that's gonna change the effect
of the letter substitution.
Now the B's get F's, the C's get A's
and now the result of application doesn't match anymore.
So it might seem like a pretty superficial
kind of relationship, this composition.
But let's remember that, well let's put this back to A, B
and let's remember that one of the first organizational
principles we got from choosing alphabetical orders
is that it put all the books onto shelves.
So these three books are sitting on three shelves somewhere.
This book, ABBA, is actually the seventh book alphabetically
in a 16 book chamber.
This one is the 33rd book out of 36 books
and the final one is the 1170th book alphabetically
in a chamber containing 1296 books.
So another way to describe this exact composition
is to say that the book in slot seven,
composed with the book in slot 33,
is the book in slot 1170.
So when I change my alphabetical order from AB to BA,
this actually affects the alphabetization
of the books on these shelves
that use it as a content alphabet.
So here I have ABBA in slot seven.
Let me back up.
So this is the whole alphabetized shelf
from AAA on the left to BBB on the right
under the assumption that this is alphabetical order.
So when I change that, it's now exactly wrong.
BBB should be the first letter
and AAA should be the last book.
And so in fact, all of these books are in the wrong place.
So we're gonna have to move all of them around
in order to achieve alphabetization
according to this new rule.
And in the process ABBA, which was in slot seven,
has been moved out of there
and a new book has been moved in and this is BAB.
So to recap, the effect of changing our sense
of alphabetical order changes the labeling
on those two slots, but it also puts
an entirely different book into slot seven.
And these two changes actually cancel out.
If I apply this letter substitution code,
now B's get F's, C's get A's, or whatever,
the books come out the same.
So my alphabetical order switch has had two effects
which have canceled out and it remains true
that the book in slot seven composed
with the book in slot 33 equals the book in 1170.
There's also this content alphabet
in this book and the output book.
If I change that by say putting A at the end,
now I get a new 33rd book in that library
and a new 1170 book in that library.
And once again, those are in compliance.
So if I apply the letter substitution code,
I get the same thing as I would have had before.
That is, it remains true that the book in slot seven
combined with the book in slot 33 is 1170.
So there's this notion that composition
is actually well-defined at the level
of the slots in the shelves.
And any alphabetization I choose
is just an implementation of that compositional structure.
So if I could go through and just mark these slots
and keep track, I kind of memoize
what all of the compositional structure was at the shelves,
I wouldn't even need the books anymore, right?
You wouldn't need to do this like arbitrary business
with alphabetization.
So this is a representation of FinSet
that really does support two concrete alternative points
of view on what composition is.
And I would argue that this one's really compelling
because it's almost like, it's almost a static
universal characterization of composition.
And then you have all these different ways
of implementing it using these books.
Any two of them are different only by change
in the permutation of the alphabetical order.
So in some sense, it's composition
that is unique up to unique isomorphism.
So when I was first thinking about this,
I thought it would be compelling
to try and switch back and forth between these views
as a way of talking about categorical structures.
And I found that it was still really hard to think
about shelf-based composition.
So I have found that it's really psychologically helpful
to introduce a new character into the story at this point
who I call the librarian.
So the librarian, it's best to think of them
as being kind of like these demi-gods you meet
in these weird logic puzzles where they can only say yes
or no, and you have to try and figure out which is which.
In the sense that the librarian is an interrogative partner.
They're sort of omniscient, and they have a limit
in what they can say, and they're not gonna volunteer
anything, so you gotta ask all the questions.
So the deal with the librarian is that
it cannot see the books.
This is a being you can talk to who doesn't know
what letters are or what the library's contents are.
All it sees is all of the compositional data
on all of the slots on the shelves.
So we've sort of outsourced that knowledge
to a fictional being who we might trust to just possess it
in our kind of hypothetical discussion.
It can't talk, but it can understand requests,
and I'll explain what that means in a minute,
and it can also learn new vocabulary.
So you can develop a rapport and a vocabulary
with the librarian for the purposes
of investigating the library.
These are some librarians from my notebooks,
which are just fun to draw as little guys with no legs
that can see everything about the library.
So essentially when I say it can take requests,
like if I wanna compose two books,
instead of going through all the work myself,
I can just see which slot numbers they're in,
and I can go to the librarian and be like,
hey, what's the composite of these two?
And the librarian sort of sees all of the compositional data
at once, so it can very quickly pick out
that you want the book in this particular slot.
Maybe the librarian starts out only knowing
what composition is, but we can invent new terminology.
Like if I wanna think about commutative squares,
I can explain to the librarian
that I'm interested in four books.
These have the same length,
these have the same alphabet,
they're composable in a certain way.
This is describable in terms of what the librarian knows.
I haven't done many applied examples,
like in conceptual mathematics and in David's book,
there's a lot of reading meaning into the category of sets.
So for example, we can talk about directed graphs.
This is a diagram in FinSet.
This object is the number of arrows,
this object is the number of points,
this is the standard construction,
where the first arrow takes the arrows here to their sources
and the second arrow takes the same arrows to their targets
and that provides the characterization of some graph,
which in book terms means I can go into any chamber
and grab two books, and those two books
can be interpreted as a graph.
If I grab another two books, I get a different graph
and then it's a compositionally meaningful embedding
of graph into FinSet because if I can find two arrows
which are commutative on the sources
and commutative on the targets,
that effectively gives me some graph homomorphism
between my graphs.
So a way you could imagine using the librarian
is to say like I have this graph I'm interested,
this graph I'm interested in
and my librarian knows what a commutative square is,
so if I'm like give me all the pairs of books
which can make commutative squares out of these,
that's the kind of thing
that the librarian can instantaneously offer up.
So you can kind of use it as a lookup butler,
which is a fun fantasy, but not really,
you're never gonna actually have the benefit of that service,
so there's a limit to how valuable it is to think about it.
What's really valuable is that if the librarian can see this,
then the librarian can also see universal mapping properties.
So if I can define something like a limit with the librarian,
I can give them a graph like this
and be like give me the limit over this,
which is I guess like an equalizer.
But really it's a cone and the idea is that
this arrow composed with this gives this arrow
and same with the targets.
And this is exactly what the librarian would be able to see.
You'd be able to look at this diagram,
see all of the spans in the entire category
and see that an isomorphism class of them
were essentially central.
There's one arrow coming in
from the tip of every other compositional cone.
And of course this has an internal meaning,
it picks out the fixed points of the graph
and you can also define co-limits the same way.
But this is kind of the concept
is that by having a series of sessions
and talking with the librarian
and trying to imagine that the librarian's point of view
reveals patterns and structures in the library
that you can't see,
that would be useful for you to know,
but would be very hard for you infer
by considering the contents of the books themselves.
You have a sort of synthetic situation
where you could stage a mock discovery
of some of the concepts in category theory.
So I think I'm gonna, yeah.
I wanna just say, so this is all,
this is as much as I got done.
But I think what I wanted to say is that,
you know, what makes this interesting is
how it proves itself in terms of its ability
to find, to learn about limits and co-limits,
adjointness and representables.
So I'd almost imagine these as three chapters
or three sessions with the librarian.
I think the arc of these would be like,
you try and do something with the books
by considering their contents.
You have a somewhat unsatisfying experience.
And then you close the books,
you put them on the shelf
and you try and imagine this
from the librarian's point of view.
How would you characterize something
using only the compositional data?
So in the case of like limits and co-limits,
you might ask like, how would you summarize two books?
Or how would you summarize a collection of books?
And you can try and do that
by thinking about their contents.
But it's actually a very disappointing process.
And then from the librarian's point of view,
you end up with these more universal structures,
like limits and co-limits.
So anyway, like I said,
this has just been kind of a fun way
of talking to myself about category theory.
But I think there is some interesting value.
It's been helpful to me.
And I would like to imagine it might be helpful to others.
So I'm sort of, this is sort of a pet project of mine,
just thinking about.
So if anyone wants to talk someday
about how to talk about limits and co-limits,
adjointness or representables in terms of the library,
I'd be happy to do that.
And that's it.
Are there any questions?
Are you thinking of turning this into a class or a book?
So I have no idea.
Discovery Room.
So I have a...
Yeah, this isn't really a project proposal
and I have a very open mind about these things.
So I've done a lot of digital interactives.
Online videos, I think,
are an effective way of disseminating this kind of thing.
But I think form could follow function in some nice ways.
Like there's something about making it into a book
that feels kind of appealing to me.
Very self-referential.
It is very self-referential.
It's also, in spite of being maybe not obvious
from these slides.
It's not in the library, is it?
No.
It's so trippy.
But I do think as a project,
it has some availabilities that I think it could really be done...
Like I think it'd be done beautifully
in a certain number of ways.
It does have an embedded typographic design problem.
Like there are a lot of people who design fonts and things
who I think could really make a meal out of designing
a parametric generative font system
for the books of all the different lengths.
There's also, I mean, I would love to do it tastefully,
but there is this character design problem
regarding the librarian.
And I think there are a lot of people who do excellent work
with regards to compelling characters and things.
So, you know, a lot of what,
a lot of what like sold public science talks
at the Exploratorium
was putting a lot of visual interest into them.
And I think that that can really keep people cozy
while the bigger ideas are sort of coming into focus.
So I think I'm partial to the idea of a book,
although I think animation does kind of help
get the point across.
So I think I'm open to other concepts as well.
I wouldn't.
So this was sort of a presentation to category theory.
Yeah.
So if your idea ever had to explain things
to non-category theorists on,
what, how would you change this for non-category theorists?
Well,
I'm going down by a factor of 10.
Okay, was it too fast?
No, it wasn't for us.
It wasn't for them, but for me.
Okay.
Yeah.
But that's okay, I'm not your audience.
No, no, well, I think you are actually.
I mean, this is kind of my point is that like creating,
like I was saying this earlier, like,
this book puts some, it would put some demands on you.
And I think in the same way that Serial Numbers
or Tamaka Mockingbird really,
they're not quite text books,
but they do require a certain amount of studiousness
and like there's a certain amount of like cognitive
endurance needed to get through those books properly.
And I really don't think there's any way of conveying
category theory that isn't going to put some demands
of that sort on the learner.
I think my hope is that, you know, the reason,
like I think, I showed those three books
that talk about the library.
I've done talks where I've invoked a library
in other contexts before and I just find that,
like the library itself is a really good hook.
It's a nice swap out for more abstract
mathematical considerations.
And there's something very congenial about just hanging out
in your imagination in a big Borgesian library
and thinking about books and things.
So I think like that's my main,
that's my main offering to like try and make this
a little more human in terms of its surface of contact.
You're not a category theorist.
So Scott, sorry, how do you, how do you do with it?
Not very well.
Because you talked about limits and co-limits.
Yeah, I knew I would.
So I just take it on faith.
I knew I was not going to be accommodating you
particularly well.
I know what you're saying, but you're talking to me.
Sure, sure.
That's the right level for this audience.
What about before the limits and co-limits?
You know, the library was appealing and then after that
it's like, and why am I here?
Yeah.
There was no purpose to destroy these, you know.
It's not a story though.
It's not a story, but even for category theorists
it's not a story, okay?
And I think that's part of the problem
with category theory itself.
No, no, no in itself.
The way that it's being presented,
because it's often, you see it arose inductively
from having, from people who effectively were doing it,
say in algebraic biology,
and then realizing that this is generalizable.
So the point was already known to the people
and they were just abstracting it away.
But now when we're describing the abstract thing
it's not clear why we're doing it.
So there is no catch to the story,
like why are you doing it?
Is this yet another representation of INSEP?
That's how you, okay?
And so we can fill in the gaps,
but why would you bother doing it?
So, I totally see what you're saying.
No, and I, so there's a few things you could do.
And I think a lot of it's like how,
like part of it is I'm trying to do a presentation
that is not strictly mathematical
in the way that, the way that it's normally phrased
in category theory textbooks.
Again, there's a way of reading graphs into a fin set.
There's also a way of looking at any span
and thinking of it as a matrix.
There are ways of like looking at a section of it
and seeing the natural numbers.
So there's a bunch of reading interpretations
into the library.
And the beauty of it is that like when you come up
with this notion of a limit,
like the librarian doesn't know what a graph is
or a matrix or even a letter,
but this notion that you share with the librarian
of a limit has meaningful applications
to all of those interpretations.
So that interpretive layer might be a way to ground this
in actual mathematical concepts.
And then I think it's just really breathtaking
to see that the fixed points of a graph
obey the same structure as you can get.
It's so satisfying to work out using co-limits
to multiply two matrices represented as spans
and to find that that crazy number weaving you do
gives the same result as this universally defined thing
at the level of compositions.
But then you can go into numbers and get products
or what is at least common multiples or min or max.
Like, there's a lot of standard ways.
Like, I mean, I feel like conceptual mathematics
is almost a textbook of ways to read different models
into set.
So anyway, I don't know.
That's one thought about how to get.
Can you do something more easily in this representation
than that would surprise one of us?
That would say, oh, that's really cool.
Do you see what I'm saying?
I sure hope so.
Interesting story.
I mean, to me, this is a setting for a story to be told.
But you need to have a language of what
that is to tell your story.
But Paul, you began by saying in the pedagogical and the
difficulties as a learner of category theory
there's something interesting about a shift in perspective.
And to me, I mean, I don't think much of it
happens that I've heard of it, but to me,
there's something in your introduction
to the character of a librarian that
is about the universal perspective or something like that.
Yeah, and I kind of, yeah, I was going to talk about that.
And I kind of blew through it because I was just getting
tired.
But yeah, so here's the thing I remember.
Like, I tried to learn category theory probably three or four
times before it worked.
And all of those times, it was just
like trying to eat something that wasn't food.
It truly was a peculiar sensation.
And I just couldn't, like, OK, I'm
being asked to pretend that I don't know what the objects are,
even though I do, so I'm pretending something.
And I'm being asked to pretend that I know that this morphism
composed with this morphism is this morphism,
even though it's hard for me to imagine how I would possibly
know that other than by paying attention
to the internal details, which I'm pretending not to know.
And then you get all these definitions
on the basis of those compositions.
So I get this cancellation law for monomorphisms,
where I got two arrows.
If two arrows coming in composed with this arrow
equal the same thing, then these two must be the same
for all such pairs in the entire category.
And this feels like a completely inactionable definition.
I'm used to, like, it's a one-to-one map.
I can look at a given function and decide whether or not
it's one-to-one.
This, am I gonna check composition with every single pair
in the entire category?
Like, it feels weirdly non-operational.
Like, I can read the definition, I can understand it,
but I can't imagine that happening in real life
that I would use.
Like, I'm just, I have the wrong expectation
about what it's for.
So I think what's valuable to me about the librarian
is that it gives you a place from which
to suspend your disbelief.
So to speak, it sort of embodies that cognitive dissonance
in a fictional character and sort of invites you
to indulge this long enough to see that there is actually
useful deductive reasoning that can be carried out
with the benefit.
With the benefit of knowing that point of view
is coherent, even if you yourself don't have it.
And I feel like that's, that my hope is that
that could separate out attention
that I think I was really feeling
when I was first trying to learn category theory.
So I don't, I don't know if that makes sense.
I can try to say what I'm getting out of this,
which is that a whole bunch of examples
of categories people often tend to learn
are what are called concrete categories,
where the objects are sets with extra structure.
Amorphisms are functions that preserve this extra structure.
And so, but the definition of category says
there's nothing about it being concrete.
The objects aren't sets.
And so there's a kind of cognitive dissonance
in learning category theory,
if you're in an unfortunate situation,
or all the examples that you know about
are concrete categories.
And the definition is not about concrete categories.
And so in some ways, you're using the librarian
as sort of the, like the,
as the passage from the concrete category
to the definition of an abstract category.
So there's this concrete way to compose books.
We actually look at the letters and you do this stuff
and you know what you're doing.
But then there's this librarian who all they can tell you
is basically like when one morphism
proposed with another morphism is another morphism.
And so when you could try to phrase that as a kind of,
you could try to pose some kind of gains or puzzles,
like what can you figure out just by asking questions
of the librarian, just the questions that can be answered
using the abstract approach to category theory,
not the concrete one.
I don't know, if it's a normal person
that this is like a worthwhile pursuit.
This is why, you know, why should you limit yourself
in this funny way of only asking yourselves
that you can answer abstractly?
My own way to try to sell categories
is to come, start in very early on
with a bunch of examples of categories that aren't concrete.
And often very small categories,
the categories are the five objects.
Right, right, right, right.
To really break away from the dissonance
of only knowing concrete examples
and also this other aspect, which is that
most of the examples of categories
that most people get told are these enormous categories.
Even all finite sets, it's already pretty large.
That's like really small, compared to the kind
of definitions normally mean.
So that business is dealing directly
with enormous categories that find,
makes people sort of scared.
Whereas I can do lots of examples
where I can draw the whole category
and apply for it, makes it a little less scary.
Yeah, I always like to draw a house.
It's a commutative triangle on a commutative square
and this is my go-to, like, small category.
Yeah, that's good, that's a good kind of thing.
So people who like graph theory
will like these smaller categories, I think.
I think that's something you can actually see.
David, you were.
Yeah, I just thought that, like,
the library represents the category theory
that you didn't understand for us in some sense,
like the guy who understands the whole thing
but doesn't know what you're talking about in some sense.
And I thought it might be nice to have a dialogue with him
where you explain what a letter is, for example,
and a letter is just that first column of books.
It's all about having one space.
Yeah.
And that guy's like, oh, there's five letters in this?
Oh, that's, yeah, that's interesting.
You can have an explanation in the library.
The library just includes the books.
That's okay.
Everything you say when you say letter,
that a librarian will be able to
convert with them, even though you have translated.
It's kind of an interesting thought.
I was kind of like, sorry, I'll get back to this.
You know, like, I was thinking about, like,
that definition of a monomorphism
is exactly what the librarian can see.
It can see that everything impending on the back
of this arrow gets a unique composite, right?
And that's like, the librarian's interesting
because that's the kind of definition
that would be obvious to it.
And I was kind of saying that, like,
whereas the librarian finds our definition super crazy
because we're using this ridiculous assembly language
and this unnecessarily, like, sequential reasoning.
You can teach them stuff.
But yeah, I...
What a letter is and what a...
You can teach them stuff and they can teach you stuff.
I like, yeah.
So I love co-discovering with the librarian.
It feels like a way friendlier style of engagement.
Right.
That is how a mathematician is not a category theorist.
Come into it.
They're the U-character, talk to the librarian.
The librarian speaks this language
but they can do all these crazy stuff
but they can't understand the most basic.
So to understand, like, in the book Shogun,
you go in and you're the, like, English person
and you go into foreign culture
and they're, like, crazy people.
And by the end, you are Japanese
and you think that such people are crazy people.
And to be able to do that reversal,
where you, like, enter as a person
doesn't understand my librarian anything at all,
interested, and leave thinking you're a librarian genius
or something.
There might be a kind of a way to make a story out of it.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, another thing, getting back to what you said,
is that for somebody like me, who I am going to be trying
to understand it only because that's what I'm trying to say,
but in my typical life, I wouldn't be.
So something about why I'm a human and why,
you know, why would I want to know?
What would get me excited about this thing?
Oh, that's cool.
Yeah.
And I would say that that remains the outstanding problem
with category theory in general, is that, like,
it's very hard to get excited about something
that you can't preview what it's about
until after you've learned it.
So I don't mean, I think you are way more accessible.
I don't know how to do it.
There is an origin story.
What was it?
The historical origin category theory.
And you don't have to tell me the details of that field,
but you can tell me the emotions and what they were
and give me the flavor of the author.
Yeah, and also not just the initial origin,
but I mean, there are many things that
have happened in the development of category theory
that are amazing results and discoveries
that you can talk about without getting
into all the many brilliant details.
And so I mean, I think that any particular approach
to category theory like this one should
can only really work well if it's part of a bigger mix
of different introductions to category theory.
And that's true with all every surface of things.
Like, what I'm trying to learn physics or explain physics,
like, the history of physics is equally important to physics.
You cannot just say, like, OK, the universe
is made out of three kinds of quarks and eight luons
and stuff like this.
Because I mean, there's nothing at all to be one.
The only way you could ever understand it
is through the history of it, along with other options.
So this is a non-historical approach,
but it could be blended with the history of it.
I would say if you can tap, there's
something in effort that you all write some food on.
And you talk about the beauty of this and the other.
And if you can somehow up front get fat across.
Yeah.
Here's my turn.
The reason I'm here is because I want to read the cool things.
You're pretty close.
I know, but I'm working here to be here.
Here's what I've known so far, and it might be wrong.
There's levels of abstractness in mathematics
and abstraction is an extremely powerful idea
in mathematics, and a category of theories
sits at the top of that.
That's one of the things.
It used to say that.
But now.
That's what I think.
And so that makes me want to understand what that thing is.
So have you known the idea that there can be variables
and there's some, you can have, say, the temperature
and the temperature can change.
So it's a variable.
You have the length of things.
You're like drawing a rope that it can get longer
as you pull it out wherever it is.
The amount of rope you have.
So that's the variable with the amount of sunlight
you can change and all that.
Yeah.
And category theories have been really an idea
that it's not just that you have these variables all around you,
what they are, what kind of thing they are.
So at temperature,
if you're measuring on a little thermometer,
it might be this position of the depth of the thermometer.
So you know that the temperature variable is that thing.
And then you also know what other kinds of things
in the world are going on
that matter to that variable that that variable
actually varies with.
So if the temperature in the room
is different in different parts,
like if I go over there in the sun,
it gets a little warmer.
And if I'm over here and the shade is a little cooler,
then I know that as I move around the room,
the temperature varies.
So not only is the temperature
where I know what it is,
it's a little position on my thermometer,
but also I know that it varies specifically
over where I am in the room.
And so if I have another variable,
which is where I am in the room,
and that's changing,
and I get up and I walk around,
and I know what that depends on, say that depends on,
I'm going to take a planned walk
as a very boring person.
I'm going to take a planned walk around the room.
And so the way I go around the room
is kind of coordinated with the stopwatch
and where it is on my hand.
My stopwatch goes around
and around I'm walking around the room.
And so now I have,
I know that where I am in the room
is a variable.
It's a position in the room.
That's what kind of thing it is.
That's what my stopwatch is.
And so I can predict from that
that I'm going to,
where my thermometer is going to be up and down,
which is the thing that goes up and down,
is going to be depending on where
that my stopwatch is,
and I don't have to remember
in the middle where I was going to the room.
And that's the idea.
That's kind of an example
that if you can make that
into something really,
really relevant and interesting,
is
probably a model
that you didn't tell me.
What's the inside?
What's the inside?
What did I, what?
I guess the inside is that if you,
so
we're interested in the variables,
but we're also interested
in the kinds of things those variables are.
So we're not just interested in one temperature,
we might be interested in all the possible temperatures
and what temperature means.
What everybody tells you is that
what temperature means is
all the ways you can have variable temperatures
and all the ways they can depend
on every other variable.
So what I heard in that
that would be the question...
Sorry, you haven't answered the question at all.
I'm not interested yet.
Scott, can I probably answer it?
Well, that's different than my answer.
So for me, listening to that,
I hear,
oh my God,
I was thinking,
but it can be expressed
using these two parameters.
Matt, Matt.
I don't know what the relationship is.
It's a cool example,
but I don't know what the relationship
through the categories is.
The type of morphosomes in the category,
the type of morphosomes,
the way they depend was important.
Variable is a morphosome,
and the thing that sort of
wrote the category there has made use of
fundamentally is that
you have a domain of the morphosome
and the codomain, which didn't have your
verbose, it's like this impermanent as well.
I mean, historically, it started with
a variable, and then later on,
people were like, oh, this is a variable
of something that depends on something else,
and only then can you have the national category.
So, like, the idea is that
you have the variables, and then
substituting in one variable on another
is composition. I mean, category theory
effectively, anything you want in math
would have a fundamental idea.
But also, I guess,
it's good to actually do that,
I don't know how to say that.
Yeah, then one of the reasons,
oh, sorry, I'm just going to say this,
one of the reasons this is
so passionate for me is
we've got to be able
to explain math,
not just to explain the topos,
which we started with every single
day, but what category theory is.
Yeah.
And why it should be
more recognized
and incorporated into our math
or something like that.
Yeah, so the obvious question is,
so why, as
a public member, do I care?
What probably would I?
Why don't we save that till after it falls up there?
Oh, sorry.
Sorry, Paul.
This is converging from over dinner we discussed.
Well, probably, at least for me,
I got it.
Sorry, Paul.
Yeah, so I guess
what I wanted to say is,
I'm probably just reflecting what you already said back at you,
but part of this is about
how to get people engaged in the category theory,
and I think this already,
you can set it up in a way, if you use
a game, for example, you can set it up
in a way that people will already
feel kind of motivated by
playing this game, and you can set up this game
like, hey, I'm this person who understands
this letter formulation here,
but I have to communicate these commands
or these instructions to this librarian
in a way only the librarian
will understand, but the librarian understands
some really weird stuff, and so I have to
kind of figure out how to
get the idea of a letter across,
and some, like, the insight
that I come across is like, oh, the librarian
will understand, if I say that it's a morphism,
a morph, or like the equivalent
of what it would be of the story,
and I can see that set up as like
a game that like progressively gets
harder and harder, and like,
I think I would like,
I'm just imagining people,
I think people would like playing that,
and trying to figure it out, and it would be
a certain type of person who would like playing that,
but I think people would get engaged in that
and just find that interesting
for its own sake, which doesn't obviously
answer the question, but can you actually
convince people that category theory
is actually important?
It does get like, people like
playing it with it already,
which I think is the first step, but I do,
I am also curious of the second step,
which is how do you actually like
sell this perspective, how do you actually
show that this perspective?
I think that's almost answered in your question though,
because as you learn to express
yourself in this language, you begin to see
you know, you express these crazy things
that you do not express in
other languages, and then
that just expressive power
that you just ultimately want to sell.
I think that's the toy example of the game.
Can I just say,
like I love the characterization,
I think it is, I think, yes, the spirit
of it should be as a game, it doesn't just
get harder though, it's that these are the concepts
you're going to work through, so this is the real payout,
the problem is like, it's hard to
preview at the beginning
what's going to come out of this, but these are,
there's a really great way of implementing
representable functors using this metaphor,
limits and...
I don't know, there's a lot of
meat here to dig into,
what we saw today was the setup
and that was sort of the preamble
to the actual main course, I
nonetheless think that how you preview it and how
you frame it is important for inviting
people in, but I just
I do want to make the disclaimer that
there is more under the hood
in the premise. What was
your name? Christian.
I just wanted to say, I think this
is a fantastic
metaphor, a fantastic story
and we don't have a wealth
of
these kind of metaphors yet.
We don't have a wealth of these kind of interpretations
and I think this is a really
novel one that
is going to change how
I think about Vincent
and it seems
like one that can genuinely spark students'
imagination.
I mean, tons of things in school do not
need some application
in mind to justify them.
I really believe that
some of the deepest value of education
is in just sparking imagination
for its own sake
and giving people these ways of thinking
and that's already
a label on its own
and yeah, I just wanted to
say this is a really
nice way of looking at this category
and one of the things is like
how the metaphor, like you said
makes the morphism the fundamental
thing rather than the objects.
I think that's huge because that's
one of the deepest lessons about category
is focusing on the processes
rather than things.
So yeah, I just
think this is awesome and I bet that
all of these constructions are going to
be meaningful within this metaphor
and you can get students thinking
about how to represent
real world languages
or what it means to translate between
things and all kinds
of games that
you can play and like
especially when you brought in the librarian
about how to represent
like the
that kind of cognitive
business that you felt and make it just
this external things
that you don't have to like assume both roles
all that stuff, I just think it's great.
It's fantastic, thank you for saying that.
So the selling point
is that this is really trippy
I
clearly
Joshua?
I want to mention that
Emily Wiel and
two other category theorists were on
Science Friday, maybe you heard it.
No
And
you know what happened is
Emily Wiel
it's an NPR show, it's fantastic
and
the host was somewhat skeptical
the host was somewhat skeptical
if there would be interest in that
the phone rang off the hook
for a category theory. Yes.
Amazing.
Because it's the same thing I feel
which is like there's something really cool there
I want to understand it
even if I don't know what it is
I just sense there's something cool there.
I do want to mention it's 5.30
I'm happy to keep talking but
can we do one more question
Josh said it's a handout.
The last question
I think that this is
like the great stepping stones
how students make some of the major conceptual tips
that are needed for category theory
the idea of looking at morphisms
rather than objects is great
but we're building that in with the idea
of going with morphisms and now these physical
objects and
objects are not even a thing
the objects are really like
I don't know
alphabets I guess
but yeah the conventional
perspective
does focus on books rather than
alphabets so that's
weird and how category theory comes to morphisms
rather than objects so that's correct
and then the librarian
just knowing how everything
combined to that I can know
what anything is is great
that is the perspective
one potential
one potential
challenge when teaching this
I think would be to explain
what composition means
so that's not really an actual
thing to do with two books
that's true
very small alphabets
people are used to doing things like
that's a lot of coda rings
yeah coda rings is pretty good
but small alphabets
you don't do that with an alphabet
with characters long
generally
yeah
you can't explain it
it's some kind of challenge
also another thing you can
another thing you
next thing you can do in this story
is you can have the person visit a library
where they don't even get to see the books
at all and they just talk to the librarian
and it's just some other category
they ask the librarian
how many books are there
five
they have to like
understand the structure
where this wants to go
is that you have the librarian
and you and the librarian share a fin set
in that I can look into the books
and he can see what the
continental
compositional structure is
but then the librarian should also be able to
offer the same service for other categories
and we think like this
these are graphs
the photomain graph in this book represents
a homomorphism
this is a post set
so I can have these libraries
and the thing is
what does the inside of this look like
how have I encoded
that these graphs are homomorphed into each other
and the answer is who cares
because I'm just going to use my vocabulary
with the librarian
we're going to keep these books on the shelves
we're never going to look inside of them
like the value of having the librarian
start in this place where you do inspect the contents
of the book and then you start comparing it
does that make
ultimately you want to set up functors
so you're going to need the librarian to be able to say
I see the entirety of this category
and I see copies of it inside of this one
and those are my
my functors
like at first it seems like this librarian
is completely out of their minds
but then you realize
the stories you kind of teach to a lesson
that sometimes you'll meet somebody in real life
who seems completely crazy
but you have to take the time
to have a conversation with them
and try to understand the perspective
you realize that their perspective actually
is very useful
and I've had this experience in real life before
and it would be a valuable lesson
it's a good secondary intent
anyway, that's so cool
