If you have a pet dog or cat, you know that it spends a great deal of time sleeping.
If you observe it closely, you will be able to apply what you have already learned in
this course.
They may be quiet and still for a long time with regular breathing and not be very sensitive
to stimuli in the environment.
The cats may actually be sometimes sitting up in this state with head down, paws tucked
under their chests.
These traits indicate that the dog or the cat is in non-rem sleep.
Now periodically, the cat may go catatonic and slump down completely and the dog, who
is usually lying down completely anyway, starts twitching its paws and maybe uttering small
whimpering sounds.
Now they're in REM sleep.
And if you look closely at their eyes, you will see the rapid eye movements that give
the name to this sleep state.
It's easy to see that your constant companions from the canine or the feline world sleep just
like you do.
But have you ever thought about sleep in the birds that fly around your garden during the
day or the lizards that might scamper along the garden wall?
And what about the fruit flies that gather around the fresh fruit left out in your kitchen?
Do these animals sleep like we do?
There are many thousands of species of animals in the world.
Do they all have the same need to sleep as we do?
Is sleep a universal need in the animal world?
Who in the world sleeps?
Well, if they do, if a fruit fly sleeps as we do, does this mean that sleep serves the
same function in the fly and the human?
Is the function of sleep so fundamental that it occurs in the simplest of animals, just
as it does in the most complex?
A quick survey of nature tells us that daily cycles of rest and activity are virtually
universal in the world of multicellular animals.
This is not surprising.
Our planet has rotated on its axis once a day since long before life evolved.
So daily cycles of light and dark, wet and dry, cold and hot have been an ever-present
factor in the lives of organisms on Earth.
Daily cycles of behavior and physiology are adaptations to a cyclical environment.
We may have our doubts about echinoderms, starfish and sea urchins, but if we look closely
enough, I imagine we'll see changes in their activity day and night.
Usually the selenirates, jellyfish, have daily cycles of depth changes in the ocean.
Now whether any phase of these activities serves the function of rest is not easy to
ascertain.
What about mollusks?
The snails in my vegetable garden certainly have a daily pattern of activity, and when
I uncover them during the day in their hiding places, they are sealed inside their shells
and very quiescent.
Going up the phylogenetic scale to the most numerous of all animals on Earth, the arthropods,
we certainly find cycles of rest and activity.
Crickets, cicadas, fireflies and moths are very active during the night.
Flies, bees and butterflies and yellow jackets are active during the day.
Coming up to the vertebrates, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals all have very
definite patterns of rest and activity.
But what is sleep?
How do we sort out simple responses to light and dark, hot and cold, dry and wet from the
true rest and activity?
And how do we compare rest in the whole animal kingdom with what we have been describing
as sleep?
We have a problem.
The problem is that scientifically we define sleep by characteristic patterns of brain activity
as measured by the EEG.
This methodology works fine for all mammals and as we will see it works fine for birds.
But it fails as a tool for studying the physiology of the rest, the physiology of rest in all
other animals.
Why?
The EEG patterns we see in mammals and birds depend to a large extent on the structure
of their brains.
Both have well-developed forebrains, the cerebral cortex in mammals and the pallium in birds.
And it is the pattern of electrical activity in these massive and complex brain areas that
generate the patterns of the EEG that we use to define sleep states.
The simpler brains of reptiles, amphibians and fish simply do not generate similar patterns
of electrical activity in their brains.
Does that mean that they don't sleep?
No.
Does that mean that the rest in fish does not have the same function as it does in mammals?
No.
After all, the EEG of mammals and birds does not tell us anything about the underlying
functions of sleep.
They are only markers of these different brain states.
There are two ways of solving our problem.
One, if we discovered a basic function of sleep in mammals and birds, we could then
ask if this same function occurs in other species during rest.
Or two, if we could establish a different set of criteria or biomarkers for sleep in
mammals and birds, we could apply these criteria to other species.
Well, later in our course we will discuss current hypotheses about the function or functions
of sleep, but right now we really cannot point to any clear and specific function and say,
that is why mammals and birds sleep.
So we're stuck with our alternative two, established non-EEG indices of sleep.
There are three basic characteristics of sleep that we can apply to animals in general.
One, sleep is a reversible quiescent state that involves a species-specific posture.
So it is distinguishable from coma or from severe hypothermia as occurs in reptiles in
winter.
Two, during sleep the sensitivity to environmental stimuli is lowered.
Thus, the sleeping animal is not as easily aroused as the quiet, wakeful animal.
We say the arousal threshold is elevated.
Three, sleep is homeostatically regulated.
If wakefulness is prolonged, it will result in an increase in some aspect of subsequent
sleep.
Now, to my knowledge, these criteria have not been applied to akinoderm, selenirates
or mollusks, but they have been applied very successfully to arthropods.
Dr. Irana Tobler of the University of Zurich has been a leader in comparative studies of
rest or sleep-like states in animals.
Some of her experiments were in cockroaches and some were on scorpions, both of which
are known to be active at night.
Now, when they were kept on a daily light-dark cycle of 12 hours of light, 12 hours of dark,
both the cockroaches and the scorpions were mostly active in the dark, especially early
in the dark phase, and mostly quiet during the light phase.
Irana was able to describe distinct states of rest during the light phase that seemed
to grade from full alertness to a low level of responsiveness.
These states involve stereotypic changes in posture.
For example, the alert cockroach has a body posture with the head held off the substrate,
the antennae erect and moving, and as the cockroach becomes less alert, the antennae
drooped and the rear end of the body sank to the substrate.
When the cockroach was least alert, its entire body and antennae rested on the substrate.
It was possible to arouse the cockroach to full alertness from any of these states by
carefully controlled vibrational stimuli, but the magnitude of the vibrations had to
be increased as the cockroach went into the antennae and body sagging states.
In summary, there are states of quiescence in the cockroach with stereotypic postures
that involve elevated arousal thresholds, but they are reversible.
There were many more episodes of the quiescent states during the light than during the dark
phases of the daily cycle, but was there a relationship between duration of alert behavior
and subsequent rest?
To test this, Irana and her coworkers deprived cockroaches of rest by gently handling them.
When they did this, the subsequent duration of rest states with elevated arousal thresholds
was increased.
Other results were found in the experiments with the scorpions, thus our non-EEG criteria
for sleep were satisfied in these arthropod species.
Still, the word sleep was rarely used to describe these rest states, and when it was, there
was considerable skepticism.
Every year there is a meeting of the associated professional sleep societies.
This is a time when sleep researchers and sleep physicians get together to present and
hear about the latest in sleep science and sleep medicine.
I remember how striking it was when all of a sudden, from one year to the next, researchers
freely spoke of invertebrate rest states as sleep.
The impetus for this change in acceptance of sleep in non-mammals and birds was the amazing
progress in studying the fruit fly, Drosophila.
Fruit flies are easy to raise and study in the laboratory.
For many, many years, they were the favorite organisms for genetic studies.
About 2,000 several papers appeared in the literature, producing evidence that rest in
fruit flies satisfied all of the behavioral criteria for sleep.
Some of the contributions were from Dr. Paul Shaw at Washington University and from Dr.
Joan Hendricks at the University of Pennsylvania and from Drs. Tinoni and Cirelli at University
of Wisconsin.
In each of these studies, they showed that the fruit fly had a rest state characterized
by stereotypic posture and increased arousal thresholds.
Also, the flies tended to isolate themselves from the activity of other flies in their
environment before they went into this state.
And when the flies were deprived of this rest state for several hours, it resulted in a
subsequent increase in rest once the deprivation protocol ended.
And more remarkably, rest amounts across the lifespan in the fruit fly seemed to parallel
those in mammals by being more in the young and decreasing with age.
Rest in fruit flies was decreased in response to caffeine and increased in response to anihistamines.
The very significant result of the apparent similarity of fruit fly rest and mammalian
sleep is that the powerful tools of fruit fly genetics can be brought to bear on questions
of sleep function.
That work is being pursued actively.
Okay, let's go back to the vertebrates.
There is evidence for behavioral sleep in fish and reptiles.
I remember doing an experiment once on western fence lizards.
This was many years ago.
The experiment required treating the animals at regular intervals around the clock.
In the dark phase we would go into their room with red lights, which they couldn't see.
And they were collapsed on their cage floors and clearly less arousal than during the day.
It surely looked like sleep to me.
Recently work on zebrafish has documented activity, postural and arousal threshold changes
across the light dark cycle.
Zebrafish appears to satisfy the behavioral criteria for sleep.
Most studies of sleep invertebrates have pretty much focused on mammals and birds, however.
And in these studies the electrophysiological methods are commonly used.
What we can say at the outset is that no features of the sleep EEG seen in mammals and birds
are seen in the reptiles with which they share common ancestors.
Thus it is thought that the EEG features of sleep in mammals and birds evolved independently.
Let's look at birds first.
Birds show the same EEG characteristics of non-rem and rem sleep as do mammals.
Non-rem EEG is dominated by slow wave activity and sleep spindles and rem EEG is a low amplitude
fast pattern.
A major difference between birds and mammals, however, is that rem bouts are very short
in birds and the percent of total sleep time occupied by rem is less than half that which
is seen in mammals.
For a long time it was unclear whether sleep in birds is homeostatically regulated.
Very early studies that use eye closure to estimate sleep time produced results indicating
that if birds were sleep deprived they showed a subsequent increase in time with their eyes
closed.
One study used a very ingenious method of sleep deprivation.
They exposed chickens to a caged ferret.
Obviously the chickens did not spend much time with their eyes closed when a ferret was
around.
Sleep amount is one reflection of sleep need, but what about homeostatic responses and slow
wave activity which seemed to be the hallmark of sleep need in mammals?
The first study of sleep EEG that used spectral analysis was on pigeons.
During the dark phase the pigeons spent most of the time in non-rem sleep, but the magnitude
of the slow wave activity did not decline across the night.
When these pigeons were sleep deprived for 24 hours their subsequent and presumably recovery
sleep showed a small increase in rem sleep time, but no increase in slow wave sleep time
or slow wave activity.
Thus the existence of sleep homeostasis seemed to be in doubt.
Now you're probably aware of the method of silencing a bothersome chattering parrot.
You put a cover over its cage.
When in the dark most birds sleep.
In one study constant light was used to induce sleep deprivation in pigeons for over 70 days.
When returned to the dark the pigeons seemed to show no ill effects and when returned to
the dark there were no homeostatic recovery responses.
Subsequent studies on several other species of birds have shown a decline in slow wave
activity over the sleep phase and also increases in slow wave activity induced by even modest
episodes of sleep deprivation.
Going back to the earlier studies it could be that the durations of the sleep deprivations
were too long and induced an unanticipated compensatory response, a mixture of sleep
with wakefulness.
When the constant light experiment was repeated and the EEG subjected to spectral analysis
it was discovered that there was more slow wave activity appearing during wakefulness
and thus the total amount of slow wave activity that was eliminated by the prolonged wakefulness
was not all that great.
So could the birds compensate for loss of deep sleep by an increase in what might be
considered drowsiness or a mixture of sleep and wakefulness?
The current state of affairs indicates that sleep and sleep homeostasis in birds is much
like that in mammals.
This is a very interesting conclusion since it is likely that the electrophysiological
properties of sleep in birds and mammals evolved independently of each other.
Slow wave activity must serve an essential function of sleep.
The most interesting aspects of bird sleep is seen in small species that migrate.
Not migrating these species are day active but when they migrate over land they do so
at night and during the day they stop to feed.
When flying over water such as from the coast of northeast United States to South America
they fly continuously for several days.
The champion continuous long-distant migrant is the bar-tailed godwit which flies 11,000
kilometers from Alaska to New Zealand and then back again each year.
When considering these migratory behaviors the question arises what about sleep?
Can they sleep on the wing?
Can they do without sleep and if so what are the consequences?
Dr. Ruth Benka and co-workers at University of Wisconsin set out to answer these questions
by studying sleep and white crown sparrows.
Sparrows were captured in nature and maintained in the laboratory under light-dark cycles
that match those in nature.
As has been well known migratory birds in captivity show what's called migratory restlessness
or sometimes the German word is used zugenrua and they do this at times of the year when
they would normally be migrating.
They are very active at night, they hop from perch to perch and they flap their wings.
The researchers found that during the non-migratory season the birds slept about 34% of the time
and that was mostly distributed across the night.
When they were showing migratory restlessness they slept only 13% of the time and that was
mostly in the early night.
In the non-migratory season the sparrows showed a declining slow wave activity across the
night and they therefore hypothesized that during the migratory season there might be
enhanced levels of slow wave activity that declined more rapidly across the short sleep
phase.
Not so, not only was there no increased slow wave activity on this short sleep schedule
but there was also no decline in slow wave activity across the night.
Since short sleep or what is called sleep restriction causes significant cognitive deficits in mammals
the researchers developed a cognitive test for the sparrows.
During the non-migratory season if they restricted the sparrows to the same amount of sleep seen
in the migratory season they observed a significant cognitive deficit.
During the migratory season however no cognitive deficit was observed.
Now these are very provocative findings.
Does the migratory bird have the ability to do with much less or no sleep for considerable
periods of time without suffering consequences?
Let's turn now to the mammals.
The most dramatic difference in sleep among mammals in general is the typical amount of
sleep.
The horse, the giraffe, the elephant for example only get about 4 hours of sleep a day.
In contrast the opossum gets about 18, bats 19 and the armadillo 17.
There are no simple explanations for these differences in total sleep duration but several
factors probably play a role.
For example how much time you really need to forage and do all that you need to do when
you're awake.
The example would be lions.
It might not take that long to bring down a wildebeest but that provides nourishment
that will last quite a while.
In contrast the elephant eats food low in quality and its digestive tract is not very
efficient.
Elephant dung looks like practically undigested vegetation balled up.
Perhaps the elephant forages for many many hours every day.
Another factor is vulnerability.
Prey species tend to be more vigilant than predators.
The lion we mentioned earlier gets about 16 hours of sleep a day and the antelope gets
about 7.
Still another factor is energetics.
An animal like the koala bear eats eucalyptus leaves that are energy poor and hard to digest.
The koala sleeps about 14 hours a day which reduces its energy demands and also provides
plenty of time for digestion.
An interesting case is the shrew.
The shrew has a very high metabolism and is a very efficient forager but it still needs
time to digest its food.
Thus the pattern of activity in the shrew is to forage for about an hour which fills
its gut and then sleep for about an hour to digest it.
It seems as if we cannot identify a particular function that requires a fixed amount of sleep
per day across all mammalian species.
What does seem to be rather fixed however is the percent of total sleep time that is
REM sleep.
That's between about 15 and 30 percent with a strong average around 20 percent.
In that distribution there's a weak correlation indicating that precocial species require less
REM sleep per day than do altricial species.
In other words those species that undergo the most brain growth following birth have
more REM sleep than those species that have a brain mass at birth that's similar to their
adult brain size.
The best correlation of a sleep parameter across mammalian species is between the sleep
cycle length the non-REM REM cycle and brain size.
The larger the brain the longer the sleep cycle length.
No one seems to have a good hypothesis about why that should be so.
Another unexplained odd finding the sleep of monotremes.
Monotremes are egg laying mammals and are believed to be very distant relatives of all
of the rest of the mammals.
Placental mammals except the monotremes are called placental mammals because the fetus
is retained inside the mother and nourished through a uniquely mammalian feature the placenta.
There are only two species of monotremes and they both live in Australia.
There's the spiny anteater or echidna and the duck-billed platypus.
What is so interesting about their sleep is that electrophysiological studies seem to
indicate that the echidna has no REM sleep.
But sleep in the duck-billed platypus is mostly REM sleep.
Truly, the most amazing sleep patterns are seen in aquatic mammals.
John Lilly was a pioneer in the study of the behavior and physiology of marine mammals and
specifically of the dolphin.
A lot of his work was on the echolocation abilities of the dolphins.
In his long-time intimate association with these amazing animals, he made many astute
observations.
One thing he noted was that the dolphins sleep with one eye open.
Now since they are not echolocating when they are at rest, he hypothesized that the one eye
open was to remain vigilant.
However, the extension of that reasoning led to the possibility that they were actually
sleeping with only one half of their brain at a time.
Lilly was right.
Almost 20 years later, after Lilly's speculation, the Russians, Lukhomotov and Supin, recorded
EEG in bottlenose dolphins.
There were two remarkable results.
First, the dolphins showed no signs of REM sleep.
And second, as Lilly predicted, the dolphins slept with one side of their brain at a time.
And the two sides switched back and forth repeatedly during a rest phase at an average
frequency of 42 minutes.
The total amount of non-REM sleep per day was about 8 hours, but it was equally divided
between the left and the right hemispheres.
However, was the whole brain observed to be asleep at the same time?
But of course, the brain was awake at the same time when the dolphins were active.
Since the first work on the bottlenose dolphins, this highly unusual mode of sleep has been
documented in other marine mammals, including other dolphin species, the beluga and pilot
whales, manatees, the walrus, fur seals, and probably the hippopotamus, but behavioral
observations only.
Interestingly, as you might know, there are three major groups of pinnipeds.
Pinniped means finned foot.
There are the walruses, there are the eared seals or the otarity, and these are like sea
lions and fur seals, and there are the non-eared seals, the focidae, like the harbor seal or
the ring seal that's much loved by polar bears.
The walruses and the fur seals have unihemispheric sleep, but not the non-eared seals.
Extremely interesting studies have now been done on the otarid fur seal by Oleg Lyman
and Jerome Siegel and their colleagues.
The fur seals are very trainable, and they make good experimental subjects.
The researchers found that when in the water, the fur seals always use unihemispheric sleep,
but when they're on land, they show bilateral hemispheric sleep.
This observation supports the idea that a major function of the unihemispheric sleep
is vigilance.
The major predators, before man at least, of the fur seal, are in the water, sharks and
killer whales, but when they come out of the water, it's usually in a rather safe location
such as offshore rocks or at the base of steep cliffs.
Many interesting questions come from these studies of sleep in marine mammals.
For example, can one hemisphere of the brain be sleep deprived and show a unilateral homeostatic
response?
This question is interesting because of the question of whether sleep is regulated globally
or locally.
As we'll learn in a future lecture, sleep responses can be seen in local regions of
the brain if those areas are used extensively during wakeful activity.
On the other hand, the neurophysiology of sleep control involves centers down in the
lower parts of the brain that project extensively throughout the cortex, thus promoting the
major transitions between wake and sleep.
So which of these systems is responsible for use-dependent sleep?
The local or the global?
Marine mammals give us a unique opportunity to address this question.
Personally, I'm extremely interested in another very special evolutionary adaptation
of mammalian sleep, and that is daily torpor and deep hibernation.
I've worked on this amazing phenomenon ever since I was a graduate student.
Most of that work was on the small hibernators like chipmunks, ground squirrels and marmots,
but in recent years we have extended our work to the biggest of the hibernators, the bears.
I'm eager to tell you about this personal journey in sleep science, but first we have
to introduce another very essential component of sleep physiology, and that is circadian
rhythms.
Circadian rhythms are truly global features of life on our planet, and they play an important
role in controlling when we are asleep, when we are awake, and when we can be at optimal
performance, and when we can get the most deep and restful sleep.
The next two lectures will be devoted to understanding the clock in our brain and how it functions
to control just about every aspect of our physiology and behavior.
Until then, sweet dreams.
