The Earth has turned on its axis once a day since long before life evolved, therefore
life evolved in a cyclical or rhythmic world and adapted to the geophysical cycles created
by the Earth's rotation. Light and dark, hot and cold, wet and dry. Rest activity cycles
and animals are a ubiquitous adaptation to the natural periodicity of light and dark.
Some have adapted to be active in the dark, nocturnal, others in the light, diurnal,
and some during the transitions at dawn and dusk, we say crepuscular animals, but all
show daily patterns of rest and activity. As we discussed in the last lecture, we cannot
really say that rest in all animal species is the same phenomenon as sleep in mammals
and birds, but definitely all mammals and birds show daily rhythms of sleep, rest, and
wake activity, and more and more we are seeing the similarities between sleep in mammals
and birds and rest in other organisms. A daily rhythm of sleep and wake is abundantly
obvious if we make a continuous recording of EEG and body temperature in an animal across
a number of days. To show our results, we plot clock time on the horizontal axis and
variables such as body temperature and sleep states on the vertical axis. Now I need to
introduce a little clock rhythm terminology here. A rhythm is a regularly repeated alternation
or oscillation in something, like sunrise and sunset, for example. The time between two
comparable points on that oscillation, such as sequential sunrises, is the period of the
rhythm. So 24 hours is the period of the natural light-dark cycle. Any particular point on
the cycle, such as noon, is a phase of the rhythm. So in a recording of the daily cycle
of the sleep, activity, and body temperature of an animal, we can identify what time of
day any particular phase of that cycle occurs. During a portion of the day, our animal subject
is mostly awake and active, and at other times the animal is cycling through different stages
of sleep. You probably think this is quite normal and not surprising what's the big deal.
What else would you expect when living in a 24-hour world? But if we conduct our recordings
under constant dim light conditions, we see something really interesting. In one such
recording of a squirrel monkey, on the first day the squirrel monkey goes to sleep about
2 a.m. and reaches its body temperature minimum about 9 a.m. Five days later, it's going
to sleep about noon and reaching its body temperature minimum about 7 p.m. The animal
appears to be running on something closer to a 26-hour day than a 24-hour day. What's
going on? Remember, this animal is under constant dim light conditions. It is receiving no time
cues from the outside world. What we are seeing is a rhythm that is internal, or we say endogenous
to the animal, and not a rhythm imposed by the environment. Such endogenous rhythms that
are close to 24 hours but not exactly 24 hours are called circadian rhythms. Circa is Latin
for about, and diem is Latin for day. When a circadian rhythm is allowed to be expressed
in an environment without time cues, we say that it is free running. When the animal does
have access to natural time cues, predominantly sun up and sundown, the circadian rhythm gets
readjusted each day to the daily geophysical cycle. We say that it is entrained.
There are three essential characteristics of circadian rhythms. One, they free run with
endogenous periods that are about but not equal to 24 hours. Two, they can be entrained
to the natural geophysical cycle. And three, they are temperature compensated. What does
this last characteristic mean, temperature compensated? Almost all biological processes
are temperature sensitive. They go faster at higher temperatures and slower at low
temperatures. This would not work very well for a clock. It would keep different times
at different temperatures. Since the body temperatures of many animals follow environmental
temperature think of fish and invertebrates, their clocks would be unreliable if they were
temperature sensitive. So an important feature of the circadian clocks in general is that
they are temperature compensated. This feature of circadian rhythms is not so important for
mammals and birds, since they maintain their body temperatures rather constant. Since their
circadian clocks are in their bodies, actually in their brains, they will not be subjected
to changing temperatures. So we don't need to go into greater detail on temperature compensation
for our discussion of circadian rhythms in birds and mammals. Okay, the circadian clocks
of mammals are in their brains. It was only in the early 1970s that the location of the
brain clock was discovered. It was well known that the primary entrainment signal to the
circadian clock is light. So investigators introduced radioactive tracers into the eyes
of rats to see where those tracers ended up in the brain. Of course, they ended up in
the known visual areas of the brain, but they were also found in two tiny groups of neurons
just over the optic chiasm. The optic nerves coming from our eyes course along the bottom
of the brain to a location right over the back of the mouth. There they join before dividing
again to go to the visual areas and the two sides of the back of the brain. Where they
join at the optic chiasm, some of the nerve fibers from each eye cross over and go to
the opposite side of the brain. This little anatomical detail is what enables us to have
binocular vision with depth perception. Something else also happens at the optic chiasm. Some
of the neuronal fibers from the retina leave the optic nerves and go to the two small groups
of neurons above the optic chiasm. Now, a group of neurons with shared properties is
called a nucleus, not to be confused with the cellular nucleus, the nucleus inside a cell.
So because of their location, we call these two clusters of neurons or these two nuclei
the suprachiasmatic nuclei, or SCN for short. The neuronal fibers they receive are not involved
in vision, but they convey information about light and dark to the SCN. These fibers are
called the retinohypothalamic tract, since they begin in the retina and they end in the SCN,
which is in a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus is responsible
for regulating many of the functions of our bodies, including temperature, water and salt
balance, reproductive functions, hormone release, energy metabolism, and many others, including
sleep. The SCN, and let's refer to it in the singular even though it consists of two identical
but connected parts, the SCN is the circadian clock in the brain. How do we know? There are two
criteria for proving that a specific structure has a specific function. They are called necessity
and sufficiency. Is the structure necessary for the function? And is the structure sufficient to
generate the function? Necessity of the SCN for circadian rhythms was shown by lesioning
it or eliminating it. Electrodes were placed in the SCN, and when current was passed through
the electrodes, the SCN was destroyed. SCN lesions eliminate all circadian rhythms, body
temperature, hormone release, eating, drinking, sleep and activity. This result is shown clearly
if we plot a variable such as activity as a function of time. Usually circadian data are
double plotted. What this means is that two days or 48 hours of data are plotted on the
horizontal axis. Each subsequent line on the vertical axis is a day. So line one will be
the data from days one and two. Line two will be the data from days two and three. Line
three will be the data from days three and four and so on. Double plotting gives us the
ability to see clearly the pattern of activity through time. When the animal is entrained
to the 24 hour light dark cycle, the activity forms two very distinct vertical blocks of
markings showing that activity begins and ends at the same times each day. When the animal
is in a constant environment and its circadian rhythms allowed to free run, the blocks of
activity drift across the plot to the left if the circadian period is less than 24 hours
or to the right if the circadian period is greater than 24 hours. But following the lesion
of the SCN, the blocks disappear entirely. The animal is just as likely to sleep, be
active, eat or drink at any time of the day. Clearly, the lesion has eliminated any circadian
rhythm and the animal is completely arithmic showing that the SCN is necessary for a circadian
rhythm. Sufficiency of the SCN to provide the functions of a circadian clock has been demonstrated
in several types of elegant experiments. First, the SCN can be taken out of an animal
and cultured in a petri dish. This cultured little bit of tissue continues to generate
circadian rhythms of neuronal firing and those rhythms can be shifted like in entrainment
by applications of several types of neurotransmitters that are known to be involved in entrainment
in the intact animal. By far, however, the most amazing experiments showing sufficiency
of the SCN as a circadian clock or a circadian rhythm generator were brain transplant experiments.
Well, I don't mean transplanting the entire brain, but transplant of the SCN tissue from
one animal to another. These experiments were done by Martin Ralf, Russell Foster, Fred
Davis and Michael Meneker at the University of Virginia. First, two strains of hamsters
were produced by inbreeding. One strain had a short free-running circadian period and the
other strain had a long free-running circadian period. Then, individual animals from both
strains received SCN lesions, rendering them arrhythmic, no circadian rhythms. Then, SCN
tissues from intact animals were transplanted into the region above the optic chiasm in
the lesion animals. But, animals that had been short period animals received transplants
from long period donors and the animals that had been long period animals received transplants
from short period donors. Two notable results came from these experiments. First, the transplanted
tissues restored circadian rhythms in the arrhythmic recipients, evidence in support of sufficiency.
But the critical scientist might ask, could the transplanted tissue simply be providing
some growth factor that stimulates healing and repair in the lesion animals? But the
second result proved that was not the case. The transplants restored rhythms with the
characteristics of the donors. So, the SCN from long period animals caused the recipients
that had been short period to have long periods and vice versa. These are truly remarkable
experiments that show that brain tissues could be transplanted and maintain their functional
characteristics. Now, that we know that the SCN is the circadian pacemaker or rhythm generator,
we have to ask how an animal's circadian rhythm is entrained to the real world 24 hour cycle.
Process of entrainment is at the heart of sleep problems that result from jet lag and
shift work. As mentioned before, an important feature of a circadian rhythm is that it can
be entrained to the natural 24 hour geophysical cycle. The primary stimulus for entrainment
is light. An entraining stimulus is called a zeitgeber, which is German for time giver.
Other stimuli such as activity or feeding, social interactions, they can also serve as
zeitgebers. But those stimuli are relatively weak in comparison to light. The effect of
a zeitgeber on a free running rhythm is described as a phase response curve or PRC. How do we
construct a PRC? First, think of the way we double plotted circadian rhythm data to show
that the rhythm was free running and how we determined from that plot what the period
of the rhythm was, less than or greater than 24 hours. Once we established such a baseline
free running rhythm for an animal, we expose it to light pulses at different phases of
its rhythm. We then measure the responses to those light pulses as advances or delays
in the free running rhythm. An advance in the rhythm means that any component of the
rhythm such as wheel running, going to sleep or waking up occurs at an earlier time. A
delay in the rhythm means that any component of the rhythm occurs at a later time. Think
of a phase advance as setting your watch ahead and think of a phase delay as setting your
watch back. Even though the animal in our experiment is free running and not exposed
to a light dark cycle, we can use the animal's rest activity record to identify phases of
the rhythm that are subjective day when the animal would normally be seeing light if it
weren't under constant conditions and subjective night when the animal would be in the dark
if it weren't under constant conditions. If we deliver our test light pulses during
the subjective day, they have no effect on the free running rhythm at all. But if we
give the light pulses in the first half of the subjective night, they cause the free
running rhythm to be phase delayed. Any particular phase of the rhythm, such as falling asleep
or waking up, will occur later than predicted by the free running rhythm. If we deliver
the light pulse during the second half of the subjective night, we get the opposite effect,
a phase advance. Any particular phase of the rhythm will occur earlier than predicted
by the free running rhythm. Now I realize that was a lot of information
to absorb. Maybe you want to go back over it to be sure you understand what a phase advance
and a phase delay is. Next, we will use our insights from the laboratory studies to understand
the role of circadian rhythms in the real world. So how does entrainment work in the
real world? Let's suppose we have a short period animal. This animal has a circadian
clock with a period less than 24 hours, so its clock is running too fast. And it would
tend to get active earlier each day and go to sleep earlier each night. This doesn't
happen. Why? In the evening, when the circadian clock
of this short period animal indicates that it should be dark, the animal is still seeing
light, and that light stimulus phase delays its clock. That phase delay brings its circadian
rhythm back into sync with the real world. If on the other hand, the animal has a period
that is greater than 24 hours, its clock will be running too slow, and any aspect of its
daily pattern of activities would tend to get later and later each day. But when at
the end of the night, it sees light, when its clock is saying it should still be dark,
the rhythm will be phase advanced, sped up, and brought back into sync with the real world.
Let's apply this to jet lag. Assume you fly from New York to San Francisco. Your brain
clock is still on New York time. So in San Francisco, you find yourself getting sleepy
earlier in the evening than you are used to, and waking up earlier in the morning. But
since you see light in the evening when your circadian rhythm is saying it should be dark,
your clock gets phase delayed and moves closer to being in sync with San Francisco time.
For travel across many time zones, it can take several days or more to get over your
jet lag. But here are some helpful advice. When traveling several time zones to the west,
you want to make sure you see bright outdoor light in the evening, and when traveling east,
you want to make sure you see bright outdoor light in the morning to maximize your recovery
from jet lag. A common experience tells you that it's much easier to phase delay than
to phase advance. In the evening, it is not terribly difficult to stay up later, but getting
up earlier in the morning can be very difficult. Therefore, getting over jet lag is easier
when you're traveling west than when you're traveling east. We say, west is best, east
is least. Warning, it is more complicated for longer trips. Consider traveling overnight
from San Francisco to Paris. There's a nine hour time difference, so to get over your
jet lag, you have to advance your circadian clock by nine hours to catch up with local
time. But when you get off the plane at 7 a.m. in Paris, your brain clock says that
it's 10 p.m. early night in San Francisco. So if you receive a strong light stimulus
now, 7 a.m. in Paris, it will phase delay your rhythm, not phase advance it, making
it difficult to get over the jet lag. What you need to do is wear very dark glasses until
noon, Paris time, then your brain clock will be in the latter half of its night, and the
exposure to bright light will phase advance your rhythm.
Now that you have had a short course on circadian rhythms, how does it apply to sleep? Why does
jet lag and shift work have such devastating effects on the ability to sleep or stay awake,
for that matter, and on the quality of sleep? Well, I told you in a previous lecture about
clock dependent alerting and the opponent processes of sleep regulation. The circadian
clock works as an alarm clock, helping us to wake up in the morning and stave off the
sleep need that steadily accumulates during wakefulness. When clock dependent alerting
subsides in the late evening, the sleep need and sleep drive take over.
So any mismatch between the phases of the circadian rhythm and our desired schedule
of activities creates problems. Think now about making the return trip to New York after
being in San Francisco for a week or two. In the evening, after we make that trip from
San Francisco to New York, we are still in the clock dependent alerting phase, when we
should be going to sleep, according to local time. Conversely, when it's time to get up,
our clock dependent alerting has not yet kicked in. This is jet lag. And the effects are not
limited to sleep and wake. Most systems of our body have circadian rhythms of function
that are kept in synchrony by the master clock in the SCN. It's not surprising that
complaints associated with jet lag include such things as cognitive functions, hunger
at odd times, indigestion, constipation, and susceptibility to colds. The more time zones
we travel, the greater are the jet lag symptoms and the longer it takes to get over them,
or come into sync with local time. There is a maximum phase shift that can be achieved
each day, and it's on the order of one to two hours. Circadian systems did not evolve
in anticipation of air travel, so the need for large entrainment responses were not something
encountered in nature and not programmed into our biology. So it can take a week or more
to fully recover from a trip across many time zones. Shift work is a particularly difficult
problem because it essentially simulates frequent travel across many time zones. Prior to World
War II, shift work was relatively rare and limited to certain professions that had to
work around the clock, such as emergency workers, hospital staff, ship crews, police, and military.
The need for maximization of wartime production made industrial shift work common. It was then
and is still mostly divided into the daytime shift, 8 to 4, the swing or evening shift,
4 to midnight, and the graveyard or night shift, midnight to 8 a.m. To share the difficulty
of working the undesirable swing and graveyard shifts, rotations are commonly practiced.
Rotations are frequently at one week intervals and rotate counterclockwise. This is the equivalent
of traveling eight time zones to the east every week. It's a truly terrible practice
with maximum negative impact on sleep and health in general. As we just discussed about
entrainment, one week is not enough time to re-entrain to an eight hour time shift.
So when the individual comes off the day shift and starts the night shift, he or she is expected
to work during the lowest portion of the clock dependent alerting curve and then sleep during
the day when the clock dependent alerting function is on the rise. So if the worker is
able to entrain to this, when he moves to the evening shift, he will experience the same
problem all over again, moving into the lowest portion of the clock dependent alerting curve.
It is not surprising, as we mentioned earlier, that accidents and man-made disasters are much
more likely to occur during the swing and graveyard shifts. Remember, Exxon Valdez,
Union Carbide Boatpulture, Noble Three Mile Island, many more.
So if shift work is necessary, it can be improved to decrease the negative impact on sleep and
health of the workers. First, extend the time for each shift to say three weeks to allow more
time to entrain to the schedule. Second, and most importantly, rotate the shifts clockwise.
If you come off the day shift and move to the evening shift, it is still mostly during your
clock dependent alerting phase. It is much easier to extend wakefulness in the evening than to
eliminate sleep in the late night. Once entrain to an evening shift, it's then easier to move on
to the night shift once again because you are still within the clock dependent alerting zone.
When one large company adapted such a shift work schedule, most workers appreciate it,
had fewer absences, and productivity went up more than 20%.
Apart from sleep problems stemming from jet lag and shift work,
are there sleep problems caused by abnormalities or pathologies of the circadian system? Yes,
there are. Problem that's very common among individuals that are blind is the inability
to entrain at all. They free run continuously and therefore have difficulties with work schedules
as well as family and social relations. Interestingly, if the individual is blind
because of loss or dysfunction of the visual photoreceptors, the rods and cones,
the ability to entrain to the light-dark cycle may still be intact,
and then the critical issue is to preserve it. The light stimuli that entrain the circadian clock
come predominantly from non-visual photoreceptors. These are the retinal ganglion cells, cells
downstream from the primary visual receptors. These cells contain a novel photopigment called
melanopsin. Individuals can be completely blind visually but still possess the capability of
photic entrainment of their circadian rhythms. But these individuals face the danger of losing
their circadian photosensitivity, because blind individuals lack the pupillary constriction
response to light, they can receive too much ultraviolet light on their retinas, and that
exposure can destroy their photosensitive ganglion cells. It is therefore imperative
for blind individuals who have circadian photosensitivity to wear dark glasses whenever
being exposed to daylight. Now, you've heard of larks and owls, people who are particularly
early risers or people who tend to stay up late at night. Larks and owls are a part of the normal
distribution of circadian types. However, there are pathological extremes that are called advanced
or delayed phase sleep phase syndromes. Advanced phase syndrome is not a very serious problem.
It just means that the individual sleeps extremely early in the evening and wakes up extremely early
in the morning. Apart from not being a very good party person, such an individual can fare well in
school work and professional work. The opposite delayed sleep phase syndrome, however, can be
debilitating. These individuals typically cannot easily fall asleep until 3 or 4 a.m. in the morning,
and they can't really be maximally awake until early afternoon. For a college student, you could
imagine how difficult it would be to deal with classes, and for anyone employed in a typical
8-to-5 job, it would be very difficult to maintain that work schedule and be productive.
Another serious malady that is circadian rhythm related is Seasonal Affective Disorder, or SAD.
SAD is a form of depression that is experienced seasonally, usually at more northerly latitudes,
when sunlight dims and the day length gets very short. The incidence of SAD is particularly
high in Nordic countries. The consequences are higher rates of alcoholism and suicide over
the winter months. Symptoms normally go into remission as days get longer in the spring and
the sunlight gets brighter. One treatment for SAD is bright light exposure, usually in the morning.
Individuals can sit in front of banks of bright lights for about an hour,
and many experience considerable improvement in mood. In the next lecture, we'll learn more
about the workings of the circadian clock in our brains and use that information to understand
more about circadian-based disorders and possible ways of mitigating them. The take-home message
from this lecture is, we are rhythmic animals and our rhythms dominate much of our behavior and
our physiology. To optimize well-being, we need to pay attention to our body's clock.
To work against our clock results in health and performance problems.
To optimize health and performance, we need to stay in sync with the clocks in our brains.
Until next time, sweet dreams.
