In the last lecture, we learned about the characteristics of circadian rhythms.
Now we can ask about the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for those characteristics.
What are the wheels of the clock in our brains?
At the simplest level, a circadian system has three components.
First, a mechanism for generating a self-sustaining oscillation.
Second, an input system that links or entrains that oscillator to the 24-hour period of the
real world.
And three, an output system that drives all of the behavioral and physiological processes
that are controlled by the circadian system.
Let's start with the oscillator.
How would you build an oscillator with a fixed period?
You probably think that you don't have a clue, but actually it is quite simple.
You need to have a negative feedback system with a delay in the feedback loop.
Now you're thinking, yeah, right, simple, I still don't have a clue.
But I am sure you have experienced many negative feedback systems with a delay in the feedback
loop.
Here's one example.
It's a hot summer evening, you're in a hotel room with a window air conditioner.
The thermostat is on the opposite side of the room.
All night long, that darn air conditioner goes on and off, on and off, on and off with
a very regular periodicity.
In this case, the negative feedback loop is through the thermostat.
When the room temperature rises, the thermostat turns on the air conditioner, and when the
air conditioner cools the room, the thermostat turns it off.
The delay is the time that it takes for the cool air from the air conditioner to mix with
the room air and lower the temperature of the thermostat.
See, it's simple.
The circadian oscillations in all species that have been studied are negative feedback systems
with a delay in the feedback loop.
And in all cases, the nature of this negative feedback system is a gene translation, transcription
system in which a gene product provides the negative feedback.
To understand this, you need to know a little molecular biology, not much, so bear with
me and forgive me if these are things you already know.
Each cell of an animal has a structure called the nucleus that contains the genetic information
that is common to each and every cell of that animal.
The genetic information is DNA, an abbreviation for deoxyribonucleic acid.
Genes are made of DNA.
DNA is a linear chain of subunits called nucleotides.
There are four different nucleotides in DNA.
These four nucleotides are the alphabet of the genetic code.
A gene is a unique sequence of those four nucleotides.
Genes are contained on structures called chromosomes.
Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes in each cell, and on those chromosomes are a total
of about 23,000 different genes.
Genes code for proteins.
So how does the genetic code of nucleotides direct the synthesis of complex protein molecules?
The expression of specific genes is controlled by signals called transcription factors.
And when a gene is turned on by a transcription factor, its nucleotide sequence is translated
into a complementary sequence of nucleotides in molecules called messenger RNA.
Messenger RNA is responsible for taking the information from the gene out of the nucleus
and into the cytoplasm of the cell, where with the help of complex molecular machines
called ribosomes, the information coded in the messenger RNA is used to build a protein.
Got that?
Genomic information goes from gene to messenger RNA, transcription, and then from messenger
RNA to protein structure, translation.
With that basic understanding of molecular genetics, let's discuss clock genes and how
they can constitute a negative feedback system with a delay in the feedback loop.
The first clock gene that was discovered was in the fruit fly Drosophila.
This was in the early 1970s, and two scientists at Caltech, Seymour Benzer and Ron Kanopka
subjected masses of fruit flies to treatments that would cause mutations in their genes.
The fruit flies were then screened for behavioral differences that could be caused by these
altered genes.
They found three types of flies with differences in their circadian locomotor rhythms.
One group had unusually long periods, one group had unusually short periods, and one
group had no circadian rhythms at all.
The researchers were able to show that these three outcomes were due to mutations of the
same gene, and therefore they called this gene PER for period.
These results were a blockbuster.
At the time, it was generally assumed that no complex behavior could be explained by
a single gene, but that's exactly what Benzer and Kanopka showed.
But they did not show how PER was involved in generating the circadian oscillation.
They did, however, discover that the PER protein expression lagged behind the production of
the PER messenger RNA, which could be an element in a delayed feedback loop.
Over 20 years passed before the next circadian rhythm gene was discovered in Drosophila,
but with that discovery came the initial concept of how a transcription-translation feedback
mechanism could produce an oscillation.
This new gene was discovered by Amita Segal, who was working in Mike Young's lab at Rockefeller
University.
Since this mutation eliminated circadian rhythms, it was called timeless.
Just like the PER gene, its messenger RNA expression was rhythmic, and the appearance
of its gene product, the timeless protein, lagged behind the messenger RNA by several
hours.
Subsequent experiments showed that the PER and the TIM proteins bound to each other in
the cytoplasm of the cell.
And when they bound together, they moved back into the nucleus of the cell and shut down
the expression of their genes.
So here was a beautiful mechanism for a transcription-translation negative feedback mechanism with a delayed
feedback loop.
But it needed one more element.
It needed something to stimulate the initial transcription of the PER and TIM genes to
produce the PER and TIM messenger RNAs.
This wheel of the Drosophila clock came from a discovery of a clock gene in mice, a parallel
story.
By the early 1990s, still no circadian rhythms had been identified in mammals, but the tools
for doing genetic analysis and manipulations in mice were developing rapidly.
Therefore, at Northwestern University, a group led by Dr. Joe Takahashi undertook a mutagenesis
screening in mice for genes influencing circadian rhythms.
They discovered a mutant that had an unusually long circadian period.
And since this was the first circadian gene in mice, they named it clock.
This was a sensation, because it was the first circadian gene to be discovered in a mammal.
But it had a slight problem.
Unlike PER and TIM in Drosophila, neither the clock messenger RNA or the clock protein
cycled with a circadian periodicity.
So how could clock be a crucial clock gene?
In the mid-1990s, the interactions between the fruit fly and the million circadian research
efforts heated up.
Twenty-five years after the discovery of the per gene and fruit flies, we now had three
circadian genes, and more were to come shortly.
A number of complementary studies were going on simultaneously in different labs, and the
results were exciting.
First, per genes were discovered in mice, indicating an amazing degree of conservation
of circadian mechanisms between fruit flies and mammals.
When a similar gene is found in different species, it is called a homologue.
A case for conservation of the circadian mechanism was made even more impressive with the discovery
of a homologue of the mouse clock gene in fruit flies.
Besides using the hit-and-miss shotgun approach of mutagenesis-defined new clock genes, the
early fruit fly discoveries suggested another approach.
The binding of per and tim was an essential component of the clock mechanism.
Only when they became bound to each other, a process called dimerization, could they
re-enter the nucleus and shut off the expression of their genes.
Now if similar dimerization steps were involved in the mouse circadian system, could the mouse
clock protein and the mouse per proteins be used to fish out other clock components, components
that bound to clock and per to contribute to the clockwork mechanism?
The answer was yes, a very successful yes.
In the mouse, per dimerized with gene products of two genes, and these genes were called
cryptochromes.
They had previously been shown to be expressed in retinas.
Retinas were blue light responsive photopigments, and their name came from the fact that their
function was cryptic when they were first discovered.
Well it turned out that cryptochrome 1 and cryptochrome 2, abbreviated as cry 1 and cry
2, are also expressed in the SCN, and their gene products dimerize with per to create
a negative feedback loop that shuts down the expression of their genes, just like per and
tim in fruit flies.
A similar effort with the clock gene product uncovered a previously unknown gene called
BMAL 1.
Now this name came about because it was found in brain and muscle, and was similar to another
gene called ART, thus brain, muscle, aren't like BMAL.
It turned out that the clock BMAL dimer turned on the expression of the per and the cry genes.
A very similar story developed in the fruit fly.
Using the fruit fly clock gene products to fish for possible partner proteins, another
gene called cycle was discovered.
Cycle turned out to be a homologue of cry, and the clock cycle dimer induced expression
of the per and tim genes.
This exciting period of clock gene discovery in the late 1990s clearly showed that both
the fly and the mouse circadian systems were transcription, translation, negative feedback
mechanisms with delayed feedback loops, and remarkably they used some very similar genes
and gene products.
Now more genes have been discovered that play roles in these clockwork mechanisms, and if
we expand our consideration to the circadian systems of more distantly related species
such as plants and fungi and blue-green algae, we could expand the clock gene repertoire
even more.
But what I have told you about fruit flies and mice is the basic story of how nature
has made circadian clocks.
The huge advantage offered by mice and fruit flies as experimental subjects is that molecular
genetic tools have been developed that make research possible on these species that is
not possible on other species.
For example, even before discovery of the clock gene in mice, a gene called tau had
been discovered in hamsters.
Tau is the Greek letter that is used to designate the period of a circadian rhythm, and the
tau mutant hamster shortened the circadian periods of these animals.
This discovery, however, did not lead to a rapid advance in understanding the hamster
circadian clock, because the genetic tools for doing the necessary experiments in hamsters
did not exist.
Now that we have a circadian oscillator, let's turn to the question of the inputs that can
phase shift and entrain that oscillator.
After that, we'll discuss the outputs of the clock that drive all of the circadian rhythms
of physiology and behavior.
To set the stage, however, I'll tell you a bit about the anatomical and neurochemical
organization of the suprachiasmatic nucleus.
You'll recall that the SCN consists of two groups of tightly clustered cells that are
just above the optic chiasm at the bottom of the hypothalamus.
These groups of cells are not homogenous.
They can be divided into a population that lies on the bottom and the outer sides of
the nucleus.
We say the ventrolateral regions, and there's another population of cells that seems to
cover and sort of wrap around this lower group.
We say they are in the dorsomedial regions.
The lower group is also called the core, and the upper group is called the shell of the
SCN.
The core and the shell have different neurochemical characteristics.
In other words, for the most part, they produce and use different neurotransmitters.
There are extensive connections between the core and the shell, and the core seems to
receive most of the inputs from the retinohypothalamic tract, and the shell generates most of the
neuronal processes that make up the outputs of the SCN.
There are also connections across the midline between the two nuclei that make up the SCN.
The neurotransmitter content of the core SCN cycles when the animal experiences a light
dark cycle, but it does not cycle under constant conditions.
In contrast, the neurotransmitter content of the shell SCN cells cycles with light and
dark, but also shows a free-running rhythm under constant conditions.
It therefore seems likely that the core of the SCN is primarily responsible for mediating
the entrainment information used by the clock, and the shell of the SCN generates the endogenous
rhythmicity and gives rise to most of the outputs from the clock.
You'll remember from the last lecture that the dominant entrainment information used
by the mammalian circadian system is light.
We spend a great deal of time on describing the phase-shifting effects of light pulses
delivered at different phases of the circadian rhythm.
How does that light information get to the SCN?
There are two routes that involve different photoreceptors, visual and non-visual, and
two anatomical routes.
The retina is constructed of five layers of neurons.
Three of those layers are on a direct route to the brain.
Then those layers are two more layers that mostly modulate the communications between
the other three layers.
The first layer, which ironically is farthest back in the retina, is the visual photosensors,
the rods and the cones.
Rods and cones communicate through bipolar cells, the middle layer, to the ganglion cells,
the layer at the front of the retina.
Ganglion cells send their axons to the brain in the optic nerves.
A few percent of the ganglion cells contain the unique photosensitive pigment, melanopsin.
These ganglion cells are not involved in vision, but they provide the light information to
the SCN that is the most important phase-shifting stimulus involved in entrainment.
The axons from these photosensitive retinal ganglion cells travel in the optic nerves,
but they form a special track called the retinohypothalamic track, which we've described before.
They make synapses with cells in the core, the ventrolateral regions of the SCN.
Most of the retinal ganglion cells do not contain melanopsin, are not intrinsically photosensitive,
but transmit light information to the visual system through the optic nerve.
That information goes initially to a structure of the brain called the geniculate nucleus
of the thalamus.
And from there it goes to the visual cortex at the back of the brain.
But some of the geniculate neurons also send axons to the core of the SCN, as well as to
other hypothalamic regions.
It has been shown that both visual and non-visual photoreception can be involved in entrainment.
Perhaps the visual information is conveyed by the root that goes through the geniculate.
We don't know for sure.
Another possible function of the visual information coming through the geniculate that doesn't
go to the visual cortex could be to mediate direct effects of light on sleep and wake.
When nocturnal animals, such as mice, are exposed to light, it induces sleep.
And when they're exposed to dark, it induces wakefulness, regardless of the circadian phase.
The opposite is true of diurnal animals.
These direct effects of light on sleep and wakefulness are over and above the circadian
modulation of sleep and wake, and are therefore called masking effects.
They mask the circadian control of sleep and wake.
For those of you concerned about jet lag, let me explain how we have exploited the unique
properties of the melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells to develop a new technology
for phase-shifting rhythms.
Unlike the rods and cones, the photosensitive ganglion cells are slow to respond to light,
but they're also slow to shut off their activation that's stimulated by light.
You can imagine that these would not be desirable properties for visual photoreceptors.
If it were a property of visual photoreceptors to respond slowly to light, when you looked
at something, it would take a while for the image to form.
And if it was a property of these photoreceptors to remain active after the light went off,
when you looked away, you would continue to see the image in your vision, an after-image.
In the experiments about phase-shifting, we discussed pulses of light, but those pulses
were usually in half an hour to an hour to get a sizable phase shift.
What we discovered is that we can also get maximum phase shifts with only 100 milliseconds
of light.
That's one-tenth of a second.
The trick is that we give single millisecond flashes a minute or so apart.
Since the photosensitive retinal ganglion cells are slow to turn off once they're activated,
they convert a stimulus of a millisecond into a much longer response.
Thus, 100 milliseconds of light delivered in this way produces the same effect as an
hour of bright light.
We're working to develop devices for travelers that would track their circadian rhythms,
wherever they are, and deliver the proper millisecond stimuli to move their circadian
phases into synchrony with local time.
As mentioned earlier, there are other sources of information that can provide weak stimuli
for entrainment of the circadian system.
Physical activity is one, and the neural connections that convey that information to the SCN have
been identified.
Confirmation of that functional connection comes from experiments in which SCN are cultured
in a dish, and the circadian rhythms of the firing rates of their neurons are recorded.
When the neurotransmitter that characterizes the supposed inputs to the clock is dripped
onto the cultured SCN, it causes phase shifts in their neuronal firing rate rhythms.
Let's now turn to the outputs of the circadian system.
The SCN is called the master circadian clock because it controls all sorts of behaviors
and physiological systems throughout the body.
But the projections of its neurons are rather limited.
Most of these projections go, however, to a critical part of the brain that is involved
in many, many aspects of control and regulation in the body.
This is the other region of the hypothalamus, including areas known to be involved in the
control of sleep and wake.
For example, in the ventral lateral hypothalamus, there are neurons that always turn on at the
onset of sleep.
The transmitter of these neurons is an inhibitory one.
It shuts down the activity of other neurons.
These sleep-on neurons project to specific brain regions that have high activity during
wakefulness.
The interpretation is that the sleep-on ventral lateral hypothalamic neurons act as sleep
switches and turn off the systems that project throughout the cortex to keep it awake.
Also, there are neurons in the dorsal medial hypothalamus, which we will discuss in detail
later, that stimulate or activate these brain regions that have highest firing rates during
wakefulness.
So the interpretation is that these dorsal medial hypothalamic cells are executive wake-promoting
neurons.
A big unknown is how to explain the differences between day active and night active animals.
In all animals, the metabolic activity and the neuronal firing rates of the SCN are highest
during the light phase and lowest during the dark phase.
Also the major neurotransmitter by far of the SCN is an inhibitory neurotransmitter,
GABA, for gamma-amino-butyric acid.
A high inhibitory output to wake-promoting cells during the light phase makes sense for
nocturnal animals, but not for day active animals.
So there must be a polarity switch somewhere that can explain the difference between day
active and night active.
Neural signals are not the only output mechanisms of the SCN.
There are probably humoral outputs as well, certainly indirect ones and maybe direct ones.
As to direct humoral outputs, there is some evidence for a defusible signal from the SCN
itself.
Remember the experiments in which hamsters were made arrhythmic with SCN lesions, and
then SCN tissue from other hamsters was transplanted, then it restored rhythms and rest in activity?
Stop experiments were done in which the SCN tissue to be transplanted was encapsulated
in material that allowed diffusion of chemicals but not neuronal communication.
This encapsulated SCN tissue was weakly effective in restoring circadian rhythms.
Now these results are not absolutely definitive because it is difficult to assure that a lesion
eliminates all of the SCN tissue, and sometimes recovery of rhythms at a low level is seen
presumably due to healing and regrowth of remaining SCN tissue.
The indirect humoral outputs of the SCN are mostly via the SCN control of hypothalamic
and other neurons that control hormone release.
For example, the release of adrenal corticosterone is controlled by the release of corticotropin
releasing hormones, CRH, from the hypothalamus.
CRH activates the adrenocorticotropin cells in the pituitary gland.
These cells release adrenocorticotropin, ACTH, into the circulation, and when ACTH reaches
the adrenal gland it causes the production and secretion of corticosterone.
The SCN sends direct projections to the hypothalamic cells that release the CRH.
However, there is also an influence of sleep on this hormonal system so it is difficult
to sort out the role played by the circadian control and the role played by sleep, which
in turn is controlled by the SCN.
The one hormone that is clearly under control of the SCN is melatonin.
Melatonin is synthesized and released from the pineal gland.
That tiny pineal sits between the cerebral hemispheres and it's connected to the brain
by a small stalk.
The neural connection to the pineal does not go through that stalk, however.
This is a very strange anatomical relationship.
Cells from the shell of the SCN project to a nearby region called the paraventricular
nucleus.
Cells of the paraventricular nucleus send their axons all the way down the brainstem
and the spinal cord to the upper thoracic region.
There they synapse on the cells of the sympathetic nervous system.
You've probably heard about the sympathetic nervous system as being the fight or flight
part of the autonomic nervous system.
Autonomic means you don't have to think about it.
The complementary division of the autonomic nervous system is the parasympathetic, which
you can think of as the rest and digest part.
Connections in the sympathetic nervous system have two neurons.
The first one is in the spinal cord and the second one is in a chain of sympathetic ganglia
that run alongside the spinal cord.
Therefore, the first one is called preganglionic and the second one is called postganglionic.
The axon from the paraventricular nucleus that is near the SCN goes all the way to the
thoracic spinal cord.
There it synapses onto a preganglionic sympathetic neuron.
The axon from that neuron goes out in a spinal nerve to the sympathetic chain of ganglia.
There it travels up the chain to the very uppermost sympathetic ganglion, which is in
the neck.
There it synapses onto the postganglionic sympathetic neuron.
The axon from that postganglionic neuron then goes up the rest of the neck over the surface
of the brain to the pineal gland.
Now, how is that for an anatomical rhubgolberg?
My apologies to younger listeners who have to Google rhubgolberg.
So, what does melatonin do?
In humans, not much.
In many animals, it is a critical component in photoperiodism.
Photoperiodism is the ability to respond to changes in seasonal day length to make physiological,
anatomical, and behavioral adjustments to anticipate seasonal changes in the environment.
For example, when to come into reproductive condition, when to put on a winter coat of
fur, when to grow antlers, when to migrate, etc.
Melatonin is released by the pineal at night, so it's a way of measuring night length and
therefore to know if the days are getting shorter or longer.
The reason melatonin is released at night is that its synthesis by the pineal gland is
inhibited by light.
In birds, this is a direct action of light on the pineal, but not in mammals.
In mammals, the light information is conveyed to the SCN in the retinohypothalamic tract
and from the SCN to the pineal by the roundabout root I just described.
Does melatonin have any role to play in humans?
It seems to be a feedback signal to help with the entrainment of the SCN.
There are melatonin receptors in the SCN.
Also melatonin has a mild sleep-inducing ability, and that is the reason it is so commonly used
by individuals to get over jet lag.
We'll come back to that function of melatonin later.
The question of how the SCN controls physiological functions throughout the body is open and important.
In recent years, it has been discovered that the genes responsible for circadian rhythms
in the SCN are expressed in many other cells of the body.
As a result, many tissues in the body can generate circadian rhythms on their own.
How does the SCN keep all of these many independent clocks around the body synchronized?
Sometimes it can, and this may be one of the causes of the many manifestations of jet lag.
In experiments in which animals were severely food restricted, they reached a point where
the physiological rhythms of their livers, kidneys, and hearts were entrained by the
feeding cycle rather than by the light-dark cycle.
Clearly, the SCN is the master clock of the body, but how and how well it carries out
this function may be an important aspect of health and disease.
Now that we have a more complete view of how the circadian system works, in the next two
lectures we will fill out a similar picture for the neural systems that control sleep and wake.
So until next time, stay in sync and sweet dreams.
