Neuroanatomy and neurochemistry may sound like rather dry topics, not to mention complex
topics, but they are important if we are to understand how we sleep, why we sleep, and
how medications and other factors influence sleep. I will try to make this subject as easy
and interesting as I can, so let's begin with a couple of stories about some very serious
medical conditions. To lay the groundwork for these stories, let me remind you of some
of the seminal and classic experiments I told you in the second lecture. The experiments
of Maruzzi and Magun, these experiments showed that electrical stimulation of some deep parts
of the brain always woke a sleeping cat. And then there were the experiments of Hess showing
that electrical stimulation of another deep brain region always put a cat to sleep. Clearly
very specific parts of the brain act as switches, turning sleep on or turning sleep off. Where
are these parts of the brain? Are there other important components of the sleep control circuitry?
How do these components work? How do they function together as a sleep regulatory system?
The significance of the discoveries of Maruzzi and Magun and Hess are revealed by some real
and very serious pathologies of sleep. I will introduce the first pathology by retelling a
true story used by Molly Caldwell Crosby to open her extremely interesting book, A Sleep,
The Forgotten Epidemic that remains one of medicine's greatest mysteries. The story is
about Molly's grandmother, Virginia. Virginia tells her granddaughter about the sleepy sickness
she experienced when she was a 16-year-old girl. She went to bed after having a bout of fever,
weakness and drowsiness that caused her to fall down the stairs. She remembers the whole world
as being white, not the white of snow, but the white you experience in a dense fog or when
your eyes are closed in a brightly lit room. She is incredibly sleepy on the verge of consciousness.
She is sort of aware of things happening around her, but she cannot wake up.
She can hear voices of her parents. She can hear voices of strangers discussing her condition.
Yet she cannot open her eyes nor can she lift her arms or legs. She cannot move her body.
She is vaguely aware of the changes of light levels that mark the passage of days and nights.
Sometimes she senses the characteristic smell when the gas lights are extinguished.
She can smell irises that her mother puts in her room.
The idea occurs to her that she is like a statue, a white smooth statue, and with dread,
she imagines that she is a statue trapped in a rigid body and unable to communicate.
Three times she hears her mother crying as the doctor declares her deceased,
and she hears them discuss plans for her viewing and her burial. With horror,
she realizes that they think she has died and she cannot tell them that no, she's alive.
She is one of the fortunate ones, however, who recovered from the sleepy sickness and lived
to tell her story to her granddaughter. The time was 1929 and she was afflicted with
the sleepy sickness known as Von Ekonimo's Flu, or Encephalitis lethargica.
The first identified cases of Encephalitis lethargica occurred in 1917. This was probably
related to the first wave of the great 1918 flu pandemic that swept the world at the end of World
War I, killing an estimated 30 to over 100 million people, which at that time was between
3 and 10 percent of the world's population. Dr. Constantine Von Ekonimo was a neurologist
in Vienna, Austria. As the surge of patients coming into the clinic increased, Von Ekonimo
recognized that a subset of the patients had a unique set of symptoms. Initially,
they may have had a slight fever and sore throat, but in association with these symptoms,
they were incredibly sleepy and even falling asleep with their mouths full while they were
eating. Although they could be woken up, they could not stay awake. Many also had abnormalities
in the functions of the muscles that moved their eyes and a whole host of other sometimes bizarre
neurological problems, which was why they came to his particular neurology clinic.
The sleepiness got worse and worse, and in many cases led to full coma and death. 40 percent of
the victims died, 20 percent recovered as invalids, 26 percent recovered with deficits, and only 14
percent recovered completely. Many that survived, eventually maybe years later, developed the
symptoms of Parkinson's disease and inability to initiate movements resulting in statue-like
poses, loss of facial expressions, and problems with communication.
Frequently, they expressed obsessive-compulsive repetition of meaningless behaviors. Some of these
individuals ended up in mental institutions. In fact, many new institutions had to be built
to house them all. A dramatization of this situation was the movie Awakening starring
Robin Williams, which tells the true story of Dr. Oliver Sacks, who as a young neuropsychiatrist
recognized that this unique population of patients had essentially been warehoused in
institutions across the country following the sudden cessation of the epidemic in 1929.
Dr. Sacks brought many of these patients together to try an experimental treatment that might bring
them out of their bodily and mental prisons, and more about that story later. Bonneconomo
did postmortem studies of the brains of patients who died of this strange sleepy sickness. He found
serious inflammation and tissue damage just above the regions of the brain that Maruzzi and Magoon
had shown to wake up sleeping cats when electrically stimulated. Bonneconomo could not discover what
microorganism was responsible for the brain infections that caused encephalitis lethargica,
and that still remains a mystery today. The epidemic of this disease that occurred in
the early 1900s was probably not a unique event. Indications are that similar epidemics had been
recorded in the 1500s, the 1600s, and as late as 1890 and 1891 in Italy when Bonneconomo was a child.
After his clinical experiences with encephalitis lethargica,
he queried his elderly mother about it, and she recalled that episode of a serious sleepy
sickness in northern Italy, which was called Nona at the time. There are occasional cases
reported in present day, and there is no guarantee that it will not again emerge as a major epidemic.
The second disease I want to tell you about is exceedingly rare, and its symptoms are the
opposite of encephalitis lethargica. This disease is called fatal familial insomnia, FFI,
and it exists in only about 40 families worldwide. The first case was documented in a man in Venice
in 1765. This is a genetic disease, now known as a prion disease. Prions are small mutant proteins
that can self-replicate and accumulate in the brain. They were discovered by Dr. Stanley Prusner
at University of California in San Francisco, and for his discovery, Prusner was awarded a Nobel Prize
in 1997. The mutant proteins are responsible for some well-known neurological diseases in humans,
including Kreuzfeld-Jakob disease and Kuru, as well as mad cow disease and cattle and wasting
disease in deer. In the case of fatal familial insomnia, the first symptoms usually occur in
midlife, and are simply a bad case of insomnia, difficulty in falling asleep. Over the course
of three to four months, the problem gets worse, and the resulting sleep deprivation leads to
hallucinations, panic attacks, and other psychotic behaviors. Worsening of the panic attacks and
hallucinatory behavior may continue to increase over another four to five months. The end result
is a complete inability to sleep, causing serious weight loss and increasing dementia
that can continue for another several months. The final stage is worsening dementia,
unresponsiveness, and eventually death, which occurs on average about 18 months after the first
symptoms appear. Even though the individuals become so sleep deprived that fatigue is overwhelming
and incapacitating, they simply cannot make the transition from wake to sleep. No sleeping
medications work. Postmortem studies of their brains show that damage to the same deep region
that when electrically stimulated puts cats to sleep. Okay, let's find out what these brain
regions are and how they function to control sleep and wake.
Let me give you a simple analogy to introduce the general anatomical layout of the brain.
Think of the stick shift of a car. The shaft of the stick is the spinal cord.
The knob on the stick is the brainstem, and your hand on the knob of the stick
is the forebrain, which is mostly the cerebral hemispheres. Covering of the cerebral hemispheres
is the cerebral cortex, and that is responsible for conscious sensation, for the ability to think
and plan to generate commands to our muscles and to store memories. The region just between the
cerebral hemispheres and the brainstem, think of it as the palm of your hand on the stick shift,
is a part of the forebrain called the diencephalon. Upper part of the diencephalon is the thalamus,
which serves as a sort of switchboard for sensory information coming up to the cerebral cortex.
Below the thalamus is the hypothalamus. Hypo simply means under. The hypothalamus is responsible
for much of the physiological regulation of our bodies. Within these various large divisions of
the brain, there are anatomically discrete groups of neurons that are distinguished by their chemical
nature and by their functions. Chemical nature, I mean what molecules they synthesize and release
at their nerve endings to excite or inhibit the target cells. These molecules, of course,
are the neurotransmitters. By function, I mean what effect these neurons have when they release
their neurotransmitters onto the target cells. Those functions depend on where they send their
processes or their axons, what neurotransmitter they release, and how that neurotransmitter
alters the activity of the target cell. A group of neurons that produce and release the same
neurotransmitter and have similar functions is referred to as a nucleus. This is different,
of course, from the nucleus of a cell. In this context, the word nucleus means an anatomically
discrete group of neurons. Keep in mind that information between the body and the cerebral
cortex is conducted by axons, the long extensions of single neurons that pass through the brain stem.
This includes all of our senses, touch, pain, heat, cold, sense, vision. The axons can only
do one thing. They generate and they conduct action potentials or nerve impulses. The nerve
impulse stimulated by a touch is exactly the same as a nerve impulse that is generated by
light, for example. The meaning of the nerve impulse depends on where it goes,
where it makes connections or synapses with target cells. If this is in the visual cortex,
the impulse is interpreted by the brain as light. If it's in the somatosensory cortex,
it is interpreted as touch. So there's a lot of specificity in the patterns of connection
in the brain. But there is an exception. Many of the axons traveling through the brain stem
to their specific targets also send branches or collaterals, as they're called, to groups of cells
or nuclei in the brain stem. The neurons of some of these brain stem nuclei are very different
from the sensory neurons that make up very specific connections. The axons arising from
the neurons in these nuclei are widely distributed throughout the brain. They make synapses with
many, many neurons rather than with specific target neurons. As a result, the neurotransmitters
they release can influence the activity of large populations of other neurons. Accordingly,
they are described as being neuromodulators. They modulate the activity of other neurons.
Now, several of these brain stem nuclei are characterized by neurotransmitters that are
generally excitatory. That means that they increase the activity and excitability of other neurons.
Because the axons from these nuclei project widely to the cerebral cortex,
they increase the excitability of the cortex and put it in an awake state. This explains why
electrical stimulation of these regions of the brain stem always arouses the sleeping cats
and how sensory information coming up the neural axis stimulates wakefulness.
So what this means is that the collaterals of the axons that are carrying the sensory
information up to the cortex also increase the release of neuromodulators that in turn
increase the sensitivity of the cortex to that incoming information.
So what are these neuromodulators and where do they come from? One of these excitatory neuromodulators
is norepinephrine, which is the same molecule as the neurotransmitter of the peripheral sympathetic
nervous system that causes fight or flight responses. But in the brain, the norepinephrine
containing neurons have their cell bodies in a brain stem nucleus called the locus ceruleus,
so named because these bilateral nuclei appear as blue spots in histological sections of the brain.
Another set of nuclei that serve this excitatory neuromodulatory function are called raffae
nuclei. They get their name from the fact that they are situated very close to midline of the
brain stem. Raffae means seam or ridge between two similar parts. The neurotransmitter of the
raffae nuclei is serotonin. You're probably familiar with drugs referred to as SSRIs,
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. An example is Prozac and these are medications that are
taken for depression. They interfere with the mopping up of serotonin once it's been released
and they therefore prolong its effect. Serotonin increases the sensitivity of the cortex and maybe
that's a reason for its mood elevating effect in depressed individuals.
Still another set of brain stem nuclei that release excitatory neuromodulators extensively
throughout the cortex and other brain regions are cholinergic nuclei. They have a variety of names
that we don't have to go into, but they produce and release the neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
One type of acetylcholine receptor is the nicotinic receptor because it is activated
both by acetylcholine and by nicotine. Nicotine is a stimulating substance causing a buzz or a high
probably because of its excitatory effects on cortical and other neurons. Now just in case
you are not awake enough with actions of norepinephrine serotonin and acetylcholine,
there's another set that surely you are familiar with. Histamine. At the base of the hypothalamus
near the optic chiasm and the suprachiasmatic nucleus is a nucleus that contains neurons
that use histamine as their neurotransmitters. It is called the tuberomammillary nucleus. It gets
its name because it sits at the base, tuber means root, and between two rounded bodies
at the base of the brain called the mammillary bodies, mammillary for rounded structures that
look like breasts. The axons from the tuberomammillary nucleus go all over the cortex,
and the histamine they release promotes arousal. And that's why antihistamines taken for allergies
make you sleepy. As a sidebar, these cells may be critically involved in the actions of a
particular anesthetic called isofloring. We don't really know how anesthetics work,
but a connection with sleep seems logical. Okay, one more. Neurons in a nucleus called
the substantia nigra, meaning black substance, produce and release dopamine. Dopamine is involved
in reward and pleasure, and it is also arousing. Reward is stimulating after all. Some well-known
drugs of abuse, cocaine and heroin work through prolonging the action of dopamine. Dopamine is
also essential for movement and is the neurotransmitter that's lacking in Parkinson's disease.
So here's the point. All of these brain stem nuclei act to excite the cortex and keep it awake,
and all of these wake-promoting neurons decrease their activity dramatically at the onset of sleep.
Thus, it is not surprising that when Maruzzi and Magoon electrically stimulated this part of the
brain, their cats woke up. It also makes sense that if the connections between these parts of the
brain and the cortex were damaged by a viral infection and inflammatory responses, the actions
of these nuclei would be compromised. Once such damage occurs, it would be very difficult to maintain
wakefulness, as was the case in encephalitis lethargica. So what about the great variety of
other symptoms that were seen in cases of sleepy sickness? The information necessary for regulating
many functions of the body involve or go through circuits in the brain stem. So depending on the
exact site of the infection, the symptoms would vary. The next question you might ask is what
turns these wake-promoting nuclei on and off? We always have to push the question back to another
level, it seems. There is another cluster of neurons in the hypothalamus that is characterized
by a unique neurotransmitter. That neurotransmitter is a peptide called hypochretin. We will discuss
this molecule in more detail when we delve into the sleep disease narcolepsy. The hypochretin
neurons in the hypothalamus send their axons to the other, to all of the other wake-promoting
nuclei that we just discussed. And when the hypochretin neurons turn on, they coordinate many
of the aspects of arousal. They turn on all of these other nuclei. So what about turning off
the influence of the arousal-promoting nuclei in the brain stem? Back in the early 1900s,
Von Okonomo made another very important and seminal discovery in treating his encephalitis patients.
A subset of the patients had exactly the opposite symptoms as those with sleepy sickness. Some slept
very little, as little as one or two hours a day. They were extremely fatigued all of the time,
but they could not sleep. When these victims died, Von Okonomo found that the inflammation in the
damage in their brains was farther forward and into the hypothalamus. Thus, he actually proposed
that there were neural pathways from the brain stem that promoted arousal, and when these pathways
were damaged, it was difficult, if not impossible, to keep the cortex awake. And then he also proposed
that there was a sleep-promoting center in the hypothalamic region that shut down these pathways
that maintained wake. It's taken us about 80 years to prove that Von Okonomo was right.
Since Von Okonomo's time, a few studies have shown that lesions of the hypothalamus of rats and
cats can result in decreased sleep. Then in the mid-1900s, a group at Harvard discovered a group
of neurons in the anterior hypothalamus that had a very unique behavior. Whereas the activity of
most neurons in the brain goes down with sleep, the activity of these neurons go up just before
the transition into sleep. The transmitter of these neurons is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter
of the brain, GABA, for gamma-amino-butyric acid. These GABA neurons project to all of the brain
stem wake-promoting neurons and turn them off. These neurons are believed to be a major sleep
switch. And don't forget an important feature of the hypothalamus. It receives lots of information
and input from the circadian clock. These several groups of sleep wake-related neurons,
the histamineurgic neurons of the tuberomammulary nucleus, the hypocretin neurons, the sleep-on
neurons that are found in the hypothalamus receive inputs directly or indirectly from the nearby
suprachiasmatic nucleus, the alarm clock of the brain. While all of these nuclei that produce
and release neurotransmitters that influence the arousal state of the cortex, a sleeper awake,
we have building blocks for a control system that can produce a daily cycle of sleep and wake.
A model of such a control system has been proposed by Harvard biologists Cliff Saper and
colleagues. They call their model the flip-flop switch. Flip-flop is a term used by electrical
engineers to describe circuits that tend to be strongly in one state or the other. Common
feature of flip-flop switches is mutual reciprocal inhibition. Thus, when the system is in one state,
it is actively inhibiting the other state. If some other input causes the system to transition
into the other state, then that state is stabilized by inhibiting its alternative.
Think of a light switch. Spring mechanisms keep it in the on or off position. It is impossible
to just balance it between the on and the off position so the lights flicker.
Saper and colleagues pointed out that the organization of the various sleep-wake nuclei
are ideal for creating a flip-flop switch. The wake-promoting nuclei send inhibitory
signals to the hypothalamic sleep-on cells at the same time they are activating the cortex.
These relationships are supported by excitatory input to the wake-promoting nuclei from the
hypothalamic-hypocritin neurons and from the circadian clock. There is also descending
excitation from the cortex to the wake-promoting nuclei, explaining the ability of social interaction
and exciting mental activity to promote wakefulness. But when some of the input to the wake-promoting
nuclei decreases, let's say the circadian clock turns off or social stimulation and sensory
stimulation decrease, then the inhibition on the sleep-on cells decreases. And the increased
activity of the inhibitory sleep-on cells inhibits the wake-promoting nuclei, including the
hypocritin cells. As a result, the system flips into the sleep mode. Much research has been focused
on this model and it has gained wide acceptance. But there is more. What can we learn from the
tragedy of the fatal familial insomnia? Remember that the postmortem analysis of the brains of
these patients revealed damage to the thalamus, the same brain region that has stimulated to produce
sleep in cats. The thalamus has a number of divisions and mostly they act as waystations
for the information coming up to the cortex. But there's one exception. One division of the
thalamus called the reticular nucleus does not project to the cortex, it projects to all of
the other thalamic nuclei. The neurotransmitter of the thalamic reticular nucleus is GABA,
the inhibitory neurotransmitter. Thus the reticular nucleus of the thalamus gates
the ascending information to the cortex. When it is activated, it shuts down the flow of
stimulatory input to the cortex. When it's inactivated, it permits activity, activation of
the cortex. And when it is destroyed by fatal familial insomnia disease, sleep becomes impossible.
The reticular nucleus of the thalamus is not included in the flip-flop switch model and it is not
absolutely certain that it plays a role in regulating sleep. Instead its role may be in
modulating different streams of information to the cortex to facilitate selective attention.
So, in summary, we have shown that many discrete structures in the brain are involved in the
control of sleep and wake. We can group these structures into those that promote wakefulness
and we can therefore associate their neurotransmitters with the role of exciting activity in the
cerebral cortex. These include norepinephrine from the locus ceruleus, serotonin from the
rathae nucleus, histamine from the tuberomammulary nuclei, acetylcholine from the cholinergic
nuclei, dopamine from the substantia nigra, and hypocretin from the hypothalamus.
The activity of these wake-promoting nuclei is influenced by sensory stimulation and by
descending inputs from the cortex. Thus, social interactions and exciting mental activity can
sustain wakefulness. In turn, these wake-promoting nuclei are under inhibitory control by the
GABAergic sleep-on neurons of the hypothalamus. And in addition, the excitatory signals they
send to the cortex is gated by GABAergic neurons in the reticular nucleus of the
hypothalamus. Now, all of these relationships are further modulated by the circadian clock
that appears to generate clock-dependent alerting by inhibiting the hypothalamic sleep-on cells
and by exciting some or all of the wake-promoting nuclei such as the tuberomammulary neurons.
Possible way that all of these components are organized into a sleep control system is proposed
in a model called the flip-flop switch. Now, I'm sorry, but that was a lot of information to digest.
But many questions remain for us to answer in subsequent lectures. For example, we have not
discussed what controls the cycling between non-REM and REM sleep. The cerebral cortex is
activated in REM sleep similar to the way it is activated in wakefulness, but the inputs and
outputs are inhibited. How can the cerebral cortex be activated, but you are not awake?
Here is a hint. All of the wake-promoting nuclei we discussed have a dramatic decrease in activity
in the transition from wake to non-REM sleep. All of these wake-promoting nuclei remain at
low level of activity and some even lower at the transition from non-REM to REM sleep
with one exception. That exception is the cholinergic nuclei. Thus, the release of acetylcholine in
the cerebral cortex during REM sleep is high, just as it is during wakefulness. That level of
cholinergic stimulation is sufficient to bring the excitability of the cortical neurons up to
the level that exists during wakefulness. But the inputs and the outputs to the cortex
remain inactivated or inhibited. Thus, REM sleep is a wake cortex in a sleeping body.
You will note that in all of our discussions in this lecture, I only referred to the control of
sleep. I never mentioned the regulation of sleep, the homeostatic regulation that matches sleep
to sleep need. Regulation has a different meaning than control. Think of driving your car.
You control the speed of your car with the accelerator in the brake. But to regulate the car,
to regulate the speed of the car, you need information. You need to know the optimal speed.
Perhaps that's 65 miles per hour. That's a set point. And you have to know how fast you are
going. You get that information from the speedometer. That's feedback information.
So either you or your cruise control use this information to adjust the accelerator
to achieve the optimal speed. Everything we discussed here were ways to control sleep and
wakefulness. But we said nothing about the homeostatic regulation. What information is used
to regulate sleep? And how is that information used? These are the questions we will turn to
in coming lectures. Meanwhile, sweet dreams.
