Up until now we have been exploring aspects of normal sleep. Later in the course we will
discuss a number of sleep pathologies. But even though we still have a number of aspects
of normal sleep to cover, such as the small issue of the function of sleep, I am going
to insert here a lecture on a sleep disorder, narcolepsy. The reason I am doing this is
that the story of narcolepsy illustrates how all of the information we have covered in
the last two lectures on the neuroanatomy, the neurochemistry, and the neurophysiology
of sleep is relevant to understanding and hopefully for treating sleep disorders.
Narcolepsy is a lifelong, currently incurable neurological disorder characterized by excessive
daytime sleepiness, disrupted sleep at night, bizarre hallucinations at sleep onset, and
cataplexy. What is cataplexy? The word comes from the Greek kata, meaning down, and plexus,
meaning a seizure. So cataplexy literally means a falling down seizure. Typically a person
with narcolepsy will have a catapleptic attack when experiencing a strong emotion, especially
a positive one, such as something that causes you to laugh. Imagine what it would be like
if every time someone told you a good joke, you collapsed onto the floor. That is cataplexy,
and that is the problem faced by many narcoleptics every day of their lives. The incidence of
narcolepsy in the U.S. population is about 1 in every 2,000 people or about 300,000 people
in total. This is about the same incidence as multiple sclerosis. It is more often found
in men than women, and the onset of the disease is usually between the ages of 15 and 30.
Narcolepsy is not life-threatening, and many people go through their entire lives without
realizing they have this disorder, but it still can be very damaging to social relationships
and employment, and it can greatly increase an individual's risk of getting into a serious
accident. The symptom that usually brings a narcoleptic person into the clinic is the
daytime sleepiness. This can be so bad that the person experiences overwhelming and irresistible
needs to sleep, even when eating, having a conversation, or engaged in a physical activity.
Of course, there are other conditions that can cause excessive daytime sleepiness, so
other criteria are evaluated before a diagnosis of narcolepsy is made. They include sleep paralysis,
hypnagogic hallucinations, and cataplexy. Now, not all narcoleptics show all of these
symptoms, in fact only about 15% do, but a final symptom that is definitive is the absence
of one of our sleep neuromodulators, hypocretin, in the cerebral spinal fluid. Now, a lumbar
spinal tap is an invasive and unpleasant procedure, so it is not a preferred diagnostic.
About 90% of narcoleptics complain of excessive daytime sleepiness, and that is frequently
the reason that they are initially seen by a sleep physician. But daytime sleepiness
is a symptom of many sleep disorders, so it is not unusual for narcolepsy to be missed
in an initial patient examination. And here's an example. After my Stanford colleague, Bill
Dement, gave a lecture on sleep to a group of Cornell students, one young lady came
up after class and said that she had trouble staying awake during the day. So, she had
already had a sleep exam. She was told by the physicians that she did not have narcolepsy
and her sleep problems were probably due just not to getting enough sleep at night, not
unusual for a college student. So, Bill asked her, do you have cataplexy? She said she didn't
know what that was, so he explained. Then she remembered a single incident when she
was at a party and someone told a joke that she thought was particularly funny. As she
started to laugh, she realized that she could not move. It frightened her, but since the
paralysis rapidly vanished, she had given it no more thought. On this basis alone, Bill
concluded that she was developing narcolepsy, and without treatment would have a great deal
of trouble with her studies. Paralysis is not unique to narcolepsy. About 25 percent
of the population have experienced paralysis when falling asleep or more commonly when
waking up, and that does not mean that they have narcolepsy. So, characteristically, temporarily
you just cannot move or talk, and you may experience strain visions. So, what's really
happening is that some of the components of REM sleep are occurring when you are really
awake. The reason that it is more common to experience sleep paralysis when waking up,
as we learned earlier, you normally enter sleep through non-REM stages, not REM sleep.
Sleep-onset REM, which is called SOAR REM, S-O-R-E-M, is another symptom of narcolepsy.
It is likely that the many claims of alien abduction result from episodes of sleep paralysis.
Sleep paralysis is seen in less than half of narcoleptics. Hypnagogic hallucinations
are experienced by about 30 percent of narcoleptics, and these are vivid and often scary visions
and sounds that are experienced when falling asleep. They are really the nightmare component
of REM sleep occurring during wakefulness. Frequently they accompany sleep paralysis.
Gravity occurs in about 75 percent of narcoleptics, and it is a manifestation of REM sleep muscle
atonia during wakefulness. A catapultic attack can be partial with only slight buckling of
the knees, drooping of the head, loss of facial expression, sagging of the jaw, slurred speech,
and weakness of the arms. Many times the attack escalates into an episode of full paralysis
of the anti-gravity muscles, resulting in collapse of the individual.
Eye muscles and respiratory muscles are not affected. Individuals generally are aware
of an oncoming attack, and they find support or sit down, so they don't injure themselves
by collapsing. Attacks generally last only a few seconds to a few minutes, and the person
recovers and continues whatever he or she was doing. Longer attacks may be accompanied
by hypnagogic hallucinations. As I mentioned earlier, a very strange aspect of cataplexy
is that it is usually triggered by strong but positive emotions such as surprise, pleasure,
and laughter. An obvious question is whether narcolepsy is inherited. Is it a genetic disease?
The answer is yes and no. How can it be? Well, that's a long story.
There is no clear genetic inheritance pattern for narcolepsy, as there is for, let's say,
sickle cell anemia or cystic fibrosis. However, relatives of narcoleptics have a 10 to 40
times higher risk for developing narcolepsy than do those who have no relatives with narcolepsy.
So some genetic predisposition is suggested. The proof against a clear genetic cause, however,
comes from data on identical twins. When one twin has narcolepsy, there is only a 25 to
30 percent chance that the sibling will also develop narcolepsy. Although the epidemiological
and identical twin studies indicate that there is a weak genetic predisposition for narcolepsy,
there must also be an environmental factor. So how do we investigate the causes of narcolepsy
and find potential therapies? One very common and productive way to make progress is to have
an animal model of the disease that enables experiments that we cannot do in humans. For
example, selective breeding programs. In the late 1960s and the early 1970s, it was the
dawn of sleep medicine. I mentioned in lecture one that Bill DeMent was the leader of this
movement. And in the early 1970s, he was making many presentations to professional medical
societies about this new specialty, sleep medicine. In his presentations, he frequently showed
videos of patients with narcolepsy who were having catapultic attacks. After one of these
talks in 1972, he was approached by a veterinarian who was in the audience. The veterinarian
said that he had seen a dog with symptoms that looked just like the catapultic attack
shown in the lecture. Unfortunately, that dog had been euthanized because they thought
it had epilepsy. But the veterinarian had a film clip of the dog having its seizures.
Bill DeMent started showing that film clip in his lecture on human narcolepsy, and the
next year he was approached by a neurologist who had a friend with a dog with similar symptoms.
That dog was a French poodle named Monique, who was donated to Stanford. EEG studies of
Monique showed that she did not have epilepsy. Her catapultic attacks were triggered by strong
emotional responses, such as being given a favorite food or a toy. Similar results were
found in another dog, a doxon. And together, these studies established the existence of
canine narcolepsy. And then in 1976, Bill acquired four narcoleptic dobermans, and that
was the beginning of the canine narcolepsy breeding program at Stanford. It was soon
established that the narcolepsy in the dobermans and later in Labradors was due to a single
recessive gene. Since it was further established that the symptoms of narcolepsy in the dogs
were very similar to the symptoms seen in human narcoleptics, it was supposed that the
genetic basis for the disease in dogs and humans could be the same. So the effort was
begun to identify the exact gene and its gene product. In a way, this search for a narcolepsy
gene was a long shot. Unlike in the dobermans and the Labradors, narcolepsy in poodles,
beagles, doxons, collies, and other breeds was sporadic. That means that the disease
seemed to crop up almost at random, and that breeding two afflicted dogs did not produce
puppies with narcolepsy. Similarly, as I mentioned, narcolepsy in humans did not seem to have
a strong genetic component. Nevertheless, finding the narcoleptic gene in the dobermans
and the Labradors could lead to insights as to the causes of the disease. The massive
effort to locate the canine narcolepsy gene went on for many years, led by several investigators
and finally by Dr. Emmanuel Mignot. By the early 1990s, they had narrowed down the location
of the canine narcolepsy gene to a very small region of a chromosome, but that still presented
a huge challenge to find and sequence the exact gene.
In parallel to the work on dogs, Mignot and colleagues were pursuing the genetics of human
narcolepsy. They discovered that particular genes for components of the immune system
were present in about 85% of all narcoleptics. However, the gene for canine narcolepsy did
not match up with the location of the canine equivalent of these human immune system genes.
But by the late 1990s, the Mignot group was getting closer and closer to the canine narcolepsy
gene by laborious molecular genetic methods. At the same time, research programs at the
University of California in San Diego and the University of Texas were investigating
a newly discovered gene that was expressed in the hypothalamus. The San Diego group led
by Greg Sutcliffe first found this gene expressed in the hypothalamus of rats, and then they
used the sequence to find the same gene in mice. They found that the sequence was similar
to that of a gene for a gut hormone called secretin. But since it was expressed in the
hypothalamus, they called this new gene product and also its gene product, hypochritin. The
Texas group led by Masashi Yanagasawa came to study the same gene in rats through a totally
different route. The receptors for neurotransmitters frequently have similar intracellular signaling
mechanisms. The genes for these receptors therefore share similar coding sequences.
So if you fish out those coding sequences from an unknown mix of genes, you can find
genes for previously unknown receptors. These are called orphan receptors because their
functions and the molecules that bind to them are unknown.
Starting with two orphan receptors from the rat hypothalamus, the Yanagasawa group found
the peptides that bind to them. Then they found that if they synthesized these peptides
and injected them into the hypothalamus of rats, the rats ate more. They concluded that
these peptides played a role in controlling appetite, so they named them orexins from the
Greek word for appetite. This seemed to be a very logical conclusion, but one detail
that you have to keep in mind, they injected the orexin peptides in the mice at the beginning
of their work day. I don't mean the work day of the mice, I mean the work day of the scientists,
and that is the beginning of the sleep phase for the mice and the rats. The Texas group
went on to study these same genes and receptors in mice, as did the UCSD group. Using mice,
they did something very interesting. They genetically engineered a mouse to knock out
the orexin gene. These mice did not produce orexin. These mice ate less, thus supporting
the idea that orexin is involved in regulating food intake. But, always surprises when you
do something new. When they used nighttime video to study the behavior of these mice,
they made an important discovery. That could offer another explanation for the changes in
food intake. These mice slept more during the night, which is normally their active phase,
and also these mice frequently collapsed in their cages and remained motionless. They
were having cataplytic attacks. Could the increased sleep and the frequent cataplexy
be the cause of their decreased food intake during the dark phase?
These independent lines of research came together in 1999, when it was discovered that the canine
narcolepsy gene had the same sequence as one of the hypocretin orexin receptor genes. The
orexin knockout mice had narcolepsy. Now we have a very compelling story that includes
rats, mice, and dogs. There is a peptide in the hypothalamus that we now call hypocretin
or orexin, and the receptors for this peptide are found in a variety of regions of the brain,
including the groups of cells, nuclei, that are involved in promoting wake. Hypocritin
and allergic cells are therefore well positioned to coordinate the activities of all of these
nuclei to arouse the animal from sleep and to maintain it in an awake state.
Now remember the experiments in which orexin was injected into the hypothalamus of rats
at the beginning of the day, and they ate more. Well, the beginning of the day is the
beginning of the rat's sleep phase. If it receives a wake-promoting neuropeptide at
that time, it will spend more time awake. Animals and people who are awake usually eat more.
So it's still not certain if hypocretin orexin plays a direct and important role in the
regulation of food intake. Subsequent studies on rats have shown that hypocretin levels
are high during the dark phase and low during the light phase. Sleep deprivation increases
the levels of hypocretin during the light phase. Food deprivation however does not increase
hypocretin levels during the dark phase, when the rats would normally be active and eating.
Can we now apply all of these exciting discoveries in rats, mice, and dogs to humans? Big problem.
All of these discoveries would nicely fit a scenario in which human narcolepsy was a
genetically transmitted disease. But we have seen that that is not the case. Is there any
link at all? Is this a case where beautiful, exhaustive, and expensive research on animals
has no applicability to humans? Not so.
The discovery of hypocretin orexin and its probable link to narcolepsy, at least in the
animal models, gave the clinical scientists a new tool. Were there abnormalities in the
human hypocretin signaling system? The first question is whether or not there is a difference
in the production of hypocretin between normal and narcoleptic individuals. Now you can't
just stick a needle in the hypothalamus of a person and measure the hypocretin content.
So how can you answer this question? Many substances that are produced and released in
the brain end up in the cerebrospinal fluid. Now it's not pleasant to have a lumbar spinal
tap, but you can convince some people to do just about anything in the name of science.
So when spinal taps were done on narcoleptic and normal subjects, the difference was astounding.
The normal subjects had clearly measurable amounts of hypocretin in their cerebrospinal
fluid, but the narcoleptics had very, very little. The next question was why do they
have so very little hypocretin in their CSF? To answer this question, researchers studied
the brains of deceased narcoleptic and normal individuals who had donated their brains to
science. The area of the brain that they focused on was the hypothalamus. In thin slices of
the hypothalamus, they applied chemicals that stain cells containing hypocretin. They could
then count the number of hypocretin cells in each slice. There was a huge difference
between the hypothalamus of normal subjects and narcoleptic patients. In comparison to
the normal hypothalamus, the hypothalamus of narcoleptics had many fewer to almost no
hypocretin cells. And in some cases, there appeared to be evidence of cell damage in
the areas where the hypocretin cells should have been. So add this set of data to two
other observations. First, narcolepsy develops in young to middle-aged individuals. It is
usually not present in newborns or young children. Second, the one common feature of most narcoleptics
is they share a particular immune system gene. The seemingly unavoidable conclusion is that
narcolepsy is an autoimmune disease, like multiple sclerosis or Lou Gehrig's disease. For some
reason, there may be many, the bodies of individuals with particular immune system characteristics
can be triggered to attack their hypocretin neurons. As a result, the hypocretin neurons
are destroyed, no hypocretin is produced, and the symptoms of narcolepsy ensue.
I have probably given you much more than you need to know about the scientific story behind
the discovery of hypocretin and its role in narcolepsy, as well as its possible role in
coordinating normal sleep and wake. However, I hope you have gotten from this story an appreciation
of how seemingly random and unrelated lines of investigation that start with no promise
of having a relevance for understanding human disease can come together in totally unexpected
ways, the result being the creation of new understanding of both basic mechanisms of
physiological functions as well as the underlying causes of disease. An interesting side light
on serendipity comes out of this whole saga. In the mid-1990s, the Canaan narcolepsy colony
and project at Stanford were led by Dr. Thomas Kilduff. The colony and the project were taken
over by Dr. Mignot when Tom Kilduff took a sabbatical to join the lab of Greg Sutcliffe.
It was Tom Kilduff and a colleague, Luis de la Silla, working at UCSD, who discovered
the hypocretin gene. None of these individuals had any inkling that their separate lines
of investigation were converging on the same target. Are there treatments for narcolepsy?
As with all autoimmune diseases, there are no cures. Therefore, the only options are
treatments for the symptoms. Since the major complaint of narcoleptics is excessive daytime
sleepiness, that is the main focus of treatment. The first line of defense against daytime
sleepiness is good sleep hygiene. This aspect of self-care is important for everyone, but
especially important for individuals with narcolepsy if they are to avoid or to minimize
the use of pharmacological treatments. Eventually, over 90% of narcoleptics do use medications,
but even so, efforts to practice good sleep hygiene can minimize the dependence on those
medications. Maintaining a regular sleep schedule is important, and maintaining a good sleep
environment will help the narcoleptic improve the quality of his or her nighttime sleep.
A good sleep schedule is more than having a regular bedtime. It also includes winding
down before sleep, not continuing work right up until bedtime. Engaging in some relaxing
activities prior to bed. The sleep environment reinforces these practices. You should not
have things associated with work in the sleeping environment. No computer, no desk, and probably
no television. Other behavioral advice would be no heavy meals and alcohol late in the
evening and certainly no caffeinated beverages. If in spite of all of these precautions, sleep
is still interrupted. It is important not to lie in bed and worry about it. The person
who can't sleep should just get up and do something relaxing until the urge to sleep
returns. All of this advice is difficult for a narcoleptic to follow, but it can help.
Another behavioral help for excessive daytime sleepiness is to give in to it. Schedule one
or two naps during the day, maybe just 15 minutes, but naps can help decrease the sleepiness
during the rest of the day. The medical treatments that are commonly used for narcolepsy include
stimulants, antidepressants, sleeping pills, and anti-cataplectic medications. Probably
the most used stimulant other than caffeine is methylphenidate or Ritalin. Taken during
the day, it reduces daytime sleepiness in about three quarters of narcolepsy patients.
Unfortunately, it has some undesirable side effects in many individuals, including headache,
nervousness, and gastrointestinal problems. The other commonly used stimulant is Modafinil
or Provigil. The wake-promoting properties of this drug were discovered in France long
before there was any understanding of its mechanism. It was shown to increase wakefulness
and vigilance, and therefore found its way into treatment for excessive daytime sleepiness.
We now know that this molecule enhances dopamine neurotransmission. It does this by interfering
with the dopamine transporter that takes dopamine that has been released at the synapse back
into the cells. Therefore, the dopamine sticks around longer in the synapse, and its efficacy
is increased. The second major symptom of narcolepsy is cataplexy. A number of drugs
that are also used as antidepressants are shown to be effective in reducing the frequency
and severity of cataplytic attacks. Two of these drugs, chlamypramine and inmypramine,
are tricyclic antidepressants. These are rather old drugs, but they block the reuptake of
serotonin and norepinephrine. Once again, these neurotransmitters are released at the
synapses, they have their effects on the receptors of the postsynaptic cells, and their activity
is limited by their removal from the synapse by reuptake mechanisms. A third antidepressant
that is effective against cataplexy is fluoxetine, also known as Prozac. Prozac is a selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor that has fewer side effects than the tricyclic antidepressants.
What all of these drugs have in common is that they enhance the activity of some of the
neurotransmitters associated with the promotion of wakefulness and vigilance. Most recently,
the drug Sodium Oxidate, commercially known as Xirem, and chemically known as Gamma Hydroxybutyrate,
has been used to treat cataplexy. The mechanism whereby this drug acts on cataplexy is not
known, but its use is controversial because of its potential for abuse. Recreationally
and illegally, Gamma Hydroxybutyrate is used on the club and the rave scene because it
enhances euphoria, sociability, sensuality, and reduces inhibition. In sports that has
been used for performance enhancement, it elevates the release of growth hormone. The
infamy of Gamma Hydroxybutyrate, however, comes mostly from its reputation as a date
rape drug because it enhances the effects of alcohol and can easily be slipped into
drinks. Reducing inhibition and consciousness and inducing amnesia, it can facilitate sexual
assault. At higher doses, it has very dangerous side effects, including suppression of breathing
and slowing of the heart, leading to death. Obviously, this is not a drug to be taken
lightly.
Even though all of the research on narcolepsy that I discussed has not led to greatly improved
therapeutics for narcolepsy, ironically it has produced a new drug concept for the treatment
of insomnia in non-narcoleptics. The concept is to block hypercretin receptors. Drugs
that have now been developed can do that, and they are in various stages of preclinical
and clinical trials.
Taken at the beginning of the sleep phase, these drugs called hypercretin antagonists
block the action of endogenous hypercretin and therefore promote deeper and more continuous
sleep. Finding better treatments for narcolepsy is an important goal for sleep researchers,
although narcolepsy is not life-threatening, it seriously compromises the quality of life
for those who are afflicted. When the disease manifests at young ages, such as in the teen
age years and early twenties, it can lead to poor school performance, social impairment
and inability to engage in many of the normal activities enjoyed by youth. In college, the
poor nighttime sleep is bound to become a more serious problem, causing exacerbation
of daytime sleepiness and inability to stay awake in class. Narcoleptics may avoid social
interactions that would bring on cataplectic attacks and therefore experience isolation
and alienation. In school and in the workforce, the narcoleptic will find it difficult to
perform at a high level while suffering from excessive daytime sleepiness. And those who
do not understand the disease might consider such individuals as lazy. Frequently, individuals
with narcolepsy are falsely suspected of taking illegal drugs or being alcoholics, so untreated
narcolepsy can be psychosocially devastating and career limiting. But with proper management,
individuals with narcolepsy can lead normal and productive personal and professional lives.
Narcolepsy involves intrusion of the fascinating and dramatic component of REM sleep, muscle
atonia into wakefulness. Previously, I suggested to you that the function of the resulting
paralysis during REM sleep could be to prevent the acting out of dreams. So what are dreams
really? That is what we'll turn to next. In the meantime, may your dreams be sweet.
