In the last lecture, I described the famous case of Henry M. Due to a surgical treatment
for epileptic seizures, he lost his ability to form declarative memories.
The inability to remember people, places, events, and facts was totally debilitating
for Henry M. But he lived a long, healthy life into his 80s.
Henry M. was able to form procedural memories.
And I devoted the last lecture to studies of the interactions between sleep and the stages
of procedural memory, encoding, consolidation, stabilization, reactivation, and re-consolidation.
In this lecture, I will explore what Henry M. lost, declarative memory, and how sleep
is involved in our abilities to form conscious memories of what we experience.
We will go beyond that to show that sleep improves the ability to use the facts we remember.
Finally, we will discuss a model of memory processes that involves the part of the brain
that Henry M. lost, and suggest hypotheses about sleep and memory consolidation, reactivation,
and re-consolidation that we can then explore in the next lecture with animal studies.
In 1885, the German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus published the results of an experiment
that he did on memory of nonsense syllables.
His objective was to quantify the process of forgetting.
He used nonsense syllables to avoid the problem of dealing with facts that were already well
entrenched in long-term memory.
As you might expect, he showed that forgetting was a function of time, and that it was rapid
at first and then gradually slowed down.
His time points were 20 minutes, 1 hour, 8.8 hours, 1 day, 2 days, 6 days, and 31 days.
He was very unhappy with his own data, because the day one result did not fit the declining
curve described by the rest of the data.
He described this result as not being credible, and probably due to accidental errors in the
experiment.
What he did not appreciate was the fact that the time points between 20 minutes and 8.8
hours were over the usual working day, and the time points between 8.8 hours and 1 day
encompassed the overnight sleep phase.
Seeking to characterize forgetting, Ebbinghaus missed the important discovery of the memory-enhancing
function of sleep.
Corneal psychologists following Ebbinghaus found similar discrepancies in their data,
but they also did not grasp the significance.
The problem was taken up again by Cornell psychologist Jenkins and Dallenbach in 1929.
They taught subjects a list of nonsense syllables.
Training continued until the subject could recite from memory all of the syllables.
Their ability to repeat that recitation was then tested at 1, 2, 4, and 8 hours after
learning.
However, in one experiment, the 8 hours was over the normal wake phase of the day, and
in the other experiment, the 8 hours was over the sleep phase of the night.
They had to wake the subjects up, of course, at different times to be able to do the testing.
What they found in the awake experiment was that a syllable recall curve fell rapidly over
the first 2 hours and then more gradually over the next 6 hours, reaching the lowest
ability to recall the syllables at the 8 hour time point.
In the sleep experiment, the recall curve fell rapidly in the first hour, less so in
the second hour, and then did not decline any more over the next 6 hours.
Their conclusion was that forgetting was less of a decay of memory than an issue of interference
from new experience and information coming in.
In other words, in their view, sleep was a passive state, and the benefit they saw to
memory was due to the absence of wake.
Sleep did not have anything to do with stabilizing and consolidating the memory.
It just prevented the interference that normally occurs because of the constant inflow of new
information during wake.
The conclusions of Jankensen-Dalenbach were not challenged by experimental results until
2006.
This is rather remarkable given all of the work that was going on investigating the role
of sleep in procedural memory which I discussed in the last lecture.
Now this very direct and incisive study was led by Jeff Ellen Bogan.
The technique was to have subjects learn a set of word associations, for example, window
with table, car with apple, tree with hammer, let's call that list A.
The subjects were practiced on list A until they could remember them all.
Everything involved the experimenter speaking one word of the pair and the subject responding
with the matched word.
The number of trials necessary to reach perfect performance did not differ if the training
was done in the morning or if the training was done in the evening.
The subjects were divided into four groups.
Two of the groups were called the non-interference groups.
They were simply trained and tested over a 12-hour interval that did or did not include
sleep.
As expected, the sleep group showed a better recall performance than the non-sleep group.
The other two groups were called the interference groups.
These groups were also trained and tested on list A over a 12-hour interval that did
or do not include sleep.
However, they each received an interference intervention just before testing.
The interference was learning a new list of word associations, let's call it list
B, just before they were tested on list A.
Based on the Jenkins and Dallenbach conclusions that sleep is simply a time when there is
no interference, the hypothesis would be that the interference imposed on these two groups
should have similar effects on their ability to recall the test list.
This is not what the data showed.
The interference group that had been awake between training and testing showed much poorer
recall than the wake group that had not received the interference intervention.
So in this group, the memory of the A list was impaired by training on the B list.
The memory of the A list was vulnerable to interference.
In contrast, the sleep group appeared immune to the interference intervention.
The recall performance in this group was much better than in the interference group
that had not slept and was almost as good as in the two non-interference groups.
So the conclusion had to be that sleep did more than simply eliminate sources of interference.
It protected the declarative memory from being susceptible to interference.
An additional group was trained in the evening and tested 24 hours later after receiving
the interference intervention.
The recall in this group was just as good as in the 12-hour interference group that
had slept.
The conclusion had to be that the sleep following the training protected the memory even throughout
the succeeding entire day of wakeful activity.
The Ellenbogen study was the first to demonstrate that sleep protects declarative memories from
associative interference.
It proved that sleep does not simply provide a time free of interference, rather it plays
an active role in consolidating declarative memory.
How does sleep do this?
Animal studies that we will discuss in the next lecture implicate the part of the brain
that was damaged in Henry M, the hippocampus.
Incredibly interesting experiments have recorded the activity of large numbers of neurons in
the hippocampus while animals were exploring a maze.
Specific neurons always fired when the animal was at the same location in the maze.
These were called place cells because their activity was associated with a particular
place.
As the animal ran through the maze, a pattern of place cell firing was recorded.
During subsequent non-rem sleep, the same patterns of place cell firing were recorded
again.
This pattern of neuronal activity represents the memory of the experience.
Was this memory being replayed during sleep?
Could memory reactivation and replay during sleep be part of the mechanism for memory
consolidation?
I will come back to these animal studies to answer these questions in the next lecture.
But here, let's ask if there is evidence for memory reactivation as part of the memory
consolidation and enhancement process in humans.
We can't put a bunch of electrodes in the hippocampus of a human to look for neuronal
signature of a memory.
But we can ask whether we could reactivate a memory during sleep and thereby improve
its consolidation.
This experiment was done in a study by Bjorn Rash, Jan Born, and colleagues at the University
of Lubeck.
The test they used was an object-pair spatial recall test.
The subjects were shown a grid with 30 squares.
Training consisted of flashing 15 pairs of images on this grid, one pair at a time.
Testing consisted of being shown one of each pair, and the subject then had to indicate
the location of the other member of the pair.
They repeated the training until they were able to get at least 60% correct.
Training occurred in the evening just before sleep.
Testing was in the morning, just after awakening.
The experimental manipulation was to expose the subjects to an odor, actually the odor
of roses, during the training, and then at some subsequent time during sleep or wake
prior to the recall testing in the morning.
The assumption, of course, is that re-exposure to the odor will reactivate the memory.
The advantages of using an odor in this attempt to reactivate a memory during sleep are that
odors are well known as cues for recall of episodic memories, they are unlikely to arouse
the subject or disturb sleep, and the olfactory system has a direct input to higher-order
neural structures including the hippocampus.
The results were very interesting.
Baselines for comparison were the recall scores with no odor applied during training or at
any other time prior to recall.
The only protocol that resulted in an improved recall score was when the odor was present
during training and then subsequently during non-REM sleep during the first quarter of
the sleep phase.
If there was no odor during training, but it was introduced during non-REM sleep, it
had no effect.
If the odor was present during training and then reintroduced during REM sleep only, it
had no effect.
If the odor was present during training and then applied again when the subject was awake
prior to sleep, it had no effect.
The conclusion had to be that reactivation of the memory by the odor stimulus resulted
in improved consolidation of that memory.
To confirm that the odor paired with training was activating the hippocampus during subsequent
sleep, the researchers had subject sleep in the fMRI machine following the training.
Exposure of the subject to the training odor activated his hippocampus.
In summary, the odor presentation experiments show that the training odor when presented
during non-REM sleep activates the hippocampus and subsequent performance on the task that
was trained is improved.
But how specific is this effect?
Is it a simple activation of hippocampal memory consolidation processes or is it specific
to a particular memory that is reactivated?
Did the odor stimulus just simply jazz up the activity of the hippocampus or did it
reactivate one particular memory that was then strengthened?
This question was addressed in another very interesting experiment in Ken Poller's lab
at Northwestern University.
Just like in the odor experiment, the subject was presented with a grid on a computer screen.
He was then shown 50 different images.
Each one had a unique position on the grid.
Paired with each image was a sound that could be associated with that image, cat, meow,
kettle, whistle, dog, bark, and so forth.
Testing consisted of each image appearing at the center of the grid and the subject had
to use the computer mouse to move the image to its correct location on the grid.
Everything continued until the subject was able to place each object within four centimeters
of its correct position.
Testing score was the average error of where the subject placed the images.
During a 75-minute nap, the subject had an EEG recording while listening to white noise.
When he was in non-REM sleep, 25 of the image-associated sounds were played within the white noise
background at a decibel level that did not exceed the white noise.
Testing following the nap showed that there was much less error in placing the images
that had been cued by a sound during non-REM sleep in comparison to the images that were
not cued.
This was a dramatic demonstration that specific memories could be reactivated during non-REM
sleep and that reactivation and subsequent reconciliation strengthened those memories.
It seems as if we are building up a pretty convincing case that sleep and especially
non-REM sleep plays an important role in the consolidation of declarative memories.
Let's come at this proposition from another angle.
The most significant feature of non-REM sleep is the EEG slow-wave activity.
In the last lecture we saw that EEG slow-wave activity reflects prior activity in a localized
region of the brain and that increased slow-wave activity correlated with improved performance.
Granted, that work involved a procedural memory, but if manipulations that influence declarative
memory also act through non-REM sleep, perhaps the effects of these manipulations are mediated
by slow-wave activity.
That proposition was tested by Lisa Marshall and colleagues in Jan Born's lab in Lubbock.
What they did was to enhance slow-wave activity during non-REM sleep following learning to
see if it improved declarative memory consolidation and subsequent performance.
The test they used was a word pair association task as I described above for the odor study.
Subjects were trained on the word pair associations until they could reach a performance criterion
of 60% right answers.
They were then allowed to enter their normal night sleep.
The way that the researchers manipulated the subject's slow-wave activity was through direct
current stimulation, DCS.
Subjects were placed on either side of the forehead over the frontal lobes of the brain,
which are implicated in declarative memory.
And by passing current through these electrodes, they could induce oscillating electrical potentials
in the underlying neural tissue of the sleeping subjects.
They used a frequency of 0.75 hertz, which is the peak frequency of the slow-wave activity
during deep non-REM sleep.
After the subjects fell asleep and during the first non-REM stage, current was passed
through the electrodes to induce strong electrical potential cycles.
The stimulus was applied for five five-minute intervals separated by one-minute intervals
of no stimulation.
The stimulation was only delivered during the first non-REM episode of the night.
The subjects were tested to see how many word pairs they remembered on the following morning.
Those subjects that experienced the enhanced slow-wave activity induced by the direct current
stimulation performed significantly better on the recall test and the control subjects
who did not receive stimulation.
Could these results be simply due to the increased electrical activity stimulated by the electrodes?
New control experiments indicate that this is not the case.
In one control experiment, they applied the exact same stimulus parameters and timing,
but they used a frequency of 5 hertz rather than 0.75 hertz, which is 0.5 or 5 hertz is
closer to the EEG theta rhythm.
That protocol had no effect on the subsequent recall performance.
Another question is whether the timing of the stimulus delivery first quarter of the
night was critical.
In the memory reactivation experiments I discussed earlier, the stimuli had to be delivered during
early non-REM sleep to be effective, and that is why in this experiment they applied the
direct current stimulation during the first non-REM episode of the night.
But is that critical?
To answer that question, the investigators applied the exact same stimulus protocol 0.75
hertz during the last quarter of the night, and that had no effect on subsequent recall
performance.
So coming at the problem from an entirely different angle, we again see that slow-wave
activity of non-REM sleep during the early part of the sleep phase is critical for the
consolidation of declarative memories.
I think that you can see we are on solid ground when we conclude that declarative memories
are consolidated during sleep, meaning that they are more accessible for recall during
subsequent wake.
But does sleep do anything else for declarative memory?
Declared of memories as isolated packets of information would not be valuable resources
for extracting meaning from the past, that is, meaning that can be applied in new situations.
Is it possible that during sleep there is an integration of new memories into a much
broader and deeper knowledge base?
Jim Ellen Bogan, Matt Walker, and colleagues designed a very clever experiment to test
this proposition.
They started by designing what appears to me to be a lot of psychedelic Easter eggs.
These were oval images that were patterned and colored in unique ways.
Let's name these images A through F. Subjects were then trained to know that A was greater
than B, that B was greater than C, that C was greater than D, and so forth.
These relationships were called premise pairs.
The subjects were able to correctly rank all of the premise pairs when tested 20 minutes,
12 hours, or 24 hours after training.
The next test was whether the subjects could infer relationships with one degree of separation.
In other words, could they decide that A was greater than C, or that D was greater than
F?
When tested after 20 minutes, the subjects could not perform above chance on this test.
However, after sleep at the 12 or 24 hour retests, they were able to make these discriminations
with a significant degree of correctness.
It seems as if the consolidation of the knowledge of the premise pairs enabled them to use that
information to make decisions about the relationships between objects removed from the rankings by
one degree of separation.
What about two degrees of separation?
Was A greater than D?
They could not perform on this task 20 minutes after training, but they could 12 or 24 hours
after training.
Once again, we have to ask whether the results are simply due to the amount of time that
passes.
Does memory consolidation occur during wake, but it takes longer than 20 minutes of wake?
To answer this question, the investigators added an experimental group that was trained
as the other groups were, but then kept awake for the 12 hours before the first testing.
The result was that at the 12 or 24 hour testing times, the sleep deprived group did fairly
well on the one degree of separation decisions, but not on the two degrees of separation decisions.
Yes, some consolidation occurred during extended wake, but the maximum integration of the knowledge
required sleep.
If you are trying to extract from the experiments we discussed in this lecture and the last
a conclusion about the specific roles of non-REM sleep and REM sleep in these memory processes,
you are probably confused.
And well, you should be.
Right now there is no clear answer.
Many studies have not addressed the question, and for those that have addressed the question,
the results are varied.
With the visual procedural memory studies, one study indicated an importance of REM,
and another study indicated importance of early sleep, therefore non-REM.
And finally, a third study that did correlational analysis of the EEG recordings and the performance
indicated that both stages were important, possibly indicating a two-step process.
That conclusion was reinforced by a NAP study in which a NAP was, with just non-REM sleep,
improved performance, but a NAP with both non-REM and REM sleep was even better.
The finger-tapping procedural task seemed to benefit most from non-REM sleep late in
the night.
For declarative memory, some studies that we haven't discussed point to the importance
of deep non-REM early in the night.
The declarative memory reactivation experiments were only effective when the stimuli were
applied during non-REM sleep, but maybe that is because there is inhibition of sensory input
during REM, so the applied stimuli would not get through.
At present, there is no definitive answer as to the separate roles of the sleep states
in memory consolidation.
One study, however, strongly supports a two-step memory consolidation process and suggests
that non-REM sleep may be important for the early stages of memory consolidation and REM
sleep may be important for integration of that memory into the background memory of
the individual.
This is a rather complex experiment carried out by a group of investigators working with
Sarah Mednick at University of California, San Diego.
The experiment involves a test called the Remote Associates Test, or RAT for short.
In this test, the subject is presented with three unrelated words, and he is asked to
come up with a third word that ties them together.
For example, the three words might be cookie, heart, and sixteen.
The association they have in common is sweet.
A cookie is sweet, a semantic relationship.
Sweetheart, a compounded word.
And sweet, sixteen, a syntactic relationship.
A second test used in the experiment is an analogy test, fastest as slow as riches to
poor.
A third element in the experiment is the phenomenon that is called priming.
Priming is an influence of exposure to a stimulus on the response to a later stimulus.
So if you had used or been exposed to the word sweet prior to responding to the rat
item I just described, you would be more likely to come up with the word sweet as your answer.
Your brain had been primed to think of sweet.
Okay, here is the experiment.
Subjects come into the lab in the morning, and they took a rat consisting of thirty items.
Following that, they did an analogy test with thirty items.
However, the correct answers on fifteen of the analogies were also the correct responses
to fifteen of the rat items.
In the early afternoon, the subjects were divided into three groups.
One group remained in quiet, restful wake, and one group was allowed to nap while their
EEGs were being recorded.
Naps ended when the individual had ninety minutes of sleep or had been in bed for two
hours.
Based on the EEG recordings, the nap group was divided into those individuals that had
only non-REM sleep, and those whose naps also included REM sleep, hence the three groups.
At the end of the day, they all retook the rat.
All three groups, the wakeful group, the non-REM group, and the non-REM REM group, showed improvement
on their rat scores over the day.
The important difference, however, was performance on their rat items that had been primed by
the analogy test.
The wake and the non-REM only nap group showed no difference in the scores for the primed
or not primed rat items, but the group that had had non-REM and REM sleep during their
naps showed a big improvement in their performance on the primed rat items in comparison to their
performance on the not primed rat items.
The conclusion was that the REM sleep facilitated a higher level of memory processing and integration.
Other studies have also implicated REM sleep in promoting insightful capabilities above
and beyond the simple consolidation of a memory.
Again, the indication is that memory consolidation during sleep is a two-step process, and it
may involve non-REM for one step and REM for another step.
A working model for declarative memory consolidation involves the part of the brain that Henry
M. Loss, the hippocampus.
This model also involves communications between the hippocampus and the cerebral cortex, where
long-term memories are stored and presumably used in cognitive processes.
In this model, the hippocampus is considered a fast-learning but temporary repository, and
the cortex is a slow-learning but long-term repository.
In wakeful experience, memory encoding occurs in parallel in both locations, but it's stronger
in the fast-learning system than in the slow-learning system.
Then during sleep, the reactivation of the memory traces in the fast system drives concurrent
reactivation in the slow-learning system.
You can think of the fast-learning system, the hippocampus, as acting like a mentor to
the slow-learning system, the cortex.
But the advantage of this process is that less important information is not reactivated
in the cortex and therefore does not get consolidated.
For example, if a subject in one of the experiments I described is asked the next day to describe
some extraneous detail about the room in which the training was done, he would probably not
remember.
The advantage of these consolidation processes happening offline, i.e. during sleep, is that
there is no new information coming in to interfere with the memory transfer and consolidation
process.
What about the roles of non-REM and REM sleep?
Non-REM is surely the sleep state when most of this system consolidation is taking place,
the interactions between the fast and the slow-learning components.
As I will explain in the next lecture on animal studies, they demonstrate the neural
communication between these two areas of the brain during non-REM sleep and clearly the
fast-learning system can be reactivated during non-REM sleep.
So what about REM sleep?
This could be the time when the memories that have been consolidated in the long-term store
get integrated into the overall memory stores without being altered or modified by other
incoming information, either from the senses or from the short-term store.
This lecture and the last one have focused almost exclusively on human studies, therefore
they are limited to phenomenological approaches rather than mechanistic ones such as recording
from neurons in the hippocampus.
Nevertheless, I have tried to show you how ingeniously designed behavioral studies can
yield considerable insight into the very complex mental processes we are trying to understand.
In the next lecture, I will move us into animal experiments to see whether more mechanistic
approaches support the hypotheses that have been generated by these phenomenological studies
in humans.
Now then, get plenty of non-REM and REM sleep so that you remember what I have told you
and you can gain insight that you can bring to our next lecture.
Sweet and insightful dreams.
