As a health complaint or quality of life complaint, insomnia is almost as common as the common
cold.
Insomnia is defined as difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or both.
The very large-scale survey included the question, have you ever had insomnia?
95% responded yes.
One wonders if the other 5% were lying.
Nevertheless, an occasional bout of insomnia hardly constitutes a health problem, but chronic
insomnia over weeks, months, and years does, and it should be treated.
But I hasten to say that we cannot ignore the potential danger of even short-term or
occasional insomnia.
The consequences of even a single night without sleep or poor sleep are impaired vigilance
and performance the following day.
Ultimately, there is the danger of falling asleep at an inappropriate time, such as
when driving.
Whereas you might think that you can easily deal with one night of short sleep or without
sleep, consider the fact that most people carry around a sleep debt.
Someone with a large sleep debt is going to be more impaired by an episode of insomnia
than someone who has been fully rested prior to the occurrence of the insomnia.
And as we will see, a condition leading to insomnia is overactivity and stress.
Someone who has been burning the candle at both ends and is getting stressed out is highly
likely to have built up a considerable sleep debt before experiencing a night of insomnia.
Let me introduce the subject of insomnia with a very poignant case.
In 1988, the Congress of the United States created a commission to look into the problem
of sleep deprivation in the United States.
It was called the National Commission on Sleep Disorders Research, and it resulted in the
creation of the National Sleep Center for Sleep Disorders Research within the National
Institutes of Health, the NIH.
The commission was chaired by my colleague and whom I have mentioned many times, Dr.
Bill DeMenn.
The commission heard testimony from sleep experts, sleep researchers, government agencies,
patient advocates, etc., etc., and they also heard testimony from individuals who have
suffered from sleep problems.
I will tell you about the testimony of one woman.
In August of 1991, this woman and her family were vacationing at the beach with her sister's
family.
Their relaxing, enjoyable, extended family get-together was interrupted by news that
Saddam Hussein's army had invaded Kuwait.
Her husband, a reserve officer, was immediately called to active duty, and overnight he was
on his way to the Middle East.
The woman was extremely worried, of course, and found it difficult to sleep.
The situation was made worse when her brother-in-law had a sudden heart attack while jogging on
the beach.
He was rushed by helicopter to a large medical center, and his wife went with him, leaving
their three children with her sister, our witness, who had two of her own children.
Understandably, our witness was even more stressed and worried and could not sleep.
After lying awake for three nights, she saw a physician and asked for something to help
her sleep.
The physician said, sleeping pills are addicting.
Just drink warm milk and have a hot bath before going to bed and listen to some soft music.
Good advice for a trivial case of insomnia, but perhaps not for a serious, acute case.
After another sleepless night, she was too exhausted to care for the five young children
in her care.
So she called her mother, who lived about 200 miles away, and asked if she could take
the kids and come and stay with her mother.
They all set out for Grandmother's house.
As they got closer to their destination, our witness began to feel an overwhelming sense
of relief that her mother would take the burden off of her.
The first signs of drowsiness resulting from her sleep debt began to show.
It was mid-afternoon, they were driving through a small town.
Without slowing her car in the slightest, she went right through a red light.
Later she did not remember the town or the light, but she did remember the screeching
brakes of a pickup truck that crashed into the side of her car.
She and her two children in the front seat sustained minor injuries, but her sister's
three children in the back seat were killed instantly.
I tell you this sad story for several reasons.
First to make the point that even short-term insomnia is something to take seriously.
Second, to emphasize that the serious consequences of insomnia are impairments of daytime alertness
and cognition.
And third, to tell you that judicious use of sleeping medications is not a bad thing.
To shun their use completely can put lives at risk.
Many of the individuals who seek medical help for insomnia are suffering from chronic insomnia.
That is insomnia that extends over weeks to years.
How frequent is this?
Surveys that are a bit more incisive than the one that simply asked, have you experienced
insomnia, indicate that up to 50% of the population has experienced recurring bouts of insomnia
that have been disturbing and not just incidental experiences.
About 10% of the population suffers from chronic insomnia.
It tends to get worse with age, and women are a little more prone to chronic insomnia
than men.
The patient usually seeks help because of the distress of not being able to sleep or
to feelings of fatigue and exhaustion during the day.
A common problem is impairments of daytime alertness that interferes with work and other
like activities.
When the self-assessed insomniac comes into the clinic, the physician has little to go
on other than the patient's subjective reports.
There are no quick, objective diagnostic tests for insomnia.
Because the subjective reporting of patients can be highly misleading, a critical component
of the examination is questions about daytime functionality.
Rarely is an all-night sleep recording or an MSLT done on patients that are simply complaining
of insomnia.
The skills of the physician really come into play to find out what the sleep pattern of
the person is, what factors might be influencing it, and what are the best therapies to recommend.
One extreme example of how the skill of the physician is important comes from a case described
by my friend Bill DeMene.
A young lady came across the country to consult with him.
She complained of severe chronic insomnia and had actually been released from the Peace
Corps because of her apparently intractable insomnia.
She was so desperate and had gone to such a personal expense to seek his help that he
conducted an MSLT.
Surprisingly, she appeared less sleep-deprived than most university students.
He then conducted an all-night polysomnographic recording on her, and it appeared entirely
normal.
Bill sat down with her and carefully went over all of the data and showed her how normal
her sleep EEG was.
He was very authoritative in assuring her that she did not have to worry about the quality
of her sleep.
She flew back home and had no more problems with insomnia.
So in the two case histories I have just told you about, you have seen a case of temporary
insomnia with disastrous consequences and a case of supposed serious chronic insomnia
that had no consequences at all.
Only what we call insomnia encompasses a great diversity of conditions, and there is no one
size that fits all, that fits all diagnoses or fits all treatments.
It's important to keep in mind that insomnia is not a disease, it is a symptom, and this
symptom can have many, many causes.
It is necessary to treat the underlying causes to mitigate this symptom.
We will consider some of the most common underlying causes of insomnia.
The list is long.
First, let's put them into some organization.
We can divide cases of insomnia into those that are primary insomnia, meaning that they
are direct problems with the sleep control mechanisms, and secondary insomnia, meaning
that they are due to disturbances of the normal sleep control mechanisms.
Another way of putting this is that primary insomnia are not due to medical, psychiatric,
or environmental causes, but secondary insomnia are.
Let me illustrate this difference between primary and secondary insomnia with cases
arising from circadian control of sleep.
We discussed in the circadian lectures the problems of advanced and delayed phase syndromes.
These are real neurological problems with the circadian system.
The circadian system is responsible for timing the onset and the end of the daily sleep phase.
There is some evidence that genetic mechanisms are involved.
Some cases have been shown to run in families, and at least one gene difference has been
seen in a family in which advanced sleep phase syndrome exists in several family members.
It is clear that these intrinsic characteristics of the circadian system that deviate from normal
would cause symptoms of insomnia.
The advanced sleep phase syndrome would cause early morning insomnia, and the delayed sleep
phase syndrome would cause sleep onset insomnia, assuming in both cases that the individual
is trying to entrain to a normal daily cycle.
We would define insomnia due to advanced or delayed phase syndrome as being primary insomnia.
In contrast, temporary insomnia is due to jet lag or shift work would be secondary insomnia.
The circadian systems of these individuals are working just fine, but the activities
of the individuals are putting them in situations where the normal circadian alerting is opposing
the abnormal schedule of sleep.
The very clearest case of a primary insomnia is the fatal familial insomnia we discussed
in the neuroanatomy lecture.
You will remember that this is a prion disease that damages a part of the brain that enables
the entrance into sleep.
Eventually this brain region inhibits the flow of alerting influences through the thalamus.
Once that control mechanism is gone, the individual cannot make the transition into sleep, no
matter how sleep deprived he or she is.
As the name of this disorder implies, it results in death, not long after the insomnia is complete.
Another major group of primary insomnia are called psychophysiological insomnias.
They are characterized by autonomic hyperarousal.
The alerting influences in their brains are excessive and oppose the onset of sleep.
An example of a condition that leads to such hyperarousal is hyperthyroidism, too much thyroid
hormone, and another is hypercortisolemia, too much of the adrenal hormone cortisol.
But if the source of the excess cortisol is from drug treatment, then we would be dealing
with a secondary insomnia because it would be secondary to the medical treatment regimen.
There are some cases of insomnia that stem from problems with basic sleep mechanisms
that many would not consider primary insomnias, but I would.
For example, nightmares.
A condition that is very much in the news these days is PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder.
Individuals with PTSD suffer from extreme recurring nightmares, which is a REM sleep disorder.
These individuals can be so traumatized by their dreams that they try to avoid sleep.
I would consider that a primary insomnia because it stems from a sleep mechanism.
Another example would be restless leg syndrome and periodic limb movement disorder.
These are considered separate conditions with restless leg syndrome occurring during wake
and periodic limb movement occurring during sleep, usually during non-REM sleep early
in the night.
Restless leg syndrome is the occurrence of very disturbing sensations in the legs that
drives the individual to just have to move them.
When this occurs at bedtime, it can impair the ability to fall asleep.
Periodic leg movement disorder is the rhythmic movement of the legs during sleep, which can
wake the person.
Both of these disorders involve problems with the normal sleep-associated relaxation of
motor activity, and therefore I would consider them examples of primary insomnias.
But some would not agree.
What does it matter?
They still impede quality sleep and result in daytime fatigue, loss of vigilance, and
impaired cognition.
And there are many cases of chronic insomnia that cannot be categorized as secondary insomnia
because they cannot be traced to any medical, psychiatric, or environmental cause.
They are called idiopathic, which simply means that the physician in the medical community
don't have a clue as to the underlying cause or mechanism.
Of course, brain damage due to accident or stroke can result in insomnia, even though
the exact brain mechanism involved can't be identified.
A question I am always asked is what about reports of people who do not sleep and suffer
no ill effects?
I assure you that there are no documented cases of such individuals.
It is not unusual to have people claim that they do not sleep, but inevitably when they
are tested in the sleep clinic, they sleep just fine.
Similarly, like the young lady who sought consultation with Dr. Dement because of her
chronic insomnia, many people think they are not sleeping, but they actually are.
In fact, about 4% of all cases of self-reported insomnia are sleeping perfectly well.
These individuals truly think that they are not sleeping.
Cases like this have resulted in a diagnostic category termed sleep state misperception.
It is thought that in these individuals, brain activity is at such a level that they feel
they are awake even though they are unquestionably asleep.
Such individuals show normal MSLTs and show no signs of excessive daytime sleepiness,
loss of vigilance, or subjective fatigue.
There has been some success in training these individuals to recognize their own normal sleep
and thereby allay their concerns.
It is interesting and instructive to consider the few cases that tried to establish how
long a normal individual can go without sleep.
What are the absolute limits to insomnia apart from what we know from the rare disease fatal
familial insomnia?
There have been several well-documented efforts to push the insomnia limits.
Peter Tripp was a popular Top 40 Countdown DJ in the 1950s.
At the peak of his popularity in 1959, he attempted a wake-a-thon for charity.
He was observed constantly by physicians, and much of this time he was in a glass booth
in Times Square in New York City.
By day four, going on 96 hours awake, he was starting to suffer from delusions and hallucinations,
rem intrusions.
He was seeing spiders in his shoes, and he began to claim that the staff were trying
to poison him.
At times his delusions were so severe, it was near impossible to test his psychological
functioning.
He continued to have significant psychosis, but did stay awake, if you could call it that,
for 201 hours, over eight days.
He then slept straight for 22 hours, and woke up, ordered the newspapers, and apparently
was back to normal.
But he continued to display behavioral and psychotic problems for many years.
He lost his job in his marriage, and he was last heard in the public domain selling books
door-to-door in the Midwest.
Did the prolonged sleep deprivation have a role to play in these changes in what had
appeared to be a successful life trajectory?
There's no way to tell.
The next case is Randy Gardner, who stayed awake for 264 hours, 11 days, in 1964.
By day four, he was having hallucinations.
He imagined he was winning the Rose Bowl, and he thought a street sign was a person.
Overall, he had fewer symptoms, however, than Peter Tripp.
After his wake-a-thon, he slept for 15 hours, and slept more than usual for several additional
days, but he seemed to return to normal rather quickly.
It was estimated that he only made up about 25% of his lost sleep.
It makes you wonder about the ability of the brain to go offline in a sleep-like manner
regionally, as a means of compensating for lost sleep.
This would be similar to the marine mammals sleeping with one half of their brains at
a time.
Although such a coordinated sleep state has never been seen in anything other than a marine
mammal, regional intrusions of slow-wave activity are seen in the EEGs of sleep-deprived individuals.
The third case is Tony Wright, who broke Randy Gardner's record by two hours in 2007.
We can conclude that total insomnia lasting several days is highly debilitating and results
in overwhelming sleep pressure that can only be resisted with extreme levels of external
intervention.
Thankfully, the Guinness Book of World Records has eliminated this category of records because
of the safety issues involved.
By far, most cases of insomnia are in the secondary insomnia category.
We have already discussed many of them, for example jet lag and shift work, which are
called schedule-induced insomnia.
But there are many more.
Obviously, many medical conditions can impair sleep, for example chronic pain, asthma, acid
reflux, drug side effects, and more serious diseases such as congestive heart failure,
chronic fatigue syndrome, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD.
But even entirely normal conditions can occasionally interfere with quality sleep, for example menstrual
cycles and pregnancy.
These would all be considered causes of secondary insomnia and the treatments would have to
be cause-specific.
Chronic pain and asthma would require very different therapies, but once these conditions
were alleviated, sleep would be improved.
A big category, of course, is anxiety-related conditions.
Stress is coming from health worries, family problems, work conditions, financial matters.
All can result in insomnia.
Frequently, it is the inability to turn off, let the cares go, put them aside until tomorrow.
The mind just keeps working when it should be easing into sleep.
There are those who can turn off and fall asleep only to wake in the early morning hours at
the end of perhaps the second sleep cycle, I call this the 3 AM insomnia.
The brief awakening opens up an opportunity for the brain to get to work again.
There is not the high sleep pressure to push one back to sleep and the worries take over.
And then a new worry arises, the worry that you can't sleep, oh my, what will I be like
tomorrow?
I have to sleep, why can't I sleep, toss and turn, toss and turn, toss and turn.
We tend to think of a stressful lifestyle and its resulting insomnia as being a recent
invention stemming from our 24-7 society, but probably not so.
It's more likely a consequence of our big, hominid brains that can mull over the past
and worry about the future.
Consider the following sonnet from Shakespeare.
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed.
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired, but then begins a journey in my head, to work
my mind when body's work expired, for then my thoughts far from where I abide, intend
a zealous pilgrimage to thee, and keep my drooping eyelids open wide, lo, thus by day
my limbs by night my mind, for thee and for myself no quiet find.
While anxiety related to insomnia goes back at least to the 16th century, surely some
scholar will also find examples from Plato or Aristotle they seem to have commented
on just about everything.
Of course the required long-term treatment is not the treatment of a sleep disorder.
It is treatment for the psychological situation that is stressing the individual.
But frequently in such cases a short-term treatment with a sleep-inducing drug can help
to move things in the right direction and at least prevent the daytime consequences of
insufficient sleep.
Psychological problems are major causes of insomnia, but for the most part they are resolvable.
Psychiatric problems are another story.
The agitation, anxiety, emotional distress, and fear associated with schizophrenic psychosis
or a severe mood disorder will obviously lead to disturbed sleep.
Symptoms of schizophrenia include inability to tell real from unreal, hallucinations,
delusions, disordered thought, and panic attacks.
These bear some similarities to some of the mental characteristics of REM sleep.
And fMRI studies show that parts of the brain that reveal abnormalities in schizophrenics
are the frontal lobes, the temporal lobes, and the hippocampus.
All of these areas overlap with parts of the brain involved in REM sleep.
There are no clear causal associations known, however.
What is an open question is whether or not the disruption of normal sleep processes plays
a role in causing or exacerbating the mental illness.
Whereas schizophrenia affects much less than 1% of the population, probably less than half
a percent, depressive illness is much more common.
About one in six Americans experience at least one episode of major depression in their lives.
Depression is almost always associated with complaints of insomnia.
The actual incidence and severity of insomnia in depression is difficult to ascertain, however.
Depression is characterized by overwhelming negative emotions feeling sad, gloomy, hopeless,
worthless.
Physical symptoms are also common, such as loss of appetite, persistent aches and pains,
indigestion, constipation, and almost always insomnia.
In fact, physicians have come to expect that anyone complaining about insomnia is probably
depressed.
Once again, we can ask if there is any indication of a causative relationship here.
Does depression cause insomnia?
Or does insomnia precipitate depression?
The National Institute of Mental Health included sleep disturbances in one of their large epidemiological
surveys.
The study population is a large and representative segment of the population.
Of those individuals who reported insomnia, 40% also suffered from a mental disorder of
some kind, mostly depression.
Only 16% of those with no sleep complaints had psychiatric problems.
These statistics tell us nothing about the possible direction of the relationship insomnia
leading to psychiatric illness or psychiatric illness causing insomnia.
However, another statistic from this study was suggestive.
Those individuals who reported insomnia in their baseline interviews at the beginning
of the study were 70 times more likely to develop a major depressive episode.
The most common form of depression is a unipolar disorder, but a small percent of the population
exhibits bipolar mood disorder.
These individuals called manic depressives cycle between periods of extreme activity,
high energy, even euphoria, during which they sleep very little if at all.
They are not tired or fatigued during the day until they essentially collapse from exhaustion.
Frequently, after the individual succumbs to the accumulated sleep debt and has a major
sleep phase, he or she makes a rapid transition into deep depression that may be characterized
by hypersomnia.
It is almost as if the sleep precipitated the depression.
The important point to take from this lecture is that for most cases of insomnia, it is
essential to identify the underlying cause.
Insomnia is just the symptom of some other condition.
In most cases, insomnia is short-term and temporary and due to an acute factor such
as a work or a school-related problem, a change in schedule or time zone, a change in the
sleeping environment or an acute illness.
Treatment in these cases is not necessary, but there should be appreciation of the danger
imposed by the resulting impairment of daytime and alertness.
In cases of chronic insomnia, treatment is called for and that treatment will depend
entirely on the identification of the underlying cause.
In only a small percent of cases is the problem arising from sleep control and regulatory mechanisms.
Usually, the problem is arising from an extraneous condition that is interfering with sleep.
In most cases, treatments for those conditions, whether they be medical issues, psychological
issues or environmental factors, will improve the quality and the amount of sleep.
The benefit, of course, will be improvements in daytime vigilance, mood, energy levels
and performance.
In a later lecture, we will survey some of the treatment options that are available and
used to treat the great diversity of insomnia as we have discussed.
I have not discussed what is probably the most prevalent cause of secondary insomnia
in the United States today, and that is sleep apnea.
We will discuss sleep apnea, its causes, and the available treatments next time.
Until then, I wish for you easy sleep onset and no 3 a.m. insomnia.
Sweet dreams.
