Sleep apnea is not only a major cause of insomnia, it is probably the largest chronic illness
in the United States.
Conservative clinical studies, involving polysomnographic recording of large representative
populations, put the incidence at 24% for men, 9% for women.
That's over 30 million people.
These are probably low estimates.
Why do I say that?
A primary indication of the occurrence of sleep apnea is snoring.
And the averages of several studies indicate that the incidence of snoring in males is
around 40% and in women around 20%.
The cost of this chronic illness is enormous.
It is the most common reason for individuals to come to sleep clinics.
It is estimated to be responsible for 50,000 premature and preventable deaths each year
from accidents, heart attacks, and strokes.
And it takes an inestimable toll on quality of life, job productivity, and family relationships.
Very frequently it is undiagnosed by physicians for many years.
Yet, after this lecture, you will be able to diagnose sleep apnea and you will also
understand that it is very amenable to treatment.
Also, treatment can rapidly produce the most miraculous changes in the individuals affected.
It can save their lives in more ways than one.
I will start with another case history taken from my colleague Bill DeMent.
After all, he's the human sleep doctor, I'm just the mouse sleep doctor.
This case is a 59-year-old man who had a car accident while driving his 11-year-old grandson
to school.
For no apparent reason, his car drifted off the road and hit the concrete support of an
overpass.
The child was unhurt, the grandfather was unconscious with minor head injuries.
The boy told police investigators that his grandfather's head had been nodding just before
the accident.
He had fallen asleep.
In the hospital, the grandfather had the full range of scans, neurological tests, cardiovascular
tests, etc.
The only thing they found that was slightly remarkable was some EEG slow waves and spiking
activity, but he had no overnight polysomnographic study.
Only EEG recordings while the patient was awake.
He was given a low dose of anti-seizure medication, told not to drive, and was discharged.
Over succeeding weeks, he became increasingly sad, apathetic, and worried about his condition.
Why was he taking anti-seizure medication?
Did he have epilepsy?
He saw a psychiatrist who diagnosed depression and put him on anti-depressant medication.
He got worse.
He lost interest in normal activities and mostly sat around dozing in a chair during the day
Brain scans showed nothing.
He was put on different anti-depressants at higher doses, no improvement.
Finally, he was put on Prozac, also no change except for weight gain.
At this point, his employer asked him to take early retirement.
Then, one day, his wife was reading Reader's Digest and came upon an article on sleep apnea
that stated the condition was characterized by loud intermittent snoring.
She realized immediately, that is my husband.
They went to their physician who dismissed it without serious consideration.
So they went to a local sleep disorders clinic.
He fell asleep in the waiting room and his snoring could be heard throughout the clinic.
Although the diagnosis was immediately clear to the sleep physician, it was confirmed with
an all night polysomnographic recording that showed frequent apneic events with cardiac
arrhythmias and blood oxygen saturations dropping down to 50%.
He was immediately placed on continuous positive airway pressure therapy.
We will discuss this later.
And in days, he was saying that he had never felt so good.
His energy levels and mood were back and all medications were discontinued.
Let me reiterate, after this lecture, you will be able to recognize individuals with problems
like this grandfather.
And you will be able to pass on advice and information that will facilitate miraculous
and even life-saving recoveries.
This is not rocket science, and it is amazing that such important knowledge is not more
widely spread, including in the medical community.
How can a physician miss thinking about one of the largest chronic illnesses in the country
when faced with the obvious symptoms?
First, what is sleep apnea?
Very simply, it is the partial or complete cessation of airflow in and out of the lungs
during sleep.
There are two basic causes that are easily distinguished from each other.
Central sleep apnea is when the drive to breathe just takes a time out.
Thus, the cessation of airflow is accompanied by no effort on the part of the respiratory
muscles.
Central sleep apnea in adults is quite rare, so I won't go into it in more detail here.
However, central sleep apnea may be at the core of a tragic pediatric problem, sudden
infant death syndrome.
SIDS is when for no obvious reason an infant, usually during sleep, simply stops breathing.
The cause of SIDS is not known, but there are some associated factors, such as exposure
to tobacco smoke, an overheated sleeping environment, and sleeping in a prone position.
A physiological correlate of SIDS risks was discovered in studies of near-miss infants
or siblings of SIDS victims.
That risk factor is regularity of cardiac and breathing rhythms, regularity.
It is thought that such regularity indicates a lack of sensitivity to feedback signals,
such as the CO2 and the O2 levels in the blood.
Sleep is also a state of decreased sensitivity to those signals.
A movement to reduce the incidence of SIDS is called back-to-sleep, because it promotes
putting infants in the supine position on their backs to sleep.
The causative factors of supine sleeping are not known, but it probably allows for greater
inspiratory lung volumes and perhaps results in lighter sleep.
The most common cause of sleep apnea, especially in adults, is obstruction of the airways,
so it is called obstructive sleep apnea, or OSA.
During an event of OSA, the flow of air through the airways slows or ceases in spite of increasing
effort of the breathing muscles to maintain the flow.
Characteristically, the efforts of the respiratory muscles will progressively increase until there
is a brief awakening from sleep that re-establishes the airflow.
These awakenings may last only seconds, and the individual will not be aware of them the
following morning.
The amnesia for the overnight apnic events results in the inability of the individual
to realize that he or she has sleep apnea.
Pals with OSA think they sleep perfectly well, thank you, across the entire night.
They come to the clinic usually for two reasons, feeling tired and exhausted during the day,
or spousal complaints about the loud snoring.
The spousal complaint is usually more thoughtful and concerned than simply the snoring.
As the spouse is awake, he or she usually is alerted when the snoring stops and the
bed partner appears to be struggling to take in a breath, followed by body movements and
gasping inspirations that open up the airways during very brief awakenings.
These events can be quite striking and distressing to the observer.
It's like watching someone choke.
As a sidelight here, successfully treating obstructive apnea gives you a twofer, a twofer
one success opportunity.
You improve the quality of sleep for the person with sleep apnea, and you do the same thing
for the spouse.
To understand the causes of obstructive sleep apnea and the various treatments, it is necessary
to know at least the very basics of respiratory physiology, how we breathe.
Gas exchange with the blood, O2 in, CO2 out, takes place in the millions of tiny, delicate
air sacs called alveoli in our lungs.
The alveoli are at the ends of an enormous system of airways that begin with the wind
pipe, the trachea, which opens up at the back of our mouths just in front of the esophagus,
the food tube.
In fact, every time we swallow, a whole series of reflex muscle contractions closes the trachea
and opens the esophagus to prevent anything except air from going down the wind pipe.
The trachea divides into right and left primary bronchi, going to the left and the right lobes
of the lungs.
These bronchi divide again and again and again into smaller and smaller bronchioles.
There are about 23 divisions in these airways.
So you can calculate how many terminal bronchioles there are by taking 2 to the 23rd power.
That is 2 times 2 times 2 times 2, 23 times.
It's a huge number.
But the number of alveoli is even greater.
Knowing about the 16th division of the airways, the alveoli begin to appear like clusters
of grapes on stems.
They provide an enormous surface area in contact with the blood that is flowing through the
lung capillaries.
It is across this large surface area that the exchanges of O2 and CO2 with the blood
occur.
But the air has to get to the alveoli and it has to be continuously refreshed.
This is where breathing comes in.
Air flow through the airways is generally not the problem in sleep apnea.
The major airways are reinforced by cartilage, so they are resistant to collapse.
The barriers to air flow are the soft tissues of the mouth, the nasal cavities, and the
throat, the various tissues between the nose and lips, and the trachea.
During wake, these air passageways are kept open by our upright posture and by muscles
that pull on tissues to maximize the opening for the passage of air.
When we lie down and sleep, however, gravity tends to collapse the soft tissues around
the air passages, and the sleep-related relaxation of the muscle fails to counteract this collapse.
As a result, constrictions of the air passageways can occur at different locations.
Think about how you breathe.
You essentially suck air into your lungs.
When you inspire, your diaphragm pulls down, your ribs pull out and your chest cavity expands.
As a result, a negative pressure is created in the lungs and air is pulled in.
Keep that idea in mind and now imagine yourself drinking a thick, fruity milkshake through
a straw.
A small chunk of fruit gets lodged in the straw, decreasing the flow of that luscious
liquid.
What do you do?
You suck harder on the straw, but the straw collapses and no liquid comes through.
That's exactly what happens when there is an obstruction in your oral nasal passages.
The mounting negative pressure in your lungs and airways causes further collapse and obstruction,
blocking all flow of air.
Increasing respiratory effort only makes the situation worse, until a brief arousal opens
up the constricted oral nasal passageways.
What features of the oral nasal cavity tissues create obstructions?
Open your mouth and look into a mirror.
You see your tongue and lots of floppy, soft tissues at the back of the mouth.
When you lie down, these tissues tend to collapse together and occlude the air passage.
Think about lying on your back.
Gravity pulls your relaxed tongue to the back of your mouth.
These changes happen in everyone when they lie down and go to sleep.
So why doesn't everyone have obstructive sleep apnea and snore?
Actually many people who snore may not have obstructive sleep apnea, as their occlusions
are not of sufficient magnitude.
The soft tissues just vibrate as air flows over them.
Two things correlate with the risk of obstructive sleep apnea, facial structure and obesity.
Tissues with receding chins or otherwise small lower jaws are much more likely to develop
obstructive sleep apnea than people with large protruding lower jaws.
Also, soft tissues in the oral cavity tend to get fat just as other tissues in the body
get fat as obesity develops.
One of the best predictors of OSA is a large neck.
Maybe we should put warning labels on shirt collars above a certain size.
Seriously, in many cases, weight loss is effective in reducing snoring and reducing obstructive
sleep apnea.
The association between obesity and sleep disorder breathing was described in 1956.
A professional poker player, as he got progressively obese, became increasingly fatigued and prone
to falling asleep during the day.
Because this reminded the physicians of the obese character Joe, in Dickens' The Postmus
Papers of the Pickwick Club, they coined the term Pickwickian syndrome.
It is now referred to as obesity hypoventilation syndrome.
Interestingly, these individuals tend to have low blood oxygenation during wake as well
as sleep, and that could possibly be an explanation of the associated high blood pressure that's
seen in these patients.
Diagnostics for OSA depend on overnight polysomnography.
Besides EEG, critical measures are breathing movements, airflow, and blood oxygenation.
Breathing movements can be measured with strain gauges attached to the chest wall, airflow
by little sensors placed by the nasal openings, and blood oxygenation by sensors placed on
a finger or on an earlobe.
The airflow monitor enables detection of not only apneas, which are complete cessations
of airflow, but also hypopneas, which are restrictions in airflow.
The severity of an individual's OSA can be quantified by an apnea hypopnea index, or AHI.
That is the number of apneas and hypopneas terminating in arousals across the night divided
by the number of hours of sleep.
Since everyone has occasional apneic or hypopneic events, the clinicians have arbitrarily set
an AHI of 5 as being a threshold for being concerned about OSA.
Mild OSA is defined as an AHI between 5 and 15, moderate OSA between an AHI of 15 and
30, and severe OSA is when the AHI is 30 to 45, and extremely severe above that.
Let's consider for a moment what those numbers really mean.
For someone with an AHI score between 45 and 50, that person is waking up between 350
and 400 times over an 8-hour sleep phase.
It is no wonder that the person is exhausted, tired, and has low energy levels the next
day, even when he thinks he had 8 hours of good sleep.
You are now prepared to be a fairly effective physician's assistant with respect to identifying
cases of OSA.
Possible cases will come to your attention because of complaints of fatigue, exhaustion,
and low energy levels.
You also know that the question, do you get enough sleep, is not the question to ask.
The person with OSA usually does not know that his or her sleep is compromised by hundreds
of awakenings over the night.
But there are some other clues you might have at hand.
Is the individual overweight?
Does the individual have a relatively short jaw or receding chin?
And you can ask a spouse or roommate, does this person snore?
Most people who snore are totally unaware of it unless they are informed by someone
who complains about it or just suffers through it.
By going through all of these considerations, you should be able to decide the probability
that a person has OSA and should seek a clinical evaluation.
You might save a life.
How can I make such a bold claim, save a life?
What are the consequences of untreated OSA?
Well, the obvious one is excessive daytime sleepiness and loss of vigilance.
We have seen in these lectures many situations where those complications have led to fatal
consequences.
What about more direct health issues?
Behavioral changes are common.
Cognitive performance degrades with sleep loss.
School and job performance can be compromised, as I related in the case study at the beginning
of this lecture.
These life events can spiral downwards.
Failures lead to mood disorders, lead to disrupted personal relationships, and so forth, even
to suicidal ideation.
Another case history.
Corporate executive with a very high pay grade started to have fatigue.
A medical consult resulted in diagnosis of depression.
Medications did not work.
The fatigue got worse and he became hypertensive.
Medications for the high blood pressure were not effective.
His job performance fell and he was fired.
He was unemployed for several years and his marriage was falling apart due to his irritability
and apathy.
He saw many medical specialists to no avail and was wondering whether his life was really
worth living.
Then quite by chance, he was selected at random from a group of patients to be asked to participate
in a clinical evaluation of a new technology, an ambulatory sleep monitor, a sleep monitor
that made it possible to record sleep parameters in the home, not necessarily in the clinic.
The sleep apnea was immediately identified.
He was put on the therapy, I will tell you about shortly, and within weeks, he was entirely
back to normal and shortly thereafter, he accepted an outstanding job offer.
Besides the years he lost from his life, it was estimated that he also lost over $2
million in salary, all because of the lack of a simple and appropriate diagnosis of his
problem.
Now, what about that high blood pressure he developed?
Severe cases of OSA are usually associated with the development of life-threatening cardiovascular
complications.
The repeated O2 desaturation of the blood leads to higher blood pressure during sleep
and eventually this carries over to wake as well.
Can we say that untreated OSA causes these cardiovascular problems?
That is difficult because you cannot do a controlled study.
You cannot diagnose a group of patients with OSA and treat some and not the others and
then follow them until they die.
That's simply not ethical.
But there are some data that come close when looked at in retrospect.
We will be moving on in a minute to a discussion of treatments for OSA.
But in the early 1970s, a new treatment called a tracheostomy was being offered.
A hole was made in the chest above the breastbone and into the trachea.
This hole was left open at night.
During the day it was plugged, otherwise the person could not talk as the voice box is
above the location of the tracheostomy.
At night when the plug was removed, the person could breathe through the hole.
This eliminated the causes of OSA in the soft tissues of the oral nasal cavity and the throat.
Many patients who were diagnosed with severe OSA and offered the treatment refused.
That entire group of patients died in the subsequent 10 years.
Conversely, most of the patients that received the chronic tracheostomy were alive and healthy
as long as they could be followed by the clinic, way beyond 10 years.
The tracheostomy treatment was a godsend for many OSA patients.
Some were literally at death's door and their recoveries were nothing short of miraculous.
Over the years, however, newer and less invasive methods have been developed and are now the
mainline treatments for OSA.
By far the most prevalent therapy is called CPAP for continuous positive airway pressure.
This technology was developed in 1981 by the Australian pulmonary specialist Colin Sullivan.
When the patient goes to bed, he or she wears a face mask that directs positive pressure
airflow into the nose.
This positive pressure prevents collapse of the air passageway leading up to the trachea.
Therefore, normal breathing continues during sleep.
There are some drawbacks, however.
Most people do not enjoy sleeping with a mask on and the air flow can dry out the nasal
passages.
Also, the system has to be carefully calibrated so that the level of positive pressure is
sufficient to keep the air passages open throughout the respiratory cycle and when
the person is sleeping in different positions.
Yet excessive pressure can be disturbing.
Chips placed in the CPAP devices have been used to document compliance and in some cases
it is not great.
On the other hand, there are many individuals who would not be without their CPAP machine.
You have probably seen many CPAP machines going through security screening in airports.
Over the years, the CPAP technology has improved considerably.
There is a diversity of mask types for patients to select from, and newer CPAP machines are
smart in that they can adjust the pressure level to maintain open air passages as conditions
change.
A fairly recent alternative to CPAP is oral appliances.
These appliances are fitted to the individual by a dental specialist.
They work in two different ways, advancing the tongue or advancing the lower jaw.
An example of a tongue retainer is a bulb that fits between the teeth and pulls the
tongue forward by a vacuum.
The lower jaw or mandible is advanced with a device that fits over the upper and lower
teeth and puts tension on the lower jaw to hold it in a forward position.
The purpose of any of these devices is to increase the size of the opening at the back
of the mouth for air to flow in and out of the trachea.
In comparison trials, the CPAP devices are generally more effective than the oral appliances,
but the oral appliances do produce benefits in reducing snoring and improving airflow
during sleep.
Surgical interventions are still with us, and many patients with severe OSA elect to
undergo surgery rather than have to use a CPAP machine for the rest of their lives.
The tracheostomy remains an option for some special cases, but other techniques are more
common.
Beginning in the 1980s, a technique called uvulopalatopharyngeoplasty, how's that for
a big word, uvulopalatopharyngeoplasty, UPPP, gained popularity.
What that very big word says is that tissues at the tissues of the oral nasal cavity are
removed to enlarge the passageway for air.
These tissues include the tonsils, the uvula, the adenoids, and other tissues of the posterior
soft palate and pharynx.
This rather complex procedure has not proven to be uniformly effective.
A criterion for success would be to reduce the AHI to 10 or less, but this is only achieved
in about 10% of the cases.
In many cases, tissues grow back, and the scarring from the surgery can make patients
worse, even if their snoring is improved.
New surgical procedures were developed at Stanford by surgeons Nelson Powell and Robert
Riley in collaboration with a sleep physician, Christian Guimineau.
The first new procedure was relatively simple and ingenious.
Muscles that advance the tongue are attached to the bone at the front of the lower jaw.
The surgeons cut out a rectangle of the lower jaw that included the insertion of these muscles.
They rotated this piece of bone 90 degrees so that it couldn't fall back in place, and
they then fixed the bone in that location.
The procedure requires only two days in the hospital, but what it does is it advances
the tongue, and that allows more space at the back of the mouth for airflow.
The individual gets a more protruding jaw as well, and some people find that attractive.
The success rate of this procedure is 60 to 70%.
A more dramatic surgery is called maxillomandibular advancement osteotomy, MMO.
Let's unpack that term, advancement.
You get that.
Move forward.
What is being moved forward?
Maxillor refers to the upper jaw, and mandible refers to the lower jaw.
How do they do it?
Osteotomy means cutting bone.
Literally, the upper and the lower jaws are cut free of the skull.
They are moved forward and screwed back in place with metal plates.
This is clearly a very major surgery, but the success rate in curing OSA is 90% or better.
A much less invasive technology has been introduced lately.
It is called radiofrequency reduction of tissue volume, or the RF approach.
The method is applied with small needle electrodes that can be inserted into tissues, just like
hypodermic needles can be inserted into tissues.
Then radiofrequency radiation can be passed between the two electrodes.
Radiofrequency radiation is what heats things up in your microwave oven.
When the electrodes are in tissue, it is the local tissue that is heated and actually coagulated.
This selective localized destruction of tissue causes a reduction in size of the structure,
whether it be the soft palate, the tongue, or whatever.
There is some inflammation and swelling immediately following the tissue ablations, but that subsides
rapidly and the air passageway is enlarged by virtue of the tissues that were lost.
Although this is still a new and emerging therapeutic technology, clinical studies have
been promising.
The method has been shown to improve nasal air flow and it has also been shown to be
effective in reducing snoring.
So far, the improvements in OSA have been modest because the amount of tissue that is
eliminated is not great.
Care has to be taken not to impair other functions such as speech in the process.
It is exciting, however, to imagine that in the future a method that can be used in an
outpatient setting could have enormous impact on what I said at the outset is the largest
chronic illness in the United States.
What I would like to leave you with from this lecture are two things.
First is the incredible seriousness of obstructive sleep apnea and its large prevalence in the
population.
And second is the miracle of treatment.
There is probably no other serious illness that has such devastating effects on people's
lives that can be reversed so quickly and so successfully as obstructive sleep apnea.
If you know anyone who snores or if you know of anyone who is chronically fatigued and
exhausted during the day, suggest to them that they seek a consultation with a sleep
physician.
30 or 40 years ago, it would have been difficult if not impossible to find such a specialist.
Now there are many more as the profession is expanding.
What is unfortunate, however, is the lack of awareness in the medical community in general
over the importance of sleep medicine.
I wonder how many individuals with OSA have been diagnosed as being depressed and placed
on medications they do not need and that do not help their conditions.
Until next time, I wish you sound, silent and healthy sleep.
Sweet dreams.
