The world today can feel soul-crushing.
Whether you're churning out emails in a cubicle for eight hours a day, or force the
sow t-shirts around the clock that are only worn once, or you're bombarded by headlines
of sea-level rise, droughts, and disasters, the crushing weight of global capitalism
feels inescapable.
But all is not lost.
While the destruction of climate chaos and the chains of fossil capitalism feel suffocating,
this science fiction author Ursula K. Le Guin argues,
We live in capitalism.
Its power seems inescapable.
So did the divine right of kings.
She goes on to add,
Any human power can be resisted and changed by human beings.
Resistance and change often begin in our art, the art of words.
The story is a powerful tool, one that harnesses the future to create change in the present.
Stories plant seeds, beautiful visions that have the potential to germinate into alternative
worlds that show us that business as usual is not inevitable.
So as we struggle to upend the current status quo of rampant admissions and extraction
at any cost, what role do visions of the future hold?
Are they useful, and what stories and artistic utopias are out there right now that might
bring a light to the looming darkness of climate chaos?
This video is made possible by the people who support me through Nebula.
When you subscribe to Nebula using my link below, you can access a brand new exclusive
bonus video to this one, envisioning what an ecological future will look like in 2120.
You can also watch my next video on China's impact on climate change a month early, alongside
more than 20 other Nebula exclusive art changing climate videos when you sign up for Nebula
using my link below.
If you want to learn more, make sure to stick around until the end.
In the days of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, utopias were under attack.
Convinced that the utopian socialism of their predecessors was not an effective way to end
capitalism, Marx and Engels rejected any form of utopianism.
They immersed themselves instead in the material realities of history, and developed critiques
alongside a theory of change that they called scientific socialism.
This framework, unlike utopian socialism, argued that society wouldn't be changed by
appealing to reason or ideals.
It would only be transformed by changing the material conditions of the economy, or in
other words, the direct overthrow of the ruling classes by the working class.
As a result, Marx and Engels were critical of sketching out what possible future worlds
would look like, and relying on those visions to create revolution.
For them, socialism was to be achieved not by attempting to appeal to people's minds,
but instead revealing and exacerbating the already present contradictions within capitalism,
the core of which was the struggle between the working class and the capitalist class.
This is not to say that Marxists never once dreamed of the future, nor that speculative
fiction is useless in the struggle for a world beyond fossil capitalism.
But instead that as much as we need the backbone of scientific socialism to critique fossil
capitalism and guide us through ending it, we also need visions of the future that give
us something to struggle for.
We need to imagine what's on the horizon, because those imaginings, those brushstrokes
of the future, are what fuel our fire.
Visualizing different worlds, at least for me, gives energy and purpose to the hard
struggle of the present.
So bringing these fictions to the page, to the canvas, and to the screen are powerful
tools of revolution.
Which is why, as Ashley C. Ford writes, the goal of oppressors is to limit your imagination
about what is possible without them.
So you might never imagine more for yourself and the world you live in.
Imagine something better, get curious about what it actually takes to make it happen,
and then fight for it every day.
But these utopias or visionary fictions don't have to be, and indeed shouldn't be, perfect
goalposts that railroad us into a strict path towards liberation.
Indeed, as DeGro's scholar Giorgio Colas writes, paraphrasing Marxist scholar David
Harvey,
Those utopias that are meant as models or blueprints, not so much because they are unrealistic,
but because the realization of a perfect ideal tolerates no objection and crushes everything
that stands in its way.
Colas goes on to say that we need dialectical utopias.
Ones that are contradictory, messy, and incomplete that challenge us and make us reflect on our
own world.
Ultimately, this means we need to envision, in the words of the Zapatistas, a world where
many worlds fit.
These authors, filmmakers, artists, and creatives need to develop a diverse range of future worlds.
So that it's not just Elon Musk,
The sky will be cleaner and quieter if yours is going to be good,
Or a white guy like me controlling the narrative of what's possible.
So if we know that these visionary fictions are crucial to sustaining the fire of an ecologically
just struggle for a better world, who's dreaming up those futures right now?
Which artists and what stories are bringing light to the darkness of climate chaos?
The worlds of the future are bright, and coursing through those future worlds are political
currents that show us that a life without capitalism is possible.
Degrowth, eco-anarchism, and eco-socialism all seek an economy beyond capitalism that
is just and ecologically sound.
But often, the political discussions of how to achieve these tendencies lack engaging narratives.
It's hard to get excited about the future when technical terms like means of production
and metabolic rift are all you hear.
While it is crucial to understand these terms in the political and economic theory behind
tendencies like socialism, we need stories to fill those frameworks with emotion and passion.
The story is the spoonful of sugar that makes the medicine go down, or the Trojan horse
that plants the seed of resistance by revealing the beauty and flaws of more liberatory worlds.
Trains and power have long understood the potency of envisioning future worlds.
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, for example, didn't just submit a jargon-heavy Green New Deal
proposal to Congress and wipe her hands clean.
She, together with Naomi Klein, painted her own vision of what a future with a Green New
Deal could be in order to sway people's hearts.
The biggest problem in those early years was a labor shortage.
We were building a national smart grid, retrofitting every building in America, putting trains
like this one all across the country.
And on the campaign trail, candidates will often ground their platform in personal anecdotes.
Through hard work and perseverance, my father got a scholarship to study in a magical place.
Because as neuroscientist Paul Zak reveals in his research, when we hear a narrative
rich with emotion and tension, our brain releases chemicals that influence us to create change.
So for the anti-capitalist climate movement, we need not only direct action and political
struggle, but also stories, narratives and visuals that reveal suffering and success
not just in the present, but visionary fictions that explore the possibilities of the future.
And there are already countless artists out there doing exactly that.
One of the core examples is Ursula K. Le Guin's The Dispossessed, a sci-fi classic that delves
into the specific contours of ecological anarchism.
The Dispossessed gives us two possible futures.
One on the resource-rich planet of Urus that squanders its abundant resources through an
over-producing market economy, and another on the resource-scarce planet of Inaris,
a planet of exiled anarchists who thrive communally on very little.
The Dispossessed is ultimately a story of opposite planets and opposite futures.
Opposite in the sense that the planet of Inaris is the moon of Urus and vice versa, but opposite
in the sense that as D-Roth theorists Georgios Kalas and Hugh March write, Inaris is what
Urus is not, and Urus is what Inaris is not.
Dispossessed possessed, barren lush, horizontal hierarchical.
Le Guin doesn't just tell us what anarchism can be, she shows us through, for example,
the small vignettes of honorasti children who are unable to conceive of a prison because
their society doesn't function on the punitive basis of our current world.
They had picked up the idea of prisons from episodes in the life of Odo, which all of them
who had elected to work on history were reading, and when a circuit history teacher came through
the town he expounded the subject with the reluctance of a decent adult forced to explain
an obscenity to children.
War through the massive aphorization projects that the people of Inaris collectively maintain.
He worked now in a planting crew, thousands of seedlings raised in the green mountains,
they planted the little trees in the dust, and they looked back as they went.
There was a mist of green, very faint, on the pallid curves and terraces of the desert.
The dead land lay, very likely, a veil of life.
The dispossessed reveals the quiet, yet messy possibilities of a liberatory future.
As philosopher Andrei Gorsnotes, the book crafts the most striking description I know
of the seductions and snares of anarchist society, and the work of speculative fiction
and ecological utopias has blossomed since Le Guin published her book in 1974.
SolarPunk, for example, has witnessed a bright new emergence of artists and writers developing
futures that look very different from the capitalist extraction economies of today.
Animation Studio delines SolarPunk world of electric apple harvesters, lush farming
cooperatives run on solar and wind power, and small technologies that tighten the connection
between humanity and nature is a perfect example of a SolarPunk future.
One that mends the relationship between nature and humanity through appropriate and community
centric technologies, cooperatives, and decentralization.
The imaginings of SolarPunk artists reveal that an ecological future doesn't have to
mean living in scarcity or giving things up, it instead shows us how beautiful the world
could be when we live with appropriate abundance.
Writer Susan Kay Quinn's short story, The Seven Sisters, gives us another glimpse into
a SolarPunk world.
One that isn't a romanticized and unrealistic view of the future, but instead reveals that
struggle and loss will still exist in a post-capitalist ecological world.
Quinn's future zooms in on a tea farming cooperative in the American South that seeks
to decolonize tea through education and fair practices.
At the farm, a close-knit community of chosen family all grows the tea together.
The whole farm met the mandates to be net, zero, on carbon, and make your own energy,
but the tea house was quite the spectacle of green tech, from the passive solar design
and geothermal heat pumps, to the solar glass windows and rooftop windmills.
But in a very SolarPunk manner, the farm doesn't rely on the backbreaking work of harvesting
tea in the blistering sun of a hotter world.
They instead use solar power harvest bots.
But of course, not everything is pure bliss.
The Seven Sisters' cooperative struggles to stay afloat after a heat dome scorches
seven acres of their crop to ashes, and their harvest drones fall into disrepair.
She had only four harvest bots running, out of ten in the fleet, and it wasn't near
enough.
Two were out for repairs, the rest needing one thing or another.
Aubrey, the farm's botkeeper, was laid up sick in the guesthouse.
Quinn shows that while the future is promising, there's still loss and pain, revealing that
an ecologically just world will certainly be more pleasant to live within, but it won't
be without scuffs and bruises.
Alongside SolarPunk, there are also visions of decolonial, anti-racist realities embodied
in the Afrofuturistic visions of movies like Black Panther.
Specifically, the capital city of Wakanda imagines a vibrant urban center that seamlessly melds
accessible transit with pedestrian-centric roads, local fisheries, thrumming markets,
and the use of advanced technology in the service of ecological living.
All the while trying to answer the question, what does the world look like without the
destructive influence of white capitalist colonialism?
This imagery is crucial, and is expanded in the indigenous futures of storytellers like
Gina McGuire, who drills down into the complicated impacts of a future where meat is banned in
the US.
It had been twenty years since the meat industry had been shut down, and US production had fully
switched over to plant-based replacements.
And how that ban might impact those indigenous to the Hawaiian islands?
He himself had never liked the idea of the plant-based proteins of meat being made and
had watched with fear for his people, as the rising protein prices had come along with
the industry.
He had watched as their waters had been increasingly fished by all those who couldn't afford the
protein.
Each of these fictions grounds notions of degrowth, anarchism, eco-socialism, anti-racism, and
anti-colonialism intangible vignettes.
They imbue these politics with humanity and emotions, and allow us to stretch out our
legs and walk around in the world we're fighting for, if just for a moment.
But there are also future visions from scholars and activists, those that want to bring the
power of the story to their political framework.
This includes work stretching all the way back to the utopian socialist William Morris'
1890 book News From Nowhere, which describes a socialist world in the year 2000.
A world without private property, hierarchies, money, class, or prisons.
And since Morris, there's been a long tradition of transforming the political into the fictional
to give the struggle emotion and purpose.
Fiction allows the reader or viewer to step into another world or another person's shoes
and feel the result.
As professor of English, Patricia Valderrama writes,
Fiction can transmit information really effectively in non-technical language.
Troy Vitesse and Drew Pendergrass tap into this tradition in the last chapter of their
book Half-Earth Socialism.
After mapping out the political technicalities of Half-Earth Socialism through discussions
of planning algorithms, transitions to renewable economies, and creating a decolonial and
biodiverse world, they paint a very tangible narrative of a person waking up in a future
that has achieved some level of Half-Earth socialism.
While the world the protagonist inhabits does sound beautiful, Pendergrass and Vitesse attempt
not to romanticize their vision.
The solar factory workers in their world still want to go on vacation.
Albeit in this future world that that vacation is furnished by the community.
Edith mentioned the extra vacation time, and I do like taking the train to the beach and
staying in one of those fancy houses they converted into a resort.
And there's still cafeteria arguments, but this time it's about what the cap on energy
usage should be for the community.
I can't believe those self-righteous people you hang out with on that farm are pushing
for a 750 watt quota.
I'll just be voting for a little more energy.
1,750 watts is not luxurious, and you know it.
And characters still put in work harvesting at local cooperative-owned farms that service
the regional area.
But at the same time, it's a completely different future from our present.
There is no fossil fuel extraction, and the economy is democratically and ecologically
planned.
There are shared communal living situations, not unlike very nice dorms, where families
can raise their kids together, share and community meals, and enjoy quiet or rowdy games of cards
after a filling meal.
But this future lays out just one vignette of a political possibility.
In contrast, the YouTube channel Prolacult shows something radically different, a world
built on hemp-based production, an economy that sequesters far more carbon than it produces
due to the fast-growing and carbon-sucking properties of hemp, and builds a socialist
and ultimately a communist world in the husk of a capitalist one.
What we require is the reindustrialization of the globe with a plant-based economy.
We must increase the production of goods, using a combination of the natural sciences,
engineering, and carbon-negative raw materials, like hemp.
All of these worlds, from the coastal waters of Hawaii to the deserts of Anaris, reveal
the energizing possibilities of a post-capitalist zero-carbon world.
But these are just possibilities.
To make the many worlds of our imagination real, we need to join the struggle of building
liberatory zero-carbon and anti-capitalist worlds right now.
But where do we start?
That's Murray Bookchin, a political theorist who believed in the importance of developing
an ecological vision of the world that seeps into the unconscious minds of the masses and
sparks change.
And hopefully the glimpses of the future worlds we've just witnessed do just that.
But daydreams can be a double-edged sword.
They can change us, but they can also paralyze us, trapping us in the comfort and beauty
of an unrealized future.
So the purpose of these speculative fictions is not to numb the pain of the current ecological
and capitalist crisis.
It's to ignite a fire under us by revealing that other worlds are possible.
We only get to live in those messy, complicated, but beautiful futures if we struggle for them
in the present.
This means building those decolonial farmers' collectives like the Seven Sisters Farm right
now.
It means for some in Atlanta, defending their largest remaining urban forest from destruction.
It means organizing your workplace to demand stronger control of production, and it means
developing ecological, post-capitalist solutions like regional environmental planning of half
their socialism or hemp-based production.
This work of building those visionary fictions today is exemplified in the anarchist practices
of Naotopias.
These political spaces develop more ecological and just pockets in the world right now that
seek self-administration, DIY attitudes, and a strong relationship with nature.
The free town of Christiania, right in the middle of Copenhagen, is a perfect example
of this Naotopia model.
After a group of anarchists and ecological activists squatted in an abandoned military
base, the Danish government ceded the rights to that growing community.
A community that, while still having to navigate the realities of living in a capitalist economy,
is carving out ecological and anarchist organizational models that are reminiscent of Ursula K. Le Guin's
Anaris.
But on some fundamental areas, we've tried to work on being independent.
We collect our own garbage, we do our own road works, for the younger children we have
our own children's institutions, a lot of stuff is done independently.
Christiania is just one future world realized today.
There are so many other communities out there, like the 2500 strong Catalan integral cooperative
in Spain that are struggling for worlds beyond ecologically destructive capitalism.
So I invite you to dream.
Take a moment out of your day and sculpt a beautiful, ecological, post-capitalist, decolonial,
and just glimpse of the future.
Write it down if you want to, draw it if you can, but most importantly, start the work
and struggle to make that world possible today.
And I did exactly that.
I just made a whole speculative fiction bonus video which envisions what would happen 100
years in the future if the city of Chicago defunded their police department and invested
in green infrastructure and jobs.
Most of the green jobs created after we divested from the police department were focused on
universal aid and crisis management.
That video would do terribly with a YouTube algorithm.
Which is why I've uploaded it to the creator-owned streaming platform Nebula.
On Nebula, I don't have to worry about the algorithm or video restrictions, because if
you don't know by now, Nebula is a streaming platform built by and for a growing collective
of creators like me.
It's where I publish all of my videos a month early and release exclusive bonus videos regularly.
Like the one I just released about Chicago's ecological future.
I've already produced over 20 bonus and extended videos that are only available on Nebula.
Like one on the problems with carbon capture, or another on how the wellness industry preys
on your climate anxiety.
You can even watch next month's OCC video on whether China is the blame for the climate
crisis right now on Nebula.
In the eyes of the world, and especially those in the US, China is the boogie man of climate
change.
Because on Nebula, I'm always one video ahead.
Signing up for Nebula using my link, and this is crucial, you need to use my link, is the
best way to support our changing climate.
It's like Patreon combined with Netflix, but better for me and you.
Because when you sign up, you don't just get access to my videos ad-free.
You get to watch all the insanely well-produced Nebula exclusive videos from your favorite
creators like Second Thought, who has an ongoing series on the history of fascism,
and how fascism so effectively became the way of life for an entire country, or Wendover
Productions, who made an hour-long documentary on sea level rise in the Marshall Islands.
The implications are dire.
And there are hundreds of other Nebula exclusive videos and creator classes available for your
consumption.
And if you sign up for Nebula using my link on screen right now, or in the description,
you can get 40% off per year, which is just $2.50 a month.
Signing up for Nebula is the single best way to support our changing climate.
And in the process, you can watch my videos a month early, get access to all my ad-free
exclusive videos, and support a blossoming collective of educational creators.
