Hello, I'm Gary Soyka and this course is the story of the interplay of man and the plants,
animals and microbes domesticated along the way from our hunting and foraging past to
the modern civilized world.
In this course, we'll explore the role that domestication of other creatures played in
the greatest transition our species has ever undergone, that is the change from hunting,
fishing, gathering and scavenging, food procuring if you will, to becoming a food producer.
Our agricultural food production practices based on those domestications set us apart
from the other animals on this planet and put us on the path to our current sedentary
civilized way of life.
Before that point, before the transition to agricultural food production, we obtained
our nourishment like virtually every other animal on the planet.
We simply fed on what was available to eat in the environment.
This course will be an effort not only to recount many of the steps leading to domestication
and the impact those domestication events had on the development of complex civilized societies,
it will also provide context, the back story if you will, for a number of present day issues
ranging from nutrition and animal rights to population pressure, new medical advances,
territorial disputes and even maybe climate change.
By necessity, this course will need to be very multidisciplinary, delving into subjects
and approaches typically associated with subjects such as anthropology, archaeology,
history, sociology, geography and ecology, evolution, botany, certainly there's going
to be some microbiology, genetics, agronomy, molecular biology and we might even touch
some philosophy.
Obviously then, this series of lectures will not be confined to any of those traditional
disciplines but rather will draw upon all of them to build an appreciation of the essential
role the process of domestication has played in the development of civilization.
We'll discuss how domestication opened the door to the agricultural food production which
in turn made it possible for civilizations to develop.
In other words, to use a phrase often employed by my colleagues in physics, domestication
was necessary but not sufficient to the development of human civilization.
In other words, what I'm saying is if you didn't have those domestications, society
and civilization wouldn't have developed as it has but of course there are other things
involved, I don't want to overstate the case.
What I'm saying then is that civilization could not have arisen in the way that it
did without animal and plant domestication.
But there were other things and we know that, we will not focus on them in this course.
There has been increasing interest in this subject, the subject of the beginnings of
agriculture in recent years, though it's not a brand new idea.
Rousseau was asking questions about the natural or non-civilized man over 250 years ago.
Recent decades have seen significant progress and work on the origins of agriculture of
course and domestication.
In essence, Rousseau was asking, was civilization as it developed on earth really a benefit
to man?
That is a legitimate question with regard to much of what will be covered here.
But I won't presume to provide the answer just some context for the question.
By examining some of the key underpinnings of the development of civilization, we may
be able to provide a somewhat different way of looking at that question posed by Rousseau
over two centuries ago.
As our own generation ponders the pressing problems of feeding a rapidly expanding human
population, climate change and the question of sustainability of our global food supply,
the material covered in this course will provide valuable context for this vital public discourse.
The course will be structured in the following way.
In the first few lectures, we'll discuss the theories that archaeologists, anthropologists
and others have been able to construct about the history of the first plant and animal domestications
and our transition of species from hunting and gathering to our really more agriculturally
based food production leading to civilization.
We'll talk about what it really means to be domesticated and try to make a real distinction
between plants and animals that are truly domesticated and those that are merely cultivated or tamed.
We'll discuss the ways our ancient ancestors went about developing working partnerships
and establishing a kind of codependency with a number of plants and animals.
We'll illustrate how these practices led to our gaining a degree of control over nature
and also look into the impact that this increasing influence over parts of the natural world has
had on the physical environment.
In the next section, then, of this course, we will explore the history of the domestication
of some key plants and animals.
Obviously, in a course of this length, it will not be possible to give an exhaustive
presentation of all the important and interesting plant and animal domestications that have
taken place.
But I will try to pick illustrative examples employing familiar and interesting organisms
to give a sense of the value and the limitations of the practice of domesticating other life
forms.
From there, we will discuss the way human activities have moved plants and animals and
microbes to new habitats, where some have done remarkably well.
For example, we're going to discuss such interesting items as the way certain iconic
plant types actually found their way to localities that were greatly affected by their presence.
For example, we'll explore the way tomatoes came to Italy and potatoes got to Ireland.
We'll also look into some interesting animal translocations as well.
In so doing, we'll look into such topics as the way horses and cattle found their way
to the Americas.
Using a few key individuals as examples, we'll talk about the way that agricultural practice
grew in importance, how it helped to foster population growth and actually determine the
fate of nations, and how its practice became progressively more systematic and ultimately
scientific.
Some of these examples may seem surprising, for I will draw my subjects in several cases
from outside the world of agriculture or science.
The course will also include a discussion of some new and exciting ways that cutting
edge techniques and approaches in the sciences are building on centuries of progress in refining
the management of domesticates in order to improve the quality and extent and the length
of human life.
We will also discuss the impacts that new science and technology are having on food
production and agricultural practice.
Consideration will also be given to benefits and challenges presented as an integrated
global food production enterprise takes on the challenge of feeding a population that
has now reached something in the neighborhood of 6.5 billion people and is continuing to
expand without any serious signs of slowing that expansion.
We will consider the impacts it is having on climate, water supply, and the condition
of the land in the oceans.
We will also look at some novel and new ways that domesticates can be employed in the chemical
and pharmaceutical industry to produce products that would be exceedingly difficult to make
without such assistance from another life form.
Finally, an effort will be made to show how the material in this course dealing with our
interaction with our domesticates helps inform the current discussion concerning the very
future of our species.
Though I will follow a rough chronological structure beginning with the neolithic transformation
from food procuring to food producing and end with our present challenges of feeding an
enormously expanded population in a sustainable way, no attempt will be made to actually catalog
or enumerate in a systematic way all the achievements and milestones that occurred between the first
domestication events and our efforts at engineering solutions to our current problems.
Of course, I will need to limit the number of specific domesticates and our interaction
with them to a few key examples, as I just mentioned.
Among those examples will be some very familiar organisms, but we will also look into the
contributions of some creatures that you may not at first have thought of as domesticates,
but which do, on reflection, neatly fit the definition of a domesticate that we will develop
in this course.
It will also be necessary to leap significant portions of time, since we will be trying
to highlight some of the most important and intriguing aspects of a story that has been
about 10 millennia in the making.
So, anyone undertaking to teach such a course, would undoubtedly be greatly influenced by
his or her own experience and training, right?
Thus, it's probably of some value to take a moment to talk about my own training and
background and why I'm drawn to such an interdisciplinary subject at this rather late point in my life.
It may at first seem unusual to you that a person with my kind of formal training that
I have had would be drawn to such a subject, but as the course unfolds, I hope you'll come
to understand how the various aspects of my background come together around this subject.
My formal training is in microbial genetics and microbial biochemistry and metabolism,
and I've also worked in the field of bioenergetics.
Certainly none of those fields seem particularly close to the subject matter that I've just
said this course will cover.
But as I transitioned from research and teaching in these areas to a long career in university
and higher education administration, including chairmanship and deanships and presidencies
and roles on commissions and governing and accrediting boards, I began to become increasingly
interested in a number of disciplines related more to my youthful experiences in farming
and agribusiness than to my past interests in laboratory-based research.
In recent years, I've been attempting to actually meld my scientific training and experience
with hands-on management of an endangered breed's conservation enterprise.
For me, this has been a transformative experience.
By going back to the land, as it were, and engaging in the breeding and management of
a group of domesticates, I began to realize just how different the demands and expectations
were on a person engaged in such activities from those I had experienced in my earlier
years.
Those animals and crops were not really on my clock.
Rather, I found that I was on theirs.
As this realization began to sink in, I began to ponder the long path our species has traveled
from its first efforts at domestication and food production to our present integrated
technologically dependent civilization.
This global village, interconnected with rapid real-time communication capacities, grew from
such domestication events.
But in just a few millennia, it became something quite different from a small encampment with
a few crops and a few animals associated with it.
It was from these realizations and experiences that the desire to teach a course of this
kind and to share some of my experiences and insights was born.
In giving this course, I'll try to use my formal, academic training and background in
science, but I will also try to bring in the perspective of one who has experienced and
is living a different sort of life.
You see, I am an active farmer, I'm engaged in growing crops and in a conservation, breeding
and maintenance program of flocks, of endangered sheep and chickens.
Now please note, I'm not saying that chickens and sheep per se are endangered, not at all.
Rather, it is some historic heritage breeds that are endangered and in need of conservation.
Thus, you can expect this course to provide some understanding of what is meant by the
term breed and why that is so important.
Along the way, as an agriculturalist, I've served as the president of the American
Livestock Breeds Conservancy and the Philadelphia Society for Promoting Agriculture.
So I think you can see this will be a tale told by one who is an academic research scientist
but who has also had his hands up inside a struggling you trying to assist her in a
breach berth and who continues to lug hay and grain to animals knee deep in the snows
of a Pennsylvania winter.
Mine is admittedly an unusual perspective on this subject, but one that I hope you will
come to feel is wholly appropriate to a subject that is at once technical and science based
but which is also as familiar and practical as the items on your dinner plate or the shoes
on your feet.
Though this course deals primarily with human-domestic interactions over the past 10,000 years, we
need to reach back farther than that to appreciate what it is that is so special about these
past 10 millennia.
Even though anatomically modern humans have been on this planet for about 200,000 years,
our story will commence about 10,000 years ago in what is called the Neolithic period,
the last part of the so-called Ice Age, as the glaciers of that last Ice Age were receding
as a result of the most recent mega-climatic change.
By the end of the Mesolithic period, the time just before the Neolithic, our kind had spread
from its point of origin in sub-Saharan Africa into every continent save Antarctica.
These people had the use of fire and were adept at tool-making. The tools were stone,
of course, but also undoubtedly employed wood, bone, animal sinew, and other soft materials
that simply did not preserve well in what are now archeological sites, leaving behind
the characteristic stone scrapers, malls, hatchets, arrowheads, and spear points.
These ancient ancestors of ours were making, and thus, presumably appreciating, art, and
they had rudimentary social structures that held together extended family hunting and
gathering groups. They were also very likely spiritual beings that did practice ritual
burial and possibly some form of religion.
They were effective group hunters, and had by this time harried some of the large mammal
and bird species to absolute extinction. A combination of hunting, climate change, and
what is called hyper-disease, that's a kind of concatenation of a number of infectious
diseases and physical disorders and maladies, these things combined and taken together had
eliminated all but just a tiny number of animal species larger than 100 pounds from North
America. It had greatly reduced the number of such animals in South America and eliminated
some large species from Europe, Eurasia, and Africa by the end of this mesolithic period.
Then about 10,000 years ago, at several different locations, actually on several continents,
some fundamental changes began to take place. These transforming events occurred earlier
in some locations than in others, but the remarkable thing is that within just a few
thousand years of each other, groups of people began an entirely new life way.
These people went from hunting, gathering, foraging, and fishing to actively producing
their own food. This transformation has been called the Neolithic Revolution, but of course
that term can be misleading. It was not some sort of Eureka or one-off event
that set people on a new path in each of these points of agricultural origin, rather it was
likely a gradual multi-generational set of practices employed to increase the abundance
of plants that had formerly been gathered and to manage animals that had formerly been
hunted. One hypothesis for these multiple origins is that in each place, some humans
found themselves in particularly rich environments for hunting and foraging, and as a consequence
reduced their wandering and began to settle for most or all of the year in a single encampment
close to their sources of food. As their populations began to grow, they began to stress even the
abundant supplies that surrounded them, and they needed to encourage more yield from the
plants and animals on which they now depended. Note that if this hypothesis turns out to
be the correct model for how our ancient prehistoric ancestors made the conversion to
being food producers rather than food procurers, it will mean that this move was catalyzed
by population pressure and attendant food limitations. Just to demonstrate how challenging
it can be to construct accurate models of the way events unfolded thousands of years
ago when there were no living eyewitnesses and no written records, no hieroglyphs or
carvings to decipher, I will bring up an additional piece of information that is relevant to this
issue. First of all, please remember that this is a science-based course, and we will
say often, science is self-correcting. When better data appears or better explanations
are offered, the accepted models can change.
There is work going on at an archeological site in Turkey that may have a profound effect
on our understanding of the pressures or opportunities that drew our early ancestors to the practice
of food production. At this site, large stone objects have been unearthed that appear to
be monumental objects of worship of some sort. What is fascinating is that these large stones
are just too big and the construction too complex to fit nicely into our former conception
of what hunter-gatherers were capable of. Yet these objects are dated to a time before
it was thought that agriculture had reached this region. What could be the explanation?
One suggestion, and it's a suggestion, is that groups of hunting-gathering people converged
at this special, today we might call it holy site, it is a little bit of an elevated plain,
and jointly constructed these monuments. That of course increased the population density
in the immediate area long enough for the monuments to be fashioned and placed. Each
even though food was probably abundant in the region for hunting and gathering, this
temporary influx of people camped out for the duration, stressed the food supply to
the extent that some attempt to increase food availability in the immediate region began.
Sure enough, some early evidences emerged suggesting that there were some crude attempts
at growing food very near the site at about the time the construction was going on. Interesting?
Yes. Compelling? No, not really, but such as science. But given time and continued interest
by scientists and committed laypersons around the world, these answers will eventually be
forthcoming. Also please note that though slightly different from the example that I
gave earlier, it was a short-term food limitation that is the catalyst in this model for pushing
people into producing food. As mentioned, domestication of plants and animals, an essential step
in real agricultural food production, may at first have occurred incidentally and inadvertently.
That is, some of the earliest and most useful domesticates may have been pre-adapted to
domestication in the absence of any conscious effort by people to accomplish the domestication.
We will have much more to say about this later in the course. It is clear that without domestication
and agricultural food production, a sedentary lifestyle in permanent settlements would not
have been possible for long. And without settled communities, the population densities, specializations
of labor and tasks needed to start the journey toward civilization would not have been attained.
That subject will also be revisited in detail in a later lecture. So, in essence, this will
be a course that attempts to connect our unique capacities as domesticators with the rise
of civilization. I will try to make the case that we have in a sense partnered with a number
of other species, plants, animals and microbes, for mutual benefit, and that jointly we and
our domesticates have done remarkably well for the past 10 millennia. So well, in fact,
that we have profoundly changed the balance of organisms on the planet and have begun
to have significant impacts on the physical as well as the biological environment.
Now, when we approach our next lecture, we are going to discuss the actual process of
domestication and explore some of the hypotheses concerning the ways our ancient hunting, gathering
ancestors began a kind of mutualistic symbiosis with a number of plants and animals and by
so doing began to exert control over nature rather than just living in nature, a practice
with both positive and negative consequences that each generation, our own most notably,
must confront. You will hear me use that word mutualistic over and over in this course.
Later, I'll take the time to define the term more carefully, but it is something that I
believe very strongly, both as a biologist and as a farmer. If you can't see how domestication
benefits the domesticate at this point, please ponder this issue till we meet again. Here
is the question. If domestication was not a benefit to chickens, how did they get to
be the most numerous and abundant bird on the planet and how did they attain a wider
distribution than any other bird species? That's an interesting question. Obviously,
in this course, I'm going to answer it for you and I think you probably already have
the clue you need. But I think you can tell from this introduction what kind of a course
this is going to be. It's not a course like one that I have ever offered before. It's
not something in which I got my PhD, did my research and am now enlightening my students.
It's not a course like I've ever given. It's not a course like I've ever taken. It's one
that is put together by two parallel interests that converge around this central issue in
the development of civilization. It comes from my passion for animals, my involvement
with them, my understanding of the cellular and molecular structures that make them work
and a desire to assist other people to appreciate that understanding this connection between
the domesticates and the civilization in which we live will be critical to answering some
of the key questions in front of us right now and that will determine ultimately the
fate of our species. We'll see you next time with the answer to the chicken question.
