Hello, and welcome back.
The story of the domestication of plants, animals, and microbes by human beings, what
we're calling the human factor, really began prior to the appearance of modern humans on
the scene.
That is, the proper conditions had to be established in the natural world prior to the participation
of humans in the process.
A naturally occurring phenomenon essential to the process is the ability of all populations
to adapt genetically over time to changing conditions.
This phenomenon is called natural selection.
In this lecture, we will briefly review what we mean by natural selection.
That is, the hereditary response populations make to environmental pressures resulting
in the most fit collection of genetic types for the given conditions, so it's something
that populations, not individuals, respond to.
This is a critical point and must be understood then from the outset.
And all naturally occurring populations of organisms tend to exhibit a significant amount
of genetic heterogeneity, making it possible then to respond by natural selection to new
pressures and opportunities.
Domestication, it turns out, is a two-way street with natural selection playing an important
role, then followed by conscious, self-aware human activity finishing off the process.
It is that human factor that has resulted in a wide array of domesticants, plants, animals,
and microbes that are both genetically and phenotypically different from their wild progenitors.
We'll talk briefly about the relationship between the hunter-gatherer and what were
likely the first two domesticants, one plant and one animal.
As methods improve and more information is gathered, new theories and models have arisen
to describe these critical events in human history, so we will be discussing our present
understanding of the situation.
But as with all scientific understandings, as we pointed out last time, it should be
kept in mind that what we think we know today is subject to revision in the face of new
information or better explanations.
So as we said, prior to any involvement by human beings, plants, animals, and microbes
in nature are susceptible to environmental pressures and are shaped by natural selection.
To illustrate that point, I'm going to just give you a very hypothetical little scenario
with no particular details, but I just want to make sure we're understanding how natural
selection can shape a population by essentially selecting pre-existing types.
Natural selection doesn't cause the changes, it selects already existing types and allows
them to become predominant.
So here's the little story.
We have a group of herbivorous animals, prey animals, living in a given environment.
They're shaped by natural selection, they've got predators, they've got food sources, that's
shaping the distribution of one trait, we'll look at just one trait, the size of the individuals
in the population.
Most of them are gathered around the middle, but there are some that are quite a bit larger
and some that are quite a bit smaller and gradations in between.
A standard curve of distribution, alright?
Now something happens, a new predator comes on the scene and he is big and he is vicious
and he likes these little prey animals.
He is so big and vicious that being larger than the norm provides absolutely no advantage.
You could be bigger than the normal, but you still can't fight this guy off.
And being the normal size also doesn't help you because that's what he's after.
But it turns out that the littlest ones in the population can hide better and this big
vicious predator doesn't find them.
So after a few generations what has happened to the size of the population of the prey
animals?
It's smaller because these little animals have become the norm, they've found their
niche and they've grown up to be the predominant variety.
What were the salient features that made that little example work?
There had to be substantial heterogeneity in the population which allowed for some to
survive in the new circumstances.
It was then the new prevailing conditions that determined which genetic variant of the population
ultimately predominated and which ones died out or became extinct.
Environmental changes giving rise to new pressures and opportunities select for the variants
best suited to these conditions and they become the predominant type.
So let's turn our attention now to seed plants growing in the wild and look at a few of their
traits that might have some bearing on their survivability.
We're just talking about plants living in the wild.
These traits would be the result of generations of natural selection always working toward
making the most fit combination of genetic traits the most prevalent or the norm in
the population.
We'll look at one trait first, seed coats.
They can differ in character.
Seeds are surrounded by a coat that can vary in thickness, toughness, its resistance to
chemicals and other disruption or to desiccation.
In a natural setting it is not hard to imagine that a seed coat that is reasonably thick
and tough would provide a degree of survivability to the seed and thus might be favored by
natural selection.
Let's look at another trait.
Since plants are not capable of locomotion they require some form of dispersal mechanism
in order to spread over the landscape.
Some plants have co-evolved with animal partners to help in this task.
Various kinds of burrs that can cling to your hair or your skin or your sweat socks deliver
seeds to new distinct distant locations.
Also, attractive food surrounding a seed can encourage animals to carry the seeds away
and deposit them in different places.
Did you ever wonder, for example, how oak trees manage to get to the top of hills if
they reproduce by acorns that roll down hills?
Well, that's their way of doing it.
Squirrels are surrounded by food that's attractive to squirrels and what do squirrels do with
their food?
They pick it up, they run to some place that they know about, dig a little hole, plant
the seed, cover it back up.
They plan to come back and get it later.
They can go uphill, downhill, doesn't matter their animals.
Some of the squirrels will go uphill with these acorns and plant them and if by chance that
squirrel happens to get bumped off by an automobile or caught by a dog he's not going
to go back up there, dig out his acorns and he has in effect planted an oak tree on a
hilltop.
Other methods of dispersion are things like those little whirly gigs that you see falling
off of maple trees.
They carry the seeds away from the base of the tree.
Think about things like coconuts floating on the water delivering seeds to different
islands.
So plants can use a number of those mechanisms.
Finally, among the grasses and they're important in this course, it is common for the seeds
to be attached to the stem by a brittle racus that shatters upon contact or mild agitation
dispersing the seeds away from the parent plant.
That would be the form of the plant that would be favored, one that would kick the seeds
out.
As was the case with seed coats, natural selection then would be expected to favor those plants
that had traits that would enhance survivability and expansion.
Thus it would be expected that successful plants in nature would have developed effective
dispersal mechanisms for their seeds.
In the wild, seeds should be just exactly the right size to optimize reproduction.
Seeds that are too small may not have adequate food storage, coat thickness or whatever in
order to provide good survivability.
But on the other hand, seeds take a lot of energy to make and making seeds that are larger
than necessary would be wasteful or it might even be making a seed that's too big to disperse
easily and these traits would likely be selected against by natural selection.
There is also genetic heterogeneity in wild plants with regard to seed germination.
Seeds can germinate synchronously, that is, all in the first available growing season
or they can germinate asynchronously with some germinating in the first growing season
and others waiting around and germinating in subsequent seasons.
If you've ever tried to eradicate weeds from your garden or your lawn, you have likely
witnessed asynchronous germination of weed seeds.
You think you get them all one year, they're back the next.
So asynchronous germination is a way for a plant to hedge its bets with regard to finding
a good growing season.
Animals like plants show significant genetic heterogeneity in wild populations.
Natural selection works on animals as we have pointed out in our little hypothetical example
to select for the most fit phenotype and its corresponding genotype.
Now I've used that word twice.
Let me just quickly point out what we mean by genotype and phenotype.
The genotype refers to the plant's genes or genetic material, its DNA, that which it received
directly from its parents.
And the phenotype is what happens when the genes are expressed into form or function.
So the form and function of the creature is its phenotype, it's a result of the expression
of the genotype.
Animals like plants have a number of features that help determine long-term survivability
or fitness in the surroundings.
In natural populations, each of those features will show significant genetic variation.
Let's look at a few such features.
One is avoidance of predators, what we call flight response.
Obviously, if a predator is nearby, the animals that respond to that more quickly and flee
more quickly are probably going to be favored by natural selection.
What other things could we think about that will be favored by selection?
Speed, stealth, camouflage, weapons, weapons like teeth, claws, stingers, etc.
But those things can also be used to fend off predators and to capture prey.
So some of these things could be used either way.
Some animals use armor of various kinds to provide defense, and we can think of those
creatures, turtles, armadillos, shellfish, and so on.
And they use that to fend off predators.
Also sometimes there are behavioral mechanisms for defending.
Muscoxon will form a circle when predators are around with all the big animals with big
horns facing out and all the more vulnerable animals on the inside.
And whales will do it just the other way around.
They'll form a circle with all the heads on the inside and those big flopping tails, which
are quite dangerous, on the outside, a way to defend against predators.
Natural selection, almost by definition then, favors animals that can reproduce effectively.
The appearance of modern humans created a different set of environmental pressures and
opportunities for the plants, animals, and microbes in their immediate environment.
Hunter-gatherers, probably inadvertently at first, created localized conditions that
impacted a number of plant characteristics, creating new pressures and new opportunities,
thus altering the plant populations through natural selection.
Some variants were favored and some were negatively impacted.
By selectively harvesting seeds that were easy to gather, they inadvertently took back
to their camp variants, which had poor mechanical dispersal mechanisms.
Think about this.
Here's a hunter-gatherer coming up the hill.
He wants to gather seeds from a grass.
Most of the grasses, when he gets near it, just the rustling, causes the rackets to fracture
and the seeds are all over the ground and he's crawling around trying to find them.
But there will be a few that have the seeds all bundled up at the top, making a real easy
pick.
And he gets all the seeds without having to bend down.
That's a disadvantage in the wild, but the human being is inadvertently now, as he takes
these seeds back to his camp, enriching the area around his camp for that characteristic.
For reasons having to do then, with ease of preparation, these early modern humans, may
have selectively gathered seeds that were large, maybe larger than optimum, and had relatively
thin or tender seed coats.
Again, they would take a disproportionate number of these seeds back to their settlement
or camp.
By so doing, they were providing a new set of selective pressures and opportunities on
these plant variants, and they were doing it without knowing what they were doing.
Once our ancient ancestors began then to appreciate that some of the plants that they found around
their settlements had properties that they valued as a result of their inadvertent selections
of seeds, they began to place negative pressure on competing weeds by cultivating the soil
and planting the seeds they preferred.
Preparation of the soil by scratching the surface or later by plowing took away the advantage
offered by a thick or resistant seed coat, because now it's new conditions.
It diminished any advantage that plants had in competing with weeds because the human beings
were taking the weeds out, and in a natural environment, of course, asynchronous germination
was favored, but in this environment, synchronous germination is favored because the human beings
would select some of these seeds and plant them in the next year.
So it was useful to come up in the first year.
Thus a combination of inadvertent and directed human activities changed the selective pressure
enough to generate plants that were sufficiently different from their progenitors, both genetically
and phenotypically, to be considered different plants.
They were, in effect, domesticated.
The first domesticated plant was probably the Bottle Gourd.
Interestingly, it was not a food source, but a utility carrier that could transport
other seeds, food, items, and possibly even liquids.
The wild progenitor had a thin skin, but early hunter-gatherers soon selected for harder
skin variants because they could hold more materials dependently.
Under only a few generations, these domesticated Bottle Gourd had skins that were much tougher
than the wild type.
The great utility of this plant resulted in its spread around much of the globe carried
by hunter-gatherers on their way out of Africa to colonize much of the globe.
Early hunter-gatherers similarly created new sets of pressures and opportunities for the
animals in their immediate environment.
Dog provides an excellent example.
Zoologists have postulated the existence of a wolf variant that they now call protodog.
It may have had a less well-developed flight response than typical wolves.
It may have been less effective as a hunter and possibly was a bit smaller in stature.
Such an animal, though arising naturally in the population, was at a distinct disadvantage
in the habitat of the wild wolf pack, and thus was probably only an insignificant component
of the wolf population, and it may have even been driven out of the pack by the other wolves.
But when man came on the scene, he created a zone around his place of activity that favored
this creature.
Why?
Well, man makes scraps when he eats, and he tosses him around, and these protodogs were
probably very good scavengers.
So they were eating, as dogs do today, out of the garbage dumps of human beings.
But people were doing something else.
People were also suppressing the predator population immediately around them as they
protected themselves and their encampments.
They provided a zone of protection for these protodogs.
And since protodog probably had a poorly developed flight response, he was rather tolerant
of the people being around.
He would come up close to them, and they could begin to have some kind of interplay.
And finally, protodog was probably not a real competitor for man in terms of being a hunter,
so he was tolerated.
And the relationship between man and dog probably came about that way, with dogs meeting
us more than halfway through that protodog variant.
If a man just went into a wolf pack and pulled one out and said, I'm going to start a domesticated
line, good luck.
At this point, it is imperative that we make a clear distinction then between a truly domesticated
animal and any number of tamed animals.
Let me illustrate this with a story from my own childhood.
When I was quite young, my dad brought home a young raccoon, a baby raccoon.
And he said, this would be fun for Gary to have in the house.
And it was.
And we were such an original family.
We named him Ricky.
And we would give him apples.
And if you know about raccoons, he would wash his apple in his food dish, and he would
eat it very neatly.
And he had nice habits.
We had a fence yard.
He would go out and do the things he needed to do.
And he would actually come back in, because he knew where his food dish was, his blanket
was, and so on.
And he was quite nice to be around.
But my mother was getting worried, because his claws were growing and his teeth were
growing.
And one day, while I was sitting on the floor with Ricky watching television and chewing
gum, Ricky's little hand darted into my mouth, grabbed the chewing gum, and my mother banished
him.
And here's the important point.
When we took Ricky out to the woods and let him go, he was really not at any disadvantage.
He was not a domesticated animal.
He was a wild animal, OK?
And he fit very nicely into that environment.
He was genetically and phenotypically no different than any other raccoon.
Now, it would be hubris to assume that human beings have the capacity to domesticate any
plant, animal, or microbe that they wish.
Repeatedly in this course, we'll make the point that the domesticates often meet us halfway
on the road to complete domestication.
We have already provided several examples of that and several of our little stories.
Think of the domestication of some seed plants or the domestication of the dog.
Additional evidence for that claim comes from the observation that we have encountered some
notable failures and some only marginal successes in our attempts to domesticate some plants
and animals.
Among the plants are ginseng and morels and truffles, try as we might.
We really don't do very well.
Domesticating them.
In the animal world, gazelles, we know that the ancient Egyptians tried to domesticate
gazelles.
No luck.
Elephants live among people.
They are good work partners.
They are not genetically or phenotypically different from the elephants living outside
the human situation.
They're not domestic.
In a number of performing animals, people have tried to domesticate things like tigers,
seals, bears, et cetera.
But we must always keep in mind that these aren't domesticated animals.
They are wild animals, hence somewhat unpredictable, as we have seen from some of the rather horrendous
accidents that have happened when people have taken these tamed but not domesticated animals
for granted.
So what is it that causes us to consider a plant animal or even a microbe a domesticate?
First, it must be maintained by humans.
And to at least some degree be dependent on humans.
It must have undergone sufficient genetic change that it is both genetically and phenotypically
distinct from its wild progenitors.
It should have some trait or characteristic deemed by the domesticator to be of value
to him or her.
And although the earliest examples of domestication may lead back almost 35,000 years, that is
the bottle gourds and the dog, the bulk of crop and livestock domestications did not
begin until about 10,000 years ago.
But it was not really until the 19th century that a cousin of Charles Darwin, Francis Galton,
really proposed a formal definition for what is meant by a domesticate.
We will discuss his six characteristics in some detail in a later lecture.
What are some of the relationships then between domesticated plants and animals and their
wild progenitors?
These are not hard and fast rules devoid of exception, but generally domesticated animals
tend to be smaller than their wild progenitors.
This is certainly true for cattle, sheep and swine, all of which are smaller than their
presumed wild progenitors.
On the other hand, domesticated plants tend to be larger on average than their progenitors.
Also many domesticated animals exhibit a trait known as neotony, or that is the maintenance
of juvenile characteristics all the way to the level of sexual maturity.
You really see this in swine when you note that even a big domesticated boar does not
have a snout and tusks like a wild boar.
Most domesticated animals are much more tolerant of man too than their wild progenitors are,
making them easier and safer to handle and allowing successful breeding in close proximity
to humans.
Some plants can revert back rather quickly to wild status, acting as weeds, and some
but not all animals can exist in the feral state.
To some degree, this reversing to weeds and feral animals can be dependent on gene flow
between wild types and domesticates.
In some cases, such gene flow is common, and in other cases, it's almost non-existent.
In the case of turkeys, it would be very common.
In the case of corn, not very likely.
Domestication then set us apart from other animals.
There's one minor exception in the ant world about leaf cutter ants, and we will not worry
about those.
So probably even other humanoids or proto-humans did not domesticate other creatures.
That's something left to modern humans.
Domestication was essential in our transformation from hunter-gatherers, as all other animals
are, to food producers.
It made possible the sedentary lifestyle with fixed settlements that we will discuss
in the next lecture, and it opened the door to the development of civilization.
Thus it can be said that the practice of domestication was an essential, if not sufficient, precursor
to the advent of civilization.
Another major and recurring theme in this course is that our domestication of plants
and animals is a kind of mutualistic symbiosis.
In order to fully understand the importance of this from a biological perspective, we'll
need to consider the following terms.
First, let's talk about symbiosis itself.
When a biologist uses that term, he is simply talking about two different organisms living
together.
Often in common parlance, we mean something different by that.
When we say symbiosis, I think we frequently are implying synergy.
That's not what we mean here.
It simply means two organisms living together.
So that concept, organisms living together, can break down into at least three distinct
types of symbiosis.
The first one we'll talk about is parasitism.
That's a situation where one of the partners clearly benefits and the other is clearly
damaged.
That will become important in this course because we're going to talk about domesticated
animals and their resistance to parasites.
For example, internal parasites will actually draw blood from animals, draw them down, make
them sick, ultimately kill them, but the parasite benefits.
Commensalism is the situation where one partner benefits, but the other is totally unaffected.
The classic example of that is a tree on which is growing a staghorn fern.
The fern benefits from being able to anchor itself on the tree and get in the right position,
but the tree is totally unaffected.
The third kind of symbiosis is mutualism.
That's the kind we're talking about when we talk about domestication because in that
kind of symbiosis, both partners should benefit.
When biologists talk about benefit, they usually only are really talking about not whether
the animal is happy or whether the plant looks good.
They're talking about the numbers in the population, whether they're going up and remaining strong,
and the distribution of the organism.
Therein you have the answer to the chicken question posed in the last lecture.
It is interesting to note that after living as food procurers for almost 190,000 years
in one of the greatest revolutions in the history of our species, agricultural food
producing communities began to spring up around the globe within just a few thousand years
of each other.
As we'll see in the next lecture, we became increasingly codependent on a variety of plant
and animal species as our settled communities expanded and evolved into cities, city-states,
nations, and now ultimately a kind of global food community.
This increasing codependence between us and our domesticates is another recurring theme
in this course.
In the final lectures, we will revisit this subject with the intent of making the point
that our generation, the one probably least cognizant of our dependence on domesticates
of any generation in the last 10,000 years, is in fact more dependent on the process of
domestication than any generation that has gone before.
We'll see you next time.
