Welcome. In the last lecture, we discussed the genetic heterogeneity of plants and animals
that permitted natural selection to occur in the wild. We then discussed the new pressures
that human beings put upon plants and animals that resulted in the beginnings of domestication.
In this lecture, we're going to talk about how those early domestication efforts between
humans and plants and animals moved us towards settled communities and closer to the food-producing
civilization with which we are also familiar.
There is a lot of guesswork involved in piecing together this story. This early history is
very hard to establish definitively. How do we think we know what we know is an important
question to raise?
Since this is a course dealing with a scientific approach to the study of the domestication
events and agricultural practices leading to civilization, we should spend a few minutes
discussing the basic approaches that have been employed to piece together the story
of the first farmers. We'll start with what is called the biological method. It was developed
by a Russian plant geneticist named Vavilov, and he provided much information about the
origin of domesticated plants. Some of the same reasoning can also be applied to animal
studies, though Vavilov only really worked with plants.
What he did was essentially look for ranges of wild progenitors by using a map, by mapping
different specimens that he found, and looking at the genomes of those specimens. And what
he was looking for was a spot on the map that had the richest array of different genomes.
He deduced that because that array existed, those plants had been there longer, and therefore
that was likely the place of origin for the domesticates. We'll return to Vavilov later
in this course. He is this sort of tragic character, and we're going to give him some
time because he connects somewhat to our time in history.
Another approach, the archeological method developed by Robert Braidwood for studies
of archeological origins in the Middle East, builds up a model for what occurred based
on typical archeological methodologies. Various materials can be found throughout what might
have been encampments, but of course always a very rich source of useful material are
middens or garbage dumps around these camps where early humans simply tossed things like
animal bones or broken tools, and that would really help archeologists figure out what went
on thousands of years ago. Seeds and plant materials can be found associated with all
kinds of ancient cooking materials, and that's also filled with clues for what was going
on. Bones and teeth of animals can reveal much information. For example, if the species,
the sex, and the age of animals can be determined from such materials, and that is very often
the case, it is possible to give a very accurate estimate of the point at which our hunter-gathered
ancestors began to husband and presumably domesticate certain livestock.
Let me explain that a little bit. If you were a hunter-gatherer, if you were just hunting
animals and eating them and throwing the bones in your midden or your garbage heap, you would
expect a mixture of male, female, young, and old, because there was no particular rhyme
or reason to where you were catching what you could catch and killing what you could
kill. You might see a preponderance of younger animals and a preponderance of quite a bit
older animals, because they may have been a little bit weakened or not as able to get
away, but there probably wouldn't be much sex difference. But as we look at these middens,
you'll see this kind of mixture of bones where there's no particular relationship to age
and sex, and all of a sudden, rather abruptly, you start to see a change. Suddenly you see
a preponderance of young male bones, and when you find female bones, they're usually
from a very old animal. Now, archaeologists put their finger out and say, aha, these people
were managing their flocks. Why do they say that? Well, as a sheep herder myself, I can
tell you why. And that is, these people realized that in the world of sheep, and the same is
true with cattle, and it's true with swine. One male can service a significant number
of females, making most of the other males, and I'm sorry to say this, fellows, superfluous.
Okay? So what happens? You don't want to keep a bunch of superfluous males around. One,
they consume food. Two, they fight among themselves, and some of them get hurt, and it might be
your best one that gets hurt. Thirdly, they're unpleasant to be around very often. They add
a level of danger and excitement to herding that isn't there if they aren't there in
large numbers. And finally, by narrowing the number of them that you use and carefully
picking the very best one, you can improve the quality of your flock. So when they saw
this change in the distribution of male, female, young, old bones in these middens,
they said, aha, these people have figured it out. They're managing their flocks, and
that probably is leading to domestication. Another important scientific method used is
isotopic dating, which provides a method of assigning absolute dates to some materials
or samples. The best known and most widely used of these techniques is carbon-14 dating.
Let me just take a second to explain that as well. Carbon exists in the atmosphere in
the form of CO2 mostly in two isotopic forms. The predominant one is carbon-12, but there
is a radioactive isotope, carbon-14, which makes up a fixed percentage of the carbon
in the atmosphere. But carbon-14 is radioactive, and it decays turning into carbon-12. Now,
when an animal is growing and it's laying down its bones, carbon is getting put in there,
into its material, into its body parts, and when the animal dies, that process stops,
and this carbon is trapped in there, no more going in, no more coming out. And over a long
period of time, what happens? The carbon-14 continues to decay into carbon-12. So over
time, the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 changes, and by knowing the exact half-life
or the length of time it takes for carbon-14 to decay, you can make very accurate assessments
of the age of a sample, assuming it contains carbon. But that's often the case in biological
materials because we live in a carbon-based biosphere. As pointed out earlier, Homo sapiens-sapiens
lived as food procurers for about 190,000 of our approximately 200,000-year existence.
Then in one of these great transformations, the greatest probably in history, our species,
within only a few thousand years, simply changed. The bulk of the population took up a new way
of life by becoming agricultural food producers. Let's orient a bit to the time period we're
talking about. This is the period often called the Stone Age because people of the time were
adept at making and using stone tools. The Stone Age is generally divided into three
overlapping phases, beginning with the old Stone Age or the Paleolithic. The dates for
these periods are, of course, approximate and differ with geography, coming sooner to
some regions than to others. The Paleolithic or Old Stone Age is named for the stone tools
humans and pre-humans employed during this period. So some of our non-modern human ancestors
or relatives were also living in that period. It encompasses well over 95% of the existence
of our species. Modern man, Homo sapiens-sapiens, 95% of our existence was spent in the Paleolithic.
The Mesolithic or Middle Stone Age varied from location to location, of course, and
in Europe and the Middle East it was thought to have begun 12 to 15,000 years ago and is
roughly separated from the Paleolithic by the level of sophistication of the stone tools
made by people living in the era. The era is generally considered to have ended with
the advent of farming and systematic herding, which began, of course, as we've said, at
different times in different places. By all accounts, the Mesolithic was over everywhere
by about 5,000 years ago. The people of this period hunted small creatures,
fished, and ate a wide variety of plant materials. There's some evidence that they used fire to
move animal herds. As the ice sheets receded, these Mesolithic hunter-gatherers began to hunt
larger animals that became available to them. They generally had no settled or permanent
communities, though there is good evidence that groups of hunter-gatherers in this period often
return to the same encampments at approximately the same season each year. We know these people made
art in caves and produced decorative or ceremonial objects. Interestingly, evidence shows that the
people of this era really were well nourished and were quite healthy. They were rather large of
stature, and we think they ate a diet composed of a number of different plants and a variety of
animals. In fact, recent studies suggest that these late Mesolithic hunter-gatherers may have
been healthier and larger of stature than the farmers that ultimately displaced them. They
also generally had better dentition than the early farmers who suffered more tooth decay as a
result of their grain-based diets that had higher sugar contents and lower amounts of trace elements.
Hunter-gatherers in favorable localities need to spend only a very small portion of their time
in the quest for food. They probably had few material possessions and they did not have to
perform much work in order to sustain themselves, and there is little evidence that they suffered
much from what we consider communicable disease. The next period, the Neolithic, is the part of
the Stone Age that will be of greatest interest to us in this course. It began at various times
in various localities, but generally it is considered to have lasted from about 12,000
to 5,000 years ago. It correlates roughly with the receding ice sheets at the end of the last ice age
and is marked by the beginnings of agricultural food production, that so-called Neolithic
Revolution. It marks one of the most profound transitions in the history of our species
because it was at that time that humans began to exert more control over nature by producing
rather than hunting and gathering their food. That revolution made us different from all other
animals in terms of how we feed. It set the stage for the advent of civilization and placed us
squarely on a path we are inexorably following to this very day. Interestingly, I find the story
of the expulsion from the garden in the Book of Genesis interesting in regard to this profound
transition from food procuring to food production. What are some of the key elements of the story
that lead me to find this so interesting? First, the story made date from about 10 to 15,000 years ago
in various oral traditions, later in written form. That fairly well matches the period when
humans were making the conversion to food production in the Middle East. Let's look briefly at some
of the main elements of the story. Before the fall, Adam and Eve were innocent in the garden.
Read that earth, garden earth, and the garden or earth fed them. They had no clothes. Read
material goods and technology, and apparently they did not work. After eating from the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, and read there the ability to produce food through domestication
of plants and animals and exerting influence on nature, the benefits of the garden were denied
Adam and Eve and their descendants. Could this story be interpreted as a metaphor for our change
from the food procuring to the agricultural way of life? If so, that tree with the strange name,
the knowledge of good and evil takes on very special significance for the remainder of this
course. It is not known for certain why agricultural practices emerged at a number of different sites
almost simultaneously. That is a few thousand years can be considered simultaneous. But many
believe that the primary trigger was climate change. As those ice sheets receded, more plants
began to grow profusely. More game was available and populations began to settle into favorable
places. As their populations grew, these settled communities outstripped the local resources
and had to learn to produce food if they were going to be able to stay there.
The transition to the agricultural way of life was not always absolute or exclusive in a given
region. There is some evidence that in a number of places foraging people lived in close proximity
to Neolithic food producers. There is a growing body of evidence to suggest that the interactions
between the Neolithic food producers and their food procuring neighbors who were still following
the old Mesolithic ways were sometimes violent even involving acts of ritual cannibalism.
In other instances, the interplay between neighboring cultures may have been a bit more benign.
The early Neolithic food producers broke roughly into two groups, horticulturists who cultivated
plants for food and pastoralists who raised animal herds. We'll talk more about these two groups
in a later lecture. Of course, there were also the integrated farmers who did both,
but it's easy to think about these two types. Horticulturalists arose in areas where water supply
was available. They undoubtedly supplemented their diets by hunting and fishing. This was not
uncommon in Eurasian, Asian or African regions and in the Americas where few large animals survived
after the ice sheets receded. Committed pastoralists arose in more arid regions of the world as it were
because it was possible for them to drive their herds to water holes. Undoubtedly,
they did not subsist exclusively on animal products, but most likely supplemented their
diets by foraging and browsing while tending or herding their flocks or herds.
As the Neolithic Revolution progressed, significant changes came in rapid succession,
which contributed to the growth in the number of settled communities and the rise in population.
The actual patterns of conversion to food production from food procurement likely varied
from place to place depending on local conditions and past cultural practices of the people involved.
The availability of surplus food, the development of specialization and labor,
and the resulting organization of manpower that resulted from the formation of settled
communities led in many cases to increasing local populations. That in turn led to the necessity
to produce more food. It should be noted human females in settled agricultural communities
probably produced more children in their lifetimes than their hunting gathering counterparts. Now
that may seem strange, so let me explain that for a second. We know in our modern world that young
women who are committed, sometimes elite athletes, actually suppress the number of menzies that they
experience during the year. And we might assume that these hunter-gatherer females walking and
moving all the time and eating this very nice balanced primarily plant diet were probably
quite fit, so they may not have essentially been available to be impregnated as often as their
more sedentary counterparts. But even of greater interest is the fact that these hunter-gatherers,
because of their diet, had very little access to soft food. So these hunter-gatherer mothers
very likely couldn't wean their young away quickly. They had to continue to breastfeed them
until they were almost able to operate on their own. That of course suppressed that lactation,
suppressed ovulation, and so a typical hunter-gatherer female might only produce say two offspring in
their life. That would not be the case with the typical female living in one of these settled
agricultural communities. And so that added to the growing population pressure in these early
settled communities. When these early agriculturalists encountered the problem of an expanding
population and the consequent need to produce more food, they had only two choices. Those same two
choices are with us still today. So please attend carefully to this point. It is a major point in
this course and we will return to it repeatedly. One way to get more food in an agricultural
situation. Use the land more efficiently and more intensely. That approach is as old as the first
settled agricultural communities and it remains a major part of our survival strategy to this day.
More food could also be produced if more useful land could be attained by preparation or by
acquiring it from others. Hence some of these early settled communities became regional powers
with hegemonic tendencies in order to control more productive land.
With the rise in settled communities came the rise in technology for agriculture and then
other aspects of civilized life. Methods and implements had to be developed for preparation of
the soil and for planting and harvesting. Food preparation and food storage required increases
in technology. Of course with surplus food and specialization of labor came increases in technology
related to military activities, housing, public works such as roads, religious structures,
government buildings, sewers, granaries, just to mention a few. Technology was also
employed to produce consumer goods for comfort, grooming, adornment or a grandizement. As people
became increasingly dependent upon their ability to produce food they became increasingly dependent
on the technologies that supported this way of life. Roughly 5,000 years ago there was a
marked increase in the development of activities that would result in modern science and technology.
Information about weather, seasons and growing conditions placed a premium on the study of
astronomy. The measurement and division of land required mathematics and geometry.
Distribution of food required the development of weights and measures. In the Middle East and
likely in other locales as well, irrigation was critical to maximizing output of food from the
land. This practice not only required careful methods for measuring and dividing land and
construction of dams, floodgates and channels, it also demanded the development of legal codes
and methods of enforcement of the laws and rules to maintain order. Note again that what we're doing
here is exerting more control over nature when we're irrigating. Issues of land ownership
probably arose as a result of irrigation with lands that had water on them more highly desired than
lands that had to have water carried in. From these early beginnings arose such concepts as
personal, private and public property. Those things don't mean a lot to hunter-gatherers
which began to take on more importance and require more oversight and management.
This provides an example of one of the ways that civilization and agriculture based on
domestication of plants and animals have been linked from the very beginning. As population
densities increase and people begin to live in close proximity to their domesticated animals,
public health issues, something of very little concern to widely dispersed hunter-gatherers,
began to take on new significance. Zoonotic diseases, that is diseases communicated from
animals to humans under natural conditions, arose and critical population densities were
achieved for the establishment and spread of infectious disease. Though attempts were made
to ameliorate the effects of these scourges of the settled lifestyle, little progress was
made until relatively modern times and that is not to say that these problems don't represent
a continuing threat to human life and health. In fact, the threat of devastating pandemic is
always with us and has its roots in these early settled communities where people and livestock
cohabited in crowded conditions. In some parts of the world those conditions persist and that is
a principal cause of the almost annual influenza epidemics emanating from Asia and spreading
around the world. This new way of living also created new tensions among individuals and groups
that needed to be addressed. In most cases this was accomplished through the development of some
form of legal code or body of civil rules and expectations. Many of these had their origins
as I said before in the establishment of boundaries and procedures relating to irrigation and
agricultural practice. In large part because of the need to control land and technology over time
periods extending beyond a single human lifetime, the concepts of patrimony and intergenerational
inheritance were developed and addressed in these emerging legal codes. In our own time and on the
front pages of our newspapers we see the continuing struggle emanating from ancient decisions and
claims played out as modern people continue to wrangle over who has rightful claim to given
pieces of land and I think you're all familiar with those. So let's quickly review some of the
major changes to the way people live resulting from domestication, food production and the resulting
move to a sedentary way of life. The incentive and opportunity for specialized labor definitely
increased. The concept of territoriality was enhanced and the concepts of personal private
and public possessions were refined. Religion became more formalized and tied to the needs of
food production and continuance of and cohesiveness of the community. Human diet began to change
and become more restricted. Attitudes toward work, leisure and time began to change. Though there
was probably less leisure time per capita in these settled communities than in hunter-gatherer groups
where people really didn't work, leisure time and goods were also distributed much more heterogeneously
in these settled communities. The concept of ownership and intergenerational inheritance began
to take on new importance. There was a heightened need for laws to settle disputes, distribute
goods and resolve issues of ownership. Communicable diseases and public health became major issues.
Obviously all matters of polity are more complex in settled communities than in hunting
foraging groups. We've talked a lot about the changes that occurred in our communities
and to the plants and animals around us, but it is worth noting that this change in
life way to food production and all that accompanied it brought about some changes in us as well.
It is becoming increasingly clear that though we are still very similar physically to those
mesolithic wandering hunter-gatherers, human evolution has not stopped. Over time our immune
systems and other responses to environmental challenge have undergone change. Our vision is
likely different and there may have been subtle changes in skeleton and musculature in response
to different selective pressures in this new way of living. It is certainly worth noting and emphasizing
that we had nearly 200,000 years as modern humans living like all other animals as food
procurers. Natural selection obviously worked on us during that time and on all our pre or proto
human ancestors. Our grand experiment as food producers has been going on for only five to
10,000 years. Though we have made some adaptive genetic changes, they are apparently subtle.
Thus some of our modern problems dealing with reproductive physiology, nutrition, sleep pattern,
social interaction may emanate from the fact that our lifestyle and way of life is quite different
from the one that's selected for our present phenotypes. So those are interesting things
to keep in mind as we prepare to move into our next lecture.
Despite some of the problems of adjustment just mentioned in a rather short time, just a few
thousand years, food producers in settled communities began to successfully displace the
previously dominant hunter-gatherer cultures to less hospitable and less desirable habitats
where most of the few remaining food procuring cultures are found today. By 1500 AD, the vast
majority of the people on earth were sustained by food that was produced by agriculture. In our
next lecture, we will discuss the dispersal and spread of early agricultural enterprise
around the globe. We'll see you then.
