Hello, and welcome to this presentation on the spread of agricultural food production
around the world.
As promised in an earlier lecture, I'll take the next few minutes to cover several of the
different scientific approaches that are being used to determine the origins of various
plant and animal domesticates and also to follow the spread of agricultural food production
from its places of origin to other areas and habitats.
Once we've discussed some of these approaches and their applicability to certain questions,
we'll briefly follow the spread of the domesticate-based agricultural way of life from a few of the
key origin points to other points on the globe.
A major theme of this discussion will be the actual patterns that seem to emerge in
our example cases, and when possible, we'll try to relate the patterns of spread to the
conditions prevailing at that particular time and place.
It's really important to note that by no later than 1500 A.D., the agricultural way of life
had essentially spread around the entire world and had become the primary way of nourishing
the bulk of the world's population.
By then, the committed hunter-gatherers had become a minority and had been displaced to
the margins of the civilized world.
Just think about that for a second.
This way of agricultural food production began only about 9 to 10,000 years ago, and later
than that in some places, and then by 1500 A.D., not terribly long ago in the timescale
we're talking about, what had previously been the absolute total human approach to food
gathering, that is food procurement, was pushed to the margins, and this new method, agricultural
food production based on domesticates, had become by far the predominant method and
it had spread around the world, only about a 7,000-year period in order to accomplish
that.
Now, as I pointed out earlier, there are a number of locations of origin scattered around
the world on several different continents.
In a matter of this relatively short time, these isolated points of domestication had
become centers for this new way of life, and then, of course, this style of producing food
had to radiate out from these points and colonize the rest of the world.
As we approach that subject, we have to keep in mind that this is a prehistoric issue,
at least in the beginning.
There are no written records, so in order to establish this story, we have to approach
it scientifically.
We have to use a number of different methods, and the first one that I want to talk about
is the so-called biological method.
This one is associated with a man named Vavilov, who will appear later in this course, not
so much because of this method, but because of his role in the advancement of science
and agriculture, but Vavilov, in the 1930s and 1940s, became deeply interested in this
question of where did agricultural lifestyles begin, and how did they move?
Where did domesticates go?
In order to do that, he looked not at archaeological material, but he looked at living material,
and what he was really looking at or trying to determine was the amount of genetic diversity
in any given plant species.
For example, if you're talking about wheat, he would ask how many different strains and
types are there, how many different genetic varieties are there, and then he made an assumption.
He thought if he could locate the actual center of genetic diversity, and when I say center,
I mean that Vavilov would map these locations.
He would lay out a map of a region, and then he would go out and take samples, and he would
note from where the samples came, and he would look for genetic variety, and he made an assumption.
His basic assumption was that where there was the most variety, that was likely to be
the point of origin for that plant.
Now, that may take a little thinking.
Why would that be?
First of all, it would suggest that this is the place where there would have been the
most trial and error, the most number of experiments, the number of things tried.
It would have been closest probably to where the wild progenitors lived, and it is also
based on the concept that as these valuable plants, these domesticated plants moved out,
they didn't move out en masse.
Genetics were taken out, which would be a small genetic portion.
In genetics, we sometimes call this a founder effect, just a small portion of the genetics
were taken out, and then a new population started from that.
So the genetic diversity in this separate place would be less.
So as you get farther and farther away from the point of origin, you get less and less
genetic diversity.
So that's an interesting assumption.
Is it always correct?
Well, no, it's not because we do know now that some plants were not necessarily domesticated
at the places where their wild progenitors grew and so on.
So it's a good place to start.
If the wild progenitor in this case also is known, then looking at its geographical range
and then adding this Vaviloff approach of genetic variability really can focus you in
quickly to the likely place where a particular origin may have occurred.
This is really useful if you're talking about a creature with a narrow range.
For example, sheep and goats, we know that the wild progenitors of sheep and goats had
a natural range that was rather tight, rather small.
And so we know using this then genetic variability business and that range data, you can really
pretty well pinpoint where these things started.
It's less useful when you've got creatures with a very broad natural range.
And I'll give you as a couple of examples, bovines, cows and pigs that really have wide
ranges in nature, long before any domestication events took place.
And what that does, of course, is make the Vaviloff method more difficult to use.
Now another approach, and in a sense a more straightforward, is the archaeological approach.
I assume that most of you have been thinking all along that the story we're telling is
based on sort of archaeological artifacts, and it is to some extent, but not entirely.
And that's the point of bringing these things up.
The beginnings of the study of the origins of agriculture based on an archaeological approach
can pretty much be attributed to an American, Robert Bradwood, who was associated with the
University of Chicago's Oriental Institute.
He started his work later than Vaviloff, but the two did actually overlap in time.
So there was some cross fertilization, if I may use that word.
And of course, Bradwood and his colleagues and subsequently many others have begun to
look for archaeological material that would be useful in determining the story of how
agriculture began, and where it began, and ultimately how it moved, OK?
So where did Bradwood start?
He started in the Middle East and using information that he could get from Vaviloff type studies,
he didn't just start at random in the Middle East.
He went to regions where there were accumulations of wild animals that were probably forbearers
of domesticants.
So he was already hedging his bet and moving in that direction.
What did he find?
Well, first of all, they looked in places like middens, garbage dumps, and in these
ancient excavations, and they found things like bones and bone fragments and teeth.
They still found pottery, some of which had seeds and other plant material actually associated
with it.
Of course, they found bone tools and stone tools and things of that sort, the kind of
stuff you would expect to find in an archaeological dig.
Well, what can you determine from things like that?
I'm going to give you just one example to show you how these people put this kind of
thing together.
A good archaeologist with zoological training can often look at a bone or a bone fragment
and determine one, it's species.
If he's got the right bones, he can determine sex, usually pelvic bones and things.
And if he's got, again, the right material, he can sometimes determine age.
So if you've got these three things, species, sex, and age, what can this tell you about
domestication?
Well, if you're looking at a garbage dump or a midden put together by a group of hunter
gatherers who are simply out hunting these animals, what kind of bones are you likely
to find with regard to species, age, and sex in this garbage dump?
You find all the bones of a given species, let's say sheep.
And then you start looking at the age, and you see a variety of ages, and you look at
sex, and you see a variety of sexes.
And then relatively abruptly, as you get to newer material, and you look in the garbage
dump, you suddenly see a very different distribution.
Now you look at the bones of sheep, and you discover that the bones you're finding are
predominantly male and predominantly young.
What does this tell you?
A hunting culture is simply out killing the animals they can kill, dragging them back,
slaughtering them, eating them, throwing the bones away.
But when suddenly you have just the bones of young males, you don't see many female
bones, and you don't see any young female bones, this suggests to you that you now have
a managed flock.
That this flock is being carefully managed, that these people have figured out that one
male can impregnate a whole lot of females, so they eat all the little males and keep
all the females to increase the size of their flock.
So clever analysis of this kind of archeological material can give lots of insight into what
was going on.
Some seeds can be identified as either wild type or domesticate, and of course that helps
a great deal in figuring out when things began to be domesticated.
And of course these people found tools and other kinds of artifacts, and these are very
useful, but they have to be kept in context and they have to be looked at carefully.
For example, there are some primitive tools that we look at and assume are agricultural
and then might assume that the people that had them are these kind of new agriculturalists,
food producers.
It wouldn't necessarily be the case because some hunter-gatherers who did not domesticate
plants and didn't actually do farming, did aid their efforts at harvesting by using
some tools to go out and harvest wild plants and bring them back.
So you have to be careful in analysis of tools.
These things require that people become engaged and think carefully about them.
We can also begin to assign exact dates, how old something is, by using isotopic dating
methods.
And the most commonly used of those is carbon dating, and there is a reason for that.
First of all, if you're interested in biological material, life on earth is carbon based.
And so if you can date the carbon in a sample, you get an idea of how old it is, and if it's
a biological sample, it's going to have carbon in it.
Carbon on earth exists naturally in two isotopic forms.
The principal one is carbon 12.
But there is also a radioactive, unstable isotope, carbon 14.
It's in very small percentage compared to carbon 12.
In fact, there's about a million, million more times carbon 12 than carbon 14.
About 10 to the 12th more carbon 12 molecules than carbon 14 molecules in the modern world.
So in a creature like myself, a modern creature, the distribution of carbon 12 to carbon 14
in my body should be something in the neighborhood of a million, million times more carbon 12
than carbon 14.
But take an ancient sample.
When the carbon is incorporated into that creature and that creature dies, then there's
no carbon going in or carbon coming out, and there's something special about carbon 14.
It decays, and it decays to carbon 12.
So an old sample is going to have an even wider differential between carbon 12 and carbon
14.
And since the half-life of carbon 14 is well-established, it's 5,730 years, we can look at the ratio
of carbon 14 to carbon 12, and based on what that ratio is and knowing the half-life of
carbon 14, it is possible to extrapolate back from the present to when that sample laid
down its carbon, when it actually, when that creature was living.
So this is a very good technique for measuring the age of biological samples, and it's of
course aided by the development of a wonderful instrument called the mass spectrometer, which
has the ability to separate atoms of things like carbon and then look at the different
weights to tell a carbon 14 isotope from a carbon 12 isotope in an automated fashion,
give you the number that you want and allow you to make the calculation that you want
to make.
Very recently, we now have molecular biology getting into the picture, and we have molecular
biological techniques that also help us figure out where things originated and how they developed.
Mitochondrial DNA work is based on knowing that mitochondria, the energy engine in a
advanced cell, comes only from the mother in genetics, and therefore we can look at
the DNA of this self-replicating molecule and follow matrilineally where creatures came
from.
We know now that the Homo sapiens sapiens, our species, came out of sub-Saharan Africa.
Most of the information for that comes from a combination of mitochondrial DNA work associated
with Vaviloff type assumptions having to do with the amount of genetic diversity.
And of course now with modern techniques using things like the polymerase chain reaction
where we can greatly amplify a DNA sample and automatic sampling and sequencing techniques,
it's possible to really do a careful analysis of the sequence of a number of different DNA
samples, again giving us very precise analysis of where certain things originated and as
we keep wanting to say in this lecture where they're ultimately going to go.
Finally, archaeologists and linguists get together and do historical comparative linguistics,
this is a field based, or this isn't it, a technique based on the assumption again that
when language groups move it's because people move.
The language isn't necessarily spread by other people picking it up, but native speakers
tend to move into a region.
So what you really have at the end of all this is a variety of approaches, archaeology,
biology, molecular biology, physics and linguistics all asking the same question.
And when you start to get agreement among these different approaches then your confidence
grows because the evidence supports itself.
And that's how these stories have been developed.
There weren't any eyewitnesses left, we don't have written records, but we have got careful
science and it's coming from various sources and it's being put together to tell the story.
Now what about the spread of agriculture?
There certainly are several models about how agriculture moved from individual points of
origin to different places around the globe.
We think, in fact we're pretty sure using these methods, that agriculture moved by diffusing
into new areas.
But that means only that we think it wasn't started de novo in a number of different places,
sort of in a continuum, but rather it's spread from places of origin into new regions.
But we don't know exactly how that could happen, I could give you two examples immediately
for how agriculture could diffuse into a new area.
One people could emulate it, they could either be impressed by it and take it up themselves
or it could be imposed on them by someone taking them over and saying you plow this
field and you do it and you can eat some of the stuff.
Or pioneers can move into an area bringing their agricultural techniques with them.
In many cases we probably had both things happening, but both of these models suggest
that agriculture spread out from points of origin and just didn't pop up de novo and
ultimately cover most of the globe.
So agriculturalists then, people who were committed to this method, this life way of
producing their own food often found themselves associated with neighboring hunter-gatherer
types, food procurers.
There's evidence that these people often lived side by side, sometimes for extended periods
of time, could go on for hundreds of years.
What do we know about these relationships of these people with each other?
We know that some agricultural settlements were fortified.
That tells us something, it tells us that the people who lived there were concerned
enough about their security that they fortified their settlement.
But we don't know who they were concerned with.
Were they concerned with their neighboring hunter-gatherers or were they concerned with
other agriculturalists who might be living nearby?
This is an interesting issue that isn't always easy to sort out.
We also know that because there were different kinds of hunter-gatherers in these regions
and different kinds of potential domesticates, when agriculturalists moved in, in very different
places they found different kinds of situations.
That means that it's very difficult to develop a sweeping model for how agriculture spread
from points of origin to where it finally ended up.
It was probably different in each locale because you had different indigenous people
living there, you had different interactions between the two, and you had different results
in each place.
However, again we keep trying to look for overreaching theoretical pictures.
When I talk about the diffusion of agriculture as opposed to de novo starting, there seems
to be another sort of uniform situation, and that is when hunter-gatherers, when food procurers
themselves do adopt agricultural ways of life, there seem to be similar ways that they
do this.
In the first place they have to have availability.
They have to know about the advantages of domesticated animals and domesticated plants.
They have to see them, they have to know about the advantages of them, and then they have
to get into the issue of substitution.
They have to get these materials.
We think they probably got them often through trade, but of course we know there's another
way you could get these things, you could steal them.
But they had to be able to get these things and then substitute them for the wild sources
of food that they had previously been using.
And then the last step appears to be what's called consolidation.
That is the weaving of this food production approach into the cultural background that
these people already have.
And so you can see that in a number of different places there are going to be a number of different
ways that agriculture actually took root.
Now we know that there were a number of sites for the start of agriculture or the origin
of agriculture, and there are really seven of them that have been particularly well studied.
We know there are more than that, but there are seven that get a lot of attention.
And it was long felt that the earliest domestication events and agricultural practices occurred
in the Fertile Crescent.
But again, this is science, and even now we should know that there are claims suggesting
that maybe there are older places of origin.
The other regions beyond the Fertile Crescent include in Mexico, South China, North China,
the Central Andes, the Eastern United States, and even sub-Saharan Africa.
We know that from the Fertile Crescent agricultural practices moved first into Anatolia, which
of course is part of modern Turkey, and then across into Mediterranean Europe and Southern
Europe.
Agriculture then traveled up the Danube, which you may recall goes, of course, north
from that area, but also turns west.
And that took agriculture into essentially temperate Europe.
We know that by 6,000 years ago, before the present, agriculture did exist in the British
Isles, so it got that far.
We also know that agriculture spread eastward from Southwest Asia into Eastern Europe.
That went all the way to the Eurasian steppes in what is really modern Hungary, which sort
of stopped going in that direction for about 600 years.
Agriculture also radiated out from points of origin in East Asia and Southeast Asia
into Oceania.
The people who often colonized the islands of Oceania were probably familiar with agriculture
before they went there.
The Indian subcontinent is the site of some initial domestications.
We know that, and when we talk about specific domestications, we'll talk about India.
But we also know that agriculture in India blended with agriculture coming from the east
and also later from agriculture that came around from the west and north.
Though agriculture appears to have spread from Southeast Asia into North Africa fairly
early, Sub-Saharan Africa may have been an independent focus for the early domestication
of agriculture in the Neolithic period.
Remember, that's where our species originated, but it's not a place where we think we started
agriculture first.
Agriculture also appears to have radiated out from several centers, independent centers,
in the Americas.
One such location was in what is now the southeastern United States.
The Andes and parts of Mesoamerica were also areas that developed their own forms of agriculture.
As I pointed out before, the specific patterns for the origins of agriculture were different
in these different places for a number of the reasons that I've mentioned.
It's clear that the transformation to food production was not accomplished in the same
way from place to place.
There is evidence for food producers and food procurers, again, living in close proximity
to each other and affecting each other in different ways and providing different patterns.
The patterns followed, depended again, on the resources available, the regional practices
of the people who were already there, and the conditions that allowed for food production.
Now, in the Fertile Crescent, there were examples of integrated farmers fairly early in the
development of agriculture.
What do we mean by integrated farmers?
We mean people who were horticulturists.
They essentially raised plants.
But they also integrated that with what we call pastoral forms of agriculture.
They herded and maintained animals.
So they were integrated.
That's one kind of farming.
We also know that there are people who are dedicated pastoralists, that they really don't
do much crop farming, but they tend flocks or herds.
We also know that there are people who are pretty much dedicated horticulturists who live
primarily by the plants they can grow and don't really integrate that with animal agriculture.
But we see all kinds of sort of hybrid situations, again, depending on the circumstances.
We know that, for example, some dedicated pastoralists do supplement their diets by
foraging as they go along with their animals, and they do some hunting and some fishing.
And we know that dedicated horticulturists, people who plant and tend plants, also supplement
their diets with hunting and so on.
That's clearly important to people who live right around me.
My agricultural neighbors keep their freezers full by hunting.
Hunting is an important aspect of balancing their diet.
To demonstrate how site-specific some of these patterns were, it's known that some
dedicated horticulturists reverted to hunting and gathering if the circumstances were conducive
to that.
We know that the people who went to Oceania knew about agriculture.
They were agriculturalists, but they sometimes found islands that were uninhabited by other
people and that were rich in flora and fauna.
These people often gave up their agricultural ways and adopted hunting-gathering lifestyles
until their population density and their impact on the native flora and fauna forced them
back.
But it shows again that the lifestyle of hunter-gatherers can be essentially more attractive sometimes
than the hard work of farming.
Despite evidence that farmers and gatherers can live in close proximity, it's undeniable
that the food-producing way of life did come to dominate.
By 1500 A.D., the vast majority of the people on earth were sustained by food that was produced
by agriculture.
By then the hunting-gathering people, as I pointed out before, were excluded to the
margins of the civilized world.
That will take us then to a point where we can start in the next lecture talking about
the impact of the way that agriculture and the dependence on agricultural food production
impacted the physical and biological environment and how some of the problems that modern men
are facing as we look at the impacts of agriculture began with our prehistoric origins.
Thank you.
