Hello.
In the last lecture, we discussed the effect of the beginnings of plant and animal domestication
on modern humans, homo sapiens sapiens, and the early settled communities that those humans
were establishing.
That brings us to this discussion of the impact that domestication was having upon
the earth, the changes that domestication brought to ecology and the geology in the
areas where human beings were evolving from food procurers to food producers.
Some estimates suggest that the population of the world was between 1 and 5 million
at the beginning of the Neolithic period that we're discussing, about 10,000 years
before the present.
That has grown to 150 million by the beginning of the first century.
By the year 1350, there were as many as 300 million humans on earth.
As we pointed out, more mouths to feed meant land must be used more intensely, or more
of it must be used.
As agricultural food production became the norm and the population began to expand, our
species had little choice but to follow both approaches, and that meant to put more land
under production and to use that land more intensely.
This too-pronged effort to exert more control over nature has had and continues to have
significant impact on surrounding environs and also on global systems.
As the present population of earth struggles with the balancing act that must occur between
producing sufficient nourishment for an ever-increasing number of people and preserving the environment
which has allowed our species unprecedented success since the end of the last mega-climate
change, we would do well to realize that the roots of these problems lie in our ancient
prehistoric past.
In the previous lecture, we discussed the emergence of agriculture as the primary way
of feeding people and it spread around much of the globe.
In this lecture, we will begin an examination of the impacts agricultural practices have
on the environment.
In order to begin this discussion, we'll need a brief discussion of the food production
population size nexus.
In other words, what I'm talking about here as a nexus is that relationship between the
size of the population and how much food needs to be produced to take care of that population.
The larger the population, obviously the more food that has to be produced.
Now in biology, we would say that this is part of the carrying capacity consideration.
The carrying capacity for us will be an extremely important concept.
The carrying capacity of an environment is a balance between an organism's biotic potential,
that is its ability to reproduce itself and the environmental pressure.
Exceeding the carrying capacity can have catastrophic consequences for an organism involved.
Now let me take a few minutes and explain that carrying capacity situation a little bit
more thoroughly and then give you an example.
Biotic potential is the built-in potential of an organism to reproduce.
Human beings have significant biotic potential.
Ours is not as significant as, for example, some insects that can make billions of offspring
in a very short time.
It takes us a little longer to do it, but our survival rates give us good biotic potential.
That pushes up the number of individuals.
Environmental resistance is what's pushing down on biotic potential.
It's things like lack of food, lack of space, inappropriate places or lack of appropriate
places for mating and so on, overcrowding, wastes, all that sort of stuff pushes down
on the population numbers.
And so there's this tension, the potential to produce more individuals and the potential
to push them down, and that reaches a sort of balance point called the carrying capacity,
which is a description for what is sort of a constant, maximum, regulatable level for
organisms in a given environment.
That's the carrying capacity.
And it looked like, from those numbers we gave you before, that when human beings were
living as hunter-gatherers before we became food producers, we had a carrying capacity
for a few million people on planet Earth.
That was the sort of balanced situation where the carrying capacity could keep things under
control.
But if you exceed the carrying capacity, things can go wrong, OK?
So let's use an example of a situation that really took place.
An island in a lake in the north was devoid of large animal inhabitants.
There were no deer, elk or moose on that particular island.
Hence it had an abundance of food for such creatures.
At some point, a breeding pair, a male and a female of these elk were deposited on that
island.
There were no predators, OK?
And they had abundant food.
So what did they do?
They ate, they grew, they got busy, and they established a family, right?
They started to have little elk, and the little elk entered bread, and soon the population
really began to grow.
And you can see the population numbers go up, up, up, up, up.
And then, of course, what happens?
Food starts to become limiting.
Well, if the carrying capacity has not been exceeded, when food becomes limiting, that's
environmental pressure and the population drops a little bit, and then the food recovers
and the population goes back up because of its biotic potential.
But if you exceed the carrying capacity, something different happens, and it happened
in this instance.
There got to be so many elk on that island that they began to eat not just the under
forest, but they began to nibble off all the branches, and they took the forest floor
down to practically nothing.
And what happens?
Well, they had to wait through the winter for more material to grow back up.
But they couldn't.
Just don't store food for long periods of time.
They can't, can or freeze.
And so what happened?
All of them died.
The population didn't just drop back down.
Their success at breeding overwhelmed the carrying capacity to regulate things.
They consumed more than could be replaced in a reasonable period of time, and the end
result is catastrophic.
The population didn't decline.
It crashed to zero.
It is for reasons like this that environmentalists often concern themselves with things like
tipping points and points of no return, because that's what happened to those elk on that
island.
Homeostasis in biological systems is the result of self-regulating negative feedback
loops.
That's pretty common stuff in biology.
Your body temperature stays constant because of a series of negative feedback loops.
They work in all sorts of ways to maintain constant conditions.
Positive feedback, on the other hand, is not self-regulating, but is autocatalytic.
It means it catalyzes more of itself.
The more you have, the more you're going to make.
We introduced this point earlier using labor pains as an example of positive feedback and
a thermostat as an example of negative feedback.
The food production population nexus that I just mentioned constitutes a positive feedback
for food producers.
Not for hunter-gatherers, not for creatures that are simply living in nature, taking
from the environment what it has, but you change everything.
When you put control over nature and begin to produce food, you change that food production
population nexus.
But it is not necessarily a positive feedback for food procurers.
That suggests that it is our food population nexus which will lead to stasis, but rather
to a fundamental change in the system.
Let me say that one more time so that we're very clear on what I'm saying.
It is that food population nexus that is a positive feedback loop, it's not going to
lead to stasis, but rather we're afraid that it's going to lead to some kind of fundamental
change in the system.
And if that change comes as the result of exceeding the carrying capacity, that's not
going to be a pleasant time in which to be around.
The foregoing points beg the question, how sustainable is the ongoing growth in the human
population and what is the present carrying capacity of the earth for human beings?
Those are big questions.
Though there is no shortage of persons willing to offer answers to those questions, my own
impression is that at this time nobody really knows.
We're going to return to that subject in the final lectures of this course.
As I stated before, there are only two options for increasing agricultural output.
You can use the land more effectively and more intensely or you can use more of it.
By definition, agriculture begins to exert a level of control over nature that is human
generated.
The more intensely we employ agriculture and the more of it we do, the greater our impact
on the physical and biological components of our environment.
That's just inescapable.
Let's discuss the effect of some specific cases, the different effects of those who
manage animal herds and those who cultivate domesticated plants.
Pastoralists alter the balance between predators and prey.
Now most of the creatures that pastoralists tend are prey for some kind of wild predator.
We know from our fairy tales as children that wolves eat sheep.
And if you are a pastoralist who is herding sheep, what is your response to wolves?
You're going to try to take them out of the environment.
Hunting wolves, killing wolves, driving wolves away is not a frowned upon activity among
early pastoralists herding sheep.
In so doing then, they also change the carrying capacity for their domesticates.
So if the predators are part of the environmental pressure, part of the environmental resistance
pushing down on your lamb flock, keeping the numbers constant, and you take away the predators,
you've changed the carrying capacity.
You've now allowed for more sheep to live in this area.
When you do that, what happens?
When you change the carrying capacity for your domesticates.
That in turn changes the predator-prey balance between grazing domesticates and their forage.
Now you may be a little puzzled by that terminology.
You may not think of a sheep eating grass as a predator eating prey, but in fact that's
what it is.
It's eating essentially its prey and you change the balance now because you took the wolves
out of the picture and you had more sheep.
The sheep are now putting more pressure on the forage.
That can and has led to widespread soil erosion which affects the fertility of the soil and
the quality of surface water and the air.
Let me give you an example.
Early agricultural practice in Greece had that effect.
The first farmers in Greece were agro-pastoralists that had emigrated from Anatolia, Turkey.
They found a land sparsely inhabited by food procurers and their settlements rapidly grew
in number and they spread quickly into new hospitable regions.
They had sheep, goats and pigs which they tended as well as the ability to grow crops
of wheat, barley and lentils.
So these folks were pretty well established integrated farmers.
Animal farming, plant farming.
These colonizing pioneers began arriving around 8,000 years ago.
Between 1,500 years after their arrival, the signs of agricultural environmental damage
were extremely evident.
Just in that short period of time, massive soil erosion brought on by overgrazing and
poor cultivation techniques stripped the soil from the hills that were the sites of
these first agricultural colonies.
What was left behind was bare rock altering the landscape to this day.
When we think of that Greek landscape, that's often what we think of.
It didn't look like that before these people came there, essentially, and I'll use the
word unwittingly or unknowingly abused the land and destroyed it.
As a result, there was a rapid and significant decline in the population of those peoples.
Not surprising.
Another example of the way domestication affected Earth's landform and ecology is the way in
which farmers cleared land.
In order to obtain more tillable land, early farmers often cut down or burned forests and
groves of trees in order to obtain more land to be used for crops or for grazing of their
domesticated animals.
Often the wood from those trees was put to very good use as building material or as fuel
for shelter, for tools, for farming implements, and of course sometimes for weapons.
That seems to be sort of the nature of our species.
It should be noted that humans have had a long and productive association with trees.
Over the millennia, a number of fruit and nut trees were domesticated as well as a fair
number of trees that could be used for specialized building purposes such as sailing ships and
special dwelling places.
So again, domesticates were also opening up trade and communication.
Those of us with bookish tendencies have a special warm spot for woody plants that provide
pulp to be used for paper.
By the way, paper is said to have been invented around the year 105 AD in China.
Many trees were of great import to man throughout the past 10,000 years without ever being actually
domesticated, even though some were cultivated in a kind of systematic silver culture or
forest culture.
We talk about a silven glade, that's a forest glade, silver culture is a kind of agriculture
for trees, and it was possible to bring some trees under cultivation, if you will, plant
them and look after them, but not really necessarily fit our definition for domestication because
those trees probably are not either phenotypically or genetically different from a wild progenitor.
Slash and burn techniques, an alternate way of clearing land to chopping trees down, quickly
produced more usable land, but little of value was actually recoverable from the trees that
once occupied the land.
Tree roots and the roots of the forest understory are essential in maintaining topsoil in many
environments.
When the trees were removed and the network of roots disturbed, soil erosion on a large
scale can and often did take place.
Since trees conduct photosynthesis on a very large scale, the loss of significant numbers
of trees reduces the availability of oxygen in the atmosphere, but of even greater consequence
may be that more carbon dioxide is left in the atmosphere, and you know that carbon dioxide
is one of those greenhouse gases.
Now I passed rather quickly over photosynthesis oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Let's take just a moment to review what many of you I'm sure know about photosynthesis,
but let's be sure.
Photosynthesis is a light-driven process.
Its purpose seems to be to take the most oxidized form of carbon that exists in the atmosphere,
carbon dioxide CO2, and reduce it to the level of cell material or down to the level
of a sugar.
So the net reaction is to take CO2 and using light as the driving force, put electrons and
essentially hydrogen ions on that CO2, hook the CO2 together and make them into sugar.
Where do the hydrogen ions come from?
In green plant photosynthesis, those hydrogen ions come from water.
So photosynthesis splits water, uses the hydrogen ions and the electrons, attaches them to CO2
and takes it out of the atmosphere.
And by splitting the water, it releases oxygen which goes up into the atmosphere.
So photosynthesis is doing just the opposite of respiration with regard to CO2 and oxygen,
and that's why it's very important to maintain an appropriate balance between photosynthetic
plants and respiring animals or the activities of respiring animals on planet Earth so as
not to upset that balance.
Now irrigation is employed in many places in order to increase production on land that
is dry or has unpredictable rainfall.
Irrigation methods too have had an impact on the Earth's geology and ecology.
Irrigation is essential in many parts of the world to produce crops and in other locales
it's employed to obtain optimum cropping conditions.
There are a number of different types of irrigation.
Some are more sustainable than others.
We have the situation in the Tigris-Euphrates Valley where we know that settlers came in
to the lower end of the valley and began a kind of irrigation that caused salination
in the land around where the irrigation was taking place.
When this reduced the productivity and those people moved up the rivers and exerted their
authority on others to find better places to farm.
But also it's interesting to note what happened in terms of the plants because when these
people began their irrigation they were planting wheat.
But wheat is fairly sensitive to salt and the wheat began to have real difficulties growing
and the people who came in behind them planted barley which is much more salt tolerant.
So you can see that sort of salination wave and a movement of barley up the Tigris-Euphrates.
River flooding of the kind that occurs in the Nile Basin can be self-sustaining and can
go on almost indefinitely as in fact it has.
Other types of irrigation can result in silting and salination which can eventually make land
unfit for crop production.
In the concluding lectures of this course we will be examining the current global food
production system.
As we approach that subject it will be important to understand that agriculture from its earliest
beginnings has had significant and increasing impacts on the environment.
There were undoubtedly mistakes made as humans learned to employ their new agricultural
techniques.
I mean look at the examples we used here today I mean the situation with those first agro
people that moved into Greece and essentially ruined their own program by causing massive
soil erosion and essentially leaving the land in a condition that we can see today thousands
of years later.
For well over one hundred millennia prior to the Neolithic Revolution human population
numbers had been reasonably constant as we pointed out before maintained by the carrying
capacity of the environment for a creature such as ourselves.
With the advent of agriculture and the accompanying efforts to exert ever more control over the
natural world early agriculturalists began to alter the carrying capacity and as a consequence
expand their numbers.
The human domestication of plants and animals in the agricultural enterprise from a very
early time has had significant impact on the land surface and subsurface water and on
the air.
The practice of agriculture which sustains us and supports our enormously expanded population
continues to have profound impacts on our environment which in turn greatly affect the non domesticated
plants and animals living around us.
Just to point that out let me let me give one more example there not far from where
a number of you may live and that is what's happening in the Chesapeake Bay.
The Chesapeake Bay of course was the richest estuary in the world at one time it was spilling
over with shellfish and crabs and it was just a very easy place to to to get seafood
okay and as agriculture began to become more intense upstream up the Susquehanna River
which empties down into the Chesapeake Bay what happened silt from agriculture runoff
from manure runoff from fertilizers began to get into all the tributaries of the Susquehanna
and into the Susquehanna itself and it began to flow down into the Chesapeake.
We began to note a number of years ago that there was a region that was simply called
the dead zone pretty dramatic isn't it.
It's a part of the Chesapeake where things no longer grow things that we're interested
in like shellfish and clams and oysters and things of that sort they're gone it's a dead
zone and so people began to look very carefully at what was going on I'm sorry to have to
report that year by year that dead zone seems to get bigger despite our efforts to ameliorate
the problem and the problem is manifold it is true there is urban sewage waste getting
into the water and what not but let's face it a very significant component of the pollution
getting into the Susquehanna and ending up in the Chesapeake creating this huge dead zone
is from agricultural practice.
We need the agriculture we need to feed people we need to we need to use the land more intensely
that means fertilizers that means stocking rates of cattle but there are prices to pay
and it's paid being paid right now for example in the Chesapeake Bay.
It is important to be aware that the roots of these modern problems lie in our ancient
prehistoric past because it gives us a more nuanced and informed approach to the current
discussions and debates about how best to resolve the struggle between competing interests
relating to land use, food production and protection of the environment.
