Hello and welcome back.
In the course thus far, we have seen that the conversion to agriculture made enormous
differences in the lives of our domesticated plants and animals, the ecology of the environment
and the actual climate of the Earth, but it also began to make significant changes in
us.
From about 10,000 to 5,000 years before the present, there arose a rich tapestry of different
peoples cooperating, competing, fighting and cohabiting.
There grew up trade, coercion, cooperation, exchange of ideas, obviously a rich and vigorous
variety.
This variety in people had and has a great deal to do with the plants and animals that
people were domesticating and tending.
We've mentioned before that domestication is a two-way street rather than a unilateral
imposition of will.
Just as the animals and plants met humans part way, so did humans adapt over time to
the behaviors and needs of the domesticates they tended and were becoming increasingly
dependent upon.
And these adaptations differed.
They differed depending upon what you raised, what you ate, what you built upon and what
your own prior experiences were.
So herding animals shaped human culture and interaction and cultivating plants shaped
civilization.
The fact is that domesticating plants and animals changed homo sapiens sapiens as much
as they changed domesticates.
And we'll discuss the earliest trajectory of that change and how tending crops and herds
of animals helped form the collective character of civilization and the roots of our basic
attitudes towards such fundamental things as time and work and leisure and distance
and responsibility and commitment.
These things were tied to those early cultures and the needs often brought on by the domesticates.
I'd like to start with an example from Hollywood because it helps me introduce this idea that
just as domestication has had an impact on plants and animals, so too has it changed
the humans in this interaction.
Anyone familiar with the genre of the Western movie knows that there were supposedly significant
differences between the outlooks, attitudes and behaviors of stereotypical cattlemen and
sheep herders.
The tensions between these two groups were thought to reside in the grazing habits of
the two species of herbivores being husbanded because sheep graze close to the ground damaging
the forage for cattle in sparse environments.
It's not a problem if the pastures are lush, but the Western movies were always shown out
on the open range where the sagebrush was far apart.
In that situation, the sheep may have created a problem for the cattle.
The movies frequently played on the assumed aggression and bellicosity of the mounted
cattlemen and the predictable docility of the sheep tenders.
I think these movie makers were actually on to something, and by the end of the lecture
I hope you'll see what I mean.
Different kinds of agriculturally based societies probably arose due to several factors.
We know that climate change may have kicked things off, that increased population played
a role, and that there needed to be more food made available in order to feed these
growing populations.
Each one of these societies and each one of these places where agriculture was beginning
faced a special set of challenges and opportunities based on environment and the needs of the
domesticates upon which it was depending.
And I think also as I mentioned before, some of the previous outlooks that their tribe
or their group brought with them into that situation.
So I think culture was already beginning to play some role here.
It seems that there was one big single divergence in the type of early settlements of our hunter
gatherer forebearers.
Some communities evolved primarily into pastoralists or animal tenders, and some communities evolved
more into horticulturalists or crop farmers.
Whether a community tended animals or raised crops had to do in large part with their proximity
to water.
In order to water animals, pastoralists could drive them to a water source.
They could then and did often settle in more arid parts of the world.
Horticulturalists, on the other hand, had to live nearer the water sources.
Water is heavy and difficult to transport long distances.
So you find horticultural excursions into arable regions, ones that are inherently farmable.
So by the mid-neolithic period, we find evidence of this transitional stage in the evolution
of civilization.
Nomadic communities that were primarily pastoralists, but were already beginning to take an advanced
view toward managing the animals they were moving, and those that were primarily horticulturalists
beginning to domesticate their plants.
There were some interesting differences between the two types of communities.
Pastoralists in this situation, this involved the development and management of a herd of
animals that provided the people with meat or skin to be used as leather, wool, hair,
milk, manure, which was a very good fuel for some of these people, transport, and even
housing in the form of tent coverings.
Hunter-gatherers hunted any number of animals, depending upon what was available.
On the other hand, grew to depend upon the specific animal that they raised and managed.
So while hunter-gatherers moved at will to follow a variety of species of game, pastoralists
moved in accord with the needs of the single type, or at best the few types of animals
upon which they were depending.
Now, this didn't happen all at once, of course, but it evolved over time and over generations.
As pastoralists learned to better care for their animals and managed their reproduction,
the herd or flock grew and flourished.
As the herd grew, there was more food available and the population of the people also increased.
As that population increased, the health and well-being of the animals grew more critical
because the contribution of the animals had to keep up with the growing demand of an expanding
population.
You can see how this probably happened.
There was a shift from hunting and gathering whatever could be found or caught to the deliberate
raising of a particular kind of creature.
Eventually, movement or settlement of human beings was as much for the well-being of the
animals as it was for the humans.
This was a radical change from the way the hunter-gatherer chose to move or settle.
The animals needed to be attentive and watchful for predators and had to assume, if you will,
the alpha role in the flock or herd leading the animals to food, water, shelter and safety.
They needed to learn to be surgeon, midwife, drill sergeant and even animal psychologists.
Economic animals often become dependent on people to help them, for example, with things
like birthing.
And this is interesting.
This shows again this interplay between people and their domesticates because human beings
often intervened in difficult births attempting to save both the mother and the offspring
because they were both, if you will, important economic units.
They wanted these animals, the animals were important, so they made a major effort to
save the mother and the offspring.
The mother in the offspring would likely have perished in the wild setting, but people intervened
and saved them.
Thus, an environmental pressure based upon birthing difficulties was simply removed.
And these creatures and their genetics survived in the flock or herd, making that flock or
herd progressively more dependent upon the shepherd or herdsman.
I'm intensely aware of this because I raise sheep and sheep have been under domestication
for about 9,000 years, and shepherds have been saving ewes and lambs carefully for a
long time, and domestic sheep do have fairly frequent birthing problems.
What is one way to resolve that problem?
It may seem hard-hearted, but one of the ways to do it is to say, I'm going to stop intervening
in these situations, and I'm going to let nature take its course.
If you do that, difficult as it may be, financially and emotionally, to watch it, you will in
fact, by culling these genes out of your flock, improve the birthing capacities of the whole
flock.
But that was certainly not being done much by our early pastoralist ancestors because
they really needed those animals because their population was growing.
Horticulturalists.
The Horto course is Latin for garden.
So as we noted before, horticulturalist communities tended to stay near available water sources
while pastoralists tended to come from the more arid places.
Animals can be driven to their water source.
Water must be hauled to crops.
We've discussed the changes in some plants that domestication brought about.
Thinner or thicker seed coats, for example, or a rackus that held onto seeds rather than
dispersing them.
But there were changes to the human beings who cultivated food and who came to depend
upon their food to sustain their growing population.
According to the specific needs of the crops, these humans developed axes and edges to clear
the land and hose and digging sticks to cultivate it.
Those tools were developed by horticulturalists in order to more effectively till the land
and improve the crop yield.
Tools were developed by pastoralists to do other things, to slaughter animals and to prepare
the meat as well as to scrape and sow the hides.
The type of domesticate and the terrain and climate had a major impact on the way land
was viewed, shared, valued, and taken care of.
Pastoralists tend to roam over a broad landscape, returning regularly with their beasts to a
fixed settlement, while horticulturalists tend to live close to their fields, cover
less ground, and choose landscapes that are not too hilly, rocky, wet, or dry.
In other words, they're looking for good farmland.
The physical environment has its own significant impact upon the development of who we are
and the physical environment in combination with a given domesticate can be the most important
factors in shaping an early emerging culture.
For example, if it were not for the sled dog, the Inuit could not have successfully entered
their harsh environment, but once that was done, however, they developed a distinctive
and unique culture in order to cope with the challenges and best employ their assets.
So if it weren't for those dogs, you wouldn't be seeing these cultural adaptations of the
Inuit to this very special environment to which they went.
Researchers suggest that the camel's water conserving abilities and ability to survive
on sparse and poor quality vegetation in the Near East permitted their pastoralist herders
to explore areas they did not have access to on foot as hunter-gatherers.
There were real differences in the kinds of work and time commitments required in tending
crops and herding animals.
Horticulturalists found themselves often tied to the seasons and the weather.
Depending upon the crop being grown, they might experience periods of intense labor
interspersed with periods of relative leisure.
Issues of territoriality were also affected by the type of food-producing activity being
engaged in.
As populations grew, the pastoralist and horticulturalist communities became less mobile
because of the effort it took to raise sufficient food.
And the latter years of the Neolithic period, we find evidence that communities consisted
more and more of mixed or integrated farming.
Individuals who had raised animals in a more or less nomadic roaming way began to settle
in one spot and to cultivate some crops as well.
The combining of the technologies of horticulture with animal husbandry emerged in the later
years of the Neolithic era and paved the way to intensified agriculture and the rise of
civilization.
The increased size of the animal herds began to require a steady supply of, guess what,
cultivated food.
Next pause for a second and think about what that just said.
For a long time, pastoralists just moved their animals around and the animals ate from the
land.
The animals were essentially hunting and gathering.
And the pastoralists were managing them, while the horticulturalists were growing crops
and feeding their families and themselves.
But now when you begin to bring the animals into a fixed place and you keep them close
to you so you can manage the flock or the herd and you can assist with the birthing,
the animals are quickly going to eat the available food right down to the ground.
So what do you do?
You essentially put your arms around them, if you will, and in a sense bring them into
your family.
You start cultivating food not only for yourself but for them too.
Now that's in a sense cultivating food for yourself because you're going to ultimately
eat these animals or take their milk or something.
But when we started to feed our animals, that extended things a step beyond just letting
them roam and graze, OK?
Horticulturalists who were more involved with the cultivation of larger fields, no doubt
welcomed the domestic animals as a much more easily acquired source of meat products than
the wild game that they had to depend on before.
So it was rather natural that this evolution to a community of people who both raised crops
and tended animals took place.
The mixed or integrated farmer could utilize a broader range of environments than either
the pastoralists or the horticulturalists in some ways but had to make technological and
social adjustments to maintain animals closer to the settlement and to the crops.
It strikes me that we still can see this division between the modern person making a living
primarily as a pastoralist and the modern person making a living primarily as a horticulturalist
and those who do both the mixed farmer or integrated farmer.
There are differences in the way each will organize and manage time and schedules depending
upon the needs of their crops or herds, for example.
Horticulturalists who depend primarily on cereal grains are intensely busy during planting
and harvest.
Their grain seeds can be stored effectively, however, so they can divide their time in
a way that allows them to prepare over long periods for the planting and harvesting.
Those who depend more on row or paddy crops find themselves tied more constantly to the
tending of these crops.
Pastoralists can have similarly characteristic approaches to time management and scheduling,
depending upon the animals they're tending.
A dairy farmer is with cattle every day.
He milks them, he's home with his family, and his social structure is built around
a fixed home and family.
Yet a cattle rancher or cowboy, though working with the same domestic animal, will have a
very different orientation to work, home, family, and territory.
So it's not just the animal, it's what you're trying to do with the animal.
Differences too in the physiology of the animals have implications for our discussion here.
Sheep, goats, and bovines are ruminants with multiple chambered stomachs.
That means they can digest cellulose, a very tough substance to digest.
That means they can tolerate more difficult grazing areas, for example, than horses.
Discussing horses brings up the issue of attitudes toward territory and land ownership,
and how attitudes toward those issues can be shaped differently by domesticants.
Unlike animals that are excellent digesters of cellulose and can find enough nutrition
from relatively poor grazing, horses are relatively inefficient grazers on poor quality
forage.
This means that sheep, goats, and bovines can stay happy and healthy longer on a single
spot of land.
Horses, however, must move or be moved to greener pastures, particularly if you hit
periods of drought or periods when forage just does not come back.
So they have to be essentially moved off the land sometimes more frequently than cattle,
goats, or sheep.
Now you do understand that there are other factors that would play into this.
It would depend on stocking rates.
I mean, if you pile a whole bunch of sheep into a pasture, they're going to eat it down
and be hard up for food too.
But if you're talking about spreading these animals relatively evenly over the landscape,
if things start to get tough, the ruminants are going to hang on better than the horses.
Horse tenders continually needed, then, new grazing lands to suit their animals' nutritional
needs.
Throughout history, tenders of horses were inclined to form mounted cavalry, because
not only did they have to move their horses, the horses gave them this wonderful opportunity.
This in turn stimulated technological advancement to make the horse an even more formidable
weapon.
Compound bows, stirrups, chariots, war wagons, all the acutramah of the use of horses in
military activities.
So people who had horses had those opportunities.
People who were not connected with horses, not so much an opportunity in that area.
This is another example of the way the domesticates we raise can influence the way our cultures
form and develop.
Look at some of the incursions by Mongols into parts of Western Europe.
We tend to attribute their attitude and bellicosity and aggression to a sort of genetic difference.
But I don't think that's really the case.
On the Eurasian steppe, sheep herding cultures often measured wealth and status by the size
of the flock under management.
A person on foot with the help of a trained herding dog can manage effectively about 200
sheep as a full-time occupation.
However, that same person and dog could manage over twice that many if the man could be mounted
on horseback.
Much larger flocks mean more status and wealth.
But they also demand more range, as we just mentioned.
That could lead to conflict at the borders between neighbors' lands.
In order to deal with such armed competition, alliances needed to be formed.
It was better to form allies and treaties than to fight it out over every little conflict.
These were often cemented with elaborate feasts and extravagant gifts.
Thus, these things get built into the fabric of the culture and it becomes a kind of ethnic
icon.
Some people have a tendency to want to have feasts and big events and make alliances that
way and do business over meals, things of that sort.
Others find that quite foreign and it all traces back to what we were raising and what
we were depending on.
So it isn't a difference, in my opinion, in DNA between the sheep farmer who thinks of
life in terms of one place for a 50-year stretch as opposed to the horse farmer warrior.
It has to do with the interplay of the culture with the domesticates.
Over several generations, these needs of the domesticates defined not only the nature
of the people who tended them directly, but the larger cultures that were comprised of
those people.
We have a sense of ourselves, different areas of our country, our rural or urban, and we
have formed very specific ideas about the characteristics of the people who come from
each.
Sometimes these different circumstances cause different attributes in the humans involved
to be valued or devalued in different ways.
I want to suggest that it is the interaction of humans with different domesticates that
is largely responsible for many of our cultural and ethnic differences.
Even the kinds of gods worshiped can be affected by the domesticates with which people partner.
This is certainly not an absolute situation, but I have noticed that ancient cultures that
depend heavily on horticultural activities generally worship fertility gods that are
usually female.
However, a number of pastoralist cultures seem to worship male gods that might have represented
the male contributions to the herding practice, while those female gods represented fertility
and fertility of the earth.
As you know, one of the most obvious features of the cultural identity and ethnicity is
food.
We know that from our own experience in a country composed of immigrants from many different
ethnic groups.
Long after these people have given up their language and their native dress, they still
want to cling to their food culture.
I know that from firsthand experience.
Having that food they are so connected with would have occupied a major portion of the
time of these people.
And again, the traits, desires and preferences that come from the way one gets that food
sets people apart in established ethnic identity.
In the first part of the course, I think we have pretty well established now that the
foundations of civilization, as we know it, have their roots in the domestication of certain
plants and animals.
As our population grew, it had to be fed.
As it had to be fed, we had to produce more food.
And as we settled the land in order to produce larger quantities of food, the places we stayed,
the climate and the nature of the land and our plant and animal partners, shaped our human
culture as much as we shaped their evolving nature.
It has been a two-way coming together of humans and domesticates with both and each of them
adapting and sharing their evolution to the other for the purpose of survival and continuity.
And so, by way of review, let's go over a few things that we've covered today.
One, we know we have changed domesticates.
That's a much repeated point in this course.
But what emerged in this lecture more clearly is that the domesticates we relied upon also
changed us.
We pointed out that different domesticates require different kinds of care and different
responses from human beings.
We also mentioned that cultures struggle to succeed and they will reward human behaviors
and traits that enhance that survivability.
They will discourage traits which work against it.
This has led to cultural and even ethnic differences.
These differences, coming so late in the development of modern humans, are probably a great deal
more cultural than they are genetic.
So, with the next lecture, we're going to begin a review of the history and development
of our oldest and most reliable domesticates.
Bear in mind the ways that humans have both changed and have been changed by the mutual
reliance we have had on one another.
We will see you then.
Thank you.
