Hello, and welcome back as we begin a new direction in this course.
In this section of the course, I'd like to discuss the history of some of the most successful
of our plant and animal domesticants.
We're going to start with the plants.
Plants, after all, are mobile and possess various defense mechanisms against predators.
But since plants and plant material are relatively easy to gather, they're more accessible, it
is likely that the human diet has always contained a significant amount of vegetable matter,
grains, fruits, vegetables.
We're going to discuss wheat, barley, oats, corn, rice, and rye in this lecture.
These are rich, nutritious foods without which we, human beings, would not have the population
numbers that we have today.
Collectively, the cereals provide a significant portion of the total caloric intake of the
world population.
Wheat, barley, oats, and rye are all old world products.
Corn is a new world plant, and rice, though certainly from somewhere in Asia, does have
rather uncertain origins, as we'll discuss later.
The ancestors of these grains appeared to our hunter-gatherer forebearers who picked
the seeds best suited to their needs.
And after many hundreds of years, they succeeded in creating domesticated forms that best suited
their needs and ours.
Now today, these few plants comprise the bulk of the plant-based calories our species consumes.
These grains come to us one of two different ways.
Of course, they can come either as their whole grain form, or they can come to us passed
through animal products, because animals, of course, are also nourished on some of these
same grains, and we, of course, when we consume the animal products, are getting those grains
kind of secondhand.
Scientists continue to select and manipulate the cultivation of them in new ways.
Ways that our ancestors obviously could never have dreamed of in order to try to satisfy
the very many hungry mouths of our world today.
We'll talk more about that in a later lecture.
Cereal grains are what we call annual plants.
They have to be reseeded each year, so they expend significant amounts of energy in reproduction,
and thus they tend to form relatively large seeds, not necessarily huge, but relatively
large seeds.
As stated in the first lecture of this course, this property, along with the relative ease
of gathering and storing, may have been what first attracted our hunter-gatherer ancestors
to these plants.
Now the oldest of these may well be wheat, which according to the archaeological evidence
we find, has actually been under cultivation for over 9,000 years, 9 millennia.
The progenitors of the three, and there are three major types of wheat, the wild progenitors
all grow in the fertile crescent.
Now in order to make sense of the sequence of domestication events that had to take place
to establish these three main types of domesticated wheat, we'll need to spend just a very few
minutes talking about the organization of the genetic material in the nuclei of plants
and animals.
We'll cover briefly things such as cell division and meiosis and mitosis, chromosomes, chromosome
number.
Please understand, I will be mindful that this is not a course in elementary biology.
The first thing to keep in mind is that our domesticated plants and our domesticated animals
are what we call eukaryotes.
They are macroscopic organisms and they have cells which contain a true nucleus, a membrane
bounded nucleus.
The bulk of the genetic material, the DNA of these creatures is contained within that
membrane bounded nucleus.
Most of the time that DNA is dispersed and unwound and it's busily being expressed to
produce the organism's phenotype.
But when the cells get ready to divide, they can't have all that loose DNA.
So the DNA compresses and tightens up into these little stick-like structures called
chromosomes which can easily be observed in a light microscope.
One of the first things people realized when they began to look at these chromosomes under
the microscope was that they tended to be in even numbers and that they formed pairs,
that there would always be two that would look alike and so you could sort of line them
up in pairs.
And when cells get ready to divide, an ordinary cell division, just before the division, each
of the chromosomes divides and the mechanism separates the two daughter cells in such a
way that each of the daughters receives exactly the right amount of DNA in exactly the right
number of chromosomes in exactly the right number of pairs.
But in one special kind of cell division called meiosis, we don't make new body cells, we
make sex cells.
In our parlance that usually means we're talking about sperms and eggs.
And what happens there, just before the division, the DNA in the chromosomes does not divide.
And instead of pairs being separated, the pairs are actually pulled apart.
This is called a reductive division and so the sex cells have half as many chromosomes
as the typical body cells.
The number has been reduced.
That means then that a sperm has not a bunch of pairs of chromosomes, but it has a bunch
of single chromosomes looking for other ones to make a pair, an egg the same way.
So in fertilization when they come together, pairs are reunited and that's the moment
then of fertilization.
So we can talk then about chromosome number.
In the simplest, easiest way to think about things, just think about the body cell of
a plant or an animal and we will usually call that the 2N or diploid number, meaning that
the chromosomes are in pairs, duplicates, diploid number.
In sex cells we have the 1N number or the haploid number.
And occasionally, particularly in the world of plants, but it can happen in animals.
Sometimes cells will fuse in hybridizations bringing in whole new genomes and then you
would not have just one pair of each kind of chromosome.
You might have another set of pairs and that would give you a 4N number or the tetraploid
and you might get yet another set of these coming in and that would give you a chromosome
number of 6 and you'd call that a hexaploid.
That's the end of our beginning biology lesson.
So the first of the three types to be domesticated, the first of the three wheat types to be domesticated
is called einkorn.
Today einkorn wheat is used almost exclusively as an animal feed.
But interestingly, einkorn hybridizes naturally with one of its diploid wild relatives.
So now you've got diploid einkorn hybridizing with a diploid relative to make emmer wheat.
Emmer is a very useful wheat in making things like noodles and pasta.
The well-known semolina flour is one of a number of varieties of this kind of wheat.
Now emmer also can hybridize with related wild diploids to form a hexaploid.
So now you've got three kinds of wheats with three different chromosome numbers.
Einkorn, diploid, emmer, tetraploid, and now this new one, hexaploid, which has a really
original name.
It's called bread wheat.
And not surprising, it's the one that's used for fine baking and of course is primarily
used for making the so-called staff of life.
It's used in making bread.
It is the most important of the various wheats in terms of human consumption.
And we continue to work with this amazing grain even today.
The scientist Norman Borlaug won the Nobel Prize in 1970 for his work in developing a
higher yielding wheat to help fight world hunger and starvation.
It's worth noting that that Nobel Prize given to Borlaug was for world peace.
It was not a scientific award because the Nobel Committee recognized, fully understood,
that by feeding people and removing hunger, Borlaug was clearly working toward world peace.
That work involving not only plant breeding, but it was also based on teaching people in
developing regions the basics of agronomy and plant breeding.
That program, which did science and teaching about agronomy and plant breeding, was the
start of what was later called the Green Revolution and may have been responsible for increasing
the carrying capacity of those regions where it was employed for human beings, more human
beings in those regions because food became substantially less limiting.
Now barley was first domesticated in the fertile crescent at about the same time as
iron corn wheat.
You may recall that in a previous lecture, we noted that barley is more salt tolerant
than most wheat.
You remember what that was about?
We were talking about irrigation in the Tigris Euphrates Valley, remember?
So for that reason, it was grown in the southern part of the Tigris Euphrates Valley after
salinization became a problem and that salinization was caused by the particular method of
irrigation the people at the time were using and the ground became more saline and then
barley got to be introduced rather than wheat.
It was at first used as a staple, but was probably always considered a sort of poor
substitute for wheat since it does not make a good bread flour.
It was widely used for animal feed as much of it is yet today.
Barley is adaptable to a greater range of climate than any other grain.
It's also able to grow and ripen faster than any of the other cereal grains.
So it has some real positive attributes.
There is good evidence that Roman gladiators also ate large amounts of barley to add bulk
to their bodies because they were frequently wounded and they needed to heal and having
bulk helped them in many ways.
Early on it was discovered that barley could be malted and brewed thus turning it from
a low quality grain into a high quality beverage.
Although other grains can be fermented into alcohol and beers, barley is the most commonly
used.
It has a large amount of two enzymes necessary for starch breakdown.
Such as a polymer of individual sugar units.
These enzymes are called the alpha and beta amylases.
They break the starch polymers down to individual glucose molecules which are actually the starting
point for the alcoholic fermentation which is catalyzed by another organism, yeast.
No other grain is capable of more amylolytic activity.
Even in wheat beers which are now becoming quite popular, that is beers that contain
a significant amount of wheat, barley malt is still a major component because the brewers
want that amylolytic activity to break down the wheat starch as well.
Barley is also most useful for beer making among the other grains because it has no particular
husk around its seeds.
Also the nature of its starch granules is particularly conducive to that malting process
and there are some other variables that have to do I think with the fact that we've gotten
used to barley and beer and so we like the flavors and the other properties that it produces.
Today more than 10% of the world's barley is used for malt.
But I'll tell you I'd be one unhappy person if I couldn't find just some barley to use
regularly in my own lamb stews.
The wild progenitor of oats grows in the Middle East but it was never effectively domesticated
there.
This is one of those anomalies that would not have worked well in the biological approach
developed by Davilov that was discussed in one of our earlier lectures.
Oats probably reached Europe as a contaminant in a shipment of wheat.
It probably grew as a weed in Europe for some time before being domesticated, probably
before anybody paid any attention to it.
And that domestication took place about 3,000 years ago probably in central Europe.
From there it spread quickly to regions that were too cool for optimum cultivation of wheat.
Oats make wonderful straw and if this lecture was being given 35 years ago I wouldn't even
think about defining straw but some people I know now because we're primarily urbanized
mix up straw and hay.
Hay is a whole plant cut off at the ground, usually dried, baled or chopped up and used
for animal feed.
Straw is the stem of a grain that's left after the seeds are taken off and it makes
very good bedding for animals but it also used to be good for stuffing mattresses, for
padding, clothing and it tends to be rather clean and it's a good insulator and it's soft.
Oats are second only to rye and survivability in poor soils.
And in 1887 Quaker Oats was the first registered trademark for a breakfast cereal in the United
States.
I find that interesting because I was born and raised in Cedar Rapids, Iowa where Quaker
Oats operated what was for years the world's largest cereal mill.
I still remember looking at it.
Rice is one of the most important staple crops in the world accounting for significant portion
of the caloric intake of a large portion of the world's population.
There is some controversy about the origins of domestic rice.
Some favor an Indian origin while others feel China is the initial domestication site.
There's some problems on figuring this out because the rice genome is not easily studied.
It is complex and there are many small chromosomes in the nucleus.
It may actually contain, some people have said this, it may contain more genes than
the human genome but I think that could be a definitional issue depending on how we want
to define a gene.
The picture is clouded further by the fact that the wild progenitors may have had a very
broad distribution before the point of domestication.
Again, this is a weakness in the biological method pioneered by Vaviloff which works best
if you have a tightly contained range for the wild progenitor.
The unusually large number, the unusually large number of cultivars and types in current
use also adds another level of complexity to the study of the origin of the first domesticated
strain.
There are several main types of rice including African rice or Asian rice that we call patty
rice.
The plant that we call wild rice in America is not a close relative to either Asian or
African rice.
So those are old world plants.
Now let's turn our attention to maize, a new world grain.
Maize was domesticated either in Mexico or Guatemala from a wild progenitor called Tiosente.
Amerindian farmers had greatly modified the plant by the time the Europeans reached the
new world in the late 15th century.
At that time maize was in cultivation from what today is Argentina all the way to southern
Canada.
That plant, though much smaller and producing smaller ears than modern hybrid maize, more
closely resembled the modern plant than it did Tiosente.
There was a long running controversy in the world of plant genetics concerning the true
progenitor of maize.
Because Tiosente looks so very different from maize, a number of scientists felt that it
just could not be the progenitor.
But a scientist named George Beedle and a group of his colleagues eventually amassed
enough evidence in favor of the Tiosente theory that it is now generally accepted as corn's
wild ancestor.
Beedle is probably best known for his Nobel Prize winning work on gene expression that
was one of the first things that showed how the genotype begat the phenotype, in other
words how genes expressed form and function.
He later became the president of the University of Chicago and was well known to a different
group of non-scientist Americans because he's the person that eliminated the game of football
from the University of Chicago.
The world of maize agriculture in America has a number of interesting participants.
One of the most interesting was a fellow named Lester Feaster.
This farmer, Mr. Feaster, became the biggest U.S. individual grower of hybrid seed corn.
Now remember, this is seed corn, not corn that people are going to eat, but it's corn
that people are going to plant.
In 1948, his company pushed the national average yield of corn, once only 25 bushels
per acre, to a record 42.7 bushels.
In Feaster's own county, the yield was 66 bushels per acre.
That's a lot of corn.
A farm boy who quit school in the eighth grade to work in the corn fields at $30 a month,
he began inbreeding and crossbreeding corn in 1925.
His neighbors watching him tie little paper bags over the corn castles and ear shoots
to control pollination called him Crazy Lester.
To keep up his experiments, he mortgaged everything he owned.
When the depression then hit, he stalled off bankruptcy only by outrunning and evading
his creditors.
One day after that, he went to an El Paso bank to plead for a last-ditch loan.
Unwrapping a newspaper, he produced a 10-inch ear of corn, the best that any of the people
in that boardroom had seen, best ever grown by a Woodford County farmer.
He then, when they were looking at that, unwrapped a handsome 14-inch ear of Feaster corn grown
from his hybrid seed.
He got the loan.
And by the age of 51, Feaster was the president and major stockholder of a bank which at once
refused him a loan.
Now as a boy growing up in Iowa, I often made extra spending money by doing corn detasseling.
We didn't tie little bags on it anymore, we actually pulled the tassels off, which is
part of the process in making hybrid seed corn.
So I feel some small connection to Crazy Lester.
Now today, maize is widely cultivated on several continents and provides a significant portion
of the caloric content of a large portion of the world's population.
It serves as a very high-quality animal feed and now may find new uses in the manufacture
of biofuels.
I'll say a little bit more about that in a moment.
It provides the sweetening agent for a vast number of the non-diet carbonated beverages
available worldwide and is also a very common sweetener in a major portion of all processed
foods.
Because of its high sugar content and ease of harvest, it was recognized early as a
great starting material for what are known as sour mash whiskies.
In a process similar to the alcoholic fermentation and beer, the sugar in corn mash is anaerobically
fermented by yeast to ethanol and CO2.
It therefore stands to reason that it could be a good feedstock for anaerobic production
of ethanol to be used as a biofuel.
This is a hot topic in political, economic and environmental circles.
Why is it a hot topic?
Well, first of all, you could argue that maybe we don't need that much additional biofuel.
Secondly, it's expensive to produce it, and it only makes economic sense if petroleum
becomes very expensive.
Then there's a niche that it can fit into.
But one of the big problems is that these plants that make ethanol are not nice to live
around.
They have nasty odors, they consume a lot of water, they consume a lot of energy, and
they produce a lot of byproduct, again, that doesn't smell particularly good.
Also, we are using land to grow corn for fuel that could be used to grow corn or other
things for food.
And so here we have that problem we've mentioned so many times.
You either use the land more intensely or you use more of it, and now we're using some
of it for biofuel, and what does that do?
It drives up the cost of food and makes food less readily available.
So we have these five, wheat, barley, oats, corn, and rice.
They are the main cereal grains consumed by the people of the world.
But there is another grain that should be mentioned, too, and that is rye.
Rye was found as a weed widely distributed in wheat and barley fields in southern Asia,
sometime around 1,800 BC.
So almost 4,000 years ago.
In Europe, rye became a staple for bread, but was considered inferior to wheat bread,
which was a luxury food.
So we know that from literature that the dark bread was sort of the people's bread, and
the hoi paloi ate white bread made from bread wheat that we just talked about, that hexaploid
wheat.
So today we found that rye reduces soil erosion, and it does something else very important.
It enhances water penetration into the soil and retention.
Thus, rye fits very well into a number of new soil erosion control strategies.
It's interesting to note that out of all the many plants available to our hunter-gather
ancestors, we rely upon a relatively small number of grains to sustain such a huge percent
of the human population.
Much of the total caloric consumption of our total world population is taken care of by
those major grains.
But there are other, less commonly known or used grains, such as amaranth, buckwheat,
millet, spelt, teft, teft, quinoa, and others, more popular in parts of the world other than
the United States.
And they are becoming better known and more widely available for a very interesting reason.
A lot of health conscious people now are beginning to realize that whole grains bring
some real benefits to the diet.
And you can go to the store and how many times do you see something that's called five grain
or seven grain or nine grain bread or crackers or something of that sort?
And some of you probably sat there and tried to figure out, do I know the name of five
or seven or nine grains?
Well, that's what some of these are being used for, and I think they are adding vitamins,
they're adding minerals, they're adding soluble fiber, they're adding interest and variety
to the basic American diet.
Now we've discussed before the fact that the domestication of plants and animals was a
two way street, that in order for domestication to occur, both the domesticate and the humans
had to meet each other halfway.
The selection of which plants to domesticate had to do with several factors.
The specific needs of the plant, that is the soil makeup, the amount of water, the climate,
the amount of sun, that's important, as well as the specific needs of the human.
And what would those be?
Ease of harvest, ease of storage and processing, digestibility, nutritive qualities, and having
a relatively high calorie efficient yield.
So there were, again, reasons from both sides.
In our next lecture, we will discuss the domestication of some of the more important groups of garden
vegetables.
We'll see here also that the list is relatively, and surprisingly I think, a short one, given
all of the various plants available to choose from.
Each of these lectures keeps emphasizing a point that was made early in this course.
That is, our ancient ancestors made some very good choices in picking the plants and animals
they wished to partner with.
That may have been due in no small part to which plants or animals met us halfway on
the way to domestication.
But in this process, we began to depend more and more on this relatively small number of
organisms to provide our nourishment.
And we began to forget about many of the other options that may have at one time been available.
The end result for us is that our diets are actually more narrow than we might imagine
for the bulk of our nourishment coming from a relatively small number of fairly closely
related creatures.
We will take up that subject next time.
