Hello, and welcome back.
Because vegetables and fruits grow only in the warm season in the temperate zones, and
because many of them don't store well, diets could be composed primarily of meat, dairy
products, and dried beans and grains. Hence, much attention was devoted to the development
and cultivation of storage crops that could be utilized throughout the fallow season until
new crops of vegetables and fruits could be grown.
Storage crops and some low-tech preservation techniques, for example things like drying,
salting, and others, helped make the temperate regions an environment where both science
and technology could flourish. People could be well nourished in those fallow seasons
and they could work indoors on issues having to do with science and technology. Consequently,
new technology-based methods of food preservation and food storage developed in those very temperate
regions, and they've made it possible then for people throughout the world to enjoy what
we might consider an endless summer at the dinner table. This, in turn, has fed back
and relegated some once common storage crops to the list of heirloom varieties.
Now, before the development of canning, mechanical refrigeration, and freezing, plants that could
be kept over fallow seasons were of great value. But let me put this, if I can, in historical
context. Up until just about now, we have been talking about things that were prehistoric,
the origins of agriculture, the spread of agriculture, the domestication of plants.
You'll notice now that we have begun to move into an era where there are indeed written
records and where we do have more information. That won't stop me entirely from periodically
reaching back into prehistory to find the foundations of things, but this course, as
we indicated in the opening lecture, is moving essentially in a chronological direction from
the ancient past toward the present, and we've now moved to where we will have written records
about many of the things that we will discuss. So if we move, for example, to the colonial
period in the United States, we can find records at locations such as Mount Vernon, the home
of George Washington and Monticello, the home of Thomas Jefferson, that make it very clear
that their kitchen gardens, the kitchen gardens of that time, were heavily slanted toward
a production of crops that could be stored and used during winter. That's quite different
than what we see in gardens today. Without such crops, food during the fallow season
would have consisted of what? Almost exclusively meat, dairy products, dried beans, and grains.
Many storage crops, but of course not all of them, are roots. Thus it was common for
most households at that time to have a root cellar. This is a cool, dark place where storage
crops could be kept, and that's certainly not an ancient idea. I personally have had
a lot of experience with root cellars. I know how they feel, how they look, and how they
smell. In a root cellar, one could commonly find potatoes. They smell earthy, sweet potatoes
also. Cabbagees have a sort of botanical smell. You could find kohlrabi, rutabaga,
turnips, carrots, beets, parsnips. Some people probably don't even know what parsnips are
anymore, along with some specialized storage crops that have altogether disappeared from
common use. One might also find a barrel of apple stored somewhere in the corner of a
root cellar from the late fall, just after the apples were harvested, till late winter
or early spring, because apples would store that well, and they did provide a sort of
pungent smell to the whole place. As an alternative to the root cellar, some farmers planted
crops such as turnips or beets. Now these are very interesting plants, because they
produce stems and leaves that can be eaten both by people or grazed by animals during
the growing season. Turnip greens, beet tops, these are things that still occasionally show
up on menus. But these plants also produce large, underground storage organs that can
be left in the ground well after the growing season is over. Then these can either be harvested
by human beings, dug up, or they can be rooted up by animals as needed. So here's another
way of storing plant material well into the fallow season.
Fruits with the exception of apples, which you just talked about, posed a special problem
when it came to storage. Most fruits, just think about a fruit like a peach, most fruits
are relatively fragile and quite prone to spoilage. Thus the only way to enjoy fruit
long after the harvest was to produce something called a secondary product. We talked a little
bit about secondary products in the last lecture when we mentioned cabbage and kimchi. We'll
talk now about secondary products. The production of secondary products was a low-tech way
of preserving some of the benefits of fruits and vegetables in that long fallow season.
Now, drying has long been used to preserve fruits and some vegetables and even some meats.
Let's step back now in time, away from Colonial America, and go back to as early a time as
4,000 years ago. It's known that the ancient Egyptians at that time were regularly drying
a variety of fruits. They dried figs and dates and grapes and possibly some other fruits
were even plums to make prunes. So they were making raisins, dried figs, dried dates and
maybe prunes. The initial purpose of this practice, this practice of drying these fruits,
was likely preservation. But the Egyptians, I think, quickly learned that this process,
which was to preserve these fruits, altered the texture, altered the sweetness, and changed
the flavor of the fruit, often in a beneficial way, turning that ordinary fruit into a kind
of special delicacy. We also have some menus from Roman feasts, celebrations and banquets.
We actually have the written records of these telling what the people ate and saying what
was ordered for the feast and what was presented. In many of these raisins, either by themselves
or as a component of some other prepared entree, were often prominently featured, suggesting
that the Romans considered them a delicacy that they were proud to serve to their guests.
Now, in Europe, Europeans have long been extending the useful life of fruits by making what we
have generally come to call preserves. That's a collective term for jams, jellies and marmalades.
In each one of these cases, the secondary product is produced by boiling fruit or fruit
juice with sugar, which is added from the outside, almost to the point of saturation.
It'll end up giving you preserves. It'll give you jam or marmalade if you put some of the
solid fruit back in. In the case of a jelly, you do that same sort of thing, but you add
a gelatinizing agent, usually derived from an animal source, to give you a slightly different
secondary product. But all of these things preserve the benefits of the fruit long after
the growing season. Fermentation can also yield secondary products
with extended, useful shelf life. Fruit juices are sometimes fermented into ciders. And,
of course, cabbages can be fermented to sauerkraut or kimchi, as we mentioned last time. And I
suppose we want to make the point, wine is, in a sense, fermented grape juice, though
I don't think wine was generally made as a preservative, but was used for other purposes.
Filling and salt brine is also a useful low-tech way to make secondary products of a variety
of plant materials for the purpose of preservation, but also for taste enhancement.
All of the low-tech preservation methods just described were in regular use before the discovery
of the microbial world by Antonin van Leeuwenhoijk in the 17th century, and then the later development
of the germ theory of disease, and I'm going to add spoilage, the germ theory of disease
and spoilage. It's worth noting that Pasteur, Louis Pasteur, who played a role in the germ
theory of disease, first became involved in microbes when he was asked to study problems
with wine going bad. So he was a person, even though we think of him in terms of his contributions
to medicine, he was very interested in food and food preservation issues. He got into
that by worrying about, if you will, sick wine, wine that went bad, and also we know
that pasteurization, a heating process named for him, of course, is used not to permanently
preserve, but to extend the shelf life of a number of foods. Yet each of the secondary
products, or each of the secondary product-forming practices that we just talked about, in effect
do one thing. They inhibit the growth and metabolism of bacteria that cause food spoilage.
Drying, that we talked about, or desiccation, does what? It concentrates natural sugars
and other metabolites, which increases the osmotic pressure within the dried item beyond
the point that can be tolerated by spoilage bacteria. Let me take a second now and just
explain what I mean by that, because we're going to go back to osmotic pressure several
times.
Think about a bacterial cell. It's a tiny little cell with its insides surrounded by
a very fragile semi-permeable membrane. That means some things can pass through the membrane,
some things cannot. It is semi-permeable. Water also can pass through the membrane.
The membrane separates the inside of the cell from the outside of the cell, but both the
inside and the outside are aqueous. Both are essentially water environments, with lots
of materials dissolved and suspended in them. Water can move back and forth across this
membrane. Some of the dissolved materials can and some can't. When you add high concentrations
of sugar or high concentrations of salt, they essentially don't pass through the membrane
easily. They sit outside the cell, and what do they do? They tend to draw water out of
the bacterial cell into the environment of the outside. That causes the cell to shrivel
and ultimately die, or at least grow very, very poorly. These bacterial cells don't have
all of the equipment of more advanced cells that can pump things and whatnot, and so they're
quite susceptible to this. The process can run in the opposite direction, too, where
pressure can cause water to go into the cell, but most of these microbial cells have a wonderful,
tough, integument on the outside, a kind of outside barrier that works like the hull
of a submarine and keeps them from imploding from the inside. But osmotic pressure is a
way to control bacterial growth, and it's used in pickling, and it's used in making
of preserves. So dissolved salt can raise the osmotic pressure, and if sugar is added,
that also can add to the osmotic pressure and help preserve food. Fermentation of food
stuffs by a group of bacteria called the lactobacilli and some other useful bacteria tends to lower
the pH in the secondary product below the point of tolerance for the spoilage bacteria.
Again, we're going after the spoilage bacteria. Please note that in the production of secondary
products, whether by osmolarity or pH, it's effective at inhibiting the spoilage caused
by bacteria. However, I think almost all of us have experienced something with these secondary
products, and we are familiar with them, and that is that occasionally we'll find a mold
growing on the surface of something that's dried, pickled, or preserved. That's because
there are a number of aerobic mold spores in the air, so they can easily affect these
things, and many of these molds are quite tolerant to high osmotic pressure and low
pHs. People have been dealing with this problem in a very pragmatic way for as long as these
preservation practices have been in use. What do they do? They simply scrape off the mold
and throw it away, since most of such contaminants, these mold contaminants, are obliquate aerobes.
They don't penetrate the product more than a millimeter or two, and mechanically removing
them often restores the product to its useful state. Again, if you do see a mold growing
on top of your marmalade, don't be too upset. You can simply scrape it off. I'd taste it
carefully, but you can probably continue to use it.
The use of spices in preserving food is, of course, a very ancient practice. It's long
been known that peppercorns and cloves condition food products in such a way as to preserve
their shelf life. It very likely was for their preservative value, every bit as much as for
their gustatory enhancement, that these plant materials were so avidly sought. We also know,
and you can prove this in the laboratory, garlic has some anti-bacterial activity, and
thus also can provide some level of assistance in preserving foods. But you can actually do
the experiment. You can take a petri plate, put bacteria on it, you can put down a piece
of garlic, you can put down a clove, you can put down a peppercorn. All of these substances
will give you a little zone of inhibition of bacterial growth. Peppercorns and cloves
are substantially more effective at that than garlic, but all three work to some degree.
Thus some meats are preserved with a combination of salt for osmotic protection, spices and
garlic for their anti-bacterial activity, and then that treatment is finally enhanced
by a process called smoking, which essentially amounts to a long, slow cooking, which kills
some spoilage bacteria without undue drying or cooking of the meat. So things like salamis
and bolognese can be done in that way, and they're going to have longer shelf lives than
fresh meat. In fact, some of you may be aware of a product that you can buy in the meat
market that has an old American name. It was called summer sausage, and the reason for
that was that you could make the sausage in the winter when it was cold, and then without
refrigeration, that sausage would be edible throughout the summer without refrigeration
because there was enough garlic, there was enough pepper, there were enough spices, there
was enough salt, and it had been smoked. So these sort of low-tech methods could make
a difference. But now let's move forward a little bit in time to the year 1809, the Napoleon
era. The Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte once awarded a prize of 12,000 francs to a man named Nicholas
E. Perre for his wonderful invention. What was E. Perre's great achievement? What did
he do that was worth 12,000 francs to Napoleon? What did he do that makes him worthy of the
place in history? It seems so simple to us today, but it was truly revolutionary. And
that is, E. Perre took glass jars that he could seal tightly. He could make them airtight,
and he stuffed them with food, added a little water to fill them up, and then sealed them
tight. And then he took this little item, this sealed up glass bottle, airtight containing
a food item and a little bit of water, he plopped it into a boiling water bath, and he
did some testing. He left these objects in for differing lengths of time, and he tested
for two things. One, he tested for how long the food would be preserved, what was its
shelf life before he detected any spoilage, and two, what was the condition of the food.
And here you have two opposing issues, don't you? If you want to extend the shelf life
of the food, boil it longer. But if you want to have food that more closely resembles the
fresh food that you put in there in the first place, you want to boil it a little bit less.
And so in the E. Perre method, it was a kind of balancing effect to get the optimum. Good
shelf life, something that might last maybe a year or more, but that also clearly resembled
the food that was put in there in the first place. Remember, Napoleon was not only a great
strategist, he was a master of logistics. He knew how to get material to the front, and
he knew how to keep his army in reasonably good shape so that it could march and fight
better than other armies. So this master of logistics quickly appreciated the utility
of a Perre's invention, which allowed him to supply his armies with much higher quality
food than his adversaries were able to give their men. You remember he said something
to the effect that armies travel on their stomachs. It was from that invention that
the practice of food canning began. Whole industries sprang up, preserving by canning
items such as vegetables, seafood, meat, and then later in the United States condensed
soups and stews. These became huge, huge industries, and they became American household names,
these concentrated soup companies, various canned food companies. Certain parts of the
United States experienced great benefit, places where certain seafood could be harvested around
the Chesapeake Bay and down into Delaware. Big canning industries developed, and that
really did create an economic boost to the United States and did allow some of these
unique food items that could previously only be experienced by the people who lived around
where they grew because they spoiled quickly and couldn't be transported at that time.
Now these things, through technology, could be canned and shipped around the world. There's
another interesting aspect to canning. It can also be done at home with a minimum of
equipment. Remember, a pair didn't have a lot of equipment. Thus making the technique
available to large numbers of people in a variety of circumstances, home canning can
be a big deal. I think as we see people becoming more interested in returning to the soil,
growing their own food, being interested in what's in their food, maybe even worrying
about their economic situation, I think we're going to see more people engaged in home canning.
That's both good and bad. I'm delighted that people want to grow their own food. I'm delighted
that they want that level of independence. But canning at the level of the industry depends
a great deal on very good science and very good microbiology. The vast number of people
who can things have no problem. But remember, some of the dangerous pathogens in food are
both anaerobic. They don't require air. They can be somewhat acid tolerant and they're
somewhat heat resistant. So, when you go to the family picnic and Aunt Sally gives you
her cold three bean salad and stands back and proudly says, I grew these beans myself
and canned them myself, think twice. If Aunt Sally hands you her cooked green beans, don't
be too worried because once you take these things out of their canning jar and heat them
up, okay? That's then plenty good enough and you'll be all right. But diseases like botulism
do pop up around home canning experiences. Okay, it's been known now for millennia that
cold retards food spoilage. There are counts of ice being transported long distances into
warm climates as early as the 11th century in practice, probably is older than that.
For centuries, people in temperate climates have used ice houses, spring houses, ice boxes
to try to keep water in a frozen state so that it can be used to retard spoilage and
help preserve food or heaven forbid in some cases, preserve corpses until appropriate
steps could be taken. The ready availability of mechanical refrigeration devices suitable
for home use began in the developed countries sometime between the first and second world
wars of the 20th century. It was common practice for centuries, however, for people in northern
Europe to take advantage of freezing temperatures in the winter to preserve food by freezing.
However, the texture, the taste, the appearance and the aroma of foods preserved that way
often changed substantially between the time the item was committed to the cold and when
it was ultimately used and consumed. By 1916, an American, Clarence Birdseye, began
his efforts to produce frozen fish that would rival fresh caught fish for appearance, flavor,
aroma and texture. Turns out that Birdseye did a little stint as a fur trapper in northern
Canada and while doing that, he made the observation that some people who caught fish up there
and very, very quickly froze the fish by simply pitching it into a very cold pile of ice.
When that fish was, pardon me, fished out later or taken out later and prepared to
eat it, it clearly resembled the fresh caught fish and so what Birdseye figured out was
that quick freezing made a big difference and he began to devote his life to the development
quick freezing techniques which we now know do much less damage to the cell structure
of fish or other food items that are being frozen. So quick freezing is the deal, not
slow freezing which allows ice crystals to form inside cells, then rupture cells and
then cause the material to be kind of mushy, get a bad texture and opens the door to bacterial
spoilage at some later point. He also, and this may sound not like a big deal, but it
turned out it really was, he also greatly improved the wrapping and packaging practice
having to do with storing frozen foods and that allowed them to be handled and used much
better. He finally began his own company in 1924 and by all accounts all of his products
were really quite outstanding. But now let's think about something, let's think about how
technology takes over and when a new idea comes in. Birdseye was making really good frozen
food products, but transportation of frozen items was still a problem. You could freeze
the stuff in his plant, if you had to throw it in the back of a lorry or a railroad car
that wasn't refrigerated, it would melt, it would be ruined. And then where would it go?
Most retail stores at that time did not have significant space for frozen items. And finally
even if they did, most households in the developed countries didn't really have adequate places
to store frozen foods even though they were requiring mechanical refrigerators. So even
if they went to the store and bought the frozen food, if they didn't use it immediately, what
could they do with it? So it was a sort of technological chicken and egg problem. What
comes first? The supermarkets expanding their capacities, the industry expanding their capacities,
the homeowners expanding their capacities, marketing to get people interested in these
things. Well, it's a long story, but we now know the outcome. Hard work and perseverance
by a number of people in the retailing industry, the manufacturing industry, began to produce
a kind of new industry that allowed frozen foods to play a very important role in the
lives of people in developed countries and the frozen food industry was off to the races.
Now the new higher tech methods of food preservation, canning, freezing, freezing with desiccation
or what is called freeze drying, vacuum sealing, combinations of these things and others are
all able to preserve food in appealing condition virtually indefinitely. Yet even in the face
of that, we still encounter and use a number of products that were first preserved by the
old low tech methods. Preserves, pickles, cured meats, fermented food products are
still popular, though they now are no longer essential as preservation techniques. Instead
they stand as examples of our learned food preferences that often harken back to an earlier
time when technology was less advanced. Yet at the same time, we must appreciate that
some food plants that were once popular, if not nearly essential, are now relegated
to heirloom status or who disappeared altogether, victims of the advance of technology.
In our next lecture, we'll deal with three of our most common, useful and I must say
beloved domesticates, dogs, cats and chickens. These three early domesticates played very
important roles in our transition to the process of food production and they helped lay the
foundation for the advent of civilization. I look forward to seeing you then.
