Hello. This lecture deals with three of man's oldest, most cherished, and important domestic
animal partners, the dog, the cat, and the chicken. What do I mean again by domestication?
Let's go back and talk about that again. There are really a number of characteristics.
First of all, there is a kind of co-dependence that should exist between human beings and
the domesticate. The domesticate should depend on the human being and the human being should
be able to depend to a degree on the domesticate. There should be a distinct genetic impact.
The domesticate should be genetically distinct from its wild progenitors. You should be able
to tell the difference genetically. Domesticates need to be something that's kept by people.
That's different than a pet. A human being can keep an animal as a pet and not have it
be a domesticate because it may not be genetically different from the wild type. There may be
no co-dependence, but that's a requirement for being a domesticate. It should be kept
by people at some point. Then finally, there should be benefit. I made a point early on
that if this really is working well, it should be a mutual benefit. Benefit to the domesticate,
benefit to the human partner. These traits can be applied to a different degree and can
mean different things to different animals. Let's talk first about dogs. Dogs have been
partnering with man since before the Neolithic Revolution, before we became food producers.
Dogs likely accompanied our ancient ancestors as they journeyed out of Africa to colonize
and ultimately settle on all of the major land masses save Antarctica. Chickens and
cats have been domesticated for at least 9 to 10,000 years and they've been familiar,
abundant and useful partners to us along our path to civilization.
Dogs are undoubtedly man's first animal domesticate. It's also clear that domestic dogs arose
from wild wolf populations. There's good archeological evidence based on bones and teeth dating back
well before the Neolithic Revolution for the existence of domestic dogs. But recent genetic
studies involving mitochondrial genetics that we discussed earlier, okay, suggest that
the first domestic dogs may have arisen as long as 35,000 years ago. So that goes back
well before we were food producers and does talk about the time when man was beginning
to colonize regions outside of sub-Saharan Africa. Dogs have contributed significantly
to their own domestication. Remember we talked about that before, that domesticates often
meet us at least halfway. It's thought that a variant of the wolf population with reduced
flight response for human beings may have begun to carve out a niche around human garbage
and refuse dumps. Now let's stop for a second here and think about that. We talked earlier
about the fact that all wild populations have a range of genetic variants. Flight response
is an important survival characteristic. But there probably were some genetic variants
within the wild wolf population that became more tolerant of man. We're not as afraid
of him. They probably also were drawn to that garbage and to that refuse. And there's
another point. This creature, which we can start to call protodog, probably wasn't as
large as some of the other wolves, may not have been as ferocious and may have been sort
of ostracized to the edge of the wolf population. Maybe he didn't find appropriate mates and
things, but found refuge around these refuse heaps. And man also sometimes fought off potential
predators that could have also been predators for this protodog. So this creature, protodog,
probably began to develop its own habitat close to human beings and probably didn't
provide any significant competition for human beings. And so not only did it tolerate people,
but people tolerated it. Over time, then, men began to apply artificial selection techniques
to these creatures, producing the large array of dog types that helped our early ancestors
enter and colonize this variety of habitats. We made one reference to that some time ago
when we talked about the Inuit peoples who moved into very cold, icy habitats and probably
could not have done that had they not been accompanied by their dogs. Archaeological evidence
suggests that dogs accompanied, then, these Paleolithic ancestors as they moved into and
colonized these significant land masses. Today's dogs can play a huge number of roles
for human beings. They remain very close to us. They can be sentries, you know, can give
us warning. They can guard our property and our person. They can herd other animals. They
can be great assists in hunting and retrieving hunted animals. They can trail creatures like
bloodhounds do. They can be draft animals. They can pull things for us. They're very
effective military and police assistants. A growing number of dogs are now being used
as human assistants, the best known of which are the so-called seeing eye dogs, but dogs
can do many things to help people. They're also starting to be used a bit in medicine
because their very keen senses may help them detect certain diseases if they can be trained
appropriately. And of course, they can be beloved and useful companions to many of us.
It's their keen sense of hearing and smell and their visual acuity in dim light, areas
where we're not very good as animals. We don't hear particularly well. We don't smell well
at all compared to other animals. And dim light is a problem for us. We see well and
bright light, maybe better than a dog. And dogs have a different structure to their retina
and they see very well in dim light. Those things taken together have helped us as their
partner, if you will, extend our sensory probes into the world around us. Something terribly
important to prehistoric man moving into new environments. Dogs also bring one other interesting
trait with them when they leave the wolf world. Wolves howl. And they do it fairly rarely
and they do it for specific purposes. Dogs bark. We still don't know what dogs are saying
when they bark. I think they're just saying, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here. Or you're there,
you're there. But the point is barking dogs can be very useful because they are working
as sentries with their better seeing, their better hearing, their better smelling and
their ability to bark. They extend our senses out far beyond what they would be without
them. Makes them a very useful partner. Attendance at dog shows illustrates the vast array of
sizes and types in the canine world. However, it must be remembered that these creatures
are all members of the same species. And what we're seeing is the impact of years of artificial
selective breeding to give us all these different types with their different functions and eye
appeals. So what do we mean by selective breeding? It's a rather simplistic technique. Let's
say we're doing something as simple as trying to get a bigger dog. I have several different
dogs breeding. I look at this group of puppies and I take the biggest one. He's a boy. And
I go over to the other set of breeding dogs. And I take the biggest girl I can find and
I put them together and I let them have puppies. And in the next generation, I look for the
biggest one again. And I keep doing this and surprise at the end, you're going to get
a master for Great Dane and Irish Wolfhound, something very big. That's the way selective
breeding works. It also is based on culling or not allowing to breed other animals that
you're not particularly interested in. So it's selecting the types you want to get the
properties you want. If breeding restrictions were completely relaxed in the dog world and
you simply let dogs interbreed across these various types, it wouldn't be too long before
we would essentially reestablish something that probably looked a little bit like proto-dog.
It would probably be about 60 pounds. It would have a sturdy brown or brown black coat and
it wouldn't show really any of these particular characteristics that we see in some of our
specialized breeds like pugs or bulldogs or afghans. I should point out again that dog
habitat is very much like our own. I'll just toss in a little story that I experienced
a few years ago and I was in Nicaragua. I was visiting a family that I'd been helping
do something and they were very short of food and they had very little in the way of physical
resources. And when I went in their modest home, there were the children playing on the
floor and asleep in the middle of the floor was a dog, admittedly skinny and that particularly
well kept. And so I asked through a translator, is that your dog? The question really wasn't
understood. And so I modified it. I said, well, do you feed that dog? Well, that actually
got a laugh through the translator because these people had trouble feeding themselves.
They certainly weren't going to feed the dog. So I was puzzled and I said, well, why is
the dog here? And I got a very straightforward answer. This is where he lives. It really
underscored this issue of overlapping habitats and tolerance with each other in minimum competition.
Dogs live where we do. Okay. And that's an important thing to keep in mind. Now, anyone
who spends time with house cats, as I do, knows that that word domestication doesn't
fit this animal. Okay. Quite as well as it does dogs. We talked about that earlier. There's
evidence to suggest that cats and people have been together for a long time. We've probably
cohabited for at least 9,000 years. We know that cats were buried with people of high
status back about that time, which suggests a special relationship between the two species.
Were these early cats domesticated or just tamed and tolerated or admired small cats
of which there are many types? Again, we have to return to that same question. The difference
between an animal that is simply tamed and tolerated or one that is domesticated. I'm
going to make the case that cats are domesticated because I'm going to use some of those characteristics
we talked about before. I think they are genetically different. Okay. I think there is a degree
of codependence or at least there used to be a significant degree of codependence. Certainly
human beings do keep cats. And so we can make the case that domestication is probably a
word that we can apply to our feline friends. We think that these animals, in fact there's
now good evidence that these animals arose in the Middle East from a domestication event
which began to separate them from a small type of wild cat that lived in the region.
What we mean by a domestication event is the beginnings of a move to genetically alter
the animal and make it different from its wild progenitors and simultaneously, as a result
of that, bring it into contact with human beings who begin to keep it, to live with it,
and to gain some benefit from it and the cat also beginning to gain some benefit as well.
Okay. Cats are obligate carnivores and that's a very important thing to note. They also have
exceptional gifts as hunters of small rodents and even some snakes. And if you've ever had
the pleasure of watching a cat hunt, you'll realize how wonderfully acute its hearing
is, how keen its eyesight is, but once it spots its prey, that's when you get the real
excitement. This is kinetic energy ready to explode and then you see an array of weapons
that are really quite astounding. When a cat which can look very sweet opens its mouth
and yawns. You'll see very large canine teeth or fangs. You'll see some bone-crushing teeth
in the back and then you see the other powerful weapon, the retractable claw. Cats can be
very, very silent. They can move with their claws retracted, but when they pop those claws
out, they have a dangerous, sharp weapon and they're extremely good with their feet. They
can catch a bird in flight with one hand. I've seen that done. And they can jump and
they can twist and they're just extremely good at hunting. And remember, they are obligate
carnivores. So when human beings made that great transition that we keep talking about
during the Neolithic from being food procurers to becoming food producers, one of the technical
problems those early farmers ran into was how do we store our grain and our seeds? How
do we store our seed stock and our grain? The grain of course had to be dried and stored
to be used when it wasn't available on the plants. That's one of the reasons grain was
important. And also these people needed seed stock. From the beginning they were saving
seeds and replanting them, which helped in that domestication of plant issue that we
keep talking about. So these people developed storage places that we would generally call
granaries, places where you put grain. The minute you do that in an environment where
agriculture began, you begin to attract small rodents. Small rodents have very high metabolic
rates and they will consume surprisingly large amounts of grain given their relatively
small size. It is no small problem to have rats, mice and squirrels in your granary if
you're counting on keeping that grain for human use. So the cat was drawn to its potential
prey, the small rodents. And the cat was very effective at demolishing the population of
small rodents in a fixed environment like a granary. Hence our early agricultural ancestors
began to appreciate the benefits that these cats could bring because not only were they
terrifically good hunters who really knocked down the pest population, they were obligate
carnivores and they could care less about stored grain and seed stock. They didn't need it.
So they were the ideal sentry. They would take out the invaders, protect the assets,
but they wouldn't touch the assets themselves. We know that it was in ancient Egypt that
the breeding of domestic cats for special traits began about 4,000 years ago. The Egyptians
as grain farmers certainly saw the utility of the cat, and this story we just talked
about about cats being guardians certainly was going on in Egypt, but probably not without
selective breeding until about 4,000 years ago. But the Egyptians admiration of feline
qualities literally led them to deify cats. As you know, cats show up in the pantheon
of Egyptian gods. They were much appreciated by the Egyptians. Sailors, much like farmers,
were also plagued by rodent pests. You had to carry bread or grain or stores onto a boat
and keeping rats and mice off your boat was tough, but you could bring a cat on board.
And the cat did just what it did with the granaries, put a hit on the rodents, didn't
bother your stores, and then there was one other advantage. Cats don't particularly
like to swim. They can, but they don't like water much. And so once they found a nice
home on a boat, they tended to want to stay there even when the boat was at rest in a
harbor. So cats quickly were dispersed around much of the agricultural area by trade and
travel along sailing routes and trade routes because they were really working for sailors
on their boats and on their ships. Modern cat breeders and cat fanciers, and that's
a word we're going to introduce several times in this course, the idea of a fancier, someone
who is just interested in or in love with a particular animal and is very interested
in special types and is interested in going to shows and maybe even competing with their
animal against somebody else's animal for some particular trade. This activity is called
a fancy and the people who engage in it are called fanciers. So modern cat breeders and
cat fanciers have stretched and molded and manipulated this small feline into a wide
variety of shapes and sizes and colors and coat types. And you can look at pictures
of cats or you can go to a cat show and you'll be astonished at how many different kinds
of cat types we have and how these animals breed true, how they in fact do constitute
real breeds. This is done through selective breeding and this subject of making a breed
and then maintaining it will be a subject of a subsequent lecture in this course. But
there's something else we need to know about both cats and dogs as it relates to this issue
of genetic difference from the wild type. Certainly domestic dogs look different than
wolves. Certainly house cats and cats in the cat fancy look different from the small wild
cats from which they arose. But the reproductive isolating barriers between these domesticates
and their wild progenitors are not complete. Genes can flow back and forth and these animals
can breed with wild types. And so in the cat fancy we have some people breeding house cats
that came from this domestication event in the ancient prehistoric Middle East and they're
breeding them back to wild cats to make new breeds of things called, one example is something
called the savanna cat. And these things are as large as a mid-sized dog. They're 50 or 60
pounds and they almost look like an exotic animal but they have emotional and behavioral
properties quite similar to a house cat. Okay, that's an interesting situation. The same is true
by the way with dogs. They went through the proto dog stage, we clearly have our domesticated dogs,
we have our breeds of dogs but dogs can still breed with wolves. And there are a population of
creatures out there called wolf dogs and some people wanted to keep them as pets. Not a good
idea. People have been hurt by wolf dogs. They begin to revert back to being non-domesticated
which makes them more unpredictable. Now there are no end of humorous stories about the differences
in behavior between dogs and cats. While dogs tend to be loyal and subordinate and tractable and
capable of unqualified love, cats tend to be aloof, standoffish and sometimes rather independent.
These traits derive from their lives as wild animals. Dogs originally are and still are pack
animals that live in a communal group and recognize an alpha male and an alpha female. When a human
being is able to usurp the role of the alpha, the subordinate loving and tractable characteristics
of a dog immediately become apparent. Cats on the other hand arose from solitary hunters and though
they appreciate the food, the shelter, the warmth, the attention we sometimes lavish on them, they
never really consider us to be up to their standards. As they say, dogs have masters, cats have
staff. One measure of the degree of domestication of any animal is the degree of dependency it
develops for human beings. That was one of our points to make an animal a domesticate. Though
dogs are capable of reverting to a feral state and have and can form packs that have some capacity
to fend for themselves, it's generally the case that without the support of a human partner, a dog
would soon be in considerable distress. Cats on the other hand can quickly become feral and survive
very nicely without any input from human beings. Thank you very much. The third of the animals I
wish to cover today might surprise you. It happens to be an animal I care a great deal about but not
everyone I realized shares my enthusiasm for this animal. This third animal that we're going to
cover is admittedly not as adorable in many circumstances as either a dog or a cat unless
of course you happen to be really hungry or if you're trying to scratch out, pardon a really bad pun,
a living in a difficult and undeveloped or underdeveloped environment. The number of
domesticated chickens on this planet and the distribution of those birds across the human
landscape suggests that man and the chicken have formed a most successful partnership. Estimates
on the worldwide chicken population do very widely but I'm not kidding about this number. There have
been claims made for as many as 24 billion of these birds in existence at any one time today.
Chickens are undoubtedly the most widely distributed and the most numerous bird on the planet. Clearly
domestication was a good strategy from their perspective. Now we know that linguistics has
played a role in our ability to understand the relationship of human beings to domesticates
and we talked about historical comparative linguistics and we talked about following
the spread of agriculture into new areas. One of the things that linguists look at is the
frequency of use of words related to a particular subject and that can be some measure of how
important that subject is or how familiar that subject is and so just look at what happens in
common speech that bespeaks the close relationship we have with chickens. Just in English the number
of words that have a chicken basis suggests how close this relationship has been for thousands of
years. I mean everybody's familiar with terms like nest egg, pecking order, protectiveness of
mother hen, mad as a wet hen, broody behavior, running around like a chicken with his head cut off,
cocky, cock shore, cock of the walk, cocktail, strutting like a rooster, scratching out a living
and many others that I'm sure you can think of. There's good agreement the chickens arose primarily
from a creature called the red jungle fowl and that furtive bird lives in an extended territory
throughout Southeast Asia. It does look quite a bit like a domestic chicken but again chickens
are genetically different. They clearly have a different kind of orientation to human beings.
They are not particularly frightened of human beings. They operate nicely around us and so
they are distinct. They have been useful to us. We do develop a kind of co-dependence.
There aren't very many feral chickens running around. If we don't take care of them they tend
to be gone so they do fit very nicely into our definition for a domestic. So we know that these
creatures were domesticated from the red jungle fowl about 10,000 years ago in Asia.
But there's also data suggesting that these useful creatures were widespread in the global
human population and I mean global by as recent time as 3,000 years ago. So they quickly spread out
in the human population after their point of domestication in Asia. Chickens were probably
rather easy to domesticate and to alter by selective breeding. Remember we talked about
selective breeding with dogs where you keep the type that you want and you begin to stretch
the makeup of the genetics of an animal to give you the type that you want. Chickens are fairly
easy to deal with that way for a number of reasons. Their biology plays right into that.
Hens can lay several eggs per week and a hen that is broody will incubate eggs of other hens
as well as her own. After the hatch however the mother hen will take care of all the chicks
until they're relatively independent. Hens not only protect their chicks they are also
rather good teachers and I really never tire of watching my hens demonstrate scratching techniques
to their peeps and they don't just scratch and let the peeps watch. They poke them and get
their attention and say look look what I'm doing and they really do teach. The gestation period
in the egg is only 21 days so a number of hatches can be accomplished in one season. Chickens tend
to stay close to where they were hatched and raised. They return to their roost in the evening.
They're rather poor flyers so again they tend to stay close to us. They don't go out and mix
with wild populations and they don't travel very far from their home so again that helps them fit
that definition of a domestic. Originally most chicken breeds were dual purpose that is they
produced both meat and eggs but in recent selective breeding associated with industrial use of chickens
the types have been broken into two general proprietary groups. There are veal chickens
or broilers which are raised for very fast growth and they give you large amounts of very tender
meat because the animals are very young when they're sacrificed and then there are layers
who may have very little flesh but they produce a prodigious amount of eggs in their relatively
short lifetime before they're recycled into dog food or wherever they go. There are additional
uses for chickens. They will do things like turn your compost pile. They will pick pests off your
off your other animals. They even have some guarding capabilities. They'll make noise when
an intruder comes in and I'm very pleased always to have chickens on my farm. They do bring a kind
of joy to me that's not entirely different than some other people get when they interact with
their dogs or their cats. When I'm having a really bad day nothing perks me up better than walking
out into the chicken pen carrying some feed and seeing these creatures run toward me with their
odd gate with their wings at their sides and they're sort of swaying stride as they come running
toward me acting like they've just experienced the second coming. Now next time we're going to
move on to another group of barnyard creatures which also were domesticated early and have played
an important role for thousands of years in our march from hunting and gathering to the
establishment of civilization. We'll see you then.
