Welcome.
To now we've seen how cats and dogs, chickens, sheep, goats, pigs, and horses helped humans
to expand, settle, and acclimate to the formation of settled communities.
Big characteristics in these creatures made these partnerships initially helpful and then
ultimately essential to the work of civilization.
We could not allow this to happen solely by chance if we were going to survive.
Our codependency on these creatures required a certain degree of predictability.
In this lecture we will look at the systematic effort of plant and animal breeders, stockmen
and horticulturists, to group and organize the organisms they wish to employ in their
work.
We'll look at the systems used to place similar organisms in useful groupings and we will
take a look at some of the methods employed to make sense of and optimize the rich heritage
of domesticated plant and animal genetic material that has come down to us from those
first prehistoric peoples who began the practice of domestication.
Though this course is intended to cover the interaction of human beings and their domesticates
for the past ten thousand years, or the period when domestication of plants and animals set
our species on the path to civilization, we've spent much of our effort thus far dealing
with prehistory and the establishment of the agricultural way of food production.
From this point onward we will confine our discussions to the past few hundred years
rather than the past ten millennia and focus on events and activities that have direct
impact on the present and likely even the future.
A recurring theme in this course has been that natural selection helped prepare a number
of what we've been calling proto-domesticates, both plant and animal, for domestication.
In every case however, the practice of human directed artificial selection implemented by
controlled breeding actually finished the process.
This lecture will be about the early and the ongoing efforts to refine that process.
Land races may have come into being as the result of natural forces acting on plants
or animals that human beings had already domesticated, but it has been only in the last few hundred
years that we've seen humans make a determined effort to make sense of this phenomenon and
derive practical benefits from it.
As livestock spread out from their points of origin, groups of animals became essentially
permanent residents, if you will, in some localities where local production requirements
and physical conditions worked together to create new sets of conditions and selection
pressures that resulted in a recognized type or form that could be reliably distinguished
from other members of the same species.
If no efforts were made to intervene through selective breeding, considerable heterogeneity
in unselected traits could and usually did accumulate.
Such a naturally occurring, localized, or regional collection of animals is generally
called a land race.
That's what we mean by a land race.
It's one of these isolated little islands of animals initially domesticated but then
brought to a particular form or type by natural selection.
Both natural selection and artificial selection can play a role in the formation of a land
race.
Though land races are sometimes referred to as local breeds or natural breeds, I feel
that that terminology confuses the situation and detracts from the definition of the word
breed that I plan to define shortly.
If no effort is made to control variability within a land race by intentional and purposeful
inbreeding, that is by breeding back to close relatives, then we can see considerable variation
accumulate in all sorts of traits outside those controlled by strong selective pressures
in the prevailing environment.
By way of illustration of that point, it can be pointed out that the land race that gave
rise to the Texas longhorn, in that land race there was really no selection pressure for
coat color.
Thus the land race that preceded Texas longhorns and the Texas longhorns themselves have no
uniform color standard and can show a wide range of colors and even coat patterns.
Thus it's common to find considerable heterogeneity for a number of unselected traits within any
land race.
Good examples can also be found among Florida Cracker horses, Florida Cracker cattle and
so a sheep.
The things that selected those land races and kept them functional where they were were
survival traits.
So things like color can change, ear set can change, all sorts of things like that, but
it's the survivability traits that were selected for in those land races.
To illustrate that point, if you visit the Florida Cracker people and look at their horses
and their cattle, if you look at them in profile they look rather normal.
But if you look at them head on, they're very narrow compared to other horses or other cattle.
They're like the fins on a radiator.
They're thin so they radiate out heat very effectively and that makes their survivability
much better in the hot, humid, muggy, swampy climates in which they live.
That's selected for the other traits aren't.
We don't have written records as to when deliberate breeding began.
But it's safe to say that some few hundred years ago the efforts became more consistent
and as herdsmen and breeders began to more closely observe and regulate these populations,
the first steps to the establishment of standard breeds began.
We might wonder why this arose as a need.
Well it's because the enterprise related to these animals gradually began to be more
dependent upon these animal partners having specific characteristics as opposed to just
the general usefulness as food or fiber.
However the faster smaller rabbits that we talked about in an earlier lecture that we
used to illustrate the distribution of genetic types across a population and how natural
selection could begin to pick out a different selection or collection of genes to make that
quicker faster rabbit.
As with the rabbits, the quest for cows with better milk production, horses with greater
speed and so forth led to efforts to breed for improved outcomes, improved defined by
people.
In other words, as civilizations flourished new environmental pressures arose which demanded
predictability.
The first steps involved in developing a standardized breed involved developing a list of standard
traits that will be selected for or against, that is the breed characteristics need to
be developed.
Secondly, stud books or compilations of pedigrees need to be developed and kept.
On-site comparisons of animals such as the current shows or fairs need to be developed
so that multiple breeders could see and discuss the breed characteristics themselves and
hopefully come to agreement on them.
In time, animals with agreed upon traits that tended to pass these traits onto their offspring
when bred to the same type began to be referred to as standard breeds.
At this point, breeders generally took steps through controlled breeding to preserve the
desired characteristics and eliminate traits that were negative or generally frowned upon.
As a consequence, artificial selection and controlled breeding began to trump the natural
selection that had helped create the land races that had given rise to the breed.
A breed then is a collection of genes that should result in an animal with a known and
predictable set of characteristics defining the breed and it should breed true for those
traits.
In order to breed true, a trait needs to be fixed.
You'll recall that in our discussion of chromosomes, we talked about an organism being homozygous,
big word, homozygous for a given gene if both copies of that gene, that is the one received
from the mother and the one received from the father at the moment of conception, were
both the same.
In that case, in that homozygous case, when sex cells are made and those two genes separate
into different sex cells, a homogenous individual can only contribute that form of the gene
since that's the only form it has.
That would not be true if the organism was heterogeneous for that gene.
Thus to make a gene pair homozygous is to fix it since that organism can only provide
that gene type in a mating.
An understanding of genetics advanced, a subset of breeders began to pay as much or more
attention to traits that they wished to enhance or eliminate.
This led to controversy as they argued about the future direction and the genetic heritage
of the animals they husbanded.
In this way, I tend to think that a breed is a social or if you will, even a political
entity as well as a biological entity.
A breed is defined by a set of inherited characteristics determined by the people who determine the breed
standard and not by nature.
The finest specimen of any given breed may not have particularly good survivability in
a natural setting, that is in the wild.
If you don't believe me, take a good look at a champion English bulldog.
Dogs like to breathe, those animals have been bred to have a face and a physiognomy
that makes breathing very difficult.
Some breeds have more to do with human amusement or interest than they do with any benefit
to the animal and I'll give you another dog example, picture a pug and I think you see
what I mean.
Since breed standards are determined by people and people can disagree, it's usually necessary
to develop some form of breed organization that develops widely agreed upon standards,
mediates and disputes among breeders over those standards and maintains the records
and registrations for the breed.
Such organizations also often organize shows or competitions to display the best of the
breed to aficionados and to the general public and to educate breeders about the best agreed
upon traits of the breed.
Now do you see why I consider a breed a social or political as well as a biological entity?
We might even wonder why we need to maintain these animals any longer when the purpose
they serve has become so personalized but such is the state of our civilization that
we can afford a partnership that is for pleasure as well as utility.
Our predecessors would have been quite surprised no doubt at the pampered lives some animals
now have.
Nevertheless, that is part of our story of evolving domestication and I certainly fall
into that category of animal pamperers.
In order to maintain a breed in its pure form, specific steps need to be taken.
There needs to be a registry of all animals that will take place in intra-breed mating
so you've got to have a registry.
Only animals that meet the criteria of the breed and conform to the breed standard can
be allowed to be registered.
Also in order to be registered an animal must be the product of a mating between two
other registered individuals so this becomes a kind of a closed family if you will.
So if care is not taken excessive inbreeding occurs and some negative and unregulated traits
can begin to accumulate.
We can look at some examples.
Look at dogs with hip dysplasia.
Let's look at some breeds of dogs with genetic blindness and tendencies toward cancer.
Let's look at thoroughbred racehorses that are having catastrophic breakdowns on the
race course.
Think about dogs that are subject to things like bloat.
Think about difficulties in birthing and Holstein cattle.
Can you think of a reason for why these problems would start to pop up?
There is a reason for it and that is that the really dangerous deleterious genes are
usually recessive.
It means when they are in a heterozygote they're not expressed but if they appear in a homozygous
form, trouble happens.
The trade is expressed, cancer is produced, hip dysplasia happens, in the case of racehorses
the skeleton isn't strong enough to stand up to the forces created by the muscles and
so on and because these animals are closely related their chances of matching up to these
recessive genes increase.
So that's one of the things we have to constantly be on guard for as we engage in inbreeding.
Despite major efforts to maintain a given form in a breed, breeds of animals do change
over time.
A glance at a Victorian portrait of a Great Dane will reveal a dog that looks quite different
from the Great Dane Champion you'll see in the Westminster dog show on television.
Why is that?
It's because mammals have to reproduce by sexual reproduction and what is sex for?
Sex we think in biological terms exists not for reproduction but for the purpose of mixing
genes.
As mammals evolved and gave up asexual reproduction and were stuck with only sexual reproduction
it's very hard to freeze characteristics in time.
Animal breeders are trying and they may be able to fight against such change over time
by relying more and more on frozen sperm and frozen embryos that they put down in liquid
nitrogen baths but again this is a high tech solution to a practical biological problem.
In the absence of controlled breeding the population drifts toward the most fit.
That's those quick rabbits again rather than the most desirable type.
Desirable is defined by a human being.
We can look at the characters from the popular film Lady and the Tramp and we can see that
point.
Those of you who've seen that film can picture a lady, she's the epitome of pulling the
genes in the gene pool toward a particular type and that type is preserved by only letting
her consort with creatures that look like her but her new friend Tramp just looks like
a dog.
Why?
He's the product of lots and lots of matings that weren't controlled and he's the result
of the gene pool drifting back toward the if you will proto dog.
He's going to have great survivability, he's going to be smart and strong and quick but
he's not going to be pretty and meet the standards that people set.
From the foregoing one might conclude that the only way to get a standard breed is through
a land race.
So that is often the case.
For example the Belgian Malinois dog came out of the land race of Belgian sheep dogs
before they were organized into a standard breed.
It's not however an obligatory step.
Dogs have been known to construct a whole new breed from known stock in an effort to
improve some trait or group of traits.
That would be the case with for example the Jack Russell Terrier where we know somebody
put that animal together or the Dishley Lester sheep which we're going to talk about at
some length later in this course.
There's a strong pragmatic streak that runs through animal agriculturalists.
Land races and standard breeds certainly have considerable utility as we've just said.
But other groupings could be imagined that would have great utility based on phenotype.
Not the genotype, not the genetic makeup, but the actual form, function and structure
of the animal that you see or experience.
A good example of such a type breed, and that's what we'll call one of those, would
be the Pinto horse breed.
Its characteristics include what you can see.
It's a useful group that you look at the animal, you know anything about its parentage, you
look at it and you say ah, it's a Pinto and you can put it with other Pintos and you can
expect that it would do things.
It's useful in that regard, but its genetics lack predictability in reproduction.
And thus the same characteristics in offspring can't be predicted with any great certainty.
Thus it's really a very limited value as a genetic resource.
That's the different situation then than a standard breed or even some land races.
Increasingly the lives of most people in the developed world, people like most of us, are
being impacted by proprietary industrial strains.
These groupings are not generally considered breeds because they're seldom shown or entered
in competitions and rather than having their standards set by a breed organization, they
are bred to meet an industrial standard for production.
And that standard can constitute proprietary information held by the company or corporation
that bred them and intends to use them in a production system.
This practice is common in the turkey, chicken and swine industries of today.
Let's take a quick look at how the need for control and predictability with plants mirrored
those of animals.
Domesticated plants also represent a defined collection of genes.
That result then, that defined collection of genes, result in established and predictable
phenotypes.
Remember we talked about phenotypes as being the expression of the genes, the expression
that you can see, measure and so on.
So plant breeders tend to operate in much the same way as animal breeders when it comes
to the basics.
The differences in reproductive systems of some plants and animals lead to some practical
divergence between these two groups.
Now when I say there's similarity in regard to the basics, what are some of those basics?
Well record keeping is still absolutely essential.
It's important to know which traits are being followed, you've got to decide that.
You've got to be able, in the case of plant breeding, to be able to accurately describe
or measure the traits that you're going to follow.
Again, much like the practice followed by animal breeders, plant breeders use controlled
breeding as the driving force in selecting the desired strain or variety thereafter and
then keeping it predictable and more manageable, which is increasingly critical as our codependence
continues to rise.
This keeps us in that positive feedback loop we discussed earlier.
For that positive feedback loop, we talked about more mouths to feed, means you've got
to exert more control over nature to put more land in production and you've got to use that
land more intensely and more effectively.
That's exactly what we're talking about here.
If we need more food, we've only got two ways to get it, use more land, use it more effectively.
That's one way to use it more effectively.
Be able to use domesticated plants in this case that have absolutely predictable properties
that you can manage to fit the circumstances, to optimize the amount of food produced and
help you stay at least a step ahead in that positive feedback loop continuing to provide
adequate nutrition for an ever-expanding population.
That's what this is really all about, but stop, think about this again.
Whether it's animals or whether it's plants, it has to do with this degree of intensity.
It has to do with our codependency because we've now put our faith in these domesticates.
We've allowed our population to grow to this size.
We now absolutely depend on these plants and these animals providing what we predict they
can provide and we can't really leave that to chance.
We've got to be able to have breeds or cultivars that we know we can manage genetically, that
we can predict their outputs because too much is riding on pure chance.
The plant breeders and the animal breeders are under the same kind of pressures to produce
this kind of predictability and this kind of productivity.
Again, plant breeders do have some advantages over animal breeders.
Plants can often self or they can be cloned.
This gives plant breeders several very big advantages over animal breeders.
Remember we said that animal breeders have a problem sort of freezing a breed in time.
They tend to drift one way or another.
The Great Dane has changed over time and so on.
We know that they're trying to come up with a technological solution to retard that change
by freezing embryos and freezing sperm that they can pull out and keep reusing the established
types before they drift off.
But the problem is it's always dependent upon sex and every time in animals, every time
you want a new generation, a new dog, a new sheep, a new cow, you've got to put a male
and a female together somehow.
Have sex and the offspring, because it's sexual, is not going to be identical to either parent
or to either of its or any of its siblings.
Not true with plants because plants can be easily cloned.
Many of us have experienced this.
We think of cloning as a big high-tech thing.
How many times have you seen someone go in somebody's house and say, gee, I love that
vine.
Look at the way it's growing.
It's beautiful.
Somebody says, well, I'll give you a cutting.
And they go over the scissors and they cut some off and they stick it down in a glass
of water and in a couple of days roots are growing out and you take it home and stick
it in a pot.
Now you've got the plant and it's genetically absolutely the same plant.
The plant has been reproduced by making a clone.
There's been no sex, no mix of genes.
You've had reproduction.
You've got a plant in this house.
Now you've still got that plant and you've got a plant in the other house, but no sex.
It was done by cloning asexual reproduction and both plants are genetically identical
to each other.
So plant breeders can easily do that.
If they have a plant that doesn't clone easily and they have to reproduce sexually, some
plants can self.
That means that they can pollinate their female organs themselves.
They have both organs on the same plant.
Though that is sex and though the seeds that are likely to be produced may not produce
a plant that's genetically identical to a parent, this is carrying the concept of inbreeding
about as far as you can imagine.
What closer relative can you think of to breed to than yourself?
The only way you can match that in the animal world is with hermaphroditic animals, but
most animals that are hermaphroditic are self sterile.
They can't fertilize themselves and the few that can seem to be of almost no economic
importance.
So that's a whole area that's denied animal breeders.
Plants make seeds or bulbs that can also be easily stored for reasonably long periods
of time.
In a practical sense, you can also keep your material around and bring it back when you
need it without having to put embryos or sperms down in a bath of liquid nitrogen as animal
breeders often have to do.
There are also significant differences in terminology employed by plant and animal breeders.
We never speak of breeds of tomatoes or wheat, but rather talk about varieties or strains
of plants within a given species.
It should be noted that plant and animal breeders had remarkable success in selecting useful
traits and combining them into valuable collections of genes, comprising land races and breeds
of various kinds without having even the slightest idea of how genetic systems actually operated.
Their work was practical and pragmatic.
It had huge impact.
It's terribly important, but much of what was entirely empirical and was based on minimal
or actually incorrect understanding of the processes actually at work.
It was not until the middle of the 19th century that some obscure work in an unpretentious
monastery garden began to provide the clues that led in time to a revolution in genetic
science.
Later in this course, we're going to go to that garden.
Now that we have a good grasp of the concepts behind domesticated species, land races and
standard and tight breeds, let's explore ways in which some of these plants and animals,
as well as some interesting microbes, became world travelers as a result of the activities
and adventures of some of the major figures in the age of exploration.
We'll look into that next time.
Thank you.
