Hello, you'll recall that in the last lecture we saw how the need for predictability had
the unintended side effect at times of weakening strains, but for the most part it improved
the serviceability of both plants and animals.
Now in this lecture we'll look at an unintended and unexpected result of the age of exploration.
We'll look at the Columbian exchange.
Though other people may have made landfall in the Americas before Christopher Columbus,
it was not until his voyages near the end of the 15th century that real ongoing interaction
between the old and the new world began.
But ever since Columbus breached the barrier of the Atlantic, worldviews were forever altered
on both sides of the ocean and domesticated plants and animals as well as people and microbes
began to move across this once impassable body of water through means other than those
that existed before like natural elements, air and water currents and geological elements
such as continental drift.
The Columbian effect was to really open connections between people on an ongoing basis.
The connecting of the previously separated old and new worlds has proven to be one of
the most significant events in world agriculture, world ecology and in the culture and cultures
of human beings.
By the end of the 15th century, at the time that Columbus is going to make these voyages,
integrated farming involving plants and animals was widespread and it was flourishing in the
old world.
The peoples of the Americas had also domesticated a number of highly interesting plants and
a few animals were also being used in what was a general commitment to an agricultural
way of life.
The old and the new worlds were effectively separated by the Atlantic Ocean until those
Columbian voyages.
There are claims that Norsemen or Chinese found the Americas before Columbus, however,
even if that's true, you got to remember that the issue was sustained contact and the
Columbian voyages resulted in sustained contact.
Those Norsemen and those Chinese, even if they did touch land, there was no significant
follow up.
The Columbian voyages then established sustained exchange in both directions and by so doing
dramatically impacted the course of world history.
The story of Columbus, the navigator and sailor, is familiar to everyone.
Virtually every grade school child knows about Ferdinand, Isabella, Columbus, Genoa and all
these things and I won't belabor those points because they really don't impinge on the part
of the story that I want to dwell on.
When he set off from Bartholona, he of course was looking for a new passage to an already
known place.
He was not looking for an entirely new world, which of course is what he found.
The discoveries of Columbus created a great intellectual stir in Europe.
More than we might imagine today, I think you got to remember world views were different
then.
Not the least of these issues dealt with the creation and with the deluge as they were
described in Scripture.
The problem was how was it possible to reconcile the descendants of the Ark with these new
men, new plants and new animals found on this new continent?
Some theologians of the time were so distraught they even toyed with the concept of two separate
creation events to try to explain these new observations.
Strangest that may seem to us today, that was a real problem in the 16th century.
Of course wealth in the form of precious metals began to find its way from the new world to
the old.
But of greater interest to us in this course are the many biological entities that for
the first time broached the barrier of the Atlantic, gained wider distribution and found
new habitats and new acceptance on new continents.
The impact on both sides of the Atlantic was so sweeping and so profound that it would
be possible to become overwhelmed by the quick recounting of all the plant and animal species
that became prominently established in their new habitats across the Atlantic from their
places of domestication.
Thus I'll discuss only a few of the more remarkable cases.
Just a few of the species that were domesticated in the new world and which found their way
east across the Atlantic were potatoes, tomatoes, chilies, tobacco, remember all of those are
what?
Olenaceae, maize, very important grain and turkeys, native American bird.
From Africa we got among other things plantains, yams, bananas, rice and sorghum in exchange.
Introduced to the new world from Europe after Columbus were also horses.
Very cheap not to be confused with the undomesticated ovines that did live in the new world and
goats, domesticated pigs also different from the indigenous porcine creatures of the new
world and cattle, wheat, barley, oats and sugarcane.
All these things came from the old world to the new.
A number of these species became so well accepted in their new habitats that they became virtual
icons for their new homelands.
For example, what could really be more Irish than a potato?
Where would the poles be without pierogi or potato vodka?
Imagine a marinara sauce without tomatoes.
What about that white or black skinned cowboy on horseback contemplating a herd of cattle
set against a field of billowing wheat?
Pretty American, right?
Well, the wheat was originally grown in the Middle East.
The horse was likely descended from those on the steppes of Eurasia and was probably
brought there by the Spanish.
He's looking at cattle introduced into the new world by the Spanish that came again from
Spain and he himself would be of either European or African descent.
All of these things are transplanted.
Every one of the species of plant or animal just mentioned crossed the Atlantic as a result
of the Colombian voyages of discovery.
Now, this interchange of plants, animals, people and microbes has been variously called
the Grand Exchange or the Colombian Exchange.
I greatly prefer the latter phrase, which is, of course, the title of a very influential
book written by Alfred W. Crosby, Jr.
And I think it carries with it a great deal more information than simply calling this
the Great Exchange, so let's face it.
It was great in the sense of being grand and large and a huge impact.
The impact of explorers and immigrants to America was felt within the first decades
after Columbus is made in voyages.
As diseases wreaked havoc almost immediately, I'll return to that point in a few moments.
Let's first look at the food exchange.
As my earlier examples hinted, many cuisines were forever altered.
Voyages entered Europe through Spain and Italy, but they did not have much impact in
those Mediterranean climates.
But they did flourish in the cooler and wetter portions of Europe that much more closely
resembled their places of domestication in the Andes.
Makes perfectly good sense, doesn't it?
They were simply transplanted from the New World in the Andes to the Old World, but
they flourished in habitats very similar to the places where they were domesticated.
The effects brought by the establishment of the potato on Ireland and parts of Eastern
Europe were indeed far reaching.
The chronically food insecure Irish, insecure for a number of reasons, many of which were
political, flourished after the introduction of the potato.
The population expanded greatly, and what became known as the splendiferous spud became
a virtual monoculture supplying the majority of the nourishment from nearly the entire
population of the island.
Before we leave potatoes, let's just think for a minute.
We think of a potato as sort of a starchy, tuberous thing that adds carbs to our diet
and probably something we could cut out with impunity and lose a little weight.
It was called the splendiferous spud for a lot of reasons.
If one consumes not only the starchy interior of the potato but also consumes the skin,
which contains a lot of other nutrients, a potato is a pretty nutritious plant to eat
and it can supply a lot of the needs, if you put a little salt on it, and then if you
can add a little bit of dairy product, a little milk, a little butter or something, we might
not be excited about that diet, but for people who were always subsisting and hanging on,
it was not a bad thing.
When a fungus then attacked that monoculture and the potato crop failed two years in a
row, it's just almost impossible for us to appreciate the degree of devastation that
that brought.
The economy of Ireland, which was never great at that time, was pushed beyond its usual
struggling condition, and starvation, starvation unto death and debilitating diseases were rampant
in a significant portion of the population left their beloved homeland in what has come
to be called the Irish diaspora, a tragedy for Ireland, a tragedy for the people, but
when you think of the impact of the Irish in much of the rest of the world, much of
it, the New World, there were some benefits that others got, and it gives some indication
of just how big an impact that Columbian exchange had in its ripple effects.
The combined impact of the introduction of both potatoes and maize, two of the four most
subsistence crops in the entire world, relieved hunger pressure in much of Europe, which resulted
in a real population explosion that began in the middle of the 18th century.
So it took a couple of hundred years after the introduction of these plants to get them
accepted, to get the practices of growing them and handling them worked out, to get
people used to using them and figuring out how to prepare them, but once that happened,
what did we do?
We would see, at least for the environment described by Europe that was affected by
these plants, we saw an effective raising of the carrying capacity for human beings
in that environment, the environmental pressure pushing down on these people and keeping their
population reasonably low was lack of food.
When suddenly more food became available, more calories became available, more nutrition
became available, that environmental pressure was relieved to some extent and the population
moved up, the carrying capacity changed.
It's also again an example of a kind of positive feedback loop if we can assume that these
new mouths that were created in this population explosion also then put demands on the society
for the production of more food.
So these lessons keep coming back.
As we learned in a previous lecture, potatoes, tomatoes and chilies, and we can even throw
in tobacco, are all members of the Solanaceae family of plants.
As a result of that, particularly in southern Europe, where the Solanaceae, the Belladonna
group, was really viewed with some suspicion.
In that part of southern Europe and southern Italy, there was quite a lag as people were
suspicious about the use of these plants.
As I mentioned a moment ago, potatoes really had a greater impact in the cooler, wetter
portions of Europe and they also, I think, met with less suspicion.
It may have been because the people were really hungry and really needed them, but it also
is that I think that the people of Ireland and the people of Eastern Europe maybe had
less experience with the negative or downsides of the Solanaceae as a poisonous plant and
as a hallucinogenic plant than did the people of southern Europe.
However, after time, the initial suspicions about the Solanaceae were overcome and chilies
and tomatoes became very popular in Italy.
The first successful tomatoes in Italy were of the yellow skin variety, hence the Italian
name for that fruit, pomodoro, or golden apple.
Of course, red varieties soon came along, contributing to the almost iconic marinara
and bolognese sauces and of course the red toppings on pizza and then there's my favorite,
which ties the last lecture with this one, how about a caprese salad with a nice big
piece of mozzarella cheese topped with a nice big slice of tomato.
So these things became virtually iconic in Italy, but the tomato part is not native
to Italy, it's essentially a transplant from the New World.
Equivalently astonishing to me is that chilies found their way into much of central and eastern
Europe as well as lending their pungent flavor to a set of truly signature Hungarian dishes.
Those of you that know Hungarian cookery know that if you were going to name one kind of
dish it would be a paprikas and of course that's made with paprika, which of course
is made from peppers, which are not indigenous to Hungary, but came into Europe from the
New World after Columbus.
Amazing to me, I hope to you.
Corn was used differently in different regions.
In parts of northwestern Europe it was primarily an animal feed and it still is.
I've bumped into social difficulties where I've served sweet corn on the cob to European
visitors who look at me like they think I'm insulting them, that I'm giving them animal
feed, but corn was used differently in different places, certainly to feed people.
Polenta, again a traditional Italian dish, is made with cornmeal, so again corn was used
to feed people in Italy and in the Balkans it became a major cereal grain staple and
was used in a kind of characteristic gruel.
Now the only New World livestock contribution of much significance to the European Larder
was the turkey, which got its name from the Turks who played a role in introducing it
into Europe.
Because you've got to remember the Ottoman Empire, the Turks, the Spaniards were struggling
in the Mediterranean, there was trade back and forth and so turkey as well as Spain was
introducing things into Europe and the turkey bird, as this thing was called, later simply
became shortened to turkey, so that's the word we use for it as well.
Europeans do call it other things, but I think they're derivatives of that word turkey.
I know in Italy it's a ticani, but it comes from the fact that it was Turks that put that
bird into Europe.
The expansion of dietary selection not only enlarged cuisine, it also gave humans more
variety which once properly managed, that is not farmed as a monoculture, greatly increased
the year round options for food and preservation, expanded the ability to rotate crops and therefore
improved output and generally aided civilizations in expanding.
Incidentally it also contributed to trade and to food becoming more and more of an industry
and we will definitely return to that point later in this course.
The changes wrought in the Americas by Europeans and other old world transplants were no less
far reaching.
Livestock played a huge role, horses and as I mentioned before domestic pigs and that's
important to note that we're talking about pigs that were domesticated first in China
or in the Fertile Crescent, found their way to Europe and then were after the Colombian
exchange brought to the new world.
North America did have poor sign animals, but they were by and large not domesticated.
Some of those creatures can still be found in the Southwest today and they're not of
great utility to the people out there, they can be hunted, but they were never really
effectively domesticated to the best of my knowledge.
The same was true with domestic sheep and goats.
There were ovines or sheep preachers in the new world, they were not in large number to
the best of my knowledge, they didn't provide a significant food source for the indigenous
peoples there, they are not in large numbers today.
So bringing domesticated sheep, again first domesticated in the Fertile Crescent, spread
around Europe and the Mediterranean, found their way into the new world after the Colombian
exchange.
Okay, so that made a very big impact as did goats.
Cattle the same way, there were no cattle in the new world, they were brought over primarily
by the Spanish, but we know that they were domesticated in several different places and
we covered the cattle domestication story the last time as they came from the great
Orochs, which interestingly, this helps us put things in context, of the barnyard creatures.
The wild progenitors of cattle lingered longer than one might expect.
The last Orochs to be reported was alive and well in Poland after the Colombian voyages.
It certainly was not a domesticate, it certainly wasn't contributing much to the welfare of
people but these huge dangerous beasts were hunted for sport and to the best of our knowledge
the last one was taken down in Poland in years after Columbus had actually taken real
domesticated cattle that had derived from the Orochs into the new world.
And of course, even though the turkey went from the new world to the old, the chicken
went from the old world to the new.
And I needn't tell you how excited I get when I think about chickens, I do like chickens
and I think it was a great contribution to the new world to bring those creatures from
Europe.
So obviously these animals had a huge influence on the diet of all the people living in the
Americas.
The importation of wheat, barley, oats, rice, sugarcane, bananas, citrus fruits and coffee
not only changed the diets of people in the Americas, some of these crops and their exploitation
in a growing world food trade had profound and devastating impacts on the politics, the
economics and the sociology of much of Central and South America that extends even to the
present.
We just can't emphasize enough the sociological impact as well as the ecological and agricultural
impact of this Colombian exchange.
The introduction of the horse into the American Southwest had far reaching effects on the
Americans living there, the American Indians living there.
It also left an indelible mark on our image of the Old West.
Think of our concept, our myths if you will, that would suggest that the plains Indians
hunted buffalo from horseback from the most ancient of times.
We get that feeling that it's presented to us that that of course was a long standing
tradition of these people, but that of course was not the case.
Amerindians were agriculturists and pedestrian ones at that until they gained possession
of some feral Spanish horses coming up from Mexico and secured other horses from the European
settlers with whom they had contact.
Thus that form of interaction with the bison was at most 100 to 150 years old by the time
George Armstrong Custer had his fatal tangle with the very able mounted warriors of the
plains tribes.
Interesting isn't it, how our images have developed, but when we add a few of these
facts about these transplants we begin to realize how to some degree superficial some
of our images are, that cowboy on horseback, the Indian hunting buffalo and what not.
These are relatively recent additions.
As I alluded to earlier, microbes also made the journey across the Atlantic.
Europeans had been living in more densely crowded cities and communities for longer
than the people of the New World.
Very early on we talked about problems of human beings living in settled communities
that were of a public health nature.
The Europeans who came to the New World had survived and this is an important thing to
remember.
They had survived childhood diseases like measles and they were often scarred by but were survivors
of smallpox and they had experienced other poxes and other eruptive kinds of diseases.
Why do we call these childhood diseases?
We call them that because they're everywhere, they're indigenous when we grow up and we
bump into them, we become infected by them, we have low level exposure to them in our
immune system, learns to handle that.
And so these sailors, soldiers, conquistadors, adventurers, entrepreneurs who sailed across
the Atlantic from Europe to the New World brought with them their microbial parasites.
And those microbial parasites found fertile ground in the immunologically naive peoples
of the New World.
So I think it can safely be said that it was not the Europeans themselves but rather their
microbial parasites that actually subdued the New World.
Now some have told us that there was a counter punch thrown by the Americans, that the Spaniards
and others that followed from Europe brought smallpox, brought measles, brought other diseases
that decimated the Native American populations.
But there was revenge and the revenge was syphilis which went back the other way.
The suggestion was that the Italian sailors or the other sailors who visited the New World
probably also visited some of its inhabitants at the same time and brought back this unpleasant
little microbiological disease.
And indeed it is true that there are accounts of an STD, a sexually transmitted disease,
that would have properties like we assume syphilis would have had at that time.
There are reports that there were increases in the incidence of that around the ports
that would have welcomed home these sailors and adventurers.
And so that's data that would suggest that this was kind of an American counter punch
for giving the Americans smallpox and measles.
But again, I think that's probably an oversimplification.
Syphilis is a very complex disease.
It's difficult to study.
And one of the things that's important to note is we know that the interaction between
syphilis and human beings has changed significantly over time.
And we don't know exactly what the etiology of that disease was in the 16th century.
And we know what was sort of being described.
But there are other diseases caused by similar organisms, spirochetes they're called, these
spiral corkscrew kind of organisms that produce things like yaws that can have symptoms not
terribly unlike what might have been syphilitic symptoms at that time.
So I think that it's possible that that counter punch was never really thrown.
That possibly the most significant of all the exchanges affected was that people themselves
crossed the Atlantic.
Prior to Columbus, there were no Caucasians, Africans or Asians in the Americas.
It's true that there were also some counter migrations of Native Americans to Europe,
but by comparison to the other groups, the numbers there are of course very small.
And one considers the influence whites, blacks and Asians have had on the culture of the
Americas and the effect their presence had on the indigenous peoples of the New World.
I think we would have to conclude that the Columbian exchange fostered one of the largest,
if not the largest cultural transformation in all of human history.
We've focused primarily on plants in this lecture because the interaction among continents
brought about fewer exchanges of new animals, the notable ones being as I've already mentioned
the horse and to a lesser extent the turkey and of course we had the sheep and the pigs
and so on.
Of lesser immediate impact but more long range impact was the effect of herds brought to
America by settlers.
In particular a number of American livestock breeds of today are vestiges of the flocks
and herds brought to the New World by the Spanish, the Texas Longhorn, the Florida
Cracker horses and cattle and the Navajo Churro sheep are good examples of these types that
escaped and became feral and were then reconstituted into managed breeds by the people living
in America.
As a result of the voyages of Columbus and later voyages of discovery and conquest of
the New World, world trade in food items and agricultural materials began to accelerate,
setting the stage for the establishment of a truly global integrated food production
system.
That topic will be the main focus of one of the last lectures in this course.
However, our next lecture will deal with some of the more interesting and exotic plant
materials that had significant social impact after they were introduced to new, naive populations
and then spread around the globe.
We'll see you then.
