Hello, and welcome.
So far in this course, we've been able to follow some major trends that led from hunting
and gathering, now to a world closer to the one we know and understand from our own experience.
We discussed the successful formation and cultivation of functional working partnerships
with a number of domesticated plants and animals.
We followed the formation of settled communities based on those partnerships, and we have seen
the human population expand in that situation.
These of discovery opened new worlds and exposed people to new and potentially beneficial
plant and animal domesticates.
And we saw the beginnings of expanded trade in those domesticates, which was leading toward
a more globalized world food production system.
In the last lecture, we even covered the use of some non-nutritive domesticates that could
almost be considered luxury items, and we noted that their availability and their price made
it possible for people across the socioeconomic spectra of the most advanced countries to access
and utilize these new materials.
As they began to contemplate the future, the important thinkers of the day saw agriculture
as an important contributing factor in the emergence of a society with sufficient reliable
sources of sustenance to permit the envisioning of better and more responsive governments
that could raise the standards of living and the expectations of all their citizens.
In this lecture, we're going to discuss the abiding interest in agriculture and food production
held by several prominent individuals of the time, variously known as either the Enlightenment
or the Age of Reason.
This period comprised roughly the last half of the 17th century and virtually all of the
18th century.
Our discussion will focus primarily on scientific investigations and interests of several prominent
figures in Europe and in America.
Obviously, there were things happening in other places as well, but we will focus here
on Europe and America.
This was a time when the belief that man could understand the universe and its workings overtook
the older view that life and the universe were simply unfathomable mysteries that operated
outside our ability to understand.
The advances and discoveries of this period forever changed our management of our animal
and plant partners and placed it on a more systematic and scientific footing.
The people that we will discuss did not all meet in their lifetimes, but each one of them
was aware of all the others and their mutual interest in agriculture had at times to take
a backseat to the pressing affairs of politics and war.
Nonetheless, these persons were all, and this is interesting, they were all leading agriculturalists
and their contributions helped set the tone for those around them and helped our codependency
with our domesticates keep pace with the demands of the increasing complexity in society.
The age of reason was a time when world views were being changed.
Deism emerged as a new way of understanding the nature of the universe, and reason and
scientific method were thought to be up to the task of unraveling the mysteries of nature.
You recall deism is a philosophical belief in a single creator God.
I think it's the God Jefferson was referring to in his famous document, but we know that
Jefferson had deist tendencies as did other American founding fathers.
So it's a philosophical belief in a single creator God which does not interfere in the
physical world, does not provide revelation, miracles or prophecy, and can be approached
only through reason and careful observation of God's creation.
It was a time when it was believed that nature could be understood, not simply endured.
And the countries of Europe, for better or worse, were also engaged in colonizing and
expanding their empires, their influence and their power.
Philosophers and thinkers such as Descartes and Rousseau and Voltaire and Hobbes and Locke
helped set the stage and create an environment in which great advances could be made in fields
such as mathematics, astronomy, chemistry and statecraft.
And I think we can add to that list agriculture.
Because as we shall see, leading men of the day were interested in engaged in managing
and advancing agriculture in ways that had previously often been left to overseers or
managers.
They understood, as we should be understanding by now in this course, that agriculture had
to keep pace with society, not only to deal with the positive feedback issue generated
by more mouths to feed, meaning more food, meaning more mouths, meaning more food, but
also by the realization that the aspirations of common people were increasing as they sought,
if not outright demanded, more from the agricultural system of the time.
The practice of agriculture also advanced greatly during this period, particularly in
Europe and in the United States.
Agriculture was fully appreciated by many world leaders and heads of state to be the
engine that helped drive their economies and determined to a significant degree the size,
the health and the vigor of their populations.
And that figured very, very strongly into the mercantile system of the day.
Because you'll recall the object of mercantilism was the accumulation by a nation of capital.
Usually that meant bullion.
This could be accomplished through favorable balances of trade or military or naval hegemony.
From this point on, agriculture would not be the province of the rude and the unschooled,
but rather would command the attention of persons of influence and authority.
As a result, disagreements about how agriculture should be conducted and the outcome of those
disputes would have profound and wide-ranging consequences.
By way of illustrations, we'll discuss those differences of opinion held by several key
American figures later in this lecture.
John George III was referred to by some of his subjects as Farmer George.
Of course, his name also meant farmer, but it was not intended as a term of endearment,
though it probably was quite accurate.
The term may have been a reference to his course manners and modes of speech, but it
would also have accurately described his passion for agriculture as well.
He understood the importance of agriculture to the strength of England and the British
Empire.
He was a practicing agriculturalist himself and a very good one.
In fact, it's said that he actually turned profit by cropping and grazing the lawns
surrounding Windsor.
It was also true that he enjoyed personally engaging in the activities of his farming
enterprises and enjoyed talking with farmers more than some of the courtiers with whom
he had to consort.
One such subject that we know he liked to talk with was Robert Bakewell of Dishley-Lester
sure, an internationally known and highly successful creator of new animal types.
Bakewell began as a farmer of modest means.
He was actually leasing his land as his father before him had, but he was a farmer possessed
of great insight and skill as an animal breeder.
He wasn't really a scientist, but he did employ systematic approaches to his breeding
efforts and he was a truly keen observer of livestock and their traits.
He could look at the same things that his contemporaries were looking at and somehow
he seemed to see them differently.
He did keep excellent records of his observations and he had the wisdom to enlist the help of
others in preserving the new breeds that he established.
In the lecture where we dealt with the establishment of standard breeds, I made a big point of
suggesting that it can be very helpful to a breeder to involve other practitioners with
the animal he is husbanding.
Bakewell may have been one of the first to actively employ this approach.
He very judiciously gave away and otherwise placed carefully selected livestock so as
to enlist the help of others in raising his prized animals, spreading the word about their
worth and interesting other farmers in owning the descendants of such attractive and useful
animals.
He even encouraged fairs and shows and focused public attention on the fruits of his work.
Once he observed a trait he liked, he would fix it through intense inbreeding yielding
a significant degree of homozygosity for the trait in question.
You'll recall from our previous lecture on that subject what that means.
If you obtain homozygosity, that means that for that trait all the sex cells that that
animal will make will have just that copy of the gene so the trait becomes fixed and
you can't get anything else into that position.
The fact that others were encouraged to become involved in aspects of his work is really not
to suggest that Bakewell was an open book, actually quite the contrary.
He was notoriously secretive about his actual breeding regiments and the approaches that
he used until he achieved the sort of package of traits, the breed that he wanted in an
animal and then he went out and sought the involvement of others.
So he kept things to himself, he practiced his things in secret and then once he got
the animal that he wanted and he fixed its traits then he enlisted the help of others
to go out and spread the word.
He seemed to appreciate more than any of his other contemporaries as I mentioned before
that acquired traits were not heritable.
Now it's not at all clear that he ever used terminology like that or that he ever really
articulated that principle but you can see that happening in his work.
For example, English farmers of that time wanted to have sheep that had fine wool.
British sheep generally didn't but they avoided importing fine Spanish merino sheep for years
because of the assumption that that would be a waste of their time and money since the
harsh English climate would cause merino wool to take on the more coarse qualities of the
fleeces of the English sheep of the day.
You see what's going on there?
The average English farmer was assuming that acquired traits could be inherited, that the
harsh British climate would cause the sheep to develop a more coarse coat and pass that
on to their offspring.
It appeared that Bakewell was sufficiently innovative that he could work in a way that
was out of step with his contemporaries but actually closer to the truth.
He seemed to be able to see through some of those things and got around them.
Some consider him I think quite appropriately the father of systematic selective breeding.
He was sufficiently prominent in his lifetime that King George requested private audiences
to discuss his philosophies on animal breeding.
Now if you stop and think about that, the King of England requesting a private meeting
with a farmer, sounds rather strange doesn't it, but that I think also helps to illustrate
how important agriculture and agricultural practices were to some of these world leaders.
Now across the Atlantic from Bakewell and King George was George Washington and Washington
knew of Bakewell's work and he was something of an admirer of Bakewell and the things that
Bakewell had been able to achieve.
He possessed copies of Bakewell's journals and I suspect but I can't prove it that he
may have found a way to acquire some of the sheep developed by Bakewell.
That may take just a little explaining.
Washington referred in his diaries that I've actually looked at and his journals to his
native sheep.
Now some historians have interpreted those passages to mean hog island sheep which were
known to live in the area at the time and in fact in the little petting zoo at Mount
Vernon there were hog island sheep there for people to look at in recent years.
But there's no real firm evidence that I know of that suggests that hog island sheep were
ever really there.
But I think there could be another explanation.
It may be that Washington never involved himself directly in bringing in sheep from England
but his neighbors very likely did.
If they did and bred them on American soil their offspring would be native sheep and
I suspect that that may be what Washington was referring to in his journals because he
was very interested in improved livestock and I can't imagine that he would want a lot
of hog island sheep which are not particularly improved on his property but some of those
nice dishly sheep of Bakewell's would have been attractive to him.
George Washington always thought of himself as a planter rather than a statesman and he
had great interest in improving his farming operation at Mount Vernon.
He was a very careful record keeper.
He may actually have been a little bit on the stingy side since he watched his expenditures
very very closely.
Again when you look at his journals you realize this was a man who knew the value of a penny
and he was very careful about how he used his pennies.
But he was also innovative and he as we know because of his role in the American Revolution
was clearly a man of action.
He designed, built and operated some truly progressive and thoughtful agricultural structures
the most notable of which was his threshing barn and replicas of that exist today at Mount
Vernon.
It's a barn in which you could put the grain that you wish to thresh on a deck that had
spaces between the boards and he would then simply bring cattle in and have them walk
over this and that would thresh the grain and it would fall below and be collected.
It was a very easy way to accomplish a very demanding task.
He may also have been America's first serious proponent of the practice of composting.
He was very interested in improving the quality of the soil at Mount Vernon and he thought
composting might be a good way and that he was miles ahead of his time and light years
ahead of his cotton planter neighbors.
We have good records indicating that he received a group of broad-tailed sheep as a gift from
the nation of Tunisia.
The sheep were unloaded in the port of Philadelphia which was the capital at that time.
Only Washington must have taken these sheep with him when he returned to Mount Vernon
after his second term as president because there are also very good records to indicate
that his stepson later took a flock of those sheep with him to the Lee Mansion in Arlington,
Virginia, where he was to marry the daughter of Light Horse Harry Lee, a Revolutionary
War hero.
So these people were well known to each other, they were planters with land and responsibilities.
I'm familiar with this story about the fat-tailed sheep in Philadelphia and Arlington because
I raised descendants of that flock on my own farm.
It gives me a sense of connectedness to American history that I can't help share with others.
It's also of interest to note that by the time of his death Washington had become the
largest whiskey distiller in America, growing the necessary grain for this enterprise on
his own fields, that's what do we see when we look at Washington.
We see him as a progressive, integrated farmer with improved livestock of several species
and breeds, a planter of a variety of crops, and a person with strong interests in agronomy
and soil improvement.
There really were few like him at that time, but he was surely a good role model for those
who would try to emulate his approach.
Thomas Jefferson, of course, was well acquainted with Washington and like Washington was a
slave holding Virginia planter.
Jefferson was an extremely clever and gifted person with remarkable talents in architecture,
linguistics and statecraft.
He of course remembered as a man of letters with strong interests and confidence in education
and he was a passionate supporter of a truly free press.
He held very different views from Washington on land use, however.
He was a cotton planter and cotton is notoriously hard on the soil.
He was fond of saying, and he actually said this, that it was cheaper to get a new acre
than manure an old one.
Can you imagine anything more different from what we just described with Washington?
In order to keep himself and his like-minded cotton planter class in prosperous business,
he needed to find a way to get new land to plant since the methods of the day quickly
wore out the land.
Now please note, here's another return to one of our continuing themes.
This is a sort of restating of an oft-repeated theme that we cover in this course.
If you want more agricultural products, your choices are more intense land use or more
land to use.
Jefferson's choice was to get more land for the nation.
We know about the Louisiana Purchase, the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
These are wonderful things.
They expanded America all the way to the Pacific Coast.
Nobody's arguing with that in any way, but I think it says something about his mindset.
The choice to keep acquiring more land and leaving behind despoiled land, moving ever
westward, required an army of soldiers followed by an army of slaves, leaving behind a growing
region of depleted and marginally fertile land.
A set of land use decisions that perpetrated this approach obviously contributed significantly
to the tensions that ultimately led to civil war.
This period of intellectual passion, however, changed the way agriculture was to be conducted
and moved out to the rest of the world via colonization and trade.
Agriculture was no longer solely the province of the rude and the unschooled, the rustic
farmer.
Rather, it would become progressively more systematic and scientific from this time onward.
The different approaches to land use illustrated by Washington and Jefferson's protocols
would ultimately come to have great societal impacts.
One can only wonder how history might have been different if Jefferson's attitudes towards
the land had been just a bit more like Washington's.
In Washington's lifetime, the Philadelphia Society for the Promoting of Agriculture was
founded as the first agricultural society in the Americas, and I bring this up for a
particular reason because, again, the membership of this organization was composed not necessarily
of people with dirt under their fingernails, but powerful and influential landholders and
serious and progressive agriculturalists.
This organization, actually the first agricultural society in any of the Americas, had great
influence on the direction of agriculture practice in early America, and Washington was its
first honorary member.
This organization did things like, for example, pressure the Pennsylvania legislature to
establish Pennsylvania State University because Pennsylvania wanted to be a state leading
in agriculture.
This organization pressured Abraham Lincoln to establish a Department of Agriculture,
a cabinet-level post.
This was a group that saw agriculture as an important component in the strength of America.
And I also bring it up because I was privileged to once serve as president of that organization,
and I'm happy to tell you it continues to flourish until this day.
Now, despite the quickening pace of progress in agricultural practice, there were still
many unsolved questions regarding science underlying domestication processes and the
improvement of domesticates.
In fact, it's truly surprising the amount of progress made in the absence of a clear
understanding of what was going on in science.
In fact, there was really a great deal of misinformation in existence.
The biological mechanisms underlying the fundamental processes of breeding animals and selecting
improved types, the biology just wasn't there.
In the next lecture, we will discuss the elucidation of some of those biological mechanisms
and the groundbreaking work of Charles Darwin and Francis Galton and Gregor Mendel.
But I would like you to keep in mind, again, what is really happening at this point.
We need to trace back over the sweep or the arc of this course, and we need to add one
more concept.
And it's one that's familiar to everyone.
And that is the understanding that necessity is the mother of invention.
The first domesticates may have in fact been brought into domestication because of necessity.
And as populations grew because of this positive feedback loop, more mouths, more food means
more mouths, means more need for food, as that happened, there were necessities for
figuring out how to bring more creatures under domestication and also to manage their genetics
and manage their husbandry and manage their cultivations in ways that would meet the demands.
So there were ever growing demands, increasing necessities that had to be met.
And we had a kind of a change in that continuum with the Columbian exchange when suddenly
there was a new world and there were new crops and there was a vast amount of new land.
There was a little bit of maybe taking eyes off the ball because there were new opportunities.
But immediately populations began to grow and as we pointed out, something else began
to happen.
As governments took a different attitude toward their citizens and citizens began to have
a voice, they began to demand things from the system.
So not only were there more people, but the people that existed were demanding more.
And so this system that had brought us from hunting and gathering to the age of reason
and the colonial period sat at the center of the question, where will we go from here?
And what was clearly needed was a scientific underpinning to put this enterprise on solid
footing and not just sort of keep pace with the ever increasing necessities, the ever
increasing demands of society, but to actually open the door and present to us new opportunities,
some of the kinds of new opportunities that we'll be talking about in later lectures in
this course.
But next time it will be Darwin, Galton and Mendel.
We'll see you then.
