Welcome.
This course has focused on the remarkable abilities of human beings to bring a number
of key plants and animals under domestication, and then by so doing set the stage for the
establishment of civilization.
As the size of the human population grew, civilization became more complex, and people
became increasingly dependent on their domesticates for support.
The sophistication with which we approached the management of our key domesticates had
to keep pace.
The achievements of breeders and stewards did continue to improve key species with regard
to a number of important traits.
Such achievements were made even more impressive given that the practitioners involved had
no understanding at all of the biological systems underlying their activities.
The work of Galton, Darwin, and Mendel, that will be covered in this lecture, placed the
study of domestication processes on a scientific footing, established natural selection as the
driving force behind evolution, and worked out the basic tenets of the genetic process
for all plants and animals.
When the groundbreaking work of these three individuals is applied to the study of the
plant and animal domesticates that have been the focus of this course to this point, it
strongly underscores the point that much practical progress could be made in domestication and
improvement of the resulting domesticates without much of a grasp of the biology underlying
the process, since it really wasn't until the work of these three men in the middle
of the 19th century that any solid explanations were available, yet vital progress had been
made for millennia up to that point.
Now, the extended family of Charles Darwin produced some of the most remarkably accomplished
thinkers of the 19th century.
His grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, was truly a man of the age of reason.
He was a physician, a poet, a philosopher, a botanist, and a naturalist.
He consorted with other leading thinkers of the time, men like James Watt, who made
the steam engine into a practical device that, of course, powered all sorts of machinery
of that era.
And Joseph Priestley, who was, of course, a free thinker, a man of the cloth, a clergyman
who was ultimately driven out of England for his religious thoughts, but he made extremely
important contributions to the world of chemistry and biology.
He was one of the discoverers of oxygen, and he helped work out the role of oxygen in photosynthesis
and in respiration.
And then also, of course, Josiah Wedgwood, who was a businessman in a sense of a very
practical sort of scientific engineering type person who was in the pottery business.
So he clearly had ideas, and some of his ideas dealt with evolution.
And that was known to his grandson Charles through his writings and journals.
He actually went farther than Charles Darwin in one area, and that is the area of prebiotic
evolution.
One of his poems, Erasmus Darwin, actually essentially described life coming out of the
non-living components of the sea.
That was really radical thinking for his day, OK?
Erasmus' ideas on evolution were shaped, at least in part, by his observation of domesticated
animals and plants.
Charles Darwin, of course, is best known for his monumental work on evolution and natural
selection.
And like so many of these people we talk about, he really was a very careful and keen observer
of nature.
He could look at the same thing that other people looked at and simply see it in more
detail and see it more clearly and fit it into context better than many of his contemporaries.
And like his grandfather before him, he had interests in and had observed carefully domesticated
animals and plants.
He actually wrote a long scholarly tome on the subject titled Variation of Animals and
Plants Under Domestication.
Through his work on natural selection, he gave modern science the major tool it needed
to understand how these proto-domesticates that we've talked about on several occasions,
the plants that sort of moved partway toward human beings who were sort of inadvertently
beginning to domesticate them, or things like proto-dog which moved toward our early ancestors
and sort of began to bridge the gap between wolves and man without much human involvement
at that point.
So that natural selection helped us understand how these proto-domesticates came into being
and provided some insight as well into the artificial selection that was then used to
refine these creatures once they were domesticated.
Francis Goulton was also Erasmus Darwin's grandson.
He's Charles Darwin's second cousin.
So you've got Erasmus Darwin the grandfather, two illustrious grandsons, Charles and Goulton,
and that's a pretty good group if you look at it that way.
The Goulton's enjoyed significant economic success which helped support Francis's wide
range of interests.
Francis Goulton made a serious study of the process of animal domestication.
He laid down a set of requirements that he felt would likely need to be met if an animal
was to be successfully domesticated.
Now remember we struggled a little bit with that point earlier in the course, but let's
look at the points that Francis Goulton laid down.
He said the animal should be hardy and not difficult to care for.
Secondly, he said that it should be perceived as having some utility to the domesticator.
Well of course you wouldn't bother to domesticate an animal if you didn't think there was some
or plant if there wasn't some utility to the process.
It should be if the domestic should be reasonably tolerant to the presence of man and be able
to actively reproduce around human beings.
This is a wonderful one, again in the Victorian language of the time.
It should be a comfort loving animal, meaning that it should be very fond of a place to
gain shelter, to have food and to have water and thus it would not be inclined to escape.
It would not be a good domestic if you were all the time trying to keep it fenced in.
He also noted to the surprise of some that only a small percentage of the animals in
the world would fit all of his criteria and thus only a small percentage would be likely
domesticates.
His list fits rather well with the criteria we've been using in this course to define
domesticates, don't you think?
And he also made that observation that we tried to make earlier and that is that domestication
isn't something we can just do.
The animal has to be the right kind of animal, it has to have the right properties, it has
to meet us part way, the same is true with plants.
So there was a little bit of chauvinism I think in the minds of some human beings who
figured if I want to domesticate something I'll domesticate it.
You might be able to tame it, you might be able to make a work partner of it, but domestication,
the ability to form a domesticate lies in large part with the domesticate as well as
the domesticator.
An intellectual really then of the first order, Galton, was a genuine polymath with significant
contributions in psychometrics, forensics, anthropology, genetics, and zoology.
And he's known to this day for coming up with some interesting terms such as eugenics,
and he coined the phrase nature and nurture.
Charles Darwin, of course the author of On the Origin of Species, of course is remembered
for his contribution of natural selection as the engine that drives evolution.
That observation and the insights that can be drawn from it has provided the organizing
principle, it really is the principle around which all modern biology operates.
That was one of the problems with studying biology before Darwin because people were
sort of overwhelmed with the diversity of biology, there were so many plants and so
many animals and so much to see, and Darwin gave us this organizing principle around which
this diversity could be explained and also how the unity in biology could be explained.
So it was an earth-shattering observation from the point of view of professional biologists.
You may recall that we referred to that natural selection approach and employed it in our
early lecture when we were discussing the genetic variation that exists in all natural
populations and how that variation causes those populations to adapt to alterations
in the environment in such way that the individuals with the genetic makeup best fit to the environment
soon predominate.
Like the men we discussed in the last lecture, Darwin was a man of resources and social standing.
At the time there was a strong general suspicion that nature really didn't quite work like
the Genesis story said and that species were not immutable but did change over time.
Le Mouvier and Le Marc had already each published on evolution and Erasmus Darwin as we mentioned
before had written poetry and essays about it and there were others.
But what was missing was a mechanism to explain how it took place.
Evolution driven by natural selection was Charles Darwin's great transformative and
lasting contribution to biology and to our understanding of our place in the universe.
What we now call evolution Darwin referred to as descent with modification.
Again, this issue of the things not being immutable was not a new idea.
Darwin himself was also influenced by one of his professors Lyle at university who talked
about the mutability of landforms, how rivers and mountains were shaped by nature's forces
over time.
Darwin worked for many years on his theory, hinting at parts of it to his close colleagues.
But he was ultimately forced before he really wanted to, he was forced to publish his thoughts
and observations because Alfred Wallace, a young man who had a reputation nothing like
Darwin's.
He simply wasn't as well connected as well known.
He was younger but he was about to publish a very similar study with a very similar theory.
And Darwin was forced to publish.
The rest of the story of course is quite well known to all.
Which has been so controversial and stirred so much passion for over 150 years is based
on a few very straightforward and in themselves non controversial observations and a few relatively
simple and easy to accept assumptions.
Let me go over those and when we look at it in that way, think in your own mind, why is
this so difficult for people to accept and deal with?
The first fact, all populations contain variability.
We've been saying that throughout this course and it is a provable phenomenon.
You can go out and look at a population of plants or animals and if you look closely
enough, you will find that they are not all identical.
There will be variation in the population.
So now let's make an assumption.
Doesn't seem to me like a terribly wild assumption to say some of that variability must be heritable.
If you want to make things easy on yourself, think about human beings, okay?
We make fairly good models in this, okay?
There's variability in the human population and we know some of that variability is likely
inherited.
Another fact, all creatures have excess reproductive capacities.
Now I don't mean that that's all individual creatures.
I'm talking about populations of species.
So if you take a group of animals at the species level or at the population level, they virtually
all have excess capacity for reproduction.
Again, not a new idea in this course.
When we talked about carrying capacity early on and we talked about biotic potential, the
pushing up of the population numbers, that was based on the concept that was excess reproductive
capacity.
So let's make another assumption.
Mating and reproduction are not random.
That is, not all creatures have the same opportunity or likelihood to reproduce and essentially
put their genes in the next generation.
Now that takes a little bit more thinking, but it doesn't seem unreasonable, does it?
That there are some individuals who will attract mates better, who will find better opportunities
to mate, who will live long enough to mate, who will live long enough to care for young
or whatever, that there's an assumption that it's not just willy-nilly, but that in fact
some things are more likely to successfully reproduce than others based on that variability
and the fact that it's inherited and the fact that that could give them some advantages
or disadvantages in mating.
Over time, the makeup of the population will change in such way that the creatures with
the genetic makeup best suited to the conditions will predominate.
That's it.
That's the theory of evolution or natural selection leading to evolution.
Had Darwin not included the chapter on the descent of man, very likely his work would
have only caused a stir among the scientific and intellectual class of his day and much
of the controversy that has attended his great work would never have occurred.
I don't see people protesting against Lamarck or protesting against Cluvier or even Darwin's
grandfather, but it was that chapter that sort of, if you will, brought down the house.
Galton was fascinated and impressed by his second cousin's origin of species.
Much of Galton's later scientific work derived from the interest he developed as a result
of reading that work and discussing aspects of it with its author.
Though Galton admired and respected Darwin and his work, he was not convinced that Darwin
had the proper understanding of genetics that he needed to support natural selection.
Darwin himself was quick to admit that genetics was not his strong suit, but he did cling
to a concept known as pangenesis to explain his results and observations.
Pangenesis put quite simply, and it was never terribly well defined at this early stage,
but it was based on the concept that there were things called pangenes that somehow circulated
in the fluids that perfused the bodies of either plants or animals, and that somehow
they contained the hereditary information that it was distributed to the various parts
of the body, plant or animal.
Galton actually undertook a series of experiments.
He did a serious study on pangenesis and using rabbits, he was able to essentially disprove
that theory.
But it's interesting to note that as much as people like to talk about Darwin, he stubbornly
held on to the pangenesis view for the rest of his life.
The missing key then to Darwinian explanation of the origin of species through natural selection
was a useful understanding of the genetic mechanisms required.
It's very clear that Darwin was on the wrong track with pangenesis, but there was no better
theory in existence at the time of his great work.
Cat would later be supplied from an unlikely source in an unlikely place.
By this point in the mid 19th century, plant and animal breeding had progressed to the
point that there were many useful and greatly improved breeds and varieties available to
agriculturalists.
The dog, cat, chicken and pigeon fancies, that is, shows for fanciers of various kinds
of dogs, cats, chickens and pigeons were in existence and flourishing in a number of countries.
It could be fairly said that the breeding of plants and animals had become a highly
refined art form.
If you ever go to a pigeon show, if you've not seen one before, you will be dazzled.
There's a huge array of different forms of pigeons, different colors, different plumage,
they act differently, and it's all because people have stretched out that gene pool to
make these different kinds, but that didn't mean they had to understand the scientific
underpinnings in order to get those rather remarkable results.
So Darwin and Galton were making great progress in explaining how natural and artificial selection
helped shape and refine domesticates through observations on natural and artificial selection.
There was still no truly good model for how the hereditary part of the process operated.
There wasn't any shortage of hypotheses, but we now know they were all totally incorrect.
And as we sort of hinted before, the red herring that was misleading the field was the assumption
that the determinants of heredity had to be fluid.
After all, didn't breeders often see what appeared to be a blending of parental traits
in offspring?
Wasn't it well known that the insides of both plants and animals were perfused with fluids
that could be carrying hereditary determinants?
That was a persistent problem, and it didn't go away easily.
In fact, even today, how often do we hear reference to the bloodline of a given animal,
which is a throwback to this old and now thoroughly discredited idea?
The breakthrough in understanding came from an unexpected place, as I mentioned before.
Johann Mendel was born in a little backwater in a quiet corner of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire, which is now part of the Czech Republic.
It was near the city of Bruno.
As a young man, he worked as a bookkeeper and as a gardener before he went off to university.
It's interesting because these early experiences may have really helped prepare him for his
later groundbreaking work.
Upon joining the Augustinian Order, he took the name Gregor, by which he, of course, is
known to history.
Shortly after moving to a monastery near Bruno, he began his experiments on heredity
using, of all things, garden peas.
At university, Mendel had the opportunity to study with Doppler, a name that we're all
familiar with.
We all know what the Doppler effect.
That renowned physicist was one of his instructors, and from Doppler, he may have learned the
importance of obviously making many observations, keeping meticulous records of those observations.
But here's the important part, and then using mathematics and statistics to analyze the
results.
Between 1856 and 1863, Mendel performed controlled multi-generational crosses among 29,000 peas.
It turned out to be just a wonderful system for attacking this problem of how genetics
works.
Why is that?
Why was this such a good system?
Well, peas were easy to grow, and they took up little space.
Pea seeds stored very well from season to season, so there was no problem in doing that.
You could keep your work going, and you could keep good records and keep your peas separate
and all that sort of thing.
Mind your peas and cues, if you will.
Pea plants can do two kinds of sexual reproduction.
They can self, or they can outcross.
Let me take a second just to talk about that, because that's very important.
Pea plants have both the male and the female organs in the flower.
Both are relatively prominent and fairly easy for a researcher to get at.
A pea plant can fertilize itself, produce seeds as a result of that fertilization, and produce
essentially sexual offspring by sex, the next generation of peas, by simply mating with
itself.
It's also possible to force them to outcross by cutting off the male parts and throwing
them away and then taking the pollen from another plant and dabbing it on the female
part.
So he had a great system there.
Mendel also had a number of strains at his disposal that bred true for a number of traits
that were rather easy to score.
From his work, Mendel developed his laws of heredity, that is the law of segregation
and the law of independent assortment.
These are not really laws in the way that physics laws are laws, but that was what they
were called.
Segregation suggested that each inherited trait was based on two particulate entities,
out fluids, particles, and not just any two particles.
Every trait was based on two particulate entities, one which you got from your mother
and one which you got from your father at the moment of conception.
These traits did not mix, but became segregated, the law of segregation, from each other when
the organism made sex cells.
We'll use those ploid words again.
You're a diploid, you've got one particulate trait, one particulate component for a trait
from mom, one particulate component for a trait from dad, you're diploid, you make haploid
sex cells, and those two determinants segregate from each other.
And so that's how those traits essentially move into sex cells, segregate, and the next
law is they can be independently assorted.
You will get a whole bunch of traits from your mother and a whole bunch of traits from
your father and they will be mixed in you, but when you make sex cells, these traits
will independently assort.
You will pass on to your own offspring some material you got from your mother and some
material you got from your father.
The radical conclusion that had to be drawn from this work was that the determinants of
heredity were not fluid, but acted as discrete particles.
We now know them as genes, but of course Mendel never used that term.
In recent times, Mendel's data have actually been questioned because his results appear
to be just too good, even when taking into account the law of large numbers.
It is also true that Mendel's work attracted little attention and had little impact in
his lifetime.
But upon rediscovery, some years after his death, the scientific community began to
appreciate the marvelous contributions he had made.
That set of experiments set modern genetic science on a most productive path, which
will occupy a significant part of our time in the rest of this course.
Interestingly, Mendel tried to do the same sort of work with bees in an attempt to study
heredity in animals.
He knew he'd really gotten something with the plants.
He wanted to see if he could carry it over into animals.
The work was a total failure.
The contrast between this work and his work on bees points up the importance of having
the right experimental system in order to answer the fundamental question.
The system that poor Mendel tried to use to answer the question about heredity in animals
was honey bees, and it was just hopeless.
The system could not have been less well adapted to what he was trying to do.
And so here you have one experimenter asking a fundamental question.
He has great success in one case, total failure in the other, and what's the difference?
The experimental system.
That's what really often determines whether you get the answer or not, is how you choose
the system.
After the failure of the bee work, poor Mendel was promoted.
He became the abbot of the monastery.
And after that promotion to an administrative post, his research career was over, and I
think there are probably some young researchers in this audience that will certainly empathize
with Mendel's situation in that instance.
Much of the rest of this course will deal with practical application of Mendelism to
the breeding of plants and animals.
Though genetics is now practiced effectively at the molecular level, that degree of sophistication
would not have been attainable without Mendel's careful observation and analysis of what was
happening in that monastery garden.
In our next lecture, we will take a look at the lives and the work of some notable plant
breeders and geneticists that were the beneficiaries, the inheritors of the work of Darwin, Galton,
and Mendel.
We will see you for that lecture.
