Welcome to this, the final lecture in our course.
In the previous lectures, we've moved with alacrity
from the first domestication of events
of approximately 10,000 years ago to the present,
and we are now poised to look forward into the uncharted future.
A men have been trying to do this for millennia with little success,
for we have learned that the past is an imperfect predictor of the future.
But we have also learned that failure to learn from mistakes of the past
dooms us to repeat them.
Recapping those lectures, we've covered our progress
from the earliest domestications of convenience,
of bottle gourds and dogs,
to domestications of crops and livestock
that provided sustenance for human beings.
We saw how that fundamentally changed the way people oriented to nature
and to each other, and the way that brought about profound changes
in social structures and life ways.
We saw it lead to population increases, changes in reproductive patterns,
dietary changes, settled communities, the sedentary way of life,
the development of civilization,
the alteration of some aspects of the human phenotype,
and always, always with an ever-increasing dependence
upon an array of plant and animal domesticates,
which provide now not only food, fiber, muscle power and companionship,
but also are playing ever more prominent roles
in improving the quality and extending the length of human life.
We've also touched on the impacts that our success as domesticators has had,
is having, and will continue to have, on the environment and the climate.
As a species, we can claim great achievements in our mastery
over some aspects of nature in order to produce more food in less space
at lower cost and with less human labor
than could have been imagined by our hunter-gatherer forebearers.
We have learned to control the genetics, the nutrition,
the maintenance and behavior of many of our domesticates
to the point that they are more like parts of a food or medicine-producing machine
than they are like free-living, integral parts of the natural world.
Along the way in this course, we have dealt with several recurring themes
that are appropriate to revisit at this moment, at the end of this course.
We pointed out that domestication is a two-way street
with the domesticates providing some pre-adaptation to or predilection toward domestication.
Domestication has not been as much exploitation as it has been partnership.
It has generally been a kind of mutualistic symbiosis
with both partners benefiting to some extent.
That's a point we've made many times.
Domestication of plants and animals was essential to the development
of the agricultural way of food production,
which led to the formation of settled communities
and that set the stage for the advent of civilization.
This new food-producing way of life led to a food population nexus
that is essentially a positive feedback loop.
Now, positive feedbacks do not lead to balanced or steady states,
but rather to accelerating explosive changes in conditions.
We also stressed that in order to get more food out of an agricultural system,
there are only two basic approaches.
Use the land more efficiently and intensely or use more of it.
Also, we noted that as civilization became more complex and interdependent,
domesticates began to play increasingly important roles
in providing non-essentials or luxuries
which significantly improve the quality of human life.
Through our technology, we have managed to elevate the carrying capacity
of the environment for our species and also for our domesticates,
far beyond what it would have been without such technical intervention.
So throughout the past 10,000 years,
humans and their domesticates have become ever more codependent.
This leads to the present irony where our generation, right now,
our generation probably depends more on domesticates
than any generation that has come before it.
Yet at the same time, we may be more removed from day-to-day contact
with these plants, animals and microbes than any generation that has gone before.
It's an interesting irony.
Taken together, that collection of frequently repeated points
helps us understand how we got to this place.
They also provide some insight into several of the major problems
facing our species during this current generation.
I like to think that they do suggest that the transformation
from a food procurement lifestyle to one of food production
is indeed akin to taking a bite of the fruit
from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
As much as any single thing,
that change in our way of life began our ascent to the place as the world's dominant species.
At the very same time, it sowed the seeds of several problems
that could prove to be our ultimate undoing.
So the big question emanating from this course is,
can these observations, derived from our past experiences as food producers,
give us useful information that might illuminate some of our present challenges
and help us set an intelligent course
as we face some of the greatest challenges our species has encountered
since the end of the last Ice Age?
Let's start that discussion by looking at each of those off-repeated points
and see how they have affected our present situation
and what we can predict about them going forward.
Many of our plant and animal domesticates
had to undergo significant pre-adaptation
before self-aware human intervention completed the process of domestication.
From a number of the previous lectures, it should be manifestly clear
that without some of these creatures meeting us at least halfway on the road to domestication,
they would not likely have ever been domesticated.
A corollary to this point is that human beings do not have the ability to domesticate all creatures.
Some can and have resisted our efforts to do so.
So looking ahead, how likely is it that we will see large numbers of new domesticates
partnering with us for mutual benefit?
I think one area where we are likely to see continued progress in that area
is in the farming of the waters.
As we pointed out in earlier lectures,
most true agriculture was done in terrestrial environments.
But our expanding population and our efficiency in fishing
has depleted many of our natural fisheries.
It's a parallel to what we saw as populations on the land began to outgrow their food sources.
As a consequence, we are seeing expanding efforts to farm the waters as we once farmed the land.
It should not surprise us then
that we are seeing new aquatic domesticates coming on the scene.
We have domesticated salmon and catfish, shrimp and a variety of shellfish.
In the summer of 2009, there are reports of farmed partially domesticated bluefin tuna.
It seems reasonable to predict that we will follow much the same path
in aquatic farming that we did in terrestrial farming.
And more and more species that we once fished or gathered will now be farmed.
Since some of these domesticates seem less desirable as food sources than their wild progenitors,
for example domestic salmon and some farm-raised shrimp,
we should show great care not to repeat some of our earlier practices
in which the wild ancestors, as some of our domestic plants and animals such as the horse,
were driven to extinction.
Please remember, our earlier mentioned concerns about farmed domesticated salmon
threatening wild populations of that fish.
I also frequently made the point that domestication should ideally more closely resemble
a mutualistic symbiosis, that is mutually beneficial symbiosis than exploitation.
I think that has certainly been the case in a number of instances.
We have good examples. One would be sheep or chickens or corn
and other plants and animals that have gained greatly in number and distribution
simply as a result of entering into a relationship with man.
However, throughout the history of our relationship with domesticated animals,
there have been instances of gratuitous cruelty and abuse of domesticates.
Though number and distribution may have improved,
we are all too aware of individual animals that were overworked, starved and abused
in a variety of ways that would certainly border on exploitation.
My fear for the future is that this tendency may be on the rise.
For economic and political reasons, there is a tendency to treat animals
as cogs in a meat or egg machine.
Concentrated animal feeding operations, feeding facilities often containing
as many individual animals as there are people in a major metropolis,
are becoming the norm and produced the bulk of the beef, pork, chicken, turkey and eggs
consumed in this country.
Though in many cases, consideration is given to the health and welfare of animals in these CAFOs,
all too often they are simply crowded, foul-smelling dark places where animals are rapidly fattened
without ever getting the chance to live a reasonably normal life.
And now I've got to be just a little careful here because I've put us on a slippery slope.
I've talked about what is a normal life.
And after all, a domestic animal isn't exactly a wild animal.
And is it living a normal life? I don't know.
And there may be a continuum between being truly wild and being totally penned up.
It is a kind of slippery slope, but I think we all know what we mean when we see an animal
penned up, never touching the ground, never seeing the sun.
It seems to me that is not living a normal life in anybody's view.
So one cannot argue against the fact that these operations provide a level of efficiency
that continues to provide meat and eggs at very reasonable prices on relatively little land.
There are of course concerns about environmental impacts, indirect costs born by the community
rather than the producer, animal welfare, and product quality and safety.
As we become more separated from our livestock domesticates,
we have a tendency to either romanticize or commoditize them.
Films such as Charlotte's Web and Babe give animals human personalities and the power of speech.
One wonders if such fanciful and romantic material, fun as it is,
gives some people an unrealistic and skewed view of the real situation.
One result could be the rise of groups devoted to animal rights
that sometimes adopt very extreme and violent measures aimed at hurting people.
On the other hand, it's also very true that a major portion of the cattle, sheep,
swine, and poultry now grown for food are in fact commoditized
in a way that if not out and out cruel, it is at least exploitive.
Have we then come to a point where the long-standing partnership with our domesticates
and the sort of respect it engendered in people for their livestock is in danger?
This is an issue that is coming to the fore and will have to be resolved.
There are those at one extreme who would do away with all animal agriculture
and others on the other end of the spectrum who would debase and abuse animals
in the name of efficiency, price, advantage, and profit.
As our dependence on domesticates continues to grow,
this is one issue that will need to be resolved in the near future.
I truly believe that a more nuanced understanding of our long relationship
with a number of domesticates based on real observation
and subjected to rational assessment will be essential to finding the proper path forward in this area.
Early in this course, we emphasized the fact that domestication of plants and animals
and agricultural food production were essential if not sufficient to the advent of civilization.
What should have been obvious from that observation is that should contributions from our domesticates suddenly stop,
civilization would almost certainly and instantly collapse.
The highly integrated global food system that is emerging is possibly the ultimate just-in-time inventory system.
It has been estimated that if all agricultural food production suddenly just stopped
and food was distributed equitably, and I mean equitably among all living people,
the world has only a few days of stored food reserves.
And of course, equitable is the key word in that previous sentence.
It becomes meaningless if we don't talk about equitable distribution
because we know some people, some individuals, probably have years of food stored up.
But if what is in the planet was spread equally just a day or two,
if you find that hard to accept, then just take a look at the shelves of your local supermarket
about five hours after some sort of major storm or other natural disaster is predicted.
Just remember what those look like.
And remember that that level of food panic is occurring in one of the richest
and most food abundant countries in the world.
I can't emphasize too much that in a world where we are easily worked up
over periodic shortages and energy resources
and where we tend to become preoccupied with our needs for information,
transportation, employment, and entertainment, food is an absolutely inelastic commodity.
If you don't eat, you die.
We now have an enormous world population dependent on a global food system
so that most of these billions of people do not produce, hunt, or gather
a significant portion of their own food essentials.
Our advanced civilization requires a level of efficiency in food production
that removes most of the population from the points of food production.
That may be fine, but we should go that way with our eyes wide open.
There is much debate in discussion concerning the concept of growing and eating local.
Such practices would add a level of food security for sure,
but it might also restrict variety.
In fact, it certainly would restrict variety, particularly of off-season products.
Remember our discussion of storage crops earlier in this course.
And some level of efficiency is almost certain to be lost if we did that.
Thus raising the price, if not the ultimate cost, of the food we consume.
And we will talk more about that later.
Now in much of this course, we dealt with issues emerging from the food population nexus.
By becoming food producers instead of food procurers, we changed this fundamental relationship.
In the world of animals and hunting gathering people, if the population increases
to the point that food becomes limiting, that factor tends to lower the size of the population.
That of course is the result of another, of our often repeated points,
the carrying capacity of the environment for a given organism.
However, and I can't overemphasize this, when we became food producers,
we altered the situation and also the carrying capacity.
By producing, we began to exert more control over nature than we had before.
The need for that control goes up when the population increases
in response to settled conditions and a steady food supply.
More people means producing more food.
More food results in still more people, which in turn causes the need to produce more food.
This is a classic positive feedback loop.
Maintenance of carrying capacity is dependent on a series of negative feedbacks.
Not enough food population drops.
Not enough individuals consuming food, food supplies increase, etc.
Negative feedbacks are essentially self-regulating and tend to maintain conditions around some set point.
Positive feedbacks are essentially explosive runaway systems that usually culminate
in some sort of abrupt change in conditions.
Remember that when the carrying capacity is exceeded, that is, can no longer regulate itself,
the result is often catastrophic.
Thus, by making the change in life way that opened the door to civilization
and our long story of success and our rise to the level of the dominant species on the planet,
we also set ourselves on a course that may simply not be sustainable.
Fortunately, along with civilization came the ability to mobilize technical solutions to pressing problems.
We have also developed remarkable communication capacities
and it is becoming clear that it is possible to focus some of the best minds in the world on a single problem in real time.
That outcome of civilization may be its ultimate salvation.
However, we must keep in mind that the problem of explosive population growth
has its roots in our ancient past in the Neolithic.
Technology can accomplish marvelous things, but we need to be mindful of the origins of the magnitude of the problems
posed by the population food nexus and the impact that it can have on the carrying capacity for our species on this planet.
Throughout this course, we have emphasized the point that agricultural people have only two ways to increase food production.
These use their land more intensely and efficiently or use more of it.
We have recently begun to farm the waters, which in a way is like using more land,
since it is a new place in which to practice food production.
But be that as it may, we still have only those two options for increasing food production.
At present, it appears that the current agricultural food production system
is adequate to produce enough food to nourish the current world population.
That may come as a surprise because it is well known that starvation, malnutrition and food insecurity are realities in the world today.
However, much of that results from poverty, political and religious conflict, infrastructure problems and natural disasters.
At the moment at least, the problem seems to be one more of distribution than of production.
In effect, that is an achievement that should not be lost sight of or trivialized.
That's quite something to be proud of.
Modern agricultural practices can and do produce enough food to feed approximately 6.5 billion people.
Such an achievement is the result of the contributions of generations of men and women
dedicated to improving practices of production and thus using the land more intensely and effectively.
But don't forget that pesky food population nexus.
We know the world population is continuing to expand at an explosive pace.
Can any system of production, even one as technically sophisticated as our present system, hope to keep up?
We know the consequences if it doesn't.
There is that looming problem of the carrying capacity and we don't want to have to cope with the consequences of exceeding it.
What of the other costs for using the available land more intensely?
We're told that the current system produces food abundantly and cheaply.
It is undeniably true that in America and other developed nations, food is generally readily available to most of the population
and food takes a smaller and smaller percentage of the average person's paycheck each year.
That's a good thing.
Those are no small accomplishments and should not be forgotten.
But we are counting the actual cost of producing food in this way, are we?
There are social, infrastructural and environmental costs that probably should be factored into the equation
when considering the cost of cheap food.
This issue will gain more attention in the years ahead as we struggle with questions of the sustainability of our current system.
During those discussions, I think it would be important and possibly salutary if the participants had a better grasp
of the origins of the problems and appreciated that they are not something that started with hybrid seed corn or factory farms
but rather have their origins in our distant past.
Yes, I keep thinking about the fruit from that tree with the funny name.
We have bitten the apple and here we are.
As our course progressed, we began to note that domesticates increasingly provided people with more than food.
Luxury goods and medicines, items that improve the quality and the length of human life
are also derived from domesticated plants and animals and microbes.
When one takes that into consideration, along with the contributions made to the food production system,
I think it becomes clear that we are more codependent with our domesticates today than at any time in our history.
We sometimes forget that point because in our technologically advanced existence,
most of us are removed quite effectively from our domesticates with the possible exception
of our companion animals, our decorative plants and a few garden items that at best add variety to our diets
but do not provide the bulk of our nutrition.
Codependence is now truly the word.
I think I've made the point strongly enough about our dependence on our domesticates
but over time we have altered our domesticates to the extent that many of them cannot survive without significant human contribution.
A couple examples, those broad-breasted turkeys that can't mate without our help and field corn,
those wonderful hybrid corns that without us looking after them would soon be gone.
It is probably not hubris for people to take pride in the accomplishments of civilization.
Our global community has spread across the continents and we are truly the dominant species on the planet.
We occupy a vast array of habitats and our numbers and our impact continue to grow.
However, it is probably worth noting that as you fly over the country at a great altitude, you don't see people.
You can deduce the presence of people, however, by observing the neat geometric patterns of fields, pastures and feedlots.
In effect, it is our domesticates, not us, that are apparent from such heights.
Clearly, we, man and his domesticates, have come a long way together.
Though it is true, those fields and pastures and the organisms in them would not be there without us.
We would be wise to keep in mind that without them, we would not be here either in our little airplane surveying all that lies below.
So what does the future hold for Homo sapiens sapiens?
That most intelligent of all creatures, the one with dominion over all the rest?
It can be a bit sobering, if not downright terrifying, to try to make a straight line extrapolation from the past to the present and then into the future.
Our genius has led us to this point where the good and the evil that emerged from our transformation into the only animal
engaged in food production on a grand scale appear to be on a collision course.
We have shown no ability to curb our explosive population growth.
We are increasingly degrading the natural world around us as we try to exert ever more control over nature to feed that population.
And the threat of catastrophic consequences attended upon exceeding the carrying capacity once and for all seems just around the corner.
But ours is a resilient species.
We need to keep in mind how perilous life was for our neolithic forebearers.
They too faced population pressures as the ice sheets receded.
They got busy and solved their problems.
They set us on this course and as a result, we have benefited and achieved greatly.
We have some advantages too as we face our problems that those ancient ancestors did not have.
Through our technology, we have improved communication to the extent that we can have a global conversation concerning the problems that face us.
We can already see people from around the world engaging to head off and resolve some of the most immediately pressing problems.
In corporate boardrooms, college campuses, the halls of power, and on small family farms,
we see an increasing emphasis on sustainability in agriculture and food production.
That word was barely used in the agricultural context just 15 years ago.
But a few pioneers led the way and now what was once a fringe movement is showing signs of becoming a mainstream trend.
People are beginning to ask serious questions about the sources of their food
and they are bringing pressure to bear on producers to stick by the principles of the unspoken covenant that has existed between us and our domesticates.
Though I think it may be futile to try to predict in specific terms what the future may hold for us,
I am continually encouraged by what I see taking place around me.
People are becoming aware of the critical issues involving food and the role our domesticates play in providing it for us.
Sustainability is now the issue being considered by many.
Though the arguments may at times be shrill and passions may become inflamed,
the point to remember is that this issue is now at the front of the minds of many.
I even take heart from knowing that you and others like you care enough about this issue to work through these 24 lectures.
I hope what we have covered has given you the backstory, the context that you need to be an informed contributor to the discussion that will likely determine the fate of our species.
