Lecture 2 – Jules Verne and the Popular Passion for Science
In the last lecture, we were talking about Frankenstein, by Mary Shelley, being the first
true science fiction novel. It was a novel about the breakdown of community, although
the particular breakdown of community that was a question arose through an overweening
desire for power, the pursuit of knowledge. Although Frankenstein is clearly a fiction
of warning, science fiction is usually associated with a love of science. In fact, the first
science fiction editors with the first science fiction magazines in the 20th century felt
that science fiction had a mission to create people who loved science and wanted to grow
up to become scientists. So, what I would like to discuss now is the role of the popular
passion for science in the evolution of science fiction. And the first person we need to look
at in that regard is Edgar Allan Poe, although perhaps the person most well associated with
the popular passion for science in the evolution of the field is Jules Verne, whom we will
talk about as well, and then some more modern followers thereof. Poe was usually thought
of as kind of a crazy guy. He is often thought to have been an alcoholic, he is famous for
having married his 13 year old cousin. Generally, he is best known as the creator of horror
stories which were turned into bad movies produced by the Hammer Organization and starring
Vincent Price. But Poe, in fact, is one of the great, great writers of the United States
and as with other great writers of the United States, was not recognized as much here as
he was abroad. The French, who I know are often criticized for their love of Jerry Lewis,
also love Edgar Allan Poe, perhaps in part because his poetry was so brilliantly translated
by Chalbot de Léon. Now, Poe in translation was an enormous influence on the French and
we can see his work in that of Jules Verne. Poe tried to write a novel or, if you look
at it another way, Poe did write one extraordinary modern novel. Why can we say two different
things about the same work? The work is called the Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym and it
is a voyage of exploration. The title character, Arthur Gordon Pym, runs away from home, goes
on the ship as a stowaway, is eventually discovered, the ship gets attacked, he gets taken on the
ship of the attackers and so on and so forth. He goes through one sea adventure after another
as a young boy. Eventually, he winds up at the end in a dugout canoe in the South Seas.
He is being drawn by a sea current down further and further toward the South Pole. Of course,
the Antarctic was unexplored at the time that Poe was writing on the first third, excuse
me, the middle third of the 19th century. As he gets drawn more and more, the water
gets colder and colder. The story is a first person narration, that is, it is told in
the words of Arthur Gordon Pym. I did this, I did that and so on. As the canoe, the dugout
canoe, proceeds, he loses his paddles. The water gets colder, the air gets colder, snowflakes
begin to congeal out of the atmosphere. This is the end of all of his voyages of discovery.
This is going to be some horrible frozen death, and then he thinks he hears a cataract.
The snowflakes darken, they become soot. The roiling sea becomes steamy, what was cold
becomes hot. Suddenly, in the mist before him, he sees the two legs of a giant who must
be straddling some great straight, like the Straits of Gibraltar. It's clear that the
canoe is hurtling over what must be the greatest waterfall in the world, and then there's
an editorial note that says, everyone is aware of the conflagration of the house of Mr. Pym,
in which he died, and unfortunately, his manuscript went with him. Of course, everyone knows how
Mr. Pym returned to us, and so there is no need to include that here. And that's the
end of the book. Now, those people who think that Poe could only write short stories argue
that the narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym, which is about 80 pages long, was Poe's attempt
to write a novel, but he got himself into a situation he couldn't get out of, so he
just pulled a fast one and ended it. In fact, Jules Verne so admired Poe that he is one
of about half a dozen prominent authors who wrote a sequel to the narrative of Arthur
Gordon Pym, trying to say what would happen next, so we know that Verne really quite admired
Poe. Those who like Poe's work and think of him as quite an accomplished artist say,
wait a minute, he had us set up for this all along. The whole point was to show us that
the notion of first person narration is only a rhetorical artifice. It's only what the
fiction writer does, and we shouldn't be pulled into thinking that what's being discussed
is real. In fact, Poe was quite a theorist in the construction of literary works and
wrote articles about how to write short stories, how to write poetry, and so on. He wrote a
number of different kinds of stories. From his point of view, one of the kinds of stories
that he wrote was what he called tales of raseocination, stories that made us use our
minds. If you read these tales of raseocination, you'll find there what we today, a century
and a half later, would call really two separate kinds of work. One is the tale of the great
detective, the other is science fiction. The tale of the great detective is actually given
its definitive shape by Poe in works like The Perloined Letter, a famous story in which
a letter is stolen, the police can't find it, they go to this famous detective Dupin,
Dupin says, if I can find it, would you pay me for it? The chief of police, the prefect
of police says, yes, I will. Then Dupin calls him back a week later and says, here's the
letter, the guy gapes, he writes the check and runs out with it, and the second half
of the story is Dupin's description of how it is that he managed to find the letter.
It's a very famous story in which he says that he found it because he realized by matching
minds with the person who stole it, the only place that person could have left it where
it could have eluded the investigations of the police was right out in plain view. So
he went into the fellow's apartment with a copy of what the letter should have looked
like from the back, saw the letter, substituted it and came away with the right letter without
the fellow ever being the wiser. Now the letter was not able to be used for blackmail, which
was the problem at hand. This famous reversal of ideas, this reversal, is in fact what goes
on when we have the fantastic, except the reversal in the fantastic is a reversal to
a whole new order of world like the dead will live as in Frankenstein. Poe wants us to think.
Poe's the prolonged letter has the detective, has the sidekick, has the problem, has the
mystery, has the explanation. It's the first writing that really gives us what will then
become Agatha Christie, Conan Doyle and so on. For Poe there was no difference between
this kind of writing and what we would call science fiction. And a paradigmatic work of
science fiction from the same period from Poe is a work called The Facts in the Case
of Mishua Voldemar. This is a very, very interesting story. It's a little bit off color if you
read it that way. The story ostensibly is told because the first person narrator feels
he must set matters to rest. It is now rendered necessary, he says, that I give the facts.
This is a matter of scientific inquiry. It's a matter of empirical reality. What are the
facts about? It turns out that our narrator has mesmerized someone in articular history.
It's called Mortis, which is Latin for at the point of death. Why does the text tell
us that a fellow is mesmerized in articular mortis rather than at the point of death?
Because by using this rhetoric of Latin, it sounds like science. After all, in science
everything has a Latin name. That's not a dog, that's Canis Canis. Ah, yes, that's
a scientific dog. In America the moon is 240,000 miles away, but in Europe it's 400,000
kilometers. Ah, much more scientific. The rhetoric of science is part of how you make
the fantastic plausible, and Poe understood that. The Facts in the Case of Mishua Voldemar
uses a Latinate rhetoric in order to make its premise plausible. He talks about Anton Mesmer,
the doctor who invented mesmerism, what we today would call hypnosis. And he happens
to have a friend, the narrator, whose name is P- guess what, P. Poe's narrator P has
a friend, Voldemort, who he says has a disease such that it admits of the calculation of
the exact hour of, excuse me, admits of the calculation of the exact hour of demise. It
admits of the exact calculation of the hour of demise. Couldn't sound more scientific
if you tried. The fellow's disease is thesis, P-H-T-H-S-I-S, which is a fancy word for tuberculosis.
It turns out, however, that this fellow's thesis, if you calculate it out, is going to
lead him to die at the stroke of midnight on a Sunday evening, the very last stroke
of the Sabbath. Clearly, Poe is writing this so that at the surface level of the rhetoric
we have science, empiricism, logic, but underneath this we're dealing with the same issues of
family curses, fairy tale ideas, can we hold off death and so on that science fiction has
always been concerned with. In fact, he mesmerizes this fellow and so he doesn't die. He stays
there. After a while, he's not breathing. He's got this big black tongue that sticks
out of his mouth. When they try to talk to him, they make passes and so on and get to
him through his trance, try to talk to him. The tongue is described as vibrating all by
itself and yet it says things. It says, help me quick. I am dying. I am dead. Let me die.
Things like that. Finally, our fellow, P, decides to release
him from his trance and see what happens. And so he does. He makes a few passes, releases
him and before our very eyes, Voldemort suddenly crumbles up and liquefies as if death which
has been held off, guess what, for nine pregnant months, as if death which has been held off
suddenly is coming to claim its own. And that's the end of the story, this horrible
vision. Now, we have here the horror story writer,
but we have here at the surface level the operation of the mind and below it we have
a symbolic level. Let's get a look at some of that symbolism.
It turns out that when he mesmerizes the fellow, he looks at him and he says, I stared, I concentrated
all my power into his right eye and then I exchanged vertical passes for lateral ones.
All you have to do is visualize that and you realize that what P is doing is delivering
extreme unction. This is a satire of what's going on in religion.
And when finally at the end, he makes these rapid passes and releases the fellow, here
comes the last paragraph of the book. Excuse me, the story.
As I rapidly made the mesmeric passes amid ejaculations of dead, dead, absolutely bursting
from the tongue and not from the lips of the sufferer, his whole frame at once within
the space of a single minute or even less shrank, crumbled, absolutely rotted away beneath
my hands. Upon the bed before that whole company there lay a nearly liquid mass of loathsome
of detestable putridity. Now think of the sexual implications of this.
This is a fellow who's inside a four-poster bed with black curtains around it. The narrator
who's writing it is named P. It's the same guy who is actually the author of the book.
He's getting amid his mesmeric passes, that is his hand going up and down. He's hearing
ejaculations that go dead, dead and burst from this elongated tongue, not from the lips.
The whole frame then at that point crumbles beneath his hands, leaving nothing but this
loathsome mass of putridity on the bed. What we have here is a covert joke, a description
of somebody who is involved in onanism. This kind of masturbatory fantasy is seen like
that of Victor Frankenstein, of somebody who would like to be able to have some kind of
normal human relation, but in fact cannot deal with sexual relations in a truly adult and
procreative way. That being the case, there's a breakdown of community and the seeking for
knowledge may have a pregnant nine months, but what's created at the end of that pregnant
nine months is not a new human life, but in fact something which the creator himself finds
loathsome. Just as Victor found his creature loathsome, P. finds his Voldemort lying on
the bed loathsome. These are stories of people who, despite their love of science, are not
able really to deal with their own ways of functioning in the world. This is an archetypal
science fiction story by the writer whom Verne most admired. Jules Verne, besides writing
a sequel to the narrative author, Arthur Gordon Pym, wrote in fact many, many stories, all
of them known as voyage extraordinaire, extraordinary voyages in English, but they're always called
that in French for some reason. And he was, because of their great popularity, the first
writer ever to make a full-time living doing science fiction. Now what he really wanted
to do was be a sailor, and in fact his brother became a sea captain. He went out and shipped
out on boats as well, but actually as soon as he got onto one, he got seasick. So when
he started making money as a writer, he bought himself a boat and tied it up to the land.
He called his boat the Saint-Michel, after the famous monastery off the coast of France,
which has a causeway connecting it to the mainland. When the tide is up, Saint-Michel is an island.
When the tide is down, Saint-Michel is part of the mainland. In other words, it's both
part of the land and not part of the land. Jules Verne wanted to go to sea, but he couldn't
go to sea, so he wrote in the Saint-Michel, which he called his floating study. And when
they had more money later on in life, he got an even bigger boat called the Saint-Michel
II, and he had yet a bigger floating study, and he never went anywhere with it. He just
kept it in the sand, and he would go and write, and think of himself as traveling around,
but he couldn't really travel around. Now why do I tell you about this? Because really
at the heart of all of Verne's extraordinary voyages is this notion of travel that doesn't
really get us anywhere. It doesn't really get us anywhere. That notion of travel that
doesn't get us anywhere goes back, usually in literary history, to Robinson Crusoe by
Daniel Defoe, 1719. And there is, in fact, a whole genre of works that are known as Robinson
ads, or Robinsonia ads, both words are used, to describe what happens in a book like Robinson
Crusoe. Let me remind you of that, and you'll see how important it becomes in Verne's work,
and then in wider science fiction.
Robinson Crusoe is the fictionalized story of the adventures of a real man named Alexander
Selkirk, who was marooned on an island west of Argentina. And, excuse me, that would put
him in Chile, west of Chile, and managed to survive using what he could salvage from
the ship that wrecked. In the fictionalized version, you'll remember, Robinson goes, is
washed ashore, and begins to construct a world for himself. He takes what should be an utterly
alien environment, and what? Does he explore it? No. Does he give himself up to it and
learn about it? No. What he does is construct a stockade so that he can protect himself
against it. He makes himself a little house, and the first thing he puts on the house,
in the house, I should say, is a placard so he can mark the days, because he doesn't want
to lose track of the calendar back in Europe where he comes from. In fact, one of the most
moving episodes in Robinson Crusoe occurs after he wakes up from the delirium of a long
fever, and realizes that he no longer knows if his calendar is correct, that he may somehow
have lost his connectedness with the entire European world of his youth. Now, Robinson
Crusoe is a stowaway as a kid, and goes through his adventures. It's a lot like the narrative
of Arthur Gordon Pym. But this is a book that has an ending. It's an ending in which he
gets saved along the way he survives by his famous relationship with his man, Friday.
How does he come to have Friday? It's a crucial scene when he finds Friday. Of course, everyone
talks about seeing that footprint in the sand. But when he finally comes upon the man himself
who's been chased there from a neighboring island that has cannibals, he meets him and
he offers him solace. He came into my grove for shelter. Here I gave him bread and a bunch
of raisins to eat and a draft of water. Think of this in religious terms. He came into my
grove. Robinson Crusoe is, in fact, making himself out to be God in the paradise to which
he is inviting this, from his point of view, savage. I gave him bread and a bunch of raisins
and a draft of water. I gave him, if you will, bread and not quite wine, because you don't
want to trust a savage with wine. So you gave him dried grapes and the water, which could
have been wine had he allowed the savage to have wine, but instead he gives him this false
communion. He's making him go through a ritual that puts him into Robinson's world. He has
him lie down on a great parcel of rice straw, as if he were an animal, and calls him the
poor creature. He says the poor creature laid down and went to sleep, creature, the created
thing, exactly what Victor calls his monster. He had all, and he's looking at his face.
This is all within the space of the page, what I'm reading to you. It's right together
in the novel. He had all the sweetness and softness in his face of a European. In other
words, instead of admiring this alien in terms of the alien's own culture, own physiology,
he praises him because he's liked the world that Robinson came from, especially when he
smiled. His hair was long and black, not curled like wool. This is, in other words, a very
racist discussion, where only that which conforms to the white Northern European prototype is
considered good. Well, he wakes up. He wakes again and comes out of the cave to me, as
if he were Jesus. Robinson where Jesus saying Lazarus come forth, comes out of the cave to
me, for I had been milking my goats, which I had in the enclosure just by. Robinson has
created this whole little farm. When he has spied me, he came running to me, laying himself
down upon, again upon the ground with all but the possible signs of a humble, thankful
disposition, making many an antic gesture to show it. At last, he lay his head flat upon
the ground, close to my foot, and sets my other foot upon his head as he had done before,
and after this made all the signs to me of subjection, servitude, and submission imaginable,
to let me know, Robinson is sure he understands all this, of course, how he would serve me
as long as he lived. I understood him in many things and let him know I was very well pleased
with him. In a little time, I began to speak to him and teach him to speak to me. Now notice
that he's not willing to learn the language that clearly the locals speak. His first effort
of communication is to make them speak his language. As the American philosopher Lin
Yutang said, the reason English is the most widely used language in the world is because
the English in their conquests followed the old adage, when in Rome, do justice at home.
And that's what Robinson Crusoe is in the process of doing. I taught him and I began
to teach him to speak to me. And first, I made him know his name should be Friday, which
was the day I saved his life. Back to that calendar, he's got to name things, he's got
to organize them, he's got to put them to rights. I called him so for the memory of
the time. I likewise taught him to say, Master, and then let him know that was to be my name.
I likewise taught him to say yes and no, and to know the meaning of them. I gave him some
milk in an earthen pot, and let him see me drink it before and sock my bread in it. And
I gave him a cake of bread to do the like, which he quickly complied with, and made signs
that it was very good for him. I kept there with him all that night, but as soon as it
was day, I beckoned him to come with me and let him know I would give him some clothes,
at which he seemed very glad, for he was stark naked. In other words, this is a version of
the fall. Just as Adam, when he eats the apple, suddenly knows instantly that he is naked.
So once Friday, so-called, has come into the enclosure that Robinson Crusoe runs, he knows
that he's naked, and he has to be given clothing, as God gives clothing to Adam and Eve. What's
going on in the Robinson Crusoe, then, is not really a voyage to the alien, a voyage
that explores the alien, a voyage that learns about the alien. What's going on in Robinson Crusoe
is a voyage of conquest of the alien, and the tools of conquest are the tools of the mind.
This is not the conquest of the alien with a musket. This is the conquest of the alien
with a name. You will be Friday, I will be your master. What Robinson Crusoe wants to
do, what all Robinson aides want to do, is travel through what is ostensibly an alien
environment, only to catalog it, tame it, and make it an extension of the world from which
the traveler came to begin with. This, in fact, is the general type of all of Jules Verne's
great stories. They depend upon the naming of the other.
20,000 Leagues Under the Sea is one of his most popular novels. In fact, it was the very
first western novel translated into Japanese when the Japanese began to open up their culture
to foreign influences. It is a book which is well known for its marvelous invention, the
Nautilus, the submarine, and people love to say, look at how prophetic Verne was. He invented
the submarine. He predicted the submarine. Sad to say, when Verne wrote this novel, published
it in 1870, the submarine had already been around for almost a century. Unfortunately,
because we don't study history very well, most of us don't know that. But Verne's readers
did know that, and I'll explain why. The first functional submarine was the turtle, which
was created by an American engineer, a Scottish-born American engineer, and was used in the War
of Independence. The turtle actually took part in a naval engagement in the Hudson River,
and seal technology that is keeping water from getting into the thing was not very well
developed then. It was a one-man machine where you turned a crank and that made the
propeller run and before the guy could do anything, he drowned so much for the submarine.
However, Robert Fulton actually did demonstrate a functional submarine in the Sen in 1807.
He tried first to sell it to the English, excuse me, to the French, to break the blockade
that the English had against them in the Napoleonic Wars. The French, because the French sort
of know exactly what is right, they have that wonderful security, they looked at this and
they said, it can't work, and they refused to buy it. I mean, it was working, they were
watching it, but they said it can't work and they wouldn't buy it. Fulton, being an American
and quite willing to sell to the highest bidder, took his submarine across the channel and
tried to sell it to the British. The British watched it, they saw that it worked, but being
British, they said, this is beastly, we couldn't use something as horrible as this in war,
and so they refused to buy it. And so he took a submarine back to the United States and
that was that. The next time a submarine came along was in the Civil War in the United States,
when the South actually did create a submarine with a nine-man crew, and it went and planted
a depth charge under a U.S. frigate and in fact blew the bottom out of the frigate. It
succeeded in sinking the boat. Unfortunately, that old problem of seal technology came along
again. Everybody who was on the frigate survived because they were just sitting there in Charleston
Harbor, they swam away, and the poor nine-man crew drowned. But the fact is that the submarine
worked. It accomplished what it was supposed to do from a military point of view. This
happened in 1864 and it was very well known around the world, so that by the time Verne
published only six years later, his readers were well aware of the fact that there was
such a thing as a functional submarine. It's true. The Nautilus was fast. The Nautilus
sealed well. The Nautilus had electric lighting within it, and that's before the invention
of the light bulb isn't Verne prophetic. No, actually, because it's after the invention
of the carbon arc lamp, and that's the kind of electric lighting the Nautilus had. Verne,
you see, persisted in inventing things that had already been invented. All he did was
make them work better than they had before he actually published. But he was looking
backwards, not forwards. What he was really doing was writing satire because all of his
readers would realize how funny these things were. For example, in one of his books, From
the Earth to the Moon, he has people get shot to the moon in a big, big, basically, bullet.
Now, Verne worked with a mathematician who helped him check all of his scientific calculations
for many of his books. Verne knew perfectly well that if you were to gain enough force
on initial ballistic impact to break the Earth's gravity and get to the moon, you would have
such an acceleration that no human being could survive it. He knew that. Still in all, Verne
created an American club, the Baltimore Gun Club, that decides to send people to the moon
this way. Now, where does he send them from? Amazingly enough, he sends them from Cape
Canaveral. And people say, isn't Verne prophetic that he knew where we would have our space
program? Well, in order to have this bullet go to the moon, you need a long rifle barrel.
So the Baltimore Gun Club builds a tunnel straight down about 500 feet so that the bullet
can get shot up out of that and go on its way to the moon. Verne knew perfectly well
that the water table in central Florida is about five feet below the surface. You couldn't
possibly build this darn thing. You couldn't possibly survive it if it happened. He was
making a joke, and he was expecting his readers, raseosination, to read this and understand
that this only sounded plausible, but in fact was a satire against American ingenuity.
Verne truly loved science. He was truly enthusiastic for it, but he didn't simply love it. He loved
it enough to play with it. And that being the case, we find this in all of his novels.
For example, in 20,000 Leagues Beneath the Sea, the action is motivated initially by
the fact that one ship after another is being destroyed in the shipping lanes of the world.
What is going wrong? Apparently something is hitting it below the water line, shades
of the American Civil War. There are two great theories about this. One theory is that what
we have there is a submarine monitor that is submarine in the original adjectival sense
below the surface of the sea. Monitor, which of course does mean warning conveniently enough,
but also is the name of the ironclad vessel that was used in the American Civil War. Maybe
this is a submarine ironclad and it's going and punching holes below the waterline of
these boats. The other theory is that it is a giant narwhal, one of those sea mammals
that has a single unicorn horn out of its head, and that it, actually it's an elongated
tusk, but it looks that way, and it's going along poking holes. Well, on this vessel we
have our main, on a vessel that goes out to find the problem, we have most of our main
characters. One is Professor Aranax, a French philosopher, Professor Know-it-all. Some say,
ah, he's the stand-in for Vern. Well, if he is, he's a stand-in for a man who has great
self-irony because Professor Aranax gets things wrong consistently. Also, he has Concey, his
faithful companion. Concey means council or consolation in French, and he is his actual,
it's his servant. And also on this vessel is Ned Land. Now, there's a good name for
you. He's a Canadian harpooner. The vessel itself is the USS Frigate Abraham Lincoln
cause Americans have ingenuity, and they're going to go out there and make the world safe.
This is back in 1870, Vern is already writing this. He's a Frenchman, but is using all of
these nationalist stereotypes in order to construct a satiric story. As the story opens,
we're on the Frigate Abraham Lincoln, and Professor Aranax, in his snooty way, is explaining
to Ned Land why it is that this has to be a giant gnar wall. Okay, why is that? Well,
Professor Aranax says to Ned Land, do you know about the pressure of the water? He said,
ah, well, the atmosphere has the pressure of 32 pounds per square inch. That's so,
Ned Land says, not knowing any better. Ah, yes. Do you know how many square inches there are on
your body? Professor Aranax asks, Ned Land says he has no idea. Aranax tells him how many there
are, and therefore he says, and he gives him the multiproduct of the two, that's how much pressure
is on your body. Now, this is wrong in terms of physics. The pressure is the same no matter how
many square inches you have. And any reader who's paying attention will know that Aranax is making
a mistake. But unfortunately, since we don't realize we're supposed to read Verne as a satirist,
we don't criticize him for that. We should be. Then he says, well, every time you go down
so many feet, you increase the pressure by 10. And so what would happen if we went down 100 feet?
Finally, he says, and so there would be three million pounds of pressure on something that's
going along down there. Nothing could survive. To which Ned Land replies, meaning that you couldn't
have a submarine monitor. And so he's only a seamen going mammal that's adapted to that could live
that way. To which Ned Land says, oh, well, if that's so, it must have skin as thick as quarter
inch steel plates, which of course turns out to be exactly the case. It's not a narwhal at all.
It is the Nautilus. It does have quarter inch thick steel plates. It's the rough and ready good
old Canadian who gets it right. The Americans fail. The smart, super smart French savant fails.
In fact, the Abraham Lincoln gets rammed by the Nautilus and they jump out and we see Aranax
swimming around in the water and he's starting to go down when suddenly someone sticks a broken
spar in front of him and says, sir, would this be of help? He looks over and there's I'm sorry,
the ship doesn't go down. They get rammed and people fly overboard. There's Konsey in the water
and Aranax says, but you weren't knocked out. And he said, yes, I know, sir, but I saw you
in the water and I thought perhaps you would need me. So we have another stereotype of this
being used for satiric purposes. In this stereotypical book, we have the Nautilus as its name
feature. They get picked up by Captain Nemo. Nemo, of course, is reminiscent of No Man,
the name that Odysseus uses in the Odyssey when the Cyclops asks him, what is your name? And he
says, my name is no man. Nemo is a misogynist. He is against the world in general. Excuse me,
as a misanthropist. He's against the world in general. He lives all alone. He is outside of
community. He is like Victor's monster, but he has control of his own destiny. Unlike Victor's
monster who can't do what he wants, Nemo can do what he wants. Why? Because like Robinson Crusoe,
he has created his own world. The inside of the Nautilus is a perfect replica of the ideal
Victorian mansion. It has its own museum. It has its own library. It has all of the finer things.
In fact, in that bullet from the earth to the moon, you have overstuffed couches to absorb the
acceleration. They look like the leather chairs from a men's club. Vern does this again and again
and again. In five weeks in a balloon, we have a huge gondola of a balloon constructed to look
like the interior of the Victorian drawing room. Nemo is going around the world, never being part
of the alien that he is in the midst of. He always carries his idea of European civilization with
him. But Vern is not satirizing the different nations just to play games with the stereotypes.
He has his own political agenda. Vern has Nemo stop one moonlit night, for example,
have the Nautilus rise to the surface. And Aaron Axe, who sneaks up behind him, sees Nemo
reach over the side as someone swims up, gives the man a bag of gold, and he swims back with
the gold between his teeth. Nemo is underwriting the revolution of the Greeks against their
authoritarian government. Nemo, in fact, is supporting exactly the same revolution
that Byron, who was there in Switzerland with Shelley and Mrs. Shelley, died in the process
of trying to support. Nemo is a romantic. He's a bironic hero. We have here again romanticism,
gothicism, satire. We have this crumbling heap. We have the world in a nutshell.
Vern goes through it for 20,000 leagues. That's, of course, 20,000 leagues under the sea,
not 20,000 leagues down, because 20,000 leagues down would get you out the other end.
That's how much he travels around the world. An enormously popular book, enormously popular.
Now, this desire to travel, to see things, to learn them, to get their names right,
this is part of the passion for science. But Vern makes this a very safe passion,
because it's incorporated within the Nautilus. There's a great love for empirical details.
There's a wonderful scene when Ned Land, always the sensible one, is in the museum aboard the
Nautilus with Konsei. Now, Konsei has learned so much from his master. Actually, he idolizes him.
And there we have what only Nemo could have acquired, the world's greatest collection of
mollusk shells. Konsei is in heaven. He says, there's this, and he names it by its Latin name,
of course, and there's that, and there's the other. And Ned Land says, oh, well, that one's good to eat,
that one's not good to eat, that one's good to eat. Turns out that Konsei divides everything
into order, genus, species, and so on. Ned Land divides them into only two categories,
those that are good to eat and those that are not good to eat. It goes on for about four pages.
Modern readers get very bored reading all of those different Latin names. The reason they're
getting bored is because they're not realizing the comic interplay between Ned Land and Konsei
as they have two different ways of looking at the same thing. In other words,
although what Poe says, in the facts in the case of Mitchell Waldemar is, I must present the facts,
Vern recognizes that there is no such thing as a fact. A fact is what we construct
as a fact, and he calls into question how we construct them. Is this one thing or is it
another thing? Is it how we use it, how we name it? Do we take it over? Do we consume it?
What makes something something? It's an act of the appropriating mind. This is a new kind of
tale of raciocination, and that passion for the use of the mind is what works throughout.
Now, the great lover of this is Hugo Gernsback, who founds the first science fiction magazines,
but long before he founded Amazing Stories, in modern electrics, back in 1911, he started
reprinting Vern's own stories. This was a magazine ostensibly devoted to teaching people
what's new in the world of electricity. But along with it, he gave them fictions,
and he gave them fictions like Vern's fictions. This love for science is a passion that grows
from the 19th century onward, and we still see it today. In the world of science fiction,
perhaps the greatest exponent of this love of science is Isaac Asimov. He, in fact, even
made history into a science and developed what he called psychohistory in the foundation trilogy,
a series of stories that, in fact, argue that you can predict the outcome of history by knowing
what great social forces are at work, and then by making appropriate adjustments, you can use your
knowledge of the laws of history to change that outcome, to hurry it along or whatever.
You can see him most at work in iRobot. iRobot is a series of stories that are based on the
three laws of robotics, and here they are. One, a robot may not injure a human being,
or through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm. Two, a robot must obey the orders given
it by human beings, except where such orders would conflict with the first law. Three, a robot must
protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the first or second laws.
Doesn't that sound wonderful? Now, the reason robots can be trusted to follow these laws is
because those laws are programmed into their positronic brains. What could sound more scientific
than positronic brains? But think about it. A robot may not injure a human being, or through
inaction, allow a human being to come to harm. Well, what if I want to clip my fingernails?
Is the robot going to stop me? You can't give somebody these instructions. You just can't do
it. You can't program in good or bad, but in a fairy tale you can. This is a perfect fairy tale
robot. A robot must obey the orders unless they would conflict with the first orders. You can't
make a robot hurt you, but otherwise it will do anything you want. It's a magic wand that you
can't misuse. No problem of the sorcerer's apprentice. And then, of course, the robot must
protect its own existence. It will always go on, but never, never at your cost. In other words,
these are perfect fairy tale tools. How could we have such a wonderful world? Only if we could
believe that science can give it to us. This is a recuperation, not just a Victorian snugness.
This is a recuperation of childhood fantasy. And in fact, that love of science, that enthusiasm
for science, that passion for science, follows us to this day. For instance, outside the world
of fiction, of writing. Look at the history of world's fairs. The first one is the Great
Crystal Palace Exhibition in London in 1851. The first huge building constructed of glass
and steel. Then we have the Eiffel Tower as the symbol for the Paris Exposition of 1889.
It still stands there. It was built to be a symbol of the new and the modern. It's still a symbol of
the city. White City was built at the Chicago's Columbian Exposition, and in the middle of it,
they had a huge spherical building called Democracy, where you could walk on an interior catwalk and
see the whole display of what would be the ideal small town of the future. And in the famous New
York World's Fair of 1939, General Motors automated exhibit that took you riding in cars through
the world of tomorrow. These world's fairs are not just once in a lifetime things. They have
become an industry, and the name for that industry now is Theme Park. And Epcot Center is perhaps
its prototype, the experimental prototype community of the future. We in America and in the rest of
the world, here comes Euro Disney and Tokyo Disney, we are trying to give an embodiment to the desire
to have the passion for science actually made real. We want to say yes, we can make the world over
exactly as we would have it. This, if you're as smart as Vern, still has satire in it, but here
the ambivalence is put to one side. Here we say we want the science, this is the fiction of world
creation. Things can be as we want them. We can all be Victor Frankenstein if we just buy our ticket
from Uncle Walt.
The first science fiction writers and editors felt a mission to create a passion for science in their
readers. Many of those early proponents were themselves passionate about science and venture
and the unknown, and very well educated in their passions. Jules Verne was the first writer to make
a full-time living from science fiction. His accounts of his voyages extraordinaire, including
the famous 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, were enormously popular with his 19th century audiences
around the world. 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea was the first western novel translated into Japanese.
This popularity has caused many modern critics to dismiss Vern. However, his writing is actually
quite sophisticated, particularly in its use of satire. He combines a passion for discovery with
a wealth of empirical detail. For example, Vern often uses lists such as that of the mollusks
collected by the infamous Captain Nemo to call attention to the way we construct scientific
fact. His stories, like Edgar Allan Poe's, can properly be called in Poe's phrase,
tales of raciocination, that is, tales that require you to think and react. Another writer
whose passion for science pervades his work is the American Isaac Asimov. In his Foundation
trilogy, Asimov created an idea he calls psycho-history. He argues that by knowing which
social forces are at work, you can predict the outcome of history. We will see that he gets
this idea from another great writer. In his Eye Robot series, Asimov uses scientific jargon to
explore human psychology and sociology. He created a world of artificial intelligence that resembles
a fairytale world with fairytale robots whose robot code does not allow them to harm humans.
The belief that science can give us a better and more humane world is not new or specific to
Asimov. It has been a human conceit from the days of London's Crystal Palace and the Great Exhibition
on to Walt Disney's Epcot Center. This mixture of hard science and childlike trust
at once entertaining and challenging forces us to consider what is fact and what is fiction.
