Lecture 3 – H.G. Wells and Science Fiction Parables of Social Criticism
As important as Mary Shelley and Jules Verne are to the development of science fiction,
people, if you ask them to name the single greatest influence in the formation of the field,
would point to H.G. Wells, and I think with great justice. H.G. Wells between 1895 and about 1901
published a series of what he called scientific romances, because of course at that time the
term science fiction still hadn't been coined, which had an enormous, enormous impact on the world.
It's hard for us to realize today that in his time H.G. Wells was thought of as one of the two
greatest writers in the English language. At the same time, say 1916, that James Joyce was writing,
that D.H. Lawrence was writing, that George Bernard Shaw was writing. H.G. Wells was taken
to be along with Henry James, one of the two greatest writers in the world in English. Now of
course in a sense James and Wells reflected an older kind of writing which got supplanted by the
modernism of Joyce Lawrence and so on, but at that time before the popular opinion spread and the
style shifted, that's the kind of stature that H.G. Wells had. It's a far cry from that to what we
now think of often as a writer for boys or writer for children. Wells was not that at all and in
fact never intended to be that. Wells himself came from lower middle class parentage. His father
was a draper and they could not afford to send him to school, but there was a wonderful system
in England at the time of Wells' youth. Wells was born in 1866. That is that there was standardized
there was a standardized national examination in every subject. That system persists by the way
and if you passed a subject either at the O level, ordinary level or A level, advanced level,
for every O level your teacher would get a bounty of a certain amount of money and at every A level
you'd get a bounty of a higher level of money. This was in order to encourage people to teach
to the exams. These exams that is the total number of O and A levels you had were what
were used for admission to the Oxbridge system, Oxford and Cambridge and therefore were crucial
in the training of the intellectual elite of England. If you could afford to go to the what
the British call public schools, what we would call private schools like Eaton or Westminster,
what have you, then you would of course be trained in these subjects. You would pass your exams,
the bounty would get paid to the school. It would be a way in which the system perpetuated itself.
It was like a farm team for the great universities. If you couldn't afford to go to these schools,
you were out of luck. But Little Herbie actually encountered a school teacher who discovered
that Little Herbie had the ability to read a book, eat it and belch back examinations.
He didn't need the teacher at all. He was a true autodidact, self-taught. What he needed the teacher
was access to the books. So this teacher made a deal with Little Herbie.
I'll give you the books. I'll sign you up for the exam. We'll split the bounty.
And so basically without ever having gone to school, the first time HG Wells actually had
formal education was when he became a laboratory assistant for Th Huxley in the years 1884 to
1887, the great, great disciple of Charles Darwin himself. Wells knew everything. He was,
as he says in his own experiment in autobiography, destined to be not a writer, not a philosopher,
not a thinker, a teacher. He wanted to learn things, put them in patterns, talk about how
patterns evolved, and then make those patterns clear to the world. Evolution is Wells' great
continuing theme, and Th Huxley is the strongest influence on him. He lived by his intellect.
Now, he left school and decided to be a journalist. He left in 1887. And while he was being a
journalist, he tried his hand at writing fanciful stories. He came up with this idea of a machine
that would allow people to travel through time. And he published serially in the newspaper,
in the year 1888, a very, very bad little novel called The Chronic Argonauts, that is,
The Sailors Through Time. It was the third draft of The Chronic Argonauts that got published.
It did not get much notice. He rewrote it three more times. And then the seventh edition,
the seventh rewriting, came out in 1895 as The Time Machine, which became an instant
smash hit and made Wells one of the literary lions of the London scene. Between that time
and six years later, he came out with The War of the Worlds, and well, in order,
The Island of Dr. Moreau in 1896, The Invisible Man in 1897, The War of the Worlds in 1898,
When the Sleeper Wakes in 1899, and The First Men in the Moon in 1901. Every one of these works
is, in effect, a science fiction parable of social criticism, grounded conceptually in a
metaphor system that depends upon the notion of evolution, but aimed at giving profound analysis
to what's going on in the world around. Now, after that stage, Wells' own work changed.
What I'd like to do is begin by an analysis of the stages of Wells' work,
talk about where that fits in the development of literature, and then come back to discuss
The Time Machine in some detail. Wells' work we could, if we like, divide into four stages,
although he was so prolific and wrote so many different things at so many different times that
this might be relatively artificial. Still, we can think of those first six years as the time of
writing of the great, ambivalent scientific romances. These are the works that leave us
wondering what we're supposed to do next. For example, in The Invisible Man, we have a story
of someone who creates, again, a fairy tale. He creates, by technology, the ability to do something
we've all fantasized about. As little children, we wished we could be the invisible person who
could go and see what we weren't supposed to see and so on. It turns out that the character
who is The Invisible Man, Griffin is his name, which is a mythical beast, if you look at the
Griffin of Greek mythology. Griffin, in order to gain the money necessary to pursue his experiments,
winds up killing a pawnbroker, almost like crime and punishment,
killing a pawnbroker who had been like a father to me. We have this same kind of
edible conflict. Who will have the power? This man had the money, Griffin needed the money.
He takes the money, he becomes invisible, and then what can he do with his invisibility?
He only manages to think of the possibility of terrorizing people, and he goes into a village
and he tries to take it over. In fact, the story has many religious overtones. For instance,
he appears to a fellow named Thomas, tells him that he, he doesn't appear to him, excuse me,
he speaks to him and says, you know, you will do my bidding. And he says, what, what, you know,
who wears that voice? And he says, you will do my bidding. He said, I'm not going to believe
you exist unless I can feel you. It's just like doubting Thomas of the New Testament and so on.
A lot of religious overtones, it follows in the main tradition of science fiction.
But there's something very interesting that gets revealed at the end. It turns out that Griffin,
who is sort of a crazed chemistry student when he's at college, as Victor Frankenstein is sort
of a crazed student when he's at the University of Ingolstadt, turns out that Griffin was born
in Albino. And in the last scene, when the epping villagers managed to surround the invisible man
and beat and beat and beat as they contract the circle until they managed to pummel him to death,
they then step back in awe as the body rematerializes. And first they see the bones and then the blood
vessels and then the nerves. And finally they see the skin. As we watch each of these body parts
reappear, they say things like amazing, astounding, astonishing. But when he finally is shown in his
whole body, they go, ugh. And we're told that they turn the children's faces away.
The monster in Frankenstein is expelled from society because he is ugly. Victor is the real
monster in Frankenstein. He is the one who could have been part of the community,
but turned against it because of his love of science. In The Invisible Man, Griffin is expelled
from society because of his albinism. He is rejected as ugly. And it's because he has been
rejected, because he is the exiled wretch that he turns to science. So what H.G. Wells is doing,
continuing in this British romantic scientific romance tradition, is giving us an alternative
to Frankenstein, suggesting that science may not necessarily be what drives us out of society,
that perhaps the forces that drive us out of society are inherent in how society looks at
people, and science can be used as only one possible reaction to those forces. In fact,
every one of these early romances is a parable about science fiction forces. The War of the
Worlds, for example, in which the Martians come down and try to take us over. We're told, as in
Shakespeare's line from King Lear, as flies are to wanton boys or weeds of the gods, they kill
us for their sport. We have the same contrast of scales between one domain and the other,
as the Martians come down and cast eyes cool and unsympathetic upon us, and treat us like cattle.
In the War of the Worlds, it turns out that the Martians are using us for food. In fact,
they are vampires. They suck human blood. But we survive in the War of the Worlds. How do we
survive? How do we beat back the Martians? It turns out that the Martians have evolved so far
that they have managed to destroy all disease on Mars. And having destroyed all disease, they have
lost their immunity to disease. And so bacteria, as it says in the book, the smallest thing that
God in his wisdom has created, managed to kill the Martians who invade us. But whether this is a
reprieve for us or for the Martians, the narrator continues, we do not yet know. What Wells leaves
us with at the end of the War of the Worlds is a parable. As the Martians are to the English,
the English are to the Indians. This is the time when England is ruling India and is taking
advantage of it. We have here a social parable in which Wells is saying, yes, yes, so far we are
controlling them. But just because we are more evolved technologically, just because we can go
to their land and rule them with weapons, does not mean that ultimately we may not find something
there that will kill us. And whether we rise triumphant at the end or they has yet to be seen.
The obvious moral to this ambivalent ending is that what the world as a whole needs
is a coming together. No more antagonism between England and India, but some kind of
collaboration between England and India. No casting out of the albino griffin because he looks
different from other people, but a recognition that superficial differences are merely superficial
differences. Continuing in this great British tradition then, Wells is a teacher, a teacher
of tolerance, asking us to look for a sense of community. He was in fact very active in many
things other than the writing of fiction. He was a member of the Fabian society. The Fabian society
is usually credited with being the great intellectual force behind the rise of socialism in England
and ultimately fell into despotude because they succeeded in getting their political program
adopted and the English social system that existed up until the time of Margaret Thatcher
was a reflection of the success, of the proselytizing of the Fabian society. There were three great
figures who were most prominent publicly in the Fabian society. One was Inesbeth, a very famous
children's author, but she tended to stay out of the more rancorous debates. The second was George
Bernard Shaw, clearly one of the great playwrights of all time, and the other was H.G. Wells. Shaw and
Wells were engaged in a great debate. Shaw wanted the Fabian society to concentrate exactly on the
politics of England, to recognize that the class structure in England was what was causing the
problems in England and that we should, we the Fabians, fight against it. The class structure in
fact is exactly what is attacked in the time machine, as we'll discuss later. Wells agreed clearly
that the class structure in England was a terrible thing and that the writing should be against that
class structure, but ultimately getting rid of class structure in England was not going to save
England, because as long as England continued to dominate other nations, we would still have a kind
of antagonism that would necessarily set a model that was anti-community, that was immoral, and that
would break down the social structure, lead to conflict, lead to war, lead to human suffering,
and so on. So while Shaw said, let us concentrate on England, Wells became a propagandist for the
world state. Wells was a propagandist for writing reform. How could you expect people to learn
English when our spelling system is so strange? He was a reformer for a single world calendar.
Let's get rid of all of these religious holidays that divide our calendar from other people's
calendar. Let's get a basic one that goes with the astronomy that we all have to live with.
He wanted a world state, a world calendar. He wanted not to worry about England. England was
just a special case, although he agreed with the Fabian society. In the course of this debate,
Wells lost out politically, and so eventually he left the Fabian society in 1908. Eventually,
the Fabian society just went out of business because Shaw's program succeeded. He was involved
in another great debate, the Wells-James debate. Now, if you ask most professors of English literature
who the great writers are, Henry James will of course be mentioned, America's greatest realist
writer, and Wells will almost never be mentioned. It's hard to remember now that in the first decade
of the 20th century, the debate between Henry James and H.G. Wells was considered probably the
single most significant debate about how literature should be written. James argued that what literature
needed to do was be true to the psychology of the individual person, that if you could make clear
the nuances of thought of the individual, if you could show how he or she was raised,
the culture that he or she lived in, what motivated that individual, then you would get the truest
picture of what the world really was. Wells said, no, we don't need a picture of what the world is.
People know what the world is. What they need is a picture that makes clear the forces that
make the world as it is. We don't need to worry about enormous developments of a single character.
We need to be able to show great social movements because these are the forces that shape our lives.
While James was arguing for the psychological novel of character, Wells was arguing for the
great social novel. And in so doing, he was not thought of as some science fiction writer,
he was thought of as being in the tradition of Emil Zola and other so-called scientific
experimental writers of France. He was worried about the large social forces. In fact, I think
that despite the ascendancy among the critical establishment of James, Wells turns out to be
the one who was correct. Not only was he correct in terms of the political utility of his work,
parables have made much more of a difference in the world than realistic novels, but also in terms
of the artistic satisfaction of the work, many, many more romances are sold with great social
forces being shown than the realistic novels. Be that as it may, Wells was in fact engaged in
this great debate. So he was worried about literature, he was worried about society,
he was worried about history. One of the kinds of things that he did as a teacher, as a writing
teacher, that is a teacher who taught by writing, was turn his ideas of evolution to writing a new
kind of social analysis. In 1920, he published The Outline of History. It was the first history of
the world that followed the evolution of what he considered all the cultures of the world.
It's the first book that actually has in it not only the battles and the kings and the queens
and Europe, but the battles and the kings and the queens in China and in Africa and in Australia.
And not only the battles and the kings and the queens, but also the lives of the majority of the
people. Wells was concerned to see the possibility that history was an evolutionary process, that we
all were part of this, that we all shared one globe. So he takes his evolutionary ideas, he takes his
global ideas of tolerance, and he writes a new kind of history, which sold over a quarter of a
million copies in its first American edition alone, four volumes. That is an enormous amount of sales
in 1920 when hardback books went for about half a day's work for the average wage earner.
Wells was enormously successful and he has changed the way in which we look at history.
He has really four stages, I would say, in his writing. One are these early great ambivalent
scientific romances. Second come positively utopian works, works that he wrote while he was working
so hard for a world state, works that are not ambivalent at all, but really try to talk about
the possibility of bringing about a positive utopia. Then third are these nonfiction works in
which he tries to show us a new way to look at the world, one aspect or another, the outline of
history being the most important. And the fourth are reflective works, like his own experiment
in autobiography, 1934, in which he thinks about his own feelings of loss when members of his family
have died and what his own life has tried to be and so on. He was a man of enormous energy, enormous
passion, and cared deeply about people as well as these forces, but as a writer he felt he had to
address the forces. The positively utopian works are brave works. They are, I think, not as interesting
as the great ambivalent scientific romances because they don't make us think as much. They don't
force us to confront a moral problem. And yet, I still say they are brave because in every case
they reflect the passing of our life, a kind of humility, a willingness to supplant the ego
for the sake of something greater. For example, in the first of these, the food of the gods, 1904,
someone is able to develop a food which, once eaten, multiplies the size, the longevity, the
intelligence, and the power of any creature that eats it. This food can be sprinkled on vegetables
and you can grow food that will, in fact, be appropriate for the people who have eaten this
food of the gods. The book is about the discovery of the food of the gods and then the inevitable
resistance by what the book calls the little people, meaning us, to having the food of the gods in
general distribution. Because what is created by the food of the gods is a new race superior to
Homo sapiens and inevitably bound to supplant Homo sapiens. Remember, Victor Frankenstein realized
that his monster, which could live on nothing but nuts, could bear cold and heat better than humans,
was bigger than a normal human, smarter than a normal human and so on, his monster could have been
the progenitor of another super race that would have supplanted us. He said no. Mary Shelley never
says in her book, or even implies, that Victor should not have protected us as we are. He shouldn't
have killed his own son, but why did he create him that way to begin with? Welles confronts the
problem and says, yes, we should allow ourselves to die out, to move on to the next stage of humanity,
a greater one. If utopia requires the destruction of the status quo, so be it for the greater good.
He was a brave man. These novels, understandably, were splashy when they were produced,
but they have not worn as well as they might. One of them, the war that will end war in 1914,
argued how ultimately we could defeat the monarchies that keep people trampled. The great war
showed how false that was, at least at the time. When I talk about these as parables then,
we're inevitably talking about a utopian urge, so I'd like to talk for a minute about what that
word utopia means. In English, we say the word utopia and we spell it with a U, U-T-O-P-I-A.
The word itself was coined in 1516 by Thomas Moore in his book, as the title for his book,
called Utopia. He wrote the book in Latin, which was common for learned Englishmen of the time,
but the title is actually a pun in Greek. In Greek, there is a distinction made between
two sounds, which I don't think I can really reproduce very well, but one of them is U
and one of them is U, and I can't make the difference well enough, consistently enough,
to be able to say them, so I'll just tell you that one of them in Greek is spelled O-U,
so let's call that an U-Topia, and one of them is spelled E-U when we spell it in English,
so let's call that an E-U-Topia. The E-U in E-U-Topia means sweet, as in euphemism,
a nice way to say something, or euphonious, a nice sounding thing in Utopia. The U as in
utopos, which is the pun from which Utopia, the word from which Utopia comes, the U means no,
so the word Utopia, Utopia, in Moore's title, means both no place and sweet place, because in
English we can't distinguish between those two sounds, and he didn't spell it O-U or E-U,
he just spelled it U, so from the very first time the word Utopia existed in English,
it actually had an ambivalent meaning. It could mean some place that doesn't exist,
or could mean some place that's perfect, and in fact that's the range of meaning that it
tends to have, that sometimes people say, oh that's such a great idea, but it's Utopian, meaning
it couldn't happen, it's too good, but sometimes we use the word Utopian to mean things that are
terrible, but also don't exist, like 1984 or Brave New World, novels in which the world has been
taken over by industrialized governments that manage to control the thoughts and lives of their
citizen in every terrible detail. The opposite of E-U, U, good or sweet in Greek is Dis, D-Y-S,
as in Dis-E-S or Dis-Functional, or in fact Dysphemism, a bad way to say things, the opposite
of a euphemism, so the opposite of a Utopia of an E-Utopia is a Dystopia, sometimes called a
negative Utopia or an Anti-Utopia. We really have then a confusing word, Utopia, which has in it
both E-Utopias, really wonderful places, and Dis-topias, really terrible places, and of course,
as you can imagine, in the course of the history of the world, people have also written about places
which maybe looked at one way are good and maybe looked at one way are bad, and so they are genuinely
ambivalent, and they could really be called just Utopias. Moore's place is called Utopia.
For most of literary history, since that work was written, people took Moore to be giving what he
considered to be a good place. They took his Utopia to be an E-Utopia. I think that that's
probably a mistake. In fact, for instance, this place is very regimented. Everyone can do whatever
he wants, except whenever you go to the next village, you have to do the work that is assigned
to you by the next village. Okay, maybe this is a wonderful communitarian way to live. This is
what the early Christian Brotherhood wanted to have, and many Renaissance Utopias, that is E-Utopias,
are based on Christian Communism. But it turns out that there's some other little hints in Moore's
Utopia that maybe should give us pause. For instance, there's a whole little chapter on the
uses of gold, and we're told that gold has really only three uses. One, it's used for chamber pots.
This is to show us, to remind us of what we should think of gold. But two, it's used for shackles
for slaves. If there are people who will not conform with the perfect laws of Utopia, why?
You shackle them and you make them conform. And three, since the Utopians don't have money,
the gold is used to hire mercenaries, because the Utopians don't believe in war.
Since they don't believe in war, they hire mercenaries. And what do the mercenaries do? Well,
Utopia is an island. And so what they want to do is take over the next island on each side,
so as to create a buffer zone around them, so that they won't have to go to war.
And that's their foreign policy. Wherever they are, they want to take over just the next island.
Wherever they are, just the next island. In other words, the use of gold is to conquer
the world. Given the fact that this is written during their tour de reine in England, I think
it's pretty clear that Moore is arguing that Utopia is not nearly so peaceful and wonderful
a place as it might be. The symbolism of gold is meant to speak directly to his own contemporaries
and show them the kind of aggression involved. This is in a sense a precursor then for HG Wells
being worried about the English domination of India. Once Moore created the word Utopia,
just as once Gernsback created the word science fiction, it became clear that there
was a whole literary history behind this that had never been noticed as a separable history.
The history of Utopian literature is usually thought of as beginning with Plato's Republic.
So that puts us in the fourth century before the common era.
In Plato's Republic, the world is run by philosopher kings. How do they run? Why? They do
what is good for everybody. They do it at great personal cost. They enforce their laws with
what are called guardians. They have the most eminently qualified people running the state.
Isn't it wonderful that those people happen to be the offspring of the previous kings because
after all everybody is used to having the monarchy carry on by biological succession?
Well, it turns out that the philosopher kings are smart enough to realize that the offspring of
one smart king might not necessarily be another smart king. So what the philosopher kings do is
they watch all the babies in the schools and as soon as somebody shows sufficient promise,
they sequester them and raise him separately and then simply claim that he was the child of one of
the kings. This is called by Plato the necessary lie and Plato is quite serious. He's quite willing
to let the necessary lie underlay the state because the virtue of having a perfect state
is worth that lie. For the same reason, he's willing to kick out the creative poets,
which is quite a famous aspect of Plato's Republic. Why does he kick out the creative poets? Because
he tells us the creative poets would have the ability to make us think of things we had never
seen before and we should tell such a person that he has the power of other gods and we should put
olive branches upon his head and anoint him with oils and then tell him we have no place for him in
our perfect republic and send him away. For we prefer the more austere kinds of poets which we
used at the founding of our state. In other words, like Stalinist social realism, as long as the poetry
extols the status quo, it supports stability. If poetry does not support the status quo,
it's a danger to the state and must be expunged. Plato meant this as a utopia.
In fact, Plato's economy is based on slave labor. Why not? Greece was based on slave labor.
If you take a look at the development of utopian literature, you'll find that every era has to
worry about economy. You can't have a perfect world where people are starving. You just have
to have a certain minimum amount of material stuff. How do you get that? In the ancient world,
the utopias were based on slaves. During the Christian Renaissance, where slaves were obviously
forbidden since Christianity itself arose as a slave religion among the Romans, you had to find
some other way of producing more goods in order to make a better world. The solution was regularized
work. That is, we would all agree to share, we would all agree to do certain hours and so on and
so forth. In fact, Karl Marx's, from everyone according to his ability to each according to
his needs, is a late reflection of this Christian communist notion of regularized work creating
sufficient economic largesse for everybody to have what everybody needs. Now, that Christian notion
is worked out in many books, many books, one of which is more is utopia, where the island is
divided into 54 segments. Each segment has its own part. Each part has its own hours of work,
this kind of work, that kind of work. And if you move around, as I said, you have to do the work
assigned, meaning they have a guest house, you're free to use it, and guests are assigned the following
work. By regularizing work, by getting rid of invidious competition, we have a world of more
wealth. It's back to paradise. The lion shall lie down with a lamb. Get rid of the competition,
there'll be enough fruit for everyone. In the industrial revolution, the economy becomes
based on machines, because machines take the labor away from us. Not only don't we use slaves, we
don't even have to use us. We can let the machines do it all. The most powerful utopia,
eutopia, of the industrial revolution is probably Edward Bellamy's Looking Backward,
an American book that was so important that over 400 Bellamy clubs were founded to try to get this
man's ideas out. He talked about an industrial army where people would be forced into doing one
kind of labor or another. He talked about a market control of work so that everybody had the same
access to money, but if you want to do a popular job, you had to work 60 hours a week. If you
want to do an unpopular job, you had to work only 12 hours a week or whatever it was, so that
everybody would contribute equally, everybody would share equally. It was wonderful, and machines
would make everything work so well. The Bellamy clubs almost got a president of the United States
elected. Bob LaFollette was their candidate. But in the post-industrial world, we've begun to realize
that the distinction between machines and people is a lot less than we might like to think it is.
I mean, sure, we have people going around with artificial hearts.
More than that, we have people who turn on their computers and find that they're saying
wise things to them, and they're worrying about this. The machine that takes on a life of its own,
the robot, suddenly begins to have rights like the slaves. And so we wind up in the post-industrial
world having humans who have become made into machines. We are slaves to the machines,
and the revolt of those slaves is our revolt. The word robot, in fact, comes from a play by
Carl Choppick, a check writer, 1920, same year as the outline of history, called RUR,
which stands for Rossum's Universal Robots. In fact, in Choppick's play, the robots are not
what we would call robots, but actually what we would now call androids, because they're
vat-grown. They're actually flesh-made, but they are artificially created human beings. Robot
comes from the Czech verb robotir, meaning to serve, and a robot basically is a created servant.
What happens in the play RUR, of course, as it happens in Frankenstein,
is that these servants eventually say, wait a minute, we're doing all the work.
We want some rights. We want some places. And as a matter of fact, we outnumber you guys,
so watch out. In other words, the product of science has escaped us again. Where do human
rights begin and end? There's always this problem with utopia. Every time you have an
eutopia, it might be a dystopia. William Morris wrote news from nowhere and published it two
years after Edward Bellamy's looking backward, because Morris, an Englishman, looked at this
American's vision of a perfect world of regularized work, saw that industrial army, and although he
didn't have the word for it, would have said, in fact, did say, but in other words, this is fascism.
And in news from nowhere, he wrote an anti-Edward Bellamy utopia, a world that he says
is like the 14th century, a 25th century that's like the 14th century, where people have very
reduced technology, very small needs, and live as he imagined the medieval world would have been,
everyone with a known place in society and functioning marvelously. The man who leads
our narrative viewpoint character through his tour of this 25th century world says,
let us drink to the days that are. At last, we have our childhood again. It's a fantasy of return.
It's back to the garden. So we have then, in utopian literature, always the possibility
of ambivalence. The good places can turn out to be bad from someone else's viewpoint.
The bad places can turn out to be good, at least from the viewpoint of those who are controlling
them, like the government in Brave New World in 1984. We have to worry about the economy,
whether it be based on slaves or regularized work or machines, or have even turned humans into machines.
But whether we have this ambivalence only potential, or we have it come down on one side
of the other into a good place or a bad place, it's always going to be there. We're always going
to have to worry, is this the society we want or isn't it the society we want? In that sense,
utopian literature, which is worrying about political science as a science, which gives us,
in the creation of New World's high adventure, intellectual puzzles and so on, is prototypical
science fiction. And one way you can look at science fiction is to say, no, it doesn't begin
with the movement of the explanation of Gothic explique to the beginning of the novel in the
beginning of the 19th century. Rather, science fiction, the tributary of that mainstream,
the oldest tributary, in fact, goes back to Plato. That utopian literature is, by definition,
science fiction, and only gets noticed to science fiction once we have both the notion of utopia
and the notion of science fiction to give us the lenses through which we can see that.
In that regard, then, science fiction would go back to Plato, work through Aristophanes,
Plutarch and so on, through the Renaissance, and then we can see that Shakespeare's The Tempest
really does fit within this stream. And it's not just accidental that it becomes an archetype for
science fiction. When Wells wrote something like The Time Machine, he was working within this
tradition. Now, The Time Machine itself is, I think, a marvelous book. It addresses all of the
issues that always get addressed in utopian literature. What are those issues? Well, the first
is whether, in a given work, we should think of it as utopian, eutopian, or dystopian. The second is,
should the world that we create be authoritarian or anti-authoritarian to put it another way,
what's the relationship between the individual and society? That's got to be an issue in
utopian literature. Third, at least in modern science, in modern utopian literature,
will the world created be technological? That is, will we embrace technology as giving us what we
need? Or will it be anti-technological? Will we realize that technology is what is giving
people the mechanism of control that we have to avoid? And lastly, will this be an extrapolation
from what we know, or will this be something that is the opposite of what we know? All of those issues,
the nature of the utopia, authority, technology, and how you get there, extrapolation versus reversal,
are seen in the time machine. The time machine is a classic story. It begins with an inventor,
who's just called the inventor, or actually the time traveler, TT. Most, almost all the
characters in the book simply have names that represent their roles. It's Wells in his great
debate with James. He hosts a dinner for a bunch of his Victorian friends, people like
the doctor, the journalist, and so on. And at this dinner, he explains to them that he has
developed a time machine. What is that? Well, he explains, time is just like all the other
dimensions except our consciousness moves along it. And that phrase, time is just like all the
other dimensions except our consciousness moves along it, is put in italics in the first chapter,
where you get explained to us how this can work and we have it. Then he gives a little
demonstration with little toy time machines. He says, now watch it because I'm not going to be able
to get it back. And he turns the little handles and it shimmers and disappears. And then during
dinner, they debate about whether or not it really went away or it was some parlor trick or whatever.
The time traveler says to them, come back next week for dinner again. And they all gather,
and the time traveler is late. Finally, he comes out and he's in tatters. And he says,
you will not believe. I left my laboratory this afternoon. And since then I have lived eight days.
And then he explains what he claims to have had happened to him in the course of the eight days.
Most people remember the time machine for the journey to the year 802701.
In 802701, the time traveler first comes out and sees everything on grass. And he sees people
who are little people. They're only this big and they're all playing together and they eat nothing
but fruit. He says, they were frugivorous. I was as if I were among children. The whole earth,
he says, is now a garden. He believes he's in eutopia. This is the end of the human evolution.
Only later does he realize that these people have degenerated so terribly that they become the cattle
that the people who live underground eat. These are the Morlocks. The ones above ground are the Eloi.
Notice the religious symbolism here. The Morlocks remind us of Malak, the evil God who demanded
the sacrifice of children. And the Eloi remind us of the one of the many, many different names of
God. There's only one which in the English Bible goes untranslated. Eloi, Eloi, Lamach, Sabachthani.
It says, when Jesus is on the cross, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? The Eloi have
been forsaken by their God, the machine, because they no longer know how to run it.
What the time traveler finally realizes is that the Eloi are the degenerate descendants
of the managerial class. And the Morlocks are the degenerate descendants of the working class.
And the class conflict is such that now that they no longer have power, the managers,
they, the workers, eat them alive. This is the dystopia that had at first looked like a utopia.
So everybody comes away from this parable, understanding that it's a warning that we
have to have the groups joined together. We need to have community. However, there's also a
voyage to the year 30 million. When on a great darkling beach, the time traveler sees nothing
but great flapping shapes fighting for survival in a world lit by a swollen red sun when the title
drag has stopped the rotation of the earth. Wells is letting us know that at a far enough
perspective, even the question of what's good and bad for human life is trivial. Because at a
far enough perspective, we are only parts of forces bigger than anything we can control.
At the end of the novel, the narrator, who is a young man at the table, says of the two flowers
that the time traveler brought back from the year 802, 701, and which no one can identify as being
part of any genus now available. He says, but I have by me two dried flowers to show that when
all else had failed, still humanity existed in the human heart. But did it exist in the human
heart? Were those flowers given in love? Or was that just some childlike gesture by a degenerate
who knew no better? Will we destroy ourselves through our technology or uplift ourselves?
Ultimately, Wells says it may not matter. But in the short run, we have a moral obligation to
take over our lives and use the power of science and technology to make our world better. The
history of utopian literature since Wells, we by Zamyatin, Brave New World 1984 and so on, suggests
that in fact, most people think we can't do it. But Wells was writing at a time when it's still
seen sensible to say, think maybe by studying this in fiction, we can make the world better.
Lecture summary. H. G. Wells is perhaps the most famous science fiction writer in English.
His scientific romances, as he called them, published between 1895 and 1901, brought him
enormous fame and defined the genre in his time. Yet Wells was also a figure of political and
literary controversy. Son of a poor tradesman, Wells was a self-taught man who disparaged
the English class system and became one of the leading intellectual figures in the Socialist
Revolution. He was a longtime member of the Fabian Society, whose other leaders included
E. Nesbitt and George Bernard Shaw. Like Shaw, Wells' political beliefs shaped his literary
convictions. He argued that social forces should determine content and plot. His great
contemporary, Henry James by contrast, felt that serious literature should be true to individual
psychology. While we have seen that later writers like Asimov agreed with Wells, this debate has
further ramifications in science fiction circles, particularly when writers like Ray Bradbury begin
to focus on individual experience. Wells went through distinct phases, during which he wrote
scientific romances like The Island of Dr. Moreau and The Invisible Man, socialist utopian novels
such as Men Like Gods, non-fiction works of history, and didactic reflective works.
Even the scientific romances reflect his preoccupation with social forces, however.
In The Time Machine, we are confronted with ideas about utopias that stretch back to Plato's Republic
and Sir Thomas Moore, who first used the word utopia as the title of his 1516 book.
Wells considers questions about the human community. What is the relationship of the
individual to society? What is the relationship of human life to other forces we may not be able
to control? These are questions that still haunt science fiction. Yet while Wells believed that
we can better our lives with technology, later writers such as Aldous Huxley and George Orwell
are more pessimistic.
