Lecture 4, Pulp Culture, World War II, and the Ascendancy of American Science Fiction.
In discussing science fiction so far, with the exception of Poe, almost everyone we've
discussed is a European, Shelley, Verne, Wells.
It would seem that the evolution of science fiction is really a European evolution, and
to some extent, of course, that's correct because there was no America from the standpoint
of the kind of writing that we read more than a few hundred years ago, whereas, as we saw,
the roots of science fiction go back at least as far as Plato, so we would expect there
to be European roots to science fiction, but as we think of science fiction these days,
we really think of it, I think, not as a European phenomenon, but if it's at all nationalized
as an American phenomenon, and in so doing, we are thinking of something specifically
that goes by the name of pulp culture, Verne, Shelley, Wells.
Those are what we would normally call highbrow writers, not necessarily the highest possible,
but highbrow.
They intended to reach a wide audience, but a wide literate audience, an educated audience.
Pulp culture characterized publishing for the masses, begun in the United States around
the time of the Civil War, and ultimately had a tremendous impact on the development
of science fiction.
So what I'd like to talk about in this discussion is a number of economic and technological
facts that bear upon the way in which science fiction developed.
First I'd like to talk about pulp culture in general, then I want to talk about dime
novels, then I want to talk about a couple of important editors and writers, and then
finally, after World War II, the breakdown of pulp culture.
Pulp culture is called pulp culture because it revolves around work that's printed on
stuff called pulp.
Really what pulp is, is the beaten down smashed up pieces of trees, it's wood that's going
to be turned into paper.
Good paper has rag content, it has cloth in it.
But cheap paper, newsprint being an example, is made from wood pulp.
If you publish on pulp, if you publish on newsprint, you're expecting what you publish
to be ephemeral.
It's not like publishing a hardback, you don't expect a library to buy it, you don't
expect the person who buys it to read it to keep it.
Things that are published on pulp are meant to be disposed of.
So there's a different economics behind the publishing of pulp books than there is behind
the publishing of hardback books.
The average pulp novel would look something like what I'm holding in my hand now.
It's in this case reduced to 8.5 by 11, it would have been the size of a tabloid newspaper.
The writing is so small that older people would probably need magnifying glass to be
able to read it.
24 pages would be the normal publication length, and in fact, at three columns across,
24 pages would turn out to give us about 60,000 words, the normal length of a modest
novel.
These novels would be sold for a dime after the Civil War, and hence we get what were
called dime novels.
Who were the consumers of these pulp novels?
They were ordinary working people.
This wasn't literature for the educated, this was literature for the masses.
As literacy began to spread with the advent of free public education, as America began
to develop a more educated workforce, these people needed entertainment, and pulp publication
served that need.
The economics of pulp publication is that the cost is low, the consumption is ephemeral.
That means that the writer who writes for pulp is not aspiring to great art.
He or she is aspiring to a quick buck, or in this case, a quick dime.
In getting that quick buck, the only way to keep the income going is to write more and
more.
What happens?
Instead of trying to say something new, astonishing, profound, with every crack out of the barrel,
the writer looks to see what worked before and make as small a variation on it as possible
so as to get an audience that's already pretested.
Pulp publication leads to series.
That is, if you liked my detective in this crime story, you'll like the same detective
in the next crime story.
We have identifiable literary genres like detective stories, westerns, science fiction,
that get published again and again and again with the same cast of characters.
This cheap publication interests people who are not looking to get something new and profound
each time.
It interests people who are looking to get an experience repeated that they liked before.
You liked our hamburger last time?
You can find the same hamburger in the same joint with the same plastic logo two miles
down the road or 2,000 miles down the road.
You liked my hero last time?
You'll like him again.
What do I mean by again?
Loose Centerans wrote Frank Reed and The Steaman of the Plains.
Frank Reed and The Steaman of the Plains, 1868, excuse me, Frank Reed and The Steaman
of the Plains, 1878, is an important dime novel.
By the time Loose Centerans was done, he had written 400 novels.
These gave rise to a whole industry of science fiction, dime novels.
Among the most famous are the Tom Swift novels, Tom Swift and his motorcycle, 1910, Tom Swift
and his wizard camera, 1912, Tom Swift and his photo telephone, 1914, Tom Swift and his
aerial warship, 1915, Tom Swift and his stone planet, 1935.
In fact, there was a second series of Tom Swift stories that came out between 1954 and
1968, and in 1991, series three of the Tom Swift stories began to be published.
They were all written by Victor Appleton.
There is no Victor Appleton.
Victor Appleton is what is known as a house name.
He is a trademark owned by the Stratomire Publishing House, and anybody who writes a
Tom Swift story is Victor Appleton.
However, there really was a Loose Centerans, and Loose Centerans really did write all those
novels, and the first guy who wrote as Victor Appleton wound up writing 1,500 novels and
published 75 Uncle Wiggly books, as well as the Uncle Wiggly board game and publishing
over 3,000 newspaper Uncle Wiggly columns.
These people, as you might guess, were paid by the word.
When you're paid by the word, you do not have an incentive to be economical, brilliant, concise.
You have an incentive to tell your audience what you know they want to hear.
What does this mean?
It means that pulp publication tends to be intellectually conservative.
Rather than challenging your readers, you ask your readers to see again what they have
liked to see.
The first dime novels came just around the time of the Civil War, and they were westerns.
Ned Buntline is the name of the writer who's most associated with this development, and
those westerns showed us again and again the same story of a lone hero who mediated between
two groups.
There was an in-group and an out-group.
The in-group might be the townsfolk.
The out-group would then be, say, the Indians or the ranchers.
If the in-group were the sheep ranchers, the out-group would be the cattle ranchers.
If the in-group was the wagon train, the out-group would be the Indians.
Whatever it is, there would be an in-group and an out-group.
The story of the western is this.
The in-group is more civilized than the out-group.
The out-group has greater survival skills.
The in-group has women, usually, and hence children and schools and jails and courts
and churches.
The out-group just has open land.
Somehow or other, there is a conflict between the out-group and the in-group.
Along comes the lone hero who shares the values of the in-group, which is after all the
civilizing force that's moving the frontier westward, and yet has the skills of the out-group.
This lone hero puts his skills to work protecting the in-group against the out-group.
At the end of that successful conflict, that lone hero then himself becomes the greatest
potential threat to the in-group.
So the traditional western has to end in one of two ways.
Either, as is the case in the Virginian by-own wister, the hero has to hang up his guns,
or, as in the case of Shane by Jack Shaffer, the hero has to ride off.
The same thing is true for the Lone Ranger, say.
So here we have the typical western, America's contribution to the form of the story.
Lone hero has the skills of the out-group, the values of the in-group, mediates the conflict,
civilization, marches west.
We're conquering new territory.
Now, already you can see how this has something to do with science fiction,
because the conquest of new territory, the taking of the laws of one place and imposing them on another place,
the naming of this place, which had, after all, names that the Native Americans gave it,
with the names that come from the language of the people from the other place,
this is exactly the story we see in the Robinsoniads, from Robinson Crusoe, right through Verne and on up.
So we have something here that's already akin to science fiction,
and some critics have said America is science fiction.
Now, these dime novels began as explicit westerns,
but pretty soon people began to write what we would now call science fiction.
So the first one is usually thought to be Edward S. Ellis's The Huge Hunter,
or The Steam Man of the Prairies, 1868.
Now, that sounds a heck of a lot like Frank Reed and his Steam Man of the Plains, 1878.
Actually, when Lucenarans wrote this, he didn't write it under his name, Lucenarans,
he wrote it under the name, no name, spelled as one word,
just like Captain Nemo, or just like Odysseus telling Polyphemus the Cyclops that he is no man.
This was another house name.
What kind of stories are these?
Well, this is, in fact, a western at the same time that it's a science fiction.
Here's how it begins.
Chapter one.
Frank shouted Mrs. Reed from the rear of her dwelling.
Here's your cousin Charlie from Missouri,
as if he doesn't know where his cousin Charlie is from.
The level of writing skill is not high, but if you took out the from Missouri to make it better writing,
you'd also take out two cents, one per word, so there's no incentive to get rid of it.
All right, said a voice that seemed to come from a sort of woodshed at the end of a long yard.
I'm coming.
The door of the outhouse was cautiously opened, and Frank Reed slipped out, carefully re-closing the door.
In a moment, he was shaking hands with the tall, broad-shouldered, western youth
who had traveled from Missouri to New York to pay him a visit.
In age, the cousins were alike, both being 16.
But while Frank, born and bred in New York, and being of a studious nature and quite a thinker,
was pale, slim, and not over-strong, the Missouri boy, breathing the free air of the great prairies,
had grown strong and robust in form, a splendid hunter, a dead shot, and a lover of wild adventure.
Now, what do we see here?
I think already we have revealed most of the characteristics that are important to recognize
about pulp culture in general, and pulp science fiction in particular.
First of all, it's clear that the audience for this is, on the average, younger than the audience for, say, Shelly or Wells.
We're really aiming this at adolescents.
Second, the educational level.
Look at the level of literary reference in here.
Zero. The level of formal education of pulp fiction is lower than that of the British scientific romance.
And of course, along with lower age and lower level of achieved formal education,
you can pretty well expect goes along a lower level of average income.
So pulp publication has a different audience than that of the works we've been talking about previously.
In addition, because this is American pulp fiction,
there tends to be a shift away from the sense of the necessity of having a restraining community that tells people what's right and wrong to do,
toward a sense of rugged individualism.
We can go out and make the world over the way we want it to be.
This is American fiction.
Now, so far, this could just be a Western.
Why do I call it a science fiction?
Well, it turns out that what Frank Reed has done is made himself a giant steam man.
And the steam man is, unfortunately, if you look at the illustration, a large black man with a top hat.
He is a parody of what would have been a slave had this been written only 20 years earlier, 25 years earlier.
They decide, Frank and Charlie, these two 16-year-olds,
to disassemble the steam man, take him out west, go to Missouri, reassemble him,
hitch him to a wagon, and let him draw the wagon across the plains as if he were some kind of Cooley.
And they will, Charlie says happily to his New York cousin, Frank,
they will be able to scare the living daylights out of those engines.
They'll be so amazed at what they see.
Now, just as Jules Verne used lots of national and racial stereotypes to make his satire,
this kind of fiction uses those stereotypes.
But unlike Verne, who is playing for a more sophisticated audience,
more sophisticated than many people nowadays realize, as I said,
this is not playing to sophistication.
This is pandering to those stereotypes.
I'll give you an example.
They are going across the plain now being drawn by their steam man, which is Frank's own invention.
He beheld a sight that brought him to his feet with a bound.
At the rear and slightly to one side of the track they had passed over,
he beheld a white man in the grasp of a brunny red skin.
The white man was on his knees.
The Indians stood over him with uplifted tomahawk.
A moment's delay would be fatal.
Halt!
The command peeled from Charlie's lips as his rifle flew to his shoulder.
Frank pulled a rod and shut off the steam.
The steam man shivered and stood still.
Crack!
The rifle peeled forth its shrill note at almost at the same instant of time.
The red skin fell lifeless to the ground,
shot through the body by the unerring aim of the Missouri marksman.
Then Frank looked around and found that Charlie had saved a human life.
Personally, I find this absolutely deplorable.
It seems to me that what Charlie has just done has taken a human life.
But it's so clear, the distinction made between Native Americans and European Americans in this,
that the Native Americans don't even count as human lives.
It's that kind of grotesque conservatism that plays to the most thoughtless notions of stereotyping
that runs through pulp culture.
Sad to say.
Now, it goes on.
It has every possible target.
One of the worst Indians that we see in this is named Sholom al-Arkham.
Obviously, it's an anti-Semitic notion since Sholom al-Arkham is a traditional greeting among Jews.
What do we find with these little racist kids running around the West behind their wonderful invention?
We find in them something which becomes characteristic of American science fiction.
A belief, believe it or not, despite all of this stereotyping, in meritocracy,
ruled by those who deserve to rule, natural right.
Here's an example.
They are at this point with a group of men, including an experienced scout,
and a stampede of buffalo has been started by a wildfire.
Dash for the woods, says the experienced scout, Snap Carter.
Halt.
The counterman came sharply upon the heels of the order.
The men had turned to obey the command of the guide,
but when that ringing word saluted their ears, they stood irresolute.
Halt, again, the order was given, and then Snap Carter turned upon the speaker,
who was none other than Frank Reed, this 16-year-old boy from New York.
What do your obey orders, said Frank, breaking in on his remonstrance?
Every man of you dropped down here, you could never enter the little grove alive.
The men obeyed, feeling that they could well trust this determined boy.
Now, that's part of what gives science fiction, and for many years, maybe justifiably, a bad name.
Somehow or other, science fiction picked up on this notion that a teenager
who's smart enough is simply worthy of ruling the world,
of telling every adult what to do, of going where he's never been before
and understanding it better than anybody else.
This is teenage power fantasy, usually aimed at somebody who is a little bit uncomfortable
in establishing normal adult relations.
In the case of this particular dime novel, what we see is that the intellectual shy Frank,
who certainly doesn't sound shy here when he's giving orders to Snap Carter and his men,
has as his double, his brawny, expert cousin.
They are both 16, together they make up the traditional Western hero.
They have the values of the in-group, the more established socialized group,
Frank comes from New York, and the survival skills of the out-group, Charlie grows up in Missouri.
Together they mediate the disputes, the first one being between a white man
and what's called a red skin, and always resolve it in favor of the East,
in favor of the in-group, in favor of the more civilized.
So we have the use of technology and the teaming of the world to standard science fiction motifs
melded into the standard story of the Western.
And as pulp fiction began to multiply like crazy because it was cheap
and had a much bigger audience than high fiction, because after all, it was cheaper
and there are more uneducated people than educated people, as this spread,
that began to dominate the tone of science fiction.
So we have no name, we have Tom Swift and so forth.
Along comes Hugo Gernsback, an American immigrant from Luxembourg.
He was born in 1884 and came to the U.S. at the age of 20, full of hope, conquering the New World.
He is the man who founded Modern Electrics.
As I told you, he began publishing Verne in 1911.
He also, in his own book, Magazine Modern Electrics, began to publish serially,
a novel called Ralph 1, 2, 4, C, 1+, a guy with numbers instead of a name.
Now Ralph 1, 2, 4, C, 4, 1+, is the story of Ralph,
one of only 10 men on the planet who is allowed to use the plus sign after his name.
He lives in an enormous tower made of steelonium coming up in the middle of Union Square in New York.
Ralph has his wonderful telephot, through which he is able to see one day
an avalanche about to begin in Switzerland,
and some lovely young girl named Alice, who is threatened by the falling snow.
Ralph gets into a flying machine of his own invention
and manages to get across the Atlantic Ocean in time to snatch Alice out from underneath the falling snow.
The story goes through one adventure after another, mostly actually based on Philip Sidney's Arcadia.
That is, we keep getting this obviously fated love broken apart by pirates who kidnap her,
other lovers who want her, except in this case, our great western hero, this wonderful fellow from the west,
is fighting against pirates who are either Martians or Venusians,
and these guys turn out to have sexual interest in Alice.
Interestingly enough, I'm sure that Ralph crammed and knew nothing about this.
At one point in this story, Ralph and Alice really do go to the moon together.
A lot of it takes place in spaceships that Ralph manages to make.
Ralph is a remarkable fellow. His mind is so powerful that at one point when he is grievously wounded,
he maintains consciousness by will alone.
He just wills himself to be conscious.
Anyway, he finally does marry, save Alice.
They do marry, and at the end, all of New York is around this phallic tower in Union Square,
cheering the fact that Ralph is now going to have a child.
Obviously, he's going to use Alice's help.
He's not going to make Victor Frankenstein's mistake.
What we have then is a 21 year old who saves the universe.
This is just 40 years later after Frank Reed saves the West.
Science fiction of the pulp variety is based on the idea that one young man,
no, one adolescent, one overgrown boy, can somehow dominate everybody
and make the world safe for American white middle class democracy,
in which he will naturally enough be spontaneously chosen as the leader.
It turns out, of course, that Ralph's name is a pun, and that's what the last line is,
that Alice suddenly realizes that Ralph is one to foresee for one.
Plus, he's a good looking guy.
So Ralph is prescient as well as everything else.
Hugo Gernsback wrote this book, and it is a classic.
Although it wasn't actually published as a dime novel, published serially in Modern Electrics,
it is the perfect exemplar of the dime novel.
It is meant to make us love science.
In fact, Hugo Gernsback really did read all of the science available in his day,
and he published as much as he could about science in Modern Electrics.
Then Ralph, one to foresee for one plus, he has diagrams of the different inventions
that he has in mind, and one diagram shows a parabolic reflector,
and at the focus of the parabola, he has a little broadcaster of electromagnetic waves,
and he shows the waves going out in solid lines and coming back in dotted lines,
and he explains how if you would just send out the waves this way and let them come back,
and figure out how long they had taken to go to make a long story short,
1912, Hugo Gernsback actually published a diagram for and a description of working radar,
almost 30 years before it ever existed, and before it ever existed in the technical literature.
It is one of the very few places where science fiction actually lives up to its billing
of inventing things before they happen.
Usually, as with Verne, science fiction writers invent things after they happen,
and Hugo Gernsback actually did give a diagram for radar and think it up on his own before it ever happened.
Now, Gernsback was a very, very great visionary, but a very, very bad businessman.
He lost control of Modern Electrics in about two other magazines that he founded thereafter,
but then in 1926 he founded Amazing Stories.
Amazing Stories, as I said, the April issue talked about the desire to publish science fiction,
and so the genre finally had a name.
He began by reprinting Verne and Wells and trying to get other writers as well.
It wasn't selling quite as fast as he wanted, so he began to pick up other writers
who had already started publishing in other magazines.
The most important of these was Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Burroughs, I'm sure you know, because he's the fellow who wrote Tarzan of the Apes.
Plus, of course, 10 more, excuse me, 12 more books.
Sorry, 23 more books in that series.
He published Tarzan of the Apes in 1912 in All Story.
That's the name of the magazine.
Just a couple of months before that, he had published his first serialized novel, A Princess of Mars.
A Princess of Mars is the first of a series that has 10 more books following it,
and its main character is John Carter.
John Carter is a Virginian.
He has unfortunately lost the Civil War.
He's out west at the beginning of the story, and he's being chased across the Arizona landscape with a colleague.
They are on horseback, and they are being chased by, what else, red devils.
The red devils chase them, and they go into a cave where the friend dies of the wound that he's gotten
from an arrow from one of the chasing Indians.
But John Carter survives.
The Indians don't go into this cave with its green miasma, some kind of strange fog.
The next thing you know, Carter falls asleep, and when he awakens, he's on this russet landscape.
He turns out to be on Mars.
And since he grew up on Earth, which has three times the gravity of Mars,
he's able to leap tall buildings at a single bound.
It's the Superman story, years before Superman gets written,
while John Carter was not able to win for his government on the Earth.
He, in fact, is able to help out the good guys on Mars and bring about ultimately a truce between the green Martians and the red Martians.
In subsequent books, he manages to marry Deja Thoris, the princess of Mars of this title,
then they have little kids of some biological mix that Burroughs never explains.
And you can see that we have a Western and a science fiction simultaneously.
People used to say that pulp science fiction was really costume Westerns, and in a way they are.
But that underlying idea that John Carter really gets his strength for good scientific bases,
that's the kind of thing that still engages us in science fictional terms.
In fact, if you read Burroughs' work with some care, you'll find out that much of it could easily be called science fiction.
Tarzan of the Apes is as good a fictionalization of the currently understood notions of anthropology
as anything you can find in the second decade of the 20th century.
And similarly, in his The Land the Time Forgot series, as the travelers go back through evolution by going upstream in this strange environment,
it turns out that the Land the Time Forgot gives us a chance to watch the evolution of human culture and the evolution of human language.
In a way, if we're willing to call anthropology a science, just as we would physics or astronomy,
all of Burroughs' work could be thought of as science fiction.
Edgar Rice Burroughs was enormously popular.
There is a large section of Los Angeles today, very expensive real estate, called Tarzana.
It's called Tarzana because it was named after the ranch that Edgar Rice Burroughs bought there,
which he named after his character Tarzan.
Tarzana was just one of the many things that Burroughs was able to acquire.
He wrote, in addition to the 11 Princess of Mars books and the 24 Tarzan of the Apes books,
six at the Earth's core books, three The Land the Time Forgot books,
six Napier books set on Venus, and many more.
In other words, altogether, he wound up writing about 60 books.
Perfectly normal for a pulp novelist.
He died in bed in Tarzana reading a comic book.
It's quite fitting.
But if that's the heritage of American pulp science fiction,
it's no wonder that parents used to tell kids that they weren't allowed to read it.
Isaac Asimov, for example, that wonderful lover of science who became the science fiction writer
and wrote those three laws of robotics, excuse me, wrote about the three laws of robotics,
as I discussed in a previous lecture.
Isaac Asimov was not allowed to read science fiction by his immigrant parents.
They wanted him to grow up to be a good American, an educated American.
But his father owned a candy store in New York,
and little Ike used to go when his father wasn't looking,
being attracted by the glossy covers with the funny monsters on them,
and read the science fiction anyway.
So science fiction was the literature of corruption.
It was what pandered to the low-class, uneducated, insecure adolescent boy
who wanted to take over the world.
Not very good literary values, but it sold like crazy
and established an enormous cultural presence.
Then along came John W. Campbell, Jr.
Campbell wrote himself science fiction under the name of Don A. Stewart.
His wife's name when he married her was Donna Stewart.
Under the name Don A. Stewart, he wrote a number of very influential stories.
Two worth noting are Twilight and Who Goes There?
Twilight is a classic story of the end of civilization
when our technology has gotten so perfect that we have forgotten how to run it,
and therefore when it goes awry, when it runs down,
no one is left to repair it, and civilization and humanity are doomed.
It's a work that has much in common with The Time Machine by Wells.
Who Goes There is the classic story that underlies the famous movies of the thing,
the thing from outer space, and so on.
It's a story about a shape-changer that appears in a scientific research institution,
and because it can change its shape, it calls into question whether or not
we really understand whom we are with at any time.
Do we really know people? Can we really trust them?
In other words, Campbell was writing in the tradition of philosophic science fiction,
of science fiction as social parable, of science fiction as ethical issue,
and yet he grew up an enthusiastic American loving the pulp culture.
He took over the editorship of Astounding magazine in 1937.
America was just coming out of the Depression.
Astounding, by the way, is still published, although it has since changed its name to Analog.
When he took it over in 37, he had a backlog of accepted stories that he had to publish,
but by 1939, the magazine took on Campbell's own stamp.
What did Campbell want?
For one thing, Campbell wanted some concern for characterization.
He wasn't willing to have somebody be merely brawny and 16 or brainy and 16.
You actually had to have some ideas, some feelings, not necessarily a lot, but some.
Second, he wanted some stylistic polish.
He did pay by the word, but as I know from having talked with many writers who worked with him,
I never met Campbell myself, but I've met many who did know him.
If you sent Campbell a 5,000-word story, which Campbell thought would be better as a 3,000-word story,
he would send you back a 10,000-word letter explaining how to cut it and condense it.
And I know many writers who have preserved those letters from Campbell
as the great lessons in the development of their writing careers.
Campbell would not pay for those extra words with money,
but he would pay with his own time to make you a better writer.
So he wanted some characterization, some stylistic polish.
Philosophically, he also wanted to promote a kind of inclusiveness.
Now, he was a racist. There's no doubt about it.
He was not, however, glad to be a racist.
So unlike the kind of pulp fiction that I read to you from Frank Reeden as Steaman of the Plains,
he was not willing to have people gladly kill the other,
whether the other be seen as a Native American or a Martian or whatever.
However, in every conflict between humans and aliens, the humans always had to win.
Always had to win.
For this reason, in the foundation series by Asimov, which got an award as the best science fiction series of all time,
we have no one who isn't human.
There's lots of conflict, but there's no one who isn't human. Why not?
Because Asimov, who was Jewish, was not willing to write about aliens for Campbell,
who clearly wanted every character, even a Jewish character,
to fail in the face of a white Protestant American.
So he just made everybody milk toast.
They made everybody milk toast to satisfy Campbell.
Now, to us nowadays that I think looks like a terrible position,
but I think to give this man his due, you have to put it in context.
On the one hand, he went a long way from the pulp novels
in at least giving the aliens a chance to have combat with the humans.
And two, he was working in America as we're pulling ourselves out of the depression
at a time when the notion of the melting pot was considered valid.
The melting pot, after all, is a notion not of individual ethnic pride.
I will be proud to be Puerto Rican. I will be proud to be Greek. I will be proud to be Chinese.
Rather, the melting pot is a notion that we will all come here and become Americans,
regardless of what may be the language of our grandparents, the colors of our skin.
We will all become Americans.
And this, in fact, is a major, major theme in the development of American culture
and, in fact, in part of the development of the American Western.
What's going on when that in-group moves west is that it is making everything into America.
We're all learning a sense of community and common support and so on
by our necessity of sharing the tribulations of taming the land.
So Campbell takes this up. It's not that he wants to get rid of aliens.
It's not that things are in the evil. They're just not as good as Americans.
And when they're in conflict, the Americans have to win.
So his idea is not exactly tolerance. It's inclusiveness.
If only the aliens will see the error of their ways, they can become Americans, too.
And one of the finest short stories in the field that Campbell himself much admired
was one called a Martian Odyssey by Stanley Weinbaum, who was a Jew.
That didn't bother Campbell any more than it bothered him that Asimov was a Jew.
In which an American, also with the initials JC, goes to Mars and is, in fact,
trying to find something necessary to refuel his ship so he can escape.
Along the way, there's this strange ostrich-like creature that tags along after him.
He calls him Twill because this creature makes this funny twill, twill sound all the time.
Twill, like John Carter of Mars, is able to jump enormously high.
He looks sort of like an ostrich, but what he'll do is he'll jump way high.
Maybe he's getting excited. At least that's what the Earth Hero thinks.
Spin around in the air, turn upside down, and dive bomb right into the grounds,
bearing his head about three feet into the ground.
Then he'll kind of shake his tush and come back out again, and then follow along after the Earthman.
Well, they go through one adventure after another, and it turns out, finally,
he realizes at the end that Twill has understood what he was after, maybe telepathically,
has managed to steal for him the thing that he was not able to get himself, which is necessary,
and bring it back to the spaceship for him at the risk of his own life.
So at the end, he says to his crewmates as they are about to leave,
and Twill is down on the surface of the planet behind them.
So at the end, I said to him, Twill, by God, you're a man,
which is the highest compliment he could think to give.
Not, I respect you because you are whatever you are, but you are just like me.
It's not a notion of tolerance, it's a notion of inclusiveness.
And that was the liberal position of magazine science fiction that evolved under John W. Campbell, Jr.
He wound up finding and supporting writers who became some of the greats in the field,
Asimov, Lester Del Ray, A. Van Vogt, Robert Heinlein, Robert Sturgeon, and so on.
He was enormously important.
If you published in Astounding, then you were publishing where it counted,
and many, many people feel that this is the golden age of science fiction,
that under Campbell's editorship, well, he actually stayed with the magazine until his death in 1971,
but until about 1970, when competition came along with other newer kinds of science fiction,
until about 1960, he defined the field.
So from 39 to 60, for a period of a couple of decades,
that's where a lot of people say was the golden age of science fiction.
By golden age, what they really mean is the time when this inclusive, aggressive, pro-technology,
pro-American notion of we can make the world safe and good for us, science fiction, was being published.
Now, up until World War II, of course, most of what was important in the development of science fiction in the world
was going on in its own little national contexts.
In America, despite the existence of work like that of Poe and some other high-brow writers who wrote work
which we would now see as science fiction, Hawthorne, Melville, for example,
wrote works we would consider science fiction, we have mostly the dominance of the pulp culture.
The pulp culture grew up, as I say, after the Civil War. Why after the Civil War?
During the Civil War, America developed for the first time simultaneously an appetite for national news
and the mechanism to get national news.
What was put into place was something called the American News Company,
and they bought warehouse space near the railheads at major cities all over the country.
And as the Civil War progressed, a newspaper reporter could go and report by telegraph for the first time to his newspaper.
The newspaper could write up the report and could then make many, many copies of the newspaper
and ship it to the American News Company, which would break it down and send it out to its different distribution points.
Many different periodicals could compete this way because the American News Company took care of national distribution.
In the European context, on the other hand, science fiction was continuing as relatively high-brow literature,
working not only with Wells but with his successors like Olaf Stapleton writing in the 1930s.
But with the Second World War, suddenly we have the hegemony of U.S. cultural dominance in the world.
At the end of the Second World War, all of that pent-up popular literature, that pulp literature,
which no one bothered to distribute to Europe, of course, it was just cheap stuff,
suddenly flowed across the Atlantic, and after a while, in fact, also across the Pacific,
and American science fiction took over everywhere, took over everywhere.
So all of science fiction after World War II took a ratchet down in terms of educational level,
in terms of income, in terms of age of expected reader.
But then something else happened.
First we get America taking over, we get science fiction as America, and then Wall Street came in.
Wall Street looked around in about 1954, nine years after the end of the war,
and well-established American hegemony by then, and saw that the American News Company had all this warehouse space
in prime downtown territory that was worth a lot more as real estate than it was as the American News Company.
So they bought it out and liquidated it.
At the end of this time, what happened was that there was no, and there still is not,
no national distribution system for periodical literature.
There is none.
What that meant was if you had yourself as a publisher, a million circulation,
you could afford to ship 100,000 to each of the 10 regional distributors.
But if you had only 50,000, you couldn't afford to ship it at all, and you just went out of business.
When the American News Company was bought in 1954, there were 38 monthly science fiction magazines.
By 1960, after they were done liquidating it, there were four.
What this meant was the science fiction short story, the let's get paid by the word idea, was almost dead.
At the same time, about 1952, Ian Valentine came up with a terrific idea.
Why not publish novels originally in paperback?
Why not put them on the news shelf, but not date them?
And unlike periodicals, they won't have a limited shelf life, and you won't have to pull them again.
So science fiction writers changed from writing short stories and serials by the word to writing novels for one-time publication.
In the course of doing that, in effect, what happened is that the American science fiction changed from its past to what would become its future.
There were three reasons for the breakdown of this culture.
One, that is the pulp culture. One was, of course, this liquidation of the American News Company.
The second was the shift of advertising funds from periodical literature to television.
The third was an editorial shift away from bug-eyed monsters to compete with newspapers that a science fiction writer-editor started asking for
science-y sounding stuff, because Sputnik went up in 57, and we have to be with it.
But they couldn't hold their own against the movies, because B-movies came along in the 1950s,
and if you wanted bug-eyed monsters, you could go to the movies and get them plenty.
Therefore, science fiction started producing the wrong product, and there was also the last, the dissolution of this SF ghetto.
Ian Valentine's paperbacks spread things around, and in fact along came Ray Bradbury,
who strung together his stories and wound up publishing The Martian Chronicles,
which was the first science fiction work that got a front page review in the New York Times book review.
It was a book of lyricism, indulging childhood fantasies, fairy tales set new on Mars,
and no apology whatsoever for the fact that the science stank.
John W. Campbell wouldn't have cared, but it didn't matter.
He was alive, but from a cultural point of view, he was dead.
And now science fiction had become what it would be for the rest of our lifetimes,
the dominant, pervasive theme in modern culture with America in the lead.
Thank you.
Lecture Summary
The earliest science fiction writers like Shelley, Verne and Wells were European.
Changes in American publishing during the Civil War era made it possible for books to be produced inexpensively and quickly.
Pulp fiction was so named because of the cheap wood pulp used to manufacture the paper on which it was printed.
Writers of pulp novels were paid by the word, so they concentrated on length at the expense of brilliance and concision.
Many pulp fiction dime novels were westerns in which a hero protects and saves a group.
As new conquests and discoveries were made, this plot device was used to explore new technologies and new scientific possibilities,
placing the spirit of American individualism in new settings.
Hugo Gernsbach, founder of Amazing Stories and the earlier Modern Electrics,
loved science and science fiction keenly and constantly sought out writers in the same vein.
His most important discovery was Edgar Rice Burroughs, whose Tarzan books brought an anthropological dimension to science fiction.
Another important promoter of science fiction was Don A. Stewart. His real name was John W. Campbell Jr.
He became editor of astounding, now analog, in 1937.
His insistence upon style and substance in science fiction writing resulted in the publishing of works by such greats as Asimov, Heinlein and Sturgeon.
During the Golden Age, fostered by Campbell and others, American-style science fiction writing spread to Europe.
Yet once the American news company was liquidated in 1954, then the national distribution of periodicals decreased,
and science fiction monthlys fell from 38 to just 4. Fortuitously, in 1953, Ian Ballentine developed paperback publishing technology
and science fiction became more polished as writers were paid by the book rather than by the word.
