Lecture 5 and the winner is Robert A. Heinlein.
When Hugo Gernsback founded the first science fiction magazine, Amazing Stories in 1926,
he was already 15 years down the road from having founded Modern Electrics.
He saw science fiction as a way of inducing people into the world of science.
He thought that he would be producing people who loved science.
He thought that he would be producing scientists.
He also of course loved the excitement of science fiction.
Now in order to increase the likelihood that there would be a community of scientists and
also in order to increase his sales, Hugo Gernsback founded what came to be fan culture.
He instituted the idea of letters columns in the science fiction magazines.
He founded what he called the science fiction league.
The science fiction league pretty quickly became defunct.
He was hoping that people who were in the league would automatically subscribe to all
Hugo Gernsback publications.
The people didn't really want to do that, but it turned out that they did want to keep
in touch with each other.
So in the science fiction magazines, fans would write in and say what they liked and
didn't like about the stories.
And one of the things that Gernsback encouraged because of his own interest in real science
was fans writing in to say, well, this story was good, but the science was really a little
wrong this way or that way, or I like this story better because the science was this
way or that way.
In other words, even though science fiction is based on the fantastic made plausible against
a background of science, the premise was in the reading that where the fantastic didn't
enter in, the science should work perfectly well.
We've already seen this with HG Wells, the time machine.
Once you assume there's a time machine, then you can go 800,000 years into the future and
see how the normal laws of evolution might have led to social classes to degenerate into
two different species.
Now when John W. Campbell took over astounding and became, I think, the single most important
editor in the field, Gernsback now having dropped out, he continued this fan culture.
The fan culture was enormously important.
In fact, of all the popular genres, none has a stronger interconnection among the writers,
the editors, and the readers because of this fan culture.
So for example, in the July 1939 issue of astounding, when Campbell is just getting
into a stride and beginning what came to be called the golden age of science fiction,
you can find a story by Isaac Asimov, a young professional writer, and you can also find
a fan letter by Isaac Asimov in the very same issue, commenting on what he thought were
the strengths and weaknesses of the way in which other stories in the magazine were handling
certain things.
In this particular case, he was talking about how they handle the love interest.
Now Campbell, like Gernsback, thought that science fiction should encourage scientists,
but the fan culture took off in a direction of its own.
In fact, the fans began to have what they called the World Science Fiction Convention,
which at first meant those fans who lived around the New York area, then eventually
came to be those fans who lived in the United States.
And actually now it has gotten to mean the fans who can read English, and it really is
a World Science Fiction Convention.
It doesn't even always happen in the United States, although so far it's always happened
in English-speaking countries.
The fans quickly established awards for the best work of any given year.
There might be an award for the novel, the short story, the novella, art, editing, and
so on.
These awards are named after Hugo Gernsback because of his interest in developing fan
culture, and they are called the Hugo.
The writer who has won more Hugo's than any other is Robert Heinlein, and Heinlein, in
fact, turned out to be the favorite author of John W. Campbell, Jr.
In a way, what Campbell was pushing was what came to be called Hard SF.
This is in the Gernsback tradition, hard not in the sense of difficult, but hard in the
sense in which we say that physics is a hard science and, say, sociology is a soft science.
Hard SF is SF that comes down hard on the side of scientific extrapolation.
So if we have a writer like Arthur C. Clarke, who actually has scientific training and calculates
the orbital velocity of a satellite around some planet that he hypothesizes in one of
his stories, he's doing hard SF.
The fans then write in and say, ah, yes, he got the calculations right, or oh, no, he
got the calculations wrong, and so on.
Hard SF, because it lives at the ideological heart of the mainstream of American science
fiction, from the pulp era on, from Gernsback to Campbell, and so on, hard SF has had a
tremendous defining influence in the field of science fiction.
On the other hand, there really is very little true hard SF.
Most science fiction is fiction first, and people are more interested in character and
plot than they are in calculation of orbital velocity.
So for instance, Jules Verne, who clearly loved science, used it obviously satirically,
as I mentioned.
And from the Earth to the Moon, he has a tunnel built so that a ballistic missile can send
people to the Moon, knowing full well that the acceleration necessary to leave Earth's
gravity would kill the occupants of the missile, and knowing full well that the 500 foot tube
that they had to drill in Florida would have put them 495 feet below the water table and
drowned them before they ever took off.
Verne was writing hard science, but he was writing it in a satiric way.
Wells, who's usually thought of as the prototype of the great hard science fiction writer,
actually was quite happy to ignore science whenever he wished.
For instance, his book about traveling to the Moon, The First Men in the Moon, 1901,
which is a satire in which the selenites, who look like giant ants, actually represent
the different roles of human beings on Earth.
And by talking to the grand selenite, our traveling hero gets to find out things that
actually reflect on political situations back on Earth.
In order to get to the Moon, the inventor named Caver, C-A-V-O-R, gets himself a spherical
ship and in the three equally distant bays that are made concave in the base of the sphere,
he puts caverite.
Caverite turns out to be a mineral of his own creation, which has negative gravity.
He puts Venetian blinds in front of these three concavities full of caverite.
And then, of course, by opening and shutting the blinds, he can get propulsion against
ordinary gravity.
Anti-gravity is absolutely anti-scientific, and Wells knew that absolutely well.
He really didn't care.
He was in the process of writing a fun satire.
So in fact, hard science fiction serves as a model, but a model that typically is used
more as a field against which to make jokes than it is something to actually pursue.
Nonetheless, when it works, it works well.
People still talk about Gerns-Bach's Diagram for Gravity in Ralph 124, C-41+, in 1942 Lester
Del Ray published in the magazines a novella called Nerves, which was the first and still
quite accurate description of what would happen during the meltdown of a nuclear power
plant.
This was 1942.
This was not only before there was ever a nuclear power plant.
This was before there was ever a nuclear bomb.
He's already giving an accurate description of what would happen if this went awry.
One of the most famous stories about hard SF is that of Cleve Cartmille's story called
Deadline, published in 1944, in which the author, using only the sources that are publicly
available, managed to have a character build an atomic bomb.
Unknown to Cartmille, the Manhattan Project was going on at exactly the same time, and
it's quite famous that the FBI came to talk to Cartmille at his home, came to talk to
his editors, and so on, feeling for sure that there had been some national security breach.
In fact, though, despite the kind of legendary or philosophical importance of hard SF to
the field of science fiction in general, as far as I've been able to tell, there's
been really only one genuine invention made by a science fiction writer and promulgated
before in science fiction, before it gets discussed by other writers, that is, non-science
fiction writers.
That's the invention of the geostationary communication satellite, what Arthur C. Clarke
called an extraterrestrial relay when he first published the proposal for this in 1945.
What we now call communication satellites.
In 1945, Arthur C. Clarke, who had gone to school in mathematics and physics, and in
fact was a navigation officer attached to the ground control guidance system that the
English used during the Battle of Britain, and was one of the very first people to help
develop the ability to fly in bad weather, which was a major, major weapon on the side
of the Allies during the war, Clarke recognized that if you had a satellite in an orbit that
matched its speed of rotation with that of the Earth, it would be possible to bounce
signals over the horizon line, and all of our modern communications now holding the world
together via communication satellite is based on this idea.
Said to say, he published it first in a technical journal before he used it in a science fiction
magazine.
So in that sense, you might say that no real invention ever appeared first in science fiction.
But since the author who invented it was himself a science fiction author, maybe we can give
science fiction credit for this.
This was really hard SF.
And Clarke is often thought of as the greatest of the hard SF writers.
Hard SF has many special joys.
It has, of course, the joy of figuring out whether or not the author did things right
or wrong.
It also has the joy of what if.
Let's just say we made gravity a little lighter, then John Carter can go to Mars in Edgar
Riceboro as a princess of Mars and jump, leap tall buildings at a single bound.
Or let's say we made gravity a little harder.
Superman can be born on Krypton, come down here and jump our buildings at a single bound.
Here are, I think, many books, but not nearly as many as one would hope, that exemplify
the joys of hard SF.
Let me mention three.
The first and maybe the most famous is Hal Clemens' book called A Mission of Gravity, 1954.
In A Mission of Gravity, we have an earth crew that lands on the center of the planet
Mesklin.
Mesklin, it turns out, is shaped like a discus, one of those things that an athlete flings.
Because it's shaped like a discus, the amount of mass between the surface of Mesklin at
the pole on the short axis between that surface and the center is much, much, much less than
the amount of mass between a point on the surface at the circumference, that is, on
the long axis and the center.
In fact, whether you are on the flat part of the discus or the rim of the discus is
a ratio of 1 to 700 in gravity, which means lots of things happen differently there than
they would happen here.
What Clement did was figure out exactly what would happen, which chemicals would flow, which
would not, at which gravities, what kinds of physiology would be useful at one gravity
and which at another, and so on.
The earth men land on one part of the planet and need something from another part.
And what they wind up having to do is enlist the aid of Mesklinites.
Of course, no Mesklinites are able to live under all their gravitational conditions either,
just as most animals that have evolved on earth can't live in all ecological niches
on earth.
And the fun of seeing this book unfold is watching how those poor Mesklinites have to
adapt to ever greater gravity as they move around their planet into places they would
never otherwise have gone, but for the fact that they're trying to help this alien who
has landed.
It's an amusing book, it's hard SF, it's a lot of fun.
Perhaps the outstanding example in terms of writerly skill of hard SF is Clark's own
novel called A Fall of Moondust, 1961.
A fall of moondust takes us to the moon.
In the days when the moon has basically two functions.
It's a scientific base and it's a tourist destination.
Now being written in 61 before earth men had in fact landed on the moon, one could still
speculate about certain things and one of the going theories in 61 was that the darker
spots on the surface of the moon, what you see when you look up at the man in the moon
or if you happen to be Asian at the rabbit in the moon, the darker spots are non-reflective
areas, the mare, the seas, which of course aren't filled with water, but are filled with
moondust that is over the eons, the pounding of meteorites on the surface of the moon, unimpeded
because there's no atmosphere, have pulverized the rock of the moon until we have microscopic
dust.
At least this was the theory or a theory that was widely accepted by the best scientists
in 1961.
Clark concocted the idea that people would go to the moon just as a tourist destination
and one of the things they would do would be to take a, as it were, boat trip around
the seas of the moon.
Now of course since there's no atmosphere, this boat was really more like a submarine
and having to be entirely sealed and then since you want to be able to see, you didn't
want to be underneath the surface of this dust, which would be opaque, so in effect
this sealed vessel would be a paddle wheeler pushing itself along on the sea of moondust.
Of course sometimes you would have to sink below the sea and sometimes you would have
to climb out of it depending upon different conditions, so the vessel itself was pressurizable
at different levels.
Now to give you an idea of how a fall of moondust works, we get of course a dramatic problem.
The problem is that there is a mechanical breakdown in the propulsion system and there
is of course only a finite amount of air in the vessel to keep the tourists alive. Can
the people on the vessel signal for help? Well, they are beyond the radio line of the
base and they are not facing toward the earth. The question is, is it possible for them to
send a signal anywhere that will be picked up by anyone that will alert them to their
problem? And simultaneously the book shows us how the people both on earth and the moon
being out of contact with the tourist vessel try to figure out what might have happened
to them. It's sort of a bit of an adventure story in that regard, but the real love of
it is the intellectual puzzle. It's the hard science fiction aspect. For me that's epitomized
by the following scene. In this scene the captain already knows that he is in trouble
and that if they are going to be able to preserve the vessel, they are going to have to sink
below the surface of the moondust. Why? They have to keep the vessel from overheating.
They don't want to expend fuel on the heat disposal system. If they are going to sink
below, then the pressure on the vessel is going to rise, as Vern talked about in 20,000
Leagues Under the Sea. If the pressure on the vessel is going to rise, it will collapse
unless the pressure in the vessel rises. So the captain is slowly letting the vessel sink
into the moondust while the crew is not letting on to the tourist that anything is wrong.
But the pressure is slowly going up. Now just as we don't typically notice the pressure
go up or down as we walk up and down many flights of stairs, but we of course would
notice it in a speeding elevator, the people on this vessel don't notice that the pressure
is going up as they sink under the sea of dust. However, one of the stewardesses is
going around serving beverages to the tourists and one of the tourists says, I'd like a cup
of tea with a good British accent. She gives him a cup of tea, he tastes it and he says,
my, this is the first decent cup of tea I've had since I've left the earth.
Now Clark does not explain further. What Clark is expecting is that the good science fiction
fan will realize that the degree to which the aromatic chemicals in the tea leaves diffuse
into the water depend upon the temperature of the water. That the temperature of the
water depends upon the temperature at boiling because water cannot get hotter at a liquid
form than the temperature of boiling. The temperature of boiling depends upon the pressure,
the higher the pressure, the higher the boiling point. The problem this Englishman has been
encountering all along without realizing it is that on the moon where everything is generally
pressurized at about 0.8 atmospheres, his water for tea has been boiling at about 180
degrees Fahrenheit instead of 212 and that comparatively tepid water hasn't been making
his tea with the right strength. But being on this vessel which is having increased pressurization
to protect it against the moon dust, they had to go up to a full atmosphere and he's
getting the tea he wants. If he were as smart as the science fiction fans, he would realize
something was wrong in the vessel. But he's not, but the readers are. And that's part
of the real joy of hard SF. The reader gets to do this stuff for himself or occasionally
in those days herself. If you'd like to see a modern example of hard SF working very well,
I recommend Robert Forward's novel, Dragon's Egg. Bob Forward is a chief scientist at
U.S. aircraft in Malibu. Excuse me, U.S. research in Malibu. Dragon's Egg is another story something
like a mission of gravity in that we have the relation between earthmen, astronauts and
natives on the surface of a planet. Here, however, the planet isn't exactly a planet.
That is, it's not a solid body rotating revolving around a sun. It is in fact a sun. It is in
fact a neutron star that is hyper-condensed matter. The fact that it is hyper-condensed
means that anything that lives on it is going to have to have an enormous density as well.
And since neutron stars rotate many times per second, what happens is that after the
Earth crew manages to make radio contact with the inhabitants of this neutron star, they
unwittingly initiate scientific evolution among them. And every time our earthmen make
one leisurely revolution around the neutron star and reconnect with their fellows down,
their comrades down on the surface of the neutron star, it turns out the people in the neutron
star have lived through many generations. So while we're just going bit by bit, they're
evolving like mad. And at the end, these primitives, whom we have just begun to lift from the dust,
are ready to well exceed and over jump humanity, all because of the physics of condensed matter.
And Bob Forward knows how to get this right. It's a very interesting book. Now, this hard
to understand, this kind of notion that you should use your mind, you can think about things,
you can take over, you can work with science in order to make things come out right. This
is in keeping with that passion for science that we saw in Vern, in theme parks, in world
expositions. It is what Clark, excuse me, what Campbell and Gernsback wanted to push. Campbell's
favorite author was Robert Heinlein. Heinlein is not usually thought of as being the greatest
of the hard SF writers, not because he doesn't write hard enough SF, he does when he's in
the mood, but because he's so much interested in other things as well. Politics is really
the core of most of Heinlein's interest. Heinlein, however, had all the right credentials. He
went to Annapolis, which is both a military school and an engineering school, but he had
to retire from the Navy in 1934 due to disability. Nonetheless, when World War II came along,
he managed to attach himself to the Navy and although he was unable to fight, he spent
the years of the war writing aviation reports and trying to help the war effort by doing
the communication necessary for the progress of science. He took the ideas of science and
used them in science fiction. You'll remember that H. G. Wells, because of his love of evolution
and pattern making, came out with a new kind of history in the outline of history, 1920,
where he saw great social forces working in all parts of the world and saw how they developed.
Heinlein wrote what came to be called future history. From the very first publication in
1939 down to his dying day in 1988, almost all of his work, not all, but almost all of
his work, fit into one grand pattern that he called future history. In 1941, Campbell
published the diagram of future history that Heinlein had written when he was a young man
just starting to write science fiction. In this famous diagram, you have different timelines.
This is what will happen in the political world. This was what will happen in the world
of inventions. This is what will happen in the social world. And he clicks off different
decades and different centuries and he writes in the titles of stories, most of which he
got to write, some of which have yet to be written. He had a grand vision for how history
must evolve based on his own notions of what were the historical forces at play when he
began writing just in the between the war period, between the war's period. This future
history, in part because it was so capacious, in part because Campbell fostered it, became
a shared framework so that throughout the so-called golden age of science fiction, other writers
would, without any problem, just set something in the year 2200 and make it a 2200, much
like the 2200 that Robert Heinlein would talk about. So when Heinlein has a book called
Revolt in 2140, pretty soon we have eight or ten other books set in the mid-twenty-second
century and they just assume a world much like that in 2140 because Heinlein's already
established it. This is a very important part of genre development. You remember that in
the beginning of the time machine, before we get the journey to the year 802-701, Wells'
time traveler has to go through an explanation of how time travel can work and he sits there
with his Victorian guests and he shows them the tiny time machine and he says, now pay
attention, I can do this only once, throws the levers, it shimmers and disappears and
they wonder if it's a parlor trick or if it has really gone off into time. Wells has
the time traveler do that. He devotes the first chapter of the book to the explanation
of what would be a time machine. Not for the purpose of convincing the guests of the
time traveler, he does that so that we readers can understand what's going on. Before H.G.
Wells wrote, there were no time machines. The fantasy of traveling through time is ancient.
We have stories of people who dream themselves into the future or dream themselves into the
past. We have stories of people who have visionary experiences in the future or visionary
experiences into the past and we even begin to get stories like Rip Van Winkle of people
who sleep themselves into the future. But H.G. Wells was the first to come up with the
idea that one could at will and by the mechanisms of technology move freely through time. Once
Wells established the idea of a time machine, no other writer needed to waste time talking
about time machines. You could begin a story by saying, Dr. Smith got onto her time machine
and went into the future and everybody would know exactly what you meant. In fact, if you
began a story after Wells with a whole chapter explaining what a time machine is, your readers
would probably be bored. There's a natural evolution in the genre. Once something becomes
a well-established motif, other writers should and in fact need to adopt it for their own
work. Heinlein established future history. He established the idea that projections from
the current felt social forces in our world in 1939 could tell us what things would be
like in 2039 or 2140 and so on. And other writers came right along and just used it.
So he became sort of the framework author for all of what became the Golden Age. And
although his interests were primarily political, in fact, because this framework depended upon
the extrapolation of historical forces, he was exactly within the feeling of hard SF.
He was saying, we can understand things, we can plot them, we can see the exact laws
at work. Now, he took these ideas and wrote works within his own politics. I would say
that Heinlein went through perhaps four career stages. The most important from the standpoint
of influence on other writers was probably the first. In the first, we can see his work
in its fullest sense. And I will give you as an example of that a book called The Puppet
Masters, 1951. Here's what happens in The Puppet Masters.
Some ballistic spacecraft crashes in Iowa. What we will ultimately see is what happened
is that slimy, slithery, moldy kind of creatures come out and manage to get to human beings
They attach themselves at the back of people's neck, at the base where that bump is between
the cervical and the thoracic vertebrae. They ride us. When they get on to us, they manage
to send tendrils into our spinal cords and come up into our brains and take over our
bodies and our minds. Although our minds are conscious and we know what's going on, we
have no control over what this possession might be. Stories of possession are of course
ancient fantasies. Possession by the devil and so on.
This however is a science fiction. It's taken the fairytale background and shifted it. Let's
just suppose we have amoeba-like creatures. By the way, this notion of amoeba-like creatures
merging with us doesn't have to be put in a negative way. Hal Clement, the author of
The Mission of Gravity, also wrote a very moving book called Needle, in which a relatively
lonely young adolescent boy has a creature from space land on him and take over part
of his body in the same way, come into his mind. And this creature, very reluctant to
scare the poor boy, communicates with him by extending pseudopods over his cornea and
spelling out words once he learns English from being in the kid's head and explains
to him that he's in his brain, but he needs his help because he's crash landed and he
wants a human body so that he can do certain things in order to repair his spaceship and
leave again. And in fact, there turns out to be the hunt of a criminal for, this guy
is hunting a criminal who's come to our planet and our boy gets to participate in a wonderful
chase and feel very powerful and befriended. So you can have someone come into your mind
and have it treated fictionally as if it were a good thing. But in Heinlein's case, in fact,
this is a metaphor for the fear of the fifth columnist during the communist scare of the
McCarthy era. The idea that someone could come from within, take someone over, that
you could talk to someone who looked just the way he did yesterday but now could be
utterly alien and subversive. This was a reflection of the politics of the McCarthy era. Now these
puppet masters communicated with each other by touching. They apparently lived a completely
communal existence, but what were they to do that? They would have their human hosts walk
together into a circle, turn their backs, and then each of them would extend a pseudopod
and they would touch each other. And then the humans would go out and do what they had
to do. The hero of the puppet masters, Sam, is someone who has by bad luck been ridden
by a puppet master, but by great good luck manages to get rid of the beast. At a crucial
moment in the story, this beast who has been removed from his back is the only live puppet
master that the agency, the U.S. government secret bureau that's trying to protect us
against this threat, has available. They want to interrogate the beast. In order to do so,
of course, the beast has to be allowed to get on to another human being again. The old
man, that is, the head of the agency, suggests that Sam let the beast back on him. Sam doesn't
want to. But another agent, Mary, says that she will. Well, seeing that Mary is willing
to do it, Sam says that he's willing to do it. And Sam goes ahead and does it. However,
he says, and when we're done with it, I can kill it, right? And the old man says, yes.
Well, in fact, at that point, there's a discussion between the old man and Sam where they talk
about men and women. And what Sam points out, what the old man points out to Sam is that
women are different from you and me. The good ones are better, and the evil ones are
vileer. Highline is often known as the Papa Hemingway of science fiction. His male chauvinism
is painfully clear. But he's trying within that context to give women a role. He's perfectly
happy to make Mary braver than Sam. In fact, when Sam finally gets this thing off his back
again, he says, I felt good as if I had just killed a man or had a woman. It's an extraordinary
collection of images that Highline puts forward. Only on page 67 do we find out in this book
that's only about 150 pages long, that the old man, in fact, is Sam's father. It's not
just a title. He is his father. And when Sam asks the old man to tell me about Mom, because
he can't remember his mother who died when he was so young, why the old man says, in
a lot of ways, she's just like Mary. Now what we have here is a typical Highline situation.
We have an edible triangle with the father figure obviously feeling some attraction to
the woman who is destined for the male protagonist of the next generation. But because the old
man keeps himself to one side, there's no direct competition for Mary. The old man had
his Mary double in Sam's mother before Sam was ever on the scene. We have the normal feeling
of edible rebellion that one expects in the conflict of the transfer of power from one
generation to the next. But in Highline's work, we typically take the father figure,
that ambivalent figure with whom the sons both love and hate, and split the figure in
half. In the case of the puppet masters, the lovable half, which is worthy of emulation,
is the old man, the head of the agency, and the hateful half, which is worthy of being
killed, is the puppet master. In fact, after Sam agrees to put the puppet master back on
his back, he says to the old man, you knew that I would do that once you showed me that
Mary was willing. And the old man said, yes, I did. And Sam says, how does it feel to be
a puppet master? But the old man says, no, no, I'm not a puppet master. Puppet masters
make you do what they want. I only show you what there might be to do, and you choose
for yourself. This may or may not be a convincing distinction philosophically, but psychologically
what Highline has constructed is a story in which it's entirely possible for someone
to simultaneously love his father figure and do everything the father figure wants and
hate his father figure and kill the father. In fact, at the end of the story, Sam is
about to lead an expedition back to the home planet of the slugs of these puppet masters.
And the book ends with these lines. We are about to transship. I feel exhilarated. Puppet
masters, the free men are coming to kill you. Death and destruction. Well, it's a happy ending
if I ever heard of one. This particular mission of death and destruction, this extension
of the police function of the old man through Sam, the son, this particular mission is
of course headed by Sam. And the second in command, although I don't know why second
since she is braver and violer, is none other than Mary. So what we have worked out in this
political story is a resolution in the psyche of the protagonist, who is fundamentally adolescent,
although he's in his 20s in terms of the chronological age he's given in the story.
He's in the process of becoming an adult. He's adolescent. We have a working out in
the psychology of the adolescent of his ambivalent feelings about his father, which are made
clear by being able to separate the father into two figures, kill the part that he doesn't
like, make it legitimate to kill that aspect of the father, and be rewarded for this resolution
by being given sexual access to a mother figure, to a Mary who was just like the mother that
he never knew. This particular working out of a problem for the main character is typical
of Heinlein. There is a typical Heinlein hero. The Heinlein hero usually works with a two-part
father figure. The talkative part is the one that influences him. In virtually all of Heinlein's
books there will be one older man who talks and talks. He talks about libertarian politics.
He talks about philosophy. He talks about religion, whatever it may be. This is the
Heinlein mouthpiece. It's the good father. Then there's the bad father who deserves to
be killed. There's also the fact that the main character in these Heinlein books always
gets the girl, but always is quite capable of doing without her. In fact, Mary is the
second in command on this ship when they take off, but kissing? No, none of that stuff.
The Heinlein character, the Heinlein hero, is always brave under fire, but he's brave
only under fire. The Heinlein hero would rather not let the puppet master back on his neck,
but if it really has to be done, why then, of course, he will rise to the occasion. He
is, in a sense, like Frank Reed. Without ever having been there before, he automatically
understands what needs to be done. When he understands it, he does it, and other people
automatically follow him. This is true from his very early stories like The Roads Must
Roll 1940, right down to his last work and died in 1988. And as I say, this typical Heinlein
hero is involved in an edible triangle. He works this out. Heinlein works this out, the
life of this typical hero in many works, and many of them won Hugo Awards. Starship Troopers,
1959, for instance, is a story about a young fellow, Johnny Rico, who goes through military
training, but it's space military training, and he will eventually, he spends the first
half of the book being trained by the old man, this sergeant who's really gruff, and
guess what? Halfway through the book, we turn, we discover it's really his father. And then
the second half of the book, he spends fighting the bugs as he himself leads a squad who all
are enveloped in these huge mobile spacesuits that allow them to go on hostile planets and
zap and blast these aliens. Starship Troopers was so effective in its simple plot, this
Heinlein hero going through this two-part motion of first training and then destruction, that
it led to sequels, almost inadvertent sequels by other writers. Joe Haldeman's The Forever
War, 1974, shows the same story. This time, however, instead of being pro-war, and this
is the, this Starship Troopers, 1959, which comes after Korea, is really much like, let's
go out there and kill those people of a bad race. Haldeman's War, 1974, Haldeman's The
Forever War, 1974, is really an anti-Vietnam War novel. And this is a novel in which, like
the people who went into Nam, which to them meant going out of the world, the soldiers
spend time being trained and then fighting and realize that they are disconnected from
all they left behind. How are they disconnected? Hard science answers the question. The theory
of relativity tells us that if we travel very close to the speed of light, the effect of
time on us will be much different from the effect of time of those who stay back on earth.
These people in The Forever War are fighting through time, not by time travel, but because
they're traveling at such high speeds to go and constantly attack the enemy of humanity,
which means that the only people who stay in synchronization with them are the people
who themselves are other soldiers. And so, in the process of fighting to save what the
Vietnam soldiers called the world, what in The Forever War is just humanity, in the process
of fighting to save these people, they themselves must lose these people. It's a very poignant
anti-war story. And just as Starship Troopers won a Hugo Award, so did The Forever War.
By the way, The Forever War also won the Nebula Award. The Nebula Award is the second most
prestigious award in the science fiction field, and it's given out by the science fiction
writers of America. A third book, Orson Scott Card's Ender's Game, 1985, follows again the
same pattern of Starship Troopers. But this time we have a young boy who thinks that for
the whole book he's been going through training. In the last half of the book, they have this
poor fellow who's been removed from his family going through the most incredible computer
war games that you can imagine, where he becomes the commander of a fleet of Starships that's
fighting aliens, Hither and Yon. In fact, he wins the game so magnificently that he commits
genocide. He kills all the aliens. Only at the end does he realize that he's been tricked.
That the second half of the book, it was no computer simulation at all. He really has
been trained to become humanity's greatest general, and has been made a genocide despite
himself. So we see that Heinlein's basic plot, this plot of the son who feels ambivalence
about the father, wants to please the father but wants to kill the father, wants to have
the new power, wants to have a life of his own but can only do it through violence, who
needs to be trained and then needs to act, this basic plot has had persistent power.
In fact, Ender's Game also won both the Hugo and Nebula Award. So we have Heinlein as the
winner as it were. He carries the Golden Age forward. There are three other eras to
Heinlein's work. One is characterized by Stranger in a Strange Land, 1961, in which he mixes
all of this with a kind of hippie mysticism that was common at the time, and led to such
terms as grokking, which basically means understand really well, except when Heinlein's characters
grok, they manage to turn other people into the fourth dimension and have them disappear
altogether. It's a heck of a weapon. The third stage is one in which Heinlein tries to reconstruct
America and perhaps the best work of that is the Moon is a Harsh Mistress, 1966, in which
we have the loonies, the inhabitants of the moon, a penal colony for the earth, rebelling
against the earth authority that wants to exploit them. They live a kind of free, capitalistic,
frontier existence. It's the American Western again and now everybody's getting good, and
they have all kinds of nifty slogans like, tan staffel, there ain't no such thing as
a free lunch. That's where that saying comes from. Heinlein is a good phrase maker. Heinlein
understands American politics. Heinlein understands the psychology of the adolescent male readers
who came up in the Golden Age and lived in that science fiction ghetto of the fans talking
to themselves and no one else. At the end of his career, the fourth stage, he wrote long
and preachy books that his die-hard fans loved and no one else paid much attention to.
But for a period of 30 years, he took the feelings of hard SF, the culture of SF fandom,
and put them together with a new and deep understanding of the Oedipal Triangle to create
what was the prototype of American science fiction, the science fiction that after World
War II, in fact, conquered the world.
Lecture summary. Hugo Gernsbach and John W. Campbell Jr. believed in hard science fiction.
That is, writing that focused on facts, figures, and diagrams. They felt this kind of prose
would entice people into a life of science. To that end, both editors encouraged what came
to be known as fan culture. Readers could comment on the stories they read and even
suggest improvements. While hard science fiction has had its successes, notably Gernsbach's
diagram of radar and Clark's 1945 proposal for the satellite, most science fiction is
fiction first and science second. Fan culture dictates this since readers are drawn to the
human element in science fiction stories. Those readers have awarded more Hugo's to
Robert Heinlein than to any other author. Not coincidentally, Heinlein was Campbell's
favorite author. An Annapolis-trained, retired naval officer, Heinlein had many interests
besides hard science.
Heinlein's greatest contribution to his field was his notion of future history. This combined
the Wellesian idea that social forces shape history with fictive predictions for conditions
many centuries ahead. Heinlein's conviction that social forces, rather than individual
psychology, make for interesting stories is evident in the stages of his career. From
his early novels of alienation and subversion, written during the McCarthy era, to the hippie
mysticism used in Stranger in a Strange Land, Heinlein has combined politics, sociology,
and a sure sense of his audience to create great science fiction.
