Lecture 6 Ray Bradbury, Ursula K. Le Guin and the Expansion of Science Fiction
While Robert Heinlein was occupying the high ground in the center of the Golden Age of
Science Fiction, there was still other science fiction going on.
You'll remember when I talked about the pulp era and the demise of science fiction short
story publication after the liquidation of the American news company, I pointed out that
there began to appear at that time paperback originals, and at that time we had other writers
coming along, people like Ray Bradbury, who was the first science fiction writer, to get
a book reviewed on the first page of the New York Times book review.
His book, The Martian Chronicles, is a book quite unlike that of Robert Heinlein, but
important for us to look at as a way of seeing another tributary that goes into the development
of science fiction.
Bradbury loved science fiction as a kid.
He was someone of a little formal education, he was born in the Midwest and brought by
his parents to Los Angeles when he was 14 in 1934.
When he graduated high school, that ended his formal education, but he liked to read.
Unlike Wells, who read straight science and learned it all, Bradbury read science fiction,
and while much science fiction got the hard ass af right, much science fiction was just
ray guns, bug-eyed monsters, and strange lurid aliens.
That's what Bradbury loved.
He was the president of the Los Angeles Science Fiction Club.
He published his own fan magazine, he lived a life of science fiction and he supported
it at first by being a newspaper delivery boy, but ultimately he became a wildly popular
writer and moved away from fiction on the page to fiction on the screen.
He gave the large mass popular images that came to be respected outside the science fiction
ghetto as representative of science fiction.
To show you how different Bradbury was from a Heinlein type of writer, we can compare Heinlein,
the engineer, the graduate of Annapolis, who begged the War Department to let him come
back to work and write aviation reports, with Robert, with Ray Bradbury, who to this day,
he was born in 1920, does not have a driver's license although he lives in Los Angeles,
and when he first took an airplane trip in 1982 at the age of 62, it was so notorious
a feat that it was recorded in Time Magazine with a picture of him sitting grinning very
nervously and his white knuckles holding on to the hand rest as a stewardess tries to
explain to him how to use that complicated device, the seat belt.
Bradbury is in fact an anti-science fiction writer from the standpoint of the hard SF
writers, and so many, many science fiction writers who wrote within the SF ghetto, those
people who were trying to support themselves at two cents a word for the magazines as the
number of magazines dwindled, resented the fact that Bradbury was getting wide popular
acceptance and was getting accolades as a science fiction writer when they felt that
he was not a science fiction writer at all.
His first great work is The Martian Chronicles.
The Martian Chronicles is what I call a composite novel.
It's composed of pieces which many of which were published separately and most of which
could be published separately, but put together in the order in which he did, they form a
connected narrative of the first landing, then the conquest, then the colonization of
Mars by Earthmen.
Now, of course, this being American science fiction of the 50s, this group of works together
was written between 1946 and 1950 and published as a book in 1950.
This being the times that they were, Earthmen all turn out to be white midwesterners, and
Martians all turn out to be something quite different.
They are iridescent.
They wear golden masks.
They live on poetry.
In the first episode that takes place on Mars, an earth ship with a very small crew is coming
to the planet.
They have yet, no earth man has yet landed.
But our perspective is that of a husband and wife on Mars who live in a house with crystal
pillars on which wine vines grow and they drink the wine from their flowers.
Even bees buzz around.
And finally the wife becomes attracted to the sound of distant music.
She hears, in fact, drink to me only with thine eyes.
She goes off to find the source of this singing.
This is before the earth ship has landed.
The Martians, in other words, stand against the humans.
The humans are science, technology, metal, dirt, fire.
The Martians are crystal, glass, gold, poetry, telepathy.
Where the humans have the power of science, the Martians have the power of magic.
In fact, the husband realizes that his wife is being attracted to something that's coming
from who knows where, and he forbids her to go further.
He then loads his blunder bus full of killing bees and goes over the hill, meets the rocket
that lands, and kills the earth men before they have a chance to speak.
In the second expedition that comes to Mars, the earth men know better.
They realize something is fatal to humans on the surface of Mars, and so they're not
willing to simply run out.
They land, and they look out through a porthole.
And what they see is a perfect Midwestern town from the era of the birth and childhood
of the captain of the ship.
They look out, and they think they can see through their binoculars, through the window
of one of these clabbered houses, a piano, and on the piano is the music that's labeled
beautiful Ohio.
They can't resist it.
They have to go to see their relatives.
Mars is heaven is the name of this particular chapter, and it's populated by the deceased
loved ones of the crew.
Everyone disperses.
All discipline disappears.
Everyone is overjoyed to realize there is a heaven.
Mars is the place, and they can all go and be with the people they lost.
The captain himself winds up going back to his old room, and he sleeps in bed or goes
to sleep in bed with his brother, who did not die after all, or is not gone after having
died as a child, but has continued to grow up and is now in heaven with the mother and
father in their old house.
But just as he's about to fall asleep, he thinks, this is much too convenient.
What if Martians didn't have weapons against us?
How could they separate us in order to deal with us one by one?
And just as he realizes what might be going on, he opens his eyes, and his brother's face
shimmers into something else, and he stabs him.
Interestingly, the story doesn't end there.
It goes on front of the page when the Martians, who after all have now accomplished what they
wanted, they've killed the Third Expedition, take all of the bodies and bring them out
to the courtyard, bury them still in a human shape, and then play music going back as they
shimmer in and out of Martian and human form.
The Martians are shape-changers.
They're telepathists.
They are poets.
It is their only weapon against technology.
The Martians somehow are braver than we.
When the Fourth Expedition lands, there are apparently no more Martians.
What happens, of course, is that the Martians have contracted measles from someone of the
First, One, Two, or Third Expedition.
And just as native Hawaiians were brought to one-tenth their population by the diseases
Europeans brought to them, so the Martians have been conveniently killed off.
I say conveniently because the Martian Chronicles is a retelling of the story of the conquest
of the American West.
Bradbury loved the excitement of science fiction, and in his case that meant he loved the pulp
tradition.
He loved the costume westerns.
He loved the idea of making the land over.
One of the chapters is called The Green Morning, and it's about a character who is named Benjamin
Driscoll, but he should be called Johnny Appleseed because what he does is walk across the Martian
landscape, screwing seeds here and there.
He falls asleep one night and is awakened by the small patter of raindrops on his face.
He opens his nostrils to this new smell.
He sits up and begins to see this new sight as vegetation grows visibly before him, not
only like Jack in the Beanstalk giving us magical growth, but simultaneously creating
the source of oxygen to make Mars a humanly habitable planet.
Ray Bradbury is giving us a voyage to fairyland by rocket ship, but a specifically American
fairyland.
The problem with the real America, however, is that the white Europeans and their descendants
who came to be the dominant force on this continent did not do so in a vacuum.
They did so by killing and displacing the Native Americans who were here when they arrived
and by using the labor of Africans, black Africans whom they brought here as slaves.
Bradbury looking to give us in a fantasy a better possible future than we had as a past
replays the conquest of the American West, but does it in a way that exonerates the European
Americans from guilt instead of having to kill or displace those native Martians, the
red planet, the red natives?
Accidentally, they just happen to die.
In fact, the connection between Martians and Native American Indians is made relatively
explicit in the fourth expedition when one of the characters, Spender is his name, goes
walking off into the Martian landscape while his colleagues are building a base around
the base of the rocket ship and comes back and says that he has found Martian cities
50,000 years old, great crystal cities that look like chess pieces, and he has found their
reels of music, meaning taped music, which he has listened to music.
He tells his co travelers such as they will never be unable to understand the expedition
wants to go and break things up.
Spender wants to preserve the native Mars as he finds it.
There's a debate.
In fact, Spender winds up killing in the effort to preserve Mars and is himself killed in
turn.
But before that outcome, one of the crew members whose name is Cherokee says, I understand
why Spender wants to do what he wanted to do.
One of my grandparents was a Cherokee and went on the long march.
So the preservation of the Martians becomes the same as the preservation of Native American
culture.
The Martians we come to see whenever we find hints of them here and there are directly
in touch with the land.
They have grown right out of the land as we now come to think often of Native Americans
as being culturally.
The earth men like Verne's Robinson characters want to pave the land, mark it out with rectilinear
roads, give it new names.
The conflict is what drives one story after another.
Bradbury also takes up the problem of racism.
Instead of having any of the crew be black, that would be too radical in 1950, he does
have a chapter called Way in the Middle of the Air in which a whole group of blacks in
the American South band together, sell all of their goods in order to buy one rocket
ship so that they can go alone and escape the oppression of American racism to have
a new land on Mars.
We never do by the way see them again on Mars, in the book The Martian Chronicles.
We don't need to see them again because of the way the book ends which I'll get to shortly.
However, Bradbury did write other Martian stories than those he chose to put in the
book called The Martian Chronicles and there is a sequel to Way in the Middle of the Air
called The Other Foot that appears in a later collection of his.
In The Other Foot, after an atomic war has mostly destroyed the earth, the earth needs
to be able to move its few remaining healthy people, meaning white, middle class, middle
western type people back to Mars so that they can have a chance to rebuild the genetic stock
of humanity.
They need to have the wherewithal to do it.
They have only enough resources left to send one rocket ship to Mars to ask those people
who have persisted on Mars, in this story, not in the book, if they will help send back
rocket ships for more earth men.
When they get there, guess who the surviving Martians are?
They are the descendants of these blacks who have left on their own and the question is,
will the blacks now that they have the upper hand refuse to help the whites?
Will they show a magnanimity greater than that of the whites and try to lead humanity
toward a multiracial future?
I won't tell you how the story ends, I want you to go out and read some of this yourselves
and enjoy it, but you see that issue, whether or not we can resolve racism, that's not
really part of the story of The Martian Chronicles and that's why Bradbury wisely kept that story
off to one other place.
This book really is coherent.
It leads to its last story, which is called Million Year Picnic.
Million Year Picnic shows us a family of the governor of Wisconsin after the atomic war.
He has escaped by private rocket with his wife and three sons.
They are on the surface of Mars, they take a boat and go along the canals.
When they get beyond the hill so that they are no longer in sight of their rocket ship,
he fires a remote control and the rocket ship is exploded.
Why did you do that, daddy?
Because if those other men come to see us, I don't want them to be able to find us.
And because our technology got a hundred years ahead of our wisdom, maybe if we stop this
for a while, in a hundred years we'll be ready for our technology again.
But right now, no.
Bradbury is suggesting that science, good though it may be, is simply something that
we can't handle and so he sets about destroying it.
Hence, you can see the rejection of Bradbury by more traditional science fiction writers
as an anti-science fiction writer.
Another way you can see that he's an anti-science fiction writer is this.
The idea that Mars has canals is an old mistake.
Schiaparelli, an Italian astronomer, first looked at Mars and saw markings on its surface
and wrote of Mars having canali.
The Italian word canali is translatable into English in either of two ways.
It means on the one hand, canals, which we think of as water filled as in Venice.
On the other hand, we think of it, it can be translated as channels, like water running
down a mountainside leaves channels.
What Schiaparelli meant was channels.
It got translated as canals.
Percival Lowell, a son of the wealthy Brahminic Boston Lowell family, became utterly enthusiastic
about the idea that there were canals on Mars and that that means that there must have been
canal builders.
So he wrote a series of books called Mars as the abode of life, Mars and life and so
on, starting around the last decade of the 19th century and into the first decade and
a half of the 20th century.
He also built the first great observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, and under his pressure
and supported by his money, great strides were made in astronomy.
No matter what was seen, Lowell would not give up the idea that there were actually
canals filled with water on Mars or if they weren't filled with water now, they must have
been filled with water at some time.
But by 1950, everybody knew that Mars did not have any water in its atmosphere to speak
of.
There could not possibly be canals.
If there were canals, they were formed naturally.
If they were formed artificially, it didn't matter.
They could be filled with nothing now but dust.
In other words, just as Vern wrote about submarines and has someone say it can't exist knowing
that his readers will know that it does exist for satiric purposes, Bradbury is telling
us there is water on Mars when he knows his readers know there is not water on Mars as
a signal to us that Bradbury is not concerned with science.
He's concerned with fairyland.
He's concerned with indulging our fantasies.
The kids say that the father tells the kids that there will be one more rocket ship coming.
The father has arranged with a friend of his who has three daughters to bring his family
to Mars and he will know the coordinates of where they landed.
And these two families, these Swiss families Robinson, will remake the world but they will
do it better this time.
This time they will not destroy the Martian landscape.
This time they will live in the newly oxygenated land with technology appropriate to it and
start again.
It's a hopeful conquest.
The children say to the father, but father, you said you would show us Martians.
Where are the Martians?
Look into the water, the father says.
They look down and they see their own faces reflected.
There he says.
There are the Martians.
In other words, what Bradbury is suggesting is that if Americans were really to give themselves
up to the land instead of trying to impose themselves on the land, they would have a chance
to make this land the promised paradise that they had sought all along.
By going to fairyland by rocket, Bradbury is trying to give us another chance at precisely
that.
In this context, he takes us from Ohio, which is where the first rocket takes off, to an
isolated human population on Mars ready to try something new and beautiful.
The Martian Chronicles, as I say, is clearly a fantasy.
It finises the basic problems of racism and conquest and exploitation in America's history.
But it was, in fact, this prototypically American tale enormously successful.
It was honored by a medal from the National Institutes of Arts and Letters.
Bradbury became an instant literary success.
His 1953 parable, Fahrenheit 451, was equally moving in a public way and was honored by
the Commonwealth Club of California and made into a relatively distinguished movie by Truffaut
in 1967.
Fahrenheit 451 is, according to this book, the flash point for paper, that is, the temperature
at which paper will suddenly burst into flame.
Of course, different papers actually have different flash points, but that's the premise
of this story, that at 451 degrees Fahrenheit, paper will burst into flame.
In this 1953 novel, our main character, Montag, is a fireman, which means that his job is to
burn books.
And he goes into people's houses, those people who have hoarded books, those terrible revolutionaries,
those antisocial types who want to live in the life of the mind and be on their own,
and he finds their books and he throws them out into the street and he burns the books
and he calls other people, cops who come and take them away to jail.
Montag's own life is a symbol of the life of the fireman society, the society that supports
their work.
His wife spends all of her time with a seashell radio in her ear, sitting in their living
room that has, on three sides, wall video vision, in soap operas, where she receives
every day her lines, and she can make believe that she's part of this ongoing soap opera.
Her only desire in life is to have a fourth wall added to their living room so that she
can be totally immersed in this.
They have no life together whatsoever.
Montag, however, finds that he is attracted to a woman who turns out to have books, and
he becomes moved more and more toward her philosophical position.
In Truffaut's movie, the same actress, Julie Christie, plays both the wife and the book
owner, and the fact that these are two different aspects of a woman as a great deal of, what
could be the same woman, adds a great deal of psychological weight to the movie over
the book.
In the book, Montag finally, in fact, becomes a member of the revolutionary party, and at
the end of both the book and the film, we see him, like a hobo, out by the railroad tracks
on the outside of town, walking back and forth as the snow falls, reciting again and again
the books that he has committed to memory.
Each of these hobos has decided to become a living repository of another book or piece
of a book, because they intend to carry on literate culture until the world has changed
enough for it to be safe to write the books down again.
Bradbury, in other words, is showing here his own mystic spiritual attachment to the
power of books.
He grew up reading comic books, he grew up reading science fiction, and he wanted a world
that would make all this wonderful.
But he saw in America of the early 1950s a deep anti-intellectualism that he feared, and
he wrote a parable of social criticism in Fahrenheit 451.
He also became a screenwriter, as I said, and he showed these same fears in his movies.
Three that are worth noting are, it came from outer space, the beast from 20,000 fathoms,
and Moby Dick.
It came from outer space is an absolutely perfect story of communist takeover from without.
A meteor, apparently a meteor, lands in Arizona.
What we really see though is an enormous sphere, it has a honeycomb pattern to it that makes
it look like what we would now call a geodesic dome.
It sort of shimmers, it glows, it is a very inexpensive special effect.
Jack Arnold produced an enormous number of these Grade B science fiction movies for the
market in the early 1950s of people who were afraid of communist takeover.
There was a tremendous sense of xenophobia in America that also supported, of course,
the McCarthy persecutions.
In it came from outer space, what we see is that the local populace goes out to investigate
this meteor.
And very cleverly, we see a sheriff say, well, I'll go back and look at it, and he goes and
walks around behind a rock so that he's going to go down into the crater with this thing
as we've seen a big establishing shot of the big glowing sphere.
He goes around behind a rock, one fellow is standing there waiting for him, and then
the sheriff comes back around the rock.
He is the same man, but all his motions are mechanical.
That's how we know he's been taken over.
This might as well be the puppet masters again.
But we don't have to have any puppets, we don't have to have any goop, we don't have
to have any special effects at all.
All we have to do is tell the actors, walk stiffly.
Once they walk stiffly, we know they've been taken over by the bad guys.
It came from outer space.
Well, of course, a journeyman hero manages to save us from that, as you would expect.
The beast from 20,000 fathoms is basically a guy in a funny rubber suit who comes up
to try to steal our women from beach parties.
It is, if you like, the forerunner of jaws.
In this case, however, it's quite explicit that the monster has been released by bomb
tests.
That's what's creating all that havoc in the sea floor, and bad things are bubbling up
because of our own militarism.
The fear of the bomb, the fear of communists, both expressed in Grade B movies.
Bradbury is writing fairy tales in science fiction form.
That he also was the screenwriter for John Euston's brilliant filming of Moby Dick shows
us how deeply connected Bradbury's own work is to the fundamental stories of American
literature.
It's no wonder, then, that when American cultural hegemony is established in much of the world
after World War II, the kind of science fiction that gets spread is not only Heinlein's hard
science fiction-flavored science fiction, but also Bradbury's allegiac poetic fairy
tale kind of science fiction.
Although people within the ghetto see science fiction as being mostly like Heinlein, in
the world at large, the ghetto is already beginning to crumble when we have people like
Bradbury writing.
When we move into the sixties, with its own political changes, science fiction begins
to expand even further.
One writer who is certainly worth noting is Samuel R. Delaney.
Chip Delaney is the first important black science fiction writer.
He's also bisexual.
He's also well-educated in literary theory as well as being educated in science.
He's a very, very powerful personality who brought a whole set of new perspectives to
science fiction.
Two books of his that I think we should note are Babel 17 and the Einstein Intersection.
Babel 17 is about a poetess rocket captain linguist, one woman who is going to save humanity
against the aliens.
The aliens have managed to confuse us by having a language of their own in which they can
communicate much more efficiently than we can.
Their language just has more capabilities than ours.
She as a poet and linguist is going to be able to crack their code, Babel 16, and give
us a new language, Babel 17, that will allow us to defend against them.
The book is about communication.
It's about breaking down boundaries.
It's about the way in which people can come to re-understand themselves as they learn
new ways of speaking.
Raidra Wong, this captain, takes along as her first mate, someone known kind of sweetly
as the Butcher.
The Butcher is the fiercest, most ruthless space soldier that humanity has.
It turns out that the Butcher had once been captured by the aliens, and they had so brainwashed
him that they had changed his fundamental linguistic categories.
He no longer had available the concept of first person singular pronoun.
He doesn't know how to say I.
There is a marvelous scene of about five pages long in which Raidra Wong finally makes it
possible for the Butcher to understand that concept again.
He's moved to her emotionally.
What he wants to say is something like, I love you, or I like you very much, or you
matter a great deal to me, but he can't say I or me.
And so he looks at her and he says, I, he says, you love, and then he smacks his fist into
his hand.
He can't think of how to say these things.
The words don't exist, the thoughts don't exist, but because she's a poet, she finds
new ways to convey the thought.
And once he has the thought, she gives him the grammatical category, and he comes to
understand language as a whole and becomes her perfect partner, and they go forward and
protect humanity.
This really is putting language at the heart of science fiction.
What Chip Delaney has done here is suggested, and I think quite rightly, that science fiction
should not be thought of as only about the sciences of physics or even biology or evolution.
They should be about any technology whereby human beings accomplish their goals, and language
is, of course, the most widespread technology that individual humans use in order to coordinate
themselves into groups and accomplish things.
In the Einstein intersection, 1967, that is the very next year, Delaney writes a strange
kind of novel in which he interweaves the diaries of a character named Samuel Delaney,
who is on a voyage to Greece and trying to understand his connectedness with the Greek
myths.
He interweaves those diary entries with the story of a post-nuclear holocaust world in
which there are all kinds of mutants that have different powers, many of which reflect
the powers of the ancient Greek gods.
This is an intersection of two different kinds of time, mythic time and historic time, and
our writer is trying to understand his role in living through that intersection.
Both Babel 17 and the Einstein intersection won nebula awards, that is they did not win
the Hugo Awards, they were not the favorites of the fans, but they were the most admired
works by fellow science fiction writers.
So with the Elegiac poetry of Bradbury, we can see not necessarily a turning away from
science fiction, an antagonism to Heinlein, but rather a preparation for the focus on
language as important as science that we see brought to flower in Delaney.
Also in the 60s, we have the emergence of a person who became very, very important for
the widespread of science fiction beyond the ghetto, in fact the dissolution of the ghetto.
Ursula K. Le Guin.
Ursula Le Guin wrote The Left Hand of Darkness, a book which was published in 1969 and was
the second book to win both the Hugo and the Nebula Awards.
The first book to do that was Dune by Frank Herbert, which in my estimation is not quite
so interesting a book as The Left Hand of Darkness.
She later wrote The Dispossessed, I'm sorry The Left Hand of Darkness was 1966, The Dispossessed
in 69, which also won both the Hugo and Nebula Awards.
In other words, she was pleasing the fans and pleasing the writers.
What was she doing?
Well to understand what she was doing it might be worth understanding where she comes from.
Ursula K. Le Guin stands for Krober, A. L. Krober was her father, A. L. Krober is one
of the handful of most famous American anthropologists ever.
The standpoint of Le Guin's work, the most important of Krober's publications, is an
essay from 1944 called The Urkumene.
The Urkumene, that's O-E-C-U-M-E-N-A-E, is a work that relates to our word economics,
which you'll remember used to be written O-E-C-O-N-O-M-I-C-S.
Economics originally meant household management, it's the study of households, Oikos is house
in Greek.
Urkumene are those who come from one house.
Anthropologists have long known that you can trace the diffusion of peoples by looking
at the diffusion of their cultural traits.
For instance, we can look at the development of peoples by looking at the development of
languages.
If we trace French and Spanish and Italian back, we not only find a common language but
we find a common geography, which brings us back to Rome, hence the language of Rome,
Latin, and hence the term romance languages.
We can do the same thing with other cultural traits than language, we can look for example
at the diffusion of the habit of using tobacco, we can look at the diffusion of the habit
of making knives out of metal as opposed to making them out of chipped stone and so on.
What A.L.
was take all of the knowledge that was available to him in 1944 about cultural diffusion and
tried to trace backwards where humanity came from and he traced them back to a site in
the Middle East, to the Tigris and Euphrates Valley, to that very area that was bombed
in Desert Storm and said this was the home of western civilization, not of all civilization
but of western civilization and it's spread out from there.
What Ursula Le Guin did was publish an enormous series of heinous novels, H-A-I-N.
In Le Guin's world, the heinous made were the original founders of the stock of which
humans including earth people are but one strand, it's as if we were the French and
the heinous were the Romans and she then goes and writes a number of novels about the Spanish
and the Portuguese and so on and sets most of them in a far future after the heinous
empire has crumbled and now the remnants of the original heinous are coming back around
and trying to take stock and see what has developed in the world as a new communication
among the worlds begins to grow up.
So her overall plan is dependent upon cultural relativity and the notions of diffusion just
as well as was upon the notions of evolution, she gets that in part from her father.
Her mother Theodora Crober is both best known for a book called Ishi in Two Worlds, a biography
of the last wild Indian in North America which was published in 1961.
It's about Ishi Ayanna that is a particular tribe of American Indian who died in 1916.
What Theodora Crober writes in this is in effect an elegy to the lost Native Americans
to what is wrong when one culture takes over another rather than noticing it.
In this regard Theodora Crober in 1961 is in perfect philosophical accord with Spender
and Cherokee in the Martian Chronicles in 1950 by Ray Bradbury.
Bursal Le Guin supports the notion of keeping Native cultures preserved.
In the left hand of darkness we have a story which is told in many parts, it's a stylistic
tour de force.
Some of the parts are told by Genley I who is a young earth man who has been sent by
the ecumen, notice the connection between that and the ecumen, sent by the ecumen, a
kind of intergalactic coordinating council to study, to be an envoy to a world called
Gethen which in English means winter.
Gethen is so cold a place that no one can even dream of going to war, just survival
is all that's possible.
Gethen is divided into a number of different countries and the two that we are most concerned
with are a monarchy and a communist state.
What really has shocked most people most about this book however is not the politics
but the anthropology.
It turns out that the Gathenians are probably a heinous experiment.
They look like ordinary Homo sapiens when they're clothed but in fact they are androgynous.
They are neither male nor female.
But once a month or thereabouts, that's on a regular basis but it's not earth months,
they go into Kimmer, what we might call sexual activity, estrus or rut.
But they need a different word because when they go into Kimmer they don't necessarily
go into male rut or female estrus.
In fact, which way they go depends upon who's near them.
If they're near nobody, why then they'll just randomly go into one or the other.
But if someone is near someone who is currently in Kimmer and actively male, they will become
female and they can then mate.
If they're near someone who is actively female, that person will then become male and they
can actively mate.
In other words, everyone on Gathen has it within his or her its power to be both a mother
and a father.
That being so, it is impossible to have a society on Gathen in which the roles that
people have are dependent upon being male or female.
You can't divide all the roles one way or the other because nobody is male or female
on a permanent basis except a few perverts who try to, as they're called perverts, who
try to take drugs to stay that way.
Now when Le Guin first published this story, feminists were thrilled because she was showing
by the reactions of Genly Eye to the strange world that didn't acknowledge masculinity and
femininity, how superficial were the categories of male and female, how culturally bound.
Feminists loved it.
When feminism moved on and wanted science fiction to say, no, male chauvinism is wrong,
well that's not what Le Guin was doing.
She was simply saying sexism is wrong and so she sort of got left behind in a way, wrote
another book called The Dispossessed which also showed men and women in a non-competitive
relationship but there they have our idea of normal sexuality.
In the left hand of darkness, Genly Eye tries to bring Gethyn around to join the ecumen.
His main contact is Therum, Harth, Ramair, Estravan, a lord of one of these countries.
It turns out that the book is told first from Genly's point of view, then from Therum's
point of view, then we have folk tales from within the culture, then we have field notes
from an incognito observer from the ecumen who came centuries before and then at the
end we have in fact also a scientific appendix on the Gethinian calendar.
There are five different ways of narrating in this book.
They all merge together to give us a composite feeling of how things should be.
This is a stylistic tour de force.
You can read it as a political document but there's another way to read it, another way
in which Genly Eye is the youngster who doesn't understand the underlying politics.
Therum is the person who believes in Genly's mission and although Genly does not realize
that Therum believes in it, he comes to admire Therum and so what happens is we have a love
story, a love story without any sexual contact and one in which at the end in order to make
Genly's own mission succeed, Therum skis, they happen to be crossing a glacier on skis,
skis off toward the guards and allows himself to be killed.
He dies for the sake of the mission of this stranger, the one person on the world who
was radically different from everyone he's ever known.
It's a political story, it's a love story, it's a psychological, excuse me, a stylistic
tour de force.
Le Guin also wrote the word for world is forest.
We say the word for world is earth, dirt.
What if the word for world were forest?
That interconnectedness, that ecology turns out to be a very subtle anti-Vietnam War book.
Her Earthsea books for children starting with the Wizard of Earthsea in 1968 are award-winning
novels about a protagonist who learns that to really control things what you need to know
are their real names and the first book has its climax when the protagonist learns what
his own true name is.
This brings us back to the importance of language that Delaney stressed, to the love of poetry
that Bradbury brought so beautifully into science fiction.
Through these writers, the anti-scientific Bradbury, the black man, Chip Delaney, the
woman Ursula Le Guin, the SF ghetto that is represented by Robert Heinlein has begun to
expand and expand and expand, so by the time we get to the end of the 1960s, the award-winning
novels in science fiction don't look like Heinlein's books at all, in fact, they begin
to look like anything that anybody can imagine.
Lecture summary.
While Heinlein widened the subject matter of hard science fiction, American writers Ray
Bradbury, Samuel Delaney and Ursula K. Le Guin introduced new perspectives to the genre.
These writers helped to widen the audience for science fiction.
Bradbury's first great work was The Martian Chronicles.
This book has very little scientific accuracy, yet was widely popular.
A series of interconnecting stories, The Martian Chronicles plays off of the pulp fiction tradition.
The first symbolizes the American West, and The Martians are thinly veiled stand-ins for
Native Americans.
Samuel R. Delaney's work also addressed marginalized groups.
Delaney was the first important African-American science fiction writer.
His award-winning novels and powerful personality drew new readers to science fiction.
While he did not necessarily write about race, Delaney did write about situations in which
a group finds itself cut off from others.
In Babel 17, it is language rather than technology that causes friction.
Ursula Le Guin, the daughter of two distinguished anthropologists, uses theories of cultural
diffusion and preservation in her novels.
Her most famous work is The Left Hand of Darkness, a stylistic and structural tour de force.
It contains five types of narrative, partly because its protagonists are androgynous.
The novel was originally read as strongly feminist.
It can also be read as a political document or a meditative story of unexpressed love.
These writers disregarded many of the traditional aspects of science fiction, however, their
different perspectives and new techniques attracted new audiences to the genre.
