Lecture 8 New Wave, Cyberpunk, and our Science Fiction World
Science fiction, as I've said before, especially as it's influenced by the pulp tradition,
is typically an aesthetically conservative kind of art.
One of the reasons for this is that it's made, in most of its examples,
for consumption by people of a comparatively low educational level,
or if not a low level, at least they're being engaged on a comparatively low level.
So movies, for instance, if they seek to have a wide audience,
obviously can't ask that everybody who go to the movie have 10 years of higher education.
But while that is true, typically, in the 1960s, new voices began to be heard.
The most important place in the development of science fiction,
feud from within the science fiction ghetto for this development of new voices,
was a British science fiction journal called New Worlds,
edited by E.J. Cornell, known as Ted Cornell.
And Cornell later turned the journal over to Michael Moorcock.
Moorcock actually edited New Worlds for more time in the period that I'm concerned with
than Cornell did, but he was following Cornell's basic philosophy.
What Cornell wanted to do was encourage writers to experiment as writers,
particularly what in fact he wound up encouraging was the importation into science fiction
of the stylistic techniques and thematic interests of modernist literature.
So that while previously science fiction, and at the time most popular science fiction in the 60s,
continued to work in the basic romance or gothic romance mode,
Cornell and Moorcock were asking people to pay attention to writers like T.S. Eliot, James Joyce, D.H. Lawrence,
and adapt science fiction to those techniques.
Perhaps the outstanding writer whom they supported was J.G. Ballard,
who is best known as the author of the semi-autobiographical novel Empire of the Sun,
which Spielberg made into a successful movie.
Perhaps the most characteristic work by Ballard is a book called The Atrocity Exhibition.
The Atrocity Exhibition is, like Bradbury's and Martian Chronicles, a composite novel.
That is to say it only takes on its full understanding when you've read all of the parts and see it as a whole.
Each of the parts could be viewed separately, and indeed he called each of them not chapters, but condensed novels.
Many of these condensed novels have a running line of boldface type,
which tells in one or two long sentences a skeleton story against which perhaps eight or ten paragraphs are written.
So there'll be one paragraph for the first ten words of that boldface sentence,
another for the next ten words, and so on.
And those paragraphs themselves will tell another story,
not so much in the sense of a story being told, but in a montage.
You'll have a snapshot of a surgical operation.
Then you'll have the snapshot of parent-child sexual molestation.
Then you'll have a snapshot of a slum.
These moving descriptions will come each ten words in the overall boldface sentence.
And each of them together is thought of as a condensed novel.
They have titles like The Assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy,
considered as a downhill motorcycle race.
And this is, in fact, obviously a takeoff on the works of the De Deists,
who came almost sixty years earlier, the French experimental writers.
What Ballard is doing is taking this notion of immediate connection,
the same thing we saw in 2001, where one segment just immediately connects with the next.
The technical term for that immediate connection in rhetoric is parataxis.
The paratactic connection of one image with another
to convey an overall sense of the violence, the alienation,
the struggle, the pain of living in our post-industrial world.
To do this, he's using the techniques that we see of just juxtaposing one allusion to another,
as T.S. Eliot did in the Wasteland, say, 1922,
using a view from the interior of the conscious of the protagonist,
as Joyce did in all of his works, and so on.
The so-called New World's writers, who began what came to be called within the SF ghetto
the New Wave, were really modernists, two generations late,
but for the first time, at least, science fiction was self-consciously
trying not to be aesthetically conservative, but rather to adapt.
Why? Because they recognized that the world had changed
and they needed a new way of writing in order to do this.
American writers had already begun writing in similar ways
without calling themselves part of a New Wave.
The most important of those, retrospect, in retrospect, we would say, is Philip K. Dick,
the man whose Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep
firms the basis for Ridley Scott's Blade Runner.
Dick's work is of varying quality.
Some of it is real pot boiler stuff that he wrote quickly to get out of debt.
But some of it, no matter how fast he may have written it,
is inspired modernism, or maybe even postmodernism,
in that it questions even its own modernist techniques
and tends to deconstruct them before our very eyes.
His most challenging works, Ubic, for example, U-B-I-K,
often go on red because they are so complicated to read,
juxtaposing one strange, misunderstood scene with another.
The main character in Ubic is seeking to find a way
to overcome the dissolution of the world,
which is happening because of the existence of a chemical, Ubic,
short for ubiquitous, that manages to dissolve categories of things,
memories, furniture, rather than particular things.
And he consults his half-dead wife,
who is somehow preserved in half-life in a mortuary,
and each communication with her drains more of her half-life away,
half-life being a term borrowed, of course, from nuclear physics.
It's a very complicated work and a very good one.
But the one that was most accessible to science fiction fans
was The Man in the High Castle, 1962, which won a Hugo Award.
The Man in the High Castle is set in America of 1962,
an America, however, based on the premise that the Allies lost World War II.
In this new America of 1962, the eastern part of the United States
is under the domination of the Germans.
The Pacific States of America is a sort of Vichy government run by the Japanese,
and the mountain states are free, but Finlandized.
They have no power whatsoever.
In the mountain states, there is, according to rumor,
a writer whose name turns out to be Robinson, we do find him in the book,
who has written a novel called The Grasshopper Lies Heavy,
with the amazing premise that the Allies won World War II.
Now, this would be a simple mirror trick.
Let's make believe it's this, let's make believe it's that,
let's make believe it's this again, except that the novel within the novel
presents in America not restored to what it really was in 1962,
but to what we had hoped it might have been in 1945,
when the Allies in fact won World War II.
So, for instance, in the Grasshopper Lies Heavy,
we're told that because America won the war,
a new reign of peace has descended upon the earth.
Because Truman integrated the armed forces,
America has finally expunged racism.
Clearly, this was not true in 1962.
Dick was trying to show us that neither what we see,
nor the opposite of what we see is perhaps what we really need.
Very, very confusing.
He deals with a question of authenticity.
He has someone make jewelry.
In fact, Dick himself was a jewelry maker and earned money by that trade.
The jewelry maker in this story creates something of great beauty,
something that the Japanese client who wants to buy it says is full of woo.
Woo is supposedly some kind of aesthetic force
that the sufficiently sensitive can feel directly.
Someone else wants to make this jewelry wealthy
by taking the design with its woo and mass producing it,
selling it to everyone.
The question is, if those replicas are not made directly by the jeweler,
can they have the woo that the jeweler put into them?
Who knows?
The Japanese who live in the Pacific Coast states of America
are eager for American antiques.
They love original Mickey Mouse watches, for instance.
Many of the characters in the book are involved in producing new antiques.
What is a thing?
What is a phenomenon?
What does something mean?
Fundamentally, the stylistic games that are being played by the new wave writers in Britain
and by the voices in America that come along with those people,
although they didn't use the same term, new wave,
fundamentally these people are writing work which is engaged in questions of phenomenology.
What do I mean by that?
Edmund Husserl, the philosopher, talked about phenomena as being intentional acts of consciousness.
He spells intention with an S, intention, not intention with a T.
He doesn't mean a willed act of consciousness, he means the opposite of extension,
that by an act of consciousness we make an intention, we coalesce something into a phenomenon.
If you ask, for instance, when were the beginning and end dates of World War II?
An American might say 1941 to 1945, but a European might say 1939 to 1945,
and a Japanese might say 1935 to 1945.
Someone else might say September 1, 1939 until and so on.
Is the phenomenon of World War II a year or a day?
Is it from an American viewpoint, a Japanese viewpoint, a German viewpoint?
What makes a phenomenon a phenomenon is not just some physical hard thing we can touch,
it's how we view it.
Dick is concerned in all of his works with defining a phenomenon
and making us understand radically how arbitrary some of those definitions are.
So, of course, also with the writers in Moorcock and Cornell's New Worlds.
Why is that important?
Because in the 60s it became ever more clear to the advent of new kinds of drugs like LSD
and the enormous growth of the public media, the easily reproduced media, film, television and so on,
that our image of the world was manipulable.
Most of us have never been to most of the places we are sure exists.
Most of us have never felt the things we believe are feelable, yet we assert that they are real.
Science fiction was taking this up, and so, as you would expect,
drug reality became an important subject for the new wave writers and for the new voices in America.
So, for example, Brian Aldous writes Barefoot in the Head,
set in a post-war Europe, this time the war having been prosecuted entirely by dropping drug bombs on people.
And they've driven people into strange hallucinations,
and our protagonist has to work his way across Europe trying to separate his reality from other people's realities and so on.
But if we look at those phenomenological writers of stylistic bravery in America in the 60s,
we will find that some of them are not usually thought of as science fiction writers at all.
The first one who comes to mind is William Burroughs with Naked Lunge, Nova Express and so on.
In fact, writers like Philip K. Dick were responding to the same impulses that other experimental writers were responding to.
Science fiction, by having expanded as it did with Bradbury, Delaney, Le Guin,
was expanding itself right out of having any definable boundary at all.
The new wave looked wonderful, but the new wave led to something else.
What it seems to have led to most directly is what we now call cyberpunk.
Cyberpunk is a kind of science fiction that is perhaps most easily characterized
by the opening sentence of Neuromancer by William Gibson, 1984, a very famous sentence.
The sky above the port was the color of television tuned to a dead channel.
And you see in that sentence a conflation of images.
A dead channel is quite different from a dead person.
The sky above the port was nothing sky-colored at all.
It's a technological simile, or metaphor in this case, was the color of a television tuned to a dead channel.
All of the overarching framework in this place of coming and going, the port,
was in fact colored by a technological incapacity to get information across.
Neuromancer is a novel about personal isolation in the post-industrial world.
Just as Max Headroom shows destroyed television sets along the gutters
as people walk around in that television series,
just as Blade Runner shows destroyed electric parts in the gutters as people go through in that movie,
so in Neuromancer we see destroyed post-industrial waste as individuals seek to connect with other individuals.
In fact, retrospectively, we can see Blade Runner also as a cyberpunk movie, as the first cyberpunk movie, if you like.
In this post-modern world, Gibson has given us a hero who is completely isolated.
He is what's called a cowboy.
He lives in cyberspace, a term coined by Gibson.
Cyberspace he calls a consensual hallucination.
It's a phenomenological question.
What is cyberspace?
If I think that your representation of your data is perfectly fine with me
and I can move through a visual representation of your data in the same way you can,
then you and I can inhabit the same cyberspace.
Case, the hero, or protagonist at least of this book, is an information thief.
He works for an industrial concern before the book begins and steals for them.
Before the book begins, he makes the terrible mistake of stealing from them,
and they do bad things to him with biological microsurgery.
We open the book with him sitting in a bar in Chiba City,
a rundown industrial section of Tokyo, hoping that he's going to find some way to survive.
In a bar served by rats.
That's the name of the bartender.
Rats, like Dr. Strangelove, has a mechanical arm, which he keeps moving, moving, moving, wiping down the bar.
Rats lets Case sit there.
It turns out that somebody wants a particular piece of information,
and Case may be the one computer jock who can get it.
They hire him, and he gets sent out into cyberspace to hunt for it.
In the course of these adventures, he winds up having rough sex with Molly.
Molly has been surgically altered.
She has stainless steel fingernails, which are retractable,
and she has one-way mirrors set into her eyes.
She's athletic. She is deadly. She's been hired to be the bodyguard on the project.
She's the closest Case ever gets to having a relationship with a human being.
Everyone stays isolated.
Another member of the team is someone known by a number of names, one of which is Dixie Flatline.
To Flatline is to have your brainwaves go dead.
Paulie McCoy, the name of this character while he was still alive,
was the greatest, the real McCoy, the greatest of the computer pirates,
able to go off into cyberspace and pull information from any company that had it.
He's the one who trained Case.
He Flatlined three times.
Each time he Flatlined, however, a construct of his personality had been saved electronically
and was used to rebuild his mind and let him function again.
The last time, however, he did not want to be resurrected.
Nonetheless, whoever wants this information has not only put together a team
of somewhat willing participants like Molly and Case, but unwilling participants as well.
They have got the chip, which is Dixie Flatline, and made it live and made him cooperate with Case.
At one point, locked together, talking to each other in cyberspace,
jacked in through their computers, through their consensual hallucination.
Case says to Dixie Flatline,
you know you repeat yourself, man.
Dixie Flatline says, it's my nature.
It's a way of reminding us that no matter how much you think you've captured the individual in a construct,
if it's still just a silicon construct, it's just a fancy machine.
It will repeat itself. This is back to the clockwork orange.
What do these people want? How do they get attracted to this job,
which turns out to be the most dangerous information heist ever?
Case wants to have the microsurgery undone so that he can continue to live some kind of a life.
Molly just wants to make money. That's how she makes her living as a bodyguard.
Dixie Flatline says, at the end of this, just erase me.
It turns out that there is an enormous artificial intelligence based in Switzerland,
which is seeking this information in order to get the code to release access to another artificial intelligence
with which it intends to merge so that it will be able to create this huge autonomous creature
made entirely of silicon, the creature of the title, Neuromancer.
In fact, the artificial intelligence succeeds.
And at the end, we see in cyberspace a vision.
Case sees himself walking down a beach with his girlfriend from before the book really began,
someone who had been killed.
And off to one side, he hears a laugh, the same laugh that has characterized Dixie Flatline throughout.
Did you give him what he asked for? Case asks Neuromancer.
Oh, Neuromancer says, I gave him more than he asked for.
He condemned him to life. It's the curse God puts on Cain.
Neuromancer uses all of the devices of postmodernism to tell a tragic story of alienation.
Unfortunately, this book made such an impact that writers less committed to the vision that motivated it tried to write within it.
And soon, beginning right away in the mid-80s, we had the development of a whole cyberpunk literature.
Some of that work is comparatively interesting, but most of it, unfortunately, seeks to comfort science fiction readers
because science fiction is in its larger numbers of conservative literature meant for mass consumption.
So, for instance, Greg Baer's book, Blood Music, 1985, is another interesting cyberpunk novel,
but you'll see how at the end it changes the essence of cyberpunk.
The setup in this novel is that a scientist, like Griffin in The Invisible Man, is illicitly working on something.
The something he's working on is intelligent cells.
The company he's working for finds out that he's diverting resources and they want to find out what he's doing.
He doesn't want them to find out, so he takes his cell culture and decides to sneak it out of the laboratory by injecting it in himself.
What happens is that his body undergoes a radical change, as Griffin's did.
In this case, the radical change is that the cells set up communication. Before you know it, his flesh is changing.
The story itself is written as a stylistic tour de force, the descriptions of the spread of this intelligent disease throughout the population of New York
and then the very structure, the architecture of New York is amazing.
The entire city becomes one communal organism by the end, with everything dripping and misshapen.
It has all the strange off-kilter look that any German expressionist could possibly want.
This should be a moment, a vision of utter horror, the dissolution of all humanity, the breakdown of all categories,
the human from the architectural, for instance.
But instead, Greg Baer has us to believe that once these intelligent cells are spread everywhere,
they stay in telepathic contact with each other and form a single group mind, which is in fact a benevolent God.
And by great good luck, the stupidity of this scientist doing what he never should have done is going to lead to the salvation of the human race.
Obviously, I personally find this a unsatisfactory ending.
And most cyberpunk novels, unfortunately, don't have the courage to look at the implications of the theme and style,
the conjunction of theme and style in Neuromancer and deal with life accordingly.
However, it is possible not to be stuck in unanswerable alienation.
Maureen McHugh's China Mountain Zhang, 1992, is also a cyberpunk novel about someone who has to learn to live with his own interface between human and machine and so forth.
But in this novel, set in a world in which the Chinese now dominate all economies,
our main character, who is part Chinese, part Puerto Rican, born in the United States,
goes to China, learns the techniques, comes back, and instead of just giving up in the face of alienation,
he is of course persona non grata in China because he's homosexual,
but he is persona non grata in America because he's poor.
Instead, he manages to find a small community, a person here, a person there.
Other people who don't really fit in, and instead of using the high skills that he's learned in China to make a lot of money and pass,
he would rather serve their needs and barter skill for skill and effect for effect to live a quiet communal life.
What we see here is the possibility of the alienated not resigning themselves to the domination of the system,
but actually recognizing that they can live on the edges of the system and make something for themselves.
Finally, we have a cyberpunk character who is not ultimately isolated.
The last line of Neuromancer refers to Molly, and it says, Case never saw her again.
The last line of China Mountain Zhang has Zhang about to open a shop for his neighbors.
The move to cyberpunk is obviously not a move just within science fiction.
The very term cyberpunk is everywhere in the world now.
It came from Gardner Desoys who coined it to describe this cyberspace novel,
and yet you can find Neuromancer, a satire of Neuromancer in The New Yorker by 1985,
just one year after this book was published.
The high temples of American culture took note of what was going on in science fiction.
Our films are changing because of this.
We're talking about Star Wars as a military option.
The information superhighway.
Science fiction began leaking out of science fiction's ghetto.
We can see this in another way, not just stylistically, but by looking at non-English language writers.
We began by talking about European writers, and I mentioned Vern,
and in passing Eugene Zamiatin, who's we in 1920 as a precursor to 1984 and Brave New World,
the most widely published novelist behind the Iron Curtain, when there still was an Iron Curtain,
the most widely published novelist was the Polish writer Stanisław Lem.
Lem is a science fiction writer.
His work Solaris, 1961, really asks us to understand what it's like to meet the alien.
This is a story about people who go to the planet called Solaris, which is entirely covered by liquid.
It may be that it is a sentient ocean.
Pieces of waves form themselves into strange shapes.
They persist for a few days and then subside into the general superficial liquid.
There is a satellite of humans that has been studying this for years.
There is an entire field called Solaristics.
Nobody knows whether what they are studying are random motions, a physical phenomenon,
a biological phenomenon, or an intelligent phenomenon.
The humans who live in the satellite, however, find that they are visited by replicants,
shades of Philip K. Dick worrying about authenticity,
people who are constructed out of the memories and desires of the humans on the ship,
shades of Ray Bradbury and the expedition where they found themselves facing their dead loved ones on Mars.
The replicants seem to be real.
In fact, our main character confronts his wife who has committed suicide years earlier on Earth,
and yet the replicants have super strength and come from somewhere.
Probably they are projections from the surface of this ocean beneath them.
But how? The satellite has no openings.
Where does the matter come from?
And who and how is their mind being read?
So Laris is about knowledge. Science fiction has always been about knowledge.
Of course, the fear of knowledge.
Lem goes on in his master's voice 1961 to show us the sociology of scientific inquiry
and how it is that people vie to make their lives out of the life of research
regardless of whether or not the research has any use.
And in the future logical Congress 1971, he gives us a world of research gone berserk.
Everything is created by drugs.
For instance, one of my favorites is Dantine, a drug which once you take it
gives you the unshakable impression that you have written the Divine Comedy.
In this world where everyone is subjected to drugs that are spread through the air by atomizers
being run by other people who are on drugs given them by the government.
No one knows whether they live in a wonderful paradise of 2 billion
or an overcrowded horror of 69 billion or something in between.
They don't know what year they live in. They don't know where they are.
Every drug that counteracts another drug reveals another apparent reality
which may or may not be reality.
Lem is writing science fiction but he's also writing a philosophical fiction
that seems to have much in common with the French new novel,
with French existentialism, with William Burroughs.
Why call this science fiction at all?
In Russia itself, the most widely published authors before the fall of the Iron Curtain
were brothers Arkady and Boris Strogotsky.
Their book Roadside Picnic is perhaps typical of their best work.
This 1972 novel is about a culture which is quite poor.
Gee, it might look a lot like the Soviet Union.
Someone has landed in this culture with a spaceship and taken off again
and the zone around the landing site is deadly.
However, apparently the aliens, whoever they are and whenever they came,
left things the way we might leave tinfoil
or used up automatic lighter at the site of a picnic.
And so people try to risk their lives to get into this zone
to find something which they can take out and sell for its ingenuity.
They can get the ideas from it, make themselves rich
and improve the economy of the world.
We are living, the Strogotskys are telling us,
not by manufacturing something new ourselves,
but on the leftovers of someone else's roadside picnic.
Clearly, had the censors in the Soviet Union been able to understand the political content of this,
they would have rejected it.
But beyond the moment that it's written for, it has a larger meaning.
As we move ever more into a service economy in the post-industrial world,
more and more we have to ask who among us really produces anything
and how many of us merely process things, take something from one place,
bring it to another and expect to be paid.
These are important issues.
In Japan, Kobo Abe published Inter Ice Age 4 in 1959,
first translated into English in 1970.
Kobo Abe is one of the outstanding mainstream novelists in Japan.
And yet, much of his work is what we would call science fiction.
In Inter Ice Age 4, the main character is a scientist
who is helping prepare Japan for the onslaught of the rising levels of the sea
by involving himself in research that will transform human beings into aquatic creatures.
It's a very complicated story psychologically,
because one of the people on whom he winds up having to experiment
to change, to make radically unhuman, is his own son.
In another work of Abe's called The Arc Sakura, 1984,
our main characters live in a leftover cave,
leftover from we know not whom.
And yet, in this cave, there is what amounts to an enormous toilet,
a plumbing device which can suck things away indefinitely.
Those people who find this cave think,
ah, we can make a fortune, go into the waste disposal business,
toxic waste, chemical waste, radioactive waste.
But they don't actually understand what makes the system run,
and so every step of the way, they run the risk of having things go wrong.
In fact, they do go wrong in many and strange and interesting ways.
Today, Haruki Murakami, who is a native Japanese but teaches at Princeton,
writes works like The Hard Boiled Wonderland and The End of the World.
This is a work which is, it turns out, finally,
set half in the mind of the protagonist who we see living in the other chapters,
the odd chapters, the even chapters in the odd chapters,
look like two different worlds.
One turns out to be the mind of the fellow who's living in the other,
and he doesn't know it.
Do we know our minds?
Science fiction is about knowledge,
but not all work about knowledge would have been thought of as science fiction.
I remind you again of the story of Oedipus,
which is about what it means to uncover the truth.
It's a story about knowledge, but who would have called it science fiction?
In fact, there are two inferences I'd like to draw from what I've said so far
about this stylistic movement and this spread of cultures,
the stylistic movement of bringing modernism in and then moving into postmodernism,
new waves to cyberpunk, and then looking at these non-English language writers.
The first is that there has been a geographic movement in science fiction to the west,
and the second that there has been a dissolution of the walls of the SF ghetto.
Consider the movement to the west.
Science fiction really begins in Western Europe,
as you would expect because science as an institution grows up in the Renaissance.
We could have given a history of science fiction that included many more names than we have.
For instance, Cyrano, the fellow whose life is made famous in the play Barrestan.
Cyrano de Bergerac was a real person, a 17th century French courtier known for his wit,
his swordsman-like skill, and indeed a large nose.
He wrote two very, very interesting satires of the political life of his day.
One is called The Journeys to the Empires of the Sun,
and one is called The Journeys to the Empires of the Moon,
and they are together called Fantastic Voyages.
They were published posthumously in 1657, two years after Cyrano himself died.
Now, they were transmitted in manuscript while Cyrano was alive.
He didn't want to risk his position at court,
but these satires are based on having people go off to other planets.
And science fiction, did he think of himself as a science fiction writer?
Of course not.
Voltaire, in the 18th century, wrote works like Michal Megas
about a giant inhabitant of Jupiter, a planet so large that, of course, the inhabitants must be large,
who comes down to Earth and sees all of our affairs as little.
This is, of course, the same trick that Swift pulls in Gulliver's Travels
when we have Gulliver going to Liliput and he sees all of their affairs as little.
In fact, in the third volume of The Voyages of Gulliver's Travels, 1726,
we have a visit to the floating city of Laputa.
That itself is a pun, of course, because in Spanish, Laputa means the whore.
Here we have a floating city built on a huge boulder inhabited by scientists
who live by exacting tribute from the people under them.
How do they exact their tribute?
They threaten to land on them and destroy their fields, their houses, their lives.
So they lower baskets and people below them give them things.
Up on the island, these scientists are so brainy that they have to employ flappers.
People with big bladders, cheap bladders filled with air on sticks, who walk behind them.
And whenever they're about to walk off the edge or something or they forget what they're talking about,
they hit them on the head.
These people are so much in the clouds, literally, that they can't understand anything.
Swift is writing a satire of science.
He's writing, in fact, more specifically a satire of the New Atlantis,
an island utopia run by philosopher Kings, written by Francis Bacon, published in 1627.
This Francis Bacon is the person whose Novomorganum is usually considered to be the text
that first defines the scientific method.
So we can look at the history of science fiction as coming through a whole line of works,
long before it takes on a special feel of its own.
A Connecticut Yankee and King Arthur's Court in the 1880s by Twain is clearly a science fiction work.
Yes, the travel back isn't a travel with a time machine,
but once our hero gets to King Arthur's Court, he uses all of his Yankee ingenuity to set things right.
It's a science fiction.
Now, if you look at this overall history of science fiction, it has a geographic center.
In the 17th century, the 18th century, the geographic center of science fiction is probably western Europe.
In fact, it's probably France, going from Cyrano to Voltaire.
By the time we get to the 19th century, Mary Shelley, and all the way down to H.G. Wells,
the center, the geographic center of science fiction, might be said to be London.
And that's not unreasonable when you consider that London, because of its economic might
and its support for industrial research and universities,
London becomes the center of the world that is most worried about the changes
that will be brought about by science and technology.
But after World War II, with the hegemony of American culture brought about
by the dispersion of pulp culture and the conquest of the Axis by the Allies,
that center has moved to New York.
And with the growing power of the science fiction film,
the geographic center of science fiction then moves to Los Angeles, where Blade Runner is set.
And nowadays, that center with all of the television cartoons, movies, programs, and so on
that come out of Japan has moved further west to Tokyo, which is the opening setting of Neuromancer.
So we have a movement west, as the world moves west, and we have a movement out.
Think of these writers who are science fiction writers without the name Anthony Burgess with a clockwork orange.
Marge Piercy, a wonderfully well-honored poet and deservedly so,
writes books like Woman on the Edge of Time, where someone imagines herself into future utopia
or the much more recent He, She, and It, in which a woman falls in love with an artificial creation.
And how is he worse than a man? What really makes a man and what really makes love?
Those are the questions, but Piercy isn't a science fiction writer.
Margaret Atwood, a great Canadian novelist, writes The Handmaid's Tale and stays on the bestseller list for over a year.
A work that's talking about a dystopian future with a right-wing American religious government.
She's not a science fiction writer, but the work is science fiction.
William Golding's The Lord of the Flies is as fine an example of anthropological science fiction as you could ask for.
It follows right in the rice borough's tradition, those boys lost on an island trying to reconstitute society on their own.
The Inheritors by Golding, 1955, is a novel about the conflict between two different primate stocks,
one of which will survive to become humanity, you and me, and the other of which is destroyed by their more intelligent cousins.
No one ever calls Golding a science fiction writer, and yet he is, and he won the Nobel Prize in 1983.
What I'm trying to get clear here is this.
There is a globalization of science fiction as its geographic center moves west,
and there is a dispersion of science fiction into our culture as a whole.
Star Trek may have been on the air originally from 1968 to 1969,
but now Star Trek has spawned Starship, Star Trek Deep Space Nine, Babylon Five, Sea Quest, and a host of other science fiction television shows.
In fact, if you take a look at the all-time biggest box office draws at the movies,
you will find, as of January 1993, when Variety published its authoritative list,
that of the ten top movies, six are absolutely science fiction.
They are E.T., The Extraterrestrial, Star Wars, Return of the Jedi, Batman, The Empire Strikes Back, and Ghostbusters.
Two of them, Raiders of the Lost Ark and Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom,
are arguably science fiction in the same vein as Edgar Rice Burrow's anthropological science fiction.
Of the only two remaining, one of them, Jaws, looks an awful lot like The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms,
although it's not written as a science fiction movie.
The only movie in the top ten that we can clearly say isn't science fiction, is Home Alone.
And since Variety last compiled its definitive list, of course, Jurassic Park has leaped over all of them
to become the biggest money-making movie of all time, obviously a science fiction movie.
This is a tie-in between TV, theme parks, political vocabulary.
The information superhighway will save us, Star Wars will kill us.
Our movies, our television, our books, our music, M.T.V., is science fiction television if there ever was any,
science fiction music if there ever was any.
All of these things now live in a science fiction world.
Desert Storm, everyone said, was a video game war.
Video games are science fiction on a desktop.
What has happened is that our desktops now hold computers, answering machines,
and we use them sitting behind our desks, blood being pumped by artificial hearts,
as we make romantic encounters on the Internet.
We live in a world which is science fiction.
If film has always been science fiction, now in our world constructed of images, we live in science fiction.
If science fiction didn't exist as a separable genre once, it will no longer exist as a separable genre again.
In fact, it is just as Victor Frankenstein had feared.
The spawn of science has escaped, and it has conquered the world.
Lecture summary.
Science fiction writers have always used contemporary literary techniques.
The conceits of modernism and the postmodern movement are no exception.
A British science fiction journal founded in the 1960s, New Worlds, supported stylistic experimentation.
Editor Michael Morkock's most important discovery was the writer J.G. Ballard.
Ballard is perhaps best known for his semi-autobiographical novel, Empire of the Sun,
which Steven Spielberg made into a movie.
The novel uses fragmentation, stream of consciousness, and differing perspectives to create an alien experience for the reader.
Personal isolation in the post-industrial world is one theme Ballard and other modern science fiction writers tackle.
American science fiction was also heading in new directions in the 1960s.
Writers like Philip K. Dick and William S. Burroughs introduced elements like historical revisionism and drug culture into science fiction.
Science fiction is traditionally a stylistically conservative genre, but at this time it was searching for new boundaries.
New wave science fiction expanded the genre and led to 1980s cyberpunk.
If the new wave of science fiction can be called modernism two generations late,
then cyberpunk can be seen as an echo of post-industrial alienation that began in 1922 with T.S. Eliot's poem The Wasteland.
The first and most famous practitioner of cyberpunk is William Gibson.
His first novel, Neuromancer, remains the ideal of cyberpunk with its allegorically named characters,
high-tech illusions, and cold, calculating emotions.
Later writers of cyberpunk like Greg Baer have softened it somewhat,
including elements of emotional resolution that many fans feel are superfluous.
Science fiction has been enormously popular around the world for decades.
In Communist Eastern Europe, science fiction writers like Stanislav Lem gave dissent a voice when few other outlets were available.
Despite the continuing popularity of science fiction around the world,
there is a steady and trackable geographical move to the West in terms of science fiction's focus.
From the Europe of Vern and Wells to the North America of Heinlein and Bradbury, science fiction now marches towards Asia.
Neuromancer is set in Tokyo and China Mountain Zhang in the People's Republic.
Thank you very much for listening.
