In 2007, Professor David Nutt at the University of Bristol and a number of his colleagues
surveyed addiction experts in a variety of fields and he asked them to rate various drugs
in terms of their potential for physical harm to the user, their potential for dependence
and addiction, and their potential for social harm.
Can you guess what was number one on the list?
It was the opioid drug heroin.
Welcome to our lecture on opioids, a fascinating class of drugs that includes the most effective
painkillers available, as well as some of the most dangerous drugs of abuse.
Now if you think about it, many of our recent lectures have been stories about plants and
plant derivatives.
We've talked about coffee and caffeine, about tobacco and nicotine, and about cannabis
and marijuana.
Last time we talked about the coca plant and the ephedra plant and the stimulant drugs
that are derived from them.
Well this lecture tells the story of the poppy plant.
In addition to producing beautiful flowers and edible seeds, the poppy plant is also
the source of opium and the many drugs derived from opium.
Among these drugs we'll find medicines such as codeine and morphine, which have revolutionized
the treatment of pain.
On the other hand, we'll also learn about heroin, which is often considered to be the
most harmful drug of abuse today.
So what is opium?
Well it's actually a kind of dried latex.
Latex is a milky fluid that is secreted by some plants when they're damaged as a defense
mechanism against insects trying to eat them.
Opium is the latex secreted from the seed pod of an opium poppy.
Raw opium contains about 10% morphine and about 2% codeine.
These are the opiate drugs, which just means that they're natural products of the opium
poppy.
A number of other drugs, including heroin, are not contained in opium itself, but are
made from natural opiates, or they have very similar effects.
And these are sometimes called opioids.
Now as you may know, the opiate drug morphine is among the most effective painkillers available
today.
Codeine has similar effects, but is weaker than morphine.
It's often used to treat minor pain and as a cough suppressant.
Of course, opium and drugs derived from opium are also often used recreationally, because
they can produce a dreamlike euphoric state.
And people have known about those effects for a very long time.
For example, there's evidence that the Sumerians knew about the psychoactive properties of
the opium poppy as early as 3400 BC.
In fact, they referred to it as whole gill, which means joy plant, or plant of happiness.
The ancient Egyptians actually used opium medicinally.
We see evidence of this in the A-Bears Papyrus, which was written around 1500 BC, and describes
ancient Egyptian medical treatments.
This 3500-year-old papyrus suggests using the pods of the poppy plant as a remedy to
stop a child from crying.
The Greek poet Homer may also have been aware of opium's properties.
In Book 4 of the Odyssey, Helen of Troy mixes wine with a drug that many scholars think
was opium.
It was described as banishing all care, sorrow, and ill humor, and it was said that whoever
drinks wine, thus drugged, cannot shed a single tear all the rest of that day.
In the 17 and 1800s, a mixture of alcohol and opium, called loudenum, became very popular,
and was widely used as a pain reliever, as a sleep aid, and to treat a variety of ailments.
And its widespread use eventually became a problem as more and more people became addicted.
For example, the British poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge was one such addict.
In fact, Coleridge claimed that his famous poem, Kubla Khan, came to him in an opium-induced
dream.
The English writer, Thomas de Quincy, was another addict.
He even wrote an autobiographical account of his experience called Confessions of an
English Opium Eater that became quite popular.
In the mid-1800s, opium trade became big business, and even led to two wars.
You see, the British East India Company was making quite a bit of money selling opium
to China.
And a large number of Chinese became addicted.
And China, therefore, tried to stop the import of opium, and it confiscated huge quantities
from the British traders.
Well, the British responded by sending troops to China, and the two wars that followed have
come to be known as the Opium Wars.
The British were victorious in both, and so the opium trade to China continued.
In fact, by the end of the 1800s, China consumed more than 90 percent of the world's opium,
and more than 25 percent of the male population of China was opium dependent.
In 1804, a German pharmacist isolated a pure alkaloid from opium, and he gave it the name
morphine, after Morpheus, the Greek god of dreams.
Now, morphine was more potent than opium or loudenum, and it became an invaluable tool
to doctors in the treatment of pain.
In fact, to this day, morphine is still considered a gold standard for pain relief.
Now, morphine was a real godsend to injured soldiers during the American Civil War, and
it was administered liberally, both with the newly invented hypodermic syringe and in pills.
In fact, some historians believe that the excessive use of morphine led to addiction
in hundreds of thousands of Civil War veterans, a condition referred to as Soldiers' Disease.
In 1898, Bear Pharmaceutical Company began selling a synthesized opioid that was one
and a half to two times more powerful than morphine, and it was marketed as a non-addictive
morphine substitute and cough suppressant.
You know what this powerful new morphine substitute was?
Heroin.
The name is actually derived from a German word, meaning heroic or strong, referring
to heroin's potent pain killing and cough suppressing effects.
And Bear actually sold heroin for more than ten years before its harmful effects were
recognized and it was removed from the market.
In fact, it turns out that heroin is actually metabolized into morphine in the body, so
it certainly isn't much of a morphine substitute.
And of course, heroin is now recognized to be among the most addictive drugs in the world.
Today, a wide variety of opioid medications are available as prescription pain killers.
You probably know many of them, Vicodin, Percocet, Phantanil, Methadone, and Oxycontin
are all examples of opioids that are used to relieve chronic pain.
And they're prescribed a lot.
In fact, in 2010, enough pain killer prescriptions were written to medicate every American adult
for an entire month.
And although these medications are extremely effective, they're also potentially addictive.
And a large number of people who begin using them for pain relief eventually get hooked.
Now let's turn to the effects of opioids on behavior and on the brain.
Opioids are what are called narcotic analgesics.
Direct analgesics reduce pain without eliminating sensation.
So they're distinguished from anesthetics, which reduce all sensation and often produce
unconsciousness.
Opioids also produce a dreamlike euphoric state, which is what makes them attractive
to recreational drug users, at least initially.
At low doses, pain relief is one of the main behavioral effects of opioids.
And the fact that they block pain without eliminating sensation makes them the drugs
of choice in the treatment of pain.
Opioids are also very effective at reducing the cough reflex, which is why they're widely
used as cough suppressants.
Now some of the less pleasant effects include nausea and constipation.
In fact, constipation is one of the biggest problems in the long-term use of opioids to
treat chronic pain.
On the other hand, this means that opioids can also be used as a treatment for diarrhea.
And although most opioids can cross the blood-brain barrier and produce effects on the central
nervous system, there are others that can't.
And that means you can use them to treat diarrhea without producing psychological effects or
risking addiction.
For example, you've probably heard of the over-the-counter diarrhea medicine Emodium
AD.
Well, it's actually an opiate drug that doesn't cross the blood-brain barrier.
At higher doses, opioids produce a rush of euphoria, but the nauseating effects can become
more severe, and some people also experience anxiety and restlessness.
But the most dangerous effect is a significant suppression of breathing.
In fact, in an opioid overdose, breathing can be suppressed enough to lead to death.
So opioids produce a number of pleasant behavioral effects like analgesia and euphoria, as well
as some unpleasant behavioral effects like nausea, constipation, and suppressed breathing.
But how?
How do they produce these effects?
Specifically, what is going on in the brain and the body that makes opioids so powerful?
Well, like almost all the other drugs of abuse that we've discussed, opioids work by binding
to receptors.
There are actually a number of different types of opioid receptors, but it's the mu-opioid
receptors that seem to be the most important in producing the behavioral effects that we've
just discussed.
Mu-opioid receptors have high affinity for morphine and related drugs, meaning that these
drugs bind very strongly and take longer to dissociate, and as a result, the drugs can
be quite potent.
And if you look at the distribution of mu-opioid receptors in the body, they're found in the
places that you might expect based on the behavioral effects that opioids produce.
For example, you find high concentrations of mu-opioid receptors in parts of the nervous
system that process pain, which makes sense given that opioids are effective painkillers.
There are also high concentrations in the brain's reward circuit, especially the nucleus
accumbens, and that presumably explains why many opioids produce a euphoric high.
But receptors aren't restricted to the brain, or even to the central nervous system.
There are actually a lot of new opioid receptors in the gastrointestinal tract, which may be
the reason that opioids often produce constipation.
Now, do you remember when we were talking about marijuana, and we pointed out that scientists
found the receptors for the drug before they found the natural brain chemicals that bind
to those receptors?
Now, in the case of marijuana, scientists looked for and eventually found the so-called
endogenous cannabinoids, like anandamide.
Well, the same is true in the case of opioids and opioid receptors.
Here again, scientists found the opioid receptors before they found any of the endogenous brain
chemicals that bind to those receptors.
Of course, it's unlikely that our bodies would be designed with receptors for compounds
that come from the poppy plant, and so scientists went and looked for endogenous chemicals that
bind to opioid receptors.
And they found them.
In fact, they found three major types of endogenous opioids, the dinorphins, the enkephalins,
and the endorphins.
Do you remember dinorphins?
We actually encountered them before when we talked about the neural mechanisms of tolerance.
You may recall that chronic drug use leads to the release of dinorphins in order to inhibit
VTA neurons and prevent them from exciting the nucleus accumbens.
And that contributes to tolerance to the pleasurable effects of drugs.
Well, the enkephalins and the endorphins are both natural painkillers, but they're active
in different parts of the body.
When you're injured or in pain, your body releases these chemicals and they help block
the pain.
Endorphins are morphine-like substances, but they originate in the brain itself.
In fact, the name endorphin actually means endogenous morphine.
Endorphins are pretty interesting.
In addition to being released during pain, they're also released during stress.
They're even released during strenuous exercise, and even when you're eating spicy food.
And when they're released, they activate the mu-opioid receptors, just like morphine
does, and they therefore relieve pain and they produce a pleasurable high, basically
the same symptoms as morphine.
Now, you've likely heard of this phenomenon in reference to runner's high.
Long-distance runners often report getting a second wind and feeling a sense of euphoria
when their endurance begins to wane.
Well, many people assume that this high reflects the release of endorphins in the brain.
This was actually difficult to test, but in 2008, some solid scientific evidence was
discovered that actually supported this theory.
Dr. Henning Booker and colleagues at the Technical University in Munich used a technique called
Positron Emission Tomography, or PET, to measure the activation of opioid receptors before
and after strenuous exercise.
Dr. Becker and his colleagues compared the levels of endogenous opioids in the brain
before and after 10 long-distance runners took a two-hour run, and they reported two
interesting findings.
First, opioid levels increased significantly after the run compared with before the run.
And second, participants with higher opioid levels reported more of a runner's high than
those with lower levels.
So these results provide some of the best evidence that runners' high may indeed be
due, at least in part, to the release of endogenous opioids, like endorphins.
But how do opioids work?
Specifically, what happens when opioid receptors are activated, and how does that produce the
effects that we've been describing?
Well, it turns out that opioids typically work by inhibiting neural transmission, particularly
the neural transmission of pain.
You see, the nervous system actually contains a set of specialized receptors and fibers
for the sensation and transmission of pain signals to the brain.
And scientists have discovered that opioids can inhibit the transmission of pain in at
least two ways.
First, opioids can inhibit pain transmission in the spinal cord even before the signals
reach the brain.
Opioid neurons have been discovered in the spinal cord itself.
And when these neurons are active, they're thought to close a gate and prevent pain signals
from getting past the spinal cord up to the brain.
So one way opioid drugs can relieve pain is by binding to opioid receptors on pain neurons
in the spinal cord and stopping the signal.
There are also descending pathways from the brain down to the spinal cord that can also
inhibit pain signals.
Have you ever wondered why soldiers often report not feeling much pain when they're
injured in the heat of battle?
Even injured athletes will often say that they didn't feel the pain until after the
game.
Well, one explanation for such phenomena is that the brain itself is sending pain-relieving
signals down to the spinal cord.
And one brain area that's thought to do this is the periaqueductal gray, or PAG for short.
The PAG contains a very high concentration of opioid receptors, and stimulating it produces
top-down signals to the spinal cord that also close the pain gateway.
So a second way that opioid drugs can relieve pain is by activating the PAG.
Opioids also appear to play a role in what's sometimes called the placebo effect.
Now as you may know, inert pills that actually don't have any direct benefit can sometimes
relieve patients' pain, as long as the patient believes that the pills will help them.
Now people often think that this kind of placebo effect is purely psychological.
That is, the patients can't really feel better, they must just be deceiving themselves.
But it turns out there's actually evidence that placebos lead to the release of endogenous
opioids, like endorphins, and that those opioids then produce genuine pain relief in the patient.
If a placebo effect was purely psychological, then administering an opioid antagonist drug
that blocks the action of opioids shouldn't make a difference.
But it does.
Many patients who normally experience pain relief from a placebo pill no longer do when
they're taking an opioid antagonist.
So clearly, opioids are playing a crucial role in the placebo's effect.
What about the euphoric high associated with opioid use?
This effect appears to depend on opioid activity in the brain's reward circuit.
As we mentioned, there are high concentrations of mu-opioid receptors in the reward circuit.
And research by my colleague Kent Barrage at the University of Michigan has found that
micro-injections of opioids into these parts of the brain lead to increased pleasure in
rats.
Now you might well ask, how can you tell whether a rat is experiencing pleasure or not?
But it turns out that rats will repeatedly stick out their tongue when they taste something
they like, as if they're licking their chops.
So Dr. Barrage and his colleagues put small doses of sugar water into the rat's mouths.
They injected morphine into the reward circuit of some of them, and then they counted how
many times they stuck out their tongue.
And what he found was very interesting.
All the rats repeatedly stuck out their tongue when given sugar water, indicating that they
like the taste.
But the rats who had opioids injected into their reward circuit actually stuck out their
tongues even more than the other rats.
So apparently activating the opioid receptors in the reward circuit led to increased pleasure,
which may be part of the reason why opioids produce a feeling of euphoria.
Now let's turn to the issues of abuse, addiction, and treatment.
It's interesting to note that although opioids like heroin have the potential to be extremely
harmful, opioids themselves don't typically lead to significant physical damage to the
body or its organs.
The real problem with opioids is with the addictive behaviors that they inspire.
In particular, opioid addicts often neglect their normal responsibilities, as their entire
existence becomes consumed by the drug.
They typically don't eat a nutritious diet.
They might also use unsanitary needles, which can lead to diseases such as AIDS.
And of course, there's the very real possibility of overdose, which could be fatal due to the
suppression of breathing.
So how many people suffer from opioid abuse?
Well, in a 2006 survey, over five million people in the United States reported using
an opioid illegally within the past month.
And a recent study found that there were over 92,000 emergency room visits related to opioid
overdose in a single year.
The majority of those people weren't using heroin, rather they were using a prescription
opioid painkiller like Vicanin, Oxycontin, or Percocet.
In fact, about 45 people in the U.S. die every day from overdosing on a prescription painkiller.
That's more than the number of overdose deaths from heroin and cocaine combined.
So what's going on in the brain that might lead to addiction to opioids?
Well, it's actually a lot like other drugs.
Brains over-stimulate the brain's reward circuit, and they trigger a large release
of dopamine.
The brain interprets that dopamine as a reward prediction error, or an indication that taking
the drug was even better than expected.
And that reward prediction error, in turn, backs up to environmental cues that are associated
with drug taking.
So when the user encounters those cues in the future, they experience a very strong craving
to use the drug.
Sound familiar?
Well, how do we know that the same mechanisms underlie addiction to opium?
Well, remember the Ventral Tegmental Area, or VTA?
This is the part of the reward circuit that contains dopamine neurons.
And scientists have found that injecting opioids into the VTA does indeed lead to increased
dopamine cell firing and a release of dopamine into the nucleus accumbens.
They do so by inhibiting the neurons that inhibit the VTA.
In other words, opioids disinhibit the VTA, which makes those neurons fire more and leads
to dopamine release.
You may recall that we saw this same kind of disinhibition mechanism at work with alcohol.
Well furthermore, scientists have found that applying a dopamine receptor antagonist, which
blocks the effect of dopamine, also blocks the reinforcing effects of opioids.
So animals taking these dopamine receptor antagonists don't develop addictions to opioids, like
other animals do.
So that demonstrates that dopamine is once again playing a central role.
Now let's turn to the issue of treatment for opioid abuse and addiction.
It turns out that there are some very effective treatments for opioid overdose.
Specifically, a number of opioid receptor antagonist drugs have been developed that have a high
affinity for opioid receptors, but that don't actually activate them.
And these drugs can therefore block opioids from binding to the receptors.
So suppose a drug user comes in with an opioid overdose and they're barely breathing and they're
close to death.
Well you can administer one of these opioid antagonist drugs, like naloxone, and they'll
recover almost immediately because you're blocking the opioid from binding to the opioid
receptors.
Now, of course, that's just treating the overdose.
What about the addiction?
What can be done to help opioid addicts quit the habit?
Well detoxification is the first step, but detox can be a real challenge for opioid addicts
because users experience very unpleasant withdrawal symptoms when they stop taking the drug.
The symptoms are the mirror opposite of the effects produced by the drug itself.
So instead of euphoria, withdrawal is characterized by depression.
Instead of pain relief, withdrawal leads to aches and pains.
And instead of constipation, withdrawal produces diarrhea.
And these kinds of unpleasant symptoms make quitting very challenging.
So a common approach to treating opioid addiction is to administer a slower, longer acting opioid
like methadone instead.
In fact, methadone maintenance is the single most common treatment for heroin addiction.
And it has met with some significant success.
For example, one study found that 80% of people who stick with a methadone maintenance program
for a full year end up staying abstinent for one to three years afterwards.
In contrast, only 12% of people who drop out of methadone maintenance remain abstinent
for that long.
And another study found that 40% of former heroin addicts were still abstinent six years
after completing methadone maintenance treatment.
Other opioids are also regularly used in the treatment of heroin addiction.
Believe it or not, heroin itself is used in the treatment of heroin addiction in a number
of countries.
The idea is to give users a lower but stable prescription dose of heroin without all the
risks associated with obtaining and using heroin on the street.
And not surprisingly, heroin addicts are more likely to stick with a heroin maintenance
program compared with a methadone maintenance program.
And perhaps as a result, they're less likely to use illegal drugs.
And measures of health and employment are also often better than an addicts getting methadone.
Of course, using opioid drugs like methadone to treat heroin addicts is controversial.
I mean, after all, you're simply substituting one addiction for another.
Another problem is that the addicts have to go to a clinic every day or two in order
to receive their treatment.
And as you can imagine, the people living near those clinics don't particularly like
the large traffic of heroin addicts who are coming to the neighborhood every day.
Another common approach to treating opioid addiction is to try to remove any reward associated
with relapse.
Sometimes addicts who have managed to quit will take an opioid antagonist like naltrexone,
which blocks the rewarding effects of any opioids that they do take.
So the idea is that if they ever get a strong craving and they end up using their opioid
drug, they won't experience their normal high because of the antagonist that's in their
system.
And this can work well for somebody who's really motivated to quit.
But the problem is people who experience very strong cravings may just stop taking the antagonist
drug so that they can get the high again.
In most cases, these kinds of pharmacological treatments are most effective if they're combined
with some sort of behavioral treatment.
It's very helpful for opioid addicts to get some kind of cognitive behavioral therapy
in which they're trained to recognize and avoid the triggers that they associate with
drug use.
And they're also taught coping skills to help them deal with the cravings when they do arise.
Some of the addicts try to do something physical to distract them when they get cravings like
go for a walk or play basketball.
And for the more 12-step programs like narcotics anonymous can be helpful for a number of people.
But as we've seen before, breaking a drug addiction is tough, and breaking an addiction
to an opioid is among the toughest challenges that anyone will ever face.
But as with all addictions, it's important to keep in mind that one relapse doesn't
mean failure, it simply represents an opportunity for the addict to learn from the experience
and hopefully be successful the next time.
Well, in our next lecture, we'll begin to explore a question that's becoming very important
in addiction research.
Can someone get addicted to a behavior just like they get addicted to a drug?
In particular, we'll discuss compulsive gambling.
Is it an actual addiction?
And does it involve some of the same neural mechanisms as drug addiction?
Those are the kinds of questions that we'll address next time.
