In the next few lectures, we're going to dive into some specific drugs of abuse and talk
about what's going on in the brain and discuss the latest thoughts on treatment.
We'll talk about a number of different drugs, including marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine,
and heroin.
But I want to begin with two legal and widely available drugs that billions of people use
on a daily basis, caffeine and nicotine.
Let's start with caffeine, and you can't talk about caffeine without talking about coffee.
Many people believe that coffee originated in Ethiopia, in the Horn of Africa, and then
spread through trade in the Arab world until it eventually made its way around the globe.
Well when coffee was first introduced to England in the 1600s, it quickly became a very popular
drink among British men.
So popular, in fact, that it began causing marital problems.
In 1674, a group of London women went so far as to circulate a petition called the Women's
Petition Against Coffee.
Here's an excerpt.
Coffee leads men to trifle away their time, scald their chops, and spend their money,
all for a little base black, thick, nasty, bitter, stinking, nauseous puddle water.
Apparently London men in the 1600s were pretty obsessed with coffee, but I think it's fair
to say that we're also pretty obsessed with coffee, and caffeine in general in our society
today.
Caffeine is by far the most used psychoactive drug in the world, and it's not even close.
80 to 90% of Americans drink coffee or other caffeinated drinks every day, and of course
that includes children.
A typical adult consumes 200 to 400 milligrams of caffeine every day on average.
I'm sure many of you are drinking something with caffeine in it right now.
But is the regular consumption of caffeine really a problem?
In fact, you might be thinking, I don't have a problem with caffeine.
I have a problem without caffeine.
Well, you'll be glad to know that except in severe cases, consuming caffeine on a regular
basis doesn't actually pose a significant health risk.
In fact, moderate caffeine use has actually been associated with a number of health benefits,
including reduced risk of Parkinson's disease and type 2 diabetes.
And of course, as any regular coffee drinker will tell you, caffeine also has a number
of behavioral benefits, including increased alertness and improved concentration.
But despite these positive effects, caffeine is not a vitamin.
It's a mild psychoactive drug that works in ways that are similar to other more dangerous
psychoactive drugs.
And regular use of caffeine can and does lead to physical dependence and the associated
symptoms of tolerance and withdrawal, just like regular use of other drugs does.
For example, people who don't use caffeine very much will often experience jitters or
anxiety after drinking a cup of coffee or an energy drink.
But regular users become tolerant to those effects.
In fact, some heavy coffee drinkers can drink a cup of coffee at night and still fall asleep
normally.
Furthermore, regular users typically need caffeine to feel normal, and they'll experience
withdrawal symptoms if they have to go without it for a while.
Think of regular coffee drinkers before they've had their first cup in the morning.
They'll typically feel very tired and irritable.
They may even have a headache.
Those are classic symptoms of caffeine withdrawal.
So what exactly does caffeine do to the brain?
Remember in our last lecture when we talked about how psychoactive drugs work?
We pointed out that many psychoactive drugs bind to the same receptors as natural chemicals
in the brain, but that they produce abnormal levels of receptor activity due to differences
in affinity or in intrinsic activity.
Well, that's exactly what's going on with caffeine.
Specifically, caffeine is an adenosine receptor antagonist.
That means that it binds to the same receptors as the brain chemical adenosine, but it doesn't
turn on the receptor.
It just prevents adenosine from turning on the receptors.
Think of the key and ignition analogy that we developed in the last lecture.
Caffeine is like a key that fits the adenosine receptor ignition, but it can't turn it
on.
Nevertheless, it does block the ignition and therefore prevents adenosine from turning
the receptor on.
So to understand how caffeine works, we really need to understand what adenosine does.
And what adenosine does is pretty interesting.
You see, adenosine is an inhibitory brain chemical, meaning that it tends to reduce
neural activity.
Furthermore, adenosine levels in the brain continuously rise when we're awake, and then
they fall back down when we sleep.
Many scientists therefore believe that adenosine serves an important role in our sleep-wake
cycle.
You see, after prolonged wakefulness, adenosine levels get high, which inhibits neural activity
and perhaps contributes to feelings of drowsiness.
Then when we sleep, adenosine levels fall so that when we wake up, neural activity is
uninhibited and we can begin another day.
Well, caffeine blocks the effect of adenosine and therefore helps us stay awake even if
it's past our normal bedtime.
Essentially, the caffeine fools the brain into thinking that it hasn't been awake for
as long as it has.
And with this interpretation, knock out mice that lack adenosine receptors don't show
the normal stimulating effects of caffeine.
By now it should be clear that there are quite a few similarities between caffeine and other
more dangerous psychoactive drugs.
Like many other drugs, caffeine binds to the same kind of receptor as a natural brain chemical.
And regular use of caffeine can lead to physical dependence, just like the use of more dangerous
drugs can.
But there are obviously some significant differences between caffeine and these other drugs.
And one very important difference involves the level of stimulation of the reward circuit.
Recall, drugs of abuse significantly over-stimulate the reward circuit, and repeated over-stimulation
can produce cravings so strong that they lead to unhealthy and even life-threatening behavior.
That's the kind of positive reinforcement that we discussed in lecture 3 that's typically
associated with real addiction.
Well in contrast, caffeine use doesn't produce that same kind of positive reinforcement.
For example, remember the animal self-administration studies in which rats chose cocaine and heroin
over food and sex?
Well, those same kinds of studies have found that caffeine is only weakly reinforcing.
Animals are not obsessed with getting caffeine in the same way that they are with more dangerous
drugs.
In fact, scientists believe that people often consume caffeine to avoid the negative withdrawal
symptoms of fatigue and irritability, not because it stimulates the brain's reward
circuit.
So that's more of a negative reinforcement situation in which continued drug use is motivated
by a desire to avoid unpleasant effects.
But remember, positive reinforcement is probably a better model of addiction for serious drugs
than is negative reinforcement.
And maybe it goes without saying, but another important difference between caffeine and
other addictive drugs is that chronic caffeine use doesn't typically lead to severe negative
consequences.
So for these reasons, caffeine is not considered to be a drug of abuse.
Even though repeated use can and actually does lead to changes in the brain and ultimately
to physical dependence, but that use doesn't typically lead to significant consequences
or distress.
On the contrary, for most people, not drinking their coffee would lead to negative consequences
and distress.
But now let's turn to another very commonly used drug.
This psychoactive drug is also legal and it also has stimulating effects that bear a resemblance
to caffeine's effects.
But unlike caffeine, this drug is one of the most addictive substances in the world and
taking it can have life-threatening consequences.
I'm talking about nicotine and the associated behavior of smoking.
Believe it or not, nicotine is actually a naturally produced insecticide.
Many plants produce chemicals that are toxic to insects because it helps to protect the
plants from being eaten.
And the insecticide that tobacco happens to produce is nicotine.
Purified nicotine was actually used as an insecticide by farmers for a number of years,
but they stopped using it.
And you know why?
Because it was too toxic to humans.
In fact, tobacco harvesters often develop an illness called green tobacco sickness that's
caused from exposure to nicotine on wet tobacco leaves.
Sixty milligrams of nicotine is actually all it takes to kill an adult human being.
And yet this toxic chemical is also extremely addictive at low doses, as the enormous number
of smokers demonstrates.
Roughly one-third of the world's adult population smokes tobacco on a regular basis.
And roughly 80% of them started before they turned 18.
That's why smoking is sometimes called a pediatric addiction.
And the same thing is true in rats.
Specifically, if rats start self-administering nicotine during adolescence, then they self-administer
significantly more than rats that start administering nicotine in adulthood.
Now, if nicotine were consumed in a drink, then the huge number of nicotine addicts
wouldn't be such a big problem.
They would actually kind of be like the situation with caffeine, although billions of people
use the drug and become physically dependent, the consequences wouldn't be that bad.
Because although nicotine is toxic at high doses, it isn't actually that harmful at low
doses.
Unfortunately, tobacco smoke contains thousands of chemicals other than nicotine.
And the health consequences of inhaling those chemicals on a regular basis are disastrous.
For example, cigarette smoke contains more than 50 chemicals that are known to cause
cancer, including the poison arsenic, the industrial solvent benzene, cadmium, which
is used in making batteries, formaldehyde, which is used to preserve dead bodies, the
highly radioactive element polonium and chromium.
It also contains carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, ammonia, and dozens of other harmful
chemicals.
Cigarette smoke also contains tar, a collection of solid particles that forms a sticky brown
residue on smokers' teeth, fingers, and lungs.
And tar is also carcinogenic.
Now obviously, regularly inhaling these chemicals is pretty bad for you.
In fact, smoking-related illnesses are estimated to kill more than 5 million people every year.
That's over 500 people every hour, and nearly 10 people every minute.
In particular, smoking is estimated to be responsible for 80-90% of lung cancer deaths.
And for every person who dies, there are approximately 20 other smokers who suffer from at least
one serious illness associated with smoking, such as heart disease or stroke.
Well, not surprisingly, smokers die earlier than non-smokers.
In fact, their life expectancy is more than 10 years shorter.
More than 10 years!
Now, it's important to keep in mind that most smokers don't want to smoke, but they're
hooked on the nicotine.
70-75% of smokers say they'd like to quit.
And 40% of regular smokers try to quit every year.
40%.
But as any smoker who has tried will tell you, it's a very tough habit to kick.
In fact, less than 10% of quit attempts end up succeeding long-term.
That's comparable to the quit rate for heroin.
Let me say that again.
Based on quit rates, nicotine is as addictive as heroin.
The behavioral effects of nicotine are relatively mild and are similar to those of caffeine.
Low doses of nicotine increase arousal and can actually improve concentration and enhance
performance in attention-demanding tasks, even in non-smokers.
But nicotine can also lead to tension and lightheadedness.
And higher doses can produce nausea, sweating, and dizziness.
Product smokers actually become tolerant to many of these effects and often find smoking
to be relaxing rather than arousing.
And they also exhibit withdrawal symptoms when their nicotine levels drop.
So they'll become irritable or stressed, and they'll report difficulty concentrating.
And many scientists actually believe that the relaxing effect of cigarettes in smokers
may simply reflect relief from these negative withdrawal symptoms.
Well like caffeine and other psychoactive drugs, nicotine works by binding to receptors
used by a normal brain chemical.
And in this case, the normal brain chemical is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
Now you may remember acetylcholine from our discussion of snake venom in our last lecture.
It's the neurotransmitter that's used to tell our muscles to contract.
But acetylcholine is also important in our mental life.
It's associated with arousal, with vigilance, and with paying attention.
But it also plays an important role in the sleep-wake cycle.
Now nicotine is an agonist for a class of acetylcholine receptors.
Recall an agonist is a chemical that binds to a receptor and strongly activates it.
Well, nicotine strongly activates acetylcholine receptors.
In fact, the receptors that it activates have actually been named after nicotine.
They're called nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
A number of studies have now demonstrated that the way nicotine produces its effects
is by binding to these nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
For example, you remember our genetically engineered friends, the knockout mice?
Well knockout mice have been created that lack the gene that helps make nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors.
And those mice don't exhibit the behavioral effects of nicotine that normal mice do.
So nicotine doesn't make them run around as much as it does normal mice, for example.
The knockout mice also don't show nicotine's benefits on attention and memory tasks that
normal mice exhibit.
The bottom line is that nicotine is having its main effect on the brain via these acetylcholine
receptors.
Okay, so now we can see why nicotine might be arousing.
It's binding to the same receptors as acetylcholine and putting them in overdrive.
And since acetylcholine is associated with alertness and vigilance, so is nicotine.
But why is it so addictive?
To answer that question, we need to return to the brain's reward circuit, which by now
might be starting to become familiar.
Recall one very important region in the brain's reward circuit is the ventral tegmental area,
or VTA.
Neurons in the VTA communicate using the neurotransmitter dopamine, which we've referred to as the
addiction molecule of the brain.
Our dopamine is associated with more incentive salience or more wanting or craving.
Well, guess what kind of receptors these VTA neurons have on them?
One common type is the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.
Now I'll bet you can guess where we're headed.
Nicotine binds to these acetylcholine receptors on the VTA dopamine neurons and it puts them
into overdrive, overstimulating the reward circuit.
The VTA dopamine neurons therefore fire a lot and they release unusually large quantities
of dopamine.
And this large dopamine release has two important consequences that contribute to addiction.
First, it triggers wanting or craving.
And second, it signals the need for more learning and the strengthening of neural pathways.
Remember in lectures two and three when we talked about reward processing in the brain?
We pointed out the important role of prediction error in signaling the need for new learning
and we argued that dopamine release serves as that prediction error signal.
So dopamine is not actually signaling the presence of reward, rather it's signaling
that the reward is better than expected.
In other words, that there was a prediction error.
And such prediction errors signal the need for new learning so that rewards can be better
predicted in the future.
And we also explained how this prediction error actually backs up so that eventually
the dopamine gets released when cues or triggers that come before the reward are presented.
Okay, now let's think about all this in the context of smoking and nicotine.
Chronic smoking leads to the repeated release of high levels of dopamine by activation of
the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors on these VTA neurons.
Over time, that dopamine signal backs up to the environmental cues that are associated
with smoking.
For example, a pack of cigarettes, a book of matches, the smell of smoke, the inside
of a bar.
Eventually any and all of these environmental stimuli become triggers that will lead to
dopamine release themselves.
And the dopamine is what produces that strong craving which leads to more smoking.
And of course, the longer this cycle repeats, the stronger the associations become.
And pretty soon it's virtually impossible to resist the urge to smoke and an addiction
is born.
Another reason smoking is so addictive is that it's an extremely efficient method for delivering
nicotine to the brain.
It turns out that ingesting low doses of nicotine isn't particularly addictive.
Even intravenous administration of nicotine is less addictive than smoking.
Why?
Well, it's because smoking gets the nicotine to the brain extremely fast.
In fact, nicotine reaches the brain about seven seconds after a puff on a cigarette.
That's twice as fast as an injection of nicotine.
And that fast action appears to contribute to its addictiveness.
Okay, well that's obviously a lot of bad news about smoking and nicotine.
And I'm very sensitive to the fact that this objective scientific presentation of troubling
facts might sound kind of cold and impersonal to people who are smokers.
After all, we're talking about real people with a real problem that causes real pain.
Many smokers have heard a lot of the bad news before.
So I want to spend the rest of this lecture talking about treatment options.
But first, let me point out that I'm a scientist, not a medical doctor.
So I'm not going to make any specific recommendations.
If you or someone you know would like advice on developing a personal treatment plan, they
should talk with their doctor.
So please don't use this lecture as a substitute for real medical advice.
But I can tell you what science has learned about some of the major treatment options
that are available.
And we've actually learned quite a bit about what works and what doesn't.
Now there's no magic bullet, and quitting is never easy.
But there are a number of treatment options that have been scientifically proven to help
motivated smokers kick the habit.
One very common approach is called nicotine replacement therapy, or NRT.
The idea is to provide low dose nicotine without smoking, and then gradually decrease the dose
over time until the smoker has kicked the nicotine habit entirely.
There are now five FDA approved approaches to nicotine replacement therapy.
The nicotine patch, nicotine gum, nicotine lozenges, nicotine nasal spray, and the nicotine
inhaler.
And both the nasal spray and the inhaler deliver nicotine quite fast, and they also can be
used as needed to control urges.
But they both require a prescription.
On the other hand, nicotine gum, lozenges, and patches are all now available over the
counter without a prescription.
And that's actually a pretty big deal, because it means smokers can easily try them with
very little hassle.
And so hopefully a lot more will.
So does nicotine replacement therapy actually help smokers quit?
Well, a number of clinical studies suggest that the answer is yes.
Typically in these studies, one group of smokers is provided with nicotine replacement therapy
like nicotine gum or the patch.
And another control group of smokers is given a placebo therapy without the nicotine.
For example, they might be asked to wear a patch on their skin every day, even though
the patch doesn't actually contain nicotine.
Or they might chew gum that doesn't contain nicotine.
The point is that the two groups do the same things, but one group actually gets nicotine
while the other group doesn't.
The good news is that these studies typically find that smokers receiving nicotine replacement
are roughly twice as likely to quit as smokers in the control groups.
So nicotine replacement does seem to help.
The bad news is that most people still don't manage to quit.
So less than 10% of people who try to quit on their own succeed the first time.
So doubling that with nicotine replacement means that the success rate is still less
than 20%.
But obviously it's worth trying.
And most smokers who do end up quitting tried multiple times before they actually succeeded.
Furthermore, previous attempts to quit can be important learning experiences that can
help you succeed the next time.
In fact, many experts recommend viewing failed quit attempts as normal steps in the path
to complete abstinence.
Even smokers who don't manage to quit completely still often smoke less than they would have
otherwise, which is also better for your health.
One other product that's become quite popular is the electronic cigarette, or e-cigarette.
But it's controversial.
E-cigarettes are similar to nicotine inhalers.
When the user takes a drag, the e-cigarette creates a vapor containing nicotine that's
inhaled.
So what's the difference between e-cigarettes and the standard nicotine replacement therapies
that we've been discussing?
Well, the big difference is that e-cigarettes haven't undergone the same rigorous testing,
and they haven't been approved by the FDA as a smoking cessation treatment.
We therefore don't have evidence about whether they actually help people quit, or about how
safe they are to use.
And there's also concern that they might be tempting to non-smokers, especially children,
because they're easier to get, and they often include flavors like bubble gum that might
appeal to children.
The concern is that kids might try e-cigarettes, get addicted to the nicotine, and then turn
to smoking real cigarettes.
On the other hand, if you're already addicted to nicotine, and you find that e-cigarettes
help you stay away from smoking tobacco, then that's certainly a good thing.
After all, it's very unlikely that smoking e-cigarettes is as harmful as smoking the
real thing.
Okay, so far we've talked about treatment options that target nicotine and physical
dependence.
But as we've seen, there's a lot more to an addiction than physical dependence.
In particular, smokers have developed very strong associations between smoking and a
variety of environmental triggers.
And somehow those associations need to be unlearned.
Behavioral therapy attempts to do that.
Smokers in behavioral therapy often work on recognizing the triggers that are the most
strongly associated with smoking for them.
And then they work on strategies for avoiding those triggers, or coping with them when they
do encounter them.
They might learn techniques for managing stress, which is a very strong trigger to
smoke for many people.
They might also get help in developing a system of social support from family and friends
who can help with encouragement and accountability.
Now, traditionally behavioral therapy has been done in formal settings.
But there are now support systems available by phone, by mail, and on the internet.
For example, 1-800-QUIT-NOW is a toll-free phone number that will connect U.S. citizens
with their state's quit line, including free access to a trained quit coach who can provide
advice and counseling over the phone.
The website, SmokeFree.gov, also provides lots of helpful information and tools to help
a smoker quit.
Now, not surprisingly, combining behavioral therapy with nicotine replacement therapy
is significantly more effective than either method alone.
Dealing with both the physical and psychological side of the addiction simultaneously can really
help.
There are also a couple of other less common treatment options that have proven effective.
One is a medication called Varenicline that was developed by the pharmaceutical company
Pfizer.
Varenicline is a partial agonist of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
Do you remember our discussion of partial agonists in our last lecture?
A partial agonist binds to receptors, but only partially activates them.
So you can think of Varenicline as a weak form of nicotine.
It binds to the same receptors, but it produces a smaller response.
So suppose you're taking Varenicline, and then you smoke a cigarette.
Well, many of the acetylcholine receptors will already be occupied by the Varenicline,
and so the nicotine won't stimulate the reward circuit as much as it normally would.
Consequently, the cravings get smaller, and it gets easier to quit.
In fact, clinical studies have found Varenicline to have about the same effectiveness as nicotine
replacement therapy.
One problem with Varenicline is that a small proportion of users have reported that using
it led to depression and even suicidal thoughts.
It therefore isn't for everyone, and it needs to be used with care.
Ironically enough, another medication that has proven beneficial in helping smokers quit
is actually an antidepressant called bupropion.
When marketed as an antidepressant, it's called wellbutrin, but as a smoking cessation
aid, it's often called Zyban.
Bupropion is a nicotinic acetylcholine antagonist, but it also has many other effects on the
brain.
And it's actually currently unclear why it helps smokers quit, but it does.
Well, that concludes our discussion of caffeine and nicotine.
Next time, we'll talk about alcohol, which our society often treats as a relatively harmless
social lubricant rather than as a drug of abuse.
But is it really different from other addictive drugs?
For example, does alcohol hijack the brain's reward circuit like other drugs?
We'll answer these and many related questions in our next lecture.
See you then.
