One of the most astounding features of the science of information is its ubiquity.
Claude Shannon's revolution has spread far beyond the technology of telecommunication.
The concepts and principles he formulated have become essential elements of the sciences
from biology to quantum physics.
Why?
What is it about information that makes it such an indispensable idea?
At root, information is about isomorphism.
Isomorphism is a term borrowed from mathematics.
It means that two different mathematical structures are essentially alike.
In topology, for example, the shape of a donut is isomorphic to the shape of a coffee cup.
That's because each one can be transformed into the other in a continuous way.
Topologically, each one is a torus.
That's the mathematical name for that invariant common quality that those different shapes
share.
That transformability of shape should remind us of the protein transformability of information.
I speak, my voice is a sound, but later it is a sequence of electrical signals or a static
magnetic pattern on a computer disk or an electromagnetic wave propagating through space.
But in the end, it is regenerated as sound once more.
Information is what we call that invariant common quality that all those vastly different
physical phenomena share.
It is the isomorphism between them.
That's why information theory is so perfectly suited to find common ground between language
and thermodynamics, DNA and MP3, photons and neurons.
And if we wear our information colored glasses, we will see the laws of information at work
all around us in a hundred different ways.
So let's consider an area that we haven't discussed yet, economics.
That's one of the most remarkable branches of the science of information.
Money itself is a form of communication, a kind of information.
This is not actually that hard to believe nowadays when most money exists in the form of electronic
account data, bits in banks, but it has been true from the beginning.
Money was invented to solve a problem.
If I have fish and you have baskets, then we can agree to trade.
Three-way trades are more complicated to arrange.
I give you fish, you give him baskets, he gives me a spear.
When time is involved, it's even worse, fish today for baskets tomorrow for spears delivered
last week.
Money is a sophisticated record keeping and communication system for all those agreements
and obligations, direct and indirect, that we undertake.
And we should not be distracted by the fact that early monetary systems used coins made
of precious metal.
The real purpose of that was cryptographic to make it hard to counterfeit the messages
of agreement and obligation.
If we can meet that cryptographic requirement, then we can use paper money or digital money.
It's the very transformability of money that tells us money is information.
On the other side, prices, the exchange rates between money and goods are also a very sophisticated
system of communication.
That system distributes information to widely separated people who need to know it.
If there is an earthquake in Indonesia that shuts down the tin mines, it will affect the
future availability of tin.
This will have implications for people all over the world who use tin whether or not
they know that they do.
So how do they get the word?
The price of tin goes up.
And they respond by finding ways to do with less or substitute something else.
They raise their own prices to pass the message along.
Yet the ball bearing manufacturer in Germany or the cell phone user in Brazil know nothing
about the BUNCA Melaid tin miners.
They do not share a language.
They do not share a culture.
But they can communicate because they are part of the same network of exchange.
At each link in that network, people understand each other well enough to buy and sell.
That's all that is necessary.
The concept of information has become central to modern economics.
More than one Nobel Memorial Prize in economics has been awarded for studies of information
asymmetry, the situation in which one party to a transaction has access to more information
than another.
Economists try to find ways to make that economic information network more efficient and effective.
And more recently, even the nitty gritty of Shannon's information theory has begun
to find its way into some economic thinking.
You see, people take actions and adjust prices based on the information available to them.
But real human beings cannot process an unlimited number of bits of data.
They have a finite information capacity.
They do try to make sure they are seeing the most important bits around them.
They subscribe to trade magazines, they scan the internet, they exchange gossip.
But there is too much.
They simply miss some of the signals.
Recent computer models suggest that this information capacity idea can help to explain
the long observed fact that price changes often lag well behind the changes in circumstance
that drive them.
That's called price stickiness, and that it is at least partly due to the fact that
we economic actors can only acquire and use so many bits per day.
All communication, economic or otherwise, is based on what we share.
And that makes sense because all communication is based on codes.
A code is an arbitrary rule that associates a symbol with a message.
In the absence of that shared rule, a collection of symbols could literally mean anything.
Michael Ventress and John Chadwick were able to decipher Linear B because they recognized
the Greek language in those symbols scratched on clay.
They shared a common code with the writers of the tablets, spoken Greek.
That was enough to break the written code.
There is an older writing system from Crete, Linear A. It uses some of the same symbols.
But the ancient Minoans who wrote it did not speak Greek.
We do not know what language they spoke.
It might have no relation to any known speech.
So Linear A remains an unsolved puzzle to this day.
The Minoans cannot speak to us.
What if we wanted to communicate with people thousands of years from now?
How could we hope to be understood by people so remote from us that we could share no
common code with them?
It's a thorny problem in communication.
The physicist Philip Morrison has called it the problem of anti-cryptography.
In the absence of a shared code, how can we not keep our message secret?
Actually, sending information even 200 years into the future, in a time capsule perhaps,
poses some challenges.
The question is not basic understanding.
It is easy to read books from 200 years ago.
So our great-great-great-great-grandchildren will probably understand us pretty well.
The problem is that most of the information we have and use today is electronic in form.
Audio, video, computer data and programs.
But most of the technologies we use to store that information won't last for 200 years.
Magnetic media like tapes and discs can become unreadable after a couple of decades.
Optical discs like CDs and DVDs last somewhat longer before the layers begin to separate.
Some of them, under ideal conditions, might endure for a century.
Even certain kinds of non-digital storage media have proved too ephemeral to last even
100 years.
Many old movies, including some famous ones, are in danger of being lost as the cellulose
acetate film stock degrades chemically over the decades.
But that isn't the worst obstacle.
Information storage technology has advanced so rapidly that many older forms of storage
have simply been abandoned.
We have surviving magnetic tapes and stacks of computer punch cards from 50 years ago,
yet much of that data is practically inaccessible.
The machines to read it don't exist.
What are the chances that a Blu-ray player will be available 200 years from now?
For our 200-year time capsule, the best bet is to use old-fashioned data storage technologies
whenever possible.
Print on acid-free paper lasts for centuries and requires no special machines to read.
Paintings likewise.
Inscriptions on metal or stone last even longer, especially if protected from the elements.
Even phonograph records may be playable after 200 years, with a technology that, even if
no longer common, would be fairly easy to reproduce.
On the longer time horizon, we face the problem of language.
Languages change over time.
Each generation speaks a little differently from its parents.
We can reconstruct the past history of language change by studying and comparing lots of different
languages and dialects that let us build a phylogenetic tree for human languages.
However, even with plenty of linguistic data, there seems to be no way to reconstruct languages
back more than about 6,000 years.
Things simply change too much over that span.
So how do we transmit information to our remote descendants 10,000 years from now?
There is an entirely practical reason why we might want to do so.
That reason is nuclear waste.
Out in the New Mexico Desert is the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant, or WIP, a facility built to demonstrate
how nuclear waste can be permanently stored in geologically stable areas.
600 meters below ground level, a huge cavern has been excavated in a massive quarter billion
year old salt layer called the Solado Formation.
Over the last decade and a half, tens of thousands of cubic meters of radioactive waste from nuclear
reactors and laboratories has been stored in WIP.
When the facility is finally closed, the access shafts will be filled in with salt and rock.
Then the salt of the Solado Formation will gradually collapse the cavern, sealing and
entombing the waste.
That's good because the stuff is highly radioactive and extremely dangerous.
It will be fairly dangerous for a long while.
It will take 10,000 years for the waste to decay to the level of natural uranium ore.
Until then, it would be a very good idea for our descendants to leave it alone.
But how do we tell them?
The problem has been studied by several teams of scientists, with fields of expertise ranging
from nuclear physics to anthropology.
They pondered what kind of monument or inscription could carry the WIP warning message so far
into an unknown future.
We cannot rely on ordinary written language, and other kinds of symbols are not much better.
The trefoil, the international symbol for radiation, may lose its present meaning.
Even the skull and crossbones, the symbol for toxicity, could be misinterpreted.
It would be unfortunate indeed if the site were dug up by people looking for pirate treasure.
And we can make no confident predictions about the science and technology of future humanity.
They may be far more advanced than we are.
They may be less.
The scientists who studied the problem came to realize that the solution involved a multi-layered
message, each layer building on the content of the last.
The first layer is straightforward.
People made this.
That seems simple, but it is a vital first step.
Unless you believe that some arrangement of stones or some scratches in a rock are artificial,
you will not try to decipher their meaning.
The second layer is also simple.
Stay away from here.
That is, after all, the main point.
So if the first two layers of the message get through, that may be enough.
The third layer is more ambitious.
It explains in a general way that something very toxic is buried deeply at the site and
that it will not be safe to dig it up for ten millennia.
And the fourth layer adds a lot more technical detail, explaining the design of the facility,
the nature of the waste, and so on.
So here's the plan.
Whip will be surrounded by a large earthwork, an earthen berm thirty feet high and a half
mile across.
Such earthen monuments are known around the world and they last a very long time.
Buried in the berm will be magnetic markers and metal targets visible to radar.
In the middle will be a roofless granite building with inscriptions and two more buried information
vaults.
Solar stone markers will be varied at various depths around the site.
And finally, extensive technical records about whip will be deposited in archives all over
the world in hopes that some copies may survive.
What about the message?
The second, third, and fourth layers of the message would have to be largely pictorial.
One cartoon might show someone digging, then growing very ill and dying.
A star chart could convey the notion of ten thousand years by using the slow procession
of the earth's rotation axis.
Diagrams could convey mathematical concepts like numbers which could in turn be used on
blueprints and technical data.
Small samples of entombed waste would likely be buried at much shallower depths to permit
scientific study.
The danger to guard against is the assumption that the recipients share parts of our many
visual or linguistic codes.
They might not.
For example, which way does an arrow point?
What does it mean?
We might consider it obvious.
Will they?
When confronted with a series of pictures, should we consider them starting at the left
or the right?
The message they convey might be radically different depending on which way we read them.
Nevertheless, we can reasonably expect that we will share some things with the future
recipients of our warning message.
There will be physical features of the environment that will stay relatively constant.
The procession of the earth's axis will cause the constellations to shift, but not
noticeably change shape.
The compass directions and the general forms of the surrounding landscape will not alter
much in ten thousand years.
Most importantly, the recipients will be human beings like us.
Studies of many different human cultures allow us to build upon human universals.
All humans who are not actually blind see in roughly the same way.
They can recognize the same simple pictures like the human form in various actions or
the human face, showing the emotions of happiness or distress.
All of these are shared information between us and future humanity.
They can form the basis of a visual code for speaking to our distant descendants.
That's how we can solve Morrison's anti-cryptography problem by making a code out of what we naturally
share.
With some effort, we have a decent chance to transmit our warning and have it understood.
Whether it will be heated, of course, is not ours to decide.
There is an even more difficult and even more speculative form of the anti-cryptography
problem.
That is the problem of communicating with extraterrestrial intelligence.
The idea that there could be thinking beings on other worlds has been around since antiquity,
but the modern research into this idea began in 1959 with a paper entitled, Searching for
Interstellar Communications by Philip Morrison and the Italian physicist Giuseppe Caconi.
Caconi and Morrison calculated that existing radio telescopes were sensitive enough to
detect signals from their counterparts orbiting nearby stars.
Those stars and the background of other radio sources in the galaxy would contribute noise.
To achieve a signal-to-noise ratio of at least one so that the signal would be easy
to spot, the bandwidth of the receiver would have to be very narrow.
The bit rate would be low, but if extraterrestrials existed within a few dozen light-years of
Earth and they had radio telescopes as advanced as ours and they happened to be beaming signals
in our direction, we could hear them.
So Caconi and Morrison proposed that we listen.
Two years later, we did listen.
Frank Drake, a radio astronomer at Cornell University, used a radio telescope at the
National Radio Astronomy Observatory in West Virginia to monitor a pair of nearby stars
for possible intelligent radio signals.
The stars were Taussetti and Epsilon Eridani.
Two of the favorable candidates that Caconi and Morrison had listed, and Drake monitored
wavelengths close to 21 centimeters, the wavelength emitted by neutral hydrogen gas, which Caconi
and Morrison suggested as a natural landmark in the radio spectrum.
Drake did not discover alien radio signals, but his experiment called Project Osma was
the first step in SETI, the Scientific Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence.
Over the decades since, there have been other efforts, many more sophisticated, some of
them ongoing today.
Drake was the first.
In 1974, Drake was director of the radio telescope facility at Arcebo in Puerto Rico,
the largest radio dish antenna on the planet.
The telescope had been upgraded with a powerful transmitter for interplanetary radar work.
To demonstrate the new capability, Drake and the Arcebo team decided to turn SETI upside
down.
Instead of just listening for deliberate alien signals, we would send a signal of our own.
Drake got his Cornell colleague, the astronomer Carl Sagan, to help him design the message.
The result is one of the most fascinating examples of anti-cryptography ever devised.
The Arcebo message was a sequence of 1679 binary digits encoded in slight shifts of
the radar frequency, FM, and transmitted at 10 bits per second.
1679 is the product of two prime numbers, 73 and 23, so a recipient might get the idea
to arrange the bits in a rectangle, either 73 by 23 or 23 by 73.
Do it one way, it is apparent nonsense.
Do it the other way, and a picture appears.
There is no way to tell how one should orient the picture.
An alien recipient might have flipped it horizontally or vertically, but the first bits transmitted
appear in the upper left corner, so that is the place to begin.
The top row is a lesson about how to count to 10 in binary.
Each number includes a bit to mark the end of the number.
The rest of the sequence is familiar, 1, 1-0, 1-1, 1-0-0, 1-0-1, and so on.
The last few numbers, 8, 9 and 10, demonstrate that we may put extra bits to the side for
longer numbers.
The next item is a group of five numbers, 1, 6, 7, 8 and 15.
These are the atomic numbers for five elements, hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and phosphorus.
These five are the elemental building blocks of life on Earth.
That might seem a little too obscure, but we must assume that the recipients do know
a good deal about physics and chemistry.
They would be bound to hit the right interpretation eventually.
After this comes a whole arrangement of five number groups.
Having figured out the atomic numbers, we can deduce that these represent chemical formulas,
so many hydrogens, so many carbons, etc.
The first is seven hydrogens, five carbons and one oxygen, a sugar.
The next one down is four oxygens and one phosphorus, a phosphate.
Then the same two units repeat, just as they do on the other side.
That's a description of the twin sugar and phosphate backbones of the DNA molecule, and
the formulas in the middle represent the four DNA bases, adenine and thymine above, cytosine
and guanine below.
This part of the message is a compact description of the molecular storage system for our genetic
information, the most fundamental basis of Earth life.
And the next part of the picture shows a rather impressionistic picture of the double-heelic
structure of DNA, and smack in the middle of it is a big binary number.
We can tell it's a number by the little bit marker at the bottom.
How big is it?
32 bits long.
It translates to about six billion, the approximate number of base pairs in the human genome.
Below the genome number, there is a picture of one of us, head, body, two arms, two legs.
Beside the human are two numbers, each is to be read horizontally rather than vertically
as suggested by the bit marker.
The number on the right is a 32-bit number equal to about four billion, the approximate
human population of the Earth in 1974.
The number on the left, in the middle of the vertical bar next to the human, is a measure
of our height, fourteen.
Fourteen watts.
Fourteen of the only unit of length that we are certain the aliens must share with us,
the wavelength of the radio wave that carries the message.
The Otosebo Radar Transmitter had a 12.6-centimeter wavelength, multiplied by fourteen, and we
get 176 centimeters, about five feet nine inches.
Evidently that's how tall Frank Drake is.
Next there is a diagram of our solar system, the sun and nine planets.
They counted Pluto as a planet in those days.
The larger planets are indicated by longer bars.
The third planet, Earth, is slightly displaced toward the human in the diagram.
That's the dot where we're from.
At the bottom is an explanation of how the signal was transmitted, a diagram of the Otosebo
antenna.
The width bars and binary number give the antenna's diameter, 2,430 wavelengths, or
a little over 300 meters.
The Otosebo message was transmitted on November 16, 1974, toward the dense globular cluster
M13, about 22,000 light-years away.
That way there would be many stars within the narrow beam.
Since the signal was only broadcast once, it is unlikely that anyone in M13 will happen
to hear it.
Nevertheless, the broadcast power was enormous, a million watts, twice as great as the largest
commercial transmitter in history, and directed with an antenna gain factor of tens of millions.
Any twin of Orosebo in the right part of M13, if it is tuned to the right frequency and
pointing our way, couldn't miss it.
Or won't be able to miss it when the signal reaches the cluster 22,000 years from now.
It's one-fifth of one percent of the way there already.
The most interesting aspect of the Orosebo message is not the remote chance that it will
be received, it's the fascinating strategy used to solve the anti-cryptography problem.
The message relies on things that we must share with the intended recipients, alien though
they be, mathematics and logic, the facts of physics, chemistry and astronomy, the physical
characteristics of the signal itself.
Anyone in the universe who can build a radio telescope must know these things.
They are an information basis on which we can build a shared code.
There have been many other attempts to send signals to extraterrestrials.
Transmissions from other radio telescopes have been directed toward several stars within
a few dozen light-years of Earth.
Each has adopted its own solution to the anti-cryptography problem.
The messages have used error-correcting codes, made attempts at logical or pictorial languages,
and even played a short concert of electronic music.
This is actually a fairly controversial subject though.
Not every scientist believes it is wise to deliberately try to contact beings about whom
we know nothing.
Maybe we should listen first.
And not everyone thinks that radio signals are the most likely means for interstellar
communication.
Light signals offer many advantages.
They are not as dispersed by the interstellar medium.
They can be sent in an even narrower beam than a radio signal with a correspondingly
greater gain factor.
In fact, at a particular wavelength seen from a great distance, a laser beam from Earth
could outshine the light from our sun.
So there are several telescope-based projects underway to search for extraterrestrial light
signals.
It's called optical SETI.
Some advocate more direct communication, but the two voyager spacecraft heading out
into interstellar space each carry a gold-plated copper disk designed by Drake and Sagan, inscribed
like a phonograph record with digital data that includes photographs of Earth and recorded
greetings in over 50 languages.
Within a protective covering in the emptiness of deep space, the grooves engraved on the
metal of the disk might retain their information for 100 million years.
Other scientists argue that the best way to find and contact extraterrestrials would
be to launch self-replicating probes like Von Neumann's reproducing robot.
The Von Neumann probes would travel to other solar systems, and from local materials would
assemble copies of themselves, the copies would head out to more distant stars.
The probes would search for intelligent life and report their findings back to Earth.
They would carry our messages with them.
I can't help but wonder whether these speculative exercises in anti-cryptography might suggest
a way to get at that thing that Claude Shannon left out of information theory, the concept
of meaning.
Remember in Shannon's theory, information is just the distinction between possible alternatives,
between messages, not any significance those messages might possess.
It's an abstraction.
Indeed, it was a brilliant abstraction because it opened a world of possibilities and laid
the groundwork for a technological and scientific revolution.
Shannon's abstract concept of information allows us to understand how different forms
of information are interchangeable and can be represented in the common currency of bits.
It tells us how to measure information by entropy and how to use codes for data compression
and error correction.
It tells us about noise and signal and bandwidth, about how to keep secrets and how to penetrate
the secrets of others.
Shannon information even tells us how to bet on horse races.
But every kind of communication, every kind of computation happens within the context
that determines its meaning.
Thus, the information stored in DNA exists within a biochemical apparatus that expresses
its base sequences as a library of protein designs, as the basic operating system of
a living organism.
Viewed another way, the DNA message is a record of the long history of life on Earth.
Either way, DNA is not simply abstract information.
It is information about something.
There is a hint too in the algorithmic information of Kolmogorov and Chaitin.
The information content of a binary string is exactly the set of instructions necessary
to create it in the context of the universal computer.
The meaning of the program is determined by the computer in which it runs.
Ultimately, the context of every message and every program is the universe itself.
Laws of thermodynamics and quantum physics govern how information is acquired and stored
and processed and erased.
Those principles set the rules, and some of the rules can take us to places that even
Shannon did not foresee.
The elementary quantum phenomenon of Wheeler and the holographic ideas of Beckenstein and
DeHufft intimate that information really lies in the relation between the part and the whole,
between the quantum and the cosmos.
As our own information universe, the universe of humans and the machines we have made grows
exponentially more complex, we need to remember how that little universe is embedded in the
far larger and richer network of nature.
For the meaning of all our light pulses and electrical signals, all those symbols on stone
or bits of wood lies not within them, but around them in the context of the universe.
If we ever do receive a signal from extraterrestrial intelligence, it will be a profound challenge
to all the sciences of information to somehow extract the meaning from that message.
Yet it is likely that the most meaningful piece of information will be the piece that
is easiest to read, that first layer of the message.
People made this.
Even that profound message would in a sense be just one bit, a yes instead of a no, a
one instead of a zero.
