In 2012, a team of Harvard scientists announced that they had successfully stored a little
over 700 kilobytes, about 5 million bits of information, the ASCII-coded text of a book,
plus 11 illustrations in JPEG format, and a computer program.
What made this remarkable was the storage medium, DNA, the oxyribonucleic acid, the
molecule that living organisms on Earth use to store their genetic information.
We're crossing a frontier.
So far, the science of information has been all about human communication and human technology.
But nature has her own messages, her own vast networks of information exchange, her own
natural codes for representing information, and technologies for processing it.
So the concept of information is indispensable for understanding the natural world, and nowhere
is this more true than in biology, the science of life.
Living things reproduce, and the offspring resemble the parents.
Therefore, there must be some kind of inheritable information, information that has passed from
one generation to the next.
What kind of information is it?
How is it represented physically?
How is it transmitted?
What does it say?
We have touched on this topic before at the beginning of the course, when we mentioned
John Von Neumann's idea of a self-reproducing robot.
A machine that can manufacture copies of itself must contain a kind of blueprint, information
that is itself copied and passed on to the robot offspring.
So it must be with living things.
The first person to understand this in a modern way was a monk and physics teacher from what
is now the Czech Republic, Gregor Mendel.
Mendel did experiments on heredity in pea plants, which he grew in the garden of St.
Thomas's Abbey in Burno.
Pea plants were a good choice.
You can grow them in large numbers and raise a couple of generations each year.
You can control which plants pollinate which other plants.
Also, you can eat them afterward.
Mendel identified several inheritable characteristics for his plants, like the color and shape of
the peas and so on.
And here is the first surprise.
Each of his characteristics is binary.
The peas might be yellow or green, but not yellowish green.
They might be round or wrinkled, but not in between a little wrinkled or somewhat round.
So it looks as though each characteristic corresponds to just one bit of genetic information.
In fact, it's two bits.
That was Mendel's second discovery.
So consider pea color.
And zero represent green and one represent yellow.
Each pea plant has two bits of pea color information.
They get one bit from each parent.
But one trait, yellow, is dominant for the actual appearance of the plant.
If the bits of the plant are 1-0-0-1 or 1-1, then the peas come out yellow in appearance.
Only if the bits are 0-0 are they green.
Orgate from Boolean logic.
Those units of inheritable information, the pieces of the biological blueprint, later
came to be called genes.
Mendel's work on genes is full of clues about the nature of that information.
Unfortunately when he published his work in 1865, it was little red and soon forgotten.
The whole thing had to be rediscovered a few decades later.
But once it was, the science of genetics was born.
The location of the genetic information within a cell was soon identified.
The chromosomes, tiny structures within cells, barely visible in a microscope.
Chromosomes occurred in pairs, just like Mendel's genes.
And chromosomes suggested an answer to a genetic puzzle.
Some pieces of genetic information are transmitted independently.
For instance, the color and shape of a pea are independent traits, whether a plant inherits
the yellow or green gene from one parent is quite independent of what shape it inherits,
round or wrinkled.
But other traits are linked.
They are both inherited or both not.
Independent traits are thus carried on different chromosomes, while linked traits are carried
on the same chromosomes.
So geneticists began to map out which traits existed on which chromosomes, but the nature
of the gene itself still remained a mystery.
Let's pause to note something amusing.
In this course, it has sometimes seemed that in whatever direction we travel, we find that
Claude Shannon has already been there.
And that's true of genetics as well.
His PhD thesis in 1940 proposed a mathematical theory for describing how genes are distributed
and transmitted in populations.
This was, of course, years before his great papers on communication and cryptography.
So perhaps Mendel's discoveries about heredity were part of the genetic code of information
theory itself.
Now, many people speculated on the nature of the gene.
And one of those people was the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger.
Schrödinger was one of the founders of quantum mechanics, but he later became interested
in biology.
After all, life is a physical phenomenon.
It is as much a part of physics as light or gravity.
Genetic information must have a physical basis.
So Schrödinger applied his physicist's insight to fundamental biological questions,
and in 1944 he wrote a remarkable little book entitled What is Life?
Schrödinger noted that genetic information is discrete rather than continuous, digital
information not analog.
The first piece of evidence is Mendel's discrete binary genes in pea plants.
The second is a clever argument about the stability of genetic information.
At the microscopic level, all matter, including the matter and genes, whatever they are, is
subject to continual thermal agitation.
Analog genetic information would be subject to continual, tiny alterations that would
add up over time.
But that sort of change is not what we observe.
Schrödinger noted the experiments on mutations by the American geneticist Hermann Neuler.
Schrödinger exposed fruit flies to x-rays, and occasionally this produced changes in
the genetic information, changes that the flies passed on to their descendants.
Those changes were discrete, all-or-nothing effects.
A mutation occurred, or it did not.
Genetic information is digital.
So based on these facts, Schrödinger argued that genetic information had to be stored
in molecular structures within the chromosomes.
And this makes sense, because of the laws of quantum physics, only certain combinations
and arrangements of atoms are possible.
These structures are ordinarily stable, but individual x-ray photons could make discrete
changes in them.
Schrödinger described the genetic material as an aperiodic crystal.
That was a very thought-provoking phrase.
A crystal is a regular, periodic arrangement of atoms.
It has a stable structure, like the gene, but because the pattern of a crystal endlessly
repeats itself, it contains almost no information.
After all, in a perfect checkerboard of white and black squares, there is no surprise in
the color of any particular square.
Therefore the molecular units in the genetic material must have a more complex, non-repeating
arrangement, which serves as a code, Schrödinger's word, for genetic information.
It's more like a pattern of pixels that make up a picture.
Schrödinger's aperiodic crystal amounts to a new state of matter, neither the perfectly
regular but informationless structure of a crystal and solid, nor the unstable disorderly
chaos of a liquid or a gas.
Well, Schrödinger's book was tremendously influential.
It attracted a lot of young scientists to work on the problems he discussed, and two
of those young scientists were Francis Crick and James Watson, by training a physicist
and a biologist, respectively.
Working together at Cambridge University in 1953, they unraveled the aperiodic structure
of the molecule within the chromosome that actually does carry the genetic information,
DNA.
Now, people already knew that DNA was the culprit, so to speak, the bearer of genetic
information.
They can sometimes exchange DNA molecules with each other, and when they do, they can
also take on new traits, ones that can be passed on to their descendants.
They have new genetic information.
When they exchange other kinds of molecules, like proteins, this does not happen.
So DNA must contain the blueprint information that is copied when the organism reproduces
itself.
Here is what Crick and Watson found.
Two backbones of phosphate and sugar form the sides of the DNA molecule.
In three dimensions, the structure is twisted in a now iconic double helix form, but for
our purposes, we can think of the backbones as the two sides of a simple ladder.
Between the backbones, the rungs of the ladder, are pairs of flat molecular units called bases.
There are four bases, adenine, guanine, thymine, and cytosine, which are represented by the
letters A, G, T, and C.
When these fit together in complementary pairs, A fits with T and G fits with C, and the pairs
can be oriented within the molecule either way.
So each rung of the DNA ladder is either AT, TA, GC, or CG.
So it is just as Schrodinger guessed, a regular stable molecular structure with units arranged
in a non-repeating pattern.
That is the genetic information for the organism, written in a kind of molecular code.
Now, Crick and Watson were quick to note that the base pair system makes copying straightforward.
The original DNA molecule first splits apart along the join between the bases in each rung.
New units assemble along the split halves, but only certain bases can fit together, A
with T or C with G. Thus, the original sequence of base pairs, the genetic information, is
reproduced in the two resulting DNA molecules.
Those Harvard scientists who stored their book in DNA were also able to cause the DNA
molecules to be copied.
They ended up with billions of copies of the original.
They joked that this was the largest printing of any book in history.
Counting all the copies, a single gram of their final product contained five petabytes
of information.
A petabyte is a thousand terabytes, or a million gigabytes.
The information density in DNA is truly impressive.
Now, a living cell only contains a tiny amount of DNA, but that still may represent billions
of bits.
It is an ASCII text, though, or JPEG images.
It isn't Shakespeare's sonnets or an audio clip of Martin Luther King, which have also
been recorded in DNA.
The DNA information in a cell is a blueprint of its structure and function.
So what kind of a code is used for that?
One of the first people to glimpse the answer was another physicist, George Gamoff.
Gamoff was from the USSR, but by the 1950s he had become an American citizen.
He worked on quantum physics, nuclear physics, and cosmology, but like Schrodinger, he became
fascinated by problems in biology.
And he was also well acquainted with Shannon's information theory, which was relatively new
at the time.
So Gamoff asked, what sort of information is being coded in DNA?
And what is the nature of that genetic code?
Gamoff focused on proteins.
Proteins are the basic molecular machines of a cell.
A protein is a long polymer or chain composed of a few hundred basic units called amino
acids.
There are many different types of amino acid, and twenty of these show up in actual proteins.
The molecule is not physically stretched out in a line, however, instead it is folded up
in a compact, very complicated 3D shape.
The details of that shape determines what the protein does.
Gamoff said, the sequence of base pairs in the DNA molecule must somehow encode the sequence
of amino acids in the protein.
The words of the protein language are amino acids, there are twenty possible words.
That means each amino acid represents log 2 of 20, 4.3 bits of information.
But the DNA language only has four letters, the base pairs for two bits per letter.
So Gamoff conjectured that the genetic code represented an amino acid by a codon in modern
language consisting of three DNA base pairs.
And later experiments by Francis Crick and others showed that he was exactly right.
Alright, so the DNA alphabet has four letters, the codon words are three letters long representing
the twenty different amino acids, and these form long sentences, proteins made up of
hundreds of amino acids.
One of those sentences is one of Mendel's genes, because the proteins control the way
the organism appears and functions.
Basically DNA itself does not play a direct role in forming proteins.
The DNA data storage and protein construction may occur in entirely separate parts of a
cell.
The molecule that carries the information from one to the other is called RNA.
RNA, ribonucleic acid, is a kind of one-sided cousin of DNA.
There's a single phosphate sugar backbone and individual bases are attached to it on
one side.
These are the same bases as in DNA, with one exception, thymine, T in DNA is replaced
by uracil, U in RNA, so the RNA alphabet is A, U, G and C.
The base sequence in a strand of RNA represents genetic information, just as in DNA.
In fact, some viruses dispense with DNA altogether and store their genetic information as RNA.
And in most cells, RNA is an intermediary between the data storage and the protein making.
In the process of transcription, a DNA molecule partly unzips and an RNA molecule forms from
complementary base pairs.
Then this RNA, the messenger RNA or mRNA, moves to a ribosome where proteins are made.
That process is called translation.
The two ends of the RNA molecule are slightly different chemically, so the ribosome knows
which end to start with.
Each group of three bases is a codon.
But the first codons in the RNA might not represent anything.
They are in the untranslated region of the RNA molecule.
Protein building does not start until a special triplet called the start codon is reached.
There is some variation, but usually this is the codon AUG.
That stands for the amino acid methionine.
Each triplet of bases, each codon, is translated into the next amino acid in the protein.
Of course, there are no spaces or commas in the molecule, so a sequence of bases could
be divided up in three different ways.
So imagine a stretch of RNA with a repeating pattern of C, A and U. It could be read three
different ways, AUC, AUC, AUC, or UCA, UCA, UCA, or CAU, CAU, CAU.
The three ways of dividing the sequence into codons are called different frames, and only
one of them is correct.
The right one is determined by the start codon.
A mistake in the RNA that inserts or deletes a single base will produce a frame error.
That usually does not lead to a sensible protein.
The translation continues until one of three possible stop codons is reached.
These are UAA, UAG, or UGA.
So let's count codewords.
Four bases taken in groups of three give us 4 times 4 times 4, or 64 possible codons.
Three of these mean stop.
Every one of the remaining 61 codons, including the start codon AUG, stands for some amino
acid.
There are no nonsense words in the genetic code.
But there are only 20 different amino acids used in natural proteins.
That means that most of them can be represented by two, three, or more different codons.
The genetic code, in other words, is somewhat redundant.
The details of the genetic code were worked out in the early 1960s, and since then there
have been some dramatic technological advances.
We have learned how to read and create very long DNA sequences.
We can record the complete genome, the entire collection of genetic information of an organism.
Our own genome contains 6 billion base pairs, or about 12 billion bits.
Only about 2% of that, however, actually describes proteins via the genetic code.
But what does the rest do?
We used to call it junk DNA, but now we are realizing that it has some important functions.
A better term is non-coding DNA.
For instance, the genes coding proteins are very far apart, separated by long stretches
of non-coding DNA.
That means they are always translated separately, and that means that a frame error, a base
lost or inserted, affects only one of the proteins, and not both.
Now not all organisms have as much non-coding DNA as we do.
In bacteria, for example, about 80% of the DNA does code for proteins.
Chemically, there are many more than 20 possible amino acids, so there is a whole universe
of conceivable proteins, some of them perhaps useful, that cannot be made by ordinary living
things on Earth.
They don't know how to make them because the genetic code has no room for them.
We've used up all the code words.
So can we change that?
After all, we can modify the genetic information in a cell, we can manufacture and introduce
new molecules, can we find a way to alter cells so that they can use unnatural amino
acids in their proteins?
The translation of a codon in messenger RNA into an amino acid is done by a short piece
of RNA called transfer RNA, or tRNA.
A tRNA molecule is bent around in a kind of hairpin shape with side loops.
Complementary bases attach to each other along the parallel sides.
Up at one end, where the hairpin bends around, three bases stick out.
These three bases can attach themselves to a complementary set of bases on the mRNA chain
A with U, G with C, etc.
And each tRNA molecule is bound at the other end to a particular amino acid.
Thus, a tRNA molecule attaches to the codon on the mRNA strand and it can add the next
amino acid to the protein.
That's what happens in the ribosome protein factory.
To incorporate new amino acids, creating new kinds of protein that no existing life could
ever make, we'd need some new transfer RNA molecules with new amino acids attached.
But that is not enough.
We need to expand our genetic code.
How?
Well, molecular biologists have approached this in several ways.
One idea is to repurpose an existing codon.
AGG, for instance, is one of six codons for arginine, and some bacteria, that particular
version, is only rarely used.
Eliminating it entirely is not too hard.
Then we can introduce some modified tRNA so that the codon AGG is translated as our new
unnatural amino acid.
A related idea is to use the stop codon U, A, G. There are other strains of bacteria that
do not recognize that particular stop codon properly.
This messes up their basic machinery a bit, but the bacteria can survive that.
With the right tRNA, this codon can be reassigned to a new and different amino acid.
And in fact, a great many proteins with unnatural amino acids have been made in the lab using
exactly this kind of modified cell.
Another way to expand our genetic code would be to use longer code words.
We could imagine codons with four or even five bases.
The transfer RNA molecules that recognize them will have somewhat wider ends with more
matching bases exposed.
There are some things to think about.
For example, a code that mixes three and four-letter codons will introduce some frame-shifting
problems, but the thing has been done successfully in living bacterial cells.
Finally, and most radically, we can imagine nucleic acids with more different bases.
Our genetic code can employ a larger alphabet.
In addition to A, U, G, and C, we might now have X and Y.
The number of possible codons is now 6 x 6 x 6, 216 code words, which gives plenty of
room for new amino acids in the new code.
And this has actually been done for the DNA in some bacteria.
This strange new genetic information can be passed from one generation to the next generation,
so for now no one has created a way for it to translate into new proteins.
These experiments on the information machinery of life can seem a little weird and uncanny.
They are like visits to a different planet, where life uses similar DNA and RNA, but a
completely different code for its genetic information.
Codes are, after all, arbitrary associations between symbol and message.
So why does our own genetic code, which we share in almost every detail with every organism
on Earth, have the structure that it does?
As it turns out, the actual code that we use has some especially nice features.
So consider the redundancy of the genetic code, the fact that most amino acids are represented
by many different codons.
This makes the code more tolerant of errors.
For example, the codon ACC translates as the amino acid threonine.
But suppose something happens to the RNA and the final letter is changed to something else.
It becomes ACA, or ACG, or ACU.
Any of these still translates as threonine.
The protein is unaffected.
The new sequence is just as good as the old one.
It isn't quite like an error correcting code, it's more like the informal spelling rules
of Elizabethan English.
There may be four different valid ways to spell one word.
Changing one of the other letters will change threonine to some other amino acid.
That is an error because it affects the resulting protein.
But not all of those changes would necessarily be disastrous.
Changing the first letter from A to U, yielding UCC, or UCA, or UCG, or UCU, changes the amino
acid from threonine to serine.
Protein and serine are chemically quite similar.
A protein in which one is substituted for the other might have a similar shape and function.
It is a mistake, in other words, but perhaps not a serious one.
Fault tolerance is an indispensable property for the genetic code.
You see, it's wrong to imagine the molecular machinery of life as a bunch of well-oiled
mechanisms in which the gears all mesh together perfectly and everything proceeds step by
step.
Sometimes talk that way, but the reality is much messier.
All of the molecules are jittering around in ceaseless thermal motion.
That agitation can drive processes forward.
It can help different molecules find each other in the soup, but the progress is unsteady.
Sometimes a process goes two steps forward and one step back.
Sometimes errors occur.
The genetic code has to be able to work in that sort of environment.
We've used computer models to see how our own genetic code stacks up against other conceivable
genetic codes generated at random, and it turns out that our code tolerates errors better
than the vast majority of the others.
Our basic genetic information system is well adapted to that noisy molecular reality.
Yet, errors are a kind of information, too.
They can tell us a lot.
So far we've talked about errors in RNA and protein making, but there can also be errors
in DNA copying, the process by which genetic information is passed from one generation
to the next.
And as long as the errors are not fatal, they will in turn be transmitted to later generations.
This is a process that is well known to scholars of ancient manuscripts.
So ascribe copies a book by hand, but every so often he makes a mistake, perhaps in one
place the word angel is accidentally misspelled angle.
To a later scribe who makes a copy of that copy, the mistake might not be obvious.
It gets transmitted further down the line.
Centuries later, we may no longer have the original or any of its direct copies.
All that remains are the copies of the copies of the copies.
Yet there is a whole history behind them, which manuscripts were carried from one place
to another, which copies were made from which sources, etc.
The parts of the text that have no errors, the parts that match the original, tell us
nothing about that history, but the errors give us clues.
For example, we find that a whole group of manuscripts say angle instead of angel.
So we can infer that those manuscripts are related.
They probably all descend from some particular version in which a particular scribe made
that particular mistake.
If we then find a difference between two angle manuscripts, if one says moth where the other
says month, then that difference almost certainly arose later after the angel angle split.
The copying errors, compared among manuscripts, contain information about the family tree
of manuscript copies.
And this also helps us deduce what the earliest versions must have been like.
Information that is shared by widely separated branches of the family tree probably came
from a common source.
The very language we use to describe this process is genetic, descendant, ancestor,
family tree.
And that's because, like genetic inheritance, it's all about the transmission of information.
And so it is no surprise that the same ideas can be applied to the vast genetic manuscript
and DNA.
By looking at the patterns of DNA variation between individuals, we can draw conclusions
about their common family tree.
Apply this to whole populations, or whole species, and you get a bigger picture of the
pattern of descent, what geneticists call a phylogenetic tree.
The Italian geneticist Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza and his colleagues have applied these ideas
to our own species, reconstructing the phylogenetic tree of human populations.
Their work gives us a glimpse of the history of humanity, the great human diasporas by
which our species spread over the Earth.
For instance, Cavalli-Sforza finds that there is much wider genetic diversity in Africa
than elsewhere.
Different populations in Africa have remote common ancestors, while the common ancestors
of East Asians or Native Americans are more recent.
This strongly suggests that the founding population of our species live in Africa, and only some
of the branches of the family left.
Genetic patterns are blurred by later migrations and intermarriage.
For instance, the Celts and the Germans have been separate European populations for thousands
of years, but my own DNA comes from both branches.
Nevertheless, the overall shape of the human family tree can still be discerned.
In the last two decades, biologists have begun to use DNA to find the broad outlines of the
phylogenetic tree of all living things.
That is, the tree that includes everything from bacteria to begonias to buffalo.
And at the root of that tree, the great, great, etc., etc., a great, great grandmother of
us all, is an organism affectionately called Luka.
That stands for the last universal common ancestor.
We know a few things about Luka.
She probably lived 3.5 or 4 billion years ago.
All living things on Earth use proteins as cellular machines, and DNA to store genetic
information.
So did Luka.
All life on Earth uses essentially the same genetic code.
We got that from Luka as well.
But there are many things we do not know about our common grandmother.
For instance, where did she come from?
What was her history?
How did this whole business of life of passing genetic information from parent to offspring
get started in the first place?
What is the ultimate source of that genetic information?
The origin of life is a subject with a great many unknowns.
Yet there are some theories and observations that may tell us a little.
To explore them, we will need some concepts of chemistry and physics.
But most of all, we will need the concepts and the principles of the science of information.
