In this lecture, we're back to drama, which we were at last in our lecture on Shakespeare.
This time we're going to take up one of the premier comic dramatists, comic playwrights,
in the history of the western world, Molière.
When we reach Molière, we're actually in the age of reason, which is sometimes also
called the neoclassical age, or the age of the Enlightenment, which in Europe lasted
from about 1600 to about 1770, or perhaps slightly later.
The values of this age were drawn from classical literature, which virtually every writer in
the neoclassical age imitated in one way or another, used as models for their own writing.
The ancestry of Molière's plays, for example, would go back to the comic plays of the Roman
playwrights, Plautus and Terence.
It was said, in fact, of Molière that he had memorized the plays of Terence in Latin,
of course, and knew them all by heart.
But when we say imitate, which is what was called in this age, when we say imitate, we're
not talking about simply copying or slavish copying or just catching up to date, but we're
actually talking about a kind of interpretive use of older writers, using them to promote
values that the period most admired or most needed.
When we did our lecture on Shakespeare, we talked about the fact that we do that with
Shakespeare all the time.
Every age has reinterpreted Shakespeare's plays in order to find in them the values
and things that we need or find useful for our own times.
The values that this age found needful or admired or tried to incorporate into their
works were such values as intellect or reason, balance and symmetry, order and restraint,
and a very clear social orientation vis-a-vis a personal one.
In by 1660, Europe had just emerged from about a century and a half of really, really bloody
civil wars that had been fought as one of the consequences of the Protestant Reformation,
which had happened about 150 years earlier.
There were political aspects to these wars, of course, but in religious terms, they were
fought over differing interpretations of the Bible, each sect believing that it had found
the right way to read the Bible and that everybody else was wrong.
The paradigm for this interpretation, these struggles, was also individualistic.
It was Martin Luther standing before the Council of Worms saying that he could not go against
his conscience even if the entire world told him that he was wrong.
The grounding of truth in individual conscience had, therefore, become one of the pillars
of the Protestant Reformation.
What this age was looking for is it was looking for values that were not based on revelation
or individualistic interpretation, but values that could be based on reason, on empirical
evidence, and one of what they called common sense, common in the sense that most people
could agree on it, common being that most people would agree that this was the sensible
or the right or the proper thing to do, so that consensus and group norms and conformity
were stressed in a way that they probably had never been in the history of the Western
world before, and perhaps have never been quite since either.
This conformity, this pressure to find common ground happened not only in terms of big subjects
like politics and religion and morality, but it went all the way down to wigs and costumes
and manners and how you ate and which fork you used at meals and all manner of things.
This emphasis on group norms and social conformity is one of the reasons why, as we mentioned
in our last lecture on Don Quixote, why this age saw Don Quixote as a deviant from the
normative who deserved the comic punishments he received because he was, after all, departing
from those norms which were really, really very important.
What this age was looking for, in fact, were what they called universals.
Those things that, as they understood them, would have been true for all times, for all
people in all times and all places.
We're a little less certain about the existence of those, and we find it a little harder to
define those universals, but this age actually believed in them fervently, and hence the
promotion of conformity, doing things by the rules, living decorously, living the way
everyone else in the group was living.
And they were also equally firm at the same time in their rejection of the individualistic,
the subjective, the eccentric, the deviant from the norm.
They were also suspicious of the passions, perhaps not surprisingly, because passion
can overwhelm reason.
They were suspicious of anger, they were suspicious of love, they were even suspicious of too
much hilarity.
Sir Kenneth Clark in his Civilization Series says that Fontenelle, the French philosopher
at the very end of his life, and he lived a very long time, he was almost 100 years
old, was very proud to say, I have never run, I have never lost my temper, and I have never
laughed.
What Clark says is, I have never made ha-ha.
This was a sort of sign of how restrained and how disciplined he had been during his
life.
One of the ideals of the age was provided by Jonathan Swift in his Gulliver's Travels,
in the Huinams, which are those rational horses who live lives of absolutely pure reason,
clouded by passions, so that everything they did could be done in a perfectly rational,
intellectual way.
There isn't, of course, much love poetry in this age, since love is a passion, and
even Molière's comedies, which end usually in a marriage, tend to push the lovers off
to one side to make room for other material.
And this, we remember, is in stark contrast to Shakespeare, because Shakespeare always
puts his young lovers at the very center of his plays.
In Molière, they're always there, but they've gotten marginalized, just a little bit pushed
off to one, in one corner, so that he can really concentrate on other things.
So that, to summarize, the values of this age were rationality and restraint and conformity
to social norms, and common sense and the avoidance of passions, particularly the passions
that would tend to cloud reason and blur our sense of intellectual judgment.
And they didn't leave the inclusion of these values in their works to chance, either.
As with everything else, they created rules for every genre based on their study of classical
literature, and then decided how you could incorporate these values into those works.
A really excellent place to study this, if you're interested in finding out what they
thought was the right way to do this, is Alexander Pope's essay on criticism, which is a very
long poem, which explains how these values should be incorporated into literature.
Since this age was full of rules and regulations for how things should be done, it meant that
when Molière sat down to write his plays, there would have been a whole lot of rules
that he had to observe, had to abide by in writing his plays.
It's perhaps better not to think of them as rules, but to think of them as parameters
within which he had to work.
These were really, really important, not just for him, but for almost every other writer
of the age.
I would like to at least mention four of these, four of the most important that Molière would
have had to keep in mind while he's writing his plays.
The first one comes directly from classical literature, and it was called the rule of
utility et dolce, which translates to something like usefulness and delight.
The assumption for the neoclassical age was that the purpose of all art was to teach lessons,
moral lessons, through the pleasures which art delivers.
Literature can teach all of the values that we've just been talking about, but it does
so in stories, in beautiful poems, in lively plays, all of which tend to sugarcoat the
pill a little bit so that we can learn more from a good story than we do for a sermon
or a moral tract, because we're more entertained, we're more interested, because we pay better
attention.
A favorite way of teaching in the neoclassical age was satire.
That is using laughter to make fun of deviance and eccentrics, and in the process try to
laugh them back into conformity, back into the normative.
In a preface to Tartuffe, which we'll talk about in a moment of play that Molière had
a great difficult time getting on stage, he says this about this first rule or parameter.
Molière says, if the purpose of comedy be to chastise human weaknesses, I see no reason
why any class of people should be exempt.
This particular failing is one of the most damaging of all in its public consequences,
and we have seen that the theater is a great medium of correction.
The finest passages of a serious moral treatise are all too often less effective than those
of a satire, and for the majority of people there is no better form of reproof than depicting
their faults to them.
The most effective way of attacking vice is to expose it to public ridicule.
People can put up with rebukes, but they cannot bear being laughed at.
They are prepared to be wicked, but they dislike appearing ridiculous.
And that's what Molière said about this himself in his introduction to Tartuffe.
The second rule or parameter within which Molière worked was known as verisimilitude,
that is, a kind of lifelikeness.
In order to teach lessons about life, art has to be lifelike, like our lives, enough
so that we can see the connections between it and our own lives.
From this came the so-called unities of time and place and action, which decreed first
that everything that happened on stage should be plausible enough that it could happen on
the street outside the theater, and the unities themselves that a play should treat no more
than 24 hours of dramatic time, it should occur in a single setting, and it should have
a single plot with a tight beginning, middle, and end, and that means none of those subplots
that the Elizabethan playwrights were so fond of, particularly Shakespeare.
Third, in order to make the lessons of drama as widely applicable as possible, characters
should not be too much individualized, but should tend toward character types.
This is part of the age's search for universals, which we mentioned earlier.
By drawing generalized characters, the thought was, we can find ourselves in those characters.
The types that Molière uses are familiar to us, and they find their genealogy too,
all the way back to classical times.
The jealous older husband of a young wife, a tricky servant, the old man, the miser,
the hypochondriac, the braggart soldier, all of which go back at least as far as Plautus
and Terence.
This need for generalizing is one of the reasons why the age was not particularly fond of Shakespeare.
Voltaire, for example, had some very critical things to say about Hamlet, and we can see
that, judging by the rules that he was working with, why Hamlet would look a little too eccentric
to be of much use as a teaching tool.
How many of us, after all, are royal princes whose fathers have been killed by uncles who
marry our mothers, and then get visited by ghosts, and then who, in addition, have the
kind of intellectual equipment that Hamlet has to analyze and deal with his problems?
Famously, Sam Johnson said, the poet does not number the streaks of the tulip, which
means that the poet is not supposed to describe any particular individual tulip.
He's supposed to draw something like tulip-ness in which we can find our any individual tulip
that we know and understand.
We can find that in that general tulip.
The fourth rule is the rule of decorum.
As Voltaire noted in the quotation we used for him just a moment ago, comedy is supposed
to ridicule folly, and tragedy is supposed to punish vice.
comedy therefore tells old stories about noble characters and uses elevated language
while comedy deals with contemporary characters and settings and uses language much closer
to that of the everyday.
It sounds, you know, listening to all these rules and you think if I had to pay attention
to all those rules and I was going to sit down and write a play, you know, it would
cramp my style, but it didn't cramp the style of people who lived in this period.
They assume these and within those parameters wrote some magnificent plays, Molière's
being among them.
So let's take a look now at some of Molière's plays and see how those rules work themselves
out in his work.
In virtually all of Molière's plays there's an unspoken assumption that human beings are
social animals who need to belong to a group to be fully human.
Now in order to grease the wheels of the social machinery, we need a high degree of socialization.
Usually expressed in the idea of manners, but as we said earlier, manners is a much
more encompassing term than just deciding which is the right fork to use at dinner.
In that context, Molière gives us a whole catalog of deviance and non-conformist people
who break away from the norms, who are treated satirically in their plays in order to try
to bring them back into normalcy.
Again, this is a very stark contrast with Shakespeare.
In Shakespeare, at the start of almost every one of his comedies, the social order itself
has problems.
It's corrupt.
It's degraded in some kind of way.
It's run off the tracks itself.
And so that when Athens or the court or Venice is the setting at the beginning of the play,
there's something wrong with the social order itself.
The young lovers, when they go off to the forest of Arden or to the woods of Athens or
they go off to Belmont, they come back bringing not just some new understanding that allows
them to marry, but they bring back a new understanding that allows the entire social order to be
reformed in a way that would be totally alien to plays like Molière.
Because in Molière, we start with the assumption that the social order is normative.
The social order is rational.
It's orderly.
It's working toward universal truths.
And against this normative background, we get all of the eccentrics of his plays, hypochondriacs
and misers and religious fanatics and jealous husbands and misguided youths.
The point of each play, at least in theory, is to laugh these deviants back into conformity,
back into line with accepted norms.
A very early one-act play, which is usually translated as something like the pretentious
ladies ridiculed or the high-browed ladies or something like that, two young girls come
up to town from the country, having read a lot of the kind of romances that dried up
Don Quixote's brain.
They come up with an understanding of what love really should be like, and that understanding
comes from books.
When they come to town, they're expecting to be wooed in similar fashion.
That is, love should be repressed attraction, it should be secret devotion, which leads
gradually over a long period of time to romantic sighs and glances and notes, and eventually
to a kind of oblique revelation.
But then love still has to be blocked by parental opposition, and that leads to a testing of
love, and finally, after a long, long time, it will be consummated in marriage.
And beyond all of this, lovers are supposed to express themselves in the most elegant,
sophisticated and refined terms so that every utterance of a wooing lover should be something
like a sonnet.
It's perhaps a little, if you know the play, Cyrano de Bergerac, it's perhaps a little
like what Roxanne expects from Christiane in that play, which interestingly, although
that was written two and a half centuries after Molière is set in the same time period,
when two suitors do actually show up to woo these two young ladies from the country, the
young women expect them to live out the scenes from their books.
They expect elaborate and poetic conversation.
They expect a lot of swooning and a certain amount of oblique displacement.
The young men, however, are from normative society, and once they realize what the women
expect, they are not prepared, and they decide to teach these young women a lesson about
what proper behavior is.
So what they do is they dress up their two valets as gentlemen to woo the ladies in the
approved romantic style.
Then at the climactic moment, they rush in literally to undress their valets and to
expose the pretensions and the unrealistic expectations of the young women.
That's the way Molière's plays tend to work.
You make fun of the people who have deviated from some kind of norm, and then you laugh
them back into the normative, back into conformity.
Most of his other plays work in pretty much the same way.
In the imaginary invalid, you have a hypochondriac who tyrannizes his family with his imaginary
illnesses.
Since he's consulting doctors all the time, he decides to marry his daughter to one of
them in order to save himself the trouble of house calls.
He'll have a doctor living in the house, and he doesn't have to call or pay for individual
calls.
His daughter, of course, is already in love with a more suitable young man, but that relationship
is broken up by the father in order to betroth her to an amazingly slow-witted and boorish
doctor.
Molière gets off a lot of really, really good shots against the medical profession generally
in this play.
As always in Molière, the hypochondriac shows by his excess what the normative should look
like.
He exceeds it and therefore shows us what the normative would be like.
It's okay to be concerned for one's health, but to be obsessed over imaginary illnesses
and to spend all of one's time worrying about them is as bad as neglecting one's health
altogether.
So the hypochondriac is the character in this play who is to be laughed and scolded and
cajoled and tricked back into conformity with social norms.
The same thing happens in Tartuffe in a much more delicate area, religion.
The deviant here is a character named Orgone, who is a middle-aged head of a family that
includes a young wife, his second wife, and two grown children from his first marriage.
He's gotten religion in later years and he's brought into the house an ostensibly extremely
devout man named Tartuffe who is in the process of gradually taking over the house and who
is, as everyone except Orgone can see, a rank hypochret who is using religion as a way
of manipulating his way into Orgone's confidence.
Molière got himself into deep trouble writing this play.
He had to rewrite it three times to get it on stage and he finally needed the king's
imprimatur to have it staged at all and we can perhaps see why.
He argued that his target wasn't religion but was religious hypocrisy and that works
up to a point.
But the central character of this play is not Tartuffe but Orgone, who for reasons that
are as clear to us as those forcing Don Quixote to become a night errand turns to religion
to control his family and to still feel important at a time in life when he's beginning to
feel as all middle-aged people do at some point irrelevant and unnecessary to his children
and his wife.
Moreover, this play suggests one can be too religious, more religious than one needs
to be or at least for the wrong reasons.
In any case, exceeding society's standards for appropriate level of religiosity.
In Molière there's always a character who expresses the social norm, who tells us what's
acceptable so that we can understand how the central character has run off the rails.
In this play it's a character named Cléant who makes clear what an acceptable level of
religiosity would be and this is what he says.
True piety isn't hard to recognize and happily these present times provide us with bright
examples to instruct and guide us.
Consider Aristun and Periandre.
Look at Arant, Alsadamus, Clétondre.
Their virtue is acknowledged, who could doubt it, but you won't hear them beat the drum
about it.
They're never ostentatious, never vain, and their religions moderate and humane.
It's not their way to criticize and chide.
They think sensoriousness a mark of pride and therefore, letting others preach and rave,
they show by deeds how Christians should behave.
They think no evil of their fellow man, but judge of him as kindly as they can.
They don't intrigue and wangle and conspire to lead a good life is their one desire.
The sinner wakes no rancorous hate in them, it is the sin alone which they condemn.
Or do they try to show a fiercer zeal for heaven's cause than heaven itself could feel?
These men I honor, these men I advocate as models for us all to emulate.
This is a real pure neoclassical definition of religion.
It's kind of religion according to the Joneses.
One doesn't want to be negligent of religion, but one doesn't want to be too religious either.
One wants to be about as religious as is acceptable for most people of common sense in your social circle.
If we remember that over the last hundred and fifty years people had been going to the stake
for what they believed, we can see both how this age is trying to prevent that from happening
again and why deeply religious people would find this definition of religion too bland,
too uncommitted, too accommodating to the world to count as real religion.
Anyway, that's the usual pattern in Molière's comedies.
In the miser, a man disrupts his family by his greed, and as usual he wants his daughter
to marry a totally unsuitable rich man so he won't have to pay for a dowry.
Summarized in this way, Molière sounds formulaic, and in some ways he is.
But we could say the same thing about Shakespeare.
We could say that Shakespeare's all of his comedies are after all simply variations on
a basic formula.
But as with Shakespeare, Molière is also capable of some amazing variations on this
basic plot.
In one of his most famous plays, The Misenthrope, we get a character named Alceste, who's so
fed up with hypocrisy and social glibness, that kind of behavior that allows people to
embrace you in public and then tear you apart behind your back, that he insists on telling
the truth to everyone all the time about everything.
So, for example, if you meet someone at the bank or on the street or at work whom you
really don't like, and he or she starts making polite small talk, if you're Alceste you have
to break it off by telling that person you really don't like him or her and send him
or her on his or her way.
If we think about how many times a day we pretend to be interested in somebody's medical
problems or his children or her divorce, when we're not interested at all and wish we were
miles away, we get The Misenthrope's point.
We understand what Alceste is after.
In social terms, Alceste, however, is clearly wrong.
We understand how a social order couldn't survive this kind of honesty.
But when at the end, the social, the society triumphs, as it always does in Molière, and
Alceste banishes himself to a remote place to become a kind of hermit, at least half
of our sympathy goes with him.
He is, by so far and away, the character with the most integrity in this play.
He has a point, and so we're not quite sure at the end of that play how happy we are with
the victory of the rational, the normative, the conformist, which is of course what we're
supposed to be celebrating in a Molière comedy.
And so, like Shakespeare, Molière can fiddle with the conventions to raise some interesting
questions for audiences.
Another interesting feature of Molière's play is the fact that his cure rate for his
onstage characters is way less than 50%.
Other characters can ridicule the Misers and Hypocondriacs and Misenthropes and the Overly
Zealous, and they can explain in detail the virtues of adopting a moderate normative course.
But mostly at the end of Molière's plays, it takes royal intervention, or a miracle,
or some kind of extraordinary event to bring about the happy ending, because usually the
deviant isn't really cured at all.
Of the plays we've talked about so far, only the young women in the highbrow ladies seem
to have learned their lesson.
At least we guess that because the play ends pretty abruptly.
It's only a one-act play.
We assume that they will behave differently in the future.
Otherwise, all the other plays we've been talking about don't really cure the deviant.
At the end of the miser, the miser is still hugging his money chest.
Alcest doesn't change his mind about social honesty.
He simply exiles himself so he won't have to deal with hypocrisy anymore.
And Orgone decides, once the king has bailed him out and he's aware of Tartuffe's hypocrisy,
he swears that he will never, ever trust another religious person again, which of course isn't
learning the lesson.
It's just leaping from one extreme to the other, from excess to deficiency.
The hypochondriac in what has to be one of the most wonderful solutions of all in all
of Molière's comedy, the hypochondriac at the end of the play, is simply made a doctor
himself.
He learns a few Latin phrases, a few Latin names for diseases, and so then he won't
have to call doctors in anymore.
From here on out he can simply treat himself.
What it suggests is that Molière seems to have been cynical about the human ability
to learn from their own errors, or from others making fun of them.
So if anyone in any of these plays learns anything, it has to be us.
It has to be the audience, people who can take to heart the pictures of deviancy that
we've seen, and then restore ourselves to normalcy in a way that seems very, very difficult
for most of his stage characters.
This is a kind of a bird's-eye view of Molière.
What's missing from all of this, of course, is what's kept him on the stage for nearly
three and a half centuries since his death, and that is an absolute sense of what works
on stage.
From the time he was nineteen, he spent his entire life in the theater as an actor, as
a playwright, as a director, as a manager.
He is perhaps the ultimate theater man in the western world.
He had the theater in him down to his bones.
As I guess everybody knows, he died a few hours after his last performance as the lead
in the imaginary invalid.
And what makes that so extraordinary is the fact that he was suffering from a respiratory
ailment that barely allowed him to breathe, and he had this cough that he couldn't get
rid of.
And so he wrote his last part to incorporate his symptoms into the part that he was playing
on stage.
And then if you think about the great ironies, he died a very sick man, playing a healthy
man who imagines that he's sick.
You can't be a more of a theater person than that to incorporate your very illnesses into
the last role that you play.
And his plays are always exquisitely and stunningly funny.
From the smallest exchange of lines to the, you know, bits of dialogue and more extended
pieces of action, and to the structures of the whole plays itself, he unerringly knows
what works on stage, so that a good production of Mollier will be a memory that will carry
with us for a long, long time.
In The Miser, for example, there's this one great little scene that takes place between
The Miser and his son.
The Miser is talking about his money chest, which has been stolen, and the son thinks
his father is talking about the son's fiance.
The dialogue makes perfect sense in a literal way, but as it goes on, each one becomes increasingly
exasperated with what seems like the stunning obtuseness of what the other one is saying,
because each one is understanding what's being said in a way that's not intended by the speaker.
The audience, of course, as always in Mollier, is in on this, is able to take in the irony
of the entire exchange and can understand all of it.
By the end of his career, Mollier could knock out scenes like this with such ease that it
still dazzles us after 350 years.
If I could end with just a tiny sort of personal experience about Mollier, some years ago I
was teaching a history of theater class in London, and one of the great things about
teaching a history of theater class in London is that there are actually enough plays playing
in London that you can do a whole history of theater based on productions that you go
see.
When we got to Mollier, there was a production of the imaginary invalid that was playing way,
way, way beyond the fringe.
In fact, it took several bus rides to get there, and it played above a pub so that we
had to actually join this little club.
It wasn't really a public theater.
We had to pay 50 pence to join the club to go see the production upstairs.
By the time my students got there, I was requiring them to go see this.
It was a Friday night, and by the time we had a complicated bus ride, I got here, paid
our 50 pence, got upstairs.
My students were in fairly grumpy humor, and what happened was that that production of
the imaginary invalid was so good, was so funny, that by the time we emerged from that, we
were in that position where sometimes happens that your sides and jaws actually hurt from
how much you've laughed.
My students understood then, in a perfectly visceral kind of way, how good Mollier really
is.
No one has ever mastered the comic theater like Mollier.
Next time we'll stay in France, and we will move ahead about a century.
We'll still be in the neoclassical period, but we'll be toward the end of it.
As Mollier comes toward the beginning of the neoclassical period, Voltaire will come toward
the end of it, and we'll be doing one of the great little masterpieces in the history of
the world, a prose fiction, called Candide.
That's our next lecture.
