These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, The History of World Literature, Part 2.
Lecture 13 Tongue Poetry
This lecture will deal with Tongue poetry, or more specifically, with three poets of
the Tongue period, whom later history decided were three of the best, the most important
of the poets of that period.
The Tongue dynasty lasted from about the beginning of the 7th century to the beginning of the
10th century, and it was one of those ages that was looked back on later as a kind of
golden age in China.
During the same time in other parts of the world, the Byzantine Empire was still strong
and the Islamic Empire was growing.
But Chong'an, the capital city through most of the Tongue dynasty, would have been one
of the great cities of the world in this period.
In the Tongue period, poetry was probably more important than it had ever been in the
history of China before, and it had already been quite important, as we talked about in
Lecture 6.
In 690, composition and interpretation of poetry became part of the civil service exam
that gave young men of talent from outside the ruling families a chance at government
posts.
So that meant that throughout the Tongue period, and considerably beyond it, actually, every
government official could quote from the book of songs, which we talked about briefly
in the 6th lecture.
And not only that, but they could also write decent poetry, so that there is poetry everywhere
in this Tongue period and thousands and thousands of poems to choose from.
Wu Ji Liu, in his introduction to Chinese literature, says that the closest we ever
came to this same state of affairs in the Western world was in the court of Elizabeth
I of England, where every court year seems to have been a poet, and in fact some of them
won their government posts because of their poetry.
In the early 18th century, a group of Chinese scholars gathered together a collection, an
anthology of Tongue poetry, containing what they considered to be the very best of the
poetry of the period, and the anthology contained 50,000 poems by 2,300 poets.
And that, remember, was only a selection.
That was only what they considered to be the best.
They had thousands and thousands more to choose from.
In the Tongue period, almost anyone with any education could turn out a respectable poem
to commemorate a visit to a special place, or contribute a poem to a party, or leave
a message when you went to visit and someone wasn't home.
And quotations from the book of songs could be used in a host of social and political
and diplomatic situations.
As we mentioned in lecture six, you could actually open a delicate negotiation by quoting
from the book of songs, and the other person would quote something back, and you could
actually broach a subject in a very genteel and indirect way.
Political relations could be handled in pretty much the same way.
What we want to do in this lecture is to spend a little bit of time talking about how Chinese
poetry means, take a brief look at what we might call Chinese poetics, and then take
a look at three of the poets whom later scholars considered to be three of the greatest of
the poets of the Tongue period, Long Wei, Li Po, and Tu Fu.
In the first century AD, AC, there was a preface that was written to the book of songs,
which explains how Chinese poetry works.
As according to this theory, a poem is always generated by something intensely on the mind.
That is, something happens.
You think of something, you're worried about something, there's an event that occurs, and
you dwell on that, and that builds up a kind of mental pressure which keeps on building
until such time as it can be expressed in a poem.
When we read these poems, we have to work backwards, beginning with the words, beginning
with the words of the poem, and then finding our way back slowly, step by step, to the
specific situation that created the emotion, that created the pressure that caused the
poem in the first place, and then if we continue to push our way backwards, we can, according
to this theory, actually discover the poet himself back there, the one who felt the feeling,
and then back to the entire world of that poet, so that in a way you can reconstruct
the situation, the poet, and even the world of the poet.
Stephen Owen, in a book called Traditional Chinese Poetry and Poetics, and Stephen Owen
is a fine translator of these poems himself, said that in a way Chinese poetics always
presupposes that a poem is true in an almost literal way.
When we read a poem by William Butler Yeats, we don't have to necessarily assume that every
detail in the poem is something that actually happened to Yeats.
We have, in the Western world, we have a sort of metaphoric truth value of poetry, and we
usually use that when we're reading poetry.
Chinese poetry, on the other hand, was understood to be an almost authentic presentation of
a historical experience, so that biographies of poets and even histories of whole epochs
could be reconstructed from poems.
Usually Tang poetry is usually a pair of five or seven syllable lines, which rhyme on even
numbered lines, so two, four, six, and eight would rhyme.
That means the basic unit of Tang poetry is a couplet, either a five syllable or a seven
syllable couplet, and then those couplets could be combined into longer and longer forms.
You could have as many couplets as you wanted or needed to make the poem as long as it had
to be, but the couplet is still the basic unit.
If we remember also the Chinese wrote their poetry in characters rather than letters,
that means that each couplet would be a pair of five or seven character lines.
Again, this is Stephen Owen again who tells us this.
He says that when you write either a five line or a seven line couplet, that the pairs
of characters should stand in a very precise parallel relationship to one another, so that
the character in the first line, the first character in the first line, and the first
character in the second line, and the second characters in the third and fourth and fifth
should stand in precise parallel relationships to one another.
He gives a Li Po couplet as an example, and what he does is he translates those five characters
in quite literal ways to come up with two lines, each with five words.
The first line would be heavens clear one goose far, and the second line, lake vast
lone sail slow.
If we tried to sort of translate that to put that into some kind of English sentence, what
the couplet says is that in a clear or blue heaven, there's one goose flying across those
blue heavens at a great distance.
In a lake, which is also very large, there is one sail moving slowly across the lake.
And if we remember that these are all supposed to stand in very parallel situations to each
other, we start out, the first character gives us two vast bodies of blue, the sky and the
lake.
Each one contains a speck of white, the goose and the sail.
Both specks are solitary, one goose, one sail.
The goose is far, and the sail is slow, and that stands in parallel too, because the goose
is far enough away that it seems to be moving as slowly across the sky as the sail, which
would be much closer, seems to be moving so that they seem to be moving at the same speed,
even though the goose obviously is traveling much faster than the sail is.
We're supposed to now work backwards if we follow this Chinese understanding of how poetry
works.
We're supposed to work backwards from the poem to the situation and the poet.
And so we can perhaps, if we do this, we can perhaps reconstruct a situation in which the
poet watches a sail carrying a traveler away.
He may or may not know the traveler, that's not clear from the poem, but as you watch
somebody leaving the sail pulling slowly away, there is always a tiny touch of sadness that
happens in a scene like this.
He is struck, standing there, watching the sail pull away, at noticing a goose flying
across the sky at a great distance, so that the parallel between that goose and the sail
carries whatever kind of meaning this couplet is going to have.
And if we reconstruct the situation, we are also supposed to be able to reconstruct the
feeling that whatever is felt intensely on the mind, that mental pressure that created
the poem in the first place.
But reading these poems carefully, a poem like this can seem a couplet like this, can
seem like just a bland and sort of random observation.
Chinese poetry always expects us to do a little work.
Herbert Giles in a book called A History of Chinese Literature says that Chinese poets
don't like to cross all their T's or dot all their I's because a Chinese reader likes
to do that for himself.
And so there's always a little bit of work left for us to do as we're reading Chinese
poetry.
The other thing to notice about this poem, which will be true of most Chinese poetry,
is the fact that the focus is on the external world, not on the poet's feelings.
The poet's feelings, in fact, have to be inferred or reconstructed from the situation
that we're looking at.
We have to work backwards to, first of all, to see the situation, then to understand what
it must have felt like for the poet to be standing there, watching that, and then we
could reconstruct the poet from all of that.
So here we have to reconstruct the entire world of this poem from a goose flying across
the sky and a sail going across a lake.
It means that translating this kind of poetry can be tricky.
Translators quite frequently, when they translate this poetry, use the word I since we're much
more familiar with that convention in Western poetry.
But most Chinese poets tend to keep our gaze not on the I who's looking, but on what it
is that he's looking at, so that the focus of a Chinese poem is almost always on the
external rather than on the internal world.
Talking about how tricky these poems are to translate, Eliot Weinberger has a little
book, a really beautiful little book, called Nineteen Ways of Looking at Wang Wei.
Weinberger in that book takes a little tiny four-line poem, two couplets, a little poem
by Wang Wei, and then he gives nineteen different translations of that poem, done by some fairly
respectable poets and translators.
And then he writes one little essay for each of those translations, pointing out what aspects,
what parts, what facets of the poem are brought out in each translation.
It reminds us also of how many legitimate ways there can be to translate even something
as tiny as a four-line poem.
One last item about Tang poetry before we actually look at the couple of them, and that
is a great deal of it seems to have been written by recluses, living out in the country, long
ways from court.
The reason for this is that in 722, the emperor severely limited the size of entirages that
were kept, could be kept by royal princes.
As a result of this, a great number of government posts were eliminated, and those who held those
posts had to return back home, they had to return to the provinces.
All of these, because they had all taken the civil service exam, could write poetry, and
so that when they went home to the country, they wrote poems about living in the country.
The amount of country poetry and appreciation of nature in the Tang period can remind us
sometimes of the early poetry of Wordsworth or Coleridge.
They all, by the way, also said that they really liked living in the country, but it's
been speculated that the reason they said this over and over and said it so frequently
and with so much insistence is to make sure that the emperor understood that they were
not blaming him for winding up living way out in the country, a long way from court.
Okay, to get us started, first we'll do a couple of poems by the three great poets as
they were chosen as the greatest of the Tang poets by later scholars.
The first one is Wang Wei.
Wang Wei lived throughout the first half of the eighth century.
Wang Wei was also a painter who did monochrome landscapes, and he also was a very devout
Buddhist who late in his life actually took vows as a Buddhist layman.
The combination of being a painter and a Buddhist makes him a gentle poet who almost always
really does keep his eye on the subject.
He has a painter's eye in his poetry, and he's always very careful to make sure that
we can see what he's seeing.
In this, that's true of the very famous poem that we'll take a look at, one of his
here.
It's in the translation by Stephen Owen.
This poem is called Written Crossing the Yellow River to Jing Heo.
The boat set sail upon the great river whose swollen waters stretched to sky's edge.
Sky and waves split apart suddenly.
The district capitals thousands of homes.
Moving on, I can see the town market and vaguely make out mulberry and hemp.
I turn to gaze back toward my homeland, only vast floods that stretch to the clouds.
In this poem, we notice that we stand where the poet stands and we see what he sees.
When we start the journey, the river is so wide that there's no horizon.
Water and sky are blended together into simply one blue.
Then suddenly as we move across the river, suddenly there is a horizon.
Sky and water split, and as soon as they split, he can see houses.
Still closer, he can make out the marketplace and the stands of mulberry and hemp.
Then having made out clearly his destination, he turns to look back and what he sees when
he looks back is a mirror image of his destination when he started out.
That is, when he looks back, the place he has come from has disappeared.
There is no horizon there, there is only vast blue.
He doesn't tell us how he feels in this poem, he doesn't have to.
We've all traveled and we all know what it's like to focus so intensely on a destination
until we get there.
And then when we do get there, we experience a little pang remembering the home we've
left far behind, so far away that it's entirely disappeared.
Wang Wei gives us that bit of homesickness, but we have to work our way backwards, dot
the i's and cross the t's ourselves.
What he gives us is what he sees, and again, we have to construct the pressure that created
this poem in the first place and the situation.
The second poet whom later scholars consider to be one of the three great Tang poets was
Li Po, and he turned out to be sort of the rascal or the rogue of the three poets.
He led a really colorful life getting himself in and out of scrapes all the time.
He traveled all over China and he, in fact, made up a kind of persona for himself that
he could use in writing his poems.
He called himself a banished immortal, suggesting that he had fallen out of heaven and was hence
not subject to the same conventions and restrictions that ordinary mortals were.
He was a Taoist, as Wang Wei was a Buddhist, but the Taoism is of less importance in Li
Po's poem than the Buddhism is in Wang Wei's.
The first poem of his that we'll take a look at is called Drinking Alone Beneath the Moon.
It's translated by Irving Low.
His poems tend to be about wine and love and friendship, and as this one is, being happy
all by himself.
This is the poem.
A pot of wine among the flowers.
I drink alone, no kith or kin near.
I raise my cup to invite the moon to join me.
It and my shadow make a party of three.
Alas, the moon is unconcerned about drinking and my shadow merely follows me around.
Briefly, I cavort with the moon and my shadow.
Pleasure must be sought while it is spring.
I sing and the moon goes back and forth.
I dance and my shadow falls at random.
While sober, we seek pleasure in fellowship, when drunk, we go each our own way.
Then let us pledge a friendship without human ties and meet again at the far end of the
melky way.
And the mood of this poem is, of course, Carpe diem, that is, seize the day.
And there is, as there is in many Li Po poems, there's a kind of theatricality.
He makes us watch him while he's having a good time with only the moon and his shadow
as companions.
While it is spring suggests that it all ends too soon, and the ending of the poem, in which
the poet and the moon and his shadow will meet beyond the melky way, suggests freeing
oneself from normal burdens and responsibilities.
Here, unlike in the long way poem, Li Po sort of forces us to focus on him rather than on
the scene.
It's one way in which Li Po was always considered slightly unconventional at his own time because
he almost always makes us watch him while he's watching whatever he's watching.
In the second poem of Li Po that we'll do, he finds a more reliable companion.
This one is called Sitting Alone in Jing Ting Mountain.
Fox of birds fly high and vanish.
A single cloud alone calmly drifts on.
Never tired of looking at each other, only the Jing Ting Mountain and me.
In that first couplet, I think we can actually see that parallel structure that Owens told
us about.
We have a flock of birds and a solitary cloud have both sailed away.
But again, instead of letting pictures do the work, Li Po brings the poem back and makes
us watch him sitting and watching the mountain, he and the mountain looking at each one another.
The mountain turns out to be a more reliable companion than either birds or clouds because
the mountain at least is not going anywhere.
A little tiny digression while we're here about, while we're on Li Po particularly,
on the influence these Chinese poets had on much, much later poetry.
Ezra Pound at the beginning of the 20th century discovered Chinese poetry and it became part
of his inspiration for the images movement, his belief that poetry should speak in pictures
or images rather than by discursive argument.
He wrote a body of poetry of his own illustrating that theory and he edited T.S. Eliot's The
Wasteland, taking out a lot of the explanations and making Eliot's poem much more imagistic,
that is making it simply a series of very precise pictures.
T.S. Eliot was so impressed with the editing job Pound had done that he dedicated the poem
to Pound and from there modernist poetry takes off.
Pound also was responsible in part for introducing the beauties of Chinese poetry into the western
world, helping to make the 20th century a great age of translations.
This is one of Pound's, it's called a translation of a Li Po poem and it's called in translation
The River Merchant's Wife.
We probably should say about Pound's poetry what later translators have said and they
have said that these are probably less real translations than they are simply Pound original
poems sort of based on an original but if we keep that in mind that the poem is called
The River Merchant's Wife and it's based at least on a poem by Li Po.
While my hair was still cut straight across my forehead I played about the front gate
pulling flowers.
You came by on bamboo stilts playing horse.
You walked about my seat playing with blue plums.
And we went on living in the village of Jo Kahn.
Two small people without dislike or suspicion.
At fourteen I married my lord you.
I never laughed being bashful, lowering my head I looked at the wall, called to a thousand
times I never looked back.
At fifteen I stopped scowling.
I desired my dust to be mingled with yours forever and forever and forever.
Why should I climb the lookout?
At sixteen you departed.
You went into far Kuto Yen by the river of swirling eddies and you have been gone five
months.
The monkeys make sorrowful noise overhead.
You dragged your feet when you went out by the gate now.
The moss is grown.
The different moss is too deep to clear them away.
The leaves fall early this autumn in wind.
The paired butterflies are already yellow with August over the grass in the West Garden.
They hurt me.
I grow older.
If you are coming down through the narrows of the river Keong please let me know beforehand
and I will come out to meet you as far as Jo Fu sa.
Even if that is a paraphrase or an original poem based on a lipo poem, like the lipo poems
it keeps the focus on the speaker, on the river merchant's wife here, but it works
with some beautiful telling images as well.
At T.S. Eliot's set about Pound, in fact, not that he had discovered Chinese poetry
for the modern world but that he had invented Chinese poetry for the modern world, so that
probably makes clear the extent to which this is a translation and to the extent to
which it is an original poem.
But anyway we can see that what Pound loved about Chinese poetry was this emphasis on
pictures, emphasis on making us see what the poet sees and he uses that to good effect
in this poem.
The last poet that we will take a look at is Tu Fu.
He was less popular in his own day than the others were, but his reputation has grown
over the years until by now he's usually considered the kind of Shakespeare of Chinese
poetry and he's had a huge influence on subsequent poets.
He was a Confucian who believed in social concerns, he believed the importance of the
family and in a way what he does is combines that beautiful picture making quality of Wang
Wei with the subjective warmth of lipo.
This poem is called Spending the Night in a Tower by the River and it's Stephen Owen's
translation again.
A visible darkness grows up mountain paths.
I lodge by river gate high in a study, frail cloud on cliff edge passing the night.
The lonely moon topples amid the waves, steady one after another a line of cranes in flight,
howling over the kill wild dogs and wolves.
No sleep for me, I worry over battles.
I have no strength to write the universe.
The parallel structure of this poem can perhaps be reconstructed also.
The cloud hanging on the cliff's edge is balanced by the moon falling into the river.
Cranes are flying overhead while dogs and wolves make their kills below.
And since cranes are a symbol of immortality for the Chinese, the contrast isn't just
between light and dark, between high and low, but it's also between life and death,
with a poet hanging between sky and earth, between cloud and fallen moon, between cranes
and wolves.
In the translation that line frail cloud on cliff edge passing by the night has a really
wonderfully rich ambiguity about it because it might be in a positive, he might be saying
he is that frail cloud hanging on a cliff's edge which would be a perfect image for one
who's high in a study by a river spending the night there.
Or it might be part of the picture, part of what he sees from that study in the tower.
In either case, whether it's in a positive or whether it's part of the ambience or the
context for the poem, or whether it might in fact be both, what it does is again is
to suggest the extent to which Chinese poetry is dependent on pictures, on giving us visual
things that we can work with, that we can use to reconstruct the feeling of the poem.
He's in a place, whatever that line, however we read that line, or however many ways we
find to read that line, he's in a place where there's still light, but he can see the darkness
crawling up the mountain paths toward him.
Everything is stopped in a moment of balance between opposites.
We get that even before that final couplet in which directs our attention to the poet
himself, who's so worried about battles and all the things that are wrong that he
knows he's not going to sleep that night.
He doesn't know which way things will go for the army, or for him, or for the universe.
All we know is that for an instant everything is poised, is balanced, is suspended, as he
is in his tower, ready to go one way or the other.
All of this is done with pictures and with images.
That's why Pound was so impressed with his poetry, which we always have to work by reading
backwards, dotting the eyes and crossing the T's until we get back to that solitary man
in his tower on the riverbank.
Chinese readers thought that if they were good readers, they could come to know the
poet almost as a kind of a friend.
They thought that if you read enough poems by a single poet, you'd actually get to know
that poet.
You'd get to know him perhaps better than we know some of our friends.
Once we've gotten to know the poems and the poet that well, then they could become part
of ourselves.
They could become lines and pictures and words to fall back on when we're sad or we're worried
or we need to come up with a good explanation for being late to a friend's party or opening
a delicate negotiation or introducing ourselves to someone, all of these uses to which poetry
was put down through Chinese history and particularly in the Tang period.
It's another reminder, as we pointed out back in Lecture 6, two of how different Chinese
literature is from the other literature that we've looked at in this course so far.
Still, we have no monsters or heroes or concerns about the gods.
Instead, what we have is a man journeying across a yellow river and feeling that twinge of
sadness when he looks back and can't see his home anymore.
We get a picture of a man drinking alone outdoors or sitting and looking stolidly at a mountain.
We get a young wife sending a letter to a husband who's been gone too long, another
man worrying about the future while sitting in a lonely tower by a river by himself.
Most other poems from the Tang period are similar.
They can congratulate a friend on a promotion.
You can say goodbye to someone who's leaving on a trip or when you're leaving on a trip
for yourself.
You can say thank you for a gift or a good dinner, again like Wordsworth.
This celebrates the ordinary lives of ordinary people and shows how art can be made up out
of ordinary things and ordinary people and ordinary lives.
Literature, as we've been doing it for the first lectures in this course, has mostly
been about killing dragons, which is one of the fine things literature can do, but it
can also make literature out of the ordinary things of ordinary life.
Next time we will stay in the east to look at a culture that came very late to civilization.
We're talking about Japan, and when it did, it just borrowed enormously from the more
advanced Chinese culture nearby.
But it did so in the same way that the Romans borrowed from the Greeks.
They both adopted and they adapted.
We'll take a look next time to see how Japanese poetry is very dependent on Chinese poetry,
and they took what they learned from Chinese poetry and made a Japanese poetry of their
own, which, while it has many similarities to the Chinese, still turns out to be essentially
and thoroughly Japanese.
So in our next lecture, we will talk about the manyoshu and the kokinshu, the two earliest
collections of poetry in Japan.
