Lecture 15 The Tale of Genji
The subject of this lecture is The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu.
About whom we know a lot less than we would like to.
We know that she came from a remote branch of the Fujiwara family which ruled Japan through
successive emperors through most of the Hain period.
It was called the Hain period because this capital city was Hain, which is present-day
Kyoto.
We know that her father held several minor court posts and twice was a provincial governor.
All we know about her childhood is from a diary that she kept much later in which she
recalls that her father had noticed how bright she was as a child and had said many times
that he wished that she had been born a boy.
We also know that from just listening in on her brother's Chinese lessons, she actually
learned Chinese.
It was an achievement that she later suppressed because it was considered unseemly for a woman
to be able to understand Chinese.
She may have accompanied her father to the provinces.
Earlier in 998 or 999, she married a distant kinsman who already had other wives and who
was considerably older than she was.
She had a daughter in 999 and then her husband died two years later.
She went to court in attendance on the Empress about 1005.
The big events in her diary from the years 1008 to 1010 were the births of two sons
to the Empress, both of whom later on went on to become emperors themselves.
The Empress was widowed in 1011 and we pretty much lose track of Morasaki after that.
She may have stayed on at court for a while and she may have died soon after.
Her death dates are usually given as something like 1015 or 1016.
Her novel was probably written between her husband's death in 999 and her retirement
from court or her death, whichever came last.
The story is about Agenji.
Agenji is a son of an emperor who has been made legally a commoner.
The primary purpose of doing this, of taking an emperor's son and making him a commoner,
was a way of cutting down on expenses for all the big retinas that had to be kept for
crowned princes, of which there would have been many given the sexual access that the
emperor had to a large number of women.
So you cut down expenses by making some of them ineligible to succeed to the throne.
In Genji's case, it's also done to protect him.
His mother was a great favorite of the empress, one for whom he had developed a kind of obsessive
passion, but who was a relative nobody who had no strong family backings and in fact,
his mother was really hounded to death shortly after Genji's birth by the emperor's first
wife and other more powerful women at court.
So Genji is orphaned early, without strong family backing, but loved by the emperor because
of his mother, he would have been the center of intrigues and danger all of his life, so
the emperor makes him a commoner without a claim to the throne.
Genji is the one who holds this entire novel together.
As we said, he is the child of a great passion between the emperor and a lady, not of the
first rank, who is then hounded to death by jealous rivals at court.
His enemies will be the same ones who killed her, especially the Lady Kokidin, the emperor's
first wife and a Fujiwara.
The emperor mourns the death of Genji's mother in a way that most people at court consider
excessive, and he continues to mourn until he finds a certain Lady Fuchisubo, so like
Genji's mother, that she becomes a kind of substitute in the emperor's affections.
She also exercises a really strong fascination for Genji, who was too young to remember his
mother, he was too young when she died, and so this woman, the Lady Fuchisubo, becomes
a kind of mother substitute for him, and as we'll see later on, she becomes something
more than that as well.
Genji grows up beautiful and bright and sensitive, so much so that even his enemies at court
are won over by his beauty and his charm.
When he gets to be 12 years old, he passes his coming of age ceremony, and he's immediately
married off to Aoi, a daughter of a powerful minister at court.
She's a few years older than he is, she's about 14 or 15, and it's a purely political
match.
He doesn't spend very much time with her, and she doesn't bear a son until quite a
few years later, shortly after which she dies.
When Genji is 18, he meets a young girl named Morasaki, who's then 9 years old, who reminds
him of the emperor's wife, the Lady Fuchisubo, and in fact she is the Lady Fuchisubo's niece,
and Genji has been fascinated with that lady for many years now, and so when he sees Morasaki,
he's immediately fascinated with her too.
He brings Morasaki into his household, and after the death of his first wife, Aoi, he
makes her his first wife, despite the fact that she has no political significance whatsoever.
At about the same time, the Lady Fuchisubo makes one slip, which allows Genji to make
love to her, she gets pregnant, and eventually bears a son.
They manage to hide the secret of the child's paternity from the emperor.
The child is presumed to be the emperor's son, and he will in fact one day become an
emperor himself.
Along the way, Genji has affairs with various other ladies.
One of them is the lady of the sister of Lady Kokidin, the woman who hounded Genji's mother
to death.
Lady Kokidin hates Genji, and the sister with whom Genji has the affair has been promised
as a first wife to the crown prince, so the affair, when the Lady Kokidin finds out about
it, lands Genji in some really serious trouble.
At about the same time, his first wife, Aoi, has a son, Yugiuri, and then she dies.
On returning from her funeral, Genji makes love to Morisaki for the first time, and then
makes her his first wife.
Genji's affair with the Lady Kokidin's sister is discovered about the same time that Genji's
father retires as emperor and then dies shortly after.
Genji is now in even bigger trouble because he doesn't have a father as emperor to protect
him anymore, and so he banishes himself to Sumo for a while.
The ostensible reason for his banishment is the affair with the Lady Kokidin's sister,
but Genji has also been for a long while troubled by his affair with the Lady Fuchisubo, his
father's wife, and a kind of mother substitute for himself, so he has a good deal to be troubled
about in that relationship.
While he's in exile, he has an affair with a priest's daughter, which is really virtually
thrust upon him.
Even the Akashi lady, as she's called from here on, is reluctant, but her father, a priest,
has great plans for his daughter, and he virtually forces the two together.
The affair produces a daughter.
After another change in emperor, Genji is called back to court, and he takes the Lady Akashi
with him, along with their daughter, back to court.
That daughter will eventually marry an emperor and become a mother to a future emperor so
that Genji manages to father one emperor and to grandfather another, despite his own exclusion
from succession.
Genji's son, by the Lady Fuchisubo, now becomes emperor, and Genji arranges, as the new emperor's
first wife, the daughter of one of his former lovers, the Lady Rokujo.
This marks, in a way, the height of Genji's political power, the height of his career.
He creates a mansion for his women.
He's got four of them now, and he divides his mansion up into four courts.
Spring, summer, fall, and winter.
Morasaki, his first and favorite wife, of course, gets the spring court.
We remember from our lecture on the Manyoshu and the Kinshu that spring is the Japanese
favorite season.
But the height of his political power coincides pretty precisely with a gradual loss of control
in his personal one.
He brings home, but fails to establish, a sexual relationship with Tamakazura, a daughter
of one of his former lovers, one who died in very mysterious circumstances in his arms
on a stormy night some years ago.
Tamakazura resists him in part by suggesting that he's too old for her and for such unseemliness.
At the same time, his new wife is unfaithful to him and bears a son to the son of Genji's
best friend.
When he finds out about it, Genji sees it as kind of just retribution for what he had
done to the emperor, his father, many years earlier.
Genji lives to be 52, long enough to see the Akashi lady's daughter married to an emperor
and to bear a son who will one day be emperor himself.
But at the same time Morasaki falls ill, Genji takes her to another one of his estates and
tends her in her last illness himself, and it's his absence that allows access to his
third wife, which produces a son which everyone assumes to be Genji's.
After Morasaki's death, Genji himself lives only one more year, and then the novel traces
the career of his flawed descendants.
Each of whom has inherited something of Genji's shining qualities, but none of whom is like
the magnificent Genji himself.
In this bald kind of plot summary, which I have really, really oversimplified as well,
this sounds like soap opera, but in a way the plot is sort of soap opera-ish.
But the novel has been praised for nearly a thousand years for the way that it analyzes
love and love relationships in psychological ways that still resonate with modern readers.
In order to appreciate this psychological analysis, I think, we have to, however, keep
in mind some differences between gender relations at the high end court in those days and the
kind of gender relations that we're used to in the modern world ourselves.
A couple of points to remember, one, marriage at least for male aristocrats was polygamous.
A first marriage was usually arranged between my parents, and it usually occurred when the
boy and girl were about 12 or 13.
This is exactly what happens to Genji in the novel.
Since people, a boy and girl being married at 12 or 13, are still really partly children,
the girl would stay with her parents, and the boy would come to visit her.
Second and third wives were usually given their own establishments, and then a man would
commute from one wife to another, stopping sometimes for liaisons along the way.
What women did in the meantime was to wait, usually hidden behind screens or blinds for
a man to show up, spending a lot of hours gazing out into rainy gardens.
The arrangements allowed some freedom for both men and women, more for men obviously
than for women, but women could be visited by other men while their husbands were away.
Genji does this many times earlier in the novel, and later in the novel it's done to
him too, while he's tending Murasaki in her last illness, the son of his best friend has
an affair with his third wife.
Still, the situation, the arrangement was harder for women than it is for men, since
they could inspire passion, but they couldn't initiate it.
They could only wait for a man to penetrate her screen, and if he didn't, to wonder why
not.
Her isolation, the isolation of an aristocratic woman in these circumstances, was complete
enough that the verb to see in Japanese can also mean to have sexual relations with.
Remember, this is comparable to that verb to know in the Old Testament, which means
to know means to have sexual relations with.
Here, the verb to see functions in pretty much the same way.
Early in the novel, Genji sees other women, and then his own women are seen by other men
as his control slips as he grows older.
Women's only recourse in this situation was jealousy against the other woman who kept
her man from coming through her screen, and there's one recurring character in the novel
who illustrates this motif of jealousy very, very well.
Early in the novel, Genji has a brief but passionate relationship with a woman who
dies one night in a strange house to which he's taken her in the midst of a great storm.
The death is a very mysterious one.
She dies, we are told, possessed by a maligned spirit.
Later on in the novel, we find that that maligned spirit was that of Lady Rokujo, a slightly
older woman who was obsessed with Genji and very jealous of her rivals.
Her jealousy recurs throughout the novel.
It even continues after her death.
It's one of the most destructive elements in the entire novel.
It's Lady Rokujo's spirit that kills Aoi, Genji's first wife, and later it also kills
Morisaki, even after the Lady Rokujo herself has been dead a long time.
Genji had had an affair with her, but when he starts cooling toward her, she becomes
fiercely jealous of all the women that he associates with.
Morisaki Shikibu probably believed literally in spirits like this, so it's not a violation
of credibility in the ambience of the novel itself.
But if, as you read the novel, what you'll see is that all of these episodes are handled
in such a way that we can read them as expressions of the psychological power of hate or jealousy
to harm and to kill, and so they make sense to modern readers as well.
But if sequestered women had to wait mostly for men to show up and could only have jealousy
or hatred as a kind of weapon to use against women who kept their men from showing up,
they also had time to write.
And it's maybe one of the reasons why there are so many women writers from this period.
In particular, this period is rich with women's diaries, diaries which paid little attention
to politics, which was, after all, a man's sphere, after all, but recorded the private
sides of life.
In this period, the Japanese word for female also meant private, and so to say that women
were writing about the private side of life, in a way, becomes the kind of redundant saying
in Japanese.
Richard Bowring, in his book on the Tale of Genji in the Landmarks of Literature series,
says this about women writers in the period.
These writings by women are some of the earliest examples of the attempt by women living in
a male-dominated society to define the self in textual terms.
Indeed, it is largely because of these works that classical Japanese becomes of more than
parochial interest.
As a result, the Heian period as a whole will always bear for us a strong female aspect.
To a great extent, it is the women who are the source of our historical knowledge.
They have become our historians, and it is they who define the parameters within which
we are permitted to approach their world and their men.
In retrospect, it is a form of sweet revenge.
Okay.
If we ask the question about what is it that holds this vast 1,000-page novel together,
the answer is probably not structure.
It's not entirely the plot.
Most critics have decided, and I think you'll probably sense this yourself as you're reading
it, that Morasaki really didn't have a clear sense of where this novel was going when it
started.
She simply began writing, and it grew sort of organically over time.
And so that it isn't the structure of the novel that holds all this together.
Rather, what critics and scholars have identified as a series of attitudes or of moods or of
themes which sort of permeate the novel even when it takes off in odd directions and goes
off in some direction that we weren't expecting, which manages to hold all of this together.
One idea that permeates the entire novel is the effort to establish a real relationship
with another person.
The second chapter in the book is a bull session on a rainy night in Genji's rooms.
A group of young men, all about 17 years old, are sitting around, and they're all talking
about their experiences with women.
And in the process, they're trying to define the perfect woman.
Like an overture, this chapter suggests the entire novel will be in some ways a search
for that perfect woman.
But critics have also suggested that it might also, the novel also might be Morasaki's search
for the perfect man.
She was on intimate terms with the Empress during these days, and it's not difficult
to imagine the Empress and Morasaki sitting down some night and just talking about imagining
what a perfect man would be, one who wouldn't disappoint, a man who would grow into perfection
the longer you got to know him.
Initially in the novel, Genji seems to be that man.
He's beautiful, he's sensitive, he's intelligent, and he seems really to understand women so
that when he focuses on one, he's absolutely irresistible.
But the story also darkens as time passes.
We discover that Genji can be selfish and insensitive on occasion, and he does get older so that
when he trains his attention on young Tama Kazura at the end of the novel, she finds
his attention offensive and deflects him.
When this happens, it comes as a shock to the reader as well as to Genji because such
a thing would never ever have happened to the young Genji, there he got whoever he wanted.
By the time he dies, two-thirds of the way through the novel, the brightness of the early
stages of the novel have darkened.
Edward G. Zidenstiker, translator of the novel, says this in his preface, and he talks
about the novel actually being divided up into three parts and what the relationship
between these three parts are.
Here's his quote.
The tale of Genji quite clearly breaks in two with Genji's death.
But there is an earlier break as Genji goes into his middle and late 40s.
If the book may thus be thought of as falling into three parts, the first part still has
a great deal of the 10th century in it.
The hero is an idealized prince, and though there are setbacks, his early career is essentially
a success story.
Then, some two-thirds of the way through the sections dominated by Genji, there comes a
tidying up and packing away of things, as by someone getting ready to move on.
And the matter of the last eight chapters before Genji's disappearance from the scene
is rather different.
Enough of romancing, Morasaki Shikibu seems to say, and one may imagine that she is leaving
her own youth behind.
The sad things are the real things.
Shadows gather over Genji's life.
The action is altogether less grand and more intimate, the characterization more subtle
and compelling than in the first section, then suddenly Genji is dead.
Once more, and very boldly this time, Morasaki Shikibu has moved on.
After the three transitional chapters come what are generally called the Uji chapters,
the pessimism grows, the main action moves from the capital to the village of Uji, both
character and action are more attenuated, and Morasaki Shikibu has a try, and many will
say succeeds, at a most extraordinary thing, the creation of the first anti-hero in the
literature of the world.
So what he suggests is that there is a gradual darkening, a three-stage darkening of the
brightness with which the novel begins.
Some critics have decided, have said that it's probably Buddhism that colors this last
section, with its teaching that desire itself is a bad thing.
The novel opens with an active passion in the emperor's excessive love for that lady
not of the first rank, and that may very well be a kind of original sin from which Genji
is born.
Genji himself is guilty of more than one such lapse during the course of the novel, and
so perhaps the last stages of the novel simply trace the effects of desire, which in any
case is not only bad, but is always, in Buddhist terms, incapable of fulfillment.
The idea of unrealizable desire is already sounded in that bull session in chapter two,
and part of that bull session, again from the same translation, we get this.
I fear there is nothing that would interest you.
To no chujo was in a contemplative mood.
It is with women as it is with everything else.
The flawless ones are very few indeed.
This is a sad fact which I have learned over the years.
All manner of women seem presentable enough at first.
Real notes, replies to this and that, they all suggest sensibility and cultivation.
But when you begin sorting out the really superior ones, you find that there are not
many who have to be on your list.
Each has her little tricks and she makes the most of them, getting in her slights at rivals,
so broad sometimes that you almost have to blush.
Hidden away by loving parents who build brilliant futures for them, they let word get out of
this little talent and that little accomplishment, and you are all in a stir.
They are young and pretty and amiable and carefree, and in their boredom they begin
to pick up a little from their elders, and in the natural course of things they begin
to concentrate on one particular hobby and make something of it.
A woman tells you all about it and hides the weak points and brings out the strong ones
as if they were everything, and you can't very well call her a liar.
So you begin keeping company, and it's always the same.
The fact is not up to the advanced notices.
Well, that may be Buddhist, but it doesn't have to be.
What it simply suggests is this growing sadness, this darkening of tone across time, which
may be Buddhist and may not.
Donald Keen, in his book The Pleasures of Japanese Literature, quotes a Japanese critic
in this way.
And this Japanese critic is saying, this book can't possibly be Buddhist for reasons that
he annunciates here.
There have been many interpretations over the years of the purpose of this tale, but
all of these interpretations have been based not on a consideration of the novel itself,
but rather on the novel as seen from the point of view of Confucian and Buddhist works and
thus do not represent the true purpose of the author.
Good and evil, as found in this tale, do not correspond to good and evil as found in Confucian
and Buddhist writings.
Generally speaking, those who know the meaning of the sorrow of human existence, that is,
those who are in sympathy and in harmony with human sentiments, are regarded as good.
And those who are not aware of the poignance of human existence, those who are not in harmony
with human sentiments, are regarded as bad.
Man's feelings do not always follow the dictates of his mind.
They arise in man in spite of himself and are difficult to control.
In the instance of Prince Genji, his interest in and meetings with various women, including
the imperial consort Fuchisubo, are acts of extraordinary iniquity and immorality, according
to the Confucian and Buddhist points of view.
It would be difficult to call Prince Genji a good man, however numerous his other admirable
qualities.
But the tale of Genji does not dwell on his iniquities and immoral acts, but rather recites
again and again his awareness of the sorrow of existence and represents him as a good
man who combines in himself all good things in men.
Later, this same Japanese critic cited by Donald Keane says that you might think of
the novel as like that of a man who collects a lot of muddy water in which he intends to
grow lotuses, because everything that happens in the novel, he says, is not there for its
own sake, but for nurturing that awareness of human sorrow, which he thinks this novel
is all about.
The Japanese phrase for this is monono aware, which means a sensitivity to things, which
Genji always has, despite his flaws and which the novel has in such abundance that it remains
one of the most important works of literature in all of Japanese history.
In the next lecture, we will move ahead to the West, back to the West, and about 300
years to Italy, where Dante was composing his great masterpiece of Christian epic poetry,
The Divine Comedy.
But before we leave Japan, we need to notice how different Genji is as a hero from the
heroes that we have looked at so far in this course.
For one thing, he's not a warrior.
His skills are the skills of poetry and painting and knowing what to wear for each occasion
and an amazing sensitivity to the needs of women.
In some ways, he's more like the knights of medieval romance than he is like the heroes
we've looked at so far, maybe a little like Lancelot, who was also expected to be able
to turn out a respectable poem, to show good manners, to be sensitive to women's needs,
not very much like Achilles or Arjuna or Beowulf.
And as you'll also notice, this is a point that we mentioned in the last lecture and
I wanted to come back and pick up.
As you'll notice, Genji has within it about 800 poems, mostly from the Kokinchu, and used
in many of the same ways that poetry was used in China to help break the ice or make an
excuse or to say something that would be difficult or embarrassing to say in one's own voice.
The woman who dies in mysterious circumstances in Genji's arms introduces herself to Genji
with a poem written on a fan that she sends him, and he can tell from her choice of poems
as well as from the calligraphy that she is a woman of taste worth a second look.
And so she gets the second look, and they become lovers, and later she dies mysteriously
in his arms.
This outlook, this use of poetry, this attitude toward poetry would change in Japan in the
coming age of the samurai, but for now Japan and China were the centers of the literature
in which taste and education, breeding and manners mattered a lot more than how many
men would kill in an afternoon.
Perhaps it's one of the reasons why in ages to come this period in both cultures was looked
back on as a golden age.
But that will end our brief visit to Japan for a while.
As we said in our next lecture, we will be back to Europe.
We will jump ahead about 300 years, and there we will come across the great masterpiece of
the European Middle Ages in Dante's Divine Comedy.
