Lecture 14, Early Japanese Poetry
In this lecture, we will be looking at two early Japanese collections of poetry,
the manyoshu and the kokinchu.
And I think what we'll see is that while Japan borrowed a great deal from Chinese civilization and culture,
it adapted what it adopted to make of it something uniquely Japanese.
Japan was a relative latecomer to civilized life.
The agricultural revolution based on rice didn't happen until the third century BCE,
by which time a number of the great civilizations in the Middle East had already risen and fallen.
The pyramids were over 2,000 years old.
Alexander the Great had conquered the Persian Empire,
the Mahabharata was being created in India,
and China had been an organized state for over 1,400 years.
In catching up, Japan borrowed a great deal from China,
Confucianism and Daoism, theories of government by the 7th and 8th century Buddhism,
and even China's writing system based on characters rather than an alphabet,
which Japan adapted to its own language in the same way that the Hebrews and the Greeks
had adapted the Phoenician alphabet,
and then later the Romans were going to adapt the Greek alphabet and adapt it to their own language.
So it's no surprise that the manyoshu is the equivalent,
the Japanese equivalent of the Chinese Book of Songs.
Its poems were composed over about two centuries.
The latest one is dated about 759.
And it has something of the same breadth that the earlier Chinese anthology did,
containing folk songs and farming songs and festival songs,
and featuring all manner of voices from emperors to fishermen.
And a lot of women poets who interestingly were in the best position to write Japanese poetry,
since in the 8th century most educated Japanese men would have written and spoken Chinese,
which would have been their medium for poetry as well.
Only people with relatively limited educations would have spoken Chinese or Japanese,
and that in fact included most women.
Interestingly, it's thought that one of the reasons there are so many love poems in early Japanese poetry
is that the men who wrote poems to women would have had to have written them in Japanese,
because that was the language of women.
The manyoshu this early collection contains 4,516 poems,
written by 400 poets whose names have come down to us,
and there are of course hundreds of anonymous poems in the collection.
They're divided into poems, the love poems, into elegies for the dead,
mostly commemorating princes or princesses and high-level aristocrats,
and then miscellaneous poems, which conclude everything else, travel poems,
poems written for banquets, poems that retell legends and on and on,
all kinds of different sorts of poems.
Like the Chinese, the Japanese divided their collection up into poems
that were suitable for public occasions and poems that were suitable for private occasions.
But having said that there are these similarities, there are some startling differences
between Japanese and Chinese poetry as well,
and most of those have to do with what we might come to think of or call as Japanese aesthetics.
One of the best places to study classic Japanese aesthetics
is a book by Yoshido Kenko, who was a 14th-century Buddhist monk,
and he wrote a book called, in translation, it's called Essays of Idleness.
He wrote the book for his own pleasure, and so he didn't intend to publish it,
and so it wasn't published until the 17th century.
It has been translated by Donald Keen, who's an important scholar of Japanese literature,
and Donald Keen actually has another book called The Pleasures of Japanese Literature,
in which he starts the book by talking about Kenko's aesthetics.
There are four items that he mentions in that introduction,
I think of particular use to us in understanding the manyoshu and the kokinshu,
and so I want to briefly summarize what he says in the first part of his The Pleasures of Japanese Literature.
The first he says, the first important element in Japanese aesthetics
is the power of suggestion.
To suggest something rather than say it explicitly, he gives some examples.
Cherry blossoms in bud or cherry blossoms which have fallen to the ground
are to the Japanese far more interesting than cherry blossoms in full flower.
The moon when it rises and sets very briefly just before dawn
or a moon in crescent is far more interesting than a full moon.
Spring and fall are far more interesting seasons than summer or winter.
And a love affair in its earliest stages, still at that point of yearning
or after it's over is far more interesting than the time of consummation.
So that's the first principle, the power of suggestion, the uses of suggestion.
The second principle he mentions is one that he calls irregularity.
And he says that Japanese aesthetics prefer asymmetry to symmetry whenever they can.
A tea service that's a little bit lopsided or bumpy
or with an occasional bald patch in the glaze is better than a perfect one.
A perfect vase can actually ruin a flower arrangement,
and of course the flower arrangement itself should be slightly asymmetrical.
The third principle he mentions is that of simplicity.
And he says, for the Japanese, an empty room with a few personal items lying about
is always preferable to a polished room full of possessions.
Old pots are preferable to shiny new ones in the tea ceremony.
Houses are better unpainted than painted.
In fact, Keen mentions a British diplomat, Harold Nicholson,
who went to Kyoto in the beginning of the 20th century.
And Nicholson remarked that Kyoto looked like a town straight out of the American Wild West
because none of the buildings were painted.
Japanese cuisine, Keen notes, has less intense flavor than other Asian cuisines.
Its spices are used sparingly, sauces and garlic hardly at all.
The idea is to be able to distinguish subtle differences in taste.
And it must go without saying that the odor of plum blossoms is preferable to the heavier scent of lilies.
And the fourth principle that he mentions is the principle of perishability.
Scroll wrappings that are destructible are preferable to sturdier ones.
Old ones are preferable to new ones.
Keen says that sometimes an old cracked pottery bowl is patched with gold
so that the cracks show more.
It shows both on the number of hands through which this is passed,
and it also is a reminder of the perishability of the bowl itself.
Cherry blossoms are prized, he says, because they last such a short time, about three days.
Other fruit blossoms last much longer, but that's what's wrong with them.
He sort of summarizes this point in translating a passage from Kenko, and the passage is this.
If man were never to fade away like the do's of Adashino,
never to vanish like the smoke over Toribayama,
but lingered on forever in this world how things would lose their power to move us,
the most precious thing in life is its uncertainty.
And Keen also says that although I don't know whether Kenko says this or not,
Keen says perhaps that's why the Japanese made their temples out of wood,
because that makes them, rather than stone, that makes them perishable,
and hence enhances their aesthetic value.
All of these principles show up in the Manyoshu, the first collection of Japanese poetry.
Suggestion shows up in the love poetry,
because love poems hardly ever describe the poet meeting his or her lover.
Rather, they show the yearning, the leading up to the love affair,
or they show the sorrow when it's all over.
Irregularity shows up in the Manyoshu in the standard Japanese verse forms,
which always have an uneven number of lines.
If we remember from the last lecture, we said that the basic unit of Chinese poetry is the couplet,
and the symmetry of that is underscored by the fact that the couplets rhyme on even numbers
so that two, four, six, and eight will rhyme.
The essential form of Japanese poetry, on the other hand, is the tanka,
which is a five-line verse, which has five syllables in the first line,
seven in the second, five in the third, seven in the fourth, and fifth.
Japanese poetry is not an inflected language, as English is,
in which every word comes with its proper accent.
When we look up a word in the dictionary, we always see not just how to pronounce it,
but what syllable the accent falls on.
And Japanese words end on one of five vowel sounds
so that any six lines of poetry are inevitably going to rhyme
on at least once during those six lines.
So neither accent nor rhyme has ever been a part of the definition of Japanese poetry.
Instead, poetry has been defined as alternate lines of more or less syllables,
so that a tanka, as we said, has five lines of five, seven, five, seven, seven syllables.
The manyoshu has some longer verse forms.
That form was called the choka.
But what the choka does is it simply alternates lines of five, seven, five, seven
for as long as it needs to, and then it concludes with two lines of seven syllables each.
But the choka died out fairly soon after the manyoshu,
and it yielded the field to the tanka.
And when a new verse form was invented by the Japanese in the 17th century,
the haiku, it was even shorter than the tanka.
It has five, seven, and five syllables,
which if we think about it are the first three lines of the tanka.
It's a tanka with the last two lines cut off.
So that irregularity shows up at very basically in Japanese poetry
in the very verse forms themselves.
Simplicity shows up in Japanese poetry in every aspect of the poetry.
A tanka has five lines and 31 syllables to work with.
A haiku, which is going to be invented in the 17th century,
has three lines and 17 syllables,
and that's as spare as the interior of a classic Japanese house
or one of those gardens of raked sand,
which has three rocks asymmetrically placed about the garden.
Parishability shows up in Japanese poetry in the themes of the poetry.
They always focus on things that pass.
A man looks in a mirror one day and is stunned to see that his hair,
which was jet black just yesterday, is white as snow today.
Cherry blossoms on a path in a garden is a perfect image
for the passage of time for the perishability of things.
A love affair is over and will never be revived.
A man walks down the street one day with a sword at his side
and a day later, a twinkly of an eye,
he's walking down the street with a cane at his side.
So these are some of the ways in which the principles that Keen says
are the basic, some of the basic principles of Japanese aesthetic
show up in these collections of poetry.
4,200 of the 4,500 poems in the manyoshu are tanka,
but since we'll get a chance to talk about them
when we discuss the kokinju in a moment,
let's take a brief look at one of the longer forms in the manyoshu, the choka.
The choka is an important form in the manyoshu
because most of the important ones, the best ones in Japanese judgment,
were written by Kokinomoto Hitomaro,
the most important poet of Japan's classical age.
He is their Shakespeare, as Tufu is the Chinese Shakespeare.
He was poet laureate for the court at the end of the 8th century,
and he wrote quite a few public poems on the death of a prince
or when the capital got moved somewhere.
But he's best remembered for poems like the ones that are called
number 220 to 222 in the anthology.
The title of this poem, as it's given by Hideo Levy,
is poem written by Kokinomoto Hitomaro
upon seeing a dead man lying among the rocks
on the island of Semine in Sanuki.
The poem, because it's a choka, is a little long for us to do together here,
so let me just give you a brief summary of it,
and then you can watch for this one when you read these poems.
It begins in praise of the island itself,
which is a sacred place in Japan's creation story,
and by repute it's one of the most beautiful places in all of Japan.
The poet has been shipwrecked the night before,
and he comes to the island in a rowboat,
and there, as his boat comes in, he sees a drowned man on the beach.
His head is pillowed on the rocky shore.
He would have noticed the man anyway,
but his attention is heightened by the fact
that he narrowly escaped drowning himself the night before
and that he thinks he might have been that man on the shore.
And then he wonders whether the man's wife at home is waiting for him,
and if he says if he knew where she lived,
he would go and tell her not to wait anymore.
He puts two tanka at the end of the longer poem
as envoys to the rest of the poem.
In the first tanka, he says that if the man's wife were here,
she'd want to go gather greens from the island to feed her husband,
but he says isn't the season of greens over?
Of course, it's the man's life that's over,
but the gentleness and tact of the question
is loving and delicate and caring.
And then the final envoy of this poem takes us back
to the picture of the dead man,
his head pillowed on rocks washed by the waves,
a picture that suggests the human condition itself,
a single anonymous dead man in a sacred place of great beauty.
And all of this by itself illustrates the Japanese aesthetic
as it's characterized by Donald Keen and as described by Kenko.
The Kokinshu was published several hundred years after the Manyoshu in about 905.
Even more clearly than the earlier volume illustrates the Japanese aesthetic.
For one thing, its range of voices is far more limited.
This was a court anthology so that the voices here are limited to the aristocracy at court.
And it uses only tanka, twenty volumes of tanka,
because thirty-one syllables is very, very compressed.
Situations and emotions are likewise very circumscribed.
And so a shortcut certain symbols and images and situations
recur over and over again many times.
In the eleven hundred poems that make up the Kokinshu,
there are only a couple of thousands of base words
so that the same words get used over and over and over again.
The dominant themes of the anthology are the qualities of nature, the seasons,
human response to the changing seasons, human emotions,
especially the emotion of love.
Six of the twenty volumes are dedicated to poems about the seasons.
And again, typically, this is what Keen was telling us earlier,
two volumes each to spring and fall,
one volume each to summer and winter,
which are far less favorite seasons of the Japanese.
And five of the twenty volumes are dedicated to love poems.
That is twenty-five percent of the total.
And maybe in spite of those restrictions,
or maybe even because of those restrictions,
the volumes are filled with delicate, little, tiny gems.
Since love is such an important theme in this book,
we'll look at several love poems by an important woman poet in the collection,
Ono no Komachi.
According to a biographical note in Stephen Carter's traditional Japanese poetry,
she was a lady in waiting at the court in the eight fifties and eight sixties.
By tradition, she was extraordinarily beautiful.
By tradition, she was sought by many men.
By tradition, she also was generally hard-hearted enough to make it difficult for many of those men.
Tradition also has her dying in poverty and rags on the street,
but most scholars doubt that,
that maybe just a form of posthumous male revenge.
One of her poems is a poem of consummated love.
As we said, this is fairly rare in Japanese poetry,
but this poem of consummated love is explicit enough that I think it needs no explication.
I think we get it just when we hear it.
This is Helen Craig McCullough's translation.
Autumn nights, it seems, are long by repute alone.
Scarcely had we met when morning's first light appeared,
leaving everything unsaid.
If you note in McCullough's translation,
she translates the tanka syllable for syllable
so that her translation has exactly the same syllable structure as the Japanese.
Five lines with five, seven, five, seven, seven syllables.
Which means that by translating this way,
she can suggest the compression and density and suggestiveness of the original
while, as she admits, sacrificing perhaps some other qualities.
Here's a second poem by the same poet.
So much I have learned.
The blossom that fades away, its color unseen,
is the flower in the heart of one who lives in this world.
This one, the one in line five, is accurate.
But since this occurs in the collection of poems about love,
it probably isn't just a generic one, but some special specific one,
and perhaps more likely some man.
The words blossom and fades and color and flower form a cluster of words,
which is called an angle in Japanese, E-N-G-O,
and an angle functions somewhere halfway between a symbol and a metaphor.
What the poem says is that something is being compared to a fading flower.
But what? Something in a man's heart.
It might be love or sexual passion or his desire for her.
But the color is unseen, she says.
So what do we make of that?
If the color is unseen, how do we know that it's fading?
Well, remember what the Chinese told us about how to read poetry.
We have to start with the poem and then work our way back
to look for the situation that lies behind it,
the pressure that made the poem necessary in the first place.
So we can at least make some guesses at this.
What's fading is the flower in the heart, which is not seen.
On the outside, from all appearances, the man looks the same
and says the same things and does the same things that he always did.
It's inside where the color has faded.
Appearances lie, that is, he looks the same as he usually did.
The heart tells the truth, but the heart is unseen.
It's invisible, and that makes it very hard to read.
And this is a lot of complication for a 31-syllable poem.
A different translation of this same poem, this one by Arthur Whaley,
teases out some of that meaning of this poem,
while again sacrificing some of the meaning that McCullough gets out of hers.
His translation of this same poem says,
A thing which fades with no outward sign is the flower of the heart of man in this world.
It's, as we said about Chinese poetry, one of the things that's true of Japanese poetry,
maybe even more true of Japanese than Chinese poetry,
is the fact that the same poem can be translated in many, many different ways,
each one teasing out some aspects of the suggestiveness of the original.
Japanese poets, because they had such small forms to work with,
learned to use double meanings and puns and word play and illusions
and conventional symbols to get what they had to say into those 31 syllables.
But like Chinese poets, they tend to be visual whenever they can be
and to let the picture do as much of the work
of suggesting the mood or feeling or emotion of the speaker as is possible.
Here is another Onono Kamachi poem.
In this forlorn state, I find life dreary indeed.
If a stream beckoned, I would gladly cut my roots and float away like duckweed.
For us readers of Western poetry, this translation seems straightforward in a Western kind of way.
The subject of the poem is I, and the duckweed comes in as a simile at the very end,
and so the simile poem would say something like, I would float away like duckweed.
But in Japanese poetry, as in Chinese poetry, the picture is supposed to be foremost.
That's what is supposed to be the heart and soul of the poem,
as it was for Long Wei and for Tufu last time.
The reader usually has to wait for the ending of the poem
to find where the subjective aspect is, where the subjectivity gets linked to the picture.
So here the subject of the poem would really be the duckweed.
The I is referred to at the very end, and then is linked back to the duckweed
rather than the other way around.
So a more Japanese way of reading this poem would be something like this.
If a stream beckoned, duckweed would cut its roots and float away.
I in this sad state find life unhappy indeed.
Here what we have is we have the picture first, and then we link the subjectivity to the very end.
Japanese writers don't very much like dotting their eyes or crossing their t's either,
and so here we have to sort of guess at what this beckoning stream might be.
It might be a man or simply a call to go somewhere, to change, to do something different.
What's clear is that that picture of a duckweed, which is willing to cut its roots
and to float away down the stream, tells us something about the poet and the state of her heart.
One last Ono no Komachi poem can illustrate one more facet of Japanese poetry.
This is Helen McCullough again, her translation.
The poem is, Alas, the beauty of the flowers has faded and come to nothing
while I have watched the rain lost in melancholy thought.
McCullough tells us about this poem that this one is extraordinarily rich
because almost every word in this poem can mean more than one thing.
Flowers, she says, can mean feminine beauty.
The word she translates as beauty can mean color or situation or even possibly sexual passion.
Fade can mean scatter or change as well as fade,
and that last phrase in the poem can either mean rain a long time or stare thoughtfully into space.
Which means that, as she says, you can read this poem in two related but entirely different ways.
The first way she suggests is this.
You could say, Alas, the flowers have blossomed unseen.
The long rains have scattered them.
That makes it a seasonal poem about looking at a path or a yard or a garden full of fallen blossoms.
And that is a powerful metaphor itself.
It has metaphorical meaning, and we can read that in whatever way we want to.
Or it can mean something like, my youth has fled and served me little
all the while I was distracted with my thoughts,
suggesting that she had been unlucky in love and is partly responsible for that bad luck herself.
McCullough has a wonderful little book called Brocade by Night,
in which she talks about some of the problems and difficulties and challenges
and rewards of translating Japanese poetry.
She's talking specifically about this poem, and this is what she says about translating this poem.
She says to choose a single one, and by one here she means meaning,
or reading, or inter-translation.
To choose a single one is to run the risk of losing the overtones
so beautifully abundant in the original.
On the one hand, the rich Chinese literary associations of the Lonely Lady in Springtime,
and on the other, the implied comparisons between the flowering tree and the woman's youth
to especially poignant examples of the transitoriness of beauty
between human sorrow and the dark moods of nature and between rain and tears.
Komachi's poem is neither metaphorical nor symbolic.
Rather, it is word play of the highest order,
with almost every word functioning to some extent as an angle,
and we must interpret it accordingly if we are to avoid violation of its artistic integrity.
What this suggests for those of us whose Japanese is less than fluent
is that perhaps the best way to read Japanese poetry is to find several translations of the same poem,
and then to compare them and look at them to find the little nuances
and suggestions that are tucked away in each separate translation.
We're reading separate translations not just to find our favorite one,
although we can do that too if we want,
but imaginatively to combine these translations to find as many nuances as we can.
And the other thing to do when reading Japanese poetry is always to read very carefully
the prefaces and the notes by the translators,
who usually are very good about telling us about the choices they've made,
how they went about deciding what aspects to stress,
what their translations have tried to focus on,
and what they had to leave out in order to make these choices.
So, the manyoshu and the kokinshu give us our first look at the Japanese aesthetic.
It will not be the last.
Down the road, quite a ways, when we get to the fourth unit in this course,
we will do a novel by Kawabata Yasunari called Snow Country.
It's a novel of the 1930s.
Kawabata was the first Japanese author, in fact, to be awarded the Nobel Prize,
and at his Nobel Prize acceptance speech, he gave the audience a fairly detailed lecture
about that same Japanese aesthetic.
One listener who was at the Nobel Prize acceptance speech listening to it said,
it was like being taken on a forced march through a blizzard of cherry blossoms.
So, we'll get back to this aesthetic again.
It's going to be one that isn't just operative in classical Japan.
It's going to be operative throughout much of the rest of Japanese history.
But long before we get there, we will also get to see in our next lecture
how the Japanese aesthetic functions in what history has decided
is probably the first real novel in history, Morasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji.
It will introduce for us a new theme in our course, the rise and development of the novel,
which once we get this started, we're going to be tracing throughout the rest of the course.
But it will also return us to this issue of the Japanese aesthetic,
because as we said, in China, poetry could serve for so many functions.
It could serve to open a delicate negotiation.
It could serve to introduce you to people.
It could serve to say things in a quotation that you would hesitate to say in your own voice.
The same thing happened at the Japanese court,
because poetry at the Japanese court will wind up being used in precisely the same kinds of ways.
Since The Tale of Genji is a novel mostly about love and about relations between the genders,
the poetry that is going to be used in The Tale of Genji will mostly be love poetry,
and mostly it will be used as a way of communication between men and women in that poem or in that novel.
There are, in fact, quotations from 800 different poems in The Tale of Genji, most of them from the Kokinchu.
And so, in our next lecture, we will do something old, something we've visited before, and something brand new.
The Japanese aesthetic, but this time how it translates into this new genre,
which is only beginning here, but which we'll sooner or later take over most of literary history,
next time when we do Morisaki's The Tale of Genji.
