Lecture 11, Beowulf.
In most of the lectures in this first unit of our journey through world literature, we
have been concerned with epic poems and with heroes, the heroes who live in epic poems.
We really have our last one of those today in the Germanic epic poem Beowulf.
But it's not just an ending, it's also a nice transition poem because one of the things
that makes this poem different from other epics we've looked at is this one, as I mentioned
in the last lecture, is one that has been touched by Christianity.
And one of the questions that critics and readers have asked over the years is, how
much does that matter?
How much does that count?
This was a pagan poem to begin with.
It has some Christian additions.
Do those Christian additions change the poem?
Do they have to be taken into account?
And we'll take a look at some of those questions as we go through this lecture.
Beowulf, the poem, seems to have come from southern Sweden to England with the angles
and Saxons and Jutes who started arriving in England in about the 5th century.
It seems to have survived orally for several centuries before it was written down sometime
between the 8th and the 10th century.
It survives in a single manuscript which was damaged by fire in the 17th century, so
we came very close to not having this poem at all.
The plot of the poem concerns its hero, Beowulf, who travels from a people in southern Sweden
called the Geets to Denmark to help Rothgar, the king of the Danes, whose mead hall is
under siege from a kind of gigantic half-man, half-monster, a kind of troll named Grendel.
He defeats Grendel in a really big battle inside the mead hall, and then he has to fight
Grendel's mother, who renews the attack on the Danes to avenge her son's death.
This fight occurs at the bottom of a really, really frightful lake or mirror.
After he wins this battle, there's a great feast at Rothgar's hall in which Beowulf
is loaded up with gifts, and he achieves the full rank of hero by being sung in heroic
songs by Rothgar's bards or scops, as they were called.
In the second part of the poem, Beowulf returns home, is acknowledged as a hero at home, is
again loaded up with gifts, and then the story jumps ahead about fifty years, during which
Beowulf has become king of the Geets and has protected his people very well.
But when he's an old man, a dragon in his kingdom is awakened by a theft of a cup from
his horde, and he begins to terrorize Beowulf's people.
So as an old man, Beowulf puts on his armor one more time and goes out to fight one last
battle.
In the fight, all of his hand-picked warriors or thanes desert him.
They all run away in fear, except for one named Wiglath, who stays and helps him fight
to the end.
After a terrific struggle, they kill the dragon, but in the battle, Beowulf is mortally wounded,
and he lives just long enough to see some of the treasure that he's won for his people
brought out of the cave before he dies.
The poem ends with the Geets building a huge burial mound for Beowulf, and with some really
gloomy predictions about what will happen to the people now that Beowulf is gone.
The poem includes a great deal of other material as well.
A great portion of it is given over to feasts and to celebrations, and the poem digresses
off into about ten different other stories.
The stories are told in enough detail that clearly they were stories that people knew
and stories that were well-developed, but none of them are told completely, so that
we have to guess that the people who heard this story initially would have understood
those stories well enough to know what was being alluded to.
For us, as modern readers, we have to have a text with some really good footnotes to
help us keep track of where those illusions come from and what they refer to.
We'll get back to those illusions in a bit.
Beowulf shares with the other epic poems that we've done in this course so far a lot of
features.
Like Gilgamesh, like Achilles, like Odysseus, like Arjuna, Beowulf is a hero who is larger
and stronger than other men, but he's nevertheless mortal.
He can and will die.
Like Gilgamesh, with Humbaba, or Odysseus, with the Cyclops, Beowulf has to fight and
struggle against monsters of more than human size and strength.
Like virtually all of the heroes we've considered, Beowulf is eager to win fame, to be remembered
in song and story after his death.
In the last line of the shameless Haney translation, which is the one I'll be citing from in this
lecture, we are told that Beowulf was keenest to win fame.
Fame is one of his great motivators.
Like other epic heroes in this course, he helps us understand the values of Germanic
culture, especially the values of a great chieftain, so that he, like other epic heroes
that we have looked at so far, he helps to define not just a people, but an entire culture.
Like all good literature, Beowulf is capable of being read in a lot of different ways.
We're going to take a look at three different readings of this poem, focusing a little bit,
at least on the question about those Christian elements.
Beowulf, to give you some suggestion of the kind of debate that's gone on around this,
and then to explore some of the poem's possibilities, it'll give you something to watch for also
when you read the poem for yourselves.
One of the most famous readings of the poem is that of J.R.R. Tolkien, who is the author
of The Lord of the Rings trilogy.
Tolkien was, in his other life, an old English scholar, and he borrowed a lot of materials
and ideas from that literature to use in his own works, The Lord of the Rings Trilogy,
which we all know.
In 1936, he wrote an article called Beowulf the Monsters and the Critics.
In that article, Tolkien argues that Beowulf is essentially a pre-Christian poem with a
few inadvertent Christian details.
They were unavoidable because the poet who wrote this down was a Christian, but he was
a Christian who was looking back on a pre-Christian past with admiration and with some nostalgia.
The poet who wrote this poem out was clearly Christian.
He calls Grendel a descendant of Cain.
The story of Noah's flood is inscribed on the hilt of a sword that Beowulf used to try
to kill Grendel's mother.
And in Rothgar's Meadhole, a scop sings a song of creation that sounds like it comes
very much from the book of Genesis.
Tolkien argued that this Christian poet in Britain wrote a poem that looked backwards
on a heroic pre-Christian past and he looked back on it with admiration, which interestingly
is precisely what Tolkien himself was going to do in his great trilogy.
There is, of course, evidence in the poem to support this view.
In many, many ways, the definitions, the terms, the assumptions of the poem are those of a
pre-Christian people.
Early in the poem, the poet defines a good king.
He defines it, what does a good king do?
He says, well, a good king is one who is a scourge of many tribes, a wrecker of mead
benches rampaging among his foes.
After a while, all the other surrounding tribes have to pay him tribute.
The summary is that was one good king.
If we ask whose mead benches is he wrecking, whom is he scourging, the answer is other
Germanic tribes.
A first century Roman historian Tacitus actually traveled north to visit these people and to
study them and then he wrote a book, Germania, in which he said that warfare was the standard
way of life of these people.
Fighting was what they did.
That was their occupation.
That was their life.
They lived to fight.
They fought to live.
What that means is that for good health in a society like this at a clan, the retainers
or theans as they're called go out and capture booty from other people.
They bring it back and give it to their chieftain and then their chieftain distributes it back
out to the theans.
It's one of the reasons why in the poem a good king is always called a ringgiver.
He's someone who distributes what his theans bring in for him.
As Tacitus described, it means that we can tell that this is a state of spiritual health.
Everybody's doing what he's supposed to be doing when the society works like this.
Immortality in this culture means winning a reputation that survives one and Rothgaard
tells Beowulf after the second battle, the second, the one with Grendel's mother, he
says, you have made yourself immortal by your glorious action.
Scops are already making up stories about him even before he returns home, and that's
a really, really good sign.
But Tolkien is a lot less interested in Beowulf's fights with neighboring tribes, even though
that does establish the ambience of the poem as purely Germanic.
He's less interested in those wars with neighboring tribes than he is those against the monsters,
against a troll, a sea woman and a dragon.
All of which Tolkien says come from deep within Norse and Germanic mythology.
They're associated with cold and darkness and wilderness.
They are enemies of human values and achievements, and they're reflections of the really, really
hostile places in which these people had lived for centuries.
In Tolkien's vision, humans create little tiny circles of light.
Rothgaard's mead hall is one of those little circles of light, and inside each one of those
circles there is laughter, there is music, there is fellowship.
But just outside those little circles are all of the forces that want to destroy it.
These people had lived long enough in places which, as Garrison Keeler tells us in Prairie
Home Companion, places where nature tries to kill you about five months out of every
year that they knew that they were lived in a hostile place.
And so in some ways, building a mead hall like the one that Rothgaard builds actually
calls Grendel into existence, creates something human and the hostile universe will try to
destroy it.
The third monster, the dragon, besides being compounded of all of the things that the Northern
Imagination most abhorred and loathes, loathes that's made up of a snake and bat and lizard
and worm, it's also a negation of all of the values of a good king.
Where a good king is a ring giver, a dragon is a ring hoarder.
It simply sits on a pile of treasure.
So in terms of opponents, as far as Tolkien is concerned, we work backwards in the poem
from the more nearly human to the less human toward the deeper and more pervasive evil
that surrounds these people in the world in which they lived.
The dragon kills Beowulf and that he does kill Beowulf at the end replicates the pattern
of all of Northern mythology in which in the final battles the gods and humans will line
up against the monsters in the last great battle, men and gods will lose to the monsters
and the world will be destroyed.
That means that the entire arc of Northern mythology is gloomy and there are no ultimate
winners.
There are only glorious or inglorious defeats.
As Rothgar reminds Beowulf on the night after his defeat of Grendel, Beowulf is at the peak
of his powers.
He's a great hero.
But Rothgar says to Beowulf, he says, don't be too sure of yourself.
Don't be too confident because nothing lasts, your strength will last, life doesn't last,
nothing lasts.
He said there will come an illness or there will come a sword or there will come a fire
or a spear thrust and then he says, your piercing eye will dim and darken and death
will arrive, dear warrior, to sweep you away.
That kind of gloomy vision that nothing lasts is deeply embedded in the Northern imagination.
Every time I read this passage by Rothgar I'm reminded of Ernest Hemingway in Death
in the Afternoon telling the little old lady about bullfighting and about writing stories.
The little old lady tells him that she likes stories with happy endings and Hemingway tells
the little old lady all stories end the same if you tell them far enough and he is no true
storyteller who ever lets you forget that.
That's what Rothgar is saying to Beowulf, this little speech that he makes after dinner.
Beowulf is a hero in part because for Tolkien, because he knows this and he uses his strength
to accomplish what he can in the meantime.
There are no ultimate victories in this mythology.
One can only hold back defeat for a while and that Beowulf manages to do for his people.
So the point of the ending for Tolkien isn't that the dragon kills Beowulf but we knew
he would, that will happen, but that Beowulf takes a dragon with him when he goes and thus
holds off the doom of his people for one more day, for one more week, for one more month,
however long it is.
The poem begins with a funeral, it ends with a funeral and the elegiac tone suggests something
of the darkness of the vision that these Germanic peoples brought with them when they came
down out of the North into Europe.
The poet is aware all the time throughout the entire poem that nothing lasts when he
tells us about the beautiful meadhole that Rothgar had built.
He says that was a course before it burned down in the fire.
He reminds us when he tells us about clans that are getting along with one another.
He says that was a course before they went to war and destroyed each other.
He knows that nothing lasts.
He knows also that the geese will disappear from history at the end of this poem.
And even the little figures of speech that these people, these poets use in their poems,
addresses this pessimistic vision.
One of their favorite little devices is called understatement, which is really using a series
of negatives to make a positive statement.
Instead of saying, I'm happy, you'd say I wouldn't want you to think that I'm not happy.
What that does is it simply understates what you're trying to say.
You don't want to say you're too happy, you don't want to make it sound too positive
because nothing good lasts anyway.
We still have a common phrase that we use all the time that comes from the Anglo-Saxons.
When someone is riotously drunk, we say he's feeling no pain.
And these are all kinds of understatements.
The poem is full of this kind of understatement where you really work hard not to overstate,
not to say anything too positively.
When Grendel is killed, we're told by the poet that the people who live in Rothgar Kingdom
don't regret Grendel's death too much.
That's clearly an understatement.
After we're told for about 20 lines how awful the lake is or the mirror in which Grendel's
mother lives, he sums up by saying that was no good place.
That's part of the darkness of vision of these people.
And that's Tolkien's reading.
Tolkien says it's essentially a pagan poem.
Don't pay too much attention to the Christian bits in it because it really doesn't affect
the texture, the fiber of the entire poem.
A second reading, and this one is suggested by John Magaliard and Lee Patterson, who are
the editors of the text in the Norton anthology of world literature, they see the poem as
a kind of meditation on the futility of tribal warfare and the Germanic love of fighting.
Most of the digressions, and all of them that can be accurately identified, are about inter-tribal
feuds, most of which end badly.
The geats at poem's end have lost their leader, and because they've lost their leader in the
world in which they live, where everybody's always attacking everybody else, they know
they are vulnerable and doomed.
The messenger who comes to tell them that Beowulf is dead says this,
Many a spear, dawn cold to the touch, will be taken down and waved on high.
The swept harp won't wake in warriors, but the raven, winging darkly over the doomed,
will have news, tidings for the eagle of how he hoked and ate, how the wolf and he made
short work of the dead.
Beowulf's own people know what lies and wait for them now that their protector is gone.
Paradoxically, in a world like this, the only way you can control violence is with other
violence which merely perpetuates the cycle.
In this reading, the monsters are not symbols of a hostile universe as they were for Tolkien
but of a kind of social sickness that pervades the whole culture.
They can be killed.
You can kill an individual monster, but the violence will simply go on.
As Beowulf prepares for his final battle, he tells a story about King Higalach's father,
Rethel, one of whose sons accidentally killed another.
When a son kills another son, there's no way that you can compensate for this.
No way you can demand payment for that death.
He says that that father, knowing there's nothing he can do to avenge the death of
a son, feels as empty as a man watching his son die on a gallows.
Again, there is nothing can be done about that.
In both cases, death can't be compensated, and if there's no compensation you can make
for death, then life suddenly becomes empty.
And this is what Magaliard and Patterson are pointing to.
They say, in a world in which fighting and revenge and payment are all the qualities,
the values that you have, this is a society which is very, very ill to its core, something
which the poet knows.
In summing up, this is how they put it.
The hero understands at some level the futility of the entire world of Germanic heroism that
he himself so fully represents.
Trolls and dragons can be killed, but how does one eradicate the violence that serves
to constitute society itself?
The monsters are finally instances of a social sickness that infects the culture as a whole.
They may be killed, but the violence they represent will continue unabated, and that,
for them, is what this whole poem is about.
A third reading, and this one is interesting because this one does make more of the Christian
elements in the poem than Tolkien does.
This is a reading by John Niles called Beowulf the Poem and Its Traditions.
He sees the poem sort of permeated with Christian values, the ones that Tolkien found only on
the margins.
He notices that both the poet and characters inside the poem refer to Judgment Day and to
Heaven and Hell.
He notices that Grendel is placed both in the context of Cain and in the context of
the Giant's War against God in the Old Testament, which makes Beowulf's fight with Grendel
and his mother into kind of a cosmic battle, God helping Beowulf to preserve the world
that he had created.
When Rothgar praises Beowulf, he thanks God for sending him, he thanks God for sending
you to me, and Beowulf acknowledges God's help in his fight with Grendel's mother.
As he puts it, it was hard fought, a desperate affair that could have gone badly.
If God had not helped me, the outcome would have been quick and fatal.
The reason why Niles finds these Christian values important is that he sees the poem's
concern as that of community, which accounts for the emphasis he thinks on feasts and ceremonial
speeches and gift exchanges, all those things which fill up this poem.
He notices that the three fights, the ones that Tolkien finds most important, take up
only about 500 out of 3,200 lines of this whole poem, and the rest of it is dedicated
to something else.
The ceremonial opening of the poem for Niles is to show how community gets established.
The earliest part of the book is about a character named Shield Sheafson.
He's the one who's counted as a good king because he wrecks other people's meat benches
and takes booty and takes treasure.
And then the first part of the poem ends with his funeral.
For Niles, this is the founding father.
This is a man, this shows how a community actually gets established.
And the funeral that he receives is a fitting funeral for a founding father.
The ending of the poem shows how community falls apart.
The geese will fall apart and will disappear from history because they fail to support
their lord in a dragon fight.
Wiglaf, the one retainer who stays behind and helps Bale Wolf kill the dragon, tells
the people what they have done in a really stinging rebuke at the end of the poem.
The digressions for Niles show how pride or anger or self-will or the breaking of
oaths can destroy a community can tear it apart.
Grendel for Niles is a perfect symbol because he lives outside community.
He's a loner.
He has no community.
He has no language.
He gives and receives no gifts.
And he hates the light and music from the meat hall.
For Niles, Bale Wolf comes to Rothgar's Hall in the first place, not in search of fame,
but because Rothgar needs help.
And besides, Bale Wolf remembers that Rothgar had helped Bale Wolf's father once years
ago, so he owes him a favor.
The celebrations after the fights show what Grendel tried to destroy.
It shows joy in human community, free of threats from outside and people singing and drinking
together indoors who trust and love one another.
When Grendel's mother retaliates according to Niles, Bale Wolf fights her not because
he wants to enhance his fame, but because Rothgar asks him to.
And again, more is made of the celebration afterwards than the fight itself.
The dragon is, of course, another outsider, another loner, and Bale Wolf fights it because
it threatens his people.
He means to make the treasure that the dragon is sitting on available to his people, but
they realize that they're not worthy of it and they bury it with their king.
Big Laugh's loyalty in that last great dragon fight shows the real value of heroism, and
that is what heroism for, what makes it useful, is that it binds society together and that
he and Bale Wolf show what loyalty to one another can accomplish.
Either one of those men would have been killed by the dragon alone, fighting together, they
managed to take the dragon with them.
And there are three speeches for Niles at the end of this poem, Reinforce this idea
of community.
The first is about a man who outlives his tribe, and it's a terrible, terrible life.
The second about is a man, about a man whose family continuity gets broken so as the harp
goes silent and the meadhole sits empty.
And the third is the speech of that messenger who comes to tell the geese that their king
is dead, the one we looked at earlier about the raven and the wolf feasting on the dead.
The disloyalty and cowardice of the geese for Niles means that their communal life is over,
their ornaments will be taken from them, and their harps will be unstrong.
At the very end of the poem, a geet woman laments at the pyre that has been built for
Bale Wolf, and what she says, she says for her whole people.
She says, a geet woman too sang out in grief.
With hair bound up, she unburdened herself of her worst fears, a wild litany of nightmare
and lament.
Her nation invaded, enemies on the rampage, bodies in piles, slavery in a basement, heaven
swallowed the smoke.
So for Niles, the poem is not about heroism per se, but about what leaders need to do
and how they need to act in order to hold society together.
Courage and fortitude and the desire for fame can all be helpful to a leader, but they
can also be destructive of society if they're used for selfish reasons instead of for communal
ones.
God allots all gifts to humans, here's where he sees the Christian values as permeating
this poem.
God allots all kinds of life and all gifts to human beings, and we all have those lives
on loan.
A man can be gifted with strength or skill, but unless it's used for the common good,
it's an affliction to others.
Unless a man remembers that those gifts are on loan from God, both he and the community
will be the ultimate losers, as Rothgar reminds Beowulf, as he loads him up with gifts and
as some of the digressions remind us.
The gifts of God, including life and strength and courage and fortitude and all of those
gifts, are all like treasure.
They can be held for a while, they can be accumulated for a while, but after one dies,
someone else is going to get them anyway.
And so the important thing is not to have them, but the important thing is what you
do with them while you do have them.
Because Beowulf is the right kind of hero in the right kind of way, he has said about
him at the poems, at poems end, not just that he was eager for fame.
We looked at that part of the passage earlier, but this is what is said in the last two lines
of the poem about him, he was the man most gracious and fair-minded, kindest to his people,
and keenest to win fame.
So because we have three different readings now, what do we make of a poem like this?
What do we say about it?
Is it a poem about mankind's losing battle with the universe, with the hostile universe,
it's always trying to destroy it?
Is it a meditation on the futility of a culture that defines itself in terms of war and can't
imagine itself engaging in any other activity outside of it?
Or is it an analysis of the uses and misuses of heroism within the human community?
The poem, like all good poems, like all good literature, can support a variety of readings,
and it's one of the ways in which good literature over and over again can still provoke discussion
and thought because there are so many ways that it can be read.
I don't know if this answers the question about the Christian elements of the poem.
I don't think that that one has been definitively solved as yet.
I think people still can disagree over what that means, how important they are in the
center of the poem.
It is interesting and we can see that we've come a certain way through history when we
look at a poem that comes out of southern Sweden and comes to England, which is already
touched by Christianity, and that suggests some of the temporal distance we've come
in this course so far.
And if we've reached a transition historically, we also have probably reached a transition
in our course.
We are at the place where at the end of some things, we're at the beginning of some new
things.
We're at the end, essentially, of our unit on epic poems and epic heroes, and we've
had all kinds of experience with all kinds of heroes over the last programs.
We've had individualistic heroes, we have heroes who fight for causes outside themselves,
we have heroes who learn how to fight in ways that dedicate all of their actions to God.
We have had heroes who fight against other heroes, and we have had heroes who fight
against monsters like the Cyclops or the Guardians of Cedar Forests or Dragons.
And because our focus was somewhere else, we didn't even really have a chance to talk
about some other kinds of heroes that come up in the Old Testament, for example.
How would we fit someone like Sampson or Deborah or David or Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
into this list of heroes and these different kinds of heroes that we've had, not to mention
the heroism of the prophets, and that has to be a kind of heroism itself, who dare to
go to kings and point their fingers at them and say you were wrong.
I'm thinking particularly of that story of Nathan, who after David has stolen Bathsheba
from Uriah, Nathan goes to David and tells the story about the man who has all these
flocks of sheep, and then the poor man who lives next door has one lamb and it's a family
pet, and when the rich man has visitors, he goes next door and he steals the lamb and
he kills it and serves it to his guests.
And David comes rising up out of his throne and says show me that man, let him be put
to death.
And Nathan pointing his bony finger at David and saying you are that man.
That's a kind of courage too, which we haven't had a really a chance to talk about.
There's a kind of heroism there.
But if epic poems are going to disappear from our course pretty much from here on, heroes
won't.
There will be heroes in all kinds of later works and many of them will borrow traits
from the heroes we've already studied.
Some will still be warriors, others will have to exercise their heroism in other ways, perhaps
closer to that of Nathan than that of Achilles.
And we will keep remeeting aspects of Achilles and Odysseus and Aeneas and Medea and Antigone
and Arjuna and in Beowulf in the heroes that we will meet later on down this course.
We will have to keep redefining heroism as we go through this course.
We will have to add some elements, we will have to subtract some, we will have to modify
some.
In order to explain to ourselves what the heroism of Don Quixote is, what the heroism
of Macbeth, Dr. Faustus, Catherine Earnshaw, Huckleberry Finn, Oconquo, Haroun El Rashid.
But this is where it all starts.
Here starts two old stories of gods and goddesses and relations between gods and humans that
we will keep coming across as we go through this course.
And these themes too will be responded to and developed in the literature that we look
at ahead in stories like Voltaire's Candide or Gertes Faust or the Plays of Bertold Brecht
or in Borges's The Library of Babel.
And we've also had a brief glimpse at what literature might look like if we're made
up of ordinary people doing ordinary things.
We've already visited literature like that in China and we've prepared the way for it
by looking at the story of Peter in the New Testament.
And so this literature will really come into its own about the end of Unit 3 in writers
like Flo Baer and Dostoevsky and Rabindranath Tugor and Ichiyu Higuchi and Nagib Mufus and
William Faulkner.
So we have a lot of things started, a lot of things to build on as we move ahead.
And we will start one new one next time because if early literature is primarily epic and heroic
in focus, one of the things that we mentioned in the very first lecture is that as storytelling
develops through time it also becomes more artful.
There are new narrative strategies, new techniques for telling stories.
And next in our next lecture we will visit India and we will take a look at three of
the most influential and powerful and enduring stories, collections of stories down through
the history of literature, which will both provide the world with stories which it will
retell over and over again for hundreds of years, but will also teach some brand new
ways of telling stories that will become the subjects and the theme and the focus for most
of Units 2 and 3 of this course.
