Lecture 48, Rushdie's Haroon and the Sea of Stories
In 1988, Salman Rushdie published The Satanic Verses.
That same year, religious leaders in Iran decided that the book was blasphemous, and
they declared a fatwa, calling for his death at the hands of faithful Muslims.
So Rushdie spent the next ten years in hiding, guarded by the British Secret Service, until
the fatwa was lifted in 1998.
While he was in hiding, he wrote the book that we'll be talking about in this lecture,
Haroon and the Sea of Stories.
It was written for his son, partly as he says to fulfill a promise, that his next book would
be one that his son would enjoy reading, and partly to explain the situation in which the
family found itself during those ten years.
The book's epigraph is a dedication to his son, whose name is Zafar, and the name Zafar
is spelled out by the first letter in each line of the epigraph in the manner of an acrostic.
Zambla, Zenda, Zanadu, all our dream worlds may come true.
Fairylands are fearsome too, as I wonder far from view, read and bring me home to you.
But while he was at it, he also used the book with its vehicle of fantasy literature to
think about some questions that I think are important for all of literature.
Some of the themes that he developed in this course of this book were the relationship between
authority and the creative artist, some of the consequences of censorship, and maybe even
most importantly, for our purposes in this course, the question that Haroon asks his
father very early in the book, what's the use of stories that aren't even true?
For us, this book can help us continue to define postmodernism, at least to add one
more element to our definition, and then can perhaps serve as the basis for a few generalizations
about our course and perhaps about literature generally.
First of all, about the story itself, just to make sure that we're all on the same page,
it begins in a city so sad that it's forgotten its own name, in which there lives a storyteller
named Rashid Khalifa, his wife Soraya, and their son Haroon.
Rashid is a fabulous storyteller, but he doesn't pay enough attention to his wife's
growing dissatisfaction with him and his stories, or to the fact that she's paying a lot of
attention to a neighbor, a Mr. Sengupta, a clerk who believes only in reality, not in
stories.
When Soraya actually runs away with Mr. Sengupta choosing for herself the factual and the practical
rather than the imaginative, both father and son are devastated.
And it's at this point that Haroon repeats to his father Mr. Sengupta's question, what's
the use of stories that aren't even true?
His father is so crushed by the boy's question that the next time he sits down in front of
an audience and opens up his mouth to speak, nothing comes out.
He has run out of stories to tell.
Rashid doesn't know that this situation is permanent, so he takes Haroon with him on
his next storytelling assignment near a place called Dull Lake in the Valley of Kay, where
he again fails to be able to tell any stories.
That night, on a houseboat on the lake, Haroon is awakened by a strange little creature.
It turns out to be a water genie named If, who's disconnecting an invisible tap that
gets its water from the sea of stories.
Haroon manages to get from the genie the wrench he was using to disconnect the tap, and he
refuses to give it back until the genie takes him to the sea of stories, where he hopes
to be able to renew his father's water series service, which is also the source of his stories.
In order to do this, the genie tells him, he will have to go see the grand controller,
the walrus.
They travel on the back of a mechanical hoopu named But to Kahani, which is the earth's
second and always hidden moon, on which is located the sea of stories.
Kahani doesn't rotate, so one side always faces the sun and is always in the light.
This is the side where the guppies live, the other side, the dark side, is the land of
Chup, a place of darkness and shadow, where all books have locks on them, and an almost
eternal silence reigns in the dark.
The dark side is ruled by the cult master, whose name is Khatam Shudd, which in Hindustani,
we are told, means something like completely finished or over and done with.
Khatam Shudd is the arch enemy of all stories and even of language itself.
His title is the prince of silence and the foe of speech.
The sea of stories turns out to be a real ocean on Kahani in the land of gupp.
It is the source of all narrative, the source of all stories in the world.
But the problem turns out to be more serious than merely getting Harun's father's water
or story supply hooked up again.
For Khatam Shudd turns out to be poisoning the sea of stories and thus polluting everything
that comes out of it.
How bad the pollution is is illustrated when Harun, who's on the hoopu's back and they
are floating across this sea of stories, and he's invited to take a drink of the water
to see what happens.
As soon as he takes a drink, he's immediately inside a story, a rescue story to be exact
and to be even more exact the story of Rapunzel, except that in this variation of the story
the princess has just gotten a haircut so that Harun has to climb up on the outside of the
tower using only his hands and feet instead of pulling himself up on her hair as the traditional
story goes.
When he's halfway up the tower he's suddenly changed into a giant spider.
Rapunzel has no wish to be saved by a giant spider and so she pushes him off the window
ledge and he falls back to the ground.
At that point he comes out of the story and he's back with if and but.
If the genie and but the hoopu, once they've heard what happens inside Harun's story they
become very concerned.
It's clear to them that filth is being put into the sea of stories which makes all the
stories go wrong.
This they say is the work of Khatum Shudd, who's also planning on putting a huge plug
in the bottom of the sea out of which poor multicolored streams that mingle to make up
all the new stories in the world.
Harun's task thus becomes far more complicated as he joins the guppies to try to defeat Khatum
Shudd and thereby prevent the plug from being put in and then help to clean the polluted
waters of the sea of stories.
The story from here on is a very complicated one.
One of the things that everyone notices about Rushdie is in all of his books from Midnight's
Children on is how lavish his powers of invention are, how much material he manages to use on
every single page.
And that's true of this book too.
If I tried to give you a summary from here on of what happens it would take nearly as
long for me to tell it as it will for you to read the book.
It's a great read with enough amusing and interesting and thoughtful material that adults
can read it with as much pleasure as children do.
And if you feel just a little sheepish about reading a children's book then maybe you
can find a child to read it to or read with and you'll double the value of the book in
the process.
All we need to say about the rest of the story is that after an amazing series of harrowing
and exciting and thrilling adventures all ends well.
Rushdie's powers of storytelling are restored, after Khatum Shudd is defeated, the waters
are cleansed in the sea of stories and Rushdie's wife and Haroon's mother comes home again
at stories and it's a really fine happy ending.
What I want to do is I want to spend the rest of our time together pushing the story out
toward some slightly more general conclusions.
First, there's a matter on which we won't spend very much time but which has seemed
important to some critics.
We're talking about the ways in which the book is a kind of allegory reflecting Rushdie's
own circumstances at the time of its writing.
The extent to which Khatum Shudd represents some specific figure like the Ayatollah Khomeini,
the extent to which the ongoing struggle between the Guppies and the Chuppies represents something
like the ongoing struggle between repressive and free societies and the extent to which
Chupp's hatred for stories reflects any specific cultures' war against the imagination are
all interesting questions and a certain amount of time and energy has been spent exploring
these questions.
I'll leave them however to your own consideration when you read the book, first because it is
possible to answer these questions in more than one way and secondly because for our
purposes I think we will simplify and limit the book too much if we spend too much time
on them because we have what I think are some other interesting ideas to pursue in this
book.
For one, we've been dealing in the last two lectures, this is a third on postmodernism.
We started with Beckett and then to Borges and here we are at Rushdie and the question
is, one question we can ask is what makes this one a postmodernist book?
The easiest answer is our first, its intertextuality, that is its engagement with other literature
and secondly the idea that its subject and theme is literature, that's what the book
is about.
In our course, this tendency to make literature about literature was actually initiated with
Proust whose remembrance of things past is an account of how that novel came to be written.
As we read that novel, we learn how its protagonist during his lifetime gathered together the
materials and experience to be able to write the novel that we've just finished reading.
It's not far-fetched in fact to suggest that once we've gotten to the end of that book,
we really need to read it again because now we're ready to read the book that he was
ready to write at the end of the book that we just read.
And if you ever do that, you'll discover that the second reading is very different from
the first.
It's one of those little interesting things about postmodernism is that second readings
are always very, very different from the first.
We also saw this tendency in Borges in a slightly different way.
He thinks of the universe as a library made up of words on pages in books and the imaginary
planet of Tlaan invades the reality of our world via a book, The Encyclopedia of Tlaan.
And he writes a story about an author recreating Don Quixote word for word in the modern world.
Since postmodernists really don't think that we know enough about reality to base literature
on it, literature can become a kind of end in itself, a kind of subject for literature.
The way Beckett's plays in their use of games and allusions to the theater remind us that
they're self-contained, that they're self-referential, that they're closed off from the world outside.
And in fact, one of the kind of generalizations, this is an overgeneralization, but it's a
way that makes it easier to remember.
If we think of realist literature as being about the world out there and modernist literature
as being about the internal world, the world of the perceiver in here, then we might think
of postmodern literature as literature which is about itself.
Patricia Waugh has a really fine little book called Meta-Fiction, and she defines what
she calls meta-fiction as fiction which is about itself.
And you might find her explanations of this kind of literature useful in thinking about
the larger issues of postmodernism.
Anyway, Haroon and the Sea of Stories is richly intertextual in all of these ways.
There's no way that I can mention all of them here, but let me just suggest a few of the
ways in which this works in the book.
The names of the two central characters are Haroon and Rashid, and those two names are
taken from the legendary Caliph of Baghdad in many of the stories in 1001 Nights.
His name, the Caliph's name, was Haroon al-Rashid, which is simply broken in half to name both
the father and the son in this book.
And their last name, the father and son in this story is Caliphah, which means Caliph.
If we combine this with the number of references that we have to Sinbad the sailor in the book,
and Sinbad we remember is a featured set of stories within the 1001 Nights, and that
its central character is, like Shahar-e-Zad, is a storyteller, we get a lot of the ambience
of that famous collection of stories as part of the fabric of this one.
It's been pointed out by some people, and it's interesting to remember in terms of
this connection of the 1001 Nights and this book, that just as Shahar-e-Zad had to tell
a story every night to stay alive, Rashidi at the moment that he was writing this was
writing stories while trying to stay alive as well.
That's just a digression.
The title of this book, at least the part of it that's the sea of stories, refers to
the most famous collection of stories in India, the ocean of the rivers of story, which we
treated in lecture 12 and which we have mentioned very frequently ever since.
But as streams of different colored water flow from that source at the bottom of the
ocean of story, and then mingle together to make new stories, so Rashidi's book is full
of references to literature not just from India, not just from the East, but from all
kinds of other traditions.
We've seen that the story that Haroon drinks from the polluted sea of the stories is supposed
to be a version of Rapunzel, which we remember is a Grimbrother story.
The book also owes large debts to Lewis Carroll's Alice books, to Alice in Wonderland and through
the Looking Glass.
For example, the Walrus, who's the grand controller of Gup, is probably from Lewis Carroll, as
are the pages at court.
The pages at court in this book are literally pages, as in pages from a book, who behave
in ways that are comparable to the court personnel in Lewis Carroll, who are really playing cards
or chess pieces.
Like Alice, who wakes at the end of her adventure to find out that she's been asleep and dreaming,
Haroon awakes in the morning to discover that all of the adventures that he's had have
happened while he's been asleep.
And while Rashidi is clearly capable of a lot of dazzling wordplay on his own, some
of the wordplay here seems to be inspired by Lewis Carroll, whose Alice books are full
of this kind of pun.
One example that we've already sort of touched on, or we sort of went by without noting,
the Genie and the Hupoo, with whom Haroon travels to Kahani, are named If and But.
And I just, every time I run across that, in conjunction with each other, I keep thinking,
how many times does a child here, a parent, say something like, I want you in bed in ten
minutes, no If's ands or But's.
And here we have If and But.
I just keep thinking that, and the word that he must have had something like this in mind,
and since it's written for his son, his son might have even heard his own father say this.
The whole book is full of that kind of play with words.
The Wizard of Oz may have provided the flying monkeys of this book and the lions, and maybe
even some of the attributes of Khatum should, which were borrowed from the wizard, as well
as the nature of the armies that Chup sends out against Gup, which seemed very similar
to those armies that we run across in The Wizard of Oz.
When, and this one is really interesting for those of us who are just finishing a course
in literature, when one of the shadow warriors from Chup meets up with Harun and his companions,
he tries to speak.
But in Chup, there has been silence for so long that when he tries to speak, all he can
get out is a gurgle, which goes, go, go, go, and a cough, cough, cough, cough.
These of course are references to two of the grimest of the modern storytellers, who perhaps
like the poison in the Sea of Stories, keep wrecking the happy endings of stories.
The names of two of the fish in the story are Gupi and Baga, which Rushdie tells us
in an appendix are taken from two characters in an Indian movie.
And the walrus, this has been suggested, and it might actually work.
The walrus might actually derive some of his qualities and part of his story from the
Beatles song about a walrus.
He's assisted in the story by an egg man who also appears in the Beatles song, and so it's
quite possible that a few of the attributes of the walrus might even have been suggested
by the Beatles.
All of this, and so much that we don't have time for, that you'll notice yourself as you
read it, are part of what we mean by intertextuality.
It's a way of making literature out of other literature.
In ways that may also be slightly postmodernist, Rushdie keeps reminding us that of the ways
that all of these traditions and motifs are always blended together in new ways to make
something new out of something quite old.
Haroon wonders out loud at one point whether those separate streams, out at the bottom of
the ocean of the Sea of Stories, all of these separate narrative lines come out as different
colors.
And he wonders whether those separate streams and separate colors don't get mixed up and
disturb each other.
But the Hoopoo says any story worth its salt can handle a little shaking up.
Later on, Haroon is talking to a page, a page named Blabbermouth, who as it turns out is
really a girl disguised as a boy, so she can be a page.
And he watches her juggling, at which she is very good, and he thinks that perhaps his
father's storytelling, and maybe storytelling on its own, is also a kind of juggling.
As he says, you keep a lot of different tails in the air and juggle them up and down, and
if you're good, you don't drop any.
So maybe juggling is a kind of storytelling too.
That's one of the things this story does.
It takes a lot of pieces from a lot of different places, a lot of other books, a lot of different
traditions, and then it juggles them.
It keeps them all in the air at one time and it never does drop any.
A lot goes on in this little book much more than we have time for, in which you will discover
on your own, but let me finish with just what I think are two really important themes.
The first one is about the enemies of story in the novel.
Khatum should's opposition to stories is clear enough.
He's an enemy of speech, he's an enemy of language, he's an enemy of communication,
he's an enemy of stories, and he uses the harshest and the most tyrannical methods to
suppress them.
At the end of the book, Harun actually comes face to face with Khatum should, and he asks
him, why do you hate stories so much, since they can be so much fun?
And Khatum should says, the world, however, is not for fun, the world is for controlling.
And when Harun says, which world are you talking about?
Khatum should says, your world, my world, all worlds.
They are all there to be ruled, and inside every single story, inside every stream in
the ocean, there lies a world, a story world that I cannot rule at all, and that is the
reason why.
Khatum should wants absolute control over the minds of his subjects, and stories, as
he well knows, makes that far more difficult, since inside of stories people can be free
to live and to imagine alternate worlds.
The ability of stories to liberate people is demonstrated at the very end of this story.
Rashid and his father are both back in the valley of Kay, and Rashid now has his storytelling
abilities back, and his job for this day is to entertain people at a political rally for
a very corrupt and tyrannical political figure whose name is Snooty Butto.
When Rashid and Harun wake up in the morning after the big adventure, Rashid goes to the
rally.
He discovers that his gift for storytelling is back, and he tells the story of the novel
that we have just been reading up to the point that we've just read it.
In a way, I always think this is a kind of a little nod in the direction of one of Borges's
infinite regresses, because we always get to the point of this story, and then the story
starts over again.
When the story is over, and he has told the story of what has just happened to them the
night before, the crowd rises up and chases Snooty Butto out of town, pelting him with
garbage as he goes.
Stories can sometimes liberate human beings.
But Khatum should is not the only enemy of stories in the book.
When Harun meets him for the first time, he's in odd ways reminded of Mr. Sengupta, the
clerk who originally asked the question, what's the use of stories that aren't even
true?
That is, what the suggestion here is that if suppression can kill stories, so can the
Mr. Senguptas of the world, who, like Charles Dickens, Mr. Gradgrind, keeps saying things
like, life is not a storybook or joke shop.
All this fun will come to no good.
For a while, Harun's mother thinks this too, and so she runs off with Mr. Sengupta.
Her farewell note says that he has no imagination which is fine with her, at least he has his
feet on the ground.
And it's of course Mr. Sengupta, long before he meets Khatum should, who has ruined Rashid's
and Harun's life.
Harun learns during the course of his adventures the values of storytelling in our lives.
As he tells one of the generals of Gup when he volunteers for a very, very dangerous mission
in this war against Khatum should, he says, I don't like the idea that all the good stories
in the world will go wrong forever and ever or just die.
As I say, I only just started believing in the ocean, but maybe it isn't too late for
me to do my bit.
Which of course he does, and the sea of stories is saved.
And that brings us to our final point.
In this course, we've traced about 5,000 years of stories and storytelling, and over
5,000 years, stories have served an amazing variety of purposes.
Initially, storytellers were epic poets like Sin Lekhi Unini or Homer or Virgil, or the
creator of Beowulf who created heroes that embodied the best features of their cultures
and thus represented those cultures, making the storytellers in some ways official spokespersons
for their people and their cultures and their times.
In the middle of our course, we saw storytellers learning to tell stories that kept some separation
between the storyteller and the stories he or she is telling, leaving a space for us to
do our own work of reading and understanding.
And that period of storytelling gave us works like Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales and the
One Thousand One Nights and Cervantes Don Quixote.
By the time of the realists, storytellers had learned to evaporate themselves out of
their stories to give us what purport to be unmediated visions of the real world.
And there, in that movement, we had such writers as Flaubert, and Ibsen, and Rabindranath Tugor,
and Nagib Mahfuz.
Then in the 20th century, in an age of eroding certainties and subjectivity, storytellers
came to see that everybody's story is somebody's story, so that the storyteller has to be placed
inside the work itself.
And that movement gave us such works as Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights and Mark Twain's
Huckleberry Finn and Proust's Remembrance of Things Past and Cowabada's Snow Country
and Faulkner's As I Lay Dying.
Finally, at the end of history, or at least so far as it's gotten to this point, we have
storytellers who see their stories as self-contained art, detached from a reality that we can't
understand, and hence upon which we cannot base our values.
It's just where we happen to be when this course ends, but given the amazing versatility
and resourcefulness and creativity of storytellers down through the ages, we can be pretty sure
that there will always be stories and storytellers, however much they might surprise us with the
uses to which they put their stories in the future.
And since we're ending with the postmodernists, we'll let them have the last word in our course,
but before they give us this last word, I have two things that I would like to say about
the course.
The one is that throughout this entire course, I've been somewhat presumptuously calling
this the history of world literature.
It isn't that, it really isn't that.
It is a history of world literature.
A different instructor would have chosen different works, would have emphasized different themes,
would have found different connections between the works that were included.
This is just one of many, many, many possible versions of the history of world literature.
And that brings us to the second point, brings me to the second point that I want to make
about this course.
The people at the teaching company and I, when we were dreaming up this course, envisioned
this as an introductory course, which contains samples of a lot of different kinds of literature.
In a way, I've been thinking of it all the way through as a kind of Whitman sampler box
of candy.
I don't know if you remember those, it was a box of candy that had one piece of each
different kind that the company makes, and each one is identified inside the lid so that
when you find one you like, you can mark that one and you can later go back and buy a whole
box of them.
And so here, that's what we were kind of hoping would happen in our sampler, which contains
almost 60 different writers and books in different genres, from different cultures, from different
languages, from different times and places, and we were hoping that somewhere along the
way that you would find some that you'd like to know more about.
When that happens, and I hope that it did, and I hope that it does, you should know that
the teaching company has many other courses on many other of these writers, most of which
go into much more detail and spend more time on all of these writers than we had time for
here.
My own next venture is going to be a 24 lecture course that the teaching company offers on
James Joyce's Ulysses.
I have read the book, I have studied the book, I have even taught pieces of it, but I can't
imagine a better way to read Ulysses and to have an expert at my elbow the entire time
helping me through that book section by section.
So whatever piqued your interest in this course, Homer, Virgil, Dante, Chaucer, American literature,
Chinese thought, Indian epics, flow bear, Proust, women writers, poets, dramatists, Salman
Rushdie, whatever it was that struck your fancy, there's another course waiting for
you that will pick up where ours leaves off.
And so now, the last word from our post-modernists.
As Rushdie suggests in Haroon and the Sea of Stories, inside every story there's a
world that's not subject either to a tyrant like Khatum Shudd or by a Mr. Sen Gupta who
also wants to control us by convincing us that our imaginations don't count for anything.
Every time we read a story, we enter an alternate world, one which in some ways always sits
in judgment on the one we live in and which gives us alternate ways of feeling and thinking.
For us, it may never get beyond the level of imaginative recreation.
We think back in this course and we think about Emily Dickinson who lived a life of
the most straightened circumstances imaginable, but in her imagination she was a free woman
whose freedom could never be compromised by whatever pressures might be put upon her as
a descendant of important and respectable people in Amherst, Massachusetts in the late
19th century.
So that there is in one level, in one way, stories can always help us be imaginatively
free and that's important in itself.
But as this story also reminds us, we never know.
Once the imagination is awake, anything can happen.
In Haroon and the Sea of Stories, once the people of the Valley of Kay realize that the
Sea of Stories is pure and flowing again, they throw snooty buttocks and his cronies
out of town and they liberate themselves.
Gabriel Garcia Marquez said once that he learned how to write magic realism both from reading
Kafka and from his grandmother.
He said who told him fantastic stories when he was hurt or sad or had had a bad day.
As he said, the stories didn't change the world, but they did give him a place inside
himself to live and feel and see alternate possibilities and he said in part that he
wrote his own stories to do the same things for other people.
William Faulkner in his Nobel Prize acceptance speech said that the prevailing pessimism
of his day suggested that when the last night fell on earth, the last sound heard would
be the sound of one puny human voice talking.
Faulkner said in that acceptance speech that he refused to accept that, that he thought
that human beings could not only survive but could actually prevail.
He didn't quite say it this way and I hope he will forgive us for adapting his words,
but if we prevail it may be in part because we always will have storytellers who will
keep our inner worlds free and able to think of alternatives.
If there ever is a last puny human voice speaking on the last day of history, we hope that voice
will be telling a story.
So as long as we have storytellers, as long as we don't allow ourselves to be controlled
by the Khatum Shuds or the Mr. Sen Gupta's of the world, those storytellers can always
help us and help us to not to accept a world that's been created for us by tyrants and
manipulators, people who want something from us.
There will always be some innermost part of ourselves that will be free.
And that's how storytellers, drawing from the springs of story as old as the sea of
stories, juggling them and combining them into new stories which are now even more than
they ever have been before multicultural in all of their brilliant colors may help us
if Faulkner is right, not only to endure but perhaps even to prevail.
And so perhaps one of the greatest and most powerful sentences in all of history was and
remains.
Tell me a story.
We genuinely hope you have enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
