Lecture 10 The New Testament
In our last lecture, we looked at the Bhagavad Gita, which is one of the important religious
documents of the Hindus.
This time, we will look at the supreme religious document of the Christians, the New Testament.
As with the Bhagavad Gita, the focus of this lecture, because the focus of the book, will
be on the relationship between God and human beings.
The Christian New Testament was written in the first century in Greek, which had been
the international language around the Mediterranean ever since the conquest of Alexander the
Great.
Jesus and his disciples would have spoken Aramaic, but clearly Paul, who wrote the first
books of the New Testament, and the other writers of the New Testament, New Greek, which
allowed the book to be disseminated beyond the borders of the world where the events
transpired.
For the Christians, this is the New Covenant, which either transcends or fulfills the old
one, which was made with the Hebrews.
At the heart of the New Covenant is the idea that Jesus died a blameless death for the
sins of the world, thus undoing the primal sin of Adam and Eve, and reconciling gods
and humans.
His resurrection both validates that sacrifice and establishes a pattern which Christians
can participate in.
By believing in Jesus as the Son of God, Christians believe that they can appropriate
his death and his resurrection.
And in addition, the New Covenant this time is made not just with the Hebrews, but with
all people.
All peoples from here on are God's chosen people.
This was, at any rate, the message of Paul, the first Christian missionary, the first
great Christian missionary whose journeys are reported in the book of Acts, and who
wrote what most scholars think are the oldest books in the Old Testament, the letters to
various churches dating from the 50s sometime, which would have put them about 20 some years
after Jesus' death.
Paul was writing to Gentiles, that is to non-Jews, who would not have known the Old
Testament, and so they would not have known what to do with the prophetic testimonies
of the coming Messiah that are given in the Old Testament.
So Paul explains Jesus' death and resurrection in terms of mystery religions, which had sprung
up all over the Mediterranean world by the first century.
The mystery religions were personal alternatives to the kind of official and public state religion
of Rome.
Official religion in Rome was a kind of function of the state, and to participate in the official
religion was a kind of duty.
Robert Payne, in a book called Ancient Rome, said, the idea of a Roman state religion was
to observe the proper rituals so that you would get the gods to bless the state, preserve
the peace, and that made religious duty something like paying one's taxes or having children
or fighting in the military.
It was probably no more or less important than any of those other things.
And the Roman religion also, as we've seen in the past, offered very little by way of
moral code.
We've seen that in the Homeric epics and in the Aeneid.
The gods pretty much do their own thing, and the humans have to invent their own morality,
and there is no promise of personal immortality in that state religion.
So these mystery cults sprang up all over the Mediterranean world dedicated to various
gods, to Isis, to Dionysus, to Mithra.
They were called mysteries because their rites were secret, were available only to initiates.
The most popular one in Rome was dedicated to the god Mithra, who had been imported from
Persia, and that Mithraism involved some ritual.
It was killing a bull and then bathing in the blood of the bull, and in some of these
mystery religions there was also a sacred meal, although there were a lot of variations
from one religion to another.
But all of these mystery religions appealed to the individual, not to the state.
And all of them promised that by participating in the death and rebirth of a god who died
and was reborn annually, the individual could achieve immortality.
So the people who wrote Paul's, read Paul's letters, would have known about these cults.
Perhaps some of them might have even belonged to one or more of them, so that Paul could
use that knowledge to declare that Jesus was the fulfillment of all other mystery religions.
For Paul, Jesus fulfilled on their mystery religions in that he was a god who wasn't
from mythology, who didn't die annually, but who had actually died once at a particular
point in history, and who had died once and for all, and whose death and resurrection via
belief and participation in the rituals of baptism and the sacred meal Leucharist could
promise immortality to the individual.
Christianity, thanks to its roots in Judaism, also came with a well-developed morality,
which was useful because it helped decide what you should do in the hustle and bustle
in the early and burly of everyday life.
Anyway, because of his emphasis, Paul was less interested in Jesus' life and teachings
than in his death and resurrection.
That was the important thing for Paul.
If you're interested in Pauline theology, probably the best place to study it is the
book of Romans.
Paul had not founded the church in Rome, and so he was being very careful when he explained
to the Romans how belief in Jesus worked and what it meant.
In some of the other letters, he had actually founded the churches, and he could assume
that people remember what he told them and so that he could take a shortcut here and
there.
Romans is probably the most complete and explicit statement of his theology.
The Gospels were written perhaps 10 or 15 or 20 years later than Paul's letters.
The Gospel of John, it's thought, may have been written much, much later, perhaps at
the end of the first century, even in the first decade of the second century.
They add to Paul's account of Jesus' death and resurrection a lot of information about
his life and teachings.
As to why they were written, when they were written, a current theory has it that most
of the followers of Jesus, including Paul, seemed to have believed that the Second Coming
was going to happen very quickly after Jesus left.
Given that, there was really no reason to write things down, but by the time you got
to the 60s, some of the people who remembered Jesus who had been his disciples were actually
beginning to die, and then it seemed important to write this down so that you could pass
it on to the next generation.
The Gospels, like Paul's letters, place a great importance on the death and resurrection,
but they also have a lot more material about his life and his teachings.
The oldest and the shortest Gospel is Mark's.
Matthew and Luke seem to have used Mark as their source, but they seem to have had other
sources since they include material, it's not in Mark, and Luke includes material which
isn't in either Mark or Matthew, so he seems to have had access to another source or series
of sources than the other ones.
These three, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, are called the Synoptic Gospels since their accounts
while they differ in some detail can be reconciled with each other.
You can make a kind of coherent story out of them.
Matthew and Luke have slightly different versions of the Christmas story.
All three of them tell of the baptism by John the Baptist, and then several years of ministry
and teaching and miracles, and all three of them then tell of the trial and the crucifixion
and the resurrection.
Luke has the ascension into heaven.
Mark simply says that he was received back into heaven, and Matthew ends with a great
commission to go and make disciples of all nations.
John's Gospel, the fourth one, is very different from the other three.
He shares only a few events with the others, although the trial and the crucifixion and
the resurrection is essentially the same in John as it is in the other three, and he includes
a lot of material that the others don't use.
He's also deeply indebted to Greek philosophy in the way that the other three Synoptic Gospels
are not.
That very famous first sentence, that great resonant sentence in the first sentence of
the Gospel of John says, in the beginning was the word N-R-K-H-Logos, and Logos came,
that word came with a huge resonance from Greek philosophical discourse, so John already
announces in that very first sentence that this is going to be a book which is going
to embed the life and teachings of Jesus into a Greek philosophical context.
In John, Jesus talks about himself a lot more than he does in the other Gospels.
Typically, he starts a long monologue by saying something like, I am the good shepherd, I
am the light of the world, I am the vine, I am the door.
Humphrey Carpenter says in his book about Jesus that the Gospel of John is really more
a meditation or spiritual reflection on Jesus than it is a history.
Christian theology actually owes more to John than it does to the other Gospels, but it
contains less about the historical figure than the other three do, and so for the rest
of this, our will to sort of set John aside regretfully, but to focus on the Synoptic
Gospels.
The differences in the Synoptic Gospels can probably be accounted for by their different
aims and audiences.
Mark was designed probably to get as much information about Jesus into writing as they
could before those who remembered him died.
The central question that Mark asks throughout his Gospel is about Jesus' identity.
Who was this Jesus?
Who is this guy?
And its answer is that he was the awaited Jewish Messiah.
In the very first verse of Mark, Mark says that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.
Not only does he say he's the Son of God, but he says he's the Christ.
The Greek word is Christos, and Christos is the Greek word for Messiah, so that from
the very outset, the very first sentence, Mark said, who was this man?
He was the Messiah.
He was the Son of God.
And in Mark, when the Jewish High Priest at Jesus' trial, when he asks him who he is,
he said, are you the Christ?
Jesus simply says, I am.
Matthew's Gospel was written for fellow Jews, and his intent is to show that Jesus fulfilled
all the Old Testament prophecies about the Messiah, or at least as many of the prophecies
as Matthew could work in.
So his Gospel is dense with allusions to the Old Testament.
He reminds us a lot of the way Virgil uses Homer, except that Virgil always lets us figure
them out for ourselves, whereas Matthew almost always tips us off that he's quoting something
from the Old Testament.
He usually says so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, or as it is written, or some
such thing, to tell us that he's now making a reference to the Old Testament.
When we read Matthew, we really do need a reference Bible, because all of those added
allusions from the Old Testament give additional resonances for the things that Matthew says
about Jesus in the New Testament.
I just picked a chapter more or less at random.
I wound up with the 26th chapter of Matthew.
In the last 61 verses of the chapter, the last 61 verses of the 26th chapter of Matthew,
there are, as I counted them, 25 references to the Old Testament.
So this is very densely rich with allusions to the Old Testament.
Matthew also seems to include some narrative details that are designed to call his Jewish
reader's attention to parts of the Old Testament story.
He's the only one, for example, who has Mary and Joseph taking the baby Jesus down into
Egypt when, according to the story, Herod was killing off all the children, all the
male children under two years old, in the hopes of killing this Jesus, whom he had heard
was going to be a king, and he was worried about the threat that might make to his own
kingship.
And of course, that trip into Egypt sets up some interesting parallels between Jesus
and Moses, and makes Moses into a kind of type of Jesus.
Moses was the one who was going to lead the children of Israel out of Egypt, and the trip
to Egypt sets up that kind of resonance.
It also recalls the story about Herod killing all the children under two years old, reminds
us that part of that Moses story is that the Pharaoh had ordered the killing of all the
firstborn sons of the captive of Hebrews.
Matthew also makes a point of noting that Jesus spent 40 days and 40 nights in the wilderness,
which perhaps is designed to recall the 40 years of wandering in the wilderness before
entering into the Promised Land with Moses.
And so, anyway, the target audiences therefore may have had a great deal to do with why and
how the books get written, and some of the differences between them.
It isn't the disagreeing about details, it's just that they're focusing on and emphasizing
different things.
Some things the synoptics do agree on, and one of them is that Jesus preferred to teach
in parables, which answer questions not discursively and directly, but usually with a story.
It's another one of the ways that John is kind of the odd gospel out.
His Jesus doesn't use parables, he uses metaphors, and he usually speaks in long kind of discursive
monologues explaining his role as ambassador from God.
In the synoptics, you have a lot of good stories which start out, Jesus will start out by saying,
the kingdom of heaven is like a man who, and then the parable gets launched.
Mark says that Jesus taught many things in parables, in fact, Mark says he hardly taught
anything outside of parables, and then Mark, when he says that, has Jesus tell the parable
of the sower of a candle hidden under a bushel and of the mustard seed to sort of illustrate
his point.
After he has Jesus tell these stories, Mark says this, with many such parables, he spoke
the word to them as they were able to hear it.
He did not speak to them except in parables, but he explained everything in private to
his disciples.
That's been a troublesome little passage down through history.
Parables as we've seen in those of Zhuang Zhou are more resonant than discursive answers,
that is, they require a little more from the hearers, and sometimes they're capable of
more than one understanding.
Mark's comment that Jesus told parables in public, and that people heard them and understood
them as they were able, is no doubt true.
But then he says that Jesus took his disciples aside and told them privately what the real
meaning was of these parables, and of course that's given rise to a huge long tradition,
that there has always been some kind of secret group that understands these parables, who
knows these truths, that were not ever made public.
And there have been groups down through all of history that have run parallel with the
history of the Christian church, in fact.
They've included over time the Gnostics and the New Testament, and perhaps the Knights
Templar, all the way down to that cult in Dan Brown's Da Vinci Code, which also believes
that they have a secret that nobody else knows about.
Fortunately, for us, most of Jesus' parables do not seem to need secret interpretation.
Many of them, like the prodigal son, or the man who loses one sheep out of a hundred,
or the woman who loses one piece of silver out of ten, are designed simply to show God's
concern for the lowly, the lost, the exception, the outcast.
The prodigal son is a famous story, and we all know this one.
It's about the younger son who says, since I'm going to get half of this, you're a
state anyway, why don't I take it now?
And so his father gives him his half of the inheritance, and he takes it off and he
wastes it.
He goes through it really fast, and when he is totally hungry and bedraggled and worked
over and he's getting through and he's broke, he comes struggling home and he says to his
dad, could I just have a job?
Give me the lowliest, crummiest job on the farm and I'll take it.
And the father is so happy that he invites all his neighbors, kills the fatted calf,
and throws a great party for this younger son.
The older son, in the meantime, has been staying home and has done all the work on the farm,
has been a good loyal son, and he's a little miffed because he says, I've been home, I've
been doing this work, I've been doing your duty, I've never disobeyed you, I haven't
gone through any of your inheritance, and you've never thrown a big party for me.
And the father's answer is this, he says, but we had to celebrate and rejoice because
this brother of yours was dead and has come to life, he was lost and has been found.
Then Jesus immediately later tells another story, which has the same point, a man has
a hundred sheep, and one of them gets lost, and so he leaves the 99, the majority of the
flock, he leaves them in the wilderness to fend for themselves while he goes out looking
for that one sheep, and when he finds the one sheep and brings it back, he too invites
all his neighbors in and they have a party.
A woman who has ten pieces of silver loses a piece of silver, and she spends a lot of
time letting the other ten pieces of silver take care of themselves while she goes out
with candle and broom until she finds that piece of silver, and when she finds it, she
invites her neighbors in and they have a big party.
The point is, after all of these parables, all of which makes sort of the same point,
Jesus explains to all of us the meaning of those parables, he says, just so I tell you,
there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repents.
In our course, this is a strikingly new idea, since in most of the theologies that we've
looked at, God or the God's favor, the strong, the beautiful, the successful, they favor
those people who are most like them.
When Achilles withdraws from battle, he gets his mother, who's a goddess, Thetis, to get
Zeus to agree to help the Trojans while he's sitting out the battle.
Zeus does, but we have the feeling that his help is not superfluous, but at least it's
bringing coals to Newcastle, because with Achilles sitting out, the Acans are going
to get defeated anyway.
So this is simply validating something that's already going to happen.
Odysseus gets help from Athena on the way home, because he really doesn't need it, because
he's going to get home without her anyway, and even more tellingly, perhaps, when two
heroes face off in Homer, they have equal weapons, they have equal skill, they live
by the same code, when they face off, one of them goes away covered in glory, the other
dies.
Homer almost always assumes that the one who won, God helped from a God, or goddess.
What that means is that once again, it reaffirms this connection between success and the care
of the gods.
The gods take care of the successful, the gods are on the sides of the successful.
In Roman stories, I think that we have seen in the Aeneid, tend to reinforce this same
pattern.
The gods care for the successful, the successful are successful because the gods help them.
We have had some exceptions to this in this course so far.
The Hebrew Bible has some really remarkable exceptions.
Yahweh will take someone like Moses and turn him into the greatest hero in Hebrew history.
Moses, we remember at the beginning of the story, says, don't pick me, I can't, I stammer.
I'm not going to be able to stand up and talk to Pharaoh, and God says, you just do what
I tell you to, and I'll be with you, and you won't stammer when you talk to Pharaoh.
David is outtending sheep, remember in the story, when Samuel comes out to pick the next
king of Israel, David is outtending sheep, and he's the youngest, the least likely, so
God has been able to take unlikely people in the Old Testament and turn them into great
heroes.
And there is a concern for the poor in the Old Testament and runs all the way through
the Old Testament.
Hosea and Amos, for example, spend most of their lives denouncing Israel for not taking
better care of the poor.
And in the Bhagavad Gita, we've had at least theoretically the possibility for this to
happen.
When we remember, Krishna says to Arjuna, he says, anybody who dedicates his actions
to me is going to be dear to me, and it doesn't make any difference who that is, anybody from
any cast, if you sacrifice the actions of your life to me, I will love you.
However, even with those exceptions in mind, the idea that God is especially concerned
for the lost, the straggler, the ordinary, is underscored by all of the beatitudes in
the Sermon on the Mount.
Who are the blessed?
Who are those who are going to inherit the kingdom of heaven?
They turn out to be the poor in spirit, those who mourn, the meek, the merciful, the pure
in heart, the peacemakers, those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, and those
who are persecuted for righteousness' sake.
How many of those values would Achilles have endorsed?
How many would Odysseus have endorsed?
Now we have moved into a world in which it would seem as though ordinary values are being,
in a revolutionary way, are being reversed.
Typically, when Matthew reports these beatitudes in the New Testament, he sees them as a fulfillment
of an Old Testament prophecy from the book of Isaiah, and this is the passage that he
has in mind.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me because the Lord has anointed me.
He has sent me to bring good news to the oppressed, to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and to release to the prisoners, to proclaim the year of the
Lord's favor and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all who mourn.
And what is clearly being announced here in both the Isaiah passage and the Matthew passage
through the Sermon on the Mount is a radically new age in which the accepted values of the
world are going to be turned upside down.
The new favored man of God is going to be the poor, who is uncompromised by wealth and
worldly accommodations, and whose sole concern is for righteousness.
This new emphasis has powerful implications for the future of literature.
Eric Auerbach in his great book by Maces argues that there had never been a serious treatment
of common people in literature.
If they appear at all, they appear, if common people appear at all, they're treated comically.
Thercides is treated that way in the Iliad.
He's the only commoner who appears in that whole poem.
The messengers in Greek tragedy are treated as sometimes as buffoons, people who make
mistakes, who are kind of comic figures.
All of the characters in Aristophanes are treated as comic characters.
So that what Auerbach says is there is nothing in all of classical literature like the story
of the denial of Jesus by Peter in Matthew in the New Testament.
The story is that Jesus, before he's betrayed, tells Peter that before the cockroach you
will deny me three times, Peter says, no, of course, I won't, I'll go to the death
with you.
And then in the bustle of that night and the scary things that happen, and Jesus gets
hauled into trial, and all kinds of terrible things happen, and Peter, before he quite
realizes even what he's doing, hears himself say three times, I do not even know the man,
and then the cock crows.
And the story tells us Peter went out and wept bitterly.
As Auerbach says, nothing like this has ever happened in literature before.
The two passages that Auerbach spends talking about this passage go like this.
A scene like Peter's denial fits into no antique genre.
It is too serious for comedy, too contemporary and every day for tragedy, politically too
insignificant for history, and the form which was given it is one of such immediacy that
its like does not exist in the literature of antiquity.
A few pages later he adds this, the story of Peter completely destroys the aesthetics
of the separation of styles.
It engenders a new elevated style, which does not scorn everyday life, and which is ready
to absorb the sensorily realistic, even the ugly, the undignified, the physically base.
Or if one prefers to have it the other way around, a new sermo humilis is born, a low
style, such as would properly only be applicable to comedy, but which now reaches out far beyond
its original domain and encroaches upon the deepest and the highest, the sublime and the
eternal.
This means, as Auerbach points out, that after the New Testament it will be possible in literature
to treat fishermen and prostitutes and tax collectors and the sick and the paralyzed and
the lame and the lost and the earring, and people like Peter who aim way too high and
then fall as far as it's possible for someone to fall, and to treat them all in serious literature,
to treat them as serious characters in serious literature.
In literary terms this may be the greatest revolution brought about by the New Testament.
It isn't going to happen overnight.
It will be quite a while yet before kings and aristocrats are replaced as the subject
of literature and replaced by ordinary people, but the seeds of that serious revolution in
literature are planted here, and we will see them bear fruit down through the rest of our
course.
In our next program, our next lecture, we will be back one more time to epics and heroes.
This time we will be looking at the Germanic epic Paul and Beowulf, brought to England
by those same peoples, those Germanic northern peoples who as the Roman Empire was collapsing
poured over the old borders of the Roman Empire, poured into Europe and became the modern Europeans.
As we will see, there are going to be many, many similarities between the Germanic epic
and the epics we have looked at in the past.
There will be many, many serious similarities between the character of Beowulf and the protagonist
of the epic poems we've done in the past, but, and this is a really important but, and
it's appropriate that it comes when it does, this will be the first epic poem that we will
do in this course, which will have been touched by Christianity.
One of the things that everyone notices about this poem is that its origins are in a purely
pagan world, but by the time it gets written down, it is written down by someone who is
a Christian, which means that there are bits and pieces of Christian thought that get into
this poem in a way that has been very, very troublesome for people down through history.
The first question is, what happens to an epic like Beowulf when it becomes Christianized?
Is it in fact Christianized?
Does, does the, do the bits of Christianity that show up in here, do they significantly
change the poem in enough ways that we have to think about it in different kinds of terms?
What we'll do when we look at Beowulf next time is we're actually going to consider that
question and we're going to ask the question, if you take a poem, take the Iliad and the
Odyssey, if you took the Iliad and the Odyssey, for example, and then added bits of Christian
theology around the edges, what would happen to it?
What would happen to the epic hero?
What would become of the ethos of the poem?
What would happen to all of the heroic codes that these poems are about?
That's sort of what happens with Beowulf.
And in our next lecture, we'll ask the question about, first of all, identifying those bits
of Christianity that show up for the first time in history in an epic poem.
And then secondly, to ask, given those bits of Christianity in that poem, what do they
do to the poem?
What do we do with them in the poem and how do we read that poem with or without the Christianity
which has been now added to it?
That's our next lecture.
