Hello and welcome to Factually, I'm Adam Conover.
Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
I am so excited for today's episode.
We have on the show today a guest I have wanted to have
on the show for years.
And frankly, one of the people I most admire
working on the internet or really in all of media today.
I first saw a video from the YouTube channel ContraPoints
five years ago in my trailer while I was working
on one of the last seasons of Adam Ruins Everything.
And this video blew me the fuck away.
It was brilliant, it was fiendishly funny, it was stylish,
and it was unlike anything I had ever seen
on the platform before.
In just 30 minutes, Natalie Wynn, the host of ContraPoints,
explained the right-wing psychologist
and self-help guru, Jordan Peterson,
better than any piece of media I had ever come across.
And from then on, every single one of her videos
became a must-watch for me.
What is so impressive about Natalie's work
is that she doesn't just repackage other people's thoughts
like so many people do on YouTube.
No, she delivers original philosophical insight
and analysis that is genuinely new.
But rather than deliver that in a lecture room or a book,
she puts them into video essays on YouTube
that are watched massively.
Her work has won her nearly 1.8 million YouTube followers
and she has also won a Peabody Award.
Her work is genuinely a new form of media,
serious philosophical work watched by millions
on the biggest platform imaginable.
And I could not be more excited to have her
on the show today.
But before we get into it, I just wanna remind you
that if you wanna support this show
and all of the fascinating conversations
we bring you every single week,
you can do so on Patreon.
Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad-free.
For 15 bucks a month, I will read your name in the credits.
We got a lot of other great community perks as well.
And if you like stand-up comedy,
I just wanna remind you, you can come see me on the road.
Head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates.
And now let's get to my interview
with the writer, thinker, philosopher and YouTuber,
Natalie Nguyen, also known as ContraPoints.
Natalie, thank you so much for being on the show.
I'm thrilled to have you.
Thank you so much.
I am very happy to be here.
I've wanted to have you on the show for years.
You're probably one of my favorite,
what do I call you, internet public intellectuals?
Like, what do you call yourself?
I guess I worry that public intellectuals
sets me up for failure.
But I'm gonna call myself a YouTuber
because why get more complicated than it needs to be?
But yeah, I make video essays on YouTube.
I've been doing that since 2016 or so.
And cover a lot of topics from politics to sexuality
to psychology, I guess I'll even cover.
So it's pretty broad, I guess,
in terms of what I'll go into.
But yeah, the channel is called ContraPoints.
And I feel like we have something in common in that.
I have said many times on this show,
I intended to go to grad school for philosophy.
I never did.
And it's been a thorn in my side ever since.
I have a shameful bachelor's.
You went for a number of years and left.
And now both here we are on YouTube,
trying to maybe use some of these ideas
in the public sphere,
but you do it on such an incredibly deep level.
Your new video, which has the title Twilight,
that's the entire title.
But in the video, you cover everything
from the nature of desire to sadomasochism,
to radical feminism,
and you end with this incredible insight
about the nature of the masculine and feminine,
and then containing each other.
And watching it, I'm like,
having every single sentence in the video,
it gives me a little mind explosion
of a new insider thought
that I'm processing with everything else.
They're incredibly dense.
It's just such an amazing work
to go all the way from Twilight to that big concept.
Like, how do you even begin to put together
a video like that?
What's the first germ of it?
Well, I think with this video,
I knew I wanted to make a video about sexuality,
but to do that on YouTube,
I was in search of a PG-13 framing device.
And so Twilight kind of became,
I was like, okay, if I want to talk about sexuality,
but I want to do it on YouTube,
the community guidelines will just love
if this video is about Twilight
instead of being about something more explicit.
So, and also, I've been alive long enough
to have sat through, at this point,
20 years of discourse about the Twilight series.
So it's something that I'm very familiar with.
A lot of the complicated conversations
people have about sexuality
have been sort of magnetized to this topic in particular.
So, you know, a lot of the things
that people worry about with Twilight,
the kind of power dynamics and the sort of,
I guess, people worry about misogyny and all this,
I guess, stuff I wanted to go into in the video.
And so for me, Twilight was just like,
I just felt this was like the right case study
that I could attach all these wider issues to.
That's amazing.
And one of the things that's amazing about this video
is it has almost four million views on YouTube.
And, you know, some of your previous works,
you know, say you did a video about Jordan Peterson, right?
That's a wonderful, I think, philosophical,
that's the first thing I ever saw of yours.
And it was really influenced the way that I think about
that guy and that entire movement in, you know,
pseudo-intellectual circles.
But, you know, that's a hot topic for the algorithm, right?
Jordan Peterson does well.
Twilight, if the words Jordan Peterson
are in the title of the video, it'll do well.
This video is about a, you know,
a couple decade old romance series.
And the topic ranges so widely
from the nature of romance fiction all the way to, you know,
the nature of desire and sexuality itself.
And people are watching it in such huge numbers.
What do you, like, attribute that to?
Because, again, it's a really dense,
like truly philosophical work.
Well, I think people are curious about these topics.
And I feel like a lot of times the discourse about them
is of a pretty low quality.
So I feel like this is another thing
that attracted me to this topic is that I felt like,
I feel like that there's stuff
that's not being said about this that I can say.
So, you know, I try to look for something like that
when I'm deciding on a video topic.
If it's something that I feel like a lot of people
are covering really, really well, then I'll, like,
well, I don't know if I can add anything to this,
but with this, I felt like I had something to add.
And yeah, I mean, I guess one reason
I decided to make this video is as a LGBT person,
I feel like, well, I'm a trans woman.
I'm not LGBT and T, but you know what I mean.
I feel like people like me were very frequently
asked these days to, like, provide, like,
to explain ourselves, like, explain your sexuality.
Why are people gay? Why are people trans?
Why are people, and, like, I've spent some time on YouTube
trying to do exactly that.
But I feel like, what I came to realize is, like,
we're trying to understand,
is people are trying to understand why people are gay
or why people are trans.
And no one even really understands
heterosexuality very well yet.
So it's like, why are we trying to do calculus
before we've figured out arithmetic?
So, in a way, I think the, which,
finally, I want to do a video about heterosexuality, right?
It's like, before we start talking,
before we get really complicated with this
and start talking about the sexuality of, you know,
trans people, like, why don't we figure out how, like,
this, the, you know, a Mormon housewife's sexuality works
in the case of Stephanie Meyer, right?
Because I feel like we haven't even kind of cracked that code.
So I guess I felt this was, like,
maybe a better introductory place for people
to start thinking about sexuality
than for, like, demanding that marginalized people
explain themselves to, to people who kind of
don't even have the tools needed to,
to understand it in the first place.
That's so funny.
Well, it's such a funny flip of the request too.
Hey, a queer person, explain yourselves to us.
Well, no, how about me, a queer person,
ask what the hell is up with you people?
Yeah, exactly.
What is up with, your media is really weird.
I mean, because heterosexuality, I mean, sometimes,
you know, people might frame heterosexuality
as like boring or vanilla or whatever.
I mean, heterosexuality is actually extremely complicated,
right?
And you notice this, like, and it's also
something that I think most queer people,
we, you know, we all kind of grew up
being taught how to do heterosexuality in a way, right?
So it's kind of the default that all of us are sort of used to.
And most, I think, a lot of gay people, even,
like, we kind of form our sexuality in response
to heterosexuality, in a sense, or sort of as a modification
of tropes that come from heterosexuality.
So I don't know whether you're taught.
Obviously, this all gets pretty controversial
with in-community stuff that we probably
don't want to get into here.
But, you know, with terms like top and bottom
and or butch and femme, like, these terms are not
the same as heterosexuality, right?
These dynamics are not literally heterosexuality,
but they obviously have some kind of resemblance
to the kind of tropes that we sort of expect
of a, you know, a kind of dominant active man
and sort of submissive, maybe passive woman.
That's kind of the stereotype of heterosexuality.
It certainly comes up a lot in romance fiction,
including Twilight.
So I felt like that was kind of an interesting place
to start with discussing sexuality as just like,
well, let's look at what's considered to be normal
and see how actually complicated and strange
the normal thing is.
Well, I found that fascinating because I am heterosexual,
or at least mostly heterosexual.
We're all a work in progress.
But, you know, heterosexuality, also all of those norms
and tropes were like imposed upon me.
And sometimes, you know, I found myself,
especially in the part of life I am now going like,
wait, what are those things?
What, you know, are those part of me?
Or were those things that were imposed, right?
And so hearing you unpack desire, the nature of desire,
submission, dominance, masculinity, femininity
is incredibly fascinating.
You have this concept that you keep going back to DHSM
in the video over and over again.
Can you tell us a little bit about what you mean by that?
And for folks who haven't seen the video, go watch it.
But, you know, I'd love to give them a little bit of taste
of what the themes are here.
Sure, yeah.
DHSM is an acronym that I made up
for default heterosexual satomasticism.
I was thinking of like BDSM and then I'll just make a,
you know, corresponding acronym that describes what I see
as the kind of assumed satomasticism
of normative heterosexuality.
So, you know, we're all familiar with,
with like heterosexual dating rituals, basically,
where it's kind of expected that a man is going
to take initiative and that a man is going to be more dominant
is going to kind of, you know, lead in the dance of dating,
right, essentially, and also of sex.
And I think that there's a whole complicated series
of power dynamics baked into these assumptions,
where it's assumed that sort of, you know,
you could take things like voyeurism, exhibitionism.
It's assumed that men like to look
and women like to be looked at.
It's assumed that, you know, men pursue
and women are pursued.
All kinds of dynamics like that, you know,
in the video I have a whole list of these,
these binaries that basically are included.
But I guess one of the questions is like, well,
why is this, is this the, is this the project,
basically, of patriarchal conditioning?
Or is there something inherent to human sexuality itself
that involves these binaries?
And so all of that stuff that I try to explore.
And explore through the lens of Twilight,
where all of these things are present,
which is part of the controversy about Twilight, right?
That it's putatively for children,
or at least for young adults.
And yet it has these themes of dominant submission,
sadism, masochism, which feel like really inherently sexual
and confusing to a lot of people,
especially when it's like in the form
of very popular fiction.
And watching it, I literally just watched Twilight
last night, unrelatedly, it was not quite researched,
but it certainly served well as it.
And yeah, I mean, that stuff is in the movie
and in a very like stark, almost blunt way.
Yeah, I think it's interesting how,
because heterosexuality is considered so socially normal,
like you can get away with like a shocking amount
of like weird sex stuff in like young adult media,
as long as you keep it as you keep it hetero, right?
And Twilight definitely pushes that as far as it can.
Obviously, like there was a decade ago,
a controversy erupted around the Twilight fan fiction,
50 Shades of Grey, which is explicitly
a kind of sadomasochistic romance novel
where, I mean, what E.L. James, the author of 50 Shades did,
basically is just pick up on all those themes
that are already present in Twilight
and kind of make explicit what was implicit in Twilight.
So in Twilight, the plot is about a male vampire, Edward,
who falls in love with a human girl, Bella,
and obviously part of the kind of sex appeal of vampires
does have to do with this hierarchical dominance, right?
The vampire is usually old,
is usually there's undertones of violence
with the fangs and blood drinking.
Rich lives in a big castle, right?
Wearing cloaks everywhere, wealthy man.
Yeah, it's inherently associated with like,
there's a few working class vampires, Lost Boys,
but usually it's, we're talking about an aristocrat, right?
Yeah.
Someone who's sort of overwhelmingly powerful
and that seems to be intertwined with why people find
something sort of sexually enticing about vampires.
It is the danger and the power itself.
So the question is like, isn't it kind of disturbing, right?
That like, we have millions of teenage readers
who seem to be so attracted to this
and like, what kind of message is this sending?
Well, before we can even answer that,
you have to unpack why this kind of thing is appealing
to so many people in the first place.
And why do you think it's appealing
to so many people in the first place?
I think for a bunch of different reasons.
I definitely, I'm certainly not dismissive
of the feminist arguments about this,
which are that, you know, if you are a woman or a girl
and you're raised in this society,
where you're kind of conditioned almost to like romanticize
a certain type of dynamic between men and women,
that sort of is the result of a long history
of men having social power over women.
So even in historical romance novels,
like Pride and Prejudice, right?
In Pride and Prejudice, you have Darcy,
this like extremely wealthy man who's,
at first he's kind of an asshole,
and then Elizabeth who needs, you know,
because of the situation of her family, she needs the money,
but she also wants a marriage of love.
And so in Pride and Prejudice, you know,
the appeal of this power dynamic seems to derive in part
from like the economics of the situation,
where it's like as a woman in the early 19th century,
you kind of have your economic fate
is intertwined with who you marry.
So it's not just, it's not,
it's hard to look at something like that
and be like, oh, this is just nature, right?
Women are just naturally attracted to powerful men.
It's like, well, women have always been put
in these situations where they kind of need men
to provide for them.
So yeah, under those conditions, obviously,
most women are going to do the rationally self-interested thing
of pursuing a man who is the only plausible route
that they have to economic stability
and to any kind of power, right?
But I also think that, you know,
the kind of SM, pseudo-masochistic dynamic
has something to it that kind of transcends
just the economic appeal, which is,
I think that there's something about sexuality,
about desire in general,
that kind of likes sort of barriers and overcoming,
you know, overcoming barriers.
So I think one thing that I think about a lot with Twilight
is, you know, when you have this like hunter and prey,
predator-prey dynamic, I think that, you know,
poetry is often described as love, as like a hunt, right?
And there's, you know, it's a motif
that goes like way back into the ancient world.
You know, you can think of myths like Hades and Persephone,
where, you know, you have, I think that when you,
desire often feels like pursuit, right?
And so I think that the metaphor goes kind of,
deeper than just economic imbalance.
I do think that the reason why it's so disproportionately
seems to be, you know, when people create romantic fantasies,
the reason why it's usually a man pursuing a woman,
I think that is largely social and economic,
but I think that someone pursuing someone,
that I think goes deeper, yeah.
Right, there's a deeper like pattern
in human sexuality or psychology or behavior
that needs some kind of disparity,
some kind of block in the way.
I mean, you talk in the video about how, you know,
desire, you can specifically only desire something
that you do not have, that once you acquire it,
the desire dissipates to some degree,
that that's the nature of it.
And so you need those impediments.
You also say that, I just wrote down this quote
from the video, equality like wisdom is not exciting.
That if Twilight had been a, there's a power dynamic,
oh no, we don't want power dynamics
in our real relationships, one might say.
But a perfectly equal relationship
between Edward and Bella would not be necessarily
worth writing a book about,
nor might it be sexy to encounter in real life,
like that sort of perfect, what do you,
could you expand on that?
Well, I think that you could certainly make,
you know, a egalitarian relationship exciting in fiction,
but the way that you do that was be to put
other kinds of barriers in the way.
So, I mean, I guess you, you look at something
like Romeo and Juliet was an obvious example
where Romeo and Juliet are, I guess,
more or less socially equal, although, you know,
as like medieval man and woman, not really,
but still like there's not quite the class element
that there is in, say, Pride and Prejudice or in Twilight,
but as a result of that, other barriers
have to be involved, right?
Their families are feuding and that as this dangerous,
almost like in this case, deadly element to their romance,
right, is that they are kind of risking everything
for each other.
There's different ways, I think,
for an artist to accomplish that,
but people do seem to find the danger of it exciting, right?
And you can, and you can create that through
the kind of vampire hierarchy, whereas like one person
is sort of overwhelmingly dangerous to the other person,
or you can create it through like social circumstances
where for whatever reason, this romance is forbidden, right?
But speaking more generally about equality,
yeah, I do think that, you know, even outside of fantasy,
if you look at like role play
and the kinds of like scenarios that, you know,
if you look at like the fan fiction people, right,
or erotica, like it's very common
to have situations of power imbalance.
So I think that, I don't think it's impossible
to make equality sexy, but I think that for a lot of people,
a kind of fantasy scenario gets more exciting
with the addition of some kind of power play.
Right, and the nature of fantasy and sexual fantasy
is something that you go into a great deal of detail
about, you have a lot of insight into,
that fantasy is some way of like licensing ourselves
to enjoy that thing while, can you complete my thought?
Yeah, I think that human sexuality
needs fantasy to function, like I think that we all,
well, I don't want to over generalize,
but I think that for most people,
they don't experience, I don't know, sexuality
as this kind of purely animalistic thing, right?
It's usually sustained by some kind of fantasy content,
you know, whether that's, I mean,
I think the best way to encounter a lot of this
is just to read a lot of like erotic fan fiction,
for example, or to like, I don't know,
I mean, you can also like, you know,
if you have the stomach for it,
you can look at pornography and, you know,
I mean, it's the variety of situations
that people can caught in their fantasies.
I feel like speaks to something in human sexuality
that kind of needs something more than just sex, right?
Sex, sexuality is more than just sex.
Even the bluntest, you know, porn hub video,
that's just a video of two people going at it,
at least the title will be like, you know,
stepmother, blah, blah, blah, there's a scenario,
like in the title of the video,
at least to just like give you a frame
of who these people are to each other,
what they might have in common, and, you know,
that might draw one person to the video more than another,
depending on what you're into.
And there has to be a reason for that, right?
Like, I think if people,
they wouldn't be, they wouldn't be so many stepbrothers
in pornography if it wasn't appealing to people
for some reason, right?
That is generating clicks.
Why is that?
Well, I mean, we can analyze why.
I don't think it's because, I don't think it is
because most people have like some kind of secret,
unconscious longing for incest.
I don't think that's why.
I think the taboo is being used in this case,
where incest is a taboo, is being used,
although it's kind of hedged with the like step thing, right?
To, you know, we don't want to go too far,
but like this element of like taboo is another factor
that kind of increases the excitement
by putting an additional barrier, right?
Where like social norms are being shattered
and desires in some way like pushing through the norm,
and that element of like overcoming a barrier
always seems to be what's exciting.
And I think that goes back to like this idea
that desire is lack or that you want what you don't have
or want what you're not supposed to be able to have.
You know, in a way, it's like the harder you have to,
the more obstacles you have to overcome
to get what you want in a way the more you want it
or the more exciting that it seems, yeah.
You also talk about fantasy.
This is the most interesting part to me
as being a way of, okay, so people say about Twilight a lot.
Why is this the fantasy?
This is a dangerous situation for, you know,
Bella to want someone who might want to kill her
or hurt her and is barely holding back.
Isn't that frightening?
But you talk about fantasy as being a way
of almost creating a safe place for the female character
to enjoy a certain type of desire
that would otherwise be dangerous.
I might be mutilating the point.
Could you, you know what I'm talking about?
Yeah, well, I think that, you know,
look at the kinds of media that people consume all the time.
Like the popularity of movies about the apocalypse
or about, you know, all kinds of horrible things happening.
People like to experience things in fantasy,
in art, in general,
that obviously we don't want to experience in reality.
Yeah, we crave the apocalypse
even though we don't want to live within it.
Most of us do not want the apocalypse to happen,
but there's, you know,
there's something that just is endlessly fascinating
to people about watching a movie
where like New York City is destroyed.
We just, we're obsessed
because we just want to see it again and again.
And that's not, I don't think
because we actually want New York City to be destroyed, right?
It's because there's, I don't know,
there's some, there's some part of it
that's part of us that's sort of fascinated
with at least the idea of destruction, right?
Yeah.
And or like the fantasy of it, even though we, you know,
and I think for mentally stable people,
those two things are securely separated.
You know, I do think that there's like a validity
to the objection that, you know,
people who worry about media like Twilight
being so popular or normal among teenagers, you know,
do teenagers have the media skills is the question, right?
To understand, okay, like this is not
depicting an actual relationship, right?
Like this is not depicting an ideal.
Like we don't, we don't want a real relationship
with a vampire that that's not, that's, you know,
this type of relationship is disastrous.
If you're actually in a relationship
with someone who wants to, you know, drink your blood
or who wants to kill you or whatever, that's, you know,
that's a catastrophe if it actually happens.
But in fantasy, again, these things kind of become exciting
and the danger as to the excitement.
But, and I think that most readers of these things know that,
right?
I think most readers of dark romance novels are aware
that what they're not, they're not consuming content
that's like, ooh, this is a blueprint
for how to live your life.
Like most people know that when,
when you read escapist fantasy, you're not,
you don't actually want that to happen.
But of course, you know, you can't always point to
some people who don't have, who, who aren't so good
at making those distinctions between fantasy
and what they really want.
But I do think that it's unfair to malign the fantasy itself
because some people are sort of don't have like a good grip
on the difference between fantasy and reality.
Yeah, we all engage in fantasy.
And yet, because it's a human thing to do.
And yet there's this constant push to criticize the fantasies
that other people have as being harmful
while engaging in our own.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I mean, that's one reason why you have, you know,
so slogans like, don't yuck my yum
or like the discourse about kink shaming.
I mean, obviously these that, you know,
that those kinds of slogans are relative
to a particular context where, you know,
you've, you've agreed on in advance that, okay,
this is a space where we're, where we're going
to openly discuss sexuality.
And, and so like within certain reasonable limits,
I think we, you know, you say like, we appreciate
that people have like a very diverse range of, you know,
turn-ons basically, right?
And so what other, what someone else might be into
might seem like completely disgusting to you,
but like, yeah, that's just, that's just how it is.
Like, I don't know, the humans are very diverse.
And human sexuality is like,
is that kind of amazingly diverse in a way?
Because the sense, obviously this is something that does
at some point have some kind of biological evolutionary
history, but the psychology of it has, is like,
well, is a significantly more complicated
than biological function.
Yeah, and a big theme in the video is
how our sexuality is more flexible or more, you know,
less determined biologically than a lot of people think.
You're pushing back against the idea
of default heterosexual sadomasochism.
A point that really spoke to me was,
you noted how a lot of men who are, you know,
socialized to be dominant or to, you know,
to be the Edward in the situation, right?
And to pursue and to be the desirer
have like a latent wish to be desired.
And I'll just say I related to this.
I was like, you know, a little ping went off in my head.
Ah, yes, I have felt that way
and never quite had language for it,
which I think is a wonderful thing
that media like yours can do.
Can you talk a little bit more about that idea
and where that came from?
Yeah, this is something I've heard
from a lot of individual men.
I mean, I also think that when I'm doing research
on videos like this, I will kind of browse
across social media in search of relevant discussions.
And I remember one time, I think it was like
the ask men subreddit, someone asked something
along the lines of, you know, what is one thing
that you want from relationships with women
that you feel like you don't often get?
And I think the most upvoted response to that question
was I want to feel like I am desired.
So I think that, you know, I think that both men
and women are in a way not served well
by being forced to conform to a default
heterosexual sadomasochism where it's only the man
who's supposed to desire and the woman only
is supposed to want to be desired.
I think that puts people in boxes
where there's certain desires that don't get acknowledged
or met.
And as you say, often people don't have the words for it.
So I think that a woman who kind of wants to that more
like, quote unquote, virile, like pursuing a desiring rule,
you know, we'll feel like she, there's something sort
of masculine about inherent to that
or something even sort of shamefully unfeminine about it.
And likewise, I think that men are put in this situation
where they, because they need to be the dominant
active pursuers, there's part of them
that maybe wants to be, you know, that you,
you want to be pursued, right?
You want to also feel that, you know,
someone you're attracted to is attracted to you
and will is kind of active in that.
And it's not just like a passive participant
for you to do things too, right?
Like I think that, but I think that, you know,
there's often some, there's often a kind of shame
that comes with that where I think it, you know,
it's sort of, it feels unmanly maybe.
I think even to kind of want to be wanted.
But there are times that, you know,
I think you have some examples of this.
If you look through the behaviors of actual men
in real life, you know, they will betray that desire
or there's certain features of masculine,
well, I mean, you saw it for yourself on a Reddit page.
These things are real and an acknowledgement
of them can lead to a more functional sexuality.
I mean, you, you had a, what's the word?
It's not variability, something like that.
Flexibility that you say, maybe rather than equality,
we can strive for, what is the word you use?
Versatility.
Versatility, thank you.
Just talk about that a little bit.
Well, I guess, I mean, the word comes from,
from gay culture where, you know,
people will use terms like top and bottom
or, you know, Dom and sub.
And then the word verse means that you are someone
who's interested in, or who likes,
basically occupying either role.
So verse, just sort of for versatile.
But I think like most straight people do not use terms
like top and bottom and, you know,
there's a question of whether straight people should use them
because it's something that comes from gay culture.
But I do think that most people,
gay or straight or bi or whatever you are,
like would benefit from this concept,
from being a little bit more open to versatility
and relationships and in sexuality.
I think that, I think a lot of people have like, you know,
by putting themselves in one box or the other,
kind of are closing off some part of their own desire.
And it's something that you kind of discover
by opening yourself up to it.
Whereas I think most people tend to, you know,
all of us are kind of on some level,
the products of the social conditioning.
And so there's a implicit value, I think,
placed on a man being active or a woman being passive
or a man being the one who desires,
a woman who's sort of being desirable.
And I think that for most people,
if you want to get outside of those boxes,
it involves navigating a certain level of shame
and overcome and also like conceptually the confusion
that comes with what I'm calling default,
heterosexual masculinity, right?
Where I think so many, this idea is like so deep
that a lot of people think that what it is to be masculine
or to be male even is to be active and to be, right?
It's often like assumed to map on to anatomy in some way,
right?
That it's just assumed that like a male sexual role is active
and a female sexual role is passive.
But I don't think that's,
I don't think that's psychologically the case.
And I think that it comes across in things like,
well, even if you just like look at like,
manosphere like incel culture, for example,
a lot of these, you know, so if you read incel forms,
they get really upset when someone suggests
like just hire a sex worker.
Well, they don't want to do that.
They don't want to hire a sex worker.
Why?
Because it's not really just about sex for them.
They haven't really analyzed this maybe,
but they want a woman to want them, right?
They don't want to pay for it, right?
They don't want this transaction because,
because, you know, and maybe they feel like
they can't say that and they don't know how to say it,
but it's like, they want to feel desirable
and that's something that they're sort of
almost confused about, it seems.
And likewise with, you know, romance novels,
a very feminine genre, you know, a lot of romance novels
are written with a very strong male perspective in them.
And one thing that I kind of speculate about
is I do think that a lot of women read romance novels
and identify with the man, right?
So, I mean, for example, and you know,
Twilight, Stephanie Meyer has rewritten
in this 2020 book, Midnight Sun,
which is just the Twilight story,
but told from Edward's perspective.
It's common in mainstream romance novels,
even for the male's perspective to be included,
I think because women have the kind of versatility,
a lot of female readers have like the versatility of that,
right?
They like being able to identify
with either side of this dynamic.
Yeah, and I mean, that's in Twilight a little bit itself
that, you know, Edward has some,
I think you would call,
typically feminine qualities.
That's what, you know, a lot of teenage boys
were pissed about when the book came out that like,
oh, he's kind of like a feminized vampire in some way.
There's parts where Bella becomes a vampire,
becomes stronger than him and maybe dominates him
a little bit, like it's almost modeling
a healthy, versatile like switch that they're able to do.
Is that the case?
Well, I think that if by the end of the series, right,
that the dynamic between them does kind of equalize,
which I do think is another thing that people do tend
to neglect when they discuss this story,
is that it starts out with this massive power imbalance.
But by the end of the series,
Bella has also become a vampire
and she's kind of like risen to Edward's level
and their dynamic is much more equal.
And that's pretty explicitly something that's explored
and breaking down at the last of those novels.
Yeah, and even in the first film,
which is the only one that I've seen, you know,
yes, there's a dominant and submissive relationship
to some degree, but also, you know,
Edward is like almost driven mad by his desire.
He can't stay away and I'm watching it going like,
Bella doesn't feel like unpowerful.
She feels like she has, you know,
there is a power in the being chased, right?
In being desired, like every single time
one of these ideas arises,
the opposite is buried just under the surface,
like ready to come out and flip over in some way.
And that sort of leads me to the end of the video.
I think one of the most powerful ideas
that when you got to this point, again,
I was like, how did we get here in a video about Twilight?
The idea that, you know, we do not have a,
I'm gonna mangle again what you said,
but, you know, we do not have a gender binary,
we have a gender yin yang,
where the masculine and feminine are counterparts
and contain each other
and are constantly undermining or replacing each other
and that containing each other and nested, nested levels.
How did you come to that idea?
Was that through the examination of Twilight?
Or was that an idea that you had had before
that you expressed via Twilight?
Well, I like the idea that this was some like deep truth
that I discovered by reading Twilight.
In reality, no, I don't think that was exactly how it happened.
But yeah, I was actually thinking about the concept
of yin yang and I like this kind of as a more,
what I think is a deeper way of thinking about
what people often think of as a binary.
So a binary is just one and zero,
but oftentimes binaries like masculine and feminine,
that they sort of are mutually constitutive, right?
Where like part of what it means to be,
you can't really understand what we mean by masculinity
unless it's complimented by this concept of femininity.
And I think that when you appreciate that,
you also kind of see the transformative capacity
that exists in this where, you know,
there is something feminine about the masculine
and there's something masculine about the feminine.
And one person is not just masculine or feminine.
I think that, you know, we all have these sides to ourself
and over time these can change
and one or the other can be more dominant
at different times.
At least that's how I think about,
that's how I think about masculinity and femininity,
not as like, oh, either you're masculine or you're feminine
and that's like an essential thing about yourself.
Like, no, I think we each contain the whole dynamic
in a way.
So I think that that is something that,
I mean, you don't have to explore this through Twilight,
but I think that it's something
that Twilight does ultimately explore.
And not just Twilight, I mean, often romance novels,
you know, they get a lot of criticism
for being sort of, you know, masochistic,
that is for having disempowered female protagonists,
which a lot of them do,
but a lot of those disempowered female protagonists
also kind of end the novel powerful.
And so I think in a way, the inequality,
you know, I mean, it's complicated,
where you could argue that the inequality
is being romanticized and often it is,
but also a lot of times the inequality
is there as an obstacle to be overcome, right?
The inequality is the driver of a conflict
where the end of the fantasy,
like the consummation of the fantasy
is in a way overcoming the inequality
and, you know, achieving an equal relationship.
Right, the separation ending,
the separation of desire ending and the becoming one,
which brings us back to the yin-yang.
And it's also a, I see how this works in sex, right?
That if you are beginning in a masculine way,
but there's the seeds of femininity within, right?
And when that comes out, that is a sexy reversal, right?
It makes me think a little bit in,
this is a very strange comparison,
but in comedy writing,
something that we do a lot is hiring and lowering.
You know, you want to see the low become high
and the high become low.
The Lord becomes the peasant,
the dog starts walking around and giving orders, you know,
like the dog and family guy or whatever, right?
It's fun to see the flip
and you wanna see it happen over and over, right?
You wanna see in trading places,
you wanna see them go up and down and down and up.
It's the transition between the two that is enjoyable.
It's not like the static nature of staying in one place,
which I don't know, that's life, right?
That's what is fulfilling,
is to experience that going back and forth.
I think there's so many odd connections
between comedy and sexuality.
There's, I like what you're saying about like high and low,
sort of, you know, becoming each other.
There's also the tension and release theme
that I think I talk about a bit in the Twilight video.
And obviously this is the thing that comics
will talk about, right?
You know, building tension,
a joke often starts by building tension
and then a punchline will be a release of that tension
and the audience laughs.
I mean, I think sexuality works that way too.
The reason our romance novel usually has a kind of,
I mean, there's a reason people like
the historical romance novel, right?
And part of it has to do with tension.
There's more tension in historical romance,
oftentimes because of the barriers
that that setting involves, right?
Everyone's wearing so many clothes.
I mean, to be very literal about it,
but also there's all, there's like social,
there's social, it's not just the bodice,
it's the social bodice, right?
There's rules about who can have a romantic relationship
with whom and those rules create a kind of,
they add to the tension between characters.
As the sort of stakes are higher,
there's more that's key,
the situation is high, strong, right?
It's tense and that I think people find sexy,
obviously hoping that eventually the tension is released,
but in a way that it just kind of similar to a joke.
Yeah, I mean, I love how comedy is similar
to other genres, I have to think about comedy
is similar to horror in a lot of ways.
I've never considered how it's similar to romance,
but it really is, that's so funny and surprising to me.
Folks, did you know that learning actually makes a sound?
It's true, listen to this.
That is the sound of you learning a new language with Babbel.
Learning a new language can be one of the toughest,
yet most rewarding challenges out there.
So if you are ready to dive in,
make sure you are using the right tools
to get the job done.
See, Babbel isn't just a game masquerading
as a learning app, it is crafted by real people
for real conversations.
With Babbel, you get tips and tools
that are approachable and rooted in real life situations,
delivered through conversation-based teaching.
This means that you'll be ready to put
what you have learned into practice in the real world.
And let me tell you something,
the real world is where you want to put the language
you learned through Babbel into use.
I live in Los Angeles,
a huge number of my fellow Angelenos speak Spanish,
and that means because I am studying Spanish with Babbel,
I can actually improve my daily life
and the communication with people around me.
It has really enriched my experience of the city I live in
because now words that used to mean nothing to me
mean something, I can speak to people,
I wasn't able to before, even just a little bit,
it really makes a big difference.
But you know what?
You don't have to take my word for it.
Studies from Yale, Michigan State University,
and others show that Babbel is effective.
One study even found that using Babbel for 15 hours
is equivalent to a full semester of college.
And look, I can't promise that it'll be easy,
but you'll be glad you did it.
And guess what?
Here's a special limited time deal for faculty listeners.
Right now you can get up to 60% off
of your Babbel subscription, 60% but only for our listeners.
At babbel.com slash factually,
get up to 60% off at babbel.com slash factually,
that's spelled B-A-B-B-E-L.com slash factually,
rules and restrictions may apply.
You also come to this point though,
about human sexuality, I think it's so beautiful.
You're talking about, again, SNM and fantasy and desire,
but you come to this point about masculine and feminine
containing each other.
And one of the things I love that you say is,
someone who is a masculine acting man or a trans person
is not appropriating someone else's sexuality.
Masculinity and femininity are like,
we all have them as humans.
We are all, and they're all our, you don't say birthright,
but they're all something that we are entitled to
by virtue of our humanity.
And that's such a, I don't know,
that's such a powerful point that spirals off
in so many other directions, philosophical, political,
and to get there from this place
where you're talking about SNM and Twilight
is fascinating to me.
Yeah, I think that, I mean,
people will often say, oh, genders differ from race,
but then without really specifying what that difference is.
I mean, I think one of them has to do with the fact that,
you know, gender exists in some form
in pretty much every human society that I'm aware of.
I guess, you know, I think gender does,
in some ancestral way, of course,
derive from the kind of generally dimorphic reproductive roles,
but obviously there's a lot more to gender than that.
And in a lot of ways, gender has become,
and for a long time, you know, quite unhinged,
I think, from directly being about reproduction.
But I think that, you know, unlike race or ethnicity,
like within every human family, there is a man and a woman.
Well, actually, not every human family, right?
We can...
Of course.
But again, I think that the origin of,
most people have a mother and a father,
and I think that's the sort of origin of a lot of ideas
about masculinity and femininity.
And I think that no one person is like,
you know, just the result of,
I mean, I guess, I don't know,
I guess there's probably some like monk somewhere
who has never met a woman, but I don't know.
I do feel that most people contain
some masculine and feminine element.
And I think that to me,
I see some level of androgyny as being,
I mean, I guess I'm kind of getting this
from Virginia Woolf, right?
Who says like, oh, a great writer is always androgynous,
right?
And the idea seeming to be that like,
to kind of fully perfect yourself as an artist,
you need to be in touch with both the masculine
and the feminine within yourself.
And, you know, if things get too unbalanced,
it leads to problems.
So I think that that applies not just to art,
but also kind of to sexuality,
where I guess I've tried it at times
to force myself into one box or another.
I've tried to be, you know,
to make myself more masculine
or try to conform to like a very strict idea of femininity.
And neither of those has ever worked for me.
So maybe this is just me, you know,
in a way, philosophy is autobiography.
In a way, maybe this is me just working
for my own personal thing
and then making sweeping generalizations about human nature.
Well, lots of people do that.
So I guess, you know, guilty.
But I think it's, you know,
there's sweeping generalizations
that other people seem to relate to.
So I think it's probably not just me
that finds that only being strictly masculine
or strictly feminine doesn't really,
hasn't really worked out well for me.
And I think it probably doesn't work out well
for a lot of people.
Yeah, I've often felt that in my own life,
that that's a box that I was placed in
and I have a constant sort of desire to undermine it
or to find, you know, more richness in it
or to find what I'm missing.
And I think that's probably part of why this
was a popular video is because it expresses that.
You said philosophy, I want to talk more
about how you think about this video
as a work of philosophy.
I mean, at one point, I believe there's a graphic
on the screen that says, or maybe you say this out loud,
that you made this video
instead of writing a PhD dissertation.
And at that moment, I realized, wait, this, yeah,
that is this dense of a philosophical work.
There is that many citation of other thinkers.
You're doing that much original thinking.
I mean, there's a huge number of videos
that are, you know, philosophy videos on YouTube
that are just summarizing.
And that's wonderful for them to summarize.
That's essentially what I feel I do as a comic.
I read a bunch of ideas and I summarize them for you
in a way that is funny and intelligible.
I make it go down easy.
And hopefully I get a couple of my own ideas in there too,
because I'm a smart person and I like to think I am.
And I have my own thoughts about the world.
But I mean, at the end of this video,
I was like, put this in a fucking library somewhere
because people need to like keep watching it
and understanding exactly what point you're making
and put it into dialogue with other philosophers
or psychologists or thinkers.
I mean, how do you think about the work in that way?
Well, I think unlike, I mean, this video,
more than my other videos was like,
I did so much research for this.
I think I read at least 100 books for this.
And then it also like a lot of articles and things.
And so I tried to get like very familiar
with like a wide range of thinking
about the topics that I wanted to cover
and use that to build what's basically a three hour argument
of what I wanted to say.
So that I think is more academic
than most of the stuff I do on YouTube
in the sense that the citations are very wide
and there's a lot of them.
But also, yeah, I am trying to make an argument
that I think is my own argument.
And then the citations are just sort of ways
of like bringing in other people's ideas.
You know, it's always tricky with a video essay.
You wanna balance like the kind of academic side
with the entertainment side.
You can't just sit in front of a camera
and like read your, you know, master's thesis or whatever.
Because I think people will find that boring.
But, you know, the hope anyway with this video
was that I was gonna be able to balance
what are my sincere ideas in my academic reading?
I'm hoping that I presented this in a way
that was not just kind of for an academic audience
but would be for a popular audience.
And people have watched the videos, I guess,
on some level that has succeeded.
I know you left the world of academia years ago
after spending some time there.
But it really struck me with this video
that you are doing work that one would strive to do
in an academic setting.
I have to imagine that there are people, you know,
in grad school or philosophy professors themselves
who are thinking, my God, I wish my ideas, you know,
we're able to get 3.7 million views on YouTube.
Are you, is that a world that you still want to interact with
or that you hope this video interacts with?
Have you had outreach from, you know,
people who are working on similar ideas and issues
in the world of the Academy?
I have, yeah.
And I, it's been long enough now that I do sometimes miss
the academic context.
I mean, I think I kind of overdosed on it a bit
when I was in my 20s.
Like, I, you know, getting a, I got half of a philosophy,
PhD, basically, and ended up quitting with a master's
before writing a dissertation.
But I think that I kind of coasted for a few years
afterwards.
I was like, well, I've basically spent most of my 20s
with my face in a book.
So now, you know, I want to like say things with that
to an actual audience.
And I felt that I found the audience on YouTube.
But I think a few years ago, I started worrying.
I was like, it's been years now since I was in,
since I was taking classes or going to seminars,
getting feedback from professors.
I sort of started to worry.
I was like, I'm going to get some,
I'm going to start getting sloppy and boring.
In a sense, if I don't, well, not boring,
but I guess I worried that I was going to get a little too
detached from that like research foundation.
So I, with this project, I really wanted to make myself
like go back to school in a way.
And so I read a lot of like pretty dense texts
from psychoanalysis to feminist theory to, you know,
kind of a wide source of commentary on sexuality
or on gender.
So I tried to kind of bolster the substance of this video
by using academic texts again.
And that's such a, it's such a project to do that.
Like as somebody who builds arguments myself
and my own work done so on TV, I do so on YouTube now.
It's a big lift for me to do 20 minutes, right?
To make a 20 minute argument.
You're doing a three hour argument
where you're doing a vast amount of reading
and also original thought.
And I just would, I'm dying to know like
a little bit about your process.
Like when you're reading a hundred books, right?
And you are trying to get your head around this argument
that you want to make.
What are you then doing with the book?
Are you, do you have a note taking process?
Like how are you assembling this argument as you go?
Yeah, my methods for making this video
were actually like so crazy that I can never do this again
because it took so long.
Like I have, okay.
I have a dog here.
How long did it take you all together by the way?
Just how long were you working on this?
I mean, I think I started it,
I think I started it in like June, 2022
and then published like March, 2024.
So more than a year and a half.
I mean, I was working on other things in between
but I think that, when I say reading a hundred books,
how long did it take me to read a hundred books?
Well, usually it takes me more than one day
to read one book.
So, you know, there were a lot of reading days.
And I had, I was writing down the quotes
that I thought were interesting.
I have a document on my computer
that has more than a hundred thousand words
of quotes and notes stuffed into it,
which is just an insane, I mean, that's,
that's, you know, at least novel length
as just a notes document.
And then most of that, obviously I didn't use
because I way overdid the note taking.
I'm not, that's why I say I'm not doing that again
because there's probably a more efficient way to use time,
which I'm trying to do
because I don't want to just make one video
every year and a half.
So I've got to find ways to be a little more efficient
than that.
But for this one project, I was like,
oh, I just, I just felt like really committing
to the bookish element of it.
So I, I made, you know, I guess a one time commitment
to just to put in basically a year's worth of research.
I really feel that making YouTube videos myself,
the pull between spending as much time
as you want on something
and getting things out more quickly.
I'm constantly trying to evaluate that myself
with the work that I make.
How do you think about, you know,
pace and, you know, nurturing your audience on YouTube?
Because as you say, you are a YouTuber.
Being a YouTuber puts you at the mercy of the algorithm,
at the, of the audience of these sort of, you know,
very mechanized processes that determine success or failure.
It seems like it would take a lot of trust
to spend a year and a half on something
and know that it will be watched on the other end
and not be anxious about, ah, shouldn't I have put out,
you know, 12 more videos in that period of time?
Wouldn't that be better for my numbers?
Like that's sort of thinking.
How do you think about that?
Oh, well, it definitely would be better for you
for my numbers if I had made 12 videos
instead of one three-hour video.
I mean, I think that for me.
Really? Because the three-hour video does well, you know.
Yeah, well, okay, that's, I mean,
I do think that long videos are,
do seem to be doing well on YouTube lately.
I think that when I was building an audience,
I would never have been able,
I don't think to do something like this.
This is, this is kind of the like,
the like luxury stuff you get to do
if you have, you have already like built that foundation.
Yeah.
I definitely think there was like a period
of having to grind a little bit to get, you know,
videos that have at least every couple of months.
And because, you know, at first you worry,
we worry, you do worry a lot about like,
oh, is the audience even going to still be there?
I feel at this point, like I have built enough
of a long-term audience that will kind of trust
the process a little bit.
And, you know, they will,
I can, I feel like I can count on them
to watch when I come up with a new thing,
even if it's been a while.
So I tend to worry about that a little less,
though I do also think that, you know,
a year and a half is too long.
And I think that I benefit from a little bit
because at a certain point with the research,
there's, there are diminishing returns
to spending more than a year on researching a video.
I think at a certain point, you know,
you have to say, okay, that's enough,
like save the rest of the research for another video.
So that's, that's from now on, I'm trying to do that
because I do, I do want to make videos
a little more frequently than once a year.
Well, it's fascinating because you could have made
just a video about, hey, I've been reading Twilight
and there was a moral panic about this series
and that misunderstands the nature of fantasy.
And that would have been one great video
that could have gotten a million views on its own,
but that is one point within this massive edifice
that you built.
And so yeah, I'm curious about,
is there some value to you in your creative process
of exploring so much in a single video
rather than chunking it up or making a more,
you know, I often look to make one discrete point, maybe two.
And if I do more than that, I start going,
ah, maybe I'm getting too over ambitious
and I need to scale it back.
Whereas this video is so incredibly maximalist
in its conception and design,
is there something about that that draws you?
Yes, there is.
And it's hard for me to explain what it is,
but I do think that that I am sort of ambitiously drawn
towards like more and more elaborate projects.
It's something that I have to like fight in myself
to not, to make every video not be three hours long,
but I do think that I like,
I don't know, there's something,
there's something fun to me to be exploring one topic
from like every possible angle.
And I don't know, there seems to be an audience
that is appreciative of that kind of like
extremely thorough deep dive.
You know, I think that,
there was a time I remember when YouTubers
were basically giving the advice,
like go no more than 10 minutes,
like no one has an attention span anymore in this day.
And now like people just regularly watch content
that's hours long.
I think part of it has to do with, you know,
the way that people watch videos has changed.
I think a lot of people, you know,
they watch a video kind of like,
kind of like they listen to a podcast, right?
It's kind of on, you know, maybe, you know,
I'm not so, I'm not so arrogant
that I think everyone who watches my videos
has to sit down at the TV with a full thing of popcorn
and give me their undivided attention.
I mean, I guess I'd be flattered if people do that,
but I'm sure, I mean, that's not how I watch video essays.
I mean, I'm doing the laundry.
YouTube is also the most popular streaming service
on television.
Like it is more popular than Netflix.
And so surely some people are doing that.
They're loading it up.
They're no longer just, you know,
clicking on a link at work, you know, in a browser tab.
And so there's been a lot of changes.
Yeah, and I do try to, I mean,
I do put effort into like visuals and things.
I do want to reward the people who have taken, you know,
who have put the video up on their TV
and are sitting down to watch it.
I do want it to make that worth people's while,
but I also know that, you know,
some people are cooking dinner and that's fine too.
You make almost every element of these videos yourself, right?
In addition to writing them, you also,
my understanding is you're your own DP.
You do your own lighting.
You do your own editing.
I believe you have other folks do the music.
Do I have that basically right?
Yeah, that's right.
I definitely, people always ask me like,
why are you doing this to yourself?
Like, why don't you hire more people to do it?
That was my next question now.
You have the money to do it.
Yeah, I feel like, well,
I think I've just gotten so used to doing it
in this kind of solitary way
that now it kind of feels like I would be like,
I don't know, I would be taking my own,
I feel like what people like about my videos
probably is that I made them on some level.
And so, I think there's something that sort of comes across
from like one person's like manic project.
Like, even, I mean, I don't know,
even if there's imperfections,
which I'm sure there are, right?
Like, there are ways that a professional
could probably like do better lighting or something.
But I don't know, there's like,
I have like the way that I do it
and I think it gives the videos
kind of a distinctive feel.
I just think it's something that people pick up on.
And also maybe it's just me being like a reclusive loner
or whatever and not wanting to deal
with the social element of having up.
No, that's such a great answer.
I mean, I've learned in my own work
how much the process is the product
and I actually experienced, you know,
I came from doing videos on a website called College Humor.
We had our low budget way of doing things
and I experienced later on
when I was doing work on Netflix,
there were things that I wanted to do
that were actually harder to do with more resources
than when I had less.
And I would try to get certain sort of gags done,
certain sort of visual effects,
try to use things on a certain timeline.
And the more expensive crews that we had to work with said,
we don't know how to do it that way.
I was like, oh, well, the 25 year old I used to work with
like could help me do it that way, right?
And so the process is the product.
The way you make the thing is how the thing comes out.
And so I understand, yeah,
if that's how you got started doing it all yourself,
that's what the audience likes.
That's the way you do it.
You maybe don't wanna fuck with something that's working
because what the audience likes
partially is the feeling of watching this lady go crazy
in her own house at 4 a.m.
You know, they like a little bit of that feeling.
I think that's exactly what it is.
Cause I think there's a certain vibe
for you for a better term
to a person like manically recording a video
in a room alone at four in the morning.
Like, I don't know.
I don't know if that could be replicated
if I weren't literally doing that.
Yeah. So I don't know.
So in terms of your audience,
you are entirely audience supported.
I don't think you take ads of any kind.
There is, that's a wonderful thing that's possible now
in today's internet media ecosystem.
It's also, there's a hazard of audience capture
of your audience driving what you're doing too much
or of feeling at the whim of your audience.
What has your experience been with that
and how do you resist that affecting your work?
Well, I am very grateful to Patreon
for allowing me to like have a financially viable career
without filling the videos with ads.
That it's a good model.
I do think that as you say,
there's a hazardous side to it,
which is that, you know, it's not the,
in a way you don't have a boss,
but in another way your boss is like this mob, right?
This group of a few thousand people
who are funding your project.
So you do, you are kind of accountable to them in a way.
So how do you not just become a people pleaser?
Yeah.
Well, I think, I mean, I've been,
lately I've been doing these like Patreon only videos
that, you know, I'm just charging people two months,
two dollars a month or whatever to watch them.
And then our people can pay more to vote on the topic.
And I do think that people who vote on topics
that are sort of, that are different than what I would,
I don't think anyone would have voted for Twilight,
for example, right?
I don't think that if I had had a poll
to decide what my next video was going to be,
I don't think Twilight would have gotten a lot of votes.
You know, people tend to vote for things,
well, one things they've heard of.
So it has to be something familiar.
It has to be often something topical.
We'll get more votes than something that's, you know,
kind of outdated or that doesn't seem particularly relevant
to the moment.
But yeah, I do think that there's something to be said
for me trying, you know,
using that kind of voting feedback
so that I kind of keep in touch
with what people care about.
But I do think that it's also good
for the main channel videos
that I'm not just taking,
that I'm not just having the topic dictated to me
by the audience demand.
Because I think a lot of times people don't know
what they want or, you know,
the most exciting content I feel like comes from,
I had no idea that I wanted this, right?
Like, I would not have asked someone to make a three hour
video analyzing Twilight from every imaginable
philosophical angle, but hopefully now that it's here,
they like it.
I think also, you know, a lot of times what you think
you want is more of what you've liked in the past,
which I think can kind of stifle,
it can stifle innovation or change where,
well, I mean, look what's happened with movies
where everything's a sequel now, right?
I think that you can become too conservative
in terms of what you are willing to experiment
with creatively if the way that you choose
what projects to work on is just informed
by what has succeeded in the past.
Well, then you just make the same thing again and again,
and no innovation ever happens.
Yeah, and if you just make the thing
that the audience says that they want,
there is some value in that.
That is something that the,
there's an value in pleasing the audience.
But if that's all that you do,
the audience is never surprised.
That's what always bothers me so much about,
you know, it's a cliche, but fans of IP media,
of superhero media or whatever, being like,
we didn't want this, this isn't what the fans asked for,
sort of discourse, why didn't they ask us
before they made the new Star Wars?
Like, well, is that what you want?
Like you didn't know, you wouldn't have known
to ask for the first Star Wars movie before it came out,
because it was a unique act of creativity
on the part of this weird dude, George Lucas.
And in fact, that was what we liked about it.
And the reappraisal of the Star Wars prequels
is exactly about that, that George was just being weird.
And that was kind of more interesting
than some mega corporation trying to give people
exactly what they wanted.
We don't get serendipity and surprise in media that way.
Yeah, I completely agree with that.
And I do think that it's too bad that,
well, I do think that I have an increasing sense,
I mean, Star Wars is probably literally the case
that a lot of creative decisions
are basically being made in corporate boardrooms.
And, yeah, I mean, it seemed, that's how it feels.
It comes across, like I liked your slogan
about the process as a product.
It comes across, right, week we can tell.
And, yeah, totally, you could just basically remake
the first Star Wars movie now,
but it wouldn't have the same impact that it had initially,
because we've already seen Star Wars make a new thing, right?
Yeah, yeah.
You are diagnosing the exact problem with my business.
Yeah, that nobody is making new things currently.
Everybody was trying to figure out,
this has worked in the past,
so let's make another one of those.
What is working and nobody is taking a chance
on the new thing.
And one of the real ironies of creative work in Hollywood,
at least, is even the executives don't know what they want,
because if they did, they would be writers and directors,
but they aren't, because they are not the creative people.
You at some point need to trust a creative person saying,
I think this is a good idea, I just wanna make it,
you should believe in me.
If you wanna get the thing that is a surprise hit,
that changes the culture or makes things go in a new way.
Yeah, it requires you to take chances,
which means that sometimes you'll lose,
but I also think that the super conservative approach to,
oh, just keep making the same thing that worked in the past.
I think that's a very short-term way of thinking,
where people will eventually get bored,
of you making the exact same superhero movie again and again.
And I think that, even economically,
that will eventually cost you,
it's worth it, I think,
to take chances on someone who's trying something new.
Sometimes it won't work, but when it does,
it really pays off.
Yeah, and that's why some of the best media brands
are the ones that you get used to
taking an interesting chance,
where, oh, if this came out, HBO used to be like this,
oh, they put a lot of money into something,
I don't know if it's for me.
You know what, I'll watch a couple,
just because I have a certain expectation.
I think people have that same expectation of your work.
Normally, I had no interest in Twilight, right?
It was not particularly on my radar,
but, oh, Natalie has a new video out
that's three hours of Natalie talking about Twilight.
I am interested in that,
because I have seen your past work,
and I know that you are going to surprise and delight me.
I love your approach of your slaking the audience's thirst
to have a say with your Patreon videos,
and then you are separately using that
to be able to fund your crazy passion products,
which are the things that people actually want of you.
That's a wonderful audience expectation to set.
Yeah, and it does require me
to have a level of trust in my own audience.
I'm trusting them to trust me, in a way.
Like, I know you probably don't think
you want a three-hour video about Twilight,
but I have an idea for one that I think you probably do want.
Just let me do it, and then we'll see.
I'm sure I will occasionally do projects that don't hit,
because no one has all hits,
but I think it's worth it to me to take the risk,
because I don't want to stultify, you know?
Do you have bigger aspirations in media?
Because, look, again, in the field I'm in,
I'm always like, my instinct is how is that a TV show?
Or how is that a movie?
Or how is that just what's the bigger version of the thing?
Which is a very capitalist fueled impulse
that comes from the media environment
that I have to work in, because that's the life I live.
Whereas you have absolute freedom,
where you're able to make a living and do what you want.
And yet, you know, this video is so ambitious.
I'm curious if you just, you know,
is there more that you want to do and in what direction?
Well, I'm pretty happy with the current process.
I mean, is there more that I want to do?
Yes, but I feel like the more that I want to do
is not necessarily what most people imagine I would want to do.
People ask me all the time,
like, aren't you going to have like a Netflix show
or something at some point?
Or, you know, when are you going to like have a,
I mean, they don't say when you're going to have a real job,
but there's some, there's some of these things
like a little bit of an implication of that.
When are you going to make it big, right?
That's the idea, that's the implication.
Yeah, when are you going to make it big?
I'm pretty happy making it medium, actually, at the moment.
Like, I think that I like the independence
and I like the fact that I can do like weird experimental things.
And I like the kind of direct relationship to the audience
that I feel like I have through Patreon,
where it's not mediated by a studio.
I don't know.
There's not to say that I will never try, you know,
doing something that is with a more conventional,
you know, production approach.
But I feel like for the time being,
I'm pretty happy with the way that this works out
with Patreon and with the audience on YouTube.
And so I'm not like itching to change it up in that sense.
Yeah, I would also ask,
oh, would you ever want to write a book?
Except that again, the video to me has the density of a book.
Every sentence is something that I want to pause and unpack
and reread, and yet is being seen by more people.
You are able to, I think, probably make a better living at it
than you would if you were to publish it as a book.
Is there, it seems kind of perfect
for getting the ideas that you want to get out out.
And yet I think there's maybe a YouTube stench
that I feel as well of, isn't there some
more legitimate place to go?
No, I mean, people asked that too, right?
When are you going to write a book?
Well, I don't know, I might write a book.
I may well write a book someday,
probably when I get tired of looking
at my face on the screen.
But I think that I feel like I've put so much time
into learning the skills of doing video essays
that I feel like I may still continue doing the thing
that I know I'm good at.
I mean, part of that, of course, is writing.
And I'm sure that that skill would transfer over
to writing a book.
So again, I think I haven't ruled that out.
I imagine myself writing a book someday,
but for the time being, all the ideas that I have
for books, I feel like I end up making them into videos.
So it's not, it doesn't seem like a super pressing need
for me to switch media.
I don't feel that you'll ever get sick
of looking at your own face.
If you spent this long doing it,
you have the same sickness that I do where...
If the narcissism has lasted this long,
I should be in the clear, right?
Yeah, if you want this many people,
if you have spent this much time
trying to get people to look at you,
you must want people to do it.
That's never gonna leave you.
Yeah, it's a long-term personality defect.
What have you been thinking about
or reading more recently that is...
I mean, this video took you a year and a half.
It came out a few months ago.
What directions do you find yourself being pulled now
in terms of your interests?
Well, I spent so much time on this Twilight video
that I net like for the last few months,
I just avoid anything romance fiction.
I'm like, I thought about it for a year and a half.
I can't stand it.
In another year, I'm sure it'll interest me again
and I'll go back to it.
But yeah, I definitely will do something
completely different next.
Obviously, well, I'm very anxious
about American politics this year.
So I think probably I'll get something
sort of a little bit more directly political,
politically engaging next.
I've been doing research for most of my adult life
on conspiracy theories.
So that's something that definitely interests me
as a possible topic.
And those go together.
I mean, American politics this year
and conspiracy theories, it feels like we're living
in a more conspiratorial politics than ever.
I remember a time when conspiracism
was this kind of counter-cultural thing
like in the Bush era or early Obama years.
But now, yeah, it's fun.
It was like, you know, Men in Black was a movie, right?
It wasn't something that people actually believed in.
Right, or it was, I mean,
I guess there was always the 9-11 truth stuff and that.
But even that, it never seemed very threatening to me.
I guess, I don't know, but maybe it should have
because now, I mean, at this stage,
like the Republican Party may as well be
a conspiracist party where like central ideas of Trump
include the idea that the elections are rigged.
So that's not, you know, this is not counter-culture anymore.
This guy was president.
He's friends with Alex Jones,
or at least they're in communication.
So this is, you know,
I've been talking with some people lately
about whether QAnon is totally irrelevant now.
And I think that it's not irrelevant.
But the reason that it's not irrelevant
is that it's actually, a lot of the pieces of QAnon
have just become incorporated into the main of the Republican Party.
So, you know, yeah, we're not talking about Q,
but the idea that the deep state is rigging elections,
for example, or the idea, like all this stuff
is basically just mainstream American political ideas now.
So it's, you know, it's a long-standing tendency,
I guess, in American politics.
Like there's that essay from the 60s
on the paranoid style in American politics
about like the Goldwater campaign, I guess.
And, you know, in the 50s and 60s,
there was like the John Birch Society
and all this idea of, you know,
like you see in Dr. Strangelove,
where there's this character ranting about
the fluoridation of water being a communist plot.
So it's not like this is new.
Yeah, I guess our vital fluids, yeah.
Yeah, the pressure is bodily fluids,
which I guess is kind of like a,
this kind of like a predecessor to the anti-vax movement.
This is the stuff I'm thinking about lately.
Like I would have been an RFK voter.
Yeah, completely.
Have you, and yeah, the conspiracy mindset,
it's not just that the literal conspiracy theories
have infected the Republican Party,
but the sort of behavior of conspiracy hunting
has infected almost everybody.
You see Democrats or, you know,
people who don't call themselves political at all,
just go down these rabbit holes constantly
of and undermine everything that they think they know,
et cetera, with that type of thinking,
even when it isn't specifically a right-wing conspiracy theory
of the type that we're most used to.
Yeah, it's really a style,
maybe a style of, I mean, paranoid style, right?
It's a style of thinking more than anything
that can be applied to like literally anything.
I mean, I feel like it's gotten to a point
where any significant event that happens in American
or world politics or news will be kind of,
it will have like a host of theories around it
about how it's an inside job,
or it's a hoax, or it's this and that, right?
I think it's just become a kind of-
The Kate Middleton photo is a perfect example of that, right?
I mean, Taylor Swift will drop an album and there's people
theorizing about how she's just secretly gay,
and she's like, I mean, it's everything.
Yeah, my friend, the very funny comedian, Sammi Mauri,
said that Taylor Swift is queuing on for girls.
That's their joke.
Yeah, it's a truth.
And people are like connecting the red string,
like between Taylor Swift songs.
That is the accepted mode of consumption
for the biggest mainstream pop artist in America,
is to treat her like you are uncovering a vast conspiracy.
Right, and she's dropping these like cryptic clues,
and it's your job to like to go down the rabbit hole
and figure out the truth.
It's, yeah, I mean, people seem to find this way
of engaging with anything very, very exciting, right?
I think it kind of, it puts you in the role
of an investigator, right?
Everyone thinks they're Sherlock Holmes,
and you feel like you can find some kind of truth
that has been hidden.
I think that there's something,
I mean, maybe this takes us back
to the romance topic, actually,
because in a way, that desire to like find what is concealed,
or like overcome some kind of veil of illusion,
I feel that that in itself is a kind of like,
you know, tension and release type thing,
where, you know, why is a hidden truth
is more exciting than an open truth, right?
Yeah.
Because there's this element of pursuit of search involved.
So it's exciting to discover a secret, I guess.
And so people go looking for secrets anywhere.
I mean, I literally have just been playing a video game
called Animal Well that is entirely built
around the search for secrets.
And that's like the, there's the motivating factor
in the game, and that's sort of an odd thing to bring up,
but it's literally what it reminded me of.
Oh, I was doing this for fun just last week
of like hunting, hunting.
What does this mean?
What does that mean?
I love the connection, though, to,
I believe you said in the video,
this is just written in my list of quotes.
You wrote philosophical questions
that would never be definitively answered
as being part of their allure, I think,
and like our desire to answer them.
They can't be definitively answered.
So we're always questing after them.
Is that correct?
Am I misrepresenting you?
Yeah, I think that's part of the appeal of philosophy
is that there's, you know, we're asking these big questions
that seem to defy definitive solution.
Yeah.
And so I think that is part of what's exciting about it
is the desire to find out something
that is, that seems like it's always eluding us.
So I wanted to ask,
because this is a question of perpetual fascination for me,
what do you think it is that philosophy does?
Because there's often, you know,
a realization I had after being very, very intent
and fascinated by philosophy for many years,
I realized, hold on a second, exactly this,
none of these questions are ever answered, you know?
People are still arguing with Plato and Descartes
and every philosopher for hundreds of years.
And so isn't that shameful
that philosophy never makes progress
in the way that science does?
Ever had essays to that effect?
I was talking to the philosopher Quill Kukla about this
and they said that what they think it indicates
is that philosophy is more of an art than a science
or a practice.
I'm just curious how you think of it.
Like what is the thing that you are trying to do
when you are answering these questions
if they can never be definitively answered?
Well, I think it does a lot of different things.
One thing it maybe does is take a mystery
and then clarify the mystery
so that even if you don't have a definitive answer,
you at least have a better understanding
of what it is that you don't understand.
I think another thing I can do is kind of,
again, like sort of clarify concepts that are kind of murky
or sort of bring out something that's sort of implicit
and make it explicit in a discourse.
So I mean, this I think has a potential
to be useful to science, right?
At least in certain fields where maybe there's a question of,
I guess psychology comes to mind where,
what are we talking about?
When we talk about consciousness
versus being unconscious,
that the question actually kind of
is conceptually complicated in a way
that is not clear to me,
that it's easily solved just through experimentation.
Before doing an experiment,
you have to have a conceptual framework
for what it is that you're testing.
Yeah, and in fact, on this show in recent months,
we've had on different neuroscientists
who are arguing between themselves
about whether humans have free will, et cetera.
And my reaction to all of them is you have committed
a philosophical error in that you don't know
what you mean by the phrase free will yet,
or that's the disagreement and you won't acknowledge it.
Like that sort of problem is a classic one
that can only be addressed by philosophy.
Yeah, I don't think the question of,
do humans have free will and in what sense, if so,
or if not, I don't think that's a question
that's going to be answered by doing functional MRI scans
of the brain.
There's a certain type of evidence
that MRI studies are going to supply,
and that certain type of evidence
is always going to have to do with what amount of blood
is flowing to which brain region,
which is not gonna really answer your free will question.
You kind of need to like to transform that
into something that can be empirically verified.
I think so, but yeah, the question about free will
is what do we mean by free will
and what is the relationship between free will
and say chemistry or these seemingly deterministic
levels of analysis?
Yeah, we might not get a final understand,
we might not get a final answer to that question,
but if we actually examine it,
we might understand a lot more about ourselves
than like all of these other things.
In the same way that you're exploring twilight
and you are coming to what I found fascinating conclusions
about human sexuality, fantasy, genre fiction,
you know, gender itself, I mean,
it's just such an incredible tour de force, I don't know.
Are you happy with a response to the video?
Like are people, are they taking it in the way
that you hoped that they would?
Yeah, I'm very happy with it.
I think that a lot of people have given it a chance
and I'm always very appreciative of the kinds of comments
that people leave on my videos.
I feel like I am proud to have a better
than average YouTube comments section.
People often like write paragraphs of texts
and some of it is very, very interesting.
People have their own ideas and insights
where people will challenge a certain point I made.
I'm always very appreciative of people
taking the time to do that
because I know these comments just get lost
in a sea of comments, but I do try,
I do read a lot of them and a lot of them,
unfortunately, are actually worth reading.
So yeah, I'm happy about that.
I mean, you really like strike me as a,
a philosopher from a few hundred years ago,
like reading your correspondences,
you know, you publish your monograph
and then you get all the responses back
and people debate and et cetera.
It's just fascinating to see work of this caliber
come across on a platform that most people to write
as being really superficial and stupid
and you're one of the most, you know,
successful and popular YouTubers
and you're doing honest to God philosophy
and psychology and analysis on there.
It's, I don't know, it's, it's incredible to see.
Yeah, sorry, go.
Yeah, the feedback is definitely one of the things
I like about YouTube.
As you say, a YouTube comment section has a reputation
as being like the worst of what the internet has to offer.
It certainly can be, but I think that I also, you know,
it's a mix of things.
Like some people just say that I'm ugly or whatever.
So, okay, thank you.
But, you know, I think that mixed in with that
is a lot of people who are leaving
actually very thoughtful ideas
and it's actually something I look forward to
whenever I publish a video
is like seeing what people will say in response.
It's almost like I want people to like challenge me back.
Like, I want people to engage with what I'm thinking about
because I know they'll come up, you know,
people have different experiences,
they have different expertise and I do,
they'll come up with a bunch of stuff
that I didn't occur to me.
And it's always very interesting to,
to see like how other people react
to like the incomplete ideas that I've had.
Well, I've given you a lot of reaction here.
We've been talking for quite a while.
I could talk to you all day,
but I should probably let you get back to it.
So, yeah, I mean, thank you so much for being here, Natalie.
Where else, I mean, we're talking here on YouTube,
which is the platform where you're at.
So I think people will be able to find you,
but where else can they find the rest of your work?
You can find me on Twitter and on Instagram
and Patreon of course,
but, you know, watch my videos for a society if you like them.
On all platforms, I'm just contra points.
So that's, should be pretty easy.
Well, thank you so much for being here.
It's been such a thrill to talk to you.
Yeah, thank you so much for having me.
This was a great conversation.
Well, thank you once again and Natalie Wynn
for coming on the show.
I know you love that conversation as much as I did.
If you did, you can support us on Patreon.
Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
$5 a month gets you every episode of the show ad free.
For $15 a month,
I will read your name in the credits of this show
and also put it in the credits
of every single one of my video monologues.
This week I want to thank Eden Welch,
Patrick Flanagan, Crattone, Linzlat, Andrew M. Purifoy,
Marcus Mitchell and Vanessa Russell.
Thank you so much for supporting the show.
Patreon.com slash Adam Conover, if you want to join them.
Head to adamconover.net for my tickets and tour dates.
You want to come see me do standup comedy on the road.
For this show, I want to thank my producers,
Sam Raudman and Tony Wilson.
Everybody here at Head Gum for making the show possible.
Thank you so much for listening
and we'll see you next time on Factually.
That was a Head Gum podcast.
