Hello, and welcome to Factually.
I'm Adam Conover.
Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
You know, it's giving season,
and if you're like me, you might be wondering,
where the hell should I give my money?
I mean, you want to make the world a better place, right?
But it's difficult to know what charity
or organization to donate to
that's actually going to make a difference,
especially because, you know,
we've got a world full of billionaires
donating money all the time,
and the world doesn't actually seem to be getting better, right?
So how do we actually make an improvement with our money?
Well, a couple years ago,
a savior emerged in the form of a movement
called effective altruism.
This was a group of scientists, philosophers, and researchers
who pledged to use their huge brains
to figure out what the most effective forms of charity were.
They did rigorous research, they conducted studies,
they held conferences,
and they convinced a lot of very rich people
to donate huge amounts of money
for the betterment of humanity.
It seemed like a really great thing
until a couple years later
when the entire movement collapsed.
It turns out they got into bed with the crypto fraudsters
like Sam Bankman Freed,
and now the entire philosophical movement
behind effective altruism has been largely discredited.
How did this happen?
How did a group of people
dedicated to figuring out the best
and most selfless ways to better humanity
get embroiled in one of the largest financial frauds
of all time?
Is it even possible for philanthropy
to do good in the world when things like this happen?
And how can average people like you or me
donate money to actually make the world
a better place this giving season?
Well, to answer these questions,
we have an incredible guest on the show.
But before we get to that, I wanna remind you
that if you wanna support this show,
you can do so on Patreon.
Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
Just five bucks a month
gets you every episode of the show ad free
and helps keep the podcast free
for everyone else who wants to listen to it.
I also wanna remind you,
I am a touring standup comedian.
If you wanna come see me in a city near you,
I just announced a whole new set of tour dates.
I'm going to New York, Philly, Atlanta, Boston,
Nashville, DC, and a whole bunch more.
Head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates.
And now let's get to today's guest.
Her name is Amy Schiller.
She's a writer and academic
who worked in the world of philanthropy for years.
But now she has a new book out
called The Price of Humanity,
How Philanthropy Went Wrong and How to Fix It.
It is such a smart and entertaining take
on this entire industry and everything that plagues it
and how you can actually make the world a better place.
So without further ado,
let's get to this interview with Amy Schiller.
Amy, thank you so much for being on the show.
It's such a pleasure to be here.
I'm so excited to meet you.
Oh, that's really nice.
I'm very excited to meet you.
Because I've been covering for a long time
the problems with philanthropy.
Philanthropy is proposed to us as this wonderful thing.
It's how the rich change the world.
You can do it yourself.
You can contribute.
What could possibly be bad about giving money away?
You have written an entire book
called The Price of Humanity, How Philanthropy Went Wrong.
The entire thing.
How did philanthropy go wrong?
What is the problem with it?
I'll tell you how I think philanthropy went wrong
because you have very ably covered many ways
that it's gone wrong.
But here's what I think has gone wrong.
It's drifted from the actual meaning of the word philanthropy.
So for me, the entry point is
philanthropy means love of humanity.
And my concern is that I saw a lot of philanthropic
movements and trends moving towards a definition
of humanity that to me felt very narrow and reductive.
So this all comes down to how we define humanity.
Is humanity sustenance merely surviving?
Or is humanity really about thriving
and our full human capabilities to flourish
and to create new things in common with one another?
So my feeling is philanthropy went wrong
when it started to become a utilitarian practice
and not an enabler of human flourishing.
And I think the word utilitarian
is gonna come up a couple of times in this conversation.
But what's an example of somebody getting that wrong
so I can understand more better what you mean?
Absolutely.
Well, I'll jump into the sort of hot button version of it
which is effective altruism embodied
by now disgraced fraudster Sam Bankman-Freed
but having a long trajectory before that,
beginning as a philosophy that basically said,
we can rank the moral worth of giving
based on how many lives per dollar we save.
So a very narrow definition of what constituted
valid philanthropy and what philanthropy's purpose was.
And let me say, I first encountered the idea
of effective altruism close to 10 years ago.
I actually, in my first show, Adam Ruins,
everything had some effective altruism adjacent ideas.
For instance, in our very first episode,
which was called Adam Ruins Giving,
it was the pilot of the whole show.
We did a whole segment on how you shouldn't give food
to food banks, you should give money to food banks
because giving food makes you feel good.
Giving money actually helps them the most
because then they can buy the foods
that people actually need.
We made fun of Tom's shoes for giving away
these free shoes when like, why not just give money, right?
Why not give the thing?
Why not trust people to make their own decisions?
Absolutely.
And I think there's a lot of validity to that.
And it, I still think there is to some degree.
It also dovetails with a very rigorous evidence-based approach
that it's like, hey, if we actually,
a lot of charity goes to waste,
if you actually wanna make sure
that the money that you donate goes to the right place,
well, then you should be able to like really rigorously
show that it has had a positive effect.
There are groups like Givewell
that would do these really rigorous studies.
I would read them and look at their recommendations.
And then it was all based on,
yeah, the utilitarian philosophy of Peter Singer, right?
Which is that, I mean, you can probably express it better
than I can, but you know, the sort of general philosophy
of like the ends are the most important thing.
The number of lives saved, the amount of pain
and suffering that you've prevented in the world.
And I always knew, look,
as the holder of a bachelor's in philosophy,
I always knew there's no, you know,
that philosophy isn't necessarily true in all respects,
but it's defensible, right?
It's respectable.
There's a lot of validity to it.
So I always enjoyed this sort of,
oh, very rigorous view of philanthropy.
And for a bunch of years, I would donate money
according to the effective altruist donations
to the Against Malaria Foundation.
That was always the best ranked one.
That was like for every couple thousand dollars
you could save a life.
And I was like, oh, I donated a couple thousand dollars.
I think I saved one life.
That was, I followed a lot of this.
And now we're in a place where it's been entirely discredited
because it got wrapped up in crypto
and San Bank Manfred and AI
and all these really weird practices.
How did that happen?
Okay.
I wanna first just pause and say,
there are some really important things
that you point out here,
which is that giving money is absolutely better
as an act of trust and solidarity
and love for one's fellow human beings than giving stuff,
which is really a mode of kind of retaining control
and retaining a sort of paternalistic view of other people.
I think I know what you need.
Here it is.
Exactly.
If I give you money, you're gonna go spend it on drugs
or alcohol.
Yes.
So here's a nice tie that you can wear
to your office job that I think you should get
for whatever it is.
Exactly.
And actually the problem with effective altruism
starts with a similar but maybe way expanded level
of that kind of hubris.
A sense of we, the smartest people
with the best algorithms know best
how money should be used.
So it was never a philosophy of actual trust
and engagement with other people.
It was always a philosophy of,
here's a philosophical term for you,
epistemological hubris.
A real sense of we can optimize
and we can perfect the exact sort of quantifiable change
that our philanthropy is going to produce
and that makes us feel good in the same way
that a lot of philanthropy is really designed
to make the donor feel good, feel validated in themselves.
You're kind of blowing my mind
because the whole premise of effective altruism is,
oh, so many donations are just feel good,
but effective altruism is you point out
feel good in a different way
because you sort of have that.
It's almost like when you buy something
off the wire cutter recommendation,
you're like, I got the best one.
I feel so proud because I know I got the best one
and you follow the Give Well recommendation.
I followed all the evidence.
This says that this is the best donation.
I'm the best little boy.
Well, a very, like a real extension
of the sort of Puritan work ethic of like,
oh, instead of I have just have the best character
and now it's I was also the smartest, right?
So you get to, in fact, you get to have both
where you're like, not only am I such a good person,
but I'm the smartest at being a good person.
So there's a lot of ego wrapped up in that method
that ultimately I think proved itself, proved it's undoing
that says, okay, this was never really engaged
with the complexities of systems,
the complexities of what people on the ground
might say they need
or even the complexity of systems change.
In fact, if you look at the effective altruists
publications, they would say,
we're not getting involved in political change.
That takes too long.
There's no way to measure the Delta.
There's no way to be secure.
Again, going back to that kind of need
for validation, need for confirmation of efficacy.
So being part of something that might be a longer,
more complex, but ultimately more transformative
initiative for what you use your dollars for
was not attractive to them.
Cause they want, you know, effective altruists want
the immediate, the tangible, the concrete,
the quantifiable for their own gratification,
in my opinion.
Yeah.
Let's talk a little bit about the roots of this movement.
So Peter Singer, again, utilitarian philosopher,
sort of develops these philosophies about,
if you want to do the most good and you should,
that's sort of an ethical burden on you,
then you should figure out the way to save the most lives,
reduce the most suffering.
And it's purely a philosophical position,
but it gets picked up by what we call
the effective altruism movement.
Who are these people and where did they come from?
Effective altruism has a lot of purchase among tech wealth
on the West coast.
So Dustin Moskovitz, who's one of the Facebook founders,
he's a major, he and his wife, Kerry Tuna,
major funders of Give Well.
Now this goes to other household names, Elon Musk,
has jumped on the effective altruist train.
Peter Thiel has jumped on the effective altruism train
as well.
There's a lot of spread.
I'll have creep, I would say, about this philosophy,
but it fits in neatly with this idea
that the world is reducible to calculation.
The world is reducible to some kind of definitive,
like algorithmic analysis.
So the idea is that a problem like poverty
can be solved by some kind of uniquely identifiable
single kind of line item of what you're gonna give to people.
It could be bed nets.
It could be something else.
But it is this idea that somehow there's one intervention
that your money can do that somehow is gonna have
an outsize effect on people's lives.
There's a satisfaction in that, right?
I remember donating the Against Malaria Foundation,
which I have no reason to believe is a bad organization.
And you make your donation and they show you
a little progress update for like the dollars,
how many bed nets your dollars are buying
and where they're going
and how many people they're gonna protect.
And it feels so quantifiable and positive.
Malaria is a huge problem and it kills many people.
And I'll take it on faith
that the lack of bed nets is a problem.
And it's something that I can,
if I buy two more bed nets,
then those are two more people
who are gonna have access to them.
But it is my feeling that it's still my emotion
that is being triggered there.
Right.
Well, the Nobel Prize winning economist, Angus Deaton,
referred to the effective altruist movement as the idea
that lies-
Past guest Angus Deaton, by the way.
Past guest.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Great.
A colleague then.
Just so you know, Nobel Prize on the show before.
And that means one for you in the future.
Thank you.
I appreciate that.
So he referred to effective altruism as the idea
that lives can be bought cheaply, like used cars.
It's the idea that lives are bought,
you're looking for the best deal.
You're looking for lives that you can gain cost-effectively.
Yeah.
That feels like a kind of icky, reductive way
of looking at other human beings.
Yeah, it's like you're doing your charity like storage wars.
Like you're showing up going like,
how much can I get for,
oh, those lives are going for like 10 bucks each.
I can save a bunch of lives over there.
Yes.
And that in fact is used as an argument for,
hey, why would you spend your charity dollar in the US?
It'll go much further if you spend it overseas,
you'll save more lives.
Exactly.
Which is like, on the one hand,
the first time you hear that, you're like,
okay, yeah, maybe I am being, you know,
chauvinistic by saying, oh, people in my city are better,
a more important, maybe I should, all lives are equal, right?
Yeah.
But then on the other hand, after a while you start going,
well, why wouldn't I try to improve the place I live?
Right.
That's where I live.
Right.
It's where I live and it's where I'm actually
in relationship with other people.
Exactly.
In some really important way.
So you have a bigger chance, a better shot
at seeing people as full, complex human beings
rather than just these kind of abstract objects
that I refer to them in the book as like avatars of poverty.
There's this like flattening and objectification
of people that comes with giving philosophies
that really see people as only their vulnerability,
only their need, only their desperation,
that you then the hero donor can save
for just one dollar a day with just one bed net.
There's a real, you want to talk about chauvinism,
but there's a real egotistical feedback loop
that comes with that that has a less chance of evolution
than if you say, okay, I'm really focusing giving
in a way that keeps me in deep connected relationship
with other people and build some common world
that I want to share with them.
And that's what the people sort of running
this movement kind of lacked.
They weren't actually in community with anybody
other than themselves and the wealthy people
that they hung out with.
And that really led to some biases.
Like I used to read the givewell.org recommendations
every year and see how they would rank different things.
And then one year I went, well, hold on a second,
I'm really concerned about climate change.
Have they done any work on climate change?
And I dug into their, like they publish all their papers.
It's very academic and rigorous.
And I went and looked at the climate change
and they had done, you know, a couple of pages on them.
They were like, well, we evaluated some things,
but we couldn't really find proof.
You know, they want really rigorous evidence
that your dollar is going to, you know,
create such and such good.
And they're like, we couldn't really find a charity
that would prove that.
Right.
And I'm going, well, what do you have to?
Like, you know, can't, we have,
like that standard is really high.
And then I started looking at the other things
they were recommending and they had started to go,
oh, a new area of focus for us is AI mitigation.
We're really worried.
And by the way, this was like five to seven years ago.
They were like, we're really worried
that AI is going to take over the world.
And if we invest money right now,
preventing AI from taking over the world,
that's going to be the most valuable.
And I was like, who, you're not working on climate change,
but you are working on AI?
Like, what, why?
And-
Well, there's two things happening there.
And one is that climate change is really ill-suited
to their framework.
It's complex, it's multivalent.
It's going to require lots of different kinds
of interventions, going to require social movements.
Stuff that you can't easily quantify
and it's going to happen at a much slower pace
than the kind of immediacy of like bed net equals life.
You know?
The other thing that's going on there
is that the appeal of the long-term future
because long-termism is the sort of new fad
that you're referring to.
That became their new thing of, oh, we need to think
not just five years or 10 years into the future,
but like 10,000 years.
Right.
This is sort of the end state of thinking of humanity
only in terms of volume.
Like how the number of beings that we count as human beings
who could maximally be alive
and not about quality of life,
not about quality of our world,
but really just the numbers.
I refer in the book to their philosophy
of existing human beings as depreciating assets.
Right?
If you're a human being that's alive today,
you have liabilities.
You can't, you know, immediately you can't quite maximize,
we're not ideal figures.
You can't maximize our utility.
You can't maximize our labor.
We might have sickness.
We're going to age.
Like it's like you drive a car off the lot
to extend Angus Deaton's analogy.
Like the moment a human being is alive, it has liabilities.
And so if they're looking for this perfect, optimized,
idealized human civilization
that really is about maximizing the number of human beings
that are alive and productive at any given time,
then you're going to look way into the future
when it's just a computer model.
You're not going to deal with the reality of human beings
in the here and now because it's too complex
and it's too compromised in a way.
There's also a degree to which it's taking
like a philosophical thought experiment
and taking it literally.
Like it's all well and good to write, you know,
well, hey, if I could, you know,
if you could spend $1,000 and save one life today
or you could spend $1,000
and save 10,000 lives in the future
because you are preventing AI mitigation
or you're mitigating an AI
that could potentially kill billions of people
in the future and you're blah, blah, blah, blah.
Right.
In a philosophical thought experiment,
you could have a fun time deciding which is more important.
But like as if someone who studied philosophy,
I was always like, well, you don't actually do that shit.
You know what I mean?
It's a thought experiment.
Like the Chinese room isn't real.
The lever that makes the train go from one, you know.
I hope I can say on this show
that there's something masturbatory about all of it,
you know, there is something like.
Well, philosophy is inherently masturbatory.
I couldn't agree more.
And that's the great thing about it.
I love masturbating.
Well, it's been great being on the show.
I'm glad.
But I don't, but you know,
masturbating is that's only one part of my life.
I don't take that to the rest of my social life.
I don't have to talk about pie charts, Adam.
We don't have to look at the breakdown.
It's okay.
Let's move off of this metaphor.
But yeah, there's an oddness to taking it.
Even taking utilitarianism, which again,
I think is a philosophy with a lot to recommend it.
I'm not like some Peter Singer hater,
but it is the kind of thing
where when you actually take it really seriously,
you're like, well.
The big problem with effective altruism is its absolutism.
The fact that there's really very little room
for alternative ways of thinking.
And to me, that's symptomatic of a bigger problem,
which is that under our current kind of,
yeah, can I use the term neoliberal here?
Can we talk about neoliberalism?
Fantastic.
So under neoliberalism, which is the kind of philosophy
that we really need to be competitive in the market
as much as possible, that our whole lives need to be
kind of oriented towards our performance
in the economic market.
It means that that takes over our lives
to the exclusion of all other ways
of relating to ourselves and to other people.
And effective altruism is this kind of consummate example
of that taking over philanthropy of saying,
well, human beings are really just,
the metric that we use to judge worth
is whether we're alive and economically productive.
And that's the mode by which we decide
where our charitable dollars go.
And that excludes so many other dimensions
of human life and things that make life worth living
and actually make us human.
Well, how did effective altruism get involved
with crypto and with Sam Bankman Freed?
Because this is the oddest part of the story, I think.
Right.
Well, I'm not a journalist with expertise
on the kind of chronology of that,
but I can say that early effective altruism
was popular among a kind of class of young bankers
who signed onto this idea of earning to give, right?
This was part of the philosophy was like,
oh, instead of going to work for a nonprofit
where there's gonna be limits,
constraints on how much good I can personally contribute,
the idea is, oh, if I go make a ton of money
working in banking, working in a hedge fund
and I give it away to the most effective charities,
then I'll be doing so much more good.
I don't wanna pause and just say,
notice how much the I figures in to all of this.
Notice how much this is about the sovereign self,
the sovereign control, I as the sort of actor in history.
And there's a missing parentheses in that little story,
which is also in the second version, I'll be fucking rich.
Of course.
Right.
I'll have a private jet and a penthouse.
Or, and like, at any time,
I can just keep more of the money if it works for me.
Like even if you start off saying,
okay, I'm gonna live a monkish existence
and donate my seven figure bonuses
to effective altruist ranked charities, that's fine.
But at any given time, you can still choose to pull back
and say, you know what,
I actually would like some of this money for myself.
I feel like I've accumulated enough virtue points
in the world.
Yeah.
Versus actually working in service of other people.
Right.
And since take a $70,000 a year a job as a social worker,
which would be a great salary for a social worker,
and actually work in service of others,
now your needs are less prioritized.
Your needs are less prioritized
and you just don't have as much control.
You don't have as much,
you're working in with other people as well
and within the system.
So there's this undercurrent of maximizing the amount
of control that you, the donor have,
even if you are allegedly doing it all for humanity.
So there's this whole cohort of bankers
who are signing on this philosophy.
Right.
There's a story in the book about a guy named Matt Wage,
who was a student of Peter Singers
and this is a early description of this philosophy.
He says, imagine if you walk past a burning building
and you could save all 100 people who were inside.
Like you had a way of like putting out the fire
or you could kick down the door and save 100 people,
that would be the greatest day of your life.
And you're like the greatest day of your life.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Everybody else inside had a pretty shini day.
Right.
Also especially cause there was one guy
trying to save all of them
instead of an entire firefighting system.
And also they're building burned down
because of poor safety codes and maybe the building inspector
You know, the building inspector had been, you know,
defunded the previous year
because there had been some tax cuts across the city.
So that the, you know, so the hero guy walking around.
A city that now is like,
you, the hedge fund you work for holds a bond
against that debt, by the way, right?
So, yes.
Those people didn't have great days,
but the hero who rescued everybody.
You at the best day, right?
So, I think you can draw a line from that mentality
to a Sam Bankman freed who says,
aha, like here is a movement Taylor made for me,
a guy who thinks he is the smartest and the most effective
and really doesn't have to answer to anybody else
as we found out.
He really didn't think he did.
So there was a, there's a sort of through line of justification
of accumulating wealth by any means
because you're going to put it to, as you put it,
the right ends.
So that's how we end up with a Sam Bankman freed.
And he became completely entwined
in the effective altruism movement.
My understanding is a huge amount,
money started flooding into this movement.
The New Yorker did a wonderful piece on this.
You know, they started buying buildings or whatever
and like, you know, having all this space
and you know, yada, yada, yada.
And a lot of that money was coming from Sam Bankman freed
and other crypto people.
And now that he is about, as we speak right now,
about to go to prison for a very long time
because he was convicted of one of the most massive
financial frauds in American history,
it's discredited the movement because the,
like the leading lights of this movement,
the philosopher kings who were writing the papers
and spreading the good word were like best buddies with him,
one of the most unethical people in the history of the country.
Why? Because he had the money.
The entire board of the FTX Foundation resigned
and wrote an open letter once the indictments came for Sam.
And there were a number of responses that basically said,
how could you like, you guys have PhDs from Oxford,
like how could you have worked with this guy
and had a foundation that was allegedly
going to give out a hundred million dollars a year, right?
And you know, buy into all of this hype
without really checking the reality.
Yeah, they were going to give out a hundred million dollars
a year to save lives and the future of humanity, yada, yada.
But that was money that they got because they just stole it.
They stole it from other people who were told, like, disappear.
But you misunderstand, those people were dumber.
They were just dumber.
They were dumb enough to believe what we told them,
which is that FTX and all that was a great investment.
Exactly.
So clearly they would not have been better.
They were not worthy stewards of this money.
The way we, the people stealing it from them, would have been.
One of the things I find most fascinating about this
is that it's a really rare example
of a philosophical idea or a philosophical movement
starting with Peter Singer and the utilitarians
that is now discredited.
I have to think that there's been some backlash
in the Philosophical Academy about this
because of its association with the real world.
It's rare for a philosophical idea
to interact with the real world so badly
that it becomes discredited.
That seems to have happened here, at least to me.
It has, and it's happened quickly, right?
It's happened in this very compressed timeframe
where you have this rise of trend of effective altruism,
like you say New Yorker profiles,
major public figures coming into view.
Not typical to have a giving philosophy
becoming such a zeitgeisty thing.
And then you have this scandal that happened
so quickly and so dramatically.
And I think what it proved is the flaws
that were baked into the philosophical model
immediately proved true,
like the moment it started to interact with,
I don't think in a way it's surprising that this happened
because this is just the inevitable product
of a philosophy that says we can do the most good
in the world without actually really caring
about other people and our obligations to them.
Yeah, it's really interesting.
Cause again, utilitarianism is not something
I throw out by itself, but the knock against it
is always that it leads to sort of perverse outcomes
if you actually follow through on it.
And holy shit, it happened immediately.
Right.
Who could have predicted everyone?
It do be like that.
It do be like that.
Honestly, I'd love to have Peter Singer on this show
because I still think he's a fascinating thinker.
Absolutely.
And I'd love to hear how he interacts
with some of what happened since,
but you know what, let's take a really quick break
cause I want to talk to you when we get back
about other streams of philanthropic thought
and mistakes that have been made
and how we can actually maybe help each other
in a more productive way.
But we'll be right back with more Amy Shiller.
You know, the year is never more hectic
than during the holiday season
with travel plans, work projects wrapping up.
And if you're on a household,
it's sometimes even hard to remember what's for dinner
or if anyone is remembered to feed the dog.
If this sounds like your home
or the home of someone you know,
this holiday season is time for the gift of organization
with the skylight calendar.
The skylight calendar is a smart touchscreen calendar
and organizer for all your chores, groceries and to-dos.
It automatically syncs all the different digital calendars
and events your family uses
and shows them all together
on one beautiful touchscreen display.
Skylight calendar is the best way
to give your family peace of mind
to enjoy the things that matter most.
It works by syncing events
from already existing calendars you have,
including Google, Outlook and Apple calendars.
You can also add events directly using the touchscreen
or with the free skylight mobile app.
It shows all family events together in one spot
so you can see what everyone has going on each week.
Families are more likely to actually check it
since it's always up to date
so they don't question mom every day about schedules.
And it also comes in two sizes,
small 10 inch or large 15 inch.
The large one is wall-mountable
and looks beautiful up on the wall.
And on top of that,
there are multiple view options to choose from,
day, week or month views,
or you can set it to schedule view
to see a few days at a time
formatted in hour by hour blocks.
And as a special limited time offer for our listeners,
you can get $15 off your purchase of a skylight calendar
when you go to skylightcal.com slash factually.
To get $15 off your purchase of a skylight calendar,
just go to skylightcal.com slash factually.
That's S-K-Y-L-I-G-H-T-C-A-L.com slash factually.
You know, if you've listened to my podcast at all,
you know that internet security and privacy
are top concerns of mine.
I don't think you can ever be too safe.
And that's why I've used a virtual private network
for years when I'm browsing the web.
Some of you may use a VPN already,
others of you might have heard of VPNs
but not known where to start.
Well, the time is now to make a jump
to NordVPN as they're offering an exclusive deal
to factually listeners.
NordVPN shields your IP address
and secures your online traffic
with state of the art encryption.
You can rest assured that you're listening to your podcasts,
streaming shows and browsing the internet
in complete privacy.
No one looking over your shoulder
and no one secretly tracking your data.
My personal favorite feature
is the ability to change your virtual location.
If you're traveling abroad and wanna stream shows
that are only available in the US,
well, wherever you might be,
just choose the little flag icon
for US, Canada, UK, Germany,
or dozens of others
to change where your connection is coming from.
I also really like that there's a built-in ad
and malware blocker.
They won't even make it to your browser,
stop dead in their tracks
before you even load those bad boys.
NordVPN is simple to set up,
even simpler to use
and this is simply the best time to try it out.
So if you wanna join me and use a VPN
to keep yourself safe on the internet,
head to nordvpn.com slash adamcon over
to get this exclusive deal right now.
That's nordvpn.com slash adamcon over.
You know, if you're headed
into your family's holiday dinner
with news alerts on your phone
and a rant in your heart,
there is no place like crooked medias
love it or leave it for the holidays.
This live variety show turn podcast
is insanely funny, wildly popular,
and critically beloved.
Each week, host John Lovett
is joined by a mix of comedians, TV writers,
elected officials and actors
who share their uncensored opinions
on everything from the Republican primary
to AI to Hollywood's sexiest aliens.
Past guests include me, that's right,
I've been on the show,
Cal Penn, Casey Wilson,
Real Housewife, Candy Burris,
former White House Press Secretary, Jen Psaki,
Congresswoman, Pramila Jayapal and many others.
Try out love it or leave it for its unique blend
of pop culture humor and political analysis,
which helps you stay informed
without triggering your gag reflex.
It is pumpkin pie season after all.
New episodes of love it or leave it
drop every Saturday morning.
You can watch full episodes
on the love it or leave it YouTube channel
or listen in wherever you get your podcasts.
Do you know how much of your personal data
is out there on the internet?
There's a good chance
it's a lot more than you'd be comfortable with.
Every day, personal data is being sold
and traded online by data brokers.
But that doesn't mean you can't stay private
and protect that personal data.
And delete me is an indispensable tool
for this very purpose.
Delete me's teams of experts
will scan the internet to find
and delete your personal data
and you will get a detailed report
of their findings in just seven days.
We live in an era of doxing online harassment
and ID theft that can compromise not just your finances
but potentially even ruin job opportunities.
About 41% of Americans are exposed
to some form of online harassment.
And let me tell you something
as a public figure on the internet,
that's something that I deal with myself.
And that is why I have been a subscriber
to Delete Me for years.
Years before they even sponsored this podcast,
I just used their service.
In fact, I signed up my entire family for it
because I didn't want any of our names, addresses,
phone numbers, any of that personal information online
where people can just get it whenever they want.
I wanted to keep myself safe and all of us safe.
And let me tell you something,
Delete Me has done a fantastic job of that for me.
So if you wanna safeguard yourself
and live with a peace of mind
that experts are hunting down
and removing your personal information
from the internet every three months,
then check out Delete Me.
Go to joindeleteme.com slash Adam
and get 20% off for all consumer plans with the code Adam.
That's joindeleteme.com slash Adam
and get 20% off with the code Adam.
Okay, we are back with Amy Schiller
talking about philanthropy and all of its problems.
And solutions.
And solutions, we're gonna talk about solutions too,
but I wanna talk about one more problem first.
Yes, let's.
We just talked about the philosophy
of effective of altruism.
I've covered recently on my YouTube channel,
billionaire philanthropy.
People like Bill Gates, Warren Buffett,
Andrew Carnegie going back into history,
this idea that billionaires can save the world
by donating all of their money.
And people can go watch that video
if they wanna sort of see the full version of that debunking
and my thoughts on it.
But I wanna ask you about a specific example of it
that's often presented as being a positive
because I know you covered in the book.
Mackenzie Scott, who is Jeff Bezos' ex-wife.
I was gonna say widow.
He's not dead, we can hope.
His ex-wife, she received billions in the divorce,
and she has been giving the money away like crazy.
And people will often say in the comments of my videos,
I'm Mackenzie Scott, now she's a great example.
She's a good example of this
because she's just trying to get rid of this shit.
I'm curious what your take is on her.
Well, it's very like, you're right, you're also right.
A very kind of fiddler on the roof approach
where it's like, you're right,
she is doing it better than any billionaire, right?
She's giving her money away
in really admirable transformative ways.
And what makes it better than how they give it away?
She gives it away unrestricted.
That's the number one thing.
And I'll get back to that in a second,
but the thing is that she is doing her philanthropy
I think better than others, but because of that,
you can see the limits of philanthropy's actual power
to create social change.
So I'll explain why.
So Mackenzie Scott gives away
tens of millions of dollars in tranches
and she works with a team of consultants
and they do a lot of vetting behind the scenes.
And so unlike many situations where nonprofits
have to write grant reports
and massage all their language to fit a funder's,
oh, we're really interested in this particular thing
or can you make this about dogs somehow?
There's like so much.
I wanna build it with my name on it.
Can I have a nice building?
There's so much catering to the idiosyncratic preferences
of funders and it takes up a ton of time
and then you have to do reporting that shows like,
oh, we spent the money on exactly the thing
that we said we were gonna spend it on
to, I think, very burdensome degrees, right?
There's certainly a case to be made
that you should do some of that,
but this is very burdensome.
Many nonprofits complain about this.
So Mackenzie Scott instead,
what she does is she just makes up her list with her team.
Her team then calls the recipients and says,
you've just been allocated some millions of dollars
from Mackenzie Scott, unrestricted, very little reporting.
Like you just got this giant windfall
and you don't have to jump through all the hoops
that you normally have to jump through to get funding.
This is super transformative
because what this does is displaces the stature
and the power of Mackenzie as the donor
and really says this is about just getting money to people
and to go back to our theme of trust,
trusting these institutions to use it
in the way that they see fit.
So there's a lot of giving away, not just of money,
but of oversight and discretion,
which is really a form of power.
I think that's super admirable
and I think that many people should be taking her example
and not putting nonprofits through all of these paces
to try and get all this money.
And this is similar to when we were talking
at the beginning of giving someone,
hey, here's money, you know what to do best with it.
I'm not worried that you're gonna spend it
on the wrong thing, like alcohol.
It's very similar to donating to an individual person.
It gives them that trust
and it deprioritizes you, the giver.
That's good.
Exactly, I think that's the best thing.
Where I think you see the limits is,
Mackenzie Scott has made many public statements
where she talks about her concerns
about social and economic justice, racial injustice,
that she wants this money to go,
not to elite institutions, but to HBCUs, for example,
or she wants it to go to local social service organizations,
things that are not priorities for the billionaire class.
These are really gifts that she's making
to organizations that serve poor,
working and otherwise disenfranchised people
in the United States.
That's also great and great and unusual.
The only problem is that for all of the money
that she has and all the money
that she's shoveling out the door,
the metaphor I use in the book is Lucy and Ethel
at the chocolate factory.
It's like they can't wrap the chocolate fast enough
to get it out the door like she desperately wants to.
Unfortunately, her holdings of Amazon stock
mean that she's just gonna keep accumulating money
even faster than she can give it away.
Wow.
So that's one problem.
Interesting.
So she hasn't divested from the Amazon stock.
She still has, the money is growing, what?
Because Amazon stock price can be used, right?
Now, this is as far as I know.
Like I can't say I know the contents of her portfolio,
but if we assume that it's from Amazon stock,
then yes, her wealth is just growing at a faster rate
than she could give it away even at this revolutionary pace.
But she could give it away.
I mean, it's possible to divest,
but she's sort of still using an endowment sort of model
where she has a big pot and then the proceeds
from the investment is what is being given away.
So her metaphor is she wants to give
until the safe is empty.
Now the problem with the safe is that
there's like a static amount of money in there.
It's not like, oh, it gets refilled
and then you have to like continuously empty it.
But there's a different strain of issue here,
which is that she could,
she could of course officially divest herself of her stock
or she could put a billion dollars
into the Amazon Worker Strike Fund.
She could use this money,
not in these kind of downstream palliative ways
where she gives it to nonprofits
that are trying to kind of make up for the deprivations
that people face in a deeply unequal society.
She could do something much more radical
and confrontational with the amount of money that she has
that would actually change labor relations,
that would actually change policy,
that might actually do something to prevent
these conditions of inequality that so concern her.
So this model of charitable giving
as a mode of social justice,
it kind of comes too late in the process.
You would have to intervene upstream
in our political system in a more confrontational way.
So I think as chaired, as philanthropy, it's great,
but as social justice, I think it's very limited.
So, okay, that's really interesting
because she's giving away the money
in a way that deprioritizes her.
But it sounds like what you're saying is the choices
that she's making her priorities of who gets the money,
it's still her team figuring it out,
she still has some biases or some things
she maybe doesn't quite understand.
Maybe just, I would say some limitations, right?
Like there's, I would love to see her go farther.
I would love to see her become a champion of workers rights
that would be much more revolutionary, much more radical,
and it wouldn't just be redistributing money,
it would be genuinely redistributing power.
So let's talk about what kind of donation that would be.
I mean, if one were to actually donate money
to a place that would actually do these things,
what sort of organizations are we talking about?
So if we're talking about nonprofits,
there are some excellent advocacy nonprofits.
There's Americans for financial reform,
there's demand progress, there's the revolving door project.
There are a number of nonprofits that really seek to
weaken the power of corporations in government.
And again, I have to echo donating money
to union strike funds would be an incredibly
ballsy and revolutionary move.
That would really be about giving workers the power
to negotiate for their own conditions.
Frankly, you could probably just give money
to union networks more broadly.
They all have operating foundations as well.
So there's some confrontational giving
that is right on the line between charitable giving,
501c3 and a form of like political giving.
You might even give it to a 501c4
that more actively does lobbying.
So that's one way to do it,
where you would actually be giving to places
that are challenging our policies and our norms
and our dynamics of labor and race and power.
And not just from a kind of marginal position,
but really confrontationally in the halls of power.
But there's still a problem there.
Cause I imagine, I take your point very well.
And as a member of two unions,
one of which SAG-AFTRA did not have the strike fund
set up as year round as the Writers Guild does
and needed a lot of donations very quickly
for that strike fund.
If they were to suddenly have, hey, we're on strike.
Well, guess what?
Here's $500 million or whatever from Mackenzie Scott.
That would have changed the strike enormously.
It would have meant that actors could have,
and by the way we're talking today,
the day after the strike was resolved and ended.
And congratulations on that.
Thank you very much.
I know you're very active on that board.
Yeah, I'm active in the Writers Guild.
I'm just a SAG-AFTRA member.
But I'm an active member,
but I don't serve in any leadership role.
But if there was a strike fund that was 10 times
what it had been,
the membership would have been in a very different place.
Maybe it could have held out even longer if necessary.
I mean, hopefully not,
but it would have changed the facts on the ground.
It would have given the workers a lot more power.
So I take that point,
but I do wonder if she did have those priorities.
If she said Mackenzie Scott divorces Jeff Bezos,
and she reads a bunch of Jane McAleavy books
and the Communist Manifesto
and realizes that worker power is the most important thing
and she wants to donate to those structural places, right?
I could see someone making the argument.
Well, now she's following her other set
of ideological commitments and biases,
which are still a fact about her, right?
And maybe there's something even more efficient
she could have done.
Like, isn't part of the problem
that one person is calling the shots at all,
isn't, wouldn't it be better just to like,
take the money away and let us vote on it?
You know what I mean?
Or something like that.
Of course, that, yes,
expropriating wealth for public use is a huge part of this.
I think I'm thinking about what is in the short
to medium horizon of possible.
Yeah, of course.
So I totally take your point and agree with you.
And there's stuff in the book about how we change
tax incentives and how we change our political economy
for a number of reasons,
but one being so that philanthropy
is not this highly stratified activity
that's only done by the mega rich,
but that we have greater equality
and democratization of wealth,
such that we have democratization of giving as well.
So I completely agree with you.
That's really interesting, democratization of giving.
So expand on that, please.
So democratization of wealth really means
a more equitable distribution of wealth.
And democratization of giving would then mean
more people had the discretionary income
that they could participate even in small ways in giving.
So one of the concepts that I put forth in the book
is the idea of going beyond a living wage to a giving wage.
So we have this idea of a living wage that would pay people.
So apparently we need a special term to say
workers are actually supposed to be able to live on
what they earn.
This is like already a paradigm change
that we shouldn't need to have, but we're working on it.
I suggest that we need to go even further
and say people should be paid a giving wage.
They should be paid enough
that they can also afford even nominally to give back.
So we're recording this a couple of weeks
before Giving Tuesday, for example,
like this day after Thanksgiving,
which is one of the largest days of giving in the year,
right before giving season starts,
30% of all gifts are made in December.
So my sense is giving is really one expression
of the health of our democracy.
And so I would wanna see people paid more
and with more robust social welfare policies
that enable us all the security and the freedom
to give to things that actually enable human flourishing
in our communities.
Yeah, if we were,
if we had a more equitable economy overall,
then more people would be able to donate
and we wouldn't have the equity problems
that we do with philanthropy
because it would be overall more democratic.
And actually the labor movement
is maybe a good example of this
because folks who have union jobs generally,
on average earn more than folks who do not.
And part of a small percentage,
I forget what my total dues are,
a percent or so of my salary goes to the union,
which is a not for profit that works for the benefit
of me and others in my industry and community.
It's not quite a charity,
but it's sort of an example of this
where the labor movement is this durable nonprofit
power center for workers' rights and for equality
and generally green things
and all the good things that we like.
And it is funded by the fact that the workers,
the workers each chipping in a little bit,
which they're able to do because they're all paid more.
Exactly.
And to expand,
yes, the unions are a crucial example of this.
And then there are parts of our lives
that really secure our quality of life.
They might be our parks,
they might be cultural institutions,
they might be houses of worship,
they might be recreation centers.
Like if we think about those as power centers as well,
places that really affirm human worth
beyond our economic productivity,
places that really cultivate human community and connection,
that is a form of building power.
That is a form of affirming human value and human worth
beyond our economic productivity.
Yeah, is it?
I gotta say though, you mentioned churches, right?
And churches are probably the most common form
of community-based philanthropy.
Many, many Americans are members of churches.
Many churches have an ideology of you should chip in a bit.
And some religions or some denominations,
that's tithing where people donate a lot of their income.
And I have to say,
not all those churches are institutions
that spend money in ways that benefit society.
Some of them spend money in ways that benefit
only the people who go to the church,
that protect wealth,
that there are some very regressive churches out there.
And so I'm wondering if our desire
to have a version of philanthropy
that is going to be good in every respect is a problem.
I mean, I said a second ago, right?
What if we just take the money away
and we all vote on what to do with it, right?
And it's very easy for me to say.
Ha, ha, ha, fuck the billionaires, take the money away,
let's all vote, let's have it be democratic.
Unfortunately, we do currently have a system
where we do that to some extent, it's called taxes.
And I think if any single person in the country
were to look at what taxes are spent on,
every single person in the country would say,
I fucking hate a lot of this, right?
And that's because democracy is a fucking mess.
And people do not agree,
and there's a lot of assholes in every society,
and there's power imbalances in society,
and there's hierarchies, and there's,
people, corporations are able to say,
oh, hold on, there's a lot of money being given out,
why don't we get some for ourselves?
We're powerful enough that we can,
military industrial complex and all that shit, right?
And it sort of seems like in order to find that path
to a positive philanthropy,
we need to solve every power-based problem in society,
which seems like a tall order.
When you put it that way.
I'm very sorry,
do you have an answer to this question in your book?
It's called how to fix philanthropy,
how to fix everything.
But I guess to me, I see having this diversified set
of tactics of how we can use money for social good
kind of offsets some of the challenges
that you just listed.
So there's a story in the book that points out exactly
what you said that like,
even our democratically elected governments
are not always going to have the interests
of human flourishing at heart, right?
They might be hostile.
And so, you know, as much as the leftist in me is concerned
that what I'm saying is, you know,
a libertarian or otherwise mistrustful of government,
I do think there's something to be said for pluralism.
So the story is that in the late 90s,
Rudy Giuliani, the then mayor of New York,
wanted to sell off about 140 plots of land
that were allocated for community gardens.
And he wanted to sell them to developers
and his argument was somehow like, we need this land,
we need it for housing.
These gardens are just, you know, these elite spaces
that are just kind of draining public resources.
And really what he meant was,
this is not economically productive.
This is not right.
So.
And these sort of spaces, by the way,
are one of the things that make New York City
a wonderful city that it is,
this is a city where we're recording in New York right now,
you walk around like, oh, there's a tiny little park.
It's just like the size of one little building.
At some point they knocked down a building
and built a little park there.
And it's one of the beautiful things.
Not only did they knock down a building,
but it was actually largely black and Latinx communities
that took over vacant lots in the 1970s
and turned them into these gardens.
So they're actually our legacies of, you know,
people of color and grassroots reclaiming
of public space and building their communities.
So what the short version of what saved these spaces
is a fundraising campaign spearheaded by Bette Midler
that for $2.4 million bought these plots
and then donated them to a land trust,
donated them to New York City land trust.
So there's this way in which philanthropy
can be this lever of using money for like humanism
even in the undesirable moments
when our governments do not have that
in their core interests.
So you actually feel that philanthropy
is not by itself bad.
It's the way we've been going about it.
It's the over prioritization
and that there is a version of philanthropy
that would be productive.
There is a thing that Warren Buffett could do
that would be net positive.
So the best story I can give you to exemplify this,
it's the last part of the book
and it's a profile of LeBron James.
So LeBron has a network of institutions
that his foundation has helped start in Akron, Ohio.
And the first of them is the I Promise School.
And I wanna just say really importantly off the top,
the I Promise School is a public school.
It has a collective bargaining agreement for the teachers.
It is not a charter school
that might be the most revolutionary thing about it.
So let's be clear that this is philanthropy
in partnership with public goods,
with like democratically funded public goods,
public institutions, public schools.
So there's the I Promise School
that has public governance,
but the LeBron James Family Foundation
and its partners fund this huge suite
of wraparound services.
They have food pickup for breakfast, lunch and dinner
for the families.
There's a barber shop for the parents of the kids
and every kid gets a bike and a helmet.
Why?
Because when LeBron was asked about the bikes,
he said, when I was a kid,
having a bike was what made me feel free.
That to me is like, how do you use money
to value the unquantifiable, the human spirit,
the intangible?
There's no balance sheet that can quantify feeling free.
And that's what the philanthropy that he gives
can provide alongside the very critical basic services.
And is there something that,
because you say that and it makes me think,
well, you know, that made LeBron feel free.
Maybe something else would make some other kid feel free.
Absolutely.
Maybe a fucking, I felt free when I had a Super Nintendo.
And so, is there something about this
that makes us avoid that pitfall
of LeBron deciding for everybody else?
No, I'm not avoiding that pitfall.
I'm not gonna pretend that we are.
It's true, he does decide,
but it's a very embedded decision.
It's embedded in his upbringing,
in his relationships, in his knowledge.
Because he's from there.
He actually, at the opening of I Promise, he said,
I know what the kids who go to the school are going through.
I know the dreams they have.
I know the nightmares they have.
So it's very deeply empathetic
and connected about that.
So it's not just, I woke up and I had this quixotic idea
that we should just give kids bikes.
Like, no, I do know, because I was this kid.
Yeah, he didn't do the,
let's contrast with what Mark Zuckerberg did
with the Newark schools, I think.
Yes.
Which I think is a bad story.
Do you remember the details?
Exactly, I'm not very well, I just talked about it.
And so, he wanted to kind of parachute into Newark
with a hundred million dollars
and revolutionized their school system,
only to create redistricting maps
that didn't take into account
where their kids would need to cross highways
to get to school.
This is one small example of the life.
He's not from there.
LeBron would make that mistake.
LeBron's like, no way, no kids crossing that,
like, buh, buh, buh, buh, buh, buh, buh, buh, buh, buh.
These people go to the schools,
like we, I know how the community works.
Exactly.
As opposed to parachuting in.
Exactly.
I know how the community works
and I'm going to partner with the institutions
that are governed by like public officials
and you know, public funding.
So there's also not that kind of takeover
of like now I'm going to become the Mr. Potter of Akron,
you know, who just like controls everything.
There's a real interconnectedness to how he does it.
And that to me is what I would like philanthropy to do
is to exist in equilibrium and in partnership,
but with a very unique understanding of its role
that like we absolutely need government for,
I say in the book, we need government for bread
and philanthropy for roses.
So, oh.
Expand on that please.
Absolutely.
Now, of course, this is much too need of a divide.
There's lots of places where this, you know,
can blend together in ways you have to work out,
but bread and roses is, as you might know,
the union slogan of we don't just need sustenance,
we need quality of life, we need things that bring us joy,
we need culture, we need music,
we need things that connect us to our souls.
And so again, my sense is like we absolutely need
a government that does a much better job
than our current government does
with providing for our basic needs,
but we also need roses and we,
I don't know that we can necessarily assume
that our government will have the means
or the priorities that allow for that.
And philanthropy has the flexibility to do that
if it does so in proper deference
to the authorities of our government.
And so let's talk about that deference.
Deference to the authorities of our government,
meaning in the case of Akron,
the democratically elected school board,
probably the parent associations, PTAs, whatever,
all the various community organs
that know what is needed there.
Right, all the things that make it
very ineffective altruism, right?
Like all of these kinds of these,
there are relationships of friction and negotiation
and solidarity and just juncture
that have to be contested.
They have to be like democratically contested.
That's what it means to be in relationship,
but you're doing so with a sense
that like you are ultimately there
to help provide the things that keep people human,
the things that bring them joy,
the things that really connect them to one another.
And so there's a humility to that
and a clear sense of purpose.
Yes, and especially when you are in deference
to the organizations within the government
that are specifically democratic,
that are coming from the bottom up.
And when I was saying,
hey, a lot of the stuff in the budget
of the federal government I don't like,
a lot of that is driven by the parts
that are not democratic.
That's driven by corporations having too much power
and the people not having enough power.
And if we instead are working in deference
to the parts of the government that are democratic,
where the people do have a voice,
then we're on the right path maybe.
I think we are, I think we are.
So for this Giving Tuesday.
Yes.
If people, you know, around this time of year,
I do think about how fortunate I am
to be doing a podcast and YouTube videos
and to have a little bit of disposable income.
And I want to make sure that I am sharing it with others
and making the world a better place
in ways that matter to me.
What do you suggest that people, you know,
think about where they start
with their own philanthropic activities
to make sure they're not falling into these?
Because again, I spent five years
following the effective altruists.
And I don't mind that my money went to bed nets,
but now I'm like, I could have done a little better.
There's a balance to strike between giving
for the world we have
and giving for the world we want to build, right?
So I would never say like just give
to these sort of evergreen pursuits of culture
and recreation and parks
because that might feel tone deaf
based on the serious local international crises
that we find ourselves in.
So I don't want to be absolutist about this,
but I would say if anything strive for a balance
between being responsive to the world that we have
and responsive to genuine vulnerability
and genuine crisis that is readily accessible
to all of us if we look around,
but also consider what can you give
and where can you give
that keeps you in relationship with others
that allows you and others to gather, to explore,
to flourish, to grow and connect.
What institutions can you give
that might be locally, they might be nationally,
but what can you do that kind of fosters
human flourishing with your giving?
Do you have an example or even one from your own life
of something like that sort of local thing
that folks can be in partnership with?
Absolutely.
So again, in New York, I support my community garden.
That's a small thing.
I also support museums ranging from ones that are,
the name brands that might be like the Met
or the Brooklyn Museum.
And I especially give to those
that are freely accessible to others,
that really allow for free admission
because that feels the most sort of democratic
and inclusive way of sharing that quality of life with others.
I have been on the board
of some men called the Chautauqua Institution,
the Young People's Board.
That's a place I grew up going
that really fostered these values in me.
I come from Cleveland, not far from Akron.
So shout out to Northeast Ohio.
And so I would give to local social service organizations
there and also to museums there.
And I should say like not just ones that are,
again, those name brands, but maybe smaller ones.
They might be local things that work with the schools.
They might be a dance troupe
that meets at your local community center
that people really value or a recreation center.
Again, stuff that brings people together
in a way that I think is missing so much of the time.
And in terms of building worker power
or power for average people like that,
we were talking about,
wouldn't it be great if Mackenzie Scott
donated organizations like that?
What sort of organizations are you thinking of
and how do people go about finding them?
Well, first of all, I would say definitely look
and see if there are workers on strike
and just give to those strike funds.
That's definitely a great place to start.
The strike funds that the union asks you to donate to,
very important.
That's a great point.
If you want to support a strike,
you have to look at how is the union asking you to support
because sometimes there'll be other funds around the edges
that are not really, you defer to the union, right?
Yeah, I agree completely.
And so the nonprofits that I mentioned before
that I think are really smart about translating advocacy
on behalf of the workers and the sort of populists
of the United States are really great.
That would be demand progress.
That would be Americans for financial reform.
They're really good at translating demands of the people
into real policy.
So those would be my other recommendations there.
I'll tell you my own part from my donations this year
is I've given to the Emergency Workers Organizing Committee,
collective, I forget which,
which is a group that anybody around the country can call
and get connected with an organizer
if you're trying to unionize.
EWALK, really great organization
that comes out of a union effort.
And I am looking for a trans-legal defense charity
because that's, I think, a very important legal issue
right now and those are folks who are really doing
the very basic on-the-ground legal and political work
to get some of the folks who need power built
in our society, most the power that they need.
But I'm looking to, as you say,
find a place that I can have a relationship with
where it's not just like, oh, hey, I'm, you know,
take the money and run or whatever,
but like, you know, where are the places
that are working most closely in their own community?
Not just doing the parachuting in like top-down work,
but, you know, actually providing legal aid
to folks who need it, you know?
I do.
And I totally second that recommendation.
And I think that will sort of require listeners
to look in their own communities.
Yes, exactly.
And kind of just use your sort of embedded networks
and your embedded knowledge about, you know,
where do you feel things are really making a difference
in helping people flourish in the place where you live.
That's so wonderful.
Amy, the book is called The Price of Humanity.
You can pick up a copy at our special bookshop,
factuallypod.com, slash books.
Where else can people, it's out December 5th.
It's out December 5th.
Where else can people find it?
Where else can they follow your work?
You can find the book is at Bookshop.
The book is also in your local independent bookstore.
The book is anywhere you can buy books.
You can find me on social media at AmyTheShill.
I'm on Twitter, I'm on Instagram.
And you can also find me at my website, AmyBestShiller.com.
And I really look forward to hearing from listeners
what your thoughts are.
Thank you so much for being here.
It's been wonderful.
Such a pleasure.
Thanks, Adam.
Well, thank you once again to Amy Shiller
for coming on the show.
Once again, if you wanna pick up a copy of her book,
you can do so at factuallypod.com, slash books.
If you wanna support this show,
please head to patreon.com, slash Adam Conover.
Just five bucks a month gets you every episode
of the show ad-free.
For 15 bucks a month, I will read your name
at the end of the credits
and put it at the end of every one of my video monologues.
This week, I wanna thank Amet A., Richard McVeigh,
God King, engineer of Be For Kind,
Sektobon, Emily Wilson, and Lee Dotson.
Thank you so much for your support.
Head to patreon.com, slash Adam Conover.
If you want to join them.
I wanna thank my producers, Sam Raudman and Tony Wilson,
everybody here at Head Gum
for helping make this show possible.
Once again, you can find my tickets and tour dates
at adamconover.net, and we'll see you next week
for another episode of Factually.
That was a Head Gum podcast.
