Hello and welcome to Factually. I'm Adam Conover. Thank you so much for joining me again. You know,
if you're like me, you like to eat. In fact, you have to eat or you'll die. And you might have
noticed that food has been getting a lot more expensive. Although inflation for food has slowed
relative to 2022, you have to remember that the effects of inflation are cumulative. And recent
numbers showed increased prices for everything from frozen juice to ground beef. Eating out is
more expensive than last year. And even vending machine prices are up. It sucks. Again, we all
have to eat. And for most of us, living off the grid and growing our own meat and potatoes is not
an option. So ideally, we'd have a world where different food companies compete to get us the
lowest price, right? Well, unfortunately, just as with industries like newspapers, internet advertising,
airlines and athletic shoes, that competition doesn't exist anymore at all. Instead, our food
system is run by monopolies. And those monopolies have the power to screw us, whether we're their
customers, their workers or citizens living in places where they exert unfair and undemocratic
influence over our lives. I mean, I can't believe I have to say this, but food is simply one of the
necessities of life, which means it's a bad thing that only a few people in this country have control
over that necessity. You simply cannot explain how we get our beef, pork, grain, how grocery stores
work, why prices are higher than ever without understanding the influence of these massive
and manipulative companies. And luckily on the show today, we have a guest who knows everything
about it. And not only that is from one of the very regions that produces our essential food
stuffs. He not only knows about this, he has lived it himself. And I cannot wait for you to hear this
interview. But before we get to it, I just want to remind you that if you want to support this show
and all of the fascinating, challenging and intelligent conversations we bring you every
single week, you can support us on Patreon. Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
Five bucks a month gets you every one of these episodes ad free. You can join our community
as well. We would love to have you there. And if you want to come see me do stand-up comedy,
head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates. Soon I'm headed to Phoenix, Arizona,
Toronto, Canada. I'm going to have a lot of other dates up there soon. Head to adamconover.net to
check them out. And now my guest today is Austin Frarick. He's an expert on agriculture and antitrust
policy. He's a fellow at Yale and he is born and currently lives in Iowa right here in the United
States. His fantastic new book is called Barons, Money, Power, and the Corruption of America's
Food Industry. Please welcome Austin Frarick. Austin, thank you so much for being on the show,
man. Thanks for having me on, Adam. Okay, so tell me, what is so fucked up about America's Food System?
How radical it's become. You have one man in Iowa as the most powerful political person in the state
and he does five million hogs a year. I mean, not alone. He does five million hogs a year.
What do you mean by he does them? That could mean a lot of things, some of which I don't want a picture.
Yes, so he owns, so he has about 7,000 workers and employees at this point. A lot of them are
contractors. You got to be careful with the word workers, but he owns five million hogs. He has
other people grow them, but he maintains the ownership as they grow them out. But his operation
produces five million hogs a year. And how much of the American pork supply is that?
So he's the fourth largest pork producer in America. Basically in my lifetime,
you've seen the hog family farmer die, where you have the 10 largest entities
do about 70% of the hog market, control it, including the largest owner of hogs is actually
Chinese multinational, Smithfield. Is there a reason you're saying, by the way, hogs and not pigs?
I'm just very curious. Oh, no, I use them interchangeably.
Okay, I was like, is pigs wrong? Should I not be saying pigs? Do I look like city folk if I'm
saying pigs? Okay. Well, and so why is that a problem to have that be so monopolized in
so few hands that one person is doing, you know, is doing so many hogs?
So let's just take hogs and I, so I open my book opens with a hog Baron, this hog guy.
I know, isn't that first of all, it's not so. I'm sorry. The hog Baron is just, what a great
image. It sounds like an anime character or something like that. I imagine a guy with like a
top hat and there's like a little snout on the front. He's got some goggles and he's like,
hello, I'm the hog Baron oink oink. Like that's, what a great guy.
You got to put a little bit more Florida on him. So my hog Baron has like a Florida twist to him.
First of all, I find this campy. That's kind of why I like this framework is it,
you don't feel powerlessness because it's so morally ridiculous. And this whole thing started
because of him. It literally was in a bar in Des Moines, 2018, where someone, a political person
was complaining. I didn't know at the time, but like Iowa doesn't have campaign contribution
limits. So he had given the governor $300,000 for her campaign. Wow. And the thing that caught
my eye was, it was not even that, it was, he has a home in the rich suburb of Des Moines,
he has a home down in Naples, Florida, which says something, but he has a private jet that he flies
back and forth between the two. Wow. And I was like, that's power. That is like that imagery
says everything. But how did Iowa fall apart in my lifetime? And how do I tell this bigger
structural story with this little like trashy Florida man? So there used to be such a thing
as a family hog farmer. Now we have a hog baron, but there used to be a hog peasant or a hog,
small landowner, right? A hog family farmer. Yeah. And now those people now are low wage
workers for this baron. And instead of like, you know, having a relationship with the animal,
your job now is about 10% of the pigs die inside these muddle sheds. So you're paid to go in their
hall at the dead bodies to throw them into a dumpster. Wow. I mean, that is, that is where we
are now. But that's also like for those people in erosion in the middle class, right? Because if
you previously, I assume, were a hog farmer, you had some ownership of some land, of the animals,
of your production pipeline. You were a producer selling to somebody. And I imagine that that
you're able to make more money that way than when you're just a surf working for the hog baron.
Yeah. And you're spending your money locally, you're paying taxes, you're sending your kids to
school, and that's all gone. You see the massive consolidation of power. And honestly, the guy's
probably taking his money down the floor to knowing how this game works. And what happens is
it's basically modern day sharecropping. It really comes from chicken. They call it chickenization
and it's happened across the food system and it happened to pork. He saw that coming where I kid
you not a century ago when they wrote the regulations to tackle the main monopolies in
response to Upton's and Clare's the jungle. When they wrote the regulations, they didn't write
chicken into it because there weren't commercial chicken slaughterhouses. You just butchered a
chicken in your backyard. So down south, corporations took that model to black farmers
that a sharecropping model plighted the chicken. And then what you see is USDA didn't step in
saying chicken, you can't behave that way. And you see the chickenization of everything else.
Wait, so let's get a little bit of a bird's eye view of the history of American food production
because you started talking about, you dropped so many little historical bombs there, sharecropping,
the regulations in the Upton Sinclair era. So take us to the moment before Upton Sinclair,
what did things look like? Why did the regulations come in and then what did we live in?
What world of food did we live in after those regulations up until the present day?
Yeah, so I think actually meatpacking is a single best way to like talk about all this stuff because
it shows what the system could be and how it all falls apart. But let me also first start with
the notion that I want to be very careful about romanticizing the past in the food system because
in the day it's rooted in genocide and slavery. Yeah. But we did make progress. We really did
and you saw the meatpacking where we as a society were mad and angry at what we saw in the jungle,
the meat quality we were getting, and we made policy choices to break up these meat companies,
to empower the workers, and they got power. That became a solid middle-class job. People on both
sides of my family did that for a living. And then what we've seen since the election of President
Reagan is systematic assault on that industry, massive consolidation, where even in my book,
I have a slaughtering baron, this super corrupt Brazilian family where I would actually argue
they're the closest thing to a criminal organization in modern-day corporate America.
Wow. Which is saying a lot, but they actually pled guilty to bribing their way to monopoly
level status. And I'm not talking campaign bribes. I'm talking bribery. But they're now the largest
meatpacker in America. They're the largest meatpacker in the world's ever seen. And that's why we
see rampant use of child labor. We see all these bad things we tackled. This regulatory system
collapsed and we shouldn't be shocked that robber barons are filling that void.
So you said members of your family did this kind of work in maybe not the good old days,
but decades ago and made a living that way. So what did their lives look like compared to what
it looks like now? Yeah, I mean, my grandfather. My grandfather was kind of like my idol. He worked
at a hog plant town, the old Wilson's. They bought a home out in the country. He had a little acreage
I grew up. That's kind of actually why I lived farming and gardening is I grew up working his
plot with him. He owns his house. And nowadays, I mean, just even where I live, a lot of immigrants
and they live in section 8 housing. They're usually Sudanese and they work at either in
Tame or Waterloo, Iowa. They live two or three families to a two bedroom. You know what I mean?
My grandfather could buy a house, lived American dream and now these people are barely getting
by and where they live is actually most highly impoverished school district, sorry, school,
elementary in the city. It's just, it says so much of where we've become and it's incredibly
dangerous. And you add the whole layer on top of it of a lot of these workers either undocumented
or on the marginal thing of there's just so much abuse going on that we just don't even know about.
So how did this transition take place? How do we go from the world that your grandfather lived
into the world that these folks now inhabit? I mean, I just think we're living in a second
gilded age, just another Lazi Farah thing. And it's such a simple thing, but I realized sitting
in a biz school class a few years ago, the goal of any corporate executive is monopoly.
Period. And so like, you saw what they did regulatory capture, you know, the election
of Reagan was such a game changer of just, I know you had Lena Conn on. I mean,
that's like to me, this best way of hope right now is we're, we're moving away from that model,
but it allowed massive consolidation to occur where my coffee Baron in my book is a secret
German family that now sells more coffee than Starbucks, but didn't even sell it being a coffee
in America till 2012. They bought Panera, Caribou coffee, Ironsigns Bagels, Burgers Bagels, Curie
Cups, Stumptown, Telegencia, Krispy Kreme, you name it. They bought all of the worst bagel chains
as a lifelong New Yorker. They bought all the bagel chains I would never fucking eat at.
In my life, they have spongy bagels. They, they toast every single one of them. And, and along
with all these other chains as well. So, sorry, go on, please. No, I was just laughing because
that's like a hot point in my marriage. My husband agrees with you. I love Panera Crunch,
Panera Bread, Semina Crunch Bagel. My husband's from New York City.
It's fine if you, you know, if you got to eat in a mall, it's completely fine. I get it. But yeah,
please, please go on. Like, how did, yeah, how did this occur?
Robert Bork. I mean, there's always going to be hatchet men for industry. I mean,
there's always going to be academics doing the bidding of the rich. And he basically
flipped America's antitrust laws upside down. We had all these guardrails. Like,
what the coffee bearing did could not have been done just a few decades ago. You couldn't come
in and roll up a competitive industry. But when these guardrails came away where they came
both with this kind of junk science where consumer welfare standards, what they call it,
where you can show that prices go lower. For consumers, you can buy a company.
You can hire any economist to produce those numbers. And so you see massive consolidation
in meat packing, in coffee, in grain, in all these different industries. I actually think
food is the most concentrated industry in America because it's that illusion of choice.
You know what I mean? Like, if you look at the peanut butter area, there's actually one company
has about a 60% market share in peanut butter, but they have all these different brands.
Wow. 60% market share in peanut butter. Like, so Laura Scutter is not a real person. That's
what you're telling me. She's just part of some bigger conglomerate. She's actually owned by that
company. I think it's Smuckers. Smuckers invented Laura Scutter. I thought her name
too conveniently rhymed with peanut butter. I was looking at Laura Scutter, peanut butter.
There's no way that this lady was like, you know what? My name sounds like peanut butter.
Let me start an independent peanut butter company. There's a fake lady. This is why my mom hates
grocery shopping with me because I love telling her these little factoids when we shop.
Yeah, in the same way. I think we would have a good time at the grocery store together
because we'd spend about three hours there and never buy anything. We'd just be pointing at stuff
going, oh, you know what's fucked up about this? About this maple syrup or whatever.
I mean, even my favorite is probably my favorite chapter right was the grocery chapter because
I love them. But I had a grocery guy tell me, you got to think of a grocery store as modern-day
mafioso capitalism because even the shelf space, there is so much shenanigans going on what you
see at the eye level, like the whole slotting fees, all these games going on. It's incredible.
Yeah. So what happens? I know about the consumer welfare standard. Robert Bork puts out a very
influential paper called I believe the Antitrust Paradox, making the argument that all the antitrust
enforcement that we had for decades and decades in America that broke up monopolies and made
sure monopolies couldn't form actually was bad and that we shouldn't be applying it. And instead,
we should only break up a monopoly when the price is going to go up for consumers. If the price goes
down, it's okay. Yes. And then that has the advantage of being very easy for judges to
adjudicate, right? You just get an economist before a judge and the economist says, oh,
here's some numbers that say the prices go down. Well, the judge isn't an economist.
They're listening to, they're like, oh, you're an economist. All right. So if you say the prices
go down, I guess they'll go down. That's good enough for me. I'm just some fucking judge and
bangs the gavel and they allow the mergers to go through. And that's happened in so many different
industries. It's happened in my industry, the entertainment industry, so many others. But 60%
of peanut butter or all these coffee chains, that's a huge amount of consolidation. That would be
illegal if not for the sea change and antitrust enforcement. It's actually probably higher than
60% because a lot of times they do the store label and you only know as usually when there's a
peanut recall. Okay. You're totally, I mean, when you're explaining that whole
Robert Bork framework is to me, that's the hallmark of this era is big words to hide. I mean,
you're using complex language to keep people out to really hide shenanigans like consumer
welfare at standard. Those words mean nothing, but they sound really smart and it plays into
people's intellectual insecurity because they don't want you to know what they're doing. That's
all that is. Yeah. The consumer welfare standard is like, oh, that sounds like a big important
legal doctrine that very important smart people came up with. And you shouldn't argue with it.
And it gives the decision, the era of legitimacy. When in fact, to what it's much simply, they're
just saying, hey, let's let the mergers go through. It's junk science, masking moral judgments.
In the day, how many logs one man should own? That's a moral question we should wrestle with
as a democracy. Excel can't tell you that answer, but we pretend to do it.
Well, so give me more examples about why this is such a big problem in food. Again,
I know this is a larger economic problem, but what makes it so bad in the food system?
The workers, the workers are the ones being squeezed here the most.
That, I mean, that is the one that shocks people the most. My book is My Berry Baron,
Driscoll's. Your Berry Baron. Oh, Driscoll's. Driscoll's is in. Driscoll's is in my supermarket.
I buy Driscoll's all the time. They sell one in three berries in America.
But they don't grow a single berry, Adam. They sell one in three berries, but they grow zero
berries. Is that what you said? Yes. Yes. How is that possible? Chicken. They chickenized the
berry industry. And it's like a combination of Silicon Valley meets chicken. So they took
the Silicon Valley model of owning the IP. So they own the IP of the berry and then they contract
out production. And part of that chapter is I wanted to tell people a lot of the produce you
consume now is moved offshore because of these trade agreements where you can exploit labor,
exploit the environment. So, you know what I mean? How can you compete on price against
a 12 year old picking berries in like Baja, Mexico? Okay. Now I have to dwell on the question of IP.
You said there's IP in the berries, intellectual property. Now I'm used to that in Hollywood,
right? Like Batman is IP, you know? And so if I want to write a Batman movie, well,
guess what? I got to get permission. And also I'm not that important as the screenwriter or
the director. Batman's the star, right? Even the actor isn't that important. So IP is a real problem
where I work. What is the IP for the berry? Is the IP the name Driscoll's? Is it the,
or is it the berry itself? What the fuck are you talking about? Both. Because they want a branded
product. I mean, Driscoll's is kind of the first branded produce thing. Like you can't think of
name a branded Apple company. You really can't. But on top of it, I can name Apple varieties.
You're right. I can't, and I know some of those are proprietary, but I can't name
a company. I can name Chiquita Banana. That's one that I can think of that's maybe older.
But the key thing is, it's really about durability. What's really fascinating about Driscoll's,
it's really, you almost kind of have to blame Walmart. Like Walmart is the king of kings
and the creation of one robber baron makes other robber barons where Driscoll's saw the rise of
Walmart coming and realized Walmart wants one company to do four berries year round for 4,000
stores. And so that berry is not engineered for taste. So they patent, they make special types
of berries that either sometimes they're gone to Morocco, sometimes in Baja, sometimes in Chile,
but it's all about durability. How can you make that berry last as long as possible as it goes from
you know, Chile up to Vermont. Right. And those Driscoll's berries, like they taste
not great. I mean, you know, I was lucky enough, my parents gardened when I was a kid and we
would have strawberries fresh from the garden. They taste so strawberry either. Incredible,
you know, Driscoll's berries are like, you're like, I'm getting a, I'm getting a hint of strawberry.
I waft it, a wafting under my nose when I bite into this watery pink white berry, you know,
it's better than nothing. It's okay on corn flakes, but it's not like a berry berry. Right.
But that's the story of the food system is nothing tastes good anymore. I mean, that is like
writing this chapter, you know, I did a little tastings like, so I love milk, shocking.
Sorry, sorry, sorry. No, no, no, no, you look like a milk drinker. You look like a milk guy. I'm
a white boy from Iowa. Yeah, of course I'm gonna love my milk, but like inputs matter,
like inputs matter and like cow and pasture is going to make a very different tasting milk than
like an industrial cow inside a metal shed or in baker's field, you know, eating corn all day.
And that's a story across the food system. And on top of it, industry will love to say this makes
cheap food. That's not factually true. That's like maybe my favorite little factoid writing this
book is, oh, these are concentrated markets, concentrated markets, gouge, that's what they
do and we see rampant gouging across the food system. So we're paying more for garbage. Like
that is what blows my mind. Yeah, those just goes berries are not like cheap. They're still,
you know, berries are expensive to buy in the grocery store still. You don't get many, you know,
you pay, I don't know, like eight bucks a little tiny thing of blueberries last year,
you know, a smoothie and a half. You know, it's not, it's just like, I mean, but the thing is
this system is done by design. Like my maybe the hardest chapter, right? But one of my second
favorites is my farm by grain bearing chapter about the Farm Bill. The Farm Bill heavily
subsidizes grains. So it makes highly processed food cheap. But if you grow produce, you don't get
anything. And it also pushes people to grow grains and not produce. So it pushed produce
off the shore of America to other countries. And when supply chains get long, transparency
collapses. Like it's so stupid, but like part of the reason why I wrote that was I read an article
15 years ago where 70% of apple juice in America comes from China. Really? 70% of apple juice
in America comes from China. But I mean, American apple farming is still big. There's like America
makes a lot of apples. I get them in the grocery store. Many of them are good.
So why would the apple juice be produced in China when we're growing apples here?
Because then the biggest part of apples is labor. It's cheaper to hire someone over there,
ship liquid across the world. I mean, we still produce a lot of apples, but not as much as you
think. I mean, it's kind of, if you go to Trader Joe's, look at the back of every juice. You'll
notice a lot of them will say, Turkey, you know, pick your country. It's a labor component. It's
as we rave standards of living for farm workers here, it undermines, you know, it kind of pushes
people off. And even in Iowa, most of the orchards are gone that I grew up with, but they're not
subdivisions. They're just more corn and soybeans because that's where more of the subsidies are
going to. You know, and I've known for a while that we covered on my Netflix show the G word,
the fact that we subsidize certain foods and not others and that we subsidize these grains.
And the story that we presented is that it's somewhat of a historical accident that we
subsidize those particular grains as opposed to any other crops. And we don't subsidize healthy
fruits and vegetables. This is a very, it's a very simple story. We told it on television,
so it had to be sort of simple and quick. It's one I've read elsewhere. I did not realize that
that story though meant that we were, I thought we were just producing less vegetables, not that it
was getting pushed offshore. That's wild. Like if I'm buying broccoli or whatever, it's like more
likely now to come from a different country entirely. Yes. It took me a while to kind of,
I love, do you know what they're like census for people? Well, USA does its own agriculture
census and every seven years they do it. And you start pulling to the data and you just notice,
oh, there's some weird trend lines going on here. And even something simple as during the new deal,
one of the things they did, the workers progress administration is they commissioned state guides
they called them. I almost think of Wikipedia mixed with like travel. I was reading the Iowa one
and I was reading about all these different regional food productions. You're like, wait,
there used to be tons of peaches in Iowa. There used to be tons of onions. So food supply chains used
to be much more regional. And part of it is, to be fair, part of it is refrigeration. Refrigeration
was a game changer. It extended supply chains. But what this system does is it really pushes
people to specialize, but it makes them incredibly fragile. So like that's what happens is like you
used to just see like Del Mar Peninsula used to do a lot of the produce for the East Coast.
The Delta used to do some produce for the South. Now, ever all your strawberries in America used to
come from California. Well, now it's starting to shift away to Baja. You know what I mean? Like
California is increasingly nuts because that's just pure capital intensive.
Right. Like, sorry, when you say California is nuts, you're not referring to the craziness of
life in California, which I can vouch to. Let me be clear. Things are pretty wild here in the state
of which I live. Now, you're talking about in California, which is a huge agricultural state,
they are now mostly growing nuts. And part of that is because nuts are easily like financialized.
Like you can ship them really easily. They're worth a lot of money. Like almonds are very,
they're calorie dense. They are also money dense per unit of almond, right? Yep, totally. And then
it's easy to harvest. You don't really need people. They just have machines that can do a lot of the
work. So you don't need to pay someone to go up there and pull down the fruit. But that means
that a state like mine that used to have used farming used to be a big part of its economy
that people actually worked in. And that there's the famous farm worker unionization efforts of
the last century. Like it's part of the history of the state, the fucking dust bowl migration,
all this shit. This is like part of what California is. Now it's just the same amount of land,
but it's being used with these giant machines to farm almonds just for a couple of people to
profit at the top rather than something that's benefiting everybody in the economy. Yeah, in
California, speaking of nuts, so it's just, it's a different food system. And it took me as a
Midwesterner a while to get my head around. Like there's a lot of problems with like the
homestead act and stuff, but it established like de concentrated power, especially in land holdings.
California, on the other hand, has always been colonial. Like you drive the central valleys,
you don't see farmhouses in the fields. And like, right, you start, I mean, you write a book like
this, there's so much stuff that ends up in the cutting room floor. I got obsessed with the water
stuff in California. Like the whole Imperial Valley makes no sense to me. Yeah, I mean,
yeah, it's crazy the way water has been redirected across the state, specifically to the in the most
popular state in the country. And by the way, I live in the most populous county in the country
as well, which is enormously thirsty of water, constantly in a drought state. But part of that
is because so much the water is directed to these farms that are owned again by one or two people
as their sort of personal wealth creation. Do you cover the, you cover the Resnicks in the book?
So I knew you're going to say that. I have a whole B list of Barons that didn't make the cut.
There's already been a lot of good. You're calling the Resnicks B list Barons,
the almond and pomegranate Barons of California. You're calling them B list. Hey, screw you,
man. These are these are great. These are some of the greatest robber Barons in the American economy.
Stuart Resnick and his wife, whose name I forget, they steal water from all across the state.
They're like making huge amounts of almond milk. Caliphia almond milk is them. Pome wonderful is
them. They've created company towns across of like where they, you know, force people to live
like on their property, right? They're horrible people. And I can't believe they didn't make
your list. I've insulted as someone who lives in California. You want to hear the
Resnick on your list? Have you seen my ass? Have you seen their new product?
What is their new product? Seedless lemons. Seedless lemons?
Because Americans, they're too lazy. They don't like the seed in their lemons. So like,
there's something evil. Like, this is the weirdest thing to say. Some of these Barons,
you have to kind of admire like the bullshit of it all. Like, that's kind of brilliant.
And it's, I mean, that's the funny thing about writing this book. Sorry, I shouldn't say funny,
but people tell me, oh, you got, when I was in Minnesota, like, you got, let me tell you about
this potato baron. When I was in Indianapolis, they told me about this carrot baron. You're just
like, it's so ridiculous that we have this. I mean, the Resnicks are, it sounds weird when I wrote,
when I structured this book, I wanted to mix up the narrative. So I have trashy money, then I go
aristocratic money, then trashy. You know what I mean? Like, you don't want to do the same story
over and over. The Resnicks kind of have this, they're like Cargill to me. They have this like
Greenwich, like they understand image construction in a way that my hog bearing doesn't give a
fuck about. Yeah. Yeah, they're very, they make themselves look good, right? There's a lot of,
they do a lot of donations and things like that. They make themselves look like upstanding pillars
of the community. Even in the products themselves, I mean, these people are one of the pioneers of
almond milk. And, you know, almond milk is wildly popular. And it is not great environmentally,
right? Because the almonds take so much water to make. It's like, you know, a bunch of almond,
but then it just, it's just almond plus water. And it took water to grow the almonds.
But they have like the, you know, the Caliphia almond bottle. It looks so wholesome and happy.
Oh, there's no, there's no cows involved. So it's good for me. Like it's got a, it's got a halo to
it. Oh, my favorite, I mean, their best product is obviously Fiji water. Oh, they're Fiji water as
well. I forgot about that. Let's ship water from halfway across the world and branded as bougie
and like sell people for like, you know, that's, that's where we are right now.
Hey folks, this week's sponsor is one of my favorites on this show. I endorse them whole
heartedly. And in fact, I have been using their product since long before this podcast even existed.
That's right. I'm talking about delete me. You know, you might not want to hear this,
but it has got to be said, your data is out there. There is a whole thriving ecosystem of
data brokers, people who collect, buy and sell our personal information on the internet right
now. That means your name, your phone number, your home address, the names of your relatives
and your friends is almost certainly out there waiting to be snapped up by anyone with an
internet connection. These sites are real. I have been to them myself and I've seen my own
information on them. And I've talked before about how exposed I felt when I realized that
people were literally buying my home phone number from these data brokers. And frankly,
I wouldn't wish that feeling on anyone. It was after that incident that I signed up for delete
me and I have not regretted it even for an instant ever since. But since then, the prevalence of
harassment and online bullying has only seemed to escalate. It seems like every single week I hear
a story about a real life incident that began as an argument or interaction between two strangers
on the internet or about some kind of stalking that began online. You deserve to feel secure and
anonymous on the internet and not have to be anxious about scammers, finding your phone number,
phishing attempts being sent to your email or strangers, knowing how to find your front door
step. So for that reason, I urge you to check out delete me, not just for your security, but for
your friends and family too. Their teams of experts scour the internet. They remove your and your
family's information from those data broker sites. They send you a report every single 90 days. It
really works. I can tell you it is true. Okay. And get this, you can get 20% off your delete me plan
when you go to join delete me dot com slash Adam and use promo code Adam at checkout. That's join
delete me dot com slash Adam promo code Adam. Hey, did you know that learning actually makes a sound?
It's true. Listen, that's the sound of you mastering a new language with Babel. Learning a new language
can be one of the toughest yet most rewarding challenges out there. So if you are ready to
dive in, make sure you're using the right tools to get the job done. A lot of language apps are
really just kind of games that are dressed up to make you feel like you're learning. Babel is
different though. It is the real deal. Lessons in Babel are crafted by real people for real
conversation. They're approachable with tips and tools that are all based in real life and framed
around conversation based teaching from minute one. Babel is concerned with helping you get out there
and put a new language into practice in the real world. I mean, look, I've lived in Los Angeles
for years and a ton of people here speak Spanish and starting Spanish with Babel has been rewarding
to me in ways that I didn't even anticipate. I mean, sure, it's made chatting with neighbors and
ordering food and enjoying cultural events easier to do, but more importantly, it's also just
enriched my experience of living in Los Angeles and has made me feel more connected to my community
in a way I didn't expect. It makes me excited to learn more and see what else it opens up for me.
Now, that's just my experience. But studies from Yale, Michigan State University and others
have shown that Babel is effective. One study even found that using Babel for 15 hours is equivalent
to a full semester of a college language course. And look, I can't promise that it'll be easy,
but I can promise you'll be glad you did it. And get this, here is a special limited time deal
for factually listeners. Right now you can get up to 60% off your Babel subscription,
but only for our listeners at babel.com slash factually. That's right. Get up to 60% off at
babel.com slash factually. Spelled B-A-B-B-E-L.com slash factually. Rules and restrictions may apply.
Yeah. And speaking of shipping, you know, these liquids halfway across the world,
I mean, it's ridiculous to be shipping so much food across the country or across the world in
cargo containers, right? I think about this every time I drink a Pellegrino and I like
a Pellegrino. It makes me feel classy, you know, to have a sparkling water at dinner.
But I'm like, a La Croix just comes from Wisconsin. Why do I need it shipped from Italy,
right? That's a lot more fossil fuels to have just like water brought from one place to another.
There's water here, motherfuckers. Like, why do I need it to come on a boat? And the same thing
is, it has to be true of apple juice and all these other products as well, right?
Yeah, because it's all about exploiting labor. I mean, it's this whole neoliberal trade stuff.
I mean, that is the trade component to the food system has been really underappreciated. I mean,
even if you go back to Baja and the berries, these are like, it's hard to use these words,
like almost like plantations, because people don't live a Baja. It's very sparsely populated.
It gets as much rain as Death Valley three inches a year. They bring in indigenous workers from
Oaxaca. It's so dangerous to go report this to be a journalist down there. They're plantations,
you know what I mean? They build desolidation plants on the ocean. They pull up the water,
they drain the aquifers. The people there don't eat the berries, they're for rich,
you know, they're for upper class Americans at Costco.
Wow. So they're literally, they're almost like terraforming,
like they're doing it on the surface of Mars or something. I mean, Baja California is a wonderful
place, but it's not suited to this kind of agriculture. They're just like, oh, here's
some cheap land with some cheap people. Let's just like get some water from somewhere else
or drain it out of the aquifer and we can grow our cash crop.
Yeah. It's that financialization, short term, private equity kind of thing where,
I mean, you get a massive amount of pig production in the Oklahoma Panhandle,
where like the dust bowl took place and pigs are thirsty or even you go to fucking,
sorry, you go to baker's field and it's like massive amount of dairy, dairy going on there.
And you're like, this doesn't make sense. I see an oil rig next to a dairy cow standing
in sand in the desert. Yeah. I mean, every time, you know, drive that freeway route from LA to
San Francisco, it's like the most, it's the weirdest part of the whole drive. You go through
that sea of cows and it was like something is not right here and also the air smells bad.
Yeah. I mean, like, but people don't realize that is dairy existed in Vermont, Wisconsin,
upstate New York for a reason. It made environmental logical sense. When you put it in the desert,
New Mexico does three times more dairy than Vermont now. And it's all over on the eastern
side by Texas near Clover. And it's just, these are industrial feedlots. And I mean,
dairy's really scary because these guys are kind of like feudal lords too because
they employ, it takes a lot of undocumented men to run these empires. They're usually also the
landlords. So they're both an employer and the landlords are usually the largest employer in the
county. I talked about my dairy bear and created that milk fair life. I don't know if you've ever
seen, it's like that branded milk in the grocery store. Coke just bought it for him. It's twice
the cost, half the volume of normal milk because it has high protein content. So young men love it.
It's, that's where we are. And when you say that, let's talk more about the financialization,
like that this is driven by the market, driven by private equity. How much is that the case?
Is it, yeah, describe how that process might work. I mean, part of it is, so like intellectual,
I came at this of you, to me, I really believe you have to understand how someone amassed power
to deconstruct it. And like, there's this, the simple stupid story is, oh, this was efficiency,
this was technology. But when you actually step back and you dig into it, you're like, no,
this is an old fashioned story of a combination of regulatory capture and access to cheap capital.
My hog Baron, he saw the industrial model taking hold, he was building some of those
metal sheds, he got some Wall Street money, and he was able to essentially get big when you saw
market changing. And then he established his market dominance. And then with that dominance,
he's able to essentially set the regulatory structure. Like he's given that money to the
governor of Iowa, that much money, because his whole empire is Iowa, he needs to control Iowa,
because the second you regulate hog manure, like human manure, his models no longer economically
viable, like, I can't say this, this fact blows my mind where like, I was 25 million hogs now,
and a hog defecates three times more than us. That's the manure of 75 million people. That's
California, Texas, Illinois combined. And that regulatory structure is gutted. Like there's
how many people live in Iowa? Three, three million, three million. So you got three million people
doing three million pounds of people shit. And then you've got 25 million hogs doing the equivalent
of 75 million pounds of people shit. Yes. So you're saying Iowa is something like what like
like, like, like seven eighths shit. Yes. Excuse me, excuse me, Iowans, but like the math there
is boggling my mind. It's the waterways in Iowa and open to her. Wow. No, I was gonna say like
seven percent of the waterways are too toxic to go into. You see these, there's manure lagoons
underneath them, and they occasionally leak, and you're like, no city would occasionally
leak human manure everywhere. And you know what I mean? It's such a fact of life. Yeah. And so you
say that the hog manure, despite there being many times more, we're talking 20 times more of it than
there is a human manure. Human shit is regulated. It can only be put certain places. It has to be
treated certain ways, not the case with hog shit. Yes. I mean, my favorite little example of this is
I go to, I fly a lot. It's like these coasts for like different stuff. And I, there's no
straight flight out of Iowa, shocking. And when I do that flight between Cedar Rapids and Chicago,
you're flying, especially in the winter, you fly over snow fields, fields covered in snow. And
you'll just see hog shit. Because what they do is they, every few months, you have to drain it. And
you're not really supposed to drain it and put it on snow in the winter. Because then when the snow
melts, it goes straight into the water. They do it. It's an, everyone knows they do it, and they
don't get fined for it. It's an open secret. But the worst one's actually in North Carolina,
because this is where the hog model comes out of, was a state senator deregulated this industry
in the eighties first. And he did it in the poor black areas. And because of the water table in
North Carolina and Iowa, they injected into the soil they put on top of it. In North Carolina,
they spray it into the air, the manure. So there's all these stories of spray it into the air.
Like, like they're watering the land. Wow. And so all the, and so there's stories of,
oh yeah, stories of these poor black churches having to repaint their steeples every few years
because they turn brown. Jesus Christ. Just turn brown from the hog shit. Yeah. You can't, I mean,
it's, people don't realize how the, how much destructive the quality of life is. And the way
these things, they're so, these states are so captured, you can't stop the construction of
these confinements when they go up. So your home is your everything in America. It's your wealth.
If one of those metal sheds full of piggies get built, you're fucked. Like, you can't do anything
about it. And it just destroys your wealth, destroys your quality of life. It traps you inside.
And one thing that really strikes me is how invisible this has become to mainstream America,
because you've got the destruction of the family farmer. That means that, well, you've got like
one guy owning an entire part of the food system. And then everyone working for him,
as you say, is an undocumented immigrant, someone with, you know, who's maybe here short term,
or maybe they don't speak English. They're, you know, they're not, they're not able to vote.
They're not, or they're living on some sort of weird company town, often, you know, the,
the central valley of California or Baja California, well, that's a different, different
country, but you get my point. And the people eating the food have no visibility because
there's been this, like, disconnect between the people making it and the people eating it.
Is that, does that sound right to you? Totally. I mean, like, to me, the bigger
tooth, just to add on to that is like one, you have local news collapse in these, in places
like Iowa. I mean, the one retro got gutted by private equity, Sinclair owns most of the TV stations.
So these stories aren't being told, they're not being reported out. So then the Robert
Barron essentially creates his own narrative. Like, I kind of think of Iowa, rural America,
now is like an extraction colony where the, like, the colonizers set the narrative.
Right. So these stories aren't told. And on top of that, you have a lot of news outlets in New
York City want to talk about what's the new high end restaurant. Like, there's not these structural
undercurrent stories. It's like, what's the new vegan restaurant in Brooklyn, you know?
Yeah, that's food journalism. Yeah. Yes. But it's easy. It's cheap. And on top of it,
my hog baron has his own spokeswoman. So like, there's this whole propaganda apparatus that
just licks them up and down all day. And I mean, my favorite, sorry, my favorite little,
my husband, I have these gay little sassy lines in the book I kind of love. And
in my hog baron chapter, Mike, Mike Rowe did a dirty jobs episode on my hog, my dairy baron.
I love that. By the way, you keep saying my hog baron, my dairy baron. You're really attached
to these people. You love them. I feel like you're, I just imagine you in your home,
like just with their pictures on the wall, like little shrines to them everywhere. Like,
you love these people. Oh, I'm like, I had a, actually a writer buddy of mine called me out on
that a few months ago, too, because it's had, I mean, I spent five years on this and I read
thousands of articles just to kind of get my head around it. Yeah. You get a vibe. You get a flavor
of them. You just kind of get to know what type of person they are. And like, I know that type
of guy, my dairy barons, I call them Bubba's, just that arrogant white guy that thinks they build
everything. I mean, so many of these guys cosplay as farmers, but they're really capital asset
managers. And like, he goes on dirty jobs, sells his narrative of being a farmer. And then I dig
into it and you're like, Oh, you actually claim residency at the Ritz Carlton, Puerto Rico,
probably to evade capital income taxes. And then like, and then my line on that,
my line is Mike Rowe sold his narrative. Like he used to sell products on QVC.
Because it's just like, yeah, Mike Rowe, the guy from Dirty Jobs famously, if people don't know,
you know, part of the right wing information machine, like he's, you know, been funded for
years by all the biggest right wing billionaires and, you know, pushing, has always pushed a
really pro corporate message on that show and on his other products, which is, you know,
that's his right to do as a communicator. I push a narrative that I find more true than that. But
that is, that is his ideological and historical role in the world.
Yeah. I mean, I did your thing. I didn't know that though. I just, I was in an Oklahoma watching
a Top Gun a few years ago. I was like there for something. I was at a theater and he cut an
ad before the movie, seeing how great fracking was for Oklahoma. But it was like the most
delusional ad I've ever seen. And you're like, because he's one of those people, my parents
always have them on like, it's like storage or just kind of on in the background.
Yeah. It's a good show. It's got this hidden ideological message that people don't usually
appreciate. That and like, to me, the truth was so obvious. That's what actually bothered me the
most about the Dairy Baron is they got a lot of press for how environmental sustainable they were.
And you just go to their operation. It's about an hour south of Gary, Indiana.
And it's just so obviously wrong. Like, I've never seen a Midwest cornfield with canals around it.
You're like, wait, what's going on here? And you Wikipedia, literally Wikipedia,
and this was an old wetlands. It was Everglades at the North. Teddy Roosevelt used to go hunting
here. This shouldn't be in row cropping production. And to do intensive dairy work,
dairy cows, we talk about hogs maneuvering a lot. Dairy cows do an insane amount more
where that dairy operation he's a part of has about 35,000 cows. Those cows do as much manure
in a day as the city of Austin, Texas. Wow. He's doing that in a wetland.
I mean, well, so let's talk again about the people who are doing the work for these guys.
Because, look, I mean, Trump is out there right now saying he's going to deport every
undocumented immigrant in America. But that's his policy. He wants to deport all of them.
And Biden has moved far to the right on immigration. There's almost a growing consensus
about like deportation. At the same time, our food system is built entirely on the backs of
these undocumented workers who are doing work that no middle class American would ever agree to do
at the wages that are being paid. And part of the work was basically invented for undocumented
people to be underpaid doing. And so how does that interact with our politics? I mean, just tell me
about that piece of it. It seems insane to talk about deporting these people when like,
where would you get your fucking driscals? That is the irony of it all. I mean,
my Dairy Baron gave a massive trek to Trump right after the excess Hollywood tape came out.
But it's like, dude, you're all empires and documented workers. I mean, even writing this
book, I discovered a worker died in his manure pit. Wow. It was a Honduras man, had three children,
it was never reported. It took me like two, three years to get the death records on him because
the power he wields in the county. That's the irony of it all. I mean, that's a thing I wrestled
with writing in the coffee chapter was, and I think this has been lost history is
the role monopolists play in financing fascists. And I danced around that in the book where Tim
Wu had this good book called Curse of Bigness, where he kind of mentioned it briefly. Yeah,
that book's incredible. Yeah. That's where I got a bunch of the argument that I told you about
Robert Borker from. Yeah. Yeah. And so he, but he had this little nugget in there that I dug
more into. After World War II, a big part of America's reconstruction in Japan and Europe was
trust busting. Like Congress commissioned a report and they're like, how did this happen?
One of the key findings were monopolist finance fascists. Hitler's largest owner was a company
called IG Farben. IG Farben was a chemical company. Hitler comes into a room and goes,
oh, I'll help you sell more chemicals, whatever. I don't mean all the crazy rhetoric. They cut
him a check. They sell him chemicals, including chemicals using gas chambers. That company's
broken up into seven. One of the modern day companies that was broken up into is, is, uh,
Bermont Santo. I just think that history is so important, especially now. And I think
because I'm from Iowa, I kind of saw where it all fell apart. Like Iowa should be the Italy
of North America. It should be the Napa. It should be where you go for food tourism yet
as a second highest cancer rate in America. It's one of the most obese states. The politics of
rage have filled the void of what used to be a solid middle class place of what used to be a
purple state. And we don't have to go down this path, but this is the path we're on. And like,
that is a goal I really wanted to have with this book is here's an honest conversation
where we are, but what we could do too. That's amazing how these barons have inflamed our politics
while keeping all the attention away from them, right? Like the, uh, the public, a lot of the
public is so angry about illegal immigration and undocumented immigrants. But like, why are
undocumented immigrants taking those jobs? Because these barons have created a job that
only an undocumented immigrant would take. That that is so poor and has done so by, uh,
fucking with the food system of the food that we eat. And so this is a problem that's entirely
created by them. And yet the public is angry at the victims, at the people who are dying in the
manure pits, uh, so that we can eat worse food, not all so that these guys on top can make more
money. It's insane. The bearing that it's the scariest is because how unknown they are is actually
Cargill. So Cargill is owned by the largest private company in America. They're bigger than the Koch
Brothers, but no one knows who they are. I mean, I didn't even have them in my business. Like when
I laid out the book and I grew up around Cargill. I was born next to a Cargill plant. I played soccer
next to a Cargill plant. My church was next to a Cargill plant. And they're, they're all about
owning the middle because they're not consumer-facing. You don't know who they are, but they have so
much money and power. And what they do is they engage, like I call it, um, they use middle man.
So they never do things overly. They pay these DC groups to do their bidding so they can play,
you know, be ignorant. You don't mean to play, you know, lead, um, what sort I'm looking for,
innocent, but it's currently dark. I mean, that is the fear of concentrated economic power is
you just assume it corrupts the local system. Yeah. Well, let's talk more about how this affects
the food that we actually eat in so many ways. Like the financialization, the monopolization
has actually altered the food itself, right? I mean, if I can give you a personal example of this.
I, uh, uh, last year was an upstate New York. I was on a college campus. The college campus had
some apple trees. It was like a historic apple orchard on it. And so they had some apples out,
like in the cafeteria, and they were like, Oh, you can have some, here's a Macintosh apple.
And I took the Macintosh apple and I bit it. And I was like, this tastes nothing like a Macintosh
apple I've ever had in my life. It was like crisp and juicy and had like, uh, had a complexity
of flavor. It makes me sound like a food nerd. I'm not trying to be snobby about it.
There was literally something going on with this apple I had not tasted before. Whereas every other
Macintosh, one of the most popular apple varieties in America I had had before had tasted almost
exactly the same. And you know, I'm sure this apple was fresher because it was local and da,
da, da. But also I was like something about the genetics seem different. Something like
everything about this apple was different to me. And it made me just reflect on there are all these
ways that the mechanized, financialized food system changes what we actually eat without
us realizing it until we finally have the counter example. I mean, but that's, I'm obsessed with
owning the middle with this book is how radical the system has become. And like part of owning the
middle and like, what we're talking about these reforms are like, Oh my God, animals should be
on the land. What a radical concept. Oh, food should be grown near you. Food should taste good.
People should get a decent living wage. We've gone so far off track. And I will say,
as dark as this can be, what gives me hope is everyone's seen it's not working. Like the biggest,
the thing that's kind of shocked me the most is how much the business traveler has taken to my book.
It's like a cliche for upper class Americans to go, Oh, I went to Italy, I ate better food,
I lost weight, you know, it's cheaper. Yeah, I mean, everyone's just kind of seeing it. It's
not working. And yeah, that is like, I mean, I had my one on Glenn Beck's TV network recently.
I mean, there's like this weird, there's this whole weird thing going to on the,
on the right right now over food. I mean, it's a little raw, milky RFK.
Yeah, no, but they've gotten it's sort of like the crunchy, you know, California hippies who got
kind of right wing have influenced the rest of the right wingers to get a little bit more crunchy.
And now they are really obsessed with the food system in a surprising way. I realized this
when I did a segment about for Adam ruins everything. And it was a pretty light segment.
It was just like, Hey, you can eat bugs if you want it, you know, like bugs are not that bad
for you. A lot of cultures eat bugs, there's bugs in the food you already eat. It's a good
source of protein, just like a fun light segment. And a bunch of right wingers, a bunch of right
wing blogs freaked out. And we're like, Adam Conover says you should eat bugs. And I realized that
they have some sort of like meme about how in the future we'll all be forced to eat like we're on the
snowpiercer train or something. And we're going to be forced to eat, you know, soylent green or
whatever. Like they're like, they have like a an apocalyptic future in mind. And I accidentally
like triggered them and their fear of being forced to eat bugs. And I wasn't aware of that until
that moment. I've seen ever since that was maybe five years ago, I've seen more and more of this
throughout the right wing. They're like obsession with the food system and purity and back to the
land and that kind of thing. Oh, I mean, just two things add on to that. One, I laugh because
Cargill's getting into the bug industry. They're trying to as a protein source to feed industrial
animals. So they want to as like soy, they kind of replace soybeans and corn is just feed the pigs
inside these metal sheds bugs, which is like a whole new separate thing. But that's actually why
I like book talks to your point, because you it's pattern recognition. You're like, why am I getting
a lot of questions about raw milk? Why am I getting a lot because people come up to you, they have
this conversation one on one, you're testing your rhetoric. I mean, that's actually where I get the
probably gossip for the book or like tips. It's just people like, oh, you should really look over
here. Like I did a book event in the hometown of my hog Baron. And it was the one time I was actually
scared shitless. I put the tracking on my phone. You're scared shitless because there was so much
shit surrounding you. You were ankle deep and shit. That's why you were scared shitless.
Or I could be floating in the next day, you know, like some little Chinatown thing goes down.
Please go on. But I was just that night I was the scariest I've been in the book tour because
like, I didn't expect doing this book tour was every place an old lady would always ask me,
are you worried about your safety? And honestly, I'm not in that I can say that it's honestly
the beauty of America is I can write a book like this and not be worried about my safety.
That said that town is like, I'm going into the heart of the beast. I'm going to a town of 5,000
people and I was to do a book talk. I was shocked. We had 50 people show up and to get 50 people at
a book talk in 2024 is a big deal. It was just people pissed off. And they were about more than
half the room came up to me afterwards. Oh, I knew I knew Jeff and they promised me this. They did
that. They did, you know, you could just see the anger and the sadness and people's face and like
that's also something I've internalized writing this book is there's a degree of Stockholm syndrome
in real America that I don't think urban America appreciates. A lot of people fought power and
they lost and like, you can't afford to leave. It's too depressing to really grapple with this
material. There's still some fighters. I opened with a book of a pissed off old woman fighting it.
Usually the fighters still are pissed off old ladies in rural areas, but it's hard. But it's
a weird, these people are barely getting by and you can just feel the pain. I don't know. I don't
know how to describe that, but it's just something I've noticed. Yeah. Well, I think we have all
felt that that there's something is deeply wrong with our food system. And, you know, we had a,
you know, when we cover on the show, what has happened to us health wise because of food,
the blame and to me always falls on the food system, on the capitalist food system that has,
you know, given us all of these foods that are very delicious to us, but are extremely unhealthy.
But more importantly, even the foods that are healthy have gotten less healthy, right? All the
meats have gotten, like they're produced less healthily for the people who produced them, but
also for us. Do you have any particular examples of that? And do you think that the process that
you're talking about here, this baronization, this chickenization of the food system is to
blame for our poor health outcomes? Oh, 100%. I mean, it takes money now to be healthy in America.
Yeah. One of the hardest sections where I was actually the obesity section in my green barons
chapter where it all goes back to corn and chicken, I joke. Yeah. But like,
just before corn syrup really took hold in America, we didn't have, I mean, sugar was hard to do.
Sugarcane has a very limited production region like Louisiana and Florida,
and sugar beets actually has this weird new DL supply management system where it's like,
there's quotas basically on how much you can produce. And but then the creation of corn syrup
in the 70s and 80s and the highly amount of subsidies going into it just exploded the use of
sugar. Julia Guthman is an academic at the University of Santa Cruz has done a lot of
scholarship on this and really drove that point home. But I mean, I, I see, I mean,
that's why I love going to grocery stores because you can just see the price points.
You see, you walk down the pop aisle and you're like, a two litters of buck 50,
but if I want carrot juice at $6, you're pushing people into it. And I don't want
an interview for this book that got junked. And it's because there's this elitism among
certain people where they blame the lower income person for their obesity. And I was like,
you don't get it. You don't get what it's like to work two jobs, have kids,
and this food is easy. It's easy to cook a frozen pizza. I mean, I, I grew up on that stuff. I mean,
it's, it's hard. Yeah, it takes money to eat healthy and it takes time when people are barely
getting by. Also, keep in mind, this stuff is, if you had a rough day, who isn't happy after like
a box of cheezus, you know, right? And well, there's, there's a place for that, right? And,
you know, the, there's a lot of concern that this sort of argument leads to a continual
shaming of people eating, you know, processed foods, et cetera. There's a place for processed
foods in the world, but there is also something clearly very wrong with our food system that is
like hurting people and that is doing something bad to their health. And you think it's, this is
what it, this is the culprit. Oh, 100%. I mean, the, the farm bill is a reflection of moral values
and our farm bill is now designed for Wall Street. It's designed for PepsiCo to make chips and
pop as cheap as possible at the expense of everything else. So as chips got cheaper,
you know, fresh stuff, stuff got more expensive. And yeah, it's, I mean, also these supply chain
lines, you know, it's even in like a lot of vegetables used to be grown in Iowa and that's
gone. Um, and also when things, my husband and I were just talking about carrots today,
how awful baby carrots taste. So like private equity is one of the largest grower carrots in
America. Yeah. I mean, it's really funny. I've had conversations with people before, because,
you know, I'm the kind of guy, I just look stuff up when I'm interacting with it. And I like looked
up baby carrots once and you probably know better than me. But the story that I read was that one
enterprising carrot company figured out, well, if we take the ugly carrots and we whittle them down
into little carrot nubs, then, you know, that's like reproducible. The carrot doesn't need to
be pretty, right? We can do that with any carrot. And then we can take the shavings and we can,
you know, turn it into sugar and use it as an additive in things. And when I try to tell people
this, I'm like, baby carrots are like whittled carrots. Like people will say to me in my life,
they'll go, no, they're, they're baby carrots. They're like little, they're like, the carrot is
a baby. They picked it while it was still a little child. I'm eating a carrot toddler. No,
motherfucker, it's a whittled carrot. Somebody put that on a lathe, you know, and it turned it real
fast to like shrink the carrot down. You're eating a mass produced like carrot chunk.
I'm embarrassed to say, Adam, I thought that until very recently.
They don't even look like baby carrots. They look like a piece of carpentry. They look like
something you'd use to join two, two by force. I just didn't think we'd be that wasteful. I mean,
that's why I just couldn't believe we would shave down a carrot. And then, but here's the thing,
it makes a bad product. And so like, you turn away from it. You're like, like,
melons is the other one I notice about. You got to put so much hummus on a baby carrot for it to
taste like anything. It's like the saddest experience to eat a baby carrot.
Yes. And so like it pushes, you're like, oh, produce isn't that good anymore, or
these Driscoll berries don't taste that good. So then you start eating more,
well, who isn't, you know, Oreos and stuff. And then on top of it, you go into these grocery stores
and like, you're not seeing innovation. You're not seeing new products because like these stores,
they don't want to deal with some local person doing what you only do two stores at Walmart.
They want to deal in the bisco that can do 4,000 stores. So that's why when you go into a store
now, you just see a new kind of Oreo. You don't see new products. You don't see quality stuff.
And it's, on top of it, it's, it skews the system so much where, I mean, so much of that
neoliberal framework of like, change the system with your fork to bifurcate the system even more.
You have like, whatever that fancy LA one's called Aragon for like the rich.
Arawan, yeah. Arawan. And then you have like, Walmart is massive. Walmart sells one in three
groceries. Their market share grocery is the same as the second, third, fourth, sixth, seventh,
and eighth combined. That is an insane amount of market power.
And as you say, one baron creates more barons because Walmart wants all the food. They want to
buy it in huge tranches. They want to get all their food from one supplier. And so that privileges
the one supplier who's able to grow the exact same thing in huge quantities to sell to every
Walmart store simultaneously. And that causes them to buy each other up. Or for one, like if
Walmart's selling one out of three groceries, then pretty soon you're going to have one person
selling one out of three berries and then probably even more than that. You said melons,
though. What's the problem with melons? I wanted to hear it.
I mean, after spending all this time, I mean, feel sorry for my husband because I just vomit
this information I had on all day. And so we got married two years ago.
I'll replace them. I'll marry you. I love hearing this stuff. He doesn't want to hear it anymore.
Okay. Propose. I'm down.
Our one year anniversary, we went to like, like France and Italy. And I'm just,
I got to see a food system that worked. And I hate cantaloupe. I just, I see it in the fruit
bowl. I think it tastes awful. But then like, they had it over there and you're like, wait,
this is actually really good. They would sell it on the side of the road. You pull over,
you buy a good cantaloupe and you're like, it's just, it's kind of like when you cut corners
so much, at some point you're cutting bone. Like there's no efficiencies again. You're
cutting quality and it's just so rapid, especially private equity people don't,
they don't understand how to run a business. I mean, the reason the best grocery stores in
America are actually still privately owned, like HGB in Texas, Hive in Iowa, Wegmans on the East
Coast. You know what I mean? There's not this Wall Street financialization because like,
some boy who went to Harvard MBA, who's never worked a grocery store job in his life,
doesn't understand the nuances of this, of these marketplaces. And it's also, it's a profession.
There's a craftsmanship to merchandising. My dad used to be a beer merchandiser. So like,
I noticed that when I go into like, you go into like a Wegmans or whatever, fancy growth, like,
sorry, those type of grocery stores, they merchandise, they care, they're,
it's homecoming weekend. It's gonna be a bunch of homecoming stuff. You go into Walmart and
they just throw the pallet on the shelf and you have to dig for it. Yep. Well, what can,
what can be done about this, right? You had said that maybe there's a positive sign in Lena Kahn's
leadership at the FTC. We'll see how long she's there based on what's happening, what's going
to happen in November. I kind of don't think Trump will keep her on if he wins. But you know,
we have seen a sea change in antitrust enforcement, at least on the Democratic side.
And there are occasionally some Republicans who will join in on an antitrust fight here or there.
They do occasionally have an ally. And you're saying that, you know, the right, right side
of the aisle is becoming more and more obsessed with food. So is there a growing appetite for
change in our food system? Yeah, I mean, I think what Lena is really fascinating is,
I actually think she's one of President Biden's best of local points, because
what says so much was earlier this year, Matt Gaetz went to the Wall Street Journal and praised her.
Wow. That is, they're such a, I'm a big fan of outflanking, like Republicans will talk this
big game about me backing, be right there with them. Josh Hawley does a lot of this,
outflank Republicans here, because it's such a, hold their feet to the fire. I mean,
it's also kind of, I'm a big believer too that weird things happen in America when
unique coalitions come together. But what gives me the big most hope and what we can do are like
three things that come to my mind. One is the death of ethanol. The Biden administration has
been incredibly aggressive at transitioning America out of flake to EVs and hybrids. And
people don't realize, but the largest use of corn now in America is ethanol. And it's really,
which is used for what? Burning, burning corn in your cars. Like it's truly. Wow. It is the Museum
of Failure included ethanol and it's an exhibit. I, anyone that thinks ethanol is good for the
climate thinks the world is flat in 2024. Also, I think in food, you see one of President Biden's
worst political appointments, Secretary Vilsack. Secretary Vilsack of USDA is a former industrial
dairy lobbyist. His solution to climate change right now is to put ethanol in the airplanes.
Wow. And by the way, this is a crazy thing to do because like fossil fuels are bad enough
because you're taking energy out of the ground, putting it into the atmosphere, right? Stored
energy out of the ground into the atmosphere. That's bad. That warms the earth de facto, right?
But if you're taking energy from the sun and putting it into the atmosphere, right? Like the
sun is hitting the corn, making the corn grow. And then you're burning that. You're releasing,
that's a whole new source of energy to put into the atmosphere to heat the planet up.
It's even worse because you have to use fossil fuels to help grow the corn.
Right. Of course you do. Fertilizer and et cetera. Yeah.
And the other appreciated thing is Koch brothers are actually massive in fertilizer. They have
a massive holding in nitrogen fertilizer. So like there's this whole weird marriage between
big egg and big fossil fuel oil that hasn't been fully, I don't think people realize.
But it's just delusional. But you know what? It's like watching Miley Coady chase that
bird off the cliff right now. Ethanol is going to die. I don't care what the industry says.
It's going to meet its maker. And my big moment, to me, it's what are we going to do at that moment?
I want to put animals back on land. That is like truly one of my biggest things because it's like,
it takes the temperature down. It makes, who doesn't want more farmers? Here's like,
most grain production is going to be robotics. That's not a bad thing. You go to a farm show
now. These tractors drive themselves. But there's only so many dairy cow one man or one person could
look after. But for these rural areas, it's more jobs. Yeah. So you want to go to a small scale
version of dairy farming again, like breaking it up. And rather than one farmer, one quote farmer
owning huge numbers of cows, you've got small scale farms again. You think that's a massive
improvement? I just want to go back to that family farmer model. It's also what it does too.
Theory is weird where actually this industrial dairy model is actually even worse for the climate
because when a cow is on pasture, when she defecates, she's fertilizing her feet.
When you put them indoors, first of all, you have to use fossil fuels to grow her feet.
But when you pull her manure, when it breaks down, it creates additional methane that is not
produced when she defecates on land. So it creates additional fossil fuel gas. So like that bakers
field dairy production model is actually incredibly more destructive for the environment than
some dairy cow in Wisconsin. So like Bill Sack comes out of that world. So that's why
he has this like bullshit kind of mentality there. But do you think there is an emerging politics
that is more populist food politics where we can sort of go across partisan lines?
Because if you're looking for rural America is largely red and Republican politicians tend to
have pro-corporate policies. So do Democrats, but these are trends we're talking about.
It does seem like this is an issue that could break some of our political logjam if you have
politicians from rural areas say, no, actually, I want to fight for the chicken farmer,
the hog farmer, the small scale pork farmer like these and actually help their folks.
Oh, totally. I mean, keep in mind, I also want to broaden the conversation because it's not just
about the farmer. It's about those who pick it, process it, transport it, cook it, serve it.
Of course. People like my mom and dad, that's one in 10 of Americans. And we're obsessed with such
a small part of the pie. And once you talk about one in 10, you center that on labor,
that's what really matters. And the dirty secret of big ag is it hollowed out its voter base.
You used to have thousands of Iowa hog farms and now you just have a few of our
barons and no one's called bluff on it. Denver has no clothes now and no one's called it.
And that's also my big thing now is I think we should junk the farm bill.
The farm bill picks favorites. It heavily subsidizes grains. It's destructive for the climate.
It rewards its incentive, this destructive model. On top of it, you have the whole heritage
heritage, Kato Institute. They hate that model too. They hate the farm bill.
And I think that's a, to me, there's no reason why Democrats should support the modern-day farm
bill. The best example of how rotten the farm bill has gotten is actually crop insurance.
Because when people hear crop insurance, they think it's for a hurricane or rain or whatever.
It's not. It's insurance for low prices where 60% of the premium is paid for by the taxpayer.
And there's no cap at them. So people don't realize Bill Gates has won the largest owner
of farmland in America. If you want to talk about another baron. So he can get as much crop
insurance as he wants, as much corn as he wants. And so, you know what I mean? It's so,
I just, I've been telling reformers, don't play, like, the system is so broken. Why
back that? Like let's move away from the system. At the same time, use school meals as like the
positive structural change vehicle. Who doesn't want all dairy-served Wisconsin come from, you
know, pasture family dairy farms instead of like industrial beef in the Brazilian rainforest.
Like it's good politics. It's good tasting. You keep your money local and you're building up a new
system as you phase out an old one. Because I mean, school food's a joke. We all know that.
Yeah. But the problem is the farm bill is one of those bills that, you know, no matter how divided
Congress is, it flies through every time because it has so many parts of the society are dependent
on it, right? Like it's got something for everybody or it's got something for the voters
in or the constituents or the money constituents in every area, you know. It gives
subsidies to the cities to purchase food, gives subsidies to the, you know, to the barons in the
red areas to grow the food. Is there really a chance that it could be, you know, junked, as you say?
I mean, it's actually kind of falling apart. I mean, they couldn't pass. They tried to do
basically a copy-paste bill and they had to punt it. So like the rumor on the street is going to try.
Okay. No, no.
Then I'm not up on what's happened. That's amazing.
No, but it's part, but it's this weird thing where, so even Republicans find crop insurance
too gluttonous. Like they want more crop insurance. You're right though. I mean,
there's this weird coalition of like, it's food stamps in the farm entitlement programs.
I'll be frank. I think you can break those apart. Food stamps are going to be okay because
Walmart depends on food stamps. Walmart is the richest family in America. Some days it's the
richest family in the world. So much of their employee and customer base depends on food stamps.
It's a waste subsidy. So much of corporate America needs that. I'm feeling comfortable.
No one's going to touch that. I mean, first of all, you just need all Democrats and 10 Republicans
to save that. You take away the crop insurance. You do Farm Bill standalone. Half Republicans
will flake on that. And if Democrats don't support it, these, these, my hog baron, you know what I
mean? Like they don't have a constituency. Yeah. They're massive amount of welfare they get. It's
just also that coalition was formed in 1960s America. The suburbs were not a part of that
coalition. Right. Like rural America's, there's something. The suburbs. I left the suburbs out
of the story. And I mean, this election will come down to a few suburbs in the Midwest states.
Yeah. What can the public do about this if there isn't sense about this as I am to take us out?
The big thing is I always tell people, buy what you can, buy your values, whatever. But the other
thing too is help connect your farmers doing it right with your schools, with your colleges.
Those procurement contracts really stabilize them. Like a lot of farmers will tell you privately,
they don't like doing the farmers market. They get rained out, whatever. It's not consistent.
You get that contract with the UC school system, your local school. It's just such a good
stabilizer. And you want to build up the people doing it right. Because writing this book over
five years is, yes, I focus on a few bad people, but most people are good. They're trying to do
the right thing. They're just struggling. And so how do you rep? How do you copy and paste them
and help them, you know, not decay, but like actually grow and, and because it's also,
there's no positive vision here. That's why I realized writing this book. No, no,
neither party is articulating that positive vision, especially for rural America.
And I actually think people crave a positiveness. Like they want the opposite of what they have
right now. And the positiveness is inspiring. You're like, okay, it gives people that power
to rush the gates to get to that better system. Like that's what gives me hope, I should say.
Yeah. And it sort of seems like all we need is a politician to, or a leader to really run on that
stuff, you know, and to say, you know, to find the way that this affects everybody and to speak
to people who haven't been spoken to. It literally is a pinata saying, hit me, hit me. I mean, look,
the meat packing, especially breaking up the meat companies, like these aren't,
these are comically corrupt companies. By the way, they're not even American.
They're like these weird state-backed monopolies. Yeah.
Smithfield's quasi, there's this weird Chinese relationship there.
A lot of the beef companies are Brazilian. So it's like, there's good politics there. It's just
something that you're waiting for the right person, vocal courage to take a swing of that
pinata. On God willing, somebody will. And I can't thank you enough for coming on here to make
the case that somebody should. You've certainly convinced me. The name of the book is Barons.
You can pick up a copy if you love this conversation at factuallypod.com slash books.
Where else can people get and where can they follow your work, Austin?
I'm on all the socials. My handles are Austin Ferrick, F-R-E-R-I-C-K.
Thank you so much for being here, Austin. It's been incredible.
Yeah. Thanks again for having me on.
Well, thank you once again to Austin Ferrick for coming on the show. Once again,
if you want to pick up a copy of his incredible book, you can head to factuallypod.com slash books.
And when you buy there, you'll be supporting not just this show, but your local bookstore as well.
If you would like to support the show directly, you can do so on Patreon.
$5 a month gets you every episode of this show ad-free. For $15 a month,
I will read your name in the credits of the show and put it in the credits of every single one
of my video monologues. This week, I want to thank Andreas Gauger, Angelique Fouquette,
Eden Welch, Patrick Flanagan, Kraton Linslatt, Andrew M. Purifoy, Marcus Mitchell, and Vanessa
Russell. Thank you so much for your support. If you want to join them, head to patreon.com slash
Adam Conover. Of course, I want to thank my producers, Tony Wilson and Sam Raubman. Everybody
here at Head Gum for making the show possible. You can find all of my tour dates. Just a reminder
at adamconover.net. I'll see you out there on the road. And until next time, we'll see you on factually.
