Hello and welcome to Factually. I'm Adam Conover. Thank you so much for joining me on the show
again. You know, the climate situation is very bad. In order to stop a laundry list of dire
consequences, we need to keep the rise in temperature to no more than 1.5 degrees Celsius
higher than pre-industrial times. And currently, we're on track for warming by almost 2.7 degrees
by 2100. Like I said, that is bad. And given this situation, given the stunning inaction we
have seen for decades, you could be forgiven for writing it all off and finding a nice hole to
bury yourself in as things get worse until you die. There's an attitude a lot of people have
right now that basically says the world is ending and there's nothing we can do about it. So let's
all give up. But guess what? That is not true. The world is not ending. It is going to exist
tomorrow, whether it's better or worse, and you are going to have to live in it. And personally,
I'm too much of a fan of my life and of planet Earth itself to give up. I don't think it's an
environmental position to say, oh, we're fucked. There's nothing we can do because there is always
something we can do. The problem is figuring out what that is. And to answer that question,
we need to understand clearly where we are, how we got here, and just what is actually possible.
It's not about optimism and it's not about pessimism. It's about understanding the reality
of the world we live in and what we can actually do about it. And you know what?
The best cure for despair is to grab a shovel and pitch the fuck in. And our guest today
is going to help us do that. She is deep in the weeds on all of the data and she has written
a deeply data-informed book that we can use as a baseline to help us attack the challenges we face
in creating a sustainable future. But before we get into it, I just want to remind you
that if you want to support this show, you can do so on Patreon. Head to patreon.com
slash Adam Conover. Five bucks a month gets you every episode of this podcast.
Ad free. We got a bunch of other great community features as well. And if you want to come see
me on the road, if you like stand up comedy, head to adamconover.net. Coming up soon,
I'm heading to La Jolla, California, San Jose, California, Indianapolis,
a lot of other dates as well. Head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates.
And now my guest today is Dr. Hannah Richie. She's a data scientist who works as a lead
researcher and deputy editor of the indispensable website Our World in Data, a researcher in
global development at Oxford. And she's the author of the new book, Not the End of the World,
How We Can Be the First Generation to Build a Sustainable Planet.
I know you're going to love this conversation. Please welcome Dr. Hannah Richie.
Hannah, thank you so much for being on the show.
No, thanks very much for having me. Looking forward to the conversation.
Yeah. So you have a new book out called Not the End of the World. We're at a time where
so many people talk about the world that we live in as though it's about to end.
Oh, who knows if there'll even be another presidential election? Oh, who knows if
a retirement? Oh, the world's not even going to be around that long. We have this fatalism
about almost everything, which is, I think, a very odd viewpoint to have.
It's a very interesting thing about our time that so many people feel that way.
But it really seems to stem, first of all, from the climate crisis that we've, you know,
I was brought up knowing, you know, watching kids' cartoons about how climate change is
coming and we're ruining the planet and we have to do something. And then for the last,
you know, 30 plus years of my life, I've watched very little be done.
And so I understand why people would say, OK, well, that means we're screwed because I was
told about this crisis as a kid and we're still not doing as much as we should be. And therefore,
you know, we're going to be a member of the last generation, you hear people say.
You have a new book out called Not the End of the World, which takes the opposite viewpoint
in its title. I love that. Tell me about it. Why do you have that view, that it's not the end of
the world? Yeah, I mean, the title is called Not the End of the World. And I think it matters how
you say it. I mean, the book tackles seven big environmental problems, like I think climate
change is the big one that we think of, but we face a range of other big environmental problems
as well. And I think the title is not, you know, oh, it's not the end of the world. This is not a
big deal. No, it's a definitive, these are massive problems, but we're going to make sure that this
is not the end of the world because there are solvable problems. I mean, if we, even if we just
focus on the issue of climate change, I think, you know, coming from an environmental background,
working in this area for years, and, you know, also speaking to other climate scientists in this
area feels like we've done a very fast 180 from, you know, not that long ago, you know, the discussion
around this was, you know, is it actually happening? Are humans actually causing it? We seem to have
done like a 180 towards, oh, it's too late and now there's nothing we can do. And I think, you know,
I think we're kind of suffering from this kind of whiplash of, you know, what happened in the last
five to 10 years that we've done a complete 180 from almost semi-denial to it's too late and there's
nothing we can do. So, you know, what I try to do in the book is lay out, yes, these are, you know,
massive and urgent problems. And if we don't get our act together, the consequences will be really,
really catastrophic. But there is someone we can do about it. And although we aren't making progress
as fast as we would want, and we're not on track for where we need to be, we are actually making
progress. And we can massively accelerate that if we make the right decisions now.
Do you think the view that it's too late, there's nothing we can do about it, is that, you know,
another form of climate denialism? You say we've made a 180 from, oh, we're not doing it at all to
it's too late. Is that just the new form of climate change denialism?
I mean, I think, I mean, I think maybe some people try to push that message because they
they think that it's helpful for the kind of climate denial message. I mean, I think for some
people that's not their motivation. I think they generally just feel, you know, paralyzed and helpless
in the massive problem. So I don't think it comes from the same place. I think the actions or the
outcomes are very similar, right? Both extremes of it's not a problem or it's too late to do
anything about it. Both lead to the outcome of inaction, right? They both lead us to, you know,
what on one side you don't take action because there's not a problem to deal with in the first
place. At the other extreme, you don't take action because it's pointless. And if we're screwed,
then what's the point of doing anything anyway? So I think the outcomes of these two extremes
can be the same even if the intent behind them is not.
Yeah. So you say we are making progress. What are examples of that? Let's try to front load the
podcast episode with some good news. How about that? What is a reason for an optimistic viewpoint?
So I think if you look at the trajectory we're currently on on climate change, it's not where
we need to be. Like we're on track for between two and a half to three degrees of warming. Now,
that's way above our 1.5 degrees or two degrees target. But if you are looking at where we were
talking about where we were headed a decade ago, you know, it was three and a half to four degrees.
So that's like a degree lower than trajectory we thought we were on a decade ago. Now, it's where
we are is not acceptable. But if we can make that progress in a decade, why can we not make more
progress to pull two and a half degrees down to two degrees? So I think there is a bit of a good
news story there. I mean, I think the most dramatic and positive change for me has been that if you
look a decade ago, I was really pessimistic about where we were, because if you looked at any of the
solutions we need to tackle climate change, I mean, fundamentally is we need to move away from
fossil fuels to low carbon energy. The problem a decade ago is that the forms of low carbon
energy we had were way more expensive than fossil fuels. So no one was going to deploy this at scale
because it was way, way too expensive. Over the last 10 years or so, you know, the price of solar
has fallen by 90 percent, the price of wind has fallen by 70 percent, the price of batteries and
electric vehicles has fallen by about 90 percent, which means that the low carbon energy sources
we need are now cheaper than fossil fuels. So you don't no longer have this, you know, this tradeoff
of, you know, should we sacrifice the economy to tackle climate change? Because they're now aligned.
It's actually just in our short term economic interest as well to go for the low carbon option.
And I think for me, that's been the most dramatic change and the most dramatic progress we've made.
Now it's really about building the stuff, right? We've pulled the prices down.
Now it's about building this stuff out as quickly as we can.
What I think is interesting about the answer, and you hear that a lot from,
you know, folks who are really following what's happening with the climate, that the price of
renewable or non-fossil fuel energy has gone down so much, that's hugely good news.
What I think is interesting about that is it really is relying on, you know, the market,
on capitalism, right? The price is low and therefore the good thing is going to happen.
I guess what I'm curious about is what is our ability to do things that the market does not
demand? You know, for instance, if I look at transportation here in the U.S., let me just
give you a pessimistic case or a pessimistic example. You know, a huge amount of our emissions
come from transportation. And a huge of that is because of, you know, single occupancy,
passenger cars, people driving two and four in these giant pieces of metal. And, you know,
if we had, for instance, you know, massively expanded public transportation in the United
States, high-speed rail, passenger rail, you know, subways, etc., even just increased buses,
we could massively reduce emissions. But instead, we're putting all of our change
into electric vehicles, which are a marginal improvement. We're changing the engine of the car,
right? And we're pushing the emissions to the power plant. But that'll be an improvement.
However, even that has stalled in the last year because, A, the government has not built a massive
series of electric vehicle chargers everywhere. But B, you know, the car industry is kind of like,
ah, sure looks like consumers love the giant gas guzzling SUVs. That's what they prefer to buy.
And who are we to tell them to buy something different? People want to buy giant, people
don't even want small electric cars. When they're buying electric cars, they're buying fucking huge
ones that, like, take massively more energy to move around, massively more energy to build, etc.
And so, you know, reducing the price and hoping, all right, if we just make the slip go in the
right direction, all the water will run the right way and we'll be moving in the right direction.
That's great. But it also seems there, we have to have an ability to do things that are,
that are counter to what is cheap and available, right? And do we have the ability to do that?
I know that's a big question to land on you early in the podcast, but it's,
it's what you made me think of. No, it's, and I largely agree with you. I think there's a couple
of points there. I think I disagree that an electric car is just like a marginal improvement on a
petrol or diesel one. I mean, even a big electric car, if you look at, I mean, what's, what, there's
always a debate of, is an electric car actually better on carbon than a petrol or diesel? I
think what's true there is that the manufacturing of the car emits more carbon, right? Because it
takes more energy to build the battery than you would have on a petrol or diesel car. But once
you start driving it, the, you, you pay off the carbon debt very quickly. So in the UK, for example,
it pays off within two years for the average driver. And then from then on, the carbon emissions of the
car are much lower. So you're talking about like a too far, up to too far reduction. And as, and
that's great, but I do just want to toss in that almost everyone I know in the United States buys
a new car every three years. So if you're paying it back in two years, or at least they're on a
lease where they renew it every three years, so there, there's that still, still that consumer
behavior problem. But please keep going. I think on that, but I think the, I'm free years seems
very, very short. I mean, I think most people in the UK, at least by secondhand cars, I mean,
the key point is that if they're buying a new car, their car they're selling will go to someone else
that will be might be replacing a petrol or diesel car. So I think at the system level, it'll be
better. If you look at the emissions of an electric car, you know, you're talking about
around a too farge reduction in emissions. And actually that will get better over time, right?
Countries are decarbonizing the electricity grid so that, you know, by hopefully by 2035, for
example, actually the running emissions of your electric car might be zero because the US has
decarbonized its electricity grid. But I take your point that I think, you know, just leaving this
for the markets to run, you know, won't get us there. I think what's also really key is the
time scale on which this is needed. I think, I think the economics of the energy transition
are now just so good that, you know, we would just do this anyway, but we might do this over 60 or
70 years and we don't have 60 or 70 years. We need to do this in a much faster timeframe,
which means you do need to combine, you know, take the advantages of the free market economics,
but also impose policy on top of that. I mean, even if you're looking at the really dramatic
declines in the prices of solar, for example, over the last 10 or 15 years, they were initially
pushed by policy, right? Some countries very early on, you know, set up R&D, set up, you know,
it schemes to do this at a very high cost. And that has been like the first, you know, push
that we needed in order to get these emissions out. So I think you do need this combination of
policy to put, you know, accelerate these timescales. And you can also take advantage of
the free market economics of it as well. I really appreciate you pushing back my rant about cars
with the data that you have. And that was what I was hoping you would do, because, you know,
I think you sort of, I found a little bit of my own built-in pessimism and I loved the way that
you spoke to it. Do you often get a lot of pushback when you are spreading these messages?
Is there a way in which, you know, the people that you're talking to, myself included,
sometimes seem like we almost want to be pessimistic about this topic? Like we have a,
maybe a built-in cynicism about it? A little bit. I think what I sometimes find is that
for every solution we come up with, there's a, yes, but there's always a counter of like,
why that solution won't work or why that solution is not good. And I think that's very healthy.
Like I think if we want to find good solutions, we need to be highly critical of them.
Right. We need to work out what is the good solution, what's effective, what's not effective.
So we're putting our priorities and money and investment in the right places. So I think we
really need this kind of critical lens to these solutions. I think what, I think for me of what's
really critical in this energy transition and tackling climate change is that I think we're
always hunting for the absolute perfect solution. We're looking for the solution that has no land
juice, no minerals, and that's zero carbon. You know, there's zero negative impacts whatsoever.
And I think the reality is that those solutions just don't exist. What we're looking for,
and we need to do this quickly, we need to move away from fossil fuels quickly. So what we're
looking for are solutions that are orders of magnitude better than fossil fuels. And we're
having them, we have them, and we're developing them. And we need to work on the downsides of
those and make sure we're not creating more damage by the solutions that we're bringing in.
I think if we are to wait for the absolute perfect solution to come along, we'll just maintain our
the state's quo, right? We'll just keep burning fossil fuels, and we won't be willing to move
to anything else. I think we need to get a bit of the balance there where we acknowledge the
downsides to some of these other technologies or other alternatives, but we try to make the most
of them and we go for this transition anyway. I think that's a really good point. And it's
something I think about a lot is when we are trying to change the world for the better,
not letting the perfect be the enemy of the good, but while at the same time, maintaining a little
bit of skepticism and criticality, because there are also folks who will sell a solution as being
better than it is when we could be asking for a little bit more. And that's why, look, I'm a
transportation wonk, I care about that a lot. And in my view, if we're rethinking, especially the US's
transportation system, if we only change the engines that are in the vehicles, that's a missed
opportunity because there's a much bigger win to be had. There's a better society to be built,
and we shouldn't expect, we shouldn't accept, hey, there's a lot of people who want to sell us
a bunch of fancy new cars. And if we do more, we will have an even better outcome. But at the same
time, I'm not one of those people who's like, ah, it costs a lot of carbon to build the battery,
so fuck it. I don't think there's a medium to be found there. I don't think everyone should go out
and buy a brand new electric car every three years. I think that's excessive. But I do think, hey,
if you can get a used electric car and you've driven your previous car into the ground and it's
time to go ahead, et cetera, there is that medium. I'm very curious, though, you talk about how we
need to find new forms of energy that are many orders of magnitude better than fossil fuels.
There are some who would say, well, what if instead of finding a great new form of energy,
what if we cut back? What if we just didn't waste so much? What if we didn't use so much? What if we
didn't insist on so much growth, et cetera? This is sort of the degrowth movement. There's a lot
of folks who have that sort of perspective, what if rather than more, we had less? And I'm curious
what you think about that point of view. I mean, I think there is some room for that. I think
where I'm skeptical is, I mean, trying to convince people to do that is very, very difficult.
And I think we would struggle with that type of message. I mean, to come back to the policy
point earlier, of course, there are things that you could do to put a cap on what we would consider
a very excessive consumption. If massive SUVs are a problem, tax really big SUVs. If really
frequent flying is a challenge, then set a tax on really frequent flying. I think you need to
be quite careful with those policies that you don't get lots of pushback. You might get pushback
if you were to put high tax on the first flight that someone takes in a given year.
But you might be able to do it at much higher levels of consumption. Someone's fifth flight
of the year, you start to put high tax on. I'm a stand-up comedian. I fly, I take maybe 40 flights
a year. That was that last year. I easily am on the highest level of frequent flyer loyalty bonuses
because it's what I do for a living. And you know what? I think I would be okay being taxed
on that because I'm doing it to make money. That's how I make a living. And if I'm using the system
that much, I would be happy if I knew that some amount of money that I was spending was going
towards ameliorating the climate harms of the flying. But you're right. I cannot just say,
hey, what if I cut back in flying a little bit? Because it's literally how I make a living.
And I think a lot of folks are in the same situation. It's very difficult to ask people,
hey, what if you just cut back? What if we all just cut back and have smaller lives
where we're less prosperous, having less fun, enjoying life less? That's just sort of not a
great pitch to people for how to solve a problem. Yeah, I don't think it's a great pitch. And I
think if that's going to be your message, I don't think we'll get very far, very quickly.
I mean, I'm not against the reductions in what we make called excess consumption. I think there
are potential ways to do that. I think what would be difficult is how do we agree on what a
level of what excessive is, right? What excessive is to you is not the same as what excessive is
to me. I think there is another key part of this, which is that if we want to reduce energy
consumption, a really good way to do that is just to decarbonise. I think we can talk about
behaviour change and that's fine. But I think we're also underestimating how much we can reduce
energy use just by getting rid of fossil fuels and by electrifying our energy systems. So if you
look at, you know, if you blow up like a diagram of the US energy system today from like the fossil
fuels that are burned and where that actually goes towards providing people what we call energy
services. So that's like heating your home or lighting your home or, you know, the wheels turning
in your car. The majority of that energy is wasted along the way. And that's because when you burn
fossil fuels, most of it goes to waste heat. It doesn't actually go towards, you know, actually
giving you the power that you need. Right. Which means that if you were to take fossil fuels out
of the system, you would get rid of a lot of the energy use without taking anything away from the
energy services or the final consumption. So your behaviours could stay exactly the same
if you wanted to, but you would need much, much less energy in the system. And that just comes
from getting rid of fossil fuels and then electrifying stuff like transport, for example.
So if you take your gasoline car, for every dollar of gasoline you put in it,
only 20 cents actually goes towards turning the wheels and moving you. The other 80 cents is just
wasted. Whereas an electric car is almost the opposite. So every dollar of electricity you put
in, only 20 cents is wasted. And around 80 cents goes towards turning the wheels. So actually to
drive the same distance in an electric car of the same size, you might need three to four times less
energy. So your behaviour hasn't changed, but you've actually massively reduced your energy
consumption. So I think we also underestimate our ability to reduce energy use just by doing the
decarbonisation bit. And then you can talk about individual behaviour change as a way to also supplement
Okay, you're really smacking down my argument again about electric cars being a marginal
improvement. It's still marginal, but it's a very large margin. I absolutely grant you that.
And I agree. It's really important to look at where the actual waste is. If we're talking about
flying, rather than me flying around to make a living, we could look at, for instance, private
jets or that kind of thing. We could look at where the largest waste is. Maybe certain celebrities
don't need to take a 15 minute flight from one airport to another. They could take a goddamn cap,
you know, etc. You know, I got to confess, I have always been a sucker for Japanese treats. I love
going down a little Tokyo, heading to a convenience store and grabbing all those brightly coloured,
fun packaged boxes off of the shelf. But you know what? I don't get the chance to go down there
as often as I would like to. And that is why I am so thrilled that Bokksu, a Japanese snack
subscription box, chose to sponsor this episode. What's got me so excited about Bokksu is that
these aren't just your run-of-the-mill grocery store finds. Each box comes packed with 20 unique
snacks that you can only find in Japan itself. Plus, they throw in a handy guide filled with
info about each snack and about Japanese culture. And let me tell you something. You are going to
need that guide because this box comes with a lot of snacks. I just got this one today,
direct from Bokksu, and look at all of these things. We got some sort of seaweed snack here.
We've got a buttercream cookie. We've got a dolce. I'm going to have to read the guide to
figure out what this one is. It looks like some sort of sponge cake. Oh my gosh. This one is,
I think it's some kind of maybe fried banana chip. Let's try it out and see. Is that what it is?
Nope. It's not banana. Maybe it's a cassava potato chip. I should have read the guide. Ah,
here they are. Iburigako smoky chips. Potato chips made with rice flour, providing a lighter
texture and satisfying crunch. Oh my gosh. This is so much fun. You got to get one of these for
themselves and get this for the month of March. Bokksu has a limited edition cherry blossom box
and 12 month subscribers get a free kimono style robe and get this while you're wearing your new
duds learning fascinating things about your tasty snacks. You can also rest assured that you have
helped to support small family run businesses in Japan because Bokksu works with 200 plus
small makers to get their snacks delivered straight to your door. So if all of that sounds good,
if you want a big box of delicious snacks like this for yourself, use the code factually for
$15 off your first order at Bokksu.com. That's code factually for $15 off your first order on Bokksu.com.
Okay. I want to talk about some of the other crises that you mentioned. I just want to ask
you one more question on this first about the price going down because there's also a phenomenon
when things get more efficient and the price goes down, we do tend to use more of them. I think about
LED lights, which are massively more efficient than every other form of light ever made,
but the result is that people are using, and businesses especially are using a lot more
LED lights because, hey, guess what? We can now have 10 times the lights for the same cost or
whatever. So why not leave them running all the time because they're just LEDs? Is that at all an
issue in, hey, the price of moving, the price of heating your home goes down, the price of lighting
goes down, the price of all these things go down? Does that just mean we'll use more of them, not less?
I think there's two angles to this. I think one angle is looking at a large part of the world
where a big constraint is just they cannot afford energy. People that don't have much heating or
lighting or air con, and actually just a big everyday struggle for them is, how do I get
access to energy? And for those people, a reduction in energy prices is a massive benefit. They might
get energy for the first time. They might get vital energy services that we have enjoyed for a long
time. So I think for them, low energy prices is just a benefit. And actually, we should be supportive
of the fact that their energy use might increase because it will mask the increase.
That is a great point. That's a great point. Thank you.
And then I think when we're talking about, for example, people in the US or the UK,
like richer countries, I think this effect that you describe is what we call the Jevons paradox,
whereas the price of something falls or as efficiency improves, you use more of it.
Now, there are a range of studies trying to look at how big this, we call it the rebound effect,
how big the rebound is. And most tend to find that there is some rebound, right? So you do
undo some of the improvements that you get in efficiency, for example, but they rarely rebound
more than 100%, right? So they might rebound 50%. So rather than getting the full 100% of the
efficiency gains, because you use more, you might only get 50%. So it's not as good as you might
initially expect just from the numbers, but it's often not so much that you use more energy
than you did before. So LEDs is a good example where people after getting LEDs, you did just use
more lights or you left them on or you might have installed more in your home. But actually,
energy use for lighting in the US has still gone down so that the rebound wasn't 100%,
but we did undo some of those gains because we use more.
Yeah. Well, and I was thinking about reading studies about light pollution that like light
pollution has, if you're an astronomer or someone who cares about bats,
like you might not be happy about LEDs because we're using more, but I'm glad to hear that the
energy use has gone down. I love knowing the name of that, the Jervins paradox. I hadn't heard
that before. Oh, Jevins. Yeah, Jevins paradox. That's really cool. This is great. I love that I
keep standing up these arguments for you and you keep knocking them down so ably. You're my
favorite kind of guest. You say that climate change is only one of many types of environmental
problem that we have facing us. What are some of the others?
I mean, I think another big one is air pollution where globally estimates, there are a range of
estimates of how many people die prematurely from air pollution every year, but they're all in the
millions. And the World Health Organization, for example, estimates that around 7 million premature
deaths every year from air pollution, which is a massive deal. And there's two problems of air
pollution there. One is what we call indoor air pollution. And that's people typically on much
lower incomes, where actually the only sources of energy they have are like wood or charcoal.
And they burn leaves in their home for heating or cooking fuels, and then they inhale the smoke.
And that's really, really bad for human health. So they have millions of deaths from that.
And then we have millions of deaths from outdoor air pollution. So that's stuff from our cars,
power plants, for example, industry. And again, millions of people die there prematurely every
year from that source of pollution. So for me, you were to quantify deaths from environmental
problems today, like air pollution would be very much top of the list. And it's something we
can have in the back of our mind, but don't really think about. Yeah. I mean, it's completely insane
that when we look at the toll of our energy system, it's one that we don't often keep in mind,
because it's sort of like an invisible death toll. Again, transportation causing emissions,
even if you just look at deaths from our transportation system, we think of car crashes,
people being hit by buses or whatever. We don't think about the number of people who
are dying of respiratory illnesses that they got because they live 800 feet from a freeway,
as many people do here in Los Angeles where I live. I mean, there's like some federal regulation
that says you're not supposed to build a home within X number of feet of a freeway.
And in Los Angeles, something like, I don't know, a huge percentage, like 40% of homes
are in violation of this because we have freeways everywhere. There's just so much air pollution.
And so people are dying left and right of respiratory diseases, but that doesn't hit the
news. It doesn't say, hey, a five-year-old child with asthma killed or a person dies at 65 when
they would have died at 90 because of air pollution in the same way that a car crash does.
And yet, those deaths are caused by the same thing. Yeah, exactly. And I mean, this is another
what we call an externality of burning fossil fuels. And that works in the same way as climate.
The CO2 emissions and the damages from climate change are like an externality, a kind of cost to
society, a social cost and environmental cost that isn't factored into the price of fossil fuels
when you burn them. And it's the same for air pollution. That's exactly the same thing. This
is a kind of hidden externality that we just don't really think about. I mean, again, I like to
highlight that these problems are solvable problems. They're tractable problems. I mean,
if you were to look across a range of especially high-income countries, we have actually made
progress on reducing air pollution over the last few decades. The US Clean Air Act has been really
successful in reducing emissions of these gases. The same in the UK. We've seen a really rapid
decline. There's still an unacceptable number of people dying from this, but we can make progress
when we put the right policies in place and we make these transitions. I guess the key challenge
there is that most people dying from air pollution today live kind of in middle-income
countries that have industrialized very, very quickly, but they've done that by burning fuels,
especially very close to city centers. So Delhi, for example, Beijing was one where if you were to
go to Beijing a decade or so ago, really, really heavily polluted. Over the last decade, it's made
amazing progress in reducing air pollution and added years onto the lives of its citizens.
So I like to highlight that these are massive problems, but they are also tractable ones and
they are ones that we can make progress on. And what are some of the other environmental
challenges? I love hearing this. I love hearing a problem and then a solution right after it.
I mean, I think a big one is our food systems. I think people massively underestimate the
environmental impacts of our food systems. I mean, I think there's almost no environmental problem
where food isn't either a big player or completely dominates the impacts. I mean,
it contributes around between a quarter and a third of greenhouse gas emissions for climate change.
It's the leading driver of deforestation. It's the leading driver of biodiversity loss.
It's the biggest user of fresh water. I mean, I think when we think about fresh water,
we think about taking a shower or brushing our teeth. It's farming is the biggest user of water.
It's the leading driver of water pollution. So there's a really long list of environmental
problems where food and what we eat and how we produce it really sits at the center of that.
Yeah. And so how do we solve this? Because some people are watching this or listening to this
going, vegan, we should all be vegan. And what a wonderful world that would be. And I've eaten
vegan for long periods for many times in my life. And yet I do not believe that we are going to solve
this problem by convincing every single person to go vegan one by one in the way that a religious
proselytizer might, that folks who are doing that are doing the Lord's work good on you. But I don't
think we're going to solve the problem that way. And I also think that eating organic,
eating local, small scale farms, very nice for folks who can afford it. But we need a system,
a food system that can feed what seven billion people at this point, eight billion we're on our
way to. Eight, excuse me, thank you. I always forget how many billions. Because when I was a kid,
let me just say, one of the fucking weirdest things in my entire life is I remember being in
high school and being told there are six billion people on earth. And then I remember 10 years
later, it was like, hey, now it's seven. And I was like, how there's a billion more people
when I was just like, you know, when I was like watching DVDs and, you know, like taking the
bus home from school, like how did what a massive change. And yet everything looks the same to me
when I'm walking down the street. It's bizarre. And now we're now we have eight. So we've added
a quarter as many people or third as many people has already existed when I was a kid.
In the last couple of decades, we got to feed all of them. So, you know, how the hell can we
have a food system that feeds these people food that they want to eat without destroying the environment?
So I think there's, I think there's two big solutions or things we need to do here.
I think the very first, the first one is we just, we need to produce food very, very efficiently.
And by that, we need high crop yields. Now, if you go back to, you know, the 1960s or the 1970s,
you know, the big crisis at that point, and what people were talking about was the world running
out of food, right? We saw this really rapid increase in the global population. And basically,
conclusion was, there's no way that we will be able to feed everyone. And then, you know, there
was the, the population bomb was the book that came out in 1968 by Paul R. Erlich. And that predicted,
you know, just, we're just going to have so many millions of people dying from famine and just
wouldn't be able to feed everyone. And that hasn't come true. And that hasn't come true because we
had what we call the Green Revolution, where we just see crop yields across the world just skyrocket.
You know, you're getting doubling, tripling, quadrupling of crop yields, which means that
despite having, you know, billions more people, the amount of food we produce per person has
still gone up. You know, we've seen a massive increase. I mean, going forward, that's also
really key. What happens if you increase crop yields is you obviously get more food. But the
key point is you, you grow it on less land, which means you need to cut down less forests. You need
to, you know, go into less wild habitats. You can, you can use much less land for farming. So that's
number one. And then number two is just, we just need to see massive global dietary change.
The biggest impact by far of our food systems is, is, is meat and dairy consumption. And we do need
to find a way of reducing that. But I, I completely agree with you that I think the, the message of
we just all need to go vegan tomorrow is just like not going to work. Yeah. And actually,
how do we, I'm fascinated to hear you say that then because I, I agree. I agree with both points,
right? And so how do we square that circle? How do we reduce, and by the way, in the last couple
years, there's been a huge amount of interest in meat replacement foods. There was like a brief
fad for them in the United States. For a couple of years, I was buying impossible burgers and
beyond burgers. And now I never want to eat one of those things for as long as I live. Like I,
I ate so many impossible burgers that I can like picture the taste like, and it repulses me at
this point. And, you know, God willing, they come up with a different version that, that tastes a
little different and is a little bit more of an actual replacement. But, you know, unfortunately,
that industry turned out to not have the results that it promised investors and the public. So
what, yeah, what do we do to reduce meat consumption if all those things we sort of
are agreed might not be the answer? I mean, I think the, I mean, I think I should say that I think,
I think food is way harder to tackle than energy. I think on energy, I think people,
for the most part, they just want, you know, cheap energy coming out of the socket, right? And if
you can provide that for them, they don't really care where it comes from. For food, people really
care about what they eat. And it's like a such a strong part of the identity and their freedom,
right? Try to tell someone what to eat and they will immediately push back, which is why I think
this is a much harder problem to tackle. Yeah. I mean, I think the, I mean, I think the key thing
there is trying to sell it to someone is all or nothing. Like you either eat meat or you don't
eat meat is not going to work, right? I think you need to find a way of reducing meat consumption
or giving people options to reduce meat consumption and starting there. And then they might progress
towards, you know, a more and more plant-based diet over time. I think you're not going to get that
overnight. I mean, I think for me, I think we will need to rely on solutions that produce
almost complete mimics of meat that we're currently eating. I guess I'm probably pretty
pessimistic that people just accept, you know, we'll just eat beans and lentils and that'll be fine.
I think for most people, they basically want a substitute for meat, which means we need to
produce meat without the animal. And there are innovations coming through on this. The problem
is that they are currently too expensive and we haven't scaled them yet. Are you correct?
Yeah. I've read accounts of the current state of lab-grown meat where they're like
sort of making like a lattice of animal cells, like very painstakingly in a lab and like one on
top of the other and like, okay, we've made the perfect artificial steak and it only costs
$100,000 a pound or whatever. It's like encouraging work, but it's not really close to market yet.
Is that right? Yeah. I mean, I think the costs are falling pretty rapidly still. I mean, yeah,
$100,000 would have been, you know, the price, you know, maybe a decade or so ago, but they've
fallen quite fast since then. And actually, I think on cost, they might be competitive,
you know, in the next five or so years. Really? I mean, the scalability will be the problem. It's
like how you then take that, you know, really fine, your created process and scale that up,
you know, to produce hundreds of millions of tons of meat. I mean, that will be the big problem
rather than the economics of it. Yeah. And we also have the problem with the food system of
people's health. I mean, as you say, since, you know, the population bomb was written in the last
50 years, there's been this enormous explosion of food production, which is great sort of
demographically, right? If you're looking at, okay, we produced enough food for all of these
8 billion people. But if you look at at least, you know, the dietary health of people in the
United States, it is poor. And you have to lay some of that at the feet of our food system.
It's not people need to make better choices. It's people need better choices in the supermarket.
The food that is being rammed down people's throats is not what it should be because of,
I would say the pressures of capitalism on these food producers to make food more cheaply and etc.
And so, you know, we have this explosion in the number of calories we're creating, but there
may be not the calories that are best for people's health. And I could imagine something similar
happening if we have our meat substituted, like we probably need, you know, some amount
of regulations in place or somebody thinking about like, let's make sure we shape this system
so that we're not producing, you know, we're feeding people and we're also not feeding them
shit, right? Yeah, no, I agree. I think the quality of the meat substitutes or, you know,
whatever we replace it with will be really important. And to some extent, that could be
another lever to encourage people to move away from particular products. Like I think as I was
saying, I think the transition in food is a much harder sell for people. But what people really
care about is their health. So if we can produce products that are one more environmentally friendly
and also better for people's health, that could be another lever to encourage people to make that
transition. I mean, I think there are a range of studies looking at, you know, the health benefits
of moving to a more plant-based diet doesn't necessarily mean a completely plant-based
diet, but a more plant-based diet. And they tend to result in slightly better health outcomes
for people. And that might not be because necessarily they're eating less meat. But I think
often when people transition to a more plant-based diet, they automatically increase the diversity
of foods that they're eating, right? Like they diversify different meals, they eat a bit more
veg, a bit more fruit, a bit more of various different foods. So overall, the quality of
their diet might improve and diversify. So I think that the health lens of this is also really,
really critical. Yeah. And when I think you can make the argument to people, hey, if you eat less
meat, if you diversify your diet, you're going to be healthier. That is an appealing message to
people, you know, people want to feel better about what they eat. And I think if we sort of
abandon the monkish devotion to, I never again shall meat pass my lips. And that's fine for those
who want to make that moral commitment. I think that's a wonderful moral commitment to make and
I support it. But if we can focus on reducing, diversifying for everybody in general, we can
make huge, huge gains without requiring people to, without requiring people to give up so much if
they don't want to. Is that sort of what it is? Yeah, exactly. I think for a lot of people,
even that first step would seem overwhelming. You know, how on earth do I eat a vegan diet?
Like what do I eat? And I actually think as you graduate, as people are gradually exposed
towards, you know, eating a bit less meat or substituting, you know, one meal, you know,
a day or a day a week for a more plant-based diet, they then start to learn stuff that they can eat.
And oh, I actually quite like this substitute or I like this different meal that I've made.
I think then they become more comfortable with it over time and might be able to take it further.
But I think the overwhelm initially of, okay, I suddenly have to eat a completely vegan diet,
you know, really puts people off. So I think we need to take people on baby steps along the way.
And then they might end up a vegan diet at the end of the road. But I think most people will not
jump immediately to that. Yeah. I mean, my own thing was like 10 years ago, I read a book by
the cookbook author, Mark Bitman, called Vegan Before Six, where he had, he's like,
here's my diet plan. I eat vegan before 6 p.m. and then I have whatever I want for dinner.
And I did that for a year or two. And then I just sort of learned, oh, here's a bunch of vegan
meals I can make myself. And so now I eat vegan quite often. Not, I'm not a permanent vegan,
but like, you know, more often than not, I'm like, oh, let me try to have a vegan meal today.
And I think getting that sort of muscle memory into people so that they know how to do it enables
them to make those choices, et cetera. Now, vegans in the comments, I know you're yelling,
everyone should just go vegan. It's fine. Like keep doing what you're doing. But we are trying to
get as many people under the tent as possible. And having a little bit of allowance for where
people are currently at, I think, helps us do that, right? Yeah, exactly. I mean, I've had this
dilemma myself. So I'm now a vegan. And I wasn't, you know, three years or so ago. And I've actually
questioned over the years, am I more effective in this role as a vegan, or as someone that's not a
vegan, but strongly encourages, you know, meat reduction? Like I sometimes have this kind of
block of if I, you know, people find out I'm a vegan, you know, they don't take my message
seriously, or they think I'm like way too extreme. Or, you know, they can't visualize how they would
get from where they are to where I am. Whereas if I was someone that, you know, didn't eat meat that
often, maybe didn't eat beef, ate some chicken or fish, they might find that more relatable. And
therefore they might actually feel like there was a shorter gap between where they are and where I am.
I mean, in the end, I just went vegan anyway. But I have questioned, you know, what's the most
effective, you know, communication strategy there or where to place yourself to reach a bigger cohort
of people? Yeah, it does. It is funny that if you're talking to a vegan, and you're feeling bad about
yourself, and then they reveal, I eat fish sometimes, and you're like, Oh, oh, thank God. Oh, okay,
all right, okay. So there's, there's some hope for me yet, you know, like it, it's just having,
having a little bit of flex, like makes people a little bit relieved. So I really love that
we're making progress in so many areas. I am curious, though, are there any areas where we're
putting a lot of effort into reducing our carbon emissions that are not so effective? That, you
know, are things that, you know, hey, we should direct our efforts elsewhere? Are there any
current initiatives that you are a skeptic about? I mean, I think the, I think on, on climate change
specifically, I mean, I think the, the issue there is that I think there's a lot of people that are
really well intentioned. They want to make a difference. They want to cut their carbon footprint,
but they don't have good information to base that on. And they often misplace their effort.
And the issue there is that they do the stuff that has a really tiny impact or sometimes a negative
impact. And then they miss the really big stuff. So when you look, for example, if you look at
surveys, you know, asking people, you know, what's the best thing you can do for the environment,
or the best thing you can do to cut your carbon footprint, they mentioned stuff like recycling,
or, you know, reusing a plastic bag or turning off the lights. And, and these are, you know,
fine to do, do them, but they're small in the magnitude of things. And actually they miss the
stuff, like adopting a more plant based diet, or, or they even miss stuff like, you know,
switching to the electric car. So they, they're focusing on the really tiny stuff and putting
effort in there, and then missing the really big stuff. And what I think was really key is if we're
to have a hope of tackling this, you know, we're past the stage of the little stuff, right? We need
to be focusing on the big stuff. So I think that's the issue that people have is also often
misplaced effort, when there's actually a list of, you know, maybe five big things that really
matter. And then the rest is more like a rounding error. Yeah. Well, recycling is such a contentious
one, because a lot of people have an awareness that, you know, recycling, at least how it's
practiced in the US is, in many ways, a bit of a PR attempt by the plastics industry to,
you know, distract from the waste that they caused. Hey, if we put that little triangle on
the thing and say it's recyclable, then people will think, Oh, it's not so bad to buy one,
and it'll remove the guilt from them. And then we'll shift the burden of being responsible
onto the consumer. Now, I don't, I believe all that is true. I know all that is true. I've,
I've studied it and done content on it myself. But that doesn't stop me from throwing all that
shit in the blue bin, blue bin, because, Hey, why not? If some of us being recycled, whatever,
I don't stress out about it too much. But I think that that breeds a cynicism in people that, Hey,
these solutions that we're being presented are capitalist schemes by people who are trying
to get us to buy more. And I don't know. I think that is what leads a lot of people to say, Oh,
we're never going to solve this problem unless we do something about our economic system overall,
that we change its structure. And, you know, that we have a rapacious economic system that is
gobbling everything up, that always wants more demands, endless growth, mines the planet for
resources, mines our labor to reduce it to its lowest possible cost, and is just, you know,
a fire that's consuming the planet until it's all gone. That's a very apocalyptic view. But I'm
curious what you think about, you know, our economic system itself and how it contributes to the
problem or if we can actually solve it under capitalism? I mean, I think that was a lot.
I like to give a lot at this point in the conversation. I'm sensing you're a big fan of
capitalism. No, I think, I think, I think those are all very valid points. I mean, I think it's
very fair to say that capitalism has got us into this mess. Release has played a massive role in
getting us into this mess. I think you can still make the argument that it can play some role in
getting us out of it now. Or at least another way I'd frame it is that to me, I'm not sure we have
a choice at this stage of trying to utilize some of the positives of capitalism, which, you know,
we discussed earlier, the kind of free market economics of energy costs and technological
change. I think that's like one benefit of this. There are obviously still massive downsides. The
question is, can you garner the benefits of the system, but also try to address and pull down
some of the downsides of the system? Right. To me, that seems more realistic than deciding,
we're just going to rip up the system and build a new one, especially on the timescales that we're
talking about here, right? We're talking about tackling this, you know, we need to really get
moving on. I mean, we should have got moving on this 20 years ago, but now we really need to get
moving on this. And we're talking about, you know, decarbonizing our electricity grids in the UK
or the US in five to 10 years. And I'm skeptical that we can tear down an economic system and
build a new one on that timescale. Maybe if we're talking about this over 70 years, then we might
have a way of, you know, working on our economic system first, and then deciding how we tackle our
environmental problems later. So I think we, in some sense, are stuck in the economic system
that we're in. But that doesn't mean we need to accept all of the, all of the aspects of it,
or just accept it as the status quo. I think there are things we can do within that system
to, to utilize the benefits and try to push down some of the major downsides of it.
I agree with you entirely. I mean, I'm a critic of our economic system. And I agree that capitalism
has gotten us into this mess. And I'm a person who is constantly wanting to envision something
better. However, I don't think that we can, we have time to wait, you know, I don't think we
have time to say, Hey, let's, let's figure out the economic system first and then deal with climate
change. We can do both things at once. And, you know, we can be realists about the world that
we live in and try to make, you know, the changes that we need to make in that world under the
system that we're in, as we also try to envision a better system and, and build it. And, you know,
I do take issue when people say, Ah, that's, you know, as people are probably going to say in the
comments of this video when we posted on YouTube, capitalism did this, we need to uproot capitalism.
Yes. And we also need to, we need to actually solve the problem that we actually face in the
limited amount of time that we have. And it is not an either or a problem. It is an and, and,
and, and problem. So thank you so much for that. Yeah, I agree. And I think, I mean, I think the,
I think the argument is often, well, we're just going to take the current system,
energy system, for example, that we're in, and we're just solving it for a different one. And,
and it's just going to be just as bad, and it's going to be so as extractive as it was before.
And again, I think this comes a little bit back to these kinds of perfect solutions,
this hunt for perfect solutions. I mean, I think we need to be real realistic that, you know,
this is not about maintaining the status quo, but like this, the rebuilding our energy system is,
you know, the biggest, ultimately, one of the biggest challenges we're going to face. And we're
just going to see really dramatic changes here. So I don't think we should underestimate how,
you know, big this transformation is that we're asking even in the food system, right? We're
trying to completely transform our food system, completely transform our energy system or industry,
you know, transport systems. So these are really kind of revolutionary changes. I think we should
underplay that. But on the kind of extractive component, I think, you know, we're trying to move
away from a fossil fuel system, which is just take, take, take, right? When you extract fossil
fuels, you burn them, they're done, right? You need to extract more, you do this every, every year.
And there we're talking about, you know, extracting 15 billion tons of fossil fuels every year.
Now, we move to low carbon energy, for example, we will also need to extract minerals. That's
completely true. And we need to be conscious of the environmental impact of that. But what's key
is that we are talking about, you know, orders of magnitude, less minerals, you know, talking about
tens to hundreds of millions of tons compared to 15 billion tons of fossil fuels every single year.
I think the key point of this transition as well is that you don't need to extract this year after
year after year, right? You can start to then recycle those minerals, you know, at the end of
a solar panel's life for a wind turbine and put that back into the system. So we will need a ramp
up period initially, because we just need to build lots of new stuff. But we'll hopefully
reach a position where a lot of that can be recycled. And we get to more of a, you know, circular
economy approach that people discuss, rather than just an extractive take, take, take one.
Yeah. And what I love about that is that you're depicting us as taking a step towards the world
we want. If you're someone listening to or watching this podcast who says capitalism is
extractive and I, that's something I hate about it, well, you're describing an energy system that
is far less extractive, right, that is pulling less out of the earth, ultimately, especially if
we're able to, as you say, reuse some of the minerals that we extract. And so that is addressing
part of the problem that you are trying to address. We're not ripping out the whole thing and replacing
it in a day, but we are taking a step towards the world that we want, which I think is really
important. And we talk about many issues on this show, whether we're talking about the criminal
justice system, right? Some folks are prison abolitionists, police abolitionists. I'm like,
hey, I don't disagree with the world that you're envisioning. Let's take steps in the meantime
to build forms of justice that are alternatives to policing, so we can show people how it works
and reduce our reliance on a day-to-day basis, rather than just focusing on the far-off horizon.
We also need to take steps towards that world today under the system that we live in. And that's
what you're talking about doing, which is why I love it so much. Are you ever, though, like,
is there ever a pessimist bone in your body about it? Is there a world that you see us
possibly heading towards that you're trying to steer us away from? Because sometimes I do know
that the optimist's point of view, especially for a climate activist, it can be a little bit of a
strategic choice, right? We need to be optimistic in order to do these things, and therefore it
makes sense to take a strategy of optimism and not be public about the fear that's in the back
of your head of like, oh, what if we don't do these things, right? So are you still powered by fear
to some degree, or are you really like confident, hey, all of these great things are going to happen
if we all keep pulling? No, definitely. Like, the fear is still there. Like, I still lose a lot of
sleep over climate change. I guess I just try to balance that fear, and in some sense, anxiety
with also with the optimism that there is something we can do about it. Like, I'm very clear always on
my messaging and also in the book that, you know, the changes I describe in the book are not
inevitable in any way, right? I don't know if we will do it. I can't force us to do it, but they
are possible. And I think there's a massive opportunity there. And I think what we need at
the moment is a positive vision of the world we could live in as almost as a North Star. I think
there's a lot of the environmental messaging is almost built around damage limitation. And it's,
you know, you know, the world will inevitably be worse in the future. We just decide how bad it's
going to be. And I think actually we need a bit more of a positive vision of, no, actually, the
future can be better. It will not inevitably be better, but there is something better that we
can work towards. How do we go from where we are now to where we would want to be? So that's what
I try to do with my messaging is try to present, you know, a bit more of a positive vision of where
we're trying to go to, but also make clear that, you know, none of this inevitable. And, you know,
if we stay on our current path, you know, I'm very scared about what the future will look like,
because we're not on a good one. But I just have some level of optimism that we can get our act
together and bend that curve closer to, you know, the temperature changes that we want and are
achievable. So give me a little bit of that positive version of the or vision of the future,
right? Like paying us a little bit of a picture of, you know, here I am. Like I said, I, you know,
30 years ago, I was watching those cartoons, right? Captain Planet and whatnot. Today,
I'm in my 40s. I'm like, hey, we didn't do as much as I feel like we should have done.
But, you know, what is the world that I could live in when I'm 80 if we do all the things that
you say are possible? So if we, you know, get our act together and tackle this, you know, we won't,
I don't think we'll limit, you know, warming to 1.5 degrees. I think, you know, that's,
you know, a very laudable goal. But I think, you know, we have kind of left it too late to
achieve that. But I think the key point there is, you know, 1.5 degrees is not a cliff, right?
Like we are, we need to fight for temperature ranges above that because with each incremental
rising temperature, we increase risks. So I think 2 degrees is still within our grasp if we really
get our act together. So we could limit warming to below 2 degrees. We will see, you know, increased
impacts there, you know, but there are things that we can do to limit a lot of those impacts.
So we'll live in a world where hopefully the majority of the world have access to energy.
They have higher standards of living than they do today. Energy is very cheap.
We don't have these, you know, massive energy price shocks, you know, that we have in a fossil
fuel system because, you know, Putin invades Ukraine, like we've seen in the last few years.
So we have more stable and low energy prices. People who have access to the energy services
they need, you know, we have much more livable cities that aren't, you know, completely governed
by cars on the road. There are, you know, better communities where we can interact. You know, we
have cycle lanes, public transport, you know, people are walking, people can sit outdoors,
they can dine outdoors. We have clean air to breathe so people aren't dying from air pollution.
You know, we don't kill, you know, more than 70 billion animals every year for food, but we still
have, you know, really tasty nutritious diets. We've got zero deforestation because we've brought
that to an end. And we have, you know, these amazing wild landscapes coming back and wild
animals coming back. That is a beautiful vision. And you feel very confident that we can get there.
You at least feel optimistic that we can get there. Yeah, these goals are completely achievable.
Whether we do them is up to us. And I mean, us, you know, at a very large collective level,
but they're there for us. And I think the key point and what I try to communicate in my messaging
is that this transition is not a sacrifice. I mean, often this environmental stuff is posed as
a sacrifice. It's, you know, oh, we'll just have to cut back or we'll just have to sacrifice this
in order to preserve the future. And that's fine. Actually, that messaging is fine if that's the
correct, you know, notation and the correct idea and correct message there. And maybe we should
just sacrifice, but we actually don't need to sacrifice because the changes we're making are
opportunities. So we have opportunities in the short term and it also leads to good benefits
over the long term. And I think we need to reframe our messaging here away from, you know,
sacrifice towards one of opportunity and abundance. Yeah, that it's the classic scarcity
mentality versus abundance mentality that we do not have to have worse lives. We do not have to
live in a worse world in order to prevent these outcomes. Actually, everything will be better.
We will all have more, more healthy, more vibrant, more prosperous lives if we were to make this
transition. I also, I love the name of your book so much, not the end of the world because it is such
a deep philosophical thing that people think the world is ending. And like it's, it's not possible
for it to end, right? Like you are, unless you personally die, right, you are going to wake up
in a world that exists and it is going to be better or worse, you know, and you are going
to have to live in it and you have some amount of control. We all have some amount of control over
what that world is based on our actions today. And no matter how bad things are, we have the
opportunity to do something that is going to make the world that we're going to wake up in tomorrow
a little bit better, a little bit worse. And so when I think about it that way, it makes me realize
this mentality that like the world is ending is nothing but a cop-out. It's, it's, it's false and
all it does is absolve you fictionally of that, of that power. It takes power away from you to
say that about the world. Yeah, I think that's the high extreme again. If you, you know, tell yourself
that the world is doomed and it's too late to tackle these problems and it is the end of the
world, then yeah, your reaction to that is, well, if it's over, then, you know, why, why, why should
I take action anyway? You know, it won't make a difference. Maybe we should just, you know,
enjoy the remaining of our lives that we have left because nothing we do now is going to change
things. And that, again, I think that's a cop-out because that's just not the reality. And that
type of approach and that, you know, messaging is not going to get us to where we need to be. I
think we need to reframe our discussions around this of, yes, these are very serious problems.
For some people, these actually are existential problems. Like people will die. People are dying
from air pollution. People are dying from climate change and people will die from climate change.
So for some people, this is really an existential threat. But we have the capacity to reduce those
risks, to reduce those dangers and actually not just, you know, have this damage limitation
vision, but also a better vision of actually improving the world going forward rather than
just trying to stop some of the damage. Yeah. And I mean, once you start thinking about that way,
it makes you realize how big of an opportunity you have because it's sort of, you go from thinking,
ah, what can I do to fight climate change or to fight these problems to thinking, oh,
everything that I do can be a solution. You know, like, whether it's eating vegan or it's,
you know, getting the electric car or it's doing policy work or whatever, like every single thing
that you do is a move in the right direction if you choose for it to be. And it can be massively
empowering to think about it that way. Yeah, exactly. And I think the, as I was saying earlier, I
think, I mean, these are, you know, massive transitions that we're doing and they touch
on basically every sector, which means that, you know, regardless of, you know, what you're working
in or where you're working or what you're doing, you know, these issues are touching you and you
can have a positive impact on that. Like, I think we often think of what you can do in environmentalism
as just, you know, how do I reduce my carbon footprint? And that's fine. And I give recommendation
of how people can do that most effectively. But I think we should also be more ambitious about
that. You know, my contribution is not just going to be how do I limit my footprint as much as
possible. I actually want to offset that and more by the positive impacts that I make, whether it's,
you know, communicating to others, whether it's someone, you know, working in politics, working
in engineering or finance or, you know, we all play a role in trying to shift all of these systems
into a more sustainable path. And actually, you know, regardless of what you do, you're probably
hitting on those every day. Yes. And this is why I'm so against people putting themselves in a
position of powerlessness. And a lot of times when I'm arguing with what I think people are
going to write in the comments, it's me arguing with that. People say, oh, we can't do anything
because capitalism. No, you can do a hell of a lot. And it's not only your responsibility,
it's your opportunity to do so. And if you don't take it, you are, you're putting yourself in a
position you're declaring that you have no power when the opposite is true. I so appreciate you
coming on today to dispel some of my lingering pessimism and tell me why I'm wrong about it.
I absolutely loved it. The name of the book is not the end of the world. People can, of course,
get it at our special bookshop, factuallypod.com slash books. But where can people find you online,
Hannah? And how can they get involved in this fight? Yeah, so I, maybe one of the best places is
I work for a project called Our World in Data. And that's a website. And we have data and research
on not just climate change and environment, but what we frame as the world's largest problems.
So you can go on there and look at all the data to try to understand what's going on in the world.
It's an incredible resource. It's really an amazing site. People should go check it out,
Our World in Data. Yeah, I have a substack called Sustainability by Numbers, where I try to understand
these problems on environment and climate through numbers. So not about like gut feelings or, you
know, intuitions or anecdotes. We're actually looking at the data on electric vehicles, for example.
I was really going based on gut feelings and anecdotes. And so you bringing numbers was an
important corrective to that. I love that. Sustainability in Numbers. Yeah. And I think how
people can contribute this like in so many ways. I think there is the, you know, reducing your
personal carbon footprint bit, which is important. But I think much more wider than that. I think a key
one is just, you know, how do you contribute, you know, from your career, for example, a lot of people,
especially younger people are deciding, you know, what should I do with my life? If you're
interested in this area, there are so many areas that you can get involved and make a positive
difference, whether that's in engineering, whether that's becoming an electricity into, you know,
massively enhance the grid or install heat pumps, whether it's spreading the message
through art. I mean, there's so many ways that you can do this in a much more positive way.
And then obviously also really key to that is trying to influence politics. And as we discussed
markets, I think you also have an impact on the market by the stuff that you buy. When you're
buying an EV, you're signaling, you know, we're done with petrol and diesel cars.
The world is moving towards electric cars. I think we can also have an impact politically and
on our market systems. Thank you so much for coming on, Hannah. I can't thank you enough.
It's been a wonderful conversation. Thanks very much. Thank you. Well, thank you once again to
Dr. Hannah Ritchie for coming on the show. If you want to pick up a copy of her book once again,
head to factuallypod.com slash books. That's factuallypod.com slash books. Every purchase there
supports not just this show, but your local bookstore as well. If you would like to support
this show directly, and I hope you do, head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover. Five bucks a month
gets you every episode of the show ad free. We also have a community book club coming up soon.
We're reading Caitlin Doty's book, Smoke Gets in Your Eyes and chatting with Caitlin over Zoom
on a private Zoom link. Hope you'll join us for that awesome event for 15 bucks a month. I will
read your name on this very podcast. Our most recent $15 a month contributors are Mask When You
Can, Protect Your Community. Thank you so much Mask When You Can, Protect Your Community for
slipping that message in there. I approve of it. AAK193 and Jasmine Andrade. Thank you so much
to all of them. If you'd like to join them, head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover. If you'd
like to come see me on the road doing standup comedy, head to adamconover.net for all my tickets
and tour dates heading to Indianapolis, Indiana, La Jolla, California, San Jose, California. Would
love to see you out there adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates. I'd like to thank my
producers, Tony Wilson and Sam Raudman, everybody here at Head Gum for making the show possible.
Thank you so much for listening and we'll see you next time on Factually.
