Hello and welcome to Factually. I'm Adam Conover. Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
This week, I want to talk about an experience that is both weird and weirdly common in 2023 in
the past couple years. You've probably seen it happen to someone around you. Maybe it was a roommate,
a parent, a family friend, or for me, some comedians I started out with. Whoever it was,
the story is the same. Someone who seemed sane with it and living in the same reality as you did
suddenly lost their mind and went down some rabbit hole to emerge as a fully blown conspiracy
theorist. Now, people have been losing their shit like this from time immemorial. As I've covered
before on this show and on Adam ruins everything, conspiratorial thinking follows from the normal
patterns of human thought that we use to understand the world around us. But it seems that there's
something particular and special about the way that people fall into the trap of conspiratorial
thinking now. Whether it starts on 4chan or Fox News, anti-vaxx or QAnon, there's a mirror world
of socially poisonous conspiracy that people keep falling into. It is incredibly painful when it
happens to someone who you know and love and it's often hard to know how to even understand what
happened. What is it about our world, our media, and our politics today that makes this happen
over and over again, the reasonable people who we love and care about? Well, today I have a truly
brilliant guest to help dig into this issue and into the entire mirror world that our politics
and media ecosystem has become. But before we get into it, I just want to remind you that if you
want to support this show, you can do so on Patreon. Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad free. You can hear all the wonderful
interviews we do every single week and you can support other people getting them as well.
And by the way, if you like stand-up comedy, just want to remind you I am a touring stand-up
comedian. I just put a whole bunch of new dates up on my website. In 2024, I am heading to New
York, Boston, Philly, D.C., Portland, Maine, a bunch of other places, Chicago, Nashville,
head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates. And now let's get to today's guest because she is
incredible. She's one of the most respected and influential public intellectuals and
nonfiction authors on the left of the past century. Her writings on consumerism, capitalism,
and climate are required reading. And her most recent book is called doppelganger,
a trip into the mirror world. I am, of course, talking about the incredible Naomi Klein and her
new book is a fascinating and personal look into the conspiratorial ways of thinking that are thriving
in the moment we live in today. So without further ado, please welcome Naomi Klein.
Naomi, thank you so much for being on the show. It's a complete thrill to have you.
I'm very happy to be with you. Your books, every time one comes out, they make waves
every single time. This new one, I am so excited about having read the introduction of the first
chapter. It's immediately gripping. You do something that is a form of thinking and communicating
that is very close to my heart. Always interesting to me where you start from
a fascinating personal story and you ladder out from that to a really wide ranging discussion of
the world that we live in today and some really fascinating intellectual issues. It's so cool.
Let's start from the starting point. The book's called doppelganger. Please tell us about your
doppelganger and how it led you on this investigation. Sure. So I do have a doppelganger
by which I mean a person who I am perennially confused and conflated with. Lots of us
have had this experience. I would say mine is more extreme than most. There is another Naomi
nonfiction writer of books who is close to my age and I don't know. We're both Jewish. We're both
named Naomi and we both write books and sort of big ideas, I suppose. You're both cultural critics
as well. Yeah. Her first book, I'm referring to Naomi Wolfe and so lots of viewers, listeners
and viewers might not be familiar with her. She was big in the 90s. She wrote a book called
The Beauty Myth. She worked for Al Gore when he ran for president. She was one of the most
prominent feminists of her generation. She used to be more on the liberal left.
This is why it became a little awkward for me to be confused with her. Now she pales around
with Steve Bannon and Tucker Carlson and was a real vector of medical misinformation
during the COVID-19 pandemic. I use her as a case study. We all know people who changed a lot
during COVID. We all know people who we've scratched our heads and gone like, what happened
to that person? Maybe it's like a public figure or maybe it's like a brother or a sister or a
yoga instructor who suddenly is talking about QAnon. I use this experience of identity confusion
because during the pandemic, I would go online and just there would be thousands of people
really angry at me about things that I hadn't done. Because they saw a Naomi on TV saying
something who looks, I mean, if you were next to each other, I could tell the difference,
but if someone hasn't looked at you for a couple years and they see the other,
oh, Brunette, et cetera, same age, et cetera. I always say she has much better hair than me.
It's really important to know.
So people are actually misattributing. Naomi Wolfe was out there saying sometimes horrible
things and they were saying Naomi Klein said this and getting mad at you.
Yeah. Like why is Naomi Klein saying that unvaccinated people have to stay away from
vaccinated people because they might shed vaccine particles onto them and then not be able to have
babies? Things like that. So in the book, I use this identity confusion, which all of us who
have something of a public platform, I think the pandemic had a particular kind of vertigo
because we are used to being in rooms full of other people who help tell us who we are.
Right? Like the last thing, I canceled a book tour. I canceled all these public events.
And so I think that, I think generally we're confused about what our social media avatars are.
Like is that us? Is that really you? It's a sort of an approximation of you.
Like it's a character version of you. It's a branded version of you.
And so I think that I didn't like being confused with her because she was saying a lot of
strange and dangerous things during COVID. But I also think that I was very confused about who
I was during COVID because I wasn't able to do the things that tell me who I am a lot of the time.
Right? So I used it as this kind of portal to get into the weirdness of how we are represented
to the world through our avatars, whether we really believe that each other are real when we
just see these avatar versions of one another. And in a way, that's like she is my doppelganger,
but so is my Twitter avatar. Like that's not really me, whoever that person is performing me on
Twitter. So I think we live in a doppelganger world, especially with AI, where we're not really
sure who and what is real. And so she is a, you know, I guess a kind of a literary device to get
at this hall of mirrors that is contemporary culture. And as soon as you start talking about
that, the number of doppelgangers like starts multiplying in my head because you talk about,
yeah, do you understand yourself, that Twitter avatar as part of you, there's these sort of
strange loss of your own identity you feel when someone confuses you with another person,
you know, when someone, whenever someone says that person looks like you, I'm like,
that's what you think I look like. It's not what I think I look like. Like it's destabilizing just
to be mistaken for another person. In fact, I was once told, I told, this happened to me in
comedy 10 years ago, I told a comic I ran into that she looked like another comic and she said,
no, I don't. And then she said, you should never tell anyone that they look like another person,
because you don't know what the person you're talking to thinks they look like, you know,
you don't know what their self image is and you could be violating their self image in a deep way.
And I always took that to heart and I no longer do that. I no longer say, oh, you kind of look
like this other person because you might be triggering some insecurity the person has or whatever.
It can be very destabilizing to be compared to another person out there.
But, you know, in the end, I decided to embrace it as an unconventional form of,
you know, sort of Zen non-attachment. Because, you know, we live in a culture that is constantly
telling us that we need to perform this perfected version of ourselves and optimize ourselves.
And it's like, you know, it's a kind of our life raft in these extremely competitive waters.
And there's something sort of liberating about realizing that no matter how carefully you tend
to your personal brand and project yourself with the exact right caliber of irony and earnestness,
if thousands of people think that you are somebody totally different, it really is just
telling you like get over yourself, you know. And so I've decided to be grateful for my doppelganger
and to take it as a message to just find other people, find the others, invest in community,
not in personal perfection because people are going to think that you think wild things no
matter what you do. I feel like you've given us the beautiful conclusion of this book at the
beginning of the interview. So maybe we should bleep it for spoilers. I don't know. That's
wonderful. But let's keep exploring. Something else that you said that made me think is, you know,
when our online avatars are those us, are people seeing us when they're looking at us,
that makes me think that when people, you know, lose that screw like Naomi Wolfe did when the
person goes QAnon, when they go anti-vax, when our friend starts behaving in this bizarre way
and starts accusing us of being involved in a conspiracy or seeing those around them,
it often is. Or being a doppelganger of yourself, like stepped for people and stuff.
Yes. Oh, you're not you anymore and they turn it away on you. Well, the pain of that is often
that we no longer feel seen by our friend. The person somehow loses their ability to see us and
to see, you know, when people are really going nuts on Twitter and accusing each other of being,
you know, whatever, vaccine propagandist or whatever, they're not seeing the people they're
talking to as people anymore. And we sort of, it seems like a very modern thing to lose our
ability to see each other as human beings. Yeah. And I mean, it's, it's weird enough when it's
somebody who you don't know, who clearly has you completely wrong. But what's weird as you're saying,
and it's like, when it's somebody who does know you and is suddenly treating you like this,
like entirely two dimensional form. Yeah. I mean, I think a lot of relationships were severed
during during COVID because we were all really stressed out and we were confused. We were anxious.
And so people were disinvited from family dinners and, you know, often for good reasons, you know,
they are immunocompromised and, you know, like, like if you had immunocompromised people in your
family, then you, and you had somebody who was not taking COVID seriously at all, you know,
that's going to create a rift and it created rifts and countless families. But I've also heard some
really nice stories since the book came out of people who, who said that they reached back out
to a sister they lost touch with or, you know, another family member and realized that, you know,
they didn't want to have all these severed connections. And maybe there, there are some
things that they agree on. Maybe they, maybe, maybe you don't like big pharma either for different
reasons, but you might be able to find some common ground and maybe pull them back from what I call
the mirror world. Because, yeah, there's often a, like, you know, I write that conspiracy culture
often gets the facts wrong, but the feelings right. And there's a, there's a way in which there's
always a little bit of truth mixed in with the fantasy in any of the conspiracies. So,
you know, you've got to extend some kind of a bridge where you find, maybe you find some common
ground and give somebody an out because they might be looking for an out. There's a lot of
grifters in there. The fact that you call it the mirror world is just, again, such an evocative
image you found to, that really makes me think about it differently. What, so let's talk about
what is it, do you think that pulls people into that mirror world? Because it's happened with a
lot of events. I saw it happen a friend of mine after 2016, after the pandemic. You know, it seems
like there are these inciting events. And what is it that, that causes this to happen to people?
So I think human beings are creatures of narrative. We like to have stories that,
that tell us who we are and, and where we are. And, and when you have a shock, like a major event
that, that, that scrambles the story of who you thought you were, like 9-11, like a lot of Americans
had no idea who these people were. And that was, that was the question like, why do they hate us?
Like, what is this? You know, we don't do a very good job of teaching what people like geopolitics
in high school, let alone university. So when it turns out that there's like people on the other
side of the planet who are very angry at your country and you, you never learned why, like you
never learned, you didn't even know they were there, right? But after 9-11, I, I wrote a piece,
I remember, I think it was for the LA Times saying, you know, Americans woke up to realize
they were, that they were at war only to find that they had been at war for a long time and no one
told them, you know? So, so I think that we go looking for stories when, when, when our stories
of self fall apart. And, and, and like, I don't know about you, but I've never lived through a
global pandemic before. I've never been told to stay home for months before. This was new terrain.
I've never looked up at the sky and not seen planes of Times Square empty. I mean, these were
shocking events. And so as creatures of story, we go looking for them. And I think what really
derailed us during COVID is that, that search for story intersected with an attention economy.
And it's an economy that means that whoever has the most outrageous
over-claiming story wins the clicks, wins the eyeballs. You know, science takes time.
We were confronting a novel virus. And you had all these scientists saying like, okay, be patient.
We have to go do our research and then we'll get back to you. And then you had a whole bunch of
grifters just rush into that gap saying, we have the story we know come over here. And, you know,
often they were dusting off theories that they had been using in different contexts,
like the anti-vax movement, right? Like they had been spinning stories about childhood vaccines
and autism, which were lies before COVID. But they just needed to kind of do a search and replace
on the COVID vaccines. And they were good to go. Like they didn't have to, you know, so anyway,
so that's some of it. Why do you call, how did you come up with the term the mirror world? And
why do you think of the conspiracy theory world as being a mirror? Well, I was struck, you know,
so I, like, I use my doppelganger as sort of my white rabbit, like in Alice in Wonderland,
to fall down the rabbit hole and really explore the world that she is in now. Because it was either
going to be like, just be horrified by everything she was saying, or, or actually try to understand
like how she could have changed so much. And I'm a researcher. And this is how I understand the
world. Like, you know, when something confounds me, I try to understand it. And so, so I started
listening to a lot of the interviews she was doing with people like Steve Bannon. She was on
his show almost every day for a while. So I listened to hundreds of hours of Steve Bannon's
podcast, The War Room. Wow. And, you know, she was also on like many lesser known.
Did you start to like the podcast after a while? Or are you like, okay, these are like my buddies
now. You get a parasocial relationship with Steve? I admit that I got his theme song
stuck in my head, which is like pretty catchy. It's a very weird anti-China theme song.
But it does end with like, let's take down the CCP. And that's when I knew I was in trouble.
When I just was like, couldn't get it out of my brain when I was doing, you know, unloading the
dishwasher. So, so, but, but I like, I call it the mirror world because I was really struck,
particularly listening to Bannon. One time it was, it was, I remember it was Christmas 2021.
And he was shilling a new coin called FJB, like fuck Joe Biden. And he was just trying to
fleece people before Christmas. He was like, get this for your relatives. And he was making
this whole pitch about how you couldn't trust the dollar anymore. So you had to buy these coins and
so on. Is this cryptocurrency? It wasn't exactly, it was even like, not even crypto. It was just
like literally a coin that said fuck Joe Biden. Like just, like just we made a little, a little
piece of metal disc that says FJB on it. Which is why I say you might be able to get some friends
and family members back from the mirror world because there are so many drifters there, right?
That they might be looking for some kind of help. It's so they're getting fleeced non-stop, right?
Right. You know, send that lifeline, see what happens. But, but as he was making his pitch,
his pre-Christmas pitch, he was saying, you know, we need to have, this is why we need to have our
own money and we need to have our own publishing companies and we need to have our own social
media platforms because we will never cancel you. We will never other you. You'll always be welcome
here. And so, and he was really talking about a one to one, like, you know, get kicked off Twitter,
you can join Getter, which they call themselves the Twitter killer. You know, get kicked off
YouTube, you can join Rumble and so on. And there was, there was like an exact mirror of everything,
like in the world that I lived in. And I was just really struck that most of the people who I know
and hang out with have no idea this world like fully exists. And they actually think that when
somebody gets kicked off the social media that site that they're on that they almost like have been
deleted from planet Earth. And it's so strangely arrogant because actually they're really good
at this. And they are building massive platforms and they're reaching lots of people. And, and
that's, you know, that's why I pay attention to them. They're a major political force, you know.
Steve Bannon is a strategist. He's trying to get back into power.
And these are happening on the public internet. They're not, it's not the dark web. It's like,
you can just go to these websites and look at this stuff. How do you, you know, I know you
tracked Naomi Wolf's progress through the book. How did she fall into this? Because it's, it's a very
even if it weren't for the connection to you, it's a very strange story.
Yeah, it's a strange story because she was such a prominent liberal, such a prominent Democrat,
feminist. How did she fall into it? You know, I have an, I have an equation in the book that might
be useful because I think there's a lot of people who have, who have changed as we, as discussed,
which is social media slash grandiosity plus social media addiction. Many of, I think pretty
much anybody who we might be thinking of spends way too much time online. And plus midlife crisis
divided by public shaming equals right wing meltdown. So I want to talk a bit about the
public shaving piece of it because I, you know, I think one of the big drivers for her is that
she's one of these people who became a spectacle for liberal left Twitter. And that's because she
made a foundational error in a book that she published in 2019. And this error was discovered
live on BBC radio. It's every writer's worst nightmare. I mean, I, I sort of remember this
as a viral moment. And I didn't, I honestly did not really know who she was or really follow her
that much, but I, I sort of remember this. What was the error that was discovered?
So she wrote a book called Outrageous. It came out, you know, a few months before the pandemic.
And it was a, it was a, it was a historical work. It was actually her PhD thesis. And it told,
what she, during this interview, she, she made this claim that gay men had been executed
for sodomy long after it was like people thought that they stopped sentencing people to death
for being gay. And what happened in the BBC interviewer pointed out that she had misread
the historical record. And he said, like in a very polite British way, like, it's just the
thing is, is that I think you misunderstood. And then he explained that, and then the bottom
falls out of her entire book. And she, and it turns out that those men had actually been released.
She misunderstood a term called death recorded, which is what she thought was a death sentence,
but it isn't. And so that was just a journalist doing his job. You know, he fact-checked a book
that should have been fact-checked by the author and the publisher and found a massive error.
But then she becomes a meme, you know, then, then people just cannot get enough of this.
And why does she become a meme? Because the, you know, this sounds like
an error is an error. That's embarrassing. Maybe people have a little bit of fun,
but there has to be something deeper going on for people to really go in on that.
You know, I think not really. I mean, I think she was, she was, she was enough of a big deal,
you know, enough of a, you know, New York Times bestselling author
that to watch this happen live on the air. It was just one of those moments where,
because it would be your worst nightmare, and there's a lot of writers on Twitter,
the idea that you could point and laugh at it happening to somebody else somehow made you feel
safer. And, but also she had been dabbling in conspiracy culture, you know, before that,
you know, she had made, she did things like they took pictures of clouds and speculated about
government, you know, yeah, you know, chemtrails and things like that. You know,
she was a bit of a cloud truther. She's, you know, just a little, just a little spot of cloud
truth, just like you're hanging out with her and she might go, Hey, clouds are fake, you know,
and you're like, Oh, well, that was weird that Naomi just sort of tossed that on me. But other
than that, she's pretty nice. Just a bit of a cloud truth of truth. I mean, I think she thinks
birds are real. I'm not sure. So, so, but because there was a little bit of a reservoir of annoyance
with her already online, because she was dabbling in other conspiracy theories, that's why people,
part of why people really went in, it sounds like. Yeah. And then during COVID, I think she was,
we were all bored and at home, and she was like, just endlessly sharing wild theories, like, you
know, like she, she'd, you'd log online and you know, she had like, you know, almost 200,000
followers, you know, it's not like she's like, it didn't have reach. She has many more now.
But she, you know, she'd say that she thinks that children were losing the ability to smile
because they were wearing masks, you know, and then that would be days of entertainment,
things like that. You know, there was a lot about vaccine shedding onto unvaccinated people.
And I mean, but, but I call her a conspiracy influencer, not a conspiracy theorist, because
there are often these glaring contradictions in the claims. Like, you know, for a while, she was
talking about how COVID was a bot, maybe had been cooked up as a bio weapon. But then she was like,
but why wear masks? You know, like, and it's just, it just seems like a bit of a contradiction
there. Like, you know, if it's a bio weapon, surely you should try not to, not to get it, you
know, she's like, so she's an influence. You should be worried about it. Contradicts the
idea that it's not that big a deal. Yeah. So the, the, the story is constantly changing with whatever
is going to get more clicks. So if everyone's supposed to get vaccinated, now the vaccines
are a bio weapon. If everyone's supposed to get an app on their phone to see if they got
vaccinated, well, it's not about the vaccine. It's the app. The app can listen to your phone
conversations and things like that. But this is what I mean about how they often get the feeling
right and the facts wrong is that, you know, that's where she really took a star turn on the right
was when she started talking about those vaccine verification apps, being a covert surveillance
plan. So the truth is like, like people are very anxious about surveillance. They're very anxious
about what happens with their data. They're anxious about their cell phones. They don't really
under, we don't really understand, you know, what is known about our movements, you know,
and so she projected all of our collective surveillance fears onto this one app. But the
response on liberal Twitter was, wait, oh, they hear about cell phones, which is kind of funny,
right? But it's, but the assumption behind that joke is that we all know that our cell phones
are listening to us and we're okay with it. But the thing is, people seem not to be okay with it,
right? So this is part of the appeal of conspiracy culture is that, you know,
they're telling a very simple story. Like if we can just get rid of these apps, then everything
will be fine and nobody will be able to track you anymore, right? Or the vaccines or whatever
is the kind of boogeyman of surveillance, whereas we actually need policy responses
so that we can control these tech companies and they're not able to mine our data endlessly and
create more doppelgangers like AI versions of us and so on. Right. The story with a grain of truth,
but with a much simpler solution and you can apply it to almost anything. Now, often when someone
is a conspiracy influencer like this, there'll be this implication that people will say, oh,
they're a grifter and a grifter generally means someone who doesn't believe anything that they say.
They're just trying to get the clicks. They're harvesting clicks. They're like following the
audience. Did you feel that that was the case in her case? Was she a complete cynic about it? Or
do you think she was believing these things and was just not able to sort of connect the dots
that they were self contradictory? It's very hard for me to know what she believes, right? And I
think that a lot of people who really go all in with conspiracy culture aren't completely cynical.
They have to convince themselves of some of it on some level. But that doesn't mean that the primary
impulse isn't grifting, isn't ego, isn't getting people to treat you like a savant or whatever.
I think she gets a lot out of this, I guess is what I'm saying. I think she lost a lot
in the world that she used to travel in. She could no longer get published. After that error on BBC,
her publisher dropped her, dumped her book. So she had every reason to move to a new market
that is very large. Tucker Carlson, when he had her on Fox, he was getting 3 million viewers a
night. There's no show on the left that she had access to that could go near that. So there's
every reason. So I don't know what she believes, but I do know that a lot of people who follow this
are not just grifting, right? The only reason the grift is successful if it's a grift is because
there are lots of customers who sincerely are listening to Steve Bannon and Naomi Wolfe and
RFK Jr. and believe it, or else it's not a good grift. You don't have customers. So it's worrying
because they're using such apocalyptic language. And if you really are in this battle for humanity
against a genocide, that's the kind of language that she uses, good and evil. She's claimed that
there is a genocide that has happened because of these vaccines. I think that it, and she also
takes pictures of her new gun and says we're at war and post-pictures of her husband doing target
practice. So this doesn't end well, I guess is what I'm saying. If you're telling people they are
fighting a genocide for good and evil, I think they might take you at your word, whether you're
grifting or not, and they might decide to do something about it. And we're seeing lots of
examples of that actually. We absolutely are. Well, we have to take a really quick break. When we
come back, I want to ask you more about how this has changed your own interaction with your online
editing. We'll be right back with more Naomi Klein. You know, the year is never more hectic
than during the holiday season with all those travel plans, work projects, wrapping up. And
if you run a household, it's sometimes even hard to remember what's for dinner or if anyone's
remembered to feed the dog. If this sounds like your home or the home of someone you know,
this holiday season is the time for the gift of organization with the skylight calendar.
The skylight calendar is a smart touchscreen calendar and organizer for all of your chores,
groceries, and to-dos. It automatically syncs all of the different digital calendars and events
your family uses and shows them all together on one beautiful touchscreen display. Skylight
calendar is the best way to give your family peace of mind to enjoy the things that matter most.
It works by syncing events from already existing calendars you have, including Google,
Outlook, and Apple calendars. You can also add events directly using the touchscreen
or with the free skylight mobile app. And it shows all family events together in one spot
so you can see what everyone has going on each week. Families are more likely to actually check
it since it's always up to date and so they don't question mom every day about schedules.
And additional fun features include dinner planning, grocery list, daily weather display,
and weather forecast based on the address of your events. And plus, when it's not in use,
you can even turn it into a digital picture frame. And get this, as a special limited time offer for
our listeners, you can get $15 off your purchase of a skylight calendar when you go to skylightcal.com
slash factually. To get $15 off your purchase of a skylight calendar, just go to skylightcal.com
slash factually. That's S-K-Y-L-I-G-H-T-C-A-L dot com slash factually.
Okay, we're back with Naomi Klein talking about online conspiracy theories,
the mirror world, doppelgangers. You had this really intriguing idea at the top of the interview
about how it made you think about how your own online identity is in some ways a doppelganger.
Can you please get into that for us? So, I think when we create an online
version of ourselves, when we choose the picture that's going to be our avatar,
when we write that sort of like kind of satirical bio, like we are creating a brand.
And what is a brand? A brand is a thing version of you, of me. And this is actually
the first book I wrote when I was in my 20s was a book called No Logo. And it was about the rise
of this idea that companies should first and foremost most be selling an idea, a brand,
not that the product was incidental, which was an idea that took root in corporate culture in
the 90s, but also that individual celebrities like the first person who called himself,
whose agent called him a super brand was Michael Jordan. And he was a mega corporation.
And there were others, there was Richard Branson and Oprah, of course. But the idea that regular
people could be brands was not possible at that stage, even though there were kind of management
consultants saying this is the future and you're not going to get a job, you're just going to have
a series of contracts. But if you really want to get ahead, you need to create a brand. And so
that didn't become a reality until social media put advertising agencies into all of our back
pockets, right? Because suddenly you two can do this for free, like for the price of your phone.
And what I'm trying to do in the book is look at it with a little bit of
distance, because I think people are often called out for being performative and being
inauthentic online and so on. This is like the ultimate smear is like you're just performing,
but we're all just performing. And the reason we're doing it is because we have all received
this message that the perfected performed self, the brand itself, is really our only hope of
survival in these incredibly competitive, shark-fist-laden waters. So yeah, I think we should
treat ourselves with a little bit of compassion and thinking about why we build these doppelgangers
of ourselves. But a brand is a thing, like humans are not meant to be brands. We've accepted the
logic and we're all doing it. And that's why we think we all need to issue press statements
whenever anything terrible happens in the world. Right. That is where I went as well, because
there's a lot of that happening right now with people saying, you need to post about this. You
need to post. You need to speak up. And it's at that moment that the distance between... You don't,
by the way. Do you don't. Thank you. I agree. I don't think anyone can force you to post,
and I don't think that posting is good by itself. Posting can be something, but it's not...
And people will try to shame you into it. Your silence is its own statement and so on.
And they're just performing themselves, like that version, whoever those people are who are
calling you out for not having issued a press statement about the Middle East.
Like unless you are a politician, unless you are a public person with some kind of record,
you don't owe that to the world. I think you should read. You should become
literate about these issues that are going to impact all of us. But if this is not your area,
you do not owe anybody that sort of us versus them performance.
Correct. And I felt that really strongly... Well, it made me think about the distance
between my brand and my personal self, because I have a large social media presence.
There are things that I post about a lot. What I don't post about international affairs,
that's not part of my brand. Now, as a person, I have a responsibility to check in on my friends
who are affected to learn as much as I can to try to, et cetera, et cetera. But there's a big
gap there. And I really was really feeling the gap over those last couple of weeks.
Yeah. And I think people feel... You start to feel like somebody's keeping track.
Like there's some list somewhere that's keeping track of everybody who has said
something, everyone who has said nothing, and we don't want to be on the wrong list.
Wait it out is all I can say. Just wait it out. And certainly don't say anything if you don't
know what you're talking about. But the point about this idea of that a brand is a thing version
of you is a bad way to be human. I have studied what it means to be a good
brand. And what it means to be a good brand is to repeat yourself endlessly and have
extreme message discipline. So if you are a good brand as a human being, you are incredibly boring.
You do not evolve. And you basically are just like a dog chasing its own tail for the rest of your
life. You're just Nike. You say, just do it. Just do it. Just do it. Just do it over and over again.
Yeah. Yeah. Just change the celebrity, keep the slogan.
Yeah. Good branding is all about discipline. And that may work for Nike, but it is
really not what one should look for in our attempts to be human, which is to actually evolve and
learn from our experiences and reserve the right to change. And it's interesting because it relates
to AI because I think the more formulaic we are as people, as artists, as creators of any kind,
the easier we are to make a doppelganger of us by AI because AI studies formulas,
as you got to keep some machines guessing. Be a bad brand. Break their own formula.
But I also think it relates to the cruelty, you know, because a brand is not a human. A brand
is a thing. And I think that when we're all out there performing thing versions of ourselves,
we start to forget that each other are humans. And then we start to throw very sharp things at one
another. And then we're surprised when we hurt each other because things don't bleed, right?
You can just, you can hurl anything you want at Nike. That'll be fine.
Do you feel that you've created a brand for yourself? Is that, did you say, oh, wait,
hold on. I am a brand in a way that I'm no longer comfortable with as you were looking into this?
Yeah. I mean, this was a question that came up for me pretty early because my first book,
I got really, really fortunate with my first book. And NoLogo became a brand in the world. And it
was very awkward because it was this anti-branding book that suddenly, like, there's a NoLogo craft
beer in England. There's, there was a whole line of Italian sundries, including some very
good olive oil in Italy called NoLogo. And then there was like a restaurant in Geneva called
NoLogo, which I went into. I was like, wow, there's a NoLogo restaurant. And I went in and I
introduced myself to the owner who ran away. He was so panicked that I was going to stew over
something that I had decided not to trademark it because I thought that that compromised my ethics.
Anyway, I was like, in my 20s, I could have gotten so rich.
Well, yeah, it became a meme, NoLogo. It was everywhere.
Yeah. So I, you know, I was confronted with this tension early on of like, okay, so even if I didn't
want to be a brand, but I did sort of want to be a brand. And then I just realized it got way
beyond my control. So I just decided to try to become a bad brand. And then the next, for me,
what that meant was not writing that marketing for another 20 years. So I, you know, my next books,
my next books were really not sequels to NoLogo, the shock doctrine, and this changes everything.
They were, you know, I just, because I thought to be a good researcher, to be a good investigative
journalist, I have to follow my, I have to follow the research and not just chase my tail.
And it was very clear to me that some writers just write the same book over and over again
and slightly change the title. I mean, they're franchises. It's very popular. But to me,
it was never really an option because I don't have the discipline to write about things that
are not interesting to me. Like, I'm too lazy for that, you know, it has to interest me.
I have to not understand it and have this desire to understand it to keep me working.
And the thing about being a good branded author is you've already figured out the formula and then
you just have to repeat it. But to me, writing is too hard to do that, you know? Like, if I'm not
in a process of discovery, I will just watch television, you know? So it wasn't so much like
that I was so pure. It was truly not an option for me. I mean, I guess I could have,
now I could have hired an AI to write those books for me.
Well, it seems like you also, you had an urge to resist it, which I deal with that in my own work.
I have my pet topics I return to again and again, anyone who listens to this show knows
what they are. I don't need to list them. But then, you know, I have an urge to get away from
that and do something new. But then the problem is, well, how do you sell that? Because people
know you for the thing that you just did, right? People know you for that. And so maybe they want
more of it. I mean, even this book seems very different that it starts from such a place of
personal history of like, hey, this weird thing happened to me compared to...
Yeah. Well, I think any kind of success is always going to create its own trap, right? I mean,
that's like Dylan, you know, going electric. Like, people didn't want that from him. And
then that's why he had to do it, you know? So, but with this book, I, it was similar in the sense
that I couldn't bring myself to write a conventional nonfiction book again, because I had lost faith
that argument changed minds. I had lost faith in the concept of a linear nonfiction argument
based book. Life was just getting too weird. And so I just thought, well, maybe I can write in a
complete, in a really different way. And, you know, this book is much straight, it's weirder,
but we live in weirder times. And it uses my own double to, to go into a hall of mirrors. And I
think that if I had tried to write about this, the weirdness of now, as if I was outside of it,
and just be like, I'm now going to make an argument about doppelgangers.
No, no, who would want to read that? Like, what's fun is to read about a hurricane from inside its
eye, you know? Oh, I love that. I love that. And to explore, yeah, what does this, what does this
mean? What does this word mean? And to explore the hall of mirrors from inside the hall of mirrors,
like to join you right there and to like try to get out, try to get out, you know,
but you got to start inside. Do you have any belief that that project can change minds more
than the linear argumentative essay can? You know, I have found that like I've, I've, I have
received so many really beautiful responses to this book of people who are grateful to have a kind
of a map of, you know, this dynamic with the mirror world where we're defining ourselves against
one another and projecting everything we can't stand about ourselves onto them, you know,
and then feeling pure because we are not them. And, you know, I think, you know, even something,
having a term like the mirror world, I have found like all a writer can do, I always see my role,
it's it as helping people read the news better. I know this as a sort of a strange like a job
I've assigned, but to myself, but like, I don't, I don't have grand ambitions about what books can
do on their own. But I do think that that we can provide a little bit of orientation and some
language, right? Like, like with a shock doctrine, I gave people some terms to describe what happens
when we're in a state of shock, and people try to take advantage of it. They try to push through a
preexisting wish list, right? And so whenever there's a disaster, people, I start hearing people say,
well, it's, it's the shock doctrine, it's they're, they're doing disaster capitalism. And I think,
okay, I helped people just get oriented a little more quickly. It's not nothing, you know, like,
I, yeah, that's, that's all I can do. I think there are more, there's more that we can do
that are not books that mostly involve organizing with one another in the real world.
Yeah. Well, but to create a piece of language that can help people understand the world more
quickly is a powerful thing to do. It's as you say, it's maybe a small contribution in the,
in the overall world of language, right, or, or of our concepts, but it, it does give people
a new verb almost a new way of, of relating. I want to return to that point of organizing,
because I obviously believe that strongly as well. But the online world, I'm curious how you
feel about it, because there's a, there's a, just a little aside early in the book,
where you say something like, oh, I dismissed that as happening just online and not in the
real world. You know, I was so naive back then we were all naive enough to still say things like
that. And what's weird to me is I lately have found myself saying, oh, that's just happening online
more. You know, I've, I've been on the internet my entire life, literally since I was, you know,
very young, I was obsessed with the internet with the computer world and like dwelled there.
And now over the last couple of years, I've been like, I want to be on the computer as little as
possible. I want to go look at a fucking tree. I want to go like, you know, be, do comedy with
people in a room. I want to meet people face to face. I like, I hate zoom meetings. I want to,
like, I will go 45 minutes to meet you in person, you know, that's just been my own,
my own orientation. And yet we do at the same time live in a world where you can't say, oh,
that's just Twitter or you can't. I'm not sure. How do you feel about it?
I mean, I think like you, I am drawn to the real to the embodied spaces. You know, I live in an
incredibly beautiful part of the world in in coastal British Columbia, where there are many
trees to spend time with. And you know, it is really literally grounding. And I don't think
that I could do the kind of work that I do if I wasn't able to balance it out with a hike in the
forest or some time on the water. And since this book came out, like being in rooms full of other
people has felt incredibly nourishing after so much time away. And I think this is how we keep
each other sane in these in these very vertiginous times. We are creatures of narrative, like I
said, and we we do that work together, you know, we make sense of the world together. And I don't
think we can do it just in a zoom meeting. I think there's something irreplaceable about doing it
with one another. And so I the way I try to use social media is as a way to get people off social
media. So like, come on over, you know, yeah, join the picket line and, you know, and, and, and go to
the rally and come to this meeting and come to this event and go to this concert and read this
book, you know, and, you know, get wherever the work is deeper than whatever the little box Elon
Musk has given us, you know, whatever that little box is or Mark Zuckerberg. So when I see a lot of
people using it in that way, right, to bring us to more to to more deeper work that more fully
represents us whatever that is. And sometimes it'll be embodied with one another. And sometimes it'll
be, you know, just offline. So that's the way I tend to relate to it. I really like that. I, you
know, I became well known over the past year for posting from the Writers Guild picket line quite
often. And I was that was to me a very beneficial use of social media because people became connected
to our struggle and they were able to offer support and and just telling, you know, showing
people what was happening was important. But I think it was really important that
I was doing it from the picket line. You know, I was like, here I am surrounded by other people
and you can see what is happening here in the real world. I'm on the street in front of Netflix.
And here's hundreds of people around me or we're at a rally, etc. If I had been doing that from my
bedroom, you know, if that if that was where the struggle was taking place, all of us on the internet,
it wouldn't, first of all, he wouldn't have won. It wouldn't have been as powerful, but it also
wouldn't have, it wouldn't have mattered like the the connecting to, you know, the real life
physical organizing mattered so much. And when you're doing that face to face, you see how powerful
it is to see someone who you're in, you know, struggle with and you see them face to face and
you give them a hug and you say you need some water and you like have a connection. It's just
funny though, because so in all this about return to work, so many people make fun of bosses for
going, oh, the ineffable synergy of being in the office together and people would make fun of those
bosses for requiring people to go back to the office. And part of me would go, I do kind of
believe it though a little bit. Like I do agree face to face has something irreplaceable.
But talking about nobody wants to go back to their workplaces, it probably means that their
workplaces sucked in, you know, they need to change their workplace culture. And that's another
argument for organizing, but I love that description because, you know, all of these ways,
like ways of building doubles of ourselves, right? Like whether we're optimizing, we're
perfecting our brand or we're, you know, I talk about the optimized body as being a kind of
doubling, right? Like the idealized form. And this is, you know, part of what pushed a lot of people
over the edge during COVID was this idea that they had a strong body, a strong immune system,
so they didn't need to worry about other people. And they didn't, you know, they didn't have to
think about being in this enmeshed, you know, world of other people. Or they see their kids as
their little mini-mes, their little doppelgangers, but all of it is about the self as opposed to
building collective power. And, you know, when we are trying to face huge collective problems
as individuals, that's when we feel most powerless, right? And we feel ashamed, you know,
because we can't seem to make ends meet, despite the fact that we're working so hard,
or we're carrying this debt, you know, or we have this terrible boss. And the power of the
demonstration, you know, and this is really where the book ends, quoting my friend, Keyanga Yamada
Taylor, who teaches history at Princeton, and also quoting the late, great John Berger about
the power of the demonstration is not just that you demonstrate to those in power at Netflix
or wherever, that there's a lot of you. It's that you demonstrate to one another that you are not
alone, that you are, that what felt individual, like an individual crisis for you, because you
couldn't pay the bills, is actually a collective crisis. It's actually a crisis for your boss
when all, when everybody gets together and withholds their labor or withholds their rent,
you know, in a tenants union, or withholds their debt payments in a debtor's union.
So that's why we need to get over ourselves, right? That is why I'm grateful to my doppelganger,
because I think I care, like all of us, I care too much about my own image. I who the hell cares,
you know? So people confuse me with somebody else. And that's that I take that as a message to just
get over myself and reach towards other people, build collective power.
Oh, I love that. It makes me think of this thought that I've had recurringly over the
past couple of years, which is that when you're face to face with other people,
they see you in a way that you can't control. I think about this as a stand-up comedian who I
perform live in front of other people and I watch other stand-up comedians. And when I think about
how the audience regards you on stage, they're looking right at you. You're exposed in front
of them. You can try to put up whatever front you want. And a lot of people can put up a front
quite well. But the audience is gay is always pierces to something that you don't control,
you know? I feel that people are able to, you know, when we're present for each other,
we see each other in this sort of like deeper uncontrollable way. And maybe that's why it's a
relief to be in person, because we, you know, on the internet, it's all artifice, right? It's all
anybody sees as what I control. And it's actually helpful to be in a situation where I'm not totally
in control. And then I get, I get seen as a person, which is satisfying and sort of lumpy and weird,
even though it's, I don't have control over, it's a little scary, but it is ultimately so much more,
there's more fucking going on there. Well, and well, they will also do things you can't control,
right? Like, and that's, that's a whole other thing. But it is, it's, I mean, this is the thing
about, I think there's certain things about the tools of technology that are habit forming, you
know, that when you can mute somebody, you know, and just, or just block, like, like there's something
habit forming about the idea that you can just make inconvenient people disappear. Which, look,
I'm a muter. I admit it. Like when someone's putting me in a bad mood, I'll mute them. I don't
block. It's so much more than the satisfaction. You can't block, but it's so fun to follow someone
and then mute them and be like, they don't know that they're muted. They still think I follow them.
They're still yelling at me and they think I hear them.
But it is, it's a sick thing to take pleasure in. Because when you are in a room with other
people, you realize that you can't turn them off. Like they are going to be, they're all fully human
selves, right? And this is why we need gun control.
I love we're having this very, like, airy philosophical argument about seeing each other
and control and identity and persona and you're like, and that's my policy argument for an assault
weapons ban. Because I want to have a debate. I just don't want it to end that way. You know what I
mean? I love it so much. And this again, it connects to so many things that I've been thinking about
who I am and how I move through the world and what I do. It sounds like it's too high and I
start wigging out about my online identity and stuff. And this is helping me giving me a framework
to think about it, which I think is your goal. So do you have any to bring us in for a landing here?
You know, concrete, like, steps that you take away from this journey that you went on with
Ms. Wolfe and everything that you learned about the mirror world? Like, how do we, especially
if we talk about those people who are really trapped within it and we want to connect back
to them? Because I have so many friends who've experienced the pain of that. I have friends
who've lost parents to QAnon who they can't speak to anymore. And to that mirror world, what do we
do? Well, so all the research shows that if somebody is going to get out of that mirror world,
you know, if they're going to get away from Steve Bannon or whoever it is that they have adopted as
a guru, it's going to be somebody who they have a preexisting relationship with who will have reached
them. And like I said, this world is full of grifters. They're getting fleeced all the time.
The stories are changing all the time. They probably have questions. Some people are too
far gone, but there may well be people who are looking for an off-ramp. And it's not going to
be my book that's going to get them. It's going to be a friend from high school who maybe read my
book and had some ideas for how to extend a bridge and find some common ground. Like I said,
I don't like Bill Gates. I don't think he's implanting us with chips.
I just think he's a fucking asshole who made his billions in a horrible way and then is bad to
people and created a propaganda machine about how great he is, where he made his own Netflix
documentary about how he's the smartest guy in the world. Exactly. There's so many reasons
to hate Bill Gates without making anything up. He's mean to his wife. He's an asshole husband,
isn't he? He hangs around with Jeffrey Epstein, if I recall. So I do think that it is worth
extending those bridges, but I don't think we're going to solve this one uncle at a time.
And I do think if you listen to how these right-wing populists are gaining ground,
it's by mixing and matching some true things with some very dangerous and untrue things,
great replacement theory. And the immigrants are coming to replace you and teachers are turning
your kids' trends. So they'll take something like a fear of surveillance or rightful suspicion of
Big Pharma and they'll mix and match it with this much more nefarious agenda. So what we can do is
we can take away the true things that they're like, we can take them back and put them to work
in a real progressive project. So I don't think we fight conspiracy culture by just like de-platforming
and content moderation. And I'm not saying that there's no role for that. But I think that
Sean Fain, the head of the UAW, has done more to fight conspiracy culture just being out there in
his eat the rich t-shirt and saying, you know, record profits should mean record contracts
and like being an actual left populist with a plan, an organizing plan for how to actually
meet people's needs. Because what conspiracy culture is, is a distraction machine. It takes
people's anger at elites, feeling that they're being screwed over. And it pivots it towards
scapegoats, right? So the best way to fight it actually is to give people a real economic project
that's going to meet their needs so they are less likely to fall for these counterfeit grifters.
Absolutely right. To say, hey, the feeling that you have is real. There needs to be a fight,
but to actually wage the right fight and don't just pay it lip service, but organize
Marshall the power. I mean, Sean Fain has power in the UAW and he is winning and people can,
hey, don't you feel like you're getting screwed? Everybody says, yes, let's fucking do something
about it rather than selling you bullshit coins. Fuck Joe Biden coins. He's going after the bosses
and that is what they fear most. I mean, there's a reason why some of the richest people on this
planet love a good conspiracy theory. Like, why is Elon Musk the single, you know, greatest vector
of misinformation right now? Like, if you were the richest man on the planet on a good day,
you would want people distracted too. You know, you would want people not looking at systems of
economic consolidation that allowed you to get as rich as you are. You would want them talking
about the Jews and the CCP and, you know, Anthony Fauci and the rest of it. It's a distraction machine
and it serves elites even though they claim to be fighting elites like Rupert Murdoch, right?
So we just need to understand this. We need to do a little mapping. That's all. Get order.
We need to understand it. And then we need to organize to show the alternative path.
And then we need to win, which we are starting to do, I think.
I think so too. I think so too. And I want to thank you for all of your organizing in
real world action, right? Because this is, that's how, that's how, that's,
that's the best way we fight this sort of fake world is by doing real work, real work.
That is such a beautiful conclusion to this conversation. Naomi, I'm so thrilled that you
came on the show. I can't wait. I'm going to get this book, an audio book, I think,
is going to be for my next month of travel on the road. I can't wait to listen to it.
I hope folks check it out. If you want to pick up a copy,
you can get it at our special bookshop, factuallypod.com, slash books. Naomi,
is there anywhere else that people can follow you or your work?
Okay, I guess I'm on. I mean, I can't answer the question now.
You're right. You're right. After an hour of talking about Twitter and stuff like that,
you know what? How about this? I have a website, NaomiCline.org, and you can, you know,
follow my articles in The Guardian, and you can sign up for my newsletter, which is free.
How's that? That sounds beautiful. And then maybe someone can see you in person
and talk to you about organizing or something like that. They run into you in British Columbia.
Thank you so much. This was such a pleasure. Thank you so much for being here, Naomi.
Well, my God, thank you so much again to Naomi Klein for coming on the show.
I hope you loved that conversation as much as I did. If you want to pick up a copy of her book,
you can get it once again at factuallypod.com slash books. That's factuallypod.com slash books.
And when you do, you'll be supporting not just this show, but your local bookstore as well.
If you want to support this show, you can do so at patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad free for 15 bucks a month.
I will thank you in the credits of the show and in all of my video monologues.
This week, I want to thank Richard McVeigh, Celine Dragon, Blamo, Michael Frasco, Lee Dotson,
Emily Wilson, Sekto Abedin, and God King, engineer of Beaverkind. Really like that username,
God King, engineer of Beaverkind. Would love to know what that means. Send me a message on Patreon.
You can message me on Patreon as well if you feel like it. I want to thank my producers,
Tony Wilson and Sam Raubman. Everybody here at Head Gum for making the show possible.
You can find my tickets and tour dates at adamconover.net. Once again, I'm going to New York,
Chicago, Nashville, DC, a bunch of other cities as well. Boston, Portland, Maine,
a bunch of places. Head to adamconover.net to get those tickets. Hope to see you there
and see you next week on Factually. That was a Head Gum podcast.
