Hello and welcome to Factually, I'm Adam Conover.
Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
You know, you may have noticed that I spend a lot of time
talking shit about the wealthy on this show,
how they hoard their wealth,
go to war against their own workers,
and are in the process of destroying the planet
all to protect their precious golden treasure.
And I think a lot of you might feel the same way.
That might be why you watch this show and you're not alone.
The American economy has gotten more and more unfair
and frankly fucked up over the past 50 years
and people have taken notice.
You don't need to be an economist
to know that there's something bad
about the top 10% of a society hoarding 2 thirds of its wealth
or about a country where wages since 1979
have grown over five times faster for the top 1%
than for the bottom 90%.
As a result, in recent years,
we have seen left-leaning social movements coalesce
in order to fight this injustice.
First, during the Occupy Wall Street movement,
then in the 2016 presidential campaign of Bernie Sanders
and more recently in the emergence of groups
like the Democratic Socialists of America,
the word socialism is now a part
of our political conversation in a way it simply wasn't
in 2008 or 2000 or 1992.
But while that's true,
it still hasn't fully entered our political mainstream.
You haven't seen a lot of socialist senators
or even many members of the house yet.
And here's the really weird part.
The same is not true for the far right of our politics.
I mean, the current GOP presidential candidate
is open about wanting to cut the modest social safety net
we do have, reducing social security and Medicare,
lowering taxes on the rich incorporations
and gutting environmental regulations,
all while enacting a wildly regressive,
frankly fascist social agenda
that will reduce the rights for women
and target immigrants for deportation.
I mean, I will grant that Bernie Sanders
is very popular for a socialist
in the context of American history,
but there simply isn't a Bernie army
the same way there is a MAGA army.
There are a hundred times as many elected MAGA leaders
as socialists in American government today.
Despite all of the left successes, why is that?
Well, to answer that question,
we have an incredible guest on the show today.
Before we get into it though,
I wanna remind you that if you wanna support this show
and all the conversations we bring you,
you can do so on Patreon.
Head to patreon.com slash adam con over,
five bucks a month gets you every episode of this show ad free.
And if you like stand up comedy,
please come see me on the road.
This April I'm gonna be in Indianapolis, Indiana,
San Jose, California, La Jolla, California,
a bunch of other great places as well.
Head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates.
And now let's introduce today's guest.
Bhaskar Sankara is president of the nation magazine,
the founding editor of Jacobin,
and the author of a book called The Socialist Manifesto,
the case for radical politics
and an era of extreme inequality.
Please welcome Bhaskar Sankara.
Bhaskar, thank you so much for being on the show.
Thanks for having me.
I feel like it's long overdue
because a lot of the issues that you write about
in your work and that you cover
are issues we've discussed on this show.
And you identify as a socialist and a leftist.
I think that it's a really interesting time
for those ideas in America because on the one hand,
you see them spreading or becoming more popular
in the public to some degree,
in the policy apparatus to some degree.
And yet the number of people,
I saw a Pew research study,
a number of people who have positive views
of socialism is going down and is much lower
than people have positive views of capitalism.
Take those broad surveys for what they are,
but it's sort of like, is this growing or is it not?
How do you feel about the overall prospects
for leftist politics and these policies
in America right now?
Well, I think 10 years ago,
you could say socialism in America as a current,
even as an opposition movement,
was basically dead.
And now you could say it's on life support.
It depends on your perspective.
I was like, oh, she's doing good.
She's only in a coma now.
So we'll see what happens in a couple of years.
Yeah.
Exactly.
So I think that for me, it feels fantastic.
I became a card-carrying member
of the Democratic Socialist of America.
Not actually card-carrying
because there were two dysfunctional
to actually get me a card at the time.
In April 2007, there was about 5,000 of us
and I was among the youngest members.
I joined right before my 18th birthday.
And today there's around 100,000 members of DSA,
the Democratic Socialist of America.
Jacobin, the Socialist magazine I founded,
has around 66,000 or so subscribers.
There is a base and obviously between having Bernie Sanders
as a self-identified Democratic Socialist,
politicians like Alexander Kasiroportez,
there is a small amount
of highly visible Democratic Socialists in public life.
And that's not something we had in the recent past
in the US and in that sense, it's doing great.
Now, is it ready to storm the barricades
and really change American society
in a fundamental way?
Maybe not, but for a opposition movement
that's just getting its legs, I'm not too disappointed.
Well, let's talk about Bernie Sanders
because when his first few campaigns,
they grew to such size, they ended up powering a movement.
The movement continued in many ways,
which resulted in the growth of the DSA.
But if you contrast that with Donald Trump's movement,
and I don't wanna create an equivalency there,
but there are some similarities,
his movement has taken over an entire party
and has the Democratic Socialist movement,
you can say, oh, there's a mayor over here,
there's some state legislatures over there,
you've got here in LA, we have, I believe,
three city council people out of 15
who are members or at least associated with the DSA.
Hey, yeah, those are successes for the movement,
but the MAGA movement has representatives,
senators, governors, et cetera,
and hey, they don't win every election yada yada,
but in terms of the way that it has been injected
into the mainstream of American politics
in this stunningly swift way is kind of in sharp contrast
to what happened to the Bernie Sanders movement
or the relative success.
So what do you credit that to,
or do you think that the comparison I'm drawing
is false entirely, which you may?
Well, I think that it's always easier
to organize big money and you get some organic backing
from ordinary people in the interests of capital.
So fundamentally, Donald Trump's appeal was,
I'm a businessman, I know what I have, make deals,
I'm gonna cut a better deal for you,
ordinary American, and also for American business
in the world.
And I think that's an easier appeal to make than,
my name is Bernie Sanders, I'm an outsider,
I wanna take on millionaires and billionaires,
can you loan me $27?
And I promise I'll spend your money well, fly economy,
and travel around the country, getting my message out.
And I think that the Sanders route was a lot tougher.
Trump was tapping into, I think,
a continuum of Republican politics.
We don't even think of it that way,
but the Tea Party to Trump, I think had common threads.
And the hysteria that Trump whipped up
around Obama's birth certificate was kind of part
of tapping into that old Tea Party base,
but radicalizing it.
Then he was able to, with his own gifts as an orator,
he might not appeal to everyone,
but he obviously is a skilled communicator
in a certain way, and an entertainer, you know?
I mean, the guy will riff for three hours
and get a stretch about everybody he hates,
and that's, you know, just as a stand-up comic,
like that's impressive, and the guy gets laughs, you know?
It is a feat of oration, what he does.
And he has a cadence, he has, just as a performer,
I think he has his skills, you know?
Bernie always seems like he's a bit tired and fed up,
which he is at this point, he has every right to be,
but Trump was able to combine his natural gifts,
the space that he had cultivated,
and radicalized a bit with the Obama birthday stuff,
with a lot of his own money,
and a very hollowed-out Republican party
that he just knew how to pick apart.
And by the time they realized that it was too late
to, they needed to stop him, it was too late,
whereas the DNC realized they had to stop Bernie,
but it wasn't too late, you know?
That Obama was able to make a few calls,
and Pete Buttigieg, and Kamala Harris,
and others were able to, from their perspective,
did the smart thing, rally behind Joe Biden,
Joe Biden winning the election.
So on their own terms, they made a good decision,
but they were unable to stop Trump.
But I do think that maybe a stronger comparison
to Trump would be, and I say this to someone
who's generally a supporter of a lot of his policies,
would be someone like Amalon, Mexico,
who's been able to combine some of his oratory and charisma,
and somewhat strongman personality,
but combine it with a genuinely progressive agenda.
I think Bernie was always, in the United States,
doing something a little bit different
and a more difficult task, given our context.
Mm, and draw that comparison a little bit more
between Amalon who, in Mexico,
and what Bernie did that's more difficult.
Just pull that out some more.
Yeah, I think that, first of all,
Amal was someone who ran multiple times for president.
He arguably won in 2006.
He had the election, again, some people say,
stolen from him then, but either way,
he was a very well-known national figure.
He is someone who came from a lot of the historical networks
that they left, but he figured out
that he had to leave and abandon some of those networks
and ways of talking and try to articulate
a more populist framework
for explaining who he was to the Mexican people
and what his appeal was about.
It was not just the regular left-wing appeals
about redistribution and taking on the wealthy,
but he combined it with this idea of fighting corruption
and fighting to preserve the sanctity and purity
of Mexican republicanism
in a national, popular sense.
Bernie Sanders, in the same way,
came from the hard left, really, in the United States.
He was a member of the Young People's Socials League,
which just sounds incredibly anachronistic,
as if anyone, all the people I know
who are members of the Young People's Socials League
are, like, 85 years old.
Right, they're not young anymore.
At the reunions, they're all on walkers, yeah.
He joined in the left,
there was before the new left, really.
Like, he was interested in this
when he was at Brooklyn College
and later on at the University of Chicago.
So we're talking about pretty early on in the 1960s.
I actually know a guy,
I'm not sure if he wants me to cite him,
but he's like,
he loves to tell me stories about this period
because he was a leftist in the late 50s and the 60s.
And often, you can't really trust all of his stories
that he once told me.
So then I told the Black Panther Party,
your slogan shouldn't be free Huey Newton,
it should just be free Huey.
But...
So take this with a grain of salt,
but you can tell me,
he recruited Bernie Sanders
to not just the Young People's Socials League.
And that, I think, is the established fact
that he did that in the University of Chicago.
But he recruited him to the,
the Shackmanite kind of Trotsky-oriented fraction
of the Young People's Socials League
in the early 1960s.
So Bernie was very steeply entrenched in the left.
I mean, Bernie, I used to do a joke on stage
about how Bernie came to LA
when he was running the second time.
And he gave a speech about,
you should all be so proud,
you have the dodges,
because we were all so sad in Brooklyn
when the dodges moved to LA.
And I was like, wow,
that's the moment I realized he was too old to be president.
Like you can't go around telling people
that you remember when the Dodgers left Brooklyn.
Like that is the oldest school thing possible.
That's like history books have been written about this.
So he's steeped in that sort of like mid-century America
in this very specific way.
Yeah, and exactly, I think that was part of his strength
because he both left behind that existing laughter.
He moved to Vermont in a place that he could,
he could really find a way to influence politics
at a bigger, bigger scale.
But he kept a lot of its allegiance
to the old bread and butter,
simple way of talking about things.
And often when people say that,
that could be a euphemism for,
let's not talk about gay people.
Let's not talk about racial justice and so on.
But Bernie Sanders is a product of the new left.
He's a product of the civil rights movement.
He's someone who went to Vermont to try to farm,
which is kind of just a crazy thought in and of itself
that kind of back to the land movement.
You would think they would maybe pick somewhere
a little bit more fertile than in his book.
I always wondered how he got to Vermont from Brooklyn.
He literally, it was part of like the back to the land,
like let's start a little homestead
in New England hippie movement.
I'm not sure if he intended to like survive by farming,
but it was definitely let's get a cabin,
let's get a little land.
Wow.
The same book where he talks kind of about,
the New York trolley dodgers or whatever,
the Brooklyn trolley dodgers leave in town
and him getting upset.
He also talks about surviving that first winter,
which was one of the worst winters in modern history
in terms of temperature and whatnot
and not having proper heat and trying to find enough
to burn, to stay warm.
He obviously has a little bit of that hippie-gippy
left in him, but he had a very simple message
and he said the same thing in his first run
in the early 1970s for office,
all the way up to his 2016 run,
which was millionaires control too much
of this country's wealth.
He would give the same percentage,
X percentage of people control Y percentage of the wealth,
same framing, same syntax.
And in a way, I think the very old,
somewhat mid-century New York ethnic accent
combined with that straight talk,
I think it resonated deeply in a lot of people.
It made somewhat radical ideas seem accessible,
comprehensible.
Yeah, and I made him seem authentic.
This guy's been saying the same thing.
It made it clear that he was authentic, honestly.
That this guy has been saying these same things
for the last 50 years, he comes by it honestly
and we can take him at his word.
But to your point about,
and I don't wanna spend the entire time
relitigating the last couple of elections,
but you're correct that there was a concerted effort
by the Democratic Party to beat him
because Obama and that wing of the party
thought that Bernie couldn't win
and they teamed up to consolidate and beat him.
And I've heard that narrative before
talking to folks in the DSA,
folks who are big Bernie supporters,
ah, Bernie got screwed by the Democratic Party,
but there were also people trying to screw Trump,
maybe not as well.
And you do at some point have to win, right?
Like, Bernie's argument or the argument
of a lot of Bernie supporters were,
well, Bernie would have beaten Trump,
but okay, and would have beaten him the first time as well
in the Hillary Clinton election.
And okay, that's a hypothetical,
but a good piece of support for the hypothetical would be
if he had won the primary.
If you want to prove that your political movement
has the goods, has the juice to sweep the entire country,
then it would be helpful to win the primary first.
And Bernie had a lot of support,
but it's like, hey, was it just that Obama screwed it?
Well, Obama might not have been able to do that
if he had had massively more support than he did
versus, whereas Trump, a thought that I have is,
you said Trump is running on the thing
of being a billionaire, et cetera,
or a very wealthy man who can make business deals,
he was also running on pure hate, right?
Just like powering of there are people out there
who are trying to screw you,
there's people coming over the border,
there's people you hate, I'm gonna take vengeance on them.
And so part of what I wondered is like,
is that not currently in where we are in American politics,
maybe just more powerful?
Is there more support for that than for socialism
and what Bernie and folks like you are asking folks to support?
So I think it's worth keeping in mind,
well, first of all, let's concede.
My view is that Bernie lost the election
and he lost because in 2016, he wasn't recognizable,
he wasn't considered credible
until all of a sudden his message resonated
by then it was almost too late.
So I think if he had started with his momentum
against Clinton earlier,
I think he would have credibly won.
There was nothing the DNC could have done to stop him.
He just got out of the gate a little bit slow
in part because this was always meant
to be something of a protest candidacy.
And I think he was surprised by how seriously he took you.
So he went.
If his 2016 campaign had been his second campaign,
not his first, things might have been different.
Yeah, and I think in his second campaign,
I think by then the democratic field was just broken up
into so many different camps.
And it just happened to be that the Bernie camp
was the largest of these many polarized camps.
But the Democrats had something that Obama,
that the Republicans didn't have,
which is a big unifying figure
that could unite the other camps.
And ultimately it wasn't just a backdoor deal
that Obama cut, it was a deal connected
to various constituencies.
And I think for a lot of let's say black voters,
particularly older black voters in the South
and South Carolina, they voted for Biden
because their primary goal was to find someone
who they thought was electable
and find someone who they thought could be Trump.
And I think the rational kernel of it is
not that Biden's policies would have been better
in a vacuum from Bernie's policies,
but that Biden was electable
and they would bear the brunt of another Trump presidency.
So in that case, it's a bunch of different actors
acting pretty rationally.
And I was a Bernie national surrogate in 2020.
I chalk it up as just losing, losing the game of politics.
And if it was a backroom way for the burning crats to win,
I would have loved to pursue that backroom way.
Yeah, that's politics is making the phone calls,
knowing the people, knowing, hey, this person,
we have to gotta get this person
and their constituency on our side.
Like you can't wish that away.
You have to sort of win that process to some degree.
So I mean, do you think that, sorry, please go on.
No, but as far as your question on,
is there a stronger constituency for hate in the US
or for Trump's sort of vitriolic appeals
and for the Bernie appeals?
I would say that when it comes to redistribution,
yeah, it might be a watch.
There might be a lot of half the country hoping
for more redistribution in the abstract,
half the country still bed into they're gonna strike it rich.
So maybe let's hold off this redistribution stuff.
I know I'm way behind on my mortgage and I'm in medical bed,
but I'm one good move away from being wealthy.
Of course, there's some aspect of that.
When you compare America to, let's say Western Europe,
I think you would find that Americans are,
one, more welcoming of immigrants
in a lot of countries in Western Europe.
So Americans, for example,
even a lot of people who vote for Trump,
one, they vastly overestimate the amount of
undocumented immigration the United States has,
but more generally,
therefore higher amounts of legal immigration
and therefore tightening the border at the same time.
So which is very different than some
of these xenophobic appeals in Europe.
A vast majority of Americans are for things
like birthright citizenship.
My parents came to the US in 1988.
I was born in 1989.
I would imagine that maybe not as commanding
of a majority as it was in the past,
but probably a majority of Republicans
would agree that I have a right to be a US citizen.
That's not the case in a lot of European countries.
Most of those countries don't have birthright citizenship
like we have throughout most of the Western hemisphere.
On a host of other issues,
I think you'll find that Americans as a whole,
especially young people, hold more progressive views
than their peers in the advanced capitalist world
in Europe and even Japan, South Korea.
This is a good starting point for us
from progressive politics.
And I think that we shouldn't let Trump's appeal
maybe make us too pessimistic
about where most Americans are on these issues.
Yeah, I agree because and I think
that is what makes this contrast so interesting to me
is that you feel the groundswell of support for these issues.
I mean, it's literally just here on YouTube
when I put in the title of something,
Billionaires Capitalism, right?
I get more views when I do that, right?
Because the audience is like, oh my God,
yes, someone is saying the thing that I wanna hear, right?
Like I can tell that there's an undercurrent.
I guess my job sort of as a comedian and broadcaster
to know how people are feeling
and to make things that speak to that
that also line up with what I personally believe,
I can sense that undercurrent as can so many other people
and the contrast between it
and the electoral success is like somewhat fascinating.
You see all these positive signs,
but you also see, well, hold on a second,
why aren't politicians who espouse
some of these policies doing better?
But before we get deeper into that, I'd love actually,
I think we waited a little too long
in the podcast to do this.
When you talk about socialism and democratic socialism,
do you have a capsule summary of what you mean by that?
Because I don't want to, you know,
people are maybe feeling in the blank
of what they believe that your political beliefs
or project is.
Well, fundamentally to me, socialism is about
at a minimum securing people's social
and economic necessities and saying that people
are entitled to certain things just by virtue of being born.
So at the very least, that means the state
as a provider of last resort for things like healthcare,
childcare, housing, you know, nutrition.
So they're making sure we have that baseline
of a welfare state.
Secondly, to me, it's about extended democracy
from purely the formal political realm
into the economic realm as well.
So if we were to agree that democracy is a good thing
at the ballot box, why shouldn't we have greater degrees
of democracy at our workplace?
And within those two broad sets of principles,
I think you could have a lot of different forms.
So I don't suppose that a centrally planned economy
would be a great system to live under.
You know, I think there's certain both incentive
and informational problems that arise in those systems.
Yeah.
But you could still have markets
where you have an employee owned
or worker owners controlling their workplaces
and competing with each other to produce goods and services
and a private sector for consumer goods and services
while also having a larger state sector
that secures things like healthcare
or some of the big, what economists would call
natural monopolies like our, you know,
railroad network or things like that
where we feel like maybe it would be fine for there
to just be one actor in the sphere.
And we'd rather not be a giant corporate actor.
We'd rather have the state where in theory
we have greater scope to control the realm of state action.
So as a democratic socialist, part of what I believe in
is in a sense a reconciliation of liberalism and socialism.
So for example, I think rights are great.
And it's great to have this idea that yes, democracy
is excellent in most spheres of life,
but there are certain things where I don't want my neighbor
intruding on my personal consumption choice.
I don't want my neighbor or the majority restricting
on my ability to speak freely or to do my own thing.
And I think those are great aspects of liberalism.
And I think they're perfectly reconcilable
with a socialism that tries to secure people's rights
to develop into individuals that can truly,
you know, reach their potentials
and can participate in this, in our society.
Because, you know, right now I think we take for granted
as Americans that a kid born in, you know,
Fairfield, Connecticut is going to have a radically different
life and life outcomes and opportunities as a kid born,
you know, 20, 30 miles away and in Hartford or Waterbury.
And I'm doing very Connecticut example.
Oh, everybody is aware of the socioeconomic strata
of different Connecticut cities and towns.
I think we all know this.
No, I know what you're talking about.
You're talking about like where I grew up on Long Island
versus Brownsville, Brooklyn, right?
Or pick your neighborhood where you're like,
oh, yeah, that's the bad part of town.
And this is the good part of town, right?
We just take for granted that, you know,
some kids going to public schools in some neighborhoods,
we're not even like Britain where, yeah, of course,
we ship people out to fancy boarding schools
are going to have different outcomes.
But public schools, we take for granted
that some of them are going to produce doctors
and lawyers and engineers and other schools
are going to produce dropouts.
And that's not normal for a rich country
where we could easily solve that problem, not even
through socialist revolution, but through tax and transfers
and investments and jobs programs
and a host of other things.
Yeah, I thought your answer was interesting there
because you sort of gave us the entire scope all the way
from the minimal to the maximal version of socialism.
You ended by talking about a substantially different economic
system that has a lot more state action,
worker cooperatives that are competing with each other.
We could dive into that.
But you also had, on the other hand,
talking about simply expanded social welfare programs
of the kind that we're already used to.
Like we already provide in America
many of the types of programs that you're talking about.
We have a somewhat socialized version of education.
We have public school K through 12.
We do not have that for higher education.
And we could talk about ways that we
could expand that for public education
so that your zip code does not determine how much,
that we don't fund public schools via property taxes,
meaning wealthier areas have better schools.
And what I find really interesting
is that in the last couple of years,
we have tested a lot of the most immediate socialist ideas
if we want to label them that way.
During the pandemic, there was massively increased welfare
payment or welfare payments of general kinds
to folks during the pandemic.
We had expanded tax credits, child welfare, et cetera,
unemployment benefits.
And those had huge beneficial impacts on people's lives
that then a couple of years later were removed.
Also, going back to the 2020 election,
when Joe Biden came into office,
he at least acted as though he was going to be much more of a,
I don't want to say a socialist,
but he was proclaiming himself sort
of the next coming of FDR, right?
He was going to do New Deal-style stuff.
And he did some of it, giant infrastructure spending,
et cetera, antitrust enforcement.
Those were all things that I expected an Elizabeth Warren
or a Bernie Sanders president to do, not a Joe Biden.
And so it feels on the policy level, holy shit,
some of these things have become not impossible in America,
even if we're not sure if they're going to stick around.
Do you have any view on that?
Yeah, I think that one interesting, first of all,
I think that the infrastructure bill
was a positive development.
It was over a trillion dollars of funding
for Roadsbridge's mass transit rail service.
Obviously, that's better than what
we would have gotten from a Trump administration.
Obviously, it's a policy success.
But I guess that sometimes the United States,
the reason why a lot of Americans feel like, oh, well,
we're already trying massive socialist-style spending
in the US, and we already have this massive welfare state,
but it just doesn't work, is because we tend
to have quite inefficiently designed programs.
When we do spend money on welfare,
we needlessly mean-tested, and we waste time and resources,
and we weaken these programs by saying,
you have to be this poor to use it.
Not only that, it does create real incentives
and disincentives, and it creates resentment towards,
let's say if you want to use this category,
it's kind of a made-up category, but the lower middle class
feels like, oh, well, I'm struggling,
or the working poor feels like I'm struggling,
but I don't qualify for something that I qualify for
if I just worked a little bit less,
and you end up dividing up working-class people
that have invested interest in protecting
a lot of the same programs, and those people who
might be working and might not qualify, for example,
for Medicaid would benefit from living in a community,
because they already live in these areas,
with their neighbors who are able to access
good health care and things like that.
So it's both the design of the programs isn't great,
and often we tend to create programs
where we allow corporations to push prices sky-high
for certain things like health care,
and our solution to the problem is by subsidizing the poorest
so they're able to access this market,
but we're doing nothing to address the cost of things.
So with education, we're doing this, higher education,
and with health care, whereas in other more
state-ified systems, you're able to find ways
to more radically reduce cost, and that's
a reason why we spend a larger percentage of our GDP
on health care than other countries like even the UK,
which has a system more expensive than Medicare
for all our main demand of the United States,
but an entire national health service.
So I often think that even things that the bill back better
kind of would emerge out of it, and would actually
get passed the infrastructure bill,
I question the design of some of those things.
Are we just subsidizing willy-nilly a lot of green companies?
Sure.
I'd rather subsidize them than other forms of capital,
but are we actually controlling the outcomes of these subsidies
or are we just throwing money at things?
Right.
Are we just giving money to more corporations
that we like maybe a little bit better,
but we're not getting at the root of the problem?
Hey, everybody.
I know we're in the ad break, but we're doing something
a little bit different today.
Today, I'm going to tell you about an amazing group of people
who did not pay us anything to be a part of the show.
We just think they do amazing work,
and we wanted you to know about them.
You might remember back in 2018, those heart-wrenching stories
of families torn apart by border patrol, refugee children
being pulled away from their parents
who were in turn deported to their home countries.
It was devastating then, and it's just as devastating now,
with hundreds of families still not reunited
after all these years.
You know, we discuss so many problems on factually,
but I firmly believe that there is always something
that can be done about those problems.
And recently, I came across an organization
called All Otrolado, which works to reunify families.
They provide holistic legal and humanitarian support
to refugees, deportees, and other migrants
in the US and Tijuana through a multidisciplinary,
client-centered, harm reduction-based practice.
Since 2018, they have successfully brought together
over 100 families torn apart by Trump's
zero-tolerance policy.
But reuniting those families is just the beginning.
All Otrolado continues to support each family
with legal aid, housing, and counseling
to help heal and get back on their feet.
I mean, can you imagine the agony
of having your child ripped from your arms,
unsure of when you'll see them again?
We cannot allow such family separations to continue,
so if you're like me and believe
that all families belong together,
then join me in supporting All Otrolado and Donate Today.
You can find the link to Donate to All Otrolado
in the description of this episode
or go to gum.fm slash charity and Donate Today.
You can also consider volunteering with the organization
which offers opportunities
that are both in-person and virtual.
The best way to get involved
is by filling out an application on their website
at allotrolado.org slash volunteer.
Thank you so much.
Folks, today's sponsor is one
I cannot recommend highly enough, Delete Me.
As a factually listener,
you know how much I value online privacy.
Well, Delete Me has been an indispensable tool for me
for many years.
I've been using them long before
they even started advertising on this show.
This day and age, it is shockingly simple
for data brokers to peddle your personal information
without your consent.
These data brokers may be selling your name,
phone number, and home address,
and you might never even know it's happening.
Trying to locate and remove all this data yourself
can feel like an impossible task,
but that is where Delete Me shines.
Their team of experts tirelessly scour the web
to track down and wipe out your personal data.
In just seven days,
you will receive a detailed report of their findings
and believe it or not,
a whopping 41% of Americans
are vulnerable to online harassment
from doxing to scams and even identity theft.
In some cases, having your info online
can turn cyber stalking
into good old fashioned in-person stalking.
Protect yourself from these threats with Delete Me.
So if you're like me
and you value your personal privacy,
I wanna make sure that your identifying personal details
are not floating around the internet
where anybody can buy them.
Well, you can get 20% off your Delete Me plan
when you go to joindeleteme.com slash adam
and use promo code adam at checkout.
That's joindeleteme.com slash adam, code adam.
I wholeheartedly recommend this service.
Check out Delete Me.
Folks, you know,
I am all about those little pick-me-ups throughout the day.
Whether it's tackling work tasks
or conquering chores around the house,
treating myself is a must.
And you know what gets me smiling every time?
Japanese snacks.
Not only are they bursting with flavor,
but their cute packaging and quirky vibes
add an extra layer of fun.
That is why teaming up with Bokksu,
a Japanese snack subscription box
has been such an absolute delight
because these are not just
your run-of-the-mill grocery store snacks.
Each month, Bokksu brings you over 20 unique treats
that you can normally find only in Japan.
Plus, they throw in a nifty guide packed with info
about each snack and Japanese culture.
Snacking while learning?
Are you kidding?
It's like this was literally made for me.
Oh, and each box ships free from Japan straight to your door.
I happen to have a box right here
and let me tell you something.
I loved the first box they sent so much.
I told our ad people,
please make sure that Bokksu re-ups
because I gotta get another box of these snacks.
First of all, check out this incredible guide here
full of beautiful photos.
It tells you about all the different snacks.
You know, my girlfriend's gluten-free
so we can find one in here
that makes sure it works for her dietary restrictions.
So, but she's not here right now.
So I'm gonna make sure I eat one of the gluten-y ones.
Ooh, 20th century pear biscuit.
This delicate biscuit is a luxurious blend
of 20th century Asian pear rich cheese
and decadent white chocolate.
Oh, it contains wheat so that means I should eat it.
All right, let me find it here.
20th century pear biscuit.
Okay, here we go, found it.
20th century pear biscuit.
Cute little packaging, let me give it a try.
Oh my gosh.
That is so good.
Oh, the pear flavor is really strong.
Mm, it's like a strong aroma.
Next to this crunchy biscuit,
the textural contrast is really wonderful.
I mean, that is so good.
And guess what?
There are 19 other different snacks in here for me to try.
I love this service so much.
And you know why?
My favorite thing about it is that they support
small family-run businesses in Japan.
Bokksu has sourced these treats
by working with over 245 small makers in Japan,
helping out their businesses
and helping to preserve their traditions.
So if you love Japanese snacks as much as I do
and if you wanna try snacks
that you literally cannot get anywhere else
outside of going to Japan yourself,
you have gotta try out Bokksu.
Right now, you can use the code FACTUALLY
for $15 off your first order on bokksu.com.
That's code FACTUALLY for $15 off your first order
on bokksu.com.
Tell them Adam sent you
and now I gotta finish these snacks.
Oh man, that's really good.
I'm glad she's gluten-free, so I could eat this one.
Staying on healthcare for a second,
so much, so many times when we describe,
hey, here's what they do in Europe.
Here's how they organize a system
or here's how we could tweak our current subsidies
to make them better, et cetera.
We're talking about improvements
that just in literal fact would be better, right?
Like when we talk about the American healthcare system,
we can go down this list of it's so expensive,
it's expensive because of multiple insurance companies
and because of the capitalist incentive.
If we had a single-payer system,
we would have better health outcomes,
everything would be cheaper
and this is being done around the globe.
It's sort of like incontrovertibly better in every way
and yet in the United States,
what is, you know, should almost be,
hey, there's an asteroid headed towards Earth,
let's look at it, it's up there,
this is real, you know, we know this for a fact,
becomes a political position that, you know,
rises and falls in popularity
and you know, I'll say right now, Medicare for All,
that is the socialist and the sort of birdie movement ask.
It's also sort of faded in popularity again in our politics.
It is less a part of our politics than it was five years ago.
And so it's such a strange state of affairs
that again, you know, a single-payer system,
better in every way, anyone who dives into the data,
it's very hard to argue that it wouldn't be.
It's very hard to defend the current system
and yet it seems so far from us being able to implement
what's like truly a common sense reform.
Why do you think that is
and what do you think the prospects are
in the future for that kind of program?
Well, I think in this case, what's interesting is
you have a chunk of the American public
that is already covered under a single-payer system,
be it retirees and also the poor,
and veterans as well who are covered through the VA
in an underfunded system,
but a system that's closer to the British NHS
than anything else.
So that chunk of Americans
are already covered by socialized medicine.
Then you have a chunk of Americans
who have stable jobs,
either they're lucky enough to have the old union jobs
and be a part of that 10% of the economy
that's covered under union contracts
or their manager or professionals
or others who have stable healthcare.
So then you have to kind of go down the list
until you find people who are getting really squeezed
by the current system.
Now, the new system would be better for a lot of people.
If we retain current spending for Medicaid and Medicare,
then in a system where we're better able to control costs,
we could actually provide more services
under Medicare, Medicaid.
If we had employers no longer responsible for healthcare,
then workers in America would be able
to use that extra bargaining power to demand
not just the platinum healthcare benefits
or their employers to pay for their HRAs
or these other tax-affirmed programs
like FSAs and HSAs.
If anyone's listened to this from the UK,
they probably just think we're insane with these acronyms,
but this is how complicated our system is,
but they'd be able to use that bargaining power
that's often spent by unions
talking about these private market benefit schemes
and actually use it towards wages or hours worked
or conditions or something more bread and butter.
So a lot of people would benefit from the new system,
but if they feel like they're getting enough
from the current system,
and if they're also in a perverse way,
maybe benefiting from the fact
that there's 20, 25 million people
who are essentially either not insured
or who are unable to access their benefits
because of how high the deductibles are,
they have the advantage of having,
let's say shorter wait times than in other systems.
It doesn't really equal that
because in practice,
you'd always encourage more doctors to join
and if people are worried about,
oh, in single payer systems,
you could see your primary care position right away,
but if you want to see a specialist that's sometimes longer
or sometimes the state kind of does its own triage
if you really need to see a specialist,
you'll see one tomorrow,
but if you need to see a dermatologist
for a cosmetic skin condition,
then you might have to wait three, four weeks.
That sort of thing.
You could just pay specialists more in the system.
You could find ways to fix this,
but I think that the constituency
that really is materially motivated to go out there
and to change US healthcare is actually not that massive
unless we have a politician,
a movement articulating the benefits
in a clear and concise way like Bernie did.
The entire Bernie campaign,
many of the people I know doing work around Medicare for all
were already insured by good employer-sponsored plans.
So it wasn't just self-interest.
I think it was about tying it to a broader vision of change
and taking on a really powerful forces,
that the medical industry.
Well, it's not just the medical industry though,
it's also like a lot of the public
has a vested interest in the current system.
You mentioned unions which would not have,
unions in the United States generally bargain for healthcare
and they have to spend maybe one out of every three
cycles.
We got to make sure we shore up our health insurance plan.
We got to make sure the plan is really good.
And hey, if there was a state-sponsored health insurance,
they wouldn't have to do so, right?
They could just focus on wages instead.
That argument's true and yet many unions
have not supported Medicare for all
because the members think,
well, hold on a second, I have great healthcare now,
I don't know what this plan would be like,
maybe it would be worse.
A, there's a huge education hurdle,
but then also sometimes the leadership of the unions
is like, well, healthcare is what we provide.
Like that is why people are excited to be a member
of the union is because they get the healthcare.
So if we don't give healthcare,
how do we know that we can get our members to show up
if we need to go on strike, et cetera?
Maybe they won't need us as much anymore.
And so those are, and by the way,
those are ways that good people in good faith
in the movement can end up,
the incentives push them in that direction.
And so it seems like there's still,
even though it all pencils outright,
there are sort of institutional barriers,
even in folks who, you would think that as a socialist,
you would be in the movement with,
with folks in the labor movement.
It's like an internal tension there.
Yeah, definitely, definitely.
I think that there's a lot of unions
who basically don't trust the government
to create a plan as good as what their members enjoy now,
or at least they feel like the union members
feel that way in the private sector.
And there's also some other unions that are afraid
that if there's a continued push
to make union membership volunteer,
so kind of open shops instead of closed shops,
that having kind of access to health insurance
and people get accessing those plans
through their union membership
is a potentially really important part
of keeping people in unions.
But I think these are ultimately pretty short-sighted.
I also think it's short-sighted for US industry
as a whole, particularly, let's say the US auto industry
that's competing with, historically competing with
labor in Japan and in Germany,
places that the state plays a much bigger role
in health provision, but are, you know,
kind of at a competitive disadvantage.
I think the counter is that employers
like having this major benefit
that everybody needs tied to employment
because it keeps people at their firms.
And again, they make the calculation
that it may be the control that they get over workers
and this leverage is more important than the savings.
But I think there's a host of small businesses
and others that would benefit from not having this burden.
Yeah, I mean, I think you're right that it's short-sighted.
It's a sort of short-term or current benefit
that some of these actors currently enjoy,
but that is preventing them from a greater long-term benefit.
And yeah, I'm just curious from your view,
how do we make progress on it?
You said, you know, it sort of needs a leader
like Bernie spreading the message,
but Bernie did the best job of it,
anyone's done in 30 years.
And, you know, again, you know, the wave rolled in,
but then went back.
And so are there, you know, in terms of this,
just looking at socialized medicine,
how does one build progress towards that
over the next few decades?
So the reason why I keep mentioning Bernie
as someone who's obviously my politics
are probably a step or two to Bernie's left in certain ways.
And I was a member of Socialist Movement
way before the first Bernie campaign in 2015, 2016.
But I keep mentioning him because I think
that we're in such a hollowed-out political environment
that we actually need big national politics
and politics at the level of communications
and politics at the level of almost like
a national kind of populist articulation,
the way that Trump provides it on the right.
And I think Bernie for a time was providing on the left
to break through this hollowed-out environment,
to break through and to re-engage people with politics.
So in the 2016 campaign,
you saw for the first time Trump and Bernie both
rallying people by the tens of thousands.
Yeah, it was displays that,
obviously there was a little bit of this in Obama's 2008 run,
but it's something that reminds you of politics
in another country, not politics,
as we've known it growing up in the United States.
Yeah, arena rallies for political candidates.
That's not something that people were doing for Al Gore.
Definitely, it would be like a once a year,
they'll just do it at the DNC.
You remember he did the weird thing
where he kind of rebuffed Bill Clinton a little bit
and aggressively made out with his wife, Al Gore.
I don't remember that,
but I'm gonna look it up after this show.
It was kind of a like, I'm Al Gore and I live my wife.
You know, that guy doesn't love his wife.
I'm a wife guy.
Yeah, yeah, exactly, exactly.
So, you know, I think that in this environment
that's so hollowed out,
one, it means that even a group as small
as Democratic Socialist America or other small groups
like Justice Democrats or Sunrise
can actually make a difference because,
and on the other side,
obviously the anti-abortion activists
and the Christian right
can kind of make a huge difference too.
With a small group of highly motivated organizers
in a hollowed out political environment
can have disproportionate influence.
But I think that the goal of campaigns
like the Sanders campaign has to be
to spur people out of this malaise,
then get them motivated and activated
and give them a language that they could use,
a framework that they could use,
a set of demands that they can identify with.
Where Bernie failed was that he wasn't successfully able
to carry on his campaign even in a limited form
through some permanent organ.
So in other words, he tried to do our revolution
which kind of went nowhere
and he tried to do these other efforts
to make his campaign permanent.
But that's not something he was particularly good at.
So it was up to us on the far left
to build organizations like the Democratic Social for America.
Whereas I think that socials politics in America
is obviously what I believe in, I think it's important.
But I think there's probably a broader base
of for egalitarian, pro-working class politics in America
that uses probably is more ideologically diffuse
and also uses a different sort of language
than the socials left does in the United States.
But that fundamentally stands for a fairer deal
for working class people and stands for defense
and expansion of important social programs
like Medicare for all.
When you say a different sort of language
than the socialists left,
what do you mean than the current socialists left?
Well, I think the socialists left right now,
we are activists but without a huge social base.
So a lot of us come from working class backgrounds
and a lot of us are involved in campaigns
that do connect with a lot of working class people.
Like for example, there's a lot of DSA members
who are actively involved in tenant rights struggles
that do have an important base.
But fundamentally we join DSA in ones and twos.
So we often create a hot house
where certain language and ideological distinctions
that are not really that important or consequential
to people's lives day to day take on greater consequence.
Right.
A lot of people reading books
and getting very heated about them in closed door meetings
is what you're talking about.
Yeah, I wish the meetings were closed doors.
So sometimes they go viral, yeah.
The interesting arguments, yeah.
And again, I think building a base of cadre
to think about some of these more theoretical points
or are committed or keep alive some of this whole language.
I actually think it's useful in certain ways.
But if you're not connected to a real social base,
you're not challenged to try to articulate your ideas
in a way every single day,
in a way that wins over ordinary Americans
and all their complexities.
So I think that's the...
Yang to Trump to back to Yang to now RFK,
junior curious teamster.
Like literally someone I spoke to yesterday.
So...
Right.
And who's a person of color, by the way, which makes it...
Yeah.
I think that's a lot of this election
because even a lot of our priors about Hispanic voters
vis-a-vis Trump is not gonna be true in this election either.
And the RFK junior factor is something
that I personally just have not considered much
until recently.
Now it just seems like he's not gonna go away
and he's gonna get his 15%
and maybe I'm just hoping only eight of those 15
will be from Biden and the rest will be from Trump.
You think he's gonna get 15,
you think RFK is gonna get 15% of the popular vote?
I think that, well, a lot of, I think,
polling would have him close to that.
I think in reality, as we closer to the election,
it'll become more and more polarized.
I think that that RFK vote will dissipate back
to both Trumps, probably 55% of it might go to Biden,
the rest will go to Trump.
And I think that the best bet,
I'm one of the few people,
and I feel like the few people in the world
that just thinks that Biden's gonna win,
if only because I feel like he's been hit so hard
with all these negatives for so many months
that it's only gonna go up from here.
And Trump between his legal trouble
and between just the sheer amount of vitriol
that a portion of Americans have for him,
I just feel like the negative polarization
is people like to call it of the race.
Well, we'll skew in Biden's favor
because we already lived through Trump
and we have, I think, concerns
that the next four years of Trump would be even worse.
And I just feel like that's the thing
that'll motivate people who are quite discontent
with Biden, like myself, to vote for him.
And I would vote for Biden if I was in a swing state.
I'm in New York, so I'll vote for Jill Stein or something.
You know why I vote for Jill Stein?
Because Jill Stein asked me,
hey, Basker, are you gonna vote for me in 2016?
I'm like, when?
No one else hit me up.
I'm not sure if it's an effective way
to win a national campaign.
She personally asked you.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, okay, but some people will say,
and let's go back.
Oh, actually, before I get to that,
I do wanna make one point that you were talking about
somebody who speaks to an actual group of working people
that reminds you of, say, Sean Fain,
who is saying a lot of those ideas,
why do we even have billionaires, et cetera,
things that maybe Bernie could have said,
or that a DSA leader would say,
but he's saying them to his actual members,
who he understands, he knows them well,
and he's trying to get them to go on strike
or sign a union card or whatever it is,
and that's really rooted to their struggle.
It's not someone like myself at a DSA meeting
with a college education saying,
hey, here's what I think would be good
for some people who I haven't met, for example,
and that's a real difference that is meaningful, perhaps.
Going back to the national election, though,
you, there were people who said the same thing
that you just said, I'll vote for Jill Stein
because I'm pretty sure that Biden's gonna win.
You did say you'd vote for him if you lived in a swing state,
but there are people who said similar things in 2016,
and other people are very mad at them
because everyone thought Hillary Clinton was gonna win,
and hey, I can just, you know,
I can do whatever I want, right, for that reason.
And I think this year,
something that is really going to give Biden
a lot of trouble is what's happening in Gaza right now,
the support for Israel, et cetera,
and it strikes me that this has been
such a wedge through the entire left.
The, you know, you had DSA members writing an open letter
about why they're leaving DSA,
because of, da-da-da-da-da-da, go down, you know,
they wrote their DSA national leadership,
put out a message that was, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
You've had this happen at, you know,
leftist groups and meetings throughout the country
in local democratic parties, et cetera.
And, you know, I've heard a lot of people say,
hey, this is, regardless of how you feel about that,
we are talking about, you know,
we're talking about America's economic needs, right,
and building socialism in America.
This is a, you know, maybe this is not a distraction
because we are a part of what's happening in Israel,
but it's a very, you know, it's such a wrench
to be thrown in at such a vulnerable moment.
And so I'm curious to get into that piece of it.
How do you think that the, you know,
Israel's offensive against the civilians in Gaza
has affected your movement?
Well, I think among DSA, if anything,
having the focal point of solidarity work with Palestine
has been a uniting factor in the organization as a whole.
I think there's some older members who objected
to some of the rhetoric used right after
the October 7th attacks.
And I think their argument was basically,
you're using a rhetoric that is preemptively condemning
Israel for the response rather than focusing on
the actual attack in which hundreds of civilians died,
and also using rhetoric in some cases
that maybe it was more appropriate
to national liberation movements in the 60s and 70s
than it is to an Islamist group like Hamas.
I think that obviously I try to aim for some of the,
in general, try to aim for a broad-based rhetoric
that tries to speak beyond the converted.
So I think there's probably some truth in that
and some of the initial communications.
But as a whole, I think in a moral and ethical sense,
I think DSA kind of got it right,
which is that there was definitely going to be
a huge and disproportionate Israeli response
on a largely civilian population.
And I think a lot of the Democratic Party,
particularly younger Democrats,
much less the far left, are united in thinking
that Israel's actions have been disproportionate,
that it's targeted civilians,
and that there needs to be an immediate ceasefire.
I think they were even hearing those sorts of things
in tepid ways from the Biden administration itself
or firm figures within the State Department,
which shows a pretty wide spectrum of belief.
So I do think that Biden hasn't exhibited
the courage that he needed to.
I think he's done just enough
that history won't say that he was Netanyahu.
And I think that's honestly been his goal.
He hasn't been, he's been probably thinking himself,
well, I don't want to spend enough capital to end this
because the last time I spent a lot of capital
on a foreign policy issue,
his correct decision to withdraw from Afghanistan,
I got so much flack for it,
but I also don't want people to think of Netanyahu,
so I'm going to do the various, the hot mic moment,
which I actually do as a hot,
do you think was a hot mic moment,
but it might as well have been staged
at the State of the Union?
This is where he was like,
ah, man, maybe he's got to cut that out, man,
or whatever, like to somebody off the mic, yeah.
Well, and he managed to just make it as awkward as possible
because he's Biden,
so he's talking about a Jewish Prime Minister.
So he's like, I need to have a come to Jesus moment for Bibi.
Ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah.
Is there a Jewish,
is there a Jewish counterpart to the phrase come to Jesus?
Neither of us are the ones to answer that question,
but I'm curious anyway, please go on.
No, but I think, I think,
I think that that hopefully, as time goes on,
that those efforts accelerate and there is some sort of resolution. But I think this is something
that history will really condemn Biden and his administration for. I think that you can count
in the thousands of lives the amount of people that would have been saved if Biden has had acted
sooner. And again, even from the narrow standpoint of Israeli defense, I don't think there's a
credible argument that killing several thousand more civilians in the operation is going to make
Israel safer as opposed to continuing the conflict and perpetuity. And that being said,
I actually am not of the opinion that Biden's actions will be a decisive
factor in the race in November 2024, I think. Really? And I say this with using my words
carefully. I don't think this is a good thing, but I do think that a lot of voters,
if the Israeli assault ends in the next month or two, a lot of voters will move on by then.
And again, I don't think they should, especially with 30 plus thousand people dead. But I think
they will move on for them. The news cycle will move on like we've seen time and time again in
these sorts of cases. And also the real politic will overwhelm people. And some of this is very
rational. We choose once over four years not who we want to be in charge in a positive sense,
but we often have to choose who we are on the far left, who we want to be in opposition to,
or for ordinary people like who's the lesser evil. And I think that for a lot of people,
that's going to be Joe Biden. And I think among a lot of voters in places like Michigan,
I think they're going to feel the pressure to vote for Biden. I think given the constraints of our
of our political system, it makes perfect sense that those people would vote for Biden.
Then again, I do feel like the credible threat of exit is an important way to actually influence
mainstream Democratic Party politicians. And that's attention. That's a balancing act between
listening to people's concerns about a Trump, a second presidency, but also wanting to be
oppositional enough that we could actually be a pressure group from the outside.
And I think that DSA members at an individual level in the organization has tried to do that
balancing act. And sometimes I think they don't get enough credit for how well they're doing that.
I think the DSA, no endorsement is in and of itself not allowing members to do what they want
and to make their own decisions. And the vast majority of those members will vote for Biden
in swing states, but it also maintains DSA as a credible oppositional force in a Democratic Party
that really does need one in an American civil society that does need one.
I really appreciate your description of it as a balancing act, because there's a constant tension
between, you know, when folks say, I can never vote for Biden because of his support for Netanyahu
or the United States' material support to Israel. Well, that's something that you have to accept.
And yet you're like, well, hold on a second, there are two alternatives here. And, you know,
we don't want the worse of the two. But if you go vote blue, no matter who, then you remove the
ability to put any pressure on. And so you do need to find, like both things are true at once,
and you need to find a middle between them. And I agree that I have seen some DSA groups,
I think, being sophisticated politically in how they handle it. I guess my broader concern
when, you know, apart from my deep concern for everybody in that region and for the citizens
of Gaza, when all of that went down, and my concern about those specific policies was
the left has a reputation and a history of splintering throughout groups, not limited to DSA,
throughout its history. And I saw splintering happen just in my own political waters here in
Los Angeles, splintering occurred. People who had previously been in coalition in the movement
with each other suddenly said, I can never fuck with those people again. And, you know, on both
sides of that. And, you know, if you are interested in political change and you understand, hey, that
requires everyone to get on the same side, or everyone to push in the same direction, regardless
of your feelings of the actual policy, like to see the splintering can be difficult and lamentable.
And so I'm curious how you think about that broader issue within left politics of, you know,
backbiting, people will complain about purity testing. I don't really like that phrase, but
that's a common complaint that you hear, etc. That sort of perennial problem and how can the
left overcome it? Well, I think that the splintering is pretty common in a lot of
of like-minded ideological groups or even just groups in general. We just happen to live in
society where there isn't that much organized activity anymore. This is the old kind of Putnam,
like bowling alone description of how it out or our socialized and our socialized.
This book has come up on this show so many times. At some point, I got to get, he's not dead, is he?
I got to get him on the show to talk about it, because it's come up over and over again.
I think Robert Putnam is still around, but he must be pretty old by this point.
He's around. I take credit. I don't take credit. Jackabin, I think, should take some credit for
its resurrection because we published a few articles about it a couple of years ago. So I
think we got some of the left talking about it. But if you look at the history of the American
political right, if you look at the history of religious groups, especially a lot of the words
we use to describe the left, like sectarianism, where does this come from? This comes from the
million different splits of religious groups into sectarian groups. I think in general,
it's something that I personally like to avoid. I like to try to be one ecumenical, but have my
beliefs, but figure out how do you create a box where we could have different ideas and have
contestation within that box. But like you said, still move together in the same direction,
and that's different than a line. A box has room for eclectic decisions and debates
over tactics and strategy. But as long as you figure out here are five core principles,
here's where we're aligned on, then we can move forward. I think sometimes when it comes to
an issue like Israel, Palestine, I think if our demand right now is ceasefire now,
I think that is a pretty broad demand that can incorporate a lot of different voices,
including liberal Zionists and others. Everyone from liberal Zionists to revolutionaries to
people who believe in democratic one state, I think we can all be in that tent together and we
can decide, debate 67 versus 48 versus one state solution some other time or within that tent.
So I actually think that the left in general has done a pretty good job in being led by groups,
like the solidarity movement. A lot of the great actions have been by groups like Jewish
voices for peace that have abused, I think really inclusive rhetoric and have talked about the fact
that their core members are Jewish Americans and here's why they're concerned by Israel's
actions. And I think, again, that's different than having a left that was so pure that said,
you can't say one word about Israeli civilians or you can't say one word about
two states or whatever. And if you say that, you can't be part of our ceasefire now movement.
If it was like that, then I would say that we're in a moment that's too sectarian.
I think that for now, the rhetoric I think is very good, the demand is broad and also the
rhetoric is about our basic human values. It's about the right of children to have access to
nutrition and people to not be under siege and against collective punishment, things that I
think are really broad. But going back to you mentioned Sean Finn before, and I think that
part of his appeal is that he's both a leader in the labor movement. He's both someone with a huge
base of support through the UAW with ordinary working class people, but also he draws on his
Christian values when he talks about his socialist values, when he talks about being an egalitarian
and when he talks about where wealth comes from and how the fruits of one's labor should be
distributed. And I think that's really powerful. And when I think about what kind of left wing
rhetoric can actually reach 100, 200 million Americans, I would imagine that sounds something
like that. I agree with that. And looking forward is how I'd like to end here. You opened by saying
over the last 10 years, moved from socialism being dead to being on life support. First of all,
that's pretty impressive because a resurrection happened in the middle there, which is a miracle.
So let's say that's an accomplishment for your movement. I would love you for you to paint a
picture of 10 years from now, right? Because you've said, hey, we need these charismatic leaders.
I don't see someone stepping up in electoral politics to take the Bernie Sanders crown currently.
No one is running for president this year with that sort of overtly socialist politics.
By the way, DSA membership I've read has slightly declined or at least plateaued for a little bit.
In terms of growth, after we've seen a lot of growth in the last 10 years,
how does the movement continue growing and where do you see it in your rosiest view?
Well, my rosiest view, I think that a lot of the younger people who move left on key issues,
we could connect with them and get them to engage in politics. And we connect with them. We tell them
engaging with politics isn't just about having a persona online or having a set of likes and
dislikes, but actually being involved in a union. And if you're in a workplace that is
unionized or can't be unionized, it's getting involved in your local community. It's either
connecting with groups like DSA or Jewish Worship Peace, some of the far left groups that I mentioned.
But it also means for people who maybe have different persuasions politically,
connecting with the local, even becoming a delegate at the DNC, something I wouldn't do
in a thousand years. And my mind isn't worth my time. But for other people, that might be how
they connect with politics. Look, taking over your local chapter of your local party is very
powerful politically. You have to sit through a lot of really shitty meetings. But you show up
to another of those meetings, you could be running the place within a couple of years.
Yeah, or getting involved with your local abortion access campaign or a host of things,
but still identifying broadly as being on the left or being part of any egalitarian
current. And a current that basically says we don't want a world where people get by and get ahead
through bullying or where we allow people to achieve exalted positions by being bullied.
We want a world in which ordinary people can work hard and be able to take care of themselves
and their families. And to me, like Trump embodies the very worst of Americans. One is like personally
pretty detestable. Even though he's occasionally funny, we could acknowledge. He's someone who just
constantly brags about being a bully. And his version of dealmaking is zero sum. Whereas I think
our vision for the United States, for the world is a very positive sum vision of expanding justice
and expanding prosperity and the world being a better place. And I think that's a message that
60 percent of the United States and 60 percent of the world can get behind. I don't think we'll
ever get a full 100. But I think that that appeal for that is far greater than where their DSA,
I think we have declined about 85,000 or 100,000. Either way, it's a country of 330 million people.
So I think this broad based movement in which I think socialists have a really important role to
play. Connecting, I think, these values, which are really commonly shared with the idea of struggle.
Because struggle means that it's not just we have this nice set of shared values we can all
march towards. But there is a small minority of people who do have a vested interest in keeping
people divided and keeping everything from our workplaces structured as undemocratically as they
are to our tax code written in the way it's written. And that's I think what liberalism is
often missed, this theory of politics and these theories of conflict. So I would love socialism
to be a complementary piece of the puzzle, changing liberalism. And then in turn, being
shaped by the people we're interacting with who aren't socialists, I think there's really a broad
movement that we can build in the here and now. Yeah. And I've seen that happen. I mean, in the
writer's guild, in the writer's strike, we have 10,000 to 12,000 members, depending on how you
want to count. And there are genuinely folks from all political persuasions. There are Republicans
and Democrats and all other sorts of folks in the union. But the one thing that almost everyone in
the union 95%, 99% of people in the union agree on is that the bosses are trying to screw us and
then if we fight back, we can win. And so there's people who I know I disagree with them politically
on many things, but we march together in solidarity and we know that we stand there going, hey, but
we're doing this together right now. And that feels more important, more powerful and separate
from who we voted for for governor or whatever. Or what cable news channel we watch. It's a
politics that we live rather than simply identify with and click a button about. And the fact that
so many people responded to it around the country. And in my view, the reason our strike went viral
nationally was people watched it and said, I want to do that too. I faced that in my job. How do I
do that in my life? That to me was really evidence. These are ideas and a struggle with a broad appeal
if we can fucking figure out how to harness it. Yeah, I think you, you proved it through practice
too. You had your theory that we can make change. You brought together a diverse coalition to make
change and people saw the results. So now it's going to be easier the next time around. Now,
with the Bernie campaign, with all these other struggles, the key is to actually rack up victories
and to give people a sense that politics isn't just something I'm going to do for fun
when I have free time between the ages of 18 and 26, the time in our lives where we have the,
for many of us, the most free time, but that it's actually an important route to achieve tangible
victories. And it's something that we can continue in various forms throughout our lives. And I think
that's the goal of any broad left movement is to achieve some victories and then add on to the
victories. Well, I feel badly that we have talked for over an hour and I haven't even gotten into
your publishing work. So let's end there and tell me a little bit about where people can find the
work that you do at The Nation and at Jacobin and, you know, the importance of that work as your
final plug and telling us about what you do. Well, I'm the president of The Nation magazine,
which is kind of a ridiculous title, but basically the publisher of The Nation.
You're literally, it's called The Nation. You're the president. You're the potus.
You're the panodist. I don't know, there's something in there.
And The Nation has been around since 1865. So it was founded by abolitionists in 1865. It's a
longest standing, you know, liberal left publication in this country. It's been
generally on the right side of history. All those years, 165 years on questions of
one piece in the like 159 years. That was pretty bad. I'm still living in the past. In my mind,
it's, you know, it's not 2024. But I'm also the founding editor of Jack from Magazine,
which is a quarterly magazine. I think for my money, it's the best looking publication in the
entire country. The design is incredible of this magazine. Like, it's like, you want to cut the
pages out and put them on the wall. I subscribed for one year just to get the print product and
it truly is beautiful. And yeah, I'm also working on a few books, but my last one was The Socialist
Manifesto, which yeah, as I work on my second book now, I'm not sure how I managed to write a book
in the past. Like, this is like, you know, five, six years ago. So there were still smartphones
and all these distractions. But for some reason, it was a lot easier than now.
Well, I look forward to the new book. And thank you so much for coming on this show,
Bosker. It's been incredible talking to you. Thanks so much. Appreciate it.
Well, thank you so much to Boskers and Carr for coming on the show. I hope you enjoyed
that conversation as much as I did. If you want to support the show, please head to patreon.com
slash Adam Conover. Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad free. You can
join our community book club. We have a community discord. We would love to have you join and hang
out with us for $15 a month. I will read your name at the end of this podcast and put it in the
credits of every single one of my video monologues, of which I should have some new ones coming out
for you very soon. This week, I want to thank Josh Beall and Mask When You Can Protect Your
Community. Thanks for, thanks for donating Mask When You Can Protect Your Community. That's a
great way to get me to read an important message on the air. We appreciate you Mask When You Can
Protect Your Community. I want to thank my producer, Sam Rodman and Tony Wilson. Everybody
here at Head Gum for making the show possible. You can find me online at adamconover.net to
remind you I'm going to be in La Jolla, California, San Jose, California, Indianapolis, Indiana,
head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates. And until next time, I'll see you on Factually.
