This week, as we continue into the climate module, in the main lecture,
one thing that you're going to see is something known as the diffusion equation,
which is a differential equation. In fact, it's a partial differential equation.
And what I wanted to do for this supplemental lecture was show you where this particular
equation comes from. So the diffusion equation describes how things spread. For example,
in other contexts, it's known as the heat equation. And it can tell you how temperature
flows from hot areas to cool areas. So if I were to bring together some kind of hot rod,
let's say it was 90 degrees, with a cooler rod, let's say 10 degrees, you can know that the
temperature will generally flow from the hot portion to the cool portion. Over time, that left
half gets colder and that right half gets warmer. But how specifically does this happen? How long
is it going to take if we take a freeze frame at a given point in time? What's the shape of that
temperature distribution across the pair of rods going to be? And what's nice is the same equation
that describes heat flow like this also describes all sorts of other diffusion. So for example,
in this lecture, we're going to focus on the idea of molecular diffusion, where you might interpret
the same graph as instead describing the density of a gas. If you were to have a room where that
density was really high in one part and really low in another part, over time the gas particles will
tend to move from the high density part towards the low density part on average. So the exact ways
that molecules interact with each other like this can be incredibly complicated to model.
And if you tried to get into that with all of the different forces at play and all the different
momentum interactions, I mean, you can try it, but you're going to get at something that's
dramatically more complicated than what we're going for here. But what we can do is say,
on the whole, the way that these molecules interact, we're going to model it as a kind
of random walk. So if you were to follow any individual molecule, and then just see what path
it traces out over time, and treat that as a random walk, and then we say, ignore the other
molecular interactions, pretend they do this random walk, but then don't account for how
they interact with each other. That's what's going to get us this diffusion equation. So in
particular, I should emphasize, we're not modeling things like pressure, where if you have, you know,
high density gas, part of what's making it move towards the low density region is the increased
number of collisions and the increased number of interactions happening in that high density part.
Here, we're just going to describe why that spread happens from the statistics alone of what a random
walk would give you. We're going to start by thinking of each particle as living in kind of a
pixelated, very discrete space, where at each time step, where time is also going to be treated
discreetly, it's going to randomly hop to one of its neighbors. So it might hop up or down or
left or right. And as time plays out, according to these random hops that happen, its overall
trajectory will be a random walk. And then what we'll do is we'll say what happens as this time
step gets smaller and smaller, and as the spatial step gets smaller and smaller, so that we see
how the discrete model gives rise to a continuous model. So just to see what this looks like,
let me play out that same animation, but with 100 different dots instead of just the one.
So here I have 100 dots sitting in that middle. And if I let it play out where with each time
step, they randomly, I think in this case, they either stay where they are, or they take a random
step to one of their neighbors. Then over time, you see this kind of spread of the molecules
across space. And the more we have, the more this looks like something that could be treated with
a continuous function. So let's say instead we were looking at 10,000 dots starting at that middle,
and we let it play out where again, each time step, each individual one is following this
relatively simple rule. Then over time, we get this spread across space. And what we want to know
is how can we describe that spread with a function or an equation that we can solve to get some kind
of relevant function. So modeling it with random walks and discretizing space, this is all in the
spirit of getting the simplest possible thing we can that's going to give rise to this equation.
And we're actually going to go one step simpler and say it's easier to think about things if they
just move in one dimension rather than two. So with each given particle, let's say at each time
step, there's a 50% chance that it hops one unit to the right, and a 50% chance that it hops one
unit to the left. So as time plays out, it simply hops around at random like this. For example,
we could use this to model a discrete version of the high density and low density graph that we
saw just a moment ago. So here I'm going to graph how many different particles are at each one of
our discrete units of space. So in this case, everything on the left has it looks like about
750 particles. And then I'll let each one of these molecules move according to the rule that I just
described. And what we're going to see is a diffusion from the dense part to the lesser dense part.
So for example, after one time step, about half of the ones on the right edge moved to the right.
And then after another time step, you know, another half of those are I guess based on the random
statistics of here, a little more than half moved one more step there. And all in all, as this thing
plays out, we see a general tendency to flow from the left to the right. Now, because this is a
discrete model, and because there's randomness at play, we see all this kind of statistical noise.
But the thought is, as you get the time step smaller and smaller, the number of molecules that
play larger and larger, and the spatial steps smaller and smaller, this flow can be described
with a nice continuous equation. One thing I should emphasize is that you often need to have a
separate rule for what happens at the boundary. So in this context, whereas usually each molecule
has a 50% chance of moving to the left, 50% chance of moving to the right. The way I have it coded
here is that if it's at the bound, then it can't move off the edge. The other 50% goes to staying
still. But you might want other boundary conditions. You know, in this context, when there's only a
finite number of molecules, you might want to just let them flow out into the infinitude of space,
or maybe you treat it periodically or all sorts of other things. But in the back of your mind,
know that whenever there's differential equations or the kinds of setups from which
differential equations arise, you do often have to think especially about the boundary.
So with all of that as a setup, let's go ahead and pull up some paper and actually describe
this a little bit more mathematically. So in this setup, we're thinking of space very discreetly,
almost as if it was divided into these different cells. And each cell has some number of particles
in it. And the rule is that at every time step, so after some time step delta t,
half of the particles, or maybe we should say each particle with 50% probability will move
one unit to the left. And then each particle with 50% probability will move one unit,
sorry, to the right, excuse me. And then the other half move one unit to the left. So,
you know, sometimes based on the statistics of it, maybe it's more than half that go one
direction or less than half that go to the other. But those are the probabilities at play.
And each one of these units of space has some number of particles in it. And I want you to
think of these as a density, which we'll denote with the Greek letter row. So row sub one is the
density at this point in space, the number of particles in this cell, row sub two is the density
at this point in space, and so on. So the question for us is, how does this density change with each
time step, if this is our rule? And in particular, how does it change if we know all of the densities
at a given point in time? Can we express that change in terms of, you know, the densities of
all of its neighbors? And this is not too hard to think about, but let's go ahead and write it out.
It'll be pretty elucidating. So this change, which in the back of our minds, we're thinking of as
something that happens because of time, as you take a step forward in time.
Well, let's also say this is a change at a particular index. So maybe we're thinking of
row sub five. Well, the things adding to it are those coming from the right and coming from the
left. So half of the particles to its right, about half of them, are going to be coming into it.
So whatever the density at row n plus one, the n plus one cell, half of those go into it. While
those are coming in, about half of the ones in your current cell are going out. So we're subtracting
off half of the density at the current cell. And then the other half of the density of the current
cell is also being subtracted off, but it's going in the other direction, which is worth writing
separately here. But we're recovering some based on whatever cell is to its left. So we're adding
one half of row n minus one. Now, when we've written it out like this, we can go ahead and
factor things out. And then I want to express it as a difference of differences. So if we just
kind of grouped certain terms together, row sub n plus one minus row sub n. And then we're
subtracting off row sub n minus row sub n minus one. And you can kind of think of what each of
these terms mean. This one here, row sub n plus one minus row sub n, is telling us the difference
in density across this barrier. That difference is determining the flux of particles between them.
And then what we subtract off is the difference in density on the left boundary. So it's kind
of like we're taking a look at the flux on the right and the flux on the left. That's what's
determining the net change of particles in this particular cell. And because this expression
is a kind of difference of differences, I'm going to go ahead and write it with a funny little
stand in notation here, where I'm going to call it delta, delta row around n. If you look at the
change in density across this right barrier, and then look at the change in density across this
left barrier, the difference between those two changes is the term that we want. But there's an
ambiguity in the notation here, because over here I'm describing a change in density with respect
to time. So maybe I should put a little subscript on that delta. But here we're describing changes
in density with respect to space. So I'll put a little subscript x there for those. So this right
here is the core idea that the change in density for each unit time, for each time step, is proportional
to this kind of second order change as we move spatially. Now ultimately we want to consider
what happens as this tiny time step approaches zero and as the steps in our discrete units of
space also approach zero, which is to say we want to understand what does this rule look like in a
continuous context. But for that we have to start talking about rates instead of absolute differences.
So what we really want to look at is something like the change over time for this density
divided by the size of that time step. That way we can take its limit and get some kind of derivative.
And then similarly on the other side what we want to see is not just the second order change of
delta, delta, rho, but we want to know that second order change divided by the spatial step. But it
should properly be the size of that spatial step squared, because if we take a second order
difference like this, then as we shrink down our spatial steps, the size of the second order
change will be roughly proportional to the square of the size of that difference. One way you might
think about this is if you were to take, you know, just the change across space of rho divided by the
size of those spatial steps, this will approach a derivative of density with respect to space.
And then if we did the same thing to that term, we said, hey, how much do you change as we take
little steps in space divided by the size of those steps? This whole thing will now approach a kind
of second derivative. But of course if we're going to be adding these new terms like the size of our
time step or the size of our spatial step to the equation, we've got to balance things out. So we
might say this whole thing should be multiplied by size of delta x squared all divided by delta t.
But let's go ahead and just wrap up all of this and also that one half as a constant. So
if we've got our change in density with respect to time, this is going to equal some constant
that I'll call d times this second order change with respect to space. So this constant d is called
the diffusivity and by definition in this context at least, it'll be equal to one half times, you
know, the step size for our particle squared divided by the time steps that we have. So if our
particles were taking larger steps with each one of these rules, then this diffusivity constant would
be larger, it would actually grow quadratically with that. And similarly if we had smaller and
smaller time steps, meaning the amount of time that it takes for each one of these jumps to
happen was smaller, that would also increase this diffusivity. So this is a constant that kind of wraps
up the idea of how quickly are these particles moving. But the benefit of wrapping all this up
nicely and having that constant out there is now we can say as we consider smaller and smaller
time steps, so delta t goes to zero, and smaller and smaller spatial steps, delta x goes to zero,
but we do it in such a way that this term d stays constant. So there's a relationship to
how our time steps and our spatial steps are going to zero. Then in the limit, we can think of these
as derivatives of a continuous density function. So on the left hand side, we would have the partial
derivative of density with respect to t. So the reason we're talking with partial derivatives
here is because there's multiple different variables that can affect density. It's a function
both of where we are in space, but also where we are in time. So you specify with respect to time.
And this is going to be proportional with this proportionality constant of diffusivity
to the second partial derivative of our density with respect to space.
So this expression is what's known as the diffusion equation. And despite having a fair
bit of fancy symbols in it, the idea is that it can arise from a very, very simple context,
in this case just a random walk model with particles stepping either to the left or to
the right with 50% probability. And moreover, this has a really nice readable meaning once we
start thinking of it with a continuous function. And for that, it might be best to turn back to some
of the animations. For any of you who haven't come across partial differential equations that
much before, it can be really nice to think of in terms of the graph of one of these functions.
So like I said, the same equation that's describing molecular diffusion, like we were just thinking
about, can also describe temperature diffusion. So here I have a graph of temperature with respect
both to space in one dimension and time. So on the one hand, you can think of this temperature
as changing in time. And you might have a little change to that temperature, del t, that's caused
by a change in time, del lowercase t, confusion of t terms here. And the ratio between those,
or more specifically, the limit of that ratio as you take smaller and smaller time steps,
gives us this partial derivative with respect to time, which is the slope of this graph in one
particular direction. But we could also take its slope in a different direction and consider the
change to our function that's caused by tiny steps in the spatial direction, look at the ratio
between those to get us a kind of slope, and then ask again, what's the limit as we take smaller and
smaller spatial steps. So what's neat about a partial differential equation is it's giving you
this kind of puzzle. It says the way that things change in one dimension is inextricably linked
with the way that it's changing in another direction. So in particular, let's go ahead and kind of
read off what it is that our diffusion equation is telling us. The second partial derivative term
with respect to space describes the curvature of this function, points where that second derivative
are negative tend to be curving down, meaning their points where the neighbors are lower than
what they are. So it makes sense that the molecules are going to tend to diffuse away or the heat
will diffuse away. Points where that second derivative are higher are points where this
curves up. So you can read this equation as saying the way that each point is going to tend to change
in time is proportional to the curvature at that point. And as you think about that for a given
function, that's actually kind of intuitive. And it has this nice effect when you imagine it playing
out of smoothing out the function because wherever there's curvature, especially sharp curves,
those are the ones that change the most quickly. So over time, the heat distribution or the molecular
distribution, whatever it might be, tends to get smoother over time. That's a consequence of this
equation. Now you might wonder how this whole setup changes if instead of thinking of one-dimensional
motion, we start thinking of two or three-dimensional motion. And the nice part is it actually hardly
changes at all. So if our cell, instead of having neighbors just to the left and to the right,
also had some neighbors to the top and the bottom. Well, we've already talked about how
this second partial derivative with respect to x term comes from looking at the change in the flux
across the right barrier to the flux across the left barrier. The difference between those two
is what gives us this net change to the density in that cell. Well, it ends up just being the
same thing, but in another dimension. You look at the flux between our cell and the top one,
the difference in density between those. And then you look at the difference in density
a little bit below that. And that difference of differences is going to tell us the net flux
of particles from its neighbors in the top and the bottom. So all that does to our equation,
if we walk through the same idea of the difference of differences and dividing by the spatial unit,
it ends up just meaning that we add a second derivative of our density function with respect
to y term. So in that context, we'd be thinking of a density function that is a function of
three different variables of where you are in the x direction, where you are in the y direction,
and where you are in time. So using partial derivatives here is just a way to kind of
tip your hat at the fact that there are multiple different things that might change that row.
And then very similarly, if we were doing this in three dimensions, you would also have to consider
the change in flux across the boundaries kind of in and out of space as you go. And this idea here
of adding together a bunch of second derivative terms actually comes up commonly enough that
there's compact notation for it. We write it as a upside down triangle squared of our density
function, rho. And the reason we write it that way is because you can also think of it as being the
divergence, so kind of this upside down triangle dot, of the gradient of rho. And even though it's
kind of a mouthful to say and even a lot to write down, this entire expression is essentially saying
how different is a given point in space from its neighbors? If the value of rho at neighboring
points of space tends to be higher than it is at a particular point in space, that's when this
Laplacian, this sum of second partial derivatives in all the directions, is going to tend to be
positive. And in the context of the diffusion equation, that could kind of make sense. If all
of your neighbors tend to have more particles than you do, your rate of change of density is going
to be positive. You're going to be gaining more from your neighbors than you're losing to them.
And again, there's kind of a nice way to visualize all of this. This operator where we're adding up
all of the different second partial derivative terms is known as the Laplacian. And here's one
way that you can think about it in terms of the graph of a function. So here I've got a function
where the input is two dimensional, it's got x and y coordinates, and then the output is just
a number. So we're graphing it above. And one way to think about this Laplacian is to say,
look at all of the neighboring points around a given point, consider the value of the function
at those neighboring points. And if the average value of the function at those neighboring points
tends to be higher than the center point, that's when the Laplacian is positive. And on the flip
side, if that average value tends to be lower, that's where the Laplacian is negative. And again,
in talking about something like diffusion, it should make sense that an operator like this
would arise. Because if at a given point, things are more dense around you, you'll tend to become
more dense. But if they're less dense around you, then you'll tend to become less dense.
Okay, so there are a couple last things that I want to bring up before wrapping things up here.
First of all, this effect that I've described of the molecular diffusion that's based just on the
random walks of the molecules themselves and the statistics at play there, is actually a relatively
small effect when it comes to looking at the overall diffusion in a gas. Most of it ends up
coming from larger scale phenomena, like the turbulent flows that you'll get. And that's the
kind of thing that arises once you start considering how these molecules interact with each other,
and all of the really hairy nonlinear complexities that are involved in that.
But the main thing I actually want to highlight is this kind of interesting dual nature to the
interplay between discrete models and continuous models. So here I showed how we can get this
continuous model for diffusion that arises from a really simple discrete setup. But what's funny
is then when we go and we actually use this diffusion equation to model things like climate
or whatever else, we find ourselves using computers to discretize what was originally described
continuously. So a simple equation like this one, you actually can solve it exactly. You can get
into Fourier series and stuff like that to get a nice perfect exact solution to the continuous
setup. But most differential equations, especially partial differential equations, you can't solve
directly. So what you do is you get the computer to discretize space and to discretize time and
just take different steps, changing the function according to the rule described by the differential
equation, which leaves us with this kind of funny situation where we have something that
we took pains to take the discrete setup and then turn it into a continuous one. And then by the
time we actually start doing something meaningful and physical with it, we just turn it right back
into a discrete one. You'll see the details for how this plays out in the main lecture today,
but the final thought that I just want to leave you with is that when you're thinking of these
discretizations of a differential equation, you know, pixelating it, approximating it,
it's not just a matter of giving us better conceptual understanding, but it also directly
maps onto the way that these differential equations are often handled in practice once you get to the
computational aspect of it.
