These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Use our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Foundations of Western Civilization II, a History of the Modern Western
World, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Robert Buchholz.
Dr. Buchholz is a professor of history at Loyola University of Chicago, where he has
been teaching for over 15 years.
He received his undergraduate education in history at Cornell University, where he graduated
magna cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa.
He earned his doctorate in modern history from Oxford University.
Dr. Buchholz is the author or co-author of several books, including The Augustine Court,
Queen Anne and the Decline of Court Culture, Officials of the Royal Household, 1660-1837
and Early Modern England, 1485-1714, A Narrative History.
He is the project director of the Database of Court Officers, which, when completed,
will contain the career facts of every person who served in the British Royal Household
from the Restoration of the Monarchy in 1660 to the Death of Queen Victoria in 1901.
Dr. Buchholz has received several awards for his teaching, including an Honors Program
Faculty Member of the Year Award and, most notably, the SUJAC Award for Teaching Excellence,
the College of Arts and Sciences Highest Such Award.
In 1997, Dr. Buchholz was named Prince of Wales Foundation Scholar for Architecture
in America.
Dr. Buchholz prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, biographical notes,
timeline and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1, The Importance of the West
Welcome to one of the great intellectual experiences of your life.
Now that rather bold statement has nothing to do with me and my limited talents.
It has everything to do with the subject that you have so wisely chosen to study.
Together, we will explore the history that has arguably done more to shape your world
than any other that of Western Europe from the 16th century to the present day.
Wherever we come from, whatever we believe, however we make a living, Americans are all
to a greater or lesser extent inhabitants of a world shaped by the last five centuries
of Western history and culture.
Over those five centuries, the Western world has seen a profound transformation which would
erase some questions.
How was it that the decentralized agrarian principalities of medieval Europe became great
industrial nation states?
How and why did absolutism rise, then yield to democratic liberalism?
How did Western science and technology create the first industrialized economies and reduce
the power of superstition and disease?
Why did Europe produce two great antagonistic economic systems, capitalism and communism?
If the great Westerners conquer half the world, then lose it.
And above all, has this legacy been, on the whole, positive or negative?
This course will explore the ideas, the events, the characters that molded the political,
social, religious, intellectual, cultural, scientific and economic history during the
most tumultuous period between the 16th and the 21st century.
We will examine absolutism and the challenges it provoked.
The Enlightenment, the French and American revolutions, the spread of constitutionalism,
liberalism, nationalism, the industrial revolution, socialism, imperialism, the Russian revolution,
two world wars, fascism, communism, decolonization, the collapse of the Soviet bloc, democratization
and the issues confronting contemporary Western society.
Along the way, we will encounter some of the most brilliant thoughts, the most fascinating
theories, the most intriguing people that the whole soap opera of human history has
to offer.
But Professor Buchholz, you might well ask, how relevant is that soap opera really to
the very real dramas that we face today at the dawn of the 21st century?
What do dead Europeans have to tell us about our problems?
In any case, isn't it our particular genius as Americans that we've escaped from the
past and that as the most powerful society in the history of the planet, we can make
our own reality?
I have a rather long answer for that.
In fact, the whole course is sort of an answer to that.
But let's start with a basic fact.
This is a course in European history.
I say that without apology.
I know and I hope that you know that there are many histories, many her stories, if you
will, that are deep and rich and well worth studying.
I mean, of course, those of the native cultures of East Asia, the subcontinent of India, Africa,
the Middle East, North and South America.
Many of us in North America can trace our backgrounds and ancestors to these non-European
cultures.
So, aren't they more relevant to our lives than the culture sometimes dismissed as that
of dead white men?
What do we have in common with French peasants of the 18th century, English workers of the
19th century, Russian soldiers of the 20th?
As I hope to demonstrate quite a bit as it turns out, but in the meantime, let me state
unequivocally that I don't teach this course either here, before the cameras and microphones,
or at my university because I think Western civilization or European culture is inherently
superior to or more advanced than or better than these other civilizations.
Quite frankly, I don't think it can rate civilizations like college football teams.
If you read the sports section in January, you know you can't even do that with any degree
of reliability.
If measured by technological advance, sure, Western civilization clearly wins, at least
right now.
But if we were to measure a society by, say, its ability to coexist with the natural world,
those of Native Americans and Mongolian tribesmen would actually look a lot better than ours.
So we fall back on the old question.
Why should we study the West?
Why should Americans concern themselves with the history of Europe?
Because like it or not, it was from Europe.
European thinkers, European traditions, European conflicts, European experiments that we in
the West derived our system of government, democracy for most Western countries, the
organization of our society into classes, our economic structure, capitalism, our literature,
much of our art and music, the media of our public discourse, television, radio, newspapers,
novels, are all by and large, for the most part, European invention, and above all, certain
core ideas, the notion that all men, and now all women, are created equal.
No taxation without representation.
The people united can never be defeated, a free press, a limited government, the idea
that those accused of crimes are innocent until proven guilty, and they are entitled
to be judged by a jury of their peers.
All of these ideas were developed during the course of European history.
All reached fruition during the period of our course.
Far from celebrating dead white men, it is these ideas which have given the world the
most powerful tools to fight the hegemony of European empires, and for all people of all
colors to achieve justice and freedom.
When oppressed or disenfranchised groups, the poor, women, racial or ethnic groups,
the disabled, gay men and women in any of the five continents argue for justice and equality,
they argue over and with these very concepts.
In the United States, they have been enshrined in the Declaration of Independence and the
U.S. Constitution, which were written by men like Madison and Jefferson, who were themselves
students of, in a sort of figurative sense, John Locke, Montesquieu, the histories of
17th and 18th century Europe, and indeed ultimately of the Magna Carta, Roman law, Socrates,
Plato, Aristotle, and the Bible.
If I may, I'd like to take just one American example, Martin Luther King.
Now most years I teach this course in the spring.
We usually begin around mid-January, which means that the first lecture, this lecture,
generally falls around the time of the Martin Luther King holiday.
Now it may seem off topic, but I'd like you to consider for a moment the life of this
one rather extraordinary American.
He was named for his father, a Baptist preacher, who was, of course, named for the great 16th
century Protestant reformer, Martin Luther.
He is Dr. Martin Luther King because he earned a doctorate at Boston University.
The university, in the sense of an institution which awards degrees or credentials for academic
knowledge, is, of course, a European invention, dating back to the Middle Ages.
King received his doctorate for dissertation on the German American theologian, Paul Tillich.
Now Tillich was a graduate of the University of Breslau in Germany.
In World War I he fought on the German side.
He was dismissed from his post at the University of Frankfurt and eventually forced to flee
Nazi Germany to America.
Eventually he taught at Harvard and the University of Chicago.
Can we agree that his life spans many of the great controversies and issues of the first
half of the 20th century?
King was also profoundly influenced by Mahatma Gandhi, the great Indian political leader,
and this is often forgotten, a graduate of an English law school in 1888.
Now I could argue that Gandhi's entire life boiled down to forcing the British to live
up to the enlightened democratic ideals that he had learned from them.
So here's another life with a profound impact on Western civilization.
King's writings and speeches, like Tillich's, demonstrate deep knowledge of Christian scripture,
but also the profound influence of much intervening culture.
They're positively drenched with the language and cadences of the King James Bible, Shakespeare,
the founding fathers, English common law, Jesus, and Gandhi.
His appeals to justice and equality and non-violence are rooted in similar fights in European history.
So here is perhaps, here is this great American, perhaps if one measures by what he accomplished,
the greatest American of the 20th century, of African descent and yet himself a product
through and through of Western culture and its turbulent history.
Now I don't want to oversell this idea of Europe's gifts to the world.
If you pay attention to this course or just watch the news, you will know that Europeans
have spent an awful lot of time fighting over and against these very ideas, and often killing
each other and other non-Europeans in wars, revolutions, and general inhumanity to their
fellow humans.
One notes continuing tensions often leading to ruthless violence in Northern Ireland,
the Balkans, Chechnya, and continuing European debates about antisemitism, immigration, public
welfare, Europe's role in the world, the latter in part a bitter legacy of European imperialism.
In the last lecture I want to suggest that the Europeans may actually have found their
way past some of these issues in a way which Americans might want to study.
But in the meantime, and in any case, despite these disputes and madnesses, I remain convinced
that European ideals of and debates about equality and inequality, justice and injustice,
class and power, reason and revelation, science and technology, remain our world's last best
hope to quote an American president himself named after an English county, himself steeped
in the King James Bible and the traditions of English common law, our last best hope
to achieve a society with liberty and justice for all.
That alone seems to me a pretty good reason for spending time on this story, these ideals,
and the place and the peoples which forged them.
Okay, fine, maybe I've sold you on this, but what gives me the right and the background
to tell you this story?
Well, I'm a professor of British history at Loyola University of Chicago where I've taught
this course every year for the past 15.
If you want to know more details about me, you can read them in the booklet or look me
up on the Teaching Company website.
In the meantime, I want to make two basic points about myself.
It should be obvious by now for my accent that I am an American.
This is very much a course presented by an American for his fellow Americans.
I like to think that my long apprenticeship in studying this people and this culture have
given me a pretty good insight into what Americans are likely to know and not know, what they're
likely to be interested in and not interested in, in about the history of Western civilization.
If I'm wrong, you'll undoubtedly find ways of letting me know.
The second thing I'd like to do here is issue a little bit of a disclaimer.
This course covers a lot of ground.
The whole of human life across an entire continent and its extensions across the globe for five
centuries.
Anyone who teaches this course has to know about 16th century theology and the 19th century
factory system and U-boats and British parliamentary politics and the experience of French peasants
and Russian serfs and the internal problems of Ulster and Kosovo and countless lands beyond
Europe.
So if I sometimes seem less than omniscient, I hope that you will forgive me as I too remain
a student of Western civilization.
Now on the other hand, if I often seem biased towards the west of Europe, Great Britain
in particular, that is more conscious.
That is a result of both circumstance and conviction.
The circumstance is that my specific area of research is Great Britain during the Tudor
and Stuart period, that's what Loyola originally hired me to teach.
This is the part of the world whose history I know best, I can't help that.
The conviction, though, is that of all the countries of the west, it is Britain.
British political and social institutions from which we in America have derived most
of our heritage, proof to follow.
So what's the underlying philosophy of this course, I've been sneaking it in on you?
That may seem an odd question.
Does history really need an underlying philosophy?
History's pretty straightforward, isn't it?
You begin at the beginning, you march on to the end, one darn thing after another in
chronological order, don't you?
50 years ago, I might very well have launched in with Ferdinand and Isabella Bankrolling
Columbus or Henry VIII beheading his wives, Louis XIV building Versailles, all these people
had issues, by the way.
I would then have carried on through the dynastic and political changes in Europe with special
attention to Napoleon and Bismarck and Hitler and Stalin and Churchill, and left off with
the fall of the Soviet Union and the foundation of the European Union.
That is, for most of the past 500 years, the history of the west has been told as if it
were the history of about 12 people.
That is, the history of kings and queens, premiers and dictators.
Now let me reassure you, you will be getting plenty of kings and queens and premiers and
dictators.
They are undoubtedly one of the reasons you signed up for the course, and you can't beat
them.
For ringing declarations and shocking pronouncements, Elizabeth I proclaiming, I have the heart
and stomach of a king, and of a king of England, too.
Louis XIV bypassing anatomy altogether to declare, I am the state.
Frederick the Great, one downing him after reading his Voltaire by asserting, No, I am
the servant of the state.
Audubon Bismarck, spurting even assertions themselves with, The great questions of time
are not decided by speeches and majority decisions, but by iron and blood.
The example of Louis XIV reminds us that kings and queens are great for scambol.
Henry VIII had his six wives, Louis XV had his mistresses, Madame de Pompadour's power
will feature in this course, or for fascinating anecdotes.
One of my favorites is Maria Teresa in 1740, Austria and Hungary, surrounded, beset by enemies.
She goes to the Hungarian diet with her children, and she holds them up to the diet.
She says, you must defend these children.
You must defend this dynasty.
One of those children grew up to become Emperor Joseph II, who was famous for telling Mozart
who had just written The Marriage of Figaro that it had too many notes.
Another great anecdote is that of Napoleon crowning himself.
Also Wilhelm I in the Ems Dispatch, and of course Churchill, Churchill, Churchill.
These are all great stories, and sources are great stories.
Within the past half century, historians have come to realize that they're not the whole
story, because at any given time there were between 80 million and 800 million other people
in Europe whose stories need to be told.
The problem with making this course a story of kings and queens, and in my view the problem
with biography as history generally, is that it creates the impression that the histories
of great nations were simply manifestations of the plans, the passions, and the whims
of about 12 or 20 people.
Now sometimes that may seem to be true.
Take one of the most important events described in this course, the Reformation.
It was obviously catalyzed by Martin Luther's doubts about the Catholic doctrine on indulgences.
But do we really believe that if Luther hadn't had those doubts, or kept his mouth shut,
that there wouldn't have been a Reformation?
Or that once he decided to nail the 95 feces on the Wurtenberg church door, the whole thing
happened like clockwork?
The first ignores a growing movement, often among ordinary people, that seems to have
wanted Reformation in Europe.
The second ignores the immense loyalty or inertia that many Europeans have for Catholicism.
But another way, historians have come to realize that European history is not simply the working
of the rulers on the ruled, but a sort of dance between them, in which each partner sometimes
led and sometimes followed.
They have also come to realize that great events like the Reformation, wars, revolutions,
often took generations to affect the great mass of the people, if at all.
One of the reasons Luther and the German princes could get away with starting the Reformation
was that most people didn't seem to notice that it was happening, nothing changed in
their churches for quite some time, or in their daily lives for even longer.
This reminds us that the great mass of people in early modern Europe never saw the king
or Cardinal Richelieu, cared not a fig for political or theological controversies, never
read or even heard of Shakespeare or Gerta or Marx, they occupied themselves the way
most of us do most of the time, in the mundane business of living.
It is they spent most of their time worrying about the same things that you and I worry
about, growing up, making friends, getting a job, finding the next meal, falling in love,
getting married, having children and then worrying for the rest of your life about what's going
to happen to them, the aches and pains and illnesses that come with life, and finally
dying and what that might actually mean.
The traditional history of wars and treaties, laws and scandals, the one we all learned
or were bored by in high school, ignored these stories, we will remember them.
By remembering them, we call the people of the past to live again, we give them a kind
of immortality.
We also remind ourselves that their problems were real, their solutions to those problems,
not necessarily as crazy as they can sometimes appear to be to us smug moderns.
And finally, we remind ourselves that we too will someday be the stuff of history.
Therefore, I will be at frequent pains to remind you that the history of Europe is not
simply the story of kings and queens or their ministers or their relations with diets or
parliaments or estates.
It is also the story of every man, woman and child who lived, loved, fought and died in
Europe during the period covered by our course.
This story must be told from the bottom up as well as from the top down.
The story must also be told side to side.
For European historians have also come to realize that their history cannot be understood
outside of the context of the histories of other places, Asia, Africa, or what historians
have increasingly come to call the Atlantic world.
I want to be clear about this, I repeat, this is a course about Europe.
Though America is the intellectual heir of the West, it is too big a topic for this course
to address American, Canadian, Mexican, Latin American or Caribbean history in any detail.
Though Africa, Asia and the Middle East have been profoundly influenced by the West, they
deserve histories of their own.
These places will enter our story as Europe enters theirs for good or ill.
Finally, this is a story that must be told with a view to what came before if only because
Europe didn't begin in 1500 or 1600.
In fact, what this course is really about is how Europeans stopped being medieval and
became modern.
To understand that, we have to address the medieval inheritance.
That brings me to the question of how exactly the course will be structured.
The course consists of 48 lectures divided after the one I'm giving now as follows.
First, eight lectures of background, I believe in a lot of pedestal before I erect my statue.
We'll begin with the geography of Europe.
We'll begin with a sort of Cook's tour of Europe as this course opens.
This lecture will explore how geography is, in my view at least, destiny.
That is, how and why climate and topography made the development of Western Europe different
from that of Eastern Europe, the development of Northern Europe different from that of
the South.
We'll then look at how European history has been affected by mountain ranges and rivers
and bodies of water and islands, and we'll look at Europe's relative distribution of
natural resources, water and timber and coal and other minerals.
Finally, to give you a better understanding of the physical environment inhabited by early
modern Europeans, we're going to pay a visit to a typical, well, non-existently typical,
village.
We will then continue with a lecture on the mental world of Europeans around 1500.
We'll examine their universe, their society, how their economy and politics were supposed
to work.
This is a lecture on a construct known as the Great Chain of Being.
That will be followed by six lectures on those developments between 1500 and 1600 or so, which
were actually destroying the Great Chain of Being, destroying the old medieval worldview.
Those six developments are Renaissance humanism, the rise of centrally governed nation states,
the discovery of the New World, the invention of the printing press, the Protestant Reformation
and the wars of religion that followed from it, the rational and scientific revolutions.
It's at that point that we're ready to begin the course proper in terms of the development
of modernity.
We'll follow the pedestal lectures with lectures on the crisis of the 17th century and a series
of wars sometimes called the Second Hundred Years War fought between Britain and France
following that crisis.
We'll talk about why there was such a crisis.
We'll talk about the French response to it, which was to embrace absolutism, the English
response, which was to embrace constitutionalism and why those two great political systems
had to clash.
Those clashes would last right into the 19th century and wouldn't end until Wellington
met Napoleon on the field of Waterloo.
At stake was the mastery of Europe, imperial control of the Americas and commercial control
of the Far East.
Those lectures will be followed by three on the Ancien Régime on the verge of the French
Revolution.
We'll talk about the European class system in the 18th century and how Europeans of all
classes lived their lives in the century before that revolution.
We'll talk about really basic mundane things like birth and upbringing and education, courtship
and marriage, disease and how people faced death.
We'll then talk about how the philosophers of the Enlightenment sought to reform the
Ancien Régime and we'll talk about two very different responses to their writings, those
of the enlightened despots of Europe, but also the American Revolution, which provided
a blueprint for other revolutions.
That reminds me that the next set of lectures, three of them, will cover the French Revolution
and its aftermath of the Napoleonic Empire.
This will be followed by five lectures on the Industrial Revolution, its causes, its
consequences, the three great intellectual responses to it, liberalism, romanticism and
socialism.
Followed by a lecture on the culture of the 19th century emphasizing the impact of science
on how people thought of man and how people thought of women.
This will be followed by two lectures on nationalism and its consequences.
These will follow revolutions in Greece, France, Italy, Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire
and culminate in the unification of Italy in 1861 and that of Germany in 1871.
But they will also take note of the fact that nationalistic tensions continued in the Balkans.
That will help to explain why, within half a century, Europe would be plunged into World
War I.
The next four lectures will cover the long-term causes of what Europeans still call the Great
War.
We'll talk about European imperialism, industrial rivalry during the Second Industrial Revolution,
the Anglo-German arms race, Bismarck's European alliance system which was designed to prevent
war, plus there will be a lecture on the cultural life of Europe at the turn of the 20th century.
This will be followed by four lectures on the Great War and the Russian Revolution, 1914
to 1918, in which I will make the argument that World War I did to Europe what perhaps
Vietnam did to our politics and our culture.
This will be followed by four lectures on the period between the wars, 1919 to 1939,
covering the Treaty of Versailles and the League of Nations, the Great Depression, the
rise of the Soviet Union, the rise of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, the Holocaust, the
approach of World War II.
We will then give World War II itself two lectures, followed by two lectures on post-war
Europe including its reconstruction, the Cold War, the end of European empires and colonialism,
the European embrace of democratic socialism, the fall of the Soviet Union, the rise of
the European Union, and a final lecture on the meaning of European history and civilization
in which I will muster all my wisdom and eloquence.
This course intends to provide an understanding of the political, social and cultural history
of Europe over these five centuries, but it will also explore the ramifications of that
history for the rest of the world, including the United States.
This is obviously a terrific story.
In the course of these 48 lectures, we will encounter numerous kings, presidents, premiers
and dictators, countless wars, a religious reformation, a scientific, a commercial, a
financial, and four major political revolutions, the English, the American, the French, the
Russian, and we might throw as well the Velvet Revolution which brought down the Soviet Union
and its satellites.
These small riots and rebellions and amazing works of art and culture, utopia, the prince,
the Sistine Chapel, Don Quixote, King Lear, the King James Bible, Leviathan, Principia,
the Saint Matthew Passion, the Night Watch, Candide, Diderot's Encyclopedia, Faust, Don
Giovanni, Beethoven's symphonies, Frankenstein, Madame Bovary, Impressionism and Realism,
the Ring of the Nibelung, Verdi's Falstaff, Mahler's symphonies, The Rite of Spring, the
Wetter's Karamazov, War and Peace, Ulysses, The Wasteland, The Trial, Werneke, 1984, Night,
The Gulag Archipelago, the lives of popes and kings but also subjects and citizens including
Ferdinand and Isabella, Henry VIII, Francis I, Charles V, Philip II, Columbus, Luther,
Galileo, Pascal, Descartes, Michelangelo, James I, Cardinal Richelieu, Gustavus Adolphus,
Cromwell, Malbra, a host of Louis XIII, XIV, XIV, XVI, Newton, Locke, Voltaire, Rousseau,
Frederick the Great, Catherine the Great, Robespierre, Napoleon, Nelson, Wellington,
Watt, Brunel, Bessemer, Adam Smith, Malthus, Ricardo, Bentham, Mill, Wollstonecraft, Wordsworth,
Blake, Shelley, Garta, Beethoven, Metternich, Garibaldi, Bismarck, the Kaisers, Nicholas and
Alexandra, Gladstone, Disraeli, Florence Nightingale, Darwin, Mendel, Lister, Koch, Hegel, Marx,
Wittgenstein, Freud, Kierkegaard, Wittgenstein, Keynes, Lennon, Stalin, Mussolini, Hitler,
Churchill, De Gaulle, Adenhauer, Brezhnev, the Beatles, Sartre, Fellini, Thatcher, Gorbachev,
Milosevic and John Paul II, as well as a few Americans who left their mark on the Western
world. If those names mean anything to you, you must be nearly as excited as I am to be
beginning this course. And if they don't, well, I think maybe you need it. Either way,
I welcome you to the history of modern Western civilization.
