Lecture 2. Geography is Destiny
Like I was saying, this is a course about modern Europe. Now, we could spend a lot of
time debating about what the word modern means, and in fact the first half of my course will
be offering my argument. As it turns out, Europeans spend a lot more time debating what
Europe means. For example, in the summer 2004, the website of the European Union asserted
that, quote, Turkey lies on the very edge of the European continent, and the prospect
of its joining the EU raises questions about where to draw the ultimate boundaries of the
European Union. In other words, they don't even know.
So for the purposes of our course, Europe means the continent west of Asia, from the
Ural Mountains in the east to Cabo de Roca, Portugal in the west, but also including the
Atlantic Islands to Iceland. From Capnordcun, Norway in the north to Gibraltar, Sicily,
Greece, and maybe, as we need it, Turkey in the south. That's about 4 million square
miles. By the way, unless you won your geography B in school, you might want to have a map
of Europe handy for this particular lecture. Now, depending upon the period covered, that
comprises about 35 countries. If this is a problem for the EU, it's one for the history
professor as well, especially the teacher of Western civilization. This course will
tell a story about Europe. In particular, it's rise to modernity. But it will not tell
every story about Europe, nor the story of every part of Europe. Rather, we're going
to be concentrating on those parts of Europe that tended to change most rapidly and dramatically
from their medieval origins politically, economically, and intellectually, and which
thus had the greatest influence over our own American civilization. In other words, we're
going to be concentrating mainly on Western Europe. Towards the beginning of the course,
we will spend a disproportionate amount of time on Italy, Spain, France, and the British
Isles, in part because these countries are most associated with those developments that
launched the modern world, the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Scientific and Rational
Revolutions, but also in part because these were the countries facing west and so had
the most to do with, well, what became us. By the way, the Americas, Africa, Asia, Oceania
will enter into our story often, for they have affected and been affected by Europe
profoundly. Later, we'll add Germany, Italy again, and finally Russia. So even as a matter
of how this course is organized, geography is destiny. What that means is that this course
may be disappointing to those of you wishing detailed information about any one particular
country. Particularly, that country does not have a history of pushing its neighbors around
or being pushed or of aggressively pursuing intellectual or economic dominance. So my
apologies to partisans of the Baltic states, or Scandinavia, Luxembourg, Andorra, or Monaco.
Even the Balkans for much of the first half of this course. These places will enter into
the course as they affect a larger story. Ironically, they are least likely to do so
when they behave or are left in peace. Let's begin with some basic geography.
One easy way to approach the geography and even the politics of Europe is to think in
terms of great axial divides, east versus west, north versus south. I want to stress that
these are states of mind and cultural categories as much as they are geographic regions. For
example, the east-west border in our course is going to shift. For the first half, western
Europe will comprise everything west of the Rhine. The British Isles, Spain and Portugal,
France, the Scandinavian countries, and I know that this is geographically incorrect.
Italy. Eastern Europe will include countless German states, Poland, the Baltic states,
the Balkans, and Russia. But as the course progresses, sometime in the 19th century,
that east-west dividing line is going to shift east to the Elba, or the older rivers. In
other words, as the region known as Germany, it didn't unify as a country until 1871, industrializes
and becomes a cultural leader. Looking to the industrializing west instead of the still-feudal
east, it will shift, it will become a western country. This is a sign that geographical
designations are constructs. They're based as much on culture as they are on physical
topography. Now, it's possible that we're witnessing a similar shift west today among
former communist nations and Turkey, that process of joining the EU. If the dividing
line east-west is as much political, economic, and cultural as it is topographic, this is
equally true for Europe's north-south divide, the Alps. North of the Alps, it's colder,
and agriculture involves heavy grains, and people excel at indoor activities. South of
the Alps, it tends to be warmer, they grow citrus and olive oil and wine, and people
can spend more time outdoors. But southern Europe is also culturally different, because
its location provided lots more contact with Africa and Islamic civilizations of the Middle
East. Other natural features have had a profound effect on European history. Mountains have
been important as barriers to invasion and trade. The Pyrenees separate France and Spain
crucially in the 17th century, and will do so again during the 1930s and the 1940s.
In Britain, the Pennines and the mountainous regions of Wales and Scotland held to explain
why those two countries are actually culturally and ethnically different from England. When
the Anglo-Saxons came over, they didn't get there. Forests also act as barriers. The
Ardennes and the Argonnes on the French and German border will figure especially in the
Franco-Prussian War and World Wars I and II. Less dramatically, because forests are isolated
and not conducive to arable farming, forests will develop their own unique economies. People
will live in small settlements, sometimes those settlements will be mobile. They will
engage in pastoral, sheep farming, not arable farming, and they will do a lot of hunting.
That's a problem, because forests in many European countries were owned by the king
and set aside for his own hunting. Therefore, to hunt was to poach, and to be a hunter was
to be an outlaw. So forest people, like gypsies, will be considered outsiders, almost a counterculture
for most of our course. People who got their livings at sea were also outside the mainstream,
fishermen, merchants, pirates. That reminds us that water defines much of Europe. So to
get back to geography or the physical aspect of geography, first, Europe is a peninsula.
In fact, it's a peninsula filled with other peninsulas. This implies that it is surrounded
on three parts by water, and that it has lots of natural harbors, which of course are conducive
to seafaring and trade. In terms of islands, there's one great group and numerous smaller
islands. The great group of islands is of course the British Isles. Now legend has it
that the fact that Great Britain and Ireland are a series of islands has prevented invasion
and preserved the unique cultures of these places. It's certainly true that in 1588,
the Spanish Armada, in 1805, Napoleon, and in 1940, Hitler were all thwarted in their
plans to invade Great Britain because of the English Channel. The failure of those invasions
was crucial, for it enabled a very important subset of Western values to survive, even
when the rest of the continent seemed to go the other way. But I always like to remind
my students that more often the English Channel has been a highway for both invaders and traders.
There have been lots of successful invasions of Great Britain, though when everybody knows
about as 1066, one we're going to talk about took place as recently as 1688, when the Dutch
under William III invaded. This has led to a never ending debate in Britain about the
degree to which Britain is part of Europe. The British can very easily now cross the
channel or cross under the channel to join their continental brethren. Iceland will be
an important stopping point on the way to America. Mediterranean islands will be strategic
for trade and for naval operations. Malta and Crete will be important naval bases, especially
during the World Wars. And then of course there's Gibraltar, the famous gateway to the
Mediterranean. One by Great Britain from Spain during the War of the Spanish Succession
at the beginning of the 18th century, the fact that the Union flag still flies over
Gibraltar is a real sore point to Spain and subject to periodic negotiations today. But
perhaps the liquid feature of geography that matters most in European history would be
rivers. European diplomats and historians have tended to see rivers as barriers. The
Rhine, the Elba, the Rubicon, the Danube, crossing the Rubicon is of course an important
phrase in our culture. But peoples on the move have tended to see them as highways,
as a means for early settlers to penetrate the countryside, the Germanic tribes penetrated
into the Roman Empire along the Danube, the Celts and Anglo-Saxons into England on the
Thames and of course the Vikings used the Rhine to get into the heart of Europe. Later, during
our period certainly, rivers have been very important for trade. The Tiber, the Rhine,
the Thames, the Sen have all been crucial to the economies of their respective countries.
Planes are crucial for agriculture. There are three great planes in Europe to know about,
the Eastern plane that stretches from East Germany through Poland to Russia, Eastern France
and the Midland plane in England, which altogether form Europe's bread basket. Planes, by the
way, are also very useful highways for invaders, as for example, the Napoleons and the German
armies would prove during the Napoleonic Wars and World War II.
Let us now turn to climate. Speaking latitudinally, Europe should be a lot colder than it is.
London sits at the same latitude as Hudson's Bay. Northern Spain, the same as Chicago.
Now, Northern Europe is famously cold, Scandinavia, North Germany, Russia. But Western Europe
is warmed by the Gulf Stream, and so Western Europe experiences a relatively mild climate.
The weather in England is always famously never very good, but it is also never very
bad, never very cold, never very warm, and so very good for growing heavy grains. Southern
Europe, warmed by the Mediterranean, is of course good for citrus, olive oil and winemaking.
I'd now like to talk about the demography of Europe, the population, the people that
make up this place and culture. If we were to take a field trip to early modern Europe,
Europe in 1500, the first thing we would notice is the relative lack of people, especially
as compared to today. Now, I should perhaps explain that because this course is about
the rise of modern Western civilization, and because I believe that modernity was beginning
well before 1700 or 1600, I'm going to choose as my baseline year here, 1500. In 1500, the
population of Europe was maybe 80 million. Today, it's more like 726 million. Now, that
implies tremendous growth, but of course, that growth was slower than any other continent
in the history of the planet during that time, and in fact, the population of Europe is now
in decline. Even during the Middle Ages, the population of Europe had actually once been
much larger, but in 1347 to 50, the Black Death, named for the black patches left on
the skin, and probably bubonic plague, though historians still argue about this, had swept
into Europe, killing anywhere from two-fifths to one-half of the population. What has that
got to do with 1500? Well, that population continued to dwindle for a century and then
only slowly began to grow back, beginning around 1450-1500. There are many things to
hold back the population of Europe as this course begins. Periodic recurrences of the
plague happened between 1361 and 1722, the last outbreak in Marseilles, France. There
was a host of additional bacterial and viral infections and exotic epidemic diseases to
which Europeans were prone. Remember that late medieval and early modern people had no
understanding of the connections among hygiene, germs, and disease. In fact, we oftentimes
don't actually know what diseases attacked them. They had weird names like the sweating
sickness or the bloody flux. They had no recourse to modern antibiotics. As a result, this period
has been called the golden age of bacteria. Famine was also something that Europeans had
to deal with, usually as a result of bad harvests. About one out of four harvests was bad, one
out of six so bad as to induce famine. While few people actually starved, the scarcity
of food lowered resistance to disease and that sent death rates up. Clothing and housing
were barely adequate to keep one warm and dry. Most people had one flee infested, suitable
in clothes and linen underwear, which was the only part of their clothing that they washed
regularly. They lived in flimsy huts made of mud and straw, as we'll see towards the
end of this lecture. They were subject to accidents, fire, drowning. Nobody knew how
to swim were very common. Violence was also common in the early modern period, war and
assault, as we will see. As a result, the average life expectancy in Europe in 1500
was about 30 years. The young were not spared. Infant mortality
ran at about 20% in the first year. This included 5% of babies which were still born and another
10% of children who would die by the age of 10. This has led some historians to postulate
that parents avoided emotional investment in their children, but that is a very controversial
concept among historians. What is certain is that this population only began to recover
again after 1500. The demographic disaster of the 14th and 15th
centuries had tremendous economic consequences. Ironically, the golden age of bacteria was
also a golden age for labor. You see, if you managed to survive the Black Death, that meant
you were part of a very small labor force that was very much in demand. These people
who were left could demand an end to serfdom, they could demand to be paid in wages, they
could demand lower food prices and lower rents. That was good news for agricultural workers,
terrible news for landowners who had to find other ways of raising money.
So what they did was they sometimes abandoned farming themselves. They would rent to peasants
instead and let them farm the land. Sometimes they throw the peasants off their land in
a process called enclosure and revert to sheep farming. This was a process that was much
criticized at the time, if you've ever read Moore's Utopia, you know this.
Finally, some aristocrats sought economic gain through war and plunder. The period before
1500 sees a rash of wars fought among kings and aristocrats. The Hundred Years War between
France and England, 1337 to 1456. The Wars of the Roses in England, 1455 to 1485. And
numerous smaller campaigns in Poland, Prussia, infighting among Italian cities, dynastic
and religious wars in Spain.
Where did people live? Well, less than 5% lived in them in towns. The largest city in Europe
in 1500 was Constantinople, but that had only 400,000 people. Only a few other cities
approached the size of, say, Birmingham, Alabama, or Stockton, California today. Paris had 200,000.
Naples 150,000. Venice 100,000. Then there's a clutch of smaller cities at about 50,000.
London, Amsterdam, Moscow, Lisbon, Madrid, Rome, and Florence. Note the high number of
these that are Italian. We'll come back to that.
Below that level of town, cathedral, county, and market towns might house several hundred.
I refer to places like Salisbury in England or Ram in France, Bruges or Dortmund or Lyon.
Some of these towns were not very urban, just a couple of cross streets surrounded by fields
with a market square. They would often swell during holiday periods or during markets to
twice their normal size. All depended on trade, and that meant they were vulnerable
to war and epidemic. In any case, most people didn't live in towns. The vast majority of
Europeans lived in villages of less than 500 inhabitants, sometimes as few as 50.
Let us imagine that in our quest to find the people of Europe at the beginning of our course,
we've trekked across forest and field looking for human habitation. We would find the continent
mostly empty and green, but perhaps in the distance we'd spy the towers of a castle or
a windmill or most likely the steeple of a village church. Any of these would tell us
that we had stumbled upon the estate of a great landlord known as a manor.
Now there are probably two impressive buildings on this manor. The first would be the Lord's
Manor House. It might be near the center of the village or up on a hill. Actually, if
this Lord has lots of manors, his manor house might be on another manor. It might be an
impressive castle or a big timber frame house. But the building that draws our attention
rather more magnetically, I think, is the church. The church was virtually the only
stone building in town, apart from that manor house. It was the religious center of the
village where Sunday services were held and holy days, about 40 of them were celebrated,
and all the important rites of passage of one's life, one's birth in baptism, one's
marriage in matrimony, and one's death at one's funeral. This church has no competition.
There's one church per village. In most of Europe, there's only one legal religion.
In the West, before about 1550, what we today call Roman Catholicism. In the East, one of
the Christian Orthodox faiths. So on Sundays, holy days, funerals, the entire village turns
up to hear the Latin or Greek mass performed behind an altar screen and to hear a homily
in the vernacular. Now, that homily is probably the only religious instruction and the only
news that these people get. And I want to make three points about it. First, most people
were probably illiterate, about 95% of the population. There were no newspapers, no television,
no radio, no internet. The local priest is almost certainly selected and remains employed
by the landlord. In other words, he's giving you the news, but he's giving you the news
the landlord wants you to have. He's giving you the company line. Now, after mass, there's
likely to be some sort of party, some sort of socializing, because Sunday and holy days
are the only days these people have off from working in the fields. There might be a church
ale or the feast associated with a particular saint. On Sundays and holidays, people would
engage in football and stick ball. They would drink ale while sitting on the tombstones
surrounding the village church. A couple of points to make here. One is that the entire
village is present, even past generations, because given the Catholic doctrine of purgatory,
there's a sense in which the living villagers are still praying for the people over whose
graves they're drinking the ale and playing the football. The second point to make is
that obviously the church is the social as well as the religious center of the village,
and contemporaries would actually have been shocked at the way we draw a line between
those two things. After the excitement of the day, we might accompany the villagers
down their one dirt track to their homes. These were likely to be small two room huts
or shacks. They're made of basically anything that will stick together, mud, straw, animal
manure. As a result, they're pretty flimsy and they're easily destroyed, washed away
anytime it rains. More prosperous peasants might at this stage be able to afford a small
house of stone or wood. All of these houses had thatched roofs and dirt floors. There
might be one wooden door, but few or no windows, because windows let in the cold. On entering
one of these hovels, our eyes take some time to adjust to the darkness because of the lack
of light and the smoke. When our eyes do adjust, we would see a hearth in the center. Now please
don't think of a cheery brick fireplace. Rather, I want you to imagine an indoor campfire.
This was the family's main source of light, of heat, its main emblem for cooking. When
the harvest were good, the average peasants diet was pretty well balanced if not particularly
mouthwatering. Rough brown bread, pea soup, cheese, meat on very rare occasions, ale or
wine. Looking around the room, we might spy some possessions. A few pots and pans, a table
and some stools, a chest, a candle holder, some candles, a few articles of clothing.
People slept on rushes or mattresses that were stuffed with straw. Admittedly, they
spent most of their time working outdoors, but at night and in the winter, they lived
their entire lives in these cramped conditions and very much in each other's company. In
other words, modern notions of privacy did not obtain. Everything that takes place in
a family would have taken place in front of the entire family. If the family was lucky,
it might have a second room to shelter the animals. Otherwise, during winter, you bring
the animals in with you. Animals are so valuable, so necessary for survival, that you can't
risk their death in a frost. They provide milk, cheese, wool that might keep this family
solvent even alive during the hard times of winter.
Finally, surrounding the village were the fields where the villagers worked. Let's talk
a little bit about work. The work of early modern European people was, of course, dependent
upon where they lived. In town, most people sold goods or services. Merchants acted as
middlemen for grain, cattle or wool. Craftsmen made and sold cloth, shoes, barrels, candles.
They shoot horses if they were blacksmiths. They ground grain if they were millers. To
do so, they had to belong to the local guild, which made sure that any merchant, any craftsman,
was a member. You couldn't trade outside the guild. They made goods by hand and on
spec rather than keeping a ready stock. You would go in, you'd order a pair of shoes.
They lived above their shops with their families and apprentices who helped with the work.
Port cities contained all the crafts and trades that we associate with seafaring. Fishermen,
shipwrights, carpenters, sailmakers, dock workers, customs officials.
In upland areas or swamps, people made their livings with sheep farming or dairy farming.
They spun wool, flax or hemp. They engaged in quarrying. But most villagers depended
upon arable farming. Surrounding the village would be a plot of common land. On this you
could graze animals and you could also play sports and games. Each villager's rented
land would be arranged in long strips in a haphazard manner. You might have several strips
that didn't connect with each other. You may be wondering why strips, why not the neat
squares that we today see from airplanes when we look down on farms? The idea behind the
long strip was that it was easier to plow because at the end of the Middle Ages the
standard beast of burden was an ox. I have to admit I don't have a lot of experience
with oxen, but I am told that oxen are not easily turned around. So you don't want to
be negotiating those four corners. You want to get behind that thing and plow all day
in one direction. Men went out to the fields where they hoed and they plowed and they sowed
and they pruned and they harvested and they winnowed. There they were joined by women and
children at peak times, planting in the spring and harvest in the fall. They worked sun up
to sundown which implied longer hours in summer, shorter but colder hours in winter. At other
times the women cooked and sowed clothes, fetched water, spun or wove wool and again
these supplemental sources of income might be the difference between economic or even
physical survival and poverty or death. Children looked after the animals and when older looked
after younger children. By the way this was a very common way for children to die because
animals can gore children. Accidents were very frequent. Before we leave these people
it's worth remembering that this manor and village would be their entire wound. Most
villagers never saw a city. They never touched the ocean. They never passed the borders of
their county. Being such a small community everyone will know everyone else and everyone
else's business. Peer pressure must have been immense and our modern notions of privacy
would have been entirely foreign to these people. All would have been conscious of the
fact that they were not masters of their own destiny. Well who was? The landlord on the
hill overlooking the village. He might live many miles away actually or he might be in
a manor house from which he could view his peasants but in any case he was the person
who determined their fate. The landlord might have been a great nobleman or a prosperous
squire or a minor gentleman. He might have owned many manors across the country or just
this one. He might have lived on the estate or at a great distance but what is certain
is that he had tremendous power over his tenants. First he commanded a vast income. He owned
nearly all the land in the neighborhood and that land yielded an income from harvesting
its crops, exploiting its mineral wealth and above all collecting the rents of the tenants
who lived and worked on it. In addition the landlord probably owned the best mill for
the grinding of grain and the best oven for the baking of bread. So he's got you coming
going. You pay rent to grow grain on his land that you then have to pay him to grind and
to bake. Control of the land also implied control of the church since it's probable that the
landlord names the priest and can also fire the priest from that local chapel. He could
demand from his tenants not only rents but taxes which could be paid in produce, wheat,
butter, a certain number of chickens a year. He had exclusive hunting and fishing rights.
He could demand corvées, annual service of a few days a year for building roads in the
upkeep of his estate. He could demand military service in time of war and even by custom
the sexual favors of any young woman on his land. If you know the plot of the marriage
of Figaro you know that this is an important plot point. These rights were called the draud
du senior or seniorial rights. Often the king would ask him to use his power to maintain
order in the countryside as a local official or paradoxically that local importance might
draw him to the capital to attend the king's council in court or to sit in parliament or
the estates general or the quartets. Now given his immense power it's probably fortunate
that medieval theology argued that great landowners had a paternal responsibility to take care
of their tenants. We'll talk more about that in the next lecture but in the meantime it
should be obvious that being a landlord gave tremendous power. Now if you remember one thing
about Europe in 1500 it should be that the people who mattered in 1500, in 1700 and beyond
own land. By virtue of owning land they owned all those little villages and all those little
lives of the people who lived in them. The second thing you should remember is that the
proportion of people who own land is very very small, less than 10% of the population.
The highest nobility with sometimes 30% of the land amounted to less than one half of
one percent of that population. All of which should raise a question. Why did the other
99.5% of the population put up with it? As my students like to ask me why didn't they
just rebel? As we shall see sometimes they did but by and large they did not. If they
did not it has something to do with the way they constructed their universe in their heads.
To explain why they didn't rebel I now have to talk about the great chain of being.
