Lecture 3 – Culture is Destiny
In the last lecture, we examined the physical and social topography of Europe in about the
year 1500.
The physical world, geographical reality, spatial relationships, and material culture
are all very important parts of history.
After all, didn't we say that geography was destiny?
But these things are less than half of the story, and sometimes they can be downright
misleading if you fail to understand how the people of a specific time and place constructed
their world mentally and made sense of it in their heads.
If I may be allowed a personal reflection to start this lecture.
One of my frustrations with the way history is done in the movies is that very often you'll
find a producer or director will brag about getting the costumes and the uniforms exactly
right and the last rivet down on the battleship that he or she is portraying in his film.
And then he'll fill his or her character's heads with thoughts they never would have
thought, their mouths with words they never would have spoken, because he or she didn't
take the time to understand their worldview, the mental universe that existed at the time.
We will not make that mistake.
If geography is destiny, culture is reality, or how people perceive their reality, a fact
which we as Americans need to know as we interact with other cultures and the values
of other peoples.
In short, you don't understand them if you don't understand their worldview.
This lecture will address the worldview of Europe circa 1500, which means that it will
deal with the medieval inheritance in philosophy and theology.
Specifically, it will lay out a late medieval ideal called the great chain of being and
the social hierarchy which it implied.
Now here I should probably issue a warning.
If you've ever taken a course from me, this goes for virtually every student I've ever
taught, you've probably heard a lecture on the great chain of being.
So if you want to skip to the next tape, you're free to do so.
This lecture will then explain why that ideal of society was under strain as our course
opens.
This will require discussion of Europe's economic base, its religious structure, and
its political arrangements at the end of the Middle Ages.
Put another way, I'm going to explain the universe to you.
As it was envisioned at least at the dawn of our course.
From celestial bodies down to earth, from God himself to the lowliest peasant, the
tiniest creature, the most infinitesimal pebble.
In 1500, most European men and women were what we would today call Roman Catholic, at
least in Western Europe.
That was about to change during the 16th century thanks to the Protestant Reformation.
But even in 1600, Protestants and Catholics shared or reacted against a common set of assumptions
dating back to the Middle Ages.
All European men, women, and children were taught, and so far as we know, all believed
in God.
Atheists as we know them were virtually unknown, perhaps unthought of, or perhaps it was just
a very dangerous opinion to express.
By the way, after about 1550 or so, the term atheist will generally mean a Protestant,
if you're a Catholic, or a Catholic, if you're a Protestant.
All Europeans believed further that God created the universe, that God ordered it, and was
active in its everyday working.
There's a special providence in the fall of every sparrow, as Shakespeare would have it.
When asked to describe their universe or its parts, late medieval commentators fell back
on metaphors.
One of their favorites was that of the body politic, that is, they thought of the English
or the French state as a body, with the king as the head, the aristocracy who bore arms
as the arms and shoulders, and the tenant farmers as and the poor as the legs and smelly
feet.
A more comprehensive metaphor, for it took into account God and all the creatures of
his universe, was the one which later historians have dubbed the Great Chain of Being.
When late medieval and early modern men and women thought about the universe, they generally
thought of it as the Ptolemaic universe, that is, as a series of concentric spheres
with earth in the middle.
Now Copernicus would publish on the revolutions of the heavenly bodies in 1543, but his ideas
would only begin to gain ground around 1600.
In 1500, most people still believed that, moving from the outer sphere inwards, there
were the stars, the planets, the sun, the moon, and at the center, the earth.
At the center of earth, the flames of hell.
Now as this implies, when they thought about the inhabitants of the universe, they thought
here too of a hierarchy arranged as follows, God who dwelt everywhere but especially beyond
the stars, as he is referred to in the Beethoven night, angels who traversed the heavens between
God and man, man who dwelt erect on the earth, animals on the earth but closer to it.
Now remember, these are Europeans, they don't have elephants, they don't have giraffes.
Most animals really are closer to the earth than most Europeans are.
Closer still if we ignore trees, and finally stones, literally on the earth.
Now there are five things that I want you to remember about the Great Chain of Being.
Number one, as should be obvious, those at the top of this hierarchy were closer to God
than those at the bottom.
Thus Church steeples aspired to heaven, the one at St. Paul's Cathedral in London
rose over 500 feet before it burnt down in 1666.
Thus when one attends a royal palace, one ascends to meet the sovereign, one goes up
to be closer to God.
Thus, the souls of the damned dwelt at the center of the earth in the molten core of
hell, farthest removed from God's mercy both spiritually and physically.
The second thing I want you to remember about the chain is I want you to note that humankind
is halfway down the chain, suspended between the angels and the animals.
Now contemporaries thought that each rank in the chain partook a little bit of the rank
above it and a little bit of the rank below it, and therefore man was both half angel
and half beast.
By the way, I'm going to be using the term man politically incorrect as it is because
that's the term that contemporaries would have recognized.
Theologians and moral commentators were deeply aware of the fact that man could go either
way, animal or angel.
In the words of Francis Bacon, a man's nature runs either to herbs or to weeds, therefore
let him seasonably water the one and destroy the other.
The third thing I want you to remember about the chain is that apart from God, each of
the ranks in the chain can be further divided.
Thus medieval theologians didn't just think of angels, anyone who's ever read their Dante
or was raised in the old Roman Catholic Church will know that there aren't just angels, there
are seraphim and caribam, thrones and dominations, virtues and powers, principalities, archangels
and angels.
The animal hierarchy too can be similarly divided, is not the lion the king of the beasts, is
not the eagle nobler than the sparrow, the whale greater than the codfish.
Plants too can be ranked from the mighty oak to the lowly fern and as for stones are not
diamonds a girl's best friend, far closer to divine beauty than say granite or grain
of sand and so with man.
Man too is arranged in a hierarchy as follows.
At the top the king, followed by aristocrats, great land owners, followed by peasants, followed
by laborers, followed by the very poor who might be said to have fallen out of the chain.
I'd like to examine each of these ranks in greater detail because they'll be the social
ranks with which we start this course.
First the king or in Germany the Holy Roman Emperor, he was the fount of justice and honor,
he was God's lieutenant on earth.
We're going to be talking a lot about kings in this course, I'm going to move over them
pretty quickly but for now it's important to remember that he is not only the most socially
prominent person but probably the wealthiest person in this society.
Below the king aristocrats and I'm going to divide these into greater aristocrats, usually
the titled nobility, those who bear the ranks of Duke and Marquis and Count or Earl and
Viscount or Baron and what I'll call lesser aristocrats, smaller land owners.
Now the first thing to note about these people apart from their titles is that they command
vast incomes, they are very wealthy and often have multiple estates.
Now the way they started off was probably as the king's soldiers and they earned those
estates through warfare.
They want to preserve their estates as much as possible and so they generally leave their
holdings to the eldest male, this is a process known as primogeniture.
They also used to build castles and many still live in them in 1500 but they are becoming
obsolete thanks to gunpowder and artillery.
From this point increasingly they build great chateau and country houses which emphasize
luxury rather than military preparedness.
Their great wealth and importance in the country imply office and also large retinues
of servants.
A great aristocrat is serviced by estate managers and chaplains, household servants
of all kinds, tenants, political allies, clients, hangers on, his web extends out into
the countryside, in fact it could be argued that his castle or country house is not just
a fortress but also a sort of mini court.
The lesser aristocracy would include knights and gentry in England, seniors in France, Hidalgos
in Spain, Junkers in Germany and the Schlakta in Poland.
Now these people usually have just one estate or maybe a couple.
Their income provides a comfortable existence facilitated by maybe a dozen servants.
But as our period wears on many of them particularly in Eastern Europe will grow poorer.
This rank oversaw the day to day local government for the king.
They service tax collectors, local judges, they raise the militia.
Below them come the peasants and perhaps I ought to say a word about this word which
has come to mean in our language anyone in a subservient position, anyone who has bosses
likes to think of themselves as being a peasant.
But in its original meaning it meant someone who lived in the country.
If you think of the derivation from Pais, Paisan, a countryman, Patria, you can only
be a peasant, you can't be a peasant and live in the city.
Peasants can also be divided between substantial peasants and for one of the better term lesser
or poorer peasants.
In England a substantial peasant would be called a yeoman.
This person would have pretty secure tenure of their land, either they own it or they've
got a lease that can't be broken.
They might have several farms, in other words the richest yeoman is often times as wealthy
as the poorest nobleman.
They might employ several servants to work them, but the difference is a yeoman farmer
will share in that work, he'll go out and help with the plowing and the harvesting.
These people made a small but a comfortable living.
In England they could vote for members of parliament specifically for the House of Commons,
they were the backbone of rural society, they served on juries, they commanded the local
militia.
Below them small farmers, what an Englishman might call a husbandman.
These are probably renters, they don't own land and their tenure is not secure.
They employ a few servants on a seasonal basis and they make very small amounts of money.
In England perhaps 10 pounds a year, to give you a sense of scale a great nobleman in 1500
in England might make several hundred pounds a year.
Cottagers, even smaller than husbandmen, rented a small cottage with no farm attached,
they make just a few pounds a year, they scrape by on the edge of subsistence.
Below them, below the ranks of the peasants, I would include laborers.
Peasants had no homes of their own, ebb in green acres for those of you who can remember
that show, these are people who probably live in the barn, they may actually do seasonal
work at various locations, they may not be permanently attached to a family.
Now in general, talking again about peasants, it was better to be a peasant in Western Europe
or a laborer than in Eastern Europe.
In Eastern Europe peasants and laborers were serfs, they were unfree, they were tied to
the land.
Now that always conjures up images, particularly in undergraduate minds of people with dog
collars literally, you know, leashed to the land.
What it means is they couldn't leave without their landlord's permission.
French peasants were free, but they had few rights and the law was harsher towards them
than it was towards aristocrats.
They were heavily taxed, unlike the clergy and nobility.
English peasants were free and had a vote, they were less heavily taxed.
Only below this level came the poor, who had no permanent residence or visible means
of support.
These last four groups below the level of the nobility form the bulk of rural society.
Now another point I want to make that's tied up in the point about divisions is that all
of these ranks can be further subdivided.
For example, the title nobility are divided into dukes, usually related to the king, marquises
or margraves, counts or earls in England, viscounts or vie comte in France, and barons.
And they were further divided by the order in which they received their title.
The chain also implies a hierarchy of genders as well as social rank.
In other words, every single family that we've described can be divided into men and women
followed by male children in birth order, followed by female children in birth order.
Biologically, women were considered to be inferior men.
Medieval theology followed Aristotle in believing that the female is a misbegotten male.
Theologically, a lot of scripture was deployed to justify that supposed inferiority.
And legally, socially and economically, the status of women in Europe was most often tied
to whichever man they belonged to, their fathers until they married and then their husbands.
If a woman lost her male, her father or her husband, she was considered quite dangerous.
European society didn't know how to handle unattached women as it didn't know how to handle unattached men.
The fourth thing I want you to remember about the great chain of being is that the top of each
chain is analogous to the head of the whole chain, God himself.
In other words, the king in the country, the father in the family, the lion among beasts,
and of course, the professor in the classroom, all represent God and were placed at the top
of their respective chains by God.
They wield God's power in his stead and so were to be obeyed as God himself.
Clearly, the people of Europe in 1500 or at least their leaders were obsessed with order.
Their fondest desire was apparently to be able to place every single human being, every
single speck of matter in its proper place in the celestial hierarchy.
By the same token, their greatest fear was disorder and that brings me to the fifth thing
I want you to remember about the great chain of being.
It was a chain, not a ladder.
To attack the chain, to disobey your superiors, to rebel against the king, to sass your professor
even to rise from the place that God had appointed for you to live your life was to commit treason
against God, was to violate the fundamental laws of the universe.
Now this is a very hard thing for us moderns to understand.
We spend all of our lives trying to do better than our parents.
We go to university for precisely that reason.
For any creature to attack its superior in the chain was to hinge the universe.
And so, in a famous speech from Troilus and Cressida, Shakespeare argues,
The heavens themselves, the planets and this center, earth, observe degree, priority and
place, insisture, course, proportion, season, form, office and custom in all line of order.
But when the planets in evil mixture to disorder wander, what plagues and what portents?
What mutiny?
What raging of the sea, shaking of the earth, commotion in the winds, frights, changes,
horrors, divert and crack, rend and deracinate the unity and married calm of states quite
from their fixture.
In the next few lines, Shakespeare alludes to the contemporary belief in astrology by
moving from the celestial to the earthly.
Oh, when degree is shaped, which is the latter to all high designs, the enterprise is sick.
How could communities, degrees in schools and brotherhoods in cities, peaceful commerce
from dividable shores, the primogenitive and due of birth, prerogative of age, crowns,
sectors, laurels, but by degree stand in authentic place.
But degree away, untune that string and hark what discord follows.
Clearly, European society in 1500 valued order, not opportunity, conformity, not originality,
community, not individuality.
When we consider that the top two ranks of the human chain represent only about one percent
of the population, yet own maybe 50 percent of the land in Europe and nearly 100 percent
of its power, it kind of makes you wonder, why didn't the other 99 percent just rebel?
Well, there were a few reasons for that.
One was education.
This is what they heard from the pulpit every Sunday.
Remember that every person is required to attend the parish church?
There were few or no competing religions and 1500 only Jews were tolerated in some parts
of Europe.
The local landlord appointed the pastor, having had this system drummed into them from childhood
on a weekly basis, having grown up being told it was God's plan, knowing no other alternative,
it became as instinctual to them as our belief in competition, ambition, and advancement
by merit is to us.
After all, it explained their universe, and it probably did prevent disorder that they
would otherwise have been impotent to stop.
As Shakespeare argues, the alternative might have been disastrous.
Imagine what a European from 1500 would think of our world.
Would he or she embrace its disorder, its constant change and opportunity?
Or would he or she find it violent, noisy, cold, and chaotic?
Would he or she not find plenty of confirmation of Shakespeare's prediction of anarchy and
misery?
But there's another reason that people accepted the Great Chain of Being.
Two related beliefs designed to mitigate the worst effects of inequality, paternalism,
and deference.
Paternalism was the belief, also taught from every pulpit in Europe, that those at the
upper end of the chain had a responsibility to look after those below them.
After all, if a father was like God, God was also a loving father.
If those at the top of the chain represented and, in some sense, embodied him, wielding
his power, surely they also bore his responsibility to look after his creation.
So, like God, those at the top of the chain were to watch paternally over their flocks
by offering military protection in time of war, justice in royal and manorial courts,
jobs and economic assistance in hard times, you're supposed to take care of your tenants.
In return, the common people below them in the chain were supposed to provide deference.
By deference I mean allegiance, obedience and respect.
They did this by attending church on Sunday, paying their taxes and their tithes to the
church, obeying God's law and the king's law and church or canon law, obeying their
landlords and their employers and their fathers and giving them the seniorial rights we mentioned
in the last lecture, a set amount of their produce, annual service to build roads and
repair farm buildings, refraining from hunting and fishing and even tolerating the sexual
advances of the landlord on their wives and daughters.
They also expressed deference by gesture, by bowing and curtsying and tipping their cap
and giving the wall.
Giving the wall means that if I happen to see a social superior walking down the street,
let's say I see the Duke of Richmond, I don't know why he's on foot, he can afford a carriage,
but here he comes and I'm clearly a social inferior because I'm just a college professor
and my job as he approaches is to give him the wall which means that I must step into
the street.
Now if we remember that the street was also the common sewer, that I am stepping into the
muck to show my respect for a social superior, could there be any more eloquent indication
of just how hierarchical this society is?
So, in the European universe of 1500, God was in his heaven, the king sat on his throne,
the landlord held sway in his manor house, fathers of all ranks were universally respected
and obeyed, and university professors retreated with the dignity and esteem, sadly lacking
in these our own times, and everyone else stepped into the muck at their behest.
Every man, woman and child in Europe knew where they stood and stand they would hat
in hand in the presence of a social superior, or would they?
It always strikes historians that when contemporaries write about the great chain of being and the
body politic, they always sound anxious.
The chain was an ideal, it represented order and stability, but life is never ideal or
neat or stable, it is messy and it changes constantly.
As our course opens, the ideal of the chain fit less and less well with the realities
of European life.
Take social mobility, the idea that everyone is supposed to be, is not supposed to move,
there's supposed to be no social mobility in the chain.
Take the nobility, these are supposedly the oldest, most distinguished families in the
realm who received their lands ages ago from the King for military service, except by 1500
an awful lot of those families had died out, and people tend to receive their land not
necessarily for going to war for the king, but by being a good royal servant at court,
by being a courtier.
These courtiers are very often viewed with resentment as upstarts.
Other nobles are deprived of their titles not only because their lines die out, but
because they've engaged in rebellion, perhaps performed an act of treason, which might mean
forfeiting their estates.
In other words, what I'm telling you is, noble families rose and fell all the time.
Peasants too rose and fell with fluctuations in the economy, fluctuations in the weather,
bad harvests, fluctuations in the season, laborers were thrown out of agricultural work annually
during winter, and of course some people fell out of the chain entirely.
That is, they didn't live on the land under the paternal care of the landlord.
This brings me to cities.
Cities had their own chains.
They would have a mare, followed by aldermen, burgers, a town council.
Underneath them, the citizens are freemen, that is, full members of the guild, followed
by journeymen and apprentices who were trying to break into the guild, followed by everybody
else.
You see, you can live in a city and not be a citizen.
Citizens were tied to the guild.
Now where does that fit into the Great Chain of Being?
Where would you put the mare of Bremen, who's probably a merchant?
Is he above a gentleman?
He works with his hands, which is something that gentlemen don't do.
What of a prosperous attorney or a struggling tailor?
Where do they fit?
The Great Chain said nothing about them for the basis of their status is wealth, not birth.
And that didn't fit the principles of the Great Chain of Being.
Cities are places where capitalism flourishes.
That means people can grow rich very fast, they can rise in status, and they can grow
poor very fast and fall in status.
Both played havoc with the notion that God placed people in immutable ranks.
Cities are also places of relative anonymity.
How does anyone know what rank you are?
You can move to a city, you can change your rank.
You can pretend to be something you're not.
Despite the parish in the village where everyone else knows everyone else's business, nobody
knows you in a city.
Thus the economic and social fluidity of cities make nonsense of the Great Chain of Being.
Then there's the church.
In the east, Russia and portions of southern Europe ruled by the Ottoman Empire, the Orthodox
churches were subordinate to the civil authority.
But in the west, the Roman Catholic Church had its own chain.
The Pope, followed by archbishops, bishops, priests, sisters, and the laity.
Which means that nearly every person in Christendom was actually part of at least two chains.
This church hierarchy too raised problems for the Great Chain of Being.
Take the papacy.
If the Pope was the vicar of Christ, and the emperor or king was God's lieutenant on
earth, well, which one outranks the other?
If these two leaders usually agreed, what would happen if they didn't?
In fact, during the Middle Ages, popes and kings had classed frequently over matters
like who appoints the bishops, and can a civil court try, or a criminal court, try a churchman
for murder or collect taxes from him?
Though the Pope had won a number of concessions in the 12th and 13th century, his prestige
took a big hit in the 14th.
First, when the king of France more or less abducted the papacy to Avignon between 1309
and 1374, this is known as the Babylonian captivity of the church.
During this period, many people viewed the papacy as a tool of the French monarchy, which
reduced the sense of the Pope being an impartial arbiter.
Then, during the Great Schism between 1374 and 1417, there was more than one Pope, two
separate sets of cardinals, elected popes.
Each one excommunicated the other.
During this period of time, some rulers actually encouraged the questioning of papal authority
by their subjects.
The upshot, of course, was a tremendous decline in the prestige of the papacy.
After the healing of the Great Schism, the church remained powerful and wealthy, with
thousands of parishes and clergy, but even that made the question more pressing.
What would happen if kings and popes disagreed more profoundly?
Then there were the problems of corruption and discipline and conscience in the church.
During the Middle Ages, there was a growing chorus that criticized both the doctrine and
practice of the church.
Groups like the Albigensians and the Lawlards and the Hussites attacked the clergy for being
too worldly, too concerned with power, too remote from the faithful.
The church regarded such groups as heretical, and kings generally agreed, often happy to
burn them at the stake.
But what would happen if kings and heretics ever agreed?
Stay tuned.
These problems were perhaps inevitable given the tensions between the chain and the reality
of medieval European life.
But as Europe entered the 16th century, it was beginning to experience six new challenges
that would eventually smash the chain and give rise to the modern world.
These were Renaissance humanism, the rise of centrally governed nation states, the discovery
of the New World, the invention of the printing press, the Protestant Reformation and its
corollary, the Wars of Religion, the rational and scientific revolutions.
I would argue that these six changes created the modern world.
Let us now turn to them.
