Lecture 4 Renaissance Humanism, 1350 to 1650
In the last lecture, we learned that medieval theologians had forged an ingenious and comprehensive
worldview called the Great Chain of Being.
The chain saw the earth and its inhabitants as part of a much wider universe arranged
in a strict hierarchical order and presided over by God.
The chain purported to place every creature, every object in the universe, in its proper
place.
Since that place had been assigned by God himself, to attempt to change one's place,
let alone to attack the hierarchical concept overall, was to commit treason against God.
The whole thing was, of course, a recipe for maintaining the status quo.
But as Europe emerged from the Middle Ages in the 16th century, its inhabitants were
neither sleeping nor standing still.
The internal stresses and contradictions of the chain were being exposed by all sorts
of new developments which had the potential to change how Europeans thought.
Slowly, subtly, Europeans were coming to question the received wisdom of the past and beginning
to move about, physically, socially, politically, and even in terms of religion.
As a result, they would soon become less superstitious, more rational, less accepting of authority,
more questioning, less apparently concerned with the next life, more with this one, all
habits of mind characteristic of modernity.
It could be argued that this tectonic shift began with a movement known as Renaissance
Humanism.
There's a great line in the medieval portion of Woody Allen's Everything You Always Wanted
to Know About Sex, but we're afraid to ask, which plays off our popular conception of
the Renaissance.
A court jester, played by Allen, is trying to bed the queen, played by Lynn Redgrave.
One of his come-on lines is something like, we'd better fool around now, because before
you know it, the Renaissance will be here, and we'll all be painting.
When you think of the Renaissance, we do tend to think of painting.
I'll get to painting and art in a minute, but far more important than lovely Madonna's
and commanding biblical statues was the set of ideas behind them.
What were the ideas behind the Renaissance?
Well every freshman knows, if you walk into class and say, what does the word Renaissance
mean, they can all still tell you, rebirth.
And then you ask them, what was reborn, and they're kind of lost.
Early in the 14th century, mostly in Italy, intellectuals and artists began to be more
interested in classical, that is Greek and Roman literature and art, for their own sakes.
Now in fact, university scholars had long been influenced by Greece and Rome.
Historians often refer to an earlier Renaissance of the 12th century, during which Islamic translations
of Greek and Roman authors made their way into Europe as a result of the Crusades.
Early curricula came to be dominated by the study of Roman law, Greek and Roman grammarians
and rhetoricians, and above all, Aristotle, who dominated the fields of philosophy, science,
politics, and aesthetics.
In fact, the great chain of being is itself very much an Aristotelian conception.
Many historians today would deemphasize the degree to which the Renaissance was a break
from the past.
They would argue that it was merely the logical outgrowth of these medieval trends.
But I would argue that something new was going on in Europe around 1500.
The medieval interest in classical writings had pretty much been limited to churchmen
and university academics, nor were those scholars terribly interested in what ancient
authors could tell them about themselves or about ancient times.
Rather, the medieval schoolmen were largely interested in pagan authors only for how they
could assist them in understanding and communicating in Latin, mastering the rules of logic as
laid down by Aristotle, all in order to assist in the great medieval project of comprehending
scripture and therefore ultimately comprehending God.
But towards the end of the Middle Ages, scholars and artists began to grow interested in the
great classical writings not only for how they could illuminate the Bible, or even
illuminate God, though both remained a preoccupation.
They became more interested in these authors for their own sakes and that of their own times.
We see, along with the traditional emphasis on Greek and Roman philosophy, rhetoric and
grammar, an increasing interest in Greek and Roman history, Plutarch's Lives, Livese
and Tacitus's histories, later Herodotus and Thucydides among the Greeks, as well as
an increased interest in Greek and Roman poetry, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, Virgil's Aenean,
the Odes of Horus, etc. for what they might say generally not only about how to speak
and write Latin, but about the human condition.
Something else is different in the century before 1500, whereas before these works might
have been studied in medieval universities to assist in biblical exegesis and rhetoric.
After around 1400 and increasingly as the century wears on, they were being read and
studied by kings, by nobles, by merchants, not only for their own sakes as stories of
value in their own right, but also for what they could tell Europeans of their classical
past and more specifically for advice on how to run states and how to live lives.
The movement is universally credited with starting in Italy.
Why Italy?
Well, Italy was perfectly placed to be the European entry point for goods from the fabled
east.
Now that meant fabrics, and it meant spices and medicines, but it also meant books.
During the Middle Ages, it had been Italian traders who had followed the crusaders into
the Middle East, and when the fighting subsided, established contacts with Muslim governments
and merchants in the Levant.
That's what contemporaries called the Eastern Shore of the Mediterranean.
This wealth, combined with a collapse of political control by the Holy Roman Empire, especially
in northern Italy, had enabled the cities of Italy to gain independence and to prosper
towards the end of the Middle Ages.
Do you remember how many of the most populous cities we mentioned in previous lectures in
Europe were Italian, Venice, Genoa, Milan, Naples, and inland Florence became a manufacturing
and those were all ports, inland Florence became a manufacturing and banking center.
The Medici were, in fact, the bankers to Europe.
Later, after about 1500, the rest of Europe would eventually either bypass the Italian
trade routes, one Portugal and Spain pioneered alternative routes to the east, or they would
seek to take control of them.
During the 15th and 16th centuries, both the Holy Roman Empire and the French fought over
control of Italy.
By 1559, the Spanish had largely won, putting an end to the independence of most Italian
city-states.
But in the meantime, the contact born of those wars would allow Renaissance ideas to spread.
In the meantime, you need to know that it was Italian wealth between 1250 and 1550 that
made the Renaissance possible.
Since that wealth was centered on cities, the Renaissance was, to start off with at least,
an intensely urban phenomenon.
It was also, I want to argue, an intensely human one.
Implied in the rebirth of interest in Greece and Rome, the Italian Renaissance saw a shift
away from the study of abstract heavenly concerns, theology, philosophy, towards the real, the
human, and the concrete.
History, after all, is full of the story of humans.
Poetry is full of human emotions, and in the case of Roman poets like Ovid, lots of sex.
I would also argue that this period and this moment sees a shift towards the individual,
all of which explains why we speak not just of the Renaissance, but of Renaissance humanism.
Now I want to be careful here, I don't want to overdo it.
Theology and philosophy continue to be growth industries for European intellectuals, especially
in Northern Europe.
Some of the greatest humanist scholars applied their more critical scholarship, in other words,
humanist methods, to more accurate translations of the Bible and early Christian texts in
the movement, which came to be known as Christian humanism.
Christian humanism is very, very important.
It will be especially important for the Protestant Reformation.
One good example of a Christian humanist is the great Dutch humanist Diziderius Erasmus.
He produced a new critical edition of the Greek New Testament, as well as a better Latin
translation, based on sounder classical scholarship than the old Latin Vulgate.
He also sought reform of the Church, through better education and scholarship.
These are all humanist values, as well as a critical examination of its core texts.
I would argue that even this, even though he is a Christian humanist, this reflects
a change in attitude.
From regarding the Bible and other texts received from the past as sacrosanct objects, to understanding
them as human documents, with a history, subject to human error, to which the individual could
bring his or her critical faculties.
So overall, I see Renaissance humanism, whatever else it might have been, as a valuation of
the human, the individual, perhaps not over the divine, but in tandem with it.
Now let's get back to painting.
To see that valuation, all you have to do is compare a medieval Madonna and child with
a Renaissance example, say one by Leonardo or Raphael.
If you look at the Renaissance example, you should be struck by the greater facial and
emotional expression, the amplitude and weight of the bodies these people eat.
The attempt to get the features of childhood just right, even though that attempt isn't
always successful.
When we see a medieval, excuse me, a Renaissance Madonna, we see a real individual with a history
and with feelings.
Another fine example is Michelangelo's David.
Obviously, this work glorifies the human body and glorifies youth, but on some level it
also glorifies this one particular person.
Now again, I don't want to overdo it.
Contemporaries would certainly have seen these productions as glorifying God and the humans
who were his creation and created in his own image.
So by glorifying humans, we glorify God.
But what strikes us today, I think, is how much they look like real human beings, people
that you might actually see walking down the street.
We see these qualities of individualism and humanity, the portrayal of human emotion,
in the late, as early as the late Middle Ages, which explains why it's so hard to draw a
line separating medieval from modern.
For example, the painter Giotto gave greater weight and presence to human figures as early
as the 14th century.
The sculptor Donatello studied classical masters and attempted to put their principles into
practice.
Italian architects rejected the Gothic and went back to simpler, classical forms in the
15th century, Michelosi's Medici Palace in Florence or Brunelleschi's Churches at San
Lorenzo and Santo Spirito.
In the 15th century, artists like Massaccio used mathematics and observation like contemporary
scientists to solve the problems of perspective.
At the same time, the sculptor Giberiti applied some of these same principles to the magnificent
east door for the Baptistry at Florence.
Fra Angelico and Fra Filippo Lippi emphasized brilliant color and sensuality as of it might.
Castagno and Da Vinci studied anatomy.
In fact, this period sees the beginnings of portraiture.
British Italian merchants and Renaissance princes wanted to be memorialized, and artists
like Montaigne and Botticelli sought to do so with flattery, but also with anatomical
correctness, again, a movement towards the human.
These trends culminated in the masterpieces of Leonardo, of Michelangelo, and of Raphael.
In particular, the work of Raphael, the School of Athens, is itself a tribute to classical
values because it enshrines all the great Greek and Roman philosophers and writers in
one great picture.
These ideals eventually spread north, certainly by 1500, thanks in part to the printing press
and also to war, culminating in the work of the great English portraitist, or at least
he was based in England, Hans Holbein, and Dutch and Flemish painters before Rembrandt,
like Rubens and Van Dyke.
By the way, one additional human element here.
Another hallmark of the Renaissance is that we know who these people are.
During the Middle Ages, artists and architects did not claim or sign their works.
It was all done for the greater glory of God.
Now, artists claimed and achieved far-ranging fame.
Vasari wrote the Lives of the Most Eminent Italian Architects, Painters and Sculptors,
published in 1568.
Imagine a world in which people want to learn about the lives of these people.
That says something about the elevation of the artist, but also an engagement with the
human.
The sculptor, Ben Venuto Cellini, wrote a famous self-glorifying autobiography, which
in the 19th century became an opera by Berlioz.
This degree of self-consciousness and self-promotion would have been unthinkable outside of academia,
academics always take credit, in the Middle Ages.
But I would argue that the real origin and the greatest impact of Renaissance humanism
came not in the visual arts, but in literature.
Beginning in the 14th century, Europeans began to produce a new kind of literature, less
about God and kings, more about human beings.
In Italy, Dante Alighieri is a sort of precursor with the Divine Comedy, which first appeared
around 1307.
Now, the Divine Comedy is clearly about celestial themes, but the stories, if you read the stories,
especially of those condemned to hell, they're intensely human.
They're written with an obvious veneration for Latin and for Virgil, but they're written
in the vernacular, so more people can read them.
But perhaps the real founder of humanism was Francesco Petrarcha, better known as Petrarch.
He wrote in both Latin and Italian.
His exemplary lives imitated Plutarch.
His Africa celebrated the Punic Wars.
He actually wrote letters to dead classical authors like Cicero, which shows you how much
he cared about them.
But at the same time, in his sonnets dedicated to his great unrequited love, Laura, he reveals
a full range of human passion and emotion.
Giovanni Boccaccio wrote the Decameron, 100 very human and kind of racy stories, told
by citizens trying to take refuge from the plague.
A century later, in 1487, Pico de la Merandola wrote an anthem for the Renaissance in his
oration on the dignity of man.
In this short work, he imagines God placing man in the great chain of being with these
words.
Adam, we give you no fixed place to live, no form that is peculiar to you, nor any function
that is yours alone.
According to your desires and judgment, you will have and possess whatever place to live,
whatever form and whatever functions you yourself choose.
All other things have a limited and fixed nature prescribed and bounded by our laws.
You, with no limit or bound, may choose for yourself the limits and bounds of your nature.
We have placed you at the world's center so that you may survey everything else in the
world so that with free choice and dignity, you may fashion yourself into whatever you
choose.
To you is granted the power of degrading yourself into the lower forms of life, the beasts.
And to you is granted the power contained in your intellect and judgment to be reborn
into the higher forms, the divine.
In Florence, Lorenzo di Medici, Lorenzo il Magnifico, patronized Italian poets as well
as painters and sculptors at his court.
These ideas spread beyond Italy as I indicated before.
In England, as early as the 14th century, Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales anticipates
later developments as Dante did.
Later in the 16th century, humanist works included the sonnets of Wyatt and Surrey,
Spencer's Fairy Queen, Shakespeare's Sonnets and Plays, Ben Johnson's Poems and Plays.
In Spain, Don Quixote by Cervantes at the beginning of the 17th century makes fun of
medieval notions of nightly conduct.
In France, the poetry of Ronsard, the political satire of Rabelais, the essays of Montaigne
wave the flag for humanism.
In music, church music remained important, and it's kind of hard to attribute any possible
classical influence to the increasingly polyphonic and complex masses of Palestrina or Thomas
Tallis or William Byrd.
But in secular music, we see a definite interest from the classical side.
Madrigals and motets were intended to be performed in people's homes.
This is the development of the songs of the medieval troupe-a-dors, but all show a classical
influence.
All based on Renaissance poetry.
They emphasize human conflict, love, war, etc., and above all the role of fortune, fortuna
in people's lives.
This is very classical, it's not religious at all.
Orlando di Lasso, Carlo Gisualdo, and above all Claudio Monteverdi, an Italian court composer
who about 1600 wrote the first still-performed operas.
All based on classical stories or fail, the return of Ulysses, the coronation of Popoea,
but filled with the human themes of love, loss, power, and ambition.
In England, about the same time, we get the songs and motets of Byrd, of John Dowland,
of Orlando Gibbons, all full of unrequited love, powerful passion, dramatically expressed.
The Renaissance humanism was about more than raw emotion, it sought to change the world.
Humanist scholars were highly critical of medieval education, which emphasized that
all knowledge was received from God through ancient authoritative texts like the Bible
or Aristotle.
Medieval scholars tended to believe that it was very hard, if not impossible, to add
new knowledge, and therefore scholarship should be based on deductive reasoning from the first
principles contained in these prior authorities.
Humanist scholars found the resultant scholastic logic to be shabby and intolerant and incapable
of fulfilling Pico de la Miranda's prediction.
Humanist scholars advocated a reform of education.
They wanted, in effect, less theology, less abstract logic, less rote memorization of past
knowledge, less narrow professionalism.
They were more open to new ideas, learning by observation and induction, more willing
to question first principles.
They wanted more emphasis on history, poetry, and ethics, which is, after all, the human
application of moral principles, and, of course, they wanted the examination and criticism
of original texts.
They also wanted a practical education, not just so that people would express themselves
better, but so that they would become good citizens.
Indeed, some humanist scholars advocated an education that went far beyond the clergy
to encompass even women.
The famous humanist scholar Roger Aschum, for example, became a tutor to Princess Elizabeth.
But this is a period of time when women, even down into the middle classes, began to receive
classical education.
They believed, like many classical authors before them, that education was necessary
to make good citizens.
This is actually a problem for the Great Chain of Being, because good citizens, the idea
that you would educate people for good citizenship, suggests the idea that people, citizens, can
actually participate in government, perhaps even make its decisions.
Admittedly, most humanist authors were more snobbish than this.
They wanted to restrict participation only to the well-educated.
And even that is revolutionary.
They see a world in which aristocrats were no longer supposed to be great warriors, but
were increasingly government servants, serving the prince in peacetime as well as war.
A good prince should, like the Medici or the Borgia, be well-educated himself and employ
those who were well-educated.
He should promote education in the arts, which would in turn promote civic virtue, but also
glorify his rule.
Practically speaking, that advice led to an explosion of Renaissance civic art and pageantry
in the 15th and 16th centuries.
We owe to this reforming impulse the great paintings and statuary of Venice, Florence,
and Rome, and later it would spread to the Court of Burgundy, the Valois Court of France,
the Tudor Court of England.
We owe to this impulse buildings like St. Mark's in Venice, Brunelleschi's Duomo in
Florence, St. Peter's in Rome, Fontainebleau and Manlouf in France, and Hampton Court in
England.
But the de-emphasis of God for the human in these equations, the emphasis on human concerns
and human capacities, also threatened to degenerate into a glorification of expediency over virtue,
practicality over idealism, and success over morality.
There's a dark side to Renaissance humanism, and we see these themes come together in two
of the greatest authors produced by the Renaissance courts of Italy, Castiglioni and Machiavelli.
One was light, one was dark.
Baltazar Castiglioni was a diplomat who wrote El Libro del Cortigiano, the courtier, in 1528.
This book captured the imaginations of contemporaries.
It was translated into many languages throughout the 16th century.
What Castiglioni's book, which is in the form of a dialogue purported to do, was to
explain how to rise into the innermost confidence of a great ruler, how to become, well, Vernon
Jordan or Leon Panetta or Carl Rowe or Karen Hughes, with all the power that that implies.
In short, it was the world's first dress for success book.
The successful courtier was to be impeccable in his manners, discreet in his behavior,
accomplished in the arts of peace and war, including dancing, poetry, horsemanship, and
swordsmanship.
This fit him to be a companion to the ruler, yet he was to wear these accomplishments lightly.
Above all, he was to insinuate himself into the confidence of his prince by never being
in the way or out of the way, telling him the truth, but in the most flattering way possible.
Indeed, the whole point of these skills was to flatter the prince into listening to good
advice, to flatter him into thinking that it was his idea all along.
Now, it could be charged that Castiglioni never really confronts the central tension
here between truth and flattery, between morality and success.
Anyone in active life can tell you it is next to impossible to embrace both simultaneously.
And in fact, the Renaissance itself only barely began to confront the fact that it is next
to impossible to be both godly and human at the same time.
Our next author would solve the problem by choosing one.
His name is Niccolò Machiavelli, and his great work is the Prince of 1532.
Machiavelli doesn't bother with courtiers.
He wants the prince to himself.
Now, in fact, he's part of a long tradition going back to at least Seneca of trying to
teach princes how to rule.
It's called the mirrors for princes tradition.
Machiavelli gives this old genre a new humanistic twist.
In keeping with the Renaissance de-emphasis of the divine and emphasis on the human, Machiavelli's
goal is not to make his prince a better person, not to get him into heaven.
It is rather to keep him in power on earth and to strengthen that power.
Machiavelli's reasoning is intensely practical.
I quote,
My intention being to write something of use to those who will understand.
I deem it best to stick to the practical truth of things rather than to fancies.
Many men have imagined republics and principalities that never really existed at all.
This is a hit at medieval school men, by the way.
Yet the way men live is so far removed from the way they ought to live that anyone who
abandons what is for what should be pursues his own downfall rather than his preservation.
For a man who strives after goodness in all acts is sure to come to ruin since there are
so many men who are not good.
Hence, it is necessary that a prince who is interested in his survival learn to be other
than good, making use of this capacity or refraining from it according to need.
As this implies, a prince must become adept at seeming to be and do one thing while actually
doing what serves.
Again I quote,
Therefore it is not necessary for the prince to have all the good qualities I have enumerated,
but it is very necessary to appear to have them.
And you have to understand this, that a prince, especially a new one, cannot observe all those
things for which men are esteemed, being often forced in order to maintain the state, to
act contrary to fidelity, friendship, humanity, and religion.
Therefore it is necessary for him to have a mind ready to turn itself accordingly as
the winds and variations of fortune force it, yet, as I have said above, not to diverge
from the good if he can avoid doing so, but be able to do evil if constrained.
Is this the freedom of choice celebrated by Pico de la Miranda?
Is this where we have ended up?
A philosophy which began by elevating human beings is now taken to this rational extreme
ended by reducing them and their lives to the level of well beasts.
There were numerous reactions to Machiavelli's work.
I could make an ahistorical argument here by saying that the two most profound ones were
actually written before Machiavelli.
They come from Erasmus and Moore.
Erasmus had written a satire of the human condition and bad government generally called
in praise of Folly, which was published in 1509.
Thomas Moore had written Utopia in 1516, describing a mythical land that was far more
just and rational than England.
In each, Renaissance princes were prodded by satire to remember their responsibilities
to their subjects and to the laws of God.
Now note that while Moore's and Erasmus's aims are a lot closer to the tradition of
the mirror for princes than Machiavelli, even here, the appeal is to critical humor rather
than abstract encomia.
In other words, these works too were far more humanistic than they were scholastic or medieval.
Perhaps the ultimate inheritors of this tradition, the humanist tradition, were the Englishman
William Shakespeare and the Frenchman Michel de Montaigne.
Shakespeare, in a series of plays written at the turn of the 17th century, explores
the human condition from seemingly every angle.
His rulers try out Machiavelli.
His courtiers Castiglione.
His comedies have the biting wit of Erasmus.
And his tragedies, the sympathy for the human condition of Thomas Moore.
Like any good humanist, Shakespeare knew his classical authors and many of his plays
center around issues of public morality that would have been familiar to Thucydides or
Seneca.
It is perhaps the ultimate humanist compliment to say that scholars and playgoers have studied
him in vain for hundreds of years trying to pin down exactly what it is Shakespeare believed.
Like Machiavelli's ruler, his sympathy seemed to shift with the winds.
Montaigne's essays, written in the late 16th century, similarly examine the human condition
from a wide variety of angles.
Like all humanists, he uses his critical faculties to advocate rational reforms.
For example, on the education of children advocates a reform of education along classical
lines.
But he also uses that questioning ability to be quite radical in of cannibals.
He makes what must have been a shocking suggestion that Europeans were no better than the native
peoples that they increasingly sought to conquer.
Note that in all these cases, the critical faculty of humanism seems to point to a kind
of moral relativism or at least a refusal to flag way for European culture as it then
existed.
Both would have been anathema to medieval thinkers.
To conclude, Renaissance humanism was a movement which urged human beings to be more practical,
less spiritual.
More learned, less ignorant.
More critical, less trusting.
More involved, less subservient.
More involved in the world, less concerned with what heaven thinks.
Its emphasis on the critical and the practical were dynamite for the old medieval worldview
and the great chain of being.
In Machiavelli, it found a prophet who would not only create a new adjective, but would
also continue to have a profound, if indirect influence on how statecraft is pursued.
We see that influence in the second great development which would attack the great chain
of being and give rise to the modern world.
The rise of nation-states centrally governed by ambitious, powerful, charismatic and Machiavellian
Renaissance princes and kings.
