Lecture 5 Renaissance Princes, 1450-1600
In the last lecture, we learned that as Europe and its inhabitants were emerging from the
middle ages, they embraced a kind of humanism that encouraged them to be better educated,
more critical of received wisdom, and more practical. Obviously this struck at the links
of the great chain of being. Now you might think that Europe's rulers would fear such a movement.
As we'll learn in this lecture, they embraced it. They were the first individuals to be liberated
from the chain. Now to understand that, we have to understand the medieval background to kingship.
When we think of medieval kings, I think we tend to think of them as being very powerful.
But in fact, they weren't absolute. Think of King Arthur, the perfect medieval king and legend.
But we always think of him as being surrounded by the knights of the round table. And if you know
the legend, you know that not all of those proved loyal. In fact, a medieval king had to answer
to or balance quite a few groups in the great chain of being. First, there was the church.
Remember that the king was subordinate to God and his angels. All medieval commentators agreed that
his power came from God and could be revoked. That power was transmitted to him at his coronation
when the Pope crowns the Holy Roman Emperor. The Bishop of Ram crowns the King of France.
The Archbishop of Canterbury crowns the King of England. In effect, the church is saying,
you're not a king unless we do this. The church also runs other ceremonies. For example, the
ceremony of homage and fealty by which new vassals were created. And every Sunday, the church
preaches from its pulpits about how great the king is and how people should obey him.
Now this implies the king's power could be revoked. During the Middle Ages,
emperors and kings had sometimes been excommunicated, in effect deposed. Since this was a declaration
that they were outside the church, this could happen over issues like could a lay ruler tax the
church? Were churchmen subject to his courts? Could he choose his own bishops? This became known
as the Investiture Controversy. In fact, it was a bishop, Archbishop Stephen Langton, who wrote
perhaps the most famous and enduring statement limiting the power of a lay ruler, the Magna Carta
of 1215. If we recall that popes claimed to be at the top of the great chain of being two,
it should be clear that medieval kings had a great challenge in proving their superiority.
Then there's the nobility. Remember that while medieval kings created and enriched nobles in
order to have an army, that meant that they thus created, enriched and empowered, a whole class
of people who might rise up to challenge them. In the feudal system, kings and emperors created
nobles by making them vassals in the religious ceremony of homage and fealty.
In this process, they endowed them with lands, also known as fiefs, in order to support mounted
knights that the king could call on for his defense. But if you've purchased any of the
medieval courses sold by this company, you know that the nobles so created often used their land
and wealth to build up independent power bases, hence the modern use of the terms feudal and fiefdom.
They sometimes used their armies not to maintain the king's peace,
but to attack local towns or even the king himself. There are lots and lots of examples.
For example, in France, the Hundred Years' War was such a rebellion, it raged from 1337 to 1456.
A series of weak kings were taken advantage of by their vassals, one of whom, the Duke of Normandy,
also happened to be the king of England. That didn't stop him from claiming the throne of France
as well. He was supported by other powerful French nobles like the Duke of Burgundy and
the Duke of Orléans. At the war's height, in 1421 to 22, the French king, Charles VI,
was forced to dispossess his own son and sign the succession over to the English king, Henry V.
When both Charles and Henry died in 1422, both were succeeded by an English infant
who became Henry VI. England too had witnessed numerous baronial rebellions in the Middle Ages.
In fact, the reason Henry V was king was because his father, the Duke of Lancaster,
had rebelled against a previous king, Richard II, and established the Lancastery in line.
Between 1422 and 1456, the dispossessed crown prince, or Dauphin of France, inspired by Joan of
Arc, rose up, had himself crowned as Charles VII, and drove the English out. That, in turn,
weakened the prestige of the English king, Henry VI, inspiring his own barons to rebel against him
in the Wars of the Roses, 1455 to 1485. If you want to know more about this, I highly recommend
Professor Buchholz's course on English history. In the Holy Roman Empire, the barons had long
operated independently of the emperor. A series of wars and rebellions in the Middle Ages had
left the emperor an elective first among about 300 equals. That is, Germany was really made up of 300
individual states, electorates, kingdoms, duchies, margarvits, bishoprics. Basically, the thing was
a feudal nightmare. The only places where the Habsburg emperor had any real power were his
ancestral lands, Austria, and the Low Countries. Spain, too, came out of the Middle Ages as really
a series of petty kingdoms in which great landowners had immense power. When Ferdinand of Aragon
and Leon married Isabella of Castile in 1469, the nobles, fearing centralization if they succeeded
to a united Spanish throne, rebelled for 10 years. And even after that was over, this still left the
independent Muslim state of Granada to the south. Now, to fight the barons, kings needed soldiers.
They needed to hire mercenary armies, soldiers you paid occasionally, rather than endowed with
land permanently, as in feudalism. Clearly, the feudal thing didn't work, hence the rebellions
we've talked about. Now, where are kings going to get the money to do this? Very early on, they
figure out that they need to ally with towns and their merchants. Towns are wealthy from trade,
and they're frequently attacked by the local baron, so they're a sort of natural ally in this fight.
In return for loans and taxes, kings would give towns military protection, certain rights enshrined
in charters, the right to hold a market, the right to pass their own laws, the right to be exempt from
some taxes. But eventually it became too cumbersome to summon the delegations of merchants and nobles
to court to explain the king's difficulties on an ad hoc basis. And so in the 13th and 14th centuries,
European kings began to institutionalize these meetings with both their barons at their loyal
barons and townsmen. In England, that institution came to be called parliament. In France, the
estates general. In Spain, the Cortes, and in the Holy Roman Empire, the diet. But only in England
and Spain did the tradition develop that laws and taxes had to be approved by these bodies.
Now, let's look at this whole system from below. Imagine you're a medieval peasant.
The king or the emperor is remote. He's off in London, Paris, Innsbruck, Vienna. The local lord
or baron is far more powerful in your life. He's probably your landlord. If you're a townsman,
you're probably more concerned with your standing in the local guild. Everywhere, the local church
is more involved in your everyday life. In other words, from the point of view of a medieval king,
this whole system was an unholy mess. It was nothing like the states we live in today,
which tend to assume that our loyalty is absolute. People paid loyalty all right and attention,
but they paid it and taxes to the church here, the nobility there, the town of townsmen,
and the king would get his as long as there was time and enough money to go around.
Now, as Europe approached the year 1500, all this began to change. A generation of new,
stronger monarchs arose, whose goal was to suppress baronial rebellions and subordinate
the church in aristocracy. They wanted to make themselves more secure and, indeed, ultimately
absolute. They would establish the modern conception of the nation state with unitary loyalty owed to
that state. These were the Renaissance princes. Now, I would divide these actually into two groups.
One generation, the founders of the firms, and a second generation of inheritors and exploitors.
First, the founders of the firms. All across Western Europe, new dynasties emerged from out of
the carnage of the civil wars that we just talked about. In England, out of the Wars of the Roses,
emerged first the Yorkists under Edward IV in 1461, and then more permanently Henry VII
established the Tudors in 1485. In France, the Valois family re-established themselves
after the disasters of the Hundred Years' War. First Charles VII and then Louis XI ruled France
from altogether 1422 to 1483. In the Holy Roman Empire, the Habsburg power revived under Maximilian
I, who ruled from 1493 to 1519. And as we've seen, Spain was united by Ferdinand and Isabella.
Isabella pre-deceased Ferdinand. He ruled until 1516. Even Portugal united under the House of Aviz,
and in Hungary, Matthias Corvinus ruled strongly from 1458 to 1490.
Now, all of these rulers had the same goal. They wanted to establish or re-establish their dynasties
on a more permanent, stronger footing and reduce theronial opposition. How would they do that?
First, they pursued strategic marriages to heal wounds within the country and gain friends abroad.
Ferdinand and Isabella married their children into powerful European royal houses.
One daughter, Isabella, married into the Portuguese royal house. Another daughter,
Juana, married Philip, Duke of Burgundy. A third daughter, Catherine of Aragon, married Prince
Arthur Tudor of England. All of these marriages will be important later. Henry VII of England,
descended from the Lancastrians, married Elizabeth of York to unite the two warring houses of the
Wars of the Roses. He then married his son, Arthur, to Catherine of Aragon of Spain.
Now, when Arthur died in 1501, Henry, fortunately, or perhaps not so fortunately,
had another son, another Henry, and as you probably know, that didn't work out so well.
He married a daughter, Margaret, into the Scottish royal house, and then Henry VII's
other daughter, Mary, was married to Louis XII of France. Now, earlier Charles VII, who you'll
remember had restored French royal power during and after the Hundred Years' War,
had engineered the marriage of Margaret of Anjou into the House of Lancaster,
and as we have seen, his descendant, Louis, married an English princess.
Maximilian, the Holy Roman Emperor, married Mary of Burgundy, allowing him to claim one
of Europe's richest kingdoms. By the way, you can see the sort of almost spider web of entanglement
of these royal families, all jockeying for position, all hoping to acquire new territory.
Maximilian married his son, Philip of Burgundy, to Juana, the daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella,
thus linking the Habsburgs with Spain. That'll be important later. The Habsburgs also married
into the ruling house of Hungary. All of these marriages bolstered new or weak lines and gave
them powerful friends and increased their holdings. The second method of the founders of the firms
was to suppress baronial private armies and ruthlessly. In France, Charles VII reduced his
barons to obedience after driving the English out. He still faced a powerful Duke of Burgundy,
Charles the Bold, whose predecessors had supported the English. In 1474, Louis XI assembled a
coalition against Burgundy and killed him in battle three years later. Louis thus annexed Burgundy,
but the Low Countries went to his daughter, Mary, who married Maximilian. Well, if you're
getting a little confused, that's okay. Louis was known as the spider for his ability to weave
this sort of web, and his patient intrigue. He eventually gathered into that web en jus, mine,
and Provence, all areas that had stood outside French royal power before. In England, Henry VII
put down a series of rebellions and held nobles in bond, that is, they had to deposit a certain
amount of money with him for future good behavior. He banned private armies, virtually ending feudalism
in England, and he expanded the powers of the Justices of the Peace, or JPs. These were small
landowners. They couldn't challenge him. By expanding their power, he took it away from the great nobles.
Maximilian subdued rebellious cities in the Netherlands, which had supported France,
and he recovered Austria from the King of Hungary, as we'll see later. Ferdinand and Isabella revoked
grants of land and power to the nobles. They demolished noble castles. They gained control
of noble military orders. You'll notice that these Renaissance princes are very jealous of
their own rights, but they're perfectly happy to trample over the rights of others. Now, in fact,
I want to be fair here. In Spain's case, they eventually opted for a rather more decentralized
government in which local areas were given great autonomy and ruled for the king and queen by a
viceroy. The third method of these Renaissance princes was to ally with cities for loans and
money. They were also careful to hire humanist educated lawyers and merchants as well as nobles
to counsel them. A fourth method was to work with assemblies. In Spain, Ferdinand and Isabella relied
on the Cortes of Castile, composed mainly of merchants, to try criminals and restore order.
Fifth, they maintained good relations with the church. Who needs trouble here?
All of these rulers were enthusiastic persecutors of heretics and religious minorities. They believed
that only a subject who worshipped as the king worshipped could be a loyal subject. Most infamously,
Ferdinand and Isabella established the dreaded Spanish Inquisition in 1478 to root out conversos,
converted Jews, and moriscos, converted Muslims, who practiced their religion secretly.
They persecuted Moors and Jews ruthlessly. From 1492, 150,000 Jews were expelled, leading to the
loss to Spain of many physicians, artists, and government officials. From 1502, Muslims were
expelled as well, and in 1602, even converted Muslims had to leave. In return, the Pope granted
to Spanish kings the title of most Catholic and the right to name bishops and abbots in Granada
and the New World. A sixth method of these rulers was to drive out foreign invaders and consolidate
holdings, as well as impose religious uniformity. As we've seen, Charles VII drove the English from
France. Henry VII sought to secure his northern border with Scotland. Ferdinand and Isabella
drove out the Moors and persecuted the Jews. They also fought to safeguard their possessions in
Italy. They reformed the army and established a great diplomatic corps that would come in handy
later. Maximilian won the succession to the throne of Bohemia and Hungary by the Treaty of
Presberg in 1491. Membray told you he'd married into the Hungarian royal house. He, in effect,
became a foreign invader. A seventh method of these kings was to reform their governments and
legal systems to be more efficient, more professional, more in control of the localities, and more
responsive to the monarch. Ferdinand and Isabella issued the edicts of Montalvo, reducing the size
of the council to make it more flexible, reforming financial agencies, emphasizing promotion by merit
rather than birth. Henry VII, like Henry VII in England, they relied on small landowners,
the Hidalgos, to police the localities. Henry VII reformed the administration of Crown Lands.
Both he and the Holy Roman Emperor created new tribunals to determine local disputes. Henry's
is famous as the Court of Star Chamber, which was actually a pretty fair and popular court in
contrast to its reputation. Finally, in keeping with the Renaissance, these princes had a healthy
respect for education, the arts, and propaganda. They employed scholars and artists. They sought to
be portrayed in the best possible light and their enemies in the worst. For example, supporters of
Henry VII actually repainted pictures of his predecessor, the usurped Richard III, to exaggerate
his hunch back. He himself commissioned a complimentary history of his reign by Polydor
Virgil. Now, the next generation I want to talk about built upon this foundation. I call them the
inheritors and exploiters. Where the pioneers laid the groundwork, their successors grew even more
powerful. And here, we meet some of the most famous people in European history, names to conjure
with. In England, Henry VIII and Elizabeth I, who between them dominated that part of the island
from 1509 to 1603 with an intermission in between. In France, Francis I and Henry II, who ruled from
1515 to 1559 altogether. In the Holy Roman Empire, Charles V, 1519 to 1556, who also,
thanks to the Habsburg marriage of his predecessors, was ruler of Spain as Charles I from 1506
to 1556. When he was succeeded by his son, Philip II, who ruled until 1598. These are some of the
most famous names in European history. All of them were well trained for the task at hand. Even more
than their predecessors, they had terrific humanistic education. Charles V was tutored by the future
Pope Adrian VI. Elizabeth I by the famed education reformer, Roger Aschum. Francis I by Christophe
de Longuil. All spoke several languages, including Latin. The cosmopolitan Charles V used to say,
I speak Spanish to God, Italian to women, French to men, and German to my horse. Henry VIII played
the lute and composed. He was an excellent dancer and horseman. He befriended Thomas More in Erasmus
before he killed the former. And he wrote a famous treatise against Martin Luther, for which the
Pope named him Defender of the Faith. Admittedly, that didn't turn out so good. Francis I was a
renowned man of letters and book collector under his patronage, Weon Boudet, established a great
French royal library. Francis was a terrific patron of the arts, as we'll see below. And he
was a better wrestler than Henry, which he proved at a summit meeting in 1520. All continued the
policies of, first, suppressing elite power. Henry VIII with his frequent executions. Charles V
launched a war against recalcitrant Protestant barons and towns. All engaged in strategic marriages.
Henry VIII with Catherine of Aragon and later Anne of Cleves. He also tried to marry his daughter to
Charles V and his son Edward to Mary, Queen of Scots. Francis married the daughter of his predecessor
and Philip II married a host of important European women, including Mary Tudor of England.
All of these rulers suppressed heretical groups. Thus, it was Charles V who summoned
Martin Luther to answer charges of heresy before the Diet at Worm in 1521. Thus, Henry VIII
wrote against the ideas of Martin Luther and later persecuted Lutherans, even as he inadvertently
launched a reformation. See, subsequent lectures. Thus, Francis I, after a flirtation with Protestantism,
clamped down in 1530 and thus Philip II imposed the dreaded Spanish Inquisition on the Netherlands
and continued it in Spain. Once when he was reproached for his cruelty, he replied,
if my own son were guilty like you, I should lead him with my own hands to the stake.
All of these rulers engaged in administrative reforms to make their state more efficient.
In England, the king's chief minister, Thomas Cromwell, launched a virtual Tudor revolution
in government. Under his leadership, Parliament passed the Act in Restraint of Appeals, which
said in 1533, this realm of England is an empire. That didn't mean that England had a lot of territory,
it didn't. What it meant was that the English king had the right to exercise
Imperium, complete control and command within his realms. This is a foundation of the modern
nation state. Cromwell also passed an active union with Wales in 1536 and proclaimed Henry King
of Ireland in 1540, though admittedly that did not go so well. He reformed crowned finances
and the administration in generally. In France, Francis I established an effective inter-council
and he punished rapacious government officials. He reformed government finances,
but he also expanded the sale of government offices to raise money.
Charles I chief minister in Spain, Francisco de los Cobos, established an efficient
administration based upon councils coordinated by a council of state, so all these rulers had their
method. Feeling their oats, they also changed policies of consolidation into expansion. Charles
V and Francis I fought for control of Italy during the 1520. Henry VIII attempted multiple
invasions of Scotland and France. Spain, of course, expanded overseas in the New World,
CNX lecture. Faced down an Islamic challenge in the Mediterranean by defeating a Turkish fleet
at La Ponto in 1571, conquered most of Italy, annexed Portugal in 1580 when the Portuguese
royal house died out, and dabbled in the politics of England and France. In terms of religion,
these rulers sometimes sought to dominate the church as well. The classic example, of course,
is Henry VIII. Unable to secure a divorce from Catherine of Aragon from the Pope in the 1520s,
he declared himself supreme head of the Church of England in 1534. Now, note that he did so
because he thought that only a son, a Renaissance prince, could maintain his power. And it is,
of course, one of the great ironies of history that the successor who did so best was his daughter
Elizabeth, who boasted of having the heart and stomach of a king. Francis I also increased
his power, securing a concordat with the Pope in 1516 that gave him the right to appoint all
bishops and abbots in France. Charles V made war on Protestant barons in the War of the Schmalkaldic
League. We'll talk about that in a later lecture. As Charles I of Spain, he gained complete control
over church appointments. And even the Arch-Catholic Philip II demanded and got papal support for his
attempted invasion of England in 1588, even though the Pope, sixth as the fifth, fought the plan
lunacy. Renaissance kings were also obsessed with projecting their power through propaganda. They
commissioned buildings and poems and paintings. Henry VIII confiscated and rebuilt Hampton Court
and White Hall. He patronized the great portraitist Hans Holbein, and he employed a stable of writers
to support his royal supremacy. Elizabeth I was more frugal, but she still had herself celebrated
in elaborate festivals, progresses through the country, poetry, and other written propaganda.
Usually she was good at getting other people to pay for it. Charles V employed painters like Titian.
Francis I built the Louvre, and the castle and hunting lodge at Chambord, possibly originally
laid out by Leonardo da Vinci, and he turned Castle Fontainebleau into a major palace, commissioning
some of the greatest artists of the day, Fiorentino, Andrea Del Sarto, Vignola, and Cilini.
In reforming their governments, stamping out opposition, and taking control of the arts and
even of religion, the princes of the Renaissance sought to redirect the loyalty of their subjects,
and indeed were founding the modern conception of the state. Loyalty was owed to them alone.
Anyone who did not understand would pay a high price. In 1536, Catholic peasants in Northern
England rebelled against Henry VIII's break from Rome, and they were ruthlessly suppressed.
The Jews and Moors of Spain and the nobles of French Brittany all learned the same lesson.
Charles V's failure to stamp out Protestantism at the end of the war, the Chmokaldic League,
is sort of the exception that proves the rule. What happened was his best general,
Maurice de Saxony, defected to the other side, and so Charles was forced to conclude the piece of
Augsburg in 1555 by which Protestant states within the empire were allowed to remain Protestant.
As a result, the Holy Roman Empire would remain divided in religion, and also decentralized
in political authority. The Holy Roman Emperor was never successful in establishing the same kind
of authority as the other kings we've talked about. That will be crucial.
Why did other rulers succeed in creating strong nation states where the Holy Roman Emperor failed?
Well, one reason hinted at above is obviously religious disunity, but another is money,
for money makes the world go round. After all, if you're going to be one of these kinds of rulers,
you need money to build palaces, to commission propaganda, to raise armies, to overall nobles,
and suppress rebellions and project your power abroad. And that, of course, raises the question,
so where are you going to get it? The obvious answer is taxes. But medieval rulers had had to
exempt nobles and the church to gain their support, and they didn't want to go back there.
That left peasants, but peasants didn't have any money. In France especially, the king taxed
the peasantry very hard. That will be important later. You could tax towns, they were cash cows.
But if you overtax them, you run the risk that you'll kill the goose that laid the golden eggs.
Moreover, every time you summon townsmen to parliament or to the estates general to ask them
for money, you're actually giving more power and more memory to that institution. That was fine,
except that every time parliament met or the estates general, the first thing on their minds
would be, well, you're meant to see, how did you spend the money last time? They might actually
refuse to grant you more money or make the grant contingent upon you redressing some grievance
or something. That will never do. Now this will be a huge story in European history. For now,
you need to know that for the princes of the Renaissance, it was an annoyance.
Was there no other source of ready money available to European rulers? Well, we've already seen
several examples. There was the Italian example. Remember the Italian city-states had grown wealthy
on trade. We've already seen that every one of the major powers noted above, except England,
tried to control Italy. Why? Because they wanted that trade. Such trade created great wealth.
Among other things, it endowed great banking houses, the Medici in Florence,
allied with the kings of France, the Fougers, who worked with Charles V and Augsburg. The Medici
became so powerful that they eventually married into the French royal house. Then there's the
English example. Henry VIII, for member, had taken over the Church of England. We'll talk
more about that in a subsequent lecture. But among his policies was to confiscate its land.
In 1534, he began with anates, taxes paid to the Pope. He then confiscated the smaller monasteries
in 1536, the larger ones in 1539, hospitals and other charitable foundations in 1547.
The idea was to increase the king's revenue. Unfortunately, this only tempted Henry to
spend more money on wars and palaces. He ended up going so far into debt that he needed quick cash,
and so he eventually sold this land, which could have endowed the monarchy for centuries
to his gentry and nobles. That made them rich and the English king poor.
Stay tuned. That's going to be another important story.
Then there's the French example. Beginning with Louis XII, the French just sold government
offices. That raised cash quickly and it stimulated social mobility, but it also expanded the size
of government, and it meant that service was based on wealth, not merit, which of course
could lead to unsuitable office holders. Then, finally, there was the Portuguese example.
Portugal was a much poorer country than any of the others we've been talking about,
but in the 14th century they came up with a brilliant idea. The Portuguese prince, Henry the
Navigator, wondered whether you could possibly bypass the Italians and sail to the east and
develop trade with them by going around Africa. Now, there's a great question here. Does Africa
actually end? Portugal's attempt to answer that question would lead to a rash of state-sponsored
exploration. Anybody with a boat wanted to try? It would also lead to the discovery of what was
for Europeans a new world.
