Lecture 7, The Protestant Reformation, 1500-1522
In the last lecture, we saw how Renaissance princes sought financial independence through
exploration, colonization, and trade in the Far East and the Americas.
We also saw that the European rediscovery of the Americas revolutionized life in both
the old world and the new, decimating native populations but enriching European monarchs,
particularly that of Spain.
Towards the end of the lecture, I pointed out that for a variety of reasons, geographical,
political, perhaps even cultural, Germany, the Holy Roman Empire, failed to participate
in the land grab.
In part because he failed to do so, the emperor would remain more of a feudal lord than a
Renaissance prince, more of a first among equals than an absolute monarch.
That would have dramatic consequences for the political and religious history of Germany.
For a weak emperor would be powerless to stop what is arguably the most important challenge
to the great chain of being yet, the Protestant Reformation.
Since before the fall of the Roman Empire over a thousand years previously, Europe had been
officially, and primarily, Christian.
Christianity was declared the official religion of the Roman Empire in 391.
European Christianity had split into two camps in 1054.
Western Europe acknowledged the Bishop of Rome, the Pope as the Vicar of Christ.
Eastern Europe, Russia, and also Christians in the Ottoman Empire, acknowledged an Orthodox
patriarchy based in Constantinople and recognized even by the Ottomans as speaking for its Christians.
Having said that, the Patriarch of Constantinople never had the administrative authority of
the Pope.
The Russian Orthodox Church, under a Patriarch in Moscow, had broken away in 1448.
Others would break away to form separate Orthodox churches in the 19th century.
For the rest of this lecture, we will concentrate on the Western or Roman Church, for that is
the church at which the Reformation was directed.
During the Middle Ages, nearly every Western European state established Christianity as
its official religion.
Rulers were crowned by the church.
Bishops were often the ruler's chief advisors and administrators.
The church taxed a high proportion of people's income.
The state enforced religious conformity by requiring all subjects to attend weekly mass,
and in some countries by tolerating a separate system of church courts for moral offenses
like drunkenness and adultery.
Since the end of the period, they burned heretics at the stake on behalf of the church.
During the Middle Ages, Jews, Muslims and other minority groups suffered discrimination.
Before turning to the church's internal problems, let us examine their situation briefly.
From 1295, the Roman Church decreed that Jews should wear badges as a mark of humiliation
for their refusal to convert to Christianity.
They were prohibited by successive church councils from employing Christians, appearing
in public on Easter or other Christian holidays.
But because Christians were forbidden from lending money at interest, Jews found a niche
as bankers and moneylenders.
Of course, that's a niche that only increased their unpopularity in some quarters.
They had also been made scapegoats for the Black Death between 1347 and 1353.
Jews were marginalized in ghettos in places like Venice and other Italian cities.
Where they were not marginalized, they were expelled from England in 1290, from France
in 1306 and again in 1394.
In Germany, the situation varied from place to place.
Remember, Germany is not a unified country during the Middle Ages or early modern period.
Medieval Spain had been very tolerant of both Jews and Muslims.
Jews developed a thriving culture there in the Middle Ages.
They were often physicians, tax collectors, but of course that too bred popular resentment.
Muslims or Moors, as they were called in Spain, were allowed to own property and worship freely.
But as we have seen, Isabella and Ferdinand, as part of their state building process, harried
them out of the country.
Possibly 100,000 Jews were dispersed first to Portugal, but then Manuel I decided on
forced conversions in 1497, and so they left for Greece and North Africa, hence the population
there of Sephardic Jews.
The Moors were driven out, first to ghettos, and then enslaved, and then driven out of
the country entirely.
The glorious exception to this really sad picture is Poland, where many Jews found a
non-hostile home.
There they created vibrant communities, they became scholars, merchants and physicians.
The justification for other states' mistreatment of the Jews and Muslims was, of course, that
in the eyes of European rulers, they not only rejected the truth of Christianity and perpetuated
damnable error, just by virtue of disagreeing with the ruler, they were disloyal.
For the same reason, the state persecuted Christian heretics, but this begs the question
of why there were heretics at the end of the Middle Ages.
While church and state generally worked hand in glove in both east and west, as we have
seen, there were clashes in the latter during the Middle Ages.
Western European kings were increasingly uncomfortable with the church's claim to have given them
their power.
Did it not come directly from God?
Kings resented papal power and authority.
Kings wanted sole jurisdiction in their lands.
They didn't want to have to split it with church courts.
For example, they wanted to be able to prosecute clergy for civil crimes, generally under church
jurisdiction, as things stood then.
Kings resented papal power to tax their subjects.
They wanted all the money.
Kings wanted to appoint bishops, since they were also royal vassals and officials.
Now, kings and popes had repeatedly clashed on these issues, and as we have seen, tensions
grew worse during the Renaissance, as the former seemed to have studied their Machiavelli.
After all, the modern nation state being forged by Renaissance princes could only admit of
one loyalty, the state itself.
There was no room for a separate, sometimes countervailing loyalty to the church.
In other words, the multinational corporation that was the Roman Catholic Church had to
be subordinated.
Now, as we have also seen, the church was not in the best shape to fight this fight
after the Avignon Papacy and the Great Schism of the 14th Century.
The schism, which, if you'll remember, had resulted in the election of first two competing
popes, and then three competing popes between 1414 and 1417, had finally been healed, when
a series of church councils deposed all three competing popes and elected a fourth, Martin
V.
After the success of these councils, there was hope that the church would become more
democratic, that conciliarism, the idea that councils should have the power to determine
church policy would make reform possible by giving priests and laypeople a voice in
church governance.
But Martin V and his successors in the 15th Century repudiated the idea of church councils.
They repudiated the idea that church councils could legislate over the pope's wishes.
They concentrated on reviving and strengthening their power through military might and magnificent
display.
Too often, they neglected the obligation to be moral examples.
More specifically, some, but not all Renaissance popes, dabbled in Italian and European politics,
further alienating secular rulers.
For example, there was the warrior pope Julius II, the one who commissioned the Sistine Chapel
for Michelangelo, who also raised armies to keep other powers out of Italy at the beginning
of the 16th Century.
Or Renaissance popes sometimes concentrated on administrative reform and maximization
of revenue instead of piety and pastoral care.
Some violated their vows of chastity and engaged in nepotism.
The great example here is Alexander VI, a Borgia pope who kept a mistress and fathered
several children at the end of the 15th Century.
Others spent lavishly on papal churches and palaces, the Sistine Chapel, St. Peter's
Basilica.
The great example here is Leo X, a Medici or Sini pope who also ruled towards the beginning
of the 16th Century.
In other words, during the Renaissance, popes behaved like great Machiavellian Renaissance
princes themselves.
That in the long run would harm their prestige and the sense that they were spiritual leaders.
Nor was the great mass of the faithful always happy with their church on the ground.
Most people, of course, turned to religion not to promote their power but to give their
hard lives meaning and consolation.
Now here we get into a great controversy among historians.
Traditionally, the medieval church has been portrayed as corrupt and unpopular, but this
view is often taken directly from works of literature like Chaucer's Canterbury Tales
or the propaganda of Protestant reformers.
In recent years archival research, that is research into documents illustrative of people's
actual lives like wills and the church records of donations and of clubs, mainly this research
has been done in England, seems to show that most clergy were doing their jobs during the
late Middle Ages in Renaissance under very difficult conditions.
Most people seem to have been Orthodox and happy Catholics.
Preaching was popular.
It was a thriving mysticism.
The writings of Meister Eckhart and Thomas A. Kempis were very popular beyond Germany,
which was their home base.
The Devocio Moderna emphasized a practical individual faith and was very popular in the
Low Countries.
Religious books sold well.
But that of course does not mean that everybody was happy in Christendom.
There was a priest shortage.
Too often priests were absent or foreign, that is to say the Pope might decide that
he needed to give somebody a job and he might give your parish to an Italian priest who
couldn't speak the language.
Priests were often guilty of being relatively poorly educated.
They didn't necessarily know even the truths of their own faith.
They like any other human being could be hypocritical.
Priests might live with women or be drunkards.
Now again, the evidence suggests that most priests were conscientious, but as you know
it takes only a few bad apples to make people remember.
Church courts monitored personal behavior, but therefore they had the potential to split
communities and breed resentment.
How would you like to be tried by your parish priest on a charge of adultery or fornication
or drunkenness, blasphemy or heresy?
Then from the 13th century, there was in many parts of Europe the Inquisition.
The Inquisition took hearsay evidence.
It encouraged neighbors to inform on neighbors.
It used torture to ferret out people who did not agree with Orthodox Catholicism.
Penalties ranged from public humiliation.
Adulters were made to stand in the town square in a white sheet holding a taper.
To horrible death, heretics were burned publicly at the stake in a ceremony which came to be
known as an auto-defei, an act of faith.
Once again, recent research indicates that most people hauled before the Inquisition
were not burned, and that its reputation was actually worse than its reality.
But still.
Another source of resentment was that church taxes were sent far away to Rome.
The resultant worldliness of the church seemed inappropriate to its mission.
People who yearned to participate in their church often felt stymied by the minimal popular
participation allowed in the Latin Mass.
It was said in Latin, behind a rude screen.
Some lay people wanted to participate more.
These issues produced two results.
First, increased anti-clericalism, a resentment on the part of both kings and people of what
they might see as meddlesome or hypocritical clergy.
And second, the beginnings of grassroots movements to change the church, which the church viewed
as heresies.
Heresy was the church's term for anyone who disagreed with him.
Early in the Middle Ages, heretics were often theologians disagreeing with mainstream opinion
about God's nature.
But during the High Middle Ages, from about 1100 on, there arose mass movements of Western
Catholics, sometimes inspired by theologians, sometimes arising on their own, who had problems
with their church.
I refer to, for example, the Alvigenzians in France and Germany, the Lollards in England,
and the Hussites in Bohemia.
Now in general, and any medievalist will tell you that I am vastly oversimplifying here,
these people, these groups, wanted similar reforms.
First, they wanted to de-emphasize the role of the hierarchy and the authoritarianism of
the church, and increase the role of the laity.
They wanted a less greedy, less worldly church, more of an emphasis on Christ's humility,
humanity, and poverty.
They thought the church charged too many fines and fees, and placed too much emphasis on,
well, physical plant.
They wanted scripture translated into the vernacular to give people a more active role.
Now you might think that if kings and lay people combined, they'd have the church against
the wall, and you'd be right.
But prior to the 16th century, they rarely combined, despite the fact that each had complaints
about the church.
Kings may have resented the power of popes, but with few exceptions, they were not about
to condone, let alone mobilize their subjects, in any attack against the church hierarchy.
I mean, stop and think about it.
I may have my disagreements with the pope if I'm the king of England or France, but he
is, after all, part of the club.
If I condone lay people questioning the pope, I'm condoning my subjects questioning me.
Instead, kings and parliaments bolstered the authority of the church by passing civil laws
against heresy, and in fact, they did the dirty work of executing many of the victims
of the Inquisition.
But if kings and people ever did combine against the church, their force would, as I have implied,
be irresistible.
By the late 15th century, there's a third group of critics that was gaining in importance.
We'll call them church reformers.
You might also call them Christian humanists.
These were generally humanist writers, often churchmen themselves, who clearly saw the
problems within the church.
Erasmus, in the handbook of a militant Christian, urged a simpler and less hierarchical church.
Nicholas de Cousa urged reform of monastery.
In fact, many later Protestant reformers came to their conclusions through humanist
training.
Philip Melanchthon and Ulrich Zwingli are two examples.
But at first, most sought reform from within the church.
They did not so much question authority as they wanted it to reform itself.
People like Erasmus edited scripture along humanist lines, they wrote polemics, and they
preached.
Again, it should be obvious that all three groups ever came together.
Change would be inevitable.
And this brings me to the story of Martin Luther.
It happened in Germany towards the beginning of the 16th century, starting with one remarkable
man.
Martin Luther was born in 1483, and he lived until 1546.
He was a devout Augustinian priest and a professor of theology at the University of Wittenberg.
He was steeped in the method and the mentality of Christian humanism, which means he was
perfectly capable of being critical.
But Luther was above all a man obsessed with his own sinfulness, his perceived unworthiness
of God's mercy.
He was equally appalled at the worldliness and corruption of the church, especially the
Catholic Church's practice of selling indulgences.
Now, to understand indulgences, you have to understand the Catholic doctrine of purgatory.
Catholic theology believed that when we die, the truly saintly go straight to heaven, and
the truly evil go to hell.
But what about us in-betweeners who are neither perfectly good nor perfectly bad?
Catholic theology posited a sort of middle place where people would do time for their
sins, where those sins could be purged, called purgatory.
Now needless to say, every Catholic wants to spend as little time in purgatory as possible.
Here the Church's claim to bind in heaven what was bound on earth was crucial.
Specifically, the Church believed that it could grant reductions of a specified number of
years in purgatory, called indulgences, in return for good deeds.
The problem arises when we ask just what constitutes a good deed.
Would say working with the poor be a good deed?
I think certainly.
How about, you know what, I don't have a lot of time to work with the poor.
How about if I just give money to the Church so that they can work with the poor?
Well that sounds pretty good.
How about if I just give money to the Church because I trust them to know how to spend
that money?
It's a very short step from here, taken in the early 16th century, to the notion of
selling indulgences.
At the time the Church was trying to pay for the rebuilding of St. Peter's Basilica in
Rome.
They could make a lot of money by selling indulgences to those who could pay.
Famously, Johann Tetzel did a brisk business going all over Germany, selling time off in
purgatory.
But this, of course, amounted to selling salvation.
After all, in such a system, who gets into heaven first?
The wealthy.
To Luther, this was an egregious misuse of the Church's power and a fundamental misunderstanding
of God's relationship to human beings.
To Luther, God was so great, so perfect, and humans so imperfect, so depraved, how could
they do anything to merit heaven?
Where the Catholic Church believed that salvation was earned through faith in God and good works,
including the performance of the seven sacraments, Luther argued that both faith and salvation
alone were gifts from God.
It was his decision whether or not to save you.
Now, Luther worked out his position in 95 Theses, which he posted on the Castle Church
Door, a sort of community bulletin board at Wittenberg, on the 31st of October, 1517.
By doing so, he launched the Reformation.
Now, it took a while for the Church to respond.
That interval was crucial.
For over the next few years, Luther and like-minded followers like Zwingli, Melanchthon, Martin
Booster, and John Calvin worked out the implications of these ideas.
They are perhaps best understood in relation to Catholic ideas, but this is made difficult
by two stubborn facts.
First, remember that Protestantism was never a single unified faith.
Almost from the very beginning, the Protestant reformers are disagreeing with each other.
And in fact, the second fact is that both faith traditions have changed markedly in
500 years, in many respects becoming more like each other.
So if you yourself are a member of one of these two great traditions, please don't be
offended if you don't quite recognize yourself in the following.
Remember, we're back in the 16th century.
In addressing what first separated Protestants from Catholics, some professors begin with
their respective theologies of salvation, but I see their most fundamental disagreement
in their source of religious truth.
Catholics found religious truth, God's wish and will, for good Christians, in three places
– scripture, church tradition, and papal and conciliar decisions.
The first scripture.
The Bible is, can we agree, a complicated document.
It is obscure to some readers and contradictory to others.
Throughout the Middle Ages, most people couldn't read anyway.
The church therefore reserved to itself the interpretation of scripture.
That is, scripture should be reserved to trained religious professionals, the Pope, church
councils, university theologians, and priests.
In theory, they received a careful theological training, but remember what we said about education.
They were consecrated beings rendered semi-sacred by their ordination.
The church also kept the Bible in Latin, the 4th century Vulgate, and prohibited vernacular
translation.
In other words, it maintained a monopoly on this source of knowledge about God.
In terms of tradition, the idea was that what the church had thought and done for centuries,
since this was God's church, was obviously God's will.
If the church had been doing something for a thousand years, that meant that it was something
that God wanted the church to do.
And finally, the idea that God's truth came through the Pope and conciliar decrees, in
other words, whatever the church hierarchy decided, was also God's will.
Now the basis for these last two, the fundamental reason that Catholics submitted to the papacy
and the church hierarchy, was that they believed that that hierarchy could be traced back in
an unbroken, apostolic succession to St. Peter, whom they believed Christ had made the first
pope.
The key passage of the Bible here takes place in Matthew 16, in which Christ turns to Simon
Peter and says,
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it, and I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in heaven, and whatsoever
thou shalt loose on earth, it shall be loosed in heaven.
Protestant reformers rejected this wide area of competence for the hierarchy.
As a young priest, Martin Luther had visited Rome, and he'd been appalled at the materialism
and the corruption he'd witnessed among high-ranking churchmen.
They were, in his view, abusing the keys that they had been given.
Remember, Luther visited Rome at the height of the Renaissance papacy.
As we've seen, he also found himself at odds with certain practices engaged in by the church
that he couldn't find in Scripture, for example the selling of indulgences.
Noting the corruption in the church and the fallibility of human beings generally, Luther
concluded that the only sure guide to God's will was to be found in Scripture, Sola Scriptura.
From this radical but simple idea came three equally revolutionary planks of Protestantism.
1. The Bible should be made available to the people.
It should be translated into the vernacular.
It should be printed using the new technology of the printing press.
It should be placed into the hands of the faithful.
Rising literacy was also important here in the 16th century.
2. Bibles in hand.
There was no need for a core of professional sacrosanct clergy to interpret them.
There was no need for popes and archbishops and bishops to mediate between God and his people.
Hence, Luther's idea of a priesthood of all believers.
There would still be ministers, but not with a semi-divine status or power of Roman Catholic priests.
3. Any piece of religious dogma or practice without scriptural foundation should be rejected
or abolished out of hand.
From this comes most of the Protestant critique of Catholic practice.
The structure of popes and bishops.
Another reason to get rid of them is they're not in Scripture.
The elaborate rituals and church decor, including crucifixes and images of saints,
moans to the sacraments.
By the way, since the church hierarchy was obviously unscriptural and corrupt,
Protestants saw the only hope for reform in the secular authority, that is, a righteous ruler.
These different attitudes to ministry were paralleled by different attitudes toward salvation.
As we've seen, Catholics believed that salvation was one through two mutually supportive means.
Faith, that is, belief in God in the resurrection of Jesus Christ in his church,
and the performance of good works, especially the seven sacraments,
which forgave sins, in three cases, baptism, penance, and anointing of the sick directly,
and produced grace.
Grace, earned by human beings in this life, was thought to be necessary for salvation in the next.
In addition to the sacraments, the performance of other good works also increased one store of grace,
serving the poor, contributing to the church, living a good life generally.
To Luther, this amounted to trying to buy one's way into heaven.
Indeed, as we have seen, Martin Luther, tortured by his own sense of sin,
convinced of the basic depravity of the human species,
believed that human beings were so far below God's perfection
that they could not hope to earn or win forgiveness for their sins or salvation in heaven.
Sixteenth-century Protestants believed that no human being could merit salvation through his own efforts.
Human beings were too depraved and God could not be compelled in any case.
Thus salvation was entirely up to him.
Faith alone justified the individual in his eyes.
Sacraments might or might not be useful in inclining an individual towards God,
but they didn't automatically result in forgiveness, salvation.
That would be telling God what to do.
Indeed, other rituals, the whole apparatus of priests and sacraments and processions and blessings and holy water,
the sign of the cross, the veneration of images, were at best useless,
and at worst, mere superstition and idolatry.
One Swiss Protestant reformer, John Calvin, went further,
arguing in the Institutes of the Christian Religion of 1536 that,
since God knows all things, he already knows, indeed has determined the future.
And therefore, he has known since before the creation who was saved or damned.
And thus, some Protestants embraced predestination.
That would lead to much soul-searching on their part to determine where they were of the saved, the elect, or the damned, the reprobate.
Now normally, these ideas, Luther's and Calvin's and the other Protestant reformers,
would have gone the way of other radical critiques, what the Catholic Church called heresies.
After all, how many Albigensians do you know?
But Protestant ideas took and survived, in part, because of three reasons.
First, the Church hesitated.
It was weakened by corruption in Rome and to a lesser extent outside of it.
It was perhaps too big and too worldly, and perhaps too confident to think that it really had to answer Luther.
After all, it had defeated all other rivals in the field.
Luther was excommunicated only in 1521, by the way he publicly burnt the bowl of excommunication.
And there was little Catholic response in print.
That gave Luther and his followers a clear field and time to get their message out.
A second factor in the spread of Protestantism was the rise of literacy and the development of the printing press.
Where previous heretical ideas had had to be copied out by hand,
Luther benefited from one of the other great inventions that created the modern world.
The invention of the printing press with movable type is usually credited to Johannes Gutenberg of Mainz around the year 1450.
By 1500, some 6,000 separate works had already been printed in Europe.
This meant that Luther's ideas, his tracts, his German translation of the Bible,
and the works of other reformers could get out, could be spread among the masses.
Now admittedly, in 1500, only about 5% of the masses could read, but by 1600, that was 20%.
So this is taking place at a time when literacy is starting to take off.
This happened because of humanistic education and the endowment of more schools, many of them supported by local communities.
Now, you might not think that 20%, a 20% literacy rate is terribly good, and that's true,
but it does mean that the odds are you probably know someone who can read.
And of course, anybody can be read too.
The third factor in the survival and growth of Protestantism was the support of the German princes.
Remember I told you that if rulers and reformers ever got together, watch out.
Early on, Luther got such support, not from his emperor.
Charles V, the Holy Roman emperor, was decidedly opposed to Luther's ideas,
and he summoned him to answer charge of heresy at the Diet of Worm in April of 1521.
There, famously, courageously, Luther refused to recant.
According to legend, he stood in front of the emperor himself and said,
Here I stand, I can no other.
God help me.
Amen.
The diet responded by declaring him an outlaw.
Now, understand this.
At this point, if Luther had been in Spain, if he had been in France, if he had been in England,
with their centralizing monarchies interested in making sure that everyone believed the same way,
what would have happened?
He would have been dragged into the public square, he would have been burnt at the stake.
But remember that Luther was living and working in Germany, the Holy Roman Empire,
where the emperor is weak and where the German princes are strong.
Some support Luther, maybe because they want church land, maybe because they believe in his ideas.
In particular, Frederick the Wise, a Lecter of Saxony, decides to give him protection.
So you see, geography really is destiny, and historical events in one part of the world
may have a profound influence on another.
Remember that the Holy Roman emperor is weak because he's poor,
and he's poor in part because he never explored the new world.
And because of that, his princes can defy him.
Martin Luther and other reformers can write,
the result would be a revolution in religion.
The Protestant Reformation had been launched.
