Lecture 11 English Constitutionalism, 1603 to 1649
In our last lecture, we saw that France, or at least King Louis XIV, reacted to the crisis
of the 17th century by embracing royal absolutism, a system in which the king explicitly claimed
his power from God and wielded it as a God would do.
Louis used the power and wealth of France to threaten the freedom of all Western Europeans
by angling for control of the Spanish Empire. Spain itself had grown weak and defeatist
due to crushing debts from its century-long jihad against Protestantism and ruled by
the imbecile Carlos II, Carlos II.
The other great Habsburg Empire to the east, the Holy Roman, was unable to challenge Louis
because it was occupied with attacks from the Ottoman Empire, often encouraged by Louis,
and the German princes were too weak to credibly oppose him. Only the Dutch, under William
of Oren, stood against the Sun King, but despite a century of Dutch commercial success, it
seemed only a matter of time before they and European Protestantism were overwhelmed.
As the 1680s drew to a close, that time seemed very near.
The Netherlands won hope. The one unanswered question in European diplomacy was, what would
England do? That question would have seemed absurd to the Sun King, for England had spent
most of the 17th century being wracked by civil wars, rebellion, economic depression, religious
strife, and of course English weather. If Spain was the sick man of Europe, England was its
resident lunatic. So how could events in England possibly derail the Sun King Express?
That is what the next lecture will be about. In this one, I have to explain why England
did not seem to be very much of a threat to Louis, why England was perceived as the least
stable state in Europe, why England chose a very different path from Louis's absolutism,
and why in fact 17th century England violated every rule of absolutism and still got away
with it. To explain that, I am afraid that I have to go back into the mists of time,
a century before that of Louis XIV to possibly the one European monarch who could claim an
ego to match the Sun King. I mean, of course, Henry VIII.
In print and in another course for this company, I have argued that nearly every problem faced
by the English monarchy in the 17th century can be traced back to the 16th century and
the reign of Henry VIII. Put another way, if English kings failed to invent and later
broke the five rules of absolutism, it was because Henry had made it so difficult for
them. Now, you will recall that a century before
Louis XIV was even a gleam in Ann of Austria's eye, there is some doubt as to whether his
purported father Louis XIII was capable of gleaming, Henry had sought to strengthen the
English monarchy against a repeat of the Wars of the Roses. In a sense, the problem facing
Henry in the 16th century was not all that different from that that would face Louis
in the 17th after the front, but in making himself head of church and state, in breaking
from the church, in relying on parliament to do so, in marrying multiple wives and in
spending recklessly on repeated wars, Henry VIII left a series of problems for his successors.
That is, instead of creating five rules of absolutism, he created five problems which
prevented it. They are the problem of royal personality,
the problem of royal control and sovereignty, the problem of royal finances, the problem
of religion and the problem of foreign policy. And if you are paying attention, it should
be obvious that those are the very obverse of Louis's solutions.
First, the problem of royal personality. Henry, like Louis, was larger than life.
He had no problem claiming to be God on earth. But having made the claim, he set the bar
impossibly high for his children and subsequent monarchs. His son, Edward, was a sickly adolescent
boy who died shy of his 18th birthday. Mary and Elizabeth were women. None of this conforms
with the great chain of being. As far as the problem of control and sovereignty
is concerned, Henry VIII clearly wanted to be a more powerful sovereign. But to throw
the pope out of England, he had relied on parliamentary legislation, the act in restraint
of appeals of 1533 for bad appeals of cases like the divorce to Rome, the act of supremacy
of 1534 is what made him supreme head of the Church of England.
Basically, Henry didn't want to go it alone. Breaking from the Catholic Church was such
a scary and momentous thing to do that even Henry felt that he needed friends.
Now, Parliament already had the right to approve or disapprove of taxes. But now Henry had given
them the right to debate and legislate religion as well. So each of Henry's successors went
through Parliament to get their religious settlements. Edward VI to establish Protestantism,
Mary to re-establish Catholicism, and Elizabeth I in 1559 to establish the Anglican Compromise.
Fine. They got their religious settlements they wanted. But empowering a body like Parliament
in this way raised a question in England that would never be raised in France. So who's
truly sovereign? King or Parliament?
Then there's the problem of royal finances. For centuries, the English king could only
tax his subjects with Parliament's permission. Permission that they sometimes refused. They
even refused Henry VIII. Worse, Henry, like Louis a century later, loved to spend money.
He owned over 60 palaces. He patronized artists and writers. He built magnificent naval ships.
You can still see the Mary Rose of Portsmouth or what's left of it. He fought a series
of wars against France and Scotland and the Holy Roman Empire. The first of these wars
drained the royal finances. The last, against France and Scotland simultaneously, cost over
three million pounds on an annual revenue of maybe a hundred thousand pounds.
Henry's great minister, Thomas Cromwell, secured him a windfall when they dissolved
the Catholic monasteries in England. So Cromwell's plan was, I know my king likes to spend money.
I'm going to find a way to endow the monarchy permanently. This should have brought the crown
90,000 additional pounds a year. But Henry wanted quick cash for his wars and so he
sold off the monastic lands. That had two long-term effects. It enriched the gentry,
the sort of lower aristocracy of England, made them more important, but it also drained
the royal treasury in the long run for the future. English kings would be relatively
impoverished. As a result, the Tudor Monarchy was chronically short of funds, never free
to pursue its wildest ambitions. Then there was the problem of religion. You know this
already. Henry wrenched England from Rome, but he refused to bring it to Augsburg. That
is, he was congenitally attracted to Catholicism. Yet he was only really supported by Protestant
and that left confusion in its wake. After oscillating between Protestantism and Catholicism
under Edward and Mary, England finally opted under Elizabeth for a compromise. The Church
of England was Protestant in doctrine, Catholic in ritual and hierarchy, leaving extremists
on each side with the hope that they could eventually win diehard Catholics and Puritan
Protestants. Then there was the problem of foreign policy. Henry VIII died leaving England
alienated from Spain and the Holy Roman Empire because of how he treated the Pope and Catherine
of Aragon and embroiled in war with both Scotland and France, financially exhausted, incapable
of maintaining large armies and navies needed to win. Edward lost the war in Scotland. Mary
lost a second war in France. Elizabeth staved off the Spanish war as long as she possibly
could but spent the last 15 years of her reign fighting it. Through it all, England struggled
against richer, more powerful countries to find its place. Should England retreat behind
its watery walls or embrace a major role in Europe? Compare this with a decisiveness
of Louis XIV a century later. All of these problems helped to explain why, contrary to
popular belief, Queen Elizabeth died relatively unpopular. Her subjects grumbled about her
imperious manner, a continuing war, high taxation and religion. Since she died a virgin queen,
this event brought a new family to the throne of England, the Scottish House of Stuart.
Lots of people anticipated the new family in 1603 with great hope. Nobody knew it at
the time, but they would do even worse. James I of England had actually ruled Scotland as
James VI since his mother's abdication when he was an infant in 1568. But James was a
very different fish from Henry VIII. As we saw in an earlier lecture, James liked to
trumpet that kings were practically gods on earth. He was one of the major proponents
of the notion that kings ruled by divine right. To that extent, Louis XIV would have found
him very congenial. But the problem with this is that by contemporary standards, James was
not very godlike, and that brings us back to the problem of royal personality. It was
not James' fault, of course, that he didn't look much like a god. That he had spindly
legs in an age when a shapely calf became a man. Those legs supported an ungainly body
crowned by an overly large head. That head housed a tongue that was itself too large
for his mouth, causing a pronounced lisp. The lisp exacerbated a stutter and a thick
scotch accent. Now, all this might be overlooked in our day and age, or even celebrated in
the name of diversity, but not in James' day. It is an unfortunate comment on human nature
that appearance really does matter. In this case, the contrast with the tutor's regal
bearing didn't play to James' advantage. It didn't help that English people hated the
Scots. They'd fought the Scots for centuries and thought of their northern neighbors as
rude, impoverished brigands. It didn't help that James came south, accompanied by an entourage
of what were called the Hungry Scots, that is, Scottish courtiers who were thought to
see England as a vast treasure house to plunder. Above all, James' personal behavior contrasted
with the tutor's. He was a remarkably informal man, affable, and with a poor head for drink.
This put people at ease, and it brought them to court, but it also reduced their fear.
It meant that he wasn't nearly so good at keeping people off balance as the tutor had
been. James hated crowds. Queen Elizabeth loved to go out amongst crowds on her progresses.
He rarely did so. Once, when told that a group of his loving subjects had gathered to express
their love for him, he replied with characteristic earthiness, God's wounds, I will put down
my breeches and show them my arse. In his later years, he grew lazy, neglecting
business to hunt or spend time with the favourites. And then there was the matter of those favourites.
James was married to Anne of Denmark. They had several children. He clearly preferred,
however, the company of handsome young men, on whom he lavished offices, titles, lands,
and affection, often public affection. Thus, one Puritan gentleman reported his shock after
observing the king with his favourites, quote, kissing them after so lascivious a mode in
public, as prompted many to imagine some things done in the tiring house that exceed my expression.
Now there is some debate among historians as to whether James was a practicing homosexual.
In a sense, it doesn't matter. The king's physical affection for his favourites contrasted
sharply with the bluff masculinity of the tutors, even the female tutors if you stop
and think about it. In conclusion, it should be obvious that many of the king's personality
traits would have been perfectly acceptable in our own day, but in the context of his
times in office, James's manner was problematic. It clearly offended his more conservative contemporaries
who were used to the tutors. This made it more difficult for him to overall parliament
as they would have done by his appearance and by his behaviour. And that was a problem
because English kings needed parliament because unlike French kings, they were not in control.
This brings us to the problem of control and sovereignty. Unlike the king of France, James
had to deal with parliament with which he rarely got along. He once complained to the Spanish
ambassador that he didn't understand how his predecessors ever allowed such an institution
to even be thought of. Now this is like, I don't know, President Kennedy complaining
to Anatoly Dobrinin about Congress because the guy he's complaining to, the Spanish ambassador,
is of course one of England's great enemies. James couldn't afford an efficient bureaucracy.
He relied on the goodwill of his aristocrats. So the king is not in control. Nor was he
wealthy, the problem of royal finances. English administration was corrupt and inefficient.
James spent money on buildings, the banqueting house at White Hall, Greenwich Palace, masks,
parties, favourites. His debts rose from 300,000 pounds at his accession in 1603 to 600,000
pounds by 1608 and a million pounds by 1621. Nor did James control the religion of the
country, the problem of religion. The first problem is that the stewards didn't rule
one country. They ruled three countries. Remember that when James became the king of England,
he was also the king of Scotland. By becoming king of England, he also became king of Ireland
as well. England, as we have seen, was mostly Anglican. But as we have also seen, the Puritans
wanted an even more Protestant settlement, like Scotland's Presbyterianism with less
ritual and ceremony, less hierarchy, no bishops. Catholics were a tiny minority in 1603, but
they were hated thanks to the persecutions of Bloody Mary, the attempted Spanish Armada
invasion in 1588, and the gunpowder plot of 1605 in which Catholic hotheads had to try
to blow up the king in the House of Lords. The English also feared invasion from Catholic
Ireland. Scotland was mostly Presbyterian, sort of in the same direction, the same inclination
of Protestantism as the Puritans. There were some Catholics in the Highlands. Ireland was
mostly Catholic, but land and power had been stripped from Catholics and rested now with
a small minority of Scots and English Protestants. All of these groups hated each other. The result
was a religious mess. James actually dealt with a mess pretty well. He wasn't a zealot.
He was content to let sleeping dogs lie. He didn't poke them. He didn't try to make
anybody conform. And that was wise. Finally, and one reason it's wise is that James did
not have an army, which brings us to the problem of foreign policy. He didn't have an army,
of course, because he didn't have any money. This was OK with James, in a way, because
unlike Henry before or Louis afterwards, James never figured himself for a great warrior
prince. Rather, James sought to be a Rex pacificus, a peaceful king who would heal the religious
and diplomatic rifts that tore Europe. Immediately upon his accession, remember, the war the
Spanish Armada was still raging at the end of Elizabeth's reign, James worked out a
treaty, the Treaty of London with Spain in 1605. He kept England out of the Thirty Years
War, unless out of some of the most terrible bloodshed of the 17th century. Now this seems
entirely admirable now, but at the time it led Englishmen to wonder what was wrong with
James. Why didn't he pursue a red-blooded, anti-Catholic, anti-Spanish, anti-French foreign
policy? Isn't that what English kings were for? So somewhat ironically, James's peace
policy, which kept his country out of the disasters of the Thirty Years War, which might
have won him a Nobel Prize today, caused Englishmen to find him less godlike. Henry VIII liked,
he spent the whole country into debt, and he started all these wars he couldn't finish.
James, they're not so sure about. In 1625, James died and was succeeded by his only surviving
son, who became Charles, now known as Charles I. Now Charles appeared on the surface of things
to be a definite improvement on his father. First, he was more dignified, so you get
godlike points there. Problem of royal personality looks to be solved, except that Charles was
a zealot who expected instantaneous obedience, who refused to compromise or explain the reasons
for his actions. Nor was he better than his father at dealing with Parliament, which means
that he wasn't in control. Despite needing money desperately, Charles repeatedly sent
Parliament home whenever they questioned his policies. He finally tried to dissolve them
for good in 1629, and he ended up ruling without Parliament for eleven years. But since Parliament
voted the taxes, what did he do for money? Charles was no wealthier than his dad, and
he was just as extravagant. He liked to spend money on his magnificent art collection, the
best art collection in Europe. He patronized Rubens, he brought Van Dyke to England, who
painted a great lot of royal portraits, which are quite beautiful. But after 1629, his dissolution
of Parliament, he had to trim expenses. This ended up being a major retrenchment of government
called thorough. That was actually the name of the program. He also sought to maximize
revenue. From hence forward, Charles's government was funded through forced loans. Royal official
would turn up and say, you're loaning the king some money, thank you very much. Customs
and positions, which means that he raised the rates charged on goods coming into the
country without asking Parliament's permission. Feudal dues. Charles's lawyers looked through
the books for any old law they could find whereby they could charge you. For example,
if the king knighted his son, they could charge you for doing that. And finally, ship money,
a tax that had been levied on port cities to support the Royal Navy, which Charles extended
to inland cities, which never saw a ship. The result was terribly unpopular. These taxes
were dubiously legal, and the country went on tax strike by 1638. But Charles's most
unpopular policies came in the area of religion. Charles was an Anglican. But unlike his dad,
Charles was also an inflexible man who wanted every one of his subjects to worship just the
way he did. This is very much the way Louis XIV would think a generation later. But remember
that Louis XIV wasn't ruling three countries with very different religious makeups. Charles
promoted high church bishops who persecuted Puritans for failing to conform to middle
of the road or high church Anglican practice. Worse, for diplomatic reasons, he was married
to a Catholic, Princess Henrietta Maria of France. Now that meant that the court was
full of Catholics, and it also raised the question of how the children would be raised.
All of which led his subjects to wonder, what kind of a Protestant is this guy? Maybe he's
secretly a Catholic. He upset his Scottish subjects in 1637 when he tried to force an
Anglican style high church prayer book on Presbyterian Scotland. Scotland erupted into
open rebellion known as the Bishop Wars, which began in 1637 and lasted to 1642.
By 1642, Parliament came to believe that it represented the interests of the people better
than the king did. Now in fact, it really represented the aristocracy and merchants who voted for
it, but it's the principle that counts here. They also came to believe that royal policy
was increasingly harmful to those interests, that is the interests of the people, and that
the king had to be stopped. Now this idea that the king might not embody the welfare
of the country, that he might have to obey a higher law than his own, that is his responsibility
to the people, that he might have to answer to his subjects is revolutionary. But in order
to prove their point, Parliament ended up having to fight the king. The result was the
first English Civil War, which lasted from 1642 to 1646. Now remember, we haven't talked
about one more thing Charles doesn't have. He doesn't have an army. He was too poor.
And so he had to rely on wealthy aristocrats and local militias, who in part because they
were so dashing, were known as Cavaliers. He also tried to get an army from Ireland.
That wasn't very popular in anti-Catholic England. Now after lots of two-ing and fro-ing, Parliament
too raised an army, a professional army that they called the New Model Army. It was commanded
by Thomas Fairfax, its leading cavalry commander was named Oliver Cromwell. Remember that name.
The nickname for the New Model Army was the Roundheads because it employed lots of ordinary
people, common people who normally did not have long hair the way courtiers did. They
worked for a living and so they couldn't afford to be dressing their hair all the time. The
New Model Army defeated the King in 1646. Now that doesn't mean you've won. You've still got a
King. You've still got to work out a settlement with him. So there ensued years of negotiation
and broken agreements because quite frankly, Charles I had no intention of treating with rebels.
Finally, when King Charles would not negotiate in good faith, remember he's rigid, Parliament put
him on trial on a charge of high treason in January of 1649. But this raises a problem. High
treason? High treason against what? What treason was normally a crime against the King? The law
was the King's law. How could Charles be guilty of treason against himself? How could he be guilty
of violating his own law? Parliament's solution was to charge the King with violating not statute
law, but a more fundamental, unwritten law hinted at in his coronation oath, his responsibility
to his subjects. Whereas it is notorious that Charles Stewart, the now King of England,
have had a wicked design totally to subvert the ancient and fundamental laws and liberties of
this nation, and in their trade to introduce arbitrary and tyrannical government, and that he
have prosecuted it with fire and sword, levied and maintained a cruel war in the land against
the Parliament and Kingdom, whereby the country have been miserably wasted, the public treasure
exhausted, trade decayed, thousands of people murdered, and infinite other mischiefs committed.
Put simply, the King was charged with committing treason not against himself, but against the
English Constitution and the English people. This is a revolutionary idea that a ruler's chief
responsibility is not to God, not to himself, but to the people over whom he rules. Even more
revolutionary is the idea that if he failed in that duty, he could be held accountable by a court
and a jury, not of his peers, but of his subjects. Unlike the frond, this is a revolution with an
intellectual underpinning, anticipating lock by 50 years. Now, in fact, the King refused to plead to
the charge. He didn't recognize this court. And so, you won't be surprised that the verdict was
a foregone conclusion. Guilty. Sentence was given on the 27th of January, and as in all treason
trials, it was death. At this point, Charles demanded to speak, but the court refused to hear him.
In the meantime, Oliver Cromwell used every means of precision he had to secure 59 signers to the
most notorious death warrant in English history. The King was taken to St. James's Palace while a
scaffold was built at Whitehall. The night before his death, he burnt his papers. He said goodbye
to his youngest children, and he urged them never to compromise with the rebels. You see,
Charles may have lost the war, and he may be about to lose his life, but he wanted to
make sure that there was a monarchy left to be preserved after his death. It's the only piece
of foresight and prescience he ever experienced. On the morning of his death, he in his attendance
took some time over his appearance. He actually joked with his groom of the bed chamber to take
care of his hair and his head. Though it has not long to stand on my shoulders, take all the care
you can of my head. He also asked about the weather. He wanted to know the temperature.
When told it was cold, he put on two shirts. He didn't want to shiver because he didn't want
anyone to think he was afraid. Finally, a parliamentary guard took him, and at 1.30 pm,
he was escorted through the Banqueting House at Whitehall. The Banqueting House was one of those
expensive building projects that had led the English to their taxpayer revolt. It's today the
only part of Whitehall Palace that still stands. You too can walk Charles the First Route.
He walked through a window against which the scaffold had been built. At the end of his walk
was facing west. He saw the scaffold draped in black. At the center of the scaffold was the block.
Beyond the block were rows of parliamentary soldiers in red coats, and beyond them below him
a crowd of ordinary Londoners, the very people in whose name this action was about to be carried out.
The King emerged into the gray January light and asked to speak, but dogged with ill luck to the
last, his voice failed him. Had the crowd been able to hear that voice, they would have heard him
make an argument that a subject and a sovereign are clean different things. To kill him was to kill
God's authority, and so to kill law and order in the state. Therefore, he, not parliament,
represented the true interests of his subjects. He ended by claiming that he was the martyr of the
people. He then turned to his faithful Bishop of London William Jackson, who had accompanied him
to the scaffold. He looked him squarely in the eye, and he said, remember, poor Jackson spent the
rest of his life trying to figure out exactly what it was he was supposed to remember. I mean,
was it the execution? Who could forget what happened next? The King turned back to the block
and said to Jackson that his executioner sent him from a corruptible to an incorruptible crown.
He then knelt. He said a silent prayer and extended his hands. This was the predetermined
signal that he was ready. The ax fell. The henchmen then raised the severed head of the King for all
to see. According to one eyewitness, at the instant when the blow was given, there was such a deep
universal groan amongst the thousands of people as I never heard before and desire never to hear
again. And well, they might have groaned. For the first time in English history, the English people
had judicially and publicly murdered their King. Such an act went against the great chain of being
and a thousand years of sermons, ceremonies, traditions, and propaganda. Remember, they hadn't
just killed him in battle or in rebellion. They had done it through legal means. For a thousand
years, Europeans had been taught that their King was virtually God on earth. The father of the nation
sacrosanct and inviolable like a Roman tribune. Now he and those habits of mine had been violated.
Within weeks, the Rump Parliament abolished the monarchy, abolished the House of Lords.
England was now for the first and only time in its history a republic. But it was not yet
a democracy. The civil wars, the execution of the King, the establishment of that republic
had been worked out and by in the interest of a very small oligarchy of landed gentry and urban
merchants. The next question was, would England now settle down? Would the English people in whose
name the civil wars had been fought and the King executed now accept rule by a small group of
parliamentary gentry and the army as they had once accepted rule by the stewards? Or would they demand
that the revolution go farther and embrace such radical notions as democracy and religious toleration?
On a deeper level, what did these events mean? Had the English people and their representatives
committed a heinous act murdering not only a king but law and order and justice? Or had they taken
the first steps towards freedom and modernity?
