These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the Teaching
Company. These lectures are titled, Foundations of Western Civilization II, A History of the
Modern Western World, Part II.
Chapter 13, War, Trade, Empire, 1688 to 1702.
In the last three lectures, we learned how France solved its 17th century crisis by embracing
the sort of Hobbesian solution of royal absolutism, and in the process became the arbiter of Europe.
Now England limped by a much more circuitous route towards a Lockean experiment which seemed
doomed to fail, constitutional monarchy. These two systems and those two countries will offer
two models for European government in the wake of the wars of religion, and they were bound to clash.
But why specifically? Remember that William III had invaded the British Isles expressly
to bring the wealth and power of England, Scotland and Ireland into his fight with Louis XIV.
In this part, Louis XIV could not sit idly by and abandon James and England to William.
He could not condone a fellow monarch's disinheritance and usurpation. What kind of precedent did
that set for the people of France? He couldn't let slip this last chance to revive Catholicism in England.
And finally, he could not sit idly by and watch William bring the British kingdoms into the Dutch column,
just as he'd been gearing to crush the Netherlands and so become the master of Europe and the Spanish Empire.
So the conflict that started in 1688 was about a lot of things.
It was about absolutism versus constitutionalism. It was about Protestantism versus Catholicism.
And it was about the balance of power, France versus the rest of Europe.
In fact, this was to be the first of a series of seven such wars between the French and the British
with a changing roster of allies which would drag on for over a century, sometimes referred to as the
Second Hundred Years War. They began with the Nine Years War, 1688 to 1697,
followed by the War of the Spanish Succession, 1702 to 14, the War of the Austrian Succession, 1740 to 48,
the Seven Years War, 1756 to 63, the American Revolutionary War, 1775 to 83,
the French Revolutionary War, 1792 to 1801, and concluding with the Napoleonic Wars of 1803 to 1815.
Now, each of these wars would continue to be about the balance of power.
And as you'll see, their outcome will determine the leadership of Europe into the 20th century,
as well as who would control America. That is, what language we get to speak.
But other motivations would change, I think. The first two wars, the Nine Years War and the War of the Spanish Succession,
are about ideas, absolutism versus constitutionalism, Catholicism versus Protestantism,
or more accurately, religious uniformity versus religious toleration.
But the next three, the War of the Austrian Succession, the Seven Years War,
and controversially, and to a lesser extent, the American Revolutionary War, were, I think, less about ideas.
Now, the exception would be the American War on the American side.
These wars were more about material things, land, especially colonies, trade, especially overseas trade.
And therefore, they're about wealth. Even the ideas of the American Revolutionary War are really about stuff, taxation.
Also, the outcome of these wars would be determined less and less in Europe,
and more in exotic locales like the woods of North America, the plains and jungles of India, the high seas.
The last two wars, the French Revolutionary War and the Napoleonic Wars, would be about ideas again,
egalitarianism versus privilege, rationalism versus tradition, nationalism versus imperialism or centralization,
and romanticism versus rationalism.
The outcomes of these wars would be determined by events at sea and battles on European soil.
Alternatively, the first two wars were about Europe emerging from the Middle Ages and the crisis of the 17th century.
The next three wars take place in a more stable Europe.
No one except the Americans is really arguing about ideas. I don't think the British were, anyway.
They're fighting over land and material wealth.
The final two wars would take place in another age of intellectual ferment and political revolution,
and that age would result in a world much more like our own.
In this lecture, we will address the first of these wars, the Nine Years War, 1688 to 1697.
Now, before we do, it might be a good idea to go over the sides of these wars.
You can't tell the players without a scorecard, so it's time for another one of our Cook's tours.
The French side basically consisted of the French in this war.
France had no allies in the First War, but in future wars, usually one member of the Grand Alliance would jump to the French side.
During the War of the Spanish Succession, it would be Bavaria.
During the War of the Austrian Succession, it would be Prussia.
During the Seven Years War, it would be Austria, and it would be Spain during the American Revolution.
Ranged against France and her allies with a Grand Alliance consisting of the three British kingdoms,
the Dutch Republic, Spain, Portugal, and the Holy Roman Empire.
Now, the three British kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland, will be referred to below when acting together as Britain.
I know that that's politically incorrect and possibly offensive to Irish-American sensibilities,
but at this stage, it's constitutionally and militarily accurate, and it's also quicker and easier to say.
England was increasingly wealthy thanks to a commercial revolution, more about that later,
but had a dismal military record, and had lost the last two trade wars against the Dutch in 1664-67 and 1672-74.
And, of course, the British army had hardly distinguished itself in resisting William's Dutch invasion.
Scotland and Ireland were very poor and militarily vulnerable.
The Dutch Republic, after 1689, was always on the British side.
Geographically, it's small and low-lying and vulnerable, both to the sea and to Louis.
As we've seen, it was constitutionally a loose federal republic.
Its constituent states were linked together by the state's general,
and it was presided over by an elected stad holder, elected for life, William of Orange, until his death in 1702.
Now, the Dutch Republic was mostly Calvinist Protestant, but embraced religious toleration.
Economic life and culture were enriched by Huguenot fleeing Louis, Catholics in the South, and Jews in cities.
As we've seen, the Dutch grew rich from trade and became a nation of merchants.
Amsterdam in 1688 was the most important banking center and money market in Europe.
In fact, interest rates in Amsterdam were half of what they were anywhere else.
The Dutch developed many of the techniques of modern government deficit finance.
They created a culture driven not by royal tastes, but by wealthy merchants,
which helps to explain why Dutch art, that of Rembrandt and Vermeer and Halls,
often depicts daily life, middle-class life, the lives of ordinary people.
Now, to defend that culture against the French in particular, the Dutch had fielded a battle-hardened army and navy.
In fact, remember, the Dutch got their start fighting the Spanish, and then they fought the British as well.
But these wars, the wars of the 18th century that were so necessary to preserve Dutch independence,
will eventually put an end to the 17th century Dutch miracle.
They'll wreck Dutch agriculture. French privateers will decimate Dutch trade,
and the wars will plunge the Dutch government into debt to survive, from which you would never fully recover.
Now, Spain had already gone down that road.
As we've seen, Spain was ruled by a weak ineffectual monarch in Carlos II.
He presided over a corrupt and inefficient administration.
Spain had experienced wide disparities of wealth. The aristocracy and church were wealthy,
but the people were mostly poor farmers.
Debt from previous wars ate up gold and silver from the New World.
But still, because Carlos ruled the greatest empire on earth without an heir,
Spain's future is very much at the heart of European politics.
Portugal is also an absolute monarchy in decline.
They'd won back their independence from Spain with French help in 1640.
One of the keys to Portugal is that it still had an important colonial empire, Brazil,
and a lucrative trade with Britain, sherry and port wine, come from Portugal.
The Holy Roman Empire is more complicated.
The emperor, Leopold I, was a Habsburg, and traditionally fought on the British side.
But the emperor as emperor was less and less able to reign in the constituent kingdoms of Germany,
especially after the peace of Osphalia of 1648.
So it's best to think of the German and imperial states as separate kingdoms.
Still, the largest of these was Austria-Hungary,
because the Habsburg had used diplomatic marriage and war to collect titles,
so that Leopold still ruled a vast central European empire.
He was Archduke of Upper and Lower Austria, he was the King of Hungary and Croatia,
he was the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Upper and Lower Silesia, and the Count of Tyrol.
This hodgepodge of kingdoms generally supported the British and the Dutch.
Austria was the largest and most important German state.
It was Catholic and absolutist, but more like Habsburg's fame than Bourbon, France.
That is, Austria was economically and socially backward.
The great estate still employed serfs.
The middle class was tiny.
There was no overseas trade.
And remember that hodgepodge of different peoples, Germans, Hungarians, Bohemians, Slovaks,
made governing difficult.
So this is not an efficient state, though Leopold did do his best to launch reforms,
among other things creating a standing army.
Brandenburg Prussia to the north had the opposite problems and outcomes.
This too was a poor, absolute monarchy trying to recover from the Thirty Years' War.
But Prussia was compact and ethnically relatively homogenous.
Moreover, Prussia had an ace up its sleeve.
Its ruler, Frederick William I, known as the Great Elector,
he's an elector because he's one of the people who can cast a vote for the Holy Roman Emperor,
believed that a ruler is treated with no consideration if he does not have troops and means of his own.
And so, he ruthlessly suppressed rebellion by Yunker aristocrats.
Like Louis XIV, he taxed them at will and impressed them into the service of the state.
In return, he gave them great power over their serfs.
He offered religious toleration for Huguenot fleeing Louis and Catholics and Jews.
He encouraged agriculture and industry and commerce,
and he plowed the resultant tax revenue into a great army,
which he increased in size from 8,000 to 30,000 men.
It's been said that where in most countries, in most countries, the state built the army,
in Prussia, the army would build the state.
Now, the other German states, and you'll remember there are scores of these,
were smaller and less significant and mostly reluctantly caught up in these wars.
Bavarian Saxony were Catholic, Hanover, Hesse, and Rhein-Palatine were Protestant.
Savoy isn't German, but it's part of the Holy Roman Empire.
It's a Catholic state between France and the Italian mainland.
Its main contribution to the war effort will be a great general, Prince Eugene,
or Prince Eugen, as he's known to Germans, of Savoy.
Most of these states were just trying to survive.
They were so poor that they had to rely on British and Dutch money
just to keep their troops in the field.
Finally, worth mentioning,
are three great empires to the north and east.
Only tangentially involved in these proceedings at first, but they'll be important later.
First, Sweden.
Sweden became a great power under Gustavus Adolphus during the Thirty Years' War.
Like Prussian rulers, he and his successors created an efficient,
absolutist Protestant state that was geared for war.
Successive Swedish monarchs bought a series of wars with Russia and Poland,
and by the late 17th century, Sweden had won an empire
that included Finland, Estonia, parts of Germany, Poland, Lithuania.
The Baltic was a Swedish lake.
These wars kept all these powers out of the Western European conflicts
that we're going to discuss in the next three lectures,
but they also overextended in exhausted Sweden.
They culminated in the Great Northern War against Russia,
and Poland and Denmark and Saxony fought between 1700 and 1721.
Now, first Sweden did very well, led by a brilliant soldier king named Charles XII.
Sweden won a great victory against the Russians at Narva in 1700,
but over time, they were simply overmatched,
and they were finally routed at the Battle of Poltava in 1709.
The Treaty of Neistat of 1721 cost Sweden most of its northern empire.
Sweden was, for the rest of the 18th century, a second-rate power.
And in fact, with Charles XII's death in 1718,
his sister Ulrika Eleonora was forced to accept a constitutional arrangement
in which the government would be dominated by a powerful legislature called the Rigstack.
In other words, in Sweden, military defeat led to constitutionalism.
In Russia, military victory would lead to absolutism, even autocracy.
Russia began as the medieval kingdom of Muscovy,
subject to the Mongol descendants of Genghis Khan.
Late in the 15th century, Ivan III, the first prince of Muscovy to call himself Tsar,
drove the Mongols back into Asia and marched into the Volga.
In 1471, he added lots of northern territory with the capture of Novgorod.
Now, the power and territory of the Tsar were all extended by Ivan the Terrible
in the 16th century, Alexei the First in the 17th century,
and Peter the Great at the turn of the 18th century.
We're going to skip over lots of Russian history to get to Peter.
Peter the Great ascended the throne in 1689 after a series of purges and coups
vying against members of his own family.
He put down rebellions ruthlessly, sometimes acting as executioner himself.
He began the westernization of Russia in 1697 when he organized the Grand Embassy
and toured Europe incognito.
The idea of incognito is that everybody knows who you are,
but you're presenting yourself as someone not who you're supposed to be.
So in other words, Peter is saying, don't treat me like Peter the Great.
I'm really not Peter the Great.
Please don't give me the sort of normal marks of respect.
And this means that he can see things and do things that he couldn't do as the Tsar of Russia.
There's a legend that he actually worked in a Dutch shipyard at one point
to learn western shipbuilding techniques.
On this trip, he recruited 750 Europeans to go back to Russia to help him modernize.
Thereafter, he demanded that courtiers wear western dress.
He imposed the Julian calendar.
He established the Russian Navy.
He reformed the governments of Moscow, the provinces and the localities,
even devolving some control to them.
He reformed the organization of the Russian Orthodox Church.
To pay for the army, he imposed heavy taxes on everybody, including vagrants.
Now, his constant military expenditure, remember, he's always fighting somebody,
the Swedes and other people that we'll learn about in a few minutes.
His constant military expenditure stimulated the economy.
Mines and foundries and shipyards were founded.
After gaining territory in the Northern War, he founded St. Petersburg as a western facing capital on the Baltic.
He moved the capital there in 1712.
He spent most of the 17th and early 18th centuries fighting successfully against Sweden in the north,
a weak Poland Lithuania in the west, more about that later,
and less successfully the Ottoman Empire in the south.
As a result, Russia would not play a major role in the Second Hundred Years War
until their end, until about the 1780s, when Russia's dominance in the east had been established.
Russia had to get its own house in order before it began to play a European-wide role.
Finally, I want to mention the Ottoman Empire, Turkey.
Following the decisive battle of Kosovo of 1389,
Turkey controlled much of the Balkans and Greece, most of southern and eastern Europe.
Now, the way they ruled these areas was that if the locals were loyal,
they were allowed to keep their old religion and more or less run their own affairs.
This worked.
Subject peoples did prove to be pretty loyal, allowing the Empire to survive despite instability at the center.
Sultans were frequently, distressingly assassinated in military and dynastic coups, and yet the Empire went on.
As indicated above, the Ottoman Empire long had testy relations,
but relations nevertheless with the great European powers.
They clashed over religion and imperial ambitions, but they needed each other for trade.
Still, the Turks fought Austria over Hungary for 150 years.
After a period of dormancy following their defeat at Lepanto in 1571,
the Turks revived an aggressive foreign policy in the 1660s.
Encouraged by Louis XIV, they besieged Vienna in 1683.
The siege was only lifted by the armies of Jan III Sobieski of Poland.
Turkish armies were finally smashed by imperial armies under Prince Eugene at the Battle of Zenta in 1697.
By the Treaty of Carlowitz of two years later, Turkey conceded Hungary to Austria.
Meanwhile, back in the West, the arrival of Britain into the coalition against Louis XIV was vital,
but not apparently at first.
The British were reluctant participants in this war.
British taxpayers had no interest in foreign wars.
Their strength was at sea, not land.
Their army was politically unreliable.
The military, the clergy, the civil service contained many old supporters of King James called Jacobites.
While most Englishmen were not Jacobites, few had much use for King William and his Dutch friends.
So in the early years of the war, Britain tried to concentrate on a naval strategy, a blue water strategy,
leaving the ground fighting to their European allies.
At first, those allies were on the defensive.
On the continent, Louis took fortress after fortress on the Dutch border.
In the summer of 1689, Louis took the war to William by backing an invasion of Ireland by King James.
In fact, the French provided very little support, but the dispossessed Catholic Irish flocked to James's side, hoping for emancipation.
James actually didn't care that much about the Catholic Irish.
He was far more interested in using Ireland as a launching pad to get his other kingdoms back.
That summer, his ragged army of Irish peasants drove the Protestants north into Ulster,
where they laid siege to Protestant enclaves at Londonderry and Anaskellen.
By the time a Williamite relief force arrived in July of 1689, thousands of Ulster men and women had died of disease and starvation,
a hallowed memory in Protestant Ulster to this day.
After a ferris had been settled in England, William arrived the next year.
The two armies met on the banks of the Boine River north of Dublin on the 1st of July 1690.
William, parading before his troops before the battle, was almost killed by a cannonball,
but he would not dismount or move to the rear.
Once the battle was joined, it was a rout.
James's poor tenant farmers were no match for Dutch and English regulars.
They broke and ran.
So did James.
He abandoned his army and fled back to France, never again, to set foot in his British dominions.
William's victory saved the revolution.
It confirmed the Protestant ascendancy in Ireland, but it was the ultimate disaster,
at least before the famine, for the Catholic Irish population.
Now, actually, William personally supported leniency for the Catholic Irish.
He would be shocked at the current use of his image by Ulster Protestants,
but he needed the Protestant ruling class of Ireland to fight his war, and they wanted revenge.
Over the next 40 years, he and subsequent English monarchs allowed the Protestant-dominated Irish parliament
to pass a series of harsh laws called the Penal Code.
Catholic Irish were forbidden from voting, from holding office, from sitting in parliament,
from attending a university, from practicing law, purchasing land, inheriting it from Protestants,
bearing arms or wearing a sword, a mark of gentility, or owning a horse worth over five pounds.
They were forced by law to divide their bequests among all their heirs.
This is called partable inheritance.
It is the opposite of primogeniture, thus guaranteeing that Catholic Irish estates would be small,
and eventually, since small estates have trouble competing with large ones, leading to their elimination.
In other words, by 1727, the Catholic Irish, amounting to four-fifths of the population,
owned only one-seventh of the land in Ireland.
No wonder that in 1729, Jonathan Swift made the satirical suggestion in a modest proposal
that the English, having sought to liquidate the Catholic Irish in any case, might as well eat their children.
No wonder that in Ireland today, the memory of William's relief of Ulster and victory at the Boyne
continues to rankle with Irish Catholics as it is celebrated tauntingly by Ulster Protestants.
Meanwhile, back at the war?
For a time, Louis controlled the seas after winning the battle of Beachy Head in 1690 off the English coast,
an England-feared invasion.
But the Royal Navy regained control and initiative the next year at the Battle of Leogh,
and that battle enabled William to take the war to Louis.
Now, William III was not much of a general, but he was persistent,
and he was a good enough diplomat to hold the Grand Alliance together.
That combination of William's sheer determination and British material resources started to wear Louis down.
In 1695, the French lost the key fortress of Namor.
Louis was running out of money, meaning the French peasant was running out of money.
In 1697, Louis XIV asked for peace.
The result was the Treaty of Rhyswick, which was sort of a draw with an Allied slant.
Louis recognized William III and his heirs, not James II and his,
as the rightful rulers of England, Scotland and Ireland.
Louis returned nearly all of the European territory that he had conquered since 1678.
And finally, Louis agreed to work out with William a partition of the Spanish Empire,
a series of partition treaties to take effect when Carlos Segundo died.
In short, Louis XIV had finally been stopped,
his dreams of a vast, bore-ball empire thwarted.
Or were they?
The Spanish and English successions between 1700 and 1702,
and indeed the entire European situation,
would change because of three royal deaths over those two years.
First, in October 1700, the King of Spain, poor old Carlos Segundo, finally died,
airless.
On his deathbed, he made a will.
Now, Carlos may not have known much,
but he knew that he was King of Spain.
He knew that he was king of the greatest empire on earth,
and he was going to decide what happened to it.
Remember that William and Louis had worked out those partition treaties,
but no one had asked Carlos.
Instead, Carlos repudiated the treaties
and decided to leave the entire Spanish Empire to one person.
Louis XIV's grandson, Philippe, Duke of Anjou.
Should Anjou refuse, the whole thing was to be given to someone else,
the grandson of the Holy Roman Emperor, the Archduke Charles of Austria.
Now, imagine you're Louis XIV.
Imagine your dilemma when you hear the news of what Carlos has done.
On the one hand, Carlos' will has just given you on a silver platter
what you have always wanted.
Oh, I know it's his grandson, Philippe,
but of course, who's going to really be calling the shots?
It's going to be Louis XIV.
On the other hand, if you accept the will,
you'll be breaking your treaty with William III
that you just signed a few years earlier
and this might provoke another war.
Imagine, therefore, the scene at Versailles
on the 16th of November, 1700.
Louis, Philippe, and his marshals are gathered behind closed doors
in the royal council chamber.
An expectant crowd of courtiers mills outside the doors.
Suddenly, they're flung open.
The Sun King emerges,
and his grandson, at his right hand,
not behind him as would be proper royal etiquette
between a king and a subject.
And he says, gentlemen, you see here the King of Spain.
Such was the will of heaven.
I have fulfilled it with joy.
At the proclamation of his most Catholic majesty,
Philip V, Philippe Quinto,
King of Spain and its empire,
the Spanish ambassador to Versailles
is said to have fallen to his knees,
proclaiming, the Pyrenees have been eradicated.
The border between Spain and France no longer exists.
Louis had taken the wager of his reign.
When William heard, he immediately called for war.
But there was a Tory parliament sitting in 1700,
and the Tories were always reluctant about the war,
reluctant to fund another war so soon
as long as the two crowns remained separate.
But would they?
Early in 1701, the French courts ruled
that a Spanish will could not affect the French succession.
More provocatively, Louis marched into the Spanish Netherlands
and occupied a number of key forts
that had their guns pointed at the Netherlands.
Most provoking and really stupid of all,
Louis announced a trade embargo against England
that applied both to France and to Spain.
He was already acting as if he ran Spanish affairs.
In June of 1701, Parliament pledged their support
to any undertakings William might make
to form a grand alliance to, in their words,
defend the liberties of Europe.
War was brewing.
It became inevitable following the Second Royal Death.
In November of 1701, the deposed King of England,
Scotland and Ireland, poor old James II,
finally died and went to his heavenly reward.
Now, James had been living in pious seclusion
with a small court of devotees at a chateau
that Louis XIV had given him near Saint-Germain, near Paris.
On his deathbed, he begged as a last favour
for Louis to recognize his son, Prince James,
as the next King of England, Scotland and Ireland,
as, in effect, James III of England and Ireland
and James VIII of Scotland.
Once again, Louis faces a terrible dilemma.
Here's the deathbed request of an old friend,
a fellow monarch, a Catholic who'd lost everything for the faith.
But if you accept it, you're going to be breaking the Treaty of Rhyswick,
you're going to be breaking your recognition of William,
you're surely going to provoke war.
Once again, Louis listened to his heart rather than his head.
This time, he made the announcement in James' sick room at Saint-Germain.
I come to tell your Majesty that I will be to your son what I have been to you
and will acknowledge him as King of England, Scotland and Ireland.
Once again, the assembled courtiers went down on their knees,
but no one made any predictions about draining the English Channel.
This meant war.
William's diplomatic corps immediately began to reassemble the Grand Alliance,
Parliament now voted the King the funds necessary for war.
But it would not be King William's war.
After months of feverish activity, the King sought rest and recreation
at Hampton Court Palace in February of 1702.
One day, while out hunting in Richmond Park,
his horse, Sorrell, stumbled on a molehill.
William was thrown and cracked his collarbone.
For years afterward, Jacobites would offer toast to the little gentlemen in black velvet,
the mole that built the molehill that tripped the horse that threw William III.
The wound became infected and William, always frail and sickly,
died on the 8th of February, 1702.
Thus, the war of the Spanish succession would not be King William's war.
It would be Queen Anne's war.
And that was important because women were not thought capable of leading troops.
She would have to delegate her authority.
Fortunately for the allies, she delegated it to John Churchill, Duke of Malbra.
