Lecture 16 Life under the Ancien Regime 1689 to 1789.
For all the change described in the last few lectures, European society in 1750 looked
pretty much as it had done in 1550 and even 1350.
For this reason, the European social system of the 18th century is often referred to as
the Ancien Regime.
But historians know what its inhabitants did not.
It was all about to be swept away in a century of revolution, which began, well, maybe in
1775, certainly in 1789.
Let's take a break from the parade of wars and treaties, kings and ministers, to examine
this society of Europe in the 18th century on the eve of this transformation.
One simple way of conceptualizing European society in the 18th century is to think of
a pyramid with a very broad base.
At the top, at the very apex of the pyramid, a tiny proportion of the population, certainly
less than 3%, the landed aristocracy.
That proportion varied from country to country, maybe 10% in Poland, 7% to 8% in Spain, 2%
in Russia, 1% to 2% in England.
Below them, maybe 10%, 20% if you include all the clergy, the middling orders of merchants,
financiers and professionals, and below them, supporting all the rest with their work, the
agricultural laborers, the peasants.
Which means that whatever most of us would like to imagine from the movies, had we been
born in the 18th century, there's a vast majority of us who would have spent our days piling
mud.
Let's begin with the class we would have envied from our soggy vantage point, the aristocracy.
As you will recall, there are really two groups in the aristocracy, the great titled nobility,
the Dukes, usually members of royal families or very distinguished politicians like Malbra.
These are very rare, only four or five or six per country.
Marquesses and margraves.
Counts in Britain, these are known as earls, followed by Viscounts, Viscounts, followed
by barons, in Britain these would be referred to as lords.
These titles were hereditary but honorific, they involve no real duties, just status,
and on the continent, certain privileges.
Secondary aristocrats without titles would include knights and gentry in Britain, seniors
in France, Hidalgos in Spain, the Schlokta in Poland.
Some of these were as rich if not richer than the titled nobility, but some were impoverished,
especially Spanish Hidalgos and Polish aristocrats.
They have honor but not wealth or power.
As you will recall, theoretically, these are the oldest families in the country.
In reality, they frequently died out and were replenished from below, from among war heroes,
the middling orders, and anyone willing to pay.
Remember too that only first sons inherited titles and lands because of the law of primogeniture.
The idea was to keep all the holdings together and make them as big as possible.
At the beginning of the century, the wealth of landed aristocrats was based upon land,
lots of it from agriculture, and even more from rents.
The Polish-Ukrainian Pataki family owned 3 million acres and had 130,000 serfs.
The greatest English aristocrats might own 10,000 acres.
They give you a baseline in contrast to peasant owned or rented an average of about 5 acres.
During the 18th century, many of these aristocrats tried to find other sources of income.
Some converted seniorial dues, legal rights to produce, into fees.
In other words, instead of demanding chickens, they demanded money from their peasants.
Some pursued enclosure, converting arable farmland into pastureland.
As the century wore on, the smartest aristocrats diversified, especially in Western Europe.
Many held offices in the royal bureaucracies that grew up to fight the wars of the 17th
and 18th centuries.
Many more invested in overseas trade and high finance.
As a result, a great figure like the Duke of Albrecht could make perhaps 70,000 pounds
a year, and I should explain I'm going to use pounds as the baseline for this lecture
because by the 18th century, it's, quite frankly, the strongest currency in Europe.
But in France and Spain, the law actually prohibited aristocrats from engaging in trade,
and that's actually one of the reasons for the relative impoverishment of those countries,
and it could be argued their relative lack of success in war, a lack of connection between
aristocrats and merchants.
At the top, aristocratic wealth made possible a lifestyle marked by opulence, elegance,
and display.
Great aristocrats lived in great country houses, or Chateau, in England, Blenheim for the Duke
of Malbra, Chatsworth built for the Duke of Devonshire with his prophets as Lord Steward
of the household.
In France, Chaunceau, owned by the Dupin family, Claude Dupin was a French financial minister.
In Austria, the Esther-Hasie Palace for the Prince of that name.
Now the 17th and 18th centuries saw a rash of great house building.
These buildings symbolized and embodied the power and wealth of their owners.
The architecture and landscaping reflected reason, proportion, and man's achievement,
that's how they would have put it, in taming nature.
They were filled with art and especially paintings of ancestors to remind visitors of the family's
illustrious lineage and achievements, and of course, if it was a new family, you faked
old paintings.
These houses had great libraries, some even had their own orchestras.
Cannons, built by the Duke of Chandos, employed George Frederick Handel to write anthems.
Esther-Hasie employed Franz Josef Haydn to write symphonies.
Clearly, the greatest of these houses were palaces, rivaling the royal court itself.
They were staffed by great armies of servants.
Lesser aristocrats and gentry lived in more moderate, but still comfortable splendor, different
in scale, but not in kind.
And yet, perhaps the greatest of these splendid edifices were only inhabited in summer.
For the rest of the year, October to May, with time off at home for Christmas, the great
aristocrats spent their time in the great capitals of Europe.
Some had posts in government.
In England and Ireland, some sat in parliament.
Most lived a dizzy life of entertainment and social obligation.
They attended the court at Versailles in France.
St. James is in England, Saint-Sussis in Prussia, Schönbrunn in Austria.
They attended the theater and the opera.
They paid visits to the great aristocratic salon of Paris.
In London, they went to clubs and coffee houses.
In all of these places, nobles interacted with great philosophers, artists and financiers.
Polite conversation became high art.
Reputations and fortunes were made or broken with a comment, a gesture, a raised or lowered
eyebrow.
In short, aristocratic life entailed awesome responsibility for a few, endless amusement
for everybody else, but at the same time, a need to mask one's emotions with etiquette
to seem to be above the fray.
Now, someone had to service this idle class.
The growing middling orders were in charge of that.
Now, by the middling orders, I mean those without titles, usually without land as well.
Most didn't do manual labor and they lived fairly comfortable lives.
Now, I'm going to want to say middle class below.
I'll bet I'll say it, but I probably shouldn't because following the classic Marxist definition
of a class, these people don't really realize they're part of one group.
They don't have class consciousness yet.
I can't really say bourgeoisie, first because not all of them lived in cities and second
because American students can't spell that anyway.
Sometimes members of the middling orders were following a family tradition in the family
firm.
Sometimes they were the younger sons of the aristocracy, forced to make a living because
they didn't inherit land.
Now, at the top of this group would be the great merchants and financiers.
They made money out of overseas and internal trade and investment.
The most successful might achieve fortunes of thousands of pounds a year, rivaling a
great nobleman.
They might try to imitate the aristocracy by perching an estate or a title.
They might even try to break into it by buying a title or by marrying an endowed daughter
to a poor aristocratic family.
In such a case, each side gets something.
The aristocrats get money, the mercantile family gets status, but this was more common
in Western Europe, especially England than it was in the East.
Unlike land, this was liquid wealth.
It could be lost to fire, bad investment, a failed trading venture, or laziness, etc.
It's important to remember members of the middling orders went up and they went down.
Below the great merchants, I would write professionals, doctors, lawyers, military and naval officers,
the clergy.
The clergy range widely in income from poor country Parsons to great bishops.
I would also include here estate stewards and major domos.
Now, during the 18th century, all of these groups grew a little more professional.
They tended to require more professional training, often better education, often at a university.
They formed professional organizations and I suppose it's a sign of pride that you get
more and more people staying in these professions rather than trying to break out and become
something else.
Below them I'd include small tradesmen, small businessmen.
Unlike merchants, they made things, they sold things in their shops.
As I mentioned before, they probably didn't have showrooms.
They made a shoe or they made a piece of silver on spec, on order.
But these people got their hands dirty for tens of pounds a year, maybe a hundred pounds
a year.
They were concentrated in cities, often in the same district, all the shoemakers in
one place, all the barrel makers in another.
Often they lived with extended families in rooms above their shops.
By extended, I mean they had apprentices living with them, young men who had signed on at
age 14 for seven years to learn their master's trade.
At the end of that period, they could petition to become members of the guild and eventually
masters themselves, though the surest way to break into the business was to marry the
master's daughter.
Below this level, I would include in the middle class servants, but you should understand
that servants could spread out into the lower orders as well.
In a world without much automation or labor saving devices, every kind of labor that took
rational thought had to be performed by a person.
And so European society was full of servants.
For ordinary people, this is the major alternative to farm work.
Servants came at every rank and status.
They were estate stewards, major domos and bailiffs who earned hundreds of pounds a year.
Personal secretaries, chaplains, valets, and ladies maids and tutors were almost companions
to the elite, but they were lucky to get a hundred pounds.
And there were footmen and cooks who might make tens of pounds a year, chamber maids
and grooms of the stables who made just a few pounds.
Now sometimes members of the middling orders resented the nobles, but more often they sought
to aid them and even to become through the more important and service to the state.
They often tried to arrange marriages into the upper classes.
They often benefited from disposable income and also from literacy.
And in Britain and the Netherlands, press freedom.
It was members of this class that read enlightenment books and novels and newspapers.
Thanks to the Protestant emphasis on education, there was a rise in literacy in Europe.
Even in France, which is not a Protestant country in the 1780s, 50% of men and 20% of
women could read.
The great Dutch and British publishing houses spread published works throughout Europe.
It was in these two countries that censorship was the least powerful.
The first daily newspaper, the Daily Courant, arrives in London in 1702.
Members of the middling orders also joined cellons and clubs and academies such as the
Freemasons, dedicated to Enlightenment ideals of equality and reason.
They attended the first public concerts given in London in the 1670s, in other words, concerts
not given for a king, but given for paying customers.
By 1700, Venice had 16 opera houses.
Peasants were those who worked the great landed estates, the smaller estates and small farms.
They did the work that made everyone else wealthy.
They comprised maybe three quarters to four-fifths of the population.
Again their experience varied widely, but there's a general rule of thumb that it was
better to be a peasant in the west of Europe than in the east of Europe, with two exceptions,
Scotland and Ireland.
In Russia, Poland, Austria, Hungary and most German states, peasants were serfs.
They owned no land.
They rented it instead with their service.
That meant they had to work two to four days a week on land set aside for the Lord's crops,
known as the demean.
They were not free.
They couldn't leave the land of their own volition.
Rather, in Eastern Europe, a serf could be bought and sold by a landlord.
They survived by working their own land given to them by the landlord the rest of the week.
They're very much in their Lord's power.
He ran the local court, he owned the only mill and the only oven, and he charged his
serfs to use them.
There was no appeal, none at all, from the Lord's decisions.
In fact, in Russia and Prussia, rulers had given landlords more power in the 17th and
18th century over their serfs in this period.
This is the way of buying them off to support the great military adventures that we've
been talking about.
Peasants did better in France.
There were still 100,000 serfs, but most French peasants were free and they could leave the
land.
Most rented, but the percentage of owners was on the rise.
They still had to pay immense seniorial dues to grain grain and baked bread or crushed
grapes in the Lord's press, and they had to pay high taxes, if you'll remember.
They also had to work on the roads for free a specified number of days a year.
And they were inferior in law to nobles.
If you've ever read a tale of two cities, you know that it was much more serious for
a peasant to strike a nobleman in France than it was for a nobleman to strike a peasant.
As I've indicated along with the middle classes, they bore the brunt of the taxes.
Remember all those wars by Louis XIV and XIV.
The land tax, assault tax, salt is a real essential.
They pay customs duties on produce, sold in towns, and a tithe on grain to the church.
So the end story with French peasants is they can be quite prosperous, but they can also
be knocked down into poverty by bad harvests or a war that doesn't go well.
If you'll remember French history in the 18th century, that happened quite a bit.
Let's now move on to England.
Most English peasants still rented, but nevertheless many held by very secure tenure and could not
easily be thrown off the land, and they made good money.
The most prosperous English peasants could make as much as 400 pounds a year.
That would be a fairly wealthy yeoman.
English peasants were free, but they were losing some customary rights, and landowners
still had certain rights, for example the right to hunt game.
English peasants were equal in law to the greatest lord, in theory, of course in practice
we all know who can afford the better lawyer.
Many peasant owning or renting land, valued at two pounds a year, had a vote for parliament.
At the beginning of the century that meant that 15% of the population had the vote, and
the tax burden in England was still pretty fair.
The land tax was borne by the aristocracy, though the excise of sale tax was borne by
everybody else.
Now the exceptions here are Scottish peasants and Irish peasants.
Both of these groups are one step above serfs.
In the case of the Irish in particular, many were displaced former landlords who had been
deported to the western part of the island, the least fertile part of Ireland.
As we have seen, they were forbidden to amass or conserve holdings.
These holdings had to be divided among their children.
I would argue that the different experiences of European peasants explain a lot of European
history.
The French Revolution of 1789, the German Revolutions of 1848, the Irish Famine of 1845-50, and
Rebellion of 1916, the Russian Revolution of 1917, and the fact that there was no subsequent
English Revolution.
What was peasant life like?
Well, as in the Middle Ages, peasants still worked sun up to sun down, with one hour for
breakfast and one hour for lunch.
Soccer was still very physical, involving plowing, planting, and harvesting, but there
was no clock to punch and no quota to hit.
There were frequent holidays, though these were diminishing.
Popular culture hadn't changed very much, it still went to the tavern or to fairs and
festivals to relax.
People played football, what we call soccer, and they liked dog and cock fighting, though
all of those practices were under attack in Protestant countries.
Women and children assist men in the fields at peak times, otherwise they are responsible
of course for tending the goat, the cow that provided milk and cheese, and the sheep that
provided wool.
As we said earlier, it would be these products that might keep a family solvent or even alive
through the winter.
Otherwise, we're mostly talking about subsistence agriculture here.
Peasants grew enough to live, but not enough surplus to sell for profit.
Even an English peasant might make, if he could sell anything for profit, 20 pounds a
year.
Compare that to aristocrats making thousands.
Housing was still small, but now we can talk about two and three room huts that are made
of stone.
The roof is still stach, but you occasionally get peasants who sleep on feather beds.
The poor, the very poor are homeless, were increasingly housed in workhouses, in conditions
designed to be so miserable that nobody would ever want to go there, which of course kept
taxes low.
So what was the life cycle like for these people?
How did it differ from ours in our modern industrial age?
The history of private life, daily life, family life, education, personal philosophy, popular
religion, food, love, and sex, they're all currently among the hottest topics in history.
But the most obvious and important thing that historians have found is no surprise.
Life was drastically different for the rich and the poor.
Take birth.
Upper class children were conceived early in young marriages, when parents were still
in their late teens.
The idea was to provide as many heirs as possible.
Middle and lower class children were conceived in later marriages, when parents were in their
mid-twenties, and so they were generally fewer.
Upper class children were immediately placed into the care of wet nurses.
These were women other than their mother, usually serving girls who were lactating.
Why?
Well, believe it or not, there was an ancient belief that it was actually healthier to be
nursed by someone other than your own mother.
But there was also a desire to free the heads of aristocratic households to resume their
duties as hostesses, and also to encourage quicker conception of the next heir.
This is medically controversial as to whether lactation has this kind of effect, but it
was believed in the 18th century.
The result was probably higher mortality among rich children than among middling and possibly
even peasants' children.
Some historians also think that elite children were not exposed to as much warmth and love
from their parents.
The result was greater psychological distance and coldness.
If so, that would explain a lot of European history.
Lower class parents raised their own children.
Middling children assisted in the family firm in the shop.
Peasant children were given important farm tasks from age three.
They looked after animals, they milked and carried milk.
When older, they assisted with the harvest and with younger children.
Now the result of that, and the fact that they were probably nursed by their own mothers,
means that lower class children were probably healthier, but they were also more exposed
to physical danger because of course animals could very easily injure children.
Let's now turn to education.
Upper class boys were placed early on into the hands of a tutor, usually a university
educated clergyman.
At a fairly young age, an elite boy would go off to an elite school.
In England, a public, really highly private and exclusive school like Eaton, Harrow, Rugby.
In France, you might go to a Jesuit academy.
In Prussia, possibly a military academy.
And for those who didn't like school, there was always the possibility of attending the
court as a page of honor.
Now all of these choices represented an opportunity to network.
It was a chance to meet people with whom you would be running the country later.
At court, it was a chance to shine before those who ran the country now.
Between the ages of 16 and 18, you might head off to university.
Oxford and Cambridge and England, Paris and France, Leiden and the Netherlands, etc.
Now no aristocratic young man was expected to study very hard.
Again, the idea behind a university education is more networking and also to act as a kind
of finishing school.
After that, you might head off for the grand tour of European capitals.
That of course meant more networking, more of a smattering of knowledge and exposure
to other courts, manners and languages.
Upper class young men were expected to bring back artwork, especially from Italy and fill
their country houses with it, which of course showed how refined and elegant they were.
Upper class girls were not given the same advantages.
This was not a great age for upper class female education, but there were exceptions.
Upper class women were taught domestic duties, how to run a household, they were also taught
manners and how to engage in witty conversation.
Sooner or later, both the boys and the girls turned up at court.
For boys, this was a chance to attract more titles and lands and offices and power and
influence.
For girls, it was a chance to attract a husband, so both genders are actually looking for matches
at court.
According to the middling orders, boys generally attended a well endowed grammar school or
boarding school.
If your parents were wealthy merchants, you might very well attend the same school as
the local aristocrat, where you were taught reading and writing and some math and of course
you needed these skills because you were going to work.
If at an elite school, you might also learn Latin.
If you wanted to be a merchant or a craftsman, you might also become an apprentice.
You might pay tuition to serve that apprenticeship between the ages of 14 and 21.
If you wanted to be a professional, you attended a university and probably had to pursue a
graduate degree.
Some middling order girls were allowed to attend school and increasing literacy made
possible an intellectual life for them of novels and poetry, but generally they were
educated at home, similarly to aristocrats, how to run a household, sewing and needle
work, cooking would have been unnecessary because even middle class people had servants
to do that.
Often like apprentices, middling order girls were farmed out to someone else's household.
There seems to have been a contemporary belief that it was easier for housewives to teach
someone else's young women than their own.
As the father of a 14 year old girl, I can't imagine why.
Peasants received little schooling.
There might be a parish school and there might be the possibility of learning some reading
and writing, but remember that peasant children were mostly needed on the farm, ambitious parents
might save up for an apprenticeship, and most girls were floated out to other households.
In general, in the West, the 18th century is a good time for children or a better time.
Possibly because of the influence of Locke and later Rousseau, there's a de-emphasis
of the idea that children's spirits have to be broken of original sin.
Instead there's a growing sense that childhood was a special time and to be enjoyed as well
as used for education.
This period saw the end of swaddling clothes and greater emphasis on hygiene, fresh air,
and even play.
There was less corporal punishment and you get actual children's clothing instead of
little versions of adult clothing.
We see the first toy stores in the 18th century and the first children's books.
Tom Telescope, the Newtonian system digested for young minds, was the hairy potter of its
day.
Marriage and family formation were perhaps the clearest area of difference between aristocratic
and ordinary life.
Now a couple of basic points to make.
Nearly everyone, except for Catholic priests and nuns, was expected to marry.
The decision of whom to marry was the most important decision, socially and economically
of anyone's life.
They didn't have to worry about making a living, they needed to start producing airs,
that was their job.
As this implies, the real significance of marriage in an aristocratic household was
not personal happiness.
Remember life expectancy is about 35.
Why would any family invest in any one individual's personal happiness?
What mattered was the long term good of the family, that's what endures.
Marriages were thus arranged by two great families.
The chief criterion was family advantage and exchange of property through dowries and
eventual inheritance.
So generally it was the parents that went out and sought the partners.
Now I want to be really careful here, you're probably thinking that therefore these marriages
were loveless.
But in fact you should know that 18th century families rarely forced two young people together
who absolutely hated each other.
That was considered barbaric.
Children had a right of veto on the partners their parents had selected.
But at the same time, parents also had a right of veto over a love match that was deemed
economically unsuitable.
Now without love as a criterion, aristocratic men were practically expected to find love
elsewhere with mistresses and prostitutes.
And if you read a lot of 18th century literature, you know that promiscuity and venereal disease
are practically a major theme.
Few aristocratic women went that route because it was dangerous.
Remember the whole point of this system is to preserve family bloodlines through the
male line, divorce laws favored men, you could be disowned.
Nell Gwynn, Charles II's mistress, and Emma Lady Hamilton, Lord Nelson's both died penniless.
This led to a rational reaction in the 18th century decrying arranged marriages, but it
would take a while for that to take hold.
Now among the middling orders there was more freedom to marry whom you wanted, but economic
responsibilities still mattered.
And even peasants couldn't marry any person that they wanted to marry.
Now peasants could mostly marry whomever they wanted.
They had nothing to lose.
There was no property to exchange.
But the community still tried to discourage an unsuitable match because remember that
if a husband abandoned his wife with a child, it would be the community that would have
to take care of them.
This apart, peasant youths were able to choose whomever they wished, but not quickly.
They generally had to wait for a house to open up or for a male to have a situation.
Now historians think that because peasants could choose whome they wanted to marry, these
marriages were warmer and more companionate.
This is a hard one to prove because of course very few peasants kept diaries and love letters.
I would also remind you that in fact, peasant marriages broke up just as often as ours do.
That is to say, husbands could desert wives and don't forget that people were dying.
The average life expectancy was still, as I said, 35.
Moreover, the rate of out-of-wedlock births soared in the 18th century.
5% of births in the 17th century, 20% of births in the 18th.
We're not quite sure why this happened.
We think it may have had something to do with increasing urbanization and a lack of social
control when you go off to the big city.
Also, the Reformation had eliminated confession and there's a lot of evidence to suggest that
in any country that went through a Reformation, confession went away, illegitimacy rates rose
except in places like Geneva where clergymen like John Calvin had a really strong control.
Those rates of illegitimacy produced lots of abandoned children and infanticide and
this was a great age for founding hospitals and orphanages.
Let's talk a little bit about the dark side of life, disease, and death.
Aristocrats in the middling orders had the greatest access to medical care to doctors
but of course that was a mixed blessing.
18th century medicine was great at diagnosis or at least getting better but it was hopeless
on cures.
Bleeding, cupping, plasters were still very much the order of the day.
There was some progress, inoculation for smallpox imported from Turkey and greater emphasis
on hygiene.
Hospitals relied on folk remedies and had the benefits of exercise.
Cities remained especially dangerous.
The plague was just dying out but other diseases thrived there, smallpox, cholera, typhus,
malaria, influenza, and alcoholism.
There were other dangers.
The Great Fire of London in 1666 burnt that city to the ground.
The Lisbon earthquake of 1755 did for that city.
Still, an increasing emphasis on good diet and hygiene may explain why the population
of Europe doubled during the 18th century from 100 to possibly 200 million people.
Now in many respects the improvements noted above, better hygiene and also from the new
world a better food supply, gentler child rearing, slightly more education, more emphasis
on love at marriage were offspring of the rational and scientific revolutions.
Those revolutions continued to transform European society in the 18th century via a movement
to which we now turn called the Enlightenment.
