Lecture 22 Beginnings of Industrialization, 1760 to 1850
By now, you understand why the late 18th and early 19th centuries are sometimes called
the Age of Revolutions, the American, the French, and now in this lecture, the Industrial.
I would argue that this Third Revolution is the most important, the most profound in its
effects on human life.
Before the Industrial Revolution, life in Europe was essentially rural, agricultural,
and natural.
Afterwards, it was to be urban, mechanized, and artificial in the sense of being man-made.
In short, I believe that the Industrial Revolution is the most dramatic watershed separating
us from the lives of our ancestors, a fact which is easy to forget because it took such
a long time and we take its effects on our own lives, electricity, for example, so much
for granted.
Put simply, by and large, they, our ancestors, worked in the fields, out of doors, amid nature,
according to their natural rhythms, and at their own pace.
We do not.
If this morning you arose to the sound of an alarm clock, you donned clothing, which you
did not sew, you ate a breakfast, which you did not grow, are traveling at this very second
in a mass-produced automobile.
In fact, if you're watching or listening to this lecture, which you're obviously doing,
then your life is fundamentally different from that of people in the first half of this
course because of the Industrial Revolution.
Because this shift is so important, we will spend some time, the next five lectures on
it.
This lecture will address the causes, or more properly, the preconditions for the Revolution
and its course.
The next lecture will address its consequences, economic, social, and cultural.
Subsequent lectures will address the intellectual and political reactions to this seismic shift.
Now, while historians generally detest the idea that anything in history was inevitable,
I think that an argument can be made for the very biggest developments, the Reformation,
the rise of constitutional government, the Industrial Revolution, that they would have
happened somewhere sooner or later.
In fact, there's a small group of historians who wonder why the Roman Empire didn't have
an Industrial Revolution.
If you accept an Industrial Revolution as a given, then the historian's task becomes
to ask why it happened just at this particular time and place first.
In other words, why Europe?
Why Britain in particular, followed by Belgium, France, the Rura Valley, and Northern Italy?
Why the late 18th and early 19th centuries?
That's the part that's not inevitable.
In a moment, I'm going to offer eight preconditions that I think account for the Industrial Revolution
happening when and where it did.
Now, you understand, don't you, that any other historian might come up with four or
sixteen, that this is very much how it seems to me and the rather smarter historians that
I've been reading.
Moreover, these are only preconditions.
They are not causes.
That is, these things made the Industrial Revolution possible.
Not one of them was sufficient to make industrialization at precisely this time and precisely this place
inevitable.
That is how I avoid the charge of making this too easy.
But taken together, I think they made industrialization highly likely in one particular place.
So for the magic eight preconditions for industrialization, they are as follows.
First, four European preconditions.
That is, raw materials, an agricultural revolution leading to a population explosion, an increase
in demand, and an increased labor force.
First raw materials.
Clearly, to have heavy industry, you must have sources of raw materials out of which
to make things.
You have to have fuel to power the manufacturing process.
Europe was blessed with all sorts of raw materials, wood for furniture and building materials
and early machines.
At rivers, water is an important natural resource as a solvent and also as a means of transportation
and as a source of power, water wheels.
Tin, iron ore for metal objects, coal which would later develop as a source of power, sheep
to provide wool, and of course, raw cotton from North American colonies.
Well, that's fine, but lots of places have this stuff and it has existed in Europe for
eons, so we're thrown back to our initial question, why Europe and why now?
The second precondition is a population explosion predicated on an agricultural revolution.
For centuries, Europe had been undergoing an agricultural revolution which really picked
up steam in the 18th century.
It's the funny thing about historians, if you ask them when the agricultural revolution
is, depending upon their period, they'll tell you it's anywhere from the 13th to the 18th
century.
Well, what this revolution implied was improved crop rotation, better landscape engineering
and drainage, better fodder crops like turnips, which meant more livestock and so more fertilizer.
Presumably I don't have to explain this.
Improved breeding produced more powerful horses and oxen.
Improved agricultural tools, plows and harnesses and carts.
Now all of these things tended to begin in England and spread to the low countries, France,
etc.
As a result of these developments, despite momentary disasters like 1788-89, Western Europe
was very largely able to feed itself throughout most of the 18th century.
Famine became a thing of the past.
Trade with America also helped.
This positive development produced sociological changes, earlier marriages, better survival
rates among infants and adults, assisted by better hygiene and better diet, and inroads
on smallpox thanks to inoculation, then at the end of the 18th century vaccination.
All of these things contributed to a population rise.
Now his figures historians give for the population of Europe during this time are naturally an
estimate and they vary widely, but I'm going to say a rise from about 100 million people
in 1700 to 200 million by 1800.
Now in the past, a population expansion like that would have spelt economic disaster because
early modern economies were not flexible enough to handle the greater labor and consumer forces
so unleashed.
But this time the growing population actually produced two further preconditions for industrial
revolution.
The first of these and the third of our European-wide preconditions for the industrial revolution
is demand.
All these people needed stuff.
They needed clothes, they needed housing, they needed transportation, they needed entertainment.
In the past, cottage industry and handmade techniques would never have been able to keep
up with this demand.
But as we'll see, Europe was now in a position to do something about it.
This time demand would be a spur to new inventions and investment.
Clothes would be the first frontier.
Later, housing, transport, tools, art, etc.
So the population boom created a market for mass produced articles.
It also created the workers who would produce those articles.
And now I come to the fourth European precondition, a labor force.
Precisely because agriculture was growing more efficient during the 18th century, there was
no need for all those people who are now being born down on the farm.
They would have to move to cities and find work there.
This would be the factory labor force that would supply the industrial revolution.
We'll find that.
All throughout Europe and especially in the West, this new itinerant labor force, spawned
by the agricultural revolution of the 13th through the 18th centuries and the population
explosion of the 18th century, was ready to get to work on the raw materials of Europe
to supply their demand.
So why did they do so in Britain first?
I now come to four further preconditions that apply only to Britain.
These were four additional qualities about Britain which helped to make it become the
first industrial nation.
First, lots of capital, second, a laissez-faire economy, third, a widespread perception that
economic and social mobility was possible, and fourth, the men who took advantage of
the other seven preconditions.
First capital.
To build a factory, you need capital, you need money, and the British had more money
than anybody else at the end of the 18th century because of the commercial revolution, first
of all, which had provided British merchants and investors with plenty of disposable cash.
As we have seen in previous lectures, British colonial trade with the Americas and India
in sugar, tobacco, spices, and slaves had made British merchants and investors rich.
They couldn't spend it all on country houses or the London season.
They needed some place productive to put it, to make it work.
Then there was the financial revolution which had provided an elaborate system of credit
not only for the government, but for individual borrowers.
By the 1760s, there were some 70 banks in London, around 600 in the country at large.
The prime rate of interest in England during the middle of the 18th century was about 4%
or less, so this was cheap money readily available.
The second British precondition, and the fifth overall, was a laissez-faire economic policy.
Prior to 1789, and to a great extent after, in France and other European countries, the
economy was directed along mercantilist lines by the state, often in the interests of the
crown, or favored courtiers, or the nobility.
Some industries, the French perfume and silk industries, for example, were practically
government monopolies.
Now, this made it hard for people in the continent to start new ventures and to innovate because
if they did so, they were always threatening somebody's interests who was powerful.
Britain, by contrast, had very little government regulation of industry.
This was in part because, remember that after the Revolution of 1688-89, the crown is constitutionally
weaker in Britain than almost anywhere else in Europe.
It's also in part because the state was influenced by and had a high regard for merchants.
Remember that merchants sit in Parliament, where they often work on and pass legislation
favorable to business, for example, the breakup of old trading monopolies.
There are also often directors of the Bank of England and the East India Company, which
lend money to the government, and so are listened to by the government.
So merchants are at the center of power.
As a result, there were very few restrictions on the activities of businessmen in England.
They were free to try new schemes without government permission or fears of excessive
regulation, high taxes, or offending some quarter.
Now, we will learn in the next lecture that there's a downside to that lack of government
involvement in business, but in the meantime, it helps get the industrial revolution going.
In 1776, Adam Smith, a professor at the University of Glasgow, published The Wealth of Nations,
heralding Britain's laissez-faire policies by arguing that economies prosper best when
left alone.
The third British precondition was a perception of mobility.
Just above, I implied that merchants and financiers played a larger role and garnered greater respect
in Britain than anywhere else.
By the way, Voltaire noticed this.
He said it was one of the reasons the British won all those wars.
Overall, British society was the least hierarchical, least obsessed with birth, the most democratic
in Europe.
Now, that may not be saying much in the 18th century, and by the way, I might also accept
the Dutch there as being very similar, but it is saying something.
The middle classes, merchants, entrepreneurs, even poor artisans grew up believing that they
lived in a relatively free and open country where it was possible to rise, where an idea
could make you rich.
Even the very poor in England looked down on continental peoples whom they believed were
so poor and oppressed that they had to wear wooden shoes.
This is a theme throughout the 17th and 18th century England that continentals have to
wear wooden shoes.
This was a symbol in English political and economic demonstrations, for example.
When the mob felt threatened by government or private economic policies, they would shout,
No wooden shoes.
As 21st century Americans, I think we can identify with this attitude.
I think we all grow up believing that if we work hard enough, we can grow rich.
I think most of us learn, as our lives go on, that it is perfectly possible that we will
work very hard and still fail to grow rich.
And yet, we continue to teach this to our children.
This is the crucial point.
If you think that you can do it, you're much more likely to try.
And out of that trying came the great innovators of the Industrial Revolution.
As we've often had occasion to point out in this course, sometimes perception is more
important than reality.
Sometimes culture is reality.
Thus, I would argue that it was no coincidence that Great Britain produced more than its
share of scientists, inventors, entrepreneurs, and men of vision at the end of the 18th and
beginning of the 19th century.
I mean men like Thomas Newcomen, James Watt, John Kay, James Hargraves, Henry Bessemer,
Sir Josiah Wedgwood, Robert Owen, Samuel Crompton, Thomas Cartwright, George Stevenson, and my
own personal favorite, Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
Now I would suspect that any European country, any country on earth, could boast an equal
number of geniuses at any one time.
But the reason we've heard of these geniuses is that only in their country, only in Great
Britain, did the other seven preconditions exist, and so allow them to exist, or at least
for us to get to know them.
That is, many of these men were middle class or even lower.
Had they been born in Germany, or in Poland, or in Russia, or Italy, or even France, we
might never have heard of them.
But they were born in a country that was ready for industrialization, thanks to its abundance
of raw materials, its growing population, increasing demand, a growing labor force, reserves of
capital, hands off economic policies, and the widespread perception that they could do it,
and so rise.
Well, fine.
So how exactly did they do it?
How did they build the better mousetrap?
We don't have time to explain how each and every trade in Britain industrialized.
Rather, in the next few minutes, I want to concentrate on just one, and then explain
how the drive to industrialize this one part of the economy inevitably affected others.
Put another way, it's a bit like the space program in the 20th century.
Developments in one area tend to disperse, or require advancement in another, and pretty
soon you have an industrialized nation.
Now, as I explain this, I'm going to be talking a lot about inventions and gadgets, and as
I do, I'm going to have to ask you to forgive the fact that I am not a mechanical engineer,
and so you will not be able, from my descriptions, you won't be able to take these descriptions
and build these things at home.
Quite frankly, I'm not all that interested in how these better mousetraps worked.
I'm more interested in the effects of those better mousetraps on Britain and Europe.
So what is this magic industry that is going to explain the industrial revolution to us?
For the purposes of this lecture, the key to unlocking the industrial revolution is
the simple, now rather common commodity that I am currently wearing, cotton.
We all know the virtues of cotton.
The cotton manufacturers are going to love me for this.
It's cool in summer.
It's warm if layered in winter.
It's easy to clean and maintain.
Now, because cotton is grown in the United States, I think we tend to take it a little
bit for granted, but my experience is that to this day in Britain, cotton still has a
certain magic to it.
It's a bit the way we feel about British wool, which of course to the British is pretty
thick on the ground.
Now one reason for cotton's special place in British consciousness is that it, for most
of British history, it just wasn't that easy to come by.
It was grown abroad in the 13 colonies, then the United States, or in the West Indies.
Now in fact, by 1750, the supply of raw cotton from the colonies was more than adequate thanks
to the plantation slave economy of the South.
It was the process of producing cotton, which made it rare and expensive.
Cotton had to be woven by hand on slow, heavy loons that required two people to work.
Out of thread that was hand spun on spinning wheels, very much like the spinning wheels
you see in antique shops today.
After carting and washing and combing and separating the cotton from its own seeds in
more or less reverse order, all these processes had to be performed by hand.
As a result, cotton manufacture was very much a cottage industry.
Raw cotton fibers were distributed by cotton factors to farmers' wives who blended and
carted and drew and spun into thread and wove the cotton thread into bolts of cloth.
Then the cotton was periodically collected by the factor.
As a result of all this labor, cotton was expensive.
It cost 11 shillings a pound in the middle to late 18th century.
That's more than half of a pound sterling, more than an agricultural worker's weekly
wage.
All that began to change in 1733.
In that year, John K. invented the flying shuttle, a lighter, quicker loom able to be
worked by just one person.
This potentially doubles the amount of cotton cloth that can be produced.
Now the rate-determining step, the one that slows cotton production, is the amount of
thread that individual suppliers can or can't supply to the weavers.
That problem got solved in 1763, when James Hargraves invented the spinning genny.
The spinning genny was essentially a multiple spinning wheel.
It was a rectangular wooden frame.
At one end, there were eight or ten or more spindles.
At the other end, there was a carriage through which fibers ran, which was attached to a
crank, which could be turned.
By turning the crank, which pushed the carriage back and forth and turned the spindles, one
person could spin the same amount of thread as eight or ten spinners could previously.
Now the problem was that the thread kept breaking in the flying shuttle, which slowed
the weaving process.
This problem was solved just six years later.
With the invention in 1769 of the water frame, also called the throttle or roll-dry machine
by Richard Arkwright.
This was used to strengthen thread.
The title water frame is kind of a misnomer, as this only refers to its source of power,
not what it does with the thread.
Rather, water frames were attached to spinning gennies, and they run thread through a series
of rollers, twisting and tightening.
If you've ever taken a good look at a piece of thread, you know that it's actually made
of many fibers twisted together.
The result was stronger thread.
By the third quarter of the 18th century, the demand for cotton to supply these machines
was now beginning to outrun supply because production was getting easier.
It was at this point that the rate-determining step was the laborious process of separating
the raw cotton from the seeds or the bowl.
That problem was solved in 1793 by Eli Whitney, or possibly Mrs. Whitney, there's actually
some debate about this, when he or she invented the cotton gin.
The cotton gin was essentially a box with a cylinder inside that you turned, you guessed
it, with a crank.
What would the Industrial Revolution have done without cranks?
On the cylinder were teeth which grabbed the cotton and pulled it through a comb.
Since the seeds were too big to pass through the comb, the cotton and seed were now separated
mechanically.
The result of this was that the supply of cotton became less laborious.
The actual picking of cotton is backbreaking and hand-laserating work, as anyone who's
ever done it can tell you.
But because separation from the bowl grew easier, one operator could produce 50 pounds
of combed cotton in a day.
This yield of raw cotton doubled every decade thereafter.
Cotton grew easier and cheaper to supply, which meant that slaveholding grew more profitable.
It could be argued that Britain's Industrial Revolution was one reason that American plantation
owners were so committed to slavery before 1861.
Now, these immense supplies of cotton flowed into England.
By 1800, the real limit on cotton manufacture was the number of spinning-genny spools which
could be cranked by a single human being.
But what if you could tap a more powerful source of energy than the human arm?
After the 1760s, it became common to assemble groups of spinning-genies, waterframes, and
flying shuttles in complexes called factories.
In order to power these factories, they were situated near water, specifically on downward
slopes near fast-moving streams.
These streams turned waterwheels, which turned cranks, which turned the waterframes and the
spinning-genies and the flying shuttles, which produced masses of cotton cloth.
In 1780, Samuel Crompton invented the mule, a sort of super-spinning-genny.
But there were two problems with this source of power.
First, it limited factory building to rugged upland areas with rushing rivers.
By the way, for the first and only time in their histories, the craggy, rugged uplands
of places like the North Midlands and Scotland and England became economically desirable
locations because they could support factories.
But these areas were not convenient to the financial and governmental centers of the
British Isles, London, or Edinburgh.
Nor do sources of raw materials and sources of labor and the markets.
They were out of the way.
More problematic was the weather, especially in this part of Britain.
River flow and therefore production would slow down in hot weather because of drought
and in cold weather because of ice.
In other words, factory owners need a form of power which was steady and not dependent
on the weather.
The answer to that was, of course, steam.
Now the ancient Greeks knew the principle of the steam engine, but they considered it
a toy.
They never applied it to practical purposes.
In 1712, in the modern era, Thomas Newcomen applied for a patent for an atmospheric engine.
The idea behind this is not that different from the kettle on your stove.
A coal fire heats water in a boiler which produces steam.
The steam is channeled into a cylinder which pushes out a piston.
But the piston can't be pulled back into the cylinder until the steam cools.
Cold water would be shot into the cylinder to suck in the piston, but the whole process
was very slow and inefficient.
So the Newcomen engine is only really useful where brute force is necessary but no speed,
for example the pumping out of mines.
But in 1769, James Watt, a scientific instrument maker at the University of Glasgow, a lab
tech modified Newcomen's engine.
He had the same idea of the boiler and the steam in the cylinders, but he added a condenser
chamber which applied steam alternately in the chamber to push the piston in and out.
He then attached a revolving flywheel.
Now we have circular motion, perfect for powering spinning gennies and flying shuttles and mules.
Beginning in 1785, textile manufacturers began to apply steam engines to power machinery
much larger, more extensive than could ever be possible with the human hand.
They could thus erect their factories closer to sources of raw materials, closer to sources
of labor, and closer to their markets, though this would actually become less of an issue
again when railroads were invented in the 1820s.
So now, the only limitation on the size of your factory and then the number of machines
you can power from your steam engine is how much steam pressure you can generate.
Unfortunately, you can't generate much.
The problem is one of metallurgy.
Early steam engines were made of wrought iron, iron that had to be pounded, and so it was
not terribly strong and a distressing number of steam engines exploded.
Metals had to get stronger.
Now, metal in those days meant iron, at least very largely before 1800.
To melt iron, you need charcoal, which comes from burnt wood.
But unfortunately, as early as 1700, Britain was running out of trees.
Remember that trees are used for everything, the building industry, the furniture industry,
and the wooden walls of the Royal Navy.
However, in 1709, Abraham Darby figured out how to preheat coal, which becomes coke, to
separate iron from its ore.
The iron would then be wrought, that is pounded flat with hammers manually.
So this results in iron of varying thicknesses, which is still quite weak.
It wasn't until 1783, when Henry Court invented puddling and rolling, using coal to heat iron
ore till it was molten.
Then the iron could be cast into molds, that you get stronger and more homogenous iron.
This all made it much easier to prefabricate materials, and it made steam engines stronger.
But of course, steel would be even better, wouldn't it?
In 1856, Henry Bessemer figured out that preheated iron and carbon produce high quality steel.
Steel is of course much stronger and more flexible than iron.
Now we're in business.
Better metals meant better tools, stronger cheaper cutlery, rails for railroads, better
steam engines.
Better steam engines meant railways and steamships by the 1820s.
More powerful pumps to allow for deeper mines meant more coal, more tin, more iron ore.
More and more powerful motive power from those better steam engines meant more and bigger
spinning gennies and waterframes and flying shuttles and mules.
These machines evolved into the very powerful textile machines that we know today.
As a result, cottage industry and piecework and handwork was just no longer profitable.
Many textile and other industries organized manufacturing in factories in big towns with
large numbers of textile machines powered by steam engines supplied by coal from mines
in the North Midlands, in Wales, in Scotland, supplied further with labor from the countryside.
Factories in turn supplied their goods to the whole world via steamships, railways.
The greatest entrepreneurs tried to control every aspect of production, and here the great
example is Sir Josiah Wedgwood, the great China manufacturer.
He established quarries for the raw materials for his China.
Then he dug canals to bring those materials to his factories.
He planned the work in his Staffordshire factories to be efficient and standardized and repetitive,
so he's beginning to pioneer mass production.
He established showrooms and shops in major cities to market his goods to the middle classes.
He'd already conquered the royalty and the aristocracy.
He'd received the royal warrant for all sorts of China sets to the king and to the queen.
This is during a period of time when George III has lots of kids, so he can make a lot
of money out of marketing to different princes.
What he would do is advertise in the showroom that such and such a China set was by appointment
to the king or the queen, and of course everybody would want to have it.
He would strike cheap copies, and now what he's doing is he's both creating a consumer
culture and he's controlling every step of the process.
The end result of all this activity varies by one's perspective.
On the global level, Britain became manufacturer to the world.
It increased its lead as the wealthiest country on earth.
For the factory owner, there were fabulous profits to be made.
For the consumer, lots and lots of cheap goods.
Take cotton.
By the early 19th century, industrialization had made available huge supplies of cotton
at unbelievable low prices.
By 1820, one spinner was able to do what had been the work of 20 spinners before industrialization.
I told you that in 1784, cotton cloth cost 11 shillings a pound.
By 1832, it cost 1 shilling a pound, and that brought cotton into the reach of the poor.
But of course, this also enhanced the profitability of American slavery, especially after Britain
outlawed slavery in its own colonies, and so helped cause the American Civil War.
Other results, without necessarily the last implication, were replicated in all sorts
of industries.
Finally, for the workers, the unemployed agricultural workers who drifted to the cities to begin
work in the new factories, the result was hell on earth.
Let us now turn to the human implications of the Industrial Revolution.
