These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by The Teaching
Company. These lectures are titled, Foundations Western
Civilization II, A History of the Modern Western World, Part 3.
Chapter 25, The Romantic Response, 1789 to 1870.
Liberalism had been the final flowering of the Enlightenment belief in human reason.
But to at least one group of authors writing at the end of the 18th century, reason was
an incomplete guide to the question of how men and women ought to live. It was cold and
unfeeling, remember your Smith and your Malthus and your Ricardo. It ignored a whole dimension
of human experience. Liberalism was inadequate to solve the problems created by the Industrial
Revolution. It missed the most important human consequences of industrialization. It moved
too slowly. And the dramatic events of the French Revolution seemed to be far more promising
as a means and a model for social change. These writers who very largely rejected the
tenets of liberalism, and even to some extent of the Enlightenment, were the first romantics.
That term romantic, like the term liberal, has all sorts of modern connotations which
don't always stem from the movement's original historical meaning. Often we use it to mean
sentimental, idealistic, nostalgic, or even erotic. But what did the term mean originally?
And why does an adjective, which we attach to steamy novels, have anything to do with
the Age of Steam, the Industrial Revolution? We can trace the roots of Romanticism to the
middle of the 18th century, and to a qualification, or in some cases a reaction against the Enlightenment.
As we've seen, a number of Enlightenment figures questioned 18th century faith in pure
reason. David Hume argued that reason was limited as a guide to causation, cause and
effect. Emmanuel Kant argued for the importance of intuition. Edmund Burke, writing about
the excesses of the French Revolution, challenged the idea that human reason always led to
human progress. He argued against the liberals, claiming that institutions and traditions
which had grown up over time, did so because they probably worked, and that the inheritance
of the past was valuable, and should never be repudiated lightly.
In an early work, the philosophical inquiry into our ideas of the sublime and the beautiful,
written in 1756, he contrasted the beautiful, the delicate, the proportional, and the rational,
for example a piece of porcelain or a formal garden, with the sublime, the mysterious,
the exotic, the capable of inspiring terror like a great mountain or a cavern, and that
idea of the sublime became intimately bound up with Romantic feeling. Most famously and
influential, Jean-Jacques Rousseau emphasized in all his work the importance of human feeling,
the lessons of the heart. He wrote, I felt before I thought.
As these writers, especially Rousseau, grew popular, there arose in the 18th century a
popular movement, especially popular among the aristocracy, to revive feelings, to glorify
sentiment. And this, of course, is a reaction against the idea that aristocrats had to keep
their feelings hidden and appear to be above the fray. Sentimental novels grew popular
all across Western Europe. On a much higher level in Germany in the late 18th century,
the sorrows of young Werther, a 1774 by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, set the pattern for the
lonely, tortured, romantic hero who ultimately fails in his quest for love and commits suicide.
This book was hugely influential. Napoleon claimed to have read it over and over. In
his poetic drama Faust, published between 1830 and 1832, Goethe takes the old and much
treated legend of a medieval alchemist and turns it into a romantic tale of a lonely,
brooding hero striving for knowledge who literally sells his soul to achieve it, but is eventually
redeemed by the woman he wronged. Now, if that isn't romantic, I don't know what is.
By the way, that one might fit Napoleon better than Werther, actually.
The dramatic poetry of Schiller, William Tell and Mary Stewart casts historical figures
in dramas that emphasize strong emotion. The poetry of Johann Gottfried Haader celebrates
German folk culture. Even in 18th century classical music, which we tend to think of
as being very formal, rococo precision, mathematical grace, we begin to see an emphasis on messy
emotion in the operas of Mozart, The Marriage of Figaro, Don Giovanni, and The Magic Flute.
It could be argued that there was something political about this. After all, who was primarily
devouring all that enlightenment and liberal writing emphasizing reason and reform? The
middle class. Against it, writers like Burke emphasized feelings and emotional ties, loyalties
to persons and kings and landlords, rather than ideas. Note this famous passage from
the Reflections on the Revolution in France, in which Burke complains of the rough treatment
of Marie Antoinette by the Parisian mob. But the age of chivalry is gone. That of
the sophistas, economists, and calculators has succeeded, and the glory of Europe is
extinguished forever. Never, never more shall we behold that generous loyalty to rank and
sex, that proud submission, that dignified obedience, that subordination of the heart
which kept alive, even in servitude itself, the spirit of an exalted freedom. The unbought
grace of life, the cheap defensive nations, the nurse of manly sentiment, and heroic enterprise
is gone. It is gone, that sensibility of principle, that chastity of honor, which felt a stain
like a wound, which inspired courage while it mitigated ferocity, which ennobled whatever
it touched, and under which vice itself lost half its evil by losing all its grossness.
I guess if you're going to try to defend the international status quo, if you're going
to try to convince people how great it is to be ruled by kings and queens, if you're
going to try to get people to forget that Marie Antoinette was eating cake while her
people starved, this is the way to do it. Appeal to the emotions. Now Edmund Burke is
often credited as one of the founding voices of Romanticism, but also of conservatism.
Can you see how the love of kings and of countries and of flags devotion to the old religion,
and perhaps a yearning for the good old days when people knew their place and were looked
after by benevolent aristocrats, the old great chain of being, is at once profoundly conservative,
but also romantic. I think it's fair to say that modern American conservatism blends this
romantic view of the past with classical liberalism. So how was it that Romanticism and Romantic
writers became defenders of the working class if this is such a conservative movement? To
understand that, we have to examine those Romantic figures who did their writing in
the midst of the Industrial Revolution. In 1798, three young poets, William Wordsworth,
Samuel Taylor Colleridge, and Robert Suvi, produced a collaborative volume entitled The
Lyrical Ballads. Now to understand why this book was so revolutionary, why it's often
considered the founding work of Romantic poetry in English, let me read to you an example
of what poetry was like before The Lyrical Ballads. Alexander Pope's Essay on Man. Now
as I do, I'm not concerned that you pay that much attention to the meaning. I'd like you
to pay a special attention to just the sheer sound of the poem. It's form to know how the
lines, pay attention to how the lines end. Know then thyself, presume not God to scan.
The proper study of mankind is man. Placed on this ismus of a middle state, a being darkly
wise and rudely great, with too much knowledge for the skeptic side, with too much weakness
for the Stoics pride, he hangs between. In doubt to act or rest, in doubt to deem himself
a god or beast, in doubt his mind or body to prefer, born but to die, and reasoning but
to err. Created half to rise and half to fall, great Lord of all things yet a prey to all,
soul judge of truth in endless error hurled, the glory, jest and riddle of the world.
Note how neatly sculpted these lines are. They're like an 18th century garden. They're
made up of rhymed couplets, regular rhythms, clear line endings. Clearly Alexander Pope
has his doubts about human reason in progress, and yet the aural effect of the poem is to
actually celebrate rationality, proportion, mathematical precision. Note above all that
the subject of the poem is lofty, philosophical, and utterly impersonal. Now compare this to
the most famous poem from the lyrical ballads. Lines composed a few miles above Tinturnaby
on revisiting the banks of the Y during a tour, July 13th 1798.
Five years have passed. Five summers with the length of five long winters, and again
I hear these waters rolling from their mountain springs with a soft inland murmur. Once again
do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs that on a wild, secluded scene impress thoughts
of more deep seclusion, and connect the landscape with the quiet of the sky. The day has come
when I again repose here under this dark sycamore, and view these plots of cottage ground, these
orchard tufts, which at this season with their unripe fruits are clad in one green hue, and
lose themselves mid-groves and copses. Once again I see these hedgerows, hardly hedgerows,
little lines of sportive wood run wild, these pastoral farms, green to the very door, and
wreaths of smoke sent up in silence from among the trees.
Do you hear the difference? I would argue that these opening lines tell us almost everything
we need to know about romantic poetry, at least for the purposes of this lecture. In
particular, they suggest to me five distinguishing characteristics of romanticism that will determine
its attitude towards industrialization. First, an emphasis on content over form.
Note how the lines meander across the page. As I read them, could you tell where they
left off, as you could with Pope? Again. The day has come when I again repose here under
this dark sycamore, and view these plots of cottage ground, these orchard tufts, these
irregular rhythms serve better to convey strong emotion, which brings me to the second characteristic
of romanticism. In romantic poetry, emotion is good. Feeling is to be embraced, and to
be shared. Again, compare this to Pope. Is there any emotion there?
Third, I would note a celebration of individuality. Note the emphasis on the feelings of the individual.
Obviously, Wordsworth's reflections are personal to him. Do we know anything personal about
Pope? Who he is, what his experience has been? Wordsworth expects you to care about him and
what he feels. Fourth, a lot of what he feels has to do with the past, a yearning for the
past. Five years have passed, five summers with the length of five long winters. For
the phyllis-sauce and their liberal heirs, the past was a bad place. It was full of irrational
traditions and stupid superstitions. But for the romantics, the past is a comfortable place.
It is progress that is sinister. Fifth, the poem obviously celebrates nature.
Note how the poem almost makes it human. Little lines of sportive wood run wild. During the
18th century, nature was something to be tamed in 18th century formal gardens. If it couldn't
be tamed, mountains, waterfalls, nature was frightening. But the romantics embraced nature.
They distrusted cities. In a later poem, the prelude, Wordsworth writes about the close
and overcrowded haunts of cities where the human heart is sick. I would argue that these
are the principal characteristics of romanticism. One, valuing of content over form. Two, valuing
of human emotion over reason. Three, the value of the individual over the impersonal. Four,
of nature over the artificial. And five, of the past over the present and the future.
We see these characteristics again and again. In romantic novels, Scott's Ivanhoe of 1819
with its nostalgia for the medieval past. Mary Shelley's Frankenstein of the previous
year about an individual who struggles against death itself, making his own Faustian bargain,
whose creature is himself a doomed romantic hero. Victor Hugo's Hunchback of Notre Dame,
Les Mesorabes, or Cromwell all emphasize emotion and they emphasize the individual as well
as the romance of the past. We see the same characteristics in romantic painting.
Jacques Louis David, who portrayed the French Revolution and Napoleonic Empire as grand romantic
adventures. Eugene Delacroix, his famous liberty leading the people, emphasized the color and
the emotion of the French Revolution of 1830. You'll remember my stressing the idea that
French revolutions are always to some extent about emotion.
Caspar David Friedrich's magnificent landscapes revel in the majesty and the mystery of untamed
nature as well as the lonely heroism of the individual. The British painter, J.M.W. Turner,
also seems to emphasize the emotions produced by natural landscapes. And in the fighting
Temeraire, he bewails the replacement of sail and wood with steam and iron ships as a ship
that fought with Nelson at Trafalgar is taken to the breakers yard. His swirling style lays
the ground for impressionism later in the 19th century. Then there's romantic music.
After all, Beethoven wrote the pastoral symphony, not the industrial symphony. His sonatas
with nicknames, usually admittedly bestowed by publishers, not by himself, have names
like the moonlight, the pathetique, the tempest, the appassionata. Beethoven broke down old
forms and he created new ones. Following the trail he blazed, Schumann wrote the spring
and wrenish symphonies. Mendelssohn's Hebrides overture and Scottish symphony both depict
foreboding scenery and that scenery is linked to romantic historical legends. List stone
poems and piano pieces, lion eyes, well, list himself as a romantic hero. The operas of
Wagner are drenched in history and myth, legend and deep emotion. All dwell on the mythological
or historical past, the role of the individual, a nature. All of these works of art dwell on
these characteristics. They also seek to evoke strong emotion and every one of them created
new forms which allowed for freer expression of that emotion. So fine, but what does any
of this have to do with the industrial revolution? The answer to that question should be obvious.
How would a movement that valued content over form, emotion over reason, the individual,
nature and the past view the new factory economy and the cities that it spawned? How would
it view Manchester? Once again, let's turn to the poetry.
William Blake was active at exactly the time of the industrial revolution. In perhaps his
most famous poem, Jerusalem, he played off of an ancient English tradition that Jesus
had visited Britain before his crucifixion. He imagined what Christ would think of Britain
in 1800. And did those feet in ancient time walk upon England's mountains green? And was
the holy Lamb of God on England's pleasant pasture scene? And did the countenance divine
shine forth upon our clouded hills? And was Jerusalem builded here amongst these dark
satanic mills? Bring me my bow of burning gold. Bring me my arrows of desire. Bring me
my spear oak clouds unfold. Bring me my chariot of fire. I will not cease for mental fight,
nor shall my sword sleep in my hand till we have built Jerusalem in England's green
and pleasant land. This poem, set to music by Sir Hubert Perry, has become a sort of
second British national anthem, along with Arn's Robertania and Elgar's Land of Hope
and Glory, etc. But one which calls Britons to build a better world, Jerusalem, than the
one in which they live. Now, obviously, Blake was something of a mystic, and he was pretty
naive about politics. Bring me my bow of burning gold. What's that going to do? How's that
going to change life? Percy Bischelli was both more ambitious and more cynical. He argued
in the defense of poetry of 1820 that poets are the unacknowledged legislators of the
world, and he sought to use that power, the emotional power of poetry, to urge his fellow
Britons towards reform and revolution. A famous example is his poem, England in 1819.
Now you should remember from the last lecture what England was like in 1819. The doddering
King George III was in his last year. Britain had just defeated Napoleon and the French
Revolution only four years before. The country was in the grip of economic depression. Luddite
machine breaking was recent and widespread. The middle class and workers wanted reform.
The government's response was the Peter Lou massacre, in which innocent women and children,
as well as male protesters, workers, members of the middle class, had been slaughtered by
regular British troops. And the six acts, which restricted personal liberties. Here's
what Shelley had to say. An old, mad, blind, despised and dying King. The princes, the dregs
of their dull race, who flowed through public scorn, mud from a muddy spring, the royal
family of England at the time, had its share of scandals. Rulers who neither see nor feel,
or know, but leech like to their fainting country cling, till they drop, blind in blood,
without a blow. A people starved and stabbed in the untilled field, Peter Lou, an army
which liberticide and prey makes as a two-edged sword to all who wield, golden and sanguine
laws which tempt and slay. This refers to the fact that you could be hanged for stealing
a bolt of cloth or a piece of bread in England at this time. Religion, Christless, Godless,
a book sealed. A Senate, time's worst statute, unrepealed, our graves, from which a glorious
phantom may burst, to illumine our tempestuous day.
Fine Percy, but tell us what you really think. More to the point, exactly what do you have
in mind? He tells us a little more in song to the men of England, which is sort of Shelley's
diagnosis of what's wrong with the state of the English economy as well as politics.
Men of England, wherefore plow for the lords who lay ye low, wherefore weave with toil
and care the rich robes your tyrants wear, wherefore feed and clothe and save from the
cradle to the grave those ungrateful drones who would drain your sweat, nay, drink your
blood, wherefore bees of England forge many a weapon, chain and scourge, that these stingless
drones may spoil the forcid produce of your toil.
Have ye leisure, comfort, calm, shelter, food, love's gentle balm? Or what is it ye buy so
dear with your pain and with your fear? The seed ye sow, another reaps. The wealth ye
find, another keeps. The robes ye weave, another wears. The arms ye forge, another bears.
So seed, but let no tyrant reap. Find wealth, let no impostor heap. Weave robes, let not
the idle wear. Forge arms in your defence to bear.
Shrink to your cellars, holes and cells. In halls ye deck, another dwells. Why shake
the chains ye wrought? Ye see the steel ye tempered. Glance on ye, with plow and spade
and hoe and loom. Trace your grave and build your tomb, and weave your winding sheet, till
fair England be your sepulcher. Well, OK.
The most romantic of romantics rejected society and its mores entirely. Byron, Shelley, Franz
List, all lived scandalous sexual lives. Collarage and de Quincey experimented with drugs, the
latter writing about it in confessions of an English opium eater. Wordsworth and Shelley,
later even Wagner, became political revolutionaries.
English romantics in particular welcomed the French Revolution. Wordsworth wrote,
Bliss it was in that dawn to be alive, but to be young was very heaven. Oh, times in
which the meager, stale, forbidding ways of custom law and statute took at once the attraction
of a country in romance when reason seemed most to assert her rights. Compare that with
how Edmund Burt felt about the French Revolution. These writers hoped for and expected the same
for England and elsewhere. Romantics wanted a complete regeneration of society, not unlike
the radicals of the 1960s, who also lived unconventional lives, and who also thought
that society was on the verge of undergoing radical change. Beyond England, continental
romantics took up the call. In Germany in 1804, Friedrich Schiller's William Tell and
the famous opera by Rossini celebrate a Swiss hero fighting against the tyranny of the Holy
Roman Empire after the Reformation. As we've seen, Beethoven's incidental music to Egmont
and his opera Fidelio take on a similar theme. While his ninth symphony, setting the words
of Schiller, imagines a world in which all a mention ver den Bride, all men shall be
brothers. In Italy, Alessandro Manzoni wrote the betrothed in 1827, in which a peasant couple
fights to end feudalism. In Russia, Alexander Pushkin went to prison for writing an ode
to liberty in 1820. And yet, as in the 1960s, radical change never really came. There was
no revolution in Britain. Britain never experienced the great romantic French-style revolution
that Wordsworth and Colleridge and Suvi really expected any day now. Rather, as we've seen,
they'd experienced gradual change as liberal ideas triumphed. France's first revolution
turned into Napoleon's empire, and we've discussed what Beethoven thought of that. The revolution
of 1830 was more middle-class and liberal than romantic and radical. Louis Philippe
was a prosaic figure, not dashing at all. And in fact, over the 1830s and 40s, he turned
increasingly repressive and conservative. English, French, and German romantics would
have to travel to find congenial and successful revolutions. They could travel to South America.
In the 1820s, Simon Bolivar, a Napoleon-like figure, led South Americans in successful
rebellions against Spain. The poet Byron famously went to Greece. He fought and died for Greek
independence during its war with the Ottomans in 1829. Or they could wait for the series
of revolutions that would erupt in Europe in 1848. But most romantics did not wait.
Most seem to have undergone a kind of personal retreat. Wordsworth and Suvi became establishment
figures defending the status quo. Wordsworth later dedicated a poem to the intrepid sons
of Albion, Albion is an ancient word for England, who fell at Waterloo, fighting the French
Revolution. Both men eventually were named poets laureate to the sovereign of England.
Your job as poet laureate is to write an annual ode in praise of the monarch on his or her
birthday. Could you become any more establishment than that?
Later in the 19th century, John Ruskin urged a return to the medieval past with guild organization
and craftsmanship. He wanted elaborate gothic decoration for public buildings. You can see
his influence today in many public places in Britain and America, especially American
University architecture, British railway stations, and very impugnance design for the houses
of parliament, which are actually a lot more medieval looking than the medieval buildings
that they replaced, yet they were built in the 1830s and through the 1850s.
Many romantics embraced a nationalism, which de-emphasized the brotherhood of man and liberal
reform in favor of embracing local traditions, folk culture, national unity, and identity.
We'll talk more about this in a subsequent lecture.
Thomas Carlisle saw society's best hope in the ascent of some great hero, a sort of
combination of an enlightened despot and a superman, who, like Napoleon, would right
the wrongs of the industrial revolution. Matthew Arnold, like Mill, urged better education,
but the tone of much of his writing, for example, Dover Beach, is valedictory and resigned,
as his civilization had seen better days. The sea is calm tonight, the tide is full,
the moon lies fair upon the straits, on the French coast the light gleams and is gone,
the cliffs of England stand, glimmering and vast, out in the tranquil bay, come to the
window, sweet as the night air. Only, from the long line of spray where the sea meets
the moon-blanched land, listen, you hear the grating roar of pebbles which the waves draw
back and fling, at their return, up the high strand, begin and cease and then begin again,
with tremulous cadence slow, and bring the eternal note of sadness in.
Sophocles long ago heard it on the Aegean, and it brought into his mind the turbid ebb
and flow of human misery. We find also in the sound a thought, hearing it by this distant
northern sea. The sea of faith was once too at the full and round earth's shore lay like
the folds of a bright girdle furled, but now I only hear its melancholy long withdrawing
roar, retreating to the breath of the night wind, down the vast edges drear and naked shingles
of the world. Ah, love, let us be true to one another, for the world which seems to
lie before us like a land of dreams, so various, so beautiful, so new hath really neither joy,
nor love, nor light, nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain, and we are here as on a
darkling plain, swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight, where ignorant armies
clash by night. Compare that with Wordsworth's joy at being alive during the French Revolution.
What happened? Well, nothing. I think the problem was that the romantics had plenty
of passion, but they didn't have any clear plan for how to bring down existing society
and erect a new one. Like the radical counterculture of the 60s, the romantics knew how to inspire
strong feelings of indignation at the injustice of existing society and excitement about the
possibility of imminent change. But with their emphasis on individuality and emotion, on
nostalgia for the past, they failed to organize. They had no practical plan. Indeed, the German
writer E.T. A. Hoffman once described the fundamental characteristic of Romanticism as
infinite longing. So maybe it was inevitable that achieving their goal was beyond their
capacity. So, as with the radicals of the 1960s, the movement's main achievement was
in changing attitudes, ways of thinking. In this sense, the romantics were a great success.
It could be argued that they dominated the worlds of literature and painting into the
1880s, the world of serious music into the 1910s. Many, like Charles Dickens, continued
to fight the good fight to right individual wrongs. In terms of popular culture, we're
still romantics. Look at our popular music, and our movies, and our television. In some
ways, the next group that reacted to the industrial revolution started out as the mirror image
of the romantics. At first, socialists had a rational plan for changing society, but
they inspired no passion. But their most famous adherents would combine and inspire both.
In the next lecture, the revolutionary philosophy of two men who were at once socialist and
romantic, rational and passionate, Karl Marx and Frederick Engels.
