Lecture 27, Descent of Man, Rise of Woman, 1830 to 1890
It could be argued that industrialization was merely the natural consequence of the scientific
revolution, as the movements which responded to it grew out of the Enlightenment.
Throughout the 19th century, science was changing, not merely how people lived, but how they
thought about their world.
In his System of Positive Politics or Treatise on Sociology of 1851, Auguste Comte argued
for positivism, the belief that a scientific approach to all human problems, the accumulation
of hard facts and their quantification, would produce sound, positive laws for society
and concrete results.
The search for such facts was undertaken by the social sciences, especially sociology,
a term first coined by Comte in 1838.
But science also had a disturbing tendency to upset old orthodoxies, Marx and Engels
build themselves as scientists.
Science meant change, and more scientific inquiry yielded more questions.
Take the most basic facts about the natural world, how old is the earth, and how did humans
first appear on it?
At the end of the 18th century, new geologic findings and the discovery of strange fossils
bearing no apparent relation to current animals and plants raised questions about the age
of the earth and how the present species came to be.
A generation or so later, Charles Lyle established the Modern Science of Geology, publishing
the Principles of Geology in 11 revised editions between 1830 and 1870, so this became a standard
work.
James Hutton argued that contrary to the 6,000 year time frame established by Bishop Usher,
the earth was immeasurably old.
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck developed an early theory of evolution in his Zoological Philosophy
of 1809 and the Natural History of Animals Without Backbones in 1815 and 1822.
He argued that life began with simple organisms, which evolved over eons of time as a result
of interaction with the environment, but he was not clear on exactly how that happened.
It was Charles Darwin who put it all together.
Now Darwin was a typical middle class Victorian Englishman.
His father was a doctor, his mother was a Wedgwood heiress, and perhaps more importantly
his grandfather was a Rasmus Darwin, a natural philosopher, a physician, and the author of
Zoonomia, which had argued that life in nature was a struggle for existence among animals.
Darwin was educated at Cambridge, famous for the sciences, remember that Newton was a Cambridge
man, and at Edinburgh, famed for its medical school.
So he was educated as an MD, but also as a clergyman.
In 1831 to 36, he signed on as the ship spotanist on the Scientific Expedition of HMS Beagle
to the South American coast, specifically the Galapagos Islands.
He collected animals and fossils.
He noted slight differences in the living specimens, both from the fossils and between
habitats.
Evolution, Darwin thought, explains the variations that he noted.
Now in a sense there was nothing new here.
Scientists had largely accepted evolution for half a century.
What was new was that Darwin suggested a mechanism by which evolution might take place.
Natural selection.
The key for Darwin was reading Malthus' essay on population.
Darwin realized that nature was a great competition for food.
Who would win that competition?
The species or representatives of that species that were best fitted to win it.
Think of the giraffe.
Which giraffe gets the most leaves?
The tallest.
Because the tallest giraffe gets the most leaves, the tallest will be the healthiest
giraffe, and the best fitted to survive, drought or natural disasters.
This giraffe then becomes the most likely to be selected by a potential mate, and the
most likely to reproduce.
Darwin called his idea natural selection, and explained it in the Origin of Species,
which was published in 1859.
The book was rapidly accepted in the scientific world for it explained so much, but was a
shock everywhere else.
Darwin himself said that when he first hit upon the idea of natural selection, he felt
as if he were committing murder.
Why?
Why should Darwin's ideas have been so controversial?
Why do they remain so today?
On a basic level, Darwin denied the biblical account of creation.
Obviously, the evolution of modern species had to take place over eons of time, not six
days.
In Darwin's words, the Bible presented, quote, a manifestly false history of the world.
But in fact, this is a bit of a red herring.
Science had been advocating evolution and denying the six-day creation for a century.
Moreover, 19th-century biblical scholars like David Friedrich Strauss, using modern
techniques of textual criticism and history and archaeology, had been moving away from
a literalist interpretation of the Bible anyway.
What really bothered theologians about Darwin was that he seemed to have removed God from
the equation entirely.
Remember Newton, the deists and their watchmaker God?
Darwin took this all one step further.
The survival or extinction of species, the survival or extinction of individual beings
was apparently automatic.
And unfair, it was based on brute force.
In Darwin's universe, God was certainly not concerned at the fall of every sparrow.
Rather, nature's law, or God's, if he was concerned in it at all, was unfeeling and
cruel.
Thus, Alfred Lord Tennyson famously referred to nature, red in tooth and claw.
Nature seemed to work not unlike modern industrial capitalism, only the fittest survive.
Which raises the question, what if you applied these ideas to the world of men and women?
You'll remember the Enlightenment tradition that natural law worked for man's benefit,
and that man was a supremely rational creature.
Darwin argued that man was just an animal in competition with other animals.
A set of writers, known as the social Darwinists, followed the implications of these ideas without
Darwin's permission.
Herbert Spencer, in his social statistics, which began publishing as early as 1851, and
synthetic philosophy in 10 volumes, 1860 to 90, and Walter Badgett, in Physics and Politics
of 1872, argued that history was the struggle of the strong against the weak.
Clearly, the civilized, the powerful, the wealthy are so because they are best fitted,
our natures and societies best.
Clearly, the uncivilized, the powerless and the poor are so because they're unfit, nature's
losers, destined to be ground into the dust.
To preserve them via charity, social welfare programs, was simply to prolong their agony,
like preserving a genetically imperfect animal, and encouraging both to breed.
Lazy fare economic policies, in contrast, would allow the cream to rise to the top.
So this is a little different from Adam Smith, who says that all benefit from lazy fare economies,
this philosophy simply embraces the winners.
Thus, just as Europeans were about to contemplate and struggle over conquering and expanding
empires, the rights of workers and the poor, and the rights of women, Darwin and the theory
of natural selection were used to justify racism, imperialism, classism, and sexism.
Most controversial of all was the implication left unstated in the origin of species, that
if all nature evolved from a primitive state, surely so did man.
But from what?
Darwin, aware of the potential uproar, refused to say until 1879, when he published The Descent
of Man.
But the writing was already on the wall.
We descended from primates.
Apes.
Now, to many Victorians, this served to humiliate man, or at least render him no better than
any other animal.
These two worldviews, one rational and scientific, the other faithful and romantic, have been
clashing ever since.
They first met in public debate at Oxford in 1860, at the annual meeting of the British
Association.
The traditionalist position was represented by Bishop Samuel Wilberforce, a famous and
powerful orator of the day, popularly known as Soapy Sam.
The Darwinians were represented by Thomas Henry Huxley, a scientific writer and popularizer.
This is sort of Jerry Falwell vs. Carl Sagan in the Victorian period.
At the climax of the debate, Wilberforce, smiling, turned to Huxley and begged to know,
was it through his grandfather or grandmother that he claimed descent from a monkey?
Huxley replied, he was not ashamed to have a monkey for an ancestor, but he would be
ashamed to be connected with a man who used great gifts to obscure the truth.
And that was that, the 19th century equivalent of, Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy.
The Victorian evolution came to be accepted scientific orthodoxy at the end of the 19th
century.
It explained or fit too much to be dismissed, the growing fossil record, and the genetic
experiments of Gregor Mendel.
Mendel explained how Darwin's useful traits were passed on to the next generation.
Mendel was an Augustinian monk at a monastery in Burnow, Czechoslovakia, which was known
for scientific inquiry.
He built on the work of 18th century taxonomists who grouped and ranked living species.
He studied 28,000 pea plants for heredity and evolution in a series of what I think
we can all agree are tedious experiments.
If you study 28,000 of anything, believe me, it's a tedious experiment.
He developed the idea of inheritance by means of genes.
He identified the notions of dominance and recessiveness.
And he published his work in 1866.
Now that work is heavily quantitative, and that may explain the fact that it didn't really
make much of an impact before 1900.
Far more immediately important to physical medicine were the discoveries of Pasteur
and Koch.
Louis Pasteur was a professor of chemistry at the University of Lille, but it may be
important to understand Pasteur to know that he had lost three daughters to typhus.
To assist the French wine industry, he studied the process of fermentation and identified
microorganisms, bacteria, which sour wine.
He saved the French silk industry by teaching them how to identify and cull bacterially infected
eggs.
He also came to understand how milk sours.
He developed the idea of pasteurization, heating milk, to kill that bacteria.
From all this work, Pasteur constructed the germ theory of disease, which was immediately
controversial.
The idea that microscopic organisms could kill large ones seemed laughable to some people.
But it was gradually proved by Pasteur's courageous experiments on anthrax vaccination,
rabies vaccination, this involved a famous 1885 inoculation of a small boy, septicemia,
cholera, diphtheria, tuberculosis, and smallpox.
In 1888, the Institute Pasteur was founded one of the world's great research centers
into communicable disease, most famously identified with identifying the HIV virus causing AIDS.
Robert Koch developed these ideas in Germany.
In the 1870s, he isolated the disease-causing agent in anthrax, thus demonstrating that Pasteur
was right.
He developed techniques for working with infectious agents.
In the 1880s, he worked on infectious wounds, explaining how tetanus worked.
In 1882, he announced the isolation of the bacteria causing tuberculosis.
In the next year, he went to India to study and isolate bacteria causing cholera.
In 1891, he became the director of Berlin's Institute for Infectious Disorders, now the
Koch Institute.
New technology in the 19th century also had an impact on medicine.
In surgery from the 1840s, anesthesia became available, nitrous oxide, ether, or chloroform.
Queen Victoria famously allowed herself to be chloroformed during one of her pregnancies
in 1852.
She reported the effect to be, quote, soothing, quieting, and delightful beyond measure.
I guess it doesn't take much to delight Queen Victoria.
Joseph Lister, who studied with Pasteur, developed antiseptics in 1865.
As surgeon to the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, he tackled the 50% mortality rate in its surgery.
Embracing Pasteur's germ theory, he applied carboleic acid to surgical instruments and
cut surgical mortality to 12%.
By the 1880s, these practices had become widely accepted in Britain and were gaining on the
continent.
In 1895, Wilhelm Conrad Rentschen discovered X-rays.
Now if science was raising uncomfortable questions about man's place in the universe, the enlightenment
and its calls for the rights of man had raised similarly uncomfortable questions about the
rights of women.
Man was a new word, but not really a new idea in the 19th century.
European history is full of writers who questioned the subordinate place of women.
In the Middle Ages, the Abbas Hallowees and Hildegard of Bingen, Eleanor of Aquitaine and
Christine de Pizon.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, Margaret Countess of Newcastle, Afra Ben and Mary Axel all were
writers, all had a small but admittedly mostly male audience.
A number of major European countries had, as we have seen, been ruled quite successfully
by women.
In the case of England, there was Elizabeth I and Anne and Victoria.
Austria had been ruled effectively by Maria Teresa and Russia by the Empress Elizabeth
and then Catherine the Great.
Now it's ironic, none of these rulers were feminists themselves.
They fought to be treated seriously among, and to a great extent as, men.
They weren't interested in promoting freedom or opportunity for their fellow women.
The key figure in changing that was Mary Wollstonecraft.
Mary Wollstonecraft asked, at the height of the French Revolution, in a vindication of
the rights of women, why the benefits of the Enlightenment were restricted to men.
She condemns the state of servile ignorance to which women were consigned, and she asks
in Enlightenment fashion why women should not be free to exercise their non-biological
talents, as men did.
Ironically, she died in childbirth, having her daughter Mary, the future author of Frankenstein.
John Stuart Mill, realizing that his own wife, Harriet Taylor, was smarter than he was, yet
barred from public life by Victorian assumptions about gender roles, extends these ideas in
on the subjugation of women, which became highly influential and translated into many
languages in the 19th century.
Mill accuses men of oppressing women, of squelching their freedom of initiative from the earliest
times, but he also accuses women of buying into the prevalent system willingly, of concentrating
on the cultivation of beauty rather than mental attainments, and of being trained from birth
to serve and acquiesce in their own subordination, usually trained by other women.
A good example that would have been obvious to everyone might be Victorian fashion, which
loaded women with cumbersome dresses and tight lacing and bustles, which limited movement
and even breathing, just as men were beginning to dress practically.
They had exchanged knee-bridges for trousers.
The French author, Amandine du Divin, reacted to this by violating every gender convention
she too wanted to dress practically.
She took the pseudonym George Sand.
She dressed in men's clothes, including trousers.
She also engaged in a series of affairs with prominent intellectuals, including the composer
Frederick Chopin.
She wrote novels and letters and memoirs, all celebrating her unconventional lifestyle.
Early socialists like St. Simone and Frederick Ingalls also embraced the notion of female
equality, and 19th century European feminists made progress on specific issues.
For example, higher education.
During the 19th century in both France and England, public education was gradually extended,
and made mandatory for women.
The first women's colleges of higher education were Gertin College and Newnham College in
Cambridge, founded in 1869 and 1871 respectively.
In Russia and France, the government sponsored secondary and university courses after 1856.
Individual women were able to graduate with professional degrees in law, in medicine,
women's medical schools opened in Zurich and Paris, and with PhDs.
As most famously Marie Curie, born in Poland but working in France, investigated the properties
of radium with her husband Pierre.
They won a joint Nobel Prize in 1903, and when he died three years later, she assumed
his position at the Sorbonne of the University of Paris, its first female faculty member.
But for most women, professional opportunities were few and far between.
Women were becoming a more common sight in certain areas of the workplace, factory work,
and some fields were increasingly associated with women.
Teaching and secretarial work became female occupations only in the 19th century.
Now reformers weren't sure about this.
They actually passed laws limiting the work women could do.
Women were barred from night work and barred from some industrial processes.
The idea was to protect women, but also the idea was to protect men from the jobs being
taken away by women.
And there were worries over women's childbearing capacity, so this idea of liberal reformers
to protect women from certain professions was actually very controversial with feminists.
So were contemporary attitudes towards sex, marriage, and divorce.
In most European countries, women were viewed practically as property and could not own
their own property if married.
There were no rights of divorce, no right of refusal of marital rights, and indeed no
recognition of the possibility of marital rape.
Birth control was largely outlawed in Europe.
Indeed the 19th century responding to the challenge of feminism emphasized female domesticity
in the words of Alfred Lord Tennyson, man for the field, and women for the hearth.
But some women fought back on specific fronts.
In England, Caroline Norton, the abused wife of a drunken, lout, campaigned for the right
of women to initiate divorce proceedings, which she won in 1857.
Also in England, Josephine Butler fought laws that went after prostitutes, not their
clients.
Regarding birth control, in England, Amy Besant, campaigned for the right to distribute information
on birth control.
In the Netherlands, Alita Jacobs established the first birth control clinic in the 1880s.
But this too was controversial with feminists.
Some thought that removing the risk of pregnancy would actually lead to more sexual exploitation.
This is a difficult issue.
Beginning in 1870 in England, married women were allowed to own their own property in
their own right.
But the ultimate goal of voice and politics remained elusive.
During the 19th century, female suffrage was really only an issue for the West, especially
England and the United States.
And that's of course because no male in the East has a vote.
During the first half of the 19th century, many women took the lead in other ways.
They took the lead in charitable organizations.
They joined liberal and reform clubs.
Women were very active in British charism, for example.
They helped establish temperance and anti-slavery societies.
In the 1850s and 1860s, in England, John Stuart Mill helped found the First Women's Suffrage
Association in 1865 and introduced the First Women's Suffrage Bill in Parliament, which
of course got nowhere.
In England, two approaches emerged by the end of the 19th century.
The National Society for Women's Suffrage urged persuasion, peaceful protest, and incremental
change.
But the Women's Social and Political Union, founded in 1903 and led by Emmeline Pankhurst,
urged violence if necessary.
Men got the vote because they were and would be violent.
The women did not get it because they were constitutional and law-abiding.
Elsewhere, she wrote, the argument of the broken pane of glass is the most valuable
argument in modern politics.
Radical feminism was born.
Stay tuned.
Now, positivism and feminism were only two currents in a rushing torrent of ideas that
threatened to overwhelm the last remaining lengths of the Great Chain of Being.
In the arts, romanticism continued, but with more of an edge to it.
A good example would be the novelist Victor Hugo, who was both a romantic and a reformer
in Claude Gaul.
He attacked the French penal system in 1834.
In Les Miserables, he had took on the whole French social system.
His vivid depictions of urban poor laid the groundwork for realism.
In painting, book illustrators like Gustave Doré were romantic, but they were also very
realistic in their depiction of industrial life.
In music, Johannes Brahms's melodies may seem romantic, but the fourth symphony and
many of his chamber works end tragically, angrily, or ambiguously.
The hero is defeated.
Increasingly, realism and naturalism reacted against the idea of the romantic hero.
Faced with the squalor of agricultural and working class industrial life, artists tried
to depict life as it really was.
This was part of the same reformist impulse as the Sadler Commissions.
In this work, humans tend to be crushed by their environment, and indeed by their animal
nature.
There's Darwin again.
For example, in literature in France, Henri de Balzac portrays Parisian society and all
of its messiness in a series of novels entitled the Human Comedy.
Flo Bares, Madame Bovary, depicts a woman who tries to cure her middle class, ennui,
by engaging in a series of sexual affairs, ending in her suicide.
Emil Zola depicts working class life with scientific precision.
In Nana of 1880, he writes about a prostitute.
In Women's Paradise of 1883, he depicts middle class women as frenzied shoppers seduced by
the new department stores.
And in Germinal of 1885, he writes about the lies of exploited coal miners in heart-rending
detail.
In Britain, Charles Dickens nearly two dozen novels, Oliver Twist, Hard Times, there are
too many to name, famously indict the greed of industrial society.
George Eliot is not so much a social reformer as an explorer of adult situations with all
their moral ambiguity, perhaps at her height in Middlemarch of 1872.
Thomas Hardy took on the institutions of marriage, class, and gender prejudice in Tess
of the Durbervilles in 1891 and Jude the Obscure in 1895.
In Russia, Dostoevsky writes crime and punishment in the Brothers Karamazov and many other
great novels.
Tolstoy's War and Peace and Anna Karenina are all realistic novels, but they're also
shot through with moral philosophy.
Finally, the Norwegian Henrik Ibsen's Adol's House of 1879 depicts approvingly a woman
leaving a loveless marriage.
Again, all real life.
In painting, we see a similar rejection of Romanticism after 1850.
Corbet's paintings depict the hard work of agricultural workers.
Jean-François Millet's Man with a Ho of 1862 portrays an ordinary, nameless man bent
over in labor.
But above all photography, invented by L. J. M. Daguer in the 1830s, can obviously claim
to be realistic, the thing itself, not subject to the interpretation of the artist.
Now of course, we now know how much interpretation is involved in the setting up and the point
of view and special effects and lighting and exposure, but at the time it seemed that you
were indeed getting the thing itself.
Cheaper than painting, photographs bring reproduction into the price range of the middle, even occasionally
the working class.
It revolutionizes news reporting and war reporting and reporting about social problems.
Now you can take photographs of the slums.
In music, we see realism, I think, in the operas of Verdi.
La Traviata depicts the fast life and tubercular death of a courtesan, a high class prostitute.
Rigoletto is about a sexual predator, the duke, and the doomed attempt of the title
character to save his daughter from him.
Otello is about raw jealousy and marital violence.
At the end of the century, Verismo opera, León Cavallo's Pagliacci and Puccini's
La Bohème, depicts poor people in squalid conditions with all of their passions.
But music was also a vehicle for nationalism.
In music, composers had always used folk melodies and popular songs, heightened symphonies
are full of Hungarian melodies.
In the 19th century, Brahms's Hungarian dances were fabulously popular, and Chopin's
Miserka's and Polonaise's used Polish and Slavic dance forms.
But increasingly in the 19th century, during the second half, we hear a self-conscious trumpeting
of national myths.
For example, Wagner's operas celebrate German mythology, Tristan und Esolda, de Meistersinger,
the massive four opera cycle der Eing des Nibelungen, music which would be used later
by the Nazis for propaganda purposes.
In the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Czech composers celebrated their Slavic heritage.
Antonin de Bourgeois composed the Slavonic dances.
His symphonies are full of folk melodies and dance forms, polkas and furiants.
Bedricks' Smetana composed a great six-movement cycle depicting episodes from Czech history
in mythology called Mavlast, my country, or my fatherland.
Now, this art is political.
It wasn't lost on anybody that Smetana didn't have a country yet.
In Russia, Tchaikovsky incorporated folk dances and folk songs into his ballets, the
nutcrackers, Swan Lake, and Sleeping Beauty.
And into his symphonies, number two is called the Little Russian.
Number three is called the Polish.
Remember that Russia ruled Poland at the time and ends with the Grand Polonaise.
And number six, the Pathetique, quotes from the Russian Orthodox funeral liturgy.
Now after 1875, there's a kind of countervailing influence, I think, in French painting, where
we see a movement away from the realism of photography towards impressionism.
Syrat, Degas, Manet, Monet, Renoir, and Van Gogh all move away from the realistic portrayal
of the thing towards an impression of it, and in the case of the last artist, Van Gogh,
a state of mind.
They also, in history, we also see a moving away from romantic stories about great heroes
and towards scientific precision and greater realism.
But the great German historian Leopold von Ronke called, VS Eichenklich Gewesen ist, as
it really happened.
Now associated with all of these movements and beliefs was a growing secularization.
The state of religion varied across Europe.
In England, the Church of England remained established, but there was a growing culture
of doubt, which I think we've seen in the case of Darwin.
In France, the Church had never really recovered the position lost at the French Revolution.
And in Germany, the Chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, and I realize that we haven't united Germany
yet, but we will, he would launch a full scale Coulter Kampf, culture war against the Roman
Catholic Church, especially expelling Jesuits, making civil unions mandatory.
Overall in Europe, Church attendance declined for workers and peasants.
As men grew less interested in religion, however, women took up the slack.
We also see a secularization among many urban Jews who begin to assimilate into a broader
European culture.
Now as we saw in the case of evolution, conservatives bewailed all of these developments.
The Roman Catholic Church in particular mounted an active resistance to modern trends and
especially secularization.
In 1854, the Pope proclaimed the immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
And that led to an explosion of faith and devotion, especially among women all across
Europe.
So there's a sense of revitalization.
In 1858, the visions of Bernadette of Lourdes became very well publicized.
And remarkably, as demonstrated by my Loyola colleague, Suzanne Kaufman, the Church actually
used modern technology and modern marketing to bring this story to the faithful and to
foster faith.
For example, they used modern advertising to attract pilgrims to Lourdes and to spread
the word.
Pilgrims were brought by train and doctors had to certify the cures, which of course
would then be related in the advertising.
But if the Church embraced the tools of modernity, it rejected the attitudes.
In 1864, Pope Pius IX issued the syllabus of errors condemning virtually the whole of
modern civilization, including liberalism, socialism, and communism.
In 1870, the First Vatican Council approved the doctrine of papal infallibility.
But in 1878, a new pope, Leo XIII, began the process whereby the Church has come to terms
with modernity.
He accepted some elements of democracy, and he raised the standards of scholarship in
Catholic universities and schools.
Now, maybe the pope's previous hostility to modernity is understandable, for he was
one of many European rulers who lost power as a result of one of its hallmarks, nationalism.
