Lecture 32 The Alliance System, 1872-1914
In the last two lectures, we saw how European rivalries at home and abroad increased tensions among the great powers.
As those tensions grew, every such power, even Britain, began to see the need to make friends as it had made enemies.
The result would be a system of interlocking alliances designed to prevent war by ensuring that any aggressor country would be outnumbered,
but equally ensuring that if any one country defied the odds, every other country would be forced to join in.
In short, the alliance system constructed to preserve the peace became the last long-term cause of the Great War.
The alliance system dated back to the 1870s and was essentially the creation of Otto von Bismarck.
To understand his rationale, it's necessary to turn the clock back to the days after Germany's unification in 1871.
Bismarck saw the new Germany as a satiated power. That is, a country with no further territorial ambitions.
This new country needed only peace to establish itself. Bismarck saw the only real threat to that peace as coming from France.
The French still smarted from the humiliation of the Franco-Prussian War. They wanted revenge and they wanted Alsace-Lorraine.
Bismarck had humiliated the French in part to reassure the smaller German states of Prussian power, but in retrospect the Treaty of Frankfurt was a mistake.
It perpetuated an age-old hatred into the 20th century.
Still, Bismarck believed that the French could be contained and the peace of Europe maintained so long as the French could be kept isolated.
That is, under Bismarck, the keystone of German foreign policy was to make sure that France had no friends.
This is sort of a real politic variation on William III's balance of power.
Bismarck achieved this goal for 20 years by the following examples of real politic.
First, he maintained close ties with Italy, bringing former enemies together in the Triple Alliance with Austria in 1882.
He avoided building a navy so that the British would continue to feel their chief threat came from the hated French.
Remember, we're talking about the period before Kaiser Wilhelm takes over.
And he established the Three Emperors League.
The Three Emperors League was built on Bismarck's lenient peace with Austria in 1866.
Now, despite the Prussian War in that year, the Austrian's chief rival in Eastern Europe was Russia.
Austria wanted to hang on to its eastern and Slavic territories.
As we've seen, Russia assumed the role of protector of the Slavic peoples and the Orthodox faith.
They claimed to want to secure the independence of these peoples, but in fact many people in Europe thought that the Russians simply wanted to annex them.
Certainly, Russia wanted an outlet onto the Mediterranean.
Bismarck used his prestige and good reputation with the Austrians to act as a go-between, engineering the Three Emperors League in 1872.
He argued that three conservative empires, Germany, Russia and Austria, should stick together.
This left France without a friend in Europe, which diverted her attentions to Africa.
Now, thanks to Bismarck's diplomacy, a series of crises in the Balkans was solved, usually in favor of the Austrians.
For example, between 1875 and 1876, Bosnia-Herzegovina rebelled against Ottoman rule.
The Ottomans slaughtered thousands in retribution.
Russia declared war on the Ottoman Empire in 1877.
The resultant Treaty of Sen Stefano ceded Armenia to Russia and made Bulgaria autonomous, but with very clear ties to the Russians.
Britain and Austria were opposed to this growth of Russian influence.
Bismarck, seen as an honest broker, called the Congress of Berlin in 1878 to partition Bulgaria and balance the rival interests.
Out of this, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro had their independence either restored or reiterated.
Austria was to administer Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Still, Bismarck was able to keep the Tsar in the alliance.
Somehow, the Three Emperors League lasted nearly 20 years, and so with it did the peace of Europe.
But in 1888, Germany got a new emperor.
We have already met Kaiser Wilhelm II.
Perhaps you figured out that he was a swaggering, impulsive braggart who advocated an expansive foreign policy.
In many respects, our stock Hollywood image of the Germans in their century of militarism got its start from the personality and behavior of this one man.
He also tended not to get along very well with his relations.
Now at this point, it might be worthwhile to explain that by 1900, many of the great ruling houses of Europe were thoroughly interrelated.
This has a great deal to do with the happy and productive marriage of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert.
Contrary to her rather straight-laced image, Victoria and Albert embraced marital conjugality with enthusiasm,
producing a series of male children led by the heir to the British throne, Prince Edward, who succeeded to that throne and ruled as Edward VII from 1901 to 1910.
They also produced a series of daughters who were married into various other royal houses of Europe.
So as a result, Victoria was grandmother to the future King George V of Great Britain,
Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, and the Tsaritsa Alexandra, wife of Nicholas II of Russia,
who was also related somewhat more distantly to the British royal house.
She was also the grandmother to a host of European princes.
Now you might think that these familial bonds would be another factor maintaining the peace of Europe,
but if you thought that, you would only be demonstrating that you had never grown up in a family.
In the case of the three cousins in particular, George of Britain, Wilhelm of Germany, and Nicholas of Russia,
family ties turned into family rivalries, with all of the bitterness that only family squabbles can produce.
With Wilhelm especially, those rivalries were carried over into policy.
In 1890, Wilhelm fired Bismarck.
He also dismissed Russia as a backward nation ruled by his idiot cousin, Nicholas.
Wilhelm launched a tariff war against the Russians, and he closed the Berlin Stock Exchange to Russia.
In 1892, he reaffirmed the Triple Alliance with Austria and Italy, leaving Russia out in the cold.
He tried to add Britain as well, which would have been a pretty formidable alliance,
but the British could not abide the growth of the imperial German navy.
Now in the meantime, Russia had become just as lonely as France.
That didn't worry Wilhelm because the two countries were so different.
France was a revolutionary republic, glorying in the Marseillaise and its roots in the French Revolution.
Russia was the last of the truly Ancien Regime agrarian empires. It was an autocracy.
It hadn't even experienced revolution in 1848. It had only freed its serfs in 1866.
But in January of 1894, France and Russia swallowed their differences and formed a defensive alliance.
In the meantime, Great Britain, beginning to feel the pressure from the naval race and the German economy,
aware that it could no longer sustain a navy larger than any two combined
and a policy of splendid isolation, also began to cast about for friends.
In 1902, the British signed an alliance with Japan.
Britain got cover for its Pacific colonies, Japan got training for its navy,
and battleships built in British yards. Stay tuned.
In 1904, Britain signed the Entente Cordiale with France,
promising mutual assistance if either were attacked.
Did I say France? This was a diplomatic revolution.
These two had been at each other's throats since, often on since when, 1066?
But this alliance made sense given the very real fears each had of Germany,
and it was all thanks to Wilhelm. His swagger and bluster and ignorance of other cultures
drove old enemies into each other's arms and created new ones.
In 1907, Britain, France and Russia, three countries as different in temperament
as one can possibly imagine among the great powers of Europe, signed the Triple Entente.
Each would go to the aid of any other if attacked.
This also saw some tensions between Russia and Britain in the Middle East.
Again, this is a diplomatic revolution.
These countries had been at loggerheads for generations about the Eastern Mediterranean.
Remember the Crimean War? But Wilhelm had managed to make them all friends.
Still, a general European war was not inevitable.
These alliances were defensive. They wouldn't come into effect unless someone were attacked.
The problem is that this system ensured that if anyone were attacked,
all would have to join in like some infernal Rube Goldberg machine.
But the metaphor that is more often used for the situation of Europe at the dawn of the 20th century
is that of a powder keg piled high with munitions ready to go up.
All that was needed was a spark.
That spark came from the Balkans in the summer of 1914.
That summer of 1914 was invariably remembered by Europeans who lived through it
as one of the most perfect, most glorious in recent memory.
As usual, the European aristocracy travelled either into the country
or to luxurious spas and watering holes where they would recuperate or socialize
before the next hectic social season in Paris, London, Berlin, Vienna, or St. Petersburg.
Heds of state were still on duty. They travelled on ceremonial visits to other capitals.
One such visit was paid that summer by the Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austrian throne,
and his wife Sophie to Sarajevo, the provincial capital of Bosnia Herzegovina.
Now, as we've seen, Bosnia Herzegovina and its neighbours, Serbia and Croatia,
had long formed an area of tension in the Balkans.
For centuries, these lands were ruled by the Ottoman Empire, which was a difficult proposition,
in part because Bosnia was home to a bewildering array of ethnic and religious groups.
There were Gypsies, and there were Jews, and most numerous and ambitious for nationhood,
there were Catholic Croats, Sunni Muslim Slavs, and Orthodox Christian Serbs.
During the 19th century, the Bosnian-Muslim nobility repeatedly rebelled against the Ottoman Empire
when it had tried to enforce more direct control.
Often simultaneously, their Croat and Serb peasants would revolt against the Bosnian-Muslim nobility.
As we've seen, the 1875 revolt caused an international crisis, leading to the occupation of Bosnia by Austria.
This solution was guaranteed to be unpopular.
Bosnian Muslims revolted, though they later accommodated themselves to Austrian rule
because they found it relatively tolerant.
Catholic Croats were happy to be part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
but they wanted to be annexed by the province of Croatia, then administered from Hungary.
Bosnian Serbs were most upset of all.
They wanted independence from the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and their dream was to join an independent Serbia.
Serbia agreed, and encouraged Bosnian Serbs to reject Austrian rule and join what it called a Greater Serbia.
In 1908, Austria-Hungary, anxious to prove that it was still a great power,
wanting to signal to the Ottomans and the Russians and the Serbians that they could not have Bosnia,
formally annexed Bosnia-Herzegovina in an attempt to squelch all these movements.
In 1911, a group of Serbian ministers and army officers responded
by forming a secret terrorist organization dedicated to the creation of Greater Serbia.
This was known as the Black Hand.
Franz Ferdinand arrived in Sarajevo on the 28th of June 1914 on a goodwill visit
in the hope of diffusing some of this tension.
He brought with him a peace plan, allowing Bosnia some autonomy from the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
He hoped to make further concessions once he was emperor, but the Black Hand had other ideas.
In early June, the Serbian Prime Minister Nikola Pasek
made a half-hearted attempt to warn the Austrian government of a possible assassination plot.
Now, he didn't want war with Austria, but at the same time,
he didn't want to expose the fact that the Black Hand had connections with the Serbian government,
so this was a tough job to try to give the warning without sort of incriminating yourself.
As a result, a message that might have averted one of the greatest tragedies in human history
was conveyed cryptically in a game of hints.
On the 5th of June 1914, the Serbian minister to Vienna, Jovan Jovanovich,
approached the Austrian finance minister, Dr. Leon von Polinski.
Jovanovich suggested that Franz Ferdinand might want to cancel his trip,
quote, some young Serb might put alive rather than a blank cartridge in his gun and fire it.
But Polinski missed the warning and replied with a laugh.
Let us hope nothing does happen.
And that was it.
The greatest conflagration in world history, from which in some ways we are all still recovering,
happened because an Austrian minister couldn't take a hint.
On the bright morning of 28th June, Franz Ferdinand and Sophie entered the city by motorcade.
By the way, because Sophie wasn't a member of the Austrian royal family, she didn't have royal blood,
but she normally wasn't allowed to be publicly in the same place as Franz Ferdinand.
So it was really quite a treat, which took place around their wedding anniversary
for them both to be in the same car together.
After a military inspection outside of Sarajevo, the motorcade entered the city
via a wide boulevard next to the river Miljaka called the Appel-Key.
Now the city was mostly pro-Austrians, so there were cheering crowds lining the streets,
imperial flags hung from the balconies.
Franz Ferdinand didn't like security, and so the only security forces present
were Sarajevo's 120 police officers.
Buried in the crowd were a small number of black-handers.
As the motorcade entered the city just after 10 a.m., one of them, Nadialko Cabrinovic,
struck his bomb's percussion cap against a lamppost and hurled it at the Archduke's limousine.
The noise alerted the driver and he sped up, so the bomb, intended to hit the motor,
hit the back seat.
The Archduke, protecting his wife, deflected the bomb with his arm into the street,
and that resulted in minor injuries to the crowd and part of his entourage.
After a reception at City Hall, the Archduke decided that he wanted to continue the visit,
but with a slight change.
He wanted to visit the hospital, he wanted to visit the wounded.
Unfortunately, the officer who was supposed to communicate that fact to his driver
was one of the wounded, so he was at the hospital and the fact never got communicated.
By the way, we may see here a little bit of the European class system.
Why didn't the Archduke just talk to his driver?
Following the old plan, the driver headed down Franziosa Street, named after the Austrian Emperor.
When told of his mistake, the driver stopped and began to back up.
At exactly that moment, another of the conspirators, one Gavrilo Princkin,
having abandoned the assassination attempt, was coming out of a sandwich shop on Franziosa Street.
The guy was getting a sandwich.
To his astonishment, there, seemingly parked right in front of him,
was the car carrying the Archduke, Franz Ferdinand and his Archduchess.
The terrorists had been given a second chance.
Princkin simply walked up to the vehicle and fired at the Archduke and Duchess at point-blank range.
Those shots would ignite the entire continent.
Austria's reaction was to immediately blame Serbia.
Today, we would call Serbia a terrorist nation and probably do the same thing.
Now, at this point, it would seem a pretty easy matter for Austria, with its army of 9 million men,
to teach the Serbs, with their army of 360,000, a lesson.
But thanks to the European alliance system, there was a problem.
If Austria attacks Serbia with its army of 9 million men, Russia,
acting as protector of the Slavic peoples, would then attack Austria with its army of 13 million.
So Austria fell back on the alliance system.
On the 2nd of July, Austria consulted its ally, Germany.
Historians believed that if Wilhelm II had urged restraint, he could have stopped the madness.
But restraint was not part of Wilhelm's vocabulary.
Instead, abiding by the Triple Alliance, believing that German emperors should stand up against Slavic aggression,
and itching to use that great army and navy of his, Wilhelm issued what has come to be known as the blank check.
That is, he pledged to back Austria to the hilt with the German army of 13 million men and the navy of 23 dreadnoughts.
At this point, the alliance system kicked in to act as a sort of infernal Rube Goldberg machine,
tripping a sequence of agreements that would plunge all of Europe into war.
On the 23rd of July 1914, Austria-Hungary issued an ultimatum to the Serbs.
The Austrians demanded a joint Austro-Serbian commission to investigate the murder,
and that the Serbian government should condemn all anti-Austrian propaganda.
Now, in fact, what they really wanted was to calculate this in such a way that the Serbs would feel humiliated,
and so feel that they couldn't possibly accept, which would, of course, provoke an Austrian invasion.
But urged by Russia and Britain, Serbia agreed to most of the demands with qualifications.
In particular, they did object to Austrian participation in the inquiry on their side of the border,
because they regarded that as an infringement on their sovereignty.
Austria-Hungary, spoiling for war, declared the Serbian reply unsatisfactory.
Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia on the 28th of July 1914.
Now, Russia, rushing to Serbia's defense, mobilized its army against Austria on the 29th of July,
and I should explain that at the end of the 19th beginning of the 20th century,
when you mobilized your forces, this was such a cumbersome process that it was felt that this was a point of no return.
You couldn't go back. You were at war.
Germany, in defense of Austria, declared war on Russia on August 1st.
France, in defense of Russia, informed Germany that it would stand by its alliance.
At this point, Italy should have declared war on Russia and France and Britain on Germany and Austria.
But both held back. The Italians didn't see this as their fight.
Why would they go to war to defend the hate at Austrians?
They played wait and see.
Eventually, in 1915, they would be persuaded to enter the war on the Allied side
on the promise of lots of Austrian territory. Remember, these are ancient enemies.
The British were rather more important.
Many historians believe that if Britain had signaled from the very beginning
that it would honor its alliances, Wilhelm might have backed down.
Instead, the British hesitated.
But on 3 August, Germany demanded free passage through Belgium to invade France.
Now, we'll talk about why this was part of the German plan in a subsequent lecture.
For now, all you need to know is that the Belgians wanted no part of the German army.
The Belgians, remember, were committed in international law to neutrality.
They refused. The Germans invaded Belgium anyway on the 4th of August.
Belgium appealed to all the European powers, including the British.
Now, Britain was reluctant to join a continental war.
But they felt honor bound to protect Belgian neutrality.
The rape of Belgium, which, by the way, was played up in British newspapers,
in particular the idea that the Germans were using Belgian babies for target practice,
mobilized the British public.
Britain issued an ultimatum, German withdrawal from Belgium by midnight.
When the Germans were still there on the morning of the 5th, Britain joined the war.
That is, the British officially went to war, not over terrorism,
and not because of the Triple Entente, but to defend the principle of neutrality.
Privately, the British were not so sure about the French,
and they feared that the Germans were about to take over all of Europe.
The Great War had begun.
By the time it was over, 11 million people would be dead.
Four great empires would be destroyed.
The balance of power in Europe and the world would be changed forever.
Europeans would experience a nightmare from which they are still recovering,
and by some measures, western civilization, as then known, would come to an end.
Perhaps the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Edward Gray, put it most eloquently,
the lights are going out all over Europe.
I fear that we shall not see them again in our lifetimes.
Wilhelm, in a rare moment of perception, was perhaps more to the point.
Now we are caught in the news.
And maybe there's one more Bismarck quote that applies in this situation.
Anyone who has ever looked into the glazed eyes of a soldier dying on the battlefield
will think hard before starting a war.
But here is the most remarkable thing about the entire disaster.
At its start in that mad summer of 1914, lots and lots of people, maybe most of them, welcomed it.
That summer, in the great capitals of Europe, in Belgrade, in Vienna, in St. Petersburg, in Berlin,
in Paris and in London, crowds cheered the coming of war.
The public squares were filled with people who broke spontaneously into full-throated song.
The Marseillais, God save the Tsar, God save the King, Deutschland über alles.
Thousands of young men, encouraged by thousands of young women,
swam to the recruiting stations, eager to join the great adventure, the great crusade, the great madness.
One of my old professors, a British veteran of World War I named Frederick Marcham,
described it to me as like going off to play the big game.
Why? Why did the people of Europe embrace the war that would destroy so many of them and so much of their civilization?
I would offer four reasons for this.
Relief, nationalism, amnesia leading to war fever, and malaise.
First relief, after years of anxiety, the people of Europe amassing arms for generations would finally get to settle things.
You know, if I may be allowed a personal reflection, I remember quite well the Cold War.
Remember the Cold War? I remember the feelings people had at the beginning of the 1980s,
when there was much talk of prevailing in a nuclear war.
There were several films about what would happen in a nuclear holocaust, and I remember well the fear.
But I also remember a feeling on the part of some people, barely expressed, of wanting to get this over with.
Let's see if the stuff works and what it will do.
Then there was nationalism.
Each member of each of those cheering crowds was absolutely convinced that his or her nation, his or her culture,
his or her government was both superior to all the others and under attack by its inferiors.
The Germans distrusted and looked down on the Russians and the French.
The French hated the Germans after 1871, and they didn't much like their British allies either.
The British feared the Germans and distrusted the French and looked down on the Russians.
The Austrians feared or resented the Slavs, the Russians, and the Italians.
The Italians hated the Austrians and didn't trust the French,
and the Russians distrusted and disdained just about everybody in Western Europe.
No wonder that the national anthems so spontaneously sung in the summer of 1914 seem to be so hostile and xenophobic.
The Marseillaise is, after all, bloodthirsty and Deutschland über alles expansionist.
Then there was what I would call amnesia and maybe war fever.
I believe that people had no real idea of what they were getting themselves into.
In particular, they had no idea of what a modern 20th century war would entail.
Remember, the last general European war had ended in 1815.
No one alive remembered what that had been like.
Even if they did, they would have remembered a far different kind of war
from the one that was about to be fought by modern technology.
The Napoleonic wars were wars between armies, not between whole populations.
Civilians were largely kept out of it, and civilian casualties were relatively light.
They were also wars of summer campaigns with long winter breaks.
And they were wars of quick movement, settled by dashing cavalry charges.
That's what everybody remembered, the cavalry charges of Austerlitz and Waterloo.
Since then, Europeans had fought relatively contained wars, the Crimean War, the Russo-Turkish War, or colonial wars.
Again, these were often one-sided.
African natives did not have carbines or artillery.
China did not have modern ironclad battleships.
At the end of the 19th century, Winston Churchill was able to participate
in some of the last cavalry charges in European history.
And indeed, how these wars were settled was very often with dashing cavalry charges.
The most famous literary treatment of 19th century warfare was probably
Alfred Lord Tennyson's stirring charge of the Light Brigade with its refrain,
half a league, half a league, half a league onward.
Soldiers in the Great War would have been very lucky to get half a league.
These were the wars studied by the military professionals in the war colleges and among the general staffs.
These were the wars read about by newspaper readers at the time
and by young boys in adventure magazines and novels later.
There was a whole 19th century genre of boys' own stories.
And it was all about great heroes fighting in either the Napoleonic Wars or the Crimean War
or the great colonial wars of the 19th century.
And in these books, war was portrayed as, again, like the big game,
as almost like some matter of school pride which could be solved by whichever side had the most spirit.
This, I think, reminds us that war is declared by old men.
It is fought by young men, and now in our own time young women,
who all too often don't know what they're getting into.
No wonder that people had such faith in their side and their military.
Most people assume that the war would be over in a matter of weeks.
People literally marched off shouting Berlin or Paris or St. Petersburg by Christmas.
In effect, the atmosphere was indeed more like that of going off to summer camp
or, as I indicated, the big game than a war.
These young men and their generals were in for a rude shock.
Finally, there's one more reason for the enthusiasm, I think,
a besetting sense at the turn of the century that Europeans had grown soft and decadent,
that science and atheism and social problems were overwhelming civilization
as the European elites had known it.
In other words, some people actually saw the Great War as some sort of invigorating cure,
a purging fire for Europe's disaffected and decadent youth.
In the next lecture, we take a break from the gathering storm of war and ask,
just what was it that Europeans hoped to be cured of in 1914?
