Lecture 34 The Great War Begins, 1914 to 1916
Over the last two lectures, we have asked why the crowned heads, aged generals and young
men of Europe rushed madly and enthusiastically into the Great War.
One more reason for their enthusiasm was that the general staffs of the armies of Europe
had been preparing for this war for years.
Each was sure that it had a plan that would lead to quick victory, and that confidence
seems to have been communicated to the troops.
But it was the Germans who moved first, with the Schlieffen Plan.
The Schlieffen Plan had its roots in Kaiser Wilhelm's failed diplomacy.
Since Wilhelm alienated the Russians in the 1890s, the German general staff knew that it
would be fighting a two-front war.
That was bad.
But the Germans also knew that the Russian military machine was antiquated and inefficient,
and therefore would take about six weeks to mobilize.
That was good.
Based on these realities, the chief of the German general staff, Alfred von Schlieffen,
devised a plan between 1891 and 1905 to knock France out of the war quickly, so that Germany
could then deal with Russia.
The secret, but now famous, Schlieffen Plan.
Step one would be to marshal 90% of the German forces on the western front and attack France
first while the Russians were mobilizing, but with a twist.
The Germans anticipated that the French would expect them to attack along the border through
the Ardennes Forest, just as Prussia had done in 1871.
The French had, in fact, constructed a series of forts along the Franco-German border, and
Schlieffen did order a faint at this point.
But the real knockout punch, the main German column, 1.2 million men in 34 divisions, would
attack France from the north.
But to get there, the German army would have to march through neutral Belgium, the Netherlands,
and Luxembourg.
Note that from the very first, Germany was willing to violate Belgium's neutrality,
and so international law.
Then, after dispatching the expected light resistance, the German column would wheel
south and take Paris.
Once Paris had surrendered, it was believed on the German side that France would fall,
Russia and Britain would bail on their erstwhile ally.
If they did not, the Germans would execute step two.
Using the efficient German railway system, they would transport the bulk of the victorious
German army to the eastern front, joining the eight German divisions already there just
as the Russians showed up to the party.
This would inevitably lead to a German victory in the east, and step three, dictate peace
terms to the whole of Europe.
Once hostilities began on 2 August 1914, everything seemed to go according to plan.
Belgium and Luxembourg refused entry to German troops.
The Netherlands had been dropped from the plan.
That will be important later.
So they were invaded and defeated.
But only after stiffer fighting that the Germans had expected.
The Germans were also surprised that the British supported the Belgians, as we've seen, and
the British Expeditionary Force showed up in time to defend Paris.
In the meantime, the German Southern Army cut through the Ardennes.
By the end of August, German field artillery were shelling Paris.
But at this point, two things went wrong.
First, because the Ardennes offensive was going so well, but also because he was worried
about the Italians to the south, the new German General's chief of staff, Helmut von
Moltke II, pulled troops from the Northern Army to strengthen the Southern.
What was therefore planned as a fate had now turned into a one-two punch.
Second, the Russians mobilized faster than anyone anticipated.
They won a surprise victory over the German forces at Gumbanan in Poland and invaded
East Prussia.
This forced the Germans to pull yet more men from the Northern offensive to shore up their
eastern front.
There, German forces under Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff halted the Russian advance
at Tannenberg in late August.
But the Western offensives now began to bog down.
For neither army, Northern or Southern, was strong enough to overwhelm its opposition.
Germans came to a head at the Marne River between the 6th and the 9th September 1914.
The Germans had to cross the Marne to take Paris.
The French commander, Joseph Joffre, lacking the sophisticated German railway network,
marshalled the taxi cabs of Paris to take soldiers to the front.
The joint French-British victory at the Marne, saved Paris, proved that the British and French
could actually fight on the same side and cause the Germans to pull back.
So the German gamble for a quick knockout blow had failed.
Have you heard the old military saying that no plan survives the first day of battle?
The Schlieffen plan was brilliant, but it was too clever by half.
It relied on too many variables.
Too many things going wrong on the enemy side.
Too many things going right on the German.
With its failure went the last hope for a quick end to the war.
Nobody would be in Berlin or Paris or St. Petersburg by Christmas.
Within two months, the German army in the West had retreated to a front running from
Switzerland to the North Sea, and both sides dug in.
Over the next four years, commanders on both sides of the Western Front would launch offensive
after offensive, hurling millions of men against enemy lines at tremendous loss of life.
At Champagne and Ypres and Artois in 1915.
At Verdun and the Somme in 1916.
At Ara, Champagne again and Ypres again in 1917.
At the Marne again, the Argonne Forest and Ypres again in 1918.
Those agains tell the story.
The Western Front would not budge more than 10 miles in either direction during all that
time.
Why?
Basically, the technology of early 20th century warfare favored the defensive side.
The concrete pillbox, barbed wire, later poison gas, and above all the machine gun.
It is a sad comment on modern life that I suppose that we all know exactly what a machine
gun does, how it works.
The shooter needs no special training or accuracy of aim.
He simply points in a general way and spews out bullets at such a rate that nothing can
live long in that field of fire.
All of this technology was mounted at the front of an elaborate network of trenches,
very old technology that eventually would stretch back several miles.
The two sets of trenches were separated from each other by about three to six hundred yards
of open ground, churned up mud that had been devastated by shells and grenades and littered
with human bodies.
No man's land, because literally no man could live there.
And yet the commanders on both sides repeatedly ordered their men over the top and into this
hell.
Why?
Because they were professional soldiers, thoroughly trained in the art of 19th century
warfare.
The commanders on both sides had mostly attended military academies where they had studied
the great wars and battles of the 18th and the 19th centuries.
You know the ones that had been wars of movement with set-piece battles won by dashing cavalry
charges.
If they had any experience of more recent wars, Jaffra, or the British general Kitchener,
at all, it was of colonial war, in which well-armed European forces had moaned down tribal warriors
armed mostly with spears.
Above all, most of the great commanders lacked the scientific and practical training to understand
how the Second Industrial Revolution had revolutionized their profession.
For example, Jaffra's use of Paris taxicabs to get his troops to the line may have been
a splendid example of French élan, but it was also a spectacular failure of the French
military's transportation infrastructure.
You will recall that the British were particularly out to lunch on the issue of new technology.
And so this explains why David Jones, a Welsh soldier and poet, could refer in one poem
to an artillery shell as a stinking physicist's toy.
There's that slam against science majors again.
His commander was no more respectful of the latest military technology.
Sir Douglas Haig, commander of the British Expeditionary Force for most of the war, asserted
that, quote, the machine gun is a much overrated weapon and two per battalion is more than
sufficient.
Quote, artillery would chiefly be of use against green troops.
And my personal favorite, quote, the power of bullets to stop horses has been greatly
exaggerated.
Indeed, the willingness of the Germans to exploit exactly these kinds of technologies
was one of the reasons the British saw them as brutal and inferior.
For it wasn't quite sporting, was it?
Well, A.K. Wilson called the submarine or the U-boat, underhand, unsporting and damned
on English.
Reginald Granton, commenting on the first use of chlorine gas by the Germans, wrote,
It was a device in warfare, thoroughly illustrative of the Prussian idea of playing the game.
Note the implication that war was a kind of game, a great national sporting match with
rules of play that gentlemen would, of course, follow.
The belief was that victory would come through team spirit and a redoubling of effort.
If you weren't winning, it was because you weren't trying hard enough.
In fact, the original French offensive plan for the Western Front, Plan 17, was to be
a full frontal assault on Alsace-Lorraine, which would succeed through the Elan, the
spirit of the French troops, actually said this.
Everyone knew that the Duke of Wellington had said that the Battle of Waterloo was one
on the playing fields of Eaton.
Now in fact, much of the poetry with which these men grew up as boys had portrayed war
as a school match or a game.
I'll give you one example, a famous one, Henry Newbolt's Vitae Lampada, written during
the period of England's colonial wars.
It begins with a school cricket match.
There's a breathless hush in the clothes tonight, tend to make in the match to win,
a bumping pitch and a blinding light, an hour to play, and the last man in.
And it's not for the sake of a ribboned coat or the selfish hope of a season's fame, but
his captain's hand on his shoulder smote, play up, play up, and play the game.
In the next stanza, the scene shifts to some desert battle in the British Empire.
The sand of the desert is sodden red, red with the wreck of a square that broke, the
gatlings jammed and the colonel dead, and the regiment blind with dust and smoke.
The river of death has brimmed his banks and England's far and honor a name, but the voice
of a schoolboy rallies the ranks, play up, play up, and play the game.
This is how they fought of war.
If geography is destiny, so I would argue is culture and mindset.
And we see this in campaign after campaign after campaign on the western front.
Perhaps the most disastrous of all these offenses was the Somme campaign of 1916, and I'm going
to use it as an example illustrating the tendencies that doomed all the others.
First some background.
That summer the French, who had just taken a terrible beating at Verdun, asked Hague
to take some pressure off of their positions by undertaking to break the German lines at
the River Somme in northern France.
During the last week of June, 1916, the British therefore unleashed a massive artillery bombardment.
The trouble was that the Germans were so well dug in by that point that it caused very little
damage.
All it did was tell the Germans that the British were coming.
At 7 a.m. on the morning of the 1st of July, 1916, the artillery bombardment stopped.
A half an hour later, a million men of the British Expeditionary Force went over the
top.
On some parts of the line, the signal to attack was the kick of a soccer ball towards the
German lines.
So for example, according to Private LS Price of the 8th Royal Sussex Regiment.
As the gunfire died away, I saw an infantryman climb onto the parapet into no man's land,
beckoning others to follow.
As he did so, he kicked off a football.
A good kick.
The ball rose and traveled well towards the German line.
That seemed to be the signal to advance.
Could you imagine being a German machine gunner in a pillbox and you see this soccer ball
coming at you?
Aristocratic officers actually went over the top, leading their men with swagger sticks,
as if on a fox hunt.
Now the obstacles facing the British Tommy as he ran across no man's land towards his
enemy were immense.
He carried a rifle and a 60-pound pack.
After all, he was going to need all those provisions if he was going to march to Berlin.
He had to cross 600 yards across ground plowed into a thick suit of heavy mud by rain and
shell fire.
A slight personal reflection here.
I have never participated in any event at all like this.
I can say that I ran cross-country in Europe when I was in college and I will never forget
the thickness and the heaviness of European mud.
It will suck the very boots off of your feet.
All of this into the face of withering fire from German machine gunners.
At first, the Germans were shocked at the sheer stupidity of the British attack, but
they soon recovered their composure.
But don't take my word for it.
Listen to the men who were there.
Private W. Slater of the 2nd Bradford Pals, Pals' friends, that was the name of the regiment,
wrote,
For some reason, nothing seemed to happen to us at first.
We strolled as though walking in a park.
Then suddenly, we were in the midst of a storm of machine gun bullets, and I saw men beginning
to twirl round and fall in all kinds of curious ways as they were hit.
Quite unlike the way actors do it in films.
Private W. J. Seneschal of the Cambridge Battalion wrote,
The long line of men came forward, rifles at the port, as ordered.
Now Jerry started.
That would be the Germans.
These machine guns let fly.
Down they all went.
I could see them dropping one after another as the guns swept along them.
The officer went down at exactly the same time as the man behind him.
In other words, German machine gun bullets are no respecters of the great chain of being.
Another minute or so, and another wave came forward.
Jerry was ready this time, and this lot did not get so far as the others.
In one morning, one day of fighting, the British Army lost 19,240 men killed.
35,493 wounded, 2,153 missing.
Only 584 were taken prisoner for a total of 57,740 casualties.
That is more than six full infantry divisions of the time.
It's more than half the total strength of the present British Army.
More than the total British losses in the Crimean, Bohr, and Korean wars combined.
More than 15 times the British losses at D-Day.
To what end?
Did they break the German lines?
Did they march to Berlin?
No.
They gained an average of 100 yards across a 16-mile front.
For the next two months, the Somme offensive gained a total of two to three miles at a
cost of 420,000 total casualties.
You do the math.
Did Hague get removed?
Was he court-martialed?
No.
He remained commander-in-chief of the British Expeditionary Force to the end of the war.
He emerged from the war a much decorated and revered figure named Earl Hague by King George
V in 1919.
To this day, it is his face that peers out from the canisters that British volunteers
carry during the annual poppy appeal in support of veterans.
Was anything learned from this fiasco?
No.
In the summer of 1917, the British tried it again at Ypres.
This time, they only lost 31,000 on the first day and 340,000 for the entire campaign.
Were the Germans any smarter?
No.
For that they tried the same thing at Verdun.
In fact, German General von Falkenhayen, his express objective at Verdun, was to bleed
the French white.
In the end, he succeeded.
He killed 377,000 Frenchmen, but he bled his own side white, too.
337,000 Germans died at Verdun.
Perhaps I should allow another soldier, Siegfried Sassoon, to have the last word in his poem,
The General.
Good morning, good morning, the General said when we met him last week on our way to the
line.
Now the soldiers he smelled at are most of them dead and were cursing his staff for
incompetent swine.
He's a cheery old card, grunted Harry to Jack as they slogged up to Ara with rifle and pack,
but he did for them both by his plan of attack.
With the failure of these various offensives, Europe settled down to a cold-blooded war
of attrition in the trenches.
Life in the trenches was a nightmare.
First there was constant mud, wet, cold and smelly.
According to Wilfred Owen at the front lines at Passchendaele, there was not one inch of
dry ground and a mean depth of two feet.
These conditions bred influenza, bacterial infections like Trenchmouth, really bad gingivitis,
far more serious was Trenchfoot, in which feet immersed in wet water and mud for hours
could turn gangrenous.
Then there were the dead bodies, dead men and horses lay where they fell only a few feet
away sometimes just over the top of the trench or actually in the trench with you.
Sometimes bodies were actually used in the building of trenches.
I'd like to quote now from the testimony of Arthur Savage who years later at age 92
remembered his life on the western front.
My memories are of sheer terror and the horror of seeing men sobbing because they had Trenchfoot
that had turned gangrenous.
They knew they were going to lose a leg.
Memories of lice in your clothing driving you crazy, filth and lack of privacy, of huge
rats that showed no fear of you as they stole your food rations and cold, deep, wet mud
everywhere, and of course corpses.
I'd never seen a dead body before I went to war but in the trenches the dead were lying
all around you.
You could be talking to the fellow next to you when suddenly he'd be hit by a sniper
and fall dead beside you and there he'd stay for days.
Then there was the noise, the constant round of shell fire whistling overhead impacting
only a few yards away had a devastating psychological effect.
Men often returned home on leave still hearing what Owen called the shrill demented choirs
of whaling shells.
In fact it was World War I that gave us the term shell shock.
Others would have nightmares for the rest of their lives and of course they would have
been counted the lucky ones for they survived.
At one point in 1917 the life expectancy of a soldier at the western front was two weeks.
The novelist Richard Aldington gives a graphic portrait of all this in his novel Death of
a Hero.
The days passed into weeks, the weeks into months.
He moved through impressions like a man hallucinated and every incident seemed to beat on his brain
death, death, death.
All the decay and death of battlefields entered his blood and seemed to poison him.
He lived among smashed bodies and human remains in an infernal cemetery.
If he scratched his stick idly and nervously in the side of a trench he pulled out human
ribs.
He ordered a new latrine to be dug out from the trench and thrice the digging had to be
abandoned because they came upon terrible black masses of decomposing bodies.
At dawn one morning when it was misty he walked over the top of Hill 91 where probably nobody
had been by day since its capture.
The ground was a desert of shell holes and torn rusty wire and everywhere lay skeletons
and steel helmets still clothed in the rags of sodden khaki or field gray.
Note that nationalism doesn't mean anything once you're dead.
There were German soldiers and Allied soldiers completely mixed up.
Here a fleshless hand still clutched a broken rusty rifle.
There a gaping decaying foot showed the thin, knotty foot bones.
He came on a skeleton violently dismembered by a shell explosion.
The skull was split open and the teeth lay scattered on the bare chalk.
The force of the explosion had driven coins and a metal pencil right into the hip bones
and femurs.
In a concrete pillbox three German skeletons lay across their machine gun with its silent
nozzle still pointing at the loophole.
They had been tacked from the rear with phosphorous grenades which burned their way into the flesh
and for which there is no possible remedy.
A shrunken leather strap still held a battered wrist watch on a fleshless wrist bone.
Alone in the white curling mist drifting slowly past like wreaths of the slain with the far
off thunder of drumfire beating the air, George Winterborn stood in frozen silence and contemplated
the last achievements of civilized men.
Is it any wonder that this is still called the Great War in Europe?
That for many Europeans this, not the French Revolution, represents the true end of the
Ancien Régime and indeed of Western civilization.
That men, ordinary men, not just intellectuals, cease to believe in what they had been told,
cease to believe in their leaders, in their countries, even in God himself.
One of the things that often puzzles Americans, I think, about Europeans is that by and large,
even in countries that never went communist, people tend not to be very religious, Poland
may be an exception.
They tend not to believe in an active and benevolent God in the affairs of men.
They tend to be very cynical about their leaders and even their countries and they tend perhaps
to be less optimistic, less sure of their own convictions than Americans seem to be.
Well, here's the reason.
In many ways, the remainder of the 20th century would for Europeans be a search for a kind
of certainty.
The answers, the sense of belonging and purpose that were lost on the western front between
1914 and 1918.
And I believe the first lecture I argued that World War I was for Europeans there, Vietnam,
given its scale, perhaps even more terrible.
This can be seen in the Writers of the Lost Generation.
T.S. Eliot wrote the great depiction of the sterile post-war world in the wasteland of
1923 as Rapun depicted a decayed civilization and a world of false values in Hugh Selwyn
Moberley.
Eventually, he would turn to fascism.
D.H. Lawrence's characters lose themselves and find meaning in sex in works like The
Rainbow of 1915 and Women in Love in 1920.
Hemingway's and Fitzgerald's characters lose themselves and find meaning in sex and,
I suppose, drink.
W.B. Yates turned to mysticism.
Virginia Woolf's Mrs. Dalloway finds happiness in the moment while another character in
the novel of that name, the shell-shocked Septimus Warren Smith, commits suicide.
There told Brecht and Franz Kafka depict a terrifying, oppressive, irrational world
which swallows up their characters in vast bureaucracies and situations beyond their
control.
Painting would become even more abstract and fragmented after the war.
Music more atonal and dissonant.
For the troops in the trenches, the only relief was the occasional leave home.
As the front was so close to Paris, London and Western Germany, it was actually very
easily easy for troops to go home quickly.
But as any returning soldier can tell you, that produces its own problems.
In Blighter's, Siegfried Sassoon wrote about his thoughts about attending a show in London.
The house is crammed, tear beyond tear, they grin and cackle at the show while prancing
ranks of harlots, shrill the chorus, drunk with din.
We are sure the Kaiser loves our dear old tanks.
I'd like to see a tank come down the stalls, lurching to ragtime tunes or home, sweet home,
and there'd be no more jokes in music halls to mock the riddled corpses round Bhopalm.
In they, he anticipates the return of the soldiers after the war.
The bishop tells us, when the boys come back, they'll not be the same, for they'll have
fought in a just cause.
They lead the last attack on Antichrist.
Their comrades' blood has bought new right to breed an honourable race.
They have challenged death and dared him face to face.
We are none of us the same, the boys reply, for George lost both his legs and Bill's
stone blunt, poor Jim shot through the lungs and liked to die, and Bert's gone syphilitic.
You'll not find a chap who served that hasn't found some change.
And the bishop said, the ways of God are strange.
In the trenches, there was only occasional sex with town prostitutes, not actually literally
in the trenches.
The famous World War I song, Mademoiselle from Armentier, is about such a whore.
And there was black humor.
The troops came up with their very own version of the popular hymn, Holy, Holy, Holy, which
went raining, raining, raining, always bloody well raining.
Now is it any wonder, therefore, that both sides sought a way to break out of the morass,
out of their mutual death grip?
One possible way was the war in the air.
Perhaps you may remember the opening scene of a 1960s film called The Blue Max, in which
a German soldier trying to dodge bullets in the trenches looks up and he sees this airplane
flying in the sky and he thinks, that's the way to go, that's the way to get out of the
trenches.
Well, in fact, to some extent, the general staffs thought that the air war might be able
to change the war.
The first airplanes were used for reconnaissance of the lines, to tell them where opposing
forces were.
But by 1915, both sides are starting to bomb, not only bomb opposing troops, but especially
in the case of the Germans, strategic bombing of cities.
We get the Zeppelin raids over London and also massive bombing raids, or massive bombers
engaged in bombing raids over Paris.
I suppose that what most people remember about World War I are the fighter aces, people
like Rene Fonk for France and Billy Bishop for Canada and Edward Manick for the British,
and above all, of course, Manfred von Richthofen, the Red Baron of Germany.
And in fact, it must be said that dashing as their activities were, that the air war
didn't actually have a tremendous effect on the outcome of the war, the damage done in
London was perhaps more psychological than it was significant for the war effort, but
of course that endless cycle of violence that began when combatants bombed cities was begun
in World War I.
It was begun because both sides wanted to find a way to break out of the morass.
In the next lecture, we will explore other attempts to do so, rather more dramatic ones
which took up more resources on both sides.
We will look at ways to win the war away from the Western Front, in the Mediterranean, at
sea, and in the East.
