Lecture 35 Breaking the Deadlock, 1915 to 1917
By 1915, the great powers of Western Europe had settled into a death struggle with each other along the Western Front.
As they hurled armies against armies to little effect beyond mass death,
it became increasingly urgent to find some other way out of the deadlock,
some other place where the enemy might be vulnerable.
In this lecture, we examine each side's attempt at an end around.
As we shall see, these initiatives increased the bloodshed,
spread the conflict to other parts of the world,
and added to the list of combatants,
but none of them would do all that much to end the war.
By 1915, with the war deadlocked in both France and Poland,
the British came up with a plan to attack Germany and Austria,
the central powers from the south.
The originator of that plan was a young man from whom we will hear again.
Winston Churchill was a descendant of John Churchill, Duke of Malbra.
That connection will be important later.
He was educated at Harrow and Sandhurst Military Academy.
As a young man, he earned a dashing reputation.
As a journalist, he covered the Cuban rebellion against Spain in 1895.
He then fought with the British armies in India in 1898.
He rode in the last cavalry charge in British history at the Battle of Omderman
in the Sudan later that year,
and he made a daring escape from captivity during the Boer War in 1899.
In other words, this guy was perhaps the British Teddy Roosevelt,
or maybe Roosevelt was the American Churchill.
Entering Parliament in 1900,
he earned an early reputation for ambition and rhetorical brilliance.
By 1911, he was named First Lord of the Admiralty at the age of 37.
It was Churchill who came up with the plan to win the war.
Now to understand the plan,
you have to understand that in the opening days of the war,
Germany and Austria had persuaded the Ottoman Empire to join the central powers.
For the Ottomans, this meant allies in their fight to hang on to their empire
against Russian ambitions.
From the British and French points of view, this was alarming.
Though the Ottoman Empire was on its last legs,
it was dangerously close to the Suez Canal.
Moreover, its Sultan, Mohammed V,
was regarded as the leader of the Muslim world.
He proclaimed a jihad against the empire's enemies.
This might have raised the Muslims of North Africa
against their French and British colonial masters.
But in fact, nothing happened.
Many of these people had no love for the Ottoman Empire.
In 1916, a British officer named T. E. Lawrence,
that's Lawrence of Arabia,
would convince Arab leaders to join the British war effort
in a guerrilla campaign against their Turkish rulers.
And so Mesopotamia, that is Iraq and Syria and Palestine,
would later become another if distant front in the Great War.
In the meantime, from Churchill's point of view,
the Ottoman Empire's entry into the war opened up the possibility
that the central powers could be attacked directly from the south.
The plan was to open up a third front
by sending a British-French naval expedition
and amphibious force into the eastern Mediterranean,
and then into the Black Sea.
The idea would be to knock the Ottoman Empire out of the war,
much like Churchill's ancestor, Malbra,
had knocked Bavaria out of the war of the Spanish succession.
The British and French would create a supply line to Russia
while taking pressure off of the eastern front,
and they could attack Austria and Germany
through what Churchill referred to as Europe's soft underbelly.
The pressure on this front,
combined with that being exerted on the other two, would end the war.
But there was a problem.
The Turks controlled the gateway into the Black Sea,
the straight known as the Dardanelles.
In particular, they controlled a series of forts
on the Gallipoli Peninsula, which could rake the straits with fire.
Churchill advocated a naval bombardment, beginning early in 1915.
But after a number of Allied ships were sunk or damaged by mines,
there is more modern technology,
Lord Kitchener, Secretary of State for War,
ordered an amphibious assault on the heights of Gallipoli.
Now, in fact, the Turks were almost out of shells,
but no one on the Allied side knew that.
Now, as is well known from the film of that name,
Gallipoli was a logistical and executional disaster.
The Germans supplied the Turks with machine guns,
allowing them to rake the beach with a constant barrage.
The Turks also had good leadership.
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the future president of Turkey,
and Liman von Sanders, a former German military officer
who'd done a lot to train the Turkish army.
The Allied supply lines were long and tortuous,
stretching all across the Mediterranean.
Moreover, the Allies had no notion of what would later be called landing craft,
nor had they engaged in any amphibious training.
The British, Australian, New Zealand, and French troops
had to approach the beaches in lifeboats, which gave no protection.
They then had to clamor over the sides of the boats
and wade ashore in the face of heavy machine gun fire.
Then, attack those machine gun emplacements up hill.
The result? Combined Allied casualties came to 250,000 men.
The effects of the Gallipoli campaign were far-reaching.
First, there would be no third front, not for a while.
Russia was not helped.
Though the attack cost 250,000 Turkish troops,
the Ottoman Empire's relations with the Central Powers were strengthened.
In 1915, while fighting the Russians and Armenia,
the Ottoman Empire decided to retaliate against Christian Armenians whom it thought disloyal.
The government began a policy of genocide that the Turks still officially deny.
They deported two-thirds of the Empire's Armenians to Syria.
Between 800,000 and 1.5 million,
estimated as 60% of the Armenian population,
died of disease and starvation and at the hands of Turkish soldiers.
These figures are still matters of great controversy,
and by the way, as of this taping,
the governments of both the United States and the United Kingdom
still deny the label genocide to these events.
In October 1915, Bulgaria joined the Central Powers
in the hope of gaining Balkan territory.
They eventually overran the Serbs,
and this cut Russia off from any help via the Mediterranean.
Churchill was made the scapegoat, and he fell from office.
Perhaps the episode's longest lasting legacy is that it left lingering bitterness
on the part of Australians and New Zealanders,
that the British had sent them into a slaughterhouse with such poor preparation.
The next move would be Germany's.
As you will recall, one of the reasons for the war
was the naval race between Britain and Germany.
Both sides had prepared four years for a great naval battle,
a new Trafalgar, what the Germans called Dertag,
between the British Grand Fleet and the German High Seas Fleet.
Churchill had immediately ordered an early mobilization of the Grand Fleet
upon Britain's declaration of war,
so that from the very beginning German ports were blockaded,
as turpits had predicted.
But the British did not want to risk a great fleet action.
It was true that they had the larger fleet by a ratio of about three to two,
but for precisely that reason, and because they were an island,
and because they thought the blockade would be enough to starve Germany out,
they had everything to lose and nothing to gain by fighting a battle.
According to Churchill, the commander-in-chief of the Grand Fleet, Sir John Jellico,
was, quote, the only man who could lose the war in an afternoon, unquote.
So the British settled in behind their blockade,
keeping German trade bottled up, and refusing to give battle.
This led the Germans to try something the French had tried
during their wars with Britain in the 18th century, commerce-rating.
Remember that Britain, too, was heavily dependent on shipments of food,
fuel, and munitions from America and the Empire.
Being an archipelago, those vital shipments had to come by sea.
The United States, though officially neutral, was happy to trade with both sides.
America had large numbers of immigrants rooting for either side,
English, Scots, and French, but also lots of Germans and Irish.
But the British blockade prevented trade with Germany.
That was a sore spot for the U.S. at first.
The Allies also whipped up anti-German sentiment with propaganda,
in particular the idea of the rape of Belgium,
in which Belgian babies were reported to have been used by the Hun for bayonet practice.
There is no evidence of this, but it was a story that became very popular on the Allied side.
Now you add to that economic self-interest to all the above factors,
and American firms traded ever-increasing amounts of goods
and loaned ever greater amounts of money to the Allies, especially Great Britain.
This Atlantic trade, in fact, became the crucial lifeline that kept Britain in the war.
By the same token, the Germans could win if they could cut the lifeline.
Now at first they tried to do it with surface raiders, cruisers like the SMS Mden.
SMS stands for Sinem Magistat Ship, his majesty's ship in German.
Q ships, which were warships disguised as merchant ships.
But these were too easy for the Royal Navy to hunt down.
Submarines in German Unterseeboots or U-boats were far more effective.
They could hunt underwater, they could then surface quickly,
they could fire shells from their deck guns or fire torpedoes, and sink the vessel in question.
Now early in the war, the German U-boat commanders, following international law,
tried to minimize the loss of civilian life.
The international law that governed this would have been the same laws that governed when
privateers boarded a vessel. Before firing, they would allow the crew to be put off in boats,
they might even offer provisions or directions to land.
But often this gave the crew time to radio the Royal Navy.
We're being attacked, which would show up and then sink the U-boat,
which rather defeated the whole purpose of the idea from the German point of view.
In the spring of 1915, the German Admiralty announced a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare.
All ships traveling to Britain were declared to be in a war zone,
or at least as they were approaching the British Isles.
Allied ships were to be sunk without warning, neutral ships operated at their own risk.
The German government placed ads in American newspapers warning noncombatants not to sail to Europe.
On the 15th of May, 1915, the U-20 sited and sank the British luxury liner RMS Lusitania off the coast of Ireland.
1,198 innocent passengers and crew died, including 128 American citizens.
Now the Germans claimed that they were perfectly within their rights
and that it was the British who were violating American neutrality
because the Lusitania was carrying war material, guns and ammunition.
In fact, technically this was true.
Years later, the Lusitania's trade manifest was made public
and it showed that she was indeed carrying contraband for the Allies.
2,400 cases of Remington rifle cartridges, 1,248 cases of 3-foot shrapnel shell cases
and 18 cases of non-explosive fuses.
But nobody knew that in 1915.
What people knew in 1915 was the horrible loss of innocent life.
The ship went down in 15 minutes.
Hundreds died below decks or in jammed elevators when the electricity failed.
An extreme list made it almost impossible to launch the lifeboats.
Bodies washed up on Irish beaches for days.
The British, who were virtuosos at demonizing their opponents,
saw a propaganda opportunity and seized it.
Heart-wrenching photos of dead mothers clutching dead children
appeared on the front pages of newspapers all over the world.
Recruiting posters were printed depicting drowning innocents with but one word.
End list.
When a German medalist struck a medal attacking the Canard Line
for allowing passengers to sail on a ship of war,
the Lusitania is depicted in the medal with a ram bow
and loaded with guns and airplanes.
The British copied the medal and made thousands more
saying that they were struck by the German government to celebrate the sinking.
And in fact, Kaiser Wilhelm was so stupid
that he decorated the commander of the U-boat with the iron cross.
Now, America caught war fever.
The Germans, who didn't need another enemy and were fully aware of America as a great industrial power,
revoked their policy of unrestricted submarine warfare almost immediately.
From now on, neutrality would be respected.
Ships would be warned.
As a result, Germany's U-boat offensive fizzled
and Britain continued to be supplied from America.
This caused the Germans to rethink the possibility of a major surface ship action.
Throughout the spring of 1916,
the German High Seas Fleet under Admiral Reinhardt Scheer
tried to lure the British Grand Fleet under Admiral Jellico
out from its base at Scapa Flow, Scotland.
Now, you will recall that the British had won the naval race.
The Imperial German Navy was outnumbered 37 Dreadnoughts to just 27.
The German plan for closing the gap was to send out a squadron of fast battle cruisers.
I should explain that a battle cruiser is armed like a battleship.
It has heavy guns, but it doesn't have such thick armor to protect it.
And so it's faster, but it's also very vulnerable to shell fire.
The Germans would send out a fast battle cruiser squadron as bait.
The idea would be that the British would think this detached squadron was all alone,
they would send out their battle cruisers,
and of course, off the horizon would be the whole High Seas Fleet.
The German battle fleet would sink the small British contingent,
and so begin the process of evening the odds between the two fleets.
Now, you'll note the problem with German plans, like the Schlieffen Plan,
they always assume that the other side is really stupid.
In this case, they assume that the whole British Grand Fleet
won't be behind their small squadron on the horizon as well.
The two fleets finally met at 4.48 p.m. on the 31st of May, 1916,
off of the Jutland Peninsula.
Involving 250 ships and 100,000 men,
Jutland was the largest battle in naval history up to that time.
Dertag had finally arrived.
Now, at first, everything went according to the German plan.
The German battle cruisers lure the British battle cruisers into battle.
In quick succession, superior German gunnery dispatched HMS Indefatigable,
HMS Queen Mary, and the inapply named HMS Invincible to the bottom.
This prompted a British admiral to remark,
there's something wrong with our bloody ships today.
But instead of the Germans trapping the small British squadron,
that squadron managed to draw the main German battle fleet
into the range of the whole British Grand Fleet
in line of battle between the Germans and their home ports.
Moreover, Jellico had crossed Shear's Tee,
that is, he was facing the German fleet broadsides to Bows,
which means he had twice the firepower of the German admiral.
Now, at this point, knowing that he was outnumbered
and just minutes away from destruction,
Shear ordered his destroyers and torpedo boats to run interference.
In other words, he ordered a suicide mission
against the combined firepower of the Royal Navy.
They were to sail towards the Royal Navy,
fire torpedoes, and lay a smokescreen,
behind which the rest of the high seas fleet would execute a 180-degree turn,
extremely difficult for scores of ships in the middle of a battle,
and retreat behind the smokescreen.
Instead of giving chase, Admiral Jellico,
now remember, he's the only man who can lose the war in an afternoon,
and he saw the German torpedoes coming.
He turned his ships away from the high seas fleet,
and therefore he let the German fleet escape.
Over the next few days, the German fleet would fight its way back to port.
So, why have I gone into all this to-ing and fro-ing about fleet maneuvers?
In part to contrast the caution of Jellico and Shear
against the earlier example of Nelson as master and commander.
But also to explain it.
You see, dreadnought battleships were, in one respect,
a little like nuclear weapons are today.
They're so expensive.
Their loss would be so devastating.
Their country's prestige so wrapped up in them,
you dare not risk them.
Both commanders seemed to have felt
that in the end their primary mission was not so much to engage and defeat the enemy,
but to bring their expensive battle wagons home intact.
Jellico knew that loss of his fleet would end the naval blockade
and give Germany a lifeline to the outside world.
It would, of course, also destroy his career.
Shear knew that loss of his fleet would end all possibility of that threat
and destroy his career.
So, both commanders chose discretion as the better part of valor,
deterrence over decision.
Now, tactically, the Germans claimed a victory.
They sank more ships and they killed more men,
and that's how they played it in the German newspapers.
The Kaiser was so overjoyed that his fleet could play with the big boys
that he passed out iron crosses like candy.
But strategically, Jutland was a decisive win for the British,
for they still controlled the North Sea.
The German fleet would spend the rest of the war bottled up in harbor.
Never again would it seriously threaten to break the British blockade.
All the Kaiser's lovely battleships began to rust at their moorings,
their crews increasingly demoralized.
It's a great irony, isn't it, that the German fleet helped cause World War I?
It would never again be given another chance to end it.
Which helps to explain why the German situation was growing desperate by early 1917.
Remember that Germany was pretty much carrying a number of weaker allies,
the Austrians fighting Russian and Serbian armies in the east,
and Italian armies to the south,
the Turks fighting the Russians in Armenia,
fighting the Serbs and later the Greeks in the Balkans,
and French and British armies in Palestine and the Arabian Peninsula.
At this point, I should explain that in 1916,
Arab peoples began a revolt against the Ottoman Empire which had ruled them for centuries.
The British finally got their third front in Mesopotamia and Palestine.
Lawrence of Arabia organized them and led them with Prince Faisal.
They entered Damascus in triumph ahead of the British in 1918.
But to open this third front, Lawrence had had to promise these Arab peoples
national self-determination, independence after the war.
But in Palestine, that would conflict with the Balfour Declaration of 1917.
A British promise to support a national homeland for the Jews.
Now the idea behind this promise is that the British were hoping
that the Jewish community around the world would persuade America to enter the war on the British side
since the British were going to do something so very nice for the Jewish people.
So here, as in so many other places, World War I set the course for the rest of the century.
It actually sets up more conflicts than it's going to solve.
Meanwhile, back in Europe.
The German army was being worn down by superior numbers in the east and west.
Though it should be said that Britain, France and Russia had their own troubles,
the French army actually mutinies at one point in 1917.
At home, Germany was running out of fuel oil for battleships and for heating homes,
as well as foodstuffs.
Something had to be done quickly or Germany would lose the war.
Early in 1917, the German government decided on two terrific gambles.
The first was to resume unrestricted submarine warfare.
Now the German Admiralty knew full well that if it did restore unrestricted submarine warfare,
sooner or later some U-boat was going to sink an American ship.
An American life would be lost.
This would almost certainly bring America into the war against Germany.
So the question was, could the U-boats bring Britain to her knees before bringing America into the war?
Could they knock Britain out of the war before the United States joined it?
They almost did it.
On the 31st of January, 1917, the Germans announced a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare.
On the 3rd of February, the U.S. broke diplomatic relations with Germany
after the sinking of an American ship, the U.S. House of Tonic, without warning.
But by April 1917, the U-boats were sinking 600,000 tons of shipping a month.
The German gamble was paying off.
The Germans were now sinking Allied ships faster than the Allies could build them.
British domestic food stocks were down to six weeks. The British were on the ropes.
But then two things happened.
First, in April, America entered the war.
This was partly because by mid-March, the U-boats had sunk a number of American ships.
It was also partly because of the infamous Zimmermann Telegram of 16 January 1917,
in which the German Foreign Minister, Arthur Zimmermann, had proposed that Mexico join an anti-American alliance with Germany.
Germany's always looking for a friend.
In return, Mexico would receive back Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas.
Well, the message was intercepted by the British, who by the way had early broken all the German codes.
By the way, that's one reason the whole British fleet was there at Jutland.
So they were, of course, delighted to share this message with the American government.
On the 2nd of April, President Woodrow Wilson asked for a declaration of war, which was granted by Congress on April 6th.
Now, it would take months to mobilize an American expeditionary force.
But the U.S. Navy was already free and able to assist the Royal Navy in shepherding merchant ships and sinking U-boats.
I told you the two things hurt the U-boats, or hurt the German gamble.
The second thing that happened to the U-boats was that in May, the British implemented a convoy system.
Merchantships would travel in packs escorted by British and American warships.
This worked. Losses to U-boats began to fall.
U-boat losses began to climb. Now they were sinking faster than German yards could build them.
Worse, the U.S. Army, inexperienced but fresh, was gearing up to join the fray.
The first German gamble had failed.
But the Kaiser still had one last card up his sleeve.
If he could end the war in Russia before the Americans got their act together, perhaps he could concentrate all his resources.
On breaking open the Western Front.
Now we have so far largely ignored the Russian Front except for the German victory at Tannenberg in 1914.
Now the Russian strategy after the disaster of Tannenberg was pretty much the same one that they had used against Napoleon.
Give ground. Retreat into the vast expanses of Mother Russia.
Wait for the German and Austrian armies to freeze or burn themselves out.
You'll remember that the Russians believed that they had a secret weapon in general winter.
Though it must be said that this time the Germans and the Austrians provided winter uniforms.
Things didn't quite work out, therefore, for the Russians as they had under Napoleon.
As we'll see in the next lecture, Russia's industrial revolution had come very late.
In fact, by many measures, it hadn't come at all.
So when Nicholas II mobilized the Russian armies, many Russian troops had no rifles, no bullets, no uniforms, and no food.
So as a result, Russia was in very poor shape to fight this war.
Luckily for the Russians, the Germans chose to concentrate on the Western Front.
It was very rare that the German commanders Hindenburg and Ludendorff in the east could get enough troops to mount serious offensives.
But in the spring of 1915, they were allowed enough units to try a major offensive in Poland.
The Russians, surprised, fell back 200 miles, abandoning lots of material, and in effect abandoning Poland.
By September, the Germans controlled that country, but were unable to advance further.
Now the Russians, stymied in Poland in 1916, tried an offensive to the south against Austria,
which of course was always a kind of weaker opponent than the Germans were.
The Russian forces under General Alexei Brusilov attacked the Austrians in Galicia.
The Austrians were weakened because they'd had to divert troops themselves to the Italian frontier in the southwest.
As a result, the Russians broke through and they gained 60 miles.
But their offensive stalled when the Russian railway system was unable to bring more troops to the front.
So once again, we see the Russian Industrial Revolution failing the Russian war effort.
Still, this offensive diverted German troops away from Verdun.
Now, if you're following all this, you can see one of the fundamental problems for commanders on both sides in World War One.
Can you see that because both sides were so evenly matched, World War One was very much a zero-sum game?
If you massed troops for a decisive offensive on one front, you'd be pulling troops away from another front and somebody else could attack you.
You'd be too weak to maintain all your fronts at once.
In other words, the only way to break the deadlock would be either to add a big ally, like the US, or eliminate one, like Russia.
That was going to be the next German strategy.
By 1917, the Russian war effort was in chaos.
In that year alone, over a million men deserted.
Total losses since the beginning of the war amounted to 7.5 million casualties.
Civilians at home faced food shortages and strikes.
Peasants began to seize the land of their landlords.
In March of 1917, which is February according to the old Russian calendar,
the Russians were still using the Julian calendar as opposed to the Gregorian in use in Western Europe,
a series of street demonstrations broke out in Petrograd.
Here I have to explain something else.
Petrograd was the renamed St. Petersburg.
St. Petersburg had been renamed at the start of the war because of course that name sounds German,
and the Russians were anxious to get rid of all German associations.
The British royal family did the same thing, changing their name from Saxe-Cobre-Golta to Windsor.
It's a bit like changing French fries to freedom fries.
On the 8th of March, that would be 23rd February by the Julian calendar,
the International Women's Day, women took to the streets demanding food, peace and civil liberties.
Over the next few days, male workers joined them.
385,000 people went on strike.
Regular troops were ordered in to quell the rebellion, but they refused to fire on the starving demonstrators.
The revolt began to spread through the countryside, mutiny through the army.
On the 12th of March, 28th February in the Russian calendar,
Russia's legislature, the Duma, established a provisional government.
On the 15th of March, 2 March by the old calendar,
Nicholas II, hoping to save the monarchy from the wreckage,
abdicated in favor of Grand Duke Michael, who very wisely turned down the job.
From this point, real power rested with the defense minister, Alexander Kerensky.
He was a university trained intellectual and a moderate Democrat.
His government passed a series of reforms, but fatally, he decided that the war must continue.
After so much Russian blood had been spilled, surrender would render their loss pointless in his view.
Predictably, the war continued to go badly for Russia.
In the summer of 1917, Kerensky ordered another offensive, Russian soldiers deserted in droves.
They headed for the cities and joined revolutionary mobs.
Russia was obviously ripe for another revolution.
It was at this point that the Germans, desperate to knock Russia out of the war, took their second great gamble.
They put Vladimir Lenin on a train to Moscow.
Thank you.
