Lecture 36 The Russian Revolution, 1917 to 1922
You probably knew that I was going to say this.
To understand what happened in Russia in the fall of 1917, you have to know something
of the history of Russia in the 19th century.
In fact, it's easy to argue that the roots of the Russian Revolution go back as far as
Russia does into the mists of the Middle Ages.
First, we need to pin down what we mean by that word Russia in 1917.
Russia in 1917 was the largest state on earth and a vast multi-ethnic empire.
That means that when we refer to Russians in the World War I lectures, we really mean
a hodgepodge of different ethnic groups.
Radiating from the heartland of Muscovy, inhabited by ethnic Russians, we encounter to the east
Siberia, populated among many other groups by Russians, Ukrainians, Buryats, Tuvinians,
Yakuts, etc.
To the south, Ukrainians, Georgians, and Armenians.
To the west, Poles.
To the north, Finns, Estonians, Latvians, and Lithuanians.
Many of these groups had been conquered or absorbed between the 15th and the 19th centuries,
and that meant that the Russian Empire was prone to the same ethnic and nationalistic
tensions that we've seen in the rest of Europe, especially in the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Now you add to that the problem of distance.
It was hard for the government in St. Petersburg or Moscow to maintain authority.
In the 19th century, it did so by harsh repression.
One popular nickname for the Russian Empire was the Prison House of Nations.
Now as this implies, Russia was, in the eyes of most other Europeans, the most conservative
and economically backward of the major European states.
In terms of social structure, it was very much an Ancien regime.
The Tsar was viewed by the Russian people as, on the one hand, second only to God.
On the other, he was their Batushka, or little father.
Both beliefs were reinforced by a powerful Russian Orthodox Church, which worked hand
in glove with the Tsarist government.
Great landed aristocrats owned most of the land, which was worked for them by peasants.
Those peasants had been serfs prior to the 1860s.
Afterwards, they were free, but still miserably poor.
In 1917, 80% of the population of Russia were peasants.
In the cities, there was a small urban elite of factory owners who had been encouraged by
the Tsars in the late 19th century, and professionals, lawyers, doctors, and intellectuals.
Urban workers comprised maybe 10% of the population in the late 19th century.
They were very poorly paid.
They tried repeatedly to organize into labor unions.
These were frequently suppressed by the Tsarist government in support of the factory owners.
But these urban workers were mostly literate and opened to new ideas.
This explains how they became highly politicized and ready for change.
As we'll see, many middle class intellectuals agreed.
Now in terms of economic structure, as all this implies, Russia was overwhelmingly agricultural.
Old fashioned farming techniques depleted the soil.
There was very little farm machinery, so farms were still worked by manual labor.
And so Russian agricultural production is nothing like what it ought to be, given Russia's
vast size.
In terms of industry, Russia was the last major European power to industrialize, achieving
minimal industrial development by 1917.
As we have seen, Russia had been trying to westernize and modernize since at least the
time of Peter the Great.
Alexander I, you'll remember, he was Tsar during the Napoleonic Wars and ruled from
1801 to 1825, had been expected to be a reformer, but as we've seen, he turned into a conservative
Christian mystic.
As we have also seen at his death in 1825, liberal military officers failed to prevent
the ascension to the throne of his reactionary successor, Nicholas I.
Nicholas ruled Russia from 1825 to 1855, and he, after coming to the throne during the
December's revolt, was very much confirmed in his conservatism.
He created a state police.
He enacted tight censorship banning all books printed in the United States.
The government controlled university life strictly.
In the mid-19th century, writers and students reacted to all this by forming secret organizations
which would urge reform on the Tsarist state.
There were numerous groups.
Among them, the populists wanted to free the serfs and improve the lot of the peasants.
The anarchists saw all government as oppressive and sought its overthrow.
Socialists also wanted revolution, but they couldn't agree on exactly where it would start.
By the end of the century, they had split into two groups.
The Socialist Revolutionary Party, founded in 1901, concentrated on improving the lot
of the peasants.
They were willing to use terrorism and violence to achieve their ends.
Marxists concentrated on politicizing urban workers.
They formed the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party, or RSDLP, in 1898.
But in 1903, at a divisive party meeting, this group too split into two factions.
The Bolsheviks, from the Russian word for majority, but mainly because their opponents
walked out of the meeting, led by Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, favored a more centralized
and disciplined party.
The revolution would come from a small socialist elite.
They wanted a tighter, smaller, more intellectually coherent party.
The Mensheviks, from the Russian word for minority, was more loosely organized, more
of a big tent, and they included a lot of intellectual moderates.
From 1905, there was also a moderate liberal party, the constitutional democrats, or the
cadets.
Now, the next Tsar, Alexander II, who reigned from 1855 to 1881, would meet reform groups
halfway.
He eased censorship.
He reformed the law so that all were equal under it.
He reduced the enlistment of conscripted soldiers from 25 years to 6.
He freed the serfs, and endowed them with land.
But in order to compensate the nobles, they had to take out loans to pay the nobles, and
that would serve to impoverish them further.
He created local representative bodies called Zemstvos, but these were dominated by local
nobles.
In the provinces, he imposed Russification, that is, a denial of nationalistic impulses.
We're all Russians.
For the most radical of the reform groups, his program didn't go far enough.
And in 1881, Alexander II was assassinated by an anarchist group called the People's
Will.
His successor, Alexander III, who reigned from 1881 to 1894, predictably turned his
back on reform and imposed another series of repressive measures.
This was vengeance for the death of Alexander II.
Alexander III intensified Russification.
Nationalist movements were crushed in Poland, the Ukraine, and Finland.
Religious minorities were repressed, including Catholics in Poland, Protestants in the Baltic
states, and Jews throughout the empire.
Jews were forced to live in special settlements.
They were prohibited from certain professions, and above all, they were subject to vicious
race riots called pogroms.
These were often spontaneous popular riots, but they were also sometimes encouraged by
the Tsarist regime.
Political freedoms were reduced.
The power of the provincial assemblies, the sensfos, were curtailed.
Popular education was discouraged.
The press was heavily censored.
A secret police informed on the population.
Political dissidents were rounded up, tortured, imprisoned, or driven into exile.
In response to this, political assassination became ever more common.
Industrialization was encouraged, but as with the Western European experience a century
before, working conditions were poor and trade unions were outlawed.
In other words, pre-communist Russia was no paradise.
To many of its people, it qualified as an evil empire.
These policies were continued under Alexander's successor.
The man who would lead Russia into the twin disasters of World War I and the Russian Revolution,
Tsar Nicholas II, who ascended the imperial throne in 1894.
The names of Nicholas and his Tsaritsa Alexandra conjure up all sorts of glamorous and tragic
images.
In particular, a deservedly popular history book by Robert Massey and the feature film
of the same name.
If you've read the book, you know that it brings to vivid life the glittering world
of early 20th century European monarchies.
But it also posits a remarkable and seductive argument about the Russian Revolution, that
one of the great calamities of human history was all caused by hemophilia, a crazed Russian
monk, and the personal foibles of Nicky and Alex.
The argument goes something like this.
Nicholas was a weak man, raised with almost no training to be Tsar.
So he relied on Alexandra, a German princess descended from Queen Victoria.
Though a diplomatic marriage, theirs would become one of the great love stories among
European royalty.
But that story was blighted when, after giving birth to four daughters, including the soon-to-be
famous Anastasia, Alexandra produced a son, Alexei, who was afflicted with hemophilia.
This was a disease for which there was no treatment in the early 20th century, and which
was almost invariably, eventually, fatal.
Now as the story goes, the only person who seemed to have a positive effect on Alexei's
disease was a wild-eyed and unscrupulous Russian monk named Grigory Yefimovich Rasputin.
In ways which have never been adequately explained, Rasputin seemed to have a psychosomatic effect
on the boy and his bleeding on several occasions seemingly saving his life.
I'm going to leave this one to the doctors in terms of explanation.
Alexandra, understandably, came to have great confidence in it and devotion to Rasputin.
But on the level of character Rasputin was unworthy of that confidence.
He was notorious, glutton, and drunkard, a womanizer, and there were hygiene issues.
Worse, Alexandra began to take political advice from Rasputin, who for the most part
urged continued repression, don't give an inch to the reform movements.
So she urged her husband to do the same, and indeed Nicholas certainly did continue the
repression and the anti-Semitism of his father.
The result was a series of disasters which eventually brought on the Russian Revolution.
Now this is a seductive theory.
It appeals to our human sense of the dramatic and a kind of popular prejudice about history.
It's kind of neat, isn't it, when stuck-up historians like me can be shown to have overlooked
something, and we like it when a great event is caused by a tiny little thing like a blood
platelets.
There's only one problem.
It doesn't fit the facts.
You see, Nicholas II had proven himself incompetent long before the arrival of Rasputin on the
scene.
He didn't need any help to wreck Russia.
He was doing just fine all by himself.
In 1904, a year before meeting Rasputin, Nicholas embarked on an ill-advised war with Japan.
Now early in the 1900s, Russia was expanding into Asia.
It already had a foothold at Port Arthur and was moving troops into Manchuria.
This threatened Japan's plans to move into the Korean Peninsula.
Remember imperialism?
On the night of 8th February 1904, the Japanese launched a surprise attack on the Russian
fleet at Port Arthur, a tactic they would use again.
Japanese forces then besieged Port Arthur, Nicholas, feeling that the prestige of Russia
was at stake, not least because the Japanese were Asians and not Christian, dispatched
the Russian Baltic Fleet to sail into the Atlantic around the Cape of Good Hope and
up the Indian Ocean and South China Sea to Port Arthur.
This is a fearsome voyage of 8 months and 18,000 miles in 1904.
By the time the battered fleet was intercepted by the Japanese, on the 27th of May in Tsushima
Strait, it was in no shape to fight.
It was destroyed by superior Japanese maneuver, gunfire, and technology.
The British were already building battleships for the Japanese.
The Russians were forced to sue for peace, accepting the mediation of President Theodore
Roosevelt.
The resultant Treaty of Portsmouth was humiliating for a European Empire that thought itself
far superior to Asians.
Russia surrendered its lease to Port Arthur, evacuated Manchuria, and recognized Japan's
right to move into Korea.
TR got the Nobel Peace Prize.
This led, indirectly, not the Peace Prize, but Russia's surrender to the Revolution
of 1905.
During the fall of 1904, a series of industrial strikes for better pay and working conditions
had failed.
On Sunday, the 22nd of January 1905, a peaceful crowd gathered to petition the Tsar for better
conditions at the Winter Palace at St. Petersburg.
Now, in fact, the royal family was away from the palace at the time.
Nevertheless, the imperial guards panicked and fired into the crowd, killing about a
hundred demonstrators.
This would come to be known in Russia as Bloody Sunday.
It led to a general strike that spread to the countryside and forced the government to
negotiate.
By 1906, Nicholas II, weakened by military defeat and the reaction to Bloody Sunday,
was forced to concede the creation of a weak legislature, the Duma.
Some civil liberties, including the right of assembly.
At this point, workers began to form elective councils called Soviets in major cities.
But over the next decade, the government reasserted itself and went back on some of its promises.
Workers' organizations and ethnic groups were suppressed.
Thousands of revolutionaries were sent to prison or exile, including in the latter case
Vladimir Lenin and Leon Trotsky.
Surviving members of the radical groups were split over whether to cooperate with the government
and work through the Duma for reform or hold out for revolution.
The liberal cadets opted for incremental reform.
The socialist revolutionaries, true to their name, leaned towards resumption of terrorism.
Mensheviks opted for cooperation and legislation, and of course Bolsheviks opted for revolution.
They wrote underground newspapers, they organized illegal strikes.
Nicholas and Alexandra did, during this period of time, listen to Rasputin's call to further
crush dissent.
But Nicholas' biggest mistake wasn't Rasputin's fault.
Rasputin argued against entering into World War I.
Nicholas did so anyway, with the disastrous results that we have already seen.
Now as in every other country in Europe, the war was popular in Russia at first.
It was seen as patriotic and God ordained.
Opponents of the war were branded as traitors.
Most radical groups were swept up in the nationalistic fury.
Liberal cadets, some social revolutionaries, many Mensheviks supported the war.
Only the Bolsheviks opposed it outright, following the Marxist logic that war only enriched war
profiteers and contractors, and killed workers.
Now as we have seen, the war was disastrous for Russia.
We have noted Russia's 7.5 million casualties and mass desertions by 1917.
Worse, every mobilization, every offensive disrupted the transportation system which
disrupted the food supply.
By 1917, famine threatened the large cities.
We have seen how in March 1917, February to the Russians, a series of protests in Petrograd
combined with mutiny in the army led to the abdication of Nicholas II on the 15th of March,
in the Julian calendar, and the creation of a provisional government led by Alexander
Karensky.
The provisional government was basically a liberal coalition.
But the end of Tsarist repression meant that all sorts of radical groups could come out
of the woodwork.
They could come back to Russia from foreign exile.
They could come back to Petrograd on Moscow from Siberia.
We're talking about anarchists and socialists, and of course communists.
In particular, the Soviets of workers and soldiers were reactivated after a period of
repression during the war.
By the end of February, or March in our calendar, the Petrograd Soviets had united into one,
thus forming an alternative source of power to the government.
They created a commission to examine the food supply problems.
They began to publish a newspaper, Izvestia, which means the facts.
But on 1st March, they issued order number one.
All soldiers and sailors were to obey the orders of the Petrograd Soviet.
Councils of soldiers could debate orders, and no soldier needs to salute a superior officer.
So in other words, even in the army, order is breaking down all over Russia in the spring
of 1917.
It was that spring that the Germans, remember the Germans?
The Germans, sensing their opportunity, rounded up Lenin and Trotsky, and other exiled Russian
dissidents all throughout Europe, and gave them train tickets for Russia.
Lenin immediately began to give a series of fiery speeches, and you've probably seen
the famous photos, or perhaps even the posters, in which Lenin, shaking his fist, leaning
out over the podium, and shouting things like bread, peace, land, down with the provisional
government, all power to the Soviets.
Lenin was joined by Leon Trotsky, who brought over lots of Mensheviks.
Together they attracted dispirited soldiers, alienated workers, and students who had began
to arm and form red guards.
Workers began to form factory committees and demand control of the means of production.
From Lenin's point of view, the Marxist Revolution was happening.
In the countryside, peasants began to form Soviets of their own, in some cases, seizing
the land from their landlords.
So this is in the spring and summer of 1917.
Even suppressed nationalities grew rest of Poles and Finns, and Ukrainians began to agitate
for some degree of autonomy.
So all the old victims of Tsarist oppression were on the move.
And on all of these issues, the new Kerensky government was a disappointment.
He wanted to continue the war.
He refused land reform.
He included lots of industrialists in the cabinet.
He wants to appeal to the middle class.
He offered nothing to the suppressed nationalities, except to go on fighting for Mother Russia.
They in effect replied, she's not my mother.
Still, most people were not yet radicalized.
They were attracted to a moderate socialist platform, not the international communism
of the Bolsheviks.
They're still out there.
They're still viewed as extremists.
At the first elections for representative Soviets in June, moderate socialists won the majority.
The Bolshevik communists only gathered 137 delegates out of 1090.
But as we saw in the case of the French Revolution, hard times favor radical solutions, and Lenin's
people were at least consistent.
They offered solutions.
By the summer of 1917, the government was already in crisis, facing coups on all sides.
In June, the first Congress of Soviets met.
This would be the legislature of the new government, and immediately backed massive
anti-war demonstrations.
So here they are reacting against their own executive.
The Bolsheviks called for the overthrow of the government.
It responded, as all Russian governments had responded in the past to criticism with repression.
Trotsky was arrested.
Lenin went into hiding.
So now the government looks like it is moving right.
But in August, that would be September in our calendar, the conservative general Kornilov
turned against the government with an army.
Kornilov was the head of the army.
Kerensky, now not having an army, facing a coup, reversed himself.
He appealed to the radical leaders like Lenin to defend the February Revolution against
Kornilov.
To do so, he gave them arms.
Now the Bolsheviks and their allies did a good job.
They amassed 25,000 followers to defend Petrograd.
They convinced Kornilov's troops to join them with revolutionary arguments.
You can imagine the degree of exchange taking place here.
The coup was suppressed.
The Kerensky government was saved.
But at the cost of arming the radicals and legitimizing the Bolsheviks.
In fact, Kerensky had in effect turned law and order in Petrograd over to them.
Kerensky had made a devil's bargain.
He was now viewed with suspicion by all sides.
The country was ripe for a real revolution.
On the 10th of October, Lenin urged the Bolsheviks to seize power.
Trotsky formed a military revolutionary committee to make plans.
On the morning of 25-26 October, 5-6 November by the Western calendar, 1917, Bolshevik forces
occupied strategic points in Petrograd, railway stations, the central telephone exchange,
the state bank, the main post office.
The Red Guards surrounded the Winter Palace where the government was meeting, defended
by Cossacks.
At 9 p.m., a Russian naval cruiser, the Aurora, fired on the palace.
Finally, that evening, the palace was stormed and the provisional government arrested.
On that very day, the Congress of Soviets handed over power to the Soviet Council of
People's Commissars with Lenin as chairman.
The next day, Kerensky fled.
The new government immediately declared a Soviet Republic.
The new state was at first a multi-party state.
Its executive was the Council of People's Commissars, dominated by Lenin.
Its legislature was the Congress of Soviets, elected from various local bodies and containing
many shades of opinion.
It declared freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, equal rights for women, regulation
of banks, nationalized health care, public education, public housing, freedom of worship
and an end to the privileges of the Orthodox Church, self-determination of ethnic groups,
but the government hoped that they would vote to remain part of Russia.
Finally, government officials were to earn no more than factory workers.
But by the end of the year, things changed.
Lenin and the Bolsheviks, increasingly called communists, claimed that the revolution was
threatened by counter-revolutionaries.
They were everywhere.
It's the oldest excuse in the book.
And so, by the end of 1917, they began to seize absolute control.
Freedom of the press was curtailed.
The liberal cadets were outlawed.
Mensheviks and socialist revolutionaries were purged from government.
The government established the Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution,
Speculation and Sabotage, or CHECA, a secret police to root out enemies of the revolution.
CHECA would be the parent of the later NKVD and the KGB.
The greatest enemy of the revolution, the Russian royal family, was executed by firing
squad in July of 1918.
Now this is a hard one for my students.
It is obviously a brutal act, and they often wonder why it should be thought necessary.
This act, of course, cannot be excused, but it should be recalled that the royal family
was almost universally blamed and hated for Russia's immense troubles.
Moreover, Lenin and the Bolsheviks, pursuing real apolitik, understood that as long as
the royal family lived, they represented a reversionary interest.
Someone might try to restore them.
And so, in their eyes, they had to go.
From early 1918, Lenin and his followers consolidated their power and pursued four main goals, which
have come to be known as Lenin's war communism.
First, seizure of the land by the peasants.
Second, seizure of the factories by the workers.
Third, an immediate peace.
And fourth, the exportation of international communism.
Remember that Marx didn't really believe in national boundaries and borders.
Communism was supposed to be about an international brotherhood of workers.
So Lenin convened the Third Communist International.
That is, the Third International Meeting of Communists, there had been two previous ones,
in 1919.
Their idea was to foment revolution in Germany, in Austria, in Hungary, so that there would
be brother communist revolutions all across Europe.
What were the results of Lenin's war communism?
It was a disaster.
Take land reform, also known as collectivization.
As the communists seized power, they lost the support of peasants who mostly liked the
socialist revolutionaries.
They'd always been on the peasant side.
The communists were especially hated because they were diverting food to the cities, and
that angered the peasants.
They were starving too.
This resulted in peasant revolts, which the government put down ruthlessly.
The seizure of the factories didn't go well either.
The factory owners threatened sabotage, so the government moved fast, perhaps too fast.
They fired all the factory foremen and middle management and put workers in charge.
Well, of course, the workers were inexperienced as managers.
Many of them, overwhelmed by the task, simply drifted away.
The factories of Russia ground to a halt.
The government had to step in over the objections of trade unions and workers Soviets.
The peace was negotiated by Leon Trotsky.
An armistice was signed on the 5th of December, 1917.
In that sense, peace came quickly.
But during the peace negotiations, Trotsky stalled.
He was hoping for communist revolutions in Germany and Austria, which would give Russia
a better deal, because, of course, they'd befell communists.
That would eventually happen briefly in 1918.
There would be communist revolutions in those countries, but they came too late to help Trotsky.
Instead, the Germans launched another offensive to show that they meant business.
What was left of the Russian army was exhausted, counting on revolution and peace.
And so the Germans captured lots of territory and strengthened their bargaining position.
The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which is in Belarus, was finalized in March of 1918.
The Germans played hardball.
Russia was forced to concede Poland and portions of western Russia about a quarter of Russia's
European territory.
This territory contained a third of Russia's heavy industry.
It also contained one half of Russia's coal and iron.
Finally, what about the international situation in Lenin's attempt to spread revolution?
Lenin's attempt to export communism only enraged the Allies.
They blockaded Russia, adding to its food crisis.
They made contact with counter-revolutionaries among the cadets and even among the aristocracy
and promoted them.
And they sent troops of their own in 1919.
That would include the United States.
In response, Trotsky organized the Red Army.
In response, personal freedoms, the right of dissent, were further curtailed.
The Cheka was strengthened.
The death penalty reimposed.
The result of all this, from 1918 into the early 1920s, was the Red Terror, the execution
of thousands of opposition figures.
Now, obviously, the Russian Revolution had tremendous long-term significance for European
history.
We're going to address that significance in a subsequent lecture on the Soviet Union.
What about its significance for World War I?
In the meantime, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk had the potential to decide the war, but maybe
in ways that were unforeseen by the Germans.
Obviously, the second German gamble had seemed to pay off.
Russia was knocked out of the war.
Germany now increased its resources and was able to ship thousands of troops to the Western
Front for one final push, a battle to end all battles in 1918, which the Germans called
the Kaiserschlacht.
The Emperor Battle, with their usual gift for grandiose terminology.
But less, obviously, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk gave the remaining Allies a taste of what
a German peace would be like.
It would be ruthless and exploitative.
Clearly, the Kaisers' greater Germany would be no benign empire.
This only increased the resolve of leaders in London, Paris, and Washington to fight
on regardless.
And so, World War I would be decided on the battlefield, not at the conference table.
In the next lecture, the irresistible force of the Kaisers' army on the Western Front,
newly augmented with reinforcements from the east, meets the immovable object of Allied
resolve, and for the first time, American troops.
