Lecture 38 Recovery and Depression in the West, 1919 to 1936.
In the last lecture, we examined the world's attempt to put itself back together after
the First World War.
I've already given some broad hints as to why that attempt, successful in the short
term, would bring even bigger problems in the long term, leading eventually to a resumption
of hostilities 20 years later.
Perhaps the most fundamental problem with the immediate post-war world, certainly one
with which everyone could identify, was economic.
Everyone wanted to get back to peacetime and the business of getting and spending, but
if World War I was the world's first total war, that meant that economies had been redirected
and attacked.
It would take a long time to repair them and bring them back to peacetime pursuits.
The situation in 1919 and 1920 was a challenge to say the least to anyone who expected to
turn the clock back to 1914.
First, vast armies and navies had to be demobilized.
Men often returned broken, physically and psychologically.
They also often returned to find that they had no jobs or that wives and sweethearts
had abandoned them.
Most of the new democracies in Europe began to build welfare states, first because returning
soldiers demanded it after the equality of the trenches, but also because returning soldiers
needed it.
A good example is public housing for veterans in Germany and in Sweden.
Most, the major exception was France, granted votes to women who had, after all, gone to
work in the factories.
War changed the culture.
We've already spoken of the lost generation of writers who rejected the old pieties.
Women now not only had the vote, they continued to work outside the home.
They began cutting their hair and wearing trousers and less elaborate dresses, and they smoked.
They also fraternized more easily with men.
Stay tuned for that one.
The war brought new words into the language, lousy, to mean anything bad.
Raincoats became trench coats, and a basket case referred to a veteran who'd lost his
limbs and had to be carried in a basket.
The war may also have brought the world's worst pandemic, the so-called Spanish flu
of 1918.
The Spanish flu, so-called because it was first noticed in Spain, ironically probably
started in American military camps, though there is some debate about that.
If true, Europe's savior would be instrumental in killing even more of its inhabitants.
The flu was spread around the globe by troop movements.
It tended to kill young adults in their teens and twenties, the very ones who had just survived
the war.
It produced between 20 and 50 million victims.
I've seen estimates as high as 100 million.
If true, that's 10 times the loss in World War I.
Obviously, the Spanish flu retarded the economic recovery.
Turning to individual European economies, Germany had begun the war as the industrial
powerhouse of Central Europe.
But as we've seen, Germany was devastated by the war and by the peace, losing one-third
to one-half of its raw materials.
The Weimar Republic, so-named for its founding city, Gertes' birthplace, tried to revive
the economy and steer a middle course between conservative royalists who wanted the Kaiser
back and communists.
It had a ceremonial president, its executive was a chancellor, its bicameral legislature
was popularly elected and was mostly dominated by social democrats.
But extreme parties of the right and the left fought in violent confrontations and always
threatened its overthrow.
The problem for Weimar Germany would be to negotiate these two between these two extremes.
Britain had entered the war the greatest manufacturing and trading nation on earth.
But remember that it had been slowing down and its factories were increasingly obsolete.
It emerged from the war with one-third of its shipping destroyed, nearly 8 million tons.
Its resources and investments had been diverted to war production from growth industries like
automobile manufacture and electronic goods.
It owed a war debt of $4 billion to the United States.
During the 20s and 30s, it would be governed by a series of weak, mostly Tory, conservative
coalition governments.
According to France, French industry was in the same shape as Britain's, but worse,
French agriculture, which was proportionally more important to the French economy, had
been devastated by the fact that most of the western front had been on French soil.
Choice farmland had been churned into muddy no-man's land.
That land was still dangerous because of unexploded shells and grenades.
Indeed, much of it is still dangerous for that reason today.
Farm houses, buildings, market towns and roads had all been devastated by shell fire and
destroying.
France also owed a war debt of $3.5 billion to the US.
France would also be governed by a series of weak coalition governments of the moderate
right or the moderate left.
Eastern Europe never had much industry to begin with.
East European farmland was also torn up by the war in Poland and Western Russia, in southern
and eastern Austria, and in the Balkans.
Back to this political and social upheaval, as old regimes fell in the last days of the
war and were replaced by democracies and revolutionary republics.
For example, the land situation was a mess because in the turmoil at the end of the war,
peasants had often seized it from ancestral landlords.
In other words, 1918, 1919, 1920 were not a good time to be a Hungarian count or a Polish
baron.
This part of the world also suffered from a shortage of seed and farm equipment.
The Soviet Union was thought a dangerous, unstable neighbor by the new democracies.
It was treated as an economic pariah by the rest of the world.
It couldn't get development loans, the West was reluctant to trade.
That would lead to an increased sense of self-reliance, isolation, and paranoia.
Only the United States came out of the war in better shape than when it went in.
The two and a half years of peace just before entry allowed it a tremendous advantage in
the production of peacetime products and also in terms of moving into markets.
Henry Ford's assembly line techniques made him an international icon.
He could produce a Model T every 10 minutes.
The short mobilization, America wasn't at war for very long, meant a shorter interval
to return to what the republicans called normalcy.
Republican administrations in the 1920s avoided foreign entanglements.
They agreed to pursue disarmament.
They pursued laissez-faire economic policies and they liked to keep taxes low.
That meant relatively small military budgets.
The money could be spent on other things.
Above all, the U.S. was creditor for Europe's huge wartime debt of about $10 billion, $3
billion of which would be spent on post-war reconstruction.
Now the debt and reparations problem would dominate European politics and economics
in the 1920s.
Clearly, the British and French and other allies were in no position to pay their debt
anytime soon.
At Versailles and afterwards, the British asked the U.S. for an all-around cancellation
of debt.
In fact, it was Winston Churchill who was asked to make the appeal.
Now that will probably sound absurd to Americans, but the British did have arguments beyond poverty.
Britain and France had paid in blood for a war which, in the ally view, had to be fought.
That war had benefited the United States in the long run.
For example, the manufacturing generated by British and French debt had stimulated the
American economy.
The British also insisted that insistence on full payment would bring the world economy
to its knees, but the U.S. insisted.
In the words of Calvin Coolidge, they borrowed the money, didn't they?
The U.S.'s insistence on payment had two effects.
First, it drove a wedge between America and her allies.
In Europe, Uncle Sam began to be portrayed as Uncle Shylock.
The second effect was that the British and the French had to get the money from somewhere.
That somewhere was Germany.
Now in fact, the British were more interested in re-establishing trade with Germany than
they were in reparations, but the French insisted on payment of their fair share.
To pay the reparations debt, Germany needed to obtain capital via exports, but as you'll
recall, a lot of German industry had been confiscated, and high tariff barriers all
around Europe kept German goods out.
By 1923, Germany began to default on its reparations payments.
French Prime Minister Poincare, an ardent nationalist, ordered the French army into
the roar to seize its coal deposits.
The German government could think of nothing better to do in response, but encouraged passive
resistance and print money to pay their reparations.
By the end of the year, 300 paper mills and 150 printing companies were turning out currency
round the clock.
The result was to render the Deutschmark valueless.
In 1914, four Deutschmarks equaled a dollar.
In 1921, 64 Deutschmarks bought a dollar.
At the beginning of 1923, 800 Deutschmarks bought a dollar.
But by the end of 1923, it would take 4.2 trillion Deutschmarks to buy a dollar.
This ruined anyone on a fixed income.
That is, unionized workers got by because their salaries were often tied to the rate
of inflation.
But middle-class shopkeepers, small businessmen were ruined, pensions and insurance policies
became worthless.
Workers were paid three times a day.
They had to take their pay home in wheelbarrows, and when one has read those descriptions,
one reads eyewitness descriptions of what it was like in Germany at the time and they
seem absurd, German money was more valuable as kindling than it was as a means of exchange.
In the long run, this helps to explain why the German people lost faith in the Weimar
Republic and started to listen to extremist politicians.
In the short run, in 1924, in fact, a more moderate coalition government came to power
in France and agreed to back off and consider an American plan to adjust Germany's debt.
The 1924 DAW's plan arranged for the U.S. to loan money to Germany to enable Germany
to pay the British and French so that they could pay the U.S.
So we lent money to the Germans to pay the British and French to pay us.
They also instituted an installment plan which started small and gradually increased
Germany's share.
The 1925 Locarno Pact, sponsored by the League of Nations, returned Germany to the community
of nations.
The next year, Germany was let into the League and also agreed not to violate the borders
of France or Belgium.
But Germany's neighbors still feared them and they formed the Little Entente.
Between 1920 and 1926, France, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania all agreed to come
to each other's defense should any one of them face a German invasion.
In 1929, the young plan fixed Germany's total obligation at $29 billion, but it never came
into effect because of the Great Depression.
In 1932, the Lausanne Conference absolved the German Republic of all reparations obligations.
Now in the end, Germany probably paid a total of about $6 billion.
It received far more than that in U.S. subsidies, a fact that was very largely forgotten very
soon after.
But the Germans would long remember the humiliation of 1923 when the French tried to strangle
them.
Now despite this crisis, Europe showed signs of economic recovery in the 20s.
But that recovery would be highly qualified.
First, it was very gradual.
Second, it took place mostly in industrial countries.
Third, it took place mostly in Western Europe, which I guess I just said.
Fourth, it was mostly spurred by American loans.
Now first, I want to talk about the positives of the recovery.
Britain, France, Germany, and the Netherlands, which remember had been neutral in the war,
began to rebuild their industry with American capital.
Most of the growth took place in the new electronics and synthetic industries.
Heavy industry, shipbuilding, auto-manufacturing, steel recovered far more slowly.
Now simultaneously, the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin launched a series of five-year
plans beginning in 1928.
Between 1928 and 1940, production increased sevenfold.
By 1940, the Soviet Union was one of the top five industrial nations on earth.
Stalin's regime also touted full employment, free medical care, full public education,
and other social services at a time when Western capitalist countries were recovering slowly
and unable to provide full safety nets.
Now of course, few in the West knew of the terrible price exacted on the peoples of the
former Russian Empire.
More about that in the next lecture.
Italy's industry recovered slowly, but Mussolini was able to increase food production.
The negatives of the 1920s recovery were, first of all, that apart from Italy, this
recovery was confined, as I indicated, mostly to industry.
Even here, European industry had lost many overseas markets to the Americans during
the war.
Old industries reluctantly faced decline.
In 1926, the British coal workers launched an abortive national strike to protest low
wages and poor working conditions in mines.
The period saw lots of mergers, including the formation of big multinationals that you've
heard of like Shell Oil based in the Netherlands and Nestle's Chocolate based in Switzerland.
Agriculture recovered more slowly than industry.
In the Soviet Union, collectivization had been a disaster.
The state taking over the farms was resented by the peasants.
Authorities responded with mass executions and mass deportations.
Combined with the famine of 1931-32, this resulted in perhaps four million deaths.
In the rest of the world, agriculture were not devastated directly by the war, had actually
expanded its capacity to feed the troops.
After the war, though, for that very reason, it suffered from overproduction, and so the
1920s actually saw agricultural depression across much of Europe.
Because most of the world was still primarily agricultural, that meant that most people
could not really afford industrial goods.
Since industrial workers were also poorly paid, demand did not match industrial output.
This was a problem.
To spur demand, people had to be encouraged to abandon old traditions like saving money
and postponing pleasure.
The key here was modern advertising, which used a lot of the same techniques that had
been used to encourage support for the war.
Big companies harnessed the power of new mass media in billboards, magazine ads, radio,
film, newsreel.
They used enticing pictures in catchy slogans and the suggestion of sexuality to encourage
people to buy now, collect material possessions, keep up with the Joneses, go into debt, replace
older purchases with the latest thing.
Take cars.
According to one General Motors executive, the key to economic prosperity is the organized
creation of dissatisfaction.
As a result, many U.S. and Western European workers purchased industrial goods on credit.
They used layaway plans, and they opened credit accounts.
In the short term, this was great.
It got industrial goods out the door and into people's hands.
The result was a period of increasing mass consumption in the West.
It was really in the 20s that much of Western Europe began to electrify, purchase gas ovens
and electric irons and toasters and radios, phonographs, automobiles, off-the-rack clothing.
In cities, a nightlife developed that, unlike the old music hall, crossed class lines.
London dance clubs, Paris nightclubs, Berlin cabarets, speakeasies in the U.S., thanks
to prohibition, often built around the new music form from America, jazz.
Black entertainers like Louis Armstrong and Josephine Baker, facing segregation in the
States, found more freedom and appreciation in Paris in particular.
Paris also became a mecca for American writers and composers.
Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Aaron Copeland and George Gershwin all went to Paris.
All this, combined with the newfound freedom for women, led to the 20th century's first
sexual revolution.
But all this high living was built on a shaky foundation.
The downside to the new culture of credit on both sides of the Atlantic was that neither
American nor European workers were actually being paid enough to keep up with their bills.
If individuals defaulted, the companies that made the consumer goods they bought would
have cash flow problems.
If that happened, they would be unable to keep up with their bank loans, and if that
happened, banks would have to call in other loans or fail.
That was crucial because loans from American banks were propping up European prosperity.
If American banks called in their European loans or failed, the ripple effect across
Western Europe would be devastating.
In other words, much of the prosperity of the 1920s was built on a chain of credit that
stretched across the Atlantic.
If any link in that chain failed, the consequences would be devastating.
Well, you know what I'm coming to, the Great Depression.
The causes of the Great Depression have been endlessly debated, but the general consensus
follows the outline I've given above.
But what does all this have to do with the New York stock market?
Why did its crash start the Depression?
Well, the one group that had done well after the war were the wealthy.
They benefited from low taxes after the war, taxes were lowered, they poured the extra
money into investments, and in particular into stocks.
This buying spree led to an artificial inflation of stock values, which led to a boom market
by 1928.
Now, companies, banks, even ordinary folks bought stocks on margin, that is, they were
buying with money borrowed against the eventual stock yield, sort of a layaway plan for stocks.
In the fall of 1929, the U.S. government got nervous about this.
They were worried about the bubble, and so they attempted to regulate speculation.
That forced brokers to demand more payment from investors.
When those investors defaulted, stock prices began to plummet.
Beginning on the 24th of October, 1929, Black Thursday, the Wall Street market collapsed.
20 million shares were sold in a panic.
$40 billion was lost in just three months.
With confidence shattered, American banks began to call in loans to companies.
The companies needing money demanded immediate payment for past goods, but remember, workers
were unable to pay, in part because they'd been so poorly paid, in part because their
employers now began laying them off to reduce expenses and debt.
Thus, began a cycle of defaulting among banks, and companies, and individuals that resulted
in the Great Depression.
The effects of all this took some time to reach Europe.
U.S. credit didn't fully dry up until 1931 or so.
In May of 1931, Austria's largest bank collapsed, and that's usually considered the official
beginning of the Depression in Europe.
In July, the first German bank suspended payments.
The effects on Europe of the Depression were devastating.
American trade sank to 35% of its pre-1929 level.
Prices dropped by more than one-half.
Production declined by one-third.
Unemployment rose in many industrial countries to one-quarter of the labor force.
World unemployment rose to 11% of the world labor force.
But different countries were affected differently.
For example, the Soviet Union was not affected at all because it wasn't part of the Western
economic system.
It had received virtually no American loans.
So in 1934, with Western Europe in the grip of the Depression, the Soviet Union was producing
twice the manufactured goods it had in 1929.
Now this is vitally important.
If you want to know why so many Americans and Europeans flirted with communism in the
1930s, it has a great deal to do with this.
The sense that communism was winning.
Capitalism was in free fall.
It had finally choked on its own greed.
It had made too few rich.
It had made too many poor.
In other words, Marx appeared to be right in the 1930s.
He had always predicted this, and now it seemed to be coming true.
Britain, France, the Netherlands, Belgium were affected much more seriously.
As prices fell and American loans dried up, factories closed, business confidence plummeted.
By 1932, unemployment stood at over 20% in the United Kingdom, 14% in France, 27% in
the Netherlands.
Whole industrial towns were virtually wiped out.
For example, Jero on Tyneside, which built ships, there was no work at all.
Of all the great European industrial powers, however, it was Germany that suffered the
most.
Germany had never fully recovered from the great inflation of 1923.
By 1932, industrial production in Germany dropped to 40% of what it had been in 1929.
By 1933, unemployment was running at 36%.
In the agricultural southern and eastern Europe, farmers couldn't afford to buy seed
and machinery, and so they started going bankrupt.
Perhaps even more than in America, the Great Depression produced tremendous social and
political upheaval in Europe.
There was certainly political and social upheaval in the States, but not as much questioning
of the fundamentals of democracy as took place on the European continent.
Europe, remember, had not completely recovered from the Great War, nor was most of it long
experienced with democracy.
Workers either terminated or subject to reduced wages took to the streets in violent strikes
and protests all across the continent.
You can't find a European country in the 30s that doesn't see these violent strikes and
protests.
Never before had Europe seemed so ripe for revolution.
Communist writers, bankrolled by the Soviet Union, labeled this the inevitable death knell
of capitalism predicted long ago by Karl Marx.
It became common in Western countries to blame bankers and government officials.
Often Jewish bankers and government officials, or the charges made of the bankers and government
officials causing this, were Jews for the disaster.
Workers urged their governments to crack down on recalcitrant workers and on the possibility
of revolution.
The result of all this was that politically, Europe began to split in reaction to the Great
Depression.
In Western Europe, the democracies were shaken by political movements of the left and the
right, communism and fascism.
In Eastern and Southern Europe, which lacked democratic traditions, those movements won
it out, establishing totalitarian states.
For the remainder of this lecture, we're going to concentrate on the former, we're going
to concentrate on the Western democracies, and then I will turn to the totalitarian states
in subsequent lectures.
I'd like to begin with the USA.
I imagine that the story of the depression in America is familiar to you, and it better
be, I don't have enough time to lay it out in full, but as you know, the Hoover administration
following Republican laissez-faire policies of the 20s believed that the market and the
economy would correct themselves.
Unemployment in the United States reached 38% by 1932, even worse than Weimar, Germany.
World War I vets marched on Washington, demanding a bonus for their services.
On Hoover's orders, they were dispersed with tear gas.
Shanty towns of homeless sprang up, which came to be known as Hoovervilles.
In Oklahoma, Arkansas and Texas, dust bowl conditions drove farmers off the land, many
headed to the West Coast seeking relief or work as migrant farm workers, as told movingly
by John Steinbeck and Hollywood in The Grapes of Wrath.
The result of all this was that the 1932 election returned Franklin D. Roosevelt in a landslide
on a promise that he would do something about the depression.
He immediately increased relief payments, and this evolved into a comprehensive set
of social programs known as the New Deal.
Roosevelt reflated the economy by massive government spending, loosely reflective of
the theories of the British economist John Maynard Keynes.
He also eased protective tariffs.
Historians still debate the real effectiveness of this program, and it certainly didn't have
much effect on Europe yet, but the restoration of confidence was palpable.
The British, led by the Conservative governments of Stanley Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain,
chose a different road to recovery, at least at first.
At first, instead of sweeping social legislation and public works programs, a la Roosevelt,
the government tried to cure the depression by cutting back on government spending so
as to reduce government debt.
Remember, these are conservative governments, they're not about to embrace socialism.
That meant to conserve government spending that welfare benefits were cut, taxes were
raised, interest rates were cut to increase investment, and the pound was devalued to
foster exports.
Unlike Roosevelt, these governments imposed protective tariffs.
But when things didn't improve, after 1933, even the Conservative government's ruling
Great Britain changed course.
They increased benefits payments, including health insurance.
They launched major public works programs to clear slums.
This plus rearmament led to a gradual, steady improvement.
Now, France was the country that had experience of the greatest number of revolutions, coups,
and attempts to change since 1789, and extremists on both sides thought that the French government,
the Third Republic, could be toppled.
France boasted numerous political parties across a very wide spectrum, and because the
French constitution called for proportional representation, that is, political parties
got the same share in the legislature as the percentage of votes they received, virtually
all these parties had some representatives in government.
It was virtually impossible for any one party to receive a significant majority.
As a result, the French governments of the 20s and 30s tended to be weak, multi-party
coalitions.
Now, economically, France had actually been relatively prosperous in the 20s, achieving
full employment and self-sufficiency by 1929.
But a lot of that was based on German reparations payments.
When the Depression hit, those payments dried up completely, class and party tensions resurfaced.
In 1936, left-wing parties buried their differences and formed the popular front, which secured
France's first socialist government under Leon Blum.
He enacted sweeping reforms.
He reduced the workweek to 40 hours.
He required companies to provide paid vacations.
He required compulsory arbitration of labor disputes.
He nationalized the Bank of France and the mutinations industry.
Leon Blum was a hero to French workers, but bankers and businessmen on the right refused
to cooperate.
They criticized him for being too slow to rearm in response to Hitler's rearmament of
Germany.
Blum was also criticized by the far left, communists, etc., who thought that by moderating
the worst effects of capitalism, he was preserving it.
They staged sit-down strikes.
They refused overtime when France did begin to rearm.
Finally, in April of 1938, the Blum government fell.
It would be replaced by another weak coalition led by Edouard de la Die.
It would be this government which would lead France into World War II.
By 1937-38, it was pretty clear that the great democracies of the West, and with them, capitalism,
had largely survived the challenge of the Great Depression.
To do so, all had flirted with some form of socialism.
None, with the exception of Roosevelt's America, were perceived as being particularly strong
coming out of this crisis.
All had to tolerate near-revolutionary movements of the right or left in their midst, for example,
Sir Oswald Mosley's British Union of Fascists.
What made their challenge so pressing was that the largest states in central, eastern and
southern Europe had already embraced alternatives to democratic capitalism.
It is to those alternatives that we turn in the next lecture.
