Lecture 39, Totalitarian Russia, 1918 to 1939.
In the last lecture, we learned how the Western democracies confronted the challenges of
the post-war period and the Great Depression.
However, the democratic capitalism was still a relatively new experiment in the West and
many contemporaries had their doubts about whether it would survive the crisis of the
1930s.
There were alternatives.
Central, Eastern and Southern Europe would opt for communism and fascism.
Here it's important to remember that this part of Europe was, apart from Germany, the
slowest to industrialize.
It was the last to democratize.
It had no democratic traditions.
It was, apart from Germany, predominantly agricultural.
And it was, apart from Russia, the part of Europe that had suffered most from the Great
Depression.
All of this helps to explain why the major countries of Central, Eastern and Southern
Europe embraced totalitarian regimes before World War II.
Now, before proceeding, it might be well to make sure that we understand what that means.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, totalitarianism is a form of government permitting
no rival loyalties or parties.
So a totalitarian regime is even more repressive of dissent than an absolute monarchy or an
autocracy.
It implies the use or threat of force on the part of the state to enforce total loyalty,
including surveillance, imprisonment, torture and liquidation.
Almost invariably, the state monitors every aspect of public and where possible, private
life.
The arts and communications media, associations and clubs, even family life, hence the totality
of totalitarianism.
Almost invariably, totalitarianism implies the use of modern technology and propaganda
techniques to monitor the population and to present the leader or leaders as godlike benefactors.
Think of those huge posters of Stalin or Hitler surrounded by adoring thousands at Nuremberg
and the propaganda film, Triumph of the Will, which could convey the experience to millions
more not present.
Most invariably, socialism and nationalism are an integral part of the totalitarian
state's ideology.
The former, to convince its citizens that they never had it so good, or at least better
off than people elsewhere, the latter to justify an aggressive foreign policy.
Finally, a totalitarian state can be of the left or of the right.
The point is not so much which ideology is believed, but that some ideology is embraced
without question, flexibility or tolerance.
The Soviet Union was the granddaddy of all totalitarian states.
Now as we've seen, immediately after the revolution there was an initial period of
coalition and political openness.
But that was broken by the disastrous treaty of Brest-Litovsk of 1918.
In particular, the left social revolutionary party denounced the treaty and left the Council
of People's Commissars.
Russian members launched a series of assassination attempts designed to restart the war.
They killed the German ambassador to Moscow.
Bolshevik leaders were also attacked.
Lenin was critically wounded.
In fact, he would never completely recover.
In other words, the first counter-revolution in Russia came not from the right, but from
the left.
But the reaction was the same as it had been in France under the Jacobin.
The Bolsheviks responded with the red terror, eliminating political opponents.
This set Russia on the path to become a one-party state.
In July of 1918, the Congress of Soviets approved the first constitution of the Russian Soviet
Federated Socialist Republic, or the RSFSR.
Lenin and his Bolsheviks became the dominant force in the new government.
Now as we've seen, Lenin's initial attempt to communize the country quickly with forced
collectivization, his war communism, was a disaster.
The Russian economy, already crippled by war, was now totally disrupted.
Industrial production in 1923 was 13% of what it had been 10 years before.
The harvests of 1921 were terrible.
The new state couldn't secure foreign loans.
That capitalist would want to invest in a regime that was preaching the end of capitalism
by violent revolution, and was beset with enemies on all sides, both within and without.
You see in 1918, a titanic civil war broke out that would rage until 1922.
Now on one level, the civil war was between the red Russians, or communists, and the white
Russians, Ukrainians.
But the white Russians made common cause with monarchists, liberals, non-communist socialists,
Mensheviks, anyone who just didn't want a communist state.
The whites were joined at various times by neighboring powers who were just as worried
about communism.
For example, thanks to Brest-Lotovsk, German troops still occupied Belarus, the Ukraine,
and the northern Caucasus.
The Czechoslovak Legion, prisoners from the Austro-Hungarian Army, kept in Siberia, were
trying to fight their way home.
British, French, American, and Japanese troops occupied Murmansk, Arkangel, and Vladivostok
until 1922.
Winston Churchill justified this invasion as follows, Bolshevism must be strangled in
its cradle.
In the spring of 1920, Poland invaded, in support of the right white Russians, but also
in the hope of recovering much of the historical Poland-Lithuania from their ancient enemy.
So this was revenge for the partitions of the late 18th century.
In 1919, the whites launched a major offensive on Moscow.
But the Red Army, newly organized by Leon Trotsky, held, and the new Soviet state survived
the civil war.
But barely.
The Polish War was ended in 1921 with the Treaty of Riga.
Russia ceded Western Ukraine and Belarus to Poland.
In 1921, the Soviet Union also accepted the de facto independence of Finland, Poland, Latvia,
Lithuania, and Estonia, and thereby lost much of what had once been Russia's industrial
capacity.
Overall, between 1914 and 1921, thanks to war, famine, and disastrous treaty negotiation,
the population of Russia fell from 171 million to 132 million.
The Soviet Union would spend much of the 20th century trying to get those lands and that
people back.
It is very important to understand these events to understand the context of Soviet diplomacy
in the 20th century.
Finally, in the spring of 1921, workers in Petrograd and sailors at the Naval Base at
Kronstadt revolted against strict communist control.
They were, of course, shot.
Factionalism was thereafter outlawed within the Communist Party, but Lenin got the message.
Lenin's new economic policy was a response to the failures of war communism.
In effect, it slowed down in some places it reversed communization beginning in March
of 1921.
First, Lenin authorized a partial return to pre-war capitalism.
Instead of requisitioning all the grain, farmers could sell surplus yield and grow prosperous.
Prosperous farmers were known as kulaks.
Lenin eased controls on trade and industry.
He retreated from international revolution.
And the NEP was by and large a success.
By 1928, production had recovered to pre-war levels.
Food became plentiful again.
Wages rose slightly.
The West viewed the NEP as a sign of maturity.
By 1925, diplomatic relations were restored with most Western powers except the USA.
That didn't come until 1933.
But loans trickled in slowly.
Moreover, all this led to a bitter debate within the party between graduates who wanted
a step-by-step road to communism and those who argued for immediate change.
In 1922, Lenin suffered a paralytic stroke and was incapacitated.
He died in 1924 at age 53, having willed both the revolution and the Soviet Union into being
through sheer force of will, oratory and propaganda, and cold calculation.
Who would succeed him?
Could the fledgling Soviet Union be held together by any other man?
The front-runner was Leon Trotsky.
Born in 1879, the son of a farmer, he had experienced numerous exiles with and without
Lenin.
He was an increasingly close associate of Lenin after the revolution, a brilliant intellectual
and an important theorist for the Communist Party.
He was also an effective organizer.
He established the Military Revolutionary Committee on the eve of the revolution, and
as Minister of War, it was Trotsky who organized the Red Army, which defeated the Whites.
Trotsky was perhaps not so great in a negotiator.
He had negotiated the disastrous Treaty of Brest-Lotosk with the Germans, and once the
Civil War ended, his importance as Minister of War diminished.
His rival was Josef Stalin.
Stalin was born Josef Zugashvili in 1879, the son of a Georgian former serf turned shoemaker.
He was expelled from a theological seminary for socialist views in 1899, because he'd
already joined the Social Democrats the year before.
Stalin joined the Bolsheviks in 1903.
He was imprisoned repeatedly 1903 to 12 and exiled to Siberia 1913 to 17, but he still
managed to help with the foundation of Pravda in 1911, and it was in 1913 that he actually
adopted the name Stalin, which in Russian means man of steel.
Stalin distinguished himself in the defense of Saritsyn, later Stalingrad, now Volgograd
during the Civil War, but he wasn't Lenin's choice.
Lenin thought Stalin rude, and on his deathbed the latter suggested that Stalin should be
shunted aside in favor of someone, quote, more tolerant, more loyal, more polite, and
more considerate to the comrades, less capricious, etc.
So Lenin was a pretty good judge of character.
Nor did Stalin have great intellectual abilities.
In the party, he was only a secretary.
From 1922, General Secretary of the Communist Party, his colleagues made fun of him.
They called him Comrade Card Index, but here's a piece of advice for those who live in the
real world.
Always be nice to the secretary.
In Stalin's case, he used his position to watch over the membership, fill it with supporters,
purge it of Trotskyites, first by keeping them out of sensitive jobs, then by expelling
them from the party.
In 1925, Stalin forced Trotsky's resignation as Minister of War.
He then banished him to Siberia.
In 1929, he banished him abroad.
Trotsky continued to write against Stalin, including a massive three-volume history of
the Revolution, published between 1932 and 1933, and the Revolution betrayed in 1937.
Stalin was bound to react.
In 1940, Trotsky was murdered in Mexico, almost certainly on Stalin's orders.
This was only the beginning of a series of purges of potential rivals and opposition figures.
Next came the sabotage trials from 1928 to 1933.
Russian and foreign engineers were accused of attempting to sabotage Russian industry.
Now, the foreigners by and large denied the charge, but the Russians confessed, almost
certainly because they had been beaten.
The outside world assumed that this was an attempt to explain the failure to reach quotas
and the slow progress of the Russian economy.
It had to be sabotaged, right?
For example, the grain harvest fell from 83 million tons to 67 million between 1930 and
1934.
The 1934-38 treason trials purged even more of Stalin's enemies from the Communist Party.
They began after the assassination of Sergei Kirov, Party Chief in Leningrad, which used
to be Petrograd, and before that was St. Petersburg.
Stalin alleged a plot by Trotsky and Hitler to assassinate him.
Torture was used to extract confessions and pave the way for executions of important party
leaders, including some of the great names of the Russian Revolution, Zinoviev, Kamenov,
Rykov and Bukharin.
In June of 1937, the Red Army leadership was put on trial secretly.
Overall, tens of thousands, including two-thirds of the party leadership, one-half of the Army
High Command, and nearly every important Communist left over from the 1917 Revolution were arrested,
tried, executed, or sent into exile, or the Gulag, where they worked 12 to 16-hour days
on state projects for meager rations and poor housing.
The purges and the Gulag created a whole genre of literature, Kessler's Darkness at Noon,
Asset Mandelstam's Memoirs, Solzanitsyn's A Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, the
Gulag Archipelago, and Shalimov's Kalima Tales.
Valem Shalimov was a 22-year-old law student when he was arrested in 1929 and sent to Solovky
prison for three years without charge.
In 1937, he was arrested again and sent to Kalima labor camp, where he languished until
1954.
Kalima Tales was smuggled out to the West and published in 1966, but back in the Soviet
Union, Shalimov was forced to sign a statement disavowing them.
Here's an excerpt.
Dugayev, a 23-year-old inmate, is set a quota by the camp overseer.
Up to here, he said, here are your shovel, pick, crowbar, and wheelbarrow.
Now get a move on.
It's better this way, he thought.
Now no one could complain that he wasn't working well.
Yesterday's farmers did not have to know that Dugayev was new to this sort of work and that
he had enrolled in the university right after school and that he had now exchanged his students'
existence for this mine where it was every man for himself.
He did not have to understand that he had been exhausted and hungry for a long time
and that he did not know how to steal.
The ability to steal was a primary virtue here, whatever it involved, from taking the
bread of a fellow inmate to claiming bonuses of thousands of rubles for fictitious, nonexistent
accomplishments.
No one would be concerned about the fact that Dugayev could not last a 16-hour working
day.
Dugayev swung his pick, hauled, dumped, and again swung his pick, and again hauled and
dumped.
In the evening the overseer reappeared and unwound his tape measure.
He measured the work that Dugayev had done.
Twenty-five percent, he said, and looked at Dugayev, do you hear me, twenty-five percent.
I hear you, Dugayev said.
He was surprised at this figure.
The work was so hard, the shovel picked up so little stone and it was difficult to swing
the pick.
Twenty-five percent of the work quota seemed an enormous amount to Dugayev.
His calves ached and his arms, shoulders, and head hurt from leaning into the wheelbarrow.
The sensation of hunger had long since left him.
Dugayev ate because he saw that others were eating and something prompted him that he
should eat, though he did not want to.
Well I guess that's that, the overseer said as he left.
Good luck.
That evening Dugayev was summoned to the investigator.
He answered four questions.
First name, surname, crime, sentence.
These were the four questions that a prisoner had to answer thirty times a day.
The following night soldiers took him behind the horse barns along a path that led into
the woods.
They came to a tall fence topped with barbed wire.
The fence nearly blocked off a small ravine and in the night the prisoners could hear
tractors backfiring in the distance.
When he realized what was about to happen, Dugayev regretted that he had worked for nothing.
There had been no reason for him to exhaust himself on this his last day.
In 1937-38 alone, the NKVD, which in Russian stands for People's Commissariat for Internal
Affairs, under Nikolay Yezhov, arrested several million people and shot perhaps one million,
possibly two million more died in the camps.
The purges finally came to an end in December 1938 when even Stalin realized that they had
gone too far.
He purged Yezhov and he appointed Lavrentiy Beria, one of his cronies, the new NKVD chief.
Finally, to further eradicate any possibility of dissent and instill loyalty to Stalin, art
and the press were strictly censored.
In 1934 independent literary organizations were outlawed in favor of the Union of Soviet
Writers.
There was a similar Union of Soviet Composers, etc. through all the arts.
These organizations provided offices and supplies and secretarial help.
In return for unquestioning loyalty, so if you're a starving artist this is a good deal.
All you have to do is never again think for yourself.
Not only could you not criticize Stalin or the state, but you had to avoid art which
was too avant-garde, too rooted in the Russian past, or too difficult for ordinary people
or Stalin to understand.
Instead, the only approved artistic school was socialist realism, shorthand for work
in praise of the party and the new state.
State artists fled, Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Rachmaninov, Serge Prokofiev, although he
later returned, Vasily Nijinsky, and later Alexander Solzhenitsyn.
Among those who stayed, Maxim Gorky and Vladimir Mielkovsky ardently supported the new regime.
Lesser lights became party hacks.
Others virtually stopped producing, the poet Anna Akhmatova.
Some were arrested, the poet Asip Mandelstam.
But some courageous souls tried to push the envelope.
Dmitri Shostakovich alternated between, well he was alienated too, he alternated between
being denounced by the authorities as an enemy of the people and being hailed by them as
a people's artist.
Boris Pasternak was denounced by the Communist Party when his novel Dr. Zhivago secured for
him the Nobel Prize in Literature, which he was forced to refuse.
All of this was necessary in Stalin's view to make him undisputed master of the Soviet
Union.
These measures were born of a combination of paranoia, increasingly marked as Stalin grew
older, and ruthless egotism.
The ultimate basis of Stalin's power was not the ascent of his people, or even of the
Communist Party, it was fear.
The fear of the Cheka or the NKVD knocking on your door in the middle of the night.
The irony was that all this took place under the smooth surface of a constitution which
seemed remarkably enlightened and humane.
The Soviet Constitution took until 1936 to work out, it is sometimes called the Stalin
Constitution.
On the surface, the Soviet Union was a loose federal system with important elements of
democracy.
It comprised 16 republics in a federal union, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Obviously these republics were granted great autonomy, but increasingly over time they
were controlled by Moscow.
Its legislature was the Supreme Soviet.
When not in session, the Supreme Soviet's functions were taken over by a Presidium of
27.
Above that, a Council of the People's Commissars was appointed by the Supreme Soviet.
Below that, numerous regional and local Soviets gave the impression of devolved power.
Now all Soviets were elected by universal suffrage, and a bill of rights and freedoms
seemed to guarantee rights and freedoms.
But those rights and freedoms were always to be interpreted for the good of the workers.
That is, the good of the workers' state, that is, the good of the Soviet Union.
That suffrage was fairly pointless since there was only one legal party, the Communist Party.
In effect, the whole superstructure of the Stalin Constitution was an empty shell since
choice was limited to the party.
The muscles and sinews of the Soviet state were those of the Communist Party, whose General
Secretary was, of course, Joseph Stalin.
Now a party is a very different creature from a state, of course, where even an absolute
estate can allow for some dissent, a party by definition is made up of individuals committed
to a single point of view, an ideology, a loyalty to the party, and often to one leader,
in this case Stalin.
In Russia, the party was the state which meant that real power lay with a very small elite.
At the bottom, there were small cells which enforced conformity and party discipline in
the localities.
At the bottom of the top, the All-Union Party Conference, which chose the Central Committee,
the party's chief policymaking organ, which chose the Politburo, the party's executive
and highest constitutional authority, which was in practice dominated by the General
Secretary.
We come back to Stalin.
What were his goals and policies besides survival and the raw exercise of power?
Well, starting with domestic policy, Stalin concentrated first on industry.
Stalin's three five-year plans were designed to catapult Russian industry into modern times
by pouring national resources into the development of steel, coal, heavy machinery, and railways
at the sacrifice of just about everything else.
Now, in fact, this worked.
The five-year plans were largely successful.
Between 1927 and 1937, the production of machinery in the Soviet Union expanded by 1400%.
By the late 30s, Russian industrial production was clearly second only to the USA.
It had surpassed France, Japan, and probably Great Britain.
In agriculture, collectivization was much less successful.
Stalin reversed Lenin's new economic policy, and beginning in the late 20s, he brutally
liquidated the Kulaks and confiscated their land.
The resulting murders and disruptions of the food supply in the Ukraine and Kazakhstan
between 1932 and 1935 killed perhaps five to seven million people.
But by the late 30s, grain yields were up 30 to 40 million tons.
Turning to the social welfare of those who survived, again, the intended social welfare
policies of the Soviet state were modern and considered progressive.
They guaranteed full employment.
The state provided free medical care, housing, and education.
Soon after the revolution, the communist state encouraged gender equality by providing birth
control and abortion.
By 1937, 35% of the labor force was female.
Communists, liberals, and labor activists in the West looked upon all this with a certain
amount of envy.
But in fact, medical care and housing were provided at a rudimentary level, especially
for the millions of workers who were drafted into industrial work literally displaced from
their homes and shipped to the city so that they could work the factories to propel forward
the latest five-year plan.
Whole families were crowded into one room.
Few houses had running water, electricity, or central heating.
Just washing clothes took all day.
In 1935, there were only 180 laundries in the entire Soviet Union.
In the mid-30s, Stalin, worried about the birth rate, rolled back gender equality.
In 1934, abortion and homosexuality were criminalized.
The family was now made legally responsible for the state crimes of its members.
You could go to the gulag for something your uncle or your cousin had done or said.
In 1936, limitations were put on divorce.
The state now emphasized that childbearing was a social duty.
It rolled back the promotion of women to management positions.
The education provided by the Soviet state was often very good, especially for those
identified as having talent.
But for most, it was just as much indoctrination as education.
In an attempt to unite the populace, religion, persecuted under Lenin, was now grudgingly
tolerated, especially the Russian Orthodox Church.
This was actually part of a larger program to revive Russian nationalism, to glorify
the Russian past as a prelude to Stalin.
He was portrayed as the true ancestor of the great Czars, the Czars who built the Czars
who modernized Russia.
Now, this was a way to try to bring all the many different Soviet peoples into the Soviet
system, even though so many of them were not Russian.
In fact, the great irony here is that Stalin, the great Russian successor to the Russian
Czars, was, if you'll remember, a Georgian.
In fact, much of this program was contrary to Marx.
Religion, nationalism, the family, all these things strengthened the state.
It wasn't withering away.
And of course, it was all bought at a terrific price.
Physical and mental dislocation, famine, starvation and death, labor camps, and execution
for those who failed to conform or somehow fell under the suspicion of neighbors or the
secret police.
For the rest, a life of strict regimentation, unquestioning obedience, constant fear of
enemies, internal and external, which brings me to Stalin's foreign policy.
Now, from the world's point of view, the Soviet Union was a rogue nation.
No one wanted to deal with a new communist state, first because they feared the spread
of communism and also because of moral indignation at the execution of the Czar and his family
in 1918.
But in the end, the Soviet Union was too big, too valuable a potential ally, too valuable
a potential market to ignore forever.
In 1922, Germany and the Soviet Union unexpectedly signed the Treaty of Rapallo.
This was a treaty between two international pariahs.
They had hated each other for centuries.
And of course, Germany was a democracy in the Soviet Union, a communist state.
But they found that since they had no other friends, they could possibly benefit from
the relationship, particularly in terms of technological exchange.
Gradually, other Western nations recognized the Soviet government culminating in the United
States in 1933.
In 1934, the Soviet Union joined the League of Nations.
In fact, during the 1930s, from the Soviet point of view, it was Russia that was surrounded
by enemies.
This is a point of view that would reign at the Kremlin until the very fall of the regime
in 1989 to 1991.
In 1931, Japan invaded Manchuria.
This created border tensions with the Soviets that erupted into fighting in 1938.
Though initially supportive of Hitler as an ally against the liberal West, Stalin also
grew increasingly fearful and suspicious of Hitler's anti-communist rhetoric and his
military buildup.
In the mid-1930s, Stalin urged a grand alliance against Mussolini, Hitler and Japan.
He also pestered the League of Nations to do something about the rising menace in Germany.
In 1938, he offered to defend Czechoslovakia when Hitler demanded the Sudetenland and asked
the British and French to do the same.
But as we shall see, instead, they signed the Munich Agreement.
In fact, the Western democracies feared Stalin's international revolutionary communism more
than they feared Mussolini's fascism or Hitler's Nazism.
That will strike us now as being very strange.
The explanation can be found in the next lecture.
