Lecture 40, Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany, 1922 to 1936.
Soviet communism was not the only alternative to democratic capitalism.
In the 1920s, a new ideology of the right arose in southern and central Europe, fascism.
But fascism was a less consistent, less coherent ideology than communism.
That is, communism has a coherent, rational ideology devised by Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels.
It may be utterly impractical, as Lenin and Trotsky discovered between 1918 and 1921.
It may never really have been implemented, given Marx's prediction that the state would
wither away.
Marx's assumptions may be completely false.
But its basic tenets do follow more or less consistently from those assumptions.
Fascism is a hodgepodge of sometimes contradictory ideas forged in the heat of political battles
by party leaders who rose up from the street, not the university.
At the founding of the Fascist Party in Italy in 1919, Benito Mussolini declared that he
had no specific doctrinal plan.
The word fascist goes back to the Italian word for bundles, fasci, which in turn harks
back to the fasches.
Bundles of sticks carried before a Roman consul, which symbolized his power.
Mussolini referred to the groups of fighters in his organization as fasci di combattimenti.
The Italian fascist symbol was a bunch of sticks tied together, thus harking back to
the Roman Empire, a besetting theme with Mussolini, but also emphasizing two more themes, unity
and fighting.
As this implies, fascism was big on groupthink.
Though some of Mussolini's and Hitler's ideas can be traced back to Machiavelli, Rousseau,
Carlisle or Nietzsche, the emphasis in fascism is not on thought per se.
It's on emotion, especially patriotic enthusiasm.
It's also on action, especially fighting.
Mussolini's fascist motto was believe, obey, fight.
It didn't really matter whom or what you believed so long as you did so.
This was because fascism de-emphasized the individual.
In the fascist view, rampant individualism had made the West weak.
Instead, fascism emphasized the group, the people, the folk in German, the nation.
It drew from Rousseau the idea that there was more wisdom in the group, in custom and
in tradition than in reason or in intellect.
Note how the turn of the century doubts about human reason and emphasis on irrationality
seemed to have validated fascist views.
As for action and fighting, Mussolini and Hitler drew from the most horrendous war in human
history the inference that war was man's natural state.
It elevated and ennobled him.
He took his mind off of the material problems of the 1920s and 30s.
In fact, one major reason that people found fascism appealing is precisely this element
of emotion.
Let someone else do the thinking for you.
This is, of course, a fairly common human reaction to the world's complexity, and it
is one of the most dangerous.
It didn't help that the 1920s and 30s were especially complex, dangerous, and depressing
times.
Another attraction of fascism, and then one that goes a long way to explain why elites
and business groups often embraced it, is that fascism seems to emphasize traditional values.
Patriotism, the family, religion, loyalty, obedience, unity, stability.
Who doesn't like those?
Can you see why fascism would seem far less threatening to members of the upper and middle
class than godless communism was?
Can you see why it might seem to be a worthy alternative to either communism or democracy
in Italy, in Germany, in Hungary, in Spain?
Italy became the first fascist state in the 1920s.
Now Italy had fought in World War I and lost half a million men on the Austrian front,
and yet had emerged with very little to show for that from Versailles.
Italy came out of the war in bad economic shape, made worse by worldwide agricultural
depression in the 1920s.
In the first elections after the war, socialists made huge electoral gains.
This worried the middle class industrialists and conservative Catholics.
They feared a communist takeover, and this prepared the way for an alternative on the
far right.
In March of 1919, Benito Mussolini, the son of a socialist blacksmith, formed the fascisti
or black shirts.
He had been a school teacher, then a socialist journalist before the war.
He edited Avanti, the main socialist newspaper.
He was jailed for opposing Italy's invasion of Libya between 1911 and 1912, and at first
he denounced Italy's entry into World War I like a good socialist.
But then he had a change of heart, and he embraced the nationalistic pro-allied position.
Upon expulsion from the socialists, he launched a new paper, Il Popolo di Italia, note the
emphasis on the people.
From 1919 to 1922, Mussolini's black shirts and communist agitators waged street warfare
against each other in major cities, Rome, Bologna, Trieste, Parma, and elsewhere.
This originally Republican now embraced monarchy to get the support of the aristocracy.
Similarly, the one socialist Mussolini now supported landowners against peasants and
socialists who had organized into land leagues to try to get some land for those peasants.
In late October 1922, Mussolini launched the march on Rome.
This coup forced Victor Emanuel III to name him Premier on the 28th of October of 1922.
Mussolini spent the next few years consolidating his power.
In 1923, the Italian parliament approved a law which said that any party which achieved
50% of the vote got two-thirds of the seats.
That meant that the Italian parliament would become a rubber stamp.
In 1924, Mussolini ordered the murder of Giacomo Mattiotti, an opposition politician.
This produced a public outcry.
Mussolini responded by suspending the constitution.
He forbade the Italian parliament to initiate legislation on its own.
Instead, he got parliament to make him responsible to the king alone and to authorize him to
make law by decree.
He founded a secret police to monitor dissent and track down enemies of the state.
In 1926, he outlawed all political opposition.
And in 1939, the lower house of the Italian parliament, the chamber of deputies itself,
would be abolished.
The lower house was the more popular house.
The structure of the Italian state was formalized under Mussolini in 1928.
As in the Soviet Union, the Italian constitution was technically democratic.
But again, as with the Soviet Union, there was no real choice.
From 1926, only the fascist candidate was legal.
As in the Soviet Union, the party was the real power in the state.
Theoretically, under the command of the Fascist Grand Council, but all the counselors were
personally loyal to its chairman, Il Duce, the leader or guide, Veneto Mussolini, was
the real power in the party.
He appointed to all positions in the party and state.
Fascist education and youth organizations indoctrinated the young.
The press, radio, films, etc. were strictly censored so that the nation's intellectual
life conformed to party ideology.
In 1929, the Vatican signed the Fourth Lateran Treaty, giving the regime the support of the
Roman Catholic Church.
Now, there's some history here.
The Pope's relationship to Italy had been ambiguous since 1861.
You will remember that he had opposed Italian unification and he had refused to give up
his claim to sovereignty in Rome.
When the forces of Victor Emanuel II seized Rome in 1870, the Pope became the self-imposed
prisoner of the Vatican.
The new treaty created the political state of Vatican City, guaranteeing full sovereignty.
Pope Pius XI quip that he liked ruling a small state, there weren't any railroad strikes
to deal with.
By the Concordat, Roman Catholicism was recognized as the official religion of Italy.
Catholic education was to be the norm in Italian schools.
In return, the bishops were required to take an oath of loyalty to the Italian state.
The financial settlement compensated the Vatican for claims on Rome, 750 million lira now,
1 billion lira later.
Priests were paid by the state.
Only in 1985 did the Italian state discontinue Catholic education in public schools and state
payment of priests.
Now, one reason for Mussolini's success in the 20s is that he could claim an improved
economy.
Now, as so often with fascism, many of his policies were seemingly contradictory.
The party strictly controlled different sectors of the economy and yet capitalism was to
great extent preserved.
In 1934, industry was organized into 22 guilds under a National Council of Corporations.
This included employers and workers, but it was closely monitored by the party.
State prohibited construction of new factories or expansion of old ones without government
consent.
It reorganized the iron and steel industry and it built hydroelectric plants and other
public works projects.
There was also a massive rearmament.
This was all paid for by raised taxes.
And yet, overall Mussolini was able to reduce government expenditure.
Unions and the right to strike were abolished.
But the state provided wide social services.
All of this seemed to be going well until the 1930s.
The depression hit Italy hard.
Mussolini's response was largely ineffective and that helps to explain his increasing interest
in foreign policy during the 30s.
To get the Italian people to forget their economic troubles, Il Duce began to launch
an aggressive foreign policy meant to revive the glories of Rome.
Now, like Stalin, at first he was quite concerned about the revival of German power under Hitler.
In particular, he did not want Hitler to absorb Austria.
It was the 1935 invasion of Ethiopia that drove him into the Fuhrer's arms.
Italy had long had economic and political interests in this part of Africa, but in the
1895-96 Italo-Ethiopian War, the Italians had been beaten and were forced to concede
Ethiopian independence.
Mussolini's invasion was intended to undo that historic mistake.
It was denounced in the League of Nations by Britain and France, but it was encouraged
by Nazi Germany.
Since the League offered no military response, the Italians overran the country and annexed
it into Italian East Africa on the 9th of May, 1936.
Mussolini's popularity soared.
He was very grateful for Hitler's support and in 1936 he joined Hitler in sending troops
to assist Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War.
Also in 1936, he allied with Hitler's Germany, forming the beginning of the Rome-Berlin axis.
In September 1937, Mussolini paid a major state visit to Berlin, subsequently Italy withdrew
from the League of Nations and banned Jews from civil and military employments.
In 1938, Mussolini firmly backed Hitler's negotiations for the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia,
and in 1939, while Hitler dismembered Czechoslovakia, Mussolini invaded Albania.
In May of 1939, he signed a military assistance pact with Hitler.
Now, neither the German alliance nor subsequent moves against the Jews were especially popular
in Italy, but Mussolini saw Nazi Germany as the coming thing.
We are already familiar with the situation in Germany in the 1920s and 30s.
In World War I had left the Germans demoralized.
The harshness of the Versailles Treaty had left them bitter.
The inflation of 1923 and the depression of the 1930s had left them desperate.
And the relatively weak Weimar government had left many Germans doubtful about democracy.
And so, the Communist Party grew in the 1920s, doing especially well in the election of 1928.
This alarmed conservatives, monarchists, industrialists, and the middle class generally.
And so, there was room in Germany for an alternative to weak democracy and godless communism.
Into that vacuum, stepped Adolf Hitler.
Hitler was born in 1889, the son of an Austrian customs official.
That father, Alois, wanted Hitler to follow in his footsteps, but Adolf, of above-average
intelligence, wanted to be an artist.
The death of his father in 1903 freed him, but he was rejected from the Vienna Academy
of Fine Arts four years later.
Hitler spent most of the next few years wandering around Vienna, attending opera, including the
operas of Richard Wagner.
He spent time in a homeless shelter.
And he was exposed to the writings of Lanz von Liebenfels, who promoted Aryan superiority,
he was anti-Semitic and anti-socialist as well.
Between 1910 and 1913, Hitler began to paint and sell postcards.
But as described in his autobiography, Mein Kampf, Hitler was like many young people just
after the turn of the century.
He was looking for something.
He was looking for a purpose.
Like so many of those young people, like Rupert Brooke, he found that something in the summer
of 1914, the Great War.
Hitler enlisted in the German army.
He was twice decorated for bravery.
He actually seems to have enjoyed the war.
This would help to explain his later embrace of the fascist idea that war was ennobling
in man's natural state.
Hitler wasn't popular with his comrades, who saw him basically as a kiss-ass.
He was always volunteering for things.
Blinded by mustard gas in 1918, Hitler learned about the armistice while lying in a military
hospital and he was shocked.
He had not expected the sudden collapse and surrender of the central powers.
This would eventually contribute to the idea that Germany didn't really lose the war on
the battlefield.
Germany must have been stabbed in the back.
Now while in hospital, a German military physician reportedly diagnosed Hitler as, quote, incompetent
to command people and dangerously psychotic, his commander said, I will never promote this
hysteric.
So somebody in the German army knew what they were doing.
After the war, Hitler remained in the service and he split time between studying in Vienna
and rabble rousing in Bavaria.
He'd been selected as a speaker by the local army high command to address veterans' groups.
He was also supposed to observe radical political groups for them and that's how he ran into
the German Workers' Party.
Now the German Workers' Party in 1919, 1920, amounted to about 200 disgruntled veterans,
unemployed factory workers, street tufts and misfits.
Hitler's speaking abilities early attracted others to the cause and by 1920 the party
had grown to about 2000.
It was soon renamed the National Socialist German Workers' Party or the Nazis.
Hitler was named party furor or leader on the 29th of July 1921.
On the 8th of November 1923, at the height over the inflation crisis, Hitler, with the
blessings of the Kaiser's most brilliant general, Eric Ludendorff, led 600 members of the Sturmabteilungen
or SA, the Nazi stormtroopers, in an attempted coup from its base in Munich.
This became known as the Beer Hall Putsch.
Now the coup plotters stormed a Munich Beer Hall or Gustav von Kar, the head of the provincial
Bavarian government was speaking.
They took von Kar hostage and they declared the formation of a new national government
in his name.
The next day, Hitler led a march to Munich city center to try to take the Bavarian War
Ministry but he was arrested.
Hitler and his cronies were sent to prison for five years.
He was released in one.
In fact, the whole episode gave the Nazis valuable publicity.
Moreover, Hitler used the year to hone his ideas and write them down in his 1924 autobiography
Mein Kampf or My Struggle.
Now if you take a good look at a picture of Hitler, the question of how this man rose
to be such a powerful figure naturally presents itself.
I think we can agree that he was neither physically nor intellectually outstanding.
I think Hitler has always struck Americans in particular as being faintly ridiculous
looking.
It's been said that Mein Kampf is the worst written influential book in history.
But Hitler was blessed with piercing blue eyes which, like resputants, seemed to have
had a hypnotic effect on people.
And don't forget too that he caught Germany in a bad moment.
His personality was certainly volatile.
He could be charming, magnetic, persuasive.
Certainly Adolf Hitler was especially good with little children.
But Adolf Hitler could also be cruel and vulgar and monumentally self-centered.
In April 1945, as the Third Reich was collapsing, he actually expected the German nation to
emulate itself with him.
Above all, Hitler was driven by immense hatreds of Jews and of Communists upon whom he blamed
all the ills of the German world.
He was driven by immense ambitions for a man languishing in prison.
Mein Kampf details a plan to create a European empire.
There's a possible second book which details a plan for world domination.
And he was driven by an immense sense of personal destiny, of being chosen to lead the German
nation out of the morass of national humiliation and weakness.
But how exactly would he do this?
The Nazi program is mostly to be found in Mein Kampf, which is more detailed than anything
Mussolini ever came up with.
Its basic points are these.
First, all history is the story of race conflict, which functions, for Hitler, much the same
way class conflict functions for Marx.
Aryan Germans, a category with no anthropological validity, by the way, were the true master
race destined to win this war.
They'd had a chance in World War I, but they'd been stabbed in the back by Jews, their
natural enemies.
Since the conflict among races for land and power was eternal, Germany had to prepare
for the next phase, the next war.
Only a strong dictatorship could save Germany from economic malaise, racial degeneration,
and being overwhelmed by its neighbors.
Hitler appealed more to the emotions than to reason.
Through extensive propaganda, Hitler sought to make the Germans race conscious.
This was the general message, delivered in Hitler's bombastic, but effective speaking
style.
But what did he intend to do specifically once in power?
When Nazi policy is examined in detail, it becomes clear that in its attempt to provide
something for everybody, it has contradictions.
For example, Hitler promised in Mein Kampf to encourage a healthy German middle class,
yet also to nationalize all industry.
He promised to give workers a share of the profits, and take jobs away from Jews and
give them to Aryans.
He also promised land reform and easy mortgages for peasants.
Indeed, noting an expanding German population, he called for Lebensraum, for, in other words,
living room, more land for that population.
Austria was to be incorporated into a greater Germany.
National honor was to be restored by repudiation of the Versailles Treaty, allowing for a military
buildup which would make possible Hitler's expansionist policies.
Hitler also encouraged industry.
He rejected or would reject democracy.
The parliamentary system was to be abolished as weak.
He rejected communism, which rejection appealed to industrialists, and he rejected Jews.
The Jewish minority was to be discriminated against and expelled.
Buddhism may have been self-contradictory, but it was successful, because first of the
German past, a European tradition of anti-Semitism dating back to the Middle Ages and alive and
well in 20th century Germany and Austria.
A Prussian tradition of militarism enhanced in the dying days of the war when the military
practically ran the government, and of course an East European tradition of authoritarianism.
That was the German past.
The German present was characterized by the humiliation of Versailles, economic disaster,
a lack of confidence in the Weimar regime.
Add to this Hitler's political savvy.
He easily resumed control of the party on release in 1926.
He organized the party on a national scale with local cells.
He persuaded business leaders and the right-wing press to back him, but it took a while.
In 1927, there were only 40,000 Nazis in Germany.
In the elections of 1928, the Nazis gained only 3% of the vote, the same elections that
were dominated by Communists.
So what changed between 1928 and 1933 when Hitler became the chancellor of Germany?
The quick answer is the depression.
The depression was a godsend to Hitler.
In 1929 and 1933, six million Germans were unemployed, barely existing on meager government
welfare payments.
Extreme parties, the Communists and the Nazis, both increased their share of the Reichstag.
They waged battles at the ballot box and in the streets.
In 1930, the Nazis rose to 18% of the vote, mostly middle class and wealthy, not the unemployed.
There was no political middle in Germany anymore.
What was the government to do?
So these two extremes were growing more and more powerful.
The government would have to make a choice.
Successive leaders were unable to solve the crisis.
Meanwhile, the Nazis claimed they had a plan.
By the elections of 1932, the Nazis had 38% of the vote, not a majority, but they were
the largest single party block in Germany.
And so, on the 30th of January 1933, President Paul von Hindenburg, World War I hero but
now old and perhaps senile, asked Adolf Hitler to become chancellor and former government.
Hitler headed what was now the biggest political party.
In any case, aristocrats and industrialists saw Hitler as more acceptable than the Communist
alternative.
They hoped that he could be controlled while stemming the red tide.
Hitler called an election for March of 1933 as a plebiscite on the new regime.
They used the interval to suppress other parties.
On the 27th of February 1933, there was a fire at the Reichstag.
A Dutch Communist named Marienus van der Lubbe was found at the scene, later charged and
executed.
Historians still debate whether van der Lubbe was the arsonist, a plant or just unlucky.
But clearly, it was the Nazis who had benefited.
On February 28, 1933, President von Hindenburg and Chancellor Hitler invoked Article 48
of the Weimar Constitution, the suspension of civil liberties in time of national emergency.
There is by the way, no equivalent provision in the U.S. Constitution.
The decree of the Reich President for the protection of the people and state abrogated
the following constitutional protections.
Free expression of opinion, freedom of the press, right of assembly and association,
right to privacy of postal and electronic communications, protection against unlawful
searches and seizures, and individual property rights, all swept away in 1933.
A supplemental decree made the SA, the stormtroopers, and the SS, the Special Security Forces, Federal
Police, agencies, 40,000 communists were arrested, the Marxist press was suppressed, and meetings
of social democrats were broken up.
On election day, Nazi stormtroopers engaged in physical intimidation and ballot box stuffing.
And yet, Nazi candidates garnered only 44% of the popular vote.
That's important to remember.
For all the vulnerability of the German people and the terrible circumstances they faced,
the Nazis were never voted into power in a fair and free election.
Hitler, seeking to strengthen his weak position, launched a series of purges culminating on
the 30th of June, 1934, in the Night of the Long Knives, on which political opponents
were arrested and killed.
Having secured a majority in the Reichstag, Hitler had that body outlaw all other political
parties.
In late March 1933, it passed the law for terminating the suffering of people and nation,
also known as the Enabling Law, giving Hitler full dictatorial powers for four years.
In August of 1934, President von Hindenburg died, allowing Hitler to proclaim himself
Führer and Reich Chancellor of the New Regime.
Any doubt about its ambitions should have been put to rest by its unofficial name, the
Third Reich.
The First Reich had been the Holy Roman Empire.
The Second Reich had been the Velhelmin Empire.
The Third Reich would be the Nazi Empire.
So what were the Nazis like in power?
Well, from hence forward, like the Soviet Union in Italy, Germany was a democracy in
name only.
The German states were abolished.
Everything was controlled from the center.
The Führer made laws and he issued orders.
The Reichstag would meet occasionally to approve the Führer's plans and occasional plebiscites
overseen by stormtroopers were held to secure wider approval of the Führer's policies.
To foster that approval, a vast propaganda machine was presided over by Josef Gerbils.
The press, books, films, art, music all were strictly censored, not only for content, but
also for ethnicity.
That is, the performance of music by Jewish composers like Mendelssohn and Mahler was
banned.
Jewish books were burnt.
Jewish musicians, professors, other professionals lost their jobs.
Führer Wurscher was organized in mass rallies, most famously at Nuremberg.
The stadium at Nuremberg could hold over 400,000 people.
Hitler's image or the swastika were displayed everywhere.
Also glorified was the German past, the folk, and the old Teutonic gods.
Children were indoctrinated by mandatory enrollment from the age of 10 in the Hitler
youth and the League of German Girls.
In terms of work, the economy was strictly planned by the state.
Labor unions were replaced by the National Labor Front, an arm of the party.
Strikes were outlawed and the unemployed were sent to labor camps.
As in Stalin's, Russia, and Mussolini's Italy, it all seemed to work.
Unemployment fell from 6 to 2 million by July 1935, and as German citizens could tell you,
Hitler built the autobahns.
But as we shall see, at a terrible human cost.
The Protestant and Catholic churches mostly cooperated.
Their activities were coordinated by the government to reinforce the Nazi message.
For those Democrats, academics, or clergy who would not conform, they could join Jews,
Gypsies, homosexuals, communists, Jehovah's Witnesses, professional criminals, and prostitutes
as virtual non-citizens.
First, the law was reformed to place the rights of the state over those of the individual.
A secret police was established, the Geheime Staatspolizei or Gestapo under Hermann Gehring
to ferret out enemies of the state.
Hitler's personal bodyguard, the Schutzstaffel or SS under Heinrich Himmler, had similar powers
to arrest, to torture, to imprison, or to execute virtually at will.
Individuals from these groups, the groups named above, were sent to concentration camps,
first established in 1933 as a deterrent.
Originally, the camps were detention camps, then they became work camps, and finally,
in 1941, many of them became death camps.
It is time to turn to the most heinous act of the Third Reich, and perhaps the sine qua
non of evil in our times, the very nadir of western civilization, the Holocaust.
