Lecture 41 The Holocaust, 1933 to 1945
We now come to a topic that represents for many people in the West the epitome of calamity and evil.
Jews refer to it as the Shoah, complete catastrophe. It is more widely known as the Holocaust.
But that does not mean that it is always well understood or that we've necessarily drawn all the lessons we might from it.
The first substantive point to make about the Holocaust is that it did not spring full blown from the mind of Adolf Hitler
or even from the state of the German soul in 1933. Its roots go back well before the beginning of this course.
For as we have seen, anti-Semitism had a long and virulent history in the West.
During the Middle Ages and Renaissance, the Church preached that Jews had sinned doubly by refusing to follow Christ and then by killing him.
Therefore, they were to be converted forcibly if necessary. Spain in the 15th century.
As late as the 19th century, the papacy encouraged forced conversion of Jewish children.
If not converted, then humiliated. Jews were made to wear distinctive clothing or symbols to indicate that they were not Christian.
Martin Luther's On the Jews and Their Lies of 1542 perpetuated anti-Semitism into the Protestant community, especially in Germany.
Neither the Catholic nor Protestant churches officially encouraged the killing of Jews,
but to judge from the amount of spontaneous violence they suffered, that is what many Europeans seem to have derived from Church teaching.
In popular European folklore, Jews were in touch with evil spirits, even the devil.
It was said that they abducted and sacrificed Christian children in their religious observances. This is known as the blood libel.
Throughout the Middle Ages and Renaissance, Jews were objects of fear and hatred for Christians.
States often simply expelled them. England in the 13th century, France in the 14th century, Spain in the 15th century.
Where they were not expelled, they were often banned from certain professions.
Required to live in ghettos. There, they established small but often thriving communities.
Venice, Poland, parts of Germany. Because they were not Christian and so not subject to the church's ban on usury,
they were often an important part of the economic life of medieval and Renaissance cities as bankers, goldsmiths and moneylenders.
As we've seen, this could lead to wealth, but also often profound jealousy and resentment, which often led in turn to popular violence against Jews.
We've already noted many examples. Anti-Jewish riots during the Black Death of the 14th century would be an early one.
The Inquisition in early modern Spain and pogroms in 19th century Russia.
By the beginning of the 20th century, anti-Semitism was still considered perfectly respectable in many circles.
On the one hand, Jews had been emancipated and granted full civil rights in most European countries during the 19th century.
This enabled them to participate in politics as representatives and ministers, the industrial revolution as financiers and factory owners.
But on the other hand, that newfound prominence was combined with old stereotypes to give new life to anti-Semitism.
For example, British cartoonists, political cartoonists highlighted those stereotypes when drawing Prime Minister Disraeli.
In France, we have already examined the Dreyfus Affair in a previous lecture.
In Italy, the Jesuit journal Tivelte Katolica disseminated anti-Jewish propaganda throughout Europe.
In Austria, the Social Democratic Party revived the blood libel.
In pre-revolutionary Russia, the Tsarist government encouraged pogroms and published the protocols of the learned elders of Zion,
a forgery which purported to be the secret Jewish plan to take over the world.
It is still cited approvingly by anti-Semites around the globe.
In other words, the anti-Semitism that Hitler picked up on the streets of Vienna was neither new nor exclusively German.
Though it may be significant that the First International Congress of Anti-Semites did convene in Germany in 1882.
Still, as we have seen, Hitler gave anti-Semitism a new, more effective voice.
First, by linking it to German nationalism and the post-war situation,
the famous stab in the back idea that Jewish bankers had somehow plotted Germany's downfall in World War I,
then coordinated her humiliation at Versailles.
Second, by draping it in racial pseudoscience, primitive genetics, bad anthropology,
remember that during the 19th century, the pseudo-Darwinian justification for empire, survival of the fittest, was a racial argument.
Jews were widely regarded as an inferior, mongrel race.
Finally, Hitler was not alone in noticing that many of the leaders of the successful communist revolution in Russia were Jews.
Members of the middle class on both sides of the Atlantic frequently associated Judaism and Communism.
An American example is Henry Ford, who believed that the international Jew was the greatest threat to the Anglo-Saxon race,
responsible for the Bolshevik Revolution, World War I, and gang warfare and bootleg liquor in the United States in the 20s.
He expressed these beliefs in his newspaper, The Dearborn Independent, and a book, The International Jew, The World's Foremost Problem, first published in 1920.
It was translated into 16 languages and is still in print in Russia and in Muslim countries.
This book was praised by Hitler.
Indeed, Henry Ford was awarded the Nazi Order of the German Eagle in 1938.
Now, in all fairness, I should point out that in later years, Ford's descendants bent over backwards to repudiate Henry's views and make their company a strong supporter of Jewish causes.
In Germany, Jews were active in the Weimar government and in the German Communist Party, and of course, Hitler played this up.
By the way, anti-Semitism was a new element in fascism. You can't find this in Mussolini's writings.
Now, in fact, there were only about 600,000 Jews in Germany, about 1% of the population in 1933, which kind of makes you wonder how such a small minority could plausibly have brought down the master race, but then the Nazis were never big on logic, were they?
Immediately upon taking power, the Nazis encouraged anti-Semitic terror.
On the 1st of April 1933, just three months into the new regime, the government announced a boycott of Jewish businesses and professionals.
On the 7th of April, Jews were formally excluded from government jobs.
On May 10th, a massive book burning was held at Humboldt University in Berlin. 20,000 volumes went up in flames.
In 1934, the government imposed strict quotas on Jews at university.
In September 1935, the first of the Nuremberg Laws, the right citizen law, deprived all Jews to find as anyone with three Jewish grandparents of German citizenship.
The law in protection of German blood and honor forbade Jews to marry non-Jews.
In 1938, Jews were banned from the practice of medicine and law and forced to register their property with the government.
That was, of course, preliminary to that property being confiscated and sold to Arians.
After the Nazi takeover of Austria, the Anschluss of March 1938, the same policies were enacted there.
In November, a German diplomat in Paris was murdered by a Polish Jew.
This became the excuse for a spontaneous mass uprising against Jews all over Germany on the night of 9 November 1938.
191 synagogues were burnt, 76 were demolished outright.
Shops were looted, Jewish homes were ransacked, their occupants beaten, almost 100 were killed.
300,000 Jews were arrested and sent to concentration camps.
This night came to be known as Kristallnacht for all the broken glass on the ground.
From hence forward, for their so-called protection, Jews were forced to live in ghettos and wear stars of David,
all of which would make it easier to round them up.
Now it was at this point that many Jews and other persecuted groups decided there was no life left for them in Germany.
In fact, 66% of German Jews had already left by 1938, 60% of those who remained had already lost their jobs.
But immigration was hard. Many did not want to leave their families and their property.
Families were only allowed to take what they could carry.
In many cases, it was the women who made the decision to go. Men were too tied up in their careers.
Would-be immigrants had to navigate their way through the cumbersome and hostile Nazi bureaucracy.
Bribes helped, but still the Germans might refuse to let you go.
Even if you could leave, that didn't mean that you had anywhere to go.
The United States and Britain had imposed strict quotas on immigration.
There was anti-Semitism there too, nor did their governments want to increase tensions with Nazi Germany.
It helped if you could get someone to sponsor you.
For some people, the most important book in Germany during the 1930s was the New York Telephone Directory.
If you could find someone with your last name, you wrote to them and you begged and you hoped
that they would agree to pretend to be related to you and possibly sponsor you in the United States.
Once the war started, the U.S. allowed only 21,000 refugees into the country between 1941 and 1945,
so by and large, this is not an alternative.
For those who failed to make it out of Germany or were living in countries soon to be absorbed by the Third Reich,
the odds were not good.
Soon after the start of the war in 1939, German leaders began to explore a final solution
to the so-called Jewish problem in Germany and the conquered territories.
At first, they considered mass deportation to reservations in conquered territories,
either southeastern Poland.
They even considered the formerly French colony of Madagascar,
which of course they had acquired or at least had a relationship with after the conquest of France in 1940.
But British control of the Suez Canal closed the Madagascar option
and Hitler's plan to invade Russia in the spring of 1941 nixed the Polish option
because now Poland would no longer be on the periphery of the Third Reich, it would be in the middle.
In 1941, Hitler announced the extermination of the Bolshevik leadership.
To cut off their biological roots, this would mean killing Russian Jews.
In the first Russian campaign, beginning in June of 1941,
mobile SS units of about a thousand called Einsatzgruppen, action squads,
were ordered to shoot Jews in front of mass graves dug by the victims themselves.
From August of 1941, Russian and Jewish women and children were targeted.
The massacre of 35,000 Jews outside of Kiev at Babayar is perhaps the most notorious example.
The killings extended to Jews in Poland and Serbia,
which saw the first use of gas in portable extermination vans.
By the spring of 1942, Jews in slave labor camps were being murdered.
These activities amounted to about one million dead.
Sometime in 1941, and there's great debate about the timing, but certainly by the end of the year,
Hitler decided on the final solution.
That is, the extermination of all Jews and other inferior groups in the Concord nations,
and the enslavement of the Slavs.
On the 20th of January, 1942, on the orders of Hermann Göring,
Reinhardt-Hydrich, head of Germany's security service,
chaired a meeting of top Nazi officials from across occupied Europe
at a villa at Vansi just outside Berlin.
Under the supervision of Adolf Eichmann,
Jews and other so-called undesirable groups were to be rounded up by the SS
or the Cooperative Regimes of Concord nations.
Poland first, then Vichy France, the Netherlands,
Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Romania, Ukraine, and the Baltic states.
Officially, countries allied with Germany like Italy and Hungary were supposed to cooperate,
rounding up their Jews too, but in fact, they sent few.
There would be resistance movements, generally not supported by local non-Jewish populations.
The Jewish ghettos sometimes organized resistance,
most famously the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising of 1943.
30,000 Jews fled east and fought with the Soviets.
Later, some camps revolted, most famously at Sobibor.
In Belgium, France, and Germany, some clergy protested the deportations,
and some countries have better records than others.
Netherlands, Norway, and Denmark provided lots of assistance to Jews to flee or hide.
The state of Israel has recognized some 18,000 righteous among the nations who assisted Jews,
including Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg, who issued 4,500 passports to save Jews in Hungary.
The Japanese diplomat Chiyuni Sugihara worked 16-hour days against the orders of his government
to provide exit visas to 40,000 Jews from Lithuania.
The German industrialist Oskar Schindler, whose famous list protected Polish Jews who worked in his factory,
but lots of other people cooperated.
Deportation happened in stages.
First, Jews were sent to ghettos, then the ghettos were cleared out.
First the poor, and then foreign Jews, and then finally everybody else.
From the 22nd of July 1942 to the spring of 1943, to give just one example,
trains carried 5,000 Jews a day from the Warsaw ghetto.
Now, in some cases, the Jewish leadership of the ghetto knew what was happening.
They gave up some Jews to save others.
Moses Marin, president of the Central Council of Elders for Upper East Silesia said,
I will not be afraid to sacrifice 50,000 of our community to save 500,000.
He later said, I stand in a cage before a hungry and angry tiger.
I stuff his mouth with meat, the flesh of my brothers and sisters,
to keep him in his cage lest he break loose and tear us all to bits.
Also sent to the camps were political opponents and clergy who preached against the deportations.
Communists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Gypsies, German male homosexuals,
and the mentally retarded, and those with severe illness,
as part of a Nazi euthanasia program for those whose lives were deemed not worth living.
People were told to take a few packed suitcases.
In fact, they would not need them, but this was part of the process by which people were kept calm.
They were sent by rail.
There is that masterful German rail system again,
usually in cattle cars to camps in Germany and Poland.
You know their names.
Belsen, Buchenwald, Dachau, Sobibor, Treblinka,
and most terrible of all, Auschwitz-Birkenau in Poland.
This is in fact only a partial list.
In addition to the death camps, many of the great German companies used slave labor to keep German industry going.
Among companies which have faced post-war lawsuits for this practice
are IG Farben, who made Zyklon B gas, and its subsidiary Bayer.
Krupp, Siemens, Daimler-Benz, BMW,
Audi, Volkswagen, Leica-Kamera, and Ford-Werke, AG.
Concentration camps had actually been created as early as 1933 to detain political prisoners
and to deter political opposition.
You knew about the camps, and so you were supposed to behave.
At first, some were work camps, but after 1941, all became death camps.
Upon disembarking from the train, you faced a German officer who looked you up and down
and signaled with his thumb, pointing left or right that you were to join one of two groups.
The old and the children were exterminated immediately, about 60% of new arrivals.
The young and able-bodied were separated by sex and sent to work for the German war machine.
They were given uniforms that looked more like pajamas, totally inadequate in winter,
and they were given inadequate rations.
One thing the Nazis never seemed to have figured out is if they wanted to punish their victims
or get work out of them.
In fact, after 1942, they actually calibrated the killings against labor needs,
but it is one of the hallmarks of Holocaust scholarship that, in fact,
the Germans actually hurt their own war effort by the amount of resources and time and effort
that they put into this infernal design.
If you grew sick, typhus was common or weak, you were most likely going to be put to death.
At first, the Germans used firing squads, but this was slow and cumbersome,
and quite frankly, regular soldiers hated the duty.
In the fall of 1942, they began experimenting with cyanide gas produced from Zyklon B, a pesticide.
Victims were told that they were being sent to showers.
The showers were, of course, actually death chambers.
The shower heads, gas nozzles.
People were packed tightly into those chambers.
Their deaths took several agonizing minutes.
When the screams had died down, camp inmates under the supervision of guards piled the bodies into ovens for incineration.
The commanders at Auschwitz were very proud of the fact that they could dispose of 6,000 persons a day.
By liberation in 1945, at least 6 million Jews, including 1.5 million children, had been killed.
That's two-thirds of the European population of Jews and two-fifths of the Jews in the world.
3.5 million Soviet soldiers died in the camps and 1.5 million Poles.
These are the generally accepted figures, but it is possible that as many as twice as many died.
Whole families, whole towns were wiped out.
If you are Jewish or of Central European descent, there is a very good chance that you know personally of someone who died in the Holocaust.
The U.S. and United Kingdom intelligence services knew what was happening.
British intelligence had intercepted Einsatzgruppen Info in November of 1941.
Remember that, well, as you will learn in subsequent lectures, the British had broken the German codes.
Jewish groups in Switzerland sent out detailed reports in 1942.
There was some reluctance to believe what was happening in government circles.
But even after it became obvious and after Roosevelt and Churchill became convinced,
they refused to bomb the rail lines on the argument that it would tip the Germans off that the Allies had broken their codes
and it would divert air power from the war effort.
Finally, the argument was made that it probably wouldn't do much good.
The Vatican also knew but feared reprisals on Catholics if it spoke out.
Now, at this stage, I wish to make a point and to ask a question.
The point is a very simple one. This happened.
As you know, there are those in our society who would deny it or minimize its scale
or minimize its significance by saying that this is only one of many Holocausts in human history.
Now, in fact, the sheer weight of evidence as to the existence and the scale of the Holocaust is monumental.
The Nazis were great record keepers.
The Einsatzgruppen, for example, made regular reports to Hitler.
We have the eyewitness accounts of victims and survivors, some of them very famous,
the Diary of Anne Frank, Elie Wiesel's Knight.
We have the eyewitness accounts of Allied soldiers who liberated the camps in 1945
and have never forgotten the sickening sights and smells that accosted them.
Famously, at Buchenwald and Dachau and elsewhere,
the Allied troops forced local residents to come and see what their furor had wrought.
More about that later.
And we have the newsreel footage shot at the time.
This is especially important because, as you know, the World War II and Holocaust generation is dying off,
and soon no one will be alive to bear witness, hence the importance of preserving German archival documents,
Holocaust survivor stories, as in Steven Spielberg's Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation,
the camps themselves, and the numerous museums that have been established around the world.
All of this is a reminder of how important history is and how important and fragile the sheer physical evidence which makes history up is.
So the historical record is mountainous and clear as to what happened, and that at least 11 million people died.
To deny this or to minimize it, one either has to be a villain or a fool.
There is no third option.
The denial of the uniqueness of the Holocaust, the denial of its uniqueness is more subtle and challenging.
It is true, of course, that human beings have been subject to mass brutality before and since the Führerwunsch, the Führer's wish of 1941.
In this course alone, we have seen civilization fail repeatedly.
In the Inquisition, in the Thirty Years' War, in the Atlantic slave trade, in the gradual near extinction of the American Indian,
in the Armenian Genocide of 1915, in Stalin's various purges and the purblind stupidity that caused repeated mass starvation in the Soviet Union.
Elsewhere, in the next lecture we'll talk about the Japanese rape of Nanjing.
After the Holocaust, the vicious regime of Pol Pot in Cambodia, a thousand atrocities perpetrated in the Middle East,
ethnic cleansing in Croatia, Kragina, Bosnia and Kosovo, the Rwandan genocide of 1994,
the Darfur genocide of the turn of the 21st century, international terrorism, etc., etc., etc.
It's a pretty depressing list.
Now on one level, I'd attest the attempt to rape atrocities like football teams.
Surely each one is unique, with unique repercussions for descendants of victim and victimizer.
What is unique about the Holocaust is that never before had an entire people, including its children,
been earmarked for systematic extermination, regardless of citizenship, by a national government.
It was not what you did or even what you believed that sent you to the gas chamber,
but who your parents were, something which you, of course, could not help.
That, as much as the horrific numbers, is the special feature of this particular episode in human depravity.
So the obvious question is, why? Why did it happen?
More to the point of this course. Why did the nation of Beethoven and Brahms, Goethe and Schiller, Kant and Hegel,
opt to turn the world into a charnel house?
Some might say that the answer lies in all those figures from German history that I haven't cited.
Martin Luther, Richard Wagner, Friedrich Nietzsche, nationalists and antisemites all.
But every great culture has great figures with great flaws and blind spots.
Thomas Jefferson kept slaves. Woodrow Wilson was a racist.
But the real truth, which I hesitate to admit to you, is that I don't know why this happened.
I can't fully explain it, but I do know this. Civilization.
That thing which separates us from the rude beasts, that thing which elevates us above our status as animals, is a fragile thing.
We have seen it fail repeatedly in this course, which is ostensibly all about it.
It fails because it is not so durable a thing as a building or a book, fragile as those things are.
Civilization is not Notre Dame Cathedral or the Houses of Parliament.
It's not the Bible or Faust or the Beethoven 9th Symphony.
It's not even the Magna Carta or the Declaration of the Rights of Man, though all of those things partake in civilization.
Civilization, I've come to believe, is an act and a conscious choice that we choose to make or not make every day.
We make civilization in the stories we tell, in the jokes we make, in the ways in which we treat others on a day-to-day basis as individuals,
especially others who are different from us, in other words.
The Holocaust did not begin in a pulpit. It did not begin at a podium. It did not begin at the right chancer.
It began at the dinner table. It began in the line waiting for the bus.
It began in what people taught their children, in the home and in the classroom, and as they were tucking them into their beds.
Which means that civilization is always being fostered or stifled. It's always in need of defense, and that, I think, is a lesson for us all.
Now, the intelligent historiography on this, as opposed to that which questions its existence, has argued recently about the responsibility of the German people.
The question here is sort of like the Richard Nixon question vis-a-vis Watergate. What did they know, and when did they know it?
In 1945 and subsequently, many Germans claimed that they had no idea what had been going on in their country.
But in 1996, a new and controversial book, Hitler's Willing Executioners by Daniel John Goldhagen, argued that a wide swath of the German people had to have known
and participated willingly, even enthusiastically, in the process of mass murder.
He also argues more controversially that German history and culture, German history, as opposed to European history and culture, predisposed the German people to be uniquely anti-Semitic.
Now, the Nazi government set up concentration camps as early as 1933 and made sure that people knew about them as a deterrent.
Hitler and the Nazis made no secret of their attitudes towards the Jews. People knew full well the penalties for political opposition and about the laws against the Jews.
Presumably, they would have noticed missing neighbors and that Jewish businesses and shops had closed, and in fact, many of them undoubtedly profited from the sell-off of Jewish property.
So above all, the Holocaust was a major multinational industry with wide involvement at all levels of German society. This seems undeniable.
But it needs to be qualified. Missing neighbors would be most noticeable in cities.
Country folk who did not live near the camps might never have known.
Other countries or their citizens also participated, some with relish. Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians, Croatians, Ukrainians and Slovakians could all be found among the guards or soldiers in the thousands.
I suppose, and please understand that I am not a Holocaust scholar and that these debates still rage, that many Germans knew that something was going on but did not really want to inquire too closely.
After all, after a decade of misery, they had jobs again and they could put food on the table. Why? Very largely because Hitler was rearming.
Thank you for watching.
