Lecture 42, The Failure of Diplomacy, 1935 to 1939.
It has been argued that the 1920s and 30s were a brief truce between two halves of the
conflict that engulfed the world in the first half of the 20th century.
After all, the sides were little changed.
But I would argue that the issues fought over in the two world wars were significantly
different.
Like all European wars, they were both about balance of power, specifically in this case
whether a German Empire should dominate the continent as a whole.
But where the first war was fought among monarchies and republics, whose regimes seemed to be
stable, the second was a fight over ideology as well.
Totalitarianism vs. democracy, communism vs. fascism vs. democracy, racialism vs. equality.
In some sense, both the very nature and fate of humanity itself, think of Hitler's views
on human nature, were at stake.
Put another way, it could be argued that the diplomats at Versailles had done such a poor
job that the second war became a life and death struggle for civilization itself.
Or at least all the good that civilization had done up to 1939.
At the risk of imposing hindsight on historical events, there is a sense throughout the 1930s
that people in the West knew that something terrible and fundamental was coming.
The signs had been there all through the post-war period.
But the first military indications actually came half a world away.
The first military action of the 1930s was the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931.
Now though geographically an Eastern, not a Western power, and therefore not technically
a part of this course, a Westernized Japan would play an ever greater role in Western
calculations and threaten the West's imperial dominance in the first half of the 20th century.
So it's worth taking a moment, I think, to catch up with Japan.
Japan had been forced to accept contact with the West in the mid-19th century, but the
Japanese always resented the unequal treaties, which in their view treated them as inferiors.
This led to a powerful anti-Western feeling in 19th century Japan.
This led in turn to a coup and civil war which established the Meiji dynasty on the imperial
throne between 1868 and 1869.
The new government abolished feudalism and established the emperor's central authority.
It sent diplomats and observers around the world to study Western customs and technology.
It established a government structure based on that imperial Germany.
The 1889 constitution was known as the gift of the emperor.
Sounds like something Kaiser Wilhelm would have come up with.
From the 1870s, Japan imported foreign engineers and workers to establish Japanese industry.
It renegotiated the unequal treaties in the 1890s through the 1910s demanding equal status,
and it began to seek colonies and empire.
The Japanese state sought empire in the 19th century for three reasons.
First, competition with the West.
All civilized countries had colonies and Japan desperately wanted to be taken seriously.
Second, to spread the benefits of Japanese civilization to the rest of Asia.
And third, to protect its western flank.
China was weak and the Japanese feared that further western encroachments, especially
by Russia into Korea, would threaten Japan.
Distain for China and fear of Russia would remain besetting themes in Japanese foreign policy.
This explains a series of conflicts and acquisitions.
In 1894, Japan defeated China easily in the first Sino-Japanese war, resulting in the
Japanese takeover of Formosa, what we know as Taiwan.
And they forced free trade on the Chinese.
Japan was beginning to establish a Western defensive perimeter.
But this threatened Russian interests.
Remember how imperialism tends to create enemies even when they're not technically neighbors?
Both countries were interested in Chinese territory in Manchuria and Korea.
The result was the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05, which, as noted in a previous lecture, Japan
In 1906, Japan was granted the Lao Dying Peninsula at the southern tip of Manchuria.
In 1907, Japan deposed the ruler of Korea and began an incursion which resulted in its
annexation as the province of Chozen by 1910.
Japan joined the Allies in World War I and by doing so acquired the Marshall, Caroline
and Marianas Islands, formerly German, in the Pacific.
Now it was establishing an Eastern perimeter.
It profited from selling munitions to the West during the war and it also advanced into
Asian markets as the West began to neglect them.
By 1920, Japan was a major industrial and military power, one of the big five joiners
of the League of Nations, and recognized as the third naval power in the world behind
Britain and the United States at the Washington and London naval conferences of the 20s and
the 30s.
But in the 1920s and the 30s, Japan experienced social and economic unrest, not unlike that
in the West.
The 1920s saw a collapse of prosperity aggravated by the Tokyo earthquake of 1923.
Japan also saw increasing calls for democratization.
The Japanese government seemed to move in that direction, declaring universal manhood
suffrage in 1925.
But the Depression hit Japan hard, as in the West and many people lost their faith
in democratic capitalism.
This strengthened right-wing groups.
In 1932, the moderate Prime Minister Inukai Suyoshi was assassinated.
From hence forward, Japan was ruled by a coalition of radical nationalists, militarists and imperialists
in the name of the Emperor Hirohito.
The role of Hirohito in all this is still hotly debated by historians.
Japan's government had studied the path of Western imperialism and concluded that the
tiny archipelago in the Western Pacific could only compete with Western countries by subduing
its neighbors and seizing their raw materials.
They also feared the rise of a strong nationalist Chinese movement that called for the ouster
of imperialist powers, like Japan, from China.
They feared the rise of a Chinese Communist movement which might ally with the Soviet
Union and overrun Asia.
And at the very least, they feared the threat to their holdings in Korea.
Remember how one colony is never enough, you have to control the areas around it in order
to protect it.
Finally, some saw expansion into China as a way to cure Japan's economic troubles by
awarding all that rich farmland to Japanese peasants and seizing China's raw materials,
iron ore and coal.
This is very similar to Hitler's contemporaneous notion of Lebensraum, living room.
In September of 1931, the Japanese forces occupying Korea invaded Manchuria without
orders but with the tacit acceptance of Tokyo.
The campaign was over quickly.
The Japanese renamed the province Manchukuo and created a puppet state under the nominal
leadership of the deposed Chinese emperor, Henry Pu Yi.
This alarmed the West, but not sufficiently to take serious action.
This action was condemned by the League of Nations and the United States.
But no military assistance was offered to China.
Japan reacted by leaving the League of Nations in 1933.
It then signed an anti-communist pact with Germany in 1936 and with Italy in 1937.
The Axis powers had gone global.
By 1936-37, 47% of Japan's annual revenue was spent on arms.
Throughout the 30s, tension remained high on the new Sino-Japanese border.
On 7 July 1937, Chinese and Japanese military patrols clashed near Beijing.
Both sides mobilized and Japan launched a strike which seized Beijing, Shanghai and
the capital at Nanjing.
Japanese atrocities in Nanjing in particular shocked the world.
Between December 1937 and March 1938, 250 to 350,000 Chinese civilians and prisoners
of war were slaughtered.
20,000 women and girls were raped and many were mutilated or murdered.
By the way, the high estimate is 80,000.
Grizzly photographs document that thousands were beheaded, burned, ban-edit, buried alive
or disemboweled.
Japanese commanders actively ordered their men to behave in the most brutal fashion possible
and there seems to have been a sort of competition among units.
These crimes against humanity have never been fully acknowledged by Japan.
By the end of 1938, Japan controlled most of Northern China.
The Chinese nationalist leader, Shanghai Shek, had retreated to the mountains to the south.
Nationalists and communists launched a guerrilla war that the Japanese would never be able
to fully suppress.
Now it could be argued that this is the real start of World War II.
But both then and later it has been relegated to the footnotes of Western history.
At the time, Japan and China seemed far away and many in the West doubted that a race of
so-called little yellow men could threaten European imperial hegemony.
To this day, the dating of the origin of World War II on September 1, 1939 with the German
invasion of Poland may be a subtle residue of that same racism.
But at the same time, if Europeans at the time ignored Japanese aggression for German,
they can perhaps be excused.
Germany was closer.
Germany had a track record.
Germany was making very scary noises.
In other words, Adolf Hitler was giving his fellow Europeans plenty to think about.
Hitler had made clear in Mein Kampf that he would repudiate the Treaty of Versailles,
rearm, and restore German greatness.
In October of 1933, Germany withdrew from the League of Nations and the Paris Disarmament
Conference.
In March of 1935, Hitler publicly repudiated the disarmament provisions of Versailles and
announced plans for a rejuvenated Wehrmacht army, Luftwaffe, Air Force, and Kriegsmarine
Navy.
He also reinstituted conscription.
Now in fact, Germany had been rearming secretly for years.
German pocket battleships used advanced weight-saving devices like welding instead of rivets to
try to meet the 10,000-ton limit imposed by Versailles, but they actually weighed more.
That same year, Hitler's navy would lay down the Bismarck and the Terpitz, officially listed
at 35,000 tons, the upper limit for battleships that had been agreed in the naval conferences,
but really weighing 42,000 tons.
German youth had long been encouraged to join glider clubs and scouting groups, which were
really cadet training courses.
There were even rumors that Krupp had designed a baby carriage that could be reassembled
as a machine gun.
Now this has never been verified, but Hitler would surely have appreciated the spirit.
To forestall criticism, Hitler signed a non-aggression pact with Poland in 1934.
This was pretty meaningless, it was just a promise not to go to war, which I guess is
implicit in every diplomatic relationship anyway.
He also signed a naval treaty with Britain in 1935, at the same time that he's laying
down the Bismarck and Terpitz, which meant that the British tacitly accepted that Germany
was entitled to have a real navy.
Only the French and the Russians were suspicious, at this point the French seeing the writing
on the wall began to make overtures to their old ally, Russia, though these did not go
very far.
But the first European blood spilt by German arms would flow in Spain.
Between 1936 and 1939, civil war broke out in Spain.
Now Spain was a poor, weak constitutional monarchy at the beginning of the 20th century.
I suppose it could be argued that it had remained a rotting hulk all through the period from
the time of its greatness in the 16th into the 20th.
It had remained neutral in World War I, and that was a good thing for Spain because the
war led to a boom as Spanish agriculture and manufacturers were in high demand in Europe.
As everybody else was making weapons, the Spanish could supply peacetime goods.
The boom in inflation led workers and soldiers to demand higher wages.
In 1919 to 26, another issue facing the Spanish was a failed war to try to retain control
of Spanish Morocco.
This was a terribly unpopular war.
It was one of the last bits of Spain's empire, and the government was trying to hang on to
it.
In September of 1923, General Primo de Rivera led a military coup.
He retained the monarchy of Alfonso XIII, but he dissolved parliament and banned political
parties.
Now though a military dictatorship, his regime was not particularly brutal.
It was viewed more as extravagant and ineffective, and in 1929 de Rivera resigned.
At this point, the monarchy should have been a focus for loyalty, but it was resented by
the right because it had given in to the dictatorship, and it was resented by the left because it
was so conservative.
So in 1931, the Spanish people elected a Republican government, supported initially by all sides.
Alfonso left Spain.
The government pursued progressive policies at first.
Women's suffrage, Catalonia and the Basque region were granted autonomy.
It was redistributed to the peasantry.
Education was secularized, and church and state separated.
But for many, especially on the right, this was too much too soon.
The Roman Catholic Church and conservatives were especially offended.
The Republicans themselves were not united, ranging from communists to liberals to moderate
conservatives.
Subsequent governments then backed off from some of these policies.
So Spain is entering a period of disunity.
Being in July 1936, a rebellion by the fascist nationalists under Francisco Franco broke out
versus Republican loyalists.
Now the world saw this as a battle between left and right.
Left-leaning sympathizers from around the world flocked to Spain to fight for the Republicans.
For example, the Abraham Lincoln Brigade of volunteers from the United States.
Stalin sent troops and materiel.
Nazi Germany and fascist Italy responded with land, air and naval support for Franco.
Among other things, not only were they supporting a fellow fascist, this allowed them to test
new weapons and techniques, such as the use of airplanes to support ground troops.
This would be the forerunner of the Blitzkrieg.
The Luftwaffe revived strategic bombing of cities at Wernicke.
Its terror famously portrayed in Picasso's masterpiece.
The Republicans were strongest in the cities, the nationalists in the agricultural south
and west.
Both sides committed terrible atrocities, but in the end it was Franco's forces which
triumphed.
In the aftermath of the war, he executed 37,000 and imprisoned thousands more.
Franco's victory, along with the accession of right-wing governments in Austria, Hungary,
Romania and Portugal, rendered most of southern and central Europe fascist or quasi-fascist
by 1939.
Meanwhile, back in the Third Reich.
As with the disarmament provisions of Versailles, Hitler argued that the territorial provisions
were unfair.
He argued further that an expanding German population needed Leibnzraum, living room,
that Versailles had denied them.
On the 7th of March, 1936, Hitler's army began to undo the territorial settlement of
Versailles by marching into the Rhineland.
This was very risky.
Hitler's forces were still tiny and poorly equipped.
He later remarked that had France so much as sent one soldier to oppose him, he would
have had to turn tail and run.
But the French would not act without the British, and the British Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain,
offered no help.
Why not?
Why did the British pursue and the French accept a policy of appeasement towards Hitler
in the mid to late 1930s?
Well, at the time, few questioned appeasement on either side of the Atlantic.
But as you know, with hindsight, British and French appeasement of Hitler has tended to
be viewed by Americans in particular as one of the great blunders of history.
In consequence, we have embraced an ironclad rule that dictates that aggression or potential
aggression is always to be met with force.
Americans also tend to view appeasement as a classic case of European weakness and cowardice,
of a willingness to preserve peace at all costs, including the cost of dignity, human
rights and national interest.
But these are opinions formed in hindsight.
At the time, the British and French justified their diplomatic approach with reasons that
seem to make sense.
First, there was the memory of World War I.
No one wanted a repetition of 1914 to 1918.
The memories of that war were vivid and bitter.
Mamed and disfigured soldiers remained a common sight in Europe.
If you've ever watched war movies from the 1930s, they tend to be anti-war.
Europeans resolved never again to fight a major war amongst each other for nationalistic
or self-interested reasons.
And they overcompensated, and pacifism became the prevailing view.
Famously, in 1933, the students of the Oxford Union debating the proposition that this house
would fight for king and country voted no.
They would not.
Then there were the economic problems faced by the Western democracies in the 1930s.
In the wake of the Depression, no one had the money to rearm.
Hitler did it by nationalizing industry and raising taxes and basically establishing a
totalitarian state.
But Britain and France were democracies.
They couldn't simply commandeer their respective economies.
In any case, they dug their way out of the Depression very largely by spending cuts.
And this, of course, rearmament would have to reverse that policy.
In fact, at about this time, the British Treasury examined the ramifications of war with Germany.
And here's what they concluded.
First, they thought that they might face a possible tax revolt in Britain.
War would disrupt a slowly recovering economy.
Britain's lack of gold reserves and foreign currency to import food would be crippling.
And of course, the Americans were likely to refuse loans because America was pursuing
a policy at the time of isolationism.
And so the British predicted that if the British state went to war, it would be bankrupt within
a year.
American isolationism, we were not about to lift a finger against Hitler, meant that Britain
and France would have to go it alone on three fronts against Germany, Italy, and Japan.
It has been argued, therefore, that appeasement at least bought the British and French time
to rearm and to forge alliances.
A third reason for appeasement was guilt over Versailles.
By the mid-1930s, revisionist historians had pretty successfully attacked and discredited
the settlement in Versailles.
Most agreed that Germany was not the only culprit to start the war.
So it was perfectly understandable if Herr Hitler wanted to even the score.
After all, the Rhineland was properly part of Germany.
Of course, if any of these people had bothered to read Mein Kampf, they would have known that
Hitler was not interested in a tie game.
The final reason for appeasement was fear of communism.
You must recall that to many in Europe, bad as Hitler was, the alternative, Stalin and
communism were worse.
To any sensible person, Hitler was a thug and perhaps a lunatic, but he wasn't a red.
At least he talked of patriotism and loyalty and brotherhood and family and obedience and
duty and mom and apple strudel.
To many in the European middle class, this sounded pretty good.
He had, after all, restored Germany, recently the dead man of Europe, back to life, and
a strong Germany was a bulwark against the red tide from the east.
In other words, Hitler may have been bad, but to many people in the 30s in the West
better him than a communist Europe.
Now there were a few politicians and observers who saw through all of this, and the most
famous one is of course Winston Churchill.
Throughout the 1930s, Churchill thundered from pen and parliament that Hitler and a
resurgent Germany represented as much of a threat to European liberties as Louis XIV
and Napoleon had been in their day.
It's no accident that he wrote the great biography of his ancestor, John Churchill Duke of Malbra,
in the 1930s, as well as much of his history of the English-speaking peoples.
In his view, it was once again the duty of those peoples to stand up against a European
dictatorship just as William of Orange and the Duke of Malbra had done.
But even Churchill was a bit of an appeaser.
His initial idea was that a grand alliance could curb Hitler's ambitions and force him
to the bargaining table.
Only if Hitler couldn't see reason should the British fight.
In any case, Churchill, like Malbra in the 1690s, I refer you to my course on Tudor
Stewart, England, was in opposition, the political wilderness.
And so he was in no position to do anything about Hitler.
In fact, Winston Churchill in the 30s was widely regarded as a relic, a windbag, or
a well-spoken kook.
Most people in the West would have agreed with Prime Minister Chamberlain's goal, the
appeasement of the world.
So when, in March 1938, German troops marched into Austria, leading to its annexation to
the Reich, Britain and France stood by.
Austria's post-war history was similar to Germany's.
At the close of World War I, the Austrian military had collapsed on all fronts.
The Austro-Hungarian Empire broke up as formerly subject peoples declared their independence
and established republics.
So did Austria itself.
In fact, the first initial Austrian idea was that they wanted to join with Germany, but
the Versailles Conference forbade this.
Austria's weak governments coped unsuccessfully, with economic turmoil culminating in the
Depression, not unlike the Weimar government in Germany.
As in Germany, this produced a powerful socialist party, but also a growing Nazi party.
In 1933, the right-wing Premier Engelbert Dolphus dissolved parliament, abolished freedom
of speech, the press and assembly, and outlawed the socialist and Nazi parties.
He began to rule by decree.
He cooperated with the Heimwehr, a fascist paramilitary group to crush the socialists.
In 1934, he outlawed all political opposition, but he was assassinated in July.
In 1935, the new Prime Minister, Kurt von Schussnig, sought Italian support to maintain
independence.
But once it became clear on which side Mussolini's bread was buttered, Schussnig tentatively
agreed to annexation by Germany.
In 1938, Schussnig seemed a reverse course, calling for a plebiscite to determine the
question.
At this point, Hitler demanded his resignation, as if Austria's national sovereignty were
already a dead letter.
He also ordered troops across the border on the 12th of March 1938.
Austria became Ostmark, the newest state of the German Reich.
Hitler justified the Anschluss in German annexation by saying that he was merely correcting
Bismarck's mistake in 1871 when he unified Germany and left Austria out.
This was viewed by the rest of the world as an internal German matter, a case of Germans
seeking to unite with fellow Germans.
Similarly, when, in 1938, Hitler demanded autonomy for Germans living in Czechoslovakia
in an area known as the Sudetenland, the British and the French were not unreceptive.
The 3.5 million Sudeten Germans had been incorporated into Czechoslovakia as a result of the Treaty
of Versailles.
When he heard of Hitler's gambit, Stalin immediately offered the Czechs help, but
he was rebuffed.
The Czechs didn't trust him, and that's understandable enough, and the British seriously
doubted Stalin's military capacity.
Remember there had been all those purges of the Red Army.
So Chamberlain of England and Deladier of France and Mussolini of Italy agreed to talks
with Hitler, at which the Czechs would have no voice over what happened to their own country.
At first, Hitler only demanded autonomy for the Sudeten Germans, but when he saw how tractable
the British and French were, he upped the ante by demanding surrender to Germany.
On the 29th and 30th of September, Chamberlain, Deladier and Mussolini agreed to transfer
part of Czechoslovakia to Germany over the protests of the Czechs.
That country, thereby, lost much of its industry and its border forts with Germany, its main
defense against Germany.
In a sense, this was just a throwback to the Congress of Vienna.
Land was being dealt like playing cards, but it was also a recognition of the right of
self-determination and of German nationalism.
In a sense, this was consistent with nationalism.
German should be ruled by Germans.
As a last-minute gesture, Chamberlain got Hitler to sign a document promising to respect
Czech integrity and renounce war as a means to solve international disputes.
And there is, of course, this famous photograph of Chamberlain stepping off the plane upon
his return to England waving this piece of paper and proclaiming peace in our time to
cheering crowds.
The photo subsequently became the symbol of appeasement and European weakness.
It single-handedly killed wing-collars, bowler hats and umbrellas, even though the latter
two are not in the photo, as symbols of competence and authority.
Not to this point, defenders of Hitler and appeasement could argue that he was merely
demanding back territory that had always been part of Germany or was primarily inhabited
by ethnic Germans.
But on the 15th of March, 1939, the German army crossed the newly drawn Czech border
and absorbed the rest of Czechoslovakia.
Now, the British and the French knew exactly what they were up against.
Following this act of naked aggression, the British and the French began to prepare for
war.
Both countries launched belated emergency rearmament drives.
Both began to cast about for friends.
In March of 1939, Britain promised to guarantee Polish security.
In April, Britain and France offered the same degrees at Romania.
But Hitler's diplomats were also working overtime.
On the 23rd of August, 1939, the world was stunned at the announcement that Nazi Germany
and Communist Russia had signed a non-aggression pact.
This was a complete repudiation of the stated foreign policies of both nations.
It also seemed to break a whole series of promises that Hitler had made to deal with
the Red Menace in Mein Kampf.
It guaranteed that should war come, Germany would not have to fight on two fronts.
It appeared that Hitler had learned something from the Kaiser's mistake.
It gave the USSR the friend it had been seeking for for so long in what had once been its
most hated enemy.
Finally, in a secret clause, the two dictators agreed to carve Eastern Europe up into spheres
of influence.
More specifically, if you look at a map, it should be pretty clear that the non-aggression
pact of August 1939 doomed Poland.
Now there was nothing holding Hitler back.
As early as April of 1939, he had instructed the German General Staff to prepare for war
with Poland.
At 4.47 a.m. on the 1st of September 1939, following a manufactured border incident,
the old World War I-era German battleship Schleswig-Holstein, named after the provinces
that had been the prize in the 1st of Bismarck's Wars, fired on Polish shore batteries at Gdansk.
Simultaneously, the Luftwaffe launched massive strikes on communications and airfields while
the German tanks rolled across the border.
The greatest cataclysm of modern times would now engulf the West.
