Lecture 43, World War II, 1939 to 1942.
In September 1939, Adolf Hitler launched the first of what he envisioned as many wars
of conquest.
Their immediate object was the acquisition of Lebensraum, natural resources, and vast
numbers of Slavic slaves to work for the master race.
For the Allies, the goal of saving Poland was never realistic.
Rather, for all the criticism they may deserve for appeasement, it should be remembered that
Britain and France went to war in 1939 on behalf of another nation without being attacked
themselves.
They did so in defense of the principle that naked aggression could not be tolerated in
a system of civilized nations.
Indeed, it could be argued that the war was really about two fundamental concepts of civilization
that dated back 25 centuries.
At the risk of grossly distorting the history of the ancient Greeks, Hitler envisioned a
Spartan state, its inhabitants supported by land and work taken from its neighbors.
Their lives would be utterly dedicated to the state which gave them their land and their
bread.
That state would be utterly dedicated to the art and practice of war so as to be able to
resist any attacker and expand its territorial holdings.
Now admittedly, in fairness, Sparta was a small state with no further designs on empire after
subduing her neighbors, and at least at first there was some element of democracy in the
Spartan constitution.
And in France represented a more Athenian solution to the problem of civilization.
They were relatively open and free societies supported in large part by international
trade and colonialism.
They were democracies except in the colonies, they stressed the rights and potential of
the individual, and they were relatively disorganized and unwarlike in the late 30s but now roused
to action.
They were defended by citizen armies.
Now again the parallel is forced, but I hold to the idea that the great Athenian experiment
of 25 centuries ago was on the line in 1939.
The Polish campaign surprised the world with its effectiveness.
The Germans determined to avoid the morass of World War I and in fact lacking the resources
for a prolonged war of attrition, combined new military technologies and techniques to
invent Blitzkrieg or lightning war.
The Luftwaffe bomb strategic points, rail yards, airfields and supply lines, and to increase
the terror, cities.
Then the tanks moved in, en masse, supported by infantry.
The Poles fought bravely, but with few tanks and their air force largely knocked out of
the war, they had no chance.
On the 17th of September the Soviets, not to be left behind, declared war on Poland,
and began to roll westwards.
By the end of September Poland was wiped off the map.
The Germans took western Poland, the Russians eastern Poland plus Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania,
massacring 11,000 Polish officers later found buried in mass graves in the Katyn Forest
near Smolensk by the Germans.
On the 30th of November the Soviets, worried about the approach to Leningrad, launched an
attack on neutral Finland with 20 divisions.
Finland had but three divisions, a cavalry brigade and a tank company, but the Finns
resisted effectively using soldiers trained for winter to harass Soviet supply lines.
But once they concentrated their forces the Soviets were able to gradually wear the Finns
down.
The treaty of March 1940 ending the Russo-Finnish war forced Finland to cede the territory the
Russians wanted.
Now in the meantime, in western Europe, the period from September 1939 to April 1940 is
often called the phony war because both sides settled in behind their fortifications and
launched no major offensives.
On one level they seem to have expected a rerun of World War I as a sort of defensive struggle.
But the Germans also hoped that the British and French would back down.
They offered peace in October.
But this time the Allies would only negotiate if Hitler withdrew from Poland.
Failing that, the war was on.
In Britain, Prime Minister Chamberlain asked Winston Churchill to join his cabinet as First
Lord of the Admiralty.
The fleet was signaled from Whitehall, Winston is back.
Immediately Winston implemented another naval blockade of Germany.
The Germans launched their U-boats again and their surface raiders.
Meanwhile, the French, drawing the wrong lesson from the previous war, dug in behind
the Maginot Line on the Franco-German border.
The Maginot Line was named after a French defense minister.
It was a 200 mile series of heavily armored gun emplacements, tank obstacles and redoubts.
Sort of a super trench in three ranks, sunk five to six stories deep and several miles
back into the French countryside between Switzerland and the Ardennes Forest.
It contained comfortable barracks, holding thousands of soldiers, ammunition magazines,
hospital wards, even cinemas and canteens to keep up morale.
Remember that the French Army had mutinied in 1917 and in a way the whole Maginot Line
is an attempt to re-fight World War I.
Surely the French were safe behind it.
The phony war ended on April 9, 1940, when Hitler, worried about the blockade of iron
shipments from Norway, invaded that country and Denmark.
The Royal Navy attempted to intervene, but suffered heavy losses at the hands of the
German Luftwaffe and the German Navy.
This disaster, which by the way was more Churchill's fault than it was Chamberlain's, led to Chamberlain's
resignation and the appointment of Winston Churchill as Prime Minister on the 10th of
May.
In a famous speech, he said that he could offer the British people nothing but blood,
toil, tears and sweat.
On that same day, Hitler invaded the Netherlands, Belgium and France.
Now as in 1870 and 1914, the French expected an attack on the border in the teeth of the
Maginot Line.
Instead, the Germans went around the Maginot Line to the north, attacking through what
was supposed to be an impenetrable segment of the Ardennes Forest, as well as the Netherlands,
Belgium and Luxembourg.
German paratroopers secured strategic bridges and airfields, the Luftwaffe bombed Rotterdam
on the 14th of May, and German Panzer divisions rolled west, first trapping the British expeditionary
force at Dunkirk, and then they rolled south, cutting through the French army.
Mussolini, who had planned a later entry into the war, decided to join in to see what territory
he could get, but he was held back by the Maginot Line's cousin, the Alpine Line.
On the 21st of June 1940, French Premier Henri-Philippe Patin, the hero of Verdun, signed the Treaty
of Compiègne.
To add insult to injury, Hitler demanded that he sign the treaty in the same railway car
at the same location as had been used for the armistice in 1918.
Germany was to occupy three-fifths of France, including most of the port cities.
Southern France would remain a dependent ally, its capital at Vichy.
There remains to this day a great deal of debate about Patin and the Vichy regime.
He claimed that he urged French cooperation with the Germans, and indeed he did this by
going on the radio and telling his population to cooperate with the Germans, to save what
was left of France, to avoid being treated as Poland had been treated, what he referred
to as Polandization.
Now, in fact, the Vichy regime won few concessions from Hitler.
During the war, the French people were mostly terribly underfed.
They had to ship most of their food to Germany.
It was actually a specific and conscious German policy that the French people be less well
fed than the Germans.
Patin did refuse to hand over France's navy, which was sheltering in North Africa and the
colonies at the time.
But he did not launch a counteroffensive from there, nor did he order the French navy to
join the British.
On the 3rd July, the British, who were worried that France's considerable surface fleet would
end up in German hands, issued an ultimatum, join us or face the consequences.
When the French commanders refused to sail over to the British, the British navy opened
fire and sank the French fleet in port at Maris El Kabir and Oran in North Africa.
Now in fact, Patin and conservative politicians looked upon the new arrangement as a way to
settle scores with politicians on the left who had been running France in the 30s.
Patin's new national revolution would put an end to socialism and atheism and it would
restore traditional values.
The liberty, fraternity and the equality model of France's first revolution was to be replaced
with work, family, country, all in cooperation with the 3rd Reich.
Since the war, there's been a great deal of debate about how far the French collaborated
and how far they resisted the Germans.
Immediately following the war, the de Gaulle regime insisted that the vast majority of
the French people had been on the side of the resistance.
In fact, only about 270,000 people can be shown to have fought with the resistance or resisted
the Germans in some palpable way.
Since the 70s, with the high-profile trials of Nazi officials in France, like Klaus Barbie,
the butcher of Lyon, there has been a movement among historians, and perhaps more reluctantly
the French people, to examine their history of occupation.
Revisionist historians have argued that the Vichy regime was widely supported and the
Nazis were cooperated with.
For example, Vichy largely cooperated with the Holocaust, unlike Italian-occupied France,
which was more of a safe haven for the Jews.
But more recent post-Revisionist historiography has stressed that Vichy was never popular.
The resistance received a lot of tacit support.
And remember that the Germans used brutal methods to enforce cooperation, and yet they
received very little of it from the great mass of the French people.
In recent years, as you well know, there's been a lot of disdain for the French and their
military record in the 20th century expressed in American popular culture.
But I think it is a good question to ask.
What would you or I have done?
What would we have done if our country were occupied by a crushingly victorious foreign
power?
Would we all have abandoned our homes, our careers, perhaps even our families, and joined
the resistance, and taken whatever circumstances and whatever consequences would have flowed
from that?
Or would we have gone along quietly in order to get along with our lives?
That is quite a question, I think.
In the meantime, the British evacuated Dunkirk between the 27th of May and the 4th of June,
saving their army but losing most of its equipment.
As Churchill said, the Battle of France was over.
The Battle of Britain had begun.
Operation Sea Lion, Hitler's plan to invade Britain, called for an amphibious assault by
the German army.
Now as in 1803-05, British naval superiority, in particular control of the Channel, stood
in the invader's way.
But Hermann Gering had promised Hitler that he could protect the invading troops by securing
command of the air.
And so, before Sea Lion could become operational, the Luftwaffe had to wrest air superiority
from the Royal Air Force in what everyone realized was the key to the Battle of Britain.
At first, everything went the Germans way.
The Luftwaffe had over 1,300 bombers and nearly 1,000 fighter planes.
The RAF had only 700 fighters.
Beginning in August, the German Air Force launched a series of raids against airfields,
munitions factories, and radar installations, which began to destroy Britain's air defense
network.
Great Britain was about a week away from losing the Battle of Britain.
By 1st September, the Germans had destroyed 338 British planes, and the RAF was losing
10% of its pilots a week.
The British air network was on the verge of collapse.
In one of the great and unscrupulous gambles of the war, Churchill responded by ordering
a massive bombing raid on Berlin for the night of 25 to 26 August 1940, and continued
raids thereafter.
Now, at this point, the British didn't have much in the way of a bomber force.
They had to throw up everything they had, including training aircraft, just to get airplanes
into the air over Berlin.
Churchill didn't have much hope of doing serious damage to the capital.
That wasn't his object.
Rather, he wanted to trick Hitler, who had pledged not to bomb British cities, and garring
who had promised the German cities would never be bombed, into retaliating against London.
Why would Churchill want London to be bombed?
Because that would spare the airfields and the factories and the radar installations.
On the 7th of September 1940, the Luftwaffe attacked the London Docks to terrible effect,
as famously described by Desmond Flower.
Suddenly, we were gaping upwards.
The brilliant sky was crisscrossed from horizon to horizon by innumerable vapor trails.
The site was a completely novel one.
We watched fascinated and all works stopped.
The little silver stars sparkling at the heads of the vapor trails turned east.
This display looked so insubstantial and harmless, even beautiful.
Then, with a dull roar which made the ground across London shake as one stood upon it,
the first sticks of bombs hit the docks.
Leisurely enormous mushrooms of black and brown smoke shot with crimson climbed the sunlit
sky.
There they hung and slowly expanded, for there was no wind, and the great fires fed more
smoke into them as the hours passed.
Now we were nearer to the docks.
The columns of smoke merged and became a monstrous curtain which blocked the sky.
Only the billows within it and the sudden shifts of flame which shot up hundreds of
feet made one realize that it was a living thing, and not just the backdrop of some nightmare
opera.
The fires raged all night, but the Germans lost 52 fighter planes and destroyed only
26.
From early September to the summer of 1941, the people of London were subjected to the
blitz.
Many were forced to spend night after night in air raid shelters and tube stations only
to emerge to find that their houses, even whole neighborhoods, had been destroyed overnight.
Zelda Marchant's description of what it was like to be a London fire warden, which was
written to convince Americans to join the war, is less literary but more human than
flowers, and I think it describes well the quiet courage, the stiff upper lip matter
of factness with which ordinary citizens confronted the unimaginable.
Smith's post is in a basement on the corner of a street in Stepney.
There were half a dozen other men at the post who, apart from their names, were no more
distinctive than Smith.
There was a tailor, a food porter, a driver, a fishmonger, men who until the September
days had not been able to express their desire for action.
Smith began to tell me about that first night.
A bomb just a few yards from him had hit a block of buildings and there were 11 people
trapped on the ground floor.
It was a noisy night, but every time we bent low we could hear the groans of the people
underneath.
I thought I'd be sick.
I held a man's hand that was clear.
It took us nine hours to get him out, and hour later we got a woman out.
They were in a bad way.
There was dirt and blood caked on the woman's face.
We wiped it off.
She must have been about 30.
They both died.
We were all a bit quiet.
It was the first we'd seen.
We couldn't have got them out quicker.
We'd torn our hands up dragging the stones away, but it was awful seeing them take the
last gasps as they lifted them into the ambulance.
Smith was quiet, even retelling the story, and one of the men said, it was the first,
you see.
Then Smith told me about the next night when he was really blooded.
Incendiaries had started a fire in one of the smaller streets and high explosives began
to fall into the fire.
Smith approached the houses from the back and got through to the kitchen of one of them.
I fell over something.
I picked it up and it was a leg.
I stood there with it in my hand, wondering what I should do with it.
I knew it was a woman's leg.
I put it down and went to look for the ambulance.
They had got the fire out at the front.
The ambulance men brought a stretcher and I showed them the leg.
Then we looked farther in and there were pieces all over.
All they said was, they didn't need a stretcher.
In fact, anatomy students were drafted from the local universities to reassemble bodies
for burial during the Blitz.
As Smith set thinking his whole body seemed to pause, you see, how we look at things now
is like this.
If they're alive, you work like the devil to keep them alive and get them out.
We listen to their groans and know they have breath in them.
If they're dead, there's nothing we can do.
Getting upset hampers your work.
So Smith learned not to overindulge his sensitivity on seeing death or torn limb and flesh.
His job was with the spark of life that survived.
By June of 1941, 500,000 homes had been destroyed, 43,000 civilians had been killed.
But the single-minded regularity of German attacks meant that the RAF could muster large
formations and mass them in response.
As the airfields and factories were spared, new pilots and planes came online.
By October 1940, Operation Sea Lion was called off.
As you know, Prime Minister Churchill argued that, never in the field of human conflict
has so much been owed by so many to so few, that is, to the pilots of the Royal Air Force.
But I think that it could equally be argued that Britain and much of Western civilization
might have fallen if he'd been wrong when he said of the many, London can take it.
Like Napoleon, Hitler had other campaigns to fight.
Like Napoleon, he thought that he could starve the British out by attacking their trade,
in particular their lifeline to America.
On the 17th of August 1940, he declared a total blockade of the United Kingdom.
The U-Boat War was a seesaw battle.
The only one Churchill later said that really frightened him.
With the fall of France in May of 1940, the Germans gained Atlantic ports, and this allowed
their U-Boats and surface raiders like the battlecruisers Scharnhorst and Gneissner,
to range from the Arctic Circle to the South Atlantic.
From the Mediterranean, beginning in 1942-43, the Jersey Shore and the Gulf of Mexico.
During 1940-41, a combination of surface raiders and U-Boats wrought havoc on the supply lines
to the United Kingdom.
This period came to be known in the U-Boat service as the happy time.
The British responded with convoys, and from mid-1941 those convoys included American vessels.
Specifically, some 50 old World War I era destroyers that had been loaned to the United
Kingdom by the government of Franklin Roosevelt through the Lend-Lease Act of March 1941.
But there were also some active U.S. Navy warships as well.
President Roosevelt clearly saw the danger from Hitler, and he wanted to get into the
war before Britain fell.
Once Britain fell, fighting Hitler would be much tougher, but U.S. public opinion did
not yet see this as an American fight, and even Lend-Lease was a hard sell.
The Germans countered with the Wolfpack.
Groups of U-Boats, attacking at night, coordinated from Berlin.
Now a key development in 1941 was the daring British capture of a German U-Boat containing
an enigma code book.
This enabled the Allies to monitor U-Boat activity.
Now the breaking of the enigma codes, which the Germans thought undecipherable, was one
of the most closely guarded secrets of the war, and in fact the British were perfectly
willing to sacrifice men in order to preserve the fiction that they didn't know what the
Germans were going to do next.
They saved enigma for the most important matters in the war.
In September 1941, Roosevelt authorized U.S. warships to fire on Axis vessels.
In October, the USS Ruben James was sunk by a U-Boat while escorting a convoy, with a
loss of 115 sailors.
This was a crucial event in turning the tide of U.S. public opinion towards the war.
Still, by 1942 the U-Boats were sinking twice as many ships as the Allies could produce.
Meanwhile, in September 1940, Mussolini put pressure on the British by advancing from
Libya to attack the British Empire in Egypt.
The next month, he also attacked Greece.
The British responded successfully.
He drove the Italians back in Africa in early 1941, and they established air bases in Greece.
This caused Hitler to turn his gates towards the south of Europe.
He began to work out alliances with Hungary and Romania in the fall of 1940, and Bulgaria
in March of 1941.
In April of 1941, he launched an invasion of Greece and Yugoslavia, mainly because he
needed to secure those air bases.
They were within range of oil fields at Ploeste, Romania, which had begun to supply the German
army thanks to his agreement with that country.
Yugoslavia fell quickly, but proved hard to hold onto.
The defeated Yugoslavian army maintained a very effective partisan resistance, led by
Draha Milovic.
After 1941, the Communists under Josef Broz Tito, later Marshal Tito, were even more effective.
At the same time, the Greek army of over 400,000 men fell easy prey to the Blitzkrieg.
They tried to defend all of Greece, which by the way, violates their strategy against
the Persians many centuries before, and it was a mistake.
That year, Hitler also threatened the British in the southern Mediterranean by bailing out
Mussolini in Africa, sending a small force to divisions, the Africa Corps, under the
command of General Ervin Rommel.
They drove the British back, nearly out of Libya.
Only a small garrison at Tobruk held out.
Rommel hoped for reinforcements to drive to Egypt, take Alexandria and the Suez Canal,
and thereby threaten Britain's oil supplies in the Arabian Peninsula.
But in fact, Rommel would never get those reinforcements, because significant as all
this activity was, it was to Hitler a sideshow.
His greatest significance was that it delayed Hitler's next offensive for three crucial
weeks.
You see, these maneuvers were just part of Hitler's peripheral vision.
He had long had his eye mainly on Russia.
Russia's vast landmass would provide unlimited labents realm.
Its vast agricultural potential and Caucasian oil reserves would supply the Reich war effort.
Its vast population would supply slaves to do the Reich's work.
Besides, it was communist, and Hitler hated communists.
He thought that the Soviet state was rotten to the core and would fall apart if pushed.
Remember the Red Army's performance in Finland.
Once the Soviets were subdued, the British would surrender, realizing they had no other
potential friend in Europe, and that Hitler now threatened their precious empire in the
Middle East and the Far East.
So Hitler ordered his general staff to begin planning Operation Barbarossa in the summer
of 1940.
Stalin was taken completely by surprise by the invasion of three million men on the
22nd of June, 1941.
Soviet aircraft lined up wing to wing were easily destroyed on the ground.
The Soviet army, forbidden to mount a strategic retreat as in 1812, was cut to ribbons.
By early August, half a million men had surrendered.
By mid-September, well over a million.
The Germans, greedy for objectives, advanced quickly along three routes, north to Leningrad,
central to Moscow, and south to Kiev.
Leningrad was encircled, and Kiev besieged by northern and southern prongs in September.
Army group center reached the gates of Moscow in November.
In the south, the Germans were welcomed by many Ukrainians, especially as liberators
from Stalinist tyranny.
But stupidly, the Germans imposed an even more brutal occupation, committing atrocities
against soldiers and civilians, and seizing land and grain.
Moreover, like Napoleon, Hitler had not outfitted his armies with winter uniforms, and remember,
the offensive began three weeks late.
In December of 1941, General Winter finally arrived and saved the motherland.
Temperatures plunged to minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit, tanks and trucks within 20 miles of Moscow
froze.
The German offensive ground to a halt.
Stalin then ordered a successful counterattack along the entire eastern front.
His troops knew how to dress for the cold.
In the meantime, the Japanese expanded the conflict.
The United States had condemned Japanese aggression in China.
In September 1940, after the Japanese persuaded Vichy to hand over Indochina, the U.S. prohibited
the export of aviation fuel and steel to Japan.
In late July 1941, after the Japanese pushed further into Indochina, the U.S., United Kingdom
and the Netherlands froze Japanese assets in their banks, thus making it impossible to
purchase oil from other imperialist powers.
The Japanese war machine would slowly strangle if it did not reverse this situation.
So the Japanese High Command began to plan the capture of Dutch and British imperial
possessions in Burma, Malaya and the East Indies.
This would provide endless supplies of oil and rubber.
And they could do it too, because of course, as we all know, the British and Dutch were
otherwise engaged in the West.
The only real obstacle was the U.S. Pacific Fleet based at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
So Admiral Isoruku Yamamoto devised an audacious plan to attack the Pacific Fleet in port using
aircraft launched from carriers.
On the morning of 7 December 1941, 8 December in Japan and the Far East, the Japanese launched
surprise attacks against the United States and Great Britain.
The Japanese Fleet Air Arm attacked the Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor.
The Japanese Army attacked the Philippines, Burma, Malaya, Borneo and Hong Kong.
These attacks were devastating.
Every American battleship in the Pacific was sunk or disabled.
Within days the Japanese conquered Hong Kong, within weeks they overwhelmed Singapore.
By March they held the Netherlands East Indies and invaded New Guinea.
In the spring the Philippines fell, the last holdout being Corrigidor in May.
The British and Americans issued immediate declarations of war on Japan on the 8th of
December.
In a foolhardy and really unnecessary move, Hitler and Mussolini declared war on the United
States on the 11th of December.
On the 1st of January 1942, the United Kingdom, the United States and the USSR and 23 other
countries signed the Declaration by United Nations to fight together against the Axis.
So as the year 1942 began, the whole world was at war.
Civilization itself was in the balance.
