Lecture 44, World War II, 1942 to 1945.
The situation at the beginning of 1942 was dire for the Allies and so for Western civilization.
Hitler's Reich now extended to nearly all of mainland Europe.
His armies threatened to seize the Russian capital, the Ukrainian oil fields, and the Suez Canal.
His navy threatened to starve out Great Britain through the U-boat war.
In the Far East, Japan's Empire stretched from Manchuria in the northwest, south through Indochina to Borneo and New Guinea,
then by May 1942, across the Pacific to the Philippines.
The Allies had lost valuable naval bases and sources of rubber and oil.
Australia and Hawaii were now under threat by the Japanese war machine.
But if the Allies could hold out, their superior numbers and the industrial might of the United States would guarantee victory.
In January of 1941, Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt had agreed to concentrate on the defeat of Germany.
But the more immediate threat to America and Australia was Japan, and since defeat in the Far East would have had serious consequences for the West,
we will spend some time on this theater.
In the spring of 1942, Admiral Yamamoto planned to take southern New Guinea and Midway Island.
His idea was to capture valuable bases, which could threaten the Hawaiian islands in Australia,
but also to destroy the American aircraft carriers, which had escaped him at Pearl Harbor.
In early May, Japanese and American forces fought to a tactical standoff at the Battle of Coral Sea.
This was the first naval battle fought entirely between aircraft launched from carriers.
The two fleets never came within sight of each other.
Though the U.S. lost a precious carrier, the USS Lexington, they stopped the Japanese advance on Port Moresby, New Guinea.
In early June, Yamamoto, commanding a strike force of 185 ships, launched his strike on Midway.
Japanese aircraft pounded the island, but in part because the Americans could read the Japanese codes,
American carrier planes caught the main Japanese fleet without any fighter planes in the air.
In a matter of minutes, the Japanese lost four carriers and much of the cream of their pilot force.
Pearl Harbor had been avenged.
From this point, while the British and Chinese fought a guerrilla war in Burma and occupied China, respectively,
the Americans began to roll back the Japanese advance in the Pacific by mounting amphibious assaults on Japanese-held islands.
The first waves were almost always led by Marines, supported by gunfire from battleships and bombs from carrier-based aircraft.
The process began in the Solomon Islands at Guadalcanal in early August 1942.
The key to Guadalcanal was which side could supply its forces by sea and air.
After a series of bloody naval battles, the US fleet eventually won this struggle.
In the meantime, the Marines fought two determined foes, the Japanese Army and Tropical Disease.
It wasn't until early 1943 that the island was declared secure.
Thereafter, US, Australian and New Zealand troops took New Georgia in August,
much of New Guinea in September, and Bougainville in November.
In November 1943, the US moved on the Central Pacific, landing in the Gilbert Islands at Macen and Tarawa.
In March 1944, it was onto the marshals at Enwitok and Wajalei.
By the summer of 1944, a combined US and Australian force had driven the Japanese out of New Guinea.
US forces landed at Saipan in the Marianas in June, Guam by August.
In the course of this operation, US pilots destroyed what was left of Japanese naval aviation at the Marianas Turkey Shoot,
which took place on the 19th of June.
The taking of these islands provided bases from which B-29s could launch a strategic bombing campaign against Japan.
In the fall, Allied forces launched invasions of the Carolinas and the Philippines.
The Battle of Late Hay Gulf, the largest naval battle in history from the 23rd to the 25th of October 1944,
finished off the Imperial Japanese Navy, largely because the Americans had air supremacy.
In the meantime, 1942 also saw the turn of the tide in Europe.
In late June of 1942, Hitler launched another Eastern offensive to capture the Caucasian oil fields.
By early September, German forces had advanced even farther into the southern Soviet Union.
A southern column took the valuable coal mines of the Donets basin and reached the banks of the Don.
A northern prong reached Stalingrad on the Volga, where it was tied up in house-to-house fighting.
I should explain that's the northern prong of a southern offensive.
One reason for the advance was that Stalin, anticipating a summer attack on Moscow,
had held the bulk of his forces even further to the north.
In November, the Red Army, those forces swooped down from the north and cut the German supply lines,
and thus surrounded Stalingrad, and with it, the 6th Army under General Friedrich Paulus.
Paulus wanted to save his army by retreating to the east,
but Hitler, obsessed with the psychological and propaganda value of holding onto a city that was named for Stalin,
ordered him to hold Stalingrad.
In the end, he promised an airlift, which proved inadequate,
and a relief force which was halted by Russian forces 50 miles away.
In a final desperate move, Hitler named Paulus a Field Marshal,
for no German Field Marshal had ever surrendered on the field of battle,
but still Hitler refused to allow Paulus to retreat.
Frozen and starving, the 6th Army surrendered in January of 1943,
ending Hitler's Caucasian offensive and costing him 200,000 crack troops.
Hitler tried one last summer offensive in July of 1943,
hoping to exploit a bulge in the Soviet lines near Kursk.
The result was the greatest tank battle in history,
which the Russians, with their superior T-34 tank, won by July 12th.
Hitler was forced to call off his offensive as the Allies were by then also threatening Italy,
as we will see later in this lecture.
The Germans had reached the limit of overextension.
They were losing a war of attrition.
From this point on, the Soviets took the offensive in the east.
They launched a counter-offensive in August of 1943 that took Kiev.
Well equipped for Russian winters, the Red Army continued to drive through early 1944.
In the north, they liberated Leningrad.
Leningrad had been under siege for 506 days.
The city's population suffering from disease and starvation fell by 1.5 million people during that time.
The siege of Leningrad is one of the great tragedies of World War II.
In the south, the Germans and Romanians were thrown out of most of Russia entirely by May.
The summer of 1944 saw the Russians drive the Germans out of the last bit of Russian territory
and reach the Vistula and the outskirts of Warsaw.
On the 31st of July, Polish insurgents staged an uprising in Warsaw.
But those insurgents were loyal to the democratic government in exile in London,
which Stalin had repudiated.
And so, and this is a matter of some controversy,
but it would appear that Stalin ordered his forces to stop
and thus allow the Germans to exterminate Polish rebels
who would have been difficult to deal with in the post-war situation.
In the meantime, sick of bearing the brunt of the European War,
Stalin put pressure on his allies to open up a second front.
In fact, during 1942, Americans participated in a number of fronts,
the war at sea, the war in the air, and finally a land war beginning in Africa.
First, the war at sea, the battle of the Atlantic.
Even after Stalingrad, there had been real doubt as to whether the Soviet Union could survive another German offensive.
The allies did their best to supply the Russian war machine by sending convoys along the Arctic Circle to Murmansk.
Those convoys became easy prey for the wolfpacks.
The famous example took place in July 1942 when convoy PQ-17, Tumor-Mansk,
lost 25 of 36 ships to German submarines.
Germany's attempts to starve out Britain also grew more intense between 1941 and 1943.
Even before the American entry, the U.S. Navy assisted the Royal Navy in convoying ships across the Atlantic.
Once America entered, German Admiral Karl Darnitz sent U-boats to attack the east coast of the United States.
What they found was a country completely unprepared for war.
They found no blackouts or other defensive measures.
Merchantships were actually silhouetted against the lights of American cities.
They sank 78 Allied ships in just two months.
At this point, it might be good to remember the experience of merchant seamen in this war.
They were very much in the line of fire.
They might be on deck or asleep in their bunks one minute and drowning in the frigid waters of the North Atlantic the next.
U-boats did not pick up survivors and convoys could not stop to do so.
Back home, they wore no uniform and so they were often treated with derision during the war as draft dodgers.
They received no veterans benefits and yet without them, Britain would have starved.
The USSR would have gone without American made material that helped to make the victory possible.
The Battle of the Atlantic reached its height between July 1942 and June 1943.
The U-boats sank 712 ships 1 million tons as late as March 1943 alone.
But convoys, knowledge of the German codes and new technology worked in the Allies favor.
For example, better radar to track U-boats on the surface and better sonar when they were submerged.
Longer-range aircraft were able to bomb and depth-charge U-boats in the middle of the Atlantic and better depth charges.
In 1943, the U.S. developed hunter-killer task forces built around small aircraft carriers which could hunt and sink U-boats.
In May of 1943 alone, 41 U-boats were sunk, one-quarter of the German Navy's operational strength.
At the same time, U.S. ship production was easily surpassing the German ability to sink ships.
The Americans had developed the utilitarian liberty ship.
It was slow and ungainly, which is a nice way of saying, pretty ugly.
But by the end of the war, the Americans could produce about one of these a day.
By 1945, the U-boats had sunk 14.4 million tons of shipping, but they lost 821 boats.
German U-boat crews had the highest casualty rate of any service in the war, 63%.
In the meantime, the Allies launched round-the-clock strategic bombing of German cities and military targets beginning in 1943.
Now the rationale behind the raids was first that they were intended to cripple German industry, transportation and communication networks.
But they were also supposed to discredit the Nazi regime in the eyes of its people.
It was well known that Hermann Gehring had told the German populace that if German cities were bombed, they could call him Meier, a Jewish surname.
The bombing raids were also intended to wreak psychological havoc on the German populace, demoralize them, sap their will to fight.
Now, the British had been unsuccessful in daytime raids on Germany, and so they concentrated on the night bombing of cities.
The most famous examples are perhaps the firebombing of Hamburg in July of 1943, which killed 40,000 people, and the firebombing of Dresden in 1944, which killed perhaps 80,000, including many refugees from the eastern front.
The Americans, confident in the durability of the B-17 flying fortress and the accuracy of the Norden bombsite, made daylight raids on specific industrial targets their specialty.
For example, they raided Hitler's oil fields at Ploesti, Romania in August of 1943.
These raids were full of casualties. They were very dangerous, because there was as yet no Allied fighter plane that was capable of escorting the bombers all the way in, which left them easy prey to Luftwaffe fighters.
For example, the later raid on the Schreinfurt-Ball Bering plant incurred 25% U.S. casualties.
But in 1944, long-range fighters with disposable wingtags like the P-51 Mustang and the P-47 Thunderbolt became available, and that improved the odds.
Hitler responded with new weapons aimed at London, the V-1 buzz bombs, and towards the very end of the war, the V-2 rockets.
Now, strategic bombing undoubtedly had some effect on German industry. During the second half of 1944, iron and steel production fell by half.
And yet, under the Nazi munitions minister, Albert Speer, German industry managed to produce ever greater amounts of material right into 1945.
Some statistics. In 1941, German industry produced 5,200 tanks and 10,247 planes.
In 1944, when the Germans were clearly losing the war, they produced 22,100 tanks and 39,807 planes.
In other words, the Germans were running out of gas, not weapons, as the war ended.
As for German morale, it was affected by the bombings, in that ordinary Germans lost faith in their regime's ability to keep them safe.
But they did continue to function, and in that sense, the strategic bombing campaign was not successful.
The loss of civilian life was tremendous. It has been estimated by the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey that 305,000 were killed and 780,000 wounded in Germany as a result of the bombing raids, with 20% of the German housing stock destroyed.
In Japan, a score of cities was firebombed, killing 330,000 according to the Strategic Bombing Survey.
These numbers are all considered to be underestimates, and I've seen figures that, in some cases, double them.
The Allied Air Campaign remains highly controversial.
It represents our side's abandonment of the principle that non-combatants should be spared, and an embrace of the notion of total war.
We will revisit this before the end of the lecture.
In the meantime, it remains to be said that there remained plenty of war for the infantry.
After shelving a plan to invade Europe in 1942, it was agreed that the way to open up the second front that Stalin wanted so desperately was to chase Rommel out of North Africa.
In the first half of 1942, Rommel had launched his drive to the Suez Canal.
But in August, the Africa Corps was stopped by British General Bernard Montgomery's forces 60 miles west of Alexandria at El Alamein.
As Montgomery chased the Africa Corps back westwards, a combined American and British force landed in Morocco and Algeria in November.
Vichy forces put up some resistance and Hitler sent reinforcements.
In fact, unsure about his French allies, he ordered the occupation of all France by the end of 1942.
Early in 1943, Rommel and the Germans had some success against the inexperienced American forces at the Kasserine Pass.
But in March, the Desert Fox was recalled to Germany to cede to the defenses of the homeland.
Axis forces in Africa were eventually overwhelmed and surrendered in May 1943, the first significant American-British land victory in the West.
This opened up the possibility of invading Sicily.
The Allies invaded Sicily in July of 1943, the Italian mainland in September.
Mussolini's government fell in July and Italy formally passed into the Allied column.
But the Germans flooded the peninsula with troops and they mounted a tenacious resistance along the Gustav line south of Rome.
They weren't going to give up this alliance.
That made the Italian front one of the bloodiest of the war.
Landings behind the German lines at Anzio in January of 1944 failed to undermine the German position.
The Allied attack on the German lines at the cliffs of Monte Cassino in May 1944 proved to be the decisive move.
But it was also highly controversial because of the presence of St. Benedict's monastery on those heights, which were bombed.
Once Monte Cassino fell, the Germans abandoned the Gustav line and Allied forces entered Rome on the 4th of June.
In the meantime, the Nazis had poured extensive resources into creating Festung Europa, Fortress Europe,
an Atlantic wall of fortifications which would throw the Allied invasion force into the sea and maybe break the alliance.
But the Allies had also been preparing.
They'd been pouring American and Canadian troops into Britain.
They'd invented efficient landing craft as well as artificial docking stations called mulberries to facilitate the unloading of troops and men in the first crucial hours after invasion.
They'd also mounted a campaign of disinformation involving spies, fake radio broadcasts, false plans planted on corpses,
and even a dummy army to convince the Germans that the invasion was going to come at the narrowest point in the channel, at the Pate de Calais, not Normandy, as actually planned.
On the morning of June 6, 1944, after receiving a favorable weather report,
the Supreme Allied Commander General Dwight Eisenhower gave the order to launch Operation Overlord.
Overnight, paratroopers dropped behind enemy lines to cut communications,
and 150,000 American, British, and Canadian troops landed along five beaches supported by Allied air power and shore bombardment by the U.S. and British navies.
The most difficult landing and the hardest fighting took place at Omaha Beach, the American landing there.
By the end of the day, Allied troops had scaled the cliffs at Normandy.
The great German counter-offensive never really materialized.
Hitler continued to think that the main invasion was going to come across the Pate de Calais, so he held these troops back in reserve.
Even after he released them, their movement was hampered by Allied air power,
and so by the end of the month, Eisenhower had nearly 900,000 men on shore at Normandy.
Once the Allied forces broke out of Normandy in late July 1944, the Normandy pocket, the German army had no choice but to retreat.
On the 25th of August, American and free French forces under Charles de Gaulle liberated Paris.
By mid-August, Allied forces also landed in the south of France, and by late 1944, the Allies were beginning to outrun their supply lines.
In December of 1944, Hitler launched his last great offensive in the West, a plan to split the Allied forces by driving through the Ardennes to Antwerp.
To neutralize Allied air superiority, the Germans waited for winter storms, which kept Allied planes on the ground.
They infiltrated the American lines with spies who spoke English and were dressed as American soldiers to give false directions.
Beginning on the 16th of December, the German offensive barreled forward, creating a vast bulge in the Allied lines, hence the name of this battle, the Battle of the Bulge,
but American troops held at St. Vith and Baston, preventing the Germans from reaching important fuel supplies.
Once the German offensive ran out of gas, it was possible for the Allies to resume their drive for the Rhine, which they crossed in March.
As the end of the war approached, the three great Allied leaders, Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill, met at Yalta in February.
Post-war dispositions were arranged, including the recognition that the Soviet Union would effectively control Eastern Europe.
Now, post-war critics have long denounced this arrangement, as in effect, subjecting millions of people to Soviet oppression and dividing Europe by an iron curtain.
They've seen it as a giveaway.
But it's kind of hard to see what else the Allies could have done, given the fact that the Soviets had sacrificed over 20 million of their citizens in this war,
and that the Red Army had already occupied most of Eastern Europe since the fall of 1944. They weren't going to give it back.
By the spring of 1945, the German war machine was defunct. The Allies began to liberate prisoner of war and concentration camps.
American troops met Soviet forces on the 21st of April at Torgau in Germany.
By the way, the site of one of Frederick the Great's great battles, an irony there.
In late April, the Red Army also reached Berlin, much of it reduced to rubble by Allied bombing.
On the 30th of April, 1945, Adolf Hitler and many in his circle committed suicide in a bunker beneath the Reich Chancellery.
Soviet troops found the bodies and cremated them.
The Red Army, after years of seeing their country pillaged, went on a rampage, raping thousands of German women.
In the meantime, on the orders of Admiral Dernitz, Hitler's designated successor, General Alfred Yodel, surrendered all German forces on the 7th of May, 1945.
But the war in the Pacific raged on over that summer.
The Imperial Japanese Navy lay mostly at the bottom of the Pacific, but the Army was still mostly intact.
In January of 1945, the Japanese attempted to offset their naval inferiority by launching kamikaze attacks.
Kamikaze means divine wind.
These were one-way suicide missions by young pilots in ancient planes against American carriers.
The assaults on Iwo Jima in February and March and Okinawa in April and June were spectacularly bloody.
6,800 U.S. personnel were lost at Iwo Jima, including 6,000 Marines.
The assault on Okinawa seemed relatively easy at first, but the Japanese launched a stubborn and vicious defensive campaign from the interior, where they were holed up in innumerable caves.
American bombers, now able to use a field on Iwo Jima, pounded the Japanese mainland in anticipation of invasion in November.
But of course, that invasion never took place.
In early August, the Americans dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing over 100,000 people in total immediately and well over twice as many from radiation over time.
Now, the dropping of the atomic bombs opened a new age and has been controversial ever since.
President Truman and some historians have argued that the dropping of the bomb was necessary.
Japan showed no signs of surrender and was arming its populace for a fight to the death.
Official government estimates of the cost of invasion range from 20,000 to 800,000 fatalities on the Allied side, with many more Japanese civilian casualties.
Quick action was also obviously necessary, as Japanese commanders of prison camps were planning to execute their prisoners.
But against this, other historians have argued that there is plenty of evidence that the bombs were not dropped for this reason.
Both the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Post-War Strategic Bombing Survey argued that Japan was already on the point of surrender, if not collapse.
Many American commanders, including General Eisenhower, saw no need for the weapon.
He said it wasn't necessary to hit them with that awful thing.
Rather, the U.S. was anxious to use the bomb in any case in order to overaw the Soviets.
Now, there's a vast literature on this question, and I am not a sufficient expert to solve the controversy for you.
I can tell you that doing the research into the question necessary to prepare for this course has only deepened its difficulty for me.
A very few things seem clear.
There is no question that the bomb hastened the end of the war.
But whether the war would have lasted much longer, whether Japan would have fought on, can never be known.
If the bomb did save the lives of American soldiers,
it did so at the expense of Japanese women, children, and old men.
While both cities contained military targets, the vast majority of victims were non-combatants.
Now, it would take a theologian or a philosopher, not a historian, to weigh the balance here.
The life of your or my father or uncle or grandfather, on the one hand, that of a Japanese mother or child on the other.
I cannot imagine that anyone is comfortable with that choice.
What seems clear to me is that when the good guys, the civilized side, began deliberately targeting civilians,
even in conventional strategic bombing, they, we, had already crossed a moral line.
By doing so, we were saying to the world in effect, we may do a terrible thing in a just cause.
And perhaps we may.
Here's another one for that philosopher and that theologian.
But I would caution and remind that civilizations' worst enemies make exactly the same argument that we may do a terrible thing in what we consider to be a just cause.
And that that is one club which perhaps we do not want to join.
In conclusion of this issue, whatever the intention, if Wernicke, Warsaw, Rotterdam, Leningrad, and London were failures of civilization,
so were Berlin, Hamburg, Dresden, Cologne, Tokyo, Hiroshima, and Nagasaki.
Now the bomb's immediate effect was to convince Emperor Hirohito that further resistance was futile.
He ordered the surrender of Japanese forces on the 14th of August 1945.
The final peace treaty was signed aboard the battleship USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay on the 2nd of September 1945.
The costs of war, the statistics are staggering.
61 countries mobilized.
110 million men and women, including 22 to 30 million in the USSR, 17 million in Germany, 16 million in the United States.
Total casualties amounted to 61 million lives.
That includes Holocaust victims and 36 million civilians.
World War II was truly the first total war.
We can break this down by country.
The USSR lost more than 13 million military personnel and 7 million civilians.
China more than 3 million military and more than 10 million civilians.
Germany 3.5 million military, 3.8 million civilians.
Poland 120,000 military and 5.3 million civilians.
Japan 1.7 million military, 380,000 civilians.
Yugoslavia 300,000 military, 1.3 million civilians.
Romania 200,000 military, 465,000 civilians.
France 250,000 military, 360,000 civilians.
The British Empire and Commonwealth 452,000 military, 60,000 civilians.
In the US 407,318 military, almost all military.
In Italy 330,000 military and 80,000 civilians.
In Hungary 120,000 military and 280,000 civilians.
In Czechoslovakia 10,000 military, 330,000 civilians died.
The material cost of the war was $1 trillion.
Now much of the world and certainly most of Europe was devastated,
materially and spiritually by World War II.
Many of the best values of Western civilization had been defended and preserved,
but at the cost of others and the sacrifice of so many lives.
Unlike 1919, there was no great confidence in 1945 that the world's leaders would find a way to avoid war.
And one more difference from previous peace conferences.
For the first time since this course began, the most important of those leaders,
the men who would decide the future of Western Europe, were not Western Europeans.
