Lecture 45, American Hegemony Soviet Challenge, 1945 to 1975.
It can be argued that the Allied victory in World War II saved what was best in Western
civilization, democratic government on both sides of the Atlantic, individual freedoms
of speech, religion, right of assembly, etc., while seeming to discredit much that was worst
in this tradition, authoritarianism, the cult of personality, fascism, uncritical nationalism,
national mob mentality, anti-Semitism, the appeasement of totalitarian states, the notion
of offensive war to achieve national ends.
But that doesn't mean that all the questions raised by the war had been answered.
If World War II discredited offensive war, has it not ever since lent legitimacy to the
notion of a defensive war?
If it discredited appeasement, have we not been groping ever since to find a middle ground
between all-out war with the world's dictators and acquiescence?
If it discredited fascism, was not the other European political and social extreme communism
legitimized by Stalin's elevation to the Big Three and victory in the Great Patriotic
War as it was known in the Soviet Union?
Indeed, if authoritarianism, cult of personality, militarism, uncritical nationalism and anti-Semitism
were discredited in the West, had not all but the last been the means to victory in
the East, that is, the Soviet Union?
Maybe World War II didn't settle so much.
Maybe a great struggle remained to decide this time between democratic capitalism and
communism.
That helps to explain why some Western commanders, most notably the American General, George
S. Patton, urged that the Western allies not stop at the Elba, but continue on through
Germany and attack the Soviets.
That suggestion wasn't taken seriously, but another general's plan that of George C.
Marshall for economic assistance to war-torn Europe can be seen as a subtler way of winning
that area for democratic capitalism.
Now as all this implies, within a few years of the war, the victorious alliance, Europe,
and the world divided into two opposing camps, fighting another life-and-death struggle with
propaganda and materiel as well as bullets, a sequel to World War II, which was itself
a sequel to World War I, known as the Cold War.
Finally, if World War II settled anything, it was the rise to preeminence of the two
great superpowers who would be the principal combatants in the Cold War, one non-European,
the United States, and the other non-Western, the Soviet Union.
In other words, for the first time in 500 years, the fate of Western Europe would not
lie in the hands of Western Europeans, and that would take some adjustment.
Obviously, the end of World War II left much unfinished business for civilization.
Much of Europe, China, and Japan were devastated.
Whole cities had been leveled by successive bombing campaigns.
The Soviet Union alone lost 70,000 villages.
Armies of refugees found themselves displaced.
12 million Germans, for example, fled westward to escape the Red Army.
Many, most notably the Dutch, faced starvation.
Local government broke down as the defeated regimes crumbled.
So the Allies turned from occupiers to relief workers, administrators, and judges.
Germany was divided into four zones, corresponding to the British, the French, the Americans,
and the Russians.
What was left of Berlin within the Soviet zone was also divided into four.
The highest level Nazis were put on trial at Nuremberg for crimes against humanity.
Now in the hindsight of popular opinion, the Nuremberg trials seemed a no-brainer, a slam
dunk for common sense justice.
But they were controversial at the time.
Never before had the leaders of a sovereign state been put on trial for their actions
while in power.
That is, the Nuremberg trials violated the idea of national sovereignty, for which,
in other respects, the war had been fought.
If the leaders of Germany could be put on trial for their actions, why not those of
other nations by some future victor?
What for example, if communism ever won, could Churchill and Truman be put on trial as aiders
and abetters of capitalist oppression?
What about the fact that both sides set about, deliberately, to kill innocent civilians in
their respective bombing campaigns and unrestricted submarine warfare?
In a strange irony of history, Admiral Dernitz, Hitler's U-boat chief, was saved from the
hangman because Admiral Chester Nimitz of the United States testified that the U.S.
too had pursued unrestricted submarine warfare.
Now despite these objections, it was felt that Nazi crimes were so blatant, so heinous
and widespread that the trials were justified.
A panel of high-level judges representing all the major victorious powers was named.
Human and defense counsel were appointed by the allies.
And in the most famous trials, about two dozen high-level Nazis, including Rudolf Hess, Hitler's
original second in command, Hermann Gehring, Hitler's first Gestapo, and later Luftwaffe
chief, Joachim von Ribbentrop, his foreign minister, Wilhelm Keitel, his army chief,
Eric Rader, the architect of his navy, Albert Speer, his munitions minister, were indicted
on October 18, 1945, for crimes against humanity.
Specifically, the deliberate instigation of wars, genocide, the murder and enslavement
and mistreatment of political opponents, religious groups, prisoners of war, and inhabitants
of occupied countries.
Albert Speer pled not guilty, arguing that Ordnung ist Ordnung.
That is, orders are orders.
They were just following orders.
It was really all Hitler's fault.
This defense has been used again and again, sometimes effectively, by soldiers accused
of atrocities.
But it was rejected in 1946 in circumstances where defendants were thought to have had a
moral choice.
Most defendants were sentenced to hang.
Some, like Darnits and Speer, received prison sentences.
Famously, Gehring cheated the hangman by taking poison before the execution of the others
on October 16, 1946.
Subsequently, 10 other trials were held of about 185 other individuals.
Doctors who'd performed medical experiments on prisoners, judges who'd misused the law
to commit murder and other crimes, industrialists who'd benefited from the forced labor program,
SS officials in charge of concentration camps or mass exterminations in occupied territories,
and other military and civilian officials.
Now, 185, you'll note that this was but a tiny fraction of all those people who must
have taken part in the horrors of the Nazi regime.
We'll see why that number is so small in a minute.
Similar trials took place in Japan in 1946 through 1948, which was given a new constitutional
monarchy by General Douglas MacArthur.
There were other, numerous other tribunals, often military, informally occupied countries,
and Nazi war criminals continued to be hunted down right up to the turn of the 21st century.
Most famously, Adolf Eichmann, architect of the Holocaust, captured by Israeli agents
in 1960, tried and executed two years later.
But many others, some as highly placed as Josef Mengele, the notorious physician known
as the Angel of Death, who performed hideous experiments on concentration camp victims,
escaped, or were smuggled out of the country.
Often to South America, where authoritarian regimes found old Nazis congenial and even
useful as they established their militaries.
Others were denazified by the Western Allies and quietly allowed to resume their lives
in Germany, and sometimes even their old responsibilities.
Why?
Well, in the eyes of the Western Allied occupiers, the United Kingdom, the United States and France,
their administrative competence and their conservative mindset and support were needed
to run the war-torn country and to keep it from going communist.
High-level Nazi scientists like the V-2 specialist Werner von Braun were cherry-picked by both
sides in the hope of giving a boost to their weapons programs.
von Braun was at once the father of Hitler's murderous V-2 rocket, as well as of the U.S.
space program and its ballistic missile program.
This mass rehabilitation of ex-Nazis made it very difficult for Holocaust victims to
achieve justice in later years.
On the other hand, it must be said that, under Allied tutelage, the German people did a far
better job of confronting their past than have other former Axis countries or their
collaborators like Austria and Vichy France.
Admittedly, in the Soviet-occupied zone, Nazism was portrayed as a screen for right-wing
capitalist oppression.
It wasn't so much portrayed as a specifically German crime, but in the Western zones, the
Allied occupying powers mounted an anti-Nazi propaganda campaign censoring literature and
newspapers.
German citizens were relentlessly taught the evils of Nazism, authoritarianism and militarism.
German schoolchildren were shown endless films of the camps.
German law forbids the use of the swastika even on model airplane kets, as well as racially
or religiously inflammatory words.
You'll note here the repudiation of Western values of free speech and historical accuracy
to defend other Western values.
Beginning with the Luxembourg Agreement of 1952, the West German government provided financial
aid to Israel, compensation and restitution to Holocaust victims.
But German corporations have only reluctantly acknowledged their activities in the war and
paid compensation to victims, and of course neo-Nazi groups still live in Germany.
Now, as indicated above, the major geopolitical reason for the gentle treatment of some former
Nazis was concerned about which way Germany would go in the Cold War.
World War II destroyed the old balance of power.
Formerly great empires, especially Britain, were exhausted.
This left two major players in the world, the U.S. and the USSR.
At the end of 1945, 50 nations signed the UN Charter in San Francisco.
But even as the document was being signed, tensions were emerging in the victorious alliance.
Following the war, these two great powers began to view each other with suspicion, even paranoia.
The American case went like this.
As was well known, Marxism-Leninism calls for the violent overthrow of capitalist regimes
around the world and their replacement by secular communist states.
At the end of the war, the Soviets occupied most of Eastern Europe, repudiating democratic
governments in exile, like Poland, largely refusing to hold free elections, installing
puppet communist governments.
In a famous speech delivered in Hannibal, Missouri on the 5th of March, 1946, Winston
Churchill warned from Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, and Iron Curtain
has descended across the continent.
Behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern Europe,
Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Bucharest, and Sofia.
All these famous cities and the populations around them lie in what I must call the Soviet
Sphere, and all are subject to a very high and in some cases increasing measure of control
from Moscow.
The Communist parties have been raised to preeminence and power far beyond their numbers
and are seeking everywhere to obtain totalitarian control.
Whatever conclusions may be drawn from these facts and facts they are, this is certainly
not the liberated Europe we fought to build up, nor is it one which contains the essentials
of permanent peace.
Of course it sounded better when Churchill delivered it.
The Western powers quite naturally feared that the Soviets had designs on the rest of Europe
to continue the speech.
In a great number of countries, far from the Russian frontiers and throughout the world,
Communist fifth columns work in complete unity and absolute obedience to the directions they
receive from the Communist center.
They constitute a growing challenge and peril to Christian civilization.
After the fall of China to communism in 1949, the West felt threatened in both hemispheres
by two vast Communist powers ready to sponsor international revolution.
But from the Soviet view it was the Americans, the West, and Western style capitalism that
surrounded the Soviet Union.
There was the American nuclear threat.
Only they had the bomb and they'd made very clear that they were prepared to use it.
Of course they'd used it twice before.
There was American anti-Communist political rhetoric culminating in the Truman Doctrine
articulated by Secretary of State Dean Atchison that the U.S. would support, quote, free peoples
who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.
Which the Kremlin took to mean them.
There was the announcement of the European Recovery Program, the Marshall Plan, in 1947,
which looked to the Soviets like a deliberate attempt to bribe Western Europe and attach
it to the United States.
Now eventually some $12 billion in food and reconstruction money poured into Europe.
This is rightly portrayed in the United States as an unprecedented act of generosity.
But it was also part of a geopolitical economic strategy.
American manufacturers needed a revitalized Europe as a market for their goods.
A devastated Europe did American industry no good.
The British and American governments worried that a devastated Europe would be ripe for
communist revolution or conquest.
The Soviets therefore feared that the Marshall Plan would make Europe into a dependent colony
of the American Economic Empire.
Listen to Andrei Zadanov, Leningrad Party Boss on American Aid.
With a view to consolidating America's monopoly position in the markets gained as a result
of the disappearance of her two biggest competitors, Germany and Japan, and the weakening of her
capitalist partners, Great Britain and France, the new course of the United States' policy
envisages a broad program of military, economic and political measures designed to establish
the United States' political and economic domination in all the countries marked out
for American expansion.
To reduce these countries to the status of satellites of the United States and to set
up regimes within them which would eliminate all obstacles on the part of labor and democratic
movement to the exploitation of these countries by American capital.
The United States is now endeavoring to extend this line of policy not only to its enemies
in the war and to neutral countries, but in an increasing degree to its wartime allies.
Of course that sounds a lot better if delivered in a Russian accent.
The Soviets did impose communist rule on Romania and Bulgaria in 1945, but remember that those
countries had been allied with Nazi Germany and invaded the Soviet Union under fascist
rule.
They did repudiate the Polish government in exile and they fixed the elections of 1945-46,
but they did that in part because that government was committed to hanging onto territory taken
from Russia in the wars of 1919-20, so this is a very, very old grudge.
Elsewhere, Stalin initially tolerated coalition governments and multi-party states in his
zone of influence right after the war.
It was only after Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland expressed interest in participating
in the Marshall Plan that the real crackdown began in 1947-48.
Christian Democrat and Socialist parties were banned, promised elections were canceled,
the Soviets installed pro-Russian communist regimes governed by parties answerable to
Moscow in occupied East Germany, Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and the Baltic
States.
Stalin's ultimate idea does not seem to have been world domination.
He didn't show much interest in non-European communist movements, nor did he take much
interest in the communist opposition even in Greece.
Rather, what he wanted was a buffer of friendly powers against the West.
Remember, the Soviets had been invaded by Western powers in 1919, the United States,
the United Kingdom as well as Japan.
In 1941, Germany.
They lost over 20 million citizens in the Great Patriotic War.
With that horrendous loss of life, the Soviets were determined to maintain friendly regimes
in Eastern Europe as a bulwark against a revitalized, independent Germany.
So they crushed a reform movement in Hungary in 1956 with tremendous loss of life.
They did the same in Czechoslovakia in 1968.
Now in fact, as we're going to see, far from providing greater security, the bulwark of
Eastern European states actually overextended the Soviets.
It gave them additional, expensive and unpopular military and political commitments that would
eventually go far to overwhelm them.
Overall, it seems fair to say that neither side wanted to rule the entire world, but
that each side felt that the other side did.
That is, its fundamental philosophical, political, social and economic worldview was
invalid, dangerous and oppressive to humanity.
It seems fair to say that these two worldviews were engaged in a titanic global struggle
and that sooner or later one of them would win.
The key period of mutual misunderstanding and paranoid reaction seems to have been 1947-1948.
How did we get into this place?
It was 1947-48.
In 1947, a conservative Greek monarchy supported by the British was under attack by communist
insurgents.
The British, still recovering from the war, stepped away.
The Americans stepped in with $400 million in aid, secured by telling Congress that this
was another Soviet plot.
In fact, it was a Yugoslav plot.
The Soviets had opposed it.
But the most important source of tension was Germany.
In May of 1947, the United States, the United Kingdom and later France fused their German
zones of occupation into an economic union.
The Americans in particular were determined that Western Germany be firmly in the Western
column, as opposed to a non-aligned but united Germany.
In May of 1952, Stalin proposed four power talks about Germany.
He wanted to prevent a revitalized Germany from moving into that Western column.
He wanted an unattached Germany, or even better, one attached to him.
Those talks were rejected by the West.
In June of 1947, as we have seen, the Americans proposed the European Recovery Program, the
Marshall Plan.
In February of 1948, the Soviets authorized a communist coup in Czechoslovakia in response
to check interest in the Marshall Plan.
At this point, the Western Allies signed the Brussels Defense Pact, which is a precursor
to NATO.
The Russians responded by leaving the Allied Control Council for German Affairs in Berlin.
In March of 1948, talks began in London, boycotted by the Soviets, to create a West
German state.
Its formation was announced in June, with its own currency.
When the Allies tried to introduce that currency to Berlin, which, remember, was an island
within the Soviet zone, the Soviets closed off access to the city.
The United States responded with the Berlin Airlift, which provided 8,000 tons of provisions
a day, for 324 days.
By 1949, the nations of Western Europe had joined the United States in a defensive alliance
called NATO.
Those in the Soviet bloc formed the Warsaw Pact in 1955.
Spies on both sides infiltrated each other's camps through the 1950s, British intelligence
was pretty thoroughly compromised, and of course, the McCarthy hearings were a sign
of charges that the American intelligence and military were also compromised, and in
fact, recent research suggests that some of that evidence was true, but that it was exaggerated
and applied with a broad brush.
Western fears that the vast Red Army, 200 divisions would roll across Europe, were tempered
by the fact that the Americans had a working atomic bomb.
Western strategy was to use the bomb, if necessary, to hold back the Red Army, nuclear weapons
holding back conventional.
But in 1949, the Soviets tested their first atomic bomb.
By the early 1950s, both sides had developed hydrogen bombs and maintained vast air forces
to deliver them to their enemies.
The British and French also developed nuclear arsenals in the 50s, the Chinese in the 60s.
By the late 1950s, the bombers were superseded by intercontinental ballistic missiles, capable
of being launched from land or sea.
As any one of these weapons could devastate an entire city, it soon became clear that
the use of even one of them would bring an overwhelming response.
Thus was born mad, mutually assured destruction.
Both sides were fully aware that the use of nuclear weapons would bring annihilation,
and to some extent, to some extent, that brought both sides to the table.
The Soviets pledged never to provoke such an attack by a first strike.
But the Americans retained first strike capability because they saw this as the only counterweight
to the size of the Red Army.
But in the 1960s, the U.S. President Kennedy and the Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed
to a ban on the testing of nuclear weapons, and this was followed by a series of non-proliferation
treaties to prevent these weapons falling into yet more hands.
So as with the arms race of the late 19th century, both sides were spending enormous
amounts of national treasure on the building of weapons that could not be used, hence the
term Cold War.
Now, in fact, the demise of European empires gave the principles the opportunity to fight
each other by proxy, as each side tried to convert the world to its way of life.
Let's talk about what happened to the empires, the great European empires, after World War
II.
World War II was their death now.
The crushing defeats experienced by the British, the French, and the Americans between 1939
and 1942 had destroyed for many subject peoples the myth of white invincibility.
Tied up in Europe, the great European powers had virtually conceded their empires to the
enemy.
The Japanese in particular claimed that theirs was a war to liberate Asia and the Pacific
from Western conquerors, and to establish a greater East Asia co-prosperity sphere.
Of course, what they really established was a far more brutal conquest and occupation.
Still, Japan did often give local elites greater responsibility than Westerners had done, and
this later paved the way for independence movements.
The great nations of Europe emerged from the war, exhausted, in no position to stand in
the way of such independence movements.
In many cases, they'd enlisted colonial peoples in the fight against the Axis by promising
to visit the issue of independence after the war.
In fact, the Atlantic Charter of 1941 specifically called for the right of national self-determination.
Churchill said that didn't apply to the British Empire, but Roosevelt and the Americans insisted
that it did.
Moreover, by educating native elites of places like Oxford, the colonial powers had exposed
them to the great intellectual heritage of the West.
And what did that intellectual heritage emphasize?
Freedom, equality, human rights, and national self-determination.
If you want to keep people in bondage, don't hand them lock.
Or other native peoples, communism, with its cry for revolution, seemed a better route
to national self-determination.
Now in response, the British, though very reluctant, were more likely to face facts
than the French or the Dutch.
It began in 1947 with the withdrawal of Great Britain from India.
By the 1960s, most British colonies had achieved independence, often peacefully, and those colonies
willingly participated in a commonwealth united by weak ties to the United Kingdom.
In contrast, the French tried to hold on to their colonies, leading to bloody insurrections
in Vietnam between 1946 and 54, and Algiers from 1954 to 61.
Now there was no practical reason for this.
Neither Algeria nor Vietnam were all that important to the French economy.
Instead, because of the humiliations of World War II, nearly every shade of political opinion
in France argued that France needed to retain these empires as some way of holding on to
national greatness.
This is one of the silliest reasons for a national policy I've ever heard.
Similarly, the Dutch tried to retain Indonesia.
After a bloody insurrection, independence was finally achieved in 1949.
The Dutch held on through 12 more years of bloodshed in western New Guinea.
Generally, European economic interests remained, causing some historians to argue that European
political hegemony, the empires, was replaced by economic dominance and trade and high finance
remaining after the flag had gone, in effect.
Even where decolonialization was accepted by the colonizing country, bloodshed often
broke out among native populations.
Colonial elites were often violently overthrown, old tribal loyalties resurfaced, and there
was conflict between Democrats and Communists, and that brings us back to the Cold War.
The two superpowers in China, locked in what they saw as a worldwide struggle, became entangled
in areas far from home in an attempt to sway the new regimes to one side or the other.
The process began in Korea in the early 1950s when United Nations forces opposed a Chinese-backed
North Korean invasion of the South.
It continued in the 1950s and 60s as the United States and Australia took over for the French
in opposing a communist nationalist movement in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos.
In May 1950, the Americans began to assist the French in Vietnam.
By 1952, they were footing half the bills for the French defense effort, and of course,
by the mid-1960s, the United States had taken over.
Note that it became American policy to oppose revolution, to oppose nationalist movements,
to oppose even democracy where there was a chance the country might go communist.
During the 50s, 60s, 70s, and 80s, the U.S. often backed ruthless murderous dictators
– Franco and Salazar in Spain and Portugal, Pinochet, Trujillo and the Somozes in Central
and South America, Marcos in the Philippines, the Shah in Iran – as long as they were
not communists.
Similar proxy fights, often backed by the American CIA or the Soviet KGB, were fought
all through the 50s and 60s in South America, Africa, and the Middle East.
Europe's relative powerlessness in all of this was demonstrated in 1956.
In that year, President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt nationalized the Suez Company and
Canal, previously owned by the British and the French.
A British-French-Israeli coalition attacked Egypt and seized the Sinai Peninsula, the
Gaza Strip, and Port Said.
But the U.S. refused to support its former allies in this war, and it joined the USSR
in seeking UN condemnation of the aggression.
As a result, the British, the French and Israelis were forced to back down and withdraw, causing
great national humiliation in Britain and France especially.
We all remember in 2003 when many Americans were angry at the French for failing to support
their old ally, but we did exactly the same thing in 1956, and with good reason.
Suez was a milestone, for it proved that the old days of European hegemony were over.
