Lecture 46 Rebuilding Europe, 1945 to 1985.
In the last lecture, we examined the international situation of Europe in the decades after World
War II.
In this lecture, we turned to its internal, domestic situation.
But even here, the Cold War and its division of Europe into two rival camps was the big
story, from internal politics to the standard of living that people enjoyed.
Once again, we must begin with a situation at the end of the war.
The internal situation of Europe at the end of World War II was dire.
Germany and much of Eastern Europe were devastated.
Nearly every country in Europe had to re-establish a working government.
Factories were in a shambles, factories were destroyed, farmland devastated, livestock
dead.
It didn't help that the winter of 1946-47 was the coldest in 50 years.
Millions of refugees flooded roads and detention camps, as did demobilized or surrendered soldiers.
Former prisoners, concentration camp victims and Axis soldiers spent months, even years,
in such camps.
There was a mass emigration of millions of Germans who fled East Prussia, now Poland,
ahead of the Red Army, or were expelled from the Sudetenland and other areas occupied by
the Reich.
In other words, instead of borders being redrawn to fit ethnic groups, ethnic groups now fled
behind borders where they were no longer in the minority.
Jews, many from families broken by the Holocaust, tried to flee to Palestine or America.
The British, concerned about Arab reaction, mainly because of oil, tried to stem the flood
to Palestine by interdicting ships and interning refugees in camps over American protests.
By 1948, radical Jewish terrorism drove the British out of Palestine, and the United Nations
offered a plan to divide the region into two states, Israel for Jews, Jordan for Palestinians,
with Jerusalem as an international city.
The Arab rejection of this plan resulted in a bloody war for Israel's independence between
1948 and 1949, and the displacement of over 700,000 Arabs, laying the ground for the next
half century of resentment and bloodshed.
Finally, on a happier note, war brides traveled to the United Kingdom and the United States.
Those who stayed in Europe built socialist states.
Socialism became the order of the day in both East and West, but only in the later latter
case was it embraced by choice.
Now as we've seen, after a brief flirtation with pluralism, the Soviets forced satellite
states in Eastern Europe to establish communist regimes after the war.
Economic policy for the whole bloc was to be coordinated by the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance, COMICON.
In fact, the Soviets retarded economic development by insisting that satellites pay massive reparations,
70 billion marks alone from East Germany.
They also forced Eastern bloc countries to give the USSR preferential trade deals in return
for oil and other raw materials.
The new regimes confiscated farms and businesses and thereby crushed whatever entrepreneurial
spirit had survived the war.
They established welfare states, providing minimal levels of health care and education,
as well as guaranteeing full employment for their citizens.
Following on the heels of World War II, this created a sense of dependence on the state
that became almost an article of faith in the East, but also a countervailing sense
of powerlessness and cynicism towards it.
That cynicism was increased by the fact that the Eastern bloc's standards of living fell
behind that, those of Western Europe.
In Western Europe, the democracies also embraced socialism, and this has always been difficult
for Americans to understand, especially in the case of Britain, which tossed out its
great war leader Winston Churchill in favor of a labor government headed by the relatively
colorless Clement Attlee.
But remember that the industrial nations of Western Europe had a long history of wide
disparities of wealth.
Remember that in European eyes, free market capitalism had brought the depression, while
the state had planned the economies that won the war.
In fact, given the scale of devastation after the war, it was widely felt that only a massive
government effort could put Europeans back on their feet.
Moreover, the war had added new sacrifices, but also a sense of corporate action.
British propaganda especially emphasized the idea that we're all in this together, regardless
of class.
How could the nations of Western Europe go back to societies of hierarchy and privilege?
Moreover, in many countries, the right conservative parties, the Church, had been discredited
by their willingness to cooperate with the Nazis.
That left the field to Socialist and Christian Democratic parties, and so.
In Britain, in France, in Italy, etc., the electorate voted overwhelmingly in 1945-47
to return governments that would plan economies, nationalize industry, subsidize healthcare,
education, etc., providing government housing to replace what had been bombed during the
war.
In France, women were finally given the vote.
Now building the welfare state was made difficult by the fact that goods were in short supply.
Rationing continued in some European countries into the early 1950s.
Parisians got three more slices of bread in 1946 than they had under the Nazis in 1942.
The wartime black market continued to flourish.
Most European currencies were so weak against the dollar that it was hard to buy food and
goods from America.
After the war, the British pound fell in 1947 from being worth $4.03 to $2.80.
But thanks in part to the Marshall Plan and rearmament, prosperity gradually returned to
Western Europe in the 50s and the 60s.
West Germany in particular recovered under the leadership of Conrad Adenauer, 1946-63,
and Ludwig Erhard, 1963-66, both veteran anti-Nazis committed to the American alliance.
As we've seen, the West German government and people made a serious attempt to confront
the Nazi past.
At the same time, it was often old pre-war companies, many of them implicated in Hitler's
slave labor system, that did best in the post-war economy.
Overall, West German industry re-assumed a leadership position in Europe under Erhard's
social market economy, in which the government would intervene to produce high growth, low
inflation, high employment, good working conditions, and social welfare services.
All of this was to be paid for by high taxes.
Most other Western European governments built on similar principles.
The presence of large numbers of U.S. troops and bases in Europe, reaffirmed by the Vandenberg
resolution of 1948, held the apparent Soviet threat at bay, and allowed the governments
of Western Europe to keep defense expenditures low so they could spend the money on social
programs.
That will be an issue later.
Finally, Western European states began to cooperate for their mutual economic benefit.
This started with a Marshall Plan.
The Americans insisted that the funds be funneled through an international organization for
European economic cooperation.
In 1951, the French Foreign Minister, Robert Schumann, proposed the formation of the European
Coal and Steel Community, the ECSC, to pool coal and steel resources.
This included France, West Germany, Italy, and the Low Countries.
Now Schumann was the perfect man to suggest greater cooperation.
He'd been born in Luxembourg, he grew up in Lorraine, which you'll remember was disputed
territory between France and Germany.
He'd actually served in the German army in World War I and in the French resistance
in World War II.
The French were worried about American economic dominance, but they also intended that the
mutual economic dependence with West Germany would make war impossible.
These two countries rely so much on each other that war would no longer be practical or desirable.
In 1957, the Treaty of Rome established the European Economic Community, or the Common
Market, a free trade area which also fostered cross-border cooperation among its six initial
members, France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.
Charles de Gaulle, French Premier and President from 1958 to 69, was one of the principal
architects of the EEC.
He had a vision of a loose federated Europe stretching from Russia to the Atlantic Ocean
independent of the superpowers.
His immediate goal was reminiscent of Napoleon's, it was to marshal European economic power
against the tide of American financial and commercial might.
This explains why in 1963, the French vetoed British entry into the EEC, on the one hand,
they were worried about Britain's economic reliance on its former colonies in the Commonwealth,
but they were also worried about its cozy relationship with the U.S.
At the same time that de Gaulle wanted a stronger Europe, he also wanted something contradictory.
He wanted to maintain French independence.
In 1966, he pressured the EEC to reaffirm national sovereignty, in other words, no nation
within the community would have to do something they didn't want to do if they didn't want
to do it.
He also took French forces out of NATO, out of the NATO command structure, and he developed
France's own nuclear deterrent, Le Force de Frappe.
He reached out to the Soviet Union and China.
Now all of this was often perceived on our side of the Atlantic as anti-American, but
de Gaulle would have said that he was just trying to define a place where a mid-level
power like France could matter.
In fact, in most of the crises of the Cold War, for example the Cuban Missile Crisis,
de Gaulle gave the United States staunch support.
In 1967, the Common Market joined with the European Steel and Coal Community and the
European Atomic Energy Commission to form the European Community, or the EC.
Throughout the 70s and 80s, the EC concentrated on economic integration and continued to add
members.
It finally added the United Kingdom in 1973, along with Denmark and Ireland, Greece, Spain,
and Portugal joined in the early to mid-1980s.
In 1979, it established an EC parliament, and by the 1970s, the EC was the world's largest
trading unit.
Its total population and GNP had now equaled the United States and surpassed both Japan
and the USSR.
During this time, the material conditions of life improved, if not steadily, in Western
Europe.
Up to 1973, real wages outstripped inflation.
People began to feel that they could spend money on goods again, in part because the
state was taking care of their retirement needs.
There was no need to save, so they bought stuff.
For example, in 1947, there were 14,000 British TVs licensed, in Britain you've got to get
a license from the government to own a TV, that's how they paid for the BBC.
By 1968, that number was 13 million.
Even poor southern countries, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Turkey, benefited by exporting unemployed
workers to the north.
They found work, they sent money home.
By the early 1970s, the US was in trade deficit to Europe, $10 billion, and had to devaluate
its currency.
But European economies were staggered by the oil crisis of 1973, and by recession in the
early 1980s.
European production costs were being undercut in Asia and Latin America.
European steel and auto manufacture were driven off the world market.
European industries like coal had to be shut down, and economists began to talk of post-industrialization.
European unemployment rose to 10.3% in 1984, 9.1% in West Germany, 12.6% in the United
Kingdom, and 17.5% in Spain.
Now of course unemployment meant that people were more dependent on government social welfare
than ever before, but European governments could no longer afford to spend sometimes
one quarter of their revenue on those programs.
That had two effects.
First, a hardening of attitudes towards immigrants and guest workers, and secondly, governments
on the right and the left in Western Europe began to cut social programs.
In the meantime, by the early 1970s, the Western and communist powers sought to thaw the Cold
War in a process called détente.
In 1972, U.S. President Richard Nixon opened relations with China and signed an anti-ballistic
missile treaty with the Brezhnev government in the Soviet Union.
Subsequently, the superpowers considered further limiting the number of nuclear weapons at
the salt talks.
But this moment of sanity fell apart at the end of the 70s with the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan in support of a communist regime in Kabul in December of 1979.
There are the Soviets again worried about their frontiers, worried about having friendly
buffer states.
Both sides stepped up development and deployment of medium-range ballistic missiles.
Medium-range ballistic missiles are targeted for Europe and within Europe.
Almost simultaneously beginning around 1980, the Western democracies experienced a shift
to conservative social and economic policy, in effect, classical liberalism, under Margaret
Thatcher in the United Kingdom, Ronald Reagan in the United States, and Helmut Kohl in West
Germany.
To some extent, this was a reaction to the reheated Cold War after 1979, but it also
marked a serious questioning of the sustainability of the welfare state in the wake of the current
recession.
In Thatcher's Britain especially, national transportation and utility companies were
privatized, failing industries like Kohl were allowed to die, and government spending
and benefits were cut.
This resulted, first, in a leaner and meaner economy, one that was more responsive to
current economic trends, and one which also generated clear winners and losers.
Inflation fell from 10 to 5 percent a year, and the upper and middle classes in Great
Britain prospered.
But the immediate price for workers in heavy industry and towns dependent on those industries
was terrible.
Unemployment rose under Thatcher in Britain to 14 percent.
In some parts of Scotland and the north of England, it was much higher.
The drastic cuts were enacted in Kohl's Germany and Mitterrand's France.
Everywhere unemployment bred discontent.
In the 1960s and 70s, radical terrorist groups tended to be leftists and separatists.
Beginning in 1968, Basque nationalists have waged a campaign for independence from Spain.
Also in 1968, the Troubles erupted in Northern Ireland, and a revived Irish Republican Army
launched a terror campaign to drive the British out.
Italy's Red Brigades and West Germany's Badr-Meinhof gang favored communism and or
the establishment of a Palestinian state.
These last were eventually broken up by infiltration and mass arrests.
In the 1980s and 90s, such groups tended to come from the right.
They generally tapped disaffected and unemployed youth and resentment of immigrant workers.
So they tended to be xenophobic, racist, and anti-EC.
Neo-Nazis sometimes identified as skinheads, but that's a little unfair.
Skinheads come in all political persuasions.
Neo-Nazis in Germany and Austria engaged in violence.
But others sought to win at the ballot box, and that's interesting.
That's an important change from the fascist parties of the 30s that denounced democracy.
These parties are trying to work and win within a democratic system.
Examples would be the National Front and the United Kingdom, which got 20% of the vote
in 1974, and Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front in France, which gained 14% of the vote
in 1988.
Now, in a pleasant irony, it was in the 70s and 80s, just as these parties were growing
in popularity, that the last fascist regimes in the West, Spain and Portugal, finally embraced
democracy.
Cultural change was made both possible and inevitable by the material conditions created
in post-war Europe.
The war in the Holocaust, combined with a historical record of state churches, further
weakened the hold of institutional religion on people's lives.
For example, in 1970, Italian women received the right to divorce.
In 1978, the right to an abortion, both over the objections of the Roman Catholic Church.
However, Christianity successfully divorced itself from fascism and began to influence
Christian democratic parties towards social justice.
The Second Vatican Council, called by Pope John XXIII in 1962, opened the windows of
the Catholic Church, leading to vernacular liturgy, greater lay participation, and ecumenical
outreach to Protestants, Jews, Muslims, and people of other faiths.
Booming scientific discoveries seemed to offer an alternative worldview to the remnants of
the old Great Chain of Being, better nutrition and the discovery of vaccines for diseases
like polio increased life expectancy.
Following the launching of the first satellite, Sputnik, in 1957, the Soviets and the West
engaged in expensive scientific competition, culminating in the space race to the moon,
won by the United States in 1969.
This period also saw old products like automobiles and telephones get better in the introduction
of new ones like the personal computer.
But the fear of nuclear threat produced fatalism and cynicism and a sense of alienation and
powerlessness that was far stronger in Europe among many people than it was in the United
States.
Existentialism, first associated with the philosopher Soren Kierkegaard, emphasized
that man was alone in the world, free but alienated from society.
In philosophy, the movement was led by Jean-Paul Sartre in literature by Albert Camus.
History to it were structuralist and deconstructionist movements in academia, which questioned the
traditional primacy of empirical fact.
Feminism increasingly questioned old gender roles, and here the key figure in book is
Simone de Beauvoir's The Second Sex of 1953, which argued that such roles were social constructs
and that women had, in good existentialist fashion, she and Sartre were lovers, a choice
to become whatever they wanted.
Europe experienced a continuing sexual revolution, while mass culture was manufactured in the
West by multinational companies, a classic example would be EMI and the Beatles.
In the East, the state strictly controlled the arts.
In all Western European countries, but especially France, there was a reaction against American
culture, or at least in favor of vernacular culture, beginning in the 1960s.
The generation that grew up thinking of Americans as allies and liberators began to give way,
by the 1980s, to one which saw them as just another imperialist power.
After the war, Europeans worried that their culture stood in the shadows of America.
Some European countries actually imposed quotas for cultural products, like, for example,
American films.
In fact, it's been in films, especially that Europeans have continued to blaze trails,
when merely has to name the directors Federico Fellini, Vittorio De Sica, Luciano Viscanti,
Jean-Luc Godard, Louis Bonuel, Ingmar Bergman, Roman Polanski.
In the 1960s, a growing youth culture, particularly among university students, produced a counterculture
that questioned old assumptions about nationalism, patriotism.
Above all, Europeans were tired of living between two giants, some would say bullies,
and under constant nuclear threat.
Arnold Toynbee, a wittly complaint of annihilation without representation.
The Vietnam War, American involvement in Central and South America, and the Middle East in
the 1960s and 70s and 80s, caused many Europeans to see American foreign policy as essentially
self-serving and hypocritical.
In 1968, widespread student and worker protests erupted in France.
By late May, 10 million were on strike.
In the 1980s, Greenpeace and various national green parties and other groups demanded the
closure of American bases and the departure of troops, the unilateral reduction of nuclear
arms, and the rejection in the early 1980s of cruise missiles.
Cruise missiles were smaller, mobile missiles designed to fly under radar and designed for
tactical operations in Europe, and that frightened Europeans.
It was one thing to have missiles at sea, or in the United States, it was quite another
to have these missiles being driven around your own country and to know what they were
going to be used for.
But in fact, it would be actions taken behind the Iron Curtain and not in the West, which
would eventually ease nuclear tensions and end the Cold War.
The first hints of change in the Soviet Union came, I suppose, after the death of Stalin
in 1953, and in particular with Nikita Khrushchev's famous secret speech of 1956 in which he
attacked Stalin and his cult of personality.
Nikita Khrushchev, General Secretary from 1953 and Soviet Premier from 1958 to 1964,
was a bundle of contradictions.
He loosened censorship somewhat, but he could be brutal if he saw Soviet hegemony threatened.
It was he who crushed a Hungarian attempt to create a more open society by sending in
the tanks in 1956.
The death toll has been put as high as 20,000, actually I've seen higher figures.
He promised to surpass the West and the Western standard of living by 1980, but in reality
the Soviet economy continued to perform miserably, in part because of pet, harebrained agricultural
schemes that never seemed to pay off, but did leave ecological disaster in their wake.
He alternated between confrontation with the West, it was Khrushchev who built the Berlin
Wall, he allied with Syria and Egypt and India, he placed missiles in Cuba, and peaceful coexistence
with it.
Khrushchev stood down from Cuba in 1962.
He worked at a test ban treaty with President Kennedy in 1963.
Khrushchev seems to have believed genuinely that communism would still triumph, but through
superior economic, scientific, and cultural performance, not through war, and that, I
think we can agree, is some progress.
However, in October 1964, Nikita Khrushchev was overthrown in a coup by hardliners led
by Leonid Brezhnev.
At home and in satellite countries, Brezhnev clamped down ruthlessly on criticism and dissenters,
famously in 1968 he put down the Prague Spring, an attempt to give socialism a human face
as the phrase went in Czechoslovakia.
It's true that in the 70s he pursued détente with the West, but he abandoned it at the
end of the decade for his Afghani adventure.
The Soviet Union was in fact beginning to lose its grip, as satellite countries began
to pursue their own way to the communist dream.
Other eastern bloc economies had found ways to trade with the West and were leaving the
Soviets behind.
In the Soviet Union, one out of 46 citizens had a car, but East Germany in Czechoslovakia
the figure was between 1 and 8 and 1 and 9.
In West Germany or the United Kingdom it was 1 and 4.
Increasingly, neither Bucharest nor Belgrade listened to Moscow anymore.
Now admittedly, the Romanian dictator, Nicholas Ceausescu, was a megalomaniacal autocrat who
imposed deliberate food and fuel shortages on his own people to keep them in line.
Just to give you one example of the wisdom of his policies, he decreed that Romanian
apartments were to be kept at 45 degrees Fahrenheit.
Albania aligned with China.
Poland had been forced to accommodate itself with the Roman Catholic Church.
The point of all this is that the iron curtain was looking less solid.
It was tearing in the 1970s and early 80s.
Above all, the Soviet economy stagnated.
Planning merely destroyed local initiative.
Corruption, cynicism and alcoholism permeated the system.
There's a famous Soviet joke.
We pretend to work and they pretend to pay us.
I guess it's just not a Soviet joke.
Ecological disasters grew frequent and indeed average life expectancy actually fell in the
Soviet Union during the 70s from 66 to 63.
Young people listened to Western radio and bought jeans on the black market.
Dissidents like Andrey Sakharov and Elena Bonner published calls for openness in Summysdott,
unofficial publications that were circulated in the underground.
By the time of Brezhnev's death in 1982, it was evident to some in high Soviet circles
that repressive policies at home and aggressive confrontation of the U.S. abroad were not sustainable.
In particular, the failure to defeat the Muslim insurgents in Afghanistan showed chinks in
the Soviet military system.
Simultaneously in the 1980s, the Reagan defense buildup put increasing pressure on the Soviets
to keep up.
Over the objections of U.S. liberals who wanted a more conciliatory policy, President Reagan
proposed and Congress authorized massive military spending over $3 trillion in the
course of the 80s.
This included deployment of new types of missiles, the expansion of the Navy to 600 ships, and
research on the Strategic Defense Initiative, SDI, a plan to create a shield of anti-missile
devices around the United States and its allies, which would have made a first strike impossible.
Now, in fact, President Reagan's public announcement of 23 March 1983 was hopelessly premature.
The science and technology simply did not exist, but the Soviets didn't know that.
SDI or Star Wars, as it was dubbed in the press, frightened Soviet leaders.
If the U.S. could be protected from a first strike, then MAD was no longer operable.
To the paranoid Kremlin mind, that meant that the U.S. might very well be tempted to launch
a preemptive strike of its own.
President Reagan's bold rhetoric added to the sense of growing tension.
In an address to the National Association of Realtors on 28 March 1982, referring to
the Marxist view of history, he opined,
It is the Soviet Union that runs against the tide of history.
The march of freedom and democracy will leave Marxism-Leninism on the ash heap of history
as it has left other tyrannies which stifle the freedom and muzzle the self-expression
of the people.
In his speech to the British Parliament of June 1982, he referred to the Soviet Union
as an evil empire.
In a 1984, he joked on tape as follows,
My fellow Americans, I'm pleased to tell you today that I've signed legislation that
will outlaw Russia forever.
We begin bombing in five minutes.
Now Reagan's critics have argued that his comments increased Kremlin paranoia, creating
a mindset that led to incidents like the shooting down of a Korean airliner that strayed into
Soviet airspace in September 1983.
Certainly the last comment, which was made when he didn't think his comments would be
recorded, the last comment was just plain stupid.
People have been yanked from commercial airliners for less.
But it must be said that overall, Reagan's rhetoric was no more harsh than the things
that the Soviets had been saying about democratic capitalism and its imperialistic American
sponsors.
Moreover, Ronald Reagan had the courage to call an evil repressive system evil when
others thought frankness diplomatically unwise.
Admittedly, he seems to have missed the flaws in his own system.
In a way, Ronald Reagan was just as ideological as his Cold War adversaries.
Both saw the world in black and white.
Both believed, rightly, that they were locked in a life-and-death struggle over the fundamentals
of civilization.
Both believed in the eventual triumph of their side and were willing to do anything, overt
or covert, legal or illegal, to achieve that end.
It is probable, certainly no archival smoking gun has been found, that neither actually
wanted to subjugate the globe in an empire, though that is precisely how the other side
interpreted their rhetoric.
Reagan's defense buildup was a form of brinksmanship.
It was intended to make the Soviet Union cry uncle.
In fact, it ran considerable risk of getting them to push the button, and it added to colossal
budget deficits.
Whatever it did, it would never have been enough to undermine the Soviet state.
Rather, the Soviet system would have to fall of its own flaws.
Put another way, only a Soviet leader could end the Cold War, or the Soviet Union itself.
Fortunately, in 1985, that leader emerged.
