Lecture 47, The New Europe, 1985 to 2001.
In 1985, the world was a pretty tense place, especially if you were European.
The two superpowers glared at each other over their nuclear arsenals, seemingly ready
to pulverize the planet over differences of ideology, starting with Europe.
The Kremlin's grip on the peoples of Eastern Europe seemed an iron vice.
Increasingly strident rhetoric from the West seemed to raise the threat level.
Europeans caught between the superpowers felt themselves powerless to reason with mad.
Personal Memory
I remember once, around 1983, watching a British television interviewer ask an American
general whether, in the event of war with the Soviet Union, British-based U.S. missiles
could be fired if Her Majesty's government objected.
Remember, these missiles are based in Britain.
His reply was, well, sir, that would be interpreted as a one-to-one tie in America's favor.
Little did anyone know that the madness would break in just four years.
Leonid Brezhnev was succeeded by a series of seemingly rigid, sickly old men in 1982,
Yuri Andropov, in 1983, Konstantin Chernyankov.
Then, upon Chernyankov's death in 1985, the 54-year-old Mikhail Gorbachev was named General
Secretary of the Communist Party.
A committed communist, he nevertheless saw that the current Soviet system was unsustainable.
He launched a major reform, perestroika, designed to save communism by making it more
open, glasnost, and even democratic.
Political prisoners were released, free expression and freedom of assembly were allowed, political
parties other than the communists were permitted, wages were raised.
He also reached out to the Reagan administration to ease the international situation, especially
in the area of nuclear weapons.
Gorbachev was the first Soviet leader, at least the first since Khrushchev, to realize
that international security was interdependent, that the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc could
never be secure if the United States and the Western Bloc were not.
Presumably, he still believed in the eventual triumph of international communism, but in
the meantime, he began to advertise his willingness to ban nuclear weapons.
President Reagan, Margaret Thatcher, and allies were cautious at first, but in 1987 the U.S.
and USSR agreed to the IMF Treaty.
It eliminated a massive number of nuclear weapons deployed since the 70s, including
missiles targeted to Europe and Asia.
Just as important, it set up extensive, intrusive inspections of each side's missile sites
by the other.
Subsequently, the START-1 and START-2 treaties resulted in further bans and reductions of
nuclear arsenals.
In 1988, Gorbachev proposed a massive reduction of conventional forces, thus in effect removing
the threat of invasion from Western Europe.
In 1988-89, he ordered Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan.
But at home, Perestroika founded on an economy organized around an arms race and which had
trained its citizens to rely on the government for their economic well-being.
In just six years of power, Gorbachev announced a dozen restructuring plans.
Because the Soviet economy couldn't sustain his wage increases, the government began to
print rubles leading to spiraling inflation.
Glasnost was supposed to get the intelligentsia and the people behind Gorbachev's reforms,
but it actually undermined the Soviet system by allowing them to commiserate freely over
what was wrong with it.
Democratization was supposed to mobilize the people for Gorbachev, but it actually allowed
oppositions to develop throughout the Eastern Bloc, and it catapulted his greatest critic
Boris Yeltsin, Moscow party boss, to the forefront.
Fortunately, and crucially, Gorbachev did not crack down in the spring of 1989 when the
Warsaw Pact, followed by the Soviet Union itself, began to break up.
Instead, in October, he would respond by announcing that the Brezhnev doctrine, the use of force
to keep satellite states in line with the Soviet Union, was dead.
This was replaced by the Sinatra doctrine.
The former satellites could now go their own way.
My way?
Get it?
In short, and this is his great achievement in the midst of many failures and the basis
for his Nobel Peace Prize, Comrade Gorbachev decided that human life was more important
than ideological purity or class struggle.
Admittedly, this remarkable year did not begin well.
On April 9th, Soviet troops fired on and killed 20 peaceful demonstrators in Tbilisi
Square, Georgia.
But beginning on May 2nd, 1989, Hungarians trying to immigrate to the West were allowed
through.
On June 4th, in Poland, the trade union Solidarity won an election and joined a coalition government.
By August, they ran it.
On August 23rd, 2 million people joined hands across Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania to demand
freedom and independence.
On September 10th, the Hungarian government opened the country's western borders to refugees
from East Germany.
On November 9th, East Germany opened checkpoints in the Berlin Wall, allowing its citizens
to travel freely to West Germany for the first time in decades.
The next day, Berliners began to tear the wall down.
Also on November 10th, the Bulgarian Communist Party leader, Todor Zhivkov, fell.
On November 17th, the Velvet Revolution began in Czechoslovakia when peaceful student demonstrators
in Prague were attacked by government riot police.
By November 20th, the squares of the capital were filled with some 500,000 protesters.
On November 28th, the communist government announced free elections.
A month later, voters returned to non-communist government under Voslav Havel.
On December 1st, East Germany's parliament abolished the special position of the Communist
Party.
Two days later, the East German Politburo and the Central Committee resigned.
The only massive bloodshed occurred in Romania.
On December 17th, Ceausescu ordered the massacre of 4,000 protesters.
The army withdrew its support, and on December 22nd, Ceausescu was deposed.
Three days later, on Christmas Day 1989, he and his wife Elena were tried and executed.
One month after that, on the 25th of January 1990, the East German government began the
official teardown of the Berlin Wall.
Finally, in the Soviet Union itself, on February 7th, 1990, the Central Committee of the Communist
Party agreed to give up its monopoly on power.
But perhaps the clearest sign of the collapse of communism and the end of the Cold War had
taken place just around the block just a week earlier.
On January 31st, 1990, the first McDonald's opened in Moscow.
Gorbachev tried to turn himself into a democratically elected leader and hold on to a federal system
with the constituent republics of the former Soviet Union.
But the constituent republics wanted independence, and early in 1991, the three Baltic republics,
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, seceded.
Again Gorbachev had a choice, and again he decided not to use military force to preserve
the Union.
On December 7th and 8th, 1991, the leaders of Russia, Belarus and the Ukraine announced
their independence, and with it, the formal end of the Soviet Union.
As an afterthought, Gorbachev resigned as the first and last president of the Soviet Union
on Christmas Day.
This ceremony was broadcast to the entire nation and the world.
Russia under President Boris Yeltsin persuaded most of the former constituent republics to
form the CIS, the Council of Independent States.
Now as the largest and most powerful of those states, Russia still exercises tremendous
influence on them all.
But the peaceful revolution in Ukraine in 2005, in which a dubious election was overturned
by popular protest, and in which the pro-Russian candidate was forced to concede defeat, shows
that Russian influence has now hit a limit.
The collapse of the Soviet Union changed the balance of power once again.
The world and so Europe would no longer have to choose between great rivals.
But if this opened up possibilities, it also raised questions.
How far and how fast could or should the countries of the Eastern Bloc embrace democracy and
capitalism?
How far and how fast should they be integrated into the West and be allowed to join NATO
and the EU?
What was the role of the new weakened but still militarily powerful Russia in the new Europe?
And what should be the role of the world's sole remaining superpower, the United States?
Finally, what was Europe's role in a world which was no longer bipolar?
Following the breakup of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union, democracy flourished in Poland,
Hungary, Slovenia and the Baltic states.
Czechoslovakia broke peacefully into two democracies, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
Yugoslavia also broke up, but much more violently, more on that later in this lecture.
East and West Germany were reunited officially on the 3rd of October 1990, with the capital
restored to Berlin by 1999, in a process that was expensive and often painful.
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's default position was that, as the two countries merged,
West German institutions or procedures were to be preferred where there were differences.
This left the Ossies, East German Ost for East, feeling invalidated, as if they were
a defeated nation or at best poor country cousins to their wealthier or more sophisticated
Western countrymen.
East Germans experienced housing shortages, hundreds of thousands lost their jobs as old
unprofitable communist firms were liquidated, crime rose, so did a sense of disorientation.
As the East German press and media disappeared overnight, imagine if they took away all of
your television channels and replaced them.
Confidence ebbed.
Over the next three years, the birth rate dropped 60%, the marriage rate 65%.
When the East German secret police, the Stasi files were opened up, they showed a society
in which friends and neighbors had informed upon each other.
East German police had hired West Germans to assassinate defectors and critics of the
regime.
Border guards had shot nearly 600 people to death between 1961 and 1989.
West Germans, on their part, resented the economic burdens of integration, the forced
hire taxes, the budget cuts for their own social services in order to take care of the
East Germans.
But the good news was that in 1994, the last Russian and American troops left Berlin, officially
closing the books on World War II.
Democracy had more difficulty in Romania, Slovakia, Bulgaria, Ukraine and Russia.
In a failed attempt to restore communism in August of 1991, Russian democracy continued
to struggle against corruption, poverty and gang warfare.
It's estimated that organized crime controlled about 40% of the economy by 1994.
Russia remained a great nuclear power, as did the Ukraine.
But because of their dire economic situation, their respective nuclear arsenals suffered
from poor maintenance and security and demoralized troops.
This created the possibility that terrorists might be able to obtain nuclear weapons from
lax or disgruntled military men who might be unable to secure or might actually sell
the weapons for profit.
This led Western governments to continue to see a collective security role for NATO.
As for Russia's economy, Yeltsin opted for a quick, hard embrace of capitalism, which
caused great hardship.
Like massive Western loans, inflation wiped out salaries and savings.
Healthcare and social services collapsed.
During the 90s, the life expectancy for men fell to 58.
Other Eastern Bloc countries suffered similarly at first.
Across the East, price controls and subsidies were abolished.
Food and fuel costs skyrocketed.
In 1994, Poland's inflation rate was 34% a year.
State factories and businesses closed, producing 15% unemployment.
There were few products to market to the West, and nobody had any money to buy them in the
East.
Overall economic activity plunged by one third.
Some electorates, having experienced democracy, now turned back to Communist parties.
But remarkably, there was no revival of totalitarianism.
Those Communist parties now pledged to work within democratic systems.
And so generally, what the revival of communism meant in these states was just a more gradual
turn to capitalism.
By 1995, things were looking up.
The Polish growth rate was 6% a year between 1995 and 2000.
The Hungarian growth rate 5%.
Slovakia-Romanian Bulgaria experienced slower growth.
Against Russia's wishes, some former Soviet allies sought to join NATO in 1999.
Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic.
Others have joined the European Economic Community, which changed its name in 1994 to the European
Union, or EU.
The Baltic states, the Czech lands, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, bringing total membership
to 25 by 2005.
Bulgarian, Croatian, Romanian and Turkish applications were pending.
So if the Cold War was really over, who won?
In 1992, Francis Fukuyama wrote in the end of history in The Last Man.
As mankind approaches the end of the millennium, the twin crises of authoritarianism and socialist
central planning have left only one competitor standing in the ring as an ideology of potentially
universal validity, liberal democracy, the doctrine of individual freedom and popular
sovereignty.
For a very large part of the world, there is now no ideology with pretensions to challenge
liberal democracy and no universal principle of legitimacy other than sovereignty of the
people.
Indeed, in the 1990s, what I would call democratic capitalism appeared to have triumphed decisively
over communism.
There remained a few holdouts like China, North Korea and Cuba.
And communist parties remained active in most European countries and elsewhere, but most
had foresworn revolution long ago.
Moreover, remember that in Europe and the former Commonwealth countries, democratic
capitalism was tempered by socialism.
In fact, throughout the 90s, as economies began to boom in part because of free trade,
in part because of the Internet, European workers received greater benefits and more
vacation time than their American counterparts, in part because of the above difference.
This raises the question, if communism lost, what exactly really won?
Democracy certainly.
And capitalism.
But what kind of capitalism?
In the States, free market capitalism has produced an affluent society, but one which
increasingly complains of overwork and a growing disparity between rich and poor.
If you remember an earlier lecture, we now have the same proportion of the wealthy owning
the same proportion of the wealth as Victorian England.
According to the UN Development Index, seven countries have higher overall standards of
living than the United States, four of which Norway, Sweden, Iceland and Belgium are European.
All provide more extensive social safety nets than the US.
Perhaps it's more appropriate to say, therefore, that while totalitarian communism clearly
lost to democracy, the jury is still out on exactly what sort of a socioeconomic system
will eventually be declared the winner.
Turning back to foreign policy, while the end of the Soviet threat was good news in
the capitals of Europe, it also presented a difficulty.
How could Europe, let alone individual European states, count if there was no longer a second
superpower competing for their loyalty?
They were no longer being courted by two suitors.
Would those states call for withdrawal of US troops?
And if so, would they now have to spend money on their own defense?
And if so, what would that mean for all those expensive social programs that we just talked
about?
Would the EU assume collective political and foreign policy authority as a counterweight
to the United States?
The successful coalition, organized by US President Bush against the Iraqi invasion
of Kuwait in 1990-91, included many European nations.
Victory in the Persian Gulf War, followed by sanctions on Iraq, demonstrated that Europe
could follow an American lead in areas beyond its shores in pursuit of common interests.
But could Europe solve an international problem without US help?
The opportunity to do so came in the early 90s in Europe's own backyard, an old trouble
spot, the Balkans.
You will recall that in 1918, the Kingdom of Yugoslavia had been created out of Serbia,
Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Macedonia.
All spoke slightly different languages, all had different religious traditions.
Orthodox Christians in Serbia, Roman Catholics among Croatians, Muslims in Bosnia and Kosovo.
Following World War II, Marshal Tito recreated Yugoslavia as a communist state.
He successfully emphasized communism over nationalism.
We are all Yugoslavs.
Nationalist agitators of any ethnic group were simply arrested.
There was no tolerance for that kind of nationalist appeal.
Taking an independent line from Moscow, Yugoslavia traded with the West, leading to relative
prosperity and a higher standard of living than the USSR, so it could be argued that
Yugoslavia was in a perfect position to capitalize on the events of 1989.
But Tito had died in 1980 and the six constituent republics of Yugoslavia began to angle for
independence and territory at the expense of the others.
In particular, Slobodan Milosevic rose to power in Serbia on the promise of a greater
Serbia to include any territory containing large numbers of Serbs.
In 1989, Serbia under Milosevic ended the autonomy of Kosovo, a region whose population
was 90% Muslim and ethnic Albanian.
Fearing Serbian ambitions, the other five republics demanded independence.
By 1991, Yugoslavia had broken up into six separate republics.
Serbia under Milosevic, Croatia under Franjo-Tujman, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Slovenia, Montenegro,
and Macedonia.
But in 1992, the Republic of Serbia, headed by Milosevic, proclaimed a new Yugoslavia,
including Montenegro, and it began to encourage Serbs in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia to
bring those states under Serb control.
The goal was to create a greater Serbia to restore Yugoslavia and control from Belgrade.
Bloody civil war broke out amongst Orthodox Serbs, Catholic Croatians, and Bosnian Muslims.
Bosnian Serbs, 30 to 40% of the population of Bosnia, as in 1914, wanted to join this
greater Serbia.
Bosnian Croats wanted to join Tujman's Croatia, Bosnian Muslims wanted independence.
Civil minorities, but especially Bosnian Muslims, were often forced out of their homes, banished
or killed in a process referred to as ethnic cleansing.
Sarajevo was shelled by Serb forces for three years.
Perhaps 150 to 200,000 were killed.
Perhaps a million were displaced.
The European reaction was at first weak condemnation.
Europe seemed incapable of acting in concert to end the violence.
Why?
Well, as in the 30s, the last war had made Europeans, perhaps understandably, gun-shy.
Western Europe also feared the Russian reaction.
Russia had resumed its traditional role as the protector of the Slavs, and in particular,
as protector of the Serbs.
There was also a sense that Balkan peoples had been at each other's throats for centuries.
What could be done now?
Finally, despite increasing economic integration, there was little experience of European-wide
military cooperation, nor did the EU really have that kind of capability.
So the United Nations sent peacekeeping forces.
Periodic ceasefires were negotiated, then violated.
UN safe havens were repeatedly attacked, most notoriously at Srebrenica in 1995, when Bosnian
Serb forces slaughtered 7,000 men and boys.
It was not until the U.S. under President Bill Clinton involved itself that any results
were achieved.
His government pressured the Serbs with economic sanctions endorsed by the EU.
By 1995, a NATO bombing campaign married to a Croatian offensive supported by the West
drove the Serbs back.
That year, Milosevic signaled his willingness to cooperate.
So the U.S. brokered the Dayton Accords, which imposed an uneasy peace supervised by NATO
forces in Bosnia.
That meant 60,000 peacekeepers, 20,000 of them Americans.
Bosnia was divided into the Serb Republic of Kragina and a Croat Federation.
The resultant shaky peace was broken in 1999, when Milosevic sought to crush a movement
for autonomy among Islamic, ethnic Albanians in Kosovo.
Russia, resuming its old role of protector of the Slavs and Serbs, paralyzed the UN by
threatening to veto any Security Council action against Serbia.
NATO, led by the U.S., launched a massive bombing campaign against Serbia.
The targets were intended to be strategic, bridges, power stations, television stations.
The Chinese embassy in Belgrade was destroyed, and between 500 and 1500 civilians were killed,
leading to much international criticism.
After 78 days, Milosevic cried uncle and withdrew from Kosovo.
This halted the bloodshed and brought the downfall of the Milosevic regime in the next
Serbian election in 2000.
NATO peacekeeping forces remained in Kosovo through the end of the century.
Many minority ethnic groups fled their homes to areas where they were in the majority and
did not come back.
In other words, sadly, ethnic cleansing was accomplished, and this became the basis for
stability in the region.
The European failure to act decisively in the Balkans crisis suggests that, at the dawn
of the new millennium, Europe has a long way to go to achieve a federal union.
Still, as the 20th century came to a close, there was much optimism about the future
of Europe.
The West had enjoyed unprecedented prosperity in the 90s.
If the fall of the Soviet Union marked the end of history, then the extended prosperity
of the 90s seemed to mark the end of economics, or at least the end of boom and bust cycles.
There was talk of perennial prosperity that would last, well, like perennial things do,
forever.
Modern European corporations like Airbus, taking advantage of free trade within Europe
and supported by generous government subsidies, began to compete seriously with American industrial
giants like Boeing.
Eastern Europe was moving rapidly towards integration with the West both economically
and politically.
The Internet, email, etc. were breaking down communications barriers and providing greater
individual freedom of expression.
Generous welfare states and the prosperity of the 90s attracted huge numbers of immigrants
to Europe.
Turks went to Germany, North Africans to France, Pakistanis, Indians and West Indians
to the United Kingdom, Indonesians to the Netherlands.
So what we see here is the legacy of empire, right?
These are all former colonial possessions of those particular countries.
Most of these immigrants became integral parts of the economic lives of their new homes
while maintaining their own cultural identity.
The EU, as we noted, expanded to 25 countries.
Its parliament and court of human rights were actually starting to matter.
In 1993, the member states of the EU signed the Treaty of Maastricht, setting the goal
of one currency and political unity.
It accomplished the first by introducing its own currency, the Euro, in 1998, with all
new currencies for participating states in 2002, though Britain, Denmark and Sweden initially
opted out.
The EU's free market economic provisions were especially good for small countries.
For the first time, maybe in history, the economy of Ireland was prosperous.
In reaction to Kosovo, at the Helsinki summit of 1999, members pledged to create a rapid
reaction force to supplement the US peacekeeping mission.
And certainly, among EU countries, there was increasing cooperation on law enforcement,
drug dealers and money laundering and anti-terrorism.
The EU also began to draw up a constitution to be approved by referenda in all constituent
countries.
And finally, European-American diplomacy seemed to be operating consensually, and for the
most part, smoothly, as the century wound to a close.
But most of these hopes had corresponding fears.
Just as the new century arrived, the Western economy suffered a downturn as internet stocks
were found to be overvalued.
The resultant need for government spending cuts raised the question of whether the European
welfare states could be sustained any longer.
Individuals for greater European involvement in global peacekeeping implied greater and
more expensive defense establishments.
Subsidies for European agriculture and industry increasingly threatened to provoke trade war
with the United States.
While Eastern Europe moved politically, socially and culturally west, Russia cast about for
its new role.
Russian democracy often seemed to be held hostage to rival gangs, special interests
and the ambitions of its president.
In 2000, former KGB agent Vladimir Putin was elected president, raising the question of
whether Russia had truly abandoned its autocratic past.
Subsequent expansions of his executive powers have not diffused this question.
Russia's poorly maintained nuclear arsenal remained a potentially destabilizing force.
In 1995, rebels in the predominantly Muslim province of Chechnya sought to break away.
This led the Russian government to pursue harsh reprisals.
That led, in turn, to Chechnya's acts of terrorism against Russia itself.
Once again, the Western European and American reaction was muted.
No one wanted to anger the Russian bear, and after 9-11, civil rights for terrorists is
a hard case to make.
The Internet, it turned out, was vulnerable to computer hacking, which might paralyze
economic and defense systems.
Some of Europe's recent immigrants, especially from Islamic states in the Middle East, rejected
Western culture as decadent and profane.
A tiny fringe from this group have been sympathetic to Osama bin Laden's call for a worldwide anti-Western
jihad.
Much of the planning for 9-11 was performed in Hamburg, Germany.
This has forced all Europeans to think harder about the place of immigrants and rights of
free speech and association in their open societies.
The possibility of integration into a European Union was rejected by nationalists in many
countries.
And finally, Europeans continued to field junior partners in their alliance with the
United States.
But it is surely the great achievement of European civilization that whatever threats
there are to European security at the end of our course, they come for the most part
from outside.
Europeans finally seem to have learned to get along without armed conflict.
Most European states have guaranteed a full array of civil rights to their citizens while
providing them with some of the highest standards of living in the world.
Is it possible that modern Western Europeans have finally become fully civilized?
