Lecture 48 – The Meaning of Western Civilization
As the millennium dawned, Western ideals seemed triumphant across the globe.
Democracy was on the march in Eastern Europe and beyond.
And capitalism had the potential to raise everyone's standard of living and, perhaps,
put a permanent end to poverty in Europe and elsewhere.
Western technology linked the globe and promised to break down cultural barriers.
And some very old Western institutions, universities, science, a free press seemed to have become
the standard everywhere.
And yet, as all this was happening, Western ideas and traditions were coming under fire
from many sides.
As Malthus predicted, the world's population is growing, estimated to reach 8.5 billion
by 2025.
Yet resources are finite, obviously.
The West consumes a disproportionate amount of the world's resources and produces a
corresponding amount of waste.
For example, EU countries account for 21% of global greenhouse gas emissions, yet only
about 12% of the world's population.
Standards to provide a more equitable distribution by limiting Western consumption and emissions,
for example the Kyoto Protocol, have been controversial in the West because of the expected
impact on Western economies, but generally more favored by the EU than the US.
Failing the success of such measures, some historians have posited future international
struggles between haves and have-nots.
Some scientists have posited ecological disaster.
In the West, the economic downturn at the millennium, born of a combination of the decline
of internet stocks and the world reaction to the events of 9-11, discredited the notion
that prosperity was inevitable and irreversible.
Once again, as in the 80s, the European welfare state seemed under threat from the latest
economic realities.
Could socialism be sustained as taxes rose to pay for the defense against terrorism?
By the turn of the century, Germany, the model of how a European economy is supposed
to work, was beset by 10% unemployment and increasing tensions about foreign guest workers.
At the same time, American free market capitalism, with less regulation and smaller government
programs, had no appeal for Europeans seeking a balance between home and work, work and play.
They just don't want to give up their six weeks paid vacation, and I can't say that
I blame them.
Non-Western peoples have not uniformly embraced democratic capitalism, let alone the entire
menu of Western values.
The horrific events of September 11, 2001, reminded us, among many other things, that
in the Islamic world in particular, Western attitudes and institutions have often been
seen as imperialistic, which they often were, and decadent, which is, I suppose, in the
eye of the beholder.
In its extreme form, for reasons well beyond the scope of this lecture, that resentment
has culminated in a terrorist jihad against so many features of modern Western life that
it hardly seems an exaggeration to say that Western civilization itself comes under attack
with every bombing, every hijacking, every abduction.
Whatever else the horrific events of 9-11 and its aftermath may mean, they indicate
that the very best of the West's values, its openness, its tolerance, its secular rationality,
its relative gender equality, render it offensive to some and vulnerable to their attack.
Though there's not been violence on a similar scale against Western values among African
or Asian or South American peoples, resentment of those values exists in all those places
with the potential to be harnessed.
As a result, historians and political scientists have come to wonder if the next wave of world
conflict will not be religious war as occurred in the 16th and 17th centuries, or class war
as Marx predicted, or race war as Hitler predicted, but a virulent combination of all three, which
has been dubbed the clash of civilizations.
Nor is the West itself united.
After an initial period of solidarity, the aggressive American response to the 9-11 terrorist
attacks, in particular the invasion of Iraq in 2003, put old alliances under stress.
The seeming reluctance of the United Nations to enforce its own resolutions on Iraq further
discredited that body in American eyes.
The U.S. preemptive strike on Saddam Hussein's regime in 2003 fractured old alliances, both
with the U.S. and within Europe, as no issue since Vietnam has done.
In the period leading up to the invasion in March of 2003, France and Germany led a
coalition of the unwilling, which emphasized diplomatic engagement with Iraq in preference
to armed force.
The United States initially found more cooperative allies in former Eastern Bloc countries like
Italy and Spain.
This raised, once more, the question of Europe's unity and role in a world dominated by a single
superpower.
It reinforced the suggestion that Europe, led by the French, might act as a counterweight
to American power.
Lost in all the rhetoric has been any kind of historical perspective.
That perspective, I think, yields two remarkable facts.
The first is, historically, allies do not feel honor bound to support each other in
every endeavor, as the U.S. proved when it refused to support France and Britain at Suez
in 1956.
The German refusal to participate marked a historic triumph of post-war Western policy
towards Germany.
Once the most militaristic state in Europe, Germany had become a pacifist nation.
But in part for that very reason, the idea that a united Europe might prove a counterweight
to the power of the United States has a long way to go.
In the spring of 2005, both France and the Netherlands rejected, and Britain tabled,
a new European constitution which would have gone far towards creating a United States
of Europe.
This suggests that nationalism remains strong in Europe, among big states used to great
power status, as it is among smaller states like those in the Balkans.
The good news is that big state nationalism at any rate tends now to produce arguments
over national cuisine and who gets to hold the Olympics, rather than arguments about
national boundaries or wars of conquest.
That is, for most Western Europeans, nationalism no longer seems to imply a right to subjugate
other nations.
It no longer seems to require conquests of the other.
If Western Europeans were paralyzed over the recent exception in the Balkans, it was perhaps
because such ethnic conflicts seem now so odd, so much of another time, in the context
of recent European history.
Still, as other institutional loyalties fade, most prominently the Church, identification
with one's own culture and language and political institutions and autonomy, and yes, even food,
even currency, British refusal to give up the pound for the Euro, remains strong.
So the book on Western civilization at the close of this course is that it faces some
challenges, all of which should raise the question for us of where the past 500 years
of Western history have actually gotten us.
In this course, we've seen the inhabitants of Europe change dramatically, but not, I
think, completely.
For example, after years of struggle, Europeans shattered the Great Chain of Being and the
assumptions behind it.
They embraced humanism, toleration, and the scientific method and revolution.
They abandoned the role of subject for that of citizen.
They created societies of ever-widening opportunity and intellectual curiosity.
They gave birth to societies in the Americas and Oceania that trumpet their openness and
their hostility to hierarchy.
And yet, Europeans themselves continue to value hierarchy, status, and tradition in
ways that Americans often find puzzling.
Europeans profited from commercial, financial, and industrial revolutions.
They created great trading empires and industrial complexes.
And by the 19th century, the wealthiest societies the world had ever seen.
But these left in their wake many victims, Native Americans and African slaves abducted
from their homes and used as farm machinery.
Urban workers reduced to the level of economic cogs in the great machine of national prosperity.
Americans sought to exploit half the world through imperialism and unregulated capitalism.
But yet, eventually, they recognized the inconsistency of that exploitation with Western ideals of
freedom and equality and self-determination.
And here, I think, we begin to get a sense of why the West is different.
In 1994, Bernard Lewis wrote,
In setting out to conquer, subjugate, and despoil other peoples, the Europeans were merely following
the examples set them by their neighbors and their predecessors.
That is, they were no different from any number of other civilizations which have preceded
them on the planet.
The interesting questions are not why they tried, but why they succeeded.
And then why, having succeeded, they repented of their success as a sin.
The success was unique in modern times, the repentance in all of recorded history.
Imperialism, sexism, and racism are words of Western coinage not because the West invented
these evils, which are alas, universal, but because the West recognized and named and
condemned them as evils and struggled mightily to weaken their hold and to help their victims.
In short, the West is seemingly uniquely capable of self-criticism and so of reform.
Europeans have in their history embraced hierarchy and intolerance, racism, sexism, imperialism,
totalitarianism, and greed.
But also liberalism, romanticism, feminism, socialism, realism, and democracy in an attempt
to build something better.
The experience of so many revolutions, so many movements suggest that perhaps the real
theme of this course is a persistent, inexorable, restless rejection of the status quo.
When that didn't work, they picked up stakes and they built alternative Western civilizations
in the Americas and in Oceania.
At home, their experiments with one Europe government, whether by Charlemagne, the Pope,
Charles V, Louis XIV, Napoleon, Hitler, or the EU, have largely failed because of nationalist
impulses.
But as this course closes, they have restrained those impulses to the point where another
general European war seems unthinkable.
Note the latest Balkans crisis, but note that unlike in 1914, it did not precipitate such
a war.
Why?
In part because Western Europeans seem to be long past the notion that anybody could
gain anything from that kind of a conflict.
This was addressed by one of the heroes of the Velvet Revolution, Voslov Havel, at the
Charlemagne Plenary Address in Aachen.
Charlemagne is of course a great symbol of European unity.
It could be argued that he practically invented Europe in the Middle Ages.
Aachen, his capital, also known as Ehlers-Chapelle in France, is another symbol of the idea of
Europe coming together.
He delivered this address on the 15th of May, 1996, and in it he said, humankind is entering
an era of multipolar and multicultural civilization.
Europe is no longer the conductor of the global orchestra, but this does not mean it
has played out its role and has nothing to say to the world anymore.
A new task presents itself, and with it, a new substance to Europe's very existence.
Europe's task will no longer be to spread violently or non-violently its own religion,
its own civilization, its own inventions, or its own power.
If Europe wants, it can do something else, more modest yet more beneficial.
Through the model of its own being, it can serve as an example that many diverse peoples
can work together in peace without losing any part of their identity.
Through its own behavior, it can show that it is possible to treat our planet considerably
and to think also of the generations that will succeed us.
It can demonstrate that it is possible to live together in peace with other cultural
worlds without a person or a state having to renounce themselves and their truth in
the process.
Now I know that neither Louis nor Havel actually deny the critique of Western society.
Europeans have behaved with rapacity and gross sensitivity to other peoples, as those peoples
have often behaved to each other.
What is unique to European civilization is its willingness to confront its own sins,
to renounce them, to make amends for them.
Admittedly, it has done that slowly and unwillingly and only partially.
It has and is doing so still today.
Now it's a theme of this course that wherever we come from, we in America are all Europe's
children, Europe's heirs.
Just because we are so young, we in the United States seem to be allergic to any suggestion
that we might ever have done something wrong.
To ask the very potentially fruitful question, a very Western question, why do they hate
us, has been branded as somehow justifying the hate.
In this I think the Europeans are ahead of us.
Stripped of their world hegemony, brutalized by their own internecine wars, forced by war
crimes trials and secret police files and video footage to confront their own multifarious
failings, they have resolved not to repeat them.
Can we their heirs make a similar claim?
It seems to me that someday, sooner or later, we will have no choice.
Admittedly, in an age of global terrorism, all this progress seems to be cast in doubt.
In Western civilization, in particular a civilization so open to self-examination and doubt, live
with and survive the continuing challenge of non-Western civilizations?
I think that it can, but only if we, its students, continue to embrace that part of the Western
heritage which has always emphasized the freedom of the intellect, the dignity of the individual,
rationality as an antidote to superstition and jingoism, a healthy skepticism, and finally
the notion identified in their different ways by Lewis and Havel, that other peoples and
cultures are valuable in their own right.
That's how we survive, by flexibility and rationality and recognizing the inherent value
of others, and we've known that since at least the piece of Westphalia.
I think is the meaning of the West, the meaning of Western civilization.
Now admittedly, other meanings are possible.
In the midst of defending these principles, we could very easily become the mirror image
of their enemies, our enemies, and revert back to an unthinking, submission to authority,
intolerance, jingoism, superstition, and suspicion in an attempt to find something safe and
comforting to believe in, to hide in.
Certainly Western history, certainly European history provides plenty of precedence, but
I would like to think that if the experience of the last 500 years has taught us anything,
it is that those solutions are temporary and in the long run destructive.
So that is, I think, what the West can teach us.
But what of civilization itself?
What of history?
What are their meanings?
Well, before I address that, I feel compelled to issue a variation on the disclaimer that
I offered at the very beginning in the first lecture of this course.
Let me say that it has been a very great privilege for me to share with you my version of the
story of modern Western civilization.
I fear that over the course of these 48 wide-ranging lectures, it is not unlikely that I have offended
with my omissions, and my errors, and my biases.
For the omissions, I plead that we only had so much audio and videotape, and the crew
in the studio can only stand so much of me.
For the errors, I do apologize most heartily.
This course demands knowledge of everything from deliberative bodies to diseases to dreadnoughts.
I still have much to learn.
One of the most frustrating things about being a professor is that you spend most of your
life out on a limb, and too often, that limb breaks.
But I would argue that another essential duty of being a professor is to profess, to tell
the truth as he or she sees it after years of study in his or her discipline.
And so I cannot offer an unqualified apology for my apparent biases.
I promise you that I have tried my best to be objective, fair, and balanced.
But like any human being, I've most likely failed.
After all, it should hardly be surprising that after studying and teaching Western civilization
for well, maybe four decades, ever since my beloved grandfather gave me my first model
airplane kit, and I started reading that little history about how this plane was used, and
what it meant to the history of the West.
Well I've developed some opinions, and some sympathies, and some convictions that you
have been exposed to for good or ill in the course of these lectures.
In fact, I've come to believe that such opinions are part and parcel of this course, for this
course is not simply a course on the history of Western civilization.
It is a course in civilization itself.
And so I stand here as a student of civilization, as a man who aspires to be civilized someday
myself to profess that there are lessons to be drawn from this history.
There are lessons to be drawn from civilization, lessons in fact in how to be civilized.
Like Martin Luther standing before his emperor, I can no other.
God help me.
The lessons of civilization are, I believe, to be found in a few simple principles.
War is a terrible thing.
You had better be sure you know what you are doing when you engage in it.
Generosity is a wonderful thing.
When deployed in defense of the defenseless and the downtrodden, at all other times it
is suspect.
Power does not last, even superpower.
Art and culture do.
So do cruelty and generosity.
Most people never got to be kings or queens, dukes or duchesses.
Most people were underdogs, caught up in vast historical forces beyond their control.
We should, I think, resist the temptation to think that we are somehow different, immune
from the political, social, economic or cultural tidal waves of history.
We are all swimming in that same ocean.
We should not laugh at our predecessors, even at their most ridiculous, for some day we
too will look ridiculous to our successors.
We should spare a thought for the underdog.
Finally, as I proposed in the lecture on the Holocaust, this course should remind us that
civilization is fragile.
It is certainly broken repeatedly.
That's because, as I said then, it is not a building or a book or a law.
It is not a theorem or an opera.
It is a daily and conscious act of respect and consideration for others.
An act of veneration for what the past can tell us.
An act of critical thinking and skepticism.
Of openness to new ideas and other cultures.
And of a quest to make ourselves something better than we are.
That act is born of what we learn and it is sustained by what we teach our children.
Another way of putting this goes back to something a great teacher used to say at my alma mater,
Cornell.
If you have enjoyed these lectures, one of the things you may have enjoyed about them
is the enthusiasm that I feel for history and for the academic life in general.
I suppose I first identified that enthusiasm.
I know that I always had it.
I just didn't know what it was when I was an undergraduate student at Cornell University.
Now, if you've ever visited my alma mater, you know that it is visually and orally.
It's the university from central casting.
It's got lovely leafy quads.
It's got imposing towers reared against the arch of heaven as the alma mater would have
it.
There's ivy everywhere.
And tucked away in all sorts of spots, probable and improbable.
All sorts of statues and plaques and benches that are intended to commemorate the glories
of learning while giving the scholar a place to rest his weary bones.
I suspect that every Cornelian knows what I'm going to say next.
If you were to visit my alma mater, you might find yourself drawn to a particularly beautiful
spot facing west under the library bell tower.
There as so often at older academic institutions, you would find a bench.
And on that bench in inscription, to those who shall sit here rejoicing, to those who
shall sit here in mourning, sympathy and greeting.
So have we done in our time.
When I'm told I was never actually able to take a course from him, the professor M.H.
Abrams, the editor of the Norton anthology of English literature and the author of The
Mirror in the Lamp, a semile text for understanding those English romantic poets we talked about
in lecture 25, that he used to end his survey of English literature by saying that here,
in that inscription, was the meaning of all art, sympathy and greeting.
So have we done in our time.
Now with apologies to Professor Abrams, I will go him one better.
Here is the meaning of the entire inheritance bequeathed to us by civilization.
Here is the meaning of human history itself, reading, because civilization is the means
by which the generations communicate with each other.
It is a sort of greeting card from past generations to the present.
And what does that card say?
Well it says, we lived and died.
We loved and hated.
We struggled and won and lost, all the while rejoicing and mourning as you do now.
Don't forget us.
Listen to us.
You might learn something.
You might learn what happens when people think that their religion, their political system,
their culture is the superior or only way, as in the Spanish Inquisition or the reign
of terror.
What happens when people pursue material wealth at the expense of all else, as in the slave
trade or the industrial revolution?
What happens when they become drunk with nationalism or the desire for vengeance, as in 1914, or
the Balkans, or what used to take place regularly on the Franco-German border every generation?
What happens when they choose order or security over freedom, as in Britain after the Napoleonic
Wars or Germany in the wake of the Depression?
What happens when they embrace new knowledge, remain open to new ideas, and fight for justice,
as in the scientific and rational revolutions and countless reform movements?
And what happens when they don't?
Too often a name.
Sympathy.
Because if you pick up anything at all from the history of civilization, it should be
a kind of sympathy for all those human beings who have gone before.
I don't think that you can study history.
I don't think that you can listen to that greeting for very long without developing a compassion
for those who fought the good fight of life before us, especially those who struggled
against injustice or great odds, serfs, levelers, industrial workers, or those whose death
came unjustly or too soon, slaves, Holocaust victims, and all those dead soldiers and sailors
in all those wars we covered.
History should, in particular, give its students a strong sense of justice and injustice, if
only by exposing them to all the best and all the worst that human beings have done
for and to each other since the beginning of time.
But sympathy too, on a deeper level, because history reminds its students that their way
is not the only way.
Other times and other cultures have had their own ways of ordering the universe, the state,
the family, relations between the genders, the business of getting and spending.
Indeed, if the first half of this course is all about how Europe became modern, the second
half is about how Europeans' modern experiences have rendered their attitudes and behaviors
so different from ours in America at the dawn of the 21st century.
We often wonder why we don't understand.
Well, it's helpful to learn to understand that past in order to explain that present.
Thus sympathy, as taught by history, also implies a kind of humility, a realization
that we in the West do not have all the answers, that other cultures have much to offer, that
other people have their reasons for doing what they do.
The end result of such understanding is what Havel meant by living in peace with other
cultural worlds without a personal state having to renounce themselves and their truth in
the process.
Now that does not mean automatic approval of every truth.
This is not an argument for relativism, cultural, or otherwise.
This kind of sympathy does not mean that we do not condemn the slave owner, the concentration
camp guard, the terrorist.
But it does call us to that most difficult of intellectual exercises, to try to understand
the experiences and motivations of those who hate what civilization loves, if only so
that we may more effectively discredit their hatred.
Now as you know, humankind still retains the power to destroy civilization as we know it,
in about the time it has taken me to deliver this lecture.
Should that ever happen, it will be due to a failure of sympathy.
The politician who presses the button, the gunman who takes one life, the terrorist who
takes many, can only do so by a failure of human sympathy, a failure to hear the greeting
of history, a failure to listen to the lesson of civilization.
And so you see, I am arguing that this course, enjoyable as I hope it has been, is much more
than a way to pass the time.
It is rather a tool kit for any citizen of the West, a survival kit for any citizen of
the world.
It is essential equipment for those of us who wish to become civilized and remain so,
in a world which is dangerous and complicated, but also beautiful and round and very delicate
and rather small.
It seems to me that we dare do no less.
We can.
No other.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
