I think that, um, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah clip
Mark from there. Fractional churn and fractional churn.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay, now. Okay, cool.
Well, thank you for coming on Sunday morning, a 30.
I hope you'll find worth it. And so, talking about fractional churn and fractional psychological insulators. I just want to start with acknowledging the people doing the work.
The first part of talking about fractional churn insulator was led by a post on a graduate student you have done and jump out. Yeah.
And the second part, the fractional TI was led by a postdoc type account graduate student Bowen churn and also a undergraduate student each and two.
And as many of you may know that we share that the decision at Cornell University, the boron nitro crystal is from the famous Japanese group and deep funding sources.
But before I actually start talking about the public.
So, of course, we would like to say that, you know, more materials realize almost nearly every phase of condensed metaphysics.
And it turns out to actually borrowers contribution between nearly everything we find in more materials.
For instance, the transport is more gap insulators that yes, a variable range hopping and quick enough crystal and stride phases.
It's under zero magnetic field, but it's very much connected.
The electrostatic of that stays for Chinese latest electron hold double layers that this can go on and go on.
And I just want to say that congratulations on the amazing over half a century contributions, you know, the condensed metaphysics and happy birthday.
Yeah, I think I don't need to introduce too much in this audience. The story really starts with the discovery of the quantum high effect, but one click sync.
And also later on, two years later, the fractional quantum high effect by stomach say cause and also the theory provided by Laughlin.
The finalization is amazing. As you heard on two days ago, that is better than actually one half a billion. We really now provides a standard for the fundamental constants.
And as soon after this actually just few years later, how they naturally asked this question whether quantum high effect can exist under zero magnetic field.
And he came up with an update model in 1988.
And I think I don't need to talk too much about it is a imaginary hopping.
And that would give rise to a positive energy gap and a negative energy gap, respectively at the K and the K prime point of the brilliant zone of this honeycomb lattice, and that would give rise to a turn insulator.
The band that has a turn number equal to one.
So the idea is that instead of applying a large magnetic field to a two dimensional electron guest without a lattice, if you can cook up is appropriate lettuce with the right amount of a imaginary hopping or complex hopping.
And then you can actually get a series of a flat trim bands that look quite similar to the Landau levels.
And if you feel like put your Fermi energy filling one of the trim bands you get the turn insulator and the front and the quantum anomalous high effect has been predicted.
And another time reversal copy of this flat trim bands, you will get the two DTI or the quantum spin hall insulator in its simplest form. And that was found by came a lay and food.
2005 2006 and also by Bernadette Hughes and John, from the same time.
So now fractionally filled a particular turn ban here under the right condition that I think Ellen already talked about how uniform the very curvature distribution is.
And you could also realize the fractional turn insulator that connects with the fractional quantum point about another zero magnetic field.
And that was first predicted theoretically in 2012 by these people here.
And now you also put another time reversal copy for this fractionally built charm band, and you can also get fractional T I fractional topological insulator that was pointed out by Bernadette can jump first and then more slightly more complete theory provided by stern 11 in 2009.
So here is the progress so far on the kind of phases that I talked about in the moray materials.
Pretty much the short messages actually that CIS FCI CIFTI all these phases matter, more or less been realized in this kind of materials.
For instance, the first is graphene aligned to boron nitride under very high magnetic field, and your young school found evidence of the fractional turn insulator.
And also in TBG to play a graphene.
Both young and difficult have a garden and also I mean as group.
Actually, in particular a mere school found under the finite magnetic field, you can also stabilize the FCI.
Also, in many of the TMD moray materials, you can actually find all these phases of matter and also very recently in multi layer from bohidia graphene aligned to be the end known just for MIT.
And also found FCI state in this very new material here.
So since that this particular material twisted multi teller I realize almost everything that I listed here. So this talk will be just about this material to stick multi teller.
Okay, so let me just first give you a brief introduction on this moray semiconductors.
The building block is this monolayer transition method that can cause a semiconductor TMD.
And this is the crystal structure if you look from top down it looks like a honeycomb lattice just like graphene.
And except that the a and the b sub lattice sides are not the same so the inversion symmetry is broken.
So that you actually open up an energy gap at the K and the K prime point of the brilliant song so you can just think of it like a gap to graphene with a gap size on the other one eb here.
Another thing different from graphene is actually that there is a transition matter with pretty heavy mass. And as a result, there is pretty strong spin up interaction.
And but the spin up interaction, the spin up a field can only point to the outer plane direction because of the mirror symmetry in each of this monolayer here.
So without this, we call it the spin is locked without a plane, and it has as the conservation which turns out to be important.
Later on. So this is the band structure, taking into account of the spin up interaction we can actually see that this is a huge spin splitting at the K and K prime points.
The splitting is opposite, so that he preserves the time reversal symmetry. So you can think of that basically the electrons at the K point or the K prime point they break time reversal symmetry, but they just break it oppositely so that the entire system has time reverses.
So, similar to just to buy a graphene not very famous, and you can actually produce more materials using the same kind of technique for instance you can just give it just angle.
And you can generate a more appear more a pattern with period about 10 nanometer depending on the just angle, but 10 nanometer is the range that we are interested in different from graphene is actually that you can also use two different materials without any twist angle but make use of the lettuce mismatch between
the two materials to produce a more a pattern. For instance, this particular combination aligns at zero degree with Thompson seven Thompson so far it has 4% that is mismatch and that will produce also a more a pattern with period about 10 nanometer.
Yeah, just compare the graphene there's an extra way of producing the more a lattice.
You can actually really see it in a STM image. This is a STM image in collaboration David Miller stood at Cornell, looking at this particular combination which is a hetero bilayer that has 7% that is mismatch.
So you can actually see that the small dots are the real atoms but on top of that you can also see the emergence of a more a lattice, pretty regular more a lattice and that's the unit cell of the more a lattice.
So, in the hetero bilayer, typically you know when you have this a super lighted structure you found flat bands in the mini blue and so so you don't really talk about a big blue and so on anymore you talk about a mini blue and so on.
In the hetero bilayer you have flat bands in each of the layer for instance multi teller and Thompson seven nine, and to a pretty good approximation in many cases that you can just isolate one flat band in this kind of hetero bilayer structure.
And it turns out that in a paper by Ellen in 2018 that low energy physics of this flat band can be mapped to a hubbub model on a triangular lattice with a T and a U term.
But for homo bilayer.
The energy level is exactly degenerate in two layer. And so you actually really, you cannot really isolate just one band you actually have to at least take into account the first two bands they are degenerates, and in general they can hybridize.
And this, it turns out that both in a paper from Ellen and also from Liang Fu in 2021 in nature communication paper that shows that the low energy physics of the first this a, actually the first four bands.
The two bands here can actually be mapped in some Swiss angle to a came a lay model. And the reason is sort of the following that each of this band has a one year orbital that forms a triangular lattice.
But together they form a honeycomb lattice. And because they are K electrons. So actually the hopping is imaginary. So it's already a bit looking like the healthy model.
And together with this scour me on lattice feature that Ellen talk about two days ago, due to the interlayer hopping term here.
The interlayer hopping is also a complex number, and that will actually generate exactly how they model in each valley in certain two angles.
And then when you take into account the other valley, then you get actually came a lay model with that these flat bands are actually turn bands with a turn them and on zero turn them naturally in this case would be turn number equal to plus minus one.
And that was the theory in 2000.
2019 and 2021. And immediately after that, actually many theories realize that now you have flat turn benches strong interaction. This is a platform for interaction driven turn insulators, and maybe even fractional turn insulators.
And one thing I also want to mention is actually that the subtleties sites here, the wave function is actually living in two different layers, in a sense.
So you can actually, and you apply a vertical electric field through the bilayer, the stock ship is actually the same as the interlayer potential difference. Well, the interlayer potential difference is the same as the subtleties potential difference in this case.
When applying electric field to the system, you can also change the turn bands from a band from turn bands to actually topologically tribute with a turn number equal to zero.
So by tuning the electric view you can also change the band structure of the system.
This is a typical device structure that we look at.
Sometimes a bit more complicated but this is sort of the idea. This is a system of bilayer sample sandwiched between boron nitride which is very good.
And then the top and the bottom are usually qualified gates.
And so because we have two gates here we can tune independently the density of electrons in the system as well as the vertical displacement view through the bilayer.
And because the vertical displacement field can also tune the topology of the bands. So this is a kind of a base diagram that, you know, you can try to remember in the small electric field regime in this gray area.
We are talking about the system is in the layer hybridized regime so that the turn number is non zero for the bands.
And if you apply a large enough electric field, you push all the electrons to one layer is for the layer polarized region and in that case the band non topological turn number is zero there.
So it looks something like this and the gray area actually expands with density just because electrostatics require that the more electrons you put in the more electric view you need to polarize all the charge to one layer.
Okay, and the convention for labeling is actually that new good one is one electron for more unit cell, or you can think of is a half built a flat train band. So that's the convention that I'll be using.
So, so this is online. I hope, let's see how far I can go.
In the last year there were actually several experiments talking about finding fractional train insulators in this particular system just Molly terrorite one family of this at just the DMD.
And first from optical signatures and also thermodynamic measurements and very soon after that few months later.
Also people directly demonstrate the measurement of our XY that is quantized to the expected value.
And so I will be talking about our story here using some dynamic measurement briefly and then I will move on to the FTI work.
And so the idea is the following that we want to measure the chemical potential as a function of density or the filling factor. And from there we can actually extract the compressibility.
And if it's zero, it's an incompressible state if it's not zero is from metallic state or compressible state.
And for both the band insulator and the train insulators it's an incompressible state so that should be zero. However, the train insulator can actually gain or lose states under magnetic field because of the edge states.
So, basically, the idea is that to measure how the train insulator gain or lose states under the field.
And the formula that governs how that actually happens is called the straddle formula.
And so this is the filling factor for the particular incompressible state. This is the magnetic flux divide by magnetic flux quantum and T and s are the quantum numbers, such that a T is the number of electron added to the sample per
and as is the number of electrons added to the sample per more added more unit cell. And if it's a topological triples days of T is zero.
So there is actually no dispersion of the state with magnetic field for integer train insulator both T and s are integers and for the fractional train insulator both T and s are fractions.
So that's sort of the idea. And we actually sort of at the beginning, we did not.
We're not able to make a very good context in the material. So we actually use a optical method to measure locally, sort of the read out locally the chemical potential of the system.
And it works is the following that in addition to the sample we actually put a sensor, which is actually separated from the sample by a thin layer of foreign nitride.
So the two are actually not touching to each other, but they are separated by a thin dielectric layer.
And we can actually in this kind of structure we can think of that pop gay and the sensor acting as the top and the bottom gate to the sample and the function of the bottom gay is to actually fix the sensor to a fixed reference point.
Okay.
And this is the work by these two people here.
And the sample is that just did more detail right here and the sensor we pick is actually a monolayer tungsten selenite.
And this he has a band structure this is the band structure of the sensor which is a very trivial semiconductor.
And but naturally you would like to pick the reference point is that you would like to fix the Fermi level of this sensor to touch just one of the band edges, either the conduction band edge or the valence band edge.
Okay.
And to read that out, you can actually look at the strength of this a vertical transition that promote electron from the balance band to the conduction band leaving a hole behind in the balance band.
And the Fermi energy actually just move to the valence band maximum.
The transition, the strength of this transition actually shows like a modern step function, because actually once you put the Fermi energy there, you introduce poly blocking for the optical transition.
And as a result, this kind of step function will provide a very natural reference points. Yeah, there's no external.
There's no signature of exit on the long case.
I'm not really looking at the exit on. But also, so the, when you have exit times is probably blocking is not going to be complete. And in fact, the exit times will turn into a charge exit time resonances.
But the neutral exit time actually if you look at a particular photo energy the neutral exit times nearly gone.
After you just put some doping into the valence band.
But there is exit time yet.
So this, this line is a density of extra is the integrated intensity of the neutral exit.
And once you dope it, that is appear. And because that turns into charge exit.
It's options rather than emissions. This is actually reflection reflection contrast. Yeah, it's a combination of real and imaginary part of the optical conductivity.
But the idea is actually that this sharp step function provides a reference point and we just pick the reference point in the middle of this curve here.
And so the advantage is actually that it's about it's a local thermodynamic readouts with some micron resolution.
And without going into you know fabricating complicated FETs.
And then in our experiment we basically change the top gay and the sensor gay voltage these two voltages in order to tune the filling factor and electric field through the sample.
And the bottom gay is to fix the sensor at the at that reference point. And we just use a feedback circuit for the optical readout and always try to lock the sensor at that reference point.
So with this experiment you can directly read out the chemical potential of the sample from the bias voltage that you apply between the sample and the sensor, and the bad gay voltage that you apply in order to keep the sensor in the reference points.
And this capacitance ratio is these two capacitors here that we can actually calibrate using the quantum oscillations in the sensor. Okay.
So that's the idea that reading out the chemical potential.
So this is a map of the incompressibility the mu dn as a function of the electric field and filling factor of a particular sample calibrated to be 3.4 degree with a moray density of about three times 10 to the 12 per centimeter square.
Okay, and you actually you can sort of see that it looks like the electrostatic space diagram that I should remember in the small electric field region roughly enclosed by this dash line here.
And the bands are topological. Once you go to high enough electric field the bands are non topological as you will see.
And then here on the right hand side just make a few line cuts the blue curve here is cutting exactly across the zero electric field where the bands are expected to be topological.
And you see a few incompressible states for instance at filling one a very strong one and filling one, one at two thirds, one third and one quarter filling factors so there are fractional states.
And once you apply the electric field into just exceed this region here just into this region there, and the new one in compressive incompressible states survive, but the other states are gone, more or less.
So those are the other curves here.
And another measurement that we can do because now we are just doing it locally optically to read out the chemical potential we can also do another measurement which is the magnetic circular dichorism to see whether there's time reversal symmetry breaking at the same point on the device.
And for instance, if we park at filling factor one here, a small electric field, you see a nice magnetic hysteresis curve that shows that the system really breaks time reversal spontaneously.
And if you park at two third at this state here, you also see the nice magnetic hysteresis. So the states are certainly incompressible and they are also magnetic.
And so the question is just that whether these states turn insulators or not.
So to do that, we just go back to, we try to measure the straddle formula. And this is the measurement. I'm plotting again the incompressibility in this case, versus filling factor and magnetic field, not the electric field we fix the electric field at zero.
So that the bands are pathological there. So this is the layer hybridized region. And now you can actually see that the filling factor for the new to the one and the new to the two third state.
They both dispersed under magnetic field so that measurement shows that it is indeed they are turn insulators.
And as a control experiment, you can actually apply a large electric field that the new good one state still survive you can look at its dispersion under magnetic field and there's no dispersion under magnetic field once you layer polarized the bands.
And this is just a mod insulator that it does not have, it does not have any non trivial topology.
We don't want to get into the details but we can actually use the quantum oscillations of the sensor to really calibrate each of the gate capacitance and calibrate the just angle and with that we can actually determine the two quantum numbers in the straddle formula T and s for the new to the
two third state, the T is within error by is equal to one, and also the as is also equal to one for the two third state with an error bar actually T is equal to two thirds, and the as is also equal to two thirds so both just this measurement show that these two Thursday is actually
turn insulators.
And you can also do this kind of measurement on different angles from 2.7 degree to 3.8 degree.
Basically, these states are pretty robust there, both the two Thursday and the killing one states, they keep to be turn insulators and fractional turn insulator with, you know, little variance angle. Yeah. Yeah.
So, I guess that you're the moving areas about the deflection, the limited area of my phone.
So, if you ask me for a transport device that we make because we pick only those that is uniform within about five micron by five micron by two micron area is pretty homogeneous in order to do the transport in this kind of device.
So, try to pick those one that you know have a large area homogeneity because we can just measure locally, and you can easily see angle variation.
Not that much a problem for large angle device, because if you have a say a certain delta theta in your angle error in large just angle the angle error is not that huge a problem.
So, not just angle device, you can easily see some area is three degrees some area is maybe 2.5 degree or something. When you do that, this is the calibrations out of oscillation.
Do you do that at that particular point. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, everything is done at that particular point.
So, this is a final word for closing this topic is that you can also apply electric field to make the bands to be non topological, and you can measure the charge gap of that incompressible state.
This is the FCI say the truth of filling, and you can actually see that once you apply the electric field, the gap goes to zero so it goes to compressible states looks like somewhat continuously.
And also you lose the ferromagnetism. So this is a part of the curious temperature, exactly at those critical point, a curious temperature is no longer positive so you lose the ferromagnetism immediately.
Okay.
How long do I have about together 15 minutes.
So, 10 minutes for 10 minutes, I will talk about this roughly.
It's protected. So it's an FBI protected by as the conservation comments you that's the case, at least.
It turns out that you know we discussed with people like Liangful. And at some point you told us that the magic angle is around two degree.
So, then we try to make a device down to two degree. It turns out that it's actually pretty challenging because the system tried to relax to this a para electric structure.
And it's not as modest angle, but the heroic efforts of this group of people here really realize this device.
So this is a device with a pretty complicated structure here let me walk you through a little bit it's 2.1 degree device with a more density about 1.2 times 10 to the 12 per centimeter square.
And it's calibrated from the land of fan of this device.
It's a do get a device that this is a top gate and the bottom gate, and this is twisted by their sample.
And we use platinum contacts to try to reduce the contact resistance. I will talk about that. And in addition to that to improve the contact we use a mono layer of constant certainize a tunnel barrier.
And on top of the top gay we actually pattern another series of gates.
One of them is actually the contact gate the CG here, which is turn on the contacts.
I'll tell you a little bit. And then the other one is the split gay is basically to turn off those regions that you don't want in the channel.
And this is a picture of the device. We actually have more like a shape for the device. It has four contacts that work, and the rest of the device is actually disconnected unintentionally from this region that has uniform or a region.
And now is actually that for those who care a little bit about the details is that if you have a uniform or a region that separates from the region with no more a typically breaks the channel just breaks there maybe it's just cracks or something that happens.
But we have a folk for terminal device here. So this is actually the contact structure that I want to talk a little bit about this contact gates actually heavily hold up the twisted monitor right in the region immediately adjacent to the platinum
the heavy hold doping is actually reduce the contact resistance within the metal and semiconductor exactly in this region.
And the channel is actually gated by the top and the bottom gay. It turns out that we can write down roughly the contact resistance in this kind of a series of resistance circuits.
And it turns out that the contact resistance is really dominated by this junction. This junction here from heavily hold doping to variable doping in the channel is quite transparent actually, as you will see.
And so the contact resistance actually is totally independent of the electric field and the filling factor inside the sample because this is only gate changed by the local gates there.
Okay, and this is the contact resistance that we measure as a function of the temperature, even down to really carbon temperature, we can get a contact resistance about 20 to 30 kilo ohm.
This number may not be very impressive for you know people doing graphene which typically you get one to two kilo ohm or one kilo ohm or something like that.
But it's actually already pretty good. It's, I would say very good already for that just the TMD devices.
And so this is a map of the longitudinal resistance.
How does the WSE2 help the contact?
We figured that if you don't put WSE2, you're actually often you cannot turn on the contact.
With the WSE2, you have a much better probability to turn on the contact.
So the platinum dopes the WSE2 which.
The WSE2 is undoped, the band alignment.
It's never doped.
The platinum and then you have the WSE2 and then you have it.
The WSE2 there is still an insulator, but the tunneling into that makes it a better contact actually.
Yeah.
I think the reason is actually that the energy gap of this 2D semiconductor is the function of doping, and also the function of the also the dielectric constant of the environment.
If you directly put the material on PT, you actually have two different band gaps across here.
And that is actually a very large shocky barrier. But if you put some layer in between you reduce that amount.
And that would actually make the contact better. But if you put too much, then you of course you just get too much tunnel barrier.
Yeah, that's sort of a working hypothesis.
It's the field strength.
Yeah.
This is a electric field and filling map of the longitudinal resistance.
And you can actually see filling one state not very clearly, but actually, let me just show you the line cut at the zero electric region. That's basically the region we are mostly interested in.
In factor one, you get zero RXX for the quantized RXY. That's the churn insulator. And you can also see that there is actually a fractional churn insulator around filling factor three half with a weak RXY plateau here not very well quantized, but it is there.
There is a RXX tip.
But for all the other states, I feel in factor two, three, four, six, you can actually see all the way up to about eight or even more beyond that.
It really just shows that there are many, many states in this device because it's a very smallest angle, all the bands are really, really flat.
But you look at this is actually a bit strange that all the states of two, three, four, six states they have nearly a zero RXX, but also zero RXY.
So because it has nearly zero hall response, this cannot be churn insulator, not like a filling factor one. So this cannot be chiral states.
So what are these states? So we then we try to measure.
Oh, it's the FCI.
What we do next is actually we measure a two terminal resistance as a function of the filling factor. So this is the configuration we shot this to contact we shot this to contact we just measure the two terminal resistance.
And we calibrate the contact resistance at very high doping and we just subtract off that one constant contact resistance.
And the blue curve is the two terminal resistance after depth subtraction of a constant contact resistance.
You can see the one, two, three, four, six, eight, and the one has a quantized RXY, but all the other states have zero RXY nearly zero RXY.
And this is a plot of the two terminal conductance is one over the two terminal resistance as a function of filling factor and different electric field you can actually see that some clear steps of one, two, three, four, six in units of E square of H.
And I want to know that for the incompressible region, the conductance is actually independent of the electric field.
But for the compressible region in between you can actually see that the two terminal conductance is dependent on the electric field that we apply to the sample.
So the two, three, four, six states cannot be chiral states because of the vanishing or response. And you actually with this geometry the filling factor three states is very special.
Because each edge actually contributes a three half conductance quantum resistance.
So it implies a personalization.
In this case, so we can do a little bit better, actually, because we have four contacts we can just do a series of a non local to a terminal measurements.
And basically this idea is really following the work by, you know, Andrea Pablo and also Ray, in the 2014 paper, they were studying the quantum spin, how you find graphene under a high molecular field.
But the simple story is actually that every time you float an electrode there you.
Thank you. Yeah, you can actually provide a point that can let the helical edge state to equilibrate at this region.
So that you can actually use the Landau particle formula you can build up this effective circuit model for the measurement for instance here you have two edges in parallel.
Here you flow this electrode so you have to add resistors in series here and one at resistors here so they are one and two in parallel.
Here is actually two and two, two in series and then they are in parallel, each other.
So this is, then you can actually really predict that what value that you would measure using this circuit model so let me just long story short.
So in factor two, the quantum spin hall insulator to terminal conductance versus electric field.
And once you go beyond the critical electric field the system just transition into a topological attribute states so this, you don't need to look at there.
You just look at the small electric field region. And each of this dashed line with a particular color is the expected value.
So edge carries exactly one conductance quantum. And for instance this contribution will give you a two is where over each this will just measure effectively one edge conductance is one is where over each.
So this measurement just confirmed that this is indeed a quantum spin hall insulator with one conductance quantum patch.
And do the same thing fulfilling factor three at zero electric field again you just need to look at the small electric field region.
And the dashed line of the expected value, the solid line of the measurement value, and they agree reasonably well, and the conclusion is actually that each edge carries a three half conductance quantum just like what I told you about.
Okay, so the only thing we can think of a state that with quantized to terminal resistance and the zero hall resistance is a quantum spin hall insulator so I think this should have some area.
And also this measurement really supports that that they are helical edge states. So, yeah, so why does it goes up.
Yeah, actually, this is this is transitioning to a trivial insulator.
And this is transitioning to a metal.
Yeah.
So that the two are different. Yeah.
Just a few comments, the new two, four, six are actually single double and triple quantum spin hall insulators.
And you may wonder why you actually can have an even number of helical edge even number of helical edge state pairs on the edges. And the reason is because of the as the conservation.
And this quantum spin insulator is actually not protected by time reversal, but is instead protected by a as the conservation, and you can actually check that experimentally if you apply in plain magnetic field.
And that will actually destroy the as the conservation and a small in plain magnetic field can actually suppress the edge conductance quite a bit.
Okay, for all the, for all the incompressible states at integer feelings. But if you do the same thing for the compressible region the input magnetic field would not do anything.
And filling factor three states we think it's a functional quantum spin hall insulator. This is the band structure.
It has a series of a secret plus one trump band at the K Valley and a series C equal to minus one and K prime valley.
They are very flat almost like Landau levels so see a new good three is actually corresponding to a half field to land our levels of this second flat band.
Okay, so they pair. So possibly is indicating some kind of composite Birmingham pairing. And I was just say that there are many existing theory at this point.
Some say that you know you can break time reversal something that you probably preserved time reversal some say that you can carry you over for charge some say that you know you can carry you over to charge, and it's over the place and hopefully there will be some
progress in the future that you know, we will know the nature of the states. And finally is energy scale of the states we can do temperature dependence.
And the short message is actually that the new three states disappear at a temperature about three Kelvin. So that's roughly the gap size of the state. So it's pretty small energy scale.
And with this, I just put down the summary and happy to answer any question.
So, for the last party, what is it the reaction of the system out of here, out of playing field.
Actually does not do anything almost nothing.
Yeah, it's protected by the right so it actually this is another thing that we really quite believe that this is true.
Out of playing field, it doesn't do anything but in playing field, it actually does something because for the TMD usually you will expect the opposite. If it's bulk transport.
Many, many samples that we study you apply in playing field does not do anything out of playing, you know, all the effect comes from the other playing field right. Yeah, it's opposite here.
So, since it's loud, if it's close to full effect, would you expect some MCD signal in those samples at the edges, or have you seen any.
Yeah, actually, you would because once you, well, only if you're driver current, if you drive a current you should get spin accumulation on the edges, and that in principle can be propped, but we have not been able to do it.
Yeah.
Yes.
So if I remember correctly, three top and the angst prediction from 2021 was maybe general for TMDs and specifically they were looking at the tungsten cell and I think at 1.4 degrees or something.
Is there a specific reason you understand now why.
Maybe two should be the right choice.
We, for reasons we don't know, maybe, I don't know, maybe Liang at some point can answer the question also.
We do not find any FCI in the tungsten cell and I we do lots of transport studies on the sample also.
You can find some some other things, but it's just not the FCI.
It's possible to go down to low twist angle 1.4.
It's pretty challenging. Yeah, so we've been looking at the larger twist angle in terms of the transport device. Yeah.
Yeah. So that may actually be the reason because the, the mass for the molecular is heavier. So the bands are flatter that are given to this angle.
Is this compatible with building interferometers?
Can you, can you.
It's possible. Well, it's an insulator, right? You can actually, you do this point on point.
But I think it's at the same time really challenging.
The test samples are pretty hard to make. I think at this point we are not trying that kind of experiment. I think it's just too far away.
I think we just need to develop how to make these devices more reliably first. Yeah.
In this TI, mention this TI is not preserved by time reversal symmetry, but by SC symmetry. Is that the reason why in your data of IXY and those integer filling factors, there's a slope of IXY.
So instead of ISY equal to zero for a finite range of.
Yeah, actually, there are certainly some features at a single point.
There are certainly some features that we don't understand. I think you're talking about this slope here, right? Yeah.
But it only happens that filling factor three for four and six and two is not the case. So filling factor three is like that.
Yeah, but you mentioned three is the FCI state.
It's the FTI state. Yeah.
But the other TI states, right, and they are also protected by as the conservation.
Okay. Yeah.
Thanks very much. Okay, thank you.
Okay, next up.
Yeah, the vitalization in superconductor.
And it's just, you have to be able to have it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Sorry, I took the mic.
That's very important.
I don't want to, I don't want to get out of the picture.
Just think this first of all.
Whatever you want.
All right.
Oh.
But maybe there is a point of here, it should be.
There was a stick to use it as a point.
Okay, look, that's the limit.
So thank you for invitation and body.
Congratulations.
Everybody is a very important person in my life.
So it taught me a lot.
And she also helped me a lot.
I don't have time to give lecture about it, but I really want him.
This is my.
This is my title, my name, place where I'm working.
This is my collaborator.
We did it with Anton Andre from the students.
I'm going to speak today.
About two effects.
I'm going to speak today.
About two effects.
And.
I will have three six of us and as junctions.
And the first question.
Why to speak in one talk about two effects.
And the answer is because they're described by one simple formula.
Just one simple formula. So if I will not have time to go to SNS junction.
Right.
Please believe me that I don't second part of my talk.
I'm not going to say anything new.
The effect which I'm going to speak about is similar, but not identical to Dubai.
Relaxation mechanism and gases.
And by the way, I don't want to buy relaxation mechanism is very long ago for Boria.
In the context of coping conductivity.
But anyway, to speak about relaxation to begin with, I have to say some couple of words about relaxation times and superconductor some metals.
And in the metal there are at least two relaxation times elastic and elastic.
And typically in films, for example, elastic relaxation time is much shorter than an elastic by many orders of magnitude.
How many.
I don't know.
And I don't know who knows.
I don't know if you can measure in elastic relaxation time metals. You may think that we localization gives you information about it.
But the localization measures are shortest out of an elastic relaxation time.
And in the body relaxation mechanism it is longest.
The longest ratio, which I know in literature was from Misha Gershinton, who measured how weekly metal cools.
And according to human milik a, this ratio could be eight, nine orders of magnitude.
And my goal, of course, I not always.
And there are several relaxation in elastic relaxation times and my goal will be.
But what if you take, say frequency dependent relaxation time and associate frequency dependent part with our electron and independent part with our elastic.
So if you can, if you consider, if you extract right to extract frequency dependent relaxation time from the data.
So it's a gathering data.
No, no, no, no, it's very high energy.
So it's completely different story. We are speaking about low temperatures superconductor one degree 10 degrees.
So it's four orders of magnitude up right.
So the question is in which data.
Okay.
So, first microwave absorption metal is featureless.
This is through the conductivity density of states and normal metal thermal velocity elastic relaxation time in its frequency is much smaller than elastic relaxation, you know, inverse elastic relaxation time.
Through the conductivity controls.
The absorption and in the last relaxation time doesn't play any role.
And also nonlinearity is very small in the adsorption metals.
Superconductors was also kind of history of this.
Superconductors is super current density, super flow density, super fluid momentum.
This is conductivity, this electric field.
And this conductivity is controlled controls adsorption microwave absorption.
Now, this is a subject of many important people, many important people worked on it starting with a bargain trip for them lucky enough to make up many, many others.
This is kind of result that small frequencies more than omega, don't pay much attention to this log.
The formula is done.
When gap is isotropic when it's an atropical it is cut off, but anyway, density of singularity of the density of states is dropped.
Broadened anyway, so this log maybe factor three.
The message here is this, is that if you measure microwave absorption and in this way superconductors, it is always smaller.
This is the order of normal map near TC was your particles roughly in normal metal. If you go down in temperature, my head with adsorption decreases.
And also, this is druidic conductivity.
The material absorption is controlled again by elastic relaxation rate.
And always on tone goal is to go one effect by another in superconductors and top to two elastic relaxation time for an elastic, which means many orders of magnitude.
And it goes with the price.
And I will tell you what the prices, but first, the mechanism.
So, is the presence of electric field superfluid momentum changes sometime as a result density of state changes sometime.
And if density of state changes sometime, it means that energy levels moving energy space.
And in adiabatic approximation, and when it is valid when it's loaded, when it is not we can discuss, but an adiabatic approximation was a practical straddle without these levels.
The result on equilibrium relaxation is created.
It's a relaxation is related to an elastic processes.
It's as a result will affect will be proportional to an elastic relaxation time.
It goes with the price.
If you want to do it in linear regime.
The density of states should be changing with electric field, for example, obviously, superfluid momentum, but density of states is a scalar.
So you need another vector.
So, and I will speak about this later.
This kind of pedestrian demonstration effect is general.
But we can speak about limit of pure superconductor, where words in cataclysm is applied this is the distribution function for the particle this is conventional Boltzmann equation, think about no relaxation.
When you drop scattering integral, think about uniform case, then you stop drop these two terms, and you have derivative of time of N of P is constant, which means that distribution function labeled by momentum is constant doesn't change in time,
but energy changes in time because superfluid momentum changes in time.
So, as a result, this whole story starts.
But I would like to be much more general.
Why, I will tell you in a second.
So, you can think about levels like the particles.
Moving in one dimensional space in energy space, and then when density of states changes in time, there is a conservation law.
Total number of levels is conserved.
So this is continued equation for levels.
This is density of the level this is velocity of the level of levels in energy space.
So we can solve this equation, and this is velocity as a function of electric field.
How electric field enters here as dot equal to electric field.
And I will call it sensitivity. This is a parameter which which can be expressed in terms of derivative of density of states over superfluid momentum.
This is another conservation law in absence of an elastic scattering. This is total.
This is density of electrons, this is the coefficient number of electrons. This is continued equation also for total number of positive particles and energy space.
And then if I add here, in elastic term responsible for an elastic relaxation.
So this is the form of the equation, which I personally never saw.
This term is responsible for motion.
Scientific term for this is expected spectral flow.
It's a one level moves together with electrons.
I will speak about mostly about a situation when scattering integral can be written in the relaxation time approximation, I can, I can do it most.
I can be more sophisticated than this but does that just really matter.
Then linearize this equation.
If I'm interested in linear in the acting field response linearize this equation.
Again, proportional to electric field.
This we the sensitivity which I mentioned, substitute this expression into expression for entropy production rate.
Yes.
Something very general. So you're talking about thermally excited was important.
No, they're not thermally excited already exists. They just move.
So there is a summer distribution.
But you need thermals. Can I put temperature to be zero. No quasi particles.
Can you wait.
No, no.
Okay, let me.
Yes, you can.
Your effect amplitude of effect will be the same.
But frequency interval where this effect will be not zero will shrink to zero.
As your temperature goes to zero that's my answer.
Okay.
This is kinetic equation for quasi part was a particle.
I'll give you an answer if you want me to explain how it works.
I give you hint.
If not, sorry.
The body relaxation mechanism is proportional to the longest of relaxation times.
If you go to zero to small temperatures, the combination time exponentially increases.
As a result, this exponent will cancel.
But frequency interval where it happens will be exponentially small.
That's what my answer.
Okay.
Probably you should think about finding them for now.
Right.
Yeah.
Okay.
Anyway, look.
Answer question was, does it die as temperature decreases.
Okay. Anyway, this is Dubai.
Conductivity so I create an introduction rate with Sigma times electric square.
And this is my formula.
And you don't have to know anything else about this.
So I divided it by drew the conductivity just to make it dimensionless.
And this is a ratio between elastic and elastic elastic relaxation time.
As I said, I don't know how many orders of magnitude are in the case when frequency is larger than an elastic.
Only that I was larger than one.
It's a similar to the body relaxation mechanism. What's not similar is that it's constant that frequency goes to zero.
Whereas the body relaxation mechanism spread right economic.
So that's the difference between superconductors.
This is just place it's new formula.
It is correct for any superconductors ASP D arbitrary disorder.
So mean free pass could be larger or smaller than in three parts.
It is mean field formula, but it can be generalized I think for quantum fluctuations, it hasn't been done but I think generalization is kind of simple.
But anyway, this is the main message here.
The ratio between the last in the last elastic elastic relaxation time are now from this formula you see the following that this derivative of density of states over superfluid momentum shouldn't be not zero.
So in super in density of states is a scalar.
So, it means that you need another vector.
So either you have S wave superconductors and you have to pass a super current in this is the price, which you have to pay for the, of course, there are another trivial mechanisms which I mentioned, which are proportion to elastic relaxation time.
Now, if it is, for example, people with IP superconductor, then this is not zero even in the absence of external superfluid momentum.
And the message here is the following that if you have a superconductor, you measure microwave absorption, and you see the value of Sigma.
Significantly larger than its value in normal metal, it's an conventional superconductor. So it's almost smoking gun or new kind of criteria, no criteria can do new.
And if it just simple D wave superconductor.
If no, no, no, no.
So it's not simply conventional.
Depends.
Anyway, you know what I mean.
You need a vector right.
Okay.
Now, the rest is okay you have to calculate this dependence of density of states of superfluid momentum hundreds of people did it in different limits, dirty case, pure case, not me this product.
Yes, it is a price you if you want to do it in this way superconductor, you have to pass super current in my understanding is that it is possible.
But most of experiments and experimenters don't do it.
Because, because the leads they don't like leads to pass a current but it will be I'm wrong.
Yes.
Yes.
This expression straight depends on the directions of what is the expression depends on the direction on the PS.
Yes, it is also in the tropic with respect to electric field in the in super current if it's a wave, you pass super current like this, there will be an electric field should be parallel.
It should be component of electric field parallel to super current yours.
If the superconductor parameter some structures, say, say, D or D plus ID, whatever things.
I mean, the directions that they study hours.
Then we can answer is complicated.
My answer is this effect will still exist.
But actually I'm done will will speak about what is in and what is as you will see that it is still survive war. Your argument is the same so super current is like this.
But it's, it derails derails me from my direction.
My short answer is yes.
Anyway, so give me density of states.
Simple as possible.
Just to see what the prices for this are pure case delta tower elastic, much larger than one.
The rate of energy of super fluid momentum is trivial very well known substituted this is a formula.
This is a ratio which I talked about.
This ratio is roughly a ratio between current super current and the pairing super current.
This is many many orders of magnitude.
This is dirty case also.
This are roughly outlooks if you have one relaxation time, you have a huge value of ratio between Sigma and Drude.
And then it drops when frequencies of order of one over time in the last.
In Zen, of course, there is another contribution which is conventional which everybody calculated before us.
But it's high frequency.
Now, by the way, this is the mistake it's much hard anyway.
Oh, I'm sorry.
This is wrong slide I don't know what occurred there. If you have several relaxation time say for example, for nun and then electron, then first omega.
When omega is larger than longest relaxation time it will decay.
So, yeah, but it is something like this.
The only experiment which we found in this area is a experiment of with a group car, but Bertrand.
This is a, this is not a sample.
Actually, this is single photon detector.
This is aluminum.
And so this sample is not prepared, especially to measure this effect.
It's a single photon detector but for some reasons they measure microwave absorption.
And these are passing current. This is the current.
And you see increase of microwave absorption. So this quantity here is proportional to sigma.
Now, the reason why personally I didn't analyze this device and whether
our theory agrees with this experiment is the following that this is a single photo detector.
And it is a device to measure single photo.
And if you prepare wire, this wire of aluminum.
The energy of one photo is not sufficient to suppress delta. So this single photo detector will not work.
So you have to damage this aluminum.
And first person who damaged this aluminum to the degree that single photo detector works was a Grisha Goldsmith Moscow long ago.
And then everybody can follow this recipe, but this is kind of not very well controlled sample.
And that's the best experiment which we should write my guess is so it's not the difficult experiment I guess, but you need leads to pass a current.
Or I know several unpublished results when people just measured microwave absorption, which was much larger than normal metal make up absorption.
So then they have the.
What.
What red line.
Red line. Yes.
The point is that if you know this, and you pass a current superconductor say near to see nothing dramatically happens. Now of course your particles as roughly the same.
No.
dramatic dependence work for
conductivity.
For the context.
Just for the context. So, in Jordan, some junction of Jordan some phrase people measure my career steps for ages. So should they see.
Okay, it depends.
It's a question of frequencies you see, right, and I don't know I have to think about frequency in which they measure.
So it's a, I don't want to answer this question in in either way.
Including questions, including questions. Okay, now.
Pass a current that's fine, but then measure nonlinear absorption.
In nonlinear absorption, one part of electric field will create two p s bar, and then now in that, then the same story are so in previous form or have to substitute p s.
Nonlinear for p s created by electric field. So the prediction is that since oppression doctors nonlinear microwave absorption, the giant.
Many orders of magnitude larger than what you expect.
Why people didn't measure it. You don't need the, you don't need leads. In this case, probably it's psychology is that if you think that everything is like a normal metal in the ATC so you don't need, you don't expect any more linearity.
Anyway, so as I, as I promised, by the way,
this formula can be also generalized easily, not only.
Very general form. And in particular, if you have a Josephson junction or array of Josephson junction.
That's a formula, but there are several relaxation times in this case.
The question is what's the frequency and what you're going to see but there is nothing else.
This brings me to my next topic is the resistance of personal junction.
And as I said, you shouldn't expect any, any new formulas here.
The idea is the same.
You have us in a junction.
You apply voltage density of states because of under a population density of states in normal metal region depends on phase difference.
You know, the equilibrium distribution is created.
If I pull it into the conduction as a conductance or resistance, dissipative resistance, what I'm going to speak about is I will have three sticks averaged over the period of a silly or Josephson oscillation.
You're a dissipative.
So this is device superconductor normal but not superconductor.
This is Josephson relations, derivative of phase equals to to elect and charge times voltage.
This is who anyway.
The same formulas.
It's a dimensional approximation when diffusion time across the normal metal is much shorter than period of oscillation.
So I can introduce distribution function which depends on the energy and by the way in previous discussion I also forgot to tell you that I assumed that the inner that elastic relaxation rates are very, very, very short.
The distribution function depends on the energy here is the same, but it's also doesn't depend on coordinate.
So it's just a question function of energy.
The same formula.
The same expression for sensitivity.
I also can write conservation law of total number of levels in continuity equation, have this expression substituted here.
The difference between what I told you about in this in this junction is the following that in this in this junction.
Actually, there are, I will have three stick depends on the external circle circle circuit.
It depends whether you fix voltage current.
But this is very technical thing.
And
So, I saw this equation.
Instead of introduction rate I can tell to I just can write expression for current.
By the way, maybe I could like to move the following command.
It looks very simple.
But it was not very simple for me.
And when I was thinking about what they're really effective.
It is the following that when you.
It's a, it's a, it's the same likes with the, with the body relaxation mechanism, it also looks very simple.
But when you think about how current to read the flows.
It is about correlation between events of emission and absorption of phonons and the phrase of electric fields.
The same as here. So you can rephrase this effect.
The following ways that can you get some dissipation from oscillating super current.
The answer is yes, because the super current value oscillates but it depends on its, its amplitude depends on on distribution function.
Also oscillates.
As a result, there is a component of super current, which is in phase is electric with the solution of collective field.
In the same as here.
With the result.
I would like just to give you a result don't want to go to the simple algebra.
There is nothing fancy here.
There is a result for a big characteristics.
In the case when voltage is fixed on SNS junction.
This blue region is new.
This is old.
Many people, how many I don't know. Many, many people.
Important people calculated this.
This is new.
This characteristic peak has to do with it.
This characteristic peak has to do with the same effect which we saw in microwave absorption.
There is one over omega tau in elastic squared and denominator.
This is similar to the body of station mechanism.
So,
formula is also for conductance at small voltages is also similar to what you saw before.
This is again general formula.
It is general SNS junction.
So you don't have to think about whether it's pure metal dirty metal.
What kind of metal would be quantum Hall effect, for example, a set of metal does really matter. This is new formula.
Interestingly,
this maximum
would be much larger than critical current.
So maximum of current here is much larger than creating the equilibrium critical current I will comment on this in a second.
Anyway, but practically my understanding is that it's possible but experiment is don't like to apply voltage.
So,
they can pass a current.
So, but it's clear already from here what is going to happen.
So,
if you apply current,
there is a
anyway, this is unstable branch.
The negative differential conductance region.
Yes, but you it's a fixed voltage so it's stable.
It fix current it would be unstable.
So, that's what I said.
What is shown here. Yes. Yes, that's what this is a fixed current. If you fix current. This is a week with statistics.
And I would like to show to you this.
I would like to change the characteristic feature of it.
Again, I am not 100% sure about statements which I would like to make.
But my impression is that most of the experiment is but maybe all of them measure critical current wrongly.
Not only in Jefferson junctions but in the films.
In general, in the reason is this look here.
The region which I'm speaking about this voltage is a very small, how small. I don't know, and I will comment on this later. But anyway, this is a different the difference between critical current and current where it jumps would be a parametrically big.
So, you measure small, I would restrict that small voltages are small. If you take literally this tower in elastic.
It is really small voltage. Sometimes it depends on time on the temperature.
But also, anyway, so there is a plateau here this legal means that there is a, there is a big parameter for it's look, it's look like a plateau.
So, this is very well, which corresponds to very small voltage and then jump.
And that's, that's the result.
But get a parameter that makes this region large is what it really says.
Look, to print, scientifically, at temperature, larger than the centaulis energy critical current is exponentially small.
And this jump is not exponentially small. So, theoretically, it would be even exponential, but of course, practically, it's not.
Okay, now, about this in elastic relaxation time, which I'm, I was speaking about.
I think it's, it makes sense for uniform superconductors in the case of SNS junction.
It's actually not.
Yes.
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, sure.
It's actually not in elastic relaxation time. It's a time to escape from this region. And this is, you know, probably. Yes, sure. Okay, it's enough five minutes for questions.
Good. So, message here, you have to substitute elastic relaxation time to really escape time. This has now been measured superconductor the SNS junction.
You can escape to this office you can expect escape in a bulk. If there is in the bulk of the sub gaps, the sub gap states, this is already hoping to the activity was a particles which has now been studied in semiconductor into conductors.
And finally,
so the rest of the messages are following that. Okay, almost everything which you want to know about small voltages.
I be characteristics in SNS junction and also in an array of them.
Can be done this way.
In particular, you can consider non reciprocity of I be characteristics.
SNS junction.
Of course, there is anxiety, theorems that conductance linear conductance of each equals to conductance of minus age, but in the linear case it is not the case it was in metals where it was studied to load
in semiconductors, but again in metals, this amplitude of non reciprocity is controlled by elastic relaxation time is a result that's really, it is usually small in here, it is giant, it's proportional to an elastic relaxation time.
And there is another kind of the whole story behind it.
This is my conclusion. Thank you very much.
And questions.
Yes.
So you have, if you have a distribution of this elastic relaxation time.
What would be the.
If you have just two.
Okay, you have to do this with simple algebra.
I can tell I could tell you what if you have to, you have a big conductivity going down.
No, no, it will be a mega dependent because you will switch off.
If you have a hierarchy of relaxation time, you will sequentially switch off all of them.
Depends on distribution function, of course.
For constant.
For constant what?
Ah, yeah, sorry, yes, for constant distribution function.
Yes.
So the reason I'm asking is because like in high DC versus residual conductivity.
Look, look, look, I deliberately didn't, didn't speak about high DC.
First place.
It's high DC.
Second place.
Not a single word is known in high DC about the relaxation rates.
And, but there is a feeling that this is by the way, the reason why you will find out in high DC works much better.
Because it's planking and relaxation rate is very short there.
And so how short, probably it will grow up.
When you go to small temperatures, but I don't know anything about it.
So voltage bias, the Josephson junction.
What?
The voltage bias, the Josephson junction that you initially showed.
Or this bias bias.
Yes.
Then, then there's an AC Josephson effect and that junction can really be some variation.
Yes.
No, no, no, no.
It's, it's very small.
Yes, it does radiate, but a contribution to, to, to, to, I V characteristics is very small.
I know, look, it's my short answer. Yes, I know.
I thought that depends on the kind of radiation conditions.
Yes, it depends on the condition, but typically this mismatch in is very small to begin with.
But second place.
I'm not in.
Look, what I showed to use many major magnitude.
So.
The voltage bias I be characteristics with the negative differential resistance is something that is seen if you voted by some junction.
So maybe at least something in less and less junction.
Because we will be very much with SSS junction.
But, but this is like a language.
No, sir.
Okay.
I mean, then I didn't get the sense of the numbers like this is something immeasurably small.
Let's think about numbers and say, if a relaxation time at an aluminum at room at one degree is 10 to power minus eight 10 to power minus nine seconds.
Right.
10 to.
So, one world is 10 to the power.
Anyway, so that's so converted in voltage will be pretty small voltage.
But my point is this, it's shorter than this.
There are no more questions.
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
I don't know if the university giant microwave absorption in a pin what the place is.
Yes, you can. Well, we can use this as a whole session pointer.
Okay, thank you.
First of all, I want to thank the organizers for the invitation. It's an honor for me to be at this workshop and celebrate Boris's birthday, his induction to the Academy of Science.
I cannot claim to be one of Boris's students, but in a way, I feel like I am, maybe a grandson, because through first through Boris Altshuler and then Boris, I feel like I've been fortunate to be exposed to this wonderful style of doing physics with clarity of the
quality of understanding is emphasized over mouse.
Okay, so thank you and happy working guys.
Okay, so my talk will be in some sense a continuation of what Boris discussed, and I will consider the application of that physics to a non homogeneous superconductor.
So we'll discuss microwave absorption in type two superconductors where a film of a superconductor hosts a because of board disease.
So this work is done.
It's based on a bunch of papers that are written together with Boris Pirok, Misha Tegelman, and also our former and current students, Tony Lou, Mike Smith, and Boris Moshinsky.
So throughout the talk I will only discuss thin films of superconductors.
So this is a cartoon, let's say we have this because of lattice in a mixed state.
And I want to start by reminding how the flux flow connectivity is traditionally understood in this case. So if you apply a transport current of this film.
This current reduces a magnet's force on the board disease, eventually they become the pin. And the system goes into the flux flow regime.
And in the flux flow regime, the pinning force becomes given element, and the magnets force is balanced by the friction force on the board disease.
And the velocity of what is this is proportion to the electric field that's essentially the Josephson relation. It's this drift velocity with which all the magnetic field lines three.
And in the traditional theory, the resistivity is all due to the friction of the word exports which behave as chunks of normal methods.
And so let me start by kind of reviewing of how this theory goes to offset what I'm going to discuss.
So this consideration of the flux flow conductivity was originated by Bardin and Stephen, and then many other people did work on this.
And in a nutshell, what you say is that the friction force is proportion to the velocity of the vortex core and the friction coefficient eta is a proportion to the normal state conductivity.
And it reflects the fact that a core can be considered as a chunk of a normal map.
So with this expression for the viscosity, you can equate dual heat to the energy dissipation rate due to viscous friction, and then substituting the flux flow velocity, one gets this well known result of Bardin and Stephen for the flux flow conductivity.
And this is the normal state conductivity times this ratio of H2 to H.
And so what's important is that the flux flow conductivity in the Bardin-Steven theory is proportional to the short elastic relaxation time, and the long inelastic relaxation time does not enter at all.
So, continuing this boring talk, I will discuss under what conditions the long inelastic relaxation time can appear in the connectivity of this type two superconductors in the mixed state.
So just boys already did the introduction, but maybe one way to understand or to illustrate how the inelastic relaxation time can appear in the presence of a condensate momentum is the following that if you consider the clean case, then the energy of a quasi particle
requires a correction proportion to PS. This correction depends on the normal state velocity of the electron, and also the contribution of the same quasi particle to the current is also proportion to the same velocity, which tells you that the quasi particle energy and its current become correlated and therefore current
relaxation is becomes intertwined with energy relaxation in the presence of a super fluid moment.
And in the vortex state in the mixed state super fluid momentum is naturally present due to vortices. So we may expect that inelastic relaxation time will appear in the connectivity.
So let me start with the simplest. That's an illustration of the bio relaxation. How this actually occurs because quasi particle levels in time with energy space, setting off inelastic relaxation processes.
Boris already explained that. So let me skip it.
I'm going to borrow on these results that Boris discussed where we studied the Debye relaxation in uniform systems where it can be expressed in terms of the dependence of the density of quasi particle states on the super fluid momentum and apply these results to this non uniform system.
So I just want to mention that maybe that we have microscopic results for both S wave superconductors and D wave superconductors for uniform systems.
And I'm going to borrow on the results for S wave, where all these kinds of sensitivities and the dependence of the density of states on PS was.
Okay, let me start with the simplest example of appearance of the Debye, Debye relaxation in the flux flow conductivity.
We can consider low temperature regime, T plus more than Delta, where the quasi particles reside only inside the vortex force.
So then this vortex for can be considered as a zero dimensional system, where the density of states is essentially the density of states of a normal metal.
The density of states per vortex is the normal state density of states times the volume of the core, which is size squared times the, where D is the film thickness and size the coherence way.
And if your system if your film is a disorder, then the volume of the vortex for depends on the position of the vortex, because these film thickness may fluctuate from point to point, and also the coupling constant diffusion coefficient can also vary.
Therefore, the coherence links will also depend on position. And then as vortices migrating through the system, it will make the density of states in the core time dependent, and this will set off spectral flow and Debye relaxation.
So then if you, you can apply our old results for you from systems, because cores are essentially zero dimensional.
And we did this with the patient Igor Manon Boris and Mike Smith, we assumed weak disorder.
And the variance of the density of states locations is relatively small, and the disorder is has long range correlations, where the correlation length exceeds the core size.
Then you can obtain this ratio of the Debye connectivity to the bargain Stephen connected in the following form, there's this big ratio in elastic to elastic relaxation time, and then a bunch of small parameters which describe the strength of disorder and correlation rates.
Yes, please.
Good. Sorry. Yes, my career will be kind of the main story, kind of background. So I think, generally, both flux low conductivity and linear micro connectivity acquire this contribution.
It's kind of a wall.
What are you talking about? Is it just flux low or you're applying might always want to open it.
Okay, this is flux flow conductivity.
It feels the next next part of the talk will be my career.
DC.
DC, but it was not linear.
No, I understand the experiment is DC, DC conductivity, right, and nonlinear, because you have to depend the vortices to go to the flux flow regime.
Right. But now it kind of looks like linear conductivity, but as I said, it's really a nonlinear regime.
So this Debye contribution looks independent of the voltage, only if the electric field is sufficiently small.
And this formula implies that the time of traversal of the correlation radius of the disorder is longer than the inelastic time and then you kind of give us this result.
And if the vortices start moving faster than the inelastic rotation becomes ineffective, and this nonlinear conductivity falls off as one or a squared, and you get roughly speaking as a function of this electric field.
And this is what happens in the Lorentzian form.
And the crossover field, where this dependence on the electric field disappear, disappears depends on the correlation radius of disorder and the inelastic time.
And this is what was done. Oh, sorry. This is done here.
Similar in the physical mechanism to be shown also exists in the micro is connectivity.
I'm sorry.
Is it better?
Good.
123. Yes.
Okay.
So if you consider the same low temperature regime at weak pinning in the US study microwave connectivity, the same physics plays a role there.
There are just the vortices are displaced by the microwave from equilibrium.
And because of the inhomogeneity of the density of states, you get a similar contribution with the linear microwave connectivity, I don't want to speak about it just mentioned that it's kind of very similar.
As I said what I will discuss is in my view a more interesting case of microwave connectivity at strong pinning.
There, the mechanism of appearance of the by contributions I think much more interesting. So let me just discuss the setup.
So now I would consider a my vortex lattice, which is strongly pinned and kind of deform irregular.
But now we have these vertices, we apply an AC microwave field.
This micro field induces the madness force, which induces ACB statements of the vertices from the pinning positions.
And the question is, what is the conducting.
In our results I'll remind you how it's traditionally understood this micro activity within the bargain Stephen picture.
So the picture is that the origin of dissipation is still friction, because now the displacements of the vortex course causes friction.
And what you really need to understand is understand the velocity of the vortices induced by the micro radiation, and then substitute this velocity into the bargain Stephen form.
And even in the presence of pinning the vortex velocity turns out to be proportional to the electric field, but it's not equal to the flux flow velocity and so let me go through this how to understand.
Now, at low frequencies, the madness force is not balanced by the friction but primarily by the pinning force, and therefore we can say that the displacements of the vortices are proportional to the transport current, which induces the vortex will be
minus force.
If you take the time derivative of this relation, what you find is that the velocity of the vortex is proportional to the time derivative of the transport current, which itself is proportional to the electric field.
And we still have the same result that velocities move with the velocity proportion to E, but the coefficient is different.
And so to find this location, you have to basically relate the time derivative of the transport current to the electric field.
This is can be expressed in terms of the effective macroscopic superfluid density of the sample. And traditionally the superfluid density is expressed in terms of the Campbell length.
It's an analogy similar to the relationship between the superfluid density in the London link.
Now the microscopic density of the sample depends on pinning, and these characterized by the Campbell length instead of the London length.
And the ratio of the Campbell length to the London length depends on the spring constant K of the pinning, and depends also on the magnitude.
And then, because in this analysis, what you find is that the velocity induced by the micro appeal is the flux law velocity reduced by the structure of the ratio of the London and Campbell way.
And as a result, what you find is that the microwave conductivity in the bargain Stephen mechanism, which we call Sigma, but in Stephen French, its ratio to the flux flow conductivity is this factor, which depends on the pain strength and the magnitude.
And again, the inelastic time does not appear.
And so, now let's.
What I will try to discuss is how the inelastic time and the device mechanism appear in the device relaxation in the pin vortex like certain device or a joker and report what it's like.
Okay, so the contribution I'm going to discuss exists, even at perfect pinning where vortices are not displaced and this friction plays no role.
And the dissipation here arises because the distribution of the super fluid momentum outside the course is disturbed by the microwave field, and this causes spectral flow.
And so, in order in population was the particles in energy, and, and this distribution relaxes via either via diffusion of quasi particles across long distances on the order of the important spacing, or by inelastic relaxation.
And really, so what I will discuss is relatively high temperature regime with temperatures of the order or greater than Delta, then the quasi particles live, not only inside the pores but also everywhere in the sample.
Also, I will stick to the London regime, where the inter vortex distance is greater than the course size.
Then, roughly speaking, the picture looks like this that the order parameters healed quickly from zero to its bulk value over length scales of the order of the four coherence link.
But then, the threshold of the quasi particle gap energy gap is actually suppressed below Delta, because of the deep airing was by the currents.
And so this is the kind of picture on the horizontal line of this density of states. This is the BCS peak, the orange dashed line, and due to the pairing, the density of states is the peak is broadened and the gap is lowered below this threshold.
The main contribution to this patient will arise from quasi particles that live outside before, and in this broadening region of broadening region.
Yeah.
Okay, so how do we quantitatively describe this situation mechanism.
So here, the, the evolution equation, the kinetic equation for these particles essentially represents the diffusion equation. So now I want to stick to dirty superconductors.
The elastic delta is small. It's a diffusive regime, and then at length at frequencies smaller than the elastic relaxation rate.
The evolution of these quasi particles is diffusive, the distribution of momentum randomizes quickly, and then the locally the distribution function depends on the on the energy.
The evolution equation is the diffusion equation, but with two exit terms. One is the inelastic collision integral, which we treat in the elastation time approximation.
And the second important thing is this contribution of the spectral flow.
So the diffusive diffusion is elastic conserves the energy, but then because of the spectral flow, quasi particles can be deposited to give an energy from other areas.
And so this is this term, which will play the main role. And here, the sub new is what we call level velocity has units of one of our time.
And it can be expressed in terms of the time derivative of the local integrated density of states here.
So I want to comment on the generality of this approach.
So we are in the dirty regime, you might ask, how, what is the correspondence between this description, and the Larkin-Avchinian equations which are more general and also apply to dirty superconductors.
So we can have chemical equations. Our function and is the analog of their function f of Larkin-Avchinian, but they have another function f one, which describes branch imbalance.
So it's important that in the situation where the spatial gradients are small generation of branch imbalance by the electric field is also small.
And at the same time, because the time reversal symmetry is broken, branch imbalance relaxes quickly by local elastic collisions, and it does not generate these long realization time.
So this is therefore Larkin-Avchinian equations actually reduce to this equation.
So with one kind of proviso, what they do have this spectral flow term, and this coefficient here is expressed in terms of some spectral current has more important, more complicated form in terms of green functions.
But you can show that for small gradients, their expressions reduces to this very simple local dependence. So this is a rather general scheme.
It describes non-agrarian superconductors at small spatial gradients.
And then to find this spatial, you just have to add the expression for the entropy production rate. It arises from diffusion and from inelastic collisions.
Okay, so then now let's apply this diffusion equation.
So time dependence again, what's the source of time dependence?
The source of time dependence is time dependence of the density of states.
So you can say basically it's an adiabatic picture where you have a locally equilibrium situation where you compute these, you know, basically retarded belongs greens functions the density of states for the quasi particles, it evolves slowly with time.
And therefore, you have density of states as a function of energy and time simultaneously.
Ah, it evolves with time because
you have deep air, right, by deep, density of states is broad and near the boundary of the gap because of the equilibrium currents.
Now you apply microwave radiation that induces condensate acceleration.
So this flow outside the vortices is changing.
Your super flow is sloshing with time because of the presence of the microwave radiation.
And therefore, locally, right, we saw sloshing of the density of states.
But now quasi particles being normal they cannot slosh together with the condensate what they feel is this time dependent non-equilibrium density of states and they have to redistribute themselves.
But they lag with the microwave.
With the microwave.
Yeah, exactly.
Okay.
So then, so all basically all life will happen outside the course in this weekly in homogeneous region.
In the London regime, the, the gap itself is uniform, and therefore, dependence of the density of states on time arises due to the condensate acceleration.
And this is this sensitivity that Boris discussed earlier, which is an extra quantity.
And so what's important is that all the properties that are relevant for the dissipation are occurring at the frequencies in this near the gap near the broadening of the DCS.
And this, the strength of fair breaking locally in space is described by this fair breaking parameter diffusion confusion times PS square divided by Delta.
It's small.
And everything we need, like the width of the broadening peak delta epsilon are powers of this fair breaking parameter. Also the height of the density of states.
It's also scales with this perfect parameter and so is the sensitivity.
And the only new input we need in comparison to uniform systems is the diffusion coefficient for quasi particles in this broadening region.
It's not equal to the normal state diffusion coefficient, but also is affected by fair breaking.
So with these inputs, we can try to understand what's going on in superconductors and the, what we need them is to understand how condensate acceleration depends on space on the coordinates in this state.
And this can be in the regime where the distance between the vortices is shorter than the pearl length, then this, the change in the magnetic field duty screen current is irrelevant and we can assume that the magnetic field is uniform.
And therefore, this super fluid velocity arises because of the transport current, and because of the vorticity of each one.
So then the condensate acceleration arises because vortices, this are displaced, and this is described by this thumb.
This is the acceleration caused by the vortex velocities, and also the uniform microwave field.
And to see what's going on, let's consider a single block at given vortex a, and I will isolate from the sum, a contribution of this native vortex a.
So this is what we call near field acceleration.
And the proportion is where the distance from the given vortex, but then the other vortices, and also the uniform field, create a far field contribution which does not decay with the distance from the vortex core is essentially uniform.
So we can estimate this far field contribution to be just the average condensate acceleration in the sample, and it's given by the electric field times the ratio of these London to Campbell links.
And the main message is that the, this short, the near field contribution, which is the near the core.
If you plug the distribution into our form is essentially recovered by the Steven result.
And this the far field contributions creates a new, new contribution to dissipation.
This dominates in the wide interval of parameters.
So let me start with the 10 minutes, even seven, seven. Okay, quickly, low frequency regime. So the key point is that was the particles are some quasi particles with energy below the percolation threshold, a trap inside the given vortex
that they cannot diffuse. And so at the lowest frequencies.
The dissipation was dominated by these trapped was a particle.
So, then, let me go to very, I will assume that the inelastic time is longer than the diffusion time across this vortex blockette.
And therefore at low, lowest frequencies diffusion stops, and the dissipation is dominated by the longest time scale.
You get this inelastic contribution, we consider the zero mode of the of the diffusion equation, and then relaxation occurs via inelastic collisions only.
So the duration of the zero mode is a proportion to this average over the blockette product of condensate acceleration by the vortex sensitivity.
So this angle brackets denote spatial averaging at a given energy in the traffic region.
In fact, that if you put this far field contribution, where the, this condensate acceleration is proportional to the electric field for a symmetric vortex, this average vanishes and you don't get inelastic rotation, but in the presence of pinning
vortices are distorted. And so this term does not, does not vanish.
And you do get a contribution to the connectivity proportional to the inelastic rotation time with these similar coefficients. And, but you have to integrate over all energies up to the calculation threshold of this term.
And one statement is that, once you plug in all these sensitivities, and how they scale with the distance, because it turns out that this integral is dominated by the quasi particles are farther away from the course on on length scales of water
of the magnetic length, which is the interverted spacing.
And with this, what you find is that the contribution to a ratio of this divide conductivity to body and students has this and I thought to be parameter K, which is non zero distortion, in general, it's a water one, it's strong pinning.
And then there's magnetic field dependence, which is hidden in the society is two factors.
Well, it's complicated, but if you assume very strong pinning, if you estimate the pinning constant by saying that when you displace the vortex by a distance of water before radius, you change the energy before by essentially
conversation there, energy, then we get a much simpler expression dependence on age is a simple power law, and then
okay, so then, but now, as you increase the frequency.
The, the inelastic contribution, the case is one over mega squared. Eventually, the inelastic realization becomes ineffective, and then diffusive contribution takes over, then to discuss this contribution, let's forget inelastic
visualization, and discuss just the diffusion equation. Also, importantly, now the distortion of the vortex is not important. You have a dipole distortion of the density due to the electric field.
In fact, it diffuses. And the characteristic time scale in this case is the towel, the, the diffusion time of quite a particles across the vortex at these energies near the circulation threshold, and it scales with their vortex distances this weird power with a third
with the intro.
Okay, then there.
Frequencies below this session powerless energy for diffusion, you will get this diffusive contribution to be frequency independent.
And here's the expression, again, the same ratio of London London and Campbell length appears here.
And you can ask at what frequencies does the diffusive contribution become of the same order as the inelastic one, and this occurs at the frequency omega star, which is the geometric mean between the inelastic realization rate and the diffusion rate across the,
across the vortex.
And at higher frequencies above the diffusion rate, you get a decrease with frequency with this non-trivial exponent five fourth arising again from this.
Strong pinning.
When you estimate the spring constant as the loss of condensation energy.
Again, this ratio of Campbell length to London length can be expressed in terms of the ratio of H over Hc two, and then these expressions for the diffusive contribution simplify.
We see that this strong pinning this far field contribution exceeds the Bardin-Steven contribution at, as long as magnetic field is smaller than Hc two, and then decreases at higher frequencies.
Okay, so let me just summarize.
We discussed
microwave absorption, which arises from processes caused by the spectral flow of quasi particles and associated with the long realization time, either inelastic realization, or the diffusion time across the vortex
packets, and for the inelastic relaxation, you need vortex distortion.
And also want to comment that although I discussed high temperatures, the same inelastic contribution due to vortex distortion also occurs at low frequencies, and for the diffusive contribution you don't need vortex deformation.
Okay.
Thank you.
Questions.
I have a short comment.
Michael Devereaux measured inelastic realization far from the vortex core by dropping quasi particles in his cubits with huge precision.
In one vortex, there are so many particles towards this, but I sense much.
And it's sort of measured.
Okay.
Strapping strength for the single vortex.
Just like you should see these localized quasi particles by impurities in the presence of water slow.
And then we sort of see the vortex and see.
Oh, they sink into it. Okay.
Okay.
I think it is precisely inelastic rate, which we need.
Okay, great. I'd like to just learn.
Questions.
Thanks very much. Wait for more.
Stay where you are. Stay where you are. Yes.
Don't move.
Any FBI contract, the actual organization is done by Megan and Alicia.
It was done wrong with us, but she was correct.
All the good things that Megan and Alicia, and I think the response is.
Right.
So let me use this.
This particular break to say again, how grateful I am all of to all of you who took this effort and came here first and delivered fantastic talks.
I would say every talk is just excellent.
And I enjoyed every moment of this talk and you told you mentioned so many of my good qualities that I never expected that something like this can happen.
Anyway, thank you again for coming here for giving these talks to discussing physics, and that's the greatest, greatest gift you could deliver to me, particularly I'm grateful to people who crossed ocean for that.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And we have now a coffee break 25 minutes so we reconvene exactly at the level.
And also, of course, I'm grateful and most of all probably to Aris and Brian Skinner who organized this workshop in spite of my myself trying to avoid it.
So I see I was wrong, but they were.
So let's do this.
All right.
Thank you.
Yeah, almost like a step.
Yeah, I guess ST is a number comes to be a micro.
Excuse me.
It's actually, you know,
the band becomes much less.
I mean, before you just can we get get into the valid decisions. I just wonder there is a some sort of kind of land level physics kind of sets in as somehow, but that's a very flat.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but I think let's kind of get back to the reflection and challenge.
Eventually this reflection and challenge leaders kind of
come back to to the fraction upon.
Yeah, yeah, so I just wonder whether there are similar things I should expect into that this case is there's any say from your picture is there.
And something like the five F state type of things maybe kind of the even denominator states is connected with this section of challenge.
So even before you get into the.
So for example, that when you turn on the magnet here, do you see that the same gap is increasing.
Yeah, it's not really so much at all.
Or maybe that little bit.
Okay, so that's, yeah, so.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, at least that tried to stabilize this.
Yeah, yeah.
We don't see very.
Okay.
How about this, just this fractional.
Yeah.
No, no, no, no, no spin on this.
What is what is the right way to call it.
That's what you call the fraction idea.
Okay.
but I think people just equate them.
Yeah, I guess.
There's nothing that the magnitude would not,
out of kind of magnitude,
it would not stabilize.
Yeah, it will be, it will cross up to a few teslas.
Yeah, and then it starts to get weird.
Then eventually around seven or eight teslas,
it just suddenly transition to the data in that cell phone.
Very important state, yeah.
Man, that's amazing.
I think, yeah, so that's, yeah.
Well, yeah, hopefully that's more things.
Well, finally, yeah, you know that,
up to the fractional challenge, okay.
We've been seeing from the land of the world.
This isn't it.
But this is, I wouldn't say that it's dramatically different,
right, it's two time reversal.
Okay, there's one very possible,
and there's just two time reversal copies of that,
especially against the SD console.
Yeah, that's true, that's true.
I think that has nothing to say.
So, or maybe you can say that,
well, you know, some of this even did not make a statement.
Amazing, but yeah, I don't know.
That's a very good statement.
So, to be honest, that's great.
Yeah, I think it's probably
maybe two time reversal copies of that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
All right, so.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Finally, actually, related to the Landau dance.
So, you mentioned the strut of the movie,
so it sounds like you're feeling
like you're doing this in five minutes.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, Dr. Chooses, it's always the best to be seen
to turn on the music or the music.
That's so far, everybody found.
Yes, so actually, the strut of the movie
is to explore the story that is the best of music.
Yes, yes, unique, I mean, the SMT, right?
Oh, SMT.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, I know so far a lot of the cast.
Actually, I think the strut of the movie
is strictly speaking, it's only for the individual case.
I think that the fractional case,
it's phenomenologically, it's always like this.
It's probably not food.
The strut of the movie.
The strut of the movie.
But for, I think, I mean, I really, okay, anyway, so.
It's assumed to be, you know, the same, you know,
the same thing.
It's assumed to also carry over the fractional case.
Yeah, yeah, we have never found anything
that, you know, the T and S are different.
Other people did not see anything
that is similar to the T and S of the movie.
But I remember when I was starting to run
through that, you know, I was trying to put it
in a different attitude to work on the movie.
So, I was like, as serious.
Oh, I think you're talking about, like,
a very young environment, the frappine with the lettuce,
basically a fragment of the band.
Yes.
That day, I think they found T and S
that's gonna be different.
So, for example, S is one half.
T is one or two is the integer.
So, that is, I think, it's very kind.
It's a lot of different concepts.
Yes, yes, yeah, those, actually,
there are also these fractional states in the T and S
but with the integer terms.
Yes.
With the integer T.
Then those are the, depending on what people call,
yeah, sometimes it's called the symmetry-breaking
churn-insulator or, you know,
the phonological-insulator wave.
It's most likely just a churn-insulator
with some starting-insulator wave, right?
So, and there's another, to just say,
I don't know what it is, because it's obvious,
to me, it's obvious, but there's a lot of
it's obvious, it's obvious, it's obvious.
Yeah.
That is basically much, I mean.
That is a churn-insulator, spontaneously.
That's a high-maturation transition.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, that's actually,
it's very similar to that in the T and S,
and we can also do the question.
Yeah, they can be fractional,
they're very good, they're fine.
One third, two third, I mean, but they can do the question.
I think so.
You can sort of, they can do different,
some of it is no visa, that they have the same.
But if there are different, that's not the question.
Why would you sort of have an edge process,
that I thought of?
No, I think as long as T is up,
you're not sharing with us.
The fractional transition has to satisfy that S,
the T is the same as the first,
because it's the professor's solution with the charts.
We can show what you observed,
but slowly, we find out that it should be enough
of each day, so that you have a feeling of success.
This part, I'm actually not so sure.
So S means that if you add a unit cell to your sample,
it's both production and charging, I mean.
Yes.
But the T has a different meaning,
but it's just every one of the plus one thing you add,
how many times we add.
But the fractional form of calling,
so the sigma x, y, is always interesting to me.
Rock T.
Yeah, T.
Yeah.
So the T, and it equals to the fractional transition.
It's not on the fractional form of the S,
so it's not on the fractional structure.
I mean, in fractional form of all, there's no that.
Oh, yeah, there's no, there's no.
Yeah, there's only T, yeah.
So the S is really coming from the trans,
so it comes from the trans.
Trans, trans, trans, trans, trans, trans, trans, trans.
I didn't want to drive the states
looking like a fractional form of all,
give rise to the other sigma x, y,
that is fractional.
I mean, it's not just a T, it's not the S, so.
Yeah.
But where's it going to be in?
I think S does not have to be necessarily the same as T.
But everybody else says it's the same.
So far, yeah, but I think,
I think I've heard it said to be a reference
to this possible S equal to one,
integer filling state, but the slope can be a fraction.
Be an expander, you mean?
Theoretically, I think.
Oh, theoretically, so what's the difference?
Some kind of a fractional, it's not being separated.
Oh, excitonic?
Yes.
Yeah, and then you can get a slope on a straight about,
it's not one, it's a function.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But I mean, it's not monologically,
if you see the same kind of dynamic questions,
you can get the state that originally
filling one with a fraction of a source.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But let's be right, that is a lot of things.
Yeah, please.
So for a twisted amount of two,
at the larger example,
there's a few problems with this.
So is there any interesting problem
that you have with the structure?
Because you talk about the small.
The new truth is still a quantum spin hall.
I mean, the two.
So at any quantum spin hall,
you add an input for the few,
you tend to suppress the edge of the structure.
I see.
Well, no problem.
Well, no, it's not that we never find any.
The only place that we find an input
for the few dependence is quantum spin hall.
Because anything that is above induction,
when involving a chiral edge state,
there's no input for the few dependence.
Quite so.
Yeah, because the spins are just locked like this,
quite a huge, you know.
Yeah, you can see the motion,
not quite a huge spin, not very new.
Oh, that's a good one.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So the only exception is really just so far,
I see the quantum spin hall.
Then the edge is protected by a z
or you can put the few breaks that
and it causes scattering for the one edge state
that you suppress the edge of the structure.
That's the only space that we have.
So we find this very new.
Oh, and that's you, of course.
You build a gamma.
Gamma.
Yeah, because in some DMEs,
but there's a lot of layers together.
Yes, you can actually get the gamma point
to be above energy.
Oh, yeah.
Then a gamma, you actually have very weak spin on the there.
And then you can go on to the host.
Oh, I see.
It's the gamma value.
Yeah, that's gamma value.
These are the two exceptions.
You don't want to be knocked down by that.
I see.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
My name is
We're going to do a discussion.
We're going to do a discussion, do you know what it is?
I'm afraid I don't know what it is.
I don't know.
But they saw a few small famous films.
They were called FCPI.
They said, OK.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
They are QIA and Korean.
They're transporos and
They're transporos and they're transporos.
It means they can't show themselves to you.
They need to show everything.
You know, they're too optimistic about this.
Try to predict.
A X tear pink is very similar to a Jala Min wearing makeup.
you're building a face diagonal and you can IXX and the P
try to pick the IXX and the P to
tell you the gap the way it's at.
It's a little bit slow.
It's a little bit slow.
It's a little bit slow.
It's a little bit slow.
What do iXX talk about?
I can tell.
There's three, won't you talk about them?
Yeah.
As long as it's like that.
You're not gonna say it?
 is what you drew.
Your focus?
That's what it is.
Okay.
You just say that.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no
down
is
second
It should be that there is no Spontaneous Symmetry Brick.
You have to add a system, add a bar, break down.
So their FC level is at a higher level.
Now it's just saying that it has Spontaneous Symmetry Brick.
So it's on a very low level.
Even when it's in the same level, you can see it.
When you look at the Stradivomular Face Diagram,
it's visible.
But we can see on the shooting,
youiles the object,
It should also be changing over.
It could be changing over times.
Game is fine.
On multiple occasions,
these are all the different things.
I'm not sure.
I think it's for what?
I'm serious.
I don't know.
This is where the fractional charge is.
Just one.
Because it's an edge channel, it's very lucky.
As long as there is a channel, it will contribute to an edge.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
Thank you very much for your attention, and of course, Boris, greetings from all of us here at Yofa, from all your colleagues and friends, and I am very grateful to you for our long range interactions. Thank you.
Okay, all questions are supposed to be heard.
The question, please.
Yes.
So, you can hear me, I guess.
Yes, yes, I can hear you.
Yeah, so if you keep pumping the system.
Yeah, I think that this situation would be very different. So, of course, the model I have shown here and our preliminary results are related to a kind of single exit on problem, then you have more or less one exit on parallates and the interactions between
are very important. If you pump to the situation, then you have one exit on per site. I expect that the physics could be very different, because the system could be strongly interacting.
Maybe there could be something like super fluidity, maybe the main contribution to exit on transport would be related to the kind of vacancies in that case, to some sites that are not occupied by the excitons, but really I do not know I think it is an interesting question to study further.
So, another very basic question is that the excitons here carry permanent dipole or they don't.
It depends. Let me say the following. It depends whether you consider, sorry, whether you consider interlayer or interlayer excitons.
So, the theory applies to both of those. So, for interlayer excitons, the coupling to electromagnetic field is stronger just because of strong overlap of electron and whole wave functions.
They do not have a static dipole. Interlayer excitons, they do have static dipoles, so they have stronger interactions, but on the other hand, the oscillators strength is smaller and the coupling with electromagnetic field would be smaller, so this branch in the dispersion would be less steep.
So, what are your Fermi-Polaron pictures? Do you have some kind of numerical estimations of what is the potential mass of the dispersion?
Okay, it's a good question. I'm sorry for not having the slide at hand. So, for the reasonable parameters, the effective mass of this Fermi-Polaron would be something between the trine effective mass and let us say b-exciton, 2-exciton effective mass.
So, for the reasonable parameters of transition metal dihalcogenites, it should be something between, say, free electron mass and probably 1.5 times free electron mass.
It is much heavier than a triumph in some sense.
In a way, yes, but not much. I mean, there is no parameter at least for the range of densities we consider.
Thank you.
One question?
Yes. So, I thought for Fermi-Polaron problem, there are two branches, an attractive one, an impulsive one, and the effective is more like a triumph and the repulsive is more like an exit, is that right?
Yes, yes, it is here. If you increase the Fermi energy, the repulsive one will emerge from the exciton and the attractive one from the trine, right?
So, that's why there's no real controversy. You said that it's not clear which one is impulsive, but you have both, right?
Yes, yes, we have both. The question is how to describe what you see in the optical experiment.
And in fact, it is a bit of a tricky problem because the question is to which extent the correlation between the trine and the hole in the Fermi-C is kept or not.
And this is something which people explore now, and this is something which is not entirely clear.
But basically, yes, if you go with the Fermi energy to zero, then basically you end up with this field particle approach, then Fermi-Polarons and trines will not be distinguishable.
We have a picture of that localized exciton in the Moray lands.
The potential well is like a harmonic oscillator, so do you expect the degrees of freedom like there are multiple levels inside of this harmonic oscillator potential well enters in the story?
In principle, yes. So, our model is of course very simple one. We consider only the ground state of this harmonic oscillator trap.
Actually, the higher states have small oscillator strength, at least in theory, that is why probably in terms of this splitting and this linear part of the dispersion,
probably it is sufficient to account for the ground states only, but well, in principle, you are right, there are excited states and they can affect the dispersion, there could be some anti-crossings here, you are right.
And just one last question, if you, so these are optically excited excitons for the transport setup that you study.
I guess that foster channel is turned off if the excitons are in equilibrium, right, like I use gating to create an electron hole layer rather than generating by photons.
That's a good point, I think that, well, if we discuss the homogeneous system, then of course there will be no diffusion, there is no direction for excitons to travel.
Also, if you create, say, optically forbidden excitons, the excitons with zero radiative decay rate, say, spin forbidden excitons, then the situation will be of course different and this mechanism will not work.
Okay, with this, thanks very much, thank you.
Thank you, thank you.
Okay, and now, surely you will hear that.
Yes, I hear you, I don't know if you hear me.
I hear you, you are not muted, so...
Jura and Sandra both are cool in physics and with mutual heart.
In your converts.
Okay, let me share my screen.
I'm not saying yet, am I?
Oh, are you?
You are not sure?
Hit twice.
There is something else.
You share screen, share.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yes.
Yes.
Now we see everything, so go to slide show and...
Yeah.
We should be in business.
Yes, we are in business.
Yeah, your time.
Okay, thank you.
Thank you, the organizers for giving me the chance to take part in this exciting meeting despite the unfortunate circumstance that I committed to be in a very different half of our globe before Alex and Brian sent invitation to me.
So, so happened that I cannot be with you in Minneapolis, but thank you for allowing me to speak remotely.
So, all of us know how Boris easily switches from one field of physics to another field of physics, which is charming and sometimes amazing.
I think to be related to column interaction.
So, therefore, I decided to tell you a little story, which I think is quite...
It is very simple, but I think it's quite charming and I hope that you find it so.
So, I decided to start from something that is the least controversial that you can imagine.
And I suggest that this equation must be like this.
It is the least controversial representation.
So, however, we all know that phi doesn't have to be electrostatic potential.
It may also be something else.
And that's what I want to tell you about.
So, let's consider...
Okay.
No, my computer doesn't want to move from one slide to the next.
That is the problem.
Okay.
So, let's consider this experiment, which actually I showed when I was speaking in the colloquium in Minnesota several years ago, in 2019.
In fact, before the COVID.
So, in this experiment, what happens is these particles that you see on the screen, they are catalytic particles.
Because they catalyze some chemical reaction, they move in the way which is far from equilibrium.
They represent some sort of an active system.
They violate detailed balance and many interesting things happen.
But I want to concentrate on something super simple that is related to this system.
So, you have this many colloidal particles sitting in the liquid and catalyzing chemical reaction.
So, what you don't see is you don't see some chemical components in this case, hydrogen peroxide that diffuses towards or away from these particles.
And I want to discuss what happens about this.
So, this is a very simple picture here, which all of us know.
This is, in fact, the Slovakovsky model of diffusion when these green particles here, they diffuse around and there is certain concentrations of particles if they are absorbed on this red ball in the middle.
And the concentration, steady-state concentration profile goes like this.
This is quite trivial. Everybody knows this, of course.
But I want to point out that there is a desirable one-or-one for long-life profile, which is trivial, which is obvious, but yes.
So, let's see where it brings us.
So, let's do a little bit more instead of particles that are absorbed on the red ball, which cannot continue forever, of course.
And using that, in infinity, we have the supply of some fuel molecules, A, which diffuse towards catalytic surface, and then catalytic surface catalyzes the transformation of fuel molecules A into exhaust molecules B.
And you have chemical reaction happening on this surface, and you have this simple construction where you have one over RT-type concentration profile of fuel molecules and similar to one over R concentration profile of exhaust molecules with their respective diffusion constants.
And then you have this chemical rate that is corresponding rate constants of catalytic reaction KAB and KBA.
So, this system is supported out of equilibrium as long as in infinity you have the supply of this A and B molecules, the fuel and exhaust. Very simple.
Okay, so this is just, if you exercise an algebra, you'll find that this chemical current is given by this formula in green frame, and you see that, of course, this chemical current becomes zero if concentrations in infinity can be formed through chemical equilibrium, and the rate is given by what sits in the denominator.
Again, very simple. Nothing exciting here.
But now imagine that you have two such catalytic particles. So here I am afraid that I asked my computer to do more than it wanted. My idea was that this yellow background will have yellow color in some gradients.
There is some gradient of color, but probably it's impossible to see. In any case, please imagine that there is a, that this ball in the middle catalyzes the reaction. Of course, it creates a gradient of this concentration.
And the second ball finds itself in the field where surrounding concentrations are not uniform, not uniformly distributed, but there is some concentration gradient.
Now, if a particle sits in concentration gradient of some molecules, then there is a phenomenon called diffusorophoresis. So the diffusorophoresis, you can think about it in the framework of standard on Zager linear response theory, and there is trivial relation that
velocity at which particle colloidal particle moves in the presence of gradient of some concentration is proportional to the gradient linear response. Again, very simple.
But importantly, this coefficient Tapa can be either positive or negative depending on how surface interacts with these molecules whose gradient is present.
So this, of course, means that two catalytic balls like this interact with the force, which is proportional to one over R square, like Coulomb force.
So we can go a little bit more in a little more details. We just can describe this course in the little more details, starting, of course, from this blue framed formula, which is the distant dependent part of the surface energy of these two molecules.
And here, of course, we assume that diffusion of colloid is pretty slow, such that the given distance between two colloids surface property come to equilibrium, and therefore we can operate with the equilibrium surface tension.
These primes indicate a derivative force with respect to concentration, and these derivatives in the simplest case, they are given by this formula where this epsilon tilde is the difference between energy of the, let's say, a particle in this case,
this B particle difference between energy of the particle close to the surface in the bulk and this gives surface energy and the derivative will give you this extra energy.
So this is all quite trivial. If you go through these manipulations, you eventually discover that this force is controlled by this expression in the brackets.
So the point that I want to make is this expression in the brackets can be either positive or negative, depending on how the particles interact.
If you look at the pure particles A and exhaust particle B, how they interact with surface of my catalytic colloid, that determines the sign of force.
So you can make this little phase diagram, which depending on this interaction parameters indicates when force is attractive and when force is repulsive.
Again, there is nothing deep or nothing complicated, but let us see where these lead us.
Of course, the more interesting version of column interaction happens when there is screen.
So if there is something analogous to screening for my colloidal system, where two colloids interact with a column like force, but if there is something analogous to screening.
In order to see that, let's imagine now not two colloids, but the crowd of catalytic colloids, many of them.
So there is this letter Phi, Phi of R is the concentration of catalytic colloids.
There are many of them and I characterize their presence in terms of their concentration.
So Phi is basically the unitless volume fraction of these colloids.
And then the rate of both reverse and forward reactions on the surface of every colloid will be proportional to the number of catalytic colloids that are present.
And therefore, in coarse-grained sense, or the distances larger than the distance between this colloidal catalyst, you have these two diffusion equations.
I mean, a few molecules diffuse with their own diffusion coefficient and the ghost molecules diffuse with their diffusion coefficient.
But with the rate proportional to the number of colloids, concentration of colloids, you have a chemical reaction that occurs on every colloid.
So in fact, this suggests that the key player here is a quantity which I call the field of chemical imbalance.
So we decided that this chemical imbalance is nonzero in infinity, but now it will depend in some way on the place, on coordinate.
So in steady state, if you forget about time derivatives here, forget about time derivatives, you start in the steady state distribution of fuel and exhaust molecules.
And you discover that, of course, this steady state distribution describes this chemical imbalance function in this familiar form where screen radius is given by this formula.
So the screen's radius is, of course, inversely proportional to the square root of concentration of these colloids, which is absolutely not surprising because the bi-radius, of course, depends on concentration of colloids in the same way.
And there is this factor which is controlled by rates of reactions and diffusion coefficient.
Now I want to emphasize that this is not, although there is one or R-square force, which is similar to Coulomb, the nature of this screening is not quite the same as in Coulomb's system because in Coulomb's system, the nature of screening is closely related to the fact that there are charges of two different sides.
Here in our system, as long as we have only one type of these catalytic colloids, we have only one type of charges.
So that is the difference.
So let's see where it goes.
So let's consider an example.
Here is an example and suppose in three dimensions we have these catalytic colloids, a crowd of catalytic colloids, confined in some osmotic bag.
They do not, because osmotic bag, I need the osmotic bag in order to prevent these catalytic colloids from diffusing fuel.
So in infinity, as before, we have this prime infinity, which is the chemical imbalance function, chemical imbalance potential, which is not zero in infinity and therefore fuel molecules diffuse from infinity while exact molecules diffuse to infinity.
And then what happens, then what happens is, in fact, over the distance of other psi from the surface, this psi chemical imbalance gets screened.
So chemical imbalance only penetrates into this osmotic bag by the distance of the other of the screen.
Inside, inside, or most of the volume inside, you know, interestingly, inside you don't have this chemical imbalance, but you do have both fuel and exhaust.
Both of them successfully diffuse inside.
The only thing that happens is inside, they are basically in equilibrium.
The relation between concentration of A molecules and B molecules inside this concentration of A molecules, which is, which is green, which is white, sorry, blue thing, and a B molecules, which is yellow thing.
The concentration, these two concentrations are in balance.
They are in equilibrium with each other.
And therefore, chemical current inside is zero.
It is screened out, and therefore, opposite to what I said to you in the beginning, these colloids inside do not interact.
There is no, well, they may interact for some other reasons, but they do not interact for this diffusion for ATP.
So it is a bit disappointing, it seems, because, okay, so we discovered that basically nothing interesting happens.
But let's, let's consider something more realistic, that I told you already.
So more realistic, in fact, these colloids usually are heavier than water, and therefore they sit at the bottom of the container.
So therefore, let's consider what happens if we have a sort of clovey two dimensional system in which colloids are sitting at the bottom of the container within some, as people call it, gravitational site, which corresponds to gravitational potential energy being of the order of thermal energy.
So again, they are confined by an osmotic bag.
And in infinity, we still have this style of infinity, which is our chemical imbalance.
And it seems that, okay, so if you take a really, really, really shallow container and say that this container is so shallow that the system is two dimensional, then yes, we know that there is a column business in two dimension is different than three dimension.
But as far as the physics of this screening concern, it's basically the same idea as in three dimensions.
In three dimensions, you only penetrate your chemical imbalance only penetrates a short distance of the order of screening cleanse into the pancake of colloids and colloids in the middle, again, don't fuel it.
And by the way, this effective screening is roughly estimated like this where psi is given by the formula that I gave you before and big H is the depth of this container and little H is gravitational.
This is not so important.
I do not concentrate on that.
I want to say what happens if the particles live actually at the bottom of a deep container.
In that case, something interesting happens because in that case, of course, delivery of, again, we have this chemical imbalance far away in infinity, but delivery of both fuel molecules into the system like this.
And delivery of exhaust molecules away from the system like this.
This does not happen in two dimensions.
It happens in three dimensions.
And when it goes through three dimensions, then the solution of my screened column equation is very, very different and there is no screen basically.
And now, finally, my colloids in the middle do interact with whole force, which is proportional to one over R squared.
And now I remind you that this force may be attractive or it may be repulsive.
And so if the force is attraction, then, of course, the colloids will clump together and form some, well, in a really steady state, they form, they will form one condensed group, probably.
It's shorter time.
They will form some smaller clumps.
But if the force is repulsion, then these colloids in the middle will form a Wigner crystal, filling the whole bag.
So that is what will happen if we have sedimented to the bottom catalytic colloids living in sufficiently deep, well, not necessarily very deep, but sufficiently deep.
So this is basically the end of my story.
I have to tell you that the story that I presented to you is basically this paper, my paper with my friend, it's Haka Rabin.
But other people, particularly Ramin Golestanian and his group, they analyze this column like behavior in great details in many examples and so on and so forth.
So I provide here a reference if you're interested.
And of course, these people are serious people.
They don't stop at having, they are not interested in simplicity.
They don't stop at having catalytic colloid of one kind.
They have catalytic colloids of two ones.
Sometimes more times, and therefore they generate incredibly rich phase diagrams like this.
I do not want to tire you explaining all the details, but you see that there are blue parts.
These particles are not my fueling exhaust.
Fueling exhaust is, as in my pictures, exists in the background.
And these particles are two types of catalytic colloids.
Sometimes they attract, sometimes they repel and they form a variety of various structures all driven by this quasi-Colombian interactions.
So this is the paper by Ramin Golestanian, Shilirama Amaswamy and their co-author.
This is the end of my story.
I want to send the organizers one again for organizing this event, well-justified event.
I want to send the organizers for allowing me to speak.
I want to thank everybody who listened for your attention.
And most of all, I want to send bodies for, as I wrote here, for friendships for many eliminating physical lessons in various places, even sometimes in the office at the Blackboard.
So to conclude, I just want to show to you a few pictures of Boris in his preferred environment.
And I think that there is no doubt that in all of these pictures Boris is thinking about the Colombian interaction.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Boris.
