The concept of spin is one of the first ideas from quantum mechanics that people come into
contact with. However, one of the most common descriptions of spin relies heavily on classical
intuition, despite it being a completely quantum property. Unfortunately, this description turns
out to be completely incorrect, so in this video we will dispel some common misconceptions about
spin, as well as answer some important questions about spin, namely what actually is it, what
determines the spin of a particle, and why do fermions always have half-integer spin,
and bosons always have integer spin. Okay, let's start at the beginning. The very classical
picture many people have of spin is that this property corresponds to a particle spinning around
an axis like a top. Now, such motion only really makes sense to talk about if the object which
is spinning is so-called extended, meaning that it has some length, width, and or height to it.
The tricky part of this is that in quantum mechanics, point particles are allowed to have
nonzero spin, but it makes no sense to talk about them spinning about an axis like this
in the classical picture, so this picture can't be correct. But then what actually is spin?
Well, although this very classical description is not right, there is a grain of truth to it.
Perhaps a less misleading, albeit a bit more cumbersome, name for spin is intrinsic angular
momentum. Now, this name can be split up into two important pieces, the angular momentum part
and the intrinsic part. The former we can think of classically as a measure of how much motion
an object has around a given axis. This is usually split between two contributions. The
contribution where the axis goes through the center of mass of the object, which we can call the
angular momentum from spinning, and the contribution where the axis is located outside the center of
mass, called the orbital angular momentum. So, for example, the earth has some angular momentum
associated to the fact that it's spinning around an axis, as well as the angular momentum it has
from orbiting the sun. Here we see why it doesn't make sense to talk about a point particle spinning.
If the particle is truly a point, then it's always located at its own center of mass,
and so it can never have any motion around its center of mass. Therefore, a point particle
can't have a classical angular momentum from spinning, though it can still have orbital angular
momentum. The other important piece of quantum spin is the intrinsic part. This simply means that
anything with quantum spin just has angular momentum, regardless of whether or not it is
classically spinning or orbiting. This may seem a little strange at first, after all, how can
something which is sitting completely still in free space have non-zero angular momentum,
but it turns out that there's a great analogy that many people will be more comfortable with.
In Newtonian mechanics, a particle can only have energy if it's moving, kinetic energy,
or if it feels some force acting on it, potential energy. When we upgrade our picture to use special
relativity, we find the famous equation for the energy of a free particle, meaning it doesn't
experience any forces, which in the case that the particle is not moving simply becomes E
equals mc squared. But this is saying that a particle which is feeling no forces and is not
moving has energy to it, completely counter to what we find in the Newtonian case. But in other
words, massive particles have intrinsic energy, so if we want to create a massive particle,
it will cost us energy to do so. Spin is exactly analogous. When we use quantum mechanics,
we can have point particles, which are completely stationary, that still have some angular momentum,
and if we want to create such particles, it will cost us that amount of angular momentum to do so.
This amount of angular momentum is the particle's quantum spin. Now, it's very important not to
get this classical spinning angular momentum mixed up with quantum mechanical spin, since they are
incredibly different. To hopefully avoid any confusion from this point forward, when we refer
to just spin, we'll be talking about intrinsic angular momentum from quantum mechanics,
and if we want to talk about the classical version, we will explicitly refer to it as classical spin.
Okay, so now that we have an idea of what spin is, we can ask what values the spin can take.
To figure this out, we need two facts. The first is that any form of angular momentum,
either spin or orbital, in quantum mechanics is quantized, meaning that it comes in whole number
units. The second fact is that the quantum mechanical properties of angular momentum
are deeply tied to those of rotations. This latter point is incredibly important,
due to the fact that rotations in three dimensions have the special property that their order matters.
Consider an arrow in three-dimensional space, initially pointing along the positive x-axis,
then rotate the arrow by 90 degrees around the y-axis, then rotate by 90 degrees around the x-axis,
and finally rotate by 90 degrees around the z-axis. After all of this, the arrow is now
pointing in the negative x-direction. Now, we will again start with the arrow pointing in the
positive x-direction, but instead first rotate by 90 degrees around the z-axis, then 90 degrees
about the x-axis, and finally 90 degrees about the y-axis. Here, we should find that the arrow is
pointing in the positive x-direction. In each of the two cases, we used the exact same rotations,
but in a different order, and found that the final states are completely different.
So, what does this mean for angular momentum? Well, angular momentum is a vector quantity,
which means that it has both size and direction. Since the order of rotations about each of our
independent directions mattered, this property carries over to measurements of angular momentum
in quantum mechanics. If we measure the angular momentum of a state in the x-direction and then
in the z-direction, we will get a different answer than if we measure the angular momentum in the z-
direction and then in the x-direction. In more technical terms, we would say that the components
of the angular momentum operator do not commute. The result of this non-commutation is that we
are only allowed to know the components of angular momentum in a single direction and are forced
into complete ignorance about the other components. Note that this is almost exactly the same story
as measurements of position and momentum. We can know one or the other, but never both.
So, this means that we can know the total magnitude as well as a single component of the
direction of the angular momentum of the state. We could choose any direction we want, but conventionally,
the z-direction is often chosen. We will write this z-component of angular momentum as a product
of a constant with units of angular momentum, called h-bar, times some number, which we will call m.
Now, since the z-component of the angular momentum will have a maximum value, there will be a max
value that m can take, which we will call l. A subtlety here is that h-bar times l is not exactly
equal to the total magnitude of the angular momentum, due to the fact that there's always some
uncertainty in the angular momentum in the x and y directions, meaning that we have to always allocate
some of the total magnitude in these directions. So, h-bar l will always be a little bit less than
the total magnitude of the angular momentum of the state. This maximum value of m will be when
the most angular momentum we can have in the z-direction is pointed along the positive z-axis.
However, this angular momentum can of course also point in the negative direction as well.
As we already established, there's nothing really special about the axis that we choose,
so it shouldn't matter how we pick the positive or negative axes. So, if we have a maximum value
for m of l in the positive z-direction, we should also have a minimum value of minus l in the negative
z-direction. All in all, this means that m is bounded to be between minus l and l. Here's where
the fact that angular momentum is quantized comes into play. This quantization means that we can
only add or subtract from h-bar times m chunks of angular momentum, each of which has size h-bar.
Said in another way, we can only change m by integer values. So, let's start with m equals
minus l and add n units of h-bar until we get to m equals l. Then we find this equation,
which we can solve for l to find that l is equal to n over 2. So, we see only two options.
The first is when n is even, in which case l is an integer, and the second is when n is odd,
and l is a half-integer. Note that if l is an integer, any choice of m will also be an integer,
and the same for half-integer values. This is the statement that the spin of a particle
can only take integer or half-integer values. Okay, so we have the possible spin states for
a particle, but what exactly determines what spin state goes with which particle?
To answer this question, we need to dip our toes into the realms of quantum field theory.
Generic quantum field theories are built to obey the symmetries of special relativity,
and in particular, quantum fields transform under the combination of Lorentz transformations,
translations, and rotations, collectively called the Poincare group,
where different quantum fields will transform differently under the Poincare group.
What we typically associate with a particle is an excitation of such a quantum field,
so we can build a single particle state by exciting the vacuum state of the field.
This is done mathematically with an object known as a field operator,
which is defined at the point where we are creating the particle. We can act on such a
single particle state with the transformations of the Poincare group, and the result will vary
depending on the properties of the state. One such property is the spin of the particle. We can,
of course, flip this logic around and instead say that the spin of a particle is determined by how
such a single particle state is affected by Poincare transformations. This shouldn't really
surprise us because rotations live in the Poincare group, and as we've already said,
angular momentum, and therefore spin, is deeply connected to rotations.
Okay, so we've discussed what spin is and what determines a particle spin,
but there's still one more question about spin that's frequently asked.
Why is it that fermions, particles whose wave functions are anti-symmetric under exchange,
are always half-integer spin particles, whereas bosons, particles whose wave functions are
symmetric under exchange, are integer spin? What's the connection between these symmetry
properties of the wave functions and spin? Incredibly, this is entirely due to imposing
causality in quantum field theories. Causality simply means that no information can ever travel
faster than the speed of light. If we have two spacetime points x and y, separated in a way
that a signal would have to travel faster than the speed of light to reach y from x,
then the physics at point x can never affect the physics at point y and vice versa.
The mathematics of this requirement are quite complex, but the general idea is as follows.
By studying single particle states, we can determine the spin properties of each of our fields.
Then, by imposing causality, we can find certain requirements that our fields must satisfy in
order for them to actually be causal and not break the rules of special relativity. These
requirements take the form of symmetry relations under the exchange of particles, which are not
causally connected. When these two results are combined, the amazing consequence is that we have
no choice but to make half-integer spin particles, anti-symmetric under exchange,
and integer spin particles symmetric under exchange. In other words, in order to satisfy the laws of
special relativity, all fermions must have half-integer spin, and all bosons must have
integer spin. This result is known as the spin statistics theorem. Spin is a very intriguing
property, since it's an entirely quantum mechanical effect with no real classical counterpart.
Although this makes it quite interesting, at the same time it makes it very difficult to apply
our classical intuition in order to understand spin. In fact, we see that if we try to naively apply
such intuition, we end up with the entirely wrong picture of what spin actually is. At the end of
the day, we find that not only is spin very interesting in and of itself, but also that it
is deeply connected to other important properties, like angular momentum and exchange symmetry.
So, even though spin may be difficult to grasp intuitively, it is arguably one of the most
important properties to be discovered in the study of quantum mechanics.
