Lecture 5 Sex and Reproduction
Hello once again. I'd like now with this lecture to start to consider some more specialized sub-topics within the study of monkey and its behavior.
I think we're well placed to do that now. We have investigated in the last four lectures the basis for anthropoid sociality.
We've talked about social bonds, the period of infancy and development, and also started the consideration of adulthood.
As we saw in the last lecture, despite cliches about sex differences, when we look at adults, male-female differences in monkeys and apes may not be so pronounced, after all, in terms of power and dominance.
In this lecture, I'd like to consider a closely related question. Are there similar sets of stereotypical views about male-female differences in the area of sexual behavior and reproduction?
And in short, the answer is yes. Typically, female monkeys and apes tend to be portrayed as sexually coy. By coy, I mean choosy, very choosy and selective about whom they mate with.
Coy females seek the best fathers for their infants, but beyond that, they're relatively uninterested, according to this view, in sex and sexual behavior. After all, their mothers, remember, think back to lecture four.
Well, by the same token, males are considered in a certain light. They are portrayed quite differently, more like Don Wands, if you will, always ready and eager to engage in sexual behavior, even beyond what is needed to father infants.
Surely, they're involved in conception, they're important for production of infants, but they're not particularly tied up with paternity and fatherhood beyond that anatomical physiological contribution, so they're freed to sow their genes wherever they might like.
Now, in some renderings of the evolutionary perspective, as shouldn't surprise you, this stereotypical difference has been applied to humans. I remember back when former president Bill Clinton was embroiled with a Monica Lewinsky scandal.
There were some columns that appeared talking about how his behavior, his non-faithful behavior, was predictable, based on the intersection of power and his sex, his gender. He's a male who's risen through the ranks to the powerful, and this is what one would expect from a male anthropoid.
Well, what kind of truth is there in this kind of picture for anthropoid primates, for monkeys and apes, primarily? As is often the case, there is a ground layer or basis of true fact that sets the stage for this type of conception, but it is a subtle and nuanced type of intersection of truth and stereotype.
So let's start to look at that. Male and female anthropoids do indeed have different interests and different strategies when it comes to reproduction. That is, when it comes to ensuring that they produce healthy offspring.
Part of this is simply derived from anatomical physiological differences. Females, we know, can only produce so many infants during their lifetimes. Females have to conceive, carry, bear, and nurse these infants, and their output as a result is quite limited. Their investment in each infant is extremely high compared to males.
Now, one way to understand this is to play a kind of trivia game with me and to ask yourself about human females. What do you think is the maximum output that any single human female has ever achieved in terms of production of offspring?
I tried to find the sort of Guinness Book of World Records answer to that question, and what I've come up with in the literature is that there was a woman who lived in 1800s Moscow, who is unnamed, at least I don't know her name, who actually, or in her lifetime, 69 children, which is really quite stunning, a statistic.
And I didn't understand that at first until I read that there were 27 pregnancies. So 27 times she got pregnant and gave birth, and obviously there were multiple offspring involved in these pregnancies.
But believe me, I'm pretty sure that that's near the maximum. That's a very, very unusual statistic, but it gets my point across that you can certainly not exceed that.
If we want to ask about not human females, but let's say great ape females, the most likely comparison for us, what kind of statistic could we come up with? Well, we don't have a comparable Guinness Book of World Records for great apes, but I have a couple of facts that would shed light on the situation.
First of all, great ape females may live into their 40s. Often they do not. They may tend to live longer in captivity than in the wild. At the National Zoological Park, there was a death recently of a 44-year-old female, and she was believed to be perhaps the third oldest gorilla in the country in captivity.
So that's pretty much getting to maximum lifespan. We know that great ape females in the wild nurse each infant at least four years and produce a new infant every four to eight years, depending on species.
And so what we can get from mixing these facts is that producing seven or eight surviving offspring per great ape female is probably the maximum.
Now, as I mentioned, I don't have an equivalent female to the Moscow human female for you, but I can suggest a possible candidate.
And this is the chimpanzee Fifi, who is the daughter of Flo, whom we've talked about before, who lives at the chimpanzee research site in Tanzania, where Jane Goodall has done her work.
Fifi, by the way, is the only chimpanzee now still alive from the population that Jane Goodall first met in 1960 when she went to that site.
And Fifi has produced eight children, and that seems to me to probably be close to the maximum, although we don't actually know that.
By the way, in captivity, the situation is quite different. Great ape females in captivity may produce offspring much more rapidly.
It may be more typical to have a two-year interbirth interval or possibly three years.
There is a much more readily available food supply. There are other differences in the two environments.
The idea that great apes are breeding well and successfully in captivity is a marker of their good health, both physically and psychologically.
So great ape births are very much celebrated. It is also the case that we're dealing with, in most cases, endangered species, so that's very important.
It's a very interesting situation in captivity with great apes because the zoos in this country and in some cases around the world coordinate where the breeding actually goes on.
In other words, animals are moved zoo to zoo in a kind of choreography to make sure that the genetic stock is kept strong.
So a male and a female may be brought together at a particular location, and basically everybody stands around and hopes for the best in terms of copulation and production of an infant.
There is one case I remember in which a zoo, I think these may have been animals who had been housed together for a long time, actually showed movies of successful copulation that other great apes had engaged in.
They projected this large movie on the wall of an outdoor great ape cage to kind of give them the idea, and I don't know, I actually don't know if it worked.
In any case, we can now start to contrast the female situation with reproduction to the male situation, and again we'll start with the human male.
And I have a very good statistic for you, so think for a moment what you imagine the maximum output for a single human male might be in terms of production of children.
And I also found the answer to be surprising, even knowing theoretically that there would be a difference.
In some time in past history there was a man called Ismail the Bloodthirsty, who lived in Morocco, who according to records actually produced through having multiple wives, 888 children.
Of course, you have to have a lot of wives to accomplish this, but the point is that it really demonstrates the difference between the potential male reproductive output and the female potential reproductive output.
And again, if we switch to great apes, we have a hard time coming up with a very good comparison, and it's even harder for great ape males.
First of all, we often don't know paternity when we go in and study a group, whether it be a community of chimps, or we go into the forest and look at these dispersed numbers of individual orangutans.
Also, it is true that we can come up with conclusions based on what we know and make inferences for males.
First of all, we know that the theoretical maximum for great ape males is surely higher than the theoretical maximum for females.
We set that number at about 8, and chimpanzee males have many, many years to reproduce, have multiple matings. Surely they can exceed that.
And by the same token, variance across individual males is going to be greater than across individual females.
There are some chimpanzee males who must sire quite a few infants.
I don't know if there's an equivalent to Ismael in Morocco, but lots anyway, and others who surely sire only a few, or possibly even not at all.
So what we have as a result of this differential potential is the fact that females, anthropoids, bear a much higher cost per infant than do males.
And this is what led to the idea that females should be choosy. They must protect their energy and their investment.
They must choose mating partners wisely in order to protect their investment.
Well, as with almost everything else in this field, there are new twists and turns in thinking and writing.
And the very latest suggestion now is to question whether, in fact, male mating effort may be so reduced compared to female.
Things I'm reading in the literature are asking, could there not be hidden costs of male mating effort?
For example, the male-male competition that we talked about before with orangutan males, gorilla males, fighting with each other, competing with each other,
to get access to fertile females in the first place, should that not be taken into account?
Could it not be that there is a lot of paternal care that just isn't as direct as the maternal care, protection and other things?
So this is very much an area of investigation and thought that is still in progress.
Where I'd like to go in this lecture, though, is to begin to contrast for you the reproductive behavior that we've been talking about,
ensuring production of healthy offspring with sexual behavior, to begin to see that they're not equivalent behaviors or equivalent terms.
Female monkeys and apes, we now know, spend time and energy on sexual behavior that exceeds what is strictly needed for reproduction.
And I'll give you some examples of this.
Females in certain populations are known to mate frequently and with much more than just one male.
This level of sexual activity that has been observed in some species, not all, certainly exceeds what would be necessary to ensure conception at the time of fertility.
An example comes from a type of macaque that monkey that we've been talking about in the baboon macaque vervet grouping of monkeys.
A certain macaque living in Europe and Africa, the Barbary macaque, has been found to mate very frequently.
The females mate when they're fertile on average every 15 minutes and with multiple males, just a kind of constant sexual behavior.
And this is not in any way forced or coerced. This is active female behavior with active solicitation.
Another example comes from apes that we haven't talked about so much, the small-bodied apes, the gibbons and siamangs.
As you may remember, these apes live in the trees and are confined to Asia.
Typically, we think of gibbons and siamangs as monogamous.
They're in mated pairs with dependent offspring.
However, in recent years, there have been two extra layers of data added in to the picture of gibbon and siamang monogamy.
The first extra layer is what's called same-sex repulsion.
Now, in same-sex repulsion, what happens is you've got a mated pair living in the forest in a small territory,
and let's say there's a strange female that approaches the pair.
Well, which of the mated pair do you think might repulse that female?
Is it going to be the male? No, it's going to be the female.
The female guards her pair bond and repulses, threatens away the other female.
That is same-sex repulsion.
So what you end up with is something that looks like monogamy, but it is very much enforced.
It's not necessarily that either partner is giving up all interest in the other sex except for the mated animal.
The second layer that's been added to understanding gibbon and siamang sexuality is what we might call extra pair copulation.
Despite mate guarding, we have now discovered that there are cases when one of the pair simply sneaks off and copulates elsewhere.
It doesn't happen a lot because mate guarding is pretty effective, but it does happen.
In fact, the whole question of sneaking around has actually become something of a popular topic in studying monkeys and apes.
Fairly recently, there was a very big splashy article that related to chimpanzee sexual behavior and this question about females and where they mate.
This got worldwide attention in the media.
It was published in a journal.
The work took place at a West African community of chimpanzees and it suggested that within this particular group of chimps during a particular slice of time,
a particular study, approximately half the infants had been sired by males outside the community.
Now, this was not expected.
The community is supposed to be the reproductive unit.
We know, of course, that females transfer between communities, but once they get where they're going, the mating was supposed to take place inside the community.
Well, you might be wondering, how would they know that anyway?
How would they know enough to claim that half the infants had been sired by males outside the community since we don't know much about paternity?
Well, the answer is that new techniques were applied to the study involving DNA.
Single hairs of chimpanzees were collected and DNA was analyzed in order to determine paternity.
So, exclusion of the community males as potential fathers had been carried out.
And, as I mentioned, this was big news to those of us who study monkeys and apes.
Certainly, I taught it. I imported this article into many classes and taught it.
And, very recently, there is now a counter-article, counter-suggestion saying, no, the DNA analysis was wrong.
And, in fact, the infants were sired by resident community males very much the opposite type of conclusion.
And the two research teams now are at odds.
And so, again, this is something that we're very much in the middle of.
But it is the case that researchers are beginning to look, whether it be with the so-called monogamous gibbons and siamanks,
or, alternatively, communities of chimps, to ask whether females and males both are doing the so-called sneaking around.
Now, we talked about female, monkey, and apesexual behavior.
Let's talk also about males.
What was predicted, of course, would be high rates of sexual behavior by males pretty much across the board.
In fact, we're seeing that, yes, high rates of sexual behavior may occur,
but they may be relatively confined to certain periods of an individual male's life, rather than just happening all the time.
For example, males may enjoy very high mating success when they first enter a new group,
in the species in which there's male transfer, baboons, macaques, et cetera.
This may happen.
We know this is the case with rhesus monkeys in certain populations.
There's a very interesting population of rhesus monkeys on the island of Cayo Santiago off Puerto Rico.
And now you may be wondering, what are rhesus monkeys from Asia doing off Puerto Rico?
And you'd be right, if you were wondering this.
A researcher imported a whole lot of monkeys from India and shipped them to this island off of Puerto Rico in the 1950s.
And ever since then, primatologists have been studying them quite intensively.
And one thing that has been found is that when a male successfully transfers across groups on this island,
his rank and status with the female shoots up.
In fact, they tend to refer to this as the new guy on the block.
The primatologist John Burrard has done some fascinating work in this area.
Suddenly there's a magnet and a focus of attention.
Females are busily soliciting and responding to this particular male,
and he has a lot of mating success.
But this may not laugh.
These monkeys make multiple transfers, and they don't often stay at high rank.
They may have a competition with another male for such high rank.
I can recommend to you, if you have a library available to you in which there are video documentaries,
there's a documentary called Monkey Island that shows this work with John Burrard
and shows not only male mating behavior in rhesus monkeys,
but also some of the things we've been talking about previously.
Female natural lines, those groups of related females,
and how they act and how they consolidate power.
So that's an excellent resource.
Also, when we're talking about male mating behavior,
we should not see it in isolation as if the male is striding around making things happen.
There's, of course, a partner there, and what we call female choice
is a very big role in mating success.
We know from talking about orangutans that it is possible for there to be forced copulations in some species.
In other words, males being able to hold down females and copulate
even though the female appears to be unwilling.
But this is quite rare in anthropoid primates.
Much more often, females need to cooperate in order for there to be successful mating.
Certainly among some monkeys, what happens is the male may approach and show interest in the female.
He then may mount her from behind, and if the female is uninterested,
she can just keep going, just walk right out from under him,
and the male is left there without a successful mating.
So we have a complex interaction between males and females,
and we don't have any particular stereotype to fall back on as was predicted should be the case.
So sexual behavior and reproductive behavior are not always equivalent.
Another way to understand this differentiation is to talk about another type of great-eighth, the bonobo,
a great-eighth that we have spent some time discussing before.
Non-reproductive sex is very prevalent in bonobos.
Non-reproductive sex just means sex that's not tightly linked to reproduction.
For example, sexual behavior, of course, occurs between adult males and adult females in bonobos,
but it occurs in different contexts as well.
For example, between males and males, between females and females,
between adults and juveniles, and between adults and infants.
We spoke earlier about the very fascinating phenomenon of female-female bonds in bonobos,
and how interesting this is.
You have bonobos arriving in the community from different places, they transfer in,
and very much unlike chimpanzees, female bonobos bond with each other.
Perhaps, we don't know, this may be related to their interest in sexual behavior.
Female bonobos carry out something that is called GG rubbing, stands for genital rubbing.
Now, I have to tell you that anyone who studies bonobos, as I have in captivity for a period of about 17 months,
notices this behavior, it's quite prevalent, it happens in the wild, and it happens in captivity.
As I've mentioned to you, it happens with all different combinations,
and I can tell you it takes a little bit of practice to be able to stand up in front of people and talk about this.
And when I first started at William & Mary, I had an experience that I probably won't forget.
It was September, and there was such a thing as parents' weekend,
where on a Friday that was designated by the college, students were encouraged to bring their families to their classes
and see what was going on in their classes.
And I vaguely kind of knew about this, but didn't really have it in the front of my mind.
So on this particular Friday, I strode into class, I had 125 students as usual, in a large lecture hall,
and I started talking about differences between one great ape and another great ape, between chimpanzees and bonobos.
So I thought to show a video.
Why not implant visual images in the minds of my students?
And I cued up this video of bonobos, and of course it's very hard to get away from sexual behavior
when you're showing visuals of bonobos.
All this began to unfold on the screen, and when I put the lights back on, I started to look
and noticed that there were a lot of adults in the audience, and there were a lot of parents in the audience,
and I'm not sure what anyone thought of me that day, but fortunately everybody was very polite about it.
It is just part of what we study. It was an interesting day.
Now, just like with the phenomenon of dominance, remember that bonobo males and females share dominance.
We are led by bonobos to ask questions differently about sexual behavior than we might have if we didn't know about them.
In other words, just as with co-dominant, it is the case that bonobos are not entirely exceptional.
We thought of them initially as being perhaps very, very different types of anthropoid primates,
non-human anthropoid primates, for this type of sexual behavior,
but further investigation is leading us to think otherwise.
Here again, we have a relatively new avenue of investigation.
It is the case that same-sex behavior occurs among Japanese macaques, for example, and some other species as well.
I should add one thing about bonobos at this point.
Bonobo females and chimpanzee females as well, and some females in other species,
get at the time when they are fertile what is called a sexual swelling.
This is a tight skin on their rump that tends to swell,
and it acts apparently as a type of signal of their fertility.
That is also in baboons, chimpanzees, and the bonobos we're talking about.
There is a marker of the time at which they're fertile and thereby able to be impregnated by the males,
and it is what my very first teacher in graduate school called the sexual swelling, a kind of passport, if you will.
We know that the bonobos and chimpanzees have female transfer,
and females tend to transfer when they have the sexual swelling.
Why is it called a passport?
Because remember that the process of dispersal can be difficult.
That success is not guaranteed.
Well, when you've got this red flag essentially hung out on the body,
the males are very welcoming to these females.
These are fertile mates that are transferring in.
And so it is possible in some species for us to track fairly closely the period of fertility,
and this makes study of these particular species particularly interesting in a lot of ways.
Once again, we are coming to the conclusion in another arena of behavior
that there's a great deal of variation to be found.
The time course of anthropoid primate studies over four and some decades
is showing us that there is a lot of variation in how females act and how males act,
and that it is this that is an important conclusion to apply to humans
when we're looking at our species in evolutionary perspective.
To get somewhat more specific, we may conclude that females,
just as they're more than mothers and may be interested in rank and power,
may be quite interested in sexual behavior.
They're constrained in their reproductive behavior in some ways.
Reproductive behavior and sexual behavior are not the same.
Yes, males are interested in sexual behavior,
but not universally to the same degree and not universally across all parts of their life cycle.
To summarize what I think is the most important point to emerge from these types of studies,
there's a lot of overlap between female sexual behavior and male sexual behavior,
which is the type of conclusion that we want to apply to understand roots of human sexual behavior in this case.
Now, at this point in the course, I'd like to suggest a shift.
We will be considering from here on out some aspects of cognitive data
that we know about monkeys and apes, thinking, learning, intelligence types of topic.
And I don't mean to suggest that that should be walled off from an investigation of sociality.
They're very much fit together, but it's a very interesting subtopic
that we will explore when we come back in the next lecture.
Welcome back.
With this lecture, we'll begin a series of lectures investigating anthropoid cognition,
and I'd like to start off with the topic of making and using tools.
I'd like to ask you to start by thinking back over your day,
or if it is the start of your day, maybe think back to yesterday.
Is there any chunk of time, any several-hour stretch in which you did not use a tool of some sort?
Tools may include pencils and pens, televisions, telephones and computers, hammers and nails.
You might have prepared your food using cooking ware, possibly a microwave oven.
Maybe you even used the computer to find a new restaurant in town at which to eat.
The point is, of course, that our lives are really full of tools.
We use tools all the time.
Tools and technology are a routine part of our lives.
And this is so not only in the United States, but cross-culturally.
Of course, anthropologists want to take the global view,
and this is true no matter what human society we look at.
It may not be a society that is so heavily dependent on computers as ours,
but in whatever way they use tools, they are surrounded by tools.
Until the early 1960s, anthropologists believed that humans were the only anthropoids to make and use tools.
Now, this should be qualified a little bit.
They thought that humans were the only anthropoids to do this under natural circumstances in the wild, spontaneously.
Yes, sure, we knew that some monkeys and apes in captivity would use tools.
We also knew that some animals, but not anthropoids in the wild, would use tools.
For example, a sea otter carries a stone on its belly when it's floating in the water
and can use it to open food as a kind of anvil.
But wild monkeys and apes, no one thought it possible.
This changed in 1960 or shortly thereafter.
At this time, in 1960, when Jane Goodall went to Tanzania to start her chimpanzee study,
tool-using and tool-making was a central defining feature of humankind.
It wasn't only just that humans used and made tools, but that was part of the definition of what it meant to be human.
Well, soon enough, Jane Goodall realized that great apes were not only using tools in the wild and naturally,
but making them as well.
They made tools to aid them in everyday life and problem-solving.
This was quite revolutionary.
As you can imagine, it must have been hard for her to believe her eyes when she saw this.
And I'll describe for you in a minute what she saw.
She had a National Geographic photographer come in and film these sequences.
The tools that we're talking about are organic tools.
That is, they're made of things like grass and leaves and stems, natural types of materials.
And I want to describe some of chimpanzee tool-using tool-making for you in this lecture
and then go on and contrast that with what some other anthropoid monkeys and apes do.
Chimpanzees solve problems with tools in ways that monkeys in the very same part of Africa do not.
We know that chimpanzees enjoy eating termites, the insects.
This is a kind of a protein snack, if you will, for chimpanzees.
They pop the termites in and eat them.
Chimpanzees will make and use what we can call fishing tools to extract termites from the hard mounds that termites build in Africa.
What this means is that chimps can therefore get year-round access to this protein snack.
They can break into the termite mound through a use of simple technology
and get out the termites that they enjoy a lot of times.
Now, the tool that they use for this is basically a grass stem, a strong supple grass stem or a grass wand.
And the process is multi-step.
First, they pick a grass stem and they may take off part of a leafy branch.
They may modify this by removing things that stick out just to have a slender sort of streamlined wand.
They then take this and put it down into a hole in the termite mound and they wiggle it.
The wiggling is important.
The wiggling alerts the termites to the fact that there is a predator down in the termite mound.
In other words, the termites respond as if the tool is attacking them.
And what they do defensively is they clamp on with their jaws onto the grass stem.
At this point, then, the chimpanzee extracts the tool from the termite mound and there is lunch for the chimpanzee.
Now, what we find is that in this very same location in Africa, we find baboons and we find baboons that also like to eat termites.
But there's a big difference between how baboons gain access to the termites and the way that I just described to you.
Baboons will sometimes sit right at the very same termite mound and observe chimpanzees doing the so-called termite fishing process.
However, in the wild, nobody has ever seen a baboon make and use a tool in this way.
They watch, but they don't adopt the technique themselves.
What baboons do is wait for termites to come out naturally of the mound.
And when they appear, baboons are quite enthusiastic about seizing them and eating them.
But they do not make tools to ensure and increase their access.
I sometimes joke with my students that this is a sorrow to me because, of course, I study baboons and I think that they're very cognitively sophisticated creatures.
But they just don't do this.
Now, when Jane Goodall saw termite fishing and when it was recorded on film, one of the first things she did is she sent off a note, a message to her mentor, Louis Leakey.
And this changed our understanding many decades ago of the definition of humans.
It was one of the very first revolutionary findings of the very recent period of primatology.
Now, let's go a little further with chimpanzee tool use and tool making beyond just the example of termite fishing.
We can offer a kind of summary statement by saying that chimpanzees are second only to humans as accomplished, persistent tool users and tool makers in the animal kingdom.
We know that chimpanzees occur in a broad band or belt across Africa.
They exist in West Africa and in East Africa and wherever they are found, chimpanzees use tools and use tools persistently and make tools.
The best anthropologist to read on this topic of population use of tools in chimps is Bill McGrew.
He has documented the fact that every population of chimps is tool dependent in some way.
So Jane Goodall's chimpanzees are in no way exceptional.
In fact, there is a range of tool types used in chimpanzee populations.
The minimum number in any chimpanzee population seems to be about nine and the maximum may be in the high twenties or even a little bit more than that.
Basically, we can boil down to all these different tool types to four main contexts of tool use.
Grooming, aggression, feeding and drinking.
Now in grooming, one animal may, let's say, be eating a fruit and it gets very sticky and the juice comes out onto her fur.
She may take a leaf and use it as a kind of wiper to get the juice that is irritating her off of her fur.
An example of aggression would be taking a stick, possibly a small rock and aiming it at somebody.
Perhaps somebody that's irritating a chimpanzee could be a human, could be another chimpanzee.
Feeding, we already have a good example in terms of termite fishing and also drinking.
It is possible that chimpanzees will take a leaf, kind of crumple it up and put it in a crook of a tree where water might be collected and they use it as a sponge.
The leaf absorbs the water and they can bring it to their mouths.
All of these, of course, are natural spontaneous behaviors.
They're not dependent on human intervention in any way.
It is interesting though that if chimps find extra resources or material available because humans are in the area, they will incorporate human material into their tool using.
A good example is the chimpanzee named Mike, studied by Jane Goodall, who found two old kerosene cans right in her can.
And he realized that if he would run with these and bang them together as he ran, pushing them in front of him, he could make a tremendous clatter.
And in fact, his rank rose in the community as he did this.
Chimps scattered right and left as he went barreling through with these cans in front of him.
Now, this is an example of flexible problem solving using a tool.
It's not only tool using, of course, that we're interested in.
It's tool modification.
Tool modification is practiced by chimps in a variety of ways.
There's all kinds of tailoring of the size of the tool to the task at hand, the streamlining that I talked about before.
And this is partly why I refer to this whole type of behavior as cognitive.
It takes some planning and some thinking and some strategizing.
Now, since the time of Jane Goodall, of course, many other primatologists have been interested in documenting different patterns of tool use in different areas of Africa.
To my mind, the most exciting work that's been done in recent years is by Christoph Bosch, who has worked in West Africa across the continent from Jane Goodall's site.
Christoph Bosch and his team works at Thai National Park in the Ivory Coast.
And in this area, chimpanzees crack nuts with tools.
This is a very complicated behavior.
In fact, I suspect that this example represents the most complex tool using by any non-human anthropoid.
Hammers are used to crack nuts.
The nuts are placed on a type of anvil.
So there's automatically, as you can see, elements to coordinate here.
Now, the hammer can be of wood, let's say log.
It can be a stone that's found around the chimpanzees, either kind of material.
The hammer is brought down on a nut that is resting on an anvil, and the anvil might be a tree root, a rock, something like that.
Now, I should make one clarification.
Stone tools, for example, these stone hammers that are used by chimpanzees, are not modified by chimps.
Organic tools are modified. Stone tools are not.
And this becomes important later when we talk about human evolution.
This is a particular behavior that seems not to occur, at least as far as we know, until the time period of human evolution.
Nonetheless, the technique of nut cracking is complex.
It involves precise movements and multiple tools.
One thing that interests me particularly is the fact that this behavior and the technique emerges gradually in youngsters.
Youngsters make a lot of mistakes as they learn.
Bosch has documented this, and has produced a film to show this as well.
So let's say you're watching a Thai chimpanzee of ages three, four, or five.
This is just the end of the period of infancy coming to the time of weaning.
You may even continue and watch them when they're six and seven and they're juveniles.
They make all kinds of mistakes in trying to coordinate the hammer, the nut, and the anvil.
They may choose an absurdly long branch and try to pick this up and crack it down on this small nut.
This doesn't work. They may forget the anvil. They may do all kinds of things.
And this is interesting because it takes years to achieve mastery in this nut cracking.
There is some guidance and some teaching by adults, mothers in particular.
I'll be describing this in much greater length in the next lecture, but to give you a hint of it now,
mothers may deliberately leave out the right kinds of tools around nuts when they're with their youngsters.
They may even, although very rarely, demonstrate the right techniques of nut cracking to their infants.
Basically, we think that there's a kind of combination of guidance, teaching, and independent learning
by the infants themselves, lots of practice, lots of mistakes, and recovery from mistakes.
This nut cracking is a good example of behavior that indicates to us that chimpanzees do have the ability
for foresight in planning.
In West Africa, there are a limited number of hammers available, particularly the stone hammers.
And it is known that chimps will pick up hammers and travel with them for some distance.
In other words, they don't wait until all of the elements happen to be in front of them before they nut crack.
Nut cracking, when it happens in season, happens for many hours a day.
And it is the case that chimpanzees will think ahead and think,
well, if I get this tool, I can bring it over here, the nut is over here, and all the elements can be coordinated.
All right, for many years then, the focus was on the chimpanzee.
We knew cross-populational tool use across Africa, documentation of all these things was ongoing.
But now the model became, all right, tool use and tool making is not limited to humans,
but it does seem to be limited to humans and chimpanzees.
Well, now we're getting extra information to show that it's not that simple either.
However, the unshakable conclusion is still that chimpanzees are the second best tool user and tool maker.
I want to make that clear.
Now, there's a lot of interest in monkeys of Central and South America.
They're called capuchin monkeys.
They're particularly good at object manipulation in the wild,
and they do appear to use a few tools to solve problems naturally in their habitat.
This is very interesting because we are talking not about a great ape,
but about a more distant relative of humans, a monkey of South America.
But although there are examples that are interesting from the capuchin, for example,
they do seem to throw and aim objects at intruders,
whether those intruders be humans or other monkeys.
What they do tends to be better defined as complex object manipulation rather than tool use.
The basic idea behind tool use is that the individual monkey or ape detaches some kind of object,
a branch from a tree, grass from where it's growing,
something in its hand, and then uses that to solve a problem.
What capuchins are very, very good at doing is opening hard fruit.
But they don't take a stone and batter the stone against the fruit, at least not very frequently.
What they do routinely is they take the fruit and they batter it against a trunk of a tree.
Now, cognitively, this is impressive.
They solve a problem and they get at food that is hard to process.
But there's a debate about whether this should really qualify as tool use or not.
The conclusion seems to be that capuchins are, again, very flexible object manipulators,
but what they do doesn't show the same degree of sophistication as chimpanzees.
Now, in five years, we may have more data, more data coming all the time.
I'll give you some good examples of that in just a few minutes.
Let's return to looking at great apes.
In contrast, what happens with the other great apes besides chimpanzees?
Because really, as far as we're aware now, in the natural environment, we don't get a lot of tool use in monkeys.
Well, what happens to gorillas, orangutans, and bonobos? Do they use tools?
Well, this is a complicated but interesting topic.
One thing we can say immediately is that all of these species of great apes are consummate tool users in zoos and research labs.
They're very, very good at it.
Zoo residents that are great apes have well-deserved reputations, in some cases, as escape artists.
For example, before I went to Africa to study baboons, I lived in West Africa for a while before I went over to Kenya,
and I studied captive chimpanzees.
Every morning, I would descend a hill from where I was living to the caging area, and I would begin my work.
Some mornings, not many, but more than I would say five over a year, I would get down there,
and the chimpanzees would be sitting very happily outside their cages during the night when everybody else was off.
They had somehow used objects, tools, their wits. I don't know how to open the cages and come out and greet us.
That was somewhat unnerving when you see your subjects outside the cage.
In some cases, we know that there are rarely, but some cases, zoo escapes by orangutans and gorillas, chimpanzees.
They'll figure out how to pick a lock with a tool. They'll think and strategize until they can get out,
and usually, they are lured back in, always. They are lured back in.
Well, what about the wild? This is also a topic that is causing investigators to ask new questions all the time.
For example, look at bonobos. Wouldn't we expect bonobos to show tool use that is akin to chimpanzee tool use?
Look how closely related they are. Look how basically similar their social organization is.
Shouldn't they be interested in using tools, in feeding, in drinking? We don't see that in bonobos.
There is no known record of termite fishing, let's say, or using leaves as sponges.
But here is something that bonobos do. In a rainstorm, they will make a rain hat.
This is something that is pretty close to our umbrella. They will gather a bunch of leaves together,
perhaps break off like a frond of a tree and hold it over their heads.
A rain hat, is that a tool? Some people say no, and say bonobos don't use tools at all.
Others say, well, why shouldn't it count as a tool?
Chimpanzees, for all their cognition involved in termite fishing and sponge drinking,
they just sit in the rain looking miserable and never make a rain hat.
So what I'm getting at here is this is a definitional question.
Bonobos do some interesting things. Is it tool use or not? It's not as complex, it's not as flexible,
it's not as regular as which chimpanzees do.
Another angle to take on this question of great ape tool use in the wild involves the gorilla.
We know that at least in the best studied populations, gorillas tend to eat a lot of bamboo and grass,
and they're herbivores basically. In some places they do eat some fruit,
but they're surrounded by food that isn't particularly hard to process or extract.
It's not as if they are spending a lot of time trying to get termites out of mounds
or try to open hard-shelled fruits. Perhaps the idea goes they simply don't need to rely on tools.
They have big strong jaws, they're fairly large, powerful creatures, especially the males,
and maybe here it is just a matter of environmental need.
If you take a gorilla and put it in captivity where it has time and leisure and lots of food available,
it absolutely will use tools.
The National Zoo Gorillas, the ones that I study in Washington, have a metal feeder attached to their cage,
and the zoo staff will so-called bait the feeder, put sticky sweet syrup in it,
and the gorillas have learned very, very quickly to pick up sticks and insert them into holes,
extract the sticks, and eat the syrup or the honey.
And there's no problem with this. It's not a mental deficiency in gorillas.
In the wild, they apparently simply don't need to make and use tools to solve problems.
Well, you'll notice that this leaves the orangutan.
And here are the plot thickens even more.
Up until maybe 1990, early 1990s, orangutans were clumped with gorillas
and basically were thought not to be tool users.
Oh, occasionally they might throw something down from a tree and try to hit a primatologist
as the primatologist tried to observe the orangut, but basically not much in the way of tool use.
Now, we saw this was a fairly secure conclusion.
We know, of course, by now that Jane Goodall had gone out to study chimpanzees.
I mentioned also that Diane Fosse went to Africa and studied gorillas.
Both of these women were chosen by Lewis Leakey, a very famous anthropologist,
to undertake these studies, to shed light on humans by looking at great apes.
Well, some people, but not all, know that there is an equivalent primatologist,
also chosen by Leakey, to go study orangutans.
Her name is Barute Galdicus.
And she studied in Borneo orangutans for many, many hours, another dedicated primatologist,
and saw essentially no tool use.
So we thought we were on fairly safe ground with that conclusion.
Not so.
In the early 1990s, the primatologist Carl van Schaik went to study orangutans in Sumatra,
a different part of their geographic range in Asia,
and found one population of orangutans that routinely make and use tools in feeding.
This was very surprising, and another one of those headline-making discoveries.
What these orangutans do is obtain honey, insects, and fruit through the use of tools.
They make what are essentially probe tools.
They may extract insects from tree holes by making sticks and using them as probes.
They may also process fruit with the use of probe tools.
Well, this was a big surprise, as I mentioned.
One reason why, in addition to the fact that there were so many hours of data already collected,
is the social organization of orangutans.
Remember that we have rejected the idea of orangutans as in any way solitary.
But we also know that there's no terribly cohesive community or group either.
The social bonds are quite dispersed.
Well, van Schaik has found that, in fact, the situation in this population in Sumatra is a little bit different.
He describes this as a situation characterized by high social tolerance among the orangutans.
These orangutans are simply more social.
They tolerate proximity of each other in, let's say, fruiting trees.
It really put that myth to rest and showed us one more time just how much variation there can be
in social organization within the same species.
Now, this high social tolerance appears to be critical to the fact that this population makes and uses tools.
The idea is, of course, that learning can occur.
This is the hypothesis. It's something that's being investigated.
In other words, if an orangutan invents some kind of a probe and begins to use it successfully,
the fact that there are others around to observe others who are tolerated during observation
ensures the fact that that particular habit may continue.
And van Schaik is engaged in trying to figure out to what degree social learning really occurs here.
Now, this example of orangutan tool use that has been found in the life course of primatology
as a discipline quite recently is a very important one.
It shows us many things.
It shows us that we don't know the full range and extent of cognitive behaviors or other behaviors in anthropoids.
Even those apes that have been studied for very many years,
it points to the urgent need for conservation of these populations.
One thing that van Schaik is very interested in finding out is, is this an exceptional population?
Now, we have all these years of data showing orangutans that don't use tools
and one population in Sumatra that does.
Well, what populations have we not sampled? What don't we know yet?
There are many exciting questions that are left unanswered.
As we begin to look at some commonalities between orangutan tool use in the wild
and chimpanzee tool use in the wild, we can start to ask,
well, what has caused tool using and tool making to emerge in these primates as, let's say,
against the bonobo and the gorilla that have the capacity for it in captivity
but don't so much do that in the wild?
And the answer is as yet undiscovered.
We think it may be a kind of mix of social tolerance
and eating certain types of food, the need ecologically to use tools
and the social bonds that reinforce any discoveries that occur.
I almost had the chance to study the orangutans that Galdica studies.
I was very interested in the early part of my career
in studying object manipulation in those orangutans.
They surely do manipulate objects, even though they don't use tools.
They're very good at foraging in such a way that moves objects around
and I think they learn from each other as they do that.
So just like with the capuchin monkeys of South America,
there may be a fine line and a distinction here
even in the orangutans of Borneo that don't do the full tool using.
They still do very interesting things.
Borute Galdicas came and spoke at my university
when I was a graduate student and was very inspiring and I met with her
and we talked over quite a few hours.
She was interested in the possibility of interviewing me
for maybe my being able to do some research with her in Borneo.
She had one condition however, she said I should get married first
and this was important because where she lived in Asia,
people expected young women to be married
and to show up with their social partners.
I pointed out that I didn't really have a boyfriend
much less any prospect of marriage and she said
oh just choose someone in your seminar, look around you, find someone.
My life plans so I did not study the orangutans of Borneo
but one of my classmates in that very class did
and I won't tell you her story but she's had an interesting career.
Now what we can say quite clearly looking back
over our about non-human anthropoid tool using and tool use
is that the use of human technology that's so much a part of our lives
is firmly grounded upon a foundation of tool using and tool making
by our closest living relatives.
All great apes are capable of tool use and tool making.
Some express that kitty in the environment
when the environment causes it to be rewarding.
So tool use and tool making is not new in human evolution.
What we're essentially beginning to do in this course
is construct a list of behaviors that were present
before the time period of human evolution.
We've talked a lot about sociology
and various manifestations of anthropoid sociology
and we can with a great deal of assurance add to that list
tool using and tool making.
And there is a very fundamental relationship
that we have hinted with the orangutan example
between social bonds, social learning
and tool use and tool making.
We're going to explore that further in the next lecture.
We're going to ask about the degree of social learning
and social teaching across anthropoid primates.
That will be next.
Applause
Music
Lecture 7 Social Learning and Teaching
Applause
Hello once again.
In this lecture we will consider social learning
and social teaching by anthropoid non-human primates.
As we have just seen in the previous lecture,
chimpanzees learn how to use tools appropriately
in a gradual manner.
And at times they are guided by their elders
and other social partners.
We also know that social bonds appear to make a difference
to orangutan tool using and tool making, where that occurs.
The question that many primatologists
are interested in now is what is the extent
of social learning and social teaching across monkeys and apes?
Is this a frequent occurrence?
Where does it occur?
We would expect based on what we know about the profound nature
of anthropoid sociality that monkeys and apes
would be primed to learn from each other socially.
We know that the surrounding animals in a group
are emotionally salient to individual monkeys and apes.
That is, one monkey, one ape, cares a lot what the other is doing
because of the emotional ties and shared histories.
We would not be surprised, therefore, to learn
that there's a lot of social learning
and maybe some social teaching in monkeys and apes.
The best way for me to approach this topic with you
is to give you at the outset a series of questions
that we, primatologists, including anthropologists,
are pursuing with the understanding that we don't have
all the answers yet, but we're in the middle
of trying to find out answers to them.
The first set of questions.
When learning is observed to occur by monkeys and apes,
can scientists even tell reliably if it's social in nature?
This is obviously a question of importance
right at the beginning.
That is, what I want to know, is it possible to know for sure
that learning comes about from interaction with social companions?
It might be that a monkey would learn faster
or learn something different
or learn more reliably by paying attention to social companions.
How do we know when that's happening?
That's an important prior question.
A second type of question is,
when would learning occur by contrast
via independent processes?
Trial and error, let's say.
Making mistakes and then fixing them on your own.
Lots of practice.
We can also ask here,
is it more reasonable to expect a mix of social learning
and independent learning than just one or just the other?
Thirdly, we are interested in teaching.
Might some monkeys and apes engage routinely and predictably in teaching?
We know from our lecture that we have some hints of Thai chimpanzees
in the west coast of Africa
helping other social companions learn how to use tools.
Well, is that rare?
Is it frequent?
Or what is the situation?
And lastly, do differences occur in monkeys versus great apes
related to social learning and teaching behaviors?
This is going to be a kind of theme for the next several lectures
comparing monkeys to great apes.
We already know to look back
that chimpanzees make and use tools to get termites out of termite mounds,
whereas baboons do not.
Baboons are equally interested in eating termites.
They just don't solve problems with the same technological competence.
Well, does this difference repeat itself in other behavioral areas of anthropoids?
Or is that just an isolated example?
Now, you might have noticed that I've suggested a comparison here
between monkeys on the one hand and great apes on the other.
Well, there is something in between.
What about those lesser apes?
Those small-bodied apes of Asia, the Gibbons and Siamangs?
I don't want to act as if they don't exist,
but the truth of the matter is that we know quite little about them in cognitive matters.
We know a fair amount about their social organization.
We know about their ecological habits and their feeding.
We even know a little bit about their communication.
But we don't have the resources to really enter them into a comparison with monkeys and great apes.
And that explains, then, the framework that I will be using with you in this lecture.
I'd like to proceed by offering two case studies concerning social learning and teaching,
both done in the wild, one on monkeys, the other on great apes.
And I believe that through a process of comparison,
these two case studies can bring to light some important conclusions.
The first will focus on monkeys, specifically baboons of Amboseli National Park, Kenya,
which was my research in the past.
I'd like to set the stage for you a little bit about the research that I did.
I've certainly mentioned to you before having studied these baboons,
but I haven't really told you much about the research.
Now, I mentioned in the last lecture, and I mentioned this for a reason,
that I did not go and study orangutans in Asia with Perute Galdicus, and you heard why.
After that experience, I met with Diane Fosse, who, of course, is the famous gorilla expert.
Unfortunately, she has now died.
She came to visit a bunch of students at my college in the past,
and she was very enthusiastic about having me carry out a study of social learning
that would relate to feeding in her gorillas.
And in fact, she gave me permission to do so, which was quite exciting.
I raised funding, grant money, to go to Rwanda, the country in Africa where she was based,
and was quite prepared to do this.
The government of Rwanda, however, rejected my request to enter the country
at the pretty much the last minute, or at least the 11th hour,
so I had equipment and money, and I was in Africa and could not go.
This is relevant because often science does work this way with unexpected twists and turns and setbacks.
What happened then is that two primatologists who had been studying baboons in Kenya
expressed an interest in my transferring my project on social learning to the baboons of Kenya
instead of what I could no longer do, working with gorillas.
The catch was that I had to completely reapply for funding and start from scratch,
but I managed to get through that, and I did embark for this adventure in Kenya.
I was extremely fortunate.
Gene Altman and Stuart Altman had been working with this population of baboons for many years,
so I inherited habituated baboons, baboons that were quite used to people observing them.
In fact, the infants, the animals that I focused on, were probably the most habituated of all.
After all, their whole lives they had researchers studying them,
so on some days I would have infants who were quite bold.
My problem was not so much that I scared anyone,
but rather that the infants would come up boldly to me,
and I did not want to really look at them or interfere with them,
or certainly I didn't want to encourage them to contact me.
I had a baboon infant try to untie my shoelaces once.
I made a mistake one day and left the window of my jeep open a little bit,
and the infant baboon slithered in this opening and ate my lunch,
so there were various encounters that I had with these very habituated animals.
I would try to minimize these. I want to be clear about that.
Amboseli National Park is about four hours' drive from Nairobi, the capital of Kenya.
I spent 14 months living in the park and amassed a little bit over a thousand hours of data.
The idea that I started out with when I got my funding was that I wanted to investigate a very clean, clear question,
and that is, how do infants learn what foods to eat and how to process them?
Do they rely on social learning?
Do they learn from their parents and other associates?
Well, this looked great on paper.
I had known in Amboseli there are very frequent patterns of new foods popping up.
Ecologically, there are rainy seasons and dry seasons and lots of changes in climate,
and say one month you'll have a new flower up here, the next month new grass, the next month new fruit.
So let's say you knew that a particular infant you wanted to study was born on May 1st,
and you'd watch it when it was very young, but then let's say sometime in July a new food would appear.
It was new for the infant. Certainly it had come up the previous year, but the infant had not been alive then,
so that you could, or of course I could, study the first encounter of the infant with the food.
And this was supposed to tell me whether or not the infant relied on learning from social companions
or figured out what to do all on its own.
As I said, looked good on paper, convinced people to give me $10,000 to do it, which in those days was a lot.
However, it didn't work out quite so easily.
I would say that there are two major conclusions from my study, and the first one is kind of ironic.
The first one is that it's very, very hard to tell if infants do or don't use social learning to solve feeding problems.
Let me try to explain to you why it's so difficult.
I studied baboons in two groups. There were a total of 19 infants that I studied over this time period.
Of course, I could only be with one group at a time.
I also used conventional sampling techniques.
That is, you don't just walk into a group and write down whatever looks interesting or flashy or catches your eye,
what we did is we would designate one infant at a time as the kind of focal infant.
We would watch what it did for 15 minutes.
Now, the infant next door could be inventing the wheel, using a new tool, and you don't care.
You look at your focal infant, and of course that's an exaggeration.
You could whip out a pen and write down what this other guy is doing,
but in terms of the official data, only focus on the focal animal.
So you'd watch one infant for 15 minutes, go to the next, and so on.
The next day you might visit the next group.
The next day after that might be a computer day where you entered data.
The next day after that, you're back to the first group.
The next day after that, maybe you have to go to Nairobi to get food and supply.
So the point is that you can watch only a very small slice of life of these infants.
You certainly are not out with them all night underneath the tree.
And the problem this led to was that when I would see an infant encounter,
what I thought would likely be a new food,
let's say I saw an infant walk up to a new type of flower
that had only emerged the previous week on the plains of Ambecelle,
and the infant would practice with it and pluck it in different ways and then eat it with nobody around her.
Could I know that the very day before when I had been with the other group or in Nairobi
that there had not been social learning?
I could not say that. I could not rule out the possibility that there had been social learning.
It made it very difficult for me to reach clear conclusions
that would in some way differentiate social learning and independent learning.
I mentioned that there were two major conclusions.
Well, fortunately, it's not just that I had to write into the granting agency and say,
sorry, I couldn't do it. I did go further than that.
I decided to shift the framework and not worry so much about social learning versus independent learning,
but ask, rather, to what extent do baboon infants make use of their more experienced social companions
when they confront feeding-related problems?
That is, I didn't worry so much about whether the very first time was a social encounter
or a trial and error encounter.
I rather looked at the whole span of feeding behavior to see,
do these infants make use of their social bonds?
And do they make use of the knowledge that is apparently in the heads of their older associates?
Whether or not they may require this use or use it the very first time,
what do they do later as they're growing up?
And I found that, in fact, infants do spend a lot of energy and effort
making use of their social ties and their social bonds in solving feeding problems.
I can give you three examples.
Infants fed on the same types of foods as their older companions did and at the same time.
This is a process that I call co-feeding, feeding on the same basic type of food while a social companion is.
So two baboons may be eating fruit or two baboons may be eating leaves,
and that would count as co-feeding.
The interesting thing, though, is that these infants selectively co-fed with adults.
They didn't always do it.
If they were walking along past leaves, let's say, they would just eat them
and not worry about whether adults were or not.
Leaves are easy to pluck.
You pluck it, you put it in your mouth, end of story.
At the other end of the continuum were quarms.
Quarms are the underground parts of grasses.
You see the brown or green part of the grasses above the ground,
and you don't see are the quarms, the really nutritious part underneath the ground.
These are very hard for infants to pull up, take strength and knowledge.
And when infants were around adults feeding on quarms, they, too, would feed on quarms.
A lot of selective co-feeding when it counts, when the infants could learn something meaningful.
Also, infants sniffed muzzles of their older companions.
This muzzle sniffing two animals will come together and they'll almost touch muzzles.
This, I believe, is an opportunity for infants to learn about what's in the adult mouth.
And this did, in fact, happen more during adult feeding than at other times of the day.
So the infant would have a clue.
What does it smell like?
What does it look like that's in the mouth of the adults?
Thirdly, infants scrounge scraps from adults.
And that's really just what it sounds like.
You'd get an adult, let's say, sitting at a bush picking off fruit,
and some scraps would inevitably fall down on the fur of the adult.
And there would be the infant right there, ready to take the scraps.
Exploitation of labor, we used to joke, not so much work for the infant,
but more importantly, a way to learn about what is good food to eat.
Now, I am building up a picture where the infant takes responsibility for learning about social feeding.
And that happens socially when all the baboons together are feeding.
The adults did not teach and did not guide the infants.
This, too, was a fairly robust finding.
I remember quite clearly an infant walking up to a tree,
some other relatives were nearby,
but the infant detached from the group who walked up to a tree,
peeled off a little bit of the bark and ate some.
This caught my attention because I had not seen adults doing this.
Mother was looking at this time as the infant made this dietary choice, did nothing,
and the infant quite soon became sick.
In fact, she vomited, and I believe that was something about the food involved.
The mother did nothing, no guidance, no protection, no teaching.
Now, I should say that when I use the term infant responsibility,
I don't necessarily mean that the infant starts out its day with a complex intention
of going around and learning about feeding from all of the adults.
It doesn't necessarily say selective co-feeding.
Yes, that's the way.
It's more that it's an exploitation of social bonds
that, to me, comes naturally from the makeup of anthropoid sociality.
All right, the second case study is quite different,
and I'm going to reprise a little bit of what we've learned
about the nut-cracking chimpanzees from Tai Ivory Coast.
I talked about these chimpanzees in the last lecture,
and I'll oppose them to ambicelli baboons.
Tai chimpanzees rely on adult guidance in addition to infant social attention
as they learn tool-using techniques.
So we're shifting just a little bit.
We can't very well compare Tai chimp tool-using to ambicelli baboon tool-using.
Ambicelli baboons don't do that,
but we're still talking about the basic feeding context
because we're talking about nut-cracking.
Infants, these chimpanzee infants attend very closely
to what their mothers do during nut-cracking.
Nut-cracking may last for a very long time, for hours at a time,
and infants may spend part of that time playing and roaming around,
part of that time watching.
Furthermore, infants beg for nuts from their mothers.
Food begging is a typical behavior of great-eighth infants.
It may involve a manual sort of request,
perhaps right beneath the chin of the mother as she's eating.
It's very clear when you see it,
it's clear that the infant is requesting food.
In fact, the mothers respond and donate nuts to the infants.
Now, this is all happening during this process
of gradual mastery of nut-cracking by the infant.
You remember that we're talking about coordinating here
the hammer, the nut in the anvil, the mistakes the infants make,
all those things that we've talked about.
The infants are indeed practicing during this time.
You might even think of it as an apprenticeship, this time period,
when infants are making mistakes.
Well, the food sharing, the food donation by the mothers
is a critical piece of this.
This underwrites, if you will, the infants making mistakes
they can afford to make mistakes
because they get food and calories and energy from their mothers.
There is definite donation of guidance and teaching
by mothers to infants in this community
during the apprenticeship period.
They do, in other words, what ambicelli baboon mothers do not do.
And this is the contrast that I want to draw for you.
And we're interested in why we're interested in asking
is there some kind of grade-Ape level cognition going on here
that supports this guidance and teaching?
Sometimes chimpanzee mothers, I've mentioned this is where
will slow down their own nut-cracking.
Very, very deliberately moving in a slow way
where they are clearly demonstrating to their infants
the right way to do something.
This is quite cognitively sophisticated.
Could it be, for example, this is one hypothesis,
that grade-Ape minds are designed to be able to appreciate
what infants in offspring don't know.
To appreciate the ignorance of some social partner.
But baboon minds do not appreciate this.
Could it be that the ambicelli baboon mothers
simply can't really tell what their infants need to know
or is there some other explanation?
I discuss this with my students and I say to them,
how would you feel if I walked into a seminar
and all of a sudden said to them,
good morning, students.
Today we are going to focus on learning the ABCs.
Now I will recite them for you
and your homework is to learn them tonight
and to come back tomorrow and to know those ABCs.
Well, they think I was crazy, of course.
Why? Because they already know their ABCs
and I would be indicating a failure to understand
what they know and what they don't.
I'm there to teach them about anthropoids,
not about ABCs.
Well, maybe it's the case that chimp mothers
have a good sense of when they need to step in
and donate information as well as food.
That is a kind of outstanding hypothesis
that anthropologists are working on.
So ambicelli baboons and tide chimpanzees
show some patterns in common
but also show some dissimilar patterns
when it comes to social learning and social teaching.
In both cases, we should understand the learning
that goes on as dynamic interchanges.
You might think back several lectures ago,
we talked about how infants should be understood
as active dynamic partners.
That, for example, it is not correct to think of infants
as only being filled up with information
as they passively wait around to transform into adults.
Rather, I want to import that same idea here.
When infants learn, they bring their own motor patterns,
how they move to the task.
They bring their own personalities,
how much they want to take a risk
versus how much they don't.
They bring their own facility at object manipulation,
their own learning and cognitive patterns.
And when they bring this to an interaction with a mother,
it changes the interaction.
The infants affect the interaction
and the mothers, of course, affect the infants
by whether they do or don't guide,
by whether they do or don't demonstrate and so forth.
So, the way I see it,
skills are not acquired through learning
or even through teaching.
You don't acquire a skill like you can acquire a piece of fruit.
I can walk up to you and ask for your banana.
I can acquire that.
But can I acquire a skill?
I think that is the wrong terminology.
It leads to a misconception.
Instead, skills emerge through social interaction.
This is as true for ambicelli baboons
as it is for tides and panties, in my view.
Both learning and teaching
involve joint participation through social interaction.
Now, in all fairness, I should say
that my own views on this question have evolved.
In 1994, I wrote a book
that really brought out the ambicelli baboon data
and some of my ideas about how this fit into evolutionary perspective.
And at this time, I was quite comfortable
with talking about a monkey acquiring a skill.
And I didn't think twice about that terminology.
It is, and this is predictable and interesting,
through my own interaction with other scholars and other colleagues
that I've come to see the situation as very different
to reject this linear idea.
What I'm rejecting is the idea that an infant just sits there
and either gets or doesn't get something from the adult
based on what the adult is doing.
It's much more mutual, co-constructed, if you want to use that term.
And for years of working with me
and, in fact, co-constructing knowledge with me,
I'd like to acknowledge here my colleague, Stuart Shanker,
who is a psychologist and a philosopher.
And it's a wonderful kind of microcosm
to be able to write about joint action
while you're participating in it with somebody
who's helping you articulate and clarify your ideas.
So that is something I see as kind of across the board here,
the joint dynamic interaction
that unites the case studies that I've talked about,
whether it be social learning or social teaching
that occurs all the same, joint and dynamic.
But there are differences between the case studies as well.
We now know that these types and pansies
rely on dynamic guidance and teaching
more than the monkeys do.
And this is leading to some, we might call them conclusions,
we better call them preliminary conclusions.
And one of them has to do with whether we're beginning to hit on
a kind of cognitive divide between monkeys and apes.
Is it the case that just like with tool using and tool making,
when it comes to teaching,
and maybe even complicated patterns of social learning,
great apes have an edge over monkeys?
Is there a different suite of cognitive factors
that sets apart gorillas from monkeys,
just as we know at the termite mound,
great apes, chimpanzees, are set apart from monkeys?
Well, we don't know,
but this is something that we want to work on very much.
One thing that is a great deal of fun about anthropology
is this fact that really has come out, I think,
in the last couple of lectures,
that we're dealing with a relatively young science.
If you oppose the study of anthropoid social behavior
and cognitive behavior to some other sciences,
we're really very much in our infancy.
There's loads that we don't know.
And this requires a certain type of researcher,
one who feels excited by and enthused by uncertainty
rather than bothered by it.
There's more that we don't know than we do know.
When we reach one conclusion, more questions emerge.
The very first time I gave an oral report in a graduate seminar,
I was nervous, I was not particularly skilled at doing this,
and one of my graduate student peers in the very middle of my talk
stormed out of the room and slammed the door, saying as she went,
this report doesn't say anything clear.
It only says if this is true, that might be true,
but somebody else thinks that might be true and that might be true.
How can we make any sense of the world if nobody agrees,
if there's no set of facts?
Well, that's how science works.
And this is very relevant to social learning and teaching.
Right now, the bulk of the data suggests to me that cognitively
we're getting a picture of great apes that can do things in the world
that monkeys can't.
And tool-using and social learning and social teaching
form the crux or the locus of those data.
And this would make a lot of sense evolutionarily
that great apes evolved more recently and are more closely related to us.
What lessons can we draw from all of this in this lecture
about the roots of human behavior?
I think first and foremost that we are primed to learn from each other.
As I see it, the infant anthropoid, whether we're talking about monkey,
ape or human, is a package, an individual, of just readiness to learn
and to learn from all those surrounding him or her.
So it is not just a human adaptation,
but it is one that has been primed by many, many years of evolution.
I think it is worth considering anthropoid infancy
in its longest time period with a long lens, I guess, is what I'm seeing.
Also, just like the conclusion we reached about technology,
we can certainly say that there are strong roots of sophisticated social learning
in monkeys and apes.
And although teaching may be evolutionarily more recent,
you don't see a lot of sophisticated teaching, some in great apes, but not a lot.
There are certainly hints of teaching in our anthropoid past,
hints that there are roots in our past of teaching.
Now, the topic that we have just talked about, social learning and teaching,
is intimately connected with another one, and that is whether or not monkeys and apes have culture.
We've talked already about how different populations of chimps use tools.
What we haven't talked about so much is, do they use those tools in different cultural ways?
That is not just because there may be fruit A in one place and fruit B in another place.
Would they naturally use two different types of tools?
But rather, do they use different types of tools just by social convention,
social custom, and social learning?
The topic of culture follows naturally from the topic of social learning and teaching.
So we will take up anthropoid culture in the next lecture.
Let's take the next logical step in the sequence that we've been following.
We talked about tool using and tool making.
We moved from there to social learning and teaching,
and now we'll move to a consideration of anthropoid culture.
No concept other than culture has been more central to the discipline of anthropology historically.
The concept is our very touchstone.
It's the one that unites those four subfields we talked about way back in the first lecture.
However, the concept has been defined in hundreds of different ways within this one discipline.
I know that it sounds like it must be an exaggeration, but it isn't.
Way back in the 1950s, a book came out that was entirely comprised of definitions of culture in anthropology.
And since then, all those decades have gone by, there are many more.
The cliche is, you find an anthropologist and there'll be one definition of culture.
You move down the hall, find another anthropologist, there'll be another definition.
What I'd like to do in this lecture is give you just a hint of the range of variation
in definitions of the culture concept by focusing on four different ways to define the term.
And using those variant alternative definitions, ask whether monkeys or apes have culture.
So this is very much an approach that asks about definitions,
but we want to move beyond definitions too and get back to questions in anthropology
that can be answered by a focus on the evolution of culture.
One way that culture may be defined is to simply equate it with social learning.
In this view, whenever learning takes place socially,
in any of the ways we've just talked about in the previous lecture, culture is present.
The idea is to eliminate genetic transmission or things that are hardwired.
Let's say animals may know how to perform a particular behavior strictly from hardwired instinct or innateness.
That, of course, is not culture.
But the minute that an animal learns from social companions according to definition number one, culture is present.
Definition number two is that culture is defined as group-specific patterns that are learned socially.
Now, we've added a variable into the mix here.
Social patterns must still be learned in this definition, but there's something else.
They must differ across groups.
So let's say there's a difference in the way two groups of monkeys eat some food.
It's the same food, but there's simply a difference that can't be explained genetically or ecologically.
They're not two different foods, the conditions are the same.
If it's a social custom or tradition that differs in different groups, that is culture.
As we go along with these defy that they get progressively more elaborated and progressively more complex,
the third definition adds in symbolic representation.
Yes, you need social learning, but more than that, culture bearers must be able to represent either objects or ideas with symbols.
A symbol, of course, stands for the real item.
We can think of a flag as a good example of a symbol using, of course, human society.
A flag represents something to the citizens of the country by convention.
Why, during a parade, for example, do American citizens stand?
Some may salute a flag.
It's, after all, just a piece of cloth, right?
No, because it's a symbol.
It's much more than that.
There can be all kinds of other symbols that are not so material as that.
For example, gestures.
The thumbs up gesture is a good example.
Let's say you're deciding that you want to signal to somebody across an athletic field halfway across that they've done a good job.
You can do a thumbs up sort of gesture.
You're looking around for a good movie to see on the weekends.
You read the advertisements and you see the comment to thumbs up.
Well, that means something to us, most of us, in our society.
It might mean nothing in other countries.
It's a symbol.
It stands for something that we understand through social convention.
Lastly, in our list of four definitions, culture may be limited to the transmission of complex ideas and complex beliefs.
I'm thinking here of ideas that underlie religion and other multi-layered social institutions.
And, of course, you can guess that this fourth definition is reserved for humans.
It's exclusively human.
Well, whether monkeys or apes might be thought to have culture depends entirely on what evidence is admitted as relevant to a certain definition among these four.
So let's go through the definitions and line up the definitions with some of the recent evidence from monkeys and apes.
And we'll start back with the idea of equating culture with social learning.
If culture is social learning, monkeys and apes have culture.
Period.
No question.
I think you can, for yourselves, come up with examples from the previous lectures.
The Thai nutcracking chimpanzees should come to mind.
The nutcracking chimps are secure candidates for culture under this definition because we know that social interaction, social learning, and probably even some form of teaching is involved.
Now, at this point, I want to talk a little bit about other species, non-anthropoids, non-primates.
Because this first definition that we are considering also admits as culture bearers, or at the very least likely culture bearers, other species.
Elephant, whales, dolphin, just to name a few, seem to undergo social learning as well.
The idea with this definition is that the net is cast wide.
Wherever social learning occurs, we should, people say, who believe this definition, see culture.
This is actually a pretty important point for this course.
In many cases, with all of the examples that I've used, many of them can be applied to other species.
Like, let's say, let's think back to emotions.
We talked about grief, joy, jealousy, the fact that Jane Goodall believes that chimpanzees express these emotions.
Well, how many of you have been thinking about your pets during these types of discussions?
Let's say dogs.
As it so happens, I just read a novel.
And, of course, it's fictional, it's a novel, but it's based on fact.
One of the characters in the novel is a dog that participates in search and rescue missions.
For example, if there's an earthquake or severe building collapse, the dog and its partner, human partner, will go and dig up people, try to find survivors.
In its well-known fact, apparently, within this field, outside of novels, as well as within, that dogs feel emotion during this process.
They get very excited when they find a survivor, not just because they're going to get a reward, but because they've done their job
and they get depressed according to the human partners if they don't find survivors.
This is so much the case that, occasionally, if a lot of attempted rescues have failed and they've only found bodies,
somebody, some human, will be sent off to be found by the dog.
In other words, it'll be set up for the dog to have a success so that it can recover emotionally.
Well, what's the relevance of all this?
The relevance is that biological anthropology doesn't claim that only anthropoid monkeys and apes have these behaviors or these emotions.
Remember the claim, though, turns on the concept of common ancestry.
That's what monkeys and apes have that's important, that whales, dolphins, dogs, et cetera, don't.
These things may have evolved, perhaps not as complexly as with monkeys and apes, perhaps so in some cases,
but they are not as relevant biological anthropologists' claim to the study of the human species simply because it's a different lineage, evolutionarily.
Alright, let's get back to our first definition, the one that admits social learning as culture and that, therefore, admits a lot of other species.
We're only going to consider monkeys and apes.
Japanese macaques are good candidates for culture under this definition.
Monkeys, of course.
There have been very many years of study of how feeding patterns are shared socially in Japanese macaques.
There's, in fact, a very famous Japanese macaque called Emo.
Emo was a female who lived a long time ago on an island off the coast of Japan who had been studied by primatologists.
She was observed to invent new feeding techniques.
One thing that she did was to take sweet potatoes that had been given to the monkeys on the beach.
This happened because scientists wanted to see them and observe them closely, so they provisioned them with sweet potatoes,
making it easier for them to watch the monkeys under close quarters.
So Emo would take a sweet potato and take it down to the water to the sea and wash it off.
Take the salt water and literally wash it.
Nobody had been observed, no monkey had been observed in this group to do that before.
A second thing that she would do is scoop up a handful of wheat that also had been given to the monkey.
On the beach, take it down to the sea, drop it in the water, the wheat would float, the sand would sink out,
and then she'd have clean wheat to eat.
Both of these things, again, were new as far as anyone could tell to the group.
And what happened is that relatively soon, her family members and close associates began also to use the feeding techniques
so that the Japanese scientists began to document the spread of the inventions through the social group.
This type of study started back in the 1950s,
and it's an example of how very pioneering Japanese scientists have been in the study of anthropoid relatives.
Well, there seem to be patterns in how these inventions spread through the Japanese macaque group.
The female we're talking about, Emo, her natural line members were among the first to pick up the techniques, her female relatives.
Also, younger monkeys were more quick to adopt the technique than were older animals,
and the adult males were the last of all, and some took a very, very long time.
Can you think why the adult males would take so long?
Of course, remember that they would have transferred in from other groups and be less closely bonded to the animals in the group.
Some scientists, and this definitely includes the Japanese researchers who documented this phenomenon,
believe that the techniques were imitated.
So Emo was imitated by the other monkeys, and therefore social learning, therefore proof of culture.
And this has been a significant thread in the literature coming out of Japan for all of these years.
It's a textbook case for social learning and culture under this definition.
And I say that quite literally, almost any textbook that includes primate behavior is likely to have a picture of Emo,
a picture of a sweet potato in this whole case documented.
Now, of course, being anthropology, there's no consensus on this question.
It wouldn't be anthropology if there were consensus.
A few skeptics have suggested that the new feeding techniques came about through means other than social learning,
which of course would disqualify this as an example of culture.
So in this case, monkey culture is not accepted.
Well, why would they say that?
Close reanalysis of the data has shown that on average it takes a Japanese macaque 2.2 years to acquire this technique after the animal first observes it.
And the question is, that's a long time.
Is that too long for social learning?
Think of all the things that could happen in that time, independent learning, trial and error, practice.
There's also some debate about whether the animals that washed sweet potatoes or threw wheat into the sea might have been reinforced positively by the researchers.
Not, of course, in any intentional way to propagate the technique, but just because the researchers were fascinated
and would tend to pay attention to those monkeys and tend to unintentionally reward those monkeys so that the monkeys would keep doing it.
So whether or not its culture is under debate.
Let's move to our second definition.
Group-specific patterns are required for culture in this definition.
Here, without any question, chimpanzees have culture.
Tool-using patterns differ markedly across chimpanzee populations.
And we know, we have very good evidence to show, that these differences are due to social learning and not just the differences in the environment or the ecology.
If you have two groups of chimps and one takes termite wands and fishes for termites, but the other doesn't, that's only interesting to us
if this other group has termites in its region.
Of course, if there are no termites, that becomes a trivial example.
So we need to look at cases where the ecology or the environment is held constant, and yet still there are differences in social customs.
In 1999, a seminal paper was published in the journal Nature that claimed no fewer than 39 different behavioral patterns that fit these criteria.
In other words, that occur because of differences in social learning and social customs.
Group-specific patterns that are cultural.
This refers entirely to chimpanzees now, this paper.
And of course, I can't go through 39 different examples for you, but I can tell you that termite fishing and how specifically that technique is accomplished is on the list.
Other types of feeding patterns done with tools, one way in East Africa, a different way in West Africa, also on the list.
And another example that's a little different that I'll mention for you are types of grooming behavior.
I've said before that grooming is not just a hygienic process in monkeys and apes, but is one of calming, social bonding, social reinforcing.
Very common in monkeys and apes.
Most times, a chimp, let's say, will simply settle down next to another one, get close to the other one's body and pick through the fur in calming types of movements.
In some populations, however, there's a very particular grooming posture that is adopted.
It is called the grooming hand clasp.
If you can picture this, two chimps are sitting next to each other.
One raises an arm straight up in the air, the other raises an arm straight up in the air, and they meet kind of like this, and then they grasp hands.
And this is simply by social custom.
We can't think of any ecological reason.
People have tried as a sort of intellectual exercise to come up with, why would chimps in one place do this and chimps in another not?
An example of the far-reaching nature of these ideas is, could there be an underarm parasite in the grooming hand clasp chimpanzees where they're lifting up their arms because they're wanting to get at this area where there are parasites?
Well, you can play that game endlessly.
You can try to think of ecological or environmental reasons, but I certainly agree with the authors of this paper.
Paper was senior authored by Andrew Whiten that this is cultural behavior according to our definition number two for chimpanzees.
Let's move to definition three, symbolic representation.
Here we're on pretty thin ice for monkeys and apes.
There are what we might call arguable data, but not data that I am totally comfortable with, interesting hints and suggestions.
For example, the primatologist Savage Rumbaugh has suggested that bonobos may mark their paths in the forest and mark their changes in travel direction as they're moving through the forest by symbolic trail markers.
Now, she is a good observer and I think this is a hypothesis that is very worthy of further testing because if it is borne out with more data, we may have an example of symbolic representation.
Here's why.
She's not claiming that when bonobos move through the forest, they just accidentally trample vegetation and the other apes can look at that and sort of figure out in some way where their partners went ahead of them.
In every animal, tramples vegetation as it moves.
Elephants certainly do.
Human trackers and who knows what other animals can use that accidental happenstance to figure out where animals may have gone.
But this claim is different.
This is the claim of intentional bending of vegetation to point symbolically towards where a subgroup has gone.
Remember that bonobos have not just communities but fluid parties.
They come together.
They come apart.
They mix in different combinations.
So the group is not always traveling together.
It would make sense in an adaptive kind of way to be able to indicate to somebody coming behind stragglers where you've gone.
The data suggests that these trail markers may occur more frequently and more clearly at junctures in the path at times when the group made a turn, let's say.
So it's very intriguing and this is a pretty good candidate for what might be symbolic representation.
There are a few other like candidates for great apes but it is definitely so new that again more data are needed.
Moving finally to the fourth definition, it is very easy to conclude that no monkey or ape groups are, as far as we know, built on a foundation of complex ideas and beliefs.
We certainly don't see any evidence of real spiritual or religious type of behavior in monkeys or apes.
We don't expect to find this.
I mean I've been saying all along how surprising monkeys and apes can be but this would really be a shocker.
So definition number four, again as I mentioned previously, tends to keep culture as unique for humans.
Now I don't want to give the impression that all anthropologists and primatologists who use definitions one, two and three, let's say, all are very easy with giving culture to monkeys and apes.
There are so many other definitions and so many other debates going on.
This is a very lively field.
So I want to mention just one or two things.
There are primatologists working on differences between ape culture and human culture, let's say.
Michael Tomasello points out that sure chimpanzees have social learning.
Chimpanzees have group specific differences in their social customs.
He disputes none of this.
But he says how really like that is what we know as human culture.
Human culture is dependent on the idea that somebody may invent something, others will adopt a new technique,
and then a year or so later, I'm just making an example here, others will build on the invention and make something new.
This is called the ratchet effect.
In other words, you take something and you build it up.
You ratchet it up a level and you use the foundational work that someone else has done to make accumulated changes.
Cumulative modifications are key for Tomasello to human culture.
This is exactly what he does not see in even the most sophisticated examples of what others are calling chimpanzee culture.
So it's not just a question of fitting behavior into definitions.
We want to go further than that and really understand what is going on as these behaviors are expressed.
I have been thinking about this issue as well and with some other of my colleagues,
I would like to look more broadly at the question of culture.
The work that we have on tool-using and on grooming postures was absolutely just mind-boggling
when it first came out and quite revolutionary, very important, and it still continues to be.
I think though that we could look too at how anthropoid youngsters learn how to participate in their social worlds,
not only through things like tool use, but in a broader sense.
How do they, for example, negotiate interactions with their social partners just in an everyday sense?
How do they request aid from their adults in their groups?
How do they express their feelings through their body movements?
How do these things get accomplished, not necessarily just the dramatic events of tool use and grooming,
but the more daily types of encounters?
I have worked with bonobos in captivity.
This is a project that I haven't talked much about, but we'll talk a little bit more about when we get to communication.
And one thing that really struck me about the bonobos in captivity, watching particularly the infants,
was what a process it really is for an infant to integrate gradually into its group.
We've built up, I think, a picture of great apes as being fairly sophisticated.
They have what anthropomorphically might be called rules or at the very least patterns of behavior that have to be learned and practiced.
Well, gestures, body movement, vocalization, facial expressions, all these things help the anthropoid youngster integrate.
But could we not begin to study that in a way that would integrate those things
into the study of what we're calling culture?
After all, in human societies, we're very interested in these more routine interactions within families,
how they differ between families, how greetings and requests differ between societies.
There's one particular anecdote that I can offer that might cement this a little bit involving my work with the bonobos.
There was an infant called Alikia. I was filming and observing.
Her mother was called Matata.
Alikia was born in June of one summer that I was carrying out this research.
And already in September, she did something that I thought was surprisingly advanced, according to my interpretation of it.
She was with her mother, of course, as we would expect her to be, being a young bonobo infant.
And her mother handed her over physically, bodily, to her older sister, the infant's older sister.
Now, the older sister seemed like she was in a calm mood and would be a relatively decent social companion,
but the infant Alikia apparently did not want to be transferred away from her mother.
She made a facial expression directed towards her mother with a pout face.
Her lips kind of came forward into an infant pout.
And then three times in relatively quick succession, she extended her arm with her palm up back toward her mother.
First once, then again, then three times.
She did not touch her mother, although she could have.
This was a gesture that I interpreted as a request.
Her mother, after the third arm extension, took Alikia back against her own body.
The sister relinquished her and leaned over and patted her sister, perhaps an attempt at comfort.
Well, what did Alikia accomplish from this interaction?
I don't know, really, but I can speculate that here was a way in which she took a relatively simple bodily movement,
a gesture, and made something happen.
She changed the social interaction.
This is a request. This kind of thing happened fairly frequently in the Bonobo family.
And I believe that we can study interactions like this first within groups, then between families,
then between groups, and start to understand how infants build up these patterns.
Okay, then biological anthropology is left with a situation where we can begin to understand the roots of human culture
by looking at monkeys and apes.
Definitionally, the field is a little bit in chaos, admittedly,
because no one agrees with anybody else about what culture is.
But according to many definitions, we have behavioral patterns that evolved
and that differ from each other across groups before the time period of human evolution.
Now, I can't resist ending with a kind of ironic twist, because I think this is important.
In September of 2000, I was invited to an international conference on the topic of culture in anthropology.
This was held by the Winner-Gren Foundation in Mexico,
and various people from different subfields of anthropology and different other disciplines as well
were gathered together to discuss culture.
After several days of meeting in seminars, some of us joked that the headline coming out of this conference should be
apes have culture humans don't.
Now, why would we come up with such a thing?
Well, I think you can understand the ape part.
A lot of the data are showing that definitionally, criteria are satisfied for ape culture.
But right now, there's movement going on in anthropology to really step back from the culture concept
as it has been traditionally used in our discipline.
This was fairly new to me at the conference, because it tends to come out more of cultural anthropology
than it does of biological anthropology.
The question is, doesn't the term culture imply that our world is made up of a lot of really bounded, isolated societies?
If you talk about Swiss culture, Navajo culture, Italian culture, Greek culture, Argentinian culture,
does that really represent the behavioral patterns we see in the world?
Isn't there more fluidity?
It's not essential in that way.
It's not isolated with every group having its own pattern.
So I came to find out that just as biological anthropologists are pushing their anthropoid subjects, monkeys and apes,
into the culture arena, cultural anthropologists are stepping back and saying,
I don't know about that concept.
There are flaws with that concept.
So we're left with a very vital field of inquiry, the evolution of culture.
Well, next step is to move, again, in what I believe to be a logical sequence,
towards talking about patterns of communication and language in our closest living relative.
