Okay, well, thank you all for coming. I'm John Dupre, as it says on the board. I'm
physically here from the University of Exeter. So, let me start off with a very kind of general
comment about the kind of thing that I'm doing. Actually, as a sort of background, a lot of
people I work with call themselves nowadays philosophers of science in practice, which
sometimes means philosophers of science in practice, and sometimes means philosophers
of science in practice. But either way, people are supposed to be doing something relevant,
connected to science. And I have to say, some of my colleagues sometimes will say, metaphysics,
what's that? Why do we care about that? I thought we're supposed to be concerned with
science and engage with science. Well, so I would just start off by saying that I think
there are many reasons in my mind for being concerned with very general, very abstract
accounts of what we're talking about when or what indeed science is talking about. And
so I'm interested as a philosopher of biology, which is my sort of primary job description,
giving or offering at least a very general account of living things. And I think that
this is really important for biology, that this is in my way of doing things, it's supposed
to be what we sometimes call a naturalistic account. That's to say, a metaphysics grounded
in the science, but also one that feeds back into the science. So we look at, we try and
find out what the world looks like from the point of view of the best science we're currently
doing. And then we might ask whether some bits of science need to pay more attention or perhaps
are using a kind of an outdated or not very defensible view of their subject matter. And
we could perhaps set them back onto the path of truth and goodness and beauty. And I guess
another, you know, apart from all that, as this quote from a much maligned 20th century
philosophy of biology, Joseph Henry Woodyer says, you can't avoid it. You can't do science
without a general picture of what you're talking about. And the general picture of what you're
talking about is what I call metaphysics. Okay. So, so I think there is a constant interaction
between metaphysics, ontology, what there is, what exists, and empirical science. Okay.
So let me just start off with a very brief bit of history. The topic I'm talking about is a
really ancient one that goes back to the pre-Socratic Greek philosophers at least. And here are two
kind of archetypal figures from that period. Parmenides, who is famous for saying change is
an illusion. There is everything is just what it is, and stays that way. And, you know, we kind of
from our very limited perspective, see all kinds of things happening. But really, you know, from,
from a broader point of view, there is just the way things are. The complete opposite view perhaps
was expressed by famously by Heraclitus, the sort of patron saint of process philosophers who said
something like, nothing endures but change. There is only change. And this is, I guess, you
will realize the view that I think at least some version of which I would like to commend to you.
Now, of course, I just say change is an illusion is probably not a very fair, you know, certainly
for a philosopher of science in practice is not a very fair characterization of the alternative to
process metaphysics. So, perhaps we should go rather to Democritus, who allegedly said, nothing
except exists, except atoms and empty space. Everything else is opinion. So, why is this,
this is, is close to the Parmenidian view, because all the really is, is a lot of atoms. And the
atoms are defined as being unchanging. Nothing happens to them. The only thing that changes is
their relation to one another. That's to say, you know, the atoms move around, and then they come
together and form you and me for a, for a tiny instant in eternity. But they don't really change.
All that changes is, is their relations to one another. Okay, so moving on, a millennium and a
half or so, we come to sort of dawn of Western science. And my basic message is, Parmenides,
or at least Democritus, won. And, and we have, and he sort of quotes from, I know I got these
separated from Robert Boyle, one of the better known scientists of that, of the scientific
revolution. The naturalist in explaining particular phenomena considers only the size, shape, motion,
or want of it, texture, and the resulting qualities and attributes of the small particles of matter.
Basically, something very close to the Democritian view. They really are just atoms moving around,
when we want to understand the things that seem to change, the sort of complex structures we
encounter, we really just need to find out what the atoms are doing, how they stick together,
perhaps they nudge one another, and things like that. But, but the things that we encounter at
our kind of spatial and temporal scales are, in some sense, not really real. So what I want to
say in this talk is that Parmenides' victory was a very disastrous one for the future study of
biology, because it's much better to think of the living world in the Heraclitian view as composed
of processes change, as always dynamic, and in no way should we think in terms of the kind of
Parmenidaean, basically there's just atoms moving around in the void way of seeing things.
Okay, so that's about it for history. So what am I going to do in this talk, moving into the
future? So the talk is that all living beings are processes, rather than substances, this is kind
of rather technical term in, in the history of philosophy, that I shall avoid on the whole. And
I just tend to talk about things. Now, of course, there's no really good word that, you know,
that's why we have technical words like substance, but I'll say a bit what I mean by thing. So I mean,
don't, don't just take it absolutely as any interpretation you might have of thing. And I
shall use this to contrast with processes, and I'll explain this more. So, so I'll say I start off
with saying about something about this difference. And then I'll talk about why I think organisms as
one kind of paradigmatic example should be thought of as processes and not as things. I should mention
in passing, I just probably mentioned this again. I am actually very strongly drawn to the view that
it's processes all the way down, that, you know, the even down to, you know, subatomic physics,
it's all processes. But I'm not, I don't feel comfortable defending that view. I mean, it obviously
would take one into some fairly technical bits of physics. I'm pretty comfortable down to the level
of macromolecules. But if you want to go down to, you know, quarks and things and, you know, some,
and you have physical, physical expertise as a physicist, which tells you the quarks really are
atoms as democratists might have thought of them. I won't argue with you, though I could if I really
had to wheel up a few physicists or at least philosophers of physics who would disagree,
but, but that's not my. So if you want to take this, this is, this is really a talk
arguing that life, living things are all living things. It's very hard to avoid the word, which
tells you something that living beings, living systems are processes and not things. And I'll talk
after talking about organisms, I'll talk more briefly about how we might incorporate some other
levels of biological organization and form a general, might we say, metaphysics of life.
And then at the end, I will just say a few things rather briefly about why this matters. Some of
them I'll say a bit more about in further lectures this week. Okay. So first of all, things and
processes. Okay. So what's a thing? So I think this is, this is the philosophical
orthodoxy that the world is made up of things. They are, and they're things specific with properties
we have. And that, that's, I say, as a kind of basis for a great deal of contemporary philosophy,
the world, there are these things in the world and they have various properties.
Particularly, they have, and this, this is, of course, is, is another big area that I won't go
into a great detail. But one kind of properties that's very important in, in this metaphysical
tradition are essential properties, the properties that make the thing a particular thing, either
a particular kind of thing, or the very specific particular thing it is. And, and there are reasons
why it's quite hard to make sense of a ontology of things without appealing to some kind of
essential properties. But again, I won't, I'm happy to talk about this later, but I won't say
much more about that now. Things are autonomous. And this, I think, is something that is really
very important to the tradition of thinking about things. If you have a thing, it could be the only
thing in the universe, right? I mean, it's, it doesn't depend on anything else for its existence,
or for its relations to anything else for its existence. Now, of course, there are maybe some
things that contingently do for reasons of, you know, for kind of for, for specific reasons, a
thing of that kind wouldn't actually continue to exist if it didn't, wasn't related to something
else. But in general, the interesting things, the most important things that we're going to talk
about and, and, and assume in our philosophy of things are things that are autonomous in that
sense. And finally, a thing has reasonably clear boundaries. Now, of course, you know, as always,
one can have a bit of fuzziness, but not too much fuzziness. I mean, there's, we really ought to be
able to, to see where, roughly where it begins and ends. And this is actually important for one, for,
for another reason that a lot of, of, of the discussion of why we should think about things
has to do with counting. We want to know how many things there are. And to be able to divide the
world into a definite number of things requires that we know roughly where one ends and the next
one begins. Okay. And, and I guess I've actually rather oddly arranged because I've gone back to
essential properties. I'm sorry about that in the slide. I don't know quite what I was thinking.
But when I say other properties, what I mean is essential, non essential properties can change.
And, but crucially, when other properties of things change, we typically want an explanation,
because the default for a thing is to stay the same. And I think this is a very important point
for understanding what attracts the interest of scientists. They tend to be interested in
why things change, giving explanations of change, typically by giving causes of change.
Okay. So the default state of a thing is stasis. Now I've got to, you know, here are some examples of
what we classically think of things. As I said, in, in my true view of the world, these are all
probably processes too. But, but I'm not going to argue that today. So I'm going to take, you know,
these very, you know, a bit of furniture is very thing like it certainly has clear boundaries,
doesn't seem to depend on anything else, and so on. Okay. So the question, of course, is whether,
you know, maybe this is a, is a thing. And I guess in, in traditional philosophical thought,
this is a standard, certainly in, if one use the technical word substance, this is a paradigm
example of a substance. And I think it's tends to be thought of in a thing like way. So what about
a process for a process philosophy? Being is dynamic. Everything is changing all the time.
And what we thought of as things, certainly the biological things are, as I like to say, and
not not the only process philosopher who has had this kind of paradigm for this eddies.
Things are eddies in a flux of process, which would think of the world as at its most fundamental
level, just stuff happening. But somehow, and that's the great challenge to understand the world,
somehow out of this flux emerge structures that have more or less stability, never complete
stability. And the stability they have is maintained always by changes by things happening. And
my kind of definition here of a process is for it to continue to exist for a process to carry on,
it has to change, things have to happen. So here's one of my favorite paradigms is I had to
actually, Jupiter was one of my examples of a thing. Here we have the red spot on Jupiter,
which you might have thought was, you know, an island or some kind of, but actually, what we
know is that it is a storm, essentially. It's a storm maintained by winds, very high velocity
winds. And the reason I like this example is ever since we've had telescopes big enough to see it,
the red spot has been there on Jupiter. It changes its shape, you know, but that's about 400 years,
I think, that we've observed this entity, which as I say, looks from a distance. You might be
a thing, but it's actually a process. If it stopped, if the wind stopped flowing around it,
if the activity stopped, it would rapidly dissipate. And then here's some more
typical kind of examples of processes. A river, which I guess was Heraclitus, most famous example,
you probably all heard the saying from Heraclitus, which I won't try and discuss, though again,
we could bring it up that you can never step into the same river twice. He didn't actually quite
say that, or nobody knows what he quite said, but he probably didn't. Nobody actually thinks he
quite said that and so on, but that's what he's the most famous for. And then, of course, finally,
we move on to the most un-thing-like processes. I have an example of a battle, which clearly,
if everybody stops fighting, there's no more battle, right? So this is a very clearly fits
this definition. And again, of course, we can ask whether these paradigmatic organisms are
processes, which of course is my thesis. So just to summarize, we have a conception of a thing
as integrated. I didn't actually talk about that, but I guess it's almost implicit. It's always so
obvious to say things and perhaps follows from the boundaries. Independent, not dependent on,
for its existence, on anything else, stable by default and has definite boundaries. Now,
none of these is necessary or even typical for processes. Processes persist through activity,
i.e. they are not stable by default. And this is the strongest contest I make as against things
for which the default condition is stasis. And again, this is something I think has
some real practical implications for how we should think about some scientific problems.
So just a quote from one of the, well, actually two mentioned here of the most prominent contemporary
defendants of Processed Philosopher, Nicholas Rescher. And then the Stanford Encyclopedia,
his article was updated by Nicholas Rescher, by John Assyk. As process ontologists see it,
enduring things are never more than patterns of stability in a sea of process. So that's really
the thesis. And by process, I understand again, something, and I often notice the embarrassment
that in English, one can't help saying something, anything, everything, all the time when one's
trying to say there are no things. So please forgive this linguistic annoyance. Some entity,
which just doesn't work in English, for which change or activity is necessary for it to continue
to be the kind of entity it is. Okay. So one last sort of preliminary note, many people will
associate Processed Philosophy with Alfred North Whitehead, who is certainly the most famous
recent advocate of Processed Philosophy. And I certainly don't want to demean the contributions
of Whitehead, which were many including this. But I really want to bypass Whitehead in my work
for a couple of reasons. One is he is notoriously difficult to understand, possibly obscure. He
also has some views tied in with his Processed Philosophy that I don't want to endorse. I mean,
I guess panpsychism, maybe sometimes I feel a little tiny pull in that direction, but it's
fairly small. I'm not comfortable with it, certainly, or theology, which again, as I suppose, is
quite widely associated with Processed Theology, but with Processed Philosophy, but not in my
view of the world. And I guess finally, to be rather mean to Whitehead, I don't really think he's
a Processed Philosopher. And that's because I think he has an atomistic view of processes.
So any of you here who are Whitehead aficionados, he has little things called occasions, actual
occasions, things which look to me a bit like unchanging atoms which make up the processes.
And I don't think we need or want such things. Anyhow, again, no disrespect to an important
contributor, but I find it easier to reinvent wheels sometimes than try and figure out where the
wheel is underneath all the mud in a very overused kind of vest. This has gone much too far. Okay,
right. So organisms and why organisms are processes. So I think there are three reasons
for thinking organisms are process, each of which is sufficient. And together, we really,
really shouldn't have any debate about this. So first of all, organisms, we all know,
are dynamically stabilized. They are systems far from thermodynamic equilibrium, right? That's
it's, you know, one of the puzzles for understanding life has always been
how something so thermodynamically improbable stays around. And of course, we know the answer to this
is through, I mean, in outline, there's a constant turnover of matter, organisms take in
matter and energy, and they process it, and they process it to maintain their structures and their
functions. And so it's the very nature of such a system, far from thermodynamic equilibrium,
that it's doing stuff to maintain itself as what it is. Second, organisms have life cycles.
They, they are not even apparently constant structures. In fact, they have a sequence
of different stages, sometimes quite dramatically different from one another. And third, and this
is, I think, is actually the thing that, that the aspect that really led me into process thinking
was realizing the omnipresence of symbiosis, and that actually organisms stabilize themselves,
not merely by what they do, their own taking in energy and processing it, but through their
relations to many other organisms, cooperative relations, which I guess, you know, we mostly,
we know, perhaps best through what we've all learned recently about our gut,
microbiomes, but of course we have lots of other organisms we're related to in many other
different ways. And I'll say more about all of these. So, so let me just go through these quickly,
not much really to say more about this. Organisms are thermodynamically open systems,
far from equilibrium, and this implies that they are not independent, they require constant input
from the environment, type of the, nor stable by default. I, if an organism doesn't do anything,
I mean, if nothing happens, you know, there's trillions of things happening inside all of us,
and every second, if those stop happening, we cease, we become dead organisms, and if we stop
taking in matter from the environment, we also more slowly become dead organisms. In fact,
if you count oxygen, we quite quickly become dead organisms. So, it's, it's, they're certainly not,
you know, independent autonomous entities. Secondly, they are developmental processes,
and I just give an example, which will all be quite familiar, possibly not the
wonderful sea creature, I don't know what that is, Medusa, on the bottom, there are some sea
creatures just have wonderful life cycles. But my point is that properties change dramatically
over the life cycle. They were all very used to the idea that the egg and the caterpillar and the
pupa and the adult are the same organism, but if we were trying to understand how that could be
the same thing, and there could be some essential property that said this is some same
entity going through all these drastic changes, it's quite a struggle. And I don't know if I might
go to this later, but people sometimes think we may be answered to that with the genome,
happy to talk about this, but just let me, just two things, genomes are highly dynamic,
of course, but also there are lots of genomes in an organism, and they're not all the same by any
means, and for various reasons. So, I could, I can certainly talk more about that if anybody
would like to become a genome essentialist and defend the, that is a way of saying an organism
is a thing at least against this objection. So, organisms don't persist by default, but as quite
often happens for process, they persist, well, sorry, as always happens for organisms, they persist
by some kind of causal continuity, but this is consistent with going through drastically
different stages. And somebody in the seminar this morning brought up the example of a party
as a process where parties can be lively at one point, and then most people can leave, and they
can be really desultory, and nobody's really saying anything, and nobody thinks the party is
absolutely ended because it stops being lively, or people stop dancing. We're used to the idea
that processes can go through changes. These are rather more dramatic changes, perhaps, I mean,
from a, from a pupa to an adult insect is about as dramatic a change as you could easily imagine,
and yet we have no trouble in the idea that just the causal continuity of the process
leads us to say that this is still the same organism. Finally, symbiosis, and I just got some,
you know, a few randomly selected illustrations here, but, you know, the basic point is that we
now think pretty much all organisms, you know, there are some, some sort of a few things floating
around in the oceans that maybe don't have much to do with anything else, but on the whole organisms
are symbiotic. The famous one that, you know, has heard of humans, and there's a debate whether,
you know, something between 50 and 90 percent of the cells in a human body are not what we
used to call human cells, they're microbial cells. Trees have amazingly complex, or plants generally,
relations to bacteria and fungi, there are whole these amazingly complex systems that interact
with the roots, the fungi actually kind of live inside the roots and then through and out into,
send their hyphae out into the surrounding soil where they interact with consortia of bacteria,
all processing the materials going in and out, and indeed, as now quite famously, passing material
down the hyphae networks to other plants in their vicinity, sometimes plants of different species,
so the degree of interconnectedness in complex botanical systems is stunning, and I guess, you
know, we often see the mushrooms that come out of these systems, but if we once thought that they
were kind of independent autonomous organisms, now realizing their very complex, intimate relations
to the plants, they live around, see something quite different, and I don't think I'll go into the
insects, that's another nice system that's been much studied, so autonomous is not a word that
really applies well to any organ, or any but a very small minority at any rate of organisms.
Okay, and so I just, you know, I like this a lot, so I just give one example,
which leads to a thesis that I like to kind of use to illustrate the significance,
in one significance of this process, your perspective. So here's one of the most successful
organisms in a typical forest environment, leaf cutter ants, I won't go too much into the biology,
but you can see here's a picture of them carrying off little bits of leaf
into their colonies, where they go various different casts, some carry the leaves,
some defend the colony, some look after the insides of the colony in various different ways,
but more interestingly, inside the colonies there are things that you can think of as the stomach
of the whole system, whether leaves are processed by specialist fungi, actually by specialist fungi,
and that depend themselves on consortia of bacteria, there are different consortia in other
parts of the system, and it turns out actually that I mentioned insects and some of their
obligate symbionts while back here are very well known when they actually also involved in
these ants, and kind of rather interestingly in some cases the while back here determine the sex
of the ants, so if you're looking for some organisms that's running the system since it's
really quite important, which what the sex of the ants are, and the cast of the ants, it may be the
while back here that are really running it as little micro reduced bacterial symbionts inside
the ants, I don't think anybody has studied the role of viruses, but almost certainly viruses
are involved, I think they're involved in pretty much any system, I'm not sure if I can mention
that further today, and so what I want to say is there's lots of ways you could sort out an organism
here, people will often say the colony is a super organism, sort of technical term, but it's a
very well integrated whole, the individual ants look most like organisms, but people often say
well they're so far from autonomous, I mean most of them are not sexual, so they can't
reproduce themselves, but also they can't, I mean there's nothing they can do to survive on their own,
you might think of the fungal stomach as an organism, a just a specialized organism for
living inside ant colonies, because I mean it's nothing, it's not related by descent to the ants,
it's a collaboration that's come together over time, and so on, so I mean there are many ways
you can carve, and of course you know there are questions at each point whether you include the
obligate microbial symbionts as part of the organisms or not, there are many different ways
you could carve up this flow of biological activity into organisms, which I call this
thesis of promiscuous individualism, and I won't go into some of you may know I have a
somewhat similar system view, which I call promiscuous realism about kinds,
but basically this thesis is just organisms are abstracted from this flux for particular
reasons according to what you're interested in, why you're doing it. Okay so processes,
and I just want to say this is quite characteristic of a lot of processes, processes intertwine with
one another in quite complex ways and have quite indeterminate boundaries, this is quite natural
for processes, very hard to understand things as entangled in this sort of way with one another,
and I you know I come back to the sort of example famous from Heraclitus of the river,
and I think you know the way rivers keep constantly changing, merging, separating is actually
remarkably similar in some ways to the way organisms, particularly the evolutionary
flow of organisms, but also just the flow of organisms in a complex system like the ant colony
can be thought of. Okay so biology is all process and another crucial thing to understand
is that this process has multiple timescales, so evolution I guess being the slowest timescale
which can be we can think of in terms of you know many millions of years, development which
can take from minutes to decades, and I guess something that maybe I should should say I hope
it's obvious in a sense it is the developmental system or cycle which is the the entity that evolves,
so you couldn't evolve just you know an ant caterpillar, I'm sorry a butterfly caterpillar,
you could what has evolved is the system, the caterpillar can't exist except as part of this
flow of process through the various stages. Metabolism at much faster rates is a great
number of processes that keep the parts of the system running, keeping them in
stable in non-thermal, far from thermal equilibrium at many different rates.
So all of the entities that one might think of in a hierarchy of biological systems are processes
at these various timescales and one of the really fascinating things in trying to get a
big picture of biology is understanding how these timescales interact, how the processes at these
different timescales build up or down to interconnect and maintain the stability of the whole flow.
So what is an organism? Now it's a horrible thing that I think I've never done before
which is that philosophers sometimes do is when they want to break up words into bits
put little subscripts on them, so I apologize but it just did seem it's a natural way of
doing it. One of the, so if you ask most biologists what they mean by an organism,
they will say something like I think what I said by organism, by organism sub one.
So there are bacteria which are single-celled organisms and then there are multicellular
organisms which typically or perhaps always come about from a starting cell which divides
multiple times, differentiates, the cells differentiate and we end up with a multicellular
organism. Basically all cells with roughly the same genetic constitution, I say roughly because
that's problematic. But when we actually look at the systems that I've been looking at we see
that actually these, a real organism moving around contains cells from many different sources
that combine to form a functional system or the one that really interacts with the rest of the
biological world. So I'll call this an organism two and as I say living systems typically involve
a complexly intertwined interaction between many distinct organisms one and this of course is
why defining the boundaries of organisms two which is I think is the most fundamental sense
is very difficult, undetermined and interest relative because you know that there are different
levels of interconnectedness between the various processes that interact but it is these very
roughly defined systems with somewhat indeterminate boundaries that I think what we mean when we
refer to organisms. When I you know point to a cow I don't mean as I say that's a cow I don't mean
apart from all the bacteria in its four stomachs. I mean the whole thing that walks around and
processes grass. So and this is actually something that I formulate in a particular way
as what an organism or what indeed a biological system is is the intersection between lineages
and the metabolic intersection of various biological lineages produces these stable
thing-like organisms and the stabilization you know facilitates of these processes in turn
facilitate the persistence of the lineage. I haven't really talked about that I'll get onto that a bit
later. So here's the sort of picture in the middle of the picture we have a traditional
kind of thing-like view of how I think it's still very common to think of the biological world
is a hierarchy of things that are put together to form bigger things so molecules making cells
cells making tissues organs so on. What I want to say is that these are actually all processes
processes synchronized between different time scales and crucially processes that
the synchronization is both from above and from below so the traditional picture that I'm arguing
against tends to be really bottom up the molecules explain how the cells work and then when you
know how the cells work you can put them together to form tissues and so on but I just you know
looking right in the middle and it was something like the heart we all know actually that of
course the heart has a physiology it's made of certain kinds of cells that you know oscillate
in certain kinds of ways but we also know that if the organism doesn't take its proper exercise and
eat its five portions of vegetables a day that it won't function very well so actually the persistence
of the organ depends entirely on its positioning within a more complex system that it's part of
and of course we could also say well the organisms would not persist if they were not
part of lineages that keep throwing them out and so on so all along I think that we should look at
not only the way the components at the lower level interact to get the behaviors of things
at the higher level but also the way the embedding in the higher level systems actually
helps to explain the properties of the components themselves okay so
so I guess what I want to say is that that's basically it that that's my summary of of what
the difference between a thing and a process is and why organisms and in fact
everything along the the hierarchy of biological complexity is is really best seen as a process
I just want to now just say a few things about some implications that this has for
what we should how we should think about some quite significant problems the first one to say is
medicine it's I think extremely standard to think of medical medicine in relation to the organism
as a mechanism a mechanism that has you know the set of parts that interact with one another to
produce healthy existence and something gets broken right we have to figure so what we do is
first of all figure out what the broken part is and figure out how we're going to fix it and of
course you know sometimes that works very well if you break your leg and you can't walk we we
quite rightly think the best way forward is to try and get the leg to join together and restore
its structural integrity and then you could with luck walk again so it's not that there's nothing
nothing right about this it's just that it's I think a very limited perspective because I think
from a process perspective the the the central mission of medical research is rather to understand
the processes that stabilize human life cycles at these various time scales and develop interventions
that maintain fortify or of course sometimes restore these processes I remember years and years
ago somebody told me and it I don't know whether it's true or not and it didn't mean much apart
from being memorable at the time that in Chinese medicine you pay your doctor as long as you don't
get sick if you get sick then you stop paying your doctor that came back to me I just thought
that is quite wonderful that is exactly how medicine should work of course you know and I
guess you contrast it with you know the power the opposite paradigm which I guess I think lived in
the US American medicine is desperately trying to invent sicknesses so that you can be paid you
pay somebody to say you don't have them anymore I'm a bit simplistic I know but but it does seem
to me that that if you if you accept the view that the default of a process is actually ceasing
to persist I mean that that process is persist by doing things then you shouldn't have this you know
that this is very different in its implications from the mechanistic view and I think my my my
favorite illustration I'm favorite I mean sounds if I love this stuff I mean I don't mean this you
know and I like it kind of way but I think the the the the illness that makes this clearest to me
is cancer so let me just say a little bit about this so when you think about human development
which is by which I don't just mean you know like zero to 15 I mean minus three quarters to
however long you live is a process of human development and as we we certainly know the
this process involves this constant and massive division differentiation and disposal of cells
right we you know the all through the life cycle we are cells dividing at various different rates
and at certain points differentiating so that we have different organs and and and so on and and
there's also we we we now know they're a process of time times at which cells are disposed of they've
outlived their usefulness now if you just try and imagine how exquisitely this process is timed
to enable a human to go through a life cycle if it goes wrong if this doesn't happen right a lot of
the things that go wrong are things we call cancer i.e cells are not being disposed of as they should
or cells are dividing when they shouldn't or cells are differentiating in ways that they're not
supposed to i don't have you ever seen some of these appalling cancers where you have little
bits of organs in a tumor um a little bit of yes one yeah yeah quite quite one seed never forgotten
but um yeah that's sort of thing feet and near here and a bit of yeah um but i mean it's it's
once yeah i think you you you get your mind around the the perfection of this process in a certain
way i mean obviously it's um there's much more to be said about that too um it's the amazing thing
is that most of the time we don't have you know seriously harmful cancers of course actually we
all we do have you know incipient cancers all the time um throughout our bodies but most of the time
we manage to suppress these and carry on through the normal life cycle um so cancer we should
assume as we of course now know is multi-causal there is no you know cause of cancer there are
countless things that make us more likely to um to to experience cancers um and the way this is
so i'd say the general problem is is to explain why we often don't get cancer rather than why
we sometimes do and how we maintain our developmental process on something i mean i'm
putting quotes because normal is such a terrible word in biology but on something that let's say a
healthy path um so and i think there are conclusions for this that that there is i don't think we're
going to find a cure for cancer i mean this seems like um this would just be extraordinarily improbable
because as if somehow after you know evolution has spent all these billions of years refining this
system we're suddenly going to say something okay but it's a bit unreliable here's something that's
going to make it 100 reliable that's not going to happen but um but there may be many cures for
many cancers which of course is rather the way we're going and i think it at least provides a
perspective that could help us think about this question in new ways um and i'm not a cancer
scientist so that i need throw that out as um a general optimistic view so um here's another one
that i've i've done a little bit more on two um viruses now viruses are for me a kind of paradigm
process if you hear people talking about viruses i think they often imagine that there are these
little things floating around the world that are viruses and you run into one or two or maybe a
bunch of them and um then they do something horrible to you well there's something true about that
there is a stage in the viral process which is the very inert stage the virion which is a little
thing that gets you know um churned out by a virus um reproducing in a host and can start the
process that that process in um some other organism but actually um if you follow the
life cycle of a virus the virion ceases to exist for the active part of the viral life cycle i
it goes into the cell all kinds of biochemistry happen you know the the the the the protein
manufacturing mechanisms get co-opted they make proteins for new viruses and eventually the cell
typically dissolves and a bunch of new virions comes out so the virions then don't do anything
until they hit another suitable cell that they can they can infect so there is nothing that runs
through the life cycle of a virus even actually you know you might think that even the genomes
don't always do this they for example switch between dna and rna forms sometimes they sit
inside the host genome for periods when is that a virus if there's a little bit of the host genome
doing nothing that's just sitting there as dna which is waiting to turn into an rna virus at
some time in the i mean um at anyway it's um it's extremely um improbable to try and think of
of a thing undergoing changes there's a there's a thing like entity that then initiates a very
un-thing like process at the end of which is a bunch more thing like entities but the virus is
surely the whole life cycle not just the inert stage of its operation so i think instead we
should think rather of a flow of dna passing through organisms sometimes sticking um and actually
i think since i uh wrote this slide um and this is another one coming which is in which case i'm
sorry if i'm anticipating i don't think i um it turns out actually that that some some things that
i didn't know make this perspective actually even more appealing which is that it turns out actually
that the infecting virus very often isn't a single virion it's actually people talk about viral
clouds quasi species and a lot of times it turns out that the infectivity of a virus depends on
properties of the population of viruses by which you're infected and actually the variations
across the population are what um defeat the immune system in a very complex set of interactions
which has a huge evolutionary history um and and so actually i mean and and i guess this this may be
something that's kind of been a little puzzling if you have the sort of simple view of the virus
as you know one particle gets into your cell and then releases all these other virions you think one
one virus would be enough to get you sick one virion now sometimes in some cases that's true in
others as as we i think learned in covid um actually it's very important how large a dose you get
and that's actually to do with the probably the diversity within the population of viruses that
infects you so actually the process of viruses interacting with hosts can often be a population
level phenomenon rather than an individual level phenomenon again something that's a much more
natural thought in terms of this flow picture i think than in terms of a thing with nasty properties
and i guess the final thing that i that i think is um you know it's now becoming increasingly clear
and again i think is um within this broader picture should be totally unsurprising
is that viruses mostly of course are harmless but actually many of them are probably functional
and essential and in fact maybe the outnumbering the cells in your body are the viruses that you
require for the function the stability of your system in particular one obvious way in this they
do this is by regulating the bacterial populations most of the viruses in your body are phages that's
to say viruses that um that um the hosts of which are bacteria and the numbers of phages in your
body makes it seem very likely that they have important roles in um stabilizing the different
the relations between the different sorts of organisms in your body i just lost the okay
okay so some conclusions um i think i'm argue that our thinking about life is actually hampered
by is grounding in the world view that since the scientific revolution has driven a great
deal of scientific thought basically a picture of things pushing pulling one another stuck together
to form mechanisms machine like connections of these entities so life isn't you know like this
sort of put all the bits together and the machine starts to go it's this really hard one constantly
maintained moment of structure and stability that emerges somehow and of course it doesn't emerge
you know the moment you're born it's emerged over billions of years of evolution from this
surrounding ocean of broadly directionless activity and i think realizing this should give us a very
different view of many aspects of life and even of ourselves and that's what i will hope to convince
any of you who come back for more in the course of this week in the next and the rest of this series
of lectures but for now i just end with if you are interested in this here's a place to go and
find out more and i'm happy to do this because this is an open access book anybody can read
it and so i'm not trying to make money off royalties or anything that is sad sorry thing
state for an academic to be in if i were but um but this is um uh this is where to look
for more on many of these topics
right so i will um take questions i'm i'm i'm instructed to ask if you could make your
questions as short as you can because i've been asked to try and summarize them before answering
them and um so um yeah i saw you first and then yeah so thank you for the wonderful talk so um
i think i'd buy the picture when we're looking at biology and then the question is um how would the
dialectic with uh your non-process opponent go concerning other things and um uh and one way
to phrase that would be to say whether one could somehow eat some of what you get from process
philosophy within a thing ontology but with processes so he would be distorted on on the
t-shirt of that view uh so it would be organisms involve processes but they are not processes
as it were so they involve processes but they're not so you have this sort of thing view there
are various processes going on and you say these processes connected with the organisms
which is their thing and the difference between draw view and that view seems to be that you
identify the organism straight forward with the processes whereas this you get acknowledges that
you have multiple processes all these things that you don't talk about just resist the identification
we don't go into the reasons for why there's the resistance but um what would you say to this
um okay so i i i um i have some sympathy with that question and i guess the sympathy i have
is um that i can see why one might want to just introduce a new term right so so i think there's
that you know the things i contrast it with things substances really carry philosophical
baggage that has really been unhelpful in thinking about life so i want i want to suggest that
the reason that that that what unites this unhelpful baggage is its kind of statusism
the fact that it's it's doesn't adequately involve the fact that the the properties we're interested
in are outputs of all kinds of activity now you might say but now we've got um and i think
this is earlier today it's somewhat similar it is you might say well okay so so organisms
are very unlike traditional or or or many of don't share many of the properties that have
traditionally been paradigmatic of things substances in the philosophical tradition
but on the other hand they're not terribly like what we used to think of as processes i um your
example i showed was that i mentioned was the party or i had a picture of a battle um or when you
know or the erosion of a cliff or you know there there are sort of processes that um seem as if
they are necessarily happenings that happen to things so maybe we should have uh maybe we
should have the things but then of course if some of the things aren't at all like traditional things
maybe we don't want to say that we don't want to say the organisms are things we don't want to say
their process so maybe we can call them something else you know we can come up with a word for them
my personal feeling well for i guess for two reasons one is it's always a kind of uphill struggle
um you know inventing a whole new category and saying that um you know we need to start thinking
in terms of a kind of category of an ontological category that we didn't really know existed
before but the other thing is there is a tradition here i mean i you know i i may have sound as if
there was basically hieroclitus whiteheader than me um and i certainly don't mean to say that um i mean
and for example um one of the things my collaborator on this book Dan Nicholson has done a great
deal of work on is the um early 20th century biology which was um was inspired actually by
whitehead people like waddington um and various actually who i mentioned at that point um was
involved with it so a bunch of of um biologists who have tried to articulate a process ontology
and i think there's there's a little historical story that actually if you look at the 20th century
up to about let's say 1953 you have um you have a lot of theoretical biology that's process
directed and then 1953 as everybody probably knows with the structure of dna was um published
and this initiated an extraordinarily productive but in some way misguided um his chapter in the
history of biology we found out a huge amount but that also embedded um a lot of really misleading
views notably the view that biology was basically just all you know run by these little bits of
dna which we now know is completely wrong the wonderful molecules dna but it doesn't it's not a
blueprint and it's not a master molecule it's just part of a complex system um and um
and i think so so so i don't think we need to go outside the tradition and invent something new
i think we need to you know reclaim a lot of the pre dna biology and then and and and actually
and it's easy to do that in a way because we know much now we know actually lots of things about
dna that make us see it's a thoroughly active molecule that's constantly doing things changing
changing its shape changing its chemical structure um you know it's it's as dynamic as i mean
there are aspects of it that are importantly very stable but even them they're not stable
because it's a very stable molecule they're stable also because there's a whole host of systems
that stabilize it that repair the sequence when it gets damaged and so on so i think um that picking
up this this thread and saying actually you know these these process oriented biologists prior to
i say the second half of the 20th century were so right about the basic metaphysics even if you
know the quite different view has been very productive we should pick it up and and reassert
the processual nature of of of life right uh yeah i i've got lots of questions but
great thanks for a great talk and it's all right if anything might be
having a little bit of fun in some ways so this is a relatively simple thing but um
basically i was wondering why do you think they cancer being more affordable means that they're
so let me illustrate what i mean um i use this distinction that you can be quite helpful in
philosophy of medicine so it's something that i call sort of contributing cause of factors and
then realizing cause of factors so um namely you may have lots of different not things but lots
lots of different causes contributing to the appearance of some sort of phenomenal whatever
but then it could happen this is maybe where this might be used for in some ways you could have a
process that kind of instantiates the thing if you like so it namely realizes it and just in the
system um and so uh you know one of the most promising paradigm for something like cancer is
this framework that i mentioned earlier briefly um so basic vision and in that kind of framework
you may well have various you know a whole range of reasons for this bioelectric communication
to break down right but the ultimate sort of realizing thing that you target would be
communication breaking down right and so in that case as long as you manage to kind of
re re-establish it you would be getting rid of cancer right so i mean basically i definitely
think that cancer being multi-posal in the sense of contributing cause of factors means that prevention
would have to be multiple multiple in that sense right like you couldn't just
decide on one course of action and prevent that but treatment seems to be rather different
because i think in in most cases it targets something closer to realizing cause of factors
so yeah i was wondering oh well i think it probably depends how broadly you interpret
communication breaking down um and if you interpret it sufficiently broadly um i mean
this is always the case where you's where with with um sort of pluralistic arguments i mean
you could you can make the terminology sufficiently inclusive to include all the things that a
pluralist would like to break down but it seems to me that taking as i hear your question that there
is one particular kind of relation that um the failure of which is what we call cancer
i mean so that that's the the monistic reading of that and if i took it that way i would say
that seems really improbable for the reason that i i tried to give that the articulation of all these
cellular divisions differentiations and deaths that constitutes a healthy life cycle is not
constituted by one single kind of relation it's i i'm i'm pretty sure constituted by or and and
maintained by an awful lot of relations now if you say you know those relations are communications
between cells yeah perhaps that's right um i mean messaging between cells determines whether they
do these things uh but that seems to me more almost like just describing cancer rather than
than providing an etiology for it and that's why i say i mean and that's why i say in a sense
you've avoided the pluralism by taking a sufficiently wide-ranging definition of what's
happening that i'm just saying it's this not working anymore i i i did see a lot of hands before
so we may have a chance i'm sure to etiology better for prevention okay yeah i mean that that's yeah
um yeah so so yeah so i was wondering that um there can be an in-between case which is neither
just since or just processes but if the stability which you think can be achieved is
achieved in a timescale which is important for humans then i think one might think then in that
case we can use substance but when the stability is not achieved in the in a we can't just run
say which is the timescale then there is only processes so there is one option which is
not everything is seen but very few things is seen and more things are processed than we
thought before and that would be closer to your view but a bit like because the stability for you
is very important and if we would say that when the stability is stable we achieve then at least
we can call it same then uh the kind of contrast between process and something else still can be
maintained which might be useful yeah no i mean i that that's that's something actually i'm very
happy to do in in many cases i mean i i think again for those of you who were here earlier i mean
that's that's how i would explain why mechanism is often a a successful strategy because the
things that you identify as the parts of the mechanism are stable over the timescale you're
interested in understanding so i i'm and of course that's just that might be a very short one and
there might be an everyday life you might say you know a certain degree of stability is sufficient
to count as a thing um and of course that wouldn't have any that wouldn't in any way i think fundamentally
contradict anything i'm saying i'm happy with that great what kind of uh mathematics would you
suggest for process based modeling in biology this is a classical question because a in
organized tradition in the retinal biology so that question has been discussed since maybe
budger, Bergalanti, Waddington, Ren Tom, Robert Rosen say what would be your answer um my answer
would be to i'm afraid to to refuse to try and answer i i mean you know i i'm i'm um i'm not a
mathematician um and you know i i'm um so i'm i'm not going to adjudicate between somebody
um i can't understand at all like Rosen and somebody i can't understand very much like
Bergalanti um i i think these the i i have greatest respect for this kind of work but it's not my
pathway into the subject i i'm afraid to say so yeah i saw you say yeah um yeah yeah yeah
and then what um yeah you then then then okay so what can you tell us about these similarities
or uh difference between your approach and all the biases and the extended cognition
um so extended cognition i think is is relative i mean i think it's it's very congenial but i
think it's it's in a different um era i mean it's it's debate a different arena i mean it's
arguing with different people i say i'm very very sympathetic to it um and i i think i buy a lot of
it but um but i don't think it's um it's kind of a competitor i think it's just a an ally
though obviously i don't mean that all people in that line of work would necessarily agree
autopoiesis um i have a i mean a lot of similarities i think um the the only
trouble with autopoiesis is well the biggest trouble that is the word autopoiesis um i mean
the notion that organisms make themselves i find very unfortunate um and i think you know an awful
lot of what um you know varela and machirana actually say seems just right and i'm totally
sympathetic to but the framework of um you know things allegedly making themselves seems to be a
pity but but that's that's probably just a little bit of a semantic quibble i think there's a great
deal um in common um and i think i would mostly say um i guess again rather like whitehead they're
not always the easiest um people to understand and and i mean you know the this is this sounds
like laziness on my part and probably is but um i do think that you know there's the you know i mean
whitehead i think in all honesty does has done quite a lot of harm to process thinking and not
by getting things wrong so much as by making people think oh my god if i if i get interested in
process i'll have to read a process in reality and that's um i know nobody wants to do that i mean
i i i obviously exaggerate but but um but i and i and i do think um so so obviously one of the
one of the aims of this project is to try and suggest actually it's i mean and obviously i'd
leave others to judge whether i'm succeeding in this but really one ought to be able to say
this sort of stuff in a perfectly straightforward understandable way it's it's really easy to
understand and i think you know um i think i think you know vralla maturana sort of often make it
seem harder than it is and come up with and and i guess the production of of of weird and slightly
misguided terminology is part of that so i i i so i would say definitely an ally definitely
right about lots but also slightly a little bit of the whitehead thing of making people think
it's much harder to understand and probably not worth the trouble
so that's it's not it's not a i'm not very happy with that answer but it'll maybe do for now uh yeah
as i understand the merit of this process is that it's also a family of problems kind of
like the shape of these things like where are the boundaries say more good as a master
the back of my first day in barba and then a few plus stages okay but um i remember for my studies
in my cell biology and molecular biology that needed reading of these subjects are studied
quite mechanistically we were interested in like different gates and triggers and the movement of
molecules themselves so it seems that this process metaphysics is helpful for framing like when you
talked about cancer and viruses but the integrity of it seems to be the mechanistic view has been
very fruitful yeah so do you think that these two kind of somehow like co-exist absolutely and this
is comes back to i just alluded to in in in the question i want to go that i don't think it's not
that i want to say all this mechanistic explanation is completely misguided at all i think we've
we just go and this why i say you know that the the very mechanistic um biology that that followed
the kind of analysis of dna and and the processes of of you know of translation and and all i mean
that's wonderful biology looks kind of mechanistic and you know the last thing i want to do is to
say that's all rubbish right so so absolutely so so the but there's two levels the first is is
there's two two kinds of reply the first is yes i i think it's perfectly intelligible within a
process framework simply by just recognizing that when you're talking about a mechanism you're not
talking about you know fixed parts you're talking about parts that are sufficiently fixed for the
time frame that you're interested in but but there are also other other perspectives in which these
parts are changing these parts may be you know uh doing other things um you know there are other
perspectives that you might if you if you think too much in terms of biology as being about finding
mechanisms there are things that you're not going to notice or you're not going to focus on i'm sorry
again to people who who've been here in this morning but i will repeat one one kind of line of
examples here i'm fascinated by the parallel histories in some ways of um genomics and proteomics
that um you know that that they start out with so here's the genome here are all these genes
lined up what they do here's the gene for this here's the gene for that you know and maybe the
gene for is just the gene for making a particular protein it doesn't have to be the gene for aggression
or something really silly but at any rate we've got all this this stuff similar with you know protein
studies we used to have the protein that catalyzes this particular reaction the protein that makes
muscle fibers you know there we look at this thing we identify them see what kind of mechanism
we can fit them into and then we gradually find that this is hugely simplistic that this stretch
of DNA not only isn't the gene for aggression or homosexuality or some nonsense that that you know
sociopathic might have come up with it's it's actually not even the gene for making a particular
protein that it's really just a resource that can be used to make often many different proteins
then i mean and and then of course you know we we also find you know epigenetics and so on that
makes um all of this even more complicated same thing with proteins that it's a slightly um you
know more you know it's a slightly more complicated actually i think a deeper problem that people you
know would think what's the function of this protein that's a bad question because what we find is
of course there is a system which we can call a mechanism in which this protein does something
and helps us to understand but then we find and i say again sorry to repeat myself but one of my
favorite bits of giveaway language in biology is we found these things were moonlighting right
this is we have moonlighting proteins that were doing something other than their job in their spare
time and you know and then they finally do 10 different jobs and what you what you realize is
that the notion that you have this set of parts that fit into a mechanism in some way obscures
something really fundamental about how biological systems work that they make multiple use of the
parts and and the parts actually become different parts in different uses so having first of all
moved on to the moonlighting process proteins we now find at least half of them are the the um the
idps the i'd never know what it sounds for the the it that's right the intrinsically disorder
proteins which actually exist in a whole bunch of different structures and only settle on a structure
in a particular context so i mean the the diversity of these resources the fact that
the system is the system and this is i think is a kind of downward causation is able to use these
resources in multiple different ways in different contexts is i think absolutely fundamental thing
about how life a is possible and b is very unlike anything we uh or at least any traditional way of
thinking about mechanism and it's not so so we can look at the particular mechanisms and if we if
we start with a particular phenomenon there you know how does a particular um you know molecule
gets synthesized we can look at a mechanism but if we then start thinking okay so now we've located
the function of all the elements involved in that mechanism then we've shut off all kinds of
thoughts that we might have about um what these things can do so again it's not it's it's not that
there's anything wrong with all the mechanism understanding we have it's just that it can
provide a framework which discourages us from looking at at certain things and and pushes
certain directions over others i mean there's an awful lot to find out in biology and and
mechanistic thinking has enabled us to find out an awful lot of stuff but but it's also i think
comes at a cost in terms of of kind of channeling thought in some directions and tending to channel
it away from other directions um sorry you you i have somewhat more big question about the boundaries
of an organism the boundaries of an organism okay and if you're deaf you'll be a way to draw the
boundaries so so for example if a human rises in thick the human with the bacteria on the screen do
not die at the same instant right and you could say that there's a boundary right here so everything
that died together instantly is within the boundary the bacteria outside um well but why would you say
that i mean i i so i guess two reasons i would be skeptical about one is i mean no death is
ending is i think is easier than beginning so you've um but but supposing supposing that you
putting that on one side why would you why would you i mean so if you have um you know
absolutely um required bacterial um symbionts um they don't necessarily die with the i mean
they might carry on with you know the next thing that ate you after you died um or they might you
know i mean typically i guess they mostly die but by no means always or necessarily
so i'm not sure why you would why you would want that to be a criterion
i take it the idea would be you decide of the living organism whether something is part of it
on the basis of whether it dies when that organism dies is that is that the so yeah i
can i mean i certainly um it's an interesting suggestion um but i i'm not sure i can really
i'm not sure i can quite see the motivation for it apart from it being a criterion that you could
apply and that would give you some um answers sometimes but but even then does it i mean i i
guess i don't actually know the the sort of empirical facts about you know what the probability
of of a random part of your you know skin bacteria i guess they've probably got a good chance of living
and they tend to be quite transitory so let's say your gut bacteria i don't know what proportion
of them die when you die i mean i think a lot of what happens is the proportions of different
kinds change dramatically and some kinds um find themselves very happy living on your
corpse and become others are not so happy and become less so um so maybe and maybe maybe you
want to say i don't if you're going to eat my corpse you're not part of me um but but more
seriously i i just i don't really see a motivation for it um i mean am i is the apart from i mean
again depending sort of on the empirical facts it could turn out that there was a really nice
cutoff and certain obligate symbionts um did pretty much all go when you went but i'm not sure if
that's true and i wouldn't and it wouldn't be very surprising if it were not true right i mean
if if if lots of obligate symbionts tended to carry on just fine eating you for a bit and waiting
to somebody else at you i mean well i think the kind of these two boundaries is the correct
rest of all the things that's the which the sorry having clear boundaries and are supposed to have
things and you would say that being able to eliminate the clear boundaries from number of
yeah i mean i i but i guess i suppose it's it's um i don't i suppose you're i think you say i mean
temporal boundaries yes i mean you know lots of stuff dies but but why that should
why that should be an answer the question of spatial boundaries when you're not there i guess is
is the question that i don't really see a strong motivation for but but it's a um yeah
the the morbid subtlety uh it's wondering uh do you regard death as um as a process or an end
of or end of process or without fitting well it's an interesting one i mean i guess something i don't
talk about much at all are events um which are in many philosophers ontology is very important
i tend to think events are just very short sharp processes uh but but um but i guess you know one
differentiation that a lot of people would make would say death is an event of course but then i
guess i would also say not necessary a slow lingering death if we're going to be morbid
is much more like a process you know a bullet in the head pretty much an event
but sorry sorry to get um
legally it's still very difficult to say one someone is technically dead because what is there
is complicated is that the cardiac arrest we can pinpoint the moment of the cardiac arrest
is that the moment when the brain is too damaged to be started again without the hurt again so even
having to pinpoint on that is really really difficult to medicine and especially in the
question of organ transplant the moment where we can uh our best i would say organ of someone
because this person is dead is still a tricky part because of the absence of brain stem break
flexes it's great in fact exactly that's when you go for jobs yeah in the case of the
legislation of the country in France you have to be branded with certain measure for at least
20 hours and i think that in the UK in fact it's a legal definition more than legal health
like science but more it's more a legal definition and it's probably yeah it is driven more by
pragmatics and you know operationalizability i think rather than any deep kind of philosophical
insight i mean obviously people would sometimes like that to be a deep philosophical truth but
i think for just the sort of reasons you're saying it's kind of hard to locate one
and certainly yeah you could be brain dead and um your symbionts would live happily for
years while you were in a permanent vegetative state which some people might say was not was
a state post death um so yeah that's actually yeah okay one last question is anybody wanted
hasn't asked a question just just okay so
so if you describe yourself as a from viscous uh individualist yeah i mean i i want to just bracket
that a little bit
so i'm just wondering about the non-promiscuous
process here is here because the promiscuity here concerns a kind of of way of different ways
of abstracting all movements from this flux so in principle that could be a position which was
much like walls in terms of the underlying ontology to some degree except that they were more
more verquining or you know more more more sort of of a hardliner about
processes of individuation and abstraction what would the consequences be because it seems to
add some onto the logical there is some agreement about underlying flux but then you're abstracting
individuals in this promiscuous way which you're aware is about but they want to be deflationary about
the abstraction process as it were yeah um i'm not sure what to say about that um
i mean what i'll say one thing which may be a bit tangential i mean i think sometimes people get
into some of the more bizarre views in philosophy by by feeling the need to assert
um you know firm boundaries and one example i think of is um and and you know some some some
um kind of analytic metaphysicians that i in many ways would respect um who argue that
the human life begins when twinning is no longer possible now i mean basically because
if twinning is possible then they they're led into the contradiction that you might become
two non-identical people and that would mean a contradiction so so life has to begin
at the moment whenever that may be when it is no longer possible in theory so i know i mean
that strikes me as um kind of you know a kind of reductioid absurdum of metaphysical argument of
the most extreme kind i mean you know that that's their problem not the problem for you know the
the perfectly happy um non-twinning embryo that is part of the same process as the you know the
non-twin fetus that it becomes um it's just whereas again you know i'd say you know if you're
happily kind of promiscuous processualist or say no it's a process that's divided i mean that's
we don't we don't you know this is this is um so i don't know if that exactly answers your
question it probably doesn't i'm pretty sure it does because you you're sort of saying that
this this kind of abstraction in fact empirically goes with the nature of the phenomena which
requires some sort of like a package yeah and i think as i said i think i think the the i mean
i think you know if i were looking for um you know a kind of reductio of the assumption that
somehow one has to draw the boundaries around an individual that would be um a nice place to go at
least because actually you know it's just the process process is split um and and you know all
these all the the industry of split brains and all of that is is just um uh a an industry of
self-destruction for um substance theorists in my world for which i have no i don't think i have
any problems with at all so
