The question of whether there are any beliefs or desires common to all human beings is a
little interest apart from the vision of a utopian inclusivist human community, one which
prides itself on the different sorts of people.
It welcomes rather than on the firmness with which it keeps out the stranger.
Most human communities are exclusivist.
Their sense of identity and the self-images of their members depend on pride in not being
certain other sorts of people, people who worship the wrong God, eat the wrong foods, or have
some other perverse, repellent beliefs or desires.
Philosophers would not bother trying to show that certain beliefs and desires are found
in every society or are implicit in some ineliminable human practice, unless they hope to show that
the existence of these beliefs demonstrates the possibility of or the obligation to construct
a planet-wide inclusivist community.
In this paper I'll use the term democratic politics as a synonym for the attempt to bring
such a community into existence.
One of the desires said to be universal by philosophers interested in democratic politics
is the desire for truth.
In the past, such philosophers have typically conjoined the claim that there is universal
human agreement on the supreme desirability of truth with the further premises that truth
is correspondence to reality and that reality has an intrinsic nature, that there is in
Nelson Goodman's terms a way the world is.
Given these three premises, they proceed to argue that truth is one and that the universal
human interest in truth provides motive for creating an inclusivist community.
For such a community would be best suited to accomplishing our desire of discovering
the one truth.
The more of that truth we uncover, the more common ground we shall share, and the more
tolerant and inclusivist we shall therefore become.
The rise of relatively democratic, relatively tolerant societies in the last few hundred
years is said to be due to the increased rationality of modern times, where rationality denotes
the exercise of a truth-oriented faculty.
The three premises I've listed are sometimes said to be necessitated by reason.
That is, the premises that everybody wants truth, that truth is correspondence to reality
and that reality has an intrinsic nature.
These three premises are sometimes said to be necessitated by reason, but this claim
is usually tautologists for philosophers who say that, typically explain their use of the
word reason by listing those same three premises as constitutive of the very idea of rationality.
They view colleagues who have doubts about one or another of these three premises as irrationalism.
I have a footnote about Nietzsche, James, and Habermas as people who are called irrationalists
for rejecting one or another or more of those premises.
Degrees of irrationality are attributed according to how many of these premises the distrusted
philosopher denies, and also according to how little interest he or she shows in democratic
politics.
In this paper, I'll consider the prospects for defending democratic politics while denying
all of the three premises I've listed.
I'll be arguing that what philosophers have described as the universal desire for truth
is better described as the universal desire for justification.
The grounding premise of my argument is that you can't aim at something, can't work to
get it, unless you could recognize it once you got it.
One difference between truth and justification is just that between the unrecognizable and
the recognizable.
We shall never know for sure whether a given belief is true, but we can be sure that nobody
at the moment is able to summon up any residual objections to it that everybody agrees that
it ought to be held.
There are to be sure what Lacanians call impossible, indefinable, sublime objects of desire, but
a desire for such an object cannot be made relevant to democratic politics.
On my view, truth is just that sort of object.
It's too sublime, so to speak, to be either recognized or aimed at.
Justification is merely beautiful as opposed to sublime, but it is recognizable and therefore
capable of being systematically worked for.
Sometimes with Locke justification is even achieved.
But that achievement is usually only temporary, since sooner or later, with Locke, some dual
objections to the temporarily justified belief will be developed.
As I see it, the yearning for unconditionality, the yearning which leads philosophers to insist
that we need to avoid contextualism and relativism, is indeed satisfied by the notion of truth.
But this yearning is unhealthy because the price of unconditionality is irrelevant to
practice.
So I think the topic of truth can't be made relevant to democratic politics and that philosophers
devoted to such politics should forget about truth and stick to the topic of justification.
Now I turn to Habermas.
In order to place my view within the context of contemporary philosophical controversies,
I'll begin with some comments on Habermas.
Habermas draws his well-known distinction between subject-centered reason and communicative
reason in connection with his attempt to separate out what's useful to democratic politics
and the traditional philosophical notion of rationality from what's useless.
I think that he makes a tactical error when he tries to preserve the notion of unconditionality.
Although I think Habermas is absolutely right that we need to socialize and linguistify
the notion of reason by viewing it as communicative, I think that we also need to naturalize reason
Habermas, like Putnam, believes that reason cannot be naturalized.
Both philosophers think, and that's a phrase from Putnam endorsed by Habermas, both philosophers
think it important to insist on this point in order to avoid the relativism which seems
to them to put democratic politics on a par with totalitarian politics.
You could say, if there's a moment of unconditionality, then you can't naturalize it.
Both think it important to say that democratic politics is more rational than totalitarian
fascist politics.
I don't think we should say that because I don't think the notion of rationality can
be stretched that far.
We should admit that we have no neutral ground to stand on when we defend democratic politics
against its opponents.
If we don't admit this, I think we can rightly be accused of attempting to smuggle our own
social practices into the definition of something universal and ineluctable because presupposed
by the practices of any and every language user.
It would be franker and therefore better to say that democratic politics can no more appeal
to such presuppositions than can anti-democratic politics, but is none the worse for that.
Habermas agrees with the criticism which post-Nichyan writers have made of what Derrida calls logo-centrism
and specifically with their denial that, quote, the linguistic function of representing states
of affairs is the so human monopoly.
So do I, but I would extend this criticism as follows.
Only over-attention to fact-stating would make one think that there was an aim of inquiry
called truth in addition to the aim of justification.
More generally, only over-attention to fact-stating would make one think that acclaim to universal
validity is important for democratic politics.
Still more generally, abetting the logo-centric idea that knowledge is the distinctive human
capacity would leave room for the idea that democratic citizenship is better suited for
the role of the distinctively human capacity.
The latter is what we human beings should take most pride in and should make central
to our self-image.
As I see it, Habermas' attempt to redefine the term reason after deciding that, as he
says, the paradigm of the philosophy of consciousness is exhausted.
His attempt to re-describe reason as communicative through and through is insufficiently radical.
It's a halfway house between thinking in terms of validity claims and thinking in terms of
justificatory practices.
It comes down halfway between the Greek idea that human beings are special because they
can know, whereas other animals can merely cope, and Dewey's idea that we are special
because we can take charge of our evolution, take ourselves in directions which have neither
precedent nor justification in either biology or history.
The latter idea can be made to sound unattractive by dubbing it Nietzschean and construing it
as one more form of the same will to power which was incarnate in the Nazis.
I'd like to make it sound attractive by calling it American and construing it as the idea
common to Emerson and Whitman, the idea of a new self-creating community united not by
knowledge of the same truths, but by sharing the same generous, inclusivist, democratic
hopes.
The idea of communal self-creation, of realizing a dream which has no justification in unconditional
claims to universal validity, sounds suspicious to Habermas and Opel because they naturally
associate it with Hitler.
It sounds somewhat better to Americans because they naturally associate it with Jefferson,
Whitman and Dewey.
The moral to be drawn, I think, is that this suggestion is neutral between Hitler and Jefferson.
If one wants neutral principles on the basis of which to decide between Hitler and Jefferson,
one will have to find a way of replacing Jefferson's occasional references to natural law and
self-evident political truths by a more up-to-date version of Enlightenment rationalism.
This is the role in which Habermas and Opel cast what they call discourse ethics.
Only if one has given up hope for discourse ethics and for all other attempts at such
neutrality will the alternative I'm suggesting seem attractive.
Whether one gives up that hope should, I think, be decided, at least in part, on the basis
of one's view of the sort of argument from performative self-contradiction which is at
the heart of discourse ethics.
I see that argument as weak and unconvincing, but I have nothing better to put in its place.
Because I have nothing better, I'm inclined to reject the very idea of neutral principles
and ask myself what philosophers might do for democratic politics apart from trying to
ground this politics on principles.
My answer is they can get to work substituting hope for knowledge, substituting the idea
that the ability to be citizens of the full-fledged democracy which is yet to come rather than
the ability to grasp truth is what's important about being human.
This is not a matter of what Opel calls let's be glündung, but of re-describing humanity
and history in terms which make democracy seem desirable.
If doing that is said to be, as Opel calls it, mere rhetoric rather than proper argument,
I should rejoin that it is no more or less rhetorical or argumentative than my opponent's
attempt to make discourse, to describe discourse and communication in terms that make democracy
seem linked to the intrinsic nature of humanity.
New section on truth and justification.
There are many uses for the word true, but the only one which could not be eliminated
from our linguistic practice with relative ease is the cautionary use.
This is the use we make of the word when we contrast justification and truth and say that
a belief may be justified, but still not true.
Outside of philosophy, this cautionary use is used to contrast less informed with better
informed audiences and more generally past audiences with future audiences.
In nonphilosophical context, the point of contrasting truth and justification is simply
to remind oneself that there may be objections arising from newly discovered data or more
ingenious explanatory hypotheses or a shift in the vocabulary used for describing the
objects under discussion which have not occurred to any of the audiences to whom the belief
in question has so far been justified.
This sort of gesture toward an unpredictable future is made, for example, when we say that
our present moral and scientific beliefs may look as primitive to our remote descendants
as those of the Greeks look to us.
My grounding premise that you can only work for what you could recognize is a corollary
of James's principle that a difference has to make a difference to practice before it's
worth discussing.
The only difference between truth and justification which makes such a difference is, as far as
I can see, the difference between old audiences and new audiences.
So I take the appropriate pragmatist attitude toward truth to be, it's no more necessary
to have a philosophical theory about the nature of truth or the meaning of the word true
than it is to have one about the nature of danger or the meaning of the word danger.
The principle reason we have a word like danger in the language is to caution people,
to warn them that they may not have envisaged all the consequences of their proposed action.
We pragmatists who think that beliefs are habits of action rather than attempts to correspond
to reality see the cautionary use of the word true as flagging a special sort of danger.
We use it to remind ourselves that people in different circumstances, people facing
future audiences, may not be able to justify the belief which we have triumphantly justified
to all the audiences we have encountered.
Given this pragmatist view of the function of the word true, what about the claim that
all human beings desire truth?
This claim is ambiguous between the claim that all of them desire to justify their beliefs
to some, though not necessarily all other human beings, and the claim that they all
want their beliefs to be true.
The first claim seems to me unobjectionable.
The second claim, however, seems dubious unless it's merely an alternative formulation
of the first.
For the only other interpretation which we pragmatists can give to the second claim is
that all human beings are concerned about the danger that someday an audience will
come into being before whom a presently justified belief cannot be justified.
But in the first place, mere fallibilism is not what philosophers who hope to make the
notion of truth relevant to democratic politics want.
In the second place, such fallibilism is not, in fact, a feature of all human beings.
It is much more prevalent among inhabitants of wealthy, secure, tolerant, inclusivist societies
than elsewhere, for these people are brought up to rethink themselves that they might be
mistaken, that there are people out there who might disagree with them and whose disagreement
needs to be taken into account.
If you favor democratic politics, you will want to encourage fallibilism.
But there are other ways to do so, beside harping on the difference between the conditional
character of justification and the unconditional character of truth.
One might, for example, harp on the sad fact that many previous communities have betrayed
their own interests by being too sure of themselves and so failing to attend to objections raised
by outsiders.
Furthermore, we should distinguish between fallibilism and philosophical skepticism.
Fallibilism has nothing in particular to do with the quest for universality and unconditionality.
Skepticism does.
Skepticism will usually not go into philosophy, at least in anglophone countries, unless one
is impressed by the sort of skepticism found in Descartes' meditations.
The sort of skepticism which says that the mere possibility of error defeats knowledge
claims.
Not many people find this sort of skepticism interesting, but those who do ask themselves,
is there any way in which we can ensure ourselves against having beliefs which may be unjustifiable
to some future audience?
Is there any way in which we can ensure that we have beliefs justifiable to any and every
audience?
The tiny minority which finds this question interesting consists almost entirely of philosophy
professors and divides into three groups.
First, skeptics like Straude, who say that Descartes' argument from dreams is unanswerable.
For the skeptics, there is always an audience, the future self who is awoken from the dream,
which will not be satisfied by any justification offered by our present, possibly, dreaming
self.
Second, foundationalists like Chisholm, who say that even if we're now dreaming, we
can't be wrong about certain beliefs, certain of our beliefs.
Third, coherentists like Sellers say that, I quote, Sellers, all our beliefs are up for
grabs, though not all at once.
We pragmatists who have been impressed by Perse's criticisms of Descartes think that
both skeptics and foundationalists are led astray by the picture of beliefs as attempts
to represent reality and by the associated idea that truth is a matter of correspondence
to reality.
So we become coherentists.
But we coherentists remain divided about what, if anything, needs to be said about truth.
I think that once one has explicated the difference between justification and truth by that between
present and future justifiability, there is little more to be said.
Some of my fellow coherentists, Appel, Habermas, and Putnam, think, as Perse also did, that
there's a lot more to be said and that saying it is important for democratic politics.
Section four, universal validity and context transcendence, Putnam, Appel, and Habermas
all take over from Perse an idea which I reject, the idea of convergence upon the one truth.
Instead of arguing that because reality is one and truth correspondence to that one reality,
Perseans argue that the idea of convergence is built into the presuppositions of discourse.
They all agree that the principal reason why reason cannot be naturalized is that reason
is normative and norms cannot be naturalized.
But they say we can make room for the normative without going back to the traditional idea
of a duty to correspond to the intrinsic nature of reality.
We do this by attending to the universalistic character of the idealizing presuppositions
of discourse.
This strategy has the advantage of setting aside meta-ethical questions about whether
there is a moral reality to which our moral judgments might hope to correspond as our
physical science supposedly hopes to correspond to physical reality.
Habermas says that every validity claim, quote, has a transcendent moment of universal validity
which bursts every provinciality asunder.
In addition to the validity claim strategic role in some context bound discussion.
As I see it, the only truth in this idea is that many claims to validity are made by people
who would be willing to defend their claims before audiences other than the one which
they are currently addressing.
Not all assertions obviously are of this sort.
Lawyers, for example, are quite aware that they fashion their claims to suit the quaint
context of a highly local jurisprudence.
But willingness to take on new and unfamiliar audiences is one thing, bursting provinciality
asunder is another.
Habermas's doctrine of a transcendent moment seems to me to run together a commendable
willingness to try something new with an empty boast.
To say I'll try to defend this argument, I'll try to defend this belief against all
comers is often depending upon the circumstances a commendable attitude.
But to say I can successfully defend this against all comers is silly.
Maybe you can, but you're in no more opposition to say that than the village champion
is to claim that he can beat the world champion.
The only sort of situation in which you would be in a position to say the latter is one
in which the rules of the argumentative game have been agreed upon in advance, as in normal
as opposed to revolutionary mathematics, for example.
But in most cases, including the moral and political claims in which Habermas is most
interested, there are no such rules.
The notion of context dependence has a clear sense in the sorts of cases I've just mentioned,
in provincial law courts and in language games such as normal mathematics regulated
by clear and explicit conventions.
For most assertions, however, neither the notion of context dependence nor the notion
of universal validity has such a sense.
For most assertions, such as Clinton is the better candidate, Alexander came before Caesar,
Gold is insoluble in hydrochloric acid and the like, it's hard to see why I should ask
myself, is my claim context dependent or universal?
No difference to practice is going to be made by coming down in favor of one alternative
rather than the other.
Habermas puts forward an analog of this distinction between the context dependent and the universal,
which might seem more relevant to practice.
This analog is what he calls the tension between facticity and validity.
He views this tension as a central philosophical problem and says that this tension is responsible
for many of the difficulties encountered in theorizing democratic politics.
He thinks it is a distinctive and valuable feature of his theory of communicative action
that, quote, it already absorbs the tension between facticity and validity into its fundamental
concepts.
It does so by distinguishing between the strategic use of discourse and what he calls the use
of language oriented to reaching understanding.
This latter distinction might seem just the one we are looking for, the one which lets
us interpret the distinction between context dependence in universality and universality
in a way which makes a difference to practice.
As I see it, however, the distinction between the strategic and non-strategic use of language
is just the distinction between cases in which all we care about is convincing others and
cases in which we hope to learn something.
In the latter set of cases, we are quite willing to give up our present views if we hear something
better.
These cases are two ends of a spectrum, at one end of which we shall use any dirty trick
we can, lying, omitting the truth, suggesting the false and so on, to convince.
At the other end, we talk to others as we talk to ourselves when we are most at ease,
most reflective and most curious.
Most of the time, we are somewhere in the middle between these two extremes.
My problem is, I don't see that these two extremes have anything in particular to do
with a distinction between context dependence and universality.
The pure pursuit of truth is the traditional name for the sort of conversation which takes
place at one end of this spectrum.
But I don't see what that sort of conversation has to do with universality or with unconditionality.
It is non-strategic in the sense that in such conversations we let the wind blow where
it lists it, but it's hard to see that the assertions we make in such conversations presuppose
something which is not presupposed in the assertions I make when I'm at the other end
of the spectrum, the dirty tricks end of the spectrum.
Habermas, however, thinks that unless we recognize, quote, that the validity claims
raised hiket nunk and aimed at intersubjective recognition or acceptance can at the same
time overshoot local standards for taking yes-no positions, we shall not see that this
transcendent moment alone distinguishes the practices of justification oriented to truth
claims from other practices that are regulated merely by social convention.
This passage is a good example of what seems to me Habermas' undesirable commitment to
the logocentric distinction between opinion and knowledge, a distinction between mere
obedience to the norms of social practices, even the sort of norm which would be found
in a utopian democratic society, and the kind of foussé by nature relation to reality which
is provided by the grasp of truth.
Both the opinion knowledge and the normals foussé's distinction appear to delians as
remnants of Plato's obsession with the kind of certainty found in mathematics, and more
generally with the idea that the universal being somehow eternal and unconditional provides
an escape from what is particular, temporal, and conditioned.
In this passage Habermas is, I take it, using the term practices of justification oriented
to truth claims to refer to the nice end of the spectrum I described above.
But from my point of view, truth has nothing to do with it.
Since social convention, rather they're regulated by certain particular social conventions,
those of a society even more democratic, tolerant, leisure, wealthy, and diverse than our own,
one in which inclusivism is built into everyone's sense of moral identity.
In this society everybody always welcomes strange opinions on all sorts of topics.
These are also the conventions of certain lucky parts of contemporary society.
For example, university seminars, summer camps for intellectuals, and the like.
Perhaps the most far-reaching difference between Habermas and I is that pragmatists like myself
sympathize with the anti-metaphysical, so-called postmodern thinkers whom Habermas criticizes
when they suggest that the idea of a distinction between social practice and what transcends
such practice is an undesirable remnant of logocentrism.
Foucault and Dewey can agree that whether or not inquiry is always a matter of power,
it never transcends social practice.
So incidentally, can brand them.
So this issue comes up in the context of Brandon's work tomorrow.
Both would say that the only thing that can transcend the social practice is another social
practice, just as the only thing that can transcend the present audience is a future
audience.
Similarly, the only thing that can transcend a discursive strategy is another discursive
strategy, one aimed at other better goals.
But because I don't know how to aim at it, I don't think that truth names such a goal.
I know how to aim at greater honesty, greater charity, greater patience, greater inclusiveness,
and so on.
I see democratic politics as serving such concrete, desirable goals, but I don't see
that it helps things to add truth or universality or unconditionality to the list of goals.
Or I don't see what we will do differently depending on whether or not we make such additions.
It may sound at this point as if the difference between me and Habermas is one that makes
no difference to practice.
We both have the same utopias in mind.
We both engage in the same sort of democratic politics.
So why quibble about the difference between whether to call utopian communication practices
oriented to truth or not?
Why quibble about the whole subject of the relevance of truth to democratic politics?
The answer is that Habermas thinks it does make a difference to practice because he gets
to make an argumentative move which isn't open to me.
He gets to accuse his opponents of performative self-contradiction.
Habermas thinks that, quote, the universal discourse of an unbounded community of interpretation
is unavoidably assumed by anybody, even me, who gets into any argument.
He says, quote, even if these presuppositions have an ideal content that can only be approximately
satisfied, all participants must de facto accept them, accept the presuppositions of
communication, whether they assert or deny the truth of a statement in any way and would
like to enter into argumentation aimed at justifying this validity claim.
My experience of speaking in Frankfurt is invariably that, at a certain point, Appel
will accuse me of performative self-contradiction.
This is the standard Frankfurt move, sort of the basic strategy of the school.
What about somebody who is outraged as are many trustees of American universities by
the social conventions of the better parts of the better universities, places where
even the most paradoxical and unpromising claims are seriously discussed, and in which
feminists, atheists, homosexuals, blacks, etc. are taken seriously as moral equals and
conversational partners?
I take it that on Habermas's view, such a person will be contradicting himself if he
offers arguments to the effect that these conventions should be replaced by other more
exclusivist conventions.
By contrast, I can't tell the narrow-minded university trustee that he's contradicting
himself.
I can only try to weedle him into greater tolerance by the usual indirect means, giving
examples of present platitudes which were once paradoxes of the contributions to culture
made by black female homosexual atheists and so on.
The big question of whether anybody has ever been convinced by the charge of performative
self-confidiction.
I don't think that there are many clear examples of such a change being taken to heart.
If you tell a bigot of the sort I've sketched that he's committed to making context-surpassing
validity claims to aiming at truth, he'll probably agree that that's exactly what he's
doing.
If you tell him that he can't make such claims and still balk at the paradoxes or the people
at whom he balks, he will probably not get the point.
He will say that people who invent such paradoxes are too crazy to argue with or argue about
that women have a distorted view of reality and the why.
He will think it irrational or immoral or both to take such paradoxes and people seriously.
That's why he doesn't think the university should allow them to teach, speak and so on.
I can't see much difference between the bigot's reaction to me and Habermas and Habermas's
and my reactions to him.
I can't see that anything like communicative reason favors our reactions rather than his.
This is because I don't see why the term reason is not as much up for grabs as the term academic
freedom or morality or pervert, nor how the anti-foundationalist coherentism which Habermas
and I share can make room for a non-recontextualizable, non-relativizable conversation stopper called
performative self-contradiction.
What the bigot and I do and I think should do when told that we have violated a presupposition
of communication is to haggle about the meanings of the terms used in stating the purported
presupposition, terms like true argument, reason, communication, domination and so on.
This haggling will with luck eventually turn into a mutually profitable conversation about
our respective utopias.
Our respective ideas about what an ideal society or university empowering an ideally competent
audience would look like.
But this conversation is not likely to end with the bigot's rocked and admission that
he has entangled himself in a contradiction.
Even if I should, by a miracle, succeed in convincing him of the worth of my utopia,
his reaction will be to regret his own previous lack of curiosity and imagination rather than
to regret his failure to spot his own presuppositions.
This section is about an argument of Albrecht Velmers who's associated with Habermas but
differs from him in various interesting ways.
I agree with Appel and Habermas that Perse was right in telling us to talk about discourse
rather than about consciousness, but I think that the only ideal presupposed by discourse
is that of being able to justify your beliefs to a competent audience.
As a coherentist, I think that if you can agree with other members of such an audience
about what is to be done, then you don't have to worry about your relationship to reality.
But everything depends upon what constitutes a competent audience.
Unlike Appel and Habermas, the moral I draw from Perse is that we philosophers who are
concerned with democratic politics should leave truth alone as a sublimely undiscussable
topic and instead turn to the question of how to persuade people to broaden the size
of the audience they take to be competent to increase the size of the relevant community
of justification.
The latter project is not only relevant to democratic politics, it pretty much is democratic
politics.
Appel and Habermas think that the demand to maximize the size of this community is already,
so to speak, built into communicative action.
This is the cash value of their claim that every assertion claims universal validity.
Albert Velmer, like me, rejects the convergentism which Habermas and Appel share with Buttman.
But he nevertheless accepts their claim that our truth claims, quote, transcend the context,
the local or cultural context in which they are raised.
My problem with Velmer, Appel and Habermas is that I don't see what the pragmatic force
of saying that an argument which, like all other arguments, convinces certain people and
not others is a good argument.
This seems like saying that a tool which, like all tools, is useful for certain purposes
but not others is a good tool.
Imagine the surgeon who, after unsuccessfully attempting to dig a tunnel out of his prison
cell with his scalpel saying, still, it's a good tool.
Imagine picture him saying, after unsuccessfully trying to convince his guards to let him escape,
so that he may resume his position as leader of the resistance, saying, still, they were
good arguments.
My problem is intensified when I ask myself whether my truth claims transcend my local
cultural context.
I have no clear idea whether they do or not because I can't see what transcendence means
here.
I can't even see what the point of taking my assertion as making a truth claim is.
When I believe that Pee and express this belief by asserting it in the course of a conversation,
am I making a claim?
What's the force of saying that?
What to saying that add to saying that I am, to speak with Purse, informing my interlocutor
about my habits of action, giving her hints about how to predict and control my future
conversational and non-conversational behavior.
Depending on the situation at hand, I may also be inviting her to disagree with me by telling
me about her different habits of action, suggesting that I'm prepared to give reasons
from my belief, trying to make a good impression on her and a thousand other things.
As Austin reminded us, there are lots of things I do when I make an assertion which can be
interpreted as part of the give and take between me and my interlocutor.
This give and take is a matter of, roughly, the reciprocal adjustment of our behavior,
the strategic coordination of that behavior in ways which may prove mutually profitable.
Of course, if somebody asks me after I have asserted Pee whether I believe that Pee is
true, I shall say yes.
But I shall wonder, as Wittgenstein did, what the point of that question was.
Is he questioning my sincerity?
Is he expressing incredulity about my ability to offer reasons from my belief?
I can try to straighten things out by asking the question to the spell out why he asks.
But he replies, I just wanted to be sure you are making a context-transcendent truth claim.
I'll be baffled.
What does he want to be reassured about, exactly?
What would it be like for me to make a context-dependent assertion?
Of course, in the trivial sense that an assertion may not always be applicable, all assertions
are context-dependent.
But what would it mean for the proposition asserted to be context-dependent, as opposed
to the speech act being context-dependent?
I'm not sure how people like Habermas and Velmer, who've given up on correspondence
theories of truth and consequently can't distinguish between a claim to report a habit
of action and a claim to represent reality, can draw this distinction between context-dependence
and context-independence.
My best guess is that they believe that, in Velmer's words, quote, whenever we raise
a truth claim on the basis of what we take to be good arguments or compelling evidence,
we take the epistemic conditions prevailing here and now to be ideal in the following
sense.
We presuppose that no arguments or evidence will come up in the future which would put
our own truth claims into question.
Whereas Velmer also puts it, quote, relying upon reasons or evidences as compelling means
to exclude the possibility of being proved wrong as time goes on.
If that's what it takes to make a context-transcendent truth claim, then I have never made one.
I would not know how to exclude the possibility that Velmer described, nor would I know how
to presuppose that no arguments or evidence will turn up in the future which will cast
out on my belief.
Relying once again on the fundamental pragmatist principle that any difference has to make
a difference to practice, I want to know whether this excluding or presupposing are things
I can decide to do or not to do.
If they are, I want to know more about how to go about doing them.
If they aren't, they seem to me empty.
I can make my point in another way by asking, what's the difference between a metaphysician
committed to a correspondence theory of truth, telling me that whether I know it or will
admit it or not, my assertions automatically willy-nilly amount to a claim to represent
reality accurately, and my fellow Perseans telling me that they automatically willy-nilly
amount to an exclusion of possibilities or a presupposition about what the future holds.
In both cases, I'm being told that I presuppose something which, even after considerable reflection,
I don't think I believe.
But the notion of presupposition, when it's extended to beliefs which the purported presupposer
astoutly denies, becomes hard to distinguish from the notion of re-description of person
A in person B's language.
If A can explain what I'm doing and why I'm doing it in her own terms, what right has
B got to keep on saying, no, what you, A, are really doing is so-and-so.
In the case at hand, we doians think we have a perfectly good way of describing our own
behavior, behavior of which Habermas approves, in ways which, as true terms, like universal,
unconditional, and transcendence.
It seems to me in the spirit of Perse's criticism of Descartes' make-believe doubt, to raise
the question of whether we are not dealing here with make-believe transcendence, a sort
of make-believe response to a make-believe doubt.
Real doubt, Perse said, comes when some concrete difficulty is envisaged if one acts according
to the habit which is the belief.
Such a difficulty might be, for example, having to seize asserting and believing some relevant
but conflicting proposition.
Real transcendence, I should say, occurs when I say, I am prepared to justify this belief,
not just to people who share the following premises with me, but to lots of other people
who don't share those premises but with whom I share a certain others.
The question whether I am so prepared is a concrete, practical question, whose answer
I determine by, for example, imaginatively previewing various other audience's responses
to my assertion and my subsequent behavior.
But such experiments and imagination obviously have limits.
I can't imagine myself defending my assertion to any possible audience.
In the first place, I can usually dream up audiences to whom it would be pointless to
try to justify my beliefs, try defending beliefs about justice in the antitholes or Nazi prison
guards or about quarks to Aristotle or about trigonometry to three-year-olds.
In the second place, no good pragmatist ever uses the term all possible.
He doesn't know how to imagine or discover the bounds of possibility.
Indeed, he can't figure out what the point of attempting such a feat would be.
Under what concrete circumstances would it be important to consider the difference between
all the x's I can think of and all possible x's?
How could that difference make a difference to practice?
I conclude that Delmer's way of distinguishing between context-dependent and context-independent
claims can't be made plausible, at least to pragmatists.
Since I can think of no better way, I think we should ask why Delmer, Appel and Habermas
think this distinction worth drawing.
The obvious answer is that they want to avoid what they call the relativism, which contextualism
purportedly entails.
So I turn now to what Delmer calls the antinomy of truth, the clash between relativist and
absolutist intuitions.
Over the beginning of his essay, Truth, Contingency and Modernity, Delmer writes his pause.
If there is irresolvable disagreement about the possibility of justifying truth claims,
about standards of argumentation or evidential support, e.g. between members of different
linguistic, scientific or cultural communities, may I still suppose that there are, somewhere,
the correct standards, the right criteria, in short, that there is an objective truth
of the matter.
Or should I rather think that truth is relative to cultures, languages, communities, or even
persons?
While relativism, the second alternative, appears to be inconsistent, absolutism, the
first alternative seems to imply metaphysical assumptions.
Let's call this the antinomy of truth.
Much important philosophical work has been done in the last decades to resolve this antinomy,
either by trying to show that absolutism need not be metaphysical, or by trying to show
that the critique of absolutism need not lead to relativism.
End of quote.
My problem with Delmer's antinomy is that I don't think that denying that there are
the correct standards should lead anybody to say that truth, as opposed to justification,
is relative to something.
As far as I can see, nobody would think that the critique of absolutism leads to relativism,
unless you thought that the only reason for justifying our beliefs to each other is that
such justification makes it more likely that our beliefs are true.
I don't think there's any reason to think that such justification makes it more likely
that our beliefs are true.
But I don't think that's a cause for concern, since I don't think that our practice of justifying
our beliefs needs justification.
If I'm right, that the only indispensable function of the word true, or any other indefinable
normative term, such as good or right, is to caution to warn against danger by making
gestures toward unpredictable situations, future audiences, future moral dilemmas, etc.,
then it doesn't make much sense to ask whether or not justification leads to truth.
Justification to more and more audiences leads to less and less danger of rebuttal, and
thus to less and less need for caution.
If I convince them, we often say to ourselves, I should be able to convince anybody.
But one would only say that it leads to truth if one could somehow project from the condition
to the uncondition, from all imaginable to all possible audiences.
Such a prediction makes some sense if one believes in convergence.
For such a belief, seems the space of reasons as finite and structured, so that as more
and more audiences are satisfied, more and more members of a finite set of possible objections
are eliminated.
One will be encouraged to see the space of reasons in this way if one is a representationalist,
because one will see reality, or at least the spatiotemporal hunk of reality relevant
to human concerns, as finite and as constantly shoving us out of error and toward truth,
discouraging inaccurate representations of itself and thereby producing increasingly
accurate ones.
But if one does not take knowledge to be accurate representation of reality, nor truth to be
correspondence to reality, then it's harder to be a convergentist and harder to think
of the space of reasons as finite and structured.
Filmar, it seems to me, wants to project from the condition our various experiences of success
in justifying our beliefs to the unconditioned truth.
The big difference between me and Velmer is that I think the answer to Velmer's question,
as a quote from Velmer, do our democratic and liberal principles define just one possible
political language game among others, is an unqualified yes.
Velmer, however, thinks, quote, a qualified no can be justified, and by justification
I now mean not justification for us, but justification period, end of quote.
As I see it, the very idea of justification period commits Velmer to the thesis that the
logical space of reason giving is finite and structured.
So I would urge him to abandon the latter thesis for the same reasons that he abandoned
Apples and Habermas's convergentism.
But oddly enough, the reasons these reasons are pretty much the reasons he gives for giving
his qualified no.
Velmer's central point in defense of this qualified no answer is one which I wholeheartedly
accept, namely that the very idea of incompatible and perhaps reciprocally unintelligible language
games is a pointless fiction, and that in real cases representatives of different traditions
and cultures can always find a way to talk over their differences.
I entirely agree with Velmer when he says, quote, rationality in any relevant sense of
the word cannot end at the borderline of closed language games since there is no such thing
as a closed language game.
My disagreement with Velmer starts when after a semicolon, Velmer finishes that sentence
with, but then the ethnocentric contextuality of all argumentation is quite well compatible
with the raising of truth claims which transcend the context, the local or cultural context
in which they are raised and in which they can be justified.
I should have finished that same sentence by saying, but then the ethnocentric contextuality
of all argumentation is quite well compatible with the claim that a liberal and democratic
society can bring together and include all sorts of diverse ethnoi, all sorts of diverse
local, cultural, social practices.
Here's a way of summing up the difference between me and Velmer.
We agree that one reason to prefer democracies is that they enable us to construct ever bigger
and better contexts of discussion, but I stop there and Velmer goes on.
He adds that this reason is not just a justification of democracy for us, but a justification period.
He thinks that the democratic and liberal principles of modernity should potcherority
be understood in a universalistic sense.
My problem, of course, is that I don't have the option of understanding them that way.
Pragmatists like me can't figure out how to tell whether we're understanding a justification
as just a justification for us or as a justification period.
This strikes me as like trying to tell whether I think of my scalpel or my computer as a
good tool for the task at hand or a good tool period.
At this point, however, one can imagine Velmer rejoining then so much the worse for pragmatism.
Any view which makes you unable to understand a distinction everybody else understands
must have something wrong with it.
My rebuttal would be you're only entitled to that distinction as long as you can back
it up with a distinction between what seemed good reasons to us and what seemed good reasons
to something like an ahistorical Kantian tribunal of reason.
But you deprive yourself of that possibility when you gave up on convergentism and thus
gave up the non-metaphysical Frankfurt substitute for such a tribunal vis the idealization
called the undistorted communication situation.
I agree with Velmer that quote, democratic and liberal institutions are the only ones
which could possibly coexist with a recognition of contingency and still reproduce their own
legitimacy.
At least if one takes the term reproduce their own legitimacy to mean something like make
its view of the situation of human beings in the universe hang together with its political
practices.
But I don't think that the recognition of contingency serves as a justification period
for democratic politics because I don't think it does what Velmer says, namely, quote, destroys
the intellectual bases of dogmatism, foundationalism, authoritarianism and immoral and legal inequality.
This is because I don't think that dogmatism or moral inequality have intellectual bases.
If I am a bigoted proponent of the inequality of Blacks, women and homosexuals to straight
white males, I need not necessarily appeal to the denial of contingency by invoking a
metaphysical theory about the true nature of human beings.
I could do that, but I might also, when it came to philosophy, be a pragmatist.
A bigot and I can say the same Foucaultian, Nietzschean thing, that the only real question
is one of power.
The question of which community is going to inherit the earth, mine or my opponents?
One's choice of a community for that role is intertwined with one's sense of what counts
as a competent audience.
Do only Aryans count as a competent audience?
Do only Christians count as a competent audience?
Do only liberal democrats count as a competent audience?
The fact that there are no mutually unintelligible language games, the point Velmer insists on
and which Davidson, I think, effectively argues for, the fact that there are no mutually unintelligible
language games does not in itself do much to show that disputes between racists and anti-racists,
democrats and fascists, can be decided without resort to foes.
Both sides may agree that although they understand what each other says perfectly well and share
common views on most topics, including perhaps the recognition of contingency, the false
pseudo-fellow gocentrism and so on, there seems no prospect of reaching agreement on
the particular issue at hand.
So both sides say as they reach for their guns, it looks as if we'll have to fight it
out.
My answer to Velmer's question about whether our democratic and liberal principles define
just one possible political language game among others is yes.
If the force of the question is to ask whether there is something in the nature of discourse
which singles our game out.
I can't see what other force the question could have and I think so, I think we have
to rest content with saying that no philosophical thesis either about contingency or about truth
does anything decisive for democratic politics.
By decisive, I mean doing what Oppel and Habermas want to do, convicting the anti-democrat
of a performative self-contradiction.
The most that an insistence on contingency can do for democracy is to supply one more
debating point on the democratic side of the argument.
Just as the insistence that, for example, only the Aryan race is in tune with the intrinsic
necessary nature of things can supply one more debating point on the other side.
I can't take the latter point seriously but I don't think that there's anything self-contradictory
in the Nazis refusal to take me seriously so we may both have to reach for our guns.
Unlike Habermas, I don't think that disciplines like philosophy, linguistics, and developmental
psychology can do much for democratic politics.
I see the development of the social conventions in which Habermas and I both rejoice as a
lucky accident.
Still, I'd be happy to think I'd be wrong about this, that I'd be happy to think that
I was wrong about this.
Maybe the gradual development of these conventions, that is, the gradual development of the social
practices which make up the basis of liberal society, maybe the gradual development of
those conventions does, as Habermas thinks, illustrate a universal pattern of phylo or
ontogenetic development, a pattern captured by the rational reconstruction of competences,
offered by various human sciences, and illustrated by the transition from traditional to modern
rationalized societies.
But unlike Habermas, I should be unperturbed if the offers currently made by the human
sciences were withdrawn.
For example, if Chomsky's universalistic ideas about communicative competence were repudiated
by a connectionist revolution and artificial intelligence, I have a footnote saying that
Davidson's argument in his article, A Nice Derangement of Epitaphs, against the sort of
MIT language learning reconstruction of communicative competence in terms of Chomsky and fundamental
grammar seems to be, you know, this Davidsonian point that we don't really need the idea
of mastering a set of grammatical rules in order to understand language learning seems
to be being supported by connectionist programs in artificial intelligence.
I don't know whether this is true or not.
I just put it in as an example of a change in the opinion of linguists of an anti-Chomsky
revolution in linguistics, which it seems to me wouldn't greatly matter to philosophers
or political thinkers, but I think Habermas goes out on a limb in, you know, his attachment
to Chomsky and his use of Chomsky's notion of competence as a sort of structural device
for his own work.
I should be unreturbed if Chomsky's ideas were repudiated if Piaget's and Colberg's
empirical results proved to be unduplicatable and so on.
I don't see that it matters much whether there are actual patterns here.
I don't much care whether democratic politics is an expression of something deep or whether
it expresses nothing better than some hopes which popped from nowhere into the brains
of a few remarkable people like Socrates, Christ, Jefferson, and so on, and which for
unknown reasons became popular.
Habermas and Oppel think that the way to create a cosmopolitan community is to study the nature
of something called rationality, which all human beings share, something already present
within them but insufficiently acknowledged.
That's why they would be depressed if the offers made by Chomsky, Colberg, etc. were
in the course of time withdrawn.
But suppose we say that all that rationality amounts to, all that marks human beings off
from other species of animals, is the ability to use language and thus to have sentential
attitudes like beliefs and desires.
It seems plausible to add that there is no more reason to expect all the organisms which
share this ability to form a single community of justification than to expect such a community
to unite all the organisms able to walk long distances or to remain monogamous or to digest
vegetables.
One will not expect such a single community of justification to be created by the ability
to communicate if one takes the ability to use language to be, like the prehensile thumb,
just one more gimmick which organisms have developed to increase their chances of survival.
If we combine this Darwinian point of view with the holistic attitude toward intentionality
and language use found in Wittgenstein and Davidson, we shall say that there is no language
use without justification, no ability to believe without an ability to argue about what beliefs
to have.
But this is not to say that the ability to use language to have beliefs and desires entails
a desire to justify one's beliefs to every language using organism one encounters.
It's not to say that any language user who comes down the road will be treated as a member
of a competent audience.
On the contrary, human beings usually divide up into mutually suspicious, not mutually
unintelligible, communities of justification, mutually exclusive groups depending on the
presence or absence of sufficient overlap in belief and desire.
The principle source of conflict between human communities is the belief that I have no reason
to justify my beliefs to you and none in finding out what alternative beliefs you may have,
because you are, for example, an infidel, a foreigner, a woman, a child, a slave, a pervert,
or an untouchable.
In short, you're not one of us, not one of the real human beings, the paradigm human
beings, the ones whose persons and opinions are to be treated with respect.
The philosophical tradition has tried to stitch exclusivist communities together by saying
there's more overlap between infidels and true believers, masters and slaves, men and
women than you might have thought, for as Aristotle said, all human beings by nature
desire to know.
This desire brings them together in a universal community of justification.
To a pragmatist, however, this Aristotelian dictum seems thoroughly misleading.
It runs together three different things, the need to make one's beliefs coherent, the
need for the respective one's peers, and curiosity.
We pragmatists think that the reason people try to make their beliefs coherent is not
that they love truth, but because they can't help doing so.
Our minds can no more stand in coherence than our brains can stand whatever the neurochemical
substrate of such coherence may be.
Just as our neural networks are presumably both constrained and in part constructed by
something like the algorithms used in parallel distributed processing of information by computer
programmers, so our minds are constrained by the need to tie our beliefs and desires
together into a reasonably perspicuous whole.
That's why we can't, in James' unhappy expression, will to believe, believe what we like regardless
of what else we believe.
It's why, for example, we have such a hard time keeping our religious beliefs in a separate
compartment from our scientific ones and in isolating our respect for democratic institutions
from our contempt for many or most of our fellow voters.
The need to make one's beliefs coherent is for reasons familiar from Hagel, Mead and
Davidson not separable from the need for the respective our peers.
We have as hard a time tolerating the thought that everybody but ourselves is out of step
as we do the thought that we believe both P and not P.
We need the respect of our peers because we cannot trust our own beliefs nor maintain
our self-respect unless we're fairly sure that our conversational interlocutors agree
among themselves on such propositions as, he's not crazy, he's one of us, he may have
strange beliefs on some subjects, but he's basically sound and so on.
This interpenetration of the need to make one's beliefs coherent among themselves and
the need to make them coherent with most of those of one's peers results from the fact
that, as Wittgenstein said, to imagine a form of human life we have to imagine agreement
in judgments as well as in meanings.
Davidson brings out the considerations which support Wittgenstein's insight when he says,
quote, the ultimate source of both objectivity and communication is the triangle that by
relating speaker, interpreter, and the world determines the contents of thought and speech.
You would not know what you believe nor have any beliefs unless your belief had a place
in a network of beliefs and desires, but that network would also not exist where you and
others unable to pair off features of your non-human environment with assent to your
utterances by other language users, utterances caused as are yours by those very features.
The difference between the use which Davidson and I would like to make of Hegel's and Meade's
realization that ourselves are dialogical all the way down, that there is no private
core on which to build, and the use which Hoppe and Habermas make of this point can
be exhibited by looking at the sentence immediately following the one I just quoted from Davidson.
Davidson continues, given the source that is given that the source of both objectivity
and communication is this triangle, there is no room for a relativized concept of truth.
Davidson's point is that the only sort of philosopher who would take seriously the idea
that truth is relative to a context and particularly to a choice between human communities is one
who thinks that he or she can contrast being in touch with a human community with being
in touch with reality. But Davidson's point about there being no language without triangulation
means that this contrast can't be drawn. You can't have any language or any beliefs without
being in touch with both a human community and non-human reality. There's no possibility
of agreement without truth, nor of truth without agreement. Most of our beliefs must
be true, Davidson says, because a description to a person of mostly false beliefs would
mean either that we had mistranslated the person's marks and noises, or that she didn't,
in fact, have any beliefs, was not, in fact, speaking a language. Most of our beliefs must
be justified in the eyes of our peers for a similar reason. If they were not justified,
if our peers could not attribute to us a largely coherent web of beliefs and desires, they
would have to conclude that they had either misunderstood us, sorry, they would have to
conclude either that they had misunderstood us, or that we did not speak their language.
Coherence, truth, and community go together, not because truth is to be defined in terms
of coherence rather than correspondence, in terms of social practice rather than in terms
of coping with non-human forces, but simply because to ascribe a belief is automatically
to ascribe a place in a largely coherence of mostly true belief. But to say that there's
no contact via belief and desire with reality, no truth without community, is as yet to say
nothing about what sort of community is in question. A radically exclusivist community
made up of only the priests or the nobles or the males or the whites is quite as good
as any other sort of community for Davidsonian purposes. This is the difference between what
Davidson thinks you can get out of reflection on the nature of discourse and what Oppo and
Habermas think you can get out of it. The latter philosophers think that you can get
something more out of such reflection than the fact that there are neither beliefs nor
persons nor truth without justification in the eyes of a community. They think you can
get an argument in favor of the inclusivist project, an argument which says that people
who resist this project involve themselves in performative self-contradictions. By contrast,
Davidson thinks that any community of justification will do to make you a language user and a
believer, no matter how distorted Oppo and Habermas take communication within that community
to be. From Davidson's point of view, philosophy of language runs out before we reach the moral
imperatives which make up Oppo's discourse ethics. Oppo and Habermas run together the
need for coherence and for justification, which is required if one is to use language
at all, and a commitment to what they call universal validity, a commitment which can
only be consistently acted upon by aiming at the sort of domination-free communication
which is impossible as long as there are human communities which remain exclusivist. Davidson
and I have no use for the claim that any communicative action contains a claim to universal validity
because this so-called presupposition seems to us to have no role to play in the explanation
of linguistic behavior. It does, to be sure, play a part in the explanation of the behavior,
linguistic and other, of a small minority of human beings, those who belong to the liberal
universalistic and classivist tradition of the European Enlightenment. But this tradition,
to which Davidson and I are as much attached as Oppo and Habermas, derives no support from
reflection on discourse as such. We language users who belong to this minority tradition are
morally superior to those who don't, but those who don't are no less coherent in their use of
language. Oppo and Habermas invoke the presupposition of universal validity to get from a commitment
to justification to a willingness to submit one's beliefs to the inspection of any and every
language user, even a slave, even a black, even a woman. They see the desire for truth construed
as the desire to claim universal validity as the desire for universal justification, but as I see
it there, inferring invalidly from, you can't use language without invoking consensus within a
community of other language users to, you can't use language consistently without enlarging that
community to include all users of language. Because I see this inference as invalid, I think that
the only thing which can play the role in which Aristotle, Perse, Oppo and Habermas have cast
the desire for knowledge, and thus for truth, is curiosity. I use this term to mean the urge to
expand one's horizons of inquiry in all areas, ethical as well as logical and physical, so as
to encompass new data, new hypotheses, new terminologies and the like. This urge brings
cosmopolitanism and democratic politics in its train. The more curiosity you have, the more
interest you will have in talking to foreigners, infidels, and anybody else who claims to know
something you don't know to have some ideas you have not yet had. Section 6, communicating or
educating. If one sees the desire and possession of both truth and justification as inseparable from
using language, while still resisting the thought that this desire can be used to convict members of
exclusivist human communities, our performative self-contradiction, then one will see inclusivist
communities as based on contingent human development, such as the twitchy curiosity of the
sort of eccentrics we call intellectuals, the desire for intermarriage beyond tribal or caste
boundaries produced by erotic obsession, the need to trade across such boundaries produced by lack
of, for example, salt or gold within one's own territory, the possession of enough wealth,
security, education, and independence, so that one's self-respect no longer depends upon membership
in an exclusivist community, e.g. on not being an infidel or a slave or a woman and the like. The
increased communication between previously exclusivist communities produced by such
contingent human developments may gradually create universality, but I can't see any sense in which
it recognizes a previously existent universality. Philosophers like Habermas who worry about the
anti-enlightenment overtones of the views they call contextualist think that since
justification is, and obviously context relative notion, one justifies to a given audience and
the same justification won't work for all audiences, it endangers the ideal of human fraternity.
Habermas regards contextualism as only the flip side of logocentrism. He sees contextualists as
negative metaphysicians infatuated by diversity and says that, quote, the metaphysical priority of
unity above plurality and the contextualist priority of plurality above unity are secret
accomplices. The idea is that post-moderns in the tradition of Nietzsche, including me,
for these purposes, are plurality freaks in the same way that the western metaphysical tradition
condemned by Heidegger and Derrida were unity freaks, whereas Habermas is neither a unity
freak nor a plurality freak but just right. I agree with Habermas that it's as pointless to
prize diversity as to prize unity, but I disagree with him that we can use the pragmatics of
communication to do the job which metaphysicians hope to achieve by appealing to the Plotinian
one or to the transcendental structure of self-consciousness. My reasons for disagreement
are those offered by Walzer, McCarthy, Ben Hubby, Velmer, and others. Reasons nicely summed up in
an article by Michael Kelly that I cite in the footnote. Habermas argues for the thesis that,
quote, the unity of reason only remains perceptible in the plurality of its voices. As the possibility
and principle of passing from one language to another, a passage that no matter how occasional is
still comprehensible. This possibility of mutual understanding, which is now guaranteed only
procedurally and is realized only transitorally, forms the background for the existing diversity
of those who encounter one another even when they fail to understand one another. I agree with Habermas
against Lyotav Foucault and others that there are no incommensurable languages, that any language
can be learned by one who is able to use any other language that Davidson is right in denouncing
the very idea of a conceptual scheme. But I disagree with him about the relevance of this point to
the utility of the ideas of universal validity and objective truth. Habermas says that, quote,
what the speaker here and now in a given context asserts as valid transcends according to the
sense of his claim all contexts dependent merely local standards of validity. As I said before,
I can't see what transcends means here. If it means that he's claiming to say something true,
then the question is whether it makes any difference whether you say that a sentence
s is true or whether you simply offer a justification for it by saying, here are my reasons for
believing s. Habermas thinks there's a difference because he thinks that when you assert s, you
claim truth, you claim truth, you claim to represent the real and that reality transcends context.
I quote, with the concept of reality to which every representation necessarily refers, we
presuppose something transcendent. Here, in my view, is where the notion of representation
raises its ugly head in Habermas and offers us a reason for never, never saying that sentences
represent reality. Habermas tends to take for granted that truth claims or claims to represent
accurately and to be suspicious of those who, like Davidson and myself, give up on the notion
of linguistic representation. He follows sellers in being a coherentist rather than a skeptic
or a foundationalist, but he's dubious about the move I want to make from coherentism to
anti-representationalism. He commends Purse over Socio because Purse, quote, examines expressions
from the point of view of their possible truth and at the same time from that of their communicability.
He goes on to say, quote, from the perspective of its capacity for being true, an acertoric
sentence stands in an epistemic relation to something in the world. It represents a state of
affairs. At the same time, from the perspective of its employment in a communicative act,
it stands in a relation to a possible interpretation by a language user. It's suitable for the
transmission of information. My own view, which I take from Davidson, is that you can give up the
notion of an epistemic relation to something in the world and just rely on the ordinary causal
relations which bind utterances together with the otterer's environments. The idea of representation
on this view adds nothing to the notion of transmission of information, or more exactly,
it adds nothing to the notion of taking part in the discursive practice of justifying one's assertions.
Habermas sees Putnam as, like himself, defending a third position over against the metaphysics of
unity on the one hand, and people like me, the enthusiasts for incommensurability on the other.
He thinks I'm an enthusiast for incommensurability. He defines this third position as, quote,
the humanism of those who continue the Kantian tradition by seeking to use the philosophy
of language to save a concept of reason that is skeptical and post-metaphysical.
Putnam and Habermas have offered similar criticisms of my attempt to get rid of a
specifically epistemic concept of reason, the concept according to which one is rational only
if one tries to represent reality accurately, and to replace it by the purely moral idea of
solidarity. My central disagreement with both Habermas and Putnam is whether,
sorry, is over the question of whether the regulative ideas of undistorted communication
or accurate representation of reality can do any more for the ideals of the French Revolution
than the bare context-dependent notion of justification. Some people care about defending
their assertions only to a few people, and some care, or say they care, about defending their
assertions to everyone. I'm not thinking here of the distinction between specialized technical
discourse and non-technical discourse. Rather, the distinction I want is the one between people
who want to defend their views to all people who share certain attributes, for example devotion to
the ideals of the French Revolution or membership in the Aryan race, and those who say they want
to justify their view to every actual and possible language user. There are certainly people who say
that the latter is what they want, but I'm not sure they really mean it. Do they want to justify
their views to language users who are four years old? Well, perhaps they do in the sense that they
would like to educate four-year-olds to the point at which they could appreciate the arguments for
and against views in question. Do they want to justify them to intelligent but convinced Nazis,
people who believe that the first thing to find out is whether the view under discussion is tainted
by the Jewish ancestry of its inventors or propounders? Well, perhaps they do in the sense
that they would like to convert these Nazis into people who have doubts about the advisability
of a Jew-free Europe and the infallibility of Hitler, and therefore are more or less willing
to listen to arguments for positions associated with Jewish thinkers. But in both cases, what
they want seems to me best described not as wanting to justify their view to everybody,
but as wanting to create an audience to whom they would have a sporting chance of justifying their
view. Let me use the distinction between arguing with people and educating people to abbreviate
the distinction I've just drawn. The distinction between proceeding on the assumption that people
will follow your arguments and knowing that they cannot but hoping to alter them so that they can.
If all education were a matter of argument, this distinction would collapse. But unless one broadens
the term argument beyond recognition, a lot of education is not. In particular, a lot of it is
simple appeal to sentiment. The distinction between such appeal and argument is fuzzy,
but I take it nobody would say that making an unregenerate Nazi watch films of the opening
of the concentration camps or making her read the diary of Anne Frank counts as arguing with her.
People interested in democratic politics both cherish the ideal of human fraternity
and cherish the idea of the universal availability of education. When asked about the education we
have in mind, we often say that it is education in critical thinking in the ability to talk over
the pros and cons of any view. We oppose critical thinking to ideology and say that we oppose
ideological education of the sort which the Nazis inflicted on German youth. But we thereby
leave ourselves wide open to Nietzsche's scornful suggestion that we are simply inculcating our own
ideology, the ideology of what he calls Socrates. The issue between me and Habermas I think boils
down to a disagreement about what to say to Nietzsche at this point. I should reply to Nietzsche
by conceding that there is no non-local, non-contextual way to draw the distinction between ideological
education and non-ideological education because there's nothing to say to my use of the term reason
that could not be replaced by the way we wet western liberals the heirs of Socrates and the
French Revolution conduct ourselves. I agree with McIntyre and Michael Kelly that all reasoning,
both in physics and ethics, is tradition bound. Habermas thinks this an unnecessary concession
and more generally thinks that my cheerful ethnocentrism can be avoided by thinking through what
he calls the symmetrical structure of perspectives built into every speech situation. The issue
between Habermas and myself thus comes to a head when he takes up my suggestion that we drop the
notions of rationality and objectivity and instead just discuss the kind of community we want to create.
He paraphrases this suggestion by saying that I want to treat the aspiration for objectivity as
quote simply the desire for as much intersubjective agreement as possible, namely the desire to expand
the referent of for us to the greatest possible extent. Habermas then paraphrases one of Putnam's
objections to me by asking quote, can we explain the possibility of the critique and self critique
of established practices of justification if we do not take the idea of the expansion of our
interpreted horizon seriously as an idea and if we do not connect this idea with the intersubjectivity
of an agreement that allows precisely for the distinction between what is current for us and
what is current for them. Habermas enlarges on this point by saying quote, the merging of interpretive
horizons does not signify an assimilation to us, rather it must mean a convergence steered through
learning of our perspective and their perspective no matter whether they or we or both sides have
to reformulate established practices of justification to a greater or lesser extent. For learning itself
belongs neither to us or to them, both sides are caught up on it in the same way. Even in the most
difficult processes of reaching understanding all parties appeal to the common reference point
of a possible consensus even if this reference point is projected in each case from within
their own context. For although they may be interpreted in various ways and applied according
to different criteria concepts like truth rationality or justification play the same
grammatical role in every linguistic community. End of quote. The note of the argument is I think
a disagreement about how much help for democratic politics can be gotten out of what Habermas here
calls grammar. As I said earlier I think that all we can get out of the grammar of the words true
and rational is the same as what we get out of a rather thin idea of justification. This thin idea
is the one we get when we answer the question where does the line come between causing people to
adjust their behavior by persuasion by working on their beliefs and desires and doing so by other
means. Unlike Foucault and some others I think it's both possible and important to draw a line here.
I don't think it helpful to extend the term violence as widely as Foucault extended it.
Whatever we're doing when we make Nazis look at pictures of concentration camp survivors it isn't
violence anymore than it was violence to educate the Hitler youth to believe the Jews were worthless
Berman. The inevitable fuzziness of the line between persuasion and violence causes problems
however when we come to the question of education. We're reluctant to say that the Nazis used
persuasion on the Hitler youth since we have two criteria of persuasion. One is simply using
words rather than blows or other forms of physical pressure. One can imagine with a bit of distortion
of history that in this sense only persuasion was employed on the Hitler youth. The second
criterion of persuasion includes abstention from words like stop asking these stupid questions
about whether there aren't some good Jews questions which make me doubt your area and
consciousness and ancestry or the Reich will find another use for you. Those are not blows but one
might say it isn't exactly persuasion either it's you know threats or something you know something
that doesn't quite deserve the name persuasion. Another example is abstention from not assigning
their stigma to one student. Unsecretic methods of this latter sort are the kind which Habermas
would say do not respect the symmetrical relationships of participants in discourse.
Habermas clearly thinks that there's something in the grammar of concepts like truth rationality
and justification which tell us not to use methods of the latter sort. He would presumably grant
that the use of such words is language use but he needs a category of distorted language use or
distorted communication to explain that it is so to speak ungrammatical language use. Immediately
after the passage I quoted about grammar Habermas says quote all languages offer the possibility
of distinguishing what is true and what we hold to be true. The supposition of a common objective
world is built into the pragmatics of every single linguistic usage and the dialogue roles of every
speech situation enforce a symmetry in participant perspective. A bit later he says quote from the
possibility of reaching understanding linguistically we can read off a concept of situated reason that
is given voice and validity claims that are both context dependent and transcendent. He then
approvingly quotes Putnam as saying reason is in this sense both imminent not to be found outside
of concrete language games and institutions and transcendent i.e. a regulative idea that we use
to criticize the conduct of all activities and institutions. It seems to me that the regulative
idea that we we wet liberals we heirs of the enlightenment we socrates most frequently used
to criticize the conduct of various conversational partners is the concept of needing education
in order to outgrow their primitive fears hatreds and superstitions. This is the concept the victorious
allied armies used when they said about reeducating the citizens of occupied Germany and Japan.
It's also the one which was used by American school teachers who had read Dewey and were
concerned to get students to think scientifically and rationally about such matters as the origin
of the species and sexual behavior that is to get the students to read Darwin and Freud without
disgust or incredulity. It is a concept which I like most Americans who teach humanities or social
science in colleges and universities use when we hope that the students who enter as bigoted
religious fundamentalists will leave college with views more like our own. What's the relation of
this idea to the regulative idea of reason which Putnam believes to be transcendent and which Habermas
believes to be discoverable within the grammar of concepts in a limitable from our description
of the making of assertions? The answer to that question depends upon how much the reeducation
of Nazis and fundamentalists has to do with merging interpretive horizons and how much with
replacing such horizons. The fundamentalist parents of my fundamentalist students think that the
entire liberal establishment is engaged in a conspiracy. Had they read Habermas these people
would say that the typical communication situation in American college classrooms or at least my
classroom is no more hair shots fly no more domination free than that in the Hitler Youth Camp.
These parents have a point. Their point is that we liberal teachers no more feel in a symmetrical
communication situation when we talk with our fundamentalist students than do kindergarten
teachers with their students. In both college classrooms and kindergartens it is equally difficult
for the teachers to feel that what is going on is what Habermas calls a convergence steered through
learning of our perspective and their perspective no matter whether they or we or both sides have
to reformulate established practices of justification to a greater or lesser extent.
When we American college teachers encounter religious fundamentalists we do not consider the
possibility of reformulating our own practices of justification so as to give more authority
to the weight of the Christian scriptures more weight to the authority of the Christian scriptures.
Instead we do our best to convince these persons of the benefits of secularization.
We assign for example first person accounts of growing up homosexual to our homophobic students
for the same reasons that German school teachers in the post-war period assigned the diary of Anne
Frank. Putnam and Habermas can rejoin that we teachers do our best to be socratic to get our
job of reeducation secularization and liberalization done by conversational exchange. That's true up
to a point but what about assigning books like Black Boy the Diary of Anne Frank and a Boy's Life.
The racist or fundamentalist parents of our students say that in a truly democratic society
the students should not be forced to read books by such people. Black people, Jewish people,
homosexual people and so on. They'll protest that these books are being jammed down their
children's throats. I can't see how to reply to this charge without saying something like
there are credentials for admission to our democratic society. Credentials which we liberals
have been making steadily more stringent by doing our best to excommunicate racist male chauvinist
homophobes and so on. You have to be educated in order to be a citizen of our society, a participant
in our conversation, someone with whom we can envisage merging our horizons. So we're going to go
right on trying to discredit you in the eyes of your children, trying to strip your fundamentalist
religious community of dignity, trying to make your views seem silly rather than discussable.
We are not so inclusivist as to tolerate intolerance such as yours.
I have no trouble offering this reply because I don't claim to make the distinction between
education and conversation on the basis of anything except loyalty to a particular community.
A community whose interests required re-educating the Hitler youth in 1945 and re-educating the
children of Southwestern Virginia in 1996. I don't see anything hair-shafts fly about my
handling of my fundamentalist students. I think those students are lucky to find themselves under
the hair-shaft of people like me and have escaped from their rather frightening and dangerous parents.
So I think that the handling of such students is a problem for Putnam and Habermals.
It seems to me that I'm just as provincial and contextualist as the Nazi teachers who made
their students read their stoma. The only difference is that I serve a better cause. I come from a
better province. I recognize, of course, that domination-free communication is only a regulative
ideal never to be attained in practice. But unless a regulative ideal makes a difference to practice,
it isn't good for much. So I ask, is there an ethics of discourse which lets me assign the
books I want to assign, but makes no reference to the local and ethnocentric considerations
which I should cite to justify my pedagogic practices? Can you get such an ethics out of
the notions of reason, truth, and justification, or do you have to load the dyes? Can I invoke
universalistic notions in defense of my action as well as local ones? Like McIntyre, Ben Habib,
Kelly, and others, I think that you have to smuggle some provinciality into your universals
before they do you any good. We think this for the same sorts of reasons as Hegel thought
you had to smuggle in some provinciality, some ethical substance, before you could get any use
out of Kant's notion of unconditional moral obligation. In particular, you have to smuggle
in some rule like no putative contribution to a conversation can be rejected simply because it
comes from somebody who has some attribute which can vary independently of his or her opinions
and attribute like being Jewish or black or homosexual. I call this rule provincial because
it violates the intuitions of a lot of people outside the province in which we heirs of the
Enlightenment run the educational institutions. It violates what they would describe as their
moral intuitions. I'm reluctant to admit that these are moral intuitions and should prefer to
call them revolting prejudices. But I don't think that any in the grammar of the term moral
intuition or revolting prejudice helps us to reach agreement on this point, nor can I see
that a theory of rationality, abandoning the hopeless quest to talk in philosophy, find
politically neutral premises, premises which can be justified to anybody from which to infer
an obligation to pursue democratic ethics. Dropping that question would let us admit
in Velmer's formula that democratic and liberal principles define just one possible language
game, among others. Such an admission would be in line with the Darwinian idea that the
inclusivist project is no more rooted in something larger than itself than, say, the project of
replacing ideographic by alphabetic writing or representing three spatial dimensions on a two
dimensional surface. All three of these were good, immensely fruitful ideas, but none of them need
universalistic backup. They can stand on their own feet. If we abandon the idea of philosophy
which manages to be both politically neutral and politically relevant, we could start asking the
question, given that we want to be ever more inclusivist, what should the public rhetoric of our
society be like? How different should it be from the public rhetoric of previous societies?
Habermas's implicit answer to this question is that we should hang on to a good many Kantian ideas
about the connection between universality and moral obligation. Dewey, however, was willing to move
much further away from Kant. Though he would have heartily agreed with Habermas that Aristotle's
political vocabulary was unable to capture the spirit of democratic politics, he did not like
the distinction between morality and prudence, which Habermas thinks essential, and on this point
he would have thought Aristotle preferable. Dewey thought that the Kantian notion of unconditional
obligation, like the notion of unconditionality itself and of universality and so far as that
idea is implicitly accompanied by that of unconditional necessity, could not survive Darwin.
Whereas Habermas thinks that we need what he calls the reconstructive sciences designed to grasp
universal competences in order to break out of what he calls the hermeneutic circle in which the
geist is fissonshaft and as well as the interpretive social sciences are trapped, Dewey did not feel
trapped. This was because he saw no need to resolve attention between facticity and validity.
He saw that tension as a philosopher's fiction, as a result of separating out two
parts of the situation for no good, that is to say no practical reason, and then complaining that
they can't be put back together again. For him, all obligations were situational and conditional.
This refusal to be unconditional led Dewey to be charged with relativism.
If relativism just means failure to find the use for the notion of context independent validity,
then the charge was entirely justified. But no roads lead from this failure to an inability
to engage in democratic politics unless one thinks that such politics require us to deny
that in Dewey's formula, democratic and liberal principles define just one possible language
game among others. The question about universality is for Dewey just the question of whether
democratic politics can start from an affirmation rather than a denial of that claim.
I don't think we can get much further in debating that question by talking about either modernity
or reason. The question of whether Hegel should have stuck to the topic of reason
by developing a theory of communicative reason, or should instead have dropped the topic and
simply politicized philosophy, is not going to be settled by looking more closely at the grammar
of words like true rational and argument. I'm referring here to a passage in Habermas's
Philosophical Discourse of Modernity where he says, Hegel had this great opportunity.
If he had gone on to become, let us say, random and developed a theory of communicative reason,
he would have had it made. But because he was stuck with the philosophy of consciousness,
he missed the chance and we had to wait for another 150 years before Habermas and random came along
with a theory of communicative reason. Neither is the question of whether philosophers like
Annette Beyer are right in suggesting that we set Kant aside and go back to Hume's attempt to
describe reason in terms of condition sentiment rather than unconditional obligation. That is,
whether Beyer is right in her view of Kant isn't to be settled by thinking harder about what we
mean by true rational argument. Although we don't, if I'm right, need a theory of rationality,
we do need a narrative of maturation. As I see it, the deepest disagreement between Habermas and
myself is about whether the distinction between the unconditional and the conditional in general
and the distinction between morality and prudence in particular is a mark of maturity
or a transitional stage on the way to maturity. One of the many points on which Dewey agreed
with Nietzsche was that it was the latter. Dewey thought that the desire for universality,
unconditionality, and necessity was undesirable because it led one away from the practical problems
of democratic politics into a never-never land of theory. Kant and Habermas think it's a desirable
desire, one which one shares, only when one reaches the highest level of moral development.
In this paper, I've tried to show how things look when one puts democratic politics in the
context of Dewey's narrative of maturation. I can't offer anything remotely approaching a
knockdown argument based on commonly accepted premises for this narrative. The best I could do
by way of further defense of my view would be to tell a fuller story, encompassing more topics,
in order to show how post-Nichie and European philosophy looks from a Dewey an angle rather
than a universalistic one. This is something I've tried to do in bits and pieces in various
articles. I think that narratives are a perfectly fair means of persuasion and that Habermas has
blocked the philosophical discourse of modernity and Dewey is the quest for certainty, like,
for example, Kant's What is Enlightenment and Hegel's lectures on the philosophy of history
are both admirable illustrations of the power of narratives of maturation. My reasons for
preferring Dewey's to Habermas's narrative are not that I think Dewey got truth and rationality
right and that Habermas gets them wrong. I think that there's nothing to be gotten right or wrong
here. At this level of abstraction concepts like truth, rationality, and maturity are up for grads.
The only thing that matters is which way every shaping them will in the long run make them more
useful for democratic politics. Concepts are, as Wittgenstein taught us, uses of words.
Philosophers have long wanted to understand concepts, but the point is to change them,
so as to make them serve our purposes better. Habermas's, Oppel's, Putnam's, and Velmer's
linguistification of Kantian concepts is one suggestion about how to make these
Kantian concepts more useful. Dewey's and Davidson's thoroughgoing anti-Kantian naturalism is another
suggestion.
