If we took a poll among professional teachers of philosophy on the question, who is the
most important living philosopher, it's not at all obvious, to me at least, who would
get the most votes. But we can be fairly sure about some of the names that would be in the
top half dozen. Quine, Popper, Jean-Paul Sartre, Chomsky probably, though strictly speaking,
he's not exactly a philosopher. Well, the first of those names, and one on which I'd
lay pretty short odds, is that of Willard Van Orman Quine, one of the professors of
philosophy at Harvard. Quine was born in 1908 and is still highly productive, so he's had
a long career, and it's by no means over yet. He's published innumerable articles and
over a dozen books, the best known of which are From a Logical Point of View, published
in 1953, and Word and Object, published in 1960. First and foremost, he's a logician,
and the original contributions to the subject which made him famous are for the most part
highly technical and not really accessible to the layman, though they always had their
ultimate roots in problems fundamental to philosophy. However, in the latter part of
his career, he's become more overtly interested in philosophy in a more general sense, and
I thought it would be uniquely valuable in this program to have a philosopher at the
very summit of world reputation talking about the basics of philosophy and of his own activity.
Professor Quine, what do you regard as the central task or tasks of philosophy?
I think a philosophy is concerned with our knowledge of the world and the nature of the
world. I think a philosophy is attempting to round out the system of the world as Newton
put it. There have been philosophers who have thought of philosophy as somehow separate
from science and as providing a firm basis on which to build science. But this, I consider
an empty dream, science, much of science is firmer than philosophy is or can even perhaps
aspire to be. I think a philosophy is continuous with science even as a part of science.
Well, if it's continuous with science and even part of science, how does it differ from
the rest of science? It differs in generality and in abstractness. Science is a continuum
extending from history and engineering and at one end, if we think of science broadly,
to such abstract pursuits as philosophy and mathematics at the other. Philosophy considers
the question of the nature of cause, for instance, where physics contends itself with finding
causal relations between specific sorts of events, biology between other sorts of events.
Again, whereas the zoologist will tell us that there are wombats and the physicist will
tell us that there are electrons. The mathematician will tell us there are no end of prime numbers.
The philosopher is interested rather in what sorts of things there are altogether. In these
ways that philosophy is more abstract in general. In other words, the philosopher is investigating
what constitutes the connective tissue of everyone's thoughts, including other people's
thoughts, so that the physicist is trying to find out whether or not A causes B, but
the philosopher is saying, but what does it mean to say that anything causes anything?
The physicist is trying to find out, say, what particular subatomic particles there are and
the philosopher says, but what does it mean to say of anything that it exists? It's at this
level of complete generality that the philosophers' investigations occur. Is that right? Now, do
you include in this or do you exclude from it the age-old questions of how the world
got here in the first place or how life began? I exclude these from philosophy. How the world
began is a problem for the physicist and astronomer, and of course there have been conjectures from
that quarter. How life began is a problem for the biologist on which he's made notable progress
in recent years. Why the world began, why life began, on the other hand, I think, are pseudo
questions, because I can't, I can't imagine what an answer would look like.
And you think that because there is no conceivable answer to these questions, they are meaningless
questions. Yes, yes, yes. So in other words, you regard the central tasks of philosophy as the
analysis and elucidation of concepts that are central to various fields of human activity,
and also, in particular, notions like what it is for something to be a cause of something else,
what it is for something to exist, what it is for something to be, shall we say, a scientific law,
the most general notions that are, as it were, the connecting tissue of thought and that we
have to use and have to employ in the specific activities that people like scientists, or I
could even be politicians, lawyers and so on, are engaged in. Is that a correct way of putting
your view? Yes, yes, I would agree with that. Do you think that the main or the most important
questions that philosophers have to deal with can be grouped under any particular headings?
There are two headings, which I think provide an important classification to begin with.
There are the ontological questions, as they might be called. Well, I think you'll need to
explain that term. These would be questions as to what there is, the general questions,
as to what sorts of things there are, as well as the question of what it means to exist,
what it means to exist, for there to be something. And the other classification, the other class,
would be, might be called the predicated questions. Questions as to what sorts of things can
meaningfully be asked about what there is. In other words, you've got two enormous spheres
of questioning here, one about what there is, and the other about what we can know about what
there is, or what we can say about what there is. Yes, and epistemology would be included in the letter.
Yes, yes, yes. Now, I think since you've made this distinction, for clarity's sake, in our
discussion, we ought to cling to it a little, and I think we'll take these two areas one at a time,
and we'll take your first one first, the whole group of questions about what there is, what exists,
or as you say, what is called ontology by philosophers. Although there are innumerable
theories about this, I think it's fair to say that throughout the history of the subject,
there have been two broad opposing views in the matter of ontology, between what you might very
roughly call materialists, and what you might call idealists. I mean, although there are innumerable
different versions of both doctrines, you do have on the one hand a view that reality consists of
matter or material objects in space and time, which exist independently of anyone's or anything's
experience of them. And on the other hand, you have a view of reality as consisting ultimately in
spirits or minds, or is existing in the mind of God, or as being put together in our minds.
Now, can I put very crudely the $64 question to you and ask you which side you're on?
I'm on the materialist side. Yes, yes, yes. Yes, I hold that physical objects are real
and exist externally and independently of us. I don't hold that there are only these physical
objects. There are also abstract objects, objects of mathematics that seem to be needed to fill
the system of the world. But I don't recognize the existence of minds of mental entities,
in any sense other than as attributes or activities on the part of physical objects,
mainly persons. That must mean then that you not only reject idealism, it must also mean that you
reject dualism. I mean, one might describe dualism as almost the common sense view. I think throughout
human history, most human beings have taken the view that reality consists ultimately of entities of
two categorically different kinds, minds and bodies. And as far as we know, in all civilizations,
past and present, most people seem to have thought this, that there were bodies and that there were
minds and that these were two fundamentally different kinds of things. Now that's what is
meant by the term dualismness. Now you must reject this view if you don't believe in the existence
of minds. Yes, true. I do reject the view. The dualistic view presents problems, creates problems
which are neither soluble nor, it seems to me, necessary. It's clear that an individual's decisions
will affect his movements, will determine his movements in many cases, and his movements in
turn will have consequences in the movements of other physical objects. At the same time, the
natural scientists, the physicists, insist on a closed system. There being physical causes,
physical explanations in principle for the physical events. They allow no place for the
incursion of influences from outside the physical world. Given all this, it would seem then that
a person's decisions must themselves be activity on the part of a physical object.
The alternative of rejecting this basic principle of physical science to the effect that
every change is, that there's no change without a change in the distribution of
micro-physical properties over space-time, over space. That alternative I find
uncongenial because the successes in natural science have been such that we must take their
presuppositions very seriously. In other words, what you are saying is that wishes, emotions,
feelings, decisions, thoughts are all things which take place in physical objects, namely people.
Of course, in a sense, that's an obvious fact. What you're saying is that not only are these
always accompanied by micro-physical changes, changes in our brains and our central nervous
systems and so on, but they indeed are those micro-physical changes. Before I go on to raise
with you some of the apparent difficulties inherent in that view, I wonder if you can
explain how it is that almost all of mankind, as I said only a few minutes ago,
has disagreed with you about this. Why people in general take a dualist view of reality?
Let me add this point. If I put that question to almost anyone else, he could say, well,
it's obvious why people think like that. They think like that because dualism corresponds to
directly experienced reality. That is how we experience things, but you can't say that because
you don't think it is how we experience things. What would your answer be?
I recognize certainly a profound difference between so-called mental events and externally
observable physical ones in spite of construing these mental events as themselves. Event states
activity on the part of a physical object. As for the traditional dualistic attitude,
certainly this goes back to primitive times. I think one cause of it, partial explanation may
be the experience of dreams and the seeming separation of the mind from the body. In that state,
certainly animism, antedated science, Thales, the first of the Greek philosophers, has said to
have said that all things are full of gods. Primitive peoples today are said to be animists
very largely and to believe that what we call inanimate objects are animated by spirits.
One can even imagine traces of animism in the basic concepts of our science itself.
The notion of cause, I suspect, began with the feeling of effort, of pushing on the part of
the individual, the subjective feeling, as a mental entity, and force surely had that sort of origin.
But as time has gone on and as science has progressed in recent centuries,
the dissociation of these concepts from their original mental context seems to have been conducive
to great scientific progress. I think of physicalism as a departure, a product of
latter-day science, which of course is a phenomenon that's very
uncharacteristic of the history of mankind. But I don't think that the chief reason why
most people take a dualist view of reality is to do with dreams or the other things that you've
mentioned. I think it's chiefly because we all do have, it seems to me, direct experience of an
internal flow of thoughts and emotions and responses and desires and fantasies and memories
and so on, which is going on all the time that we're awake and which is extremely complex,
not only in the sense that it may be about complicated things, but also in the sense that
there may be several different things going on at once. And I think we're all directly aware of
something like this going on inside ourselves, and this doesn't manifest itself in any way in
observable external behavior. We are aware of these things and I'm not denying their existence,
but I'm construing them or reconstruing them as activities on the part of physical objects,
namely on our part. And the fact that these are not observable on the whole from the outside
doesn't distinguish them from much that the physicist assumes in the way of internal microscopic
or submicroscopic structure of inanimate objects. A great deal goes on that we don't
observe from the outside and that we have to account for conjecturally the
important reason for construing all this activity as activity on the part of bodies
is to preserve the closed character of the system of the physical world.
Does this mean that you deny the real existence of the age-old problem about whether or not we have
free will? It doesn't mean that, but because the will would retain its status even though
becoming ultimately a neural phenomenon and an aspect of the activity of a physical object.
However, I think the problem of the freedom of the will is an outcome of a confusion.
There's no question in my mind about the freedom of the will that the will is free
in the sense that people very often do what they will to do. They are free
to within limits of constraint and within limits of their strength or talent
to do things that they will to do. Freedom of the will does not mean that the will is free
to will as it will. That would be nonsense and it doesn't mean that the will is uncaused. The will
is caused and we all are prepared to recognize that the will is caused when we try to train
children in such a way as to influence their behavior or enact laws to discourage criminals
or we try to get votes. People try to sell things. All these are cases of
causing people to will, but the freedom of their will remains insofar as their activity
is the result of a causal chain, one link of which is the willing and that willing can be
itself caused in this. Given that you hold these views, how do you see the traditional
body-mind problem? Let me just remind our viewers of what that is. I've said earlier that most
people seem to take a dualist view of reality, a view that everything in the universe consists
ultimately of either minds or bodies, that there are both kinds of entity. That has given rise to
a traditional problem which no one has ever come up with a thoroughly satisfactory solution to.
That is the question, how are these incorporeal, abstract, non-material minds able to actually
move and push about the material bodies? It's clear that since you don't believe in the existence of
minds as independently of bodies, the problem does not present itself to you in that form.
Given your views, do you simply bypass the mind-body problem totally?
No. As you say, the body-mind problem doesn't exist in that form for me. There's no longer
that problem of interaction and in fact it's in order to eliminate the problem in that form
that I opt for physicalism. However, the problem then arises.
How are we to talk about all these ordinarily so-called mental events and mental activity,
this flux of experience if we're not recognizing minds, not recognizing mental entities?
It's no good trying to paraphrase all this into neurological terms because it would take too
much in a way of detailed understanding of the mechanism of the nervous system.
Now, there's a, as a first step, a quick, easy solution to that. One may simply keep the
mentalistic terminology, but regard all these terms as terms applicable to bodies
and to the activity of bodies. This is easy. This is too easy in a way because there's another
point about the, in favor of the physicalistic attitude, which I haven't touched on up to now,
namely the advantage of intersubjectivity, objectivity. The data are not introspective data,
the data are shared, can be shared by other observers. It's because of this, in large part,
at least, that the natural sciences have been so successful. Now, and introspective psychology
has not been comparably successful. Well, now, if we simply take over all the conceptual apparatus
of introspective psychology and mentalism, and simply try to excuse it by saying all these
attributes or activities of bodies, we're no longer getting the benefit of the intersubjectivity of
natural science. However, there's a, there's a way of coping with this difficulty, and it is
behaviorism, in the sense of which I think behaviorism is important and valuable. I think
the role of behaviorism is the legitimation of mentalistic terms without having to go through the
indirect and, in fact, impracticable channel of neurology.
Criteria, observable, intersubjectively observable criteria for mental states,
are found in behavior, in observable behavior.
And that would include verbal behavior.
Including verbal behavior, yes. And insofar, as such criteria are available, we do have the
benefits of natural science, after all. And this is without full neurological explanation.
So, the extent to which I'm a behaviorist is, in seeing behaviorism as a way of making objective
sense of mentalistic concepts, I don't identify the mental states with the behavior.
I identify the mental states, rather, with neural states, nor do I regard behavioral
accounts as, in the last analysis, explanatory of the mental states, mental phenomena.
I think that the full explanation of these is to be found, rather, at the neurological level.
In other words, if you're saying that behaviorism is not an explanation of the kind of problems
of which the philosopher deals, but a way of formulating them, I mean, it's a kind of language
in which the problems should be couched or formulated before we then go on to try and
provide solutions. Exactly, yes. I think it would be helpful if we paused a moment at this point,
Professor Quine, and if I try to recapitulate the ground that we've covered before we attempt
any forward moves. I started this discussion by asking you what you regarded as the central
tasks of philosophy, and you not only said what you thought philosophers ought to be doing, you
also said what you thought they ought not to be doing, and you ruled out a number of questions,
but you grouped the questions that you thought philosophers ought to concern themselves with,
under two main heads. The first head being questions about what exists, what does reality
consist of, and the second group being what can we know about this, and how can we know,
and what can we say about it, and so on. Now, from that point onwards, we've been pursuing
the first of those two groups of questions, and you've said that in your view, your view of
reality is physicalist. You think all reality consists in physical entities, that there are not
minds separate from physical entities, and that the notion that there are leads us into all sorts
of conceptual confusions, which you think a behaviorist analysis liberates us from. I'd like
us now to start going over to questions of the second kind, because we were beginning to get
into them already, and that's why I thought it time to stop and reassess where we were.
Can we now move into the second area of how we acquire knowledge of this physical world in
which we find ourselves? Good. One correction I would make, though,
my position is not that there are only physical objects, there are also abstract objects.
But these abstract objects are not mental. It's important to make that distinction,
isn't it? You don't believe in the existence of minds separate from physical things,
but you do believe in the existence of certain abstract entities. Yes, numbers, notably.
But I think you need to explain that a bit. If you are a physicalist, how can you justify your
belief in the existence of abstract entities at all? The status of sets or classes and numbers
and functions, I think, again, not from the point of view of the predicate side of philosophy,
is not basically different from the status of hypothetical entities such as elementary
particles in physics. In both cases, it's a matter of framing hypotheses
of which imply our past observations, of which imply future observations under
specifiable conditions, which would then serve to corroborate or refute these hypotheses.
And these general hypotheses contain reference not only to the ordinary observable objects,
but also to many auxiliary objects, we might say, in the way of unobservable physical particles,
and also in the way of numbers and functions, because these come into the formulations,
into the hypotheses of a quantitative kind. And even classes or sets, the biologist speaks of
genre and species of organisms. And all these entities are furniture of the world,
posited on an equal footing in our system of the world.
Well, you say on an equal footing, but it does seem to me that there is a very important difference
between the sense in which subatomic particles are unobservable and the sense in which they
numbers are unobservable. And subatomic particles are bits of stuff, but it just so happens,
perhaps because of the accident of our optical apparatus, that they're bits of stuff which
are too small for us to see. But if we had microscopic eyes or super microscopic eyes,
perhaps we could see them. And if we had different kinds of fingers, we could pick them up. I mean,
they are bits of material, but numbers aren't bits of material. However small, are they? I mean,
they are, as it were, abstract through and through. There is nothing but abstraction to them.
It's true. There's this discontinuity. But the continuity of ordinary observable objects with the
elementary particles is rather more tenuous than had once been supposed. Because
an elementary particle is too small, for instance, even in principle to be
detected by light, because it's smaller than any wavelength.
Furthermore, the behavior of the elementary particles is basically unlike that of larger
bodies, so much so that it's, I think, only by courtesy that they're called material.
The indeterminacy with respect to whether two segments of the, two segments of paths of an
electron are segments of the path of the same electron or two different ones.
Indeterminacies of position, the antithesis between wave and core puzzle in the interpretation of
light, and other anomalies, something called the Bose-Einstein statistic, all suggest that
the analogy of body is an analogy that was useful for extrapolation up to a point. But then the
reshuffling, the evolution of hypotheses in the light of further experimentation and further
refutations, have finally carried us to the point where the continuity is no longer so evident.
I would like to leave at that particular point there, Professor Klein, because I want to step
back three paces in our discussion and take up something which strikes me as being a very
much more general interest, that we were talking about a moment ago, and then we got slightly
sidetracked, and I think it was partly my fault that we did. I want to go back to the point where
you were saying, or suggesting anyway, that the adoption of a physicalist approach to reality,
or a behaviorist analysis of behaviorist where formulating problems, has the effect of liberating
you from the spell of certain entrenched ways of looking at things, which though they may be part
of common sense, are nevertheless mistaken. Now that's the point I want to take you up at.
Can you say what some of the entrenched ideas are from which you believe your approach would
liberate us? Good. Liberation is one way of looking at it. Stirner discipline is another way of
looking at behaviorism. But at any rate, a major example is the notion of meaning.
There's the common sense notion that words somehow convey meanings. How do we know that
the same words convey the same meaning to two speakers? We can see that the speakers react
in the same way. All this is describable in behavioral terms, but might the meanings themselves
be different? What behavioral sense can be made of the question? No behavioral sense, no adequate
behavioral sense has been made of it. There are other notions that come similarly into question.
Translation. Once the notion of meaning is questioned, the notion of translation becomes
more complex. We can no longer say it's simply a matter of producing another sentence. It has
the same meaning as the sentence that's being translated. The notion of necessity, again,
comes into question. Well, there are two kinds of necessity out there, logical and causal. Yes,
the one commonly understood as necessity by virtue of the meanings of the words.
The sentence is true by virtue of the meanings of the words that it contains.
This characterization goes by the board if the notion of meaning does. Then there's the notion
of physical necessity, necessity by virtue of physical law. This doesn't depend in the same way
on meaning, but by somewhat the same sort of scruples, it also becomes questionable.
It's not clear to me that there's a difference between a general truth in the form of a general
proposition, general statement, which just happens to be true and one that is a law.
The term necessary, the adverb necessarily, is in very common use and suggests that perhaps
people have a distinction in mind between two sorts of truth, the necessary and the accidental
or contingent. But I think the use of the ordinary use of that word can be explained otherwise.
I think it's dependent on situation, on context. One says necessarily, and follows it with a
sentence, when he thinks that the other person is bound to admit it because of what he already
has committed himself to or because he may be presumed to believe. This will vary with the context.
So you're calling into question such very fundamental notions of our thinking as
causal necessity, logical necessity, the idea of a law, the notion of meaning.
The ground is beginning to disappear from under our feet. I think what I would like to do at this
stage, Professor Quine, is ask you to characterize for us as a whole the kind of view of the world
that we're coming out with. Can you? Good. Well, let's proceed again in terms of that dichotomy
between the ontological and the predicational. On the ontological side of what I am accepting,
assuming. The physical objects, the physical object being construed quite generously as
the content of any portion, however scattered and discontinuous of space-time, and all
classes of such things, and all classes of such classes and so on. And mathematicians have
known, discovered over the past century, how all talk of numbers and functions and all other
mathematical entities can be paraphrased into talk of the pure set theory of classes.
Classes, classes of classes, appropriate ones can be made to do the work of numbers and of
functions and the rest. So we need these. On the other hand, these are abstract objects that I
accept. There are others that I would reject, properties. I would reject because there's the
question of, there's the question in what circumstances do two descriptions, two characterizations
determine the same property, and in what circumstances do they determine different
properties which just happen to be properties of all the same things? The problem in short of
individuation, identification of properties. And it's ordinarily said that two clauses,
let's say two phrases, determine the same property if they have the same meaning.
But of course, this characterization goes by the board if we don't accept the notion of meaning.
In the case of classes, this problem of identification does not arise because classes are
identical simply if they have the same members. Properties I'm persuaded are dispensable in
science. It's not clear how to dispense with the classes. So this would be my tentative ontology
and I would regard it as part of science and subject to the fallibility of the rest of science,
namely the individuals and the hierarchy of classes and classes of classes and so on built
upon them. The individuals being physical objects. On the predicate side,
my view is I think mainly rather negative. It's one of
rejecting predicates that have too little in the way of
behavioral or let's say observable criteria for their application or failing that.
I think one must also accept theoretical predicates which don't admit of observational
criteria. But there one must insist on there being pretty firmly related to predicates of
the observational kind through laws, hypotheses, general physical theory, which makes for
a well knit system of the world which expedites prediction. So that I would insist not that
predicates have necessary and sufficient conditions in observation but that they have
a good share in the way of observable criteria symptoms of application or that they
play a quite a promising role in the theoretical hypotheses.
One thing that pleases me very much about the discussion that we've had is that none of it
so far has been specifically about language or about words and I say that because a lot of
intelligent laymen who begin to take an interest in philosophy are sometimes put off by what they
take to be the discovery that modern philosophers are doing nothing but talking about words,
talking about terms, analyzing sentences, statements and so on. And you haven't talked in
that way at all and it's quite clear that the problems with which you are concerned are not
problems about language. Nevertheless, someone opening your books or a student coming to study
with you at Harvard for the first time would find that a great deal of your technique of approach
to these problems is via the analysis of concepts and therefore careful attention to words, the
elucidation of sentences and statements and so on. Why is it that you and other contemporary
philosophers adopt this linguistic approach to what are after all essentially non-linguistic
problems? One reason is a strategy that I call Semantic Ascent, A-S-C-E-N-T.
Philosophical issues are often concerned with very fundamental traits of one's conceptual scheme
and if two philosophers disagree on such points, it's difficult for them to discuss their
disagreement without each of them begging the question because it's hard to reason and argue
without making use of the fundamental principles of one's own conceptual scheme.
And a way of avoiding or minimizing this difficulty is the device of
moving up one step semantically and talking about words instead of using the words to talk about
the things. And if one makes this move, then one can talk about the rival systems as systems of
sentences. One can compare them in point of simplicity and in point of inclusiveness and
make a judgment on a shared basis without the circularity, the question begging.
We're coming to the end of our discussion now, Professor crime, but I would like just before we
do literally end, I'd like to ask you if you can say anything at all perhaps in the light of the
discussion we've had up to this point about what you are currently working on. I have to ask you
to be briefer than I would like because we have so little time left, but I would like you before
we end to say something about what you're doing original work on now. Well, at present I've been
writing short things in an effort to elucidate some of the points already in my
other writings or to extend and improve them. But there are several
problems on which I would like to see someone make breakthroughs.
One of them is connected with language, namely the development of some conceptual scheme to take
the place of the untenable old-fashioned theory of meaning, something new and something more
acceptable in the way of theory of what goes into good translation, for instance.
This is a job perhaps for linguists, but it's something with a philosophical interest and
it's a job also where someone with a philosophical curiosity is apt to be helpful to the linguists.
A second one is related rather to psychology. I should like to see a system of concepts developed
which would do the work of the old mentalistic idioms of propositional attitude, x believes that
p, x regrets that p, x hopes that p, the sort of thing. These idioms are subject to some subtle
logical difficulties and complications and they're very wanting, in large part of their
applications, wanting in adequate behavioral criteria. I should like to see, not for general
discourse, but for scientific purposes, some apparatus which would serve the same purposes
as these and be free of those faults. The third is related rather to mathematics.
The somewhat begrudgingly one I accept, I accept the apparatus of abstract objects, sets and the
rest, as I'll accelerate to science because it seems to be needed. But I should like to see a
minimum basis, an economical basis, and a very clear, clearly intelligible basis
for set theory, which was adequate, just barely adequate, to so much mathematics as is needed
in natural science. And it might be that if this were developed, it would among other things give
us a more intuitive understanding of the so-called paradoxes, the antinomies of set theory and their
solution, such things as Russell's paradox, which are familiar to some of our viewers,
I'm sure, and not to all, so that might be a good place to stop.
Well, we will have to stop. Thank you very much, Professor Kwan.
