When I was doing all these focus groups last year one of the interesting things that came up all the time was people saying like
Democrats or swing voters not Maga people would say
Yeah, you know what? We do need a wall. We need a wall around California
Stop basic shit escaping and washing over the rest of the country
They see the same videos right if like the homeless people like walking zombies with machetes in their hands and they
Want that we don't want this everywhere. Yeah, this is happening. Yeah, too
So it can happen again that that's the opportunity it can happen
But the thing is that people people either stay and they put down roots and they get woke or they make a pile of money
And they leave that's it like no one actually invests in San Francisco. That's the problem
In one sense like you can't really get
PR or a story stronger than what Hamas did and to me the actual interesting thing there is right
That's like pretty much bad as it gets right
It's like sort of filming the torture to chambers of the NKVD and the Gestapo in Eastern Europe
But within like 10 days, it's basically
The NPCs in the media just go back to the script basically only not the most ripped for you know, like a few new cycles
Like maybe 10 days
It's funny right before this Dominic I tweeted I'm about to talk to Dominic Cummings
What should I ask and someone actually chime in some bigger questions?
So I was just reading those before so I've got some some great follow-ups that I think we want your input on
But yeah, on the right wing left wing thing
I am a bit of a Fukuyama fanboy
and I think
He's he's vast not that I think you are to be clear, but I think he's vastly misunderstood people
Don't read through the 40 chapters of reinterpreted Hegel
They barely even repest the title it and his and of course the best chapter in that book is actually the last chapter
in which he actually he predicts a lot of the sort of
you know
Philosophical on we and melez that we currently see in the West right and he actually predicted in some sense the rise of
Wokeness or sort of perverted liberalism that would turn out turning on itself
You know Fukuyama's point just
Sort of
He goes
That last chapter which I agree with you. I think it's the book
He goes into some detail in in to Nietzsche's critique of modern liberal
and
And that is forgotten. You're right in the way that people talk about that book
They always get the last chapter. Yeah, and just to summarize there
I've done a whole piece on it defending. I'm actually in my in my sub stack
You know when he said the end of history
He didn't mean obviously that that things would stop happening in the world
What he meant is that the the arc of political evolution
However far back you want to draw it from hunter-gatherer tribes to the agricultural revolution
You know middle-aged the theocratic dynasties the imperial age nation whatever whatever that arc is
It kind of ends with liberal capitalism, right?
Because the original Marxist idea Marx originally predicted that communism to come after liberal capitalism had yeah
had triumphed in a way to come up and divide the spoils and deal with the inevitable inequality they had dealt with but the
Fukuyama in charge is like no no no, that's a we're not we're probably not going to regress to a darker age
Although we might but we're definitely not advancing into some sort of socialist utopia
Like this is as good as it gets liberal capitalism
end of story that and and the Nietzschean angle like he he quotes thus bake our a sister a lot in which again to summarize very
Quickly what is a complex work?
There are supposed to be these men with hollow chests who live at the end who have given up the passions
And the mad joys of tribalism war, you know pestilence wars of ethno-nationalic
I you know ethno-nationalist identity which is funny to say in the context of Israel, which I want to get to as well
But in some sense in that book
I think he actually explicitly says the European Union would be the final retirement home of the last man like that the European project in
some sense was the home of the last man and
In some sense with the far right you're seeing it's unwinding potentially exactly also with you know with with the growth of Putin and
You know the way the EU
In lots of ways, I think that's exactly right and Brussels has tried to live out that role in many ways right over the last 10 years. I mean
15 years ago when I would say to people I
Used to live in Russia. I met people like Putin
He is not what you think this whole idea that like he's some kind of like quite moderate reformer and a technocrat and
Russia's going to join the EU in you know in a few decades time. This is all completely insane and
You're all gonna get a terrible shock by this and it was an incredibly at that time
It was a very serious like a very extreme view
Even two or three years ago. No Britain and Europe were basically pretty happy with the state of squo in which London is the laundry for the Russian mafia
Energy keeps flowing to to Germany very cheaply
And we just kind of like draw fail over a lot of the KGB oligarch behavior
People didn't want to face it
So when Trump came over and pointed out some of these things it became a meme with everyone in the EU literally laughing at Trump
About the about the Nord Stream pipeline and warning, right? I mean, of course like now nobody gives Trump any credit for being for being
Be correct about it
But that sort of shows the extent to which I think the Brussels just didn't want to face these kind of issues and still doesn't
Okay, I've got a random question. It's a slight detour Eric
But maybe you'll let me go crazy with the agenda one conversation speaking of the house of the last man
By the way, I love the house of the last bed like the post history is actually pretty cozy
I was in Lisbon recently and I was in Paris recently. My daughter is actually moving to France. She's a Franco
She's a she speaks French. She went to the DC here
I'd be I'd love my child to grow up in Paris, right?
And I think, you know, one of the base that we have in the group is you know
It's kind of around the spread of wokeness that you know
This whole this whole business of things going squishy a total dedication to equality a fallen standards
Like a lot of things are just kind of going soft
What I found interesting for example, and again, I'm actually driving at a point here in the case for example
The Paris rights that happened this this summer that in its contours kind of felt a little bit like the BLM phenomenon in the United States
Which as you know kind of in the in the COVID tizzy became like a whole thing a whole moral panic that kind of sees the West
You saw it explode in the UK
I think the the Anglo-Saxon English speaking world is definitely kind of a thing and I think the UK
Here is the echoes very loudly of the American political zeitgeist
I think those echoes are heard much less loudly on the continent and you saw what happened in Paris that the legendaries would
Showed up and the riot police and they crushed it and that was the end of it
Did not extend from there and I told the group look this Anglo-Protestant software does not run on Latin Catholic hardware
It's just not gonna wokeness is not gonna spread to the continent in the way that you're expecting
Like I is that true or am I am I misreading food?
I
Mean I think you've definitely got something of a point like there's definitely a kind of common Anglo-American
Several problems
Partly connected with the fact that our that's that's our universities and our media are much more similar right the media and
Oxford and Harvard
BBC in New York Times
There's just much much more crossover than there is between either Britain and France or America and France
So I think extent it's definitely true on the other hand of course
There's many many layers of irony the whole thing, but
it
To a very large extent the kind of crazy
Philosophical origins of the whole I don't even like using the word woke because I think it's a mistake, but that's phenomenon
It is itself a product of continental philosophy right transported over to America
Christie's post-war and growing particularly in the 60s and then infiltrating humanities departments and social science departments and
Everything else though. Obviously like the the Allen Bloomsburg closing American mind is
It's partly a kind of trace of the if this intellectual current so
In that sense, I think that probably like the long-term trajectory
I think still similar in Europe and you can see it in Brussels
You know, it's still following. We're all basically downstream of the madness of San Francisco like it's different
But you're everywhere in Europe is downstream of
San Francisco's and sciencey. It's just a question. Is is that so true because I I think you're right
But the joke has always been in the United States that San Francisco is five years ahead of the US
And then whatever that madness is is roughly five years ahead of Europe
I think the time scales have actually compressed. It's more like a year
But you still think it's downstream of of the city. I'm speaking to you from
Exactly. Yeah
What do you know that the time to go is this
This kind of insane Petri dish of experimentation
The the Berkeley itself was like, you know, the kind of radical center of a lot of the so 67 68
Craziness, right? And and that kind of that impetus never died away. It's kept pushing
and
these things just have a have an incredible tendency to
Wash East know if you'd said
If you'd started to watch some of the just let's take for example some of the crazy shit on trans right
Now if you'd said a few years ago, okay, there's like a full-stack system in
Northern California
whereby kids are
Brainwashed into this crazy shit and then there's actually like you can go to Stanford Medical Center and they'll and they'll start
Giving you surgery and start talking about taking out ovaries from 12 year olds
And that's in Europe that I said that this is completely insane like that couldn't possibly happen
It actually sounds like child abuse
Ten years later here we all are right with this dealing with the same shit
So speaking of San Francisco one topic I wanted to get to we can't I guess we can just jump to it if we're following this
This you know bizarre sort of this this tour. So
We were talking recently Dominic or I know some of the people
So there's like an SF reform movement going on right there's some people
I think that we all know that who by the way are very well respected in tech more broadly like people like Gary Tan
Who has made quite a name?
He runs Y Combinator which speaking of influential organizations hugely
I went through it myself hugely influential organization people like David Sacks who was early on a PayPal a bunch of companies huge investor are
Putting real money and time into trying to change the politics of San Francisco
I think this is exactly what you just said
Which is the way I've dealt with it having lived here off and on for almost two decades is like it's not really a city
Don't expect saying city behavior. It is a Petri dish in which we will say oh psychedelic drugs game on or rule of law
Who needs it defund the police? Oh, let's see what happens or you know autonomous vehicles, you know, what's gonna happen, right?
Yeah, that said some people do care about seriously, which I support by the way
And they definitely want to reform it and change it and we were kind of studying the reasons as to why
We think it was broken. I I'll just toss that theory out there
You're filled free to disagree on and riff in another direction
But I think part of the problem with San Francisco is twofold
One there's endemic corruption going back decade. I mean going back to the gold rush days
It's always been just a pit of corruption at the city level and it's no different now
It's just masquerading under progressive politics in my opinion. There's a whole homeless industrial SF has the second highest municipal budget in the United States
I think over 11 billion dollars at this point. It's only a city of roughly seven to eight hundred thousand people
It's not a very big city. It has the second biggest municipal budget in the United States after New York
Where does that money go? You look you walk around it doesn't seem as if this is a well-funded city
It looks like a dystopia frankly
It's funny
I retweeted a photo recently someone posted of an autonomous vehicle in front of a homeless guy stealing electricity charges laptop
And that's exactly literally what I've described it as autonomous vehicles navigating around homeless people people think it's a joke
But that's literally what it is when you walk outside
so it's a combination of corruption and I think the other thing is and and to you know
Give a little shade to the tech people tech people fundamentally don't deeply care about politics
I think you have opinions on this
I think they just you know you go to a museum here and whoever funds it funds it
But like there's not a Google hospital or like a Facebook
I mean Zuck gives a fair amount of money you go to New York and even the biggest wall speed asshole has endowed like a wing of
You know Cornell Medical Center or whatever the latest exhibit is at the Met in San Francisco
That's less so people to it's a gold rush town people the miners come in either make a fortune and stick around or move to Marin
Or they leave and that's it. No, no one's kind of from here and no one really invests in a deep way
Although to be clear that's changing people like Gary. I think we're changing that
Any that's just all framing. What do you think it would take to fix San Francisco?
And we come can we maybe convince you to try to help fix it by coming to San Francisco?
I mean
What you say makes sense to me, but I
Guess like the obvious question is like the people who accept obviously is crime gets worse crime is obviously
often a very big issue in politics, right and
logic
San Francisco earlier this year like I turned the wrong corner
I went down a street and then suddenly felt like I've walked into like some kind of a poor leg
And literally had to run back down out the street
Really like 90 seconds for a way. There's like people coming around as if it's like perfectly normal. It's just
Hey, I then went and spoke to some people that night. I had dinner in Palo Alto and they're like
Fucking like you're in San Francisco. Like I haven't been there in like for you for you
I think I know I live in I live in London. I think I visit San Francisco more often than a lot of people in
Which maybe says something about
As you say about the disconnection between the tech world and the city but of the people who were left
Well
What so here's a question why why?
hasn't
Independence obviously Republicans have completely do but why haven't independence
Campaigning on crime and corruption being able to make any progress when it's when it's like when it's a global punchline
For like videos of apocalyptic dystopia
Hey, we'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors
Real quick. What's the easiest choice you can make taking the window instead of the middle seat?
Outsourcing business tasks that you absolutely hate. What about selling with Shopify?
Shopify is the global commerce platform that helps you sell at every stage of your business
Shopify powers 10% of all e-commerce in the US and Shopify is the global force behind all birds
Rothy's and Brooklyn and millions of other entrepreneurs of every size across
175 countries
Whether you're selling security systems or marketing memory modules
Shopify helps you sell everywhere from their all-in-one e-commerce platform to their in-person POS system
Wherever and whatever you're selling Shopify's got you covered
I've used it in the past at the companies. I've founded and when we launch merch here at Turpentine
Shopify will be our go-to
Shopify helps turn browsers into buyers with the internet's best converting checkout up to 36% better compared to other leading commerce platforms
And Shopify helps you sell more with less effort thanks to Shopify magic your AI powered all-star
With Shopify magic whip up captivating content that converts from blog posts to product descriptions
Generate instant FAQ answers pick the perfect email send time plus Shopify magic is free for every Shopify seller
Businesses that grow grow with Shopify
Sign up for a $1 per month trial period at Shopify comm slash moment of Zen
Go to Shopify comm slash moment of Zen now to grow your business no matter what stage you're in Shopify comm slash moment of Zen
I
Think it's so the first time I ever got dog piled on Twitter was I don't know how many years ago
It was I guess in 2015 or 16 when they passed this thing called prop C
That was a tax on gross revenues, which is nuts particularly for tech businesses
To basically give more money to the homeless industrial complex even though it wasn't working
And I think I calculated how much money you would raise
Divided it by the number of homeless people and realized that it was as much money for homeless people as like the base salary as a Google engineer
They were literally put it falling that much money
And I'm like how is this possible?
I got totally dog piled and ripped apart now if you go and
Criticize the homeless industrial complex or even call it that you don't get dog piled
And in fact, there's a whole set of people who are there with you saying yeah
We need to fix this and so I think the the vibe has definitely changed. There's been something like the recall of
Chesa Boudin who was literally the son of communist cop killers
It sounds like I'm making it up
But that actually who works for Chavez in Venezuela like it sounds like a like a punchline
But it's actually his biography and he got elected district a turret like the prop the equivalent of like the prosecutor, right?
And then it was like so outrageous he finally got kicked out
So I think some of that is happening and that was a crime issue. That was literally there is no law in order to get rid of this guy
So yeah, that that is I think that is happening to a certain degree. I guess though that so what one thing that
Possibly behind it. I don't know you tell me is that I found
So when I wrote this thing in 2021 saying
Like we're heading towards Biden Trump to like everyone thinks the Trump's finished and it's not going to come back
But actually we're heading towards Biden Trump to and let's Silicon Valley people decide to intervene and build alternatives
I spent some time talking to people there and the and the basic a problem that I had was people said
We largely agree with what you're saying and we largely agree that if it just ends up doing it as Trump Biden to that's obviously terrible, but
Precisely because politics has got so insane in the ways that you described
It's exactly why it's totally impossible for me and my friends and other people here who've got anything to actually get involved with it
Because it would just be instantly completely destructive and I'd
My family and my friends and my investors and my staff would all think I'd literally lost my fucking mind
If I suddenly said we're gonna build an alternative to Biden, you know, we've got to do something different
So it does seem to be this kind of catch-away to and it's similar catch-away to in Britain. I think that
As political as the kind as establishment politics becomes more insane and
The kind of communist mind virus expands and expands into the mainstream media as well
And they attack and trying to destroy the lives and careers of anyone who gets involved with politics
It doesn't share the kind of approach
Then it then there is this paradox where
Able people entrepreneurs builders people who could do it much better
Want to more and more and the probably more inclined to get involved with politics in one sense
And they were 10 15 years ago whether like politics is we know, whatever
Vote Obama and get on with building my my trillion dollar company
The the more inclined to get involved in one sense, but in another sense the madness is like it is system
Is a great room greater barrier?
As I know
I think that makes sense
I think yeah, I think the problem with techies is that not that they can't be political or be operators because they can they end up having
These large organizations, but I think a couple things one
The whole techie vibe just gives a lot of mainstream normie voters the ick to use zoomeries, which is like
It's just a different sort of vibe what it takes to make
I mean look at Mark Zuckerberg who I worked for I was at at Facebook 10 years ago on early members
I actually think very highly of them and I said as much in my memoir, but you know like you know that guy couldn't sell free
beer, I mean, it's just
It's just one of those things. I mean maybe now
Maybe but he also pissed off a lot of people like we raised the question
I could either run for mayor of San Francisco and win and I'm not I'm not sure he could actually even among techies
He may not be able to he actually might have a better chance and like Reno, Nevada
But you know, which is definitely more red than San Francisco than he wanted San Francisco
Yeah, I mean, I think he was a great example of this public right because he got someone who
Was actually a hero to lots of people on the left even just three to five years ago
He was very
Explicitly and openly saying I would change this a bit to you. That's why I'm going to do electric cars
And this is why we're going to do space exploration and etc etc etc and
But even someone with the
success that he had and
the kind of backstory of actually being on the side of the
Progressive supposes like one of the top three biggest causes
As soon as you basically put a couple of feet out of line with the establishment view
They just immediately said oh, you're a Nazi and we've got to start, you know
Having the DOJ investigate you and maybe we should take all your shit
And that's no, I mean I've had to me don't you know, like if if if Elon can go from being like
Global love figure to global hate figure in like 18 months then imagine what they could do to me, right?
And you're seeing it now as a as a side thing. I mean, you know relevant
Elon just went to Israel and inside of Twitter. I Jewish Twitter. It's a whole kerfuffle because a lot of sort of mainstream
bien penson liberal American Jews dislike Elon one for like
Applying snarkily to some vaguely anti-semitic tweet, maybe and also just maintaining a Twitter platform in which I mean to be blunt
There are kind of open anti-Semites on Twitter now
And they haven't been banned, right?
But he's definitely not he's obviously not telling the party line when it comes to content moderation on Twitter
But this is a guy who by the way went some of the places
I went to actually and reported from for tablet magazine like the actual keep it seem right in the Gaza border
He was seen wearing body armor in one of them because it actually is dangerous down like I was down there
It's a war zone. So the guy actually went there I spray set up met with hostages
Accepted a gift that I'm not taking off till you get your hostages back basically said. Yeah, Hamas has to be destroyed
This is this is unacceptable and he's still he's still being pillared as an anti-Semite because of his like content moderation policies on
Twitter, which are definitely not the sort of the sort of policies that the left would want. It's just it
Yeah, you just shaking my head
SMH
Yeah, I don't really think it's to do with content moderation though
I think it's I think it's a I think it's a much broader thing. He just he signaled that he is not with
the main
All right, and the way that the Ukraine war kind of
Coordinated in a very in a pretty unusual way
like establishment position
establishment politicians and media in
Washington and London and across Europe very quickly and
Anyone who stood out against that
I have I have the same thing here like
I've been like I've been like the one one in a thousand or one in ten thousand anti-putin for 20 years
Regarded as madly extreme in my anti-putin this right
Literally the whole thing just flipped because I said I think this war is a fuck up. I don't think there's an actual strategy
It's gonna end in tears. We're gonna get bored and then have to finish it for the news
Well, you're obviously a paid Putin shell your
Fascist Apologies, you're an evil perk the whole thing. So I think
He did he bought Twitter he said I'm pro free speech and he didn't tell the didn't tell the line on on Ukraine
All in short order and that was enough seemed to me
Hey, we'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors
Compliance doesn't have to be complicated
In fact with Vanta, it can be super simple
Trusted by over five thousand fast-growing companies like chili Piper patch
gusto and juniper
Vanta automates the pricey time-consuming process of prepping for sock to
ISO
2700 and one
HIPAA and more with Vanta. You can save up to 400 hours and 85 percent of costs
Vanta scales with your business helping you successfully enter new markets land bigger deals and earn customer loyalty and
Bonus our moment of Zen listeners get $1,000 off Vanta. Just go to Vanta.com
slash Zen
That's V a in ta.com
slash Z E N
I
Wasn't so Torrenberg here is actually the son of Israeli Jew and I converted actually just so you know the company you're keeping her down
I
I went to Israel recently and you know, obviously, I'm pretty public about being kind of pro-Israel and what they're doing in the war
one thing that people have commented on and I
I tend to agree with it
Israeli PR is like terrible like they're just not cracking the nut when it comes to the West I have theories as to why but before I
Contaminate the the vibe. I'm curious if you agree with that
What is your take on Israel? What is your take on their PR strategy? Can they even win the PR war?
well, I think so a
Few things right
Ironically like the whole kind of you know Russia was involved with Trump in 2016 story was obviously complete bullshit
right, but
There was a major KGB operation from the 1960s to try and shape Western perception about
Israel in a negative way
that was highly successful and
Ended up influencing all kinds of publications in the West including publications read by people like Jeremy Corbyr, right?
The guy who took over the lay of party here who's like crazy
extreme anti
anti-Israel so you have like almost became and almost became PM to be clear
Yeah, it's within like 12,000 vote 12,000 votes distributed in different seats and and he would have been Prime Minister in 2017
Yeah, exactly um
So there's those like very long-term currents which have programmed the intelligentsia here for
For decades in ways which I think are almost like not one in 10,000 people know the history of this and quite understand
What what like how this actually worked?
You also though have
It's clear talking to people there that the you know Netanyahu does not have a grip of the whole Prime Minister's office
It's chaotic Prime Minister's office does not coordinate well with Mossad and other parts of the deep state in Israel
So like there is no concerted problem messaging
Either
So I think in a kind of tactical operational sense that's in that's important
But also though, I think there's like a psychological problem, which is that they keep they think that
They think
They make what I think is like a common problem, which is they think it's basically about facts
they think oh these we watch this terrible news from the BBC or whatever and
These people don't know the truth and if we explain the actual facts about Hamas and explain blah blah blah
Then it'll suddenly change somehow
And so they keep trying to hammer it with certain PR strategies of the Western media
But I think it's just fundamentally
flawed
because I don't think it's about facts like the
Sad truth is that BBC like all the broadcasters
They have a long-term moral simple moral story about why Israel are
Is an apartheid state and their occupiers
And everything all information filters into this simple story and then filters out
Right, and then and that's it. It doesn't it doesn't require it doesn't work on the basis of facts
It doesn't work on the basis of reason doesn't work on the basis of logic
So I think any PR strategy which tries to combat it with facts and reason and logic is just is doomed
but it's like
It's a bit like in a way like in a small in a small scale obviously
But just in terms of what you were saying before about about Zuckerberg
When the first crazy
Carol card one of the stories came out in 2016 about
Russia and Facebook and Cambridge Analytica and all of that
Facebook sort of thought well, this is all such obvious bullshit and like it doesn't reflect how digital advertising actually works
We'll explain some facts and then everyone will realize what the truth is
They didn't understand that they were actually caught up in them in a in a moral story, right?
But the whole point was evil tech companies have helped the evil fascists
So just explaining to you at times guys like your coverage doesn't actually understand what how digital marketing works
And if we you know, we'll explain to you how digital marketing works and then you know, there's terrible coverage
We'll go away who's that work in Facebook like clearly operating like this for like three years
And then in the end they why don't we just keep getting fucked it like what's going on here?
But that's why right because they're trying to deal with logic in facts about something that's sort about logic in facts
Yeah, and I found that same trap. So my book came out in 2016, which is a memoir, which you know was a very kind of
Inside truthy. What's that? I read it great. Oh, great. Oh, thank you. Great. Thanks. Yeah
And I yeah, I actually met that Carol Calder were a figure once at some festival and yeah
Yeah, and it's worth noting that in her career career before being a journalist
I'm using air quotes for those listening to a podcast. She was a novelist
Which I think is probably where her talent should have remained because given
Literally everything she wrote about Facebook was completely fictional, but I also felt. Oh, yeah
No, no, no, I'm gonna explain how digital marketing works as I've been on the inside
It got nowhere it meant it meant nothing
Everyone still thinks that the Russian influence campaign or that this came to analytical thing was real and yeah, you're right
I mean it was just hopeless at the end
But but getting back to Israel like I mean
Once like kind of argument is that like the videos that first came out of like the barbaric attacks did have some impact
Like there was a window of like one week of grace period in which world-dependent seemed to be kind of pro-Israel as you saw
Literally the most barbaric and heinous atrocities being committed like literally live streamed by the people actually committing it
And I think, you know, I saw the famous 46 minute video
That's even like more gory of what Hamas did as did Douglas Murray and other journalists and they've reacted very strongly to it
I included it in my piece and tablet about what's going on there. So
to some degree I think and I think truth does help but
Getting back to like you're right. It doesn't fit into the narrative like this poster business
Which has driven me crazy right this business of ripping down. I've put kidnapped posters
Just on that point because I think that's an important thing right
In one sense like you can't really get
PR or a story stronger than what Hamas did
And to me the actual interesting thing there is right, that's like pretty much bad as it gets right
It's like sort of filming the torture to chambers of the NKVD and the Gestapo in Eastern Europe
But within like 10 days, it's basically
The NPCs in the media just go back to the script
So even
Mentally
Appalling as that and as powerful as that basically only knocks them off script for you know
Like a few new cycles like maybe 10 days and then they're back to oh Israel's destroyed a hospital in Gaza. I
Know right. It's crazy. It's like imagine the Nazis had like live streamed Auschwitz and then like two weeks later people were like
Wow, I don't know were they really shoved in ovens did this expert of
Exactly, I don't know that they know the dead German civilian count is higher than the British one
I think we should have a ceasefire. That's clearly what we should do now
That was clear the tenor of the conversation in 1943 at 10 downing
Yeah, no, I agree with you. Um, yeah, and that I mean now
To me like like the people in Israel doing the communications
Understand this way. I feel so sorry for them because watching them it looked like it looks increasingly like that
Like doesn't the world sort of knows what Hamas did right, but it seems like we can't get traction with this
so like
repeating it or and
They seem to be like increasingly lost
As there's there's some realized like global opinion and the global media is away from the story
But they don't have like a follow-up plan. No, I think so, you know, I've got lots of Israeli friends
I've Israeli business partners. I was there for a while
Who knows I may move there one these days
I think the problem with Israel and I said this in my piece is like the Israelis
Israel is a fascinating country with the fascinating people. They don't realize how weird they are, right?
Like they're obviously very assimilated to like global American Anglo whatever Western business culture
They've obviously been very very successful as an economy GDP per capita
matching Germany in the UK's which is
More than 10x higher than any neighboring country. It's like they're very good at playing the Western game
But the internal Israeli nation narrative is completely unlike the West right now to the point that like
One of the questions I got from a friend of mine is like
How is it that the Western left is lining up with a theocratic death cult instead of like the Israeli left?
Which is actually super commie by the way, and it's funny like all these kibbutz that were attacked by Hamas
Like European press was calling them settlements. It's like do you have any idea what you're talking about?
This is literally the lefty tree hugging peaceniks who live in literal communism
Where they literally split up the income and live in the only functioning communism one confined in the West
That's who got attacked. That's who you're calling settlers and and and painting as the right, but that's the thing
I think the Israelis
How are they gonna sell the story they're a religious ethno-state like
That's square with a Western narrative in which oh, no, it's borderless. It's universalist anybody can be Norwegian
right like this business of the
You know the Irish the Algerian or whatever it was immigrant who like stabbed the kid in Ireland that they kept on saying
No, no, no, it's it's an Irish man. It's like no it isn't and the fact he isn't it's some of the material to the story
But you can't accept the fact that in fact not everybody can become an Irish man or whatever
And that's that's the collision like I'm not sure that Israel can be sold and at some point like my advice to them would like win
The war and just it doesn't matter what the West
But I mean you can see the kind of madness of the West right
The the most the most perfect example of it
The way that the most insane trans-right activist propaganda people have kind of joined forces
The first people who are all getting thrown off the roof
stat
of
mobilizing most aggressively on behalf of
Hamas and Hezbollah
I understand the madness of Western. I mean to the first Israelis. It is pretty tough to understand that right
I mean, it's like, you know, joke is it's like chickens organizing for KFC. It's like I
Do you understand what the nature of the thing you're talking about is? Yeah
So maybe switching topics slightly to one of the questions and one of the things came up in our group
So, you know Dominic you, you know, I pretty clearly in Britain where things are pretty classic
So at least as far as I understand, I actually don't know the UK deeply well
I've lived in Spain and France, but I don't know the UK well
but but you have hovered in elite circles and
I've kind of dabble. I mean in tech, right?
Well, this is the real core of the question. What is an elite? What is the new elitism that's coming?
There's a lot of people that I think we all know who are from those elite circles are very financially
Capable and endowed and privileged and all that and they're not gonna send their kids to university, right?
Like they're just not gonna go the Harvard Cambridge route or whatever that is
And but they don't they don't have an alternative like they don't know what what's the other thing
So is there a new elite coming does there need to be a new elite like what?
What's your read on all that? I mean you have kids I assume. So this is like a real question for you
I
Mean a lot a lot of different questions bound up in that. I do think that
Was the one thing is you alluded to I
Think it's very interesting about this question like are we gonna send our
Like I've got a seven year old a seven year old kid
You know ten years ago
I would probably not really have even reflected on it much
But just would have assumed that obviously like I wanted to do certain kind of school and then
Ideally get into one of the top
universities in the Western world and I wouldn't have probably reflected on it much. Whereas now I
think
The opposite I think maybe in maybe in like 10 12 years
Like if he really wants to do maths and he's really good at maths
Then maybe he should still go to Cambridge or Harford if he can get into one of those two places, but barring that
It seems to me
Less likely with every day
That that's something that I would want him to go and spend his time in quite the opposite
So I do think that's a big issue
I
Hope that some of the rich people do what their
Forefathers it
And actually go out and start new things. I also hope
It also strikes me that maybe there's an opportunity
To kind of jailbreak the maths and physics departments because a lot of the credibility of these universities
Why doesn't any more come from the history of the English department or whatnot?
Which is all just taken over by
By insane forces the credibility that they have left really comes from doing hard sciences
So maybe
You know one one thing I've been talking to some people about is the idea of could you say
Right, we're going to set up something
An offer faculty from maths physics, maybe computer science and say you only have to move like half a mile away
For work you don't have to move your family
But you can shift to a new institute which we're going to run
It's gonna be running the following ways
There's gonna be actual academic freedom all of the crazy communist shit is going to be completely forbidden
None of it's going to exist
and
Here's the kind of principles on which it will operate you'll get more money you'll get more freedom
You'll be able to move much faster. You know if you're a professor of physics now at Oxford
The amount that you can actually do
In any kind of time frame is like almost zero because the bureaucracy is so completely insane
So I think there are there are possibilities like that maybe for for creating different
For creating different institutions. It doesn't strike me as likely that in like 30 years time
The smartest kids are all going to be keeping going to these universities
And they're going to be
You know as mad as they are now politically
So something's going to something's going to change there. Are they going to break up and fracture?
Or people are going to create new things and pull away high status people
And a little change like that
And obviously
Yeah, so on the on the university front. I think that's but
Politically though the fundamental question is I think goes back to what we were talking about before
We've you know, we've we've seen in the western world this very big shift in elite talent
Where
You know 50 years ago or 70 years ago a huge number of the most able
Smartest people that could actually build things the general groves characters
Of people who built bletchley in britain, right?
These people have
Very largely stopped going into public service
So if you go to the the caliber of top civil servants now in in britain
And in washington is drastically lower
And more and more of the of the most able people are in some combination of maths money
pc
hedge funds
startup world
et cetera et cetera now
That obviously has all kinds of advantages from an economic perspective
But I think it's also disastrous from a government perspective
And some of these people are going to need to have to get
Again, I'm going to move back into politics. I think if it's going to change. We can't just have
all of our great builders
Operating as entrepreneurs in private companies whilst
you know the cia and the nsa and
white haired institutions
Just keep decaying and are less and less able to cope with with problems
But then the
Right, but then the question becomes do you sort of revitalize existing institutions or do you create new ones?
At the end of the day, I mean, I'm
Really in the camp. I mean having having done both in government
I very strongly think that um
The startup model is the way that
To go in government like if you're going to try if if your goal is
if you so if you're the new president you take over january 2025
and by
2030 20 20 20 35 you want a drastically reformed american military
Do you a
Try to do some kind of conventional reform project in the pentagon or b set up new institutions
That will just tunnel
around the bureaucracy
Empowered in different ways legally set up in different ways with completely different freedoms over hr
Over freedom of information over procurement over, you know, all of the bullshit
Which makes it just impossible to do any and it's obvious that you do be right. You don't say to the u.s. Air Force
Um, I mean, I've I'll give you like a classic example that I've actually had experience within government
What do you do with future planes? Well, of course the existing raf in britain doesn't want to do drones
Because the whole institutional structure and the whole way you get promoted is by being in charge of pilots
so
He fights against all
Against actually shifting to modern technology. So instead of trying to convince this old bureaucracy
To do the new thing you just set up as you set up the drone force, right?
You don't try and make the old thing do the new thing
You set up the new thing and you just shift money and power towards the new thing
um
You know, it is possible to reform things
And I've reformed some things. I spent a lot of time in the department of education changing things, but it's incredibly hard
It's incredibly slow
um
The forces against you are so massive and you've got to kind of get everything aligned
Just right. It's it's just much simpler to to to do startups in government that it is to to um
I'll give you a practical example of that as well
So we set up a new data science and ai team in number 10
Because it was new
It was actually much easier to create it seemed much less threatening
um
It didn't seem like it like this terrible challenge to existing power structures the way that telling a lot of existing things
That had to change would have been
Uh, of course now it's actually successful and it's doing all sorts of things
Of course part of the system are desperately trying to close it and destroy it because it shows everyone up
But it's super ours for the old parts of the system
But it certainly was much easier to get
that it was
You know persuade thousands of people to change
What if you're trying to become president?
In the first place you talk about, you know, if you do become president
But if you're trying to win in the first place, do you try to take over the left?
Do the democratic party? Do you try to take over the republican party? Do you start a new party?
How would you how would you think about that? I know you're interested in america 2024
Um
Talk talk about that
I mean, I think practically speaking now in the states like the
I think the the die is cast on the republican side, right? Like trump is going to win the nomination now
This seems like a lot of donors are going to throw a lot of money down the toilet trying to back. Um, hailey. I think, um
She cut there's no campaign that she can run that can win like possibly trunk can blow himself up. Um, but uh
She she got
Time to do that as I said in 2021 was then um, and and and they've left all that too late. Um
I do think it's underrated with biden that uh, the kind of assumption seems to be that
Now he wants to do it. Therefore, he'll just keep doing it
I think an underrated scenario is that he just takes like another mental dip
And the polls blip down enough that it's just clear that trump is going to win
The electoral college and all the focus group reports start pinging back up through the system from the five six key states saying
Yeah, there's all this thing though to say that
Biden doesn't mean biden biden means either we've seen our biden gargar biden
They can't actually be president or it's going to be president kamala and we'd rather have trump than president kamala
So fuck it. We're gonna go for trump and as those focus group reports come back up
You can imagine panicking
Democratic party and they shove him out. So I do think it's underrated that biden could still get the that he could get pushed out
um
I mean it was a setting up a new party. So I did some focus group and polling research on this
um
last year in the states
And it was we we hit a kind of interesting problem like
Figuring out what a new party should say and do to be very popular
Was not so hard right which is generally a lesson of electoral politics
If you actually just listen and you want to figure it out
There's there's usually a way the problem that we found was that people said
Yeah, god, we hate the old parties. It's crazy that they're so shit. It's crazy that they won't change and listen to us
Yes, I want the third party
But I probably wouldn't vote for it and you go but why not like you literally just said all these things and now
We've given you the third party. Here's our policy. We've designed it. We've got your theoretical leader that you like
But then what like why are you not going to vote for it? And they go
Well, because we're just going to be a waste of vote and the crazy people never get in and like the whole from the country
So they kind of that first pass the post problem. I think is it is a real problem and I think
To realistically you like it's so therefore like getting over that. It's either a very long process
You have to resign yourself might take 20 30 years to build
or
You need a kind of global superstar
You need an elon type person
Or can you type person someone of someone of that level of global fame that just like instantly punches through all media
Do you know what I mean?
Yeah, let's say it wasn't too late
It was like a couple years ago and someone like elon had come to you and said hey, you know, I want to run
I want I want to compete. What is sort of the core issues or what is the platform that would that would that would
That would be able to compete that would that would most widely resonate
I think you talked about this a little bit in your podcast with andrew sullivan
um
When you unpack that a little bit
um
well
again, so
so
What issues really simple right and kind of shows the problem if you if you just do regular focus use of people and you chat around
What sort of things that people people want one of the first things that people will spontaneously say is term limits
We've got all of these old people. We've got these like senile people in both parties everywhere
It's it's an it's an embarrassment for us on the world stage
We've got to have term limits and drive these old people out and get new talent in and also we just not just old people
We just don't want the same people there all the time
And it cuts completely across party support. You can aoc fans support it trump fans magus the most
board is like
a total home run
But why do no
But the old parties can't support it right because the old parties are locked into a system where if you say that
That's like that's like calling for like everybody in congress to to be you know, investigated by the irf
It's like it's declaring war on the system
But if you're going to be a third party you didn't care about that you prepared to take risks and and you and you were just openly out
war with the system anyway
then you'd have a bunch of things like
Term limits like much stricter controls on congress
All of their dodgy sharing, you know buy stocks and shares and inside failing all that kind of crazy shit
You have a whole set of things like that
um, I think you'd be
Uh, you'd be very tough on the border very tough on crime like you'd be much closer to trump on that
And it's constantly interested like the democrats are just out of touch with a lot of their own voters on that
Like I can't remember now when I did all this research it was last year and I can't remember the exact numbers
But no there's a good chunk of democrats who uh, uh, um, who supported biden in 2020
Who basically agree with trump on police the border, uh, etc, etc
um
I think you'd be crazy to do a lot of what the republicans trying to do constantly writing on social security and
and um, destroying obama care
again, I would
everything like that, um
Trying to like have some kind of big argument about the overall structure of the healthcare system is just doomed
I've I've run a whole bunch of focus groups on that. There's no way through. There is no like
Great new universal plan that people go. Oh, yeah, okay. This guy's cracked it and this is what we should do
But I think definitely you definitely have um, you definitely avoid that. Um
But I think
A bit like a bit like um, what we did in 2016 and 2019, right? We got attacked by the media constantly as being completely incoherent
uh, um, and it was
Because our agenda
Didn't fit neatly onto the existing party access and it didn't fit onto a left-right thing
So we were much tougher on immigration than the conservatists were but we were actually in the same place as the country was
Like we were with the median voter
We were um to the left so to speak of the conservator party on um healthcare
But we were exactly where the median voter was now in west minster all the media say
Oh, your policy is in go here and no one will pay attention to that doesn't make any sense
But that's not how voters think
So again, if you're constructing if you're constructing
A party in the states and you just were optimizing for winning
Right, not whether or not the pundits say you're smart or whether your strategy makes sense if you're just optimized for winning
It's it's definitely going to look a bit odd like that. It won't fit into the conventional party structure
It won't fit on a left-right axis
And that's partly because like
It is sort of crude caricature terms if you if you do focus groups in research
on swing voters
Whether it's in california or or pennsylvania or in britain
They're kind of nationalist, right? They are
Then they are far to the right
Of most elected representatives on many issues and and to the left of them on many issues at the same time the same person
And this is completely constantly. I think I underrated and and not um
So the whole political punditry world works constantly on this idea of the center ground
Which is regarded as this kind of average of left and right
Oh, there's balloons coming up
Yeah
Um
This idea of the center ground whether where people are kind of average of left and right
And it's just
It all pundits basically believe it and there's endless everyone writes about it in every election
But it just doesn't actually map to the data of how how real voters
Yeah, I mean it's I mean I agree with you, right?
Like it's funny one of the catchphrases you see of san francisco your average san francisco guy is like
I'm socially liberal but fiscally conservative. It's like actually most americans are fiscally liberal and socially conservative
As a matter of fact your it's you
I mean that that is an elite view but most americans are actually not like that
They're actually socialists of the core and the government better not touch my medical care
But they're actually to the right and a bunch of other issues
exactly
One thing I I wouldn't I don't know if I pushed back on it because I suspect that party would actually still win
But one thing I've noticed again the eu us difference in the eu however, and again, I mean the the continent for the most part
However broken any political process might be it does seem like things kind of converge
If there is a majority view and to use one particularly hot button issue, but
It's it's a good issue because it's very parameterized abortion, right?
Abortion is actually not a binary thing the real debate is actually at what is the what is the cutoff at which abortion happens
And if you look at most polling in the united states, it's almost exactly where the law dictates in most european
Again, I'm not sure what the laws in the uk, but in germany france and spain
It's basically anywhere between 11 to 13 weeks is the upper bound for abortion
That tends to be where people pull at most people don't want a total ban
Most people don't want an abortion literally two seconds before the child is born
And most people land in that 35 and and americans are the same way by the way
And and yet the narrative in the united states is either
Fully banned no way like the catholic party line or it's the liberal line
Which is any encroachment to abortion is unthinkable never mind that like when disantis for example
I think in his initial platform he had a 15 week limit
Which is more permissive than most european countries and most american liberals like didn't even seem to understand
That actually florida abortion law would be more to the left than france's would
But it didn't matter right but in the u.s. Thing and then
And i could cite examples when it comes to to gun laws to a bunch of other things where in fact most americans are not crazy
I need to own a tank gun nuts nor total banners or somewhere in the middle
And yet in europe policy tends to converge to the democratic meme
But in the u.s. Actually it does it it actually pins to the extremes
And i don't know if that's because of primary first pass post voting or what but it things can be different
Because of the proof because of the primary problem become
On certain things like abortion because as you say it's um, I mean so again, I looked at this issue last
Last year um
And you can see like how you could craft a policy on abortion which would basically be like reasonably popular with people but
It will be attacked
Whether you're a republican or democrat you'd be massively attacked by the people on your own side
for
Proposal if you actually crafted
The like the optimal strategy on abortion for a presidential candidate
As soon as you said it you would be attacked whether you're a republican or democrat by by your own side as like
As a mass traitor, but i've got a theory on this like it's not inconceivable to me
The trump might actually go into the next by like september october 2024
Trump may have a more popular policy on uh, it'd be closer to the median voter and have
Uh a more popular policy on abortion than than biden
Because if you look at his history, he was never a kind of um very far right on this issue. It's from new york. Um
So it's possible
possible
Certainly if you listen to the polls, he will do but it would be a very interesting move for him suddenly to shift
And and here's and here's an alternative like way of how the of how abortion works
Like during 2020 election campaign
Biden actually shifted from a more popular policy on abortion to a less popular policy on abortion
Why did that shift happen?
It happened because the staff in his own campaign revolted and basically
Demanded of him that he changed policy and he didn't feel strong enough at that moment in the campaign when he was still weak
to push back against his own staff and that shows like another dynamic at this point the democrats are
so taken over by very young very elite university educated
staff
That they constantly push their own campaigns to positions which are completely irrational
If you're actually trying to optimize for winning
You know, can you see this?
There's all sorts of vapor out on this right in 2016 something like a third of the ads that hillary ran actually helped trump
and the ads which were most
Popular with democrat activists and donors and got most clicks with them with the most helpful towards trump
Right, this is like a crazy thing which doesn't fit with the conventional wisdom the conventional wisdom is
Okay, politicians may be shittered government, but they are at least trying to win elections
That is not true. It's almost never true
Politicians generally are optimizing for much shorter term things. They're optimizing for internal
Kind of in-group dynamics in their factions and signaling to the media over like a 48 hour window
That's most of what their activity is
And that's what explains this constant weird stuff of wide
wire politicians not actually
Adopting the optimal strategy, which is doesn't make ends basic democratic theory
But is that unique to the u.s. Because like again in the u. Just just to cite the european example
Things have kind of converged to the public will in the u.s. They have it
um
No, I think it's I think it's uh, I mean, I think it's why I think it's I think it's widespread across across democratic
I guess across democratic politics. I think america is a bit odd because of the primary thing
But um britain has definitely been the same, you know, I've watched elections here 20 years
Certainly since 2010 the only election campaign that was actually rational was our campaign in 2019
It's just apart from that both sides constantly run
Run election messages, which are just which clearly don't work
And another example of it, right isn't the referendum
Our strategy was hated by all of the mps and um the most kind of committed activists on our own side
Because these people
They don't really want to listen to the public
What they want to do is is tell the public what they should believe
And they constantly think well if you just shout louder at them and tell them more
Then the public's finally going to go all right. Okay. Well, I agree with you. Okay, right
Which is not how things usually work, but they hate listening people importantly hate listening
Yeah
Can I can I bring up one last thing speaking of alternatives to democracy one topic that came up in in our group chat this morning?
um, I believe uh
A venture capitalist we both know dominic
Was hanging around with uh king charles. He's king now, right?
Part of my privilege is being an american is not thinking about royals, which is what spurred the debate
He felt that the british the british monarchy has a certain gravitas
And a certain social function to play
As head of state
I think it's a ridiculous out ofistic throwback to a barbaric age that we should be done away with
I think one of the most ridiculous things about the australians and the canadiens that they still have a foreign monarch on their coin
Unlike us crazy americans gun nuts that we are we have no foreign monarch on our coins. Thank you very much
And in fact my my right as an american is not thinking about which royal waste rule popped out of which royal vagina
I don't have to think about this crap
And I think that in fact if there is a liberal democrat
I mean, I think the role of head of state though is important
And one thing that actually the westminster not the westminster system, I guess but
Other parliamentary systems have is they have a head of state that's different than the head of government, right?
Like in israel, for example, um, you know, you've got her's izak herzog
Who's the head of state who meets with douglas murray and the hostages and kind of represents the people?
And then you've got the head of government who everyone hates of course because the head of government always hated who actually operationally runs things
And um, if there's one thing the american political system gets wrong
Is the head of government the head of state are basically the same person
Which is why national politics are basically symbolic religious wars when really it should be about who's the best ceo
But in any case that's a that's a long wind up. But what do you think of the royals dominic? Are they worth keeping around?
um
I mean obviously the thing is ridiculous in lots of ways, but I think you're being too russian is tantonia. I think you're thinking
But well, it's this weird throwback and it doesn't really make any sense and they all have these
Weird outfits and how can this possibly be a rational way of looking at it? But um
I would say
Russianism in european politics is uh as often being the path to catastrophe
um
The people family makes no logical sense, but I would actually be in favor of keeping it and I think that um
I've got two basic two basic things
One is that I think from a practical point of view if it was replaced
It's almost inconceivable that what replaced it will be an improvement in my
In my eyes and secondly
Something that I've noticed which I think is important
Very hard to quantify is I think I think it's it's it's a kind of um
It's a last defense against extremism slash fascism slash communist takeover
And the reason for that is that um the armed forces don't swear an oath to the government. They swear an oath to
But they did swear an oath to the queen
Now we'll see this where it goes to the king
and
I think that has an oddly
Stabilizing effect that you can imagine all kinds of political disasters
Or you can imagine the kind of political things you often see in god who's happening
If you imagine similar things happening in britain
Because it distributes power in this way
It will be much harder for some kind of like extremist fanatic government
To take over and actually take over the entire state and take over the armed forces and have some kind of Stalinist coup
Do you know what I mean?
Because the armed forces are the parts of the state
there's this like residual feeling of
Oh, you're actually basically like some kind of like foreign inspired coup and we're just not going to do what you say
Yeah, and that and that's literally happened. So in 1981
There was a coup a coup attempt in spain actually in which the wari de civile
Which is like the the paramilitary like the the militarized police literally stormed the parliament and there's a photo of
Coronel tejero like wavering on a pistol and giving a lecture in front of the
The in the chamber of deputies in spain and what happened?
King what Carlos the second of spain basically got on tv in his uniform with the flag behind him and said
Yeah, we're not going back to fascism. This is not going to happen and basically called up every general and said all right
Pick a side bro
Me or jail and everyone said okay. Okay. Okay. Everyone come down
Like and then they arrested the coup leaders and like that was the end of it
And so in fact it worked exactly as you said right the embodiment the spirit of the nation kind of arose and said no
We're not doing this crazy shit. Everyone go back to your room
exactly
if someone tried to do that in britain and then
Because of this diffuse authority, you know, it is sort of slightly weird like, you know, you sit in number 10
Are you the prime minister says, okay? We're going to do this or you know, sending special forces somewhere or we're going to do this with whatever
the actual like the
The actual formal powers in lots of ways are
Not his he is acting on behalf of the queen
and
It does have a weird effect and it and it does mean that these people
Would not, you know, if it suddenly went crazy
or
Or there was some kind of like, you know, weird person managed to take like a Hitler star situation right where someone actually wins an election
becomes head of state
In all kinds of rationalist european constitutions
Well, the whole system now reports up to them including the armed forces and the new person is won the vote
Well, everyone just has to do what they say sort of thing
That doesn't happen in in the in the weird archaic irrational british constitution
But I think the little bit of friction and absurdity in it is like a good good long-term hedge
Interesting. Yeah, I mean, it's like the second amendment in the united states
The worst comes to worst everyone's got their rifle
But yeah, I'm trying to think in the u.s. Who occupies that role of like sanity check
It really is the constitution right the u.s. Constitution is the symbolic thing that embodies the nation
But of course, that's a tax subject interpretation, which is why supreme court almost acts like a rabbinical court, you know
Interpreting the the Torah or something right and so the u.s. Is kind of a religious project
But yeah in the u.s. There is no embodying of the nation outside of the
The constitution
About going too far in some ways, isn't that like I always find it interesting how
um
If you take like a quite an extreme situation in american politics
Of rusevelt in the 30s after his second win
When he was really like I can't remember exactly what the majority was that they had in congress
But it was extraordinarily massive and he'd got a massive landslide
And he could really he could and was
Ripping out washington closing things down reopening things doing all kinds of stuff
But he then made a move on the supreme court and he basically had to back off
It was seen as like just a stepped off. That's a good example
He tried packing the court famously by which meaning putting his cronies in and basically interpreting
You know like the my my polyside professor in high school said what is the u.s. Constitution?
Whatever nine justices say it is
And so if you control the justices you control the constitution and that that in fact was the step too far
I mean that was like that would be like imprisoning the queen. That's it. You've lost everybody. Nobody's going to follow you there, right?
yeah
Okay, we've been talking
I'll go for it. It's a
No, I'm just saying I've harassed dominic with all my okay. Ask the smartest bird. I know questions
Dominic you got them all
I've got a couple more and then we'll get down. Okay. Go ahead. Go ahead
well one
So some people use the mental model of thinking about the the left in the u.s. As you know college educated people
one third of the country plus
You know certain might you know a large percentage of certain minority groups that those college educated people claim to speak on
behalf of and and prioritize and and give deference to
Against on the right non-educated
uh, or you know non college educated
What working class white people and that's a crude, you know summarization
but it's a way of the kind of describing the differences and the tensions that emerge where
sort of one third of the the country
Sort of speaks for two for for the rest of the country in terms of dominating the institutions
That that governed the the rest of the country and best there's sort of this populist outrage that that has the numbers
But doesn't have the power and thus elect someone like trump
How would you edit that that characterization the u.s. And i'm curious if that same sort of cleaving or something similar to that
Is what's also happening in other countries where we're seeing
Sort of similar figures like trump or is it all very very different
No, i mean i think so
There's definitely something
Common across the western world in terms of what's happening with educational polarization, right?
You can see in the data in every country
The story is is sort of similar since since 1945
graduates
used to be
much more conservative
And and and that shifted dramatically
I mean, sorry it shifted gradually for decades and then it's really kind of become turbocharged in the last in the last 10
10 20 years
And that's definitely thrown poor
It's definitely confused all of the old system right they don't they haven't quite understood it as part of the reason why
they
Didn't see brexit coming and didn't see trump coming. I mean just in like one interesting way before brexit
Most of the polling companies didn't wait by education
Certainly in britain and i think similar problems happen with the polling in
In america, um
They just didn't like so our data science team
looked at all of these polls in 2015 2016 and they said, you know, like
The data that we've got is not being is not reflected in the mainstream polls
The fundamental reason is that they don't understand what's happening with education polarization and very similar thing happened, I think
With trump, so there's no doubt that
establishment parties of being caught on the on
All on on the part for it by that
I'd like to ask one more question since, um
Getting to this issue of um, you know education and the and left versus right
I mean, I forgot who I read it was probably tyler cohen or somebody
If you mentioned how in the 1950s if you told somebody you're a democratic or republican
Or to use a slightly more wonky term if it was the input to your you know, your logistic
Regression model that tried to classify various parts of your lifestyle
Being republic or democrat wouldn't have told you whether you owned a firearm went hunting
Had a college education. I wouldn't have told you lots of things actually and while now it's almost
Dispositive, right?
Literally, it is like a 90-10 split either way for every question
I just said whether you're a republican democrat whether you own a gun went to college, etc
And so there's just been massive split of just
Beyond politics. I mean in the u.s. It really is a red versus blue tribe sort of issue
um, and I'm not even sure what why that is and I've lived in red states and
I'd be a hard nut to crack with if you tried based on politics
You know, whether I own a gun or not or whether I have a college education
But like broadly speaking like why is it?
Here's a better question
Why does the right kind of suck in the sense that like when it comes to like aesthetics when it comes to education
I mean, I think it was david revneck who famously called trump a short-fingered vulgarian
Which he kind of is and you know
He said many things that were true, right?
Like his his critique of russia during 2016 was actually correct
And so not to say that everything trump said was was nonsense
But there's there's an error about him when he has a rally
It's like the pillow guy that shows that it's like people that you wouldn't want your sister to date or
You know media or culture that you yourself wouldn't consume or identify with and yet you're kind of stuck
Right because on the one hand
Like let's face it anyone with any level of IQ education elite status income is like shopping at Whole Foods
And living in one of six cities and that's their lifestyle
And yet if if you kind of reject whole hog the the far left agenda
Well, what do you do? Are you going to go live in Nashville? Like no
That said this is someone who's lived in Reno and rural Washington
So I I have made that jump but probably speaking most people are not going to do that
It feels like it feels like the mid-wit mean right whereas the right
You know both has sort of the the the hick but also peter teal and sort of the the new counter-lead or sort of the true intellectual
Yeah, but the but the peter teals are the majority right at the end of the day. That's not that's not, you know, if you
Would a guy from San Francisco even if he had some trump sympathy if they went to a trump rally
Would they look around and say, oh, yeah, we I have a deep sympathy with these people. No, he wouldn't you walk right out of there
And so what do you do with that? Right? If
You're not going away. You're not going with the far left agenda and yet you're you know
The polarization question is
Someone and it does seem I mean I'm not an expert on this now
In terms of looking across like lots of different countries. So I'm not sure
how's correct statement
Certainly relative to Britain. So for example
in America
These issues as you say have become more and more polarized and more and more identified on a party basis
So even if you go back to like 1980
You had far more ticket splitting you had far more people who would like vote for a Democrat senator
but then maybe vote for Reagan, right?
And you couldn't be as sure by the fact that they voted for Reagan about a whole set of their views
As you would be now if someone said I voted for Trump. So it's definitely shifted
um
Over the last 40 years
That that kind of process hasn't happened in in Britain
And I think quite a lot of other European countries in terms of these things being locked into party identities
So there has been educational polarization. That's like a cross-western trend
But that educational polarization is not mapped onto party identification
Across the west in the same way it has in America
And I don't know what the answer
It's a very interesting question as to why as to why that's different
Um, again, like is the project is the primary process play some some part of that
Uh, other structural dynamics in the in the american vote system don't know. Um
But that is a difference for sure between america in europe and also and also britain on that other question
um, I think it comes back to to to what was touched on a couple of times, which is just
um
Small people on the right have gone out of politics
so
If you look at say so everyone hate on the right people like me
We hate the new york times
We hate a whole load of like that
Liberal media in quotes, right
but
Nobody's trying to create an elite thing to take on the new york times in its own terms
As you say like a lot of the media
Kind of entrepreneurial activity like banon type stuff
Is basically just like trashy. It's not trying to create. It's not trying to like beat the new york times in its own game
Which someone should try and do
but
I think I think a big part of the reason why is is this question of where of where talents
It's gone
And the left still has a whole load of smart people who are basically on the left go into politics because they want to control these
Old institutions and they want to tell everyone what to do
Whereas people who are as smart on the right
Are you know, so you have like two kids now age 20
The one who's left inclined wants to go and work with like larry summers in washington
And then work in the u.s. Treasury you tell everyone what to do and then get rich good work for golden sacks after some spell in dc, right?
whereas
the person who
Has read a lot of mesas and hyac
are
It's probably gonna
Want to come and work with you guys in in california or on some tech startup, right?
Maybe go work for angioreal and combine drones and national security
But when they look around at the p and this becomes self-reinforcing
When you when when smart 20 year old? I mean, I've had this myself in terms of recruiting and looking at things
We have like very smart kids age 20 23
They're looking at options and they go and look and talk to the politicians like I don't want to work with these fucking clowns
They just they they're losers. They're not going to get anything done. They don't really know what they're there for
Uh, why do I want to go and work with those people?
So the smart person on the right the hyac fan those often does different things and I think over generations this
This is just compounded and compounded and compounded. I was fascinating. You know when I after just after the election
I wrote a blog and the blog basically said, okay, we're going to rip up government
And we're going to do all of this stuff differently
We're going to break a load of shit and we're going to build a load of new shit
And if you want to do this if you're a weirdo if you're a misfit if you've got technical
Abilities that you've like never got involved with politics because it's such a shit show get in touch and come and help
And I had a common exact number that but like 50 000 people applied for a job. I mean it was just completely insane
So you can see there is this untapped
There are a lot of people who actually do want to get involved with politics and government
who are like not people on the left
But at the moment they're like largely away doing their own things
And they're not going to drop those things to go work for a conventional
conservative thing in washington or london
That they just think is hasn't got an actual plan couldn't execute any way is not going to win
By the way, I was going to ask you about that ad because that was pretty that was pretty famous and went viral at the time
Did you actually hire somebody from from the 50 000 applicants?
We hired some we had some like
Openly and we hired some covertly and was kind of going to get planted them in a deep state
Oh, wow
I uh, I love I love it. I want to close by uh ending or I want to end by
Returning to where we began which is on san francisco. There was one argument earlier that we said hey tech people don't care about san francisco
There's the counter argument that that uh, mark adresin has publicly made uh, who you know came on the show
Who whose group chat introduced us and he said hey actually they do care and they're um, you know
Reed Hoffman dustin moskovitz
um and other tech people are some of the biggest donors to the dnc to to the biden campaign and um also to
In san francisco politics, they're we're actually we've tech has created the situation that they currently exist
They're and they're relatively happy with it or they think that's the best that can be done
With within the limitations and that efforts like gary tan and um, you know others
And by the way, mike solana is trying to create a right wing new york times our good friend
You know, he's early in that. Well, hopefully he'll he'll be able to do it, but um
Yeah, people like gary tan
Well good intention
Mark's argument that he made on our show is that it um, it actually doesn't help because there because there's no republican party
um
Trying to reform just from within the left will further um incentivize the left to keep going crazy and and and and take control
Whereas the only real solution is to let things get so bad that that a republican party can can emerge
And and no no gary nobody wants to go right wing even 80 percent of elan of san francisco is anti elan
They think he's too, you know, right winger beyond the pale and so we're caught
In a rock and a hard place
Which is do we just not do anything and wait till things are so bad that a republican party can emerge or
Can reform happen from within the the the the the left and people like gary the others kind of take over
Despite the sort of structural
ratcheting to the most extreme
That mark mentions happens in kind of one party cities or states
So strikes me as as extremely unlikely that there's going to be a republican
In any kind of like short-term way like in the next 10
15 years or so
Because of other national dynamics. I just can't see it's a bit like what we're talking about in terms of is
Israel and like just moral
signals
but
The moral signals of the republican party are such that
Magic whole bunch of people go. Oh, yeah, you know, I listen to what they've got to say in san francisco crime's got so bad
Maybe we should go republican
I don't think that that's going to happen. However bad things get
I can sort of understand
mark's
argument about the potential futility of trying to reform inside the democrats, but so my answer to that would be
Hoping for a republican revival is doomed certainly in the next 10 years
So forget that
uh
It's perfectly plausible that trying to like have any kind of reform inside the democrat party isn't going to work
But why are those unique to alternatives? Why can't you build an independent force?
Which doesn't have the branding of either
That's what that's where I would start
and
So I wouldn't try and spend a lot of my time like
Fighting the internal battle to the democrat party because I think a lot of that is a waste of time
And an effort and energy and won't work anyway
If if there is a way through and it may not be right sometimes like places and cities and cultures to just like
Their own secretary and there's nothing you can do about it
um
Uh, but if there is a way through I'm sure that it it's by building something separate to the two parties in san francisco
And say right we are san francisco people
We don't like the republicans for that reason. We don't like the democrats for this reason
But here are the things that we believe in and here's what we want to build and if you put us in power
Well, here's how we'll fight corruption. Here's how we'll fight crime. Here's how we'll do this
And you know, you just you you market test the message that you know
At least it works with with the voters that you need
And then you try and find some people to
To to sell the message and see see see what can be built. That's where that's where I that's where I would start
But the hardest problem I'm sure is going to be people like because of this chicken and egg problem the worst
The worst the worst the better already ends up working. You're like when the real
When the revolution comes until that it just puts everyone off from getting involved
I and I I would say the black pill on sf politics we saw very recently
Which is that in fact sf could be easily cleaned up. So she I'm literally on second street in soma
About a block away from a high highway that typically has a homeless encampment under it
And it currently doesn't because shishin bing was here and they cleaned up all the streets in san francisco
And practically overnight practically overnight the city went from the dystopia you saw to something else and I would say
To quote one of our great american philosophers hl menkin
Democracy is letting the voters choose and then giving it to them good and hard
And I would say that maybe the democrats actually want things to be this way because they amplify the problems
Which they are the solution which is oh no, there's this drug and homelessness problem
And there's this whole thing about it. Again, they could clean it up, but they sort of choose not to
Yeah, I think that
That makes so
That makes um a lot of sense to me
A lot of california, um, I mean california democrat politics is intensely mainly corrupt and for people like usum
The current thing
The only way the current thing doesn't work for usum is if he actually wants to go and become a national figure
And I think that's an interesting question right because
When I was doing all these focus groups last year one of the interesting things that came up all the time was people saying
like
Democrats or swing voters not maga people would say
Yeah, you know what? We do need a fucking wall. We need a wall around california
Stop basically shit escaping and washing over the rest of the country
And you know because they see the the same videos right of like the homeless people like walking out like zombies with machetes in their hands and they think
We don't want this everywhere. Um
And that's a real problem for usum for sure if he wants to become a national
A national figure, but in terms of the internal california politics maybe the democrat party could just
Doing this for
For a long time right you you tech people can like keep insulating yourselves
Like the roman senators in the republic you can build your
Build your your walled gardens the walls of the walled gardens ever higher and your fish ponds ever more magnificent and keep the madness out for
another 10 years maybe
I mean I I've always suspected my my dark theory by way sf is a tech hub
Is that you need like billion dollar startups to fix some of the problems the city has and it's actually not even a joke right?
Like the public transport here sucks. So we had uber the housing situation hotels completely sucks. We had airbnb
The dating scene by the way is terrible. So we had dating apps
The social scene is actually not so great either. So we had all the social media like literally every every great consumer tech
Sort of innovation you've seen has been kind of a patch to the sf system from very entrepreneurially minded people
Company to provide personal security with drones is like
Yeah privately is next. Um
I mean before we go starting a new party. I presume is very difficult
You you don't have the infrastructure that the other parties have
um
If if that were so obvious why aren't people
Doing it. What are the big bottlenecks to to making that happen?
I think the
Overwhelmingly the the biggest bottleneck is just this first pass the post problem that you have to get to some critical mass before you can break
Through uh, and and it's very hard to persuade people to get involved with with something
In a first pass the post system because they think well, you know, I don't want to commit 10 years of my life to building this
Which may not get
Where you actually
Can punch through that's the fundamental
Uh, and I think it's that's why it's like it's overwhelmingly likely that
If that's solved it'll be because someone
Super duper famous like global like legit globally famous character
Decides to do it. That's that's the way you could
Jumpstart it. I don't think lack of info. I think actually the lack of info in lots of ways is actually a great advantage, right? I mean
Just in our own experience because we were a startup in 2016
We just did everything better than the established parties did because we just you know use the cloud
We built all this stuff ourselves. We actually built had a proper tech team
um
Whereas as soon as we went in and we took over the conservative party
We looked around the infrastructure there like the whole thing is just completely rotten and broken and doesn't work is like
um
A bit like central government. Actually, you know, like people think this is it can't possibly be true
But when I arrived in number 10
The prime minister of great britain
Has less access to a file sharing system that like a two person startup does
They can at least use google docs and like live edit the same document in different parts of the building or hotel
Or in different parts of the building the british prime minister could not do that
oh my god
in tony you mentioned at the beginning of this call how
San Francisco has like an 11 billion dollar budget or something like that and 700 800 000 residents
Do we know how that money is spent? Is that is that public and if so are you know, where is it spent?
I mean, I I assume it's public record. Um, I think the the correction is not like literally bags full of cash level of corruption
It's the sort of todyism of there's all these ngos, right that are you know
ngos are basically church groups for people who think they're smarter than religion effectively
And so you have all these ngos and it's literally this gravy train in which they throw money at people who make the problems
worse and
You know, I forget exactly how much aid you get as a homeless person
I said, I think it hovers around eight eight hundred to nine hundred dollars a month
You basically get for free just showing up and so I mean one of the
Shocking not shocking things that if you actually talk to homeless people
And there's a few twitter accounts in which people go out and chat to almost people
Almost none of them are actually from san francisco
They come from abroad because they know they can get it basically get a free right here and here here's a quick
Here's a quick job interview question dominic if the aid for the homeless person is nine hundred dollars
What is the average fentanyl dose price in san francisco per day?
If you're if you show up if you wash up hopeless in san francisco and you're basically given
Um, you know a nine hundred dollars a month cash grant. What's the average cost of a fentanyl dose on the street?
I guess that's out right like it's basically like
20 30 dollars a day is what that's how
Because of course it is the markets in equilibrium
Right, of course it is so and so yeah, I mean, I assume this is all public record, eric
But it's like I don't know. I mean the taxes are incredibly another thing by the way is a shocking thing
Another random us eu
Observation because I I thought when I wrote cast monkeys
I actually moved to europe thinking I'd get canceled for other reasons for for writing like this tell all book
And so I like I spent time in barcelona and berlin and paris like checked out the startup scenes
I didn't go to london by the way
But it's like europe does everything right to get startups going like literally they'll take over entire buildings and give them the startups
They'll have grants
There's a lot of talent in europe like they do everything right and then like nothing happens startup wise in the united states
They do literally everything wrong top to bottom and yet you they cannot stop producing
Which is incredible
But like there's so many taxes here like your your restaurant bill is marked up with some health mandate thing
Which isn't even a hard number the restaurant can just randomly mark shit up by like five or ten percent
Which is ridiculous and yeah, it's just there's there's so much loss and ridiculousness in california and yet here we are
I'm this i'm in san francisco
But to me the twitter is a good analogy where ilan could have started a new twitter
And we have friends who've tried to start a new twitter and it's it's very difficult network effects are very hard
And it's it's much easier although still hard to take over existing twitter and similarly
I went to miami a couple years ago thinking that everybody would leave san francisco and also follow
And it turns out no matter how bad it gets people aren't leaving
And so it's probably a lot easier to move more people to miami to san francisco than to move people out of san francisco into
Uh, some other city or some other country where you can get some deal with the government
Like like like the whole technology state move network state movement is trying to do
So it sounds kind of like totally plausible, right? Like what what why but so quickly the obvious question like why hasn't this happened before?
Why hasn't it happened already people?
Well, hold on so it
I don't know who you're trying to move here
But so I mean san francisco. I was here for the first tech boom people should loads of people moved in san francisco
Like it's still kind of dead like it is not recovered fully from covet
But like circa 2011 the place you want it to be in the western world
Was within 10 blocks of where i'm sitting right now, which is where every consumer internet company was literally created
Right, like it was happening socially happening business wise. Everything was here. You felt like you were in the center of the world
This is that's right. Yeah, this is happening. Yeah, too. So it can happen again. That's the opportunity
It can happen
But the thing is that people people either stay and they put down roots and they get woke or they make a pile of money
And they leave that's it like no one actually invests in san francisco. That's the problem
Yeah, it might be changing though. There's a rise in political consciousness in the last few years
Like I know entrepreneurs who are now getting into politics full time
um, because they see how how fucked things have gotten here and um, and there's there's like a ecosystem around it. Um
There's uh, there's it's high status now in a way that it wasn't a few years ago
That's true. Things have changed a little bit, right? You can get twitter influenced by posting about san francisco politics in a way that
You would never have done 10 years ago. Yeah
Solana built his whole his whole you know audience off his media company off that
Um, if practical campaigns that you guys think like, you know, so-and-so is going to try and do something and they're a good guy
Then obviously like hook me up. I'll be happy to like look at you know, research
They're doing or ideas for messaging and stuff like that if I can help in some way
Cool
Yeah, we'll uh, we'll keep you posted
I don't know of anything at the moment outside of grosef
But you're in that group chat and I don't think they're they're serious enough
um
But I'd also be interested. So yeah, we're trying to create that conversation here in the podcast
So let's uh, let's keep the conversation going
But when the next governor comes up, maybe we should try to find some like, um,
legit celeb that we can work with to like the walk or someone to
become governor
Yeah, totally. It's been it's been done before
We're on arrange it
Rather mutant via like virus tryout place, right? So let's let's let's get the walk going in calif
Before we maybe move into the white house
Yeah, exactly. Um, also Dominic. Thanks so much for for coming on and we'll uh, continue the conversation
I just love you to talk
