In this video, I'm going to show you how you can become a mathematical wizard. You can basically
break down all of mathematics into four levels. Level one is the apprentice. At this level,
you are focusing on learning basic mathematics. By basic mathematics, I mean pre-algebra,
intermediate algebra, college algebra, calculus, trigonometry, pre-calculus, basic stuff
that you learn, and most people are at the apprentice level. One thing that characterizes
this level from the other levels is that apprentices do not know how to write proofs. This is all
computational based mathematics. The emphasis is to gain as much exposure and as much practice as
you can so that when you go to the next levels, you have a strong foundation. In this video,
I'm going to give you books that you can use to master the apprentice level. Level two is the
magician. Magicians are focused on learning to write mathematical proofs. This is a struggle. It
is one of the hardest things that people who are learning math have to do, but it is worth the
struggle because once you learn to write mathematical proofs, you can progress to level three and
become a warlock and start learning all kinds of mathematics. In this video, I'm going to show you
some books that you can use to progress to the next level of warlock. Level three is the warlock.
This is the level where you are trying to learn all of the undergraduate mathematics that you can
and it is still a struggle. You still encounter situations where you're not sure if your proofs
are correct. You have doubts and you don't know if what you're doing is correct, but at the same time
you have some ability. You have the ability to write mathematical proofs and you've made it this
far in the progression. You're actually writing proofs. You're just not a master yet. Warlocks
can learn all kinds of math on their own, but it's still a struggle and that's what separates warlocks
from wizards. Wizards have an easier time learning higher level mathematics. At level four, you are
a mathematical wizard. You have the ability to pick up any book on mathematics and learn mathematics
on your own. This is the highest level of mathematics. This is research level mathematics.
It doesn't mean you have to do research. It just means that you have the ability to absorb and learn
higher level mathematics on your own. This is where you want to be and this is where you want
to get because you can always learn math from previous levels when you get to this level
and the world becomes yours. You become a mathematical wizard.
This is a good starting point for someone who has been away from mathematics for a very long time.
The subject is pre-algebra and almost all of these books are widely available. So these first two
are easy to find. You can find them online and I'll try to leave links in the description.
I will also try to look for this one in case you want to check it out. So this book here,
Essential Pre-Algebra, Skills Practice Workbook by Chris McMullen, PhD, is a great book because it
has answers to every single problem and so you can work through it and check your work. You can
also write in this book. It's an actual workbook. It is not really considered a textbook but it's
quite affordable and it's worth it if you're trying to brush up your pre-algebra skills.
Another really good widely available modern book is this one here. Everything you need to ace
pre-algebra and algebra 1 in one big fat notebook. This book is really fun. It teaches you a lot of
mathematics and it's got really, really cool pictures. So perfect for someone who is just
trying to get back into mathematics. The last one I want to show you is Pre-Algebra by Harry H.
Jonas. I wanted to include this one because it's kind of a collectible. It's got a really cool
cover and it's from the early 70s. So if you want an old-school approach to mathematics,
you can try to find this book. And again, I'll look for every single book in this video
and I'll do my best to leave links in the description if I can find the books.
Another subject that people who are studying level one mathematics study is geometry. So
here I have three books. The first one being Shams Outline of Geometry. This book is widely
available and is a great reference for geometry. So it's worth having in your mathematical library.
In fact, that's the only reason I have it. It's just a good reference. It pretty much has
everything you're going to need when you're studying other subjects. If you need some geometry,
it's probably in this book. If you want a book that is a great choice for self-study, this is it.
Everything you need to ace geometry in one big fat notebook. This book will guide you through
everything. It has great illustrations, examples, and it has answers to every single problem.
This is an awesome book for learning basic geometry. I had to include a collectible book
in this list. And so here we have Geometry by Fisher and Hayden. And this book has some really
interesting topics. I think this is way more advanced than the other books. It's also harder
to find, but I'll do my best to find it. Look at that. Geometry on the surface of the sphere.
You get all kinds of mathematics that you don't see in other books, in old geometry books like
this one. Curved surfaces, area and volume, mapping, similarity, congruence, and symmetry.
Yeah, really old school book. Okay, let's go ahead and go through the rest of these books
really, really quickly so we can get to level two. This one is everything you need to ace math in
one big fat notebook. This is a highly accessible book. It's widely available, and it has answers
to all of the problems. This is a book that you can use to learn basic mathematics. Speaking of
basic mathematics, we have the legendary Basic Mathematics by Serge Lang. This book is really
unique because it has tons of topics. And while this is considered level one mathematics, just
be warned, it does have some proof based exercises. Elementary statistics is a subject that most
people study in college. So it's definitely a level one mathematics. This is a highly
computational stats book that is worth owning and worth reading if you are trying to learn
statistics. Mathematical ideas. This is a book that you've probably never seen. This covers
random math topics, but again, the level is pretty basic. So if you're in this level, if you feel like
you can understand some of this material, you can definitely pick up this book and learn all kinds
of cool mathematics. This is the Shams outline on probability and statistics. And this book is great
for learning probability and statistics. It has really good examples and it has answers to a lot
of the exercises. It's a great choice for self studying probability and stats. This book is
used in courses such as Precalculus and Trigonometry at various colleges. It's called Algebra and
Trigonometry and it's the second edition. It's by Stuart Redlin and Watson. I'm pretty sure there's
a newer edition, but this book contains a behemoth of information. There is just so much math in
this book. And a lot of people are at this level. This is what you study like before you take a
calculus class. Here's a book that is just on trig. So a lot of the books cover algebra and
trig, but this one is just trig. It's the one by McKeeg and Turner. This is one of the best
intermediate algebra books ever written. It's the one by Blitzer. Blitzer is a great author.
His books are very easy to understand compared to a lot of the other books. And that's why they are
so widely used at colleges today. So they're just solid books. This is a big, thick book on
intermediate algebra. It's going to give you answers to all of the odd numbered exercises.
And this is a textbook, right? I want to emphasize that this is a textbook.
So if you compare this to other books that are not textbooks, you're going to get
a lot more information in a book like this. This book is a workbook. It is not a textbook. It's
called Trigonometry Essentials Practice Workbook with Answers, Master Basic Trig Skills. This
was written by Chris McMullen, PhD. And this book is a workbook. So it has exercises and it has answers
to all of the exercises. And you can write in the book. So it's a great supplement to an actual
textbook on trigonometry. Here's another choice for intermediate algebra. This is the one by
Alan R. Angel, solid book for learning basic mathematics. It's good stuff. Okay, let's quickly
go through the rest of these. We've got Algebra Essentials Practice Workbook with Answers.
This one is a workbook. So really good for people who are trying to, you know, get better at basic
math. It's got answers to all of the exercises. And you can write in it. So this is a step up
above his prealgebra book. I like this book. I think it's worth it. And it's very, very affordable.
If you want something more comprehensive, you can take a look at something like this one.
This one is College Algebra Essentials by Blitzer. Essentials means that it's missing some of the
sections that the regular college algebra has. That's okay. It's a lot more affordable. And it's
an actual textbook. Okay, so it's got like some serious math in it. It's got definitions. It's
got tons of exercises. And you get answers to all of the odd numbered problems. This is an excellent
choice for someone who is trying to get better at algebra. If you feel you're not here yet,
you can take a step back and look at something like this, intermediate algebra. This is the one
by Miller O'Neill and Hyde. This is actually the first book I ever had on math, because I use this
for the first math class I ever took. And I remember struggling, but it's a pretty good book.
And it's the one I use to get started with mathematics. And if you're looking for something
more exotic, of course, I like to include collectible books in my videos. We have
intermediate algebra for college students by Lewis Lighthold. So Lewis Lighthold was the
inspiration for the real life Jaime Escalante from the 80s movie Stand and Deliver. So if you've
seen Stand and Deliver, the main character was inspired by Lewis Lighthold. This guy was a legend
and he wrote legendary books. And this book is pretty rare, but I'll try to find it. Now we have
entered the world of calculus. So here we have Serge Lang's, a first course in calculus. This
is the third edition. There is a much newer edition available. And this book is pretty good.
It's got all kinds of interesting topics, but it's not going to have everything you need maybe
for your courses in college, but it does have a lot of mathematics in it. And it is going to make
you better. Another really interesting book we have here is differential equations with linear
algebra. So this is a book that teaches differential equations. And also it has some linear algebra.
In order to read this book, you want to know some calculus. So this is like the top level of level
one, like you're almost at level two, you know, once you get past differential equations, that's
really when you start approaching level two mathematics. This is a classic book on calculus.
It's part of a series called mathematics for self study. And it's written by Thompson. It's
called calculus for the practical man. This is the book or one of the books that the Nobel Prize
winning physicist Richard Feynman used to teach himself calculus. This is another workbook. It's
called essential calculus skills practice workbook. So this is one of those books that you can buy
and basically use this to get a better grade in your class, right? Because these problems are
carefully picked. And they seem to be exercises that you would put on a test, you know, if I was
teaching a calculus class, I would, you know, these are the types of test questions people would
probably see or questions like this. So it's a great book. If you're trying to get better
calculus, everyone needs a big, thick calculus book, in my opinion. And this is a great book.
It's called calculus, and it's by Anton, a new horizon. This basically has everything you need
for calculus one, calculus two, and calculus three. So you could take three semesters of
calculus with this book. It's a huge, thick math book. Here we have a differential equations book.
This is one that I have actually used to teach differential equations to college students in
the past. This is a pretty good book. I've read portions of it. And I've done most of the exercises
from various sections in this book. I'd say it's a pretty good book on differential equations,
and one worth trying if you're trying to learn the subject. We've got three big calculus books
left in level one. We've got calculus with analytic geometry by Swakowski. Super thick book, again,
contains all the calculus you need. Then we've got the calculus by Lewis Lighthold. This one is
more rare because it's by Lewis Lighthold. But I believe there is a newer addition, and I'll try
to leave that info in the description. This is a legendary book. Yeah, this book really changed
the way calculus books are written because it was the first book to really provide really clean
examples and become popular. There might have been some other books that came before this one
that were written in this format, but none I'm aware of. And this last one has a really cool
psychedelic cover. It's called Calculus, and it was written by Ellis and Gullick. I love the cover
of this book. Level two mathematics, the magician. This is where you are trying to learn to write
mathematical proofs. So what does it take to get to level two? It actually takes very little. It's
all about you. If you decide that you feel like you know enough algebra and calculus and trig
and differential equations, and you are ready to enter the world of proof based mathematics,
then by all means jump into it and become a magician. Most people never see level two mathematics.
It's really only math majors that have to take courses where they learn to write proofs. But
once you master level two mathematics or at least get very good at it, you can jump to level three.
Let's take a quick look at some of the books in level two. This is one of the first proof writing
books I ever purchased. It's called Mathematical Proofs, A Transition to Advanced Mathematics
by Chartrand, Palomini, and Zhang. This book will teach you to write mathematical proofs. I think
it's a great book. The biggest downside of this book might be the cost. It's a little expensive,
but I think it's worth every penny. It's an excellent book for learning to write mathematical
proofs. Perhaps a more affordable option is Proofs by Jay Cummings, and I reviewed this book in the
past, and Jay actually left a comment in the video. I thought that was really, really cool.
This is a great book for learning to write proofs, and it's super, super thick. I definitely
recommend this book. This one is free. That's right. You can actually get this book for free
on the internet. You can just search for a book of proof, and you can download the book.
You might be wondering, if it's free, why do I have a copy? Because I decided to buy a physical
copy. I wanted to have a physical copy that I could touch and feel, and so I went online and I
bought one. So great book for learning to write proofs. I have read a few of the sections, and I've
probably done like 20 or 30 exercises from this book, and I think it's great. It's an excellent
book for learning to write proofs. It is one of the better ones, and it's free. I think this might
be my favorite. I really hate to say it, and I hate to admit it because I hesitated hard. I did not
want to buy this book, but people kept mentioning it last year in the comments, and I caved, and I
bought it, and it's great. This book has really good explanations, and it's small, so you can lay in
bed and read it. How to prove it, a structured approach by Velman. He gives really crystal clear
explanations of how to write mathematical proofs. Here is one that was recommended to me by a former
professor. It's called How to Read and Do Proofs by Daniel Solow. Several of the people here on the
channel have used this book and have praised it. It is a solid book on learning to write proofs.
And this is the last one I want to show you on proof writing. It's called An Introduction to
Abstract Mathematics by Bond and Keane. I like this book a lot, probably because I've spent
so much time reading it and working through it. I think it's a great book and another solid choice
for learning to write proofs. The bad news is, in order to progress to level three,
you really want to have a strong command of proof writing. You should at least know how to write
basic proofs. And that is hard. It takes a lot of time and effort and that's why these books will
help you. If you're wondering which book should you get, I say get all of them if you can. If you
are tight on money, get the free one. You can just download it. And if you have to pick one to buy,
I'm going to say get this one here. How to prove it, a structured approach. I really, really think
this is the best choice for anyone who is trying to learn to write proofs. And it's hard for me
to say that because all of these books are so good and they're all great books. None of them are
bad books. These are not bad books. They're all great. But this one is just a little bit better.
And I really like the size. You can kind of like lay in bed and read it. He just has really good
explanations. Daniel Velman does a wonderful job in his book. All right, let's go to level three
mathematics. This is where it gets really, really interesting. This is level three mathematics,
the warlock. You can see how many books we have here because at this point, you know how to write
mathematical proofs. And once you know how to write proofs, the world is yours. So this is mathematics
that typically math majors would study. So if you go to a college or a university, anywhere in the
world, these are some of the things you would study. So let's take a quick look at some of the
books I have here because there are so many books and so many topics. Real analysis by Jay Cummings.
If you recall, Jay Cummings wrote the proof book we talked about earlier. This is an excellent book
on real analysis. And it's very, very affordable compared to some of the other books. Look how
thick that is. Super nice book on real analysis. You definitely want to know how to write proofs
before jumping into real analysis. Basically, you're going to be doing
something similar to calculus that you've done before, but you're going to be proving everything,
which makes it much more challenging. I wanted to include discrete mathematics in level three
because I feel like there are some proofs in here where you would benefit from already having some
proof background, in particular in this book here. So I have them here in increasing order of difficulty.
For beginners, we have Discrete Mathematical Structures by Coleman, Busby and Ross. This
is a really nice book and it's very good for beginners who are studying discrete math. What
is discrete math? Well, it covers logic, sets, counting, probability, proofs, statistics, graph
theory, tons of topics combined into one subject, which is called discrete mathematics. This one
is very affordable. It's a Dover book. Dover is a company that reprints old math books and makes
them more affordable. It's called Introductory Discrete Mathematics by Balakrishnan. This book
is significantly more challenging than this one. I've read various portions of this book
and it's a great book and it's affordable. This one is a Game Changer, Concrete Mathematics,
a Foundation for Computer Science written by legends, right? Graham Neuth Patashnik. These
people are legendary and this is a legendary book. This book is no joke. It is super hard
and it definitely warrants level three mathematics. This is warlock level and it's got answers to all
of the problems, right? Like not just answers, but like solutions. It's awesome, awesome book,
but it is no joke. One of the things that characterizes level three mathematics being a warlock is
again your ability to write proofs. If you can write proofs in theory, you can pick up any of these
books and you can start reading and you can start learning mathematics. That's why it is such a big
deal to master level two. For example, let's just start looking at some of these books. This is
Advanced Calculus by Creighton Buck. Solid book. This one teaches advanced calculus, but it introduces
it from a multivariable and a single variable approach right from the beginning. So it makes
it great for learning advanced calculus. There are easier advanced calculus books,
but I do like this one and it's probably one of my favorites, if not my favorite.
Here's another book we have and this one's on partial differential equations. This is the one
I actually used when I studied partial differential equations. It's pretty good. It's got some typos
in the solutions, but it's pretty good. Two more for PDEs. Got introduction to partial differential
equations. This is the one by Greenspan and then we've got another one here by Zach Manoglo
and Tho. This is a Dover book, so it's super, super affordable. Introduction to Real Analysis by
Bartle and Sherbert. This book is interesting because I checked this out from the library
several years ago and I forgot what book it was. I thought, I like this book. I don't remember what
it's called and then one day I found it and I bought it and it's a great book. It's really,
really good for beginners. This is definitely easier than the book by Buck on Advanced Calculus.
This gives you a much more introductory approach. Plus, it's got a really, really cool cover, right?
Bartle and Sherbert. Let's take a look at this pile here. We've got Introduction to Probability
by John E. Frund. This is a little bit more advanced, so it definitely warrants level three,
in my opinion. The subject of number theory. This is the book by Long. This is a classic.
I love this book. This is the first number theory book I purchased and it will teach you
number theory, but again, you want to know how to write proofs. Here we have a more advanced book
on probability and statistics for engineers. Here we have a wonderful book on analysis. Again,
great for beginners. The one by Stephen Abbott. Wonderful book. Numerical analysis. That's right.
Numerical analysis is something you can learn and study once you become a warlock and this is a book
that you can use to do it. Another numerical analysis book and this one's a little bit more rare
and I don't know if you can see it, but it says usually there. Numerical methods that usually
work. It's by Foreman Acton. What a cool name. Over here we have some more advanced books.
Advanced calculus by Fitzpatrick. This is the one I used as an undergraduate. Very tough,
but it's probably one of the easiest books for beginners. Linear Algebra by Hoffman and Cunn's.
This is proof based linear algebra. Old school book. I included the legendary Spivak in level three
because it really, really helps if you know some proof writing before you jump into Michael Spivak's
legendary book. Over here we have another pile. Let's take a look at it. Complex analysis. For
this you're going to want to know how to write proofs and you're going to want to know some
calculus. Beautiful subject. One of the nicest subjects you can study as an undergrad. This is
the one by Saffin Snyder. Pricy book, but worth it. I think this is easier than the Brown book,
which I actually don't have in this video and it's more popular than this one, but this one
I think is the easiest one for complex analysis. An entire book on logic. That's right. An entire
book. That's something you don't see often. It's the one by McCollos. An abstract algebra book. I
love this book. And another proof based linear algebra book. This one's a little more modern,
so you can think of this as a modern version of the book by Hoffman and Cunn's. Let's take a quick
look at some warlock level books. We've got Introduction to Probability and its Applications by
Schaefer. This is a great book and you can find a solutions manual for it as well. Great for
mathematical statistics. This one is good too, but it doesn't have answers. And this is the
indie edition. It's the one by Rice. Then we have a legendary book on abstract algebra by Israel
Nathan Herstein. Lovely book. I had a friend who worshiped this book. Principles of Mathematical
Analysis by Rudin. This is one that is again legendary, very hard to read, very rigorous.
Rudin doesn't really explain things in a very nice way, but it's still a famous book. It's got
like a cult following. My favorite abstract algebra book for beginners by Dan Cericino.
Probably the most popular topology book in the world, right? Topology by Monqueries.
So you can learn topology once you get to level three, once you become a warlock.
This is kind of like the high end of level three, right? Topology is tough. Once you get past
topology, you're really getting close to level four. Then we've got a classic here on Advanced
Calculus by Hildebrand. Calculus of several variables by Goffman, going quickly here.
We still got to get to level four. I have way too many books. Well, there's no such thing.
Here's a hardcore book by Weatherburne, Mathematical Statistics.
Naive Set Theory by Paul Helmholtz. Applied Computatorics by Fred Roberts. A whole book on
Computatorics. And Advanced Engineering Mathematics by Zill. This is the same author of the Differential
Equations book, which I was showing you earlier. The bad thing about this book is that it's a
little bit pricey. Notice I have this international edition. Yeah, these can get pricey, but these
books have so much content. Let's take a look at this last pile, Introductory Real Analysis.
This is by Kolmogorov and Fomin. This is a Dover book, hardcore. I included this one because
it's kind of strange, right? Plain and spherical trigonometry. This is not really taught in schools
anymore, but I feel that having more maturity before reading this book will help you appreciate
it more. That's why I put it in level three. We've got two abstract algebra books, both great
for beginners, the one by Frele and the one by Pinter. And then we have a classic book on functions
of several variables. This is the one by Fleming. This book is beautiful. This is a beautiful book.
If you can find it, buy it. It's just wonderful. We've got some more statistics, mathematical
statistics. Two books here, one by Rost and one by Frund. Another partial differential equations
book. This is the one by Miller. Great book. A book on combinatorics by Tucker. A book on
graph three by Gold. And an advanced calculus book by Fox. I have this book by Fox in Spanish,
actually, which is really interesting. I have the Spanish version of this book. So how do you get to
level four mathematics? How do you become a wizard? Well, basically, you want to have a lot
of exposure to most of these topics. You don't have to know everything here, but you have to have
some exposure to advanced calculus, to linear algebra, to topology, to complex variables.
At least know the very basics of number theory. Just having exposure and knowing how to write
proofs in these subjects will help propel you to level four. Most people need a mathematics degree
in order to get to level four, because this is what you learn with a math degree, right? You cover
a lot of this information. And so to self study this takes an eternity, but I think it's possible.
I really think it is because people can do it, right? People have done it and you can do it.
You can become a mathematical wizard. Okay, let's go to level four.
This is level four mathematics, the wizard. You know you're at level four when you feel like you
have had plenty of exposure to topics such as abstract algebra, advanced calculus, linear algebra,
and you feel like you can pick up one of those books and you can read it and you can learn on
your own. When you're at the point where you feel like you can pick up an undergraduate level
math book and sit down and read it and learn, that's when it's time for level four. And that's
graduate level, because that's what you have to be able to do at the graduate level. You have to be
able to learn new mathematics on your own. Let's take a look at some of these books so you can see
what kind of mathematics wizards do. So measure theory by Halmos is a legendary book. Paul Halmos
was a very famous mathematician. He passed away several years ago and he wrote many amazing books.
Measure theory is something that first year graduate students see when they go to graduate school.
It is extremely difficult and extremely hard and if you are thinking about learning measure theory,
my advice is get every single book that you can afford on measure theory and find every
single resource you can and do your best. Here's another book by Halmos. This is called a Hilbert
space problem book. And it's exactly what it says it is. It's a problem book on Hilbert spaces.
It's got tons of problems and it's got tons of solutions. It's an excellent book for someone
looking for hard mathematical problems on Hilbert spaces. Then we have an advanced book on functional
analysis by Narichi. Pretty hardcore stuff here. Definitely want to be a wizard before you learn
this. Another super hardcore book on functional analysis by Rudin. This one is really, really
tough. And the easiest functional analysis book ever written in my opinion. The one by Kreizig.
So all great books on functional. This is the easiest one. Then you get weird stuff like piecewise
linear topology. That is definitely wizard level. Not something you've probably even heard of.
Analytic topology. Again, something that you've probably never seen. This is the one by Wyburn.
Topics in ring theory by Barshay. Very, very advanced book on ring theory. Algebraic number
theory by Weiss. Again, very advanced stuff. And then we have another book here. Hilbert spaces
by Berberian. Classic book. Abelian varieties by Serge Lang. Serge Lang is one of my favorite
authors. I collect his books. And that's actually why I have this book. Abelian varieties. So super
advanced stuff that only wizards study. Differential geometry is something that could considerably be
level three because a lot of people see it as an undergrad. But I threw it into level four because
most people don't see differential geometry as undergrads. It's not taught at most schools. It's
not something that's typically taught. So it's a little bit more niche. So I threw it into the
graduate level. Algebraic topology. That's definitely grad level. This is super hard stuff.
This is the graduate level book on abstract algebra. And I included it here because of that.
But you can use this as a beginner. Nevertheless, for the amount of content it has, it's definitely
wizard material. Topology of manifolds. Again, super advanced stuff here. Real and complex analysis.
This is by Walter Rudin. This is called Papa Rudin. The baby Rudin is the principles of mathematical
analysis book we saw earlier. This teaches you measure theory. And it's a very, very hard book.
And it's a very good book. Algebra by Hungerford. I like this book. I know some people don't.
I'm a big fan of this book. Methods of the functions of several complex variables. So earlier we saw
a complex analysis book by Sath and Snyder. That's for a single complex variable. This one covers
several complex variables. So the math is way more advanced. In fact, many schools don't even teach
this stuff. It's so advanced. And that's true for a lot of these topics. Functional analysis or
short course. That's a great book. A book on variational analysis. This is super advanced.
Algebraic extensions of fields. Look at that. Beautiful. Another measure theory book. This is
the one, again, by Halmos. It's a different edition. And over here we have analytic function
theory by Hill. So you can see these books here contain topics that are just super advanced.
So you definitely want to have a strong command of mathematics before you can become a wizard.
So that's level four, a mathematical wizard. Hopefully after watching this video, you can
become better at mathematics. And I'm really curious, what level are you at? Do you feel like
you're at level one, level two, level three, or level four? Let me know in the comments below.
Good luck and become a mathematical wizard.
