Welcome to lecture three. Today I'm going to talk about theories of the earth. Last time,
I spoke to you about how over the course of the 18th century, Newton's system captured
the allegiance of many natural philosophers. We examined several developments that convinced
them that the laws Newton formulated accurately describe the motions of the heavens. They
had the sense that Newton had discovered laws nature obeyed. For most, Newton's discovery
testified to the wisdom of the Creator, who had imposed these laws on nature. Admittedly,
they had had to make their peace with a reading of the Bible that didn't seem to require
that the earth stood still, but by the 18th century many had done that. For some, like
Pierre Laplace, the laws Newton had discovered worked so well that the Creator didn't need
to hang around to make sure that nothing in the complex system went wrong. This deism,
as the position was called, brought with it a disposition that I want to spell out a bit
more. Incidentally, you should know that Laplace was hardly the first to display this deistic
attitude. As we'll see in this lecture, it preceded him by many years. As I mentioned,
most natural philosophers of the day regarded the study of nature to be quite compatible
with their religious views. Finding out the natural laws God had imposed on nature, the
natural means by which God acted in nature, merely increased their reverence for the Creator
Himself. The point is that, for most, the pursuit of knowledge about nature, far from
causing them to question their traditional faith, strengthened it. Like Newton himself,
they believed God was intimately involved in creation. God was, after all, the author
of the laws nature obeyed, so he certainly was able to intervene and change the operation
of natural laws whenever he wished, say in answer to the prayer of a believer. The attitude
of those inclined to deism was different. Let me underscore again, such folks were not
atheists, but because they were impressed that natural laws operated without need for
a constant divine supervision, God's relationship to nature became something like that of an
absentee landlord. I once had a colleague who described God's relationship to nature
and deism this way. It was, he said, as if God created the cosmos and the natural laws
by which it was to run, and then went out for an eternal cup of coffee. Well, with this
kind of attitude about the power of natural law, it was more likely that those who held
it would entertain results that would run up against specific tenets of traditional belief.
One of the areas where this occurred had to do with the earth. Newton had discovered the
laws by which the heavens moved. If you were really impressed by the power of natural law,
and if your view of the deity was that God used natural law to make nature work, then
God must have used natural processes to make the earth, we know. And it was up to us to
discover the laws governing that process, just as Newton and Galileo and Kepler had
ferreted out laws governing the way the heavens moved. Well, such ideas began appearing in
the 18th century. And today I'm going to tell you about three of them in the 18th century.
These naturalistic explanations of how the earth originated became known as theories
of the earth. They were speculations on the causal means God had employed in shaping the
history of the earth. The idea of proposing a theory of the earth, of speculating on the
means God might have employed on creating the earth, really originated in the 17th century.
But in the older theories of the 17th century, the intent was to support the Genesis account.
It began with Rene Descartes. He wrote about the formation of the world in a work called
Le Monde, or the world in 1633. Actually, he didn't allow the book to be published right
away because he saw what happened to Galileo the year before, and he worried that some
might take offense at his ideas. Anyway, he depicted God as the first cause of things
including the materials and the laws for the formation of the world. The actual construction
of the world, however, he described as having happened as a natural process. He made clear
that God had created all the creatures we know five or six thousand years ago, so he
did not appear to challenge the mosaic chronology. The earth, he said, had solidified from the
matter that was everywhere. There were no empty places in the Cartesian cosmos. The earth's
outer surface was hard, and just beneath that, there was a layer of water. Each summer, the
sun dried out the crust so that fissures developed and water leaked through, producing
an empty space where the water had been. During the winter, the fissures closed. The crust
then collapsed, forming mountains, while the water gathered on the surface into the seas.
There was more to Descartes' scheme, but that need not concern us now. Just know that for
some, his system was seen as a good example of how you could use the new ideas of natural
philosophy to make the accounts of the Bible more reasonable. Others also began to bring
what they thought about the earth's physical features to bear on a better understanding
of the scripture. In doing this, there were some critics who opposed the idea that we
needed this information. From their point of view, the important point was that God
had done it. How God brought about it all was not that significant, but a growing number
of natural philosophers felt that knowledge of the earth could do what knowledge of the
heavens had. The new science would only bring greater glory to the Creator.
Closer to the end of the century, Thomas Burnett in England wrote a work entitled,
Sacred Theory of the Earth. It was likely from this work and its title that the phrase
theory of the earth came to have the meaning I gave it above, speculations on the causal
means that God had employed in shaping the history of the earth. Burnett set out in
the work to provide a complete exposition of the mosaic history of the earth from the
beginning to the end. It owed a good deal to Descartes, whom he referred to as an eminent
philosopher with a similar hypothesis. Throughout the work, Burnett made it clear that he thought
discovering the various changes the earth had gone through in its development was a
pious enterprise. The book attracted a great deal of attention. One contemporary attacked
it because he said the changes Burnett had described would have taken longer than the
six days mentioned in Genesis. Burnett himself, in a later work, conceded that it was hard
to imagine the development he depicted as occurring in six days, so he offered that
the mosaic account should be understood allegorically. The biblical age of the world didn't give
enough time. This concession got him into trouble. He had been appointed chaplain to
the king, who at the time was William the Third, the one who came over with his wife
Mary from Holland to take the English crown in the so-called Glorious Revolution of 1688.
The outcry against his interpretation of Genesis resulted in the loss of his theological post,
but the fame, or should we say notoriety, of his book brought a great deal of publicity
in England to the idea of a theory of the earth. Okay, that's the 17th century. Let's
go to the 18th century. In the 18th century, we'll see that natural philosophers became
more and more willing to free themselves from the confines of the commonly understood implications
of biblical references. They were not content with illusions to God's direct action as
a means of creating the earth, but in spelling out the natural means they thought God might
have employed, they assumed it would have taken a much longer time than the six days
referred to in Genesis. Let me give you examples of Enlightenment theories of the earth from
the early, middle, and then end of the century. There is a really intriguing theory of the
earth that was written near the beginning of the century in France, although it didn't
see publication until mid-century. Its author was Benoit de Malais, who served as France's
ambassador to Egypt between 1692 and 1718. He composed what he called a new system on
the diminution of the waters of the sea. de Malais was not your ordinary sort. Of course,
he traveled a lot in the Mediterranean region in the course of his duties as ambassador,
but that didn't mean he would automatically possess the inordinate curiosity about the
area that he had. For example, he mastered Arabic. That enabled him to read works few
Frenchmen ever saw. He read Arabic histories. The view of history he gleaned from them was
very different, as you can imagine, from what he had been taught in Christian Europe, and
he absorbed it like a sponge. You could hardly do that and remain unaffected. Anyone who
would find Arabic history fascinating is not likely to be the kind to insist on a mosaic
chronology of six literal days of creation. de Malais brought the same curiosity he showed
about Arabic versions of history to his travels. He liked, as you might guess, visiting historical
landmarks. I should tell you what you may already have assumed. Yes, de Malais was also
interested in natural philosophy. That meant that it wasn't just history that fascinated
him. He also paid a great deal of attention to the physical features of the regions he
went to. He became familiar, for example, with the topography of the Mediterranean lands.
Now, this is where an idea he'd heard about from his childhood came into play. You see,
de Malais' grandfather had become convinced that the sea level was diminishing. He'd made
observations of the seashore near the family home in France, and he was sure that the shoreline
was receding. I'm not aware if his grandfather made any other claim about all this, but his
pet theory about the water level was certainly communicated to his grandson. de Malais was
the kind of fellow who liked to take measurements, and some of the measurements he made during
his travels around the Mediterranean convinced him his grandfather was right. The waters
of the sea were diminishing. He noticed, for example, that there was a difference between
descriptions of seaside historical sites of old from their situation as he observed it.
Between the time that it passed, since the historical record had been made, he was even
able to come up with a rate at which the waters of the ocean must be dropping. If, for example,
the shoreline were so many units higher a certain number of years ago from what it is
now, then he could estimate how many units per year it had dropped. He concluded from
structures in ancient Carthage that the rate the sea level had dropped from earlier times
to his day was three feet every thousand years. Clearly not very fast. Well, de Malais determined
that he would write a book on the subject. He would write a theory of the earth based
on his idea that the waters on the earth had been slowly receding for a long time. He told
a friend of his back in France what he was doing. The friend was Bernard de Fontanelle,
who himself had written a well-known work on the plurality of worlds back in 1686. Fontanelle
persuaded de Malais to include an account of the development of the earth within the
solar system. Now de Malais was not one to shy away from a challenge, so he decided to
do it. And he knew it would be a challenge. He could appeal to his countryman Descartes
to explain how the vortices of matter had produced an earth in the first place. de Malais
focus would be the development of the earth from its primitive state to that he observed
around him. The rate of the diminishing of the waters was so slow that the history of
the earth must have taken a lot longer than the commonly understood five or six thousand
years. So it was going to cause problems. He knew that. He came up with an idea he thought
might help keep him out of trouble. He'd write the book as a conversation between two people,
one of whom was a missionary and the other of whom wasn't a Christian. A philosopher
from India, he named Telly Ahmed, which was, incidentally, de Malais' own name backwards.
He'd put all the dangerous ideas into the mouth of the non-Christian, so no one could
then fault him with defending heathen ideas. All he'd be doing was to let Frenchmen know
what people elsewhere believed. Well, of course, as you might guess, the tactic wouldn't
work. Galileo had tried a version of that tactic a century earlier, and look what it
did for him. He'd tried casting his results as a conversation among three people who
were merely exploring the ideas of Ptolemy and Copernicus, but everyone saw through
it and they'd see through this time, too. But that was down the road a long time from
when de Malais actually wrote the work. The title, Telly Ahmed, referred to the main character,
the Indian philosopher. If you opened the book, you encountered an Indian understanding
of the earth's past. The French missionary, who was talking to Telly Ahmed, learned right
away that the earth was originally covered with the waters of a primitive sea, the swirling
currents carved out mountains beneath its surface, but in accordance with his idea,
the depths of the primal ocean gradually decreased. That, of course, exposed the tops of the highest
mountains. Once the mountain tops were exposed, they began to wear away. The eroded material,
Telly Ahmed explained, settled back into the water and collected onto the ocean floor as
sedimentary rock. All the while, the sea level continued to drop, so this new sedimentary
rock also eventually was exposed to the air as new mountains, and as the process continued
more and more dry land emerged. Obviously, such a process must have taken an enormous
amount of time. Using his rate of three feet every thousand years, Telly Ahmed estimated
that over two billion years had passed since the primitive waters had begun to recede.
Two billion years, that would get the attention of French readers when they encountered it.
But that wasn't all. I mentioned that D. Malay was not shy. Indeed, he included in
his book an account of how life had developed, and it wasn't simply to say, God created
the fish of the sea and the beast of the field and leave it at that. The French missionary
made it clear from what he added to the conversation that he believed the appearance of fish and
land animals and, of course, humans was the work of the hands of God. But Telly Ahmed
did not appeal to the direct action of God. He did not give details, but he asserted that
fish had changed during the time the sea was gradually receding. Oh, he made it plausible.
The air above the seashore was so moist, he said, that it could be considered an almost
equal mixture of air and water. It was breathable, so flying fish could exist in it. So while
escaping a predator or having been thrown onto the land by the waves, these fish could
continue to live, and as they did so, their features gradually altered. Listen to his
words. The little wings which they had under their belly and which, like their fins, helped
them to walk on the sea bottom, became feet and served them to walk on land. This was
not the hand of God. This was a natural process, and it must have taken eons. If you continued
reading, you'd discovered that humans themselves were over 500,000 years old.
Well, D. Malay had finished the work well before his death in 1738, but various delays
prevented it from being published, even though he had wanted it to come out. Finally, it
made an appearance 10 years later, and it was a bombshell. The immediate outrage, incidentally,
was the timescale. Of course, what made the huge amount of time was the slow pace of the
natural process he described. Newton and others might believe that the discovery of natural
laws led to greater admiration for the creator, but apparently this practice of appealing
to natural laws could lead into trouble as well, at least in some areas. D. Malay's
book was too much, even for Voltaire. The year after telemed appeared, Voltaire wrote
that no system could give the least support to what he conceded was a widely prevalent
idea that the earth had changed its face over time. He rejected that D. Malay or anyone
else had shown that the earth had been covered by an ocean for a long period of time, or
that humans now lived where aquatic animals once lived. Of course, D. Malay was dead.
No one could punish him for his ideas, even if some would have liked to.
Our second example of a theory of the earth was created by someone who wasn't dead. This
theory came out the year after D. Malay's work appeared, and that didn't help him.
The atmosphere was already hostile against natural philosophy where the age of the earth
was concerned, and because Georges-Louis Leclerc was very much alive at mid-century, there
was no way he was going to escape censure. Leclerc would survive, and in fact, he would
later achieve great fame. In 1773, King Louis XV bestowed on him the title Comte Befone,
and that's the name by which he is known in the history of science. It's the name I'm
going to use here as well. It came from an estate he inherited from his mother when he
was 25, but the honor that King bestowed was due to his extensive accomplishments as a
natural philosopher. At mid-century, he'd not yet establish the great reputation he
one day would have. That was in the future, so when in 1749, Bufon published the first
three volumes of his natural history, it began a series of developments that would bring
him problems. Bufon had risen impressively to become head of the king's garden, that
important institution of natural science I mentioned to you back in lecture one. The
natural history, his publication, was to be a multi-volumed work whose goal was to organize
all that was known about the natural world. Like Dimalay, Bufon was not shy about the
scope of his project. In the first volume, for example, Bufon included a history of the
earth because, he said, it was the history of nature in its most ample extent. How did
Bufon think the earth had come to be? Once again, it was through natural processes God
had used, not through a direct supernatural decree of God, and it became immediately clear
that Bufon believed the earth was extremely old. Why? Because he announced that the more
recent changes in the last few thousand years of the earth's history were insignificant compared
to those that had occurred in the ages following the original creation. Bufon viewed the earth
as just one of the planets. Its history was tied to that of our solar system. Now came
the really novel idea Bufon introduced. Regardless of what you thought of it, you had to admit
it was intriguing. Bufon suggested that the earth and other planets had originated as
the result of a comet that had struck the sun. The comet had come in at an oblique angle
and the collision knocked off huge pieces of the sun's mass that settled into orbits
at various distances away. That's why he said all the planets circled the sun in the same
direction and in the same plane. He invoked the name of the Great Newton who had acknowledged
that comets occasionally collided with other heavenly bodies. Let's remember that this
was right at the time when Mopet-chouis and Clairot were using Newton's system to great
advantage in France. We saw that last time in lecture two. These pieces of the sun were
clearly hot masses. Once they were separated, however, they could cool faster, which they
proceeded to do according to Bufon. He concluded that as the piece that was the earth cooled,
it became covered with water from the condensing atmosphere. So, we have once again, as in
de Malais, a primitive ocean that covered the earth. And again, the motions of this
primitive universal sea, in Bufon's case caused by huge tides, carved out mountains
and valleys beneath the surface. Unlike de Malais, Bufon was reluctant to say how dry
land came about as time passed. Well, you can imagine what the reaction was to all this.
The faculty of theology of the Sorbonne in Paris notified Bufon of some 14 propositions
from the natural history which they regarded as reprehensible. One reviewer, who clearly
thought Bufon's work was outlandish heresy, noted that it required a world far older than
Moses made it out to be, he said. Bufon had not said exactly how old, but the reviewer
asked whether there was really any difference between Bufon's view and that of authors
who believed that the world was eternal. He was obviously trying to associate Bufon with
materialists. Well, as I said, Bufon was not yet so great that he could withstand such
criticism. He had to retract what he'd said. And the retraction came out in the next volume
of the natural history, volume four. Here's what he said. I declare that I had no intention
to contradict the scriptures, that I believe most firmly all therein related about the
creation both as to the order of time and matter of fact. And I abandon everything in
my book respecting the formation of the earth and generally all which may be contrary to
the narration of Moses. We know, however, that he continued to believe in his theory.
He knew about recently published measurements of the heat in mines and hot springs that
had been made to support the claim that the center of the earth was hot. He also knew
of Newton's estimation that an iron sphere the size of our earth would take more than
50,000 years to cool from red hot to the temperature of air. Bufon set out in the coming years
to conduct his own experiments on the rates of cooling for various substances that make
up the earth. He published his results in a work on minerals in 1774 in which he inferred,
he thought conservatively, that it had taken almost 75,000 years for the earth to cool
to its present temperature and over 33,000 years to cool to the point when organic life
could begin. In 1778, Bufon republished his thesis about the comet in a new book entitled
Epics of Nature. By this time, the atmosphere in France had changed from a quarter century
earlier. As we saw last time, natural philosophy was becoming more visible in France. Lots
of ideas were in circulation. We'll see later in lecture 10 that here in the years of the
eve of the revolution in Paris, there was a lot of people making claims of all sorts.
So when he now wrote that the writer of Genesis had not meant for the days of creation to
be understood literally, it didn't seem as scandalous as it would have at mid century.
In his book, which was widely read, Bufon depicted seven epochs of formative activity
in the earth's history. Life appeared only after 33,000 years. By the time humans appeared
in the final epoch, some 70,000 years had passed. It was still sensational, but this
time he was not forced to recant. On the contrary, it was Bufon's work that as much as any introduced
the French public to the idea of an extended period of history prior to human history in
which no life had existed. We'll see that idea take hold with the work of another Frenchman
in lecture 15. The final example of a theory of the earth from the 18th century that I
want to tell you about comes from a Scotsman, James Hutton. In 1785, Hutton read a paper
to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, which was printed in the society's transactions a few
years later. Then in 1795, he published a longer form of his ideas in a book. All had
the title, Theory of the Earth. Hutton promised in his subtitle to investigate what laws had
been operating to change the surface of the earth. I need to mention two assumptions that
colored Hutton's conclusions. First, he believed that the earth had evidently been made for
the sake of humankind. For example, there was a reason why the earth's surface was made
of soil. It was because plants require soil, and we require plants. Plants would not have
been able to grow if the earth's surface had been completely solid, so it was not accidental
that natural forces broke up the solid earth so that its surface did not retain the hardness
it had deeper down. That was the first assumption. The second one was that nature's forces did
not, in his view, act suddenly and dramatically. Hutton said that the operations of nature
are equable and steady. This assumption had an obvious consequence. If nature's forces
were slow acting, then they must have been acting for a long time. In other words, the
earth was pretty old. To wear rock down into soil, which was then carried by moving water
to the sea, required an enormous amount of time. Hutton observed that the course of nature
cannot be limited by time. Hutton believed that the soil that eroded into water eventually
formed into rocks. He rejected the idea that some were maintaining and which we'll examine
in our next lecture, that rocks formed by a process of consolidation or precipitation
out of the water. His view was that the soil was fused into rock by the action of subterranean
heat. That same heat, through the pressure it exerted from below on the rock it had fused,
slowly pushed the rock upward, gradually lifting it out of the water to form mountains like
the Andes and Alps. What then? Here is where Hutton becomes most interesting to me. Well,
the whole process starts over again. The surface of the earth familiar to us was just the latest.
There had been different phases to the earth prior to our age. In fact, Hutton suggested
that there was a cycle that repeated over and over so that cycles of decay and renovation
occurred over and over again. And they constituted nature's means of sustaining plant and animal
life according to a wisdom that had been in operation for an indefinite succession of ages.
The last words of his treatise have become famous. He wrote, The result therefore of
our present inquiry is that we find no vestige of a beginning, no prospect of an end. More
than Demolais or Bouffant, Hutton thought that he was defending his religious convictions
with his ideas. To him, it was clear that God had made the whole arrangement so that
life could exist, human life in specific. So he was testifying to the wisdom of God just
as other great natural philosophers before him had. The problem with that, of course,
was that his predecessors had not appeared to challenge the veracity of the Bible as
he had. He may have thought that he was bringing glory to God, but most of his readers had
major problems with his conclusions. What was true about all three of our theorists
of the earth, however, was that they believed that God acted on nature by establishing natural
laws that dictated nature's course. That was becoming more and more common an attitude.
And as we have seen, it sometimes implied that it wasn't going to be possible to make
the traditional straightforward interpretation of the Bible when it referred to nature. That
was more than most people were willing to do. In our next lecture, we're going to meet
a different approach to the study of the earth. It was distinguished from this tradition of
offering a theory of the earth. How? Well, we'll discuss that next time. But in a word,
that tradition saw itself as much more empirically based. It was much more reluctant to speculate
in a grandiose fashion about causes that had made the earth what it is today. And we'll
discuss that then our next time.
