Welcome back. This is lecture 17. In the last two lectures, we've been learning how natural
philosophers in France confronted new ideas about life in its past in the early decades
of the 19th century. We've seen how the idea of extinct beasts that roamed the earth before
recorded history captivated the French public. It was the reality of the fossils that people
could actually see that made this so real. It wasn't only an idea, just a theory that
some natural philosopher had dreamed up. Here was the fossil. It demanded an explanation.
What kind of animal had it been? When had it been alive? Were animals like it still alive
somewhere? All these questions required answers in a way that no grandiose theory ever did.
We also saw how there was a great difference of opinion about these beasts. George Cuvier
insisted that they were no longer around, that they belonged to extinct species. They'd been wiped
out by periodic catastrophes that had plagued the earth's past. For Cuvier, God had created all
the species that ever lived, including those of the present. The ones that had become extinct
were victims of catastrophes. The ones that still lived, including us humans, had avoided
being totally wiped out by catastrophes. That was Cuvier's take. Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
saw things differently. He didn't think of the prehistoric beasts as members of extinct
species. He thought of them as earlier forms of today's species. Or, if you prefer, he
thought of present-day species as changed forms of past species. In other words, Lamarck
thought that there'd been an evolution of species from past to present. It was part
of his whole deistic outlook. He thought that God had created an order of things that was
able by itself to produce the nature we know. That included the living world. Living organisms
had got started for Lamarck by means of spontaneous generation, and then had evolved into the
diversity of life we see all around. It had taken an enormous amount of time, and it didn't
require the direct supervision of God, because the laws God had imposed on the world took
care of everything by themselves. Two visions of the past, two visions of God's relationship
to nature. Now today, we're going to go across the English Channel to Britain. What was going
on there? Did the British think of these things in the same terms as the French? Well, the
situation in Britain during this time resembled the one on the continent in certain respects,
and in fact, we'll see that it drew on the French story directly in some ways. But it
also contrasted with the continental experience as well. The British way of dealing with these
issues had a British flavor, or should I say British flavors. Let me explain. In Britain,
the encounter with life in its past is best understood against the two regional backgrounds
of North and South. These provide the two flavors I want to discuss. Let's go North
first to Scotland. Here, the issues that grabbed the attention of Scottish natural philosophers
focused on geology and theories of the earth, so we can see right away that there's going
to be a contrast with the French scene, at least with the one dominated by Cuvier. I've
mentioned a couple of times already how continental writers like Cuvier came at the question of
the earth's past. They preferred the approach of Abraham Werner in Germany. That was the
one based on detailed empirical observations of the mineral composition of local regions.
We met first this approach, or we first met this approach, back in lecture four, and Cuvier
in particular emphasized that in going this route, he was rejecting the old theory of
the earth tradition that went back to Demolais and Bouffant and Hutton in the 18th century.
ists of the earth used what observational evidence they gathered to support grand high-level
explanations of the structure and history of the earth in terms of a few natural causes.
That was the key. They were looking for causal laws. I have to mention this all again because
it comes up in the North British story. Okay, back to Scotland. It's the turn of the century
right around 1800. A small group of thinkers in Scotland creates their own debate about
the geological past. In a nutshell, what this group did was to transform Werner's empirical
approach. Recall he'd named it, Geognasy. They transformed Werner's Geognasy into something
it never claimed to be, into a theory of the earth. And then they proceeded to compare
this new theory of the earth to the theory of the earth of their countryman, James Hutton.
Some of these North British thinkers liked the new theory of the earth that had been
created from Werner's Geognasy. Others preferred Hutton's theory. And the debate they created
has become famous in the history of science. So our next task is to see how all this came
about. And we're also going to want to ask whether the important place that this debate
has been given in history of science is deserved. We'll do that once we've taken a look at it.
Let me identify this famous debate so you'll know what I'm talking about. The series of
exchanges between those who based their theory of the earth on Werner and those who defended
Hutton's theory of the earth has become known as the debates between the Neptunists and the
Vulcanists. The names referred to agencies appealed to and explaining the surface features
of the earth. Vulcanism was the theory of the earth in which the primary causal means
God had employed in shaping its history was the earth's subterranean heat. So obviously
Vulcanists were impressed with what Hutton had said. Vulcanism contrasted to Neptunism,
which was the theory of the earth in which the primary causal means God had employed in
shaping its history was the movement of water. Now the debates began with the appearance
of two books in 1802 by men from Edinburgh. The first was John Playfair's illustrations
of the Huttonian theory of the earth. You can tell from the title which side he was on.
Playfair's book was followed quickly by another, this one written by John Murray, and called
a comparative view of the Huttonian and Neptunian systems of geology. This sounds like it might
be a balanced consideration of both theories. In fact, it was a defense of the new Neptunist
viewpoint. Incidentally, the first mention of these terms Vulcanists and Neptunists, at
least the first mention that I know of, comes from Playfair's book itself in 1802. He talks
there about the way minerals are formed and says that there are basically two means that
nature uses, fire and water. And then he says that the partisans of each agency, and this
is a quote from the book, have of late been distinguished by the fanciful names of Vulcanists
and Neptunists. Well, whatever the origin, the names stuck.
Let's look deeper into Playfair's book. This was a defense of Hutton and Vulcanism. Playfair
was well aware of Werner's Geognasy, but he says right at the beginning that he wasn't
interested in it. And the reason he gives for this position is revealing. He was not
interested in Geognasy, he said, because it didn't deal with causes. And he liked Hutton's
approach because it did deal with causes. So Playfair was very unlike Cuvier over in
France. He liked grand speculative schemes that appealed to causal laws. He preferred
a theory of the earth. From this point of view, Werner's Geognasy was less interesting
because it didn't set out to address the question of what causal agency had shaped
the earth over the centuries. It was interested more in the mineralogical content of rocks.
Playfair liked the kind of question that motivated Hutton. And in general, he liked Hutton's
answer. Playfair agreed with Hutton that the interior heat of the earth was the primary
agent of geological change in history. And he agreed that it acted so slowly and regularly
that it must have been in operation forever in a day. Well, not literally forever of course,
but in indefinitely long time. But Playfair placed his own stamp on Hutton's work too.
Recall that Hutton's main motivation was to show God's action in nature. Hutton believed
he was demonstrating God's greatness by revealing the intricacies of God's provision for humankind.
These seemingly eternal cycles of decay and regeneration that broke up the soil so that
humans could survive was evidence of how truly great, how far above humankind, yet how loving
God was. Playfair was less concerned with this kind of natural theology. So he removed
this theological concern to demonstrate God's action. And he replaced it as much as possible
with sound geological theory as he regarded it as sound geological theory. What do I mean
by sound geological theory? Well, that's the question. For one thing, Playfair depicted
Hutton as a natural philosopher who brought a method to his work. Now, this wasn't something
that had been a concern to Hutton particularly. He didn't push a particular method in his
original paper. He hadn't said, good natural philosophy does this, and this, and this,
and see that's what I've done in this work. But Playfair essentially did exactly that.
For example, it was Playfair who began this tradition of presenting Hutton's system as
results that had been directly induced or inferred from observations. Hutton himself hadn't
made that claim. And there was something else. Playfair emphasized that the method of his
hero Hutton was better than the one the Neptunists used. How? Well, they appealed to accidental
causes like floods, but Hutton did something different. Hutton, Playfair said, explained
the formation of seas and continents, not by accident, but by the operation of regular
and uniform causes. Now, this assertion about nature's regularity is in Hutton. But Playfair
made it a point to associate nature's regularity and uniformity of action with Hutton's name.
In fact, thanks to Playfair, Hutton's theory has become known in the history of science
as an example of what's called uniformitarianism. That's the idea that in natural science we
should rely on lawful action, that there's a uniformity between nature's past and the
present. It's the opposite of catastrophism. There you rely on sudden and unusual action,
something unpredictable, something that happens rarely, maybe only once. Playfair was saying
that the method of good natural philosophy relies on causal law, not on unpredictable
and accidental catastrophes. Well, there was another Scotsman who was not about to let
Playfair have the whole field to himself. This was Playfair's contemporary John Murray.
Murray did not agree that Playfair had said the last word on what sound geological theory
was either. Murray was one of several people in Scotland who were familiar with Verna's
work. He went out of his way to remind his readers that Verna's work resulted from strict
inductions made from careful observations. And when he said that, of course, he was appealing
to exactly what Verna's system was known for. So thus far, he was not doing what Playfair
had done to Hutton. He wasn't imposing something onto Verna's approach that wasn't already
there. But in fact, he would do that. He did remake Verna's work into something that suited
his own purpose. Murray made Verna's geognasy into something it wasn't designed at all to
be. Let me tell you how this happened. Murray explained, of course, that in Verna's approach,
the inductions were made in conjunction with an organizing generalization about rocks consolidating
from a primitive, aqueous solution. That was fair enough. We know that's what Verna
did do. But then Murray went on to make Verna's empirical work into a causal theory of the
Earth. He was clear about this. For example, in acknowledging that it was necessary to
assert not merely that the consolidation had taken place, but to show the causes that had
acted to produce the consolidation, he conceded Playfair's point about the needs for causal
explanations. In other words, he conceded that Verna had not sought for a causal theory,
but he argued that didn't matter since there was one implicitly present in his approach.
It was just a matter of identifying it, and then one would have a theory of the Earth that
could be compared to volcanism. Clearly, Murray felt that the causal agency he identified,
the movement of water, would more than do the trick. So in Britain, the debates of the
first decade of the century would largely be over which cause was correct, heat or water.
And now each side was asserting that its claims resulted from empirical observations. Volcanists
emphasized the slow action of heat and the uniformity of action from the past to the
present. Neptunists emphasized the dramatic action of moving water, which for many British
was easier to reconcile with the direct and divine superintendents of history. After all,
there was a flood recorded in the Bible, so the debates raged over that first decade sometimes
with a real passion. You can imagine the disadvantages of each side, and you can imagine that as
long as the partisans were pitting one idea against the other, as if it was a matter
of choosing which one was correct, there wouldn't be much chance for a meeting of the minds.
Well, by 1810 and 1820, the situation changed a little for the better. That is, things calmed
down a bit. Basically what happened was that folks realized that it wasn't a matter of
either or. For example, both volcanists and Neptunists came to agree that the action of
water resulted in the erosion and dislocation of masses of land. So water had an effect
that was slow acting too, just like heats. And they also came to understand that while
the dramatic action of water played a part in the formation of present rocks, so also
did heat and chemical action. Clearly earthquakes and volcanoes had something to do with the
interior heat of the earth, and they were dramatic, quick acting forces that shaped
the earth. So if in the past the temptation had been to see volcanism as involving only
slow acting forces and to see Neptunism as using only dramatic forces, that was no longer
as easy to do. Both sides were coming toward the middle. And then in the middle of the
second decade in 1815, attention began to shift away from the formation of rocks and
tore the fossils embedded in them. This happened because of the work of an unknown engineer
named William Smith. For some 20 years, Smith had been using the fossil remains in rocks
as markers of their age, and on the basis of this scheme he published a map of the geological
strata of England and Wales. All these developments helped to make people realize that you couldn't
just talk about the issue as if it was heat or water. It was more involved than that. Lots
of things were entailed. I want to say something else about this famous encounter between volcanism
and Neptunism. We have to keep in mind that this debate was largely a British phenomenon.
Murray may have successfully transformed Werner's Geognasy into a theory of the earth in Britain,
but that wasn't the way Werner was regarded on the continent. Many on the continent continued
to see Werner's approach as they always had. I mean that they didn't regard it as a causal
theory. Although they did view Hutton's work that way. To them, Hutton's theory was but
one of several competing theories of the earth. So on the continent, it was not a matter
of comparing Hutton to Werner. And even within Britain, the replies to play fairs' popularization
of Hutton's theory were largely a regional matter. They tended to be carried out by Edinburgh
sympathizers of Werner. I want to point this out because, frankly, Hutton's theory has
in my opinion, and in the opinion of others, been given a disproportionate amount of attention
in the history of science. I'm arguing here that it was a regional matter within Britain,
mainly a north British concern. This overvaluation of the influence of Hutton's theory in the
early 19th century has happened, I think, because Hutton's uniformitarian approach
and the emphasis on the role of the earth's interior heat later settled in as important
components of geological science. But that would take some time before that happened.
Here in the first decades of the 19th century, it was Werner's approach that was more influential.
His geognasy produced what one historian has called the venerian radiation. I mentioned
this earlier when we were talking about Werner. This generation of thinkers who found an inspiration
in Werner and spread out over the continent doing solid observational work in geology
on into the 1830s. So if we want to portray the period with the overall emphasis where
it should be, it was Werner, more than Hutton, who was important at the time.
So much for North Britain. That was what I called the first example of the unique flavor
of the British way of dealing with issues of the earth's past. Let's go south now to
England. And in England, we're going to Oxford University. Here in southern Britain, an issue
emerged during the second decade of the century that would prove to be very important. It
began innocuously enough, in fact, you'd never guess from its origins that it was going to
assume a place in history of science. Why? Because the issue began as an attempt to reform
the discipline of world history at Oxford. What has that got to do with natural science?
Well, in order to explain that to you, I have to tell you something about this discipline
called world history. You see, British scholars assumed that humans determined world history.
So classical scholarship in this field focused on written documents from the ancient past.
It was just that when they thought of the world, they didn't think beyond the role of
humans in the world. World history was human history. Given that assumption, it stood to
reason that the primary credentials of the world historian would include a knowledge of the
languages of antiquity, including those of the Orient, and an expertise in deciphering texts.
I don't want to mislead you here. There was some interest in subjects that went beyond
human activity. For example, English world historians acknowledged that it was good if
you had a little familiarity with astronomy and the basic physical features of the earth.
That was good to have. But even then, any information you had about the earth's physical
state was really only meaningful to them as it fit into the reconstruction of human history.
This all began to change when Cuvier's 1812 work on fossil bones became available to English
readers in translation in 1813. The editor of the translation was one of those Scotsmen
who were involved in the debate between neptanism and volcanism. He himself was an Edinburgh
neptanist. So not surprisingly, he latched on to Cuvier's theory as something that had supported
his view. He included an essay along with the translation in which he explained why Cuvier's
work confirmed his own understanding of neptanism. Now there was a war going on between France and
England at the time. It was the final years of Napoleon's reign and the rulers of Europe
were determined to bring the end about as quickly as possible. So there wasn't any way for Cuvier
to get word across the channel that would counter the impression given in this translation that
he supported a neptanist's theory of the earth. We know he would have regarded such a conclusion
as a distortion of Werner's work. Enter William Buckland. Buckland had been a student of the
classics at Oxford and then after 1813 became a professor of mineralogy there. Buckland clearly
was an unusual sort. He was far more interested in natural philosophy than the rest of the world
historians at Oxford were and he determined to do something to convince his colleagues
that their field of study needed revising. Buckland's achievement would be to bring natural
science more centrally into the study of world history in Britain and Cuvier was a great help to
him. Of course he quickly read Cuvier's work and became convinced that it was extremely relevant to
the discipline of world history. Buckland endorsed Cuvier's idea that human history was just the
last in a series of periods of earth history and that there had been long stages of history
where no humans lived and where humans were not that no humans lived but where humans were of
little importance. Cuvier thought that humans lived from the beginning on and he agreed with
Cuvier's claim that major catastrophes had been responsible for wiping out whole species of animals
in the past. In fact what Buckland would do was to import French catastrophism into England
and make it very popular. By 1815 he began lecturing to his students about the fossil
remains of elephants and mammoths and then in 1819 he gave a lecture to his university
colleagues in classics which was subsequently published as a book. Had the appropriate title
for a work in the classics in Latin of course the book was called Vindicii Geologicae roughly
of the claims of geology. It had a subtitle that promised to connect science and religion.
In it he began his campaign to make geology a worthy academic subject in the university
as part of world history and he was pretty successful. His defense of the earth's catastrophic
past in fact had an enormous impact just as it had in France. This stuff was fascinating to the
English listener as well as the French had been to the French. Of course Buckland was a colorful
character. He was a real eccentric but that just helped his cause. It made him interesting along
with the wonderful subject matter he expounded. Buckland in fact brought geology to center stage
in Britain during the 1820s. He was helped in this by a new discovery he heard about in 1821.
He learned about some fossil remains that had been uncovered by quarrymen in a cave in Yorkshire.
Of course Buckland immediately set out to examine the bones and to try to make sense of them and
within two years he had a book on the subject. It was called Reliquiae de Luvianae. He had to stay
with the Latin after all. He was a classicist. The title meant literally relics of the deluge.
Now the English had their fossil bones too. The bones represented a real collection of animals.
There were remains from hyenas, an elephant, rhinosemuses, other animals all found together in a cave.
Buckland put it all together and announced that from the markings on the remains of the
larger animals found in the cave he had inferred that the hyenas had dragged these remains into the
cave. So what's the big deal about that? Well if Buckland was right then it meant that all
those animals that had lived together in the same region long ago had been there at the same time.
Buckland even claimed that they had lived before Noah's flood had occurred.
Now that was a bold statement for the English natural philosophers of the day.
One reason why it was daring was that if it was right then the traditional understanding of Noah's
flood was wrong. That traditional understanding assumed Noah's flood had covered the entire earth
so that remains from different regions of the world had been mixed together by the swirling
waters of that primal ocean. This would explain why a variety of bones like the ones found in the
cave could end up together. Buckland was offering an alternative explanation that didn't require a
universal flood. Of course with controversy comes more fame and then when Cuvier himself over in
France heard about Buckland's work, had some good things to say about it, well Buckland became even
more famous. I want to pause and take stock of the significance of Buckland's contribution here.
The appearance of his work had three effects I want to highlight. First, and I suppose most
obviously, it created a synthesis between the British and French ideas about the earth's history.
It did this by merging British classical studies with Cuvier's focus on catastrophic forces. So
what emerges in the 1820s is the dominance of catastrophism as an approach in the British
treatment of life in its past. That's important because one of Buckland's students, a young man
named Charles Lyle, will change that in the 1830s, but in the 1820s catastrophism was in.
This catastrophism was not identical to the old neptanism since catastrophes were no longer
limited to the action of water. The second effect of Buckland's work was that he challenged the
traditionalists of his day to reconsider their views. Buckland rejected, for example, a strictly
literal reading of the Bible in favor of a broader classical vision of its meaning.
He accepted that the history of the earth and of life on its surface went back a long, long way,
far longer than the old-fashioned notion of 6,000 years that some of his classicist colleagues still
accepted. And as a result, Buckland's claims called forth a spate of works that were opposed to his
theory. So Buckland was in some senses a radical where his conservative colleagues were concerned.
That has to be kept in mind because usually Buckland is portrayed as a thinker who was guided
by his strong religious views. And I don't deny that he was. It's just that these religious views
were not of the ultra-conservative type. And that brings me to the third effect that Buckland
had on his age. His understanding of the past may have permitted an extended age of the earth and
of life, but Buckland categorically rejected the deistic vision of Erasmus Darwin, James Hutton,
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, and others. Buckland was himself an Anglican cleric. He respected the
scripture, and he had no interest in challenging the church of which he was a part. He didn't think
he was doing that by taking the positions he did. Yes, his understanding of Genesis permitted him
more time for world history than many were conceding. But by the same token, he respected the
reality of Noah's flood. It was one of the recent catastrophes that had plagued the earth for ages.
And it was clearly a central event in human history. The absence of human fossil remains from it
would prove to be a problem for Buckland, but that was in the future. He'd have to worry about that.
So we have to see Buckland for what he was. Neither a hard-line religious conservative
nor a liberal deist. He defined his own position, and Buckland's demand that classical world history
should be expanded to include geology, I would assert, makes him a progressive force within
British academe. By 1830, the controversies over life in its past had been placed front and center
in Britain, just as they had been on the continent. And much of it was Buckland's doing. It was in the
very next year of 1831 that a young man named Charles Darwin, fresh out of university, would join
a voyage around the world that eventually would change things mightily. But Darwin's voyage was
not the first such trip to capture the public's imagination. It had also been done earlier by
a German explorer who had been living in Paris since near the beginning of the century. And these
voyages of these two men will be the subject of our next lecture.
