This is Lecture 18. Today, we're going exploring. For the last three lectures, we've been occupied
a good deal with life's past. That was clearly the case in the work of Georges Cuvier on
the world of prehistoric beasts, and it obviously applied to Jean-Baptiste Lamarck's understanding
of the evolution of life. Life's past was less directly a concern of the North British
in their debates about volcanism and neptanism. That had more to do with the Earth's geological
past, but the history of life was central to the work of William Buckland as he set
out to convince his colleagues at Oxford that natural science was crucial for understanding
world history. Those were the last three lectures. Today, I want to talk about the present, not
our present. I mean the present for those who were living in the early 19th century. Specifically,
I want to introduce you to two individuals from this general period who set out to explore
the world of their day. That included both the physical world and the things that were
living in it. I'm talking about Alexander von Humboldt and Charles Darwin. Both of these
men set out on extended voyages of discovery that would last five years. They did it some
thirty years apart, von Humboldt at the beginning of the century and Darwin in 1831. But their
purposes were similar. In fact, as we'll see, von Humboldt's journey provided one of the
motivations for Darwin's. Now voyages of exploration had been going on well before the 19th century.
We're all familiar with the famous voyages of discovery from the early modern period.
They included, after all, Columbus's trips to the New World. And there were lots of other
early explorers. The most important of these pre-19th century voyages for our purposes,
however, occurred in the 18th century. Two of them, for example, were particularly inspiring
to the young Alexander von Humboldt, one of today's subjects. One of these 18th century
journeys was undertaken by Louis Antoine de Bougainville, who became the first Frenchman
to sail all the way around the world in a voyage that lasted from December 1766 to March
1769. He took the king's naturalist and botanist with him, so we know that collecting information
about the natural world was one part of his mission. And when he came back, Bougainville
wrote an account of his adventures that became one of von Humboldt's favorite childhood books.
So even as a youth, von Humboldt was dreaming of going off to see the world and learning
about the strange creatures that inhabited its remote parts. And then, when he was 21
years old, von Humboldt actually met and traveled in Europe with one of the two naturalists
who had been aboard Captain Cook's second voyage of 1772. This was Georg Forster, whose
tales also inspired the impressionable young von Humboldt. In fact, he later called Forster
his guiding star. So who was this Alexander von Humboldt anyway? Well, I can tell you
right up front that Alexander von Humboldt was Europe's leading international man of
natural science during the first half of the 19th century. And the main reason that
he rose to such fame, although certainly not the only reason, was his trip to the Americas
from 1799 to 1804. And that's what I want to talk to you about today.
As you can tell from his name, von Humboldt was the son of a nobleman. His father, who
died when Alexander was just a boy, was an officer in Frederick the Great's Prussian
army. So when Alexander was born in 1769, he came into a world of wealth and privilege.
He wasn't ever really going to have to worry about making money. By the same token, that
meant that he wouldn't follow the normal educational pattern of young Germans. Middle class young
men would normally follow their early training in elementary and secondary schools with attendance
at a university where they pursued a degree. This they did in one of the four faculties
that existed at the time. These four faculties were first the philosophy faculty. That was
a general faculty that included most of what we would think of as the arts and sciences.
This incidentally is where you would likely pursue natural philosophy. The other three
faculties were the so-called higher faculties. They were almost like professional faculties.
They dealt with more specialized studies. And the professions that mattered here were
law, medicine, and theology. Now this particular set of faculties might strike you as an odd
combination to designate as higher, but when you think about it, they train students in
how to keep people healthy, how to settle their differences, and how to take care of
their souls. Pretty much take care of life, take care of life, right around all over.
Well, von Humboldt, like many children of noblemen, had a private tutor. That took care
of his early training. He had no real need for a degree, but he was the curious sort
and he did attend various universities and academies for a few semesters. And that made
up the formal part of his education. But von Humboldt had access to another source of
education that was not open to most people. It was his exposure to the cultural life in
Berlin. In fact, this is what really accounts for his intellectual development. In the very
first lecture, I referred to the salons of Berlin during the late 18th century that rivaled
those in France, which are perhaps more well known. It was the Jewish intellectual community
of Berlin that supported some of the best salon life there at the time. Von Humboldt
himself was not Jewish, but he eagerly joined into the wide-ranging discussions of this
intellectual atmosphere of the Enlightenment Jewish community there in Berlin in the salons.
And he found there the kind of stimulation that really excited his mind. Now, I said
that he didn't have to worry about money. That didn't stop Alexander from pursuing a
career. In fact, his mother had encouraged him to make himself useful. Well, he'd always
been interested in the study of nature. And one of the many areas of his interests was
mineralogy. So he determined to make his study of mineralogy practical by becoming a mining
administrator, which he accomplished by the age of 23. It wasn't until a few years later
that his mother died and he was informed about the details of his inheritance. And what he
learned was that he was extremely wealthy. And of course, now he was independent. He
decided to give up his career in mining administration and undertake scientific research on various
problems. In fact, it was one of these problems, one on animal electricity that first brought
von Humboldt to our attention back in lecture 12. That was his demonstration that you could
generate the electricity needed to make a frog's leg contract using just one metal, not two,
as Volta was saying. During this period, I'm talking here about the late 1790s, he spent
considerable time in Jena and Weimar. These were the centers of the German romantic movement
that was well underway. Here he got to know Goethe, Schelling, and other prominent figures
of the so-called romantic circle, and they got to know him. But all along that childhood
dream of traveling nagged away at him. That was his real goal, to undertake a voyage of
discovery in the tradition of his boyhood heroes. And now that he'd become involved
with natural philosophy, he imagined taking a different kind of trip. He would go to the
Americas for the purpose of conducting scientific research. And he realized his dream. In fact,
it was the first journey of exploration that was undertaken solely for the purpose of gathering
information about the world and its creatures. First, he went off to Paris in 1798, where he
witnessed for himself the excitement Cuvier was causing. He met all the French savants. He even
met the aging explorer Bougainville. Among those he became acquainted with was a French botanist
named Emé Bonplon. They hit it off with each other, and von Humboldt invited Bonplon to join
him in a research expedition to the Spanish colonies. So they set off for Spain, where they
had an audience with the king and queen in Madrid. This was a wise move. Why? Because they were
able to acquire special passports that guaranteed the cooperation of Spanish colonial authorities
in assisting their research. Finally, in June of 1799, the two left Spain for South America.
Thanks to von Humboldt's personal wealth, they were better equipped for research than any travelers
before them. As he departed, von Humboldt made clear what his goals were. He wrote that he
intended to collect plants and fossils and make astronomical observations. Nothing that novel
in this. That was kind of assumed, but when it came to expressing his basic motivation, von
Humboldt took a grand view. His main purpose, he said, and these are his words, was to find out
how the forces of nature interact upon one another and geographic environment influences plant and
animal life. He had another goal. I must find out, he said, about the unity of nature. This
preoccupation with nature's many forces and their unification impressed a lot of people in these
years. Later, we'll explore this topic specifically in lecture 25, the first one of the series on
physical science and culture. The journey took the two travelers first to Venezuela, where they
spent a year exploring the coast and the interior. In February of 1800, they set out to explore the
relatively unknown region of the upper Orinoco. This was the tropics with a vengeance. They endured
unspeakable hazards, snakes, jaguars, and worst of all mosquitoes and a host of other biting insects
from which escape was impossible. Von Humboldt collected specimens of plants everywhere he went.
He took readings of the heavens of barometric pressure, the temperature of the bodies of water
there, and he and Von Humboldt decided then that they were going to try to confirm the existence of
a canal that some claimed linked the two great river systems of the Orinoco and the Amazon.
After the two explorers found and traversed what is known today as the Casa Cuiari Canal,
its existence was no longer in dispute. From Venezuela, the pair took a brief trip to Cuba,
and from there, they embarked on a two-year exploration of the Andes of Colombia, Ecuador,
and Peru. It was in Ecuador that Von Humboldt accomplished the deed that brought him more
fame than any other single accomplishment. He climbed Mount Chimborazo, almost to the summit,
got up to over 19,000 feet. At the time, it was thought to be the highest mountain in the world,
so you can see why it made him famous. While in Peru, incidentally, he took readings of the cold
current off the coast. Now he wasn't the first one to discover this current, but it still bears his
name to this day. The final stage of the trip lasted another year and a half, took Von Humboldt
to Mexico and then the United States. He came first to Philadelphia, where he met with American
natural philosophers. His real goal, however, was to go to the new capital in Washington.
He wanted to meet Thomas Jefferson, whose writings, he said, had inspired him from his
earliest years. With Jefferson, he discussed many scientific subjects, and of course, Jefferson
quizzed him about his knowledge of the inhabitants of the territory recently acquired from France,
the Louisiana Purchase. Von Humboldt shared maps with Jefferson that he had made during his stay
in Mexico, and then it was back to Europe, finally, after five full years away. He had regularly sent
word home of his adventures and they had been reported on during his absence. There had also
been rumors of his death in the wild that circulated among people in Europe. All these reports
established him permanently as a celebrated man of natural philosophy when he came back through
Europe and proved the rumors of his death were untrue. For example, his appearance in Paris in
August of 1804 made him the center of public attention. Historian of astronomy Agnes Clark
has noted that at one time Alexander Von Humboldt was the most famous man in Europe with the exception
of Napoleon Bonaparte. Naturally, he was presented at court, but Napoleon himself was jealous of
Von Humboldt's fame. He received Von Humboldt coldly and condescendingly it was reported.
As you might anticipate, Von Humboldt's books, including the accounts of his travels that began
appearing in 1814, were widely read. He decided to stay in France. He really liked Paris and his
celebrated position there. In fact, he lived in Paris until 1827. And finally, he was recalled to
Prussia and Berlin by the king of Prussia. The following year, he gave the keynote address to
the new German Association of Natural Scientists as we'll learn in a later lecture when we explore
the new institutions of natural science that had begun to appear in the 1820s. And then in the 1840s,
the first books of Von Humboldt's multi-volumed work entitled simply Cosmos began making their
appearance. Cosmos was, according to historian William Langer, the most widely read book of the
time other than the Bible. So Von Humboldt was an enormously influential person during the first
half of the 19th century. And among those whom he influenced was a young Englishman named Charles
Darwin. Darwin's the other explorer we want to examine today. Charles Darwin's voyage around
the world was the decisive event of his life, in my opinion. There were some ways in which Darwin
was like Von Humboldt and other ways in which he was different. One of the ways he was like Von
Humboldt was that Darwin was also born to wealth and privilege. Now, I hasten to add that Darwin
was not an aristocrat like Von Humboldt was. But he still enjoyed the comfortable life of the
landed gentry who frequently intermarried with aristocrats in England. Darwin's father was a
successful and wealthy physician. He had worked hard for what he had and he believed like lots of
19th century English upper middle class people that his son should do the same. So Robert Darwin,
the father, exerted pressure on his son Charles to choose a career befitting of someone of his
station. Charles was sent off to university initially with the understanding that he would
follow in his father's medical footsteps. But Darwin found the prospect of becoming a physician
distasteful. There are stories about this, for example, how Darwin lost his breakfast while
watching surgeons at work at Edinburgh where he had gone to prepare for his medical career.
But the short of it was there was no way Darwin was going into medicine and he had to break this
to his father. He left Edinburgh and went to Cambridge University where he finished his degree
in January of 1831. Worked out an agreement with his father that in the fall he'd return and begin
the specialized study necessary for the ministry. That, after all, was a perfectly respectable career
for a young man. In fact, some of Darwin's relatives of his own age were choosing that route.
But Darwin got hold of Von Humboldt's personal narrative. This was the English translation
of Von Humboldt's account of his travels in the New World. Darwin simply devoured it.
He too had an idea of traveling to exotic lands. He had romped around the Scottish countryside and
seashore when he was in Edinburgh and at Cambridge he'd continued his study of natural philosophy.
So he developed the idea of going to the Canary Islands sometime before settling down as a country
parson. Then everything changed for him for the better. Came that summer before he was to go back
to Cambridge in the fall, in the form of a letter from his favorite professor there, one John Henslow.
Henslow and Darwin had done a lot of field trips together and Henslow knew of Darwin's
considerable abilities as an observer of nature. He wondered if Darwin might be interested in
providing the company of a gentleman to the captain of an exploratory voyage to Terra del Fuego.
Darwin's social status as an educated upper middle class member of society,
while not exactly equal to that of the captain, would still provide much better company than would
be available otherwise among a crew of sailors. Well, of course, Darwin was ready to sign up
immediately. But there was that understanding with his father and the expectation that he'd go back
to Cambridge that fall. It took some doing, but eventually Charles persuaded his father that a
trip like this was not a waste of time. In fact, it had real benefits to a future clergyman to
know how wonderful God's creation really was. Anyway, he got past this barrier and a few others
before he finally departed on the HMS Beagle in December of 1831 for what would be a five-year
circumnavigation of the globe. I should add that Darwin was not designated the ship's naturalist,
as is sometimes thought. That claim by custom went to the ship's surgeon, in this case one
Robert McCormick, who regarded the voyage as his opportunity to become famous. But Darwin was simply
a much better naturalist than McCormick, and that soon became clear to everyone. It wasn't long before
the crew and the captain were treating Darwin as if he was the naturalist. The situation I was,
I suppose somewhat understandably, unacceptable to McCormick. Before barely four months had
elapsed, McCormick, with considerable resentment, left the Beagle in Brazil and returned home.
Well, Darwin took right over. His accomplishments during the voyage lived up to Henslow's
expectations. They marked Darwin as a skilled observer, and Darwin explored everything. Of the
five years of the voyage, Darwin spent three years and one month exploring and living on land.
The Brazilian rainforest just overpowered his senses. Only Funhumbold, he said, had given any
advanced warning, and he'd taken Funhumbold with him. Here's what he wrote, I'm at present fit only
to read Funhumbold. He, like another son, illumines everything I behold.
He gathered specimen after specimen, hoping his father would continue to pay for their shipment
back to his professors in Cambridge. He was right in anticipating that his father would keep
shelling out support. However strict Robert was, he must have realized that his son was involved in a
grand adventure and he probably wanted to be part of it. The ship spent some two months, sorry,
two years, mapping the east coast of South America. And finally came to the southern tip
to Tierra del Fuego. Here the Beagle had a specific mission. Literally, on board was a missionary to
the region. And he was accompanied by three Fuygens who had been picked up on an earlier voyage and
taken back to England. There they'd all been civilized, or so it was hoped, and now they were
returning with the English missionary as assistants in an experiment of evangelization.
But alas, the experiment turned out to be a miserable failure. The Fuygens reverted immediately
to their former existence and the English missionary had to be taken back aboard. But Darwin learned an
important lesson from the whole affair. He experienced just how thin the veneer of civilization
could be. That certainly broadened his vision like nothing he could have seen back in England.
It introduced Darwin to the idea that there was nothing sacred about civilization. Its power
to affect human behavior was quite limited. Whatever else they were, humans were also animals,
and on this level there was continuity between cultivated Englishmen and savages.
That would later help him see humankind as part of the natural world.
Not everything Darwin thought about came directly from his experiences in remote parts of the earth.
He'd taken things to read with him as well. I mentioned von Humboldt. He also took with him
the first volume of Charles Lyle's Principles of Geology, which had just come out before he left.
Henslo sent him volume two from home, which he got in Montevideo, Uruguay.
What did he read in Lyle's books? Lyle, like James Hutton, whose theory of the earth we
met back in lecture three, and we've talked about several times, believed that nature's processes
acted gradually and uniformly. In this he went against his teacher William Buckland,
who had become a real champion of catastrophes in the 1820s. Lyle's view, obviously, again
like Hutton's originally, required an enormous period of time for nature's regular action to
occur. In fact, Lyle's view was that the earth's condition had always been basically the same,
a steady state. Lyle didn't think the earth had progressed from a primitive state to a different
one, the one of the present. In his steady state theory, the basic conditions on earth have remained
constant over time and have not developed from a primitive state to that of the present.
In volume two, Lyle even explained how some species had become extinct. It hadn't occurred as the
result of catastrophes, as his teacher would have it. It came about as the result of a gradual
process, according to Lyle, that didn't require any sudden changes in the landscape.
So you can imagine how Darwin must have felt when in one of the regions he explored,
where he'd found fossil remains of clearly extinct animals, there was no evidence of
there was no evidence of major landscape changes. The Beagle eventually made it around the tip of
South America over to the western coast off the western shores of South America. Darwin visited
the Galapagos Islands, a group of islands that are close to the equator. While he was there,
he was primarily interested in their volcanic geological features. But of course, he also
observed the indigenous species of living organisms. These islands are famous for the very
large tortoises that are found there. These tortoises didn't swim like turtles do, so the
tortoises were essentially prisoners on their islands. A British resident told Darwin that
each island had its own species of tortoise. But Darwin failed to find the fact particularly
interesting. He did, however, notice that mocking birds on the islands were different,
and he recorded that this paralleled what he'd been told about the tortoises.
But he made no point of thinking about it further or making further observations about it.
Well, after leaving the Galapagos, the Beagle traveled to more islands this time in the South
Pacific. Then they went to New Zealand and Australia, went to South Africa, and they took
a quick jaunt back over to Brazil. Finally came home to England by way of the Azores.
The whole trip had taken five years. It was 1836. Darwin was now 25 years old. He'd had
enough experience in the field to last most people a lifetime. As it turned out, it was
encounters he'd had with the forms of life on the Galapagos Islands that would provide the occasion
for the idea of evolution to make an appearance near the end of the voyage.
During the last leg of the voyage, Darwin tried to rearrange his notes and sort his field notebooks,
and that's when he came across a curious problem. He wasn't sure how to sort the Galapagos birds,
but they're just varieties of one species, or did they represent different species?
Here's what he wrote about the problem. When I see these islands in sight of each other,
tenanted by these birds, but slightly differing in structure and filling the same place in nature,
I must suspect they are only varieties. And then the tortoises came back to his mind as well.
They too must be varieties, but he jotted down an alternative suggestion,
even though it had some astounding implications. If the tortoises were in fact different species,
it would undermine the stability of species. But why would one environment produce two
different species, both adapted to it? That was something he couldn't understand.
It wasn't until after he returned home that the idea of evolution really germinated and began
to blossom. In fact, it was several months after his return in March of 1837 when Darwin consulted
an expert about the problem with the Galapagos birds. He went to see John Gould, who was an
ornithologist and taxonomist. He'd asked Gould to examine specimens of finches he'd collected on
the Galapagos, and he wanted to hear what Gould had to say about them. Gould was very clear. The
birds were definitely different species. They might even coordinate with individual islands.
He couldn't be sure about that because the labeling wasn't clear enough to tell.
But when other possible examples of multiple species in the same environment came to mind,
the tortoises, for example, Darwin began to allow himself to consider the other alternative he'd
mentioned. Maybe species aren't stable like everyone assumes. Well, not everyone. He had had
an acquaintance at Edinburgh when he was a student there who was really into Lamarck.
And then there was his grandfather, Erasmus' views. But his grandfather's ideas were part of a
grandiose poetic vision of life in its past. He hadn't based it on the kind of evidence that
Darwin was now using. We can imagine, however, the growing excitement in Darwin's mind as he
realized that he was taking the evolution of species seriously. What I mean is that Darwin knew
that he was coming to this idea because of some hard empirical information that didn't seem to
make sense on any other ground. Not that they made all that much sense when seen as the result of
evolution either. See, evolution wasn't a popular option at the time. Lamarck's work had been
carefully reviewed by Lyle in his book, but only as a prelude to destroying it as a live option.
So Darwin was treading on unpopular ground, and he was young. One of the things he'd thought about
on board the Beagle was perhaps changing his mind about the ministry. Maybe he'd become a professor
like Henslow. But if he did that, he sure wouldn't do his cause any good by embracing a viewpoint
that most everyone who is important rejected and regarded as radical. So you can see the
dilemma that Darwin faced. What we know is that by the end of June, the year after his return,
we're talking about June 1837, Darwin had bought some new notebooks and was beginning
a systematic consideration of what he had learned and what he thought. One of those notebooks was
dedicated to the transmutation of species. So he was clear. He was going to explore this radical
idea to see what it held for him. Naturally, he kept all this to himself. No sense having others
jump all over him. Of course, he knew there were lots of problems with evolution or transmutation,
as he called it. Did it happen suddenly by jumps? How did it get started? Did geography and geology
play a part by raising barriers? But for the next several years, as he worked hard on developing
what he soon began to call my theory, he came up with an idea that would help. This was the idea
of natural selection. We'll look more at the working out of his theory in lecture 20 when we
examined the making of his great work, The Origin of Species. But in our next lecture, we'll learn
about a sensational development of the 1840s that convinced Darwin more than ever not to make his
radical ideas public.
