Welcome back. This is Lecture 21, and it's about some troubles Darwin's theory encountered.
Last time we saw how Darwin's book, The Origin of Species by Natural Selection, quickly
sold out when it appeared in November of 1859. It had been long in the making. You could
say Darwin had been working on it for some two decades, and even then he'd been rushed
into print when it looked like he might be scooped by someone else, Alfred Wallace. To
tap it off, it seemed to Darwin as if the idea of natural selection had just popped
into Wallace's head in 1858. Anyway, when Darwin did get the book out, it quickly became
the talk of the town. That was because Darwin was pretty well known in England. He was a
respected naturalist and a world traveler with the author of numerous books on various
aspects of the world of living things. He was an upstanding member of Victorian society,
a well-to-do gentleman of natural science from a recognized lineage. The Darwin's, like
the Wedgwoods from his wife's side, were both widely known. Beyond the Darwin's acknowledged
place in upper middle class society, Darwin's grandfather was a noted author of essay and
verse, and the Wedgwoods, they were highly successful makers of pottery, including the
Queen's wear style that was in such great demand. So the Wedgwoods were another easily
recognized family. Yes, Darwin was somebody in English society, and here he was writing
outlandish things, or were they outlandish? People were eager to learn exactly what Darwin
had to say about the question raised by his title, How Species Originated. I referred
last time to the charged atmosphere of the 1840s and 1850s because of the attention natural
science was receiving from Chamber's book and other events. Those developments, however,
weren't the only reason why the atmosphere was already heated up when Darwin came along.
In fact, they weren't even the primary contributors to the tension. To see the whole picture,
we have to look at the political climate. You see, there had been a series of political
revolutions in 1848, not in England, mind you. They'd been confined to the continent,
but there they'd occurred in several national capitals, Paris, of course, and Berlin and
Vienna. In England, massive petitions demanding change had been submitted to Parliament, including
a final one in 1848 itself, but things had not boiled over into genuine revolution in
England like they had across the Channel. And the revolutions that occurred in the European
capitals all had failed. Some took longer to play out than others, but by 1852, everything
was over. And the monarchs were back on their thrones, seemingly more powerful than ever.
What the revolutions had done, however, was to raise the hope, however briefly, that a
new social order was dawning. One more in sync with the modern industrial era that was
all around. Now, I bring up politics here because, especially on the continent, there
were those who openly associated natural science with revolutions. We'll learn more about how
this worked out later in lecture 31. To be sure, they were the radical voices. The majority
regarded natural science as a perfectly safe and respectable enterprise, not at all threatening
to society. The point is, however, that just as natural science had begun to challenge cultural
assumptions, it was now beginning to be used to challenge even political institutions. Among
those who identified themselves with natural science, it seemed that an increasing number
were happy to be associated with non-traditional positions. And that meant you could never
be sure what position one of these new scientists was going to take. It could be, and most often
was, a view that natural science reinforced all those good social values the Victorians
were famous for. But not in every case. Society was changing on so many fronts. The new developments
in natural science were just a small part of the general awareness that the world was
changing fast. And another thing, for some time in the German states, the public had
been greeted with works that were highly critical of traditional religion. David Friedrich Strauss
had written a notorious life of Jesus that discarded miraculous events of the New Testament
in the Bible as mere stories. And then another German, Ludwig Feuerbach, followed Strauss'
work with a biting criticism of Christianity. Christian doctrine, Feuerbach wrote, was a
mere projection of human needs into the heavens. Humans need law, so they create an all-loving
God. Humans crave power, so God is all-powerful. Now, both of these works, that by Strauss
and the one by Feuerbach, found their way into English translation, done by a young woman
named Marianne Evans. So the fact there was a British market for this kind of thing meant
that even in England, the stakes were going up on many fronts. As I said, we'll look into
the impact of all this in a later lecture. For right now, I just want to note that the
situation in 1859 had become more tense, even from what it had been when Chambers'
book had come out in 1844. Then the majority of people complained about Chambers, and they
did so quite publicly. But by 1859, when Darwin's book was published, we're on the other side
of revolutions on the continent and the radical German theology that had made its way into
the country. Because there were more options out there, because you couldn't be sure anymore
about who took these radical ideas seriously, it was no longer fashionable to make dogmatic
public pronouncements about such controversial matters. In this lecture, we're going to see
how Darwin's theory fared in the 19th century, and we're going to take into account all four
decades that were left in the century. I say that because we're not going to rely solely
on one of the initial reactions that has gotten so much press. You may have already heard
about the famous encounter I have in mind. It happened in June of 1860, and it's been
frequently misinterpreted. I'm referring to a meeting of the British Association in Oxford,
and the debate that took place there between Bishop Samuel Wilberforce and Thomas Henry
Huxley. Here's what happened there. This was a meeting of Britain's first modern scientific
society. What do I mean by modern? Well, I'm going to go into that in considerable detail
in lecture 28, when we talk about the new institutions of natural science that emerged
in the 19th century. Suffice it here to say that by modern, I mean a society that was
open to all natural scientists. And yes, by this time, we do have scientists. They could
come together in an annual meeting to exchange ideas. I know you've heard me insist before
that we can't use the word scientist until it had been coined. Well, that had happened
well before 1860. And in that year, the British Association was well over 20 years old. Its
annual meeting had become a routine that everyone knew. On this particular day in June, something
out of the ordinary occurred. In a regular meeting titled simply botany and zoology.
First an American professor, John William Draper, he'd been trained in chemistry, was
on the medical faculty at New York University. Draper spoke on the implications the Darwinian
hypothesis held for civilization. He'd been working on a book on the intellectual history
of Europe. It would appear in 1862. And he obviously wanted to incorporate into his thinking
the latest developments in English science. But he was boring. And the audience began
to let him know it. They were eager to hear what another person on the platform had to
say about the Darwinian hypothesis. This was Samuel Wilberforce, Bishop of Oxford, who
was present since the meeting of the British Association was in his city that year. What
did he think of Darwin's book? As expected, the bishop, when he finally got to speak,
was critical of Darwin's idea. He was a gifted orator, and the audience found him much more
interesting than the American. On the platform as well was one of Darwin's defenders. We
met him for the first time at that April meeting at Darwin's house back in 1856, when Darwin
solicited opinions on the possibility that species might have evolved. This was Thomas
Huxley, a young marine biologist. He'd objected to the idea of transmutation or evolution back
in 1856, because he worried that it could be used to support the presumption that nature
confirmed progress. Huxley thought that sounded too religious. But once Darwin's theory was
published in Fall and Huxley read it, he was immediately convinced. His old worry about
transmutation being too obviously progressive didn't apply to Darwin's version of evolution.
Natural selection didn't guarantee progress in any traditional sense at all. So Huxley
became one of Darwin's staunch defenders. He hadn't planned on going to the meeting
that day to hear a clergyman rail against Darwin, but Robert Chambers persuaded him
he ought to be there. Well, Wilberforce knew Huxley would be disagreeing with his criticisms
of Darwin's theory, so he offered a challenge to Huxley. He inquired whether it was from
his grandfathers or his grandmother's side that he was descended from an ape. Naturally,
Huxley replied to Wilberforce in kind in that bitingly critical way wrapped in humor that
the British do so well. And then others spoke to the session. The captain of the Beagle added
his views, and Darwin's friend Joseph Hooker spoke up in defense of the theory. All in all,
it was a prolonged exchange with a few charged statements thrown in for spice. It had been a
debate, to be sure. There were partisans on both sides, but many of those present agreed that
it had been a draw. If it had been unusual, it was because there had been some dogmatic claims
made, and that, as I indicated, was no longer as fashionable as it had been when people had
freely denounced Chambers' book. It said that one woman fainted during the exchanges. And William
Hewell, the highly respected master of Trinity College in Cambridge, thought that the bishop
shouldn't have inserted himself into a debate about natural science. And Hewell was sympathetic to
the bishop's point of view. In fact, however, the debate was a minor incident, and its significance
has been overblown. I'll concede that it did focus public attention on Darwin in his book,
but too often accounts of the 1860 meeting of the British Association have suggested that this
was a high water marker of the so-called warfare between science and religion. Of course, it did
represent the exchange of ideas on this front. That had been going on since the vestiges. But the
charged atmosphere of the late 1850s was, as I indicated a minute ago, due to a lot of things.
We have to make a distinction between the increasing presence of radical ideas and
prevailing opinions. Yes, radical ideas were out there, and radicals were offensive because they
disregarded the fashion of not openly proclaiming dogmatic views. Most folks were not for revolution.
Most folks were not for the new German ideas about religion. Most folks were not persuaded that
the newest ideas of natural science required them to change their views on religion. So there were
more radical voices, but they didn't represent the prevailing opinion. I have to tell you that the
relationship between natural science and religion was not, in fact, the most pressing issue of the
day in Britain. It was not even the most pressing religious issue. British theologians were more
concerned about the radical scholarship that was coming across the channel from Germany,
what's known as the higher criticism of the Bible. In a controversial book of 1860 called Essays and
Reviews, a collection of contributions from British scholars from several fields, higher
criticism was the issue. Darwin's theory was barely mentioned. So my concern is that we put the
1860 British Association meeting in perspective. Ironically, the event has become significant,
but I think its significance is not because of what happened there, but because of the way it
has often been interpreted. Some historians who believe that religion and natural science are in
fact mutually antagonistic have assumed that this was also true in 1860 in Britain. So they've
portrayed the encounter as Huxley's triumph over Wilberforce, but it's the consensus now among
historians that Darwin's book did not enter Victorian society like a plow running into an
anthill. That's the colorful way one historian has characterized the misguided way. Some other
historians have portrayed this incident. The more we learn about the 19th century in Britain,
the more we have to acknowledge that numerous individuals, both scientists and theologians,
reconciled Darwin's ideas to their conservative religious views. So we want to avoid bringing
back to the 19th century ideas that are widely prevalent in our own day and assume they fit.
I believe that in this case, they don't. Well, it wasn't long before scientific difficulties
with Darwin's theory began to crop up. This happened right away in the 1860s, and I do mean
scientific difficulties. Issues raised not by the likes of Bishop Wilberforce, but by natural
scientists themselves. Among the first was the claim that there hadn't been sufficient time for
evolution by natural selection to occur. And it was raised from a quarter you might not expect
by a physicist. This was William Thompson, later Lord Kelvin. You may have heard of his absolute
temperature scale. He was one of those who defined the new science of thermodynamics just prior to
the appearance of the origin. Anyway, Thompson had become convinced that the cosmos was running down.
What did he mean by running down? Well, we're going to take this up in Ernest in lectures 29 and 30.
For now, let me just say that Thompson inferred the running down of the cosmos
from his work on energy exchanges. He determined that exchanging energy involved processes that
were irreversible. One way of expressing this irreversibility was that gradually energy was
becoming less available to sustain the order in the cosmos. So it was gradually running down.
That meant, of course, that as time passed, the cosmos and the earth within it was slowly
becoming a different place. Now, you may recall that this was the opposite conclusion from the one
that Charles Lyell believed. We met his steady state earth back in lecture 18. Lyell believed that
the earth had always been the same, essentially. Yes, it underwent cyclic changes. One region that
was now dry land may have been under water at an earlier time. But other than these minor changes,
the landscape remained similar. The minor changes had no accumulative effect. If you were transported
back in time, you'd recognize the landscape regardless of how long ago it was. So the earth
was in a steady state. Although it had been here for an enormous time, according to Lyell, it hadn't
developed from some qualitatively different primitive condition to the one we see today.
So Lyell and Thompson held opposite beliefs on the history of the earth,
and they were pretty much mutually exclusive. There really was no compromise possible. If
Lyell were right, then the earth could have been supporting life on its surface for who knows how
long. Certainly more than enough time for the evolution Darwin claimed to have happened.
And that was indeed a lot of time. If evolution happened as Darwin said it did,
not according to some pre-existing plan, then it must have taken eons for the complexity we see to
have come about. A little like, though admittedly not exactly like, the amount of time it would take
monkeys to type Shakespeare. Thompson didn't think the earth had been cool enough
to support life for anywhere near that long. In fact, as early as 1861,
Thompson announced to the British Association meeting that even the sun's age was likely no
more than 100 million years old. Then a year later, Thompson declared that Lyell's steady
state theory of the earth amounted to a perpetual motion machine. That, as many conceded, was against
the first principles of natural philosophy. Well, Darwin's insistence on gradual evolutionary change
required far more than even 100 million years. Physics and evolutionary biology were at odds.
Some of Darwin's defenders tried to accommodate the physicists by suggesting that evolution might
have occurred more rapidly than Darwin thought. But Darwin himself refused that suggestion. So,
Thompson's denial that there had been sufficient time for gradual evolution to have happened
remained a thorn in his side. It was only after the turn of the century, with the discovery of
radioactivity, that physicists revised their estimates of the ages of the sun and earth
so that they were compatible with the kind of timescale that Darwinian evolution required.
But it was an unresolved issue in the 19th century, certainly not something that helped
Darwin's cause among scientists. That was one of the scientific difficulties. But there were more.
A review of Darwin's book in 1867 by a Scottish engineer named Fleming Jenkins
raised a pressing problem about why natural selection simply wouldn't work.
Jenkins pointed out that the advantageous variations Darwin counted on so heavily
wouldn't have the effect Darwin thought. They would, he said, be swamped out by normal traits.
Let me explain. Here's how Jenkins thought of it. He appealed, in fact, to Victorian racial
assumptions, racist assumptions, really, to illustrate his claim. Imagine he said that a
white-skinned sailor is shipwrecked on an island inhabited only by blacks, Africa.
Now remember, Jenkins equated the sailor's whiteness with superior traits of intelligence,
ingenuity, courage, self-control, endurance. So where Jenkins was concerned, this sailor
represented a favorable variation within the black population. He said, for example,
that the white sailor would likely become king and have many wives and children. But as superior
as this white man was supposed to be, it wouldn't matter. The black color of the general population
and the lesser qualities of the natives would not be altered over time by his presence.
Come back in a few generations, Jenkins said, and you likely wouldn't see any trace of the white
man's presence. Why? Because it would have been washed completely away. You see, many in Darwin's
day accepted the idea that heredity resulted from a blending of the traits of the parents.
Blending inheritance was the idea that hereditary materials from two parents
are on the whole averaged in the offspring. So as the sparse amount of white hereditary
material was blended with the huge amount of black hereditary material, the white would be washed
out. Even though it represented a favorable variation within the black community, it would
simply be overwhelmed by the huge volume of the black characteristics present.
Well, as long as you accepted the notion of blending inheritance, the idea that hereditary
material of the parents is blended or averaged in sexual reproduction, as long as you accepted
this, Jenkins' critique made a great deal of sense. If every generation averaged the hereditary
material from the two parents, then since there was only one white in the population,
the white hereditary material would be cut in half in the first generation of offspring,
and thereafter it would continue to be cut in half with each succeeding generation.
It wouldn't take that many generations before the white hereditary material
would be just a trace amount. Darwin tried to respond by means of a theory of heredity he'd
created that permitted some favorable variations to persevere, but he continued to smart under
Jenkins' critique. Then came another criticism. The Duke of Argyle emphasized an instance of
inheritance that seemed to escape natural selection. He wrote a book in 1867 called
The Rain of Law in which he argued that some natural traits were not governed by natural
selection. Take the coloration in hummingbirds, he said. That didn't help them survive,
and natural selection operated only on characteristics that benefited survival.
So the Duke inferred that there must be a different source for nature's beauty
than natural selection, and he could think of only one,
the design of the creator. God was the source of beauty since it wasn't required by nature.
Darwin responded, of course. He appealed to a special application of natural selection.
It's not true, he said, that nature doesn't need to have beauty.
Beauty has a very practical function. Color, for example, is important in attracting mates.
The greater the color, the more a hummingbird will mate,
and the more it mates, the more it propagates its hereditary material among the species. A lot
more, for example, than other less colored birds. Darwin's addition of sexual selection to his
theory answered the Duke of Argyle, but I confess it didn't persuade the Duke, and it didn't persuade
a lot of others. Enough of the scientific problems that Darwin's theory faced. There were also
philosophical and religious difficulties with natural selection that made their appearance.
Some people found Darwin's method objectionable. Many, including some of Darwin's friends,
just couldn't accept the idea that natural selection operated on variations that were
produced by chance. It seemed too preposterous. Are we really supposed to believe that the marvelous
adaptations we see all around us in nature could result from chance? Some of these adaptations
are truly amazing. Amazing. They couldn't have come about as the result of chance variations.
And if humans were also the product of this chance, then did the mental world of humans evolve
from some kind of primitive condition, too? If that were the case, then what about the moral
capacity of humankind? If it ultimately derived from chance variations, if all we're doing is
just trying to survive, then could you really say that we have any moral responsibility?
But for most, the idea that morality was a survival mechanism was just too much.
So natural selection didn't fare very well in the 19th century. But, and this is interesting,
the general acceptance of the idea of evolution increased. I mean the idea that life had developed
from some kind of primitive beginnings to what it is today. That gained credibility in the 19th
century. Darwin's ironic achievement in the 19th century was to have promoted the notion
of evolution at the expense of his own theory of natural selection. Once the origin made its
appearance, there was a market for all kinds of books on evolution. And several people who had
already believed in evolution now felt emboldened to come forward. Of course, there was a revised
edition of the vestiges that came out immediately and it sold extremely well. And then an old
school acquaintance of Darwin's from his days in Edinburgh published a synopsis of his
zoology lectures that indicated his long-standing commitment to the evolution of life. Finally,
a man named Herbert Spencer will meet him again when we talk about social Darwinism.
Spencer refined articles he'd written earlier on what he'd called the development hypothesis
and put them out in a book called First Principles. It appeared in two parts in 1860 and 1862.
Spencer's work depicted a grand cosmological evolution from a state of chaos to a state of
order. If there ever was a work that underscored Britain's sense of progressive advance, this was
it. But remember that Huxley had warned much earlier about the idea of progressive evolution.
He thought it was something you had to be careful with. It could so easily be made into a general
endorsement of progress that it forced nature to endorse progress. In fact, what appeared to be
happening was that evolution was becoming a fashionable means of confirming progress. It was
almost as if the approach chambers had taken and even the tact Lamarck had introduced was becoming
more acceptable. Add to it that Darwin himself had acknowledged that natural selection was not
the exclusive means by which evolution occurred. His hereditary theory, for example, contained
aspects that bore similarities to Lamarck, and he'd acknowledged in his book The Origin of Species
that use and disuse did play a role in evolution, although in his view a much less prominent one
than the role natural selection played. No wonder that the public often blurred the distinction
between Darwin's and Lamarck's understanding of evolution. That was as annoying to Darwin as it
was difficult for him to prevent. So what we can call neo-Lamarckian ideas flourished in the waning
decades of the 19th century. The attraction of Lamarckian evolution was, as we saw in lecture 16,
that it could be easily reconciled with divinely controlled evolution. That might still be too
much of a stretch for many, but Lamarckian deism was clearly becoming more acceptable.
Natural selection, on the other hand, operated on variations that appeared
as if out of nowhere. That is, you really didn't have to ask where they'd come from.
Darwin's theory worked just fine, even if you assumed they were completely random. As a result,
you couldn't predict in advance where Darwin's evolution was going, and that made natural
selection incompatible with Victorian convictions about progress and advance.
So when I note that the idea of evolution became more and more popular as the century wound down,
invariably it was some form of neo-Lamarckian evolution that filled this bill. It led,
by the end of the century, to what one historian has called the eclipse of Darwinism. An eclipse of
the moon involves a part of the moon being blocked out for a time. And that's what happened to
Darwin's natural selection. It got partially blocked out during the waning decades of the century,
while the idea of evolution found greater acceptance. Natural selection as the means by
which it occurred did not. So the eclipse of Darwinism has come to refer to the
preference for neo-Lamarckian ideas of evolution over Darwin's natural selection in the decades
around 1900. As you can guess, Darwin's understanding of evolution by natural selection
did come out from behind the moon, so to speak. But how Darwinism, that is, evolution by natural
selection, emerged into prominence again is a story for historians of 20th century science to tell.
Now back in lecture seven, when we were talking about Linnaeus and his insight that
some species had come into existence after the original creation, that there had been an
origin of species, I noted that this was a different claim from one about the origin of life itself.
That issue, the origin of life from non-living nature, was hinted at and discussed in the
early 19th century. We saw it in Lamarck, and it was also a subject taken up by the German
Romantic Nature philosophers. It became an issue again in these decades around the time of Darwin's
work. Darwin himself avoided the claim that life had arisen naturalistically. He allowed that the
creator had breathed into life or life, breathed life into an original form or forms, but others,
particularly in France, did not avoid it, and it precipitated a real debate that involved one of
France's favorite sons, Louis Pasteur. His contribution to the debate about the origin of life
has to be viewed in the context of Pasteur's overall achievement as a man of science.
That's what we'll take up in the next lecture.
