Welcome back. Here we are at lecture 28. Because of the way I've organized this course, we've
tried to stay with each topic we've considered long enough to do it justice. That's meant
that occasionally we've had to do several passes over a single set of decades, one pass
to deal with connected topics in biological science, for example, and then later we came
back to catch up on what was happening in the physical sciences. Take the events we
talked about in the last two lectures, the discovery of electromagnetism and Fourier
and Carnot's novel ideas about the behavior of heat. All that happened during the same
years in France when Cuvier's prehistoric beasts were thrilling audiences and when
Lamarck was defending his theory of evolution. In Britain, Faraday rose to prominence during
the decade when the arguments over Neptunism and Vulcanism gave rise to the catastrophic
synthesis of William Buckland and the young Charles Darwin set off to travel around the
world. Now along the way, though through some of this material, I've had several occasions
to mention, if only very briefly, that here in the early decades of the 19th century, natural
science was beginning to emerge into a form much closer to the one we recognize in the
21st century. I've made references to scholars who observed that this is the time when natural
philosophers were becoming clear about what being scientific meant. And I've also noted
in passing this was the time when natural philosophers successfully communicated a consensus
about that to the public at large. Well, all those brief illusions were necessary to support
points I was making at the time, but today we're finally going to give this subject of
the emergence of natural science from natural philosophy its full due. We're going to see
the appearance of the scientist, a recognized practitioner of natural science for the first
time. Back in lecture 14, we considered the different alternative visions of natural science
that graced the landscape of the early 19th century. We observed that there was at that
time no one scientific approach to the investigation of nature. There were competing claims for
that label. Let me review some of these different visions of natural philosophy that existed
in the early decades of the 1800s. There were those like Georges Cuvier in France who insisted
that gathering empirical information from which generalizations about nature could be formed
was the primary responsibility of the investigator of nature. To Cuvier, it was a straightforward
simple matter. But to his senior colleague Jean Baptiste Lamarck, natural philosophy was
not so straightforward as all of that. He complained that the mere gathering of facts
ignored the need to bring ideas to the interrogation of nature. Of course, that sounded like prejudice
to Cuvier who dismissed Lamarck's approach as unfounded dogmatic speculation. Lamarck
once replied to such criticism by observing, and these are his words, those who would conclude
that in the study of nature, we must always limit ourselves to amassing facts, resemble
an architect who would advise always cutting stones, preparing mortar, wood, ironwork,
etc., and who would never dare to employ these materials to construct an edifice.
So Lamarck thought Cuvier was being naive to think he could simply go out and gather
facts. In the German states, nature philosophers urged that the accumulation of information
in order to test some idea about nature's mechanisms was seeing nature only from the
outside. They believed firmly that you needed to include as well the special knowledge humans
possessed because they were part of nature. This led Schelling to champion replacing the
image of nature as a machine with that of an organism. And that made possible the inclusion
into natural philosophy of both an aesthetic and moral agency that was largely absent in
the strictly mechanical approach. One historian of science has recently characterized this
inclusion of moral agency in the pursuit of knowledge of the world as sentimental empiricism.
She intends to capture by that phrase the emotional commitments that natural philosophers
traditionally brought even to their empirical observations of nature. So there were different
general visions of natural philosophy. Finally, I must note that the first two decades of the
19th century also saw the flowering of numerous specific movements that wished to associate
themselves with natural science. We've already examined the origins of mesmerism in the late
18th century. Well, mesmerism continued to flourish throughout the 19th century, spawning
derivative movements involving somnambulism and the like. And mesmerism wasn't alone.
In 1798, the respected physician Franz Josef Gaul introduced his system of phrenology to
German readers in a leading journal. And over the course of the next decade, he proceeded
to elaborate on it and to see it widely praised. I mentioned to you how popular this movement
became in England. Its basic message was that natural law ruled everywhere, even in regulating
our mental capacities. Following almost exactly the same chronology, Samuel Hahnemann introduced
what he called a new principle for finding the healing powers of substances in a noted
medical journal in 1796, then followed it in 1806 and in 1810 with full articulations
of his system of homeopathy. That too demonstrated incredible staying power. So you can see what
I mean when I say that there was no common agreement in society in the early 19th century
about what being scientific meant. Lots of folks were claiming they were scientific,
but they often meant very different things by the term. And all this was taking place
at a time when Europe itself had been turned upside down. The old regime in France had
been dismantled by the revolution. And in its aftermath, Napoleon Bonaparte proceeded
to conquer Europe in order to make way for his vision of what the world should look like.
That of course continued to disrupt traditional political and economic structures that were
already under enormous strain because of the industrial revolution that was in full sway.
And that, as much as anything, made the working classes increasingly aware of their own unfavorable
situation. So, with the final defeat of Napoleon in 1815, when Europe began the process of
trying to put itself back together, so much had changed and was continuing to change that
putting Europe back together wasn't going to be an easy task. Let me mention one more
factor in all this. In a sense, this factor, which was predominantly a feature of the growing
middle class, was a vehicle by which all this change was being evaluated. I'm talking about
the emergence of what scholars have called a public sphere in the middle class. I've
already made use of this phrase in these lectures. A defining feature of the public sphere was
the acknowledgement that argument, not status, should determine authentic social authority.
In the past, what the king decreed required no further justification because the king was
the king and he possessed complete authority. But with the emergence of a public sphere
and with it something called public opinion, the king's authority was eroded because now
there was a public opinion about whether the king's action had been reasonable. Wherever
it had come from, the public sphere was definitely a part of a new reality. In the German states,
one measure of the emergence of a public sphere was the proliferation of journals of all kinds,
which had been underway since the late 18th century. I want to focus on the German situation
because it was here in the fluid situation of post-Napoleonic Europe that a new idea
of a scientific community began to take shape. It was actually the founding of a new journal
of natural science that marked an early step in the process of solidifying the scientific
community. And the key individual here is one of the nature philosophers, one of the
followers of Friedrich Schelling. I'm speaking of a zoologist named Lawrence Oaken. Oaken
had climbed up the ranks of academe from meager beginnings as the son of a farmer. He was
obviously very intelligent, but it was his fiery personality that drove him to succeed.
And that same personality got him into politics as well. Oaken simply couldn't sit still when
he saw something he felt had to be changed. He was a man of action who didn't want to
miss the chance for change and progress that he saw lying before the German states. That's
why he took a lead in the politically charged atmosphere of post-Napoleonic years of those
years. Oaken had been trained in zoology and he valued the romantic vision of natural philosophy
that Schelling had made popular during the first decade of the century. In fact, he became
known as one of the leading nature philosophers of the day. That involved him in debates with
those who did not share his vision of nature philosophy. But Oaken loved debate and argument.
He never shied away from public discussion. Oaken came to embody the values of the new
public sphere, especially the value that said that you should question authority and let
open argument prevail. After Napoleon had been defeated in 1815, Oaken determined that he
would establish a new journal devoted primarily to the natural sciences as a means of instructing
the public in the proper route to truth. He would let the public see how things were
done in natural science. He called the journal Isis, we would say Isis, named for the Egyptian
goddess of nature. And it proved to be an immediate success. Clearly, there were a lot
of people who agreed with him that open discussion was important. Oaken claimed to print virtually
everything that was sent to him, including occasional vitriolic criticisms of himself,
and he did so under the assumption that the truth would prevail in the jury of public
opinion. Now, although the focus of the articles was natural science, political issues began
to appear in Isis as well. It was a politically tense time in Europe, especially in the German
states. Many of the young men who had gone off to fight in the wars of liberation against
Napoleon came home, determined that Germany should never be dominated again by a foreign
power. And that meant to them that Germany had to be united. The German states could
not compete militarily with great powers like France if they continued to exist in these
separate states. The students organized fraternities as they came back to the university education
that had been interrupted by the wars, and many of these fraternities dedicated themselves
to the patriotic cause of unifying the fatherland. In a famous demonstration in the fall of 1817
on the 300th anniversary of Luther's nailing his 95th thesis on the church door, students
from many universities gathered to demonstrate for change, and they gathered at the castle
where Luther had hid from his opponents. And who do you think was one of the four faculty
sponsors of the event? You guessed it, Lawrence Oaken. Naturally, reports of the meeting made
it into Isis. But as the leaders of the German states worked to restore what had been so
disrupted by the French Revolution and by Napoleon, they were hardly ready to endorse
the students' demands for unification. How was Germany to be united? Which state would
supply the king? And what would be the status of existing sovereign princes? In their view,
it was a time to restore order, not create chaos. But that's what they saw the students
to be doing. And as Oaken's Isis became more and more openly critical of political authorities,
under the cause of open discussion, of course, the authorities determined that something
had to be done. So, Oaken was given a choice. Cease publication of Isis or lose your professorship
at Jena University. The decision wasn't a difficult one for Oaken. He was too committed
to his cause. He chose to resign his teaching position and move Isis, which was enjoying
great popularity, to another city where he would be allowed to publish. And Isis continued
to appear. Except for the famous number 195 from December of 1817. That contained the
report on the student demonstrations, and it was confiscated. Incidentally, it's still
hard to find it in libraries to this day. I recall looking for it in Harvard's Widener
Library. The whole run of Isis was there, except for the famous number 195.
Well, Oaken showed good sense and at least toned down the rhetoric after he moved to
Leipzig. He'd given the world the first open journal of natural science, and he'd done
so in a way that drew attention, great attention, to the values he associated with science.
Open discussion and debate. But he wasn't through. He determined that the time was ripe
for another experiment, this time the establishment of a modern scientific society. The founding
of a society for natural science greatly accelerated the congealing of a scientific
community. Up to this point, gatherings of those interested in the study of nature were
often local groups. They usually had a narrow focus within the natural sciences. There were
exceptions to this, of course. We've already met the Royal Society in England and the Academy
des Sciences in France. And in Germany, there were Academien de Wissenschaften, like the
one in Göttingen that had been established in the middle of the 18th century. But these
were exclusive societies. They weren't open to just anyone interested in natural science.
So once again, it was Oaken who took the lead in creating a new society for German natural
science. Because it was the first such organization, it would become a model for others, as we'll
see. He came at it with the same spirit of openness that he'd cherished in his journal.
So he used ISIS to call a meeting to be held in Leipzig in September of 1822. The purpose
was to organize the Gezelschaff, Deutsche, Notteforzscher, and Edze, the Society of German
Investigators and Physicians. Thirteen participants showed up, approximately half of which were
physicians and half researchers. Now this doesn't sound like much of a start, but in fact it
was. This small group of organizers caught Oaken's vision and decided to meet annually.
They would meet in different cities of Germany, alternating between southern, northern, eastern,
and western locations. One of Oaken's goals was to bring together those working in closely
related fields to stimulate collaboration among individuals who might otherwise be unaware
of each other. It was sound logic. All the group had to do was to sell the natural philosophers
at large on the idea. But for that task, Oaken had his journal ready to hand. Oaken insisted
on something else. He knew that there were disagreements among natural philosophers about
fundamental matters that had to do with natural science. So he required that the annual meetings
also have social gatherings as an essential feature of the conference. His idea was to
promote informal interchange in the hope that participants would learn to balance their
sometimes strong disagreements about issues of natural science with the greater unity
that moments of shared enjoyment provide. As you can see, the basic ingredients of modern
scientific conferences are all here. To say the least, the idea of a national society
with an annual conference open to all was a tremendous success. The 1828 meeting, for
example, was held in Berlin, where the King of Prussia attended an evening social occasion
for participants with spouses and some 1,200 persons came. The inaugural address was given
by the grand old man of German science, Alexander von Humboldt, whom the King of Prussia had
just called home to Germany after his long sojourn in Paris. In his address, Humboldt
suggested and the participants agreed to create seven individual sections of natural science
and medicine. This marked an early step in the direction of the specialization of natural
scientific research. Four years later, the GDNA held its first international meeting
in Vienna. Now, in spite of these successes, we can't yet say that natural philosophers
had become professionalized. But the word natuavissen Schachtler, natural scientist,
would very soon make its way into the German language, and with it would come the idea
that there was a practitioner of natural science. Those who pursued research in natural science
had acquired a greater social visibility than they ever had before. It would not be long
before German universities began to create separate faculties for natural science, breaking
away from the old parent philosophy faculty that they had been part of. That happened
at different times in different universities over the course of the 19th century. And companies
began to hire these natuavissen Schachtler to conduct research of interest to them. So
there was a newly recognized practitioner of natural science. Can we ask what this new
natural scientist believed about science? We're going to do that very thing in a second,
but first I want to tell you about the effect the German society had on British science.
The German success served as a model for British investigators of nature to organize their
own society. To see how that came about, we have to take stock of the situation in Britain
in these years. During the 1820s in Britain, there was concern among certain of the younger
natural philosophers that Britain was falling behind in natural science. Let me tell you
a story that will serve to illustrate the mood. Charles Babbage, a mathematician from
London, had received a stipend from the government to begin building a calculating machine that
he'd designed. By the late 1820s, he ran out of funds and he resented having to go hat
in hand to persuade either the government or the Royal Society to support continuing
the project. He couldn't understand why the value of scientific research was not more
widely recognized by political authorities and even by those who graced the hallowed
halls of official scientific institutions like the Royal Society. Now, Babbage wasn't
alone in complaining about the lack of support that scientific research had. His close friend
from undergraduate days, the astronomer John Herschel, shared his impatience. Herschel
was the son of the famous astronomer, William Herschel, who had emigrated to England from
Germany in the middle of the 18th century. And he shared Babbage's, that is John, shared
Babbage's pessimism about the future of English science. In 1828, he wrote to an acquaintance
that, and I'm quoting, it is idle for us to attempt competition with our continental neighbors
whether French or German in matters of science, we are rapidly dropping behind in the race.
Then in 1830, Babbage published a book entitled, Reflections on the Decline of Science in England.
As you can imagine, it caused a great stir because of its attempt to expose English science
as second class. In addition, Babbage openly criticized the Royal Society of London for
being dominated by members who were far more interested in aristocratic status than in
scientific achievement. And here's where the German meetings came in. Babbage had been
the sole Englishman to attend the Berlin meeting of the GDNA in 1828, which he then described
to his fellow British countrymen in a journal article. The experience inspired the British
to create their own national scientific organization. When more positive reports filtered across
the channel about the 1830 German meeting, which was held in Hamburg, several of the younger
British natural philosophers decided to take action. So an announcement went out for a
general scientific meeting at York in September of 1831. The response, not quite the same
as in Germany, local philosophical societies in the urban centers and the manufacturing
towns, they were enthusiastic. But those associated with what's been called the scientific
clericy, the aristocracy, gentry, clergy, and established academics interested in natural
science, these were distrustful of the new venture and tended to send their regrets.
But the organizers plowed ahead and set up a structure largely modeled on Oaken's successful
German organization. Well, those who did attend the York meeting deemed it a rousing success.
Here at the 1831 meeting, they declared the formation of the new British Association for
the Advancement of Science. The organizers decided to take the movement to the doubters,
so they scheduled the next two meetings to be held in the venerable academic centers
of Oxford and Cambridge. It would be virtually impossible for the professors of natural philosophy
to stay away completely. And in fact, they didn't. Each year, the meeting showed rapidly
increasing attendance. Whatever hesitancy the so-called scientific clericy had once
had about disrupting older traditions, it no longer mattered. They were clearly not
in control. As in Germany, the new society focused attention on open exchange of ideas
in common disciplinary interests combined with social occasions that diffused animosities
and promoted goodwill. And also like the Germans, the British moved the annual gathering from
city to city to be sure to demonstrate a sense of inclusiveness for all who wished to participate.
Finally, the British also instituted the practice of a keynote or inaugural address by a prominent
individual who would challenge them to carry on the cause. It was during the Cambridge meeting
of 1833 that the British asked the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge, a longtime friend of those
who sought to encounter and understand nature, to deliver the inaugural address. And it was
somewhat ironic, since like Oaken, Coleridge also had gone to Jaina in his youth to study
the nature philosophy of shelling. In his remarks to the gathering, Coleridge forbade
members of the BAAS to call themselves philosophers. The traditional title some still preferred.
They were different from philosophers, he said. It was in response to this challenge
thrown down by Coleridge that William Hewell, master of Trinity College, coined the word
scientist at the Cambridge meeting as a term that designated those who studied material
nature. The following year, he used the new name in print in a review, and finally in
his book on the philosophy of the inductive sciences of 1840, Hewell wrote, we need very
much a name to describe a cultivator of science in general. I should incline to describe him
a scientist. Well, there were those who despised the new term. Not surprisingly, the leading
critic was one of those natural philosophers well ensconced in a university position as
a natural philosopher. He had no reason to want to change things. It might open up the
gates to include those perished the thought outside the university. But such individuals
were behind the times. The new term was here to stay. It was true that as yet, there weren't
a lot of job possibilities for scientists outside of professorship in a university somewhere.
But the government survey was hiring those trained in geology, and more and more opportunities
like that would begin to emerge. So there was a new social identity on the horizon. There
was a practitioner of natural science, and it emerged right at the time when all kinds
of attention was coming the way of natural science. There was the publication of the
many volumes of von Humboldt's cosmos, beginning in the late 30s and early 40s. There were
the tales of Darwin's voyages. There was the sensational issues raised by Combs book
on phrenology. And then Chambers book on the vestiges of the natural history of creation.
There were the discoveries of new planets and the building of huge telescopes, both
of which we have yet to talk about. There were the claims made by the Germans that natural
science somehow was linked to political revolution, and also that the new outlook helped us to
expose the scriptures as myths. There was the link between natural science and a strictly
deterministic scientific materialism. There were assertions that we have to change our
idea about the end of the world. And to top it all off, there was Darwin's origin. Now
admittedly, there were many who continued not to be all that interested in these issues,
having to do with natural science. But that kind of position was becoming increasingly
hard to maintain. Natural science had a way of intruding into your world regardless of
who you were. More and more it became something you felt forced to have an opinion about.
And now there were these natural scientists who seemed to speak for natural science at
annual meetings. So what kind of image of natural science did these new scientists tend to impart?
If they were now the socially recognized authorities, what did they say science was, and how did
it differ from the older natural philosophy? It would of course take some time for the
new role in 19th century society to become firmly established. But when the leaders
of the new scientific society spoke, they did carry a kind of authority that communicated
more of a consensus than had been present in earlier years. For one thing, scientists
seemed to agree that their enterprise was more narrowly focused than it had been when
there was still natural philosophy. There we saw that there were at least two metaphors
that were used for nature, the machine and the organism. With the emergence of the natural
scientists, the appeal to nature as organism diminished, and the image of nature as machine
increased. There were a couple of books in the 1840s that tried to spell out why natural
science was different from what shelling and the romantics had been up to. By mid-century,
it was no longer acceptable to identify yourself as a nature philosopher in Europe. It was
a different story, incidentally, here in the United States. Along with that came an accompanying
feature. The task of the natural scientist, at least of the physical scientist, became
more and more to find nature's mechanisms. And that meant that mechanics became the
supreme science. Mechanics and logic are identical, said Wilhelm Wundt around mid-century. He
meant that the scientist had explained something about nature's working if he or she had identified
the mechanism that was responsible for it. It was clearly that old view of nature, drawn
as if one stood outside of nature. It was the view the romantics so regretted in the
waning years of his career Goethe wrote with prophetic accuracy around 1830 to a correspondent
that it would be a long time before the view of things they shared would return. One final
observation about the emergence of a consensus concerning how natural science was to be pursued.
Remember back in lecture 13 that the new science of biology had been born in the midst of the
flourishing of the view of nature as romantic. Scholars have recently been pointing out
that in spite of the consensus that was claimed by the new scientific community of the middle
of the 19th century, the goals of what I've occasionally referred to as romantic science
did not die completely. The historian Robert Richards has very recently demonstrated impressively
how very explicit it remained in the German tradition, even found its way into Darwin
by way of Alexander von Humboldt. In other words, it continued to hover beneath the surface
and there was additional evidence of the concern to retain moral agency at the heart of natural
science in spite of what the new consensus said. That was in the continued flourishing
of what now began to be known as alternative scientific practices. Mesmerism, homeopathy,
chronology and a myriad of other systems were now alternative to a standard model. But now
we have scientists and they're pretty much agreed about what it is they do. In our next lecture,
we'll see how these new scientists come to one of the major insights of the 19th century,
the conservation of energy.
