Welcome back. This is lecture 31. In the last two lectures, we followed physicians and physicists
as they tried to sort out ideas about energy in the 1840s and 1850s. I hope the point I
wanted to illustrate was clear in those lectures. That is, that the development of natural science
sometimes runs into challenges that are not met in a moment of discovery when all becomes
clear. That sometimes happens, but not always. There's no more important concept to come
out of the 19th century for the physical sciences than energy, and yet it was a long time before
scientists were all on the same page about it. Eventually, energy came to be defined
as the capacity to do work. That's a rather abstract idea. Capacity to do work? But it
was necessary to cover both Helmholtz's idea of tens of force, which became potential energy,
and what Thomson called actual energy. But the capacity to do work, you have to admit
that's not an easy idea to get your mind around. At the end of the 19th century, one physicist
referring to the conservation of energy said, we know something is conserved, but we're
not sure exactly what it is. But even though the emergence of an understanding of energy
in the 19th century is more a case of muddling through than discovery, that doesn't mean
that energy didn't play a central role in physical science or in the impact that physical
science had on culture. We saw how both the first law of thermodynamics, the conservation
of energy, and the second law of thermodynamics, the irreversibly increasing amount of unavailable
energy in the universe, both contained broader implications for a so-called scientific understanding
of nature. What we want to explore today is how this idea of a scientific worldview was
exploited in the decades after the middle of the century, because not everyone agreed
about what these or other results of natural science meant in the larger scheme of things.
We caught a glimpse, for example, at how North British physicists used new ideas about energy
to support and modify their religious understanding. But there were others who took a different
lesson from what was happening in natural science. And when they did so, they aggressively
took their message to the broader public. They took ideas from both physical and biological
science and constructed a bold new worldview from them. Now, ideas about conservation of
energy emerged from a rather technical context, but these new popularizers of natural science
made them palatable enough to the public to support their grand new vision.
I'm talking about a group of writers who've been called scientific materialists. In their
view, it was high time that someone stood up and proclaimed the bald truth about the
world that natural science had revealed. The movement of scientific materialism added
another dimension to the turmoil of the mid-century years. As I've mentioned in earlier lectures,
the 1840s was an active time in Europe, economically, socially, politically, intellectually. Economically,
industrialization was in full swing. It was the time portrayed by Dickens in England.
High finance, manufacture, trade. And other nations were beginning to catch up to England.
Several German states began to see wisdom in a collective economic action over the individual
protectionist regulations that had been keeping them weak. And the German railroad industry,
which made its appearance in the 1840s, would ensure that new German goods would circulate.
Of course, social change came in the wake of the spread of industrialization. That also
had been described by Dickens. We know about the life of Oliver Twist, led. Friedrich Engels
also got into the act with his book of 1844 on the condition of the working classes in
England. It was not the same old life of yesteryear. The watchword was change, and you'd
better catch a ride or you'd surely be left behind. In fact, many were left behind, forced
into a hand-to-mouth existence that often involved crime.
Politically, things boiled over in 1848, not in England. There you had the riots and massive
demonstrations of the Chartist movement. But in France, all the political exiles and
malcontents from elsewhere in Europe seemed to have gathered in Paris, where they clamored
for the creation of a new age. You get a sense of the mood from reading some of the novels
of the period. It was a time when decadence seemed to run rampant. King Louis Philippe,
the so-called bourgeois monarch, became increasingly unpopular. At one point, it was said that
it wasn't even safe for him to review his own troops. He was caught between those on
the left who called for radical change and those on the right who called for a return
to the glory days of old under a strong leader. When revolution broke out in Paris in February
of 1848, it precipitated revolutions in other major cities on the continent. But many had
the sense, certainly Karl Marx did, that the failure of the revolutions of 1848 was just
a temporary setback. The march of modernity was too strong to be bottled up by the outdated
structure of old-fashioned monarchies. And that was what you had restored to the thrones of
Europe once the revolutions had fizzled. Finally, intellectual change was everywhere. First,
there were the vestiges. We've run into the impact of that book several times already. But I want
to focus today on the continent and Germany since scientific materialism was most visible there.
The intellectual harbinger of the movement was the materialism of another German who wrote early
in the decade of the 1840s. This was Ludwig Feuerbach, a theologian whose book on the essence of
Christianity rocked Germany in 1841. I mentioned Feuerbach's book briefly a few lectures ago.
Let me take a minute and tell you a little more about Feuerbach's message.
Feuerbach had been schooled in the idealism of the philosopher Georg Hegel. But he came to the
conviction that Hegel had been wrong to insist that the realm of the ideal took precedence over
that of the material. Feuerbach argued that the act of sensation of the real world was just as
primary and important as the act of thinking. He put it this way, sensing is already thinking.
Being a theologian, Feuerbach proceeded to reflect on the meaning of his new found materialistic
emphasis for religion. It meant he concluded that we have to be realists about our situation.
We have to realize that many of our idealistic notions are not realistic. Take the doctrines
of Christianity. For example, the idea of God. We invest in God attributes of love, knowledge,
and power. But if we're realistic, we'll realize what's really going on here. Religious ideas are
really human ideas that have been projected into the heavens. We humans crave love, so we make
God all loving. We're curious about the world, so we make God omniscient. We want power, so God is
all powerful. It's time we wake up to what's going on. It says if we take the measure of ourselves
standing small on earth and then project that measure into the heavens, by the time we view
what we've projected, it's so magnified that only God could possess it. The message of Feuerbach's book
was that it was time we grew up. It's time we exposed religion as a mere projection of human
needs. Humans had invented a domain of divine existence, which they then claimed transcended
our ordinary experience of the material world. They created an illusory realm, which they then
claimed to be real. In fact, he said religion was one grand anthropomorphism. The young Karl Marx
found Feuerbach's materialism to represent an inspiring inversion of the Hegelian idealism
that had been dominating the philosophical scene. Marx's famous theses on Feuerbach,
which were written in 1845, show appreciation for what Feuerbach did in his book on Christianity.
In fact, one of his most well-known declarations, you know, the one about religion being the
opiate of the people, that's very Feuerbachian. But Marx took Feuerbach one step farther. He
wanted to incorporate one more element into the realistic perspective that Feuerbach called for,
that of practical action. Thesis 11, the most famous one, made that clear. Philosophers, wrote
Marx, have only interpreted the world in various ways. The point is to change it. So Marx reformulated
Feuerbach's materialism into a materialism of action, what he called dialectical materialism.
That was to be the appropriate philosophical foundation for social change. But Feuerbach
impressed more than just radical thinkers like Marx. He also proved enormously influential
on some of the younger generation of physicians and natural philosophers in Germany.
And the reason was clear. It was because Feuerbach had identified himself with natural science.
Where did the link to natural science occur? It came when Feuerbach identified his method.
He was, he said, nothing more than a natuoforscher, a natural investigator of the mind.
This word natuoforscher was the word that natural philosophers had traditionally
chosen for themselves. It was still very much in use in the 1840s. It would soon give way to the
word natuovissenschaft, their natural scientist. Just like in England, the label natural philosopher
was giving way to the word scientist. So Feuerbach was saying that his analysis of the foundation
of religion was the same kind that an investigator of nature used to discover nature's truth.
As I said, a number of younger minds felt the same urge Feuerbach had to come clean about how
natural science had changed the way that we have to look at the world. We have to face up to the
hard truth about reality. All these things we humans have created, like gods in the heavens,
even notions of the spirit and soul, they don't really exist as immaterial entities,
like we've made them to be. In the years just after Feuerbach, then the use of natural science
to promote materialism became very visible in European society. Among the first proponents
of scientific materialism was a fiery young professor of zoology from Gießen in Germany.
This was Karl Vogt, who came from a line of political activists, especially on his mother's side.
But his father, too, had become embroiled in local politics. He was a liberal physician there in
Gießen whose political activities had forced him to flee Germany for Switzerland in the mid-1830s.
Teenaged Karl stayed behind to continue his studies in chemistry at the university,
but he, too, couldn't stay out of trouble. And only a year passed before young Karl had to flee
because of his own political involvement as a student. Well, he finally got to Switzerland, too.
The only way to avoid being apprehended, incidentally, was to walk the whole way.
And he entered the university there. It was in 1839 when he completed a medical degree in Bern.
Now he has to decide what to do. He uncovered an opportunity to do research work under the
direction of the noted Swiss naturalist Louis Agassiz. That was in Neuchâtel,
so he jumped at the chance. All in all, he spent five years studying fossils and geology with Agassiz.
It was wonderful in a wonderful education experience, even if folk didn't find himself
very much attracted to the strongly religious way that Agassiz interpreted fossils.
He finally left Neuchâtel and went to Paris, where he remained for three years in the middle
of the tumultuous 1840s, then came an opportunity to go back to his hometown of Gießen and become a
member of the faculty at the university there. He was to be a professor of zoology. It's in this
period that he began publishing, and it soon became clear that folk was not one of those
German academicians who tried to stay neutral about things. Of several works from this period,
the best known is one entitled Physiological Letters. You can tell from the title that it was
meant for a wider audience than merely other natural philosophers. He was writing letters to
the educated classes, and it didn't take them long to encounter his full-blown materialism.
Folk was a man with a fiery personality, as I said. He was the kind of person who loved a good
fight, especially if it was conducted in public. So when he made a point about how natural science
entailed a materialistic view of life, he didn't mince words. On the contrary, he chose his words
for their effect. It's this work that contains his most famous statement, which was made to
support his materialistic view of mental activity. It was, that is, his statement was,
that thoughts stand in the same relation to the brain as Gaul does to the liver or urine to the
kidneys. Now that made things clear. Thoughts were a secretion of the brain. Talk about catching
the attention of the reader. It was hard to be neutral about a statement like that.
Well, perhaps not surprisingly, once revolution broke out in Germany in 1848,
Folk was elected a representative to the Frankfurt parliament. He was, after all, a public figure
now. In the parliament, there was a sense that with the revolution, a glorious opportunity had
come to remake Germany. Germany would finally be united, and in the process, the parliament would
give to the new state a constitution worthy of the modern age. So the delegates tended to be
extremely idealistic about their task, and they set out to make sure that every aspect of life
had their attention. That meant that they debated and debated about everything. It's one of the
reasons why the revolution failed, because the delegates addressed a whole lot of idealistic
subjects and ignored practical matters, like, for instance, creating a standing army.
That's why in 1848 in Germany has been called the revolution of the intellectuals.
While in Frankfurt, Folk continued to take the kind of radical stances he'd addressed in his book.
For example, he defended revolution as something sanctioned by nature, and depicted scientists as
necessary revolutionaries. And because the parliament wanted to settle the issue of the
relation of the church and state, Folk also let his views be known on that, and here emerged his
real antagonism to supernaturalism and religion. He attacked religion and its institutions,
declaring then, and these are his words, that the purpose of the revolution coincides rather well
with the conclusion of the materialistic Bible, unrestrained war against church and religion.
Once again, it was clear what he thought. Throughout his life, Folk continued to defend
the view that natural science revealed a materialistic universe we all must accept.
Folk's sounding the materialistic alarm found an echo in the work of a young Dutch
physiologist, Jakob Moleskoot. Moleskoot was slightly younger than Volk, although he came
from Holland, he had come to Germany for his education in natural science and physiology,
to be specific, and he stayed in Germany and began teaching there in 1847. These were the
years right after Feuerbach's bombshell. Moleskoot met Feuerbach, and he impressed him with his
scientific work, that that's the work that he was doing. Moleskoot was researching the physiological
chemistry of food. He published a book on the physiology of nutrition in 1850, and then followed
it in the same year with a more popular version. That was clear from the title of the work. It was
called The Theory of Nutrition for the People. In this work, Moleskoot proclaimed that life was
merely an exchange of matter. That was it, just matter of one kind being exchanged for another.
Of course these exchanges were unique, that is they were such that the organism was able to
repeat the exchange over and over, and thereby renew itself over time, but basically life could
be understood as just exchanging one kind of matter for another. And if that was so, then
obviously the kind of matter involved in the exchange either promoted life or detracted from it.
So what you ate, your diet, made a huge difference in the kind of life you enjoyed.
The kind of food you ate determined everything, including differences in thought and character.
Moleskoot noted that the Irish, for example, were doomed to lose their struggle against England,
because their diet was overly dependent on potatoes, and that produced laziness.
Coursing through the veins of the Irish was, I love this German expression,
fowl-less, cartofel-bluet, lazy potato blood. Well, the book was reviewed by none other than
Ludwig Feuerbach. And what was the title of that review? It was an essay called Natural Science
and the Revolution. Feuerbach saw Moleskoot's insight about the materialistic basis of life as
nothing short of revolutionary, and he endorsed Moleskoot's materialistic explanation of human
character in a phrase that has been famous ever since. It was a play on words in the original
German, der Mensch ist Wasser ist, you are what you eat. In 1852, Moleskoot wrote another book,
The Cycle of Life. Here he declared again that life was just a cyclical exchange of matter.
It was not due to a special force. Life was just the result of the forces of matter, heat,
light, electricity, and mechanical motion. Notice that Moleskoot was proclaiming his
radical message at the same time that physicists were trying to get straight how all the forces
in the universe were interrelated. Only Moleskoot, who based his claims on physiology, was far more
radical in his conclusions than someone like William Thompson would ever be. As a materialist,
he was saying that the phenomenon of life was not all that special in the universe. It was just
one kind of arrangement of matter, a fairly complex one, but one kind as opposed to the
simpler arrangements of inorganic material. So when Moleskoot suggested near the end of the book
that corpses should be used to fertilize fields, that every meal ought to be seen as the Eucharist,
he caused such a stir that he soon lost his position, left Germany for Switzerland. It seemed
like everybody had to go to Switzerland. But if folk and Moleskoot attracted the public's attention
with their claims about the lessons of modern science, the third member of what's been called
the unholy trinity of scientific materialists became the most well-known of all. He was Ludwig
Büchner, young German physician working in Tübingen. We met him back in lecture 23 when I
described his unusual views on what evolution meant for society. I mentioned then that he had
two talented siblings, his sister Louisa, who was active in the German women's movement and his
brother Georg, an early communist also gifted playwright. The Büchner family itself was unusual,
as far back as the early 18th century, many of the fathers of this particular Büchner lineage
had been medical men. Ludwig's father, Hans Büchner, was no exception there. Although he was
German, he'd gone to Holland early in the 19th century to study medicine. I'm not sure why he
went outside Germany to begin his studies. Anyway, before Ludwig's father completed his degree,
he became a regimental surgeon in the Dutch army. No doubt this was because there was a
great need for surgeons. This was after all the time when Napoleon was making it clear to the
countries around France that he wasn't going away. In fact, Ludwig's father soon switched his duties
to the French army and accompanied Napoleon's troops as they began to conquer Europe. By 1811,
Ernst returned to Germany, where he finished his medical studies, in Gießen,
same city where the Vogt family lived. Right after Napoleon was defeated, he took on a post as a
medical counselor in Darmstadt, where he and his wife raised this family of gifted children.
Now, Ludwig himself, as I mentioned, also went to medical school and became a physician.
He got his degree at Gießen, where Carl Vogt was teaching. In fact, during the time of political
revolution in 1848, he worked hard to get Vogt elected as a delegate to parliament,
so we know he was aware of Vogt's radical views. Büchner found himself attracted to what he
referred to in his dissertation as the new physiology, by which he meant a physiology that
rejected vital activities as due to special organic forces. The failure of the revolution of
1848 hit Büchner hard. He had found a job as an assistant in a medical clinic in Tübingen,
but it just didn't make up for a general depression he felt in those years.
Then in 1853, the German Society of Natural Scientists and Physicians, that's the new
scientific society Oaken founded back in the early 1820s. The GDNA, as it was known, came to
Tübingen for its 30th anniversary meeting. Ludwig attended its sessions and was uplifted.
The inspiration he found in the meeting and his reading of Molaskoad's cycle of life that had
just appeared inspired him to try his hand at writing, what his brother Alexander called the
family disease. The result was a book that was, to say, the least a big hit. It simply was entitled
Force and Matter, and it appeared for the first time in 1855. Eventually it reached 21 editions,
it was translated into 17 foreign languages. It was enormously influential, the Bible of
scientific materialism. Among those whom it influenced later in the century, for example,
was the young Albert Einstein who read it as an adolescent. Well, what was in the book?
Why was it so popular? For one thing, Büchner captured the essence of his message with a slogan,
no force without matter, no matter without force. It was like a declaration of independence from
all things spiritual, all things that claimed not to be linked to a material foundation. Büchner
was aggressively proclaiming that there was no such thing as immaterial spirit or soul,
and he embarked on a campaign to eliminate every kind of supernaturalism and idealism
from the explanations of natural events. Büchner had a strong conviction about
what he understood to be the method of natural science. It was indicated in his subtitle,
which said that his book contained studies that were empirical nature philosophy. He clearly
wanted to distinguish what he was doing from the nature philosophy of Shelling. His way of
proceeding was to him an uncomplicated empirical approach that resulted in straightforward laws
of science, and so it was the only route to knowledge. Since it was the only route to
knowledge, then other disciplines, especially philosophy, had to adopt the approach of natural
science in his opinion. In saying this, Büchner was echoing a conclusion that could be heard from
others who were convinced that natural science had become clear about its method. This growing
conviction that the emergence of a consensus about the method of science led to a new understanding
of the greater significance of natural science. This conviction was reflected in the shift from
the use of the older word, not to a foreshadow, natural investigator, to the newer word,
not to a wissenschauffler, natural scientist, and it was happening around the same time
that the comparable shift in terminology was happening in England.
The law of nature that Büchner loved to celebrate was the one Helmholtz had proclaimed in 1847,
the conservation of force. In Büchner's phrase in 1857, he called it the immortality of force,
meaning of course that force could neither be created nor destroyed.
It was matter and its property of force that was immortal, not the souls of humans.
Curiously, when it came to the implications about heat death that Helmholtz had made clear
in his Königsberg speech, Büchner explained the second law of thermodynamics to say merely
that systems like our sun and planets must run down. In fact, Büchner rejected the inevitability
of universal heat death. He said that our world must and will celebrate its resurrection someday,
and that betrayed an optimistic vision of the future that wasn't really warranted by his materialistic
beliefs. Well, it was Büchner's force and matter that became the summary statement of scientific
materialism. Although, as we've seen, there were others who preceded him in declaring a
materialistic vision, Büchner became the symbol of the movement. Of all the materialistic works in
the decades around and after mid-century, his book was the most readable, the least technical,
the most effective in its boldness. Büchner claimed to be standing up for the truth.
For example, he wrote, one cannot make a thing other than it is, and nothing seems to us more
wrong-headed than the attempts to introduce orthodoxy into the natural sciences.
The work had that same quality that proved so threatening in chambers as vestiges a decade
earlier. It was daring to speak the bold truth about what natural science had revealed concerning
the cosmos, and the news wasn't good for people of traditional faith. Büchner's news was even worse
than what chambers had announced. Chambers, at least, went out of his way to claim that
his view ennobled our vision of God, that familiar deistic assertion was strangely absent here.
Büchner's message was pessimistic. It would even get to the author himself personally.
He became extremely depressed, almost committed suicide. Later, writing under a pseudonym,
he published some of the things he'd written down right after force and matter came out.
Listen to this. We are like dogs on a treadmill, he wrote. The glowing irons of life
brought us to restless running without goal until we fall dead from exhaustion in the grave we have
made for ourselves. Well, if this is the message he got from his own work, you can guess that the
rest of the world had picked it up too. And of course, he was denounced on all sides. That was
no doubt part of the reason for his depression as well. But then there were others who agreed
that what he'd said was true. Those who agreed with scientific materialism embraced it with an
emotional commitment, rivaling that of religious faith. Furthermore, it became clear that in age
of realism, of calling things like they were, and not dressing them up with religious sugar coating,
had replaced the romantic spirit of earlier decades. This new spirit of realism was evident
elsewhere in the culture as well as in the materialistic controversy that flowed from
natural science. You could see it in the Realpolitik, the politics of reality that the new chancellor
of Germany, Otto von Bismarck, pursued. He made no bones about throwing out the romantic dreams
of the delegates to the Frankfurt Parliament in 1848. He called for using cold, hard,
calculated factors in his analysis, blood and iron, he said. And he used exactly that to successfully
unite the German states into a new Reich by 1870. The new spirit of realism was evident in art
and literature too. You saw it depicted in paintings like Gustav Courbet's The Stonebreakers
and in others. You recognized it in novels. Take Gustav Flaubert's Madame Bovary, for example.
These artists attempted to tell it like it was rather than to focus on edifying the reader.
And once Marx moved beyond the passionate exhortations of his communist manifesto before
the revolution, you could see the new realism was affecting him too after the revolution in a way
that he sat down in the British Museum to examine economic data. And from that came not an inspiring
call to the barricades, but the realistic analysis of Das Kapital. That was in 1859. Scientific
materialism, a world of molecules in motion, was one symbol of this new era of realism.
And if you took the motion of molecules seriously within natural science itself,
a number of positive scientific results could occur. So we'll take a look at those in our next lecture.
