Hi, and welcome to another philosophy lecture.
This is going to be an interesting one, Willard Van Orman-Quine, on what there is.
Quine was a very influential philosopher.
One of the greatest American philosophers in the analytic tradition.
He was born in 1908 and died in 2000, December 25.
As I said, he was regarded as one of the most influential philosophers of the 20th century.
He was a student first at Harvard University and then became a professor there, and he
taught there, I think, until he died.
He made incredible contributions through the philosophy of language, so understanding
of language, metaphysics, and other things.
So in this particular video lecture, I'm going to try to explain what it seems to be according
to Quine, the problem of ontology.
And so I try to explain his famous paper on what there is.
Quine begins his paper by saying a curious thing about the ontological problem is its
simplicity.
It can be put in three Anglo-Saxon monosyllables.
What is there?
And it can be answered, moreover, in a word, everything.
And everyone will accept this answer as true.
However, this is merely to say that there is what there is, and it's not very helpful.
Quine is going to explain that what there is, what exists in reality, is to be determined
on the basis of what can we translate into a variable, as I will show you in a minute.
Now Quine in this paper wants to show that some of the most popular ontologies of his
time, at least, were false.
Perhaps if not false, they were not well justified.
If you don't remember what ontology is, go back to my video lecture on metaphysics.
Ontology is the sub-branch or the branch of metaphysics that is concerned about existence
of being.
And the objects we can or we should commit to.
What objects do exist?
For example, in my logic course, I teach how to test syllogisms, standard form categorical
syllogisms, by using a technique known as the three-ven diagram technique.
So each venn diagram, these three circles representing each term, as you know, standard
form categorical syllogism has exactly three terms.
So you can use one circle for each term.
So you have three circles and you overlap the circles.
And then you diagram the premises and see if the conclusion is diagrammed as a result
of your diagram in the premises.
So this technique shows you whether a particular diagram is valid.
Now there are several standard form categorical syllogisms.
There are invalid, many that are valid, but also there are syllogisms known as conditionally
valid.
Now the condition is the existence of certain entities.
So once you do the diagramming of the premises and you fill up the circles in the venn diagrams,
if a syllogism has universal premises and a particular conclusion, so in other words,
if the premises are a-form or e-form and the conclusion is an i-form or an o-form, then
those syllogisms are very special, very strange because they may be valid on the condition
that the entities of the subject, and when I say the subject, I mean the subject of the
conclusion, those entities really exist.
Now in that situation, what do you do when you diagram the syllogism?
What you do is that you may place an x in the diagram, and if the x fits the diagram
and shows the conclusion, then that particular syllogism is known as is said to be conditionally
valid.
If this is too confusing, go to my lecture on diagramming testing syllogisms and also
testing varieties, and you will see practically what I do in the video, how I determine the
validity.
But the point that I was trying to make is the x.
The x in logic is the existential import.
It refers to the existential import.
Now the point is, what exists?
When do we use the x?
Well, Quine explains a way out of this puzzle, okay?
Now another thing that I wanted to say about the paper, Quine's paper, is that Quine uses
in the paper some names of hypothetical philosophers.
One is Mech X, and the other one is Wyman, okay?
It's pretty much recognized by many that Mech X is probably Mech Taggart, the British philosopher
Mech Taggart.
I have a video on Mech Taggart on the nature of time, by the way.
And the other Wyman would be Maynong.
I'm not sure why he doesn't address them directly.
It's not important at this point.
But the point of what he's trying to establish, Quine, is to establish a viable standard for
ontological commitment.
In other words, to what entities should I commit?
What entities do exist, and I commit to their existence?
Also, he wants to suggest how we should decide between competing theories.
Now, the paper starts with the riddle of non-being.
There's something known as Plato's Beard.
Plato's Beard says the following, non-being must in some sense be.
Otherwise, what is it that there is not?
Let me explain what this means.
What it means is that statements about objects or properties that don't exist are problematic.
In other words, when you deny the existence of certain objects, for example, you deny
Santa Claus.
Say, Santa Claus does not exist, okay?
Well let's stick to the example given in the paper of Pegasus.
Pegasus, as you know, is a mythical winged horse, Pegasus.
So when you say Pegasus does not exist, what exactly do you mean?
What do you say?
If you deny the existence of Pegasus in their way, you are affirming the existence of Pegasus.
Mech X makes this point.
If Pegasus were not, if Pegasus didn't exist, then we should not be talking about anything
when we say, when we use the word.
Therefore, it would be nonsense to say even that Pegasus is not.
Consider the phrase, Pegasus does not exist.
And ask yourself, is this true or is it false?
If you say yes, it is true.
What makes this true?
What makes this true must be meaning.
Truth requires meaning.
Meaning requires reference.
If the word Pegasus is meaningful at all, then there must be something that refers to the
name Pegasus.
But if there isn't anything to which the word Pegasus refer, then the word Pegasus is meaningless.
But if Pegasus, the word Pegasus is meaningless, then the statement Pegasus does not exist
cannot be true.
But if it's not true, then it must be false that Pegasus doesn't exist.
But think about it now.
If it's false that Pegasus doesn't exist, in order for that sentence to be false, that
implies that Pegasus does exist.
It's a big mess.
So some philosophers like MechEx might respond the following.
Look, Pegasus is an idea, a concept in our minds.
So if the word Pegasus is an idea, then the statement Pegasus does not exist.
The idea does not exist.
It's false because there is or there isn't a certain Pegasus idea.
That's how you make sense of Plato's beard.
Now, Quina observes a problem with MechEx's solution.
He observes that when I talk about things, I understand there is a distinction between
those things and ideas of those things.
So my idea of a table is, call it a brain state.
And a table is an existent object in space and time.
However, what about the idea of Pegasus?
When, first of all, when I say that there is Pegasus, an idea of Pegasus, what is the
idea of Pegasus?
Probably can't be an idea of some other idea, right?
But in any case, when I talk about Pegasus, I am not talking about an idea.
I am talking about a real horse with wings.
So when I deny the existence of Pegasus, I'm not denying the existence of the idea of Pegasus.
I'm denying the existence of a horse that has wings.
Here's another solution to this problem, Plato's beard.
This is Wyman's solution, okay?
Wyman observes there are actual things, like tables, dogs, pizzas, buildings.
And there are things that do not exist, but they could exist.
For example, dragons, rent-free-for-all, and Pegasus, our Pegasus.
Also you have to observe that there are things that could never exist.
These for example, like the round square, or a married bachelor, these are absurd.
They are contradictory in terms.
There can't be such thing as a square that is also round, or a married person who is
not married, or a non-married person who is married.
Great.
So in other words, Wyman's solution is that, to Plato's beard, is that when we say anything
about these things like Pegasus, is that Pegasus, we have to say, is something that could exist.
So in other words, Pegasus subsists, okay, subsists.
So Pegasus has his being as an actualized possible.
So in other words, these are the sphere, the realm of all objects.
And there are actual objects, like for example, horses, okay.
There's a subset of the set of all objects that exist.
But among the set of objects, there are also objects that could exist, or subsist, like
dragons, like Pegasus, okay.
So that's the way we think of these entities.
But Quine observes immediately that if we have no principles to exclude possible objects
from existence, what principle is there against the existence of a round square, right?
If we have to say that Pegasus exists, because it is one of those objects that is contingent,
right?
And so it has existence, while it has, in a sense, because it has subsistence.
But then, how do we know, how do we make a distinction between things that just subsist,
they don't really exist in space and time, they're possible, and they have subsistence.
And existence of round squares and Mary bachelors.
I mean, if they don't really exist in actual reality, then what's the rule?
Then we can say, if there's no rule, we can say, well, then anything could subsist.
Why do we have to say that round squares cannot subsist?
We could say, perhaps, that they do not exist, okay.
But we can't say that they cannot subsist, because what are the rules of subsistence?
So it makes it very messy, very, very complicated.
It's better to get rid of this world of subsistence.
Furthermore, Quine gives an example.
Take, for example, the possible fat man in the doorway.
And again, the possible bald man in that doorway.
Are they the same possible man, or two possible men?
How do we decide?
How can we decide if a possible man or subsistence man, bald man or fat man or whatever, is identical
to another?
It seems that there are no rules of identity in subsistence.
So once again, this is just messy.
It's better to abandon this kind of world of subsistence.
Now let me talk about another objection.
Another objection is that these ontologies presented by MechEx and Wyman, according to
Quine, commit the fallacy of equivocation.
They equivocate meaning and naming.
The fallacy is to assume that just because a term, a word, is meaningful, and it is meaningfully
used, it follows that that term must refer to something that really exists.
Now this error was already pointed out by Russell's theory of definite description.
And also by Frege, when Frege talks about the meaning, the difference between meaning
and naming.
For example, the evening star and the morning star.
The phrase evening star names a planet, the planet Venus, but the morning star names the
same object, but the two phrases don't have the same meaning.
They name the same object, but they don't have the same meaning.
Otherwise the ancients would have known that they were the same object.
That's why they had different names.
So Wyman and MechEx confuse the alleged name, the named object Pegasus, with the meaning
of the word Pegasus.
Before concluding that Pegasus must be, must exist.
So how do we shave Plato's beard?
Well by using Russell's method.
This method says that we have to analyze and translate in illogical form any statement.
For example, the statement, there exists a flying winged horse named Pegasus.
We translate it with these funny logical operators, which means, you say this inverted
E letter means that there exists, there is an X, such that this X, this X is F, it means
it flies.
So also the plus sign, this X is winged and also this X is named Pegasus.
So now I can shave Plato's beard, I can deny the existence of something without creating
any ambiguities by stating the following.
It is not the case that, or it is not true that, there exists or something is a flying
winged horse named Pegasus.
You see the difference.
Now I don't deny the existence of Pegasus.
I deny that there is such a thing as Pegasus, namely an entity that flies, that is an horse,
that is winged, and that is named Pegasus.
As an alternative I can say, I can rephrase Pegasus as a definite description.
For example, the winged horse that was captured by Bellarophon.
So I can say it is not the case that there is such an entity and so on.
Now let us turn to the ontological problem of universals.
I have a video lecture for universal, watch that video lecture.
The question whether there are such entities as attributes, relations, classes, numbers,
functions, mech X, or people like mech X thinks that there are, speaking of attributes we
can say there are red houses, red horses, red sunsets.
Now these houses, roses, and sunsets then have something in common.
And this, which they have in common, is all I mean by the attribute of redness.
So redness would be something that really exists like Plato's forms, if you remember
from my lecture on Plato.
So the argument would be the following.
We correctly classified red houses, red roses, and red sunsets and as things that have the
same color, there must be something, a property that is in common in the world that makes
them belong to the same family.
Or there exists an X that is the shared property of redness, okay?
Now, Quine says, one may admit that there are red houses, red roses, sunsets, but deny
that they have anything in common.
The word red or red objects denotes each of sundry individual entities, which are red
houses, red roses, red sunsets, and so on.
But there is not in addition any entity whatsoever, individual or red or otherwise, which is named
by the word redness.
That houses and roses and sunsets are all of them red, may be taken as ultimate and irreducible.
In other words, why do we classify all things together as red?
Quine says, well, we don't have to postulate redness as an entity or a platonic form.
We can just say simply they have a common property, namely redness.
And what is this common property of redness?
Quine would say, there are red houses, red roses, and red sunsets end of the story.
So in other words, this would be a brute fact, they just resemble.
The doctrine that universals are just names without any corresponding reality, and that
only particular objects exist.
This is with the doctrine that Quine is endorsing.
So in other words, we just say no to properties.
Our commitment to properties isn't informative as an explanation anyway.
So Quine says, it doesn't explain anything, it only postulates even more entities.
We can say that they are brute facts, the fact that they resemble, they have something
in common.
Mech X or any other philosopher doesn't have any explanatory power, doesn't offer any
explanatory power.
There are all the occult entities that he posits under such names of redness.
So what do I gain by saying that there is redness, I don't gain anything.
I can, on the other hand, apply two good principles.
One principle is the Occam's razor.
As you know, Occam's razor says, do not multiply entities unnecessarily.
And so Quine is using Occam's razor as a principle.
Why should we multiply entities unnecessarily?
When we can just say redness is just a brute fact, all these objects are red.
Under the story, why postulating an entity known as red?
And this is supposed to minimize brute facts, although it seems that by saying that it is
a brute fact, it just adds another brute fact.
But anyway, what about meaning?
Now Mech X argues the following, granted.
The description between meaning and naming is fine.
The morning star, the evening star, fine.
But let us even grant that Pegasus or red or redness in other such entities are not names
of attributes.
Still, you admit they have a meaning.
But these meanings, whether they are named or not, are still universal meanings.
So we usually get it right when we classify things, read things.
Quine and I just arbitrarily assign these names and understand these meanings.
So there must be something responsible for our ability to do this and to have meaning.
Quine has nothing against meaning.
However, he says, I feel not reluctant toward refusing to admit meanings.
For I do not thereby deny that words and statements are meaningful.
One thing is to say that there is meaning and something is meaningful.
I remain free to maintain that the fact that a given linguistic utterance is meaningful
or significant, as I prefer to say, is an ultimate irreducible matter of fact.
Or I may undertake to analyze it in terms of directly of what people do in the presence
of linguistic utterance, a linguistic utterance in question, and other utterances similar
to it.
In other words, what Quine is not advocating but he's suggesting, I don't have to say
that there's meaning.
I can simply say that explaining in behavioristic terms, saying that something is meaningful
because it is a disposition to behave in a certain way with respect to an utterance.
For example, some dogs are white and not thereby commit ourselves to recognizing either doghood
or whiteness as entities.
Some dogs are white, says that some things that are dogs are white.
And in order that this statement be true, the things over which the bound variable
something ranges must include some white dogs but need not include whiteness or dogness.
So once again, we can analyze it in a logical way and say that there are some things that
are white and there are dogs.
This is nothing to do with dogness and whiteness.
And we can make sense of what we mean by some dogs or many dogs are white.
So Quine says that there seem to be three options, Platonism, which I discuss at length
in my video on Plato, Plato's metaphysics, which argues that there are abstract entities.
They exist independently of human beings and human minds.
The second option is conceptualism, which says that abstract entities exist but only
as concepts in our minds.
And then the third one is nominalism.
There are no abstract entities, we just use terms.
How do we decide between them?
Well Quine says that we have to decide which one is correct by doing the same thing that
scientists do.
What do they do?
We posit some hypotheses and then we test these hypotheses by making decisions based
on theoretical principles.
For example, simplicity, which one is more simple, is simpler or is the simplest?
The better hypothesis is the simpler one or the simplest.
Usefulness, so the better hypothesis is the one that is useful, that explains more, that
has greater predictive power and explanatory power and also coherence.
The better hypothesis is the one that is more coherent.
It does not conflict with other truths that we accept, that we have already established
and we hold as true and we have strong reasons to believe to be true.
Quine, by the way, prefers nominalism.
Mathematicians could deny, for example, that there is a prime number greater than 10, yet
find it useful, very useful to act as if numbers existed.
So what is the conclusion?
Well the conclusion is rather inconclusive.
The question of what ontology actually to adopt, Quine says, still stands open.
Let us by all means see how much of a physicalistic conceptual scheme can be reduced to a phenomenalistic
one.
Viewed from within the phenomenalistic conceptual scheme, the ontologies of physical objects
and mathematical objects are myths.
The quality of the myth, however, is relative.
Moving in this case to the epistemological point of view, this point of view is one among
various corresponding to one among our various interests and purposes.
In other words, what is there to answer the original question at the outset?
What is there?
What is there is, we don't really know ultimately what is there, but we have to commit only
to those entities that can pass the logical test.
These that pass the logical test and we cannot speculate that these things really exist.
Some of these things really exist.
Some of these things are objects that exist in a nominal sense, in a useful sense, for
example, mathematical objects.
So as long as they contribute to some meaning and understanding of other things in the world.
So Quine sums up that his applications of Russell's method to Plato rules out the reasoning
behind some ontologies.
So we can discard some ontologies, a linguistic subject does not entail the existence of a
corresponding abstract entity, for example, Pegasus.
We can make sense of Pegasus, we can deny the existence of Pegasus without creating
any problems.
Now Quine suggests that we continue to pursue our ontologies in an open-minded and experimental
spirit.
So in sum, the question, what is there?
Quine responds, I don't know, but Quine can't infer the existence of a certain abstract entity
or entities, ideas, universal meanings, via Plato's beard.
Quine himself, then as I said, is a materialist when it comes to ontology, arguing that although
abstract entities exist in a certain sense, they were not mental.
They exist in a sense that we can regard them as useful, the useful entities.
If they ultimately exist, we don't know, but we don't have to commit to their existence.
And this is the end of another video lecture.
Thank you for watching, I'll see you next time.
