Hello, my name is Mark Vernon and I wanted to see whether I could offer something to
the conversation that's going on between figures like Jordan Peterson, Ken Wilber,
John Viveke, the people at Rebel Wisdom and others are trying to put this conversation
together. And what I wanted to see if I could do was inject the perspective of a figure
who I feel and kind of hope will become seminal in this debate and discussion, which is the
figure of Owen Barfield. He was one of the Inklings, friend of Alan Watts, and he always
thought his time would come. And I feel with this conversation that's going on now, maybe
his time is coming and I'm going to try and make his case. So I thought I'd try in this
half hour or so just to see whether I could put together some sense of what he has got
to offer, how he's in the conversation, but also offering something different and see
whether that can make any sense. And I've structured it around three sort of broad
areas that pick up on things that repeatedly come up when people discuss Peterson, Wilber,
Viveke and others and see whether Barfield does have something different to say. So the
first one I wanted to talk about was what you might call the problems with the kind
of mountaintop view. I feel often what the approach, often from cognitive science, in
fact, tries to do is kind of take a mountaintop view and come out with a kind of theory of
everything, a map of meaning, maybe a cognitive schema, sort of developmental schema, and
integrate everything that's empirically observed about people's development into that map in
order that where people are at can be charted. Now, there's clearly something very valuable
in this. I'm a psychotherapist and developmental psychology is very influential and important
in trying to help someone. But it does lead to problems as well. And it's actually quite
often commented that people can get kind of lost in the maps by which I think they mean
that they kind of lose touch with realities. It is a trying to chart whether they're on
the map or there's endless debate about the maps themselves, rather than the reality of
what's going on, that they're the maps are trying to open up. And Barfield has a very
different approach, which I feel can complement that and maybe help reconnect with reality
when the maps approach tends to disconnect. And that's because he took a narrative approach
to these questions. And in particular, he took a narrative approach that stressed a kind of
imaginative participation with oneself and with life. Now, let me just try and explain what I mean
by that is that he was a philologist. And he looked at how words change meaning across different
periods of cultural time. So the way that ancient Greeks use words, late antiquity, the medieval
period, the early modern, even differences between the early modern and modernity as we know it
now. Words have very dramatically changed meaning. And because words are, we participate in life by
the use of words, you know, words aren't just signs that we use to point. And the words themselves
carry a life for kind of vitality. You wouldn't be able to make any sense of what I'm trying to
say, unless those words directly are not just conveyed, but we're immersed in the meaning of
what we're talking about, what I'm trying to say. They are in a way life themselves. Barfield put it
on this way, he said that words have soul, they have a kind of animating quality. And so the
advantage of looking at approaching things from a philological perspective is that you always stay
in touch with that vitality with that life. And what Barfield did was tell a story about how
words change meaning, which was based on the idea that consciousness itself changes, that it evolves,
that it shifts. And the experience of life that someone in the ancient world, for example, would
have had is therefore very different from the experience of life which we have now. But it's
always about the experience of life. And it tells, say, the stories of the ancient myths to open up
that older experience, and see what's being lost, what's being gained from the kind of myths which
we tell ourselves now, the kind of heuristics that we use now. It's imaginative to because language
is this intermediate form which we humans use. It's part of what Plato called our in between
status, as a world where we're not just like other animals. So far as we can tell, who as we're just
get on with life, we do reflect on life. And we have this capacity to step back to some degree. And
that forms part of our our life as well, whether it be out of wonder or out of anxiety. But neither
we like the gods who don't use language, all the kind of visions of heaven and so on, interestingly
show paradises a place where language isn't used. But instead, the kind of direct communication goes
on a kind of telepathy. This is almost the experience there can be tolerated and known in all
its fullness. We aren't there yet. But language is this intermediate kind of zone. Put it another way,
you know, it's both sound, a physical thing, and its meaning, what you might call a spiritual
thing, something that's immaterial. And so we human beings, our life as it were, is very connected to
our use of language, not because language determines everything that we can know and experience, but
because language is of the domain that we're predominantly in this in between status, kind of
aware, but not fully transparent to being itself. And so this philological approach, this use of
words that have soul meant that he could track how meanings changed. And so words can also become
sort of fossils of consciousness. They can tell this story of how things change. I was thinking
about word this morning, which captures something of this, the word emotion. And until really took
quite recently until the 19th century, the word emotion was still very connected to motion.
Emotion and motion were sort of one on the same thing. Emotion just meant a kind of agitation
that led to motion. So for example, romantic poets could talk about the sweet emotion of the wind.
That that basically the South wind was felt to carry a kind of sweetness. And that was part of its
motion. The emotion of the wind was in the world, you might say. And it was only in the 19th century
when the disenchantment of the world really set in that emotion was taken into ourselves and is now
experienced predominantly, if not only as an kind of inner state. So emotion, the word is both a
fossil of an older consciousness, which you can pick up in poets, like say, Shelly, that talk about
the emotion of the wind, as well as carrying something about our inner state. Now, if I say
emotion, now you experience something of what it is to have that inner state, which I also have.
So it's a kind of narrative, a sort of philological approach that keeps you in touch with with
reality and experience, rather than a schema, which for all its uses inevitably has to kind of
detach you somewhat from the from the experience. And so people often talk about getting lost in the
maps or having any debates about the maps and losing touch with reality itself. So that was one
thing that's an advantage, I think, with this kind of narrative approach. Another advantage of the
narrative approach is that it extends the sort of epistemological range of things. So for example,
it's often remarked at T.S. Eliot, the poet remarked this, that science is very good at gathering
information. But you need a kind of knowledge in order to know how to join that information up.
You need to kind of wisdom in order to be wise about the different kinds of knowledge approaches
and you might take to that pure information. And so you need as well to join the dots, then there's
also a question of how you join the dots. That's wisdom. And but this participative approach
which Barfield advocates and takes it further than that actually. And because wisdom is also
connected to meaning and purpose. As it were, there is lots of different kinds of wisdom in the
world. And there's the wisdom of the moment. And there's the wisdom of different spiritual
traditions, different wisdom traditions that sometimes called. And you can sort as it were
between those different wisdoms by asking this question of meaning and purpose. That is a felt
sense of what draws you in life and makes life feel fuller. And that itself can discern the
wisdom. But it doesn't stop there. And with meaning and purpose, there's needed for a kind of vision
as well. It's not just the individual meaning and purpose that counts. And but the vision which
can be shared in a collective sense to that, as it were, discerns the meaning and purpose, what
vision you have. And then vision itself, as it were, nest sits within being the way the world
actually is reality itself. So reality, you might say, gives rise to different kinds of vision,
which gives rise to different kinds of meaning and purpose, which gives rise to multiple
wisdoms, different takes on on the world, which can join the dots of knowledge, which itself
can understand and see the different knots of pure information. So you go move from not just as
what information to knowledge to wisdom, as the sciences, particularly the cognitive sciences
tried to do, but extend that even further. So you join that into meaning and purpose, vision,
and then being itself. So it links up the whole of reality, this approach, I think, and through
these different levels of being. That sounds a bit complicated, perhaps, but you know, it's in a
story when you read a story, and when you read a myth, actually, all these levels are operative. And
again, this is kind of narrative approach. You know, you read a modern novel, and you realize
that it's not just as well the information of what's going on in the plot, the knowledge and the
wisdom of the characters concerned, the meaning and vision of their life. But what their life itself
conveys, being itself is operative. It happens at all these different levels when you when you
try and deploy a narrative or a myth to navigate your way through life, and not just a schema. So
to put it another way, this is about sort of participating, participating all the way in
life. And it's about your love of life, your zest of life. It brings in desire, as well as
cognition and awareness. I think it's also quite one with the age. For all the faults of our age,
if there is one powerful force operative, it is desire, you know, we want more out of life. I
think that the genius of capitalism is that it takes that more, it completely understands it, but
drives it into pure desire for material gain, for what you might call the material more, and tends
to occlude or to conceal spiritual goods, which operate according to different laws for the
material world. But nonetheless, and you know, our age is threaded through and through with this
desire for more. And I think that you always get into problems if you try to be too ascetic about
that, if you're seen to be resisting the age. Because what happens then is that life in all its
fullness reduces to a kind of set of moral demands. It starts to feel heavy and oppressive. But again,
all the great spiritual teachers have talked about how life actually feels like it's expansive, it
lightens, it grows, and your desire is satisfied when you're following the right way. I think we
get a sort of clue to that from Barfield's sense that participation is what counts. You can ask
yourself, you know, is this approach inviting me to participate in life more fully in all the
ways that I have. It certainly is about discipline and training and focus. But ultimately, it's about
opening up. And so I very much like this alternative approach as well, for that reason. And then
finally a sort of comment in this first section about narrative rather than map. I think what it
also does is it joins up what's known with the Noah. It no longer leaves you a sort of stranger in
the world. But because it operates at this level of soul, cultivates a sense of participating in
life. And again, the more cognitive approaches, they inevitably separate what's known with the Noah,
you from what you're studying, in order to do the study. They obviously want to return you to life
and reality itself. But that comes about quite spontaneously. When you are, for example, engaged
in poetry, Barfield was very interested in poetry. And because a poetic utterance doesn't just tell
you something about the world, gives you a feeling for that about the world as well. You know, when
Shakespeare compares the beloved to a summer's day, he's not just saying, this is my beloved, but
he's conveying something of the felt experience of being with that beloved. So what's known and the
Noah join up in this soulful way. And I think that this is the reason why soul is such an important
word in this debate as well. Ask yourself, you know, is what I'm thinking about reading about,
talking about the conversation, does it feel it has this quality of soul? And because the point
about soul is that with soul, you don't feel a stranger in the world, you feel you belong,
and you feel you're being carried along by the kind of flow of life, which wants you. But as it
were, wants you to be part of this bigger flow as well. I think, you know, there's no coincidence
that jazz is often called soul music. And because jazz requires both the participants to know
something about the music, whether they're a listener, and certainly if they're a player. But
they can't do jazz. And yes, that unless they're also completely immersed in the music, that what
they know, and what they're knowing must be completely connected. And soul is the natural
words that brings those side of things together. So that's the first sort of take on these things,
which I think Barfield has. It's a participative approach that uses a kind of narrative of who
we are as human beings, very interested in language, very interested in soul. And so can both be a
kind of understanding, but an understanding that constantly invites you to keep a main focus on
reality itself, and not get lost in the abstractions from reality. First point. Yeah, the second area
I wanted to pick up was how Barfield talks, not so much about developmental stages, as if there's a
kind of linear or cyclical spiral sort of progression through our psychology. But instead,
his biggest story is one of return. He sees our task as being a return to a kind of spiritual
fullness, which was our Aboriginal state. But it's a return with a key difference. So he actually
sees it as a kind of you, rather than say an upwards slope or as a spiral upwards, his preferred
shape is a you. And what he argues is that, individually, in life, maybe even through the
course of a day, we are both descending down one side of the you, but also have the potential to
re-ascend up the other side of the you. And he thinks that if that happens to us as individuals,
it also happens to cultures, and indeed the unfolding of history over periods of time. There's a
descent and then an ascent. And what that descent and ascent signifies is the descent from the
kind of Aboriginal whole, the one to use the neoprotonic scheme, a word, maybe Brahman, the
divine God, a kind of spiritual connection and integration, perhaps that you see in Aboriginal
cultures, where there's not really a distinctive sense difference between, say, the me and the
not me, the mortal and the immortal, the self and the other, the creature and other creatures.
There's a kind of continual flow and negotiation of that sense of life. But human beings seem to
descend. And this leads to both kind of alienation. On the one hand, a sense of disconnect and
struggle, but also a defining of the individual, the creation of inner life that makes us who we
are as people, as persons. It gives us self awareness. It gives us a sort of sense of awakening
up to who we are for all that that is painful. Ourself, you might say, is born out of a kind
of ontological gap that opens up between us and the rest of the world. And then the task is
to return to that sense of union. But without loss of the individual, without loss of self,
to use it in neoprotonic terms, it's the idea that the many can join back into the one, but with
their particularity, completely participating in the one, rather than say that their individuality
being kind of lost in order to return to the one. It's the vision you get, say, in Dante, when
Dante goes into paradise. And he constantly remarks how all the souls in paradise are distinct
souls. He still meets individuals he knew back on earth. But those souls are all moving in their
own place, in their own way, in a kind of marvellous harmony that is the music of paradise.
They're the many individuals now differentiated, but also fully participating and enjoying the life
of the one, the life of God. So this U-shape is Barfield's preferred sort of metaphor for trying
to capture how he sees our movement through life, both as individuals and as cultures.
And I think it has certain kind of advantages. I partly hinted at one there already, which is that
the ego, rather than being seen as a kind of problem, is actually seen, well, to use a Buddhist
phrase as the obstacle that's also the way, that when the ego, first of all, differentiates, it steps
back, as it were, from life. It can become inflated, it can become vainglorious, the risks that we
know with ego. But the way to deal with that is not to try and smash the ego. It is to see that
the ego can become the vehicle by which you can return to the one. To use Jung's phrase, it must
become the servant and not the master. The ego must realise that it's just the tip of the iceberg
of the bigger self, of the divine self, ultimately. But the advantages it has, as it can reflect, it
can discern, and it can know that of which it's participating in. And so this reorientation,
this realignment of the ego is, in fact, the return back to the one. It's a constant sort of
struggle, constant process, pride, vainglory, all these kind of things which have been identified
in the wisdom traditions constantly come up. And yet it's working through that, that you return
to the one. And a second advantage, I think, that the Barfield approach has, is it's both a process
of emanation and a process of emergence. Sometimes in these debates and this conversation,
there's a kind of a discussion about whether it's about emanation or about emergence. So
emanation broadly is a sense of descent. It's the sense that maybe from the one, the many creation,
evolution emerged, and it were a distance itself from the one, that sort of movement
outwards of the emanation. And then the alternative is emergence, which is from something very simple,
say the Big Bang, came a gradual complexification of creation. And it passes through a series of
thresholds. And as a threshold is moved through, something new emerges that couldn't really have
been anticipated before. The most obvious case is the emergence of life out of non-life. Now,
they both have their kind of advantage, but I think that they can be joined together with this
sense of descent and return. Because, say, on the up movement, something new is experienced,
as it were, from the individual's point of view, something new does seem to emerge,
but also at the same time, it seemed to be actually a kind of return from what originally
emanated if a return with difference. So the way in which these two sides of the discussion could
be brought together, I think, with this new experience that Balfield articulated.
I think we're beginning to see this take even in new Darwinian evolution, new accounts of
Darwinian evolution, even in the science itself. I'm thinking here of the work of individuals like
Dennis Noble or Simon Conway Morris. And what they're beginning to realize and put the case
together for is that an evolutionary story, which is seen as just pure randomness,
can't really account for the way that we see things are. Because it does seem that there's
direction, if I say the word purpose, I mean maybe sort of goal-endedness in science. Science
is very nervous about purpose, strictly speaking. So I don't want you just to sort of load purpose
and teleology back into science. But certainly someone like Dennis Noble is starting to see how
the mutations that occur in organisms at various levels of the organism, from the DNA right up to
the whole organism, they often seem to have, they cut short just what would have been a purely
random process to rather simplify. You might say there's not enough time in the history of the
universe for all that evolutionary unfolding if it was just purely random. There does seem to be
some sense of rule. Or to use Simon Conway Morris's term, there's a kind of convergence in evolution.
That evolution, what Simon Conway Morris suggests is that evolution searches out niches. And niches
are part of the environments that are pre-existing to the organism. And that the organism through
its evolution fills those niches. And so evolution seems to converge into the same answers. So an
obvious, an often cited example of that is the eye, that we have binocular eyes, like octopuses
have binocular eyes. And yet our eyes and octopus eyes have evolved by completely different evolutionary
pathways, but they occupy the same niche of binocular sight in the environment in the cosmos.
Now, this debate amongst evolutionists about whether niches are created or whether they're
discovered, Simon Conway Morris is on the side of discovery. But if that plays out, if that wins
out that idea about niches, much also like Dennis Noble's ideas about there being seeming to be
a direction, but all sorts of different levels of reality too, then I think that's going to start
to fit with evolution used in the more spiritual sense, where levels of emergence are actually
seen as a return to the one, because the emergence fills niches that are actually contained within
the whole. You might put it in that way. That would be a kind of spiritual way of trying to
knit Darwinian evolution with spiritual evolution. So that's another value, I think, of this idea
of a kind of return rather than a developmental process. Another advantage it has, I think that
the return notion really values older kind of consciousnesses, earlier stages of what
developmentalism would call developmental stages, developmental phases. And it's because
older stages are seen to have a clue, a kind of imaginative sense of where the return must go,
if it's a return, even though it's a return with kind of self-awareness. So for example,
you know, an older phase of consciousness would have been what Barfield calls original
participation. It was this sense when there wasn't a clear difference between me and not me,
mortal, immortal, self, other, gods, humans, and this older sense of flow that I was describing
earlier. But rather than seeing that as sort of primitive, or somehow to be as it were moved on
from, it's actually got a completely vital clue to us about how we might live again,
because we too want to know that sense of connection. We too want to know and see not just
ourselves, but others, not just mortal life, but immortal life, to know as it were, the life of
nature and the world around us, to feel it, to participate in it, as our ancestors had,
according to this story. But we want to do it with this difference of self-awareness. We want to do
it with this sense of individuality that's porous once more to the world around us. So
older consciousnesses are not seen as stages to move on from. They're seen as actually vital to
study and get to know, even to preserve, because they have completely important clues, imaginative
nudges, which we must learn about in order to ourselves be on this path of return. You know,
you get this when someone like Jung, for example, or move recently in anthropology, they study these
other forms of life, these other consciousnesses. It's even now happening in the study of plants,
trees and fungi under the ground and so on. And what you get from these studies is not just a
kind of objective stepping back of this is how it works, but it evokes wonder and awe in you.
There's this sense that there's a different consciousness as well, just beneath your feet.
And that itself, because it carries this quality of soul, can awaken a kind of consciousness in
you over time too. So science becomes a spiritual practice. Anthropology becomes a spiritual awakening.
What was old needs to be taken into what's going to be new. So there's not a division,
not again, this sort of linear sense of moving on, not a sense of superiority,
but of a gathering and a return, which this U shaped model of participation can offer.
But just a final thought on this second phase, which I think the second aspect that perhaps
Barfield can offer, it changes the language around our times. So rather than seeing our times as a
kind of meta crisis, as a kind of complexification of things that's never been seen before,
what it sees it as is a kind of fall as a crisis. But within that crisis, there's good and there's
bad. Again, Barfield's philology would know that the crisis wasn't just the bad notion
originally, but it was also a turning point. And so to our crisis now can be a turning point.
And it's the turning point that's at the bottom of the U. That's where this fits into the second
observation of Barfield's contribution to the conversation. The crisis is a turning point.
And much like, say, the fall in Judeo-Christian mythology, well, certainly in Christian mythology,
the fall is as it was where Adam and Eve kind of wake up and realize their alienation. Nonetheless,
it's also the moment when salvation becomes possible to use the Christian term, that that's
also the beginning of their return. And so Jesus, for example, in the story is called the second Adam.
The original fall is seen as also the moment of possible awakening. Sometimes it's said,
actually, in psychotherapy that our sense of ontological gap, our sense of crisis, our sense
of anxiety is also actually the moment when our sense of selfhood can start to form. That'd be a
psychotherapeutic way of putting it. Anyway, so it's not as it were that we're just looking over
the edge and sort of hoping that somehow we might pull out of it, maybe through better technology,
through becoming smarter, somehow sort of bootstrapping ourselves out of this crisis.
And this more spiritual use story which Barfield has to offer sees the seeds of a new emergence
within the crisis, because the crisis is also a turning point. It's not to downplay the seriousness
of what we face, but it is perhaps also to see that hope in the despair, if only we as a world
can see it a right, can have the right vision, the right way of shaping this story, telling a
different narrative, which is one of participation and return. I think Barfield can offer us something
that could become very important in that way too. So I've talked about how he doesn't have a kind of
mountain view, map view, but a narrative participating view. And I've talked also about
how he doesn't have a kind of developmental stages view, but has a you or return point of view
and tried to outline how that can be of use and benefit. A third way, which I think Barfield's
different, and in a way this is the sort of most key of all, is that Barfield is utterly
ontologically committed about reality. Again, in some of the conversation that goes on,
you hear a kind of ontological weariness or an ontological sort of reserve holding back,
hedging your bets. It particularly comes up in questions about God and the divine. Do you believe
in God? Someone might be asked. And someone like Jordan Peterson will in a way quite rightly say,
well, it depends what you mean. And that is very much a good response. It's called apophatic theology
in the tradition, the awareness that you can't say anything positively about God. So it's hard
to affirm anything positively about God. But nonetheless, within apophaticism, there's no
doubt that there's being itself is the basis of reality, that the divine is the basis of reality.
And from that, and that's important, not just sort of theologically. It's important because
that also is the soil of a kind of spiritual ecology, a kind of consciousness that's not
just inside our own heads. But there is, as Barfield put it, the inside of the whole world.
It's talked about in terms of beings like angels and spirits. Sometimes it's remarked that, you
know, if the cosmos seems to have a kind of intelligence, then maybe there are intelligences
operative in the cosmos. You know, if I said I had intelligence, you'd assumed there was a kind of
intelligence in me. I was an intelligent person, not just a kind of abstract intelligence like a
mathematical formula. And so Barfield would say, within this spiritual ecology, and we can start
to wake up to the inside of the whole world, which will include the sense of other beings,
other intelligences that are operative. And this is so important because not just to make a kind
of theological statement, but because it's when we're reconnected, our pit, our pits are participating
with those other intelligences, and with the consciousness that's not just locked inside
our skulls, but we realize what's going on inside our skulls, it puts an echo of the
consciousness of the whole cosmos, that the meaning crisis will be over. That we'll be able to have
the real basis for forming right relationships with the world around us, whether that be the
environment or nature, whether it be spiritual reality too. So ontological commitment is not
just a sort of wise hedging of your bets, whether that be for reasons of skepticism or awareness
that epistemologically it's very hard to say anything about the divine positively.
Actually, at the end of the day, it does matter because it's a whether you have
a growing awareness that this spiritual reality more broadly is out there and that participating
with it is actually the path to return. So let me put that in a slightly different way.
In terms of the feel of the discussion, it makes a difference too because, well, let me use another
metaphor that Barfield used. He talked about how modern consciousness has a bit of a camera feel,
and what he meant by that was that it can feel a bit like taking a picture with a camera as a
word. There's a kind of black box that reaches out and then tries to grab a bit of reality,
but where as a word, the black box actually is in relation to reality is left sort of in suspense.
And science is broadly quite like that, and that it as a word tries to take the view from
nowhere, as Thomas Nagel famously put it, to grab a bit of reality and study it. It's a kind of camera
consciousness, but it leaves you with this sense of alienation. So you know something, but you're
not quite sure how you as the knower participate with it. And Barfield said that a return consciousness
is a different instrument, and the instrument that he returned to was the Aeolian harp. Now,
the Aeolian harp is a bit like a sort of violin box that has strings tuned over a
soundboard, and then it's left in the wind, in say a doorway or in a window, so that the wind,
the spirit of the earth, Barfield would remember that the word for wind and spirit,
is the same in all the old languages like Greek and Hebrew. So the idea is that the wind blows
over the soundboard and the strings to make the music. It's an instrument that completely
participates in the world around it. And he would argue that rather than being cameras,
we must start to think of ourselves as Aeolian harps as a word tuning ourselves, so definitely
doing something ourselves, but in order to participate once more with the world around us.
And so ask yourself, what's the feel of the conversation? Does the conversation that you're
involved with have more of this camera feel, this sense of sort of slight
part, a stepping back? Or does it have the more Aeolian harp feel that as you talk, the music
you make is filled with sort of love and passion and participating with life as a whole, with the
inside of the whole world? That's quite another, a good little indicator of what kind of stance
you're taking towards life and what journey you're engaged with. Another area where I think this
ontological commitment makes sense is to do with discussions about the shadow.
Jung is becoming more important again in this conversation and his remarks about the shadow
are part of that. And working on the shadow, working on the side of yourself that you have
constructed a personality around to try and avoid, which we all do. But to use the Freudian
expression, the repressed always returns. And so the shadow, although we've tried to
write out of our lives can often be ruling and running our lives. That was the observation
which Jung made. But it was just the first observation that Jung made, because Jung also
said that through the shadow, you can discover the self. And this is again the sort of the
spiritual side and ultimately the divine side. And so it's through the shadow, the shadow work
you might say is not an end in itself, it's a means to a greater end. And that end is a
reconnection with the divine. And the reason why the shadow is so important here is because
if the shadow is that which you don't want to engage with, it also then becomes a barrier
from that which you might engage with more fully. And so I like this idea of ontological commitment
that it doesn't just see our task in life to sort of try and wrestle with ourselves to be less
monstrous, less concerned with our own self and so on, struggling with that. It actually sees the
shadow as the roots the way forward into the divine life, into the life of the many that we
might share and then ultimately the many returning to the one. But of course you can only have that
sense of the shadow work if you also have that wider ontological sense, that wider ontological
commitment too. So there's a second way in which ontological commitments do actually matter.
Relatedly, I think you also begin to see that this is not about sort of trying to bootstrap
yourself into awakening, to sort of design the right technologies that might lead to the
next stage of human evolution, which has this very kind of camera internal, slightly trapped,
caught up anxious feel. It's about relating. It's about opening up and relating to the world around
you. You know, if you have the commitment, the ontological commitment that the world around
you is alive with a kind of vitality and a consciousness of its own, whether it be the
natural world or whether it be the spiritual world, whether it be the divine world, then you
can relate to it. You can speak to it as it were, you can try and study it, reach out to it, speak
to it, but you also begin to expect it to speak back to you. And again, you know, this is actually
quite a common experience that many people have, but perhaps the language of relationality can
open it up and bring it into this conversation. You know, people talk about synchronicities.
They talk about experiences gathered together under parapsychology. They talk about the universe
wanting me to do this or didn't want me to do this, even if they're not theists. And of course,
if you're theistic, you'll talk about the spirit or about the divine, about Brahman, about the
emptiness that's actually a fullness. So what you're trying to do there is we learn to relate
to these wider aspects of reality, to open up to them. And I think that that has a kind of expansive
soulful feel, which the bootstrapping technology designing our way out of this mess can lack,
something else that the Barfieldan perspective has to offer. And maybe to bring all this together,
I think at the end of the day, what the participative narrative, the you return, the many returning to
the one, and the ontological commitment that consciousness is the basis of all things, and
that we're trying to see how our consciousness is but a mirror, a reflection, an echo of the wider
consciousness that we can relate to. These three aspects of Barfield I've been trying to unpack.
The advantage of bringing them all together is that enables us to be engaged in this conversation
as whole people. And by that, I mean that we can bring our will to it. We want this return,
we want this emergence, we want this sense of evolving and reconnecting, solving the problems
that face us, the willful side to us. But it also brings together the desiring part of ourselves,
the passion, the love, that sort of energy which can propel us upon the way. It knits it together
with will, will as it were if you like, discerns the passion and directs the passion. And then
thirdly, you can also bring in the knowledge part of ourselves, the part of us which does actually
know things, which is discerned, which is worked out, which can understand the next step at least
and that we're taking along the way. And so the will, the desire and the knowledge can be knitted
together. And that's what it is to be a whole person. Those three things gather together in our
soulfulness that, as it were, it's not just something lost inside ourselves, but it's engaged
with a full flow of life, a full shaping of life. So the conversation between lots of people now
and trying to bring in Barfield's take on it, he was a philologist and rather than a cognitive
scientist, he thought about language and words and how they carry this soulfulness, that both
means we experience life as well as study life in our words when we use words, we as it were feel
the meaning as well as hear the meaning, whether the in-between creature, as he put it, awakening
and returning to the divine. But with that word, he also then developed, with the study of words,
he also developed a narrative, this story of a kind of different experiences of consciousness
shaped throughout time, words of fossils of an older consciousness, as well as reflections of our
consciousness now. And that understanding that narrative is imaginatively, immensely creative
for us now, because older consciousnesses are not just things we've moved on from, but they have
their own genius, and they enable us to become awakened once more to something which was experienced
before, and particularly a participation in life, which is kind of our struggle now. It's a you
image of development, and it's completely ontologically committed, not because it knows
the divine, let alone all the spiritual reality and so on, but because it senses it's there,
and when it speaks to reality, when it tries to study, reach out to reality, it's a way
contraining itself for those moments when reality speaks back, it learns to hear, you might see,
like the AO in harp, with the music that comes out of the winds moving over its strings,
as well as to look, which is the more camera consciousness, trying to trade sort of snapshots
of reality. It brings in, I think, a whole story. Now if that was of interest, I'll be doing other
conversations about this, because I appreciate that I probably didn't capture all of it very clearly,
and it's quite a big story to tell, and if I may just make one plug, if you've got this far in the
story in my video, it's this book, which is coming out in August 2019, where I try to tell this story
through particularly the Christian consciousness, which is the one that's dominated in the West,
that's the reason for picking up on Christianity, but hopefully unpacks a lot of what Barfield has to
say. Thanks.
