So this is a film about the recent conversation between Jordan Peterson and John Bovakie and
for it I'm joined by Paul van der Klee, how are you doing Paul?
I'm doing well, it's great to be here.
Awesome, yeah and I'm really glad to have you here to kind of make sense of what happened
because it's a conversation that we and a lot of other people were really really looking
forward to.
Real anticipation seeing Jordan and John together and I think there was a real split in reaction
to it between people going what was that?
If you look at the comments section below it I've never seen so many people respond negatively
to Jordan's interruptions of John, I'd say that's the main sort of theme of the comments
which is extraordinary in itself but also that there's a lot of, I kind of like it like
panning for gold because there are a lot of golden nuggets within the conversation but
it's quite difficult to access them, it didn't flow very well and I think it's a really interesting,
I think shining a light on what actually happened and maybe what the backstory was could give
a lot of help to people to make sense of it.
All of the difference in perspectives between John and Jordan, what was really going on
and I'm going to sort of just do a quick little bit of framing first Paul before we get into
kind of your reaction to it and what we made of it when we first saw it but if people are
not familiar with John's work, maybe they're very familiar with Jordan but not so familiar
with John, so John Vaveke is worked alongside Jordan in the psychology department at the
University of Toronto, they both have deep interests in kind of the area of myth, religion,
the deep story of Western culture, John had this series Awakening from the Meaning Crisis,
50 episodes that he brought out probably in the wake of Jordan's kind of appearance on
the stage as a kind of, it probably prompted a little bit by that and John has had a huge
amount of really interesting conversations over the last couple of years with people
yourself, Jonathan Pageau, many of the people in the same kind of orbit around these sort
of central questions of meaning, questions of meaning, questions of the deep stories
that drive us all of the same topics that Jordan is really interested in.
I was fascinated by the clickbait title that Jordan chose for the video, a conversation
so intense it might be psychedelic which is interesting as well, this feels like a really
significant coming together of perspectives that we've been waiting and wanting to see.
I'd like to start by saying they had a real enthusiasm for each other and a real, I'm
going to play a little clip now that came up at the end like the real enthusiasm and warmth
between the two of them.
Being a great proponent of yours, I mean that in the sense of noting the greatness that's
in you and seeing how it's manifested itself, especially in your relationship with your
students and noticing that and having admiration and respect for that.
And I respect your work and I disagree with it in parts but we've always been able to do that
in a way that is born with affection and respect.
Well God, it's always nice to find someone who disagrees with your work who could help correct it.
Exactly, seeing the other guys.
I mean thank God man, that's why I want to talk to you, I don't like being wrong
so and I know you don't and so no doubt we're still both pretty wrong.
Mostly so, if the history of science is something we should pay attention to which we should.
Yes, or the history of our own life for that matter.
And I know Paul, you've put out a couple of reaction videos to this and you've sort of been
wrestling a little bit with what happened.
Maybe you could start by framing what you were hoping for from the conversation and what your
reaction has been to it so far.
I too was very much looking forward to this conversation.
I know, I know John's work fairly well at least in these areas and I know he's got some critiques
of Jordan's approach to meaning through narrative, through hero mythology and I was really anticipating
those two working through some of those kinds of issues and they never got there.
I, my reaction like many other peoples was what was that?
I had never heard Jordan like that before.
I was amazed at how well John Vervecchi sort of rolled with all of the redirections
that happened in the conversation.
You fundamentally understand God by saying what God is not
but not of course randomly, right?
What you're trying to do is-
Oh, that's sort of like the God of the gaps.
Well, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Oh, sorry.
No, no, that's- don't apologize, we're friends talking.
Well, I don't I don't want to derail the conversation. So it's been it's been like
this and it's been wonderful. It feels to me like doing Petrie behind that conversation,
especially on Jordan's side. I think part of it is he, you know, he and John Revekey
last spoke in 2015. John Revekey has continued his academic trajectory. And I think with
his YouTube channel and all of these conversations with him sort of discovered a whole new pathway
where Jordan has been busy with his health, the culture war stuff. So I saw I'm I'm seeing this
much more as a video where Jordan is to a degree getting introduced for the first time with what
John has been doing for the last five years. Yeah, and that was my sense as well was that John
was, John is so enthusiastic anyway. Like he's he brought that enthusiasm to the conversation.
And Jordan, I think, got him got kind of swept up in that to some degree as well. And it was kind
of John reporting back to Jordan, like, look what you've been missing, or look what's been going
on. Look at all this interesting stuff that's been happening. But I want to start by pointing
like the central paradox of the conversation is that John's central interest is in Deologos,
which is kind of a shared dialogue that goes somewhere new. And he kind of summarized it in
there with talking about Phylius Sophia versus Phylius Nicaea. Phylius Nicaea meaning the love of
victory. Phylius Sophia meaning the love of knowledge. We haven't talked about why people
want us to talk. And the reason they want us to talk is because our ideas dovetail to a substantial
degree and also diverge interestingly. And so I guess they want us to talk so that we can think.
Well, that's it. And I see that's what I was going to say. That's one of the defining. I would
say one of the defining. It certainly seems to be the case as a defining criteria for Socrates,
that if you and I can get to places in the Deologos that we couldn't get to individually,
then real Deologos has has come into existence. And that's Phylius Sophia, the love of wisdom,
as opposed to Phylius Nicaea, the love of victory. And so right, right, right. I didn't know those
phrases. Phylius Sophia, which is the Phylius Sophia. Wisdom is the feminine essence of God.
Yeah. Well, the Phylius is, you know, it's itself a collaborative love.
Did you say Phylius? Yeah. Phylius and Phylius. Phylius Sophia. So Phylius Sophia. The three
loves, the Aros Phylius Agape. This is Phylius. And Phylius is the love that is expressed and
shared in community. And then Sophia, of course, is the word for wisdom. That's where we get
philosophy from. Phylius Nicaea is the love of victory, like Nike victory.
Right. And yeah, it's interesting because the, tell me what you think of this. I think the YouTube
dialogues that we undertake are characterized by Phylius Sophia. And the YouTube dialogues
conducted in the main by the, what would you call it, legacy media are Phyla, Phylius Nicaea.
Phylius Nicaea. And I think people appreciate Phylius Sophia much better. You better believe
it. I certainly appreciate it much better. For John, this is, and he studied it a lot as a
cognitive scientist. It's how can you have a conversation that goes somewhere new that builds
upon itself, that is not about trying to best the other person or just kind of repeat what you
already know. But how can you have a dialogue where you discover new territory together? And I
think the interesting thing for me is given that that was the subject of their talk, the question
is how much they achieved that in that conversation. And I mean, if you go by the YouTube comments,
you probably say that they didn't achieve it very much. And it goes to the heart, I think of
what I consider like the trajectory of Jordan Peterson over the last, since his kind of eruption
onto the stage, the whole Peterson phenomenon of 2018 onwards, that sense of novelty and whether,
like my overall sense of him getting slightly stuck in his story, which I'll come to a little bit
in a bit. But there was this weird, almost performative contradiction, given the topic that
John has made this kind of lifetime study of, of what does it mean to get that into a flow state
together? What does it mean to explore new territory together? What does it mean to
actually know the cognitive science of what is going on physiologically when we're in this kind
of flow state of exploration? And I like my overall sense is that I would love to see,
and this is not judgmental, because Jordan is obviously coming back from a huge
number of difficulties, the health problems, and it's kind of certainly not up to full strength.
But to the hope is that in time, we might see Jordan enter more into those kind of conversations.
But I felt that it was, there were elements, there were moments of that in this conversation
with John, but it was very glitchy. Like there wasn't so much of a sense of a shared
edifice that they were both building together. There was a sort of, I think there were moments
of that, but it also just felt, I think glitchy is probably the best word that I can think of.
I agree. In some ways, I contrast this with Jordan's first talk with Sam Harris with Brett
Weinstein there. In that first talk in Vancouver, Jordan was very clearly trying to build something,
and Sam wasn't playing. Sam sort of played this knock it down game, and Jordan kept trying to
construct something. Sam kept trying to knock things down. In this conversation, I don't think
Jordan was trying to knock things down. I think he was, I hear in many places in the video,
he's trying to grasp, to assimilate, to figure out where John is at. And so he's doing a lot of
attempts at recognition, attempts at connection, but usually what you get with that hopefully
is a weaving together of things. Whereas there, it was sort of two tracks. John would mention
something, and Jordan would connect it with something, and John would go a little further,
and Jordan would connect it to something else. John was very gracious in sort of developing
that connection a little bit, but then John continued to want to get back to
something a little bit more consistent. And I think actually through the video,
John was able to make some impact, at least in terms of John's four Ps of knowledge, expanding
beyond the propositional into the perspectival participatory. And I think that was helpful.
And at the end of the video, I think they achieved some of that.
Yeah, and I'd love to maybe go into with you sort of sifting some of those
flecks of gold from the interview in a second. I just thought I'd, my overall sense about this
sense of Deologos, this sense of going somewhere new in a conversation, I'd like to just sort of
drill into that because my sense of what, when I first discovered Jordan Peterson in 2017,
watching his lectures was, there was this real sense of exploration, like he was going on a
journey, you could sort of see him in the Maps of Meaning series in 2017. It was not a dialogue,
but it kind of was. You saw him, he'd find one of his students who was listening and he'd speak to
them, and he'd respond to kind of the mood in the room. And you got this sense of there was a lot
and aliveness to his exploration. It was like he was walking in a landscape and putting things
together as he was walking. And I think that was part of what was really compelling about
him in that sense. And then I think when he first came to attention in 2018, he had a series of
conversations with people that also felt like they had that kind of sense of exploration.
And then we saw him go on this book tour where he was pretty much with differences, like not
every evening was the same, but he was doing the same story pretty much every night. And my sense
is that over time he got more and more trapped in that story, that he wasn't really on that sense of
exploration or on that sense of kind of novelty anymore. And I think that, I mean, people that I
know who knew him at the time also said they found him sort of, he got a little bit more stuck and
a little bit more reactive. And one of the amazing things that I think a lot of us really respect
about him is he also reflected on that himself. I remember a question that he answered in an AMA
a while ago that I'll probably play the clip from here. He talked about the corruption of his soul
that he recognized and the way that he was responding to journalists, for example.
The problem is I'm becoming too much on guard. And I've noticed a developing sense of impatience
within me and some suspicion. And that's not good. I don't want to be in situations where
those are my fundamental orientations. It's a sign of a certain amount of internal corruption on my
part. And I want to be in situations where I'm speaking with people, speaking honestly to people
who are honestly listening. And this is what I felt coming through quite a bit in the conversation
with John. It came in and came out this sense of John would say something that sparked a story
that Jordan already knew. And he'd start kind of telling that story. And I've seen that quite a
lot in some of his interviews since he's come back. And it reminds me as a journalist, whenever I
interview someone usually quite prominent, who's been interviewed a lot in the past, you know that
if you ask them certain questions, they're going to give you a story. And it's almost impossible to
get them out of that once they start. The more the more famous someone is, the more used to
they are to telling that story. It's like, okay, here comes the story about this. I won't name any
names. But it's happened quite a lot. And part of your job as a journalist, like how can I get them
out of those tram tracks and into new territory? And sometimes it's very, very difficult because
anything you say, they'll just go into the story they already know. And I've had the sense sometimes
with Jordan in the conversations he had since he's got back, a guest will say something, and then
it's like, okay, now it's the Cain and Abel story. Now it's the Tower of Abel story. And it's like,
as the audience, we've already heard all of those things. And there's something in that. It's like,
it's the, when you go and see a band, and it's like, well, play the hits, you already know,
there's a little bit of that. But that was, I felt that coming up quite a bit in the John
conversation that John would say something, and then Jordan would kind of go into something that
we were already familiar with. And that's also how I, having tracked the whole kind of intellectual
dark web conversation, that's where that kind of glitched out as well for me was this sense of,
for various tribal reasons, for various kind of aligned incentive reasons for various
that that sense of exploration and novelty that I felt in 2018 2019 just fell away.
Audience capture being another issue, like all of these different things start to start to just,
and I think because of the nature of the media environment we're in at the moment, it literally
warps around you. You don't, you start to kind of tune out anyone who doesn't have a positive,
you've got an infinite amount of feedback. So you only start listening to the supportive stuff,
you start kind of just producing stuff for the your traditional audience. Some things become
profitable, admitting you're wrong about certain things is not profitable. All of those kind of
factors start to come in as well. But that's why I think this is such a fascinating conversation to
analyze, because the topic at hand, Deologos emergent alive dialogue is the thing I think
that we that we were attracted to originally. And I think it's also the thing that could
that will that could potentially be Jordan's healing as well in some ways. Like I think that's
what he needs that sense of like pursuing truth in an original in an interesting and in an
unscripted way again. I think that would that's the sort of the juice in some ways.
The description on the video, I initially I was quite surprised the video was released at all
because of the strangeness of it. And I think that was known because of the strange psychedelic
reference in the title. My take on this increasingly is is more shamanic. And I think what you
described is is what Jordan needs in that something needs to disrupt his sense making.
We need to see in him a hunger again for something other than a lot of the political
or social transformations he's been talking about. And and I think you're right that the irony of the
video is that this is about Deologos. And that is what we were looking for from it. And that is,
I think in many ways what Jordan needs. Now, I'm fully aware that as a Christian minister using
the word shamanic will raise a lot of eyebrows among Christians. But as a as a working preacher
and minister, that is exactly the way the Bible works in a preacher's soul. Because the Bible
is a very strange book. And especially the teachings of Jesus, they're supposed to disrupt.
And if you read the sermon on the mount, after 2000 years, nobody's really quite sure what that
sermon means. And in that sense, it's rather shamanic in that it's supposed to break up our sense
making. So I think I think a number of us are looking for that for Jordan and from Jordan,
because with, you know, what I often call his first wave, I think that's what propelled him.
When he came onto the scene, we heard something in that moment that broke up sort of the,
the stage sense making and said, Oh, here's some fresh insight. Now, whether Jordan has that in
him or not, I've spoken to a number of his undergraduate and graduate students who some
of whom say things like he, your first, your first impression, your first for your first take
for Jordan for a while is very, is very much that way. But then you, once you've heard about,
you know, the rats and the wolves, and then he sort of, then, okay, this is all map territory,
and you move on. And so I agree very much that I think if Jordan is going to
really content to find, to be able to make the kinds of contribution we saw in 2017, 2018,
he's going to need different conversation partners. And I don't know that the current
conversations he's doing, which have many of which are sort of book interviews, but they're
not really interviews. In other words, he's, I, in some ways, I, I see him trying to get at Dea
Logos. And here, John Vervake actually has in a very, you know, serious way, he's been studying it.
And so I would love to see Jordan sort of come to John and say, help me, John, you know, find a
new way of having transformative conversations that not only transform me, but transform even
an audience. And, and I think, as Jonathan Peugeot said, hopefully transform what is a fan base,
which isn't particularly helpful, but maybe a broader community where they can be, where there
can be productive pushback and productive engagement that allows all of us to grow.
And, you know, that's what I've seen in a lot of, in a lot of your community and,
and the way that you've pursued this work.
Yeah. And I'd like to play that clip from Jonathan Peugeot now.
You're always aiming at something that's better, or you wouldn't be aiming. You're always moving
towards something that's better, or you wouldn't be moving. So then why wouldn't you move towards
the greatest good? Yeah. Well, it's because it's terrifying, I suppose in part. But then as, you
know, I've tried to put that into practice in my life and it's tearing me into pieces.
Yeah. I don't know, though, if, if one of the reasons is because you're also alone.
And I, you know, because you, I mean, at least to my understanding, you're not in a, in a, in a
community. Well, it's hard to say. I mean, it's hard to say.
Because fans are certainly having laughs. Well, they've been a community. I mean,
one of the things that has held me together certainly is the commitment that I feel to,
to the people who've been so positive towards me and my family. I mean, it was very subtle,
but I got the sense in that, that Jonathan was questioning, but the whole fan versus peer dynamic,
which I think we can all slip into on this, in this, this, the weird kind of nature of, of the,
the business that we're in, if we're making content, and particularly if we're sort of,
if that's a big part of our lives or a big part of our business, it's very difficult to,
it's very difficult to avoid that dynamic, especially if in some ways you're kind of
financially tied up with it as well. But I think this was, yeah, I think that's what Jonathan,
I haven't checked that with Jonathan, to be honest, but that was what I made of that
interaction was, was a sort of cautionary, wo wo careful fans are not people coming up to you
after a lecture, people kind of in your comments threads, they're not the same as, as peers who
will challenge your thinking, who will reflect back to you and will help you to kind of develop.
And, and that's what was also beautiful about the conversation with John is,
as Jordan reflected at the end, he was, he's glad to have those relationships and,
and that's what's exciting, potentially about them continuing those conversations and
continuing the, the dialogue. I think part of what needs to enter into,
into these, into the space that we're, we're sort of creating and exploring
is the question of institution, because in a university context, the university is supposed
to provide that in a church context, the church is supposed to provide that what we're sort of
doing out here in YouTube land does not really provide that. We might have some peer accountability,
if I say something that I lose status in the eyes of David Fuller or Rebel Wisdom or John
Vervake or Jonathan Peugeot, there might be a little bit of accountability in there, but I think
asking deeper questions about structures and institutions would be helpful in
creating communities where that afford this over a long period of time. And, and I don't think any
of us quite know how to do that, because I don't know that we've necessarily been able to create
structures that afford that very well. Can you explain what you think those might look like?
I don't know, because again, obviously as a, as a working pastor,
churches have some of those dynamics, but all the same, those same issues of audience capture
are very true for clergy, because you get captured by your congregation. They pay your salary,
and so then clergy, then maybe go to different places.
I think what we've seen created, I mean, John Vervake will often talk about
this little corner of the internet where we're having conversations with you, with Jonathan
Peugeot, with each other. We've got some of that going, but we, you know, and I like what
Peugeot said to him when he said, you know, fans are not a church. Okay, well, what, what is this
church supposed to do? A church, and this is actually my, churches in the modernist frame have
become these little propaganda machines. And I think that is there undoing right now, because for
many people, the last place you would go to have an open conversation about you, what you really
think, even if it's heterodox, would be a church, because you'll lose status for heterodoxy.
Heterodoxy in itself is not necessarily helpful. And I think John's idea of Dia Logos, where you've
got, where you've got two people seeking truth, early in the conversation, Jordan Peterson talked
about sort of hunting philosophia, which I thought was good. But that's more of what we need. And
perhaps what we should think about more are hunting bands where, you know, people, people
have practiced ways of collaboration. They know each other's skills. Yet what motivates the hunt
for the tribe is the need for food. And I think as you described, what happens to people when they
get a very high status, wealthy, successful, they're no longer on the hunt. And there is a certain,
you know, Jordan's been back now since January. It's not clear what he's doing, but I fear a
certain lostness because he's had a couple of successful books. You know, anybody will talk to
him, almost anybody who he wants to will talk to him. Where's the hunt?
Well, the hunt is the internal drive towards truth, which I think was what really drew so many of
us to him originally. I would say there is an open question. You have to see what are the
confounding factors in that. I mean, the whole idea of petus and ink nowadays, I think, is something
that do you have the incentive structure still to go for truth, especially when certain things that
you say get a certain audience. And it's very difficult not to kind of follow that, even if
that's completely unconscious. And then there's various things that you can easily dismiss people
who are critical of you as being bad faith or motivated by some other kind of, oh, they're just
trying to get views off my name or whatever that might be. And then you start screening out people
who might have useful things to reflect back to you. And you see that happen constantly in this
landscape. And then you've got the comment sections, you've got, I mean, I find that, and I think also
a little bit of self reflection and awareness of like that happens to all of us, probably to
rebel wisdom as much as anyone. I can't deny that I'm conscious of the comment section. But at the
same time, what I will say is there's a paradox of, I don't think, I think people have still got in
their minds this sort of like alternative versus mainstream. What they don't realize is once you've
created a little thing around being alternative, that becomes the status quo at that point.
So I'll put out films that they'll be like, Oh, that's too consensus or that's too status quo.
It's like, not for this ecosystem, it isn't. I know that when I put out certain things,
it's going to get a bad reaction from from the comment section. It's like, what's more brave,
putting out anti woke stuff that I know is going to go down incredibly well in this little ecosystem
that I'm part of, or putting stuff out that's going to challenge that perspective.
I mean, I don't know. I mean, I'm, I'm have to be aware of my own biases as well. Like,
I know there's a lot of people are like, Oh, you, you come from mainstream media,
your BBC channel for or whatever, and you're just still part of that. It's like, well,
maybe I have some of that. But also, I think there's a lot of values that were held within the
tradition of journalism around truth seeking, that maybe a lot of journalism has lost. But I
think the alternative media has lost it, never really had it. And that's the key point that I
keep coming back to. It's like the incentive structures of the alternative are not conducive
to truth seeking at all. The incentive structures of the mainstream are increasingly less conducive
to truth seeking as well. But that's why we're in this really terrifying valley,
what I've called the uncanny valley between the two. And that's what kind of obsesses me. And I'm
fascinated by because we're all like Jordan Peterson. All of us are trying to pursue truth in our own
kind of limited way and sense made together. And I think you're that brings back to what
you were saying before of like, how do we do this? Because we've seen we can't really do this alone.
We've seen so many cautionary tales of people being captured by their audience of being,
yeah, basically falling by the wayside, the entire kind of history of the IDW is like
one by one falling by the wayside. And as an alternative sense making structure,
like that's a terrible cautionary tale. Like these are very, very smart people and they all got
captured in one way or another, or most of them got captured in one way or another,
or fell out or stopped kind of moving forward or whatever it whatever it is.
But yeah, that question of how do we do this and some kind of
bands of hunters, like you say, I think is the way to do it is to is to be in relationship with
people who are able to challenge us and we're able to kind of develop our kind of sharpener
and knives against each other.
Part of the irony of the taking down of the mass media culture has been that
part of what afforded truth seeking and internal critique, self critique,
within that culture was its, well, its establishment, its sense of establishment.
I was speaking with an accountant who was a neighbor of mine who used to work for newspapers
and he said, you know, in the 70s and 80s, newspapers were enormously profitable.
And what that afforded was the New York Times could have, I mean, in a sense, they were so
well established, they could have all kinds of self criticism built into it.
And I think as you well described, a lot of alternative media is so captured by audience,
they can't afford to waver from their, from their dogma.
And now we're seeing that in the mass media as well, because they're so hungry, they can't afford.
I thought that came quite through, I thought that came through quite well in Peterson's Barry
Weiss interview. And so actually with the decline of blue church, we're finding blue church
increasingly acting like alternative, let's say, you know, narrowly, you know, narrow agenda
organisms. And so again, I think there's, there's both a, a kind of a, a hunger driven,
a hunger for the truth driven that has to be willing to say, I don't, I don't care how poor
this makes me, I'm that hungry, but then probably also on the other side, where you have structures
that say, okay, I can, I can reasonably afford to pursue the truth and I know it will cost me,
but I'm, you know, that is what we do. And this kind of corruption, I think you find,
I certainly see it in church structures, but now we're seeing it in, as I think Jordan Hall
nicely says, blue church structures as well. It's a weird paradox that as the alternative
gets stronger, the mainstream is becoming more alternative. Yes. Yeah. I wonder just whether
we might go back to, as we sort of taught, as I mentioned, sort of panning for gold, like the
gold flex in the, in the conversation. I mean, I was really interested in what they were talking
about related to the, they touched on postmodernism, but only very briefly.
John was talking about sort of Foucault and Derrida having a little bit more of a complex,
it being a slightly more complex picture than is often painted of the, of the postmodernists.
And that felt, that felt rich in itself, that could have been a conversation.
If the mainstream of Western culture is the mainstream of human culture,
or akin to it, so akin to that shamanic tradition, for example,
then the claim is that that mainstream is, is the desire for power. And that's the opposite
of what we're saying. Genuinely, the opposite. It's the antithesis to that, because that isn't,
isn't Philo Nikea, the antithesis to? Yeah, I think it is. Well, I mean, that's part of it.
Is it, is it genuinely the antithesis? I mean, so is this, is this a claim of,
is this a claim of satanic possession of the West? I mean, is the, is the,
is the culture war that deep? Well, I don't know. I mean, the claim is that it's about fundamentals.
Right. It's a fundamental critique of Western society. It means fundamental. That's why
Derrida went after philogo centric, philogo centrism.
Yeah. And I think, and there's in Foucault, it does similar things, but the thing you have,
you have to remember is, you know, toward the ends of Derrida's career, right? He's reaching into
Neoplatonic mysticism, negative theology is something he starts to take an interest in,
and Foucault, you know, you know, technologies of the self. And he gets very deeply interested
in the work of Pierre Hadeau, right? And what is ancient philosophy and the wisdom tradition
and Philea Sophia? And he starts to turn towards it and starts to recognize it as
I know nothing of that. I know nothing of that. Yeah. Well, that's what, so I mean,
well, that's, that's very interesting. And then he dies.
Yeah. Foucault also.
Or Foucault. No, Derrida, we were, sorry, we were speaking of Derrida.
I was speaking of both. I said, you see Foucault getting very interested in
negative theology, Neoplatonic mysticism. And then you see Foucault getting very interested in,
you know, Stoicism and Pierre Hadeau's work.
There's an irony in Peterson's work that I thought really came between the Michael Malice and the
Barry Weiss. Because on one hand, Peterson has made a name for himself bashing post-modernity.
But Peterson is himself post-modern in some deep ways. And a regular critique of Peterson,
you had James K. Smith, a professor from Calvin University on your program. And he,
you know, this is one of his critiques of Peterson as well. And I, I think,
I think the way forward for someone like Peterson.
In what, in what way, Paul, in what way is Jordan Peterson post-modern?
Modernity is dying. And when, and, and John in that conversation nicely set up the contrast
between the three P's, which are much more lived experience, perspectival, procedural.
And, and so you've got the one P, which is propositional. And modernity is all about
the world of objects, where, where Peterson, when Peterson begins maps of meaning,
there are two ways to view the world, a world of objects and a form for action. And so Peterson
very much takes the pragmatists through modernity. But within that pragmatism,
there is what, what John Vervecchi talks about those three P's. And in this, in this beautiful
section, at a point that John Vervecchi makes all often, he says, what is emerging out of cognitive
science is a recognition that our ability to grasp something means sort of taking it into
ourselves. We grasp the cup and about minute 25 in there, he goes through that. We grasp the cup.
In other words, something of the cup has to get into my mind. And so the subject object distinction
is being broken down by cognitive science. And that is, that is something within post-modernity
that they in fact have been working at. Because within post-modernity, there's a critique of
that subject object. We are, we are disinterested viewers from above who see the world as it is.
And cognitive science is saying, that's not how we know the world at all. And, and Peterson
with his sort of ancient modern approach has always sort of flexed in that direction and asked
questions that make rigid modernists like Sam Harris uncomfortable. And so when you look at,
you know, Peterson drew such a strange breadth of fans, some of them, you know,
as, as John Vervecchi said in that interview, people do not appreciate how radical
Jonathan Peugeot is. And he's so radical because he's so ancient. And that ancient modern has been
attention in church circles now for the last 20 years as modernity is receding. And as there is a
recognition that proposition as such is always necessary. It's deeply embedded in the scientific
effort, but is insufficient for human beings to actually move forward and increasingly is
an insufficient descriptor. And this deeply critiques Protestantism, which is of course,
I'm a Protestant minister, deeply critiques the ways that we have framed communities.
So that has always been in Peterson and John is in some ways pushing him on that and saying,
okay, what does that mean as a scientist? Because Peterson has always, if you listen to
Peterson and Barry Weiss, they're lamenting the loss of blue church, you know, whoa,
blue church has fallen. And well, that's, Jordan's been pushing it.
Yeah, you can argue he's probably one of the primary factors in the loss of
faith that so many people had in blue church, meaning the sort of media establishment.
I think he he certainly and potentially quite deliberately embarked on a on his
mission to show up or or one of the one of the effects was to show up all of the limitations
of that structure. Yeah, but I think yeah, I like that idea. And I think you're right that kind of
the contrast and conflict between him and Sam Harris is very much Sam Harris from from Will
Barry in terms is orange, modern, completely modern, rationality rules. And in a way,
Peterson probably is postmodern relative to that, because he's
but arguably he's also, I mean, he's not, you could argue he's metamodern, I don't know if you
know those distinctions. So the idea in integral theory is that you've got modernism science,
which is the structure, then postmodernism was effectively a kind of deconstructive force around
that, which is obviously something Peterson plays himself against. But in a way,
Peterson is postmodern in his critique of modernism, but he's reconstituting it. So in a way, you
probably would put him integral or or, yeah, integral or metamodern, I mean, there's different
words for it. But effectively, it's the word for a perspective that can observe and understand
the other perspective that understands what postmodernism is. It understands what modernism is.
Because within those worldviews, they can't actually understand the critiques, they can't
understand the the other worldviews. Whereas the the the idea is that there's an integral worldview
that can actually understand all of these different perspectives. And I'd say that's where I probably
place Peterson within that. But his critiques are are the same as yeah, his critiques of science
scientism and materialism are very similar to a lot of the postmodern critiques. That's interesting.
And I just and Peterson partly gets there because of his Darwinian truth. And that's,
I mean, when he showed up in the in the Christian sphere,
he basically uses Darwin to give an account for the credibility of, let's call it ancient wisdom,
because if the wisdom has survived this long, that is a tell for truth. But modernity arose
in the frustration with the letdown of certain forms of ancient wisdom. And, you know, I don't
know very much about, you know, I've listened to some of your content about integral theory. But
I think with each passing, there's always in the initial stages of passing, there's always
throwing too much away. And then after sort of the the tragedy of the revolution,
those who are a little bit beyond it say, all right, well, what of modernity should we keep?
And what of modernity was unhelpful? And that's successive over all of the various patterns
that went before. And Peterson, I think part of what he has shown is he has that capacity
but and again, to come back to Dia Logos, the I think the questions are
what kinds of conversation partners, what kinds of needs are going to help him to
fulfill that potential that I think that potential is I think what a lot of us saw in him and say,
there's real potential there for breakthroughs beyond some of the siloed structures. And again,
it's someone in the church, a tremendous weakness of the church has been its siloed nature. It either
has borders that are too thin, where it's always just me to me to me to behind any new, you know,
progressive cause or it's so rigid that, you know, we're just going to try to outlast the world,
but that isn't working. So and Peterson showed, I think, potential for
affording some breakthroughs with a lot of these boundary issues.
Yeah, this feels very, you know, very narratively right to kind of finish maybe on this on this
point. And I agree that the idea that who are the dialogue partners that he maybe needs to engage
in to recapture that sense of exploration. I think John is definitely one. And I think
pretty much all the people who John has been in dialogue with over the last two years,
like all of those, there's some fascinating conversations with people like Bernardo Castro
and Jonathan Pageau and others exploring and getting into the stream of thought,
like jumping into the stream of thought and swimming together, this sort of sense of
rather than coming from a fixed position, a sort of more malleable position where you're in dialogue
with others and evolving your thinking. I also would like if people are watching this and they're
not familiar with John Bovaki's work, I wanted to reference some of the films that I think would
help kind of frame him in a better way than happened in that conversation maybe. We put out
a few interviews with him, one called Flow States and Wisdom, another one after the
Meaning Crisis, which is where he kind of frames his new Deologos project. And another great dialogue
between John and Peter Limburg called the Evolving Conversation. I want to put up the title cards
from those on over the video and people can kind of find them in the show notes below. And also,
maybe just touch on we've been trying to kind of like how come I trained as a counselor,
but that's my background and I trained in a form of Deologos called Inquiry,
which is really in dialogue with another person trying to get to the edge of our understanding,
trying to articulate what's going on in the relational field between us and to take ourselves
somewhere new in that kind of exploration. And we've tried to do that as well with the courses
that we're running as well, with John Bovaki as one of the guest faculty on our Sense Making 101
course. I'd like to give a little plug for that. If you enjoyed the conversation with John or you
want to learn more, check out that course because that's part of the answer for me is like I don't
think we can do this without becoming different kind of, as you said before, without allowing
ourselves to be transformed. And that's really what we've been trying to do, like how can we do,
it's why we've had such a focus on practice and such a focus on events and
sessions that try and work with some of these technologies. And I also point people towards
other really amazing technologies like circling, like Inquiry, all of the empathy circles,
glass bead games, some of these other kind of technologies, because I think,
and then that links back to what we were saying before about John's
4p cognitive science, the propositional is not enough. The propositional is one aspect,
but the procedural, the perspectival and the participatory is absolutely crucial. And yeah,
I think that's hopefully what we're all trying to kind of bring more in our own ways.
And from, I mean, from the church side of things, I mean, churches have part of that
conversation that I thought was very interesting was when they, when John was talking about grasping
the cup, you have a sense that you can look at the light, or you can see through the light. And
they're both valid perspectives. But there needs to be a transformation that occurs, obviously,
in Christian tradition, you know, we've got a lot of words for this, this is conversion, this is
quickening, this is, and, and, and you need to do that in order to know, it isn't the question,
as in a modern sense, where you sit above it, and you, you look at all the pieces and you
take an analysis, you actually have to step into it in order to know. And, and that's sort of
connects, I think, the knowing and loving. Because in, you do not know unless you love,
and, and in some ways, you cannot love unless you know at least something. So, I mean, that,
at least for a Christian minister, that's always a part of, of my work and, and always the, the
question of continuing to reform institutions. Always a pleasure, Paul. And I really like
your new setup. You're looking very professional. Well, thank you, David. I am, I don't try too
hard at that, but I appreciate it. Awesome. Our ability to make sense of the world is breaking
down. We're making more and more consequential choices with worse and worse sense making to
inform those choices, which is kind of running increasingly fast through the woods, increasingly
blind. Over the last two years, Rebel Wisdom has interviewed some of the world's top thinkers.
Now we've brought them together for an eight week online course, Sense Making 101, with Daniel
Schmacktenburger, Diane Musho-Hamilton, John Vivecchi, Doshin Roshi, and more. Improve your
sense making, develop your sovereignty, and join a wider community looking to do the same.
