This is the first ever conversation between two of my favourite cultural commentators,
the writers Paul Kingsnorth and Mary Harrington, and it's all about the overlaps between their
thought and their analysis of what we're calling the war on reality.
Well, as opposed to my case, I use this word, the machine, all the time in the writing I'm doing at the
moment. It's not my word, I've stolen from writers like D.H. Lawrence and George Orwell
and Aldous Huxley and everyone else who was paying attention for the last 100 years. And
I'm really talking about this giant techno industrial monstrosity that is in our heads
and in the world, which is really the project of modernity as far as I can see. And the
project of modernity is to build a machine to replace God, because we've given up on
God and consequently we've given up on limits and living within the natural world and our place
within that. I've borrowed from Heidegger elsewhere to frame this in terms of what you call the
machine, Paul, wants to turn everything into standing reserve. It wants to enclose everything.
It started with the commons and then it started patenting things and now it's moving on to
patenting people's bodies and genetic sequences. I invited them to dialogue because I had an
intuition they'd be able to go deep together. And this went even better than I expected.
I think it's a really important development in the cultural conversation and I'll come back
and explain why at the end. So, hope you enjoy it. Paul Kings North, Mary Harrington, welcome.
Thanks for having me. Good to be here. So, this is, I believe, the first time that you
both have been in dialogue with each other. You've both written for Unheard. So, you've been
in the same online magazine and there's a lot of overlaps between your thinking. So,
I'm really looking forward to this conversation. And as I thought maybe it'd be good to start maybe
with asking you each, because I know you've both been looking forward to being in dialogue with
each other, what it is that you are looking forward to talking about and what you find
interesting in each other's thought before we dive into some of the topics we prepared.
I like Paul's conception of the machine. I'd be happy to talk about that for an hour and a half.
Yeah, I mean, I think we're coming at the same thing from a different perspective actually. I
really like, I love the notion of reactionary feminism actually. Apart from being a great catch
phrase, it actually really opens up a lot of really necessary questions about and not just about
women's issues either, but just broadly about limits and the body and nature.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, you get it. You get it, you see.
I do get it because you're coming from a feminist perspective at the same sort of stuff I think
I'm writing about from whatever perspective I write. The moment you start thinking about reactionary
feminism, you realise it's reactionary eco-feminism and then you're away.
Yeah, well, I mean, I suppose what I would say I'm coming from, I suppose, is my background as
a former environmental activist, somebody who writes and thinks about the natural world a lot,
and you don't have to do that for very long before you realise that obviously we're
intimately a part of it. And the whole thing is a question of limits and whether or not we can
break them. And then the questions about the body and the questions about women's and men's bodies
and the questions about the reality of being human and the questions about rainforests and
climate change turn out to be the same questions, which is how we live within limits.
Good, well, that's it. We've dealt with everything.
So that's good. Thanks, David.
Great. Mary and Paul, thank you very much.
Yeah, that's it. That's the tweet. That's what it says.
Yeah, that's a really great introduction. And as you said, Paul, that the idea is
that somehow the modern world seems to be in conflict with itself, or at least with the
natural world. And this is something you've touched on in your writing, and Mary, you've touched on
as well. Could we start by framing that? How do you see that from the sort of biggest picture?
Well, as opposed to my case, I use this word, the machine all the time in the writing I'm doing
at the moment. It's not my word. I've stolen from writers like D. H. Lawrence and George Orwell
and Aldous Huxley and everyone else who was paying attention for the last 100 years.
And I'm really talking about this giant techno-industrial monstrosity that is in our heads
and in the world, which is really the project of modernity as far as I can see. And the project
of modernity is to build a machine to replace God, because we've given up on God. And consequently,
we've given up on limits and living within the natural world and our place within that.
And we've decided that through the use of technology, science and reason, we can effectively
build a new world which doesn't seem to limit us in any way. And we've decided that any limits at
all, whether they're the limits that our body provides or the limits that the natural world
provides us with or even the limits of our behaviour towards each other, are disgraceful
chains that prevent us from being free and rational in the individuals. And so I think it's a big,
it's just a very big, very old way of seeing that is manifesting itself in silicon and plastic
all around us. And as I say, coming at that from the perspective of an environmentalist or a former
one, what I saw was the green movement being entirely sucked into this way of seeing. And I
became, I became a greener years ago because I was entranced by the smallest beautiful model that
the Greens used to believe in in the 70s. When I was a little boy, you know, the world of EF Schumacher
and Leopold Korr and Gandhi and Tolstoy and everyone else who told us to live within natural
limits in a way that would actually be nourishing to us. And the green movement instead brought
into this machine thinking in which it saw climate change and other issues as technological
problems to be solved with more technology, all of which sucks us into the same project of busting
down limits. So now environmentalism has become a question of how many wind farms you can get up
and whether you should use nuclear power and GM crops, whether you should do X, Y and Z to effectively
create a quote, sustainable limitless machine world. All paths kind of lead back to this
modern way of seeing almost every question. I mean, Mary comes at this from, from, from as far as I
can see from the angle of, you know, from the feminist angle, but as she says, it's, it's the
same question, actually, you can just approach it in from all of your different sort of personal
perspectives. And it all leads you back to this attitude we have to nature and human nature.
Yeah, I agree. I suppose I sort of come, I found myself coming at it from the perspective
of the things that you can't say from within that model, and rather direct experience, particularly
of what it is about being a mother that you can't put into words from within the model.
And I've theorized, I've borrowed from Heidegger elsewhere to frame this in terms of, you know,
what you call the machine pool. See, it wants to turn everything into standing reserve, you know,
it wants to, it wants to enclose everything, you know, it started with the commons and then it
started patenting things and now it's moving on to patenting people's bodies and genetic sequences
and you know, but it wants to, it wants to move things from being naturally occurring to biosemiotic,
you know, relationships with one another to being inert resources that can be instrumentalized
and ideally commodified and turned into, turned into something that can be used for something
and sort of unmoored from its relational context. That's the basic movement, unmoor something from
its relational context and then turn it into things which can be traded back and forth in a
sort of liquid and limitless way. So if that's the basic model, the problem with that from the
perspective of a feminist and a mother is that everything that matters, everything that's important
about being a mother is impossible, you can't, is not visible within that model. Because all
of mothering is about pattern and all of mothering is about repetition, you know, it's about, it's
about showing up for your baby every day in all the little ways that are important because the
baby's completely dependent on you and all the, all the things which are nice about it are impossible
to frame in those, in terms of the machine because they can't be commodified. I mean, you know, it's
easy to sort of wax sentimental about your baby's first laugh. But yeah, I think a lot of mothers
will relate to the experience of getting to the end of the day and having had actually a lovely day,
but then somebody asks them, oh, what did you do today? And you, you, you can't say,
you just can't sum it up because you did stuff and you were there and it was in the moment and
just the, the day went by and bits of it were probably really boring. But if you try and explain
it to somebody from, from the perspective that's outside the relationship and that sort of dynamic
business of kind of sustaining a tiny dependent person, if you like, with the, with the energy and
with your own body and your own way of being in the world. And you try and explain that sort of
dynamic activity to somebody who isn't part of it and who isn't within those relationships with you,
they'll just be like, well, that sounds pretty dull and repetitive. And it kind of is, you know,
I mean, if you have a, if you have a functioning brain and an education, it does get boring after
a bit, but it's also really important and it's also really lovely. And I mean, this is, you know,
as somebody with a functioning brain and an education and also a deep, deep love of my
daughter, these are all things which I've kind of wrestled with and found myself theorizing as
well as doing. And I've, and I've come to realize that it's, it's another, it's another angle on
the same problem that I think Paul is wrestling with, which is about how the things, the things
which matter and the things which sustain us and the things which are meaning making and the
things which are genuinely sustainable and create sustainable life in relation to other life are
all pattern based. Then none of them are, none of them are information based, they're all meaning
based. And information, if you like, is blind to meaning, because meaning, meaning in here's in
pattern and repetition and the everyday and the ordinary and the relational. And the moment you
turn it into standing reserve, the moment you enclose it, instrumentalize it and send it out
as inert stuff to be liquefied in one sort of a market or another, it becomes information and it
stops being meaningful. The moment you commodify a child that, I mean, you understand, you understand
where I'm going. Yeah, and we are there, aren't we? We are pretty much commodifying children
already. We are literally commodifying children as a whole. There are rows and rows of cots in
bombshells as in Ukraine, where children which were commissioned by parents elsewhere in a rented
uterus are waiting for their commissioning parents to come and collect them. I say parents in the
loosest possible sense. This is not, this is not a form of parenthood, which I recognize as such.
But yes, we are commodifying children at this point.
We're commodifying everything and I think that the notion of enclosure is really important. I
keep coming back to this one as well, again and again and again. I mean, you could argue that
this whole process begins literally with the enclosures, land enclosures in Britain from, say,
the 15th century onwards. And, you know, global capitalism, if you like, global industrialism
is a process of enclosing everything. So you start off with the land, then you go on to the workers,
then you go on to the human body, you go on to the natural world. Everything's enclosed.
And it's also a process of making everybody rootless and making everything rootless. It's about,
if Mary talks about relationships, I suppose I talk about roots, which is pretty much a different
way of saying the same thing. If you're rooted in a place, if you're rooted in your relationship
with a family, if you're rooted in your own body, if you're rooted in the environment around you,
then you have something which, as Mary says, you can't actually commodify. You can't commodify that
sense of being. Well, you can, and they do. But in the real sense of what it actually means to be
human, it's not measurable. But everything has to be measurable in the age of the machine. It has to
be measurable. It has to be commodifiable. It has to be profitable. Because that's the only way we
can measure whether we're progressing. And of course, we must always progress towards something
better by enclosing and by uprooting and by turning everything into a standing reserve. And that
actually breaks the business of being human in the world. It breaks, I mean, you talk a lot about
sense making, David, and you can't sense make it. If you can't make sense of any of these
relationships, if they've been broken, and I do think that so much of the kind of madness in the
culture at the moment, apart from being driven by social media, is also just actually being driven
by the destruction of things which, for millennia, we've thought were completely normal, including
what motherhood is and what fatherhood is and what families are and what it means to be in a place.
All of this kind of stuff that nobody had to question much. Now suddenly, everything has to
be questioned. And there aren't really answers, because it doesn't make sense.
Yeah, I want to, it's a good question. And I wonder whether this is going to help make more
sense or less sense, bringing in the sort of metaphysical dimension, because you both talk
about this. And the concept that people may or may not be familiar with the kind of
Gnosticism, the idea that this is a very deep-rooted pattern of thinking where the real world is
somehow fake, is somehow kind of an illusion, and actually, there's a sort of inner essence that
is real, is sort of very much mimicked. I think both of you have referred to this in your writings,
is kind of mimicked in the way that our attitude to the world now seems to be. And so I wonder,
do you think that kind of, I'd love to hear about the sort of the metaphysical frame that you
are both bringing, and also whether you think that that kind of makes things more intelligible or
less? I've used the phrase fully automated luxury Gnosticism. With a slightly flippantly,
I've borrowed it from Aaron Bastani's book, Fully Automated Luxury Communism, where he imagines that
actually left wing utopia is going to be attained by the automation of everything, presumably the
liquefaction translation of everything into standing reserve, which is just going to bring
about a world of eternal abundance for everyone somehow. With apologies to Bastani, I've not
actually read the book, but I gather that that's the gist of it, Fully Automated Luxury Communism,
so I borrowed that for Fully Automated Luxury Gnosticism, which is, well, I don't believe it's
coming, but I think it's an aspiration which is being sold to us, of which the reality is perhaps
less appealing. If you like, it's Fully Automated Luxury Gnosticism is this kind of high sounding
promise that we're all going to be able to escape the constraints of our body into something
into a miraculous world where really we can do anything, whether that's the metaverse and
with a haptic interface that means somehow we can see and feel and touch and taste
things in this imaginary digitally constructed world, and we'll never actually need to have any
kind of reference back to what's happening in our physical, in the physical plane at all.
Or, you know, any number of other sort of techno fixes for the problems of materiality and the
problems of embodiment. I suppose it's one of those things where I sort of mean first and ask
questions later or decide what it is I mean by it later. Well, I mean, you often end up, I mean,
I started, I did that with reactionary feminism as well, and it's completely turned into a thing.
So sometimes, sometimes it's just good to go, it's good to walk backwards for a bit and see
where you end up. So yeah, I mean, but Paul, Fully Automated Luxury Gnosticism, you know,
can we, can we fully automate it? How luxurious would it be? You know, how Gnostic is it?
It is interesting that there's the notion of Gnosticism is floating around a bit at the moment.
So historically, the Gnostic movement was a sort of very loose collection of beliefs that were
around in the early centuries of the Christian church. And the Christian church declared them
heretical because effectively Gnosticism says, as you suggest, David, that this world is either,
is either fake or it's something to be transcended. So what you do with, I mean, Gnosis literally means
knowledge. It means a kind of secret knowledge. So the Gnostic movement is, is promoted and still
promotes actually the idea that you can escape the body and the physical realm if you have the
right kind of secret knowledge. And the Christians said and say that this is a heresy because
Christianity is embodied, just as Christ was a kind of melding of the human and the divine.
That's what we are. And so Christianity is not the Christian claim is not that we're going to
escape from physical reality and float off to somewhere better. It's that physical reality
can be transformed. Whereas the Gnostic say, no, this is basically a hell. And the Gnostic tradition
also has the has this great notion of the demiurge. There's an evil being who thinks he's God,
and he is the one who has created matter. And so matter is inherently evil. And so the human
spirit is a divine spark trapped in matter and we want to escape from it back to the back to the
place where we belong. So it's not much of a leap from that to Mark Zuckerberg's metaverse.
It's not much of a leap from that to what Silicon Valley is doing. I mean, openly doing and openly
talking about which is attempting to transcend the messy horribleness of physical reality so
that we don't have to die so that we don't have to give birth so that we don't have to be the sex
that we were born so that we don't have to be anything that's actually relational and anything
that limits what we imagine our free will is. This is my daughter visiting the podcast there
because it's so interesting. Yeah, so that's I mean, and it is exactly that that's the Gnostic
promise today. And it's it's the notion that the physical reality of stuff is escapable. But this
time we're not doing it through secret Gnostic religious knowledge, we're doing it through
technology, which is our equivalent of that. And it's no joke to say that this is exactly where
the project is headed. You only have to listen to Ray Kurzweil speaking or any of these other
guys in Silicon Valley, Elon Musk or any of them, they're very open about this. It's the
great dream of where we're supposed to end up. And I think Mary's right, we're not going to get
there because of all sorts of actual physical realities that are going to get in the way.
But I think we're going to do a lot of damage as we attempt to. And I also think it's an elite
project, you know, it's not something that's available to the majority of humanity. This is,
you know, this is something you do in your New Zealand bunker, primarily.
Well, there are some there are deep photographs doing the rounds of people where, you know,
homeless guys with metaverse golfers on. And actually, that's good. It's egalitarian at least.
Right. Right. Right. Also an incredibly bleak advert for the metaverse itself,
which I think accidentally says the quiet part out loud, where some washed up old dog who used
to have a great life being the life and soul of the party or, you know, loved and surrounded by
friends and is now lonely and, you know, doesn't live on his own and miserable and, you know,
but basically has a crap life and comes into the metaverse and just makes it all come back again,
but fictionally and digitally created. And that's a happy ending to the story.
Well, in fact, what the advert is saying very clearly is if you have a shit life,
come and sit in the metaverse and you can pretend it's not so shit.
You know what it always strikes good news apparently.
Yeah, I mean, this is like the matrix written from the point of view of a script in which
Agent Smith is the good guy, isn't it? This is where we are. We've been 20 years on,
we're 20 years on and we've just we're telling the same story, but now it's good news. Yeah.
And as you said, I don't actually think we're going to get there because it's somebody still
has to take the bins out, bluntly. I mean, this again is the feminist point. You know,
somebody still has to do the dishes. And even if it's a machine does the dishes,
someone still has to unload the dishwasher. You know, so it is eventually titles all the way
down. Somebody still has to grow the food. And all of and even if you build robots to grow the food,
somebody's got to service the robots. And then somebody's got to do the dishes for them somewhere
at the bottom is somebody doing the dishes. And they're probably not in the metaverse while they're
doing the dishes. So yeah, it's an elite project at the end of the day. And someone somewhere
is cleaning up the rubbish that's left behind after the big party.
Yeah, and you had a really interesting insight as well that there's a kind of the memetic warfare
that goes alongside of the information warfare that goes alongside it seems to be more and more
about any kind of hint of fixity or reality is now called essentialism is now kind of to be
attacked memetically, I guess. And that that I find a really interesting development.
Not just essentialism, it's fascism. To state that limits exist and continue to exist,
no matter how hard you push against them is is now is now framed straightforwardly as fascist.
You know, even if you're just observing something which is there, you know,
the act of noticing it is makes you crypto fascist.
Yeah, it's a very, very interesting one. There's this whole notion of essentialism,
which has become such a boo word on the left. And as Mary says, very quickly becomes an accusation
of fascism. Apart from being a stupid representation of actually what fascism is, it's just very,
it's very telling that the people who use that language who always self titled progressives
believe that as you say, any any kind of limits, any kind of actual roots in the natural world
is is not only evil, but it's somehow associated with like the worst political project in human
history. And it's, you know, it's not it's not just it's not even just a smear, it's like there's
a real belief in this, you know, there's there's a real sense that if you are talking about limits
being either even real or beneficial, or having to live within say your own body or live with the
natural world as it is or whatever it is, then you are somehow pushing at the door of some kind of
yeah, vicious ethnocentric racial warfare or whatever it is. And it's like it's almost like
people have had their minds bent by the machine to believe that if you actually have to live within
the God given limits of nature, or if you use a phrase like that, then, you know, you're such a
troubling person that you have to be removed. So who's left? The only people who are left are
people who believe there are no limits at all. And in this kind of merger of, I suppose, progressive
left ideology and machine Gnosticism, it's very weird. And it's happening very quickly as well.
And it's almost impossible in some cases to have conversations, you know, about this without, as
Mary says, having the having the F word thrown at you, which is, yeah, again, I think in other
in other maybe more sane parts of the world and in other more sane times, these conversations
are possible, they were possible five years ago, 10 years ago, you know, you could sit around talking
about all this Huxley. And there would be no problem. But suddenly, it's accelerated into a
very strange place. I mean, it does. It depends a little bit where you stand and who you're
speaking to. I think just a very immediate example, my very good friend, Louise Perry,
who's recently written a book about the case against the sexual revolution,
when which she argues from her background is as a broadly left liberal feminist,
who's sort of but but working, but worked in a rape shelter and left her questioning a lot of
a lot of what she had internalized about what the sexual revolution meant, who it was for,
and what it was actually doing. And so she's written a whole book about her perspective on
this with chapter titles that I would think sort of would have been, as you say, five years ago,
very difficult to argue with, like loveless sex is not empowering, people are not commodities,
you know, listen to your mother, all sort of fairly, fairly sensible, you would think
straightforward statements to make. And somebody, somebody of, you know, within within the academy
posted the screenshot of her chapter headings today, saying this is a real mask off moment,
you know, look at this, look at the horrors which are which are coming forth from, you know,
the various other sort of imputations of the F word. And I mean, but the and was then then
received quite a lot of replies to the effect of which bit of people are not commodities,
are you objecting to them? And really, really, the response was, though, there is nothing here
that any of us disagree with, you know, this is actually not really this is this is this all
sounds very sensible, which which indeed it does, you know, loveless sex really is not empowering,
certainly not to women anyway. But there are, I suppose what I'm trying to say is there are a
lot of people out there who see this stuff, and feel endlessly wordlessly frustrated with this
stuff. And, and don't just just aren't really sure how to mobilize against this stuff, because
it's because the the the sort of integrated message messaging apparatus, which is transmitting,
it seems, seems very well articulated and very, very sort of all encompassing. But actually,
it isn't actually, it isn't creeped through the cracks, people still have eyes and functioning
brains. Because because this would be a sort of pushback, sorry to interrupt, this would be a sort
of pushback, I think, saying, Well, maybe there are, because with social media, especially, it's
very easy to make any kind of case and say, Well, everyone thinks this one, actually, maybe it's
just a few people, because the pushback would be, okay, maybe there's a few people who are kind of
saying that this person's a fascist for for asserting that there are kind of gender roles or
whatever. But is this not is this not kind of nut picking, kind of extreme examples, rather than
kind of a wider mood or a wider kind of feeling? Well, I think the sort of I would say there's
two ways of looking at that. It's very difficult to discern what public opinion actually is now,
because Twitter both is and is not the real world. And you know. And also, you know, there are,
I think you can you can argue about how how impactful a silent majority actually is compared
to the concerted efforts of a very small group of extremely committed zealots, which, you know,
I think if you look at history, it tend to be more effective than any amount of silent majority.
So, so from that perspective, you know, the cards are the cards are stacked in favor of the fully
automated luxury Nostics, because they have the mic and they really, really, really believe this
stuff. But I don't know, I think there are, I think that I really think there are hard limits
to it. You know, there are hard limits to how how much women, as has been very abundantly evident
in Britain recently, and increasingly so in America, too, there are limits to how much women
will tolerate being told that a woman is anybody who says they're a woman, for example, you know,
which is which is the most egregious and the most in your face, battlefront in the in the
push for no limits whatsoever on in turn, in individual self actualization on any terms whatsoever.
That's the most sort of that that's the most egregious front in that particular. I mean,
there are there are many others. But it's also it's also the one which is mobilizing the most
sort of cross party resistance. Because I mean, if you've grown, if you've grown a new human
inside your literal uterus, you know what a woman is. And it's also notable how many of the people
how many of the men who pay lip service to this idea that a woman is anybody who says they're
already immediately knows what a woman is the moment they want to render uterus. You know, there
are these all this stuff is very it's it's full of slippages and it's full of bad faith and it's
full of inconsistency and everybody knows that to be the case. Because at the end of the day,
you know, the the liquefaction of everything, I've just been writing a chapter about this
actually, you know, is that the this the the liquefaction of everything doesn't actually work
because because it's premised on the idea that there's no such thing as nature and no such
thing as human nature. And that's not actually true. So what it does in the end is it it successfully
liquefies all of the norms or all of these established structures. But because because
human nature continues to exist, it then it simply reframes that as a set of supply and demand
problems. So instead of instead of having, you know, codes for in the instead of having courtship
rituals, you have the sexual marketplace. And that's a straightforward reordering of the the
sex differences between men and women, you know, which, you know, had quite elaborate social codes
ordered around them, you know, in order to kind of balance the balance the interests of men and
women, you know, under particular economic circumstances, you liquefy that you blow it
all out of the water and say no, actually, everybody can just do what they want now.
But and what what happens is not that everybody does what they want. Exactly. What have because
people still people still have urges which are not rational. And some of those are connected to
reproductive roles, they just are. But but instead, but and because this stuff goes on existing,
it just it just gets reabsorbed into the marketplace and it becomes a set of supply and
demand problems. And the same the same is now happening with biological sex, you know, it's
either being, you know, the desire to be one sex or another is being is being reimagined as a set
of supply and demand problems. You know, there are already medical papers out there, we are talking
about, you know, uterus transplants into men who men who identify as women. I don't know where they're
going to get the uterus is from, but presumably from from women who identify as men or who knows,
who knows anyway, there's this is being imagined as you know, a set of Lego parts that could just
be swapped so that they're in the right place, presumably through some sort of marketplace.
And the same goes again for babies, you know, women are still the only people who can just
date new humans. So so here again, because we were we're in the process of liquefying all of the
norms. But but we haven't in the process successfully managed to abolish the underlying
material facts, you know, on which those norms are built. We just end up we end up reimagining
them as a set of supply and demand problems. So now if you need a uterus, you just go and rent one.
And but the point is the liquefaction doesn't work. And so the and my sense is there's a
there's a kind of frustration there among the automated luxury nostics, because every time
they try and every time they try and get to the bottom, to the point where actually we really
have just attained full grey goo Satanism. It just it never quite works because it's because
there's always there's always another level of materiality, which has its patterns and continues
to be what it is. And I, it's a very depressing, very pessimistic sort of a hope. But I do, I
have some, you know, if I have hope, it's in the fact that that that persists. It just is. And
it doesn't matter how many times you try and liquefy, it continues. Yeah, and I think that's
really, that's a great summary of it all. I mean, this is, I've written quite a few times in these
essays and doing at the moment about the how revolutions effectively, especially progressive
revolutions always clear the ground for the machine. They think they're creating a utopia.
And what actually happens from the French Revolution onwards, is you destroy all the
customary structures, you destroy the traditions, you destroy the structures from families to
community level structures up to church level, you literally you, you know, you burn down the
churches and you try to destroy the family and you read it to be the land. And what happens then
is you just create a void and into the void commerce rushes. And so as Mary says, everything
becomes commodified. And so the result of your grand utopian progressive revolution is not
a fairer world. It's effectively a world that is more commodified, more individualistic,
and more, more prey to the machine. And that brings us to the point after about 200 years
that we've got to now where everything is a commodity. But there are a lot of people who
consider themselves to be progressive who have confused out with liberation. And this is really
what liberation has come down to as Mary is also saying better than me is liberation from nature
at all levels, liberation from the body, liberation from everything around you. And
this this I think explains the kind of the people who scream about fascism and the people who are
so committed to this is they genuinely think, well, effectively, they're blanks latest, right,
they genuinely believe that if you can remove all of the supposed change the tires down from
from the reality of biological sex to the existence of family to national culture to
whatever it is that you think is getting in the way of equality in utopia. Then we're all
then we're all the same. And then we can indeed all choose to have babies ought to be men ought to
be women ought to live anywhere ought to be whatever we want. But that's not true because
we're hefted, you know, we're hefted and we're rooted in whatever cultural or background or
biology we have. And there are some things you shouldn't, you can't get away from. But also
you shouldn't want to because they actually make you human. And that's the thing that there's this
notion that these structures that have always in most societies and most times been customary
from the family to the village to the religious institution, whatever it is, that they are
bad things which which limit us as opposed to the possibility that they are actually things
which enrich us and which structure our urges in useful ways. And that's that's the point where
can I have to probably painfully rediscover that we we probably built these structures for a reason
and we lived in certain ways for a reason. And however imperfect those ways might have been for
lots of people, and they're hardly unimprovable, they still probably built on a knowledge of human
nature that we're now pretending isn't there anymore. And yeah, we're getting to the point
where we've deconstructed almost everything. And as Mary said, there's a kind of there's a grinning
face at the bottom of it is not looking good. I've come I've come gradually to the conclusion
that actually gender ideology is mostly particularly transgender children. It's
are being instrumentalized, you know, there are some seriously distressed people who are for
for all men or a number of range of different often quite complicated, you know, personally
very painful reasons, you're deeply unhappy in their bodies and in the world as it is,
you know, and I think that's that's often a rational response to finding themselves in a
very in an absolutely intolerable place, you know, particularly adolescent women,
who find themselves in a world so saturated with porn that actually to me it seems a
completely reasonable response to take hormones that make that make you resemble a male and cut
off your breasts. I mean, I would probably be tempted if I were 14 today. So, you know, from
that point of view, I have no I have no beef with with people who are trying to find some relief
in in a embodied condition that they find intolerable. You know, that's not who I pick
a fight with. But what what I see is a subset of very distressed people who are being instrumentalized
in pursuit of a much bigger project, which is the deregulation of human nature as such.
If you like the deregulation of the of the human body, you know, much the same way as
the financial sector was deregulated in the 1980s, the aim is to deregulate the body
and deregulate the idea that we had that the body has a nature, because that opens that opens up
boundless commercial sphere in which, you know, organs regenerate self regenerating organs can
be synthesized in laboratories. Human animal chimeras can be developed for who knows what
purposes. I mean, you know, the possibilities are endless if you're a mad scientist with no
no ethics. But you have to you have to render an inexcusably low status, any sort of the
currently still pervasive common conviction act with truth, in fact, not conviction truth,
that humans have a nature, and that, you know, males are normatively one way and females are
normatively another. And, you know, humans have a normal number of limbs and so on and so forth.
You have to you have to completely denormalize destabilize and liquefy that consensus before
you before you can embark on the, you know, deregulatory business opportunities that flow
from that. Yeah, no, I think that's right. That's exactly what's happening. And the demonizing of
the of the turfs and the fascists and everybody else is precisely part of that project, which is
to silence and to provide endless new names for the people who are saying exactly that.
Really interesting what you're saying about the, like, what is the sort of the
question that arises? Like, what's the most fundamental driver? Because you you mentioned,
Paul, that you felt like commerce was filling the gap of this sort of revolutionary moment.
But are you saying that you think commerce is is actually the driver or is the driver
deeper? Is the driver some kind of, I mean, you've called it the machine, but how
where do you think that machine lives? Do you think it's kind of a psychological structure or a
yeah, what what do you think is actually, because it's also kind of for me kind of maps onto some
of the conspiracy thinking as well, where I see a lot of the time people kind of collapse around
looking for an agent, a specific agent or a specific set of agents, whereas actually there
is a sort of tendency towards often that seems deeper. So where where do you locate those those
drivers? Yeah, well, I have a terrible feeling that the driver is metaphysical. I mean, this is not
just about making money. There's a lot of interest in that. But there's I keep I always talk about
this fascinating book by Kevin Kelly called What Technology Wants, which is a really good book to
read. You should read it, Mary, if you haven't already, it's a few years old now, but it's
Kevin Kelly is one of the Silicon Valley guys. And he's very much into the notion that
something is being created, which he calls the technium, which is pretty much the same as I
suppose why I'm calling the machine. And he says, look, this thing is becoming self aware. And
that's the point, right? It's starting to manage itself is starting to push its own direction,
starting to starting to manifest. And this is again, the attitude of a lot of the guys behind
this project that they think they're creating the next, they think they're building the next
level of evolutionary consciousness. You know, this is why they're so obsessed at the moment,
I think with artificial intelligence, they really think they can create post humans. And they think
perhaps this is Kevin Kelly's explicit notion that humanity is just a stepping stone on the
way to something greater, greater consciousness that they're helping to build, but which is also
weirdly manifesting through them. So it's a very quasi religious thing that is happening. I'm not
saying everybody involved in it believes that there's a lot of profiteering just, and a lot of
kind of mind is following the herd. But there's something going on with the creation of this
post human metaverse machine, machine, machinist sort of post human, anti human, non human
world in which it literally is it's a metaphysical project in which they're trying to recreate or
build a heaven on earth, entirely reconstructed. I mean, you hear it a lot when people talk about
how they want to go and live in, they want to terraform Mars or they want to fly off and live
on moon bases. Because that's the fantasy, the explicit fantasy of how they can create an entire
planet right from the dust up in their own image. So there's something in it that is very much bigger
than just a kind of profit scrabble. And again, you don't need a conspiracy theory in which there
are six evil people in a bunker making a plan. You just need enough people to buy into something
which is moving already, which I think is where we're going. And it's kind of the inevitable
result of the whole attitude, the whole worldview of modernity, I think, to come back to what we
started with, with the notion of the rational individual who can detach himself from nature
and build his own paradise. Now we've got the technology to do it, but we will have soon.
And that's really what encompasses the whole thing, I think. So it's an ideology or even
a religious worldview that drives it, I think. You said, I feel like you're sidling along the
edge of implying that it's not so much that we have ideas as that ideas have us.
Yeah, well, I think that's true. I suppose, yeah, that's not a bad way of putting it.
We are, I mean, I think you see this really manifesting on social media. It's one reason
I don't have any social media accounts. People are being entirely controlled by ideas and by
visions and by ideologies or whatever these things are. They're not the great, the famous
I support the current thing meme is quite funny, but it also has a kind of deeper meaning to it,
which is that there's, you know, you're being controlled when you're on your smartphone looking
at this stuff, you can feel it. And so, yeah, ideas have us, memes have us, metaphysics have us
entirely, I think. And they can almost become self-replicating in the age of the machine and they are.
I would agree with that. I mean, I'm hopelessly compromised in that way, Paul,
for fully cognizant of my cyborg state.
Well, you're so good at meming, Mary, it would be a shame if you thought.
Well, you can't be completely unplugged if you've noticed that.
No, I'm not completely unplugged. No, I do pop in here and there. And one of the reasons I don't
have social media is that I know very well, because I did have a Twitter account for a while
years ago. I know very well that I would get tempted to start doing exactly the same thing.
I'd get sucked into that really easily. It's not, it's not a puritan position so much as a
practical one. I know it would rot my brain. So I keep away.
Yeah, I'm very ambivalent about my own relationship to Twitter. But one, I suppose the thing I wanted
to lob in here, which is it's a conversation I've had a number of times with, you know, other people
who are sort of embedded in the cyborg memeplex as I am, who will cheerfully chat to you about the
fact that they know perfectly well that the memeplex that you see on the internet is, you know,
that the memeplex is real. But the what you, the simulacrum of it you see on the internet is not,
it's not the thing. And who can see the difference very clearly. Now, I suspect that there are a
lot of people who sport the current thing you can't see the difference. But there are, there are
a surprising number of people out there who see what the, what the internet memeplex is a metaphor
for and recognise that it actually exists and is out there. See what it's a metaphor for? What do
you mean by that? What do you mean by that? Well, I mean, it's actually, what it's a metaphor for
is the thing that we started off talking about, you know, when you, when you were referenced,
I was talking about patterns and meanings and the relational, the relational nature of everything
in, in, in human culture and the natural world. We are another person of, if we're,
well, we're talking about, you know, people, shadow people who should be part of this conversation,
you know, a dear friend of mine, Wendy Wheeler, who died a couple of years ago, who was a pioneer
in biosemiotics, wrote a lot about her work was very, it was multidisciplinary. And it crossed,
and it was based on the thesis that everything in the natural world is not, it's not based on
information, it's based on meaning, everything in the natural world is a series of relational
dialogues between different meaning making systems, which I found an incredibly illuminating way
of thinking about how, how organisms exist in relation to one another. But I think one of
the classic examples is, you know, there's a lovely video about this somewhere on the internet,
what happened, what happened when they reintroduced wolves into, so into a national park in America.
And through a concatenating series of impacts that reintroducing the apex predator had on various,
various natural systems through the sort of, you know, concatenating interrelations of these
various systems, it ended up changing the path of the rivers that ran through the,
ran through the nature reserve. Because, because some wolves ate some more, some more large animals,
there were, there was a different sort of vegetation and that meant smaller animals went over
there instead. And that in turn meant something else and something else and something else and
eventually the rivers changed course. And that's what I mean when I say that the memeplex is real.
Because in a sense, the normative patterned behaviors of each of these species acting in
relationship to one another, you know, acts like a series, it's metaphorically speaking, you could
say it's a series of means that, that exist in dynamic dialogue with one another. And in the
course of doing that, you know, they, that process, if you like, manifests in, in what we see
materially in the natural world. And I suppose that's probably, that's probably the clearest
articulation I can give of what I think the actual memeplex is. And that's, and that memeplex,
if you like, the actual memeplex is not one in which humans exist as separate from the natural
world. Because obviously, we're, we're having impacts on the natural world all the time.
I suppose one of the, I keep chickens at home. They stop me if this is getting, getting too
weird or too lateral for you. I keep chickens. I think a lot about chickens because I like chickens.
You know, they're, they're kind of psychopathic and they're kind of miniature dinosaurs and other
things. But, but they're also one of the most successful bird species on, I think they might be
the most successful bird species on the planet. And they've done that by existing in a dialogue
with humans. You know, they're not the only domesticated animal in that way. And obviously,
a lot of them have to take one for the team. But, you know, at a species level, it's a very
effective survival strategy. You know, I think there are, there are countless billions of chickens
in the world. And it works from a, from a species point of view. But, you know, unless, unless you're
a, you're a fully paid up member of the machine, and you want to keep, you want to keep chickens
in battery farms. You know, if you're, if you're keeping, if you're keeping animals like that,
you sort of, you have to, you have to do so roughly in accordance with their nature.
You can, you can exist in a functional, you know, ongoing sustainable dialogue with a domestic
animal. But, you know, unless you, unless you imprison them and, and doctor them in various
ways to make them tolerate it, you have to, you have to keep them in conditions where they can
scratch, for example, if they're chickens or if they're, if they're sheep, they need different
conditions. And so, so there's a, there's a kind of ongoing dynamic relationship where, you know,
the animal, animal husbandry is partly about meeting the animal where it is. And it's partly
about, partly about how a domestic animal does a species level response to that, you know, and
over times, you know, specialist breeds evolve. And, you know, there are, there are particular
different types of, sorry, I'm probably getting very arcane with this, but it's just, you know,
once you get into those, you know, the, the, the semiotics of, of human animal interactions,
you know, it's just boundlessly rich terrain. You know, there are, there are, there are
differences in how good at giving birth unaided, different, different breeds of sheep are,
because I think it's, I think it's the herdwicks, which are, which are normally kept on very barren
upland terrain in the, in the north of England. And because you just can't get up there during
lambing season, basically the ones, the ones that survive are the ones who can give birth without
any help. And there are other breeds of sheep, which are kept in lowland territory under much
closer watch, who are, who generally need help, a lot more help with lambing because they, over
time, they've just evolved that way. And you can see, you can see how that would work, you know,
the herdwicks, the, the herdwicks that make it are the ones, are the offspring of, of mothers,
of youths that can, that can give birth on their own. And, and just over time, they've got much
better at it. And there are other breeds of sheep, which, which, which aren't. And, and these are,
these are the sorts of dynamic interactions between humans and the animal kingdom or,
and, and I mean, you, you can, you can point to any number of different examples. I think there's
a, another one, which I really like is the North American peppered moth, which over the last
hundred years has become, it's become darker as a consequence of evolving in much more
polluted conditions. It used to be, it used to be mostly white. I think some of them,
then they have, they have different patterns and over, over the last hundred years, they've
become darker because the human influence on their environment has, has, has made for,
has, has meant they need a different color of camouflage in order to survive. So, so we're
constantly existing in dialogue with the natural world, you know, with this sort of memeplex.
And I think the, the fundamental fantasy of the machine that we're somehow separable from it
and entitled to instrumentalize it, you know, once you, if you look at it from inside the
memeplex or you look at it from a perspective of thinking about us as participants in this
and entangled in this enormous sort of multi species, interspecies memeplex, it's, it's,
it's a sort of monstrous imposition and just a fundamental category error.
Yeah. And this, this takes me right back to the point about environmentalism that we talked
about right at the beginning, really, where I come in, I suppose, you know, this is a sort
of a conversation about Gaia theory, really. This is a conversation about the interconnectedness of
all things and the fact that there's no separation between humans of nature and that we're entirely
reliant on everything else, but that living in urban interconnected societies, we can very easily
pretend that that's not true until we start keeping chickens or any, any number of other things.
But it is, it is exactly why it is impossible for the new metaphysics of the machine to succeed in
the end, because what it's trying to do is, as I say, recreate, recreate or to create a new world
on the basis that the current world is a standing reserve on the basis that the current world is
just a fake or not a fake, but a pure material realm that there's nothing to it, that there's
no consciousness, why doesn't the human mind that there's no real interconnections that there's
nothing, that there's nothing sacred, that there's nothing higher than us, that there's nothing
that may be operating outside our purview. And that's not true. And that's not a religious claim
either. You can, you can read any number of scientific papers these days about the consciousness
of trees and the interconnectedness of fungal mycelia and any number of interesting studies
which demonstrate that things that are not human tend to be a lot more conscious and interconnected
than we might assume in the modern age, which incidentally is something that most
indigenous people know instinctively and traditionally. So that's real. So what we are
doing precisely is trying to break apart and instrumentalize and break down into material
parts, something which actually is alive that we're part of, which is the planet itself.
We're playing, we're literally playing God, except God knows what he's doing and we don't.
And that's why, that's why it hits the buffers and it will keep hitting the buffers.
And at the micro level, you know, a human body is a real thing and you can't,
you can't change it beyond a certain point. And at the macro level,
there's something very big and interwoven going on with the planet itself that we don't understand
and we can't, and we can't fiddle with beyond a certain point. And we're just going to learn
it the hard way. That's what's going to happen. We're going to learn it the hard way because we
don't want to learn it by paying attention. I wanted to throw in a concept around this
question of like what's driving it. And I wonder whether you both might have seen this,
but a lot of talk recently about the kind of concept of the egregore and which is a sort of
idea of maybe we are all the individual human brain as connected to a smartphone, just choosing to
kind of upregulate certain messages or not based on kind of ideological reasons could be seen as a
kind of individual neuron in a wider sort of group consciousness that we're not, we don't know where
that is going, that that's sort of almost like a, that could be, do you think that's a useful concept?
And that could kind of explain sort of a kind of wider perspective of an intention that we're
part of, but we don't fully understand where its destination or direction of travel is.
Yeah, well, it's an occult concept, isn't it, egregores? I've seen a few people
chatting about it recently. I mean, there's certainly a sense that you can come back to that
notion that we're being controlled by something that's bigger than us. And I think fundamentally
that is happening through the internet. I wrote quite a fun short story a few years ago called
The Basilisk, which was all about this, which I quite enjoyed writing. I should just write
short stories because there's a much quicker way of trying to explain all this than putting it in
essays. But that was precisely about the possibility that something is controlling us through the web,
whether that something is a sort of a mind force that we create in some ways, or whether it's
something else. I don't know, but there's something, there's something going on which is bigger than
us. The internet has manifested it. And it's part of the craziness. And it's really difficult to
pin down. But it's people talking about egregores is one sort of pointer to the fact that people
can again feel that there's something much bigger behind the weird on-screen interactions that no
one can quite explain or put their finger on. Well, I would love to do a part two where we talk
about what we're going to do, what we do now. Because if we've reached the bottom, if we've
reached the bottom, and there really is nowhere further down, I mean, there might be a lot along
way further down. But if we've reached the point where we've liquefied everything, what happens
next, I think that's a question I would love to talk over with you. No, it's a big one. Yeah,
how to live through it, how to make sense of it, how to resist it. Yeah, that would be a great chat.
Awesome. So this is diagnosis, and then we have a follow up with solution.
No promises, no promises. Yeah, Mary, Mary and Paul, thank you very much. Thank you.
So I hope you enjoyed that. I really loved the conversation while I was part of it,
and I listened to it again afterwards and something really landed. So I'm going to try
and explain why I think this is significant. Maybe you can let me know what you make of
this in the comments. I think what this conversation was is a moving towards a synthesis position
between what you might call dissident right and dissident left. It's explaining how the extreme
woke agenda is liquefying all structures, which is what the right is angry about.
But Paul explains that ultimately this is in the interests of capital and it's a corporate agenda,
which is what the left is upset about. And it also validates the feelings of the conspiracy
minded that something coordinated is going on, but locates the source of the problem not in a
shadowy cabal, but in the metaphysical, what Paul calls the machine, and Mary calls fully automated
luxury Gnosticism. So I think this is inching towards a synthesis position. And what's more
powerful is the way that they both deliver their message with wit, intelligence and depth.
And with none of the reactivity and anger that characterizes so much of this debate.
So I really do think this is a step forward. And I'm looking forward to hosting them again in
dialogue, along with rebel wisdom members, which we're going to do soon. So if you want to join
that conversation, check out the membership options below in the show notes and hope to see you there.
