The great Sufi master, Mullah Nasruddin, was on his hands and knees searching for something
under a street lamp.
A man saw him and asked, what are you looking for?
My house key, Nasruddin replied, I lost it.
The man joined him in looking for the key, and after a period of fruitless searching,
the man asked, are you sure you lost it around here?
Nasruddin replied, oh, I didn't lose it around here, I lost it over there by my house.
Then why, the man asked, are you looking for it over here?
Because, Nasruddin said, the light is so much better over here.
There are many ways to interpret this story, but one way might serve as a helpful reminder
as we embark on our study of religion.
As we search for this phenomenon called religion and study a variety of religious traditions,
we might find ourselves using the light of familiar categories to help us understand
what we're studying.
This story can serve as a cautionary tale about the problems of using what we know
from our upbringing or our own religion to illuminate the concepts, symbols, and practices
of other traditions.
It's important that we move outside the familiar, well-lit areas of our life and expand the
region in which we search.
We'll find that the other traditions we study will provide their own sources of illumination,
and that rather than try to understand other traditions through our pre-existing categories,
we might acquire new categories for understanding.
Not only might we find surprising, thought-provoking answers to the questions we bring to the study
of religion, we might find that even our questions themselves need to be reexamined.
Welcome to this course on cultural literacy for religion.
I'm Mark Berkson, and I'm looking forward to exploring the world's major religious
traditions with you.
There's no doubt that religion is a profoundly important subject of study, and that it matters
on many levels.
Author Stephen Protherow of Boston University argues that religious literacy is essential
for an educated citizen in his democracy, and that unfortunately Americans are not doing
very well in this area at all.
Recently, the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life tested Americans' knowledge about religion
by giving a quiz about the Bible and world religions.
Here are some questions from the quiz.
See if you can answer them.
Don't worry, there's no pressure and no grade.
How many of the four Gospels, the first four books of the New Testament, can you name?
When does the Jewish Sabbath begin?
What is Ramadan?
And what religion do the gods Vishnu and Shiva come?
In this lecture series, we'll answer all of these questions, and many more like them,
so don't worry if you couldn't answer them now.
You'll be able to by the end of the series.
The average score for American respondents on this survey was 50 percent, a failing grade.
Americans don't know much about non-biblical traditions.
Only 38 percent knew Vishnu and Shiva were Hindu gods.
The vast majority of Americans cannot name the four noble truths of Buddhism or the five
pillars of Islam.
But it's not just that Americans don't know about non-biblical religions.
A Gallup poll revealed that only half of American adults can name even one of the four Gospels
of the New Testament, and less than half could identify Martin Luther as the person whose
writings inspired the Protestant Reformation.
Why do Americans do so poorly on religious tests?
Worse, in fact, than their European counterparts who are, as a whole, much less religious.
One reason is that very few American public schools teach about religion.
I find most incoming students at my school have had very little education about world
religions in their public schools.
This may be due to the reluctance on the part of many school administrators and teachers
to bring religion into the classroom.
After all, the Supreme Court ruled quite clearly against prayer in the classroom, as a case
we'll explore in a future lecture.
However, this concern about teaching religion is entirely unfounded.
There's a vast difference between proselytizing or requiring religious acts in school and
teaching students about religion.
The Supreme Court made this very clear in a school prayer ruling.
It said, it might well be said that one's education is not complete without a study
of comparative religion or the history of religion and its relationship to the advancement
of civilization.
In other words, public schools certainly can, and I would argue should, teach world religions.
And a good case can be made that such courses should be encouraged and perhaps even required
at the college level.
But Americans don't realize this.
In fact, only 23% of Americans know that a public school teacher is permitted to read
from the Bible as an example of world literature.
This is one of the lowest scores on the entire Pew test.
If you watch the lectures in this series, you'll ace tests like those given by Pew
and Gallup.
And that's important not just because it feels good to score well on a test, but because
an understanding of religion is essential on multiple levels, three of which I'll mention
here.
First, you cannot understand the world without understanding religion.
Open any day's newspaper and you'll find that numerous stories have a religious dimension
to them.
People throughout the world make sense of their lives, find meaning, and acquire values
through religious traditions.
Religion is one of the strongest motivators of human behavior, so we need to have a background
in religion to understand the forces that shape our world.
Religious beliefs and values can have profound political impact, as we can see in examples
just from recent decades, ranging from the US Civil Rights Movement to the Iranian Revolution,
from Buddhist monks protesting the Vietnam War, to the liberation of Eastern Europe from
communist rule.
According to one survey, 90% of members of the US Congress consult their religious beliefs
before voting on legislation.
Given the importance of religious beliefs, the consequences of ignorance about religion
can be serious.
I remember how disturbed I felt a number of years ago when a leading government official
with responsibilities in the Middle East couldn't explain the difference between Sunni
and Shia Islam, which is quite a crucial distinction for him to know if he's going to be involved
in that region.
Both religious bigotry and ignorance were on display when Sikh Americans were violently
targeted after September 11th simply because they wore turbans and were thus mistaken for
Muslims.
And just recently, a US Airways flight made an emergency landing because an Orthodox Jew
was praying using Tefillin, which are small black boxes containing prayer scrolls and
leather straps to attach them to the arm in the forehead.
How I wish they'd had asked, is there a doctor on the plane?
Specifically a PhD in religion.
The problem could have been avoided if the flight crew understood the religious symbols
of Judaism.
A background in religion is necessary for an understanding of human behavior not just
in the world today, but throughout history, for people have always been shaped and guided
by understandings and traditions that we can call religious.
Neanderthals and early modern humans practiced burial rituals with religious elements, such
as accompaniment by tools that suggest a possible belief that the dead would be traveling
to another realm.
Human skeletons stained with red ochre and surrounded by grave goods, such as animal
bones and seashells, were discovered in a cave in Israel, and these remains date back
around 100,000 years.
We call ourselves Homo sapiens, the beings that know or think, but we can just as easily
call ourselves Homo religiosis, as religious behavior is as old as our species itself.
The power of religious ideas is such that they've produced some of the most extreme
examples of good and evil in human history.
Religious motivations can lead to selfless sacrifice, profound love, social justice movements,
and awe-inspiring beauty.
But they can also lead to bigotry, close-mindedness, and mass murder.
Any force with this kind of power demands careful study and reflection.
So our first reason to study religion is to understand world events and human behavior
in our time and throughout history.
Second, most of you watching this lecture live in a country with significant religious
diversity.
In my own city of St. Paul, Minnesota, for example, I live a short drive from mosques,
Buddhist meditation centers, one of the largest Hindu temples in America, a secret warra,
Orthodox conservative and Reformed Jewish synagogues, and numerous Christian churches
from a wide variety of denominations.
And not only is there diversity among faiths in the U.S., there's also great diversity
within each religious tradition.
In America, a Theravada Buddhist from Thailand can meet a Chinese Pure Land Buddhist, a Japanese
Zen Buddhist, and a Tibetan Buddhist in the same community, which is something that wouldn't
have happened in most parts of the Buddhist world throughout most of history.
Think about the degree to which concepts and practices from the world's religions have
become part of the common vocabulary in the United States.
Have you ever commented on your great parking karma?
Do you live in a city with an impressive selection of yoga classes?
Have you read about the use of mindfulness meditation and stress reduction therapy or
sports training?
So we need to understand other religious traditions, so that we can understand our nation and
our neighbors.
In fact, you might find yourself invited into the home of someone from a different faith.
In a very practical sense, the lectures in this series will help you understand the religious
objects and texts that would be found in the home, the special diets that might be eaten,
and the rituals that might be performed.
Robert Wuthnau writes that Americans in minority religions, such as Buddhism, Hinduism, and
Islam, wish to be understood not merely tolerated.
They are distressed, he writes, by the exasperating ignorance of their fellow citizens.
As we reflect on these first two reasons why we should study religion, to understand world
events, and to understand our own country and neighbors, we can see why an understanding
of religion is important for cultivating citizenship.
As voters in elections and as participants in the vital conversations of civic life,
it's imperative that we be informed.
An educated citizenry is the foundation of a successful democracy.
Thomas Jefferson famously wrote, If a nation expects to be ignorant and free in a state
of civilization, it expects what never was and never will be.
The third reason to study religion is so that you can attain greater self-understanding.
For people who are religious, it's easy to see why this is so, as so much of their identity
is formed through engagement with a religious tradition.
But what about people with no religious tradition?
What about atheists?
I would argue that every person, regardless of religious affiliation or belief, can attain
greater self-understanding through the study of religion.
The reason is this.
Among the many things that religious traditions are, they are the contexts in which the most
important fundamental questions of human existence are explored and struggled over.
Religious traditions explore questions like, What is ultimate reality?
What is itself?
How do we understand death?
They all lead to questions that every one of us must think about if we are to live the
examined life that is distinctly human.
How should I live?
What gives life meaning?
The study of religion gives us the opportunity to think through these profoundly important
questions in the company of some of the greatest thinkers and texts from many different cultures
and historical periods.
So the encounter with religious traditions should never simply be an armchair academic
exercise.
It should be an existential encounter where we try to gain an imaginative insider's perspective
on the religious traditions of the people we share the world with.
This can be an unsettling experience, for it might lead us to question some of our fundamental
beliefs and values.
Woody Allen once said, Maybe the unexamined life is not worth living, but the examined
life is no picnic either.
And here's a little riddle for you.
What's the difference between going to see a doctor and going to see a religion professor?
Well, when you go to the doctor with a pain, he gives you something to make you feel better.
But you go to the religion professor feeling pretty good and leave with pains that you
didn't know you had.
Taking religious literacy, by which I mean knowledge of the basic teachings, symbols
and practices, founders, institutions and values of the world's major religious traditions,
is an essential first step in gaining a deeper understanding of these religions.
But it's only a first step.
I hope that this engagement with other religious traditions will be a catalyst that will inspire
you to engage in deeper studies and encounters with these traditions.
There's no substitute for direct experience, travel to other countries, visits to religious
institutions, conversations with members of other traditions.
This lecture series will, I hope, give you a map that will help you navigate these future
encounters and better understand the events of our time.
Now that we've talked about the importance of studying religion, we face our next question.
How should we study religion?
The study of religion is both a great joy and a great challenge, because there are so
many ways to approach it.
The study of religion involves the disciplines of history, theology and philosophy, literature,
sociology, psychology and anthropology, music and art, among others.
So I don't think it's quite right to call religious studies a discipline, rather you
can think of it as a multidisciplinary field.
So in this course, we'll try to attain the imaginative insider's perspective on other
religious traditions I mentioned earlier.
And when we study our own tradition, we'll strive to retain the ability to step outside
of it and engage in rigorous critique.
I will aim to bring both appreciative and critical perspectives to the study of every
religious tradition.
And this brings us to another big question for the lecture, a very important one to address
before we move on.
What is religion?
Since you've chosen to listen to our religion course, you must have some idea of what religion
is.
But it's actually not easy to come up with a definition.
So I have a short assignment for you.
You didn't think there wouldn't be assignments, did you?
This one's fun to do with others.
Come up with a concise one to three sentence definition of religion.
Such an exercise is quite instructive.
So if you're watching at home, hit pause and write out your definition.
Before we discuss common approaches to defining religion, let's take a look at the word religion
itself.
While there's debate about this, many scholars believe that the root of the word comes from
the Latin ligare, which has the meaning of connecting or binding, as with our word ligament.
So re ligare, a rebinding, would refer to establishing the connection between human
beings and deities.
Some would say that this term evokes the binding obligation that we have toward the
gods.
But this is a word with a Latin root from the Western tradition.
What happens to our notion of religion if we begin to include religious traditions from
China or India?
Will we have to expand or alter our definition?
Now you might ask, is it really that important to come up with a definition?
Well for one thing, it's a useful exercise to undertake before we begin our study, as
it'll raise some important issues.
In addition, how one defines religion can have real legal, political and social import.
For example, let's say someone argues that their religious freedom is being infringed.
How can we tell if their activity is, in fact, religious?
And what if an organization wants tax exempt status?
Must we not decide when something is religion and when it isn't?
Now we can get to our definition exercise.
I suspect that some of your definitions might contain something like the following sentence.
Religion involves a belief in God, gods or supernatural beings.
When American students are asked to define religion, it's quite common that the words
belief and God or gods will be found in the definition.
Now some of you might have gone a different route and written something like, religion
provides answers to fundamental questions and provides meaning and comfort.
Or perhaps some of you focused on other things religion does, like binds people together
in communities or provides a set of values and morals.
These two kinds of definitions represent two common approaches to defining a word.
The first one is called a substantive definition.
And in this approach, one attempts to state what the essence of religion is.
What makes religion a distinct phenomenon?
The element without which something would not be a religion.
That essential element might be a belief in a God or gods.
This second approach is known as a functional definition.
And it focuses on what religion does, on the function or role it plays for the individual
or community, such as providing answers, meaning, comfort, morals or a sense of community.
Let's evaluate these first two attempts at definition.
The substantive definition makes it easy to determine what counts as a religion, as we
only need to ask the question about belief and deities.
But there's a drawback.
What about a tradition like Zen Buddhism?
As we'll see, there's nothing in Zen that looks like the biblical God or the gods of
the Hindu Pantheon.
Should we then exclude it from our list?
Might a substantive definition like this be too limiting?
If we turn to a functional definition, religion as providing answers and giving meaning, we
see the opposite problem.
Such a definition would certainly include Zen Buddhism, but would it not also include
systems of philosophy or political systems?
Would we have to call Marxism a religion?
Some functional definitions emphasize the way that religions bind people together in
communities around shared beliefs and practices.
Well, couldn't this also include devoted fans of the Boston Red Sox?
Perhaps you might want to extend the definition this way, but many would argue that functional
definitions are too broad.
The limitations of these two approaches have led to a third approach in definition, which
is known as the family resemblance approach.
This looks at elements or clusters of characteristics that are common among what we would normally
call religion.
So these might include a belief in supernatural beings, ritual acts focused on sacred objects,
a total worldview explaining the nature of reality and how to orient ourselves toward
it, an explanation for suffering in evil, a means of liberation or salvation, ceremonies
involving music and dance, a set of authoritative scriptures and specialists who interpret them,
and so on.
One makes a big list of such features, and if most of them are present in a particular
community or tradition, one could call it religious.
Unlike the substantive approach, there is not one single feature that all religions must
possess, and this is why this family resemblance metaphor is used.
If one lines up five members of the same family, it might be the case that four of them share
the same nose, a different four of the same cheekbones, three of them the same hair color,
and so on.
But there may not be one feature that all five share, but there's a set of common features
found among them.
So this is how such an approach would deal with the question of Zen Buddhism.
It might not have a belief in God, but it has most of the other elements which is sufficient
to merit the label religion.
There are other issues that arise when we try to define religion.
Some scholars see religion as more of an individual phenomenon, whereas others see it as more
social.
For psychologist William James, religion is about the relation between individual men
in their solitude and the divine, whereas anthropologist Emil Durkheim focuses on how
religious beliefs and practices unite into one single moral community, all those who
adhere to them.
Notice how their definitions are shaped by their disciplines.
Further complicating the matter is the debate over what is called reductionism in religious
studies.
A reductionistic definition uses terms to explain one phenomenon, such as religion,
entirely in terms of other phenomena, such as biology or psychology.
The essence of reductionism is saying that religion is nothing but a psychological coping
mechanism or nothing but a genetic disposition.
This raises an important question.
Must a definition do justice to the self-understanding of religious believers?
Think about another word that captures an important aspect of human experience, love.
What if someone were to say, love is nothing more than the effect of pheromones, it's
completely biological.
Well we don't have to deny that there is a biological element in our experience of love,
but we might want to argue with the claim that it's nothing more than that.
There are aspects of being in love that just can't be captured by biology.
Someone could say that to understand love, one needs the scientist and the poet.
Might a rich complex understanding of religion need not only the psychologist and biologist,
but also the theologian and the philosopher, not to mention the anthropologist, the historian
and many others.
For me, religion, like love, is too complex and multi-liar to be reducible to any one
explanation.
We can see how difficult it is to come up with a single definition of religion.
In this lecture series, I'll take a family resemblance approach that will focus on those
traditions that have most of the features we normally associate with religion.
These are the traditions that have collectively shaped the lives of the vast majority of
the world's population for the last 2,500 years, Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism,
Taoism, Shinto, Shamanism, Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
Along the way, we'll also study the traditions of smaller groups of people that have also
had a major impact, the Jain, Sikh and Baha'i traditions, among others.
As we look at each tradition individually, as well as the relationship among them and
also engage in comparative reflection along the way, we'll encounter another important
question.
What is the nature of a tradition?
Given the remarkable diversity that we'll encounter within each religious tradition,
what features provide coherence to a religious tradition?
Within the wide range of religious expressions within each tradition, we can begin to see
those elements that are shared among most or all members of that tradition.
And that is one of our projects in this series, to find those elements that give integrity
and coherence to a tradition, while honoring the diverse expressions.
We can begin by understanding that traditions are not about shared agreements.
In fact, it makes more sense to think of traditions as ongoing conversations, often debates and
arguments about things to which all members are committed.
Rather than think about agreements, think about those things that the members of the
traditions care about, what matters to them.
They might debate endlessly about how to interpret these things, but they're all orienting their
lives toward these things.
Take the tradition that you know best, and think about what ten things would be in the
set of commitments for your tradition, the ten things that you would explain as a way
of introducing your tradition to others.
For Christians, that group would include Jesus, the New Testament, the Trinity, Faith,
Sin, Salvation, Communion, and so on.
For Buddhists, it might include the Buddha, the Sutras, the Four Noble Truths, Karma,
Enlightenment, and so on.
Christians will disagree on who Jesus was and how we should live in light of his example,
and Buddhists will likewise disagree about Buddha.
But what provides the coherence to the tradition is that Christians will be debating about
Jesus and the New Testament, while Buddhists will be debating about Buddha and the Sutras,
so it's not about agreements, but commitments that make traditions.
As we encounter each tradition in this series, we'll enter into it through an exploration
of those things that matter most to its practitioners.
Since I began with a story, I'd like to end with a story, and this one comes from the
tradition of Zen Buddhism.
It's about a Zen master from the Meiji era, the late 19th, early 20th century in Japan,
who receives a university professor who has come to talk about Zen.
The Erudite professor sits down at the table for tea with the Zen master and begins pontificating
about the teachings of Zen.
The master begins pouring the tea, and keeps pouring until the cup is full, and then continues
pouring until the cup overflows, and the professor watching this exclaims, the cup's over full
and no more will go in.
Like this cup, the master said, you are full of your own opinions and speculations.
How can I show you Zen unless you first empty your cup?
This story is a good cautionary tale for all of us, especially me, as it's a professor
who's taught the lesson in that story.
We all bring our preconceived notions with us as we begin our study, and we must do our
best to empty our cup, to set these aside so that we can encounter our subject with
as open a mind as possible, what Zen teachers call beginner's mind.
Some of what you encounter might strike you as bizarre.
On the other hand, you might think you already know what there is to know about your own
tradition.
I hope that in the coming lectures I can make the strange, familiar, and the familiar strange.
I'll try to make new topics from unfamiliar traditions accessible so that you can attain
an appreciative understanding of them, while hopefully helping you to take a new look at
the traditions you know best so that undiscovered facets can emerge.
When you've gained these understandings over the course of the next 23 lectures, you'll
be able to achieve the imaginative insider's perspective of the world's religions that
is so valuable.
With this perspective, you'll better understand the world, your country, your neighbors, and
yourself.
I'm glad that you're going to join me as we learn about and reflect on one of the most
important and fascinating subjects in the world.
