I read polls about religious belief with great interest, and in many of these polls,
the following question is asked.
Do you believe in God?
Most of the time, the responses are broken down into yes, no, or don't know.
It often seems to me that the first thing one should do when asked by a pollster if
he or she believes in God is to ask the questioner, what do you mean by God?
If you tell me what you mean, I'll tell you whether I believe.
The reason for this is that there are so many conceptions of God that grouping all of the
yes answers into one category doesn't tell us much about what those people actually believe,
or what the people who answer no are actually denying.
There's a wide range of conceptions of God, and we need to explore some of the most commonly
held beliefs.
In almost every tradition we're going to study, we're going to encounter various supernatural
beings, God, gods, spirits, so on.
The category of divinity is one of the five key themes that we'll encounter in almost
every religious tradition, and the purpose of this lecture is to examine each of these
categories.
In addition to divinity, the other four categories are Scripture, Ritual, Good and Evil, and Soteriology,
or the Doctrine of Salvation or Liberation.
We'll gain some general knowledge about these important aspects of religion, which will
help prepare us for our study of the world's religions.
Why not begin our study of religious themes thinking about the biggest topic of all, God?
But before we even begin, we have a problem with language.
Perhaps it's not even a good idea to just use the word God to describe all the views
we'll discuss.
Is that word tends to invoke the God of the Bible or Quran, which might be misleading when
talking about the gods of non-monotheistic religions?
Some scholars use more general terms, such as divinity or ultimate reality, to refer
to the realm of being that is beyond the human and of supreme importance.
People who believe in some kind of God or gods are called theists after the word theos
from the Greek for God.
That's where we get the term theology, a discourse or understanding about God.
That word is related to the Latin deus, from which we get words like deity and divine.
Those who believe that there is no God are atheists, and agnostics are those who do not
know whether there is a God or not.
Agnostics believe that if we do not or cannot have knowledge about God's existence, the
only responsible position is, I don't know.
Some scholars have argued that simply asking people whether or not they believe in God
isn't sufficient to really capture the attitudes people have towards the existence of a deity.
For one thing, it does not tell us how they conceive of God, and second, it doesn't tell
us how confidently they hold the belief.
Richard Dawkins came up with a seven-point scale to determine people's beliefs with
more precision.
Try to locate where you are on this scale.
Category one, absolute certainty in the existence of God.
Two, high degree of confidence in the existence of God, but with some doubt.
Three, leaning toward belief in existence, but with less confidence.
Four, completely neutral.
There's an equal degree of probability that there is or is not a God.
Five, leaning toward rejection of the belief in God.
Six, high degree of confidence that God does not exist, but with some doubt.
Seven, absolute certainty in the non-existence of God.
Now, simply asking people the yes-no question, do you believe in God, it makes it seem like
there's only ones and sevens out there.
However, in the many years that I've been asking students to locate themselves on this
scale, I find that the majority fall in categories two through six.
Many people have at least some doubts, and after that, it's a matter of degree.
So rather than ask yourself whether or not you believe in God, ask yourself where on
the scale you would be.
When we turn to conceptions of God, we find a number of categories that determine the
nature of people's beliefs.
So first, the number of gods, and how many are there?
According to the latest statistics, over half of the world's population believes in
one God.
It's approximately 55%, it's a very rough estimate.
In other words, they are monotheists.
Monotheists believe in one supreme being, and emphasize the unity of that being, although
there are doctrines like the Trinity that believe in different persons or aspects within
the one God.
The reason for the high percentage of monotheists is the large number of Christians and Muslims,
who together make up about half the world's population, along with smaller numbers of
Jews, Sikhs, Baha'is, and other monotheists.
But at the same time, there are more religious traditions that are polytheistic, meaning
a belief in many gods, from Chinese folk religions and Shinto in East Asia, to numerous indigenous
traditions in Africa, Australia, and Central and South America.
Many religions of antiquity, including the classical Greek and Roman religions, as well
as the Celtic, were polytheistic.
There are many varieties of polytheism.
Normally the gods are organized into pantheons, although this may be done in different ways.
In some cases, each god occupies a different plane of existence, or has a different function
