When I was in New Delhi recently, I spent time in areas that shared many features with
any bustling metropolitan area in the United States.
Traffic jams, bustling shopping areas, internet cafes.
Many journalists have written about India as the next great economic superpower, a high
tech nation filled with engineers, call centers, and the largest movie industry on earth.
Where does Hinduism fit into all this?
Even in the most modern districts of New Delhi, the answer is, it's everywhere.
Pay attention and you'll see small shrines set up around the trees that line the avenues.
You'll notice people with marks on their foreheads indicating the God whom they worship.
Walk into the internet cafes and you'll often see an image of a deity surrounded by incense,
flowers, and food offerings.
Hinduism is woven into the lives of over 800 million people in India.
Hinduism is a good place to begin our study of the world's religions for a number of
reasons.
It's considered by some scholars to be the oldest living major religion in the world.
By some estimates, there are nearly a billion Hindus making it the world's third largest
religion after Christianity and Islam.
While most Hindus are found in South Asia, primarily in India and Nepal, where Hindus
make up at least 80% of the population, as well as Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, Hindus can
also be found in many other parts of the world, such as Bali, Guyana, England, Canada, and
the United States.
Hinduism is also one of the most aesthetically rich religious traditions, with visually stunning
depictions of deities and awe-inspiring temples.
An experience of Hindu ritual in a temple engages all the senses, the sights of the deity
representations, the smell of the incense, the sound of music and chanting, the taste
of the sweets that have been blessed.
If we want to use a metaphor to understand what a religious tradition is, we might be
tempted to use a tree.
There's a point where it emerges from the ground, the beginning of the tradition, which
corresponds to the life of the founder.
Then there's the very early history of the tradition, a shared trunk from which all else
grows, and over time there are divisions as the branches split off and then split again.
This image would work quite well for Christianity and Buddhism.
But the metaphor simply does not work for Hinduism.
There's no founder, no historical origin point.
To understand Hinduism, we need a different metaphor.
One that works better than the tree is a mighty river into which many tributaries flow.
In a country as vast as India, there's a tremendous amount of regional diversity.
The practices and languages of one area will differ dramatically from another.
Over time, the deities and rituals of different regions and villages often become absorbed
into the vast Hindu tradition.
The flow is actually two-way.
A local deity might be identified with, or associated through kinship or marriage with,
a major Hindu deity.
So the stories associated with that local deity might become part of the story of the
Hindu god.
In this way, the local tributary will make contributions to the larger Hindu river.
At the same time, the great Hindu river will extend its influence through the tributaries
to most parts of India, which means that over time, certain deities and practices will gain
widespread acceptance, and certain features of Hinduism will be shared by people from very
different parts of the country.
While this produces many common themes in Hinduism, there's still great diversity.
In fact, it would be hard to find a statement of belief that would be agreed upon by all
Hindus.
There's no centralized authority to enforce orthodoxy.
There's no universally accepted creed.
The very word Hindu itself did not originate with Indians trying to describe shared religious
beliefs.
Rather, it was used in various forms by outsiders, such as Persians, Greeks and Arabs, to refer
to the people who lived in a certain area, that beyond the Indus River.
In other words, it was originally a geographic term, not a religious one.
And the vast majority of people who describe themselves as Hindus today either live in South
Asia or trace their ancestry to that region.
This gives Hinduism a special connection with a particular part of the world and gives it
an element of ethnic identification.
At the same time, there's a universality to Hinduism.
Anybody who finds Hindu teachings compelling, engages in the study of the Hindu tradition,
practices the rituals and so forth, can become a Hindu.
So as we'll also see in the case of Judaism, Hinduism has elements that are both ethnic
and geographic on the one hand, and universal on the other.
During this lecture, and the following two lectures, I will tell the story of the evolution
of Hinduism, along the way introducing you to the most important texts, deities, concepts,
rituals, and practices that have shaped the tradition.
We start with the two great traditions that served as the foundations for Hinduism.
The Indus River Valley Civilization and the Vedic tradition.
The Indus River Valley Civilization was a sophisticated urban society that flourished
around 4,500 years ago.
It's difficult to know much about the religion and culture of the people there because their
language has never been deciphered, but here are a few things that we do know.
First, there were statues of female figures that may be goddesses, and there was an emphasis
on fertility.
Some of the female figures are pregnant.
In addition, the people produced carved seals, many of which featured animals.
On some seals, there were figures shown in yogic meditative poses.
And one significant seal shows a figure with horns or a horned headdress sitting in a
lotus-like posture.
Some scholars think that that might be a deity who prefigures the god who would become known
as Shiva.
Furthermore, we know that bathing was important to the Indus people, as great baths were a
central feature in the cities.
Scholars believe that bathing had an important ritual function, most likely involving purification.
So, it's possible that a number of important features of later Hinduism, the importance
of goddesses, the centrality of bathing and the use of water and rituals, many of the animals
so prominently featured in the Hindu pantheon and the human animal hybrids, and the significance
of yoga and meditation have their origins with the Indus River Valley civilization.
All known as Aryans migrated into India from the north around 2000 BCE.
But before we talk more about these people, I should mention that the word Aryan, along
with ancient Asian symbols like the sastika, were appropriated by the Nazis in the 20th
century, which often causes confusion to students of South Asian religions.
We have to ignore such associations when we study ancient Indian religion.
The word Aryan comes from the Sanskrit word Arya, meaning noble.
And this group, the Aryans, transformed the landscape of Indian religion.
The Aryans were a nomadic, pastoral people who raised cows, sheep, goats and horses,
used horse-drawn chariots in warfare and racing, and enjoyed gambling, music and wine.
They brought with them a number of things that would become important parts of later
Hindu religion.
First, their scriptures, known as the Vedas, and the language in which they were written,
a form of Sanskrit.
Second, a pantheon of gods.
Third, rituals officiated by priests called Brahmins.
And fourth, a social class system.
The period that saw the rise and flourishing of Aryan culture and the primacy of their
texts and rituals is known as the Vedic period.
And it lasts from approximately 1500 to 500 BCE.
The Vedic religion they practiced was the foundation out of which Hinduism arose.
Aryan society was divided into four social classes.
The top two consisted of Brahmins, or priests, who were the religious authority, and Kshatriyas,
the warriors and rulers who were the political and military authorities.
Then came the Vaishyas, the merchants, traders and farmers.
And the fourth and lowest class were the Shudras, or servants.
These four classes are known as varnas, and they form the basis of what will later become
the Hindu caste system.
The top three varnas are known as twice-born, which refers to the first or biological birth,
and then the second birth, which is a social-cultural birth, a coming of age, marked by the Upanayana
ritual, in which the boy, traditionally it was with boys, is given a sacred thread to
where it goes across the left shoulder and down to the waist.
This is still done today, although now in some forms of Hinduism it is allowed for all adolescent
boys regardless of varnas, even sometimes for girls.
Traditionally, only those who were twice-born can have access to the Vedic texts.
The Shudras were denied this.
They couldn't even study or hear the sacred Vedas.
Veda is a word that means knowledge or wisdom.
In fact, it's worth pointing out that Sanskrit belongs to this vast Indo-European language
family, which also contains English.
This means that there are going to be many connections between Sanskrit and English words,
and Veda is one example.
It's connected with English words, wisdom, wit, and video.
When we read the Vedas, we're entering into the world of some of the oldest existing texts
written in an Indo-European language.
The Vedas are considered by Hindus to be not of human origin.
Their texts reveal to sages in ancient times and pass down.
Orthodox Hindus accept the authority of the Vedas, even though very few Hindus can actually
read the texts in Sanskrit, and that would be somewhat akin to English speakers reading
texts in Latin.
While the earliest parts of the Vedas date back to approximately 1500 BCE, it's unlikely
that these texts were written down until around a thousand years later.
This is a remarkable fact to think about.
The texts were orally transmitted for centuries, and in the opinion of most scholars, these
were very accurate transmissions.
With our comparatively paltry memorization skills today, this achievement is difficult
to imagine.
Elaborate mnemonic devices were used to aid in memorization.
The boys who were taught the texts had to learn this method of chanting as well, so
teachers would use hand gestures and physically manipulate the boys' heads to help the lessons
sink in.
This practice still continues within some communities today.
The Vedas are divided into four sections that contain different types of texts, including
hymns, ritual texts, and spells.
The oldest is the Rig Veda, which contains 1028 hymns dedicated to a variety of deities.
The final portion of the Vedas is the Upanishads, texts that are highly philosophical and speculative.
In the Vedic hymns, we see an emphasis on rituals performed for the gods in the hopes
of gaining benefits in this world for this life.
There's not a significant otherworldly aspect to the early Vedic hymns.
The people of the Vedas wanted long life, health, victory in battle, and blessings such
as suns, cattle, and wealth.
Many of the deities in the Vedas are nature deities such as heaven and earth, the wind,
the waters, and Surya, the sun, which is still worshipped by many Hindus today, such as those
who gather on the banks of the Ganges River at sunrise to greet the sun.
Many yoga practitioners know the set of poses known as the sun salutation.
It's interesting to note that when nature deities are portrayed in the Vedas, they're
not usually treated as human-like gods.
Rather than think of a god of the sun, a human-like being with control over the sun,
the Vedic hymns speak of worship of the sun directly.
In other words, nature itself is seen as divine.
Of the many gods in the Vedas, there are three that are most important, Agni, Soma, and Indra.
Agni is fire.
Fire is a central component of Vedic ritual, and the rituals are characterized by offerings
placed in sacred fires.
Householders from the Vedic period up through the modern times have been expected to keep
sacred fires going in their homes, and the offering of fire in light to deities is still
an important part of Hindu rituals today.
In addition, fire is seen as a messenger that brings our offerings to the gods.
After all, when we put something in the fire, the fire carries it up to the heavens.
The second of the three main gods is Soma.
Soma is a consciousness-expanding beverage made from a plant or mushroom that was consumed
during rituals.
It is, we might say, a psychoactive sacrament that enabled the ones who partakes it to have
a powerful experience of the divine, to travel to the realm of the gods, to experience what
the text calls supreme ecstasy.
An offering of Soma was a central feature of some Vedic rituals, and the preparation
of Soma is itself celebrated in the Vedas.
The final Vedic deity we will discuss is Indra, who is a human-like god.
Indra is a warrior god and a king, a deity who battled and defeated the serpent demon
and released the waters, making the land fertile.
He is considered the god of thunder and rain and a courageous fighter.
Two final Vedic themes are worth mentioning.
The first is that there is a cosmic order that must be upheld.
Each thing finds its place within that order.
Ritual sustains that order, and threats to that order must be addressed.
The idea of doing one's duty, finding one's place within the cosmic and social order, is
a fundamental idea in Hinduism.
The second theme involves Vedic accounts of the creation of the world.
According to the Rig Veda, the world began with the sacrifice of a cosmic primordial
being named Purusha.
The hymn says that, the moon was born from the mind, from the eye the sun was born, from
the breath the wind was born, from the head the heaven issued forth.
This image implies a cosmos in which everything is really part of one body.
All parts are interconnected.
The entire universe is seen as a single, vast organism.
Having this vision is an account of the origins of the social hierarchy, the class system.
It said, Purusha's mouth became the Brahmin.
His two arms were made into the rulers, the kshatriya.
His two thighs, the farmers and merchants, the Vaishyas, and from his two feet, the servants,
or shudras, were born.
Thus, the Vedas give a divine origin to the four social classes, the varnas.
We can see how this can be used to oppose efforts to change the class structure, as the Vedic
account portrays a social order that is built into the very fabric of the cosmos.
As I have mentioned, the Vedic texts were used in a ritual context.
The Vedic rituals were often spectacles that involved the construction of a great altar.
The rituals which were officiated by Brahmin priests involved the chanting of Vedic passages
and the offering of sacred elements into the fire.
These grand rituals were largely replaced over time with the temple and home rituals
known as pujas, which we will discuss in the next lecture.
This brings us to a moment of great transformation in Indian religion.
Around the sixth century before the common era, an increasing number of religious seekers
were leaving the Vedic fold and striking out on new paths.
There were wandering renunciates, forest ascetics, and founders of new religious movements.
Vedic texts were still being written, but they departed in many ways from the early
hymns.
The part of the Vedas that had the greatest impact on Indian philosophy, and in fact were
to influence later philosophical movements in the West, are the Upanishads.
Whereas the early Vedic hymns focused on maximizing welfare in this life, the Upanishads have
a very different perspective.
Attachment to the things of this world produces suffering.
Along with this attitude was a particular belief about life and death.
As long as people are bound by attachment to this world, they will continue to be reborn
indefinitely.
The cycle of birth, death, and rebirth is known as samsara.
A belief in rebirth would be widespread in India from this period onward.
Many people learning about rebirth in South Asian religions believe that if rebirth were
true, that would be great news.
After all, wouldn't it be nice to believe that a death were not annihilated, but rather
come back again and again to experience new lives?
For the Indian traditions of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism, rebirth is bad news.
If life is characterized by suffering, by aging, sickness, and death, who would want
to go through the whole thing over and over again?
Just when you think you've escaped, you get pulled back in.
The ultimate goal then is to achieve the liberation that would free you from the cycle.
A crucial question that will be addressed in all the Indian traditions is, what gets
reborn?
In the Upanishads and in much of later Hinduism, there is the notion of an eternal, unchanging
soul called atman.
While the material part of the body returned to earth upon death, the soul is reborn repeatedly
until liberation.
The Bhagavad Gita, an important Hindu text, states,
Just as man discards worn out clothes and puts on new clothes, the soul discards worn
out bodies and wears new ones.
For Hinduism, the concept that explains the mechanics of the rebirth process is karma.
The word karma itself means action, and it refers to the inexorable law of cause and
effect that explains how every action, in a sense, plants a seed that will come to fruition
in some way later in this life or in a future life.
Who we are today is the product of our previous actions, and our current actions will shape
who we are in the future.
So the soul is reborn in accordance with its karma.
I want to emphasize karma is not a fatalistic concept.
Your karma may have shaped who you are today, but you have freedom to choose what to do
with these circumstances and thus shape your future karma.
So what is the atman?
If you Panishads tell us that if we understand our true identity as atman, we would be liberated
from suffering.
So what is the true Supreme Self beyond samsara, beyond all suffering?
While Hindu thinkers will talk about the atman in a variety of different ways, one way to
describe the nature of atman is pure consciousness, pure subjectivity, awareness itself.
This is a challenging concept, but we can think of it this way.
When you think of being conscious, you normally think of being conscious of something, conscious
of something you see, or taste, or hear.
If your atman is pure subject, then it cannot be an object.
So anything that can be an object of your consciousness cannot be it.
Since you can be conscious of your body, it can't be your body, and you can also be conscious
of your thoughts, your emotions, your sensations.
Thus none of these is your true self, the pure subject.
Take away everything that can be an object of consciousness, and what is left?
Consciousness itself.
The Upanishads teach that this is your true identity, and that this is changeless, deathless,
eternal.
Within the association of attachment to the world with suffering, and the understanding
of the true self is that which is not bound up in the world, many religious seekers in
India began to renounce their ordinary lives.
Renouncers would leave home and become wandering ascetics or forest dwellers, seeking liberation
away from society and its fetters.
We can now see one of the most fundamental tensions within Hinduism.
The importance of preserving cosmic and social order by finding one's place within it, and
the quest to find liberation from the world through renunciation, asceticism, and non-attachment.
Some of the most powerful ideas in Hinduism have come from attempts to reconcile this
tension, and we'll see one of the highest expressions of this attempt in the Bhagavad
Gita, the subject of an upcoming lecture.
For now, we'll examine two systems within Hinduism that allow a place for seemingly
conflicting ideals and goals.
The first is the four ends, or four goals, of humanity.
Hinduism recognizes that there are a number of goals toward which people aim, and it affirms
many of these as worthy of pursuit.
The first of these is the vitally important concept of dharma, which connotes the meaning
of duty or obligation.
As we saw in the Vedas, there's a sense of the cosmic and social orders in which we must
find our proper place.
Our dharma is what tells us that place.
The second end is the realm of material gain, wealth and power, artha.
The artha shastra, one of the most important texts for understanding this goal, contains
numerous passages on political and economic thought, particularly the duties of a king
and the administration of the state.
The third end is pleasure, kamma, and I'm sure that I don't need to convince you of
the attraction of this goal.
Hinduism preserves a place for the realm of pleasure of all kinds, sexual of course,
but also many areas of aesthetic pleasure, music, poetry, art, dance, and food.
The most well-known text in this area is the kamma sutra, which is written around the 3rd
to 5th century of the common era, in which it's said that the cultured person was expected
to learn 64 arts and sciences, ranging from singing, dancing, and flower arranging, to
cooking, calligraphy, and archery.
The delights described in the kamma sutra are far broader than merely sexual.
The text covers a vast range of sensual and aesthetic pleasures, and there are wonderfully
detailed descriptions of the cultured person's daily schedule, applying fragrant pastes and
breath fresheners in the morning, playing with birds, taking an afternoon nap, making
social calls, and enjoying music and dance.
At the end of the day, one meets his beloved and engages in the activities most famously
described by the kamma sutra.
Finally, there's the fourth goal, that of moksha, liberation from the samsaric cycle
of birth, death, and rebirth.
This will be the focus of our final lecture on Hinduism.
But we're now going to focus on the foundational concept of dharma.
In its most expansive sense, dharma connotes right conduct, it has elements of law and
morality.
In fact, Hindus call their tradition sanatana dharma, the eternal dharma.
Hindu texts speak of dharma as having ultimate importance.
One says, dharma is the foundation of the whole universe.
Upon dharma, everything is founded, therefore dharma is called the highest good.
While there are many factors that go into establishing one's dharma, two are of greatest
importance.
One's social class, or varnah, and the stage of life that one is in, one's ashrama.
As Hinduism developed, the four varnas of the early Vedas were divided and subdivided
into thousands of castes and sub-castes, known as jati.
One's caste is determined by birth, and people of a given caste are expected to marry within
that caste.
Cast is connected not only with birth and marriage, but also with occupation.
The caste hierarchy, which is often linked with economic and political hierarchies, is
also connected with notions of purity and pollution.
The most polluting jobs, dealing with dead bodies, cleaning streets and bathrooms, handling
garbage and so on, are relegated to those who are considered outside of the caste system,
or outcasts.
Only known as untouchables because their very touch is considered polluting.
They're known as dalits, or the oppressed, and some, such as Gandhi, who aim to eliminate
the concept of untouchability, call them harijans, or children of God.
While the modern Indian constitution formally outlawed untouchability, it still exists in
many ways.
Dalits are often prevented from worshipping in certain temples, or drawing water from
certain wells.
Nevertheless, some gains have been made by Dalits, in part because of affirmative action
type programs that set aside certain slots in educational, political, or corporate institutions
for them.
A Dalit has served as President of India.
It's a more ceremonial post than Prime Minister, but that's significant nonetheless.
And a Dalit has served as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
While much of one's dharma is determined by caste, another key element is the stage of
life that one is in.
The tradition recognizes that people will aim for different goals during different periods
of their life, and the texts establish an ideal narrative for a human life.
The first stage is that of the student.
So in this stage, young people dedicate themselves to learning, and among the things they learn
are their religious obligations.
The stage normally lasts from around age 8 to age 20.
The next stage is the householder stage, and this is the time of life to get married.
Through a properly arranged marriage, a practice still found throughout much of India today.
It's where you raise children, get a job, and earn money.
The householders consider the backbone of society, for even the religious communities
depend upon the financial support of wage earners to survive.
The next stage, that of the forest-dweller, hermit, or more familiar to us, the retiree,
generally occurs when a person has grandchildren and is ready to begin to withdraw from the
life of working and raising a family.
This withdrawal is symbolized by the extinguishing of the household fire that's been kept throughout
the other stages.
The fourth and final phase is that of the renunciate, the most committed of whom live
out their remaining days as wandering mendicants, celibate beggars focusing on overcoming all
attachments to the world and following spiritual pursuits.
In a sense, this is the polar opposite of the final stage of the American life cycle.
In America, the latter part of life is supposed to be a time to enjoy the wealth one's accumulated,
to live a comfortable life and focus on one's children and grandchildren.
In the traditional Hindu system, the emphasis is on withdrawal, giving up possessions and
ties to the world, and ultimately to family.
The goal is to live the final stage of one's life, not attached to any particular people,
objects, or places.
It's difficult to attain moksha, liberation, if one remains bound to the things of this
world.
In addition, we can see the final stage is a preparation for death, which requires a
complete letting go.
We're beginning to see a common theme in the study of Hinduism.
Rather than approach life as a series of either or choices, Hinduism finds a way for
both and.
It has a generally inclusive and pluralistic approach in much of its religious orientation.
We will see this in the next lecture, when we look at the fascinating and diverse pantheon
of Hindu gods.
