When most of us think of religion, we think of a god or gods, a divinely revealed text
in the concept of an eternal soul.
Buddhism explicitly rejects these elements.
And for this reason, Buddhism challenges our very notion of what a religion is.
Learning about Buddhism, therefore, expands our understanding of religion and the forms
it can take.
It's also interesting to note that more and more Americans are becoming Buddhist,
in many cases taking on a Buddhist practice in addition to the religion of their birth,
producing such new religious identities as Zen Christian and Buddhist Jew.
What is it about Buddhism that's enabled it to transform the lives of countless millions
of Asians from nations such as China, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Bhutan, and also enabled
it to attract so many Jews and Christians who often find it compatible with their monotheistic
faiths?
Among the many features of Buddhism that have attracted people is one that we'll focus
on in this lecture.
Buddhism claims to offer something that all of us dearly want, a way out of suffering.
Buddhism is a tradition of tremendous diversity in many forms.
When looking at the wide range of forms a tradition can take, we can ask, what elements
unify a tradition?
What common features are shared among the many strands of Buddhism?
One element that is shared by all Buddhists is a connection with the historical Buddha,
born Siddhartha Gautama, sometime in the 6th or 5th century BCE.
This is a story of great significance for all Buddhists, although they might differ on
how to interpret it and apply it to their own lives.
The major themes of the story illustrate the central characteristics of Buddhism, so the
story of the Buddha is a good place to start.
There's no way of telling how historically accurate the story is.
The earliest full biography dates from over 500 years after the Buddha's death.
In addition, there are multiple versions of the story and many well-known accounts of
the story, such as the one I'll give here, drawn multiple sources.
But we need not be concerned with historical accuracy here.
What matters most is the meaning that this life story has had for millions of Buddhists
throughout history.
The story has been an inspiration to Buddhists and a source of teaching that illustrates many
of the most important Buddhist doctrines and practices.
So in this lecture, I'll focus on telling the story, and through the telling of the
narrative of the Buddha's life, introduce the central doctrines, practices, and values
of the Buddhist tradition.
Because the Buddha's teachings were passed on orally for centuries before they were
written down, they often featured numbered lists, such as the Four Noble Truths and
the Eightfold Path to help in the process of memorization.
We'll learn about a few of these in this lecture.
Before beginning a story, one has to figure out where the beginning actually is.
We might begin with Siddhartha's birth, but in a culture that believes in rebirth, we'd
have to ask, which birth?
The man who would become the Buddha, like all of us according to widespread Indian belief,
had lived countless lives before his birth as Prince Siddhartha.
In many of these stories, known as Jataka Tales, he is an animal who illustrates an important
Buddhist virtue and thus accumulates the merit, or good karma, necessary to achieve the rebirths
that would lead to his precious human life, one that would bring to the world an enlightened
being.
These stories, which are read to children in Buddhist countries, often feature the Buddha
as an animal such as a deer, a rabbit, or a monkey, and they emphasize virtues like compassion,
selflessness, and patience.
From this we can see there's a deep connection between humans and other animals in Buddhism,
since our lives move back and forth across species' lines.
It's easy to see why some forms of Buddhism require a vegetarian diet.
Eventually, this chain of connected lives leads to a prince born to a ruler of a small
kingdom near the border of Nepal and India in the foothills of the Himalayas.
He's born into the Shakya clan, which is why he is sometimes called Shakya Muni, or
the sage of the Shakya clan.
The place of his birth, Lumbini in modern day Nepal, is a pilgrimage site for Buddhists,
the first of four that constitute the locations of the most significant events in his life
narrative.
There are many remarkable stories associated with his birth, which is true of important
religious figures of many traditions.
One is that his mother, Queen Maya, experienced in a dream or vision, an auspicious white
elephant touching or entering her side, in a sense blessing her and foretelling a significant
event.
The baby is born from her side, after which he takes seven steps, an impressive skill
for a newborn, and then speaks, more impressive still, he announces, this is my last birth.
I shall dispel the suffering that fills the world.
Queen Maya died shortly after Siddhartha's birth, and he was brought up by his mother's
younger sister.
A sage made a prediction about Siddhartha's future, but it was one with two possible paths.
He would either grow up to be a powerful ruler like his father, or he would become a great
spiritual leader.
His father, as is often the case in stories such as these, wants his son to go into the
family business.
He wants to keep his son so satisfied with the pleasures of palace life that he never
want to leave.
Siddhartha would therefore grow up surrounded by beauty and youth, playing games, enjoying
music, marrying and eventually having a son, and experiencing the happily ever after that
might conclude other stories the kind of life most of us would take in a minute.
But in Buddhism, this is the life that will be rejected in order that the truth about
our existence can be seen, and the answer to life's fundamental problem can be found.
The 29-year-old prince eventually persuades his father to let him see the parts of the
kingdom outside of the palace walls.
Despite his father's efforts to ensure a pleasant, uneventful journey, Siddhartha has four encounters
that will change his life, and the lives of hundreds of millions of people since that
time.
He first encounters an old person, and Siddhartha wonders where people who looked like that
come from.
He said,
O charioteer, who is this man with gray hair, supported by a staff in his hand, his limbs
feeble and bent, is this transformation a natural state or an accident?
His charioteer explains to him that all human beings who live long enough will become as
that person.
Siddhartha then encounters a sick person, and then a corpse, and is told that sickness
and death await all human beings, even princes.
We might find it difficult to believe that someone can live almost three decades and
not be aware of aging sickness and death, but the story can point us toward an important
truth.
Young people, despite having the knowledge that people age and die, don't really understand
this in terms of their own lives.
We could spend years turning away from aging and death, but sooner or later, events will
bring us face to face with the reality of impermanence.
The three encounters that Siddhartha has thus far had in the story represent these moments
of realization when we confront our mortality.
In light of this knowledge, Siddhartha could no longer distract himself with the diversions
of temporary pleasures because he now knew what awaited him, and the problem wasn't
just aging and death one time, but endlessly as we die and are then reborn, die and reborn
again, kicking and screaming the whole way.
The fuel that keeps us cycling through the system and determines what kind of rebirths
we'll have is karma, the law of cause and effect, whereby every action plants a seed
that will come to fruition in some way later in this life or in a subsequent life.
The cycle of birth and death, known as samsara, is characterized by suffering, and is something
that many religious seekers of the time sought to liberate themselves from.
This quest for liberation is illustrated by the fourth encounter Siddhartha has.
He sees a wandering renunciate, someone who, in the words of the ancient texts, had renounced
the world for the sake of deliverance.
And this showed Siddhartha that there's another path.
There are people pursuing liberation from the cycles of samsara.
Siddhartha decides to leave the palace, a decision known as the Great Renunciation, a
pivotal moment in the narrative.
As he left the palace, he cut off his hair, got rid of his princely clothes, and went to
the forest where other renunciates and masters pursued liberation.
From this moment, Siddhartha's quest was to find liberation from the cycle of suffering.
He would find it, but not before he took two wrong but instructive turns.
The first involved learning deep transforms of meditation, becoming completely absorbed
in concentration allows one to escape the suffering of the world for a time being.
But as Siddhartha discovered, these states are temporary, and one comes out to face the
world again, he needed to find a way to free himself from suffering in the midst of the
activities of the world.
The second path was one of severe asceticism, and this was the attempt to conquer suffering
by willing oneself to endure austerities facing increasing deprivation and self-denial.
Siddhartha virtually stopped eating, becoming emaciated in the process, but he discovered
that this path too did not give him the answers he sought.
He found that the path to liberation lay in the middle way, the path between hedonism
and self-indulgence on the one hand, and severe asceticism and deprivation on the other.
There's a story that illustrates this.
It's said that Siddhartha overheard a music teacher teaching a student about tuning one's
instrument, in this case a stringed instrument like a lute.
The teacher said, if you turn the string too tightly, the string will break.
If you leave it too loose, it will not play.
The right way is in the middle.
He ended his ascetic period by taking food from a village girl.
He would need strength in order to complete his quest.
Siddhartha eventually made his final stand, or we should say sit, by sitting in front
of a tree, which will become known as the Bodhi Tree, the Tree of Awakening, and refusing
to move until he had gained liberation.
In a story that evokes elements of the life of Jesus, he has to face temptation.
He's challenged by Mara, a figure associated with worldly life, attachments and desires
and ego.
Mara brings an army and tries to move Siddhartha from his spot by frightening him away.
With a calm resolve, Siddhartha holds his ground.
So when fear doesn't work, Mara's daughters use their seductive powers to try to lure
Siddhartha away with lust.
This too fails.
Finally, Mara thunders that he could bring up legions that can testify to his right to
be on that spot.
Who will support Siddhartha?
Who will speak on his behalf?
Siddhartha touches the fingers of his right hand to the earth, and the earth trembles and
roars in support of him.
Mara is vanquished.
This moment is represented by images of Siddhartha in a meditative posture, the lotus posture,
with the left hand resting in his lap and the right hand touching the earth.
This is known as the earth witness gesture, or mudra.
After overcoming this trial, Siddhartha begins to enter deeper and deeper states of meditation,
developing insights along the way.
He sees his previous rebirths and how he, and ultimately everybody else, is pulled through
the cycles of samsara by creating karma which can be traced to the three poisons, ignorance
or delusion, desire or greed, and aversion or hatred.
He then saw the way out, the gate through which he could enter into a new way of being
in the world, a way free from suffering.
He was transformed.
There are different ways to talk about his attainment, which like all religious states
within any tradition, must inevitably be discussed in terms of metaphor.
Three of these are the most common.
Number one, he was enlightened.
This points to the fact that he now saw the world in the right way, the truth was illuminated.
He was aware.
Second, he woke up.
He was later asked what had become of him.
If he had become some sort of God, he replied simply, I am awake.
This is the meaning of the word buddha, the awakened one.
He woke up from a life of delusion and suffering to a way of truly seeing reality for the first
time, a way that brings freedom.
And third, he attained nirvana.
Which can be said about this term, its root indicates the meaning of extinguishing or
putting out.
And buddhism often talks about two types of nirvana, that which can be experienced in
this life, what the buddha experienced upon waking up, and that which occurs at death
called parinirvana, when one exits the cycle of samsara.
The nirvana experienced in life indicates a way of being free from the suffering caused
by grasping, a life in which the fires of ignorance, greed, and hatred have been extinguished.
The sight of his awakening becomes the second major pilgrimage site in buddhism.
Bodhgaya, in the Indian state of Bihar, is visited by millions of Buddhists a year who
come to the Mahabodhi temple which was built to commemorate this event.
Pilgrims to this site can sit in the presence of a tree that is said to have been grown
from a sapling of the original tree under which Siddhartha became the buddha.
Well at this point in the story, the buddha has awakened, and this brings us to the essential
question.
What did he wake up to?
What was it that the buddha was now able to see, understand, and attain that led to the
end of suffering, to wisdom and compassion?
And here we come to the traditional formulation of the most fundamental teaching of buddhism,
the Four Noble Truths.
The first noble truth is that life is dukkha.
Now I left that final term in its original language of Pali because translations can
be misleading.
One common translation is life is suffering.
This can make buddhism sound very negative, as if every experience in life is bad.
We know this is not true.
I mean Siddhartha, having lived in luxury, clearly knew this wasn't true.
So one way to understand the first noble truth is as follows.
Life, as we ordinarily live it, is unsatisfactory.
We never have everything we want.
If you doubt this is true, imagine a situation where you're walking along a beach and you
come upon a strange looking ancient lamp.
Unable to resist the urge to rub it, you're quite amazed when a genie actually emerges.
So here's the test case.
If you were truly offered any three wishes, could you ever imagine answering, no thanks,
I'm fine.
I mean there's always something we wish were different and we are therefore perpetually
discontent.
Everything we have, we can lose.
So our sense of happiness is always accompanied by an undercurrent of anxiety that anything
can change at any moment.
So in addition to the consciously experienced physical and mental suffering of life, there's
also the continuously present subtle suffering that permeates our life.
Talking about dukkha can be a real downer.
When I teach Buddhism to undergraduates, I avoid ending a class meeting with the discussion
of the first noble truth without mentioning the good news.
This state is not inevitable.
It has a cause that can be addressed as its origin is in something that we do.
This brings us to the second noble truth.
Dukkha is caused by our grasping, our craving.
This understanding of the fundamental human problem is not the kind of metaphysical formulation
that might be seen in concepts like original sin or the existence of radical evil, some
negative force out there.
The problem is psychological.
It's our minds that make us suffer.
Some have said that Buddhism can be seen as not only a religion, but at this level
as a psychology.
To see why grasping is such a problem, we have to keep in mind the Buddhist view of
the world.
Everything is impermanent.
This is a rare view for religions.
Most traditions are anchored in something permanent, something eternal.
But in Buddhism, everything is understood to be continuously changing moment by moment.
Some things that look solid are flowing, just at a speed too slow for us to process.
Think of time-lapse photography when we can see a flower growing, blooming and dying in
a few seconds.
If given enough time, we would see mountains shift, grow and shrink.
Cities would arise out of deserts and then decay and fade away.
When we grasp at a world like this, we can never be satisfied because we take the world
to be solid and we try to hold on to it when in fact it's fluid.
As withholding water, the tighter you grasp, the more it slips through your fingers.
And of all the things in the world, what we grasp at most is our self.
And this brings us to perhaps the most radical teaching in Buddhism, the one most difficult
for so many Westerners to accept, the no soul or no self doctrine.
Buddhism denies a permanent, unchanging self.
This is simply a logical corollary of the Buddhist view of the impermanent nature of
things.
We are continuously in flux.
Every aspect of ourselves is changing, physically, mentally, emotionally.
We think we're a separate being, a subject living in a world of objects.
But the Buddha taught that if we really pay attention, we see that there's nothing unchanging
about us and nothing completely separate from the world around us.
The stable self and the sense of separateness are illusions created by the mind.
Buddhism does not eliminate the permanent self, it exposes it as a fiction.
And if this illusion that causes so much of our suffering, we now have learned the Buddhist
teaching of the three marks of existence, or dharma seals.
They're the three characteristics of all reality, impermanence, no self, and of course
dukkha, unsatisfactoriness.
And now, finally, the good news.
Since we now know the cause of the unsatisfactory nature of life, the cause of our suffering,
we know it can end.
The third noble truth is that freedom from suffering is possible.
Dukkha can stop.
This is the truth of cessation.
This noble truth really gets your attention, which brings us to the fourth noble truth,
the way out of dukkha, the noble eightfold path.
The eight aspects of the path are often grouped into three categories.
The first category focuses on the importance of seeing the world in the right way.
This involves two steps on the path, right view, meaning understanding the truths of
impermanence and no self, for instance, and right intention, not just understanding them
intellectually but applying them to your life.
The next three steps are all in the category of ethics.
The path to liberation requires a commitment to ethics, keeping in mind that immoral acts
come from a deluded mind.
The three are right action, right speech, and right livelihood.
And the final three steps are in the category of meditation.
One is right effort, which must actually be applied in all parts of the path.
One is right concentration, the ability to focus and calm the mind, to gain control of
our stubborn, unruly thoughts and emotions.
The remaining one is a distinctively Buddhist contribution to Indian religion and to the
world, the Pasana meditation, meditation aimed at insight through mindfulness.
This form of meditation differs in important ways from the absorption meditations the Buddha
had mastered in the forests.
The Pasana meditation does not shut out the world, but rather seeks to see clearly the
true nature of ourselves and the world.
He's paying attention, seeing things clearly that liberates us from the self-imposed suffering
created by our own minds.
This practice is addressed by the Buddha in the Satipatanasutra, the Foundations of Mindfulness.
He begins by saying, this is the only way for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation
for the attainment of nirvana, namely the Foundations of Mindfulness.
The first foundation is mindfulness of the body, which begins with awareness of the breath.
Describing the meditator the Buddha says, ever mindful he breathes in, ever mindful he
breathes out.
Mindfulness meditation usually begins with the breath and is then applied to all other
aspects of the body and mind.
Mindfulness meditation, you observe all phenomena as they arise, thoughts, emotions, body sensations,
without getting caught up in them, identifying with them, or pushing them away.
Meditator does not judge, but rather simply observes.
In this state, we no longer identify with our thoughts, we no longer get carried away
and controlled by our emotions, because we're able to observe them from a place of equanimity,
a settled posture, and centered awareness.
The Buddha's powerful insight, fairly simple to state, but requiring great effort to put
into practice, is that observation itself diminishes the power of the thoughts, emotions,
and desires that are being observed.
Awareness is the key to breaking the cycle of suffering.
Awareness brings insight and dissolves the poisons.
Many people look at the Four Noble Truths as a form of spiritual, psychological therapy.
You can almost see a medical approach to the problem of human suffering.
The First Noble Truth is the diagnosis of our condition.
Although our specific symptoms might differ in kind and intensity, we're all suffering
from dukkha.
The Second Noble Truth is the origin of this disease, what doctors call the etiology.
Our dukkha is caused by grasping.
The Third Noble Truth is the good news that our condition is treatable, there's hope,
and the Fourth Noble Truth is the prescription, the Eightfold Path.
Since the problem can be seen as psychological, our mind creates our suffering, and the practice
that addresses the problem is observational and empirical, the approach has been seen
as rational and in accord with scientific worldviews in the West today.
This is one reason that Buddhist mindfulness meditation has been incorporated into psychotherapy
by many therapists from a variety of schools.
Meditations include mindfulness-based stress reduction programs and what's called dialectical
behavior therapy, which combines cognitive behavioral therapy with mindfulness meditation.
The largely non-supernatural, empirical approach of this form of Buddhism is one reason why
Jews and Christians find it largely compatible with their religion of birth.
Practitioners of meditation are not required to accept any particular supernatural claims
about the world.
They're simply asked to observe their minds and bodies, to follow their breath, and to
pay attention.
Now we can return to our story.
When we last left Siddhartha, now the Buddha, he had understood the nature of reality and
liberated himself from suffering.
Now he could simply enjoy a life free of discontent and mental anguish.
But he had a major decision to make.
Could he teach this to others?
Could people, or normally so consumed with self-centeredness and greed, understand this
teaching and put it into practice?
Here it is said that one of the gods told him that some human beings would respond, and
the Buddha decided to teach.
And this is what he devoted the rest of his life to.
He walked around India for 45 years teaching the truths he had discovered, the body of
knowledge and practice known as the Dharma.
His first sermon, or sutra, set this process in motion, and is thus called, Setting in
Motion the Wheel of the Dharma, the content of which we've been discussing here, such
as the Four Noble Truths.
The wheel, with eight spokes for the eightfold path, is an important Buddha symbol.
The place where he taught his first sermon, at a deer park in Sarnath, is the third major
pilgrimage site, along with the places of his birth and enlightenment.
One would not exist if the Buddha had simply freed himself from suffering.
It was only because he transmitted the teaching so that it could be passed down for generations
that liberation remains possible for people today.
This first sermon marks the beginning of the Buddhist community, the Sangha, as he gained
disciples who would learn the teaching, commit it to memory, orally transmit it, eventually
write it down, and constitute the first monastic communities.
So we've now been introduced to what Buddhists know as the Three Jewels.
The Buddha, the Dharma, his teaching, and the Sangha, the community of Buddhist practitioners.
When people become Buddhists or join a monastery, they recite the refuge formula, whereby they
take refuge in these three jewels.
We're now coming to the end of the biographical narrative.
The story of Buddhism, of course, will continue.
At the age of 81, the Buddha died.
The teacher of impermanence could not, of course, escape impermanence.
Buddhist teacher Ajahn Chah said, you should understand that even the Buddha himself, with
his great store of accumulated virtue, could not avoid physical death.
The site of his death in Kushinagar is the fourth main pilgrimage site.
His ashes were divided up and buried in mounds known as stupas, which became a major architectural
form in Buddhism that developed a wide variety of styles throughout the Buddhist world.
I will conclude this lecture by reflecting on the words that the Buddha spoke at the
end of his life.
The last words of major religious figures often teach centrally important lessons.
The Buddha told his followers, you must be your own lamps, your own refuges.
Take refuge in nothing outside yourselves.
All individual things must pass away.
Strive onward vigilantly.
These words underscore the fact that the Buddha did not teach the need for any kind of supernatural
grace or intermediaries.
The emphasis here is on the individual quest, on a person's effort to see the truth and
attain liberation for him or herself.
The Buddha taught that our mental suffering is self-created.
The discontent we experience is created by our clinging, which can be ended by waking
up to the right perspective, living a moral life, and practicing meditation.
This lecture centered on the story of a man who woke up, and our remaining discussions
of Buddhism will look at the way that his teaching and the many forms of Buddhism it
gave rise to, transformed all of Asia, and ultimately the world.
