It is said that every Japanese person lives within walking distance of a Shinto shrine.
These range from small, modest, unadorned shrines attended to by lay people who live
nearby to grand, elegant complexes with multiple buildings and full-time priests.
If you go to Japan, you may be lucky enough to encounter a Shinto festival which can range
from loud, colorful exuberant affairs with throngs of people in the street and deities
being transported in sedan chairs to more formal rituals tied to the agricultural calendar,
some of which involve the emperor himself.
Shinto is considered the oldest organized religious tradition to arise in Japan, but
to say that it was organized, or even a religious tradition in the conventional sense, might
be misleading.
Prior to the entry of Confucian and Buddhist influences into Japan in the 6th century CE,
Japanese religion was mostly a local affair, with decentralized, varied practices taking
place in villages and towns throughout the land.
In the 7th, 8th century, the two most important early Japanese texts, the Kojiki and the Nihon
Shoki, presented the founding myths of Shinto, and it is now a far more organized tradition.
However, many of the practices involving the deities, shrines, home altars, and purification
rituals that make up what's called Shinto, still occur in a non-organized local way.
One of the main elements in all forms of Shinto is the importance of the kami.
The word Shinto itself means the way of the kami.
Kami is often translated as god or spirit, and such beings are certainly an important
part of what the word kami refers to.
But Kami has a larger meaning as well.
There are many kinds of kami.
First, there are the mythological kami, the kamis who are discussed in the ancient myths,
and who are responsible for aspects of creation.
There are also kami associated with particular activities, qualities, or things.
Inari, for example, is the kami of fertility, rice, and agriculture, and she sometimes appears
as a fox.
She's one of the most popular kami, and since she's connected with productivity, companies
sometimes put a statue of Inari on a small shrine on the grounds of their headquarters.
So if you see a statue of a fox in Japan, you're probably looking at a representation of Inari.
Another popular kami is Hachiman, considered the protector of Japan and the god of war.
There are also kami associated with nature.
These include Ameterasu, the sun goddess, Susanol, the storm god, and Tsukiyomi, the
moon god.
There's a sense that many aspects of nature, mountains, rivers, trees, and so forth, can
be considered kami.
Mount Fuji, the highest mountain in Japan, is a particularly important kami to many Japanese.
The spirits of the dead can also be seen as kami, and influential historical figures can
be considered important kami.
People with enough power and charisma, such as religious or political leaders, great warriors
or artists, can achieve the status of living kami.
Throughout much of Japanese history, the emperor of Japan has been considered a living kami.
It's always revealing to see what a culture emphasizes in its creation myths.
In some cases, such as the Bible, the focus is on the creation of the entire universe.
In the case of China, as we saw, the emphasis is on the creation of culture and institutions
that benefit humanity.
In the Japanese myths, the focus is first and foremost on Japan.
Shinto is a tradition that's very much centered on the land and the people of Japan, and it
doesn't aspire to universality in the way that Christianity, Islam, or Buddhism do.
This is why virtually all practitioners of Shinto are of Japanese ancestry, when rarely
hears of people who convert to Shinto, or of Japanese people actively trying to convert
a non-Japanese to Shinto.
In the ancient Shinto texts, kami appear from a primordial chaos, and the two most important
are Izanagi, the male, and Izanami, the female.
In order to create a land, they stand on a heavenly floating bridge and take a spear
and push it down in the mist.
From the drippings of the spear, an island is created, to which they descend and ultimately
create other kami.
In the process of giving birth to the fire kami, Izanami is badly burned and withdraws
to the underworld.
Izanagi is told not to look upon her in her condition, but he's impatient, he looks at
her, and flees after seeing her condition.
When he returns to the upper world, he has to purify himself from his contact with the
underworld.
From this process, other important kami are born, including Ameterasu, the sun goddess
who was born from his left eye, and Tsukiyomi, the moon god, born from his right eye.
Ultimately, Ameterasu sends her grandson to descend to the earth and rule there, giving
him three sacred treasures, a mirror, a sword, and a jewel.
This begins the imperial line.
The treasures are said to represent wisdom, the mirror, courage, the sword, and benevolence,
the jewel.
These objects are supposedly still given to a new emperor upon enthronement, but this
is done in private.
These treasures have never been seen by the public, nor do any photographs exist.
One central theme in the myth is purity and impurity, and the purifying ritual that Izanagi
undertakes becomes a model for later purification rituals in Shinto.
The emphasis on purification appears in many ways in Japanese culture.
It's often carried out through the use of water, or salt.
For example, before a sumo wrestling match, salt is sprinkled over the ring to purify
it.
One of the most important elements of the myth is that it establishes a link between
the kami and the island and emperor of Japan.
Japan, in this understanding, was a direct creation of the kami, and emperors are considered
direct descendants of Ametarasu, the sun goddess, who becomes the deity most closely
associated with Japan.
For this reason, Chinese and Japanese emperors are understood quite differently.
Throughout history, Chinese emperors were deposed and replaced by people with no hereditary
claim to the throne at all.
Commoners led rebellions that overthrew dynasties and then installed themselves on the throne,
claiming the title emperor.
This could not happen in Japan.
To be emperor, one must be in the lineage.
It's not a title that can just be claimed by military victory.
This doesn't mean that emperors always had power.
They could be relegated to figurehead status, while another authority, such as the shogun,
had real power.
But the shogun could never claim to be emperor.
The divine status of the emperor only changed after World War II, as we'll see shortly.
The worship of kami is done either at shrines, called Jinja, or in the home, with a small
version of a shrine called a kami dana.
As with most forms of Asian religion, there's no weekly congregational worship at a Shinto
shrine.
People will visit a shrine whenever they're moved to do so, and in some cases this will
be for a particular occasion, such as a prayer to have a child or pass an important exam
or recover from an illness.
In addition, large numbers of people will visit shrines on important festival days.
One of the most distinctive architectural features of a Shinto shrine is the gateway,
or torii.
This consists of two poles and a crossbar between them, and it signifies passing into
the everyday world, into the realm of the sacred.
Home shrines often feature a small torii.
After passing through the torii, it's polite to bow before you do this, worshippers purify
themselves before proceeding to the inner areas of the shrine.
They pour water into their hands with a bamboo ladle, and then wash their hands and mouth.
There are two main parts to the shrine.
A worship sanctuary, called a haiden, and an inner sanctum, called a honden.
People will stop in front of the worship sanctuary and ring a bell and then clap their hands
to get the attention of the kami.
They'll then bow or kneel and offer their prayers.
Many people will leave offerings, such as coins or rice wrapped in paper.
The inner sanctum, to which only priests are allowed access, contains what's called the
shintai.
An object into which the spirit of the kami descends.
The shintai is usually not a representation of the kami, but rather a sacred object that
serves as a location for the kami's spirit.
Typical shintai include mirrors or jewels, or naturally occurring objects, like stones.
Shintai are hidden from view and only removed from shrines on festival days when they're
carried around in sedan chairs, usually wrapped up and put in boxes.
Many visitors to a shinto shrine purchase a talisman or an amulet while they're there
to receive protection against harmful spirits.
Many shrines also have a structure on which visitors can hang wooden tablets or pieces
of paper that contain prayers on them.
The most important shrine in Japan is the ise shrine, which actually consists of a number
of shrines, the inner shrine of which is dedicated to ameterasu.
It's said that the sacred mirror, one of the imperial treasures given to every emperor,
is kept there.
The priest of the shrine must be a member of the imperial family.
And every 20 years, the inner shrine is destroyed and rebuilt with new wood, keeping a very
old shrine perpetually renewed.
This process engages thousands of people in a series of rituals in which giant logs are
brought through rivers and streets and prepared for the new shrine.
The next two rebuilding years are 2013 and 2033.
The Shinto priest is responsible for the upkeep of the shrine and for performing rituals or
worship for the kami.
Priests normally wear long white robes and black hats.
Most Shinto priests are married and the priesthood often passes down from father to son, although
women can also be Shinto priests.
Many Shinto priests study for their positions at institutions approved by the Shinto Shrine's
Association.
Home worship is done at the kamidana, which often contains some kind of shinto, like a
small round mirror, along with a torii and other decorative elements such as candles and
wooden tablets.
Worship, which is often performed daily, generally involves washing one's hands, making offerings
of flowers, water, and rice or fruit, and offering prayers.
Now, in contrast to that simple home worship are the dramatic festivals, matsuri, that
can last for days and draw tens of thousands of people.
Many of these are sponsored by shrines and occur at the shrine, although in many cases
the festival may not be specifically connected to Shinto, but rather a general Japanese festival.
Most Shinto festivals feature kami being paraded around in portable buildings that are elaborately
decorated and placed on poles that are carried around by people from the community.
During this event, the carriers will sometimes be swept away with the spirit of the festival
and they'll begin swaying intensely back and forth.
They're shouting and singing, and the festival features entertainment, from sumo wrestling
events to karaoke competitions, and vendors selling food and all kinds of wares.
Some of the major Shinto festivals are connected with the harvest, including an autumn festival
celebrated at the Issei Shrine, where food is offered to Ame Terasu.
One of the most important of these festivals is the daijousai, which is the harvest festival
performed at the accession of a new emperor.
The kami are informed that a new emperor is taking the throne, and the ritual is said
to pacify the soul of the recently deceased emperor.
Some people believe that it's at this ritual that the new emperor becomes a living kami.
Shinto has long been involved with political authority in Japan, and during parts of the
19th and 20th centuries, this resulted in the official creation of state or national
Shinto.
In the 1860s, the government created an office of Shinto worship and required citizens to
register at shrines.
They made Shinto a national ideology that was promoted by the state.
They emphasized the divinity of the emperor as part of an unbroken line of kami, ruling
Japan from the earliest times.
The Meiji Constitution said, The emperor of Japan shall be reigned over and governed by
a line of emperors unbroken for ages eternal, and the emperor is sacred and inviolable.
All over time, this developed into an ultra-nationalistic, militaristic ideology that emphasized the superiority
of Japan and the Japanese people.
And Japanese textbooks spread this ideology to generations of school children.
Before we judge this as a unique phenomenon, we should recall the American notion of manifest
destiny.
Many nations have their own superiority myths.
This movement in Japan provided the cultural foundations for the expansionist doctrines
that would lead Japan to invade China and other parts of Asia, and ultimately to Japan's
role in World War II.
After the war ended, the supreme commander of Allied forces in Tokyo issued a Shinto
directive that abolished state Shinto.
But it protected shrine Shinto practice as part of a policy of religious freedom.
There could be no government support for Shinto priests and shrines, and no use of textbooks
and edicts to indoctrinate the people.
Finally, the emperor had to renounce his divinity.
In a radio dress, he stated,
The ties between us and our people have always stood upon mutual trust and affection.
They do not depend on myths and legends.
They are not predicated on the false assumption that the emperor is divine and that the Japanese
people are superior to other races and faded to rule the world.
Some Japanese who heard the broadcast were shaken.
Not as much by what he said as by the fact that they had, for the first time, heard their
emperor's voice.
And it was the voice of an ordinary human being.
We've seen how Shinto focuses on the relationship between people and the kami that populate the
natural world and have the power to affect our lives.
Throughout the world, religious specialists help to mediate the relationship between humans
and spirits in very different ways from those seen in Shinto.
Even as shamans, these men and women often alter their state of consciousness and travel
to other realms in order to serve the community.
And we turn to their traditions now.
Shamanism is one of the world's oldest and most widespread forms of religion.
Today there are shamans still practicing in virtually every part of the world, from East
Asia to Africa, from South America to Siberia.
There are many forms of shamanism.
I can't even scratch the surface of the numerous varieties here.
My goal is to introduce you to some of the most commonly shared characteristics of shamanistic
traditions.
And since we've been spending our time in Asia, provide two concrete examples from two
Asian traditions, Korean and Hmong.
That way you can see the many ways that these two traditions and many others are similar
while also getting a sense for some of the variety found among different types of shamanism.
The term shaman comes from Siberia, meaning a person who's moved or raised.
Shamans were important figures among many nomadic hunting and gathering communities,
where they performed a lot of functions.
Throughout the millennia, shamans have typically served the roles of healer, medium, priest,
diviner, sorcerer and sage.
Many cultures these roles are differentiated and given to specialists, but the shaman
usually combines all of these roles.
In order to accomplish their jobs as healers and mediums, shamans have a number of techniques
to enter into altered states of consciousness and make contact with gods or spirits.
Shamanistic cultures are generally polytheistic.
In many cases, the shaman in the altered state experiences him or herself going on a journey
to the spirit world.
This soul travel is a central feature of many shamanistic traditions, such as the mong.
Some shamans, like those we'll see in Korea, are more likely to call the deities down than
to travel out to them.
Shamans use a range of different techniques to enter these states, dancing, drumming,
fasting and ingesting consciousness expanding substances such as peyote, ayahuasca or psilocybin
mushrooms.
A key part of the role of shamans is serving their communities.
Shamans serve in many ways.
Sometimes they're working to heal a particular individual.
Sometimes they can apply their healing powers to entire community in need.
In addition, they can help a community find the best place to hunt, or they can try to
bring a good harvest.
So how does one become a shaman?
There are two general methods.
The first is heredity, where the child of a shaman is expected to become a shaman.
The second method, and this one often accompanies hereditary transmission, occurs when a person
is chosen by the spirits to be a shaman.
This calling is experienced through a shamanic illness.
A person will begin to show a number of symptoms, such as hearing voices, loss of appetite,
fatigue, physical discomfort, hallucinations and strange dreams.
In many cases the person will be taken to doctors to find a cure.
That doesn't work, then a shaman will be called in to do a ritual that will determine if the
person has been visited by a spirit.
If this turns out to be the case, the person is understood to have a choice.
Either accept the calling and become a shaman, at which point the symptoms will cease, or
refuse the call, and continue to suffer.
One of the most striking features of Korean shamanism, at first glance, is most Korean
shamans are women.
Female shamans are called mudang.
In fact, not only are women the shamans, but most of the people who hire shamans and work
with them are also women.
They're also male shamans, but we'll focus on the mudang here.
Is they're the ones you're likely to see if you encounter Korean shamanism?
It's estimated that there are 300,000 shamans in South Korea.
A woman who's destined to be a shaman will usually experience an illness of the type
I described earlier.
A mudang will be invited to perform a special ritual to find out if she's experiencing
what is called a dissent or intrusion of a spirit.
The mudang will determine which spirit is seeking her out, and then perform another
ritual to consecrate the spirit and initiate the new shaman.
At this point, the new shaman will apprentice herself to the experienced shaman, learning
techniques and rituals from her, and the new shaman will install an altar in her home with
images of the spirits.
Mudang perform rituals to heal the sick, bring good fortune to the home, and help ensure
the well-being of villages.
These rituals, known as gut, are a way to communicate with, propitiate, and please the
spirits.
There are many deities in Korea's shamanistic pantheon, as there are in most forms of shamanism
around the world, and these include gods associated with natural elements, such as mountains
and water, stars, as well as great generals and other military figures.
Many deities can be helpful if the shaman has a good relationship with them, but some
spirits enter into people and cause illness.
People use many different techniques to protect themselves from the spirits, including amulets
and the use of sounds or colors that the spirit doesn't like.
Benevolent spirits can be enshrined in the home to protect the family, and the housewife
makes regular offerings to these gods.
The dwelling place of these gods might be an earthenware jar filled with rice.
There are many different kinds of shamanistic rituals.
Some are seasonal and focus on the welfare and prosperity of the community.
The outdoor seasonal rituals in the spring and fall take place on hilltops, or by sacred
springs, and there are also rituals for crisis situations like illness or the inability to
conceive, and rituals for the dead that attempt to ensure peace for the recently deceased
and to protect the home from the possible threat from the dead.
While many rituals are performed outdoors or in homes, there are also hundreds of shamanistic
temples in South Korea, and shamans are performing rituals in public on a daily basis for those
who offer a fee for their services.
One mudang said, we used to do our rituals in hiding, but now we have no shame in performing
in public.
I can hardly take three days off a month.
In a typical good, the chief mudang is often accompanied by assistants, including a musical
shaman who is responsible for the percussive music that so often accompanies shamanistic
rituals.
This is a feature seen in shamanism around the world as rhythmic drumming and music can
help the shaman enter into a trance and connect with the spirits.
The shaman brings a great deal of colorful clothing and implements that she'll wear
when acting as a vehicle for the spirits.
This is one of the central features of Korean shamanism, and it's not always seen in other
forms of shamanism.
In longer goods, the shaman will change outfits many times, putting on the clothing appropriate
for the particular spirit she's hosting at that point in the ritual.
So if it's the spirit of a fierce general, she might don a military robe and hat and
carry a sword.
Other commonly used implements are flags, fans, and bells.
During the rituals, the mudang will serve as a medium, entering into trance states and
speaking on behalf of the spirit.
Her manner and voice will change as the spirit speaks through her.
Shamans will also demonstrate the power of the trance and give evidence of their possession
by performing remarkable feats, including walking barefoot on swords without bleeding,
or even licking sharp sword blades, or holding heavy objects like steaming pots of water
by their teeth.
She'll also perform divinations, whereby she'll use techniques such as tossing coins
or balancing objects to determine whether things are unfolding in auspicious ways.
While the most popular religions in South Korea are Buddhism and Christianity, shamanism
still plays an important role.
Given that Buddhism and Christianity are foreign religions, many Koreans highlight the importance
of shamanism as the original and only indigenous religion of Korea.
Even many of those who do not believe in it will still recognize its cultural importance,
and the dances and the costumes of shamans are showcased in various forms of entertainment.
The government has called shamanistic rituals intangible cultural assets.
Interestingly, despite the popularity of other religions and the increasingly rational and
technological aspects of parts of South Korean society in recent decades, shamanism is enjoying
or resurgence.
In a marriage of shamanism and technology, many shamans now have websites, and one can
have a divination performed by a shaman online.
The Hmong are an ethnic group found largely in the mountainous regions in China, in Southeast
Asia, and increasingly in the United States.
Many of the Hmong who lived in Laos during the Laotian Civil War of the 1950s-70s fought
against the Communist Laotian and North Vietnamese forces, often on behalf of and supported by
the CIA.
After the communist victories, the Hmong were severely persecuted, leading many to move
to refugee camps in Thailand and ultimately to the United States, where over 230,000 Hmong
now live.
My own city of St. Paul, Minnesota, is home to one of the largest Hmong populations in
America, with California and Wisconsin also having large Hmong populations.
To understand how Hmong shamans heal, we have to look at Hmong conceptions of illness
and souls.
The Hmong, like the Chinese and many other Asian ethnic groups, believe that a person
has multiple souls.
The most common number is seven, but other numbers are seen.
When all of the souls are in the body, cooperating harmoniously, the person is healthy, but when
a soul wanders off or is lured away, the person becomes sick and can die.
A soul can wander off during a dream and not make it back.
It can be frightened away by a traumatic incident.
It can be lured away by an evil spirit.
The shamans job is to go after the soul and bring it back.
Sometimes the shaman can lure it back.
Sometimes he must negotiate with the evil spirit for the soul.
And sometimes he must do direct battle with the evil spirits for the soul.
We can reflect on what the conception of health and sickness might say about Hmong values.
Health is when all the souls, the community we might say, are together harmoniously, and
illness is when one is separated, isolated, alienated.
Often how important community has been to the Hmong is they have made a life for themselves
in the hills of Asia, often surrounded by other sometimes hostile ethnic groups.
Such a picture can have a lot of meaning.
So what does the ritual of soul rescue actually look like?
Retrieving a lost soul can be demanding and draining for a shaman, often taking several
hours.
The shaman puts on a black veil over his face to facilitate his trance.
He gets on a bench, which represents the horse, and this is how he can travel to the
spirit realm.
He'll often have some forms of percussion on him, like bells or a drum, and he's accompanied
by helpers who support him and can add to the rhythmic accompaniment.
The shaman chants and goes deeper into trance, taking an inward journey to the spirit world.
Unlike Korean shamanism, the notion of traveling out to the spirits is central here.
At one point in the ritual, a string is tied around the shaman's wrists, which helps lead
the soul back.
Animal sacrifices are also important in Hmong rituals.
The souls of the sacrificed animals are offered in exchange for the human soul, which expresses
the closeness of animal and human souls.
The shaman offers gratitude to the animal for its sacrifice, and the animal is usually
consumed after the ritual.
Many shamans will receive the jawbone of the animal, so a shaman with many jawbones has
evidence of the numerous rituals he's performed.
We've now encountered the indigenous traditions of China, Korea, and Japan.
Prior to that, we looked at the major traditions of India.
The next lecture, we'll see what happens when the religious traditions of East and
South Asia come together, an encounter that transformed religion throughout Asia and ultimately
the world by giving rise to new forms of Buddhism, uniquely East Asian forms, such as Zen.
And we'll see the origin of those fascinating questions that have vexed human beings for
centuries, like, what is the sound of one hand clapping?
