Many religious traditions have a sacred center, a place that is holier than any other, and
that exists not only as an important pilgrimage site, but also as a powerful force in the
religious consciousness of all believers.
As we've seen, Farhanasi functions this way for Hindus, and we'll see how Mecca
occupies this status for Muslims.
So what is the sacred center for Jews?
I believe that there are two ways to answer this question, and this will illustrate the
two very different forms that the religion has taken since the Israelites reached the
Promised Land, according to tradition, over 3,000 years ago.
The first sacred center is undoubtedly Jerusalem, which was established as the capital of the
Kingdom of Israel by Israel's greatest king, David.
According to tradition, the Kingdom of Israel existed as a united monarchy from around 1020
BCE to 930 BCE, during which it was ruled primarily by three kings, Saul, David, and
Solomon.
It's under the reign of King Solomon that the great temple is built in Jerusalem as
a home for the Ark of the Covenant, and also as a place to make sacrifices to God.
The Israelites, who had been wanderers for so long, now have a place of worship, a place
where God's presence could be felt most powerfully.
After Solomon's death, the northern tribes rebel and establish a kingdom of Israel in
the north, while the southern kingdom of Judah, which retained Jerusalem, remains loyal to
David's line.
The northern kingdom of Israel is conquered by Assyria in 722 BCE, and most of the Israelites
are exiled and dispersed, becoming known as the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel.
The kingdom of Judah, however, remains independent for over a century more, until it's finally
conquered by the Babylonians in 586 BCE, leading to the destruction of the temple.
Many of the Judeans, or Jews, as those from Judea can be called, are exiled in Babylon,
yet another example of an exile and eventual return in the history of the people.
After being in exile in Babylon for 50 years, some Jews returned to their holy land, permitted
to do so by King Cyrus of Persia, who had conquered the Babylonians.
Although most Jews did not return to Jerusalem, the Rebuild Temple, the Second Temple, became
a sacred center and important symbol to Jews wherever they lived.
However, the religion that these Jews practiced bears little resemblance to the Judaism practice
today.
So, we'll now discuss the transition from the religion of the Second Temple, which featured
a priestly class and animal sacrifices to God, to the religion of the rabbis and Torah
that characterizes Judaism today.
To that, we now turn.
In the 4th century BCE, the Empire of Alexander the Great brought Greek influences to the
Middle East, and many Jews began to adopt Greek ways.
Divisions between traditional and Hellenized, or Greek-influenced Jews, increased.
These divisions within the Jewish community were dramatically compounded when the Hellenistic
Syrian ruler Antiochus IV, who had authority over Israel during this time, attempted to
impose Hellenistic culture on all of Israel.
He mandated the worship of Greek gods, forbade the reading of and obedience to the Torah,
and banned circumcision.
When an act powerful for its symbolism, he put an altar to the Greek gods Zeus in the
Temple in Jerusalem, and he sacrificed a hog, an animal considered unclean in Jewish
law, in the Temple.
This led to a rebellion of the Jewish people, led by the Maccabee family, against the Sarians.
This triumphant war, which resulted in the establishment of an independent kingdom of
Israel, is commemorated every year through the celebration of Hanukkah, which we'll discuss
at greater length in the next lecture.
This kingdom lasted for less than a century until its conquest by Rome, and it was the
last Jewish nation until the establishment of the State of Israel nearly 2,000 years
later.
So what was the religion of the Jewish people like during the Second Temple period?
First, it centered on the Holy site of the Temple, in which priests performed sacrifices
of animals, grains, and holy oil.
In addition, there were groups that separated themselves from society.
The Essenes were a group that focused on piety and maintained purity through retreat from
corrupt society, communal ownership of property, asceticism, and a commitment to righteous living.
And some Essenes were treated to a compound near the Dead Sea called Qumran, where their
library of texts, known as the Dead Sea Scrolls, was discovered in 1947.
These include some of the oldest surviving copies of biblical texts.
At the same time, however, another form of Judaism began to emerge.
Jewish religious life began to flourish in places outside of the Temple, namely synagogues,
houses of prayer, where people could meet to read the Torah and pray together.
The organization of the Hebrew Bible was finalized, and the tradition of reading weekly Torah
portions probably began.
While the religion of sacrifices in the Temple were controlled by priests, it was the sages,
scholars, and scribes, people who had become known as rabbis, or my master, who were authorities
in the realm of Torah study and interpretation.
Another group of Jews that was important toward the end of this period is the Zealots, who
advocated armed resistance to Roman rule.
Roman civil religion required the worship of emperors, which was forbidden under Jewish
monotheism, and taxation also produced discontent.
This all came to a head in the great Jewish revolt, which began in the year 66 CE, which
culminated in the slaughter of Jewish rebels and the destruction of the Second Temple in
the year 70.
If you've been to a Jewish wedding, you no doubt remember the dramatic part toward the
end of the ceremony where the groom smashes a glass.
There are many interpretations of this practice, but one of them is that even during a joyous
event like a wedding, Jews must remember the painful event of the destruction of the
Temple.
The only part of the Temple that survived was a set of foundation stones used in a retaining
wall.
This one surviving fragment of the Temple, known as the Western Wall, is the holiest
pilgrimage site to Jews in the world, along with the Temple Mount itself.
Many Jews who come to the Wall weep and mourning over the destruction of the Temple, which
has given the site the name the Wailing Wall.
In addition to praying at the Wall, many Jews put written prayers on slips of paper into
cracks in the Wall.
From this point until the 20th century, the vast majority of the world's Jews lived in
the Diaspora, a condition of scattering and dispersion around the world.
Even today, over half the world's Jews live outside of Israel.
During the two millennia that the Jews did not live in their Holy Land and without their
Temple, what held the community together?
I began this lecture by saying that there are two sacred centers for Jews, and the first
one is Jerusalem, the Temple in particular.
Throughout the many centuries of exile, Jews still kept Jerusalem in their hearts and minds,
and wherever they lived, they'd maintained the aspiration to one day return to their
promised land.
Psalm 137 contains the powerful lament of the Jews, who during the Babylonian exile
declared, If I forget you, O Jerusalem, let my right hand wither.
Every year, at the end of the Passover meal, Jews proclaimed, La Shana Habaa Birushalayim.
Next year in Jerusalem.
Nevertheless, once the Temple was lost and the people dispersed, the Jews had to find
a new center.
And they found it not in a building or a city, not in a place at all.
The new center was the text, the Torah, which became the foundation for the traditions,
laws, and rituals that held the community together throughout the diaspora.
After the destruction of the Temple, the authority of the priests and the practice of animal
sacrifices were replaced by the authority of rabbis and the practices of prayer, Torah
reading, study, and ethical behavior.
And these have remained essential to Judaism ever since.
Rabbis were heads of the Jewish community, leaders of liturgical prayer and rituals,
scholars and teachers and experts of jurisprudence.
People gathered in synagogues, houses of assembly, to read from the Torah, pray and sing, although
such places were not required for communal worship.
The rabbis engaged in a process of interpretation called midrash, which involves probing the
deep meaning of biblical texts, filling in the gaps of stories in the Bible, and looking
at subtexts and implications of passages.
There are two areas of Judaism that are the focus of debate and interpretation.
Hallecha, covering the areas of law and custom, and Agadah, all the non-legalistic aspects
of the tradition, including narratives, history, folklore, moral and practical advice.
The commandments and laws of Judaism bound Jewish communities together during the diaspora
and marked the Jewish communities as distinct from the other communities around them.
As the rabbis continued to engage and discuss matters of law, ritual, ethics, and other
aspects of life, their discourses were eventually written down and brought together in the
Mishnah, around 200 CE.
Later rabbis' analysis and commentaries were ultimately organized and combined with the
Mishnah to make the Talmud.
The Talmud is fundamentally important in rabbinic Judaism.
The Torah is not read or interpreted in isolation in rabbinic Judaism.
The Talmud is essential for understanding the Torah and applying it to one's life.
For example, think about the biblical prohibition of work on the Sabbath.
The Bible says that on the seventh day, thou shalt not do any manner of work.
What exactly constitutes work?
Can you cook, read, walk?
One can exceptions be made.
And for that matter, when does the Sabbath actually begin and end precisely?
This is where you consult the Talmud, which has a section on 39 categories of activities
that are prohibited on the Sabbath, along with the discussion of precise methods for
determining the beginning and end of the Sabbath.
In the Talmud, you'll find a passage of the Torah surrounded by comments and interpretations
from rabbis, which themselves are then subject to further interpretations and discussion.
In other words, the Talmud presents an ongoing conversation and debate across space and time
among rabbis in its pages.
And the process continues among rabbis today.
Discussion and debate have been central features of the Jewish tradition.
One of the principal ways that students learn in a Yeshiva, a Jewish religious school, is
to be put together in pairs where the two students converse and argue.
In an interview, Jewish writer and philosopher Elie Wiesel was asked, Christians express
beauty through sculpture and painting, Muslims through calligraphy and architecture.
How do Jews express beauty?
Without hesitating, he replied, with words.
From the time of the fall of the Second Temple, Jews have lived in almost every part of the
world.
And in most of the places they lived, they constituted a separate community that tried
to prohibit marriage with non-Jews, follow their own authorities and laws, and preserve
their way of life and traditions while in exile.
This is how Jews managed to avoid being assimilated into the dominant cultures where they lived,
and how they survived as a people and maintained their culture in the centuries of the diaspora.
The treatment of Jews varied dramatically in different places at different times.
In some cases, they were largely left alone to maintain their way of life, at times such
as the later Middle Ages in Poland, Jews were able to flourish in many ways.
In this case, Poland's leaders encouraged Jewish immigration to promote economic development.
Enjoying freedom in matters of work and residence, the Jewish population grew and thrived, making
Poland a center for Jewish life and thought in the world.
The Jews of Central and Eastern Europe are known as Ashkenazi Jews.
Ashkenazi is a Hebrew word for a region in Germany where the group of Jews originated.
During the 11th and 19th centuries, Jews from this region migrated to areas further east,
including Hungary, Poland, Ukraine, Lithuania, and Russia.
The Ashkenazi Jews developed the language of Yiddish, which was a hybrid of German and
Hebrew written with the Hebrew alphabet.
Yiddish cultures made many contributions to Western society, drawing from its rich storytelling
tradition and distinctive styles of humor, which has led to a long tradition of well-known
Jewish comedians, such as Henny Youngman, Mel Brooks, Woody Allen, and Jerry Seinfeld.
And of course, we have Ashkenazi Jews to thank for such words as Schmutz, Chutzpah,
Kvetsch, and Schlepp.
The majority of Jews in the world today, including Israel, and a significant majority
of American Jews, are Ashkenazi.
Jews flourished in other areas as well during certain historical periods, with one notable
example being Islamic Spain.
It's worth noting, especially in light of the tragic history of Jewish-Muslim relations
since the 20th century began, that throughout the Middle Ages, Jews usually fared relatively
better under Islamic rule than they did under Christian rule.
As we'll see when we discuss Islam, during the 10th and 11th centuries, the height of
civilization was found primarily in great Muslim cities like Baghdad and Córdoba.
In Muslim Spain, Jews could rise to high positions in politics, medicine, philosophy,
and literature.
Jews who lived in Spain and Portugal and their descendants are known as Sephardi Jews.
Sephardi basically meaning Spanish.
In addition to their different points of origins, Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews differ in other
respects as well, differences in matters of ritual, food, and pronunciation of Hebrew,
for example.
There were many influential Jewish thinkers during the Middle Ages, but perhaps none
is considered as great as Moses Ben-Maiman, called Maimonides, and known by many Jews
as Rambam, for the acronym Rabbi Moshe Ben-Maiman.
He was born in Córdoba, Spain in 1135 and died in Egypt in 1204.
A prolific author, Maimonides was a rabbi, philosopher, legal scholar, physician, in
fact a court physician to powerful rulers, and a leader of the Jewish community.
His 14-volume Mishna Torah, a codification of Jewish law and ethics, is considered to
be a standard of comprehensive scholarship, still studied in Yeshivas today.
The mystical esoteric expression of Judaism is generally referred to as Kavala, which
found systematic expression first in the 11th and 3rd through 13th centuries and developed
different forms later on.
The most important mystical text is the Zohar, the first appearance of which occurred in 13th
century Spain, although its origins are traditionally said to date back centuries earlier.
Despite the fact that European Jews did well and made many contributions in certain times
and places, their overall story is of course profoundly painful and tragic.
A pattern that repeats itself countless times throughout the two millennia of the diaspora
is one where Jews were oppressed, ghettoized, expelled, and all too often violently attacked.
Even in places where they once thrived, like Poland and Spain, Jews eventually fell victim
to changing historical and political currents.
In Poland, ruthless campaigns were conducted against Jews in the 15th century, and starting
in 1648 over 100,000 Jews were killed in Poland and the Ukraine when they were targeted during
wars and uprisings.
In late 15th century Spain, after Christian rulers replaced Muslims, Jews were forcibly
expelled from the country in which they lived for more than a millennium.
Antisemitism was pervasive throughout Europe and the Middle Ages and into the modern period
and Jews were exiled from many countries.
Jews were expelled from both England and France in the 13th century, for example.
Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries in Russia, many Jewish communities were victims
of violent mob attacks known as pogroms which aimed to assault and kill Jews and destroy
their businesses and synagogues.
These are just some of the examples and they're important to understand as precursors to the
most horrifying manifestation of antisemitism, the attempted genocide of the Jewish people
in the Holocaust during World War II.
This systematic, state-sponsored campaign of murder against the Jewish people resulted
in the deaths of over half of the entire Jewish population of Europe, about 6 million people.
That's over a third of all Jews in the world.
In Hebrew, this is known as the Shoah, or catastrophe.
Yom HaShua is a date to commemorate the Jews and others who died in the Holocaust.
It's held on the 27th day of the month of Nisan in the Jewish calendar, which falls
in April or May.
At sundown in Israel, the Israeli flag is lowered to half-mast and six torches are lit to represent
the 6 million Jews who perished.
There's no public entertainment.
Instead, speeches and documentaries reflect on the event and a siren is sounded throughout
the country at 10 a.m., during which the people stop to silently remember the dead.
It's impossible to overstate the significance of the Holocaust and the consciousness of Jews.
In Jewish thought, theologians had a struggle with their understandings of God, the problem
of evil, and the nature of the covenant in light of their suffering.
Jewish thought was haunted by the question, how can we continue to have faith after the
Holocaust?
While some Jewish theologians brought currents of anger and protest against God into their
theologies, and others came to understand God as lacking omnipotence, most thinkers argued
for a sustained faith in God and for a commitment to justice and compassion to ensure that such
a tragedy will never happen again.
A powerful voice for this reaffirmed faith is Emil Fachenheim, who argued that the Jewish
people must not let the actions of Hitler drive them from their faith.
He wrote,
Jews are forbidden to hand Hitler posthumous victories.
They are commanded to survive as Jews lest the Jewish people perish.
They are commanded to remember the victims of Auschwitz, lest their memory perish.
They are forbidden to despair of the God of Israel, lest Judaism perish.
The intensity of the Jewish commitment to never forget, and to take all steps necessary
to ensure their security and freedom, contributed strongly to the Zionist movement and the creation
of the modern state of Israel.
Zionism is the Jewish movement that sought to establish a Jewish homeland in the biblical
land of Israel.
As we've already seen, there was always a sense among diaspora Jews that they were
yearning to return to Israel, expressed each year in the cry of, next year in Jerusalem.
With increasing antisemitism in Europe, these calls intensified, and in the late 19th century
Zionism grew into an organized political movement led by Theodor Herzl, an Austrian journalist.
Groups of Jews began to return to build settlements with a commitment to building a new nation.
As an important part of this process, the language of Hebrew was revived in the 19th
and 20th centuries as a language to be shared by returning Jews who spoke a wide variety
of languages in the diaspora, such as Yiddish as we've seen.
This is the only known example from history of a language with no native speakers being
consciously revived to become the native language of millions.
Hebrew had been considered the sacred language of the Jews in which they prayed and read
the Torah, but it was turned into a modern national language during this period.
Many Zionists were secular Jews, motivated not by any particular theological commitments,
but by the belief that Jews would never be fully secure until they had their own nation.
In fact, some Orthodox Jews initially opposed Zionism, believing that only God could end
their exile and restore the temple.
Ultimately, the modern state of Israel was founded in 1948 as a homeland for Jews.
The origins of the Arab-Israeli conflict, which has led to so much hostility between
Arabs and Jews, who as we know often coexisted peacefully in many periods of the diaspora,
has its origins here.
Before we can get to the details of how Jews practice, we have to first ask another question.
There are many different forms of Judaism, and the details of how Judaism has lived differ.
In some respects, for each individual Jew, however, most Jews, other than completely
secular Jews, who consider their Jewishness purely ethnic, fall into one of three groups.
Orthodox, conservative, or Reformed.
Orthodoxy is the form of Judaism that emphasizes closely following the revealed law contained
in the Torah and Talmud as interpreted by the rabbis.
Orthodox Jews have differed profoundly over conceptions of God, the role of reason, or
the legitimacy of Zionism, but they all agree on certain essential matters of law and ritual,
although they'll debate over the details.
Among the many divisions with an Orthodoxy, we'll focus on two.
One form of Orthodox Judaism is Hasidism, which developed in 18th century Eastern Europe.
The movement was founded by Rabbi Israel Ben Eliezer, born in 1698, who was known as
the Master of the Good Name, Bal Shem Tov.
He was seen to be a man not only of great knowledge, but spiritual power and charisma.
And this was the beginning of the tradition of the Tzadik, or Rebbe, in Hasidism, a charismatic
figure with wisdom, authority, and spiritual attainment, who was qualified to transmit
a form of transformative mystical knowledge.
Hasidic Jews place a great emphasis on emotion and celebration, finding joy in the relationship
with God, and expressing it through singing and dancing.
They find holiness in day-to-day life, and they highlight the sacredness of the ordinary.
When Hasidic Jews pray, they do so with deep concentration, often swaying back and forth
as they chant in total immersion.
Hasidic men usually wear dark clothing, often involving a long jacket and black hat.
Following a biblical passage forbidding the shaving of the side of one's face, Hasidic
men often have long, uncut sideburns and beards.
Some forms of Hasidism have a strongly messianic element, emphasizing the role that prayer
and good works can play in bringing about the Messiah's coming.
While some Orthodox Jews, such as those called ultra-Orthodox, are more insular and commit
themselves to a life of intensive religious study, the modern Orthodox seek to come to
light.
The modern Orthodox seek to combine observance of the law with a fuller integration into the
modern world.
Like other Orthodox Jews, the modern Orthodox are fully committed to living out the will
of God as expressed in the Taran Talmud, but they also embrace secular education, a very
wide array of professions, as long as the job is in accord with Jewish ethics and law, modern
forms of dress, and somewhat greater gender equality.
Some Yeshivas are open to women, although there are no female Orthodox rabbis.
The origins of conservative and reformed Judaism are found in the Enlightenment, a period in
the 18th century that was characterized by a commitment to the authority of reason, along
with notions of individualism, autonomy, equality, and rights.
In some countries, such as post-revolution France, Jews began to gain rights, including
citizenship, and Jews in many countries, especially Germany, began to develop forms
of Judaism based on Enlightenment values that aimed to integrate Jews more fully into European
society and culture.
There were movements to change the liturgy so that some hymns and prayers and sermons
were delivered in the common spoken language, the vernacular, instead of Hebrew, and to
shift the focus away from a return to Israel and rebuilding of the temple, and toward the
notion that they could live as faithful Jews and good citizens of the countries in which
they lived.
In other words, their condition would no longer be seen as being in exile, but rather at home.
Reform Judaism grew out of this 18th century Enlightenment movement, and it led to services
that featured vernacular language, and choirs, sometimes organs, men and women seated together,
and a downplaying of the aspiration to return to Israel and restore the temple.
But most importantly, it said that the essence of Judaism did not lie in adherence to following
Jewish law.
The laws of the Torah would be seen as guidelines that could be adjusted to modernity, not as
binding obligations that all Jews must observe.
Judaism would be modernized, and would focus on ethics.
One of the most significant transformations came in the role of women, as Reform Judaism
has had women serving as rabbis since 1972.
The first woman rabbi, the only one before 1972, was ordained in Germany in 1935.
She died tragically in the Holocaust.
Reform Judaism has also embraced gays and lesbians, and gay rabbis have been ordained.
Most Reform Jews do not keep kosher, do not strictly observe the Sabbath, and do not attend
synagogue weekly.
However, many Reform Jews do attend synagogue periodically, especially during the High Holy
Days, and still practice important rituals and traditions, such as the lighting of candles
on the Sabbath, or holding a Passover Seder, celebrating the barred bat mitzvahs of sons
and daughters, and observing holidays such as Chanukah and Purim.
American Jews who are affiliated with a synagogue, the highest percentage is Reform, followed
by Conservative and then Orthodox.
Conservative Judaism was also shaped by Enlightenment values, but it resisted some of the more liberal
positions taken up by the Reform movement.
While the very term Reform emphasizes the move to change Judaism, the word Conservative
demonstrates the commitment to conserve the essence of Jewish tradition.
It's also been called traditional Judaism.
Conservatives affirm the authority of Jewish law, but argue that its interpretation and
application have always changed throughout history.
While Conservatives do not adhere to the law as rigorously as Orthodox Jews do, there is
a tendency to believe that ethical justifications are required to override the law.
The Conservative movement voted in 1983 to ordain women, and they approved the ordination
of gay and lesbian rabbis in 2006.
We've now surveyed the story of the Jewish people from the biblical period to the present
day, and we've looked at the main forms of Judaism today.
In the next lecture, we'll look at how Jews live today, what rituals and holidays are
practiced, what are the practices that are likely to be found in the home of an observant
Jew.
In answering these questions, we'll see Judaism not only as an ancient tradition that has taken
many forms throughout history, but also as a living tradition that continues to give
meaning to millions of Jews today.
