Welcome to our final lecture.
I'm delighted that you chose to spend time with me thinking about so many fascinating
and important topics.
I believe that with the knowledge that you've gained about the world's major religious traditions
and their beliefs, practices, and texts, you'll develop new insights about the world, about
your neighbors, and about yourself.
In this lecture, we're going to apply the knowledge that we've gained about the different
religious traditions to a number of contemporary situations.
We live in a rapidly changing, increasingly borderless world, and we must keep in mind
that religious traditions are living things.
We're always being shaped by dynamic cultural, national, and global forces.
When we try to understand any religious tradition, we're trying to pin down a moving target.
So I want to begin this last lecture with an eye on movement, on the direction of trends
that we can perceive now that will contribute to religious transformation in the decades
ahead.
Knowledge of these trends will help us understand both current and future events.
Before we look at demographic trends, we must discuss one of the most significant transformations
in American religion.
The fact that women, who have been so often marginalized and silenced in religious texts
and within religious traditions, have increasingly brought their perspectives and voices to the
process of interpreting scriptures and critiquing traditions.
Female pastors and ministers in most forms of Protestant Christianity, female rabbis
and reforming conservative Judaism, and female Zen masters in Western Buddhist institutions
just to name a few examples, have brought about profound transformations in their respective
traditions.
Feminist theologians have developed an approach to conceptions of God, texts, rituals, and
structures of authority that attempts to eliminate the patriarchal elements that they
argue distort the true message of the religion.
Some scholars speculate that these changes in America will reverberate throughout the
world in the decades ahead, transforming religion in many different cultures.
Now we'll turn to some of the major demographic changes that have occurred in recent decades.
Is these changes will shed light on the shifting religious landscape of America?
They are increased diversity, growth in conservative Christianity, more fluid religious identity,
and an increase in religiously unaffiliated Americans.
Let's begin with increased diversity.
One of the most significant factors in increasing diversity was the ending of exclusionary immigration
practices with the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965.
Non-European immigration increased dramatically.
For example, the Chinese American population more than quadrupled between 1965 and 1990.
In addition, the cultural transformation of the 1960s, which involved openness to new
religions and practices, led to greater interest in Asian religions, as we saw with our discussion
of the Hare Krishna movement.
Religious teachers from many non-Western religions began to teach and open up temples
and centers in America.
Furthermore, the Muslim population has grown due to the combination of African American
conversion and immigration from Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.
The United States has become more and more diverse during the last half century, and
the influence of non-Judeo-Christian religious traditions has profoundly transformed American
religion.
Information can also be seen within Christianity.
The United States continues to be, as it has throughout its entire history, a majority
Christian nation.
Approximately 75% of Americans are Christian, but this percentage has been steadily declining
for decades.
Twenty years ago, that number was around 86%.
Two of the reasons for this are the increase in Americans who belong to religious traditions
outside Christianity, and the rise in the number of Americans who consider themselves
unaffiliated with any religious tradition.
Within Christianity, there's also been a notable trend, a rise in fundamentalist and evangelical
Christian churches, and a decline in what have been called mainline denominations, such
as Lutheran, Methodist, and Episcopalian.
Over a quarter of Americans identify as evangelical, a higher number than identify with the mainline
Protestant churches.
One of the most notable characteristics of American religious identity today is our
third trend, religious fluidity.
Given the wide range of religious options available to Americans today, it's not a surprise
that many Americans now see religious affiliation as a choice, rather than a fixed part of
their identity.
Recent surveys reveal that between 25 and 35% of Americans have switched religious
affiliations to another religion or no religion at some point in their lives, and if we include
switching denominations, the number exceeds 40%.
This is particularly true of Catholics.
About 60% of all Americans who were raised Catholic are no longer practicing Catholics,
half of them left and half are lapsed Catholics.
However, the number of Catholics in the United States has remained largely stable due primarily
to Latino immigration, which has led to what many scholars call the Latinization of the
Catholic Church in America.
An illustration of how much the American approach to religious identity has changed comes from
a 2011 CVS New York Times poll of Americans nationwide.
One of the questions on the poll was, what is your religious preference today?
Think about the very wording of that question.
Not what is your religion or your religious identity, but what is your religious preference,
which carries the assumption that religious identity is a choice rather than a stable
part of who we are, like our ethnicity.
But then comes the kicker.
What is your religious preference today?
It's almost as if the pollsters think that your preference might change tomorrow.
The notion of fluidity in religious identity has permeated our culture.
This brings us to our final trend, an increase in unaffiliated Americans.
At the same time as there is a trend toward growth in conservative Christian denominations,
there is a trend in a very different direction.
The number of Americans who consider themselves unaffiliated with any religious tradition
doubled in the last decade, from 8% of the population in 1999 to 16% in 2008, and it's
growing.
In a recent poll, the American population broke down this way.
Protestant around 51%, Catholic 24%, non-Christian religions including Jews, Muslims, Hindus
and Buddhists combined around 5%, and none 19%.
This makes the unaffiliated, sometimes called the nuns, the third largest group, and larger
than any individual Protestant denomination.
This group of unaffiliated Americans is now the single largest religious group in Oregon
and Washington.
It's between 20 and 25% of the population there.
While people in this group don't feel that they belong to any tradition or religious
institution, they still for the most part believe in God.
Around two-thirds indicate a belief in God or some higher power, and many describe themselves
as spiritual, but not religious.
This essentially means that while they feel that there is a spiritual part of their lives,
they are rejecting organized religion and institutions.
Some of them feel the spiritual connection most strongly in nature, and they tend to
think of God as an impersonal higher power, or cosmic force, rather than a personal being.
They use words like mystical and contemplative to describe their spiritual orientation, and
they focus more on God's love than on God's judgment, more on the divine within human beings
than on sinfulness.
These four demographic shifts increase diversity, growth in conservative Christianity, fluidity
of religious identity, and rise in religiously unaffiliated Americans, raise important questions.
For example, given the increasing religious diversity within communities, how will members
of one tradition view and treat members of other traditions?
The health of our communities and society rests largely on how this question is answered.
Religious traditions, as we've seen, involve claims about ultimate things—the nature
of reality, humanity, the best way to live, the way to be saved.
Many people wonder, what is the status of my traditions' claims, and its scriptures
and rituals, in light of the fact that other traditions have different perspectives on
these issues, and feature different scriptures and rituals and so on.
If your religion is true, must other religions be false?
Or are there ways that multiple traditions can all be seen as true?
There are many different attitudes that members of one religious tradition can have toward
members of other religious traditions, and I'll focus on three of the most well-known
positions here—exclusivism, inclusivism, and pluralism.
All of these positions are represented within virtually every religious tradition.
I'm going to use Christianity as my primary example here, as it's the majority religion
in the West, but this same analysis can be undertaken with any tradition.
Exclusivism is the position that one's own religion is the only true religion, and that
therefore it's the only religion that can provide salvation or liberation.
For one example of exclusivism, we can look at a statement from the Protestant Congress
on World Mission in Chicago from 1960.
In the years since World War II, more than one billion souls have passed into eternity,
and more than half of these went to the torment of hellfire without even hearing of Jesus
Christ, who he was, or why he died on the cross.
We can see that this position can provide assurances to someone that their own tradition
is right, and it can also motivate that person to go out and convert others.
However, many people have been troubled by exclusivism, especially as they come to know
and care about members of other religious traditions.
The problem is this.
How can a just and loving God condemn to eternal hellfire billions of good people who just
happen to be born into another religious tradition?
Theologians who have trouble believing this have developed alternatives to exclusivism.
Two of these are inclusivism and pluralism.
The position of inclusivism is that while one's own tradition, let's say Christianity
here, is the only one that contains complete truth, other traditions may have pieces of
the truth.
Salvation is still available to those who are outside of the tradition.
But here's a key point.
Insofar as anyone, Christian or not, will be saved, it's only through Jesus Christ.
So non-Christians who are saved may not know by what means they are saved, but they're
saved nonetheless.
For inclusivists, the grace of God is extended to all human beings, not just Christians.
And the saving work of grace can be accomplished even if the individual is not a member of
the Christian faith.
So non-Christians, who strive to lead a good life, in accordance with God's will, we could
say, are considered, to use theologian Karl Rahner's term, anonymous Christians.
This form of inclusivism allows Christians to maintain that salvation can only be understood
within a Christian framework, but that it's available universally.
Other theologians think that the step away from exclusivism is a good one, but that inclusivists
don't go far enough.
Pluralists reject the idea that any one religion has a monopoly on truth and salvation.
We should recall that pluralism is a feature of religion in many parts of the world, and
it's been quite common for people in China, Japan, or India throughout history to either
be connected with more than one tradition or to acknowledge that traditions other than
their own are true.
One form of pluralism holds that despite the outward appearance of difference, at the deepest
level, all religions are the same.
A common metaphor is that the different religions are different paths of the same mountain.
They all lead to the same summit, to an encounter with the divine, with ultimate reality, which
is known by different names and in different forms and different historical and cultural
contexts.
This form of pluralism tells us, if we could just see beneath the surface of our different
names and rituals and symbols, we'd see that we're all walking toward the same destination.
This theologian John Hick writes, the supreme being is referred to as God in a Christian
church, as Adonai in a Jewish synagogue, as Allah in a Muslim mosque, as Rama or Krishna
in a Hindu temple, and yet there's an important sense in which what's being done in the several
forms of worship is essentially the same.
Other pluralists deny the sameness of all religions and argue that this neglects the
profoundly important and often irreconcilable differences that exist among them.
If we truly want to respect and appreciate other traditions they argue, we must maintain
their distinctiveness and not try to blur the differences.
This pluralist approach begins with the notion that ultimate reality, God, the divine, is
beyond our ability to completely grasp.
We must acknowledge that as limited human beings, we can never understand divine reality
in its entirety.
The Sufi poet Jalaladin Rumi wrote a famous poem about an elephant in a dark room.
People who have never before seen an elephant walk into the room.
Each touches one part of the elephant, the trunk, the tusk, the ear, and thinks they
know what the elephant is like.
Rumi concludes by writing, each of us touches one place and understands the whole in that
way.
If each of us held a candle there and if we went in together, we could see it.
In this form of pluralism, no religion possesses truth in its entirety.
Each tradition possesses its powerful truths, but also its blind spots.
Each religious tradition approaches ultimate reality from a particular perspective and
each can shed a valuable light.
So the more religious traditions we welcome into the conversation, the more illumination
there will be.
This is why learning about each other's religious traditions and engaging in interfaith dialogue
in a spirit of openness and humility is so essential.
In America, the general trend has been away from exclusivism and towards inclusivism and
pluralism.
According to a recent survey, a significant majority of Americans believe that it is possible
for people not of their faith to go to heaven.
This is a remarkable change from surveys taken in the early 20th century, which at times
showed that over 90% of respondents believed that Christianity was the one true religion.
What has led to this remarkable change?
One explanation is that people's social networks have become more religiously diverse.
According to recent surveys, more and more Americans have members of their families in
circle of friends who are from religious traditions different than their own.
About 25% of Americans are in a committed relationship, married or otherwise, with someone
of a different religion.
And 75% of Americans have a close friend of another religion.
On average, half of the members of people's circle of closest friends are from a religion
outside of their own.
And two-thirds of Americans have at least one extended family member of another religion.
And there's not only a growing number of multi-faith families, but also an increase in the number
of multi-faith individuals, people who feel a connection to more than one tradition.
As our families, friends, and communities are becoming more religiously diverse, and
as we learn about other religions, we as a people are becoming more pluralistic and placing
a greater value on religious diversity.
It's simply difficult for many Americans to believe that someone from a different religion
whom they love and admire will be sent to hell.
It's worth stepping back and reflecting on the coexistence of the two very different
trends we've discussed.
On the one hand, an increase in conservative Christian denominations that have foundations
strongly grounded in a literal reading of the Bible and a set of moral absolutes.
On the other hand, an increase in unaffiliated people, multi-faith families and individuals,
greater religious fluidity and pluralism.
Perhaps we can see these two trends as opposing responses to the same phenomena, the rapid
pace of change brought about by globalization, a sense of instability, increased diversity.
On one side, there's a desire to establish firm foundations in light of the dramatic
changes we're seeing in the world and our nation.
On the other side is a thoroughgoing embrace of the change, a rethinking of the notions
of religious affiliation and religious truth.
While there's a trend toward pluralism and tolerance, at the same time there are inevitable
conflicts, misunderstandings, and sometimes outright bigotry and violence.
I've chosen religion and violence to be our final topic because the question of how religious
traditions coexist is a vital one for our age.
Given the tensions among and within religions, how do we address the ever-present possibility
of religious violence?
What's the link between religion and violence?
Does religion cause violence?
I'd like to suggest that no simple statement such as religion does or does not cause violence
can be made.
Rather, we have to begin with a much more complex relationship that I'll try to represent
with the following equation.
Certain kinds of religion, plus political, economic, and cultural factors, plus social
and organizational factors, when combined can lead to an increased probability of violence.
Our analysis can proceed from this equation and will look more deeply at each category.
First, we'll look at the role played by religion.
I want to begin with a statement that I hope you'll remember long after this course is
over.
Differences within religions are as great if not greater than the differences among
them.
On every major issue you can imagine, there's a wide range of views and interpretations,
a continuum of positions within each tradition.
Let me illustrate this.
Take the issue of women's authority within religious traditions.
Every religion will contain views ranging from complete patriarchy on one side to full
egalitarianism on the other.
Or take the issue of attitudes towards other religions.
As we've just seen, we can find a range from exclusivism to pluralism within each religion.
So for every issue, imagine a set of continuum.
The range of views found within all of the traditions.
What we discover is that there will often be more agreement about important issues going
across traditions on the same position of the continuum than going along the continuum
within one religious tradition.
In other words, a pluralistic Christian who believes that women should be ordained will
have more in common in important ways with a Jew or Buddhist who's also pluralistic
and egalitarian than with a fellow Christian who's an exclusivist and believes women should
not be ordained.
Now we can apply this picture to the issue of violence.
On the issue of violence, there's a continuum of views, from militancy to pacifism and many
positions in between, which will exist in virtually every religion.
So we need not see religion in general, or even a particular religion as a cause of violence.
Rather, the problem is certain forms of religion that can be found in almost every tradition.
Clearly, religion is one of the major sources of fanaticism in the world.
Religion is able to inspire the most noble, compassionate actions, but it can also lead
to the most destructive, violent actions because it makes ultimate claims.
Here comes when people give absolute, uncritical obedience and commitment to a religious text,
doctrine, leader, or institution.
Mahatma Gandhi once argued against unreflective acceptance of authority by saying,
I decline to be bound by any interpretation of Scripture, however learned it may be if
it is repugnant to reason or moral sense.
Rather than unreflective, uncritical obedience, other factors that are often associated with
religious extremism and violence are,
1.
A zealous puritanism, an intense drive to purify the religion, there's a focus on weeding
out heretics from true believers.
2.
A dualistic thinking that divides the world into us and them, that sees the world in terms
of a cosmic battle of good versus evil, the army of God versus the army of Satan.
And 3.
A next-worldly focus with an emphasis on martyrdom.
I want to emphasize, these factors do not necessarily give rise to violence, but when
they're all combined, they provide an ideology that often inspires and shapes militancy.
These visions characterized by absolute certainty and zealous puritanism, good evil, dualism
and martyrdom can be very appealing, because they radically simplify the world.
They provide a sense of purpose, empowerment and belonging to someone who might feel disempowered,
hopeless and lost.
An interview terrorist said,
When they trained me and put the gun in my hand, I went from being a wretched refugee
to a soldier in God's army.
Now think about the fact that that terrorist began as a wretched refugee.
The factors that gave rise to that condition are also relevant.
And this brings us to the political, economic and cultural factors.
Clearly, religion is neither a necessary nor a sufficient explanation for fanaticism
and violence.
Many militant and terrorist groups have been secular after all.
And most religious people are not violent extremists.
The religious orientation that we just described is more likely to give rise to violent movements
in particular contexts, environments that produce grievances and lead some to seek solutions
in militant religious groups.
Non-religious factors include the lack of opportunities for legitimate political expression,
treating those who are disenfranchised to look for other methods of influence.
Other factors include ethnic conflicts, disputes over land, that's one of the most important,
poverty and unemployment, and a cultural environment that glorifies violence and martyrdom.
In addition, there are psychological factors, such as a sense of alienation, humiliation,
hopelessness and rage, which can be found at both individual and group levels.
Such conditions make people vulnerable to recruitment.
And this brings us to social and organizational factors.
Very few terrorists act completely alone.
Most terrorists, at least to some degree, were recruited by someone.
They received support and training.
In his book, Acts of Faith, Ebu Patel writes,
When we look back in the lives of religious terrorists, we find a web of individuals
and organizations that shaped them.
These young killers are not, for the most part, dramatically deranged individuals.
They're kids who fell into murderously manipulative hands.
Many extremist organizations have charismatic leaders who are able to find and recruit vulnerable
people, a process that's become easier in the internet age.
Studies show that violent extremism is assisted greatly by cyberspace.
Injustices against a group can be shown repeatedly online in order to foster greater amounts
of anger and resentment.
And that's then channeled through the recruitment process, which can also occur via websites
and chat rooms online.
The main purpose of seeking to understand all these sources of religious extremism and
violence is so that we can prevent it in the future.
If all three of these categories, religious worldview, the political and economic environment,
and the recruiting organization, can be factors in explaining religious violence, they can
also play a role in reducing religious violence.
Let's begin with religion.
We've seen that certain forms of religion may increase the likelihood of militancy.
But one can find alternatives to these views without leaving their religion.
Religious transformation doesn't need to involve conversion to another religion.
Rather, it can mean embracing a new form of the tradition, one that's nonviolent, one
that combines faith and critical inquiry, one that favors dialogue with other traditions
rather than bigotry.
The statistics we saw earlier lead us to another strategy, promote diverse social networks.
The survey showed that having friends and neighbors of different religions leads to
increasing pluralism and tolerance.
This is important, not just in America, but everywhere.
Ashutosh Varshini, in his book, Ethnic Conflict in Civic Life, shows that a similar dynamic
holds for India.
Inter-ethnic and inter-religious organizations and networks are agents of peace.
Varshini found that basically the more civic organizations existed in a community and brought
people together from different religious traditions, the more likely that community was to avoid
outbreaks of violence when problems arose.
Political and economic factors must also be addressed.
Anger and resentment caused by poverty, unemployment, oppression, and the lack of any outlet for
one's voice can boil over into violence.
According to a recent study, poor people in countries with high levels of unemployment
are more vulnerable to recruitment by militant organizations.
Studies have shown that nations with large numbers of young, single, unemployed men face
increased risks of instability and violence.
So assisting vulnerable young people through job training and career counseling can help
move them away from extremist organizations to more productive, nonviolent pursuits.
Finally, we'll look at organizational factors.
All of these religious and political factors that we've discussed usually don't lead
people to militancy unless they become part of an organization.
Militants tend to be highly motivated and well organized.
It seems oxymoronic to talk about intensely motivated moderates, but that's what needs
to happen.
Moderate organizations that stand for nonviolence and dialogue must propagate their writings,
create websites, build organizations, and recruit with as much if not more zeal than
the violent extremists.
These organizations must target the vulnerable young people that the extremist groups are
going after.
This is precisely what Yvou Patel did.
Patel founded his own organization, the Interfaith Youth Corps, which is dedicated to bringing
together young people from different religions and having them work side by side on service
projects.
We have seen that one of the greatest sources of peace and one of the greatest sources of
conflict among people is religion.
Here's what I believe.
Religion becomes dangerous when it focuses on the drawing and defending of boundaries.
This is the realm of us and them from which comes division and strife.
Religion at its best is about the dissolving of boundaries and the experience of connection.
It's a process by which we overcome separation and feel our kinship with all of creation,
our sense of belonging to larger realities that both transcend and include us.
This brings us to the end of our 24 lecture journey to become more culturally literate
about religion.
In our first lecture, we talked about the surveys that reveal the lack of religious
literacy among Americans today.
Given what you now know about religion, you can play a role in addressing the problem
of ignorance about other religions and in combating intolerance and stereotypes.
If you read an article about an Islamic holiday, Hindu ritual, or a debate about church-state
separation, if you're invited to a bar mitzvah or a baptism, if you find out that someone
you know meditates or fasts on certain days, if you see an ancestral altar or an image
of Sikh gurus or a yin-yang symbol in someone's home, you'll now understand the larger context
and have a greater appreciation for the religious commitments.
I want to commend you for devoting your time to this valuable project and for your willingness
to learn about and reflect on the religious traditions of the world.
I believe that in order to bring about peace, we must stand with humility, openness, and
wonder, alongside our neighbors from other religious traditions, cultures, and backgrounds,
ready to engage in dialogue about the things that matter most to us.
Learning about each other's religions can be a point of entry into such conversations,
which can make us better neighbors and better citizens.
For in the end, religions can't do anything.
People do.
And by understanding the religious traditions that have shaped our fellow human beings,
we connect more deeply with them.
By cultivating our religious literacy, we better understand our neighbors, our world,
and the events of our time.
