Hi, this is Paul. A lot of people have been asking for me to do some work on this conversation
between John Lennox and Jordan Peterson. It's a good conversation. It's a conversation
that I think a lot of Christians have been waiting for. But before I talk about it, I
want to contextualize it a little bit because YouTube sort of has this culture where it's
tribal match of red rover where you're just, you know, let's have Jordan come over and
Jordan will come over into the, first the battle will be into the Christian camp and
then the battle will be between the Orthodox and the Catholics and the Protestants and
how many versions of Protestants and alignment with Pope Francis or against Pope Francis
or, I don't even know the intramurals the Orthodox have, but I certainly imagine they
do have their own intramurals. So I want to contextualize this a little bit because today
I released the video where I talked about Jordan Peterson and Bill Maher. And part of
me, before I release a video like that, part of me knows that's going to bang, hit, you
know, number one of the last 10 videos. YouTube analytics kind of shows you that thing. And
a lot of people will watch that and the comment section will sort of get flooded with four
against Jordan Peterson stuff and yada, yada. And this, this kind of thing, I just sort
of endure. Part of me would far rather put out a video that mostly people from the corner
watch and the usual suspects sort of put comments below and we can sort of continue to process
these conversations, this drama, these journeys as we go along instead of sort of having the
internet of hot takes and the internet of beefs sort of take over the comment section
and cloud the conversation. Part of me would love to see people just sort of sit back, sit
back and, and think a little bit more thoroughly about what exactly we're looking for from
Jordan with respect to this religious question. Because if you, if you think about it more
than your tribal instinct sort of jumps onto you for more than a minute, especially if
you, let's say, don't have a personal relationship with Jordan Peterson, meaning you don't have
a kind of friendship where you have his cell phone number and you can text him and he'll
text right back, or you can call and then go out to coffee and such and such. And the
vast majority of us do not, myself included, what, what really is our participation in
this game? And to me, it's sort of connected to this much broader cultural game that we
play of participation with the heavenly host of people we see on the screens and what they
believe and what they don't believe. And I, I, I touched that a little bit when on Twitter
the other day, I just caught that Heather Hying and Brett Weinstein were doing a live
stream and that, and so I just, I wonder what they're talking about. So I just click over
there for a minute or two, try to get a sense of what they're talking about. And then Brett
sort of looks across the table at Heather with a, with really a lovely look. And when
I saw them at ARC, I said to them, you know, complete, completely apart from all of the
kinds of things that I could sit down and have 10 hours of conversation with Brett about
with respect to religion, which would probably go absolutely nowhere. I just wanted to say
to them, you know, one of the things I really love about your channels is the way that you
two interact with each other. And Brett was just looking adoringly at his wife. And I
thought that alone is an enormous thing on the internet, just to have a happily married
couple who are thinkers and talkers, regardless of whether you think they're right and wrong
on, on how many different issues they're doing something good in the world, just by, just
by being married well on camera before the internet. Now, is that everything I could
always hopefully ask for? No, of course not. Do I have other ideas about religion and other
desires about what people would have in their life with respect to their belief and their
religion? No, of course I do. But a little bit of, a little bit of understanding about
how small we are today, I did a Randall's conversation with someone that I, that came to
the Washington conference and probably a good number of the Randall's conversations will
be behind the $3 membership thing, not because I'm trying to keep it from people, but just
because many of the people that have conversations with, they want to tell their story and they
don't really want their story on the whole open internet. And so, you know, if you're
really interested in it, $3 a month, you can unsubscribe at any time. If you want to go
and look and watch the Randall's conversations, there they are. Will there be other Randall's
conversations not behind the paywall? Absolutely. But that's probably where they're going to be
because many people have the sense to maybe not just share everything in their story out
on the internet all the time for anyone to see just passing by. Not that $3 is a huge
barrier to find out, but the truth is, it's just going to keep things there. Anyway, so
I asked one of the questions I usually ask people, which was, well, how did you find
my channel? And he told me the story and I, he had been unemployed for a little period
of time and he was watching a lot of critical drinker and he'd kind of been through all
the critical drinker videos. And then I popped up and first there was this horror that, oh,
either this is going to be an angry old man shouting at the sky or it's going to be some
evangelical pastor who's trying to use pop culture to wheedle his way in to get that
message across. And what he discovered was, of course, something a little bit different.
And then he watched a video after video and even cared enough to come to a conference in
Washington, DC. And then at the conference say, I'd really love to do a Randall's conversation
with you. So we set that up and we did it today. All that to say is people have lives and the
development of their faith or non faith is a very subtle extensive process, only part of
which, and this is what I talked with Rafe Kelly a little bit about, only part of which is actually
sort of accessible to us in real time in terms of our awareness and our consciousness. So much of
this is happening at levels in our, even within our own cognition, but also in the cognition that
happens between us in the world at levels we don't simply understand. And in my opinion, the best
language we have for describing that is language about the work of the Holy Spirit, language about
the spirits and principalities and powers. That's why I use that language because it's that level
that all of these transactions are underway. And that is as true for Jordan Peterson as it is for
any of us. If you're really curious about Jordan's faith development, the video I would actually
recommend is one that just popped up on my feed, Tammy Peterson Rosary testimony. It's a beautiful
little film about Tammy's cancer and her healing. And you gain a lot of insight into what is probably
the most formative relationship of Jordan Peterson's life. And the miracle that rescued Tammy from
cancer, and I'll call it a miracle, is something that impacts her family deeply. And as the news came
out recently, she has begun the process to become an adult convert to Catholicism. And I pray that
this process is a beautiful one. And, you know, there could be a bunch of Protestants, there's stuff
in this video that are going to trigger some Protestants and fair enough. But as I said to the
rando and the randos conversations, they said, what piece of advice were you given that sort of
sticks with you? And I had to stop and really think and who gave it to you. And the one the one
thing that I said to him was one thing that I learned from my father is pick your battles. And
what picking your battles is all about is keep the first things the first things. And whether or
not the miracles trigger you or the rosary triggers you or the Virgin Mary triggers you or
Catholicism triggers you or whatever triggers you. Here's a woman that had a new lease on life. And
the story is intimately connected with a Catholic worker who came close to her in her moment of
need. The relationship that she has with her son, she talked about how, you know, when she was
diagnosed with cancer, she told her son and it just he was just, you know, floored by this. Of
course he was. And anyone will tell you, especially priests will tell you that the rosary is not
sort of a magic cure all to to beat cancer. There's a reason we call things miracles.
I'm waiting on a plumber. He said he'd be here at two o'clock. It's three o'clock and he's not
here. It's the way it goes sometimes with people, but when I think about this story, I think about
the providence of God and the work of God in the world and the work of God, even in YouTube and
between us and in all of these little comings and goings. I know I probably, a lot of you have
already clicked away because you were just looking for Jordan Peterson, John Lennox, dumb, dumb, dumb.
No, no, let's take our time because these are people and think about them as people and think
about what molds them and shapes them. And because as a pastor, I will tell you it is these journeys
in life that mold and shape people. And if you are a pastor or a priest, what you work with is the
care of the soul. And in many ways, it's deeply intertwined with the care of the story. And
this is what we work on. Now, I'll go desperately wanted me to watch a recent video by Apologetics
Roadshow in which the Apologetics Roadshow guy brought out this Peter Atkins, Unbelievable.
I think this is probably part of the big conversation series that Justin was doing a
number of years ago. And what this clip basically demonstrates is exactly the point that C.S. Lewis
makes in the beginning of his book, Miracles. I ball for evidence, heaven forbid. I find that
very difficult question. I'm just interested, what sort of evidence could science or the physical
universe present to you that would make you think actually that that is evidence that there's a
mind behind this? I find that a very difficult question. If I were looking in the Bible for
evidence, heaven forbid, I would expect to see maybe increase in entropy as equal to Q reversible
divided by temperature. And that is, if there was literally an equation in the Bible like that,
rather than all this wishy washy elastic writing that it pervades. This is so interesting because
wishy washy elastic writing, but then he goes on. Something like that, that they discovered in the
Bible. Well, exactly. The problem is, would it actually make you, I mean, is there anything from,
you know, is there any kind of evidence in the universe that could make, I mean, if the stars
lined up to spell, Peter, please believe in me, it's about time. I put it down to madness.
To personal madness. It sounds like, Peter, that there's no evidence that will persuade you away
from atheism. Well, to be honest, I think that's probably the case. In that sense, do you even
have an evidence based view if you're actually committed to atheism a priori? Well, I'm predicting
that there will be no such evidence. That's not quite the same thing as being committed to it,
a priori. I can't. But you said there's no evidence that would persuade you otherwise.
I think it's much more likely that I would have gone mad than such evidence would have been provided.
It's a brilliant clip. It's a brilliant clip. And again, CS Lewis makes this point at the beginning
of his book, Miracles, and he uses it with its completely other illustration. He says,
the only person that I ever know that the only person that I've known who has
claimed to have seen a ghost doesn't believe in ghosts. This is the way we work. You know,
all this talk of evidence, yadda, yadda, yadda, this stuff has been YouTube
boilerplate with atheism versus Christians forever. And the whole thing is hogwash.
People believe or they don't believe. And most of what goes into their belief or unbelief
is by no means the product of some rationalist calculation. And this is one of the big points
that John Vervakey makes. And he's dead on right. You know, reason has more to do with
relationship. This conversation that John, now I'm bringing every video into this video before
I even get to the video that I sort of said I was going to do, but that's okay.
I'm going to make a proposal for which I think there's an argument. It's based on
convergence of quite a few people's work, but perhaps most important to me right now is the
work of James Filler and his book on Neoplatonism, Heidegger, and the history of being, which is
relation as ontological ground. And his proposal is what the Neoplatonists had argued is that
contrary to an Aristotelian Cartesian framework, substance, individually, independently existing
things are not the ultimate ground of reality. Relation is. So it's not that relations emerge
from the things related, but the things related emerge from this field of relationality. You
can hear whitehead here, and you can also surprisingly hear physics, both that upper
end of relativity and the lower end of quantum. So this idea of relationality and what's really
important about that is it binds reality to information, which is inherently relational,
intelligibility that's inherently relational. And why am I going on about this? Well, think about
what you just said. You said the Christian idea and the Trinity, and this is Filler's argument,
too. The Trinity is, if properly understood, and I think the Eastern Orthodox Church fathers,
I know you might be Catholic or something. I don't mean to be insulting, but people like,
you know, Dionysus. There's a lot of sharing, a lot of these church fathers across the Protestant
Catholic Orthodox realm. Yes. And Maximus, one Western person, Erogena,
and also Nicholas of Cusa, who is Catholic, really make this very strong proposal that the
Trinity is actually a way of trying to exemplify that the ultimacy, that ultimacy is inherently
relational. And then if sacredness is about connectedness, about this dynamic reciprocally
open, reciprocally opening relationality, we can see why sacredness seeks ultimacy.
Just explain to me how you're using the word ultimacy. I don't think I've got this.
Ultimacy means, okay, so your life depends on an everyday practical distinction between
appearance and reality, things that are illusory versus the things that are real. Okay. And it's
interesting that if you do a, like McGee and Barbara, if you do research into what is a necessary
feature of wisdom, it's the ability to see through illusion and into reality. That's one of the
defining features of the wise person. So notice something though, that we can only judge one
thing as illusory by comparing it to something that is real. There's a point made by Plato and
Marlo Ponti. So saying that everything's an illusion, actually it's like saying everything
is tall. It doesn't make any sense, right? Real is a comparative term. It's an
inherently comparative term. And then what we're doing is we're seeking what, what is that against
which all the comparisons are made. And all the work on, you know, when people experience what
they call the really real and mystical experience, it shows that people will, so what happens?
Yaden's work, when people, let's say they have a mystic and they encounter the really real,
they change their lives, their relationships, because they want to be in closer conformity.
So there's this, I want to be one with what is most real. That's what I'm meaning by
ultimate. And then what I'm saying is, go back to this picture that I was showing.
So if you want to get a sense of, let's say, Jordan Peterson's heart, now he said many,
many times that, well, you know, the details, the details of his personal convictions with
respect to the define or private classical modernist move. But the most, I think John
Vervecchi is right there. Relationality is what brings the facts, the building blocks, the things,
the stuff into right relation in our lives. Because again, this is sort of a basic thing
that we've been talking about in the corner for a very long time. You've heard commentatorial
explosiveness here in this room here in my messy office, there are, I could spend the rest of my
life just focusing on the things in this office and the relationality between this and that. But
relationality does is sort of stack things up in a value hierarchy. And then suddenly
it's the relation value hierarchies, of course, comparative relationality between this and that.
And so when Tammy Peterson is deathly ill with cancer, that no one survives. And Jordan has
acafesia from getting off these benzos and Michaela is running him to Russia. I saw, I probably won't
live long enough to read the definitive biography of these people, but it is going to be the most
insane book. It is going to be so good because their lives are quite, quite remarkable. And
everybody just sort of wants to have a little internet game. Is he or isn't he? What is he or
what isn't he? Or he's this or he's that? People, yes, you can talk about people that way. Those
are useful categories. We use them all the time. We have to because it's shorthand and because
lives are short yada yada yada. But when it comes to higher and higher resolution with respect to
people and our relations with them, deeper things matter. Now, the first thing to know about John
Lennox, if you've been around the internet apologetics community or at least around
unbelievable long enough, you know who this guy is. Now he kind of sits there and he kind of looks
like a grandpa. He's not wearing a fancy suit and his hair is kind of over the place and his
eyebrows are sticking up and you might think, do not think that for a minute. I call this guy
the Irish apologetics kung fu panda because he is sharp and he has his act together with respect
to these things. And this is the reason Justin Breyer Lee has had this guy opposite Peter Atkins.
Opposite, I don't know how many people again and again and again and again because he is no dummy.
He's been around the church. He's been around the faith. He's a mathematician. I mean, he is a very
sharp cookie and sort of this happy laid back older guy thing just lures you in and then he's
got you. That is John Lennox. That is who this man is. And so it's really cool that one way or another,
you know, he and Peterson are in a conversation together and now there are conversations that
Jordan has that go badly because Jordan steps on them. He gets excited about what he wants to say
and it's like, you might as well take the other person out of the room Jordan because you're
basically, you could do what I do and just line him up on a video and then just go off on your own.
But not this conversation. This conversation really goes well. And I said all of that sort of to
frame it because what does Jordan believe in his heart? Well, you can ask, you can go back and look
at Jordan, talk about faith, go back to that. What is it? Lawrence College? St. Lawrence College?
Well, maybe this is the plumber. No, it's not the plumber.
And when Jordan says, you know, what about religion? And he says, well, you know, this talk,
this chattering thing about what you think you believe, that's a far secondary importance
than how you act and what you act from. And that idea is true. And it should sober both
Christians and non-Christians alike because a great deal of what pastors major in in church is
getting Christians to actually sort of live out their belief. And it's very dangerous for atheists
because they sort of live out Christian belief from layers beneath them. This video is going to
come out after my eye and Hershey, I leave video and where I talk about some about that.
So what Jordan is doing here is comparing notes because
even though at this certain level, Jordan keeps getting asked about, does he believe in God? Yada,
yada, yada. There's a lot more going on about this. And Jordan's been thinking hard about this
stuff. And he's been testing people when he gets the chance. And now he's got someone in the room
that he clearly respects. And he wants to do some note comparing. And I can't think of a better guy
for him to talk to. Here we go. So I wanted to start by asking you your opinion on some
questions that have gone through my mind recently. And there's one that's very specific, I think
I'll start with, which is that, you know, I think for, for a lot of my life, and certainly when I
was younger, I really bought the doctrine that there was an unbridgeable gap between the scientific
way of looking at the world and the Christian way of looking at the world, let's say. And
that the split, the split, the apparent split between science and religion was a consequence
of an incommensurate dichotomy of worldviews, you know, and that the church had been opposed to
scientific progress, at least in part because the scientific viewpoint existed in contradiction to
Christian doctrine. We sold the fridge. I discovered someone had, this is the weird
stuff that happens at church, part of the introduction or the interruption. Someone
had stored a whole bunch of things of potato chips in the freezer, at least been in that
freezer for like before the pandemic. Well, you're still good. So it gives the pastor a little snack.
Anyway, back to it. Sure. But then, especially in recent years, in the last 10 years,
I've started to understand that that was something like a French Enlightenment slash
rationalist propaganda campaign, and that there's a different, that the relationship between
science and Christianity is much closer than I had imagined. I caught on to this a little bit by
reading Jung, but that just as the universities develop, I love the fact that he used the word
cotton down to it. And those, these subtle things are helpful because they help a broader range of
people listen to Peterson. Anyway, out of the monastic tradition, the notion that the natural
world was intelligible to the inquiring logos, that it had an intrinsic logic that studying it
would be beneficial to man, first of all, that it would be comprehensible and beneficial, and that
that was actually a kind of moral obligation. That all struck me as like axiomatic statements of
faith that were predicated on the Christian tradition that were the preconditions for the
emergence of science. And, you know, I've tried to take that idea apart over the last three or
four years to see if I can find any flaws in it. But I think the evidence that the universities
emerged out of the monastic tradition, instead of emerging contrary to that, that's absolutely
incontrovertible on every grounds you could possibly imagine. And the notion that you need to believe
in the intelligibility of the world, the capability of the human logos, and the,
and the beneficial consequence of acquiring knowledge, you have to believe in all that to
even get the scientific enterprise going. I also think that's incontrovertible and that those are
axioms of faith. And so I don't know how, I don't know if those views are in accordance with your
views or what you think about that. So I'd like to hear what you think about that. This is extremely
interesting to me because I never saw the tension between Christianity and science because very
early on as a teenager, I was introduced to the writings of a scientist who was a Christian
who drew my attention to something Alfred North Whitehead wrote. And it was really put in much
simpler language by C.S. Lewis when he wrote, men became scientific because they expected
law and nature, and they expected law and nature because they believed it a law giver.
And so very early on, and I was fascinated by the idea that actually modern science
is a legacy of the biblical worldview. And therefore it's no accident that the pioneers,
Galileo, Kepler, Newton, Maxwell, and so on were believers in God. And as you pointed out,
it underpins the tradition that lies behind the great universities of the world, that the doctrine
of creation was actually the belief, the underlying presupposition that allowed people to do science.
So I've come over my life to the conclusion that science and the biblical worldviews sit very
comfortably together, but it's science and atheism that do not sit comfortably together,
which I know is quite a controversial statement, but at least it gets discussion going.
Now, when I was in, I'm going to say the word again, all of you Scots out there,
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Edinburgh, New College, having a festival, Alistair McGrath made similar
points. And again, we're facing what was sort of a, I mentioned in previous video, a lot of what
has sort of reverberated through the last century was the modernist fundamentalist fight.
And that fight was, it was certainly on the American scene. It was in Europe. And I think,
in many ways, it's that fight that sort of set up the imagination that these two things are at odds,
but I'll have to look for that McGrath video. We'll see if it's up yet. The university sometimes
can be really slow about putting their stuff up. They have last year's up. Yeah, see, they've got
NT Wright and they've got Rowan Williams, but they don't have this year's up yet. Anyway, when it
gets up, I'm going to keep looking for it because Alistair McGrath's talk, I thought was excellent,
and it touched on this. Completed a couple of documentaries with the Daily Wearer Plus crew,
and one of them was in Athens and two were in Jerusalem. And we were trying to puzzle out the
relationship between Greek thought and Judeo-Christian thought, most particularly the strange
happenstance that the Greek idea of an intrinsic logos in the world seemed to dovetail with the
Judeo-Christian idea of, you might say, of the word incarnate in the human psyche. And
it seemed to me and obviously to other observers that there was an affinity between the Greek
idea that the cosmos had an intrinsic comprehensibility and the idea that the proper orientation
for human beings ethically would be one of honest communication and investigation. And
those two things snapped on top of each other. It made me think of something that I actually
learned from Richard Dawkins, and I think this is a deep idea. Dawkins wrote a very influential
essay where he claimed that any organism that can function in an environment has to be a microcosm
of that environment. So for example, if you were an alien biologist and you were presented with a
terrestrial bird and you took the bird apart, you could infer from the bird's structure the
gravitational pull of the earth, the density of the atmosphere, the chemical composition of the
atmosphere, the electron. Remember what Viveki said about relationality? Now sort of here is
implicit that well sort of the environment comes first and then the bird comes second.
But of course the environment and the bird are of course, they're working at different speeds,
but they are also both changing. And so it's sort of the correlation between the two. And again,
the conceptualization of the two itself is also a product of a lot of this. But the correlation
of the two is in fact this relationality. The electromagnetic frequency that the sunlight
was, what would you say, at what electromagnetic frequencies the sun's light was most amenable
to vision, etc. You could derive a model of the environment from the physiology of the organism.
Now I know that there were medieval ideas that were deep in Christianity that the human soul
was a microcosm of the cosmos, that it reflected the structure of reality itself. And I've been
thinking about this in terms of how the world might be best conceptualized. So there's a mix
of ideas here. And if an organism has to be a microcosm of the cosmos in order to function,
and we are a microcosm in that regard, and we are a personality that runs on a narrative,
which we seem to be, then in what way is it reasonable to claim that the cosmos itself
is best conceptualized as something that could be entered into relationship with
personality to personality, and that that's not the most fundamental reflection of reality. I mean,
it seems to me that that's where Dawkins thought eventually points, if his proclamation that
an organism has to be a microcosm, an accurate microcosm in order to survive is accurate. So
now that. Long, long time ago, for those of you who have been watching this channel for years,
and there are a few thousand of you. Pascal, spirit of finesse, spirit of geometry,
should have been triggered by this. Years ago, when I was talking to John Varvakey about this,
when I, when I first came across, you know, it's interesting how much Pascal is in Lewis,
as I've been reading this biography of Lewis by Alistair McGrath. I should really do a much
deeper dive into Pascal himself, because Pascal seemed to figure a lot of the stuff out. And,
of course, Pascal was very early in, you know, early modern period. But this, basically, I hear,
I hear Peterson talking about, this is the spirit of finesse, that the way and this sort of connects
up with the mode that you have to enter into when dealing with persons is the appropriate mode for
religion. Now, the spirit of geometry is an appropriate mode. This also sort of maps on to
Ian McGilchrist's two hemispheres of the brain. But the spirit of finesse is the proper mode,
because now take this, this idea that he brought from Dawkins. The reason that
religion is shaped the way it is, and this is where Peter Atkins is told, well, there's, if
there's an equation in it, no, you don't understand. And every time Brett Weinstein starts talking about
this updating of wisdom, and that the old rules, and he's thinking about that religions are these,
these books of rules, and what religious people are, is they just keep following these little
rules. Now, again, rules are handy things, and rules are good things, and rules are fine. But you
cannot sort of reduce everything down to these little rules, because of this divide that Pascal
noted between sort of these two modes, the spirit of finesse and the spirit of geometry,
rule-based is sort of geometry, you can reduce geometry down into a bunch of rules.
But you can't pursue life that way. And I think John Revecky runs through well,
why sort of this rule-based approach doesn't work, because of commentatorial explosiveness,
because the number of rules that you would need, multiplies infinitely, because of the
commentatorial explosiveness of the world. Now, if you don't know what commentatorial
explosiveness is, you can go watch Awakening for the Meaning Crisis, it's this thing that I run
through. It's the basis of what led Jordan to a whole bunch of this, that via cognitive science,
what we do when we engage productively with the world is a massive compressive and reduction
effort to sort of break the world down into sizable parts that we can productively engage
with. In other words, we engage with the logos of the world productively, because things sort of
scale and they fractal down. I don't know if that made any sense to you, but it made sense to me.
Dovetails with the idea that the logos as a personality, so that would be the Judeo-Christian
concept, can investigate the logos of the universe and that those things dovetail. So now, I know
that's a conflict. And of course, the image of God is in there too. We are made in God's image,
and this personality, this personhood, this spirit of finesse, this mode of person, of relationality
is, in fact, the mode that we properly, we are like God in that way. We are children of God in
that way. Paul uses that phrase in the book of Acts. And...
...mismash of ideas, but I'm interested in your thoughts on that.
No, those are good ideas, Jordan.
Well, I think there's a lot in that actually. And I recall listening to you, you have a very
interesting lecture on Genesis 1. And when you came to this statement that human beings are made
in the image of God, you paused and you pointed out that this was the cornerstone of our civilization.
And I agree with that entirely. I think that what Dawkins is saying actually points to the exact
opposite direction to what his worldview is, which is atheism, of course. In other words,
that we can read off from creation something about the idea of a creator.
Now, we got to clean up this language. Atheism, of course. Okay, that's a shorthand for
that there is no governing, there is no governance of the, there is no personal governance of the
universe that we can relate to. So often, when we talk about God, this is what we're talking about.
And will Christians believe they can relate to the personal governance of the universe?
And Jordan Peterson basically made the argument that our person, our person ship, and I would,
I would push his argument even further that the evidence of the productivity of our person ship
in the universe and the capacity of the personal to colonize, and C.S. Lewis again goes through
this quite a bit in his book, Miracles, to colonize and manage and master the impersonal
is suggestive of the very fabric of the universe that the universe, in fact, is personal. Now,
one might argue, he's gonna flip this around and play devil's advocate that this is only
projection on our part. The difficulty with that argument is the universe seems receptive to person
hood. What C.S. Lewis does in Miracles is he uses reason and what's really helpful is to recognize
the ancient relationship between reason and this logos that Peterson is talking about. I
noticed this in Romans 12 on Sunday. You can see I have my Sunday school class up on the channel too,
but very famous passage. Therefore, I urge you brothers and sisters in view of God's mercy
to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God. And this is your
Lexham English Bible says reasonable service. And if he says true and proper service,
the RSV translation I grew up on was spiritual worship. And well, what is that? What is that?
What is that word beneath it? Well, it's this funny word that its root is in, its root is in logos.
And sometimes it's translated reasonable or rational and sometimes it's translated spiritual.
Well, what does that mean? What is the connection? Because if you would ask a modern, the logical
and the spiritual would seem out of source, but not if the spiritual is basically held together
and managed by the logos. It's the logos. It's, it's logos is the proper worship because you're
worshiping in line with the logos. So, so C.S. Lewis, there is then a God who is not a part of
nature, but nothing has yet been said to show that he must have created her. Might God and nature
both be self-existent and totally independent of each other? If you thought, and this is sort of
what you imagine, say, a sky daddy or super thing or something with something of that nature.
If you thought you would be a dualist and you would hold a view in which I consider manlier
and more reasonable than any form of naturalism, you might be many worse things than a dualist,
but I not fit, but I do not think dualism is true. There's an enormous difficulty conceiving two
things which simply coexist and have no other relation. If this difficulty sometimes escapes
our notice, that is because we are victims of picture thinking. We really imagine them side
by side in some kind of space, but of course, if they are both in a common space or a common time
or any kind of common medium whatsoever, they both would be part of a system and in fact of a nature.
Even if we succeed in eliminating such, such pictures, the mere fact of our think, of our
trying to think of them together slurs over the real difficulty because for that moment anyway,
our own mind is a common medium. If there can be such a thing as sheer otherness,
if things can coexist and no more, coexist and no more, it is at any rate conceptual in our mind
cannot form. And in the present instance, it seems especially gratuitous to try to form it,
for if we already know that God and nature have come into a certain relation, they have at the
very least a relation almost in one sense a common frontier in every human mind. The relation
which arises at that frontier are indeed the most complicated and intimate sort. That spearhead of
the supernatural capital S, which I call my reason links up to all my natural contents, my sensations,
emotions and the like. So completely that I call the mixture by a single word me. Again,
that is what I came called the unsymmetrical character of the frontier relations.
When the physical state of the brain dominates my thinking, it produces only disorder,
but my brain does not become any less a brain when it is dominated by reason capital R. Now again,
if you hear reason, you think, oh, Sam Harris, think of reason more as right relation.
And think of reason in terms of this Greek word, which is, has its roots sort of in this logos,
because that's sort of the thing that holds it together. It's this common medium.
The military metaphor of a spearhead is perhaps apparently ill-chosen. The supernatural reason
enters my natural being not like a weapon, more like a beam of light which illuminates
or a principle of organization which unifies and develops. Our whole picture of nature being
invaded, as if by a foreign enemy, was wrong. When we actually examine one of these invasions,
it looks much more like the arrival of a king among his own subjects, or a Mahut visiting
his own elephant. You have an elephant in a rider image. Look at that. The elephant may run amuck.
Nature may be rebellious, but from observing what happens when nature obeys,
it is almost impossible not to conclude that it is her very nature to be subject. All happens
as if she has been designed for that very role. And this, I think, is really what they are driving
at here. That, well, science seems to give us knowledge. Now, it can give us knowledge in
certain domains. Science struggles, in fact, to give us knowledge of itself, as John Verveke
points out numerous times. But the fact that it works as well as it does, even with us, suggests,
as C.S. Lewis says, that it is in fact a king, not science is the king, but personhood is the king,
and the immaterial world is, in fact, nature, or the material world is, in fact, nature.
And that's the kind of thing that we have, we experience in white technology,
is such a deep temptation for us because suddenly we are filled with our sensation of
our mastery over the world. And this, again, connects back up with the image of God.
And as you say, it dovetails perfectly. Let me put this another way. I'm a mathematician by
background and a linguist. I love language, and mathematics is a very sophisticated language,
but I love natural languages as well. And it seems to me that where this fits together best
is first in the fact that we can do science in the sense that there is a rational intelligibility
to the universe, which is the foundation of modern science and is a legacy of the biblical
worldview, so that the mathematical describability Einstein talked about,
he couldn't imagine any genuine scientists without faith in that. It's the axiom for doing
science is to believe the universe is intelligible. But if you ask for the rationale behind that,
again, not just intelligible, subjectable, that the universe in fact is subject to us,
and this, of course, is Genesis 1. Now, to the degree to which we are good stewards of this power,
the universe rebels against us because our subjection of it is not the kind of proper
subjection, but let's say the good master has to its dog who loves and cares for his dog.
Rafe and I talked about this in our conversation, but in fact, the exploiter who does not care
for the domain to which he has been given dominion, but in fact merely exploits and abuses.
We believe the universe is intelligible. It bears the imprint of a creator, and I see that at the
level of mathematics in its capacity to, at least in part, gives a handle on what's out there,
and also biology, where we have at the heart of every living cell the longest word we've ever
found, the genetic code. And all of that leads me to formulate it as follows, that we live in a
word-based universe, and that's the key of the Logos for me. Okay, and so what do you mean in that
case? So what do you mean specifically that we live in a word-based universe? What does that mean
for you on the broader conceptual landscape? Well, now that's a super important question,
because again, I believe in God. I don't believe in God. The book of James says, well, the devils
believe in God. They perhaps in some ways have clearer knowledge of God. If you think about
knowledge in terms of propositional knowledge, if you think about knowledge in terms of this
disembodied, abstract saber, if you use Spanish instead of cono sed, this kind of knowledge,
they certainly have that, but how about intimate knowledge? How about relational knowledge? Because
it's that's where all of this begins getting interesting. You can know that the girl across
the classroom is named Fulana, but to know her personally is a whole other thing.
Well, it means that this universe is not simply a product of natural unguided forces. It is a
product of a rational creator, an intelligent creator, and I believe even more than that,
a personal creator. Now, how I get there is only in part from a response to the universe as I find
it, the point you made about each organism being a microcosm of its environment. It's also, it seems
to me that there are two sources, two major sources of knowledge. There is, first of all,
observing the universe, science, etc. Then there are the humanities, but there's also the concept of
revelation in which I believe. In other words, it's not simply the human quest for the creator,
it's the creator revealing himself. So, for me, the anchor point in the end is that the
logos became human and we beheld his glory. In other words, we can see exactly what this means
in terms of what we can understand. That is the human being in which God encoded himself in Christ.
Those are big ideas, of course. They're very deep ideas. They need unpacking,
but that's essentially where I'm coming from. Okay, so now Lennox is going to bring out
argument made by Alvin Plantinga, made by C.S. Lewis, made before Lewis. I forget exactly who
Lewis cites for this argument, that in fact, if the universe is a product of randomness, would you
entrust yourself to this type of product? I'm jumping ahead a little bit, but this gets into
some of that and it gets into, again, the combinatorial explosiveness that you need.
Facts need prioritization. That's what values do. Again, Peterson's talked about this quite a bit
and he continues working through this. The scientific truth that's truest and beneficial
simultaneously is actually the conjunction in this Athens Jerusalem sense. It's actually the
conjunction of the intrinsic logic of the objective world making itself manifest to the
truthful penetrating psyche of the human observer. It's the interaction between those two that
constitute scientific truth and not one or the other. There's no getting, see, and what the
atheist materialists would like to do is to say, well, the world of facts speaks for itself,
but that's also technically untrue because there's an infinite number of facts.
They're certainly not all relevant. We can drown in the plethora of facts. That's the
combinatorial explosiveness point. We certainly will do that and to even communicate about them
or study them or even draw our attention to them. We have to prioritize and hierarchically arrange
the facts and we do that according to an ethic and I think that's actually, I think that is
incontrovertible on scientific grounds because we have seen the emergent realization in a whole
variety of domains, AI not least, that there are facts, but those facts have to be prioritized
and you prioritize facts with an ethic. That's absolutely right. There's a deeper problem
it seems to me with the atheist understanding of science and that is this. And again,
this yes or no God has become shorthand for a whole bunch of other consequential beliefs
and ideas. And so he says, atheist, okay, they're going to fight over this word again,
but his point is, well, what exactly is the nature of the universe? Is the universe intelligible?
And if the universe isn't intelligible, what are the implications of that intelligibility?
And what are the implications if in fact, our intelligibility is merely illusory?
That we do the science with our minds. Some people think the mind and the brain are the same. I
leave that aside since you're an expert on the mind and the brain. But I often say to people,
you know, what do you do science with? I've asked many leading scientists this,
they say, well, I do it with my mind and my brain. Give me a brief account of the brain.
And they say to me, well, the brain is the end product of a mindless, unguided process.
And I pause and I look up straight at the eye and I smile and I say, and you trust it. Tell me
honestly, if you knew that the computer you use or the machinery you use in the lab
was the end product of a mindless, unguided process, would you trust it? And the interesting thing,
I've done a lot of experiments with this little story and I've always got the answer, no, I would
not. So I say, you have a problem. In other words, your atheism is undermining the very
rationality you use not only to do science, but to construct any argument whatsoever. It's not
only shooting itself at the foot, it's worse than shooting itself at the brain. Let me,
and there's an example of John Lennox. Now this is a killer argument. And as again,
it's at this point that you just have to say, okay, he just landed a killer argument.
Do all the atheists just say, oh, okay, well, no, we don't change world views that way.
Just like, okay, Fulana comes over and introduces herself. Okay, well, it's going to take time,
it's going to take process, because all of this getting to know one another and know what the
world looks like from a different point of view, and know the implications of all of these ideas,
and even how in fact, these ideas that we are sort of crunching in this part of our mind,
which is conscious, is related to sort of the emergence of the ideas. Well,
we don't know. Now Peterson is about to go through this, and it's a very interesting thing because
he says, you know, these ideas appear to us. This is like revelation. Now that's,
that itself is a whole other interesting idea. And, and it's, I think it's a powerful point. I
don't know if, if I can go as far with it as Peterson would like to go with it, because,
and I don't think it's, I don't think it's wrong-headed, but it gets, it gets again to this
point that what is, what is it exactly that you want from Jordan? If Jordan would suddenly go
to a church, if Jordan would suddenly go to your church, well, you'd probably be excited and giddy
about that for a day or an hour, or maybe even a whole week or a month. But after that, it would
just kind of become normal things. And then in fact, if you had a little church fight in your
church over the color of the carpet, or others over some doctrinal, doctrinal position, etc, etc,
and Jordan was on the other side of it, you'd be annoyed with him.
These conversations are excellent because what they help us do is continue to process these,
that they help us do the work of engaging with a world
that is filled with the logos of God. And the process isn't just about sort of getting our
thoughts straight, we have to do that. I had a person come up to me just last Sunday, and somehow
I quote Lewis a lot in my sermons, and, and she came up to me and she's a dear, lovely, wonderful
woman. And she said, you know, I got this book, Mere Christianity, and I started reading it,
and it's hard, I don't understand it. And some of you might say, mere Christianity,
that's the easy one, read miracles, or even read his scholarly stuff, you know,
preface to Paradise Lost, or his Oxford English Literature book, or, you know,
yeah, Lewis can get a lot harder than Mere Christianity. Mere Christianity was pitched
to a radio audience in England during the war. But for many people, that's just not the wavelength
that they're at, and all the think-y-talk-y stuff. For some of us, that's, you know, that's where things
are, and that's absolutely fine. But for many people, they aren't. And it's amazing how much sense
people can make through sort of this personal relationship mode. And I think, in fact, it's
a deeply powerful mode, and it's the mode that, in fact, in many cases trumps the other mode.
People don't care how much you think until they, until they, people don't care how much you know,
until they know how much you care. There's only these little pastor turnaround things that are
semi-easy to remember. You can see I didn't remember it right the first time. But anyway,
I don't, I don't know how much more I'll do with this video, as with all the daily wire things,
there's another half hour. I haven't actually listened to the last half hour. I very much want
to, because I very much enjoyed this conversation. And this has been the conversation that Christians
have been waiting for. But I don't think, in the end, a lot of people who are sort of playing the
tribal game are going to get out of the conversation what it is they're looking for. Well, maybe some
will, and that's great. But, you know, even, even with all the drama around Diane, Hersey, Ali,
there's a, there's a, it's sort of like Tom Brady winning the Super Bowl. I won the Super Bowl.
I won it again. I won it again. I won it again. And he doesn't quite know when to retire.
But winning the Super Bowl isn't what it was. Now, you can apply some of Peterson's
ideas about meaning, how meaning is always in the reaching, not in the grabbing.
And I think there's a lot of truth to that. And I think, again, the truth is that in this world,
we are always reaching, and the receiving comes in Christian terms, and this is what
Christians actually call it, the consummation. And you might say, consummation, that's a funny
word. Well, it's the same word that happens after the consummation of the marriage. It's a deep form
of knowing. It's not just knowing that. It's consummation. So maybe that's enough for this.
I'll keep an eye on the comments and we'll see, because there's a lot of videos I want to treat.
There's a lot of stuff out there, but this, this was a good one. I absolutely recommend
watching it, but it's not, I don't even know what people are looking for with respect to the whole
Jordan Peterson Christian or no thing. It certainly is building a lot of popularity on
YouTube channels, but I don't think that game is what we think it is. Anyway, leave a comment.
Let me know what you think.
