What is language? What is meaning? And how does language come to have its meaning in the first place?
Today, we're going to look at probably the most influential philosopher of all time to write on this subject, Ludwig Wittgenstein.
We're going to focus in on his second great philosophical work, the Philosophical Investigations, where he really tries to focus in on the question of
what is a language and how does it get its meaning. Wittgenstein is looking at previous theories of language and meaning,
and basically saying they all try to claim that language has this or that basic purpose or essence.
Wittgenstein's going to say, language doesn't really have a single essence. There is no one way we can sum up what language is all about.
Nevertheless, he's not going to say that language doesn't have any meaning as a consequence. Rather, he's going to make sense or try to make sense of what language
means without thinking of it as having a single essence.
Okay, that's where we're going to be going. Let's get straight to it. Wittgenstein was working on the Philosophical Investigations through the late 1930s and 1940s,
but it was only published posthumously in 1953. He starts it in a pretty surprising way, with a long quote from the philosopher St. Augustine.
Wittgenstein's trying to describe a view of language, a historical philosophy of language, which he calls the Augustinian view, and he describes it like this.
The individual words in the language name objects, sentences are combinations of such names. In this picture of language, we find the roots of the following idea.
Each word has a meaning. This meaning is correlated with the word. It is the object for which the word stands.
Okay, so this is the view that Wittgenstein calls the Augustinian view. He's not defending that view. He's going to go on and criticize that view.
Why is Wittgenstein interested in this philosopher, St. Augustine? Well, really, he's not.
What he's interested in is a picture of language that he thinks is completely pervasive in the history of our thinking about language and meaning.
When we start thinking about what language means, we tend to think, oh, here's a word and the word picks out some object in the world and sentences.
They're just combinations of these words, so ultimately what language is doing is it's describing the world, it's picking out objects in the world.
Wittgenstein is going to say that's not how language works, or rather, sometimes language works like that, but that's not really the main story about how language gets its meaning.
So first up, let's just say a little bit more about what Wittgenstein has in mind by what he's calling the Augustinian view of language.
So the basic view is that words stand for objects in the world, and a word gets its meaning by correlating the word with an object.
And on this picture, how would we explain these meanings to one another? How would we learn a language in the first place?
Well, says Wittgenstein, ostensive definition is going to be the key to this theory of language.
What's an ostensive definition? It's when we point at an object and we go, that thing is called whatever.
So here I am sitting in my attic at the moment. That thing over there, that's a camera. That thing up there, that's a light.
This thing here, that's a person. That's how we would explain what words mean.
We would point to the object that is the meaning of the word, and we would say the word, ostensive definition.
And just to be clear here, Wittgenstein isn't endorsing this view, he's explaining the view and he's going to go on to criticise it.
Why is Wittgenstein talking about this really kind of, you know, far back in the past historical figure, St Augustine,
who we don't often think of as a philosopher of language?
Really what Wittgenstein's trying to do here is not pick on this one particular philosopher, St Augustine,
rather he's trying to stress the universality of this picture of language.
So many philosophers throughout the history of philosophy, you know, Descartes, Locke, loads of them,
basically assume this picture of how language works.
What Wittgenstein's trying to do here is just emphasise how universal this view is and how uncritically accepted the view is within the history of philosophy.
Then he's going to go on to criticise it.
One of the philosophers that Wittgenstein is setting out to criticise alongside Augustine and Descartes and Locke is Wittgenstein himself.
So he's going to criticise the view of language that he's set out in his previous book, The Tractatus Logico Philosophicus.
OK, but if he'd started his second book, The Philosophical Investigations, by saying,
I'm going to criticise what I previously said in my first book.
You know, that kind of seems a bit narrow and people might legitimately say,
well, you know, OK, you're admitting you're wrong, but why should I care?
It's much more interesting for him to say, I think most philosophers in the past held this view of language and I'm going to tell you what's wrong with it.
Before we go any further, I'd just like to jump in here and say, I hope you're enjoying this content.
If you'd like to help me out to make more educational, academic content like this,
go and take a look at my Ko-Fi page and see how you can help me out.
OK, so first up, what does Wittgenstein think is wrong with the Augustinian view of language?
Wittgenstein gives a number of different objections and the first one is based around this idea of extensive definition.
The idea that extensive definitions pointing to an object and saying the associated word are meant to be the foundations of language learning.
Wittgenstein thinks that just can't be right.
The basic problem he brings up is this.
Suppose we point to an object like I point to the camera over there and I say, that's a camera.
I could be pointing to any number of things.
I could be pointing to the object, the camera, or I could be pointing to another object like the lens,
or I could be pointing to the shape or the color or the size of the thing.
I could be saying there's one thing there.
I could be saying that belongs to me.
If we don't know the function of the word camera, how do we know what kind of thing I'm trying to talk about?
Or even am I talking about a thing at all?
Am I talking about the fact that I own it?
Or am I talking about an expression of, you know, I like that thing or I don't like that thing?
Unless we know how the word camera is meant to function, you know, is it meant to pick out an object?
Is it meant to describe how I feel about it?
Unless we know those things, we can't really hope to use an ostensive definition,
a pointing gesture to explain what the word means.
Now, Wittgenstein's not denying that we ever use ostensive definitions to convey what a word means, right?
Once we know that the word camera is a word that picks out a kind of object,
then you might go, oh, well, what kind of object does the word camera pick out?
And I'll go, that kind. See that object over there? That's a camera.
Okay, so once we've got that set up, once we know the function, the grammatical purpose of the word,
then I can use it, I can use an ostensive definition to tell you what the word means.
But really Wittgenstein is saying there, it's not the ostensive definition itself,
rather it's the whole process, learning the grammatical function of the word.
Together with this process of you understanding that I'm now going to point to an object,
it's that whole kind of interaction that gives the word its meaning,
that allows me to communicate what that word means.
It's not just the ostensive definition.
So says Wittgenstein, ostensive definitions can't be the one and only foundation of language use.
So that's Wittgenstein's first objection to the Augustinian picture of language.
But then he raises some other worries, okay?
Think about all the words that don't stand for an object in the world.
Let's just take one particular example, names that don't pick out a particular existing object,
names like Robin Hood or Superman, they name fictitious entities, right?
I can't point to any particular existing person and say, oh, that's Robin Hood.
You know, I can point to a story or a picture or whatever, but you know,
the word Robin Hood doesn't pick out the picture.
It's not like the picture is called Robin Hood.
Robin Hood is the name for a person who may be existed in the past, but doesn't exist anymore,
maybe never existed at all.
Superman doesn't pick out any existing entity, you know, it's merely a fictional creation.
Okay, so if the word is meant to stand for an object in the world and there's no object in the world,
what on earth does that word or that name mean?
So this is the problem of empty reference or fictional names or, you know, got lots of different names.
What Wittgenstein's pointing out here is that even in the case of words that function grammatically as names,
their purpose is usually to pick out a particular person or object.
They needn't do it, but we can still communicate meaningfully with them.
Sometimes we use meaning and reference as synonymous concepts, but they're not always.
Words can have a meaning even if they don't have a reference,
as in there's no object in the world that that word stands for.
Third kind of objection that Wittgenstein gives to the Augustinian picture of language,
it's a very restrictive view of language.
It basically says the one and only function of language is to describe objects in the world,
to describe the ways that the world is.
And then Wittgenstein starts pointing out, look at all the different ways that we use language.
Look at all the different functions and purposes we might have in using bits of language.
So he gives the following examples.
Giving orders and obeying them, reporting an event, forming and testing a hypothesis,
making up a story and reading it, play acting, guessing riddles, making a joke.
Telling it, translating from one language into another, requesting, thanking, cursing, greeting, praying.
Okay, so this is just a list of a whole bunch of different things that we can do by using language.
What is the argument that Wittgenstein's giving here?
Well, he's basically encouraging us to think about all of these different kinds of language use
and saying, do they really fit this picture of taking a word and using it to name an object in the world?
Not really.
We're doing many different kinds of things with words, with trying to communicate different things
or bring about different effects in our audience or sometimes just get people to laugh or whatever.
It's very, very difficult to boil all of these very, very different uses of language down to just one function,
like describing the way that objects in the world are.
This is a technique that Wittgenstein uses again and again throughout the philosophical investigations.
He's basically saying, look, you know, your theory says that this thing works this way or that way,
but just look, just go out there and think about all the different ways that language gets used.
It's going to be super hard to bring all of those diverse uses under one particular theory.
So he's not going to try and do that.
He's not going to try and give one theory that kind of unifies all of the diverse uses of language.
He's basically going to say, let's just look at the way language is in fact used.
We'll get into the details of what Wittgenstein says on those kind of issues later in the video,
so stick around for that.
Before we get to that, let's have a think about what Wittgenstein says about the relationship between language and the mind are thoughts.
So there's this idea of the Cartesian model of the mind.
Cartesian meaning coming from Descartes.
So Wittgenstein thinks the Cartesian model of the mind is an idea that underlies a lot of theories of language.
Wittgenstein thinks it's pervasive.
He thinks it's wrong.
So let's see what Wittgenstein says about that.
So according to the Cartesian model of the mind, the mind is like a private sphere.
Here I am inside my own mind, inside my own head, and that's something that I've got access to, but you don't.
You access your own mind, your own thoughts.
I can't access your mind.
You can't access my mind.
The best we can do is communicate our thoughts, our feelings, our beliefs, et cetera, using language.
So Wittgenstein's original target here in the Philosophical Investigations in Augustine, he wrote,
I want to make my wishes known to others, but this I could not do because my wishes were inside me while other people were outside and they had no faculty which could penetrate my mind.
And along similar lines, here's John Locke.
Words as they are used by men can properly and immediately signify nothing but the ideas that are in the mind of the speaker.
Okay, so these are just examples of the kind of targets that Wittgenstein's got in mind, Descartes, Augustine Locke, basically saying,
here we have these private thoughts, these private ideas in our own minds, they're kind of locked away there, and it's language that we're using to label ideas in our minds and to communicate them with one another.
Okay, so we've got two ideas there.
One is private mental entities hidden away from everybody else, only I can access mine, only you can access yours, and language is the bridge.
Language is the tool that we use to communicate hidden private thoughts from one person to another.
So on this view, the purpose of language is kind of not just to label objects in the world, rather it's to communicate thoughts from one person to another.
It's like the bridge between hidden entities. Wittgenstein thinks that's just not what's going on at all.
All of this rests on a big philosophical misunderstanding, not just of language, but also of the mind.
So Wittgenstein says, Augustine describes the learning of human language as if the child came into a strange country and did not understand the language of that country.
That is, as if it already had a language, only not this one.
Or again, as if the child could already think, only not yet speak, and think would here mean something like talk to itself.
So Wittgenstein doesn't like this picture at all.
It's not the right picture of language, but it's also not the right way to think about the mind.
So these passages are the start of the famous private language argument.
I've done another video that does a deep dive on that. You can go and see that at this link here.
The idea is basically we're sometimes tempted to think that thoughts, ideas, emotions, etc. are these private entities in our minds.
Wittgenstein just thinks that is a big, big confusion.
Even if there were such things, we couldn't talk about them meaningfully.
OK, let's sum up where we've got so far. Wittgenstein has been criticising and rejecting two quite pervasive theories or ideas about how language works.
One is the Augustinian view with ostensive definition, words work by labelling and describing objects in the world,
and the other is the Cartesian model on which words work by labelling and describing private mental objects, thoughts and such.
OK, so what is Wittgenstein's positive view? What does he put in place of these views that he doesn't like?
So now Wittgenstein's going to start telling us about the way he thinks language does work, and he starts off in a pretty unusual way.
He says, think about games. Think about the concept of a game.
What does it take for something to be a game? Take all the different kind of games out there.
Do they all have to be competitive? Do they all have to have different teams fighting against each other?
Well, no, you don't have to have teams. They can be single-player games.
Do they have to be competitive? Maybe, but there are lots of competitive things like exams that aren't games.
It's actually really, really hard to say what something has to be to be a game.
That is to give a definition that all and only the games share.
It's difficult, in other words, to give a set of necessary and sufficient conditions for being a game.
Wittgenstein admits this and he says, OK, but is the concept of a game meaningless?
No, of course not. We understand perfectly well what we mean by a game.
We understand what games are, even though we can't give a nice, sharp definition.
The concept itself isn't nice and sharp.
And his point here is that we don't have to have perfectly sharp, precise concepts in order for words to be meaningful.
The concept of a game, it's what he calls a family resemblance.
This idea of family resemblances is a pretty important Wittgensteinian notion.
According to Wittgenstein, a family resemblance is a complicated network of similarities overlapping and crisscrossing.
So for instance, I've got my mum's height, I've got my dad's chin, I've got my granddad's kind of pedantic streak.
You know, these aren't features that are shared by absolutely everyone in my family,
but anyone who knew my family well and then comes to know me will be like,
yep, he's pedantic just like his granddad was, or they might go, oh, you've got your dad's chin.
OK, so this is the idea of family resemblances.
But there might be no one single feature that every single member of that family has
that differentiates them from any other unrelated families.
OK, so we're not looking for one characteristic that all and only the members of this family have,
but nevertheless we can pick out various different physical features that allow us to say,
oh yeah, I can see that those two people are related.
Wittgenstein says it's pretty much the same with games.
We can say that this thing counts as a game because it relates to these other clear concepts of games in this or that way.
But in so doing, we're not saying that every single possible game out there has to have these features
because there might be other ways in which other games resemble these games that we know and love.
There's no one feature that unites all the games.
Nevertheless, anything that we think of as being a game is going to resemble the things that we take to be the paradigm games in one or two or more ways.
So in practice, we have a perfectly good working concept of a game.
We can meaningfully use that word even though we haven't given it precise boundaries.
We haven't given it a set of necessary and sufficient conditions.
So we've got this idea of the paradigm games, the kind of central exemplars of the concept.
So in our case, that might include physical sports like football, rugby, cricket.
It might include the ball games that you learn when you're a kid.
You're growing up. You play these games with your family.
These all count as paradigm games, paradigm examples of the concept.
And then we can say, oh, this other thing, well, it counts as a game because it resembles this paradigm.
And this other thing counts as a game because it resembles this other paradigm game, perhaps in completely different ways.
So the concept is vague. We don't have to give it sharp boundaries for it to count as being meaningful.
And then Wittgenstein is expanding this analysis, not just to the concept of a game, but to the concept of language use in totality.
Vagueness is an inherent feature of language, not just in the words themselves, but in the way that we use language.
There is no precise definition of what using language is or the purposes that language can have.
We use language in many, many different ways.
And this use of language and that use of language, well, they might bear a family resemblance to one another.
They don't have to fit a very narrow template of what language is all about, like it is on the Augustinian view of language
and like it is in the Cartesian model of the mind.
Wittgenstein takes this example of a game really quite seriously.
He talks about language games. Basically, when we are using a language, using a language in a certain way, it's like we're playing a game.
And just like we can't say the one thing that all the games have in common, similarly, we can't say the one thing that all the language games have in common.
Nevertheless, all the different language games out there, asking a question, telling a joke, making up a story and telling it and so on,
they all bear a family resemblance to the paradigm cases of language use.
Wittgenstein says, here, the term language game is meant to bring into prominence the fact that speaking a language is part of an activity or of a form of life.
So we've hit on another central Wittgensteinian concept here, this idea of a form of life.
And I think this is one of the most confusing and contested ideas that we get out of Wittgenstein in this part of the philosophical investigations.
What does he mean by a form of life and why is it important to understanding language use?
Well, to try and get a handle on that, let's start off by setting up a potential problem with this Wittgensteinian understanding of language.
Games are governed by rules. That's really what makes them games rather than just like random doings of stuff.
And similarly, Wittgenstein says, language games, language use, it's based on rules.
Okay, but if that's the case, and we're taking this analogy with games seriously, the rules of the game, they're up to us.
So if the rules of language are up to us, why can't we just change them willy-nilly?
Think about what Humpty Dumpty says in Alice in Wonderland.
When I use a word Humpty Dumpty said in a rather scornful tone, it means just what I choose it to mean, neither more nor less.
The question is, said Alice, whether you can make words mean so many different things.
The question is, said Humpty Dumpty, which is to be master, that's all.
So what's going on here? Wittgenstein wants to say, yes, we are responsible for the rules of language.
The meaning of language is up to us, but me or you as individuals, we can't just use words however we want as Humpty Dumpty tried to do.
The fact that we use language in a meaningful way means that we have to have some kind of shared principles.
And this is what he calls the shared form of life.
One way of thinking about it is, it's the way we do things as a community, as a community of speakers, a language community.
Wittgenstein says, if language is to be a means of communication, there must be agreement, not only in definitions, but also, queer as this may sound, in judgments.
So in order for us to use a language meaningfully, Wittgenstein thinks we first have to agree on certain basic things.
And that doesn't mean that we have to kind of get together and say, OK, we agree on this, this, this and this, now we can use language.
Rather, it just means that we have to, as a community, kind of rub along together.
And now at this point, you might be thinking, well, that seems kind of really problematic because on loads of big issues, we don't agree.
We don't have shared interests.
So, you know, Wittgenstein here, he's not talking about, oh, we have to agree, you know, politically or anything like that.
Obviously, we can use language meaningfully to express these disagreements we have.
What Wittgenstein's trying to get at here is that there are embedded in our society, you know, certain principles that are so foundational that we don't really think about them.
But, you know, ideas like, there is a world out there, there are other people and we have to communicate with each other both about our wants and our needs and our feelings and about the stuff out there in the world.
According to Wittgenstein, if there was a community out there that just didn't have any of these shared principles, we really wouldn't be able to communicate with them at all.
We wouldn't be able to communicate with a completely different form of life.
He says at one point, if a lion could talk, we could not understand him.
This is one of the most confusing things I think he says in the philosophical investigations.
You know, are we saying that we are a shared form of life because we share a biology that the lion doesn't share?
Or is it more to do with social and cultural principles?
Different Wittgenstein scholars have taken different interpretations here.
You know, Wittgenstein isn't completely precise in what he says.
He doesn't set out his theory and try to avoid all misunderstandings.
That's just not the way he does philosophy.
So I think, you know, there is definitely lots of leeway to interpret Wittgenstein in different ways on this point, on this particular point about what he means by a form of life.
But what we should definitely agree is that Wittgenstein thinks that form of life, whatever it means, is really essential to language having a meaning at all.
And you know, Wittgenstein isn't really trying to give us a precise theory, a model of how language gets its meaning.
Rather, he's trying to get us to go out there and look at how language is used in practice and through looking, through looking carefully to understand how language gets its meaning, how all the different uses of language interact.
He says, for a large class of cases, though not for all in which we employ the word meaning, it can be defined thus.
The meaning of a word is its use in the language.
So this is probably one of the most famous ideas that Wittgenstein gives us, the idea of meaning as use.
It's the idea that language gets its meaning not through describing objects out there in the world or through picking out private hidden ideas in our minds, but by being used.
And because there are lots of different ways of using language, lots of different language games, there's not going to be one unified account of meaning.
You know, language means this or language means that.
That's how we understand it.
Language isn't going to have this one unified essence.
Really Wittgenstein says the best we can do as philosophers of language is to say, there's this language game here and this is how this one works.
And there's this language game over there and that's how this one works.
They're both language games because they bear a family resemblance to one another.
What do they have in common?
What is the theory of meaning that encompasses all of them?
Well, that's where we can't really go.
All we can do is describe how this one works and how that one works.
And once we've said what their use is, that's really all we can say about the meaning of language to attempt to go further than that.
According to Wittgenstein is really to fall into this trap of the Augustinian picture of language or the Cartesian model of the mind in thinking that language has this unified essence when it doesn't.
Well, that's what Wittgenstein says.
It's a really controversial view.
Not everybody agrees with it.
What do you think?
Leave me your thoughts down in the comments.
I'm going to try to reply to all of them.
You know, I don't always agree with Wittgenstein on all this stuff, but I hope I've convinced you what a fascinating and influential philosopher of language he is.
If you want to go on a deeper dive on some more issues that Wittgenstein brings up, go and take a look at this video over here.
Thank you to all my Kofi supporters for making this content possible.
Thank you to you for watching this far.
I really appreciate it and I hope to see you back on Attic Philosophy soon.
