
What people are saying about

Capitalism vs. Freedom
The ravages of the neoliberal assault on the global population have
by now reached the point where they are literally threatening
decent survival, not in the distant future. This eloquent study
reveals clearly the roots of the problems and their severe
dimensions, and calls for renewal of the inspiring vision of
libertarian socialism that was displaced and marginalized through
the past century but can be revived within the guidelines that are
outlined here, expanding on important initiatives already underway.
Noam Chomsky
In many ways the consciousness and propensities of young people in
the US give reason to be optimistic about the future. On average our
young generation is less racist, less homophobic, less sexist, and less
militaristic than its forbears. In addition to these admirable
characteristics, young Americans are also freedom loving, which is
where Larson's book comes in. In the US more than anywhere else
the cause of "freedom" has been appropriated by right-wing
libertarians as a powerful ideological vehicle to gain political
support for a conservative political agenda—to the point where if
you tell a young American that you are a "libertarian socialist" they
look at you in utter confusion, as if you have contradicted yourself
in only two words. With a welcome sense of humor, Larson focuses
on examining what freedom means and does not mean, why the
right-wing libertarian political agenda subverts freedom rather than
promotes it, and why a libertarian socialist program is how young
Americans can achieve the freedom they long for.
Robin Hahnel


First published by Zero Books, 2018
Zero Books is an imprint of John Hunt Publishing Ltd., No. 3 East Street,
Alresford, Hampshire SO24 9EE, UK
oɽce1@jhpbooks.net
www.johnhuntpublishing.com
www.zero-books.net
For distributor details and how to order please visit the 'Ordering' section on our website.
Text copyright: Rob Larson 2017
ISBN: 978 1 78535 733 6
978 1 78535 734 3 (ebook)
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017940002
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in critical articles or reviews, no part of this
book may be reproduced in any manner without prior written permission from the
publishers.
The rights of Rob Larson as author have been asserted in accordance with the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Design: Stuart Davies
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY, UK
We operate a distinctive and ethical publishing philosophy in
all areas of our business, from our global network of authors to
production and worldwide distribution.

Contents
Introduction: What is Freedom?
Chapter 1: Classes and Crashes - Freedom of Work
Chapter 2: Pennies For Your Thoughts - Freedom of Information
Chapter 3: Codependence Day - Political Freedom
Chapter 4: Hierloom Doom - Freedom of Future Generations
Chapter 5: Socialism and Freedom - Democratic Economic
Organization

We have been cursed with the reign of gold long enough.

Eugene Debs, Chicago Railway Times, 1 January 1897

Introduction
What is Freedom?
This is a book about freedom. Before looking into how our economic
system helps or hurts human freedom, it's worth thinking about
what freedom is. Most of us think of freedom as what you do when
nothing's stopping you. It's the ability to do what you want, within
the limits of your free time and budget. That's a good start, because
it reminds us why we care about freedom in the ɹrst place. Because
whatever you like to do, whoever you love, whatever makes you
laugh or feel fulɹlled, those things represent the value of social
freedom to you. Whatever way you to like to waste your time,
whichever career option you're free to follow or regret following,
represent the fruits of freedom. How much freedom you have
decides how much fun, adventure, enrichment, growth, peace and
love you get to enjoy in your limited human years.
John Stuart Mill's "On Liberty" is considered to be one of the
founding philosophical essays on freedom, and it takes the position
that freedom is about "the nature and limits of the power which can
be legitimately exercised by society over the individual."1 Mill's
view was that "in things which do not primarily concern others,
individuality should assert itself," and "the sole end for which
mankind are warranted, individually or collectively in interfering
with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection
... the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised

over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to
prevent harm to others."2
So the concept of power appears quickly in any discussion of
freedom. Social power means the ability to direct the actions of
other people, to make an individual or group do what you want.
Power may be exercised in diʃerent forms by diʃerent groups or
institutions, but since it means forcing people to do things against
their will, it's considered to be antagonistic to liberty and freedom.
For this reason, reductions of the power held within a society are
thought to expand freedom—for example, if a government loses its
power to police what people say, freedom of speech is therefore
expanded. Often, related freedoms are grouped together and
referred to as "rights" that individuals should possess, like the right
to a free speech.
Mill wasn't absolute in these principles, concluding that "There
are also many positive acts for the beneɹt of others, which [a
person] may rightfully be compelled to perform; such as, to give
evidence in a court of justice; to bear his fair share in the common
defence, or in any other joint work necessary to the interest of the
society of which he enjoys the protection ..."3 But, since the use of
power or compulsion means forcing people to do things they
wouldn't do otherwise, it's considered to be antagonistic to personal
liberty and the burden of justiɹcation is on the supporter of using
force.
So Mill's basic view was that power had to be limited, in order to
protect a realm of freedom of action for individuals. This basic
picture, in which freedom is mainly seen to be an absence of power
and coercion over people, was described as "negative freedom" by
the Russian-British philosopher Isaiah Berlin in his inɻuential essay
"Two Concepts of Liberty." Berlin outlined a pair of complementary
concepts of freedom, with negative liberty being essentially what
Mill supported, "that there ought to exist a certain minimum area of
personal freedom which must on no account be violated," and
recognizing that "Where it is to be drawn is a matter of argument,
indeed of haggling."4 But he also observed that negative liberty has

limits, since "liberty in this sense is not incompatible with some
kinds of autocracy," where "a liberal-minded despot would allow his
subjects a large measure of personal freedom. The despot who
leaves his subjects a wide area of liberty may be unjust, or
encourage the wildest inequalities, care little for order, for virtue, or
knowledge; but provided he does not curb their liberty, or at least
curbs it less than many other regimes, he meets with Mill's
speciɹcation [of negative freedom]. Freedom in this sense is not, at
any rate logically, connected with democracy or self-government."5
Recognizing this, Berlin also described "positive liberty," which
asks what we are free to actually do, rather than how much we're
constrained by power. Instead of asking, "How much do society's
power centers limit my freedom?" positive freedom asks, "What am
I free to do?" or "What power centers decide what I'm free to do?"
The diʃerence is sometimes represented as the ideal of negative
freedom, or "freedom from," where liberty is unconstrained by some
external power, on the one hand; and on the other, the positive
liberty of "freedom to" do diʃerent things, like the right to share in
an economy's prosperity, or the right to vote and have a say in how
collective decisions get made.
Positive freedoms people might have could evolve over time, with
the society's material standard of living. It wouldn't make much
sense to say a medieval farmer was being oppressed because he or
she wasn't free to become a cosmetic surgeon—the society's level of
wealth and knowledge at that time didn't allow many people to do
much beside produce food. Once a society develops to the point that
people are free to specialize and develop sophisticated skills, we
might say that a young person should be free, or have a right, to
study to become a surgeon if they choose.
Amartya Sen, the Nobel Prize-winning Indian economist, made
this point when he wrote that "Sometimes the lack of substantive
freedoms relates directly to economic poverty, which robs people of
the freedom to satisfy hunger, or to achieve suɽcient nutrition, or
to obtain remedies for treatable illnesses, or the opportunity to be
adequately clothed or sheltered, or to enjoy clean water or sanitary

facilities."6 Sen's point was that to the extent that an economy can
aʃord these services for the population, their lack of a positive
"freedom to" use and beneɹt from them is a real limit to liberty, a
situation often seen in "the persistence of deprivations among
segments of the community that happen to remain excluded" from
society's wealth.7
On the other hand, Berlin was skeptical of overreach in the scope
of positive freedom, suggesting it could be exploited by
authoritarians to control individual behavior, on the grounds they
should be free to order people around to achieve their ambitions.
This would make positive liberty "at times, no better than a specious
disguise for brutal tyranny."8 However, Berlin was quite clear that
there was value to both categories of freedom, saying "the
satisfaction that each of them seeks is an ultimate value which ...
has an equal right to be classed among the deepest interests of
mankind." And he suggested "Perhaps the chief value for liberals of
political—'positive'—rights, of participating in the government, is as
a means for protecting what they hold to be an ultimate value,
namely individual—'negative'—liberty."9 So the positive freedom to
decide, with your fellow citizens, the policies of social power centers
like governments, itself helps protect your personal negative
freedom. And indeed, a careful reading of Mill's own classic essay
indicates that he realized "men might as well be imprisoned, as
excluded from the means of earning their bread."10 Even in a work
mainly focused on negative freedom, Mill recognized the value of
positive freedom.
Many other ɹgures have debated the subject, with diʃerent
conclusions that cut across political lines. The conservative
economist Frank Knight of the University of Chicago wrote that
opponents of the positive view of freedom "overlook that fact that
freedom to perform an act is meaningless unless the subject is in
possession of the requisite means of action."11 This is a classic
argument for positive freedom, the freedom to pursue various
actions, although Knight himself was skeptical of the distinction. On
the other side of the political spectrum, the Marxist philosopher

Erich Fromm also held that freedom from powerful people or
institutions wasn't enough, and that people might in fact "try to
escape from freedom altogether unless they can progress from
negative to positive freedom."12
On the other hand, the arch-libertarian economic Murray
Rothbard wrote that to his mind, the word "free" meant simply
"being unmolested by other persons."13 Similarly, the prominent
eighteenth-century Prussian philosopher Wilhelm von Humboldt
strongly opposed positive freedom, even including "all measures
employed to remedy or prevent natural devastations," which even
supporters of only negative freedom alone are usually prepared to
accept.14
But despite this philosophical debate about the complexities of the
nature of freedom, the thinkers who actively shaped today's
economic policies took a relatively simple view of the issue. In his
1962 book Capitalism and Freedom, economist Milton Friedman
wrote that "The fundamental threat to freedom is power to coerce,
be it in the hands of a monarch, a dictator, an oligarchy, or a
momentary majority. The preservation of freedom requires the
elimination of such concentration of power to the fullest possible
extent and the dispersal and distribution of whatever power cannot
be eliminated—a system of checks and balances."15 So Friedman
stands closer to Humboldt and partially Berlin, saying that limiting
power will increase the negative freedom of individuals, spreading
their scope of independent action.
Friedrich Hayek agreed, writing in his prominent book The Road
to Serfdom that "'Freedom' and 'liberty' are now words so worn with
use and abuse that one must hesitate to employ them to express the
ideals for which they stood." Like Friedman, Hayek favored a
concept of liberty keeping fairly strictly to the negative version of
freedom from external constraint, describing how "During the whole
of this modern period of European history the general direction of
social development was one of freeing the individual from the ties
which had bound him to the customary or prescribed ways in the
pursuit of his ordinary activities."16

Friedman's Capitalism and Freedom and Hayek's The Road to
Serfdom promoted the argument that free-market capitalism was the
social arrangement that most encouraged human freedom. The
books' arguments gained more prominence in the decades that
followed and in the 1980s these views became the basis for a good
deal of government policy, from the Reagan administration and
Thatcher government in the US and UK, to Deng Xiaoping and
Augusto Pinochet in China and Chile.
The debate among these views is usually described as breaking
roughly along political lines—conservatives and libertarians take the
view that negative freedom is best, citing reservations like Berlin's,
and that this freedom is provided by markets. More liberal
commenters accept negative freedom, but also think some form of
positive freedom is required (usually from the public sector), as in
Sen's and Knight's arguments above. The schools broadly agree that
capitalism provides negative liberty.
This book makes the argument that capitalism and markets fail
the tests for both categories of freedom. Capitalism withholds
opportunities to enjoy freedom (required by the positive view of
freedom) and also encourages the growth of economic power (the
adversary of liberty in the negative view of freedom). The book's
focus will be on power within capitalism, and therefore on the
negative picture of freedom, since this is considered to be promoted
by market economics, and because it's the part of the deɹnition of
freedom on which people most broadly agree. However, the
important positive concept of liberty will also appear often.
This argument begins in Chapter 1, which looks at the diʃerent
forms of economic power that are created in markets, as wealth and
market shares become concentrated in fewer and fewer hands.
Chapter 2 extends this market analysis to the media and information
networks, owing to their special importance in providing the means
for individual freedom of thought and social action. Chapter 3
reviews the frequently decisive control that concentrated wealth has
over government policy, Chapter 4 projects modern environmental
trends to map the freedom of future generations, and Chapter 5
turns from capitalism to other economic systems that might both

constrain economic power and provide more positive freedom, as
well.
So this is a book about freedom and therefore a book about
power. Consider yourself free to read.
Endnotes
1. John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, Mineola, NY: Dover, 2002, p. 1.
2. Ibid, p. 47, 8.
3. Ibid, p. 9.
4. Isaiah Berlin, Four Essays On Liberty, New York: Oxford
University Press, 1969, p. 124.
5. Ibid, p. 129-30.
6. Amartya Sen, Development As Freedom, New York: Anchor
Books, 2000, p. 4.
7. Ibid, p. 7.
8. Berlin, Four Essays On Liberty, p. 131.
9. Ibid, p. 166, 165.
10. Mill, On Liberty, p. 26.
11. Frank Knight, Freedom and Reform, New York: Harper &
Brothers, 1982, p. 7.
12. Erich Fromm, Escape From Freedom, New York: Ishi Press, 2011,
p. 134.
13. Murray Rothbard, Man, Economy and State with Power and
Market, Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2009, p. 654.
14. Willhelm von Humboldt, The Limits of State Action,
Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 1993, p. 17.
15. Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2002, p. 15.

16. Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2007, p. 68, 69.

Chapter 1
Classes and Crashes

Freedom of Work
Masters are always and everywhere in a sort of tacit, but constant
and uniform combination, not to raise the wages of labour ...
Such combinations, however, are frequently resisted by a contrary
defensive combination of the workmen ... It is not, however,
diɽcult to foresee which of the two parties must, upon all
ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dispute, and force
the others into a compliance with their terms. The masters, being
fewer in number, can combine much more easily; and the law,
besides, authorizes, or at least does not prohibit their
combinations, while it prohibits those of the workmen.
Adam Smith1
Experience demonstrates that there may be a slavery of wages
only a little less galling and crushing in its eʃects than chattel
slavery, and that this slavery of wages must go down with the
other ... those who would reproach us should remember that it is
hard for labor, however fortunately and favorably surrounded, to
cope with the tremendous power of capital in any contest for
higher wages or improved condition.
Frederick Douglass2
In the twenty-ɹrst century a rising wave of men and women globally
are seeing alarming failures of our social system, and frustration is
growing because many people don't feel free to ɹx things.
Americans told the Gallup opinion polling agency in 2014 that they
are less and less happy with their "freedom to choose what you do
with your life," with reported satisfaction dropping to 79 percent.3
A BBC World Service poll also found people's belief that media are
free has fallen around the world, with conɹdence in the UK, US and

Germany falling below 50 percent.4 Less than half of respondents
felt free to safely express their opinions online, not only in Russia
and China, but also Australia and Mexico. These tumbling numbers
are leading people around the world to search for answers about
their weakened freedoms.
One heavily promoted road to freedom follows ɹgures like Milton
Friedman and Friedrich Hayek, whose ideas are reliably featured on
more conservative media like US talk radio and New Corporation
properties from the UK to Brazil. Friedman's central claim was that
capitalism, or a "free market" system, leaves consumers "free to
choose" among diʃerent goods and jobs, while Hayek is most
associated with a complementary opposition to government policies
like income taxes or broader social "planning," which many would
now call "big government." Hayek held that these policies were in
fact a "Road to Serfdom," because they meant more government
power in the economy, threatening to reduce us to the condition of
unfree "serfs"—the helpless economic semi-slaves of the feudal
economic system that preceded capitalism.
But while this view has continued to be promoted on the most
dominant commercial media, there are some problems. The issue
reviewed in this chapter is the problem of power—whether authority
is mainly held by government, as Friedman and Hayek claim, or
whether large amounts of money could also mean signiɹcant social
power. An honest look at these subjects can help us understand a
puzzling statement by billionaire Nick Hanauer, a hugely successful
investor and a cofounder of Amazon.com. In an article written for
"My Fellow Zillionaires," Hanauer disagrees with these prominent
economists when they dismiss income inequality—the gap between
the incomes at the top of society and the average household.
Hanauer credits his business success to his strong foresight, and
writes that today he sees "pitchforks" because "inequality is at
historically high levels and getting worse every day," warning that
the US and the world are turning into "a feudal society."5
So which is the real road back to the Dark Ages and a loss of
freedom? Is it growth of government functions in society, the

regulations and taxation that Hayek claimed would lead to
"serfdom?" Or is it the growth of towering fortunes and corporate
empires that is reducing us to "a feudal society," as the billionaire
Hanauer suggests? Let's cross-examine the case for capitalism and
see if the books have been cooked.

Atlas Hugged
One of the greatest advocates for the libertarian view of capitalism
was the economist Milton Friedman, Nobel Prize winner and maybe
the most respected conservative economist in the US. Friedman was
an informal economic adviser to conservative US president Ronald
Reagan, who said in an interview with the libertarian magazine
Reason that "I believe the very heart and soul of conservatism is
libertarianism."6 Reagan himself wrote a warm blurb for Friedman's
book Free to Choose and recorded an endorsement video for
Friedman's TV series based on the book, calling the show
"something of rare importance."7 Friedman's policy views had an
enormous impact across political lines and media platforms.
And despite his death in 2006, Friedman has remained prominent
in today's conservative media. The right-wing radio icon Rush
Limbaugh said on his talk program that "Milton Friedman should be
the Bible for young people, or anybody, trying to understand
capitalism and free markets."8 When Friedman died, William F.
Buckley, considered the dean of conservative intellectuals until his
own death in 2008, wrote an obituary of Friedman in the most
respected right-wing magazine in the US, National Review. He said:
The period since 1980 has been the Age of Friedman
economically ... The Age of Friedman began approximately in
1979-80 when his disciples, Margaret Thatcher and Ronald
Reagan, took power ... And these two leaders embarked on
economic policies, broadly inspired by his theories, that have
given their countries a quarter century of fast economic growth
interrupted only by two short and shallow recessions in the U.S.9
Considering the $12 trillion ɹnancial cataclysm and semi-depression
that followed later in 2008, this warm praise is the tiniest bit ironic
now.

So what is this Age of Friedman? Friedman himself proudly
summarized in The Wall Street Journal the Reagan administration
policies he had helped create, including "slashing taxes" and
"attacking government regulations," a trend called "deregulation"
which has continued to this day.10 Based on the Friedmans' ideas
becoming a major global policy inspiration, the Review said of
Friedman and his wife and frequent coauthor, Rose, "These two
great champions of freedom should recognize that they have won.
The course of history is ɹrmly on their side."11 So today's main
economic policy trends, strongly in the direction of tax reduction
and economic deregulation, are parts of this Age of Friedman.
Friedman's basic view was that freedom is promoted by markets,
which are social arrangements for the buying and selling of goods
and services. To visualize a market, you can picture yourself at a
mall, or a farmer's market, or shopping online. This "market
freedom" had a huge importance, as Friedman wrote in his
inɻuential book Capitalism and Freedom:
Economic arrangements play a dual role in the promotion of a
free society. On the one hand, freedom in economic arrangements
is itself a component of freedom broadly understood, so economic
freedom is an end in itself. In the second place, economic freedom
is also an indispensible means toward the achievement of political
freedom ... Viewed as a means to the end of political freedom,
economic arrangements are important because of their eʃect on
the concentration or dispersion of power. The kind of economic
organization that provides economic freedom directly, namely,
competitive capitalism, also promotes political freedom because it
separates economic power from political power and in this way
enables the one to oʃset the other.12
Friedman held that these free markets promote freedom because
they allow competition, giving consumers and workers the freedom
to decide what they want to buy and from whom, and likewise
whom to work for. Writing with his wife in Free to Choose, he

explained that in a free market "When you enter a store, no one
forces you to buy. You are free to do so or go elsewhere. That is the
basic diʃerence between the market and a political agency. You are
free to choose."13
This basic picture of market freedom was a main focus of the
other most prominent ɹgure of right-wing economics, Friedrich
Hayek. He taught at the highly prestigious London School of
Economics and the University of Chicago, and later advised
conservative governments including Thatcher in the UK and
Augusto Pinochet in Chile. He had a more recent popularity boom
after being extensively promoted on the popular right-wing Glenn
Beck Program.14
Hayek held that the provision of economic goods and services by
government had none of the freedom of the market, and that
Western civilization had gone far beyond an appropriate level with
its attempts to moderate the market's cycle of growth and recession,
called the "business cycle." Hayek called such programs "socialist"
and a betrayal of Europe's history of "freeing the individual from
the ties which had bound him to the customary or prescribed ways
in the pursuit of his ordinary activities." Since then, "We have
progressively abandoned that freedom in economic aʃairs without
which personal and political freedom has never existed in the
past."15
Like Friedman and the broader "libertarian" tradition, Hayek held
that markets bring about the maximum of human freedom and
unlock 
human 
potential. 
"Economic 
liberalism 
... 
regards
competition as superior not only because it is in most circumstances
the most eɽcient method known but even more because it is the
only method by which our activities can be adjusted to each other
without coercive or arbitrary intervention of authority."16 This
crucial connection, between a "free market" and competition, is
usually taken for granted, as it was in Friedman's arguments above.
Other major economists of this tradition on the Right include
Murray Rothbard, less prominent than Hayek and the Friedmans but
considered a major ɹgure in libertarian and conservative circles. He

concluded that markets allow "free association" and that successful
businesspeople possess superior qualities: "A man earns proɹts ... by
superior foresight and judgment" and "The greater a man's proɹt
has been, the more praiseworthy his role."17 Proɹt, of course, is the
money made by a business after its basic costs have been paid.
Rothbard's argument was also based on the use of proɹts to pay for
new investments by the company, to buy new equipment or build
new productive facilities. These investments increase the amount of
production in the economy, and can create new jobs and goods,
leading economists to refer to businesspeople as "job creators."
A ɹgure with similar views, but far more popular, is Russian-
American author Ayn Rand. Rand has long been a mascot for
libertarian politics and her book Atlas Shrugged is one of the best-
selling books in history. Her work is often read among powerful
people, yet her work is a crude, comic book version of this same
conservative picture of the market economy. To make the concepts a
little more obvious for the reader, Rand's infallible executive
protagonists are all described as good-looking, and the antagonist
workers and regulators are ugly and poorly dressed.18 Only slightly
less shallow is her capitalist characters' tendency to magically run
the ɹrm themselves—they both manage their corporate empires
directly and also invent the new scientiɹc products and do the
striking commercial art and design the buildings. They are truly
portrayed as borderline supermen, only based on their power as big
businessmen, not their ethnicity.
Many libertarian ɹgures are less extreme than Rand's near-
worship of capitalists, like Friedman who wrote more modestly that
"the inequality of income" in "large part reɻects initial diʃerences
in endowment, both of human capacities and of property."19 But
more than Friedman and even more than Rand, the bar for capitalist
worship was set by Ludwig von Mises, who is considered to be the
founder of the highly conservative Austrian School of economics, to
which Hayek and Rothbard belong. Mises wrote about the "Creative
Genius" of wealthy entrepreneurs:

Far above the millions that come and pass away tower the
pioneers, the men whose deeds and ideas cut out new paths for
mankind. For the pioneering genius to create is the essence of life
... For him there is no leisure, only intermissions of temporary
sterility and frustration ... The accomplishment ... does not
gratify him mediately because his fellow men at best are
unconcerned about it, more often even greet it with taunts,
sneers, and persecution ... Creating is for him agony and torment,
a ceaseless excruciating struggle against internal and external
obstacles; it consumes and crushes him.20
While Friedman and Hayek implied business people and the rich
have little social control, Mises and Rand celebrated CEO power. In
fact, Mises was such a fan of Rand's Atlas Shrugged that he
delightedly wrote to her about their shared views:
You have the courage to tell the masses what no politician told
them: you are inferior and all the improvements in your
conditions which you simply take for granted you owe to the
eʃort of men who are better than you.21
Business ɹgures themselves only occasionally make arguments
similar to these fascists of capital, like the nineteenth-century
corporate lawyer John Hay, who claimed "That you have property is
proof of industry and foresight on your part or your father's; that
you have nothing is a judgment on your laziness and vices, or on
your improvidence. The world is a moral world, which it would not
be if virtue and vice received the same reward."22
As for critics of these views, Friedman wrote in Capitalism and
Freedom that "a major source of objection to a free economy is
precisely that ... It gives people what they want instead of what a
particular group thinks they ought to want. Underlying most
arguments against the free market is a lack of belief in freedom
itself."23 Writers on the Right don't often bother to actually quote an
opponent of their views, instead just insisting that they're literally
against freedom and moving on. Indeed, Charles Koch, multi-

billionaire oil industrialist and a major funder of Tea Party
candidates and libertarian think tanks, wrote that opponents of
these views support "big government" and believe "that you are
incapable of running your own life."24
So the traditional right-wing picture of capitalism celebrates the
freedom of a creative class of entrepreneurs whose competition
creates new industries, lifting up the rest of us in happy
employment. It's a view of freedom that starts at the top of society,
a picture where the masses should get out of the way of the creative
elites. It's a very traditional view, and widely seen on conservative
and commercial media around the world. It's also weak-sauce
ideology.

The Fun Percent
The ɹrst aspect of capitalism to explore, and to evaluate for its
relationship to freedom, is its concentration of wealth. Wealth has
many forms, including money wealth, like cash and deposits in bank
accounts. But it also includes productive wealth, like ownership of
agricultural land or industrial property, often through "shares" of
corporate stock, which are pieces of ownership of businesses. This
second form of wealth is especially important because it produces
more wealth—food or products for sale—and proɹts from their
production. These basic forms of wealth are often called "capital."
The connection between freedom and the concentration of wealth
has been debated for some time, and the picture painted by the
thinkers on the Right is fairly consistent. In Free to Choose, for
example, the Friedmans are skeptical of:
... the widespread belief that it is not fair that some children
should have a great advantage over others simply because they
happen to have wealthy parents. Of course it is not fair. However,
unfairness can take many forms. It can take the form of the
inheritance of property—bonds and stocks, houses, factories; it
can also take the form of the inheritance of talent—musical
ability, strength, mathematical genius. The inheritance of
property can be interfered with more readily than the inheritance
of talent. But from an ethical point of view, is there any diʃerence
between the two? Yet many people resent the inheritance of
property but not the inheritance of talent.25
Hayek, too, claimed inequality wasn't a major problem: "The fact
that the opportunities open to the poor in a competitive society are
much more restricted than those open to the rich does not make it
less true that in such a society the poor are much more free than a
person commanding much greater material comfort in a diʃerent
type of society."26 Similarly, Rothbard wrote "That there is

inequality of ability or monetary income on the free market should
surprise no one. As we have seen above, men are not 'equal' in their
tastes, interests, abilities, or locations. Resources are not distributed
'equally' over the earth."27
Surely anyone can see the logic of this argument. Very good
doctors and carpenters attract more consumer demand, and the
prices they charge can then rise, leading to higher incomes for these
more talented, harder-working or smarter professionals. The
Friedmans' argument was that since humanity cannot control the
initial endowment of talents given to each individual, we should
likewise have no expectation of controlling unequal endowments of
money. This is apparently intended seriously.
But in portraying this concentration of money in society as a
reasonable development, the libertarian tradition completely
dismisses the power of concentrated money. As reviewed in the
Introduction, unrestricted power is usually seen as the enemy of
freedom, in the most common "negative" concept of liberty. So the
phenomenal concentration of wealth of recent history could
represent a problem for freedom—"economic power."
Hayek illustrated this conservative skepticism of any inɻuence
arising from wealth in The Road to Serfdom, a major theme of which
is that when the state gains new authority over the economy (by
imposing a new tax or creating a new regulation), it gains serious
new power. One might conclude from that view that there is power
within the market, perhaps in the enormous concentrated fortunes
of the modern era, a power that is transferred to the state when it
makes a regulatory move. But Hayek draws the issue intriguingly:
"To believe that the power which is thus conferred on the state is
merely transferred to it from others is erroneous. It is a power newly
created and which in a competitive society nobody possesses. So
long as property is divided among many owners, none of them
acting independently has exclusive power to determine the income
and position of particular people," but of course this is the whole
point.28 If wealth, including property, is not divided among "many

owners" but instead increasingly concentrated in a thin upper crust,
Hayek implicitly allows that problems could arise.
And indeed, the political Right does occasionally show some
contradiction on the point, as when Friedman writes in Capitalism
and Freedom about "the role that inequality plays in providing
independent foci of power to oʃset the centralization of political
power."29 However, this concession of the possibility of power
ɻowing from giant fortunes usually comes up only when it can be
put as a counterweight to the power of the state. There are
exceptions, like when von Mises asked, "on what else is the power
of 
a 
businessman 
founded 
than 
on 
his 
wealth?"30 
The
archconservative grudgingly admitted that some anticapitalist critics
are "on comparatively better grounds" for wanting "to prohibit the
accumulation of wealth precisely because it gives a man economic
power."
But despite some of these conservative arguments, the basic
power of money is very real—a large amount of money can buy or
build very important things in a market society, creating new
companies and industries, building up commercial empires over
time, and hiring or ɹring a workforce. It can largely decide the
conditions of any employment it provides. Crucially, great wealth
decides what industries will be invested in, which ultimately
determines what tomorrow's society will look like. One of the most
fundamental realities of our modern global society is that money
means power and the modern world situation makes it diɽcult to
take seriously Hayek's insistence that economic power is "newly
created" when the government steps in.
There are a few particularly important dimensions of this
economic power to look at. One is that money knows no inherent
limits—an individual's fortune can potentially grow indeɹnitely,
both in absolute terms and relative to the rest of society. While
executive and legislative powers in the government are enormous
and vitally important to understand, they often have real limits
described in founding documents of the world's governments, often
based on a "balance of power." Money knows none of these pesky

limitations, and over decades gigantic fortunes with incredible
power and inɻuence can arise, giving their owners towering
importance in society, despite Hayek's "many owners" daydream.
The potential scale of this power is illustrated by Wall Street
banking titan JP Morgan's bailout of the frigging US federal
government itself in 1894. And then again in 1895.31 Surely the
ability, by one lone man's decision, to rescue the economy from
depression again and again constitutes tremendous power.
But particularly, more money means you can buy more freedom.
With a large fortune, you can aʃord more accountants to free you
from your tax burden, more doctors to free you from preventable
disease and more attorneys to free you from the consequences of
disobeying the civil laws. This, of course, means that as fortunes
grow, and rich individuals or families gain wealth and clout, their
freedom may expand at the expense of the freedom of others, a
development called "hegemonic freedom." This means that the
growth of your freedom came at the expense of someone else—for
example, if you get a judge to agree you have the positive right to
get drunk and hit people, your freedom to commit random violence
is increased, yet the negative freedom of other people not to get
punched is decreased. This hegemonic freedom simply becomes
what we recognize as power, the ability to change the world
according to an individual's or group's wishes, and to make others
do your will. Bosses have power and anyone who has had a job
knows the fundamental work reality of hierarchy, taking orders
from upstairs and passing them downstairs.
So, if colossal fortunes are an important means of gaining power
and hegemonic freedom, it's natural to review how concentrated
wealth has become. One very prominent and comprehensive review
of global wealth was done by Thomas Piketty, whose 2014 book
Capital in the Twenty-First Century caused quite a stir for a long book
on economics and inequality. Piketty compiled an enormous
database from tax records in the developed world, especially Europe
and North America, to study the evolution of capital ownership. His
ɹgures on concentration of overall wealth are very striking. Piketty

groups US households into deciles, each of which represents 10
percent of the total population, and centiles, each of which
constitutes 1 percent of the country. In the US, Piketty ɹnds "By
2010, the top decile's share of total wealth exceeded 70 percent, and
the top centile's share was close to 35 percent."32 In Western
Europe, the picture is slightly less severe but similar, with the
wealthiest 1 percent owning nearly 30 percent of national wealth in
the UK and 23 percent in Germany. China's richest 1 percent holds
over a third of the country's wealth.33
At the global level, concentration is almost unbelievable, with the
worldwide wealth share of "the top centile about 50 percent, and
the top decile somewhere between 80 and 90 percent."34 On the
other hand, "half the population own virtually nothing: the poorest
50 percent invariably own less than 10 percent of national wealth
... The inescapable reality is this: wealth is so concentrated that a
large segment of society is virtually unaware of its existence, so that
some people imagine that it belongs to surreal or mysterious
entities."35
Crucially, Piketty also found that among the wealthiest 1 percent
of US households, "shares of stock or partnerships constitute nearly
the totality of the largest fortunes ... Housing is the favorite
investment of the middle class and moderately well-to-do, but true
wealth always consists primarily of ɹnancial and business assets."36
This agrees with the work of the Economic Policy Institute, which
breaks down the ɹgures on stock ownership: The richest 5 percent
of US households in 2010 owned a formidable 67.1 percent of all
stock, and the wealthiest 1 percent of households had a staggering
35 percent of traded stock all to itself.37 Meanwhile, the lower 80
percent of US households held only 8.3 percent of US stock and a
large part of that is held passively in retirement accounts.
The scale of wealth concentration has been backed up by Wall
Street itself, for example in Citigroup's leaked "plutonomy" memos,
describing a condition in which "economic growth is powered by
and largely consumed by the wealthy few." Despite the red-faced
objections to Occupy Wall Street by many conservatives and

libertarians, Citi's own analysts conclude "Clearly, the analysis of
the top 1% of US households is paramount."38 They have also stated
they are "generally comfortable with the thrust" of Piketty's own
analysis.39 Other corporate observers have quietly reached similar
conclusions, with companies catering to wealthy consumers
thriving, while mid-scale ɹrms decline.40 These widely diʃerent
approaches arrive at the same conclusion: from nation to nation,
there is a small class of phenomenally rich households that do
indeed "own the country."
What all this information about wealth concentration means is a
class structure. Social class refers to the diʃerent levels of prestige,
wealth and power within a society, whether oɽcial or unoɽcial.
Americans are often discouraged from thinking in terms of class, but
as labor researcher Katie Quan put it, "not to think in terms of class
is unfortunate, since no matter what our ideological persuasion may
be, class analysis gives us a way of viewing the world that identiɹes
power relationships. It clariɹes who has power,"41 and indeed class
analysis is regularly used in describing other societies, whether
medieval feudalism or today's Third World dictatorships. In the
market economy, four basic classes are discernible, although of
course there are many diʃerent ways of chopping them up, and I
oʃer these as some basic guidance for conceptualizing the class
system.
At the top are the owners of society, the wealthiest few percent
who hold those cartoonishly disproportionate shares of capital and
overall wealth. This social layer is sometimes called "the ruling
class," or more descriptively "the owning class." They are deɹned
not so much by their huge incomes, but by the source of that income
—primarily the dividends and other revenues from ownership of the
productive economy.
At the bottom, of course, are the poor, these days increasingly
likely to be unemployed but still composed mostly of the "working
poor," those who work part- or full-time yet remain well below an
adequate standard of living. They represent something like a ɹfth of
society in developed countries; although there is wide variation and

in the global South or "Third World" they make up an enormously
larger proportion. They live entirely on their labor incomes and
indeed often prematurely die on them.
In between these two classes lies what is often vaguely described
as the "middle class;" although a little more precision is helpful.
Within this middle realm we can distinguish two similar but distinct
classes. One is the "working class," representing the large part of the
population in the developed nations that earns a sometimes-decent
living, but almost entirely from labor income. This class is
associated with "blue collar" jobs, corresponding to the construction
workforce, industrial workers, truck drivers, sanitation workers,
nurses, teachers and others employed in essential but often low-
paid, physically demanding and typically unglamorous work.
The upper part of the middle class can be described as the
"professional class," also making their living mostly from work
income. This echelon of the social system includes the "white collar"
workforce, often doing intellectual work and holding various college
or graduate degrees; your doctors, lawyers, engineers, accountants,
professors and corporate managers. This class owes the large
majority of its income to its education and relatively scarce
advanced skills, rather than simple ownership of a large fortune.
Families in this class can earn decent amounts up to quite large
incomes and sometimes imagine that they are "the rich" or
"successful" in society; though they are mostly well below the top
levels.
This modern class structure, in the US and around the world, is
commonly informal and unspoken, especially in settler countries
like the US or Australia with little history of aristocratic deference
to remember. Today, few people are born in the US, Europe or
China with a deɹnite guarantee to remain in the class of their
parents; although in practice this is common. Barbara Ehrenreich
pointed out the resulting anxiety of the professional class in her
book Fear of Falling:
... the professional middle class is still only a middle class, located
well below the ultimate elite of wealth and power. Its only

'capital' is knowledge and skill, or at least the credentials
imputing such skill and knowledge. And unlike real capital, these
cannot be hoarded against hard times, preserved beyond the
lifetime of an individual, or, of course, bequeathed ... Whether
the middle class looks down toward the realm of less, or up
toward the realm of more, there is the fear, always, of falling.42
The connection of this class structure to freedom can be seen more
clearly if we consider a favorite argument of Friedman's that
regardless of the level of wealth concentration, the market allows
for what he calls "proportional representation":
... the role of the market ... is that it permits unanimity without
conformity; that it is a system of eʃectively proportional
representation ... I cannot get the amount of national defense I
want and you, a diʃerent amount. With respect to such indivisible
matters we can discuss, and argue, and vote. But having decided,
we must conform.43
Friedman clearly glosses over some major problems here, which
are brought forward thoughtfully by radical Left economist Robin
Hahnel:
It is not one person one vote, but one dollar one vote in the
market place. Some claim this as a virtue: If I have a particularly
strong preference for a good I can cast more dollar ballots to
reɻect the intensity of my desire ... But, there is something wrong
when people have vastly diʃerent numbers of dollar ballots to cast in
market elections. Few would hold up as a paragon of freedom a
political election in which some were permitted to vote thousands
of times and others were permitted to vote only once, or not at
all. But this is exactly the kind of freedom the market provides.
Those with more income have a greater impact on what suppliers
in markets will be signaled to provide than those with less
income, which explains why 'market freedom' often leads to
outcomes we know do not reɻect what most people want ... the

intensity of people's desires for basic healthcare is higher than the
intensity of desires for plastic surgery as well. But those voting for
plastic surgery have many more votes to cast for even their less
pressing desires than most voting for basic healthcare have even
for life and death needs.44
So the modern class structures are a major impediment to real
freedom, since the resources locked up in the portfolios of the
owning class give them power and are kept from being freely used
to express the basic requirements of the great majority. Unless, of
course, the majority really does want shallow rich people to get
butt-lifts.
On the other hand, the daily reality for those lowest on the global
class structure is quickly summarized by the highly respected Indian
economist Amartya Sen, who wrote in his inɻuential Poverty and
Famines that "Starvation is the characteristic of some people not
having enough food to eat. It is not the characteristic of there being
not enough food to eat. While the latter can be a cause of the
former, it is but one of many possible causes."45 Including the cause
of being so abjectly poor that food is unaʃordable, even if it is
abundant for those higher in the class system—their enormous
allowances express more desire for food than the desperate pleas but
tiny incomes of the global poor. But for libertarian thinkers like
Friedman and Hayek, who insist it's best to conɹne ourselves to
negative freedom, starving people have no particular positive
freedom or right to any surplus food.
A ɹnal genre of money's ability to grant more (hegemonic)
freedom was described by columnist Russell Baker, who wrote:
There are plenty of rich men who have no yachts and others who
have no Picassos. Many of the rich have no winter homes in the
South and there are a large number with no summer homes in the
North. Many more have no private jets of their own, and a
surprising number do not even have a chalet in the Alps. Every
last one of them, however, has a lawyer ... The man who has a
lawyer working for him full time, year in and year out, is rich

and, almost certainly, bound to get richer. What we have here is a
class structure deɹned by degree of access to the law.46
Among the freedoms granted by enormous fortunes, is freedom from
having to say you're sorry.

To the Bigger Go the Spoils
Having considered money's muscle, it's time to look at how markets
really work. Capitalism is based on a market economy, in which
decisions about what goods to produce and consume are made by
consumers and producers, buying and selling from one another. The
Friedmans wrote in Free to Choose that in a free market, "If one
storekeeper oʃers you goods of lower quality or of higher price than
another, you're not going to continue to patronize his store. If he
buys goods to sell that don't serve your needs, you're not going to
buy them ... You are free to choose."47 This picture is at the very
heart of the modern conservative and libertarian worldview, and it's
pretty laughable.
This picture of freedom to choose among many companies'
products assumes that there are many diʃerent companies from
which to buy. This market setting, with plenty of alternatives for
consumers, is often called a competitive market in economic jargon,
meaning it has many competing companies, which themselves must
be small relative to the overall market. Friedman in Capitalism and
Freedom wrote that "Of course, competition is an ideal type ... as I
have studied economic activities in the United States, I have become
increasingly impressed with how wide is the range of problems and
industries for which it is appropriate to treat the economy as if it
were competitive."48
However, markets may become less competitive over time
through a process called "concentration"—the tendency for smaller
ɹrms to get bought up or beaten down by the bigger ɹrms. This can
lead to a full "monopoly," where a single giant company supplies
the entire market, or a lesser degree of monopoly called "oligopoly,"
where a market is dominated by just a few very large ɹrms.
Friedman calls monopoly one of "the most diɽcult problems" that
can arise in an economy, explaining that monopolists have "control"
of an industry and can "determine signiɹcantly the terms on which
other individuals shall have access to it." This kind of control is

called "market power"—the social, economic and political inɻuence
of giant companies. Concentrated market structures, like oligopoly,
allow big ɹrms to gain diʃerent levels of market power, and
sometimes to work together and wield even more authority.49
Friedman claims "By removing the organization of economic
activity from the control of political authority, the market
eliminates this source of coercive power ... Economic power can be
widely dispersed. There is no law of conservation which forces the
growth of new centers of economic strength to be at the expense of
existing centers."50 Later, he insists "The most important fact about
enterprise monopoly is its relative unimportance from the point of
view of the economy as a whole."51
This baked-in denial crosses mainstream political lines. For
example, Paul Krugman, one of the most respected liberal
economists in the US, concludes his textbook's chapter on the
subject by observing "across industries, oligopoly is far more
common than either perfect competition or monopoly." Yet, he feels
the reɻexive assumption of free market competition is still justiɹed,
because often "the industry behaves 'almost' as if it were perfectly
competitive."52
Some of the best research on the subject of these "market
structures" is by author Barry Lynn, whose outstanding book
Cornered documents the concentration of market after market, often
hidden from our view by maintaining independent brand names
even after being bought by giant conglomerates. For example, nine
of the ten best-selling brands of bottled water are sold by three ɹrms
—Pepsi, Coke and Nestle.53 Looking at eyeglasses, "LensCrafters,
Sears Optical, and Sunglass Hut are all owned by the same
company, the Italian eyewear conglomerate Luxottica."54 Turning to
the working man's beer, "all the microbreweries and brew pubs
together accounted for less than 4 percent" of the total, while
"among the industrial brewers, consolidation never stopped ... With
the merger in 2007 of Miller and Coors, under the direction of South
African Breweries (SAB), and the takeover in 2008 of Anheuser-
Busch by InBev, the United States ... was basically reduced to

reliance on a world-bestriding beer duopoly, run not out of
Milwaukee or St. Louis but out of Leuven, Belgium, and
Johannesburg, South Africa."55 And now, just Belgium, since in
2015 AB InBev itself announced a $108 billion purchase of SAB
Miller.56
Scholars of monopoly and market concentration have found that
the degree of consolidation depends on the peculiarities of diʃerent
markets, with some industries having several factors pushing for
oligopoly and market power, while other markets may remain
decentralized. One major driver is the economy of scale. An
economy of scale occurs when a company's per-unit costs decrease
as it produces more goods, usually because the ɹrm operates in an
industry with large up-front expenses, like manufacturing. If a ɹrm
invests $1 billion in a cell phone factory and ends up producing just
phones, each unit will cost $1 million before labor and materials
expenses. But if the factory instead produces 10 million phones over
its lifetime, the cost of capital per unit drops to $100 each.
These incentives have been present since the Industrial
Revolution; although conservative economists prefer not to
recognize their importance. Hayek considered market concentration
to be "exaggerated"57 and he held the government to be usually
responsible for it. He dismissed the argument that "technological
changes have made competition impossible in a constantly
increasing number of ɹelds," claiming "This belief derives mainly
from the Marxist doctrine of the concentration of industry."58
But economists with an interest in the opinions of actual business
people have found they frequently report scale economies. Mid-
century US economists Wilford Eiteman and Glenn Guthrie directly
surveyed heads of manufacturing corporations, with striking results
—only about 5 percent of surveyed ɹrms reported the rising costs
conventionally expected by economists, while 94 percent reported
scale economies of diʃerent types.59 The highly respected Harvard
business professor Alfred Chandler wrote in his meticulous business
history Scale and Scope that as industries grew:

Production units achieved much greater economies of scale ...
Therefore large plants operating at their 'minimum eɽcient scale'
(the scale of operation necessary to reach the lowest cost per unit)
had an impressive cost advantage over smaller plants that did not
reach that scale ... In many industries the throughput of plants of
that scale was so high that a small number of them could meet the
existing national and even global demand. The structure of these
industries quickly became oligopolistic ... In many instances the
ɹrst company to build a plant of minimum eɽcient scale and to
recruit the essential management team remained the leader in its
industry for decades.60
Chandler also appreciated that these scale eɽciencies meant
"market power." He points to an incredible letter written among
executive staʃ of the great DuPont chemical empire, suggesting that
if the ɹrm gained:
... an absolute monopoly in the ɹeld, it would not pay us ... The
demand of the country for [gun]powder is variable. If we owned
all therefore when slack times came we would have to curtail
product to the extent of diminished demands. If on the other hand
we control only 60% of it all and made the 60% cheaper than
others, when slack times came we could still keep our capital
employed to the full and our product to the maximum by taking
from the other 40% what was needed for this purpose.61
From a very diʃerent perspective, the radical historian Douglas
Dowd agreed, observing that large-scale industrial technology made
it "necessary for business ɹrms to enlarge ... and possible to increase
their proɹts by their ability to control their markets."62 The
unorthodox Australian economist Steve Keen conɹrmed "increasing
returns to scale mean that the perfectly competitive market is
unstable: it will, in time, break down" into oligopoly or monopoly.63
This is an impressive level of agreement among industrialists,
eminent business historians and radical analysts. In the face of this

very broad consensus, Mises' and Hayek's claim that concentration
is purely a "Marxist doctrine" doesn't pass the laugh test.
Beside scale economies, another driver of market concentration
emerges among major merchant companies, those that buy goods
from manufacturers and sell them to consumers. These "trading
monopolies" arise when a merchant ɹrm or retailer gains such a
large share of a consumer goods marketplace that they become
indispensable to manufacturers and wholesalers, to whom they can
dictate terms and arm-wrestle over prices. Today, there are two
principal US merchant monopolists—Wal-Mart and Amazon.
The real gravity of Wal-Mart lies in its power, technically called
"monopsony"—a ɹrm that has power not only for much of what it
sells, but also for what it buys. Consider Pankaj Ghemawat's analysis
of the ɹrm in the prestigious Harvard Business Review:
Size advantages exist because markets are ɹnite ... Wal-Mart, the
discount merchandiser, illustrates the power of local and regional
scale economies. Historically, it focused on small Sunbelt towns
that its competitors had neglected. Most of these towns could not
support two discounters, so once Wal-Mart made a long-lived,
largely unrecoverable investment to service such a town, it gained
a local monopoly. The company reinforced this advantage by
wrapping its stores in concentric rings around regional
distribution centers. By the time competitors realized that this
policy cut distribution costs in half, Wal-Mart had preempted
enough store sites to render competing regional warehouses
unviable. Now you know why Sam Walton is one of the richest
men in America.64
And why, when Walton died, his four kids each became one of the
ten richest Americans.
The power of Small-Mart's monopsony is enough for it reorganize
and oligopolize whole industries through its "category captain"
system. As company historian Charles Fishman put it, "Wal-Mart
retains the power in the relationship," since Wal-Mart buys 20
percent or more of many manufacturers' output.65 Barry Lynn

observes that "Free-market Utopians have long decried government
industrial policy because it puts into the hands of bureaucrats and
politicians the power to determine which ɹrms 'win' and which
'lose.' Wal-Mart picks winners and losers every day."66 Hayek's
argument was that government "central planning" is the Road to
Serfdom since it represses diverse markets. But private sector
powermongers are apparently less scary.
Meanwhile, Amazon is becoming the online Wal-Mart, for a start
clearing a third of US book sales, a hugely inɻuential position when
the big bookstore chains are bankrupt or close to it, and
independents now rare. As Paul Constant of the Seattle Stranger put
it, "We now live in an America dotted with 'bookstore deserts,'
where people would have to drive for hours, maybe even a full day,
to browse the stacks at an Amazon competitor."67
Businessweek journalist Brad Stone wrote that:
Amazon had an easy way to demonstrate its market power. When
a publisher did not capitulate and the company shut oʃ the
recommendation algorithms for its books, the publisher's sales
usually fell by as much as 40 percent ... Bezos kept pushing for
more. He asked [an employee] to exact better terms from the
smallest publishers, who would go out of business if it weren't for
the steady sales of their back catalogs on Amazon.
Amazon's libertarian CEO Jeʃ Bezos called this "the Gazelle
Project," meaning "Amazon should approach these small publishers
the way a cheetah would pursue a sickly gazelle." But soon
"Amazon's lawyers heard about the name and insisted it be changed
to the less incendiary Small Publisher Program."68 Amazon's more
common move was simply the mere "threat of decreased promotion
on the site," a negotiating tactic Amazon called "Pay to Play. Once
again, Amazon's lawyers caught wind of this and renamed the
program Vendor Realignment."69
These tactics have also worked against other major ɹrms, like
Macmillan and Time-Warner.70 The business world is watching as

"The retailer's power in the book industry ... has prompted
publishers to move toward consolidation as they look to fortify their
own negotiating positions by adding heft and larger inventory."71
Once again, free competition it ain't. Prices are often set by this kind
of corporate pissing contest rather than the "invisible hand" of
eɽciency.
Lynn observes that online commerce actually has an especially
strong concentration drive:
Precisely because the Internet eliminates the "tyranny" of locality,
it eliminates most of the physical obstacles to centralization, such
as the price of real estate. The result is consolidation beyond
anything we have ever seen in the physical world, often in the
form of a single superdominant entity—Netɻix, Amazon, iTunes—
that also tends to enjoy real cost advantages over real-world
rivals.72
Notably, Amazon founder Jeʃ Bezos is himself a libertarian (while
his cofounder Nick Hanauer says he fears "pitchforks" coming for
his "fellow zillionaires").73 So Bezos claims to believe in a market
with many ɹrms and scrappy competition, but once his market
dominance is established the ɹrm shows its true colors, arm-
wrestling with other corporate titans and towering over "sickly
gazelles." Thus, libertarianism is refuted by another of its own
powerful adherents.
A ɹnal form of market concentration (whether it leads to
oligopoly or a full monopoly) is found in markets that involve
networks, such as air travel, Internet service or electric power.
These markets have an inherent tendency to concentrate, since the
value of a network is increased the larger it gets—clearly, an airline
with gates in a hundred cities is worth more than one with gates in
ten cities, and a social media network is worth more as it connects
more users.
But even these cases don't move Friedman:

Railroads in the United States are an excellent example. A large
degree of monopoly in railroads was perhaps inevitable on
technical grounds in the nineteenth century ... But conditions
have changed. The emergence of road and air transport has
reduced the monopoly element in railroads to negligible
proportions ... If railroads had never been subjected to regulation
in the United States, it is nearly certain that by now
transportation, including railroads, would be a highly competitive
industry with little or no remaining monopoly elements.74
Friedman got his wish when the rail freight industry was
deregulated in 1980 with the Staggers Rail Act, which removed
limits on shipping charges, and related legislation exempted the
rails from anti-monopoly laws.
Friedman thought this would unleash new competition, but as
often happens, when regulation was loosened the "Age of Friedman"
seemed to be a rerun of the nineteenth century's Gilded Age. As
Fortune magazine describes complaints against the rail corporations:
The central charge is one that would've been familiar to
Rockefeller: monopoly power. Since freight railroads were
deregulated in 1980, the number of large, so-called Class I
railroads has shrunk from 40 to seven. In truth, there are only
four that matter: CSX and Norfolk Southern in the East, Union
Paciɹc and Burlington Northern Santa Fe in the West. These four
superpowers now take in more than 90% of the industry's revenue
... An estimated one-third of shippers have access to only one
railroad.75
And so free-market economics fails yet another test. Conservatives
to this day blame dissatisfaction with capitalism on government
regulation, saying that if only it were abolished we would "nearly
certainly" see "a highly competitive industry." But when regulations
fall away here on planet Earth, networks and big upfront costs make
an outcome of "four superpowers" almost inevitable. Irony loves
company!

Industries like these, with network eʃects and also giant upfront
costs creating scale economies, are often referred to as "natural
monopolies"—their eɽciencies are strong enough to make a
monopolist more eɽcient than multiple ɹrms. Often, cases like
these are considered to be the ones with the best case for running
the industry through a public body, or for at least strong regulation,
since market competition is especially clearly not in eʃect. And
while the Right recognizes the issue, even here they prefer that
markets run unimpeded, even if it means a monopoly. Friedman
states: "When technical conditions make a monopoly the natural
outcome of competitive market forces, there are only three
alternatives that seem available: private monopoly, public
monopoly, or public regulation. All three are bad so we must choose
among evils ... Having learned from both, I reluctantly conclude
that, if tolerable, private monopoly may be the least of the evils."76
In fact, he later speciɹes that even government oversight is too
much, urging "private unregulated monopoly,"77 like Standard Oil
in the early days.
The emerging future of monopoly was projected by The Wall Street
Journal's own headline covering the major online companies,
"Giants Tighten Grip on Internet Economy," and illustrated with a
gigantic ɻying saucer covered in corporate logos, apparently
beaming individuals aboard.78 It plainly reported that "the Internet
economy is powered by an infrastructure ... controlled by a small
handful of tech giants" and described Google, Microsoft, Apple,
Amazon and Facebook as "established companies [that] dominate in
essential services that both fuel and extract value from the rising
digital economy." Their centrality to the very functioning of the
Internet means "ecosystems" are gradually built around these
corporate nodes, so that "Anyone building a brand, for example,
can't ignore Facebook's highly engaged daily audience of 1 billion.
Anyone starting a business needs to make sure they can be found on
Google. Anyone with goods to sell wants Amazon to carry them."
Similar status applies for mobile apps, music and video.

Google's search monopoly has an especially crucial role, one
which net neutrality pioneer Tim Wu called "the Web's great
switch" for exploring information, a hugely important position.79
The New York Times' sympathetic technophile calls these ɹrms the
"Frightful Five" that "lord over all that happens in tech" and are
"better insulated against surprising competition from upstarts." At
turns rivals and partners, they are "inescapable," "central to just
about everything we do with computers," and together they "form a
gilded mesh blanketing the entire economy."80 Less ɻoridly, they
own the "platforms"—the basic systems and network hubs
increasingly relied on by the rest of the economy, including for
social interaction.
However, many liberals and some conservatives suggest that all
this talk about "economic power" is overblown, since "antitrust" law
outlaws any "restraint of trade," like powerful monopolies. Liberals
like Lynn, who would rather see capitalism preserved but regulated
to take the edges oʃ, claim that antitrust law puts "checks on the
autocratic power of the corporate managers and the labor bosses."81
This faith has been shaken by the aggressive weakening of
antitrust law over the last forty years, since it relies on a
representative government, standing up to concentrated capital.
This problem will be examined in Chapter 3, but for now radical
economist Edward Herman notes "Antitrust has gone through
cycles," 
with 
the 
last 
"cycle" 
beginning 
in 
the 
Reagan
administration, which "aggressively dismantled antitrust, imposing
drastic cuts in budgets and manpower, installing oɽcials hostile to
the antitrust mission, and failing to enforce the laws."82
The business press observed at the time that "Stressing
deregulation, the Reagan Administration appears likely to aim at a
more relaxed and ɻexible approach to antitrust policy," with the
new head of the program favoring "an antitrust policy based on
eɽciency considerations."83 So if corporations can convince the
Justice Department it will save money by merging, the division may
sign oʃ on it, regardless of its eʃects on market power. This is why
antitrust often allows absurdly anticompetitive mergers, like that in

2006 between the appliance makers Maytag and Whirlpool, with its
"combined market share of 50 to 80 percent for washers, dryers and
dishwashers, with refrigerators not far behind."84 The EU and other
nations have experienced broadly similar trends.
But enforced or not, the inherent limits of antitrust policy's ability
to ɹx the fundamental problem of market concentration are given
by Harvard's Chandler. He comments "the existence of the Sherman
Act discouraged monopoly in industries where integration and
concentration had already occurred. It helped to create oligopoly
where monopoly existed and to prevent oligopoly from becoming
monopoly."85 In other words, antitrust (when it was enforced)
prevented full monopoly but left gigantic networks of vertically
integrated ɹrms in place to dominate the marketplace.
When brieɻy mentioning these issues, Friedman remarks,
"What about the danger of monopoly that led to the antitrust
laws? That is a real danger. The most eʃective way to counter it is
not through a bigger antitrust division at the Department of
Justice or a larger budget for the Federal Trade Commission, but
through removing existing barriers to international trade. That
would permit competition from all over the world to be even
more eʃective than it is now in undermining monopoly at
home."86
Regrettably for Friedman's breezy dismissal of the issue, many
oligopolies and monopolies are today global in their scope.
Consider Exxon-Mobil. After Rockefeller's free-market monopoly
Standard Oil was broken up into a regional oligopoly under antitrust
action in 1911, several of its pieces rejoined in the "relaxed
antitrust" era of the Age of Friedman. This created colossal ɹrms
like Exxon, and indeed in this industry the US government even
encouraged this as a lever of US power over world energy markets.
Businessweek memorably described the company's CEO as "The
Man," commenting ironically "The Man is not a head of state, but
the distinction is academic."87 It notes "the plush senior

management suite at Exxon's headquarters is known within the
industry as the 'God Pod,'" typical of "the sovereign state of Exxon,
accustomed as it is to using its superior technology and ɹnancial
muscle to dominate not only rival companies but whole countries."
The business writers call Exxon "capitalism exempliɹed." Despite
Friedman's sweet hopes, the global market is not big enough to
make any ɹrm into small player.
So just how concentrated is, for example, the US economy? The
Concentration Ratios calculated by the Economic Census in the US
Commerce Department are quite incomplete, but are the best record
we have. Even their limited ɹgures are striking, with the 2012
census indicating that the eight largest pet food ɹrms produce over
80 percent of the US total (by share of value added, generally
proportionate to production); the biggest four snack food ɹrms
produced more than half the US total; the eight biggest coʃee and
tea companies produce 70 percent of the full output; the four
biggest book publishers earn more than 40 percent of the industry's
total revenue; and the eight largest software publishers write
enough code to earn almost half the market income.88 And while
the global record diʃers in detail, the overall trend is clear. The
data, though problematic and limited, shows a clear pattern of
concentration across many crucial industries.
Indeed, the loyalty of the Right and today's "libertarians" to their
view of competitive markets and their alleged "free association" is
almost touching, considering the towering heights of power the
early tycoons reached before the mild threat of antitrust was
created. Consider the nineteenth century's "Gilded Age," the time of
purest, nonregulated and lightly-taxed laissez-faire capitalism in the
US and Europe. That era didn't see a ɻourishing of enduringly
competitive markets with "free to choose" consumers and workers,
but instead a very consistent concentration drive toward oligopoly
or worse—Standard Oil, American Tobacco and US Steel are classic
free-market monopolies. The early railroad kingpin Cornelius
Vanderbilt remarked when facing a legal obstacle, "What do I care
about the law? Hain't I got power?"89 Likewise, Wall Street kingpin

JP Morgan arranged huge horizontal and vertical mergers among
corporations across the economy, giving rise to a whole series of
monopolies and trusts that were "Morganized" by the powerful
ɹgure, including the colossal US Steel monopoly.
So, after this review of the record of market concentration,
intermittent government regulation and business power, what is left
of the libertarian idea of "free to choose?" The answer is given by
Rothbard. "If consumer demand had really justiɹed more
competitors or more of the product or a greater variety of products,
then entrepreneurs would have seized the opportunity to proɹt by
satisfying this demand. The fact that this is not being done in any
given case demonstrates that no such unsatisɹed consumer demand
exists."90 So no level of monopoly can possibly deface our free-
market doctrine, revealing the right-wing intellectual tradition as a
disgraceful fraud and a sickening waste. While governments do
indeed often promote giant semi-monopolist corporations as
"national champions," the point libertarians sweep under the rug is
that the market is quite capable of producing towering corporations
with full monopoly power all by itself.
George Orwell, the globally celebrated journalist and critic of the
totalitarianism of the Soviet Union, himself reviewed Hayek's book
The Road to Serfdom for the London Observer in 1944. He agreed
with Hayek's claim, as Orwell put it, that "collectivism is not
inherently democratic," an insight born of Orwell's own evolving
socialist positions (see Chapter 5). But his torpedoing of the core
ɻaw of Hayek's arguments was simple:
But he does not see, or will not admit, that a return to 'free'
competition means for the great mass of people a tyranny
probably worse, because more irresponsible, than that of the
State. The trouble with competitions is that somebody wins them.
Professor Hayek denies that free capitalism necessarily leads to
monopoly, but in practice that is where it has led.91
But apparently Wal-Mart's "local monopolies" and tycoons laughing
at the law aren't too impressive to libertarian and conservative

economists, who are, after all, Free To Choose to ignore reality. But
this happy view of market concentration contrasts with the very
diʃerent way economists view labor concentration.

Labor's Loves Lost
By now, we've reviewed the strong concentration of capital
ownership, both in household fortunes as well as market
consolidation. But what about labor? The Right's take on the
freedom of the labor market is that it leaves us free to choose among
multiple uses for our labor, protecting you from power plays by a
tyrannical boss.
The most reliable and eʃective protection for most workers is
provided by the existence of many employers ... The employers
who protect a worker are those who would like to hire him. Their
demand for his services makes it in the self-interest of his own
employer to pay him the full value of his work. If his own
employer doesn't, someone else may be ready to do so.
Competition 
for 
his 
services—that 
is 
the 
worker's 
real
protection.92
The ɹrst serious problem with these rosy reviews of the market is
that after the previous section, it must be admitted that the "many
employers" the Friedmans are expecting may never arrive to the job
fair. And they do quietly concede that "Two classes or workers are
not protected by anyone: workers who have only one possible
employer, and workers who have no possible employer,"93 which
makes consolidation and outsourcing very relevant for freedom.
The second great problem is that, fundamentally, people are in
fact not commodities. A seller of non-perishable goods can store
them until market conditions are favorable. This patience is
unavailable for owners of mere labor power, who stubbornly require
food and water at regular intervals. The kid cannot skip eating this
quarter and eat more next quarter instead. Treating labor as an asset
priced by supply and demand, like toasters or toothbrushes, is a
gross insult to the human spirit and indeed, is responsible for some
of the gravest crimes committed against humanity in our history.

A further problem is that this traditional claim that the labor
market is "free" is based on another assumption, that if you don't
ɹnd an employer you want to work for, you can just produce goods
on your own. Friedman states: "Since the household always has the
alternative of producing directly for itself, it need not enter into any
exchange unless it beneɹts from it. Hence, no exchange will take
place unless both parties do beneɹt from it."94 This would indeed
grant a good deal of freedom to the man on the street, but
"producing for itself" implies access to productive resources,
including what we call "capital," which as we've seen is so highly
concentrated that a very large part of global society has essentially
none. This means that since we have no "positive freedom" to use or
decide on how to use the capital stock, the typical working person is
also left with diminished "negative freedom," since employers who
own the concentrated capital have dramatic power over employees
in the market.
Ultimately, these problems mean that the workforce is constantly
tempted to organize, in order to gain some collective power of its
own to set against the weight of giant organized companies. The
main form of workforce organization is the labor union, where
workers organize into bargaining units that can negotiate with
companies on more equal terms. Despite reliably hostile media
coverage (see Chapter 2), unions remain popular among the global
workforce, with worker surveys and even Businessweek reporting
that Americans say in rising numbers that they would like to form a
union in their workplace.95 More recently, the Gallup polling agency
found in 2015 that Americans' approval of labor unions had reached
nearly six in ten, yet more than half expected them to continue to
weaken.96 And labor's loves, the major gains won by the movement,
have also turned out be pretty enduringly popular: the common
observance of a "weekend" when many workers have regular time
oʃ, the eight-hour day for much of the workforce and child labor
laws that encourage kids to go to school rather than competing with
adults for jobs.

The reasons for this generally popular view of unionizing are
explained by many sources, including by civil rights hero Martin
Luther King Jr, who in his brief but historic career made allies of
labor and spoke often at meetings of labor union locals:
The labor movement was the principal force that transformed
misery and despair into hope and progress. Out of its bold
struggles, 
economic 
and 
social 
reform 
gave 
birth 
to
unemployment insurance, old-age pensions, government relief for
the destitute, and, above all, new wage levels that meant not mere
survival but a tolerable life. The captains of industry did not lead
this transformation; they resisted it until they were overcome.97
Indeed, King said the labor movement and the civil rights movement
both fought "the economic and political power structure."
But most importantly for the main points of this chapter, King
told an AFL conference in 1961 that the labor movement arose
because before it the working man "was hired and ɹred by
economic despots whose power over him decreed his life or death
... Those who in the second half of the nineteenth century could not
tolerate organized labor have had a rebirth of power and seek to
regain the despotism of that era while retaining the wealth and
privileges of the twentieth century."98 A "despot" is an entity with
supreme power, something very far from the traditional picture of
"many holders" of money that the Right promotes. King criticized
"the tragic inequalities of an economic system which takes
necessities from the masses to give luxuries to the classes" and in
one of his ɹnal speeches, he celebrated the power of organized
people to stand up to governments and concentrated capital:
We can all get more together than we can apart; we can get more
organized together than we can apart. And this is the way we gain
power. Power is the ability to achieve purpose, power is the
ability to aʃect change, and we need power. What is power?
Walter Reuther said once that "power is the ability of a labor

union like UAW to make the most powerful corporation in the
world—General Motors—say yes when it wants to say no."99
Few are aware that King was assassinated while supporting a
Memphis, Tennessee labor action, supporting city garbage men who
were on strike for recognition of their union. King often called the
opponents of labor and civil rights "reactionary,"100 a derogatory
term for the Right's political views, implying they favor static
tradition or a return to the past. This could quite easily apply to
Hayek, Friedman and many of today's libertarians and their
hankering for a return to the Gilded Age.
Despite the relative popularity of unions, the institution has also
been in steady decline for decades. The Economic Policy Institute
ɹnds "union density," the proportion of the national labor force
that's represented by a union collective bargaining contract, has
fallen from 26.7 percent in 1973 to 13.0 percent in 2011.101 The
Harvard Business Review also observes that "Labor is on its own
politically in America in the 21st century,"102 a fact we'll come back
to in Chapter 3. It may be confusing that unions have declined even
as their popularity has largely held up and the solution to the puzzle
is labor repression. Since the era of early capitalism, labor has faced
major obstacles to solidarity, with workers split along racial, class,
gender and occupational lines. Much worse, striking workers were
often violently attacked by hired company thugs like the Pinkertons,
who outright massacred strikers in episodes like the Homestead steel
strike. Open anti-labor violence mostly ended in the developed
world following the late nineteenth century, but remains quite
common in the Third World (see Chapter 5).
In the developed world, more modern methods are based on
misinformation and bullying, as when Businessweek reports that
worker surveys had indicated a gradually rising willingness to join a
labor union, but found:
... heightened corporate power has checked union growth ...
Unionization elections are typically so lopsided that most unions

have all but given up on them. Most employers pull out the stops
when labor organizers appear, using everything from mandatory
antiunion meetings to staged videos showing alleged union thugs
beating workers, backed by streams of leaɻets and letters to
workers' homes. While most of these tactics are legal, companies
also illegally ɹre union supporters in 25 percent of all
elections.103
These moves have left organized labor a dramatically reduced
player in the US economy.
However, the economists on the Right have more scalding
antagonism for unions than for any other social institution, even the
state itself. Unlike their treatment of the market, where the power of
huge 
corporate 
empires 
is 
reliably 
minimized 
or 
called
"inappropriate" to discuss, with labor organization the treatment is
very diʃerent. In Free to Choose, the Friedmans cut straight to the
issue that evaded them while looking at the business world—they
start with a section directly titled "The Source of Union Power,"
which concludes that unions "enforce a high wage rate" with
government action or through "violence or the threat of violence:
threatening to destroy the property of employers, or to beat them
up.104
Libertarians can very reliably be counted on to immediately
counter any mention of "corporate power" or "economic power"
with the demand, "Well what about labor power?" Labor power still
exists today, but the inɻuence of organized labor has ɻagged along
with its density numbers. Trying to put equal blame on corporate
empires and labor unions is pretty ridiculous, similar to blaming in
equal measure the business world and the churches, or the
organized fraternal societies like the Rotary Club. All these
institutions have some inɻuence and some even have a measure of
social power, but compared to the colossal corporate concentration
numbers in the last section, their weight is small potatoes.
This kind of naked defense of power is even more glaring if we
take up the Right's view of trade organizations, a very prominent

part of the economic scene, as Robert Brady observed in his ɹne but
almost-unknown book Business As a System of Power. For example, a
"Resolution on trade associations" adopted by the powerful National
Association of Manufacturers (NAM) "heartily approves the plan of
organizing each industry in the country in a representative national
trade association" and hoped "every dealer, jobber, manufacturer,
and producer of raw materials should be a member."105 However,
NAM's most core program was to resist worker organization, as
Brady 
observes: 
"except 
for 
certain 
short 
intervals, 
its
overshadowing interest has been in labor relations. A common
interest in opposing organized labor has served to hold the
membership together, to dominate the motives in organizing and
perfecting the machinery" of organization.106
This is oddly similar to Hayek's view of the issue: "It is merely a
play upon words to speak of the 'power collectively exercised by
private boards of directors' so long as they do not combine to
concerted action—which would, of course, mean the end of
competition and the creation of a planned economy."107 But that's
the point—they do combine for concerted action, both by merging
into larger conglomerates and by organizing into industry
associations. Rather than the "planned economy" of socialism that
haunts Hayek's dreams, it is corporate monopoly and oligopoly, and
their industrial organizations, that are the main source of today's
central planning. Brady concludes, "The real signiɹcance of such
concentration is found less in the exercise of direct monopolistic
powers than in the position of leadership of the giant concerns in
their respective ɹelds ... by such devices as 'price leadership,' [or]
'sharing the market,'" in line with Chandler's analysis above.108
Here, in the face of the Right's contempt for organized labor and
its selective blindness concerning organized capital, we should
remember one of their idols, Adam Smith. Smith is commonly
considered the father of the economics discipline, and among
conservative economists like Friedman and Hayek he's an especially
crucial ɹgure. But Smith's picture of the capital-labor dynamic

depends fundamentally on the question of organization (or as he
wrote, "combination") and deserves to be quoted at length:
The workmen desire to get as much, the masters to give as little
as possible. The former are disposed to combine in order to raise,
the latter in order to lower the wages of labour. It is not, however,
diɽcult to foresee which of the two parties must, upon all
ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dispute, and force
the other into a compliance with their terms. The masters, being
fewer in number, can combine more easily; and the law, besides,
authorizes, or at least does not prohibit their combinations, while
it prohibits those of the workmen. We have no acts of parliament
against combining to lower the price of work; but many against
combining to raise it. In all such disputes the masters can hold out
much longer. A landlord, a farmer, a master manufacturer, or
merchant, though they did not employ a single workman, could
generally live a year or two upon the stocks they have already
acquired. Many workmen could not subsist a week, few could
subsist a month, and scarce any a year without employment. In
the long-run the workman may be as necessary to his master as
his master is to him; but the necessity is not so immediate.
We rarely hear, it has been said, of the combinations of masters;
though frequently of those of workmen. But whoever imagines,
upon this account, that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of
the world as of the subject ... Such combinations, however, are
frequently resisted by a contrary defensive combination of the
workmen; who sometimes too, without any provocation of this
kind, combine of their own accord to raise the price of their
labour ... But whether their combinations be oʃensive or
defensive, they are always abundantly heard of.109
Smith, who again is considered a heroic intellectual ɹgure across
numerous economic schools, describes a labor market that is
basically an organization-oʃ: which side can best organize and
outmaneuver the other drives the outcome, and in most cases

business has the edge. In fact, this is a simple description of class
conɻict.
Hayek hopes he "will not be suspected of any tenderness toward
the capitalists if he stresses here that it would nevertheless be a
mistake to put the blame for the modern movement toward
monopoly exclusively or mainly on that class. Their propensity in
this direction is neither new nor would it by itself be likely to
become a formidable power."110 Similarly, Friedman says in
Capitalism and Freedom: "While there seems not to have been any
upward trend in the importance of enterprise monopoly over the
past half-century, there certainly has been in the importance of
labor monopoly." Obviously, based on the numbers in the Age of
Friedman, the opposite is true.
This consistent pattern frankly reveals that a number of quite
respected, Nobel Prize-winning conservative economists, including
Friedman and Hayek, are intellectual opportunists. By coincidence,
their analysis has bottomless contempt for organized labor (even on
its now-small scale), but the giant crimes of the enormously greater
power of organized capital are studiously ignored. This puts
Friedman and Hayek closer to other ɹgures who have used their
formidable intellects to defend other cruel power systems. We have
little respect today for intellectual supporters of slavery, of the
"divine right" of kings and the feudal system, of the Nazi or Soviet
states, or other tyrannical powermongers. Today's "libertarian"
intellectuals take their place in a long tradition of defense of power, a
parade of shame stretching back to the ancient priests who defended
the righteousness of early kings with ɹne-sounding words.
There is an exception to this pathetically opportunistic judgment
of power systems—these right-wing kingpins will recognize
corporate power if labor is involved and can take the fall. Hayek
claimed "the impetus of the movement toward totalitarianism comes
mainly from the two great vested interests: organized capital and
organized labor. Probably the greatest menace of all is the fact that
the policies of these two most powerful groups point in the same
direction."111 After the previous section and Smith's analysis earlier,

the claim that the interests of labor and "the capitalist class" often
"point the same direction" is pretty laughable. A more historically
accurate picture comes from the Gilded Age railroad developer and
ɹnancier Jay Gould, who said simply "I can hire one-half of the
working class to kill the other half."112
Consider the prominent recent case of collusion in Silicon Valley,
in which some of the biggest ɹrms in the high-tech economy were
caught conspiring to keep down the wages of their software
engineers. The "tech giants" were caught on email agreeing not to
"recruit," or try to hire, engineers from one another, in order to
restrain their salaries.113 Collusion is messy and after a Google
recruiter contacted an Apple employee, CEO Steve Jobs wrote to
Google's CEO Eric Schmidt in a bullying tone, and Schmidt
promptly informed Jobs the employee would be "ɹred within the
hour."114 The Wall Street Journal reports Jobs then forwarded that
email to other Apple execs "and added a smiley face."115
The sharpest lesson of the aʃair came from economist Dean
Baker:
The classic libertarian view of the market is that we have a huge
number of people in the market actively competing to buy and
sell goods and services ... However, the Silicon Valley non-
compete agreements show that this is not how the tech
billionaires believe the market really works. This is just a story
they peddle to children and gullible reporters ... The fact that the
Silicon Valley honchos took the time to negotiate and presumably
enforce these non-compete agreements was because they did not
think that there were enough competitors to hire away their
workers. They believed that they had enough weight on the buy-
side of the market for software engineers that if they agreed not
to compete for workers, they could keep their wages down.116
In the end, it's a picture of lopsided power: the giant stature of
immortal, powermongering corporations owned by the richest
families versus hard-to-organize hungry human beings whose unions

have been in decline for several decades now. But this major
imbalance of negotiating leverage originates in the grossly skewed
concentration of wealth and the time has come to take a look at the
very diʃerent lives led by people in the diʃerent classes.

No Man is an Island, But He Can Buy One
After this analysis of classes, market power and the decline of labor,
we can take a moment to survey the actual world created by these
economic processes. After all, day-to-day life is a story of lived
experiences, not just aggregate numbers. The wild divergence of
these class realities is most striking in the area of housing. Housing
is of course extremely important for the world majority, not just for
its inherent utility as basic shelter, but also as the principle
investment of the developed world's middle class. But millions of
Americans have borrowed heavily against their homes, in addition
to those who lost their homes to foreclosure during and after the
2008 crisis, with the EPI concluding that "creditors, including
banks, own far more of the nation's housing stock than people
do."117
But for the owning class, the recent experience of housing
volatility is dramatically diʃerent. Consider the most expensive
neighborhoods of New York City, where a high-end property
developer remarks "It's like a return to the Gilded Age," referring
again to the late nineteenth century when low taxes, weak
regulation and almost nonexistent unions meant a society close to
pure capitalism. The Age of Friedman policies are bringing us
gradually back to that era, even on the streets: "After spending
decades doing duty as schools, embassies, consulates, nonproɹt
headquarters, apartment houses and the like ... important and
irreplaceable buildings" are advertised as "ripe for conversion to
what they were in the beginning: beauteous, commodious and
expensive single-family residences."118 Or as The New York Times
calls them, "Trophy townhouses."
But the rich have problems, too: Manhattan is notoriously
impossible for parking, so a new luxury development is oʃering
parking spaces for $1 million apiece.119 The rationale, as the
developer puts it: "When someone is paying $50 million for an

apartment, another $500,000 for the luxury of not walking a block
or two and having your own spot, I guess it becomes a rounding
error." Although it takes a regular American 20 years of work to pay
for that rounding error. Or 113 for a regular Thai, or 625 years for
the average Brazilian.
Besides the return of in-city mansions for the aʀuent and their
cars, New York and London have also seen the growth of "poor
doors." These are entrances to new luxury buildings, erected with a
city requirement to include some aʃordable housing units for
regular working people, in addition to "market rate" units that sell
in the seven ɹgures and up.120 The Guardian describes a luxury
London development where the main door opens to "luxury marble
tiling and plush sofas, and a sign on the door alerts residents to the
fact that the concierge is available. Round the back, the entrance to
the aʃordable homes is a cream corridor, decorated only with grey
mail boxes and a poster warning tenants that they are on CCTV and
will be prosecuted if they cause any damage."121 An agent for
wealthy buyers is quoted saying that the purpose of the doors is "so
the two social strata don't have to meet."122
The extra doors are also slightly ironic, since the more expensive
neighborhoods have a high concentration of second or third
apartments for globally aʀuent families or individuals, meaning
they often go empty. The Times describes a tony street where "very
few people come and go, because most of the apartment owners live
someplace else ... This very costly form of desolation means that
some of the city's most expensive residential buildings stand mostly
dark, lonesome and empty on the inside." Just like their owners! So
while New York City has large numbers of homeless people die on
its streets every winter, a condo tower in the Time Warner complex
is "generally about 60 percent occupied, while those in the north
tower are only about 30 percent occupied." A high social cost, not
lost on those only moderately rich full-time residents who are, as
The Times put it, "living in a deserted piggy bank."123
And even as their properties sit in empty silence, the top 1
percent indulges in hotel stays with bills to startle the most jaded

observers. The trend is reviewed in The Wall Street Journal articles
on elite suites around the world, including "bathrooms clad in
honey-colored onyx and Skyros marble, with shelves lined in leather
... a walk-in cellar and a spa suite ... 21,000-square-foot suite has its
own hair salon and movie theater ... a two-story round library
complete with a secret passageway."124 The Ritz-Carlton Abu
Dhabi's Royal Suite has a neighboring room for bodyguards. The
New York Palace has its own massive space "which a Saudi prince
spent $12 million refurbishing for a six-month stay some years
back," which comes to about $2 million per prince-month.
However, nothing compares to Ralph Ellison's little place on the
water—he recently bought a Hawaiian island. As The Wall Street
Journal recounts, while it doesn't quite "feel real" to him, the Oracle
founder and billionaire "owns nearly everything on the island,
including many of the candy-colored plantation-style homes and
apartments, one of the two grocery stores, the Four Seasons hotels
and golf courses, the community center and pool, water company,
movie theater, half the roads and some 88,000 acres of land."125
The approving Journal acknowledges that the "local population" is
"one whose economic future is heavily dependent on his decisions,"
but the billionaire's purchase of an airline to ferry out hyper-
wealthy tourists from Honolulu makes it okay.
Beyond housing, conspicuous consumption takes on cruelly
wasteful proportions, like $700 Aniversario cigars and $6000
handbags. These are eclipsed, though, by the high-end home tennis
court at $55,000, the $330,000 yearling race horse and the $11
million personal Sikorsky helicopter, for ɻying into Manhattan to
shop without sitting in traɽc on Route 27 back to the Hamptons.
These and many other owning-class necessities are compiled
annually by Forbes in its "Cost of Living Extremely Well Index,"
sampling the budget demands of the wealthiest US households.126
Family budget entries include $14,000 facelifts and $400,000 in
annual yacht maintenance, a far cry from the working-class choice
between Junior's college fund and keeping the heat on.

But the most revealing ruling class recreation is philanthropy.
This habit is one of the most common defenses of the ruling class:
while these ɹgures may wield enormous fortunes, they are generous
and share the wealth through donations to important charities, these
days usually through creating an endowed foundation. The
Friedmans claim in Free to Choose that plutocrats are getting a bum
rap: "The charge of heartlessness, epitomized in the remark that
William H. Vanderbilt, a railroad tycoon, is said to have made to an
inquiring reporter, 'The public be damned,' is belied by the
ɻowering of charitable activity in the United States in the
nineteenth century."127 More generally, "private fortunes were
largely devoted in the end to the beneɹt of society."128
And, indeed, the amounts of money involved are impressive, as
the nineteenth-century free-market monopolists Carnegie and
Rockefeller gave away billions (in today's dollars) to ɹght disease,
and build libraries and churches.129 But, in fact, this dramatic
philanthropy is another manifestation of the power of the owning
class. While these phenomenally rich individuals and corporations
can give their money to positive social projects, they can decide to
take it away as well, or do something radically diʃerent with it, or
just stuʃ it away and not invest in anything. The choice is theirs and
by making choices with such huge consequences over millions of
people, they exercise power, which again is traditionally seen to be
the enemy of freedom, as reviewed in the Introduction. After all, if
positive works are all that's required to justify power, it's easy to
point to history's many generous kings and "benevolent dictators."
Are these ɹgures justiɹed in having power, since they sometimes
cared to use it for generous purposes? Or is this still an unfree social
conɹguration, since these societies were still one dictator's stroke or
royal mood swing away from having these nice projects taken away
and replaced by horrible enterprises?
An example of the whims of today's great philanthropic
foundations came from Michael Bloomberg, former mayor of New
York and worth an estimated $48 billion, when he said to the press
casually, "I'd argue another gift to ɹght a disease that has a lot of

the world's attention and people are focusing on it is not where I
want us to go."130 Or as a Forbes headline put it, Bloomberg is
"Bored With Philanthropy."131 So if the current epidemic is getting
dull and played out, you, the billionaire, can yawn and pass on
funding it, and put your foundation money toward a new, more
cutting-edge cause to talk about at elite parties.
A ɹnal crucial problem is that in this era of tax cuts for wealthy
households and resulting government budget deɹcits, many
advocates of cutting government services or the social safety net
point to private philanthropy and "faith-based" organizations as
being able to step into their place. But this is immediately ludicrous
—private charities, even on the scale reviewed here, are nowhere
near able to pay independently for a country's total social needs—
from housing the insane to providing vaccines.
The foundations themselves recognize this, as when Patty
Stonesifer, then chief of the Gates Foundation, said "Our giving is a
drop in the bucket compared to the government's responsibility."132
This was conɹrmed recently, when the Foundation committed $50
million to ɹght the current Ebola outbreak in West Africa. In
contrast, the UN estimates the total cost of containing the outbreak
at roughly $600 million.133 Deɹnitely within the reach of these
modern foundations, but far from the kind of reliable commitment
they are known to make. Friedman himself acknowledges this issue
when he says in Capitalism and Freedom, "Freedom is a tenable
objective only for responsible individuals. We do not believe in
freedom for madmen or children ... It would be nice if we could rely
on voluntary activities of individuals to house and care for the
madmen. But I think we cannot rule out the possibility that such
charitable activities will be inadequate,"134 so even leading
"libertarians" may concede that there are limits to ruling-class
muniɹcence.
Also, it has to be recognized that quite commonly, philanthropy is
a costly but very valuable way to clean up your plutocratic image.
Business historians observe that Rockefeller felt a religious drive for
his donations, but they see, too, that "Philanthropy also held an

earthly reward for Rockefeller: It helped transform his legacy from
that of a predatory monopolist to one of the most generous donors
of his century."135 This commercial ulterior motive also applies to
more modern philanthropic giants like the Gates Foundation, where
the business press reviews the intriguing history of its origin:
"Twenty years ago, people associated the name Gates with 'ruthless,
predatory' monopolistic conduct," and quoting a wealth adviser:
"His philanthropy has helped 'rebrand' his name." The power of
charity is simple: "after taking a public relations beating during [the
Microsoft antitrust] trial's early going in late 1998, the company
started what was described at the time as a 'charm oʃensive' aimed
at improving its image ... Mr. Gates contributed $20.3 billion, or 71
percent of his total contributions to the foundation ... during the 18
months between the start of the trial and the verdict."136
Or consider the donors to the Clinton Foundation, "a who's who
of some of the world's wealthiest people," as The Wall Street Journal
called it, years before it became an election issue.137 The donor list
showed that the Foundation is funded by powerful elites who are
not exactly champions of freedom, including the Monarchy of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Ukrainian steel "oligarchs" and
Blackwater, the US mercenary company under legal sanction for its
killings in Iraq.138 Big Charity remains a ruling-class pastime.
Meanwhile, the average American's recreation, like taking in the
ball game on TV, has remained an ad-traɽc plaything of the great
US corporate oligopolies. The traditional ɹrst pitch of a baseball
game used to be an occasional ceremony with a public ɹgure.
Today, the tradition is a component of large commercial contracts
between the team franchise and sponsors, "regarded as a marketing
opportunity, a sweetener in sponsorship deals between baseball
teams and groups that want a piece of the spotlight," as the business
press reports.139 "Sometimes, there are ceremonial second, third,
and fourth and ɹfth pitches." The admirable ɹgures honored by a
pitch in front of a regional commercial market include
representatives of banks, media networks and "reality" TV shows.

Of course, these class-driven lifestyles do have devoted defenders,
like Hayek and the Friedmans. If they don't speak up for the rich
and powerful, who will?

Ups and Downs and Downs
Having reviewed power in the market, the resulting class lifestyles
and the ɹg leaf of philanthropy, we should take up the issue of
stability and freedom. The regular need for basic goods among
living people means that economic downturns or ɹnancial crises put
employers in stronger positions of power relative to their workforce.
And with the US and world economies now in an ongoing, volatile
semi-depression along class lines, it illustrates that some basic
stability, or security, is needed for real freedom.
Hayek specially addresses this in a chapter of The Road to Serfdom
called "Security and Freedom" and he recognizes "the supremely
important problem of combating general ɻuctuations in economic
activity and the recurrent waves of large-scale unemployment which
accompany them. This is, of course, one of the gravest and most
pressing problems of our time."140 These ɻuctuations are called the
"business cycle"—an irregular but persistent pattern of ups and
downs in market activity. Employment tends to follow this pattern,
meaning that when the market shrinks, or enters "recession," there
is a very consistent decrease in the number of jobs.
But Hayek's weak-sauce ideology implies that while wild swings
of fortune and the resulting suʃering "oʃends our sense of justice ...
in the world as it is men are, in fact, not likely to give their best for
long periods unless their own interests are directly involved. At least
for great numbers some external pressure is needed if they are to
give their best."141 Hayek's elitism is fairly open and will come up
again in Chapter 2.
This same reactionary view is expressed in a broader frame by
early Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter, famous in the ɹeld for
his concept of "creative destruction," in which markets are
continuously changing, creating new goods and ways of doing
business, and simultaneously destroying the value of previous goods
or ways of producing them. As he wrote in his most prominent
work, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, "The essential point to

grasp is that in dealing with capitalism we are dealing with an
evolutionary process ... Capitalism, then, is by nature a form or
method of economic change and not only never is but never can be
stationary."142 But an economy that "never can be stationary" can
also never be stable or secure, as far as an individual or family in it
is concerned. In a system engaged in constant churn, there can be
little conɹdence that a career will not be destroyed. And the
workforce of the twenty-ɹrst century knows all too well that it is
considered totally disposable when change happens.
A common wrongheaded opinion related to this issue is that the
unemployed are lazy and could surely ɹnd work if they would try
harder, like when US right-wing icon Glenn Beck said of workers
drawing long-term unemployment in the stagnant post-2008
depression, "I bet you'd be ashamed to call them Americans."143
Apparently reactionary boobs like Beck believe that literally
millions of working people are suddenly simultaneously struck by a
contagious case of being a shiftless jerk right at the beginning of a
recession.
The power dynamic caused by the business cycle is similar to that
caused by "capital mobility," the freedom of businesses to move
their capital and production around the world, compared to the
limited "labor mobility." One of the great accounts of modern
capital mobility is Capital Moves, Jeʃerson Cowie's book about RCA,
the electronics ɹrm. "Each of RCA's plant relocations represents the
corporation's response to workers' increasing sense of entitlement
and control over investment in their community. Capital ɻight was a
means of countering that control as the company sought out new
reservoirs of controllable labor." But "In each location, a glut of
potential employees shrank over time into a tightening labor
market, once-deferential workers organized into a union shop, and
years of toil on the shop ɻoor recast docility into a contentious and
demanding, if isolated and ambivalent, working class. The
geographic terrain inhabited by capital was far larger than labor's
niche, however," with RCA moving ɹrst to the US South and then
internationally.144

By now, stories are everywhere of this capital mobility and the
wrenching instability it means for the workforce, leaving
communities and whole regions behind. And as anyone knows who
has lived in a town after it loses a major employer, the ripple eʃects
are serious—the laid-oʃ workers no longer have the money to
spend, so local businesses see a big drop in business, so they in turn
lay oʃ staʃ, which aggravates the situation. Soon, the town may be
ruined economically or even turned into a ghost town. This is the
power of capital investment, in one of its modern forms—the ability
to remove or create capital assets and an employment base,
according to shifting strategies.
Maybe the deɹnitive instance of capital mobility today is the
former citadel of American industrial strength, Detroit. Once the
great center of US manufacturing, and in fact the core of the
productive juggernaut that won the World Wars and awed the world
with wealth production, Detroit in 2014 was history's largest
municipal bankruptcy. And the fundamental reason was accurately
ɹngered by The Wall Street Journal: "years of capital ɻight."145
Compare this mobility of capital with the mobility of people after
a job loss. Yale economist Charles Lindbolm:
People must move, leave their homes, change their occupations—
any of a number of possible major changes, none of their own
choosing ... A person whose style of life and family livelihood
have for years been built around a particular job, occupation or
location ɹnds a command backed by a threat to ɹre him
indistinguishable in many consequences for his liberty from a
command backed by the police and the courts ... Income-earning
property is a bulwark only for those who have it!146
And without it, each of us is subject to the shifting winds of private
investment, which may move our work across many international
borders, with us unfree to follow even if we wanted. And today's
refugee crisis makes eʃorts to leave your home country look
especially unattractive. The desperate global reality of "labor
mobility" includes the nightmarish Mediterranean "ghost ships"

crammed with Syrian, Iraqi, Afghan, and African immigrants and
literally pointed at Greece or Italy and set on autopilot.147 Or the
extremely dangerous "death train" ride on freight rails across
Mexico by penniless Central American migrants, hoping to reach the
US or Canada.
It's also essential to observe that recessions are more severe
following a ɹnancial crisis, clearly proven by the wave of major
crashes since the deregulation of ɹnance in the "neoliberal" policy
era of the Age of Friedman. Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart
and Kenneth Rogoʃ document that giant ɹnancial crises, like those
common today, typically follow ɹnancial deregulation. Their
extensive review concludes that "Periods of high international capital
mobility have repeatedly produced international banking crises, not only
famously, as they did in the 1990s, but historically."148
Recessions started by ɹnancial crashes also usually involve heavy
amounts of debt, used to make large purchases during good times,
like a house, a car, or building a business. Recently, people in the
professional and working classes have been more likely to go into
debt just to cover basic expenses, since their incomes have been ɻat
or shrinking for forty years. This huge growth in debt, from
mortgages in the housing crisis to student loans for young people
hoping to help their odds, creates an enormous burden for the
regular classes when the business cycle lurches into recession or
worse. Today's personal debt levels are awful to contemplate,
especially in the US, where the country's trillion dollars in credit
card debt was only recently eclipsed by over a trillion dollars in
student loan debt.149 This debt represents signiɹcant power by
creditors over their borrowers—reɻecting class power.
A hilarious example of this is the recent growth in "starter
interrupt" devices, installed in cars sold to high-risk "subprime"
borrowers, typically those with low or stretched middle-class
incomes. These devices disable cars if the recipient of the loan goes
into default or sometimes after merely missing a payment. Present
in millions of cars and trucks, these allow "lenders to retain the
ultimate control," as The New York Times describes.150 The lenders'

devices can make cars "shut down while idling at stoplights" and
also feature "tracking capabilities that allow lenders and others to
know the movements of borrowers ... And the warnings the devices
emit—beeps that become more persistent as the due date for the
loan payment approaches—are seen by some borrowers as more
degrading than helpful." Yet Hayek wrote, "What is called economic
power, while it can be an instrument of coercion, is, in the hands of
private individuals, never exclusive or complete power, never power
over the whole life of a person."151 One wonders.
All these factors—the business cycle, heightened capital
concentration and mobility, union decline, the growth of debt and
the return of serial ɹnancial crisis—point to a drastic reduction in
the security and certainly the bargaining position of the workforce.
And in fact that's the view of at least one prominent right-wing
economist—Alan Greenspan, the former Chair of the Federal
Reserve and longtime Ayn Rand fan. Speaking in the late 1990s,
Greenspan attempted to account for why the relatively tight job
markets of the time were failing to translate into growth in wages.
"Because workers are more worried about their own job security
and their marketability if forced to change jobs, they are apparently
accepting smaller increases in their compensation at any given level
of labor-market tightness," he said.152 Thus, the conservative Wall
Street Journal found in 2011 that since the 2008 crash, "companies
shared only 6% of productivity gains with their workers."153
Today's workforce, according to the Age of Friedman's own
supporters, runs on fear.
In the face of all this, Hayek says that any measures to ensure
worker security must be strictly limited, even if the result hurts: "It
is essential that we should relearn frankly to face the fact that
freedom can be had only at a price and that as individuals we must
be prepared to make severe material sacriɹces to preserve our
liberty."154 Freedom, indeed. The power wielded by capital and its
threats to move is a quite decisive violation of negative freedom.
Perhaps most damningly of all, we can consider the testimony of
Frederick Douglass, escaped slave and public intellectual:

As the laborer becomes more intelligent he will develop what
capital he already possesses—that is the power to organize and
combine for its own protection. Experience demonstrates that
there may be a slavery of wages only a little less galling and
crushing in its eʃects than chattel slavery, and that this slavery of
wages must go down with the other ... those who would reproach
us should remember that it is hard for labor, however fortunately
and favorably surrounded, to cope with the tremendous power of
capital in any contest for higher wages or improved condition ...
The man who has it in his power to say to a man, you must work
the land for me for such wages as I choose to give, has a power of
slavery over him as real, if not as complete, as he who compels
toil under the lash. All that a man hath he will give for his life.155
Unlike Douglass, Friedman and Hayek side with the power of "the
fortunate ones of the earth," King's "reactionaries" and "despots,"
and Smith's "masters." They pay no attention to the oligopolies
owned by Citigroup's "plutonomy" and "1 percent," and their "The
public be damned" island-buying arrogance. Their weak-sauce
ideology focuses instead on those shady "defensive combinations of
the workmen" and the "charm oʃensive" philanthropy of the rich.
Humanity works for a worldwide ruling-class rogue's gallery dressed
by obedient intellectuals as freedom. The open hand giveth, and the
invisible hand taketh away.
Endnotes
1. Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Indianapolis, IN:
LibertyClassics, 1981, p. 84, 83.
2. Frederick Douglass in Philip Foner and Yvonne Taylor, eds,
Frederick Douglass: Selected Speeches and Writings, Chicago, IL:
Chicago Review Press, 1999, p. 676, 678.
3. Gallup, "Americans Less Satisɹed With Freedom," 1 July 2014.

4. GlobeScan, "One-in-Two Say Internet Unsafe Place for
Expressing Views: Global Poll," BBC World Service, 31 March
2014.
5. Nick Hanauer, "The Pitchforks Are Coming ... For Us
Plutocrats," Politico Magazine, July/August 2014.
6. Manuel Klausner, "Inside Ronald Reagan," Reason, July 1975.
7. Ronald Reagan, "Free to Choose,"
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=um-p3ZhiO60.
8. Rush Limbaugh, "Milton Friedman Schools Phil Donahue (and
Barack Obama) on Capitalism and Greed", 31 July 2012.
9. William Buckley, "Milton Friedman, R.I.P." National Review,
Vol. 58, No. 23, 18 December 2006.
10. Milton Friedman, "Freedom's Friend," Wall Street Journal, 11
June 2004.
11. Stephen Moore, "All Friedmanites now," National Review, Vol.
50, No. 14, 3 August 1998.
12. Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2002, p. 8-9.
13. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1990, p. 222-3.
14. Justin LaHart, "The Glenn Beck Eʃect: Hayek Has a Hit," Real
Time Economics (The Wall Street Journal), 17 June 2010.
15. Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2007, p. 69, 67.
16. Ibid, p. 86.
17. Murray Rothbard, Man, Economy and State with Power and
Market, Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2009, p. 515.
18. Ibid, p. 20, p. 14.
19. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 163-4.

20. Ludwig von Mises, Human Action, Auburn, AL: The Ludwig von
Mises Institute, 1998, p. 138-9.
21. Jennifer Burns, Goddess of the Market, New York: Oxford
University Press, 2009, p. 177; cited in Corey Robin, The
Reactionary Mind, New York: Oxford University Press, 2011, p.
91.
22. Priscilla Murolo and A.B. Chitty, From the Folks Who Brought
You the Weekend, New York: The New Press, 2001, p. 120.
23. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p.15.
24. Charles Koch, "I'm Fighting to Restore a Free Society," Wall
Street Journal, 2 April 2014.
25. Friedmans, Free to Choose, p. 136.
26. Ibid, p. 135.
27. Rothbard, Man, Economy, and State with Power and Market, p.
656.
28. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 135-6.
29. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 168.
30. Mises, Human Action, p. 803.
31. Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons, New York: Houghton
Miʀin, 1934, p. 414-5.
32. Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press, 2014, p. 349.
33. Ibid, p. 344; Joachim Frick and Markus Grabka, "Wealth
Inequality On the Rise In Germany," German Institute For
Economic Research, 28 May 2009; Christina Larson, "China's 1
Percent vs. America's 1 Percent," Bloomberg Businessweek, 28
July 2014.
34. Piketty, p. 438.
35. Ibid, p. 257, 259.

36. Ibid, p. 260.
37. Lawrence Mishel, et al, The State of Working America, 12th ed.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2012, p. 387.
38. Ajay Kapur, et al, "Plutonomy: Buying Luxury, Explaining
Global Imbalances," Citigroup, 16 October 2005; Ajay Kapur, et
al, "The Global Investigator: The Plutonomy Symposium—
Rising Tides Lifting Yachts," Citigroup, 29 September 2006.
39. Myles Udland, "Bank of America Merrill Lynch Is 'Comfortable
With the Thrust' Of Piketty's Analysis," Business Insider, 30 May
2014.
40. Nelson Schwartz, "The Middle Class Is Steadily Eroding. Just
Ask the Business World," New York Times, 2 February 2014.
41. Katie Quan in Michael Zweig, ed, What's Class Got To Do With
It?, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2004, p. 95.
42. Barbara Ehrenreich, Fear of Falling, New York: Pantheon, 1989,
p. 15.
43. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 23.
44. Robin Hahnel, The ABCs of Political Economy, London: Pluto
Press, 2014, p. 273.
45. Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines, London: Oxford, 1990, p. 1.
46. Russell Baker, "Observer: Legally, Rich Is Best," New York
Times, 27 May 1969.
47. Friedmans, Free to Choose, p. 222-3.
48. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 120.
49. Mises, Human Action, p. 359.
50. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 15-6.
51. Ibid, p. 121.
52. Paul Krugman and Robin Wells, Microeconomics, 3rd ed. New
York: Worth, 2013, p. 425.

53. Barry Lynn, Cornered, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2010,
p. 6.
54. Ibid, p. 32.
55. Ibid, p. 38.
56. Tripp Mickle and Saabira Chaudhuri, "AB InBev's SABMiller
Deal Still Faces Hurdles," Wall Street Journal, 11 November
2015.
57. Ibid, p. 91-2.
58. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 91.
59. Wilford Eiteman and Glen Guthrie, "The Shape of the Average
Cost Curve," American Economic Review, Vol. 42, December
1952.
60. Alfred Chandler, Scale and Scope, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1994, p. 23-4, 26.
61. Ibid, p. 76.
62. Douglas Dowd, Inequality and the Global Economic Crisis,
London: Pluto Press, 2009, p. 62.
63. Steve Keen, Debunking Economics, London: Pluto Press, 2001, p.
104-5.
64. Pankaj Ghemawat, "Sustainable Advantage," Harvard Business
Review, Vol. 64, No. 5, September-October 1986.
65. Charles Fishman, The Wal-Mart Eʃect, New York: Penguin,
2007, p. 95, 79.
66. Barry Lynn, "Breaking the Chain," Harper's Magazine, July
2006.
67. Paul Constant, "It's Time to Turn Your Back on Amazon," The
Stranger, 30 May 2014.
68. Brad Stone, The Everything Store, New York: Little, Brown and
Company, 2013, p. 243-4.

69. Ibid, p. 245.
70. Greg Bensinger, "An Amazon-Disney Dispute Erupts," The Wall
Street Journal, 11 August 2014.
71. Leslie Kaufman, "Hachette Adds Heft to Combat Amazon," The
New York Times, 24 June 2014.
72. Lynn, Cornered, 2010, p. 54.
73. Amy Martinez and Kristi Heim, "Amazon a virtual no-show in
hometown philanthropy," The Seattle Times, 31 March 2012.
74. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 29.
75. Mina Kimes, "Railroads: Cartel or Free Market Success Story?"
Fortune, 13 September 2011.
76. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 28.
77. Ibid, p. 128.
78. Don Clark and Robert McMillan, "Giants Tighten Grip on
Internet Economy," The Wall Street Journal, November 6 2015.
79. Tim Wu, The Master Switch, New York: Vintage, 2011, p. 280.
80. Farhad Manjoo, "Tech's 'Frightful 5' Will Dominate Digital Life
for Foreseeable Future," The New York Times, January 20, 2016.
81. Lynn, Cornered, p. 117.
82. Edward Herman, "A Brief History of Mergers and Antitrust
Policy," Dollars & Sense, May/June 1998.
83. Leonard Silk, "Antitrust Issues Facing Reagan," The New York
Times, 13 February 1981.
84. Steven Pearlstein, "Arguments for Whirlpool-Maytag Just Don't
Wash," The Washington Post, 22 February 2006.
85. Chandler, The Visible Hand, p. 375.
86. Friedmans, Free to Choose, p. 225.
87. Anthony Bianco, "Exxon Unleashed," Businessweek, 8 April
2001.

88. US Census Bureau, American FactFinder, Establishments/Firms,
Concentration of Firms, "Manufacturing: Subject Series" and
"Information: Subject Series," retrieved 19 August 2016.
89. Josephson, The Robber Barons, p. 15.
90. Rothbard, p. 654.
91. George Orwell, As I Please, New York: Nonpareil, 2000, p.118.
92. Friedmans, Free to Choose, p. 246.
93. Ibid, p.245.
94. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 13.
95. Richard Freeman, "Do Workers Still Want Unions? More Than
Ever," EPI Brieɹng Paper #102, 22 February 2007; Aaron
Bernstein, "Can This Man Save Labor?" Businessweek, 13
September 2004.
96. Lydia Saad, "Americans' Support for Labor Unions Continues to
Recover," Gallup, 17 August 2015.
97. Martin Luther King, Jr., in Michael Honey, ed., "All Labor Has
Dignity," Boston: Beacon Press, 2011, p. 113, 90.
98. Ibid, p. 36, 38.
99. Ibid, p. 17, 177.
100. Ibid, p. 22.
101. Mishel et al, The State of Working America, p. 269.
102. Roger Martin, "In America, Labor Is Friendless," Harvard
Business Review blog, 28 August 2014.
103. Aaron Bernstein, "Can This Man Save Labor?" Businessweek, 13
September 2004.
104. Friedmans, Free to Choose, p. 235-6.
105. Robert Brady, Business As a System of Power, New York:
Columbia University Press, 1943, p. 195.
106. Ibid, p. 213, 201.

107. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 165.
108. Brady, Business As a System of Power, p. 210.
109. Smith, The Wealth of Nations, p. 83-5.
110. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 205.
111. Ibid, p. 204.
112. Murolo and Chitty, From the Folks Who Brought You the
Weekend, p. 111.
113. Mark Ames, Techtopus, "How Silicon Valley's most celebrated
CEOs conspired to drive down 100,000 tech engineers' wages,"
23 January 2014.
114. James Stewart, "Steve Jobs, a Genius at Pushing Boundaries,"
The New York Times, 2 May 2014.
115. Jeʃ Elder, "Tech Giants Discussed Hiring, Say Documents, "The
Wall Street Journal, 21 April 2014.
116. Dean Baker, "Silicon Valley billionaires believe in the free
market, as long as they beneɹt," The Guardian, 3 February
2014.
117. Mishel et al, The State of Working America, 12th ed 397-8.
118. Robin Finn, "New York's Once and Future Mansions," The New
York Times, 5 September 2014.
119. Michelle Higgins, "For the New York Condo Owner With
Everything, a Million-Dollar Parking Spot," The New York Times,
9 September 2014.
120. Ginia Bellafante, "On the Upper West Side, a House Divided by
Income," The New York Times, 25 July 2014.
121. Hilary Osborne, "Poor doors: the segregation of London's inner-
city ɻat dwellers," The Guardian, 25 July 2014.
122. Adam Lusher, "Were 'Poor Doors' added to mixed
developments so wealthy residents don't have to go in

alongside social housing tenants?" The Independent, 25 July
2014.
123. Elizabeth Harris, "Why Buy a Condo You Seldom Use? Because
You Can," The New York Times, 11 February 2013.
124. Sara Clemence, "Hotels Race to Create the Best Suites," The
Wall Street Journal, 23 August 2013.
125. Julian Guthrie, "Larry Ellison's Fantasy Island," The Wall Street
Journal, 13 June 2013.
126. Peter Bernstein and Annalyn Swan, All the Money in the World,
New York: Knopf, 2007, p. 208-9.
127. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1990, p. 36.
128. Ibid, p. 139.
129. Bernstein and Swan, All the Money in the World, p.280.
130. Paul Sullivan, "Private Citizen Bloomberg's Philosophy on
Philanthropy," The New York Times, 25 April 2014.
131. Agustino Fontevecchia, "Bored of Philanthropy, Billionaire
Mike Bloomberg Back As Chief At Bloomberg LP," Forbes, 3
September 2014.
132. Bernstein and Swan, All the Money in the World, p. 279.
133. Donald McNeil, "Gates Foundation Pledges $50 Million to Fight
Ebola," The New York Times, 10 September 2014.
134. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. 33.
135. Bernstein and Swan, All the Money in the World, p. 280.
136. Randall Smith, "As His Foundation Has Grown, Gates Has
Slowed His Donations," The New York Times, 26 May 2014.
137. Susan Schmidt, Margaret Coker and Jay Solomon, "Clinton
Reveals Donors—Charity Got $140 Million Abroad," The Wall
Street Journal, 19 December 2008.

138. Rachel Zoll, "Saudis, Indians Among Clinton Foundation
Donors," Associated Press, 18 December 2008.
139. Andrew Keh, "Tonight's Honored Guest on the Mound, a
Backɻipping Frog," The New York Times, 28 May 2013.
140. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 148-9.
141. Ibid, p. 149-50, 151.
142. Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy,
London: Routledge, 2003, p. 82.
143. Glenn Beck, Glenn Beck, 16 August 2014,
http://mediamatters.org/video/2010/08/16/beck-on-some-
99er-protesters-i-betyoud-be-asha/169275.
144. Jeʃerson Cowie, Capital Moves, New York: The New Press,
1999, p. 4.
145. Douglas Lavin, "Michigan's boom brings better times to cities
blighted by unemployment, "The Wall Street Journal, 25 January
1995.
146. Charles Lindblom, Politics and Markets, New York: Basic Books,
1977, p. 48-50.
147. Giada Zampano and Matina Stevis, "'Ghost Ships' Leave
Refugees Adrift, "The Wall Street Journal, 2 January 2015.
148. Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoʃ, This Time Is Diʃerent,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009, p. 155-6.
149. Susanne Soederberg, "The Student Loan Crisis and the Debtfare
State," Dollars & Sense, May/June 2015.
150. Michael Corkery and Jessica Silver-Greenberg, "Miss a
Payment? Good Luck Moving That Car," The New York Times,
24 September 2014.
151. Ibid, p. 166.
152. David Wessel, "Fed Chief Sets Monetary Policy By Seat-of the-
Pants Approach," The Wall Street Journal, 27 January 1997.

153. Mark Whitehouse, "Workers Not Beneɹting From Productivity
Gains," The Wall Street Journal, 5 March 2011.
154. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 156.
155. Frederick Douglass in Philip Foner and Yuval Taylor, eds,
Frederick Douglass: Selected Speeches and Writings, Chicago, IL:
Chicago Review Press, 1999, p. 676-8.

Chapter 2
Pennies For Your Thoughts

Freedom of Information
Under existing conditions, private capitalists inevitably control,
directly or indirectly, the main sources of information (press,
radio, education). It is thus extremely diɽcult, and indeed, in
most cases quite impossible, for the individual citizen to come to
objective conclusions and to make intelligent use of his political
rights.
Albert Einstein1
The twentieth century has been characterized by three
developments of great political importance: the growth of
democracy, the growth of corporate power, and the growth of
corporate propaganda as a means of protecting corporate power
against democracy.
Alex Carey2
Among our diʃerent freedoms, the liberty to share information and
learn about the world is among the most important. To the man on
the street, attempts to control the ɻow of information quickly attract
suspicion and opposition. We normally associate heavy restrictions
on information with dictatorships, along with propaganda—the
manipulative use of repetitive, one-sided information. John Stuart
Mill wrote in his seminal On Liberty that attempts "to control the
expression of opinion" are intolerable, even if the institution
responsible represents the public will: "The power itself is
illegitimate."3 A common conservative view of this subject holds
that such attempts generally originate in government, while on the
other hand the market "turns out to be a more eɽcient mechanism
for digesting dispersed information than any that man has
deliberately designed,"4 as Friedrich Hayek put it.

But the market economy has a long tradition of information
control, too; for example in the work of Edward Bernays, who's
considered to be the central founder of modern public relations and
who helped organize the government Creel Committee to encourage
public support for World War I. He went on to spend most of his
career working for private sector giants—Alcoa, Proctor & Gamble,
Lucky Strike cigarettes—and as he put it, the inventors of the new
ɹeld of propaganda "applied (on behalf of business) the publicity
methods they had learned in the war." Bernays found in his work
that even in market economies, "We are governed, our minds
molded, our tastes formed, our ideas suggested, largely by men we
have never heard of."5
This practice is very important in the real-world marketplace of
gigantic ɹrms, concentrated markets and sharply skewed wealth
that was described in Chapter 1. The exercise of market power takes
its own form in the information and media markets, and with a
special importance: control over knowledge is a major barrier to any
fundamental social change that could address these structural
problems we're dealing with. It turns out that with a free market of
information, you're free to be patronized by the billionaire media
property of your choice.

The Price is Righteous
The traditional conservative picture has been that free markets
allow for a free ɻow of information. As described in Chapter 1,
Hayek saw most government action as the ɹrst step on the "Road to
Serfdom," ending inevitably in the gross dictatorships that were
emerging as he wrote in Nazi Austria. Totalitarian governments, he
correctly observed, tend to control information until:
The word 'truth' itself ceases to have its old meaning. It describes
no longer something to be found, with the individual conscience
as the sole arbiter ... it becomes something to be laid down by
authority ... The general intellectual climate which this produces,
the spirit of complete cynicism as regards truth which it
engenders, the loss of the sense of even the meaning of truth ...
the way in which diʃerences of opinion in every branch of
knowledge become political issues to be decided by authority, are
all things which one must personally experience—no short
description can convey their extent.6
Hayek was far less concerned about a handful of separate centers of
information control rather than just one, as we'll see.
Building on this traditional belief in the general freedom of
information in markets, economists often focus on the systematic
way markets provide speciɹcally economic information, which is
through prices. Prices from this perspective are essentially pieces of
information about how relatively scarce diʃerent goods are, in
terms of the resources needed to make them—how many resources
are required to make a book compared to a bulldozer, for example.
The theory goes that any change in the conditions of a market, like
a change in consumer diet preferences, will be transmitted
automatically through a free market because of changes in the price
of some foods relative to others.

Glenn Hubbard, of the conservative American Enterprise Institute
and the main designer of the 2003 Bush administration's tax cuts,
summarized this "market mechanism" that relies on free-ɻowing
information:
Changes in relative prices—that is, the price of one good or service
relative to other goods or services—provides information, or a
signal, to both consumers and ɹrms. For example, in 2010,
consumers world-wide increased their demand for cattle and
poultry. Because corn is fed to cattle and poultry, prices for corn
soared relative to prices for other crops. Many farmers in the
United States received this price signal and responded by
increasing the amount of corn they planted.7
This simple concept of market prices is held up by the economics
profession and the Right as a special merit of market economies—
their ability to quickly transmit huge amounts of information as
easily understood price movements. The Friedmans wrote about
how price signals adjust economic production around the world:
No one sitting in a central oɽce gave orders to these thousands of
people ... The price system is the mechanism that performs this
task without central direction, without requiring people to speak
to one another or to like one another ... People who can use the
information have an incentive to get it and they are in a position
to do so.8
Crucially, this picture of the free transmission of market information
is based on an expectation of "competitive" markets with many
diverse ɹrms, as discussed in Chapter 1. The importance of
competition for an information market is that if a company provides
incorrect or misleading information, companies or investors paying
for that information will discover it's poor and turn elsewhere.
Having somewhere else to turn implies other ɹrms and, indeed, a
large number of them. So a competitive aspect of markets is crucial
here just as it was in the more general cases in the last chapter. But

as we've seen, to economists as long as a market is "free," meaning
free of government meddling, it is simply assumed to be diverse and
competitive.
Hayek took this abstract picture of prices to the next level. He
wrote in the prestigious American Economic Review that "The
peculiar character of the problem of a rational economic order is
determined precisely by the fact that the knowledge of the
circumstances of which we must make use never exists in
concentrated or integrated form, but solely as the dispersed bits of
incomplete and frequently contradictory knowledge which all the
separate individuals possess."9 In other words, modern economies
are hugely complex with millions of diʃerent people and companies
making billions of decisions, so the only way to deal with that much
complex data is to let the market aggregate a price through supply
and demand. Without anyone having to try a comprehensive
calculation, markets automatically organize the information.
For this reason, Hayek concluded that "It is more than metaphor
to describe the price system as a kind of machinery for registering
change, or a system of telecommunications which enables individual
producers to watch merely the movement of a few points," but he
went further and seemed to grant divine, godlike stature to the
market's pricing system. "I am convinced that if it were the result of
deliberate human design ... this mechanism would have been
acclaimed as one of the greatest triumphs of the human mind. Its
misfortune is the double one that it is not the product of human
design and that the people guided by it usually do not know why
they are made to do what they do."
This leaves the Right's picture of market information pretty clear
—markets transmit information automatically, without conscious
human choice, and summarize huge amounts of data into simple
changes in prices or other data. They allow for many diverse sources
of information. They organize our lives. They wield the shining
sword of truth. Hallelujah!

The Press Compressed
These over-the-top fantasies can only be sustained through a level of
abstraction that leaves out several problems with this rosy picture of
market information, some of which will come up separately in
Chapter 4. The biggest problems with these views come from the
question of power reviewed in Chapter 1: markets consolidate over
time, ɹrms grow large and gain cost advantages and then market
power, and the wealthy owners of the small numbers of gigantic
companies share a class interest that guides their decision-making.
That class interest is exempliɹed by the literally total absence of
labor leaders from US Sunday news talk shows in the ɹrst two-thirds
of 2014, while CEOs and pro-business analysts dominated.10
In fact, these uniquely important markets involving information
and communication actually have an especially strong tendency to
consolidate and form oligopolies themselves, unless some public
regulation limits that somewhat. This tendency is an example of
"network eʃects." Markets that require a network of some type for
their use, like air travel or telephone service, become more valuable
to consumers as more consumers use them. When more airports
open, the local airport gains new value for consumers since they can
ɻy to more destinations. Much the same has always been true of
communications and media markets.
The hard numbers are recorded in the US Economic Census,
which gathers information including the level of concentration in
diʃerent markets; although it bears repeating that these oɽcial stats
understate the issue. Still, the 2007 results, the most recent
available, are pretty impressive. The four largest cable providers in
total reached 68.3 percent of the total market, the eight largest
Internet service providers served 48.7 percent of the market, the
eight largest newspaper publishers earned 44.9 percent of market
income, the eight largest radio networks were heard by 73.7 percent
of the audience and the four largest Web search portals were used
by a whopping 90.6 percent of the market.11 Even these understated

levels of concentration numbers are completely divorced from the
picture casually implied by Friedman and Hayek above.
These high media-consolidation levels did not exist until relatively
recently, where the pattern of market evolution seen in Chapter 1
appears again, most recently helped by the relaxing of antitrust
limits to concentration and the deregulatory Telecommunications
Act of 1996. The Act removed many media ownership caps (limits
to how many media outlets one ɹrm or individual can own) and
also allowed cable, phone and media companies to compete in
delivering data to households. The idea was, according to the
Congressional summary, "to provide for a pro-competitive, de-
regulatory national policy framework" for communication.12 One
major component was "wire-to-wire competition," the removal of
limitations on media cross-ownership, allowing media ɹrms to
merge into diʃerent branches of the market—so the phone
companies could buy cable companies, media conglomerates could
buy cable networks to accompany their cable channels and so on.
But media merger coverage in the anti-regulation Wall Street
Journal still reported the common pattern of deregulation and
consolidation often seen in the rest of the economy. Following the
Act, a Journal headline described one of the many resulting
enormous mergers, between Comcast and AT&T Broadband, which
"Cements the Rise of an Oligopoly In the Cable Business."13 It
reported, "After the phone and cable industries were thrown open to
competition in 1996" the FCC and industry "predicted a boom for
consumers." But instead, the deregulation started "a new phase in
the hyper-consolidation of the cable industry ... An industry that
was once a hodgepodge of family-owned companies has become one
of the nation's most visible and proɹtable oligopolies, as smaller
operators are unable to cope with the rising costs of the business."
And it's not just the Journal's opinion—an NBC ex-exec is quoted
actually saying "The big media companies are quietly re-creating
the 'old programming oligopoly' of the pre-cable era" as the largest
toptier media ɹrms now reach over 80 percent of the prime-time TV
audience, through their subsidiaries and parent networks.14

So the expectations of "free" market advocates have failed
another test—rather than becoming a rich, free, diverse market
environment after deregulation reduced the coercive hand of the
government, the industry became more consolidated and less
diverse. If people have any "positive freedom" to multiple sources of
news and entertainment, free markets frequently work against that.
The conservative Journal itself notes the common features of
network-based industries:
The cable mating dance mirrors a similar frenzy long under way
in the phone industry, leaving the nation's two essential
communications lines in the hands of powerful oligopolies. It's a
scenario also unfolding for the nation's airlines, another industry
where deregulation set oʃ a ɻurry of mergers, creating a short
roster of powerful giants. And consumers are, in many cases,
paying the price.15
This conservative business reporting tracks closely with the
conclusions of radical media analysts like Robert McChesney,
Professor of Communication at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, who lays out the issue of media market structure in the
most fundamental terms, describing:
Vast conglomerates that function as oligopolies in not just one
media market but in many. In media, as elsewhere, these
monopolistic/oligopolistic markets are predicated upon high
barriers to entry that severely limit the ability of small startup
media ɹrms to enter the market successfully ... Firms in
oligopolistic markets have much greater leverage over their
suppliers (and labor) to negotiate better prices ...16
And as with all even partially competitive systems, companies take a
risk if they don't grow as big and powerful as their rivals.
McChesney also highlights vertical mergers, where ɹrms buy their
suppliers or distributors: "Vertical integration is a powerful
stimulant to concentration; once a few ɹrms in an industry move in

this direction, others must follow suit or they can ɹnd themselves at
an insurmountable competitive disadvantage—possibly blocked at
all turns by opposing gatekeepers."17 In the end, "As with
oligopolistic markets in the broader economy, small independents
exist to do the stuʃ the big guys ɹnd too risky or unproɹtable. If
successful, they tend to get bought out or enter into a formal
dependent relationship with a giant."
So despite endless technological changes and mergers, the reach
of the ɹve largest ɹrms still extends to nine in ten TV viewers.18
And with so few ɹrms, they tend to do a lot of business together—
going in on new risky projects together, pooling capital for major
investments, sharing risk and cementing their market power. And
again, while "libertarian" economists theorize free markets are
automatically competitive settings, industrial organization is
recognized by the industry to be hugely important, even if they
aggressively ɹght it among the workforce: "The top media moguls
stay in constant touch, meeting annually in Idaho to discuss mutual
interests and map future deals." Regarding Milton Friedman's most
fundamental thesis, that markets permit consumers to be "free to
choose," especially in this most important information market,
McChesney's retort is "People can't reasonably express their desire
for an alternative in the marketplace if the choice does not exist ...
The market can prove to be a quiet, but ruthless, commissar."19
However, while power exercised by government is obvious, as
with the commissars of the totalitarian Soviet Union, market power
can hide, as shown by Clear Channel's hundreds of "local" radio
stations. As mentioned in Chapter 1, a common way that today's
oligopolies manage their markets is through the illusion of
competition through diʃerent brands and subsidiaries. As the
Journal describes:
Via a practice called 'voice-tracking,' Clear Channel pipes popular
out-of-town personalities from bigger markets to small ones,
customizing their programs to make it sound as if the DJs are
actually local residents ... It's also a huge beneɹt to Clear

Channel, which can boast of a national reach and economies of
scale to advertisers and shareholders ... That's why Clear Channel
is developing multiple identities for a battalion of DJs like the 29-
year-old Mr. Alan, who is based at KHTS-FM in San Diego, but
also does 'local' shows in Boise, Medford, Ore., and Santa Barbara,
Calif.20
The conservative paper describes the legacy of deregulation:
The new sound of radio is tied to big changes in the industry
brought on by a 1996 law that got rid of the nationwide
ownership cap of 40 stations. The law allowed companies to own
as many as eight stations in the largest markets, double the
previous limit ... A fragmented business once made up mainly of
mom-and-pop operators evolved quickly into one dominated by
large publicly traded companies that controlled stations around
the country. No one took advantage of the new law more
aggressively, or successfully, than Clear Channel ... Today, it
operates more than 1,200 U.S. stations, compared with 186
stations owned by its biggest publicly traded rival, Viacom Inc.
This practice exists among local TV stations too, where the Pew
Research Center found that in almost half of local US TV markets,
recent mergers have "resulted in stations in the same market being
separately owned on paper but operated jointly," a practice called
"joint sales agreements."21 These arrangements have contributed to
the fact that a quarter of local TV stations now produce literally no
original news content, with diʃerent media conglomerates sharing
news vans and the totally hilarious practice of allegedly diʃerent
stations airing literally identical programming. Pew observes that
for owners, "The economic beneɹts of station consolidation are
indisputable."
So once again, we have a few huge empires, unlike the diverse
"free market" that the Right promises. However, the giant semi-
monopolists are prepared to use some of their enormous resources
to look like a rich and diverse industry, using faked "local" radio and

outright duplicated TV programming. Meanwhile, the radio empire
Clear Channel carries Rush Limbaugh and a parade of similar idiot
radio hosts who put the blame for our economic problems on our
"heavily regulated" economy. But the huge size and power of Clear
Channel, their employer, is a direct result of the deregulation of radio
and other media following the 1996 law. Irony loves company!
A similar pattern arises with the conservative Fox News, part of
right-wing 
Australian 
billionaire 
Rupert 
Murdoch's 
News
Corporation empire. The Journal, again, wrote that the Federal
Communications Commission has for many decades maintained a
"25% foreign-ownership limit on TV and radio stations ... The FCC
has long had the ability to waive the foreign-ownership cap for
individual companies, but in practice has rarely used it. One of the
few exceptions concerned Rupert Murdoch's News Corp."22 Fox
News, then, has built up its empire of feverish right-wing political
reporting thanks to a (then) privileged exemption to the allegedly
repressive-of-business power of the government. Yet, the channel
still runs "Regulation Nation" segments, claiming that the
economy's weak job market is caused by the government's rigid
regulations, which were no obstacle to building its own empire. The
Journal itself was bought by News Corporation in 2007, with
libertarianism refuted by yet another of its own supporters.
The late Washington Post editor and media critic Ben Bagdikian
has observed that today's media empire executives have "more
communications power than was exercised by any despot or
dictatorship in history."23 And the industry has organized itself to
serious eʃect:
Though not a literal cartel like OPEC, the Big Five, in addition to
cooperation with each other when it serves a mutual purpose,
have interlocking members on their boards of directors ... All ɹve
join forces in one of Washington's most powerful lobbies, the
National Association of Broadcasters ... The media conglomerates
are not the only industry whose owners have become
monopolistic in the American economy. But media products are

unique in one vital respect. They do not manufacture nuts and
bolts: they manufacture a social and political world.24
Bagdikian allows that "Some competition is never totally absent
among the Big Five media conglomerates. The desire to be the ɹrst
among many is as true for linked corporations as it is for politicians
and nations,"25 but that's still a far cry from the rich markets we
were promised by the Right. It all means that the many sources of
information in the reactionary dogma of the market are merely
handsome hallucinations.
And as we've seen, the business press has itself spent years
reporting on the dark reasons for this media consolidation. We read
that:
... the new media giants have discovered that owning both
broadcast and cable outlets provides powerful new leverage over
advertisers and cable- and satellite-TV operators. The goliaths are
using this advantage to wring better fees out of the operators that
carry their channels and are pressuring those operators into
carrying new and untried channels ... Media companies counter
that their consolidation only puts them on a level playing ɹeld
with cable operators, who are themselves merging into giants.26
On a more obvious level, the media-monitoring group FAIR reported
the pathetic way the proposed Comcast-Time Warner merger was
covered on Comcast's property, MSNBC. On the conservative show
"Scarborough Country," the tough-talking conservative host brought
up his boss, Comcast CEO Brian Roberts, as FAIR recounts:
The merger also came up during a brief chat with Scarborough
and business pundit Donny Deutsch. "We know Brian,"
Scarborough explained. "We get our paychecks from Comcast.
Obviously we're not sort of cool and detached from this news." He
added: "Even if I weren't working here ... I would be saying, 'It's
a pretty stunning story about how successful Comcast is right
now.' Deutsch concurred: "Everything they've done is right."27

That's some hard-hitting reporting there, Scoop! Episodes like this
have probably contributed to driving Americans' trust in
commercial media down to all-time lows of 40 percent in recent
years' Gallup polls.28 And indeed, it's reasonable to say that when
watching commercial media, you are watching concentrated money
and corporate power speak to you, presenting the narrow range of
ideas they'd like you to pay attention to. The "other companies" that
the Friedmans alleged would "protect" us are about as protective as
an absentee parent, and certainly no "positive freedom" is present
here, which in this context would mean having freedom to access a
wide variety of views from commercial and non-commercial
sources.

Money Yells
So, with media corporation CEOs, business journalists and radical
analysts all agreeing that media markets are highly concentrated
and have only grown more so since deregulation, how do the big
ɹgures of right-wing economics deal with this departure from their
models of free information ɻowing through diverse markets? It
turns out, they really don't.
Milton 
Friedman 
brieɻy 
acknowledged 
limits 
to 
market
information, such as prices, with his wife in Free to Choose:
"Anything that prevents prices from expressing freely the conditions
of demand or supply interferes with the transmission of accurate
information. 
Private 
monopoly—control 
over 
a 
particular
commodity by one producer or a cartel of producers—is one
example. That does not prevent the transmission of information
through the price system, but it does distort the information
transmitted."29 This could be a signiɹcant admission from Friedman,
but almost unbelievably, the only example the Friedmans give of
this potentially embarrassing point is OPEC, the global oil cartel
made up of various governments, not private companies. So even
when brieɻy acknowledging the possibility of market monopoly and
the warping of market data, the Friedmans still can't bring
themselves to mention a single example actually from the private
sector. This allows them to dismiss the issue: "Important as private
distortions of the price system are, these days the government is the
major source of interference with a free market system." But the
waves of consolidation and choice-reduction following media
deregulation prove that breezily blowing past the issue of private
power over information has not served the interests of freedom.
Hayek has an even stronger reputation on the Right as being a
defender of freedom of information; however, his attitude toward
the issue betrays his elitist view of humanity: "Probably it is true
enough that the great majority are rarely capable of thinking
independently, that on most questions they accept views which they

ɹnd ready-made, and that they will be equally content if born or
coaxed into one set of beliefs or another. In any society freedom of
thought will probably be of direct signiɹcance only for a small
minority."30 Once again, the strong class bias of the political Right
comes back, with the ugly we-were-meant-to-rule attitude of Ayn
Rand and other fascists of capital.
However, Hayek continues: "But this does not mean that anyone
is competent, or ought to have power, to select those to whom this
freedom is to be reserved ... It shows a complete confusion of
thought to suggest that, because under any sort of system the
majority of people follow the lead of somebody, it makes no
diʃerence if everybody has to follow the same lead." More to the
point, Hayek also suggests that "the eʃect of propaganda in
totalitarian countries is diʃerent not only in magnitude but in kind
from that of the propaganda made for diʃerent ends by independent
and competing agencies. If all the sources of current information are
eʃectively under one single control, it is no longer a question of
merely persuading the people of this or that." Hayek's argument is
relevant for societies where state-run media dominate the
information system, including not only more authoritarian regimes
like China and Russia, but also pro-Western dictatorships like Saudi
Arabia and Chad. But private media lead the world system and their
limits are less discussed by Nobelists of Hayek's stripe.
Hayek's 
blissful 
lack 
of 
concern 
about 
propaganda 
by
"independent and competing agencies" runs head-on into the work
of ɹgures like Edward Bernays, the pioneer of propaganda and
public relations for both the state and for private capital. Bernays'
long career among today's various power centers makes it diɽcult
to accept the Friedmans' and Hayek's view that business has little
propaganda power. He wrote that "It was, of course, the astounding
success of propaganda during the war that opened the eyes of the
intelligent few in all departments of life to the possibilities of
regimenting the public mind ... Business oʃers graphic examples of
the eʃect that may be produced upon the public by interested
groups."31 And certainly the PR world brags about having "The

Power to Change the Debate," quoting the web page of major DC
ɹrm Berman and Company.32
Bernays, clearly, is no less elitist than Hayek, but his experience
working for the "invisible government" conɹrms the trend of
concentration in media and information markets: "The invisible
government tends to be concentrated in the hands of the few
because of the expense of manipulating the social machinery which
controls the opinions and habits of the masses." Hayek's insistence
that state propaganda "is diʃerent not only in magnitude but in
kind" from the widespread corporate use of similar tools is also
addressed by Bernays: "New activities call for new nomenclature.
The propagandist ... has come to be known by the name of 'public
relations counsel.'"33 Bernays' point, obviously, was that these are
fancy names for the same job.
In fact, Bernays also makes a direct connection between
Friedman's and Hayek's assumption that free markets are rich,
competitive and diverse sources of information, against the clear
reality of oligopoly. He begins by noting that "The tendency of big
business is to get bigger. Through mergers and monopolies it is
constantly increasing the number of persons with whom it is in
direct contact."34 But often:
Public opinion is no longer inclined to be unfavorable to the large
business merger. It resents the censorship of business by the
Federal Trade Commission. It has broken down the antitrust laws
where it thinks they hinder economic development. It backs great
trusts and mergers which it excoriated a decade ago ... In the
opinion of millions of small investors, mergers and trusts are
friendly giants and not ogres, because of the economies, mainly
due to quantity production, which they have eʃected, and can
pass on to the consumer. This result has been, to a great extent,
obtained by a deliberate use of propaganda in its broadest sense
... But it would be rash and unreasonable to take it for granted
that because public opinion has come over to the side of big
business, it will always remain there.35

Tim Wu, a Columbia University professor of law and author of The
Master Switch, maybe the best book on media and information
industry concentration, described the inherent drive toward
monopoly in network industries like media markets:
The deɹning principle of network economics is the so-called
network eʃect, or network externality. It is the simple but
powerful idea that unlike most products, a network becomes more
valuable as more people use it. No one joins a social network like
Facebook without other users. And a network that everyone uses
is worth fantastically more than the sum value of one hundred
networks with as many users collectively as the one great
network.36
Friedman and Hayek's total failure to address an extremely basic
feature of this important kind of market displays a lack of
seriousness that is characteristic of their widely respected work. But
these characters are still featured on today's conservative radio and
TV shows, which themselves blame our economic problems on
regulations, even though their own empire-building success is itself
owed to removed or weakened regulation. Once again, whether
their work was used to lower tax rates on the richest and most
powerful US households, or to deregulate ɹnance, media and food
safety, 
these 
ɹgures 
are 
Nobel 
Prize-winning 
intellectual
opportunists.

Putting Their Money Where Your Mouth Is
The problems with the freedom of market information aren't limited
to the tight ownership of the media markets, nor their network
structure. The business model of the industry itself, in however
many hands, also has an enormously important role in shaping the
information that gets through.
James Curran's and Jean Seaton's book 
Power 
Without
Responsibility is considered to be one of the most inɻuential books
on media history in the UK. Their review of the record shows that
the concentration of the newspaper industry into a few huge
publishers was indeed partially driven by the issues reviewed in
Chapter 1, like network eʃects and scale economies arising from the
rising cost of publishing equipment. This:
... rise in ɹxed costs made it more diɽcult for people with limited
funds to break into mass publishing. It also generated a
relationship of economic inequality, since leading publishers were
able to obtain large economies of scale (through spreading their
'ɹrst copy' costs over a large print run) ... The operation of the
free market had raised the cost of press ownership beyond the
readily available resources of the working class. Market forces
thus accomplished more than the most repressive measures of an
aristocratic state.37
However, it was the development of the advertising market itself
that led to overwhelming market concentration and the loss of
independent voices. As newspapers began reaching larger audiences,
running paid advertisements from other commercial ɹrms became
possible. Part of this new ad revenue could be used to oʃset a
lowered newspaper cover price, which further increased circulation
for papers that attracted advertising. This gradually led to a few
huge newspaper chains run by "press barons," because "nearly all
newspapers ... depended on advertising for their proɹts since their

reduced net cover prices no longer met their costs. Advertisers thus
acquired a de facto licensing power because, without their support,
newspapers 
ceased 
to 
be 
economically 
viable."38 
And
unsurprisingly, 
"Even 
non-socialist 
newspapers 
found 
that
controversial editorial policies led to the loss of commercial
advertising ... Yet publications which conformed to the marketing
requirements of advertisers obtained what were, in eʃect, large
external subsidies which they could spend on increased editorial
outlay and promotion in order to attract new readers." Thus, free-
market forces narrowed the diversity of opinion in the media.
Of course, companies spending money on marketing prefer
audiences with money to spend. For this reason, former Washington
Post editor Bagdikian describes "an iron rule of advertising-
supported media: It is less important that people buy your
publication (or listen to your program) than that they be 'the right
kind' of people. The 'right kind' usually means aʀuent consumers
eighteen to forty-nine years of age, the heavy buying years, with
above-median family income."39 Also, advertisers "are increasingly
interested in the context of their ads in the medium—the
surrounding articles in newspapers and magazines and the type of
broadcast program in which their commercials are inserted. An ad
for a sable fur coat next to an article on world starvation is not the
most eʃective association for making a sale."
It was in this spirit that ABC put out a booklet for its advertisers,
as an industry journal, Broadcasting, described some years ago:
"ABC-TV has presented advertisers with a new prime time sales
booklet that contains a section arguing that ABC not only has the
biggest audiences but the most desirable demographics as well. The
section is labeled, 'Some people are more valuable than others.'"
NBC's programming head retorted that ABC's viewers were more
numerous but had lower incomes, concluding "their audience will
be worthless."40
The sleazy ways this plays out on the air today are vigilantly
reviewed by FAIR, including in its annual "Fear & Favor Review,"
which documents how the media ɹrms' owners and advertisers warp

and shape the information that reaches the average citizen. The
2013 Review pointed out a Washington Post "debate" on energy
policy, which "featured proponents of oil and gas drilling, but no
industry critics, perhaps because it was derived from forums co-
sponsored by Vote4Energy.org, a project of the American Petroleum
Institute. Post readers weren't alerted to that fact," though it was
referred to in an online video.41
The power of market institutions makes itself felt elsewhere, even
in market segments that seem to be based on delivering very
objective information. Consider ratings services—ɹrms that measure
some process or trend and produce reports summarizing them.
Recently, Volkswagen dominated headlines for its faked emission
readings, but in fact the issue is systemic. The Wall Street Journal
describes "a system in which car makers pay the very ɹrms that test
and certify their vehicles. That system relies on the use of so-called
'golden vehicles,' stripped down prototypes that car makers send to
testing ɹrms for inspection."42 This "widespread" and "cozy"
relationship "allows car models to undergo tests before they are
ɹtted with everything from back seats to wheels with heavier tread,
boosting fuel eɽciency and lowering emissions." The article cites
European critics suggesting "the commercial ties between car
makers and testing ɹrms allow them to wield too much inɻuence
over test results," with an environmental group in Brussels saying
"There is no incentive to be tough on car makers."
A further example of commercial power and its limiting impact on
the market can be found in Gloria Steinem's description of the
diɽculty in securing advertisers for the feminist Ms. Magazine in its
early days:
When Ms. began, we didn't consider not taking ads. The most
important reason was keeping the price of a feminist magazine
low enough for most women to aʃord ... Food advertisers have
always demanded that women's magazines publish recipes and
articles on entertaining (preferably ones that name their products)
in return for their ads; clothing advertisers expect to be

surrounded by fashion spreads (especially ones that credit their
designers); and shampoo, fragrance, and beauty products in
general usually insist on positive editorial coverage of beauty
subjects, plus photo credits besides. That's why women's
magazines look the way they do.43
An especially embarrassing example comes from The Wall Street
Journal itself, the prominent conservative business paper that has for
years excellently documented the problems caused by market
deregulation, while arguing for even more of it on the editorial
page. In February 2008, the paper ran an editorial about the then
emerging ɹnancial crisis, focusing on the credit-rating companies
Standard & Poor's (S&P), Moody's and Fitch, whose job is to rate
ɹnancial products, like bonds, in terms of their expected yield and
risk. These "Big Three" agencies became notorious for granting very
safe "AAA" ratings to the highly risky subprime mortgage securities
issued during the housing bubble. The Journal editors claimed this
was because government regulators had prevented other ɹrms from
entering the market (until 2006), which would have encouraged
more competition and rating honesty. However, the bigger issue is
the basic business model—the rating agencies make far more money
if they grant high ratings to junky "subprime" assets, because the
large investment banks and ɹnancial ɹrms selling them are willing
to pay for these favorable ratings, creating an "issuer pays" model.
The Journal leaves the blame on the SEC, but apparently has no
problem with the issue of being paid by the companies whose
products you're supposed to evaluate. The paper does acknowledge
the issue: "But every business has potential conɻicts. In the
newspaper industry, we sell ads to the same people we cover. The
question is how ɹrms manage these conɻicts—and whether the
marketplace is allowed to discipline companies that fail investors."44
Indeed, in an oɽcial corporate reply on the editorial page a week
later, an S&P oɽcial said "Reputable news outlets like the Journal
keep a strict 'church and state' separation between their editorial
and business operations. Similarly at S&P, we have rigorous policies

to support the independence of our ratings ..."45 This debate is
interesting and revealing, since both business media like the Journal
and credit-rating agencies like S&P are important parts of modern
information markets.
First, the marketplace has indeed disciplined S&P, but not quite
how the Journal editors expected. They would probably agree with
Hayek, that the information relevant to these ɹnancial securities
would be most accurate if supplied by the market. And indeed, after
the crisis, the Big Three were chastened by their catastrophic rating
biases and tightened up their criteria. S&P stiʃened its rating
criteria the most, but then found it was losing market share—since
in the marketplace, making money means being hired by the ɹrms
whose securities they are supposed to judge impartially. But this
meant S&P's business suʃered relative to the other ɹrms as it
assigned lower ratings to ɹnancial products, and eventually the ɹrm
announced it was "introducing modiɹed business standards that
made it easier to give bonds higher ratings," as the business press
described.
The changes seemed to work. More banks began choosing S.& P.
to rate the new bonds backed by residential mortgages ... Since
S.& P. eased its standards last year, its market share has risen to
69 percent from the 18 percent it had in the ɹrst years after the
crisis ... On nearly every deal since it changed its standards, S.&
P. has been willing to make more optimistic predictions about the
bonds it was rating than the other agencies rating the deals ...
Bankers want more optimistic predictions because they make the
bonds easier to sell to investors.46
So the "market discipline" is not to share real information
accurately, as Hayek insisted would happen, but to supply the right
information—that which is most conducive to immediate proɹt-
making.
Secondly, this "church and state separation" between newspaper
ad departments and editorial oɽces isn't very impressive, and the
Journal itself has let its own ad-driven business model take priority

over its alleged integrity. The advertising industry's trade magazine,
Advertising Age, has reported on the huge growth of "sponsored
content," which is material paid for and supplied by outside
companies but set up to look like regular news coverage.
By wrapping ad messages in a format that looks like editorial
content—and calling them something else, such as 'sponsored' or
'partner' content—they hope to trade on the trust and goodwill
editorial has built up with the audience ... The Wall Street Journal
publishes three special sections underwritten by Deloitte [the
ɹnancial services giant] ... where editorial stories by Journal
reporters run alongside a box of content marked as sponsored.
Deloitte has no inɻuence over which editorial stories appear, a
Wall Street Journal spokeswoman said.47
These same principles deɹnitely also apply to the Journal's
corporate parent, News Corporation. The network blames regulation
and big government for society's problems, but in 1998, journalists
for a Fox-owned Florida TV station prepared a story on a synthetic
hormone designed to increase milk production in cows, produced by
Monsanto, the enormous manufacturer of Roundup weedkiller and
other commercial chemicals. The journalists found that the hormone
caused serious health problems in the cows and was likely to aʃect
milk drinkers hormonally, despite the FDA's approval of the drug
(more on this rubber-stamp nature of current regulation in Chapter
3).
As the excellent PR Watch reports, "Immediately after FDA
approval of rBGH, attorneys for Monsanto sued or threatened to sue
stores and dairy companies that sold milk and dairy products
advertised as being free of rBGH," usually for "defamation."48 But
Monsanto threatened Fox with "dire consequences," presumably in
the form of withdrawn advertising and legal suits. The network's
own legal staʃ dragged the journalists through dozens of revisions,
attempting to minimize or remove any mention of cancer or other
speciɹc health eʃects. Bribes and bullying were also attempted,
including an episode where the journalists claimed a manager said

"We paid $3 billion for these television stations. We will decide
what the news is. The news is what we tell you it is."
Hayek claims the market is an "eɽcient mechanism for digesting
dispersed information." Meanwhile, we're digesting synthetic cow
hormones.

Original Spin
These pressures, from concentrated corporate ownership and an
advertising revenue-based business model, mean that freedom of
information is often very constrained in a market system. The
resulting media performance has been analyzed by radical media
critics Edward Herman and Noam Chomsky, whose classic book
Manufacturing 
Consent 
organized 
the 
various 
market 
and
institutional pressures on news into a simple "Propaganda Model,"
built around the diʃerent ɹlters that shape and limit the
information received by the man on the street. One ɹlter is "the
limitation on ownership of media with any substantial outreach by
the requisite large size of investment," which means the media tend
to be "owned and controlled by quite wealthy people" who "have a
special stake in the status quo by virtue of their wealth and their
strategic position in one of the great institutions of society."49
Likewise with the ɹltering power of advertising capital in the
market:
With advertising, the free market does not yield a neutral system
in which ɹnal buyer choice decides. The advertiser's choices
inɻuence media prosperity and survival ... The power of
advertisers over television programming stems from the simple
fact they buy and pay for the programs—they are the 'patrons'
who provide the media subsidy. As such, the media compete for
their patronage.50
Elsewhere, Chomsky used a revealing paired example to explore the
pro-status quo features of the capitalist media marketplace, with
regard to aggressive US foreign policy:
We have no problem in perceiving the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan as brutal aggression ... But the U.S. invasion of South
Vietnam in the early 1960s, when the Latin American-style terror

state imposed by U.S. force could no longer control the domestic
population by violence, cannot be perceived as it was. True, U.S.
forces were directly engaged in large-scale bombing and
defoliation in an eʃort to drive the population into concentration
camps where they could be "protected" from the enemy whom, it
was conceded, they willingly supported. True, a huge U.S.
expeditionary force later invaded and ravaged the country, and its
neighbors, with the explicit aim of destroying what was clearly
recognized to be the only mass-based political force ... But
throughout, the United States was resisting aggression in its
yearning for democracy.51
Herman wrote that a merit of this system, from the point of view of
the powerful:
... is that it is not total and responds with some ɻexibility to the
diʃerences that frequently crop up among elite groups. This
allows controversy to rage within the mass media, but conɹned
almost completely to tactical matters ... In sum, a market system
of control limits free expression largely by market processes that
are highly eʃective. Dissident ideas are not legally banned, they
are simply unable to reach mass audiences.52
This is also the basis for the use of commercial media in this book,
since the information in the national press, like The Wall Street
Journal and The New York Times, is excellent but limited to
conventional views of the social system. So rising wealth inequality,
aggravated instability and indeed media ownership concentration
are reported in these media, but within a limited range that stops
short of suggesting these issues are symptoms of problems with our
economic system. Much as with the foreign policy coverage
Chomsky describes above, the commercial media very often provide
valuable information, especially in their business sections for
investors and executives who need good data, but within speciɹc
limits.

Edward Bernays, the PR pioneer who believed in cooperation
between business and government, had his own thoughts about the
resulting media performance:
... it remains a fact that in almost every act of our daily lives ...
we are dominated by the relatively small number of persons ... In
some departments of our daily life, in which we imagine ourselves
free agents, we are led by dictators exercising great power. A man
buying a suit of clothes imagines that he is choosing, according to
his taste and his personality, the kind of garment he prefers. In
reality, he may be obeying the orders of an anonymous gentleman
tailor in London.53
While Friedman said we are Free to Choose, actual PR cofounder
Bernays said we are in fact Free to Imagine That We Choose.
It's also worth addressing the relentlessly repeated claim by
conservative media that the media generally are "liberal." This
claim is about as bedrock as you can get on the Right, and is usually
based (if any evidence is given at all) on the tendency of journalists
and editors to vote for the Democratic Party. Herman notes that this
argument avoids:
... the questions of ownership and control, implying that lower
echelon personnel set their own agendas, without rules from
above. The massive historic evidence that key owners ... have had
deɹnite policy agendas that they have enforced in their
organizations is simply not discussed ... The neo-conservative
analysts also don't do much in the way of analyzing actual news
and opinion outputs. Their main focus is on whether the reporters
and copy editors vote Republican or Democratic.54
The deɹnitive mid-century writer on freedom of expression and
against state control of thought is George Orwell, whose Animal
Farm and 1984 became popular classics on the dangers of control of
knowledge by tyrannical governments. Indeed, Orwell's books are
even frequently seen in libertarian book catalogs. However, Orwell

also wrote a preface to Animal Farm that went unpublished in the
UK for decades, in which he made his point clear that control over
information was not purely a state-power phenomenon:
The sinister fact about literary censorship in England is that it is
largely voluntary. Unpopular ideas can be can be silenced, and
inconvenient facts kept dark, without the need for any oɽcial ban
... not because the Government intervened but because of a
general tacit agreement that 'it wouldn't do' to mention that
particular fact. So far as the daily newspapers go, this is easy to
understand. The British press is extremely centralized, and most
of it is owned by wealthy men who have every motive to be
dishonest on certain important topics. But the same kind of veiled
censorship also operates in books and periodicals, as well as in
plays, ɹlms and radio. At any given moment there is an
orthodoxy, a body of ideas which it is assumed that all right-
thinking people will accept without question ... Anyone who
challenges the prevailing orthodoxy ɹnds himself silenced with
surprising eʃectiveness. A genuinely unfashionable opinion is
almost never given a fair hearing, either in the popular press or in
the highbrow periodicals.55
This part of Orwell's work, claiming capitalism suppresses freedom
of information, hasn't received the same media attention as his work
criticizing the USSR. For some reason.

TMI Inc.
So the media markets that bring us information are warped by
tightly concentrated ownership and by their advertising revenue-
based business model. But the scale of the advertising itself, and the
scale of data collection carried out by ɹrms to reɹne it, are also
important for understanding how markets restrict and limit our
freedom of information. The relentless character of modern
marketing can be seen in the estimate by advertising professionals
that urban consumers saw about 2000 ads a day in 1970, with
today's ɹgure closer to a staggering 5000 daily. Ad ɹrms boast to
the business press that successful marketing is "in your face, and
you can blanket a marketplace."56 This refers to the virtually
unlimited scope of modern advertising, on TV, in print, online, on
hold, before movies, during movies, pasted to the pharmacy ɻoor,
sprayed onto food, projected onto buildings, posted by the road,
played on the radio, painted on cars, worked into ball games and
written in the sky. And a growing market segment is engaged in
marketing to kids, before their critical thinking powers even have a
chance to kick in. One freedom you do not have is freedom from
constant advertising messages.
This ubiquity deɹnitely includes the school system, where young
people are supposed to be introduced to ideas and information in
their formative years, and where "brands have managed, over the
course of only one decade, to all but eliminate the barrier between
ads and education," as Naomi Klein put it.57 Public budgets have
fallen, typically including education cuts, and "As fast-food, athletic
gear and computer companies step in to ɹll the gap, they carry with
them an educational agenda all their own." Bagdikian also notes
that "Free classroom materials are produced by 64 percent of the
ɹve hundred largest American industrial corporations, 90 percent of
industrial trade associations, and 90 percent of utility companies."58

Besides the relentless bombarding of consumers and students with
commercial information to shape views and drive consumption,
ɹrms have for some time also used these media properties to
directly improve their own image in the eyes of the public. This
practice has evolved since Bernays' time—in 2012, The Times
described the fast-food chain McDonald's as "quietly launching a
major counteroʃensive" against its critics among the movement for
better nutrition, with a company plan to "change how we think
about food." The power to do this depends on money, but the chain
is up to the challenge: it spends $2 billion a year on marketing,
enough to fully immunize 10 million African children each year.59
Because McDonalds "owns nearly 17 percent of the limited-service
restaurant industry," equal to the next four largest chains combined,
it can "reach an audience far larger than the one that saw 'Super
Size Me,'" and pay to keep its stories at the top of the Twitter trends
list, showing how today's celebrated "grassroots social media" are
just as readily manipulated by money as the older media they
succeeded.
However, a more cutting-edge aspect of marketing is what
McDonald's calls "brand work." In the face of spreading consumer
demand for healthier food, the company aims to distort the
(accurate) perception that its processed food is unhealthy: "In
exchange for perks like free trips, access to important people and
sometimes ɹnancial compensation, bloggers are encouraged or even
contractually bound to write about a company ... Some bloggers ...
get paid as much as $20,000 for the work, which by McDonald's ad-
campaign standards isn't much money." But entrepreneurs ɹnd it's
eʃective at keeping consumers swallowing McDonald's.
The brand work is designed for "reaching an audience that has
become wary of slick ad campaigns," since the ad comes not from
the company itself but "from somebody they trust," as an expert
puts it. For stressed blue- and white-collar mothers, receiving a ɹve-
ɹgure payment for a lowly blog post, or being ɻown to meet high-
ranking corporate oɽcials, is a major event, even if invisibly cheap
for McDonald's colossal marketing budget. A "mom blogger"

describes how after meeting company president Jan Fields, "Now I
relate to her ... and in turn I relate to McDonald's." This paid
promotion of favorable information is another violation of the pretty
picture of automatic information transmission put up by the
defenders of capitalist markets, like Hayek, and reveals vital
information to be a plaything of the ruling class.
Indeed, the social media themselves are generally good examples
of the power of money to warp the information we receive, as on
Twitter where fake accounts can be bought by the thousands for
about six cents each at current prices, The Wall Street Journal
reports.60 Similar to this is the genre of TV and online ads, where
hardworking employees of a giant conglomerate (or good-looking
actors portraying them) appear on camera saying, "I'm Company X."
The intention is clear: repeat a message associating the company
with normal working people, not a large corporate institution with
unpopular policies.
But these eʃorts to shape our perception of ɹrms are only one
side of the coin. The other side has to do with how ɹrms collect data
to ɹne-tune promotions, which means gathering information. In this
era of huge public concern about data gathering and privacy, the
focus is almost entirely on the PATRIOT ACT and the National
Security Agency's PRISM data collection, which have become
correctly notorious for their apparently almost universal hoarding of
personal communications. But the practice has also become a
mainstay of the corporate world, where giant concentrated
resources again create real social power.
Before today's online economy, where a product viewed one
moment becomes an ad following you around the Web, the large US
retailers led the wave of private collection of personal data in order
to tailor sales pitches—and without the consumer's awareness that
this is happening. Proɹling Target as a leader in modern data-driven
marketing, The New York Times reports that ɹrms can "buy data"
about virtually any aspect of your work history, consumption
proɹle, or even social and political views.61 In fact, the only
drawback so far for retailers is how well their data collection works,

risking a "public-relations" disaster if women, for example, found
out Target knew they were pregnant before their family did.
The company ultimately developed a poker face, where Target
"camouɻaged how much it knew," in order to encourage new
shopping habits in customers going through life changes, to the
point where an executive conɹdes "we started mixing in all these
ads for things we knew pregnant women would never buy, so the
baby ads looked random." The program represents an enormous
"informational asymmetry," where one side of a deal knows more
than the other side. The manufacturer knows more about the quality
of a good than a new consumer and a worker knows their own work
ethic better than an employer. Target and other retailers investing
their giant resources in data are considered to have achieved mixed
success, and similar methods have been used by other large
consumer goods ɹrms like Proctor & Gamble. The Target
corporation ultimately told their statistician to stop communicating
with the press, perhaps concerned they had tipped the industry's
hand.
At this point, we should refer again to the view of Milton and
Rose Friedman on this subject. They wrote in Free to Choose:
What about the claim that consumers can be led by the nose by
advertising? Our answer is that they can't—as numerous
expensive advertising ɹascos testify. One of the greatest duds of
all time was the Edsel automobile, introduced by Ford Motor
Company and promoted by a major advertising campaign. More
basically, advertising is a cost of doing business, and the
businessman wants to get the most for this money. Is it not more
sensible to try to appeal to the real wants and desires of
consumers than to try to manufacture artiɹcial wants or desires?
Surely it will generally be cheaper to sell them something that
meets wants they already have than to create an artiɹcial want ...
The real objection of most critics of advertising is not that
advertising manipulates tastes but that the public at large has
meretricious tastes—that is, tastes that do not agree with the
critics.62

"They can't." But they quite commonly do, as shown above. The fact
that it sometimes fails doesn't mean it's not brainwashing; Soviet
propaganda was by no means universally believed, so does that
mean that it wasn't relentless propaganda capable of having a
cumulative eʃect? And if "artiɹcially-creating desires" is futile, it's
hard to explain Coca-Cola spending about $3 billion on marketing
its chemical-syrup water every year, while Pepsi clocks $2 billion
annually, according to Advertising Age.63 It's unlikely that this pair of
ɹrms are throwing away $5 billion of good proɹt every year even
though "They can't" have any inɻuence over consumer behavior.
But according to the dean of conservative economics, we don't really
think advertising manipulates people. We're just snobs. Case closed!
Then, when city and state governments try passing taxes on
sugary drinks because of their socially expensive health impacts, the
beverage industry (through their own organized trade body, the
American Beverage Association) hires canvassers to go door-to-door
opposing the restrictions, wearing shirts saying "I picked out my
beverage all by myself." The message of course is that governments
making sugary drinks more costly is paternalistic—it treats people
like children. However, the ABA's member companies tend to
outspend political opponents ten-to-one, ɻooding media with one-
sided information.64 The fact is that you did not choose your
beverage yourself, Coke drinker—corporations threw a lot of
valuable capital at your attention span while you watched TV as a
child and an adult, to cultivate non-rational attachments and
associations in your mind with their sugary beverages.
Stuart Ewen, author of the classic book Captains of Consciousness,
has engaged in careful scholarship to document the business
thinking that went into this ad-swamped world of today. He cites
business economist Paul Nystrom, who said the dull, monotonous
aspect of work under industrial capitalism was creating a
"philosophy of futility," which could itself stimulate more
consumption: "this lack of purpose in life has an eʃect on
consumption similar to that of having a narrow life interest, that is,
in concentrating human attention on the more superɹcial things that

comprise much of fashionable consumption."65 This is quite beyond
Friedman's simple view and indeed it's more often the powerful
market execs who have the snobby attitudes.
Whether the market is for shoes, cars or healthcare, the free-
market phenomena of concentration and class interest put power in
the hands of a few giant empires and their wealthy owners. But in
information markets, the stakes are far higher, limiting the very
ideas we're exposed to and blocking the social change that could try
to deal with these power centers. While we value freedom of
information, our market system is more concerned with its quarterly
proɹt results. In the market of ideas, money yells louder than words.
Price tags for shaping the marketplace of ideas66
Blogger praise online
$20,000
Economist papers favoring ɹnancial deregulation
$124,000
Place a book on The New York Times bestseller list
through PR agency buys
$210,000
A House election campaign, deciding idea dominance in
policy
$650,000
Olympics Partnership, allowing an on-site pavilion and
prestige used in ads
$100
million
Buy The Washington Post
$250
million
Global annual ad campaign keeping brands in front of
consumers
$3 billion
Endnotes
1. Albert Einstein, "Why Socialism?" Monthly Review, May 1949.

2. Alex Carey, Taking the Risk Out of Democracy, Champaign, IL:
University of Illinois Press, 1997, p. 18.
3. John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, Mineola, NY: Dover, 2002, p. 14.
4. Friedrich Hayek, Nobel Prize Lecture, "The Pretence of
Knowledge," 11 December 1974.
5. Edward Bernays, Public Relations, Norman, OK: University of
Oklahoma Press, 1952, p. 78; Propaganda, Brooklyn: Ig
Publishing, 2005, p. 37.
6. Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2007, p. 178.
7. R. Glenn Hubbard and Anthony Patrick O'Brien,
Microeconomics, New York: Pearson, 4th ed, p.54.
8. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1990, p. 13-5.
9. Friedrich Hayek, "The Use of Knowledge in Society," American
Economic Review, Vol. 35, No. 4, September 1945.
10. "Labor Almost Invisible on TV Talk," FAIR, 28 August 2014.
11. U.S. Census Bureau, "Economic Census 2007," 2014.
12. U.S. House of Representatives, 104th Congress, 2nd Session,
House Report 104-458, p. 1.
13. Deborah Solomon and Robert Frank, "Broad Bands: Comcast
Deal Cements Rise of an Oligopoly In the Cable Business," The
Wall Street Journal, 21 December 2001.
14. Martin Peers, "Show of Strength: How Media Giants Are
Reassembling the Old Oligopoly," The Wall Street Journal, 15
September 2003.
15. Deborah Solomon and Robert Frank, "Broad Bands: Comcast
Deal Cements Rise of an Oligopoly In the Cable Business," The
Wall Street Journal, 21 December 2001.

16. Robert McChesney, The Problem of the Media, New York:
Monthly Review Press, 2004, p. 177.
17. Ibid, p. 180, 186.
18. Ibid, p. 183, 186.
19. Ibid, p. 202, 190.
20. Anna Mathews, "From a Distance: A Giant Radio Chain Is
Perfecting the Art of Seeming Local," The Wall Street Journal, 25
February 2002.
21. Pew Research Center, "Acquisitions and Content Sharing
Shapes Local TV News in 2013," 16 March 2014.
22. Gautham Nagesh, "FCC Relaxes Rules on Foreign Ownership,"
The Wall Street Journal, 15 November 2013.
23. Ben Bagdikian, The New Media Monopoly, Boston: Beacon Press,
2002, p. 3.
24. Ibid, p. 8-9.
25. Ben Bagdikian, The New Media Monopoly, Boston: Beacon Press,
2002, p. 5-7, 50.
26. Martin Peers, "Show of Strength: How Media Giants Are
Reassembling the Old Oligopoly," The Wall Street Journal, 15
September 2003.
27. "Our Boss Is Great! How MSNBC Covered Comcast Merger,"
Fair Blog, 19 February 2014.
28. Justin McCarthy, "Trust in Mass Media Returns to All-Time
Low," Gallup, 17 September 2014.
29. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1980, p. 16-7.
30. Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2007, p. 179.

31. Edward Bernays, Propaganda, Brooklyn: Ig Publishing, 2005, p.
54-5.
32. Berman and Compnay, http://www.bermanco.com/, accessed
29 November 2014.
33. Bernays, Propaganda, p. 63.
34. Ibid, p. 90.
35. Ibid, p. 94.
36. Tim Wu, The Master Switch, New York: Vintage, 2011, p. 318.
37. James Curran and Jean Seaton, Power Without Responsibility,
London: Routledge, 2009, p. 26-8.
38. Ibid, p. 28-32.
39. Ben Bagdikian, The New Media Monopoly, Boston: Beacon Press,
2002, p. 223, 230.
40. "Not who's got the most; who's got the best?" Broadcasting, 9
January 1978.
41. "13th Annual Fear & Factor Review," Extra!, February 2013.
42. Jason Chow, Ruth Bender and David Gauthier-Villars,
"Europe's Cozy Car Testing," The Wall Street Journal, 1 October
2015.
43. Gloria Steinem, "Sex, Lies, & Advertising," Ms. Magazine,
July/August 1990, p. 18-28.
44. "AAA Oligopoly," The Wall Street Journal, 26 February 2008.
45. Vickie Tillman, "Standard & Poor's Gives Its Side of the Story,"
The Wall Street Journal, 8 March 2008.
46. Nathanial Popper, "S.&P. Bond Deals Are on the Rise Since It
Relaxed Rating Criteria," The New York Times Dealbook, 17
September 2003.
47. "News Organizations Face Tricky Trade-Oʃ With 'Sponsored
Content,'" Advertising Age, 23 September 2013.

48. "Monsanto and Fox: Partners in Censorship," PR Watch, April-
June 1998.
49. Edward Herman and Noam Chomsky, Manufacturing Consent,
New York: Pantheon, 1988, p. 4-5, 8.
50. Ibid, p. 14, 16-7.
51. Noam Chomsky, Necessary Illusions, Boston: South End Press,
1989, p. 50.
52. Edward Herman, Triumph of the Market, Boston: South End
Press, 1995, p. 171-2.
53. Edward Bernays, Propaganda, Brooklyn: Ig Publishing, 2005, p.
37-8, 61.
54. Edward Herman, Triumph of the Market, Boston: South End
Press, 1995, p. 258, n. 8.
55. George Orwell, "The Freedom of the Press," The Times Literary
Supplement, 15 September 1972.
56. Louise Story, "Anywhere the Eye Can see, It's Likely to See an
Ad," The New York Times, 15 January 2007.
57. Naomi Klein, No Logo, Picador: New York, 2002, p. 9.
58. Ben Bagdikian, The New Media Monopoly, Boston: Beacon Press,
2002, p. 167.
59. Keith O'Brien, "How McDonald's Came Back Bigger Than
Ever," The New York Times, 4 May 2012.
60. Jeʃ Elder, "Inside a Twitter Robot Factory, "The Wall Street
Journal, 24 November 2013.
61. Charles Duhigg, "How Companies Learn Your Secrets," The New
York Times, 16 February 2012.
62. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1990, p. 224-5.

63. Natalie Zmuda, "Pepsi plays catch-up with Coke, adds $556m
in spending," Advertising Age, 29 January 2012.
64. Michael Grynbaum, "Soda Makers Begin Their Push Against
New York Ban," The New York Times, 1 July 2012; Vauhini
Vara, "Campaign Over Soda Tax Bubbles Up, "The Wall Street
Journal, 13 August 2012.
65. Stuart Ewen, Captains of Consciouness, New York: Basic Books,
2001, p. 85.
66. Keith O'Brien, "How McDonald's Came Back Bigger Than
Ever," The New York Times, 4 May 2012; Charles Ferguson,
Inside Job, Sony Pictures Classics, 2011; Ruth Graham, "Can
Megachurches Deal With Mega Money in a Christian Way?" The
Atlantic, 12 March 2014; "Price of Admission," Center For
Responsive Politics,
https://www.opensecrets.org/bigpicture/stats.php?
cycle=2012&type=A&display=A;David Segal, "In Olympic
Park, a Deluge From Our Sponsors," The New York Times, 11
August 2012; Brad Stone, "Why Jeʃ Bezos Bought The
Washington Post," Bloomberg Businessweek, 8 August 2013;
Natalie Zmuda, "Pepsi plays catch-up with Coke, adds $556m in
spending," Advertising Age, 29 January 2012.

Chapter 3
Codependence Day

Political Freedom
Any honest Democrat will admit that we are all now
Friedmanites.
Larry Summers1
A nation that continues year after year to spend more money on
military defense than on programs of social uplift is approaching
spiritual death.
Martin Luther King2
After the havoc of 2016, with the rule-breaking Sanders and Trump
campaigns in the US, Brexit and broader skepticism about the
European Union, rising authoritarianism in Turkey and Mexico, and
governments wracked with corruption from Brazil to Malaysia, and
above all the Trump administration, no one can doubt that popular
disgust with politics has become more deeply felt and more globally
prevalent in recent years. And with good reason—the level of
cynicism shown by political ɹgures, the divergence of oɽcial state
policy from the basic desires of citizens and a pronounced
movement toward more authoritarian government with wider
surveillance, all add to the mountain of grievances felt around the
world.
So it's interesting to see what the recent trends have been in
government policy and where today's very unpopular "neoliberal"
political trajectory has come from. Policy changes always require
intellectual justiɹcation and here we return to the prominent
libertarian ɹgures whose work has been a focus of this book.
Friedman and Hayek are especially identiɹed with the beginnings
and rationales for neoliberalism, since the very start of our "Age of

Friedman," as the conservative National Review called it. So let's
review how they see the issue.

Minority Rules
Conservatives and libertarians are strongly identiɹed with
supporting "smaller government," and the Friedmans' Free to Choose
expounded on this at length:
Currently, more than 40 percent of our income is disposed of on
our behalf by government at federal, state, and local levels
combined. One of us once suggested a new national holiday,
"Personal Independence Day—that day in the year when we stop
working to pay the expenses of government ... and start working to
pay for the items we severally and individually choose in light of
our own needs and desires." In 1929 that holiday would have come
on Abraham Lincoln's birthday, February 12; today it would come
about May 30; if present trends were to continue, it would coincide
with the other Independence Day, July 4, around 1988.3
Of course, tax collections aren't mainly used to pay "the expenses
of government," but to supply "public goods"—services that tend to
be drastically underproduced by markets because they beneɹt the
broader society, more than individuals. Things like roads,
streetlights, bridges, sanitation systems and scientiɹc research are
examples, and the Friedmans do acknowledge this later: "City
streets and general-access highways could be provided by private
voluntary exchange, the costs being paid for by charging tolls. But
the costs of collecting the tolls would often be very large compared
to the cost of building and maintaining the streets or highways."4
Likewise, services like education or immunization against diseases
beneɹt everyone by yielding better educated societies that can
provide more sophisticated goods and services, or a lower incidence
of infectious diseases that beneɹts everyone in the society.
Notably, more consistent libertarians, like US economist Murray
Rothbard, insist that even local roads could be eɽciently run on a
toll basis. He wrote in Man, Economy and State that "such services as
education, road building and maintenance, coinage, postal delivery,
ɹre protection, police protection, judicial decisions, and military

defense" should be private and were "historically supplied by
private enterprise."5 Indeed, Rothbard and other more libertarian
ɹgures have disputed the very existence of public goods themselves.
In the "Age of Friedman," the beginning of Rothbard's dream has
come to pass, as a deadlocked US Congress has failed to pass the gas
tax increases to pay for public road upkeep, forcing states to
institute tolls on more and more roads—the US toll road mileage
rose to 5400 miles, The Wall Street Journal reported.6
The rise of the Trump administration looks set to increase this
trend, as the campaign promise of $1 trillion in infrastructure
spending "relies entirely on private ɹnancing," the business press
relates, "which industry experts say is likely to fall far short of
adequately funding improvements to roads, bridges and airports."7
This is likely diɽcult for Rand readers and supporters of libertarian
purists like Rothbard to comprehend, but even sympathetic business
media ɹnd the plan hard to buy. Since the proposal "largely boils
down to a tax break in the hopes of luring capital to projects,"
problems arise as "Experts say there are limits to how much can be
done with private ɹnancing. Because privately funded projects need
to turn a proɹt, they are better suited for major projects such as toll
roads, airports or water systems and less appropriate for routine
maintenance, they say." Indeed, even the head of the business
association representing private toll-road operators ɹnds the plan
more conceptual than serious. The paper also adds that "tolls have
proved unpopular, with toll-road operators in Indiana and Texas
ɹling for bankruptcy protection."
More fundamentally, critics of these libertarian views could argue
that control over transport routes was the exact extortion
opportunity used by German nobles that created the actual phrase
"robber baron," now often applied to great capitalists. Much as at
that time, private toll roads would leave drivers helpless before a
multitude of local road barons—the Journal notes as an example
that the city of Plano, Texas, is "nearly surrounded by toll roads."
Perhaps a Toll Road to Serfdom.

But the Friedmans' point is that while a very limited number of
social functions are indeed best provided collectively through public
policy, government can still force people to comply, and therefore
has power and ought to be sharply constrained. That's a reasonable
principle, considering the "negative freedom" supported by these
ɹgures—the freedom from being made to do something by outside
forces. But as we saw in Chapter 1, this kind of coercive power is
prevalent in the market also.
Nonetheless, libertarians tend to see raw, violent coercion in even
the most tame and sensible programs of public provision, if they
tend to reduce the power of commercial institutions in the
marketplace. One memorable instance appeared in one of Milton
Friedman's columns for Newsweek, where he wrote this gem of
Reaganite righteousness:
"Consider social security. The young have always contributed to
the support of the old. Earlier, the young helped their own
parents out of a sense of love and duty. They now contribute to
the support of someone else's parents out of compulsion and fear.
The voluntary transfers strengthened the bonds of the family; the
compulsory transfers weaken those bonds."8 Yep, fear of the dark
storm troopers of Social Security has torn our families asunder.
And of course, with no public pensions, if a person makes a bad
investment with their savings and loses it all, and lacks
prosperous young relations, there's no safety net to prevent street
grandmas.
But as has come up previously in this book, Friedman and Hayek,
although the most prominent of conservative-libertarian economists,
were also political advisers focused on what was achievable by their
Reagan-Thatcher patrons. So Friedman, rather than the mass
privatization of roadways that Rothbard supported, put his focus on
social security or health regulations—easier targets for immediate
policy change. Hayek, moreover, wrote for a Western European
audience, which meant that the overwhelming popularity of public
programs and welfare had to be accommodated: "Thus neither the

provision of signposts on the roads nor, in most circumstances, that
of the roads themselves can be paid for by every individual user," he
said.9 "Nor is the preservation of competition incompatible with an
extensive system of social services," leaving "a wide and
unquestioned ɹeld for state activity."10 It's certainly questioned by
American libertarians, who tend to be more purist, like Rothbard
above.
The Friedmans also concede that in a republic, government is not
based on a distant king's decrees but decided through some form of
popular election:
Of course, we have something to say about how much of our
income is spent on our behalf by government. We participate in
the political process that has resulted in government's spending
an amount equal to more than 40 percent of our income. Majority
rule is a necessary and desirable expedient. It is, however, very
diʃerent from the kind of freedom you have when you shop at a
supermarket. When you enter the voting booth once a year, you
almost always vote for a package rather than for speciɹc items ...
When you vote daily in the supermarket, you get precisely what
you voted for, and so does everyone else.11
The Friedmans are again merely presuming a rich, diverse and
competitive marketplace, which as we saw in Chapter 1 isn't so
common. That chapter also reviewed how this picture of "voting"
with your dollars in the market, which the Friedmans refer to again
here, gives far more votes to those with a lot of money.
But another crucial point for Friedman was that these "public
goods," for which government must be relied upon since markets
cannot produce everything, must be paid for by those who use them
and not by a large social majority imposing taxes on someone else,
like the wealthier households.
There is no inconsistency between a free market system and the
pursuit of broad social and cultural goals, or between a free
market system and compassion for the less fortunate ... There is

all the diʃerence in the world, however, between two kinds of
assistance through government that seem superɹcially similar:
ɹrst, 90 percent of us agreeing to impose taxes on ourselves in
order to help the bottom 10 percent, and second, 80 percent
voting to impose taxes on the top 10 percent to help the bottom
10 percent.12
This last point is worth considering. It suggests the possibility of a
tyrannical majority using the political institutions of the republic to
vote through taxes on some oppressed minority. We can imagine a
cruel population paying for public works by taxing a persecuted
ethnic group, for example. However, the possibility of a social
majority deciding to more aggressively tax a minority in a society
that holds power over them due to their resources, like an
aristocracy or a concentrated capitalist class, begins to sound rather
diʃerent. The issue will return later in this chapter.
The kind of government the Friedmans and Hayek would prefer is
stated clearly: "a society that puts freedom ɹrst will, as a happy by-
product, end up with both greater freedom and greater equality."
The policies that would be pursued are sometimes called
"neoliberalism," and are those Friedman later proudly pointed to as
the Reagan legacy, including "slashing taxes" and "attacking
government 
regulations." 
Given 
the 
Right's 
long-standing
antagonism to labor unions (reviewed in Chapter 1), we can take it
that they wouldn't be much in the picture either, and indeed all
these have been major thrusts of government policy for the last forty
years.
The prescription is for a return to the public policy conɹgurations
of the late nineteenth century, the "Gilded Age," an era of gigantic
monopolies that the Friedmans ironically defend in Free to Choose:
"A myth has grown up about the United States that paints the
nineteenth century as the era of the robber baron, of rugged,
unrestrained individualism. Heartless monopoly capitalists allegedly
exploited the poor, encouraged immigration, and then ɻeeced the
immigrants unmercifully. Wall Street is pictured as conning Main

Street ... The reality was very diʃerent. Immigrants kept coming."13
Apparently, this is meant to suggest that they were attracted by the
freedom of early America, although pesky historians might also
point to little "push" factors like the Irish Potato Famine.
So the neoliberal "Age of Friedman" is likely to be a return to the
Gilded Age of super-powerful monopolists, child laborers and an
economy staggering from boom to crash, and indeed we have
moved impressively in these directions over the last forty years.
There are other issues to address too, including that our "having
something to say" in the political world is being swamped by a
torrent of money surging through the electoral and political process.
Though a very old feature of our capitalist republics, it has taken on
truly fantastic proportions in the neoliberal era. The Friedmans
proposed a "Personal Independence Day" from government taxes,
which are described as a despotic and ineɽcient parasitizing of our
hard-earned dollars. I would suggest instead a "Co-Dependence
Day," to focus on the impressive level of control corporate money
has won over the state.

You Say You Bought a Revolution
The tight historical relationship between concentrated economic
wealth and state power goes back very far and indeed a lot of world
history makes a lot more sense when the strategies of concentrated
capital are added to the picture. To explore this broad subject I'll
focus on the US, which is often recognized to be an especially
money-driven society, but as we'll see the principles apply widely.
The ɹngerprints of money are easily seen on one of the founding
documents of the modern era, the United States Constitution. The
deɹnitive work on the economics of the Constitution is Charles
Beard's classic An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution, which in
detail lays out the economic interests of the delegates to the
Constitutional Convention that wrote the document, and the
economic patterns of the national reaction to it and its ratiɹcation.
While criticized for highlighting economic interests rather than the
more conventional approach to the document, which focuses on the
liberal republican ideals of the founders, Beard has a sturdy
response: the founders themselves focused on economic interests
heavily in their own debates while writing the document.
Consider, for example, comments by James Madison—the
founding father given credit for writing much of the US Constitution
—in the Federalist Papers, the series of articles by Madison and
fellow founders Thomas Jeʃerson and John Jay. Madison wrote
about the "diversity in the faculties of men," which meant:
... the possession of diʃerent degrees and kinds of property
immediately results; and from the inɻuence of these on the
sentiments and views of the respective proprietors, ensues a
division of society into diʃerent interests and parties ... The most
common and durable source of factions has been the various and
unequal distribution of property. Those who hold and those who
are without property have ever formed distinct interests in
society. Those who are creditors, and those who are debtors, fall

under a like discrimination. A landed interest, a manufacturing
interest, a mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many
lesser interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations and
divide them into diʃerent classes, actuated by diʃerent
sentiments and views.14
Much as with Adam Smith (see Chapter 1), ɹgures like Madison
tended to have a realistic picture of society that included class
analysis.
Beard observes that the giant majority of the delegates to the
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia had large economic
interests that would be aʃected directly by the document they
shaped, including many large landowners, major merchants,
slaveholding plantation owners, government bondholders, a few
manufacturers and especially commercial lawyers who represented
these great interests. Beard's conclusion is that a whopping ɹve
sixths of the Philadelphia delegates were "immediately, directly, and
personally interested ... and were to a greater or lesser extent
economic beneɹciaries" from the Constitution's adoption.15
The main economic interests of this time shaped the Constitution
to stop laws that limited their wealth and power. State governments
had sometimes enacted "stay laws," which prevented landlords from
evicting indebted tenant farmers or kept creditors from seizing
assets from penniless borrowers. State governments were declining
to recognize the bonds issued to pay for the revolution's giant debts
and some states issued their own paper money, devaluing existing
cash and making debts easier to repay. Finally, the states were at
the mercy of Great Britain's powerful Royal Navy, which frequently
stole the contents of merchant ships or forced their crews to work
for them instead.
The Constitution as a document almost perfectly conforms to
these issues. It restricts the ability of the states to infringe on private
contracts, so they cannot respond to popular demands among the
electorate for debt relief; and, likewise, states are prohibited from
issuing money or impinging on private property rights. The federal

government, on the other hand, has its powers spread apart and
separated, which Madison famously described as a "separation of
powers." On the basis of the philosophy of freedom we reviewed in
the Introduction, this sounds pretty good—we often think of
concentrated power as being an obstacle to freedom, so if the
powers of government are split up into legislative, executive and
judicial branches, that would seem to aid the cause of human
liberty.
Except the speciɹcs of the plan serve more to bar the electorate
from inɻuencing the state and to maintain the status quo. Madison,
who again is considered to be the father of the Constitution, wrote
in his class analysis that owing to the "diversity" of people's ability
to get rich and gain or inherit property, "The causes of faction
cannot be removed," which meant contention in society was
inevitable. This created the danger of diʃerent interests combining,
and creating a faction or class organization that could overwhelm
the minority of the propertied. The current system was created to
preserve for Madison's class the beneɹts of the freedom of
commerce provided by a republic, but to always limit the power of
other, potentially numerically larger classes and factions. The limits
on voting, and the layers between the federal government and the
people, would have the eʃect of "passing [laws] through the
medium of a chosen body of citizens." Only one part of the new
federal government, the lower chamber of Congress, was
democratically elected under the original Constitution. And of
course, voting restrictions set by the states exempted from the
voting franchise women, indentured servants in the North, slaves
and those without land or a business concern. And the sheer size of
the country would "make it less probable that a majority of the
whole will have a common motive to invade the rights of other
citizens; or if such a common motive exists, it will be more diɽcult
for all who feel it to discover their strength and to act in unison
with each other."16
Clarifying, Beard cites a letter Madison wrote to Jeʃerson about
the dynamics of power and government. Among other fascinating

insights, Madison baldly states "the invasion of private property is
chieɻy to be apprehended, not from acts of Government contrary to
the sense of its constituents, but from acts in which the Government
is the mere instrument of the major number of the constituents." All
these little-remembered historical facts are a manifestation of what
John Jay, the ɹrst US Supreme Court Chief Justice and coauthor of
the Federalist Papers, memorably said: "Those who own the country
ought to govern it."17
This tradition continues, as documented by perceptive scholars
like Thomas Ferguson of the University of Massachusetts, prominent
for his development of the investment theory of party competition.
He describes "the 'Golden Rule' of political analysis—to discover
who rules, follow the gold," meaning "trace the origins and
ɹnancing of the campaign."18 The heart of this school's argument is
pretty simple—politics gets complicated, and taking time to get
involved in it at some level, learning about the issues, and the eʃort
required to ɹght political confrontations, are limited resources for
most working people. In other words, engaging in politics is an
investment of time and energy, and the more resources you have
access to, the bigger an investment you can make. Ferguson's "core
proposition" was that "the investment theory of parties holds that
parties are more accurately analyzed as blocs of major investors who
coalesce to advance candidates representing their interests."19 The basic
"money in politics" problem that folks generally see today, on the
Right and Left, can be explored more carefully.
The relatively large resources required in this picture mean that
the biggest political "investors" are likely to be the great business
entities and wealthy families. However, Ferguson observes at the
outset that "The theory does not deny the possibility that masses of
voters might indeed become the major investors in an electoral
system;" however, "ordinary voters require strong channels that
directly facilitate mass deliberation and expression ... By far the
most important of such organizations, of course, are labor unions."20
Ferguson applies an extremely strong research process showing
the model's ability to explain American history from the War of

1812 through the 1990s, observing that major public policy shifts
tend to follow business maneuvering. For example, while ɹnancial
interests have historically favored free trade, since it broadens their
investment opportunities and encourages overall growth, the
industrial sectors had perennially demanded tariʃs—taxes on
imported goods. This had led them to frequently take opposing sides
on these and other political issues, even while sharing interests like
private property rights and breaking labor unions. However, by the
early 1900s "The ɹnanciers were investing more and more in
American industry. They were beginning to acquire some of the
same interests in tariʃs, aggressive foreign policies, and export
drives ... With manufacturing now playing a new pivotal role in the
plans of the major investors in both banks and railroads, a switch of
sentiment on the tariʃ was inevitable."21
This analysis highlights the role of commerce and helps to explain
the gigantic amounts of cash involved in shaping policy today. The
Center for Responsive Politics is the most respected nonproɹt
research group, tracking elections and lobbying data, and organizing
it by candidate, party, industry, or company. The totals are pretty
stupefying—in the 2012 US presidential race, Obama's campaign
and allied groups spent a total of over $964 million, while Romney
and allies spent about $1.14 billion.22 In the 2014 congressional
race, the overall cost of campaigns for the House was $1 billion,
with the Republicans leading the Democrats somewhat; in the
Senate race, $608 million was spent on far fewer campaigns, with a
narrower GOP edge.23 The Republican edge in money may have
been reɻected in their majorities in both congressional chambers,
though Romney's small edge didn't avail him.
Much of the huge increase in political spending is channeled
through Super PACs, entities legalized by the now-infamous Citizens
United Supreme Court decision, which allows corporations or unions
the ability to spend unlimited amounts supporting candidates
through these Political Action Committees, provided they do not
oɽcially coordinate policy.24 Notably, the business news service
Bloomberg's 2015 poll found that by large margins, Americans

oppose the Citizens United decision that allowed these Super PACs
—with 78 percent calling it a bad decision that ought to be
overturned, and 17 percent saying it was a good decision.25 The
conservative Wall Street Journal conɹrms Ferguson's investor theory,
quoting the head of a pro-Ted Cruz Super PAC who openly states:
"The 
savviest 
investors—in 
and 
out 
of 
politics—demand
performance metrics and accountability."26
Beyond the world of campaign funding, consider lobbying, the
process of trying to encourage, persuade or bully political ɹgures
into taking diʃerent positions. Lobbying has become an extremely
unpopular occupation, usually on the expectation that so much
additional money behind one side of an argument will trump
anything a regular constituent says, and given the numbers you can
see why. The highest lobbying spenders for 2015 are led,
unsurprisingly, by the US Chamber of Commerce, the largest of the
business organizations (see Chapter 1). The Chamber spent a
whopping $64 million in that year, while the National Association
of Manufacturers itself spent $14 million and the Business
Roundtable, another business group made up of the CEOs of the
largest 100 US companies, spent $14 million also.27 Several larger
corporations also spend tens of millions individually. Notably, no
labor union cracks the top twenty. The highest spending sectors of
the economy were FIRE (ɹnance, insurance, and real estate) at a
towering $352 million in 2015, health services at $381 million and
communications with $281 million. Labor's total for the year: $33
million.28 This wild imbalance in access to money for political
investment is one reason that Roger Martin wrote in Harvard
Business Review that "Labor is on its own politically in the 21st
century."29
While most political science specialists still prefer to see politics
as about a debate of ideas, with decisions made by various
"majoritarian" processes where all citizens and groups are
represented, some researchers are more savvy. Professor of Politics
Martin Gilens ran a giant mathematical analysis of nearly 2000
national surveys that classiɹed respondents by income, ɹnding the:

... impact of average citizens' "preferences" to be at "a
nonsigniɹcant, near-zero level ..." Not only do ordinary citizens
not have uniquely substantial power over policy decisions; they
have little or no independent inɻuence on policy at all ... When a
majority of citizens disagrees with economic elites or with
organized interests, they usually lose. Moreover, because of the
strong status quo bias built into the U.S. political system, even
when fairly large majorities of Americans favor policy change,
they generally do not get it.30
While the US is something of a paradise for political spending,
political investment is deɹnitively not limited to that country or the
developed world. Global experience in recent times often conforms
to this pattern; although always with unique political conditions. In
China, the government remains authoritarian and outwardly
committed to its Communist rhetoric, but since the late 1970s the
country has trended toward capitalism along with the rest of the
world in the neoliberal period. However, China's government is
independent and strong enough to have insisted on policies that
actually develop the country, from technology sharing by companies
seeking market access to maintaining a cheap currency to boost
exports.
But as the country's double-digit economic growth rate continued
through the decades, huge private fortunes have arisen and the
country has taken on more characteristics of market dominance of
politics. Global CEOs are actively solicited for advice by the Chinese
president, even publicly, and private investment has continued even
as China's economy has recently cooled, and mobile capital allows
lower value-added manufacturing to move to Indonesia and
Bangladesh.31 Indeed, China's own legislature is increasingly
dominated by the country's wealthy—The New York Times reports
that "Among the 1,271 richest Chinese people tracked by the
Shanghai-based Hurun Report, a record 203, or more than one in
seven, are delegates to the nation's Parliament or its advisory
body."32 Although the Congress is a rubber stamp for the ruling

Party, "the concentration of wealth in its ranks reɻects the growing
inɻuence of the rich in Chinese politics. This is no accident. Starting
more than a decade ago, the Communist Party, founded to empower
workers and peasants and quash the capitalist class, began to
welcome wealthy members to broaden its appeal and buttress its
authority."
The pattern continues next door in Hong Kong, the former British
Imperial possession and longtime base for Western trade with China.
A part of China since 1999, the local business elite has consistently
sided with the mainland government's preselection of which
candidates will be allowed to run for oɽce in Hong Kong.33 Indeed,
they 
stage 
counterdemonstrations 
against 
those 
demanding
democracy, in which The Times reports that "Many participants
brought along their Indonesian and Filipino domestic helpers ...
with some given Chinese ɻags to wave."
Each case is unique in its details and in many instances the right-
wing view of this issue, based on "crony capitalism," is relevant.
Crony capitalism describes a nominal market economy, but one with
monopoly, oligopoly or other concentrated structures, because
industries were put in the hands of allies or "cronies" of the state
regime. A classic case is that of Carlos Slim, the Mexican billionaire,
whose telecom corporations are proɹled in The Wall Street Journal:
"His Telefonos de Mexico SAB and its cellphone aɽliate Telcel have
92% of all ɹxed-lines and 73% of all cellphones. As Mr. Rockefeller
did before him, Mr. Slim has accumulated so much power that he is
considered untouchable in his native land, a force as great as the
state itself."34
The Age of Friedman has changed Mexico:
Monopolies have long been a feature of Mexico's economy. But in
the past, politicians acted as a brake on big business to ensure
that the business class didn't threaten their power. But political
control faded in the 1990s with the privatization of much of the
economy ... Congress routinely kills legislation that threatens his

interests, and his ɹrms account for a chunk of the nation's
advertising revenue, making the media reluctant to criticize him.
The New York Times also wrote that "Mr. Slim's style of wealth
accumulation is not rare in modern Mexico. From television to
tortillas, vast swaths of the Mexican economy are controlled by
monopolies or oligopolies. Many of Mexico's billionaires were
created by the government during the privatization of state-owned
companies in the 1990s."35
However, the inevitable usage of the quite legitimate "crony
capitalism" concept is as an opportunistic tool to keep focus oʃ the
power of money and market share. As Chapter 1 explores
extensively, all historical evidence shows that capital concentrates
with economic growth and monopolies arise in free-market settings,
quite consistently. The pre-regulation and pre-progressive taxation
era of the Gilded Age shows pure capitalism clearly, and its gigantic
nationwide monopolies far from an era of freedom from the ravages
of power. So in many markets, the oligopoly or monopoly may
indeed arise directly from government privatization that places an
existing state monopoly in the hands of a crony of the regime, as in
the case of the billionaire Slim or the Russian "oligarchy" of post-
Soviet monopolists. But at least as often, markets get to their
towering heights of monopoly all on their own—indeed, Slim
himself, while clearly a giant beneɹciary of shady government asset
sales in the "crony" model, was born wealthy and held a good deal
of cash at the right moment, when Mexico's phone system was
privatized in the 1980s at the beginning of the Age of Friedman.36
He has since played an aggressive monopoly game, cornering
markets and crushing competitors within the marketplace. The
Journal refers in passing to Rockefeller's "stranglehold on reɹning
oil" as a parallel to Slim—a free-market monopoly for anyone
willing to open their eyes.
These general instances are illustrative, but the investment
perspective shows its mettle best in Ferguson's analysis of the rise of
the New Deal in capitalist America. The New Deal was the program

for economic recovery during the endless and grinding conditions of
the Great Depression of the 1930s. The series of major policy
changes dating from that time includes the creation of Social
Security, the public pension system for the elderly and disabled; the
National Labor Relations Act, which essentially legalized unions and
the 
legitimacy 
of 
collective 
bargaining 
for 
workers; 
the
establishment of a national minimum wage, setting a ɻoor under
worker earnings; the Glass-Steagall Act, which broke oʃ risky
investment banking from the commercial banking ɹeld that held
Americans' deposits; deɹcit-spending employment programs and
other progressive social policies. The rise of those social policies—
which are extremely popular—and eventually their decline, are all
driven by decisions and strategic maneuvers of coalitions of political
investors in shifting economic conditions.
Ferguson observed that at the end of World War I, Wall Street
split from industry over the issues of the tariʃ. Meanwhile, labor
unions had been almost totally crushed before World War I and
were crushed again after the war. But in the Depression, labor
roared back to life amid "epic class conɻicts" and in time became a
signiɹcant political actor.37 While some employers reacted with the
usual aggressive tactics, some ɹrms that were relatively capital-
intensive rather than labor-intensive were prepared to accept labor
unions among their smaller, more professional workforces. In the
1930s, the more capital-intensive corporations and the free-trade-
oriented Wall Street banks were prepared to form an alliance, in
which organized labor with its own resources could participate as a
political investor. This new matrix made up the New Deal coalition:
"World War I disrupted these cozy relations between American
industry and ɹnance ... while none of them were pro-union they
preferred to conciliate rather than to repress their workforce."38
Ferguson's point is that the unusual combination of gigantic
corporations and successful unions can be understood with an
investment-based analysis.
But most investor coalitions, just like political ones, can break
apart and change shape as the broader economy and society evolve,

and indeed the programs of the New Deal have been in pronounced
decline since the late 1970s, along with parallel programs around
the world. This trend has dominated the Age of Friedman and its
neoliberal policy, itself arising from shifting investors as well as the
failure of the New Deal to take radical steps, like removing the
tremendous economic power of concentrated rich classes and their
companies.

The New Deal, Dealt
The New Deal and other public programs of the era, like the Great
Society measures of the 1960s such as Medicare and Medicaid, and
the environmental legislation of the 1970s, meant that rich families
and their large corporations faced far higher tax rates, confronted
signiɹcantly tighter regulations on their businesses, had their
monopoly-making mergers blocked and mostly had to accept the
legal existence of labor unions. But the rich and their corporate
property kept their power, through retaining diminished but still
potent concentrated fortunes and market shares. This meant that the
New Deal, despite rhetoric from some of its supporters and
opponents alike, was no break from capitalism. This limited reform-
based approach contained the seeds of its own destruction, for by
leaving the power of wealth and big business alive, these opponents
of New Deal programs could work against them, and over decades
have successfully restored many of the old conditions of the Gilded
Age in our neoliberal era.
During the New Deal, American business partially accepted
expanded government and labor organization, but also bided its
time under the postwar liberal period, maintaining more friendly
ideas in circulation until conditions could be shifted in their favor.
New York University history professor Kim Phillips-Fein's Invisible
Hands does an impeccable job telling the story, following inɻuential
businessmen of the period, for example at GE. General Electric came
into existence as a free-market monopoly, "Morganized" from
several merged appliance ɹrms by Wall Street titan J.P. Morgan (see
Chapter 1). GE was among those global market-leading, capital-
heavy corporations that was willing to accommodate its relatively
small labor force when it demanded union recognition and
ultimately supported the New Deal.
However, the great strike wave that followed World War II shook
GE's management, especially the 1946 electrician's strike, as
Phillips-Fein describes: "In some of the striking communities, for

much of the strike, the workers essentially controlled access to the
plants. Hundreds of workers encircled the factories in long picket
lines, refusing access to white-collar and management employees
and allowing only limited numbers of maintenance men through the
lines."39 This kind of strike action is related to union tactics like
plant occupation or "sit-down strikes," where a community-
supported labor force takes control of the capital they work with,
and tends to be far more alarming to ɹrms like GE, many of which
turned from being New Deal advocates to avowed opponents.
Certainly the corporate organizations of the time, like the big-
industry National Association of Manufacturers, remained strongly
opposed.
This was immediately indicated by labor legislation, which even
in this era of relative union strength put several basic union tools
outside the law. In the immediate aftermath of the postwar strike
wave, Congress overrode Truman's veto in passing the Taft-Hartley
Act, which outlawed sympathy strikes (strike action taken by one
union to support unions in another), mandated that supervisors and
foremen be kept out of shop bargaining units, and other union-
weakening policies. The National Labor Relations Board, created to
adjudicate union elections, itself ruled under the Eisenhower
administration that "employers had the right to hold 'captive
audience' meetings during working hours, at which managers could
try to persuade workers not to vote for a union; in the past,
employers had been obliged to provide union organizers with equal
time to speak to employees."40
The corporate world itself separately developed new methods,
many of them part of the so-called "Mohawk Valley Formula,"
named for the location of a failed strike against Remington Rand.
Elements of the formula include the traditional threat of violence
and stockpiling of weapons by the company, but rather than
outright violence newer techniques were used, like insulting labor
organizers as disloyal, or threatening to close or move if the union
wins, and especially setting up groups of workers sympathetic to the
company to publicly oppose the union, but without revealing the

role of the company as the funder. These dirty corporate playbooks
drove the course of the US labor movement's "union density," the
proportion of its workforce organized into a collective bargaining
unit. It peaked in 1954 at 33.5 percent and has declined ever
since.41
But less appreciated among the main tools of the business world
to undermine unions and the New Deal was the cultivation of
intellectuals. Intellectuals and academics who considered wealth not
to be a source of power, but willing instead to oppose the power of
unions and government programs, found themselves receiving
signiɹcant support. Their work would encourage skeptical
Americans and Europeans to forget their suspicion of concentrated
wealth and see power only in its enemies. One important ɹgure in
this use of conservative intellectuals by business was Harold
Luhnow, a Kansas City businessman. His company's well-endowed
philanthropic trust, the Volker Fund, fully funded Friedrich Hayek's
salary over his ten-year tenure at the University of Chicago. The
Mont Perelin society, the preeminent libertarian think tank, had its
academic participants' travel costs paid by the Fund and Milton
Friedman's book Capitalism and Freedom, which this book is a
response to, was based on lectures by Friedman it had sponsored.42
This history is painfully ironic, considering that Friedman himself
argued that New Deal programs like Social Security arose because
liberal intellectuals propagandized the public into supporting them,
manipulating people into getting behind Big Government. But in
reality, a huge grassroots movement during the Great Depression,
when millions were robbed of their own security in the market, was
the origin of the program.43 If Friedman wanted to see a social
movement driven by intellectuals with a hidden personal
motivation, he could have looked at his own neoliberal campaign.
As Phillips-Fein summarizes, "It is not clear that the romantic,
political free-market approach of the Mont Perelin Society would
have survived without the support of businessmen."44
But crucially, the essential support from business was kept quiet,
to obscure the social elements these intellectuals worked for. Hayek

wrote to Luhnow that:
... any eʃort in the sphere of ideas, if it is to be eʃective, must
avoid even the appearance of being dependent on any material
interests, and for that reason we have been careful not to include
in the list of persons originally invited, anyone, however
sympathetic with our aims, who might be thought by the public
to represent speciɹc interests.
In fact, the record shows that across the most conservative
institutions created in this period, from the right-wing National
Review magazine to the American Enterprise Institute to the Mont
Perelin Society, "All of these organizations relied on the
contributions of businessmen," often secretly.45 The Heritage
Foundation was created with money from the right-wing Coors beer
family, while the energy industry's Koch brothers proudly founded
the arch-libertarian Cato Institute (originally the Charles Koch
Foundation).
This business community strategy of ɹghting on all fronts—
government, 
business 
investments, 
media 
and 
building 
an
intellectual rationale—was explicitly thought out in a particularly
important but almost unknown document, the "Powell memo." The
1971 document, actually titled "Attack on American Free Enterprise
System," was written by Lewis Powell, a prominent attorney, for his
friend Eugene Sydnor, the head of the Education Committee for the
US Chamber of Commerce. Powell suggested in the memo, marked
"Conɹdential" but later leaked, that the pressures on business in the
early 1970s had become too great to tolerate, and business would
have to use its resources to organize and ɹght back.46 Because so
many of its proposals came to pass, and since it represents an
insider view of corporate organization and political planning, it
deserves to be quoted at length.
Powell began "No thoughtful person can question that the
American economic system is under broad attack," but insisted "We
are not dealing with sporadic or isolated attacks from a relatively
few extremists or even from the minority socialist cadre. Rather, the

assault on the enterprise system is broadly based ..." After praising
the work of Friedman, Powell condemns "economic illiteracy,"
adding "This setting of the 'rich' against the 'poor,' of business
against the people, is the cheapest and most dangerous kind of
politics." Powell ought to have consulted Madison, Smith or Martin
Luther King about faction and class conɻict.
Based on this survey of the situation, Powell's core message was
"the time has come ... for the wisdom, ingenuity and resources of
American business to be marshalled against those who would
destroy it ... This involves far more than an increased emphasis on
'public relations' or 'governmental aʃairs'—two areas in which
corporations have long invested substantial sums." Turning to the
"Possible Role of the Chamber of Commerce," Powell explicitly
backed up the arguments reviewed in Chapter 1 about business
organizing 
trade 
bodies, 
while 
ruthlessly 
ɹghting 
worker
organization. "Strength lies in organization, in careful long-range
planning and implementation, in consistency of action over an
indeɹnite period of years, and in the political power available only
through united action and national organizations."
Focusing on the college campuses as "the single most dynamic
source" of opposition to capitalism, Powell not only attributes this
in part to the freewheeling inquiry required on campus, but also
suggests that faculty who "are unsympathetic to the enterprise
system ... are often personally attractive and magnetic; they are
stimulating teachers, and their controversy attracts student
following; they are proliɹc writers and lecturers; they author many
of the textbooks, and they exert enormous inɻuence." The attractive
and magnetic part is very, very true. But Powell has a trump card:
the people actually in charge of colleges are sympathetic. "The
boards of trustees of our universities overwhelmingly are composed
of men and women who are leaders in the system."
Asking "What Can Be Done About the Public?" Powell suggests
"The national television networks should be monitored in the same
way that textbooks should be kept under constant surveillance." He
continues,

"The average member of the public thinks of 'business' as an
impersonal corporate entity, owned by the very rich and managed
by over-paid executives ... It is time for American business—
which has demonstrated the greatest capacity in all history to
produce and to inɻuence consumer decisions—to apply their
talents vigorously to the preservation of the system itself."
Politically, Powell is consistent: "There should not be the slightest
hesitation to press vigorously in all political arenas for support of
the enterprise system. Nor should there be reluctance to penalize
politically those who oppose it." But most relevant for the subject of
this book are Powell's comments on the system's "Relationship to
Freedom ... The threat to the free enterprise system is not merely a
matter of economics. It is also a threat to individual freedom ... the
only alternatives to free enterprise are varying degrees of
bureaucratic regulation of individual freedom." The common claim
that "there is no alternative" to capitalism, except a loss of freedom,
will be explored in Chapter 5.
Weeks after preparing the memo for the Chamber, Powell was
appointed to the US Supreme Court. But even as he wrote, the
political turning point approached. The major strategic pivot of the
corporate world and elite families away from the postwar "liberal
consensus" of the New Deal era occurred in the mid- to late-
seventies, when inɻation reached high levels and corporate
proɹtability fell. The rising prices reɻected a long list of social
forces, but labor unions' wage-increasing strikes were blamed and
demonization of them rose in media. At the same time, industrial
proɹtability fell with the recovery of the industrial economies of
Japan and German-centered Europe after World War II, which
meant more competition for global sales. Combined with the labor
antagonism and what Businessweek called "America's Growing
Antibusiness Mood," the business world decisively shifted from
grudging New Deal acceptance and labor accommodation, to
pursuing the goals of the Powell memo.47 Beside a new emphasis on
global production and world capital mobility, it meant support for
neoliberal policy.

President Reagan entered oɽce after a campaign aggressively
funded by the corporate world to bring labor, inɻation and
government social programs into line. A Wall Street Journal survey
reported a whopping 87 percent of the CEOs of big corporations
supported Reagan, a signiɹcantly higher rate of support than he
received from small ɹrms.48 And no wonder, for the neoliberal
economic policies of his conservative administration were based
directly on the work of those intellectuals that business had
supported with their rich resources for years. Reagan's staʃ handed
out a 1000-page Heritage Foundation policy program to his Cabinet
in its ɹrst meeting, he spoke at AEI conventions and while speaking
at a conservative political dinner, "He made special mention of his
gratitude to Friedrich von Hayek, Milton Friedman, and Ludwig von
Mises ... for their intellectual acuity in dark times," as Phillips-Fein
recounts.49
Implementing these policies in the "Age of Friedman" that
followed the Reagan revolution has taken diʃerent forms—from
deregulation to the inequality-boosting tax cuts referred to in
Chapter 1. As social programs were cut back globally, the term
"austerity" came into increasing use to describe the lowered levels
of social supports and public goods that government could provide.
Some eʃects of austerity are simple, like the cutbacks on social
safety net programs like food stamps. As Reagan's tax cuts for the
richest households and their corporations created huge budget
deɹcits, budgets got balanced not by retaxing the rich, or cutting
the military spending we use to overthrow pesky foreign
governments, but by cutting social supports. When the US Congress
cut the food stamp program by $5 billion, a modest amount by
national standards, it meant a reduction in the monthly total
received to terribly low amounts, a big deal considering that one in
seven Americans used the program at the time and almost half of
recipients were children.50 The eʃects damage poor neighborhoods
as well, since with less money to spend, stamp recipients buy less
from local stores, a ripple eʃect in the economy sometimes called
the "multiplier." Much like when a major employer closes and other

businesses feel the echo in the lower spending by laid-oʃ workers
that follows, business or government investments tend to have
"knock-on" eʃects that magnify the impacts of their decisions.
The clearest place to see this is in health. Public Health expert
David Stuckler and Professor of Medicine Sanjay Basu document the
ramiɹcations of austerity in public health programs in their
outstanding book The Body Economic. Among their careful data
analysis is a comparison of health outcomes in Iceland and Greece.
When Iceland's banks went bankrupt in the world ɹnancial crisis of
2008, the IMF stuck to the neoliberal script and was willing to
extend emergency loans only on terms of extreme austerity—
Iceland's public spending was to be cut by a dramatic 15 percent of
GDP, in order to aʃord payments to the banks' creditors equal to
half of Iceland's gross income for several years.51 Almost
unbelievably, the IMF designated healthcare a "luxury good," but
Iceland's government put it to a vote. In a 2010 referendum the
people of Iceland voted 93 percent against the IMF austerity
program to pay oʃ the international creditors of the banks' risky
investments.52
Iceland did the opposite of economists' demands:
By ɹrst rejecting the IMF's plan for radical austerity, it protected a
modern-day equivalent of the New Deal ... In 2007, Iceland's
government spending as a fraction of GDP was 42.3 percent. This
increased to 57.7 percent in 2008 ... This increase didn't lead to
inɻation, runaway debt that has been impossible to pay back, or
foreign dependency—the predicted disasters that austerity
advocates claim will result from stimulus programs.
Iceland expanded social support programs of public housing, job
retention and debt relief for small businesses, and its health
spending rose, to a quarter of GDP in 2009.53
The success story of Iceland's rejection of austerity is contrasted
by Stuckler and Basu with the tragedy of Greece at the same time. In
Greece, an even more drastic IMF bailout was oʃered, but unlike in

Iceland, the birthplace of democracy canceled a planned public
referendum on austerity. The cuts were heinous: the IMF demanded
that public health spending drop to 6 percent of GDP to free up
budget money to repay foreign banks and lenders, while
governments supporting the IMF, like Germany, typically spend
around 10 percent of GDP on health.54 In a horrifying plunge,
Greece went from a lower-rung developed country to health
conditions more common in the developing world, with OECD data
showing a 40 percent spike in infant mortality and an almost 50
percent jump in unmet healthcare needs. Indeed, "The Health
Ministry continued to avoid collecting and publicly disclosing many
standard health statistics."55
Crucially, with Greece forced into austerity after passing on
democracy, it did not start getting out of debt. In fact, as its
economy slowed and tilted into recession under austerity, its debt-
to-GDP ratio rose. This lead the IMF to actually assign its economists
to recalculate its assumed multiplier values, ɹnding a value higher
than one, meaning that spending can stimulate the economy, in line
with the Icelandic experience.56
This austerity applies worldwide, as global ɹnancial institutions
like the IMF still put health spending on the chopping block as soon
as a country requires a bailout after some dictator loots its assets.
The legacy of this aggressive budget balancing at the expense of the
poor countries can blow back on the rest of the world—many
observers noted that the World Health Organization, a UN body,
was slow in its response to the 2014 Ebola outbreak in western
Africa. The New York Times reported that "The W.H.O ... has been
badly weakened by budget cuts in recent years, hobbling its ability
to respond in parts of the world that need it most ... The disease
spread for months before being detected because much of the work
of spotting outbreaks was left to desperately poor countries ill
prepared for the task."57 The WHO was able to manage large health
crises like SARS in China, Ebola in the Congo and plague in India,
but then "the global ɹnancial crisis struck. The W.H.O. had to cut
nearly $1 billion from its proposed two-year budget, which today

stands at $3.98 billion ... The whims of donors also greatly
inɻuenced the W.H.O.'s agenda, with gifts, often to advance
individual causes, far surpassing dues from member nations." More
alarmingly, 
the 
WHO's 
"epidemic 
and 
pandemic 
response
department" was dissolved and its components spread to other WHO
bodies. Austerity plainly contributed to the Ebola epidemic, which
killed thousands and terriɹed the world.
With austerity in health and education causing such painful direct
and side-eʃect costs, where else can government turn to ɹx the
budget hole created by the waves of upper-income tax cuts? A 2014
public poll by the Harris agency found that it can be hard to decide
—their report was titled "What to Cut when Majorities of Americans
Support Most Major Government Services?" They found over 75
percent of the public supported Medicaid, environmental protection
and defense, and over 85 percent supported social security, crime
ɹghting and Medicare.58 Harris also found that support for these
programs has increased slightly over the last few years. This pattern
of support for safety nets and public goods programs associated with
the New Deal period is common globally, but all these programs
(except defense) are aggressively targeted for further austerity,
before and after the rise of Trump.

Shadow Puppets
Today's money-centered, neoliberal world oʃers endless further
examples of the power of wealthy social elements and concentrated
markets to shape political events, from Europe to Asia to Latin
America. The history of this phenomenon in the developing world
will make up the next section. But for now, the incredibly thorough
degree of control of capital in aʃairs of state, and the contrary fact
that it is still not all-powerful, should be explored. And for an
emblematic case, the US is still the ideal test setting, famous
globally for its limited and declining controls on how cash shapes
politics. Recent years have shown the US House of Representatives,
the lower chamber of the American legislature, to be a particularly
gross showcase.
Consider the Boehner resignation. House Speaker John Boehner
resigned his position after being the face of the congressional
Republicans' aggressive eʃorts to undo Obamacare, the 2013
government shutdown and demands for aggressive spending cuts.59
But while there was much discussion of the political maneuvering,
as usual little attention went to the crucial and shifting role of
corporate America, to whom the GOP owes its congressional
majorities. The surprising events leading to the Ayn Rand-reading
"moderate" Paul Ryan becoming Speaker reveals the degree to
which the US Congress is a ruling-class plaything.
The Tea Party was founded by Koch brother money and Fox News
free publicity—the conservative Wall Street Journal reported that
"Business groups spent millions of dollars on the [2010] mid-term
elections to help secure a GOP majority in Congress," while the
more liberal Washington Post's rendering was "business groups have
helped Boehner and his counterparts in the Senate raise millions of
dollars to put Republicans in oɽce, including the 2010 election of
tea party lawmakers who have now roiled the GOP."60 Since its
origin, the Tea Party's backers hoped to use an aggressive, talk-radio
fed constituency and rowdy House members as momentum to

continue the long project of overturning the remains of the New
Deal and Great Society programs—progressive taxation on the rich,
Social Security, Medicare and industrial regulation.61
But it's not easy being a political puppeteer—business thought it
could control the Tea Party, but it turned out it can't. The Journal
observes that "the rebellious wing" of the Party has refused to carry
out even basic legislative functions, which meant that not only were
the New Deal programs and tax levels under the ax, but also "the
top legislative priorities of large American companies were thrown
into deeper disarray."62 This was not the plan. Increasingly rabid
GOP primary elections, fed by paranoid right-wing media, usually
happen prior to the giant corporate funding that seals the deal in
the general elections. This resulted in a growing "Freedom
Caucus"—the 
current 
Tea 
Party-derived 
wing 
of 
GOP
representatives. While this wing is archconservative, its "anti-
elitism" has run up against business priorities, in a way corporate
mega-donors hadn't expected.
Beside a willingness to ɻirt repeatedly with government
shutdowns and even debt defaults, which horrify businesses and
most especially Wall Street, the caucus' free-market ideology led to
business defeats like defunding the Export-Import Bank. The Bank
extends credit to foreign purchasers of US-made products and
services, serving to boost exports and corporate sales. Corporate
America doesn't take such misbehavior lying down, no more from
Republicans it paid to elect than from Democrats it also paid to
elect. In a political system where lobbyists openly refer to "investing
in" candidates and having "buyer's remorse" when they sometimes
disobey, resources will be put into action.63
And so it was that in Alabama in October 2013, the Chamber and
other business ɹrms started spending to defeat Tea Party candidates,
after having spent so much to create and install them.64 In a special
primary runoʃ pitting a Chamber-backed business candidate against
a 
shutdown-supporting 
incumbent, 
the 
Chamber's 
"post-
government-shutdown eʃort to derail Tea Party candidates" kicked
into high gear. Giant corporations like Caterpillar, Pɹzer, BASF and

AT&T, along with large industry groups like the National Retail
Federation (which includes Walmart), all essentially conceded they
made a mistake with the 2010 crop and pushed back toward more
traditional pro-corporate conservatism.
The US Chamber decided on which candidates to support in part
on whether they voted to end the shutdown.65 Corporate America
succeeded in some House races and failed in others, as business
funding competed with the extreme "libertarian ideology" a
Chamber sympathizer complained of, along with the fact that
"extreme conservatives tend to be more reliable voters," as The New
York Times suggested.66 This mixed record isn't expected to deter
the Chamber and other business groups—as Bloomberg Businessweek
reported, "The chamber's goal is to send a message to House
Republicans that those who oppose its agenda will face political
consequences."67
All this meant that the 2014 "midterm elections were billed as a
resurrection of sorts for the party establishment after the Chamber
of Commerce and other groups, aligned with the business wing of
the party, repelled conservative challenges," as The Wall Street
Journal put it. The Chamber spent $50 million, a gigantic amount
for a congressional election year.68 This especially visible control of
the republic by money was a major contributor to the unpredictable
campaigns of 2016, including the Sanders and Trump campaigns.
Through this whole period of major swings in the political
investments of the business world, Speaker Boehner "was seen by
many in the business community as a bulwark against tea-party
excesses," as the business press put it. So the Speaker's departure,
lamented by hugely powerful business groups like the US Chamber
of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers, threw
a wrench into elite eʃorts to control the Republic.69 For while
Boehner's replacement was the extreme anti-New Deal but pro-
stability Congressman Paul Ryan, business media like the Journal
watched apprehensively the growing list of giant demands made by
the Freedom Caucus. It included numerous "policy promises" from
the Speaker, but most interesting from the point of view of business

control, Speaker candidate Kevin McCarthy before his withdrawal
"pledged to defend any GOP incumbent against possible campaign
attacks from outside groups, including the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce."70
Government shutdowns are becoming part of the Tea Party era of
US governance and arise each time a new funding bill or a debt-
ceiling increase are needed. Shutdowns are treated as theater by the
extreme GOP, with buʃoons like Senator Ted Cruz playing to TV
audiences as standing on anti-government principle. But shutdowns
are enormously disruptive and expensive, and threats to allow a
default on public debt are far worse—Fox News viewers are often
unaware that US government bonds, which the Treasury
Department issues to borrow money, are the cornerstone of the
national and indeed global ɹnancial systems, owing to their
historically negligible risk of default. But in the 2013 shutdown, the
rating agency Fitch put US bonds on "rating watch negative,"
meaning they might be downgraded from their impeccable AAA
status.71 Another main agency, Standard & Poor's, actually
downgraded US debt to AA after the 2011 crisis. These dramatic
steps sent waves through the system, as the millions of transactions
based on the bonds and related instruments abruptly seemed less
safe. The broader eʃect is to inject new uncertainty into an already
jittery global marketplace. For this reason, The New York Times
described "fear" on Wall Street of another disruptive shutdown,
while The Wall Street Journal reported that the 2013 shutdown "cut
between two-tenths and six-tenths of a percentage point from real
GDP in that year's fourth quarter, according to government and
private estimates."72
Ryan has a 93-percent legislation rating from the US Chamber,
which heartily approved his 2015 budget proposal, which would
have made over a trillion dollars in cuts from welfare, food stamps
and other safety net programs, cut other domestic programs by a
half-trillion dollars, repealed the Aʃordable Care Act and created a
special "emergency" war fund to shield the Pentagon from spending
caps.73 But Ryan's history of advocating immigration reform still put

him under a cloud with Freedom Caucus, which couldn't bring 80
percent of its membership to agree to vote for him.74
The 2016 election, dominated by the elevation to power of idiot
racist TV ham Donald Trump, is a reaction against this reign of
campaign cash, even while the Journal reported that "Corporations
Bet on GOP Senate Control," as "corporate PACs plowed $3 million
into the campaigns of Republican candidates ... 15 times as much as
they contributed to Democrats in those same races ... Corporations
generally split their PAC money fairly evenly between Republicans
and Democrats, with a slight majority of donations going to the side
that is winning."75 So while "Corporations are extremely cautious in
how they dole out campaign funds," in the most competitive Senate
races Corporate America made bolder moves, as "business PACs
directed 99% of their donations to the Republican candidate."
But while the Chamber leans heavily Republican in recent races,
there was a major exception in 2016 as the CRP reports the US
Chamber gave $13,865 to Clinton's campaign, while a pitiful $520
is recorded as being donated to Trump.76 This of course reɻects the
highly unconventional Republican candidate and Clinton's own
conservative, pro-business record, despite New Deal aʃectations
during the primary to fend oʃ Senator Sanders. But with Clinton's
loss we must confront the question of how the Chamber was
thwarted in this staggering race, a question debated with an
enormous level of passion and rather little evidence-based
argument.
To see how this episode is a harbinger of rage at globalization and
the deepening inequality seen in the current neoliberal period of
global economic policy, consider the surprising Brexit vote, in which
the areas of the UK voting most strongly for withdrawing from the
European Union were those most hurt by aggressive austerity cuts to
social supports under David Cameron's Conservative government.77
Indeed, the correlation of Vote Leave turnout and ɹscal cuts to
satisfy austerity budget-tightening appears to be consistent even
down to the ward level within UK cities. "Leave" voters' anger at
their economic decline, plus a very real racist resentment of East

European EU citizens' increasing immigration, led them to lash out
by choosing the kick-the-Establishment-in-the-balls option, even
though that is likely to make their predicament signiɹcantly worse.
As will the Trump administration, for reasons reviewed below.
Perhaps ɹttingly, longtime rebellious writers on the political Left
have most clearly resolved this, like Ajay Singh Chaudhary, who
compared American voters to those in Germany, where voters "have
an actual Left to ɻee to."78 The great socialist writer Mike Davis
captured the mood among marooned blue-collar towns (and the
evangelicals who stuck with a serial divorcee and sex-assaulting
candidate), which "wanted change in Washington at any price, even
if it meant putting a suicide bomber in the White House."79 Labor
scholar and former TransAfrica Forum president Bill Fletcher
usefully observes that Trump ran on opposition to globalization and
immigration, rather than the broader neoliberal program of
deregulation and tax cuts, which Trump indeed celebrated.80
The press was reporting Clinton's cash edge throughout 2016,
even toward the end when Clinton's Super PAC had three times as
much cash on hand as Trump's, which indeed held only about a
third of what previous GOP nominee Mitt Romney had on hand at
the same time in 2012.81 But a detailed review suggests how Trump
was able to cope with signiɹcantly less campaign cash than
Clinton's team. Using the CRP data, we can conɹrm Clinton's major
fundraising superiority, with a total of over $687 million raised,
relative to Trump's $307 million.82
Digging into the Center's expenditures data for the White House
campaigns, a major discrepancy emerges. Clinton spent just under
half her campaign and PAC budgets on media—48.9 percent of the
campaign total, coming to a giant $125 million.83 But Trump's
campaign spent only 37.8 percent of its budget, $30.4 million, on
media.84 And yet who would argue that Trump was under-featured
on US media during the campaign? The diʃerence is made up of
"earned" media, the bizarre political term for coverage of a
candidate generated by independent media sources, like an article

or TV segment covering the candidacy, but without the campaign
purchasing it.
This earned media is no small thing—Trump's continuous
coverage was worth over $2 billion by media ɹrm estimates.85 The
value of earned TV and radio time is usually larger than what a
candidate spends on air time, but Trump's gigantic media exposure
left him with two and half times the earned media value Clinton
had. That goes a long way toward making up for Trump's lower
cash-on-hand and aids the money-driven politics thesis somewhat:
while Trump had less money, he clearly had other material
resources, in this case, his preexisting TV celebrity and ability to
outrageous statement his way onto cable TV on an hourly basis.
Indeed, as the world fears its uncertain future coping with the
Trump administration, it could be said that being a born-rich
billionaire with a reality TV persona, Trump is a deɹnitively
capitalist ɹgure.
These ugly stories speak to the liabilities of an investment-based
electoral system. But as bad as it looks within the developed world,
the Third World story is the more revealing one, as far as the value
of human life in the eyes of concentrated capital.

Touché Pinochet
This chapter is focused on political freedom, which Friedman said
arises from the economic freedom of the market. To test this, it's
important to consider the record of the developed countries'
dealings with the large majority of the world's peoples, who live in
the developing world. These dramatically diverse societies, which
make up most of the "Global South" geographically and often still
referred to as the Third World, have little in common except being
subject to half a millennium of global control and colonialism by the
"West"—primarily Western Europe, later joined by the US and
Japan. Far beyond the standard conquering and occupying that are
mainstays of human history, these were worldwide systems of
control treating subject countries as sources for resource extraction,
as captive markets that had to buy imported goods from the colonial
power and as chess pieces in the competition among the Western
imperial powers.
Recognition of this history in the Western world is low, outside of
experts and political radicals, but the documentary record is
extensive. Globally prominent scientist and social critic Noam
Chomsky observed in his book Year 501 that the year 1992:
... brings to an end the 500th year of the Old World Order,
sometimes called the Colombian era of world history ... The
major theme of this Old World Order was a confrontation
between the conquerors and the conquered on a global scale. It
has taken various forms, and been given diʃerent names:
imperialism, neocolonialism ... Or, more simply, Europe's
conquest of the world. By the term "Europe," we include the
European-settled colonies, one of which now leads the crusade ...
Japan was one of the few parts of the South to escape conquest
and, perhaps, not coincidentally, to join the core, with some of its
former colonies in its wake.86

This 500-year period saw great imperial powers like Britain, France,
Spain, Portugal, Holland, Italy, Belgium and Germany, outright
invade or sometimes swindle local and regional powers around the
globe. The imperialists came with advanced technology of violence
and great ruthlessness. But they also relied on extensive claims of
ɹne intentions, to uplift and enlighten the backward and inferior
natives—much like today's neoliberal capitalism, colonialism didn't
come without valuable intellectual support. Russia and the US had
similarly violent and expansionist policies, but mostly without
needing to cross oceans to express them. Anyone glancing at a world
map from this era will observe almost the entirety of the Earth's dry
land colored one of the shades of European empire.
The Old World Order became the new around the late nineteenth
century, as the US industrialized during the Civil War and Gilded
Age, becoming the world's biggest economy and eventually its
dominant military power. Rather than outright annexing countries
into a directly run empire as the Europeans did, the methods to
dominate shifted to heavy investments—buying up the capital and
land and productive assets of a country, and overthrowing
governments if they went against foreign, or indeed domestic elites'
ownership of large-scale private property. Europe shifted to this new
conɹguration of exploitation only after World War II.
In Latin America the US business world overtook the UK in
investments and share of trade during the 1920s, buying up larger
shares of these lands' capital and productive wealth, and gaining the
power to increasingly dominate poor foreign lands, after being
previously looted by the European colonialists. "Venezuelan oil
under the Gomez dictatorship, mines in Bolivia, Chile and
elsewhere, and the riches of Cuba were among the favored targets
... US dominance of the Brazilian market peaked after World War II,
when the US supplied half of Brazil's imports and bought over 40
percent of its exports," Chomsky summarizes.87 This was an era
when the historian of the CIA, Gerald Haines, wrote "Following
World War II the United States assumed, out of self-interest,
responsibility for the welfare of the world capitalist system." The US

pursued "neocolonial, neomercantilist policy," where territory is
economically exploited to the stronger power's interest.88
Turning to the Middle East, a region long-recognized as especially
important for its still-unparalleled energy reserves, the pattern of
world power is especially clear. The champion Middle East reporter
Robert Fisk's enormous book The Great War for Civilization is a
masterwork on the region's history and for a citizen of the Western
world it's not easy reading. Britain, for example, created Iraq in
1920 from provinces of the defeated Ottoman Empire, while France
created Syria and Lebanon the same year.89 The British had
previously promised independence to the Arabs for helping drive
out the Ottoman Turks, so when it went back on its word the Royal
Air Force had to bomb rebellious tribes and the army put down
large uprisings, in many of the same places the US and UK would
return to a century later in the Iraq War. The British installed a
puppet king, subject to an alleged referendum by the Iraqi people,
which "gave him a laughably impossible 96 per cent of the vote."90
After World War II, the US eclipsed European power in the Middle
East as it did around the world and as the European empires fell
apart America often stepped in, but usually with the same policy of
installing strongmen and supporting friendly regimes, including oil-
rich Saudi Arabia and the other theocratic monarchies of the Persian
Gulf. This isn't exactly a freedom-promoting policy.
Besides defending the horrifyingly brutal human rights records of
these countries, the US and the West sold them giant volumes of
weapons, from jets to ships to bombs to tanks. These sales ran into
the billions even as the Arab on the street in these countries lived in
poverty, sometimes with a modest state stipend for stability's sake.91
The Saudis, like freedom-stomping potentates around the world,
deɹnitely had the money to buy arms, as did Saddam Hussein, who
before becoming America's public enemy number one in 1990 was a
valued US ally against the Iranians, who themselves had been a
democracy before being overthrown by the US and the UK to install
a dictator in 1953.

In fact, throughout the 1980s and early nineties Saddam was an
especially important US ally and weapons client, and at the time of
his worst atrocities. Fisk records the Iran-Iraq War: "The United
States had been furnishing Iraq with satellite imagery of the Iranian
battle lines since the ɹrst days of the war, and a steady stream of
unoɽcial U.S. 'advisers' had been visiting Baghdad ever since."92
The aid continued, even as cyanide gas was used against the Kurds
in the city of Halabja. In 2002 and 2003, the Bush administration
and Tony Blair's government relentlessly referred to this atrocity to
justify the US invasion of Iraq; the pivotal American role was
conspicuously absent from the story.
And crucially, at the same time as it was guiding and arming Iraq,
the Reagan administration was sending weapons and money to the
Mujahideen forces ɹghting the Russians, who had invaded
Afghanistan.93 Many of these ɹghters—including Osama bin Laden
himself—would later turn their rage against the West and especially
the US. Journalist Patrick Cockburn, famous for his cutting-edge
reporting on the region and especially the rise of ISIS, observed:
... within hours of the 9/11 attacks ... Washington made it clear
that the anti-terror war would be waged without any
confrontation with Saudi Arabia or Pakistan, two close US allies,
despite the fact that without the involvement of these two
countries 9/11 was unlikely to have happened. Of the nineteen
hijackers that day, ɹfteen were Saudi. Bin Laden came from the
Saudi elite. Subsequent US oɽcial documents stress repeatedly
that ɹnancing for al-Qaeda and jihadi groups came from Saudi
Arabia and the Gulf monarchies.94
But the Saudi role is doubly important:
Saudi Arabia is inɻuential because its oil and vast wealth make it
powerful ... Another factor is its propagating of Wahhabism, the
fundamentalist, eighteenth-century version of Islam that imposes
sharia law, relegates women to the status of second-class citizens
... Wahhabism is taking over mainstream Sunni Islam. In one

country after another Saudi Arabia is putting up the money for
the training of preachers and the building of mosques. A result of
this is the spread of sectarian strife between Sunni and Shia.95
Karen Armstrong comments on Saudi Arabia's "funding the building
of mosques with Wahhabi preachers and establishing madrasas that
provided free education to the poor. Thus, to the intense dismay of
many in the Muslim world, an entire generation has grown up with
this maverick form of Islam."96
This powermongering history continues to torment the region,
with the Iraqi and Syrian Civil Wars being the most dramatic and
cruel manifestations. While the West's main concerns in the conɻict
only arose once its horrifying collateral damage drove millions of
refugees into developed Europe, the complex war has deep roots in
the history of colonialism there. Journalist Charles Glass' ɹne
history of the conɻict, Syria Burning, observes that the rebels
ɹghting the cruel dictatorship of Bashar al-Assad use "weapons
made in America, bought by Saudi Arabia and funneled through
Turkey."97
The Islamic State itself, Cockburn observes in his widely cited and
reliable analysis, did not just arise out of a vague scary foreign
religion. "It was the US, Europe, and their regional allies in Turkey,
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait, and United Arab Emirates that created
the conditions for the rise of ISIS. They kept the war going in Syria,
though it was obvious from 2012 that Assad would not fall."98
Unfortunately, all these countries are US and Western allies,
ultimately supporting the Islamic State—the regime most fearfully
associated with a total loss of individual freedom in the world scene.
In the face of this grotesque record, the right wing has its own
very traditional picture of the West's history in the world, one
which tends not to dwell on the long and undisputed history of
taking over countries against their will and using heinous levels of
violence to control them. Consider a sparkling article published in
The Wall Street Journal by foreign aʃairs professor Walter Mead of
Bard College and the libertarian Hudson Institute:

At bottom, we are witnessing the consequences of a civilization's
failure either to overcome or to accommodate the forces of
modernity ... the Middle East has failed to build economies that
allow ordinary people to live with dignity, has failed to build
modern political institutions ... the Arab world has tried a
succession of ideologies and forms of government, and none of
them has worked.99
What about the legacy of colonial control and looting, and then
neocolonialism and support for dictators? Mead has perspective
since after all, it's been "One hundred years after the fall of the
Ottoman Empire and 50 years since the French left Algeria," while
"Britain's defeat of the Ottoman Empire liberated the Arabs from
hundreds of years of Turkish rule." To call this a sanitized history
hardly describes it—it is a grotesque lie and a hideous farce, but
Mead 
is 
hardly 
unusual 
among 
conservative 
intellectuals.
Coincidentally, the atrocities that get forgotten and the tyrants who
get left out are the ones that would embarrass our home country.
Man, what are the odds?
This section has focused on the Middle East, but the role of the
imperial powers in shaping most of the modern world in a ruthlessly
violent and selɹsh way goes well beyond that. And since World War
II and the US era of global dominance, the US has taken up the
imperial role and cast as a threat to freedom every Third World
regime that doesn't put private property rights and US military
bases ɹrst. William Blum's impeccable research on the rich
documentary record shows that the US has become a global force
that prevents any desperately needed social reform, as he
documents in his book Killing Hope. Consider a few examples from
the American golden age.
In the Congo in Central Africa, the independent post-colonial
government led by Patrice Lumumba was undermined by the brutal
former colonial power, Belgium, using its still-strong inɻuence and a
direct military action to trigger a secession by Katanga, the most
economically valuable province and the location of extensive
Belgian mineral investments. The US supported this while buying

Congolese legislators until the cruel military leader Mobutu took
over with Western support. Years later, the congressional Church
committee 
conɹrmed 
that 
Dulles 
had 
ordered 
Lumumba's
assassination as "an urgent and prime objective."100
Across the Atlantic, Brazil's government was considered to be
again too independent and too neutral in the Cold War for Defense
Secretary McNamara, and had Communist Party members in some
cabinet positions under the elected government of President Joao
Goulart. More crucially than typical postcolonial independence,
"The Goulart administration, moreover, passed a law limiting the
amount of proɹts multinationals could transmit out of the country,
and a subsidiary of ITT was nationalized. Compensation for the
takeover was slow in coming ..."101 The Kennedy administration
directed development organizations to funnel money into more
conservative and pro-US political candidates, cut oʃ previously
ɻowing foreign aid, and a former CIA oɽcer claims an expensive
covert propaganda campaign against the regime. The US
immediately supported the military coup that followed, in which
"Congress was shut down, political opposition was reduced to
virtual extinction, habeas corpus for 'political crimes' was
suspended, criticism of the president was forbidden by law, labor
unions were taken over by government interveners, mounting
protests were met by police and military ɹring into crowds," as
Blum documents.102
This history is extensive, and readers interested in learning more
of this absorbing global history should consult the sources cited here
and in the notes. But a short survey should suɽce to show that the
core capitalist countries of Europe and the US have been
archenemies of democracy, and of freedom, except for the
hegemonic freedom of elite large-scale property owners. Friedman's
thesis, that political freedom will be advanced by his conceived
freedom of the marketplace, deserves a lot less respect and
remembrance than the army of the dead left behind by the greed of
the powers of the world. An army extending, in the eye of the
student of history, to the horizon in all directions.

Global Elites and the Man in the Street
The average person globally is now unlikely to feel that they share
control of what happens in the world with their fellow men and
women, as the Brexit and Trump rebellions illustrate. The popular
feeling and reality is that they are subject to powerful elements
above them—people, families and organizations that wield
enormous power and inɻuence, who trample the freedoms of the
common man and woman in the course of their global chess game.
The disagreement is about the nature of these elites. Reading
conservative literature, or listening to today's highly inɻuential
conservative talk radio and Fox News on US cable, or the Web
presence of the far-right European political parties, the listener gets
a vague picture of elites. You'll hear about snotty coastal big-city
elites, government bureaucratic elites who regulate industry and use
"politically correct" speech codes to limit the freedom to use racial
language, and, above all, media elites on the network news shows
who are biased against the conservative message. These social
elements are all relevant and have diʃerent forms of power, but
what kinds of power they have, how they interact with others and
what patterns are dominant never gets explored.
Sometimes, the elitism arising from wealth and market power
does come up in the right-wing conversation, but only brieɻy and
through a sharp partisan lens. And as soon as the subject arises, the
analysis collapses into confusion. For example, Rush Limbaugh
approvingly read a Pat Buchanan article on his radio program, an
article in which Buchanan contrasted the evangelical Christian and
blue-collar 
Republican 
rank-and-ɹle 
with 
the 
"chamber-of-
commerce and country-club Republicans," who are more invested in
economic issues and tax cuts than the base, and who make up a
"Republican Party elite."103 This kind of analysis is common outside
conservative circles, but Limbaugh only brings it up to argue that
the party elites should stop criticizing Donald Trump. Afterward,

"elites" go back to being found mostly in phrases like "beltway
elites" to describe politicians, not "chamber of commerce" elites.
Likewise, the political money pioneer Senator Ted Cruz is willing
to allow the existence of a super-wealthy elite 1 percent, using the
lingo of the anticapitalist Occupy Wall Street movement. But it can
only arise as an adjunct of big government: "The top 1% under
President Obama, the millionaires and billionaires that he
constantly demagogued, earned a higher share for our income than
any year since 1928. Those with power and inɻuence who walk the
corridors of power of the Obama administration have gotten fat and
happy under big government."104 And yet the conservative Wall
Street Journal cites a report by the conservative Koch brothers-
founded Tax Foundation, which estimated that Cruz's drastic tax
program "delivers its biggest beneɹts to the top 1% of U.S.
households, adding about one-third to their after-tax income."105
Not surprising, considering the hedge fund billionaires directly
running his Super PACs.
The evidence reviewed in this chapter supports the claim made in
Chapter 1: there is a spectrum of forms and levels of power, in
people and institutions, and the most ɻexible and unlimited in its
potential scale is the power of money and capital. Locally prominent
people, politicians and businesses have some power but can be
overruled by city or state governments, or a warlord with an army,
or a national government, or a large corporation with the threat of
capital mobility. Or these all may be misled into disaster by the
power of propaganda by a state, corporation or person with the
resources to ɻood the world with its message. These are all forms of
power and inɻuence, which we understand to limit human freedom,
and holding diʃerent amounts of this power makes a person part of
an elite among other powerful and inɻuential people, usually with a
life of privilege. The fact that the endless day-to-day stream of talk
radio and conservative media focuses so obsessively on elites, but
only those in government, or among journalists who vote Democrat,
or the top labor union leaders, leads us to a similar verdict for
Hannity, Levin and Limbaugh as for Friedman and Hayek:

opportunists, working for the interests of power and therefore
against the cause of human liberty and freedom.
From this background, we can also evaluate the "libertarianism"
represented by this tradition. It's valuable to have a political
grouping opposed to any of the large, powerful institutions of our
time, as they all require scrutiny and eʃorts to limit their power.
The state, the churches, civil groups, all have some inɻuence and
therefore warrant some regular critical attention. But libertarians, as
this book shows, have a conspicuous tendency to be critical of one of
the great power centers of our society, but actively and aggressively
insist that private power centers are no threat, whether the
megabanks or giant corporations or rich families. The result is a
skepticism of power that rings very hollow, because it's so selective
and in the clear economic interests of its supporters.
This broader view of power and its diʃerent dimensions gives us
some guidance on global policy issues. Citizens in the US and
Europe often react favorably to devolution—proposals to take power
from federal government in the US or the European Union system
and invest it instead in state governments, or the EU member state
parliaments. The appeal, of course, is that of moving decision-
making power closer to the people and correspondingly reducing
the power of the larger, federal government entity. But the crucial
issue is that again, only power in the public sphere is being
recognized, and the pivotal leverage of big, international companies
never comes up. While a national government can take on a giant
corporation on more or less even terms, even a medium-sized
company can push state or national governments around by playing
one oʃ against the other, thanks to the capital mobility Chapter 1
describes.
People who are frustrated and angry at elites should take a long
moment to contemplate where power comes from, its diverse
nature, and what kind of policies and social movements for change
will leave their kids freer. The best present you can give a kid is
freedom and the responsibility to use it well, hopefully including
freedom from the codependent relationships among today's elite
power centers. Rich elites that would make each of us a chess piece

in their power-mongering contest for worldwide market and
military dominance.
Endnotes
1. Lawrence Summers, "The Great Liberator," The New York Times,
19 November 2006.
2. Martin Luther King, "Beyond Vietnam," The Liberatory Thought
of Martin Luther King Jr., Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2012,
p.222.
3. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1990, p. 65.
4. Ibid, p. 30.
5. Murray Rothbard, Man, Economy and State with Power and
Market, Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2009, p. 984.
6. Miguel Bustillo and Nathan Koppel, "In Texas, Toll Roads
Proliferate—and a Backlash Builds," The Wall Street Journal, 20
October 2014.
7. David Harrison, "Donald Trump's Infrastructure Plan Faces
Speed Bumps," The Wall Street Journal, 11 November 2016.
8. Miltion Friedman, "Will Freedom Prevail?" Newsweek, 19
November 1979.
9. Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2007, p. 87.
10. Ibid, p. 87-88.
11. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1990, p. 65-6.
12. Ibid, p. 140.
13. Ibid, p. 36.

14. Charles Beard, An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of
the United States, New York: Dover, 2004, p. 14-5.
15. Ibid, p. 149.
16. Ibid, p. 157-8.
17. Carl Beck, "John Jay and Peter van Schaack," The Quarterly
Journal of the New York State Historical Association, Vol. 1, No. 1,
October 1919, p. 2.
18. Thomas Ferguson, Golden Rule, University of Chicago Press,
1995, p. 8.
19. Ibid, p. 27.
20. Ibid, p. 29, 48.
21. Ibid, p. 76.
22. The Center for Responsive Politics [CRP],
http://www.opensecrets.org/pres12.
23. Ibid, http://www.opensecrets.org/overview.
24. Nicholas Confressore, "Big G.O.P. Donors Stir Senate Runs,"
The New York Times, 11 April 2014.
25. Greg Stohr, "Bloomberg Poll: Americans Want Supreme Court
to Turn Oʃ Political Spending Spigot," Bloomberg, 28 September
2015.
26. Rebecca Ballhaus, "Super PAC Donors Are Taking Charge," The
Wall Street Journal, 31 December 2015. The ɹnal paragraph and
Conway quote were not included in the print version.
27. CRP, http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/top.php?
indexType=s&showYear=2015.
28. CRP, http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/top.php?
indexType=c&showYear=2015.
29. Roger Martin, "In America, Labor Is Friendless," The Harvard
Business Review, 28 August 2014.

30. Martin Gilens and Benjamin Page, "Testing Theories of
American Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average
Citizens," Perspectives on Politics, Vol. 12, No.3, September
2014.
31. Laurie Burkitt, "Rolling Out the Red Carpet," The Wall Street
Journal, 24 October 2013.
32. Michael Forsythe, "Billionaire Lawmakers Ensure the Rich Are
Represented in China's Legislature," The New York Times, 2
March 2015.
33. Michael Forsythe and Alan Wong, "Thousands in Hong Kong
Rally in Support of China," The New York Times, 17 August
2014.
34. David Luhnow, "The Secrets of the World's Richest Man," The
Wall Street Journal, 4 August 2007.
35. Eduardo Porter, "Mexico's Plutocracy Thrives on Robber-Baron
Concessions," The New York Times, 27 August 2007.
36. Azam Ahmed, Randal Archibold and Elisabeth Malkin,
"Mexico's Richest Man Confronts a New Foe: The State That
Helped Make Him Rich," The New York Times, 9 August 2016.
37. Ferguson, Golden Rule, p. 116.
38. Ibid, p. 133-4.
39. Kim Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands, New York: Norton, 2009, p.
95.
40. Ibid, p. 31-2, 105.
41. Ibid, p. 15; Michael Bordo in Bordo et al, The Deɹning Moment:
The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth
Century, University of Chicago Press, 1998, p. 292.
42. Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands, p. 41-4, 136.
43. Elton Rayack, Not So Free to Choose, New York: Praeger, 1987,
p.119-20.

44. Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands, p. 52.
45. Ibid, p. 44, 174, 86.
46. Lewis Powell, "Attack on American Free Enterprise System," US
Chamber of Commerce Education Committee, 23 August 1971.
Note that the released version, prepared by the Chamber after
the conɹdential original was leaked, repeats the title as "Attack
of American Free Enterprise System," a perhaps more accurate
representation of the plan.
47. Robert Brenner, The Economics of Global Turbulence, London:
Verso, 2006, p. 106, 141; "America's Growing Antibusiness
Mood," Businessweek, 17 June 1972.
48. Frank Allen, "Carter Rating from Business Drops Further," The
Wall Street Journal, 30 October 1980.
49. Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands, p. 259-61.
50. Kim Severson and Winnie Hu, "Cut in Food Stamps Forces Hard
Choices on Poor," The New York Times, 7 November 2013.
51. David Stuckler and Sanjay Basu, The Body Economic, New York:
Basic Books, 2013, p. 62.
52. Ibid, p. 63, 66.
53. Ibid, p. 71-72.
54. Ibid, p. 84.
55. Ibid, p. 90-91.
56. Ibid, p. 88, 92.
57. Sheri Fink, "Cuts at W.H.O. Hurt Response to Ebola Crisis," The
New York Times, 3 September 2014.
58. "What to Cut when Majorities of Americans Support Most
Major Government Services?" Harris Interactive, 4 March 2014.
59. Josh Zumbrun, "Boehner Departure Complicates Business
Priorities," The Wall Street Journal, 25 September 2015.

60. Jia Lynn Yang and Tom Hamburger, "Business groups stand by
Boehner, plot against tea party," The Washington Post, 17
October 2013.
61. Janet Hook and Patrick O'Connor, "Grass-Roots Anger
Transforms Republican Party in Congress and Presidential
Campaign," The Wall Street Journal, 9 October 2015.
62. Josh Zumbrun, "Boehner Departure Complicates Business
Priorities," The Wall Street Journal, 25 September 2015.
63. David Krikpatrick, "In a Message to Democrats, Wall St. Sends
Cash to G.O.P." The New York Times, 7 February 2010.
64. Campbell Robertson and Eric Lipton, "In Alabama Race, a Test
of Business Eʃorts to Derail Tea Party," The New York Times, 31
October, 2013.
65. Johnathan Martin, Jim Rutenberg and Jeremy Peters, "Fiscal
Crisis Sounds the Charge in G.O.P.'s 'Civil War,'" The New York
Times, 19 October 2013.
66. Ibid.
67. Greg Giroux, "U.S. Chamber Seeks to Oust Boehner Tea Party
Antagonists," Bloomberg, 28 July 2014.
68. Neil King Jr., "GOP, Business Recast Message," The Wall Street
Journal, 25 December 2013.
69. Jennifer Drogus, "Timmons: Speaker Boehner Friend of
Manufacturing, Tireless Champion of the American Dream,"
National Association of Manufacturers, 25 September 2015.
70. Kristina Peterson and Siobhan Hughes, "Before Speaker Vote,
House Conservatives Drawing Up Wish List," The Wall Street
Journal, 7 October 2015.
71. Nicole Hong, "U.S. Debt Rating Put on Watch by Fitch," The
Wall Street Journal, 15 October 2013.

72. Jonathan Weisman and Michael Shear, "The Post-Boehner
Congress and Washington's Sense of Dread," The New York
Times, 26 September 2015; John Carney, "Why Boehner's
Resignation Is Good for Markets and the Fed," The Wall Street
Journal, 25 September 2015.
73. "Letter Regarding Chairman Paul Ryan's FY 2015 Budget," U.S.
Chamber of Commerce, 8 April 2014; Jonathan Weisman,
"House Republicans Propose Budget With Deep Cuts," The New
York Times, 17 March 2015.
74. David Herszenhorn and Emmarie Huetteman, "Paul Ryan Wins
Backing of Majority in Freedom Caucus for House Speaker," The
New York Times, 21 October 2015.
75. Rebecca Ballhaus and Brody Mullins, "U.S. Firms Betting
Republicans Maintain Senate Control," Wall Street Journal, 6
November 2016.
76. CRP, https://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/recips.php?
id=D000019798.
77. Sascha Becker, Thiemo Fetzer and Dennis Novy, "Who Voted
for Brexit? A Comprehensive District-Level Analysis," University
of Warwick Working Paper Series, No. 305, October 2016.
78. Ajay Singh Chaudhary, "What a proper response to Trump's
fascism demands: a true ideological left," Quartz, 17 November
2016.
79. Mike Davis, "Not a Revolution—Yet," Verso Blog, 15 November
2016.
80. Bill Fletcher, "Quick reɻections on the November 2016
elections," billɻetcherjr.com, 9 November 2016.
81. Rebecca Ballhaus and Brody Mullins, "Spending on U.S.
Elections Slides for First Time in Recent Political History," The
Wall Street Journal, 26 October 2016.

82. CRP, https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate?
id=N00000019 and
https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?
id=N00023864, respectively.
83. CRP, https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/expenditures?
id=N00000019.
84. CRP, https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/expenditures?
id=N00023864.
85. Nicholas Confessore and Karen Yourish, "$2 Billion Worth of
Free Media Time for Donald Trump," The Upshot, New York
Times, 15 March 2016.
86. Noam Chomsky, Year 501, Boston: South End Press, 1993, p.3.
87. Ibid, p. 155-6.
88. Ibid, p. 157, 159.
89. Robert Fisk, The Great War for Civilization, New York: Vintage,
2007, p. 144-146.
90. Ibid, p. 146, 148.
91. Ibid, p. 690-1.
92. Ibid, p. 207.
93. Ibid, p. 62.
94. Patrick Cockburn, The Rise of the Islamic State, London: Verso,
2015, p. 4-5.
95. Ibid, p. 5-6.
96. Karen Armstrong, "The spread of Wahhabism, and the West's
responsibility to the world," New Statesman, 26 November
2015.
97. Charles Glass, Syria Burning, London: O/R Books, 2015, p. 134.
98. Patrick Cockburn, The Rise of the Islamic State, p. 9.

99. Walter Russell Mead, "A Crisis of Two Civilizations," The Wall
Street Journal, 12-13 September 2015.
100. William Blum, Killing Hope, Monroe, ME: Common Courage,
2004, p. 156-158.
101. Ibid, p. 163-4.
102. Ibid, p. 170.
103. Rush Limbaugh, "What Would Mr. Buckley Think of Mr.
Trump?" 14 August, 2015; Patrick Buchanan, "GOP Elites Call
For Purge of Trump," RealClearPolitics, 14 August 2015.
104. Ted Cruz, "Ted Cruz in ABC This Week interviews during
2015," 8 February 2015,
http://www.ontheissues.org/Archive/2015_ABC_Ted_Cruz.htm.
105. Richard Rubin, "Ted Cruz Tax Plan Would Yield Big Gains to
Top 1%—Report," The Wall Street Journal, 29 October 2015.

Chapter 4
Heirloom Doom

Freedom of Future Generations
Global warming is socialism by the back door.
George Will1
It is diɽcult to get a man to understand something, when his
salary depends upon his not understanding it!
Upton Sinclair2
So far, this book has reviewed the dramatic scope of power within
market economies—power over the workforce, power over the ɻow
of information, and power over government processes. But one
further arena of power and control has to be brought up: power over
future generations. If the present generation of men and women
have the ability to choose between leaving a wealthier, or
environmentally richer, or more peaceful world for future
generations, they clearly exercise some power over future
populations. And the decisions made through human history, and
especially the modern period of capitalism, have rarely been ones
that prioritized the welfare of people who must live in the world we
leave them.
The term "externalities" refers to the side-costs of economic
transactions, where parties that aren't involved in certain market
decisions still have to deal with their consequences. It could be an
individual annoyed by someone's cigarette smoke, or future
generations coping with hugely altered natural environments.
Today, our externalities are leaving an awful legacy—multitudes of
extinct species, a warming climate, and hugely prevalent pollution
from chemicals and plastics. The forms that modern externalities
take on need to be reviewed, and the likely consequences for future
generations evaluated, before we can fully understand the dynamics

of power within capitalism. So let's begin by considering the
conservative and libertarian views of the subject and then review
the scientiɹc record's projections of the economy of the future.

There Goes the Neighborhood
As usual we begin with the more conservative view, as expressed by
its most prominent thinkers. In Milton Friedman's Capitalism and
Freedom, the problem is described:
Strictly voluntary exchange is impossible ... when actions of
individuals have eʃects on other individuals for which it is not
feasible to charge or recompense them. This is the problem of
'neighborhood eʃects.' An obvious example is the pollution of a
stream. The man who pollutes a stream is in eʃect forcing others
to exchange good water for bad ... it is not feasible for them,
acting individually, to avoid the exchange or to enforce
appropriate compensation.3
Considering the scale that these "neighborhood eʃects" or
"externalities" are taking on, from traɽc smog to species extinction
to climate change, some would say that "neighborhood eʃect"
somewhat trivializes the issue. But at least these ɹgures do concede
a problem exists, unlike more lightweight intellectuals and shallow
right-wing radio show hosts.
Friedrich Hayek even allowed that externalities could warp his
cherished symbol of market eɽciency, the price system, which
transmits information through markets (see Chapter 2). "The price
system becomes similarly ineʃective when the damage caused to
others by certain uses of property cannot be eʃectively charged to
the owner of that property," since:
... there is a divergence between the items which enter into
private calculation and those which aʃect social welfare ... Nor
can certain harmful eʃects of deforestation, or some methods of
farming, or of the smoke and noise of factories be conɹned to the
owner of the property in question or to those who are willing to
submit to the damage for an agreed compensation.4

After the denial of capitalism's problems from these thinkers in this
book's previous chapters, these are pretty candid concessions! Just
recognizing the issue isstrong meat from the two most prominent
conservative economists of the twentieth century.
However, the tendency in this school is often to acknowledge the
undeniable existence of these economic side-eʃects, but then to
move on quickly to minimizing them and disparaging any
government attempts to actually limit or ɹx them. In Free to Choose,
Milton and Rose Friedman wrote that indeed, "Almost everything
we do has some third-party eʃects, however small and however
remote," and they correctly recognize an important aspect of
externalities: "The primary source of signiɹcant third-party eʃects
of private actions is the diɽculty of identifying the external costs or
beneɹts."5 It's very diɽcult to say for sure exactly how much your
cigarette smoking has aʃected the health of your family, for
example, and whether Junior's asthma is largely because of your
two-packs-a-day or because of air pollution from the nearby
highway. So far, fair enough.
But the Friedmans veer away sharply with their following demand
that for anyone supporting legal limits to things like public smoking
or lead-emitting car exhaust, "the burden of proof should be on its
proponents."6 After conceding the reality and prevalence of
externalities, and speciɹcally agreeing that they are frequently
challenging to quantify in terms of their eʃects, or to deɹnitively
prove them harmful to particular individuals, we're told we should
still generally oppose any public policy. The reality of the issue is
brieɻy accepted, but the resulting popular desire for political action
is immediately denied.
On the other hand, people who take externalities seriously,
including many scientists and public health specialists, are more
likely to support a "precautionary principle," suggesting a default
posture of caution before producing or consuming a new commodity
on a very large scale. But this would happen to be an obstacle to
commerce in new commodities and so libertarian intellectuals

reliably oppose it; apparently yet another instance of right-wing
intellectuals showing opportunistic tendencies.
The Friedmans double down, claiming that "The environmental
movement is responsible for one of the most rapidly growing areas
of federal intervention. The Environmental Protection Agency ... has
been granted increasing power and authority." The scope of the
issue has no speciɹcs in their description, and notably in a book that
often argues for balancing costs and beneɹts, no beneɹts of EPA
policies are brought up, only discussions of costly budgets and staʃ
ɹgures. And interestingly for writers who completely, totally neglect
to cite any scientists or experts on public health, they claim "Public
discussion of the environmental issue is frequently characterized
more by emotion than reason."7 An emotion-driven debate to which
they are willing to contribute, apparently.
Their conclusion therefore ignores the overwhelming ɻow of
scientiɹc research on environmental side-eʃects of industrial
capitalism (reviewed below), and take their political shot for
Reaganite libertarian anti-regulation.
This is a very brief treatment of an extremely important and far-
reaching problem ... Perhaps it may also lead to a second look at
the performance of market mechanisms in areas where they
admittedly operate imperfectly. The imperfect market may, after
all, do as well or better than the imperfect government. In
pollution, such a look would bring many surprises.8
Maybe one of these "surprises" will be that scientists are fretfully
anticipating a series of "global-scale failures" owing to the enormous
scale of today's externalities.9 It's beyond "imperfect" and well
beyond a neighborhood's reach.
Other conservatives are more cautious about extracting capital
from natural resources, but no less committed to it. Oxford
economist Paul Collier wrote in his book The Plundered Planet that
yes, natural resources are precious and potentially fragile, but that
our obligation is only to be custodians of natural assets, meaning

"We are ethically obliged to pass on to future generations the
equivalent value of the natural assets that we were bequeathed in
the past."10 As long as the value derived from exploiting nature is
not immediately consumed (or "plundered"), then we are behaving
responsibly.
This means that nature is seen as a capital asset exchangeable for
money and indeed Collier comments that "Biodiversity is a good
thing, but within the context of our survival, not as an end in itself.
We are not here to serve nature; nature is here to serve us."
Likewise, he claims "natural substances only acquire value as a
result of technological discoveries," and scientists or activists who
support the conservation of natural systems "hate industrial
capitalism," are somehow both Marxist and monarchist, and "sense
the opportunity to refresh the guilt-ridden colonialist hangover."11
This man is considered a bold thinker in today's neoliberal political
setting.
More liberal "green" ɹgures tend to limit themselves to what can
be achieved by encouraging businesses to be more interested in
sustainability—the ability of an economy to function indeɹnitely by
not overconsuming natural resources or over-polluting. Among the
most prominent liberal "green" thinkers is Paul Hawken, who writes
early in his inɻuential The Ecology of Commerce that "business is
destroying the world, no one does it better," and claims "The market
of today is free but in an entirely diʃerent way, because its freedom
is immune to community accountability. The primary freedom of
the modern, global marketplace is that companies can grow
unremittingly."12 Certainly Collier or the other conservatives
reviewed here could be accused of seeing freedom in these terms. So
Hawken says that while capitalism creates a freedom for large
institutions to grow and prosper, this is a disservice to others—the
"hegemonic freedom" that really means power over people, as
discussed in Chapter 1.
More cuttingly, he reminds us that "to redesign or start up a
business that maintains a holistic relationship between economy and
ecology handicaps the entrepreneur ɹnancially since she bears the

costs of the additional responsibilities that she has assumed and her
competitors have shunned," a problem of "the current economic
system." Indeed, "the sheer size of the largest corporations tends to
grant them the political and economic power to externalize costs
that should be properly absorbed by the company."13 Yet, despite all
this, Hawken goes on to suggest that sustainability can be achieved
by relatively simple government regulations like green taxes, which
would tax ɹrms in rough proportion to their pollution.
Hawken further concedes elsewhere in the text that "Concentrated
political and economic power is a major deterrent to establishing
green taxes and other features of a restorative economy." And more
broadly, as we saw in in Chapter 3, any reforms demanded by the
public and placed on capital's liberty by elected representatives can
be undermined and watered down over time, just as the broad New
Deal programs of income supports and industrial regulation were.
Hawken also expects ɹrms to voluntarily reconɹgure their entire
business models to accommodate habitat conservation and pollution
limitation, despite the pressure from Wall Street to maintain
proɹtability. As he perhaps accurately says, "No other institution in
the modern world is powerful enough to foster the necessary
material and economic changes."14 Which also implies no other
institution is powerful enough to successfully ɹght against the
necessary changes. For as we've seen, institutions don't often make
voluntary changes adverse to their material well-being.
For their part, left-wing analysts have been willing to call for
more fundamental social changes to cope with the towering
problems created by our limitless economic growth. Socialist
sociologist John Bellamy Foster wrote thoughtfully about these
subjects, questioning:
The dominant conception of human freedom. For centuries our
society has seen freedom as a mechanical outgrowth of the
technological domination of nature, and of a social arrangement
in which each individual is encouraged to pursue his or her own
self-interest with no consideration of the larger natural or social

repercussions. Environmental protection, it is feared, would set
limits both on the freedom of human beings to exploit the earth's
resources, and on the freedom of individuals to pursue their own
immediate material gain.15
He supports "a human relation to nature that is based on 'freedom
in general': not the freedom to exclude others from a genuine
relation to nature and the full development of life's possibilities; but
rather the freedom of all to share in life's development as part of an
organic community."16 So Foster, writing from the Left, considers
people to have a positive freedom to take part in enjoying the
richness of nature.
In order to resolve which side of this argument is more sensible,
we'll have to consider what actual scientists say about these
subjects.

Inherit the Whirlwind
It's a striking fact about today's environmental arguments that
people often feel quite entitled to insist upon questions of ecological
fact, without even the slightest familiarity with the current state of
science on the subject. Few people would think they know better
than their doctor or an architect, but with scientiɹc subjects that
bear on money issues, suddenly everyone is a skeptical thinker and
casts themselves as brave rebels against the scientiɹc consensus.
A great way to cut the crap in any argument about climate or
ecology is to simply ask your conɹdent debate partner what was the
last scientiɹc paper they read about their claim. More often than
not, your friend will be relying on a source that does not directly
refer to any scientiɹc ɹndings, let alone actual scientiɹc research
material itself, before shooting oʃ their mouths. We can avoid this
pitfall by sampling the current research.
Doing so becomes alarming quickly. A major debate in the ɹeld is
the nature of the "Anthropocene," a newly designated geological
period, based on the rise of humanity and our unprecedented
powers to reshape local environments and global ecological systems.
The debate has recently moved past the stage of argument over
whether or not this new period exists, since the large majority of
Earth scientists now ɹnd the giant impact of humanity adequately
transformative worldwide, and geologically visible enough, to
qualify as its own geological era. The debate now addresses the
Anthropocene's nature and the exact timing of it, for example in a
2016 paper for the prestigious US journal Science by a large global
team of chemists, geologists, archaeologists, oceanographers and
biologists.17 The paper discusses diʃerent possible times to
designate the start of the period, from the spike in global population
in the eighteenth century, or from the rise of polluting emissions
during the Industrial Revolution in the nineteenth, or using the
appearance in the record of "Novel markers, such as concrete,
plastics, global black carbon, and plutonium (Pu) fallout." It

suggests that from the perspective of new geological markers, "The
start of the Anthropocene may thus be deɹned ... with the
detonation of the Trinity atomic device at Alamogordo, New
Mexico, on 16 July 1945 CE." Not an auspicious start to the era
named for us!
Other scientists disagree within the rules of scientiɹc debate, with
some supporting earlier starts and another team suggesting "Only
beyond the mid-20th century is there clear evidence for fundamental
shifts in the state and functioning of the Earth System that are
beyond the range of variability of the Holocene and driven by
human activities."18 The scientiɹc conversation continues, but
clearly within a broad agreement that a new era has arrived in
which human economics has become a driving force transforming
the planetary system. Again, we're redeɹning geological epochs here
—reaching way beyond what can be called "neighborhood eʃects."
These issues are often discussed around the concept of
sustainability—the ability, referred to earlier, of a society to sustain
itself indeɹnitely on available resources, rather than exhausting
them or choking on its own accumulated pollution. This subject can
be written large or small—smaller-scale examples include the
plunging groundwater levels in the US plains states, where ancient
freshwater aquifers are falling fast as farmers use them to irrigate
their crops. The High Plains Aquifer's southern reaches are
"increasingly tapped out, drained by ever more intensive farming
and, lately, by drought," The New York Times reports. "And when the
groundwater runs out, it is gone for good. Reɹlling the aquifer
would require hundreds, if not thousands, of years of rains ... Most
of the creeks and rivers that once veined the land have dried up as
60 years of pumping have pulled groundwater levels down by scores
and even hundreds of feet."19 This kind of overuse of a readily
accessed but limited resource, often called a "common resource," is
a frequently seen and widely recognized limit of the market system.
Other relatively small-scale examples of the rising anthropogenic
era include great icons of global capitalism—not just the famously
prosperous US heartland, but Cerro Rico, one of the symbols of early

colonialism, is literally collapsing from the issue. Cerro Rico is a
mountain in Bolivia, famous for its incredibly rich silver deposits.
These major precious metal deposits had a hugely crucial economic
eʃect under the cruel Spanish Empire, bringing enough coinage into
Europe that "It fueled the early growth of European capitalism," as
the press reminds us, and indeed the mountain is depicted on
Bolivia's national ɻag.20 But now the silver deposits have been
mined so aggressively and exhaustively that the top of the mountain
is in danger of collapse.
The government agency in charge of mining allows private ɹrms
to run the mines since silver prices crashed decades ago, so
competitive forces have led them to overexploit the deposits,
beyond a level that might be sustained even over the medium term.
And of course the usual bargaining power advantage of capital
owners (reviewed in Chapter 1) applies here, whether the operator
is the government, private companies or the Spanish Empire: "For
all the wealth the mountain generated, the misery outpaced it a
hundredfold. The Spanish used Indians, or slaves brought from
Africa, to work in the mines in brutal conditions. The death toll was
high," and today engineers report "accidents were frequent and
often fatal and that the bodies of dead miners, frequently migrants
from the countryside, were often taken straight to their villages for
burial so the deaths did not come to the attention of local oɽcials
or mining regulators."
But 
beyond 
these 
smaller-scale 
examples, 
the 
issue 
of
sustainability in the Anthropocene has a number of far larger-scale
dimensions, two of which we'll look at here—mass extinction and
climate change. Mass extinction refers to large waves of species
extinctions, in which many separate species of animals, plants or
microorganisms have their numbers fall below the level that can
maintain them as a population, and the species ceases to exist.
Extinction is a normal process occurring in natural habitats at a
relatively regular, measured pace, but the geological record is
punctuated with "mass extinction events," in which great numbers
of species disappear in a short timespan. The most famous of these

is the extinction of the dinosaurs and the ecosystems associated with
them at the end of the Cretaceous period, likely owing to a major
planetary impact by a large meteor or comet. But today, it is
broadly agreed by biologists and other scientists that the planet is
about to enter, or already has, a sixth global extinction event, only
this one is caused by human activity and the global Anthropocene.
As usual, people enjoy spouting opinions about this issue without
doing much (or any) research into the current scientiɹc literature on
the subject, and laugh oʃ the spreading extinctions of hundreds of
species of little-known frogs or obscure sea life. But the scientists
take the subject much more seriously and one of their major
ɹndings is that today's crash in the global richness of species (or
"biodiversity") is the result of destruction of the natural habitat that
species live among.
This includes the most charismatic species, like the "megafauna,"
or large animals like giraʃes and bears. A large team of biologists
recently wrote in the journal BioScience that:
... 59% of the world's largest carnivores ... and 60% of the
world's largest herbivores ... are classiɹed as threatened with
extinction on the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature (IUCN) Red List ... Species at risk of extinction include
some of the world's most iconic animals—such as gorillas, rhinos,
and big cats—and unfortunately, they are vanishing just as
science is discovering their essential ecological roles.21
Or consider forests. An outstanding 2015 study of global forest
landscapes by a large team of life scientists discovered that forest
stands have become so diminished and fragmented by human
development that, to their horror,
Nearly 20% of the world's remaining forest is within 100 m of an
edge—in close proximity to agricultural, urban, or other modiɹed
environments where impacts on forest ecosystems are most
severe. More than 70% of the world's forests are within 1 km of a
forest edge. Thus, most forests are well within the range where

human activities, altered microclimate, and nonforest species may
inɻuence and degrade forest ecosystems ... across experiments
spanning numerous studies and ecosystems, fragmentation
consistently degraded ecosystems, reducing species persistence,
species richness, nutrient retention, trophic dynamics, and, in
more isolated fragments, movement.22
Another impeccably credentialed cadre of scientists note that the
same processes of destruction and degradation of habitat have been
happening on land environments for far longer than ocean
ecosystems, but recent centuries have seen the rise of extremely
serious deterioration in the seas also. They note that "Current ocean
trends, coupled with terrestrial defaunation [loss of animal species]
lessons, suggest that marine defaunation rates will rapidly intensify
as human use of the oceans industrializes."23 The oceans are under a
large number of stresses, from rising catches of large ɹsh to growing
"dead zones" caused by fertilizer runoʃ to plastic and chemical
pollution to escalating acidity. This "industrialization" of the seas
means, among many other things, a plunging availability of habitat
for the unbelievable variety of marine life forms.
Elizabeth Kolbert's popular book The Sixth Extinction puts a more
intimate face on the dry scientiɹc facts of our mass extinction,
recording for example the words of an Australian scientist studying
the reef systems of the Paciɹc: "Yet here I am today, humbled to
have spent the most productive scientiɹc years of my life around the
rich wonders of the underwater world, and utterly convinced that
they will not be there for our children's children to enjoy."24
Other research in Science estimates "land use and related
pressures have already reduced local biodiversity intactness—the
average proportion of natural biodiversity remaining in local
ecosystems—beyond its recently proposed planetary boundary
across 58.1% of the world's land surface, where 71.4% of the human
population live."25 The "boundary" refers to estimates of the "safe
limit" beyond which biodiversity and species richness may crash
and be irretrievable.

But the newest contributor to mass extinction trends is global
climate change, which contributes modestly at the moment, but is
projected to grow dramatically. A conservative study in Science
suggests an outcome, if we follow our current trajectory, that on its
own "climate change threatens one in six species (16%)."26 Climate
change is the gradual evolution of global temperatures over time,
dominated in the last few centuries by the giant growth of
greenhouse gases, which trap heat in the Earth's atmosphere, from
human industry and agriculture. These gases, including carbon
dioxide from smokestacks and car tailpipes and methane from
farming, allow the Sun's radiation in but are partially opaque to the
infrared radiation that the Earth reɻects back into space. This raises
overall temperatures, just like in a greenhouse.
The subject of climate change, more than any other subject, is
aʀicted by people who've heard only a few minutes of one-sided
commentary but have decided they know better than the scientists,
and will claim there's no scientiɹc "consensus," or broad agreement,
about the phenomenon. However, researchers have examined this
speciɹc issue and their ɹndings are striking. Scientists studying the
subject for Environmental Research Letters found "The consensus that
humans are causing recent global warming is shared by 90%-100%
of publishing climate scientists" according to a series of reviews of
abstracts of climate research papers and separate surveys of authors
of these papers themselves.27 One of the papers included in that
analysis examined an amazing 11,944 climate-relevant paper
abstracts, showing a high level of professional consensus. "Among
abstracts expressing a position on [anthropogenic global warming],
97.1% endorsed the consensus positions that humans are causing
global warming ... we invited authors to rate their own papers ...
97.2% endorsed the consensus ... Our analysis indicates that the
number of papers rejecting the consensus on AGW is a vanishingly
small proportion of the published research."28
Indeed, even while the great ɹrms of the energy industry were
arguing publicly that climate scientists were mistaken, their own
engineers were taking climate change and sea-level rise seriously in

their designs. Exxon, Shell, BP and others formed the Global Climate
Coalition with a mission of casting doubt on the science of global
climate change. The Los Angeles Times reports that:
... one company, Exxon, made a strategic decision in the late
1980s to publicly emphasize doubt and uncertainty regarding
climate change science even as its internal research embraced the
growing scientiɹc consensus ... In 1989, before Shell Oil joined
the Global Climate Coalition, the company announced it was
redesigning a $3-billion North Sea natural gas platform that it had
been developing for years. The reason it gave: Sea levels were
going to rise as a result of global warming. The original design
called for the platform to sit 30 meters above the ocean's surface,
but the company decided to raise it by a meter or two.29
So the ɹrms went on funding public denial, despite their own better
advice. The powerful International Monetary Fund (IMF) takes the
issue seriously also. They estimated the yearly "external" costs of
using fossil fuels, counting eʃects on public health and the various
environmental ramiɹcations, come to a stupefying $5 trillion per
year.30 This constitutes "one of the biggest externalities ever
estimated," The Wall Street Journal reports, and again quite beyond
Friedman's quaint "neighborhood eʃects."
But the corporate climate-denying organizations, typical of the
associations of powerful ɹrms reviewed in Chapter 1, was fairly
eʃective. A fascinating research article published in the prestigious
Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences applied an
analysis algorithm to a giant number of texts discussing climate and
concluded "organizations with corporate funding were more likely
to have written and disseminated texts meant to polarize the climate
change issue." And further, "corporate funding inɻuences the actual
thematic content of these polarization eʃorts," so that rather than a
non-partisan scientiɹc subject, the issue is treated like a "polarized"
political issue, with corporate-driven talking points always present.
The paper empirically addresses "the actual social arrangements
within which large-scale scientiɹc (mis)information is generated,

and the important role private funding plays in shaping the actual
ideological content of scientiɹc information that is written and
ampliɹed."31
And the commercial media, for their part, have gone on treating
the issue as a debatable political subject rather than increasingly
settled science. As FAIR and other media monitors have
documented, their various current aʃairs programs and hosts have
reliably fought against accepting these well-established scientiɹc
conclusions, unlike their usual more accepting pattern of reporting
on cutting-edge science news.32 Through this policy, they have
followed their institutional obligation not to oʃend the large
corporations that are their advertisers, as well as the class interests
of the wealthy families and stockholders that own all these
corporations. Exactly the kind of thing George Orwell suggested
would happen, back in Chapter 2.
The combination of corporate funding to deny the issue, and
obedient dissembling by the commercial media, has had an eʃect.
Studies, for example by Yale researchers, have found that just 12
percent of Americans believe (correctly) that over 90 percent of
relevant scientists have reached the conclusion of human-caused
global climate change, while 14 percent think less than half of
scientists believe this. Barely more Americans believe climate
change is human-caused than a naturally occurring ɻuctuation.33
Meanwhile, not only the energy industry itself, but also the rest of
the business world have realized that scientists have settled the
basic issue and are taking it seriously. The insurance industry, long
looked to as the business segment that would wake the rest of the
economy up to the issue since it would have to pay the costs of
rising seas and temperatures, has said little on the subject. Business
reporting has found that "Most insurers, including the reinsurance
companies that bear much of the ultimate risk in the industry, have
little time for the arguments heard in some right-wing circles that
climate change isn't happening, and are quite comfortable with the
scientiɹc consensus." However, insurance data-management ɹrms
argue that "insurers haven't changed their tune because ... they

haven't yet experienced hefty, sustained losses attributable to
climate change."34 So the industry's not fooled by "politicized
science," which is nice, but it won't help shift the debate until the
huge costs are already here.
As we'll explore next, the very real consequences of the climate
change we're now largely committed to, have the real potential to
contribute to our many global crises, quite plausibly to the extent of
destroying civilization. Now, this book has argued that concentrated
power is opposed to human freedom, which everyone basically
agrees with, and that capitalist institutions and classes wield a great
deal of that power, which few in prominent intellectual positions
agree with. But here we're looking at the ability of capitalists who
are responsible for our planet-transforming energy emissions to keep
the issue from being seen by the public as basic science, even
though they knew otherwise.
Exxon-Mobil CEO Rex Tillerson, prior to being elevated to the
Trump administration's State Secretary, commented "We have spent
our entire existence adapting, OK? So we will adapt to this. Changes
to weather patterns that move crops around—we'll adapt to that. It's
an engineering problem, and it has engineering solutions."35 This
adaptation is expected to cost trillions and mean the loss of
signiɹcant ecological functioning, but ɹgures like Tillerson and the
giant of capital he ran were able to bring it upon us.
What is the ultimate power? I say to you, it is the power to doom
the houses of man.

Serfdom 2100
With this understanding of the power involved in the twenty-ɹrst
century's environmental issues, we can look at the broader
ramiɹcations for freedom itself. The issue of freedom arises from the
plain reality that our economic system is not sustainable, meaning
that on its current course society will exhaust its precious resources,
get cooked by climate change and become poisoned by its own
pollution. If this comes to pass, it unavoidably means that future
generations will not have access to the basic functioning systems we
rely on today, will not have the ability to enjoy adequate fresh air
and water, and will not be able to enjoy the beneɹts of biodiversity
or "ecosystem services" like pollution ɹltering or the simple
aesthetic value of nature.
This possible future diminishment or collapse of natural systems
means men and women of the future will not have the freedom to
beneɹt from or enjoy such ecological services—a major loss of
positive freedom, the liberty to partake in valuable natural systems.
When future species are extinct, temperatures dramatically higher,
sea levels elevated, pollution-absorbing capacity exhausted and
basic natural processes like decomposition or pollination falling
apart, humanity will have dramatically limited freedom to enjoy the
foundations of life. Indeed, since this process has been going on for
many centuries, we ourselves enjoy less positive ecological freedom
than our ancestors, who might have been able to contemplate now
extinct animals and now vanished landscapes. Our compensation is
a richer material economy built from the consumption of these
systems; although as we've seen, not everyone gets to share in the
spoils. And if the processes of capitalism continue, we're likely to
reach tipping points where more material wealth will be totally
unable to compensate for huge losses of our natural heritage.
To grasp the grave risks to liberty from our economic trajectory,
it's useful to choose a point in the future to evaluate the loss of the
freedom to beneɹt from nature. Many scientiɹc and social studies of

environmental deterioration and social adaptation to it use the end
of the twenty-ɹrst century as a benchmark, and so the year 2100 is
convenient as a milepost to gauge the future we're looking at, if the
world's scientists are any guide. Think of it as a spoiler alert for the
freedom your grandkids will enjoy.
The broadest environmental issue today is global climate change
and its most fundamental consequence is the basic rise in average
temperatures already recorded by the giant majority of scientists.
Exactly how quickly the atmosphere and oceans will warm, and
what parts of the planet will warm when, are subject to natural
scientiɹc debate. But the benchmark projections of temperature
increase come from the IPCC, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, made up of climate scientists, geologists,
meteorologists and oceanographers from around the world. The
IPCC generally is actually conservative in its conclusions, in part
owing to government inɻuence, which prefers not to release
alarming information, but its cautious conclusions can be
legitimately described as representing a major benchmark for the
scientiɹc consensus on climate change.
The IPCC's most recent report, the Climate Change 2014 Synthesis
Report, details its expectations for the climate change of the twenty-
ɹrst century. Their estimates for global mean temperature increase
range by 2100 from 1 to 3.7 degrees Celsius (or 1.8 to 6.6 degrees
Fahrenheit).36 These warming projections have extremely serious
ramiɹcations, way beyond the uncomfortable heat and occasional
ɻooding people casually imagine.
For terrestrial conditions come 2100, scientists writing in the
prominent journal PLOS Biology summarize their work in an
abstract:
We show that although the global mean number of days above
freezing will increase by up to 7% by 2100 under 'business as
usual' ... suitable growing days will actually decrease globally by
up to 11% when other climatic variables that limit plant growth
are considered (i.e., temperature, water availability, and solar

radiation) ... Notably, tropical areas could lose up to 200 plant
growing days per year.37
This potentially catastrophic decline in plant growth is expected to
arise mainly from hotter peak temperatures and decreased water
availability. Beside this global trend, severe regional desiccation (or
drying-out) is expected, for example in the US southwest, which is
believed to have an over 80 percent chance of an extreme drought
during 2050 to 2099, researchers have written in Science Advances.38
Separate research indicates by mid-century, tens of millions of
Americans will endure "smoke waves" caused by the huge plumes of
ɹne smoke and ash billowing out from the giant western wild ɹres
promoted by the projected dryness and summer heat.39
Beyond the obviously crucial issue of food production and
drought, in regions that are hot to begin with, the coming century
looks to be especially unkind. A paper in Nature Climate Change
observes that while the human body can adapt to high temperature
conditions through increased respiration and sweating, there are
natural limits to this process, and by 2100 extremities of
"temperature in the region around the Arabian Gulf are likely to
approach and exceed this critical threshold under the business-as-
usual scenario of future greenhouse gas concentrations."40 This
means that during the summer it will be impossible to live outdoors
in much of the Middle East, a development "likely to severely
impact human habitability in the future." In other words, Europe
hasn't even seen its real refugee crisis yet.
These projections are built upon the IPCC's "business as usual"
scenario, a plausible choice given the world's foot-dragging on even
today's wimpy emissions treaties. The eʃects are likely to take us by
surprise, despite all the warnings of scientists, as researchers in
Science note this century's climate warming "is comparable in
magnitude to that of the largest global changes in the past 65
million years but is orders of magnitude more rapid."41 They
conclude that "The combination of high climate-change velocity and
multi-dimensional human fragmentation will present terrestrial

ecosystems with an environment that is unprecedented in recent
evolutionary history." Other research in PNAS predicts "future
climate states with no current analog and the disappearance of some
extant climates ... Novel climates are projected to develop primarily
in the tropics and subtropics, whereas disappearing climates are
concentrated in tropical montane regions and the poleward portions
of continents."42 They suggest up to nearly half "of the Earth's
terrestrial 
surface 
may 
respectively 
experience 
novel 
and
disappearing climates by 2100 AD."
That combination of habitat fragmentation, and the decline of
other natural systems owing to climate disruption, means that when
Science ran a research article by a very large team of scientists that
developed "Global Biodiversity Scenarios for the Year 2100," they
found that climate was the second most important driver of
"biodiversity change," after human land-use change.43 They found
"There is clear evidence for nonlinearities and synergistic
interactions among many of the global change drivers." Surprising
combinations of eʃects like these mean that scenarios and
projections for the future are not real predictions, because of the
complicated nature of the systems being studied. These earnest
technical papers are projections based on present observation and
current best scientiɹc understanding, not guaranteed for sure, but
the best we have.
Less complicated than precisely which of our "externalities" is
most responsible for mass extinction is the relatively simple subject
of sea-level rise. The IPCC has corresponding estimates of expected
sea-level rise to go with its temperature-increase projections,
ranging from 0.4 to 0.63 meters (1.3 to 2.0 feet).44 The median and
upper projections would mean serious disruption to all coastal and
low-lying areas, which of course are where human civilization has
developed most of its largest cities and biggest investments.
Other scientists base their projections on higher sea levels, in part
because more recent work suggests that the worldwide "climate
sensitivity," or the amount of climate-system warming for a given
amount of carbon emissions, is recently appearing to be toward the

higher end of the IPCC's projections. Work published in the Journal
of Climate indicates this is largely owing to the tendency of tropical
clouds to thin out more as warming continues, thus adding to the
warming per ton of CO2.45 Research in the journal Nature, using
such higher sea-level increases, projects that:
... a 2100 SLR [Sea Level Rise] of 0.9m places a land area
projected to house 4.2 million people at risk of inundation,
whereas 1.8m aʃects 13.1 million people—approximately two
times larger than indicated by current populations. These results
suggest that the absence of protective measures could lead to US
population movements of a magnitude similar to the twentieth
century Great Migration of African-Americans.46
Pretty high stakes, but as we saw above the power of the energy
industry has been enough to force this reality on us.
Exactly how this will play out for any speciɹc coastal region is
unclear, owing to the large number of local variables, but some
estimates have been made. Adding to the pressures on a crucial
Arab country, "Without adaptation, a rise by 0.5m would displace
3.8 million people in the most fertile part of the Nile River Delta,"
reports an article in Science; others observe a giant increase in the
likelihood and scale of future ɻoods on the US East Coast.47 Beside
the direct loss of real property values, economists project ɹnancial
asset losses from twenty-ɹrst century climate change in the trillions
of dollars.
Below the rising sea surface, losses from this out-of-control
climate extend to ocean-based commerce and food production. A
large team of scientists in PLOS Biology expected a drop in
phytoplankton concentrations, which is menacing if you consider
that the tiny microorganisms jointly called plankton are a base of
the entire marine food chain. "By 2100, projected changes in
temperature, dissolved oxygen, pH, and primary food supply vary
signiɹcantly among regions," but the researchers report "robust"

conɹdence in the upward trend of ocean temperature, and the
downward trend of oxygen and pH.48
Indeed, the oceans appear to be in for a terrible beating over this
century. Scientists in Nature expect a wide occurrence of elevated
CO2 levels or "hypercapnia," which can produce behavioral and
neurological changes in sea animals. "We predict that the present-
day amplitude of the natural oscillations in oceanic CO2
concentration will be ampliɹed by up to tenfold in some regions by
2100." This means "major ɹsheries" may be exposed and
horrifyingly, "hypercapnia is expected in up to half the surface
ocean by 2100, assuming a high-emissions scenario."49 Indeed,
between ocean warming, acidiɹcation, hypercapnia and other
stressors, biologists writing in Science assembled a model projecting
"the global collapse of all taxa currently ɹshed by the mid-21st
century," and found "rates of resource collapse increased and
recovery 
potential, 
stability, 
and 
water 
quality 
decreased
exponentially with declining diversity."50
Kolbert's book describes the decline of sea organisms that rely on
calcium shells or plates, including starɹsh, clams, barnacles and
coral. These organisms are vulnerable to the "acidiɹcation" of the
world's oceans, since the carbon dioxide emitted as an externality
by our capitalist economy chemically dissociates in seawater into
acidic compounds. This acid has built up in the seas as our
exponential Industrial Revolution has continued, to the point where
the legendary Great Barrier Reef of Australia is projected to be a
dead rubble pile by 2050. As the problem has continued, marine
biologists have identiɹed a threshold level of pH=7.8, at which
"the ecosystem starts to crash ... which is what we're expecting to
happen by 2100."51
Of course this is just for the coming century and the really long-
term eʃects are far worse. For example, a report in PNAS indicates
that while projections of sea-level rise through 2100 are generally a
meter or less, the climate system's long-term adjustments are
"roughly an order to magnitude higher."52 This means that

"unabated carbon emissions up to the year 2100 would commit an
eventual global sea-level rise of 4.2-9.9 m ... we ɹnd that land that
is home to more than 20 million people is implicated and is widely
distributed among diʃerent states and coasts." So the full impacts of
climate change have a far longer horizon than the twenty-ɹrst
century. Among those potential coastal losses are several World
Heritage sites—the locations of special global historical or cultural
signiɹcance designated by UNESCO, the United Nations cultural
body. In this longer run of millennial time, scientists expect 136 of
these precious structures or locations will be impacted, including
some of humanity's most beautiful and important monuments,
buildings, neighborhoods and ruins that would be sinking or
submerged.53
All these issues are intimately connected to issues of freedom. At
the least, there is an issue of positive freedom, the "freedom to" do
diʃerent things, in the sense that the irrevocable changes to the
world made in our time will strip future generations of the freedom
to enjoy nature. Many men and women of the future may not be
free to drink clean water, or to explore rich, thriving coral reefs, or
catch the ɹsh that mature among them. They will be unable to enjoy
the simple splendor of natural settings and processes that we
presently take for granted, even in their diminished state.
Indeed, are we not currently limited in our freedom owing to the
decisions of our ancestors? We're not free to observe a pod of the
near extinct Right Whale or the totally extinct Giant Sloth. Right
now, millions globally lack drinkable water or have their homes lost
to growing deserts, all the result of economic decisions made by past
generations. These are irrevocable changes and more than losing
pretty megafauna, it's the loss of the basic systems that include
them, and on which we rely, that's important here. Seen through the
lens of the long-term eʃects of our decisions, our descendants look
less likely to have built heaven on Earth and more like the unfree
serfs of the Middle Ages, their standards of living dramatically cut
down and their freedoms sharply pulled back, but now thanks to
decisions made by their forebears in our times.

At other times, the relationship of ecology and freedom is more
synchronized. In 2014, 7500 gallons of a synthetic chemical used in
coal processing leaked from a storage tank into the Elk River in
West Virginia, making the water reek of licorice and forcing
300,000 people to avoid the poisoned water for drinking or
cleaning. The New York Times observed that eʃorts to encourage the
state to adopt strong environmental regulations "died a quiet death
with barely any consideration by state and local lawmakers," while
The Wall Street Journal found the "Chemical-Spill Site Avoided Broad
Regulatory Scrutiny," typical in the neoliberal Age of Friedman.54
They observed that "The chemical that leaked into the river, 4-
methylcyclohexane methanol, isn't closely tracked by federal
programs. Before last week's spill, a state regulator said
environmental inspectors hadn't visited the site since 1991." The
chemical company whose tank ruptured? Freedom Industries Inc.
When future generations look at the world we've left them, will
they think back on our era as representing the freest time for
people? Or will they see our short-term-based actions, creating huge
ecological "debts" for them to pay, as closer to how the great US
intellectual and freed slave Frederick Douglass saw the "boasted
liberty" of slave owners in the old South: "an unholy license."55
That sounds to me how future generations will see some of our
liberties, if we proceed along our present course.
So for our next and ɹnal chapter, let's pivot to the positive and
take up the question of how we can avoid plunging into the abyss
that the world's scientists are telling us is dead ahead.
Endnotes
1. Jamie Weinstein, "George Will Calls Global Warming 'A
Religion,' 'Socialism By the Back Door,'" The Daily Caller, 27
April 2014.
2. Upton Sinclair, I Candidate for Governor: And How I Got Licked,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press,
1934, p.109.

3. Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2002, p. 30.
4. Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2007, p. 87.
5. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1990, p. 31.
6. Ibid, p. 32.
7. Ibid, p. 213, 214.
8. Ibid, p. 218.
9. Brian Walker et al, "Looming Global-Scale Failures and Missing
Institutions," Science, Vol. 325, No. 5946, 11 September 2009.
10. Paul Collier, The Plundered Planet, New York: Oxford University
Press, 2010, p. 11.
11. Ibid, p. 32, 18, 195.
12. Paul Hawken, The Ecology of Commerce, New York: Harper,
2010, p. xvii, 88.
13. Ibid, p. 42, 108.
14. Ibid, p. 103, 20.
15. John Bellamy Foster, Ecology Against Capitalism, New York:
Monthly Review Press, 2002, p. 52.
16. Ibid, p. 58-9.
17. Colin Waters et al, "The Anthropocene is functionally and
stratigraphically distinct from the Holocene," Science, Vol. 351,
No. 6269, 8 January 2016.
18. Will Steʃen et al, "The trajectory of the Anthropocene: The
Great Acceleration," The Anthropocene Review, Vol. 2, No. 1,
April 2015.
19. Michael Wines, "Wells Dry, Fertile Plains Turn to Dust," The
New York Times, 19 May 2013.

20. William Neuman, "For Miners, Increasing Risk on a Mountain
at the Heart of Bolivia's Identity," The New York Times, 16
September 2014.
21. William Ripple et al, "Saving the World's Terrestrial
Megafauna," BioScience, 27 July 2016.
22. Nick Haddad, "Habitat fragmentation and its lasting impact on
Earth's ecosystems," Science Advances, Vol. 1, No. 2, 20 March
2015.
23. Douglas McCauley et al, "Marine defaunation: Animal loss in
the global ocean," Science, Vol. 347, No. 6219, 16 January
2015.
24. Elizabeth Kolbert, The Sixth Extinction, New York: Henry Holt,
2014, p. 138.
25. Tim Newbold et al, "Has land use pushed terrestrial
biodiversity beyond the planetary boundary? A global
assessment," Science, Vol. 353, No. 6296, 15 July 2016.
26. Mark Urban, "Accelerating extinction risk from climate
change," Science, Vol. 348, No. 6234, 1 May 2015.
27. John Cook et al, "Consensus on consensus: a synthesis of
consensus estimates on human-caused global warming,"
Environmental Research Letters, Vol. 11, No. 4, 13 April 2016.
28. John Cook et al, "Quantifying the consensus on anthropogenic
global warming in the scientiɹc literature," Environmental
Research Letters, Vol. 8, No. 2, 15 May 2013.
29. Amy Lieberman and Susanne Rust, "Big Oil braced for global
warming while it fought regulations," Los Angeles Times, 31
December 2015.
30. Ian Talley, "IMF Estimates Trillions in Hidden Fossil-Fuel
Costs," The Wall Street Journal, 18 May 2015.

31. Justin Farrell, "Corporate funding and ideological polarization
about climate change," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, Vol. 113, No. 1, 5 January 2016.
32. Peter Hart, "In Denial on Climate Change," Extra!, 1 May 2007.
33. Anthony Leiserowitz et al, Climate change in the American mind:
April 2014, New Haven, CT: Yale Project on Climate Change
Communication, April 2014.
34. Eduardo Porter, "For Insurers, No Doubts on Climate Change,"
The New York Times, 14 May 2013.
35. Chris Mooney, "Rex Tillerson's view of climate change: It's just
an 'engineering problem,'" Washington Post, 14 December 2016.
36. R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.), Climate Change 2014
Synthesis Report, IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 2014, p. 60.
37. Camilo Mora et al, "Suitable Days for Plant Growth Disappear
under Projected Climate Change: Potential Human and Biotic
Vulnerability," PLOS Biology, 10 June 2015.
38. Benjamin Cook, Toby Ault, and James Smerdon,
"Unprecedented 21st century drought risk in the American
Southwest and Central Plains," Science Advances, Vol. 1, No. 1,
12 February 2015.
39. Jia Liu et al, "Particulate air pollution from wildɹres in the
Western US under climate change," Climatic Change, July 2016.
40. Jeremy Pal and Elfatih Eltahir, "Future temperature in
southwest Asia projected to exceed a threshold for human
adaptability," Nature Climate Change, 26 October 2015.
41. Noah Diʃenbaugh and Christopher Field, "Changes in
Ecologically Critical Terrestrial Climate Conditions," Science,
Vol. 341, No. 6145, 2 August 2013.
42. John Williams et al, "Projected distributions of novel and
disappearing climates by 2100 AD," Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences, Vol. 104, No. 14, 30 January 2007.
43. Osvaldo Sala et al, "Global Biodiversity Scenarios for the Year
2100," Science, Vol. 287, No. 5459, 10 March 2000.
44. Pachauri and Meyer, p. 60.
45. Florent Brient and Tapio Schneider, "Constraints on Climate
Sensitivity from Space-Based Measurements of Low-Cloud
Reɻection," Journal of Climate, Vol. 29, No. 16, 28 July 2016.
46. Mathew Hauer et al, "Millions projected to be at risk from sea-
level rise in the continental United States," Nature Climate
Change, Vol. 6, 14 March 2016.
47. Josh Willis and John Church, "Regional Sea-Level Projection,"
Science, Vol. 336, No. 6081, 4 May 2012; Christopher Little et
al, "Joint projections of US East Coast sea level and storm
surge," Nature Climate Change, Vol. 5, 21 September 2015.
48. Camilo Mora et al, "Biotic and Human Vulnerability to
Projected Change in Biogeochemistry over the 21st Century,"
PLOS Biology, Vol. 11, No. 10, October 2013.
49. Ben McNeil and Tristan Sasse, "Future ocean hypercapnia
driven by anthropogenic ampliɹcation of the natural CO2
cycle," Nature, Vol. 529, No. 7586, 20 January 2016.
50. Boris Worm et al, "Impacts of Biodiversity Loss on Ocean
Ecosystem Services," Science, Vol. 314, No. 5800, 3 November
2006.
51. Kolbert, The Sixth Extinction, p. 130, 118.
52. Benjamin Strauss et al, "Carbon choices determine US cities
committed to futures below sea level," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 112, No. 44, 3 November
2015.
53. Christophe McGlade and Paul Ekins, "The geographical
distribution of fossil fuels unused when limiting global warming

to 2°C," Nature, Vol. 517, 8 January 2015.
54. Trip Gabriel and Coral Davenport, "Calls for Oversight in West
Virginia Went Unheeded," The New York Times, 13 January
2014; Alexandra Berzon and Kris Maher, "Chemical-Spill Site
Avoided Broad Regulatory Scrutiny," The Wall Street Journal, 13
January 2014.
55. Frederick Douglass in Philip Foner and Yuval Taylor, ed,
Frederick Douglass: Selected Speeches and Writings, Chicago, IL:
Chicago Review Press, 1999, p. 196.

Chapter 5
Socialism and Freedom

Democratic Economic Organization
Economic equality is not social liberation. It is just this which
Marxism and all the other schools of authoritarian Socialism have
never understood ... The urge for social justice can only develop
properly and be eʃective, when it grows out of man's sense of
personal freedom and is based on that. In other words Socialism
will be free, or it will not be at all.
Rudolf Rocker1
The public life of countries with limited freedom is so poverty-
stricken, so miserable, so rigid, so unfruitful, precisely because,
through the exclusion of democracy, it cuts oʃ the living sources
of all spiritual riches and progress ... Socialism in life demands a
complete spiritual transformation in the masses degraded by
centuries of bourgeois class rule.
Rosa Luxemburg2
With capitalism revealed as a system of power over society,
information, government and the environment, we've got to
consider alternatives. This can be a scary prospect for a lot of
people, since most of us count on a functioning economic system of
some type to stay alive, so tampering with it can make people
nervous. But just as societies around the world confronted a system
of illegitimate economic power when they outlawed slavery in the
nineteenth century, the biggest job for our generation in the twenty-
ɹrst century is abolishing private ownership of productive capital
and the gigantic power arising from it.
It's scary but exciting too, and one good piece of news is that
many of our greatest modern ɹgures have left us a legacy of
signposts we can follow on the journey. The main goal will be to see

what kinds of social organization could help us limit concentrated
power and thus maximize freedom. The main challenge will be to
get rid of modern class structures and towering economic power,
without in the process creating too strong of another power center,
in government or elsewhere. The goal, in other words, is to build a
free socialist society.
With capitalism staggering from crisis to crisis, public support for
the idea has only built despite reliably hostile media treatment.
Rasmussen Reports, a polling agency that actually tends to skew
conservative, reported a ɹnding in 2009 that barely more than half
(53 percent) of US adults believe capitalism is better than
socialism.3 
Twenty 
percent 
preferred 
socialism—impressive
considering the total lack of media support—and those under 30 are
almost evenly split. A Pew poll found almost a third of Americans
have a positive view of socialism, whatever exactly they feel it
means.4 Let's review the basic idea and see the reaction from the
ɹgures most eagerly associated with the call to freedom today—the
right wing. I'm sure they'll be very mature about it.

The Big Idea
Socialism, like many political and social traditions, is made up of a
variety of diʃerent schools and therefore diʃerent deɹnitions of
what the idea is. There tends to be a core of features that a socialist
economic system would be expected to have, including equality and
a limit to the scale of private property. However, the most essential
element of the socialist tradition is workforce control over
production and investment—economic democracy.
What would social control over the economy look like? On the
individual level, it would mean that when you go to work, you and
your coworkers would have access to the information that
management usually keeps to itself, and you would together be in
charge of work decisions—what to produce, how much and using
what methods. In other words, a democratic workplace.
But of course a decent standard of living requires a great deal of
coordination with other workplaces, to keep necessary goods and
services ɻowing through their often long production chains in a
reasonably eɽcient fashion. This communication across industries is
enormously helped by today's sophisticated telecommunication
technology, which could also allow diʃerent workforces to
collaborate together to satisfy an agreed-upon plan. This interaction
among diʃerent production units, run by their own workforces, is
called "free association," and requires that workers be in charge of
the capital equipment and the installations they need to work. It
also demands a broad desire to cooperate toward economic goals on
a consensual, democratic basis, a priority called "solidarity."
Organization within communities would probably be essential,
too—to ensure that production is carried on safely and that local
areas will be able to prosper economically. These kinds of
coordination will require extensive expertise, as do many areas of
the economy. This is ɹne—socialism isn't opposed to expertise, just
the practice of granting power to those with that expertise. Doctors
and surgeons have enormous technical skill, but that skill doesn't

usually give them the authority to make you get an organ transplant
without your consent. The same should be true with economic
planning and management, since planners and managers are after
all skilled workers, and their products—economic plans—should be
chosen democratically by representatives of aʃected workers,
neighborhoods and the broader economy.
These basic contours would mean a much freer society than our
current capitalist one. Obviously, this bottom-up picture of running
an economy is very diʃerent from the countries called "socialist" in
recent history, a point we'll come back to. But with this basic
description in hand of workforce control over investment and the
means of production, how have conservatives taken to the idea?
The Right's view since the advent of the movement is that
socialism would mean tyranny, while the free market involves no
authority or power over anyone. By now we've seen how the latter
claim is worthless and sadly the ɹrst claim fares no better. The
Right's view was given by Friedman, when he made the typical
claim that socialism requires total state control over the economy,
where "all jobs are under the direct control of political authorities."5
Hayek, for his part, claimed "socialism means the abolition of
private enterprise, of private ownership of the means of production,
and the creation of a system of 'planned economy' in which the
entrepreneur working for proɹt is replaced by a central planning
body."6
A founder of the archconservative "Austrian" economics tradition,
Ludwig von Mises, gave another great example of hoary European
reactionary thinking in his The Anti-Capitalistic Mentality. Like other
libertarians, he insisted that "Wealth can be acquired only by
serving the customers," and "Here everybody's station in life
depends on his own doing."7 From this he concluded that in a
market economy, "It is ... exclusively your fault if you do not
outstrip" the successful ɹgures in society. And since "merit alone"
decides your station, "the unsuccessful feel themselves insulted and
humiliated. Hate and enmity against all those who superseded them

must result."8 Mises, then, attributed socialist movements to
emotions of jealousy and resentment.
Following their long-running pattern, none of these authors feels
the obligation to include more than a breathtakingly few quotes or
citations from any actual socialists of any stripe. Most often, no
ɹgure on the Left is quoted at all, let alone the strongest advocates.
Another expression of their intellectual opportunism, this also helps
them completely fail to register the central feature of socialism—
worker control.
Hayek argued that freedom should be conɹned to its negative, not
positive, meaning:
... freedom from coercion, freedom from the arbitrary power of
other men, release from the ties which left the individual no
choice but obedience to the orders of a superior to whom he was
attached. The new freedom promised, however, was to be
freedom from necessity ... Freedom in this sense is, of course,
merely another name for power or wealth ... The demand for the
new freedom was thus only another name for the old demand for
an equal distribution of wealth.
He added that "the promise of greater freedom has become one of
the most eʃective weapons of socialist propaganda."9
Any downward redistribution of wealth has been total anathema
for the political Right throughout history, based in traditionally
powerful social classes that tend to own a disproportionately large
share of the world's money and productive assets. So, while
defenders of capitalism openly oppose the positive concept of
freedom, they claim negative freedom is provided by the market.
But the market in fact fails to uphold the negative "freedom from"
coercion, which is opposed to concentrated power, since capitalism
is itself a system of power for all the reasons reviewed in Chapter 1.
So in reality capitalism fails to meet either of these standards of
freedom.
But Hayek's basic connection of the socialist ideals of equality and
classlessness to positive freedom is essentially correct. That goal was

also condemned by the Friedmans, who prefer equality of
opportunity to what they call "equality of outcome. Everyone
should have the same level of living or of income, should ɹnish the
race at the same time. Equality of outcome is in clear conɻict with
liberty."10 This is immediately pretty weak—I've never seen a race
where the loser is starved to death, but this is very much in the kitty
if you lose in the global marketplace. Some Right writers have been
slightly more reasonable on this point, as when Hayek conceded
sensibly that "What socialism promised was not an absolutely equal,
but a more just and more equal, distribution. Not equality in the
absolute sense but 'greater equality' is the only goal which is
seriously aimed at."11 And in fact many socialists will countenance
somewhat higher incomes for those engaged in very unpleasant or
productive work. But the point is adequate equality, such that no
one holds major power over anyone and no classes of people have
that ability.
Also, there is the claim that making dramatically more money
than others is an indispensible incentive to encourage people to
work. Hayek again claims "At least for great numbers some external
pressure is needed if they are to give their best."12 The Friedmans
state coldly that the market created "the incentive to transform our
society over the past two centuries ... Of course, there were many
losers along the way—probably more losers than winners. We don't
remember their names. But for the most part they went in with their
eyes open."13 Their outcome as beggars and prisoners is an
acceptable loss requiring no comment, apparently.
The Right's other common insistence, that socialism means "big
government" and "government control over all jobs," struggles with
the fact that the core socialist idea, of workforce control over capital
and investment, overlaps heavily with the platform of anarchism,
the revolutionary cousin of socialism. Daniel Guerin literally wrote
the book on Anarchism, which in this school means a very organized
society, not a chaotic lack of order but lack of power, heavily based
on grassroots organization and worker control in the area of the
economy. He viewed anarchism as closely related to the more

bottom-up schools of socialism, which he called "libertarian
socialism," for which "the ideal to be pursued must surely be this
direct democracy which, if pressed to the limits in both economic
self-management and territorial administration, would destroy the
last vestiges of any kind of authority."14 To Guerin, this was a major
plus, as economic and political power are seen to be enemies of
freedom, as this book has reviewed. It's hard to square the insistence
of every right-wing radio host that socialism means Big Brother's
hand on your shoulder, if you consider that one of the wings of
socialism is known as anarchism.
This basic picture of socialism as economic democracy, run
through some form of worker organization, was at the heart of
socialist thinking for many years, reaching its best expression in
writers like Anton Pannekoek. A mid-century Dutch scientist and
Marxist, his book Workers' Councils is almost a manual on healthy
socialist organization. A sampling:
The great task of the workers is the organization of production on
a new basis ... Collaboration of equal companions replaces the
command of masters and obedience of servants ... The ruling
body in this shop-organization is the entirety of the collaborating
workers. They assemble to discuss matters and in assembly take
their decisions ... In great factories and plants the number of
workers is too large to gather in one meeting, and far too large for
a real and thorough discussion. Here decisions can only be taken
in two steps, by the combined action of assemblies of the separate
sections of the plant, and assemblies of central committees of
delegates ... The delegates constituting them have been sent by
sectional assemblies with special instructions; they return to these
assemblies to report on the discussion and its result, and after
further deliberation the same or other delegates may go up with
new instructions ... information is not restricted to the personnel
of the shop; it is a public matter, open to all outsiders.15
Rudolf Rocker, a German social philosopher, agreed, writing
thoughtfully that:

... a Socialist economic order cannot be created by the decrees
and statutes of a government, but only by the solidaric
collaboration of the workers with hand or brain in each special
branch of production; that is, through the taking over the
management of all plants by the producers themselves ...
[practical experience] has shown us that economic questions in
the Socialist meaning cannot be solved by a government ... If the
world could be set free by decrees, there would long ago have
been no problems left in Russia.16
Erich Fromm, the inɻuential social psychologist, supported a not
dissimilar "communitarian socialism," in which "every working
person would be an active and responsible participant, where work
would be attractive and meaningful, where capital would not
employ labor, but labor would employ capital."17 Bertrand Russell,
the eminent British philosopher, explored these issues for years,
generally maintaining that "the ultimate political power should be
democratic ... Unless there is popular control, there can be no
reason to expect the State to conduct its economic enterprises except
for its own enrichment, and therefore exploitation will merely take
a new form. Democracy, accordingly, must be accepted as part of
the deɹnition of a Socialist regime."18
This focus on economic democracy and workforce control does
indeed have some obstacles to contend with, like the issue of the
industrial scale of operation. Ron Reosti writes in the enjoyable
anthology Imagine: Living in a Socialist USA, that "despite the
destructiveness of corporate power in our current society, some
enterprises of that size will continue to exist in a socialist economy.
Their economies of scale will be beneɹcial, provided they are run
democratically."19 Richard Wolʃ, a prominent Marxist economist,
suggests workers "must function collectively as their own board of
directors," within democratically organized representative bodies
across industries and regions. "Deɹned in this way, socialism would
entail a speciɹc kind of interconnected democratization of the
economy and the society."20

These diʃerent conceptions of social control of investment
represent a healthy diversity of emphasis and broad agreement on
some of the fundamental principles of a socialist economy. And this
participatory strain of socialism is as native to the US as the rest of
the world, shown when American labor leader and Socialist Party
presidential candidate Eugene Debs denied "that the industries can
be taken over and operated by the workers without being
industrially organized." This was meant in addition to the broader
political action with which Debs is more identiɹed.21
A similarly bottom-up approach to socialism was suggested by US
economists Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel in their very
stimulating but little remembered book Unorthodox Marxism, which
proposed democratic councils of workplaces as one of "socialism's
deɹning contours." They suggest "Councils are conducive to direct
communication, long-term personal relationships, and conɻict
mediation involving all parties equally," with the socialist goal that
"work will take on a new meaning. No longer controlled from
without, instead of being a dreaded means to attain the end of
leisure time consumption ... work will become an end in itself ... The
councils will eventually transform the workplace into an arena
where people can eʃectively engage their creative powers."22
As far as more orthodox Marxist approaches, this most prominent
school within the broad socialist tradition has a conɻicted record on
the issues of power and freedom that have dominated this book.
Until the 1910s, the heart of the Marxist movement was represented
by ɹgures like Pannekoek, or Rosa Luxemburg, who held that
socialist movements depend "on the organization and the direct,
independent action of the masses."23 She saw that economic
democracy "possesses a powerful corrective—namely, the living
movement of the masses, their unending pressure. And the more
democratic the institutions, the livelier and stronger the pulse-beat
of the political life of the masses, the more direct and complete is
their inɻuence."24
On the other hand, V.I. Lenin, who became the face of global
communism after the Russian Revolution led to the creation of the

USSR, has a shifting record on the nature of socialist organization.
Before gaining power, his views tended to align with the socialist
majority that Pannekoek and Luxemburg represented. Lenin agreed
with and indeed emphasized the traditional Marxist concept that the
state must "wither away" after power is no longer in the hands of
capitalists. In The State and Revolution he wrote that socialist
parliaments or republics would still be inadequate since "democracy
is also a state," meaning that even democratic states are power
systems, too.25 In the course of democratizing the economy, he said
the state must "transform" from its current authoritarian form "into
something which is no longer a state in the proper sense."26
Despite these rather anarchist-esque descriptions of worker
control, Lenin talked a very diʃerent line once in power in
traditionally authoritarian Russia, and his actual practice in the
Soviet Union will be explored in a moment. He came to reject what
he called "Left communism," meaning those socialists who
demanded worker control over economic activity, rather than a
centralized state allegedly working in their interest. While
Luxemburg celebrated the development of the intellect of the
people, Lenin held that party elites had a duty of "awakening and
enlightening the undeveloped, downtrodden, ignorant peasant
masses," and party members "must not sink to the level of the
masses, to the level of the backward strata of the class."27 And
certainly, Lenin's dictator-like behavior once in power included
orders that the Central Committee should dictate to local
committees, appoint their leadership and decide the organizational
rules.
Many socialists strenuously opposed Lenin's elitist views,
including Luxemburg, who claimed that "The ultra-centralism asked
by Lenin is full of the sterile spirit of the over-seer. It is not a
positive and creative spirit."28 Mocking his claim that "it is no
longer the proletarians, but certain intellectuals in our party who
need to be educated in the matters of organization and discipline,"
she wrote "Nothing will more surely enslave a young labor movement to
an intellectual elite hungry for power than this bureaucratic strait

jacket."29 To this socialist tradition, Leninism was a right-wing
deviation and really a rejection of the socialist ideals of broad
participation in social and economic decisions, and the hope that
the man and woman in the street can freely share leadership roles
without a need for bosses and enforcers.
Built into many of these diʃerent descriptions of socialist
structures is a need and a desire for a spiritual change among
humanity, with the goal of waking up the millions of us who trudge
into work every day and are ground down into a passive role where
we take orders from the top. Socialism as discussed here would
contribute to a spiritual change involving empowerment of the rank-
and-ɹle workingman and woman, helping them to feel capable of
contributing to not just the muscle but the brains of the economic
process. Socialism would both promote and require this change, as
the main part of the workforce would be participating in the
economic decision-making currently monopolized by the owners
and managers of capital. It would require them to strongly desire
free and fair outcomes, and prioritize working in solidarity with
other democratic workplaces through free association. It would
transform humankind.
Importantly, a strong tendency among people discussing or
debating changes in social organization is to propose (or demand) a
full blueprint of the proposed social structure. This is very
understandable, in our scientiɹc and engineered age when
diagrammatic representation is naturally prized. However, the
diversity of views quoted in this book suggests that our level of
understanding of social structures is far more modest than our
understanding of engines and computers.
All this means is that the proper approach to these issues is an
experimental one—instead of mapping the future society out in
detail, we should be encouraging diʃerent peoples and communities
and industries to try out diʃerent methods and conɹgurations of
participatory socialism. That can accompany the political eʃort that
tends to dominate headlines. This experimental approach would
acknowledge our limited understanding of social evolution, follow

the scientiɹc approach we rely on everywhere else, and allow for
diʃerent peoples and economies to play to their own strengths and
explore the various possibilities within a broadly socialist economic
system, where important productive property is not owned and
controlled by a small upper crust.
A number of radical theoreticians and economists have, however,
prepared rather detailed projections for how societies could be
organized to allow for the maximum level of democracy and
grassroots participation in economic decisions. One of the best-
known examples is Parecon, a proposed system of economic
organization based on councils and recursive decision-making
developed by Albert and Hahnel. Proposals like these are quite
handy as jumping-oʃ points for discussion and socialist creative
thinking, but we should also have the humility to realize that we're
unlikely to get major social change right the ɹrst time, and that
diʃerent peoples and industries will naturally take to diʃerent and
diverse variants on the core idea.
Having seen how socialist ideas might broaden human freedom,
and the Right's somewhat disingenuous response, we should
consider an important technique of resisting socialism: repressing its
most prominent advocates.

Sanitized Radicals
Years ago the conservative National Review happily described the
Friedmans' memoir, Two Lucky People, including how "Rose
Friedman quotes that all-too true adage, which is really the
enduring message of this book, that 'If one is not a socialist before
the age of thirty, one has no heart; if one remains a socialist after
that age of thirty, one has no head."30 This is a classic saw on the
Right.
Someone should tell that to notorious imbecile Albert Einstein,
who wrote about the need "to stop the intolerable tyranny of the
owners of the means of production (land, machinery) over the
wage-earners, in the broadest sense of the term."31 In 1949 he wrote
an extensive essay on his political and economic views for the ɹrst
issue of the great socialist journal Monthly Review:
The economic anarchy of capitalist society as it exists today is, in
my opinion, the real source of the evil ... Insofar as the labor
contract is "free," what the worker receives is determined not by
the real value of the goods he produces, but by his minimum
needs and by the capitalists' requirements for labor power in
relation to the number of workers competing for jobs ... Private
capital tends to become concentrated in few hands, partly because
of competition among the capitalists, and partly because
technological development and the increasing division of labor
encourage the formation of larger units of production at the
expense of smaller ones. The result of these developments is an
oligarchy of private capital the enormous power of which cannot
be eʃectively checked even by a democratically organized
political society. This is true since the members of legislative
bodies are selected by political parties, largely ɹnanced or
otherwise inɻuenced by private capitalists who, for all practical
purposes, separate the electorate from the legislature ...
Moreover, under existing conditions, private capitalists inevitably

control, directly or indirectly, the main sources of information
(press, radio, education). It is thus extremely diɽcult, and indeed
in most cases quite impossible, for the individual citizen to come
to objective conclusions and to make intelligent use of his
political rights ... I am convinced there is only one way to
eliminate these grave evils, namely through the establishment of a
socialist economy, accompanied by an educational system which
would be oriented toward social goals. In such an economy, the
means of production are owned by society itself and are utilized
in a planned fashion.32
Einstein was explicitly skeptical that the workforce is "free," and
indeed recognized the "enormous power" of concentrated capital.
Rose Friedman and the National Review might have considered
Einstein's position before shooting oʃ their mouths about dumb
socialists.
Another man "with no head" was civil rights hero Martin Luther
King, whose critical view of economic power and support for labor
was reviewed in Chapter 1. Although rewritten by mainstream
media and scholarship as a liberal mainly focused on segregation
and voting rights, he grew signiɹcantly more radical over his too-
short career. Notably, at the time of his receipt of the Nobel Prize in
1964, he told the press "We feel we have much to learn from
Scandinavia's democratic socialist tradition," although the extensive
Nordic social support system does not extend to full worker control.
More revealingly, while jailed in Selma, Alabama, King's words are
recorded as, "If we are going to achieve real equality, the United
States will have to adopt a modiɹed form of socialism."33 Very few
Americans are aware of this aspect of King's thought, but it certainly
shaped his activism, which grew more radical and fully political
until his assassination while supporting a public sanitation workers'
strike.
Mahatma Gandhi had over his career conɻicted views of the
subject, with Norman Finkelstein's What Gandhi Says quoting his
"hope" that India's independence ɹght was "only part of the general

struggle of colonial peoples against world capitalism and
imperialism." On the other hand, he didn't support the key socialist
goal of relieving great property owners of their productive property.
But he can surely speak with some authority about how powerless
people can change society: "[C] apitalists were after all few in
number. The workers were many. But capital was well organized
and had learnt to combine. If labor realized its inherent strength and
the secret of combination it would rule capital instead of being
ruled by it."34
Or consider George Orwell, who is probably more identiɹed than
any other English-speaking writer with indicting the horrors of
communist totalitarianism. His books Animal Farm and 1984 are
globally known for their satires of Stalinist thought control, his
writing is cited by the Friedmans and other conservatives, and his
work is often found in conservative and even libertarian book
catalogs.35 This is pretty hilarious, considering for example that
Orwell wrote in 1946 that "Every line of serious work that I have
written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly, against
totalitarianism and for democratic socialism, as I understand it."36
Elsewhere, when Orwell described his experiences ɹghting
fascism during the Spanish Civil War in his famous Homage to
Catalonia, he observed that while there was "a section of the
Socialists, standing for workers' control," there were other nominal
socialists calling for "centralized government and a militarized
army."37 This cleavage in the socialist tradition will come up in the
next section, but for Orwell socialism required not only "common
ownership of the means of production," but also "approximate
equality of incomes (it need be no more than approximate), political
democracy, and abolition of all hereditary privilege," aiming for "a
world-state of free and equal human beings."38
Perhaps with a premonition of Friedman and Hayek themselves,
Orwell also remarked that "In every country in the world a huge
tribe of party-hacks and sleek little professors are busy 'proving' that
Socialism means no more than a planned state-capitalism with the
grab-motive left intact. But fortunately there also exists a vision of

Socialism quite diʃerent from this," describing a "classless
society."39 And in The Road to Wigan Pier, Orwell's study of the
English working class, he found that capitalism "makes freedom
impossible," and that "The only thing for which we can combine is
the underlying ideal of Socialism: justice and liberty."40
A yet more inspirational ɹgure is Malala Yousafzai, the brave
Pakistani girl who was shot in the head by Taliban gunmen for her
activism for girls' education in Pakistan. Her trip to the US, and
meeting with Obama, were heavily covered by US commercial
media, celebrating her heroic deɹance of fundamentalist terrorism.
However, the media studiously kept from mentioning two facts, one
of which was her admonishment of the president for his global
program of "extrajudicial" drone assassinations, which she said were
both morally wrong and only creating more enemies of the country.
But also unmentioned was her participation in a Marxist summer
school and her message to a Pakistani Marxist convention saying "I
am convinced Socialism is the only answer and I urge all comrades
to take this struggle to a victorious conclusion. Only this will free us
from the chains of bigotry and exploitation."41 That bit stayed oʃ
the front pages.
There are many more examples like this, with global ɹgures from
Mandela to Picasso with a history of open, bold socialist views of
diʃerent types. The immediate lesson is that Rose Friedman and the
National Review are perhaps mistaken about the mental weakness of
anyone holding a socialist worldview, but we could also consider
the Western world's educational system's tendency to cleanse all
these prominent ɹgures of their dirty socialist radicalism.
Meanwhile, the Right can foam at the mouth about the schools
being a communist burden, churning out students indoctrinated
with left-wing propaganda. Which somehow misses its best
opportunities, apparently.

Bolshit
By far the most eʃective weapon used in the capitalist world to
resist the sensible logic and humane appeal of socialism is the
alleged socialist structure of Soviet Russia and the rest of the
"communist bloc." The USSR, or Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
was held up for generations in the West as an example of what
happens with socialism—a hideous, bloody Stalinist dictatorship.
Friedman, for example, claimed in Capitalism and Freedom that the
breakup of the Soviet Union "brought to a dramatic end an
experiment of some seventy years between two alternative ways of
organizing an economy: top-down versus bottom-up; central
planning and control versus private markets; more colloquially,
socialism versus capitalism."42
The idea that a comparison between the US and the USSR is a fair
trial of anything, let alone something approaching a scientiɹc
experiment, reveals very clearly the totally politicized sham of a
scientist that Friedman and his fellow travelers are. Absolutely no
one with an actual sense of scientiɹc conduct would suggest such a
thing, because experiments are fundamentally based on similar
starting conditions. When testing a new drug, real scientists proceed
by trying it out on multiple sets of test rats that have identical diets,
exercise, living arrangements and social activity, with the only
diʃerence being the presence or absence of the drug. That way, any
diʃerences in outcome are clearly due to the drug and not some
other factor.
But the US and Russia are hugely dissimilar, even in just their
economic conditions. Russia has perennially been a poor, thin-
soiled, underdeveloped peasant dictatorship. The US is a young
society with hugely productive land and climate, with a tradition of
republican government as well as markets. The largest land war in
human history occurred when the USSR was invaded by Nazi
Germany, right in the middle of this alleged "experiment," with
losses north of 20 million people; meanwhile the US was the only

major World Ward II belligerent with no combat at all on its own
national soil. The fact that economists, and political scientists across
the spectrum, are so prepared to put the Cold War episode down as
anything like an experiment shows that their "scientiɹc" work is a
disgraceful fraud and an opportunistic sham.
A helpful contribution to contrasting the Stalinist empire and the
ideals of socialism is Noam Chomsky's essay "The Soviet Union
Versus Socialism," which sensibly recognizes that:
The terminology of political and social discourse is vague and
imprecise and constantly debased by the contributions of
ideologists of one or another stripe. Still, these terms have at least
some residue of meaning ... Mastery over production by the
producers is the essence of socialism ... the essential element of
the socialist ideal remains: to convert the means of production
into the property of freely associated producers and thus the
social property of people who have liberated themselves from
exploitation by their master.43
On the other hand, "The Leninist antagonism to the most essential
features of socialism was evident from the very start," quoting
Lenin's observation that "we passed from workers' control to the
creation of the Supreme Council of National Economy." Chomsky,
somewhat like Rosa Luxemburg above, is skeptical of there having
been any socialist structures present at all in post-revolutionary
Soviet Russia, and concludes from the record that Lenin and Trotsky
"destroyed every vestige of socialism" in Russia.
Certainly, the fact that the USSR and other Leninist countries had
a centrally planned economy does not itself make them socialist.
Einstein himself observed that "it is necessary to remember that a
planned economy is not yet socialism. A planned economy as such
may be accompanied by the complete enslavement of the
individual."44 For his own part, Orwell wrote "In my opinion,
nothing has contributed so much to the corruption of the original

ideal of socialism as the belief that Russia is a socialist country and
that every act of its rulers must be excused, if not imitated."45
Notably, the "R" in USSR stands for Republic and most of the so-
called socialist countries used the term, as do a multitude of
oppressive Third World dictatorships. Yet, Friedman and other
apologists for capitalism don't try to take the Soviet use of that word
to oppose the idea of having a republic and elections. Only the
socialist part of this fraud is associated with these dictatorships, in
order to defame it. The Western world still needs the pretension of
its republic, so that is simply recognized to be a morally respectable
idea being cynically used by Russia, China and others to make
themselves sound better. More sensibly, we should apply that logic
to all the positive ideals they defamed, including socialism.
A similar point applies to the many political parties calling
themselves "socialist" in the developed world, which work not for
democratic control over production and investment but for mild
reforms to today's neoliberal capitalism—social welfare and
unemployment insurance, more access to education and healthcare,
greater voter participation and such. Often associated with nations
of western Central and Northern Europe, this version of
parliamentary socialism (or "social democracy") isn't that radical,
since it leaves private ownership of large-scale property in place.
However, it can still be a very valuable lifeline for struggling people
and can push the limits of reform within capitalism. Today, this
political strain is quite visible in political ɹgures like Bernie Sanders
in the US and Jeremy Corbyn in the UK.
While these are perfectly reasonable short-term reforms that
should be supported, they're far from anything like a seriously
socialist platform. Chris Maisano observed in the useful book The
ABCs of Socialism:
For all of Bernie Sanders's virtues, his campaign for president has
only thickened the fog of ideological confusion. At one campaign's
stop last year, he endorsed the thinking behind the most of
simplistic of ... memes: 'When you go to your public library, when
you call your ɹre department or the police department, what do

you think you're calling? These are socialist institutions.' By that
logic any sort of collective project funded by tax dollars and
accomplished through government action is socialism ... It's one
thing to identify public libraries with socialism. They operate
according to democratic principles of access and distribution,
providing services to all regardless of one's ability to pay.46
But none of this means workforce control over the economy since
the social democratic picture of socialism is mainly expanded
government services within a market economy. And as Maisano also
points out, "because all of those purportedly socialist programs have
been won without fundamentally challenging private property,"
there's no recognition of the power or the owning class or any "need
for a decisive confrontation with the owners of capital and their
political allies."47
Many of today's social democrat parties are aɽliates of the
Socialist International, which as Gerard Di Trolio wrote in Jacobin
magazine is "Socialist in Name Only."48 This can be seen quite
quickly by reviewing its membership list, which includes the
austerity-mongering George Papandreou, the former Greek prime
minister, about as far as you can get from a socialist program.
Egypt's National Democratic Party, the ruling apparatus of deposed
dictator Hosni Mubarak, was in good standing for many years, along
with the UK Labour Party and US Democratic Party, which in recent
decades are full-on appendages of neoliberalism (see Chapter 3).
And indeed, during the era of independence movements for Europe's
former colonies, "the SI was encouraging the formation of center-
left parties in the newly democratizing countries as a means of
marginalizing more radical forces."
For many years, socialists haven't been naïve about the Soviet
dictatorship, or the sometimes aggressive but commonly weak-sauce
semi-reforms of the UK Labour Party, or any of the allegedly
"socialist" Third World states. The fact that these drab dictatorships
tried to tramp themselves up with words borrowed from humanity's
highest aspirations, like "republic," "socialist" and "democracy,"

doesn't tarnish those valuable ideals as much as the reputations of
shallow intellectuals, on all sides, who take them seriously.

Crashes to Ashes, Bust to Rust
The world of the early twenty-ɹrst century is staggering under
neoliberal capitalism and the confused popular responses to it, like
Brexit and the Trump administration, but opportunities for freedom
have not disappeared. With people's faith in the system of market
power fading, as suggested by today's electoral upsets and the
worldwide polling mentioned earlier, it's a great time to take stock
of world currents, and evaluate where organizational and
educational eʃorts can have an eʃect.
Today's social struggles are very much a race against time
ecologically. Millennia of human exploitation of natural systems
have had a cumulative eʃect, especially since the advent of
industrial capitalism and its centuries of exponential cost
externalizing. The eʃects are growing increasingly ominous and
indeed scientists are ɹnding that the rate of change is picking up, as
reviewed in Chapter 4. Notably, large craters have begun appearing
mysteriously in the great permafrost expanses of Russian Siberia.49
While investigations continue, geoscientists suggest that warming
soils are releasing methane hydrates, which as the ground warms
can transition to gaseous methane that bursts out of the ground in
giant ejections. Notably, methane is itself a more potent greenhouse
gas than carbon dioxide. The air near their lower reaches has a
methane concentration of 9.6 percent, far higher than the normal
concentration of 0.000179 percent.50 A smoking gun, indeed a
smoking 90-foot crater.
Meanwhile, in the US state of Florida, made up of low-lying,
porous limestone that is particularly vulnerable to climate change
and rising sea levels, it's reported that the very mention of these
subjects has been prevented by the political authorities. Despite
administration denials, the Miami Herald claims that the state's
Department of Environmental Protection oɽcials "have been
ordered not to use the term 'climate change' or 'global warming' in
any oɽcial communications, emails, or reports," under the

administration of Republican Governor Rick Scott.51 The unwritten
policy can be seen in state reports, which no longer mention climate
change except when directly referencing the titles of previous
reports from before the pitiful gag rule was imposed. A former staʃ
member says "Sea-level rise was to be referred to as 'nuisance
ɻooding.'"
A summary of the possible future is given in the updated edition
of Limits to Growth, a classic book analyzing how far the limits of the
Earth's natural systems can be pushed, in various diʃerent
scenarios. Across most of them, the study team concludes "the world
system does not totally run out of land or food or resources or
pollution absorption capability. What it runs out of is the ability to
cope."52 This indeed has been the character of the ɹnal stages of
many previous societies, unable to handle the endless seemingly
diʃerent problems arising from their overexploitation of the natural
systems they depended on.
It's a sacred necessity that socialism not inherit a cursed Earth.
Politically, the current period is notoriously volatile, with US
global hegemony partially waning but remaining violent, and
entering a new, unstable period accompanied by increasingly
dramatic acts of state and jihadi terrorism. Deranged right-wing
media, 
both 
corporate 
and 
Islamist, 
drive 
people 
with
underdeveloped critical thinking skills to violence on a regular,
escalating basis. The environmental crisis also feeds into this, with
scientists proposing that the disruptions of climate heating, droughts
and ɻooding are aggravating conɻicts. The subject remains
controversial among scientists, but most recently a group of
researchers has observed that the Syrian Civil War, one of the worst
conɻicts of our time, was precipitated by a protest movement that
partially emerged among desperate and displaced farmers dealing
with the worst drought in the history of modern Syria.53 In this way,
climate change is literally turning up the heat on global conɻicts.
For these and other reasons, the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
moved its "Doomsday Clock," which represents the risk to humanity
of a terminal nuclear conɻict, to only three minutes to midnight, the

most dangerous reading since the renewal of the Cold War in
1984.54 The global refusal to deal with climate change was part of
this calculation, raising the odds that someday humanity will wake
up to the day of a thousand suns.
Today's world situation sees the large majority of the human race
living in the Third World, or what today is called the "Global
South," as opposed to the Northern nations that developed
economically—Europe, the US, Canada, and Japan. Citizens of the
developed North (or the "West") tend to be almost totally ignorant
of conditions in the South, as well as the North's history of keeping
them there, part of which came up in Chapter 3. Maybe the most
important issue to consider here is development—the process of
income growth and diversiɹcation that takes countries out of Third
World conditions. Since this process is the greatest hope of the large
majority of people in the world, it's crucial to recognize the role that
the developed Northern countries, in the form of the G7, played in
the 1970s in blocking the New International Economic Order (NIEO)
promoted by the global South, in the form of the G77 and the
broader Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
The NIEO would have obliged the developed North not to merely
give a trickle of "development aid" to the desperately poor South,
but rather capital grants for economic development, higher and
more stable prices for the raw materials that many of the poor
economies rely on after the colonial redesigns of their economies,
and transfer of sophisticated technologies to the poor countries.
After all, the Northern countries themselves developed behind big
tariʃ barriers and free foreign technology. However, the G7 was
generally opposed to this prioritization of development of the
poorest, with the US taking a leadership role in defeating it, a
phenomenal story recounted in Vijay Prashad's overpowering book
The Poorer Nations.
Instead, the North successfully implemented the current
neoliberal 
standards—treaties 
promoting 
free 
trade, 
private
corporate investment in the poorer economies and an unforgiving
stance toward Third World debt. The former colonial powers were

able to "break up the unholy alliance" among the NAM, but among
the G7 "Solidarity in bargaining must be achieved," as it was
explained by the then Chancellor of West Germany, Helmut
Schmidt.55 And despite literally ɹve centuries of the global South
being colonies and captive markets of the developed world, US
President Reagan mocked the Third World's proposals for their
development: "Others mistake compassion for development, and
claim massive transfers of wealth somehow, miraculously, will
produce new well-being."56 A truly heinous historical remark, in
light of the record.
The eʃects of these developments cast a long shadow—including
on demographic development. As the developed Northern countries
dictated to the South through the long colonial era and the
"neoliberal" period since then, the South's restrained development
has kept birth rates high, in the traditional pattern of large families
insuring poor parents against old age, even as death rates have
fallen with the partial introduction of public health measures,
mainly inoculation. The New York Times observes that Nigeria, for
example, will have the current population of the US in a country the
size of Arizona, Nevada and New Mexico in around twenty-ɹve
years. Most of the projected increase from today's world population
of 7 billion people is expected to occur in sub-Saharan Africa, since
"In Asian countries, women's contraceptive use skyrocketed from
less than 20 percent to 60 to 80 percent in decades. In Latin
America, requiring girls to ɹnish high school correlated with a sharp
drop in birth rates."57 For Africa, however, at least for the moment,
"Of the roughly 20 countries where women average more than ɹve
children, almost all are in the region."
And with a majority of the world's population now urban, not
rural, historian Mike Davis has written the deɹnitive account of the
growth of the Third World megacity in his book Planet of Slums. The
gigantic growth in urban living in the developing world doesn't owe
to the traditional city-building dynamics of the Industrial
Revolution, which the North experienced: "Since the mid-1980s, the
great industrial cities of the South—Bombay, Johannesburg, Buenos

Aires, Belo Horizonte, and Sao Paulo—have all suʃered massive
plant closures and tendential deindustrialization. Elsewhere,
urbanization 
has 
been 
more 
radically 
decoupled 
from
industrialization, even development per se."58 Indeed, today's cities
of the Global South have more to do with the crisis of global
agriculture than industrialization and rising living standards.
The worst part of breakneck urbanization, here or in Victorian
England, is as Davis puts it, "Living in Shit."
Today's poor megacities—Nairobi, Lagos, Bombay, Dhaka, and so
on—are stinking mountains of shit that would appall even the
most hardened Victorians ... Constant intimacy with other
people's waste, moreover, is one of the most profound of social
divides. Like the universal prevalence of parasites in the bodies of
the poor, living in shit, as the Victorians knew, truly demarcates
two existential humanities. The global sanitation crisis deɹes
hyperbole. Its origins, as with many Third World urban problems,
are rooted in colonialism. The European empires mostly refused
to provide modern sanitation and water infrastructures in native
neighborhoods ... postcolonial regimes from Accra to Hanoi thus
inherited huge sanitation deɹcits that few regimes have been
prepared to aggressively remedy.59
In Bangalore, the center of India's much-celebrated hi-tech
economy, The Times observes that "the dark side of the country's
rapid economic growth" is its incredible amount of civil garbage.
"India's plague," they call it, not counting the actual plague,
apparently.60 While the "garbage crisis grew directly out of its
stunning success," a strike by sanitation workers who'd gone unpaid
for weeks and "the city running out of abandoned quarries to
quietly deliver a day's load" has brought the system to its knees.
Now, the city is embracing the "informal system of 15,000 waste
workers," peasants who pick through the ɻood of trash for food or
sellable items. These 15,000 garbage pickers are apparently not
themselves a demerit to the city's "stunning success."

The growth of mega-slums is occurring even as ɹnancial giants
and rich governments are buying up Global South real estate at an
impressive pace, in a twenty-ɹrst century "land rush." The Guardian
relates that "Leading the rush are international agribusinesses,
investment banks, hedge funds, commodity traders, sovereign
wealth funds as well as UK pension funds, foundations and
individuals attracted by some of the world's cheapest land ... Saudi
Arabia, along with other Middle Eastern emirate states such as
Qatar, Kuwait and Abu Dhabi, is thought to be the biggest buyer."61
While the lives of people in the South aren't worth much, their land
may be, leaving them to scrape by in pestilential urban hells making
a living however they can, if they can.
Such industry as is present is conducted on dramatically one-sided
class lines. The organization and mobility of capital discussed in
Chapter 1 has striking eʃects in, for example, Bangladesh, the
largest producer of textiles after China itself. The headline-making
collapse of a garment factory in 2013 at the Rana Plaza complex
outside Dhaka killed 1129 and left another 2515 injured, maimed
and disabled. The factory had passed safety inspections by a
European trade organization, suggesting its audits were a PR ɹg
leaf.
The workforce had evacuated the building the day before the
disaster, after a large crack appeared on the building exterior. The
workforce isn't stupid. However, the factory management ordered
the workers back the next day and "Some workers were threatened
with docked pay if they didn't comply. Soon after, the building
collapsed," as The Wall Street Journal reports.62 After hundreds of
thousands of workers went on strike in protest of the lack of real
safety standards, the Bangladeshi government made it somewhat
easier for workers to unionize.63
This is an impressive activist victory, since in Bangladesh "factory
owners, many of whom are also local politicians or members of
Parliament, maintain political clout." In fact, over 10 percent of the
total seats in the Parliament are held by owners of garment
contractors. Yet, a director at Human Rights Watch observes "Had

one or more of the Rana Plaza factories been unionized, its workers
would have been in a position to refuse to enter the building on
Wednesday morning, and thus save their lives."64 And their limbs,
which numerous survivors lost. Once again, worker organization
remains a way to pry some power and a bit of freedom from the
machinery of capital.
But, unsurprisingly, unions have struggled to survive in
Bangladesh against the organized power of the owners of capital, in
a continuation of the tradition of violence against worker
organization. Closed-circuit cameras outside plants record union
activists being beaten by thugs directed by factory management, in
one instance with a major US apparel company itself ɹnding that
"factory managers directed those attacks," for example one where "a
female union president was beaten in the head with an iron rod."65
Management claimed the violence originated in a worker dispute,
but the union simply refers to the videos, showing that "some
managers and anti-union workers had arrived early and were
strategically placed when buses stopped outside the factory."
Notably, the factory "produced clothes for several international
retailers." Milton Friedman often used the easy example of neckties
and other garments to illustrate the diverse nature of markets,
passing over the more embarrassing cases like utility and transport
monopolies. But even here, in an apparently more diverse market,
the chic designers use the same dank, deafening, densely packed
sweatshops to produce their pretty ɻash merchandise, provided the
roof doesn't fall in.
History suggests that industry has simply outsourced its most
dangerous and exploitative work. A century earlier, these heinous
industrial accidents occurred in the US instead. As the great radical
historian Howard Zinn recounts:
On the afternoon of March 25, 1911, a ɹre at the Triangle
Shirtwaist Company that began in a rag bin swept through the
eighth, ninth, and tenth ɻoors, too high for ɹre ladders to reach.
The ɹre chief of New York had said that his ladders could reach

only to the seventh ɻoor ... The law said the doors could not be
locked during working hours, but at the Triangle Company doors
were usually locked so the company could keep track of the
employees. And so, trapped, the young women were burned to
death at their worktables, or jammed against the locked exit door,
or leaped to their deaths down the elevator shafts ... When it was
over, 146 Triangle workers, mostly women, were burned or
crushed to death.66
So in some industrial accidents, the workers leap from the building.
In others, the building falls down on the workforce. This freedom of
choice was totally missed by the Friedmans.
But these tragedies could be almost completely avoided, of course,
if human beings no longer worked on a large scale producing goods
and services. The long-term process of automation—replacing some
kinds of human work with more sophisticated capital equipment—is
maybe the clearest instantiation of the irrationality of capitalism. In
a socialist world, freeing the workforce from this often dull,
repetitive work would be a blessing, but in the market economy it is
damnation. For it often puts large parts of the existing workforce
out on the streets, with no guarantee that new work will be
available to replace it, or that the existing workforce will have any
realistic hope of retraining and educating for such new jobs as arise.
The Wall Street Journal alarmingly reported recently that:
In the Australian outback, for example, mining giant Rio Tinto
uses self-driving trucks and drills that need no human operators at
iron ore mines. Automated trains will soon carry the ore to a port
300 miles away. The Port of Los Angeles is installing equipment
that could cut in half the number of longshoremen needed in a
workplace already highly automated. Computers do legal
research, write stock reports and news stories, as well as translate
conversations; at car dealers, they generate online advertising;
and, at banks, they churn out government-required documents to
ɻag potential money laundering—all jobs done by human workers
a short time ago.67

The conservative paper quotes research agency and academic
forecasts projecting that a third of all current jobs will likely be
automated within ten years, and half of all jobs in two decades.
Anything remotely like these ɹgures is a gigantic change for the
human condition and likely not for the better. While the automation
of so much arduous human labor might create the millennium under
a sensible economic system, under capitalism it means layoʃs,
disappointment, and huge involuntary life changes and movements
of people around the world. Irony loves company!
Importantly in this connection, economist Richard Wolʃ observes
that "had workers been their own directors in the 1970s, they would
not have stopped raising workers' real wages while their
productivity kept rising," which of course is what happened under
neoliberal capitalism.68 Today's sophisticated information systems
could 
hugely 
help 
with 
the 
problem 
of 
coordinating 
a
democratically run economy, but as long as it remains private,
capital will be used more along the lines of today's social media.
Facebook and Twitter are thought to be free to use, with many users
not realizing that they are the product—enormous social media
account rolls are presented by these platforms to advertisers willing
to pay for the fractured attention span of the users. As we convert
our personalities and identities into cleaned-up online avatars of
ourselves, we're also bringing up a new generation in a shallow
version of social connection, and forcing ourselves into smaller and
smaller venues for speech, making it harder to make nuanced
points.
With this endless parade of bummer news developments, it's easy
to feel down. But being truly pessimistic is pretty cocky, since all we
experience today is surprise. The Arab Spring, the Occupy
movement, 9/11, the rise of ISIS, the Chicago Republic Windows sit-
down strike, the startling success of the Sanders and Trump
campaigns, all took us by surprise. Being sure of bad outcomes
implies you're somehow not here getting startled with the rest of us.
As Harriet Fraad and Tess Fraad-Wolʃ write, "Imagine not fearing
layoʃs! Democracy at work would prevent the terror of job

insecurity that plagues Americans. Worker-run companies do not
outsource their own jobs."69 Former slave Frederick Douglass, who
stated his opposition to the "wage slavery" that was only a slight
improvement over the "chattel slavery" he had been forced into,
famously wrote:
The whole history of the progress of human liberty shows that all
concessions yet made to her august claims, have been born of
earnest struggle ... If there is no struggle there is no progress.
Those who profess to favor freedom and yet deprecate agitation,
are men who want crops without plowing up the ground, they
want rain without thunder and lightning. They want the ocean
without the roar of its many waters ... Power concedes nothing
without a demand. It never did and it never will. Find out just
what any people will quietly submit to and you have found out
the exact measure of injustice and wrong which will be imposed
upon them ... The limits of tyrants are prescribed by the
endurance of those whom they oppress.70
The point is, global conditions will probably continue their current
horrifying decline, unless far more men and women start to put
some of their time and energy into social and economic activism.
Rather than ɹghting for a "libertarian" world, with more freedom
for families of towering fortunes to dominate the world, regular
people could work on forming an environmental activist team, or a
reading and discussion group, or a labor union. That's a seed to
plant in the hope of growing another world, a world that could one
day be free of the reign of gold.
A world of free, democratic socialism, answering the prayers of
millions of people around the world, would be a very positive legacy
to leave. We could have a truly free economy. It could spiritually
transform us. A world where the sun shines on a free race of people
is worth a little of your free time, so please join your fellow men
and women in turning the page of history. Let's steal from the rich
and drink to the poor.

Endnotes
1. Rudolf Rocker, Anarcho-Syndicalism, London: Pluto Press, 1989,
p. 27-8.
2. Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution and Leninism or
Marxism? Ann Arbor, MI: Ann Arbor Paperbacks, 1961, p. 70-1.
3. Rasmussen Reports, "Just 53% Say Capitalism Better Than
Socialism," 9 April 2009.
4. PewResearch, "Little Change in Public's Response to
'Capitalism,' 'Socialism,'" 28 December 2011.
5. Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2002, p. 16.
6. Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2007, p. 83.
7. Ludwig von Mises, The Anti-Capitalistic Mentality, Princeton, NJ:
Libertarian Press, 1981, p. 2, 11.
8. Ibid, p. 10, 13-14.
9. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 77-8.
10. Milton and Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, New York: Harcourt,
1990, p. 128.
11. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, p. 140.
12. Ibid, p. 151.
13. Friedmans, Free to Choose, p. 138.
14. Daniel Guerin, Anarchism, New York: Monthly Review Press,
1960, p. 60.
15. Anton Pannekoek, Workers' Councils, Oakland, CA: AK Press,
2003, p. 19-23.
16. Rocker, Anarcho-Syndicalism, p. 94-5.

17. Erich Fromm, The Sane Society, New York: Fawcett Premier,
1965. P.248.
18. Bertrand Russell, In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays, New
York: Routledge, 2004.
19. Ron Reosti, "A Democratically Run Economy Can Replace the
Oligarchy," in Francis Golden, et al, Eds., Imagine: Living in a
Socialist USA, New York: HarperCollins, 2014, p. 36.
20. Richard Wolʃ, Capitalism Hits the Fan, Northampton, MA: Olive
Branch Press, 2013, p. 212.
21. Debs, Eugene V. Debs Speaks, p. 206.
22. Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel, Unorthodox Marxism, Boston:
South End Press, 1978, p. 258-60.
23. Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution and Leninism or
Marxism? p. 86.
24. Ibid, p. 62.
25. V.I. Lenin, The State and Revolution, London: Penguin Books,
1992, p. 18.
26. Ibid, p. 38.
27. V.I. Lenin, "Left-Wing" Communism, an Infantile Disorder, New
York: International Publishers, 2009, p. 42.
28. Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution and Leninism or
Marxism? p. 94.
29. Ibid, p. 89-90; p. 102.
30. Stephen Moore, "All Friedmanites Now," National Review, Vol.
50, No. 14, 3 August 1998.
31. Albert Einstein, The World As I See It, New York: Citadel Press,
1997, p. 74.
32. Albert Einstein, "Why Socialism?" Monthly Review, May

33. Douglas Sturm, "Martin Luther King, Jr., as Democratic
Socialist," The Journal of Religious Ethics, Vol. 18, No. 2, 1990,
p. 99.
34. Norman Finkelstein, What Gandhi Says, New York: OR Books,
2012, p. 62, 65.
35. Friedmans, Free to Choose, p. 135.
36. George Orwell, "Why I Write," A Collection of Essays, Orlando,
FL: Harcourt Brace & Co, 1981, p. 314.
37. George Orwell, Homage to Catalonia, New York: Houghton
Miʀin Harcourt, 1980, p. 62.
38. George Orwell, The Lion and the Unicorn, Harmondsworth, UK:
Penguin, 1986, p. 75-6.
39. Orwell, Homage to Catalonia, p. 104.
40. George Orwell, The Road to Wigan Pier, Orlando, FL: Harcourt,
1958, p. 179, 216.
41. Convention report, In Defence of Marxism,
http://www.marxist.com/historic-32nd-congress-of-pakistani-
imt-1.htm.
42. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, p. viii.
43. Noam Chomsky, "The Soviet Union Versus Socialism," Our
Generation, Spring/Summer 1986.
44. Albert Einstein, "Why Socialism?" Monthly Review, May 1949.
45. George Orwell, "The Freedom of the Press," The Times Literary
Supplement, 15 September 1972.
46. Chirs Maisano in Bhaskar Sunkara, ed, The ABCs of Socialism,
London: Verso, 2016, p. 14-15.
47. Ibid, p. 15.
48. Gerard Di Trolio, "Socialist in Name Only," Jacobin, 28
December 2014.

49. Steven Smith et al, "Near-term acceleration in the rate of
temperature change," Nature Climate Change, 9 March 2015.
50. Katia Msokvitch, "Mysterious Siberian crater attributed to
methane," Nature News, 31 July 2014.
51. Tristam Korten, "In Florida, oɽcials ban term 'climate
change,'" Miami Herald, 8 March 2015.
52. Donella Meadows et al, Limits to Growth, White River Junction,
VT: Chelsea Green Publishing, 2004, p. 223.
53. Henry Fountain, "Researchers Link Syrian Conɻict to a Drought
Made Worse by Climate Change," The New York Times, 2 March
2015.
54. The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists,
http://thebulletin.org/timeline.
55. Vijay Prashad, The Poorer Nations, London: Verso, 2012, p. 43,
47.
56. Ibid, p. 79.
57. Elisabeth Rosenthal, "Nigeria Tested by Rapid Rise in
Population," The New York Times, 14 April 2012.
58. Mike Davis, World of Slums, London: Verso, 2006, p. 13.
59. Ibid, p. 138-9.
60. Gardiner Harris, "India's Plague, Trash, Drowns Its Garden City
During Strike," The New York Times, 26 October 2012.
61. John Vidal, "How food and water are driving a 21st-century
African land grab," The Guardian, 6 March 2010.
62. Syed Al-Mahmood and Tom Wright, "Collapsed Factory Was
Built Without Permit," The Wall Street Journal, 25 April 2013.
63. Syed Al-Mahmood, "A Year Later, Rana Plaza Survivors
Struggle," The Wall Street Journal, 23 April 2014.

64. Syed Al-Mahmood and Tom Wright, "Collapsed Factory Was
Built Without Permit," The Wall Street Journal, 25 April 2013.
65. Steven Greenhouse, "Union Leaders Attacked at Bangladesh
Garment Factories, Investigations Show," New York Times, 22
December 2014.
66. Howard Zinn, A People's History of the United States, New York:
HarperCollins, 1999, p. 326-7.
67. Timothy Aeppel, "What Clever Robots Mean for Jobs," The Wall
Street Journal, 24 February 2015.
68. Wolʃ, Capitalism Hits the Fan, p. 214.
69. Harriet Fraad and Tess Fraad-Wolʃ, "Personal, Emotional, and
Sexual Life Without Capitalism," in Francis Golden, et al, Eds.,
Imagine: Living in a Socialist USA, p. 78.
70. Frederick Douglass, Selected Speeches and Writings, Chicago, IL:
Lawrence Hill Books, 1999, p. 367.

Zero Books
CULTURE, SOCIETY & POLITICS
Contemporary culture has eliminated the concept and public ɹgure
of the intellectual. A cretinous anti-intellectualism presides, cheer-
led by hacks in the pay of multinational corporations who reassure
their bored readers that there is no need to rouse themselves from
their stupor. Zer0 Books knows that another kind of discourse -
intellectual without being academic, popular without being populist
- is not only possible: it is already ɻourishing. Zer0 is convinced
that in the unthinking, blandly consensual culture in which we live,
critical and engaged theoretical reɻection is more important than
ever before.

If you have enjoyed this book, why not tell other readers by posting
a review on your preferred book site.

Recent bestsellers from Zero Books are:
In the Dust of This Planet
Horror of Philosophy vol. 1
Eugene Thacker
In the ɹrst of a series of three books on the Horror of Philosophy, In
the Dust of This Planet oʃers the genre of horror as a way of thinking
about the unthinkable.
Paperback: 978-1-84694-676-9 ebook: 978-1-78099-010-1
Capitalist Realism
Is there no alternative?
Mark Fisher
An analysis of the ways in which capitalism has presented itself as
the only realistic political-economic system.
Paperback: 978-1-84694-317-1 ebook: 978-1-78099-734-6
Rebel Rebel
Chris O'Leary
David Bowie: every single song. Everything you want to know,
everything you didn't know.
Paperback: 978-1-78099-244-0 ebook: 978-1-78099-713-1
Cartographies of the Absolute
Alberto Toscano, Jeʃ Kinkle
An aesthetics of the economy for the twenty-ɹrst century.
Paperback: 978-1-78099-275-4 ebook: 978-1-78279-973-3
Malign Velocities
Accelerationism and Capitalism
Benjamin Noys
Long listed for the Bread and Roses Prize 2015, Malign Velocities
argues against the need for speed, tracking acceleration as the
symptom of the ongoing crises of capitalism.
Paperback: 978-1-78279-300-7 ebook: 978-1-78279-299-4
Meat Market

Female ɻesh under Capitalism
Laurie Penny
A feminist dissection of women's bodies as the ɻeshy fulcrum of
capitalist cannibalism, whereby women are both consumers and
consumed.
Paperback: 978-1-84694-521-2 ebook: 978-1-84694-782-7
Poor but Sexy
Culture Clashes in Europe East and West
Agata Pyzik
How the East stayed East and the West stayed West.
Paperback: 978-1-78099-394-2 ebook: 978-1-78099-395-9
Romeo and Juliet in Palestine
Teaching Under Occupation
Tom Sperlinger
Life in the West Bank, the nature of pedagogy and the role of a
university under occupation.
Paperback: 978-1-78279-637-4 ebook: 978-1-78279-636-7
Sweetening the Pill
or How we Got Hooked on Hormonal Birth Control
Holly Grigg-Spall
Has contraception liberated or oppressed women? Sweetening the Pill
breaks the silence on the dark side of hormonal contraception.
Paperback: 978-1-78099-607-3 ebook: 978-1-78099-608-0
Why Are We The Good Guys?
Reclaiming your Mind from the Delusions of Propaganda
David Cromwell
A provocative challenge to the standard ideology that Western
power is a benevolent force in the world.
Paperback: 978-1-78099-365-2 ebook: 978-1-78099-366-9

Readers of ebooks can buy or view any of these bestsellers by
clicking on the live link in the title. Most titles are published in
paperback and as an ebook. Paperbacks are available in traditional
bookshops. Both print and ebook formats are available online.
Find more titles and sign up to our readers' newsletter

at http://www.johnhuntpublishing.com/culture-and-politics
Follow us on Facebook

at https://www.facebook.com/ZeroBooks
and Twitter at https://twitter.com/Zer0Books

