

Load Screen
Let me start by saying I use all these corporations' services
constantly. This book was written on Apple devices, using
Microsoft Word software, employing an enormous number
of Google searches, with some of the research material
purchased from Amazon affiliates. And I will irritate my
friends by promoting it on Facebook.
So I'm not pretending to be above using these services.
Indeed, I probably couldn't have written this book without
them. And that's the point—it's not just me.
In 2017 the world was on the edge of global
confrontation over the clusterfuck of a chess game that was
the Syrian Civil War, and a number of times the United
States and Russia came dangerously close to a full
confrontation, which could have gone all the way to nuclear
conflict. Preventing that scenario is the hotline system,
maintained by the two countries' military bases in the
region, which allows both sides to inform one another of
their flight paths and attack plans, so that the air forces don't
accidentally target one another or risk an unintentional near-
collision. A mainstay in US-Russia relations since the Cold
War era, the hotline is a pawn in disputes between the
countries, but rarely is it actually deactivated.
It was reported at the time that a backup exists to the
conventional phone-based hotline. It is a declassified Gmail
account.1
This book is not about whether the towering corporate
empires of Silicon Valley make useful products—few
people would try to deny that. It's about the fact that I have
little choice but to rely on these huge firms in order to carry
out a project like producing a book, much like the American
and Russian air forces in running a war. Our economy now

largely relies on these tech companies, giving them
incredible power. It's not the first time capitalism has
evolved a new ruling core of networked companies that
eventually dominate the entire system, but it may wreak the
deepest changes yet.
And exploring these new, powerful institutions of capital
is the purpose of this book.


© 2020 Rob Larson
Published in 2020 by
Haymarket Books
P.O. Box 180165
Chicago, IL 60618
773-583-7884 www.haymarketbooks.org
info@haymarketbooks.org
ISBN: 978-1-64259-087-6
Distributed to the trade in the US through Consortium Book Sales and Distribution
(www.cbsd.com) and internationally through Ingram Publisher Services International
(www.ingramcontent.com).
This book was published with the generous support of Lannan Foundation and Wallace Action
Fund.
Special discounts are available for bulk purchases by organizations and institutions. Please call
773-583-7884 or email info@haymarketbooks.org for more information.
Cover design by Matt Avery.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data is available.

Contents
Introduction
Bitatorship
What this book is for
Chapter 1
The Flaw of Gravity
The network origins of tech monopolies
Chapter 2
Macrosoft
The original platform giant
Chapter 3
The Apple Bitten
The long road to number one
Chapter 4
Amazon's Smile
Snowballing scale in online retail
Chapter 5
Being Evil
The company that governs the Internet
Chapter 6
Disgracebook
The trivial network that moves the world
Chapter 7
Neutralized
The defeat and victory of the telecom networks

Chapter 8
Redefining R&D
The state's unknown role in creating the Internet and mobile tech
Chapter 9
Leashing the Techlash
Tech's love-hate relationship with politics
Chapter 10
Share This!
Socializing the Internet
Notes
Index

INTRODUCTION
Bitatorship
What this book is for
It might seem weird that so many people are turning against Big Tech.
After all, we spend much of the day on our phones, log long hours on
Facebook and YouTube, and for many years the great innovators of
Silicon Valley and its CEOs have been toasted on TV and praised by
presidents. Apple CEO Steve Jobs became a global icon of the visionary
genius, even becoming a basis for the Iron Man movies. Barack Obama
was extremely close to the industry, and especially to Google, with 250
people moving between his administration and the company.1 During his
first presidential meeting with tech CEOs, even Donald Trump said, "We
want you to keep going with the incredible innovation. There's nobody
like you in the world.... Anything we can do to help this go along, we're
going to be there for you."2
Many liberal and conservative figures have celebrated the tech
industry's fun and useful new services, often available for free, and for
decades praised the disruptive instincts of Silicon Valley. Libertarian
economist Tyler Cowen, for example, writes that the tech companies
"have placed so much of the world's information at our fingertips, and
more often than not it is accessible within minutes or even seconds....
The benefits of the tech companies still far outweigh their costs, as
evidenced by how few Americans are trying very hard to opt out."3
There are whole books of this shallow, religious ball-fondling.
But despite this bottomless ocean of mainstream ass-kissery, the
reality is that Big Tech towers over us and has incredible influence over
our lives. So much of our daily work, commerce, and socializing
happens on their systems or relies on their data. All the feverish worship
of Innovation can't hide the fact that the technology companies have
largely taken over the economy, hoarded our data, played dirty to crush
challengers, and utterly reshaped our lives to their advantage. The

companies are typically run by bullying tyrant CEOs, who abuse their
corporate subordinates and have structured their companies so as to
maintain their sole power over major decisions. No vision for
fundamentally changing our society can succeed without seriously
thinking about how to deal with today's tech companies, which have
arguably become the central industry in capitalism altogether. And all
using technology the bastards didn't even invent!
Holding a magnifying glass up to the monumental tech corporations
is the purpose of this book, and it won't conform to the conventional
picture of Big Tech as friendly giants with free software—a picture that's
finally wearing thin anyway. I wash my brains of it! We'll be looking
head-on at the different forms of stupefying, world-changing power
wielded by today's biggest corporate titans over the man in the street.
And you don't have to take my work for it. Consider a little-noticed
report in the conservative Wall Street Journal, titled "Giants Tighten
Grip on Internet Economy," focusing on the major tech corporations,
which were represented in the article's art design as a huge flying saucer
covered in corporate logos, apparently beaming people aboard.4 "The
Internet economy is powered by an infrastructure ... controlled by a
small handful of tech giants," it declared, describing Google, Microsoft,
Apple, Amazon, and Facebook as "established companies [that]
dominate in essential services that both fuel and extract value from the
rising digital economy."
The centrality of these firms to the functioning of the Internet means
whole "ecosystems" of users are gradually built around these corporate
nodes, so that "anyone building a brand, for example, can't ignore
Facebook's highly engaged daily audience of 1 billion. Anyone starting a
business needs to make sure they can be found on Google. Anyone with
goods to sell wants Amazon to carry them." And the same goes for
mobile apps (dominated by Google and Apple's stores) and video
(Google's YouTube).
As of this writing, the five biggest companies in the world by market
value are Microsoft, Amazon, Apple, Google, and Facebook. It's very
unusual for the world's five biggest corporations to all lie in a single
sector of the economy. It reflects the fact that the technology markets are
especially prone toward winner-take-all outcomes.
The short version is that the tech sector is especially monopolyprone
because of an economic phenomenon called "network effects." Network

effects occur when the value of a good or service increases as more
people use it—like a telephone. As more people joined the early phone
network, the value of a telephone in your house grew, since you could
potentially call more people and businesses with it. The same principle
applies to other markets that operate on networks, like web search
engines and social media.
Network effects tend to create monopolies because the first one or
two companies to gain a large mass of users tend to attract more users—
success breeds success in network markets. This means that early market
leaders tend to become almost magnetically irresistible and grow
extremely quickly as the network gains value from more users, leading to
yet more users. This economic process tends to leave a single hugely
dominant company, like YouTube, with gigantic user numbers due to the
overwhelming attractiveness of a network that has everyone on it. This
kind of dominance, where users are attracted because of the existing
presence of many users, makes a company into a "platform."
In other networked markets, a full monopoly isn't reached but still
there are at most two companies dominating, as with Google's and
Apple's smartphone software. But even there monopoly power is
present, as seen in the laborious process involved in switching from an
Apple to an Android phone. It's an enormous headache, requiring the
movement of tons of personal data like music and pictures, re-changing
many settings, and recognizing that some apps are only available on one
smartphone platform, or must be repurchased. This creates a barrier to
entry known as "lock-in," where users face real costs to switching.
Network effects are discussed more fully in the next chapter, but one
fascinating point to raise here is that several of the Big Tech CEOs knew
about network economics back when they first created their companies,
or early on in their history. Consider this recounting from a Fortune
journalist describing Facebook cofounder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg
and his friends in the early days of their company:
They loved to talk about how Thefacebook showed what economists call "network
effects." And it did, just as have many of the great communications and software
innovations of the last hundred years.... Since every incremental user thus in effect
strengthens the service, growth tends to lead to more growth, in a virtuous cycle. That was
surely the case with Thefacebook, just as it was with instant messaging, AOL, the Internet
itself, and even the telephone.5
So Zuckerberg and company knew the deck was stacked in their favor.
So did Bill Gates, the cofounder and longtime CEO of Microsoft, who

exploited similar network effects to dominate computer operating system
software. As we'll see, Microsoft's Windows platform became dominant
once its early success attracted more developers and users than smaller
upstarts could, making Windows an industry standard for productivity
apps and games to work on users' computers. Since almost all apps thus
ran on Windows, that created an application-based barrier to entry for
other software companies, and meant "lock-in" on an industry-wide scale
and insane growth for Microsoft. A senior Microsoft executive wrote in a
confidential email to billionaire investor Warren Buffett that applications
create "the 'moat' that protects the operating system business," a
recognition of the entrenched power of platform economics.6
And to top it off, besides these companies often seeing their own
monopolies coming, almost all of the crucial basic research that created
the gigantic platforms' technologies, essential hardware, and even the
Internet itself came from the public sector, not from the tech industry's
tyrannical kid CEOs. Despite a surging river of bullshit that worshiped
Apple CEO Steve Jobs and other slick tech front men, the long-term
research into the dirty work of making mobile tech and fancy software
platforms came from Cold War R&D investments by the military and the
US university system.
In short, the towering tech platform corporations and their heavily
celebrated CEOs are a bunch of phony, power-mongering, monopolist
douchebags and the new core of the global ruling class. As we'll see,
their power is truly incredible, and the growing techlash against them
will likely fail to seriously limit their influence. They must be
understood.
Gilded Rage
The dominance of Big Tech over major chunks of world commerce
might smell pretty familiar. Similar levels of market power were held by
previous network monopolies, like the railroads; and actually, the pro-
business Wall Street Journal reporters draw the point directly: "Put
another way, they own the digital equivalent of railroad lines just as the
Web enters a new phase of growth."7
Indeed, in trying to anticipate the possible futures of our online
giants, the early era of railroad network monopolization can be pretty
instructive. For example, consider the cruel monopolies that were
dominant in the late 1800s, during the US Industrial Revolution and the

"Gilded Age." Historians describe the railroad monopolist Cornelius
Vanderbilt as wanting "to make himself a dictator in modern civilization"
by buying up railroad routes, since "trade now dominates the world, and
railways dominate trade."8 Railroads were the circulatory system of the
Industrial Revolution, and the Gilded Age capitalists built them into
continent-spanning empires with tremendous influence.
The robber barons—the big capitalists of the 1800s—held enormous
power over their different domains, but also fought bitterly to undermine
or corner one another's monopolies. This include monopolies that arose
from markets without the boost of network effects—John Rockefeller
tried using the thundering income from his Standard Oil monopoly to
buy up iron ore in order to force the steel magnate Andrew Carnegie into
paying him for it. Later, the Wall Street kingpin J. P. Morgan
maneuvered Carnegie into accepting a buyout so he could more fully
"Morganize" steel into the supposedly more "rational" US Steel
monopoly, as he eventually did for other corporate titans from American
Tobacco to General Electric.
Fascinatingly (and horrifyingly), the barons also fought by buying up
major railroads—the equivalent of today's interstate highways. When
Morgan's various railroad networks doubled their freight rates
simultaneously in order to twist Carnegie's arm, the city of Pittsburgh's
very economic life was threatened until Carnegie's giant fortune paid for
a hastily built new rail line to reach the coastal networks.9 Carnegie
himself had made similar moves to push back against smaller railroads in
the past, as Matthew Josephson's great history The Robber Barons
recounts. These kinds of epic battles among gigantic, annoyed capitalists
are happening right now, although on very different digital platforms,
like when Google pulled YouTube from Amazon's smart speaker devices
after Amazon wouldn't carry Google's Pixel phones. These twisted
battles of the giants will appear throughout this book.
Ultimately, that historic rail-network battle led to the climax of the
Gilded Age epoch of unregulated capitalism, when the growth of
Rockefeller's encroaching Union Pacific-based south-western rail
network threatened the Eastern Seaboard-centered system owned by
Morgan and his allies. The banker had endeavored to Morganize the
industry for years, buying up bankrupt rail lines in transactions that
always created great paper wealth on Wall Street, and by the McKinley
era Morgan was estimated to control as much as half the total US rail
mileage—a truly impressive level of network concentration.

But the Rockefeller-aligned network fought back, and soon the two
sprawling rail octopuses came into direct conflict over the important
Northern Pacific line, held by Morgan allies. The two trust giants battled
through proxies to buy a direct controlling interest in the line, and in the
process they unintentionally triggered an enormous crash in the stock
market—the 1901 "Northern Pacific Panic." Morgan kept control, and
Rockefeller's proxies got board seats, but the collateral damage of the
crash to the economy was enormous. In the aftermath Morgan famously
told a journalist, "I owe the public nothing."10
Again today, while conservative figures insist that the government
regulation of rail networks during the midcentury New Deal period was
unnecessary and stifled the competition that must arise in free markets,
after railroad deregulation in the 1980s, the industry went through a
predictable merger binge. Eventually, as Fortune magazine reported,
"since freight railroads were deregulated in 1980, the number of large,
so-called Class I railroads has shrunk from 40 to seven. In truth, there are
only four that matter.... An estimated one-third of shippers have access
to only one railroad."11
Wow, that sounds very slightly similar to our new online economy!
Even pro-business columnists like the Wall Street Journal's Christopher
Mims recognize that the tech giants "Tiptoe Toward Monopoly," as a
headline of his went. Fittingly, the paper's editors playfully illustrated
that article with tech company CEOs dressed up like their Gilded Age
forbears.12
User's Guide
Having reviewed the basics of network effects, the prominent views
celebrating the Silicon Valley giants, and some historical networks, we
can now outline this book's more critical views of the tech titans.
The first chapter dissects the nature of networks, their particularly
strong tendency toward monopoly, and mainstream views of these
subjects. Chapter 2 takes up Microsoft, a company that clearly owes its
monopoly to network effects. To quote the Financial Times, "Microsoft
worked hard through the 1980s to win over software developers. This
ensured there was a steady supply of Microsoft-compatible applications
and helped to establish MS-DOS and Windows as industry standards."13
Its monopoly is better known than those of its newer tech compatriots

because of its long history of monopoly-related legal trouble, from the
ongoing European Union competition inquiries to the aborted 2001 US
antitrust suit. The latter complaint alleged that Microsoft used its
overwhelming dominance in commercial operating system software to
crush competitors in other markets, and to entrench its network hub
status.14 The company's heavy reliance on permanently "temporary"
workers, to whom they deny benefits, also deserves attention.
Apple is the subject of chapter 3, which examines the gigantic
success of what is now among the world's largest companies by market
value. Since Apple primarily produces hardware— iPhones, Mac
desktops, and laptops, along with the software to run them—some have
suggested that Apple has not benefited from network effects. But Apple
products and services, like Microsoft's Windows and Facebook's
services, also constitute a platform because they are a nexus of network
effects. Beyond being a network hub, a platform is a group of related
services that allow others to create and use content and applications, as
Facebook and Google's Android phone system do. Developing a
successful platform is the holy grail of network effects, as it can create
an ecosystem of users and services organized around it. Apple's open
(but curated) App Store meets these criteria. Labor conditions in the
plants of Apple's contractors have become a scandal too, the most
frontline picture of the company's network monopoly power.
Chapter 4 takes up the colossal Amazon, which is fast growing
beyond being simply the online Walmart. Amazon has benefited from the
same network effects that have helped the other web giants, and from its
current status as a platform for a broader ecosystem of commerce.
Consider 
Amazon's 
enormous 
network 
of 
third-party 
sellers,
representing merchandise producers who sell through Amazon's site.
The Financial Times observes that Amazon "acts as e-commerce
platform for an increasing number of retailers," with the power of
network effects.15 Also, author Nicholas Carr reminds us that "much of
Amazon.com's early appeal came from the book reviews donated by
customers," which also demonstrated a network effect as avid readers
were attracted to the site's large number of reviewers and reviews,
showing the classic positive feedback pattern.16 Satisfying Amazon's
flood of orders has also required a giant "fulfillment" workforce,
sweating away their hours in Amazon's warehouse network.
Chapter 5 examines Google. Although its reputation is far sunnier
than the other giants, Google too has benefited pivotally from network

effects. Investor Arun Rao and consultant Piero Scaruffi's History of
Silicon Valley finds that
[s]earch was a classic network service. The more people that used a search engine and
clicked on results, the better a search engine could be at optimizing results and so have
more relevant results, attracting more users.... On the technology side, it was impossible
for most companies to enter search. Because most search algorithms optimized based on
past users' searches, network effects prevent new engines from being as powerful as the
dominant few.
The authors conclude that Google's "terabytes of data" from past
searches and emails constitute "an enormous barrier to entry."17
Furthermore, the Financial Times quotes a Citigroup analyst describing
YouTube, the hugely popular video-sharing platform Google purchased
in 2006, as "a network effects business" itself.18
Chapter 6 explores the great time consumer, Facebook. The company
has perhaps the clearest version of the network effect: everyone wants to
join a social network that their friends are on, not one with none of their
friends. And, as more and more users become subject to this effect, the
value of the network and its attraction to others grows and grows. We
now know its founder, Mark Zuckerberg, was aware of this dynamic, and
it's such a classic case that it's become literally a textbook example, with
prominent economists citing it as an easy-to-understand example of
network effects creating a platform.19 The company's giant market
capitalization, the fifth-biggest in the world, reflects the monopoly
potential of even a trivial-seeming company, with a rather durable
market position despite an endless parade of scandals like the
livestreaming of capital crimes and a series of data breaches.
After these profiles in power, chapter 7 explores the battles over net
neutrality—the principle that all online data should receive the same
treatment. This issue involves the telecommunications companies, like
Verizon, Comcast, and AT&T, in conflict with the Silicon Valley web
giants, although the latter have moderated their views. The telecom firms
lost on net neutrality in 2015 but won in 2017, partially because of
waning support for the neutrality cause from the tech empires
themselves.
Chapter 8 reviews the history of the marvelous technology these
companies all rely on, and explores the little-known fact that almost all
of it, from the early Internet to the tech in your smartphone, was
developed by various public, government, and military entities. Chapter
9 confronts the relationship between the tech sector and major

governments, including the Trump administration, which the tech titans
have criticized but have mostly continued to work for.
Finally, chapter 10 explores possibilities for stripping these firms of
their huge power by socializing the industry, through a combination of
user activism, workforce organization, and political action. This could
create a version of the Internet over which users and programmers
actually share influence, rather than following the dictates of CEOs and
their Wall Street investors. The acute need for online socialism is
suggested by the words of Tim Berners-Lee himself, the computer
scientist who invented the World Wide Web: "The problem is the
dominance of one search engine, one big social network, one Twitter for
micro-blogging. We don't have a technology problem, we have a social
problem."20 Or more specifically, an economic problem. The Internet, so
famously free and quirky in the early days of the 1990s, is becoming
enclosed by colossal giants of online monopoly capital.
Irony loves company!

CHAPTER 1
The Flaw of Gravity
The network origins of tech monopolies
The nineteenth-century railroad regulator Charles Francis Adams
observed that "gravitation is the rule, and centralization the natural
consequence, in society no less than in physics."1 And indeed, markets
for goods and services have a long history of becoming dominated by
giant companies, from Standard Oil to Ticketmaster. But today's
globalized information networks have taken the perennial trend even
further.
The 1 percent's technology corporations are reaching new heights in
the drive to accumulate capital, and they are conquering our newest
industries. Even the liberal New York Times, for example, in 2017 ran a
business-section analysis of Silicon Valley's dominance over our
information networks, calling giants like Google and Facebook the
"undisputed rulers of the consumer technology industry."2 Its author, the
reliable technophile Farhad Manjoo, writes that the "Frightful Five," as
he calls the tech behemoths, "lord over all that happens in tech" and are
"better insulated against surprising competition from upstarts." At turns
rivals and partners, they are "inescapable" and "central to just about
everything we do with computers," and together they "form a gilded
mesh blanketing the entire economy." Elsewhere in the piece, Manjoo
describes the giants as "the warden of a very comfortable corporate
prison.... It's too late to escape."3 The paper, usually happy to celebrate
Silicon Valley, now finds that its corporations aim to "own every waking
moment," to quote its technology blog.4
Elsewhere, the sober Financial Times of London has said of Apple
that "Steve Jobs' legacy is the omniscient tech company," with its galaxy
of data on our reading and listening and viewing habits, along with a
giant scale of operation "that smaller rivals cannot match," leaving the
company with "huge power."5 Investment bankers, quoted in the Wall

Street Journal, suggest that the tech monopolies will last because "scale
is rewarded," and that entering these markets requires "a very high level
of capital intensity." Another important factor in the fast-evolving online
landscape is how "the giants can spend more money than rivals to
improve their services."6 However, despite having highlighted Silicon
Valley's monopoly power in their own coverage, the business press plays
along by focusing on the tech giants' sunny stock futures and their ability
to "extract extraordinary market value," rather than examining the ethical
or political ramifications of this incredible monopoly power.
And it's not just the economy that relies on these platforms— it's
society. These corporations own the major systems for music sharing,
web video, and online social interaction, the latter taking up larger
portions of the world's waking hours each year. And due to the
gatekeeper status they hold, other apps for music and social media must
meet the terms of Big Tech to appear on their platforms. National media
often note the sheer difficulty of boycotting the companies because of
their sprawling reach alone.7 These monopolies raise profound questions
about how much influence corporate-curated online environments have
on our day-to-day lives, and our connections with our fellow men and
women.
So the question is, why are these crucial new markets "straight out of
the box" monopolies, as the Economist once described them?8 If the
Internet is such a rich landscape, with a broad diversity of sites and
interests and sources of information, why are so many of the markets
related to it utterly dominated by great monopolists? The answers lie
mainly with a phenomenon known as network effects.
Siliconopoly
By their nature, some goods and services are distributed through
networks, in which the service moves from hubs to users, or from one
user to the next. The classic example is telephone service— you and
anyone else with a cellular phone is a participant in the
telecommunications network, and when you call a friend, your
conversation travels through nodes in the network between the two of
you, like cell phone towers.
Markets for services that are provided through networks have a
number of special features. A crucial one is the network effect, which

illustrates a basic fact about this kind of service: the more users a
network has, the more valuable it becomes. In other words, when you
enter a given market—for example by buying a smartphone and signing
up for a cell service package—you slightly increase the value of the
service for everyone else on the network, since your number is one more
that can be dialed. So the more people that join the network, the more
valuable it becomes for each of us as its potential reach expands.
These network effects have several ramifications. One is that markets
for services distributed through networks tend to get monopolized—
meaning a single company produces all, or almost all, of the market's
product. Since the value of a network grows as more users join it, it
means that firms with early success in the market can experience a
positive feedback cycle, where a large number of users attracts yet more
users, leading one or two firms to enjoy runaway growth, swamping their
rivals.
Many other markets have strong tendencies toward monopoly for
more common reasons, such as the advantage offered by economies of
scale, where large up-front investments in a business can be "spread out"
over large amounts of output. This cost pattern, common in
manufacturing and other industries with big startup costs, also
encourages companies to become big in order to exploit the scale
economy and improve their profitability. At the same time, the large up-
front costs act as a barrier that discourages new startups from entering
the market. The result tends to be an "oligopoly," a market dominated by
a few big firms, or sometimes a straight monopoly.
Microsoft, one of the firms reviewed in this book, is a great example
of both network effects and scale economies. Its Windows operating
system (OS) was adopted by IBM for an influential PC model, and as it
came to be used on a large number of commercial computers, its OS
attracted more software coders to write their applications to run on
Windows so they could have access to the biggest possible market.
Through Windows' popularity among programmers, Microsoft attracted
more PC users, who desired the OS with the most useful tools and
games. This cycle creates a need for "interoperability"—the ability of
parts of a system to work together. A crucial factor in the development of
networked services that can talk to each other, interoperability requires a
standard system that everyone agrees to adopt so that new applications
can be widely used. This standard system, once it becomes widely
accepted, is often said to be "locked in"—so dominant that it's almost

impossible to break away from. This dynamic explains the origin of the
awkward "QWERTY" keyboard configuration, which is far from
optimal; but after it became widespread in hardware around the world,
and with so many generations of workers having trained on it, changing
to a new standard would have unacceptably high costs. Of course, giant
companies and monopolies are common in other markets too, including
those that don't rely on networks for the value of the product or service.
The Western world has monopolies in eyewear, emergency adrenaline
packs, and beer, and in the past had them in huge sectors like oil, steel,
and cigarettes.9 These giant monopolies (or oligopolies) arise from
common market phenomena such as economies of scale. But when
network effects and the need for technical standards are present on top of
economies of scale, we observe this particularly strong drive toward
capitalist monopoly.
Albert-László Barabási, a Romanian physicist and network science
pioneer, has developed many of our core ideas about how networks
behave, which can help us understand how they evolve in information
markets such as those for telephone service or Internet access. Barabási
observes that the network of connections among sites on the Internet
doesn't resemble a road map, where each city has about the same
number of highways connecting it to other cities. Rather, information
networks resemble maps of airline service, with most cities having just a
handful of connections, while a few cities, the major hubs of the airline
system, have a giant number of connections. In network science, most of
these connected entities, whether cities or Internet users, are referred to
as "nodes," which are connected by links to the major "hubs." In this
structure, there is no meaningful average number of connections among
the nodes, since most have just a few links while a handful are hugely
connected, so these networks are considered "scale free," meaning they
have no representative scale of connectivity among them.10
This network structure applies directly to the online sites that we surf
through web browsers, since a small minority of sites— Google,
Facebook, Amazon, and others—are enormous "hubs," with gigantic
numbers of visitors and tons of connections to other websites. Barabási
observes that as networks grow over time, there is a common behavioral
pattern called "preferential attachment," in which new nodes favor
linking to other nodes that already have many links—the hubs of the
system. As he explains in his absorbing book Linked, this creates "a clear
advantage for the senior nodes" since in many networks, "popularity is

attractive." This creates a "rich-get-richer phenomenon" for the senior
nodes that have become hubs.11 Preferential attachment plays a major
role in the growth of a huge variety of networks, from phone and Internet
systems to networks of proteins that control how genes are expressed in
living organisms.12
Importantly, Barabási also found that seniority is not the only factor
determining whether a network node becomes a hub— there is also the
question of each node's actual inherent value. Some nodes, even if they
aren't yet heavily linked to, are still very attractive for the valuable
services or content they provide. Barabási finds that the nodes' "fitness,"
along with whatever preferential attachment they already enjoy,
determine which nodes attract more links and become hubs. Google's
excellent search algorithm software, for example, ensured it was "fit"
relative to its early search competitors. (Its software was developed
heavily by public institutions like Stanford University—see chapter 8.)
But "if two nodes have the same fitness ... the older one still has an
advantage."13
Economists have occasionally recognized that networked markets
differ in major ways from others, even in the very constrained formal
models they often focus on. In the early days of personal computing in
the 1980s, economists Joseph Farrell and Garth Saloner concluded in the
prestigious American Economic Review that network industries have "a
socially excessive reluctance to switch to a superior new standard" as
users resist being cut off from other network users, and that early
incumbents may have "an insurmountable advantage of installed base"
that enables their predation on newcomers.14 Furthermore, as Stanford
economist W. Brian Arthur observed, once a dominant tech format
"begins to emerge it becomes progressively more 'locked in,'" and in
that context "laissez-faire gives no guarantee that the 'superior'
technology ... will be the one that survives."15 These are painful
admissions from economists, who usually admit to few flaws in the
marketplace.
Experts on the guts of the Internet are also well aware of these issues,
which not only apply to the network structures of the World Wide Web
but also to the technical standards that allow us to view the information
on any online service. Writing in the tech industry magazine Wired,
Steve Steinberg observes that for the basic systems used to send
information through the Internet, there's "incredible resistance to

change," because "existing standards have simply become too pervasive
for us to even think about changing them."16 Since network-based
services "put a premium on compatibility," eventually technology like
Internet Protocol, or IP, which is used to send packets of information
through the global network, reaches lock-in. Steinberg laments this basic
reality: "Network effects are depressing—they allow bad standards to
win."
And what's true on the technical end is true on our user end. As the
conservative magazine the Economist observes, "Customers, once they
have chosen a program, tend to 'groove in'; learning to use software
takes time, and information is often saved in proprietary file formats, so
switching programs is painful." This explains "the tendency of market
leaders to get even further ahead.... The winning firm can invest that
money in developing new products, lengthening its lead." In the end,
"monopoly power becomes pervasive."17
This network reality shapes the web we browse every day, along with
the mobile apps we often use as shortcuts to specific Internet services.
The results are recognized across the spectrum of opinion, from the
conservative business experts quoted above, to more liberal ones like
communications scholar Tim Wu, who writes in his eminent book The
Master Switch that "over the long haul, competition in the information
industries has been the exception, monopoly the rule." He observes that
"no one joins a social network like Facebook without other users ... a
network that everyone uses is worth fantastically more than the sum
value of one hundred networks with as many users collectively as the
one great network."18
Further to the left, Marxist media critic Robert McChesney writes
that network effects explain why "monopoly [is] so much more
pronounced and so much more impervious to direct competitive
challenge on the Internet than in the balance of the economy."19 And
even mainstream investor and business writer Arun Rao, while
recognizing their established importance, calls network effects "the most
overhyped concept in Silicon Valley." In his analysis, tech startups
heavily cite the network effect as a way to draw in investors with the
promise of a company's domination of a new market.20
Furthermore, the web giants themselves are on the record more or
less agreeing with this interpretation. Speaking to the Financial Times,
Hal Varian, Google's own chief economist, explained that "network

effects unleased by digital technology tend not to spawn free competition
among equals but a 'winner takes all' effect in which a single company
emerges with all the spoils. In the software era, that company was
Microsoft; in the internet era, it is Google."21 And eBay founder Pierre
Omidyar agrees his giant site has benefited from network effects, where
"the more people that use them, the more useful they are," as the
business press summarized.22
Antitrustworthy
Of course, not everyone supports this negative picture of the monopoly-
like power of the network hubs. Indeed, most commentary on the web
giants celebrates their fun technology and accepts their size and power as
the price of our electronic conveniences. In fact, a good deal of the
coverage of these giants insists they don't actually have that much power
at all.
Returning to the Economist, consider its discussion of the question
"Should digital monopolies be broken up?"23 Despite its own reporting
on the network-based power of the web giants, the magazine answers in
the negative, claiming that its central example, Google, "is clearly
dominant ... but whether it abuses that dominance is another matter."
While network effects mean Google has few serious competitors, the
author claims that the huge company
is not in the same class as Microsoft's systematic campaign against the Netscape browser
in the late 1990s: there are no emails talking about "cutting off" competitors' "air supply."
What's more, some of the features that hurt Google's competitors benefit its consumers.
Giving people flight details, dictionary definitions or a map right away saves them time.
Similarly, defenders of Silicon Valley have held that "network effects
and advantages of scale do not in themselves amount to barriers to entry.
Facebook was not the first social media company, and did not have
unique access to network effects.... Whatever barriers Google may
enjoy, they are clearly not sufficient to put off all comers."24 This
argument is used by most defenders of monopoly— since it's not
inconceivable for a new firm to win against the odds, the monopoly can't
really be that powerful. But this is weak-sauce ideology, as the point isn't
that barriers are 100 percent effective; it's just that they strongly
discourage new market entrants and limit the potential pool of new
competitors to gigantic firms from other industries, which might have
enough resources to punch in.

Nevertheless, this argument does raise an interesting issue, which is
that many of today's dominant tech titans did have earlier competition
that they beat out before rising to their current unassailable positions.
Google was preceded by AltaVista and other search engines, and
Facebook grew in the shadow of Myspace. However, the basic dynamic
of network effects leading to locked-in monopoly is still in effect here—
the key issue is which firm can first reach a tipping point, where the
site's rich body of users itself begins to gravitationally attract new users.
The Financial Times reported that while Internet firms "thrive on
network effects.... They also atrophy rapidly when users turn to the next
new thing and let their free accounts become dormant." Thus the
accumulation of network effects to Facebook's advantage allowed it to
eclipse Myspace, which indeed went into rapid decline. For networked
markets, "when growth stalls, or even slows, they tend to implode as the
network effect goes into reverse."25
And indeed, the Economist does concede that its usual sunny free
market portrayal "paints too rosy a picture.... The internet giants rarely
compete strenuously on each other's home turf. Instead they scuffle for
position in markets that are less important to them while trying to build
up defenses around their core businesses.... All the big internet
companies 'own a space.'"26
Other prominent defenders of Silicon Valley monopolies include
Robert Bork, a former circuit judge of the US Court of Appeals and
failed Supreme Court justice candidate. Writing with economist J.
Gregory Sidak in the Journal of Competition Law and Economics, Bork
mounted a vigorous defense of Google, insisting that mere "possession
of monopoly power in the relevant market" isn't enough to justify
government action to break the monopolist apart. Rather, the existing
law only prohibits "the willful acquisition or maintenance of that power
as distinguished from growth or development as a consequence of a
superior product, business acumen, or historic accident."27
So simply being a monopoly with no effective competition doesn't
justify any legal charge in the US; it must be proven in court that the
company was actively scheming to evily crush its competitors. The fact
that network effects make early market leaders magnets for new users,
which increases their edge and leads toward their company achieving
"lock-in," is totally irrelevant in the eyes of these conservative legal
experts. And for good reason—one may note the disclosure in the Bork

report's fine print: "Google commissioned this report, but the views
expressed are solely our own."28
Bork and Sidak also claim "Google has no incentive to foreclose
competitors from search because doing so is unlikely to offer additional
profit at the potential cost of driving away consumers."29 But as
discussed in the business press, consumers do get "grooved in" to using
software that takes time to learn to use, and as a result of network effects
they tend to become entrenched and attract more users. And despite the
eminent paid research of former justice Bork, the conservative Wall
Street Journal openly reports its findings that "Google Searches Boost
Its Own Products." Specifically: "Ads for products sold by Google and
its sister companies appeared in the most prominent spot in 91% of
25,000 recent searches related to such items. In 43% of the searches, the
top two ads both were for Google-related products."30
The monopolists themselves are sometimes more open about and
indeed proud of, their uncontested power, taking a brazen "might makes
right" position. Exhibit A is eBay cofounder Peter Thiel, who has
claimed "we tend to confuse capitalism with competition," as David
Brooks paraphrased in the New York Times. Brooks adds, "When Thiel is
talking about a 'monopoly,' he isn't talking about the illegal eliminate-
your-rivals kind. He's talking about doing something so creative that you
establish a distinct market, niche and identity."31 The end result,
however, is still a gigantic monopolist, regardless of its snowflake
uniqueness. Like many others, from those of Rockefeller to today's drug
makers, their monopoly is often a point of pride.
Beyond the writers who defend the Silicon Valley giants as either
powerless, not abusing their power, or deserving of their monopolies,
many observers—both liberal and conservative—say that all this talk
about "economic power" and monopolies is overblown in the face of US
antitrust laws and European competition laws, which prohibit any
"restraint of trade." For example, New America Foundation fellow Barry
Lynn—who promotes a regulated capitalism— claims that antitrust law
puts "checks on the autocratic power of the corporate managers and the
labor bosses."32 And indeed, in his book Cornered, Lynn argues that
anti-monopoly laws "prove [Charles] Adams wrong" about the
gravitational principle of capitalism.33
Yet antitrust law has been attacked aggressively over the last forty
years. In the lead-up to President Reagan's inauguration, business

reporters at the New York Times observed that "the Reagan
Administration appears likely to aim at a more relaxed and flexible
approach to antitrust policy," with the new head of the program favoring
a "policy based on efficiency considerations."34 Later, the Obama
administration promised a return to aggressive antitrust action, but it
only blocked the very biggest horizontal tieups, like Comcast's attempted
purchase of Time Warner Cable, or AT&T's pass at buying T-Mobile.
The Wall Street Journal's Brent Kendall attributed this reluctance to a
view that "antitrust enforcers, once in office, also want to avoid unfairly
penalizing companies that earned their dominance on the merits."35
But this allegedly merit-based dominance is difficult to square with
the conclusions of Harvard business professor Alfred Chandler Jr., who
in books like Scale and Scope details the monopolization incentives.
According to Chandler, even in traditional manufacturing, and even
without the added incentives of network structures, economies of scale
still meant the presence of giant companies and limited competition
across the economy:
Production units achieved much greater economies of scale.... In many industries the
throughput of plants of that scale was so high that a small number of them could meet the
existing national and even global demand. The structure of these industries quickly
became oligopolistic.... In many instances the first company to build a plant of minimum
efficient scale and to recruit the essential management team remained the leader in its
industry for decades.36
But enforced or not, Chandler explains the inherent limits of antitrust
policy's ability to fix the fundamental problem of market concentration:
"The existence of the Sherman Act discouraged monopoly in industries
where integration and concentration had already occurred. It helped to
create oligopoly where monopoly existed and to prevent oligopoly from
becoming monopoly."37 In other words, antitrust prevents full
monopolization but leaves many huge, vertically integrated firms in
place to continue dominating the marketplace.
And today even this pattern has declined, especially since the Justice
Department's attempt in the 1990s to break up Microsoft, to the point
that antitrust policy's sole function is to block the most outright
monopolistic network mergers. After all, as the right-wing Economist
observed, even if one of the Big Tech giants were broken up in an
antitrust action, "in all likelihood" one of the smaller resulting firms
"would eventually sweep all before it as the inexorable logic of network
effects reasserted itself."38 In other words, network economics drives

many markets to monopoly again and again, as in the case of the telecom
giant AT&T, which had its landline monopoly broken up by antitrust
action in 1982, but then completely rebuilt its grip on landline service
through subsequent mergers.
Other similarly reformist steps have sometimes limited the monopoly
power of the telecom networks that bring you net access, like AT&T. An
example is 2015's Title II net neutrality ruling, which outlawed these
telecom companies' favoring of certain online content or slowing some
of its delivery—although it was overturned in 2017.39 But while net
neutrality requires that the owners of the data "pipes" to our phones
don't get to charge for extra speed or throttle holdouts, it doesn't limit
the development of the web itself into ecosystems built around privately
owned platforms, like Amazon and Google.
So these reforms, which regulate particular expressions of power, are
valuable but limited in scope—and under constant assault by industry.
Antitrust law arose partially as a concession to populist agitation against
the great industrial and rail network trusts of the late nineteenth century,
but it was recognized then as a relatively small surrender of the most
naked forms of monopoly, leaving untouched the foundations of the
system. As President Theodore Roosevelt—considered to be a great
champion of trust-busting—once exclaimed to J. P. Morgan, "If you
don't let us do this, those who will come after us will rise and bring you
to ruin!"40 So competition laws leave in place gigantic companies owned
by their stockholders, who are usually the richest citizens of an economy
—connecting today's towering corporations to the economic ruling class.
These competition laws have been further weakened since their heyday,
thanks in part to heroic intellectuals like the former circuit judge Bork.
This all means that antitrust law won't change the fact that large
chunks of the United States and world economies are heavily reliant on
Big Tech. The Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission
may investigate the platform giants, impose hearty fines, or even order
limited sell-offs of big acquisitions, but their gigantic social role isn't
going anywhere. The coming chapters will dissect each of the Big Five
platforms, revealing similar stories of network effects and user/developer
lock-in. But while the stunning raw size and power of the online titans
was fated in the nature of networks, our failure to regulate them, break
them up, or socialize them is a policy choice. A choice future generations
may make differently.

CHAPTER 2
Macrosoft
The original platform giant
Microsoft was the original tech monopolist of the software age. Rising
on the strength of an association with analog hightech colossus IBM, the
network effects of the software industry cemented Microsoft's position,
as its widely used operating system was the most appealing for third-
party application writers. The company's monopoly position as an
industry standard became almost inevitable—along with a position of
extreme market power.
This success fed longtime CEO Bill Gates's abusive tendencies
toward his subordinates, as well as his hostile posture toward
competitors, which often manifested as an openly expressed desire to
destroy all rivals. "'We're going to put Digital Research out of
business,'" a company history recounts Gates saying, "slamming his fist
into the palm of his other hand. He would issue a similar vow twice more
during the next year ... promising to put MicroPro and Lotus out of
business, each time emphasizing his promise by smashing his fist into
his hand." Corporate historians observe that "it was clearly not enough
for Microsoft to beat the competition; Gates wanted to eliminate his
opponents from the playing field."1
Today Microsoft is considered to have been late to the mobile
revolution, and thus a less hip tech giant relative to the other four titans
examined in this book. Gates, for many years the richest man in the
world, is now eclipsed by Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos. However, the
company has come back strong in recent years, with spiking profits and a
robust private platform, and it periodically exchanges the title of world's
biggest company with Apple and Amazon. But it remains the only one
adjudicated by a US court as a monopolist before the law.2
Breaking Windows

Microsoft was a tiny software company in the US Southwest, writing
programming languages for small makers of early personal computers
(PCs) in the late seventies. Its break came when it was hired to write the
operating system and other programs for IBM's new personal computer
in 1980. For decades, computers were huge mainframes, the "heavy
iron" run by IBM to crunch data and store information for large
corporate and military customers. But miniaturization, and especially the
advent of semiconducting processor chips, meant that individual-sized
computers for personal workstations were becoming technically feasible.
IBM was relatively late to realize the threat this posed to its main
business center of gigantic business computers, and so in its haste to get
a PC to market, it used commercially available, "off the shelf" parts from
various computer component manufacturers. IBM's long-established
reputation as a reliable business partner, and its history of setting
standards for computing that other firms followed, meant its PCs were
extremely popular among corporate America.
However, the use of sourced parts for a large majority of the
machine, along with licensing of components, meant the IBM PC was an
"open architecture," meaning its components could be obtained
piecemeal on the market, rather than being fully proprietary. Since this
PC could be easily copied, companies like Dell, Hewlett-Packard (HP),
and Compaq brought the many IBM "clones" into existence. Industry
historians hold that this variety of suppliers, along with IBM's existing
reputation, is the key reason the PC became an "industry standard"—a
hardware and software framework that creators of software would be
attracted to.3 And when these clone manufactures proved themselves
happy to follow IBM's lead in buying Microsoft's operating system, that
too became part of the industry standard. This meant the wide supply of
clones helped to reinforce the IBM-compatible PC's dominant role.4
Perhaps significantly, Gates himself would later suggest it was his
elite social connections that landed Microsoft this pivotal gig. William
Gates III came from an aristocratic Seattle family, his father an attorney
and president of the state bar for a time, and his mother later a regent of
the University of Washington. Washington State's Republican governor
was a family friend and frequent houseguest. His mother sat on the board
of the United Way, the national charity, along with John Opel, then
chairman of IBM, and she encouraged the hiring of her son's small
software concern.5

Crucially, this did not "set a standard" in the conventional use of
being the best product in a market that others are then judged against. As
I discussed in chapter 1, in markets based on networks, a technical
industry standard is necessary for participants to communicate and to
create products or services that can be understood and used by others.
Much as telephones need basically compatible technology to connect a
call, so do computers and their programs. This was not lost on the young
Microsoft, and "We set the standard" was its corporate motto since its
early days as a tiny Albuquerque startup; it was "preached by Gates as
gospel until it had been burned into his company's psyche," as a
company history puts it.6
As late as 1981, the industry was still fragmented and lacked
standards, which meant that the market for application software was
limited, since new programs would only run on certain computers that
they were written for. The PC was an immediate hit, thanks to IBM's
name, the swarm of clones all carrying shared computer languages like
BASIC (used for creating computer programs, including applications
that run on an OS), and Microsoft's disk operating system, MS-DOS.
Journalists James Wallace and Jim Erickson suggest that "arguably, MS-
DOS became an industry standard as much from the momentum
generated by the huge success of the PC as anything Microsoft's brash,
competitive chairman did." And crucially, "as the IBM PC gained in
popularity, more and more programmers wrote software for that machine
and for the operating system Gates had acquired."7
This advantage—in which a dominant platform attracts programmers
looking to secure the greatest possible audience for their work—is
pivotal since it gives the already-dominant company an even stronger
position: consumers and companies will be attracted to its product not
only because it has become a standard, but also because it will come to
have far more useful applications than other, less-dominant alternatives.
In Microsoft's case, this meant that its monopoly operating system was
further protected by a belt of applications that were built to run on DOS
(and later its successor, the more user-friendly Windows). In other
words, by setting a standard with its OS, Microsoft has over time
magnetically drawn an "ecosystem" of software applications, which
protect its operating system like a moat. The Office suite, including
Word and Excel, was itself produced by Microsoft. And more useful or
fun applications impose a cost on anyone wanting to switch—a good

deal of PC software isn't available on other platforms, or would have be
reinstalled and perhaps paid for again.
Many Microsoft corporate emails and memos were entered into the
public domain in the course of the antitrust trials (discussed below),
giving us an incredibly valuable window into the strategizing of the first
great software monopolists. In an email to major Microsoft investor
Warren Buffett, senior executive Jeff Raikes wrote: "If we own the key
'franchises' built on top of the operating systems, we dramatically widen
the 'moat' that protects the operating system business.... We hope to
make a lot of money off these franchises, but even more important is that
they should protect our Windows royalty per PC."8 Raikes is admitting
that what critics call the "applications barrier to entry" is real and was
part of the company's own strategizing. The conservative Economist
agreed: "The applications barrier to entry gives Microsoft its enduring
monopoly power."9
Under a 1982 deal, Apple Computer contracted Microsoft to write
software programs for its Macintosh PC (see chapter 3) and provided the
Seattle company with prototypes and program-writing tools. Gates
copied most of the visual elements to create the interface for Windows,
which was much more intuitive than DOS. Rather than the mathematical
programming language prompts then used on PCs, Windows was a
graphical user interface (GUI), with visual cues for things like files,
programs, and simple actions like deleting by dragging a file to a trash
icon using a mouse cursor. This was a major innovation at the time.
But Windows' similarity to the Mac OS was so great that Apple
Computer threatened to sue Microsoft for copying its GUI fundamentals
and thus undermining demand for Apple's more expensive Macintosh,
which was released as Windows was rolled out in the early 1980s.
Microsoft later acknowledged in the agreement's announcement that "the
visual displays ... are derivative works of the visual displays generated
by Apple's Lisa and Macintosh graphic user interface programs."10
Indeed, a company manager said the newer OS was named Windows
because "we wanted to have our name basically define the generic"—in
other words, the company's product would have the name of the
windows-based graphics displays themselves.11 But Gates showed that
old-economy arm-twisting was still a rule of the road in the new
economy of Big Tech, as he forced a settlement by threatening to stop
development of both the Word software processing program for Mac and

Excel, the spreadsheet program. This was hardball, since Apple had few
software applications, and it ultimately backed down.
The nature of platform economics also played a role in Apple's
failure to create an industry standard in PC software, instead becoming
the "other" user interface in the industry until the advent of mobile
technology and the release of the iPhone in 2007. Communications
scholar Tim Wu finds Windows was "a partially open system," meaning
it invited software writers to connect to its platform and create new
programs.12 In contrast, Apple CEO Steve Jobs kept control over
software development and prevented free access for accessories (or
"peripherals"). Wu suggests that
[Jobs's] decision to close the Macintosh helped make Bill Gates the richest man on
earth.... Even if Windows was never as advanced or well designed as Apple's operating
system, it enjoyed one insuperable advantage: it worked on any computer, supported just
about every type of software, and could interface with any printer, modem, or whatever
other hardware one could design. Windows ran off with the market Apple had
pioneered.13
Thus, Gates's better intuition of platform economics meant that
Microsoft could attract a large body of third-party programs, helping to
build a huge installed base of users and thus decisively beating Apple to
setting a standard.
The significance of this episode in platform economics is confirmed
by Albert-László Barabási, physicist and network studies pioneer. In his
book Linked, he observes: "[A]s everyone knows, Windows prevailed
despite the fact that Microsoft was not the first mover. When the first
version of Windows came out, it looked like an ugly rip-off of Apple's
revolutionary operating system. Apple, however, kept a rigid monopoly
on its hardware, while the PC offered a free ride to all computer makers.
Therefore the PC became the dominating platform in our computer-
driven world."14
Apple's suit, however, speaks to a major theme in Microsoft's
corporate history. Despite its claims to be a great economic innovator,
Microsoft actually has a notorious record of nakedly stealing technology
to strengthen its software monopolies, and to secure new ones. Even in
the earliest days, the company owed its cash cow to the work and
funding of others, as BASIC was originally developed by a pair of
Dartmouth professors through a National Science Foundation grant to
develop an easier means of teaching programming to students.15 Public
funding in fact has a long history of creating the basic technologies that

the Silicon Valley tech giants later enjoy taking credit for. (I discuss this
at greater length in chapter 8.)
Further, the original disk operating system Microsoft developed for
IBM has a similarly dubious history. IBM's urgent need for an operating
system meant there was insufficient time to develop a new OS, so
Microsoft actually purchased one from a tiny company called Seattle
Computer Products in 1981 for $75,000, renaming it MS-DOS.16
Wallace and Erickson's popular book Hard Drive describes Microsoft's
reputation in the industry as "notorious" for "predatory pilfering," mostly
committed against far smaller companies, who can be picked on safely.
The classic pattern is for Microsoft to approach a company and express
guarded interest in its product, and to suggest a possible partnership.
"After Microsoft is given a glimpse of how the software works, it
suddenly loses interest in the deal—only to announce later that it has
been working on surprisingly similar, but competing, software."17
Indeed, a company project manager relates that "frankly, that is
Microsoft's forte: A competitor comes in and does something interesting,
then we come in and basically clone it; do it marginally better and throw
some clever marketing clout behind it, then relentlessly make it better
over the years."18 This history is ironic considering Gates once
indignantly told a 1976 hacker gathering that he was "ripped off" by
early software pirates making copies of MS-BASIC.19
This episode itself speaks to another major theme of Microsoft
corporate history: tech CEOs are often gigantic assholes. Sadly, this will
be a recurring theme in this book—the towering arrogance of awkward
tech entrepreneurs who rise to positions of incredible power and gigantic
wealth, and then abuse employees with a mode of bullying that is
protected by their corporate hierarchy.
Anyone skeptical of the power of hierarchical business structures to
create cultish conformity should contemplate business reporting like the
following, on Gates's habit of rocking in his chair: "It has become part of
the corporate culture at Microsoft among programmers trying to re-
create themselves in the chairman's image. Gates often rocks himself in a
chair, elbows on knees, to contain his intensity, especially when the talk
is about computers; it's not unusual to walk into a room of Microsoft
managers and find most of them rocking in sync with him during an
important meeting."20 Yikes. His corporate tenure was also marked by
"childlike temper tantrums" in which he berated his employees on a

fairly regular basis, and even walking out on a softball Connie Chung
interview.21
By 1992, Gates was the richest man in the United States. As his
charming, boyish nerd image faded and his reputation for ruthlessness
and abusiveness spread, journalists began observing the similarities
between Gates and other great capitalists of American history. Most
notably, Gates himself saw his reflection in John D. Rockefeller, the
definitive US monopoly capitalist with his nineteenth-century oil
products empire. Gates spoke with admiration of Titan, Ron Chernow's
enormous biography of Rockefeller.22
To protect its monopoly, Microsoft developed a clever policy for its
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs)—the companies that
produced the actual desktop and laptop PCs. The OEMs were essentially
kept in Microsoft's orbit through an ingenious "per processor" licensing
scheme. Microsoft offered the computer makers two options: either pay a
simple license per copy of the DOS or Windows OS that the OEMs
preinstalled on their machines for sale to consumers; or pay a royalty to
Microsoft for every computer they sold, at a major two-thirds discount or
higher. This discount option was of course extremely appealing to Dell,
HP, and other manufacturers, but it also created a disincentive for them
to offer any competing operating systems, since they would effectively
be paying for two of them—the discount was only obtained if the per-
processor royalty was applied to all PC units shipped by the OEMs,
whether they had Windows or not. For other software makers, this was a
craftily devised barrier to entry—one that ended up keeping Apple and
other companies from licensing their own OSs.23 When one OEM
decided in 1992 to ship just 10 percent of its units with a competing OS,
Microsoft doubled the price for DOS, and the OEM immediately backed
down and shelved its plan.24
But all this was just the beginning of Microsoft's predatory
leveraging of its OS monopoly. Crucially, Microsoft maintained certain
policies on its application programming interfaces (APIs). These are
codes in an operating system that allow it to efficiently respond to
applications, like word processors, spreadsheets, or games. If the design
of an app was not tailored toward a set of APIs, it could run poorly on
that operating system, or not at all.
Microsoft decided not to reveal all the Windows APIs to outside
developers, and as a result its native Word and Excel performed better on

its now-universal platform. That's a big deal, since writing and number
crunching are among the most used purposes of personal computers.
Microsoft indignantly denied any suggestion it had any hidden APIs,
until it was later forced to concede it had over a dozen of them for its
Office programs.25
And since Microsoft created its own word processing and
spreadsheet applications, it had a further potential advantage over third-
party app makers in that its in-house software writers would have access
to new versions of the OS before outside developers would. To fight
criticism over this further unfair advantage, Microsoft began to suggest it
maintained a "Chinese Wall" between its operating system business—
which made software to run the processor and the basic computing
environment—and its application business, which made programs that
ran "on top of"
the OS.
The problem was that there was no "wall," and the claims about it
were apparently mostly fraudulent. While the company was willing to
imply the wall's existence publicly to mollify competing app publishers,
a senior company application programmer is quoted in Wallace and
Erickson's book saying, "I remember Bill Gates saying many times,
'There is no Chinese Wall.' Somebody got this idea there was this wall
between systems and applications so we wouldn't talk to each other.
There's no such thing. We don't have any separation here, just one big
company."26
The early 1990s software marketplace saw the "software wars," in
which applications-writing firms like WordPerfect and Novell teamed up
to fight Gates, and still perished. Microsoft prevailed in these fights not
just with its hidden APIs and processor-licensing advantages, but with
more classic monopolist tactics like underpricing. Microsoft wanted
prices low to gain market share and solidify its application dominance,
and unlike smaller competitors it could afford microscopic profit margins
on its applications sales, since it held the steady revenue stream
generated by its near monopoly of the OS market. Similarly, Microsoft
refused to share the basic communications protocols used for computer
servers providing database storage. Microsoft thus used what economists
call asymmetrical information, in which one party knows more than
another, to put competing server companies at a competitive
disadvantage.

But notoriously, Gates failed to anticipate the advent of the Internet,
with a Microsoft board member telling BusinessWeek that Gates was
immediately dismissive: "His view was that the Internet was free," and
"there was no money to be made."27 Hence, no interest from a defining
figure of modern capitalism. But as the Internet and its World Wide Web
grew rapidly, early web browsers like Mosaic became popular. Soon
redeveloped by the same engineers into Netscape Navigator, it went on
to set an industry standard for web browsing. The actions the monopolist
took to crush Netscape and wrench away that standard ended up leading
to the first antitrust trial of a modern Big Tech corporation.
But despite the dawning of a new industry and its challenging
technical details, the overall economic setting was unchanged since the
early days of the market economy. During development of Microsoft's
competing browser, Internet Explorer, one software writer suggested that
it be made freely available online like Mosaic/Netscape. Gates called
him a communist.28
Gates Litigates
In the words of one tech journalist, Gates wanted "Microsoft to set up
toll booths on the information highway."29 And in particular, the
company now saw the threat that Windows OS could be replaced as the
dominant information technology platform. The primary concern was the
potential for the Internet, and in particular the potential of a browser
enabling its use (such as Netscape), to perform the same functions as a
computer operating system— store files, run important programs, and
allow access to media, news, and entertainment. Crucially, this meant
Internet browsers were potentially "middleware": software running on
top of a basic OS but capable of largely replacing its functions. In
particular, if a browser grew popular, third-party software developers
would write applications to run on it—to play video, or manage large
files, or run flashy games. This could end up attracting enough
developers to create a new "applications barrier to entry," like the one
that made Windows the industry standard. And once Microsoft finally
realized that, it went to war.
This period is described in business and computing history as the
"browser wars." Microsoft began by withholding its APIs from Netscape
when the browser company requested a preview of them for the next
version of Windows. Then it approached Netscape's management, and

according to them offered to divide the browser market, with an
executive offering a "special relationship."30 Netscape rejected this
because of the gigantic advantage that it would give Microsoft's new
browser, since it would likely come packaged with the ubiquitous
Windows OS updates.
Thanks to the ensuing legal challenges, we know a fair amount about
Microsoft's browser war strategy. The discussions reveal fairly naked
plans to use monopoly power to crush a startup competitor. Microsoft got
a license from the rights holders to the original version of Mosaic, which
it redeveloped it hastily into Internet Explorer. Gates and his minions had
feared that Netscape had already reached a tipping point where, through
network effects, it would be embraced as a new standard and would
become "locked in." Thus a top Windows executive said in an email, "I
don't understand how IE is going to win.... We must leverage Windows
more"—meaning, for IE to beat Netscape, Windows would have to come
packaged with updates for the whole OS.31
In another internal email from Gates himself, he suggested using the
Office application monopolies to further weaken Netscape's position:
"One thing we have got to change in our strategy— allowing Office
documents to be rendered very well by other people's browsers is one of
the most destructive things we could do to the company. We have to stop
putting any effort into this and make sure that [rendering] Office
documents very well depends on PROPRIETARY IE capabilities.
Anything else is suicide for our platform."32
Several additional measures followed in which Microsoft used its
monopoly to block Netscape from other platforms. They pressured Intuit,
the home accounting software maker, to switch its default browser from
Netscape to Explorer for "something like $1M," according to an email
from Gates.33 They did the same to Apple and to AOL, sending an email
describing the CEO's offer to the online firm. "Gates delivered a
characteristically blunt query: how much do we need to pay you to screw
Netscape? ('This is your lucky day')," as an AOL internal email
described the offer.34
Allegedly, Microsoft vice president Paul Maritz infamously stated
their goal in making their own browser free on their OS: to "cut off
Netscape's air supply."35 By the time of the release of Windows 98, the
company had gone further and barred OEMs from ever removing IE
from their desktops, and in that update the software would at times

override the consumer's browser choice and launch IE, which even
Microsoft internally called "a jolting experience."36
The company was even more aggressive toward Sun Microsystems, a
Silicon Valley computer company that was marketing an innovative new
product, Java. Java is a software program that created an OS-neutral
platform for applications, meaning programs written for Java standards
could run on computers operating Windows as well as Apple's
Macintosh computers and the few machines running UNIX—creating the
potential for a new form of "middleware" that might weaken the
Windows monopoly. Microsoft's reaction was to distribute with its OS
updates a deliberately poorly functioning, or "polluted," version of Java,
which kept applications from running well on Windows. An appeals
court later released an internal Microsoft document stating the goal by
name: "Kill cross-platform Java by growing the polluted Java market."37
Besides using its leverage with other companies and users to destroy
the threat of middleware, the company needed to seize their markets too.
For this, Microsoft employed a strategy that would play a crucial role in
court—integration. Taking advantage of its existing monopolies,
Windows updates would begin to include generic knockoff versions of
middleware companies' products, which would instantly gain major
market footholds because they would be included on any up-to-date PC,
since they all ran Windows. Thus, Microsoft's Internet Explorer browser
was "bundled" into Windows 95, and along with Netscape Navigator
being thrown off the OEMs that Microsoft controlled, and dropped by
AOL, the browser market share swung dramatically away from Netscape
and toward Microsoft. Navigator was finally crushed when Microsoft
used its leverage over Apple, including its $150 million investment in the
company and its porting of the popular Office, to get Steve Jobs to
remove Navigator from the Mac.38
Then Gates went even further—in the IE 3.0 update in 1996, the
software was changed. Previously, the browser was a separate
application, with software code distinct from the operating system. But
the 1996 update began the process of including code for the operating
system in the browser and vice versa, making it difficult to remove
either. This "commingling" had helped Windows itself get widely
adopted, as its early versions were similarly commingled with MS-
DOS.39

But Microsoft's hardball tactics in the browser wars, and its endless
parade of power plays, from chip design to media players, now began to
catch up with it. It was attracting more critical attention from the media,
and from government regulators. And there was indeed something for
them to see, beyond all these technical details. Gates had become a
modern monopoly CEO, and he knew it. In public he said: "Who decides
what's in Windows? The customers who buy it." But at a dinner party
with his then fiancée, Melinda French, the talk turned to politics and he
bragged, "Of course, I have as much power as the president has."40 And
indeed, he golfed with President Clinton, had dinners with House
Speaker Newt Gingrich, and had Vice President Al Gore visit
Microsoft's Redmond corporate campus. Like all great capitalists, he
enjoyed the company of powerful figures with abutting interests. But his
company's flagrant monopoly, and in particular the aggressive attempts
to extend it by leveraging its monopoly power, were forcing the
government's hand.
The first national anti-monopoly action against Microsoft was
brought by the Federal Trade Commission, over the per-processor license
system. But the FTC ultimately deadlocked on the issue in 1993, after
one commissioner recused himself. This led to a handoff of the case
from the FTC to the Department of Justice, which suspected Microsoft of
abusing its monopoly by tying its new products into its existing
dominant OS to develop new monopolies in related industries, such as
web browsing. Crucially, US antitrust law does not outlaw monopoly,
especially if it is obtained through market processes—processes
including the network effects of software compatibility (see chapter 1).
What is illegal is actively leveraging one monopoly into another, and, as
we've seen, Microsoft did a ton of that. However, on appeal the DOJ
settled for a consent decree that required Microsoft to quit tying new
products to its OS but, crucially, did allow the integration of new
features into its operating system. This was a position the company
strongly held, and so a draft decree allowed "integration which offers
tech advantages." Seeing integration as a way to allow monopolization
of adjacent markets, Gates insisted to his attorneys, "Remove those last
four words!" This was eventually achieved.41
Unsurprisingly, Microsoft went on to claim that browser technology
was not a separate product (although Netscape and IE had both been
independent software for years) and that it was instead a feature of the
OS. This didn't satisfy the DOJ, which accused Microsoft of violating

the 1994 consent decree and thus went back to court in 1998, as the
company readied its Windows 98 update with IE bundled in. The
presiding judge took a critical stance toward Microsoft but, crucially, did
not issue an injunction in the early stages of the case, which could have
blocked the company from making IE mandatory on Windows PCs and
given Netscape some breathing room. As a result, Microsoft was able to
take major market share from Netscape throughout the legal process,
such that by the time of Microsoft's loss in court the issue was nearly
moot in the market.42
The trial itself is fascinating for several reasons, not the least of
which is Gates's performance. He gave hours of videotaped testimony
for the case, viewable today online.43 Besides being a transparently
evasive and condescending douchebag, Gates made a long list of explicit
claims that would soon after be directly refuted in court when compared
with his own emails. According to his private words and those of his
management team, numerous company claims were shown to be naked
lies, from the denial of the meeting with Netscape to divide the market,
to the existence of a wall separating OS development from application
software development. Soon, ace designers from Apple were testifying
that their company had found no advantage to mixing browser and OS
code.44 Steve Ballmer, then a Microsoft executive, memorably declared
at a company event, "To heck with Janet Reno," the US attorney general
— which didn't make the company seem any more reasonable.45
But importantly, it was during this time that Gates discovered
charitable giving. Launched in 2000, a time when Gates was looking like
a heartless, lying corporate tyrant, the Gates Foundation has since
become the largest and most widely recognized global charity, managing
an endowment of $44 billion that is used to support economic
development. Indeed, the philanthropy of the world's richest men and
women serves as one of the main arguments of their defenders—sure,
Gates and other billionaires make a lot of money, but then they use it to
help us. So generous! But if we review the business press's own
observations, we can gain a fuller picture: "Twenty years ago, people
associated the name Gates with 'ruthless, predatory' monopolistic
conduct," a wealth manager frankly stated to the New York Times. "His
philanthropy has helped 'rebrand' his name." The dark side of charity is
easily seen in Gates: "After taking a public relations beating during [the
Microsoft antitrust] trial's early going in late 1998, the company started
what was described at the time as a 'charm offensive' aimed at

improving its image.... Mr. Gates contributed $20.3 billion, or 71
percent of his total contributions to the foundation ... during the 18
months between the start of the trial and the verdict." 46
After an attempt at arbitration under a business-oriented judge failed,
the court formally ruled that Microsoft had a monopoly on Intel-based
PC operating systems, and that it had used illegal monopolization tactics
to crush middleware threats from Netscape, Sun, Apple, and others.
These findings survived appeal, meaning Microsoft stands convicted
today as a tech platform monopolist. The findings of law also concluded
that Microsoft should be split—as with AT&T after its own antitrust
conviction, Microsoft would be forced to divest large parts of its
business.
The form of breakup the DOJ sought was called "ops-apps"—
splitting the company into one unit selling the operating system, and
another selling applications like the Office suite. While in this
arrangement, both units would still be monopolies in their respective
areas, they would be weakened since the apps company would likely sell
to other companies and the ops firm might have reason to work with
other application developers, thus ruining the application barrier to entry
it had created. On the other hand, Microsoft and its allies argued that the
efficiency of the Windows standard might be broken, since it wasn't
certain that new firms would produce compatible products.47 After
weighing the arguments, the court formally ordered in June 2000 that
Microsoft be broken up, along with other significant restraints on its
behavior.
Microsoft, of course, appealed this verdict, but during the wait for
appeal hearings, the US held its 2000 election, in which George W. Bush
took 
office 
under 
highly 
disputed 
circumstances. 
Republican
administrations have historically been more lenient to antitrust
defendants, and the new DOJ announced in September 2001 that "the
Department will not seek a break-up of the company into separate
operating systems and applications businesses."48
The settlement gave Microsoft far more leeway in its API disclosure,
and rather than bar Windows from including IE, the decision was to
allow OEMs to hide the browser from the end user, hopefully
encouraging the manufacturers to include independent browsers or other
middleware. So users would see desktop icons on their PCs that might

include other browsers and not necessarily IE, even though it was still
present.
But other aspects of the settlement, including a lack of reduction in
royalties owed to Microsoft if other middleware was installed, limited
the importance of the change in browser status. The bar on the bundling
of IE was only set to last for five years, although it could be extended.
And amazingly, Microsoft could override any OEM-added desktop icons
(for other browsers, for example) starting two weeks after activation, if
the user approved a simple prompt.49 Overall, Windows remained
bundled, IE dominated the browser market, and Netscape remained
defunct. As law professors Andrew Gavil and Harry First concluded in
their book on the Microsoft litigation, "Courts cannot raise the dead."50
The limited restraints on Microsoft's behavior expired several years later,
with its desktop OS monopoly intact. The New York Times observed that
the verdict "imposed few new restrictions that would slow Microsoft's
aggressive push into new markets"; it was an "ineffective slap on the
wrist."51
Clouds Gather
Having covered Microsoft's victories on appeal in the United States,
which coincided with the European Union's imposition of similarly
limited remedies, we can now review the evolution of the corporation's
platform power into the era of mobile and cloud computing. There are
some surprises, but Microsoft's market weight has remained heavy and
its conduct only somewhat restrained. Even an incredibly uncritical
blogger covering the company wrote in her book that "Microsoft learned
some valuable lessons, thanks to the U.S. Department of Justice and the
handful of states who sued.... Instead of being quite so blatant,
Microsoft has taken a quieter back route to achieving the same ends."52
The first thing to consider is whether Microsoft is even in the top tier
of tech giants anymore. Many articles and reviews of the largest tech
corporations don't include it, or mention it in passing. However,
Microsoft retains ownership of a number of pivotal platforms that make
it enduringly powerful and important, and it remains among the five-
largest world companies by market value—trading the number one spot
back and forth with Amazon and Apple, and standing a bit above Google
and Facebook.53 Microsoft, today worth around a trillion dollars and

with its own lasting platforms on mobile devices, stands among the Big
Five tech giants that now tower over the rest of capitalism.
When Windows 10 was released in summer 2015, Microsoft made
the dramatic change of not charging for the upgrade, which had been a
cornerstone of its business model for years.54 The change seems to be an
effort to bring the giant closer to Google and Facebook, which make
their software available for free, and to Apple, which provides free
updates to the programs running on its hardware. The reason for this
shift lies in the industry's structural evolution and the rise of mobile
computing. Microsoft, having missed the advent of the Internet, and
bringing the US Justice Department down upon itself in the effort to
claw back the lost opportunity, also missed the explosion of mobile
devices. And it has paid for these strategic missteps in lost revenue and
prestige—for a short time in March 2010 Apple surpassed Microsoft in
market value, around the quarter-trillion-dollar mark, while Facebook
founder Mark Zuckerberg declined Microsoft's offer to buy the social
network for $24 billion in its early years.55
The key fact lies in a detail of CEO Satya Nadella's decision to make
Windows free—it applies only to devices with screens smaller than nine
inches. This includes phones and tablets but not laptops or desktop PCs,
suggesting the goal is to transition Microsoft's application software
monopolies to the rising mobile platforms while still preserving
Microsoft's full OS dominance of the desktop, where Windows updates
still come with a cost. Microsoft has cut its per-processor license fee for
lower-end OEMs but kept the basic business model intact for anything
larger than an iPad.
The Wall Street Journal reports that Microsoft has not only returned
to growth after years of stagnation (albeit at a giant level of profitability),
but has become "the only pre-internet tech giant to escape the decline of
its legacy product," in this case the Windows operating system.
Microsoft's persistence in the top ranks owes to a number of strategies.
One is a relentless campaign of big acquisitions of valuable firms and
startups that look to provide unique tools or software to help Gates's
colossus survive in the mobile world. Microsoft bought LinkedIn, the job
search hub, for a whopping $26.2 billion, and GitHub, the open-source
software development platform, for $7.5 billion; and these acquisitions
happened on top of the company's absorption of smaller software
developers using Microsoft's coding language to create programs for

mobile platforms. These led the Wall Street Journal to pronounce in a
2016 headline, "Microsoft, Rebooted, Emerges as a Tech Leader."56
The company's bigger hardware efforts are evident in its Surface line
of laptops and tablets, which are slick and run on strong processors—part
of an effort to compete with Apple's famous style and power. Many of
these models are built with the sophisticated and efficient ARM chips
used in Apple machines (see chapter 3). With the desktop PC market
now shrinking, Microsoft has no choice but to create a hardware habitat
outside PCs, which may in the future be found primarily in the
workplace.57 And Microsoft is unwilling to leave mobile hardware
platforms entirely in the hands of its rival Apple and the manufacturers
of devices running Google's Android operating system, especially
Samsung (see chapter 5).
But above all, Microsoft has held on to its place in the top rung of
Big Tech thanks to its success in the transition to cloud computing.
Cloud computing refers to the remote provision of computer services that
were once delivered on-site by large networks of servers around the
world. This allows for major efficiencies, as large corporate and
government institutions can now lay off IT staff and sell equipment that
were only sometimes needed, and services like computing power or
database management can now be provided online. This is a major shift,
as computing becomes closer to a paid utility like the power bill.
Microsoft's cloud computing program, called Azure, is a strong
second-place contestant to market creator and leader Amazon, so the
main discussion of cloud computing has been saved for chapter 4. For
now, though, it's important to realize that besides Microsoft's enduring
monopolies in PC operating systems and office productivity software
across platforms, it's the growth of Azure that will keep the company
relevant. The business world's judgment is that Microsoft is "the stiffest
competition" to Amazon, and it has pulled away from Google Cloud,
which now stands in a distant third place.58 Microsoft now supplies 13.3
percent of the market's services, while Amazon supplies 51.8 percent
and Google 6.0 percent, and the company is aided both by its long
history supplying business with IT and by corporate wariness of being
totally dependent on Amazon.59 Still, Microsoft and Amazon do often
work together, which is typical of oligopolies—markets, like the cloud
computing industry, that are dominated by just a few enormous firms.

Most recently this has taken the form of merging the "skills" of their
creepily feminized digital assistants, Cortana and Alexa, respectively.60
In individual fiscal quarters, the company's cloud infrastructure
revenue is growing at rates kissing double digits as the market grows
rapidly, helping enormously to offset declines in PC license sales.61 The
company is investing massively in this new sector, spending a couple
billion every quarter on enormous data centers. The scale of these
"server farms," built around the country and world to provide quick data
access, is enormous. "Three important economies of scale," to quote
Microsoft's financial filings, have been the impetus for this new
direction:
Larger datacenters can deploy computational resources at significantly lower cost per unit
than smaller ones; larger datacenters can coordinate and aggregate diverse customer,
geographic, and application demand patterns, improving the utilization of computing,
storage, and network resources; and multi-tenancy lowers application maintenance labor
costs for large public clouds. As one of the largest providers of cloud computing at scale,
we are well-positioned.62
Economies of scale, of course, have a long history in industry of
encouraging aggressive growth in company size and market share, as
firms invest to achieve high levels of mass production and the low costs
that come with them. They apply to the demand side of this relationship
too, as suggested by a memo released by Gates (but actually written by a
software engineer): Clients "are increasingly considering what services-
based economies of scale might do to help them reduce infrastructure
costs or deploy solutions as-needed and on [a] subscription basis."63
New cloud products include customer service "bots" for corporate clients
looking to cut call center workers, as well as tools for clients looking to
build their own. But again, the enduring capitalist motives shine through
the bleeding-edge hi-tech. In the bland words of a corporate researcher
speaking to the Wall Street Journal: "There's huge interest from
enterprises in deploying bots for customer services.... The intent usually
is to reduce cost by reducing head count."64
The rocketing growth of cloud computing has led to the one of the
greatest internal reversals in the company's history: it downgraded the
status of Windows, folding its pivotal platform for software makers into
the fast-growing Azure unit, in a recognition that the mobile era is seeing
stagnating desktop computer sales. Windows remains hugely prevalent,
however—the business press reports that almost 700 million devices run
Windows 10, and some version of Windows runs on over 1.5 billion

devices globally.65 But the main platform for developers is now the
cloud.
The growth in Microsoft's cloud arm has also been particularly
helpful for its Office suite of work software, since those apps have their
own network effects. This manuscript was written on Word, because
that's the document format publishers usually want, it's the one most
often used by writers, and most editors are familiar with it. Likewise
with Excel, a near-universal tool for basic spreadsheet work. And today,
as mobile applications are replacing their desktop-bound predecessors,
Office is most often provided through the cloud via an Office 365
subscription. The service today has 120 million monthly users, according
to the company.66
Critics of Excel often point to its role in several high-visibility
disasters like the enormous financial losses suffered in JPMorgan's
infamous 2012 "London Whale" trade. Yet Microsoft's biggest disasters
still seem to come from its deliberate decisions. One truly staggering
case involves the 2017 epidemic computer virus WannaCry, a
ransomware program—once installed on a computer, it encrypts files and
deletes them unless the owner sends a payment to the hackers within a
certain time limit. The Financial Times found that Microsoft withheld a
free patch from users of older versions of Windows that would have
blocked the virus's activity.67 Freely distributed to users of newer
versions of its OS, those on older ones were charged $1,000 per device
for "custom" support such as the anti-virus patch, but with a $750,000
minimum payment that scared off many PC users. The company, along
with chipmaker Intel and the later generation of online companies, has
continued to announce patches that must urgently be made to its
software, each time starting an arms race with criminal hackers to exploit
the vulnerability.68
The insanely high fee meant that only large corporate customers
could possibly afford this "custom" support, so clients like Britain's
National Health Service had no choice but to go without it—leading it to
become one of the most globally prominent victims of the ransomware,
and disrupting the health needs of untold numbers of UK patients. The
Financial Times suggested that this reflects a "quandary" for Microsoft,
"as it tries to force customers to move to newer and more secure
software, while at the same time earning a profit from the army of
engineers it employs on security issues."69

Microsoft does not lack for profitability. The "quandary" is how
much to twist vulnerable clients' arms for a security patch that was
developed with revenue from several monopolies, costs almost nothing
to distribute to at-risk users, and would have prevented millions of
dollars in ransoms and disruption. Screwing over clients who made them
rich makes Microsoft hard.
Networkforce
After charting this long record of corporate monopoly and legal
maneuvering, we should contemplate the workers who actually produce
the useful software that has put monopoly power in Microsoft's hands.
While the white-collar workforce designing and integrating software at
Microsoft is far from toiling in a coal mine, the company remains
notorious for its work conditions and the helplessness that many of its
workers feel.
We've already taken note of the abusively tyrannical tirades of the
company's cofounder and longtime CEO, Gates. Even sympathetic
biographers refer to his frequent "abrasive, childish rants" and "childlike
temper tantrums."70 Gates's number two and CEO successor, Steve
Ballmer, maintained this tradition of management by yelling like an ape.
These are the patterns of human behavior that are encouraged by the
strict hierarchy found in the business world.
To complement this portrait of hierarchical workplace bullying,
consider the demureness expected from some sections of the workforce.
It was current CEO Satya Nadella who infamously suggested at a
conference that female staff should not push for raises, but instead wait
for management to notice their contributions. This immediately made
Nadella the poster boy for the Clueless Tech Bro, and rightly so.71
Nadella has since made conspicuous efforts to condemn Silicon Valley's
tilt toward male engineers and managers, a conversion that convinced
few people. The bigger point perhaps is that while management is free to
scream in an employee's face and blame them for its own failures, the
employee is not only barred from yelling back; for many, even asking for
an increase in compensation is a little too cheeky.
Beyond the worker abuse and open sexism typical in capitalist
systems, there are more particular examples of power mongering, like
the opportunistic use of the H-1B visa program. The visa allows for the
temporary (three- to six-year) hiring of foreign workers for specialized

occupations, and it has been most heavily used by two sectors:
outsourcing firms and Silicon Valley. Gates argued in a 2007 Washington
Post editorial that further technological progress requires we "make it
easier for foreign-born scientists and engineers to work for U.S.
companies." The CEO wrote: "American competitiveness also requires
immigration reforms that reflect the importance of highly skilled foreign-
born employees. Demand for specialized technical skills has long
exceeded the supply of native-born workers with advanced degrees," a
shortfall that has reached "a crisis point."72
On the other hand, Senators Bernie Sanders and Chuck Grassley
have been less gung ho about the visa program, arguing that companies
should be restricted from using H-1B visas if they have had mass layoffs
within the last year. The senators' goal, as a 2007 article on Ars Technica
put it, was "to ensure that US companies are not exploiting the H-1B
system by essentially replacing US workers with cheaper foreign
talent."73 Sanders observed that under legislation then under
consideration (but not enacted), the number of additional visas would be
approximately equal to the projected number of high-tech jobs created in
the sector. Ultimately, the motive of Gates and the industry in their
aggressive support of the visa program seems to have less to do with
their professed cosmopolitanism than with their structural need to keep
programmer salaries depressed.
But above all, the classic feature of labor exploitation in tech is a
traditional one: overwork. As far back as the late eighties, the Seattle
Times ran memorable articles describing the company's work
environment as a "velvet sweatshop," an early view of the tech industry's
culture of overwork, referred to in the industry as "crunch time" or,
indeed, "death marches." In one notable example, it reported that "sixty-
hour work weeks without overtime are common" in the company's
"woodsy corporate headquarters" that evokes "the quiet intellectual
industry of a college campus." However, "the word 'unions' make[s] the
blood drain" from the faces of tech company executives.74 The Times
continued:
Workers quick to extol the multiple charms of their employer prefaced all negative
comments with a request for anonymity, and even ex-Microsoft employees expressed
concern about repercussions, since many still have affiliations with Microsoft or the high-
tech industry. Halfway through the research for this article, sources began calling back
frantic, demanding to know which parts of their statements would be used—the result of a
memo ... requesting that any contacts with outside media be sanctioned first by corporate

communications. In some cases sources were asked to check with the reporter about what
would be printed, and report back to the company their findings.75
The paper suggested that "this strategy had its Orwellian aspects."
George Orwell, a socialist best remembered for his damning portraits of
totalitarian thought control, would probably want to take down the bars
on these Windows.
But the technology is evolving in the opposite direction, with the
business papers today reporting that "Microsoft Corp. tallies data on the
frequency of chats, emails and meetings between its staff and clients
using its own Office 365 services to measure employee productivity,
management efficacy and work-life balance.... Earlier this year,
Microsoft sales team members received personalized dashboards that
show how they spend their time, insights that managers cannot see."
Cannot see yet. But "companies, which have wide legal latitude in the
U.S. to monitor workers, don't always tell them what they are
tracking.... Microsoft also sells that type of workplace analytics software
to other companies."76
BusinessWeek has also reported on the company's work conditions.
Reviewing legal actions in which Microsoft attempted to enforce non-
compete agreements on workers defecting to Google or other companies,
it observed that the 2005 hearings "painted a distinctly unflattering
picture of the company's inner workings." The company's low morale is
related in part to aggressive cost cutting:
Microsoft sliced health benefits, introducing, for example, a $40 copayment on some
brand-name prescription drugs.... Even the cuts that seem trivial have dampened morale.
Just whisper the word "towels" to any Microsoft employee, and eyes roll. Last year,
Microsoft stopped providing a towel service for workers who used company locker rooms
after bike rides or workouts. Employees who helped the company build its huge cash
stockpile were furious.77
More importantly, due to Microsoft's stock price stagnating for many
years around the turn of the century, "more than half of Microsoft's
employees have received virtually no benefit from their stock
holdings.... Microsoft's compensation moves have created a haves-vs.-
have-nots culture. Newbies work for comfortable but not overly
generous wages, while veterans have a lucrative treasure chest full of
stock options." Even within the more privileged white-collar workforce,
corporate hierarchy and class distinctions still loom large.

Other classic white-collar policies at Microsoft have unfortunately
become the standard among members of the Fortune 500, like the
company's policy of peer review. Up until 2013, software developers
were evaluated by their colleagues every six months, and the lowest-
rated 5 percent were fired.78 This "rank and yank" policy is a familiar
tool in powerful hierarchies, in which labor exists as simple input tools
to be thrown out if performing poorly in the short run. Gates said: "There
are other jobs out there.... If they don't have what it takes to work at
Microsoft, they can go to Boeing or back East." And eat cake. Gates
again illustrates the unflattering personal ramifications of holding
enormous power over other people, including enormous obliviousness,
like the French aristocrats of old. Indeed, journalist James Wallace more
than once refers to the industry term "Microserfs."79
But the serfs do rise up, as when the company's workers in 2018
questioned CEO Nadella and handed him a petition with three hundred
thousand signatures, including those of five hundred Microsoft workers,
demanding the company cease its data processing and AI contracts with
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, criticizing its role in
incarcerating immigrants and refugees, and separating children from
their parents at the border. The New York Times noted the petition came
at a delicate time, as the company had the truly hilarious hope of
"positioning itself as a moral leader of the technology industry," making
it ironic that the workers speaking to reporters "declined to be identified
for fear of retaliation."80
Microsoft has also been the target of some of the limited labor
litigation in the industry. This has mostly been in regard to another
common feature of modern labor markets: precariousness and insecurity.
The most prominent of these lawsuits was Vizcaino v. Microsoft, in
which "permatemps" hired by Microsoft were found to have been under-
compensated. However, only the blocked access to Microsoft's stock
purchase plan (then allowing a 15 percent discount on share buys by
employees) held up as an official violation. Further, the verdict only
applied to those long-term "temporary" workers who actually worked for
Microsoft, rather than independent contractors hired through a broker, so
the case seems to have held little of value for today's tech workers.81
Microsoft ultimately settled for $97 million, a pittance by their
standards. One analysis concludes that "the court's decision in favor of
the contractors resulted in Microsoft implementing a policy to make the

distinction between permanent employees and contract employees even
more clear, rather than reducing the number of contractors."82 This
seems to conform to past experience, in which labor has rarely been
significantly helped by simple court actions, owing not only to labor's
inability to match its opposition in terms of affording legal expenses, but
also to the unfavorable nature of US labor laws, largely written under the
influence of corporate lobbyists.
And generally, over the last forty years Microsoft has played a major
role in establishing the human standards of the tech sector. In 1991, at
the height of Microsoft's monopoly over computing and before its legal
troubles, the company threw its annual Christmas party in Seattle. The
theme was New York City, with areas set up to resemble Greenwich
Village and Little Italy. Paid actors attended dressed as street people.83
Even in its off-time celebrations, the company includes the hierarchies of
the capitalist landscape it rose from, even if there's no clear rationale at
all.
It was Microsoft that showed the world that the "New Economy" of
sophisticated, high-tech corporations was not fundamentally different
from the Old Economy of capitalism in its core characteristics:
monopoly and class conflict.

CHAPTER 3
The Apple Bitten
The long road to number one
In January 1984, Apple Computer aired a striking commercial during the
Super Bowl, in which an image of a totalitarian ruler spouts propaganda
at cowed workers until a sexy athlete with an Apple logo on her shirt
runs in with a giant hammer, which she swings into the screen,
destroying it. The ad became famous, both for its then-innovative art
design and its tagline, "You'll see why 1984 won't be like 1984."
The reference, of course, was to the famous satire Nineteen Eighty-
Four, socialist George Orwell's critique of totalitarianism. The creative
director at Apple's ad agency said the spot "explained Apple's
philosophy and purpose—that people, not just government and big
corporations, should run technology."1 The beloved computing nerd icon
and creator of the original Apple Computer, Steve Wozniak, captured
this spirit when he said, "Our first computers were born not out of greed
or ego but in the revolutionary spirit of helping common people rise
above the most powerful institutions."2 To quote a former member of
Apple's marketing staff, "Revolutionize may be the most used word in
Apple marketing."3
Yet, Apple is now among the three biggest corporations in the world,
and the very first to reach a trillion dollars in market value. Far from
encouraging revolution and opposing totalitarianism, it uses exhaustively
exploited labor at every turn, has a famously oppressive and hierarchical
work climate, and is itself among the most powerful institutions in the
world today.
Apple Tarts
Well before its modern era of flashy mobile devices, Apple was known
for 
its 
sleek, 
user-friendly 
personal 
computers. 
These 
were

groundbreaking because of their "graphical user interface," or GUI,
which freed the user from having to learn computer code commands.
Instead, a simple visual desktop metaphor allowed files to be opened and
altered, different programs run, and media accessed.
While Apple has reliably taken credit for its technical and design
innovations down the years, as with Microsoft (see chapter 2) much of
the most innovative work occurred elsewhere, often by public
institutions. Apple booster Steven Levy recognized in his book on
Apple's early years that among its innovations, "the best ones were
borrowed."4 The original development of visual windows opening on a
computer display, representing particular files or programs, was funded
by the military's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA
discussed at greater length in chapter 8).
In particular, a good deal of the GUI elements most associated with
Apple's computers (and later Microsoft's Windows) were created at the
Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) operated by Xerox, including the
window display and the mouse. When DARPA's modest funding for
research was cut back, several scientists went to PARC to continue their
research on computer interfaces.
Years later, a young Steve Jobs and other Apple staff went to PARC,
and in exchange for valuable Apple stock, were allowed to observe
PARC's Altair computer, with its movable windows and pop-up menus,
leading Jobs to jump up and exclaim: "Why aren't you doing anything
with this? This is the greatest thing! This is revolutionary!"5 In fact,
when Jobs later accused Bill Gates and Microsoft of copying Apple's
own GUI, Gates replied, "No, Steve, I think it's more like we both have
this rich neighbor named Xerox, and you broke in to steal the TV set,
found I'd been there first, and said, 'No fair, I wanted to steal the TV
set!'"6 Notably, these are founders of companies that are now well
known for spending millions to take others to court for infringing on
their intellectual property.
Apple was first founded in 1976 by Jobs and computer whiz Steve
Wozniak (little-known cofounder Ronald Wayne sold his shares early).
From the earliest days, the ambitious Jobs had a tendency to connive and
use his friendship with Wozniak (or "Woz") to his advantage. When Jobs
got an early break designing a game for video game giant Atari, he found
the circuitry too difficult and got Wozniak to design it. Yet after
delivering the game, Jobs dragged his feet on paying Wozniak and

eventually gave him $350. Years later, when Wozniak discovered Jobs
had received $5,000 for the program from Atari, he realized he had been
betrayed by his friend. "I just cried," he remembered.7
Jobs and Wozniak went into business producing and selling
computers, at first essentially glorified circuit boards, later adding
keyboard interfaces and monitors. The 1977 Apple II was the first
milestone, with an open setup and a licensed version of Microsoft's
BASIC programming language, allowing software developers to write
supporting applications like games. However, the Apple III, released in
1980, was a closed system, meaning independent developers couldn't
write programs to it; and its lack of software and external slots for
peripherals hindered its ability to become a platform by attracting
software developers. So was the 1983 Lisa, meant to be the first
computer to fully exploit PARC's GUI technologies. It bombed because
it had wildly inadequate memory and a high price tag, especially
damaging in the face of the exploding dominance of the IBM PC
(running Microsoft's operating system) during the same period.
When the Lisa sold below expectations, Jobs said to the staff, "You
guys really fucked up. I'm going to have to lay a lot of you off."8 Indeed,
on February 28, 1981, Apple laid off forty-one of the company's fifteen
hundred employees, later known as "Black Wednesday." Levy called this
"the loss of Apple's virginity" and "the end of innocence."9 This would
be just the first, and far from the worst, of Apple's sins against working
people.
Much as with Bill Gates, Jobs became notorious for preserving the
very worst of hierarchical capitalist tyranny into the information age. On
the one hand, Jobs became the icon of the tech CEO, charismatic and
brilliant, and a gigantic amount of glamorizing coverage has passed for
analysis of the figure and company for years, serving as the clear basis
for big-budget movie heroes and villains. However, in almost all
firsthand accounts, Jobs was known for his abusive tirades against his
official subordinates and for being a general heel. He mocked the idea of
extending stock options to a former best friend working at the company
who had been too naïve to ask for them early on, and he lied about
having no control over the process. Macworld publisher David Bunnell
recounts that Jobs parked his car in a handicap space at the Mac building,
since his car would be keyed by disgruntled workers if he parked at the
side of the building or behind it. Stanford business professor Robert

Sutton wrote, "It sometimes seems as if his full name is, 'Steve Jobs, that
asshole.'"10 Truly, a classic capitalist.
But the wreckage of the Lisa led to the rise of the Macintosh, which
would in time become Apple's signature product before the mobile era.
Jobs, having been pushed away from the Lisa team over his inability to
work with others, ended up taking over the Mac project from other
managers, even though he had argued for killing the project in the early
days. He later took credit for it in the press. As Wozniak has said, "With
Steve you never know exactly where an idea comes from."11
Launched with the famous 1984 ad, the Mac fixed some of Lisa's
problems, introducing more memory and more affordable pricing. Its
interface was truly elegant and utterly intuitive, the consummation of the
GUI. But its sales still struggled for years (after a brief surge of buying
among Apple enthusiasts), again owing partially to premium prices—
Apple's "standard markup" was in the neighborhood of 300 percent. And
even this was exceeded when the Mac, $500 to manufacture, was priced
at nearly $2,500.12 Sales were also dampened by performance issues,
including the manufacturer's failure to include an internal cooling fan,
which Jobs refused to approve on the grounds that it was inelegant.
But in the end, as we saw in chapter 2, Apple's computers were
swamped by the huge success of the IBM PCs running Microsoft
software, which were revolutionizing computing at the time. The
obvious question in this period of the industry's history is why Apple's
fine, if expensive, products were definitively beaten out for market share
by computers running Microsoft's operating systems, MS-DOS and then
Windows.
The reasons were the network effects and platform economics
discussed in chapter 1. For something important happened between the
Apple II and all the company's computers that followed—Jobs closed the
system. While the Apple II had many peripheral slots to attach drives,
printers, and other software enablers, the III had no slots, nor did the Lisa
or Mac. Further, Apple would not license its operating system to other
manufacturers like Dell, as Microsoft had. This meant corporate
purchasers were leery of widespread investment in Apple machines,
since if anything went wrong they had only one company to turn to,
unlike the variety of PC-making OEMs. And those low adoption rates in
turn led to the Mac having significantly less third-party software than
Windows.

These combined factors meant that the Mac OS could not become an
industry standard, while the more-open Windows OS could, and did.
Journalists and business analysts covering Apple recognized its goal was
to set "an industry standard alongside DOS, the inferior but widely
accepted IBM and Microsoft system," but Apple wanted more control
and feared repeating IBM's experience. Its use of third-party parts, and
an operating system from Microsoft, meant that the PC "clones" from
Dell and other OEMs ate into the sales of IBM's own machines. So out
of fears of "cannibalizing" its own hardware sales (and their premium
prices), Apple never licensed its OS and therefore missed its chance to
gain major market share, as Microsoft had done.
Apple's niche market role was further assured by the strong tendency
of corporate buyers to use what Levy calls "an unwritten code: one
would never, ever go wrong by sticking to whatever IBM called a
standard."13 This was so because, in addition to having a wider market
for supplies, IBM PCs were becoming widely used by other Fortune 500
firms, limiting incompatibility issues—a standard network effect.
Despite these continual missteps by Apple, which have drawn enormous
criticism from business historians and were indeed later repeated in the
mobile era, Jobs did recognize that setting a standard was the goal. But
he mistakenly believed Apple could create "a second industry standard,"
rather than being part of the one already started by the IBM PCs.14 This
plan shows a real failure to understand platform economics.
Even in the markets for application software, Apple's moves hurt its
chances of becoming an industry standard. It broke with tradition by not
including a programming language with its computers, thus limiting
users' ability to modify programs. Also in this period, the company
actively discouraged the "porting" of applications—altering programs so
they could run on a different operating system.15 The purpose of this
move was to encourage the creation of entirely new apps for Apple's
machines, but it also undermined the application barrier that the more
open Apple II had cultivated, further weakening Apple's ability to set
standards.
However, the major exception to this policy was Microsoft—besides
BASIC, it ported the predecessors of the crucial Word and Excel
productivity programs to Apple's OS. Business histories record that at
times, Microsoft had as many workers developing Apple software as
Apple had employees in total.16 As with past network monopolists, they

soon turned to struggle against each another, with enormous
consequences for our digital economy. Microsoft's work on Apple
applications, using secretive Mac prototypes, allowed Gates to use the
knowledge gained to develop similar GUI-based applications for the
IBM PCs for which Microsoft created operating software.17 Failing to
stop Gates, Jobs himself attempted to double-cross him by developing
Apple's own programming language, MacBASIC, but gave that up when
Apple's existing BASIC license lapsed and needed to be renewed—the
company couldn't risk being without a programming language. And
when Windows 1.01 was about to be released, to forestall an expected
lawsuit from Apple, Gates threatened to cease work on porting its
business apps as well.
But most stunning of all is a memo from Gates himself to Apple's
CEO a John Sculley, essentially imploring Apple to learn from
Microsoft's standard-setting, competition-destroying example and desist
its stubborn refusal to license its OS. Gates's memo is an open
explanation of the network effects and platform economics that gave him
his own monopoly, including the crucial role of network standards and
the lock-in experience of users of applications. As such, it deserves to be
quoted at length:
Apple must make Macintosh a standard. But no personal computer company, not even
IBM, can create a standard without independent support. Even though Apple realized this,
they have not been able to gain the independent support required to be perceived as a
standard. The significant investment ... in a "standard personal computer" results in an
incredible momentum for its architecture.... The industry has reached the point where it is
now impossible for Apple to create a standard out of their innovative technology without
support from, and the resulting credibility of other personal computer manufacturers.18
Gates added that the lack of "Mac-compatible" manufacturers meant
that "corporations consider it risky to be locked into the Mac, for reasons
of price AND choice." Therefore, Apple should license the Mac to three
to five OEMs, and "Microsoft is very willing to help Apple implement
this strategy." A second letter from Gates to Apple repeated the offer to
help, concluding, "Please give me a call."19 In 1997 Gates invested $150
million in Apple, along with extensive patent sharing, in order to keep it
alive as the Department of Justice investigated Microsoft for
monopoly.20
Wozniak, far from a scheming strategist, himself wrote that "the
computer was never the problem. The company's strategy was. Apple
saw itself as a hardware company; in order to protect our hardware, we

didn't license our operating system."21 For this reason, analyst Owen
Linzmayer wrote that "Apple itself is really to blame for the success of
Windows."22
Because of all these factors, as Wozniak implied at the time, the
company's real platform power would not come from its software, as it
did for Microsoft. Instead it would come from the hardware itself, and it
was its hardware that would soon open up an entirely new form of
computer use that has reshaped our society, becoming the gateway
through which the Internet itself is accessed and therefore the means for
the other Big Tech giants to interact with us. It was the iPhone that
created Apple's platform power on the new terrain of mobile hardware.
But before the advent of Apple's mobile devices, the company saw
its darkest days, with years of declining sales and various explorations of
selling the company, especially around its brush with bankruptcy in
1997. This period saw the dramatic events that are the stuff of corporate
biography—Jobs chafed under the leadership of CEO Sculley, causing
problems to the point that Sculley had the board strip Jobs of his formal
title and roles in the company. Jobs in fact attempted a failed boardroom
coup while Sculley was overseas, and he returned later as interim CEO,
at the time that Apple was finding more success with its strikingly
designed iMac desktops, styled by Apple's rising design star Jonathan
Ive.
Jobs's return was shortly followed by the beginning of Apple's
stunning rise in handheld products, when the pioneering iPod was
released in 2001. Clunky and limited by today's standards, it was a major
innovation at the time, mainly due to its large storage capacity for music
previously transported through large quantities of CDs. But crucially,
here platform economics again played an important role—much like the
original Mac and other expensive Apple products, sales fell after an
initial boom, once enthusiasts had done their buying.
It was only with the introduction of the iTunes music-buying and -
playing software in 2002, including a negotiated deal with the major
record labels to offer their music through the service, that iPod sales shot
up. The presence of a sturdy seed of listeners attracted the music labels,
in turn attracting more non-Mac users who valued the richer selection
available to them as more music listening migrated online with the rise
of Napster, and the rising quality of broadband made downloading media
feasible. Soon iTunes was so dominant Jobs called it the "Microsoft" of

music streaming.23 And above all it was the porting of iTunes to
Windows in 2003 that led to the real takeoff of iPod and iTunes sales, as
the dominant OS platform now put that software before millions of new
users. Notably, Jobs initially resisted the iTunes idea.24
The early success of the iPod showed what was possible with new
mobile technologies—the source of Apple's great platform power, profit,
and capitalist growth. But despite the huge effect of smartphones on our
society, the apple doesn't roll far from the early corporate tree.
ImperiOS
The smartphone revolution has reshaped society. It has made instant
gratification available for anyone who can afford a phone and data plan,
and added a new, enormous obstacle to social exchange as our eyes lock
onto screens instead of other people. Adam Greenfield observes in his
book Radical Technologies that "refugees recently arriving from
warzones have been known to ask for a smartphone before anything else,
food and water not excluded."25 The Wall Street Journal has published
estimates that each iPhone customer is worth about $1,000 in profit
every two to three years, while tech journalist Brian Merchant called the
iPhone "the pinnacle product of all capitalism to this point."26 And
Apple has rushed to take credit for this potential, but as with much of
their earlier tech, most of it had already been developed, often by the
public sector.
This subject is dissected in chapter 8, but for now it's perhaps most
crucial to observe an interesting fact—mobile multi-touch displays, the
basis for modern smartphone interaction, were first developed by
publicly funded scientists working in the same giant physics research
facility where the World Wide Web was created. British scientist Tim
Berners-Lee is credited with the creation of the data protocols that
allowed the sharing of online documents and websites using a uniform
set of rules. He worked at the European Organization for Nuclear
Research (known by its French acronym CERN), a major European
physics lab located below the Swiss-French border whose facilities
include the Super Proton Synchrotron, an enormous subterranean
supercollider. The facility was so big that manually adjusting the
system's controls along the 1.3-mile-wide collider wasn't practical, so
mobile handsets were developed to allow scientists to efficiently operate
the system. This ended up including the capacitive touch screen, which

executes different commands based on the strength and nature of the
user's touch, allowing the whole system's controls to be accessible in
just a few clicks or taps.27
The phone's components also have wide roots, including the special
display glass (from Corning), its touch sensor chip (from Broadcom),
and even the central processor chip (from Samsung).28 The pioneering
multi-touch screen technology had been refined by the work of a victim
of hand injuries who built a touch-sensitive interface to allow him to type
better, which resulted in the development of a product named the
iGesture NumPad. Apple later bought the small company and acquired
its patents.29 And although Apple design head Jonathan Ive said Jobs
was initially "very, very dismissive" when the original iPhone prototypes
were shown to him, at the product's debut in the famous 2007 launch,
Jobs said: "We have invented a new technology called multitouch, which
is phenomenal.... And, boy, have we patented it."30
Even the standardized cellular network protocols and the Wi-Fi
technology used by smartphones to connect to data networks were
developed by public workers, at the European Commission and the
University of Hawaii, respectively.31 So the frequently repeated claim
that Apple and other Silicon Valley giants deserve their huge profits and
power because they invented today's fancy tech crashes like an
overloaded Apple III.
As fancy as it is, the iPhone relies for its production on very familiar
patterns in capitalist markets. The labor to produce and sell it, from
mines in Bolivia and the Congo to manufacturers in China to retail clerks
in Apple stores worldwide, is insultingly undercompensated and
aggressively kept from having any influence over the process. (The labor
forces required to make Apple work are reviewed later in this chapter.)
Environmentally, it's a similarly traditional story, with colossal volumes
of upturned earth in China's rare earth element mines needed to build the
phone, and huge amounts of aluminum that is incredibly energy-
intensive to refine. A single iPhone 6 requires seventy-five pounds of
ores for the metals, along with one hundred liters of water and twenty
grams of cyanide for separating the tiny amount of gold, creating giant
amounts of poisonous by-product.32
Greenfield writes that "the polluted streams, stillborn children and
diagnoses of cancer, too, become part of the way in which the
smartphone has transformed everyday life, at least for some of us."33 But

Apple's toys are the ultimate sleek modern products, and the dirty, cruel
realities of their production are kept far from the minds of its purchasers;
despite significant press coverage of the production chain, Apple's brand
identity is one of the world's strongest, and consumers' reliance on them
itself discourages looking under the hood.
This brings up the truly incredible marketing apparatus used by
Apple to move phones. Apple has been called a leader in "creating want,
fostering demand, and broadcasting technologic cool."34 This has been
crucial for the firm's growth into the world's largest corporation, and
indeed Apple's own corporate filings state that the company uses
"frequent product introductions and transitions" in order to "stimulate
customer demand."35 And after the flashy launches, Apple's brand
awareness hinges on the spending of large amounts of cash so that the
company's commercial messages are repeated over and again in every
medium.
More broadly, the company's mystique is managed as aggressively as
any other giant agglomeration of capital. Commenting on the company's
famously tight-lipped PR discipline, Adam Lashinsky writes, "Apple's
public relations department operates not so much on a need-to-know
basis as a you-will-not-know basis."36 Amazingly, Apple says it has
never paid for product placement, despite being featured in countless TV
scenes and movies. Apple's cachet among creatives and college
campuses seems to have made its Old Testament logo a new testament to
the power of capital and its ability to get Apple's brand identity into
people's minds—a task made easier if you monopolize publicly
developed technology that meets legitimate needs. Also helpful is
Apple's practice of "escalation"—code for product requests by
celebrities, who get special VIP customer service, like replacement
displays in under an hour.
Apple may not need to invest heavily in favorable coverage anyway,
as even its own investors have come to feel that the mobile phones
unleashed by the company have borderline addictive effects. User
surveys indicate that over a third of US teenagers wake up during the
night to check their devices, and about a quarter of parents do so.37
Almost half of users also say they feel addicted to their phones, which is
among the reasons that large Apple shareholders JANA Partners and the
California teachers' pension fund asked the company to address the
"unintentional negative side effects" of such obsessive phone use among

young people. Unusually for large investors, they made this move
publicly, and they included the release of data showing half of US
teenagers look at screens for over four hours a day, and a quarter for
eight hours a day.38 Notably, these typically short-term, profit-obsessed
funds want Apple to address the problem with better parental control
software, rather than rethinking private capitalist ownership of one of our
main windows to the world.
But however marketed, Apple's nature as a maker of "closed"
systems has remained remarkably consistent into the mobile era. When
Jobs unveiled the new phone, he openly disdained allowing third-party
applications—software made to run on the iPhone by a developer other
than Apple. This made the phone a "walled garden" in industry parlance,
meaning it was under the total control of its owner. Even the constant
demand from developers for access, and hackers breaking the phone so
independent apps could be installed, didn't move Jobs. What did move
him was falling sales. Once again, Jobs had failed to understand platform
economics and network effects, and much as with the original
iPod/iTunes system, it was opening the platform up that ultimately
attracted a community of users and developers, making the platform a
success.
Granted, the early iPhone did have some software that was inherently
open—mainly its web browser (in the form of Apple's own browser,
Safari), which allowed access to the Internet. But there was not enough
useful software to make the phone a hit, which struggled much like the
iPod did before iTunes was released for Windows. So among the earliest
phone updates was addition of the App Store, an iPhone feature that
allows users to buy software applications written by third-party
developers.
While far from the ocean of apps available on Windows-based PC
systems or Android, the App Store has grown vigorously, broadening the
range of software for an otherwise-closed platform and making the
devices a lot more fun and useful. Crucially though, even this nominally
open setting is tightly curated by Apple, which lists dozens of reasons it
may choose to reject a third-party app, and refers to some that are secret.
Perhaps this is why, despite its lucrative proceeds, the app environment
is relatively limited thematically—by far the most popular apps are
games, making up over 80 percent of sales.39 These are followed by
streaming apps like Netflix, Hulu, and YouTube, which along with
Tinder make up almost all the total sales.

Nonetheless, today Apple would be a Fortune 100 company just on
the revenue from its App Store, with billions in annual sales, which are a
gold mine for the company since it takes a 30 percent cut simply for
making the platform available to app developers. Indeed, Apple's own
SEC filings recognize this essential role of independent software in
making the hardware appealing, reporting that "competitive factors ...
include ... a strong third-party software and accessories ecosystem." In
other words, the presence of games and apps made by outside companies
is essential for the iPhone to remain relevant to its relatively elite market
segment. Further, Apple's "future performance depends in part on
support from third-party software developers," and in turn "developers'
perception and analysis" of the popularity of Apple's products
"compared to Windows-based products."40
And much like Microsoft's "moat" from its "applications barrier to
entry," the use of these downloaded software applications makes it
harder, more expensive, or simply more of a nuisance to switch to any
other smartphone. Getting another phone and loading it with your
favorite apps typically means buying them again, along with the time
required to download and configure them. Worse, the reality is that some
apps simply won't transfer to other phones, for proprietary or
compatibility reasons, as the New York Times and other sources have
reported.41 Since applications are used far more than traditional voice
calling, this creates a barrier to switching that benefits Apple (and other
phone makers). Reviews also note that iPhone messaging has
significantly limited functionality when texting an Android user, with no
message receipt acknowledgments and sometimes lost messages, and
this makes switching from Apple to Android very challenging if your
friends or family use it. One reviewer puts it: "Apple has erected some
high walls around its iPhone users."42 But, especially in the iPhone's
early days, before the App Store and during its initial development, its
closed nature meant that useful software would be especially important,
after the early sales to Apple superfans gave way to limited public
interest, just as with the Mac twenty years earlier. And it was here that a
new firm—Google—made a crucial contribution, with a full suite of
highly useful and popular applications. The later platform struggles
between Apple and this upstart shape the mobile hardware markets to
this day.
Cores

To achieve its sales targets for iPhone, Apple needed software, which
was limited for the new kind of mobile product and especially due to
Apple's long-standing closed structures. But Google offered a lucrative
set of apps, which were not only popular but also partially opened up the
system—Google Search, Gmail, Google Maps, and YouTube, the video
hub. These, along with the Safari browser, gave the phone far more
appeal and are considered to have greatly helped the iPhone's gigantic
popularity.
The giant corporations needed each other, as Google was desperate
for mobile search traffic to help build its algorithms and gain resulting
network effects (its own rise will be discussed in chapter 5). Thus they
worked closely together at first, in particular against what tech journalist
Fred Vogelstein called their "common enemy: Microsoft."43 Microsoft's
enduring PC monopoly was not replicated in the mobile market, but, on
the other hand, the Microsoft antitrust settlement specifically did not
apply to cell phones. This meant Google was anxious to get market share
on mobile search, especially after Microsoft released its own competing
search engine, which went through various names before the company
settled on Bing. Google's CEO, Eric Schmidt, sat on Apple's board of
directors and, in a disgusting display of their corporate aspirations,
Google's founders looked up to Jobs.
This alliance was born out of Apple's particular form of platform
economics. While Microsoft's platform is composed of PC OS software
that decides how your workplace computer functions, along with
productivity applications that, as a result of network effects, are widely
used in the workplace, Apple's is hardware based—but no less crucial.
Smartphones are now the main way that users interact with not only the
Internet, but also the other corporations in the Big Five—giving Apple
(and in time, Google) the ability to decide what you see on your phone.
This means that the other tech giants, including Facebook, Amazon, and
Microsoft, all have to go through the smartphone makers to reach us.
And that is platform power indeed. The Wall Street Journal reports that
Apple's phones have been "a catalyst for the growing dominance of tech-
industry titans," and have "made it easier for big companies to connect
with customers."44 For better or worse!
This was well recognized at the time—Eric Schmidt thought Apple
would end up with a smartphone platform monopoly, rather than the
duopoly with Google that would shortly emerge. "It was not obvious to
us ... that it would be a two-horse race between Apple and Google....

These are network platforms, and it is traditional that you end up with a
couple as opposed to ten." Indeed, a Google engineer suggested that
"Apple might be even worse than Microsoft—the way they curated out
everything they didn't like from their app store and all that."45 And
Apple was far from moving away from a closed hardware platform—in
fact, by this time it had begun using "pentalobe screws" to physically
enclose the iPhone, meaning that specialized equipment was required to
even open the device.
Meanwhile, Google's own network effects in desktop search, along
with its purchase of YouTube—itself a platform monopoly, had in time
made it one of the most powerful companies on the web. And watching
Jobs repeat his mistake of running his hardware as a walled garden over
which the company had total control, Google's execs saw an opportunity
to better exploit network effects and create a rival open phone operating
system that would encourage far more third-party support and thus reach
a potentially bigger market. Google had bought Android, a small handset
designer, in 2005, and in the years after the iPhone's success (partly due
to Google's own software), it gradually developed the Android OS and
made the decision that it wouldn't make the phone—the actual handsets
would be made by different original equipment manufacturers (OEMs).
Google would just make the operating system and many applications, a
software-based strategy much like what Microsoft did to gain its
monopoly on IBM-compatible PCs twenty years before.
By 2008, Google's founders were ready to provide their OS to OEM
phones, despite their lucrative relationship with Apple. When Jobs saw
the first Android-running phone, an HTC "Dream," he was incensed. A
meeting between Jobs and Google founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin
involved nasty threats of legal action, as Jobs called it "a fucking rip-off"
and demanded a crippling removal of anything resembling the iPhone's
multitouch GUI.46 Page and Brin bowed to this at first, wrecking the
very first version of the phone's chances, but Google soon pushed
forward on new phones. By this time, "the Apple-Google partnership to
protect the world from Microsoft was unraveling ... they were a lot more
angry at and scared of each other than either of them were of
Microsoft."47
Despite the charming picture of may-the-best-man-win competition
promoted by economics textbooks and libertarian politicians, the reality
was that Jobs was berserk with rage at any competition in the
smartphone market. At an employee meeting, he unloaded: "Apple did

not enter the search business. So why did Google enter the phone
business? Google wants to kill the iPhone. We won't let them. Their
Don't Be Evil mantra? It's bullshit."48 Even more memorably, Jobs said
in his authorized biography: "I will spend my last dying breath if I need
to, and I will spend every penny of Apple's $40 billion in the bank, to
right this wrong.... I'm willing to go thermonuclear war on this." There
are few offenses to a monopoly capitalist greater than competition,
which they are supposed to welcome. We may be reminded of Bill
Gates's demands to "crush" his competitors, slamming his fist into his
hand.49
Jobs kicked Google's apps off the default iPhone setup (they could
still be downloaded from the store), including Google Maps, which was
replaced by Apple Maps, software so utterly inept it remained a major
black eye for Apple's reputation for some time. Meanwhile, sales of both
versions of smartphone exploded, as Android phones of various makes
and styles were soon selling forty million units a quarter, and iPhone
sales doubled with each new product update. Meanwhile PC sales began
to decline, and, in a turn with added symbolism, in 2010 Apple passed
Microsoft as the biggest tech company by stock valuation, a position
they trade back and forth with Amazon to this day. The App Store and
the premium prices on the phones themselves both contributed massively
to this achievement.
But Jobs's wrath was bottomless, leading to litigation. Since Google
would be difficult to sue, as it made no competing hardware and gave its
own software products away for free, Apple resorted to suing Google's
handset-making proxies. The main event was a major suit Apple filed
against the giant South Korean conglomerate Samsung, the largest
Android phone maker, despite the fact that Apple is also Samsung's
biggest customer, doing several billion dollars in mobile chips and other
annual business. BusinessWeek described the litigation cases as "Apple's
Jihad" against Google, which "reflects life in the tech big leagues: Apple
sharply reminding a formidable rival who's boss.... The combatants
barely notice the millions of dollars in legal expenses," as Apple fought
"mere proxies for another foe—Android."50 But the suit, which actually
went to a rare Silicon Valley trial and resulted in a victory for Apple, led
to a wave of countersuits by the Android OEMs. Thus was inaugurated
the grand tradition in Big Tech of using patent litigation as another
weapon, like ad campaigns and corporate alliances, often ending in large
omnibus patent cross-licensing agreements where the firms agree to

share tech to end the wars of legal attrition. Largely in response to these
moves, Google bought phone maker Motorola in 2011, mainly to protect
itself with the addition of the company's large, seventeen-thousand-
strong patent portfolio.
Since Android was a more or less open platform, it quickly built an
application developer community and caught up with the early lead held
by Apple and its iPhone-iTunes hardware-content platform. Much as
Microsoft beat Apple in the eighties by more widely distributing its
software and thus attracting more applications with network effects, so
the various Android-running phones were able to magnetically attract a
fast-growing crowd of third-party developers. But Apple's three-year
lead meant it too had an ecosystem of software partners, managed
through the App Store. The app lock-in, estimated to often cost around
fifty to one hundred dollars to replace apps at this time, discouraged
much switching of platforms once most customers had one or the other.51
And so, as millions of cell phone users globally switched to a
smartphone running Android because of the lower costs and wider array
of software, the world market settled into a smartphone OS duopoly—
one that avoids the usual monopoly outcome, but just barely, being tilted
heavily toward Android.
Crucially, "the more successful Apple became, the more Google and
Android hewed toward Apple's 'we control everything' approach," as
Vogelstein puts it.52 Ultimately, Android came to global dominance, with
the Wall Street Journal reporting in 2017 that iPhone's US market share
had declined to 32.5 percent, with 25.7 percent belonging to Samsung,
and a total share of all Android-running companies' phones now claimed
over 50 percent.53 Globally, Android's share is several times the size of
Apple's, with more affordable phones running Google's software, along
with premium models like Samsung's Galaxy series and now Google's
own Pixel line. But crucially, while Android made applesauce out of
Apple's monopoly, and Apple ships only one-sixth of phones worldwide,
it makes a staggering 91 percent of the smartphone industry's profits.54
But whether you run your life through an Android or iPhone handset,
you're part of the modern world's data-hoarding, location-tracking
corporate panopticon. Journalist Yasha Levine writes:
Where we go, what we do, what we talk about, who we talk to, and who we see—
everything is recorded and, at some point, leveraged for value. Google, Apple, and
Facebook know when a woman visits an abortion clinic, even if she tells no one else: the
GPS coordinates on the phone don't lie. One-night stands and extramarital affairs are a

cinch to figure out: two smartphones that never met before suddenly cross paths in a bar
and then make their way to an apartment across town, stay together overnight, and part in
the morning. They know us intimately, even the things that we hide from those closest to
us.55
We'll come back to today's relentless tracking technology in chapters 5
and 6, but the most amazing thing to consider from this perspective is
that Apple has strived to make it itself into a champion of privacy,
largely on the grounds of collecting less of our data than have Google
and Facebook, which scoop up this kind of location-based data and
much, much more. The press reports Apple has "weaponized privacy,"
despite hoarding a good deal of location and app data on its users even as
it criticizes Facebook and Google. Google's CEO, referring to the more
affordable prices for many Android-running models, shot back with a dig
at Apple's premium prices: "Privacy cannot be a luxury good."56
Apple's limited market share is partially compensated for by its
depth. Most of its users own other Apple devices, including watches,
speakers, TV modules, and above all the iPad. Fascinatingly, Apple's
tablet was designed specifically to increase Apple's revenue per user.
Vogelstein memorably writes: "If Google was going to try to win the
mobile-platform war on breadth, Jobs wanted the world to know he was
going to win it on depth.... The people who owned iPhones would also
own iPads, iPod Touches, and a slew of other Apple products that all ran
the same software."57 In this way, despite having only minority market
share, Apple maintains major network platform power through its linked
devices' premium prices, and it is well on its way in its transition to
selling services like music and apps, which make tens of billions
annually as the smartphone market matures and comes to resemble the
car market, where the products are seen to have a relatively consistent
level of quality, and buyers want to get several years of use out of them
rather than constantly update. The transition was symbolized in 2019 by
the departure, after a long estrangement, of Ive, Apple's famous
hardware design head, and the second most powerful figure at the
company, according to Jobs's own assessment years before.58
Indeed, Apple has doubled down on its extortionate price points,
most conspicuously with its iPhone X and its thousand-dollar price tag.
To make sense of it, the conservative Wall Street Journal was forced to
take the loathed step of citing the economic theory of an anti-capitalist
figure—Thorstein Veblen, the American economist who coined the
phrase "conspicuous consumption." The idea is that people buy certain

costly products partially because "the expense broadcasts status, taste,
and wealth," as with the flashy sports cars bought by young business
executives.59 The Journal insisted such goods "violate the economic
laws of gravity," but class signaling is real enough for Apple to maintain
its enormous iPhone revenues.
Another stale economic "law" that Apple violated involved its
battery scandal, in which Apple acknowledged (after a blog broke the
news) that its software updates slow the processor of older phones in
order to keep the aging batteries from overloading and abruptly shutting
off the phone. This has been called "programmed obsolescence," after
the idea that a company holding market power may deliberately shorten
the lifespan of its products in order to encourage replacement sales.60 To
deal with the bad publicity, Apple generously offered a discount for
battery replacements, charging twnty-nine dollars rather than seventy-
nine dollars in yet another tone-deaf response that failed to deter the
individual lawsuits, many of which seek class-action status.
Other moves suggest Apple, while having risen through its power-
mongering history to become for a time the very largest corporation in
the world by market value, has reached a certain plateau. For years,
Apple did not pay a dividend to stockholders—a regular payment of a
piece of the company's profits to its owners. Failing to pay a dividend is
common among growth-hungry Silicon Valley tech giants, which plow
most revenues into investments for continued expansion. However, in
March 2012 new CEO Tim Cook finally did just that, partially due to the
company's gigantic foreign cash pile, which reached a peak of a quarter
trillion dollars in 2017. (Some of this cash was built up under an
arrangement with Ireland that allowed Apple to avoid almost all tax on
its foreign earnings, which the EU has since declared illegal.) Apple
openly said it wouldn't bring that cash home until US tax law changed—
which, thanks to the 2017 tax bill that President Trump signed into law, it
did. The vast majority of the foreign cash was returned under the low
onetime 15.5 percent rate on foreign earnings, allowing the company to
engage in a $100 billion stock buyback plan for its wealthy stockholders
rather than make job-creating investments.61
In another sign of industrial maturity, Apple has built an insanely
fancy new headquarters in Cupertino, California, a gigantic ring-shaped
hive that cost $5 billion to construct. The Journal's business section put
it perfectly in a headline: "At Apple, One Ring to Bind Them All:
Booming technology titans build glitzy architectural marvels to project

power."62 When its cutting-edge theater for product launches was
opened, company cofounder Wozniak remarked, "Wow, this is not
normal."63
Spoiling the Others
But as with all corporations, it's the workers who actually design the
specs, build the device, and flog the products. And the labor policies of
the world's biggest corporation are emblematic of the early twenty-first
century—temporary work, long hours under extreme duress, low pay
relative to the company's towering profits, and conformity to corporate
hierarchy. That came into clear view when a longtime Wired journalist
and prominent Apple ass-kisser wrote of Jobs's "acid humiliation" of
workers "even on occasions when Jobs himself was unqualified to judge
the quality of the work in question." He recounts an episode in which
Jobs aggressively belittled an employee, "complaining about a
preexisting problem that the employee hadn't even addressed yet.
Defending yourself was out of the question."64 As "revolutionary" as
Apple pitches itself to be, its workplace hierarchy is based on the same
thing as every other business: capitalist class power.
Jobs was long on taking credit for his workers' labors, but he was not
an engineer himself, to the point that his staff sometimes committed
"silent mutinies" over his dictates, like adding more memory to the
famously wimpy original Mac.65 But those workers were exploited to the
limits that were acceptable in the professional classes of the developed
world; some wore T-shirts reading "90 HRS/WK AND LOVING IT."
Likewise, programmers for big product launches referred to the weeks-
or months-long grinds without seeing their families as "death marches,"
much like what employees have reported at Microsoft.66 A Silicon
Valley businessman comments, "No other company has that level of
fear," although as this book shows, that's a competitive distinction.67
Indeed, even things that would be utterly conventional at less
secretive corporations, like a company organizational chart, are hoarded
by management and deliberately made unavailable to the workforce.
When business magazine Fortune designed its own Apple organizational
chart in 2011, outsiders visiting the campus said workers were eager to
avoid being seen looking at it.68 Nondisclosure agreements, in which a
party legally swears not to publicly disclose embarrassing information,

are commonly used in corporate settings to gag employees from blowing
the whistle on their dirty dealings. But at Apple, some new hires have to
sign a "preliminary NDA first, agreeing that they would never discuss
the existence of the next NDA they were about to sign, in case they
didn't want to sign that one."69
But the software these white-collar employees write for the phones
would be useless, of course, if not for the physical electronics
themselves. And Apple's toys are brought into being, on the most
physical level, the same way other home electronics are—with highly
exploited third-world labor. Child miners in Bolivia's globally infamous
Potosí mine bring out the silver content; brutalized Congolese miners
produce the cobalt and tantalum. The rare earth metals come from
China's Inner Mongolia Province, the tin from Indonesia in a mine
marked by small pay and high worker mortality. As ephemeral and
increasingly services-based as Apple's business is, its hardware comes
from hard labor.
But Apple's most notorious labor issues involve its principal
contractor, the giant Taiwanese manufacturer Foxconn (formally known
as Hon Hai Precision Industry), which makes electronic parts and
assembling final units for many global electronics firms. A gigantic
corporation itself, it employs a staggering 1.3 million people—twice the
raw head count of all five top tech giants put together.70 It became
infamous in 2010 after reports of a series of suicides in its gigantic
manufacturing complexes.
Conditions on the factory floor include psychotic production speeds
of smartphones and video game consoles, in twelve-hour shifts. Workers
who do not meet the borderline-impossible production quotas have their
workstation sign turn red, and are afterward subject to extended public
humiliation by line supervisors. (Notably, some Apple engineers have
commented on "eerie parallels with this and the public humiliation" Jobs
subjected his own white-collar teams to.)71 Workers are expected to be
silent on the line, and they report being rebuked for requesting restroom
breaks. Turnover is extremely high, for those who can afford to quit.
Such exploitation is how Apple is able to maintain its gigantic profit
margins on its products, and still turn over its entire corporate inventory
every five days.
In protest and despair of this exploitation, more than a dozen workers
in 2010 alone threw themselves from the enormous factory dorm

buildings, with similar numbers talked down by management. The
corporate reaction was to install suicide nets on the rims of the buildings.
In true dark comedy, management also ordered workers to sign oaths not
to commit suicide.72 Also hilariously, Jobs claimed "Foxconn is not a
sweatshop," while his heir Tim Cook toured the United States with a
company PR team calling for corporate "moral responsibility."73
While these abuses were widely reported—something human rights
workers have said is helpful in putting pressure on the company—the
more interesting part of the story is what happened next. Journalist Brian
Merchant relates: "In 2012, a hundred and fifty workers gathered on a
rooftop and threatened to jump. They were promised improvements and
talked down by management; they had, essentially, wielded the threat of
suicide as a bargaining tool. In 2016, a smaller group did it again."74
This astonishing turn is a rare instance of a suicide strike, demonstrating
that worker inventiveness and solidarity can still wring concessions out
of capital, even possibly at life's last instant.
But even in far better work conditions thousands of miles away,
Apple's US operations still exploit labor to the greatest degree possible.
Apple's stores are certainly a sensation by retail standards, as its mall
outlets have stupendous revenue-per-square-foot numbers, even as the
overall sector declines in competition with online commerce, above all
with Amazon's platform. But service work, including retail, remains
based on today's "neoliberal" approach of offering limited pay and little
to no benefits and hoping that the worker moves on after a few years.
Apple has kept tightly to this approach—while each Apple retail
employee handles over $480,000 in sales a year, they earn no
commission and wages run in the neighborhood of nine to fifteen dollars
per hour.75
Speaking to the New York Times, a sales staff member said workers
are so enamored of Apple's brand that they're willing to work for less:
"When you're working for Apple you feel like you're working for this
greater good. That's why they don't want a revolution on their hands."
On top of receiving low pay, the "Genius Bar" technicians who
troubleshoot devices were ordered to limit customer appointments to ten
minutes as the stores' popularity took off, which could lead to large
pileups of customers stuffed around the help area if complaints took
longer to cope with. Many techs ended up missing their state law-

required breaks and then were required to affirm when clocking out that
they had taken them, even when they hadn't.76
San Francisco workers found that "some systemic problems" were
too challenging to cope with, like management giving part-time workers
full-time hours without changing them to benefits-eligible status. And so,
using social media and then a dedicated website to reach other stores'
employees, but refraining from using the word "union," workers began
organizing the flagship store. Management quickly distributed "union
training materials" to scare workers off, but ultimately it had to resort to
offering early pay hikes and even extending benefits packages to part-
timers. That reaction again shows that organizing retains its strength
even in the Big Tech era. However, as often happens when management
shows some flexibility and spreads around some relatively petty wealth,
the organizing drive lost momentum.
But the ultimate story of labor at Apple is probably the wage-fixing
conspiracy. From 2005 to 2010, the market for software engineers
became rather tight as fast-growing giants Google and then Facebook
aggressively hired to build out their platforms (discussed at greater
length in chapters 5 and 6). Typically, tight wages lead to higher pay
when workers are scarce, and that probably would have been the result,
had a legally adjudicated corporate conspiracy in Silicon Valley not acted
to keep salaries in line. And Steve Jobs's Apple was at the center of it.
The plan was based on a set of no-poaching agreements, in which
Big Tech companies secretly agreed not to cold-call experienced
engineers at other companies. The rationale behind the agreements is that
because experienced software designers are rare, they are unlikely to
respond to simpler hiring techniques like job listings or employment
fairs, while direct cold-calling yields somewhat better results. Once
again, thanks to the subsequent court cases filed over the agreements, we
have internal documents and emails from the great tech powers, and
they're even juicier than the Microsoft antitrust memos.
Among the evidence were emails from ringleader Jobs, who, for
example, wrote to Google CEO Eric Schmidt in response to its efforts to
recruit Apple engineers, "If you hire a single one of these people, that
means war." Given the mutual reliance of those firms reviewed above,
the threat was not empty. Google's human resources hiring documents
indicated that Google had "special agreements" with certain companies
and were thus on "Restricted Hiring" lists, and also a "Do Not Cold

Call" list that included Apple, Microsoft, Intel, and other tech and
telecom firms like IBM and Comcast.77
Apple reciprocated, with an internal email reading: "Please add
Google to your 'hands-off' list. We recently agreed not to recruit from
one another so if you hear of any recruiting they are doing against us,
please be sure to let me know." Emails from Schmidt on the subject
started with "DO NOT FORWARD," and indeed in later emails that
referred to bringing eBay into the circle, he wrote that he would "prefer"
that the communication be done "verbally since I don't want to create a
paper trail over which we can be sued later?" His HR head replied,
"Makes sense to do orally. i agree."
At one point a Google recruiter, apparently ignoring the illegal
agreements still in effect, attempted a cold call to hire an Apple
employee working on web browsers. Jobs complained peevishly to a
chastened Schmidt, who shortly wrote back to Jobs with an email saying
the offending recruiter would be "fired within the hour." Jobs responded
with a smiley face.78
Later, when word of the wage-fixing deals got out, the companies
faced a Justice Department lawsuit and then a large civil suit by sixty-
four thousand employees. The DOJ action was settled with an agreement
that the firms wouldn't collude again to restrict attempted recruiting,
even though, of course, the behavior was already illegal. But the class
action suit was the bigger affair, and it resulted in the presiding judge
making the unusual move of rejecting an early settlement.79 That original
$324 million settlement was later raised in 2015 to $435 million, to be
paid by the various corporations involved, coming to several grand
awarded per class member.
The point of the episode was summarized by liberal economist Dean
Baker, who observed that the scandal proved Silicon Valley libertarians
really don't think about the market the way [they] claim to think about the market. The
classic libertarian view of the market is that we have a huge number of people in the
market actively competing.... There is so much competition that no individual or
company can really hope to have much impact on market outcomes.... However, the
Silicon Valley non-compete agreements show that this is not how the tech billionaires
believe the market really works. This is just a story they peddle to children and gullible
reporters.... They believed that they had enough weight on the buy-side of the market for
software engineers that if they agreed not to compete for workers, they could keep their
wagesdown.80

As we saw in the opening of this chapter, Apple began with a real
revolutionary spirit, and carried it into a corporate golden age with an
anti-establishment marketing slant. However, the rules of capitalism and
platform economics meant that the company became a great anti-worker
institution, married to the most conservative institutions of our time and
incredibly aggressive in defending and expanding its strictly controlled
territory, from driving workers to suicide to wrecking the environment to
conspiring illegally against their engineers.
The early days may have been marked with a revolutionary spirit and
commercials quoting socialists like Orwell, but monopoly capitalism has
its effects. An Apple software manager on the original iPhone team put it
well: "It's interesting to see how people perceive the company now
versus then, how that has changed. It's not that kind of Rebel Alliance
vibe—we're Big Brother now."81

CHAPTER 4
Amazon's Smile
Snowballing scale in online retail
Amazon's founder and CEO Jeff Bezos became the world's richest man
in the summer of 2017, edging out former Microsoft CEO Bill Gates,
who held the title for a decade—although that's after Gates put billions
into his foundation while he was looking bad in the press during the trial
for his PC operating system monopoly. Bezos retained the crown even
after his 2019 divorce, the world's most expensive, and also retained
control of company voting rights.1 Bezos's $108 billion fortune arose
from his enormous company, which in recent years has traded the title of
number one largest company globally with Microsoft and tech colossus
Apple.
Amazon says its huge growth and success owes to being "obsessed
with the consumer." In fact, the record shows the company's rise has
been fueled by the growth-boosting momentum of economic network
effects, horrifying levels of labor exploitation at both the white- and
blue-collar levels, and a boost from a fortunate sales tax exemption.
But most interestingly, in the very early startup days of the company,
Bezos explained to a colleague why the company was so hell-bent on
fast growth: "When you are small, someone else that is bigger can
always come along and take away what you have.... We have to level the
playing field in terms of purchasing power with the established
booksellers."2 But once Amazon itself reached great stature, it did not
encourage a level playing field; rather, it used its own increased leverage
and bargaining power to drive whole market sectors into surrendering
their profitability to Amazon's growth. As a former content writer for the
company's front page wrote, "As the public saw it, we had morphed
from David to Goliath."3
Formerly "Relentless"

Bezos founded the company after several successful years at a Wall
Street hedge fund. From the very beginning, the plan was to "exploit" the
Internet, as Bezos's biographers describe the business model.4 The
Internet itself was developed by public research entities including the
Pentagon's research arm, DARPA (where Amazon's first tech officer
previously worked), and European physics research agencies. The
strategic value of running a retail business online was that it had almost
no "transaction costs"—the term economists use to describe the costs of
doing a deal. In-person retail requires significant transaction costs, like
driving to a store, paying for gas or transit, conforming to retail hours,
and the nuisance of being presentable enough to appear in public.
Shopping via the then brand-new World Wide Web potentially offered
major convenience, as it does to this day. These lower transaction costs
have been a major part of online retail's expansion at the expense of
brick-and-mortar stores.
Bezos actually chose books to begin building his empire for purely
utilitarian reasons—they shipped relatively well, didn't spoil, and were
available from wholesalers. The company soon became the standard for
rapid growth—the original company motto was "Get big fast." Sales
grew quickly in the mid-1990s, with the company expanding into new
merchandise categories like DVDs and music, and then toys and
electronics. The goal of unceasing growth was fundamental in those far-
smaller days—among possible early names for the company was
Relentless.com—type it in your web browser and it still takes you to
Amazon.5
The company's growth was stupendous, with its top-line revenue
shooting up by over 50 percent during some quarters, before gradually
lowering into 20 percent growth per quarter as the laws of large numbers
kicked in. These numbers were still huge, however. This famously fast
growth owed to many factors. Beyond the low transaction costs of the
business model, there was also the fact that years of previous
consolidation in the bookselling industry had left large stretches of the
United States with few or no bookstores, creating a near-captive market
for Amazon.
But the crucial factor was the network effects. In markets run through
networks, services get more valuable as more people use them, like the
telephone network. Over time Amazon has had a number of features
fitting this pattern, including in the very early days, when the book
review feature was added. Business journalist Brad Stone explains that

"Bezos believed that if Amazon.com had more user-generated book
reviews than any other site, it would give the company a huge advantage;
customers would be less inclined to go to other online bookstores."6
Author Nicholas Carr, too, observes that "much of Amazon.com's
early appeal came from the book reviews donated by customers."7 This
constitutes a mild net effect, as the number of customers writing reviews
made the site more attractive to others. Bezos himself recognized the
dynamic at play, and according to Stone, once said that "the company
that got the lead now would likely keep it"—a recognition of a key
feature of the network industries we've already observed.8
But the real net effects arose as Amazon gradually groped toward
becoming not just a sprawling online retailer, but a platform—a network
based on allowing other users to bring their own goods to sell at the
company's central network location. For Microsoft and Apple, this
meant software applications running on their PC operating systems or
mobile phones, whereas for merchandise-mover Amazon it meant
creating an essential venue for other retailers. Indeed, Amazon execs saw
Microsoft as the archetype for this business model.9
The platform was built over several fits and starts, beginning in 1997
when the company opened Amazon Auctions, then zShops, both of them
attempts to get smaller retailers to set up virtual storefronts on Amazon's
larger site. These sites saw little business, but Bezos kept them open,
suggesting his understanding of platform economics, as he told execs he
hoped for third-party sales via these sites to grow as fast as the
company's own sales. Indeed, former Amazon front-page writer James
Marcus claims Bezos openly said at the time that "if necessary, we
should decimate the books division to make [the] auctions [division]
work."10 This may have been an overreaction to the rise of auction site
eBay, but it also speaks to Bezos's clear vision of network effects. When
sales from zShops stagnated, Bezos realized they could be juiced by
linking to those third-party items from Amazon's own product pages. As
Stone puts it, that move "was the central insight that not only turned
Amazon into a thriving platform for small online merchants but powers a
good deal of its success today."11
That's because higher sales of all types meant higher volumes with
lower costs, allowing Amazon to lower its prices, a short-term boon to
the consumer but also a move bringing more business to the company,
allowing it to further cut costs and, of course, to attract more third-party

sellers to its platform. It was thus a self-reinforcing virtuous cycle the
company called its "flywheel," better known as "platform economics."
The conservative Economist magazine found Amazon enjoyed not only
"increasing returns," including the capitalist hallmark of "economies of
scale," but also network effects: "More shoppers on the Amazon site
make it more alluring to third-party sellers, which increases the range of
goods it can offer, which attracts more shoppers."12 The company's huge
growth became caught up in the feverish mania of the 1990s tech stock
bubble, and only a luckily timed issue of bonds just before the 2000
crash kept the company from declaring bankruptcy, unlike many of its
ignominious tech-bubble colleagues. By 2002, third-party sales had
reached a third of cash flow.13 Also in that year, Amazon, no longer
enjoying the protection of the tech bubble, was forced to turn its first
modest profit to appease investors. But the company kept its foot on the
gas to build its platform power.
That push forward included the creation of Prime, Amazon's loyalty
program that offers fast shipping (and now streaming media) for an
annual fee. The program lost money for several years, but, as a company
exec said, "it was really about changing people's mentality so they
wouldn't shop anywhere else." This again helped drive up volumes and
push down costs, and allowed more aggressive negotiations with
suppliers. But above all the drive to retain and expand the platform,
connecting buyers and other sellers, was the biggest goal—the
company's later invention of Prime Day, a national Amazon-themed
shopping holiday, was "another way to tighten its grip on shoppers," as
the conservative Wall Street Journal put it.14
The platform push continued, and by 2012 Amazon's third-party
sellers sold nearly 40 percent of the items shipped, with over two million
retailers on the rechristened Amazon Marketplace.15 By 2019, 58 percent
of all sales came from Marketplace, with almost 1 percent of all
Americans selling goods on Amazon.16 Taking a flat commission off
each sale in the neighborhood of 10 percent, the platform was profitable
and above all became a magnet for thousands of small and midsize
companies wanting to sell on Amazon's incredibly visible website,
without having to create their own web presence. The Journal reported
that "those sales are nearly pure profit margin because Amazon doesn't
have to buy and hold the product itself. It also gets paid for items that
sellers ship in for Amazon to fulfill."17

But as owner of the platform, Amazon takes advantage beyond the
commission. When particular items sell unusually well, the company
takes note and starts selling them itself, meaning the small sellers are in
part product scouts for Amazon. The company claims not to do this, with
an exec asserting, "We do not allow anyone inside Amazon to have
access to individual sellers' data in order to build a private-label
product."18 But product data are what would help a company most in
picking a category to invade, and this disavowal of sharing precious data
between different arms of one company sounds a lot like the "Chinese
Wall" that some execs alleged to exist between Microsoft's operating
system and application arms. Bill Gates and others later mocked the silly
idea, making it at least plausible that Amazon is happy to look at
independent seller data to develop its own brands. And indeed, in time
Amazon began its "Accelerator" program for third-party merchants,
giving them more prominent placement on the crowded site, and waived
fees and other perks, in exchange for which Amazon gains the right to
buy the brand outright for a mere $10,000, crumbs to the world's richest
man.19 This strongly suggests Amazon is interested in profiling indie
merchants for profitable categories.
Further, because small sellers are competing among one another and
Amazon proper, the Marketplace platform creates a "race to zero," as
one entrepreneur calls it, with sellers aggressively fighting to offer the
very lowest price point since doing so puts their offering in the website's
"buy box," Amazon's default selling slot for the product.20 But because
of Amazon's hundreds of millions of customers and the site's visibility,
even those companies that get fed up with this setup tend ultimately to
return, their arms twisted by platform economics.
To this day, Amazon prioritizes the health and growth of the
platform. Its financial filings describe its "A2Z Guarantee," which will
"reimburse buyers [of independent sellers' products] for payments up to
certain limits" if the product isn't received or doesn't match the
descriptions, although "as our marketplace seller sales grow, the cost of
this program will increase and could negatively affect our operating
results."21 The company has essentially put itself on the hook for making
petty fraud victims whole in order to preserve its platform.
Maintaining the platform's growth has come at various costs. One is
difficult relations with big brand-name companies and luxury goods
sellers, who fear that the price cutting common in the Marketplace is

undermining their brand prestige and pricing power, along with
advancing a brisk trade in knockoffs. Apple famously refuses to provide
iPhones to Amazon for resale, and brands like Nike and Louis Vuitton
fear the loss of "a sense of exclusivity," as the Journal put it.22
More impressively, to protect and expand the platform, Amazon
actually began lowering the prices charged by the independent sellers
and paying the difference itself. This "Discount provided by Amazon"
measure would make no damn sense at all, unless we realize the
importance the company puts on its platform power.23 And as Amazon
and the other tech platforms expand globally, Amazon has resorted to
actively "recruiting" small merchants to sell on its site, to build out its
platform power in other major economies like India. The business press
reports Amazon has gone to the extent of lending small firms the money
for inventory in order to get it available on Amazon.in, thereby
gravitationally attracting more business.24 The company even faced a
legal challenge in 2018 from eBay, which filed a lawsuit accusing
Amazon of poaching its higher-value sellers by infiltrating its internal
member message system.
As Amazon grew, it continued to lose money overall—an enduring
feature of most of the company's history and often held up to showcase
the "boldness" of Bezos and his venture capitalist (VC) backers, bravely
withstanding heavy losses in the name of growth. But obviously, most
businesspeople can't get away with such a strategy—if your company
keeps losing money, your VC backers on the board are going to throw
you out and get a new CEO who makes them money. So how could
Bezos keep his investors from getting spooked? Business reporting has
regularly concluded that it's Amazon's gigantic, platform-fueled growth
rate that's kept them quiet.25 This growth into ever more industries
means insane future profits and enormous market power, and investors
have by and large been willing to accept this. But this all means
Amazon's bold acceptance of near-term losses or tiny profits, along with
Bezos's famous claim that "your margin is my opportunity," can all be
attributed to one thing—network effects.
In addition to this long history of platform building, Amazon's
"Relentless" expansion also relied on its exemption from collecting state
sales tax (save in its home state of Washington), as national law for
decades spared online retailers from collecting it in states where it had no
substantial physical presence. Amazon went to great lengths to protect

this advantage over brick-and-mortar stores—as it grew and built giant
sorting centers for its widening selection of merchandise, it cutely
classified them as "wholly owned subsidiaries" earning no revenue.26
Indeed, before opening these giant centers it would often negotiate with
each state in order to secure gentle tax treatment in exchange for hiring
local workers. When cash-strapped states started declaring Amazon's
affiliate sites (websites carrying its ads) to be storefronts qualifying for
state taxes, Bezos cut off the affiliates rather than confront a tax bill.
Most amazingly, Bezos justified these tightfisted moves by claiming
the company got no benefit from public services and thus should be
exempt from the taxes that paid for them: "We're not actually benefiting
from any services that those states provide locally, so it's not fair that we
should be obligated to be their tax collection agent since we're not
getting any of the services."27 This is arguably the most degenerately
stupid statement made by the tech CEOs in this book—Amazon is a huge
devourer of public services—it intensively uses public roads with its
fleets of owned and hired delivery trucks; it leans heavily on intellectual
property laws to protect its numerous patents; and it demanded in its
search for a second US headquarters that the local workforce be highly
educated. Compared with a typical human family, Amazon is a giant
public services hog, and Bezos's pitiful claim otherwise is a hideous
farce.
Indeed, the company's 10-K filing for fiscal year 2016 states, "We
regard our trademarks, service marks, copyrights, patents ... and similar
intellectual property as critical to our success, and we rely on trademark,
copyright, and patent law ... to protect our proprietary rights."28 For
example, Bezos patented the site's "1-Click" ordering functionality,
forcing Apple to pay a lucrative license fee to use it for iTunes. But
despite its dependence on the government to protect its intellectual
property, Amazon devours most of its public services at the state and
local level, as its trucks and hired delivery partners drive a surging river
of products to homes nationwide, putting wear on those expensive
infrastructures. So Bezos's opportunistic, self-serving claim of Amazon
not benefiting from public services doesn't pass the laugh test.
And even when Amazon finally yielded to increasing numbers of
states forcing it to collect sales taxes to remit to state treasuries (and
beginning to call for a single national standard), it usually worked out
deals to delay the start date by a few years. And far more importantly,
Amazon exempted the sales of its third-party sellers when adding the tax,

leaving it to them to collect it, and thus remained rare. The US Supreme
Court ruled in 2018 that e-commerce operators like Amazon must collect
sales taxes, but the ruling only applied to those crucial third-party sales
in the fifteen states that have enacted legislation putting tax collection
responsibility on "market facilitators" like Amazon.29 This shows again
that Amazon holds its platform above anything else, maintaining after all
these years the significant edge of not collecting taxes on indie sales in
most states, even as Marketplace sales make up over half Amazon's
total.
And the picture looks unlikely to change, since Amazon's SEC
filings indicate they hold over $600 million in federal tax credits, to be
used to offset future taxes. Amazon received these credits mainly under
the US research and development tax credit program.30 And the Seattle
Post-Intelligencer reported that Amazon's own regulatory filings
indicate the gigantic organization paid nothing in federal income taxes in
2017.31
As of this writing, Amazon is now the second-biggest company in
the world by market value (behind Microsoft and ahead of Apple,
Google, and Facebook), with $177 billion in yearly revenue and a few
billion in actual yearly profit, thanks mainly to its remote-computing
cloud services unit. This gigantic firm has developed a major internal
hierarchy, despite Bezos having claimed that "a hierarchy isn't
responsive enough to change," and early on delegating decision making
to various business units. Stone notes: "Microsoft took a top-down
management approach with layers of middle managers, a system that
ended up slowing decisions and stifling innovation. Looking at the
muffled and unhappy hierarchy of the software giant across Lake
Washington" turned Bezos away from a corporate ladder, we're told.
This led to the famous "two-pizza teams," small numbers of workers
(able to be fed by two pizzas) working autonomously toward
management-set goals.32
Yet despite this feel-good decentralization rhetoric and day-to-day
autonomy, the reality of capitalist workplace hierarchy is very present at
the company. It adopted from Microsoft a system of numerically ranking
workers and then firing the low-rated ones.33 When complaints or
customer-related problems reach Bezos, he's known to forward the email
to a unit manager with a mere "?" at the top, which to employees "has
the effect of a ticking time bomb" indicating they have hours to fix the

problem. Their fix "will be reviewed by a succession of managers before
the answer is presented to Bezos himself."34 These question mark-tagged
emails are called "escalations" within the company, an interesting
terminological parallel to Apple, whose "escalations" refer to requests
for quick repairs and upgrades from celebrities or VIPs.
Stone reports that "Amazon styles itself as highly decentralized and
promises that new employees can make decisions independently. But
Bezos is capable of stopping any process dead in its tracks," and
employees can find themselves "in the hottest possible spot at Amazon:
under the withering eye of the founder himself."35
And that's not so good, since even Amazon's most sycophantic yes-
men in the field of business journalism describe Bezos as a particularly
notorious corporate tyrant. Much like the other executive-founders
profiled in this book, the picture conforms toward the same temper
tantrum-throwing corporate bullying seen across the tech sector and
indeed capitalism in general. Bezos is so prone to over-the-top chewing-
out of his subordinates that they began referring to his "nutters," and
actually compiled a list of the worst episodes. Highlights listed in
corporate histories include "Are you lazy or just incompetent?," "If I
hear that idea again, I'm gonna have to kill myself," and "Do I need to
go down and get the certificate that says I'm CEO of the company to get
you to stop challenging me on this?"36 Clearly no corporate hierarchy
here! Bezos later hired a management coach, surely fixing the issue
completely. Or not. Describing a company pep rally where Bezos
"chewed out" a logistics exec onstage with "a very public, very petulant
scolding," one observer noted that the outburst led to no one wanting to
sit with Bezos and his wife at the post-speech dinner.37
Unsurprisingly, Bezos is politically inclined toward libertarianism, a
preference picked up from his prosperous oil-engineer father who fled
the expropriations of the Cuban Revolution. But again, nothing about
Bezos's personality or political proclivities would be important or
interesting except that thanks to the centralized power wielded by huge
corporations under capitalism, he has enormous power over people.
Leaders of this type, including Bill Gates and Steve Jobs, are well
known to be idolized and imitated by their corporate subordinates, as
illustrated by Gates's rooms full of rocking men and Jobs's campus of
turtlenecked jackasses. Likewise, Bezos has cultivated his own inner
circle of dickish subordinates that, as Stone reports, even within the

company have the "playfully derisive" nickname "Jeff Bots."38 Like the
other power-mongering capitalist lieutenants of the tech giants in this
book, these MBAs praise their boss frequently and recite his
management ideas like cult members.
Luckily, the Jeff Bots don't act at their full discretion—actual robots
are involved, too. Amazon is among the leaders of the "optimization" of
business processes, using metrics to evaluate every decision and then
building the preferences into the algorithms that run a large part of the
day-to-day activity on the platform. In the past, Amazon had book-
category and genre pages that attracted significant online readership, and
the website's front page was carefully curated by writers as well as
corporate sales staff. Long ago those staff were laid off or reassigned as
these functions could be conducted automatically. In his memoir
Amazonia, former company writer James Marcus describes being
replaced by the "Culture of Metrics," which "had an Orwellian ring to
it."39 This automation is perhaps a sign of encouraging gains in
productivity in the abstract, but today Amazon relies on these systems to
regularly "scrape" pricing data from competitors' sites and then
automatically match or slightly underprice them, in order to leverage its
platform power into more market share.40 As we'll explore in the
discussion of technology in chapter 8, algorithms are typically written by
managers and other representatives of corporate power.
As the richest man on God's earth, Bezos's $108 billion has allowed
him the usual bouquet of lush properties—the ten-acre mansion complex
in the same posh Seattle suburb as Gates, four adjoining luxury
apartments in Manhattan, three hundred thousand acres in Texas, and a
pair of neighboring houses in Beverly Hills. The neighbors say that "Mr.
Bezos doesn't seem to be home very often," reflecting the busy lifestyle
of the man the Wall Street Journal calls "the Amazon czar."41 More
impressive are Bezos's new twin mansions in Washington, DC, the
former site of the Textile Museum. More public than the Amazon CEO's
other properties, the mansion is expected to be Bezos's launchpad for
extensive DC lobbying and influence mongering, much as the LA
properties are in part intended to anchor Amazon's big push into movies
and TV.
The gigantic firm finally reached a scale where it could manage a
dividend in 2015, and the next year it even began buying back stock to
more directly enrich its wealthy shareholders. But the gigantic twisted

giant that is Amazon has proven itself to be a true bully of the markets,
with a long history of using its huge market weight to undo client after
competitor after customer. It's a fascinating story, in which the company
again and again justifies its ever-growing power in the laws of the jungle
whose name it takes.
Let Us Prey
Amazon's explosive growth soon proved Bezos correct that "when you
are small, someone else that is bigger can always come along and take
away what you have." But now it was Amazon that was bigger, and it
would do the taking. Surviving the dot-com crash thanks to its well-
timed bond sale, Amazon pushed past additional growing pains,
including a lawsuit from Walmart after several of its execs defected from
the offline tyrant to the online one. It also faced down a scandal when the
New York Times reported many of Amazon's recommended products
were chosen as a result of the seller making "co-op" payments—what is
often called "payola" in other industries, a term referring to any
undisclosed payment by a company for favorable promotion of its good
or service.42 But Amazon's growth continued and led it to gain
increasing credibility with manufacturers and suppliers, which in turn led
to getting direct shipments from them.
Amazon's enormous power is now relatively well recognized in the
mainstream, including what economists call "monopsony" power—the
ability to exert power as a huge buyer, which is distinct from the selling
power of a monopoly.43 This became relevant fairly early in Amazon's
record of torrid growth and in its negotiations with UPS, the major US
commercial shipping company. Amazon had contracted with them for
much of its shipping, but as its stature rose, Amazon approached Federal
Express (today known as FedEx) and began quietly integrating their data
systems while increasing shipments.
When UPS declined to negotiate rates, Amazon virtually cut it off as
a shipping vendor, such that UPS went from receiving millions of
Amazon parcels daily to only a handful. Its cultivation of FedEx,
combined with Amazon's ability to rely on the US Postal Service to
deliver a large number of boxes—allowing it to continue smooth service
for buyers—meant UPS caved after seventy-two hours and offered
Bezos lower rates. Stone observes that the experience taught "the
company an enduring lesson about the power of scale and the reality of

Darwinian survival in the world of big business."44 This natural selection
framework is frequently used to justify the business world, but it's a
pretty phony use of the idea because while successful biological
organisms must start over each generation—as new individuals may
inherit their parents' successful traits but must fend and grow for
themselves—corporations absorb their rivals, and grow and grow.
The case of Amazon and baby products shows how monopolization
works in real-world markets: through predatory business strategy. As
Amazon expanded into more and more product categories, certain
holdouts came to its attention. One was Diapers.com, a startup selling
baby products, run by entrepreneurs who idolized Bezos. The delivery
service was a godsend to some exhausted parents, and the small outfit
attracted millions in venture capital investments, bringing them to the
attention of Bezos's executive team.
Spotting potential prey, Bezos's team told the Diapers.com founders
that Amazon was readying a large launch into the category, and therefore
it would be in everyone's best interest to negotiate a buyout immediately.
When this "offer" was declined, Amazon cut prices for baby products by
up to 30 percent, although Amazon later said its pricing had nothing to
do with this upstart company. But hilariously, the small businesspeople
noticed that when they tweaked their posted online prices, the Amazon
website's algorithms changed its own prices accordingly.45 The gigantic
company's web-crawling software was automatically tracking the prices
of its small competitor.
While the startup flirted with selling itself to Walmart, Amazon
ratcheted up the existential pressure by announcing a new loyalty
program offering a whopping additional 30 percent off diapers in return
for joining a subscription program, Amazon Mom. Diapers.com staff
estimated the program was losing $100 million a quarter, and once
Diapers caved and sold, Amazon closed its money-losing program to
new members, although it later had to hastily reopen it after the Federal
Trade Commission started sniffing around.46 These moves show that
Amazon wasn't trying in good faith to compete, as sunny libertarian
pictures of markets assume. Rather than being "obsessed with the
customer" and seeing who could best satisfy the market demand for the
lowest sustainable price, Amazon purposefully ran the category at a giant
loss in order to drive its smaller, cash-poorer rival out of the market, and
then monopolized it. It's a predator—a gigantic, immortal economic
predator gaining strength with each meal. Capitalism keeps its stripes!

But books were Amazon's original market category, and in the end
they were the site of its cruelest predations.
By 2004, Amazon was selling a large portion of the books purchased
in the United States. So it began to display its now-famous aggression
with publishers, and here I quote at length a recounting by Stone,
revealing, among other things, the frank, analytical approach of
corporate reporting:
Amazon approached large publishers aggressively. It demanded accommodations like
steeper discounts on bulk purchases, longer periods to pay its bills, and shipping
arrangements that leveraged Amazon's discounts with UPS. To publishers that didn't
comply, Amazon threatened to pull their books out of its automated personalization and
recommendation systems, meaning that they would no longer be suggested to consumers....
Amazon had an easy way to demonstrate its market power. When a publisher did not
capitulate and the company shut off the recommendation algorithms for its books, the
publisher's sales usually fell by as much as 40 percent. "Typically it was about thirty days
before they'd come back and say, Ouch, how do we make this work?" says Christopher
Smith, a senior book buyer at the time.
Bezos kept pushing for more. He asked [then-head of Amazon publisher relations Lyn]
Blake to exact better terms from the smaller publishers, who would go out of business if it
weren't for the steady sales of their back catalogs on Amazon. Within the books group, the
resulting program was dubbed the Gazelle Project because Bezos suggested to Blake in a
meeting Amazon should approach these small publishers the way a cheetah would pursue a
sickly gazelle.
As part of the Gazelle Project, Blake's group categorized publishers in terms of their
dependency on Amazon and then opened negotiations with the most vulnerable
companies.47
Yes, Bezos sees himself as a predator, even though his sharp teeth arise
not from his own prowess but from the large size of his corporation,
which itself owes mainly to network effects underwriting its fast growth.
Stone adds that "soon after the Gazelle Project began, Amazon's lawyers
heard about the name and insisted it be changed to the less incendiary
Small Publisher Negotiation Program."48
Stone notes that these lower wholesale book prices allowed Amazon
to lower its retail prices, which attracted more consumers and put more
pressure on physical bookstores. The record is full of episodes where
executives openly acted as predators to remove competition. "By his
own admission," one executive (named Randy Miller) charged with
squeezing publishing houses
took an almost sadistic delight in pressuring book publishers to give Amazon more
favorable terms. He ranked all of the European publishers by their sales and ... persuaded
the lagging members to alter their deals ... once again with the threat of decreased
promotion on the site. Miller says he and his colleagues called the program Pay to Play.

Once again, Amazon's lawyers caught wind of this and renamed the program Vendor
Realignment.
When negotiating with European publishers,
"I did everything I could to screw with their performance," he says. He took selections of
their catalog to full price and yanked their books from Amazon's recommendation engine;
with some titles, like travel books, he promoted comparable books from competitors....
These tactics were not unique to Amazon. The company had finally learned the tricks of
the century-old trade that is modern retail.... Walmart in particular had mastered this
perpetual coercion of suppliers, and it did it with missionary zeal and the belief that it led
to the low prices [the company promoted].49
Against this background of naked power plays, by the mid-2000s
Amazon had finally reached a scale where it could match Walmart's
price cuts, and for some years it even won contracts to run the online
commerce sites of Target and Borders books, as they had fumbled the
development of their own web presences.
The giant brick-and-mortar booksellers Borders and Barnes & Noble
never launched online operations that could compete, leading in large
part to the latter's constant retrenchment and the former's bankruptcy
filing in 2011. This was an especially grotesque development, as Borders
and B&N had pursued their own aggressive corporate expansion
strategies, often siting their gigantic stores, with correspondingly huge
selections, directly next to mom-and-pop independent bookstores. The
small shops' inevitable closures in the face of the big-box giants meant
that when they were in turn steamrolled by Amazon, millions of
Americans were left without any local bookstore and thus no recourse
but Amazon itself.
As the company turned the screws on the publishers, in 2004 it began
to prepare the Kindle. Amazon had an early flirtation with online music,
but Bezos realized that Steve Jobs beat him to the punch with the 2001
iTunes release, and he "ultimately concluded that if Amazon was to
continue to thrive as a bookseller in a new digital age, it must own the e-
book business in the same way that Apple controlled the music
business."50 This led the company to develop hardware for reading
electronic versions of books, a risky strategy given Amazon's lack of
manufacturing experience. Its eventual e-reader tablet, the Kindle, was
far less versatile than a smartphone but had longer battery life and a
better display for reading.

To make the new book format and device a success, Bezos
apparently pulled the e-book price of $9.99 out of thin air, which, as a
result of his power, had serious consequences for the publishing world.
Amazon knew publishers would be horrified at this price point, which
would be money-losing for the publishers, but it needed them to commit
scarce resources to digitizing their large libraries in order to establish the
platform power of the new device. So the executive staff decided not to
give advance notice of this money-losing price point, lest the publishers
balk, and so the publishing houses' first knowledge of it came when
Bezos announced the product publicly in 2007.
Importantly, Amazon sustained its model of operating as a tech
company as well as retailer and, like later Big Tech rivals Google and
Facebook, never forgot to record a single thing a customer did, as Yasha
Levine recounts: "Amazon deployed a system for monitoring and
profiling. It recorded people's shopping habits, their movie preferences,
the books they were interested in, how fast they read books on their
Kindles, and the highlights and margin notes they made."51
The Kindle 2, released in 2009, was the breakout version, and in the
years until Apple's release of the iPad in 2010 and Barnes & Noble's
Nook e-reader in 2011, Amazon held a staggering 90 percent of the e-
reader market. To the publishers, "Amazon's dawning monopoly in e-
books was terrifying."52 The enforced low prices "tilted the field" further
against physical bookstores, and gave "Amazon even more market
power. The publishers had seen over many years what Amazon did with
this kind of additional leverage. It extracted more concessions and
passed the savings on to customers in the form of lower prices and
shipping discounts, which helped it amass even greater market shares—
and more negotiating leverage."53
Amazon's rising demands and especially its under-ten-bucks prices
drove European publishers to dig in their heels as the company
apparently sought to "control every square on the publishing industry
chessboard."54 George Packer broke the story about payola's continuing
role in Amazon's book recommendations, revealing in a 2014 piece for
the New Yorker how "co-op" fees, extracted from the publishing houses
to pay for said recommendations, grew along with Amazon's influence.
Even large houses had effectively given Amazon a discount of over 50
percent, and for smaller houses it had reached 60 percent off, perilous
numbers for an industry with notoriously thin profit margins.55

This led US publishing houses to take their famous "agency" action
in 2010, which, with their joint 60 percent share of books sold on
Amazon, demonstrated they were a collective threat with some
countervailing bargaining power. By transitioning to an agency model,
the book publishers would become their own retailers and could thus set
their own retail prices. This plan did require another means to sell in the
new and growing e-book market, but luckily by 2009 they had the option
of another physical platform with Apple's iPad—although it was one that
itself took a generous 30 percent commission.
Bezos lost his mind when word reached him of the industry's attempt
to defy him, and Amazon removed the "Buy" buttons completely from
Macmillan books after the publisher informed Kindle execs in person of
the change. The company stripped the Kindle editions from its website
for days as well. US monopoly scholar Barry Lynn writes, "The
reasoning was obvious: the sudden loss of sales, which could amount to
a sizable fraction of Mac-millan's total revenue, would soon bring the
publisher to heel."56 Amazon even posted a public message on a
company forum: "We have expressed our strong disagreement and the
seriousness of our disagreement by temporarily ceasing the sale of
Macmillan titles." The price increase actually made the Kindle more
money for some time as Amazon's dominance of e-books only slowly
eroded, while the book publishers were able to stay solvent through their
ability to charge prices that better covered their digital and production
costs.
Ironically, Bezos was able to get his revenge for this partially
successful act of defiance. First, he contained the revolt by going to
midsize publishers and bluntly telling them they didn't have the
bargaining power to try the agency model as the larger firms had, and
that Amazon would deliver a potentially fatal blow to their thinner
margins if they tried. Then, staying true to his tendency to use the public
services for which he doesn't feel obligated to pay taxes, he filed a
complaint with the Federal Trade Commission, the US anti-monopoly
regulator, and suggested that the publishers and Apple were conspiring to
raise e-book prices.
The fact that Amazon held a near monopoly in these e-books didn't
taint the move, because, as with Microsoft, Amazon had acquired its
monopoly power without raising prices or merging with an oligopoly
competitor. The FTC complaint gained steam after several imbecilically
casual remarks from Steve Jobs about working with the publishing

houses to raise book prices via the agency model, and ultimately the
staggering book publishers were formally accused by the Justice
Department of conspiracy, paying heavily to settle with the regulators.
Apple contested the verdict, and the case spent years winding through
court, while Bezos's Kindle grew fat with sales.
So Amazon, similar to other great monopoly capitalists like
Rockefeller, has a long record of stopping at nothing to clear the market
of competition, which stands in stark contrast to the conservative
economists' rosy picture of healthy market efficiency. The lengths Bezos
was willing to go to crush even small competitors are rough to read
about. He forced the online shoe retailer Zappos to sell itself to Amazon
after he spent $30 million building a separate website, Endless.com—
which offered different styles and sizes of shoes with free overnight
shipping—demonstrating Amazon's usual strategy of losing money to
pull market share away from vulnerable competitors. This bite
apparently wasn't enough to break the company, so Bezos, unbelievably,
added a five-dollar bonus to its overnight shipping rates, meaning
customers were paid five bucks to buy shoes. Faced with this plus
several pressures arising from the Great Recession after 2007, including
lower consumer spending and freezing credit lines, Zappos's investors
sold out to Bezos, after which the shipping bonus was discontinued. He
claimed, "When given the choice of obsessing over competitors or
obsessing over customers, we always obsess over customers."57
Obsessed with giving them five dollars until the market is consolidated, I
guess.
The company's broader retail platform has grown through all this
corporate arm wrestling, with Amazon being willing to antagonize
higher-end companies by allowing the independent sellers to continue
aggressive discounting. Companies like Sony and Black & Decker have
gone back and forth with Amazon on allowing regular sales of their
products on Marketplace at rock-bottom prices, but they usually come
crawling back because of Amazon's unique market strength.
Amazon's pissing contests extend, of course, to the public sector.
Amazon's self-serving views about not being obliged to pay for the
public services it vacuums up reached a new level with the company's
new headquarters search, which the New York Times described as "the
most dramatic sweepstakes of modern capitalism."58 After grandly
announcing, in 2017, its need for a new "HQ2" to complement its
enormous footprint in costly Seattle, the company received an ocean of

applications from 238 North American cities and regions. By design, the
process was a media frenzy, with endless free publicity for the company
while America fell over itself trying to offer free things to the world's
richest man.
The results were a truly pitiful display of local officials groveling.
Cities filmed video after video overflowing with the empty language of
marketing and conservative government, with flimsy attempts at charm.
But, of course, Amazon's real interests were more material. The Wall
Street Journal reported that the company's "in-house economic-
development team shows how vital tax-incentive deals have become to
its business model and gives a window into why the company pitted
cities against each other to win the biggest subsidy package possible."59
Amazon claims its "emphasis on taking advantage of incentives is part of
its culture of frugality." A research report found the company had
already raked in $1.1 billion from some form of public subsidy on its
facilities and operations since 2000.60
Many of the bidders were among the poorest in North America,
offering money and subsidies from budgets already bleeding and cutting
back public services. Detroit offered the company thirty years tax-free.
New Jersey and the city of Newark put together a staggering combined
package of $7 billion in tax cuts and subsidies, and Governor Chris
Christie openly dared other states to top it. Charmingly, the Journal
noted that the company "has advised HQ2 candidates to keep this phase
private."61 And of course, why should we taxpayers intrude on this
process, as the company decides where to move on the basis of how
much of our tax money is thrown at it?
Worse, the very public nature of Amazon's search has led to
"unintended demands" from other giant corporations now demanding the
same sweeping concessions Amazon wrung out of the states, including
the "hefty tax breaks."62 The Wall Street Journal opined that "[this] is a
pitfall that often accompanies large tax incentive packages used to lure
employers to a state"—interesting from a paper that continuously
supports granting more of those packages to our glorious job-creating
companies. And, of course, Amazon ultimately made fools out of most
North American cities by ultimately splitting the investments in New
York and the Washington, DC, area—the two greatest existing centers of
commercial and political influence and power in America.

The company now earns half of every dollar spent online, and it
continues its relentless expansion: into food with its acquisition of pricey
premium grocer Whole Foods, which it's integrating into its Prime
discount and delivery service; into online advertising to compete with
Google and Facebook; and into shipping by land, sea, and air, with its
creation of a sea-freight forwarding service, plans for an air cargo hub,
and the beginning of a "lastmile" delivery business.63 And Bezos himself
bought the journalism institution the Washington Post for half a billion
dollars. But it's Amazon's growth in utterly new industries that is now
getting the most attention.
The Cloud of War
Cloud computing refers to the development of technology allowing
information-processing needs, like storage, database management, or
processing power, to be provided online instead of through a company's
own hardware. The data is stored and processed in computing centers
built by tech companies—huge, windowless warehouse-like buildings
filled with tall rows of computer servers, managing data or doing
calculations for clients around the world. A quickly growing portion of
today's computing requirements are done through cloud computing, and
Amazon is the market originator and leader (with Microsoft a strong
second).
As industry analyst Nicholas Carr observes in his book on the new
field, The Big Switch, Amazon was technically providing basic utility
services to clients back in the 1990s, when "companies and individuals
could become 'Amazon affiliates,' giving them the right to market
Amazon's products through their own sites (in return for a small cut of
any resulting sales)." The cloud technology let the affiliates connect to
Amazon's databases to display product information and images on the
affiliate site.64
The project grew out of the company's ambitions to be seen as a tech
company like Google, rather than a mere retailer like Walmart. The
company sat on a giant pool of data on customers' buying and rating
behavior, the currency of the tech age, and early on it made some
available to publishers, later creating APIs (application programming
interfaces) that let software developers collect price and product data.
Other APIs let clients use Amazon's shopping cart and payment system.
Meanwhile the fast-growing company had internally made computing

resources available to its many divisions, devoted to functional
operations (called "primitives") like basic processing and data storage.
These projects were later grouped together as Amazon Web Services
(AWS), which today includes these functions as well the Simple Storage
Service (S3) and the Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) for data-crunching
needs.
These à la carte, online-enabled services at first attracted small
businesses that had a hard time paying for all their own IT hardware and
staff, but soon large firms took notice. The service grew quickly, in part,
again, due to low prices that Amazon's investors tolerated in exchange
for breakneck growth. Also, Bezos had learned another cautionary lesson
from other tech titans, and "he didn't want to repeat 'Steve Jobs's
mistake' of pricing the iPhone in a way that was so fantastically
profitable that the smartphone market became a magnet for competition,"
as Stone puts it.65
The efficiency of cloud computing is that it reduces the need for
expensive in-house hardware and software, which traditionally allow for
high data processing speeds and handling heavy data traffic, but are often
only needed in the busiest conditions and are otherwise unnecessary.
Amazon's own systems were built to manage the traffic flood the week
after Thanksgiving, and the rest of the year much of it sat idle. "Most of
the system's capacity went unused most of the time," Carr observes, and
Bezos said in 2006 that "there are times when we're using less than 10
percent of capacity." Now computing power can be bought as a utility,
like the power bill, and business observers hope it will end up benefiting
smaller firms and startups, which would otherwise struggle to afford the
big IT assets of large corporations. Cloud computing could thus "level
the playing field," as Carr suggests.66
Amazon utterly dominated the cloud computing market for some
time and is now the largest player, at about 51 percent market share,
followed by Microsoft's Azure cloud service at 13 percent and Google at
6 percent.67 The highly widespread use of Amazon's remote servers has
made them at times a chess piece in Amazon's larger rise, as when
Walmart pointedly told its tech contractors in 2017 to keep their
applications off Amazon's cloud if they wanted its business. And unlike
the rest of Amazon's famous cash-burning business model, AWS is
profitable—highly profitable. Indeed, only when AWS blew up did the
company begin to take a few billion in profit a year (rather than
reinvesting the full torrent), and even embark on share buybacks; cloud

computing is responsible for half of Amazon's profits to this day. In the
Economist's analysis, AWS "operates with economies of scale that are
practically impossible to reach."68
And crucially, big corporations are not the only ones seeing the value
in Amazon's services—other big institutions, like the Pentagon, are
noticing as well. Since 2013, Amazon has hosted data for the
Department of Defense, the CIA, and other security agencies. Gaining
clout with the security establishment by helping to manage the transition
from on-site mainframes to the cloud, Amazon has been able to "lock in
an advantage over the competition ... the U.S. Transportation Command,
which manages transportation for the Pentagon, said it was prepared to
award AWS a contract without a competitive bid."69 And the market is
thin for alternatives anyway—few have Amazon's security-state seal of
approval.
Amazon's dominance of the security cloud is thus unlikely to wane
soon. The Wall Street Journal reported that the three-biggest cloud
providers together invested over $30 billion in 2016 alone in their
gigantic data centers, filled with cold-stored banks of computer servers,
to run their corporate services. The business paper found "the massive
investment is creating a barrier for would-be rivals that would need to
spend tens of billions of dollars to match the computing capacity
Amazon, Microsoft and Google already have," and quoted an investment
banker: "They've created a powerful moat." High barriers to entry are a
classic feature of long-lived monopolies and oligopolies.70
Amazon's central role is likely to grow, as the DOD has been taking
offers for a gigantic multibillion-dollar contract for years' worth of cloud
business, code-named JEDI, which is an outrage unto itself. But
crucially, the Pentagon has insisted that all the business will go to a
single company, giving Amazon the inside track on the basis of its
experience providing computing to public institutions from the CIA to
the Smithsonian. And as the Wall Street Journal notes, the Pentagon also
insists "that bidders provide a cloud that can handle unclassified, secret
and top-secret data. Only Amazon so far has received government
approvals to house its most highly classified data in the cloud."71
For all this (somewhat menacing) potential, the cloud has very real
downsides. Amazon's military work has led it to drive off other entities
frowned on by the military, above all the state-secret-releasing site
WikiLeaks, which it kicked off its servers, causing famous Pentagon

Papers leaker Daniel Ellsberg to cancel his Prime membership on
principle and to call for a boycott.72 Further, the fact that companies
allow Amazon, Microsoft, Google, or Oracle to be custodians of their
data, stored many miles from the company's actual operations, imposes
new risks. As with any utility, service can be disrupted, like when a
snowstorm pulls down power lines and you have to sit in the cold until
service is restored. But now the stakes are higher. With information
essential to core business processes being managed in the computing
centers of the "cloud," the scope of potential disruption is significantly
widened, and is only partially compensated for by redundancy in the
network.
In 2012 a large electrical storm, or "derecho," on the Atlantic
Seaboard caused heavy rains, flooding, and downed trees, leading to the
failure of local power grids. Nicholas Carr relates that as computing
access for millions of people hung in the balance,
the data centers in the Amazon complex immediately began switching over to their
backup diesel generators. But there was a glitch in the system. The switchover failed at
one of the centers, and its servers went dark. Compounding the failure was a bug in the
load-balancing software Amazon uses to route traffic around problem spots in its network.
As if that weren't enough, another software bug prevented some backup data stores from
kicking in. Amazon's technicians acted quickly.... But though the outage was brief, the
recovery proceeded haltingly. It took the company many hours to reboot its servers,
reconstruct its databases and its virtual machines, and get all its systems working again.73
The problem wasn't a onetime event, as another outage in 2017 affected
its S3 system and froze or slowed apps that require Internet storage from
AWS. This outage, which lasted about four hours, began after an
Amazon worker entered incorrect commands and disabled a large block
of Virginia servers. It affected numerous US businesses, but this time
Amazon's built-out network allowed some clients to move their work to
other centers that stayed online.74 The New York Times called it "a rare
fumble for Amazon in cloud computing" and observed that large
corporate customers were trying to diversify their cloud service by using
different providers for different functions. This was in response to a "fear
among businesses" that "Amazon's dominance could lead to a new form
of 'lock-in,' giving it huge leverage over customers because of the costs
of switching providers. In the 1980s and 1990s, those costs helped
Microsoft gain a seemingly unshakable grip on personal computing."75
Now Microsoft itself is Amazon's main credible competitor.

Amazon and the other cloud oligopolists are investing heavily in
their centers and systems to avoid these kinds of disruption in the future,
but it illustrates that when a few firms run an industry, the stakes are
raised if anything goes wrong. And given the new scope of the cloud in
running virtually every data-based service we rely on, those stakes are
high indeed. But for business journalists, there's no problem that can't be
dealt with through effective PR, as Stone blandly suggests: "Outages had
widespread repercussions, and chronically secretive Amazon found it
had to get better at explaining itself and speaking to the public."76
Those stakes increasingly extend not just into big corporate databases
but into the home, too, since it's the power of the cloud that's allowing a
new wave of small hardware products that use specialized cloud
connections to punch above their weight, including "smart speakers."
These small computers and stereos deployed around the house allow
"voice computing," in which simple verbal commands or queries activate
the speaker to run a function like playing music or searching online. The
cloud enables these devices, therefore extending its presence right to
your bedside.
As with the cloud itself, Amazon has been the leader in the smart
speaker market with its various Echo models, followed by the Google
Home, the Microsoft Invoke, the Facebook Portal, and the Apple
HomePod. Market analysts find Amazon leads the market in part by
offering characteristically rock-bottom prices, because Amazon sees the
speakers as "an entry point for e-commerce."77 Thus, having its speaker
rather than another company's in a home means regular chances to push
its own retail products, to entice more households into Prime, to collect
more data, and to charge monthly streaming music fees.
These always-listening devices have already led to a number of
innovatively creepy episodes, like the one involving a Seattle woman
whose Echo mistook parts of a conversation as commands, recording the
conversation and then sending it to a person on the user's contact list
without the user's consent.78 Google, for its part, conceded that its own
smart speaker picks up some conversations, even when the speaker
hasn't been addressed by its activation phrase. Some of these "audio
snippets" are listened to by live language experts to improve its voice-
recognition AI— issues that might seem minor, except that the press
reports over fifty-three million smart speakers were sold or issued
globally in

2018 alone.79
And when a coalition of child- and privacy-advocacy groups tested
the Echo Dot Kids Edition service, they found that the information it
recorded about children's requests and searches couldn't be deleted by
employing parental controls but required contacting customer support.
This could become a major issue later as federal law increasingly
protects minors' online privacy, especially since apparently 85 percent of
apps in the Alexa store have no privacy policy at all.80
Gradually the tech majors are eroding the walls of how deeply we let
them hook into our lives, and the speaker market is a bleeding-edge
example of that. Users now allow the speakers' algorithms to help decide
if one outfit looks better than another on them, and with Amazon's
purchase of a company making smartphone-connected, camera-equipped
doorbells—and its new service of delivering products inside your home
when you're not there, or even inside your car—the company integrates
itself ever deeper into customers' lives.81 Amazon now deploys
"personalized pricing" on many goods categories, showing different
users different price points for the same product, depending on their past
behavior, and allowing Amazon to experiment with users' shopping
decisions. Its giant pool of extremely low-wage freelancers through its
"Mechanical Turk" program, which allows people to participate in social
science research surveys for pennies, have given researchers a highly
convenient but also statistically skewed survey research pool, as the
Technoskeptic relates.82 But all these cutting-edge, creepy cloud-based
toys rely on human labor to be produced and to operate. And Amazon's
labor history is less than Prime.
Picking Fights
Amazon grew up in Seattle in Microsoft's shadow, and this chapter has
reviewed the numerous ways the company took inspiration from its
forbear, from rank-and-yanking employees to cultivating platform users.
Sadly, this also extends to labor conditions. James Marcus cites
paperwork he signed while joining the company as a writer in its early
days, headlined "Job-Related Stress":
The Employee ... recognizes that his position may involve a high degree of job-related
stress. As a condition of employment, the Employee agrees that he will not bring an
action against the Company for ... damages alleged to have resulted from such job-related
stress, and will indemnify the Company.83

The clause was well founded, especially in the company's early days,
when coders and warehouse workers alike were consumed in "Death
Marches"—as other tech giants playfully call them—where major
software reconfigurations or warehousing clearance pushes were
completed over many days, with sleep brief and on-site. In general,
workers often didn't take even weekends off, giving up a precious legacy
of the labor movement.84 Stone relates that Bezos "was imagining a
different culture for Amazon, one where employees worked tirelessly for
the sake of building a lasting company and increasing the value of their
own ownership stakes." Yeah, so different. But during hiring interviews,
"if the potential employees made the mistake of talking about wanting a
harmonious balance between work and home life, Bezos rejected
them."85
But of course, the ramification of this work policy is that women,
who society still widely expects to take the primary care-giver role for a
family's children, will be disproportionately discouraged from working
or advancing in such an environment. Silicon Valley's well-documented
problem of drastic underrepresentation of women is in significant part
due to its embrace of a fanatical worth ethic that leads to sneering at any
work-life balance, meaning Bezos's rejection amounts to form of
institutionalized sexism.
The white-collar staff was subjected to nightmarish conditions
similar to those at other tech giants, including long double shifts in the
warehouse when the company was shorthanded during the holiday
season—orgies of work whimsically called "Operation Save Santa."
Bezos refused to subsidize bus passes for years, to prevent against a
situation where some workers leave to catch a bus earlier instead of
working late and driving home.86 Writing in Jacobin, Joe Allen
documents how "emails arrive past midnight, followed by text messages
asking why they were not answered." Unsurprisingly, management is
given a prepared set of "leadership principles" that are a heinous
caricature of libertarian authoritarianism. A standouts: "Leaders are right
a lot. They have strong judgement and good instincts."87
And as the company grew, "Bezos drove employees even harder,
calling meetings over the weekends, starting an executive book club that
gathered on Saturday mornings.... As a result, the company was not
friendly toward families, and some executives left when they wanted to
have children." When a female staff member asked when policies

supporting work-life balance might be put in place, Bezos responded that
"we are here ... to get stuff done, that is the top priority.... If you can't
excel and put everything into it, this might not be the place for you."88
Amazon is very much part of the gender imbalance in the broader market
economy, where women's reproductive decisions can eject them from the
workforce.
Yet despite the staff's extensive sacrifices, like delaying the start of a
family or never seeing their existing one, the picture is different for the
CEO. Although Bezos terrorized the workforce and consumed their
waking hours, before their separation his wife MacKenzie (formerly his
subordinate during their time on Wall Street) became pregnant, and the
couple moved into a giant mansion in Medina near Bill Gates's estate.
According to Stone, MacKenzie would drop off Bezos daily in a minivan
after taking the kids to school, then retire to her separate apartment to
write.89 When their first son was born, Bezos took time off. As he
should. As everyone should! But at Amazon, simply having a basic
family-work balance requires major privilege.
Of course, many of the white-collar staff are privileged themselves in
their relatively high salary levels, and most famously in the stock options
that are commonly part of compensation packages, especially for early
employees and senior staff. Marcus memorably describes himself and his
fellow "vested" colleagues as "the arbitrarily rich."90 However, as with
Apple and other tech giants we've reviewed, options are restricted to
certain white-collar workers who are already relatively well
compensated. Further, Amazon backloads these options, so that larger
payouts come after having worked more years with the company, which
is unusual.91 And there are some burdens that are carried beyond the
grave of an individual's tenure at Amazon: the company has a record of
enforcing non-compete clauses, threatening to sue workers who quit and
get hired by competing companies.92
But the company is more notorious for its history with its blue-collar
workforce. The warehouse "pickers" who hasten from shelf to shelf with
carts gathering items, and then back to the central belts that send the
combinations off for sorting and packaging, are the sweating workforce
behind the delightful convenience of shopping online. From its earliest
days, when knives sold in the new kitchen goods category came sliding
down the conveyor system with no packaging, Amazon has worked its
blue-collar workforce to the bone. Endless hours for limited pay is the

norm, as are escalating performance targets that have workers
continuously running from wing to wing of the warehouses.
Pickers carry handheld scanners to confirm the merch and direct
them to the next shelf, which also allows the company to track them on a
productivity-per-second basis. Managers frequently chew out the
workforce for not meeting goals and threaten them with firing,
sometimes on a daily basis. The demands rise and rise, suggesting a
purposeful strategy of running workers to exhaustion and then replacing
them. One picker wrote that the harried workers still show each other
desperate support, like trying to cover for a coworker who's running late,
but with little wiggle room for solidarity.93
The most nationally infamous episodes involve the Allentown,
Pennsylvania, fulfillment center's issues with heat. Amazon balked at
providing AC for its Midwestern and mid-Atlantic facilities, perhaps not
realizing the feverishly hot and humid summers in the region. When
temperatures reached triple digits in the warehouses in the summer,
rather than spring for climate control the company decided to add a few
minutes to breaks and hand out water or Gatorade to the workers running
from shelf to shelf in the stifling heat.
But in Allentown the spiraling heat index and ludicrous productivity
demands meant workers worked through pain and heat stress, to the
point that some became faint or passed out on the work floor. This
situation reached such a cartoonish extreme that Amazon hired
paramedics to sit in an ambulance on-site, ready to treat heat-stressed
and dehydrated employees. Some were taken to local hospitals and
replaced by unsuspecting new hires.
This nightmare persisted until an ER doctor called government
regulators after admitting temp worker after temp worker for heat strain,
a complaint followed up by other witnesses, including one from "a
security guard who reported seeing pregnant employees suffering in the
heat," according to the Allentown Morning Call, whose bold reporting
on a major local employer earned national prominence.94 Subsequent
OSHA inspections found fifteen workers fainted from heat on one hot
June day, leading to the installation of more fans and cooling bandanas.
Workers taking time off to recover incurred disciplinary points against
them, which could add up to firing. Some took to chanting, "End slavery
at Amazon."

Stone suggests the bad PR around this and other episodes led to
Amazon's installation of AC in more fulfillment centers. Thanks to
government disclosure rules requiring publicly traded firms to report
their median worker salaries, we know Amazon pays an average
fulfillment center worker $28,446 a year, or $13.68 an hour, typical of
the US warehouse industry but not reflective of Amazon's incredible
revenues and market stature.95
On the other hand, Amazon's federal filings say, "We consider
employee relations to be good."96 So that's reassuring, too.
On the warehouse floor, the corporate propaganda against theft is
aggressive. Amazon cites concerns about stealing in its refusal to open
large garage doors in shipping bays, which would significantly help
ameliorate the heat. While waiting in line at the large security gates
before they can leave (time for which the US Supreme Court has ruled
they need not be compensated), workers get to look at large screens
showing employees who have been fired for stealing, shown in silhouette
with "terminated" stamped across them, next to a list of the products
taken.97 "Orwellian" is the word usually used for this kind of thing, but
perhaps we rush to judgment. After all, Jeff Wilke, the powerful head of
Amazon's logistics unit, wears flannel shirts during the holiday season
"as a gesture of solidarity with his blue-collar comrades," Stone notes
ironically.98
Wilke was the first to install time clocks in Amazon's fulfillment
centers to introduce "discipline," also known as "Taylorism." Another
important innovation of his was designed to help cope with Amazon's
regimented, exhausting work, as execs deal with the holiday season
stress. His solution: primal screams. And no, I'm not making this up.99
These screams may fade over time because Amazon bought Kiva, the
manufacturer of mobile robotics, for the better part of a billion bucks,
likely with an eye toward making human workers less essential. The
Wall Street Journal reports that so far, deployed robots work with
humans to get orders located and packed more quickly, but picking itself,
which involves retrieving merchandise of many different sizes and
shapes, is harder to automate, "though developers are getting close."100
These kinds of practices help explain the enduring interest in
unionization. But like the rest of Silicon Valley, the company has resisted
unions for the workers, and while Stone notes that the Teamsters and the

United Food and Commercial Workers have "tried to organize
associates" in the fulfillment centers,
Amazon's logistics executives quickly met these campaigns by engaging with employees
and listening to complaints while making it clear that unionizing efforts would not be
tolerated. The sheer size of Amazon's workforce and the fact that turnover is so high in
the fulfillment centers make it extremely difficult for anyone to organize workers.... The
unions themselves say there's another hurdle involved—employees' fear of
retribution.101
This is understandable, after episodes like Amazon's closure of a call
center in 2001, which the company claimed was unrelated to labor
organizing there. Joe Allen wrote perceptively in Jacobin that "Walmart
consciously built its distribution centers in remote, conservative regions
of the country to avoid the threat of unionization," a pattern followed by
manufacturers and other great retailers like Amazon. Operating globally
does mean some traditions of worker solidarity will be unavoidable, as
when thousands of European workers went on strike in late 2018, some
chanting, "We are not robots."102 In Spain, Amazon was even reported to
have requested that police intervene in a strike and enforce worker
productivity levels, which the baffled police declined to do.
In the United States, reports uncovered that Amazon even had its
warehouse staff sign non-competes in their hiring contracts, barring them
from work in any field competing with Amazon in any way—an almost-
impossible standard to clear.103 After a public backlash, Amazon
announced it would stop requiring it, but only of its hourly temp
workers. All the bad press must have gotten to the fulfillment arm,
however, because the company deputized a number of warehouse
workers to defend the fulfillment center conditions by taking to Twitter
as "Amazon FC Ambassadors." The upbeat tweets defended the
company's work conditions, and Bezos, with polite emojis and capital
letters. (They were likely penned by HR or other on-site employees
given new duties.)104
Amazon looks set to be a brutal frontier for labor organizing for
years to come, as dramatically shown in the protests coinciding with the
2019 Prime Day, the grotesque sham holiday Amazon created to have
another big-purchase day in the summer, to complement the Christmas
buying season. By July 2019, more than half of US households were
Prime subscribers, bringing real stakes to the Prime Day strikes waged
by thousands of Amazon's workers across Western Europe, united by the
rallying cry "No more discount on our incomes."105

Amazon's clear abuses of the legal rights and simple dignity of labor
make it even more obnoxious that the company continues to hold so
much power over publishing. By 2019 Amazon sold well over half of US
books of all types—today it utterly dominates most publishers, letting us
now explore, as the New York Times put it, "What Happens after
Amazon's Domination Is Complete?" It turns out that towering over a
market, partly on the strength of the sheer number of existing platform
users, has detrimental effects.
Much like Google and Facebook are now accused of, Amazon makes
pitifully little effort to police its platform or ensure product authenticity
or quality. The inevitable result is an explosion of fakes, including
counterfeit books, such as sensitive medical manuals that are shoddily
scanned and sold online by independent sellers, sometimes commingled
with Amazon's own stock so that the buyer has no way of knowing their
book is counterfeit.106 Until, of course, the print is illegible or the
author's name is misspelled on the cover. And as with the other platform
operators in this book, it's next to impossible to get the company to care
or take action; and then reactions are reactive, not proactive—removing
specific fraudulent seller accounts rather than committing resources to
policing the platform for any quality standard. As the Times reported,
"The company has such a grip on books that counterfeits do not seem to
harm it. They might even increase its business," since, after all, Amazon
still gets a sales commission. And worse, in order to get real books listed
ahead of their cheap knockoffs, some sellers and publishers resort to
paying Amazon for ad space or to place its items at the top of search
listings— essentially rewarding Amazon for its lawless platform policy,
often to the tune of thousands a month.
Many earnest book lovers now often turn to their Kindle for much of
their casual reading, downloading books and reading them on the go.
However, few read the tablet's fine print, which gives the company
control over access to Kindle-formatted e-books, even after they're
downloaded onto users' physical machines. And so there was a surprise
in 2009 when Amazon deleted some editions of certain books, the rights
to which hadn't been properly cleared— from users' Kindles
themselves.107
Amazon controls the wireless network that allows downloading and
synchronizing e-books, including the ability to delete them without user
action or permission. Among the books remotely deleted were editions
of Nineteen Eighty-Four by socialist writer George Orwell. Orwell

would probably nominate Bezos, the twitchy-eyed corporate tyrant, as
Big Brother's capitalist twin.

CHAPTER 5
Being Evil
The company that governs the Internet
Google is one of the modern world's most important institutions, playing
a central role in how the entire Internet functions and providing access to
the world's most relied-upon online platforms. Famous for its useful
services provided for free, and its reputation for housing cutting-edge
new technologies, Google has one of the most revered reputations of any
corporation in the world, including being known for generous employee
benefits. The company's lightning-fast search results and video loads are
possible thanks to its gigantic global infrastructure of enormous data
centers filled with servers, fully owned fiber-optic cables, and leading-
edge software algorithms. Google's data centers are in nearly every
country, including the arctic settlements of Greenland, war-wrecked
Yemen, and besieged Gaza.1
Google is also known for pursuing inspiring ideals, represented in the
company's famous motto, "Don't be evil." Industry magazine Wired
happily quoted company cofounder Sergey Brin's comment that "the
societal goal is our primary goal."2 Even the sharp-minded
communications scholar Tim Wu, coiner of "net neutrality," is willing to
suggest that Google is a break from past cycles of monopoly, and "really
is a different kind of firm."3
And yet, as it has grown to become one of the world's biggest
corporations, it has begun to use its near monopoly in online search to
build a towering empire of data that covers most of our online and
offline lives. It has used its search power to "surface" results it favors
and "downrank" those it doesn't, and made similar power plays on its
other major platforms for smartphones and YouTube. In time this has led
to software developers despairing at their dependence on the once-
idealistic company, comparing it to Microsoft, and even describing it as
an "evil empire."4 And users have become wary, too, perhaps realizing

the truth of what Google executive Andy Rubin said—"We don't
monetize the thing we create. We monetize the people that use it."5
Synonymous
Begun in 1996 as a research program at Stanford University by young
grad students Larry Page and Sergey Brin, the search engine that became
Google was meant to satisfy a real need. The World Wide Web, the most
popular Internet application, was still new to the public in the 1990s and
growing explosively quickly. As users created an ocean of websites,
attracting other interested users to those sites became fairly difficult, and
at the same time people were becoming unsatisfied with the tame
"walled gardens" of curated content run by the major "web portals" of
that time like AOL and MSN. Web browsers like Netscape had made the
web explorable, if you already knew the web address you wanted to get
to. But finding sites related to an interest, whether cooking or cat pictures
or celebrity nudity, was another story.
Search engines at that time were relatively primitive—Alta-Vista, the
most popular, ran web searches using a simple process of matching
keywords on sites, but this was a blunt approach that meant many
irrelevant search results. Worse, as the web grew and search became
more important, site owners began "gaming" engines by stuffing the
bottoms of their pages with popular keywords, so results often included
large volumes of useless spam-like sites.
Page and Brin's new search engine avoided this through the clever
adaptation of a tool of scholarship—citation measures. The importance
of academic papers is sometimes gauged (crudely) by determining how
many other papers cite it—papers that are considered to be valuable or
important by other figures in the field tend to be referred to and cited
more frequently. Page developed an automated software process, or
algorithm, that ranked websites by how many links they had from other
sites, thus suggesting their relative importance to other web developers.
The mathematical guts of the process were developed by Brin, and the
algorithm, named PageRank, formed the early core of Google's search
process. The two gradually added many other "signals," like the
repetition or position of the keywords.6 At the time, they named their
search engine "BackRub" since it tracked backlinks from other pages to
estimate relevance.

Notably, this algorithm was developed in an academic setting, where
ample public funding supported the cutting-edge research. Brin had
received a scholarship from the National Science Foundation to attend
the school, and Page's mentor was awarded an NSF grant to study online
information.7 Further, the entire Internet and web themselves were made
possible by funding from the NSF and the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA)—the Pentagon's research arm. Indeed, the
clearest sign of Google's academic roots was that during its
development, its original web address was google.stanford.edu.
Use of the search engine grew extremely quickly, in part because of
its technical superiority, but also because of network effects. Net effects
are important in search, as Silicon Valley historian Arun Rao describes:
Search was a classic network effect service. The more people that used a search engine
and clicked on results, the better a search engine could be at optimizing results and so
have more relevant results, attracting more users. As a result of a positive network effect,
with current search algorithms only one firm should dominate.... On the technology side,
it was impossible for most companies to enter search. Because most search algorithms
optimized based on past users' searches, network effects prevent new engines from being
as powerful as the dominant few. By collecting terabytes of data on past searches ... the
dominant core engines had erected an enormous barrier to entry.8
Rao adds that net effects and economies of scale in search were so great
as to make online search "a natural monopoly" like a local utility
company, where duplication is unneeded and wasteful.
Frequent Google ally Lawrence Lessig, at the time a Stanford law
professor, also observed that Google "produced this amazing machine
for building data, and that data has its own 'network effect.' ... Every
time you search, you give Google some value because you pick a certain
result.... So each time you do a search, you're adding value to Google's
data base," creating a major advantage and encouraging a market with
one or only a few big companies.9
As with many technological breakthroughs, other researchers had
developed similar software tools. The pattern is common, as with Bill
Gates and Paul Allen buying a DOS system that they modified into MS-
DOS, or with Mark Zuckerberg's many contemporaries working on
almost-identical social media sites. In this case, an IBM researcher
created a similar system that ranked sites by links, but the aging
computer giant sat on it. And a Chinese engineer also developed a
hypertext link-based search system, which his employer, the business-
media holding company Dow Jones, also did nothing with.10

But as the engine's superiority became clear and user searches shot
up, online portals became interested, and in fall 1998 the renamed
Google engine was incorporated as an independent company. Soon it
made deals to provide search services for major portals like AOL and
Yahoo, along with the major browser Netscape, bringing huge volumes
of user traffic that the company desperately struggled to accommodate
by buying cut-rate servers it could reprogram for cheap, using cash
raised from early "angel" investors, including Amazon's Jeff Bezos. The
company's rocketing growth also required more mature corporate
leadership, and the company's early board favored Eric Schmidt, a tech
industry veteran formerly of Sun Microsystems and other firms.
The hundreds of thousands of daily searches all yielded data— data
about what made search more effective, what made users search more,
and what links they clicked on without returning for a second try—the
"long click" that indicated relevant search results. This data attracted to
its staff the young, freethinking engineers for which the company is
famous, many of whom see themselves as part of the "anti-Microsoft,"
since that company had openly used its PC operating system monopoly
to take over the web browser market. Ironically, the engine was created
in a Stanford department housed in the Gates Computer Science
Building, endowed by the adjudicated monopolist himself.11
Every time you conduct a Google search, literally hundreds of
computers in Google's data centers or "server farms" fire up and
extremely quickly look for matches to your search terms on the
company's copy of the entire web, with each server searching one piece,
or "shard," of the index. This parallel computing dramatically speeds up
the process and lowers "latency"—how long you have to wait after
typing for your search results. Some industry watchers estimate a full
quarter of North American Internet traffic, from search to maps to online
video, runs through Google's servers.12
The infrastructure required to bring millions of daily search results to
billions of users globally is enormous, with dozens of gigantic data
centers around the world connected by high-bandwidth fiber-optic cable.
After renting center space in the early days, Google now builds its own
centers and connects them with its own cables and networking
equipment. These enormous centers are filled with racks of servers,
made to be replaced as they fail, all of which devour electricity and are
cooled by an elaborate evaporative cooling system. Today Google makes
these servers itself, produced in such stupendous numbers that the

company has claimed to be the world's biggest computer manufacturer,
larger than Dell and other OEMs of PCs and laptops.13
A classic instance of the scale of Google's data centers is The Dalles,
Oregon, a town on the Columbia River struggling with the decline of the
aluminum industry. The small town had already invested in a high-
bandwidth fiber-optic cable network at its own expense, and nearby
hydroelectric dams meant cheap electricity. Google sited a server farm
there, but only after scouting it in secret because "if people in a given
locality knew it was Google they were dealing with, they might be less
generous in giving tax breaks," as Steven Levy puts it. The town had
already obtained a designation as an "enterprise zone," meaning many
tax abatements and other incentives were in place, but Google wanted
more concessions. For an estimated fifty to one hundred long-term jobs,
the local congressional representative negotiated a deal for the company
to site a server farm in the town in exchange for fifteen years of tax
"relief." The company also demanded the entire town be sworn to
secrecy before revealing itself as the buyer; local officials were made to
sign NDAs, and even after the town's newspaper broke the story, Google
insisted townspeople not refer to it.14 To be fair, the company did make
some goodwill gestures in exchange for the extremely favorable deal it
received, including a donation to build a local Lewis and Clark Museum
and a few grand in advertising credits for local nonprofit entities. These
are the kind of one-sided practices used by Big Tech to put its footprint
down in a community.
Soon the company's search business grew to become so dominant as
to be literally synonymous with web search—most of us now refer to
"Googling" something we want to know. In an effort to expand its free-
access, advertising-funded, data-hoarding business model, it began a
long-running spree of corporate acquisitions. The company has come to
be derided in business circles as a "one-trick pony" since, other than
search, every one of its major services was brought into the company as
a purchase, from Maps to You-Tube and even to its own Android
smartphone operating system.15
The company's search model has clear value, in its reliability and
strong relevance-ranking processes. But real flaws have been identified
by critics, like University of Virginia media studies professor Siva
Vaidhyanathan. His book The Googlization of Everything is an excellent
exercise in critical thinking about the company, on a subject where
original thought is rare. He observes that because PageRank was

developed on the premise that pages with the most links to them are most
relevant, the effect is to promote the dominance of those sites. In other
words, "Web search is inherently conservative."16
People's use of Google tends toward wildly excessive trust in a
corporation that uses opaque algorithms to rank the Internet. This means
the stakes are high when the company creates new, increasingly
authoritative-seeming but utterly uncurated search results; my favorite is
the "Knowledge Panels." These are boxes appearing at the top of many
searches, offering concise information about a common question or a
biography of a person. Originally confined to famous people, many
people now have them. But exactly how they're granted isn't clear,
because, as the Journal reports, "no human being is in charge of making
such selections."17
Google's algorithms make the call, and the common mistakes that
often appear in people's panels as a result have taken months of user
requests for Google to resolve. The company now encourages people
with panels to get "verified" through a process the company runs,
allowing faster changes. Hilariously, former company CEO Schmidt's
own panel incorrectly claimed for some time that he wrote the book
Pharmacy Technician Exam Certification and Review. Another mis-
profiled person said of Google, "They have more authority over my life
story than I do." Although users often are happy to accept the
Knowledge Panels as fact, sadly these are often grossly wrong, with
sources sometimes included and sometimes not.18
In a major transition, in 2009 Google rolled out "Personalized Search
for everyone," in which results are tailored to the individual users, rather
than the link-based consensus process that preceded it.19 Even users
logged in on computer labs at a public library have some personalization,
based on location and other signals. This process is enabled because of
the bottomless ocean of data Google has collected on us from its various
services over the years, and, as The Filter Bubble author Eli Pariser
concludes, this personalization means there is no standard Google search
result for any subject, so the engine increases the chance of its users
living in "bubbles" where the results they see and views they hear match
what they already believe.20 Even the number of search results for a
single term now varies from one user to another, and for hot-button
subjects like climate change you'll see utterly different results depending
on Google's inferences of your political views.

Today Google's market share in online search is 78 percent on PCs,
and a staggering 95 percent on mobile search, largely because of its
Android smartphone operating system.21 Google originally bought this
open-source mobile OS as a "refuge" platform for its mobile apps to
avoid depending entirely on Apple's iPhone. Android now runs the giant
majority of smartphones globally, produced by many OEM handset
makers. However, there are real blocks to Google's search ubiquity that
are often legacies of the company's past battles. For example, an iPhone
user wanting to search by voice must ask Siri, Apple's virtual assistant,
to specifically "Google Search" for something; otherwise it will default
to Microsoft's Bing.22 And the company has struggled to absorb markets
without a Latin character set, making Russia, Japan, Korea, and China its
lowest-penetration markets (little data is available on search in Arabic).
Submerging Subversives
Many observers are reluctant to declare Google a monopolist; Tim Wu
brings himself to call Google "technically" a search monopolist, while
the great web inventor Tim Berners-Lee referred to the "near-monopoly
status" of Google and Facebook.23 More important than the label are the
market share numbers above, and the question of whether the company
has any meaningful competition or an insurmountable lead. Business
journalists, including respected Wired journalist and author Steven Levy,
have something to say about it in their reporting for investors and
executives. In his 2011 book In the Plex, Levy recounts how Google's
team sought to develop "innovation after innovation that would broaden
Google's lead over its competitors and establish it as synonymous with
search." Or, when acquiring cutting-edge ad-placement companies, how
"Google felt that they had a window to be the only game in town."24 Or
how the company's combination of "engineering talent, fiber-optic
cables, and data centers" created "a nearly insurmountable advantage
over their competitors." Yet Levy also earnestly describes the company
upholding its "Don't be evil" mantra: "An idea would come up in a
meeting with a whiff of anticompetitiveness to it, and someone would
remark that it sounded ... evil"25 So go figure.
To call a company a monopoly implies a lack of serious alternatives,
so in tech markets a common question is the extent of "lock-in"—how
much does a device, platform, or service lock consumers into sticking
with it when they might prefer to leave, with Apple and Microsoft being

good examples. Google has long claimed it has no real lock-in, with its
attorneys reliably repeating that "competition is just a click away,"
meaning Bing is available for search and thus no monopolization is
possible in the market. Company executives reliably cite a crucial
episode to defend the company from antitrust action: in 2009, as a result
of a rare Google service outage, the engine was unavailable for a period
of hours. In that time, millions of users turned to Yahoo for their
searches, a scenario in contrast to that of Microsoft's locked-in OS
monopoly and its very clear and purposeful efforts to keep users or
developers from any alternatives.26
But Vaidhyanathan observes the flaw in this argument, finding that it
could be valid if boycotting or migrating from Google did not incur significant
downgrades in service by losing the advantages of integration with other Google services.
Google's argument also ignores the "network effect" in communication markets: a service
increases in value as more people use it.... Network effects tend toward standardization
and thus potential monopoly.... If only a few people used Google for Web searching,
Google would not have the data it needs to improve the search experience. Google is
better because it's bigger, and it's bigger because it's better.... Opting out or switching
away from Google services degrades one's ability to use the Web.27
He adds, "To search for something on the Web using Google is not
unlike confessing your desires to a mysterious power."28
In other words, Google has a special status, one Wu described as the
web's "master switch"—the most reliable means of navigating the great
expanse of the Internet.29 Switching away from it means using tools that
benefit from significantly less data and thus give clumsier search results.
And Google has played the main role in arranging for dangerous sites to
be stripped from search results, like those with computer-infecting
malware or ones repeatedly used for fraud, thus cleaning up the web.
Further, Google's other services are all integrated (and the company
aggressively encourages this), meaning that giving up one Google
service weakens the strengths of the other applications a user may stick
with. Giving them all up is a great sacrifice indeed for a person today,
where everything from job applications to dating sites to most of the
world's commercial services can be arranged online.
And since Google is the main way we navigate the entire Internet, it
has enormous power in what it chooses to present (or not present) to us,
and the agenda-setting influence of this role is hard to overestimate.
However, the main way the company's power is exercised is not so
visible. Google's simple ability to rank its search results (via backlinks,

personalization, or other signals) puts incredible power in its hands as the
world's dominant search engine. Of course, the company's whole pitch
for PageRank is that crafty software automatically ranks the results,
creating a neutral, technocratic means of sorting information. But
Vaidhyanathan observes that in May 2007, Google removed the word
"automatically" from its "Explanation of Our Search Results" page, a
major difference.30 The explanation also indicates the search results are
absolutely under Google's control, and it has used this control to surface
results it favors and to submerge those it doesn't.
Meanwhile, the extensive nature of the user settings means that
there's great import to how the settings are initially set—the "default
settings." The large majority of users of these platforms are barely aware
these controls exist, and few use them, but to no one's surprise, the
default settings are reliably those giving Google the most access to our
data and the most leeway to use it for many purposes, including targeting
ads to us. A former Googler and "design ethicist" comments, "If you
control the menu, you control the choices."31
Other cases of the company's staggering influence are simple, as
when Google withholds access to its popular apps from Android phone
developers who alter the system too much for Google's liking. While the
Android system is open source, and thus able to be altered or augmented
by phone handset makers, Google draws red lines—above all, its search
engine must be the default. Google's power is such that if a phone maker
produces even one phone that doesn't meet Google's requirements, it
withholds its crucial apps from all that manufacturer's phones, including
those that do meet the requirements.32 This is one among numerous
practices that have gotten Google in trouble with the European Union's
more assertive antitrust enforcers.
Likewise, when the Trump administration's immigration bans were
first issued, Google engineers debated in an internal email thread the
possibility of adding more search results that suggest benefits from
migration.33 While not enacted, the discussion itself indicates the
potential influence at Google's discretion. A more expansive instance has
been Google's treatment of online shopping sites. Google has been eager
to augment its share of online shopping searches, which are often
especially profitable but require more complex "vertical" search
processes, where rather than searching for simple terms like "heart
disease" or "local restaurants," the user types a far more complex

question with multiple factors to consider, like "What's the best credit
card for air miles?" Toward the goal of keeping shopping market share,
Google has actively downranked competing shopping comparison sites,
like Idealo or Foundem; the latter debuted in 2006 and appeared high in
Google's search results at first, but after forty-eight hours was suddenly
dozens of pages down. Meanwhile other engines like Yahoo kept them
ranked high—suspicious.34
Thanks to a resulting European court case that found Google guilty
of anti-competitive practices and fined it $2.7 billion in 2017, we now
know that executives decided that Google's comparison-shopping results
would appear at the top of price-comparing searches, regardless of the
natural results of the search algorithm. One exec wrote, "Larry thought
product should get more exposure." The technical means of this are
complex, but the point is that Google holds the power to push a business
out of public view by tweaking its algorithm to kick it down its results a
few pages, which for most searches is enough to kill it. But Google may
not deliver on the European requirement that the company allow other
shopping services to bid on the top slots: the business press reported later
the same year that "ads for products sold by Google and its sister
companies appeared in the most prominent spot in 91% of 25,000 [post-
settlement] searches related to such items. In 43% of the searches, the
top two ads both were for Google-related products."35 Tech industry
magazine Wired was so skeptical that the title of its Facebook post
linking its coverage of the settlement read "Monopolies gonna
monopoly."
Other once-popular services, like the dining review site Yelp or travel
planner TripAdvisor, rejected buyout offers from Google only to find
that Google began pulling their content directly onto its search results,
meaning most users never visited their sites. Today Google responds to
commerce-related searches by putting prominent links at the top from
companies that pay, or promotes its own results by putting Google Maps
at the top. Google was also ordered by the European Union's competition
regulators to allow companies to opt out of this practice of "scraping"
content off other websites, which Google appealed.
But if Google can downrank into obscurity vertical-search websites
in commercial categories where it wants "more exposure," it can do that
same thing to political news and views. Google now plays a central role
in how people keep up with the world, providing major news outlets with
large proportions of their total online traffic through referrals and clicks

from search results; about 40 percent of clicks on the company's trending
topics are for news, and a recent study found Google makes almost $5
billion a year from their middleman role between consumers and news.36
This is almost as much as the entire news industry made from ads that
year, meaning Google is absorbing about half the industry's income
without hiring a journalist.
Beyond starving a news industry that the public needs as never
before, this significant dominance of online news means giant stakes
come with any changes the company makes to its search rankings and
content hosting. Figures on the political right have declared Google and
Silicon Valley in general to be their enemies, partially owing to the
predominantly liberal leanings of their workforces. But as usual,
although conservatives angrily insist on their nationwide TV and radio
shows that they are being silenced, it is in fact the political left that has
been suppressed.
After the revelations in the wake of the 2016 election regarding
Russian online ad purchases, Google found that about 0.25 percent of its
regular traffic led to information it considered to be deliberately
misleading or fraudulent, and so it adjusted its search algorithm toward
more "authoritative" content. But, as the press reported, the change
appeared to have a particular asymmetric nature. According to the New
York Times, "The change drew complaints that it prompted a steep drop-
off in traffic. But the organization that complained and all the sites
whose traffic it cited leaned to the left."37
Indeed, the leftist media watchdog group Fairness and Accuracy in
Reporting (FAIR) found that after Google's drive for more reliable
content, the sites reporting drops-off in traffic are uniformly on the left,
and often among the best left-leaning sites. They included the popular
left news site Democracy Now!, whose traffic fell by 36 percent;
Truthout, by 25 percent; CounterPunch, by 21 percent, and the liberal
AlterNet, by a crushing 63 percent.38 AlterNet's graph of its site traffic
shows the catastrophic impact of this move by the Internet's "master
switch," with its visitor numbers gradually rising over several years to
well over six hundred thousand and then plunging steeply after the new
algorithm was introduced. AlterNet's executive editor wrote, "It appears
that Google has pushed popular, high-traffic progressive websites to the
margins and embraced corporate media." For all the hype about right-
wing figures like Alex Jones being "de-platformed" by YouTube

sanctions, it is the left that has been stripped of its standing in the
algorithms of Google Search.
Beyond the power-mongering chicanery specific to Search, Google
has a long record of shady influence-spreading that is similar to those of
other giant corporations. One example was uncovered by a Wall Street
Journal investigation, which found Google was financing large numbers
of academic research papers that reached conclusions supporting its
views on regulation, data collection, and taxes, paying university
professors fees from $5,000 to $400,000. Crucially, many of these papers
did not include notice that the research was funded by a private entity
with a material interest in the issues the papers discussed. Incredibly,
Journal reporters uncovered that "in some years, Google officials in
Washington compiled wish lists of academic papers that included
working titles, abstracts and budgets for each proposed paper—then they
searched for willing authors."39
On the other hand, scholars with a critical perspective are less
favored. After the EU shopping service fine was imposed on Google,
Barry Lynn, the US monopoly scholar and critic, posted a statement
praising the fine on the website of the New America Foundation (NAF)
think tank where he worked. CEO Schmidt made an angry call to the
institution's head, and soon Lynn received emails from his boss accusing
him of "imperiling the institution as a whole"—Google was a major
funder, and in fact the foundation's main conference room is the "Eric
Schmidt Ideas Lab." Apparently some ideas aren't welcome in this "lab."
In an email to Lynn in which she referred discouragingly to his earlier
description of Google that included the M-word, she wrote "We are in
the process of trying to expand our relationship with Google on some
absolutely key points ... just THINK about how you are imperiling
funding for others."40 Lynn's role at NAF was terminated shortly
thereafter.
But the sneakiest way Google has come to exercise its market power
is related to conditions where one party knows more than the other party
—a situation economists call "asymmetric information." Painfully, while
Google's staff pride themselves on their "anti-Microsoft" nature, the
company is using informational asymmetry in ways very similar to
Microsoft in its 1990s monopolist heyday. The New York Times has
reported that "Google unfairly hinders the ability of search competitors
—and Microsoft's Bing is almost the only one left—from examining and
indexing information that Google controls, like its big video service

YouTube.... Microsoft's Bing search service cannot examine and index
up to half the videos on YouTube."41 And much like Microsoft, Google
hides this apparent use of its platform status to curb a competitor by
claiming 
the 
services 
are 
"incompatible" 
technically—but 
by
withholding certain technical standards, it can perpetuate that condition.
Indeed, former high-level Google exec Marissa Mayer remarked:
"It's very, very complicated technology, but behind a very simple
interface.... Our users don't need to understand how complicated the
technology and the development work that happens behind this is. What
they do need to understand is that they can just go to a box, type what
they want, and get answers."42 Mayer is openly celebrating a strategy of
deliberate asymmetric information, one of the practices for which
Microsoft was very nearly cleaved in two.
And the two firms have an ongoing antagonism—in an episode
showing what a plaything US antitrust law has become to today's tech
behemoths, Google and Microsoft got into an "antitrust complaint-off" in
2008. With Google taking over search, Microsoft made a hostile bid to
take over Yahoo, leading Google to refer the antitrust implications to
regulators, which Wired journalist Steven Levy noted was "a rather odd
stance considering Google's previous insistence that the search
marketplace had no lock-in and thus wasn't a valid candidate for
antitrust action."43 But in the meantime Google made a deal with Yahoo
to set up an arrangement in which some Yahoo users would see Google's
ads, and the adjudicated monopolist Microsoft then referred that to
regulators. Google dropped the deal when the DOJ said it would sue, but
then Yahoo announced it would sell its search business to Microsoft for a
billion dollars; that business was combined with Microsoft's own data to
create Google's main extant search rival, Bing.44 Not much of a rival
though: its traffic sources are cell carriers eager to annoy Google, and of
course it's the default option on Windows PCs and Microsoft's web
browser, Internet Explorer—suggesting people aren't turning to Bing
because they see it as a real alternative to Google, but are using it when
it's a default option presented on another platform. Its worldwide search
market share is in the neighborhood of 5 percent, which means it trails
not only Google but also the Chinese search engine Baidu.
Speaking to author Ken Auletta, Schmidt said he and the founders
ask themselves, "How can you grow big without doing evil?"45 One still
wonders.

Ad Nauseam
An interesting research paper by a pair of Stanford grad students in 1998
had some intriguing findings:
Currently, the predominant business model for commercial search engines is advertising.
The goals of the advertising business model do not always correspond to providing
quality search to users.... We expect that advertising funded search engines will be
inherently biased towards the advertisers and away from the needs of the consumers.
Since it is very difficult even for experts to evaluate search engines, search engine bias is
particularly insidious.46
The authors were, of course, Brin and Page, the Google cofounders who
within ten years would be responsible for covering the entirety of the
web with ugly, slow-loading, brain-eroding eyesore advertisements. The
story is a classic case of capitalism molding thought around itself, even
the thinking of clever Stanford grad students.
In the late 1990s, numerous search engines openly accepted
advertiser money for their sites to be included at the top of search results,
most notably GoTo.com. Brin and Page were disgusted, since whatever
integrity the search algorithm had would be tainted by the crass
commercial question of how much money changed hands. But, of
course, as Google's traffic went vertical on the strengths of its superior
technology and network effects, large amounts of cash were urgently
needed to continuously add more servers and networking equipment that
kept results coming and latencies low. And since Google was becoming a
main channel for "intentional traffic"—consumers who know what they
want and are looking for it—there was a natural opportunity to pay for
all those servers and employees to operate them.
Taking advantage of this market opening began with the launch of
new software called AdWords. This code placed text-only ads alongside
of (not above) the "organic" results generated by the search engine itself
whenever a user executed a search for commercial goods.47 Importantly,
Google created "quality scores" for the advertisements based on how
often they were clicked— the guiding principle was that clicked ads
were the ones actually interesting to consumers. The old cliché of
advertisers not being sure which half of their ad money is wasted would
no longer apply online—Google's analytics software would allow them
to know precisely how many clicks resulted from a given ad. AdWords
was self-service and easy to use, and for many search terms a relatively
affordable and valuable option, especially for smaller businesses. Also, it
was operated through a "Vickrey" auction, where the winner pays only a

penny more than the second-place bid, which stabilizes bidding and
reassures winners that they didn't wildly overpay. As AdWords became a
major success commercially (and brought in large amounts of additional
consumer data), Levy wrote, "From that point on, Brin and Page saw
nothing but glory in the bottom line."48 Google's 10-K SEC filing for
fiscal year 2017 states that the company makes "substantially all of our
revenues from advertising."49
Page's new view of ad-funded search was that Google maintains "a
church/state wall" between search and ads, likening it to newspapers
keeping reporting separate from advertiser influence— an idea mocked
by the great satirist of propaganda George Orwell, who wrote:
"Unpopular ideas can be silenced, and inconvenient facts kept dark,
without the need for any official ban.... So far as the daily newspapers
go, this is easy to understand. The British press is extremely centralized,
and most of it is owned by wealthy men who have every motive to be
dishonest on certain important topics."50 So the influence of great
capitalists over information through advertising-dependent business
models is not new—but the technology and its reach are. In time, the
AdWords spots were moved from the side of the organic search results to
above them, and separated by a decreasingly visible blue line, after
which they were marked by a small "i" or "sponsored," and today, "Ad"
or "sponsored." Not for nothing did a mere 38 percent of Americans say
they were even aware of the difference between the sponsored links and
the organic search results.51 Yikes.
Yet ad buyers have their own hierarchy in Google's eyes. Eli Pariser
recounts an episode when an environmental group was running a
campaign targeting the Royal Caribbean cruise line, demanding it quit its
practice of dumping raw sewage into the ocean, for which they bought
Google ads. Days later, Google pulled the spots, for "language
advocating against the cruise line industry." But the ad text had only
said, "Help us protect the world's oceans. Join the fight!"52 Church-state
separation indeed.
But it was AdSense that began the real transformation of the entire
web. Drawing on technology acquired from the purchase of Applied
Semantics, Inc. (ASI), the software pioneered an ad keyword-matching
approach that could be applied to ads all over the Internet. Once
implemented, a webmaster or blog owner could let Google sell ads to
appear on their site that matched concepts, not just keywords, using

ASI's "semantic analysis." This meant that ads for skis could be placed
on mountaineering sites, ads for kitchen appliances on cooking blogs,
and so on across the entirety of the World Wide Web. The technology
meant "the whole Web can become a platform for Google and
Facebook," as Pariser put it.53 And indeed, as AdWords and then
AdSense became extremely successful, Google purchased Blogger, the
world's most popular blogging site. According to the consensus of
business journalists and analysts, it did so for one reason: to expand its
ads inventory. Now Google was the custodian of thousands of blog
pages, previously bereft of ads—creating more ad surfaces that could be
sold to meet the enormous demand from advertisers. This is especially
painful in light of an opinion poll conducted at the dawn of the Internet
era in 1995, in which two-thirds of US respondents said they didn't want
any form of online advertising!54
And similar to early efforts by other tech giants like Amazon to grow
their platform at any cost, when it introduced the program, Google
sacrificed significant near-term profit by approaching the publishers of
blogs and websites to buy the ad space itself, and not even charging the
AdWords advertisers for the click—as Levy put it, "Essentially, Google
was paying all the costs from both sides, just to launch AdSense."55 An
ASI hire explained, "Google felt they had a window to be the only game
in town," and the Financial Times reported on "the economies of scale
and network effects that come from being the biggest player in the
market."56 Once again, Google hoarded information from its business
partners, refusing to reveal the split of AdSense revenue between Google
and the publisher hosting the ads, until finally caving in 2010 to reveal a
32-68 percent split, respectively.57 Importantly, this wide reliance on
Google for modest income from blogs and websites created a significant
online constituency, willing to defend Google against charges of power
mongering and other sneaky tactics.
Soon after Google announced the purchase of ASI in 2003, Microsoft
and AT&T (both of which had been previously designated full
monopolists and ordered broken up by federal judges) publicly
demanded regulators block the merger, as Google held 70 percent of the
global search ad market and would now have 80 percent of non-search
ads on third-party sites.58 The two companies were quite the Laurel and
Hardy of monopolization here. Unbelievably, the FTC allowed Google to
further cement its online ad dominance with its 2009 purchase of

AdMob, which placed ads on websites designed for mobile viewing on
smartphones, the main growth area in the online ad market. Google's
dominance (challenged only by Amazon's marketplace ads for indie
sellers and Facebook's own data hoard for ad targeting) is indicated by
the way it continually raises the minimum bids for more popular search
keywords, which disproportionately hurts smaller advertisers.59
Further, thanks to Google's extensive acquisitions, online advertisers
must deal with the company at nearly every stage, well beyond search
ads. To place ads on all those third-party webpages, companies use the
leading tool for buying ad space, Display & Video 360, a Google-owned
entity. Bids placed with that tool or other ones go to online ad
marketplaces for bidding on space, with Google also owning the gigantic
AdX, claiming half the world market share of ad bids. Webpage
operators sell the space using AdMob for mobile apps or Google's
DoubleClick Bid Manager (discussed below).60 This extensive presence
throughout market segments is how Google, as the business press puts it,
"dominates" the online ad industry.
The company's 10-K filings also regularly indicate its fear of
increasingly popular ad blockers, which constitute a real threat to
Google's entire revenue model. But ingeniously, the company is itself
promoting a new ad blocker on its own popular web browser, Chrome—
but one that only filters out ads not placed by Google. The ad blocker is
designed to prevent the loading of ads that don't meet certain standards,
set by the Coalition for Better Ads. But the business press indicated that
the coalition was not "a true joint effort but a Google-dominated one
that, while reducing ads widely considered annoying, also could
ultimately help Google's bottom line.... Google's leading role in the
standard-setting process troubled some of the coalition's members, who
observed that the blacklisted ad formats generally don't apply to
Google's own business."61 The purpose of the Chrome filter is to block
pop-up ads, auto-playing ads with sound, and ads that appear before
website content can be accessed. The Journal noted: "The move could be
a defensive one.... Some 26% of U.S. web users now employ the
software on their desktop devices."62 It was definitely a business-driven
process—Facebook got exemptions for its ads featuring autoplay video
with sound, for example.
But reminders of the web's early potential as an ad-free space still
echo through the system. On Wednesday, November 12, 2014, two-thirds

of Americans got their wish as a rare Double-Click outage globally freed
the Internet from ads, for about an hour. Blank spaces remained where
the ads were supposed to appear.63 Sometimes capitalism's loss is our
gain.
HugeTube
Ah, the YouTube. Easily one of the most important sites on the Internet,
it has become the dominant online video hub and has reached truly
preposterous proportions—YouTube users reportedly view over a billion
hours of video, and upload the equivalent of sixty-five years (i.e., about
560,000 hours) worth of playtime every day.64 The incredible
prominence of the platform means that its algorithm for recommending
videos is one of the most important factors shaping human thought on
the planet, meaning our great social struggles may be canceled out or
hugely boosted by the unknowable whimsy of a giant company's
intellectual property, and so far its record has ranged from abject neglect
to actively promoting some of the most heinous ideas possible.
UCLA professor George Geis wrote in his book on Google's
acquisitions history that "YouTube's popularity enabled it to achieve
strong network effects resulting from coupling content generating
'suppliers' with content consumers."65 With the site's rocketing
potential, one might ask why the founders sold to Google in the first
place. YouTube cofounder Chad Hurley said the site lacked the resources
to cope with explosive network effect-fueled growth: "We thought we'd
burn up our bandwidth. We worried our servers would go down.... We
needed resources to scale the company. We only had a staff of sixty
people dealing with the weight of the world." Hurley knew that raising
cash for more servers would be a headache and time-consuming, and
said that Google "wanted to give us the freedom not to have to maximize
revenues right away."66 Soon YouTube was the second most popular
search engine in the world—after Google.
Entertainment industry veteran Jonathan Taplin makes a fair case that
YouTube's intense growth, besides the obvious network effects, owes to
the site's early and explicit policy of allowing piracy of copyrighted
content. The site's cofounder wrote in an email: "So, a way to avoid the
copyright bastards might be to remove the 'No copyrighted or obscene
material' line and let the users moderate the videos themselves."67 Plus,

the platform benefited from brilliant startup tactics like taking out a
Craigslist ad offering one hundred dollars to "hot" women for every ten
sexy videos they posted (yes, really).68
Crucially, Google maintained this relaxed copyright posture after it
bought YouTube in 2006, with internal emails suggesting to the
company's leaders that Google should "pressure premium content
providers to change their model towards free" and "set up 'play first,
deal later' around 'hot content.'"69 The 1998 Digital Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA) largely indemnifies online sites from copyright
violation, provided they obey "takedown orders" from copyright holders
demanding that stolen content be removed. To give an example of what
resulted from YouTube's copyright piracy strategy, in 2015 alone the site
received five hundred sixty million takedown notices.70 A suit by
entertainment giant Viacom was dismissed under the DMCA's "safe
harbor" provisions, which exempt many online venues from liability for
hosting copyright-violating media.
YouTube's explosive growth also owes to its ad-free status for much
of its early years, as once again the incentive to build a network platform
exceeded the immediate need for short-term profitability. With the
platform's dominance now fully cemented since the Google acquisition,
multiple pre-roll ads are now typical for most clips, and longer videos
have algorithmically inserted "mid-roll" ads that break in awkwardly
during play. Notably, You-Tube allowed Google to enter new advertising
territory. In search ads, Google had focused on "directed demand"
among consumers who had already decided they wanted or needed a
product, but YouTube now allowed for more "soft sell" advertising
aimed at building up corporate brands—the kind of ads on TV or
Facebook. This allowed it to "present opportunities to ad agencies that
related to general branding," as Geis put it.71
But crucially, YouTube operates toward the opposite algorithmic goal
of Google Search. Search was designed to move users on to their web
destinations quickly, with the goal of the "long click," where a user does
not return to try other results. But with YouTube, Google has a stake in
keeping viewers on the site to view more videos and more ads—
prioritizing since 2012 the site's "stickiness." And Google's success in
moving searchers on quickly has been matched in its engineering for
keeping them around for online video.

Unfortunately, the platform has concluded that the best way to do this
is to promote more extreme views in its "Recommended" or "Up Next"
algorithm. This recommendation algorithm drives over 70 percent of
YouTube viewing, according to the company. The Wall Street Journal
conducted an extensive investigation of the platform's algorithm by
hiring a former YouTube recommendations engineer to study the site,
finding that it reliably promotes clips that draw strong traffic and keeps
users clicking on more videos. When it comes to news-related subjects,
these results tend to be those with more extreme views, especially
conspiracy theories from the political right.72
Indeed, a search on Google for current political events will tend to
surface mainstream news sources, while the same search on YouTube
presents hyper-partisan, frequently conspiracy-mongering hysteria with
no supporting evidence. The New York Times found the platform's
recommendations have a "tendency to push everyday users toward
politically extreme content—and, often, to keep them there." Videos that
get emotional reactions or trigger curiosity through ridiculous claims in
their titles are consistently favored in the algorithm, and with subjects
like immigration that draw strong right-wing responses, users beginning
with a relatively neutral news video can get deep into alt-right territory in
only two clicks. Another former Google engineer cleverly examined the
platform using the example of videos promoting the flat-Earth theory,
"because it's apolitical." Videos promoting this ludicrous ancient dogma
are still consistently promoted on YouTube astronomy clips, because
they attract more clicks and get more watch time—public understanding
be damned.73
This conspiracy theory-mongering tendency of YouTube has
attracted more attention, and in 2018 executives announced their
intention to "surface" more content from "an ever-changing list of
authoritative news sources" selected with the staff of the Google News
service.74 As with Facebook, the platform is countering the toxic
conspiracies its own algorithms promote by pairing it with material from
the mainstream commercial press, but with all the limits Orwell mocked
above. The platform is also screening its "Preferred" content, uploaded
by the most popular video makers, and even that step has required hiring
about ten thousand people.
But these moves are late and pretty modest next to the scale of the
need, reflecting the tendency of platform companies to prioritize growth
over the curation of their sprawling networks. For this reason, along with

conspiracy-mongering content the platform has also become overrun
with far-right extremist views, with huge numbers of heavily subscribed
user channels tied to real-world violence. Figures like far-right
"comedian" Steven Crowder, who was allowed to call socialists "f*gs"
for years on the platform, and Vox correspondent Carlos Maza a "lispy
queer" and a "gay Mexican." But since he did not specifically call for
violence or doxing (the public release of personal information like
someone's phone number online), YouTube waited years to boot him
from the platform.75
The far right has also benefited from the watch-time-maximizing
recommendation algorithm, because its members are inclined to post
longer videos, with inflammatory messages that tend to attract views
over more mainstream content. And along with the far right's reliable
emphasis on building community and thus more reliable viewers, it now
dominates YouTube, dwarfing the leftist content makers. Meanwhile
platform executives tell the New York Times they were "obsessed with
increasing engagement during these years" and "rarely considered
whether the company's algorithms were fueling the spread of extreme
and hateful political content."76 A further tweak to the algorithm called
"Reinforce" employed users' past views and interactions to suggest
related subjects, and was hugely successful at increasing watch time—
and at steering conventional right-of-center viewers toward crazy fascist
ranting.
Throughout this time, some YouTube staff proposed tighter vetting of
videos in the recommendation algorithm, or limiting search results after
a mass shooting to more mainstream news sources. Each time, the
suggestions were shot down by management. A former senior manager
told Bloomberg: "We were so in the weeds trying to hit our goals and
drive usage of the site.... I don't know if we really picked up our
heads."77
By the summer of 2019 the platform had become so notorious that
YouTube finally announced a policy banning white supremacy, neo-
Nazism, and other views from its video system, specifically "videos
alleging that a group is superior in order to justify discrimination,
segregation or exclusion." The company's often-changing policies and
"whiplash-inducing deliberations" now also mean the algorithm will
surface less content that is extremist or "borderline," the platform's term
for videos that almost but don't quite break its new content rules.78

The far right has claimed ever since that it is being censored, even
though as conservatives their whole economic position is that private
property shouldn't be regulated by the government and that markets are
competitive; so by their own logic, YouTube and Facebook should be
free to "de-platform" them, leaving them the option to simply move over
to the next giant content platform. Or alternatively, they could wake the
fuck up. This issue of how much extremism should be allowed exposure
in terms of space and time is as old as media, but the suggestion many
are now making is that YouTube, with its content algorithms and its
eagerness to meet Wall Street's revenue expectations, should not be
making the call.
Then there's the apparently bottomless abyss of "weird YouTube."
An unholy combination of the inconceivable vastness of YouTube's
content and the control of recommendations and search results by
attention-maximizing algorithms, weird YouTube is fueled by the profit
incentives of a capitalist economic system that reward the platform with
more viewer-hours, and content creators with splits of bigger ad dollars.
Giant numbers of small content shops now apparently create insane
numbers of baffling, computer-created, algorithm-pleasing content that is
damn weird and plainly made just to get through the system's
recommendations hoops and make people (including kids) watch a pre-
roll. On the website Medium, James Bridle published a brief essay about
the creepy and off world of kids' YouTube and the disturbing,
nonsensical computer-generated cartoons of which kids now watch large
amounts. His unpleasant review observes the "unconsciously-generated,
emergent outcomes" of the platform and how the result, I think
indisputably, is "industrialized nightmare production."79
Children and their media are such a potential point of vulnerability
for the platform that the press reports Google is considering major
changes to kids' content, including moving all children's content to the
separate YouTube Kids app. And far more dramatically, some YouTube
employees are reported to be arguing for disabling the recommendation
algorithm for kids' content altogether, a gigantic change from the point
of view of the platform's watch-time-maximizing business model.80
Such changes would have been inconceivable for the platform a few
years ago, but the company's hand may be forced by the abyss of weird
YouTube, as well as other emergent properties of the algorithm.
Most horrifyingly, at some point the recommendation algorithm
evidently realized that some users favored certain thematic features of

videos, like children in various states of undress in uploaded home
movies. Sure enough, the algorithm had managed to tease out the
viewing habits of pedophiles, and as designed it recommend further
(innocently uploaded) content with these themes. This was an
inadvertent, or "emergent," property of the system, which meant
"YouTube never set out to serve users with sexual interests in children—
but in the end ... its automated system managed to keep them watching,"
as the New York Times reported.81
By now, the incomprehensible scale of YouTube is such that Google
is visibly struggling to govern it, and dragging its feet on adopting a
"gatekeeper" role that sets rules on what's allowed on the platform. Due
to the insane number of daily uploads, comprehensive human screening
isn't possible, let alone economical— algorithms have been relied upon
to filter out videos according to signals in their titles or other data, but
these have very real limits. After a long series of fairly hilariously
mismatched ad-video pairings (high-end cosmetics on ISIS beheading
videos and such), the platform unilaterally raised the threshold for a
YouTube channel to host ads to ten thousand views, a high bar—industry
watchers estimate about 88 percent of all YouTube channels fall below
that mark—that represents just 5 percent of total views. Then, in 2018,
this threshold was raised further, now requiring channels to have at least
four thousand hours of watch time and one thousand subscribers.82
The same hyper-focus on Wall Street-pleasing growth, rather than on
policing the ocean of content on the platform, is something YouTube
shares with Amazon and Facebook—and Google itself. It has even
extended to the relatively stable Maps application, which has recently
become heavily populated with fake listings created by businesses to put
them in more local search results and bring in more business. This means
people searching for products or emergency services can be steered to
addresses where no actual business exists, due to phony listings by
unscrupulous operators— but Google still collects a fee on the click if
the company paid for its alleged locations to be promoted in an ad at the
top of a Maps search listing. And as with Amazon and Facebook, the
company is conspicuously reactive, not proactive—removing fraudulent
listings when the national press asks about them, but not changing the
profitable algorithms to prevent the problem in the future. And much like
Amazon, as a remedy the company often recommends that real
companies buy ads to keep their businesses on the first page of search
results to avoid being pushed down by a swarm of phony listings.

Analysts studying the platform estimate that Google Maps has about
eleven million fake business listings at any one time.83 The dark depths
of modern platforms are diagramed in maps with their own terra
incognita.
Cookie Monster
Big Tech has become notorious for its hoarding of its users' personal
data, collected with huge breadth and down to minute detail. Facebook in
particular is associated with this practice, especially after a series of
major scandals involving the use of personal data (discussed in chapter
6). But Google is inarguably the greediest of these companies in its data
collection, to an extent that can surprise even jaded users. After all, as
noted above, the collection of data is a key part of the network effect of
online search—more searches and click data mean more accurate
searches, attracting more users and searches, in the familiar positive
feedback cycle of network effects.
Google has vacuumed up user data from the start. As Pariser puts it:
"Brin and Page were determined to keep everything: every Web page the
search engine ever landed on, every click every user ever made. Soon its
servers contained a nearly real-time copy of most of the Web.... The
search-quality division at the company acquired a black-ops kind of feel:
few visitors and absolute secrecy were the rule."84
A major step in this area was the 2004 release of Google's email
service, Gmail. It caused a large stir itself when users learned that the
free, high-storage email service featured on-screen ads that were targeted
to the user through the scanning of the text of their emails. The scanning
was conducted automatically by software algorithms similar to those
used to filter out spam from inboxes, but the company was completely
unprepared for the backlash, not realizing that their huge scale and power
made such moves feel far creepier. However, the service had a crucial
ancillary benefit for the company—it required a login. With that, Google
could cross-reference people's email data with their search history on
Google and YouTube (which also required a login to post video), along
with precise location data from Maps—the beginning of its program to
synthesize all its data into comprehensive individual profiles.
But the real turning point was the acquisition of the giant display ad
agency DoubleClick, which brought pivotal changes to the company's
"cookies." Cookies are pieces of software planted on your computer or

phone by sites as you browse the web, recording where you've been for
the purpose of presenting ads you're likely to be interested in. Cookies
are now stupendously widespread—visiting a typical website like CNN
installs an average of 64 of them, while Dictionary.com puts 223 cookies
and other trackers on your computer, according to Pariser.85
Google's AdSense system had always used these cookies, but the
escalation was dramatic. As Wired's Steven Levy reported, through a
corporate acquisition the company gained "an omniscient cookie that no
other company could match." As a user browses, the cookie
develops into a rather lengthy log that provides a fully fleshed out profile of the user's
interests ... virtually all of it compiled by stealth. Though savvy and motivated consumers
could block or delete the cookies, very few knew about this possibility and even fewer took
advantage of it.
The information in the DoubleClick cookie was limited, however. It logged visits only to
sites that ran DoubleClick's display ads, typically large commercial websites. Many sites on
the Internet were smaller ones that didn't use big ad networks.... Millions of those smaller
sites, however, did use an advertising network: Google's AdSense. AdSense had its own
cookie, but it was not as snoopy as DoubleClick's. Only when the user actually clicked on
an ad would the AdSense cookie log the presence of the user on the site. This "cookie on
click" process was lauded by privacy experts....
Google now owned an ad network whose business hinged on a cookie that peered over
the shoulder of users as it viewed their ads and logged their travels on much of the web.
This was no longer a third-party cookie; DoubleClick was Google. Google became the only
company with the ability to pull together user data on both the fat head and the long tail of
the Internet. The question was, would Google aggregate that data to track the complete
activity of Internet users? The answer was yes....
After FTC regulators approved the DoubleClick purchase, Google quietly made the
change that created the most powerful cookie on the Internet. It did away with the AdSense
cookie entirely and instead arranged to drop the DoubleClick cookie when someone visited
a site with an AdSense ad.... Now Google would record users' presence when they visited
those sites. And it would combine that information with all the other data in the
DoubleClick cookie. That single cookie, unique to Google, could track a user to every
corner of the Internet.86
This means your online behavior is being tracked and logged, pretty
much anywhere you go. The New York Times reports that a recent
research paper found 74 percent of its sample of pornographic websites
had Google trackers attached to them, often installed by the publishers to
display DoubleClick ads or run analytics.87 Amazingly, Brin called
people's fears exaggerated and dismissed their claims about this mega-
cookie being "more of the Big Brother type."88 But even that might be
putting a positive gloss on today's data hoarding—Lawrence Lessig, who
has defended the company in areas like its book scanning, noted that in
Orwell's book Nineteen Eighty-Four, when Big Brother was introduced,
at least the characters "knew where the telescreen was.... In the Internet,

you have no idea who is being watched by whom. In a world where
everything is surveilled, how to protect privacy?"89 Siva Vaidhyanathan
calls our data crisis, in which Google and Facebook collect and trade our
data and sell it off to unknown numbers of third parties, the
"cryptopticon."90
In 2016, Google went even further by changing its terms of service
(TOS). The change seemed positive at face value, asking users to
activate new functions that would allow more control over their user
data, and let Google show them more relevant ads. But what the change
did was merge its tracking data with users' search history, and the
personal information in Gmail/YouTube/Google+ accounts, into "super-
profiles."91 And Google wasn't done—beside using the mega-cookie to
record users' browsing history, combined with their search logs and
Gmail contents, Google "Now Tracks Your Credit Card Purchases and
Connects Them to Its Online Profile of You," as a 2017 MIT Technology
Review headline revealed. By contracting with third-party data firms that
track 70 percent of all credit and debit card purchases, Google can now
offer advertisers further confirmation of which ads are working, not just
to the point of clicking but to the point of sale.92
With its new TOS, Google does let users view some of the data it
holds on them, but it takes "an esoteric process of clicks," as Ken Auletta
put it, and again most users are unaware of these issues in the first place
even though they opted in, so most fail to ever view their data files.93
Additionally, each Google service has its own privacy terms and settings,
and they change without warning, so we have to be constantly vigilant
for their changes and subtleties. And Google joins the tech community in
its use of "dark patterns," repetitive tactics that wear down users into
allowing data access.94 And finally, even opting out of customization
doesn't end the data collection, just the use of it to target ads to you—
your movements, browsing, searching, emailing, and credit card buying
are all still compiled. In 2017 Google announced it would soon stop the
unpopular scanning of Gmail text to place ads—the catch was that the
company had enough data on users from its super-profiles that it could
now personalize them without the scanning.95
And for all its hoarding, the pile isn't even secure. Because of a
glitch in their software, Google unknowingly allowed third-party
developers designing applications for Google+ (their unsuccessful
attempt at a social media platform to rival Facebook) to access private

portions of user profiles. This included full names, email, gender,
pictures, locations, occupation, and marital status— over a three-year
period.96 An internal memo indicates that as with Facebook's own
developer data leaks, there's no way to know if the data was misused in
any way. But, most important, Google learned of the issue in spring 2018
but refused to announce or disclose it, fearing "reputational damage" to
itself. The episode only came to light after internal company
communications were shared with the Wall Street Journal.
Whatever this company is, it rhymes with "shmevil."
Drone Striking
Google's labor force is well known for its lush perks, like free, healthy
on-campus food options on top of median pay nearing $200,000 a year.97
But some, like Corey Pein, have identified the incriminating economics
behind this generous-looking policy. In his book Live Work Work Work
Die, he quotes a corporate recruiter who explains, "They might get a
twenty-dollar steak, but with the extra time they've stayed at work,
they've provided an extra two hundred dollars in value to their
employer." Pein himself suggests that "the seeming lavish enticements
were a way to attract profit-producing programmers, who were in
exceedingly high demand, without offering higher salaries"—a pretty
plausible-sounding idea.98
The Google workplace has other distinct perks. The company's in-
house "chief cultural officer" seeks a "flat" corporate culture, and the
workers are "smashed together" into teams and shared offices to advance
a team feel.99 Employees enjoy benefits like various high-quality cafes,
on-staff masseuses, and a hirable errand-running service. Google's tech
staff is said to recognize their work lives are "charmed."100 Especially
celebrated is the company's famous freely structured "20 percent rule,"
in which a Google engineer is free to work on any project they choose
for the equivalent of a fifth of their worktime.
But the hiring process is notoriously long and detailed, requesting
information back to individual undergraduate course grades, ranking
applicants by the college they attended, and taking eight or more
interviews over six to twelve months. This "whiff of elitism" tends to
produce a workforce dominated by "brainy strivers from privileged
backgrounds," as Steven Levy puts it.101 Further, the celebrated 20

percent rule is misleading as well. It applies only to the computer
science-trained staff, while the rest receive the benefit only at
management's discretion. And "in practice, the self-directed labors often
came in addition to a full week's work. Thus the company wide joke that
such endeavors were actually '120 percent projects.'"102 Indeed Eric
Schmidt, in the book he wrote with Jonathan Rosenberg, himself says
"20 percent time is more like 120 percent time, since it often occurs on
nights and weekends," adding "we don't pay people for successful 20
percent projects.... We don't need to ... the reward comes from the work
itself."103
We should also remember that Google was found in court to have
been one of the key players in the software engineer wage-fixing
conspiracy organized by Apple's Steve Jobs. Schmidt's emails on
illegally screwing the company's workforce are worth citing again. They
began with "DO NOT FORWARD," and he added that he preferred to
discuss the collusion "verbally since I don't want to create a paper trail
over which we can be sued later?"104
And despite the claims of a "flat culture," there are well-recognized
hierarchies among the company's eighty thousand workers. One is the
privileging of company engineers, who write the actual code and
configure the application interfaces that make the platform technology
work. Levy observes they are "royalty" at Google, while those "without
computer science degrees ... weren't exactly second-class citizens, but
definitely a lower class of citizens."105
However, the simple hierarchy of capitalist management is always
present, even at cutting-edge tech giants that like to pretend they
eliminate bureaucracy, as we saw with Amazon. And Google's "flat"
workplace is actually a hilariously perfect example, as its HR arm
developed an employee ranking system with no less than nine levels—
eleven counting executives. Levy notes, "Some of the distinctions were
vague. Often, Google didn't even share with employees what level they
occupied on the ladder," which of course fits so so well with the
company's alleged values of transparency and flatness.106 Notably, at
one point the founders noticed a new level of middle management
appearing in the company's divisions as they grew, and they decided the
company's engineers would no longer have managers. Instead the
engineers would self-organize to fix problems and apportion resources,
but the founders soon found the engineers preferred having managers

carry the responsibility of coordinating and guiding the work of so many
development projects. Brin and Page eventually relented and accepted
the growth of a corporate bureaucracy to manage their great engineering
forces, and what followed was, in Levy's words, "a corporate amnesia"
about "Brin and Page's 2001 kill-the-managers caper."107
At the top of the system, the billionaire founders, who cleverly built
useful software that exploited network economics at a time of rapid,
publicly funded technological change, now lead lifestyles typical of the
ruling class. Schmidt owns a yacht and a suite of private planes; Page, a
$60 million yacht; executive Marissa Mayer, multiple homes including a
penthouse suite at the San Francisco Four Seasons. The two cofounders
own a pair of huge private planes, and they even obtained special
permission to conveniently park them at the nearby NASA facility.108
Spending less time in the office, the two and their families are often off
to Africa or Alaska, or playing with elite toys like personal helicopters,
Teslas, and sailboats. But, as Levy reports, "the key was keeping it on
the down low. When someone failed to maintain that discipline,
colleagues would note it," suggesting a culture of controlling phonies
wanting to keep a poker face about their obscene wealth.109
This hierarchy extends to the company's great currency— data. In a
memorable episode, a journalist for news site CNET, covering Google's
vast data collection, gathered information on then CEO Eric Schmidt as a
test case. His address, net worth, images of his home, political
contributions, and other information were compiled, and despite his
stumping for public acceptance of the company's data vacuuming, he
had what journalists described as a "hissy fit." For publishing Schmidt's
"personal information," CNET as a whole was cut off from getting
answers from Google for a year.110 And it wasn't even Schmidt's first
time complaining about his data being accessible on the platform along
with all of ours.111 But of course Schmidt's data is no more public than
yours or mine—CNET simply used Google's own services to essentially
dox him. But unlike us, Schmidt had the power to create consequences
for it.
Company cofounder and storied genius Larry Page himself also
emerges as a bullying capitalist tyrant to stand alongside Gates, Jobs, and
Bezos. After hearing carefully prepared presentations by exhausted
engineers, Page has said, "You're wasting our time" before ordering their
project killed. Other demos have been greeted by "I'd rather be doused

with gasoline and set on fire than use your product," and, when an
employee at a meeting suggested the company was going overboard
against leaks in the run-up to the release of Android, Page shot back, "I
think that's a decision for the team to make, not you."112
Google's executive team certainly made the decisions in the deep
recession year of 2009, when even a quickly growing company found it
economical to issue pink slips. Several hundred jobs in ads and a
recruiting shop in Phoenix were axed, along with a whopping ten
thousand contract workers—always the expendable front lines in layoffs.
However, at the company's weekly venting session with management,
called TGIF, the workforce complained, with one worker saying, "If we
don't take care of them, shame on us as a company!" Ken Auletta reports
that "Brin and Page said nothing, but associates said they were
increasingly distressed by Google employees' sense of entitlement. This
was a company, not a socialist paradise, and the Phoenix question—like
the grumbling when Google pared cafeteria hours and no longer allowed
employees to cart home dinners for the entire family—troubled them."113
But Brin and Page needn't be too troubled, thanks to a company
stock structure granting them near-total control over major decisions.
The company's somewhat-unusual two-tier stock structure gives the
founders the ability to override conventional shareholders on decisions
regarding most corporate affairs, including the appointment board
members. So the firings went forward and front desk staff on the Google
campus "suddenly disappeared, as swiftly and unceremoniously as
Google deletes spam from its search rankings."114
But other issues among Google's staff soon arose, especially
concerning the composition of the workforce. The tech industry is
notorious for being dominated by men, especially white and Asian men.
This is especially so at Google, where the Department of Labor sued the
company after it refused to disclose pay data to confirm its compliance
with equal opportunity laws, a requirement for government contractors
like Google. Conducting its own analysis in 2017, the DOL found pay
discrimination against women "pretty much across the entire workforce"
and that "discrimination against women in Google is quite extreme, even
in this industry."115
Google says that compensation is based on many factors including
employees' HR rank, job, and performance rating, and that pay is settled
by managers who don't have access to information about the employee's

gender. Its own internal analysis found literally no pay gap across world
operations.116 However, like other tech behemoths it declines to release
this compensation analysis, let alone the required raw data, and has
aggressively acted to keep it secret. In 2015 a female Google engineer
had posted a crowd-sourced spreadsheet on which employees could
voluntarily share their salaries, with about 5 percent of workers
participating, that showed visible disparities in pay.117 She said managers
retaliated against her in response and she soon left the company.
But the issue blew up when Google fired James Damore, another
software engineer, who wrote a controversial memorandum that was
posted to the company's internal communications systems. In it he
claimed that inherent gender differences account for pay disparities,
citing men's alleged ability to handle stress better than women, which
thus accounted for women constituting only 31 percent of Google's staff
and only one in five of its engineering and technical workers.118 Google
fired Damore, while saying the action was not taken because he had
expressed unpopular views, but for doing so in a disrespectful fashion.
This made Damore a hero in right-wing circles and outlets like Breitbart,
but as a labor lawyer at UCLA told the New York Times, "There's no free
speech in the private sector workplace." The company now faces dueling
lawsuits, one from woman workers demanding equal pay and
transparency regarding compensation, and one from Damore claiming he
was unjustly fired. Of course, since it's not illegal to be fired on the basis
of one's political views, the libertarian Damore (ironically) sued under
California's more liberal labor law, which "prohibits employers from
'forbidding or preventing employees from engaging or participating in
politics.'"119
But the politicization of Google's workforce has had the effect that
literally every one of Google's recent efforts to not "be evil" have come
from the increasingly organized workforce, not from company
management. Consider China. The company's (partial) withdrawal from
China has regularly been portrayed as an agonizing corporate decision to
sacrifice access to a lucrative market rather than engage in state-
demanded censorship. In the Chinese search market, beginning in 2006
Google arguably bested the state at censorship for a time, using its
superior search technology; but in its defense, Google included an on-
screen note letting users know if results had been censored. Since leaving
the People's Republic of China in 2010, the company has been lustfully
eyeing the country's enormous market and the huge growth of its

domestic search engine, Baidu. But returning would surely mean a
renewed commitment to a practice of slick censorship (and maybe no
longer including in search results the company's previous notice that
some results are being blocked), and thus hundreds of Google employees
signed a 2018 petition demanding the company come clean about its
planning for the company's new Chinese engine. Code-named
"Dragonfly," the engine's secret development has incensed Google's
outspoken workforce and led them to demand employee participation in
ethical reviews as well as outside monitors. But to the commercial press,
including the New York Times, the fact that Google is considering
resuming its censorship role in China is "a sign of a more mature and
pragmatic company"—and one less concerned about doing evil.120
And the activism of Google's workforce isn't limited to participation
in censorship overseas. Another petition with several thousand engineer
signatures went to management after the revelation that the company was
secretly working for Project Maven, a Pentagon program to develop
artificial intelligence for military drones. While allegedly only for
surveillance, it would also aid in the targeting capabilities of war
machines responsible for the deaths of thousands of suspects without
trial, along with numerous bystanders. The letter insisted, "Google
should not be in the business of war" and should abandon its
subcontractor status in the program.121
Google's management had gone to great lengths to conceal the nature
of the program from its workforce, with one internal email from a head
AI researcher advising that company PR and public statements "avoid at
ALL COSTS any mention or implication of AI.... Weaponized AI is
probably one of the most sensitized topics of AI—if not THE most. This
is red meat to the media to find all ways to damage Google." The
eminent author of the email noted she was speaking publicly about
"Humanistic A.I." at the time in order to burnish the idea. But it was the
company's workers who reacted volcanically, and Google ended up
forced to host a debate on the issue, with so much interest among
employees that the subject was debated not once but three successive
times in one day so that workers around the world could watch. Brin,
considered the most principled of Google's ranking figures, justified the
company's involvement in the program by saying "it was better for peace
if the world's militaries were intertwined with international organizations
like Google rather than working solely with nationalistic defense

contractors," according to the New York Times.122 This is a pretty pitiful
defense.
Soon opposition spread outside the company, with workers at other
tech firms and professional tech societies signing petitions and making
statements opposing the program, among them Page's own Stanford PhD
adviser. According to a Google worker interviewed in the socialist
magazine Jacobin, the company pushed the line "Ethics is complicated.
Ethics is hard," but it was clearly eager to take the Pentagon's business.
When a worker asked Brin what kind of voice workers had in making
decisions like taking weapons work, he responded: "Letting you ask that
question is the voice that you have. Very few companies would allow
you to do that."123 The worker notes: "Libertarianism is the ethos of the
leaders of these big tech companies, not the rank and file.... We stood up
because we believe workers should have a voice." The worker adds,
"Organizing around Project Maven helped people realize that no matter
how good their job is ... they're still workers, not owners."
But the most impressive manifestation of Google's worker activism
is definitely November 2018's full walkout of over twelve thousand
employees, in protest of the revelation that Google had granted an
enormous $90 million exit deal to Android unit leader Andy Rubin after
finding he had been credibly charged with sexual harassment. Writer
Angela Nagle, a maverick voice of the Irish left, had previously noted
this tendency in the industry: "Tech companies may love the feel-good
factor of intersectional feminism and diversity speak, but there are a few
things they love more, such as tax avoidance and monopoly
capitalism."124
Incensed by Rubin's golden parachute and informed by the struggles
against Dragonfly and drone AI, as well as the #MeToo movement
against sex harassment, the organizers united under the name Google
Walkout for Real Change, observing that "these forms of marginalization
function together to police access to power and resources.... Sexual
harassment is the symptom, not the cause. If we want to end sexual
harassment in the workplace, we must fix these structural imbalances of
power."125 The demands specifically included the same rights for
contract workers, saying "the power structure ... inherently diminishes"
those temps and contractors, and is "rooted in the same foundation of
inequality."126 The walkout was as worldwide as Google's operations,
with employees leaving work in California, London, and Singapore.

Google ultimately agreed to end its practice of forced private
arbitration of sexual harassment and assault charges, which tend to
require NDAs and often favor the employer and their great legal
resources. In light of today's scrutiny of institutional sexism, unequal
pay, and workplace discrimination, it should perhaps go without saying
that the company shouldn't have changed its policy only when met with
strikes and extensive public shaming. And notably, the company didn't
address other demands by the workforce, like making its internal report
on sexual harassment public, or its most pivotal demand—a board seat
for an employee representative. Common in other developed countries,
this limited measure of shared oversight was dismissed by CEO Sundar
Pichai, who called it a decision for the company's board to make. Time
and class struggle will tell.
A few months after these embarrassing walk-backs, Google quietly
removed its "Don't be evil" motto from its corporate code of conduct.
Schmidt had once called it a "cultural lodestar that shines over all
management layers, product plans, and office politics."127 But in 2015
Google's holding company, Alphabet, changed it to the wimpier "Do the
right thing," and the dispensing of this cutesy shallow corporate bullshit
was complete.128 Now capitalist market incentives will openly determine
who will be surfaced, and who submerged.

CHAPTER 6
Disgracebook
The trivial network that moves the world
Many of us roll our eyes at the mention of Facebook, probably in
response to the trivial nature of our friends' pointless posts, weird phony
links, hyper-partisan bickering, and wonderful cat videos. But Facebook
is the fifth-largest company in the world, after the other four tech giants
dissected in this book, and it's a hugely important platform for many
people. About 45 percent of Americans get news through it, and in large
swaths of the developing world it's synonymous with the Internet itself.
In June 2017 the US Supreme Court ruled that the government can't
entirely ban even sex offenders from using social media like Facebook,
since so much of society's politics and business is conducted there.1
Indeed, Facebook's colossal 2.1 billion user base is such a perfect
example of network effects that it's literally a textbook case, picked by
economics professors to illustrate the increased value of network
services as more people use them.2 Like the other tech giants we've
reviewed, Facebook has its own disgraceful history of network
monopoly and aggressive market power-mongering, and it has shown an
enduring, cartoonishly casual treatment of two billion people's data.
Some of its botches are finally weighing on the company, but as we'll
see, the smart money is on Facebook's locked-in users staying put.
Creeps and Bounds
Facebook's origins are shrouded in controversy, with competing claims
of who came up with the idea that became the platform. Various students
at Harvard circa 2004 were interested in trying to develop an online
social network, and the dispute over its creation would be made into a
book and eventually a David Fincher movie. Despite its murky genesis,
most everyone knows that credit ultimately gets attributed to Mark
Zuckerberg, with his typical Harvard pedigree—the son of a dentist and

psychologist who grew up with a nanny and attended the elite Exeter
Academy.3
Zuckerberg had previously come to attention on campus with his
creation of Facemash, which used ranking algorithms to display pairs of
photos of students and allow site visitors to cast a vote for the hottest.
Conceived as a campus-focused version of the then-popular
HotOrNot.com, we know from an online journal post made at the time
that Zuckerberg created Facemash while drinking beer after being
dumped by a "bitch." Many of the pictures were obtained by hacking
into the various campus residence houses and downloading their
"facebooks," collections of photos of freshmen students. Zuckerberg's
site asked: "Were we let in for our looks? No. Will we be judged by
them? Yes." Luckily no one pursued an idea expressed in the journal to
include farm animals for consideration alongside the freshmen.
So it could be said that Facebook's early success was driven by
men's desire to be creeps. Zuckerberg was brought before the university
administrative board for the hacking and privacy violations, but in line
with the disciplinary actions often taken against privileged Ivy League
students, the board let him off with a warning. However, the campus
coverage of this affair brought Zuckerberg to the attention of a group of
students 
attempting 
to 
establish 
an 
online 
social 
network,
HarvardConnection. They eventually approached him to code it for
them, which led to a major court case over whether Zuckerberg stole the
idea from those students.
The short version of this gossipy origin story is that Zuckerberg had
been hired informally, and after doing some work stopped
communicating.4 At any rate, Zuckerberg eventually settled with the
other students in 2008, for amounts that speak to the money at stake—
$30 million in cash and stock.5 Other settlements would follow,
including with another early cofounder who later sued over having his
shares diluted.
But 
the 
endless 
contention 
misses 
important 
context.
Communications scholar Tim Wu observes that the social network idea
was very much in the air at the time, with Harvard's own residential
computing head stating in mid-2004 that an "electronic facebook" for the
campus was "a very high priority for the College.... We have every
intention of completing the facebook by the end of the spring semester."6
So between various Harvard students, Zuckerberg, and the university

itself, it's clear that many people were thinking about the possibilities,
and there wasn't a single flash of inspiration or solitary stroke of genius.
But Zuckerberg worked hard and quickly, and designed the site in an
appealing minimalist style. The site became immediately popular after
the publication of a profile in the campus paper, and it went on to benefit
from the network effect in the most classic fashion: everyone wanted to
join a network that their friends were on, and, as more and more users
joined, the value of the network and its attractiveness to others grew and
grew. Even though Zuckerberg's initial service had almost no
functionality save the ability to create a profile and view others, its
popularity skyrocketed, and soon the large majority of Harvard
undergrads had joined—ten thousand users in about a month.7
Importantly, Thefacebook (as the service was originally known) in
the early days was limited to Harvard, required the email address of a
Harvard student or faculty member to create an account, and would only
grow by gradually adding campuses with similar requirements. This
worked to the platform's advantage in a number of ways—first,
campuses are natural social units with extensive social networks, so it
was a fortuitous starting point. Being limited to the campus also made it
feel like a private network, easing students into the early step of sharing
information on their online profile pages, similar to the paper ones the
campus already maintained. As it expanded, its association with the
flagship Ivy League school gave it useful prestige.
As the service became dramatically popular and expanded to other
Ivy League campuses, Zuckerberg and his dorm-room partners struggled
to keep up. Servers and network equipment were needed to host the site
and handle the traffic, meaning thousands of dollars were needed to pay
for it, and in the early period Zuckerberg resisted ads, thinking they
would clutter the platform. A few were allowed, including Mastercard
ads selling credit cards to college students, which was unsurprisingly
successful. And raising near-term cash wasn't a huge obstacle, due to the
economic background of the founders. Zuckerberg put in a couple
thousand from programming jobs he'd held, his partners from wealthy
backgrounds were able to invest tens of thousands, and of course
Zuckerberg's parents kicked in, coming to a family investment of
$85,000. The class basis of the service is worth remembering along with
its creepy origins.

Zuckerberg used his elite connections with Exeter chums and others
to get the site promoted at Stanford and Dartmouth, and each time the
service was extended to another elite campus, membership would shoot
up after just a few hours' coding.8 As pure a case of network effects as
can be found, Thefacebook definitely can't be credibly claimed to have
succeeded over other online social networks because of its quality—to
give just one example, in 2005 the customer support department for the
entire platform was a single student at Berkeley, working part-time. At
one point there was a backlog of 75,000 support requests from users,
which grew to 150,000 before falling as the platform blew up and could
afford more support.9 Obviously, responsive service wasn't the driver of
the site.
This was the same problem experienced by Friendster, the social
networking site that was most similar to Thefacebook in its early days. It
had a long head start over Zuckerberg, and often that is enough to
become the enduring winner in network-based industries. However,
Friendster couldn't keep up with its own network-driven growth, always
behind in the race to catch up on server capacity, and in the end it
collapsed under its own weight as pages took twenty seconds to load.10
The great cost of "scaling," as it's known in Silicon Valley, is a real
barrier to entry that Friendster failed to pass, but Thefacebook, with its
frantic network investments, was able to clear it. Further, because of the
controlled process of rolling out one new school's access at a time, it
could grow rapidly yet in a somewhat-measured fashion, usually
activating registration once the waiting list approached 20 percent of the
student body.
The young Zuckerberg "used that word dominate all the time," an
early visitor to their operation commented. Still it was the early days, and
early exec Sean Parker found "Mark was actually very rational about the
low probability of building a true empire."11 However, they did know
how building an empire could happen: Zuckerberg and his friends were
very aware of "what economists call 'network effects,'" as a corporate
biographer describes it, where "growth tends to lead to more growth, in a
virtuous cycle."12 Virtuous for a monopoly, anyway! So, as with Bill
Gates and Jeff Bezos, but not Steve Jobs, their eyes were open to the
economics working in their favor.
From 2004 some real money was coming in, primarily from Apple,
which paid Facebook for a sponsored page, handing out a buck per group

member per month, coming to over $50,000 monthly.13 And by this time,
Silicon Valley venture capitalists were taking notice, despite the
company barely covering its rocketing server expenses. But huge growth
is a magnet all its own for capitalists, and in early 2005 the service's
users were growing by 3 percent daily.
Capitalist interest grew as the site added functionality like a "Wall"
for the user or their friends to write on, which increased member
engagement with the site. Users at Stanford reported, "I can't get off of
it." "I don't study. I'm addicted." "Everyone's on it."14 Music to the ears
of advertisers! In the end, Accel Partners landed the investment, and it
gave million-dollar bonuses to the founders. Following this investment,
the recently renamed Facebook moved to a modern glass building and
added the Photos app—a new functionality that demonstrated how
pictures tagged with users could spread through the network and
encourage the "Facebook trance" that the execs were already learning to
feed. But it also led to Zuckerberg's conception of a "social graph" that
represented the network of social ties and relationships among the
members, which Facebook would exploit effectively once it developed
its advertising-based business model.
At this point Myspace remained as the main challenger to Facebook,
with four times its membership. It had survived the challenge of scaling
well, but in summer 2005 it was bought by Rupert Murdoch's News
Corp, which immediately blanketed it in ads. Along with Myspace's
generally eclectic layouts, the site began to lose appeal—and load more
slowly. These developments, along with Facebook's stunning growth, led
the network effect to run in reverse for Myspace as users backed away
from the service after seeing their friends do so.
Importantly, Facebook didn't reach its borderline-monopoly status
just through network effects and Harvard name-dropping. Crucially,
Zuckerberg and his friends had been reading up on business-school
giants including Peter Drucker, the originator of the term "knowledge
worker" and a symbol of refining corporate hierarchies, and they began
using real predatory monopolist tactics. Consider the "surround
strategy," used to take over the market at schools like Baylor University
in Waco, Texas. The campus had its own local online social network,
since there were numerous local startups in the firm's first years in the
mid-2000s. Rather than open Facebook at that school and compete
directly, the team prepared a list of colleges within a hundred miles of it
and opened the service in those schools instead. As students piled into

Facebook on those campuses, students at Baylor (and other schools
where similar strategies were used) saw all their friends on a rival
network, and the economics of it did the rest.15 Soon the local network
would be extinct, and Facebook would roll on to conquer new lands.
Indeed, Marc Andreessen, added to the board by Zuckerberg,
suggested in 2009 that "it's too late for somebody to compete with
Facebook on Facebook's turf."16 He would know—he cofounded
Mosaic, later Netscape, the first web browser widely used in the United
States and which was famously crushed by Microsoft for resisting its
monopoly in the browser wars.
Having activated open enrollment for everyone in 2006, Facebook
finally surpassed Myspace in membership in 2008 as it went global. So,
when reorganizing users' profile pages that year to encourage more
sharing and network activity (for example, changing the "[User] is ..."
prompt for posts to "What's on your mind?"), the company internally
referred to the change as "FB 95," referring to Microsoft's Windows 95,
the product considered to have consummated Microsoft's drive to
become a global monopoly.17
During this heady growth era, after Zuckerberg's friend and well-
connected company executive Parker was arrested for suspected
possession of cocaine, Zuckerberg gained total control over the board
and the company's decisions, a position he maintained after the
company's later initial public offering. As Parker put it, "That solidified
Mark's position as the sort of hereditary king of Facebook."18 And even
today the company's official 10-K filings for investors note that the CEO
holds an unusual amount of power even by corporate standards,
observing, "[O]ur CEO has control over key decision making as a result
of his control of a majority of the voting power of our outstanding capital
stock." And "in the event of death, the shares ... will be transferred to
the persons or entities he has designated."19 Parker wasn't exaggerating.
Former Zuckerberg adviser Roger McNamee says, "Decision making
at Facebook is even more centralized than at Microsoft." He adds, "If
you wanted to draw a Facebook organization chart to scale, it would look
like a loaf of bread with a giant antenna pointing straight up. Zuck and
Sheryl [Sandberg] are at the top of the antenna.... Everyone else is down
in the loaf of bread. It is the most centralized decision-making structure I
have ever encountered in a large company."20 David Kirkpatrick's
perspective on this model of control is that "Zuckerberg will almost

certainly continue to rule over Facebook with absolute authority. He
wants to rule not only Facebook, but in some sense the evolving
communications infrastructure of the planet."21
As with the other CEOs profiled in this book, the power of bosses
makes their personas important for the day-to-day realities of the
workforce. Some friends of Zuckerberg's left the company, explaining
that they "got fed up.... Working with Mark is very challenging," mainly
due to his ambiguity.22 Zuckerberg himself is a cipher to many who meet
him, giving few reactions to conversations and listening blankly. During
the company's all-out growth period in 2006, he was known for
frequently fainting in the office, sometimes mid-meeting, until his sleep
schedule and diet were brought under control. Andreessen compares him
to Bezos (the temper-tantrum-throwing tyrant), Jobs (the abusive, blame-
shifting incompetent), and Gates himself, who of course used his
monopoly power to crush Andreessen's own firm in the 1990s.23 It's
unclear why Andreessen thinks this comparison is favorable.
The high point of Zuckerberg's enormous power and the childish,
creepy misogyny that started his journey is his celebrated business card.
Multiple sources describe his carrying (at least for some time) a pair of
them—one reading "Mark Zuckerberg, CEO," and the other reading
"I'm CEO—Bitch."24
The Feed
As Facebook rocketed upward, the service's functionality remained
limited to viewing one another's profiles and vainly manicuring your
own. But the pictures function demonstrated people's appetite not just
for sharing but for being able to conveniently view all their friends'
updates, which ultimately resulted in the News Feed. This is the now-
familiar central landing place on the service where you view all posts or
actions of friends, with the platform using algorithms to decide which
items to display and what order to put them in.
The service was rolled out in fall 2006, along with the advent of the
hugely successful open registration. But the Feed led to the biggest crisis
Facebook had then faced, and like the far-bigger crises it would later
confront, this one originated in user privacy. Previously, users felt they
were sharing personal information only with their friends, and that their
information was viewable only on their own wall. With the rollout of the

Feed, it suddenly felt like everyone could see all of a given user's data—
even though, as the company made clear in its response, nothing had
changed, with the Feed only viewable by the same group of friends.
What changed was the way the Feed brought to users' attention just how
much they had exposed on the site.
Critical emails flooded the company, and huge new groups formed
on the Facebook platform opposing the new feature. As they proliferated
into the hundreds, some with hundreds of thousands of members, the
company soon realized over 10 percent of the service's users were in
organized opposition to its decisions.25 Facebook hired security guards
to escort staff members into the company building, and it responded in
true capitalist fashion: condescension. "Calm down. Breathe. We hear
you," read the blog headline Zuckerberg composed in response.
But patronizing bloggery couldn't hide the fact that the company
would have to respond meaningfully to such a major revolt of the users,
who after all generated nearly all of the site's content. The internal
debates foreshadowed issues surrounding Facebook's rise as an
information hub—as Kirkpatrick recounts, "There were earnest debates
in Facebook's conference rooms about whether they should simply block
messages about the protest groups from showing up in people's News
Feeds."26 Zuckerberg vetoed this on grounds of "journalistic integrity." It
was the first time the company would grapple with its growing power
over the information people have access to, and it revealed the gun that
remained in the site's hands.
In order to "quell the uprising," the company rolled out the first of
many new privacy features that gave users some semblance of control
over certain uses of their information. You could now opt out of having
some actions reported to the News Feed, like photo comments or
relationship status changes. Though these were small concessions, they
were the first recognition of a threat Facebook continues to deal with:
user content strikes. Since effectively all the platform's content is user-
generated, the fact that sites like Students against Facebook News Feed
grew to three-quarters of a million members in days showed that the
service's convenient tools for organizing fans of the Apple Computer
could also be used to organize opposition to corporate power.
And as Facebook's numbers rose into hundreds of millions and then
billions of users, the content of the Feed became increasingly important.
For among the flow of selfies, pictures of food, and wedding

announcements, people were also sharing news. Naturally, news would
be among those things users of a social network would be interested in
sharing, but the site's exploding network growth meant that the news on
the Feed, posted by friends or others, became a major source of popular
information about world affairs. And problematically, this news was
doubly curated, first by the interests of your online friends, and then by
the algorithms of the company itself.
This has enabled the rise of the tech-mediated "filter bubble," where
readers or viewers of news on tech platforms are exposed to items posted
by their friends, or chosen by a service's algorithm based on what
they've clicked on in the past. This tendency is very real—site
algorithms are driven by "relevance," which is mainly established by
what you've previously expressed an interest in. And, of course, our
friends are more likely to have similar beliefs and views to us than the
average person—surely an enduring fact through history. But now,
because of these factors, many of us can accidentally end up exposed to
nothing but views and news writing we agree with already, since
everything else is filtered out.
Eli Pariser, who wrote the book on this subject, observes that this
platform-enabled bubble is more serious than in previous eras, when
people's views were largely limited to their real-world friends and their
choice of newspaper or TV news. For one thing, the modern filter
bubbles aren't visible to you—when you flick through cable news until
you find an option relatively close to your views, or walk past library
sections containing other ideologies, there is at least an indication that
alternatives exist. But on tech platforms, like Facebook and Google, you
may very well have no idea your search results are being personalized
according to dozens of data points, or that your News Feed is tailored to
what you've engaged with in the past.27 This is particularly hazardous
considering the availability of Facebook Everywhere, and its successor,
the Pixel software, which have enabled sites across the web to port in the
"Like" feature and other social media plugins. This allows a lot of off-
Facebook activity to be logged back to your user account, and it
potentially extends the company's echo chamber to the rest of the
Internet.28
As the public increasingly uses these platforms to learn about the
world, the tendency of bubbles to encourage partisan or hysterical
information has heightened the spread of "fake news," which before the
Trump administration's use of the phrase meant plainly false information

that tended to spread quickly. A filtered Internet experience is dry tinder
to this fire, as opposing sources that might debunk lies may be kept off-
screen. The main approach to resisting fake news has been to affiliate
with various "fact-checking" bodies, like the respected myth-debunking
site Snopes, and to use their determinations to label posts.29 For
example, utterly false articles, such as those reporting Pope Francis's
endorsement of the Trump campaign, get a "disputed" label. And more
tellingly, the company has also begun to "surface" more coverage from
various mainstream publishers, which means giving it a higher
placement in users' Feeds.
But as the media watchdog group FAIR pointed out, if we were
living under this system, in the nineteenth century, Ida B. Wells's anti-
lynching news reports would surely never have appeared. That is to say
that mainstream approval is mainly extended to news sources that don't
disturb the commercial status quo, and that maintain a favorable climate
for the influx of advertising dollars—a point explored in depth by a long
list of leftists from George Orwell to Noam Chomsky.30 The company
has continued to experiment with its news settings, mostly in poor
countries like Bolivia, Cambodia, and Slovakia, where small markets
lower the risk in the company's eyes.31
Facebook later reported that articles tagged as "disputed" by fact-
checking entities were clicked 80 percent less, raising the enormous
power Facebook and its appointed fact-checkers have over the biggest
information platform in the world.32 This fact is now widely recognized
—most vocally by the political right, which lit the reactionary corners of
the Internet on fire with claims of conspiracy and anti-conservative bias
after recent revelations by Gizmodo that some editors of Facebook's
Trending Topics section curated it to limit conservative sources.33 The
company later fired the contract workers who altered pieces for political
reasons, moving to a software-based approach, which "quickly led to the
appearance of false stories in the box," according to the conservative
Wall Street Journal.34 This was the beginning of the right's antagonism
to Big Tech, whose rise it happily supported for decades in the name of
free markets.
Meanwhile, there arose a wave of research reports and statements
from former company insiders suggesting that engaging with the
platform was actively making people sadder. The Royal Society for
Public Health in the United Kingdom studied young people's use of

various social media platforms including Facebook and Instagram,
finding they tended to encourage users to compare their lives with
others'.35 And Facebook's former VP for user growth, Chamath
Palihapitiya, said he feels "tremendous guilt" over his role in the
company because the curated versions of ourselves we upload tend to
have negative effects on users, especially those passively viewing others'
sunnier-than-reality versions of their lives on the platform. Palihapitiya
said the result is "ripping apart the social fabric," and that his kids
"aren't allowed to use that shit."36
In response to this fairly horrifying news, the company decided to
focus the platform more on "meaningful interaction," pivoting its
algorithm to show less posted content from businesses (including media)
and more from friends. This meant plunges in traffic for commercial
websites and dire financial straits for many media outlets. Over the
course of 2017, news publishers' average referrals from Facebook fell
from 40 percent to 24 percent, a crushing drop.37 Whether the change
toward more shallow content from friends and less shallow content from
business is positive or not, the point is that Zuckerberg and the board will
decide how much news we see on their platform. As Wall Street Journal
reporters put it, despite Facebook's resistance to playing "an even more
active role in deciding what content is acceptable on its site," it remains
"the most powerful distributor of media content on the web."38
One prominent left media editor, Nathan Robinson of the socialist
magazine Current Affairs, wrote frankly that since newsstand sales now
barely exist, and "almost all of our online traffic comes from Facebook
and Twitter ... the sharing of our articles on social media is the engine of
our growth." So one simple change in Facebook's algorithms or a cheeky
tweet that Twitter decides violates its terms of service, and they can shut
off links to the site. "Instantly, we would lose a significant portion of our
audience, with no way to get it back."39 For this reason Robinson titled
his essay "Why I Love Mark Zuckerberg and Can Never Say a Word
against Him."
Ad to Worse
From the earliest days developing the service, Zuckerberg was resistant
to advertising. While his opposition was more aesthetic and not as
intellectually elaborated as Google's founders', in its earliest years

Facebook had very limited advertising. In discussions with early investor
Peter Thiel, Zuckerberg agreed to put growing the user base above short-
term monetization—much like tech leaders did during Amazon and
Google's salad days.40 But as the platform's network-fueled growth went
vertical, servers worth millions of dollars had to be paid for and kept
running. And as with Google, a project that began largely for its own
merits, with profit as a relative afterthought, now faced a requirement set
by the economic structure of capitalism—to become a commercial
business so it could acquire the financial resources needed to grow. But
even in its early days, the company promoted its "addicted" users to
buyers of its limited early ads.41
In 2006 Google had a deal with Myspace to place ads on its site, and
Facebook struck a little-remembered deal with Microsoft to do the same.
This brought in significant cash to finance Facebook's galloping growth,
especially since Microsoft, in its eagerness to compete with its archrival
Google, agreed to money-losing rates, swinging Facebook from losses to
a respectable profit.42 In time Google began courting Facebook for its
ad-placing business, and Zuckerberg soon moderated his views of ads,
remarking, "I don't hate all advertising. I just hate advertising that
stinks."43
But during the negotiations, Facebook's contact-importer function,
which allowed new users to find their friends on Facebook by uploading
their email address books, stopped working with Microsoft's popular
Hotmail service, which steered emails Facebook was sending to spam
folders. The contact importer was an important source of Facebook's
frantic expansion, and the glitch caused the company's growth to slow up
dramatically. Once the ad deal was struck, the importer started working
fine with Hotmail again— meaning Microsoft had very likely turned to
its classic tactic of purposefully creating incompatibilities with other
software as a means of arm-twisting.44
But crucially, the deal also freed up some ad inventory with which
Facebook could begin experimenting, especially in the area of micro-
targeting. With its ocean of user data, Facebook could steer ads for
different goods and services to quite-specific groups of users, with ads at
first based on simple keywords users had written on their user profiles.
The sheer volume of personal information users had entered into the
platform allowed Facebook to take advantage of its network, providing
enormous potential for micro-targeting.

And with the hire of Google advertising head Sheryl Sandberg,
Facebook developed an online advertising business model that would
satisfy a different market segment than Google's wheelhouse. Google's
model for its gigantic ad business is based on finding and displaying ads
to consumers already searching for them—those who have decided they
want to buy a new smartphone or movie tickets or a pair of sneakers.
This advertising "fulfills demand" in industry language, whereas
Facebook's access to so much lifestyle and life-event data means it's
better suited for ads that make you realize you'd like to buy something in
the first place—for example, it could display ads for diapers and
pediatric services to a user who recently posted that she was pregnant.
This is called "creating demand" or the "soft sell" in ad circles, and it
represents a far larger portion of the ad market than demand fulfillment
—TV ads are demand creators, for example.45 But despite this
distinction, both companies focus on highly targeted online ad dollars,
and thus they remain in competition over corporate spending.
Law professor Tim Wu observes in his absorbing book The Attention
Merchants that Facebook was attractive to many users at first partially
because it had few to no ads, unlike Myspace, which was packed with
trashy-looking online come-ons. But once users were more locked in
(and as the company needed a greater cash flow to finance infrastructure
investments), it opened up the floodgates. Wu reviews the history of the
ad-driven business model from radio to online platforms, founded on
providing "free" entertainment or news in exchange for a few moments
of your time, looking at or listening to commercials for companies whose
payments for your attention provide the media business's revenue. In
other words, he finds that while we may feel like customers of ad-based
businesses, we are in fact the product, since our attention is sold to ad
buyers.46
Soon Facebook had developed a large number of categories to slot its
users into, allowing micro-targeting on a minute level just as the spread
of high-speed broadband Internet service encouraged large numbers of
people to go online, and the revenue model became an incredible
success. Interestingly, among the early adopters of these targeted
demand-generating ads were local businesses, taking advantage of the
ease of the platform's targeting software and its simple credit card
payment system. But national brands were on board too, and in time the
ad model utterly dominated the company's revenue, coming to a
whopping 98 percent of its income in 2017, according to its financial

filings.47 In Wu's description, "[T]he public became like renters
willingly making extensive improvements to their landlord's property,
even as they were made to look at advertisements ... a virtual attention
plantation."48 Or as Sheryl Sandberg put it, for all the company's
"connecting the world" rhetoric, "we have the business model. The
revenue model is advertising. This is the business we're in, and it's
working."49 And Facebook's ad-based business model extended well
outside the platform proper and into the rest of the web— for instance,
planting "cookies" on your computer, thus creating those ads that
creepily follow you around the Internet after you view a company's site
an Amazon listing and leave without buying.
There have been snags—Facebook has a history of misstating, to its
benefit, the viewership of posted video and other metrics. Recognizing
the essential nature of its relations with its main customers, Facebook
agreed to form a "measurement council" composed of its ad gurus,
representatives of major commercial buyers, and ad industry
executives.50 However, Facebook maintains the power in the
relationship, since it has the irreplaceable platform with two billion users
and a galaxy of their personal and tracking-based information. So despite
it all, the Wall Street Journal observes that "while marketers may be
frustrated right now, few have actually left Facebook," and its ad
business continues to generate $40 billion in yearly revenue—much like
us, advertisers are locked into the platform. One ad exec with a
prominent advertising firm says they must "play ball" with Facebook.51
The platform has reorganized its privacy functionality a number of
times, showing users their various categories of personal information and
allowing them to download it. But despite it all, company execs have
stated publicly that users "largely haven't changed their privacy settings"
despite even the uproar over developer data access triggered by the
Cambridge Analytica scandal (see below).52 This inertia may speak to
user disinterest, or the feeling of futility given that the information is
likely already out there for good, and network effects keep the users on
the platform for the same reason they were already there—everyone else
is there.
The Hands of f8

Since its creation, Facebook has been a platform—users are encouraged
to create their profile content and upload photos and other media, while
the company provides the attractive space of a popular social network.
But in 2006 Zuckerberg also began looking seriously at the possibility of
allowing outside software developers to create tools and games that
would run on Facebook for its billions of users. As his fawning
biographer and Fortune journalist David Kirkpatrick relates, "He wanted
to do for the Web what Gates did for the personal computer," and "not
only did Apple succeed at this masterfully with its Macintosh operating
system, but it succeeded again, first with the iPod and then with its
magnificent iPhone."53 Zuckerberg in fact consulted with Gates, the
adjudicated monopolist. Yikes.
This broader platform strategy was designed in part to definitively
defeat Myspace, a company often held up as a claim that network effects
don't necessarily favor incumbents, as it had a membership lead of many
millions during Facebook's early days. However, it accepted large
amounts of unappealing ads that cluttered the site, and at the time it had
declared some independent applications wouldn't be allowed on the site,
weakening its platform position.54 Zuckerberg saw a chance to build out
the platform, and additionally, to make itself distinct from Myspace in a
way that would secure its social media dominance.
The open platform was formally inaugurated in 2007 at a new annual
conference the company arranged, where third-party developers could
show off their new applications and games. Perhaps ironically, in light of
the huge privacy ramifications years later, the conference was named
"f8"—it would turn out to be "f8-ful" indeed. Dozens of companies
demonstrated apps at the first conference, and the event, along with the
launch of the iPhone a month later, seemed to augur a new era of mobile
applications.
Traffic on the site spiked yet again, to the point that Facebook had to
actively borrow servers from other tech companies, and in time the
company cocreated a dedicated data center for app partners.55 Soon
goofy, trivial games like FarmVille were hugely popular, and
notifications from players to other Facebook users were stuffing system
inboxes. By summer 2008 the havoc wreaked by these explosively
popular apps and their ubiquitous links led the company to try to weed
out the spammers and more obviously abusive apps by lowering their
prominence in the News Feed. It encouraged users to file complaints and
eventually implemented a rating system that led to a reduction in the

chaos. Once the initial turbulence was stabilized, the move toward
transforming Facebook into a platform proved hugely successful, and by
2009 app makers were bringing in around $500 million annually—
almost as much as Facebook itself. At the time, a Facebook exec said,
"We sort of stumbled our way through becoming good at dealing with
developers."56
Did they? Throughout these years, a Wild West atmosphere had
developed among the developers—not just independents making useful
tools or fun games, but classic capitalists eyeing Facebook's gigantic
trove of valuable targeting data. This was the environment that enabled
the large-scale scraping of our personal information for which the
company has now become notorious. The more or less open leveraging
of our freely entered information to attract huge numbers of developers
seemed to trouble even the Wall Street Journal, which in 2018 assessed
that "Facebook was, for a time, a vehicle for exfiltrating massive
amounts of data about its users to developers and data miners of every
stripe," pulling data about users of the third-party apps as well as all their
friends.57
Zuckerberg allowed the practice for several years, over which the
company rose to rank among the top-five towering Big Tech companies.
But Facebook began to fear the results of this policy and started reigning
in developer access, especially to data about the friends of app users.
And yet, the decision to stop this licentious approach to personal
information was only taken after a consent decree with the Federal Trade
Commission in 2011, following a suit filed by the Electronic Privacy
Information Center (EPIC) after the company continued claiming users
could keep their data private while routinely allowing it to be made
public. The FTC required the company to provide app users with their
privacy information and require consent before applications could pull
more information beyond what they have set to "public" on their user
profiles. And only in 2014 did the company tell developers to delete
information about users' friends, effective in 2015; moreover, some
companies got extensions, including Microsoft and Apple—making the
latter's condemnation of Facebook's treatment of privacy sound pretty
disingenuous.58
But by then, many applications had our data in their corporate hands,
and some held onto it even after they were found out, as in the case of
the now-infamous data analysis company Cambridge Analytica. The
scandal involved the company lying about its use of the data it collected

on tens of millions of people who participated in its personality quiz app,
then retaining the data after Facebook demanded it be deleted.
Amazingly, Facebook only became aware Cambridge Analytica had held
onto the data after a group of news agencies, including the London
Observer and the New York Times, brought it to the company's attention.
This shows the limited interest Facebook had in maintaining user control
over personal information, in contrast to the consuming drive to become
an open platform. A Columbia University professor observed, "For many
years, Facebook was basically giving away user data like it was handing
out candy," driving its platform to its current heights.59 The data-
gathering apps themselves often indicated up front that any data
collected would be for academic purposes, "but the fine print ... may
have told users it could be commercial," the Times reported. Such apps
are able to pull all your address book's contacts' basic information and
"likes" in under a second.60 Hilariously, the company's open-platform
era was given a passing grade in the area of user control of data by its
outside auditor, the respected consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers,
as late as 2017!61
The company is now probing suspicious-looking developers, but
Zuckerberg himself has conceded that it's impossible to find out where
all the user data went and how it will be used, since the open period
lasted several years, and after all, many of the companies running shady
data-scraping apps through the period no longer exist.62 Indeed, the scale
of the platform is such that Zuckerberg has since openly referred to
holding internal discussions about whether enough trained auditors exist
in the world to audit all the apps now or formerly on the platform.
In the midst of the Cambridge Analytica scandal, the company also
admitted that besides various classes of application-developing partners,
Facebook also shared extensive user data access with more than sixty
hardware companies, including Apple, Amazon, and Samsung. These
companies were also exempted from the 2015 restrictions on friends'
data, on the absurd grounds that the firms delivered the Facebook
platform to mobile users and thus Facebook considered them essentially
extensions of the company under the FTC's terms.63 Notably, Facebook
now expects to pay a fine to the FTC for this lapse, since it violates the
terms of the 2011 consent decree. The company has indicated it
anticipates a fine in the neighborhood of $3 to $5 billion, which sounds

punishing, but the Wall Street Journal observed that "Facebook made
over 11 times the high-end of that amount in revenue last year alone."64
The waves of bad press crashing into the company were
accompanied by the backlash over the use of the platform in the 2016 US
election. The campaign was an infamously divisive and trashy episode,
and one of the most contentious aspects has been the revelation that
foreign entities created groups and bought social media ads promoting
themselves and related events in the United States. Typically, the
accounts took contentious or extreme positions and seemed to have the
effect of inflaming tensions among different social groups. Sometimes
the accounts supported opposing events, in some cases even held on the
same day—anti-immigration groups were supported along with Black
Lives Matter.65 These pages promoted or partially financed dozens of
political events, and since then, positions outside mainstream political
bounds are often alleged to be foreign backed—sadly, not a new
phenomenon.
But most reporting on the subject has observed that the outside
groups seemed to glom onto preexisting social groups and their
movements, with the Wall Street Journal reporting they "often sought to
work alongside legitimate groups organizing rallies and protests."66 And
after all the evidence we've seen of Facebook failing to anticipate the
problems of its platform, it's maybe unsurprising that the company
actually cut Russia out of its own (pre-controversy) report it published
on the 2016 election. At the advice of its attorneys and policy team, its
report was shortened by several pages and Russia-related material was
removed, with the country's name appearing only in a blog post months
later.67
Considering that a grand total of 290 Facebook and Instagram
accounts were found to be connected to the St. Petersburg-based Internet
Research Agency—a firm that receives Russian government support—
and that a total of about $100,000 was spent on ads promoting these
groups, this should be considered relatively small potatoes in the world
of global election-influence intrigue.68 The United States spends billions
annually on international diplomacy and espionage to influence elections
every year, and the US Chamber of Commerce and its members in the
banking, pharmaceutical, and energy industries spend billions to
manipulate American elections, making this hugely discussed outside
spending look puny. Since then, Facebook has required that buyers of

political ads include affiliation information that can be viewed on an ad
display, and political regulation is now expected among the numerous
government investigations of the company.
The scandals have added up, including recent reports of a giant
security breach in which the personal data on thirty million users was
stolen, ostensibly by spammers, reportedly leading Zuckerberg to tell his
senior execs that Facebook was "at war," that he would act with less
company consensus and that he would confront critics, including by
hiring slimy political opposition researchers. Zuckerberg famously
bought four houses surrounding his main mansion in Palo Alto for extra
privacy, as nakedly ironic as that is. But the escalating backlash has also
led to more animosity toward Silicon Valley billionaires, to the extent
that company security expenses for Zuckerberg and his family reached
$20 million in 2018, according to the Wall Street Journal.69
The company has reacted to the setbacks as most gigantic
corporations would—by pouring cash into advertising that tries to
reshape the associations people have with its brand. The company
shelled out $382 million in 2018 and is sharply increasing that amount,
including to pay for what the business press calls "apology ad"
campaigns. (These numbers are enormous, though still well behind
Amazon's unbelievable $1.84 billion annual spend).70
But the fallout of this parade of scandals, from selling off our data to
build its platform to the Russia affair, have sufficed to finally penalize
Facebook in a meaningful way, at least in the near term. Its stock price
took a steep, headline-grabbing dive in summer 2018, representing the
largest one-day loss of value for any US company in history, after its
report that user growth—while continuing—was slowing, as was growth
in ad sales. The company had indicated this user trend would continue in
the near term, leading to the headline-grabbing market drop. The price
largely recovered after users failed to desert the service; platform lock-in
has to date put a floor under the stock.
Yet even that same earnings report showed the network's enduring
strength—revenue increased 42 percent from the previous year and
profits leaped 31 percent from their already-high levels.71 These kind of
numbers normally cause giddy joy in the wealthy elite who own most
corporate stock, so the fact that they caused the stock to skid may say
more about how overheated equity markets have become than it does
about the company's impending doom.

Valley of the LOLs
Despite its market swoon, Facebook remains firmly dominant in social
media and the targeted ad market. Besides its main site, the company
also controls Instagram, Messenger, and WhatsApp, each with over a
billion users—gigantic in comparison with competitors Twitter and
Snapchat, with under a half a billion users between them. Its subsidieries
capture a whopping fifty minutes of the average American's day.72 It
holds tens of billions in cash and had a truly preposterous profit margin
of 39 percent in 2017, according to its 10-K federal filing for that year.
Like other fast-growing tech companies, it pays no dividends to its
stockholders but is embarking on a large stock repurchase program of up
to $6 billion.73
The company has real potential to flex this muscle in the future—
Tim Wu observed in The Master Switch that "social-networking sites,
Facebook first and foremost, stealthily aim to conquer by offering
themselves as Web alternatives. Many forms of content that once stood
independent on the Web ... are now created instead on Facebook ...
unlike Web pages, Facebook pages are Facebook's property, and are
deliberately not linked to the rest of the Web."74 This walled garden is
even more serious in the fast-growing markets of the developing world,
where the company's Free Basics program, offered to users with simple
phones and tiny budgets, gives Facebook total control over the user's
access to the Internet, the ultimate walled garden.75 The company is
moving to open the service to kids under thirteen, following YouTube's
steps to hook ever-younger users.
Defenders of the online monopolies rush to insist that new startup
competitors could unseat them, as Facebook did to Myspace and
Friendster in its early days. But like its Silicon Valley peers, the company
is spending heavily to avoid that, prompting the Wall Street Journal to
report that it has "an internal 'early bird' warning system that identifies
potential threats." This of course helps the giant to follow in the
monopolist footsteps of Microsoft and Amazon: closely observe
competitors, mimic their products at a low price that loses money, and
use existing network incumbency to utterly crush, or maybe buy, the
startups.76 The Wall Street Journal, despite claiming on its editorial page
that disruptive tech startups can fix any social problem, recognizes that
the giants "make it increasingly difficult for startups to compete and stay
independent" without being "squashed by one of the behemoths."

Apparently with no sense of irony, the Journal concludes that "Mr.
Zuckerberg is sensitive to anything that might disrupt Facebook, even
the teeniest startup."
This power could be checked by organized worker power, and as
with the other tech giants profiled in this book, the terrain is only
partially new. The company has had a reputation for a boys' club
atmosphere—a notorious feature of the tech sector—as in the startup
days, when the office ladies' room had a crude mural of hetero-fantasy
lesbianism. When the company gained respectability after the VC
investment, the mural was painted over.77 For years there was only one
woman working in the company's core engineering circle, and
Zuckerberg handled sexual harassment charges by publicly embarrassing
the offender in-office, with no follow-up.78
And to this day, women software coders at Facebook have their work
rejected 35 percent more often than their male colleagues, confirming
their widely held belief that women's coding work is subject to more
scrutiny than men's.79 In its reply to the company engineer who
conducted the study, management stated that these findings simply
reflected the ranks of engineers at the company— perhaps not itself
realizing that this implies that women's "inferior" coding explains why
they rise up the corporate coding ranks slower than men, raising its own
questions.
In addition to the issues faced by white-collar workers, Facebook
also has a more blue-collar segment of its workforce whose work
conditions are comparable to that of Apple's Foxconn contractors or
Amazon's warehouse workers. Facebook's content contractors are
mostly temps with poor compensation, especially considering that they
review about eight thousand posts daily, often screening them for
violence, sexual abuse, cruelty to animals, and other twisted garbage
from a human society with a warped economic system but free access to
online services. This on top of their impossible task of cleaning up the
platform's duplicate and persistent fake accounts.80
The Wall Street Journal reports that
Facebook decided years ago to rely on contract workers to enforce its policies. Executives
considered the work to be relatively low-skilled compared with, say, the work performed
by Facebook engineers, who typically hold computer-science degrees and earn six-figure
salaries, plus stock options and benefits.... Several former content moderators at
Facebook say they often had just a few seconds to decide if something violated the

company's terms of service.... Turnover is high, with most content moderators working
anywhere for a few months to about a year before they quit or their assignments ended....
Former content moderators recall having to view images of war victims who had been
gutted or drowned and child soldiers engaged in killings.81
A former monitor "rarely had time to process what he was seeing
because managers remotely monitored the productivity of moderators";
another is suing Facebook, claiming that continuously viewing suicide
and beheading videos caused her PTSD.
But of course, for platforms like Facebook and Google, the great
majority of work for the platform is done for free, by the users. The great
magnetic platforms attracting viewers create the incentive for us to
produce video, create websites, and update our social media profiles
while the platforms themselves merely keep the system running—and
stalk us to refine their ads, to boot. Or consider Facebook's many
translations of its site for markets around the world, which occurred
through the use of software listing the words to be translated, and then
allowing native speakers of those languages to nominate translations and
then to vote on the best one. Through this system, the Spanish version of
the site was created by users in four weeks, the German in two weeks,
and the French in two days, costing the company almost nothing.82
So, since our "volunteer" user labor is a major part of the platform
ecosystem, there's real gravity to the various semirevolts among users
down the years. Earlier I described the major uprising that accompanied
the introduction of the News Feed itself, where at one point a full 10
percent of the platform's users were members of opposition groups,
some of which reached many hundreds of thousands of members. But
there have been numerous other revolts, including after the 2008
introduction of Beacon, a commercial alert system that announced
purchases Facebook users made on partner websites like Netflix or
Zappos. There was a drop-down menu that allowed users to opt out of
sending the buying information to all their Facebook friends, but the
users often failed to notice it and found themselves broadcasting their
private purchases across the platform.83 Again, tens of thousands joined
protest groups as the company waited three weeks before even
addressing the backlash to the abrupt, unannounced shift in how personal
data would be treated. The platform then redesigned Beacon into a fully
opt-in system, later allowing it to be shut off completely, which was
among the opponents' major demands.

But the most famous user uprising to date involved the site's terms of
service. Today many of the commercial relationships we enter into in
capitalism are governed by TOS, which tend toward extensive detail and
legalese that few users read, even though economists will tell you
consumers make decisions with all the relevant data in mind. Facebook's
TOS underwent a significant change in 2009, and indeed it was noticed
not by a regular user but by the Consumers Union. The change occurred
in the section granting Facebook a license to "use, copy, publish, stream,
store, retain, publicly perform or display" your posted information and
data. But the company had quietly removed a clause stating that this
license would expire should you close your account and remove your
content from the platform. This meant that even if you canceled your
account, your data would remain in Facebook's hands, presumably to
target marketing to you on the rest of the web.
Again, large Facebook groups opposing the change appeared, and in
days they had hundreds of thousands of members. EPIC and other
consumer entities were filing complaints with the FTC, and the mood
was souring, until the CEO posted in the small hours that the previous
TOS would be resumed temporarily. He then announced there would be
a vote on a new "Statement of Rights and Responsibilities," with the
catch that the vote would be binding only if 30 percent of users polled—
which at that time would mean around 60 million people. In the end
about 1 percent of that number voted.84 However, Zuckerberg was able
to express pride in his generous referendum offer—which he only
extended after an outside group had caught the company's sneaky data-
grab and the user base had begun aggressively organizing and put the
fear of god into management.
But as the company has grown, partially replacing the public square
as the venue for public discussion and debate, its decisions about the
limits of argument have become hugely important, despite its long
resistance to being forced into the role of the "arbiter of truth." The
company can temporarily or permanently suspend accounts or simply
downgrade them in the News Feed, allowing them to remain on the
platform but keeping anyone from seeing their posts.85 The policies have
shifted almost continuously and are clearly subject to further change.
So far, the most public episode involving policing the platform is that
of Alex Jones, the prominent conspiracy theory-mongering imbecile and
host of a show on his site InfoWars. Known for feverish claims that 9/11
was committed by a government conspiracy, that fluoridated water is a

mind-control plan, and that multiculturalism constitutes "white
genocide," Jones seldom presents any evidence for his goofy claims and
would thus simply be expected to have his content down-rated after fact-
checkers found it failed to pass the laugh test. But crucially, Jones also
has a long history of harassment and inciting violence; for instance, he
publicly revealed the home address of a parent of a child killed in the
Sandy Hook school shooting, after claiming the kids and parents were
"crisis actors" hired by the state. He also frequently pantomimes firing
guns on-air at figures he dislikes, actions Facebook cited in temporarily
suspending his personal account. Following this move, Jones received
bans—some temporary, others permanent—from Twitter, Apple's App
Store, and Google's YouTube.86
Presently the company is working on an independent content-
monitoring board that would operate partially separately from Facebook
and as of this writing, develop hard rules that the company's multitude of
moderators could use uniformly. But, the makeup of the board, how
independent it would be, and how it would make decisions are all still up
in the air, and the press reports "there has been little consensus of how
[Facebook] should govern speech on its platform." Notably, the large
number of scholars and speech advocates the company has consulted
don't agree on the board's scope, with some academics and journalists
suggesting the board should be free to debate the company's privacy
policy or its algorithm for ranking posts. So far Facebook is resisting that
role for the board, wanting it to focus on content governance only, while
the company retains authority over the rest of the platform. Facebook
hopes to release a "charter" that will detail the oversight board's rules on
content, and the charter is expected to contain an appeals process through
which a user can file a complaint if they feel a moderator has stifled their
content unjustly. Zuckerberg explained, "If you're not happy after getting
your appeal, then you can also try to appeal to this broader board or
body," suggesting the structure is "like some of the higher courts in other
areas."87 Making the platforms more into a private government than
ever.
Exactly where the line should be drawn is naturally a difficult
question, as old as freedom of speech, but the absolutely essential point
is that Mark Zuckerberg shouldn't be in charge of deciding. Having an
obligation to serve the company's growth even while celebrating free
speech, Facebook has followed a similar path to Google's, pushing any
views outside the conventional political spectrum down in its rankings

and visibility, whether they include any calls for violence or not. The
media watchdog group FAIR observed the dark precedent being set by
"de-platforming" the wretched testosterone-pill-selling idiot Jones,
noting that it was immediately extended to banning—without warning—
numerous left-wing Facebook pages that do not advocate bloodshed,
including Occupy London and No Unite the Right 2, a group opposing
large demonstrations by white nationalists. These abrupt disappearances
were met with fairly large outcries, and soon the pages were back up, but
again without explanation.88 It suggests that Facebook's decisions about
allowable content will be based on the commercial needs of itself and its
advertisers, and the pressures of powerful states.
All of this lines up with a remark from a close company observer in
Kirkpatrick's book: "Facebook can flip a switch and turn you off.
Anybody. Anytime."89 Power indeed!
As the company staggers from crisis to crisis, many users have come
to a fatalistic view that "privacy is dead" and that their information is out
of their hands for good. Perhaps that accounts for the popularity of a
piece of business reporting that found the company has an alert that can
tell users when private parts of their profiles, such as direct messages,
have been accessed by a Facebook employee, typically for fixing bugs or
reviewing platform issues. Regular users, however, do not see this alert,
since it is available only for users who are themselves Facebook
employees. The alert is known within the company as Security
Watchdog, but company employees have their own internal term for it.
They call it the "Sauron alert," after the nightmarish, all-seeing eye in the
popular fantasy trilogy Lord of the Rings.90
Irony loves company.

CHAPTER 7
Neutralized
The defeat and victory of the telecom networks
Net neutrality is the principle that data should be treated equally by
network operators like Internet service providers, the companies that
transmit your online information through their cable or wireless services.
This equality would eliminate practices like an ISP blocking access to a
website run by a competitor, or discrimination in service, where
companies that can afford it get access to "fast lanes" that deliver their
data more efficiently, while smaller sites that can't cough up the money
get relegated to slow lanes. The ISPs are the great companies of the
telecommunications industry, including the giant cable and broadband
companies like Comcast and AT&T, and the mobile cell service
providers like Verizon, Sprint, and (again) AT&T.
On February 26, 2015, the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) made a headline-dominating decision to regulate Internet
providers by a standard based on this principle, in a milestone for
freedom of information and popular activism.1 The business world's
media reported that the decision was the outcome of opposing forces,
both representing a "backlash."
The neutrality victory was driven by what the Wall Street Journal
called a "public backlash"—its phrase for activist groups and engaged
individuals unsatisfied by the FCC's earlier positions, which had favored
the telecommunications industry.2 In May 2014 the FCC issued a call for
public comment—common for proposed new regulations—and it was
swamped by the staggering volume of public comments filed—four
million, with the press reporting that the "overwhelming majority of the
comments 
supported 
common-carrier 
style 
rules," 
the 
central
requirement of net neutrality.3 But the conservative paper had previously
observed that if the agency moved forward with this rare regulatory
stance, it would also face a "telecom backlash" from Verizon, Comcast,

and their trade association, which had won court cases against the FCC's
previous efforts to impose some neutrality rules.4 And with the advent of
the Trump administration, they ultimately got their way.
However, this book's subject, the tech giants, have a shifting role in
this political debate. Usually seen to be supportive of net neutrality,
Silicon Valley's growing dominance is drawing it into the
telecommunications industry, diminishing its support for the popular
neutrality principles. This shift has the potential to reshape web access in
the long run, and, thanks to Big Tech's pivotal role today, to
fundamentally change online expression and freedom of information.
Bet the Net
A lack of net neutrality standards has two broad consequences. One has
to do with the prices that ISPs charge for providing Internet access at
reasonable speeds. ISPs could charge significant amounts to firms that
can pay, creating an "artificial scarcity" in information markets and
allowing ISPs to add a new revenue stream to their business model.
"Artificial scarcity" describes markets where production technology
allows for an abundant supply,
plenty to satisfy the consumption needs of the whole market, but in
which suppliers are able to restrict the amount produced. This often
applies to markets characterized by intellectual property laws, like
copyrights or patents, which limit lawful production to companies
holding these licenses and thus possessing a monopoly.
Profits are elevated with higher prices, but this cuts off some part of
the market from consumption, making the product or service
"artificially" scarce. For example, without net neutrality an ISP might
charge streaming video platforms like Netflix or Hulu for faster service,
leading those firms to elevate their prices to an amount that some
consumers can't afford. That means some consumers won't pay for the
services, even though providing them would require invisibly small
resources. And the telecoms aren't above it—a number of them already
supplement their existing revenue streams by selling data about your web
browsing habits, from your favorite sites to what health issues you search
about, with AT&T being the leader in this market segment.5
The second consequence has less to do with relative prices and more
to do with power. Having a degree of control over the flow of

information through any medium, from phone service to TV to Internet
access, grants a significant position of market power. The issue isn't as
abstract as it sounds. In 2014, without any such regulation to prevent it,
Comcast and other broadband providers deliberately "throttled"—
restricted—the data transmission for the popular video-streaming service
Netflix, frustrating thousands of subscribers waiting for their programs to
load. To end the blockade, Netflix agreed to pay the broadband providers
tens of millions of dollars a year. This was a significant trigger for
elevated public awareness about neutrality principles, as the cable firms
had gone too far—they had gotten between America and
its TV.
It was a prominent episode but far from an isolated incident. Rebecca
MacKinnon's book Consent of the Networked gives numerous other
troubling examples, like when Verizon blocked text messages to
supporters from the pro-choice organization NARAL, with executives
citing company policy to block "controversial or unsavory" content at
their discretion. AT&T muted a portion of a Pearl Jam concert it
livestreamed when front man Eddie Vedder criticized President George
W. Bush.6 Likewise, Comcast was found to be blocking use of the
popular file-sharing service BitTorrent, including downloads of public
domain content like the King James Bible.7
These relatively innocuous cases show the powerful potential of an
unregulated, for-profit network. Broadband firms and ISPs could create a
major new revenue stream by extorting content producers to pay up for
faster speed service, and those unable or unwilling to pay could be
neglected or, indeed, actively throttled. The cable and wireless firms
would thus have major leverage over the flow of information through
society.
But a lack of net neutrality has major potential ramifications for the
politics of attention. Our news and commercial entertainment have long
been developed in profit-centered institutions creating material that will
not threaten the status quo. But as more "content" is delivered through
online venues, the need for "content providers" to meet the demands of
gatekeeping cable and cell phone companies adds an additional layer of
profit priority for the products competing for our attention. A program
may already be nonthreatening to the market model, may cross-promote
a media conglomerate's other intellectual property, and may have an
advertiser-friendly format. But Comcast or AT&T may require additional

concessions, like favorable coverage or support for their future telecom
consolidation plans, if they want to avoid paying a fee for adequately fast
transmission. This represents yet another opportunity for major capitalist
institutions to leave their fingerprints on commercial media products.
And the ability to limit streaming speeds of some sites or sources, in
particular, represents a new weapon for these firms in the struggle over
attention. Young Internet users, above all, are often guided to different
sources by their ease of access, in addition to their prominence on the
tech companies' platforms. The classic example of this is video
streaming, where research indicates that the faster the online data speeds
users grow accustomed to, the less time they are willing to wait to load a
video. For users with fast fiber-based service, 80 percent abandon the
video file after a delay of ten seconds, illustrating the potentially
dramatic effects of paid prioritization on the capturing of user attention.8
Further, sites critical of the telecom industry may be shunted from the
attention of online users by telecoms lightly throttling access to them. It's
hard to overstate the potential power the telecoms and their regional
service monopolies hold without neutrality restrictions—our ubiquitous
smartphones may give us instant gratification for information, but the
power to provide that satisfaction could be used against industry critics,
not by fully deleting them but by making their blogs take forever to load.
The business media found that these developments, plus the
industry's earlier court victories, "made clear that broadband access
providers face few limitations on terms they can seek in negotiations
with content companies."9 Tim Berners-Lee, considered to be the
inventor of the World Wide Web, called this market development "a
fundamental shift in power in the Internet economy," driven by the
growth of residential ISPs like Comcast and their buying up of other
"backbone" network-provider firms. Berners-Lee observed that this
market concentration has made the ISPs into gatekeepers, a strong
position since content lacks "any practical way to route around Verizon,"
as he put it. So rather than the net-neutral scenario—all data coming
through the pipe should be treated equally—the possibility arises that "in
a world where Netflix and Yahoo connect directly to residential ISPs,
every Internet company will have its own separate pipe."10 Which would
also make regulation far harder, all due to what he calls the "growing
power of the residential broadband providers" who appear to be
conquering his invention.

Net neutrality activists argue that this potential power-mongering
mess can be resolved through the FCC legally reclassifying the ISPs
under Title II of the Communications Act of 1934. This is the regulation
historically applied to "common carriers" relied on by the broader
society, like the phone lines— under common carriage rules, if you dial
your favorite pizza joint, AT&T can't connect you to another pizzeria
that paid them money instead. The ongoing struggle to win this
regulatory standard contains valuable lessons for social struggle and is
shaped crucially by the economics of Silicon Valley.
Neutering Net Neutrality
The first of three rounds of fighting over neutrality began in December
2010 and was indicative of the FCC's long-standing reputation as a
"captured" regulator. The FCC's chairman at the time, Tom Wheeler,
was himself a former cable industry lobbyist, and unsurprisingly the
FCC's first attempt at a neutrality policy was literally written by the
industry.
This FCC order, in 2010, was prepared by lobbyists and attorneys for
AT&T, Verizon, and Google, and it actually did ban the blocking and
discrimination of data transmission. But a gigantic omission pointed
toward the reason for the phone corporations' participation: the rule
applied only to the "wired" Internet, meaning the part of service that
comes through a fiber or cable line, not via a wireless signal. Liberal
scholar Tim Wu, coiner of the term "net neutrality," observed in The
Master Switch: "That enormous exception—AT&T and Verizon's
condition for support of the rule—is no mere technicality, but arguably
the masterstroke on the part of [the telecom firms]. It puts the cable
industry at a disadvantage, while leaving the markets on which both
AT&T and Verizon have bet their future without federal oversight."11
Wireless was then and remains the growth center of the industry, so
this exemption meant AT&T and Verizon would be free to block,
discriminate, and prioritize to their sleazy deal-making hearts' content.
Still, the telecom companies overall found even this infringement on
their corporate liberty to be too much to tolerate, and the major trade
associations, including the United States Telecom Association and the
National Cable and Telecommunications Association, filed lawsuits
immediately after the decision. The regulation, the Open Internet Order

of 2010, was ultimately struck down in court in 2014, leading to the next
round of the struggle.
Title II: The Quickening
To understand the second round of net neutrality confrontation, the
lineup of corporate forces on either side of the issue must be reviewed.
With the information industry's fast evolution, the lines shift quickly and
need to be carefully analyzed. The most common picture puts the cable
and wireless ISPs—primarily Comcast, Time Warner Cable, Verizon,
and AT&T—on one side, opposed to net neutrality on account of their
economic incentive to charge for fast-lane access to their data "pipes."
On the other side, the platforms like Google, Facebook, and Amazon
want to go on expanding their businesses without new tolls for net
access.
This basic antagonism has indeed applied for some time, and it
resurfaced in a 2014 open letter to the FCC—signed by dozens of tech
firms, including titans like Google, Facebook, Amazon, Yahoo, and
Twitter—opposing Chairman Wheeler's new scheme to allow "paid
prioritization" and arguing against allowing "individualized bargaining
and discrimination." The letter called the proposal "a grave threat to the
Internet." This stance was enormously significant as it put major
corporate weight on opposing sides, which in a capitalist society is often
required before a subject can become politically contested.
However, the market and technologies have swiftly evolved, taking a
turn when President Obama made his famous November 2014 video
statement supporting Title II reclassification of the Internet—applying
the common carriage rules of the phone industry to online systems. But
at this exciting moment for the neutrality movement, the business press
observed that the online giants left the handling of the response to the
lower-profile Internet Association, one of their trade groups. The
National Journal's interpretation was that "aside from the letter, the big
Web companies like Facebook and Google mostly stayed on the sidelines
of the debate."12 This "muted response" reflects the maturing of the
online market and the growing market power of its largest firms.
Notably, Google was also moving toward becoming an ISP itself,
with both its Google Fiber pilot projects in Austin, Texas, and the Kansas
City metro area, and its piloted phone service, Google Fi.13 These
developments, though short-lived, meant the company was beginning to

operate in both spaces of web content and web access, giving it
conflicting allegiances in the debate. Indeed, after the Obama White
House announced its support for common carrier rules, Google CEO
Eric Schmidt told an administration official that the position was a
mistake. Even worse, in the proposed 2010 rule written by industry,
Google had agreed with Verizon that neutrality rules weren't even
necessary on wireless systems. As a Wall Street Journal headline put it,
"Google and Net Neutrality: It's Complicated."14
But once finally enacted in early 2015, the FCC's neutrality order
decided to conspicuously "forbear" using the full regulatory apparatus of
Title II, like price limits, keeping to a "light touch" approach that left
more freedom to the industry. The policy also left open some neutrality-
related issues, like how much ISPs like Comcast could charge content
firms like Netflix to connect to high-capacity networks in the first place,
although boosting or throttling that traffic would be prohibited.15 But the
main net neutrality provisions were confirmed, and the FCC in its short-
lived rules frequently drew attention to the tsunami of public comments
in justifying its decision: "Because the record overwhelmingly supports
adopting rules and demonstrates that three specific practices invariably
harm the open Internet—blocking, throttling, and paid prioritization—
this order bans each of them, applying the same rules to both fixed and
mobile broadband Internet access service."16
Among the several neoliberal objections to the common carrier
designation was the Republican FCC commissioner Ajit Pai's claim that
the agency's reclassification was unnecessary since "the Internet is not
broken.... There is no problem for the government to solve."17 People
waiting impatiently in 2014 for Netflix to load their TV shows when
Comcast and other cable firms were throttling its bandwidth access
might disagree. For their part, the cable and cellular ISPs claim that the
threat of FCC interference will limit their infrastructure investments—
meaning the networks will decrease their laying of cable and upgrading
of cell towers. But this claim is somewhat implausible in view of the
staggering fact that the network giants make an absurd 97 percent profit
margin on their bandwidth service, as MIT Technology Review reports.18
This cartoonishly high profit rate means that any mild regulatory burden
is unlikely to overcome the telecom industry's enormous incentive to
expand the business and swim in profit. Experience with net neutrality in
Europe and elsewhere has borne this out.19

The Empires Strike Back
The advent of the Trump administration amounted to a major setback for
net neutrality, as it did for so many other important economic, social, and
environmental policies. Trump appointed the leading Republican on the
FCC, Pai, to head the agency, followed shortly by the announcement that
the agency was reevaluating the Title II classification. Pai's main
justification for doing so was his repeated claim that net neutrality was
depressing investment in the telecommunications network, despite the
absurd profit rates on broadband assets. Other observers noted that
Comcast and other large broadband providers had continued to increase
their yearly capital investments since the FCC's rules were issued.20 But
on December 14, 2017, the commission voted to overturn the Title II
ruling, despite continued telecom investment and despite the lack of
significant competition among the cable companies that supply the
broadband for Wi-Fi.21
Exactly what this major reversal for freedom means as far as market
conditions are concerned will take time to be revealed— but there are
clues. Tech giants like Amazon already prominently sponsor Internet
access in places that have always been exempt from neutrality rules, like
coffee shops, in-flight airline services, and other places that provide web
access as a perk. This means that users are steered toward the sites
paying the sponsorship fee, although differences in permitted bandwidth
aren't yet common. On mobile, the telecoms have been experimenting
for some time with "zero rating," a practice of not counting use of certain
partner websites or services against a data plan.22 Alternatively, the
Journal ponders cheap Internet service "subsidized by—and centered on
—the internet giants themselves. This is how Facebook operates in vast
swaths of the developing world, where users see the internet and the
social network as one and the same."23 The neutrality violations can be
expected to expand over time, likely leading to poorer service for those
less able to pay, and restricting the scope of the Internet to which they
have access.
Once again, the Silicon Valley giants are broadly credited with
opposing these steps toward ending enforcement of net neutrality, and
once again their role is plainly exaggerated. While in 2010 the biggest
online firms directly signed onto the effort, in 2014 they mostly left the
role to their lower-profile Internet Association, and in 2016 their support
was thinner still, so much so that some tech figures even argued that the

reclassification wasn't necessary for effective neutrality.24 The business
coverage included headlines like "Web Firms Protest Efforts to Roll
Back Net Neutrality," but reading the fine print reveals the companies
involved were led by second-tier firms like Netflix, Reddit, and
GoDaddy. And Netflix, itself the poster child for net neutrality, was "less
vocal" on the subject after it worked out satisfactory commercial deals
with the telecom giants to route its data. The Wall Street Journal bluntly
reported that the company "says it is less at risk now that it is big enough
to strike favorable deals with telecom companies. The company did just
that, reaching several deals in recent years to pay broadband providers
for ample bandwidth into their networks."25 And "some big players,"
including Google and Amazon, "were content with relatively low-key
efforts."26
During the neutrality debate, the smaller firms were purposely
displaying the annoying spinning pinwheel that denotes slow-loading
content as a warning against what a free hand for the telecom industry
could mean. Meanwhile, Google couldn't be bothered to include the
subject on the front of its hugely prominent search engine page, instead
running a post on its relatively obscure policy blog. Amazon deployed a
noncommittal button linking to the FCC comment facility, and Facebook
CEO Zuckerberg posted that he supported Title II but was "open to
working with members of Congress." Hardly aggressive stances.
Again, we must ask why. And the answer is plain: though these firms
do rely on open access to the telecom industry's "pipes" of the Internet to
deliver their oceans of free content to platform users globally, they are
also themselves becoming ISPs, investing heavily in new cables and
fiber services to bring content and their platforms' own services to users,
even if the "last mile" to consumers is a telco.
As such, their interests are no longer directly opposed to the telecom
giants; indeed, the interests of these once-antagonistic parties
increasingly overlap.
Since the second round of net neutrality struggle, in which neutrality
activists were dramatically victorious over the cell and cable companies,
the tech giants have moved further in this direction. The business media
describe the process behind this frequently, as when the Journal reported
that in early 2016 Microsoft and Facebook were jointly investing in a
transatlantic data cable to add redundancy to the networks their platforms
rely on. Costing in the hundreds of millions of dollars, "only the very

largest Internet companies have made the plunge" into digital
infrastructure on this scale. The deal indicates "the biggest U.S. tech
companies are seeking more control over the Internet's plumbing."27
Amazon has also invested in an undersea bundle of fiber-optic
cables, and in late 2016 Facebook and Google announced major
investments in a high-speed line between Los Angeles and Hong Kong.28
In addition, Google is laying an incredible sixty-two-hundred-mile-long
fully private cable from Los Angeles to its data center in Chile, part of
efforts to catch up to Amazon and Microsoft in cloud computing.
Fascinatingly, a Google cloud exec is reported to have claimed the
company's telecommunications infrastructure "adds up [to] the world's
biggest private network, handling roughly 25 percent of the world's
internet traffic ... without relying on telecom companies."29 Except that
now, it is a telecom company.
For years, all the tech giants have invested in their own highspeed
data lines between major cities as well. These investments are also
intended to ensure enough capacity to route information among the
giants' enormous data centers. The business press suggests, amazingly,
that "the investments have pushed aside the telephone companies that
dominated the capital-intensive market for more than a century." The
process is reminiscent of Rockefeller's money-gushing Standard Oil
empire first conquering energy, and then taking over the rail lines
carrying that energy.
The market developments make it easy to understand why the Big
Tech firms are decreasingly confronting the telecom industry: they are
increasingly entering the industry, and gaining an economic interest in
the ability to prioritize data or penalize its flow depending on payment.
This is a major long-term trend that will see the future blurring of the
lines between tech and telecom, and largely explains Silicon Valley's
declining commitment to net neutrality.
You and What Army?
Since the role of nominally open network-supporting corporations like
Google turns out to be quite overhyped, there must be another factor to
explain why telecom internet service was temporarily reclassified to
"common carrier" status under Title II. It's not too difficult to identify—
the commission received over four million comments on its proposed

regulatory stance allowing "commercially reasonable" fast-lane
treatment in 2014, with over 99 percent supporting strong net neutrality
rules. The enormous volume of public comments repeatedly broke the
FCC's comment facility, but was only the most dramatic component of
the overall activist strategy that resulted in the victory at the commission.
Considering the relative rareness of left-wing victories, and also the
reversal of this policy under the Trump administration, these tactics are
worth some attention.
One crucial dimension was the effective combination of online and
offline organizing, especially relevant to an issue like this that directly
affects the web environment. So while activists in groups like Free Press
and the Electronic Frontier Foundation publicized the issue and steered
alarmed web users toward the FCC comment system, organizers planned
to increase the heat on public officials through "real life" actions.
Most dramatically, activists camped out in front of the FCC building
in Washington, DC, an "occupy" tactic that ballooned from a pair of
activists in sleeping bags to a tent city of dozens of people. This move
was important, especially since the organizers prepared for the direct
action through extensive training and awareness-raising. Malkia Cyrial
of the Center for Media Justice told the valuable activist website Waging
Nonviolence: "All along we've been doing a lot of education and
advocacy, but at this point we're ready to take direct action against these
companies and target members of Congress."30 Likewise Kevin Zeese,
an activist with Popular Resistance, named direct action as one activist
strategy among many: "We don't like to occupy.... It's a tactic that we
use very sparingly."
But the occupation—especially alarming to the FCC, which is
accustomed to bureaucratic invisibility—played a critical role, since
before 2015 the reclassification of ISPs as Title II common carriers had
been dismissed as "politically impossible." As Zeese puts it, "When they
say it's politically impossible, our job as activists is to make it politically
doable." Demonstrations spread to regional FCC offices and the
corporate headquarters of Comcast and Verizon. Of course, the main
venue for organizing actions remained online, fitting for the subject and
also reflecting the shift of civic engagement to web venues, for better or
worse.
In 2017, Netflix, Reddit, and others reprised the "Internet slowdown"
protest, showing the ubiquitous spinning "loading" wheel and playing an

important role in reengaging activists from 2014. But the results were
somewhat less dramatic than the previous round, perhaps owing in part
to the diminishing support of the tech titans. However, an impressive
level of public engagement was still reached as comments poured in at
the FCC again, over the July-August public comment period. This
forced the FCC to "rate-limit" submissions, in which tranches of
comments were gradually submitted so as not to overwhelm their docket
facility yet again.31
Notably, this time the level of comments soon spiraled out of control,
reaching an absurd twenty-three million by the time of the repeal vote. It
soon became apparent that many comments were being left by software
on computers programmed to pour posts into the system, skewing
against neutrality.32 Many claimed to have been submitted by public
figures, claims that were quickly demonstrated to be false; others were
posted under the names of deceased or fictional people. A particular anti-
neutrality email studied by the Wall Street Journal, starting with the
same stuffy sentence, was posted at "a near-constant rate—1,000 every
10 minutes—punctuated by periods of zero comments, as if web robots
were turning on and off.... The Journal examined those 'unprecedented
regulator power' comments and found that duplicates of it exceeded any
other comment.... The comment has been posted on the FCC website
more than 818,000 times."33 A report by telecom firms also found many
of the mails were attributable to "FakeMailGenerator.com." On any side,
it's a pity that by this stage the public comment process at the FCC and
other public regulators' websites has now been heavily gamed.
Several of these tactics also echoed those used against other attempts
to restrain the open web, like the copyright-mongering Stop Online
Piracy Act in 2012, and the cable industry's attempts to persuade
Congress to strip the FCC of its authority to stop paid prioritization in
2006. In the latter case, in one of the most impressive episodes of online
social action, activists assembled an alliance of left-wing, right-wing,
and overtly apolitical groups to oppose the measures, including some
major online firms, consumer groups, MoveOn.org, Free Press, SEIU,
the Christian Coalition of America, Gun Owners of America, the AARP,
the American Library Association, and National Religious Broad-
casters.34 This broad coalition opposed the attempt by the cable and
phone corporations to put up toll gates to reach their enormous networks.
This activism was effective enough to kill the bills in Congress—no
small feat.

In the end, the huge battles for net neutrality, and the major victory of
getting the FCC to grudgingly support it despite major industry
resistance, is a surprisingly happy if temporary chapter in a long story.
The left has limited policy triumphs to celebrate these days, so this
unvarnished, if short-lived, victory should not be forgotten. Four million
commenters can't be wrong!

CHAPTER 8
Redefining R&D
The state's unknown role in creating the Internet and mobile tech
The world-reshaping technology wielded by the corporations of Big Tech
is usually considered to be the main justification for their power. Sure,
they may be incredibly powerful and have unaccountable influence over
our lives, but hey, they earned it— Gates and Jobs and Bezos and Page
and Zuckerberg had to invent the technology, right?
Except they didn't invent it. The original name for the Internet was
ARPANET, because it was developed by the US military's research arm
and affiliated universities. The original address of Google was not
google.com but google.stanford.edu, because it was developed in a
publicly subsidized research campus. The original name for Wi-Fi was
ALOHAnet, because the University of Hawaii struggled to network its
island campuses and developed new radio technology to do it.
In fact, nearly all the scientific and engineering research that went
into today's fancy high-tech products and services came from the public
sector—primarily research universities and the military. Even a very brief
survey of this history makes that abundantly clear and helps us see where
resources could be best used to develop the science and technology of the
future, and where the credit for today's platforms really belongs.
The Advent of ARPANET
Consider the chips themselves, the miniaturized processors that provide
the computing power on the PCs and smartphones this book has
described. In 2018 the Turing Award, given for achievement in the
computer sciences and often considered the Nobel Prize of computing,
went to professor Dave Patterson of the University of California,
Berkeley, and professor John Hennessy at Stanford. In the 1980s these
academics had codeveloped the reduced instruction set computer (RISC)
chip, a more efficient processor that allowed for greater computing

power. That chip architecture is completely ubiquitous on today's mobile
processors, and even Intel chips have moved toward its simplified
structure.1 Today the two work for Google, Patterson as a researcher and
Hennessy as an Alphabet board member, but their pivotally important
original work occurred on public campuses with no near-term profit
motive to harry them. In fact, the pivotal use of silicon to create modern
semiconducting chips was first researched by public-private partnerships
among the military, AT&T, Xerox, and others.2
The origins of the Internet and its most popular application, the World
Wide Web, are somewhat better known. The system that would become
the Internet first arose in the 1960s in response to twin needs of federal
agencies: the desire of scientists to share access to then-scarce computer
resources, and the US military's need for a decentralized, redundantly
connected network that could survive a nuclear conflict—a major concern
during the Cold War. The data-hungry world of espionage and
counterinsurgency also played a major role from the early days. The
project was taken up by the Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA), the Pentagon's main research arm.
The technology to provide these goals was eventually found in
"packet switching," a means of sending information in which data or a
message is broken down into packets with address information attached,
sent through a communication network, and reassembled at its destination
back into the original message. This technology had costs related to the
need to include routing info on so many packets, but it made the system
flexible and allowed for cheaper hardware.3
One difficulty was that in order to connect with each other, the
research centers and military facilities had to use a huge variety of
different computers and operating systems—this was before the
standardizing effects of the IBM PC and the Microsoft operating system
monopoly. But, if they could connect all these machines, it could
eventually make the network stronger by bringing together so many
different resources.
ARPA funded the leasing of communication lines from AT&T—
which held a monopoly over US telecommunications until the 1980s—
and organized the sprawling project. The first ARPANET computing
installation to be connected was UCLA in September 1969, followed by
the other early network nodes of UC Santa Barbara, the University of
Utah, and the Stanford Research Institute. A good deal of technical details
had to be painstakingly ironed out, yet decisions were mostly made

through a consensus process among users and operators, and ARPA's
funding gave it the ability to coerce holdouts who were using other
technical standards.
Notably, in the early days of limited network use in the 1970s,
computer user activism was common, including in the Users Interest
Working Group (USING), which lobbied for more applications funding
and other issues. But as Janet Abbate observes in her essential Inventing
the Internet:
Faced with organized action by users, the ARPA managers were evidently afraid that the
network might slip out of their control. Members of USING were dissuaded from pushing
their demands by ARPA program manager Craig Fields, who made it clear that the
authority to make plans for the network lay with ARPA, not with USING.... The fate of
USING revealed the limits of ARPA's generally non-hierarchical management approach.
Individual users or research teams had tacit or explicit permission to add hardware and
software to the system; ARPA even gave financial support for some of these experiments.
However, users as a group had no say in the design decisions or funding priorities of the
ARPANET project. The ARPANET experience is a reminder that the efforts of individuals
to build virtual communities are constrained by the realities of money and power that
support the infrastructure of cyberspace.4
More and more scientists were using ARPANET to transmit data sets and
gain access to computing power, analyzing seismic and weather data,
modeling molecules, and advancing medicine. And packet-switching
technology was being applied to other communications media, so by the
1970s ARPA was running three experimental networks—the wired
ARPANET, the Bay Area radio-based PRNET, and the satellite-based
SATNET.
It was only when ARPA successfully demonstrated interconnection of
these different network systems that the Internet could be born. This
would require devising technology for connecting them, called protocols,
which had to be designed to run on many different computers and allow
for an orderly flow of data between hosts. The solution, after prolonged
design debate under ARPA's aegis, was a set of protocols knowns as the
Transmission Control Protocol and Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), with the
former arranging the flow of packets and the latter managing the
articulation among the different networks—like information flowing
through wired broadband connections to a radio signal for cell service.
TCP/IP was well suited for the military, which eventually adopted it and
thus gave it a great impetus to spread as an informal standard.
Notably, ARPA insisted that the protocols, as well as source code for
the computers connecting the ARPANET and other crucial information,
be publicly available and not the property of its primary contractors. And

as Abbate comments, "Beyond Xerox PARC ... there seems to have been
no corporate participation in the design of the Internet."5 Of course, in the
United States a strong political tendency exists to privatize public goods
as soon as possible, but, as another technology history recounts,
"[i]ndeed, in 1972 the telecommunication giant AT&T declined the
government's offer to take over ARPANET, the forerunner of the modern
internet, on the grounds that it was not likely to make a profit."6 IBM also
turned it down.7
So it was ARPA that triumphantly carried out the first demonstration
of the Internet, a network of networks, when on November 22, 1977,
packets of data were broadcast from a traveling van on a California
highway over PRNET, to an ARPANET gateway, into space through
SATNET to Europe, and back via ARPANET to California. This proof of
concept excited the technical community and spurred interest among
many research and defense bodies, which joined the network and adopted
its open protocols, often with ARPA help or funding.8 In time the military
insisted that all ARPA sites adopt these same protocols, which meant long
hours reconfiguring host computers but helped further the technical
standards for internetworking. The military also peeled off its network
(MILNET) from ARPANET in 1983, putting the latter under civilian
control and bringing university researchers back into dominating its user
base.
In light of how the popular tech fairy tale presents a story of online
tech arising from brilliant small business startups, it is hilarious that in
reality, it was Colonel Heidi Heiden who ordered the commercialization
of the technology. Nominally this was done so that there would then be
multiple commercial suppliers of the networking tech, but market forces
would soon lead to large regional monopolies. The privatization included
a $20 million fund for computer manufacturers to port TCP/IP to their
products, which Abbate openly calls "technology transfer," a term that
today is more associated with Western companies condemning Chinese
government requirements that Western companies share tech secrets in
exchange for access to China's giant market. But this current tech being
forcibly transferred by China relies on public US research that was forked
over to the business world decades ago, and unlike the Chinese, those
companies were even paid for the privilege—"All the major computer
companies took advantage of this opportunity, and by 1990 TCP/IP was
available for virtually every computer on the American market."9 Years
later, the federal government's Office of the Inspector General concluded

that the privatization program was polluted by conflicts of interest, with
insiders retained to lobby for telecoms including MCI, and with no effort
to seek competition.10
Indeed, Abbate's own rather apolitical book's summary leaves the
conventional view dead in the water:
The story of the Internet's origins departs from explanations of technical innovation that
center on individual inventors or on the pull of markets. [ARPANET pioneers Vint] Cerf
and [Robert] Kahn were neither captains of industry nor "two guys tinkering in a garage."
The Internet was not built in response to popular demand, real or imagined; its subsequent
mass appeal had no part in the decisions made in 1973. Rather, the project reflected the
command economy of military procurement, where specialized performance is everything
and money is no object, and the research ethos of the university, where experimental
interest and technical elegance take precedence over commercial application.11
In the early 1980s, many more universities were connected to ARPANET
via their computer science departments' phone-based connections, mainly
through funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF), the major
US basic science agency. ARPA helped fund these LANs (local area
networks), too, while the NSF helped bring large regional networks of
universities online and leased its own high-speed lines for a "backbone,"
creating a central network to manage the rising packet-switching traffic
known as the NSFNET. The NSFNET overlapped with ARPANET for a
time and shared costs, but by the time most universities were networked
in the late 1980s, the ARPANET hardware and early configurations were
showing their age. Twenty years is a long interval in computer science
terms, and military overseers decided to retire it as obsolete, transferring
the ARPANET nodes to the NSFNET, then formally dismantling it in
February 1990.12
As use climbed through the 1980s, US telecom companies finally
began taking an interest, and pressure rose to completely privatize the
network, since private investment in commercial networks for companies,
schools, or individuals had gradually spread in the wake of the pioneering
ARPA and NSF networks. By the early 1990s, it was possible for the
commercial spin-offs of the early contractors to take over since by then "a
whole parallel structure of commercial TCP/IP networks had evolved."
In 1991 the NSF unveiled a plan for Internet service to be taken over
by private firms—including some of the phone companies— which
would be designated as Internet service providers. The argument was that
the ISPs would inevitably provide better service and investment than
government bodies since they would have to compete with each other and
provide their own gateways to their network backbones. The transfer

from NSFNET to commercial ISPs was effected on April 30, 1995,
marking the end of US government ownership of the Internet's systems
and infrastructure.13
But this vision of rich market competition quickly proved illusory
when the cable ISPs went on a massive merger binge after deregulation in
1996, becoming great regional monopolies that would soon launch a
crusade to undo net neutrality. It wasn't long before the Internet itself
became dominated by a few gigantic online platforms, magnetically
attracting users through the network effects we've seen demonstrated in
case after case in this book. So, while the loss of control by authoritarian
government institutions may sound appealing, the history comports with
the main message of the authors of Misunderstanding the Internet, who
found that early optimistic forecasts of the Internet's potential "all had
one enormous error at their center. They failed to recognize that the
impact of technology is filtered through the structures and processes of
society.... In brief, the rise of the internet was accompanied by the
decline of its freedom."14
The popular fairy tale of private geniuses driven by desires for
personal gain leading to world-shaking innovation is even refuted in the
case of Tim Berners-Lee, who is famous for developing the three main
technologies that constitute the standard protocols needed for any user to
get on the World Wide Web and access information. Working at a huge
research institution that required an enormous amount of technical
equipment to test fundamental particles, he developed a "memory aid"
that allowed the creation of documents in which the act of clicking on a
particular term could lead to other documents explaining that term. This
technology became "hypertext," and Berners-Lee pioneered the
acceptance of a decentralized protocol system for it. The lack of a central
authority meant some could become "dead links," but that way the system
would also be open to independent users.
Then came the encoding language (HTML) and the system for
creating addresses for various sites and pages, each containing a universal
resource locator, or URL. Berners-Lee also set up and wrote the software
for the first computer "server" that made documents available to online
users. Crucially, the European Organization for Nuclear Research
(CERN) had adopted TCP/IP, so the web app could run on top of those
protocols and be used by any user connected to the ARPANET/NSFNET.
Fascinatingly, there was another attempt at developing a global
hypertext system similar to that created at CERN, but this was a private,

market-based effort, and it occurred simultaneously with the military's
failed attempts in the 1980s to get private corporations to take over the
early Internet. Ted Nelson developed a project called "Xanadu," but as
the press recounts, "Nelson wanted Xanadu to make a profit, and this
vastly complicated the system, which never got off the ground. Berners-
Lee, in contrast, persuaded CERN to let go of intellectual property to get
the Web airborne."15 This was done in 1993, and while many mock
Berners-Lee for not patenting the technology to become rich, his decision
to release it publicly was typical of the scientific community's desire to
broadly share information as part of the greater research enterprise.16 It
certainly created insane wealth for others who had useful platforms and
fewer scruples.
Berners-Lee continued working with the early online giants—
Microsoft, Sun, Apple—to maintain regular protocols on the fast-
evolving early web to keep it from developing separate standards and
becoming balkanized, with some sites requiring different browsers or
other incompatibilities. Notably, as I mentioned in chapter 1, Berners-Lee
is concerned that the World Wide Web's potential has been undermined
since "some of its most successful inhabitants have begun to chip away at
its principles. Large social-networking sites are walling off information
posted by their users from the rest of the Web," and if that trend is not
reversed, "the Web could be broken into fragmented islands."17
Getting Mobile on Its Feet
Consider the similar story of Wi-Fi, the modern world's favorite thing to
both use and complain about. The local radio signals that allow mobile
computing within range of a router at home or business are the principal
means of Internet access today, and perhaps unsurprisingly, the
technology was invented by a research university. Tech journalist Brian
Merchant writes: "While wireless cell networks evolved from massive
government-backed projects, the main way our phones get online began
as a far-flung academic hackaround. Wi-Fi began long before the web as
we know it existed and was actually developed along the same timeline as
ARPANET." In the 1960s the University of Hawaii's various island labs
couldn't communicate with the main computer in Honolulu. Scientists
solved this problem using a pair of high-speed UHF channels to access
off-site computing resources, launching "the project [that] would grow

into the aptly named ALOHAnet, the precursor to Wi-Fi."18 Notably, the
project was partially funded by ARPA and the US Navy.19
On this same note, although Apple is the tech giant most associated
with slick mobile technology, it arguably owes the most to public
research. The famously sensitive multi-touch interface of the iPhone and
later smartphone and tablet models owes an enormous amount to public
research, despite Jobs's claims that the company originated it. Amazingly,
the first screen surface able to detect multiple simultaneous finger
movements was developed in the 1970s by an engineer at CERN, the
same particle collider complex where Berners-Lee would later develop
the Internet Protocols.20
Merchant notes that
while Jobs publicly claimed the invention as Apple's own, multitouch was developed
decades earlier by a trail of pioneers from places as varied as CERN's particle-accelerator
labs, to the University of Toronto, to a start-up bent on empowering the disabled.
Institutions like Bell Labs and CERN incubated research and experimentation; which is to
say that the government poured in hundreds of millions of dollars to support them.21
The idea for the touch-sensitive "capacitive screens" themselves,
which take advantage of the human body's own ability to conduct
electricity, arose in research by the Royal Radar Establishment, a UK
military body, in the 1960s. The highly versatile multi-touch interface,
allowing many different commands and actions from the user, was
developed by a University of Delaware PhD candidate under an NSF-CIA
research program. He later commercialized the technology, and the
company was bought by Apple in 2005, two years before the first iPhone
release.22
Together, these brushstrokes paint an overall picture that is pretty
dramatic, one best observed by viewing the diagram below. It comes from
a US government science-promoting body, the Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP), which in a February 2006 report on digital
technology analyzed the iPod, Steve Jobs's celebrated mobile era-
inaugurating smartphone predecessor. The diagram illustrates how the
most impressive technical components, from the drive to the memory to
the battery, were developed through public sector research. The complex
LCD display was the result of research from the Department of Defense,
the NSF, and the National Institutes of Health; basic research on
processing radio signals was funded by the Army Research Office; the
DRAM memory cache was developed by IBM with DARPA funding. The
report observed that the iPod "illustrates the unexpected benefits of basic

research.... The device itself is innovative, but it [is] built upon a broad
platform of component technologies, each derived from fundamental
studies in physical science, mathematics, and engineering."23
The Entrepreneurial State, by Mariana Mazzucato is by far the best
consideration of all these issues, including the origins of the smartphone
era. She observes that what makes a smartphone smart is its connection to
the Internet and other online applications, which as we've seen rely
completely on the networks created and nurtured over many years by
ARPA and the NSF. But further, the Global Positioning System required
for Google Maps and finding restaurants and bars was developed by the
DOD in the 1970s for more accurate deployments of materiel and
munitions. Only in the 1990s was the system released and quickly
swamped with civilian use.
The attractive liquid-crystal displays, too, owe their existence to Cold
War military investments, spurred by worries that the increasingly
dominant Japanese suppliers of the 1980s lacked adequate capacity to
meet US demand alone. So the Pentagon, eager for more sophisticated
and interactive display technologies, organized an industry consortium
working on flat-panel displays, with the breakthrough technology under
development at consortium member Westinghouse. Mazzucato notes that
"the research carried out at Westinghouse was almost entirely funded by

the US Army."24 But the company then shut down the program, leading
the project head to appeal to a series of US computer giants— IBM,
Compaq, Xerox, 3M—but it was turned down by all of them before
receiving a contract from DARPA in the late eighties, enabling the
development of later device displays. Further, the lithium-ion batteries
essential to today's power-hungry devices have a similar story of early
funding from the NSF and the Department of Energy.25 Also, cellular
communications standards, including the early system development to
prove the concept, were heavily supported by European government
investments in signal processing.26 And so on.
Having checked a majority of the boxes of what makes a smartphone,
Mazzucato lists nearly every functional component of the device, along
with the public or military agency that developed it or funded its creation.
It's an alphabet soup of public bodies— DOE, DARPA, NSF, CERN,
Army Research Office, the Navy. Jobs sure was proud of his role in
designing the device, but his engineers relied on decades of taxpayer-
funded research at these agencies, whose investments created all the
fancy tiny components of the slick device we use to navigate the world,
communicate with our friends, and take pictures of our pets.27
Cheating at Monopoly
Beyond the basics, even the hardware and software technologies at the
hearts of the Big Tech platforms themselves often derive from public
work. Bill Gates's and Paul Allen's MS-BASIC operating system, which
they sold to IBM and ended up dominating the global market for many
years, was written in the BASIC computer language. This language was
created by professors at Dartmouth in 1964 with funding from the NSF.28
Later, Gates was filled with scorn that the public might oppose his use of
this technology to monopolize computing.
And besides the background story of the smartphone multitouch
interfaces, Apple had even more fundamental roots in public-sector
technology. The PARC research facility, from which Steve Jobs obtained
the basics of the graphic user interface that became the Mac and later all
computer interfaces, had several former ARPA researchers working on
those display concepts. The prominent Wired journalist Steven Levy
wrote, "This little-known branch of Defense was quietly kick-starting the
computer revolution that would result in the Macintosh."29

The most visionary action that can be attributed to the world's richest
man, Jeff Bezos, is that in the web's early days he was "doubling and
tripling his bet on the Internet," as his biographer puts it.30 A wily
business move perhaps, but it amounts to recognizing a good opportunity
to make money on technology developed by federal taxpayers over the
1960s, '70s, and '80s. Facebook's deferential corporate biographer David
Kirkpatrick admits: "Something like Facebook was envisioned by
engineers who laid the groundwork for the Internet. In a 1968 essay by J.
C. R. Licklider and Robert W. Taylor, 'The Computer as Communication
Device,'" the two essentially envisioned Facebook's basic social
network.31 They worked for ARPA.
And of course, Google itself, considered the most academically
inspired of the megacaps, was originally google.stanford.edu, where it
was developed through the state and federal tax funding of the state of
California and the United States, which provided long-term research
stability and freedom from the need to turn a short-term dollar. There,
Page and Brin could state with detachment that "advertising funded
search engines will be inherently biased towards the advertisers.... We
believe the issue of advertising causes enough mixed incentives that it is
crucial to have a competitive search engine that is transparent and in the
academic realm."32 Page's first research paper included the note, "funded
by
DARPA."33
But the secret origins of Big Tech in public research don't speak to
how the tech is used once it's privatized. Google's search algorithms have
been hugely elaborated since it became a private company, but once in the
realm of the marketplace, technology evolves only in directions that
engorge profitability. Data scientist Cathy O'Neil's distressing and
digestible book Weapons of Math Destruction reviews details of harmful
software algorithms, ones with no transparency or dynamic learning to
improve on previous errors. She notes that "in the case of web giants like
Google, Amazon, and Facebook, these precisely tailored algorithms alone
are worth hundreds of billions of dollars." Yet "our livelihoods
increasingly depend on our ability to make our case to machines. The
clearest example of this is Google. For businesses, whether it's a bed-and-
breakfast or an auto repair shop, success hinges on showing up on the
first page of search results. Now individuals face similar challenges,
whether trying to get a foot in the door of a company, to climb the ranks
—or even to survive waves of layoffs."34 O'Neil also notices that these

harmful algorithms "tend to punish the poor.... The privileged, we'll see
time and again, are processed more by people, the masses by
machines."35
A similar story emerges with artificial intelligence, considered among
the most advanced technological fields today. Merchant observes that
"before Siri was a core functionality of the iPhone, it was an app on the
App Store launched by a well-funded Silicon Valley start-up. Before that,
it was a research project at Stanford backed by the Defense Department
with the aim of creating an artificially intelligent assistant." That includes
the spoken interface so associated with AI in the popular imagination:
"As with much of the advanced computer research around Stanford then,
ARPA was doing the funding. It would mark a decades-long interest in
the field of AI from the agency, which would fund multiple speech
recognition projects in the 1970s."36
The field is advancing through improvements in deep neural networks
—computer algorithms modeled on the human brain that crunch data and
attempt to learn to do different tasks. These most elaborate algorithms,
however, will be corporate property, and corporations will resist
divulging their proprietary code just as they already do for more
conventional algorithms that sort search results and screen credit
applicants. The Wall Street Journal observes: "For the corporations, the
algorithms will be proprietary tools to assess your loan-worthiness, your
job applications, and your risk of stroke. Many balk at the costs of
developing systems that not only learn to make decisions, but that also
explain those decisions to outsiders."37
This likely means that a powerful new tool will gradually emerge for
the tech giants, and it will be developed as recklessly as the rivalry among
the monopolists allows. The industry has tried to preempt serious
government regulation by creating a number of proposed ethical
guidelines backed by one or the other giant, including Microsoft, Intel,
and the Information Technology Industry Council, which includes
Google, Facebook, and Apple. It's of course unlikely these entities will
propose anything that could limit their future profitable exploitation of
the technology they're investing in today, but so far US administrations
have been willing to allow self-regulation, and these guidelines are
evidently intended to perpetuate that permissiveness.
Overall, however, the clear tendency is for publicly backed research
entities, not private companies, to experience major technological leaps.
Only states and publicly funded research institutions can support long-

term basic scientific research, which by its nature is based on exploring
the unknown and can never guarantee a genuine breakthrough will be the
result, let alone a money-making one. Plus, the costs of scientific research
and experimental engineering—including trained scientists and fancy
prototyping equipment—are large.
Private institutions are under systemic and legal obligations to make
money quickly to reward their capitalist investors; thus expensive,
uncertain long-term research is inevitably harder and harder to justify as
quarters tick by with few money-making breakthroughs to show for it.
Small wonder, then, that the Internet, the web, the GUI, modern
processors, Wi-Fi signaling, fundamental computer languages, and even
Google itself arose from the academic or military research settings where
steady funding is more or less assured and near-term stock prices don't
drive whether projects get axed. The history is long—Guglielmo Marconi
developed radio for the Royal Navy, Berners-Lee the web protocols for
CERN. The OSTP notes, "Past DOD research has resulted in
revolutionary technological capabilities such as radar, digital computers,
wireless mobile communications, lasers, fiber optics, composite
materials, the Internet (and other 'packet switched' networks), and
satellite navigation."38
Mazzucato herself observes that private businesses dominate overall
spending on research and development, responsible for 67 percent of the
total. However, on basic R&D the exploration that takes place in more
fundamental research areas with no immediate commercial return but that
sometimes discovers basic new technologies—the federal government
together with the university system hugely dominate at 72 percent.39
Private companies appear to be more suited to shorter-term, applied
research using basic discoveries and technologies developed by the public
sector's basic R&D work.
The point, of course, isn't that the military should have discretion on
where it spends its hundreds upon hundreds of billions of dollars each
year, or that war is worth it for its high-tech spinoffs. The major role
played by the Pentagon in US research funding means that there will be a
bias toward research with potential military applications, a broad area but
still a potentially limiting one—technologies with no clear military
relevance will be at a disadvantage for limited funding dollars. Rather, the
point is that the public sector is the natural space for scientific and
technological research, providing the steady funding and also maybe
imposing some popular constraints on what can be done with the tech.

Not only is technology too important to be left to the tech giants, it
didn't even come from them in the first place.

CHAPTER 9
Leashing the Techlash
Tech's love-hate relationship with politics
Big Tech had a long honeymoon, with users globally delighted by the
convenience and versatility of modern tech platforms, from YouTube to
Amazon Marketplace. Especially in the mobile era, with free or low-cost
applications like Google Search and Facebook, consumers seldom saw
any downsides to using these services, which undoubtedly provide major
value for communication, work, and entertainment.
But every honeymoon's got to end sometime. Microsoft's antitrust
trial and the guilty verdict on its monopolization of the web browser
market started the process, but it escalated dramatically with the
successive waves of revelations about the platforms' data policies, leaks
of personal information, arm-twisting on carrying productivity apps,
heinous labor conditions, and lax security protections against foreign
election meddling. This bad press has piled up and definitely had an
effect on the perception of the tech giants, and it's already leading to
more government oversight.
By 2018 the tech megacaps had experienced so many scandals and
embarrassments that press headlines referred to their regular responses as
"the Tech Industry's Apology Tour."1 Some speculated this would lead to
user rebellions and state regulation— sometimes called the "techlash."
But the companies' entrenched monopolies and oligopolies, fortified
with network effects and "grooved-in" user habits, along with the giant
mountains of data and lobbying cash on hand, may well put a leash on
the techlash.
Trump l'Monde
It was so easy at first. For years, the high-tech sector was seen as a
leading edge of economic innovation and a source of pride in American

ingenuity. The web and other popular Internet applications remade
society and created whole new industries not to mention enormous
amounts of wealth. The United States' tradition of laissez-faire policy
easily carried over to the new industries, and applied across the political
spectrum. Back when Microsoft first faced investigations into its
monopolies, then-Republican senator and later presidential candidate
Bob Dole perfectly articulated the bipartisan response when he said: "A
company develops a new product, a product consumers want. But now
the government steps in and is in effect attempting to dictate the terms on
which that product can be marketed and sold.... Pinch me, but I thought
we were still in America."2 US liberals and conservatives happily
celebrated Big Tech well into the twenty-first century and the mobile era,
with the business papers reporting that the "dominance" of "big online
platforms ... was made possible in part by a quarter-century, bipartisan
Washington consensus backing rules and regulations designed mainly to
foster their development."3
The bipartisan celebration of tech had a highly dark side, too, made
most famous by the National Security Agency's secret PRISM program,
only revealed publicly when NSA contractor Edward Snowden leaked
documents about the program in 2013. Inaugurated during the airless
days of the Bush administration, PRISM took advantage of the incredible
data hoarding of the platform giants. Supposedly intended to prevent
terrorism, PRISM has taken advantage of a rubber-stamp oversight court
to evidently vacuum up as much data as it feels like on nearly anyone.
As Surveillance Valley author Yasha Levine writes, PRISM is "a
sophisticated on-demand data tap housed within the datacenters of the
biggest and most respected names in Silicon Valley: Google, Apple,
Facebook, Yahoo!, and Microsoft. These devices allow the NSA to
siphon off whatever the agency requires, including emails, attachments,
chats, address books, files, photographs, audio files, search activity, and
mobile phone location history."4 Such complicated processes required
significant participation by the tech companies themselves, to the extent
that the Guardian reports the NSA paid the companies millions of dollars
to cover their compliance costs.5 The tech behemoths didn't see fit to
inform their users about the program, even though it could potentially
give the state an utterly complete picture of users' online activity, and in
real time.
As Google rose to succeed Microsoft in the 2000s as arguably the
most important of the platforms, it gradually followed the lead of other

great corporations and opened up a lobbying shop in DC. It became
famously close with the Obama administration, with numerous Google
staff members working for the administration and its campaigns. Wired
journalist Steven Levy records that "Google employees, through the
company PAC, contributed more than $800,000 to his campaign, trailing
only Goldman Sachs and Microsoft in total contributions."6 That much
money goes a long way toward undermining the separation of search and
state.
Notably, the Federal Trade Commission, the national agency charged
with monitoring and blocking monopolization or other abuses of trade,
proposed a Do Not Track option for consumers in 2010. Modeled on the
national Do Not Call list that legally bars telemarketers from calling
listed numbers, it would have created an opt-out system preventing the
collection of tracking data. Later the Obama administration developed a
provisional Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights aiming to increase users'
control of their data. Both were defeated amid heavy lobbying, mainly
by Google and Facebook.7
The FTC also voted in 2012 not to charge Google with unfair
practices. The investigation began after various third-party sites, like
Yelp and LinkedIn, demanded that their content not be "scraped" by
Google—making it appear directly on Google's search results and thus
causing traffic to their actual sites to plummet. On its face, the case was
quite suspicious, as Google was plainly a rising center of major power.
But the Obama-era FTC vote was unanimous.8
Then, of course, came the administration of the nakedly racist, serial
sexual-harassing, TV billionaire imbecile Donald Trump. A nation still
reeling at his upset victory watched as the tech giants were invited to
Trump Tower for a historic gathering to confer on the economy with
representatives of the administration. Amazon, Google, Facebook,
Apple, Microsoft, Oracle, Intel, IBM, and other platform giants all
attended.9 The meeting was favorable and led to typically bland press
releases on commitments to innovation.
But Trump soon developed a significant antagonism with Silicon
Valley, and as usual his hostility has been mainly about a personal
grudge: namely the fact that the industry largely supported his opponent
Hillary Clinton, who received $1.6 million from Google's political action
committee (PAC) alone. Shortly after his meeting with the tech moguls
Trump began to claim— on Twitter, with no attempt at providing

evidence—that the platforms were all biased against him, that tech is
utterly bereft of conservatives, and that Amazon pays too little in taxes
and exploits the US Postal Service (that final claim is more plausible).
Most of these claims are hard to take seriously, considering that the
tech execs have significant shared interests with conservative, pro-
business political figures like those around Trump. As Jathan Sadowski
wrote in Jacobin, the conference was relatively simple as "billionaires
met to express their interests and discuss policy.... The executives didn't
have to set aside their politics to talk business— their politics align with
the new administration."10 Above all, the prospect of a major corporate
tax cut and a break on each company's gigantic overseas cash piles were
magnetically attractive to the big corporations, and they got their wish in
the 2017 Tax Act.
Sadowski's point was confirmed early in the administration, when it
issued its first in a series of bans on travel for citizens of Muslim-
majority countries, triggering large protests at airports nationwide. A
Wall Street Journal reporter observed that when the administration
"tightened the criteria for granting H-1B visas to temporary professional
workers, it effectively favored Silicon Valley giants over outsourcing
companies."11 And New York Times reporting found that "the larger tech
companies tended to be less forceful in their reactions to the executive
order than the smaller ones," although "pressure had been building on
companies to speak out against measures being endorsed by Mr. Trump.
Some of that impetus came from employees, and some from activists."12
In fact, despite its usual love of the industry, the Times had to
acknowledge that, as a headline put it, "Tech Opposition to Trump [Is]
Propelled by Employees, Not Executives." It noted the companies are
"vulnerable" to "the sentiments of their customers and employees, some
of whom have more radical ideas in mind." Tech workers have formed
activist groups like Tech Solidarity, which tries to provide IT help to
people fighting the Muslim ban and other Trump policies, and the Tech
Workers Coalition, which seeks to support labor and other organizing.
One tech organizer said, "I want pressure from below to counterbalance
the pressure management is already feeling from above."13 As we saw
with Google's occasionally principled moves of recent years, the main
impetus for decency is from the workers, not the rich execs.
Claims that Big Tech has an anti-right-wing bias are also hard to
reconcile with the fact that during the 2016 campaign, a number of

Facebook workers complained that Trump's posts frequently violated the
site's limits on hate speech, blaming national problems on various
minorities. But Zuckerberg decided the importance of a national
presidential candidate's speech overruled this requirement—speaking
both to the power of Facebook's platform and to its tolerance of Trump's
racist tirades.14 Indeed, Trump was the biggest political advertising-
buyer on Facebook in 2016, spending $274,000.15 The campaign used
the social network's targeting features extensively, often experimenting
by running a dozen similar versions of an ad, testing which were most
successful.
Other reasons for the political animus against Big Tech may be
related to the claim by Steve Bannon, Trump's former chief strategist,
that "two-thirds or three-quarters of the C.E.O.s in Silicon Valley are
from South Asia or from Asia," which is both racist and incorrect,
typical of Bannon's celebrated "strategizing."16 But more likely, the
main source of conservative antagonism toward tech is related to de-
platforming, where a platform company, typically Facebook, Google, or
Twitter, suspends a user's account or channel due to statements violating
the terms of service. As discussed above, this isn't unheard of, especially
for evidence-free, conspiracy-mongering huckster jerk-offs like Alex
Jones, but the main victims have been leftists who have seen their most
prominent sites dramatically downranked in Google's search results. Yet
the right never forgets a grudge, and episodes like Facebook's short-lived
curation of the News Feed to limit right-wing posts, and Jones's
suspensions, will likely be enough to create right-wing ill will toward
Silicon Valley until kingdom come.
But in the world of real policy, Google scored an early triumph in
lobbying the Trump administration at the time it was considering
nominating Utah attorney general Sean Reyes to head the FTC. Reyes
had previously asked the commission to reopen its antitrust investigation
of the company, and as the Wall Street Journal reports, "Google
responded to the threat of potentially unfriendly policies from Mr. Reyes
by engaging a squadron of GOP lobbyists to press the incoming Trump
administration not to name him to the position," and succeeded.17 It also
freely contributed $285,000 to Trump's inauguration, as well as throwing
money at reactionary gatherings like the far-right Conservative Political
Action Conference (CPAC), plus donating heavily to right-wing
institutions like the Heritage Foundation and the American Enterprise
Institute.18

However, the main overlap because tech and Trump is the 2017 Tax
Act, which dramatically reduced US corporate income tax and
temporarily reduced middle-class taxes, but also contained a provision
on overseas corporate cash. Historically taxed at a repatriation rate of 35
percent, firms will now mostly pay no US tax on international profit at
all, but with the requirement of paying a 15.5 percent tax on the profits
already piled up at the time of the bill.19 Most of the Big Five tech
platforms profiled in this book took advantage of this hugely lucrative
change in the tax law, bringing home tens of billions for their share
buybacks and dividends for the wealthy investors who own their stock.
The towering overseas cash piles were an example of disruptive tech
holding to older corporate practice—years earlier, when Google had
been found to be funneling much of its business through a post office
box in Bermuda in order to avoid $2 billion in yearly taxes, CEO Eric
Schmidt responded to criticism by saying, "It's called capitalism."20
Of course, the Tax Act was sold to the public in the same way as the
GOP's other tax cuts—the new money in businesses' hands would be
used for new investment, creating jobs. But, as Wall Street Journal
reporters observed on repatriating their money, "the nation's tech giants
can now more freely dip into their stockpiles of overseas cash. They
don't seem to be in any hurry."21 The companies have been using low-
cost borrowing to finance their data center investments and put cash into
shareholders' hands, easily affordable for companies exploding with
revenues. Most tellingly, Microsoft's chief financial officer told analysts,
"When we have seen an opportunity to invest, we have not really waited
for tax reform to do that." Despite right-wing claims that taxes are the
obstacle to job creation, it turns out today's corporations are rich enough
to work around them.
These policy victories speak to Big Tech's quick adaptation to the
world of DC lobbying, aided by towering heaps of money. Tech lobbying
has reached huge scales, with billions thrown at K Street influence-
peddling douchebags to twist legislation to platform demands. From
2013 to 2018, only Boeing spent more on lobbying than Google, which
internally describes its lobbyists and ex-diplomats as "foreign minister"
and "ambassador."22 The five tech titans are close behind, with each
hurling 4 to 6 million bucks a year at warping US policy to their ends.
While publicly entertaining the idea of some regulation, Facebook has
lobbied behind the scenes to respond to its long list of heinous problems
with its own promised software fixes, while Amazon has pushed to

create a uniform national e-commerce tax code and to keep antitrust law
limited to preventing monopolistic price hikes.
Despite this, Big Tech's political hand has been weakened by the
much-commented-upon scandal of Russian interference in the 2016 and
2018 US elections—mainly by buying ads for controversial or divisive
Facebook pages and YouTube channels. While American commenters
have been shocked by these programs, by US standards this is a pretty
mild level of interference, given America's long history of fixing
overseas elections and overthrowing governments. I took this up in
greater detail in chapter 6, but it's worth noting here that the United
States has recently attempted the exact same strategy as a means to
meddle in other countries, including Cuba. The Miami New Times
reported that the US Office of Cuba Broadcasting, which produces
programming opposed to the Communist regime, planned "to create non-
branded local Facebook accounts to disseminate information," and that
"budget documents suggest the OCB planned to spread U.S. propaganda
through Facebook channels designed to fool Cuban users into thinking
the information was coming from other Cuban users."23 USAID was
caught operating a phony "Cuban Twitter" platform also, the paper
reports. But this is US propaganda, so the political mainstream considers
this not to be an act of war, which is how hyperventilating liberals have
described Russia's comparatively modest trolling.
Despite the shadow cast by possible future regulation, the tech giants
appear to have reached a new pinnacle. Although they have disrupted
many industries, tech platforms "haven't attacked banks," as business
observers have put it, instead limiting their incursions to moves into
accepting deposits, making loans, and other practices of commercial
banking. One suggested reason why is that the great US megabanks are
becoming major cloud-computing customers, making the tech giants
wary of antagonizing such big customers.24 And certainly cloud services
are more profitable than retail banking, and as a result, when the
platforms roll out new mobile payments services, they tend to do so in
partnership with one or another of the gigantic banks providing the
capital and back-end services. All this suggests Big Tech's true arrival: it
is apparently reaching codominance of the economy with Wall Street.
Disrupted

And so it was that in June of 2019, the dam finally broke and even the
investment-friendly US government, across its branches, at last began to
turn on Big Tech. First, the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade
Commission, which share jurisdiction of antitrust policy that targets
monopolistic firms, announced they had negotiated to split up
responsibility for future investigations of the tech giants, with Justice
taking potential probes of Google and Apple, and the FTC taking
Facebook and Amazon.25 This represents a real threat to the platforms,
as antitrust cases carry at least the theoretical possibility of firms being
broken up, as the DOJ tried to do with Microsoft in the nineties, only
calling off this goal during the appeals process.
Then, Congress got involved, with the House Judiciary Committee
opening an investigation into the platform companies that looked into
Big Tech's squelching of competition, with several other committee
heads and senators threatening or planning hearings on a variety of
aspects of the firms' business. Even cases that end up putting few
restraints on Silicon Valley will still probably drag on for years, running
up legal bills and creating bad PR for the industry.
And a number of US state attorneys general are organizing their own
investigations, as they also have state-level antitrust laws similar to
national ones, as when several state governments participated in the
nineties-era DOJ antitrust action against Microsoft. The states are
broadly seen to carry far less weight than the federal bodies, but the scale
could grow—presently, between one and two dozen attorneys general are
involved in discussions about bringing tech monopoly cases.26 It's a real
array of forces against the platform giants, despite the national political
leadership waiting forty years into the platform era to get interested (the
Microsoft case notwithstanding), typical of the famously pro-business
policy leanings of the US government.
The companies vary in their exposure. Apple's public posture as the
tech giant who cares about privacy doesn't spare it from the
consequences of its own monopolistic sins, like when the trillion-dollar
colossus lost a 2019 Supreme Court case that allowed an antitrust lawsuit
to be brought against the company's control over the App Store, where
iPhone users download games and applications. The company's hearty
30 percent slice of app sales, along with the conspicuous fact that Apple
users spend nearly double the amount spent on Android apps—despite
the latter serving a far-larger mobile market—led the justices to find that
the suit can move forward.27

Investigations have found that Apple's own apps reliably appear at
the top of searches in its store, a major advantage despite the fact that its
applications often are notoriously unpopular (like Maps) and indeed are
often barred from being rated, unlike third-party apps. For apps that
generate subscription or sales revenue, Apple's appear first in 95 percent
of store searches!28 The practice is similar to Google's and Microsoft's
past efforts to steer results toward their other products in any gatekeeper
role they gain from network effects.
Still, that's a smaller headache than the one Google is dealing with,
although both are in an anxious scramble to shift some of their massive
phone-production chains out of China to avoid the effects of the
administration's clumsy trade war, with Apple asking its major suppliers
to explore moving up to 30 percent of their production process from
China to nations in Southeast Asia.29
Google and Facebook, with their data hoards and political baggage,
are more at risk. Google's relentless disruption of industries to its
advantage, from news to travel to e-commerce, have earned it a
Microsoft-like enemies list. Indeed, nearly every company Google has
stomped on in this book is lining up to brief or formally request DOJ
action, including Yelp, Microsoft, TripAdvisor, Oracle, News Corp and
other news publishers, and online ad buyers.30 And while the FTC's
2012 investigation of Google saw some agency staff commenting that
the company's products were popular, as well as pointing to their free
cost, others observed its actions and mergers "likely helped to entrench
Google's monopoly power over search and search advertising."31
Facebook has the biggest target on its back, with its successive giant
scandals around election interference, its allowance of startlingly wide
access to user data by developers, and its practice of buying or copying
competitors. The press has reported that the company is expecting to
have to hand over internal emails, including some from Zuckerberg
himself, that suggest "senior executives didn't make compliance with the
FTC order a priority." One is said to be an inquiry from Zuckerberg
about one of the giant crowd of third-party apps the company allowed to
be built for its platform, with the app claiming to have information on
tens of millions of users, including personal details regardless of the
privacy setting they chose. In the correspondence, Zuckerberg asked his
lieutenants if it was possible the app developer really had collected so
much data. That app was later suspended, but there was little effort to

look into third-party privacy violations, and the company's main concern
is that these and other emails will enter the public record (as many of
Microsoft's most embarrassing monopoly-mongering messages did).
Notably, internal company documents that were under US court seal but
made available by the UK Parliament showed the company eagerly
looked for ways to widen its access to user data without notification, and
was able to track users' activity on other platforms.32
Likely due to this vulnerability, Zuckerberg has announced he is open
to some form of regulation of consumer privacy and online political ads,
along with ominous efforts to "define reasonable boundaries for public
debate" on its platform, as the press puts it.33 Facebook's goal is to be
handed relatively light new rules that can perhaps be ignored over time,
rather than serious antitrust action like a breakup that forces the company
to sell Instagram, WhatsApp, or Messenger—a possibility made slightly
more possible when company cofounder Chris Hughes wrote in the New
York Times that the company ought to be broken up along these lines.34
The FTC finally imposed a $5 billion fine on Facebook in June 2019,
which the agency hailed as an "unprecedented" penalty. But of course,
the amount comes to about one-eleventh of the company's annual
revenue, and the deal exempted Facebook's conduct prior to that fine
from further legal action.35 It also required the usual mild requirements,
like an independent privacy-monitoring board and "privacy audits."
At the same time, the agency announced it was opening a new formal
antitrust investigation into the company, as the techlash rolls on. But
right away, there are unusual and not very encouraging signs that the US
government is not being very aggressive—one being that the two of the
platform giants that earn most of their revenue from targeted advertising
will be investigated by two different agencies. Grouping Facebook and
Google together would be the natural choice, with their similar profiling-
based ad businesses, so separating those investigations suggests
duplicated work.
Further, many insiders are calling less for breakups of the giants and
more for "behavioral" settlements, where companies are required to hold
their different units at arm's length so as not to create unfair advantages
over rivals. This is a bad sign, since this was the compromise reached
with Microsoft, which was later found to have nakedly violated the
terms, in part because it was in charge of monitoring its own compliance.
This is a strong sign of lessons not learned from the industry's history of

bucking antitrust regulation and the courts. Additionally, anti-monopoly
law in the US relies heavily on proving a dominant firm has harmed
consumers by raising prices, even though that's far from the only form of
market power, and it's a test companies are especially likely to pass if
they offer their products for free, as Google and Facebook of course do.
And even as national investigations grab headlines, you have to look
seriously at the massive resources the platforms have to defend
themselves. Gearing way up from the early days, when the public and
policymakers were euphoric about tech, and policy issues could be an
afterthought for the companies, Big Tech now includes some of the
biggest lobbying spenders in the entire economy. The scale is incredible
—Apple, Amazon, Google, and Facebook spent a total of $55 million on
lobby shops in 2018 alone, with Microsoft just south of $10 million.36
Among its team, Facebook now employs a pair of lobbyists who
formerly worked for House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's office, including,
incredibly, her former chief of staff. Even more staggering, the very head
of the Antitrust Division at the DOJ itself, Makan Delrahim, worked as a
contract lobbyist for Google in 2007. He now favors "a broad view" of
Big Tech, with the press reporting that while in office, he "has favored
middle-ground solutions."37
Hell, in May 2019 the industry's main lobbying organization, the
Internet Association, gave its "Internet Freedom Award" to none other
than the noted champion of online expression, Ivanka Trump. The Wall
Street Journal relates that "the internet giants have learned from the hard
lessons of Microsoft, which was caught flat-footed with a sparse
lobbying presence in the 1990s when federal antitrust officials called for
a breakup of the software giant."38 Its headline was "Tech Giants Amass
a Lobbying Army for an Epic Washington Battle," and it must be
recognized the companies are sitting on the better part of half a trillion in
cash.
For its part, Amazon is now "One of Washington's Most Powerful
Players," as a Journal headline ran, with its PAC giving $637,500 in
2018, amusingly split evenly between Republican and Democratic
candidates.39 Some of that spending, of course, is to help maintain
Amazon's giant government cloud computing contracts, from the CIA to
the Pentagon. That's in addition to its huge spending on public policy
and advocacy groups, including the conservative American Enterprise
Institute and the Competitive Enterprise Institute, and the company

reported in that year giving $10,000 or more to around forty-seven
different groups and think tanks.
Indeed, all five of the Big Tech platform companies reviewed in this
book now spend north of $5 million a year on lobbying activities. But
Google has been far in the lead for years, spending around $15 million
annually since 2011, and recently overhauling its DC influence shop in
the face of the new potential investigations. As of 2018 the company had
a hundred lobbyists spread over dozens of firms, bringing it the honor of
the greatest lobbying spender in the United States that year. Like
Amazon, it pours millions into friendly think tanks, university
departments, and policy groups writing reports favorable to the company.
Until 2018, Google's own DC lobbying operation was headed by a
former Republican congresswoman.40
Further, tech now leans heavily into the other form of corporate
investment in government influence: campaign financing. Today both
political parties take in giant volumes of Silicon Valley cash, in part
because, as the New York Times gracefully put it, "the progressive base
has already soured on Wall Street, fossil fuel and pharmaceutical cash.
Silicon Valley had been, until recently, one of the last relatively untainted
wellsprings from which to draw campaign contributions." That certainly
includes the more typical conservative, pro-business Democrats, like
2020 presidential front-runner Joe Biden, one of whose fundraisers was
hosted by former Google CEO Eric Schmidt. In 2019 Pelosi held a
congressional fundraiser luncheon at the home of Microsoft's chairman,
who kicked in $50,000.41
And even the more liberal candidates like Senator Elizabeth Warren
and leftists like Senator Bernie Sanders are major recipients of tech
dollars for their campaigns—the biggest donor group for both is
Alphabet, with Microsoft and other tech companies close behind.42 And
incredibly, despite the acidic opposition to immigration of all kinds by
the Trump administration, large companies sponsoring educated tech
works via the sought-after H-1B visa are getting applications approved at
rates around 99 percent, according to the Journal, while smaller firms
have far more petitions turned down.43
I should also add that not all outside companies want the online firms
broken up. In particular, advertisers have indicated that breaking up
Facebook and Google "could work against their interests," the business
pages report, because "the technology giants have allowed them to reach

huge audiences and target them efficiently." Indeed, a credit card
company marketing exec has said, "I cannot walk away from scale"—no
doubt bearing in mind the incredible data hoards allowing precision
targeting.44 However, ad buyers do have gripes with the platforms,
especially since it's hard to tell if their ads placed with Google or
Facebook have led to a given sale. They hope regulation will include
"universal identifiers" attached to ad performance across platforms—a
reform that would only help other giant corporations track us more
effectively.
The confrontation between Big Government and Big Tech will likely
drag on for years, and past history isn't very promising. But the threat of
US regulation is also a late arrival on the scene, as the European Union
has so far taken the lead in trying to rein in the giants.
Tech's Nemesis
The nations of the European Union have a reputation for a stronger
regulatory apparatus than in the United States, although the differences
are often exaggerated. The disparity is wider in tech, largely because the
megacap platforms are US-based and have benefited from a purposefully
light regulatory hand. Yet because of Europe's enormous market, its
more aggressive approach has forced Big Tech to bend to its demands.
The Wall Street Journal notes: "Europe's international influence stems
from a confluence of factors, starting with its market size. Companies
wanting access to the EU's 500 million potential consumers—one of the
world's richest markets for products and services—must play by EU
rules." And "in today's globalized markets many also seek to standardize
internationally, for scale economies or other reasons."45
Consider Google's comparison-shopping searches, which have put
the company's commercial listings at the top of its search results to the
detriment of independent online shopping services. The EU brought
down a large $2.7 billion fine on Google for the practice and demanded
it change the displays, and it also cracked down on the company's
practices regarding apps on phones running its Android operating
system. Google requires handset makers to include several of its own
apps, like Search, Maps, and YouTube, and to make its search and
Chrome browser the phone defaults—almost perfectly mirroring
Microsoft's practices on the OS it owned.46 The EU met this move with
an even bigger $5.1 billion fine, which is staggering by US standards.

Yet as the New York Times observes, "Google hardly felt it," as it made
$3.2 billion in profit that quarter after the fine, "shrugging off" this
aggressive sanction.47 Even the EU's regulations may not be enough to
restrain Big Tech and its surging river of cash.
Other tech kingpins have been challenged by European competition
standards, too—not least Amazon, which is also being investigated for
unfair competition in response to its particular combination of its own
retail and third-party merchants. Because it often sells products in
competition with its independent Marketplace sellers, it likely has access
to information about pricing, sales, and production of those goods that
the smaller independent sellers can't match.48
The EU's tax crackdowns have gotten more attention though, as the
cartoonishly low tax rates paid by the most profitable firms on God's
earth have proven intolerable, especially as most of Europe spent years
in grinding recession with austerity programs that reduced public
benefits. And because of the enormous size of the online platforms,
small EU states like Ireland and Luxembourg have made special deals
with them to attract their investments and employment, running up
against EU prohibitions against "illegal state aid."49
Through complex tax-avoidance strategies that place the company's
revenues in low-tax locations, many corporations today dramatically
lower their tax bills and avoid kicking in for the huge amount of public
goods and services they suck up. Google used a profit-shuttling method
known as the "Dutch Sandwich" to reduce its overseas tax rate to 2.4
percent, racking up $3.1 billion in tax savings over 2007 to 2009 alone,
Bloomberg reports.50 Notably, the IRS actually approved this ludicrous
arrangement in 2006.
Amazon had a similarly exploitative relationship with Luxembourg,
while for many years Apple used another complicated scheme called the
"Double Irish," paying a tax rate of between 0.005 percent and 1 percent
on the entirety of its enormous European profits.51 But again, Ireland's
EU-forced efforts to recover the lost $15 billion-odd in tax revenue
aren't likely to materially hurt the world's largest corporation—as the
Journal reports, "Even if Apple is forced to pay the full penalty, it would
make only a small dent in the company's $231 billion cash hoard."52
But the centerpiece of Europe's efforts to tame Big Tech is its suite of
personal data and privacy laws, above all the GDPR—the General Data

Protection Regulation. In contrast to the marketplace approach, the
GDPR treats personal data in a fundamentally different way, seeing it as
the personal property of individuals. That means it has major
requirements for the platforms—above all, they must ask user permission
before using personal data, although that requirement doesn't prohibit
them from collecting the data initially. Under this arrangement, users can
ask companies what information they have on them, and request they
delete it. To partially level the playing field against the huge
corporations, the GDPR allows users to form class action-like bodies to
file complaints, which have a regular but bureaucratic process with many
steps to pursue cases. The companies must also take some steps to make
it easier for users to change services, to avoid the "lock-in" common
with online platforms. Amazingly, it further requires that terms of use
must be in actual readable language, rather than legalese, and it has real
enforcement teeth, with potential fines up to 4 percent of global revenue,
meaning many billions of dollars for the tech giants.53 It appears to be
inspiring other enforcement mechanisms involving actual punishments,
as in Australia, where a panel proposed a nuclear option for rule
violation—policing the companies' actual algorithms.
But as often happens, some attempts to limit the power of gigantic
corporations by regulating them have already been gamed to the benefit
of the giants. Google, which the GDPR was designed to regulate, has
actually insisted on a strict interpretation of it for its clients on AdSense,
its program placing ads on independent websites. This actually helps
Google maintain power over the online ad market, sinc,e besides keeping
Google on the right side of the GDPR, the policy strengthens its hand
against other ad-placing companies: Google's users are often more
willing to click the consent option, since Google's huge suite of crucial
services makes the bargain more attractive than for less-known sites.
And as smaller online ad-space sellers struggle to get visitors to consent
to the use of their data for tracking, more ad buyers are being directed by
online ad markets like DoubleClick Bid Manager toward Google's own
ad inventory, which is reliably in line with the data law.54
This means Google and Facebook are "leveraging their vast scale and
sophistication as they seek consent from the hundreds of millions of
European users who visit their services each day ... setting an industry
standard that is hard for smaller firms to meet," the business press
reports.55 Google now requires its ad-selling website and app-making
clients to get consent for targeting from each ad-placing company they

use; likewise, it demands its digital ad-placing competitors get consent
for each possible company that might place an ad on them or be blocked
from Google's services. This is a very high standard for Google and
Facebook's much-smaller competitors, making the European ad business
a sad business.
Facebook is seeing success in getting European users to approve of
the use of their data for some targeted marketing, but also has to work
around a prohibition on buying more personal data on users about their
offline purchases. Yet even in Europe the company's revenue has
continued to shoot up, partially because the decrease in daily users has
been small, and only a minority of remaining users have opted out of
targeted ads. This is perhaps because, as the Journal reports, "users who
don't want to give Facebook access to their data must go through a few
more steps before Facebook accepts their decisions, according to mock-
ups of the permission screens.... Facebook hasn't built a way for users to
decline to provide more data with a single tap."56
All of this suggests that even in the face of Europe's aggressive
competition laws and data controls, the tech behemoths may be too great
to be tied down by any law that leaves the power of their market
platforms intact. So to see real limits of their power, we should turn to
markets where the platforms themselves are barred or harnessed.
Watch on the Great Firewall
China has become a great bogeyman in the eyes of the West, with world
news often dominated by horrified reporting on China's rapid economic
growth, its rise as a world power, and its eager building of infrastructure
in the developing world. The accounts accurately identify these recent
moves as imperialist, but never with any reference to the far bigger and
longer history of the Western countries' imperialism and global debt-
fueled influence mongering.
The Chinese government remains highly authoritarian and, since it
sits on another of the world's greatest markets for goods and services,
has frequently dictated terms to Western companies, including the tech
platforms. The latter have become justifiably notorious for participating
in the state's wide-reaching censorship and surveillance network.
Referred to as the Great Firewall, this network has a level of information
restriction that is often typical of the developing world, but Western
commentators, largely out of chauvinism, showcase it as uniquely evil.

Microsoft, for example, banned the word "democracy" from Chinese
blog posts it hosts and, more flagrantly, created a special version of its
operating system for China, "Windows 10 China Government Edition."
It's also likely to submit its source code to the government, allegedly so
the state can check for the "back doors" that Edward Snowden revealed
were installed by US intelligence agencies.57
Apple has especially extensive relationships in China, as
"substantially all" of its products are manufactured there, as its financial
filings state. The conditions in the factories operated by its largest
contractor, Foxconn, have already been noted. But it also relies on China
as the second-largest market for its high-end phones and gadgets, and as
such has made a long list of concessions to the state's surveillance needs.
Some Chinese citizens and dissidents are able to evade the Great
Firewall using VPNs, virtual private networks, that create the appearance
that a web user is outside the country and thus allowed access to blocked
content; however, to keep friendly relations with the state, Apple
removed almost seven hundred VPNs from its App Store in 2017
alone.58
Worse, to comply with government demands Apple agreed to transfer
the iCloud data of Chinese users to a domestic partner, meaning those
users' data will be stored within China. This means the state will likely
have extensive access to this information, and indeed could potentially
seize the physical servers on which the data resides. Apple has also taken
the additional step of storing the encryption codes for those user
accounts in Chinese territory as well.59 Cloud leaders Microsoft and
Amazon have also transferred user data to Chinese partner companies,
again to preserve market access.
Facebook, for its part, has experimented with censored versions of its
social media platform in order to return to the country, which kicked it
out in 2009. Other moves have so far been frustrated, from CEO Mark
Zuckerberg's efforts to learn Mandarin to his stage-managed visits,
during which he jogged through downtown Beijing without the
protective pollution masks often worn by locals, creating a nice pro-
China photo op but bringing little real result.60
But the most storied odyssey in the country is Google's, likely
because of the contrast between the Western image of a pure-evil
Chinese government and the company's ethical reputation. The company
entered the market in 2006 with the creation of Google.cn, which

required licensing that mandated Google would conform to state
demands to censor results like "Tiananmen Square." But notably,
Google's service included notices on its search results if some results had
been blocked by government requirement.61 The Chinese-language
version of Google.com, on the other hand, ran from the United States
and so was slow but uncensored, leading the government to frequently
block it, along with other Google properties like YouTube and Blogger.
Google had to compete with Chinese search engine Baidu, which had
more market share, but Google was favored by more educated, Western-
oriented professionals. In order to carry out the censorship, Google as
always used algorithms that could accomplish the whitewashing with
limited human involvement, and, as tech journalist Steven Levy writes,
the algorithms did "a scary-good job in preventing Chinese citizens from
accessing forbidden information."62 But the state still intermittently
blocked or slowed Google.cn, would demand particular results be
removed or searches cleaned up, and appealed to nationalism to give the
censorship-accepting Baidu a popular edge over the foreign Google. As
its participation in state censorship went on, the company drew
increasing criticism in the West, as well as from the Chinese state media,
which berated it for not stripping foreign news websites from its results.
Finally, Google suffered a major hack targeting its crucial source code.
As Levy relates, "What they stole was apparently so critical that Google
never revealed its nature."63 That was the last straw, and in 2010 the
company closed Google. cn and directed traffic to its uncensored Hong
Kong site, which the Chinese government continued blocking mainland
users from reaching.
The episode is often held up as an example of Google holding to its
high ethical standards despite strong monetary rewards for collaborating
with the Chinese government. But the Wall Street Journal notes that
"Google pulled its search engine only after Chinese hackers broke into
its systems in search of source code. In other words, it fled an existential
threat as much as an ethical dilemma."64 Likewise, Ken Auletta observes
that Google's participation in (and even exceeding of) Chinese
censorship was yet another reason to be critical of the company's shady
power, and thus Google's allegedly principled withdrawal from the
country "was as much a business as a 'Don't be evil' decision."65
Attracted to China's giant market, the company has since endeavored
to return leading it to recently develop another censored engine code-

named "Dragonfly." The Google workforce's opposition to this and
activism to stop it were discussed in chapter 5; at any rate, observers
judge it unlikely that Google will be granted another search license there.
The company still operates facilities in the country, including an AI lab,
and of course works closely with phone manufacturers using its almost-
universal Android mobile OS. Other Western tech giants have gone
further, as when Yahoo provided the government with the identity of a
dissident journalist, who was soon arrested. Worse, the data security
company Cisco provided the Chinese government with the network tools
to create the Great Firewall in the first place.66
Many writers have pointed out that censorship in China is less about
utterly banning certain terms, although that does happen, as we've seen.
It's more about manipulation of context and managing attention, keeping
it attracted toward pop culture frivolity and cheap nationalism, to the
detriment of hard-hitting dissident information. The attitude of the
Chinese tech majors toward these issues is evident in the words of
Alibaba head Jack Ma, responding to the question of whether his engine
should include results from Chinese dissidents: "No! We are a
business.... Shareholders want to make money. Shareholders want us to
make the customer happy. Meanwhile we do not have any
responsibilities saying we should do this or that political thing."67
The Chinese state has supported domestic tech giants of its own,
keeping the US-based platforms at bay and at times abetting in the theft
of Western technology. American commentators and the US government
bitterly condemn this forced "tech transfer," but considering that said
technologies were mostly developed by various US research agencies
and then "transferred" to the private sector through privatization, a more
sensible response is "easy come, easy go."
The giants of the People's Republic of China include Alibaba,
colloquially known as China's Amazon, as well as search giant Baidu
and the enormous Tencent, which dominates messaging and online
games. The three heavies have strategic patterns somewhat parallel to the
US platform giants, originating in different sectors and then trying to
compete in limited areas where each feels they could claw away some
market share. The Chinese companies also operate on the same scale as
the Western ones, with the combined valuation of Alibaba and Tencent
comparable to the total value of Facebook, Amazon, Google, and
Netflix.68 And following the US giants' lead, the companies purposefully
create incompatibilities, such as blocking each other's links from

working, making them unclickable. The American and Chinese
platforms even sometimes strike deals among themselves, like when
Google and Tencent reached a large patent-sharing deal.
World governments continue to endeavor to cope with the rising
influence of Big Tech, with India taking similar steps to China's in
demanding that the data of Indian users be stored in-country. India's
telecom agency is also threatening Apple over its refusal to make the
agency's spam-blocking app available on its prominent App Store.69
Globally, dozens of countries are passing legislation to govern their
citizens' use of tech platforms, including Japan, Malaysia, Brazil, and
Colombia, which have advanced laws similar to Europe's privacy
requirements.70 As Facebook becomes the Internet for many
impoverished users in the Global South and especially Africa, keeping it
on track for finding another billion users may come down to its ability to
block these privacy laws from taking hold in some of the world's poorest
countries.
For years, the standard view has been that the greatest power centers
in the world are national governments, with their abilities to tax,
imprison, regulate, and invade. But Big Tech's mountains of cash,
control over information, and planetary global networks may yet give
them a run for their money.

CHAPTER 10
Share This!
Socializing the Internet
With our world seemingly hurtling toward catastrophe for several
separate reasons, a movement to take control over the tech networks
from their bullying douchebag CEOs could seem like a sideshow. But the
total reliance of our economy, our social lives, and our attention spans on
the tech giants and their online platforms raises the stakes.
Much of today's political momentum is apparently on the right, with
borderline-fascist movements rising to power around the world. Many
populations are groping for a response to these alarming developments,
with some promoting the traditional pro-corporate, neoliberal political
figures, like Hillary Clinton or Emmanuel Macron. But this centrist-
rightist spectrum is now being challenged by an upsurge in leftward
movement, sometimes centered on popular left figures like Bernie
Sanders or Jeremy Corbyn. These figures are more critical of
concentrated corporate markets, but the alternatives they offer remain
within the realm of private ownership of large-scale capital, defined as
capitalism.
By now, the parade of shameful power-mongering disgraces that is
the Silicon Valley record suggests that the industry's power is out of
control and should be challenged, limited, and perhaps stripped from
them entirely. For all the world's breathless, cringey, sycophantically
worshipful puff pieces on tech CEOs and their slick products and free
services, the sheer scale of their economy-conquering, worker-abusing,
all-knowing power is finally eclipsing their economic alibi. If our lives
and economy now rely on these firms and their platforms, they are too
important to be left in the hands of the companies. A positive
fundamental change would be to bring them under the control of the
people who make them run, and the users who create so much free
content for them. An economic system where the economy and its

productive capital are run by the workforce, known as socialism, can
most definitely be achieved in the online economy.
Therefore, we should recognize an online socialism as a major
priority for radical change, replacing the power wielded by the tech
sector with democratic control over the Internet's crucial platforms.
Online socialism would represent a movement to impose a form of
popular representation on decision making about platforms, where the
workers maintaining them and users making them fun decide how they
will operate, rather than leaving it to a CEO to make sneaky terms of
service changes in the dead of night. This would represent a major
achievement in human liberation, owing to the platforms' pivotal role as
a mode of modern human expression, information sharing, and
enrichment. In fact, because of our widening dependence on web-
mediated services, online socialism could be a leading edge in helping to
socialize the broader economy—bringing the great corporate decisions
that shape our lives, about investment and employment, under our actual
control.
Socializing Silicon Valley means poses unique challenges and special
opportunities. Markets that involve information, like traditional media
and the tech platforms, reliably encounter heightened resistance from
defenders of capitalism. The wide extent of the companies' information-
filtering capability adds a layer of complication, as does the global nature
of these firms. But the user-produced nature of much online content
means the barriers to organization may be significantly lower than those
in other industries. Further, the pivotal daily roles of these platforms
suggest that a strong movement to socialize them could have a force
multiplier, making it an especially fertile focus for leftist action.
Strategies for socializing a sector aren't always worked out in detail, but
plans are important, especially given the crucial importance of this
industry. I'll attempt to briefly sketch out those strategies now.
User Disillusion
Envisioning a more radical network agenda today means moving well
beyond mere anti-monopoly law and toward forms of public ownership
and worker management of the crucial web platforms—those that are
now accepted as essential for disseminating information, like YouTube,
Facebook, and the smartphone operating systems. As labor and socialist
history amply demonstrate, this is easier said than done, and a number of

challenges present themselves, including ones common to information
industries and others unique to the online sector. Not least among these is
the particularly thorny question of exactly how the digital behemoths
should be brought under democratic control.
Fundamentally, socialism in any part of the economy is about power,
and who gets to make the important decisions about what will be
invested in and how the economy will grow. Under capitalism, the great
productive capital of the economy is private property, and investment
and production decisions are made by businesses and the CEOs and
boards who own them. Under socialism, workers make these decisions,
usually understood to have goals of more equally sharing the goods
produced and generally supporting other people, or "solidarity."
Socialism is also thought of today with additional goals in mind, like
improving work conditions and guaranteeing workplace diversity along
racial, gender, and other lines, as well as taking environmental
sustainability seriously rather than prioritizing near-term profit above all,
as markets do.
So in a socialized economy, you would go to work and have access to
the information about your business or workplace that the manager or
boss currently keeps to themselves, and you and your coworkers would
have to decide what to do in light of that information. Since the modern
economy requires huge scales of production, both to produce enough
goods and to achieve efficiencies like economies of scale, representation
would be required—modern economic enterprises with tens of thousands
of workers can't all meet and vote directly on everything. A socialist
democracy could extend to economic decisions, through a system in
which workplaces send delegates to attend decision-making meetings
and report back on them, voting as the workplace itself votes, and being
subject to recall if the schmoozing reps get too big for their britches and
start bucking the will of the workers they represent.
This vision, of popular democratic processes making economic
decisions, is the core idea of socialism, rather than the vision of a
government takeover of industries, as it has been represented in the past.
For online platforms, this would mean that users and the platform
operators would share responsibility for developing the platforms, and do
so toward shared, openly discussed goals rather than those settled on by
an executive team striving for a Wall Street ad-clicks target. We users
would actually be able to set what information we felt like sharing, what
we do and don't want tracked for optimal platform experience, and share

the decisions about how the platform should change its layout or
functionalities.
Rather than picking up your phone and discovering a feature is no
longer available, or that some information of yours has been tracked
without your knowledge, or that an app no longer works on an updated
operating system, you would know what changes were coming to the
platform and would at least have a share in the process deciding on them.
Any widely used platform should have a process where users and
engineers jointly decide what new features should be developed, and
how to implement them. Above all, your personal data would be
considered your personal property, and you could readily opt in if you
wanted more of the customization that the companies presently use to
justify tracking you to every dark corner of the Internet. Today's product
officers at Big Tech would be retired in favor of one or another
democratic decision-making structure. Like socialism in any sector, we
should bring an experimental attitude to the online sector, open to trying
out and evaluating different organizational ideas and decision-making
processes, but this is at least an idea of what online socialism could look
like.
Proposals for democratizing the platforms are circulating, such as the
call for platform cooperativism, advanced by Trebor Scholz and Nathan
Schneider in their book Ours to Hack and to Own. They argue for co-op
principles of "shared governance and shared ownership of the Internet's
levers of power—its platforms and protocols. Democratic ownership and
governance are the pillars of what cooperativism refers to."1 These goals
closely correspond to the broad ideals of online socialism.
State control, especially without a radical, society-wide process of
democratization, is an unappealing option for the information network
sector. The traditional saw of capitalism's reactionary defenders is that
socialism inevitably means government control and a more authoritarian
state, and this argument is often deployed with particular force in
discussions about industries already prone to monopoly, like cable
companies' broad empires and the entrenched networks around the
online platforms. The aggressive virulence of this extremely common
pro-business argument is undermined by the unflattering reality that
these now-crucial tech monopolies clearly reveal that "free markets"
rarely remain richly competitive. Instead, they result in markets
concentrated into a few colossal companies, as in the tech industry or the
other giants throughout the whole history of capitalism, like

Rockefeller's titanic oil monopoly or Anheuser-Busch InBev's near
monopoly in beer. So, even when the celebration of markets' alleged
"freedom to choose" wouldn't pass the laugh test, the bit tyrants and
their ocean of media supporters instead trash the idea of worker control,
equating it to state totalitarianism.
Overcoming this argument requires the political sophistication to
recognize the irrationally reflexive suspicion of public institutions in
modern politics. This paranoia can be overcome if the left is willing to
keep its focus on the question of power; indeed, the millions upon
millions of public commenters in the various battles over FCC neutrality
policy were significantly motivated by antagonism toward the enormous
power centers of AT&T and Comcast. Most citizens are capable of
seeing the towering power of the telecom empires, and the same is
becoming true of the far-larger tech platforms, so this widely
disseminated right-wing argument can be outflanked in organizing and
education work.
Another challenge to socializing the Internet arises from the fact that
unlike other networks (such as the railroads of the Gilded Age), digital
networks are global in their extent, meaning any successful effort to
socialize them will require coordinated international action by platform
workers and users. This of course raises obvious problems of global
activist articulation that are very familiar to veteran political and labor
activists. Strategies for international organizing have historically
included aggressive efforts to cultivate transnational organizational
connections among labor and anti-capitalist movements, requiring
significant institutional resources and sustained commitment. Campaigns
to antagonize a corporate platform therefore require carefully planned
solidarity with workers and users abroad to bring meaningful pressure on
the platform owners, and indeed to mount the more dramatic coordinated
actions needed for any political move aiming to bring the Internet under
popular control. Some steps in this direction have occurred. For example,
in the resistance against Amazon's labor practices in Europe, warehouse
workers in Germany, Poland, and France have met to discuss how to
coordinate across country borders, a necessary counter-strategy in a
corporation where "orders can be shifted from one warehouse to another
if problems arise," as a worker's account describes.2
A further implication is that any successful democratization of one or
more of these platforms within a particular polity will represent only a
piecemeal victory that would come under perennial sanction by the

World Trade Organization or another body. One can readily imagine
management in this sector responding with a capital strike, in which
company owners, feeling threatened or otherwise displeased, shut down
their enormous businesses, or pull their financial wealth out of a country,
which can put colossal pressure on an economy.
In the tech sector, a capital strike could manifest in a move where the
global architecture of a Google or Amazon refuses, out of ruling class
indignation, to recognize a socialized portion of its system or be
smoothly articulated, and suddenly links aren't connecting, orders aren't
taken, and documents aren't intelligible. This speaks again to the
desperate need for international cooperation.
As always, the greatest obstacle to socialist organization is the
reaction from the powerful corporations in the industry. We can be
confident that tech firms will react to existential challenges with
aggression—the industry has already shown the true colors that lay
behind its playful, cutesy nerd façade. The no-poaching wage-fixing
conspiracy that Steve Jobs led and the industry's overexploitation of the
white-collar and blue-collar sections of its workforce give us ample
evidence of corporate greed and hostility to worker autonomy.
Beyond the usual firing of organizers on factory floors or in open-
format office suites, online firms have a variety of levers of power to
resist organization. Above all, these empires of capital can be expected
to turn to propaganda, having overwhelming power to filter and shape
the information that growing numbers of us go online for. This is a major
obstacle, as citizens used to socially and politically engaging through
Facebook cannot expect their News Feed to include many posts by
"Socialize Facebook" group pages, nor can we expect Google Search to
put "Socialize
Google" on the first page of results. The aggressive and deceitful actions
of the cell carriers and cable companies in their fight to keep their
broadband businesses free of net neutrality rules are probably suggestive
of what can be expected, from heavy political lobbying to aggressive PR
campaigns to well-funded minority civic groups willing to express
"concern" that closely tracks the industry's own views.
Confronting this information-filtering power is surely the single-
greatest challenge to socializing the Internet platforms and perhaps the
broader economy. Counteracting the muscle that hub owners rely upon
will require extensive reliance on both online and offline solidarity. The

successful campaigns against the telecom firms, once again, prove that
this broader solidarity agenda can be achieved. In 2015 and 2017, major
online awareness campaigns, along with real-world sit-ins on corporate
campuses and occupation of company and state offices, saw major
successes and might do so again.
Further, we should recognize that the online giants' near-total
ownership of our universe of personal private data will surely bear on
any organizational drive to socialize the platforms. The larger part of the
Valley's entire business model is, after all, built upon commercializing
our personal data in a variety of ways, and it is utterly naïve to imagine
the tech empires will confront a movement representing an existential
threat to their wealth and network power without playing dirty.
Movement leaders and ideological heads can confidently expect to be
"doxed" by the platforms themselves, with their dirty laundry publicly
aired in the cowardly anonymized-leak fashion, familiar to many
veterans of movements for social justice. Skilled organizers could use
the companies' clear responsibility for these fortuitously timed leaks to
further undermine the credibility of the platforms' corporate owners, but
of course this won't stop the damage from being done.
Any early projections like these about an emerging movement must
also take into account the historic difficulty workers have encountered in
drives to organize the professional ranks of software writers and
hardware engineers, as existing groups like the Tech Workers Coalition
have described. As I've reviewed throughout the book, these
professional workers are well paid and mobile, not infrequently on
something like their own terms. These conditions are certainly subject to
change as market and political circumstances evolve, including for
nonmarket reasons like state policy shifts. The Trump administration's
crusade against immigration includes efforts to cut back the H-1B visa
program, which allows employers in certain industries to sponsor the
migration of workers with scarce technical skills. So far these steps have
actually favored Big Tech, which had received very high levels of
approval for its applicants, but stricter moves could shift labor market
conditions in the sector, likely leading programmer salaries to rise, in
which case the will to organize against employers may fall.
Alternatively, salary ceilings may remain if temporary workers continue
to be hired in higher numbers to defray the expense of fewer foreign
workers. These changes could make the workforce more sympathetic to
organization and unionization.

At the lower end of the wage and prestige scale, we have the
frontline workers of the Silicon Valley money machine—the Foxconn
contractors on Chinese factory floors, the Google content-checkers
running content flags on YouTube, the low-wage sales force of the Apple
stores, and the sweating subjects of the Amazon warehouse empire. Here
the obstacles to organizing are more clear, as these are more traditionally
exploitative work settings. This means classic union tools are called for,
though surely they must be utilized in a more effective way than in
recent years, as the union density numbers of the labor movement have
continually fallen. Below I discuss in greater detail the ways organizing
can be more effective, but the continuity of the challenges facing leftist
organizing is pretty clear.
From a wide reluctance to promote public influence over information
networks, to hoards of private information, to traditional anti-union tools,
to control over the information filters we take for granted daily, Silicon
Valley has plenty of means to resist organizing drives of all sorts. Having
reviewed this grim toolbox, we can consider the unique opportunities to
organizing in this sector.
Socialized Media
Despite the numerous major advantages held by the online giants,
activists have certain assets in their struggle to bring the Internet under
popular control. Given the growing importance of the online economy
and its potential to serve as a lever to jump-start socialization of the
broader economy, any advantages that may offset the bosses' high cards
will be essential for our side to understand.
One advantage has materialized during the struggles for net
neutrality: organizing has been aided by the fact that individuals spend
more and more time in online environments, which for all its drawbacks
does mean that the initiative required for contributing to the struggle is
significantly reduced. Of course, online contributions—like blog posts,
petition signing, regulator comments—are proportionately smaller as
well; however, in some circumstances this can be compensated for by the
resultant greater numbers. This dynamic was especially relevant during
the neutrality battles because of the relative ease of filing FCC
comments.
Naturally the issue of web access arouses particular passion among
the extremely online, and the time and effort required to transmit a

complaint to the FCC is plainly minute compared to one's contribution to
taking over ownership of the major global online platforms. But the US
telecom industry did put up a strong fight against Title II and still lost at
least once, owing in part to the moral power and democratic weight of
the four million neutrality-supporting public comments the agency
received in 2015, and the yet-larger number in 2017. So, the relative ease
of online engagement should be taken seriously and be part of modern
campaign planning in any context. This dynamic is especially important
considering the possibility, as yet unevaluated, that such low-initiative
actions could be "gateway actions" drawing passive platform users into
struggles that require both online and offline engagement.
It's relevant here to recognize this time-honored pattern of struggling
for mild reforms and the way it leads to energized activism and
emboldened demands. There are no shortage of "non-reformist
reforms"—legal prohibitions and regulations that encourage further
activism rather than stifle it through small concessions. The great media
scholars James Curran, Natalie Fenton, and Des Freedman present a
number of these reforms in their incredibly useful Misunderstanding the
Internet. They include publicly owned broadband infrastructure, strict
limits on the use of personal data by the tech firms, subsidies for
journalism that has been displaced by platform economics, and the
requirement that platform space be free of cookies and other invasive
software.3 Each of these proposals is a legitimate step forward, limiting
the power of the tech giants and opening a little more space for privacy,
journalism, and creator control.
But perhaps the most important advantage for organizers of online
socialism is the reality that most of these tech giants employ relatively
few workers relative to revenue, relying instead on user-generated
content. From Facebook profiles to Google's YouTube to Apple's
iTunes, content is in large part produced at no cost to the firm apart from
the labor costs of the network managers and software engineers tasked
with the maintenance of the platform. This immediately indicates that
any project to lessen the power of tech monopolies will falter without
major support from the great body of users, themselves demanding more
control.
The dominance of user content has several specific ramifications for
online organizing. The first to consider is the rather-unexplored
possibility of significantly lower barriers to entry in radical campaigning.
Consider the Herculean efforts required by labor organizers down the

years to raise the consciousness of their fellow workers, to avoid
workplace retaliation and illegal firings, and to navigate the reality of
anti-union violence, all to organize workers into a bargaining unit that
can campaign effectively. On today's online platforms, content creators
are pivotal, so we must take seriously the major potential advantage of
organizing users outside the intimidating presence of a boss in a
conventional work hierarchy.
Plainly, any online organizing on the platforms themselves, as in the
cases of Facebook pages calling for the platform's socialization, or
YouTube channels criticizing Big Tech, is always subject to the
companies' awareness and constant, detailed monitoring. However,
because of the platforms' central economic role, activists have a
plausible near-term expectation of hanging on to meaningful space for
organizing against platform power. It must be appreciated that the
barriers for achieving this are still significant, but a far cry from classic
shop floor intimidation. Exactly what form an organization of online
creators would take can be resolved in the organization process, and as
always it should arise organically from those being organized—perhaps
in the form of a creators' rights league, video producers' union, or online
authors' guild. But this organizing must be based on a more radical
conception than just winning a slightly better deal for the creators. The
organizational ideology should be based on the simple recognition that
the online firms have prospered gigantically through the advantages of
their "donated" works and the extensive power they hold over these
works, and that the proceeds and control should be vested in the hands of
the originators and actual creative people rather than tech empires owned
by the global 1 percent.
In light of the essential role played by user content, one very
practical tactic suggests itself: user strikes. The various rebellions that
have taken place on Facebook's platform show the potential of this
tactic. For these platforms, an organized decision to withhold
contributions of content by a large body of users could be just as painful
as a strike by a traditional workforce—the value produced on social
media derives entirely from the collective contributions each of us make
when we post, contributions for which we get no compensation, while
the CEOs and investors rake in historic profits. Like any strike, the
pressure put on the companies will depend on how much of this
exploited labor is withheld, and for how long, but the most critical metric
among these firms is engagement—and if it falls thanks to some users

purposefully boycotting, leading to other users engaging less as content
declines, that means fewer eyeballs on ads and fewer links clicked.
Gigantic amounts of money are created and lost quarterly as engagement
on Facebook and Snapchat rises and falls—I expect in the future we will
see that deliberate and sustained decreases in engagement can create real
pain for these giants.
Further, a user strike offers advantages not found in a traditional one
—the greatest of which is getting to avoid the burden of strikers' lost
wages. Obviously, there would be other, partially compensating
pressures, since using the platforms is often enjoyable and they often
provide quite-essential services, as this book has argued. While third-
party sellers on Amazon or creators of compensated video on YouTube
would indeed take a potentially painful economic hit to contribute to the
struggle, the rest of us would simply have to forego our streaming video
and social media habits. Painful enough!
And full-on labor strikes among the workforce proper will still be
essential, as demonstrated in the Google walkouts and Foxconn suicide
strikes. Of course, this basic technique is nothing new, as strikes have for
many years been part of the toolbox of the trade union movement and the
radical left. In traditional labor strikes, workers refuse work on an
organized basis in order to push their demands, such as for health care or
pay increases from a company's rising profits. Because of the
fundamental role skilled, experienced workers play in producing all the
goods and services we consume, they have historically been able to
wield surprising power against even the most gigantic companies, if they
are well organized into unions or other bodies. As the escaped slave and
public intellectual Frederick Douglass put it, "As the laborer becomes
more intelligent he will develop what capital he already possesses—that
is the power to organize and combine for its own protection," in order
"to cope with the tremendous power of capital."4
The greatest form of labor strike is the "mass strike," where very
large numbers of organized men and women strike for a broader social
goal, like demanding the voting franchise or public health care. The
prominent twentieth-century socialist Rosa Luxemburg wrote that "the
mass strike" is "the method of motion of the proletarian mass," meaning
it is the workers' most fundamental means of opposing capital and taking
control of their lives into their own hands. Mass strikes require a good
deal of preceding work and organization, as they "do not exactly fall
from heaven."5 But since the main obstacle to maintaining a mass strike

of users is the nervous compulsion to check our phones—as opposed to
the traditional striking obstacle of the nervous compulsion to eat—this
tactic could be a useful and effective way of leveraging Silicon Valley's
reliance on our donated labors.
Still, even within this somewhat more favorable organizing terrain,
inherent limitations to these tools should not be underestimated. Major
ceilings to this opportunity could include, first, making headway in
swamped News Feeds, YouTube home pages, and Google search pages.
These platforms are already bursting with plenty of abundant online
content, and simply gaining attention for an important drive to organize
users and workers will be an endeavor in itself.
Further, it will be a significant undertaking to persuade online users
to put time into an uncertain effort to demand reforms, or indeed, major
transfers of control or ownership. An often-noted feature of platforms is
the tendency to take them for granted as handy venues for sharing all the
posts and videos that make the web rich, and thus the traditional
tendency to normalize the institutions of capital is very much an obstacle
here.
Finally, there remain, of course, all the long-standing tools used by
the great conglomerations of capital to legitimize their rule through
various propaganda, which I have discussed in this chapter and
throughout this book. The popular suspicion against big institutions and
their profit obsession can be brought to bear, and of course, the firms
themselves will attempt to turn it against whatever labor or radical
organization is running the organizing campaign. These are classic
contours of conflict between labor and capital, and can be expected to be
particularly formidable since these firms have the major edge of the
ability to filter information.
It's to be expected, should any movement against Big Tech show
significant promise, that Google will rank activist sites lower in search
results, Outlook spam filters will have their settings quietly adjusted to
send activists' appeals into junk files, and Facebook will limit the
visibility of these campaigns on News Feeds. The political question of
how much influence the platform owners are allowed to exercise over
campaigns to organize them must become a real political issue.
But these limitations do not obviate the reality that organizing and
radicalizing online users still has conspicuously lower barriers to entry
than are traditionally observed in classic labor organizing, such as it is.

Savvy organizers and crafty activists can and should bring their
creativity to bear in breaking through the online clutter and maneuvering
around the limits that platform owners are sure to deploy.
In this, organizers and activists should be sure to highlight the reality
that control of our self-created online content is increasingly limited, and
on a fairly immediately visible basis. This extends from Facebook's
ability to police our speech in posts on its platform, to Apple's efforts to
push our work onto their cloud by omitting the universally accepted USB
ports from their new laptops, to Amazon's control over your Kindle
library. These transparently selfish moves by the Valley giants truly
enrage people. People get pissed when platforms they have trusted with
their life's work and private thoughts turn out to be utterly outside their
control.
Many of us have direct experiences of this endlessly frustrating lack
of control over our data and, freely created, and indeed donated content.
This experience could be summarized by referring to radical
communications scholar Robert McChesney: "Over half of the roughly
84 data categories Facebook collects about its users are not available for
them to see."6 Yet how many of us have even taken the time to read
Facebook's policies regarding control of our data, even the fraction of it
we are allowed to learn about?
The central role of user data in these platforms suggests some
specific features for online socialism, as technology writer Evgeny
Morozov explains in the New Left Review:
It's primarily from data and not their algorithms that powerful companies currently derive
their advantages, and the only way to curb that power is to take the data completely out of
the market realm, so that no company can own them. Data would accrue to citizens, and
could be shared at various social levels. Companies wanting to use them would have to
pay some kind of licensing fee, and only be able to access attributes of the information,
not the entirety of it.7
This kind of reconsideration of the nature of data would put significant
autonomy back in the hands of platform users, and strip it from the giant
platforms.
Again, none of this is to minimize the essential role of organizing the
tech workforce. Well-planned campaigns with committed resources,
coordinated international solidarity, an emphasis on strong numbers of
experienced organizers, and a serious drive to engage the communities
from which the workers come have proven to be enduringly successful
for workers in more conventional settings, as Kate Bronfenbrenner and

other labor scholars have shown.8 Tactics along these lines, guided by
the above principles, could go a long way toward overcoming the
challenges to organizing the tech sector for democratic control.
Looking downstream to the data "pipes," there may be more than
temporary utility to ensuring that opposition to net neutrality is
permanently associated with the grotesquely unpopular Trump
administration and its GOP appointees at the FCC. This would be in
addition to its association with the widely disliked broadband empires of
AT&T, Comcast, and Verizon. However, the recent price wars among
these giants may temporarily limit consumer rage until a price leadership
regime can be restored. A socialist campaign would recognize the power
of these firms to control our information and online world, and would
serve as a classic case for worker and user control.
So despite the major entrenched advantages held by the tech titans,
there are legitimate tools in the hands of activists, organizers, and
educators who can see the need for shared control over systems that
affect all of us. Having considered the obstacles and advantages, what
now can be projected about future struggles over the ownership and
control of the Silicon Valley corporations and their platforms?
The Last LOL
It is a fact that online platforms have been superseded in the past, but
only by fellow early-arrivers with moderately better software, as when
Facebook displaced Myspace. The sole major exception to this limited
pattern is AOL, the nineties-era Internet portal that became famous for
introducing the United States to the web and for stuffing its physical
mailboxes with free software discs. These allowed home PCs to get
online through dial-up technology, where a modem could connect
through a conventional household phone line. In the early years of the
Internet, this for a time made AOL the main platform, and thus the object
of the enormously expensive and unsuccessful AOL-Time Warner
merger.
That platform's unusual loss of dominance owed to technological
change, as the phone and cable companies developed broadband
technology to send more data faster through phone lines, and then
through cell signals and cable TV. As this new "broadband" service
spread across the broad mass market from its early use on college
campuses at the turn of the century, AOL's value utterly plummeted,

until it came to be seen as a costly albatross around media conglomerate
Time Warner's neck.9 The role of entry point for the web shifted from
that short-lived monopoly to the URL bar that allows any web address to
be typed, but also to a limited number of dominant home pages run by
the current majors—Google, Facebook, Microsoft's MSN.com, and
Verizon's Yahoo.
But entrenched hubs that have grown into great established platforms
seldom fall on their own, a historical precedent suggesting that the stock
market's expectation of Big Tech's continued dominance looks like a
pretty good bet. The worn-in role of these giant network hubs is the main
basis for investors' enduring confidence in Silicon Valley, to the point
that they now represent the five largest companies in the world by
market value: Microsoft, Apple, Amazon, Google, and Facebook,
respectively.10
Illusions around this reality are widespread, including some wildly
deluded commentators who suggest that the new tech hubs are actually
undermining capitalism. In a widely cited but grotesquely misguided
article in the Guardian, Paul Mason suggested that "the giant tech
companies ... cannot last" because their "fragile corporate edifice [is] at
odds with the most basic needs of humanity, which is to use ideas
freely."11 Mason's romantic idealism is apparently based on the
popularity of sharing online media, and his column traveled widely on
the notion that sharing a news article or YouTube video will lead to the
crash of capitalism. This is difficult to square with the reams of
documentation of Silicon Valley's legal and economic means of
protecting its platforms. And if you're not convinced by this book,
written by an economist on the political left, consider instead a
November 2015 headline from the conservative Wall Street Journal:
"Giants Tighten Grip on Internet Economy."12
It's possible the giants will seriously stumble despite their entrenched
hub status—for example, through a crash in their stock values, which are
extremely high (but arguably justified by the titanic profits and power
the firms hold, and valuations aren't yet as out of control as they were
during the 1990s tech bubble).13 Another prospect is a major security
hack or meltdown, which can't be excluded from the realm of possibility
after revelations like Intel's 2018 disclosure that the core processor chips
sold over the last decade to Amazon, Microsoft, Google, and Apple had
security blind spots that could be hacked. This set off a race among the

giants to ensure their huge server banks and software updates were
patched, which could create major problems for a typical company but,
as a corporate strategist said to the press, "when you control that much of
the market and you're that prevalent with customers, you get away with
it."14
And even the early signs of the emerging political techlash look
modest—few official proposals of breakups exist. So, without a popular
socialist takeover of this sector, the behemoths' dominance will probably
last and they will also run the new technologies of augmented reality,
virtual reality, and AI. Whatever the best plan is for developing these
unprecedented technologies, it will be decided by those with custody of
their development, which should probably not be the world's biggest
profit-obsessed, power -mongering corporations. For God's sake.
That point applies more broadly—while no one can predict the future
of technological evolution, any observer of the sciences will agree that
among those making the most dramatic progress is biological technology
—especially the use of genetic engineering and editing techniques. The
potential ability of these new tools to alter human life is nearly
inconceivable and may put today's electronics-based tech revolution to
shame. The potential extension and improvement of life it promises is
amazing, but it too will probably be under the control of a few nerdy brat
billionaires using publicly developed technology—visible even now with
the advent of innovative genome-editing tools like CRISPR-Cas9.
Someday another economist will be writing a book about the Bio
Tyrants. Obviously, the incredible potential power represented by this
technology will be far more than the biotech entrepreneurs can be trusted
with. This is capitalism.
Much like the rail tycoons on the nineteenth century, today's tech
monopolists are fighting by using their platforms against one another.
Amazon has refused to sell Google products that compete with its home
speaker, or to make its Prime Video library functional on Google's
Chromecast streaming device. Google retaliated by pulling YouTube
service from Amazon's devices.15 Amazon does carry Google's Pixel
and buys its ad space, but it won't sell Apple's streaming device. The
level of technology has changed, but what hasn't changed is our lives
being held hostage to the ruling class's pissing contests.
Every day, thousands of young people are growing up with advanced
technology in their hands that can bring them an ocean of information,

games, video, and attenuated social interaction. The longer this essential
technology, and the all-important network platforms around which it's
built, are in the hands of huge corporations who care only for making
their Wall Street growth targets, the more impoverished our lives will
become and the harder the fight will be. The technologies of the Internet
and its platforms are hugely valuable, and the potential of online
socialism to develop them for human expression and education and
entertainment is therefore enormous.
Already the tide is turning. The eminent Pew Research Center
reported in 2019 that the proportion of Americans who hold broadly
positive views of tech companies has fallen from around 70 percent to
just 50 percent in just the last four years, with plunges across political
party affiliation. Further, 55 percent of Americans said tech companies
"have too much power and influence."16 If Microsoft can come within a
chip's width of being bisected by antitrust action, if Title II classification
can at least temporarily become law over the heads of the telecom
oligopoly, if Google and Facebook can be put on their economic heels by
their inability to police their content empires, then Silicon Valley is not
invincible. Global solidarity among tech workers and users can bring us
an Internet that actually lives up to its hype, and indeed its potential. A
socialized Internet, one that is actually under the control of all of us
whose lives depend on it, can be won with online and offline activism.
And online socialism could be a leading edge for socialism in the
broader economy.
Each of us should contribute time and energy toward the activism
and education required for this beautiful goal and the spiritual changes in
the social nature of humanity that it promises. If that goal were met, we
could leave a far better world to our kids than one in which their tiny
wages go toward data plans and tech toys that give them shallow
entertainment and utterly worthless semi-news, and above all leave them
compliant subjects of capital. We could give them a world of free men
and women.
For all these reasons, and for the sake of all of us, we can't allow the
Internet platforms to remain the private property of the online
bitatorship. Today's technology raises legitimately difficult questions,
but the great mass of us users who have given the platforms most of their
value should get to decide what the terms are, not ruling-class CEO
douchebarrels. The insistence from the far right that it's the
conservatives who are oppressed in this story is a hard red pill to

swallow, especially since in the early years they opposed regulating the
platforms in the first place. But a movement this big means moving
beyond conventional political lines—for all the tendency of online
entertainment and smartphones to drive us apart into our separate phones
and bubbles, our survival requires an online socialism that brings us
together.
Irony loves company.

 
Notes
Load Screen
1. Michael Gordon and Ivan Nechepurenko, "U.S. Is Warned after It Downs Syrian Fighter,"
New York Times, June 19, 2017. The reference to the Gmail account has since been removed
from online editions of the article.
Introduction: Bitatorship
1. David Dayen, "The Android Administration," The Intercept, April 22, 2016.
2. Jack Nicas and Rolfe Winkler, "Donald Trump Strikes Conciliatory Tone in Meeting with
Tech Executives," Wall Street Journal, December 14, 2016.
3. Tyler Cowen, Big Business: A Love Letter to an American Anti-Hero (New York: St.
Martin's, 2019), 100-101.
4. Don Clark and Robert McMillan, "Giants Tighten Grip on Internet Economy," Wall Street
Journal, November 6, 2015.
5. Clark and McMillan, "Giants Tighten Grip," 143-44.
6. "Special Article: Microsoft and the Future: Busted," The Economist, November 13, 1999.
7. Clark and McMillan, "Giants Tighten Grip."
8. Charles Francis Adams, Chapters of Erie (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1956), 11.
9. Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons: The Great American Capitalists, 1861-1901 (New
York: Houghton Mifflin, 1934), 422, 392.
10. Josephson, The Robber Barons, 436-41.
11. Mina Kimes, "Railroads: Cartel or Free Market Success Story?," Fortune, September 13,
2011.
12. Christopher Mims, "Tech's Titans Tiptoe toward Monopoly," Wall Street Journal, May 31,
2018.
13. Simon London, "From Product to Platform," Financial Times, January 18, 2004.
14. Amy Harmon, "U.S. vs. Microsoft: The Overview; Judge Backs Terms of U.S. Settlement in
Microsoft Case," New York Times, November 2, 2002.
15. London, "From Product to Platform."
16. Nicholas Carr, The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google (New York:
Norton, 2013), 139.
17. Arun Rao and Piero Scaruffi, A History of Silicon Valley: The Greatest Creation of Wealth in
the History of the Planet (Palo Alto, CA: Omniware Group, 2013), 397, 398-99.
18. Richard Waters, "Google Changes Tack in Media' Swirling Universe," Financial Times,
October 10, 2006.

19. Paul Krugman and Robin Wells, Microeconomics, 5th ed. (New York: Worth, 2018), 384.
20. Quentin Hardy, "The Web's Creator Looks to Reinvent It," New York Times, June 7, 2016.
Chapter 1: The Flaw of Gravity
1. Charles Francis Adams, Chapters of Erie (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1956), 11.
2. Farhad Manjoo, "Tech's 'Frightful 5' Will Dominate Digital Life for Foreseeable Future,"
New York Times, January 20, 2016.
3. Farhad Manjoo, "Tech's Frightful Five: They've Got Us," New York Times, May 10, 2017.
4. "Daily Report: Seeking the Captive Consumer," New York Times, February 13, 2012.
5. John Gapper, "Steve Jobs' Legacy Is the Omniscient Tech Company," Financial Times,
January 11, 2017.
6. Don Clark and Robert McMillan, "Giants Tighten Grip on Internet Economy," Wall Street
Journal, November 6, 2015.
7. Jack Nicas, "They Tried to Boycott Facebook, Apple and Google. They Failed," New York
Times, April 1, 2018.
8. "Everybody Wants to Rule the World," The Economist, November 29, 2014.
9. Rob Larson, Capitalism vs. Freedom: The Toll Road to Serfdom (Alresford, UK: Zero
Books, 2018), chap. 1.
10. Albert-László Barbási, Linked: How Everything Is Connected to Everything Else and What
It Means for Business, Science, and Everyday Life (New York: Penguin, 2003), 70-71.
11. Barbási, Linked, 83, 85-88.
12. Fragkiskos Papadopoulos et al., "Popularity versus Similarity in Growing Networks," Nature
489, no. 7417 (2012): 537-40.
13. Papadopoulos et al., "Popularity versus Similarity," 96.
14. Joseph Farrell and Garth Saloner, "Installed Base and Compatibility: Innovation, Product
Preannouncements, and Predation," American Economic Review 76, no. 5 (1986): 940, 950.
15. W. Brian Arthur, "Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-In by Historical
Events," Economic Journal 99, no. 394 (1989): 117, 127; see also Michael Katz and Carl
Shapiro, "Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility," American Economic
Review 75, no. 3 (1985): 425.
16. Steve Steinbereg, "Schumpeter's Lesson," Wired, January 1, 1998.
17. Christopher Anderson, "Doomonomics," Financial Times, May 25, 1996.
18. Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New York: Vintage,
2011), 318-19.
19. Robert McChesney, Digital Disconnect: How Capitalism Is Turning the Internet against
Democracy (New York: New Press, 2013), 132.
20. Arun Rao and Piero Scaruffi, A History of Silicon Valley: The Greatest Creation of Wealth in
the History of the Planet (Palo Alto, CA: Omniware Group, 2013), 390.
21. "Free Does Not Live Up to Its Billing," Financial Times, July 1, 2009.
22. "E-Commerce: In the Great Web Bazaar," The Economist, February 26, 2000.
23. "Should Digital Monopolies Be Broken Up?," The Economist, November 29, 2014.
24. "Everybody Wants to Rule the World."
25. John Gapper, "When the Networks Bubble Over," Financial Times, March 30, 2011.
26. "Should Digital Monopolies Be Broken Up?"

27. Robert Bork and J. Gregory Sidak, "What Does the Chicago School Teach about Internet
Search and the Antitrust Treatment of Google?," Journal of Competition Law and
Economics 8, no. 4 (2012): 663-700.
28. Bork and Sidak, "What Does the Chicago School Teach?," 663.
29. Bork and Sidak, "What Does the Chicago School Teach?," 666.
30. Jack Nicas, "Google Searches Boost Its Own Products," Wall Street Journal, January 20,
2017.
31. David Brooks, "The Creative Monopoly," New York Times, April 23, 2012.
32. Barry Lynn, Cornered: The New Monopoly Capitalism and the Economics of Destruction
(Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2010), 117.
33. Lynn, Cornered, 13.
34. Leonard Silk, "Antitrust Issues Facing Reagan," New York Times, February 13, 1981.
35. Brent Kendall, "Promised Monopoly Crackdown Fizzles," Wall Street Journal, November 7,
2015.
36. Alfred Chandler Jr., Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1994), 23-24, 26.
37. Chandler, The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business (Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press, 1993), 375.
38. "How to Tame the Tech Titans?," The Economist, January 22, 2018.
39. Rob Larson, "The Economics of Net Neutrality," Dollars and Sense, July/August 2015.
40. Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons: The Great American Capitalists, 1861-1901 (New
York: Houghton Mifflin, 1962), 451.
Chapter 2: Macrosoft
1. James Wallace and Jim Erickson, Hard Drive: Bill Gates and the Making of the Microsoft
Empire (New York: HarperCollins, 1992), 211.
2. Andrew I. Gavil and Harry First, The Microsoft Antitrust Cases: Competition Policy for the
Twenty-First Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014), 157.
3. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 168.
4. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 233.
5. James Wallace, Overdrive: Bill Gates and the Race to Control Cyberspace (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1997), 145-46.
6. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 120, 216-17.
7. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 213.
8. Gavil and First, The Microsoft Antitrust Cases, 155.
9. "Special Article: Microsoft and the Future: Busted," The Economist, November 13, 1999.
10. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 315-16.
11. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 252.
12. Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New York: Vintage,
2011), 54.
13. Wu, The Master Switch, 279.
14. Albert-László Barabási, Linked: How Everything Is Connected to Everything Else and What
It Means for Business, Science, and Everyday Life (New York: Penguin, 2003), 104.
15. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 23.
16. Wallace, Overdrive, 97.

17. Wallace, Overdrive, 390.
18. Wallace, Overdrive, 118.
19. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 99-101.
20. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 11.
21. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 38.
22. Wallace, Overdrive, 22-23; John Heilemann, Pride before the Fall: The Trials of Bill Gates
and the End of the Microsoft Era (New York: Harper-Collins, 2001), 125.
23. Wallace, Overdrive, 36-37.
24. Wallace, Overdrive, 45.
25. Wallace, Overdrive, 39.
26. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 398-99.
27. Wallace, Overdrive, 184.
28. Wallace, Overdrive, 266.
29. Wallace, Overdrive, 79.
30. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 17.
31. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 36.
32. Bill Gates, "Office Rendering" email, Plaintiff's exhibit 2991, Comes v. Microsoft Corp.,
December 5, 1996.
33. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 112.
34. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 133.
35. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 113.
36. Gavil and First, The Microsoft Antitrust Cases, 82.
37. Gavil and First, The Microsoft Antitrust Cases, 100.
38. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 22.
39. Gavil and First, The Microsoft Antitrust Cases, 36.
40. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 64.
41. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 66.
42. Gavil and First, The Microsoft Antitrust Cases, 67.
43. "Bill Gates - Microsoft Antitrust Deposition - Highlights," YouTube video, November 2,
2018, www.youtube.com/watch?v=gRelVFm7iJE.
44. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 144-45.
45. Steve Lorh and Nick Wingfield, "When Mr. Gates Went to Washington," New York Times,
April 14, 2018.
46. Randall Smith, "As His Foundation Has Grown, Gates Has Slowed His Donations," New
York Times, May 26, 2014.
47. Heilemann, Pride before the Fall, 216-17.
48. US Department of Justice, "Justice Department Informs Microsoft of Plans for Further
Proceedings in the District Court," press release, September 6, 2001.
49. Gavil and First, The Microsoft Antitrust Cases, 122-23.
50. Gavil and First, The Microsoft Antitrust Cases, 314.
51. Amy Harmon, "U.S. vs. Microsoft: The Overview; Judge Backs Terms of U.S. Settlement in
Microsoft Case," New York Times, November 2, 2002.
52. Mary Jo Foley, Microsoft 2.0: How Microsoft Plans to Stay Relevant in the Post-Gates Era
(Indianapolis, IN: Wiley, 2008), 125.
53. Stephen Grocer, "Microsoft, Peers Stage Rebound," Wall Street Journal, October 24, 2016.

54. Nick Wingfield, "Windows 10 Signifies Microsoft's Shift in Strategy," New York Times, July
19, 2015.
55. Wu, The Master Switch, 294; Arun Rao and Piero Scaruffi, A History of Silicon Valley: The
Greatest Creation of Wealth in the History of the Planet (Palo Alto, CA: Omniware Group,
2013), 400.
56. Jay Greene, "Looks Who's Back! Microsoft, Rebooted, Emerges as a Tech Leader," Wall
Street Journal, December 16, 2016; Steve Lohr, "Microsoft Buys GitHub for $7.5 Billion,
Moving to Grow in Coding's new Era," New York Times, June 4, 2018.
57. Jay Greene, "Microsoft Expands Surface Lineup," Wall Street Journal, October 18, 2017.
58. Jay Greene, "Cloud Gains Lift Microsoft," Wall Street Journal, January 27, 2017.
59. Angus Loten, "Microsoft Narrows Gap with Amazon in Cloud," Wall Street Journal, August
2, 2018.
60. Jay Greene and Laura Stevens, "Rivals on Speaking Terms," Wall Street Journal, August 31,
2017.
61. Jay Greene, "Microsoft's Services Revenue Lifts Quarterly Results," Wall Street Journal,
October 26, 2017.
62. Microsoft Corporation, Form 10-K, fiscal year ended June 30, 2016, p. 4.
63. Quoted in Nicholas Carr, The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google (New
York: Norton, 2008), 81.
64. Ted Greenwald, "Microsoft Unveils Virtual-Assistant Bot," Wall Street Journal, September
26, 2017.
65. Jay Greene, "Microsoft Downgrades Windows' Role in Cloud-Focused Reorganization,"
Wall Street Journal, March 29, 2018.
66. Tatyana Shumsky, "Stop Using Excel, Finance Chiefs Tell Staffs," Wall Street Journal,
November 29, 2017.
67. Richard Waters and Hannah Kuchler, "Microsoft Held Back Free Patch That Could Have
Slowed WannaCry," Financial Times, May 17, 2017.
68. Robert McMillan, "Microsoft Warns Of Bug in Windows," Wall Street Journal, May 16,
2019.
69. Waters and Kuchler, "Microsoft Held Back Free Patch."
70. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 38.
71. Tiffany Hsu, "Microsoft C.E.O. Says Tech's Progress on Gender Equality Is 'Not
Sufficient,'" New York Times, September 26, 2017.
72. Bill Gates, "How to Keep America Competitive," Washington Post, February 25, 2007.
73. Jacqui Cheng, "Senators: Companies with 'Mass Layoffs' Shouldn't Hire More Foreign
Workers," Ars Technica, June 7, 2007.
74. Paul Andrews, "Inside Microsoft—A 'Velvet Sweatshop' or a High-Tech Heaven?," Seattle
Times, April 23, 1989.
75. Andrews, "Inside Microsoft."
76. Sarah Krouse, "The New Ways Your Boss Is Spying on You," Wall Street Journal, July 19,
2019.
77. Jay Greene, "Troubling Exits At Microsoft," BusinessWeek, September 26, 2005.
78. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 368; Stephen Satterwhite, "Here's to the Death of
Microsoft's Rank-and-Yank," Forbes, November 13, 2013.
79. Wallace, Overdrive, 102, 104.
80. Sheera Frenkel, "Microsoft Employees Question C.E.O. over Company's Contract with
ICE," New York Times, July 26, 2018.

81. Alan Hyde, Working in Silicon Valley: Economic and Legal Analysis of a High-Velocity
Labor Market (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 2003), 196-98.
82. Chris Benner, Work in the New Economy: Flexible Labor Markets in Silicon Valley (Malden,
MA: Blackwell, 2002), 125.
83. Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 417.
Chapter 3: The Apple Bitten
1. Owen Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0: The Real Story of Apple Computer, Inc. (San
Francisco: No Starch Press, 2008), 109.
2. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 20.
3. Adam Lashinsky, Inside Apple: How America's Most Admired—and Secretive—Company
Really Works (New York: Business Plus, 2012), 126.
4. Steven Levy, Insanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That Changed
Everything (New York: Viking, 1994), 74.
5. Lashinsky, Inside Apple, 75.
6. Levy, Insanely Great, 90.
7. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 4.
8. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 80.
9. Levy, Insanely Great, 125.
10. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 59-61, 93; Lashinsky, Inside Apple, 20.
11. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 88.
12. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 97.
13. Levy, Insanely Great, 224, 196.
14. Linzmeyer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 69.
15. Levy, Insanely Great, 194.
16. Levy, Insanely Great, 161.
17. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 169-71.
18. Quoted in Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 245-48.
19. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 249.
20. Lashinsky, Inside Apple, 15.
21. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 247.
22. Linzmayer, Apple Confidential 2.0, 169.
23. Simon London, "From Product to Platform," Financial Times, January 18, 2004.
24. Lashinsky, Inside Apple, 24.
25. Adam Greenfield, Radical Technologies: The Design of Everyday Life (London: Verso,
2017), 28.
26. Tripp Mickle, "Apple Breaks Losing Streak, as Sales of iPhone 7 Shine," Wall Street
Journal, February 1, 2017; Brian Merchant, The One Device: The Secret History of the
iPhone (New York: Little, Brown & Co. 2017), 5.
27. Merchant, The One Device, 77-78.
28. Merchant, The One Device, 67, 97, 359.
29. Merchant, The One Device, 84-87.
30. Merchant, The One Device, 93, 70.
31. Merchant, The One Device, 189-90.

32. Merchant, The One Device, 59.
33. Greenfield, Radical Technologies, 19.
34. Greenfield, Radical Technologies, 297.
35. Apple, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended September 24, 2016, p. 9.
36. Lashinsky, Inside Apple, 130.
37. Betsy Morris, "Many Teens Check Their Phones in Middle of Night," Wall Street Journal,
May 29, 2019.
38. David Benoit, "iPhones and Children Are a Toxic Pair, Say Two Big Apple Investors," Wall
Street Journal, January 7, 2018; David Gelles, "Tech Backlash Grows as Investors Press
Apple to Act on Children's Use," New York Times, January 8, 2018.
39. Merchant, The One Device, 174, 182.
40. Apple, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended September 24, 2016, pp. 5, 11.
41. Catherine Rampell, "Cracking the Apple Trap," New York Times, October 29, 2013.
42. Joanna Stern, "Ugh, Green Bubbles! Apple's iMessage Makes Switching to Android Hard,"
Wall Street Journal, October 18, 2018.
43. Fred Vogelstein, Dogfight: How Apple and Google Went to War and Started a Revolution
(New York: Sarah Crichton Books, 2013), 6.
44. Betsy Morris, "What the iPhone Wrought," Wall Street Journal, June 24, 2017.
45. Vogelstein, Dogfight, 84, 129.
46. Vogelstein, Dogfight, 95.
47. Vogelstein, Dogfight, 117, 119.
48. Vogelstein, Dogfight, 124.
49. Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011), 512.
50. Paul Barrett, "Apple's Jihad," Bloomberg Businessweek, April 2, 2012.
51. Vogelstein, Dogfight, 141.
52. Vogelstein, Dogfight, 185.
53. Timothy Martin and Tripp Mickle, "Phone Giants Ramp Up Rivalry," Wall Street Journal,
April 2, 2017.
54. Tripp Mickle, "Apple's Cash Hoard Set to Top $250 Billion," Wall Street Journal, April 30,
2017.
55. Yasha Levine, Surveillance Valley: The Secret Military History of the Internet (New York:
Hachette, 2018), 171.
56. Tripp Mickle, "Apple Touts New Privacy Features amid Scrutiny of Tech Giants," Wall
Street Journal, June 3, 2019.
57. Vogelstein, Dogfight, 147.
58. Tripp Mickle, "Jony Ive Is Leaving Apple, but His Departure Started Long Ago," Wall Street
Journal, June 30, 2019.
59. Josh Zumbrun and Tripp Mickle, "How Apple's Pricey New iPhone X Tests Economic
Theory," Wall Street Journal, September 17, 2017.
60. Tripp Mickle and John McKinnon, "U.S., French Officials Question Apple over iPhone
Battery Slowdowns," Wall Street Journal, January 9, 2018.
61. Tripp Mickle, "Apple Allays iPhone Worries, Adds $100 Billion to Buyback Plans," Wall
Street Journal, May 1, 2018.
62. Tripp Mickle and Eliot Brown, "At Apple, One Ring to Bind Them All," Wall Street
Journal, May 15, 2017.
63. Christina Passariello, "Steve Jobs Theater Debuts," Wall Street Journal, September 13, 2017.

64. Levy, Insanely Great, 141.
65. Levy, Insanely Great, 145-47.
66. Levy, Insanely Great, 95; Lashinsky, Inside Apple, 4.
67. Lashinsky, Inside Apple, 38.
68. Lashinsky, Inside Apple, 42.
69. Merchant, The One Device, 349.
70. Merchant, The One Device, 264.
71. Merchant, The One Device, 371.
72. Merchant, The One Device, 264-65, 270.
73. Andrew Ross Sorkin, "Apple's Tim Cook Barnstorms for 'Moral Responsibility,'" New York
Times, August 28, 2017.
74. Merchant, The One Device, 273.
75. Merchant, The One Device, 310-11.
76. David Segal, "Apple's Retail Army, Long on Loyalty but Short on Pay," New York Times,
June 23, 2012.
77. Mark Ames, "Revealed: Apple and Google's Wage-Fixing Cartel Involved Dozens More
Companies, over One Million Employees," PandoDaily, March 22, 2014.
78. James Stewart, "Steve Jobs Defied Convention, and Perhaps the Law," New York Times,
May 2, 2014.
79. David Streitfeld, "Court Rejects Deal on Hiring in Silicon Valley," New York Times, August
8, 2014.
80. Dean Baker, "Silicon Valley Billionaires Believe in the Free Market, as Long as They
Benefit," The Guardian, February 3, 2014.
81. Merchant, The One Device, 377.
Chapter 4: Amazon's Smile
1. Sandra Garcia, "MacKenzie Bezos Owns $36 Billion in Amazon Shares. Now She Is
Vowing to Give Away Much of Her Wealth," New York Times, May 8, 2019.
2. Brad Stone, The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of Amazon (New York: Little,
Brown, & Co., 2013), 52.
3. James Marcus, Amazonia: Five Years at the Epicenter of the Dot.com Juggernaut (New
York: The New Press, 2005), 221.
4. Stone, Everything Store, 23, 57.
5. Stone, Everything Store, 31.
6. Stone, Everything Store, 37.
7. Nicholas Carr, The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google (New York:
W.W. Norton, 2013), 139.
8. Stone, Everything Store, 49.
9. Stone, Everything Store, 107.
10. Marcus, Amazonia, 182.
11. Marcus, Amazonia, 115.
12. "Primed," The Economist, March 25, 2017.
13. Stone, Everything Store, 115.

14. Sebastian Herrera and Sarah Nassauer, "The One Amazon Day Deal That Walmart and
Target Can't Match," Wall Street Journal, July 15, 2019.
15. Herrera and Nassauer, "The One Amazon Day Deal," 303.
16. David Dayen, "Prime New World," In These Times, July 2019.
17. Laura Stevens, "Amazon's Profit Jumps, but Sales Growth Disappoints," Wall Street
Journal, February 2, 2017.
18. Jack Nicas sand Karen Weise, "Anger at Big Tech United Noodle Pullers and Code Writers.
Washington Is All Ears," Wall Street Journal, June 10, 2019.
19. Jon Emont, "Amazon Offers Sellers a Leg Up, with a Catch," Wall Street Journal, July 18,
2019.
20. Stone, Everything Store, 304.
21. Amazon.com, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended December 31, 2016, p. 14.
22. Matthew Dalton and Laura Stevens, "Why Amazon Still Has a Luxury Problem," Wall Street
Journal, October 9, 2017.
23. Laura Stevens, "Amazon Snips Prices on Other Sellers' Items ahead of Holiday Onslaught,"
Wall Street Journal, November 5, 2017.
24. Vindu Goel, "Amazon, in Hunt for Lower Prices, Recruits Indian Merchants," New York
Times, November 26, 2017.
25. Justin Lahart, "Why Wal-Mart Should Worry Amazon Investors," Wall Street Journal,
November 16, 2017.
26. Stone, Everything Store, 288-89.
27. Stone, Everything Store, 289.
28. Amazon.com, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended December 31, 2016, p. 11.
29. Adam Liptak, "Supreme Court Clears Way to Collect Sales Tax from Online Retailers," Wall
Street Journal, June 21, 2018.
30. Liptak, "Supreme Court Clears Way," 22.
31. Stephen Cohen, "Amazon Paid No US Income Taxes for 2017," Seattle Post-Intelligencer,
February 27, 2018.
32. Stone, Everything Store, 167-69.
33. Marcus, Amazonia, 243.
34. Stone, Everything Store, 325.
35. Stone, Everything Store, 327.
36. Stone, Everything Store, 176-77.
37. Marcus, Amazonia, 53-54.
38. Stone, Everything Store, 233.
39. Marcus, Amazonia, 51.
40. Laura Stevens and Heather Haddon, "Amazon Acts First on Food Prices," Wall Street
Journal, August 29, 2017.
41. Nancy Keates, "The Many Places Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos Calls Home," Wall Street
Journal, October 5, 2017.
42. Marcus, Amazonia, 167-69.
43. Jonathan Taplin, Move Fast and Break Things: How Facebook, Google, and Amazon
Cornered Culture and Undermined Democracy (New York: Little, Brown, & Co., 2017),
124.
44. Stone, Everything Store, 180-81.
45. Stone, Everything Store, 296.

46. Stone, Everything Store, 297-99.
47. Stone, Everything Store, 243-44.
48. Stone, Everything Store, 244.
49. Stone, Everything Store, 245.
50. Stone, Everything Store, 231.
51. Yasha Levine, Surveillance Valley: The Secret Military History of the Internet (New York:
Hachette, 2018), 170.
52. Stone, Everything Store, 278.
53. Levine, Surveillance Valley, 278, 256.
54. Levine, Surveillance Valley, 280.
55. Packer, "Cheap Words," New Yorker, February 17-24, 2014.
56. Barry Lynn, "Killing the Competition," Harper's, February 2012.
57. Stone, Everything Store, 271-73.
58. Kirk Johnson, "5 Lessons Seattle Can Teach Other Cities about Amazon," New York Times,
November 16, 2017.
59. Laura Stevens and Shayndi Raice, "Amazon Homes in on Tax Breaks," Wall Street Journal,
October 20, 2017.
60. Nick Wingfield, "Side Benefit to Amazon's Headquarters Contest: Local Expertise," Wall
Street Journal, January 28, 2018.
61. Laura Stevens, Shibani Mahtani, and Shayndi Raice, "For Amazon, a Grand Tour," Wall
Street Journal, April 3, 2018.
62. Shayndi Raice and Laura Stevens, "In Their Push to Lure Amazon, Cities Face Unintended
Demands," Wall Street Journal, March 15, 2018.
63. Heather Haddon, "Amazon Sells $1.6 Million in Whole Foods' Store-Brand Products in
First Month," Wall Street Journal, September 29, 2017; Nick Wingfield, "Bit by Bit, Whole
Foods Gets an Amazon Touch," New York Times, March 1, 2018; Greg Bensinger, "By Land,
Air and Now Sea: Amazon Looks to Arrange Ocean Freight," Wall Street Journal, January
14, 2016; Laura Stevens and Erica Phillips, "Amazon to Deliver Air-Cargo Flights," Wall
Street Journal, March 16, 2017; Greg Bensinger and Laura Stevens, "Amazon Takes Aim at
UPS and FedEx," Wall Street Journal, September 28, 2016.
64. Carr, The Big Switch, 72.
65. Stone, Everything Store, 221.
66. Carr, The Big Switch, 74.
67. Angus Loten, "Microsoft Narrows Gap with Amazon in Cloud," Wall Street Journal, August
2, 2018.
68. "The Walmart of the Web," The Economist, October 1, 2011.
69. Ted Mann and Brody Mullins, "As Trump Bashes Amazon, the Government Relies on It,"
Wall Street Journal, April 5, 2018.
70. Jay Greene, "Tech's High-Stakes Arms Race: Costly Data Centers," Wall Street Journal,
April 7, 2017.
71. Ted Mann and Brody Mullins, "Amazon's Rivals Fear They Will Lose Out on Pentagon's
Cloud-Computing Contract," Wall Street Journal, April 12, 2018.
72. Steve Wasserman, "The Amazon Effect," The Nation, May 29, 2012.
73. Carr, The Big Switch, 235-36.
74. Robert McMillan, "Amazon Grapples with Outage at AWS Cloud Service," Wall Street
Journal, March 1, 2017.

75. Nick Wingfield, "Miscue Calls Attention to Amazon's Dominance in Cloud Computing,"
New York Times, March 12, 2017.
76. Stone, Everything Store, 222.
77. Tripp Mickle and Laura Stevens, "Amazon Echo Prices Turn Smart-Speaker Market on Its
Ear," Wall Street Journal, December 18, 2017.
78. Laura Stevens, "Amazon Alexa-Powered Device Recorded and Shared User's Conversation
without Permission," Wall Street Journal, May 24, 2018.
79. Sarah Needleman and Parmy Olson, "Google Contractors Listen to Recordings of People
Using Virtual Assistant," Wall Street Journal, July 11, 2019.
80. Betsy Morris, "Amazon Is Accused of Violating Kids' Privacy with Smart Speakers," Wall
Street Journal, May 9, 2019.
81. Laura Stevens, "Amazon's New Echo Aims to Answer Age-Old Question: Does this Look
Good on Me?," Wall Street Journal, April 26, 2017; Nick Wingfield, "Amazon Tries a New
Delivery Spot: Your Car," New York Times, April 24, 2018.
82. Isabel Sterne, "Academic Research and Its Subjects, Both Now Pawns in Amazon's
Empire," The Technoskeptic, Spring 2019.
83. Marcus, Amazonia, 17.
84. Stone, Everything Store, 49.
85. Stone, Everything Store, 43-44.
86. Stone, Everything Store, 73, 51.
87. Joe Allen, "Logistics' Two Fronts," Jacobin, March 28, 2017.
88. Stone, Everything Store, 89-90.
89. Stone, Everything Store, 336-37.
90. Marcus, Amazonia, 148.
91. Stone, Everything Store, 329.
92. Greg Bensinger, "Amazon Sues Executive Recently Hired by Target," Wall Street Journal,
March 22, 2016.
93. Mac McClelland, "I Was a Warehouse Wage Slave," Mother Jones, February 27, 2012.
94. Spencer Soper, "Inside Amazon's Warehouse," Morning Call, August 17, 2015.
95. Georgia Wells, Rachel Feintzeig, and Theo Francis, "Amazon's Typical Worker Is in a
Warehouse Making $28, 446 a Year," Wall Street Journal, April 22, 2018.
96. Stone, Everything Store, 161.
97. Amazon.com, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended December 31, 2016, pp. 58-59; Taplin,
Move Fast and Break Things, 83.
98. Stone, Everything Store, 165.
99. Stone, Everything Store, 180.
100. Jennifer Smith, "A Robot Can Be a Warehouse Worker's Best Friend," Wall Street Journal,
August 3, 2017.
101. Stone, Everything Store, 190.
102. Isobel Asher Hamilton and Ruqayyah Moynihan, "Amazon Reportedly Left Police in Spain
'Dumbfounded' by Asking Them to Intervene in a Mass Warehouse Strike and Patrol Worker
Productivity,' Business Insider, November 23, 2018.
103. Jana Kasperkevic, "Amazon to Remove Non-compete Clause from Contracts for Hourly
Workers," The Guardian, March 27, 2015.
104. Matt Day, "Amazon Warehouse Envoys Rally to Tweet Upbeat Comments about Working
Conditions," Seattle Times, August 23, 2018.

105. Clark Mindock, "Amazon Prime Day: Workers Strike across the Globe for Better Pay and
Working Conditions at E-commerce Company," The Independent, July 15, 2019.
106. David Streitfeld, "What Happens after Amazon's Domination Is Complete? Its Bookstore
Offers Clues," Wall Street Journal, June 23, 2019.
107. Brad Stone, "Amazon Erases Orwell Books From Kindle," New York Times, July 18, 2009.
Chapter 5: Being Evil
1. Jack Nicas and Juan Forero, "Google Will Put Servers in Cuba," Wall Street Journal,
December 13, 2016.
2. Alexis Wichowski, "Net States Rule the World," Wired, November 4, 2017.
3. Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New York: Random
House, 2011), 296.
4. Ken Auletta, Googled: The End of the World as We Know It (New York: Penguin, 2010),
122.
5. Steven Levy, In the Plex: How Google Thinks, Works, and Shapes Our Lives (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2011), 229.
6. Levy, In the Plex, 21-22.
7. Auletta, Googled, 35.
8. Arun Rao and Piero Scaruffi, A History of Silicon Valley: The Greatest Creation of Wealth in
the History of the Planet (Palo Alto, CA: Omniware Group, 2013), 397-99.
9. Auletta, Googled, 138-39.
10. Levy, In the Plex, 24-27.
11. Levy, In the Plex, 14.
12. Yasha Levine, Surveillance Valley: The Secret Military History of the Internet (New York:
Hachette, 2018), 172.
13. Levy, In the Plex, 181-83.
14. Levy, In the Plex, 191-94.
15. George Geis, Semi-organic Growth: Tactics and Strategies behind Google's Success
(Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2015), chaps. 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7.
16. Siva Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should Worry) (Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2011), 133.
17. Shalini Ramachandran, "Google's 'Knowledge Panels' Might Think You're Dead. Or
French," Wall Street Journal, May 31, 2019.
18. Jack Nicas, "Google Has Picked an Answer for You—Too Bad It's Often Wrong," Wall
Street Journal, November 16, 2017.
19. "Personalized 
Search 
for 
everyone," 
Google 
blog, 
December 
4, 
2009,
https://googleblog.blogspot.com/2009/12/personalized-search-for-everyone.html.
20. Eli Pariser, The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized Web Is Changing What We Read
and How We Think (New York: Penguin, 2011), 3.
21. Jack Nicas, "Ads Boost Alphabet, Fueled by Phone Use," Wall Street Journal, October 28,
2016.
22. Fred Vogelstein, Dogfight: How Apple and Google Went to War and Started a Revolution
(New York: Sarah Crichton Books, 2013), 6.
23. Wu, Master Switch, 273; Jonathan Taplin, Move Fast and Break Things: How Facebook,
Google, and Amazon Cornered Culture and Undermined Democracy (New York: Little,
Brown, & Co., 2017), 249.

24. Levy, In the Plex, 41, 104.
25. Levy, In the Plex, 152, 145.
26. Levy, In the Plex, 331-32.
27. Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything, 19-20.
28. Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything, xiv.
29. Wu, Master Switch, 280.
30. Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything, 66.
31. Taplin, Move Fast and Break Things, 13.
32. Sam Schechner and Jack Nicas, "EU Targets Android's Dominance," Wall Street Journal,
April 21, 2016.
33. Kate Conger, "Google C.E.O. Denies Allegations of Political Bias in Search Results," New
York Times, September 21, 2018.
34. Charles Duhigg, "The Case against Google," New York Times Magazine, February 20, 2018.
35. Jack Nicas, "Google Searches Boost Its Own Products," Wall Street Journal, January 20,
2017.
36. Marc Tracy, "Google Made $4.7 Billion from the News Industry in 2018, Study Says," Wall
Street Journal, June 9, 2019.
37. Daisuke Wakabayashi, "Trump Says Google Is Rigged, Despite Its Denials. What Do We
Know about How It Works?," New York Times, September 5, 2018.
38. Robin Andersen, "Backlash against Russian 'Fake News' Is Shutting Down Debate for
Real," Extra, November 29, 2017.
39. Brody Mullins and Jack Nicas, "Paying Professors: Inside Google's Academic Influence
Campaign," Wall Street Journal, July 14, 2017.
40. Kenneth Vogel, "Google Critic Ousted from Think Tank Funded by the Tech Giant," New
York Times, August 30, 2017.
41. Steve Lohr, "Antitrust Cry from Microsoft," New York Times, March 31, 2011.
42. Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything, 54.
43. Levy, In the Plex, 344.
44. Levy, In the Plex, 343-46.
45. Auletta, Googled, 23.
46. Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page, "The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hyper-textual Web Search
Engine," Computer Science Department, Stanford University, January 1998.
47. Tim Wu, The Attention Merchants: The Epic Scramble to Get inside Our Heads (New York:
Vintage, 2017), 264.
48. Wu, The Attention Merchants, 265.
49. Alphabet, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, pp. 5, 7.
50. Auletta, Googled, 21; George Orwell, "The Freedom of the Press," Times Literary
Supplement, September 15, 1972.
51. Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything, 60.
52. Pariser, The Filter Bubble, 151.
53. Pariser, The Filter Bubble, 41.
54. James Curran, Natalie Fenton, and Des Freedman, Misunderstanding the Internet (New
York: Routledge, 2016), 63.
55. Levy, In the Plex, 104.
56. Richard Waters, "Microsoft in $6.2bn Ad Business Writedown," Financial Times, July 2,
2012.

57. Levy, In the Plex, 107.
58. Levy, In the Plex, 333.
59. Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything, 28.
60. Patience Haggin and Kara Depana, "Google's Ad Dominance Explained in Three Charts,"
Wall Street Journal, June 17, 2019.
61. Douglas MacMillan, "Google Will Block Spammy Ads (Just Not Many of Its Own)," Wall
Street Journal, February 14, 2018.
62. Jack Marshall, "Google to Help Publishers Get Ready for Ad Filters," Wall Street Journal,
June 2, 2017.
63. Alistair Barr and Rolfe Winkler, "Google's DoubleClick Outage Turns Internet Ad-Free for
Over an Hour," Wall Street Journal, November 12, 2014.
64. Jack Nicas, "YouTube Tops 1 Billion Hours of Video a Day, on Pace to Eclipse TV," Wall
Street Journal, February 27, 2017.
65. Geis, Semi-organic Growth, 66.
66. Auletta, Googled, 152-53.
67. Taplin, Move Fast and Break Things, 100.
68. Levy, In the Plex, 243.
69. Taplin, Move Fast and Break Things, 101.
70. Taplin, Move Fast and Break Things, 184.
71. Geis, Semi-organic Growth, 66.
72. Jack Nicas, "How YouTube Drives People to the Internet's Darkest Corners," Wall Street
Journal, February 7, 2018.
73. Max Fisher and Katrin Bennhold, "As Germans Seek News, YouTube Delivers Far-Right
Tirades," New York Times, September 7, 2018.
74. Jack Nicas, "YouTube Takes Aim at Conspiracies, Propaganda," Wall Street Journal,
February 2, 2018.
75. Justin Anderson, "YouTube Continues to Selectively Enforce Its Terms of Service," FAIR,
June 10, 2019.
76. Kevin Roose, "The Making of a YouTube Radical," New York Times, June 8, 2019.
77. Mark Bergen, "YouTube Executives Ignored Warnings, Letting Toxic Videos Run
Rampant," Bloomberg, April 2, 2019.
78. Kevin Roose and Kate Conger, "YouTube to Remove Thousands of Videos Pushing Extreme
Views," New York Times, June 5, 2019.
79. James Bridle, "Something Is Wrong on the Internet," Medium, November 6, 2017.
80. Rob Copeland, "YouTube Weights Major Changes to Kids' Content amid FTC Probe," Wall
Street Journal, June 19, 2019.
81. Max Fisher and Amanda Taub, "On YouTube's Digital Playground, an Open Gate for
Pedophiles," New York Times, June 3, 2019.
82. Jack Nicas, "YouTube Blocks Ads from Channels with Fewer Than 10,000 Views," Wall
Street Journal, April 6, 2017.
83. Rob Copeland and Katherine Bindley, "Millions of Business Listings on Google Maps Are
Fake—and Google Profits," Wall Street Journal, June 20, 2019.
84. Pariser, The Filter Bubble, 32-33.
85. Pariser, The Filter Bubble, 6.
86. Levy, In the Plex, 333-34.

87. Charlie Warzel, "Facebook and Google Trackers Are Showing Up on Porn Sites," New York
Times, July 17, 2019.
88. Auletta, Googled, 185.
89. Auletta, Googled, 190.
90. Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything, 112.
91. Natalia Drozdiak and Jack Nicas, "Google Privacy-Policy Change Faces New Scrutiny in
EU," Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2017.
92. Michael Reilly, "Now Tracks Your Credit Card Purchases and Connects Them to Its Online
Profile of You," MIT Technology Review, May 25, 2017.
93. Auletta, Googled, 267.
94. Christopher Mims, "Who Has More of Your Personal Data Than Facebook? Try Google,"
Wall Street Journal, April 22, 2018.
95. Jack Nicas, "Google to Stop Reading Users' Emails to Target Ads," Wall Street Journal,
June 23, 2017.
96. Douglas MacMillan and Robert McMillan, "Google Exposed User Data, Feared
Repercussions of Disclosing to Public," Wall Street Journal, October 8, 2018.
97. Douglas MacMillan, "At Google's Parent Alphabet, Median Pay Nears $200,000," Wall
Street Journal, April 27, 2018.
98. Corey Pein, Live Work Work Work Die: A Journey into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley
(New York: Metropolitan, 2017), 68.
99. Auletta, Googled, 18.
100. Auletta, Googled, 286.
101. Levy, In the Plex, 140-41.
102. Levy, In the Plex, 124.
103. Eric Schmidt and Jonathan Rosenberg, How Google Works (New York: Hachette, 2016),
227, 240.
104. James Stewart, "Steve Jobs Defied Convention, and Perhaps the Law," New York Times,
May 2, 2014.
105. Levy, In the Plex, 130.
106. Levy, In the Plex, 260.
107. Levy, In the Plex, 158-59, 162.
108. Auletta, Googled, 334-35.
109. Levy, In the Plex, 157
110. Auletta, Googled, 136.
111. Levy, In the Plex, 175.
112. Levy, In the Plex, 171, 218.
113. Auletta, Googled, 273-74.
114. Levy, In the Plex, 257.
115. Sam Levin, "Google Accused of 'Extreme' Gender Pay Discrimination by Us Labor
Department," The Guardian, April 7, 2017.
116. Georgia Wells, "Google Rebuts Claims It Underpays Women," Wall Street Journal, April
12, 2017.
117. Jack Nicas and Yoree Koh, "Google's 'Trust Us' Approach Doesn't Satisfy Pay Gap
Skeptics," Wall Street Journal, June 24, 2017.
118. Daisuke Wakabayashi, "Contentious Memo Strikes Nerve Inside Google and Out," New
York Times, August 8, 2017.

119. Allysia Finley, "OK Google, You've Been Served," Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2018.
120. Kate Conger and Daisuke Wakabayashi, "Google Employees Protest Secret Work on
Censored Search Engine for China," New York Times, August 16, 2018.
121. Scott Shane, Cade Metz, and Daisuke Wakabayashi, "How a Pentagon Contract Became
an Identity Crisis for Google," New York Times, May 30, 2018.
122. Scott Shane and Daisuke Wakabayashi, "'The Business of War': Google Employees
Protest Work for the Pentagon," New York Times, April 4, 2018.
123. Ben Tarnoff, "Tech Workers versus the Pentagon," Jacobin, June 6, 2018.
124. Angela Nagle, "Silicon Intersectionality," Current Affairs, November 2, 2017.
125. Kate Conger and Daisuke Wakabayashi, "Google Overhauls Sexual Misconduct Policy
after Employee Walkout," New York Times, November 8, 2018.
126. Amie Tsang and Adam Satariano, "Google Walkout: Employees Stage Protest Over
Handling of Sexual Harassment," New York Times, November 1, 2018.
127. Schmidt and Rosenberg, How Google Works, 65.
128. Kate Conger, "Google Removes 'Don't Be Evil' Clause from Its Code of Conduct,"
Gizmodo, May 18, 2018.
Chapter 6: Disgracebook
1. Issie Lapowsky, "The Supreme Court Just Protected Your Right to Facebook," Wired, June
19, 2017.
2. Paul Krugman and Robin Wells, Microeconomics, 5th ed. (New York: Worth, 2018), 384.
3. David Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect: The Inside Story of the Company That Is
Connecting the World (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2010), 21-22.
4. Ben Mezrich, The Accidental Billionaires: The Founding of Facebook: A Tale of Sex,
Money, Genius, and Betrayal (New York: Anchor Books, 2010), 123.
5. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 84.
6. Tim Wu, The Attention Merchants: The Epic Scramble to Get inside Our Heads (New York:
Vintage, 2016), 289.
7. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 35.
8. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 36-37.
9. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 132-33.
10. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 73.
11. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 51, 53.
12. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 143-44.
13. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 102.
14. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 118.
15. Mezrich, The Accidental Billionaires, 147; Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 101.
16. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 312.
17. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 303.
18. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 148.
19. Facebook, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, p. 18.
20. Roger McNamee, Zucked: Waking Up to the Facebook Catastrophe (New York: Penguin
Press, 2019), 155, 144-45.
21. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 319.

22. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 269-70.
23. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 166, 320.
24. Mezrich, The Accidental Billionaires, 249.
25. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 190.
26. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 191.
27. Eli Pariser, The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized Web Is Changing What We Read
and How We Think (New York: Penguin, 2011), 9-10.
28. Pariser, The Filter Bubble, 39.
29. Deepa Settharaman, "Facebook Steps Up Fake-News Fight," Wall Street Journal, August 4,
2017.
30. Laura Flanders, "Could Ida B. Wells Have Exposed Lynching on Your Newsfeed?," Extra,
May 9, 2018.
31. Sheera Frenkel, Nicholas Casey, and Paul Mozure, "In Some Countries, Facebook Fiddling
Has Magnified Fake News," New York Times, January 14, 2018.
32. Brendan Nyhan, "Why the Fact-Checking at Facebook Needs to Be Checked," New York
Times, October 23, 2017.
33. Farhad Manjoo, "Can Facebook Fix Its Own Worst Bug?," New York Times Magazine, April
25, 2017.
34. Nathan Olivarez-Giles, "Facebook Turns Screws on Fake News," Wall Street Journal,
January 26, 2017.
35. Christopher Mims, "Zuckerberg's Dilemma: When Facebook's Success Is Bad for Society,"
Wall Street Journal, January 7, 2018.
36. James Vincent, "Former Facebook Exec Says Social Media Is Ripping Apart Society," The
Verge, December 11, 2017.
37. Benjamin Mullin, "One Website's Facebook Apocalypse Is Another's Opportunity to
Shine," Wall Street Journal, January 12, 2018.
38. Deepa Seetharaman, Lukas Alpert, and Benjamin Mullin, "Facebook to Overhaul How It
Presents News in Feed," Wall Street Journal, January 11, 2018.
39. Nathan Robinson, "Why I Love Mark Zuckerberg and Can Never Say a Word against Him,"
Current Affairs, January 3, 2018.
40. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 177, 271.
41. Wu, The Attention Merchants, 296.
42. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 178.
43. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 175.
44. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 238-44.
45. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 259.
46. Wu, The Attention Merchants, 12.
47. Facebook, Inc., 10-K for fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, p. 9.
48. Wu, The Attention Merchants, 301.
49. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 273.
50. Mike Shields, "Facebook Says It Found More Miscalculated Metrics," Wall Street Journal,
November 16, 2016; Lara O'Reilley and Suzanne Vranica, "Marketers Say Facebook's
News Feed Update Will Be 'Nail in the Coffin' for Organic Posts," Wall Street Journal,
January 12, 2018.
51. Sapna Maheshwari, "Facebook's Current Status with Advertisers? It's Complicated," Wall
Street Journal, Aril 18, 2018.

52. Stu Woo and Sam Schechner, "Facebook Doesn't Expect Revenue Impact over Privacy
Concerns," Wall Street Journal, April 12, 2018.
53. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 217, 218.
54. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 222.
55. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 227-28.
56. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 232, 231.
57. Christopher Mims, "Facebook's Identity Crisis Looms," Wall Street Journal, March 20,
2018.
58. Deepa Seetharaman and Kirsten Grind, "Facebook Gave Some Companies Special Access to
Additional Data about Users' Friends," Wall Street Journal, June 8, 2018.
59. Sheera Frenkel and Kevin Roose, "Zuckerberg, Facing Facebook's Worst Crisis Yet, Pledges
Better Privacy," Wall Street Journal, March 21, 2018.
60. Matthew Rosenberg and Gabriel Dance, "'You Are the Product': Targeted by Cambridge
Analytica and Facebook," New York Times, April 8, 2018.
61. Nicholas Confessore, "Audit Approved of Facebook Policies, Even after Cambridge
Analytica Leak," New York Times, April 19, 2018.
62. Deepa Seetharaman, "Zuckerberg Says Facebook Probe into Apps Won't Uncover All Data
Abuse," Wall Street Journal, March 22, 2018.
63. Nicholas Confessore, Cecilia Kang, and Sheera Frenkel, "Facebook Back on the Defensive,
Now over Data Deals with Device Makers," New York Times, June 4, 2018.
64. Laura Forman, "Facebook May Be Tough Beast for Regulators to Tame," Wall Street
Journal, June 4, 2019.
65. Deepa Seetharaman, "Russian-Backed Facebook Accounts Staged Events around Divisive
Issues," Wall Street Journal, October 30, 2017.
66. Deepa Seetharaman and Robert McMillan, "Fake Facebook Accounts Latched On to Real
U.S. Protest Groups," Wall Street Journal, August 2, 2018.
67. Robert McMillan and Shane Harris, "Facebook Cut Russia from Report on Election," Wall
Street Journal, October 6, 2017.
68. David Kirkpatrick, "Facebook Sees Little Evidence of Russian Meddling in 'Brexit' Vote,"
New York Times, December 13, 2017.
69. Robert McMillan and Jeff Horowitz, "Tech Backlash Puts Silicon Valley on Edge," Wall
Street Journal, May 10, 2019.
70. Alexandra Bruell, "Facebook to Boost Ad Spending as It Tries to Restore Reputation," Wall
Street Journal, June 14, 2019.
71. Sheera Frenkel, "Facebook Starts Paying a Price for Scandals," New York Times, July 25,
2018.
72. Christopher Mims, "How Facebook's Master Algorithm Powers the Social Network," Wall
Street Journal, October 22, 2017.
73. Facebook, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, pp. 42, 26.
74. Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New York: Vintage,
2011), 298.
75. Jonathan Taplin, Move Fast and Break Things: How Facebook, Google, and Amazon
Cornered Culture and Undermined Democracy (New York: Little, Brown, & Co., 2017),
144.
76. Betsy Morris and Deepa Seetharaman, "For Tech Innovators, Facebook Looms Large," Wall
Street Journal, August 10, 2017.
77. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 118, 129.

78. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 132, 136.
79. Deepa Seetharaman, "Facebook's Female Engineers Claim Gender Bias," Wall Street
Journal, May 2, 2017.
80. Facebook, Inc., Form 10-K, fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, p. 4.
81. Lauren Weber and Deepa Seetharaman, "The Worst Job in Technology: Staring at Human
Depravity to Keep It Off Facebook," Wall Street Journal, December 27, 2017.
82. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 277.
83. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 247-50.
84. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 307-10.
85. Farhad Manjoo, "What Stays on Facebook and What Goes? The Social Network Cannot
Answer," New York Times, July 19, 2018.
86. Kevin Roose, "Facebook and YouTube Give Alex Jones a Wrist Slap," New York Times, July
27, 2018.
87. Deepa Seetharaman and Jeff Horwitz, "Facebook's Effort to Build an Internal Court for
Content Is Far from Simple," Wall Street Journal, June 27, 2019.
88. Alan MacLeod, "That Facebook Will Turn to Censoring the Left Isn't a Worry—It's a
Reality," FAIR, August 23, 2018.
89. Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect, 327.
90. Deepa Seetharaman, "Facebook's Double Standard on Privacy: Employees vs. Everyone
Else," Wall Street Journal, May 3, 2018.
Chapter 7: Neutralized
1. Rebecca Ruiz and Steve Lohr, "F.C.C. Approves Net Neutrality Rules, Classifying
Broadband Internet Service as a Utility," New York Times, February 26, 2015.
2. Gautham Nagesh, "Net-Neutrality Proposal Faces Public Backlash," Wall Street Journal,
July 14, 2014.
3. Ruiz and Lohr, "F.C.C. Approves Net Neutrality Rules.
4. Ryan Knutson and Thomas Gryta, "FCC Likely to Catch Telecom Backlash," Wall Street
Journal, January 8, 2015.
5. Sarah Krouse and Patience Haggin, "Internet Providers Look to Cash In on Your Web
Habits," Wall Street Journal, June 27, 2019.
6. Rebecca MacKinnon, Consent of the Networked: The Worldwide Struggle for Internet
Freedom (New York: Basic, 2012), 116-17.
7. Ben Collins, "Comcast Now Says It Will Not Sue FCC," Daily Beast, February 26, 2015.
8. S. Shunmuga Krishnan and Ramesh Sitaraman, "Video Stream Quality Impacts Viewer
Behavior," University of Massachusetts, November 14, 2012.
9. Shalini Ramachandran, "Netflix to Pay Comcast for Smoother Streaming," Wall Street
Journal, February 24, 2014.
10. Timothy B. Lee, "Comcast's Deal with Netflix Makes Network Neutrality Obsolete,"
Washington Post, February 23, 2014.
11. Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New York: Vintage,
2011), 288-89.
12. Brendan Sasso, "Despite Fierce Opposition from the Major Internet Providers, the FCC Is
Poised to Seize Expansive New Regulatory Powers," National Journal, February 5, 2015.
13. Alistair Barr, "Google Strikes an Upbeat Note with FCC on Title II," Wall Street Journal,
December 31, 2014.

14. Alistair Barr, "Google and Net Neutrality: It's Complicated," Wall Street Journal, February
4, 2015.
15. Ramachandran, "Netflix to Pay Comcast."
16. Federal Communications Commission, In the Matter of Protecting and Promoting the Open
Internet, Report and Order on Remand, Declaratory Ruling, and Order, March 12, 2015, p.
7.
17. Ruiz and Lohr, "F.C.C. Approves Net Neutrality Rules.
18. David Talbot, "When Will the Rest of Us Get Google Fiber?," MIT Technology Review,
February 4, 2013.
19. Mark Scott, "Dutch Offer Preview of Net Neutrality," New York Times, February 26, 2015.
20. Miriam Gottfried, "Don't Get Too Excited about the FCC's New Rules," Wall Street Journal,
April 16, 2017.
21. Cecilia Kang, "F.C.C. Repeals Net Neutrality Rules," New York Times, December 14, 2017.
22. John McKinnon and Ryan Knutson, "Want to See a World without Net Neutrality? Look at
These Old Cellphone Plans," Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2017.
23. Joanna Stern and Christopher Mims, "Tech That Will Change Your Life in 2018," Wall
Street Journal, December 27, 2017.
24. John McKinnon, "Web Firms Defend Net Neutrality as GOP Takes Aim," Wall Street
Journal, April 13, 2017.
25. Drew FitzGerald, "Netflix Backs Away from Fight over Internet Rules Now That Traffic Is
Flowing," Wall Street Journal, December 13, 2017.
26. John McKinnon and Douglas MacMillan, "Web Firms Protest Efforts to Roll Back Net
Neutrality," Wall Street Journal, July 12, 2017.
27. Drew FitzGerald, "Facebook and Microsoft to Build Fiber Optic Cable across Atlantic,"
Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2016.
28. Drew FitzGerald, "Google, Facebook to Invest in U.S.-China Data Link," Wall Street
Journal, October 12, 2016.
29. Drew FitzGerald, "Google Plans to Expand Huge Undersea Cables to Boost Cloud
Business," Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2018.
30. Jay Cassano, "How Activism Won Real Net Neutrality," Waging Nonviolence, February 26,
2015.
31. "Net Neutrality Breaks Records," Fight for the Future, July 13, 2007.
32. James Grimaldi and Paul Overberg, "Lawmakers Seek Checks on Phony Comments before
'Net Neutrality' Vote," Wall Street Journal, December 13, 2017.
33. James Grimaldi and Paul Overberg, "Millions of People Post Comments on Federal
Regulations. Many Are Fake," Wall Street Journal, December 12, 2017.
34. Lawrence Lessig and Robert McCheseny, "No Tolls on the Internet," Washington Post, June
28, 2006.
Chapter 8: Redefining R&D
1. Cade Metz, "Computer Chip Visionaries Win Turing Award," New York Times, March 21,
2018.
2. Mariana Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths
(London: Anthem, 2013), 94-95.
3. Janet Abbate, Inventing the Internet (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 17-19.
4. Abbate, Inventing the Internet, 95.

5. Abbate, Inventing the Internet, 127.
6. James Curran, Natalie Fenton, and Des Freedman, Misunderstanding the Internet (New
York: Routledge, 2016), 51.
7. Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State, 104.
8. Abbate, Inventing the Internet, 131-32.
9. Abbate, Inventing the Internet, 143.
10. Corey Pein, Live Work Work Work Die: A Journey into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley
(New York: Metropolitan, 2017), 124.
11. Pein, Live Work Work Work Die, 145.
12. Pein, Live Work Work Work Die, 194-95.
13. Pein, Live Work Work Work Die, 199.
14. Curran, Fenton, and Freedman, Misunderstanding the Internet, 33, 76.
15. Robert Wright, "The Man Who Invented the Web," Time, June 24, 2001.
16. Curran, Fenton, and Freedman, Misunderstanding the Internet, 54.
17. Eli Parsier, The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized Web Is Changing What We Read
and How We Think (New York: Penguin, 2011), 217-18.
18. Brian Merchant, The One Device: The Secret History of the iPhone (New York: Little,
Brown, & Co., 2017), 190-91.
19. Abbate, Inventing the Internet, 115.
20. Merchant, The One Device, 70-72.
21. Merchant, The One Device, 9.
22. Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State, 101-3.
23. Office of Science and Technology Policy, "American Competitiveness Initiative: Leading
the World in Innovation," February 2006, 8.
24. Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State, 106-7.
25. Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State, 108.
26. Merchant, The One Device, 188-90.
27. Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State, 109.
28. James Wallace and Jim Erickson, Hard Drive (New York: HarperCollins, 1992), 23.
29. Steven Levy, Insanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That Changed
Everything (New York: Viking, 1994), 43.
30. Brad Stone, The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of Amazon (New York: Little,
Brown, & Co., 2013), 161.
31. David Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2010), 66.
32. Parsier, The Filter Bubble, 31.
33. Yasha Levine, Surveillance Valley: The Secret Military History of the Internet (New York:
Hachette, 2018), 147.
34. Cathy O'Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction (New York: Crown, 2016), 29, 115.
35. O'Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction, 115.
36. Merchant, The One Device, 228-29.
37. Heidi Vogt, "Artificial Intelligence Rules More of Your Life. Who Rules AI?," Wall Street
Journal, March 13, 2018.
38. Office of Science and Technology Policy, "American Competitiveness Initiative," p. 11.
39. Mazzuczato, The Entrepreneurial State, 60-61.

Chapter 9: Leashing the Techlash
1. Farhad Manjoo, "Apple Shuns the Tech Industry's Apology Tour," New York Times, June 4,
2018.
2. James Wallace, Overdrive: Bill Gates and the Race to Control Cyberspace (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1997), 269.
3. Jacob Schlesinger and Jeff Horwitz, "Tech Backlash Frays Cozy Ties to Washington," Wall
Street Journal, July 26, 2019.
4. Yasha Levine, Surveillance Valley: The Secret Military History of the Internet (New York:
Hachette, 2018), 190-93.
5. Ewen MacAskill, "NSA Paid Millions to Cover Prism Compliance Costs for Tech
Companies," The Guardian, August 23, 2013.
6. Steven Levy, In the Plex: How Google Thinks, Works, and Shapes Our Lives (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2011), 319.
7. David Streitfeld, Natasha Singer, and Steven Erlanger, "How Calls for Privacy May Upend
Business for Facebook and Google," New York Times, March 24, 2018.
8. Daisuke Wakabayashi, "Missouri Opens Antitrust Investigation into Google," New York
Times, November 13, 2017.
9. Jack Nicas and Rolfe Winkler, "Donald Trump Strikes Conciliatory Tone in Meeting with
Tech Executives," Wall Street Journal, December 14, 2016.
10. Jathan Sadowski, "Silicon Valley for Trump," Jacobin, December 21, 2016.
11. Greg Ip, "A Wary Tech Sector Is Booming in the Land of Trump," Wall Street Journal, April
25, 2017.
12. David Streitfeld, Mike Isaac, and Katie Benner, "Silicon Valley's Ambivalence toward
Trump Turns to Anger," New York Times, January 29, 2017.
13. David Streitfeld, "Tech Opposition to Trump Propelled by Employees, Not Executives,"
New York Times, February 6, 2017.
14. Deepa Seetharaman, "Trump's Posts Fuel Discord in Facebook Ranks," Wall Street Journal,
October 22, 2016.
15. Sheera Frenkel, "The Biggest Spender of Political Ads on Facebook? President Trump,"
New York Times, July 17, 2018.
16. Streitfeld, Isaac, and Benner, "Silicon Valley's Ambivalence.
17. John McKinnon and Brody Mullins, "Google's Dominance in Washington Faces a
Reckoning," Wall Street Journal, October 30, 2017.
18. Cecilia Kang, "Google, in Post-Obama Era, Aggressively Woos Republicans," New York
Times, January 27, 2017.
19. Douglas Macmillan, "Tech to Size Up Tax-Law Impact," Wall Street Journal, January 31,
2018.
20. Corey Pein, Live Work Work Work Die: A Journey into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley
(New York: Metropolitan, 2017), 127.
21. Douglas MacMillan and Jay Greene, "Tech Giants Are in No Rush to Spend Overseas
Cash," Wall Street Journal, February 5, 2018.
22. Rebecca MacKinnon, Consent of the Networked: The Worldwide Struggle for Internet
Freedom (New York: Basic, 2012), 7.
23. Jerry Iannelli, "U.S. Government Has Plans to Spread Hidden Facebook Propaganda in
Cuba," Miami New Times, August 21, 2018.
24. Telis Demos, "Why Amazon and Google Haven't Attacked Banks," Wall Street Journal,
April 26, 2018.

25. Cecilia Kang, David Streitfeld, and Annie Karni, "Antitrust Troubles Snowball for Tech
Giants as Lawmakers Join In," New York Times, June 3, 2019.
26. John McKinnon, "Google, Others Now Draw State Scrutiny," Wall Street Journal, June 8,
2019.
27. Brent Kendall and Tripp Mickle, "Apple Loses Bid to End App Antitrust Case in Supreme
Court," Wall Street Journal, May 13, 2019.
28. Tripp Mickle, "Apple Dominates App Store Search Results, Thwarting Competitors," Wall
Street Journal, July 23, 2019.
29. Yoko Kubota and Tripp Mickle, "Apple Explores Moving Some Production Out of China,"
Wall Street Journal, June 20, 2019.
30. Ryan Tracy and Valentina Pop, "Google's Enemies Gear Up to Make Antitrust Case," Wall
Street Journal, June 24, 2019.
31. Brent Kendall, "Justice Department Is Preparing Antitrust Investigation of Google," Wall
Street Journal, June 1, 2019.
32. John McKinnon et al., "Facebook Worries Emails Could Show Zuckerberg Knew of
Questionable Privacy Practices," Wall Street Journal, June 12, 2019.
33. Jeff Horwitz and Deepa Seetharaman, "Facebook's Zuckerberg Backs Privacy Legislation,"
Wall Street Journal, June 26, 2019.
34. Chris Hughes, "It's Time to Break Up Facebook," New York Times, May 9, 2019.
35. Mike Isaac and Natasha Singer, "Facebook Antitrust Inquiry Shows Big Tech's
Freewheeling Era Is Past," New York Times, July 24, 2019.
36. Center 
for 
Responsive 
Politics, 
"Microsoft 
Corp,"
www.opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?id=D000000115&year=2018.
37. Brent Kendall, "Antitrust Cop Balances Tech Issues," Wall Street Journal, July 8, 2019.
38. Cecilia Kang and Kenneth Vogel, "Tech Giants Amass a Lobbying Army for an Epic
Washington Battle," New York Times, June 5, 2019.
39. Brody Mullins, Laura Stevens, and John McKinnon, "How Amazon Became One of
Washington's Most Powerful Players," Wall Street Journal, June 20, 2018.
40. Brody Mullins and Ted Mann, "Google Drops Lobbying Firms as Government Scrutiny
Grows, Wall Street Journal, June 13, 2019.
41. Shane Goldmacher and Stephanie Saul, "Democrats Take Aim at Silicon Valley. They Take
Its Cash, Too," New York Times, June 6, 2019.
42. Ted Mann, Chad Day, and Julie Bykowicz, "Democrats Rake in Tech Donations," Wall
Street Journal, June 8, 2019.
43. Louise Radnofsky, "New Gatekeeper on Legal Immigration Sets a Tougher Tone," Wall
Street Journal, July 8, 2019.
44. Suzanne Vranica and Alexandra Bruell, "Advertisers Are Wary of Breaking Up Google and
Facebook," Wall Street Journal, June 20, 2019.
45. Daniel Michaels, "Hot U.S. Import: European Regulations," Wall Street Journal, May 7,
2018.
46. Adam Satariano and Jack Nicas, "E.U. Fine Google $5.1 Billion in Android Antitrust Case,"
New York Times, July 18, 2018.
47. Jack Nicas, "Google Shrugs Off $5.1 Billion Fine with Another Big Quarter," New York
Times, July 23, 2018.
48. Sam Schechner and Valentina Pop, "EU Starts Preliminary Probe into Amazon's Treatment
of Merchants," Wall Street Journal, September 19, 2018.
49. James Kanter, "E.U., Citing Amazon and Apple, Tells Nations to Collect Tax," New York
Times, October 4, 2017.

50. Jesse Drucker, "Google 2.4% Rate Shows How $60 Billion Is Lost to Tax Loopholes,"
Bloomberg, October 21, 2010.
51. Sam Schechner, "Apple Takes a Step on Payment of Back Taxes to Ireland," Wall Street
Journal, April 24, 2018.
52. Robert McMillan, "EU Demand Adds to Challenges for CEO," Wall Street Journal, August
31, 2016.
53. Adam Satariano, "What Europe's Tough New Data Law Means for You, and the Internet,"
New York Times, May 6, 2018.
54. Nick Kostov and Sam Schechner, "Google Emerges as Early Winner from Europe's New
Data Privacy Law," Wall Street Journal, May 31, 2018.
55. Sam Schechner and Nick Kostov, "Google and Facebook Likely to Benefit from Europe's
Privacy Crackdown," Wall Street Journal, April 23, 2018.
56. Deepa Seetharaman, "Facebook Provides a Preview of Its Privacy Makeover," Wall Street
Journal, April 18, 2018.
57. Jonathan Vanian, "Microsoft Just Built a Special Version of Windows for China," Fortune,
May 23, 2017.
58. Yoko Kubota, "Apple Pulls Illegal Apps Targeted by Chinese State Media," Wall Street
Journal, August 20, 2018.
59. Robert McMillan and Tripp Mickle, "Apple to Start Putting Sensitive Encryption Keys in
China," Wall Street Journal, February 24, 2018.
60. Paul Mozur, "China Said to Quickly Withdraw Approval for New Facebook Venture," New
York Times, July 25, 2018.
61. Levy, In the Plex, 280.
62. Levy, In the Plex, 284.
63. Levy, In the Plex, 309.
64. Andrew Browne, "Beijing's Dream Is a Nightmare for Apple," Wall Street Journal, August
9, 2017.
65. Ken Auletta, Googled: The End of the World as We Know It (New York: Penguin, 2010),
339.
66. Levy, In the Plex, 284.
67. Eli Pariser, The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized Web Is Changing What We Read
and How We Think (New York: Penguin, 2011), 139.
68. Li Yuan, "Tech Titans Wage War in China's Next Internet Revolution," Wall Street Journal,
December 21, 2017.
69. Newley Purnell, "India Looks to Curb U.S. Tech Giants' Power," Wall Street Journal,
August 13, 2018.
70. Paul Mozur, Mark Scott, and Mike Isaac, "Facebook Faces a New World as Officials Rein in
a Wild Web," New York Times, September 17, 2017.
Chapter 10: Share This!
1. Trebor Scholz and Nathan Schneider, eds., Ours to Hack and to Own: The Rise of Platform
Cooperativism, a New Vision for the Future of Work and a Fairer Internet (New York: OR
Books, 2017), 12.
2. Amazon Workers and Supporters, "'Stop Treating Us Like Dogs!'—Worker Resistance at
Amazon in Poland," Pluto Press Blog, www.plutobooks.com/blog/worker-resistance-
amazon-poland June 23, 2019.

3. James Curran, Natalie Fenton, and Des Freedman, Misunderstanding the Internet (New
York: Routledge, 2016), 207-8.
4. Frederick Douglass, in Philip Foner and Yuval Taylor, eds., Frederick Douglass: Selected
Speeches and Writings (Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 1999), 676-78.
5. Rosa Luxemburg, in Helen Scott, ed., The Essential Rosa Luxemburg (Chicago: Haymarket
Books, 2008), 141, 147.
6. Robert McChesney, Digital Disconnect: How Capitalism Is Turning the Internet against
Democracy (New York: New Press, 2013), 152.
7. Evgeny Morozov, "Socialize the Data Centers!," New Left Review, Jan/Feb 2015, 45.
8. Kate Bronfenbrenner and Robert Hickey, Blueprint for Change, Office of Labor Education
Research, Cornell University, 2003.
9. Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New York: Vintage,
2011), 262-63.
10. Jonathan Taplin, "Can the Tech Giants Be Stopped?," Wall Street Journal, July 14, 2017.
11. Paul Mason, "The End of Capitalism Has Begun," The Guardian, July 17, 2015.
12. Don Clark and Robert McMillan, "Giants Tighten Grip on Internet Economy," Wall Street
Journal, November 6, 2015.
13. Corrie Driebusch and Ben Eisen, "Nasdaq Crests 7000 as Tech Giants Roar into 2018," Wall
Street Journal, January 3, 2018.
14. Ted Greenwald and Jack Nicas, "Intel Wrestled with Chip Flaws for Months," Wall Street
Journal, January 5, 2018.
15. Jack Nicas, "Google Pulls YouTube from Amazon Devices, Saying It Isn't Playing Fair,"
Wall Street Journal, December 5, 2017.
16. Pew Research Center, "Americans Have Become Much Less Positive about Tech
Companies' Impact on the U.S.," Fact Tank: News in the Numbers, July 29, 2019.

 
Index
"Passim" (literally "scattered") indicates intermittent discussion of a
topic over a cluster of pages.
Abbate, Janet, 211-12, 214
Accel Partners, 168
Adams, Charles Francis, 13, 23
AdMob, 140
AdSense. See Google AdSense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), 210-23 passim. See also
ARPANET; 
Defense 
Advanced 
Research 
Projects 
Agency
(DARPA)
AdX, 140
Alexa, 47, 112
Alibaba Group, 249
Allen, Joe, 114, 118
Allen, Paul, 124
ALOHAnet, 209, 217-18
Alphabet Inc., 161, 210, 241. See also Google
AltaVista (search engine), 122
AlterNet, 134
Amazon.com, 9, 25, 28, 85-120, 178, 257, 263; ads, 92, 106, 140; Apple
relations, 93; Barabási view, 17; books, 99-104; China, 247; cloud
computing, 46, 107-13, 204, 240, 247; Europe, 242-43, 256;
Facebook relations, 106, 182; Foxconn and, 78-79, 187; FTC and,
235; Google compared, 139, 148; Google relations, 6, 106, 269-70;
Intel chips, 268-69; lobbying, 234, 239, 240; Microsoft as model,
88, 94, 113; Microsoft relations, 46-47, 57, 60-62, 111; net
neutrality and, 199-203 passim; new headquarters search, 105-6;
O'Neil on, 222; payola, 97, 102-3; Prime Video, 269-70; shoes,

104; smartphones, 70; smart speakers, 112, 269; tax dodging, 243;
Trump administration meeting, 230; Trump on, 230; undersea cable,
203; Wall Street Journal on, 2-3; work conditions, 113-20, 187,
256, 259; "world's largest company" competition, 44, 85, 93-94;
YouTube and, 148, 270
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 107-9, 111
American Enterprise Institute, 240
America Online. See AOL
Andreessen, Marc, 169, 170
Android (operating system), 46, 67, 71, 73, 131, 156; phones, 4, 8, 68-
74 passim, 126-31 passim, 160, 236, 242, 248
AOL, 122, 124, 267; Microsoft relations, 38, 39
Apple Computer, 1-5 passim, 8-9, 28, 44, 55-83, 87; Amazon relations,
93; antitrust case, 236; China, 65, 78, 237, 246-47; cloud
computing, 246-47, 265; debt to public research, 218, 221; DOJ
and, 235; early web protocols and, 217; Facebook relations, 167,
172, 182; Financial Times on, 14; free software updates, 45; Google
relations, 69-74, 81; India, 250; Intel chips, 268-69; laptops without
USB ports, 265; lobbying, 239; "lock-in," 61-62, 73, 129;
Microsoft relations, 31-32, 35, 42, 46; new headquarters, 76; NSA
and, 229; as panopticon, 74; privacy policy, 181; smart speakers,
112; tax dodging, 243; Trump administration meeting, 230; wage
fixing, 80, 154; Wall Street Journal on, 2-3; work conditions, 77,
80, 259; "world's largest company" competition, 44, 66, 76, 85, 93-
94. See also App Store; iPad; iPhone; iPod; Macintosh PC; Safari
(browser); Siri
Apple II, 57, 59, 60
Apple III, 57, 59
Apple Lisa, 57-59
Applied Semantics, Inc. (ASI), 139-40
App Store, 67-73 passim, 190, 223, 236, 246, 250; antitrust case, 236-
37; India, 250
Army Research Office, 219
ARPA. See Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA)
ARPANET, 209-17 passim
Arthur, W. Brian, 18

AT&T, 10, 24, 25, 42, 140; ARPANET and, 213; military partnership,
210; net neutrality and, 194-99 passim, 256; Trump administration
and, 266
Atari, 57
The Attention Merchants (Wu), 177-78
Auletta, Ken, 136, 152, 156, 248
Azure. See Microsoft Azure
Baidu (search engine), 136, 158, 247-48, 249
Baker, Dean, 82
Ballmer, Steve, 41, 50
Bannon, Steve, 232
Barabási, Albert-László, 17-18, 32
Barnes & Noble (bookseller), 101, 102
BASIC (programming language), 30, 32-33, 57, 60, 61, 221, 227
Baylor University, 168-69
Bell Labs, 218
Berners-Lee, Tim, 11, 64, 128, 197, 216-17, 218
Bezos, Jeff, 28, 85-108 passim, 119, 120, 125, 221; early Internet
investment, 221; employee relations, 114-15; Google investment,
125; "Jeff Bots," 95; Zuckerberg compared, 170
Bezos, Mackenzie, 115
Biden, Joe, 241
The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google (Carr), 107
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. See Gates Foundation
Bing (search engine), 69, 135, 136
BitTorrent, 196
Black and Decker, 105
Blake, Lyn, 99-100
Blogger, 139, 247
Boeing Company, 234
Borders (bookseller), 101
Bork, Robert, 22
Brazil, 250
Bridle, James, 146-47

Brin, Sergey, 71, 121-23 passim, 137, 138, 149-59 passim, 222
Britain. See United Kingdom (UK)
Bronfenbrenner, Kate, 266
Brooks, David, 23
Buffett, Warren, 5, 30-31
Bunnell, David, 58
Bush, George W., 43, 196
Cambridge Analytica, 179, 181-82
Carnegie, Andrew, 6
Carr, Nicholas, 9, 87, 107, 108, 110
Central Intelligence Agency. See CIA
Cerf, Vint, 214
CERN, 64, 216-18 passim, 224
Chandler, Alfred, Jr., 24
Chernow, Ron: Titan, 34
China, 65, 78, 128, 136, 158, 214, 237, 245-50
Christie, Chris, 106
Chrome (browser), 141, 242
CIA, 109, 218, 240
Cisco, 248-49
Clinton, Bill, 40
Clinton, Hillary, 230, 251
CNET, 155
CNN, 149
Colombia, 250
Comcast, 10, 24, 81, 193-201 passim, 205, 256, 266
Communications Act of 1934, 197-98
Compaq, 29, 220
Competitive Enterprise Institute, 240
Conseil européen pour la recherche nucléaire. See CERN
Consent of the Networked (MacKinnon), 195
Conservative Political Action Conference, 233
Consumers Union, 189

Cook, Tim, 76, 79
Cornered (Lynn), 23
CounterPunch, 134
Cowen, Tyler, 1-2
Craigslist, 142
Crowder, Steven, 145
Cuba, 234
Curran, James: Misunderstanding the Internet, 215-16, 261
Current Affairs, 175
Cyrial, Malkia, 205
Damore, James, 157
DARPA. See Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Dartmouth University, 166, 221
Dell, 28-29, 34, 59, 60, 126
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), 56, 86, 123,
219, 220, 222
Defense Department. See US Department of Defense (DOD)
Delrahim, Makan, 239
Democracy Now!, 134
Department of Justice (DOJ). See US Department of Justice
Diapers.com, 98-99
Dictionary.com, 149
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), 143
Digital Research, 27
Dole, Bob, 228
DoubleClick, 149, 150. See also Google: DoubleClick Bid Manager
Douglass, Frederick, 263
Dow Jones, 124
eBay, 20, 23, 81, 88, 91
Echo (smart speaker), 112
Economist, 15, 22, 25, 31
Electronic Frontier Federation, 205

Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), 181, 189
Ellsberg, Daniel, 110
Endless.com, 104
Energy Department. See US Department of Energy (DOE)
The Entrepreneurial State (Mazzucato), 219-20
EPIC. See Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC)
Erickson, Jim, 30, 33
European Organization for Nuclear Research. See CERN
European Union (EU), 76, 131, 132, 133, 241-45 passim, 250, 256;
European Commission, 65; GDPR, 243-44
Excel (software). See Microsoft Excel
Facebook, 8, 10, 19-22 passim, 120, 163-92, 202, 262-68 passim; ads,
140, 141, 143, 176-79, 241; Amazon relations, 106, 182; Apple
relations, 167; Barabási view, 17; Beacon, 188; Berners-Lee view,
128; China, 247; Cuba and, 234; data hoarding and selling, 140,
148, 151, 181, 182, 237, 265-66; children and, 186; "de-
platforming" and policing of speech, 146, 190, 191, 232, 265; early
history, 4, 164-70; ethical guidelines (proposed), 223; Europe, 244-
45; free software, 44; FTC and, 235, 238; Global South, 250;
Google+ compared, 152; Google relations, 176, 177; hiring, 80;
lobbying, 230, 234, 239; Microsoft purchase offer, 45; Microsoft
relations, 45, 176-77; net neutrality and, 199-203 passim; News
Feed, 171-74 passim, 180, 188, 190, 232, 257, 264, 265; New York
Times on, 13; NSA and, 229; O'Neil on, 222; as panopticon, 74;
Russian election interference and, 234; sexism and sexual
harassment, 164, 186-88; smartphones, 70; smart speakers, 112;
transoceanic cable, 203; Trump administration meeting, 230; Trump
hate speech, 231-32; Wall Street Journal on, 2-3, 186, 187; work
conditions, 186-88; "world's largest company" competition, 44, 93-
94; YouTube compared, 148. See also Instagram; WhatsApp
Facemash, 164
Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR), 133-34, 174, 191
Farrell, Joseph, 18
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 193-94, 197-207 passim,
256, 260, 266

Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 26; Amazon and, 99, 104; Apple and,
104; DOJ jurisdiction sharing, 235, 238; Do Not Track option
(proposed), 229-30; Facebook and, 181, 182-83, 189, 237, 238;
Google investigation, 230, 237; Google purchases and, 140, 150;
Microsoft investigation, 40; Trump administration, 232-33
FedEx, 97
Fenton, Natalie: Misunderstanding the Internet, 215-16, 261
Fields, Craig, 211-12
The Filter Bubble (Pariser), 128, 138, 139, 149, 173
Financial Times, 14, 21-22, 49
First, Harry, 43
Foundem, 132
Foxconn, 78-79, 187, 246, 259, 263
Freedman, Des: Misunderstanding the Internet, 215-16, 261
Free Press (organization), 205, 207 Friendster, 167, 186
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
Gates, Bill, 4, 27-42 passim, 47-53 passim, 57-62 passim, 72, 124, 221;
"Chinese Wall," 36, 90; in "richest man" competition, 28, 32, 34,
85; rich neighbors, 115; sycophants, 34, 95; Zuckerberg and, 170,
179
Gates Foundation, 42
Gavil, Andrew, 43
Geis, George, 142
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (EU), 243-44
Gingrich, Newt, 40
GitHub, 45
Gmail, 69, 149
GoDaddy, 202
Goldman Sachs, 229
Google, 1-10 passim, 18-25 passim, 44, 46, 102, 121-61, 237-45
passim, 257-68 passim; AdWords, 137-39; Amazon compared;
139, 148; Amazon relations, 6, 106, 269-70; Apple relations, 69-
74, 81; Barabási view, 17; Berners-Lee view, 128; Biden and, 241;
China, 128, 158, 237, 247-48, 250; Chromecast, 270; cloud
computing, 46, 108, 110, 203-4; cookies, 149-51; debt to public

research, 222; "de-platforming," 232; Display and Video 360, 140;
DOD work, 158-59; DOJ and, 136, 235, 239; DOL suit, 156-57;
DoubleClick Bid Manager, 140, 244; Double-Click purchase, 149-
51; ethical guidelines (proposed), 223; EU, 242, 243, 244; Facebook
compared, 191; Facebook relations, 176, 177; FTC investigation,
230, 237; hiring, 80, 81; Intel chips, 268-69; LA-Chile cable, 203-
4; lobbying, 229, 230, 234, 239; Microsoft compared, 122, 125,
135; Microsoft relations, 52, 136, 237; Motorola purchase, 73;
motto change, 161; net neutrality and, 198-203 passim; New York
Times on, 13; NSA and, 229; Obama and, 1, 229; O'Neil on, 222;
PageRank, 123, 127, 130; as panopticon, 74; Patterson and
Hennessy, 210; "powerful moat," 109; research paper financing,
134; servers, 125-26; sexual harassment, 160; smartphones, 69-74
passim, 122, 237, 270; smartphones, Android, 8, 46, 71, 126, 131,
242, 248; smart speakers, 112; tax dodging, 233, 243; transpacific
cable, 203; Trump administration meeting, 230; Trump donation,
233; wage fixing, 154; Wall Street Journal on, 2-3; work
conditions, 152-56 passim, 160, 259, 263. See also Chrome
(browser); Gmail; Pixel (smartphone); YouTube
Google Ads. See Google: AdWords
Google AdSense, 139-40, 150, 244
Google.cn, 247-48
Google Fi (pilot phone service), 200
Google Fiber, 200
Google Maps, 69, 72, 126, 132, 148, 220, 242
Google News, 144
Google+, 151, 152
Google Search, 23, 69, 128, 134, 143, 227, 242, 257-58
Google Walkout for Real Change, 160
The Googlization of Everything (Vaidhyanathan), 127
Gore, Al, 40
Grassley, Chuck, 51
Great Britain. See United Kingdom (UK)
Greenfield, Adam: Radical Technologies, 63-64, 65
Hard Drive (Wallace and Erickson), 33
Harvard University, 164-66

Heiden, Heidi, 213
Hennessey, John, 210
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 29, 34
A History of Silicon Valley (Rao and Scaruffi), 9
Hong Kong, 248
Hon Hai Precision Industry. See Foxconn
Hotmail, 176
HotOrNot.com, 164
HTC Dream (phone), 71
Hughes, Chris, 238
Hulu, 68, 195
Hurley, Chad, 142
IBM, 16, 27-54 passim, 58-61 passim, 124, 219, 220, 221; ARPANET
and, 213; hiring practices, 81; PC, 58, 59, 60, 71, 211; Trump
administration meeting, 230
Idealo, 132
iGesture NumPad, 64
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). See US Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE)
India, 91, 250
Information Technology Industry Council, 223
Instagram, 175, 183, 185, 238 Intel, 49, 81, 223, 230, 268-69
Internet Association, 199, 202, 239
Internet Explorer (IE), 37, 38, 39, 41, 43, 136, 136
Intuit, 38
Inventing the Internet (Abbate), 211-12
iPad, 102, 103
iPhone, 32, 62-75 passim, 83, 128, 222-23; X model, 75. See also App
Store
iPod, 62-63, 67, 74, 179, 219
Ireland, 76, 243
iTunes, 63, 67, 73, 93, 101, 261
Ive, Jonathan, 62, 64-65, 75

JANA Partners, 66
Japan, 128, 250
Java (software), 39
Jobs, Steve, 1, 14, 32, 57-81 passim, 95, 101, 167, 221; e-books, 104;
iPhone development claims, 64-65, 218, 220; iPhone pricing, 108;
sycophants, 5, 95; wage fixing, 80, 154; Zuckerberg compared, 170
Jones, Alex, 134, 190, 191, 232
Josephson, Matthew: Robber Barons, 6
Justice Department. See US Department of Justice (DOJ)
Kahn, Robert, 214
Kendall, Brent, 24
Kindle (e-reader), 101-4 passim, 120
Kirkpatrick, David, 170, 179, 191, 221
Kiva, 118
Lashinsky, Adam, 66
Lessig, Lawrence, 124, 151
Levine, Yasha, 74, 102, 229
Levy, Steven, 153, 221; on Apple, 56, 58, 60, 77; on ARPA, 221; on
Google, 126, 129, 136-39 passim, 150-55 passim, 229, 247, 248;
on Obama campaign contributions, 229
Licklider, J. C. R., 221
Linked (Barabási), 18, 32
LinkedIn, 45, 230
Linzmayer, Owen, 62
Lisa (Apple computer). See Apple Lisa Live Work Work Work Die (Pein),
153
Lotus, 27
Luxembourg, 243
Luxemburg, Rosa, 264
Lynn, Barry, 23, 103, 134-35
Ma, Jack, 249
MacBASIC (programming language), 61

Macintosh (Apple PC line), 31, 32, 39, 58, 61, 221; Mac OS, 31, 59, 179
MacKinnon, Rebecca: Consent of the Networked, 195
Macmillan Publishers, 103
Malaysia, 250
Manjoo, Farhad, 13-14
Marcus, James, 96, 113, 115
Maritz, Paul, 38
Mason, Paul, 268
The Master Switch (Wu), 19-20, 130, 185, 198
Maven Project. See Project Maven Mayer, Marissa, 135, 155 Mazzucato,
Mariana: Entrepreneurial State, 219-20, 224
McChesney, Robert, 20, 265-66
McNamee, Roger, 170
Merchant, Brian, 64, 79, 217, 218, 222-23
Messenger (Facebook messaging app), 185, 238
MicroPro, 27
Microsoft, 4-8 passim, 16, 27-54, 59-63 passim, 69-73 passim, 87-88,
111-13 passim, 237-41 passim; Amazon relations, 46-47, 57, 60-
62, 111; antitrust conviction, 25, 30, 36, 40-42 passim, 69, 227,
235-40 passim; Apple relations, 31-32, 35, 42, 46; browser
campaign, 21; China, 246, 247; cloud computing, 46, 107, 108, 110,
204, 247; common enemy of Apple and Google, 69, 71; early web
protocols and, 217; ethical guidelines (proposed), 223; Facebook
relations, 45, 176-77; Google ASI purchase and, 140; Google
compared, 122, 125, 135; Google relations, 52, 136, 237; hiring
practices, 81; Intel chips, 268-69; lawsuits, 53-54; lobbying, 229,
239; "lock-in," 4, 61, 129; management, 50-54, 94; model for
Amazon, 88, 94, 113; NSA and, 229; Office 365, 52; Pelosi and,
241; "powerful moat," 109; presidential campaign contributions,
241; privacy policy, 181; search engine, 69; single winner in the
"software era," 20; smartphones and, 70; smart speakers, 112; tax
policy and, 233; transatlantic cable, 203; Trump administration
meeting, 230; Wall Street Journal on, 2-3; work conditions, 50-54;
"world's largest company" competition, 44, 85, 93-94. See also
Bing (search engine); Internet Explorer (IE); MS-DOS; MSN.com;
OfficeSuite (software); Outlook
Microsoft Azure, 46, 108

Microsoft Excel, 30, 31, 35, 48, 60
Microsoft Word, 30, 31, 35, 48, 60
Miller, Randy, 100
MILNET, 213
Mims, Christopher, 7
Misunderstanding the Internet (Freedman, Curran, and Fenton), 215-16,
261
Morgan, J. P., 6-7, 25
Morozov, Evgeny, 266
Mosaic (browser), 36, 37, 38, 169
Motorola, 73
MS-BASIC, 33, 221
MS-DOS, 30-35 passim, 40, 59, 124, 211
MSN.com, 122, 268
Murdoch, Rupert, 168
Myspace, 21-22, 168, 169, 176-80 passim, 186, 267
Nadella, Satya, 45, 50, 53
Nagle, Angela, 160
NARAL, 195-96
National Cable and Telecommunications Association, 198-99
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 219
National Science Foundation (NSF), 123, 214-21 passim
National Security Agency (NSA), 22-29
Netflix, 68, 188; net neutrality and, 195, 197, 200, 201, 202, 206
Netscape (browser), 21, 36, 37, 122, 124
New America Foundation (NAF), 134
News Corporation, 168, 237
New York Times, 13-14
Nook (e-reader), 102
Northern Pacific Railway, 7
Novell, 36
NSF. See National Science Foundation (NSF)
NSFNET, 214-15, 217

Obama, Barack, 1, 24, 199, 200, 229, 230
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), 117
Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), 218-19, 224
Office of the Inspector General, 214
OfficeSuite (software), 30, 35, 38, 39, 42, 48, 52. See also Microsoft
Word
Omidyar, Pierre, 20 O'Neil, Cathy: Weapons of Math Destruction, 222
Opel, John, 29
Oracle, 110, 230, 237
Orwell, George, 82-83, 96, 117, 120, 138, 144; Nineteen Eighty-Four,
55, 120, 151
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
Ours to Hack and to Own (Scholz and Schneider), 255
Outlook, 265
Packer, George, 102-3
Page, Larry, 71, 132, 136-38 passim, 149, 154-59 passim, 222; ad-
funded search and, 137, 138; employee relations, 155-56
Pai, Ajit, 200
Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), 56-57, 213, 221
Pariser, Eli: Filter Bubble, 128, 138-39, 149, 173
Parker, Sean, 167, 169
Patterson, Dave, 210
Pearl Jam, 196
Pein, Corey, 153
Pelosi, Nancy, 239, 241
Pentagon. See US Department of Defense
Pichai, Sundar, 161
Pixel (smartphone), 73, 173, 270
Poland, 256
Postal Service. See US Postal Service
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 182
Prime Day, 89, 119
PRISM (NSA surveillance program), 229-30
PRNET, 212, 213

Project Maven, 158-59
Radical Technologies (Greenfield), 63-64
Raikes, Jeff, 30-31
Rao, Arun, 20, 123-24; History of Silicon Valley, 9
Reagan, Ronald, 23-24
Reddit, 202, 206
Relentless.com, 87
Reyes, Sean, 232;
The Robber Barons (Josephson), 6
Robinson, Nathan, 175
Rockefeller, John D., 6-7, 34, 104, 204
Roosevelt, Theodore, 25
Rosenberg, Jonathan, 153
Royal Caribbean, 138-39
Royal Navy, 224
Royal Radar Establishment, 218
Royal Society for Public Health, 174-75
Rubin, Andy, 122, 160
Russia, 128, 183-84, 234, 235
Sadowski, Jathan, 231
Safari (browser), 67, 69
Saloner, Garth, 18
Samsung, 46, 64, 72, 73, 182 Sandberg, Sheryl, 170, 177, 178
Sanders, Bernie, 51, 241, 251
SATNET, 212, 213
Scaruffi, Piero: History of Silicon Valley, 9
Schmidt, Eric, 69, 81, 125, 127, 134-35, 136, 153-55 passim; on Google
tax avoidance, 233; net neutrality and, 200
Schneider, Nathan, 255
Scholz, Trebor, 255
Sculley, John, 61, 62
Seattle Computer Products, 33

Securities Exchange Commission (SEC), 68, 93, 138
Sherman Act, 24
Sidak, J. Gregory, 22
Siri, 128, 222-23
Smith, Christopher, 99
Snapchat, 185, 263
Snopes, 173-74
Snowden, Edward, 229, 246
Sony, 105
Spain, 119
Standard Oil, 6, 13, 204
Stanford Research Institute, 211
Stanford University, 18, 122, 124, 125, 136, 159, 222; ARPANET and,
210, 211; Facebook prototype and, 166, 168; Siri, 223
Steinberg, Steve, 19
Stone, Brad, 87, 88, 94-100 passim, 108-18 passim
Stop Online Piracy Act, 206
Students against Facebook News Feed, 172
Sun Microsystems, 39, 42, 125, 217
Supreme Court, US. See US Supreme Court
Sutton, Robert, 58
Taiwan: Foxconn. See Foxconn
Taplin, Jonathan, 142
Target Corporation, 101
Taylor, Robert W., 221
Teamsters, 118
Tech Solidarity, 231
Tech Workers Coalition, 231, 259
Tencent, 249, 250
The Dalles, Oregon, 126
Thiel, Peter, 23
3M, 220
Time Warner, 267

Time Warner Cable, 24, 199
Titan (Chernow), 34
T-Mobile, 24
Trip Advisor, 132, 237 Trump, Donald, 1, 76, 131, 173, 194, 201, 205,
230-31; FCC appointees, 266; hate speech on Facebook, 232;
immigration policy, 241
Trump, Ivanka, 239
Truthout, 134
Turing Award, 210
Twitter, 119, 175, 185, 190, 199; "de-platforming," 232; Trump use, 230
UCLA, 211
Union Pacific Railroad, 6-7
United Food and Commercial Workers, 118
United Kingdom (UK), 174-75, 218, 224; Parliament, 238
United States Telecom Association (USTelecom), 198-99
University of California, Los Angeles. See UCLA
University of California, Santa Barbara, 211
University of Hawaii, 209, 217-18
University of Toronto, 218
University of Utah, 211
UNIX (operating system), 39
UPS, 97-98
USAID, 234
US Army, 219, 220
US Chamber of Commerce, 184
US Department of Defense (DOD), 109-10, 158-59, 219-25 passim;
Amazon and, 240; Siri and, 223. See also Advanced Research
Projects Agency (ARPA); US Army
US Department of Energy (DOE), 219, 220
US Department of Justice (DOJ), 26, 104; Apple and, 81-82; FTC
jurisdiction sharing, 235, 238; Google and, 81-82, 136, 235, 237,
239; Microsoft and, 25, 40-45, 62
US Department of Labor (DOL), 156-57
Users Interest Working Group (USING), 211

US House of Representatives, 239; Judiciary Committee, 235-36
US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), 53
US Navy, 218
US Postal Service, 97-98, 230
US Steel, 6
US Supreme Court, 93, 117, 163, 236
US Telecom Association. See United States Telecom Association
(USTelecom)
Vaidhyanathan, Siva, 127-31 passim, 151
Vanderbilt, Cornelius, 5-6
Varian, Hal, 20
Verizon, 10, 193-200 passim, 205, 266. See also AOL; Yahoo.com
Viacom, 143
Vizcaino v. Microsoft, 54
Vogelstein, Fred, 69, 73, 74
Wallace, James, 30, 33, 53
Walmart, 97, 98, 101, 107, 108, 118
WannaCry (ransomware), 48
Warren, Elizabeth, 241
Washington Post, Bezos purchase of, 106
Wayne, Ronald, 57
Weapons of Math Destruction (O'Neil), 222
Westinghouse, 220
WhatsApp, 185, 238
Wheeler, Tom, 198, 199
Whole Foods, 106
WikiLeaks, 110
Wilke, Jeff, 117-18
Windows (operating system), 8, 16, 30-52 passim, 56-63 passim, 67,
68, 136, 169; "China Government Edition," 246
Wired, 132
Word (software). See Microsoft Word

WordPerfect (software), 36
World Trade Organization, 257
Wozniak, Steve, 55, 57, 58, 62, 76
Wu, Tim, 32, 121-22, 128, 165; Attention Merchants, 177-78; Master
Switch, 19-20, 130, 185, 198
Xerox, 56-57, 210, 213, 220
Yahoo.com, 124, 132, 136, 268; China, 248; net neutrality, 197, 199;
NSA and, 229
Yelp, 132, 230, 237
YouTube, 3, 10, 68, 69, 122, 141-48, 149, 262-64 passim; Amazon and,
148, 270; on Android phones, 242; children and, 146-47, 186;
China, 247; content-checkers, 259; "de-platforming," 134, 146, 190;
Google purchase of, 70, 142; Russian election interference and, 234
Zappos, 104, 188
Zeese, Kevin, 205
Zuckerberg, Mark, 4, 10, 45, 124, 164-91 passim, 203, 237-38;
allowance of Trump hate speech, 232; China and, 247; employee
relations, 170; net neutrality and, 203

Rob Larson is Professor of Economics at Tacoma Community College
and author of Capitalism vs. Freedom and Bleakonomics. He writes for a
number of venues including Current Affairs, Dollars & Sense, and
Jacobin.

About Haymarket Books
Haymarket Books is a radical, independent, nonprofit book publisher
based in Chicago.
Our mission is to publish books that contribute to struggles for social
and economic justice. We strive to make our books a vibrant and organic
part of social movements and the education and development of a
critical, engaged, international left.
We take inspiration and courage from our namesakes, the Haymarket
martyrs, who gave their lives fighting for a better world. Their 1886
struggle for the eight-hour day—which gave us May Day, the
international workers' holiday—reminds workers around the world that
ordinary people can organize and struggle for their own liberation. These
struggles continue today across the globe—struggles against oppression,
exploitation, poverty, and war.
Since our founding in 2001, Haymarket Books has published more
than five hundred titles. Radically independent, we seek to drive a wedge
into the risk-averse world of corporate book publishing. Our authors
include Noam Chomsky, Arundhati Roy, Rebecca Solnit, Angela Y.
Davis, Howard Zinn, Amy Goodman, Wallace Shawn, Mike Davis,
Winona LaDuke, Ilan Pappé, Richard Wolff, Dave Zirin, Keeanga-
Yamahtta Taylor, Nick Turse, Dahr Jamail, David Barsamian, Elizabeth
Laird, Amira Hass, Mark Steel, Avi Lewis, Naomi Klein, and Neil
Davidson. We are also the trade publishers of the acclaimed Historical
Materialism Book Series and of Dispatch Books.


