

OceanofPDF.com


OceanofPDF.com


OceanofPDF.com

© 2024 Rob Larson
Published in 2024 by
Haymarket Books
P.O. Box 180165
Chicago, IL 60618
www.haymarketbooks.org
ISBN: 979-8-88890-105-2
Distributed to the trade in the US through Consortium Book Sales and Distribution (www.cbsd.com)
and internationally through Ingram Publisher Services International (www.ingramcontent.com).
This book was published with the generous support of Lannan Foundation, Wallace Action Fund, and
Marguerite Casey Foundation.
Special discounts are available for bulk purchases by organizations and institutions. Please email
info@haymarketbooks.org for more information.
Cover design by David Gee.
Illustration of Earth © 2014 Dmitry Rukhlenko.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data is available.
OceanofPDF.com

To Noam, whose work we carry on
OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS
BOSS FIGHT
— INTRODUCTION —
WHY READ ABOUT
THE RULING CLASS
— CHAPTER 1 —
THE NUMBERS
— CHAPTER 2 —
THE LIFESTYLE
— CHAPTER 3 —
THE CLASSES
— CHAPTER 4 —
THE LIES
— CHAPTER 5 —
THE BURDEN
— CHAPTER 6 —
THE CLANS
— CHAPTER 7 —
THE PLAN
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NOTES
INDEX
OceanofPDF.com

This is an impressive crowd—the haves and the have-mores. Some
people call you the elites; I call you my base.
—George W. Bush1
I saw that mill built stone by sone; I saw the pickers, the carding
engines, the spinning mules and looms put into it, one after the
other, and I would see every machine and stone crumble to the
floor and fall again before I would accede to your wishes.
—Colonel Richard Borden,2 cotton baron, on the thirteen-
hour day
The only thing for which we can combine is the underlying ideal
of Socialism; justice and liberty.
—George Orwell3
OceanofPDF.com

T
BOSS FIGHT
he world's billionaires now have their own private space programs.
The classic public space services like NASA were paid for by
aggressive taxes on the rich, but those are gone now so Jeff Bezos,
Elon Musk, and Richard Branson each have their own, where they take
their friends to orbit, soak up media coverage, and even pretend to do
research.1 The wealth gap has reached such towering proportions that the
most insanely expensive projects are now within the play budgets of our
fun-hoarding ruling class.
Conservative novelist Tom Wolfe coined the term "masters of the
universe" to refer to elite Wall Street financiers, and it became a broader
mainstream term for the insanely rich elites of today and their fantasies of
power.2 But when things actually turn ugly, it's another story—the Masters
had their hands out for bailouts after the 2008 and 2023 financial crises, and
when the COVID-19 pandemic took hold in 2020 they stampeded out of
town to their remote estates and summer homes.
And their decisions matter. A leaked 2005 investment memo from two
Citibank economists called the US a "plutonomy," meaning "economic
growth is powered by and largely consumed by the wealthy few." They
estimated that "the top 1% of households ... account for 33% of net worth,"
compared to "the rest, the 'non-rich,' the multitudinous many, but only
accounting for surprisingly small bites of the economic pie." They
concluded that for their business, "clearly, the analysis of the top 1% of US

households is paramount."3 Many Americans, encouraged to imagine
themselves as billionaires-to-be, may hope to enter the 1 percent, but it's a
tough lift at $4.4 million American just to get in, let alone the average of
$10.4 million in wealth you'll need to really fit in.4
Meanwhile, incomes have stagnated for most of the US population for
decades and debt has risen steeply, while the real fruits of economic growth
went to the top households. And in an incredible development, the average
life expectancy in the US, the richest country in the world, actually stopped
rising in 2015. It fell until 2018, then rose briefly only to drop again with
the pandemic, continuing through 2021.5 That same year, the billionaires'
hoard went from $3 trillion to $4.5 trillion.6
And today's data shows that every country, no matter how poor or rich,
has a hyper-affluent tiny ruling class. As the Financial Times put it, the
world is in "a new imperial age" with "a system of indirect rule that has
involved the integration of leaders of developing countries into the network
of the new ruling class."7 That class is more worldwide in its lifestyle than
ever, since its members frequently count among their wealth a significant
passport collection, purchased from the many countries that offer full or
partial citizenship in exchange for making a qualifying real estate purchase
or other investment.8 Safes stuffed with global residency documents are the
family jewels of the world's ruling class.
As we behold continents on fire, pandemics thrashing public health
systems to smithereens, and falling economic prospects and life spans, we
must remember one thing: All this, all this is for the benefit of a tiny
number of people, a small class that owns the wealth and institutions of the
economy, a ruling class for whom we are ruining every part of the natural
systems on Earth, and screwing over a gigantic social majority that's
desperate for a fair share of the wealth they produce in the first place.
As billionaire investor Warren Buffett said, "There is class warfare, all
right, but it's my class, the rich class, that's making war, and we're
winning."9
The wider world gets peeks at the wealth of the ruling class when parts
of it get in trouble, like when Russian oligarchs had their megayachts,

private planes, and other assets seized due to Western sanctions during the
Russo-Ukrainian War. But there are so many more exploits to explore, and
elite-class vulnerabilities to learn. This book is for learning all about our
global rogues' gallery of remote ruling-class bastards.
OceanofPDF.com

I
INTRODUCTION
WHY READ ABOUT
THE RULING CLASS?
f you're the type that's out to envy the flashy high-end lifestyle of the
rich, there's no shortage of magazines to read and online videos you
can watch. Countries like the US that celebrate wealthy people are
happy to produce tons of media around them, from Downton Abbey to
Succession. The rich of the real world have their luxurious lives depicted in
Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous and the Wall Street Journal's Mansion
section.
But this book is not just for ogling the velvet lives of the ruling class,
although there's plenty of room for that. It's about taking the rich out of the
cockpit of society and putting a democratic system in their place. Because
beyond their multiple gigantic homes and private jet miles, the control of
the ruling class over the rest of us is pretty stunning, not to mention utterly
grossly undeserved.
It's a fact that today eight rich men own as much wealth as the bottom
50 percent of the world's population (all four billion plus of them).1 In
2020, half the names on the Forbes list of the fifty richest families had
appeared on the list in 1983.2 The richest 1 percent of US households owns
40 percent of the stock market, and the top 10 percent owns 84 percent,
meaning that the rich own corporate America and its great productive

power.3 These figures are pretty obscene, and a peek behind the high-tech
security fences protecting their enclaves reveals a lifestyle even obscener.
The overpowering flow of money to these families has led to some
unbelievably dumb and cartoonishly wasteful uses of the wealth of
humanity. On Wall Street, it's now somewhat out of fashion but still
common for rich finance employees to literally eat gold, using a topping on
their desserts and coffees that could completely change the lives of the less
fortunate.4 Other members of the ruling class think big, like when
billionaire Larry Ellison bought one of the Hawaiian islands in 2013.5
Despite Hawaii having the highest rents in the US, Ellison gave makeovers
to elite resorts there instead of building affordable housing.
Today's giant megayachts burn a hundred gallons of diesel an hour
standing still, and customizations include Kevlar-lined safe rooms.6 The
richest tenth of the world is responsible for almost half of all climate
emissions, playing a giant, disproportionate role in climate change and
destroying the ecosystem, even while portraying themselves as
environmental celebrity spokesmen.7 As you research the ruling class, you
discover that getting rid of them isn't just something needed for humanity to
progress, it's a matter of life and death.
They have surprising numbers of apartments they've never lived in,
expensive clothes they do not wear, imported cars they do not drive. And it
is all paid for with money the rest of the population is desperate for—there
are many thousands of GoFundMe fundraising appeals for groceries and
rent for working-class people, enough that the platform created a separate
category for monthly expenses and bills.8
So this book isn't just for leering at the gross excesses of the elite
lifestyle, or feeling the heat of watching cruelly hoarded money wasted on
tacky-ass conspicuous consumption. This book is for fighting back—
organizing your coworkers into unions to wrestle the boss for a fair share,
building political movements to demand universal health care and good
schools anyone's kid can go to. And it's for helping to take late action to
preserve a version of our natural environment and climate for future
generations. To achieve anything, important labor and environmental

movements require a good understanding of what's going on—including the
shifting strategies of the owning class and their corporate property.
The point of this book is not just to study the rich, but to learn their
vulnerabilities, and to help build the growing movements that could put
some limits back on the power of the ruling class that owns our economy
and runs the government. In the past the rich have had what they consider
punishing tax rates slapped on their giant incomes, the popular voting
franchise was established over their objection, and agitation even forced
some of their corporate monopolies to be broken up. And even in a country
as capitalist as the United States, the rich have experienced one major
expropriation, a massive seizure of their productive wealth that was worth
the equivalent of billions today.
That time was the emancipation of the American slaves in 1863. And
one good emancipation deserves another.
Overview
How can some dumb book help accomplish all that? We'll start by looking
at the money, digging into who has how much, the ruling class's share of
the total economy, and with a special interest in the 1 percent's ownership
of the corporate world of big business. Knowing just how much wealth our
rulers are hoarding tells us how much is available to be put to way-better
use. Before we get to the lurid lifestyles and ugly class conflict, we need to
learn who's holding the bag, and chapter 1 shows us just that for the US and
around the world.
The second chapter turns to the steamy, secretive world of the ruling-
class lifestyle. Gigantic homes, private planes, purposeless expensive
trinkets, and of course an entourage of groveling ass-kissers are just the
beginning. Yachts with Picassos, billion-dollar divorces—it's all here, and
it's all disgusting.
Next we take a microscope to the class structure of our society,
considering what defines different economic and social classes and how
they relate to each other. A picture emerges quickly of concentrated wealth
forcing the working class to toil for corporate empires. Understanding that

today's global companies enrich themselves by exploiting the labor of the
working class also reveals the potential power of the toiling majority: the
boss needs us more than we need the boss. The segregated economic lives
we lead are also part of the class landscape profiled in chapter 3.
Chapter 4 takes up the tired defenses of the rich rolled out by various
bootlicking sycophants. According to supporters of capitalism, the richest
families deserve their monumental fortunes for all kinds of dumb meritless
reasons: more productive personal characteristics, natural selection among
people, alleged technological innovations, and above all philanthropic
charitable giving. Every one of these embarrassing fig leaves wilts the
minute you look at it critically, and yet few prominent media figures seem
to ever criticize their bosses, allowing these bald-faced lies to sink into the
popular consciousness. Hastening the decay of these "common-sense"
myths is a direct aid to the growth of social movements to build a better
world, since belief in them is often the first thing organizers have to toil
against.
Our fifth chapter is a careful consideration of the ecological impact of
the 1 percent. Despite often claiming to be Very Concerned About the
Environment, wealthy businesspeople, politicians, and celebrities have the
most disgracefully wasteful lifestyles in the world, scarfing down resources
and farting out wildly disproportionate levels of climate emissions. The
public data on this subject is pretty stunning, and ought to serve as a handy
road map to preventing our so-called betters from continuing to cook the
planet.
Chapter 6 explores the numerous ruling-class subspecies, first reviewing
key ruling-class industries like Wall Street and Silicon Valley, and then
governing elites around the world. Russian oligarchs, Chinese billionaires,
European corporate families, Arab monarchs—this chapter takes a trip
around the world and dissects every specimen of owning-class jerk known
to science.
Finally, chapter 7 starts with the resurrection of the labor movement and
the stunning upswing in support for socialism in the US. As we'll see,
socialism as a goal goes beyond the highly popular but relatively modest
reforms associated with the cause today, like Medicare for All. Real

socialism means expropriation of the great wealth of the ruling class, from
its vast pools of liquid wealth to its tightly held ownership of corporate
America. Not just taxing their giant incomes, but actually confiscating the
assets that put them in charge of society would be the break with capitalism
that past reform efforts failed to make. Doing so would allow us to operate
the economy on a democratic model with gains for all, rather than enriching
the wealthy while we toil for a pittance in dead-end jobs. So with the
working class rediscovering its strength, this final chapter puts on the brass
knuckles and talks about what it'll really take to pry the invisible hand of
the ruling class off the steering wheel of society.
You can't overthrow a ruling class you know nothing about. Grab a
beverage and put up your feet, you'll soon have the secret access ports of
the Death Star of capitalism, and then the clock's ticking till the big finale.
OceanofPDF.com

E
CHAPTER 1
THE NUMBERS
JUST HOW RICH ARE WE TALKING?
I can't live on 5 percent or 6 percent return on my investments
anymore. It's not enough. I need more.
—Wealth peer group participant1
God gave me my money.
—John D. Rockefeller2
ven people who rarely think about the economy are aware of their
country's billionaires. The richest people around the world are often
treated as symbols of the people's hopes for prosperity, or as
national champions. Famous ones get celebrity-level news coverage of their
cosmetic surgery and high-stakes divorces. But beyond that, Americans
don't talk that much about class—the sociologist Paul Blumberg called it
"America's forbidden thought."3
However, Americans' intuitions about the wealth gap were fascinatingly
revealed by a study conducted by Harvard Business School and Duke
University.4 A representative national sample was asked to estimate what
they thought the US wealth distribution was, and then to indicate what they
felt an ideal distribution might look like. The researchers found Americans
believe that the wealthiest 20 percent of households own about 59 percent

of total US wealth, while the number was closer to 84 percent when the
study was conducted. Their ideal distributions of wealth had the richest fifth
of the country owning a relatively modest 32 percent—closer to Sweden's
distribution. Despite reliable media opposition to any suggestion of
redistribution of wealth, they found "much more consensus than
disagreement" on the subject.
But when you're talking about millions and billions of dollars, it can
sometimes feel overwhelming or totally abstract to learn about how much
wealth exists in society, and how much is stuffed right at the top. It can feel
like trying to think about how much water is in the ocean, how many stars
are in the galaxy, or how old the Earth is. But knowing the details is
important, I think, especially down the road when we look at where the
money goes. And if you want to do something about the wealth and power
of the rich, you need to at least understand them and their holdings.
Especially because it's not just cash—other economic assets are also locked
in the hands of the rich, like stock in the corporations we buy from and
work for. Social control, like money, can be hoarded at the top.
But just how much money are we talking about here?
Making Payroll
We can measure up the money of a society in different ways. One way is by
income—who earns how much of the total income, and from what kind of
economic activity. For the large majority of us, incomes play the main role
in deciding our standard of living, since most people don't have large
amounts of independent wealth.
Economists studying incomes in the US and around the world have
identified clear historical patterns. Incomes broadly grew slowly over the
long historical eras from antiquity to the industrial revolution of the 1700s
and 1800s, as hard-won gains with simple technological advances were
wiped out by periodic plagues, wars, and climatic shifts. With the arrival of
the Industrial Revolution, production of goods grew and national incomes
rose in Western countries through the Gilded Age of Rockefeller and
Carnegie, then fell with the Great Depression and the destruction of so

much wealth in the world wars. Production and total national incomes then
rose again in the postwar era of more government-managed growth.
Through this long history, however, different families had very different
economic experiences. Sticking to incomes for now, for the working
majority wages fell during the Industrial Revolution as workers were
pushed off farms and into factories, in harsh competition with one another,
thus creating today's modern labor market of wage-based work. In the late
1800s, incomes finally grew for some workers, as labor broadly became
more skill-based, and as the professional middle class of managers,
engineers, and other educated professionals grew to support the fast-
growing industrializing economy.5
But incomes for rich households rose strongly through the Industrial
Revolution as large existing merchant fortunes or traditional landholdings
could be invested in capital for industry. And income grew quickly for
owners of that physical capital—productive assets like factories, farms, oil
refineries, and data centers. But since capital ownership has always been far
more concentrated than people's ability to labor, this growth mainly
benefited the richest. Over this period top household incomes went from
being predominantly based on land rents and commerce to being primarily
from financial assets that represent ownership of big business, and the data
reveals that to this day within the top 1 percent of households "pure capital
income (rent, interests, and dividends) clearly predominates."6
This means a lot of the shifting fortunes of historical struggles among
the classes can be seen in the factor share of income, which refers to how
much of the total national income goes to the owners of different "factors of
production"—labor, capital, or important natural resources like oil or
lithium. The Industrial Revolution in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century
Europe slowly lifted capital's share of income to a peak of 40 percent in
1870, which then gradually declined and fell more steeply after World War
II, before rising again in all countries after the 1980s' turn to
"neoliberalism," the current version of capitalism characterized by free
markets, reduced social welfare spending, limited labor unions, and much
lower taxes on the rich.7

This income history is documented by contemporary economists like
Thomas Piketty, the French economic historian and breakout publishing
success. Piketty, for his part, was a professed liberal at the time of his
famous book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, supporting capitalism but
with traditional "social democratic" measures—a progressive income and
estate tax, regulations on industries, extensive public services. Despite his
support for profits and markets, he got so uncomfortable looking at a wealth
gap as big as today's that he wrote a gigantic book about it.
Figure 1. Income inequality in US, 1910-2010. From Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First
Century (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2014).
One reliable pattern throughout history is that inequality of labor
income in wages or salaries is modest compared to the giant inequality of
ownership of capital. Ownership of these productive assets creates its own
flow of passive capital income. And while the modern US is famous for its
high-paid CEOs, the fact remains that for the very richest families, capital
income dominates. Piketty finds "the upper centile [1 percent] always
consists of several different social groups, some with very high incomes
from capital and others with very high incomes from labor; the latter do not
supplant the former."8 But as we'll see later in this chapter, the really
crucial distinction of the rich is their ownership of most financial assets,

including most of the stock in corporate America, meaning their shareholder
capital and incomes are what most distinguish them as a class.
Piketty's book is full of great insights, but maybe the most fascinating
analysis of US incomes came from the RAND Corporation, the famous
Pentagon-associated private think tank. In 2018 two of their researchers
conducted a simple "counterfactual," a what-if scenario for the economy,
that imagined what today's wealth disparity would be like if incomes grew
evenly across tax brackets. This question was spurred on by the fact that
over the big-government New Deal period, from World War II until the
1980s, incomes in the US had grown in exactly this way.9 This growth
tended to track the growth of the overall economy, so while the rich
remained wealthier than the rest of us, incomes grew at about the same
pace, partly because labor unions granted some collective bargaining power
to working-class people.
This relative equality ended when the New Deal order was replaced by
the pro-market policies of the present neoliberal era—lower taxes on the
rich, deregulation, privatization of public assets, and declining labor union
strength. For their study, the RAND researchers built a simple new metric
for measuring how close each income bracket's growth was to the overall
GDP, and then looked at what those incomes would be if their growth had
continued to track GDP. In the real world that we had to live in following
the 1980 Reagan Revolution, the growth of the productivity that powers the
economy continued, but wages and salaries didn't keep pace.10 Those
diverging variables are the real portrait of neoliberalism—a revolution by
the rich against the majority, where the working class toil harder and harder
but get less and less of the fruit of their labors. Think of all your hours on
the clock, all that work on those long shifts. It's mostly for the benefit of
someone else, usually someone already loaded.
The RAND researchers note that the median US income in 2018 was
$36,000, whereas their counterfactual of a continued egalitarian growth
regime shows a median income of $57,000. That's a large difference for
people, but more hideous is what the counterfactual experiment shows for
the richest 1 percent—their yearly income would be $549,000 under the
old, more egalitarian New Deal system. Not exactly poor. But in reality, the

cutoff income of the 1 percent at the time was twice that amount:
$1,160,000. RAND, reliant on public funding and not prone to criticizing
the system, observed that "those with incomes below the 90th percentile lost
a sizable share of their economic power over the last four decades."
But as important as incomes are, they feed into pools of assets known as
wealth—while income is a flow, wealth is a stock. For many of us, incomes
barely cover costs so our wealth doesn't grow much. The data show the
well-to-do have been living a different history indeed.
Classroots
Wealth, defined as assets minus debts, has followed similar growth patterns
to those observed in incomes over the modern period. Historically, wealth
overwhelmingly meant land, specifically agriculturally productive land,
often along with various forms of enslaved workers. Wealth reproduced
itself but grew only modestly over the long run until the Industrial
Revolution, when incomes and wealth rose steeply. This era was the Gilded
Age, before the income tax, labor unions, and regulations of the later New
Deal era. The resulting concentration of wealth during the Gilded Age's
heyday was incredible—historian Steve Fraser observes that "by the
midpoint of the Gilded Age ... the bottom 40 percent came away with 1.1
percent."11 And at the peak of the period in 1910, the richest 1 percent of
households owned 45 percent of national wealth and the top 10 percent had
a full 80 percent of the pie.12 By 1929, on the eve of the Great Depression,
the 1 percent had gained over half the wealth of the United States.13
In the UK, the 1 percent owned an almost unbelievable 70 percent of
the national wealth in 1895, and the richest 1/100th of the French owned
over half their country then as well.14 By 1985 the wealth of the richest 1
percent was wrestled down to a low point of only owning a quarter of the
nation's wealth in the US, while the top 10 percent held on to 63 percent,
somewhat higher than in the European states, which also saw lows of
wealth concentration at this time.15 But then came the neoliberal era of
Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher across the Western world, the Deng

Xiaoping market opening in China, and privatizations worldwide. The
results since have been pretty stunning.
Figure 2. Global income and wealth inequality, 2021. From World Inequality Database,
https://wid.world/.
For the most recent period of world history, by far the best source of
global data on the modern distribution of wealth is the World Inequality
Database, which maintains an incredible and up-to-date dataset on who
owns what, nationally and globally. Its directors include some of the most
recognized economists studying today's drastically lopsided global wealth
landscape, including Piketty and the University of California, Berkeley's
Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman. Their website is a stupendous
resource for exploring today's ruling class, with excellent data visualization
tools, as well as free downloads of their book-length World Inequality
Report, the last two editions of which I will partly rely on here.16
One extremely crucial finding is that over almost forty years, from 1980
to 2017, the 1 percent globally soaked up fully 37 percent of the world's per
capita wealth growth.17 This number is an especially rude pie in the face for
the many conservative and liberal defenders of capitalism, who insist the
way to aid the poor is to increase economic growth. In reality, most of that

growth goes to the affluent owners of the giant companies who have great
bargaining power in deciding how much corporate income goes to wages
for the majority and how much goes to profit for the small stockholding
minority. When US president Barack Obama was confronted on cable news
with a study finding that 95 percent of income gains over his presidency
went to the richest 1 percent, he admitted it.18 Not the kind of change his
voters were hoping for.
Incredibly, the WID data from the 1990s to today indicates that global
wealth per person grew at an average 3 percent yearly rate for the richest 10
percent of households, 5 percent for the richest 0.1 percent, and indeed "the
wealthier the individuals, the higher their increase in wealth ... The top
0.000001% (one person in 100 million, that is, the top 52 billionaires in
2021) saw their wealth increase by 9.3% per year over the period."19 The
poorest global 50 percent saw their wealth grow at an average annual rate of
3.7 percent, and starting of course from a far, far, far lower point. When
economists insist that the best way to help the poor is mainly to support
more growth, it should be understood they are promoting a strategy that
only further warps the economy and heaps more wealth on people who
already have altogether too much.
In the US, these numbers meant rich families took off after 1980, both
in dollar terms and in their share of the total national wealth. Despite a lot
of claims that today's rich earned their fortunes, the large majority of them
are owners of assets like stocks and bonds, not business creators. Their
existing wealth makes saving much easier, and the resulting differentials in
savings rates "snowballed" into the rich buying more equity at the same
time profits rose.20
The outcome: by 2021, the richest 1 percent of Americans owned a
godforsaken 34.9 percent of our national wealth, with the top 10 percent
owning 70.7 percent.21 Every person who deals with anxiety about paying
bills, who is suffering from the inability to pay for medical care, or hoping
their oldest kid can hold down the fort while they pick up a shift, should
think about the number 34.9 percent every night when falling asleep. The
middle class itself, the 40 percent between the bottom half and the top 10

percent, has seen its wealth share fall from 34 percent in 1980 to 28 percent
in 2021.22 So the squeezed middle class is very real, but unfortunately their
shrinking economic prospects are leading many of these people to vote for
Donald Trump rather than sensible socialists who could actually address
their problems (more on which in chapter 7).
An inescapable conclusion is that when millions of people are suffering
and dying because of needs they can't afford to address, even though our
societies produce goods abundantly, those people are suffering directly for
the needless excess affluence of a ruling elite that has absorbed most of the
wealth of the former middle class over the last forty years. The WID
researchers note that while the US plus Canada are together the richest of
the world regions they examine, the region "is also the most unequal when
it comes to wealth ownership."23
More specifically, Saez and Zucman have published research using
Federal Reserve data finding that the top 1 percent in the US had on
average $18 million in wealth all told. That works out to thirty-eight times
the wealth of the average household.24 So the last forty years of
neoliberalism have seen the richest 1 percent's share rise and the bottom 50
percent remain close to zero net wealth, due to its limited assets being
matched or exceeded by its debt, especially housing debt. Saez estimates
that the richest 1 percent alone gained a full 48 percent of the income
growth over the twenty-five years ending in 2018.25 Authors with Forbes
found that in 2006 the total wealth of the Forbes 400 was 9.5 percent of US
GDP.26 Piketty notes, "wealth is so concentrated that a large segment of
society is virtually unaware of its existence, so that some people imagine
that it belongs to surreal or mysterious entities."27
It may be worth noting here that economists widely recognize what we
call the "diminishing marginal utility of income," meaning that money does
indeed increase personal happiness when people rise from poverty to the
middle class, but after that it raises happiness less and less. For example,
"Americans who earn $50,000 per year are much happier than those who
earn $10,000 per year, but Americans who earn $5 million per year are not
much happier than those who earn $100,000 per year."28 My colleagues are

usually shy about drawing the obvious conclusion: that wealth should be
redistributed downward from those who won't miss it to those who
desperately need relatively modest sums. Economists will come up
throughout this book, often in not incredibly flattering ways.
While the rich claim to have earned their huge fortunes through
innovation and hard work, inheritance is a giant factor. The dry literature
does recognize that "the desire to perpetuate the family fortune has always
played a central role," and the schemes by which the wealthy pass their
fortunes down to their children is a fascinating subject. In addition to the
great inheritance of estates after the death of a senior relative, gifts by living
family members have grown significantly in recent decades, mainly to
children and often in the form of an investment real estate asset.29
Piketty explains, using a mathematical expression that indicates the rate
of return, r, on capital exceeds the usual rate of economic growth, g, causing
wealth to concentrate:
Regardless of whether the wealth a person holds at age fifty or sixty
is inherited or earned, the fact remains that beyond a certain
threshold, capital tends to reproduce itself and accumulates
exponentially. The logic of r > g implies that the entrepreneur
always tends to turn into a rentier. Even if this happens later in life,
the phenomenon becomes important as life expectancy increases.
The fact that a person has good ideas at age thirty or forty does not
imply that she will still be having them at seventy or eighty, yet her
wealth will continue to increase by itself. Or it can be passed on to
the next generation and continue to increase there.30
The WID researchers also note that wealth has "cumulative effects: for
example, it is easier to save if you inherit an apartment and do not have to
pay rent."31
Luke Savage observed in the socialist magazine Jacobin that of the fifty
hugely rich families listed on the Forbes Billion-Dollar Dynasties list in
2020, more than half were in the Forbes 400 index in 1983.32 You yourself
can keep up with movements of the rich up and down the ranks with the

online Bloomberg Billionaires Index.33 And notably, all the wealth we're
talking about here is private, as opposed to public wealth held by
governments, like public buildings, treasury balances, and military
facilities. The US and most other rich countries have fairly huge amounts of
government debt, issued after the country backed away from aggressively
taxing the rich over recent decades, enough to make the balance of public
wealth close to zero or even negative. This means that private wealth
completely dominates the economic profile of society.34
These numbers together are approximately a restoration of the levels of
inequality of the Gilded Age, of Rockefeller and Carnegie and their
monopolies. The scale of that achievement takes some time to really
contemplate. The reality of so few individuals and families owning such
tremendous oceans of wealth, not just living lives of ludicrous luxury but
having so much social importance, is the most central thing—they have so
much power over their employees and the government, and the decisions
they make, good or bad, have such great consequences for society as a
whole. This tremendous economic and social power puts major limitations
on the freedom of the rest of us, as we have only a small ability to decide
what happens in society, and no positive freedom to consume goods like
health care that are produced in huge amounts but only available for those
who can pay.35 Today's resurgent labor movement and Left political
leaders, like Bernie Sanders, speak to people's gilded rage.
The Hand That Feeds Them
Some conservatives dispute the stunning numbers produced by the WID
and the scholars associated with it. One editorial by two analysts in the Wall
Street Journal, for example, said the reports "echo a standard left-wing
critique of capitalism: Economic growth does not serve all classes of
society ... That portrait of the country is wrong."36 The editorial then lists
several important factors left out of the reports, for example the role played
by taxes that pay for transfer payments to poorer parts of society, like food
stamps and Medicaid. People's earnings also change over their lifetimes,
which snapshot studies omit. And as conservatives often do, the editorial

lists all the nice material things, like cell phones, that even poor Americans
often have, down to microwave ovens.
Sadly, as with most conservative "rebuttals" to liberal or Left
arguments, almost all of it is completely irrelevant. The WID reports,
Piketty's major book, Zucman's careful documentation, and many other
reports by responsible economists reliably recognize the important role of
taxes and transfers, often devoting whole chapters to them. Also, these
studies almost always develop distributions of income or wealth over
historical time, as we've seen—it's the opposite of "snapshot measures."
And the fact that poorer echelons of Americans are able to rent apartments
with fucking microwave ovens is less impressive than today's think-tank
defenders of the rich seem to think. Especially because, as the WID and so
many other papers point out, the middle class has sunk deeper into debt
since the neoliberal era began in the 1980s—borrowing for those nice
homes, borrowing for their increasingly gigantic cars and trucks, and
borrowing for their college degrees. The authors of this embarrassing smear
piece, Kevin Hassett and Aparna Mathur, are regulars at the Journal and
hold well-compensated positions at the archconservative, privately funded
American Enterprise Institute. It would be more Enterprising of these lazy
phonies to read the studies they're pretending to criticize.
Another type of bad argument about the wealth gap comes from liberals
of the pro-market type who dominate the political parties that used to be
made up of social democrats, like the US Democratic Party or Labour in the
UK. Consider Douglas McWilliams, a former IBM economist and corporate
consultant, who's critical of this whole body of research in his own book on
inequality, The Inequality Paradox. Unfortunately, the only research he ever
refers to is Piketty's breakout hit book, and like many reviewers he appears
not to have read the long text. He calls the entire approach a "conspiracy
theory" based on Marxist concepts of exploitation.37
In fact, Piketty's book mostly pins inequality on an empirical
mathematical relationship, r > g, which suggests capital accumulates more
quickly than the broader economy grows, driving up inequality over time.
Most of the big shifts are attributed to major social changes like
industrialization and the New Deal, which are pretty far from secret

conspiracies. McWilliams shows his cards when he says he's "on the side of
reducing poverty, which seems to me to be more important than reducing
inequality." This fails to recognize the incredible power that huge fortunes
put in the hands of the rich, by whom he's employed after all. Worse, like
other liberals and conservatives he argues the best way to reduce poverty is
to increase economic growth, but as we've already seen, a cartoonishly
lopsided majority of today's economic growth flows into the already very
richest pockets. He goes on to actually suggest that people documenting
inequality really just resent not being able to afford the expensive London
neighborhood he lives in.38
A further embarrassment for more conservative economists like these is
that the facts are backed up by other researchers who are far less critical of
the current system, including those at the Federal Reserve. The Fed is
America's central bank, with a number of roles including organizing the big
bailout packages we need for our giant banking corporations every few
years, as well as running monetary policy, where interest rates are adjusted
up or down to slow or speed up the economy. The Fed's policymakers are
mostly bankers and financial experts from Wall Street and around the US,
but the system produces a very rich output of economic research.
One useful class of public data the Fed maintains is the DFA, the
Distributional Financial Accounts.39 These are quarterly estimates of the
amounts and different forms of wealth in the US, using data from the highly
reputable Survey of Consumer Finances and the Financial Accounts of the
United States, huge datasets maintained by the Fed's regular surveys of
households. While only extending the last thirty-odd years, they still capture
a great deal of information about the evolution of incomes, wealth, debt,
and many other fascinating variables. The most recent data presently
available, for the third quarter 2021, has the richest 1 percent owning 32.1
percent of all wealth, and the top 10 percent owning 69.6 percent. It's pretty
close to the WID's numbers, and the point is that all serious research agrees
that the richest households have a hugely disproportionate share of
economic resources, and crucially that nearly all the economic growth of
the last several decades has gone to these richest echelons. Indeed, the
pyramiding of income and wealth at the top of the distribution is one of the

better-proven conclusions in today's social sciences. The Fed's data are
downloadable and also packed with visualization tools.
The pandemic years only threw fuel on this raging fire. When the
COVID-19 shutdowns took effect in early 2020, it played to the business
models of the Big Tech platform corporations like Google, Amazon, and
Facebook (now Meta). The tech companies' stocks exploded as earnings
skyrocketed, enriching the ruling class, which owns most stock (see below),
but especially the billionaire founders of those companies. From March
2020 to March 2021, Jeff Bezos's fortune grew by a staggering $58 billion;
Google cofounders Sergey Brin and Larry Page were enriched by $32 and
$33 billion, respectively; and Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg gained $29
billion while his platform played a major role spreading misinformation
about COVID that likely worsened the plague.40 In total, the collective
wealth of all America's billionaires rose from $2.95 trillion at the start of
the pandemic to $4.56 trillion a year later.41 Incredible.
For the majority of us, of course, rising mortgage, credit card, and
student debts took off in the 1980s when wages started stagnating, and these
debts count against wealth. Total household debt was 75 percent of national
income in the mid-1980s, reached 135 percent in 2009 after the financial
crisis, and stood at 110 percent in 2012. So over this whole period "the
bottom half of the distribution always owns close to zero net wealth," the
WID researchers note, "when including negative wealth such as credit card
and housing debt."42
The Harvard Business-Duke survey study mentioned above is important
to keep in mind when considering these numbers. Recall that a surprisingly
large consensus in the random survey sample, including even wealthier
households and conservatives, preferred a distribution of wealth closer to
the social democratic Scandinavian model, where the top 10 percent own a
mere 32 percent of the wealth.43 A staggering 92 percent said they preferred
that setup to a distribution typical of the US. Meanwhile the survey
participants estimated on average that in the US the richest 20 percent owns
59 percent of the total national wealth, whereas the real number at the time
was about 84 percent.

And importantly, this level of concentration of wealth is present in the
US across demographic groups, including the most frequently discussed
ones of race, education, and age. Discussion in America of economic
inequality is often in terms of differences among these groups in the US,
due to its long history of racism, the earnings premium of education, and
the fact that people save over their life spans and tend to be richer later in
life than earlier.
But writer and policy developer Matt Bruenig analyzed the Fed's
Survey of Consumer Finances for the socialist magazine Jacobin and found
that "in reality, the level of wealth inequality within each group is virtually
identical to the wealth inequality that we see in the society as a whole."44 In
other words, among white families, Black families, those holding a college
degree, those without a degree, and regardless of age group, the top 10
percent owned 69 percent to 74 percent of the total wealth of that
demographic group. Using SCF data, Bruenig presents the distribution of
wealth owned by each 10 percent of households, for white families,
Hispanic, and Black, for those without a high school degree, those with
college degrees, those with head of household aged eighteen to thirty-five,
those thirty-six to fifty, and they are all nearly identical. Huge numbers for
the top tenth regardless of their demographic characteristics, a smaller share
for the next 10 percent, and crumbs for the rest. Bruenig notes that the
difference in wealth between the average US white and Black family is
$160,710. That's a lot of money, but "the $181,440 net worth of the median
white family is less than one-fourth of the $746,821 they would have if all
the country's wealth were distributed evenly."
All the Money in the World
Outside the US, the wealth landscape isn't much better. To be a part of the
global 1 percent, you need just under $3 million in assets, a threshold met
by families making up fifty-one million people worldwide. Across all
countries, the richest one in a hundred families owns 38 percent of the
stupendous $557 trillion of global wealth.45 The richest 10 percent own a
towering 76 percent of global wealth, while the bottom half of the world's

population has about 2 percent of the total. Different regions of the world
vary, as we'll see, but in a limited range shaped by modern global
capitalism: the top tenth always owns between 60 and 80 percent of
regional wealth, and the bottom half is almost always under 5 percent.46
In Europe, their top 1 percent of households has had a striking recovery
from the high-tax era of postwar social democracy, although not as stunning
as in the US. Britain's 1 percent, for example, owned 70 percent of the
nation's wealth in 1914; today it makes do with only around 20 to 22
percent.47 Conspicuously, Europe is one of the few regions where the
austerity policies wreaking havoc around the world have been less effective.
National health and education systems have resisted the budget cuts and
privatizations of the last forty years, and as a result, it's the only region
where the middle-class 40 percent still has more income than the top 10
percent.48 Nowhere else is this true today.
China is still ruled by its Communist Party, but since its opening to
private investment and privatizations it has gained the capitalist features of
fast economic growth and a hyper-rich owning class. China's richest 1
percent today owns 30.5 percent of the nation's wealth, and the top 10
percent owns 67.8 percent.49 An enormous number of people in China have
been lifted out of global poverty due to the country's state-led market
development model, with the country's own bottom 50 percent holding 6.5
percent of national wealth, very low but a relatively rich share by world
standards. China's inequality has increased using more limited measures as
well, including the traditional Gini coefficient.50
Across the world more broadly, the pattern continues and the difference
is especially steep for the large realms of the world known as the
developing world, or formerly the "Third World," including the regions of
Latin America, South Asia, and Africa—showing the long legacy of
European colonialism and high debt levels since then. India and China both
had large industrial sectors in their economies for centuries, and as late as
1800, the two together made up over half of world manufacturing output at
53 percent. By 1900, after the brutal British colonization of India and the
partitioning of Ming China into captive spheres of influences by all the

European powers plus Japan, their share was just 5 percent. The WID
researchers note that the share of world income going to the poorest 50
percent of the world's people, who are almost entirely in the developing
world, is still today about half what it was in 1820 at the dawn of the
colonial era.51 Just a blessing for the struggling masses, colonialism.
And indeed, despite the world's poor being mostly in the developing
world, billions of dollars a year in interest payments are paid by the Third
World to lenders in London, New York, and Paris. While the poor countries
today are no longer under the formal control of the rich countries, they do
still send a heavy flow of assets to them, due to debts run up by dictators,
and from the rich of the Western countries buying up assets in the poor ones
during upheavals and recessions. This hideously perverted flow of money
from the poor to the rich continues to this day, and the poorest countries on
Earth still owe literal trillions to wealthy bondholders in rich countries that
ruled them for centuries and stripped them of their wealth (see chapter 6).52
Of course, the forms that all this wealth takes vary widely, within
countries and especially between them. The rich of all countries own huge
fortunes in financial assets, multiple residences, and other high-end real
estate. Many also own mineral deposits, oil and gas rights, legal licenses to
valuable intellectual property, bank accounts with big electronic balances,
and, of course, good old-fashioned cash. The history of each region and
country makes a huge difference for the local ruling class profile. The
richest families in South Africa and many of the former Latin American
colonial possessions have unusually white complexions, often being
descended from a local Europeanized elite or big white colonial
landholders. America and Europe's numbers show you don't have to be an
imperial possession of another country for centuries to have an awful tiny
ruling class, but in the former colonies, which contain most of the world's
population today, the people in charge are often descendants and inheritors
of colonial exploiters and slave owners.
So no matter how poor the country today, it has a tiny elite with wealth
similar to that of the richest families in the developed countries. In the
developed world, the richest 1 percent of households owns 25 percent of all
wealth in Europe, 30 percent in East Asia, and 35 percent in North America;

and in the developing world, the richest one-hundredth owns 46 percent of
all wealth in Latin America and in Russia, 38 percent in Sub-Saharan
Africa, 30 percent in India, and 44 percent in the Middle East.53 The WID
website has data for most countries broken down to various scales, so
anyone can find out precisely how hard their country is getting screwed by
capitalism.
But having reviewed all these figures for today's hypercon-centration of
wealth, it's important to recognize that wealth comes with power, and
combined with the power of the state wielded by political figures, it's the
source of the influence and control of the ruling class. Power is not only
about the state, and its institutions of the legislature and courts and police
and military, although God knows they're crucial. Power comes in various
forms, legal and military but also economic and ideological.
Some forms of wealth make this especially clear. Piketty estimates that
by the start of the US Civil War, the four million slaves in the South had a
total market value equal to about a year and a half of the national US
income, "roughly equal to the total value of farmland."54 The point very
definitely still holds today. If you're a power-hungry megalomaniac, you
can seek authority by running for a government position or working up to a
senior position in a public bureaucracy or the military, gaining very real but
legally limited power. Alternatively, you could build a business that makes
you rich without any limit, and push your employees around and drug test
them and make them listen to awful music while they work all day. You can
buy a media empire and shape the ideas that everyone hears and thinks
about day after day. With a ton of money you can invest in things you want
and lobby the government to prevent things you don't.
Money and economic control mean power, and that's the heart of the
ruling class. And the very best place to see that is the intersection of the
world's rich and the corporate empires they own.
Lock, Stock, and Barrel
Big fortunes aren't held in cash. The towering wealth of the really rich
certainly includes generous demand deposits, but the hallmark of a rich

family is its well-diversified investment portfolio, including asset classes
like government bonds, real estate, and financial securities. Above all, these
financial assets include corporate stock—pieces of ownership of companies.
If you buy corporate stock, or "equities," you own a bit of the firm and are
entitled to a proportional piece of its profit. Companies issue these shares
when they "go public," inviting investors to buy into a growing business
and own a piece of its profitability.
Big corporations often have many millions of shares outstanding,
reflecting decades of expansion and many rounds of cash-raising. This
means investors only sometimes exercise any direct control over the
companies they own, although there are important exceptions and large
stockholders can generally get a hearing with senior executives or get seats
on corporate boards. Stanley Aronowitz noted in his book How Class Works
that CEOs serve the shareholders—which they are themselves, due to their
stock-heavy pay package. He wrote, "We have seen how vulnerable top
executives are, as boards of directors dismiss them after a few quarters of
low profitability."55 Ownership of large amounts of stock in the gigantic
corporations that dominate our market system, from Wall Street to Silicon
Valley, means ownership of the productive economy. And this form of
wealth, riskier than others but with potentially much higher yields, is even
more concentrated than the rest of wealth.
The definitive work on US stock ownership is by economist Edward
Wolff, of New York University and the National Bureau of Economic
Research. In a series of research papers, Wolff confronted the idea of the
"shareholder democracy," popular among liberals and conservatives, which
claims that because many US households own stock, most Americans
benefit from rising corporate profits and a booming stock market. But Wolff
discovered that, in fact, the proportion of Americans owning any stock
peaked at 51.9 percent in 2001, fell in recession, recovered between market
crashes, and then plunged again to 46.9 percent after the 2008 finance
crisis.56 So the first point is that not even a bare majority of US households
own any stock at all.
But the far greater point is that in addition to this limited participation,
"many of these families had only a minor stake in the stock market in 2010,

with only 34% with total stock holdings worth $5,000 (in 1995 dollars) or
more ... and only 22% with holdings worth $25,000 or more."57 Middle-
class wealth is mostly tied up in physical assets, primarily the personal
home along with cars and other personal property. Wolff found the middle
swath of American households has three-fifths of their assets invested in
their homes, although due to large mortgage debt, housing wealth is limited
even among the middle class. In contrast, the richest 20 percent of
Americans own their main home outright almost universally, and often have
other real estate.
The bottom line is that stock ownership is "highly skewed by wealth
class. The top one percent of households classified by wealth owned 40
percent of all stocks in 2016, and the top 10 percent 84 percent, and the top
quintile 93 percent."58 Other business assets are even more concentrated.59
And notably, "there are striking differences in returns by wealth class. The
returns on gross assets were generally higher for the top 1% than for the
middle three quintiles ... The differences reflect the greater share of high
yield investment assets like stocks in the portfolios of the rich and the
greater share of housing in the portfolio of the middle class."60
Piketty's meticulous analysis of modern wealth data also found "the
importance of real estate decreases sharply as one moves higher in the
wealth hierarchy. In the '9 percent' group ... real estate accounts for half of
total wealth ... In the top centile, by contrast, financial and business assets
clearly predominate over real estate. In particular, shares of stock or
partnerships constitute nearly the totality of the largest fortunes ... Housing
is the favorite investment of the middle class and moderately well-to-do,
but true wealth always consists primarily of financial and business
assets."61
As the socialist economics magazine Dollars & Sense put it,
"Americans are treated to a daily stock market report on the nightly news.
And for some (a small minority) this report will have considerable
relevance. But for the vast majority of viewers, the numbers will seem
unconnected to their daily struggle to make ends meet—because they
are."62 Even the New York Times recognized that "riotous market swings ...

have virtually no impact on the income or wealth of most families. The
reason: They own little or no stock... Roughly half of all households don't
have a cent invested in stocks, whether through a 401(k) account or shares
in General Electric."63
This also means, of course, that they sit out the stock market rallies,
which recently brought the richest 10 percent to owning a new high of 88.8
percent of outstanding stock in 2021, according to the Fed's DFA data.64
That's an especially big deal in this neoliberal era of gigantic global
corporations, often monopolies or at least oligopolies, because profits are so
tremendously high after decades of mergers and outsourcing. The high
inflation following the COVID-19 pandemic gave many large, consolidated
firms an opportunity to raise prices faster than costs and widen their profit
margins further.65
Corporations return money to their stockholders either by issuing a
share of profits to them, called dividends, or by buying up their own stock,
which tends to increase its price and thus increase shareholder wealth. The
business press reports that after pausing these payouts during the
uncertainty of the pandemic, companies paid out $20.3 billion in dividends
and spent over $500 billion on buybacks in just the first half of 2021.66 By
2023 they were projected to clear $1 trillion.67 This is where the wealth of
society is located, and since publicly traded corporations are owned by rich
households across the land, C. Wright Mills memorably wrote in The Power
Elite that the corporate world "is, in operating fact, class-wide property."68
Beyond just having piles of cash and fancy personal property, it is this
that defines the real modern ruling class—ownership of the productive
economy. This extremely high level of centralization of business equity
means that despite fashionable claims that the ruling class is made up of
sleek professionals in media or influencer roles, the real ruling class is an
owning class that not only possesses vast liquid wealth but owns most of the
world of big business. When stock markets boom, as they have for the last
few decades (between dizzying crashes), and companies report years of
gigantic record-breaking profits, you may benefit a bit if you hold some
shares or have a decent retirement account. But the world of big business is

mainly the property of the richest households, and this nexus of corporate
power and rich families should be a central part of anyone's understanding
of who's really in charge of the world.
For the ruling class, a share is a thing you own, not a thing you do.
And the same hyperconcentration of financial assets is present in more
cutting-edge markets like cryptocurrencies, the new electronic assets that
claim to be potentially usable as decentralized money systems, outside the
control of governments and banks. The National Bureau of Economic
Research recently found that about 0.01 percent of the holders of Bitcoin,
the most popular cryptocurrency, own 27 percent of the existing nineteen
million Bitcoin. The conservative Wall Street Journal laughed that for all its
hype of decentralization, "the top bitcoin holders control a greater share of
the cryptocurrency than the most affluent American households control in
dollars."69
This relatively brief survey of the scale of the owning class's wealth
hoard is enough to paint the picture. Since the world elite turned against
social democracy in the 1980s and '90s, the already-rich were swamped
with a tsunami of wealth as their taxes fell and their stocks rallied. From
cash to equities to fancy toys, the economic growth that capitalism is so
famous for has piled up in the portfolios of the very very richest people and
their insufferable families. The amount of money involved is sometimes
really beyond the ability of the person on the street to easily understand—
the worker who spends long shifts toiling for $9 an hour has a tough time
picturing what a billion-dollar lifestyle really looks like.
So what does it look like? Even as their fortunes grow, the ruling class
spends a monumentally warped amount of money on just the craziest tacky
crap you ever heard of, from fancy clothes to personal staff to giant
vacation homes to metaverse NFTs. Their catered-to coked-up pampered-
ass lifestyle is the subject of the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

P
CHAPTER 2
THE LIFESTYLE
IT'S WORSE THAN YOU THINK
Well, I do think it's excessive... It is absolutely excessive. No
question about it. But it's amazing what you can get used to.
—Larry Ellison, on his megayacht1
First launched in 1943 as a Canadian warship, [th e yacht
Christina O] was present at the Normandy landings before being
purchased by Greek shipping magnate Ar istotle Onassis and
beginning her life as a pleasure cruiser. Elizabeth Taylor and Frank
Sinatra sipped cocktails on the boat's whale-foreskin bar stools.
—Rory Satran, "What the World's Richest People Wear on
Yachts"2
rivate luxury jets. Spacious elite penthouses towering over major
global cities. Enormous pleasure yachts made with forty million
worker-hours. Food literally dusted with gold. A safe full of visas
and foreign passports. Huge closets full of stunningly expensive high-end
clothes. Private chefs in your private suite at a private resort. Million-dollar
watches. An entourage of ass-kissing sycophants.
Now that we've seen the stupendous amount of cash, equity, and assets
in the vaults and portfolios of the ruling class, the inevitable question is,

where does it all go? Middle-class people sometimes imagine that the rich
only fly first class and send their kids to the best schools in town. In fact,
the really rich fly on their private aircraft (making enormous additions to
our environmental crisis) and raise their kids with private tutors, followed
by hyper-elite academies with tiny class sizes, while personal staff do their
errands and chores.
It all flows into the endless river of utter wasted excess that decorates
the days of the ruling class. The $100 million estates, the cosmetic surgery,
the acres of classic paintings kept in storage units in Switzerland, and their
family names on universities and public parks. There is no limit to the
bottomless depravity and naked egomania of the highest-wealth households.
The Fun Percent
The universally recognized founding text for understanding the
consumption spending of the rich is The Theory of the Leisure Class, by the
Norwegian-American sociologist Thorstein Veblen. The 1899 book is the
origin of the term "conspicuous consumption"—the concept that expensive
goods and services are consumed partially just to impress peers, and of
course people of lesser means. Beyond clear enrichment and "the power
conferred by wealth," Veblen held there is the desire to establish oneself as
a great figure: "In order to gain and to hold the esteem of men it is not
sufficient merely to possess wealth or power. The wealth or power must be
put in evidence, for esteem is awarded only on evidence. And not only does
the evidence of wealth serve to impress one's importance on others ... but it
is of scarcely less use in building up and preserving one's self-
complacency."3
Referring especially to classic centers of wealth like noble households
but also today's more established rich families, Veblen found "refined
tastes, manners, and habits of life are a useful evidence of gentility, because
good breeding requires time, application, and expense, and can therefore
not be compassed by those whose time and energy are taken up with work
... In the last analysis the value of manners lies in the fact that they are the
voucher of a life of leisure."4

When you have still more wealth to show off and even richer jerk
friends to compete with, you can get staffed beyond your needs, with more
of "those servants who are in most immediate and obvious attendance upon
their master. So that the utility of these comes to consist in great part, in
their conspicuous exemption from productive labour and in the evidence
which this exemption affords of their master's wealth and power," which
Veblen somewhat amusingly calls "vicarious leisure."5
Peter Bearman's fascinating book Do ormen, on the professionals who
monitor the front doors at high-end city buildings, observes that doormen
sometimes "see themselves solely as conspicuous display items for the
tenants to consume." One is quoted saying, "Some people will stand there
in the cold just 'cause they don't want to open the door. It's funny how the
wealthier side is living 'cause you know it's kind of weird ... Sometimes
they'll even ring the doorbell, and they'll just wait. All they have to do is
open it, but sometimes I'm like on the intercom or working the elevators
but they'll still stay there. It's like they're frozen or something."6
But high-end consumption—whether to wow the average Joe on the
street, your fellow rotten elite friends, or yourself—has grown with the
wealth of the ruling class. Let me take you on a tour, first with an item from
the Wall Street Journal.
An elegant stone façade just off the Champs Élysées hides what may
be the world's most elite liquor store. Spirits maker Moët Hennessy
has turned a Parisian apartment into a discreet, invitation-only
boutique for its best clients and those of its parent, luxury giant
LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton. Decades-old bottles of
limited edition Dom Pérignon champagne, costing thousands of
dollars each, lie in a temperature-controlled closet made of crystal
glass. A display case holds massive 'Nebuchadnezzar' bottles of
Cheval Blanc, each containing almost four gallons of the
ultraexpensive Saint-Émilion wine. The apartment, opened a year
ago, is part of an intensifying effort by luxury firms to pamper their
best-heeled customers ... The clientele isn't the 1% of the world's
richest people. It is the top 0.1%, a group that already makes up a

disproportionate percentage of sales for the industry, which
corresponds to Ultra-High Net Worth Individuals, the roughly
211,000 people around the world with individual net worth of more
than $30 million.7
The Journal continues: "High-end menswear firm Stefano Ricci flies its
tailors to clients around the world to make custom suits. Each suit costs
between $10,000 and $20,000, and customers are expected to purchase at
least five for a tailor to make the trip ... The Ricci family recently opened a
country house near its headquarters in Florence where it hosts top-spending
clients, even allowing them to drive the family's collection of vintage cars."
Regrettably, however, there's a common lament in high-end commerce:
"Why the Rich Are Bad Customers," as the business press puts it. A top
executive at Barclays Wealth said rich clients make "demanding and often
unreasonable requests" and "impossible demands on an organization." Very
high-end clients, those in the $100 million territory, demand institutional
pricing—the reduced-price volume discounts given to large companies or
governments. A billionaire gloats, "The best part about being rich is all the
free stuff you can demand."8
But money talks. When hedge fund tyrant and Trump adviser Stephen
Schwarzman turned sixty in 2007, he hired the enormous Park Avenue
armory and turned it into, for real, "a large-scale replica of the
Schwarzmans' Manhattan apartment," as the New Yorker famously
reported. "Replicas of Schwarzman's art collection were mounted on the
walls, including, at one entrance, a full-length portrait of him by Andrew
Festing, the president of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters. Dinner was
served in a faux night-club setting, with orchids and palm trees. Guests
dined on lobster, filet mignon, and baked Alaska, and were offered an array
of expensive wines."9 Martin Short emceed, Patti LaBelle and Rod Stewart
sang. Guests included the chairman of Sony, New York cardinal Edward
Egan, and the governor of the State of New York.10 Eighteen months later
the financial world was in flames and Schwarzman was far richer.
Not having attracted enough infamy at his sixtieth, when Schwarzman
turned seventy he threw himself another over-the-top affair, with a sea of

valets, servers, bartenders, live camels, trapeze artists, Mongolian soldiers,
and drivers. Gwen Stefani sang "Happy Birthday" to a guest list including
senior Wall Street grandees from brand-name firms like Carlyle, Barclays,
Citigroup, and KKR, billionaire industrialist David Koch, and Trump
treasury secretary Wilbur Ross. The president himself did not appear,
although Schwarzman served on a Trump administration advisory council,
and Trump's kids Ivanka and Jared Kushner did make it.
Also among the guests was David Boaz, a VP at the Cato Institute, the
prominent libertarian think tank. Boaz apparently was present mainly to
ensure that a furious public would get plenty of capitalist propaganda in the
coverage this time around: "It's not as if he hasn't been generous ... It's his
money. He can do whatever he wants with it ... He earned it."11
Schwarzman's birthday boots must have had a lustrous shine indeed!
Schwarzman may be the modern leader of conspicuous consumption,
but his Wall Street brethren blazed the trail. Financiers led the still-popular
trend among the world's rich of literally eating gold, shaved or sprinkled as
a topping onto cake, cappuccinos, and champagne, according to the
Journal's reporting with the frank headline "Why the Rich Like to Eat
Gold."12 This was right after the 2008 finance disaster, so presumably the
reason is "because they are detached spoiled-rich princelings sulking from
their public scoldings." For some, merely eating it isn't enough. Robert
Frank includes in his book Richistan an anecdote of a Florida old-money
gentleman who owns a solid-gold straw for sipping champagne.13
It's a pattern as old as American capitalism. A famous 1897 costume
ball at the Waldorf in New York saw the rich host appearing as Louis XIV,
the Sun King himself, and fifty, fifty, women who came dressed as Marie
Antoinette. The party was also arguably slightly insensitive since a
depression had begun four years earlier.14
The socialist writer Nathan Robinson read a stack of books by
billionaires (or their hired ghostwriters) and quotes Ken Langone, CEO of
Home Depot, who wrote in his memoir: "Should I follow the Bible? I'll be
honest: I'm not giving everything away. Why? Because I love this life! I
love having nice houses and good people to help me. I love getting on my

airplane instead of having to take my shoes off and wait in line to take a
commercial flight. You want to accuse me of living well? I plead guilty ...
As I said, I've been rich and I've been poor, and rich is better."15
Inconspicuous Consumption
Even in Veblen's time he recognized the rich were becoming somewhat
more demure than their wild ruling-class party era of the Gilded Age,
partially due to rising public resentment and growing labor and socialist
movements. Especially since the New Deal era of the 1930s to 1970s, when
an organized labor movement led a democratic drive to tax the rich and
break up their corporate monopolies, many of the rich have been wary of
flaunting it too much. This sadly short-lived history has led to a pretty
hilarious persecution complex among certain billionaires who, despite
owning a large chunk of society and being quite able to get their views out
by buying TV networks or state senators, whine nonstop to their journalist
employees about their surviving taxes and regulations. Ex-Starbucks CEO
Howard Schultz said even the term "billionaire" had become unfair and that
"people of wealth" would be better.16 Many "people of wealth" are still
excited to throw big parties and plaster their names on stadiums and giant
publicly visible mansions, but others prefer anonymity and don't put
themselves out—beyond maybe placing their name on a large university
campus building they paid for.17
Rather than give up the parties, today the rich are instead frequently less
conspicuous in their personal affectations. You may have noticed that
cartoons depicting rich people often show them in very dated attire—
monocles and top hats. This was the ruling-class-signifying attire of the
Gilded Age in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and since
then the rich have sadly learned to tone it down. The preference for clothes
among the rich is now often a T-shirt and blue jeans public-facing persona,
even if the actual T-shirt and jeans of that dressed-down look are insanely
costly.
The writer and architecture critic Kate Wagner wrote for the Nation that
"You Can't Even Tell Who's Rich Anymore," finding "One of the great

disappointments of contemporary life is that in times of hopelessly vast
income inequality, society's arch-capitalists ... are boring. The zenith of
their boringness? How they dress."18 She notes Facebook CEO Mark
Zuckerberg wearing Patagonia vests with a pullover, Bill Gates's khakis and
loafers, and the endless tech guys in "an ill-fitting blazer with a T-shirt and
jeans." She mentions Alexandre Arnault of LVMH, who "does not know
how to wear clothes. He only knows how to lard his frail, millionaire body
with various hype-driven status symbols ... You used to be able to look at
someone and tell that they were rich. Clothes have always been an
important class signifier." But now the styles of the rich "are often
borrowed or stolen from the lower classes by the upper. The heirs of old
wealth go to private colleges and wear the same Carhartt jackets owned by
truck drivers. Tech billionaires try to look like your neighbors or
pensioners." Veblen said it was "seldom altogether unaffected ... that make-
believe of rusticity."19
Paul Fussell's popular book Class refers to the richest households as
being "top-out-of-sight," since their gigantic wealth is now often hidden
behind closed gates. "Showing off used to be the main satisfaction of being
very rich in America," he wrote. "Now the rich must skulk and hide. It's a
pity."20 But Fussell wrote at the very start of neoliberalism in the early
1980s, when the New Deal-era wary watchfulness of the rich still lingered.
Today, while the rich like to publicly project a dressed-down aesthetic, we
can learn from Forbes journalists in their book All the Money in the World
how the money gets privately spent in a typical rich-person-year, including
loafers for $410, dress shoes for $4,000, $40,000 for prep school, $7,600
for caviar, $8,000 for fresh flower arrangements for six rooms in season,
$14,000 for a facelift, $1,300 for a day in concierge hospital care, $4.8
million for a yacht, $1.3 million for an Olympic-size pool, $8 million for a
private plane, $11 million for a private helicopter.21 Or cough up a couple
hundred million to buy a beloved sports team and then move it across the
country.22
But the wealthy across eras do have a well-known history of cosplaying
as the normal classes. John Kampfner's incredible historical survey The

Rich describes how "millionaire coal mine owners gave dinners with their
servants dressed as miners. One event was themed the 'poverty social,'
where guests came dressed in rags and 'scraps of food were served on
wooden plates. The diners sat about on broken soapboxes, buckets and coal
hods. Newspapers, dust cloths and old skirts were used as napkins, and beer
served in a rusty tin can.'"23
In his book on the 1 percent, author Paul Street wrote, "Another factor
contributing to the relatively invisible and 'unseeable' nature of the wealthy
'true elite' is the reluctance of many rich people to flaunt their wealth and
the determination of many elites to cloak that wealth in more plebian or at
least middle-class wrappings ... [C]onspicuous consumption went
'underground.'" Now "the 1% prefers on the whole to keep its opulence
behind private walls and gates, making it less likely to provoke popular ire
in the supposed 'land of equality.'"24
Some forms of consumption remain inherently conspicuous, like that
popular pastime of the ruling and even middle classes—cosmetic surgery.
While a mass-market product, high-end services are stunningly costly and
elite. Steven Gaines's book on South Beach high society describes Dr.
Leonard Roudner, known as the "breast man" in Miami, charging $7,000 a
pair. "He was so busy that he operated on five women every day of the
week and squeezed in two more implants every other Saturday ... He'd
even shaped the breasts of three generations of women in the same
family."25
If there is one term reliably used when marketing to the rich, it is
"exclusive." 
Exclusive 
destinations, 
exclusive 
service, 
exclusive
accommodations. Exclusive here of course means it is prohibitively
expensive for the typical person, and therefore suggests only a certain type
of people are let in, excluding the riff raff. It's fascinating, because society
at large has been struggling for years with trying to become more inclusive,
especially since the racial unrest of 2020. There's been some real effort for
more inclusive institutions, media images, and especially language, in terms
of race and gender. Many conservatives, who are mainly animated
politically to defend traditional hierarchies in society, are furious about
these "woke" developments, but for societies as cruelly racially

discriminatory as the US and many other modern states, it's hard not to
view it as a broadly positive development.
Which makes it interesting that we have a remaining form of very open
exclusivity right in plain view in our society, class-based exclusion, in
addition to the perhaps better-recognized forms of racial exclusion. The
ubiquitous, and I mean ubiquitous, use of the word "exclusive" in
marketing to rich consumers shows it, especially in pitches to the UHNWIs,
as marketing literature calls people with over $30 million American.
Consider watches. The industry had its best year ever in 2021, by selling
less. "The Swiss watch industry is moving ever further upmarket as brand
owners target rich consumers and try to differentiate their products from the
Apple Watch and other wearable tech."26 High-end Rolex units start at
$10,000 and the sky's the limit. Some super-high-end units sell for a million
bucks. The business press notes some smaller more down-market
watchmakers charge just a few grand, "offering an 'inclusive' form of
luxury to which most consumers can realistically aspire."
Apple itself is definitely the higher end of the mobile electronics
marketplace but is seen as representing middle-class affluence, rather than a
maker of actual elite goods. This is important to the marketing of the Apple
brand and its access to broad middle-class markets globally, although it
does flirt with more exclusivity, as in 2015 when it released the Apple
Watch Hermès, having a specially styled interface, the first tie-in for the
company with a luxury brand. The special edition watch cost $1,500, but
the company's famous former design chief, Jonathan Ive, "resists the notion
that Apple is becoming exclusive, a defining characteristic of luxury
goods."27
And when Bill Gates's ex-wife and billion-dollar charity co-kingpin,
Melinda French, traveled to Manhattan to appear on NBC's Today show,
she was preceded by a "military operation"-level security detail, on the
scale of a visiting foreign dignitary. This personal army of security
consultants did a sweep of the full studio prior to her arrival, with sources at
the show saying even Beyoncé and Michelle Obama didn't have such an
expansive security apparatus. French was appearing to promote her new

book imprint about authors striving for "radical inclusion."28 Unfortunately
this required excluding everyone else from the area.
Haute Divorce
All relationships age and some don't age well. In the modern world,
separation and divorce allow unhappy marriages to be dissolved—a mercy
to the couple and sometimes their kids. But when you have billions of
dollars of various kinds of assets, things have a way of getting messier, as
recent divorces at the very, very high end of the wealth distribution have
shown. Of course, in cases of separation it's far better for the kids when
their parents settle amicably, where the parties agree or use arbitration to
split assets in a civil manner. But for a ruling class-analyzing creep like me,
ugly, contentious divorces are way better, since those go to court and some
court records get publicly released, which is great for books like this.
The New York Times, for example, reports on "a 1 Percent Divorce"
between two heinous New York real estate assholes. The marriage fell apart
with the 2008 crash, leading to the unhappy couple suing one another over
things like $12 million in artwork, $1.8 million in jewelry, and "a pair of
Albert Cheuret sconces, circa 1925, which were valued at $100,000."29 But
they come much, much bigger. The Bezoses', for example, although they
settled amicably.
But the really big one is the Gateses'. With one of history's great
fortunes, estimated at $124 billion at the time of the filing, this process will
go on for years. Assets include a stock portfolio with billions in diversified
equities, a large stake in the Four Seasons luxury hotel chain, various
mansions in Washington and California, huge tracts of land that formerly
made Gates the biggest single private owner of farmland in the US, a stake
in a company serving private jet owners, and one of Leonardo da Vinci's
notebooks. For all the stupendous extent of the assets, "lawyers point out
that the issues that cause friction in the average divorce are completely
absent for the stratospherically wealthy," as middle-class couples may find
themselves comfortable, but not wealthy enough to be comfortable once
everything is split in half.30 Much of this great wealth is hidden secretively

behind shell companies with purposefully boring, generic names. And of
course this is all before even talking about the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation and its $50 billion endowment, which is in a trust that can't be
divided in the marital estate, so it should remain intact to needlessly
dominate the world of philanthropy for years to come (see chapter 4).
Uglier cases occur, as with the Bosarges. Wilbur Bosarge got rich quick
through high-frequency trading and took his wife Marie on a spending spree
on art, antiques, three yachts, and thirteen homes. But when the
octogenarian billionaire left his wife for his twentysomething Russian
mistress, the result was "A High-Stakes Divorce Illustrates How the Rich
Play Real-Estate Tug of War," as the Journal headline read. The former
Mrs. Bosarge soon discovered she had no access to any of their 13 homes,
or their private island in the Bahamas, because "the Bosarges—like many
ultrawealthy people across the globe—own their homes through a complex
network of trusts and limited liability companies. Now that they are
divorcing, Mrs. Bosarge said her husband is using these complex ownership
structures ... to essentially eliminate her stake in the homes, and to prevent
her from accessing what she said is billions in cash and other property."31
The extremely complex details arise from the US state South Dakota wildly
loosening its laws around trusts, allowing trust holders to domicile property
from around the world, to hold it with near-complete anonymity, and to
even alter the trust terms without notification of those named in the trust.
The former Mrs. Bosarge may therefore fail to collect money even if
victorious in divorce court.
Then there's the kids. Elite youth attend Financial Life Skills retreats,
studying portfolio theory, debt management, and prenups, and above all
learning "how not to squander their fortunes." The issue is serious, as
surveys of rich families find almost 40 percent of millionaires give their
children unrestricted access to the kids' money, rather than putting any
brakes on it. Further, wealth research firms find "most millionaires today
plan to leave at least 75 percent of their estates to their children. The
number is highest for families with households worth $25 million or more,
disproving the widely held notion that wealthier families are more likely to
leave a greater share to charity."32

It can go well—consider LVMH, the great European luxury
conglomerate mentioned earlier, run by Bernard Arnault, one of the
megabillionaires who trades world's-richest-man status with Bill Gates, Jeff
Bezos, and Elon Musk. The business press recently ran a long article, "The
World's Richest Person Auditions His Five Children to Run LVMH, the
Luxury Empire," and it's exactly what it sounds like. Arnault is grooming
his adult kids to run various branches of the sprawling firm, even having
them weigh in on managers, and they share voting power on the holding
company that owns the conglomerate. When inflation rose steeply in 2022
and public resentment mounted with it, Arnault's oldest son "suggested
LVMH launch an ad campaign publicizing how much the company paid in
French taxes last year and the number of jobs it created ... His father took
the advice."33
Finally, before moving on to the big toys of real estate and travel,
consider one more feature of the high life that money can buy: an inner
circle of cringing ass-kissing sycophants. It is a fact that if you are very
rich, powerful, or famous, you will attract people who want to perhaps get
some of the money, get favors from your position of power, or take
Instagram photos with their famous friend. It means that sooner or later you
will be surrounded by people who tell you how great and smart you are all
day. Think about that experience. Sooner or later, you will completely lose
touch with reality and think that every dumb idea you have is brilliant and
no one is as good as you. Every very rich or powerful person experiences
this tendency, and some individuals may even have the fiber to resist it. But
life is long.
The effect is very real. Chrystia Freeland recounts in her terrible book
Plutocrats the experience of a US tech executive vacationing at a luxury
Four Seasons hotel: "The service was exceptional—at one point, as he was
sitting by the pool and dropped the spoon he was using to eat his melon, a
waiter instantly appeared with a choice of three differently sized
replacement spoons. The Silicon Valley executive said that readjusting to
ordinary life had been hard; he had become impatient and rude when
confronted by the slightest delay or discomfort. 'When you are used to

being catered to twenty-four/seven, you start to feel the world should be
built around you and your needs. You lose all sense of perspective.'"34
You can tell rich and powerful people have adapted to this bubble of
pampering and ball-fondling because anytime someone confronts them to
their face, they are stunned. Years have probably gone by since one of their
groveling staff dared to jeopardize their job and inner-circle position by
contradicting them. When Senator Elizabeth Warren publicly told off
megabillionaire media monopolist Michael Bloomberg during the 2020
Democratic primary debates, it was like he had witnessed time travel, he
was so dumbstruck. People who are critical of elites—whether celebrities,
billionaires, or politicians—tend to get tossed, and soon a powerful
groupthinking inner circle is in place.
This tendency is known for leading to many terrible state decisions
made by remote leaders who come to believe the pleasing claims of their
courtiers, from Bush's invasion of Iraq to Putin's invasion of Ukraine. But I
think it also explains how rich people can be reassured when they make
really gross decisions, like Elon Musk's blundering purchase and then
mangling of Twitter, or indeed his divorcing the mother of his children, who
was about his age, and then dating an actress fourteen years younger than
he, then another actress fifteen years younger, then a singer seventeen years
younger.35 Obviously the billionaire is aging while his shortlived girlfriends
stay the same age—something your friends will give you a lot of shit for,
but not if they count on one of your monopolies for a job. Indeed, when the
billionaire's texts were revealed during the lawsuit compelling him to buy
Twitter, they were pretty cringy: "You are totally right. I 100% agree with
you." "I'm ride or die brother—I'd jump on a grande [sic] for you." "I am
100% with you Elon. To the f—cking mattresses no matter what." "You are
the hero Gotham needs."36 The reality of climbing the economic ladder—
competitive ass-kissing.
No wonder therapists to the very rich often describe their clients' issues
with trust. One psychologist with numerous upper-class clients told the
Guardian, "I hear this from my clients all the time: 'What do they want
from me?'; or 'How are they going to manipulate me?'; or 'They are

probably only friends with me because of my money.'"37 Paranoia is also
common—some rich people pay for bulletproof bathroom shower doors.38
So really, the ruling class should have its wealth socialized just to help
their inner emotional well-being. Socialism is self-care.
Crashing Mansion
One of the main arenas for conspicuous consumption is the household.
From great stone castles to royal palaces to modern tech-mansions, the rich
have long been eager to show just how superior they are to the typical loser
living in a shack, tenement, or homeless encampment. And when you're as
rich as the owning class, and you have shallow friends to impress, the sky's
the limit.
The top end of the US residential property market is completely insane,
with over-the-top cutting-edge penthouses and enormous, elaborate Gilded
Age mansions. You can keep up with developments in this market segment
with the numerous luxury real estate listing services, including the Wall
Street Journal's Friday section, Mansion. Driven by a combination of elite
pride, gloating, and aspirational ogling, these media are how one can learn
about Hamptons homes with $30,000 spent on a single room—on the
curtains.39
Among properties large enough to have names, Casa Encantada is a
classic estate in the Bel Air hills outside Los Angeles. The property has the
distinction of setting the record for the highest-priced residential property
sale in the country—twice, in 1980 and again in 2000. Owned over time by
great capitalists like hedge fund boss Ken Griffin and hotel titan Conrad
Hilton, the most recent renovation required 250 workers of various
specializations. Beyond the gate and long driveway to the motor court with
fountain, the breathless real estate coverage describes the "40 rooms,
including three kitchens, or 60 if you included the servants' quarters, and
the walk-in silver, fur and wine vaults in the basement ... There were rooms
paneled in rare woods like English sycamore and black walnut and
furnished with eighteenth century French paintings, antique clocks and
centuries-old Chinese porcelains ... A silver tea service had been made for

the czar of Russia in the 1800s."40 The property was large enough for
guests to be "physically tired" after the full tour.
Or consider the once bohemian surfer hideaway of Malibu. For years
seen as a less-developed haven with less-crowded beaches than Santa
Monica, the area was "discovered" by software billionaire Larry Ellison in
the early 2000s, when he began collecting what would become "around 10
homes" in the neighborhood. Celebrities and billionaires followed suit,
driving beachfront home prices into the stratosphere. Venture capitalist
Marc Andreessen bought three Malibu houses for a quarter billion dollars.
Ellison used his enormous fortune to also buy up unassuming rustic local
businesses and turn them into chichi sushi restaurants and private clubs,
attracting Kardashians but driving out the sunburned California locals.
Now, residents complain that most fellow homeowners have two, three, or
four other homes and thus visit only occasionally. Even as prices have
skyrocketed, the town's full-time population has fallen by a large
percentage and school enrollments are less than half their level of twenty
years ago.41
Ellison, of course, is no stranger to evil land grabs—he bought a
Hawaiian island in 2013. On the island of Lanai, Ellison "owns nearly
everything on the island, including many of the candy-colored plantation-
style homes and apartments, one of the two grocery stores, the two Four
Seasons hotels and golf courses, the community center and pool, water
company, movie theater, half the roads and some 88,000 acres of land,"
leaving the "local population ... one whose economic future is heavily
dependent on his decisions."42
The Gateses bought a $43 million seaside estate shortly before their
divorce, with a "10-person Jacuzzi overlooking a fire pit, a long oceanfront
deck, limestone flooring, and a swimming pool."43 But the pinnacle of
today's real estate market, where properties are mostly high-end and
become glorified places for the rich to park their incredible wealth, is the
laughably gigantic property in the Holmby Hills named "The One" and
originally asking half a billion dollars. With twenty bedrooms (including
seven for staff in a separate structure), five elevators, and four pools (plus

the infinity-edge moat), the huge hyped monstrosity ended up not finding a
buyer even at a highly reduced price and sold at bankruptcy auction for a
mere $126 million.44 Other properties by the developer have fared better,
including a similarly huge Bel Air mansion that according to the press
"comes with two years of prepaid household staff."45
Meanwhile, New York City retains the highest concentration of
billionaires in the world, as the home of Wall Street and so much of the
world's media economy. There, Griffin bought an under-construction
penthouse for $238 million, setting a US residential purchase record. Built
"after the landlord evicted dozens of middle class tenants from their rent-
stabilized apartments," the buyer is not expected to visit frequently. Griffin
seems eager to soothe his conscience with large donations that have led to
the Whitney art museum naming its new building's lobby after him. The
notorious archconservative economics department of the University of
Chicago literally renamed the department after Griffin following a $125
million donation.46 Griffin earned $1.4 billion that year, and has said the
rich have "insufficient influence" in politics.
The Gateses' daughter Jennifer paid $51 million for a Tribeca penthouse
spanning three floors with the usual two dishwashers, wine fridge, and
separate private elevator. The building is marketed as "paparazzi-proof" due
to its punched windows and secure underground garage.47
Other modern NYC units come with a parking space, since Manhattan
is notorious for crowded streets. The cost: one million dollars. "When
someone is paying $50 million for an apartment, another $500,000 for the
luxury of not walking a block or two and having your own spot, I guess it
becomes a rounding error," says the developer.48 Another favorite of mine
is the rich 1950s Manhattanite who directed her butler to return to her
Hamptons estate weekly to dig up soil, for her Pekingese, Peaches, to poop
on.49
But the main destination for today's rich with cash to stash is
Billionaires' Row, just south of Manhattan's Central Park. Named after the
historic Millionaires' Row of stately properties on the east side of the park,
mostly built by the Gilded Age tycoons and since redeveloped, the new

developments tend to be unappealing, superthin, insanely tall residential
towers spiking from the city skyline like cell signal bars. Built with
unhinged levels of media hype, these towering, charmless buildings are
"gilded, gated communities in the sky ... built with a single constituency in
mind: the richest people on earth."50
Like many of the properties discussed here, these structures are
technically homes "but they are also investment vehicles for the superrich.
Some of the owners have never set foot in their apartments, viewing them
instead as one might a stock or an artwork from a great master—a vessel in
which to store wealth." This tactic is extremely common in the modern
housing market, and indeed is widely recognized to play a major role in the
grinding housing crisis in major American cities, where surprising numbers
of properties sit vacant as third homes, investment properties, or pure poker
chips in hedge fund property speculation—all unavailable for any working
person to actually dwell within.
Buildings are "jammed with high-end amenities geared to the super
rich," like fifteen-thousand-square-foot outdoor terraces, sixty-foot outdoor
pools, saunas and steam rooms and basketball courts. But as another worker
is quoted in Doormen, "Most of them are not like us, they live here
sometimes, but they also have houses in London and Hawaii, places like
that, you know."51 One resident of a top-end New York building adds,
"Everybody hates each other here."52
Many liberal jurisdictions, like New York and London, have recently
required developers to include among their mega-ritzy luxury developments
some affordable units for normal people, to help cope with the housing
shortages racking urban markets. Developers obliged and grudgingly built
some middle-class-type units, but still wanted most of their buildings to be
the most profitable, high-end model possible, leading them to install special
separate entrances for tenants of the more affordable units that became
known as "poor doors." The Guardian describes a main entrance with
"luxury marble tiling and plush sofas, and a sign on the door alert[ing]
residents to the fact that the concierge is available. Round the back, the
entrance to the affordable homes is a cream corridor, decorated only with
grey mail boxes and a poster warning tenants that they are on CCTV and

will be prosecuted if they cause any damage."53 An agent flatly says the
separate doors are "so the two social strata don't have to meet."54
Other rich people have more classic tastes, preferring stately turn-of-
the-century New York City limestone buildings to weird hypermodern
towers, and thus find themselves buying town houses and merging them—
only to recreate the large Gilded Age mansions the buildings originally
were, during the first era of America's ruling class. The Times describes
these "trophy town-houses": "After spending decades doing duty as
schools, embassies, consulates, nonprofit headquarters, apartment houses
and the like ... important and irreplaceable buildings" are now being
advertised as "ripe for conversion to what they were in the beginning:
beauteous, commodious and expensive single-family residences."55
But if any place can contend with Manhattan as a headquarters for the
rich, it's the Hamptons, the Long Island beachfront communities a few
hours' drive from the city. There the idle rich have more country room to
create their visions for their homes. Which, let me tell you, are pretty
fucking bonkers. Mining billionaire Ira Rennert's Fair Field estate has sixty-
three acres, five buildings including a sixty-six-thousand-square-foot
Italianate mansion, twenty-nine bedrooms, three pools, a 164-seat movie
theater, and its own power plant.56
Another choice instance, regarding a banker's daughter in the 1890s,
from Gaines's book on the Hamptons:
Her gardens were so massive and complex to maintain that every
summer she imported thirty gardeners from Japan for the chore,
bivouacking them in a small tent city built on a remote corner of the
property ... On occasion, to impress houseguests, Adele would
change the entire color of a garden overnight, so guests would wake
in the morning to discover a garden of pink flowers where an all-
white one had been the night before. To achieve this, Adele's frantic
Japanese gardeners uprooted the old garden and planted thousands
of water-filled glass vials with cut flowers in them. Because Adele
was offended by the sight of the gardeners' toiling in her gardens,
her edict was that they had to work only at night. This made their

chores rather difficult, especially since the perfection of the gardens
was such an obsession with Adele that she decreed they must always
look in fresh bloom; so every night the gardeners had to deadhead
thousands of fading blooms by lantern or moonlight.57
Or consider Ron Perelman, the businessman who built a billion-dollar
fortune from the humble beginnings of his father's mere $12 million
fortune. His property, The Creeks, is the largest in East Hampton and
patrolled by armed guards. Because boaters on the adjacent lake can view
the property, Perelman demanded to buy all the rental boats, and when
rebuffed asked to purchase the store itself. Gaines relates that "since staff
turnover is high (mostly because Perelman frequently fires people), each
member of the corps of maids, cooks, handymen, cleaning and grounds
maintenance crews, and landscapers is asked to sign a confidentiality
agreement. It is also said that the household staff is asked to make
themselves scarce if they see Mr. Perelman in passing. Each Friday at a roll
call for the staff, a set of dicta and rules are handed out to every
employee."58
The estate had a storied history, but
Perelman wanted the legendary mansion stripped, renovated, and
put back together again from cellar to attic, including the installation
of new floors, walls, bathrooms, plumbing, electrical wiring, and
ducts for central air-conditioning—in about six weeks. Perelman
insisted that he be in residence on weekends to keep an eye on
construction, and during the week all the furniture in the house was
carried outdoors, covered with tarps, and then carried back inside
for him on the weekends. At one point nearly forty painters worked
in tandem on the house, the exterior of which changed color several
times over the summer until Perelman settled on light beige.59
Then there's Mark Zuckerberg's buying spree, occurring around the
time his Facebook social media platform was becoming associated with
online extremism, election interference, and failure to protect user

privacy.60 According to coverage in the business press, Zuckerberg "looks
to buy up neighboring properties to ensure control of his surroundings and
likes his homes to be enclosed by foliage to block views from onlookers ...
After buying his five-bedroom home in the Crescent Park area for about $7
million in 2011, he and Ms. Chan bought up four neighboring houses. They
paid more than $43 million for all four homes, far above market rate"
before razing them. "Real estate agents involved in Mr. Zuckerberg's search
were required to sign confidentiality agreements carrying clauses that
prohibited them from revealing Mr. Zuckerberg's identity or requiring them
to scrub images of properties from the internet." Considering Zuck's poor
record of protecting privacy for his billions of users, the Wall Street Journal
calls his zealous pursuit of privacy for himself "a tad ironic."61
More secluded settings are indeed harder for us proles to learn about,
but drama sometimes forces open a crack. When Mexico's state oil
company chief was wanted for fraud in 2020, he hid out in the southern
Spanish enclave of La Zagaleta. Considered "one of the world's most
exclusive residential compounds," the estate encompasses two thousand
richly landscaped acres with two golf courses. "La Zagaleta is patrolled
round the clock by guards and has fences with infrared sensors," and staff
"are strictly forbidden to talk about its 230 homeowners or their guests."62
The oil chief was only arrested when he drove off the estate.
Of course, the rich need help running these gigantic homes. Robert
Frank's book Richistan describes "butler boot camp" where trainees learn
the "Ballet of Service," a smooth dance-like choreography to "become
master at the care and feeding of the rich:"
"They learn how long it takes to clean a 45,000-square-foot mansion
(20 to 30 hours depending on the art and antiques) ... The rich, they
will learn, like their shampoo bottles and toothpaste tubes always
filled to the top. If their employers have four homes, chances are
they'll want their dresser drawers and bathroom cabinets arranged
exactly the same in every house, so they don't have to go searching
for their socks or pills. And they learn that the rich live in constant
fear of germs ... Most of all, the Starkey students learn never to

judge their employers, whom they call 'principals.' If a principal
wants to feed her shih tzu braised beef tenderloin steaks every night,
the butler should serve it up with a smile. If a principal is in Palm
Beach and wants to send his jet to New York to pick up a Chateau
LaTour from his South Hampton cellar, the butler makes it happen,
no questions asked."63
Senior household staff are today called "household managers," running
"family offices" to manage the details of millions in annual spending. The
training company also has a manual for principals to learn how to deal with
staff, which it calls an "owner's manual."64
And when it comes to building up these elite estates, anything goes.
Thus:
"Trophy trees" have become the new status symbol for America's
uber-rich, with wealthy landowners paying hundreds of thousands of
dollars to have the prized plants shipped into their yards by
helicopters, barges and flatbed trucks ... While most wealthy
citizens can buy a Bentley or a Rolex, trees—much like original
artworks—are one-of-a-kind objects that allow their owner to
distinguish themselves and advance their status. Like artworks, the
trees are aesthetically pleasing, but they also have the added bonus
of being able to signify the owner's environmental credentials and
their passion for sustainability ... Dozens of land-scapers can work
on any one job, and it can cost clients up to $250,000 for the entire
process ... When [landscapers] approach the original owners of the
tree, many are ecstatic about receiving tens of thousands of dollars
for an object they believed was relatively worthless. However, he
has found many who are unwilling to part with the plants ...
Workers ... often use a 300-tonne crane to move rip [sic] out the
trees from their original location. Given that some of the trees have
been in place for more than a century, their roots run deep and the
process of removal is at once extremely delicate and incredibly
hefty.65

Beautiful, precious organisms that take nature centuries to grow are
ripped out of the ground so they can be ornaments at the ruling class's
ornament-packed estates. Hopefully their spoiled kids at least get some
enjoyment from the Given Trees.
To Be, or Yacht to Be
When it comes to conspicuous consumption, sure you need your insanely
costly, uncomfortably slick-looking home. But what about when you need
to go out? Not on errands of course, your household staff and family
shopper will be taking care of that—and who cares what the help goes out
in.
But I mean out like joyriding. The yachts of today have gone far beyond
the classic sailboat schooners of New England aristocratic families. Today a
superyacht is defined as a private, professionally crewed craft longer than
eighty feet, of which there are thousands now on the seas, and their rich
owners don't much mind the reaction. The St. Barths Bucket yacht race is
held every year, including 2009 when the country was seething at Wall
Street and its rich proprietors after the enormous banking crisis the year
before. Fortune magazine called the event "a testament to tone-deafness
[and] megawealth ... If you have sufficient millions, it may not really
matter if your portfolio plummets. Nor may you particularly care if the
proles are offended by your profligacy."66
A top-end model today costs several hundred million bucks, enough to
build a couple hospitals, and is the length of a pro football field. Modern
units are designed as settings for luxury service, so a model that size may
accommodate up to a dozen guests in VIP staterooms but will also have
utilitarian bunk-bed dorms for up to thirty crew members, yielding a high
crew-to-guest ratio to keep the giant ship sparkling and the guests pampered
within an inch of their lives.67 The Russian oligarch Farkhad Akhmedov's
beast has a pair of helipads, a mini-submarine, and a pool across nine decks,
although his main goal is keeping it from his ex-wife.68
Shipyards catering to the top of the market have order books for
superyachts booked out to 2025.69 And increasingly, these yards are laying

down megayachts, luxury ships over 180 feet long, which can only be
serviced in certain specialized ports like Barcelona. The ships are so large
that they frequently require their own support fleet. The largest ships
especially, or those with a more traditional, sailing-based affectation, often
require whole additional craft trailing them as they party their way across
the Adriatic or the Caribbean. Jeff Bezos's gigantic new 417-foot
superyacht has a "support yacht" with its own helipad and extensive stores
and water toys, to keep the main craft looking tolerably modest. That main
craft cost the Amazon founder a monumental $500 million and created a
minor scandal when it was proposed to disassemble a century-old Dutch
bridge to allow it to pass.70
The yachting technological frontier remains in motion. In 2019 Daniel
Snyder, billionaire owner of the Washington Commanders, spent $100
million on the Lady S, with the usual insane features—a giant gym capable
of golf, basketball, and volleyball, a helipad, spacious guest suites. But his
boat made headlines as the first to have a company-certified IMAX theater
aboard. The manufacturer reported it added $3 million to the construction
cost and in the end, the workers had to build the theater first, then build the
rest of the boat around it.71
But just because you're a pampered plutocrat cruising the Caribbean
doesn't mean you have no problems. An entire consulting market, no joke,
now exists for educating yacht crew about very high-end art preservation—
because so many billionaires are buying precious, irreplaceable art and
putting it on their pleasure ships. Incidents include a champagne cork flying
at a Picasso, and a painting by Jean-Michel Basquiat that was "damaged not
by sea spray, but by breakfast cereal." The kids threw their cornflakes at the
priceless work, "and the crew had made it worse by wiping them off the
painting."72
The Guardian reports that when a client complained a Rothko
composition didn't fit in his yacht's grand salon, the consultant sighed: "We
turned the piece by 90 degrees. The artist would probably be turning in his
grave, but we took a deep breath and said 'It's your painting, do what you
like.'" Another had a Japanese modernist piece that didn't fit in the beach
club. "In the end we cut it up to make it fit."

Of course it doesn't end for the superrich with play boats. Private jets
have become perhaps the definitive symbol of modern wealth, bringing
precious exclusivity to help keep you away from the smelly masses, while
also maximizing your valuable time. This market has exploded in recent
years, motivated by a desire among the rich to avoid what they call the
"mosh pit" of boarding commercial airlines.73 Models vary for private
aircraft, with some pitched to the merely affluent who can share access with
a jet card, while the top-end Gulfstreams are wholly owned by
multibillionaires. The interiors are what you'd expect, with all-plane Wi-Fi
installed at a cost of $650,000, and press reports describing "bespoke
flatware from Muriel Grateau in Paris, V'Soske rugs or other luxe
features."74
This book will have a lot more to say about private jets in chapter 5, on
the stunning environmental cost of these toys and the consumption habits of
the rich generally. For now we'll limit ourselves to perhaps the ultimate
private jet experience: travel agencies are now booking trips around the
world wholly traveled in private aircraft. Over twenty-four days, travelers
will enjoy private flights around the world with luxury, hotel level
amenities developed by high-end resorts like the Four Seasons. The Journal
describes a couple touring: "In Bora Bora, the couple swam with manta
rays. In the Wadi Rum desert, they enjoyed a Champagne cocktail 'in the
middle of nowhere.' And in Siem Reap, they attended a private ballet
performance, hosted by the prince of Cambodia."75 Newer versions of the
itinerary include more remote destinations like New Zealand and the
Maldives, including two helicopter excursions, for the easy price of
$130,000.
And for luxury air travel, planes aren't the only option. For busy
commuters who want to decamp their Silicon Valley or Wall Street jobs to
their vacation homes without the bother, yet another industry has arisen to
cater to ultra-high-net-worth families: private helicopter travel. For
impatient Wall Street financiers especially, money's no object for a ride on a
Sikorsky S-76 out to their summer places in the Hamptons. Short rides to
the regional airports cost about two hundred bucks for an eight-minute lift,
where luxury SUVs await to carry clients to their terminals. "That Noise?

It's the 1%, Helicoptering Over Your Traffic Jam," wrote the New York
Times, adding the industry was "yet another manifestation of the income
inequality that has come to define life in a new Gilded Age." One passenger
flying to the Hamptons says, "The exclusivity of it, I like that."76
And yet the real monstrosity is yet another market serving the rich:
space tourism. Subject to an insane amount of hype, the space launches that
were once the pride of America's public sector are now the playthings of the
literally stratospherically rich. As noted in the introduction, three separate
billionaires now have their own space programs, some serving military
satellite launch clients, and others for space tourism—taking tiny numbers
of people sixty-two miles up, to the Kármán line at the very edge of space,
to experience a few minutes of weightlessness. The cost is unbelievable,
both in money and in emissions.
The market leader is Axiom Space, which uses Elon Musk's SpaceX
rockets to dock with the International Space Station, the publicly built
orbital research platform. Tickets for the roughly ten days in orbit cost in
the neighborhood of $55 million. As in so many cases of market
"innovation" (see chapter 4), the innovating is mostly about finding new
ways to exploit public resources. The New York Times reports: "NASA has
in recent years become more receptive to allowing companies to find new
ways to make money on the space station ... NASA set up a price list for
various commercial activities, including charging companies like Axiom
$35,000 a night for each tourist staying at a station for space to sleep and
the use of its amenities like air, water, the internet and the toilet. The largest
chunk of the $55 million ticket price is for the rocket ride, which Axiom
will pay to SpaceX, not NASA."77 Rich non-astronauts have already visited
in the past, as when the Japanese billionaire Yusaku Maezawa went up in a
Russian rocket in 2021.78
The big trial for Jeff Bezos's own Blue Origin tourism company came in
the summer of that year when after an endless media circus, Bezos and a
few chosen passengers successfully reached the edge of space and then
returned to sea level, over about ten minutes. The affair was seen as risky as
space tourism vehicles are subject to far, far less testing than components of

commercial flights.79 The later death of a billionaire and his entourage on
the Titan submersible shows the drastic potential of ruling-class thrill-
seeking, but Bezos was unscathed.80 Amusingly, one auction winner who'd
bid $28 million was a no-show due to a "scheduling conflict," a good term
for chickening out on a billionaire's roll of the dice.81
Richard Branson, UK billionaire and founder of Virgin Atlantic and
spin-off travel businesses, was excited to beat Bezos to the punch that
summer by launching his space tourism venture first, charging a quarter-
million dollars for the experience.82 He is said to have celebrated on his
private island in the British Virgin Islands, although the regrettable failure
of his Virgin Orbit subsidiary, which was to launch satellites from under the
wings of a modified Boeing 747, may have dampened his mood.83 Socialist
writer Luke Savage described these operators as "a class of people whose
fortunes have grown so incomprehensibly large they must now be spent on
yachts that contain other yachts and vanity expeditions in the thermosphere
because the traditional symbols of billionaire opulence no longer suffice."84
The basic picture is as clear as a classic painting on a superyacht. By
now the reader must see the regrettable necessity of throwing the rich
overboard.
Art of the Deal for Art
It's well known now that rich households are willing to pay stunning
amounts for fine art. A Warhol went for $105 million in 2013, a Francis
Bacon triptych for $142 million (it ended up on a yacht), even Norman
Rockwell's famous Saying Grace sold for $46 million. Art market analysts
note that the taste of rich investors in art is often more keyed to its expected
performance as an investment, but of course elite buyers also need to be
told they have impeccable taste. Some genres of art, like postwar American
art, French impressionist works, or paintings by Old Masters, have
incredible, competitive demand from rich buyers, while whole realms of
great art held in high esteem by scholars receive no bids.85
A truly classic episode in today's art market was triggered by a
nighttime attic fire at The Creeks, Perelman's infamous overbuilt Hamptons

estate. The fire caused significant damage to the structure, and various
expensive artworks were evacuated, although in protective "museum
quality" cases. The art never burned or got soaked in the water from the fire
hoses dousing it, but afterward Perelman sued his insurers, claiming he
"noticed some changes." He claimed one "didn't have its spark," adding, "It
just lost—it just lost its oomph."86
Richer still, Perelman's insurance underwriters, including at the great
Lloyd's of London, had to admit in court that "Mr. Perelman had been
allowed in his policy to set valuations for artworks he owned, a
consideration he had asked to be afforded 'as a collector,'" as the press
reported. "A collector with billions of dollars" would be more suggestive of
why this crazy policy was extended.
Similarly, casino magnate Steve Wynn was showing off his Le Rêve by
Picasso to his awful guests and put his elbow through the canvas. Wynn,
who has a diagnosed eye condition, then sued Lloyd's, who agreed they
were on the hook for the lost value of the painting but couldn't agree on
how much they owed.87 Ultimately the canvas was restored and Wynn sold
it to the financier Steven Cohen for $155 million. Picasso, a socialist
himself, would probably be just totally pleased.
But the daily reality of what the rich have done to art is bad enough. The
business press reports that a handful of ugly warehouse complexes now
have some of the best art collections in the world, because that is where the
owning class stores art bought as an investment. The utilitarian Geneva free
port zone, a maze of warehouses, railroad tracks, and barbed-wire fences,
contains "treasures from the glory days of ancient Rome. Museum-quality
paintings by Old Masters. An estimated 1,000 works by Picasso. As the
price of art has skyrocketed, perhaps nothing illustrates the art-as-bullion
approach to contemporary art collection habits more than the proliferation
of warehouses like this one, where masterpieces are increasingly being
tucked away by owners more interested in seeing them appreciate than
hanging on walls."88 Originally for storing bulk commodities like grain,
free ports are becoming "storage lockers for the superrich," even as actual
museums, where the public can view some of the human artistic legacy, are
under threat from budget-cutting austerity. The director of the Louvre calls

the ports the greatest museums no one can see, and confidentiality rules
mean that now little is known about where various beloved compositions
even are. The Times notes Picasso's Garçon à la pipe disappeared after
being bought in a Sotheby's auction in 2004 for $104 million. "Dealers
suspect a free port is its likely new home."
Stamping Your Classport
But of course, the rich lifestyle is about a lot more than just expensive,
extra-fancy versions of consumer goods we all buy some version of. Any
person of means will tell you they've learned money is better spent on
experiences and travel than goods, and travel itself is an indelible feature of
elite life. But it's a lot more than the summer trip to European tourist traps
that the average Joe counts himself lucky to get. C. Wright Mills wrote in
The Power Elite, "All over the world, like lords of creation, are those who,
by travel, command the seasons and, by many houses, the very landscape
they will see each morning or afternoon they are awakened."89
Consider further the practice of buying passports. Today fourteen
countries offer passports with a qualifying real estate investment. Spain's
property visa program, for example, has a minimum investment of
€500,000. Many more countries, including the US and most of the EU, offer
residence visas for non-property investors, which can frequently lead to
passports over time. A number of smaller states, plus Turkey, will directly
issue passports to property buyers regardless of residence. The Times notes,
"The picky passport shopper needs to consider price, each country's tax
system and the speed of its bureaucracy: Dominica is the fastest to hand
over a passport, and Turkey the slowest among nations that go straight to a
passport ... Wealthy Chinese are by far the biggest buyers of both visas and
passports, followed by Russians, experts say. There is also growing interest
among French citizens eager to avoid high income taxes and Britons
desperate to maintain their European Union membership."90 A consultant
estimates that 36 percent of UHNWIs (those with assets over $30 million)
have a second passport.

There's more, but this book only has so much space. The elite
consumption habits of the very rich are an object of fascination in media, so
you can always catch a cable TV show or YouTube channel that tours giant
coastal mansions or outlines the luxe features on new superyachts. With a
mix of stunned resentment and deluded envy, there will always be an
audience for the lifestyles of the rich and famous.
But let's remember the monumental opportunity cost of this
consumption. Every one of those million-dollar watches and $100 million
estates could have been spent on housing and health care for normal human
use. The US government has estimated that housing all America's homeless
would cost roughly $20 billion, or forty Bezos-yachts.91 Pouring resources
into rich-kid toys is the opposite of what a rational economic system would
be doing at this time of troubles for the world.
The rich have exploited us and the world's resources for a tremendous
fortune that has been largely squandered on flashy shit for shallow show-
offs. That money should be used by the rest of us. Who the "rest of us" are
is the subject of the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

H
CHAPTER 3
THE CLASSES
HIERARCHIES OF CAPITALISM
Of course, I have as much power as the president has.
—Bill Gates1
To serve is to rule.
—Motto, Groton School2
aving delved deep into the incredible hoarding of wealth at the top,
and the bottomless ocean of money-wasting conspicuous
consumption, the average Joe on the street might ask, "Where the
hell do I fit into this?"
Well, a ruling class needs classes to rule over, and that's what we turn to
now. Lower classes have a history as long as civilization and are an
enduring feature of hierarchical, class-based societies. Roman plebians,
Greek slaves, China's untold generations of poor farm families, the grubby
working class of Victorian England—there are endless configurations for
the lower rungs of society. But capitalism, like any system, has unique
characteristics of life for the less-fabulously-wealthy majority.
Of course, there are many valid ways to dissect and study a society, by
region or by race or by age or by gender. But the way economic resources
are distributed through a country, and how that puts different people in

social positions of power or submission, has a lot to tell you about what
happens in that society. Class is a lot more than a tax bracket; it is kind of
social world created simply by a few people being in a position to grant or
retract the ability of the great working class to make a living, and the
twisted relationships that creates among people.
This is a book on the ruling class, but here we'll focus on the object of
its power, which remains anyone who works for a living—the global
working class.
Time to declassify the class structure.
Bottom Dollars
Broadly, an observer of the economy can make out a number of social and
economic levels, not only based on how much money people have but how
they make their living. This book has so far covered the economics of the
richest households, whose members may work, and often earn gigantic
CEO incomes from managing large corporate entities. But primarily the
household incomes of these families are made up of income from property
—dividends on stocks, rent on residential or commercial properties, interest
income from big cash deposits, and capital gains from corporate stock
buybacks.
This is the crucial distinction between the rich, or the owning class, and
the rest of us. Most of us make our money from working, but for the rich
this is only sometimes the case. The ability to not just have a giant income,
but to have a giant income from assets your family already owns, is an
economically existential distinction. It's crucial to recall the numbers on
stock ownership, where the richest 1 percent of households owns 40 percent
of traded corporate stock, and the top 10 percent owns 84 percent.3 This
position of ownership of the productive economy, and the social and
political power arising from that, is what defines the ruling class, and it
goes back centuries to the advent of capitalism in the enclosure movement.
Economist Douglas Dowd recalls the origin of capitalism in "the
exploitation of workers whose farming land had been commodified by 'the
enclosure movement.' Those who had worked the land, free but far from

rich, were swept off the land ... and were transformed into desperate and
powerless laborers."4 The land became private property, its new owners the
ruling class.
Below the elite are various economic echelons that people often enjoy
smooshing together into a vague "middle class." Historically, analysts on
the Left have called the rest of society the "working class," which has the
advantage of suggesting something important—most families pay the bills
by working, earning wages per hour or salaries per year in exchange for
labor. The kind of labor varies greatly, but from elite software coders to
sewer maintenance workers, work is being done for an employer in order to
make a living.
However, many people—especially those who don't want anyone to
focus on the monumental wealth and power of the rich—prefer to blur this
simple distinction. While conservative supporters of capitalism and "free
enterprise" enjoy claiming they oppose vague "elites," these elites usually
turn out to be various nonconservative middle-class people, like college
professors and media figures. An actual billionaire may be thrown in if they
aren't conservative, like George Soros or Tom Steyer.
These voices also like to suggest the main class difference is between
blue- and white-collar work, roughly manual labor and intellectual work.
And indeed, there is a dramatic difference in the daily work lives of a
worker manipulating a spreadsheet in a climate-controlled office and a blue-
collar worker toiling to clean a hideous "fatberg" of congealed material in a
sewer under our feet, or climbing overhead to mind-bending heights on cell
phone towers taller than skyscrapers with little protection.
But for all their major differences, blue-collar and white-collar workers
all have one pivotal thing in common: the threat of a pink slip. Anyone
working for one of the enormous companies that dominate most economic
sectors can be laid off in the event of a recession or other retrenching, no
matter how important your work is or how well you're paid for it. The exact
details of how to define classes remains a fluid debate.5 But fundamentally,
anyone in the white-collar or blue-collar working class, however exactly
you define them, is at the mercy of the boss and the company's quarterly

profit-per-share targets. This is why class is a useful concept—as researcher
Katie Quan has said, "Not to think in terms of class is unfortunate, since no
matter what our ideological persuasion may be, class analysis gives us a
way of viewing the world that identifies power relationships. It clarifies
who has power."6
Class shouldn't be so controversial—capitalists talk about it all the time.
When told one of his schemes to crush competitors was illegal, early
railroad monopolist Cornelius Vanderbilt memorably said, "What do I care
about the law? Hain't I got the power?"7 A century later, PC operating
system monopolist Bill Gates said, "Of course, I have as much power as the
president has."8
The Marxist economist Douglas Dowd addresses the question of what
power is: "The short answer is that social power is held by those who
control what is ... most valued in their society ... Control over the means of
material survival has placed its possessors at the center of power in all
societies. In the modern world the key has been private ownership and
control over the means of production; the very definition of capitalism."9 C.
Wright Mills wrote in his famous book The Power Elite that "Class
consciousness is not equally characteristic of all levels of American society:
it is most apparent in the upper class ... Those of the upper strata ... if only
because they are fewer in number, are able with much more ease to know
more about one another ... and thus to be conscious of their own kind. They
have the money and the time required to uphold their common standards."10
And while liberal social analysis often relies on a pluralist approach,
seeing companies and workers as just a few among many social groups
deserving an equal political hearing, in fact the interests of the workforce
and the business community are almost entirely irreconcilable—a raise for
the workers means a cut in company profit. Sociologist Erik Olin Wright
observed in Understanding Class that "the economic advantages people get
from being in a privileged class position are causally connected to the
disadvantages of people excluded from those class positions ... [T]he rich
are rich in part because the poor are poor; the rich do things to secure their
wealth that contribute to the disadvantages poor people face in the world."11

All this suggests that regardless of the real divergences of blue- or
white-collar jobs, anyone below the owning class is truly working class. But
it also recognizes the owning class is in a position of major power over us,
who work for our damn living, and there are pretty big ramifications of the
concentrated ownership of wealth amassed by those at the top of the social
order. If the world's productive farmland, car factories, oil refineries, data
storage centers, and pharmaceutical patents are owned by a small minority
of rich people, it puts the rest of us into a position of almost inevitable
dependence. The huge majority of us don't have the land to grow our own
food or the ability to produce our own essential products. All we can do is
work for the firms holding these productive assets, essentially renting
ourselves to them in exchange for a paycheck. But not only are we subject
to firing at any moment, we're also unlikely to get the full value of our
labor since everyone else is in the same position.
This situation means competition among workers for jobs, which
suppresses pay and benefits for everyone—demand too much, and some
other poor shmuck with kids to feed may underbid you. Private ownership
also means that a company (or its rich owners) can up and move their
factories or other capital holdings across the country or around the world.
The owners therefore have incredible power in their hands, power that
allows them to demand workers must submit to the worldwide workplace
hierarchy where the ruling class of shareholders hires a CEO to tell
managers to tell workers what to do.
Many supporters of capitalism don't see this as a problem, since
multiple employers exist and anyone can always start their own business.
However, thanks to neoliberal deregulation in the 1980s and '90s, many
industries are more and more monopolized, limiting employment options.
Further, starting your own business of any size means competing against
these giants, and often requires a bank loan, banks being businesses with
stockowners just like other companies. These facts put workers, whether
educated professionals or toiling laborers, in a vulnerable position relative
to the rich owners of productive property (what economists call capital).
So while conservative thinkers behold the labor market and see freedom
and liberty, in fact we are in a position of stealth domination by the rich

who own so much of our world's resources. I wrote a whole book taking up
the question of capitalism and freedom in detail, but suffice it to say that the
realistic life options for the average jerk on the street is utterly dwarfed by
the wide range of action available to the gigantic corporations and rich
family fortunes that tower over us.12 It's difficult to seriously claim that
people are free when they're subject to sudden decisions that can put them
out of a job, or into a worse or more dangerous one, based on a rich man's
whim. And in markets, "there is something wrong when people have vastly
different numbers of dollar ballots to cast in market elections," as the great
socialist economist Robin Hahnel wrote, leading medicine to provide more
cosmetic surgery for shallow rich people and less basic medical care for
poor families, who lack the dollar votes to make it economical.13
Unprofessional
The blue- and white-collar split does matter, even if the fundamental
distinction is between those whose income comes from work and those
whose income comes from property. For example, the blue-collar working
class has been devastated by the outsourcing of industrial manufacturing
from the US and other developed countries. In the developed world,
employers may have to pay for outrageous luxuries like health insurance,
and in the 1980s and '90s moved production to developing countries with
far lower pay expectations. Free trade deals greatly eased the process for
global companies to "offshore" or "internationally outsource" production,
and the trend became enormous—a study by Harvard Business School
found 84 percent of a very large sample of US firms moved production
offshore in 2011.14
The loss of millions of good-paying manufacturing jobs has just utterly
destroyed working-class communities around the world, including in the
US. These are the parts of the country being decimated by fentanyl and
other opiates, the ones without any realistic economic opportunities to keep
people off the street. In 1995, when the process was in full swing, the
corporate magazine Businessweek noted that "of course, companies always
try to restrain labor costs to maximize profits. But when unemployment

falls, they're usually forced to raise wages to attract and retain employees.
That's not happening this time," because companies "have access to ...
pools of cheaper labor in other parts of the globe."15 Over time,
professional-class jobs like accountancy and engineering have become
vulnerable to the process as well.
But the visible distinction between white- and blue-collar work has
created opportunities to blur the much more profound distinction between
the ruling class and working class, and allows supporters of the status quo
to give great prominence to intra-working-class divisions. For example,
during the first year of COVID the Wall Street Journal called the blue-
collar/white-collar split a "Deep Divide Between Haves and Have-Notes."16
When the COVID-19 epidemic hit, many office workers could work from
home, submitting work online and meeting through videoconferencing
software. Working-class people, from cashiers to meat plant workers to bus
drivers to utility workers, stayed on the job and often paid with their health
or their lives.
Some observers have developed different terms for the blue-and white-
collar strata within the working-class population. The term "professional-
managerial class" is sometimes used to refer to better-paid workers who
often hold a college degree or other credential proving the possession of
skilled knowledge. The expression indicates their positions as professionals
—doctors, lawyers, engineers, professors, scientists—or working in
management, that echelon of business employees who work for the business
owner but give orders to the rest of the workforce. This PMC is then
contrasted with the more common use of working class: those doing more
physical work or considered to be less skilled (or anyway not requiring a
formal degree, although often an extreme amount of work knowledge and
training is involved).
The sadly late socialist writer and cocreator of the PMC concept,
Barbara Ehrenreich, had this to say about the professional-managerial class
in her book Fear of Falling: Professionals often believe their education and
skills put them on track to climb a ladder into the rich class, but

the professional middle class is still only a middle class, located well
below the ultimate elite of wealth and power. Its only "capital" is
knowledge and skill, or at least the credentials imputing such skill
and knowledge. And unlike real capital, these cannot be hoarded
against hard times, preserved beyond the lifetime of an individual,
or, of course, bequeathed ... Whether the middle class looks down
toward the realm of less, or up toward the realm of more, there is the
fear, always, of falling.17
As recognition has spread among the public of the astronomical riches
and overwhelming influence of the ruling class, there has been a growing
admission among prominent media that perhaps there is class conflict after
all, but it is only among these two strata, the manually laboring working
class and the college-educated professional class. And there are, as we've
already seen, real differences beyond work conditions, as anyone who has
worked in both levels can tell you. But the people claiming a great clash
between educated and non-college-educated middle-class families are
usually conservatives and liberals who support private property and
capitalism, and who usually discourage class-based thinking. They seem to
have discovered their inner Marxists now that the rich are nearly universally
seen as too loaded and powerful, and would probably like to redirect our
significant class resentments. Divide and conquer has been a formidable
tool historically and today.
This strategy also draws on people's desire, in our current economic
system, to feel like they have people to look down on, to prove they are not
the losers of society. The "middle class" term encourages people to think
they're not in the bottom rungs, which speaks to an anxiety common in
hierarchy-based societies like ours. "Hey, I'm middle class, maybe not yet
rich but I'm not one of those loser poors." There's a strong social need for
that among many people, especially when every institution we have is
organized around who's giving orders and who follows them.
Further, this book has already mentioned the decline in US life
expectancy, a stunning development for a country so lousy with wealth. But
it's well recognized in epidemiological circles that this decline is mainly

among the white working class, confirmed by research in one of the most
respected scientific journals in the country, the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. In 2021 it published research confirming "life
expectancy in adulthood is falling for those without a BA degree," finding
the one-third of Americans with a bachelor's degree live not just more
prosperous but longer lives, and this was true regardless of gender or race.
Incredibly, "by 2018, intraracial college divides were larger than interracial
divides conditional on college; by our measure, those with a college
diploma are more alike one another irrespective of race than they are like
those of the same race who do not have a BA."18
Professionals with college degrees are also well known to have better
incomes, which makes a major difference in quality of life. Professional
jobs are typically less physically demanding than blue-collar work,
although PMC workers often have the heavily encouraged idea that their
comfortable but relatively modest incomes are just the beginning of their
upward climb. However, class mobility, as this idea is known, has been
declining in the US for years—the conservative Wall Street Journal reports
on a "substantial body of research" finding "at least 45% of parents'
advantage in income is passed along to their children, and perhaps as much
as 60%."19 Children in poorer families are commonly in poor health, which
is well established to have lifelong effects on both adult health and
economic outcomes—slum housing, for example, is far more likely to
contain lead paint and water pipes, which do long-lasting damage to
juvenile nervous systems and brain development. Asthma is far more
common among poorer households whose kids inhale mold, dust mites, and
other harmful domestic toxins in poorly maintained or cleaned housing.20
Ironically, class mobility is now lower in the US than in the countries of
Scandinavia, which, despite often being insulted for being too socialist,
invest heavily in public goods like quality education and health care, which
improve mobility.
Despite it all, class mobility retains a mystique, especially in the US,
and college plays arguably the central role in that mythology. Colleges
today are encouraged to have first-generation college students among their
graduating classes, and education can enable a working-class kid to become

a professional-class adult, if they wish. The admissions process is fraught
for professional families, with great pressure to get their child into the right
school, and beyond the specific category of racial preferences through
affirmative action (now ended anyway by the Supreme Court), admissions
and college success have been broadly seen to be a meritocracy, similar to
the market itself.
Which is why the Varsity Blues scandal was such a psychological blow
to the professional class. A college consultant ran a business getting kids of
wealthy families into prestigious schools on fraudulent grounds. Methods
included cheating on tests using special accommodations, fake athletic
backgrounds to get sports scholarships, and sometimes bribing coaches. The
consultant was recorded on an FBI wiretap saying to a complicit parent
living on the coast, "I'll make them a sailor or something, because of where
you live."21 Because some of the parent clients were famous celebrities and
the truly wealthy, the scandal caught especially big headlines. The $25
million fraudulent business led to a modest prison sentence.
But the case also exposed how colleges themselves badger wealthy
families for fundraising, blurring the line between legal collegiate donations
and bribes. The significance of this came out in a new research report on
college admissions using an enormous dataset from the most prestigious
schools, including the Ivy League, Stanford, Duke, MIT, and the University
of Chicago, covering half a million applicants. It found, as the New York
Times summarized, even among students with the same test scores,
"children from families in the top 1 percent were 34 percent more likely to
be admitted than the average applicants, and those from the top 0.1 percent
were more than twice as likely to get in ... [C]olleges gave preference to
the children of alumni and to recruited athletes, and gave children from
private schools higher nonacademic ratings."22 The result shows "how
America's elite colleges perpetuate the intergenerational transfer of wealth
and opportunity ... [T]hese policies amounted to affirmative action for the
children of the 1 percent, whose parents earn more than $611,000 a year."
Public universities were found to be much more fair, but elite colleges play
a disproportionate role in government and corporate decision-making—
while less than 1 percent of US college students attend the top twelve

schools, 13 percent of the top 0.1 percent of earners attended them, along
with 12 percent of Fortune 500 senior executives and a quarter of the US
Senate.
After college, your life as a consumer may also be dramatically easier if
you come from a more affluent middle-class background. The business
press has reported for years on CLV—consumer lifetime value. This is a
class of measurements used in the business world that employs various
economic and behavioral cues to sort consumers into different categories.
Companies in turn base their offers of service and pricing on these
categories. If you have a smart-phone or bank account, you have at least a
couple of these ratings, and like the various competing corporate credit
scores each one of us is so lucky to have, these things shape your consumer
options, like credit card perks or upgrade options for airline seats. If you
call to complain frequently, if you make a lot of returns, if you wait for
things to go on sale before buying, you may be considered a "costly
consumer" with too low of a lifetime value to the company to be worth
catering to—your calls will go to the lowest-rated centers and have the
longest wait times. Some of the systems assume married people are better
customers, some assume the opposite, and of course your score is secret and
not available to you. The business press quotes a Wharton School marketing
professor who comments, "Not all customers deserve a company's best
efforts."23
This is the real economics of class levels. Other works on the subject
are playful treatments of mostly personal class signals, like Paul Fussell's
enduringly popular book, Class. Still surprisingly current on campuses, it
describes how to tell a middle-class person from a working-class person,
mostly using clothing and media cues. It has a funny appendix including
exercises challenging you to rank people or households by visible class
signals, mainly relying on broad class stereotyping and a monumental
snobbishness.24 While very entertaining and a popular favorite, it is the only
book on the subject of class I have ever read with no economics in it,
although it is rich on the cosmetics of class hierarchies.
Blue- and white-collar details aside, the basic reality of concentrated
property, property needed by living humans in order to produce the needs of

life, creates the fundamental class dynamic of today. Workers getting a pay
raise often comes with a fall in the value of their employer's stock, since the
company will be less profitable going forward because a few more pennies
will be going to the working class. This means, in short, that there is a
relation of enduring class conflict in capitalism, between the rich who own
the economic means of production, and various tiers of working people who
have the choice of working for them, or watching the kids starve. Now
that's a class line.
Don't take my word for it! It was the great Warren Buffett,
multibillionaire and one of the world's richest men, who frankly admitted,
"There is class warfare, all right, but it's my class, the rich class, that's
making war, and we're winning."25
Buyer's Remorse
So far this discussion of the classes has focused on the distribution of
wealth and its consequences for everyone else. But this owning class needs
to be connected to the one institution that's a match for global corporate
power—the state.
It's an easy connection to draw. Historically, the governing elites of
many civilizations have been synonymous with wealth—John Kampfner
notes in his sweeping book on the rich throughout history that the word
"rich" shares an Indo-European root word with the Latin term rex and the
Sanskrit rajah, both meaning "king."26 Early monarchs used their control of
the state to monopolize economic resources (mainly land- and slave-based
in that era), and systems like feudalism were based on parceling out local
control over portions of their lands to nobles or aristocrats who in turn ruled
over the luckless peasants. Thorstein Veblen observed that this means the
rich are naturally conservative, since they benefit the most from current
arrangements and have the most to lose if they are changed in some way.27
The United States, since its origins the most thoroughly capitalist
country in the world, shows how much power free markets can create for
the rich owners of big firms, but also how completely controlled by money
and commerce a government can be. The country's first chief justice of the

Supreme Court, John Jay, wrote: "Those who own the country ought to run
it."28
With the advent of industrial capitalism in the 1800s, incredible
economic power independent of the state emerged, to such an extent that by
the late nineteenth century, figures like John Rockefeller and Cornelius
Vanderbilt could fully control corrupt state legislatures, buy judges' rulings
with favors, and largely write legislation as needed—although the main
goal, especially in countries like the US that have little precapitalist history,
was to keep the state from meddling in markets, or worse, blocking the
consolidation of markets into gigantic private empires like Rockefeller's
Standard Oil. Once the markets are monopolized, sure, some state
regulation is pleasing to the rich, as its costs are easily met by the
incumbent titanic firms but are burdensome to upstart competitors. Matthew
Josephson's The Robber Barons recounts how early railroads protected their
regional monopolies—their owners "went to the state or national capital
with a valise of greenbacks; or ... sat directly in Congress ... giving out
stock to other Congressmen that they might be prompted to look after their
own property. [California rail baron] Collis Huntington, to be sure, was a
subtle master, who whenever possible secured signed evidence, such as
canceled checks given in payment, so that the men involved were 'ever
afterward my slaves.'"29
Sociologist Stanley Aronowitz wrote that "the term ruling class signifies
the power bloc that at any given historical period exercises economic and
political dominance ... over the society as a whole and over the class within
which it functions ... [T]he dominant fraction of capital tends to play the
leading role together with the top layer of the permanent political class."30
Likewise the socialist journalist Doug Henwood defines the ruling class in
Jacobin magazine as that "politically engaged capitalist class, operating
through lobbying groups, financial support for politicians, think tanks, and
publicity, that meshes with a senior political class that directs the machinery
of the state ... [W]e shouldn't underestimate the importance of the political
branch of the ruling class in shaping the thinking of the capitalists, who are
too busy making money to think much on their own or even organize in

their collective interest."31 Henwood's point speaks to how fundamental a
firm control over the government is to any ruling class.
In the industrial revolution of the latter 1800s, the original monopolists
like Rockefeller and J. P. Morgan, along with their political counterparts
from President McKinley to Ronald Reagan, were mostly WASPs—a term
used to refer to the ruling class being dominated by white Anglo-Saxon
Protestants. Henwood argues in Harper's that for all their crimes here and
around the world, the WASPs had at least the virtue of taking a long-term
view of their possessions; today's ruling class, while more diverse, has no
such overarching project besides enrichment. This reminds of C. Wright
Mills's point that "no matter what its pretensions, the American upper class
is merely an enriched bourgeoisie ... [T]hey cannot invent an aristocratic
past where one did not exist."32 The WASPs did try though—Henwood
notes the famous slogan of Groton, the hyper-elite Massachusetts boarding
school that taught corporate and political elites from FDR to the Bush
dynasty, is Cui servire est regnare: "To serve is to rule."33
However, this overlap of state and capital often leads misguided
supporters of capitalism, like today's libertarians, to chalk up any
monopolies in the economy to "crony capitalism"—government figures
instituting laws or regulations that put an industry under the control of one
person or company that is politically allied with them. This is indeed a quite
common phenomenon in the world today, especially in the developing
world, as chapter 6 will explore. But there were no regulations giving
Rockefeller the insane power of an oil monopoly, no senator gifted
Carnegie his near-monopoly in steel, and no regulation granted Google its
mobile search monopoly. Natural market forces operating in gloriously
unregulated businesses led to these monopolies and oligopolies, through
well-known market dynamics like economies of scale, network effects, and
the lasting appeal of market power.34
Much has been written on the fascinating reasons capitalist competition
leads to market consolidation and monopoly, and the endnotes for this
section include great reading on the subject. But for the moment suffice it to
say, as the great socialist writer and critic of totalitarianism George Orwell

did, that "a return to 'free' competitions means for the great mass of people
a tyranny probably worse, because more irresponsible, than that of the
State. The trouble with competitions is that somebody wins them.
[Prominent conservative economist] Professor Hayek denies that free
capitalism necessarily leads to monopoly, but in practice that is where it has
led."35 And within those towering monopolies, the workplace is a strict
legal hierarchy. As Ehrenreich wrote, "Some employers bar speech of any
kind with your fellow employees ... You probably had to pee in a cup to get
your job ... [Y]our purse or backpack can be searched by the employer at
any time; your e-mails and Web activity can be monitored."36
But in my view, the definitive story of the dominance of capital over the
state comes from the treasury crisis of 1894, when financial shifts had
undermined the US dollar to the point that the US Treasury had to acquire
fresh overseas gold reserves to back the currency. The tale is told by
Josephson:
In 1894 the Secretary of the Treasury, with Cleveland's consent, had
been compelled to go to Morgan to borrow $50,000,000 for the
purchase of foreign gold. Morgan had thundered "Impossible!"—
that is, save at his own terms, which he ultimately forced the
government in its extremities to accept ... By mobilizing a powerful
coterie of banks, life insurance and trust companies the Corsair had
succeeded in financing the government's needs and "saving his
country" at usurious rates ... But "saving the country" once had
been insufficient; the gold had been drained away rapidly again by
the great hoarders, the gold reserve had vanished anew. Cleveland,
under fire for his dealings with the banking consortium, had been
forced nevertheless to come, hat in hand, for a further issue of gold
bonds, in 1895, at terms imposed by the Morgan syndicate ...
Fearful of popular opinion, the President had resisted paying the
"pound of flesh" exacted. The story has often been told of how
Morgan, rebuffed by the President, waited alone and played solitaire
at his hotel in Washington, massively silent, stubborn in his certainty
—as the government's gold reserve sank to only a day's supply—

that Cleveland, having no other refuge, must in the end submit once
more to him, the master of Wall Street.... At a subsequent
Congressional hearing, asked the profits made from the affair, "I
decline to answer."37
What is political power? I put it to you it is being able to bail out the
entire United States government. Twice.
In the modern period, participating in politics takes resources—time,
money, and energy. Thomas Ferguson of the University of Massachusetts
refers to "the 'Golden Rule' of political analysis—to discover who rules,
follow the gold," in this context meaning "trace the origins and financing of
the campaign." Ferguson's main point is that "the investment theory of
parties holds that parties are more accurately analyzed as blocs of major
investors who coalesce to advance candidates representing their
interests."38 No sector of society has more time and money to invest than
the business world and great capitalists, but Ferguson suggested labor
unions could help regular people participate in the political process by
making it easier and more fun to invest time and energy in politics.
On the one hand, government power has the force of law, and states can
force capitalists to pay taxes or break up their corporate monopolies. Then
again, modern states often have strict legal limits for the power of various
state officeholders, from term limits to disclosure rules to the balance of
powers with other government arms. The power of money, on the other
hand, can grow without any limit and put just incredible power in the hands
of its owner. If you're a megalomaniac who wants power, sure you could
join the state and have very real but limited power. Or you could become a
billionaire and buy your own news networks and newspapers, shaping the
ideas people hear, and then move your wealth around the world when a
state displeases you (rewarding another one that wouldn't dare tax your
ninth vacation home in the process). This ability to yank money away from
states with displeasing governments, or "capital flight," is itself a major
check on any political success by the Left; at the first sign of social
democracy, the ultrarich can sell off a country's bonds and currency to crash
its growth prospects.

When the enormous housing bubble exploded in 2008 and touched off
the greatest financial crisis since the Great Depression, it became a lasting
source of public bitterness when Congress and the Federal Reserve ran
gigantic bailout programs for the huge, deregulated banks that had placed
bad bets on the market. The megabanks, as they are known, were far too
large to be allowed to default (which would have resembled the events of
the 1930s), but rather than break them back up or nationalize them the
government gave them over $700 billion in bailout money, plus years of
cheap loans from the Fed, while the public received little beyond
unemployment checks in the resulting deep, long recession.
The bailout was arranged by the banker-run Treasury Department of the
George W. Bush administration, but was continued by Barack Obama.
When Obama used harsh terms to criticize Wall Street's reckless housing
bets at a time of growing public resentment, Wall Street traders who had
contributed to his campaign openly used the term "buyer's remorse"—we
invested in this guy, and he's saying rude things!39 The fact that he
sustained their bailouts and let Congress, where the industry has great
influence, write their own reregulation apparently wasn't enough to make
the deal worth it.40 At this time Businessweek ran the headline "Finance
Executives Are Confused About Why the Nation Loathes Them."41 In the
end, both political parties remained dependent on Wall Street, whose donor
role only grew in the years after the huge crash. Unsurprisingly, little was
done to seriously impinge on their power and privilege.42
When a new, smaller but still important set of regional lenders imploded
due to abrupt depositor flight in 2023, a similar political response occurred.
Many of these banks catered to cash-rich venture capitalists in the tech
sector, and with them teetering in the midst of bank runs, the FDIC—the
government-run deposit insurance program—announced it would waive the
historic deposit cap of $250,000. Writer Nathan Robinson observed in a
headline for the socialist magazine Current Affairs that "Every Libertarian
Becomes a Socialist the Moment the Free Market Screws Them."43
And in the nuts and bolts of the Republic, money is a dominating force,
especially following the Supreme Court's infamous Citizens United ruling

in 2010, which allowed unlimited contributions and spending by super
PACs in political campaigns. Since then, it has been up to invaluable
nonprofits like the Center for Responsive Politics to allow the public to
keep track of who has paid money to which politician's campaigns. Using
this data, it was revealed in 2021 that "a dozen megadonors and their
spouses contributed a combined $3.4 billion to federal candidates and
political groups since 2009, accounting for nearly one out of every 13
dollars raised," as the New York Times summarized.44 The biggest single
spender was the media monopolist, billionaire, former New York City
mayor, and monumental asshole Michael Bloomberg, who spent $1.4
billion. Although a full billion of that was on his own vanity presidential
campaign.
Developments like these led the popular socialist senator Bernie
Sanders to ask Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen in a congressional hearing,
"In your judgement, given the enormous power held by the billionaire class
and their political representatives, are we still a capitalist democracy or
have we gone over to an oligarchic form of society in which incredible
enormous economic and political power now rests with the billionaire
class?" Yellen declined to answer directly.45
Socialist philosopher Olúfẹ́mi O. Táíwò argues that institutions like the
state are subject to "elite capture," where "political projects can be hijacked
in principle or in effect by the well positioned and resourced ... Elite
capture happens when the advantaged few steer resources and institutions
that could serve the many toward their own narrower interests and aims ...
Elite capture is symptomatic of social systems with unequal balances of
power."46 Whole arms of state policy, from housing to foreign aid, get
hugely twisted by this process and often end up further enriching financiers,
and demoralizing activists. But there are ways to fight back.
Classes and Clashes
Many people in the lower rungs of the capitalist hierarchy don't especially
enjoy suffering in penniless poverty when they can see billionaires
squandering millions on luxury car collections and empty penthouses.

There's a perennial history of the working class organizing against long
odds to get some share of the owning class's ill-gotten gains—the central
force in those stories being the labor movement.
The historical pattern has been carefully analyzed, including by figures
who are thought to be the most capitalist. Take Adam Smith, the great
Scottish philosopher often considered to be the father of economics. Smith
held that markets are efficient in certain circumstances, but at the beginning
of the industrial revolution that would create the modern capitalism of
today, he already observed the power dynamics at play in the market:
Masters are always and everywhere in a sort of tacit, but constant
and uniform combination, not to raise the wages of labour ... Such
combinations, however, are frequently resisted by a contrary
defensive combination of the workmen ... It is not, however,
difficult to foresee which of the two parties must, upon all ordinary
occasions, have the advantage in the dispute, and force the others
into a compliance with their terms. The masters, being fewer in
number, can combine much more easily; and the law, besides,
authorizes, or at least does not prohibit their combinations, while it
prohibits those of the workmen.47
Other figures, less associated with economics proper but celebrated for
their perceptiveness and wisdom, reached similar conclusions. Frederick
Douglass, the escaped slave and self-taught intellectual, had this to say
about the industrial capitalism roaring up after the Civil War:
Experience demonstrates that there may be a slavery of wages only
a little less galling and crushing in its effects than chattel slavery,
and that this slavery of wages must go down with the other ...
[T]hose who would reproach us should remember that it is hard for
labor, however fortunately and favorably surrounded, to cope with
the tremendous power of capital in any contest for higher wages or
improved condition.48

Martin Luther King Jr., the great civil rights leader, described a similar
view of capitalism and class conflict in the twentieth century, and explained
the enduring appeal of labor unions to give an organized workforce some
countervailing power against the owning class:
The labor movement was the principal force that transformed misery
and despair into hope and progress. Out of its bold struggles,
economic and social reform gave birth to unemployment insurance,
old-age pensions, government relief for the destitute, and, above all,
new wage levels that meant not mere survival but a tolerable life.
The captains of industry did not lead this transformation; they
resisted it until they were overcome ... [The worker] was hired and
fired by economic despots whose power over him decreed his life or
death.49
That's the reason for the enduring popularity of the labor movement,
and why it's ruthlessly opposed by business and the ruling class—it's the
main weapon, historically and today, for scraping a share of the national pie
from the clutches of the elite. And especially in their ability to strike, to
refuse to labor and turn the wheels of society without proper compensation,
unions reflect too an understanding that while our property laws give
capitalists the final say over what happens in our society, in fact it is the
working class that holds the ultimate economic power. Without the workers,
no plant can run and no food can be grown, as strikes prove. But without
the CEO, the plant can absolutely still run. It is the working class that holds
the real power, and only the social structure of enforcement of property
rights can conceal that.
Modern unions have plenty of problems, but the movement is going
through a real renaissance, as we'll see in chapter 7. Yet unions have been
in brutal decline over the neoliberal period, with "union density"—the part
of the labor force represented by a collective bargaining agreement—falling
to 10.1 percent in 2022 after peaking at over a third in the 1950s, according
to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.50 In just the private sector, the rate is 6.2
percent.51 The beating down of unions, even as they remain popular, has

taken two forms: outsourcing work overseas when possible and, when stuck
with domestic workers, breaking their unions. Even Businessweek has
reported that "heightened corporate power has checked union growth ...
[C]ompanies also illegally fire union supporters in 25 percent of all
elections."52
Ehrenreich adds, "Management uses every means possible to intimidate,
isolate, and harass the union's supporters ... [M]anagement-run meetings
... may take place daily in the weeks leading up to an NLRB election ...
Harder to resist are the one-on-one and small group get-togethers, where
individual workers are grilled about their union allegiance for as many
hours as it takes. During one union drive among truck drivers, management
confronted workers individually about personal issues like their credit
ratings and family responsibilities ... [T]he union drive was defeated."53
By far the greatest and darkest account of crushing labor is Confessions
of a Union Buster, consultant Martin Levitt's book on his years breaking
unions to keep workers from getting pay raises, health plans, and vacation
time. The book is overpoweringly vile despite Levitt's professed remorse,
and must be quoted at length:
Union busting is a field populated by bullies and built on deceit ...
The only way to bust a union is to lie, distort, manipulate, threaten,
and always, always attack. The law does not hamper the process ...
[A] labor relations consultant ... goes to work creating a climate of
terror that inevitably is blamed on the union ... The enemy was the
collective spirit ... to be sure it would never blossom into a united
work force, the dreaded foe of any corporate tyrant ... My team and
I routinely pried into workers' police records, personnel files, credit
histories, medical records, and family lives in search of a weakness
that we could use to discredit union activists. Once in a while, a
worker is impeccable. So some consultants resort to lies. To fell the
sturdiest union supporters in the 1970s, I frequently launched
rumors that the targeted worker was gay or was cheating on his
wife. It was a very effective technique, particularly in blue-collar
towns ... We always called union leaders "bosses," for example, to

repel the image of the union as a true worker organization.
Meanwhile management was painted as humble, caring, righteous
... [A] common strategy among management lawyers, was to
challenge everything ... [I]f [a consultant] could make the union
fight drag on long enough, workers would lose faith, lose interest,
lose hope ... I began to understand that the success of my plan
meant, quite plainly, that management would continue to wield
absolute control over its workers—that lust for control is, of course,
what moved chief executives to agree to hand over control to us;
they swallowed their pride for a few months; then, when we were
through, they got us out of the building as fast as they could ... The
union doesn't get to come inside. The union gets to talk to the
workers only after they've heard eight hours' worth of the other
side, sometimes accompanied by threats, sometimes by tears.54
Playing dirty is common, including framing the union: "I dispatched a
contingent of commandos to scratch up the cars of high-profile pro-
company workers and to make threatening phone calls to others," then
blame the labor organizers.55
The battle for the dignity for labor goes on. For now, let's look at what
this system of antagonistic class interests does to our society in the
meantime.
The Wrong Side of the Tracks
All class-based societies have several features that distinguish life in the
various levels. Access to economic resources is the most obvious one, but
another enduring feature of hierarchical societies is class segregation.
Whether brought about through religious conviction, state policy, or simple
market mechanisms, the very strong historical tendency is for the various
classes to become physically separated from each other. This allows the
elite to avoid having to view the poor and the toiling working class, which
might make them feel uncomfortable; and also keeps the increasingly
luxurious insanity of the rich out of sight of the working classes, who might

be inspired to redistribute some of that wealth, through labor action or
politics.
Past societies, with ruling classes based on nobility or aristocracy, saw
elites ruling from remote country mansions or giant impregnable castles,
which historians say were always intended more to keep the local people
subjugated than to defend against foreign invasions. Other societies, like
those with major racial cleavages, would often develop very racially cued
segregation systems, such as the postwar United States where for many
years the Federal Housing Administration would decline to insure homes in
Black neighborhoods and private-sector banks practiced "redlining," a
policy of declining to extend residential mortgages in those same
communities. These practices are one of the main reasons why Black
household wealth is so limited today compared to white households in the
US.
These separate and unequal experiences occur throughout economic
life, not just at home. In 2015, LAX airport agreed to lease a facility to a
private company serving the affluent or celebrities willing to cough up
$1,800 to avoid long security lines at the terminals. And just like the Titanic
was strictly segregated into different classes with metal gates, today's giant
cruise ships have lately added new, very fancy and very exclusive separate
realms of their gigantic vessels with private elevators and set-aside bars and
restaurants, private personal assistants on call, and a separate, faster number
for room service. The New York Times calls it a "money-based caste
system"; a McKinsey consultant says, "Class segregation can create
something to which people can aspire."56
Robert Frank describes the Yellowstone Club, an elite ski resort founded
by a rich couple, where "members can ski more than 50 trails without
having to wait in lift lines or dodge the hoi polloi ... Legions of club staff
are always on hand to prewarm the members' ski boots, stock their homes
with groceries and flowers and, in one case, hand-slice special meat for
their dogs. Indeed, the big draw of the Yellowstone Club is the comfort of
knowing that everyone around you is wealthy."57

Steven Gaines observes some of the abrupt geographical class cutoffs of
the ultimate capitalist playground, New York City, in his book on the city's
high-end real estate market, The Sky's the Limit.
Some delineations of class and status are obvious to the eye—for
instance, the abrupt change north of Ninety-sixth Street on Park
Avenue, where railroad tracks rise out of the ground and the
pristinely kept co-operative doorman buildings of Carnegie Hill
suddenly give way to tenements and bodegas. But there are also
more muted differences. There is a "better" side of Park Avenue ...
On Central Park West apartments above Eight-second Street are
worth $100,000 less per room, for no discernible reason other than
being north of an invisible social demarcation that defines "too far
uptown." And while Fifth Avenue might be "the best address," if
your apartment is on a floor below the "tree line," usually the fourth
floor, and your view of the park is blocked by leaves in the summer
or bare branches in the winter, yours is a shabby lot compared with
the neighbors above you, whose apartments are worth hundreds of
thousands of dollars more per floor the higher you go.58
And as shown in chapter 4, class segregation is a major part of the
emergency plan for rich families. When COVID-19 shut down schools in
2020, black SUVs lined up in front of doorman buildings in the fine
neighborhoods of New York and Paris as affluent families prepared to
retreat to their country homes, remote ranch properties, or Caribbean
superyachts. All very far away from you grubby proles and your breathy
germs, segregated away from the better families of society.
That episode was not an anomaly. Media theory professor Douglas
Rushkoff, in his book Survival of the Richest, describes an alarming
meeting he was invited to with a number of billionaires who asked
questions about how to endure their expected future of climate disruptions
and worker uprisings:

How long should one plan to be able to survive with no outside
help? Should a shelter have its own air supply? ... Finally, the CEO
of a brokerage house explained that he had nearly completed
building his own underground bunker system, and asked, "How do I
maintain authority over my security force after the event?" ... They
knew armed guards would be required to protect their compounds
from raiders as well as angry mobs. One had already secured a
dozen Navy SEALS to make their way to his compound if he gave
them the right cue. But how would he pay the guards once even his
crypto was worthless? What would stop the guards from eventually
choosing their own leader? The billionaires considered using special
combination locks on the food supply that only they knew. Or
making guards wear disciplinary collars of some kind in return for
their survival.59
In Rushkoff's account, he argued for more prosocial perspectives like
using their wealth to help the world deal with these issues, and to treat their
guards as friends now to ensure loyalty later. "They rolled their eyes."
Besides the endless, ugly injustice of economic segregation, there are
other effects of this separation that are less immediately obvious. One is
that, as with all forms of segregation, putting walls between people (often
literally) means you don't see what's on the other side. This means people
just decide that things are very good or very bad "over there," depending on
their personality. Some rich or professional-managerial class families have
stunningly rosy ideas about how poor and working-class people get by,
soothing their own consciences with the easy belief that it's not so bad, and
if they're really poor they're used to it so it's not so hard for them. Sure, it's
based on nothing and is nakedly self-serving, but with class segregation
you're never confronted with any evidence to puncture your pleasing
illusions.
Others go in the opposite direction. Many middle-class households have
a gut-level, overpowering fear of what they imagine to be the nonstop
violence and crime of poor cities and neighborhoods. Because class and
race often correlate in many societies, as in the US, France, or the Persian

Gulf, there's commonly a racial aspect to this, but not at all universally.
Again, the barriers of segregation keep people from actually learning about
people in other classes, so you're free to project onto them and their
communities any soothing fantasy of plenty or wagon-circling fear that you
feel like.
A final note on economic segregation is that it's not just geographic,
although of course being on one or another "side of the tracks" was and is
the classic form, as Gaines describes. But there are others, one being
parallel institutions—children of the ruling class, and even higher PMC
families, usually avoid increasingly defunded public schools and instead
attend private schools and various elite academies. Mills wrote in The
Power Elite about the crucial importance of elite schooling: "The private
schools do perform the task of selecting and training newer members of a
national upper stratum ... It is in 'the next generation,' in the private school,
that the tensions between new and old upper classes are relaxed and even
resolved ... As a selection and training place of the upper classes, both old
and new, the private school is a unifying influence, a force for the
nationalization of the upper classes ... It is the characterizing point in the
upper-class experience."60
Obviously, these academies are typically located in the "better"
neighborhoods, which casts a long shadow itself. Places like schools or
hospitals or ball courts are where different kinds of people can mix and
learn about each other, so the fact that they are themselves sorted by wealth
really helps seal off any cracks through which you might learn how the
other half lives. Whichever half that is.
And, of course, the other modern definitive form of class segregation is
not just geographic, or finessed through private institutions, but vertical.
The stupendous heights of residential towers in the great cities allow the
owning class to really feel "above it all" and to literally look down on the
rest of us. Books like Gaines's on elite real estate leave no doubt that part of
the "prestige addresses" of big cities is not just the high-end zip code but
also the pretty incredible physical heights from which you may live your
stinking rich elite life. Thrillingly, you may be able to see to the other side

of the tracks, sure, but you usually can't quite make out what goes on.
Perfect.
At times class segregation does break down. In the summer of 2023, a
large leaky ship packed with desperate migrants and refugees went down
overnight in the western Mediterranean, as tragically happens these days as
people flee economic despair and climate change. Six hundred and fifty
Egyptians, Pakistanis, and Palestinians drowned. A nearby superyacht, the
Mayan Queen IV, owned by a Mexican silver magnate, was in the area and
was ordered to help the recovery operation. The crew spent hours collecting
refugees in the dark.61 The gleaming pleasure ship, usually full of partiers
blasting club music, picked up a hundred survivors and ferried them quietly
to port. The image is incredible.
This broad outline gives you a quick taste of how people picture class
today. While media reliably fixate on the gap between professionals and
manual workers, the bottom line is that anyone working for a living is part
of the broad working class, and those whose living mainly comes from
property portfolios are the owning class. The numerical facts are a tiny and
ever-further-away hyper-rich minority, and a stagnating or slowly declining
working majority, with that decline more or less painful depending on the
country's economic starting point.
When you recognize the incredible changes to the lives of most people
that could be achieved through even a relatively modest redistribution of
wealth, you can't really avoid concluding that the many many many people,
especially kids, who die as a result of the status quo were effectively
murdered. The continuation of any political or economic system that
consigns people to live far more grindingly poor lives than necessary is a
total godless abomination.
Next, we'll return to the subject of the ruling class and examine the
reassuring tales we're told to justify them. Quite a few alibis exist for the
rich, but none can get them acquitted of presiding over a class system that
sentences the working class to hell.
OceanofPDF.com

W
CHAPTER 4
THE LIES
THE RULING CLASS HAS NO ALIBI
Pioneering doesn't pay.
—Andrew Carnegie1
People charge Mr. Rockefeller with stealing the money he gave to
the church... but he has laid it on the altar and thus sanctified it.
—Pastor of the Euclid Avenue Baptist Church, Cleveland2
hen you bring up the rich, or the idea of a ruling class, there are
a couple of positive things about business and wealth that you
are 100 percent ironclad guaranteed to hear. These lines of
argument are abjectly predictable, yet people raising them reliably believe
they are brilliant freethinkers who are blowing your mind with their galaxy-
brain insights.
In fact, every era and ruling regime has its ideology, a set of socially
encouraged beliefs about how society should work, who should be in
charge, and what the relationships are between different people. Ideology
may come in the form of blatant state propaganda, a party line you're
expected to at least pretend to believe, or else. But it can also be a lot more
subtle, like an idea or phrase that's so reliably repeated that you come to
accept it as "common sense" even without a gun to your head.

But a lie's a lie, and brothers and sisters, we've been living with some
doozies. Time to blow away the fog of propaganda and have a look at the
man behind the curtain.
Taking a Living
Make a criticism of business, capitalism, or the rich, and some helpful
interlocutor will suggest you should be grateful to the ruling class for
providing you with a job. "Job creator" is an honored title in the US,
bringing with it the suggestion that were it not for your boss hiring you, or
some person with money putting their hard-earned cash into a business,
then where would you be? Struggling to stay alive catching fish in the creek
by hand in your reeking skunk-skin loincloth getting attacked by bears,
that's where.
The problem with this particular argument should be clear from chapters
1 and 3 of this book. Throughout history, whatever economic wealth is
around has been controlled by the ruling elements of society—state, church,
whatever. Agriculturally productive land, valuable slaves, important trade
routes, relevant raw materials, all belonged to nobles, kings, churches, or
merchants, putting everyone else in a position of inevitable economic
dependence. This certainly continues with capitalism today; as readers will
know from previous chapters, today's wealth is highly concentrated in the
richest households, including the productive economic assets. From large
farming estates to plastics factories to oil refineries to power plants to
banks, all are private property mostly belonging to giant corporations which
themselves are mostly the property of the top households, which own their
stock.
As we've seen, this is why the rest of us are members of the working
class, regardless of exactly how rough or cushy our particular jobs are. We
have no choice but to work for money to pay for necessities, and since
nearly all of society's productive wealth is concentrated in so few hands,
this obligation means renting yourself to the ruling class's corporate
property—getting a job.

So to celebrate the most loaded households by calling them job creators
is pretty rich. If anything, they are job hoarders—it is they who can decide
who will work the land, where on Earth factories will be located, and what
terms you must accept if you want a bank loan to start your own business.
They may claim "the market" makes these decisions, and there is some
truth to that, but as explored elsewhere today's markets are
hyperconcentrated, with only a few giant firms dominating most of them, a
condition called "oligopoly." Full monopolies themselves are common too,
from patented pharmaceuticals to utilities to network-based monopolies like
Google's YouTube.3 Monopolies aren't quite as common as during the
Gilded Age of the late 1800s, before antitrust regulation limited them, but
they've made a major comeback since these regulations were themselves
dialed back.4
We should note too that capitalists are quite proud of their job-
destroying—of the market economy's drive to find new, cheaper ways of
making products, poorer places to move production to, and new
technologies to replace workers with. This does indeed mean more efficient
production of goods relative to cost, but it also means millions of families
can find their livelihoods yanked away overnight. The loss of US
manufacturing and the descent of formerly industrial cities into stagnation,
unemployment, and drug abuse has taught the American worker one thing:
they are considered expendable.
Being in possession of the productive economic assets, or the "means of
production" as critical economists say, puts the rich and their CEO
representatives in the driver's seat of the economy, above all in the
dominant sectors of finance and tech. And for all their claims of great
investment risk, as business writers have observed, entrepreneurs "are
actually moderate risk takers when their leverage is set against the scale of
their wealth."5
As is often the case, people making libertarian arguments are really just
celebrating the powerful in society and deserve no more credit than the
intellectuals who defended past ugly systems of class power, from
feudalism to the slave economy to fascism. And as we'll see in the next
section, conservatives especially have a tradition of celebrating these people

not just for their alleged job creating but for being superior to the average
person in general.
The Best Families
Defenders of ruling elites have seldom been satisfied with the argument that
the rich deserve their wealth because of their grudging willingness to
provide jobs for everyone else. Very commonly, the tendency is to celebrate
the rich and powerful as being different kinds of people from the rest of us
—suggesting that they built their gigantic companies up from scratch by
their own almost miraculously superior knowledge, relentless drive, and
willingness to make tough calls.
The works of Herbert Spencer, for example, were the Bible of the
Gilded Age millionaire industrialists and financiers. Sometimes called the
Marx of the rich, Spencer claimed to extend to society the scientific insights
of Charles Darwin, whose theory of evolution through processes of natural
selection had revolutionized biology. Darwin claimed that competition by
organisms for the scarce resources of survival meant the preferential
reproduction of organisms well suited to their natural environment, leading
to the incredible variety of adaptations to every niche in the living world
today.
Spencer claimed to apply this watershed insight to social analysis. But
rather than organisms evolving by passing on traits suited to changing
ecosystems, Spencer claimed in the competitive economy human
individuals also had to fight for scarce resources, and those who became
rich were the best-suited to life. And not just best-suited, it also turned out
the rich were better people too, why just look at their elegant estates and
their many luxurious possessions and their fine diction.
Andrew Carnegie, the great Gilded Age steel monopolist, wrote, "While
the law [of natural selection] may be sometimes hard for the individual, it is
best for the race, because it insures the survival of the fittest in every
department," although he frankly admitted capitalism was creating "rigid
castes" and called the wealth gap "the problem of our age."6 Danny Dorling
draws out the unflattering implications of these views in Inequality and the

1%: "It is remarkable ... to have to acknowledge that some people really do
believe that some of us are actually of 'better stock' than others. They don't
say this out loud, of course. Animal breeding metaphors are hardly
acceptable as a way to talk about fellow citizens."7
More concretely, a paper for the Peterson Institute for International
Economics found that while "the superrich in the United States are more
dynamic than in Europe," still "just over half of European billionaires
inherited their fortunes, as compared to one-third in the United States."8
That's still a lot of inheritance going on, and for billions of dollars of wealth
that are desperately needed by so many people.
But what research we have does not suggest the rich are superior to us,
and in fact their wealth-drenched lives seem to lead in the opposite
direction. There is a common, and institutionally encouraged pattern of
carefully hoarding wealth and keeping it within the family, and putting
personal relationships, even marriage, beneath economic imperatives.
The heiress Abigail Disney wrote for the Atlantic about her inheritance
and how she was "Taught From a Young Age to Protect My Dynastic
Wealth," especially once she came into the money at the age of twenty-one.
She was "taught certain precepts as though they are gospel: Never spend the
'corpus' (also known as the capital) you were left. Steward your assets to
leave even more to your children, and then teach them to do the same. And
finally, use every tool at your disposal within the law" to keep the money
from the government, which will only waste it on health care for poor
people. She also learned to "marry people 'of your own class' to save
yourself the complexity and conflict that come with a broad gulf in income,
assets, and, therefore, power."9 She adds, "Having money—a lot of money
—is very, very nice ... I have wallowed in the less concrete privileges that
come with a trust fund, such as time, control, security, attention, power, and
choice."
And more specifically, we can turn to the body of rigorous social
science research on the rich, which tends to reveal that they are assholes. A
group of psychologists at the University of California conducted an
impressive series of lab and field tests to probe the moral fiber of wealthier

people and published the results in the highly prestigious Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. They found "upper-class individuals behave
more unethically than lower-class individuals," being in particular "more
likely to break the law while driving, relative to lower-class individuals,"
and in the lab "were more likely to exhibit unethical decision-making
tendencies," as well as to lie, cheat, and take goods from others.10 The first
two studies involved assessing the class signals of oncoming cars at a
California traffic intersection, and recording whether the driver obeyed
traffic laws and allowed a waiting car to pass or instead cut them off. The
second study replaced the second car with a pedestrian, with both studies
finding that after controlling for other factors like sex, age, traffic
conditions, and the time of day, "upper-class drivers were the most likely to
cut off other vehicles" and "were significantly more likely to drive through
the crosswalk without yielding to the waiting pedestrian."
In the lab, participants were given a survey to state their subjective view
of their personal social and economic standing, and given a well-established
exercise to heighten class feeling, by comparing themselves to people with
more or less money, education, and better or worse jobs. They then
participated in simple lab activities to gauge behavior—being offered candy
from a jar that the subject is told will later be given to a room full of
children, meaning the more the subject takes, the less remains for kids.
Richer subjects took more candy than lower-ranked subjects. Asked to
privately roll a die and told the highest-total roller would receive a cash
prize, upper-class subjects were more likely to lie to the experimenter and
report a higher total roll (all rolls were predetermined to sum up to twelve).
The psychologists then ask rhetorically, "Is society's nobility in fact its
most noble actors?" You can guess their conclusion. They chalk up the
shitty behavior of the rich to their increased independence, both from
economic need and from regard for others' opinions, as well as having the
resources to cope with any costs of their unethical behavior.
You can be high-class and pretty classless.
Atlas Ran

Many defenders of capitalism get there through the work of Ayn Rand, a
twentieth-century successor to Spencer and author of smash hit libertarian
books like The Fountainhead and Atlas Shrugged. Her very, very, very long
novels are thinly veiled libertarian critiques of the more regulated, tax-the-
rich capitalism of the New Deal era in which she lived. Rand's books are
Spencer pitched at a comic book level—the company executives run the
business, invent the actual products themselves, and work long hours to
almost single-handedly build their business empires. They are also
portrayed in the books as being very hot, and have cool affairs with edgy
sex.
Of course, in reality, when we say a CEO "built the company," we know
the building was put up by construction workers, the goods it produces are
made by factory workers, and the company is run by office workers. In
some of the novels, workers demand regulations or more money, and they
are depicted as not sexy, but fat and gross! The libertarian economist
Ludwig von Mises wrote to Ayn Rand, "You have the courage to tell the
masses ... you are inferior and all the improvement in your conditions
which you simply take for granted you owe to the effort of men who are
better than you."11 The Randian picture is a race of capitalist supermen,
who are creative geniuses who above all take the risks.
In the developed world, it's easy to become reasonably comfortable and
imagine yourself as owing your plush surrounds to your previous bold
gambles of fortune. But in real life, risk and peril are scary, no longer an
abstract idea but a real risk to yourself. So of course, when it came down to
it and the shit hit the fan, the rich hit the road.
The New York Times ran an unusually salty 2020 headline, "The Rich
Have a Coronavirus Cure: Escape From New York," finding "Broad-scale
emergencies never fail to reveal the fault lines in the American class
system, and it was suddenly clear that well-off New Yorkers ... had a
powerful inoculant: secondary real estate."12 The New York press reported
heavily on the rich pouring out: "The flight from New York was on. For
those who could afford it—like the rich who fled plague-stricken Florence
in The Decameron—salvation, it seemed, might be reached by the Long
Island Expressway. Or at least space, and possibly social distance from their

social inferiors. Doorman buildings all over New York had SUVs lined up
out front, lifeboats against an invisible virus."13
Indeed, an analysis of smartphone data found that the whole city's
population fell by about 5 percent, over 400,000 people, over those months.
And using census tract data, the pattern was clear: "The higher-earning a
neighborhood, the more likely it is to have emptied out."14 In more tony
neighborhoods like the Upper East Side, West Village, and SoHo, the
resident population fell by over 40 percent, even as other more middle- and
working-class neighborhoods saw much smaller changes.
Bloomberg News then memorably ran the headline "Quandary for High
Flyers: How to Travel Safely to Your Yacht," with the riddle: "A yacht
awaits at harbor, but how to safely reach it without risking contact with the
COVID-exposed masses?"15 But an enterprising firm, "spurred by member
demand," began offering private, pre-sanitized flights to Malta, the popular
elite destination with zero income and estate tax, and where citizenship can
be openly purchased for $1.3 million American. Once there, a "pre-
sanitized car" bears clients to their pre-stocked yachts. The firm notes its
Bombardier Global 6000 rents at around $16,000 an hour, plus fees for the
"jet-to-yacht service."
The obliviously selfish rich partying during a dangerous epidemic
scandalized and delighted the public when it regularly surfaced, often via
celebrity news. Nick Bilton thus reported for Vanity Fair on a Silicon Valley
source grousing that "all these rich people can't stop themselves ... They
just can't stop themselves from throwing parties and going on their jets and
socializing as if everything was normal." He recounted,
countless billionaires hitting the road, flying around the country to
wherever case numbers are lowest. One investor worth several
billion who has several homes told a friend—who then parlayed the
information to me in tones of shock and awe and more than a tinge
of jealousy—that he was in Miami when the numbers were lowest at
the start of the pandemic; hopped over to Los Angeles when Florida
got a bit dicey; and now that California is a hotbed, is in New York
enjoying the season's outdoor dining. Another billionaire in Los

Angeles has been hosting lavish dinner parties (no social media
allowed) where an on-site nurse administers 15-minute coronavirus
tests outside as guests drink cocktails, and allows them in to dine
once their tests come back negative.16
More seriously, the Guardian reported the rich "are understood to be
taking personal doctors or nurses on their flights to treat them and their
families in the event that they become infected. The wealthy are also
besieging doctors in private clinics ... demanding private coronavirus
tests."17 And of course in decamping, the rich and their staff often spread
COVID. A smalltown Hamptons volunteer firefighter and construction
worker told the press, "I don't fault them. They own property; they have a
right to be here. But it was definitely brought out here from them."18
Throughout the pandemic there was no more sought-after asset than
access to medical care. Many of us got familiar with clumsy telemedicine
appointments over the COVID years, but the rich had a totally different
experience. We're talking about "concierge care ... typically not covered by
insurance, gets around restrictions placed on doctors ... But it comes at a
steep cost: Prices for services can be two to three times higher, and that
comes on top of annual fees."19 In the earliest days of the sickness before
mass-produced consumer tests, you could pay $1,000 for a twelve-hour
result (plus another $1,000 to have the medical pro come to the Hamptons).
A high-end office call from a dermatologist charged a $5,000 fee, transit
included, typically by helicopter. Even dentists leaned into elite home
appointments, charging "$1,000 for the doctor to walk in the door, $500 for
a cleaning and $600 for a whitening, up from $200 in the office."
Chapter 3 described the class segregation typical of historical societies
and capitalism today. Ruling elites or today's owning class reliably live in
expansive conditions of almost comical sumptuousness, and above all in
"exclusive" settings—where everyone else around you is from similar
economic backgrounds. White-collar and blue-collar neighborhoods are
sorted through simple market prices, but the effect is to frequently wall off
different walks of life from one another. These patterns, interesting in

themselves, take on renewed importance in conditions of social emergency
like the pandemic.
Once isolated in their deluxe ranches, posh vacation estates, and British
castles, the world's ruling class had to pass the time too. The New York
Times reports an in-home, deluxe manicure-pedicure cost $125 during
COVID, far more than usual, while concierge-style one-on-one coaching
and mentoring for kids was $250 for a ninety-minute session.20 Meanwhile
thousands of fundraisers were running on GoFundMe.com for groceries and
rent for the working class. Over $100 million was raised on the
crowdfunding site in 2020 for everyday expenses, enough for the company
to introduce a new fundraising category for monthly bills—rent and
groceries.21
The business press also reported on the rich hiding out in the outdoors,
at huge luxury ranch properties often in the US West. Property owners who
paid around $3 million per luxury "cabin" were able to experience those
long, long months of the pandemic, which so many of us spent cooped up in
stuffy apartments, in large stately homes with dozens of acres. A rich couple
comments, "When you're in town, you're stuck in a house—you can
basically walk up and down the streets and that's it. We've got our horses
here and 2,000 acres to walk around on and ride on—it just seemed like the
place to be."22
Again, for the working class, quarantine conditions were different
indeed. Housing has always been an easy place to observe the wealth gap,
but while the rich fled their urban trophy properties to their rural trophy
properties, the poor were marooned in their shittier accommodations.
The prominent Indian writer Arundhati Roy related to the Financial
Times the story of the hasty and punitive lockdown that was sprung on the
country, with only hours' warning:
Many driven out by their employers and landlords, millions of
impoverished, hungry, thirsty people, young and old, men, women,
children, sick people, blind people, disabled people, with nowhere
else to go, with no public transport in sight, began a long march
home to their villages. They walked for days ... Some died on the

way. They knew they were going home potentially to slow
starvation ... As they walked, some were beaten brutally and
humiliated by the police, who were charged with strictly enforcing
the curfew ... A few days later, worried that the fleeing population
would spread the virus to villages, the government sealed state
borders even for walkers. People who had been walking for days
were stopped and forced to return to camps in the cities they had just
been forced to leave.23
Beyond the living conditions of the classes under COVID-19, there's
the question of access to testing and treatments for the disease itself. In the
early, scarily confusing days of the epidemic, access to tests was highly
sought-after, and like everything else in a capitalist market-based system,
they went to those who could pay.
Consider Fisher Island, a Miami Beach private island reachable only by
ferry and "one of the wealthiest places in America." There residents were
able to secure antibody tests for everyone in the neighborhood, even when
the ferry and marina were closed. The island, where an equity membership
costs $250,000, used connections with the University of Miami to secure
the tests. But despite all these VIPs jumping the line, a working-class
person could still get tested. If they worked for one of these rich
households. "Home health aides and housekeepers also got tested."24
The rich countries themselves became notorious for securing vaccine
stockpiles capable of inoculating far more people than their own
populations, even as poor countries of the developing world waited for their
first shots. Spurred by genuine uncertainty around vaccine efficacy and a
total lack of concern for the world's poor, the US and UK signed contracts
for four times more doses than they had population, while Canada ordered
six times. A researcher wrote, "The high-income countries have gotten to
the front of the line and cleared the shelves."25 Few showed any concern for
epidemiologists' pleas to inoculate the most vulnerable populations in all
countries before moving on to less at-risk populations in each state—
instead, the industry and states have largely catered to the wealthy of the
world.

The world went through a hell of a natural disaster in 2020 to 2023,
with some signs (and plenty of corporate encouragement) that COVID is
hopefully now transitioning to another endemic respiratory bug like the
cold or flu. But society is changed for good it seems, with the rich having
greatly enlarged their already glaringly inflated share of the economy even
as the global majority was traumatized by going through a yearslong
calamity with limited government aid and terrible political leadership.
Nick Bilton quotes a doctor who says, "Coronavirus is a poor person's
virus. We're seeing it spread in poor neighborhoods, to poor families who
must go to work and live in close proximity to each other."26 Meanwhile the
great successes and job creators of our society, celebrated for their bold
investment and risk-taking, immediately rushed the exits with all the room,
toys, and drugs they could carry. Diseases take a deadly toll on the human
race, but being a gigantic rich asshole is less contagious.
Patently Ridiculous
There is no word more often used to defend the ruling class than
"innovation." Arising as a common defense of the rich in the 1990s
alongside the popularization of the Internet, the claim is that rich tech CEOs
earned their private jets and million-dollar watches because they invented
useful services like Google, fun devices like the iPhone, and especially the
greatest of modern innovations, the Internet itself.
Regrettably, every part of this claim is 100 percent horseshit. Google
search, Wi-Fi functionality, and their underlying technologies of radio and
the Internet were without exception developed by the state, specifically
military research agencies and the university system. The facts of the
development of each of these technologies are well established and run in
the opposite direction of the claims of allegedly innovative billionaires, but
my god are they casually, universally, and unbelievably assumed to be true.
The ruling class and their corporate media property love to talk about
innovation and will often deploy its fruits promptly in their operations, if
conditions are right. But you can be sure that companies will do so, without
fail, in the most controlling and profit-making manner, regardless of the

technology's broader potential. And not infrequently, companies have full-
on suppressed innovations if they feared they could hurt their existing profit
centers. Yet the media fawn over tech CEOs as if they single-handedly
invented their key technologies, going so far as to hold up real imbeciles—
like the prominent South African mining heir, Tesla-buyer, and Twitter-
ruiner Elon Musk—as real-life versions of supergeniuses like Iron Man. It's
dumb.
Why wouldn't companies and their wealthy owners support innovation
and research into new technologies? The reality of the scientific process is
that research is uncertain—you never know if your science staff is on the
verge of a new trillion-dollar breakthrough, or instead slogging away at
basic research that will never yield a marketable product, let alone a highly
profitable one. It can take many years for a research program to yield useful
technology, if it ever does, and the problem is that companies are under
short-term pressure to meet their profit-per-share targets.
For that reason, basic research and development is most commonly
done by public institutions, such as universities and militaries, which are
mostly immune to near-term profitability goals. Since research takes a long
time, is uncertain of any payoff, and is also frequently quite expensive, it's
not reasonable (at least within market logic) to expect private firms to pour
resources into costly R&D that may never pay off. But public institutions
can do this, and as a result most major technological developments have
taken place within that sector.
Consider the Internet. Most of us use it via Wi-Fi, the short-range radio
signal system that allows your phone to download your email, post cat
videos, and view pornography. Radio as a usable wireless communication
system was famously developed by Guglielmo Marconi, for the Italian
navy. Wi-Fi itself was developed by the University of Hawaii in the 1970s
to manage access to its one mainframe in Honolulu for its dispersed
network of island campus computers. Named ALOHAnet, the one-way
radio signals would in time form the basis for modern Wi-Fi standards.27
The Internet itself was originally known as ARPANET, named for
ARPA, the Advanced Research Project Agency, the Pentagon's main
research arm. The development of this technology took decades, during

which the military, select research universities like MIT and Stanford, and
the National Science Foundation spent major resources for a dispersed
communication system that could perhaps survive nuclear war, manage the
military's sprawling Cold War surveillance system, and help scientists share
datasets.
The government research agencies even tried a few times to get the
private sector interested in the potential of the technology and to take over
the research—the United States has a strong tendency to privatize public
assets. But again and again, companies from IBM to AT&T flatly declined
to take over managing the new inter-network.28 ARPA and the universities
developed the crucial tech, like packet-switching and certain universal
technical standards so that different networks could communicate with one
another, culminating in the first successful test in 1977.
Of course, the Internet itself was only of limited use until the advent of
the World Wide Web, using the HTML technical standards developed by
UK physicist Tim Berners-Lee, who built them to create an operations tool
for a public research facility, the European Laboratory for Particle Physics
at CERN in France and Switzerland.29 This technical standard allowed for
the use of the Internet to exchange data constituting Web pages, along with
email (then the main form of Internet use, prior to the development of
mobile telephony and apps in the 2000s). Berners-Lee developed the
standards and released them publicly for free, allowing them to be used by
the decentralized body of Internet users, rather than keeping them as trade
secrets with proprietary protocols that were incompatible with any other
users, which the main computing companies like IBM and Apple preferred
to do.
Eventually, the now-proven Internet architecture was finally privatized
by the Clinton administration in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. It was
only then that firms saw enough commercial potential in the online
network, building up early dial-up-era portals like AOL. Without the
decades of public funding of the Internet, it would have remained
undeveloped and all the value created by Amazon, Google, and
smartphones could never have been realized (for better or worse).

And even these online platforms themselves required significant public
support to get through their money-losing stages and reach profitability.
Google's first web address, after all, was not google.com but
google.stanford.edu, since it was developed in a research lab by grad
students with public funding from the National Science Foundation.30
Reputation Laundering
No defense of the powerful is more universal than celebrating their good
works of generosity. Far older than capitalism, this line of thinking has been
used to defend the powerful throughout history, from kings to popes to
CEOs. Sure, the king may oppress us with taxes for his own comforts, and
draft us to fight his crusades, and appoint violent inbred imbecile lords to
rule over the fief we live in, but he gives a few shillings to the Sisters of
Benevolence Hospice for the Dying. So let's stop criticizing him and focus
on those evil Muslim Turks!
An old argument indeed. But of course, no matter how much the town
criers may be required to sing the praises of the powerful when they feel
like conspicuously dropping a few crumbs down to our level, you can't
justify power by occasional good deeds, whether heartfelt or merely made
as tactical moves to mollify restless subjects. No one wants a king even if
he's nice. Maybe he has a kid die suddenly or has a stroke, and becomes
less nice, or dies himself and gets replaced by a less-friendly relative.
Concentrated power like that has historically been seen as antagonistic to
freedom, since power can dictate to you and limit your liberty.
But many people must have failed to get the message, because
philanthropy remains a major way for powerful people to try and essentially
launder their dirty reputations by using some of their ill-gotten gains to put
up a library or orphanage or soup kitchen for regular people. It is
completely ubiquitous among the rich today to put some modest slice of the
family wealth into a well-publicized bequest to a university or hospital and
expect endless praise as well as their name on the building.
A Wyoming mutual fund manager quoted by Freeland in Plutocrats
even sips his own Kool-Aid. He states, "People don't realize how wealthy

people self-tax ... You know, there's a fellow who was the CEO of Target.
In Phoenix, he's created a museum of music. He put in around $200 million
of his own money. I have another friend who gave $400 million to a health
facility in Nebraska or South Dakota, or someplace like that ... I think we
should get rid of taxes as much as we can ... Because you get to decide how
you spend your money, rather than the government."31
Note that if there were real commitment to solving humanity's
problems, the money is genuinely there. UN World Food Programme head
David Beasley perhaps unwittingly proved how insincere this Spirit of
Giving among the wealthy truly is when he noted that a single one time
donation of $2 billion would be adequate to eliminate world hunger, and
that the figure was only about 2 percent of the net worth of Elon Musk at
that time.32 Warren Buffett did give each of his kids a $10 million charitable
foundation "as a Christmas present at the end of the 1990s,"33 but no
billionaire has yet offered Beasley the funds to wipe out hunger. The
specific number cited has been questioned as too small, but even five times
that amount would equal less than 10 percent of Musk's fortune at the time.
So while the ruling class is truly in collective possession of the means to
cure many of the world's painful ills, it dispenses crumbs at a time and
issues a professional press release with each tiny morsel.
Business reporter Robert Frank recognizes that many rich "view charity
as a cheap way to burnish their image. Others simply want to buy their way
into society."34 Yet, like his colleagues, he also breathlessly celebrates a
finance millionaire who's sick of Big Charity and runs his own
"entrepreneurial charity," just like a business! His charity, which is
seriously called A Glimmer of Hope, "has performance targets built into
every grant he makes. When he funds a small NGO in Ethiopia, he pays it
only for the first quarter. If it achieves its goals—digging a certain number
of wells, or starting a school—he funds the NGO a second quarter. If it
doesn't, it loses the funding. At first, the Ethiopian NGOs resented the
process. They saw it as overly demanding and punitive ... Now, he says,
most of the groups are used to it. 'These developing nations have become

dependent on handouts,' he says. 'Grants became an entitlement.'" His
business card reads "Philip Berber—Glimmer of Hope."35
Sociologist 
Linsey 
McGoey 
reports 
on 
this 
trend 
of
"philanthrocapitalism," where charity "emulates the way business is done in
the for-profit capitalist world" and "describes a way that capitalism itself
can be naturally philanthropic, driving innovation." The problem, she
observes, is that this partial provisioning of services undermines support for
public services from the government that are available to everybody. Worse,
"many philanthropists ... earned their fortunes through business strategies
that greatly exacerbate the same social and economic inequalities that
philanthropists purport to remedy."36
Andrew Carnegie is probably the most famous ruling-class
philanthropist, with Carnegie libraries in over three hundred US cities, and
many museums funded by him. Generous indeed, but the money came from
one of the really great evil Gilded Age monopolies. Carnegie's empire of
steel plants is described in John Kampfner's incredible book The Rich: "He
squeezed the maximum production out of his workforce ... In his steel
mills, the workers worked twelve-hour days, doing a whole twenty-four
hours on alternate Sundays, irrespective of the prospect of accidents—just
so they would be allowed to take the following Sunday off. For Carnegie
and his generation of investors and industrialists sitting in their plush
offices, the money kept rolling in."37
Carnegie's rival, the great oil monopolist John Rockefeller, controlled
an almost incomprehensible amount of wealth in the later 1800s, and as he
therefore became subject to increasing public suspicion, he began making
large, headline-grabbing donations. Rockefeller gave $600,000 (over $20
million in today's money) to the University of Chicago, leading it to
develop its economics department which then and now is distinguished in
its support of the gigantic monopolistic trusts such as the one Rockefeller
operated; one economics professor criticized the railroad cartels and was
fired by the university for "incompetence."38
Since then, the University of Chicago economics department has
become famous as one of the most conservative and pro-market schools in

the world, indeed has played an active role in undermining rare socialist
governments around the world. When Rockefeller gave a further three
million to the school, students are said to have sung:
John D. Rockefeller
Wonderful man is he
Gives all his spare change
To the U. of C.
He keeps the ball a-rolling
In our great varsity39
But Bill Gates, the Rockefeller admirer, Microsoft cofounder, and one
of the world's richest men, is probably the modern definitive case. Gates is
now considered by many people to be one of the better billionaires when
compared to Donald Trump or the Koch brothers. This is mainly due to the
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation being the world's largest private
charitable entity, with billions in its endowment, used for fighting AIDS,
accelerating economic development, and many other worthy causes.
Gates's fortune comes from Microsoft, which for decades had a global
computer operating system monopoly. During his company's manic growth
period, Gates emerged as a modern Gilded Age tycoon. Even sympathetic
biographers refer to Gates's frequent "abrasive, childish rants" and
"childlike temper tantrums."40 More importantly, Gates was a dedicated
monopolist from the very earliest days. "We're going to put Digital
Research out of business," a standard history book of the company recounts
him saying, "slamming his fist into the palm of his other hand. He would
issue a similar vow twice more during the next year ... promising to put
MicroPro and Lotus out of business, each time emphasizing his promise by
smashing his fist into his hand."41
The near fanatical pursuit of this cause led to Microsoft's famous '90s-
era antitrust case, which it eventually lost with the company being legally
declared a monopolist. Gates turned out to have lied extensively in his
video deposition for the case, and came to be seen as such a condescending
robber baron that he literally became a Simpsons villain.42

It was during this time when Gates's reputation was in the toilet that he
discovered charitable giving. It took no time at all for the popular press to
begin falling over itself to celebrate Gates's generosity, with Wired gushing
that his foundation had "saved some 6 million lives," and created "a new
era in philanthropy, in which decisions—often referred to as investments—
are made with the strategic precision demanded of business and
government, then painstakingly tracked to gauge their success."43
The business press sums up the effect: "Twenty years ago, people
associated the name Gates with 'ruthless, predatory' monopolistic conduct."
However, "after taking a public relations beating during [the Microsoft
antitrust] trial's early going in late 1998, the company started what was
described at the time as a 'charm offensive' aimed at improving its image
... Mr. Gates contributed $20.3 billion, or 71 percent of his total
contributions to the foundation ... during the 18 months between the start of
the trial and the verdict."44 A wealth manager frankly states, "His
philanthropy has helped 'rebrand' his name."
But even here we see the limits of meeting social needs through rich-
people philanthropy. The Gateses' divorce has put into question how the
Foundation may change its priorities, a monumentally important question
because it funds so many projects. And indeed Melinda French Gates "is no
longer pledging to give the bulk of her wealth to the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation and instead plans to spread it among philanthropic endeavors,"
and as she put it: "I recognize the absurdity of so much wealth being
concentrated in the hands of one person, and I believe the only responsible
thing to do with a fortune this size is give it away—as thoughtfully and
impactfully as possible."45 On her terms, on her timetable, and aligned with
her own shifting priorities.
And in this era of tax cuts for wealthy households and the resulting
government budget deficits, many advocates of cutting back the social
safety net still point to private philanthropy and "faith-based" organizations
as potential substitutes. But this is immediately ludicrous. Private charities,
even on the scale reviewed here, are nowhere near capable of paying for a
country's social needs—whether that need is housing the mentally ill or
providing vaccines.

The foundations themselves recognize this, as when Patty Stonesifer,
then chief of the Gates Foundation, admitted, "Our giving is a drop in the
bucket compared to the government's responsibility."46 This was further
confirmed when the Foundation committed $50 million to fight the 2014
West African Ebola outbreak, while the UN estimated the total cost of
containing the epidemic at roughly $600 million.47 Definitely within the
reach of these modern foundations, but far beyond the kind of commitment
they are known to make. Hell! Since its founding, the Gates Foundation has
had a yearly health budget larger than the UN's World Health
Organization.48
Further, the rich are themselves bad sources of ongoing philanthropic
commitment, because they're so fickle. Michael Bloomberg, the great
media monopolist and billionaire, wrote, "I'd argue another gift to fight a
disease that has a lot of the world's attention and people are focusing on it is
not where I want us to go." A related Forbes headline read that Bloomberg
is "Bored of Philanthropy."49 The late real estate kingpin, Leona Helmsley,
left $12 million to her dog, Trouble, and billions more for causes supporting
the welfare of dogs. The press reports on her estate: "The first goal was to
help indigent people, the second to provide for care and welfare of dogs. A
year later ... she deleted the first goal."50
This giving is all transparently cosmetic, too. When the roof of the great
Parisian cathedral Notre Dame tragically burned down in 2019, rich
Frenchmen were one-upping each other on how much they pledged toward
the repair and reconstruction. A 100-million euro donation from the second-
richest Frenchman was followed literally hours later by a 200-million euro
donation from the richest one. Soon nearly a billion euros had been pledged
by rich French families and corporations, yet a second inferno was ignited
when an adviser to one of the French billionaires posted online that such
donations should receive a 90 percent tax deduction rather than the normal
60 percent.51 For a country already convulsed with demonstrations by a
movement against regressive taxes (see chapter 5), this led to furious
demands for reinstatement of the wealth tax recently abolished by the
neoliberal French government. The adviser withdrew the suggestion. More

broadly, billionaire Eli Broad spelled out the goal of giving when he said,
"I'm not aware of any large gifts that are anonymous," and indeed an
Indiana University survey found a mere 1 percent of million-dollar-plus
gifts are given anonymously.52 The stupidly wealthy want everyone to
know how generous they are.
Even worse, rich philanthropists are often incompetent, thinking they're
above traditional development entities and end up exacerbating the
problems they claim to be trying to solve, or creating entirely new ones. A
great example comes again from the Gates Foundation, which makes a
major part of its branding a special commitment to the eradication of
malaria in the developing world. The classic means of doing this, among
many charitable entities, is the distribution of mosquito nets—synthetic nets
with tiny holes, allowing air to circulate during sleep but too small for the
disease-spreading pests to get through. Many mosquito nets are further
coated in pesticides.
But the large charities failed to consider the realities of desperate
poverty, where rather than use the nets to keep away malaria while sleeping,
the poor repurpose them for fishing. In south-central Africa, the nets are
stronger than traditional woven nets, and used to scoop up whole swaths of
lake and coastal sea bottoms, dragging up very small fish that would escape
normal fishing nets. But this also includes the juvenile fish fry needed to
reproduce the next generation of adult fish, and, further, the fact that the
nets are covered in pesticides often means that they have poisoned the small
ponds and precious regional lakes in the region. Hundreds of millions of
these nets are passed out for free to the poor of Africa and the developing
world every year, many labeled "Do not wash in a lake or a river."53 Some
become chicken coops and even bridal veils.
And even if we set aside all this, there is still the fact that when things
go badly wrong for the rich, all of their generous donations can disappear.
The failed cryptocurrency exchange platform FTX and its disgraced
founder Sam Bankman-Fried made extensive contributions to charitable
entities before the market predictably crashed and extensive wild misuse of
depositor money was discovered. FTX, now in bankruptcy court
receivership, began trying to claw back much of the money, with a number

of tech and media nonprofits having to return over a million dollars apiece
donated by the company or Bankman-Fried's family foundation. Bankman-
Fried himself told the press that "the majority of his charitable giving was
sincere. But he also said that some was to curry favor with the public.
'When I pledged to give away $2,000 to some brand name charity as part of
some promotion related to FTX's business, that was as much PR as
anything else.'"54
Similarly, McGoey observes that many foundations welcome "pledges"
that may or may not ever materialize. She notes billionaire Richard
Branson's 2006 pledge to the Clinton Global Initiative to donate $3 billion
to climate change-related causes over the following ten years. He ended up
spending $300 million, about one-tenth that amount.55
Giving to your local charity and activist groups is great. But high-end
philanthropy is uniformly ruling-class reputation laundering, giving away
pennies from towering fortunes they should be forced to give up altogether.
And when regular people do their philanthropy, it's often much closer to
home—the University of Chicago found that fifty million Americans, 20
percent of the country, have contributed to a crowdfunding campaign for
medical bills. About half of such donations were for coworkers, and an
accompanying survey found that 60 percent of respondents said the
government has "a great deal or a lot of responsibility" for providing help
when a person can't afford medical care, and another 25 percent said "some
responsibility."56 Instead, we donate $20 to each other when we get sick or
hurt while the rich are on TV congratulating themselves for bungling some
project in the Third World.
The socialist writer Nathan Robinson read a large pile of books by
billionaire entrepreneurs and found that "Billionaires tell themselves many
things. They say that market price is value, meaning that if you're making
money, you're helping the world. They say that they are rewarded for risk
and hard work, even though they don't risk anything of value and people
who work far harder than they do earn pittances ... Their justifications for
their success crumble when touched."57

All these arguments are so well-worn that defenders of the ruling class
will rattle them off with the reliability of a reflex action. Throw shade at
any billionaire or trillion-dollar corporation and some dweeb will be
making a Brave Defense of Free Enterprise with these exact tired saws. Any
socialist should be prepared with these rebuttals and details—hopefully you
can pull away the fig leaf from the ruling class's shriveled claims to build
up society and soothe its wounds, when it is labor and the Earth's bounty
that truly built their wealth.
These weak-sauce alibis may be laughable, but the dominant
commercial media, on TV, radio, and online, will repeat them until the end
of time because after all they're the property of the same owning class and
aren't run by people who were hired to criticize the boss. It's a central part
of how we're controlled by capitalists even in relatively free republics in
the developed world—major media and online platforms can choose the
facts you hear and shape your perspective on the world until everyone
believes in the same "common sense." But the elite's claims of job creation,
innovation, and made-for-TV charity balls aren't going to fool the world
forever. Which is good, because as we'll see in the next chapter, the world's
clock is ticking.
OceanofPDF.com

A
CHAPTER 5
THE BURDEN
WHAT ABOUT THE CLIMATE?
[T]here is scarcely any limit to the carbon emissions of the ultra-
wealthy.
—World Inequality Report1
I owe the public nothing.
—J. P. Morgan,2 after the Panic of 1901
third of the world's wealth is in the hands of its richest one
percent, including ownership of the productive economy through
financial assets. A class that thinks of itself as having superior
individual characteristics like risk tolerance actually spends its existence
decked out in purposeless excess, pouring resources into their toys on a
mind-boggling scale.
But we're not done with the parade of hilarious disgrace yet, because
the owning class of our weary world is also responsible for a surprisingly
large share of the damage "we" are doing to the planet itself. Their heavy
consumption of material resources across the board, and their concentrated
ownership of the global corporate conglomerates responsible for so much of
today's environmental pollution, are an important part of any portrait of the
ruling class. And as we'll see, their hoard of the world's wealth comes with

a giant share of the world's carbon emissions: the top 10 percent of world
households emits almost half the greenhouse emissions of the entire world,
and the richest 1 percent nearly 17 percent by itself. Besides their own
wide-mouthed consumption, their share arises from their ownership of most
of the stock in the great industries that consume a staggering share of global
energy.3
You can see how the numbers get run up. The world now has thousands
of superyachts, with features like glass elevators, marble floors, onboard
Turkish steam baths, and air-conditioned helicopter hangars.4 A single one
of those superyachts burns over a hundred gallons of diesel an hour
standing still, and releases as much yearly greenhouse emissions as eight
hundred cars.5
All the living organisms of the natural world have no one to count on
but us to do something about the absolute overturning of natural systems we
have carried out in the blink of an evolutionary eye. Strap in, this horror
show has no intermission!
Wealth CO2ncentration
As long as there has been a modern, capitalist ruling class, it has been the
driving force damaging and consuming the environment, and not just with
its lopsided levels of consumption and ownership of the productive
economy. These people are also most able to insulate themselves from the
consequences of their actions through the market force of class segregation,
living far from the most destructive and poisonous results of fast-growing
economic activity. The rich set fire to the planet, but get to reside in green,
environmentally-spared places, essentially paying for fresh air and clean
water while the poor of the world, from Pakistan to Detroit, get to consume
water laden with lead or poisoned with pesticides.
During California's brutal drought of the 2010s, some wealthy owners
of large estates evaded high fees from water utilities, created to encourage
conservation during years of bonedry weather, by simply trucking in water
from out of town. TV personality and consumer trends magnate Oprah
Winfrey had large trucks with thousands of gallons arrive at the gates of her

estate each day. Oprah is said in time to have cleaned up her act, but reports
cite the three biggest private, nonagricultural water consumers in
California's Santa Barbara County as sucking up thirty million gallons of
water between them over 2012-13.6 Meanwhile, today's increasingly
powerful climate change-boosted hurricanes frequently overwhelm water
treatment plants and infrastructure in poor, majority-Black cities in the
American South. Unable to pay for trucked-in water, low-income
households end up boiling tap water for months on end.7
Nature and "environmental services" are increasingly privatized, along
with everything else in our neoliberal era. Recall from chapter 2 that the
"new status symbol for America's uber-rich" is "trophy trees," which
involves wealthy homeowners buying mature, attractive trees and having
them pulled out by the roots and trucked to their estates. At a cost of up to a
quarter million dollars, the trees "have the added bonus of being able to
signify the owner's environmental credentials and their passion for
sustainability."8 If something more seasonal is better suited to the taste of
the fabulously wealthy, they could take their lead from media kingpin
Sumner Redstone, who once had a full ton of snow trucked to his gigantic
123-room mansion so he could enjoy a white Christmas.9
The scientific community, which has been pulling its hair out for
decades trying to get powerful people to take environmental collapse
seriously, has become remarkably critical of the relationship of capitalism
to the environment. A paper in the top-level prestigious journal Nature
Communications reviews a very broad body of literature on the resource-
intensity of consumption, the relation of consumption of goods to
emissions, and the problem of an economic system with a growth necessity.
They find "humanity needs to reassess the role of growth-oriented
economies and the pursuit of affluence ... [P]revailing capitalist, growth-
driven economic systems have not only increased affluence since World
War II, but have led to enormous increases in inequality, financial
instability, resources consumption and environmental pressures on vital
earth support systems." Resource use is driven by broadly affluent
consumers in the developed world and also by "members of powerful
factions of the capitalist class." They advocate a range of solutions; some

are modest, including "reducing the need for consumption" through
"increasing lifespan of goods, telecommunication instead of physical travel,
sharing and repairing instead of buying new, and house retrofitting." Others
are more radical, up to and including "eco-socialist approaches, viewing the
democratic state as an important means to achieve the socio-ecological
transformation."10
Today the most prominent and pressing environmental question is
climate change. Its destructive record and worse potential are driving a
great movement to commit real economic resources to fighting it, including
proposals like the Green New Deal in the US that would tax the rich to
create jobs needed for a major energy industry transition from fossil fuels to
green renewables. But conservatives have reliably politicized the issue, for
example when the hoary commentator George Will blandly declared,
"Global warming is socialism by the backdoor."11
But the dangers are monumental. In 2023, days of awful choking smoke
haze shrouded New York City and Washington DC, forcing centers of
power and media to experience the "smoke season" formerly known as
"summer" in California and other western US states. The most recent report
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the definitive global
scientific body gathering researchers' growing understanding of climate
change, found in 2023 that human civilization is definitively causing global
climate change, that the effects grow as our fossil fuel emissions continue,
and that climatic shifts will hurt food production, water availability, and
quality of life for millions and indeed billions of people globally.12 The
poorest parts of the world, centered in lower latitudes, are most at risk from
the changes to climate and are those who can least afford to adapt to them.
Young people above all are increasingly concerned about the uncontrolled
spiraling of the climate and the world environmental situation, with
research documenting their elevated stress and anxiety as the process
unfolds.13
The responsibility for climate emissions is usually split up nationally or
regionally, with the originators of the Industrial Revolution, the Western
realms of Europe and North America, frequently estimated as responsible

for about half of all total historical greenhouse gas emissions between them.
China, almost universally referred to today as the greatest carbon emitter, is
a relative newcomer to modern development and is thus estimated to be
responsible for about half of Europe's total, so far.14 It's widely recognized,
however, that the developing world (or the Third World as Western
audiences used to say), has played a tiny role in the historically rapid
release of all these climate-altering emissions, but is climatically and
geographically more vulnerable to them than the Western culprits. But, so
far the developed countries have succeeded in economically forcing the
developing world into the "emissionary" position, making a strong case for
future climate reparations.
As with other areas, we can find data on the share of emissions by class.
And it shouldn't surprise us to find that the rich, being the biggest owners
and spenders of wealth generally in our society, are to blame for a gigantic
share of the climate changes we will be enduring in the coming decades.
Emissions profiles by household wealth are as lopsided as those of income,
which makes sense because the more you consume, the more energy is used
to make goods for you, and the more assets you own, the more
responsibility you share for the economy's emissions. Economists are quick
to celebrate capitalism and its long-term economic growth, producing more
goods and services for us to consume. But beyond the problem that most of
those goods and wealth go to the already-rich, the messy side effects of our
economy grow just as the economy itself grows. The fast growth of these
side effects, or "externalities," is often brushed aside by economists even as
they celebrate capitalism's huge growth in production and wealth.15
The actual data on this chasm of emissions responsibility are pretty
brutal, with the most comprehensive research again coming from the World
Inequality Database, referred to frequently in chapter 1. The World
Inequality Report 2022 has extensive recent information on the distribution
of emissions, just as it does for the distribution of wealth. And notably, it
includes territorial emissions from countries but also a credible measure of
carbon emitted in national imports, keeping those carbon footprints from
being outsourced overseas and off national carbon budgets.

The WID confirms the historical contributions to climate emissions,
with 27 percent from the US-Canada and 22 percent from Europe, large
shares due to their early industrial revolutions and their dramatic growth in
economic production, energy consumption, and thus emissions.16 As
important as that is, the real headline result relates to the contribution not by
region, but by class. Noting that "inequalities in average carbon emissions
between regions are quite close to the inequality in average incomes
between regions," the report finds that globally, "the top 10% emit 31
tonnes [of CO2-equivalent per person per year] (47.6% of the total). The top
1% emits 110 tonnes (16.8% of the total). Global carbon emissions
inequality thus appears to be very great: close to half of all emissions are
due to one tenth of the global population, and just one hundredth of the
world population (77 million individuals) emits about 50% more than the
entire bottom half of the population (3.8 billion individuals)."17
Further damaging for the case that the rich have a positive role to play
in the transition to green energy, the researchers find that from 1990 to
2019, "the top 1% is responsible for 21% of emissions growth." Meanwhile
the global bottom 50 percent was culpable for 16 percent of this growth.18
This is relevant since further economic growth—increasing the amount of
goods and services produced over time—is the universal economic goal of
all current political and certainly business leadership. Worse, it's the most
popular proposed way of raising the standards of living among the world's
poor. Punting the welfare of the poor to future economic growth fails on its
own terms, since the giant majority of the gains of growth go the already-
rich, but will also consign us to a future of uncontrolled climate change
driven hardest by those same elite households.
A final, dark aspect of the WID accounting of emissions inequality is
the remaining "carbon budget"—the amount of fossil fuel emissions that
can still be released while keeping the world within a limited amount of
projected climate change, such as increases in average land temperatures of
1.5°C or 2.0°C. The more climate warming we experience, the more
damaging the effects will be, in rising sea levels and summer temperatures,
more and worse droughts and floods, and more general weather

destabilization. But having already burned so much carbon to develop our
capitalist economies, the remaining budget is limited.
The WID researchers observe that only the poorest halves of most
regions are within the per capita allowances of the present UN climate
targets, and offers the tough conclusion: "It follows that all emissions
reductions efforts are to be made by the top half of the distribution. In the
US, "the top 10% must cut its emissions by close to 90%," although also
"the middle 40% by around 50%."19
The report recommends progressive carbon taxes on the highest
emitters, to discourage emissions and raise badly needed funds for
adaptation. And in a thoughtful note, they point out that such policies help
shift focus from consumers to asset owners, since "carbon consumers ... are
often constrained in their energy choices, because they are locked-in carbon
intensive infrastructures systems. On the contrary, investors who opt for
investments in fossil industries do so while they have many alternative
options to invest their wealth in."20
The details reflect the shifting class conflict of recent decades. A report
for the Paris School of Economics from WID contributors noted, "Global
CO2e emissions remain highly concentrated today: top 10% emitters
contribute to about 45% of global emissions, while bottom 50% emitters
contribute to 13% of global emissions. Top 10% emitters live on all
continents, with one third of them from emerging countries."21 The detailed
contours of emissions inequality are attested in other research, including
several impressive reports from Oxfam, the prominent children's charity.22
The Paris School report suggests a broadly representative portrait of a
top 1 percent-emitting person, reflecting the top emissions profile
generally: "A rich American traveling 5 times a year from New York to Los
Angeles (round trips, first class) and twice a year to Europe can emit up to
35tCO2e per year, solely for her air transport emissions," with another ten-
ton equivalent for automobile use, and another ten for home energy in a
year. But the final yearly figure for these elite emitters comes to an
incredible three hundred tons of CO2-equivalent, with a giant portion
coming from "the production of all the services and goods purchased by the

household that given year," the transportation of these goods to the elite
consumer, and the emissions associated with their often-enormous
investments.23
A final class aspect of the climate crisis is well reviewed by Matt Huber,
geography professor at Syracuse University, who observes that "industrial
capital ... is responsible for the bulk of emissions in capitalist society."
Citing 
figures 
from 
the 
quite 
mainstream 
Energy 
Information
Administration, he observes the industrial sector constituted 54.8 percent of
the world's energy use in 2018, relative to residential use at 12.6 percent,
transportation use at 25.5 percent, and commercial use at 7 percent. Using
IPCC data, he finds the whole residential sector, even with household
transportation included, accounts for less than 15 percent of world energy
use, despite the constant emphasis in climate media and politics on personal
energy use choices.24
The relevance of this data for our purposes is of course that the owning
class has among its holdings the equity in the world of production and
industry, through its ownership of most corporate stock. As seen in chapter
1, the richest 1 percent of US households by wealth owned 40 percent of all
stocks in 2016, and the top 10 percent held 84 percent.25 So the emissions
of the enormous capitalist productive economy are part of the owning
class's liability as well. If they get to keep the profits from it, they can be
responsible for the emissions from it.
Huber adds that the common view that "all of us" are responsible for the
climate crisis is better recast as "a small minority of owners who control
and profit from the production of the energy, food, materials, and
infrastructure society needs to function."26 For these reasons, Huber called
his book Climate Change as Class War.
The monumental emissions of the richest people in the world are a fair
target for climate rage.
Abetting the Jet Set
In media portrayals, private jets may have pushed aside superyachts as the
definitive global elite status signifier, even as they have become more

associated with a showy squandering of the world's carbon budget.
Conspicuous consumption, long recognized as impressive consumption of
resources, can also extend to consumption of the world carbon budget.
Industry reports put the average wealth of a private jet owner at
approximately $1.5 billion, observing the incredible expense of buying,
fueling, and staffing a private aircraft. Sticker prices range from $14 million
for a Cessna Citation XLS up to $42 million for a Falcon 2000DX.27
Elite events, like the famous Sun Valley Conference in rural Idaho
known as "summer camp for billionaires," can see rural airstrips
transformed into parking lots for private planes. The interiors are what
you'd expect from people able and willing to spend a couple tens of
millions of bucks on private transportation. Robert Frank's description of
one private plane in his book Richistan gives the flavor: "[The interior had]
a handwoven carpet from Thailand, made from wool and silk, with 14
colors, at $600 a yard ... The cupboards were stocked with Versace china,
Christofle silver and Lalique crystal." Not to mention alligator-skin toilet
seats.28 He also notes that "the waiting list for Gulfstreams is now two years
long, and some buyers are selling their 'slots' on the Gulfstream waiting list
for up to $1 million to more impatient buyers."29
Forbes, the flagship magazine for insufferable rich conservative
bastards everywhere, recently reviewed a research agency's report on the
world profile of private jet owners.30 A number of interesting findings
emerge, including exactly how common their use is among ultra-high-net-
worth individuals, those with a net worth over $30 million. Fully 69 percent
of private jets are owned in North America, yet despite fast growth, "just"
14.1 percent of UHNWIs own one, whereas in Latin America and the
Caribbean, the number of registered jets is 23.4 percent of the UHNWI
population. The number of jets per UHNW person is higher in Africa than
the US or Europe as well, at 18.8 percent. The magazine notes this "may
have more to do with the fact that in North America and Europe, there is a
much broader range of options to access private aviation." Popular options
like fractional ownership programs, similar to time-share condos for private
jets, or "jet cards" for buying bulk time on private craft, are most common

in the US and help extend private jet privilege to mere very-high-net-worth
individuals.
In a truly stunning report, Swedish management professor Stefan
Gössling compiled an incredible profile of private jet use in the Annals of
Tourism Research. Reacting to the trend of "flight shaming" and reflecting
that "little is known about the air travel patterns of affluent and influential
people," Gössling developed an innovative method of using social media
accounts to develop data on billionaire and celebrity air travel patterns.31
He notes the context that "household studies have regularly found that
higher income groups are also the most mobile," and that emissions from
transport and travel account for the largest part of carbon inequality.
Gössling also observes that politicos and celebrities who enjoy being
seen as leaders or spokespeople for the legitimate and valuable movement
to address climate change are broadly seen as hypocritical phonies: "Al
Gore has been repeatedly criticized for his energy-intense lifestyle,
including the use of private aircraft"; and noting the opprobrium when
"actor Emma Thompson flew from Los Angeles to London to join a protest
of the Extinction Rebellion Movement." More evidently earnest figures,
like Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg, have embraced principled
non-flying lifestyles.
But the paper's highlight is Gössling's use of Instagram, Twitter, and
Facebook posts to construct private flight maps for 2017 for a number of
global figures, combined with known purchases or ownership of private
aircraft. Gössling recognizes that such posts are curated by the creators,
who will likely exempt some trips or stops for security or privacy reasons.
Still, the resulting maps are incredible and reproduced in figures 1 and 2.

Figure 1. Flight patterns of Bill Gates, 2017. From Stefan Gössling, "Celebrities, Air Travel, and
Social Norms," Annals of Tourism Research 49, no. 4 (October 2019).
Figure 2. Flight patterns of Mark Zuckerberg, 2017. From Stefan Gössling, "Celebrities, Air Travel,
and Social Norms," Annals of Tourism Research 49, no. 4 (October 2019).

As you can see, the travel is extensive, especially for a single year and
given the near certainty of undercounting. Gössling found "the average
flight by Bill Gates, at 5821 km, was about twice as long as the average
flight by Jennifer Lopez and four times the average distance flown by Karl
Lagerfeld." Noting that total emissions vary significantly, "on the high side
of the emissions' [sic] spectrum, Bill Gates' flight activity generated >1600
t CO2." (A middle-class American emits twenty-two tons a year.)32
Amusingly, Gates recently published a book on climate change that gives
no space to actual tax-funded climate policy (since that could potentially
somewhat decrease his incredible wealth), and instead encourages middle-
class people to buy expensive electric cars while hoping for new alternative
jet fuels.33
The unflattering profile of frequent private jet flight, especially for short
distances, is famously the purpose of @ElonJet, the automated social media
account using flight data to post trips taken by the private jet of prominent
tech entrepreneur and useless media tyrant Elon Musk. After his bizarre
efforts to buy Twitter led to his legal compulsion to consummate the
purchase, among his numerous ill-considered staff-shedding decisions was
to ban @ ElonJet and numerous other similar accounts, then reinstate them,
then require them to post on a twenty-four-hour delay.34 Despite Musk
often boasting of his commitment to free speech on his struggling platform,
the account now only posts as "ElonJet but Delayed," using the handle
@ElonJetNextDay. Elon's recent flights, as I look, are mostly about a half
hour, few more than three hours.
While the US is correctly seen to dominate the world of private jets (or
"business aviation," as the sector misleadingly prefers to call itself), the
industry has grown fast in Europe. Recent research has shown that far from
being used mainly to facilitate business, private aircraft are overwhelmingly
used for private travel and for surprisingly short distances. A report by the
European zero-emissions group Transport & Environment reached some
damning conclusions, including that "close to 50% of all intra-EU private
flights cover distances of less than 500 km ... These distances correspond to
the operational range where planes are the least efficient," due to the higher

emissions at takeoff and landing relative to cruising.35 Observing that even
conventional commercial aviation is a privilege enjoyed mostly in the
developed world, flying private involves a totally different wealth level,
with even "relatively affordable" jet card memberships starting at about
$5,000 an hour.
More offensively, the Transport & Environment report estimates that 41
percent of private flights are empty legs, flown to move the plane to where
it is needed by a wealthy owner. Of occupied flights, the average occupancy
was 4.7 passengers, but regardless of passenger load "private jets are on
average 10 times more carbon intensive that commercial flights."
Comparison of these numbers, including quality ground transit options like
European trains, is unbelievable as well:
Figure 3. Comparison of CO2 intensity of private jets and other travel modes (direct emissions only).
"Private Jets: Can the Super-Rich Supercharge Zero-Emission Aviation?", Transport & Environment,
May 2021.

The report also notes that European private "flights are mainly
concentrated along the UK-France-Switzerland-Italy axis," and that the
French coastal resort Nice is heavily represented among flight destinations,
which "confirms that private jets are being used by wealthy people to enjoy
the sun." Further, the fact that commercial flights are almost always
available for the same routes leads the report to conclude that private
aviation is heavily used not for business efficiency but "for rich people to
get more quickly to their second homes and holiday destination." A popular
French Twitter account tracks the private flights of various French
billionaires, including, for example, one day in 2022 when media kingpin
Vincent Bolloré made three flights between France and Greece, releasing
twenty-two tons of carbon dioxide, about ten years' worth of car emissions
for the average Frenchman.36
The French case is itself instructive. The rise of the gilets jaunes, or
yellow vest movement, was a fascinating development that throws great
light on the subject. French president Emmanuel Macron, similar perhaps to
the Democratic Party's national leadership in the US, is a textbook
neoliberal—socially progressive but economically conservative, relatively
tolerant of growing racial and gender diversity, but "fiscally responsible" on
cutting corporate taxes and limiting regulations of the corporate world.
Much like the rest of liberal global leadership, Macron was eager to mollify
the mounting environmental movement amid dire warnings from scientists,
and so his administration imposed a tax on gasoline and diesel in an attempt
to nudge French motorists to more fuel-efficient vehicles or transit options.
A popular reaction against the climate policy quickly arose that was
broad and real, with large numbers of France's proud citizens participating,
and for an impressively long period. Writer Vanessa Bee thoughtfully
observed in Current Affairs that "the protesters' demands ... are
surprisingly progressive with the exception of a couple of potentially
reactionary points," including a halt to the regressive fuel tax but other
economically progressive pro-climate moves, like hydrogen car subsidies,
raises on other fuel taxes, lower individual taxes, and an end to privatization
of gas and electric utilities. Bee concludes, "The left's prints are all over
this."37

That's because of the crucial missing chapter of the story, which is that
in the previous year, Macron's neoliberal government abolished the long-
standing wealth tax, or the "solidarity tax on wealth" implemented by the
Socialist government in 1981. "France's Rich Get Much Richer After
Abolition of Wealth Tax" was the Forbes headline.38 The total effect was to
reduce taxes on the wealthy and raise them on the middle and working
class, which was offensive to the French regardless of the hike's potential
for decreasing fossil fuel use. The World Inequality Database addressed the
episode, noting the carbon tax had no "compensatory measures for low- and
middle-income households. The reform was introduced at the same time as
a suppression of the progressive wealth tax on financial assets and capital
incomes ... essentially concentrated among the top 1-2% of the
population." On the other hand, "in British Columbia (Canada), a carbon
tax was implemented along with a significant package of transfers to low-
and middle-income households, which ensured the social viability of the
reform."39
But the demonstrations themselves were frequently used by right-wing
media to imply that the population was rising up against climate taxes,
rather than Macron's neoliberal redistribution of wealth upward. The
conservative Wall Street Journal predictably claimed the "popular rage"
was due to "the demonization by political activists" of carbon dioxide, and
that "voters don't see climate change as a threat demanding personal
sacrifices."40 Knowing French history, it's more likely that the French
public, like those around the world, has majorities in favor of climate
action, but aren't willing to foot the bill themselves while the rich, who are
hugely disproportionately to blame for the problem, get their taxes slashed.
Thus, the progressive character of the yellow vests' demands.
This episode is probably suggestive of how future neoliberal
governments will attempt to deal with climate disaster, imposing the costs
on the majority while actively continuing to exempt rich households and
their corporate property from paying any of them. The European Union, for
example, has a climate law that caps total emissions and makes emitting
firms pay based on their carbon use. Private jets, however, are exempt from
the law. Worse, France itself enacted a climate law in 2021 barring domestic

flight routes that can be completed by train in two-and-a-half hours or less,
but this climate law applies to commercial flights, not private jet travel.41
So the Right's portrayal of the yellow vests as a popular uprising against
Big Government's climate laws is connerie.
Perhaps most damning of all, the phenomenal climate reporter Dharna
Noor observed that during the 2021 Glasgow climate conference of world
leaders, so many senior politicians and business leaders were expected to
fly private that the official delegate guide listed private airports among the
conference arrival points. Noor observed that a rock-bottom measure would
be to bar private jet travel to the world's most prominent climate
conference, but that they should indeed be banned permanently.42 Noor
suggested a "soft ban" by imposing a 100 percent tax on personal jets and
their cost of travel, with proceeds donated to the woefully underfunded
Green Climate Fund, intended to finance poor countries' climate transition.
Much of what passes for progress in climate talks is "commitments" from
governments for binding emissions cuts, often not met or met years late,
and difficult to take seriously when leadership can't take even the relatively
painless symbolic move of avoiding private flights to climate conferences.
Private jets mean public regrets, but there is one more area where the
world's plutocrats are running truly wild with their emissions. The
Transport & Environment report claims that private aviation "is, without
peers, the most carbon intensive activity that anyone can engage in." But
unfortunately, there is one exception.
Space Waste
As noted at the front of the book, today's wealth concentration is so utterly
out of hand that three billionaires have their own space programs. Hyper-
billionaire, Amazon.com founder Jeff Bezos and Virgin Atlantic plutocrat
Richard Branson both launched suborbital tourism flights in the summer of
2021, with Bezos's Blue Origin flights costing around $100 million. The
national press are private property themselves (Bezos owns the Washington
Post, for example), and so have gushed at the heavily choreographed launch
events: "The Amazonification of space has begun in earnest. What was once

largely the domain of big government is now increasingly the realm of Big
Tech ... For decades, NASA did not get enough funding to do anything as
epic as the Apollo program ... In contrast to the Apollo project in the 1960s,
the next trip to the moon will be outsourced."43 Of course, these jumped-up
pet projects funded with laundered public dollars, and tech monopoly
profits are mostly for tourism, taking billionaire geriatrics up to the edge of
the atmosphere and pretending it's Star Trek.
The article quoted above actually notes that the evolution of space
travel, from a costly but real government success story to private property
owned by the rich, is similar to the story of the Internet.44 Much as that
technology was privatized and then talked about as if billionaire CEOs had
invented it, space travel may have a similar future.
But of all the extensive talk and hype about private space travel and
climate, there is frankly no better account of the new industry's climate
realities than the WID's, which must be quoted at devastating length:
Perhaps the most conspicuous illustration of extreme pollution
associated with wealth inequality in recent years is the development
of space travel. Space travel is expected to cost from several
thousand dollars to several million dollars per trip. An 11-minute
flight emits no fewer than 75 tonnes of carbon per passenger once
indirect emissions are taken into account (and more likely, in the
250-1,000 tonnes range). At the other end of the distribution, about
one billion individuals emit less than one tonne per person per year.
Over their lifetime, this group of one billion individuals does not
emit more than 75 tonnes of carbon per person. It therefore takes a
few minutes in space travel to emit at least as much carbon as an
individual from the bottom billion will emit in her entire lifetime.
This example shows that there is scarcely any limit to the carbon
emissions of the ultra-wealthy.45
Looking over all this, it's hard not to become really furious at people
with far more money than they can ever need, who not only keep it from a
world majority who desperately need resources, but are also actively

destroying the future in order to yet further enrich themselves. The broad
realms of business and politics are obsessively bent on this demonic,
suicidal course.
People, and the planet, deserve life. The ruling class deserves extinction.
OceanofPDF.com

H
CHAPTER 6
THE CLANS
A GLOBAL SAFARI FOR RULING-CLASS SPECIES
WORLDWIDE
Let me issue and control a nation's money and I care not who writes
the laws.
—Mayer Amschel Rothschild1
Some measure of inequality is essential for the spirit of envy and
keeping up the Joneses that is, like greed, a valuable spur to
economic activity.
—Boris Johnson2
ow does an American tech billionaire compare to a Russian mining
oligarch? What distinguishes a Chinese manufacturing baron from
a Saudi prince? What difference does it make if a ruling-class
family comes from South African mining or Brazilian agribusiness? How
does a Japanese zaibatsu compare to a Korean chaebol?
Every country on God's earth, rich or poor, has its own tiny awful ruling
class. Regional history and local details make enormous differences, but
these upper elites will reliably own whatever there is of value to own in that
country and expect endless credit for telling their working classes what to
do. This chapter will compare the distinct upper crusts to be found on the

planet. The richness of world history and the broad diversity of elite
populations worldwide means this will necessarily be a brisk survey,
exploring too the most important industries for billionaire generation,
conspicuously Wall Street and Silicon Valley.
In the twenty-first century few lands have been spared the rule of gold.
Through relatively good times of growth or global recession, all humanity
now has the same class in charge, making this a basic part of the human
condition. No plane ticket will let you escape from that.
Banks for Nothing
Capitalism is famous for its long-term growth, increasing the amount of
goods and services produced each year, therefore creating the possibility for
a higher standard of living (depending on who gets to reap the rewards of
this growth). For firms to grow and build a new factory or food processing
plant or cell phone tower, they need money—liquid capital that can be
spent, or invested, to build up production. Even cash-rich companies like
Apple and Exxon don't cover most of their expansion through cash on hand
—they finance it. They get bank loans or mortgages, or issue bonds, but in
all cases the key to growth is access to capital.
Banks, or the financial services industry if you prefer, are the private
institutions that collect this capital from depositors and can bundle it into
loans to businesses (or people, as with mortgages). This puts bankers in the
most influential position in the economy—everyone big and small must
come to them for capital, and they tend to become uniquely knowledgeable
about what's happening in the market economy. Thus, banks often emerge
as the most powerful companies, and bankers the most powerful figures,
within capitalism.
This has had some mighty dramatic manifestations, as in the example
mentioned earlier of J. P. Morgan bailing out the US Treasury twice in one
year (see chapter 3). As it was in Morgan's time, today banks are at the
heart of capitalism's drive for company growth and market dominance.
Morgan's Wall Street trust utterly dominated finance at the turn of the last
century, when America came to have the world's biggest economy. But then

came the New Deal with its regulations cutting back on monopolies and
putting limits even on the oligopolies. Banking in particular was targeted, as
it was seen to be too powerful, not to mention that it was widely considered
responsible for the Black Tuesday crash that kicked off the decade-long
Great Depression.
So, the banks were broken up along state lines, prohibiting them from
merging with or buying banks in other states; and along industry lines, so
the main street commercial banks holding regular peoples' deposits couldn't
go into investment banking, the risky world of high finance on Wall Street.
Almost as if these limitations were successful, the New Deal era saw no
major financial crises. But once the Reagan Revolution brought neoliberal
deregulation to the industry, that changed fast. Companies went on a giant
merger binge in the 1990s and 2000s, creating today's "megabanks." It was
these colossal banks—JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, and
Citigroup—that made the bad bets on subprime mortgages in the 2000s that
led to the enormous finance crash of 2008.3
Banks today are regulated, but largely on their own terms since the
Obama administration left the reregulation job to Congress where the banks
have deep influence, and megabanks today remain gigantic and powerful.
When bank runs broke out on a number of midsize lenders like Silicon
Valley Bank and First Republic in 2023, the government again acted
aggressively to insure all deposits (even those above the FDIC cap) and
avoid large depositor losses. Our weary world has definitely not seen its last
panicky finance crash, but the industry's top figures remain just about the
most senior members of the world's ruling class. They also remain
notorious in the business world and media depictions as gigantic, awful,
bullying, coke-blasting economy-ruiners.
And so it was from their ranks that Jeffrey Epstein emerged, a
millionaire financier with ties to major billionaires like Leslie Wexner, who
had a long career as a pretender and a predator. Epstein courted the really
rich as clients, cultivated Ivy League academics, and passed strangely
through circles of elite power. Epstein is also infamous, of course, for his
monstrous record as a serial sex offender, who somehow managed to

receive a lenient sentence on the charges from his first conviction for
solicitation of a minor for prostitution.
This didn't stop him from endeavoring to turn his modest fortune into
elevated contacts with elite power brokers by, among other things, flying to
his private island with men from the highest circles. Men like former US
president Bill Clinton, celebrity attorney Alan Dershowitz, former
Microsoft CEO Bill Gates, and Prince Andrew of the UK were all flown to
Epstein's private island, where testimony has since revealed Epstein kept
young women in conditions of nightmarish sexual subjugation.4 None of
these men have so far been legally proven to have engaged in underage sex
on Epstein's trips, with the partial exception of Andrew, who settled a court
case and has seen his role in the royal family diminished. On the other
hand, the record is clear that none of these men have scruples against
ruining the lives of thousands of people in industries where they oversaw or
enabled decades of brutal outsourcing, or reckless mangling of the social
safety net. Thus, flying on a private jet to a private island and partaking in
the exploitation of fetching runaways doesn't really seem beneath them.
Epstein of course was later indicted, only to die in prison under
somewhat suspicious circumstances, leading to speculation that he may
have had blackmail information on his powerful guests. He did indeed
appear to blackmail Gates, using his knowledge of a separate affair of
Gates's to demand he contribute money to a charitable fund Epstein was
setting up.5
Today, as this book has reviewed, bankers struggle to understand why
they're so unpopular. But they absolutely pioneered the reborn Gilded Age
elite lifestyle in the modern world, with stratospheric pay, crush-my-rivals
ruthlessness, weird shiny Wall Street suits, and perks from corner offices to
putting the cocaine inhaled off a sex worker's ass on the company credit
card. Wall Street set the tone for the modern capitalist owning class, and
what do you know—it turns out they're evil assholes.
Forbes magazine noted in 2023 that the finance and technology
industries lead the way in creating the "ultra-rich," along with classic

standbys like manufacturing and retail.6 Having covered banking, let's turn
now to the hyped-up world of the tech industry.
Siliconned
For some years, Americans were in love with Big Tech. The Internet, online
video, then mobile apps, and streaming—so much fun! Everyone went
whole hog and put all their information onto online platforms and signed
terabyte-length terms of service agreements without reading them. But after
a few blissful years, it became apparent these companies couldn't be
bothered to spend money protecting all that private data, were steering
people into conspiracy theory rabbit holes to maximize interactions, and
were tracking your every move.
Only then did America wake up to how colossal and powerful the giant
platform companies have become, but by that point it was too late. As I
wrote in Bit Tyrants: The Political Economy of Silicon Valley, tech
platforms are powered by "network effects"—the ability of communication-
based services to gain value as more people use them. The first user of a
telephone or online video hub has little to do; it's only when others start
using them that they actually get useful. And the more users a service has,
the more content creators it attracts, and thus more users. This network
effect creates an unusually strong tendency toward monopoly—incumbent
firms tend to attract new users, and soon the advantage is "locked in." Even
the hyper-capitalist Economist magazine called the online platforms
"straight out of the box" monopolies.7
Relatively early on in the dominant platforms' digestion of the industry,
the conservative Wall Street Journal ran a cover article with a flying saucer
with corporate logos beaming users aboard, under the headline "Facebook,
Amazon and Other Tech Giants Tighten Grip on Internet Economy." It
described plainly that "the Internet economy is powered by an infrastructure
... controlled by a small handful of tech giants," naming Microsoft, Apple,
Amazon, Facebook, and Google as "established companies [that] dominate
in essential services that both fuel and extract value from the rising digital
economy ... Anyone starting a business needs to make sure they can be

found on Google. Anyone with goods to sell wants Amazon to carry
them."8
By now several of the tech platforms are trillion-dollar corporations,
and their leaders have become the newest nouveau riche to ascend to
capitalism's ruling class. Their dumb dressed-down look, their imbecilic
repetition of "disruption" and "Uber-of-this" lingo, and their striving for
monopoly have reshaped the style and conversation of ruling elites around
the world.
Big Tech is thoroughly bound up in everything we do, from working to
exercising to dating to watching TV. The industry has proved politically
powerful enough to stop all efforts in the US to regulate it, although the
Europeans have had more success, instituting bloc-wide rules (that often
become globally observed by the platforms) requiring local storage of data,
limits to tracking software, the right of users to control their data, and more.
But tech isn't going anywhere, and indeed has now become arguably
codominant with Wall Street as the central sector of modern capitalism.
Whatever the future of humanity is, Silicon Valley is tightly bound up with
it, and there's no delete key in the world that can remove their incredible
power and all-seeing eyes.
Engulfed
Past these key industries, we can explore the broader world of the ruling
class. The rulers of today's Arab states around the Persian Gulf mostly owe
the survival of their monarchies to Britain and America. Britain cultivated
the local Gulf elites in the nineteenth century, and the modern Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia only arose between the World Wars, with American blessing
as the House of Saud took control of the realm and the most holy Islamic
sites. The region has one of the world's most unequal wealth landscapes,
with its richest 1 percent of households owning a stupendous 44 percent of
the regional wealth.9 Royalty of the Gulf states are famous for their
stratospheric oil fortunes—one prince was reported to have lost $6 million
in a single night at Monte Carlo.10

The regimes of these countries are also some of the ugliest, most
nakedly authoritarian ruling classes in the world. The royal families have
spent their decades in power locking up opponents, closing independent
media, repressing their Shiite minorities, and buying off their subjects with
slices of the thundering river of oil money that made these hideous regimes
the best friends of the West. No elections, women often must be covered
head to toe and cannot go out without a male escort, just literal gross feudal
monarchy. Yet every postwar American president has staged photo ops with
these kings and princes as they sought to maintain control over global
energy supplies, a move that pretty drastically undermines the regular
claims of Western governments that they respect freedom and human rights.
The Arab monarchies, and especially the Gulf states, are also highly
reliant on hyper-exploited migrant labor, mostly from South Asia. In small,
arid states with low populations that wish to use oil wealth for upward
mobility, there are limited options for a blue-collar workforce to build the
insane new buildings, wait on wealthy subjects, or care for the children of
the Gulf's middle classes. The Gulf states are so reliant on foreign labor that
migrant workers came to represent "the majority of the population within
most Gulf states," as the best book on the subject puts it, kept under control
by having "their political and economic rights ... carefully restricted and
managed. The possibility to obtain property, form unions and own capital
were outlawed."11
This reliance on borderline slave labor only reached real Western public
awareness in 2022 when the World Cup was set in Qatar, a petrostate
thought to have high standards of living for their local subjects. During the
Games, journalists were occasionally allowed into notoriously private
Qatari homes. Accounts describe large estates with multiple guesthouses,
tended by groundskeepers from East Africa and South Asia. A wealthy
Qatari suggests, "The minute you say, 'salaam alaikum'—'hello,' you know
—you give them a lot. They just feel respected." The author of the piece
goes on to describe a gender-segregated female group of affluent Qataris
watching a game, during which "every few minutes, staff members wearing
purple dresses and white cotton gloves made the rounds with trays
brimming with bowls of sweets, cappuccinos in gold-rimmed cups and a

pot of Arabic coffee. One passed by with a bouquet of flowers so large that
I could see only the legs of the housekeeper carrying it." All this in a
"highly stratified" country, with "approximately two million migrant
laborers enlisted to facilitate a luxurious lifestyle for about 380,000 Qatari
citizens."12
In Dubai, laborers from the Indian subcontinent are recruited and go
into debt for their flights to the Gulf, and have their passports seized on
arrival, making them utterly helpless to their overseers "in modern-day
bondage, and [have] no choice but to continue to work in the searing heat in
order to pay back their debts." Foreigners (semi-slaves and rich expats) are
80 percent of the population.13
Today, the monarchs are eager for tourism and foreign investment, and
are looking to clean up their reputations. For Saudi Arabia, by far the
largest, most influential, and most economically important Gulf state, the
stakes are higher. The current wretched godforsaken monarch to rule that
accursed land, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, is campaigning to
lessen the kingdom's reliance on oil and gas exports. To do so, he began by
wringing wealth out of his own awful royal family, once by keeping fellow
princes and other family members against their will for weeks at the Riyadh
Ritz-Carlton until they coughed up a few million for the cause.
To come up with cash, Saudi princes sold off incredible assets,
including $600 million in art, real estate, and yachts. This included "a $155
million British country estate, two yachts more than 200 feet long, and
Mughal jewels gifted as wedding presents by a late king." Some royals
"with large staffs and lavish lifestyles" were spending upwards of $30
million a month. Now bin Salman is charging a tax on them: $2,500 a year
"for each domestic worker beyond the fourth employee, costing some
royals hundreds of thousands of dollars a year."14
Much of the extorted money goes into the Prince Salman's utterly daffy
ideas, such as Neom, a desert city meant to be a futuristic "smart city"
where all services run on personal technology, part of The Line, a fever
dream of a development planned to run a mile long and just 660 feet wide,
standing 1,600 feet tall with mirrored walls.15 Projected to cost several

hundred billion dollars, the alleged city would be monitored by AI using
predictive data models to improve city life. This fully stupid quick-fix
development fantasy is the kind of thing you get with deluded child
monarchs surrounded by ball-fondling sycophants, and probably not the
very best use of an incomprehensible amount of money in a country with
plenty of desperately poor people.
Another part of the royal family's cash is going to clean up the
kingdom's image, tainted by little petty offenses such as never holding
elections, keeping women in conditions associated with the Taliban,
suppressing the Shiite minority, and lopping off the heads of criminals. One
way of cleaning up reputations, also used by Russian oligarchs (see below),
is buying up popular British football teams. The Saudis bought longtime
underdog UK football team Newcastle United shortly after Manchester City
was also bought by Abu Dhabi via intermediaries. In response to this naked
attempt to improve the image of an ugly medieval dictatorship, fans cheered
and gathered "in thobes and headdresses, waving the Saudi flag, inscribed
with the shahada, while singing that their club had, at last, been returned to
them."16
And yet it's easy come, easy go, because countries run by autocrats
often have a hard time sticking with a plan. With billions in play to change
the kingdom's reputation, in 2018 the crown prince learned that a critical
Saudi journalist, Jamal Khashoggi, had entered the Saudi consulate in
Istanbul to get documents for his coming marriage. Khashoggi never left
the consulate. The Saudis have changed their story about what happened;
however, the Turks and the CIA have reached the same conclusion: the
prince had Khashoggi killed in the embassy, dismembered his body, and
smuggled it out in duffel bags.17
Later, a ruling-class friendship between the crown prince and Amazon
founder and billionaire Jeff Bezos fell apart. The two had been in touch for
some time about Amazon building a data center in the kingdom with the
typical enormous government subsidies. And when this deal fell through,
pictures were leaked from Bezos's phone showing racy images of his
mistress. The Saudis denied involvement, and it turned out to have

apparently been Bezos's mistress's brother who leaked the pictures, but the
friendship was over—the Wall Street Journal calls the two "archenemies."18
The Gulf monarchs look set to continue trying to balance their own
absolute autocratic medieval power with enough modernization to attract
foreign capital and friendly media puff pieces. But there aren't enough
duffel bags in the world to carry out the dismembered body of Arab
freedom.
LOLigarchs
And it was all going so well.
Prior to Russian president Vladimir Putin's ill-fated decision to invade
Ukraine in 2022, the Russian rich had largely succeeded in joining their
Western and global counterparts as members of the world's owning class.
Their purchases of priceless art were cleared, their kids enrolled in elite
Western academies, and their yachts docked next to craft owned by their
American, European, and Chinese peers. Even Putin's original 2014
invasion of Ukraine, which brought sanctions on the country and the early
rumblings of the renewed Cold War with Russia, still left Russia's oligarchs
integrated into the global ruling class.
The oligarchs themselves only arose with the collapse of the Soviet
Union in 1991. Under the "shock therapy" approach insisted on by US
consultants, the Soviet economy was sold off to anyone who could come up
with the widely distributed vouchers, through honest or crooked methods.
Within a few years, the legacy of Soviet industrialization was in the hands
of a tiny number of hyper-rich, super-evil Russian capitalists often called
"oligarchs," from a classic Greek term for rich rulers. The rule of the
oligarchs in the 1990s was so ugly and brazen that when Putin first came to
power in 2000, originally with their support, his mandate was to bring them
back under control. At that time, the World Bank estimated that the thirty
richest oligarchs controlled an unbelievable 40 percent of Russian GDP.19
Under this entente, the oligarchs didn't interfere with politics or
complain too much when Putin's state locked up political opponents—a
perennial activity in Russia—or nationalized certain strategic sectors,

especially energy. And the state didn't stand in the way of their riches,
which the oligarchs heaped up with stunning abandon. To this day, the
region is one of the most unequal on earth, with a whopping 46 percent of
its capital held by the richest 1 percent.20
Kampfner recounts how the oligarchs turned London's high-end real
estate market into "Londongrad":
Former British government ministers queued up to represent them in
the House of Lords. Spin-doctors did their PR, tasking juniors in the
office to "improve" their clients' Wikipedia entries—the internet
made it easier to launder reputations, but also easier to be found out
... Several law firms helped Russians to use Britain's hideously
indulgent defamation culture to slap suits on enquiring journalists at
the first sign of trouble.21
By far the most common form of oligarchic conspicuous consumption
has been yachts. Selling one to an oligarch "all starts with NDAs," for the
broker, the shipbuilders, and the crew. Russian yacht owners, like American
and European ones, have tastes that can run the final bill for a luxury boat
up to the hundreds of millions of dollars. The Times breaks it down: $28
million for the steel hull, $24 million for the fancy deck, $21 million for the
engine room, and $18 million just for paint. There are crazy addons too, like
$2 million for a movie theater or $2 to $3 million for fully ventilated
Kevlar-lined safe rooms. "Some billionaires even build their own medical
units, complete with nurses and doctors."22 Upkeep is usually about 10
percent of the yacht's build price, plus docking fees for a giant boat that can
run $29,000 a week, or $750,000 annually.
Since the start of the Russo-Ukrainian War, only some nations' ports,
like Turkey and the UAE, remain open to the cruising oligarch. With Russia
sanctioned over its war crimes in Ukraine, just flying their private jets has
become almost impossible. Dozens of them are now sitting on the tarmac at
Dubai's Al Maktoum International Airport, at a cost of about $1,000 a day.
Dubai allows them in, but because the planes can mostly no longer be
insured or serviced due to sanctions, they are largely stuck there.23

Getting Western goods is also difficult, no small concern for buyers
working for ultrarich oligarch households. Cars, smart-phones, and clothes
are still entering Russia to satisfy oligarch demand, mostly through
friendlier third countries like Turkey and Kazakhstan. A Dubai luxury car
showroom director of communications said, "The wealthy people always
stay wealthy," finding the war "did not affect them."24 Many rich Russians
have moved temporarily to Turkey, which has not joined the Western
sanctions regime. The press notes that "newly arrived Russians are buying
as many as four apartments at a time, usually with cash, in order to invest
the $250,000 required for citizenship" (see chapter 2).25
Meanwhile, as the horror of war grinds on in Ukraine and refugees
continue to flee the fighting, bombing, and threats, it's fair to note that once
again the rich fled first. The Financial Times has covered how "from private
schools to cosmetic surgery clinics, restaurants and upmarket estate agents,
Polish businesses catering to the well-heeled are adapting to a new influx of
customers: wealthy Ukrainians fleeing Russia's war. While a majority of
refugees were forced to escape their country with few possessions, a
smaller group of relatively affluent Ukrainians arrived in their own cars and
have provided an unexpected boost to upmarket businesses amid an
economic slowdown." Private schools, cosmetic surgery clinics, and high-
end shopping are benefiting from the exodus of Ukrainian oligarchs.26
When Russia's rich can rejoin their brothers and sisters in the world's
ruling class is unclear. At the time of writing this book, the Russo-Ukrainian
War grinds on, looking at the moment increasingly like a war of attrition or
full-on stalemate. When this eventuates in talks and eventual peace is
obviously unknowable, and until then the war will have many victims—
dead civilians, displaced refugee families, rising hunger in the developing
world from lack of Russian and Ukrainian food exports, and the destroyed
environment of east Ukraine, littered with unexploded cluster bombs and
poisonous depleted uranium rounds.
But there will be one more victim—the sad oligarchs who can only
yacht to Turkey or the UAE due to sanctions, and whose Western imports
are more expensive due to extra middlemen. The Russian tragedy carries
on.

Great Cabal of China
China, for all its surviving Maoist iconography and its definitely still-ruling
Communist Party, is a classic capitalist state today. Starting with special
economic zones, China began opening up its economy to foreign
investment in the late 1980s, which American and European corporations
were delighted to provide. They invested to create a cheap export platform
for products formerly made domestically with expensive first-world
workers, and of course also for access to China's own enormous domestic
market.
There's a great deal of Western animosity now toward China, but it's
somewhat strange since China did what we wanted—open up the economy.
China, however, also did what the West did, which was to retain a strong
enough state to guide actual economic development that benefited the
country, rather than what the Third World was forced to do (see below). For
decades the Chinese government would hold large summits and meetings
with executives of Western corporate CEOs, with senior political leadership
meeting heads of Blackstone, AIG, Carlyle, BP, Pepsi, Walmart, and Coca-
Cola, just looking at one 2013 meeting.27
Having a tyrannical state is far from anti-capitalist—the sadly most
common mode of economic development is authoritarian, from the Gilded
Age autocrats to Stalin to postwar Japan to today's China. Most developing-
world countries have tyrannical governments and market economies, but
China's government has managed something few other developing-world
countries have—they have used the things the West insists will bring
development, like foreign direct investment, in a way that actually did
develop the country. China now has many capitalist features, including a
rich owning class—the country's richest 1 percent owns 30.5 percent of its
wealth, one of the relatively lower shares globally.28
Other economists, including the great inequality scholar Branko
Milanovic, express some hope that Chinese inequality may fall thanks to
classic mitigating factors like widening access to education and potentially
more social welfare, suggesting "one can be optimistic that China's income
inequality may have peaked." Yet, he also notes the countercurrents of

corruption and fast-rising wealth that tend to increase the share of national
income going to capital, which is always highly concentrated.29 China's
long-running troubles with its large housing-construction companies and
measly social safety net mitigate against these hopeful possibilities.
Either way, as is common around the capitalist world, China's rich can
defend themselves. A New York Times headline ran, "Billionaire Lawmakers
Ensure the Rich Are Represented in China's Legislature," finding "among
the 1,271 richest Chinese people tracked by the Shanghai-based Hurun
Report, a record 203, or more than one in seven, are delegates to the
nation's Parliament or its advisory body."30 Kampfner observes the
National People's Congress is
by far the wealthiest legislature of any country ... [I]ts seventy
richest members make more than the total net worth of all members
of all three branches of the US state ... From the days of the Tang
and Ming dynasties, China's elite has been careful to hide its wealth
behind high walls. Sales of luxury items are rampant among the top
1 per cent, but where possible the acquisitions—or the identities of
the purchasers—are kept out of sight. Limousines invariably come
with blacked-out windows; fine wines are drunk in restaurants
hidden away in secure compounds. In November 2013, the world's
most expensive case of wine—a 1978 Burgundy, Romanée-Conti—
sold at Christie's in Hong Kong for $476,000, to a Chinese bidder.31
Modern China is more capitalist, in fact, than many realize. A drive by
President Xi Jinping to reduce inequality with a "common prosperity" plan
was meant to address "concerns that elites had benefited disproportionately
from the country's economic boom," the Wall Street Journal reports. But
Beijing "walked back some measures," including "plans to expand a new
property tax that could have funded social-welfare programs, but faced
opposition from elites and policy makes [sic] who worried it would push
property values lower." Notably, "China's tax system is less progressive
than developed countries', with burdens falling mostly on lower-income
workers. Raising tax rates on the upper class, who tend to be more

politically connected, has faced resistance ... Personal income taxes in
China add up to 1.2% of gross domestic product, compared with about 10%
in the U.S. and U.K."32 Experts suggest the government "introduce
inheritance or capital-gains taxes on individuals, which would redirect more
wealth from richer families, but that would also likely face opposition." The
major analogues are countries with great historic rivalries with China,
above all Japan and Korea, which both relied heavily on state guidance and
subsidies to build up their postwar electronics and automotive sectors,
rather than a market-based approach that would have seen them carry on
with their existing comparative advantage in rice and fish. All these
economies 
used 
state-based 
development 
models, 
mostly 
under
authoritarian conditions—the US occupation authority in Japan, and the
US-backed Park dictatorship in South Korea—and all succeeded by
breaking Western rules.
The Chinese ruling class of businessmen, tech leaders, and government
functionaries is as self-interested and cruel as any other, but it is one of the
few that is not actively desiring another major global conflict, one we
would be unlikely to survive with our civilization intact. Here's hoping the
Middle Kingdom takes the high road.
Old Colonials
Europe's ruling class has had a hell of a ride, fully dominating the world for
a couple hundred years. Covering the world's map in the colors of its
western states, European colonialism gave a majority of the planet's
countries a shared origin story: having a war to drive out some European
imperialists.
Wealth in the western European countries rose sharply with the
Industrial Revolution, when traditional social and natural systems were
digested as industrial inputs for early capitalism. Industrialization kept
Europe in charge of its colonies until the world wars, which first weakened
and then broke their hold over Africa and Asia, with Latin America having
kicked out its Iberian colonists earlier only to become economic satellites of
Britain and then America.

After World War II, the Europeans lost their empires, despite Churchill's
best efforts to maintain British control of the great prize of India. Since
then, labor and social democratic movements led postwar Europe to
develop a system of social supports that is the envy of the rest of the world.
Despite waves of austerity in the neoliberal period, much of these national
health-care and educational systems have persisted.
But since the wars, the European ruling class has been completely
subordinated to the direction of America. Incorporation into the NATO
military alliance has played a major role in this, including its gradual
expansion to the east despite regular Russian insistence that this is
unacceptable. After NATO looked weakened by the erratic and isolationist
aspects of the Trump administration, it came surging back after the outbreak
of the Russo-Ukrainian War. European acquiescence to American foreign
policy and even economic decisions has gone on, like expelling Chinese
Huawei technology and cutting off the country's access to cutting-edge
semiconductor printers manufactured in the Netherlands.
As mentioned previously, Europe has the least crazily lopsided wealth
distribution today, with the richest 1 percent of households owning a mere
25 percent of the region's capital.33 Still, it's a more inheritance-based
ruling elite than in America, and the older rich families, frequently ones
with royal or noble backgrounds, or at least historic connections to state
power, are some of the most insufferably arrogant and literally entitled in
the world. Rich families expect respect and are very accustomed to being
able to tell schoolmates that they can buy their families, giving the
European Old Money rich the exact characteristics that aristocrats are
mocked for worldwide.
The richest man in Europe, Bernard Arnault, and his family have
already been mentioned in this book. Arnault is presently auditioning his
adult children to run various arms of the luxury goods conglomerate the
family controls and which makes Arnault intermittently the richest man on
Earth. The kids hold seats on the board of the holding company that gives
the family control of the company and are expected to inherit various senior
positions in it over time.34

Germany, as Europe's most dynamic economy, is far from exempt. A
subject of some national reflection is the continued prominence of the
classic German industrial families, many dirtied with crimes against
humanity during World War II but still national economic champions today.
The definitive text on this particular sector of the European ruling class is
David de Jong's irresistible Nazi Billionaires. It artfully describes the long
relationship between the powerful country's rich industrial families,
beginning with support for the democracy-hating, free-market-loving early
Nazi Party, and culminating in running grossly enlarged wartime industries
with thousands of enslaved POWs and Jews.
Today, some younger members of these families would prefer we all
move on from the past. Verena Bahlsen, 26-year-old inheritor of the great
Bahlsen confectionery company, scolded a socialist politician who
advocated for the common ownership of Germany's biggest industrial
companies by saying: "I am a capitalist ... I own a quarter of Bahlsen and I
am happy about it, too. It should continue to belong to me. I want to make
money and buy sailing yachts from my dividend and stuff."35
But the ultimate example of this inherited wealth is, of course, the
various European royal families, above all the House of Windsor in the UK,
which is technically one of the richest in the world, although much of their
assets are fixed by hoary royal institutions and customs. Thus, although
they throw off quite large streams of income, they broadly can't be disposed
of like other forms of wealth. King George VI famously referred to the
family and its interests as "The Firm," and its assets include a large real
estate portfolio in the Crown Estate, including choice assets in London, plus
the Duchies of Cornwall and Lancaster, which together are worth over £16
billion, according to the Financial Times.36 Plus you got your various
palaces, racehorses, and gigantic precious stones with dumb names like the
Koh-i-Noor diamond.
Still, Danny Dorling notes in his book Inequality and the 1% that the
estimated wealth of the whole UK 1 percent is about £110 billion: "For the
price of the richest 1 per cent in Britain, we could instead support 1,100
royal families ... and the superrich don't even smile and wave."37

There's no Old Money like Old World Old Money.
Third World, Last Place
Everyone knows that there are many extremely poor countries in the world,
sometimes called the Third World, or these days the "developing world."
These countries are often seen as scary, struggling places, with billions of
people trapped in grinding poverty across the poor regions of Africa,
southern Asia, and Latin America.
But these countries have been The Poor Countries for quite some time
now. At the end of World War II, the great states of the developing world,
like Brazil, Indonesia, India, and the Congo, were dramatically poorer than
the developed world. Today, seventy-five years later, they're still poor. Just
what the hell is going on here?
For centuries, most of today's developing world was part of the colonial
systems of the European powers, including Britain's hold on India and
Egypt, French ownership of West Africa and Vietnam, the Netherlands'
possession of Indonesia, the Belgian Congo, Portuguese Brazil, and so on.
Colonies were used as sources of vital materials, from precious Eastern
spices used to rescue bland European cooking, to desperately needed oil to
fuel the West's industrial economy. The colonies were also often barred
from importing products from other European powers, making them
important "captive markets" of their mother countries. And in addition to
these economic incentives, the countries' territories were treated like chess
pieces in the rivalries of the great powers.
After the imperial powers were beaten, exhausted, and occupied during
World War II, the developing world launched movements for independence
—and the Europeans fought doggedly to avoid giving it to them. From
French Algeria to British India, the colonial powers used ungodly violence
and torture on a huge scale against dissidents, keeping cruel pro-Western
regimes in office as long as possible. As the developing countries of the
Global South gradually won independence in long, bloody struggles, their
traumatized societies fell under what leftists often call "neocolonialism"—
using local dictators installed and supported by the rich Western states to

run these newly independent countries, thus allowing Western companies to
continue owning many of the crucial resources and selling products to their
large markets.
One of the most valuable tools to keep these countries from real
independence has been debt. The battle-scarred governments arising from
the wars of independence—with some authoritarian and some managing to
remain partially republican—demanded compensation from the former
imperial powers. This was in recognition of the scale of their crimes against
the Third World, from the enormous violence unleashed against them to the
significant part of their wealth that was stripped and invested to build up
Western economies. Europe and the US refused; however, they frequently
indicated they were prepared to lend them money instead.
Despite constant requests for capital grants as reparations rather than
lines of credit, many developing countries borrowed money, ostensibly for
development—investing in education, health, and domestic infrastructure to
begin the journey to a developed-world standard of living. Frequently these
loans were organized by the World Bank, created by the Western powers
after World War II to help provide "development credit" to the Third World.
These loans for roads, bridges, schools, and hospitals were supposed to be
paid for by the countries' great future economic growth, although notably
the World Bank and Western investors favored projects that built on the
poor countries' existing comparative trade advantages. This meant
exporting basic goods like bulk crops or raw commodities like oil and
copper—largely 
leaving 
the 
higher 
value-added 
processing 
and
manufacturing to the developed world.
But the numerous right-wing authoritarians installed by the US in the
Cold War environment were extremely corrupt, including the Shah of Iran,
the fascist Brazilian military government, and the string of US-backed
dictators in Pakistan. The countries borrowed giant amounts from
international banks in the Western countries in the name of the world's
penniless, but the money went straight up their rulers' noses, while the debts
stayed on the books despite being clearly "odious"—debt that should be
canceled due to illegitimacy. According to the World Bank, by 2010 the

"external debt" owed by poor Third World states had reached an
outrageous, towering $4 trillion.38
And it's even more offensive when you consider where these giant sums
from poor people go. Developing world debt—the bonds issued by
sovereign borrowers like governments in the Global South—is held widely,
but like most financial assets, public debt from the developing world is held
mostly by financial institutions and wealthy investors in the developed
world. The atrocity of this really needs to be considered—you have the
most grindingly poor people on the godforsaken planet remitting quite large
sums of cash to the richest people and institutions in the world, taking from
Malala to give to Donald Trump Jr.
But the giant loans from the World Bank and private foreign investors
failed to enable the needed economic growth—in part because of the
inherently limited, commodity export-based development model, and also
because much of the money went into corrupt dictators' Swiss bank
accounts. And when inadequate growth left the countries unable to readily
pay their debts, creditors called the IMF—the International Monetary Fund.
Mind the SAP
Originally created to help regulate capital flows, the IMF was constituted
alongside the World Bank in the famous Bretton Woods global financial
policy summit in 1944. But by the 1980s the IMF had evolved into the
credit community's enforcer—developing countries that fell behind on their
debt payments would find lenders wouldn't extend them further credit,
except for the IMF. But the Fund has become infamous worldwide for the
policy changes it requires before extending new loans, known as SAPs—
structural adjustment programs. Allegedly these are meant to help countries
stabilize their finances, giving lenders confidence that the countries can
manage their debt and resume economic growth. However, the policies are
a recipe for satisfying wealthy foreign ruling-class lenders above all else,
often at the expense of recession or long-term stagnation in these painfully
poor countries, through aggressive "austerity" programs.

For example, SAPs typically include fiscal austerity—fixing the
government's budget deficit by cutting social spending. The main targets
usually include health and education spending, as well as subsidies—
spending by the state to lower prices for basic food and fuel, like cooking or
heating oil. For the global poor, these subsidies are often life-and-death
concerns, making the difference that keeps families from having to choose
between food and keeping the heat on, and so they're often the most
forcefully publicly demanded government policies. But they are a fiscal
drag on the poorest states because huge numbers of desperate people rely
on them, and they make an obvious target for IMF policy writers. SAPs also
require new, highly regressive taxes, usually on the poor or small middle
classes.
SAPs also require monetary austerity and privatization, where a public
agency is sold off to private investors, such as health clinics or major
infrastructure like ports. This helps the government budget but means
people must pay for formerly free services, and comes with large layoffs as
the newly private agencies try to make money, damn the cost. The ruling
elites of these nations end up having their interests protected, whether these
are large landholdings (the classic developing-world ruling-class asset) or
major former public property, like ports or telecommunications systems.
The great Marxist writer Vijay Prashad uses the example of the small
south African state of Malawi, which after a disastrous privatization of its
agricultural development agency saw prices of basic grains shoot up 400
percent, which along with alternating floods and droughts brought full-on
starvation. The IMF did not consider this adequate cause to amend the SAP,
and Malawi spends more annually on its debt service than on health,
education, and agriculture put together.39
So the IMF's SAPs, along with other Third World calamities, have kept
the developing world in a perpetual state of "development" for many
decades now, by turning them into debt-servicing machines. Don't take my
word for it—the late archconservative economist (and archenemy of mine)
Milton Friedman himself said, "IMF bailouts are hurting the countries they
are lending to, and benefitting the foreigners who lent to them. The United
States does give foreign aid. But this is a different kind of foreign aid. It

only goes through countries like Thailand to Bankers Trust."40 The IMF
then is an important part of the global systems of control, making it a long
shot for a social movement to not only gain state power anywhere in the
world, but also preventing any real left-wing government from taking any
steps to reform its economy. Strapped governments ordered to implement
austerity can't redistribute wealth for great social programs, so along with
other entities like the financial markets and the US military, the global
ruling class has yet more defensive tools to stop any popular struggles for
socialism or other popular political movements.
And so as decades pass, large countries containing enormous wealth,
like Brazil, Indonesia, and the Congo, somehow remain grindingly poor
(although their top households stay fabulously rich). This is neocolonialism
—the component of neoliberalism that maintains the people of the Third
World in debt traps, and which looks not all that different from classic
colonialism. After so many decades of failed promises, even the IMF has
been forced to recognize the real effects of its SAPs—in a truly incredible
IMF paper titled "Neoliberalism: Oversold?" staff economists report,
"Instead of delivering growth, some neoliberal policies have increased
inequality, in turn jeopardizing durable expansion ... Austerity policies ...
hurt demand—and thus worsen employment and unemployment ...
[E]pisodes of fiscal consolidation have been followed, on average, by drops
rather than by expansions in output."41 Yet new IMF lending programs for
states like Argentina and Pakistan still have the reliable austerity-heavy
terms, like previous "bailouts"—not bailouts of the countries, but bailouts
of the countries' ruling-class creditors. It is a darkly hilarious fact that
there's an entire category of urban and rural uprising known as "IMF riots,"
which reliably erupt after some proud, poor country is racked with SAP
austerity.
Often IMF SAPs require explicit repudiation of political programs that
won mass support. Pakistan is a clear case of this global class warfare,
where Prime Minister Imran Khan ran for office on a popular program of
jobs and welfare—more health and education spending, and employment to
raise the quality of life for this fast-growing population. But finding the
state close to defaulting on its debt, his government has been largely forced

to "shred his political program," as the Wall Street Journal reported, and
"raise tax rates, curb government spending and increase gas and electricity
prices in return for IMF support."42 Calling his country's condition a "debt
trap," Khan hopes the country can return to growth after the SAP, but the
bailout isn't even a sure thing since "the U.S. government, which holds
sway over the IMF," is concerned that Pakistan will use the bailout funds to
repay large loans to China instead. It's worth noting that, as the new
program continues to weaken the economy and "stifle demand," this is
Pakistan's twenty-second IMF program, all of which have been overseen by
a string of successive US-backed military dictators, from Zia-ul-Haq to
Pervez Musharraf.43
Through it all, these countries face horribly widespread hunger,
malnutrition, and even famine. Years ago even the conservative Financial
Times recognized that "there is a problem of distribution, to be sure, but it is
more to do with money than with food. People are not hungry these days
because food supplies are not available; they are hungry because they are
poor."44 The IMF is a major tool of today's global ruling class, as the
Financial Times also said: "The fall of the Soviet bloc has ... create[d] a
new imperial age," with "a system of indirect rule that has involved the
integration of leaders of developing countries into the network of the new
ruling class."45
Like a family reunion you don't want to get invited to, the world's
ruling class has a family resemblance that's hard to look at. For all their
enormous diversity of historical backgrounds, paths to great wealth, and
local peculiarities, the owning classes look a lot alike the world over. They
hoard whatever wealth is to be had in the land, rule over the hapless
subjects or citizens living there, and demand nonstop celebration and praise
for their alleged efforts at creating jobs, public service, or defending of the
faith.
But every elite's time in the sun ends someday. For the final chapter,
let's look into bringing that day closer.
OceanofPDF.com

T
CHAPTER 7
THE PLAN
THE SOCIALIST MOVEMENT TO STICK IT TO THE MAN
The rights and interests of the laboring man will be protected and
cared for by the Christian men to whom God has given control of
the property rights of the country. Pray earnestly that right may
triumph, always remembering that the Lord God Omnipotent still
reigns.
—George F. Baer, president, Philadelphia and Reading
Railroad1
[T]he low-skilled American worker is the most overpaid worker in
the world.
—Hedge fund manager2
oday's ruling class towers over us, and commands the major
economic and political institutions. They shape how economies will
work through control of investment, and control the ideas people
encounter through their ownership of the dominant private media. Every as-
seen-on-TV argument to justify their towering power and debased waste
collapses immediately when scrutinized, so they do their best to make sure
that scrutiny is carefully avoided.

Beyond scrutinizing the rich, though, there are ways to deal with their
control over society. Traditional social democratic measures, like heavy
progressive taxes on high-income households, or tight regulation of their
corporate empires, remain popular and achievable today, and we should
continue pursuing them. But a more effective approach would be to
"expropriate" the ruling class—to take away their large-scale property, so
that they no longer own and get to control the economy. Every factory, giant
farm, data center, oil refinery, and goods warehouse is owned by a rich
person, family, or class, giving them their gigantic incomes and social
power. Past efforts to put the rich in their box, like European social
democracy or the US New Deal, mostly failed at this decisive step, leaving
the rich with the cash and social influence to mount a major comeback
thanks to the neoliberalism of the last forty years. If we get another chance,
we should avoid making the same mistake.
But the men and women of today's ruling class are far from invincible.
Our side has won victories large and small in the workplace, and in politics.
Today's labor movement and the surprising resurgence of socialist politics
hold some real promise for saving humanity and our feverish planet. If
nothing else, they prove that people can, and will, stand up to all the money
in the world. As the great Indian independence leader Mahatma Gandhi
wrote, "Capitalists were after all few in number. The workers were many.
But capital was well organized and had learnt to combine. If labor realized
its inherent strength and the secret of combination it would rule capital
instead of being ruled by it."3
The secret is out! Let's see how it can be used to help fight the ruling
class of the twenty-first century.
Well-Red
People across the board, especially younger people, are questioning the way
the economic system works, confronting enormous challenges like the rise
of incredible student loan debt, shrinking support from the social safety net,
falling real incomes (and indeed life expectancies), and above all the
existential threat of global climate change. These daunting challenges have

led young people to question the status quo economic system significantly
more than previous US generations, at least according to what they say.
This trend eventuated a series of public opinion polls over the last
several years that have created quite a stir among liberals and conservatives.
Among the increasingly prevalent views that keep Corporate America
awake at night are results from the broadly respected Pew Research polling
agency. As far back as 2014, Pew observed that two-thirds of Americans
recognized that economic inequality had grown, and with little difference
between political party affiliations. And despite no support for the idea in
dominant corporate media, in order to reduce poverty "54% of all
Americans [supported] raising taxes on the wealthy and corporations in
order to expand programs for the poor." Half of respondents said poverty
was due to circumstances beyond a person's control, versus 35 percent who
blamed a lack of hard work. Half said that the rich owe it to having "more
advantages than others." Americans said by two to one that "the economic
system unfairly favors the wealthy."4 And an incredible 66 percent said
there were "very strong" or "strong conflicts between the rich and the
poor."5
By 2016, a Harvard University survey of young adults found that 51
percent did not support capitalism, while 42 percent did. The survey noted,
reasonably, that "capitalism" and especially "socialism" are not terms with
universally agreed-upon meanings, but still only among respondents over
fifty years of age did a majority say it supported capitalism.6 This began the
now-common media story that young people hate capitalism.
To clarify the issue, Pew returned to the subject in 2019 and included in
their results the "crosstabs," or views by respondent category. This added
some fascinating results, such as that African Americans are the most
socialist unit of the United States, with 65 percent having a "very or
somewhat positive impression of socialism." Fifty percent of all
respondents aged eighteen to twenty-nine said the same, and support for
socialism rises as family income falls.7
Pew also asked respondents to use their own words to describe what the
terms meant to them, and which system they supported most. The 42

percent with a positive view of socialism gave responses to the effect that it
"creates a fairer, more generous system" and "builds upon and improves
capitalism," while the 55 percent with a negative view in the poll said it
"undermines work ethic, increases reliance on government" and referred to
"historical and comparative failure." Among the 33 percent with a negative
view of capitalism, respondents said the system "benefits only a
few/unequal distribution of wealth," and found it "exploitative/ corrupt in
nature." The 65 percent with a positive view of capitalism found it
"promotes individual opportunity" and was "essential to America."8
For the record, capitalism is usually defined as an economic system
characterized by markets and private property—meaning productive private
property, like large farms, semiconductor plants, and data centers, rather
than petty private property, like your personal clothes and toothbrush.
Socialism is usually defined as a system with public or social ownership of
productive property and a more equal, or egalitarian, distribution of wealth.
The highly respected Gallup polling agency found the next year that
more than half of US Democrats, 57 percent, had a positive view of
socialism, with support for capitalism falling from 56 percent in 2016 to 47
percent in 2020.9 These numbers do move up and down over the short term,
but it's worth noting again and again that the US is a hyper-capitalist
country with schooling and media that present wall-to-wall support for free
markets and capitalism, with private media trumpeting the superiority of
free enterprise to Big Government, and schools requiring economics classes
with a curriculum that is little more than glorified capitalist indoctrination.
And yet the outsourcing tsunami of the last thirty years—and then the years
of pandemic lockdown—have unmistakably taught the public they are
considered disposable. So what is the best that can be achieved by cradle-
to-grave propaganda? Support for the system of about 3:2. Nothing to write
home about!
The broad pattern has held up in other polling. Pew found in 2023 that
Americans' biggest complaint about taxes was that "some corporations
don't pay their fair share" and "some wealthy people don't pay their fair
share," both of which were reported more bothersome than the amount
respondents personally paid.10 Axios, the popular short-form news site, ran

a survey with pollster Momentive in 2021, finding "just half of younger
Americans now hold a positive view of capitalism—and socialism's appeal
in the U.S. continues to grow, driven by Black Americans and women," in
part due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic offering an opportunity
for people to "re-evaluate their political and economic worldview." Among
the findings were that "just 66% of Republicans and GOP-leaners ages 18-
34 have a positive view of capitalism, down from 81% in January 2019,"
and an incredible "56% of younger Republicans say the government should
pursue policies that reduce the wealth gap." Forty-one percent of all adults
viewed socialism favorably, and "socialism has positive connotations for
60% of Black Americans, 45% of American women and 33% of non-white
Republicans." And those eighteen to thirty-four were "almost evenly split
between those who view capitalism positively and those who view it
negatively (49% vs. 46%). Two years before, that margin was a gaping 20
points."11
Importantly, the 2022 numbers are broken down by wealth ranges, a
phenomenally useful measure. As socialist blogger Carl Beijer observed,
the common insult on commercial media is that socialism appeals to a
bunch of rich kids, but in reality "the numbers point in the opposite
direction: socialism does best among poor voters and worse among the
middle and upper classes." While support for socialism in lower-income
households was split 45 percent to 45 percent in the poll, only 33 percent of
middle-income respondents and upper-income respondents liked the idea.
Mirroring this, support for capitalism climbed to 60 percent in middle-
income families and 70 percent for rich ones.12 Which makes sense of
course, since richer people would have the most to lose with socialism
taxing their wealth or confiscating their corporate property. But the cheap,
idiotic slur that socialism is popular among rich kids is common enough to
need this refutation.
All these numbers have sent terror through wealthy and conservative
circles. The Economist, the UK business magazine, ran a cover story on
"The Rise of Millennial Socialism," and you can just feel the cold sweat on
the face of the editors. They fret that "socialism is back in fashion ...
Socialism is storming back because it has formed an incisive critique of

what has gone wrong in Western societies ... [T]he left has focused on
inequality, the environment, and how to vest power in citizens rather than
elites ... Yet, although the reborn left gets some things right, its pessimism
about the modern world goes too far."13 They insist that capitalism is the
system of freedom and liberty, despite creating gigantic monopolies, hyper-
rich billionaires, and frequent financial crashes right in front of their eyes.
Some socialists would counterargue that it's capitalism that's a threat to
freedom, by creating a tiny ruling class to rule over us and destroy the
world—I wrote a book making these arguments myself.14 The Economist
admits that the Left's "answer to 'how to pay for it all' is usually to soak the
rich ... quite an easy sell in America."15
Even Glenn Hubbard is sweating young people's disaffection with
capitalism. The Columbia Graduate School of Business professor was the
chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers for the George W. Bush
administration and is considered the author of the multiple major tax cuts
that dramatically enriched the top US households. Hubbard wrote for the
Atlantic that, to his horror, "Even My Business-School Students Have
Doubts About Capitalism," with his MBA pupils saying in class that
capitalism leaves people behind and that economists are less brilliant than
they like to let on.16 Smart kids!
Especially crucial, all these impressive figures for socialist views are in
a condition of zero media support for these ideas. TV news, the major
newspapers, and the prominent online news portals are private property
with all the interests of their rich owners, from Jeff Bezos to the Disney
corporation to Elon Musk. Collis Huntington, the Gilded Age railroad
monopolist, said he bought newspapers with the plan to "control or burn"
them.17 If the mass media would provide any reasonable opportunity for
these subjects to be debated, it is plausible that support for socialism would
be significantly higher. When popular socialist figures like Sanders go on
Fox News, an eyebrow-raising number of people in the attending audiences
show support, or at least an openness to being persuaded. The fact that these
high figures for socialism can be reached with wall-to-wall media
opposition is pretty stunning, frankly.

Which brings us to another, related movement that gets little love from
the private media industry—labor.
The Laborious Movement
The labor movement has struggled against extremely high odds worldwide,
dealing with the inherent power of employers over the workforce. As
described in chapter 3, the reality is that the productive property that
sustains society belongs to a small number of companies and their rich
owners, and people's need for income requires us all to compete for
positions working for them. While capital owners and company managers
like to paint themselves as virtuous entrepreneurs creating jobs for everyone
else, their concentrated ownership puts them in a position of power over us,
the workers, and over the government as well. For this reason, companies
and their wealthy owners have hated unions like poison, so labor unions are
the definitive means of resisting the otherwise unchallenged power of the
ruling class.
That's why there is an incredibly cruel world history of often-violent
repression of workers attempting to organize in order to match organized
capital. The standard history of the Gilded Age observes, "In his own
factories Rockefeller would permit no collective bargaining, but only
'company unions' in the time-honored relationship of 'obedient servants
and good masters.'"18 Carnegie said of his enormous steel empire, "We
have no Union in our works."19 Capitalists have been bent on breaking
unions for as long as they have existed.
One significant, and perhaps unlikely, recent development aiding the
uphill struggle of labor organizing was the major changes to the US and
world workforces ushered in by COVID-19. The respiratory disease that
went on to kill over a million Americans followed the historical pattern of
past epidemics in reducing the labor force. Older employees took early
retirement, some dropped out to care for sick relatives or children when
schools and childcare centers closed, and of course many thousands died.
These factors "tightened" the labor market, with fewer applicants for

positions across the economy, and thus raised worker bargaining power for
the first time since the advent of neoliberalism in the 1980s.
Not everyone is happy about this—the always pro-business Wall Street
Journal complained that "more workers across a range of industries are
going on strike ... while the tight labor market has taken away some of the
risk of walking off the job," observing that there were 180 strikes over the
first half of 2022, up from 102 a year before, and with three times the
number of workers involved.20 The New York Times added that "shortages
in labor and supplies ... leave employers more vulnerable," and that while
"large companies have considerable power ... the fitful economic recovery
from the pandemic has eroded management's advantages." Therefore
"companies often pre-empt a labor action by improving compensation," a
welcome move to many workers since the class reality is "the mere act of
striking can exert an enormous psychological and financial toll in an
economy where workers have a limited safety net. When unionized workers
receive strike pay, it's typically a fraction of their usual pay, and they must
often picket outside their workplace to receive it."21
The press reports that in 2022 "68% of Americans approved of labor
unions, more than at any other time since 1965." And yet, America's "union
density"—the proportion of its workforce represented by a union—fell to
6.1 percent of private employers in 2021.22 Labor organizing is technically
legally protected in the US, but in practice companies can often get away
with canning activists. The press reports that after initially humoring
organizers, companies like Apple and Starbucks began firing them, usually
for flimsy reasons that are contradicted by previous actions, such as firing
one employee shortly after promoting them. Apple's Kansas City store fired
five active union organizers in 2023, for offenses like tardiness that workers
were not previously punished for. A federal judge found Starbucks illegally
fired seven employees in the Buffalo area shortly after their union won a
pair of elections there.23
The already-lopsided reality of US labor law is being made more
unbalanced by the month, as when the now notoriously right-wing Supreme
Court expanded the exposure of striking workers to liability if their

employers' property is at all damaged during a work stoppage.24 This
follows other recent court decisions, including that many workers can't
bring collective legal action against employers, that public sector unions
can't require nonmembers to pay fees related to collective bargaining, and
that unions can't access company property to talk to workers, and many
others reviewed in Adam Cohen's Supreme Inequality, finding one of the
Court's main legacies has been to support corporations, tilt the playing field
against unions, and remove even middle-class means to contesting them
like class action lawsuits.
By the 2010s, "the evidence showed that the Court's conservative
justices were not just pro-business—they were extraordinarily so by
historical standards. A study released in 2013 calculated that all five
members of the conservative majority at that time ... were among the top
ten most pro-business justices to serve on the Court since 1946 ... Alito was
the single most pro-business justice of the thirty-five who had served since
1946, and Roberts came in second."25 The Court found time for these
ruling-class-friendly rulings while also striking down national abortion
access, affirmative action, and protections for gay consumers.
But despite this repression by state and capital, the results of organizing
in the aftermath of an epidemic have been fascinating and a source of some
hope. West Coast port workers won a major 32 percent pay increase in
2023, as well as a onetime "hero bonus" honoring the dozens of
dockworkers who died while keeping the ports running during COVID.
Other 
transportation-related 
workers 
have 
also 
won 
significant
improvements, like a 30 percent bump in pay and pension contributions for
FedEx pilots, and 34 percent raises for pilots at Delta Air Lines and Spirit.26
Often this wave of workplace actions is more about work conditions
than pay. Seven hundred Pennsylvanian nursing home employees struck
successfully for raises, but also ceilings for patient-to-nurse ratios. Two
thousand mental health therapists at the Kaiser Permanente system in
California and Hawaii struck for pay increases, and for Kaiser to reduce the
wait for patient appointments, which according to the union could take
eight weeks or longer.27

Other actions have been met with setbacks. Rail workers, for example,
have been horribly squeezed by the shrinking number of rail shipping
companies since their deregulation in the 1980s. The companies, under Wall
Street pressure to cut costs and raise their return on assets, implemented
"precision scheduled railroading," which means having only one or two
workers operating enormously long trains that may stretch over a mile. To
keep to this low-cost model, the railroads required their workers to remain
"on call," and to work for days and sometimes weeks on end without
conventional weekends or any other regular time off. The lines then added a
punitive points system where workers lost points for scheduling days off,
even for family events or emergency illness. Running out of points meant
suspensions and eventually firings, but the points could be earned back by
being on call for two full weeks straight.28 The rail workers were ready to
strike in 2022 to push back on these conditions until President Biden, using
national authority over the crucial transport system that ships a giant
proportion of goods across the nation, forced a settlement with limited
raises but that left the system largely in place.
This upturn during the pandemic has built on gains from before the
plague years. Teachers in 2018 engaged in a series of strikes across the US,
some wildcat (not authorized by a national union body), taking a full half-
million teachers and support staff to the picket lines.29 Teachers are also
endeavoring to organize a national campaign aimed at the growing number
of charter schools, which are sensationally popular with conservatives since
they are publicly funded but privately run—often by religious groups or
billionaires. The Journal reports hundreds of charter school teachers in Los
Angeles voting to join teachers' unions, desiring "job security and input into
the curriculum and other decisions now handed down by administrators and
a board that includes Anthony Ressler, a billionaire who bought the Atlanta
Hawks [in 2015]."30
The effort to organize the coffee chain Starbucks has been a significant
beacon of hope. From 2021 to 2023, no fewer than 331 Starbucks locations
voted to unionize. In addition to the generally tight labor conditions
following the epidemic, the press notes that college-educated workers, often
consigned to service work well below their qualifications and saddled with

major student loan debt, are increasingly viewing unions favorably. Over 70
percent of college grads support organizing, with even higher numbers
among younger workers. The press notes that while typically a minority in
"nonprofessional workplaces," workers with a degree often "feel
empowered in ways that others don't." The New York Times notes a further
factor, especially important in the US: "They often know their rights under
labor law."31 On top of these generally favorable views of unions prevailing
among the typical barista demographics, the particular conditions at the café
chain also have some favorable features, such as long stretches without a
shift manager present. This lack of direct oversight allows open discussions
about pay and working conditions, something that is especially important
for campaigns like these that are led by workers rather than a professional
organizer.
While eager to avoid looking too clearly like a union buster, the
company has adopted all the conventional anti-union tactics discussed in
chapter 3, including the final step—closing. After vague reports of drug-
related incidents common in retail settings, Starbucks closed a dozen stores,
including two unionized shops in Seattle and one in Portland that had
petitioned for recognition.32 All stores in college town Ithaca, NY were
closed amid an organizing drive. So far no unionized Starbucks has a union
contract.
Amazon has been a tougher nut to crack. Labor has struggled to make
inroads organizing the mammoth online retailer's enormous workforce,
which is second only to Walmart in its number of employees. The
warehouse workers' union failed to organize a number of Amazon facilities,
most prominently an enormous depot in Alabama, losing the vote by large
margins after Amazon reached for every union-busting tool in the box.
Organizers noted that early in the drive, over two thousand workers signed
union cards, but in the end only about a third of that number voted for the
union. The Times suggested, "The erosion of that early support showed the
power that employers have in campaigning against unions by holding
mandatory meetings and talking to employees during work hours about the
downside of organizing ... The company's slogan—'Do it without dues'—

was pushed to workers in text messages, mandatory meetings and signs in
bathroom stalls."33
But the organizers won global headlines when a long, tough campaign
of two years led to a successful union election at a giant Amazon facility on
Staten Island, known in the company as JFK8. Despite celebrated raises,
eighteen bucks an hour isn't much in New York, and some workers were
homeless, sleeping in their cars in the facility parking lot.34 Organizers
campaigned daily outside the facility, hosting cookouts, recording TikTok
videos, and handing out free marijuana to workers. Amazon's attempts to
overturn the election ultimately failed, although the company has so far
refused to negotiate a contract with the union, a very common corporate
tactic to continue dragging out the process and hoping union supporters will
get burned out or economically exhausted.35
An attempt by the same union, Amazon Labor Union, to organize
another Staten Island facility failed, due in part to the challenge of building
relationships and solidarity at workplaces with turnover rates in excess of
100 percent a year.36 Another vote at a facility in upstate New York failed as
well, after Amazon said the company held mandatory meetings with
employees to help them "understand the facts."37
Elsewhere in tech, a few Apple retail stores have voted in a new union,
pleasingly called the Apple Coalition of Organized Retail Employees.
Apple, as noted above, humored the organizers at first in order to maintain
its progressive corporate persona, but now that some have succeed it's taken
a more aggressive stance toward organizers by finding ways to shitcan
worker-leaders.38 Tesla workers in Buffalo are attempting to win collective
bargaining, fighting an uphill battle against celebrated tech imbecile Elon
Musk. Musk has disparaged unions and been found by the National Labor
Relations Board to have illegally fired a worker supportive of organizing in
a Fremont, California plant. It also found Musk "illegally threatened
workers with the loss of stock options if they unionized."39
The gigantic tech monopolist Microsoft now has its own first employees
represented by a union after a video game studio, which the trillion-dollar
platform company acquired in its gaming push, voted for representation

with the Communications Workers of America. Under heavy regulatory
scrutiny in the deal, Microsoft grudgingly agreed to remain neutral through
the union campaign and spared employees the usual mandatory anti-union
meetings and messaging.40 It will supposedly also remain neutral if
employees pursue unionization at Activision Blizzard, if its acquisition of
the gaming giant is finalized.
These promising early victories are small though compared to the
successful United Auto Workers strike in 2023, a large inspiring triumph
after decades of union concessions to the automakers like health care and
pensions cuts, and the creation of two-tiered contracts paying new hires
less. By negotiating with all three US car majors at once while striking
individual high-value workplaces one at a time, the autoworkers employed
a powerful strategy that in weeks mounted the disruption until the
companies gave in. The tentative contract would eliminate the tier system,
mandate real raises that by 2028 will see workers earning in the $80,000s a
year, and importantly include a provision for company-funded strike pay.41
The new union leadership is far more dynamic and radical than the previous
corrupt senior figures, and is openly encouraging other unions to align their
own contract negotiations with it in future years to multiply the strength of
the movement.42
That's a road trip you'd actually enjoy being on.
Company Frowns
But in the face of these positive developments, employers are still
endeavoring to turn back the clock, including bringing back a very
traditional means of controlling the workforce—the company town.
Referring to urban settlements fully dominated by one employer (and often
founded by and controlled by that employer), company towns have a bad
reputation for exploiting the workers not just on the clock like usual, but in
their every commercial transaction and indeed almost every human activity.
The company town is considered to be a symbol of the ultimate exploitation
of workers, with the potential for wide surveillance and the increased power
of a boss who can not only fire you but evict you on the same day.

Company towns are today seen as a relic, but they are most definitely
making a comeback, and are surprisingly similar to their earlier analogs
from the Gilded Age of hyperconcentrated wealth.
Classic cases include Krupp, the great German munitions company
famous for supplying the Reich with the weapons to fight various world
wars. During the 1890s Alfred Krupp oversaw incredible growth in his
business, to the point that new housing was needed around the giant
industrial city of Essen. Krupp built several new suburbs or "colonies," as
John Kampfner describes in The Rich:
Krupp arranged his city according to the needs of the business.
Rents in company homes were up to 20 per cent cheaper than those
for private rooms in town; this was designed to tie in his labourers.
The policy at least had the merit of transparency: a new worker was
told that if he left the firm for another job, he would lose his
accommodation. His rent came straight out of his wage packet and
went back into the company. He would spend his money in the
Krupp stores ... The transformation of Essen into a company town
was complete by the mid-1870s ... Krupp's dream was for workers
to spend their lives from cradle to grave in the control of the
company.43
He said, "We only want loyal men, who are grateful to us in their hearts
and lives for giving them their daily bread."
The model is a mainstay of capitalism, and many US cities, like Gary,
Indiana, were founded as company towns under the utter tyranny of the
boss. One case under development today is the brainchild of Musk, the
famous tech incompetent. Various corporate entities connected to Musk's
staff and companies are buying extensive tracts of ranchland outside Austin,
Texas, in order to build a "utopia" on the Colorado River, a location that the
Wall Street Journal noted would "allow Mr. Musk to set some regulations in
his own municipality and expedite his plans." The settlement would have
well-below-market rents of $800 a month for Musk's employees, relative to
median rents in the county of $2,200 a month. Great deal, except again the

reality of having not only your livelihood, but your living quarters under the
control of your boss. "If an employee leaves or is fired, he or she would
have to vacate the house within 30 days."44
Globally, however, companies continue to pursue the cost-cutting
method of boosting profit employed since the advent of globalization in the
1980s—capital mobility. This means closing down production in a
developed country where workers expect expensive entitlements like health
care and moving production somewhere cheaper. China's own development
is now driving some manufacturers to yet poorer countries, like Malaysia
and Vietnam, especially apparel makers who are most sensitive to labor
costs—even China's average labor cost of $3.27 an hour is too much for
some firms.45
The mobility of capital, where giant global companies belonging to the
ruling class can use pro-business policies and free trade agreements to shut
down plants and quickly move them across borders, is a wild contrast to the
mobility of labor. While firms can move across international frontiers, and
international financial networks can send gigantic amounts of liquid wealth
breezily around the world, human beings are another story. Sociologist
Stanley Aronowitz wrote that "the heart of laborism is that workers, through
their unions, are constituted to limit capital's freedom to put labor in
competition with itself globally as well as within the nation-state."46
Western nations from the EU to the US are regularly consumed with
periodic anti-immigrant hysteria (especially funny in immigration-founded
countries like the US and Australia), even in the face of the post-COVID
labor shortage. This has led to conditions where, since adults are reliably
turned away at the US-Mexico border, unaccompanied minors are coming
across in significant numbers, creating an opportunity for "sponsors" to
bring children from Central America and put them to work paying off the
resulting debts, a new form of indentured servitude, mostly for child labor.
Thus the news services have found extensive use of undocumented
child labor, for example in the US auto parts supply chain, especially for
Korean automaker Hyundai. They report that when Labor Department
inspectors arrived without notice at one plant, "workers rushed out the back

and left the premises before they could be questioned." Hyundai claimed it
would cut off those suppliers, but later backed off the claim. Reuters adds,
"In two separate statements sent by the same public relations firm, [the
Hyundai contractors] said their policies forbid the hiring of any workers not
of legally employable age. Using identical language, both companies said
they hadn't, 'to the best of our knowledge,' hired underage workers."47
The Times reported on a Grand Rapids, Michigan, plant for Hearthside
Food Solutions—which produces and packages processed food for huge
brands like Cheetos, Lucky Charms, and Nature Valley granola bars—
where workers under sixteen worked on dangerous fast-moving assembly
lines during twelve-hour shifts. The paper found "twelve-year-old roofers in
Florida and Tennessee. Underage slaughterhouse workers in Delaware,
Mississippi and North Carolina ... In town after town, children scrub dishes
late at night. They run milking machines in Vermont and deliver meals in
New York City ... Girls as young as 13 wash hotel sheets in Virginia ...
[M]iddle and high school teachers in English-language learner programs
say it is now common for nearly all their students to rush off to long shifts
after their classes end."48
The great labor journal Labor Notes wrote of the trend, "That's how
billionaires become billionaires—by cutting corners on safety, forcing us to
work at unsafe speeds, and not paying us for the full value of the work we
do." It cites a report of a thirteen-year-old working nights at a
slaughterhouse, "A school nurse learned about the girl's night job after
finding 'chemical burns, blisters and open wounds on her hands and one
knee.'"49
But it's not just immigrant youths—states across the US are loosening
century-old child labor laws. The Journal reports that Georgia, Ohio,
Missouri, South Dakota, Illinois, New Jersey, and New Hampshire have
lengthened the number of hours fourteen-and fifteen-year-olds can work, or
removed the need for a company to get a government permit to employ kids
under sixteen. Work hours for that age group are still limited by federal law
on school nights, and it still bars them from certain dangerous work. But the

US Labor Department found a 69 percent increase in minors found to be
illegally employed since 2018.50
Conservatives are applauding these changes—the right-wing Wall Street
Journal editorial page wrote, "A Little Work Never Hurt Anyone—
Including Teenagers," an impressive claim, considering the literal crushing
in construction and dismemberment in meatpacking that are too often
reported by these kids. The editorial claims, "Opponents of these state laws
are carrying water for Big Labor. The goal is not protecting children.
Rather, it's protecting the pay of current employees by restricting the supply
of labor."51 And this is partly true, since child labor laws were partially
instituted in the first place to keep adults from having to compete for jobs
with poor dumb kids with no knowledge of their rights or worth, and to
allow children to focus on school instead of sleeping through it after a night
shift.
A revived labor movement will have some junior members indeed.
Berning Point
Part of the reason this lurch back toward Gilded Age working conditions is
possible is because labor has few political allies. This likely owes much to
the fact that labor's interests are diametrically opposed to business, which
has the ultimate political trump card—gigantic amounts of money in a
country where getting elected is incredibly expensive. The average Senate
race in 2022 cost $13.5 million, and both Joe Biden and Donald Trump
spent over a billion dollars apiece on their 2020 campaigns (counting
spending by their affiliated political action committees), according to the
Center for Responsive Politics.52
The gigantic cost of running for office means that most politicians must
make extensive promises to donors, who can kick into their campaign
accounts and their shadowy PACs. People and institutions with money to
contribute are less likely to favor candidates or policies that would tax their
wealth or break up their monopolies, so the tendency is that America's
popular leftist views, described above, seldom get translated into policies. A
recent study used political survey data and a regression method to conclude

"senators are vastly more responsive to the views of affluent constituents
than to constituents of modest means. For example, constituents at the 75th
percentile of the income distribution appear to have almost three times as
much influence as those at the 25th percentile on senators' overall voting
patterns, and several times as much influence on specific roll call votes.
Constituents near the top of the income distribution have even more
influence."53
And I think we all know how disconnected we tend to feel from our
theoretical representatives in state and national capitals. The idea of getting
officeholders to aid a constituent sounds immediately unlikely or at least
daunting to a lot of politically unserved or cynical people. The political
Right seizes on this to advance its claim of the inherent uselessness of
government, that it can literally never do anything right, wastes public
money to no end, and other incorrect remarks mostly aimed at getting taxes
and regulations off the backs of the rich, which they have succeeded at. A
more thoughtful approach would recognize we feel we have no control over
our representatives not because it's impossible to have a good republic, but
because another class of society has all the liquid assets, real property,
industrial equity, and media resources to broadly run the private society and
be in a position to decisively influence the state. Government really can
serve us, but only if we have meaningful democratic control over it, rather
than leaving it to secretive ghouls who insist we pay no attention to the man
behind the curtain.
So in the present system it's unsurprising that you get more of a hearing
if you're a ruling-class citizen, affluent enough to contribute the legal
maximum to national political campaigns and throw fundraising parties for
the candidates. Indeed, if you're rich enough you can take sitting US
Supreme Court justices out on fancy international beach trips and long
jaunts on your superyacht, as was scandalously revealed to be the basis of
the relationship between billionaire real estate developer Harlan Crow and
archconservative justice Clarence Thomas (who also forgot to file any of
the legally required disclosures about these regular "gifts").54 The ultimate
in access is to be rich enough to host some of the most powerful men in the

world on your pleasure boats, and have whatever political conversation you
want away from prying eyes.
Beyond the gigantic cost, leftist politicians get an additional level of
unsurprising hostility from commercial media and their corporate or
billionaire owners. In particular, the surprisingly successful national
campaigns of Vermont senator Bernie Sanders have encountered truly
adversarial media, for example in the Wall Street Journal, property of
Australian archconservative world media billionaire Rupert Murdoch. The
Journal grudgingly admitted that "socialism appears to carry far less of a
stigma than it once did, particularly among young people who form the base
of Mr. Sanders's support," noting a Boston Globe poll finding fully 31
percent of Democratic primary voters in New Hampshire said the term
"socialist" described their political views.55 It noted too that this was
inconceivable before the monumental financial crash of 2008 and the
resulting Occupy Wall Street movement of 2011, which opened up many
people to a recognition that capitalism may not be the very final form of
human social organization. And the media hostility was almost uniform,
with all major cable and broadcast news channels openly rooting against the
popular candidate.
Seattle voters elected socialist economist Kshama Sawant to the city
council in 2013, after she ran on a proposal to significantly raise the city's
minimum wage in order for workers to keep up with the rising cost of
living. This was a shock to the business world, accustomed to more pliant
liberal politicians (although Seattle had elected a socialist mayor as recently
as 1922).56 Not content to simply raise the wage floor while the owning
class calls the shots, when hyper-profitable aircraft giant Boeing threatened
to relocate production if its main labor union didn't accept major
concessions, Sawant argued publicly that "workers should take over the
factories and re-tool the machines to produce buses," as business news
outlet Bloomberg disgustedly put it.57
With the insane expense of running for national office in the US, plus
the predictable commercial media hostility, it could be argued that the real
point of many socialist campaigns, at this time, is mainly to use elections'
brief period of actual national political attention to put socialist ideas in

front of the country. Socialist campaigns have been rather successful in this
regard, for example with the flagship socialist policy proposal, Medicare for
All, which would create a kind of "single-payer" public health system that
covers everyone and spares you dealing with insurance corporations ever
again. Support for it has grown as Americans have overheard scraps of
comparisons with other capitalist countries, like the UK, where the
conservative Financial Times compared US life expectancy to that of
Blackpool, England, well known within the UK as being an extremely poor
town with the lowest life expectancy in the kingdom. The Times concluded
that "the average American now has the same chance of a long and healthy
life as someone born in Blackpool, the town with England's lowest life
expectancy." Blackpool residents could expect to live five years longer than
people in the poorest US communities. More cruelly, "one in 25 American
five-year-olds today will not make it to their 40th birthday. No parent should
ever have to bury their child, but in the US one set of parents from every
kindergarten class most likely will."58
Pew found that 63 percent of Americans supported some form of
government health care program in 2020 (up from 59 percent the year
before), including 34 percent of Republicans and 88 percent of
Democrats.59 This is an incredible achievement, since there is again literally
no visible support for this type of program in national media, which of
course earn much of their profit from ad spending by health insurers, the
pharmaceutical industry, and hospital chains, to whom the idea is like a
bone-felt religious taboo.
In addition to important policies like M4A, the Sanders campaigns have
had major effects on opening up people to broader political ideas. Carl
Beijer notes that a "Bernie Bump" is visible in levels of polled support for
socialism, with stated support rising from 35 percent in the Pew polls to 42
percent around the second Sanders campaign in 2020.60 Sanders is likable
and a good communicator, but isn't a singular figure—this bump likely has
more to do with Americans being briefly exposed to leftist ideas that the
media, for a minute, couldn't ignore as usual.

Beyond current political candidates, the socialist tradition has prominent
figures, like the great physicist Albert Einstein. Remembered today as a
brilliant scientist and commemorated in cheesy posters worldwide, Einstein
is part of a great, long tradition of socialists whose left-wing ideas have
been scrubbed from the record. Few students are aware that Einstein wrote
an essay for the socialist journal Monthly Review, in which he argued,
The economic anarchy of capitalist society as it exists today is, in
my opinion, the real source of the evil ... Insofar as the labor
contract is "free," what the worker receives is determined not by the
real value of the goods he produces, but by his minimum needs and
by the capitalists' requirements for labor power in relation to the
number of workers competing for jobs ... Private capital tends to
become concentrated in few hands, partly because of competition
among the capitalists, and partly because technological development
and the increasing division of labor encourage the formation of
larger units of production at the expense of smaller ones. The result
of these developments is an oligarchy of private capital the
enormous power of which cannot be effectively checked even by a
democratically organized political society. This is true since the
members of legislative bodies are selected by political parties,
largely financed or otherwise influenced by private capitalists who,
for all practical purposes, separate the electorate from the legislature
... Moreover, under existing conditions, private capitalists
inevitably control, directly or indirectly, the main sources of
information (press, radio, education). It is thus extremely difficult,
and indeed in most cases quite impossible, for the individual citizen
to come to objective conclusions and to make intelligent use of his
political rights ... I am convinced there is only one way to eliminate
these grave evils, namely through the establishment of a socialist
economy, accompanied by an educational system which would be
oriented toward social goals. In such an economy, the means of
production are owned by society itself and are utilized in a planned
fashion.61

Or take Martin Luther King, discussed in chapter 3 as a great ally of the
labor movement, and who is commemorated on the level of a secular saint
for his nonviolent approach to racial justice. Like many progressive and
radical Black intellectuals, King had little confidence in capitalism. He
wrote in a letter to his future wife that "I am much more socialistic in my
economic theory than capitalistic," adding that "capitalism has outlived its
usefulness." He later told the national press of his work with the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference, "In a sense, you could say we are
engaged in the class struggle," and said at an SCLC staff retreat that
perhaps "America must move toward a democratic socialism."62 A seldom-
mentioned part of King's legacy.
Another socialist, the UK writer George Orwell, is famous for his great
satires of the totalitarianism of allegedly socialist states like the Soviet
Union in his books 1984 and Animal Farm. But it's pretty cheap that we
very infrequently hear that he also said things like "Every line of serious
work that I have written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly,
against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism, as I understand it."63
Among his extensive writing in support of socialist movements, he
elaborated that "The only thing for which we can combine is the underlying
ideal of Socialism: justice and liberty."64
The full nature and history of socialism require their own book. I'll get
around to it! For now, it's essential to keep in mind how popular these ideas
remain even when fully locked out of commercial media, popular
education, and the bipartisan political consensus. Some ideas are too
sensible and popular to bury completely.
But we should take a moment to reflect on what socialism would mean.
The traditional socialist goals—rough economic equality and worker
control of the means of production—require the end of private ownership of
large-scale property. Not your personal things, but the manufacturing plants,
data centers, and great industrial capital that make up the productive
economy. Presently those enormous assets are the private property of
individuals or companies and their stockholders, and thus pursue market
goals of maximized profitability.

So inevitably, socialism would require the end of private ownership of
the productive economy. That means expropriation, taking these assets
away from their present hyper-rich owners. Much like the slave economy in
the nineteenth century or local fire stations in the twentieth, these assets
should be taken away from the rich, and run through different forms of
public management, accountable to a democratic process. Everyone likes
those historic expropriations, and now we just need a final great one to end
all the endless nightmares and abjectly intolerable social outcomes this
book has reviewed.
There is no social battle that would be harder. Expropriation is (rightly)
recognized by the rich as the ultimate threat to them, and anytime someone
proposes some relatively mild tax increase or other burden on them, they
immediately suggest the tax is the First Step to Socialism and the
expropriation of their monumental wealth. And because the media remain
private property, their message will be loud enough to resonate widely.
But we should ask ourselves, why were the rich able to bring about the
turn back toward unregulated markets and low taxes that we call
neoliberalism? It's because the reforms of European social democracy and
the US New Deal did not expropriate the rich—while heavily taxed and
subject to extensive public regulation, private property remained private
and our oligarchs remained our oligarchs. Wall Street, big industry, the
military contractors, the early tech industry—those giant institutions
remained the property of rich individuals or, more commonly, enormous
corporations owned by rich individuals. Their large-scale private property
endured all the burdens and indignities of the short social democratic era of
the Western world, created by long-running movements that climaxed
during the Great Depression, but powered by human beings, not immortal
corporate institutions.
And once people wearied of the problems of the era, private media
could frame the issues as the result of too much Big Government, and get
popular support behind figures like US president Reagan, UK prime
minister Thatcher, and related shady characters in business and finance who
ran the neoliberal push to return to the total playground for the rich that was
the Gilded Age—all too successfully.

Should our current movement succeed and inaugurate a new period of
labor organization and socialist political gains, we must not repeat the same
mistake. Any future success by socialists will be met with resisting cries not
to go too far, just let the clever corporate managers run the transition to a
democratic-run economy, don't throw out the benefits of free markets in the
revolution. But those free markets don't make us free to consume the
abundant wealth, and those clever managers will inevitably be looking for
opportunities to set the process back and return their former private
paymasters to their positions of rule.
The single way to avoid this fatal error is to commit to a program of
expropriation as a core element of future socialist politics. This—this
simple idea—is the foundation stone for any future we might hope for with
basic economic security for our kids and any chance of an inhabitable
future natural environment.
We live in a world with millions of homeless citizens even as the rich
hoard thousands of properties sitting empty, of ugly concrete warehouses
that hold humanity's artistic and cultural treasures while they inflate
someone's asset portfolio, of privately owned fossil fuel-burning power
plants dooming us all daily. Working people should be living in those
properties, the art and artifacts should be in museums, and that energy
system should be going through a crash conversion to renewables. It's hard
to see that happening without a real socialist movement, and indeed a
thorough-enough change to no longer be considered a reform—socialism
and solutions to our problems require a real revolution.
Assets like computer processor chip fabricators, chemicals plants, utility
networks, and enormous agricultural estates should not belong to one
person, or one corporation. They should be the property of common
humanity, should be run democratically, and should contribute to a world of
equality and sustainability.
Anything less, and the same completely mad capitalist system will
remain, with elites a step away from returning to power and an economy
slowly, steadily killing the planet's biosphere.

Better the scary uncertainty of fundamental change than the certainty of
destroying the world. No one wants to live in such turbulent times as these,
but creating a free, socialist future is an unmatchable gift we could give to
coming generations.
Steal from the rich and give to the poor, sounds like a winner.
Class Dismissed
For all its popular support, the labor movement still frequently loses, and
progressive candidates often go down in defeat. Polling support for
socialism and broad approval of labor unions are great, but turning them
into actual social change takes struggle, trying and failing and learning from
mistakes. It's hard to compete with giant corporate networks able to move
jobs around countries and the world, oceans' worth of shadowy cash
drowning out socialist candidates, and wall-to-wall corporate ownership of
media, meaning the sources we use to learn about the world remain the
property of the ruling class.
But centuries of the rule of gold shouldn't discourage us. Few expected
the giant events and upheavals of this era, from epidemics to wars to bank
panics. And few people thought that past systems of power and wealth
could be fundamentally changed, that the French revolutionaries could
overthrow the king or that the US slaveholding aristocracy could have its
human property pried from its grip. If the penniless citizens of Haiti could
throw out their imperial overlords, if workers could organize a drive for
universal health care in a country as business-run as Britain, if a leftist
could get the message of popular socialist policies on TV before millions of
people, there is real hope that humanity can move beyond capitalism. Some
people don't care for this idea, but it's plain historical fact that all our
positive social changes and victories for oppressed people seldom come
from fits of conscience among the powerful—they come from broad
movements of social struggle where people turn out for demonstrations,
strikes, meetings, and organizing actions over years.
People are ready to fight back. A recent poll found an overwhelming
majority of Americans are pessimistic about the future and that of their

children, with 44 percent saying their financial situation is worse than they
expected for their stage in life.65 The BBC recently reported that the UK
Red Cross is organizing a food aid campaign for Britain, which has seen a
huge rise in demand for food aid since the Conservative government
instituted austerity programs that included cuts to public support, along with
similar programs in the EU. The Red Cross, which had not operated food
aid in the UK since World War II, said this move had been accompanied by
a half million people needing food bank support in Britain, along with a 75
percent increase in demand for food aid on the continent.66 Bloomberg
reported in spring 2023, with a tight job market and a growing economy,
that the line for the American Red Cross Food Pantry in Boston was the
length of two football fields.67
Back when the US invaded Iraq without justification, millions of people
flooded into the streets of the world's cities in urgent opposition. The
upsurge of popular activism led the staid New York Times to declare, "There
may still be two superpowers on the planet: the United States and world
public opinion."68 When French president Emmanuel Macron, after a bitter
fight, overrode large majorities and raised the retirement age even while
cutting taxes on the rich, protesters stormed the headquarters of the French
luxury goods conglomerate LVMH, the CEO of which, Bernard Arnault,
was the world's richest man at the time. Demonstrators chanted, "There is
money in the pockets of billionaires."69 It's no lie—Bloomberg reported the
world's richest five hundred people added $852 billion to their fortunes in
the first half of 2023 alone, with each member of its Billionaires Index
gaining an average of $14 million—a day.70
The editor-in-chief of the Wall Street Journal himself, Gerard Baker,
wrote that today "Aristocrats Face the Pitchforks," observing that "life's
winners" gathering in elite circles like the World Economic Forum are
disconnected from the struggles of the global majority. He goes on,
referring to the infamous ruling regimes of France and Russia before their
revolutions: "The history of aristocracies has mostly ended unhappily ...
[T]he best they may be able to hope for is a less violent, less terminal, but

ultimately no less significant modern-day version of what happened to the
Bourbons or the Romanovs."71
Olúfẹ́mi O. Táíwò wrote in his book Elite Capture that for all of today's
long overdue appreciation for racial diversity and land acknowledgments,
"no matter who we 'center' in our organizing culture's thoughts and
messages, there will be lead in our water until and unless we do something
about the pipes."72 The escaped slave and self-taught intellectual Frederick
Douglass said, "The whole history of the progress of human liberty shows
that all concessions yet made to her august claims have been born of earnest
struggle ... If there is no struggle there is no progress."73
In all its forms around the world, the struggle against today's ruling
class will decide what kind of future humanity and the Earth will have.
Let's fight for a good one, because if we don't, a dark one is guaranteed.
Ruling classes look invincible right up until they collapse. Maybe your
contribution will be a tipping point.
And when struggling against the ruling class, remember to always have
a laugh at their expense. They can afford it.
OceanofPDF.com

T
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
his little book could never have been prepared without the help of
many people. The scholars at the World Inequality Database, whose
work I've drawn on extensively, are a gift to economists around the
world. My Haymarket editor, John McDonald, was as patient as ever with
my deadline delays and excessive adverbs. Without the marketing skills and
experience of Rory Fanning and Jim Plank, I doubt many people would
have seen this book. Of course, all errors, omissions, oversights, and
general ham-fisted fuckups are my responsibility.
OceanofPDF.com

NOTES
1.    John Kampfner, The Rich: From Slaves to Super Yachts: A 2,000-Year History (London: Little,
Brown, 2014), xi.
2.    Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons: The Classic Account of the Influential Capitalists Who
Transformed America's Future (New York: Harcourt, 1934), 364.
3.    George Orwell, The Road to Wigan Pier (Orlando, FL: Harcourt, 1958), 216.
Boss Fight
1.    David Streitfeld and Erin Woo, "The Amazonification of Space Begins in Earnest," New York
Times, July 21, 2021.
2.    Tom Wolfe, "Greenwich Time," New York Times, September 27, 2008; Daniel Trotta, "'Masters
of the Universe' Get Lesson in Humility," Reuters, September 19, 2008.
3.    Ajay Kapur, Niall Macleod, and Narendra Singh, "Plutonomy: Buying Luxury, Explaining
Global Imbalances," Citigroup, October 16, 2005; Ajay Kapur et al., "The Global Investigator:
The Plutonomy Symposium—Rising Tides Lifting Yachts," Citigroup, September 29, 2006.
4.    Facundo Alvaredo et al., World Inequality Report 2018 (World Inequality Lab, 2018), 237; Lucas
Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022 (World Inequality Lab, 2021), 251.
5.    Sabrina Tavernise and Abby Goodnough, "American Life Expectancy Rises for First Time in
Four Years," New York Times, January 30, 2020; Alex Lemonides, "While Life Expectancy Is
Rebounding in Parts of the World, White Deaths Drive a Further U.S. Drop," New York Times,
April 9, 2022.
6.    Americans for Tax Fairness, "Billionaire Pandemic Wealth Gains of 55%, or $1.6 Trillion, Come
Amid Three Decades of Rapid Wealth Growth," Institute for Policy Studies, April 14, 2021.
7.    James Morgan, "Rip van Winkle's New World Order," Financial Times, April 25, 1992.
8.    Peter Wilson, "Want a Second Passport? Try Buying a House," New York Times, May 21, 2019.
9.    Peter Bernstein and Annalyn Swan, All the Money in the World: How the Forbes 400 Make—and
Spend—Their Fortunes (New York: Knopf, 2007), 188.

Introduction: Why Read about the Ruling Class
1.    Deborah Hardoon, "An Economy for the 99%," Oxfam International, January 16, 2017. The
paper derives this point from Credit Suisse data and Forbes.
2.    Luke Savage, "America's Dynastic Superrich Are Rigging the Rules to Protect Their Power,"
Jacobin, June 16, 2021.
3.    Edward Wolff, "Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962 to 2016: Has Middle Class
Wealth Recovered?," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24085,
November 2017, 16, 37.
4.    Robert Frank, "Why the Rich Like to Eat Gold," Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2009.
5.    Julian Guthrie, "Larry Ellison's Fantasy Island," Wall Street Journal, June 13, 2013.
6.    Joe Fassler, "The Superyachts of Billionaires Are Starting to Look a Lot Like Theft," New York
Times, April 10, 2023; Kevin Koenig, "How Much Does That Oligarch's Yacht Actually Cost?,"
New York Times, September 2, 2022.
7.    Lucas Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022 (World Inequality Lab, 2021), 133.
8.    Ben Eisen, "In Coronavirus Recession, the Out-of-Work Turn to GoFundMe," Wall Street
Journal, November 21, 2020.
Chapter 1: The Numbers
1.    Robert Frank, Richistan: A Journey Through the 21st Century Wealth Boom and the Lives of the
New Rich (New York: Random House, 2007), 209.
2.    Peter Bernstein and Annalyn Swan, All the Money in the World: How the Forbes 400 Make—and
Spend—Their Fortunes (New York: Knopf, 2007), 280.
3.    Paul Fussell, Class: A Guide Through the American Status System (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1983), 15.
4.    Michael Norton and Dan Ariely, "Building a Better America—One Wealth Quintile at a Time,"
Perspectives on Psychological Sciences 6, no. 1 (January 2011).
5.    Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2014),
225.
6.    Piketty, Capital, 280.
7.    Piketty, Capital, 199-201.
8.    Piketty, Capital, 301.
9.    Carter Price and Kathryn Edwards, "Trends in Income from 1979 to 2018," RAND Corporation,
November 20, 2020.
10.  Michael Brill et al., "Understanding the Labor Productivity and Compensation Gap," Beyond the
Numbers 6, no. 6, (June 2017).
11.  Steve Fraser, The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized
Wealth and Power (New York: Basic Books, 2015), 66.
12.  Piketty, Capital, 347-48.
13.  Facundo Alvaredo et al., World Inequality Report 2018 (World Inequality Lab, 2018), 238.
14.  Alvaredo et al., World Inequality Report 2018, 270, 247.
15.  Alvaredo et al., World Inequality Report 2018, 238.
16.  World Inequality Database, https://wid.world/.

17.  Alvaredo et al., World Inequality Report 2018, 223.
18.  Hibah Yousuf, "Obama Admits 95% of Income Gains Gone to Top 1%," CNN, September 15,
2013.
19.  Lucas Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022 (World Inequality Lab, 2021), 96.
20.  Alvaredo et al., World Inequality Report 2018, 232.
21.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 251.
22.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 99.
23.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 33.
24.  Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman, "The Rise of Income and Wealth Inequality in America:
Evidence from Distributional Macroeconomic Accounts," Journal of Economic Perspectives 34,
no. 4 (Fall 2020): 3-26.
25.  Emmanuel Saez, "Striking It Richer: The Evolution of Top Incomes in the United States
(Updated with 2018 Estimates)," UC Berkeley, February 2020, Table 1.
26.  Bernstein and Swan, All the Money, 4.
27.  Piketty, Capital, 259.
28.  Daniel Gilbert, Stumbling on Happiness (London: Harper Perennial, 2007), 217-18.
29.  Piketty, Capital, 391-93.
30.  Piketty, Capital, 395-96.
31.  Piketty, Capital, 244, 246.
32.  Luke Savage, "America's Dynastic Superrich Are Rigging the Rules to Protect Their Power,"
Jacobin, June 16, 2021.
33.  Bloomberg Billionaire Index, https://www.bloomberg.com/billionaires/.
34.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 15.
35.  Rob Larson, Capitalism vs. Freedom: The Toll Road to Serfdom (Alresford, UK: Zero Books,
2018), ch. 1 and 2.
36.  Kevin A. Hassett and Aparna Mathur, "Hassett and Mathur: Consumption and the Myths of
Inequality," Wall Street Journal, October 24, 2012.
37.  Douglas McWilliams, The Inequality Paradox: How Capitalism Can Work for Everyone (New
York: Overlook Press, 2018), 27, 33.
38.  McWilliams, Inequality Paradox, 67.
39.  Found at https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/dataviz/dfa/index.html.
40.  Nitasha Tiku and Jay Greene, "The Billionaire Boom," Washington Post, March 12, 2021.
41.  Americans for Tax Fairness, "Billionaire Pandemic Wealth Gains of 55%, or $1.6 Trillion, Come
Amid Three Decades of Rapid Wealth Growth," Institute for Policy Studies, April 14, 2021.
42.  Alvaredo et al., World Inequality Report 2018, 240.
43.  Norton and Ariely, "Building a Better America."
44.  Matt Bruenig, "The Top 1 Percent Owns Nearly Everything in the US. We Need to Seize Their
Wealth," Jacobin, October 6, 2020.
45.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 21-22.
46.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 10-11.
47.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 269.
48.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 30.
49.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 213.

50.  Li Shi, Hiroshi Sato, and Terry Sicular, Rising Inequality in China: Challenges to a Harmonious
Society (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 31.
51.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 5.
52.  Rob Larson, "The IMF's Bottomless Bottom-Line Cruelty," Current Affairs, July-August 2021.
53.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 34, 219.
54.  Piketty, Capital, 159.
55.  Stanley Aronowitz, How Class Works: Power and Social Movement (New Haven, CT: Yale
University, 2003), 4.
56.  Edward Wolff, "Who Owns Stock in American Corporations?," Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society 158, no. 4 (December 2014): 383.
57.  Wolff, "Who Owns Stock?," 385.
58.  Edward Wolff, "Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962 to 2016: Has Middle Class
Wealth Recovered?," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24085,
November 2017, 16, 37.
59.  Wolff, "Household Wealth Trends," 18-19.
60.  Wolff, "Who Owns Stock?," 380.
61.  Piketty, Capital, 260.
62.  Ed Ford, "Concentration of Stock Ownership," Dollars & Sense, (Jan/Feb 2022).
63.  Patricia Cohen, "We All Have a Stake in the Stock Market, Right? Guess Again," New York
Times, February 8, 2018.
64.  Robert Frank, "The Wealthiest 10% of Americans Own a Record 89% of All U.S. Stocks,"
CNBC, October 18, 2021.
65.  Theo Francis, "Price Increases Come Easily for Big Businesses, but Inflation Still Squeezes
Profits," Wall Street Journal, October 10, 2022.
66.  Caitlin McCabe, "Companies Are Flush with Cash—and Ready to Pad Shareholder Pockets,"
Wall Street Journal, May 16, 2021.
67.  Hannah Miao, "Corporate Stock Buybacks Help Keep Market Afloat," Wall Street Journal,
February 27, 2023.
68.  C. Wright Mills, The Power Elite (New York: Oxford University Press, 1956), 122.
69.  Igor Makarov and Antoinette Schoar, "Blockchain Analysis of the Bitcoin Market," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 29396, October 2021; Paul Vigna, "Bitcoin's 'One
Percent' Controls Lion's Share of the Cryptocurrency's Wealth," Wall Street Journal, December
20, 2021.
Chapter 2: The Lifestyle
1.    Robert Frank, Richistan: A Journey Through the 21st Century Wealth Boom and the Lives of the
New Rich (New York: Random House, 2007), 129.
2.    Rory Satran, "What the World's Richest People Wear on Yachts," Wall Street Journal, August 19,
2023.
3.    Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007),
26, 29.
4.    Veblen, Theory, 36-37.
5.    Veblen, Theory, 41-42.

6.    Peter Bearman, Doormen (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 139, 147.
7.    Matthew Dalton, "Luxury Firms Lavish Even More Attention on the Ultrarich," Wall Street
Journal, March 15, 2017.
8.    Robert Frank, "Why the Rich Are Bad Customers," Wall Street Journal, September 8, 2010.
9.    James Stewart, "The Birthday Party," New Yorker, February 4, 2008.
10.  Michael de la Merced, "Inside Stephen Schwarzman's Birthday Bash," New York Times,
February 14, 2007.
11.  Thomas Heath, "A Billionaire, Gwen Stefani and a Horde of Camels Bolster the Trump
Economy," Washington Post, February 15, 2017.
12.  Robert Frank, "Why the Rich Like to Eat Gold," Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2009.
13.  Frank, Richistan, 115.
14.  Chrystia Freeland, Plutocrats: The Rise of the New Global Super-Rich and the Fall of Everyone
Else (New York: Penguin, 2013), 6.
15.  Nathan Robinson, "How Billionaires See Themselves," Current Affairs, January 5, 2021.
16.  Arwa Mahdawi, "How Can You Comfort a Sad, Scared Billionaire? Call Them a 'Person of
Wealth,'" Guardian, April 11, 2023.
17.  Veblen, Theory, 66-67.
18.  Kate Wagner, "You Can't Even Tell Who's Rich Anymore," Nation, March 24, 2023.
19.  Veblen, Theory, 92.
20.  Paul Fussell, Class: A Guide Through the American Status System (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1983), 30.
21.  Peter Bernstein and Annalyn Swan, All the Money in the World: How the Forbes 400 Make—and
Spend—Their Fortunes (New York: Knopf, 2007), 207-9.
22.  Bernstein and Swan, All the Money, 223-24.
23.  John Kampfner, The Rich: From Slaves to Super Yachts: A 2,000-Year History (London: Little,
Brown, 2014), 227.
24.  Paul Street, They Rule: The 1% vs. Democracy (New York: Routledge, 2014), 175-76.
25.  Steven Gaines, Fool's Paradise: Players, Poseurs, and the Culture of Excess in South Beach
(New York: Random House, 2009), 187.
26.  Trefor Moss, "Luxury Brands Are Making Watches Even Fewer People Can Afford," Wall Street
Journal, June 11, 2022.
27.  Christina Passariello, "Apple's First Foray into Luxury with Hermès Watch Breaks Tradition,"
Wall Street Journal, September 11, 2015.
28.  Aaron Johnson, "Billionaire Melinda Gates Had 'Military Operation' Level Security Protection
for 'Today' Show Appearance," Radar Online, May 17, 2023.
29.  Julie Creswell, "With Fortune Falling, a 1 Percent Divorce," New York Times, February 1, 2014.
30.  Nicholas Kulish et al., "The Gateses' Public Split Spotlights a Secretive Fortune," New York
Times, May 13, 2021.
31.  Candace Taylor, "A High-Stakes Divorce Illustrates How the Rich Play Real-Estate Tug of War,"
Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2020.
32.  Frank, Richistan, 220-21.
33.  Nick Kostov and Stacy Meichtry, "The World's Richest Person Auditions His Five children to
Run LVMH, the Luxury Empire," Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2023.

34.  Freeland, Plutocrats, 239.
35.  Joseph Bernstein, "Elon Musk Has the World's Strangest Social Calendar," New York Times,
October 11, 2022.
36.  Rob Copeland, "The Rich, Famous and In-Between Vie for Elon Musk's Attention," Wall Street
Journal, September 30, 2022.
37.  Clay Cockrell, "I'm a Therapist to the Super-Rich: They Are as Miserable as Succession Makes
Out," Guardian, November 22, 2021.
38.  Gaines, Fool's Paradise, 158.
39.  Nina Munk, "Greenwich's Outrageous Fortune," Vanity Fair, July 2006.
40.  Katherine Clarke, "With $250 Million Ask, A Storied Bel-Air Estate Becomes America's Priciest
Home," Wall Street Journal, June 21, 2023.
41.  Katherine Clarke, "Decades After Larry Ellison Landed, These Kingpins Are Sending Malibu
Real Estate Even Higher," Wall Street Journal, June 16, 2022.
42.  Julian Guthrie, "Larry Ellison's Fantasy Island," Wall Street Journal, June 13, 2013.
43.  Katherine Clarke, "Bill and Melinda Gates Buy Oceanfront Home Near San Diego for $43
Million," Wall Street Journal, April 21, 2020.
44.  Laurence Darmiento, "L.A.'s Most Extravagant Mansion Sells for Less Than Half Its List Price,"
Los Angeles Times, March 3, 2022.
45.  Candace Jackson, "Who Wants to Buy the Most Expensive House in America?," New York
Times, December 23, 2017.
46.  Nikita Stewart and David Gelles, "The $238 Million Penthouse, and the Hedge Fund Billionaire
Who May Rarely Live There," New York Times, January 24, 2019.
47.  Britney Nguyen, "See Inside the Penthouse Bill Gates' Daughter Jennifer Reportedly Just Paid
$51M for in a 'Paparazzi-Proof' NYC Luxury Building," Business Insider, February 25, 2023.
48.  Michelle Higgins, "For the New York Condo Owner with Everything, a Million-Dollar Parking
Spot," New York Times, September 9, 2014.
49.  Steven Gaines, The Sky's the Limit: Passion and Property in Manhattan (New York: Hachette,
2005), 59.
50.  Katherine Clarke, "Billionaires' Row Was Built for the World's Wealthiest. Has It Lived Up to
Its Name?," Wall Street Journal, June 8, 2023.
51.  Bearman, Doormen, 157.
52.  Stefanos Chen, "The Downside of Life in a Supertall Tower: Leaks, Creaks, Breaks," New York
Times, February 3, 2021.
53.  Hilary Osborne, "Poor Doors: The Segregation of London's Inner-City Flat Dwellers,"
Guardian, July 25, 2014.
54.  Adam Lusher, "Were 'Poor Doors' Added to Mixed Developments So Wealthy Residents Don't
Have to Go In Alongside Social Housing Tenants?" Independent, July 25, 2014.
55.  Robin Finn, "New York's Once and Future Mansions," New York Times, September 5, 2014.
56.  Bernstein and Swan, All the Money, 205-6.
57.  Steven Gaines, Philistines at the Hedgerow (New York: Little, Brown), 1998, 105-6.
58.  Gaines, Philistines, 94-96.
59.  Gaines, Philistines, 166.
60.  Rob Larson, Bit Tyrants: The Political Economy of Silicon Valley (Chicago: Haymarket, 2020),
chapter 6.

61.  Katherine Clarke, "Mark Zuckerberg's Private Properties," Wall Street Journal, May 2, 2019.
62.  Raphael Minder, "A Mexican Oil Chief's Hide-Out: Sea Views and 2 Golf Courses," New York
Times, February 22, 2020.
63.  Frank, Richistan, 13-16.
64.  Frank, Richistan, 24.
65.  Andrew Court, "'Trophy Trees' Are the New Wealth Status Symbol," Daily Mail, April 23, 2021.
66.  David Kaplan, "The Yachting Class Sails Along," Fortune, April 13, 2009.
67.  Bill Springer, "What's the Inside of a 350-Foot-Long Superyacht That Charters for over $2
Million per Week Really Like?," Forbes, August 22, 2020.
68.  Nicole Aschoff, "Superyachts and the Super Rich," Jacobin, February 22, 2020.
69.  Raphael Minder, "These Boats Are Really Big, but Barcelona Has the Room," New York Times,
January 10, 2022.
70.  Allison Morrow, "Jeff Bezos' Superyacht Is So Big It Needs Its Own Yacht," CNN Business,
May 10, 2021.
71.  Jacob Bogage, "Daniel Snyder's New $100 Million Purchase Is the First Superyacht with a
Certified Imax Movie Theater," Washington Post, January 23, 2019.
72.  Rupert Neate, "Mind My Picasso ... Superyacht Owners Struggle to Protect Art," Guardian,
February 2, 2019.
73.  Rupert Neate, "Demand for Private Jets Soars as Rich Travelers Try to Avoid 'Mosh Pit,'"
Guardian, September 30, 2021.
74.  Benjamin Mullin, "When Private Jets Ferry Billionaires to Small-Town Idaho," New York Times,
July 1, 2022.
75.  Dana Wood, "Around the World in 24 Days: Is a Luxury 'Jet Cruise' for You?," Wall Street
Journal, August 8, 2023.
76.  James Barron, "That Noise? It's the 1%, Helicoptering Over Your Traffic Jam," New York Times,
August 1, 2019.
77.  Kenneth Chang, "There Are 2 Seats Left for This Trip to the International Space Station," New
York Times, March 5, 2020.
78.  Micah Maidenberg, "SpaceX and Axiom Launch Private Astronauts to Space Station," Wall
Street Journal, April 8, 2022.
79.  Micah Maidenberg and Doug Cameron, "Blue Origin Launch: Jeff Bezos and Crew Complete
Successful Space Flight," Wall Street Journal, July 20, 2021.
80.  John Branch and Christina Goldbaum, "A Rubik's Cube, Thick Socks and Giddy Anticipation:
The Last Hours of the Titan," New York Times, July 2, 2023.
81.  Kenneth Chang, "Jeff Bezos Picks 18-Year-Old Dutch Student for Blue Origin Rocket Launch,"
New York Times, July 15, 2021.
82.  Alistair MacDonald, "Richard Branson Races Jeff Bezos to Space as COVID-19 Hits Business
Back on Earth," Wall Street Journal, July 8, 2021.
83.  Dave Sebastian and Benjamin Katz, "Richard Branson's Space Company Virgin Orbit Files for
Bankruptcy," Wall Street Journal, April 4, 2023.
84.  Luke Savage, "The Billionaire Space Race Is the Ultimate Symbol of Capitalist Decadence,"
Jacobin, July 14, 2021.
85.  James Stewart, "Record Prices Mask a Tepid Market for Fine Art," New York Times, December
6, 2013.

86.  Colin Moynihan, "Did Five Paintings Lose Their 'Oomph'? It's a $410 Million Question.," New
York Times, November 15, 2022.
87.  Nick Paumgarten, "The $40-Million Elbow," New Yorker, October 15, 2006.
88.  Graham Bowley and Doreen Carvajal, "One of the World's Greatest Art Collections Hides
behind This Fence," New York Times, May 28, 2016.
89.  C. Wright Mills, The Power Elite (New York: Oxford University Press, 1956), 92.
90.  Peter Wilson, "Want a Second Passport? Try Buying a House," New York Times, May 21, 2019.
91.  Annie Lowrey, "Homeless Rates in U.S. Held Level Amid Recession, Study Says, but Big Gains
Are Elusive," New York Times, December 10, 2012.
Chapter 3: The Classes
1.    John Heilemann, Pride Before the Fall: The Trials of Bill Gates and the End of the Microsoft Era
(New York: HarperCollins, 2001), 64.
2.    Doug Henwood, "To Serve Is to Rule," Harper's, November 2019.
3.    Edward Wolff, "Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962 to 2016: Has Middle Class
Wealth Recovered?," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24085,
November 2017, 16, 37.
4.    Douglas Dowd, Inequality and the Global Economic Crisis (London: Pluto, 2009), 22.
5.    Stephen Resnick and Richard Wolff, "The Diversity of Class Analyses: A Critique of Erik Olin
Wright and Beyond," Critical Sociology 29, no. 1 (January 2003).
6.    Katie Quan in Michael Zweig, ed., What's Class Got to Do with It?: American Society in the
Twenty-First Century (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2004), 95.
7.    Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons: The Classic Account of the Influential Capitalists Who
Transformed America's Future (New York: Harcourt, 1934), 15.
8.    Heilemann, Pride, 64.
9.    Dowd, Inequality, 31.
10.  C. Wright Mills, The Power Elite (New York: Oxford University Press, 1956), 30-31.
11.  Erik Olin Wright, Understanding Class (London: Verso, 2015), 8.
12.  Rob Larson, Capitalism vs. Freedom: The Toll Road to Serfdom (Alresford, UK: Zero, 2018).
13.  Robin Hahnel, The ABCs of Political Economy: A Modern Approach (London: Pluto, 2014), 273.
14.  Michael Porter and Jan Rivkin, "Prosperity at Risk: Findings of Harvard Business School's
Survey on U.S. Competitiveness," Harvard Business School, January 2012, 6.
15.  Aaron Bernstein, "The Wage Squeeze," Businessweek, July 17, 1995.
16.  Eric Morath, Theo Francis, and Justin Baer, "The COVID Economy Carves Deep Divide
Between Haves and Have-Nots," Wall Street Journal, October 5, 2020.
17.  Barbara Ehrenreich, Fear of Falling: The Inner Life of the Middle Class (New York: Pantheon,
1989), 15.
18.  Anne Case and Angus Deaton, "Life Expectancy in Adulthood Is Falling for Those without a BA
Degree, but as Educational Gaps Have Widened, Racial Gaps Have Narrowed," Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 11 (March 8, 2021).
19.  David Wessel, "As Rich-Poor Gap Widens in the U.S., Class Mobility Stalls," Wall Street
Journal, May 13, 2005.
20.  David Shipler, "Total Poverty Awareness," New York Times, February 21, 2004.

21.  Anemona Hartocollis, "A Trial about Wealth, Privilege and the Murkiness of College
Admissions," New York Times, October 6, 2021.
22.  Aatish Bhatia, Claire Cain Miller, and Josh Katz, "Study of Elite College Admissions Data
Suggests Being Very Rich Is Its Own Qualification," New York Times, July 24, 2023.
23.  Khadeeja Safdar, "On Hold for 45 Minutes? It Might Be Your Secret Customer Score," Wall
Street Journal, November 1, 2018.
24.  Paul Fussell, Class: A Guide Through the American Status System (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1983), 191-93.
25.  Peter W. Bernstein and Annalyn Swan, All the Money in the World: How the Forbes 400 Make—
and Spend—Their Fortunes (New York: Knopf, 2007), 188.
26.  John Kampfner, The Rich: From Slaves to Super Yachts: A 2,000-Year History (London: Little,
Brown, 2014), xiii.
27.  Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007),
131.
28.  Carl Becker, "John Jay and Peter van Schaack," Quarterly Journal of the New York State
Historical Association 1, no. 1 (October 1919): 2.
29.  Josephson, Robber Barons, 355.
30.  Stanley Aronowitz, How Class Works: Power & Social Movement (New Haven, CT: Yale
University, 2003), 94-95.
31.  Doug Henwood, "Take Me to Your Leader: The Rot of the American Ruling Class," Jacobin,
April 27, 2021.
32.  Mills, Power Elite, 50.
33.  Henwood, "To Serve Is to Rule."
34.  Larson, Capitalism vs. Freedom, chapter 1.
35.  George Orwell, As I Please, 1943-1945: Volume 3 of the Collected Essays, Journalism and
Letters of George Orwell (New York: Nonpareil, 2000), 118.
36.  Barbara Ehrenreich, This Land Is Their Land: Reports from a Divided Nation (New York: Holt,
2009), 129.
37.  Josephson, Robber Barons, 414-45.
38.  Thomas Ferguson, Golden Rule: The Investment Theory of Party Competition and the Logic of
Money-Driven Political Systems (University of Chicago Press, 1995), 8, 27.
39.  David Kirkpatrick, "In a Message to Democrats, Wall St. Sends Cash to GOP," New York Times,
February 7, 2010.
40.  Jane Sasseen, "The Changes Business Wants from Obama," Businessweek, November 5, 2008.
41.  Brendan Greeley, "Finance Executives Are Confused about Why the Nation Loathes Them,"
Businessweek, December 16, 2013.
42.  Rebecca Ballhaus and Brody Mullins, "Wall Street's Donor Role Expands as Money Flows into
2016 Election," Wall Street Journal, February 1, 2016.
43.  Nathan Robinson, "Every Libertarian Becomes a Socialist the Moment the Free Market Screws
Them," Current Affairs, March 13, 2023.
44.  Shane Goldmacher, "Dozen Megadonors Gave $3.4 Billion, One in Every 13 Dollars, Since
2009," New York Times, April 20, 2021.
45.  John Nichols, "Bernie Sanders Asks Fed Chair Whether the US Is an Oligarchy," Nation, May 7,
2014.

46.Olúfẹ́mi O. Táíwò, Elite Capture: How the Powerful Took Over Identity Politics (and Everything
Else) (Chicago: Haymarket, 2022), 10, 22-23.
47.  Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Classics, 1981), 84, 83.
48.  Frederick Douglass in Philip Foner and Yuval Taylor, eds., Frederick Douglass: Selected
Speeches and Writings (Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 1999), 676, 678.
49.  Martin Luther King Jr., in Michael Honey, ed., "All Labor Has Dignity" (Boston: Beacon Press,
2011), 113, 36, 38.
50.  Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor, "Union Members—2022," January 19,
2023.
51.  David Harrison, "Union Membership Hits Record Low Despite Votes at Apple, Amazon,
Starbucks," Wall Street Journal, January 19, 2023.
52.  Aaron Bernstein, "Can This Man Save Labor?," Businessweek, September 13, 2004.
53.  Ehrenreich, This Land, 129-30.
54.  Martin Jay Levitt with Terry Conrow, Confessions of a Union Buster (New York: Crown, 1993),
1-3, 26, 59, 62, 184.
55.  Levitt, Confessions, 195.
56.  Nelson D. Schwartz, "In an Age of Privilege, Not Everyone Is in the Same Boat," New York
Times, April 23, 2016.
57.  Robert Frank, Richistan: A Journey Through the 21st Century Wealth Boom and the Lives of the
New Rich (New York: Random House, 2007), 74.
58.  Steven Gaines, The Sky's the Limit: Passion and Property in Manhattan (New York: Hachette,
2005), 38-39.
59.  Douglas Rushkoff, Survival of the Richest: Escape Fantasies of the Tech Billionaires (New York:
Norton, 2022), 3-4.
60.  Mills, Power Elite, 64.
61.  Jason Horowitz and Matina Stevis-Gridneff, "A Superyacht Gave a Lifeline to 100 Migrants
Thrown into the Sea," New York Times, June 21, 2023.
Chapter 4: The Lies
1.    Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons: The Classic Account of the Influential Capitalists Who
Transformed America's Future (New York: Harcourt, 1934), 108.
2.    Josephson, Robber Barons, 322-23.
3.    See Rob Larson, Bit Tyrants: The Political Economy of Silicon Valley (Chicago: Haymarket,
2020), chapter 5.
4.    See Barry Lynn, Cornered: The New Monopoly Capitalism and the Economics of Destruction
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2010).
5.    Peter Bernstein and Annalyn Swan, All the Money in the World: How the Forbes 400 Make—and
Spend—Their Fortunes (New York: Knopf, 2007), 66.
6.    Chrystia Freeland, Plutocrats: The Rise of the New Global Super-Rich and the Fall of Everyone
Else (New York: Penguin, 2013), 9-11.
7.    Danny Dorling, Inequality and the 1% (London: Verso, 2019), 44.
8.    Caroline Freund and Sarah Oliver, "The Origins of the Superrich: The Billionaire Characteristics
Database," Peterson Institute for International Economics, Working Papers 16-1, February 2016.

9.    Abigail Disney, "I Was Taught From a Young Age to Protect My Dynastic Wealth," Atlantic,
June 17, 2021.
10.  Paul Piff et al., "Higher Social Class Predicts Increased Unethical Behavior," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 109, no. 11 (February 27, 2012).
11.  Jennifer Burns, Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the American Right (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2009), 177.
12.  Ginia Bellafante, "The Rich Have a Coronavirus Cure: Escape from New York," New York
Times, March 14, 2020.
13.  Joshua David Stein, "The City's One-Percenters Flee the Rest of Us to the Hamptons," New
York, March 20, 2020.
14.  Kevin Quealy, "The Richest Neighborhoods Emptied Out Most as Coronavirus Hit New York
City," New York Times, May 15, 2020.
15.  Suzanne Woolley and Devon Pendleton, "Quandary for High Flyers: How to Travel Safely to
Your Yacht," Bloomberg, May 22, 2020.
16.  Nick Bilton, "'All These Rich People Can't Stop Themselves': The Luxe Quarantine Lives of
Silicon Valley's Elite," Vanity Fair, August 13, 2020.
17.  Rupert Neate, "Super-Rich Jet Off to Disaster Bunkers amid Coronavirus Outbreak," Guardian,
March 11, 2020.
18.  Sarah Maslin Nir and Tracey Tully, "Did New Yorkers Who Fled to Second Homes Bring the
Virus?," New York Times, April 10, 2020.
19.  Paul Sullivan, "In Pandemic, More Are Paying for Direct Access to Their Doctors," New York
Times, August 21, 2020.
20.  Gillian Friedman, "Pandemic Luxury: 'Concierge-Style' Coaches and $350 Movie Tickets," New
York Times, July 21, 2020.
21.  Ben Eisen, "In Coronavirus Recession, the Out-of-Work Turn to GoFundMe," Wall Street
Journal, November 21, 2020.
22.  Amy Gamerman, "Wealthy City Dwellers Seek Refuge from Coronavirus at Remote Ranches,"
Wall Street Journal, April 8, 2020.
23.  Arundhati Roy, "The Pandemic Is a Portal," Financial Times, April 3, 2020.
24.  Patricia Mazzei, "Everyone Wants an Antibody Test. Everyone on This Private Island Can Get
One.," New York Times, April 14, 2020.
25.  Megan Twohey, Keith Collins, and Katie Thomas, "With First Dibs on Vaccines, Rich Countries
Have 'Cleared the Shelves,'" New York Times, December 15, 2020.
26.  Bilton, "'All These Rich People.'"
27.  Brian Merchant, The One Device: The Secret History of the iPhone (New York: Little, Brown,
2017), 190-91.
28.  Janet Abbate, Inventing the Internet (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 135. The best history
of the development of the Internet, filled with fascinating detail and showing consistently little
involvement from the private sector.
29.  James Curran, Natalie Fenton, and Des Freedman, Misunderstanding the Internet (New York:
Routledge, 2016), 54.
30.  Larson, Bit Tyrants, 123.
31.  Freeland, Plutocrats, 246.
32.  Luke Savage, "Do Not Welcome Our New Billionaire Overlords," Jacobin, November 18, 2021.

33.  Bernstein and Swan, All the Money, 236.
34.  Robert Frank, Richistan: A Journey Through the 21st Century Wealth Boom and the Lives of the
New Rich (New York: Random House, 2007), 162.
35.  Frank, Richistan, 159, 175-76, 178.
36.  Linsey McGoey, No Such Thing as a Free Gift: The Gates Foundation and the Price of
Philanthropy (London: Verso, 2015), 7-9.
37.  John Kampfner, The Rich: From Slaves to Super Yachts: A 2,000-Year History (London: Little,
Brown, 2014), 224-25.
38.  Josephson, Robber Barons, 322-24.
39.  Josephson, Robber Barons, 325.
40.  James Wallace and Jim Erickson, Hard Drive: Bill Gates and the Making of the Microsoft
Empire (New York: HarperCollins, 1992), 38.
41.  Wallace and Erickson, Hard Drive, 211.
42.  The Simpsons, season 9, episode 14, "Das Bus," directed by Pete Michels, written by David X.
Cohen, aired February 15, 1998, on Fox, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H27rfr59RiE.
43.  Steven Levy, "Bill Gates and President Bill Clinton on the NSA, Safe Sex, and American
Exceptionalism," Wired, November 2013.
44.  Randall Smith, "As His Foundation Has Grown, Gates Has Slowed His Donations," New York
Times DealBook, May 26, 2014.
45.  Emily Glazer, "Melinda French Gates No Longer Pledges Bulk of Her Wealth to Gates
Foundation," Wall Street Journal, February 2, 2022.
46.  Bernstein and Swan, All the Money, 279.
47.  Donald McNeil Jr., "Gates Foundation Pledges $50 Million to Fight Ebola," New York Times,
September 10, 2014.
48.  Kampfner, The Rich, 342.
49.  Paul Sullivan, "Private Citizen Bloomberg on Philanthropy," New York Times, April 25, 2014;
Agustino Fontevecchia, "Bored of Philanthropy, Billionaire Mike Bloomberg Back as Chief at
Bloomberg LP," Forbes, September 3, 2014.
50.  Stephanie Strom, "Helmsley Left Dogs Billions in Her Will," New York Times, July 2, 2008.
51.  Liz Alderman and Steven Erlanger, "As Rich Lavish Cash on Notre-Dame, Many Ask: What
About the Needy?," New York Times, April 17, 2019.
52.  Bernstein and Swan, All the Money, 302.
53.  Jeffery Gettleman, "Meant to Keep Malaria Out, Mosquito Nets Are Used to Haul Fish In," New
York Times, January 24, 2015.
54.  Eric Wallerstein, "FTX Seeks to Recoup Sam Bankman-Fried's Charitable Donations," Wall
Street Journal, January 7, 2023.
55.  McGoey, No Such Thing, 31.
56.  Eric Young, "Millions of American Donate through Crowdfunding Sites to Help Others Pay for
Medical Bills," NORC, University of Chicago, February 19, 2020.
57.  Nathan Robinson, "How Billionaires See Themselves," Current Affairs, January 5, 2021.
Chapter 5: The Burden
1.    Lucas Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022 (World Inequality Lab, 2021), 146.

2.    Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons: The Classic Account of the Influential Capitalists Who
Transformed America's Future (New York: Harcourt, 1934), 441.
3.    Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 133.
4.    Joe Fassler, "The Superyachts of Billionaires Are Starting to Look a Lot Like Theft," New York
Times, April 10, 2023.
5.    Fassler, "Superyachts."
6.    Ann Louise Bardach, "Lifestyles of the Rich and Parched," Politico, August 24, 2014.
7.    Christoper Flavelle et al., "Mississippi Crisis Highlights Climate Threat to Drinking Water
Nationwide," New York Times, September 4, 2022.
8.    Andrew Court, "'Trophy Trees' Are the New Wealth Status Symbol," Daily Mail, April 23, 2021.
9.    Peter W. Bernstein and Annalyn Swan, All the Money in the World: How the Forbes 400 Make—
and Spend—Their Fortunes (New York: Knopf, 2007), 158.
10.  Thomas Wiedmann et al., "Scientists' Warning on Affluence," Nature Communications 11:3107
(June 19, 2020).
11.  Jamie Weinstein, "George Will Calls Global Warming 'A Religion,' 'Socialism by the Back
Door,'" Daily Caller, April 27, 2014.
12.  Core Writing Team, Hoesung Lee, and José Romero, eds., IPCC, 2023: Summary for
Policymakers, in Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II
and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
(Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC, 2023), 4-5, 7.
13.  Tosin Thompson, "Young People's Climate Anxiety Revealed in Landmark Survey," Nature,
September 22, 2021.
14.  Nadja Popovich and Brad Plumer, "Who Has the Most Historical Responsibility for Climate
Change?," New York Times, November 12, 2021.
15.  Rob Larson, "Trillions and Trillions: The Selective Blindness on Endless Economic Growth,"
Current Affairs, Nov/Dec 2021.
16.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 129.
17.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 133.
18.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 135.
19.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 141-42.
20.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 144.
21.  Lucas Chancel and Thomas Piketty, "Carbon and Inequality: From Kyoto to Paris," Paris School
of Economics, November 3, 2015, 2.
22.  Tim Gore, "Carbon Inequality in 2030," Oxfam, November 5, 2021, 4.
23.  Gore, "Carbon Inequality," 30.
24.  Matthew Huber, Climate Change as Class War: Building Socialism on a Warming Planet
(London: Verso, 2022), 61-62.
25.  Edward Wolff, "Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962 to 2016: Has Middle Class
Wealth Recovered?," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24085,
November 2017, 16, 37.
26.  Wolff, "Household Wealth Trends," 55.
27.  "The Jet Traveler Report," Wealth-X / VistaJet, 2018.
28.  Robert Frank, Richistan: A Journey Through the 21st Century Wealth Boom and the Lives of the
New Rich (New York: Random House, 2007), 133.

29.  Frank, Richistan, 135.
30.  Doug Gollan, "This Is Where You Will Find the Most Private Jets per UHNW Population,"
Forbes, August 22, 2021.
31.  Stefan Gössling, "Celebrities, Air Travel, and Social Norms," Annals of Tourism Research 49,
no. 4 (October 2019).
32.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 130.
33.  Bill Gates, How to Avoid a Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We
Need (New York: Knopf, 2021).
34.  Yan Zhuang and Euan Ward, "Twitter Reinstates Suspended Accounts of Several Journalists,"
New York Times, December 17, 2022.
35.  "Private Jets: Can the Super-Rich Supercharge Zero-Emission Aviation?," Transport &
Environment, May 2021.
36.  Constant Méheut, "As France Swelters, Private Jets Come Under Attack," New York Times,
August 25, 2022.
37.  Vanessa Bee, "Home For the 'Gilets Jaunes' Days," Current Affairs, December 10, 2018.
38.  Alex Ledsom, "France's Rich Get Much Richer After Abolition of Wealth Tax," Forbes, October
9, 2020.
39.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 128, 131.
40.  George Melloan, "The Yellow Jackets Are Right About Green Policies," Wall Street Journal,
December 16, 2018.
41.  Méheut, "As France Swelters."
42.  Dharna Noor, "Ban Private Jets," Gizmodo, November 1, 2021.
43.  David Streitfeld and Erin Woo, "The Amazonification of Space Begins in Earnest," New York
Times, July 21, 2021.
44.  Rob Larson, Bit Tyrants: The Political Economy of Silicon Valley (Chicago: Haymarket, 2020),
chapter 8.
45.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 146.
Chapter 6: The Clans
1.    John Kampfner, The Rich: From Slaves to Super-Yachts: A 2,000-Year History (London: Little,
Brown, 2014), 362.
2.    Kampfner, The Rich, xxv.
3.    Rob Larson, "Not Too Big Enough," Dollars & Sense, July/August 2010.
4.    Rebecca Davis O'Brien, "Epstein's Longtime Pilot Said the Cockpit Door Stayed Closed on the
Financier's Planes," New York Times, November 30, 2021.
5.    Khadeeja Safdar and Emily Glazer, "Jeffrey Epstein Appeared to Threaten Bill Gates over
Microsoft Co-Founder's Affair with Russian Bridge Player," Wall Street Journal, May 21, 2023.
6.    Richard Chang, "How the World's Billionaires Got So Rich 2023," Forbes, April 9, 2023.
7.    "Everybody Wants to Rule the World," Economist, November 27, 2014.
8.    Don Clark and Robert McMillan, "Facebook, Amazon and Other Tech Giants Tighten Grip on
Internet Economy," Wall Street Journal, November 6, 2015.
9.    Lucas Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022 (World Inequality Lab, 2021), 34.

10.  Kampfner, The Rich, 286.
11.  Abdulhadi Khalaf, Omar AlShehabi, and Adam Hanieh, eds., Transit States: Labour, Migration
and Citizenship in the Gulf (London: Pluto, 2015), 4, 16.
12.  Christina Goldbaum, "His Estate Has 3 Swimming Pools and a Stable. He Says He's Not Rich.,"
New York Times, December 10, 2022.
13.  Kampfner, The Rich, 291.
14.  Stephen Kalin, "Saudi Royals Are Selling Homes, Yachts and Art as Crown Prince Cuts
Income," Wall Street Journal, April 24, 2022.
15.  Robert Worth, "The Dark Reality Behind Saudi Arabia's Utopian Dreams," New York Times
Magazine, January 28, 2021.
16.  Rory Smith, "Saudi Arabia, Newcastle and Soccer's Worship of Money," New York Times,
October 8, 2021.
17.  Warren Strobel, "CIA Concludes Saudi Journalist Was Killed on Crown Prince's Order," Wall
Street Journal, November 17, 2018.
18.  Justin Scheck, Bradley Hope, and Summer Said, "Bezos, Saudi Prince Suffer Bitter Split," Wall
Street Journal, January 27, 2020.
19.  Kampfner, The Rich, 308.
20.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 34.
21.  Kampfner, The Rich, 313.
22.  Kevin Koenig, "How Much Does That Oligarch's Yacht Actually Cost?," New York Times,
September 2, 2022.
23.  Rory Jones, "Russian Oligarchs' Private Jets Find Refuge in Dubai but Can't Leave," Wall Street
Journal, April 9, 2022.
24.  Anton Troianovski and Jack Ewing, "How Russia's Rich Get Their Luxuries Now," New York
Times, May 11, 2023.
25.  Jared Malsin and Elvan Kivilcim, "Superyachts, Seaside Apartments and Suitcases Full of Cash:
Russians Pour Money into Turkey," Wall Street Journal, April 7, 2022.
26.  Raphael Minder and Barbara Erling, "Affluent Ukrainian Refugees Boost Polish Luxury
Businesses," Financial Times, March 3, 2023.
27.  Laurie Burkitt, "Rolling Out the Red Carpet," Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2013.
28.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 213.
29.  Branko Milanovic, Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2016), 178-79.
30.  Michael Forsythe, "Billionaire Lawmakers Ensure the Rich Are Represented in China's
Legislature," New York Times, March 2, 2015.
31.  Kampfner, The Rich, 325-26.
32.  Stella Yifan Xie, "Xi Jinping's 'Common Prosperity' Was Everywhere, but China Backed Off,"
Wall Street Journal, April 3, 2022.
33.  Chancel et al., World Inequality Report 2022, 34.
34.  Nick Kostov and Stacy Meichtry, "The World Richest Person Auditions His Five Children to
Run LVMH, the Luxury Empire," Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2023.
35.  David de Jong, Nazi Billionaires: The Dark History of Germany's Wealthiest Dynasties (New
York: HarperCollins, 2022), 6.
36.  Andrew Hill, "Chair of the 'Firm,'" Financial Times, September 10-11, 2022.

37.  Danny Dorling, Inequality and the 1% (London: Verso, 2019), 13-14.
38.  World Bank, Global Development Finance 2012 (World Bank, 2012), 1.
39.  Vijay Prashad, "The IMF Is Utterly Indifferent to the Pain It's Causing," ZNet, October 17, 2019.
40.  Robin Hahnel, Panic Rules!: Everything You Need to Know about the Global Economy
(Cambridge, MA: South End, 1999), ix.
41.  Jonathan Ostry, Prakash Loungani, and Davide Furceri, "Neoliberalism: Oversold?," Finance &
Development 53, no. 2 (June 2016).
42.  Saeed Shah, "Pakistan Offers Sharp Shifts to Win IMF Bailout," Wall Street Journal, July 1,
2019.
43.  Saeed Shah, "'The Middle-Class Person Is Dying.' Pakistan's Tax Push Is Deflating Its Leader's
Political Base.," Wall Street Journal, October 17, 2019.
44.  "Food in the Wrong Places," Financial Times, September 4, 1965.
45.  James Morgan, "Rip van Winkle's New Economic Order: The Fall of the Soviet Bloc Has Left
the IMF and G7 to Rule the World and Create a New Imperial Age," Financial Times, April 26,
1992.
Chapter 7: The Plan
1.    Matthew Josephson, The Robber Barons: The Classic Account of the Influential Capitalists Who
Transformed America's Future (New York: Harcourt, 1934), 374.
2.    Chrystia Freeland, Plutocrats: The Rise of the New Global Super-Rich and the Fall of Everyone
Else (New York: Penguin, 2013), 240.
3.    Norman Finkelstein, What Gandhi Says: About Nonviolence, Resistance and Courage (New
York: OR Books, 2012), 65.
4.    "Most See Inequality Growing, but Partisans Differ over Solutions," Pew Research Center,
January 23, 2014.
5.    Rich Morin, "Rising Share of Americans See Conflict Between Rich and Poor," Pew Research
Center, January 11, 2012.
6.    Max Ehrenfreund, "A Majority of Millennials Now Reject Capitalism, Poll Shows," Washington
Post, April 26, 2016.
7.    Hannah Hartig, "Stark Partisan Divisions in Americans' Views of 'Socialism,' 'Capitalism,'"
Pew Research Center, June 25, 2019.
8.    "In Their Own Words: Behind Americans' Views of 'Socialism' and 'Capitalism,'" Pew
Research Center, October 7, 2019.
9.    Frank Newport, "Democrats More Positive about Socialism Than Capitalism," Gallup, August
13, 2018.
10.  J. Baxter Oliphant, "Top Tax Frustrations for Americans: The Feeling That Some Corporations,
Wealthy People Don't Pay Fair Share," Pew Research Center, April 7, 2023.
11.  Felix Salmon, "America's Continued Move toward Socialism," Axios, June 25, 2021.
12.  Carl Beijer, "Socialism's Base Is the Poor, and Capitalism's Base Is the Rich," carlbeijer.com,
October 27, 2022.
13.  "Millennial Socialism," Economist, February 16, 2019.
14.  Rob Larson, Capitalism vs. Freedom: The Toll Road to Serfdom (Alresford, UK: Zero Books,
2018), introduction and chapter 1.

15.  "Life, liberty and the pursuit of property," Economist, February 16, 2019.
16.  Glenn Hubbard, "Even My Business-School Students Have Doubts About Capitalism," Atlantic,
January 2, 2022.
17.  Josephson, Robber Barons, 227.
18.  Josephson, Robber Barons, 372.
19.  Josephson, Robber Barons, 421.
20.  Kris Maher, "Strikes Becoming More Common Amid Inflation, Tight Labor Market," Wall Street
Journal, September 16, 2022.
21.  Noam Scheiber, "How the Pandemic Has Added to Labor Unrest," New York Times, November
1, 2021.
22.  David Harrison, "Amazon Workers' Union Victory Bolsters Revitalized Labor Movement," Wall
Street Journal, April 2, 2022.
23.  Noam Scheiber, "Companies Are Taking a Harder Line on Union Organizers, Workers Say," New
York Times, May 22, 2023.
24.  Noam Scheiber, "Supreme Court Backs Employer in Suit over Strike Losses," New York Times,
June 1, 2023.
25.  Adam Cohen, Supreme Inequality: The Supreme Court's Fifty-Year Battle for a More Unjust
America (New York: Penguin, 2020), 244.
26.  Paul Berger, "New Ports Contract Would Raise Pay 32%, Bring Dockworkers $70 Million in
Bonuses," Wall Street Journal, June 15, 2023.
27.  Kris Maher, "Strikes Becoming More Common amid Inflation, Tight Labor Market," New York
Times, September 16, 2022.
28.  Noam Scheiber and Niraj Chokshi, "Workers Say Railroads' Efficiency Push Became Too
Much," New York Times, September 15, 2022.
29.  Maher, "Strikes."
30.  Kris Maher, "Unions Eye L.A. Charter Schools," Wall Street Journal, November 16, 2015.
31.  Noam Scheiber, "The Revolt of the College-Educated Working Class," New York Times, April
28, 2022.
32.  Heather Haddon, "Starbucks Closing Some Stores, Citing Safety Concerns in Certain Cafes,"
Wall Street Journal, July 12, 2022.
33.  Karen Weise and Michael Corkery, "Amazon Workers Vote Down Union Drive at Alabama
Warehouse," New York Times, April 9, 2021.
34.  Lauren Kaori Gurley, "A Homeless Amazon Warehouse Worker in New York City Tells Her
Story," Vice, June 18, 2021.
35.  Noam Scheiber and Karen Weise, "Amazon Loses Bid to Overturn Union Victory at Staten
Island Warehouse," New York Times, January 11, 2023.
36.  Sebastian Herrera, "Unionization Stalls at Amazon as Turnover, Company Efforts Stymie
Activism," Wall Street Journal, December 28, 2022.
37.  Sebastian Herrera, "Amazon Workers Reject Union in Vote at Upstate New York Warehouse,"
Wall Street Journal, October 18, 2022.
38.  Salvador Rodriguez, "Apple Employees at Maryland Store Vote to Unionize," Wall Street
Journal, June 18, 2022.
39.  Jack Ewing, "Tesla Workers in Buffalo Begin Union Drive," New York Times, February 14,
2023.

40.  Noam Scheiber, "Video Game Workers Get a Union Foothold at Microsoft," New York Times,
January 3, 2023.
41.  Mike Colias, "Detroit Is Paying Up to End the UAW Strike. Now Carmakers Will Live with the
Costs.," Wall Street Journal, October 30, 2023.
42.  Nora Eckert and Mike Colias, "Three Young Activists Who Never Worked in an Auto Factory
Helped Deliver Huger Win for the UAW," Wall Street Journal, October 30, 2023.
43.  John Kampfner, The Rich: From Slaves to Super-Yachts: A 2,000-Year History (London: Little,
Brown, 2014), 202-203.
44.  Kirsten Grind et al., "Elon Musk Is Planning a Texas Utopia—His Own Town," Wall Street
Journal, March 9, 2023.
45.  Kathy Chu, "China Loses Edge on Labor Costs," Wall Street Journal, December 3, 2015.
46.  Stanley Aronowitz, How Class Works: Power & Social Movement (New Haven, CT: Yale
University, 2003), 102-103.
47.  Mica Rosenberg, Kristina Cooke, and Joshua Schneyer, "Child Workers Found throughout
Hyundai-Kia Supply Chain in Alabama," Reuters, December 16, 2022.
48.  Hannah Dreier, "Alone and Exploited, Migrant Children Work Brutal Jobs Across the U.S.,"
New York Times, February 25, 2023.
49.  Luis Feliz Leon, "Slingshot: Children on the Killing Floor," Labor Notes, May 25, 2023.
50.  Adolfo Flores and Jennifer Calfas, "States Look to Ease Some Child-Labor Laws amid Tight
Market," Wall Street Journal, March 10, 2023.
51.  Jason Riley, "A Little Work Never Hurt Anyone—Including Teenagers," Wall Street Journal,
April 11, 2023.
52.  Taylor Giorno, "'Midterm Spending Spree': Cost of 2022 Federal Elections Tops $8.9 Billion, a
New Midterm Record," OpenSecrets, February 7, 2023; "2020 Presidential Race," OpenSecrets,
https://www.opensecrets.org/2020-presidential-race.
53.  Larry Bartels, "Economic Inequality and Political Representation," Russell Sage Foundation,
November 2002.
54.  Paul Kiel, "How Harlan Crow Slashed His Tax Bill by Taking Clarence Thomas on Superyacht
Cruises," ProPublica, July 17, 2023.
55.  Laura Meckler and Richard Rubin, "Democrats' Shift Left Aids Sanders," Wall Street Journal,
February 8, 2016.
56.  Kirk Johnson, "A Rare Elected Voice for Socialism Pledges to Be Heard in Seattle," New York
Times, December 28, 2013.
57.  Peter Robison, "Occupy Tastes Rare Success in Rise of Seattle Socialist," Bloomberg, March 12,
2014.
58.  John Burn-Murdoch, "Why Are Americans Dying So Young?," Financial Times, March 30,
2023.
59.  Bradley Jones, "Increasing Share of Americans Favor a Single Government Program to Provide
Health Care Coverage," Pew Research Center, September 29, 2020.
60.  Carl Beijer, "The Bernie Bump Is Over," carlbeijer.com, October 26, 2022.
61.  Albert Einstein, "Why Socialism?" Monthly Review, May 1949.
62.  Matthew Miles Goodrich, "The Forgotten Socialist History of Martin Luther King Jr.," In These
Times, January 15, 2018.

63.  George Orwell, "Why I Write," A Collection of Essays (Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace, 1981),
314.
64.  George Orwell, The Road to Wigan Pier (Orlando, FL: Harcourt, 1958), 216.
65.  Janet Adamy, "Most Americans Doubt Their Children Will Be Better Off, WSJ-NORC Poll
Finds," Wall Street Journal, March 24, 2023.
66.  "Red Cross Launches Food Aid Campaign for Britain," BBC News, October 11, 2023.
67.  Mike Dorning, "Lines Stretch Down the Block at Food Banks as Costs Go Up and Pandemic Aid
Expires," Bloomberg, May 7, 2023.
68.  Patrick Tyler, "A New Power in the Streets," New York Times, February 17, 2003.
69.  Nick Kostov and Stacy Meichtry, "LVMH's Paris Headquarters Stormed by Protestors," Wall
Street Journal, April 13, 2023.
70.  Annie Massa and Jack Witzig, "Musk, Zuckerberg Lead a $852 Billion Surge among World's
Richest People," Bloomberg, July 3, 2023.
71.  Gerard Baker, "Aristocrats Face the Pitchforks," Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2017.
72.Olúfẹ́mi O. Táíwò, Elite Capture: How the Powerful Took Over Identity Politics (And Everything
Else) (Chicago: Haymarket, 2022), 114.
73.  Frederick Douglass in Philip S. Foner and Yuval Taylor, eds., Frederick Douglass: Selected
Speeches and Writings (Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 1999), 367.
OceanofPDF.com

INDEX
Figures are indexed by the page number followed by f.
@ElonJet, 130-131
Advanced Research Project Agency, 107
All the Money in the World (Bernstein and Swan), 38
Amazon Labor Union, 176-177
anti-union tactics, 85-86, 172, 173, 174-177, 185
Apple Coalition of Organized Retail Employees, 177
Aronowitz, Stanley, 26-27, 76, 180
ARPANET, 107
Axiom Space, 57-58
Baker, Gerard, 193
Ballet of Service, 52
Bearman, Peter, 33
Bee, Vanessa, 133
Berners-Lee, Tim, 107
Bezos, Jeff, 21, 58
Big Tech, 143-144
Billionaires' Row, 48
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 112-114, 115
Bilton, Nick, 101
Bit Tyrants: The Political Economy of Silicon Valley (Larson), 143-144
Bloomberg Billionaires Index, 17, 192
blue-collar. See working class
Blue Origin, 58, 135
Branson, Richard, 58, 116

Bruenig, Matt, 22
capital
accumulation of, 17, 187
and carbon emissions, 126
definition of, 9, 68
liquid, 140
property as, 27, 48, 64
capital flight, 80
capital income, 9-11, 26-29
See also wealth
Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Piketty), 10
capitalism
American beliefs about, 167-171
Big Tech's power within, 143-144
class warfare inherent to, 74-75, 125-127, 163
critiques of support for, 68, 77-78
definition of, 66, 168
economic power created by, 18, 25-26, 67-68, 76-82, 183-184
growth inherent to, 9, 14-17, 20-21, 121-125, 140
origin of, 65
Wall Street's power within, 78-79, 140-143
See also carbon emissions; climate change
capitalist ruling class. See ruling class
capital mobility, 67, 69, 180
carbon budget, 125
carbon emissions
by class, 2, 119-120, 123-127, 130, 136
and industrial capital, 126
of private jets, 128-132, 135
by region, 123-124
of space tourism, 136
of superyachts, 120
See also climate change
carbon tax, 125, 133-135
See also wealth tax
Carnegie, Andrew, 97, 110-111, 172
Casa Encantada, 45-46
Center for Responsive Politics, 81
child labor, 181-182
Class (Fussell), 38, 74
class consciousness, 65-67, 71-73

class mobility, 72-73
class segregation
during COVID-19, 88, 103
exclusivity as, 87-91
historical, 86-87
purpose of, 87, 89-90
class warfare, 74-75, 125-127, 163
climate change
and capitalism, 121-122, 126
and climate law, 134
human cause of, 122
and reparations, 123
ruling class' role in, 2, 120, 123-127, 130, 136
unequal impacts of, 91, 120-123
See also carbon emissions
Climate Change as Class War (Huber), 126-127
climate law, 134
climate tax. See carbon tax
Cohen, Adam, 173-174
colonialism, 24-25
See also neocolonialism
commercial media, 106, 117, 126-127, 171, 184-186
company town, 178-180
concentrated property, 74-75
Confessions of a Union Buster (Levitt), 85-86
conspicuous consumption, 32-36, 127
consumer lifetime value (CLV), 74
corporate stock. See shareholder capital
counterfactual income study, 11-12
COVID-19 pandemic
and child labor, 181-182
class segregation during, 88, 100-101, 103
global vaccine inequity during, 104
health care access during, 101-102
impacts on working class of, 103-105
and labor unions, 172-173
ruling class' socializing during, 101
wealth growth during, 21
The Creeks, 50-51
cryptocurrency, 30
debt, 158-163

de Jong, David, 156
diminishing marginal utility of income, 16
Distributional Financial Accounts (DFA), 20-21
divorce, 41-42
Doormen (Bearman), 33
Dorling, Danny, 97, 157
Douglass, Frederick, 83, 193
Dowd, Douglas, 65, 66
economic growth, 9, 14-17, 20-21, 121-125, 140
See also capitalism; structural adjustment programs (SAPs)
Ehrenreich, Barbara, 70, 78, 85
Einstein, Albert, 186-187
Elite Capture (Táíwò), 82, 193
Ellison, Larry, 46-47
enclosure movement, 65
See also private property
Epstein, Jeffrey, 142
exclusivity, 39-40, 49, 51-52, 54-58, 87-91
expropriation, 3, 166, 188-191
factor share of income, 9
factors of production, 9-10
See also capital
Fair Field estate, 50
Fear of Falling (Ehrenreich), 70
Federal Reserve, 20-21
Ferguson, Thomas, 79
financial crises, US, 80-81, 141
fine art, 55-56, 59-60
Frank, Robert, 36, 52-53, 87-88, 110, 128
Freeland, Chrystia, 43-44, 109
free port, 60
free trade, 69
French, Melinda, 113
Friedman, Milton, 161-162
Fussell, Paul, 38, 74
Gaines, Steven, 39, 50-51, 88
Gates, Bill, 111-113, 129f, 130
Gates, Melinda. See French, Melinda
Gilded Age, 12-13, 18, 37, 48-49, 172
gilets jaunes, 132-134

A Glimmer of Hope, 110
global working class. See working class
GoFundMe, 103
Gössling, Stefan, 128-130
Green New Deal, 122
Griffin, Ken, 47
Harvard Business-Duke survey study, 7-8, 21-22
Henwood, Doug, 76-77
How Class Works (Aronowitz), 26-27, 76, 180
Huber, Matt, 126-127
income inequality, 8-12, 13f
inconspicuous consumption, 37-40
Industrial Revolution, 9, 82-83, 155
Inequality and the 1% (Dorling), 97, 157
inheritance, 16-17, 42-43, 97, 156-157
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 160-163
Internet, 106-108
Josephson, Matthew, 76, 78-79
Kampfner, John, 38, 75, 149-150, 153, 179
Khan, Imran, 163
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 83-84, 187-188
Krupp, Alfred, 179
labor law, US, 173-174
labor movement. See labor unions
Labor Notes, 181-182
labor unions
and COVID-19 pandemic, 172-173
decline of, 11, 84
power of, 79, 82-84, 166, 172, 180
resurgence of, 174-178
successes of, 174, 175, 177-178
youth support for, 175
See also anti-union tactics; working class
Langone, Ken, 36
La Zagaleta, 52
Levitt, Martin, 85-86
life expectancy, US, x, 71, 185-186
LVMH (Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton), 33-34, 43

Macron, Emmanuel, 132-134
Marconi, Guglielmo, 106-107
McGoey, Linsey, 110, 116
McWilliams, Douglas, 19-20
Medicare for All, 185-186
middle class. See working class
Mills, C. Wright, 29, 61, 66
Morgan, J. P., 78-79
Musk, Elon, 44-45, 130-131, 177, 179-180
NASA, 57-58
Nazi Billionaires (de Jong), 156
neocolonialism, 24-25, 158-163
See also colonialism
neoliberalism
megabanks under, 141-142
neocolonialism as aspect of, 24-25, 162
restoration of the Gilded Age through, 18
as revolution by rich against majority, 10-12
wealth inequality resulting from, 14-16, 158-163
network effects, 143-144
New Deal, 11-12, 36, 141
Noor, Dharna, 134-135
oligopoly, 95
See also Big Tech; Wall Street
Orwell, George, 78, 188
passports, 61
Perelman, Ron, 50-51
Peterson Institute for International Economics, 97
philanthropy
as inconsistent and incompetent, 114-116
as philanthrocapitalism, 110
as reputation laundering, 108-113, 116
Piketty, Thomas, 10-11, 17, 25-26, 28
Plutocrats (Freeland), 43-44, 109
plutonomy, ix
The Power Elite (Mills), 29, 61, 66
private helicopters, 57
private jets
carbon emissions of, 128-132, 135
as exempt from climate laws, 134

financial costs of, 127-128
maps of travel by, 129f, 130f
recommended bans on, 134-135
UHNWI's use of, 128
private property
exclusion through, 49, 51-52, 87-88, 91, 103
extravagance of ruling class, 45-50
and global residency, 61
as investments, 48
as wealth, 27, 64
See also expropriation
productive economy, 27-29, 64, 188-191
productive property. See capital
professional-managerial class (PMC), 70
See also working class
r > g, 17
See also capital
Rand, Ayn, 99
Reagan Revolution, 141
See also neoliberalism
redlining, 87
reparations, 158-159
reputation laundering, 108-113, 116, 147-148
The Rich (Kampfner), 38, 75, 149-150, 153, 179
Richistan (Frank), 36, 52-53, 128
The Robber Barons (Josephson), 76
Robinson, Nathan, 36, 81
Rockefeller, John D., 111, 172
Roy, Arundhati, 103-104
ruling class
and Big Tech, 143-144
carbon emissions of, 120, 123-127, 130
debt as a tool of, 158-163
as defined by capital ownership, 1, 10-11, 26-29, 64, 189
elite collegiate perpetuation of, 73
inheritance as central to, 16-17, 42-43, 97, 156-157
political power of, 18, 25-26, 76-82, 183-184
and Wall Street, 140-143
See also wealth
ruling class, global
Arab monarchies, 145-148

Chinese capitalists, 152-154
International Monetary Fund as tool of, 160-163
Russian oligarchs, 149-152
western European colonizers, 131-132, 155-157
ruling class, lies about
best families, 96-99
concerned with the environment, 124-125
innovative, 105-108
job creators, 94-96
philanthropic, 108-116
risk-takers, 99-104
ruling class, lifestyle of
divorce as part of, 41-42
as exclusive, 39-40, 49, 51-52, 54-58, 87-91
global residency as part of, 61
private property as part of, 45-50
travel as part of, 54-57, 61
as wasteful, 2, 53, 121
Rushkoff, Douglas, 89
Russo-Ukrainian War, 150-152
Saez, Emmanuel, 14-16
Sanders, Bernie, 81-82
Savage, Luke, 17, 58
Sawant, Kshama, 185
Schwarzman, Stephen, 34-35
shareholder capital, 11, 26-28
shareholder democracy, 27
Silicon Valley, 143-144
The Sky's the Limit (Gaines), 88
Smith, Adam, 82-83
socialism
American beliefs about, 168-170
definition of, 168
and electoral campaigns, 185-186
goals of, 188-189
youth support for, 169-171
See also labor unions
space tourism, 57-58, 135-136
Spencer, Herbert, 96
Starbucks unions, 175-176
Street, Paul, 38-39

structural adjustment programs (SAPs), 160-163
superyachts, 54-56, 91, 120, 150
Supreme Inequality (Cohen), 173-174
Survival of the Richest (Rushkoff), 89
Táíwò, Olúfẹ́mi O., 82, 193
The Theory of the Leisure Class (Veblen), 32-33
"trophy trees," 53, 121
UHNWI (ultra-high-net-worth individual), 34, 61, 128
Understanding Class (Wright), 67
union busting, 85-86, 172
unions. See labor unions
United Auto Workers, 178
Varsity Blues scandal, 73
Veblen, Thorstein, 32-33
Wagner, Kate, 37
Wall Street, 78-81, 140-143
Wall Street Journal Mansion section, 45-46
water access, 120-121
wealth
concentration of, 17
definition of, 12
growth during the Gilded Age, 12-13
middle-class, 27
and power, 18, 25-26, 67-68, 76-82, 183-184
property as, 64
shareholder capital as, 11, 26-28
See also ruling class
wealth inequality
as caused by capital accumulation, 17
in China, 23, 152-154
and colonialism, 24-25
and neocolonialism, 158-163
overview of global, 8-9, 13f, 14-16, 23
in the Persian Gulf, 145-146
in Russia, 149-150
in the United States, ix-x, 8, 13-14, 20-22
in western Europe, 13, 23, 155-157
See also World Inequality Database
wealth tax

American support for, 167
carbon tax as, 125, 133-135
Chinese, 154
French abolition of, 133-134
importance of, 166
white-collar. See working class
Wolfe, Tom, ix
Wolff, Edward, 27
working class
blue-collar versus white-collar, 68-72
definition of, 91
dependence on ruling class, 65-68, 145-146, 171-172
as segregated from ruling class, 87-91
wealth of, 27
See also labor unions
World Bank, 159
World Inequality Database
carbon emissions data from, 124-125
on carbon tax, 133-134
conservative critiques of, 18-19
overview of, 14
on space travel, 136
See also wealth inequality
World Inequality Report, 14-15, 23-25, 120, 124-125, 136
World Wide Web, 107
Wright, Erik Olin, 67
Yellowstone Club, 87-88
yellow vest movement, 132-134
Zuckerberg, Mark, 21, 51-52, 130f
Zucman, Gabriel, 14-16
OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Rob Larson is a professor of economics at Tacoma Community College and
author of Bit Tyrants: The Political Economy of Silicon Valley and
Capitalism vs. Freedom. He writes for Jacobin and Dollars & Sense, and is
the House Economist for Current Affairs. He lives in Tacoma, Washington.
OceanofPDF.com


OceanofPDF.com

