We've been working our way through the circular flow diagram that describes how an economy works.
The previous lecture is focused on goods markets and labor markets,
and in this lecture and the next one will shift the focus to the third of the three main markets,
the markets for financial capital.
This lecture is going to focus on describing those markets overall
and also on the demand side of financial capital markets,
which in this case primarily means the demand for capital from businesses
that seek to invest it in buying plant and equipment.
Then the next lecture is going to focus on the supply side of the financial capital market.
That's how households can invest their savings.
People sometimes feel like the price in a goods market or the wage in a labor market isn't quite fair,
but rarely do they feel like the entire market should be treated as completely illegitimate.
However, many people do have a nagging sense that the payment of interest,
which is the price in a financial capital market, is somehow just wrong.
Why might this be?
Well, goods are tangible and visible.
The old economic planners in the Soviet Union 20, 30 years ago
had a list of 20 million goods that were involved in the economy.
Labor and the idea of a job is something we all experience, or we can visualize it in some way.
But interest payments and a return on financial capital seem somehow harder for a lot of people to grasp.
It's all money. It means in practice that it's sort of invisible.
You don't actually see money earning a rate of return.
You just see printed financial statements.
There's also a long-standing prejudice, especially in Western thought,
against financial capital markets, that is, against certain forms of paying a return to those who invest.
In the Middle Ages in Europe, charging interest used to be considered a sin, a sin of usury.
In fact, Jews were often in the money-lending business because they were under no religious prohibition
to avoid charging interest on loans.
It's still true in some Islamic countries today that there's a prohibition on charging interest,
which, as you can imagine, tends to make running a bank kind of a complicated business.
In Shakespeare's play Hamlet, Plonius says to Laertes,
Neither a borrower nor a lender be, for the loan oft loses both itself and friend,
and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
It was never morally questionable or a sin to pay wages or to buy a good.
No one ever said, never a worker or an employer be, never a consumer or a producer be.
It's only borrowing and lending that seems to make people queasy.
We need to step past that if we're going to talk about markets for financial capital.
There's also, I think, a common semantic confusion about the idea of investment,
which tends to make things complicated.
On one side, the term investment sometimes refers to financial investment in stocks and bonds.
But investment is also used to refer to when businesses buy physical capital,
like machinery or new buildings, and invest in new plants or equipment.
So when you talk about investment and people who are investing,
typically you're referring to how they supply financial capital
and how they seek a high return without too much risk.
But when you refer to firms who are investing,
you're actually referring to how they are demanding financial capital
so they can buy physical plant and equipment.
This term investment ends up being used both talking about supply of financial capital
and demand for financial capital.
Now, I'm going to try and keep this clear by referring to financial investment,
when I mean the supply of financial capital,
and physical capital investment or capital investment
when I'm referring to demand for financial capital to buy machinery and equipment.
But I will inevitably slip up now and then, and just to be warning you,
other folks often will be even less clear than I am about this distinction.
So you should be aware that when talking about investment,
it has these two separate meanings and be clear of which one is actually being used.
Financial capital markets can be interpreted in the same basic supply and demand framework
as markets for goods and markets for labor.
The supply of financial capital comes from those who save financial capital.
We typically think of this as coming from households in general.
Firms do save money too, so in a technical sense, it's not quite right to say just households save,
but since firms are owned by shareholders and by households,
you can kind of think of firms as saving on behalf of their shareholders,
and thus households ultimately do all the saving even if firms seem to do part of it.
The supply of financial capital is a relationship.
Supply is always a relationship, right?
In this case, supply of financial capital is the relationship
between the quantity of capital supplied from households,
that is the savings of households, and the rate of return they receive.
When you borrow money and pay interest, the rate of return is an interest rate.
When you borrow money, you pay a certain interest rate,
but in other cases, like if you buy a share of stock in a company or something like that,
the rate of return will depend on whether the company expands and makes profits in the future.
So I'll sometimes talk about interest rates, I'll sometimes talk about rates of return.
The only difference between those is that an interest rate is usually at least somewhat predetermined,
and a rate of return might include all kinds of different returns on financial capital.
Now, you might expect in general that the quantity of financial capital supplied
should rise with the interest rate or the rate of return.
If you can get a better rate of return or a higher interest rate, you should save more.
In fact, it doesn't seem to rise a heck of a lot.
Instead, the amount that people save seems to depend somewhat more on habits and cultural patterns
and what your employer does.
If your employer automatically puts a certain amount of what you earn in a retirement account,
well, then you save, and if your employer doesn't do that, well, then you don't save.
And that seems to be the biggest factor that really influences how people supply financial capital.
What about demand for financial capital?
Demand for financial capital is a relationship.
Demand is always a relationship, right?
In this case, it's a relationship between the quantity of capital demanded by borrowers
and by those who want financial capital and the interest rate or the rate of return that they need to pay.
Demand for financial capital comes from people who want the use of the funds now,
and they're willing to pay a rate of return in exchange for being able to use those funds now.
As the interest rate goes up, the rate of return goes up, a lower quantity of financial capital is demanded.
And you can imagine this more easily, I think, in terms of people.
You can imagine that people buying houses and cars and such are more likely to buy when they can borrow at a low rate of interest.
And similarly, firms are more likely to invest in plant and equipment and physical capital
when they can get money at a low rate of interest.
As people or as firms have to pay a higher and higher rate of return or a higher interest rate,
then demanding financial capital becomes less attractive and there'll be a lesser quantity demanded.
If you put together the demand for financial capital from those who want it so they can make some sort of a purchase
and supply a financial capital from savers, you'll get some sort of an equilibrium.
Once again, the market will tend to adjust toward that equilibrium.
Imagine starting off, for example, if you had an interest rate or a rate of return that's really, really very low.
At a very low rate of return, lots of firms and individuals want to borrow and receive a large quantity of financial capital
because they don't have to pay very much interest.
But not many savers are going to think it's worthwhile to save money at that low rate of return, that low interest rate.
And so there'll be a low quantity of financial capital supplied.
In that situation, the quantity of financial capital demanded would be high, the quantity supplied would be low,
and with that extra demand, there'll be a shortage of financial capital and the interest rate will tend to rise over time.
In general, interest rate will tend to rise up to the point until at some rate of return, the quantity demanded of financial capital
will be equal to the quantity supplied.
As always, equilibrium is going to be where quantity demanded and quantity supplied are equal to each other.
There are actually many different capital markets for financial capital, just as there are many different labor markets,
and they're defined by the different characteristics of the investments that are out there.
For example, who is it who is receiving the financial investment?
Is it a large firm? Is it a small firm? Is it an individual buying a house? Is it the government?
What's the financial history of whoever is receiving that financial quantity of funds?
Is it a loan that they're receiving where they're promising to pay interest?
Is it buying a share of the business like stock? What form does the investment take?
And all of those different kinds of factors will then play a role in what the rate of return looks like,
in what demand and supply are going to look like in that individual market for financial capital.
Each rate of return that's paid, each rate of return being the price in the financial capital market,
can be broken down into three different factors.
The three factors are a compensation for the expected inflation that might occur,
a compensation for the level of risk, and a compensation for what we call the time value of money.
Let me walk through each of those three one at a time.
In a world with inflation, on average, goods are going to cost more over time.
So, if you're a saver, if you're putting money aside, you need to get a positive rate of return
on the funds that you've invested just to keep up with inflation.
Now, a rate of return is typically expressed as an annual percentage.
You say something like, I got a 5% rate of return, I got a 10% rate of return.
You mean over the course of a year.
Now, at that rate of return, the rate of return you receive, economists call the nominal interest rate.
The nominal interest rate is the actual interest rate which is charged or paid.
But in a world with inflation, where on average, goods are costing more and more over time,
you need to get a positive nominal rate of return just to keep up with inflation.
For example, if inflation is 3%, so on average, goods cost 3% more each year.
And you get a nominal return of 3%, you're just running in place.
The return you got is just keeping up with inflation.
So, what you really want to know is, how much are you ahead of inflation?
And that measurement of how much you are ahead of inflation is called the real rate of return or the real interest rate.
So, to calculate the real interest rate, you would take the nominal interest rate and subtract the rate of inflation.
The interest rate minus the inflation rate is referred to as the real interest rate.
So, say the inflation rate is 4%, the nominal interest rate or the rate of return is 9%.
Then, you're getting 9%, but inflation is 4%.
So, your real gain, the gain above inflation is 5%.
Some years back in the late 1980s, I was crossing into Mexico for a day trip one day.
And as you crossed over the border, there were these giant billboards that were advertising 80% returns if you put your money in the bank.
And of course, that opened my eyes.
But the 80% return was a nominal return paid in Mexican pesos.
And since in Mexico, the inflation rate at that time was actually something like 100%,
you would actually be getting a negative real rate of return even if you had a nominal rate that was positive 80%.
Second part of what rate of return is included.
Part of the rate of return is compensation for a level of risk you are taking.
And whether you're going to be repaid on time or even whether you're going to be repaid at all.
If a small firm borrows money, it typically has to pay a higher interest rate or a higher rate of return than a large firm.
And a large firm typically pays more than, say, the federal government.
Why is that?
Well, small firms are more vulnerable.
They're more vulnerable to twists and turns of the economy.
They're more likely to go broke.
They're less likely to repay.
And a riskier borrower will need to pay a higher rate of return to make up for that risk that they're imposing.
The third part of the rate of return is the time value of money.
That's a payment for being willing to put off consumption for a time.
Even if inflation was zero, even if risk was zero, you would still have a need for a positive interest payment or a positive rate of return.
After all, the person who is saving the money is giving up the chance to buy something with that money for a period of time.
Even if they get repaid in the future, even if they're repaid with certainty in the future,
they still need some compensation for being willing to delay that consumption.
So when you look at rates of return across an economy, inflation is typically the same across the whole economy.
And the time value of money might vary a little bit, but basically it's much the same across an economy too.
When you look at the range of different interest rates that are paid by different borrowers,
like the different interest rates that are paid for a car loan or a credit card loan or a house loan
or by a big business or a small business or by the government,
the big differences in interest rates are really related to the risk of those different borrowers.
Now, in thinking about how capital markets work, the really key fact is to think about the big trade-offs that occur across time.
When you're buying and selling goods, it's happening at a point in time. Labor is sort of a point in time.
But when you borrow money, when you receive financial capital, you're essentially buying the use of the funds now
and paying for it with interest payments for a rate of return.
For example, this is what you do with a college loan. You get the money now, you repay it in the future.
House loan. You get the money now, you repay it in the future.
A firm that borrows to build a new factory. Get the money now, repay it in the future.
On the other side, when you save, you're agreeing to give someone your money now.
And in return, you're going to get an interest payment or a rate of return.
So you're handing off the money on the condition that you receive something in the future.
Now, getting a certain dollar amount of money now is better than getting that same amount a few years in the future.
If you doubt that's true, just think about the situation.
Someone owes you $100 or something like that and they say, well, I've got your $100, but I'll pay you five years from now.
You wouldn't feel like that was the same amount of money.
Having a certain level of dollar expenses now is also worse than having that same level of dollar expenses in the future.
If you can pay later, you'd rather pay later.
This is true even if there's no risk. It's true even if there's no inflation.
There's a clear implication here. Money in the present is worth more than money in the future.
If you want money now instead of in the future, you have to pay for it because the money is worth more now than it would be in the future.
Now, I've given some of the reasons this is generally true.
In the future, the money could be eaten away by inflation.
In the future, there's a risk of not being paid.
In the future, somebody had to defer consumption.
There was that time value of money.
But the bottom line, the bottom line is $100 right now in your hand is worth more than $100 a year from now
or several years from now.
But how much more is it worth?
How do you compare worth in the present to worth in the future?
And the concept economists have to use that is the idea of present discounted value.
Present discounted value is a way of taking costs or benefits that occur at different points in time and comparing them directly.
Present discounted value is the amount that a future payment is worth in the present
if it was to be received immediately.
Now, let's think about in practical terms what that means.
What is $100 a year from now worth in the present?
Well, let's assume for the sake of the argument that the interest rate is 10%.
So you plot your handy-dandy calculator and if you were given $90.91 right now
and you invested it for a year at a 10% interest rate, then you would have $100 a year from now.
So the present value of $100 a year from now if the prevailing interest rate is 10% would be $90.91.
What's $100 worth two years from now if you think about the present?
Well, if the interest rate is 10%, you pull out your handy-dandy calculator.
You can figure out that if you were given $82.64 right now and you invested it for two years and you got a 10% return each year,
it would equal $100 at the end of two years.
So the present value of $100 two years off in the future if the interest rate is 10% would be $82.64 in the present.
You can kind of see how this formula is working for taking a future value, money received in the future
and changing it into a present value for what it's worth right now.
If you want the explicit formula, the present discounted value is going to be equal to the future value
divided by 1 plus the interest rate raised to the power T of the number of years.
But you can just sort of think about it in terms of what is the future expense worth in the present?
How much money would it take in the present if you got it right now and you invested it at the prevailing interest rate for the appropriate amount of time?
How much would you need to take in the present to equal whatever the amount is off in the future?
This concept of present discounted value actually has a lot of very practical applications.
It's one of the most heavily used tools in business finance.
In business investment decisions, for example, businesses have to think about investment expenses that they incur right now
when they build new plant and equipment and returns they would get off in the future after they can produce stuff with that equipment.
So for example, let's say that a firm wants to build a factory that costs $2 million and it calculates that five years from now it will earn $3 million.
Well, that firm had $2 million in the present and revenues of $3 million which are five years off in the future.
Has it earned $1 million in profits?
Well, not in any true economic sense because those $3 million five years off in the future would need to be discounted back to the present.
So you could compare it directly with the $2 million you have to spend right in the present.
You need to take into account, if you think of it a different way, the opportunity cost.
If you'd invested that $2 million for five years at the prevailing rate of interest, not bought plant and equipment with it, you would have earned a return over that time.
It's only the amount above and over what you would have gotten from the prevailing interest rate that's really profit to you and your firm.
If you have a home mortgage, present discounted value is very relevant to you.
You probably remember what it looked like if you at some point you had a 30 year mortgage and you looked at your total payments.
There's just some huge amount of interest you're paying over time.
But here's an interesting thought.
The total value of all of your loan payments including interest is exactly equal to the present discounted value of your house, which is the purchase price.
After all, you could either pay cash for your house, that's paying the purchase price right now in the present, or you could borrow money and pay over time all the interest.
But those two things are equal payments.
They have the same economic value.
It's just a question of for most people, it works a lot better in my financial life if I pay off my house slowly than if I try to pay for it all at once.
I can't pay for it all at once.
But the present discounted value is the same in both cases.
When it comes to social policy, there are lots of government programs that involve buying something now or building something now and then having a later payoff.
A lot of environmental issues have a cost now and a benefit in the future.
Traffic safety might involve building a highway in a certain way now for saving lives in the future.
Or there might be expenses for helping children now, which will pay off in the future.
All of those need to be analyzed using this idea of present discounted value and comparing costs in the present to benefits off in the future.
Here's one odd application of present discounted value.
When most state lotteries announced their big jackpots, they add up all the payments you would receive over 30 years.
They don't tell you the present value of it, they tell you what you would get over 30 years.
In New Jersey a few years ago, they wanted to pass a law that if an older person won the lottery, they could get their prize all at once.
They shouldn't have to wait 30 years.
After all, if you win the lottery in your 70, you might not be alive for another 30 years.
But the lottery had to explain that the prize they announced over 30 years is not the present discounted value.
The actual value of what they've got is only about two thirds of the announced total.
Now, of course, it doesn't mean it's not chopped liver to win the lottery.
It's still a great thing to win the lottery, but it's not quite as good as advertised either.
The lotteries like to play games with present discounted value and make it look like the prize is somewhat bigger than it actually is.
Now, what I want to do is shift the focus a little bit.
Now that we've got this idea of present discounted value in mind, this idea of supply and demand in financial capital markets,
and focus on the firms that demand financial capital.
Where do those firms get the money that they need?
Well, firms that want to invest in the future need to find a source of funds after they've already paid their current expenses,
and there are several different places they can turn.
One place they can turn is retained earnings, which are more commonly known as profits,
and that's one source of financial investment for firms.
The word retained in retained earnings means the firm decided to hold on to that money
and reinvest it by buying plant and equipment rather than paying it out to the shareholders who own the firm as dividends.
You can think of a firm as doing its own saving in effect.
It's saving its own profits and then reinvesting its own saving on behalf of investors.
And in fact, for established firms that have been around a long time,
their own retained earnings is a primary source of their investment capital
when they need money to build new plant and equipment.
Firms can also borrow money.
There are basically two ways a firm can borrow money.
One is to borrow money from a bank, and I assume that idea is pretty familiar, so I won't talk about it,
but the other would be to borrow money by issuing bonds,
and that may be just a little bit less familiar, so it's maybe worth talking about a bit more.
A bond is just a way of borrowing.
A bond has a face value and an interest rate and a time.
For example, a bond for $1,000 with an 8% interest rate for 10 years
will pay 8% interest each year for 10 years,
and at the end of 10 years, it will repay that face value of $1,000.
So it's just a way for a firm to borrow money, but instead of borrowing from a bank,
they essentially borrow from those who buy the bonds.
If you don't repay your bond, then the firm can be legally declared bankrupt and taken over.
So if you're a firm and you issue bonds, you're the government and you issue bonds, you owe that money.
If you don't pay it, you can be declared bankrupt and taken over.
Interest rates are going to vary depending on risk.
If you're borrowing and you're a highly profitable firm like Walmart,
you can issue bonds at a pretty low rate of interest,
because people know you're a safe borrower you're likely to repay.
On the other hand, a junk bond is just a high interest rate, high risk bond.
It's a bond issued by a firm which has some high risk of not repaying,
and thus that firm has to pay a high rate of return or a high interest rate
to get people to be willing to buy the bonds in the first place.
Governments, when they issue bonds and borrow, can pay a pretty low interest rate,
and in general, we know the federal government can repay if it needs to.
It can raise taxes, it can borrow more money.
In any case, once you've issued a bond, once you've borrowed money,
a company must make the predetermined interest payments.
And of course, a company will only borrow if it believes the return on its investment
will be high enough so that it can make the interest payments
and still have some funds left over as profit.
Final way for a firm to raise money is to raise money through equities
which are more commonly known as corporate stock.
Corporate stock essentially gives owners of the stock part ownership of the firm.
For example, imagine a firm has a total of 100 shares of stock.
If you own 20 of those 100 shares of stock, you own 20% of the firm.
If the firm pays out its profits as dividends,
then you get a share of those dividends in proportion to your ownership of the firm's stock.
If the firm was sold, then one-fifth of the purchase price of the firm
should come to you because you own 20 out of 100 shares of the total.
However, unlike bonds which have these predetermined interest rates,
there's no guarantee that the owner of a stock will receive anything in a given year,
or even anything at all.
Stocks are much riskier. The return can be higher.
The return could also be lower or negative.
Stock tends to be most often used as a way for younger and smaller companies
to raise money more than for established companies.
So the typical overall pattern is that very small firms need to find money
from specialized funds like venture capital investors
or sometimes what are called angel investors,
rich people who want to put their money into small companies,
or small companies need to fund their own growth in one way or another.
But as firms get bigger and start having sales and profits,
at some point they need a big infusion of capital,
and at that point they sell a lot of stock,
and that helps them really expand and get up to a large scale.
Once the firm is fully established,
then it tends to get its financial capital with profits
and in some cases by issuing bonds.
And it will only issue more stock if, say, it's buying another firm
and it uses the stock in its own firm to buy stock in the other firm.
Most firms can't quite keep just issuing stock and issuing stock and issuing stock
because stock, remember, is ownership of the firm.
If you've got 100 shares in your company and you issue 100 more shares,
then that original 100 owners now only own half as much of the company as they did before.
Their ownership is diluted, as we say,
and people don't want a company where they're getting their ownership diluted
and diluted over time.
Now, in the next lecture, what we're going to do is talk about stocks and bonds
and bank accounts from the supply point of view.
That is, not the view of the firm receiving the money,
but the view of the investor who's putting money into those different kinds of accounts.
But before we leave this topic of how firms get financial capital,
it's worth saying that the ability of firms to raise capital
and the ability of firms to invest is extraordinarily important
because investment and the ability of firms to buy new plant and equipment
is one of the main contributors to economic growth over time.
It's one of the main contributors to expanding productivity
and expanding the standard of living.
We'll talk much more about this in the macroeconomics lectures of this course,
but suffice it here to say that the U.S. has tended to lag behind
much of the industrialized world in the proportion of its economy
that is devoted to saving and devoted to investment on the part of firms.
And in the long run, if firms are investing in new capital and equipment,
this can be highly detrimental to a country's long-run growth in its standard of living.
