With this lecture we have one more shift in emphasis. The last two lectures have talked about difficulties that arise in labor markets with poverty and inequality.
The next two lectures are going to shift to difficulties markets face because of information problems, risk and uncertainty.
The standard example of a market with a willing buyer and a willing seller presumes that each party makes a voluntary trade because they know what they're getting.
However, the real world is full of situations of imperfect information where you don't quite know what you're getting, and that can create real problems for how markets function.
To understand the problem, it's maybe useful to pose a series of economic situations and ask what you would do in each one.
First situation. Imagine you're shopping for a used car, but you're basically clueless about what happens inside a car's engine. You have imperfect information.
Now sure, you do what you can, you read a magazine like Consumer Reports, you check some websites, maybe you even hire a mechanic to check out the car you're thinking about buying, but you still can't be sure.
So you're out shopping. You find two used cars that are the make and model you wanted to get. These two cars look just about the same to you, and one costs just about what you expected to pay.
The other one costs one-third as much. So which car do you buy? Do you buy the one that was what you were expecting it to cost, or do you buy the really, really cheap one?
Think for a second about your choice. Well, in a world of perfect information, your information says the two cars are equal.
By the cheaper car, you're getting a great deal. In a world of imperfect information, you have to think to yourself, maybe that very, very low price is telling you something.
Maybe that really, really low price means the low priced car is a lemon the seller is trying to unload because it breaks down all the time and no one wants to get it.
Now, my point here is that because of information, imperfect information, your choice is not a simple one. You might decide to buy the higher priced car just saying, well, that's about what I was expecting that makes sense to me.
You might buy the cheap car and say, well, it's cheap and I'm just going to hope for the best. You might not buy a car at all.
If you gripe and say, well, I'm not sure about buying this cheap car, the seller is likely to be really peeve. The seller will say, well, that's a great car. You know, what do you mean?
Why do you think there's problems? What's the problem? The difficulty is that imperfect information complicates the market and it might even make the trade between buyer and seller impossible.
If you can't be reassured about the quality of what you're getting or if you can't agree with the seller about the quality.
Now, similar problems arise in labor and capital markets. So here's the second situation. Imagine you're in charge of hiring at a certain company.
Somebody applies for a job and there's a line on the job application where it says expected salary and that person names a salary that is half what you thought you might have to pay for that job, 50% less.
Now, you can collect information about this worker. You can collect a resume, you can collect references and all that sort of stuff. But at the end of the day, there's a certain degree of uncertainty.
You have imperfect information about what sort of a worker that would really be. So if you're in that position, should you go ahead and hire that worker who's offering to work for half of what you expected to pay?
Well, you might. You might say, well, this is such a great deal. I just can't pass it up. You might also say there's a reason this person is offering to work for half pay.
It either means they don't know what the heck is going on in this job or it means that there's something really wrong with them and they're a low quality worker in one way or another.
And by offering to work for half pay, they're sort of saying to me, I'm not going to be a real reliable worker or a very high quality worker. You just can't know for sure.
Again, an element of risk and uncertainty has entered the picture because of imperfect information.
Third example, imagine you're in charge of making loans at a bank and somebody applies for a loan and says, I really, really want this loan.
I want it so much. I'll pay you 10% a year more interest than you usually charge. I really want the loan.
Now, you can collect financial information and business information about this borrower, but at the end of the day, how would you feel about loaning to someone who offers to pay a really, really high interest rate?
Maybe you'd say, well, that sounds like a good deal. Okay, here's the money. But you might also say, boy, it sounds to me like this person is kind of desperate.
They're, they sounds like they might be really high risk and they know it. It sounds like maybe they're the sort of person who's likely to not repay the loan at all, in which case the high interest rate isn't going to do me any good.
Again, risk and uncertainty has entered the picture because of imperfect information, thus complicating the idea of making a deal between buyer and seller.
Now, markets have a variety of methods for attempting to reduce this problem of imperfect information. Let me give you some of the examples.
When you buy a good, for example, it might have a warranty that it's going to, for a certain period of time, it'll be fixed or repaired. There might be certain guarantees about how it won't break down.
You might be able to buy a service contract, which says that if anything happens in the first 12 months or 24 months or 36 months, it will be fixed up somehow.
All of those are ways of reassuring you that even though you have imperfect information, you're not going to actually be taken advantage of.
Another thing is trademarks. We talked about intellectual property and trademarks in an earlier lecture. That helps you identify who made the product and whether or not you trust that company.
There might be certain trademarks of clothing or of electronics or of cars that you think, well, if they made it, it's likely to be pretty good.
In the labor market, there are things like resumes and references to help reduce the problem of imperfect information.
There are also licenses and certificates for a lot of different jobs. Some of the professional workers who have to hold a license are teachers, nurses, engineers, accountants, lawyers.
In fact, most states require a license to work in the following jobs as a barber, an embalmer, a dietitian, a massage therapist, a hearing aid dealer, a counselor, an insurance agent, and a real estate broker.
There are also some jobs that require only a license in one state. For example, in my own home state of Minnesota, there's a requirement for a state license if you're going to be a field archaeologist.
A neighboring state, North Dakota, has a state license for anyone who sells fishing bait for fishing bait retailers.
In Louisiana, you need a state license to be a stress analyst, whatever that is, and California requires a state license to be a furniture upholsterer.
Now, can laugh a little bit about some of those licenses, but they do give some assurance of quality that the person has at least passed some sort of screening,
and that could make you more comfortable about hiring that person or letting that person do a certain kind of work.
In the financial capital market, there are also ways of reducing imperfect information.
For example, before you give a loan, you do a financial records check and a credit check on whoever is borrowing.
You can require a cosigner, that is, someone else who promises to repay if the original borrower doesn't.
You can require putting up collateral, that is, pledging something of value that will be sold to repay the loan if you don't.
In a house loan, the collateral is your house. In a small business, maybe it's a piece of equipment that the business owns.
And in all of these, another way of thinking about imperfect information being reduced is through reputation.
If you're in a business where reputation matters and repeat business or repeat interaction matters,
your reputation can serve as a way of reducing the level of imperfect information.
If a restaurant wants you back, that restaurant needs to build up a reputation.
If you have a certain reputation in your industry or at your firm, that can help you get jobs other places.
Now, in many markets, not all markets, but many markets, these kinds of mechanisms provide enough information so that the market can work fairly well.
But in other cases, there's an argument for the government entering the picture to set certain kinds of rules for what information will be available.
For example, the government sets rules for disclosing information, like on the side of packages, all the ingredients of products need to be listed,
in order of quantity in which they are used. There are also rules about disclosing the financial records of companies and having them audited by independent auditors.
Now, those sorts of rules may not always be followed, they may not always be perfect,
but they do tell you that the government views it as important enough to have certain information out there that it's going to be required that the information be out there.
In fact, the government also gets into questions about advertising. It requires that if a firm makes a claim in advertising, that that claim has to be supported.
It has to actually be something of a true claim. And that sort of regulation is, again, seeking to ameliorate the problem of imperfect information.
Let me give you some classic cases of misleading advertising. One classic case from the 1950s occurred when Colgate Pomalov created a television ad that claimed to show rapid-shave shaving cream being spread on sandpaper,
and then the sand was shaved off the sandpaper. So, shaving cream that was so good, you could take the sand off sandpaper.
But what the TV ad actually showed was, they had some plexiglass, they sprinkled sand on it, no glue, just sprinkled the sand on top, and then they scraped the sand off with the razor.
So that ad had to be pulled. In the 1960s, in magazine ads for Campbell's vegetable soup, the company was having problems getting a nice pretty appetizing picture of the soup,
because all the vegetables kept sinking to the bottom, so it just sort of looked like soup with no vegetables inside it.
So, they filled up a bowl with marbles and poured the soup over the top, so the vegetables sat on top of the marbles, and it looked like the bowl was just crammed with vegetables.
Again, prosecuted, not legal to do that. In the late 1980s, Volvo filmed a TV ad, and it showed a monster truck driving over cars, and it was crunching their roofs, crunch, crunch, until it got to the Volvo, which did not crush.
However, the Federal Trade Commission investigated this ad, and they found that in making the ad, the roof of the Volvo in the advertisement had been reinforced with an extra steel framework, while the roof supports on all the other car brands had actually been cut.
So, it wasn't exactly a fair comparison.
And even in the last few years, the Wonder Bread Company ran TV ads featuring some guy identified as Professor Wonder, and he said that because Wonder Bread contained extra calcium, it would help children's minds work better and improve their memory.
Now, that claim was disputed, the government objected, and in 2002, the company agreed to stop running those ads.
Now, of course, it's easy to point out cases where companies have been deceptive in their accounting records these last few years, with the frauds at Enron and many other large companies.
I'll talk about those issues a little bit in the next lecture.
My point here isn't that these rules are perfect, or that they catch all the problems. They clearly don't catch all the problems.
My point is that a decent level of information is necessary if markets are to work well, and so thinking about how that information is provided is really crucial.
In many markets, but not all of them, some combination of this reputation and guarantees and licenses and collateral and all those kinds of things reduce the risk of imperfect information by enough so the market can work pretty well.
But there is at least one set of really important markets in the economy where imperfect information creates extraordinary problems that are really very difficult to resolve, and they deserve special attention in this lecture.
And I'm speaking of markets for insurance.
Insurance markets rely on information.
The sellers of insurance have to estimate the risk that buyers will be involved in some event, like an accident, that requires compensation.
But the information about who will suffer what events is really quite imperfect, and as a result, insurance markets can completely break down.
Now, when I talk about insurance markets, I'm explicitly talking about health insurance, auto insurance, property insurance, life insurance, as well as social insurance like social security, unemployment insurance, workman's compensation, government provided flood insurance.
All these kinds of insurance markets face the same sort of difficulties because of the problem of imperfect information.
Let's sort of start off here by talking about how these markets work, how insurance markets work, and then illustrate how the problems of imperfect information arise.
The basic level, how does insurance work?
We know that an undesirable event is going to happen to certain members of a group.
And let's say that the risk of the event happening is known, but what we don't know is exactly who is going to suffer from the event.
We know, for example, what proportion of people in a certain age group are going to die, but we don't know exactly which ones.
We know roughly how many people are going to have a car accident, but we don't know exactly which ones.
Now, in this situation, everyone in the group can pay into a common pool of funds, and then the common pool of funds is used to compensate those who suffer whatever the negative event is.
Now, to make all this a little more concrete, let's use the example of a market for car insurance.
Let's suppose that there's a group of 1,000 drivers, and of course it's more like 10,000 or 100,000, but let's keep the numbers simple,
and you could divide that group of 1,000 statistically into four groups.
900 of the 1,000 don't have any accidents in a year.
50 of the people have only a few door dings or chipped paint, really tiny little accidents that cost $100 each.
30 of the drivers have medium-sized accidents that cost an average of $1,000 each in damages,
and 20 of the drivers have really big accidents that cost an average of $15,000 a piece in damages.
Now, let's say that at the beginning of the year, there's no way of identifying which drivers are low-risk, high-risk, or medium-risk,
and that assumption is obviously unrealistic because of imperfect information.
We'll come back to it later, but for right now, let's assume that we don't know.
So, what's the total loss that the company is going to face in a year?
What's the total damages incurred by the car accidents for this group of 1,000 drivers?
Well, if you multiply it all out, it'll be $335,000.
So, that's the 50 drivers having $100 accidents, 30 drivers having $1,000 accidents,
and 20 drivers having $15,000 accidents.
Multiply it out, add it up, you get $335,000.
So, if each of the 1,000 drivers paid an insurance premium of $335 each year,
then the insurance company would collect the $335,000 that it needs to cover the cost of all the accidents that's going to happen.
Now, in reality, of course, insurance is more complicated than this in at least two key ways.
Probably more than two key ways.
One is that the insurance company has costs of running the company,
so it can't just collect the money and hand it out.
There's some additional costs there.
Also, the insurance company can take the money it's received, the premiums it's received,
and invest them for a time before it needs to pay them out in damages.
So, the insurance company can get some extra revenue from the rate of return on investing that money before it needs to be paid out.
However, in an average year, the costs of the company, the costs of running and administering the company,
and the investment returns more or less balance each other out.
So, this basic example that the money is paid into a pool and then it's paid out again
actually comes pretty close to capturing the intuition of what really goes on in insurance markets.
Now, that description of insurance markets implies a fundamental rule,
which is worth remembering whenever somebody talks about insurance.
The fundamental rule is that what an average person pays into insurance over time
must be very similar to what the average person gets out of insurance over time.
You're not going to have a situation where the average person pays in a little,
but the average person gets out a lot.
They have to match up with each other.
Now, of course, there are going to be some variations caused by the investment income of the insurance company
because they can invest the premiums for a time and the costs of running the system.
But year in, year out, it has to be true that what goes in is very similar to what comes out.
It's also true that the payouts that insurance companies make are typically concentrated
on a relatively small share of the people who have very large claims.
In the example I just gave, it was going to be true that of the total of 335,000 in losses,
300,000 of that, almost all of it, occurred for the 20 people out of a thousand
who suffered major accidents.
So, at the end of the given year, those 20 people are protected,
but a lot of other people are going to feel like they paid money into the system
and didn't get very much back.
Similarly, for health insurance, in any given year,
it's going to be true that a relatively small proportion of people
who get very, very sick and need to be hospitalized for an extended period of time
are going to account for a large share of costs.
And so, year in, year out, most people are going to be paying into health insurance
without getting very much back.
It's when you get very, very sick that it makes a huge difference to you.
The same is true for property insurance.
The U.S. government has something called the National Climactic Data Center,
and it found that over the 23 years from 2000, or from 1980 up to 2002,
the U.S. experienced 54 weather-related disasters
that caused at least $1 billion in damages.
For example, Tropical Storm Allison caused $5 billion in damages in Texas and Louisiana
and other states in June 2001,
and Major Forest Fires caused $2 billion in damage across 11 western states
in the summer of 2002.
So, again, if you're someone buying property insurance,
most years you're going to pay and pay and pay,
and nothing all that terrible is going to happen to you.
But every now and then, be a forest fire, there'll be a hurricane, there'll be a true disaster.
And at that point, all the money flows toward that disaster.
Now, up until this point,
our whole example has been based on the idea that of those people getting insured,
the chance of the bad event happening to those people was randomly distributed.
So they could all just be pooled together.
But what happens if the chance of people having that bad event is not randomly distributed?
Indeed, people's risk of bad things happening to them
is often determined, at least to some extent, by the actions that they take.
And moreover, people know what actions they take.
They know something about their own level of risk,
and they know it better than an insurance company can ever know it,
and how thorough the information the insurance company tries to collect.
So there's a problem of imperfect information here.
The insurance company doesn't know what the information is that the people have
about who is high risk and who is not.
So several problems arise as a result.
The first big problem is called moral hazard.
And moral hazard is the problem that insurance markets face,
because the fact that people have insurance leads people to take fewer steps
to avoid or prevent the bad event from happening in the first place.
For example, people who have fire insurance have something of a less incentive to prevent fires.
People who have medical insurance have less incentive to care about the costs
of the medical tests and procedures that they receive.
They have a little bit less incentive to take steps that might change their diet
or exercise habits in a way that would result in lower medical costs.
They even have less incentive to become very informed about what medical care
is likely to be extremely helpful or moderately helpful,
or maybe only has a small chance of being helpful.
Doctors in an insurance system, in a health insurance system,
have less incentive to hold down costs or not to order tests.
If you have social security, form of insurance,
you have less incentive to save money for your own retirement,
because after all, social security is out there.
The result of people having less incentive to act in a way
which would cause them to avoid bad events
is that the size of the losses is bigger for everyone.
The size of the costs is bigger for everyone.
And insurance costs more on average than it otherwise would.
And this term, moral hazard, can be a little bit confusing.
In some cases, like outright insurance fraud, it really is a moral issue.
But more often, we're not really talking about a moral issue here,
we're just talking about a change in incentives.
If you're protected against a negative outcome,
you have less incentive to try and avoid that outcome from happening.
And so, things that are insured against tend to have bigger losses
as a result because of moral hazard.
The other big issue with every insurance market is the problem of adverse selection.
Adverse selection is the problem that insurance markets face
because those who are especially likely to have the bad event,
like those who are especially likely to have a car accident,
are often more likely to end up with insurance.
While those who are very low risks and aren't likely to,
won't think that insurance is a very good deal.
Because after all, they know they're a good risk,
and they know they're not very likely to need the insurance.
The insurance company has only imperfect information
about who's likely to be high risk and who's likely to be low risk.
And so, it's going to be hard for the insurance company
to figure out how to charge different prices to these different groups.
If the insurance company just sets the price of the insurance at the average lost,
then everyone who knows they're safer than average
will tend to say, well, this really isn't worth it to me,
or they'll take the minimum possible insurance coverage.
Also on the other side, then those who have great risk
are going to load up on insurance
because they know it's going to be a really good deal for them.
So the average insurance price will tend to attract people
who have high losses, more than people with low losses.
And the insurance company will soon find that the average,
he's losing all the low risks,
and they need to keep raising the price of the insurance
higher and higher and higher.
And as they do that, low risks are going to keep dropping out
because it's not worth it to them,
and even high risks will drop out
because the insurance ends up costing so much.
Because of adverse selection, insurance turns into a game
that isn't about spreading risk across a population.
It's about the insurance company trying to select safe risks
and exclude all the unsafe risks
and make money from that selection process.
Now, insurance plans have a variety of ways
of trying to address moral hazard and adverse selection.
One way to address moral hazard, for example,
is to require the injured party to pay a share of the costs.
And you could do this through deductibles
and co-payments and co-insurance.
A deductible is an amount that the insurance policyholder
has to pay out of their own pocket
before the insurance coverage kicks in.
For example, with auto insurance, you might say,
the insurance company only pays if the loss is greater than $500.
Health insurance policies often have a co-payment
in which the policyholder must pay a small amount.
For example, in the health insurance policy I have,
you need to pay $20 each time you have a doctor visit.
And then the insurance company covers usually most of the rest.
Another method of cost sharing is co-insurance.
Co-insurance means that the insurance company
covers a certain percentage of the cost,
like, say, the insurance might pay for 80% of the costs
of repairing a home after a fire
and the homeowner would pay for the other 20%.
One classic study of health insurance
found that when one group of patients had modest co-payments,
like $20 for a doctor visit, and another group didn't,
those who had the co-payments got one-third less health care.
However, the health status of the two groups was actually exactly the same.
So the co-payments were discouraging care,
but they didn't seem to be affecting the health of the people involved.
This fits with some other estimates in the health economics literature
that maybe one-third of all health care spending is largely precautionary,
in the sense that it doesn't provide any direct, measurable medical benefit.
Now, of course, some precaution is good,
and I wouldn't say we should get rid of precaution,
but in a situation with moral hazard where people have no reason
to back off from any tests or anything that they might possibly help them,
the precautions can get a little bit crazy, too.
Another thing insurance plans can do,
if they can draw upon a large pool of customers,
then they don't have to worry as much about adverse selection
because a really large pool of customers
is more likely to have a large number of low-risk participants
which can offset the people with high risks.
In health insurance, for example,
the common way of getting a big pool of participants is using employers.
If everyone in a certain employer is signed up,
then the assumption is that will include some low and high risks
and the company doesn't have to worry as much about adverse selection.
In car insurance, there are laws in almost every state
that everyone has to get car insurance.
And so low risk can't drop out of the car insurance market.
They're required by law to get car insurance,
and that helps reduce the problem of adverse selection
and those people selecting out.
In many countries, you get a large pool for health insurance
by nationalizing the industry.
Absolutely everyone is inside the health insurance industry in those countries.
In fact, health insurance is a vivid, vivid example
of an industry which is just plagued by the information problems
of moral hazard and adverse selection.
All the other industrialized nations of the world, other than the United States,
have said, essentially,
the problems of imperfect information in health care
are so severe that a private market in health insurance just isn't going to work.
So, those nations have essentially said,
we're going to get rid of the moral hazard problem
in which people demand more and more care
by having some sort of government controls over what can be provided,
how much is going to be spent,
how soon people are going to get certain kinds of care.
And we'll get rid of the adverse selection problem
by having the whole country in the pool,
the whole country in the insurance pool.
Now, how does that work out
if you've got the whole country in the insurance pool?
Well, as is perhaps well known,
the United States spends a lot more on health care than other countries do.
There's some data from the World Health Organization.
As of 2002, U.S. health care spending was $5,274 per person,
and that includes all government health care programs
and all private health care spending.
If you look at other countries like Canada, France, Germany, Japan,
the United Kingdom,
health care spending in those countries
was between $2,000 a person and $2,600 a person.
That was half or less of the U.S. level on a per person basis.
If you look at health care spending as a share of GDP,
health care spending in the U.S. as a share of GDP
was 14.6% of GDP.
If you look at Canada, France, and Germany,
health care spending as a share of GDP was 9% to 11% of GDP.
If you look at Japan and the United Kingdom,
health care spending in those two countries was roughly 8% of GDP.
So the United States is spending extraordinarily more on health care.
Now, of course, we're getting something for that health care spending.
If you are an insured person in the United States,
you get extremely good health care.
Many of the health care innovations come out of the United States,
whether it's pharmaceuticals or whether it's equipment,
because, after all, those are things which are rewarded
by the U.S. health insurance system.
They're not rewarded by the systems in other countries.
But still, at the end of the day, you have to ask yourself,
is spending literally double worth it?
Is the U.S. really getting enough of a payoff from that?
Especially given that 40 million people in the country
don't have any health insurance at all.
In other countries, they've decided that the problems
of adverse selection and moral hazard are so great
that they need to nationalize health insurance.
I'm not sure if that's quite the right answer,
and many of those countries are moving toward more incentives,
but it shows you how powerful the problems
of imperfect information can be.
