Let's start by thinking about a choice and listen up because you're going to need to
make a decision here.
I'm going to ask you about a choice about what you prefer.
When asking about preferences, there's no right or wrong answer, but it can be instructive
to think about why you prefer what you prefer.
So here's the choice.
On one side, you could be a person with an average standard of living in the modern U.S.
economy, say a member of a typical family defined as two or more people living together
who would be earning about $55,000 per year in the mid-2000s.
That's one choice.
On the other side, you can have that same income, $55,000 per year, living in, say,
$25,000.
So you need to choose which standard of living you would prefer.
Now before you choose too quickly, let me give you two things to take into account.
Remember first of all, there's been a lot of inflation since 1925, so having an annual
income of $55,000 a year in 1925 would have made you extremely rich by the standards of
the time, probably far into the upper 1% of the income distribution.
So in 1925, this income level means a big house, servants, the best of everything that's
available.
But here's the other kicker.
If you choose 1925, you also need to live with all the technologies of 1925.
That is, you need to live with the household technologies, the transportation technologies,
the medical, the entertainment technologies, all the technologies of 1925.
So let me summarize your choice here.
Either you can be, relatively speaking, a very rich person in 1925, with access only
to the technologies available in 1925, or you can be a person with an average standard
of living today, with access to all the modern technologies.
So which do you prefer?
Mull it over for just a moment.
When I ask this question to various groups, it tends to be a choice about two to one for
the present.
People prefer being an average standard of living in the present to rich in 1925.
Older groups, I found, are a little more willing to choose the past, but even there, a majority
tend to choose the present.
Now, this question has no right or wrong answer, as I said at the beginning, but it tends to
draw out some of the reasons that people value economic growth and to show how much they
value it.
I mean, think about the trade-offs that are involved in this choice.
When I ask students this question, I ask them why they chose what they chose, they tend
to focus on things like, there are no computers.
There's hardly any access to recorded music.
After all, in 1925, there's just a few radios, which are relatively expensive at the time.
In 1925, there are no antibiotics.
Travel is slow.
If you want to go across the ocean to visit Europe, you're pretty much limited to a boat.
You might rather have a modern dishwasher and clothes washer and microwave and freezer
than needing to manage a group of servants to deal with all your clothes.
Now, of course, each person will draw the line in their own way.
Maybe you would be happy being a rich person in 1925, but not so happy being a rich person
in 1870 or 1800.
But the bottom line here, the bottom line is just that even when your income could be,
in a relative sense, 10 times higher or more, even when you're comparing some of the richest
people at certain times in our history, in our history, not that long ago, the advantages
of economic growth really do make a huge difference.
They're really worth your consideration.
They're really worthy as the first goal of macroeconomic analysis that we're going to
discuss.
Let's talk about economic growth.
The key thing about economic growth of nations is that it compounds over time.
Small differences in annual growth rates work out to enormous differences in standard
of living over a generation or two.
The formula here for taking the present value of an economy, looking at the growth rate
and the period of time and figuring out the future value, the formula is to take the present
value, multiply it times 1 plus the growth rate of the economy, raise to the power of
the number of years that you're waiting for this to happen, and that will give you the
future value.
Now, that formula is just a little messy, but it's essentially the same formula that
we used before when we were talking about economic growth, and we talked about rates
of return.
Mathematically, the process of compounding economic growth rates is exactly the same
as the process of compounding growth in interest rates that we discussed back in Lecture 7.
The big lesson here is that small differences in growth can make a huge difference over
time.
Let me give you some numerical examples.
Let's first of all imagine that you've got an economy which is growing at 1% a year.
1% a year, okay?
It starts off just to keep the calculation simple, where the GDP is 100.
So GDP is 100, it's growing 1% a year.
After 10 years, it would be 110, a little bit more, but not much.
The compounding doesn't do much over those 10 years.
Then after 25 years, 1% growth a year would be 128, and after 40 years, it would be 149.
What about if it was growing at 3% a year?
If an economy was growing at 3% a year, which is more or less the average for the U.S. economy
over a sustained period of the last few decades?
Well, after 10 years, an economy growing at 3% a year would go from 100 to 134.
After 25 years to 209.
And after 40 years to 326.
In other words, over 40 years growing at 3% a year, an economy would triple in size over
those 40 years.
So you can sort of see the power of compounding beginning to kick in, the growth, or the growth
building on growth of previous years.
What about if you had a growth rate of 5% a year?
It's sort of the rate the U.S. economy might have in a really good year, but many countries
like Brazil or Mexico have rates like that sort of on an ongoing basis for relatively
long periods of time.
Well, at 5% a year, our economy that starts out at 100 reaches 163 after 10 years, reaches
339 after 25 years, so at more than triples after 25 years.
And if you could sustain that for 40 years, the economy would be 704, would increase more
than 7-fold over 40 years.
And finally, let's think about an 8% rate of economic growth.
Now 8% is frankly a little bit crazy.
When we talk 8%, we're talking the fastest periods of Japanese economic growth back
in the 1960s and 70s, we're talking China in more recent years.
But let's think about it.
With an 8% rate of economic growth, in just 10 years, the economy would go from 100 to
216, so at more than double in size in a decade.
After 25 years, the economy would go from 100 to 685.
It would increase almost 7-fold in 25 years, which is well within the lifespan of a person.
It's even within the working life of a person.
It starts off working at 25, and by the time they're 50, the economy has increased 7-fold.
And if you could sustain that 8% rate of growth for 40 years, which no country has done, but
just for the sake of the illustration, if you could sustain an 8% rate of growth for
40 years, then the economy would grow from 100 at the beginning of that time, say when
a person was 25, to 2172 at the end of that period.
In other words, over the course of a person's working life from age 25 to 65, they could
see the economy expand by a multiple of 22.
That's an extraordinary change in standard of living.
So my basic lesson here, by giving these numerical examples, is that seemingly small differences
in the annual rate of growth.
The difference between 1 and 3%, 3 and 5%, 5 and 8%.
It only looks like a percent or two.
And you might sort of say, well, you know, what's 1 or 2%, what difference can that make?
But remember that it builds and builds and builds.
It's a percent or two or three every single year.
And over time, over several decades, it makes a huge difference in the standard of living.
It makes all the difference.
In the long run, you can argue that economic growth is literally the only thing that matters
to the standard of living.
What are some examples of fast and slow growth rates over time?
Well, just to give you some historical feel for what these numbers mean, if you go back
to the start of the 20th century, the United Kingdom and Argentina were two of the countries
with the highest per capita GDP in the world.
A century later, by the start of the 21st century, the United Kingdom was barely at
average for Europe as a whole.
In Argentina, if you rank the countries of the world ranked 80th or something like that,
it wasn't even in the group of what we think of as high income or highly developed economies.
What happened to the UK and Argentina?
Well, it wasn't that they had one or two bad years, or even that they had a bad decade.
The US economy had a terrible decade in the 1930s, but what really happened is that the
rate of growth for those economies was at a lower pace, and it was a sustained lower
pace over a period of decades.
As they more or less walked in place or made gradual slow growth, the rest of the world
surged ahead.
Japan and South Korea are another useful example.
Those two countries have largely caught up to many Western European nations in per capita
GDP.
Japan is roughly the equivalent of some of the richer nations in Eastern Europe, South
Korea is the equivalent of some of the poorer nations in Western Europe.
How did they do that?
Well, it wasn't that they just woke up and over one three-year period or five-year period,
boom, they caught up all at once.
Instead, it was sustaining those 8% rates of growth for several decades, while basically
healthy economies like the United States were growing at about a 2% or 3% annual rate.
So that gap of 5% a year, 4% a year, makes an enormous difference when it's sustained
over time.
When countries start off behind, like Japan and South Korea did a century ago, can they
catch up?
What would it take to catch up?
Well, there's an argument that countries that start off at lower levels of productivity
might be able to take advantage of a period of catch-up growth.
The idea of catch-up growth is that as one economist famously said some years ago, there
are certain advantages of backwardness in an economic sense.
One advantage of backwardness is that you can copy and use technologies that have been
invented other places.
You don't have to invent it all yourself.
And so when you can do that, you can sprint ahead by relying on technologies that have
been developed elsewhere.
If there's catch-up growth, this implies that over time, the lower income nations of the
world should be able to close the gap in per capita GDP with higher income nations, gradually
over time.
However, this hasn't been happening in the last century or so.
The world economy, since about 1870 up to the mid-early 2000s, has seen a divergence
actually between the richest and poorest economies of the world, not a convergence.
Why is it that this gap has gotten bigger?
What's going on with this gap?
A standard historical starting point is usually about 1870 for various historical reasons
in the US and Germany and for different kinds of comparisons.
But here's a rough and ready comparison based on 1870.
In 1870, if you took the richest countries in the world and you took their average per
capita GDP, countries with the highest incomes, and you looked at the poorest countries with
the lowest per capita GDP, the ratio of the highest countries to the lowest countries
was about nine to one, about nine times as high in per capita GDP.
Now project forward to 1960 and do the same exercise.
Take the richest countries in the world, those with the highest incomes measured by per capita
GDP, those with the lowest incomes, lowest per capita GDP, and the ratio by 1960 instead
of nine to one is about 38 to one.
If you look at 1990, same exercise, per capita income of the high income countries versus
per capita income of the low income countries, the ratio is about 45 to one.
So the divergence between high income countries and low income countries seems to be, there
seems to be divergence rather than convergence.
Why is this?
Why has this happened?
Well in an arithmetic sense, if you look at the actual standards of living, what's going
on here is that the poorest countries in the world in 1990 or in 2000 are essentially living
at subsistence.
They're living at the lowest possible level where people are just barely getting enough
to eat.
And if you go back to 1870, the poorest countries in the world are still living at subsistence,
where about the lowest possible standard of living.
So if you look just at the lowest countries in the world, there's been very little gain
from 1870 up until the late 1990s.
But if you look at the high income countries of the world, say the United States, much
of Western Europe, Japan and the like, they've obviously grown extraordinarily since 1870.
So there seems to be some sort of a lesson here that the problem is that some countries
are stuck not growing at all.
There is catch up growth for countries like Japan and South Korea and China once they
start growing.
But some countries are just stuck and they haven't even gotten out of the starting gate
yet.
In fact, at the start of the 21st century, Nobel laureate economist Robert E. Lucas
of the University of Chicago wrote an article in which he described the process of long
run economic growth in this way.
He said, imagine economic growth between the countries of the world as a sort of horse
race.
And each country is a horse, and all the horses start off in their gates around about
1800.
Around about 1800, some countries start the process of economic growth, like say the
United Kingdom and the United States.
So the gates go up and those two horses, the United Kingdom and the United States, start
running down the course.
But all the other horses remain stuck in their gates.
Now, as you proceed through the 19th century, other horses leave the gates.
Other countries start the process of economic growth.
So Germany starts, France starts, the countries of Scandinavia start.
In the 20th century, you see the starting gates go up for Japan, for East Asia, now
for China, perhaps for India.
I'm not meaning for this to be an inclusive list, but to give you a sense.
Now, as these late comers start off, Lucas argued, they can experience catch up growth
by piggybacking on some of the lessons and technology and markets that already exist.
But some countries have yet to get started at all.
The wealth of the high income countries, that growth of the high income countries, is really
not built on keeping Africa poor or India poor or Western China poor.
Those places are not poor because they're helping make the United States rich.
They're poor because they are completely detached from the world economy and underdeveloped
and not involved in trade or globalization.
It's just hard to blame the international economy for the persistence of poverty.
Globalization and the international economy has been extraordinary helpful in lifting
countries like East Asia and Japan and China out of global poverty.
Saying that globalization creates poverty is kind of like saying, and this doesn't make
a lot of sense, exercise makes me overweight because I don't do it.
If you're not participating, then what you're not participating in is probably not the problem
either.
But there's an interesting possibility here, as the gates have gone up for country after
country, region after region.
If the 20th century was a time of divergence between the high income and the low income
countries, might the 21st century be a time of convergence?
For example, the World Bank classifies all countries of the world into high income, middle
income and low income.
And so if you look at the period from 1990 up until the early 2000s, a little bit more
than a decade, real GDP in the high income countries rose 2.5% a year over that time.
The middle income countries rose 3.2% a year, a little faster, and the low income countries
led by China and India rose about 4.3% per year.
Thus, the economic gap between countries was reduced a little bit over this time.
In the process of economic growth though, it's worth remembering that those who started
earlier have gotten off to a really, really big lead.
As a result, the inequality between rich and poor countries, the highest and the lowest,
has been growing because the rich have been moving ahead while those with low incomes,
the poor have been standing still.
As more ketchup occurs, however, the result could be, could be, less economic growth in
the last half century or century.
Now, this prediction is controversial.
There's some who argue that continued divergence will occur.
It's not clear whether, say, Africa will experience a productivity takeoff, and there
are countries of the world which have taken a few steps forward and then seem to also
have taken some steps back.
For example, in Latin America, there have been times when Argentina and Peru and Venezuela
seem to be really zooming forward during the 20th century, and there have been times when
they seem to have taken three or four steps backward.
There's some people who argue that certain parts of coastal Africa showed signs of convergence
in the first half of the 20th century, but since then, they've clearly experienced divergence
and haven't been able to keep up with the richer countries of the world.
When a country does fall behind in per capita GDP, it can take a long time to catch up.
Let's think about the problem for a moment of some desperately poor countries in the
world like those in Africa.
Their per capita GDP might be, say, $500.
A high income country like the United States might have per capita GDP of $30,000.
Let's imagine that the low income country grows at a remarkably fast rate.
Let's call it 8% per year, and it keeps that up for 40 years.
Meanwhile, the high income country grows at, let's call it, 2% a year.
Now you can do the multiplication here yourself, but bottom line, 40 years later, this low
income country that started off at $500 a year is now up to $10,862 a year.
That multiple of 22 kicks in.
However, the high income country, which started off at $30,000 a year with 2% growth after
40 years, it'll be up to $66,000 and change per person.
Now it's true that it's no longer a multiple of 60 to 1, like it was at the beginning of
the time period, but it's only a multiple of, call it, 6 or 7 to 1.
Now that is an insanely optimistic growth forecast for the poorest countries of the
world, and even with that insanely optimistic forecast that they sustain 8% growth for 40
consecutive years, those poorest countries will still be far, far, far behind in standard
of living, 40 years from now.
And there's just no plausible way to fix that.
That's the most optimistic forecast for those countries I can really give you in good conscience.
In the long run, internally generated growth is by far the single most important factor
in a nation's standard of living.
It's going to be far more important than trying to redistribute from rich to poor.
Countries have to grow from within and grow across the board.
Remember, if you redistribute a per capita GDP of $500 a person, it's still $500 a person.
That's the average.
Again, Robert Lucas, the University of Chicago, described the importance of growth in this
way.
He said, in this very minute, a child is being born to an American family, and another child,
equally valued by God, is being born to a family in India.
The resources of all kinds that will be at the disposal of this new American will be
on the order of 15 times the resources available to his Indian brother.
This seems to us a terrible wrong, justifying direct, corrective action, and perhaps some
actions of this kind can and should be taken.
But of the vast increase in the well-being of hundreds of millions of people that has
occurred in the 200-year course of the Industrial Revolution to date, virtually none of it
can be attributed to direct redistribution of resources from rich to poor.
The potential for improving the lives of poor people by finding different ways of distributing
current production is nothing compared to the apparently limitless potential of increasing
future production.
So what are the sources of economic growth?
How could we increase future production?
Since I'm focused here on real economic growth, I'm just going to leave out inflation and
how it could drive up nominal GDP.
Since I'm focused on per capita growth, I'm going to leave out the issue of a larger population.
I'm also going to leave out the issue of people working more hours.
We're not trying to increase the GDP here by having everyone work more hours.
We're trying to get higher per-person output.
So my real focus is on the underlying causes of productivity growth.
We can call that higher output per hour worked, or sometimes it's output per number of workers
in international comparisons.
Why might productivity grow, the increase in output per hour worked?
Well, there are three big reasons.
One would be an increase in physical capital, that is, more capital equipment for workers
to use on the job.
Second reason would be more human capital.
Human capital refers to workers who have more experience or better education.
And the third big reason is better technology.
That is, better ways of producing things, of using your physical capital and of using
your time.
Now, in practice, all of these work together.
More skilled workers with investment in new plant and equipment that embodies better technology
and production methods all fit together to increase production.
But you can do a calculation where you consider how much has education per worker increased,
how much is equipment per worker increased, how much is skill per worker increased.
And then what economists tend to do is they find that those factors don't explain nearly
all of economic growth.
And so they say the rest must be a development in technology.
When you do this sort of breakdown of the determinants of economic growth for an economy
like the U.S., you find that about a quarter of economic growth can be explained by growth
in human capital, more education, more experience.
Another quarter of economic growth can be explained by physical capital, that is just
more machinery to work with, more plant and equipment.
But about half of all growth is new technology.
In other words, it's not using the same old capital or the same old skills from before,
but actually new technology.
Notice that these things that produce more productivity don't necessarily depend on a
heavier use of the world's resources.
Maybe they will, maybe they won't.
But new ideas, new skills aren't necessarily a greater use of resources.
For low income countries, if you do a similar breakdown of their reasons for growth, you
tend to see that more of their productivity growth is coming from gains in physical and
human capital, and not as much of their productivity growth from new technology, although all three
continue to play a role.
And so part of the goal for low income countries is to start the process of catch up growth,
which means tapping into the new technology that's available in a better way.
Let's talk a little about U.S. productivity experience in recent decades.
You look through the 1950s and 1960s, U.S. productivity growth, that's increase in output
per hour, often hovered near 3% a year.
But from the 1970s into the early 1990s, productivity growth sank.
It was more often in the range of something like 1.5% or maybe 2% per year.
It stayed at that lower level for approximately 25 years, and then began to move back up again
in the late 1990s.
Now this period of the 1970s into the 1980s had lots of economic issues.
There were high oil prices, there was the OPEC situation, there was high inflation in
the 1970s, there was a big defense spending drop and then build up.
There were tax cut issues and budget deficits, but of all those issues, the productivity
slowdown is unarguably the worst issue of all.
Let's get a sense of the problem here.
Let's say for the sake of argument, just purposes of illustration, that the economy
lost 1.5% per year of productivity growth for 30 years.
In rough terms, not worrying about compound growth rates, that means real per capita GDP
was 45% smaller at the end of the time than it would otherwise have been.
So imagine if real per capita GDP was 45% larger in the mid-2000s.
Say in 2005, instead of having a GDP of roughly 12 trillion, GDP would have been 17.4 trillion.
Now in that universe, that alternative universe, government would have had plenty of money
to pay for the Bush tax cuts of the early 2000s and wipe out the budget deficit and
still raise spending on lots of programs.
People would have had an average of 45% more in their paychecks.
No matter what your issue is or your problem is, whether it's tax cuts or spending increases,
having per capita GDP be 45% larger would make your problem a lot easier to fix.
Starting in the late 1990s, the U.S. economy began to see a boost in productivity amid
a lot of talk about a new economy built on the dramatic advances in information and communications
technology.
And productivity bounces back for a couple years in the late 1990s, up in about 2.5%
a year.
But a lot of economists at that time are skeptical of whether anything has changed.
The worry was that the late 1990s also looked kind of like a bit of an economic bubble of
sorts with rapid but perhaps unsustainable growth.
So there was this concern, maybe productivity was just high for a couple years, but would
it last through the next recession?
Well, the U.S. economy has a recession in 2001, and one of the remarkable things about
the 2001 recession is usually productivity slows down a lot in recessions, at least
temporarily, because output is down and productivity is output per hour.
But productivity does not slow down much in 2001.
And in 2002, 2003 and 2004, productivity growth was near or above 4% each year, which made
these three of the best years for productivity growth in the last 50 years.
Now it's always, of course, very hazardous to say, we're seeing the start of a long-term
trend and maybe I'll look like an idiot for saying it, I mean, I can't imagine that productivity
growth is going to stay above 4% per year for the long-term.
But maybe the U.S. economy has finally shucked off that time of 1.5%, 2% growth a year and
is back to sustained solid productivity growth in the range of about 3% per year.
At least by the mid-2000s, the productivity boost of the new economy appears to be a
real phenomenon in which new information and communications technology are boosting productivity
in a wide array of jobs.
Professor of mine, when I was back in graduate school in the early 1980s, used to like to
say that the standard job in the U.S. economy involved picking up a piece of paper, looking
at it, doing something with it, and then picking up another piece of paper.
And a lot of jobs are in that category at that time, sales records, billing, accounts
receivable, shipping invoices, overseeing sales forces, all that kind of stuff.
And there were a lot of middle managers who spent all their time on those kinds of jobs.
The new economy technologies, the new computer and information technology wreaked havoc on
those kinds of jobs.
One common example now is you think of a hospital supply room where everyone goes in, gets their
supplies, swipes with a barcode, walks out.
The room automatically keeps track of what's needed, automatically orders more, automatically
schedules delivery, automatically pays and acknowledges payment.
It's just so much easier.
And across the U.S. economy, examples like that are multiplying and multiplying.
I may look like a fool for saying it a few years from now, but it does seem like we're
seeing a great transforming surge of productivity growth in the U.S. economy.
