These lectures have already touched on international issues in a number of places. For example,
we've talked about what's meant by the balance of trade. We've talked about the impact of
international trade on competition within markets and how that affects antitrust policy.
But the last five lectures of this course are going to focus almost exclusively on international
economic issues. This lecture focuses on the arguments for free and unrestricted trade in
goods and services, while the next lecture then lists arguments for restricting trade
and gives a sense of how economists respond to those arguments. The following two lectures
then focus on international movements of financial capital, with one lecture focused on exchange
rates, and the following lecture focused on the question of when flows of financial capital
across borders can cause financial crashes, as has happened in countries like Russia and
Argentina in the last decade or so. Then the final lecture will give an overview of the shape
of the global economy and some of the main macroeconomic issues that it faces. It's perhaps no
surprise that to keep my Economist Union card, I need to be in favor of free trade, and I am in
favor of free trade, but I will also readily admit that it's a complex situation with both costs
and benefits. Let's start off with some basic perspective. How much globalization to use the
buzzword of the day has occurred in recent decades? Let me give you a simple-minded answer, which is
often, in my mind, a pretty good answer. Take a look at a statistic like exports as a share of GDP.
That tells you what proportion of your economic output is being sold outside the country. If you
used imports instead, it would say what proportion of what is consumed is being sold inside the
country. You could use either one truth be told. But in 1950, world exports were about 7% of world
GDP. Now, world exports are about 25% of world GDP. So there's more than a tripling going on there.
There's a similar pattern for the U.S. economy. In 1950, U.S. exports were about 3% of GDP. In the mid-2000s,
exports are about 12% of GDP. So again, there's kind of a tripling or quadrupling going on there. When
people talk about globalization, this is, in essence, the trend they're talking about, that of the
stuff that is produced in an economy, a much larger share is now being sold across international
borders than was before. Now, there are several reasons why international trade could be a win-win
situation for all the countries that participate. Let's start off by focusing on the arguments of
economists for why gains from trade exist. And I'm going to categorize these into three groups. One is
absolute advantage, one is comparative advantage, and one I'm going to call dynamic gains over time. But
we need to explore each of those, obviously, in a little more depth. So let's start off with the idea of
absolute advantage. What's meant by that? One nation has an absolute advantage over another nation in the
production of a certain good if it can make that good with higher productivity. And productivity would
be higher output per hour or somehow fewer inputs being needed to make that output. As an example,
think about a world that just has two countries. Let's call them the United States and Saudi Arabia. And
for a moment, let's just set aside all the issues about national security and oil dependence and
everything else like that. Let's say, and this is plausible enough, that the United States has an
absolute advantage over Saudi Arabia in growing wheat. We Americans don't sing about those amber
waves of grain for nothing. Saudi Arabia has an absolute advantage on the other side in producing
oil. Saudi Arabia, there's a lot of places where you can more or less put a sharp stick in the
ground and oil will bubble up. Now, of course, Saudi Arabia does have some fertile areas where it can
grow crops. But if Saudi Arabia tried to grow all of its own wheat, it's going to be quite costly
to do so. It's it's just hard to grow wheat in the desert, even with irrigation. The United States
on the other side does have some areas where oil is fairly cheap to drill. But if the US economy
tried to provide all of its own oil, it would be quite costly to do so. I mean, we're now talking
about, you know, going offshore, drilling straight down a couple of miles, drilling horizontally
underground, using various technologies to push the oil out. So both sides can produce their
desired output of wheat and oil at lower cost if they play to their absolute advantage and then
trade with each other. The US can produce lots and lots of wheat and trade it for oil. Saudi Arabia
can produce lots and lots of oil and trade it for wheat. Both countries can be better off if they
played where they have their productivity advantage. I think for most people, that idea of trade
is relatively intuitive, relatively straightforward, just because growing wheat in the desert and trying
to drill for all the US oil offshore would be obviously so very costly. But now let's imagine
the next case, and this is where it gets a little more difficult, a case where one country has an
absolute productivity advantage in all areas, and the other country has an absolute disadvantage
in all areas. Now the mental example I sometimes use here, which isn't quite fair or quite accurate,
but as a mental example, I'm using the US and Mexico. There's a very, very wide range of goods
and services where the US has workers with a higher average level of education. The US workers
are working with better and newer capital equipment. The US workers are supported by a better infrastructure
of communications and electricity and transportation. And so there are just a lot of goods that US
workers can produce more productively than workers in Mexico could. Or if, for example, Mexico
worries you to think about Mexico, think about Africa or China. US workers are just extremely
productive at making an awful lot of things. However, even in this situation where one country
is more productive in all goods than the other country, it is possible for trade between the
two countries to benefit both of them. And this is a surprising and, I think, counter-intuitive
result that goes back to the early 19th century, economists have been trying to explain it ever
since. The fundamental idea here is the idea of comparative advantage. And here's what comparative
advantage means. Comparative advantage exists when a nation has either a largest productivity
advantage in producing a certain good or service compared to other nations, or if it doesn't have
any area of productivity advantage, then it has a comparative advantage in where it has the smallest
productivity disadvantage in producing a certain good or service. So to get comparative advantage,
you need to think about all the possible things that a nation should do. And the theory of comparative
advantage says, focus on those things where your productivity advantage is biggest, or if you
don't have anything where it's biggest, focus on those areas where your productivity disadvantage
is smallest. Now, let me try and give you an intuitive feel for how this can benefit all parties.
Now, I've personally never had a secretary, but let's pretend I had a secretary. I like to pretend
that sometimes. And let's say for the sake of argument, there are two main jobs I have to do.
One is editing economics articles and the other is typing memos. And let's say for the sake of
argument that I am faster at both jobs than my secretaries. I am faster at editing economics
articles and I am faster at typing memos. So I have a productivity advantage in both areas.
Does it follow then in logic that because I have a productivity advantage in both areas,
I should do all the work of the office and my secretary should do nothing?
Well, of course not. That would be just foolish. It would be foolish because the secretary's time
wouldn't be being used at all. Presumably, my advantage at editing economics articles is much
bigger. My advantage at typing is relatively smaller compared to my secretary. So I'm much
better off hiring a secretary, focusing on the area where my productivity advantage is greatest
and letting my secretary focus on the productivity area where the secretary's
productivity disadvantage is least. It would be silly for me to try and do everything.
Similarly, another example, should the great professional basketball player LeBron James
mow his own lawn. Now, let's face it. This is a world-class athlete. He is probably much faster
at mowing his lawn than anyone he can hire. He has a productivity advantage at mowing his lawn.
But it would be crazy for him to spend his time that way, right? He should focus on the area of
playing professional basketball and doing endorsements where he has an extraordinary
productivity advantage. And then he should hire other people to do other jobs, even if he would
still have a productivity advantage in those areas. And it benefits both parties for him to hire those
people and for those people to have a trade and exchange. Third example, my father was in the
Boy Scouts. I think he was even an Eagle Scout. So when I was growing up and our family went camping,
my dad was the best at everything involved in camping. He is the best at collecting firewood.
He's best at making a fire. He's best at cooking. He's best at putting up tents. He's best at
everything. He has a productivity advantage in all aspects of camping. So question, should dad
do absolutely all of the work while the rest of us sit around and watch him? Is that better for
everyone if we do that? Well, of course not. I mean, you know, dad can't do everything. He's
going to run out of time. It's going to be better for everyone if my father focuses on the skills
where his productivity advantage is biggest and where the rest of us focus on the skills where
our productivity advantage disadvantage is smallest. And when we combine those productivity
advantages and productivity disadvantages, certainly my father will be better off getting
help. And in fact, we'll all be better off because a great deal more is going to get done
and get done more easily than if one person tries to do everything. So with those sorts of intuitive
ideas in mind, let's now retreat to my example of the United States and Mexico. Let's say that the
United States is better at producing computers in the sense that it has higher productivity
and it's better at producing textiles than Mexico is, again, in the sense that the U.S. has higher
productivity. Does it therefore follow that the United States should produce both all of its
computers and all of its textiles and have no trade with those with Mexico in either area?
Well, no, for just the same reason. The U.S. should focus on the area where its productivity
advantage is greatest, which is presumably computers in this little hypothetical example,
and Mexico should focus on an area where its productivity disadvantage is least,
which would be textiles. The two can then trade with each other and both nations can be better
off. Both the nation with the productivity advantage in both goods and the nation with the
productivity disadvantage in both goods can both benefit from trade. This is the remarkable
theory of comparative advantage. The remarkable theory of comparative advantage establishes
that even when one nation is more productive in all goods, both nations can still benefit from
trade. If you're the nation with the productivity advantage in all goods, focus on those areas
where your absolute advantage is greatest. If you're the nation with the disadvantage in all goods,
focus on where your absolute productivity disadvantage is the least. Now, you sometimes
hear someone who is economically illiterate say, but what about the nations that have no
comparative advantage? What if what if nations just don't have any comparative advantage? Then
they can't trade. The reason I refer to this as illiterate is because even if you have lower
productivity at absolutely everything, you still have a comparative advantage. You just need to
find the area where your disadvantage is smallest. In effect, everyone has something they are least
bad at and that's what you should seek out and do, whatever your least bad at. It's kind of inspiring
in a weird sort of way that everyone fits into this picture. Now, both absolute and comparative
advantage are issues about trade between countries with different productivity levels,
selling really different products, computers, textiles, wheat, oil, really different products.
However, well over half of world trade happens between countries that are really very similar.
I'm thinking particularly here of the high income economies of the world in North America,
in Europe, including Japan and Australia, New Zealand. Much of the trade between these countries
involves buying and selling literally the same products. The US imports cars from Europe and
exports cars to Europe. Japan exports cars to the US and does import some cars from the US.
Countries are importing and exporting cars back and forth. They're importing and exporting machine
tools back and forth. They're importing and exporting computers back and forth. A few years ago,
when the statistics for Britain and France showed that cars were the biggest import for
those economies and also the biggest export for those economies. So rather than buying and selling
very different goods, they're really buying and selling the same goods. Moreover, the countries
that are buying and selling have, in a big picture sense, very similar wages. I mean they're all
high income countries. It's not like some are dreadfully poor like China or India. So why does
this kind of trade exist? It's not obviously absolute advantage. It's not obviously comparative
advantage. And a lot of the study of international trade since the 1970s and 1980s has focused on
this kind of similar trade, trade in the same goods between similar countries and tried to
figure out why that might be beneficial. Let me give you some of the possible reasons.
One possible reason, trading similar goods allows even smaller countries to take advantage of
economies of scale. Imagine, for example, that you're in the United Kingdom, which is a relatively
small economy by world standards. If you have a whole bunch of little car companies in the United
Kingdom, they're going to be quite small. They won't be able to take advantage of the fact that
large car companies can produce at a lower average cost. They won't be able to take advantage of those
economies of scale. So what should you do? Well, if you have a couple of very, very large car
plants in the United Kingdom, those can take advantage of economies of scale, and then they
can sell back and forth with car plants in other countries that also are very large. And thus,
even the smaller countries can take advantage of economies of scale and trade back and forth.
A second advantage of this kind of trade, trading similar goods provides a gain of variety.
You get many different kinds of cars. Again, if you're the United Kingdom, a relatively small
economy, it might be that one big car plant provides essentially all the cars the United
Kingdom really demands in a given year. But if you trade back and forth between other countries,
then you can still have the economies of scale, but also have a much greater variety
of possibilities within your market. A third advantage, trading similar goods
allows a greater degree of specialization within industries. And the issue here is what's called
breaking up the value chain, or sometimes the word disintermediation is used if you hear that.
What they're referring to there is that when you're making a car, you break it up into lots of
pieces. They're going to be low tech pieces like the plastic for the seat covers. They're going to
be higher tech pieces like the computers and the engines. There's going to be assembly parts.
And what can happen with trade between similar countries is that these parts all get divided
up. Part of the car is made here. Part of the car is made there. The parts are all shipped.
They go back and forth across national borders. Eventually, they're assembled and sold someplace.
This is sometimes called Smithian trade because it follows Adam Smith's idea of the gains from
a greater division of labor that was discussed back in lecture two. If everyone can focus on these
specific specialized tasks, they can be more productive in all the individual tasks.
A fourth advantage, trade in similar goods can encourage a flow of knowledge and skills
that will benefit both countries. Give you an example from the United States. The Japanese
companies invented something called just-in-time inventory management in which inventories were
kept very, very low and things were only delivered to the factory as they were needed. It turns out
that in a number of industries, that's a very, very effective way of organizing manufacturing.
Well, the U.S. learned that idea from Japan. There was a flow of ideas, not just of goods and
services. Another famous example that I confess may or may not be true is that back in the 14th
century, the great explorer Marco Polo went to China and the legend has it that he brought back
the idea of noodles, which eventually became the Italian pasta industry. He didn't bring back
actual noodles, you understand. He brought back the idea of noodles and that interchange of ideas
can be extraordinarily powerful. A fifth advantage, trading similar goods across national borders
provides greater competition for domestic producers and thus better incentives for low
prices and innovation. Now, all of these factors together help explain why trade between countries
might benefit those countries even when it's the same goods and the same kinds of economies.
And honestly, I suspect that these kinds of factors are probably much more important to the
productivity gains from trade, maybe not much more important, but quite important compared to
the basic absolute and comparative advantage arguments. But they're really hard to measure
these gains and so economists are still struggling with trying to say how you measure the gains
from the kinds of things I described. Moreover, the advantages of trading and who should benefit,
what should be split up, where your comparative advantage lies are bound to shift somewhat over
time as new products are developed, workers learn new skills and so on. These shifts can
also be a source of gains to an economy since learning and competing in global markets provides
pressure for productivity gains. So that's the theory of why there are gains from trade. What's
the evidence? There's actually a strong empirical correlation between countries that expand trade
and countries that have good economic growth. The circumstantial evidence here is extremely
strong. If you look at time periods where trade is expanding, that tends to be when economies
are expanding. Time when trade is contracting tend to be like the 1930s when the economy is lousy.
Countries with expanding trade tend to be countries with expanding economies. There are
literally zero examples, literally zero examples of countries that have gotten very rich without
expanding trade. The World Bank published a study several years ago on this subject. They split the
world economy into two groups. Group one was called globalizers and globalizers were countries where
the ratio of exports to GDP doubled in the 1980s and 1990s. So this would include, for example,
China, India, Mexico, most of the high income countries of the world, total of three billion
people. For that group of globalizers per capita GDP rose 5% per year in the 1990s. Group two was
non-globalizers and for non-globalizers the ratio of exports to GDP declined in the 1980s and 1990s.
This would include much of Africa, include the Middle East, it would include Russia.
For that group per capita GDP declined an average of 1% per year in the 1990s.
However, when you think about trade and growth, international trade is only one of many factors
that contribute to economic growth and it probably isn't the most important factor.
Other key factors might include education, investment, new technology, and a good rule
of law that supports market institutions. What I'm trying to say here is a country with poor
education and low investment and high corruption and no rule of law is not going to save its economy
by saying, well, let's expand international trade. Expanding international trade does help
economic growth and in a significant way, but when you're making the case for free trade,
it's important not to present it as some sort of cure-all for everything that goes wrong.
I mean, if you asked me what's important for helping a nation grow, I'd list lots of factors.
I might start with education and healthcare for the population, physical infrastructure, water,
electricity, telecommunications, keeping inflation low, lack of corruption, laws about
competition, a well-regulated financial and banking system, flows of information and ideas,
and in this mix I would add in globalization in foreign trade, but it's not obviously the
king of the list. Moreover, the gains from globalization are real, but they aren't free.
Gains from globalization are the result of restructuring industries relying on suppliers
from other countries and orienting your economy toward the global economy. So I think the gains
from trade are real. I also think that it's important not to overstate them and present them
as some magic cure-all for what ails the economies of the world.
Ultimately, how close is the world to a borderless market? How far has globalization actually gone?
When people talk about globalization and trade, they often talk about what they call a borderless
world, where goods and money zoom back and forth as if borders don't really exist.
How close is the world economy to a world where, from an economic point of view,
national borders don't matter? And the perhaps surprising answer is that even in the early
21st century, national borders still seem to matter a heck of a lot, and let me offer some of the
evidence. One measure of trying to think about whether borders matter is to compare trade between
metropolitan areas or states or regions that are a certain size in terms of their economy
and a certain distance apart. And you might compare two of those regions within one country,
like, say, the states of Illinois and Washington, Washington state, and you might compare within
Canada, say, Ontario and British Columbia. And then you would say, okay, let's look at trade going
between those two within the countries, and then let's look at the crisscross trade going across
the national border. Now, if borders don't matter, then the trade going back and forth
across the national borders should be more or less the same as the trade within the countries,
because the national border doesn't matter. And of course, for any two examples, this might not
be true, but if you look at a bunch of examples together, you should be able to see a pattern
there. When you do that kind of a study, you find that actually the effect of national borders is
large. There was a study a few years ago that compared trade between provinces of Canada and
states of the United States, and it found out that after you adjust for distance in the size
of the local economies, Canadian provinces trade maybe 12 to 20 times as much with each other
as they do with comparable US states. If you look across OECD countries, the sort of rich
high income countries of the world. Trade within the country is often three to ten times as high
will give between the regions of the country as trade across borders. Now, these estimates are
often being recalculated using different methods. I wouldn't want you to hang your hat on one
certain number, but overall, it seems clear that the national border really does matter,
matters a lot. Another test of a borderless world. Do things cost pretty much the same
if you cross from one country into another country? Think about some tradeable good that's common
across markets like color televisions or cars or blue jeans. Does these are going to cost pretty
much the same if you look at say Minneapolis and Chicago and St. Louis, but if you cross
national borders, do they still cost the same? In fact, prices are extremely different across
national borders. There are a lot of detailed surveys on this point. Perhaps the easiest way
to see the point is to look at what happens when exchange rates shift. After all, if prices are
going to be the same across national borders, then when the exchange rate moves, then the prices
should move just as much. But it turns out that only about half of changes in the exchange rate
filter through to prices in different markets. So if you're comparing in different countries,
this sort of movement in exchange rates, this comparison between prices is happening all the
time and prices are not changing in lockstep between the U.S. and Japan or Japan and Canada
or the U.S. and the U.K. Why do national borders matter? What's the difficulty? We think of ourselves
in this globalized economy. The reasons would be things like transportation and communication
networks are usually developed within a country with nations in mind. They aren't developed to
help facilitate movements across national borders. Whenever you go across a national border, you
have to deal with different legal and tax systems. You may have to deal with different languages and
cultural issues. You may have different currencies, different rules about dealing with the labor force,
different safety regulations, different accounting rules. There may also be explicit laws to limit
imports one way or another. When you try and value all of these things and add them up,
it can add up to an extra cost of 40% or so when goods cross national borders, which is
really a significant boost in costs and would explain why things don't move across national
borders all that easily. Now, this argument about the borderless world is just an argument about
facts. I should say that if you're in favor of free trade or if you're opposed to free trade,
this argument can cut either way. All I'm saying is that if you favor free trade,
you should be really happy because there could be a whole lot more of it.
If you're opposed to free trade, you should be worried because we can have a whole lot more of
it. My point is that we are not yet close to a borderless world. You can see a lot more trade
across borders in the future for a variety of reasons. For example, there are international
trade agreements which could encourage trade across borders, transportation costs keep falling
and falling with new technology, and obviously information and communication costs keep falling
and falling as well. And those things are all going to make it easier to coordinate trade back
and forth across international borders. In the future, I expect this trend to globalization is
not nearly over, but is actually going to still be continuing. The public discussion over free
trade is often really a matter of labels. Labels can be highly controversial. In the dispute over
abortion, for example, you have this pro life and pro choice label, so everybody can be pro
something. The equivalent in free trade is everyone needs to be for something. So everyone says,
well, we're in favor of free trade, but some people add as long as it's fair. Well, fairness.
Fairness is one of these concepts that you may notice economists have had a hard time with.
Fairness is in the eye of the beholder. In many times, many cases, many situations,
fairness is just a sweet talking way of saying, I don't think we should import stuff from other
countries. The arguments for limiting imports can be evaluated on their merits. That's the
subject of the next lecture. But sort of saying it's just fair to do something is, in my mind,
assuming what needs to be proven. When I hear someone talking about, I'm in favor of free
trade, as long as it's fair trade, I get suspicious that basically they're not in favor of free
trade. And frankly, I'm usually right to be suspicious. I hope that this lecture has convinced
you that support for free trade is at least not an irrational prejudice. There are real
and important gains that are possible from free trade. But of course, the argument for free trade
won't be complete until we consider all the possible costs and trade offs and reasons that are given
for limiting trade. And that's the task of the next lecture.
