A few years ago, a research economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco wrote
the following lines.
If you asked a random sample of economists to name the three most difficult questions
confronting mankind, the answers would probably be 1.
What is the meaning of life?
2.
What is the relationship between quantum mechanics and general relativity?
And 3.
What's going on in the foreign exchange market?
Not necessarily in that order.
Anyone who has traveled outside of the United States has some good intuitive sense of what
an exchange rate is.
But why exchange rates are at the level they are, why their value changes, and what if
anything should be done about it are difficult questions.
Let's start off by clearing away some of the rhetorical underbrush that often gets in the
way.
The subject of exchange rates is typically discussed with some terminology that can be
deeply misleading.
Let's start with this idea.
Everyone knows that strong is good and weak is bad, right?
Everyone knows that in financial matters, appreciates is good, like when your house
or the stocks that you own are worth more, and depreciates is bad, like when your house
loses value.
Well exchange rates are a case where what everyone knows about stronger and weaker and
appreciate and depreciate is wrong.
When it comes to prices after all, it is never clear whether a higher price is good or bad.
Whether you favor strong or weak gasoline prices, for example, depends on whether you
own stock in an oil company or whether you are pumping gasoline to put in your car.
Producers always like high prices for what they produce.
Consumers always like low prices for what they buy.
Society has both consumers and producers.
Indeed, most of us play both roles at various times.
Now an exchange rate is just a price.
We're going to define the term the exchange rate is the rate at which one currency can
be traded for another.
So when you say a strong dollar, all that means is that the US currency, the US dollar,
can buy more of other currencies.
A weak dollar just means US currency buys less of other currencies.
Now whether you prefer that a price is high or low, remember always depends on whether
you are buying or selling.
If you're buying imported products, you like a strong dollar that can afford lots of other
currency.
If you're working in an export industry which is selling somewhere else in the world, you
might prefer a weak dollar.
Well get into that sort of logic more as this lecture goes along, but the point is that
in the foreign exchange rate, it's just a price like any other price.
And high prices and low prices just depend on where you're standing.
In the foreign exchange market for currencies, everything is as you would expect a matter
of supply and demand.
Let's talk about who's on the supply side of a foreign exchange market and who's on
the demand side.
In particular, I'm going to focus here on the market for the US dollar.
Let's think about the supply side first.
If you are a US tourist traveling abroad, you are supplying US dollars.
That is, you want to give US dollars to the foreign exchange market and you want to receive
foreign currency in exchange.
Foreign firms that sell in the US market earn US dollars like Toyota selling a car in the
United States.
But back home where they produce the good, they need to have their own currency.
They want to have in the case of Toyota, Japanese yen.
So they will supply the US dollars that they earned by selling in the United States into
the foreign exchange market and they will exchange them for whatever their home currency
is.
Another source of supply is US investors who want to invest in other countries.
US investors start off with US dollars.
They've got those dollars, but if they want to invest in say Germany, then they need euros.
So they would supply their dollars into the foreign exchange market and get the euros
they need so that they can invest in Germany.
So on the supply side, you can think of those groups as providing dollars into the foreign
exchange market.
Now on the flip side, who's demanding dollars in the foreign exchange market?
Well, it's sort of the other half of the three groups I just mentioned.
You could imagine, for example, foreign tourists in the United States.
They are earning or arriving with their own currency from whatever their home country
is, but they're going to demand US dollars because that's what they need to spend in
the United States.
US exporters who sell in another country have earned foreign currency.
They've earned that foreign currency, but they want to trade back to US dollars to pay
their workers and suppliers in the United States.
So they are going to demand US dollars in the foreign exchange market.
Further, foreign investors who want to invest in US assets and US stocks or bonds or real
estate, they start off with their home currency and they demand US dollars because they need
US dollars to buy the US assets.
So you can imagine the foreign exchange market as involving these different groups of people
involved in supplying and demanding currency.
Of course, when we think about supply and demand in the foreign exchange market, it
typically happens through financial intermediaries like banks.
If you're a tourist in Mexico, you don't have to literally find a Mexican who wants to tour
in the United States and swap money with them.
Instead, everyone goes to the bank.
The bank sort of acts as an intermediary, matching up these folks who want to trade
their currencies.
So the average person doesn't actually observe a foreign exchange market in operation.
When the US dollar is stronger and can buy more foreign currencies, those who supply
dollars are going to benefit and those who demand dollars are going to suffer.
When the US dollar is weaker and can buy less of foreign currencies or, equivalently, foreign
currencies buy more of US dollars, when the US dollar is weaker, then those who supply
dollars benefit and those who demand dollars suffer.
Now to try and make this distinction a little more concrete.
Let's think again and walk through each of our three groups.
Tourists who are either from the US or coming to the United States.
Those who trade goods, importers and exporters.
And those who want to invest in other countries, whether they're from the US and investing
abroad or from abroad and investing in the United States.
So tourists first.
Imagine you're a tourist in another country and you're trading US dollars for other currencies.
So you're a US tourist abroad.
In that situation, a stronger dollar is great because it's buying more of the foreign currencies.
So you sort of feel like you can buy more stuff when you're abroad.
But if you're a foreign tourist coming to the United States, you want your home currency
to buy a lot of US dollars.
So you would prefer that the dollar be weak.
And in passing, I'll note that if you're a US business that caters to foreign tourists,
like say you're running a hotel in a restaurant in Florida where there are a lot of European
tourists coming to stay, you like a weak dollar because that encourages more tourists
from abroad to come and patronize your hotel and restaurant.
Let's think about firms that import and export.
Firms that produce US imports prefer a strong US currency because they are earning US dollars.
So think about like Toyota.
When they come over here to the United States and they earn US dollars, they like to have
a really strong US currency because when they trade back to yen, they get lots more yen.
And indirectly, US consumers should also like a stronger dollar because they're the ones
buying the imported products.
In effect, a stronger dollar means that US consumers can buy more of goods from all around
the world.
On the flip side, US firms that export abroad are going to prefer a weak United States currency
and stronger foreign currencies because they are earning the foreign currency.
After all, a US exporting firm pays its expenses in US dollars, it earns the foreign currency
and then it wants to trade back to US dollars.
In effect, for an exporting firm, a weak dollar holds down the firm's expenses, which are
incurred in dollars, and a strong foreign currency keeps the earnings up since they're
earning the foreign currency.
Now as a result of this pattern, a stronger dollar tends to hurt exports, tends to help
imports and either reduce a trade surplus or cause a trade deficit.
A weaker dollar, on the other hand, tends to encourage exports, make it easier to produce
and sell abroad or more profitable to do so.
A weaker dollar hurts imports, it makes your dollar able to buy less in world markets,
and it reduces a trade deficit or causes a trade surplus.
What about foreign investors?
Foreign investors in the US economy like a strong dollar because the US dollars they
earn with their investment are now worth more.
So they're earning dollars, they like getting more so when they trade back to their home
currency they've got more money than they expected.
However, a strong US dollar can hurt US investors abroad because US investors abroad are earning
foreign currency and a strong dollar means when they convert back into dollars they
get less than they otherwise expected.
Thus, a strong currency encourages a net inflow of foreign financial capital, it encourages
people to come to the US and get dollars, and a weaker currency discourages such inflows.
This all sort of fits together, I mentioned a moment ago that a strong currency tends
to discourage exports and raise imports and lead to a trade deficit.
Here I'm saying that in terms of investment, strong dollars encourage capital inflows,
and these are essentially the same statement, because you know, trade deficits mean an inflow
of capital.
To put this point another way, a strong dollar encourages foreigners to invest in the US
assets instead of buying US goods.
So it encourages that inflow of capital.
Conversely, a weaker dollar encourages foreigners to buy US exports instead of investing in
US assets, and that leads to a smaller trade deficit and less of an inflow of foreign capital.
So when we think about strong and weak dollars, appreciating and depreciating dollars, remember
it all depends whether you're a buyer or a seller.
Let's now do some facts about exchange rates.
Let's get a little more concrete about what exchange rates are and how they've changed
over time.
The world had 165 different currencies in 2003, alphabetically going from the Afghanistan
Afghani and the Albanian Lek all the way through the alphabet to the Zambian Quacha and the
Zimbabwean Dollar.
But the currencies that really matter the most to the US economy are the currencies
of our main trading partners.
And what I have in mind here are some basic currencies for Canada, like the Canadian Dollar,
the Chinese Yuan, the European Union Euro, the Japanese Yen, and for each of these the
currency and the exchange rate can get stronger and weaker at any given time.
So in the news a lot the last few years has been the European Euro.
As of April 2005, there were 0.77 euros per US dollar, or to put it the other way, it
took $1.30 in US dollars to buy 1 euro.
In Mexico in April 2005, the peso was 11.1 pesos per US dollar, or to think of it the
other way, it was 9 cents US would buy 1 peso.
So you can look up these exchange rates in newspapers or at the Federal Reserve website
whenever you like.
The historical pattern of exchange rates over time is that starting with the end of World
War II they were fixed up until the early 1970s and then floating since then.
Let's sort of talk about that pattern.
The Bretton Woods Agreement in July 1944 created the International Monetary Fund and
also the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development which is actually usually
called the World Bank.
I'm going to focus on the IMF here.
One of the jobs of the IMF was to fix exchange rates in one place.
What actually happened is there was an international treaty where all currencies were convertible
into gold at a certain rate and the US dollar was convertible into gold at a certain rate
so all currencies were effectively fixed relative to the US dollar.
Now that system fell apart in 1973 for reasons we'll get into a little bit later on and since
then exchange rates have been allowed to float, meaning that the market primarily determines
the exchange rate and the forces of supply and demand with some occasional government
intervention.
Floating exchange rates have proven really pretty volatile, often rising and falling
by 30% or more over a period of a few years.
The Federal Reserve calculates an average exchange rate for the dollar where it takes
an average of all the exchange rates that are out there and it weights them according
to how much trade does each country do with the United States.
So big trading partners, their currency gets a bigger weight than little trading partners.
Based on that average, the US dollar exchange rate rose 30% in value from 1981 to 1984.
Then from 1985 to 1988 it fell 25%.
Those are big swings.
From 1999 to 2001 it was up 10%.
From 2002 to the fourth quarter of 2004 it was down 20%.
Now of course short-term movements within a day or a few months or against movements
against individual currencies have been even larger than this but these overall averages
should give you a sense that the currency really does jump around a lot and foreign
exchange rates can be highly volatile.
In the long run though, economists believe, exchange rates move toward what's called the
purchasing power parity or sometimes the PPP exchange rate.
What is this purchasing power parity exchange rate?
Well, it's the exchange rate that equalizes the prices of internationally traded goods
across countries.
Now what exactly does that mean?
Well, there's a group of economists at something called the International Comparison Program
which is run under the auspices of the World Bank and they sit down and they calculate
the PPP exchange rate for all countries.
What they do is they look at a basket of internationally tradable goods, things like
color televisions and wheat and oil, and they do detailed studies of what these look like
in a whole bunch of different countries.
Then they say, whatever the exchange rate is, that would be the PPP exchange rate, is
the exchange rate we're buying that basket of goods will be the same cost in each different
country.
Their argument is that the exchange rate has to go to the purchasing power parity rate
in the long run.
If it was true that a whole bunch of internationally traded goods were cheaper in one country than
in another country at the existing exchange rate, then somebody could make money by buying
in the cheap country and selling in the expensive one.
So that can't be a long run equilibrium.
It can't be a balancing point for the exchange rate.
Eventually, buying cheap countries and selling in expensive ones would alter the quantities
demanded and supplied in a way that would lead the exchange rate to move toward the
purchasing power parity rate.
This theory of purchasing power parity also implies that exchange rates will adjust for
differences in inflation between countries because, after all, purchasing power parity
is linked to the actual purchasing power of goods and services.
If your country, say, had 5% higher inflation in this group of internationally traded goods
every year, over time you would expect the exchange rate for that country to depreciate
or weaken by 5% every year.
In effect, your money is buying 5% less every year relative to other countries, so your
currency will also buy 5% less every year relative to other countries, and that will
keep the purchasing power parity exchange rate in effect.
But in the short and medium run, exchange rates are often not near the purchasing power
parity level.
Instead, they fluctuate up and down quite dramatically.
In the short and medium run, exchange rates are largely driven by changing expectations
about rates of return, which can then lead to a lot of volatility.
The total traded on foreign exchange rate markets in the early 2000s is roughly $1.2
trillion per day.
$1.2 trillion with a T dollars per day.
That's an extraordinary volume.
Total global exports in the world economy are something like $9 trillion per year.
Clearly a lot of currency is being traded that doesn't involve the needs of buying and
selling goods and services.
Instead, it's about financial investment in one form or another.
It's about people saying, what will give me a higher rate of return, an investment in
the United States, or in Europe, or Brazil, or in Russia, and the answer will depend partly
on the existing rates of return, but it will also depend on what you expect exchange rates
to be in the future.
Overall, if I'm a U.S. investor, it doesn't do me any good to go to Brazil and get a 20%
rate of return if Brazil's currency depreciates by 30%.
Because when I try and convert back to U.S. dollars, that depreciation of the currency
will more than offset any gains I had.
So when people think about investing in other countries, they're thinking about, do I expect
the exchange rate in that other country to get stronger?
If I do think it's going to get stronger, I'm going to go put money in that country.
And that behavior sets up a cycle of self-fulfilling expectations.
If people think a currency is going to strengthen, they're going to go invest in that country.
And as they go to that country and they invest in it, the greater demand for that currency
will cause it to strengthen as they were expecting in the first place.
So people expect a stronger currency, they invest seeking a stronger currency, and then
the result is the currency does get stronger.
But this sort of cycle of self-fulfilling expectations can't go on forever.
At some point, the exchange rate needs to get back to its purchasing power parity level.
So it falls back.
We've called this kind of behavior a bubble before, where people are investing based on
an expectation that the price will keep going up, not based on fundamental market factors.
There's lots of little mini-bubbles going up and down in exchange rate markets all the
time.
Well, what should be public policy with regard to exchange rates?
One policy is, let the market determine the exchange rate.
Just let supply and demand do it.
And this is basically the United States policy with regard to exchange rates most of the
time.
The argument for this policy is, yep, exchange rates go up and down.
So what?
Will prices go up and down?
Interest rates go up and down?
And the rest of the economy?
Some costs like health and education seem to just keep going up.
Other costs like computer and telecommunications technology keep falling.
Prices move in a market economy.
Get used to it.
The difficulty with this sort of laissez-faire policy is that exchange rate markets are really
quite volatile.
Even if the mammoth U.S. economy can more or less just let its exchange rate go, it
may be that there are smaller countries who are importing and exporting half or more of
GDP.
And they're just not going to be comfortable letting the exchange rate move that much.
It has too great an effect on too much of their economy.
Well, what happens if a government seeks to manage its exchange rate?
If it wants to do that, it should generally seek a stable or a slowly moving exchange
rate over time.
After all, a stable exchange rate helps create a stable business environment for trade and
for long-term investment.
And the logic here is similar to some of the reasons for a low inflation economic environment.
You want firms to focus on increasing productivity and thinking about their comparative advantage
in global markets.
You don't want firms thinking about how to protect themselves against exchange rate
movements or how to profit as exchange rates go up and down.
Imagine if the U.S. economy had 50 separate state currencies.
It would be crazy to trade between states.
Essentially, a common currency across the United States is a permanent fixed exchange
rate across states.
A California dollar is equal to a New York dollar is equal to a Texas dollar.
But this business of trying to trade with many, many different currencies is the reality
for say Latin America or Africa.
And it was the reality for much of Europe until the introduction of the Euro changed
things and made much of that continent under one currency.
So a goal might be to try and keep the currency somewhat stable.
It's sometimes proposed a nation should depreciate its currency to help its exporters become
more competitive and create more jobs.
Well, it's true that a weaker currency will help exporters as we talked about.
And sometimes it does make sense for a currency to decline in value, maybe because a country
has been having relatively high inflation, so the purchasing power of its currency should
diminish.
But depreciating currency is not a road to economic growth and a high-income national
economy.
After all, a weaker currency makes exporters more competitive, essentially, by paying workers
less.
It makes the money that workers earn worth less in international markets.
Also, a weaker currency hurts all the firms that are purchasing imported products, like
imported oil.
And there's a lot of firms in that category.
As a long-term strategy, you can't continually depreciate your currency.
I mean, if some depreciation of your currency is good, where does it end?
Are we saying here, if your currency was worth nothing, then you would be super rich?
I suppose that just doesn't make any sense.
A government might seek to control exchange rates, and when it seeks to do that, one way
of doing it is to try and use monetary policy.
If you use contractionary monetary policy, then a country can raise its exchange rate,
or its interest rate.
If you raise your interest rate, that will strengthen your exchange rate because people
will want to invest in your currency for the higher rate of return.
Conversely, an expansionary monetary policy can reduce your interest rates, and that will
make your currency less attractive to foreign investors and weaken your exchange rate.
If monetary policy is used for this purpose, then you can't simultaneously use it for
fighting inflation or fighting unemployment.
Monetary policy is only one tool.
It can't do everything.
So a country which focuses its monetary policy on exchange rates may find that sometimes
it would prefer to be using monetary policy for some other purpose.
For example, imagine a country that suffers a negative economic shock of some kind, so
it has a recession and high unemployment.
No one wants to invest in that country, and so its exchange rate starts falling.
No one is demanding its currency.
If they want to keep their exchange rate up, they'll need a contractionary monetary policy
to make interest rates high and make their exchange rate and their currency more attractive.
But that contractionary monetary policy will make their recession worse.
And faced with that trade-off, most countries will try and help their domestic economy,
not their exchange rate.
An alternative method for government to try and affect exchange rates other than monetary
policy is to buy and sell its own currency directly on foreign exchange markets.
For example, a country that wants to strengthen its currency could just buy its own currency
on foreign exchange markets.
A country that wanted to weaken its currency could sell its own currency on foreign exchange
markets.
But this direct approach buying and selling your currency has its limits too.
When a country sells its own currency, what does it get?
Well, it gets foreign reserves of some other currency, like the U.S. dollar.
What about if a country buys its own currency?
If it wants to buy a currency, well it needs something to buy it with, and so it needs
to have some reserves of a foreign currency, like the U.S. dollar, in order to buy its
own currency.
Well, what that means in effect is, a country can keep selling its own currency as long
as it's willing to keep building up foreign exchange reserves, but at some point this
is going to look a little crazy, the country is just accumulating U.S. dollars.
On the other side, you can't buy your own currency forever.
At some point you run out of foreign exchange reserves to keep buying currency.
So you can buy and sell your own currency, but there are sort of natural limits to how
far that can go, and it tends to be much more a short-term quick hit process than a long-term
policy.
All government attempts to manage exchange rates run into two practical problems.
One is that foreign exchange markets will attempt to outguess the government, and it's
never completely clear what exchange rate the government should choose.
Imagine that the government is attempting to stabilize an exchange rate, but investors
in the international markets are trying to guess in advance what the central bank is
likely to do.
For example, what if foreign investors expect government to cause a currency to fall?
Well, if they expect the currency to fall, they'll sell that currency and cause it to
fall in the first place.
Then if the government changes its mind and decides that it's not going to, then investors
may say, well, okay, now we'll buy it again, and the currency is going to go back up.
So beliefs about what the government might do can actually make the exchange rate quite
volatile in the short-term.
Moreover, it's hard for governments to choose a realistic exchange rate.
In the long run, a currency needs to reflect purchasing power parity, it needs to reflect
what it can buy.
But if the government tries to fix the currency at an unrealistic level, too high or too low,
it's going to create imbalances and financial stress.
For example, let's say that the government tries to keep the exchange rate too strong.
Then over time, it's going to have very weak exports and very large trade deficits over
a sustained period.
If the government keeps the currency too weak, then it's going to have large trade surpluses
and a continual outflow of investment capital.
Again, speculators will begin to anticipate the currency is going to move, the government
would then have to step in and use either interest rates or direct buying and selling
to discourage the speculators, and at some point, it just becomes crazy to be trying
to move interest rates back and forth, keep buying and selling currency forever.
So some countries have attempted to keep their exchange rate more stable than the market
outcome, but they've recognized that trying to keep it completely fixed is difficult,
and they've allowed their currency to move a little bit back and forth over time.
The general wisdom in the mid-2000s is that this policy, although it sounds very sensible,
it sounds sort of intermediate, may not make a lot of sense.
The problem is that when government starts saying, we're going to try and keep the exchange
rate roughly fixed, it often leads to very, very little variation in exchange rates for
a long time.
No firms and banks in the economy begin to act as if exchange rates were really fixed
in one place.
But then when the exchange rate does move, it moves dramatically, and the effects are
especially painful because firms and banks haven't planned and hedged against a possible
change in exchange rates.
Thus, the argument goes, it's better either to be clear that the exchange rate is always
flexible or that it's always fixed, but choosing a sort of in-between, sometimes it'll move,
sometimes it won't, we'll kind of figure it out as we go along, may end up being the
worst policy of all.
So overall, what do we think about exchange rate policy?
I'm afraid I don't have any real clear, clean lessons for you here.
But certainly one step would be that an economy should avoid inflation, to avoid sort of big
shifts in the foreign exchange market.
It should avoid huge trade imbalances, which can also bring about big movements in supply
and demand for exchange rates.
An economy can either choose to let its exchange rates float, or it can choose to fix its exchange
rates.
But it probably shouldn't hang out in the middle ground, kind of sometimes letting the
move and sometimes not in an unpredictable manner.
Many of the international financial crashes we'll discuss in the next lecture occurred
in countries that had sort of promised to keep their exchange rates in one place, but
then left their firms and their workers and their economy unprepared for changes in the
exchange rate when they actually happened.
