Lecture 5, Nietzsche and the Greeks
Nietzsche was obsessed with the Greeks. He discovered them as a schoolboy and one can
only imagine the fantasies he must have had as a very young man. They stayed with him
throughout his life. In fact, his last crazed note well into the period of insanity, he
signed Dionysus. There is a contrast that goes throughout his philosophy between the
ancient Greeks and modern bourgeois Christianity. And there is a sense in which understanding
what he liked about the Greeks or what he loved about the Greeks is essential to understanding
what he disliked and sometimes what he despised about modern society. He was of course a philologist
and he is a classics professor. He knew his ancient texts very well. The Greeks that he
really admired though was not the Greeks that as a philosopher you would expect him
to have loved. He thinks that the Greece of Socrates and Plato and Aristotle was already
in some sense decadent. And the Greece that Nietzsche really praised and admired was the
Greece of Homer, the Greece of the ancient Trudeidians, the Greece of tragedy. And his
first book, The Birth of Tragedy, talks at great length about the ways in which tragedy
became possible for the Greeks and consequently the ways in which tragedy has become unthinkable
for us now. The obsession with the ancients was not Nietzsche's alone. Germany in general
was taken with the Greeks. There was a growing awareness for one thing that Germany and it
was not yet fully Germany. But Germany was aware of the fact that it was increasingly
a backward country compared with France, compared with England and consequently it was very
defensive. If one traces the history of the 19th century, what one traces is a coming
to awareness of German culture, a kind of defensiveness that German culture really does
deserve the same place in the sun as say French culture or English philosophy. By the time
we get to Nietzsche of course we've got a unified Germany under Bismarck but nevertheless
there's still a profound defensiveness about it and Nietzsche is very keenly aware of this.
As opposed, he thinks, to ancient Greece. The influence of the Greeks was so profound,
not just on Nietzsche but on the German cultural elite in general, that Butler a few years
ago wrote a book called The Tyranny of Germany, The Tyranny of Greece over Germany. It's a
very apt title. There's a sense in which since the 18th century the Germans had looked to
Greece as a kind of golden age, the time when human life was, if not perfect, as good as
it gets and modern period by contrast is inferior, maybe pathetic. Nietzsche thinks it's very
important though not to simply to dismiss modernity because as I said when he wrote
in a very early essay about history, he made the point that simply getting lost in history,
simply bemoaning the fact, as some of his predecessors had done, that Greece was so wonderful and
were so impoverished, that leads to a really lousy life. So the important thing is Greece
should be a kind of model and he despised his fellow scholars. I'll leave it open to
what extent this might still apply today. He called them scholarly oxen who worried
about Greek grammar, who worried about Greek philology, who worried about when such and
such was written or performed, but then spend even a minute fantasizing about what it would
be like to live as a Greek and in particular what it would be like to live as a Greek,
a Greek German today. The Greece that he admired is very much the Greece of Homer or more accurately
since Homer is writing about other events or talking about other events, really four
centuries earlier. It's the Greece depicted by Homer and of course this gives rise to
one of those rumors we have talked about that Nietzsche really liked barbarians and it's
hard to think about Achilles and Agamemnon and Menelaus and the gang without thinking
of them as barbarians they were. Nevertheless, there's a sense in which the virtues they
displayed, the attitude towards life was something which was enviable and it was clearly something
missing in the modern world. And if you think about the tragedies that were written by the
Greek playwrights, this is all before Socrates, plays like Oedipus, Antigone, the plays about
the Trojan women, Prometheus. What you realize is that it's a model of life that we have
trouble understanding, it's so cruel, it's so stark. I mean the idea of a fate driving
Oedipus to do these awful things, a curse which had been cast on his father now extending
to him, which of course would extend in turn to his daughter Antigone, the idea of realizing
that one had done something pretty awful, murdering your father, marrying your mother
and consequently putting your own eyes out because you had seen too much, that kind of
vision to us is just plain awful. And so one of the themes of the Birth of Tragedy is
how it was different for the Greeks and how when they saw these tragedies performed, something
very different was going on. In fact, the theme of the Birth of Tragedy and it's very
core is that tragedy is a real honest recognition of what life is all about. And to be sure
Oedipus, Antigone, these are people that face dilemmas, situations that none of us really
would like to face, but the truth is of course we all are going to face our own dilemmas,
we all have to face up to death, we all have to face up to the bad things in life and the
question is how do we do that? Do we accept it as the way things are or do we rationalize
it away? The idea in the Birth of Tragedy, which we'll talk about in much more detail
in the next lecture, is that the Greek view of tragedy was possible because two different
strains of thought or two different strains of feeling came together in a remarkable way.
The one, the Apollonian, the rationalistic, saw tragedy as something that happens to the
individual. It's a real personal loss. On the other hand, and what I'd like to emphasize
here is the Dionysian. And the Dionysian is connected up with what you might call the
super personal. It's the idea of ourselves as part of the flow of life. And if you think
about orgiastic rituals, if you think about what Hegel called Bacchanalian revels, one
of the things that's most pronounced about it is a loss of the sense of self, a sense
of going with a flow, a sense that one is part of life and what happens to one as an
individual really is of no great importance. And that sense of overriding passion of identity
with a whole as opposed to a kind of rational individualism is what Nietzsche thinks allows
the Greeks to come up with this notion of, on the one hand, something awful happening
to an individual and at the same time understanding this as something beautiful.
The birth of tragedy makes a distinction, however, between two different sets of Greek
authors. Nietzsche sees the early great Tritidians, namely Sophocles and Escalus, as very much
in tune with this merging of the Apollonian and the Dionysian, getting the two in balance,
whereas the third of the great three Greek tragedy writers, Euripides, Nietzsche really
condemns. And he condemns them in particular because of his linkage, which is debatable
in classical circles, but his linkage with Socrates in particular. With Euripides and
with Socrates, that's when Greek thought and Greek culture goes into decline. The difference
was that Sophocles, Escalus saw tragedy as something that's inexplicable, something
that couldn't be rationalized. You watch Oedipus or Antigone, both plays by Sophocles, and
the overwhelming sense you come away with, apart from the beautiful poetry, is that life
is really a mystery, that the things that happen to people can't be explained. With
Euripides on the other hand, what Nietzsche says anyway, is rationalization into the picture.
And of course, whether or not the link with Socrates can be ultimately sustained, that
Euripides and Socrates, in common, tried to explain tragedy in such a way that human beings
could ultimately think their way through it. And that's precisely what Nietzsche wants
to say one could not do. He also thinks that the ancient Greeks had as one of their primary
virtues, the fact that they were agonistic, the fact that they believed in struggle, that
life itself was a struggle. The tragedies make this very clear, and of course Homer's
two great books, the Iliad and the Odyssey, make it amply clear to what extent life is
always a struggle of one sort or another. The more peaceful version of this struggle,
the Olympics, which come after all from ancient Greece, is an illustration of the way in which
this sense of ferocious competition is something that goes all the way back to the Greeks.
And despite our pretensions, at least until a few years ago, that the Olympics are rather
amateurish, if you like, a kind of genteel sporting event. With the Greeks, it was very
clear that it was more than that. This cut right to the quick of human nature. It wasn't
just sport, it was life. This sense of agon, this sense of struggle, was Nietzsche thought
what made the Greeks so beautiful. And that's the word he uses over and over again, that
they saw life in terms of a struggle, and the struggle itself became an artistic form.
The idea of looking at life as a struggle even extends to such supposedly genteel professions
as philosophy. One often talks about Socrates in terms of his love of the truth, his pursuit
of wisdom, and certainly that's how he talked about himself. But you don't have to read
much of Plato to see right through that. What Socrates really loves is a good argument.
What he really likes is to get down and dirty in the streets and show that he's the smartest
guy of all. Socrates is as competitive as any philosopher has ever been, and in fact one
might argue that Socrates sort of set the model for what philosophers think of themselves
today. The important thing is winning arguments. Socrates is often contrasted with the Sophists,
a school of philosophers who were pretty much his contemporaries. I sometimes think of them
as the ancient equivalent of law school, because in democratic Greece their function was to
teach people the art of rhetoric, to teach them how to make arguments, to teach them
how to win arguments. And Socrates contrasts himself on the grounds that that's all they
do. What he's about on the other hand is the truth. But as several of my classes friends
have argued in great detail, I think the truth is that Socrates wasn't against the Sophists
so much as he was one of them. In fact, he was the best of them. That agonistic sense,
life is struggle, life has tension, extended even to philosophy. What Socrates says in
philosophy quite to the contrary. The idea of Greece's agonistic also explains in Nietzsche's
terms why Greece declined. Because in the early days of Greece when there were constant wars
between the city-states, invasions from the Persians and so on, there was always this
struggle. And Nietzsche says, and this is one of the places where he stretches history,
as long as the Greeks had a struggle going on, they knew what life was about and they
were great. As soon as they found themselves in a period of relative peace, what happened
was that that kind of inner instinct for struggle turned against themselves. And that's when
they started to decay. The idea of Greek tragedy as two vital forces then gets resolved, or
shall we say, destroyed by an overemphasis, by Euripides, but mainly by Socrates, on the
rationalistic, on the Apollonian. In fact, one of the features of Socrates' philosophy,
which has often been commented on, but perhaps not in the properly unsympathetic way, is
that what Socrates is all about is in a way a kind of denial of tragedy. He says, for
example, that the only thing that a truly good man has to worry about is the status of his
own soul. If he is properly attentive to the status of his soul, to the health of his soul,
nothing else can harm him. Now, if you think about poor Oedipus, Oedipus was a good man.
Oedipus, in fact, did everything that was expected of him. Within the context of the
culture, I think we should say Oedipus did everything that Socrates would say he ought
to do, even, much to his detriment, self-examination of a very profound sort. But the idea that
this somehow inoculated him, made him immune from misfortune, obviously quite the contrary.
The truth is, bad things happen to good people. But Socrates' philosophy ultimately is. There
is this thing called the eternal soul, which outlives the body, which, in fact, lives forever.
And Socrates had a fantasy of a more perfect world in which his pure soul could think
pure ideas without the interference of all these bodily temptations, instincts, and sufferings.
As I said, I think the truth is actually the opposite. If Socrates' soul had lived on
forever just thinking by itself without anyone to argue with, I think, in fact, it would
have been a pretty miserable soul. Because Nietzsche is right. What makes Socrates tick
is human engagement, human encounter, this kind of competitive struggle. What gives way
when we abandon the Dionysian, the sense of reckless abandon in favor of the purely
rationalistic, in favor of the Apollonian, is that we stop thinking in terms of life.
Life is, after all, at least in part Dionysian. When we start thinking with Socrates that
life is reason, that life is pure rationality, and understanding life, thinking beyond tragedy
is possible, then there's a sense in which we deny life itself. As I suggested, Nietzsche's
argument even goes further than this. He says, for example, to understand Socrates' philosophy
is to understand that Socrates actually hated life. Appearances, to the contrary, said Socrates
is very clearly in Plato's dialogues. A very jolly, happy soul who loves his encounters
with his students and other people, he's what we would call a fulfilled human being. Nevertheless,
Nietzsche points out that on his deathbed, Socrates, of course, was executed, forced
to drink hemlock for supposedly corrupting the minds of the youth and a kind of blasphemy.
But when he died, Nietzsche says of him the following, I admire the courage and wisdom
of Socrates and everything he did, said, and did not say. This mocking and enamored monster,
Pied Piper of Athens, who made the most overweening youths tremble and sob, was not only the wisest
chatterer of all time, he was equally great in his silence. I wish he had remained silent
at the last moment of his life. But in that case, he might have belonged to a still higher
level of spirits. But whether it was death, or the poison, or piety, or malice, something
loosened his tongue at the last minute and he said, O credo, one of his friends, I owe
you a Sclepius, a rooster. Sclepius was the patron saint of health, of medicine, and offering
him a cent, a rooster would have been considered, basically, pain your doctor for curing a disease.
This ridiculous and terrible last word, Nietzsche writes, means for those who have ears, O credo,
life itself is a disease. Is it possible that a man like him, like Socrates, who had lived
cheerfully and like a soldier in the sight of everyone, should have been a pessimist?
Shades of Schopenhauer. He had merely kept a cheerful demean while concealing all of
his life, his ultimate judgment, his inmost feeling. Socrates, Socrates suffered life,
and then he revenged himself with his veiled, gruesome, pious, blasphemous saying. Did
Socrates need such revenge? Did his over-rich virtue lack an ounce of magnanimity? Alas,
my friends, we must overcome even the Greeks. The picture there is very clear that despite
all appearances, Socrates didn't like life. Socrates saw life as something to be overcome.
The fantasy which he expresses in some of his, the fantasy which he expresses in those
words which depict his last days, that his soul might live on, just doing philosophy,
is a kind of liberation. And Nietzsche wants to say, that's exactly the wrong picture.
The right picture is accepting life for exactly what it is and enjoying it for exactly what
it is. He brings up the Greek myth, which we're going to come back to several times.
It's a Greek myth also, I suppose a Persian myth, but perhaps best known as a kind of
Indian myth. The myth of eternal recurrence, the idea of life circling around, coming back
again. And the importance of that myth for Nietzsche, more than anything else, is the
idea that life is to be emphasized for the sake of life, not for the sake of an eternal
existence, not for the sake, as in Christianity, of a future heaven. That the weight of each
moment is such that one should appreciate life and all the moments in life for their
own sake. Now in terms of philosophy, what Nietzsche does is in fact looks behind Socrates.
If you look before Socrates came onto the scene, and before the Sophists, they're in
fact a whole series of Greek philosophers, and we do them the disservice of simply referring
to them as the Presocratics, as if the first philosopher is really Socrates, and these
other guys that appeared first, really, well, they only barely count, they're sort of a
warm-up act. But the truth is that, well, we don't know much about them. In many cases
we don't have much of their writings, but then you can argue, we really don't have anything
of Socrates' writings either because he didn't write. What we have is what we have from Plato,
and from Herodotus and from some other Greek historians. But the truth is that an awful
lot was going on in Greece before Socrates, and Nietzsche, as a good philologist, was
well aware of this. But again, he makes distinctions. The philosopher who is clear in a way his
favorite, the one who, in many ways, models his own picture of reality and picture of
the universe, is Heraclitus. The philosopher who said that all is flux, everything changes.
The philosopher who took as his element the primary substance of the universe, where others
said it was water or air or earth, Heraclitus said it's fire. And the important thing about
fire is it's always changing. If you look at a flame, it's never the same shape twice.
For Heraclitus, struggle, strife, war, was the essence of all things. The truth is that
people were based on a nature which itself was always in contradiction, which was always
moving and changing itself. It's Heraclitus, of course, who says more or less the famous
saying, you can't step into the same river twice. The idea being that life is not something
static, much less something potentially eternal. Life is something which is always changing,
it is what it is, and understanding that is the real wisdom. Contrast here, one of Heraclitus'
contemporaries, a Greek philosopher named Parmenides, who in many ways anticipates much of Plato.
Parmenides thought that reality is and must be of necessity, eternal, enduring, unchanging.
All of change is an illusion. The truth is that what we perceive as reality is not that
at all. But of course, because what we see is this changing world, it follows that we
just don't have the capacity to know reality at all. It is and must be a mystery for us.
There's Parmenides' best known student named Zeno, who demonstrates this in a series of
famous paradoxes. The idea of an arrow never reaching its mark, because at each instant
it's only covered half the space that it did before, and consequently, if you add up the
moments, and of course they didn't know about infinitesimals then, the moments get smaller
and smaller and smaller, but the truth is the arrow never reaches its mark. Now of course
there's lots to say about that. Tom Stopper perhaps did it best when he has one of those
professors in a play say, and Saint Sebastian must have died of fright. But it seems to
me that the basic idea is something much larger. It's Parmenides' philosophy, and that is here
is the clearest example of change, movement. But here I'm going to prove to you geometrically
that movement is an illusion, that movement is impossible. And what follows from this
is the idea that reality has to be something else than this changing world that we perceive.
This of course is the same philosophy that is picked up by Socrates, and then most famously
by Plato. The differences and similarities between Socrates and Plato is something much
more much debated, and this is not a lecture on Greek philosophy as such, so I'm not going
to try and figure out the difference. The truth is, of course, that Socrates didn't
write anything. It is mainly recorded by Plato. Certainly some of the ideas were Socrates'
philosophical ideas, but equally certainly much of it was embellished, and later on in
his career I think actually just made up by Plato. So in a way, think of Socrates and
Plato in a hyphenated way, at least as far as the philosophy is concerned. And what that
philosophy looks like is an emphasis on the eternal, an emphasis on the otherworldly,
an emphasis on what Plato called the world of being, a world in which there is no change,
a world in which there are only perfect ideals, a world of which this world is only a shadow,
and of course one of Plato's most famous images, which Socrates tells in the Republic,
is the myth of the cave, in which we have a story about a bunch of prisoners chained
to a cave, and all that they ever see are the shadows on the wall. But suppose one of
them were to turn around, break free, and actually see the world itself. It would be
so dazzling that he would probably be blinded, and if he came back and tried to tell his
fellow prisoners what he had seen, they would be so outraged that they would kill him. Of
course that's not a bad summary of what actually happened to Socrates, but what it also depicts
and what Nietzsche is picking on is the idea that this world of our experience is not the
real one. There is another world which is very different, and although Plato didn't say
that this world is unreal, nevertheless it's pretty clear that the world of our experience,
the world we live in, is in some very important sense, less real, less important than the
world of being, and that to Nietzsche is the kind of escapism. It's the ultimate refuge
of rationality, and that is why Socrates, he says, made reason into a tyrant. Now this
is something to explain in a number of different ways. Part of it, of course, might be put
in straightforwardly philosophical terms, in terms of the general trend of Greek thought
from the very first philosophers, and we're now talking back to, say, Hesiod the poet
and Thales, who is usually credited as being the first philosopher-scientist, but through
parmenides, Heraclitus is often ignored here, through Socrates and Plato to Aristotle,
and you look at that trend, and one way of describing it is, it is the sophistication,
the development of reason, but there's another way of describing it, which is the way Nietzsche
describes it, and that is, it is the decline and the neglect of the Dionysian. When I said
that Nietzsche says Socrates is ugly, that he was lower class, and ultimately that Nietzsche
hated life, that he thought it was a disease, the main point there was to say, what we find
in Socrates is a need to escape, an unwillingness to accept life for what it is, the need to
somehow see beyond it, and what we get with Socrates, in particular, is this emphasis
on reason, not just as a kind of human faculty, a human ability to think, a way of calculating,
a way of manipulating concepts and so on, all that's fair enough, but reason can do
something else, reason can do what Parmenides thought it couldn't do, reason can actually
see through to the world of being, the world as it really is, and that vision, if not blinding,
is so striking, Plato assures this, that once one sees it, one will fall hopelessly and
eternally in love and never be able to go back into the cave of ordinary experience,
but of course the other danger, the one that Nietzsche focuses on, is that what you're
falling in love with also has to be reflected in terms of what you're falling out of love
with. When you fall in love with reason and fall in love with this more perfect eternal
world, what you do is you fall out of love with this world and with your life, and that's
what goes wrong after Greece.
