Lecture 18 What is nihilism, the problem of asceticism?
As we said in the second lecture where we talked about various rumors about Nietzsche,
Nietzsche's name is often associated with the word nihilism. Also, because Nietzsche is such a
critical, apparently destructive writer, because he attacks so many things and so many people,
religion, morality, Socrates, Christianity, it's often assumed that Nietzsche is basically a
nihilist himself, or at any rate, a very destructive philosopher who has very little positive to say.
We hope we've already cast some doubt on this view, both in the second lecture and in all the
lectures since, but this time we'd like to focus on nihilism as such and its most prevalent
manifestation, its harshest manifestation, what is often called asceticism.
Nihilism itself is a concept that came into Europe fairly recently, just about Nietzsche's time,
although there were certainly analogs back as far as ancient Greece, in fact Socrates might be
viewed as in certain ways, attacking certain kind of nihilistic thinking in the Sophists.
But in its modern incarnation, we traced the word nihilism back to the Russians in back in
the Tsarist days, and in particular, I think the first popular use of the word was in Turgenev's
novel Fathers and Sons. What that means is that the youths, the sons, rejected the authority and
the values of their parents. For contemporary Americans, this is nothing new, but in old Europe,
in Tsarist Russia, it probably must have been something of a shock. The concept of a nihilist
then is something fairly localized, and it's just what we would call teenage rebellion. But by the
time the term moved west and got to Germany, it had taken on a much broader meaning. A nihilist was
someone who rejected not just his or her parents, but someone who rejected a tradition. And if you
think about the sorts of traditions that were prevalent in Russia at the time, and certainly
some of the traditions that would have been prevalent in Germany at the time, again, this might
have been quite a shock, especially, say, in a small German town such as the one Nietzsche was
raised in. Rejecting a tradition can, of course, take on many different dimensions. It depends
what kind of a tradition. It might be a fairly specific, narrow cultural convention, or it might
be something much broader that has to do with a whole way of life. And consequently, the notion
of nihilism spread to being the rejection of an entire culture, and even the rejection of an
entire society. But of course, although Nietzsche fits many of these descriptions, in particular,
he rejected his Lutheran tradition as much as possible, and he rejected German culture as much
as possible in Wagner, but also in the fact that he, from the time he started teaching in Switzerland
at a very young age, spent virtually all of his adult and sane life outside of Germany quite
conscientiously, Nietzsche quite clearly rejected German society in many of its different manifestations.
He even rejected the language, although he is probably its greatest writer. He said he really
wished he could write in something else, like French, so that people wouldn't associate his
ideas so much with Germany. But there's a certain limit. You can reject your society, but there's
an idea of rejecting society altogether. That would certainly be a very extreme form of nihilism.
And one can say, or someone like Nietzsche, that perhaps that's what he does too. For example,
he spends much of his time in solitude, not just because he didn't have friends, but also by
choice. And when Zarathustra comes down out of the mountains, it's quite an effort. And it's very
clear that Zarathustra is very much in line with a whole history going back to the Old Testament
of solitude in its hermits. And in that sense, one might say it's not completely absurd to reject
society. And insofar as one chooses to live in solitude, that's just what one does. But one is
still not rejecting all values. And that's what nihilism in its philosophical sense really amounts
to. In a note which is published at the beginning of Nietzsche's book, or the book that was published
from Nietzsche's notes called The Will to Power, Nietzsche writes, everything lacks meaning. What
does nihilism mean? That the highest values devalue themselves. The goal is lacking. The answer is
lacking to our why. Now one can read that fairly straightforwardly as a statement concerning
the meaning of life. And if you think about this in the context of Schopenhauer, there's a clear
example of what nihilism would look like. We look to find the motive, the goal, the purpose behind
all of our actions. We look to see what it's going to lead to, how it's going to turn out, how it
will make our lives or other people's lives better. And the Schopenhauerian answer is, it's not going
to make any difference. There is no answer to that kind of a question. And as for the why, a
teleological why in which we ask, what is the purpose? What is the meaning? The Schopenhauerian
answer is, there is no answer. There is no meaning. Nietzsche rejects this Schopenhauerian position.
And with it, he rejects philosophical nihilism. It is a position he argues against and not for.
Despite the fact that there are particular senses in which one might say, Nietzsche defends nihilism,
or in which we might say that Nietzsche rejects the values or the traditions in which he took part.
But if we're thinking about nihilism in this general way, then the question comes up, what would it be
to reject values? What would it be to reject all values? Or what would it be, as Nietzsche writes in
his note, that the highest values devalue themselves? What values is he talking about? Well, he's not
talking about all values. Nietzsche says very clearly, all the way through his career, that if you
want to define human nature, the first thing you must say is that human beings insist on value. We
see the world through value-colored eyes. We do not know how to look at things neutrally, value-free.
So it's not a question of giving up all values. It's simply a question of which values? And here,
of course, his target comes into focus. What he's concerned with are two particular kinds of values
which one kind of society, namely his society, has taken as being immensely important and absolutely
central. First, moral values. And second, religious values, or more accurately, the values of the
Judeo-Christian tradition. What's behind this, as always with Nietzsche, is an attack on values that
he considers detrimental to life. And of course, one might find these elsewhere as well. We saw them
in the overemphasis on historical scholarship, and we saw them elsewhere. But the truth is that
religion and morality remain his focus. Looking back through history, one can see that the question
of being positive as opposed to negative towards life has a very long history. In fact, it predates
the Christian religion by quite a few years. In philosophy, we often distinguish between
skepticism on the one hand and cynicism on the other. Thinking about these, we start to recognize
that it's not just two slightly different philosophical viewpoints, although in fact,
they're often confused and conflated. But the truth is there are two completely different
attitudes towards life. And Nietzsche would say the first, skepticism, is quite healthy. The second,
cynicism is most unhealthy. It's a rejection of life. Living with an attitude of trial and error,
experimentalism, trying to look deeply behind things or under things, getting truer explanations,
or rejecting explanations that face value. This is skepticism. It's a sign of mental health,
something we encourage in our students. On the other hand, cynicism is sick.
Cynicism is, in a way, being tired, being weary, being so skeptical that one no longer will accept
anything. It's been said very recently, for example, that for someone in the current day and age to go
around with a cheery attitude towards life is to invite the question, what's wrong with you?
There's a sense in which cynicism is a view which is most unhealthy because it doesn't even allow
for possibilities. Rather than looking around as skepticism does, it rather shuts things down.
It's closed as opposed to open. Decadence, from this point of view, is a form of cynicism.
It can be very creative, and taking Socrates as an example, it can be brilliantly creative.
In a way, you might say, Socrates opened up whole new worlds. But that's just the problem.
They were other worlds. They weren't paying attention to, and they weren't sufficiently
appreciative of this one. So in short, one wants to say Nietzsche is against nihilism.
It is what he spends his entire career attacking. And yet, one can say, in certain restricted domains,
he remains a nihilist. For example, we emphasized in an earlier lecture how he's a nihilist without
knowledge in one sense. He refuses to take the truth as something fixed, absolute, and easily
accessible. Quite the contrary, he says, where truth is concerned. We should be skeptical.
We should be very subtle. And we should not accept this notion of truth, which says that the truth
is something fixed and out there as opposed to something that, in part, we create through our
experiments and through our living. He's a nihilist in certain ways about religion,
not all religions, and not everything about Christianity, but certainly certain central
doctrines, certain central values. He does say, let's reject that. And when in Zarathustra,
Zarathustra urges, come, my brothers, what is falling down, let's push it the rest of the way.
Basically, the image is not one of destruction, but rather it's preparing for the future.
It's making room for something new and better. That's what nihilism is for Nietzsche.
Indeed, for Nietzsche, many of the most important people in the tradition, both philosophical and
religious, are people that he would like to move out of the way. We talked about a number of them
in our previous lecture where we talked about favorites and targets. Among Nietzsche's most
famous targets are several central figures, Socrates, Plato, and St. Paul being among them,
that he does see as having played their part in history, but now need to be pushed out of the way.
And much of his discussion has to do precisely with revaluing. One of the structural ways in
which he talks about revaluation, and one that becomes, in a way, a kind of integral problem
for his own philosophy, is the idea of revaluing or devaluing itself in the case of either Christian
or philosophical ideology. In a way, he thinks the belief in the Christian God has devalued itself,
because part of the ideology that went with belief in the Christian God was a kind of notion of
honesty and a kind of self-examination. His conviction was that eventually, Christians,
if they were honest about it, realized that belief in the Christian God was not very central to
their conception of the real world, not very central to their conception of how things were,
and that, realistically, it wasn't even true that the Christian God really played that important
role anymore. Once that became clear, it wasn't too much further to starting to recognize what
Nietzsche calls the death of God, or at least the fact that belief in God is no longer so central
to living in the Western world that this is the center of our culture in general. So he thinks
that, in a way, historically, the philosophy and the religion that he inherited has already moved
in such a direction that it's come to question its own beginnings. His tendency is, in general,
to question the origins of things, not always with the aim of pushing them aside, but at least to
ask whether or not values that we currently hold started out being the values that are important
to us, and whether or not what initiated or what began as a kind of initially healthy move,
psychologically, remained that, or whether it turned into something else. He writes a whole book
called On the Genealogy of Morals. Bob will have a number of things to say about some of his analyses
there, where he talks about the origins of some of our moral valuations and asks whether or not
these were reasonable moves at one time, but have ceased to serve an important purpose for us or a
healthy purpose for us, or whether or not there might still be reasons to retain them. I'm going
to focus for a moment on the third essay of this three essay work and talk about what, in a way,
is one of the most problematic type of valuations for Nietzsche's own philosophy, namely the high
value that humanity in general has frequently placed on asceticism, asceticism involving
practices that seem to be life-denying. Why is this so central to Nietzsche? Well, on the one hand,
he has this long-term background of thinking in terms of Schopenhauer's view of reality
and his own agreements or disagreements with it. Schopenhauer's conviction was that asceticism
was actually the way to make life good. If, after all, most of us end up coming to grief
precisely because we take seriously our own obsessive personal desires, asceticism was a
move in a very different direction. Indeed, if you engage in ascetic practices like fasting,
you end up feeling, in a way, so removed from everyday reality, in a sense so physically
weakened, that you're concerned about whatever particular fantasy you're entertaining in general
at that point in your life starts to recede a bit. In fact, it's possible to start to feel
relatively willless, and that indeed was what Schopenhauer recommended, to renounce one's will
and thereby to attain a kind of peace. Nietzsche rejects all that and favors instead of you that
recognizes human desire for vitality, the human desire for power. And that creates a certain
question for Nietzsche himself. If indeed humanity in general and all our basic actions are motivated
by a desire for vitality and power, what on earth are we to make of ascetic practices?
It would be one thing if ascetic practices were merely means to an end, a kind of instrumental
way of assisting one's own health. For example, for some people, the need to cut down on cholesterol,
at least in recent times, has struck them as an important means to the end of maintaining their
vitality. Granted, their immediate desire might be for food that is rich in cholesterol, but there
is a sense that if they change their diet, removing some of these foods from it, they'll end up feeling
more full of life in the end, perhaps even in the short run. Now that would make sense on Nietzsche's
analysis. But ascetic practices don't seem to really be means to a very obvious end at all.
The idea is to fast for the sake of fasting, or to sacrifice things for the sake of sacrifice,
to give up candy for Lent, not because candy is bad, but simply because it's a good idea
to be able to give these things up. Nietzsche asks then, well, what sense are we to make of
ascetic desires, the strategy of employing these ascetic practices? Is there some deeper motive
that actually is a matter of will to power, or is this really something that falsifies Nietzsche's
entire theory? Nietzsche concludes that there actually is a way in which ascetic practices
do manifest will to power. But this manner is quite subtle. The basic idea is to split one's own
sense of self into two parts, the controlling part and the part that wants something. If you give
up candy for Lent, you have the controlling part that is attaining a kind of mastery over another
part of yourself, the part that wants the candy. If you fast generally, there's a sense in which,
although you want to eat, there's a part of you that is more powerful still. In a sense,
Kant paves the way for this kind of split of a psyche when he talks about inclinations versus
our rational conception of what we're obligated to do. Of course, Kant realizes there are all sorts
of things that we want, and even that's part of our nature. Biologically, we do have desires and
inclinations. That much is something that we can't do anything about. But nevertheless, Kant views it
as not only a kind of important and noble thing about the human being, but indeed our moral obligation
to resist those inclinations, not to use, not to appeal to them at all in deciding what we ought
to do, but instead listening to reason alone and allowing reason to tell us when to disregard
our inclinations entirely. What Kant does there is to show us a kind of domination structure
inside the psyche. We have, on the one hand, the controlling part, and on the other hand,
the natural human being. And those sorts of philosophical systems that are used to justify
aesthetic practices generally do allow for a kind of willful assertion of something like the self,
or the self under one conception, over another part of the self. And that's where Nietzsche sees the
will to power having been sublimated. Granted, when someone is aesthetic, when someone succeeds in
these practices, you would have to say that they have in a sense controlled themselves,
not simply given into will to power on one level. But what they've really done is substitute
one type of expression of will to power for a much more subtle one, but one that in a way
gives them a sense of status and self-consciousness that might be enviable
to the person that is more direct. There's a kind of sense of control of oneself that is
in a way virtually complete. Along with this, Nietzsche sees a kind of self-righteousness
that comes about. Someone who is able to control their impulses is able to not only feel on top
of themselves or in control of themselves, but superior to other people as well. Someone who
doesn't seem to have a problem with temptation in some particular direction can easily view those
who succumb as inferior in lots of ways. And when need not broadcast this, there's a kind of
internal sense of self-righteousness that really is its own reward. So Nietzsche would say that
these sorts of practices are a good example of what he frequently finds in the case of human
psychology, that what seems to be the motive, the apparent motive, is actually a disguise
for something that is very close to its opposite. Now Nietzsche doesn't stop here. He goes on to
point out that while religious traditions on the whole have tended to opt for asceticism of a pretty
straightforward sort, often he would say a rather barbaric sort that weakens the practitioners,
we actually have many more manifestations of asceticism than is commonly realized.
Particularly in science, the broad sphere of human quest for knowledge, which he would say
actually has its form from the time of Socrates, there's a strong sense of subordinating oneself
on the one hand in order to gain something that expands your sense of self vastly, knowledge.
In a way, the whole project of science is a lot like the kind of project described in Gerdus
Faust, where the chief character makes a deal with the devil to sell his soul to the devil,
if the devil will give him these great powers to gain knowledge. That might seem like a bizarre
sort of proposition to make, but I think Nietzsche sees that as a very real kind of parable
to reflect the way in which science has been pursued. He certainly complains that lots of people
expend all of their energies, their vitality, any kind of psychological balance in their life,
all for the sake of pursuing a kind of dream that he thinks is very unlikely to reach much
fruition in an individual life. Nevertheless, this remains a quest that he describes as will to power.
This desire for truth is in a sense a kind of desire to ally your finite powers with something
closer to the infinite. No longer simply an individual, one is a representative of humanity
trying to acquire knowledge for the whole. This is certainly a step in the right direction
if one views oneself as will to power. The same kind of move is made when the scientific worldview
replaces the more religious worldview and the recent history of the West. Nietzsche calls
the scientific worldview a kind of shadow of God that still lingers with us, because although in a
way the view of the Christian God is one of those cases where he thinks the highest values have
devalued themselves, many of the particular images related to belief in God linger in the
scientific worldview. People frequently talk about the designs of nature instead of the
designs of God, or view internal development of organisms as a kind of on a teleological model
as fulfilling some kind of purpose. Nietzsche thinks it's very important not to simply transpose
the habits that we've had in our religious past and move those to a kind of scientific worldview,
and in part he too is motivated by will to power. His own claim is that we ought to resuscitate our
powers and recognize them as our own and not transpose them to the Christian God. Similarly,
we ought not transpose them to some dream of a nature that we don't really know much about.
Instead, we ought to recognize them as ours. So he too wants to maintain that will to power
is our primary motivation, indeed his primary motivation.
The seeking out of other worldly views, different kinds of asceticism is part of what drives Nietzsche
throughout his career, and one finds it in all sorts of different places. Kathy just mentioned
science and scholarship more generally, and in the last lecture I pointed out that there's a sense
in which one can lose oneself in the past, one can deny life by in effect trying to look at other
people's life. That's a version of the other worldly. One also sees it in, for example,
Hegel's view. Not so much the general sense of the phenomenology that I discussed before,
but rather in the view of history as something which, as Hegel puts it himself, dwarfs the
individual, virtually makes him insignificant. And if one takes that worldview and really focuses on
it, and really does diminish one's view of him or herself, then it's also a sense of other
worldliness, a sense of self-denial. One really does find oneself caught in a vision in which
one doesn't make much difference. Tolstoy, in one of the epilogues to war and peace,
takes the Hegelian vision and describes in very concrete terms what we don't get from Hegel.
The major players in the war between the French and the Russians, in the battle of
Borodino in particular, Napoleon on the one hand, the Russian generals on the other,
and he says of them, even though they thought they were instrumental, in fact decisive,
in making the decisions that would change world history, the fact is that they were just pawns
in the hands of a much larger force, fate itself. That too is a kind of other worldliness,
a kind of self-denial, and if one thinks of oneself that way, then one does in fact reduce
oneself to insignificance. That of course is very much a picture which we get in some forms of
Buddhism, that one sees the world as a whole, and one sees the self as an illusion, and the idea,
which is captured in Schopenhauer, is again to reduce oneself to insignificance.
You find it too in the kind of antiquarianism that Nietzsche both praises and rejects.
What he praises is appreciating the past as our past, but what he rejects is losing
ourself in the past. That too is an other worldliness. Or one thinks of Marx's classless
society, the idea of a future in which there will be no classes, in which there will be no
class conflict, in which presumably there will be prosperity and happiness. Marx doesn't really
spell it out very much, but one can see in, for example, the life of some of our current day
Marxists. What they do is they live in the theory, they live in this future dream, and consequently
they are as ascetic as any religious cult. One finds it too in something Camus writes about
in The Methodist Sisyphus, when he talks about what he calls philosophical suicide.
Now in particular he's referring to Kierkegaard and certain forms of religious resignation,
but what he has in mind is a more general thesis, which might be put, it's whenever you give up on
this life, whenever you look to another life or a future state of affairs, whenever you don't
appreciate the moments of this life, what you're doing is basically suicide, it's rejecting life,
it's what Nietzsche calls a naysaying to life. I was thinking about this as we were flying the
other day, which is something we do quite frequently, and we were in an airport and I watched one of
many people walking down the halls of a air airport in Chicago, talking on a cell phone,
and he was utterly oblivious to people around him, he was just having a conversation with
someone or other, and thought occurred to me, probably not fair to the fellow in question,
but he really was somewhere else, and the idea of being somewhere else as I thought about it
really does capture an awful lot of our present secular existence. To talk about asceticism
doesn't require a religious concept of the otherworldly or a platonic view of a certain kind of heaven,
and it doesn't promote necessarily a kind of peacefulness, the sorts of things that for example
certain Buddhist and Hindu and Taoist sects aim for in their aesthetic practices, but rather it can
even be in a kind of frenzy, and I was thinking how much of our current life really is caught up in
that sort of thing, talking on the telephone, cell phones in particular, our emphasis on email,
or going back a few years, people who walk around in public or in nature with Walkman on,
with earphones listening to music, I don't care whether it's Beethoven or whether it's the latest
in Grunge Rock, but there's a sense in which they're somewhere else, and the picture that I kind of
at least entertain is that there are all sorts of ways which we in our frenzied secular world
are now inventing of also not being in this life, not paying attention to our lives,
but in a sense always being otherworldly, and that doesn't mean necessarily ethereal or even philosophical.
