Lecture 24 Eternal Recurrence, Nietzsche Says Yes to Life
One of Nietzsche's most exciting ideas, with reference to life affirmation, is the one that
he calls eternal recurrence, or the eternal return of the same. It's introduced in a couple
of his works. For example, it gets a notable place in Zarathustra as one of Zarathustra's
main teachings. But perhaps the most famous introduction is in his book, The Gay Science,
where he writes,
What if some day or night a demon were to steal after you in your loneliest loneliness
and say to you,
This life, as you now live it and have lived it, you will have to live once more, and innumerably
times more, and there will be nothing new in it but every pain and every joy and every
thought and sigh and everything unutterably small or great in your life, will have to
return to you all in the same succession and sequence, even the spider and this moonlight
between the trees, even this moment, and I myself. The eternal hourglass of existence
is turned upside down again and again, and you with it, speck of dust.
Would you not throw yourself down and gnash your teeth and curse the demon who spoke thus?
Or have you once experienced the tremendous moment when you would have answered him,
You are our God and I never have heard anything more divine. If this thought gained possession
of you, it would change you as you are, or perhaps crush you. The question in each and
every thing, do you desire this once more and innumerable times more, would lie upon
your actions as the greatest weight? Or how well disposed would you have to become to
yourself and to life to crave nothing more fervently than this ultimate confirmation
and seal?
The idea of time being a circle is actually a very ancient one, and it recurs in a number
of cultures. The ancient Aztecs and Mayans, for instance, had a notion of the world being
destroyed many times and then being recreated. And similar ideas occur also in India. Nietzsche
was probably most familiar with the idea in its currency in antiquity, among the Greeks
in particular. For example, Heraclitus had a kind of vision of eternal recurrence, as
did the Stoics. And the Pythagoreans seemed to have a view that in many ways conforms to
the passage that Bob just read, the idea of events repeating themselves cyclically in
exactly the same order. One of the reasons that I think Nietzsche might have found this
idea so interesting is in part because of its deep-rooted past in the history of humanity.
But also, the fact was that Christianity had turned against this idea, and therefore I
think it has a certain kind of animus against the Christian orthodoxy, too. Nietzsche brings
it up. The reason that the idea was rejected by Christianity, and indeed the early Christians
did have a number of debates about this, was that if you really believe that Jesus redeemed
mankind and had taken away the sin of the world, it didn't make a lot of sense to have
this happen over and over again. This had to be a one-time historical event. So in order
to really believe the story of atonement and redemption, the view became cemented that
there was in fact only one time, and that time in fact was linear.
The idea of time as a circle, time as linear, of course, tarried Nietzsche back into physics,
which he did keep up with. And as Kathy mentioned in the last lecture, the move in physics at
the end of the 19th century was to get away from the sort of Newtonian talk about mechanism
and matter in motion, and instead start to talk about energy, and in particular talking
about energy packets and little points of energy. And Nietzsche actually in his notes,
let me emphasize only in his unpublished notes, plays with the idea of an actual physical
proof of eternal recurrence. It goes like this. Time is infinite. Now, let's leave
aside a contradiction that's already evident that if time is a circle, it's not infinite
in the linear sense, which this argument presupposes, but time is infinite. There's
a finite number of energy packets in the world, and consequently a finite number of
sequences of energy packets. And so in the infinity of time, the number of sequences
is going to have to repeat itself, an infinite number of times. Let's not worry about the
mathematics of it, but there's an obvious flaw in the proof right from the outset. In
so far as this is supposed to be something which, as everything in Nietzsche is supposed
to, influences our lives and the way we live, if it's supposed to have the weight that he
refers to in the quotation that I read, then it has to make some difference, whether it's
this sequence or perhaps some other sequence, whether I am me myself, or I am someone else
or not at all. But if, in fact, there is this infinite repetition, there is also the infinite
repetition of every other energy sequence as well, so that not just this life, but every
possible life that I could lead or any possible life without me would also repeat a different
number of times, which I think takes the steam out of the argument. But Nietzsche never published
this, and I think it's a good thing he did. It's like one of those notes that we write
ourselves all the time, often on the napkin of the coffee shop or whatever, and we get
home and we look at it and we think, this idea is really silly. I don't know what made
me think of it. And Nietzsche was certainly wise not to publish this particular proof.
But that doesn't mean he didn't believe in eternal recurrence. He certainly thought that
this was one of his most fascinating thought experiments. And the idea is, as the suggestion
and the quote suggests, is that if you take this thought seriously, that your life as
you are now leading it is going to be repeated an infinite number of times, then the weight
it gives to this life and to the moments of this life is incalculable compared to the Christian
image, that this life is but a blink. It's but a moment in time, and it's the next life,
the eternal life that gets all the weight.
Milan Kanderer, the great contemporary Czech novelist, picks up on this theme and he uses
it both as a title and the starting meditation of his great book, Unbearable Lightness of
Being. And it has to do with the notion of events repeating themselves an infinite number
of times and consequently having a certain amount of weight. So we think about our lives
and the question is, would we tolerate the idea of that much weight on the way we live?
Instead of rationalizing as we so often do, well, this will be over soon. Or this is only
a couple years of my life, then I'll get to do what I really want to do. Or it's just
this life, and of course this is suffering and toil and ultimately meaningless in its
own terms, but there's another life, a more perfect life, awaiting for me somewhere else.
Instead of that kind of thinking, what if we really took the moments of our lives seriously?
The result is a kind of a test. It's also a psychological hypothesis, and one might think
of it in the following way, and let me give here a very personal antidote. It's always
awesome, I hate to say it, 30 years ago, when I was a student in medicine and I was aiming
it to be a doctor. I love science, but to tell you the truth, I hated medical school.
And working in hospitals as one did in medical school in those days right from the start,
I realized very quickly that I really didn't like being around sick people, and I didn't
like a lot of the people in my medical school class who were a little bit too anxious for
money and the kind of then absolute authority that doctors had in the world, this is before
malpractice suits. There was a sense in which I kind of hated everything about it, and let
me add so I'm not misunderstood, I have great respect for doctors, I love my own doctor,
but nevertheless I came to realize, though very slowly at that time, this wasn't me,
though I love science, but medicine was not what I was really meant to do.
During that time I was attending the lectures of the man from whom I eventually got my PhD,
over in the philosophy department, and as I sat listening to him talk about a philosopher
whose name I didn't learn to spell actually, and in particular about two-thirds of the
way through the term talking about this curious idea called eternal recurrence, he said to
me and a hundred other students, pretty much what I've just read to you, what if your life,
every moment of suffering and pain and so on, you had to live over and over and over
again, and I was indeed very unhappy and unhappy with myself at that time. Well you can guess
the ending of this story, but then fifteen minutes after the class ended I was off to
the dean and I quit medical school, I went into philosophy and I never regretted it ever
since. The idea is that eternal recurrence gives us a way of thinking about our own lives
because I was really guilty of thinking, I hate this but only a few more years and then
I get to what, be an intern and then I get to be a resident and then I get to work in
a hospital and work off my debts, of course my father encouraged that kind of thinking,
but I came to realize that it was really self-destructive for me and if this was a life I had to lead
over and over again, then I had to live in a different way and so the power in my own
personal case I think was astounding, it changed my life and here's an idea that Nietzsche
throws out, granted he's talking about the will to power, granted he's talking about
these other notions which may seem abstract to us, but when you try to apply them to your
own case they can have a powerful impact as an existential imperative.
I think this kind of test is in a sense a kind of Nietzschean alternative to the Christian
examination of conscience, where indeed one is always looking forward to the next life
and considering the details of this life always in terms of the next. I think that's one
of the reasons that Nietzsche usually presents eternal recurrence in the form of something
like a thought experiment. This idea of a demon coming to one in the middle of the night
is not intended to be a terrifying picture of what actually will happen, but a kind of
way of taking a perspective on your life. I think that also might explain why Nietzsche
made so many notes suggesting something like a physical proof of eternal recurrence, even
if he recognized that this would never make these days the scientific American. I think
what he had in mind was that we're so used to thinking of life as something that is led
from past to future and in a single line and exists once and is all together over that
it's almost impossible for us to really fully internalize a much more traditional vision
that actually many of our ancestors in most societies had. The idea that time was actually
a circle. Now one of the reasons that people have difficulty dealing with this idea in
Nietzsche is that it seems that it might make the meaning of life pretty questionable. After
all oftentimes we think that it makes a lot of difference that we learn to overcome our
faults and improve in certain ways. Nietzsche himself would encourage that. So what good
is a story that says well actually sooner or later you'll come back to that beginning
point where you haven't mastered this at all and you'll have to move uphill again. Worse
yet from the standpoint of the traditional story it seems that there's really not a lot
of freedom. It's often pointed out by Nietzsche scholars that if this really were a time that
recurred eternally and there was no difference between an occurrence the first time and its
recurrence we wouldn't know which this was. In fact there'd be no way of differentiating
this life which we think we're doing as a kind of improvisation now from a life that's
been led hundreds, thousands, eternally times, eternal times before. And if that's true it
seems that we don't really have much choice about the way we live. That we're all part
of a pre-programmed sequence. I think Nietzsche turned it away to physics as at least one
arena that might explain things in terms of causal interconnection where things do operate
in methodical sequences in a way that doesn't strike anyone as questioning the meaning of
life. Partly it also points out that if we doubt the cyclical model and physics would
say the cyclical model makes sense we really obviously are living with a lot of prejudice
if we insist on the notion of linear time. And actually if one thinks about the Big
Bank theory I think there is a sense in which physics actually would be on Nietzsche's
side here. But overall there's a kind of deep prejudice against the idea of eternal recurrence
in the Judeo-Christian world because we do want some sense of freedom, of free will. Nietzsche
has a tendency to look at free will as it's been described in the Judeo-Christian tradition
as really a kind of effort to deflect blame oddly enough. If we have a notion that human
beings are free in their choices that they have alternatives and they make the choices
they do because they've been free to do so then we can always blame people when they
do the wrong thing. Although it might look as though this notion of free will gives us
reason to criticize ourselves and indeed it does what it ultimately leads to in Nietzsche
thinks is a kind of general reinforcement of the idea of looking outside you to find fault
or to shift blame. A kind of way of ugluifying the whole world around one. By contrast he
thinks the vision of eternal recurrence creates a very different attitude toward the world
and the whole life in which one lives. He talks about this concept in terms of the expression
Amur Fati which we brought up earlier, the notion of love of fate. He comments, I want
to learn more and more to see as beautiful what is necessary in things. Then I shall
be one of those who make things beautiful. Amur Fati, let that be my love henceforth.
What that suggests is that Nietzsche sees the model of eternal recurrence which interconnects
all events with all others really as providing a kind of way of looking at reality as intricately
interconnected in a way that resembles the way a marvelous artwork has all the parts
intimately interconnected. That it is a way of seeing as beautiful each element because
it takes meaning within the context of the whole and gives the whole a part of its life.
In a sense it gives a kind of vision of the individual that connects the individual with
the larger picture but without denying the individual its own unique contribution. I
think Nietzsche sees that as a very forceful and powerful idea and one that tends to make
our vision of reality more profound and more beautiful. On the other hand, how does this
tie in with the notion of freedom? It's quite clear that Nietzsche doesn't think that we're
free in a completely radical sense. He does think that human beings are motivated by some
basic forces within them, basic drives, and that we're not free not to experience those
things. The primary freedom he thinks that we have is really in what way do we deal with
these internal drives? Do we express them directly or not? We have some choice about
that and in particular we have some choice about whether we view ourselves as hapless
victims of these forces or as active participants in life and if freedom is a matter that concerns
him it's a matter of feeling free to really actively engage with your life. To deal with
life in the present despite all the things that are already settled about it despite
all the details of the present that you're not in any position to change, but to really
take your role in the present in as active a possible way, in a sense to really fully
be yourself. That's the only kind of freedom that he thinks really makes sense for human
beings to want, but fortunately he thinks it's the kind of freedom that is really quite
available to us.
One of our friends, a poet who worked for some years with Joseph Campbell, wrote an
essay on death in which she referred to it as bold scenario and it can be very simply
stated. It's our tendency to think of, well, we live and then we die, boom, nothing, end
of story. And she contrasts this with many myths and legends of ancient times and medieval
times and other cultures, some of them still ongoing strong and all of them have a talk
about life, not to sell in terms of an afterlife and that's too often the only alternative
that we think of, but rather in terms of an enrichment of life, seeing life for example
repeating through one's children, not a literal repetition of your life perhaps, but in a
very important sense, an extension and expression of yourself, or the repetition of yourself
in the culture that you live in, or the repetition of yourself in some divine or something else
sacred manner which is open to all sorts of religious interpretations. But the basic
idea of saying yes to life also includes such things as an acceptance of death, but an acceptance
of death not as simply final, although believe me Nietzsche did not accept the Christian notion
of the afterlife. Nevertheless, he was very clear that there is a sense of immortality
which is available and available in particular to those who really excel. It's a notion
that goes back to Plato at least and certainly one could take it long before that, but in
his dialogue The Symposium which I talked about with reference to Love lecture 14, what
we find is Homer being referred to as an immortal, not that Homer had children, we don't know
if he did or not, we don't even know for sure if there was a Homer, but Homer is immortal
through his children, through his works, that is the Iliad and the Odyssey. And Socrates
states in The Symposium, who could possibly want any children compared to those? And the
answer I think for Nietzsche is that he too thought of his life in terms of a kind of
ongoing repetition if you like, a repetition of his life not in the same way and not the
same lonely sick man coming to life again and going through the same travails, but there's
a sense in which Nietzsche saw his work themselves as his immortality and his frequent comments,
sometimes even very narcissistic comments about himself as a buffoon and why doesn't
he succeed like Jesus and so on. Nevertheless, I think you can see this in a different light
and that is that what Nietzsche was aiming at was to give meaning to his life by doing
something that went beyond his life and doing great works is perhaps the best way to do
that.
Indeed, this is a very clear case of Nietzsche's not attempting to say in any kind of clear
way what sorts of ambitions Wooder wouldn't amount to trying to have influence beyond
oneself. He leaves it entirely open. He thinks some people do it through having children,
through building institutions, through planting trees. There are many ways in which an individual
reaches beyond their finite lifespan into the future and into this whole cycle of time
that's going to proceed before one. And indeed, the myth, in a sense, recreates one throughout
the entire timeline. You can almost see the idea of time as a circle as suggesting that
there's no absolute point where your existence fully ends or begins. True, there's a sense
in which we do have a sense of ending with death, but that's only a provisional ending.
There's also no particular moment where one is judged absolutely. And this, too, he sees
as a kind of deficit in the Judeo-Christian tradition, where the point of death is a point
at which judgment comes completely, that the state of your soul at that point is the final
determinant of your salvation or damnation. Instead, eternal recurrence is a vision in
which each moment in the timeline is as important as every other and also has a kind of reflection
or influence on all the others. One exists in a way as a drop of water in a wave, but
one has, in a sense, the whole life of the wave as part of one's own reality, and that
he takes very seriously. So he thinks this is a very important idea because it provides
an alternative, an alternative to the traditional view from his background, to a way of looking
at the individual's life as being meaningful in a kind of full sense, but not one that
depends on a notion of eternal life after the grave as being a way of getting that.
Aristotle considers in his ethics the curious question whether a person can be called happy
until he's dead or for that matter, even after. It's a curious question because when we think
of happiness, we think of it as a state of mind and the current American answer would
be, of course, when you're dead, you're finished being happy, but that's it. What Aristotle
had in mind, of course, wasn't simply feeling happy, but Aristotle had in mind a word that's
usually translated as flourishing. But I think in Nietzschean terms, we might think of it
as a kind of self-realization in terms of one Greek poet he admires, Pindar, becoming
who you are. But that's not something that ends with death. Aristotle in his musings
considers the following example. A man who is greatly respected in Athens dies, but his
children then rebel against the state or are involved in some deep scandal, besmirching
the family name. There's a sense in which the events after the man's death deeply affect
his flourishing. He may be dead, but nevertheless what's important about him, what is surviving
about him is his reputation, his good name, his family, and now through the behavior of
his children, that's been ruined. So too, Nietzsche sees quite clearly that what he
is and his becoming, who he can be, doesn't end with his rather pathetic death in 1900,
but rather is going on even as we lecture and what we make of him and what you make
of him. There's a sense in which what it means to be immortal, what it means to live
on and repeat your life, has to do with the way in which you continue to survive. Now
with Nietzsche we have a name to attach with most people. In a sense they disappear from
history, but nevertheless as Kathy used in this Taoist image of the drop in the wave,
nevertheless they continue to exist in the wave itself. Now Aristotle has another notion
which I think is very relevant here as a way of starting to bring this all to a close.
We repeat in many times, Pinders' phrase, become who you are, and we've related this
to Nietzsche's perhaps ill-chosen phrase, the will to power, saying that what he means
by will to power is ultimately a kind of self-expression and self-realization. But all this really leaves
open the question, now what exactly does Nietzsche want us to be? Well, this is made
problematic by the fact that he refuses, in effect, to give us any concrete advice and
recorded Zarathustra now several times, don't follow me, just find your own way, find out
what's inside of you. But there is something that Nietzsche says in gay science which I
think is extremely valuable in this sense, and that is, give style to your character,
the great art. Now what that means is not fashion, it's not sort of being stylish, but
rather it's making something of what you have and who you are. The notion of fate that
Kathy just brought up again, and the love of fate, has to do with something that many
of us find really difficult, namely loving who you are and loving what you've got to
work with. That doesn't mean being satisfied or content, what it means is loving, accepting,
what you've got to work with, and then making something beautiful out of it. When we were
talking about resentment and slave morality, one of the points we made was that what the
slave does is takes his flaws and turns those flaws in a way into weapons by re-describing
them as good, and that's distinctive of slave mentality of resentment. But this is something
very different. One of the examples that Nietzsche uses which I'm sure was tongue in
cheek, was Napoleon's speech impediment, which in his position of power he employed
as a way of making people pay attention to him all the more. And if you think about Nietzsche
himself, here's a very sick lonely man. What do you do when you're physically ill? What
do you do when you find yourself temperamentally or circumstantially just alienated from other
people? And what Nietzsche did was he gave shape to himself. One of our favorite Nietzsche
scholars and a good friend has argued that what Nietzsche does basically is what Plato
does with Socrates. What he did was he gave shape to himself as an author, as what we
now know as Nietzsche, and in a way the man with the moustache becomes almost irrelevant
to the creation that Nietzsche has become. In a way it's all an art of transfiguration,
and I think transfiguration, despite or perhaps even because of its resonance with the Christian
background, is a term that explains a lot of what Nietzsche sees as desirable in living.
It's taking your own traits and giving them a setting. I'm reminded of Messian writing
a composition while in a concentration camp where there were musicians who played various
instruments that normally wouldn't be in an ensemble together. And yet taking the resources
he has, he creates this masterpiece. In a sense Nietzsche thinks all of us have that
as a kind of project that we can engage in with ourselves. In a way he does follow Aristotle
who thinks we are born with certain kinds of traits or temperamental endowments, but
we wouldn't really call those virtues, even if they're endowments people like, until we've
gained some control over them and found the right occasions to use the particular traits
we have. Say someone is born with a very, a disposition toward a hot temper. That can
be a problem for the person and for those around the person. On the other hand it can
be directed in a way that makes that person a really powerful influence on his or her
society. If you take a kind of tendency toward anger and turn that into motivation to work
for a cause, say, that can sometimes work to stellar results, both for oneself and for
others. And again this notion that the distinction between individual and the community is overplayed,
an idea that Nietzsche has, should be, it should be recognized in this connection that
Nietzsche does think that the individual does play off other people in vice versa. In fact
in the passage where he talks about giving style to one's character, he concludes by
saying the important thing is that a person takes some satisfaction in himself or herself.
If not all the rest of us will be his or her victims. And I think that what he has in mind
there is that none of us are really so much an island as we come to think of ourselves.
Again this is an argument against the Christian vision where the individual's soul has its
own vocation. For Nietzsche it really is the here and now in the community. We'll conclude
with one of his final statements of eternal recurrence. Whoever has really gazed down
with an Asiatic and super Asiatic eye into the most world denying of all possible modes
of thought beyond good and evil and no longer like Buddha and Schopenhauer under the spell
and illusion of morality perhaps by this very act without really desiring it may have opened
his eyes to the opposite ideal, the ideal of the most high spirited energetic and world
affirming man who has not only learned to come to terms with and assimilate with what
it was and is but who wants to have it again as it was and is to all eternity insatiably
calling out once more. Thanks.
I'm Tom Rollins, President of the Teaching Company. We hope you've enjoyed the lectures
on these tapes. To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog
call 1-800-TEACH-1-2 that's 1-800-TEACH-1-2 or visit us on the internet at www.teach-1-2.
That's TEACH-1-2-2. Thank you very much for listening.
