DUPLEX FILTER CONTROL DESCRIPTION 
 
GENERAL OPERATION- the system is designed so that A and B filters run in parallel 
with both units normally in service at the same time. There are three conditions that can 
trigger a backwash sequence. All triggers are followed by a time of day delay. The 
backwash trigger method is selectable through the HMI. A backwash sequence is defined 
as backwash and a fast rinse. After a backwash sequence the unit will return to service. If 
a unit is in backwash or fast rinse the other unit goes offline. Only one unit can be in a 
backwash sequence at a time. The three types of backwash triggers are: 
 
1. Differential Pressure (DP) Trigger - There are four pressure transmitters (located on 
the Inlet and Outlet of each vessel) which are used to determine the differential pressure 
for each filter (A and B).  There is an adjustable delay that can be entered on the HMI to 
avoid a quick DP spike from triggering a backwash. After the system's DP has risen 
above the setpoint for the duration of the adjustable delay, there will be an alarm and the 
units will delay until the time of day selected for filter A, and then the unit will backwash 
sequentially - A followed by B (five minutes after). Each unit has it's own time of day 
delay, but in the case of a DP triggered event, they will only heed the time of day for 
vessel A.  An alarm will be displayed notifying the operator that a high DP condition has 
triggered a backwash. 
 
2. Elapsed Run Time (Hours Left) - each unit has an entry for elapsed service run time. 
This value is entered in days. The time left in days will be displayed on this screen if the 
mode chosen to start backwash is elapsed time. Once this elapsed run time in service has 
been reached and the time of day for each vessel (A and B) arrives, that unit will go into 
backwash.  
 
3. Service Gallons (Gallons Remaining) - each unit has an entry for batch gallons.  The 
unit will count service gallons for each vessel (A and B), and when it reaches the setpoint 
and the time of day for the same vessel, it will go into backwash.  
 
Following is a detailed explanation of all the screens: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
MAIN MENU 
 
This screen can be used to navigate to any of the listed screens. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SETUP MENU 
 
The setup menu screen allows the operator to navigate to any of the screens listed.  The 
LOGIN / LOGOUT function enables access to K-FACTORS and CONFIG, which are 
only required for advanced maintenance of the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
OVERVIEW  SCREEN 
 
The overview screen displays a graphic layout of the filter system. 
 
FLOW - Inlet GPM is displayed on tanks A and B, as well as a system overall GPM on 
the inlet header.  GPM for tanks C and D are indicated in the upper left corner of the 
screen. 
 
VESSEL STAGE INDICATORS - below each tank is an indicator showing its current 
stage. It can be any of the following: 
Service - the unit is producing product water 
Backwash - 1st cleaning cycle 
Fast rinse - 2nd step in cleaning cycle 
Offline - unit is forced offline and not available for service. 
 
VESSEL MODE INDICATORS - below each tank is an indicator showing its current 
operating mode. It can be either manual or automatic. 
 
CYCLE TIME - if a unit is in a backwash or fast rinse step the cycle time will count 
down here in seconds. 
 
PUMP RUN INDICATORS- The well and recycle pumps each have an indicator on the 
screen. They will display green when running or red when not.  
 
TANK LEVEL INDICATOR – The tank will fill to indicate the level of the Recycle 
Tank. 
 
AUTOMATIC VALVE POSITION INDICATORS - each automatic valve will be green 
when commanded open and red when commanded close. 
 
NAVIGATION - Aside from the buttons taking you to the FLOW TOTALS screen and 
the MAIN MENU, the vessels and tanks are all clickable and take you to their respective 
control or setup screens. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VESSEL X MANUAL CONTROL 
 
DAYS UNTIL BW - If the days-based regen trigger is enabled, the days remaining until 
the next cycle will be displayed in the lower left corner of the screen. 
 
CAP REMAINING - If the volume-based regen trigger is enabled, the gallons remaining 
until the next cycle will be displayed in the lower left corner of the screen. 
 
REGEN CYCLE TIME REMAINING - If the vessel is in backwash or fast rinse, the 
time remaining until the next stage will be displayed in the lower left corner of the 
screen. 
 
MANUAL / AUTO BUTTON - Toggle the valves on this vessel between manual and 
automatic control. 
 
ONLINE / OFFLINE BUTTON - Enable or completely disable the valves on this vessel.  
Offline closes all valves and prevents them from being actuated. 
 
VALVE STATUS INDICATORS - These show the current status of the valve (labled to 
the right). 
 
VALVE LABELS / ACTUATOR BUTTONS - In manual control mode, clicking on the 
valve lables will toggle the respective valve between open and closed positions. 
 
NAVIGATION - Aside from the buttons taking you to the MAIN MENU screen and 
FILTER X, the vessel is clickable and takes you back to the SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
screen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MANUAL BACKWASH 
 
The operator can use this screen to manually start a backwash sequence, advance the 
stage of a cycle, or abort a cycle completely. The timing of each step is still automatic, 
unless advanced manually by the operator. The status of each unit is shown near the top 
for reference.  Note that backwash controls only function when the respective vessel is in 
auto control mode.   
  
BACKWASH START BUTTON- Press the backwash start button to start the desired unit 
into a backwash. This button can only be used to start. It can't be used to advance the unit 
once it is started. 
 
 
BW ABORT BUTTON- use this button to end the backwash sequence and return the unit 
back to service. 
 
ADVANCE BUTTON- Use this button once a backwash cycle has begun to advance the 
unit from backwash to fast rinse, and from to fast rinse back to service. 
 
 
MANUAL / AUTO BUTTON - Toggle the valves on this vessel between manual and 
automatic control. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CYLE TIME ENTRIES 
 
Use this screen to adjust the times for the backwash and fast rinse steps. All times are in 
minutes. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  On the lower, left, a SETUP button takes you to the SETUP 
MENU. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REGEN TRIGGER SELECT 
 
This screen can be used to select from the regen triggers which will initiate a cycle, and 
to configure the relevant setpoints for all triggers. 
 
TRIGGER - Choose either Days or Gallons (Time or Volume) to trigger a regen cycle.  
PSID (Differential Pressure) can be enabled or disabled independently of whether Time 
or Volume is being used. 
 
DELAY - Enter how many seconds of continuously high differential pressure are 
required to trigger an alarm condition and / or initiate a cycle. 
 
PRESSURE – Press this to enable DP triggering.  Green indicates the trigger is enabled; 
red means disabled. 
 
GALLONS – Press this to enable volume triggering.  Green indicates the trigger is 
enabled; red means disabled. 
 
DAYS – Press this to enable time triggering.  Green indicates the trigger is enabled; red 
means disabled. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  A button in the lower left corner of the screen will take you 
back to the SETUP MENU screen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REGEN TRIGGER SETTINGS 
 
This screen can be used to select from the regen triggers which will initiate a cycle, and 
to configure the relevant setpoints for all triggers. 
 
TRIGGER - Choose either Days or Gallons (Time or Volume) to trigger a regen cycle.  
PSID (Differential Pressure) can be enabled or disabled independently of whether Time 
or Volume is being used. 
 
DELAY - Enter how many seconds of continuously high differential pressure are 
required to trigger an alarm condition and / or initiate a cycle. 
 
DAYS - The days of service for each vessel before a cycle is triggered can be entered 
here. 
 
GALLONS - The gallons through each vessel before a cycle is triggered can be entered 
here. Note: this entry is made in thousands of gallons. 
 
TIME OF DAY - Enter an hour (0-23) and a minute for each vessel which will specifi 
what time of day regen cycles will occur once triggered.  Note: times for vessels A and B 
cannot be set within 30 minutes of one another.  The system will automatically correct 
the time for vessel B if the times are too close. 
 
PLC TIME - This is shown here as a convenience. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  A button in the lower left corner of the screen will take you 
back to the SETUP MENU screen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SERVICE FLOW ALARMS 
 
This screen can be used to set the high and low alarms for each unit. There is a short 
delay on this alarm to avoid false alarms from surging. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  A button in the lower left corner of the screen will take you 
back to the SETUP MENU screen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

K FACTORS 
 
Use this screen to enter in the K FACTOR for each flow sensor. This is the pulses per 
gallon factor that is determined by the flow sensor and type of fitting used. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  A button in the lower left corner of the screen will take you 
back to the SETUP MENU screen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FLOW TOTALS 
 
This screen displays the flow totals for each unit- product, backwash and since last 
backwash. 
 
"Since last Backwash" is reset automatically every time the unit ends backwash and goes 
back into service. All other flow totals are not re-settable unless you contact the factory. 
 
The total is calculated by adding the flows for vessels A and B. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECYCLE SYSTEM CONTROL SCREEN- 
 
Use this screen to adjust the set points of the recycle tank level transmitter and to control 
the Recycle Pump. This screen also has entries for the following presets: 
 
HAND - When the Recycle Pump is Online and in Manual control mode, use this to start 
or stop the device. 
 
ON/OFF - Use this to toggle the Recycle Pump between Online and Offline.  Offline 
means it cannot be started at all. 
 
AUTO - When the Recycle Pump is Online use this to toggle the Recycle Pump between 
automatic and manual control. 
 
STATUS INDICATOR - This indicator will display the current status of the Recycle 
Pump. 
 
SETTLE TIME - Enter how many minutes the pump should wait after a backwash before 
it starts pumping the wastewater back into the inlet stream. 
 
LOW LEVEL -  Once the recycle tank level falls to this level, the recycle pump will stop 
and a regen cycle will be premitted to initiate. 
 
HIGH LEVEL - If the recycle tank level reaches this setpoint, a backwash will not be 
allowed to initiate automatically. 
 
HIGH HIGH LEVEL - If the recycle tank level reaches this setpoint, an alarm will be 
triggered. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  A button in the lower left corner of the screen will take you 
back to the CONFIG MENU screen.  The PREVIOUS button will take you back to the 
last screen visited. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
RECYCLE TANK SETUP SCREEN- 
 
Use this screen to adjust the scaling of the recycle tank level transmitter. 
 
SCALE MAX – Use this to set the high range of the level transmitter. 
 
SCALE MIN - Use this to set the low range of the level transmitter. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  The RETURN button will take you back to the last screen 
visited. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CONFIGURATION SCREEN 
 
This screen is used to exit the HMI program.  Exiting the HMI program will NOT impede 
system operation.  Factory credentials are required to access this screen as it is typically 
only required for advanced maintenance and configuration. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SET TIME 
 
Use this screen to adjust the realtime clock. The top row shows the current time. The 
middle area has two buttons for minutes and hours. Use these two buttons to enter in the 
correct time. Use the red "set time" button to send the new value to the controller.  Note: 
this time is important for the regen cycle time of day (time of day to start a backwash), 
but is NOT related to the time of day displayed with an alarm.  That time is set in the 
screen by exiting the program. 
 
NAVIGATION - A button in the lower right corner of the screen will take you back to 
the MAIN MENU screen.  A button in the lower left corner of the screen will take you 
back to the SETUP MENU screen.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ALARM HISTORY 
 
ALARM HISTORY- this screen records the alarms. 
 
Below is a list of alarms that can occur: 
 
1. SYSTEM HIGH DP - This occurs when the system has had high DP. This alarm 
occurs regardless if the unit has its DP start enabled. 
 
2. HIGH FLOW - This occurs if the flow rate for some vessel goes above setpoint. 
 
3. LOW FLOW - This occurs if the flow rate for some vessel goes below setpoint. 
 
4. CIRCUIT BREAKER TRIPPED - This occurs when a circuit breaker trips or is 
opened. 
 
Any of the above alarms will first cause an alarm banner to appear. Use the button on the 
banner to close it and then press the alarm silence button on any of the screens to silence 
the horn. 
 
NAVIGATION - The MAIN button in the lower left corner of the screen will take you 
back to the MAIN MENU screen. 
 
 
 
 

