Peter Dalmaris
Lecture 3
Arduino Step by Step
Section 1 Lecture 3 
Tools and the prototyping process 
In this lecture I will show you the tools and process involved in prototyping with the 
Arduino. 
There is nothing Arduino-speciﬁc about either these tools or process. The Arduino is an 
incredibly eﬀective creative tool because it accelerates prototyping dramatically. 
The prototyping process 
Prototyping is an iterative process whereby each iteration's objective is the reﬁnement of a 
prototype. 
It looks like this: 
It all begins with an idea, a problem or a thing that you would like to build. Usually you will 
have some prior knowledge of the problem area, or some informed assumptions that can 
help you get started. But at the very beginning, you will not have the details or at least 
some of the knowledge necessary to help you in actually building whatever you are trying to 
build. 
So, you go ahead and use what you know to build a prototype, version 1. This prototype 
may barely work at all, but it should be doing something that you can test and learn from. 
Testing yields information that you can use to adjust your original assumptions. This 
adjustment is called reﬁnement. 
#1

Peter Dalmaris
Lecture 3
Arduino Step by Step
Iteration after iteration will yield more and more information and result to more and more 
reﬁnements until at some point your prototype, be it version 100 or version 1000, is the 
product or solution you aimed for. 
Of course, the Arduino is not necessary in the prototyping process. You could do 
prototyping using bare-bones electronic components down to the transistor. However with 
the Arduino, you can prototype much faster because (1) you will be using general purpose 
and already tested components which allow you to focus on your actual objective and (2) 
you will be using high-level tools to do so. 
Tools 
Yet another really nice thing about prototyping with the Arduino is that you only need few 
and very basic tools. 
Not including the board itself, shields and other components mentioned in Lecture 2, you 
can build great projects with just these items: 
1.
 
Multimeter (not strictly needed) 
2.
 
Solderless Breadboards 
3.
 
Jump wires 
4.
 
Power supply (not strictly needed) 
A multimeter 
A multimeter is not required for the majority of the projects you will be building as a 
beginner. However having one and getting to know how to use it will help you a lot later on. 
Multimeters vary in capabilities and prices, but for 
$20 or $30 you can get a really nice digital one that 
will show you things like: 
1.
Voltage AC and DC 
2.
Resistance 
3.
Continuity between two parts of a circuit 
With these basic capabilities, you will be able to 
check that there is voltage diﬀerential between two 
pins, or that a battery is charged, check the 
resistance of a resistor, and conﬁrm that two parts of 
a circuit are electrically connected. 
This is what a typical digital multimeter looks like. 
#2

Peter Dalmaris
Lecture 3
Arduino Step by Step
Solderless Breaboards 
A solderless breadboard is a convenient way 
to connect components together without a 
need to use solder and a soldering iron. 
With a breadboard, you will just connect your 
components into electrically connected 
sockets. When you are done, you can clear the 
breadboard and use it for another project. 
In a breadboard you get a couple of rows 
containing sockets that carry ground and 
positive voltages along one or both sides of 
the board, and multiple columns containing 
sockets that are electrically connected. 
Here's a medium-sized breadboard. 
If you could x-ray a breadboard, you would 
see something like this: 
An "x-ray" photo of a breadboard 
You can see here how sockets are electrically 
connected vertically or horizontally. 
And here is a picture of a simple Arduino 
project where an LED that is connected to the 
Arduino pin 9 (digital out) and ground via a 
resistor. Instead of making the connections 
directly into the Arduino connectors, which 
would result in a messy bungle of wires, I 
plugged the LED, resistor and jumper cables 
into a mini-breadboard. Much cleaner setup! 
Jumper wires 
A jumper wire is a thin cable with pins at either end. Use them to 
make connections on a breadboard and on the Arduino headers. 
They come in many colours and lengths. One thing to remember: 
you don't want to run out of jumper cables during your 
prototyping so make sure you have plenty available! 
My only "rules" when it comes to jumper cables are these: 
#3

Peter Dalmaris
Lecture 3
Arduino Step by Step
1.
 
Use red for positive voltages 
2.
 
Use black for ground 
Any other colours can be used to signify the connection of diﬀerent kind of components or 
functions that each one serves. For example, you could use light coloured wires for sensors 
and dark for buttons or displays. Up to you. 
Power supply 
The Arduino can provide power for itself and for the circuit you are building from the USB 
cable that is used to connect it to your computer. 
However, there are three obvious cases where you will need an external power supply: 
1.
 
If you want your sketch and gadget to continue its operation after your computer is 
turned oﬀ. 
2.
 
If your circuit becomes large enough so that the Arduino can't provide enough 
power 
3.
 
If your computer's USB port can't provide enough power. 
Here are three things you can do to deal with such situations: 
 
An external power supply 
This provides DC power from an electrical outlet. Anything 
rated at 9V to 12V and 250mA or more will work with the 
Arduino. Just make sure it outputs DC power, not AC! I got 
mine from an old cordless phone. 
 
A breadboard power supply 
Very useful if you want to drive devices that need more 
power than what the Arduino can provide, such as a motor. 
I have one of these which uses the same kind of power 
brick as the Arduino and provides both 5V and 3.3V of 
selectable output. 
 
A battery pack 
If you want to go oﬀ-grid, then you need battery power. 
You can buy plastic battery cases speciﬁcally designed for 
the Arduino on ebay, or just ﬁnd an old broken battery 
operated toy and recycle its battery pack. Here's one that 
I use. You just need this pack to produce voltage that falls 
within the Arduino's operating range. 
#4

Peter Dalmaris
Lecture 3
Arduino Step by Step
Ok, with all the logistics out of the way, time to get into our ﬁrst project: let's go to Lecture 4 
and make an LED blink!
#5

