 
Lab Setup Instructions 
 
Most labs would be conducted on the Kali Linux Virtual Machine using VirtualBox. Instructions for 
installing the VirtualBox software and importing the Kali Linux VM are given. We recommend 
VirtualBox, but instructions for importing the machine in VMware are also available at the end. 
Link for Kali Linux VM (VirtualBox, Recommended):  
https://www.dropbox.com/s/y71nhxheuffirpc/Kali-Linux-VM-VirtualBox.zip?dl=0 
Link for Kali Linux VM (VMware): 
https://www.dropbox.com/s/e4i11g9obs5yruq/Kali-Linux-VMware.ova?dl=0 
 
Note: When expanded, the VM would require at least 10GB. If you experience any problem during 
lab setup, please drop us a message.  
 
The VirtualBox Route 
 
Installing VirtualBox 
To run the virtual machine, you need a VMware player such as VirtualBox. VirtualBox is free for use 
as an educational tool and can be downloaded from the following link: https://www.virtualbox.org 
 
Click the “Download VirtualBox 6.1” button and you will be taken to the download page. 
 

 
 
 
Please select the appropriate version based on your operating system and install it. 
 
Normally the following steps are not required on other operating systems, but please note that if 
you are running MacOS then you may need to turn on Security permissions as some kernel 
modules of VirtualBox are blocked in the newer versions of the MacOS. You may see a warning: 
 
 
 
 
In this case, please go to System Preferences --> Security and Privacy --> General and then allow 
the permissions as shown in the following figure: 
 
 
 
 
After that, please follow the normal steps as guided by the VirtualBox installer for completing the 
installation. 

 
 
 
The “KaliLinux” Virtual Machine 
The virtual machine is available as a resource for this lecture and can be downloaded from there.  
 
Credentials: 
• User: kali Password: kali 
• Super user password: kali 
Installation and Settings of the Kali Linux VM 
 
Disclaimer: The VM machine and any software contained within is merely to be used in a 
sandboxed environment as it has several vulnerabilities. It has been configured to be used for 
educational and demonstration purposes only and Logix Academy does not accept any 
responsibility for any loss resulting from the use of this machine.  
 
Safety Tips:  
• Do not put this VM on a public facing machine 
• Do not put any sensitive document or information on the VM 
 
Steps:  
1. Download and install Virtual Box as described previously 
2. Download the Kali Linux Virtual Machine from 
       https://www.dropbox.com/s/y71nhxheuffirpc/Kali-Linux-VM-VirtualBox.zip?dl=0 
3. Unzip the virtual machine folder 
 
Open VirtualBox then go to Machine --> New 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Please select a name of the machine, for Type -> Linux and for Version -> 32-bit 
 
 
 
Please select appropriate RAM for the machine, we recommend using at least 2 or 3 GB. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Please select Use an existing hard disk file 
 
 
 
The next screen asks you to add an existing disk, so click Add 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Please select the .vdi file 
 
 
 
Please select the .vdi file that you have just added and click Choose 
 
 

 
 
The machine is ready, but we need to tweak a few more settings. Please select Settings 
 
 
 
Please select the following settings for Video Memory and Scale Factor 
 
 

 
 
 
Congratulations! Your machine is ready, you can launch it by double clicking the virtual machine 
and login using kali as username and password. 
 
 
 
Important: 
In some cases, you may see some error logs or a blank shell asking for login. Please just wait for a 
little longer and the Virtual Machine would take you to the GUI based login screen as shown below: 
 
 

 
 
 
Troubleshooting Tips 
 
1. If you get a kernel module load problem when running the virtual machine, please make 
sure that you have turned on access for VirtualBox in the Security and Privacy settings as 
described in the initial installation steps 
2. In some cases, users have reported a flickering problem with the virtual machine. Please try 
turning the scaling mode on or off from the View -> Scaled Mode 
3. You can also try using the VMware image that we have shared. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
The VMware Route 
 
We highly recommend using VirtualBox for hosting the virtual machine as the VMware image has 
not been thoroughly tested. We have exported the VM as a Virtual Appliance in the .ova format. 
Note that the free version of VMware, VMware Player is only available for Windows and Linux.  
1. Please download the VMware Player from:  
https://www.vmware.com/au/products/workstation-player.html 
  
2. Once VMware player has been installed, launch it and select “Open a Virtual Machine” 
 
 
 
3. Now Browse and select the .ova file and click Open 
 
4. Name the virtual machine, browse to the directory for the virtual machine files, and click Import 
 
The VMware player will perform some tests and if successful, will import the machine. Once the 
import has been completed, you can launch the VM using the following credentials: 
Username: kali   Password: kali 
 
Kali Linux 
C:\VMs\Kali Linux 

