
teach 
yourself 
ancient greek 


ancient greek 
gavin betts and alan henry 
For over 60 years, more than 
40 million people have learnt over 
750 subjects the teach yourself 
way, with impressive results. 
be where you want to be 
with teach yourself 

The authors wish to acknowledge 
the help of George Gellie and 
Deane Blackman. 
For UK order enquiries: please contact Bookpoint Ltd., 130 Milton 
Park, Abingdon, Oxon 0X14 4SB. Telephone: +44 (0) 1235 
827720. Fax: +44 (0) 1235 400454. Lines are open 09.00-18.00, 
Monday to Saturday, with a 24-hour message answering 
service. You can also order through our website 
www.madaboutbooks.com 
For USA order enquiries: please contact McGraw-Hill Customer 
Services, PO Box 545, Blacklick, OH 43004-0545, USA. 
Telephone: 1-800-722-4726. Fax: 1-614-755-5645. 
For Canada order enquiries: please contact McGraw-Hill Ryerson 
Ltd., 300 Water St, Whitby, Ontario L1N 9B6, Canada. Telephone: 
905 430 5000. Fax: 905 430 5020. 
Long renowned as the authoritative source for self-guided 
learning - with more than 30 million copies sold worldwide - the 
Teach Yourself series includes over 300 titles in the fields of 
languages, crafts, hobbies, business, computing and education. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data, a catalogue record 
for this title is available from The British Library. 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number, on file 
First published in UK 1989 by Hodder Headline Ltd., 338 Euston 
Road, London, NW1 3BH. 
First published in US 1993 by Contemporary Books, a Division of 
the McGraw-Hill Companies, 1 Prudential Plaza, 130 East 
Randolph Street, Chicago, IL 60601 USA. 
This edition published 2003. 
The Teach Yourself name is a registered trade mark of Hodder & 
Stoughton Ltd. 
Copyright© 1989,2003 Gavin Betts & Alan Henry 
In UK: All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any 
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publisher or under licence from the Copyright 
Licensing Agency Limited. Further details of such licences (for 
reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright 
Licensing Agency Limited, of 90 Tottenham Court Road, London 
W1T4LP. 
In US·. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United 
States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored 
in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of Contemporary Books. 
Typeset by Transet Limited, Coventry, England. 
Printed in Great Britain for Hodder & Stoughton Educational, a 
division of Hodder Headline Ltd., 338 Euston Road, London NW1 
3BH by Cox & Wyman Ltd., Reading, Berkshire. 
Impression number 
1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
Year 
2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 

introduction 
xi 
how to use this book 
xi 
abbreviations 
xiii 
map of ancient Greece 
xv 
01 
1.1/1 the Greek alphabet and its 
pronunciation /2 accents .2 exercise 
.3 excursus - the different forms of 
Greek 
1 
02 
2.1/1 nouns in Greek /2 first declension 
(feminine nouns) and the feminine definite 
article /3 basic uses of cases /4 verbs in 
Greek /5 present and future indicative 
active of -ω verbs (and corresponding 
infinitives) /6 word order and elision 
.2 Greek reading /1 vocabulary 
9 
03 
3.1/1 second declension and the masculine 
and neuter definite article /2 first 
declension (masculine nouns) /3 first and 
second declension adjectives /4 adverbs 
/5 prepositions /6 present indicative and 
infinitive of ειμί, I am .2 Greek reading 
/1 vocabulary 
19 
04 
4.1/1 imperfect indicative active and 
weak aorist indicative active and infinitive 
active of -ω verbs 12 first and second 
person pronouns, and αυτόν, -ην, -ό 
/3 connecting particles .2 Greek reading 
/1 vocabulary 
28 

^ Γ Ί 
05 
5.1/1 third declension - consonant 
stem nouns (1) 12 contracted verbs 
§ 
13 further uses of the definite article 
| 
.2 Greek reading /1 vocabulary 
38 
06 
6.1/1 third declension - consonant 
stem nouns (2) 12 second declension 
contracted nouns and first and second 
declension contracted adjectives 
/3 compound verbs formed with 
prepositional prefixes /4 -ω verbs with 
stems in palatals, labials, dentals 
.2 Greek reading /1 vocabulary 
48 
07 
7.1/1 strong aorist indicative and infinitive 
active of -ω verbs 12 φημί say 13 indirect 
speech /4 indirect command /5 numerals 
/6 negatives Π phrases expressing time 
and space .2 Greek reading /1 vocabulary 
58 
08 
8.1/1 middle and passive voices 
12 deponent verbs /3 indirect statement 
/4 third declension nouns - stems in ι and υ 
.2 Greek reading /1 vocabulary 
69 
09 
9.1/1 demonstrative pronouns 12 the 
relative pronoun oc and adjectival clauses 
/3 αυτός and its uses /4 reflexive and 
reciprocal pronouns /5 possessive adjectives 
and pronouns .2 Greek reading 
/1 vocabulary 
81 
10 
10.1/1 interrogative τίο and indefinite tic 
12 questions, direct and indirect 13 first 
and third declension adjectives /4 third 
declension adjectives .2 Greek reading 
.3 extra reading - the wisdom of Socrates 93 
11 
11.1/1 root aorist, aorist passive and 
future passive 12 agent and instrument 
13 -ω verbs with stems in λ, μ, ν, ρ 
/4 third declension nouns - stems in ευ, 
αυ, ου /5 crasis .2 Greek reading 
102 

12 
12.1/1 participles 12 uses of participles 
.2 Greek reading .3 extra reading -
epigrams 
111 
13 
13.1/1 oddities of declension /2 verbs 
used with the genitive or dative /3 further 
particles .2 Greek reading .3 extra reading -
Plato 
121 
14 
14.1/1 moods of the Greek verb 
/2 subjunctive mood /3 optative mood 
/4 uses of the subjunctive and optative 
.2 Greek reading 
133 
15 
15.1/1 perfect indicative active /2 verbs 
used with participles .2 Greek reading 
.3 extra reading - Prometheus bound (1) 144 
16 
16.1/1 phrases and clauses of result 
12 pluperfect indicative active /3 perfect 
and pluperfect indicative middle/passive 
/4 other parts of the perfect tense 
.2 Greek reading .3 extra reading -
Heracles 
154 
17 
17.1/1 imperative mood: commands and 
prohibitions 12 comparison of adjectives 
and adverbs /3 meaning of the comparative 
and superlative /4 constructions involving 
the comparative and superlative /5 active 
verbs used in a passive sense .2 Greek 
reading .3 extra reading - Prometheus 
bound (2) 
165 
18 
18.1/1 -μι verbs 12 δίδωμι give, τίΟημι 
put, place /3 είμι I shall come/go 
/4 other verbs with principal parts from 
different roots /5 conditional sentences 
/6 aicpoc, μεοοο, έοχατοο .2 Greek reading 
.3 extra reading - the sea, the sea! 
178 
1 9 
19.1/1 ϊοτημι and its compounds 
12 potential clauses 13 oddities in verbs 
.2 Greek reading 
189 
vii 
ο ο 
I 
I 

20 
20.1/1 verbs in -νομι 12 ΐημι and its 
compounds /3 genitive of price or value 
/4 genitive of separation /5 accusative 
of respect or specification .2 Greek 
reading 
199 
21 
21.1/1 wishes 12 further temporal 
conjunctions (έως, μέχρι, πρίν) 
/3 further demonstrative and relative 
adjectives/pronouns /4 further 
impersonal verbs /5 accusative absolute 
.2 Greek reading .3 extra reading -
love poetry 
207 
22 
22.1/1 summary of the uses of roc 
12 uses of cases (1) - accusative 
.2 Greek reading .3 extra reading -
Anacreontea 
220 
23 
23.1/1 uses of cases (2) - genitive 
12 uses of cases (3) - dative .2 Greek 
reading .3 extra reading - further 
elegiac poetry 
231 
24 
24.1/1 yes and no 12 summary of uses 
of ού and μή /3 diminutives /4 dual number 
/5 verbal adjectives in -xoc/-x0c and -reoc 
/6 verbs of precaution and striving 
Π verbs of hindering, preventing, 
forbidding, denying .2 Greek reading 
.3 extra reading - the think tank 
245 
25 
25.1/1 Homeric Greek 12 differences 
in phonology and morphology 
/3 differences in syntax .2 readings 
from Homer 
258 
appendices 
265 
1 conjugation of λύω loosen 
265 
2 conjugation of contracted verbs 
(present and imperfect) 
268 

3 conjugation of ειμί be, έρχομαι 
(and είμι) come/go, φημί say, 
οίδα know 
271 
4 rootaorists 
273 
5 conjugation of δίδωμι give, τίθημι 
put, place, ΐημι let go, senc/ forth, 
ίοτημι make/stand 
274 
6 conjugation of δείκνϋμι (present 
and imperfect) 
279 
7 numerals 
280 
8 accentuation 
281 
9 Greek verse 
286 
key to Greek reading exercises 
289 
principal parts of verbs 
321 
vocabulary 
327 
index 
375 
IX 
ο ο 3 
Φ 
I 


How to use this book 
αρχή ήμιου παντός 
a [good] beginning is half the whole 
On one occasion when giving a speech, Hiero, a Greek ruler in 
ancient Sicily, was interrupted by complaints about his bad 
breath. This revelation of what must have been a chronic 
problem distressed him considerably, and on returning home 
he reproached his wife for not having told him of it. She 
indignantly justified herself by saying that she had thought that 
all adult males smelt as he did. To depend on a virtuous spouse 
to correct such faults has obvious dangers. If you are relying 
solely on this book to begin the study of ancient Greek, there 
are similar pitfalls. Apart from the key, you will have few 
checks on your progress, and it will be essential to follow up 
any doubt, however small, about meanings of words and 
points of grammar. To be able to do this you must make 
yourself completely familiar with the arrangement of the 
book's contents. 
We assume that you are acquainted with the basics of 
traditional English grammar, as this is the framework we use to 
explain the structure of Greek. You should be familiar with the 
parts of speech (adjective, adverb, 
article, 
conjunction, 
interjection, noun, preposition, pronoun, verb) and with the 
meaning of such terms as finite, transitive/intransitive, 
clause, 
phrase, subject, object, etc. If these are new to you, you should 
consult the Glossary of grammatical terms on the website 
http://tyancientgreek.org, or one of the many elementary books 
on the subject. 
The main part of the book consists of twenty-five units. Each 
consists of either two or three sections. The first is taken up 
with grammar, the second contains sentences and passages of 

Greek for reading, while the third section (except in the first 
unit) is a longer Greek passage for additional reading. 
The grammatical sections, which are headed .1, are carefully 
graded over the course of the book in order to set out the basic 
features of Greek grammar in a systematic and easily digestible 
way. Each should be mastered before tackling the next. Very 
often a particular section cannot be understood without a 
knowledge of what has gone before. 
Grammar as a whole can be divided into two parts, one 
involving the forms which a word can take (e.g. those of a first 
declension feminine noun, 2.1/2), the other dealing with the 
ways in which these forms are used to make up phrases and 
sentences (e.g. the uses of the dative case, 2.1/3e). The former 
we must learn by heart. The latter we can only fully understand 
when, after learning a general rule, we see, and are able to 
understand, examples of it in use. Because of the importance of 
such examples the sentences given to illustrate grammatical 
rules are nearly always original Greek, and every effort should 
be made to understand them fully. By reading them carefully 
every time you revise a unit you will not only come to 
understand the grammatical point involved but also extend your 
vocabulary. 
To work through the reading exercises with one finger in the 
corresponding page of the key is not recommended, although 
you should make full use of any help provided by the notes. It 
is only by analyzing the forms of words and patiently working 
out the construction of clauses and sentences that you will make 
progress. A full translation of an exercise should be written out 
and then compared with the key. When you discover you have 
made a mistake, you must meticulously hunt out the point of 
grammar concerned and see how you came to be wrong. To help 
you do this many cross-references have been supplied in all parts 
of the book (a reference of the form 22.1/2 is for the 
grammatical section (.1) of a unit, but one such as 22.2.2 is to 
the reading section (.2)). Your final step should be to read 
through the Greek aloud until you are able to translate it 
without reference to your own version or the key. This will 
familiarize you with the construction employed and any new 
vocabulary. Some rote learning of new words is, of course, 
inevitable. If, however^ you go to the trouble of actually 
memorizing some of the many famous phrases and verse 
passages contained in the reading you will find your grasp on 
the language extending itself in an enjoyable and rewarding 
fashion. 

Appendices 1-7 give grammatical tables and other information 
to supplement particular units. Appendix 8 is on accentuation 
and should be consulted regularly and mastered over the course 
of the whole book. Appendix 9 is added to show how Greek 
verse was constructed; a knowledge of metre is not necessary for 
understanding Greek verse but obviously adds to our enjoyment 
of it. 
The section Principal parts of verbs complements the vocabulary 
with information about verbs whose present stem is either not 
used, or not used in a regular way, to provide the stems of other 
tenses. 
For ease of reference to grammatical points an index is 
provided. 
Extra reading, revision exercises, and other material will be on 
the website http://tyancientgreek.org . 
Abbreviations 
a. or acc. 
absol. 
act. 
adj. 
adv. 
aor. 
c. 
cap. 
cf. 
compar. 
conj. 
dat. 
ex. 
f. or f 
f. 
fut. 
gen. 
imp. 
impers. 
impf. 
ind. 
accusative 
indecl. 
indeclinable 
absolute 
indef. 
indefinite 
active 
indir. 
indirect 
adjective 
inf. 
infinitive 
adverb 
interrog. 
interrogative 
aorist 
intr. 
intransitive 
about, approximately /. 
line 
capital 
lit. 
literally 
compare 
11 
lines 
comparative 
m. or m 
masculine 
conjunction 
mid. 
middle 
dative 
n. or η 
neuter 
example 
η. or nom. nominative 
feminine 
opt. 
optative 
following 
pass. 
passive 
future 
pers. 
person 
genitive 
perf. 
perfect 
imperative 
pi. 
plural 
impersonal 
plpf. 
pluperfect 
imperfect 
poet. 
poetical 
indicative 
poss. 
possessive 

xiv 
3 Ρ* 
3 α 
c S 
ο 
3 
pi. 
plural 
rel. 
relative 
plpf. 
pluperfect 
s. 
singular 
poet. 
poetical 
sc. 
namely 
poss. 
possessive 
subj. 
subjunctive 
pple. 
participle 
supl. 
superlative 
prep. 
preposition 
tr. 
transitive 
pres. 
present 
trans. 
translate 
pron. 
pronoun 
v. or voc. vocative 
refl. 
reflexive 
viz 
that is to say 
Round brackets ( ) contain explanatory material or a literal 
translation; in the vocabulary round brackets are also used to 
indicate alternative forms. 
Square brackets [ ] are used in translations for words which are 
required by English idiom but have no equivalent in the Greek 
original; not all such words are marked in this way. Square 
brackets are also used to supply missing words. 
+ 
means in conjunction with, compounded with, or followed 
by. 
< 
means is derived from. 
> 
means produce(s). 
* 
marks a word which cannot stand first in a clause or phrase. 
# 
indicates that the following sentence or passage is verse; in 
the vocabulary this sign indicates that the word to which it 
is attached is poetical. 
t 
is explained in the introductory note to the vocabulary. 

uojionpoau; >S 


1.1 Grammar 
1.1/1 The Greek alphabet and its pronunciation 
The Greek alphabet consists of twenty-four letters, each with its 
traditional name. Today it is used in both upper and lower case 
but in antiquity it existed only in different varieties of capitals. 
The pronunciation given below does not in every case reflect 
what we know of the language of fourth-century Athens (the 
type of Greek described here - see 1.3); because we learn 
ancient 
Greek 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
reading, 
not 
of 
communication, we do not need to be as careful about its 
pronunciation as we would be with a modern language. 
Name 
Pronunciation 
alpha (άλφα) 
a (see below) 
beta (βήτα) 
b 
gamma (γάμμα) 
g (as in game, never as in gesture, but 
as η in ink before κ, ξ, χ or another 
γ; see below) 
d 
short e (as in met) 
sd (as in wisdom, but represented in 
English as z) 
long e (like at in fairy) 
th (as in thing; see below) 
i (see below) 
k (but represented in English as c) 
I 
Aa 
Ββ 
Γγ 
Δδ 
Εε 
Ζζ 
delta (δέλτα) 
epsllon (έ ψϋλον) 
zeta (ζήτα) 
Ηη 
Θθ 
Ιι 
Κκ 
Λλ 
Μμ 
Νν 
Ξξ 
eta (ήτα) 
theta (&ήτα) 
iota (ιώτα) 
kappa(κάππα) 
lambda (λάμβδα) 
mu (μύ) 
nu (νυ) 
» (ξει) 
m 
χ (as in axe) 

Ο ο 
omicron (δ μικρόν) short ο (as in lot) 
Π π 
ρ! (πει) 
ρ 
Ρ ρ 
rho (ρώ) 
τ 
C c 
sigma (α,γμα) 
s (as in sign) 
Τ τ 
tau (ταυ) 
t 
Τ υ 
upsllon (ύ ψΓλόν) 
u (represented in English as y, see 
below) 
Φ φ 
phi (φεΐ) 
ph (see below) 
Χ χ 
chl (χει) 
ch (see below) 
Ψ ψ psl (ψεΐ) 
ps (as in maps) 
Ω ω 5mega (ώ μέγα) 
long ο (like oa in broad) 
In Greek words taken into English and in transcriptions of 
Greek proper names Greek letters are normally represented by 
their phonetic equivalent except where indicated above (and in 
some diphthongs - see note 2). 
Consonants 
The normal English pronunciation is recommended where no 
example is given. To distinguish between κ and χ the latter is 
pronounced as the ch in the Scottish pronunciation of loch. The 
letters ζ, ξ, ψ are double consonants and the equivalents of c8, 
KC, nc respectively, for which they must always be used: e.g. 
when c is added to the stem γυπ- we must write γύψ, never γύπο 
(5.1/1). The letters θ, φ, χ are not double consonants; the 
pronunciation given above is that normally used today but in 
the Greek of our period they were pronounced as t, p, k with an 
accompanying emission of breath (i.e. something like these 
consonants in English when initial. Compare the difference 
between the English and French pronunciation of the Ρ in 
Paris). 
Examples of the second pronunciation of γ are: οπόγγοο 
(spongos) sponge, Οφίγξ (Sphinx) Sphinx, έλεγχοΰ (elenchos) 
scrutiny. 
The form of sigma given above (which dates from the Roman 
period) is, for reasons of convenience, the one increasingly used 
in modern editions. The traditional forms of lower case sigma, 
which date from the Middle Ages, are σ when initial or medial, 
ς when final, e.g σύστασις (ciiciacic) composition. 
The 
traditional upper case version is Σ. All three forms occur in 
Σωσιγένης (Οωοιγένηο) Sosigenes. 
Vowels 
All Greek vowels have a long and short pronunciation. These 
pronunciations have separate symbols in the case of ε/η and ο/ω. 

The other vowels have both values but only one symbol. In 
works of reference, but not in normal printed texts, the two 
values of these vowels are distinguished by marking the long 
form with a bar above (macron), σ, I, ϋ. They are pronounced: 
a as in father 
α (i.e. short a) as in a shortened version of δ, like u in but, 
never as in sat (this sound did not exist in Greek). 
I as ee in need 
ι as i in sit (or; more accurately, as in French petit). 
ϋ as in French sur 
υ as in French tu 
Diphthongs 
Greek had two types of diphthongs: 
(i) where both elements are written normally and pronounced 
as follows: 
αι as at in aisle 
01 as oi in oil 
αυ as ow in cow 
ου as oo in cool 
ει as ei in rein 
υι as we 
ευ/ηυ as eu in feud 
When any of these combinations is not to be taken as a 
diphthong, the second element is marked with a diaeresis ("): 
βοΐ (bo-ί), Aat'c (La-is). 
(ii) where the long vowels S, η, ω are combined with an iota. 
This iota is placed below the vowel (iota subscript), not after 
Tl> Φ·1 For convenience these diphthongs are always 
pronounced as simple δ, η, ω. 
Breathings 
Every word beginning with a vowel or diphthong has a rough 
0 or smooth 0 breathing. A rough breathing denotes an initial 
h, a smooth breathing (which is something of a superfluity) the 
absence of initial h: ήμερα (hemera) day, ayaOoc (agathos) 
good. A breathing is placed over the second element of a 
category (i) diphthong: αίνιγμα (ainigma) riddle; Αιοχύλοο 
(Aischiilos) Aeschylus; but when an initial vowel which does 
not form part of a diphthong is in upper case the breathing is 
placed in front: Όμηροΰ (Homeros) Homer. Words beginning 
with υ always have a rough breathing vc (hus) pig; O\|/oc 
(hupsos) height. Initial ρ is also always given a rough breathing 
because it was pronounced rh: ρυθμόΰ (rhuthmos) rhythm. 
1 Th ' 
rmi„e 1 0 t a is> however, placed after the long vowel when the latter is in upper case. The 
only common example is "Ai^c Hades. 

Notes 
1 In the grammar and reference sections long α, ι, υ are marked 
S, I, ϋ, except in the case of g, ά, ΐ, ύ, because iota subscript 
appears only under long vowels and in the other three cases 
the circumflex accent (see next subsection) shows that the 
vowel must be long. 
2 The traditional spelling and pronunciation of Greek proper 
names, and also the form taken by Greek derivatives in 
English, almost always reflect the Roman system of 
transliteration: Αχοχνλοο (Aischiilos) Aeschylus; Οΐδίποικ; 
(Oidipous) Oedipus; καταΰτροφή (katastrophe) catastrophe. 
3 For marks of punctuation Greek uses the full stop and 
comma as in English but for colon and semicolon there is 
only one sign, which is a dot at the top of the line ( ). Our 
semicolon is used as a question mark in Greek (;). Inverted 
commas and the exclamation mark are not normally used. A 
capital letter is used at the beginning of a paragraph but not 
with each new sentence. 
1.1/2 Accents 
We owe the idea of visually indicating word accent to 
Aristophanes of Byzantium (not to be confused with the 
Athenian comic poet), an altruistic scholar of around 200 BC 
who wished to help foreigners to pronounce Greek correctly. 
Since the Renaissance, accents have always been employed in 
printed texts. While not of crucial importance in reading Greek, 
they are useful in distinguishing certain words and present little 
difficulty if correctly approached. 
Accent in classical Greek was one of pitch, not of stress as in 
English. An English-speaker, when told that avOpotmoc human 
being is accented on its first syllable, would naturally 
pronounce that syllable with a heavier emphasis. A Greek, 
however, instead of emphasizing the a, would have pronounced 
it at a higher pitch and so given the word what we should 
consider a somewhat sing-song effect. We do, of course, use 
pitch in spoken English, but in a totally different way. In the 
question you're going to Athens? the last word has a rising 
pitch, but in the statement you're going to Athens it has a falling 
pitch. 
Classical Greek has three accents: 
' acute, indicating rising pitch 
grave, indicating falling pitch 

~ circumflex, indicating a combined rising and falling pitch 
(the sign, originally Λ, is a combination of an acute and a 
grave). Because the time taken by this operation was 
necessarily longer than that indicated by an acute or a grave, 
it can occur only with long vowels and diphthongs, and only 
on these do we find a circumflex. 
The basic features of Greek accentuation are: 
(a) nearly every word has an accent, which can be on the final 
syllable (ποταμόΰ river), or the second syllable from the end 
(ϊπτκκ horse), or on the third syllable from the end 
(ίπποπόταμοΰ hippopotamus). In forms of verbs the position 
of the accent is nearly always determined by the length of the 
final syllable (see Appendix 8, b); with other words whose 
form can change the accent is generally fixed. 
(b) an acute or grave accent can stand on a diphthong or long or 
short vowel, but a circumflex only on a long vowel or 
diphthong. 
(c) an acute can stand on the end syllable of a word (πειρδτηΰ 
pirate), on the second from the end (μοναρχία monarchy), or 
on the third from the end (ακρόπολη acropolis). 
(d) a grave can stand only on a final syllable, where it 
automatically replaces an acute when another word follows 
(ό πειρβτηο απάγει τον ίπποπόταμον the pirate is leading 
away the hippopotamus). A final acute is retained, however, 
before a mark of punctuation (ώ ποιητά, ή πΐθι ή άπιθι Ο 
poet, either drink or go away) or when a word so accented 
is quoted. (For the effect of enclitics see Appendix 8, d). 
(e) a circumflex can stand on a final syllable (των ποταμών of the 
rivers) and, within certain limitations, on the second from 
the end (Μυκήναι Mycenae). 
The rules for accents are given in Appendix 8. These should be 
referred to and gradually mastered in the course of studying this 
book. For purposes of pronouncing Greek words, each of the 
three accents should be treated alike and given a simple stress 
accent as in English. The old British (and Dutch) habit of 
imposing the Latin system of accentuation on Greek is to be 
avoided. This system has prevailed in our pronunciation of 
nearly all Greek proper names in English. We say Euripides 
(Ευριπίδη^, Socrates (Οωκράτηΰ), Epidaurus 
(Επίδαυρο^ 
because the Romans, not unreasonably, adapted them in this 
way to their own language (cf. second note to last subsection). 

A Roman, however^ who did the same in actually speaking 
Greek (as every educated Roman could), would have been 
disowned by his friends as an embarrassing ignoramus. 
1.2 Exercise 
1 Read aloud and transliterate the following names of famous 
writers: Άριοτοτέληο, 'Αριοτοφάνηο, Δημοοθένηο, Ήρόδοτοο, 
Θεόκριτοο, Καλλίμαχος Πίνδαροο, Πλάτων. 
2 Read aloud and transliterate the following words and then 
look up their meaning in the vocabulary: 
άκμή, ανάθεμα, άνάλϋοιο, άντίθεαο, άοβεοτοο, αύτόματον, 
άφαοίσ, βάθοο, γένεαο, διάγνωαο, δόγμα, δράμα, ζώνη, ήθοο, 
ηχώ, ιδέα, κίνημα, κλΐμαξ, κόομοο, Kpicic, κώλον, μέτρον, 
μίαομα, νέκταρ, νέμεαο, όρχήοτρσ, πάθοο, οκηνη, ςτίγμα, 
ύβριο, ύπόθεοιο, χάοο, χαρακτηρ, ψΐ5χή. 
3 For practice with capitals read aloud and identify the 
following proper names (accents are not used when a word is 
put in upper case): 
(α) ΑΓΑΜΕΜΝΩΝ, 
'AXIAAEYC, 
ΕΚΤΩΡ, 
ΈΛΕΝΗ, 
'OAYCCEYC, ΠΑΤΡΟΚΛΟΣ ΠΗΝΕΛΟΠΕΙΑ. 
(b) 'ΑΘΗΝΑΙ, 'APrOC, ΘΗΒΑΙ, KOPIN0OC, CIIAPTH, 
ΚΡΗΤΗ, TOAOC, CAMOC. 
1.3 Excursus - the different forms of 
Greek 
Greek is a member of the Indo-European family of languages, 
as are English, French, German and most European languages. 
The original Indo-European speakers lived in what is now 
western Russia but migration began at an early date, possibly 
soon after 3000 BC. The groups which we would now call Greek 
originally came to Greece at different times during the period 
2000-1000 BC. They have lived there ever since and preserved 
their identity despite invasions and long periods of foreign 
domination. Greek settlements also existed, in some cases for 
over 2,500 years, in other Mediterranean countries and in Asia 
Minor. 
The earliest records in Greek date from about 1300 BC and are 
written on clay tablets in a syllabic script called Linear B, which 
is totally different from the Greek alphabet familiar to us. The 

latter was taken over, with some modifications, from the 
Phoenicians at some time before 750-700 BC, the period to 
which the oldest surviving examples can be assigned. 
It is possible that Greek had already split into dialects early in 
the second millennium BC. Certainly there is unmistakable 
evidence of different dialects in the oldest works of Greek 
literature, the Iliad and the Odyssey of Homer (25.1/1), which 
must have been composed before 700 BC (their exact date and 
manner of composition are matters of dispute). From then up to 
the time of Alexander the Great (died 323 BC) a large quantity 
of Greek texts survives and proves the existence of five major 
dialect groups, which show, in some cases, considerable 
differences from each other. By no means all dialects served as 
vehicles of literature and we need only concern ourselves with 
those which were so used. From an early stage Greek literature 
was clearly divided into different genres (epic, elegiac poetry, 
choral lyric, etc.), and often a particular dialect became so 
intimately associated with a literary genre that a tradition was 
established which sometimes lasted long after the dialect had 
ceased to be spoken. Some of these associations are mentioned 
in the following list: 
Ionic - the language of the Aegean islands (except those on the 
southern fringe and Lesbos to the north) and the central area of 
the west coast of Asia Minor. The latter contained the most 
important Ionic settlements and it was there that Greek cultural 
and intellectual life began with Homer and the earliest 
philosophers. Poets of the seventh and sixth centuries BC 
established Ionic as the dialect of elegiac and iambic poetry. It 
was also the original dialect for literary prose and was used by 
Herodotus (a Dorian by birth) for his Histories (4.2.9). 
Aeolic - the language of Lesbos and the adjoining Asia Minor 
coast. It was used by the most famous poetess of antiquity, 
Sappho (early sixth century BC), and her male contemporary, 
Alcaeus, for personal lyric poetry. Their initiative was not 
continued. 
Homeric dialect - the language of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey. 
1 his was an artificial dialect which was never the language of a 
particular area or group, but had been developed over a long 
period by generations of poets. It was basically an older form of 
jonic but with elements from other dialects, chiefly Aeolic. 
Homer's position as the greatest Greek poet was never disputed 
jn antiquity, and epics which reproduced his language were still 
BEING written in the fifth century AD. The Ionic of Elegy, which 
survived even longer, generally had a Homeric flavour. 

Doric - the language of the Peloponnesus (except the central 
and north-west area), Crete, and other parts of the Greek 
world. Choral poetry, which was sung by dancing choirs, was 
originally the creation of Dorians and even when written by 
non-Doric speakers was always given at least a Doric flavour. 
Attic - the language of Athens (historically an offshoot of 
Ionic). With the rapid political expansion and cultural 
development of Athens after the final defeat of the Persians by 
the Greeks (479 BC) Attic became firmly established as a literary 
dialect despite its late start when compared with Ionic and 
Aeolic. By the beginning of the fourth century BC Athens had 
become the main cultural centre of Greece. This was in no small 
part brought about by the literary masterpieces that had been 
written and were still being written by Athenians in their own 
dialect. The Attic of the early and middle period of the fourth 
century 
BC, as exemplified 
in Plato's 
dialogues 
and 
Demosthenes' speeches, has always been taken as the most 
satisfactory form of Greek for beginners and is the type 
described in this book. Attic is the language of Tragedy and 
Comedy (except for their choral odes, which have a tinge of 
Doric). By the end of the fifth century BC it had superseded Ionic 
as the language of prose. 
The conquests of Alexander had important political and 
linguistic consequences for the Greek world, which he enlarged 
considerably. Greek culture and civilization were extended over 
all lands bordering on the eastern Mediterranean and a lingua 
franca emerged which, with a few exceptions, gradually 
replaced the older dialects even in Greece itself. This new 
language was basically a development of Attic and was called ή 
κοινή διάλεκτοΰ the common dialect (in English the koine). It 
was the language of the Greek man in the street and for that 
reason was used by the writers of the New Testament, who 
wanted to reach as wide an audience as possible. Educated 
classes, imbued with the prestige of Classical Attic, regarded it 
as a debased form of Greek, but the koine, apart from the few 
survivors of the older dialects, had, by the first century of our 
era, become the living form of the language and is the ancestor 
of Modern Greek. The latter cannot, of course, be understood 
simply with a knowledge of fourth-century Attic or the koine, 
but, because of the conservative nature of Greek, which we see 
at all periods, the changes that have occurred over a period of 
2400 years are fewer than those which distinguish Modern 
English from Anglo-Saxon. 

• 
c 
3 
Ο 
For this and all subsequent units extra reading will be found at 
^ ^ ^ 
the Internet website http://tyancientgreek.org 
2.1 Grammar 
2.1/1 Nouns in Greek 
In English the gender of a noun is determined by its meaning; 
man is masculine, woman is feminine, car is neuter and when 
referring to these we would say he, she, it respectively. In Greek, 
however; the gender of a noun is often arbitrary and does not 
necessarily indicate anything about what it denotes. While, for 
example, γυνη woman is feminine and άνηρ man is masculine, 
χώροι land is feminine, and λόγοο speech is masculine, though 
δώρον gift is, understandably, neuter. More often than not we 
cannot see why a particular noun has a particular gender. It is, · 
however; generally possible to tell the gender of a noun by its 
ending in the nominative and genitive singular; and it is also 
according to these endings that Greek nouns are grouped into 
three classes, which are called declensions. Each declension has 
a distinctive set of endings which indicate both case and number; 
just as in English we have child, child's, children, children's, 
though Greek distinguishes more cases. To go through the list of 
all possible forms of a noun is to decline it. 
2.1/2 First declension (feminine nouns) and the 
feminine definite article 
Most first declension nouns are feminine (the few masculines 
are declined slightly differently - 3.1/2). The feminines end in -η 

or -α. Those in -α change alpha to eta in the genitive and dative 
singular unless the alpha is preceded by a vowel or p. All first 
declension nouns have the same endings in the plural. The 
feminine form of the definite article is declined in the same way 
as the feminines in -η. 
SINGULAR 
Nominative 
ή 
Ήμ^η 
χώρ-σ 
θάλαττ-α 
the 
honour 
country 
sea 
Vocative 
ιΓμ^η 
χώρ-α 
θάλαττ-α 
Accusative 
την 
τΤμ^ην 
χώρ-αν 
θάλαττ-αν 
Genitive 
τηο 
ιΧμ^ης 
χώρ-tfc 
θαλάττ-ηο 
Dative 
τη 
τίμ-η 
χώρ-ςι 
θαλάττ-η 
PLURAL 
Nominative 
αί 
τΤμ-αί 
χώρ-αι 
θάλαττ-αι 
Vocative 
ιΤμ-αί 
χώρ-αι 
θάλαττ-αι 
Accusative 
τάο 
τΤμ-άο 
χώρ-Gc 
Θαλάττ-Gc 
Genitive 
των 
τΤμ-ων 
χωρ-ων 
θαλαττ-ων 
Dative 
ταιο 
τΤμ-aic 
χώρ-aic 
θαλάττ-αιο 
Notes 
1 The definite article must agree with the noun it qualifies in 
number, gender; and case: των ιΤμών of the honours, τάβ 
χώρβο the countries (accusative). Contexts where it is used in 
Greek but not in English are: 
(i) with abstract nouns, ή αλήθεια truth 
(ii) with nouns (usually plural) indicating a general class, αί 
κόραι girls (as a class) 
(iii) optionally with proper nouns, with no differences in 
sense: ή Ο,κελίσ or Ο,κελίσ Sicily, ή 'Αφροδίτη or 
'Αφροδίτη Aphrodite. 
In translating a common noun in 
the singular without the definite article, a should be 
supplied in English: ή νίκη the victory, but νίκη a victory. 
2 The final alpha of most nouns ending in -εα, -ία, -pa is long. 
3 Here (and in the second declension) when the final syllable 
bears an acute in the nominative, as in τΓμή, the accent 
becomes a circumflex in the genitive and dative (for the 
technical terms see Appendix 8). 
4 In the genitive plural all first declension nouns have a 
circumflex on their final syllable. 
2.1/3 Basic uses of cases 
In English the only case ending in nouns is that of the genitive 
(as in girl's, men's, etc.). Elsewhere, the function of a noun is 
shown by its position (the difference in meaning between the 

depends solely on the word order) or by a preposition: the 
traffic warden was hit by a car (here the part played by the car 
is indicated by the preposition by). In Greek, however the 
function of a noun is indicated by its case ending: 
(a) The subject of a clause must be put in the nominative. 
(b) When we address a person the vocative is used; this is 
normally preceded by ώ Ο and followed by a mark of 
punctuation. For the sake of completeness the vocative is 
given for such nouns as τΤμή but these forms rarely occur. 
(c) The direct object of a verb must be put in the accusative. 
(d) The genitive can express possession: Cleon's horse (in English 
we can also say the horse of Cleon). Another common use of 
the genitive in Greek is to express separation (20.1/4). 
(e) With nouns denoting living things the dative expresses the 
indirect object after verbs of saying, giving and the like 
(24.1/2^). In Socrates gave a drachma to Xanthippe 
the 
direct object is drachma (answering the question gave 
what?), which would be put into the accusative δραχμήν; the 
indirect object is Xanthippe (gave to whom?), which would 
be τη Ξανθίππη with no preposition (we may also say in 
English Socrates gave Xanthippe a drachma). The dative has 
other uses with nouns denoting living things and can nearly 
always be translated by to or for. With inanimate nouns 
(Athens, arrow, boat) different uses are possible and will be 
treated separately. 
The accusative, genitive, and dative, are, for convenience of 
reference, called the oblique cases. They are the cases used after 
prepositions, which perform the same function in Greek as in 
English, i.e. they define the relation between the word they 
govern and the rest of the clause in which they are used. In' 
Greek the word governed is always a noun (or noun-equivalent, 
see 5.1/3) or pronoun (Greek does not say before now because 
now is an adverb). With prepositions indicating motion and rest 
a pattern can be seen in the case required: 
( f ) Prepositions indicating motion towards govern 
the 
accusative, e.g. eic την χώρΟν into the country, npoc την 
οίκίαν towards the house. 
\g) Prepositions indicating motion away from govern the 
genitive, e.g. από της μάχηο from the battle, έκ Ο,κελίδο out 
(h\ 
lfSicil?\ 
Prepositions indicating rest or fixed position govern the 
dative, e.g. έν τη θαλάττη in the sea. 
AU the above prepositions, except προς (3.1/5), take only the case 
shown. 
11 
c 
3 

2.1/4 Verbs in Greek 
A finite form of a Greek verb (i.e. one that can function as the 
verb of a clause) is defined in terms of person, number; tense, 
mood, and voice. Person and number are determined by the 
subject of the verb: a finite verb must agree with its subject in 
person and number (just as in English we cannot say we is). First 
person is the person(s) speaking, i.e. I or we; second person is the 
person(s) spoken to, i.e. you; third person is the person(s) or 
thing(s) spoken about, which can be a pronoun (be, she, it, they) 
or a noun. The concept of number is the same as with nouns. 
Tense indicates the time in which the action of the verb takes 
place. Mood tells us something about the nature of the verb's 
action in a particular context; at the moment we are only 
concerned with the indicative mood, which is used to express 
facts. Voice shows the relation of the subject to the verb. We shall 
first deal with the active, which is the voice used when the subject 
is the doer of the action. 
Auxiliary verbs (shall/will, have, be etc.) are used to form most 
tenses of an English verb (I shall teach, he has taught, we will be 
taught), but in Greek are found only in certain passive forms. 
Elsewhere, the person, number, tense and voice (and also mood 
- 14.1/1) are shown by the stem and ending. For example, we 
can tell by the stem and ending that λύοουοι is third person 
plural future indicative active of the verb λύω I loosen, and 
therefore means they will loosen. It is superfluous to add the 
Greek for they (unless for emphasis), as this is part of the 
information conveyed by the ending. 
Verbs in Greek belong to one of two groups (called 
conjugations). These are distinguished by the ending of the first 
person singular present indicative active, the form in which 
Greek verbs are customarily cited1 (contrast the convention in 
English of referring to a verb by its present infinitive active). 
Those in -ω (e.g. λύω) are by far the larger class; the other 
consists of verbs in -μι, e.g. ειμί I am (3.1/6), δίδωμι give 
(18.1/2). 
2.1/5 Present and future indicative active of -ω 
verbs (and corresponding infinitives) 
The present indicative active is formed by taking the present 
stem (λϋ- i.e. λύω minus ω) and adding the endings given below. 
For the future indicative active we make up the future stem by 
1 A sub-category called deponents is slightly different - 8.1/2. 

adding sigma to that of the present (i.e. λϋ + c > Xtfc-) and we 
then apply the same endings. These stems are also used for the 
infinitives. 
PRESENT 
FUTURE 
SINGULAR 1 λύ-ω 
I loosen 
λύο-ω 
2 λό-eic 
you (s.) loosen 
λύο-ειο 
3 λύ-ει 
he, she, it loosens λύο-ει 
PLURAL 
1 λϋ-ομεν 
2 λύ-ετε 
we loosen 
you (pi.) loosen 
INFINITIVE 
Notes 
3 λύ-κ)υοι(ν) they loosen 
λύ-ειν 
to loosen 
I shall loosen 
you (s.) will 
loosen 
he, she, it will 
loosen 
we shall loosen 
you (pi.) will 
loosen 
λύο-ουοι(ν) they will loosen 
λύο-ειν 
to be going to 
loosen 
λϋο-ομεν 
λύο-ετε 
1 In English we have different forms of the present tense, I 
loosen, I am loosening, I do loosen and so on. There are 
distinctions in usage between these forms, but as Greek has 
only one we must decide from the context which English 
form we should use to translate a Greek verb in the present 
tense. In one context λύουα might mean they loosen, in 
another they are loosening or do they loosen. Likewise, λύοω 
can also mean I shall be loosening. 
2 The Greek second person singular is always used when 
addressing one person, the plural when addressing more 
than one person. Greek has a distinction here which we no 
longer have in English. Greek does not, however, have 
familiar and polite forms of the second person as in French, 
German, and other languages. A slave and master would 
have addressed each other in the second person singular. 
3 It will be noticed that in each form the stem is followed by 
an o- or e- sound. This indicates the presence of the so-called 
thematic vowel (o or ε), which is most clearly seen in the first 
and second persons plural. The same pattern, which marks 
these tenses as thematic, is repeated in the imperfect (4.1/1). 
4 The final ν shown in brackets in the ending of the third 
person plural is called the movable v. In prose it is used 
(without brackets) only when a word with this ending is 
followed by a word beginning with a vowel or diphthong or 
stands at the end of a clause (its use in verse is freer). It 
occurs here and in a few other endings. 
To form the future of πέμπω send, the final π of the present 
stem is combined with c to give πέμψ-ω I will send. Other 
final consonants in present stems will be treated at 6.1/4 and 
11.1/3. 

2.1/6 Word order and elision 
(a) Although the order of words within a Greek sentence may 
often be similar to that of English, Greek word order is 
generally much less predictable. As mentioned in 2.1/3, 
there is a close link in English between the order in which 
words occur and their function. In Greek, however, where 
the grammatical function of a word is determined by its 
form, not by its position, word order can be varied much 
more than in English. This is mainly done to emphasise a 
particular word or phrase. If in the English sentence 
Aphrodite is beautiful we wished to emphasize beautiful we 
would, in speech, articulate it with greater weight (in 
writing we could underline it or put it in italics). In Greek 
the emphasis would be conveyed by a change in the word 
order; ή Αφροδίτη ecu καλή would become καλή έςτιν ή 
'Αφροδίτη. These differences will be indicated as they occur. 
Emphasis apart, two further points regarding word order 
should be noted here: 
(i) Adverbs nearly always precede the word they modify, 
ταχέως τρέχει he runs (τρέχει) quickly (ταχέως). This 
particularly applies to the negative ού(κ) not, ουκ έχω... 
I do not have... (ουκ is the form used before vowels and 
diphthongs with a smooth breathing; it becomes ούχ if 
the following vowel or diphthong has a rough 
breathing, e.g. ούχ ϋει it is not raining). 
(ii) Just as in English we can say the land of Aphrodite or 
Aphrodite's 
land, so in Greek we have ή χώρδ της 
'Αφροδίτης and ή της 'Αφροδίτης χώρα (note that the 
article of χώρσ must be retained in the latter). 
(b) The Greeks disliked the juxtaposition of a final vowel and 
an initial vowel (e.g. από 'Αθηνών from Athens). Although 
tolerated in prose, this is almost totally absent from most 
forms of verse. In the case of final short vowels (except υ) it 
is avoided by eliding (i.e. dropping and not pronouncing) a, 
ε, ι, ο before a word beginning with a vowel or diphthong, 
e.g. άπ' OIKIGC (= από oiKiCtc) from a house; παρ' Άφροδίτην 
(= παρά Ά.) to Aphrodite. When the vowel following κ, π, or 
τ is elided before a word beginning with a rough breathing, 
these consonants become χ, φ, θ, respectively, e.g. ύφ' Ελένης 
(= υπό Έ.) by Helen. Elision is marked by an apostrophe as 
shown. It is not always applied in prose texts.1 
1 The final αι of verbal endings can be elided in poetry, and occasionally even in prose 
(example at 21.2.2(xi)). 

2.2 Greek reading 
The Odyssey describes the return of the Greek hero Odysseus 
(in English we sometimes use the Latin form of his name 
Ulysses) to his homeland, Ithaca, after the sack of Troy. At a 
later stage we shall read some of the original, but now we shall 
start with a simplified version of Odysseus's landing at Scheria, 
probably to be identified with the modern Corfu. The scene 
occurs in the sixth book of the Odyssey. 
In reading Greek the following steps should be followed: 
(a) Look up each word in the vocabulary and parse it (i.e. 
define it grammatically; this is particularly necessary with 
words which vary in form). 
(b) Mark all finite verbs as this will indicate the number of 
clauses. 
(c) By observing punctuation and conjunctions used to join 
clauses, work out where each clause begins and ends. 
(d) Take each clause separately and see how each word relates 
to the finite verb of its clause (subject, object, part of an 
adverbial phrase, etc.). 
(e) See from the conjunctions how the clauses are related to 
each other and work out the overall meaning of the 
sentence. 
An analysis of sentence 13 will be found in the key. 
1 ό Όδυοοεύο άπό τηο Tpoiac ήκει, άλλα ό Ποοειδών έν τη 
Οχερίρ την ναΰν (ship) διαφθείρει. 
2 ό Όδυοοεύο έκ τηο θαλάττηο φεύγει και υπό έλάρ έαυτόν 
(himself acc.) κρύπτει πρόο τη άκτη. 
3 δναρ ή 'Αθηνά τη βαοιλείρ Ναυοικάρ λέγει ότι δει (it is 
necessary) την οτολήν έν τη άκτη πλύνειν. 
4 άμα τη ήμέρρ ή Ναυακάα την οτολήν έκ τηο οίκίαο έν άμάξη 
πρόο την θάλατταν φέρει. 
5 έν τη άμάξη έοτί (there is) καί (also) έδωδή τη Ναυακάρ καί 
ταΐο έταίραιο. 
6 αί κόραι τάχα πλύνουα την οτολήν πρόο τη έλάρ ού ό 
Όδυοοεύο καθεύδει. 
7 έπειτα αί κόραι την οτολήν έπί την άκτην έπιβάλλουοιν. 
8 λούουοιν έαυτάο (themselves) καί την έδωδήν έοθίουοιν ην 
(which) έν τη άμάξη έχουοιν. 
9 εωο (while) έν τη άκτη παίζουοιν, ή Ναυοικάα οφαΐραν ρίπτει 
άλλ' ή οφαίρα είο δίνην πίπτει. 
10 αι των κορών βοαι τον Όδυοοεα (acc.) εγειρουοι και 
έκπλήττουοιν. 
11 ο Όδυοοεύο θαυμαζει ποΐ τηο γήο ήκει, και απο τηο ελααο 
έξαίφνηο έρπει. 

14 
c 3 
s 
2.1/6 Word order and elision 
(a) Although the order of words within a Greek sentence may 
often be similar to that of English, Greek word order is 
generally much less predictable. As mentioned in 2.1/3, 
there is a close link in English between the order in which 
words occur and their function. In Greek, however, where 
the grammatical function of a word is determined by its 
form, not by its position, word order can be varied much 
more than in English. This is mainly done to emphasise a 
particular word or phrase. If in the English sentence 
Aphrodite is beautiful we wished to emphasize beautiful we 
would, in speech, articulate it with greater weight (in 
writing we could underline it or put it in italics). In Greek 
the emphasis would be conveyed by a change in the word 
order; ή 'Αφροδίτη ecu καλή would become καλή έςτιν ή 
'Αφροδίτη. These differences will be indicated as they occur. 
Emphasis apart, two further points regarding word order 
should be noted here: 
(i) Adverbs nearly always precede the word they modify, 
ταχέως τρέχει he runs (τρέχει) quickly (ταχέως). This 
particularly applies to the negative ού(κ) not, ουκ έχω... 
I do not have... (ουκ is the form used before vowels and 
diphthongs with a smooth breathing; it becomes ούχ if 
the following vowel or diphthong has a rough 
breathing, e.g. ούχ ϋει it is not raining). 
(ii) Just as in English we can say the land of Aphrodite or 
Aphrodite's 
land, so in Greek we have ή χώρα της 
'Αφροδίτης and ή της 'Αφροδίτης χώρα (note that the 
article of χώρα must be retained in the latter). 
(b) The Greeks disliked the juxtaposition of a final vowel and 
an initial vowel (e.g. από 'Αθηνών from Athens). Although 
tolerated in prose, this is almost totally absent from most 
forms of verse. In the case of final short vowels (except υ) it 
is avoided by eliding (i.e. dropping and not pronouncing) a, 
ε, ι, ο before a word beginning with a vowel or diphthong, 
e.g. άπ' οικίας (= από οικίας) from a house; παρ' Άφροδίτην 
(= παρά Ά.) to Aphrodite. When the vowel following κ, π, or 
τ is elided before a word beginning with a rough breathing, 
these consonants become χ, φ, θ, respectively, e.g. ύφ' Ελένης 
(= ύπό Έ.) by Helen. Elision is marked by an apostrophe as 
shown. It is not always applied in prose texts.1 
1 The final αι of verbal endings can be elided in poetry, and occasionally even in prose 
(example at 21.2.2(xi)). 

2.2 Greek reading 
The Odyssey describes the return of the Greek hero Odysseus 
(in English we sometimes use the Latin form of his name 
Ulysses) to his homeland, Ithaca, after the sack of Troy. At a 
later stage we shall read some of the original, but now we shall 
start with a simplified version of Odysseus's landing at Scheria, 
probably to be identified with the modern Corfu. The scene 
occurs in the sixth book of the Odyssey. 
In reading Greek the following steps should be followed: 
(a) Look up each word in the vocabulary and parse it (i.e. 
define it grammatically; this is particularly necessary with 
words which vary in form). 
(b) Mark all finite verbs as this will indicate the number of 
clauses. 
(c) By observing punctuation 
and conjunctions 
used to join 
clauses, work out where each clause begins and ends. 
(d) Take each clause separately and see how each word relates 
to the finite verb of its clause (subject, object, part of an 
adverbial phrase, etc.). 
(e) See from the conjunctions 
how the clauses are related to 
each other and work 
out the overall meaning 
of the 
sentence. 
An analysis of sentence 13 will be found in the key. 
1 ό Όδυοοεύο από τηο Τροίαο ήκει, άλλα ό Ποοειδών έν τη 
(Γχερίρ τήν ναΰν (ship) διαφθείρει. 
2 ό Όδυοοεύο έκ τηο θαλάττηο φεύγει καί ύπό έλάρ έαυτόν 
(himself acc.) κρύπτει πρόο τη άκτη. 
3 δναρ ή 'Αθηνά τη βαοιλείρ Ναυοικάρ λέγει ότι δει (it is 
necessary) τήν οτολήν έν τη άκτη πλύνειν. 
4 άμα τη ήμέρρ ή Ναυοικάα τήν οτολήν έκ τηο οίκίαο έν άμάξη' 
πρόο τήν θάλατταν φέρει. 
5 έν τη άμάξη έοτί (there is) καί (also) έδωδή τη Ναυοικάρ καί 
ταΐο έταίραιο. 
6 αί κόραι τάχα πλύνουοι τήν οτολήν πρόο τη έλάρ ου ό 
Όδυοοεύο καθεύδει. 
7 έπειτα αί κόραι τήν οτολήν έπί τήν άκτήν έπιβάλλουοιν. 
8 λούουοιν έαυτάο (themselves) καί τήν έδωδήν έοθίουοιν ην 
(which) έν τη άμάξη έχουοιν. 
9 έωο (while) έν τη άκτη παίζουοιν, ή Ναυοικάα οφαΐραν ρίπτει 
άλλ' ή οφαΐρα είο δίνην πίπτει. 
10 αί τών κορών βοαί τον Όδυοοέα (acc.) έγείρουοι καί 
έκπλήττουοιν. 
1 1 ό Όδυοοεύο θαυμάζει ποι τηο γήο ήκει, καί άπό τηο έλάαο 
έξαίφνηο έρπει. 
15 
C 
3 » s 

12 την Ναυακάαν και xac έταίραο έκπλήττει. 
13 αλλ' ή Ναυακάα έν τη άκτη αναμένει διότι ή 'Αθηνά την 
άνδρείαν eic την καρδίαν εισβάλλει. 
14 ό Όδυοοεύο τη Ναυακάα λέγει δτι άπό τηο Ώγυγίαο ήκει. 
15 ή Ναυακάα ταιο έταίραιο λέγει δτι δει τω 'Οδυοοεΐ (dat.) 
έδωδήν και οτολήν παρέχειν. 
16 τον Όδυοοεα πρόο την του πατρόο (of her father) οίκίαν άγει ν 
έθέλει αλλά την των πολιτών (of the citizens) 
αιτίαν 
δειμαίνει ει βλεπουαν αυτήν (her) μετά του Όδυοοέωε 
(gen.). 
17 ώοτε ή Ναυακάα και αί κόραι την οτολήν πάλιν έν τη άμάξη 
πρόο την οίκίαν φέρουαν, άλλ' ό Όδυοοεύο έκτόο άναμένει. 
Notes 
1 ό nom. s. m. of the definite article (3.1/1); Όδυοοεύο 3rd 
declension (11.1/4); ήκει has come 
(the subject is ό 
Obvccevc) the present tense of this verb is to be translated 
by the perfect tense in English; την ναΰν lit. the ship, but we 
would translate his ship; Greek normally does not indicate 
possession if this is obvious from the context (9.1/5; cf. 
sentences 4, 5, 12, 13, 15, 16). 
2 υπό έλάρ beneath an olive-tree; as Greek does not have an 
indefinite article (a, an in English) this must be supplied in 
our translation; cf. below έν άμάξη (4) and οφαΐραν (9). 
5 The datives τη Ναυακάα and τα^ έταίραΐΰ are to be 
translated 
for... 
7 έπί ... έπιβάλλουαν the repetition of έπί as a verbal prefix 
cannot be reproduced in English and we would simply say 
they throw ...onto 
the shore. 
9 άλλ' = άλλά (2.1/6&). 
10 τόν acc. s. m. of the definite article; έκπλήττουαν sc. him 
(Odysseus; because the object of the second verb is the same 
as that of the first, no pronoun is needed in Greek). 
13 eic ... εισβάλλει for the repetition of eic cf. note on 7. 
15 τω dat. s. m. of the definite article. 
16 του gen. s. m. of the definite article. 
2.2/1 Vocabulary 
Individual vocabularies are provided for Units 2-9. Personal 
names whose English form is a simple transliteration of the 
Greek, or close to it (e.g. Οωκράτηΰ Socrates), are not included, 
but will be found in the main vocabulary. The meaning given to 
each word is that appropriate to its use in the preceding reading; 
for a fuller range of meanings the main vocabulary should be 

consulted. Words already given in a grammatical table (or 
earlier vocabulary) are not repeated, except where a different 
meaning is involved. 
It is normal practice in Greek dictionaries and lists of Greek 
words to give the nominative singular of a noun, its genitive 
(usually in abbreviated form) and the appropriate nominative 
singular form of the article; this information establishes both its 
declension and gender, e.g. θάλαττα, -ηο, ή (note that the accent 
in the genitive - here θαλάττηο - is not always on the same 
syllable as in the nominative; see Appendix 8, a). Verbs are cited 
in the first person singular present indicative, e.g. κρύπτω. 
άγω lead, bring 
Αθηνά, -0c,1 ή 
(the goddess) 
Athena 
αίτίδ, -Gc, ή 
blame, censure 
άκτη, -f\c, ή shore, coast 
άλλά (conj.) 
but 
άμα see ήμέρδ 
άμαξα, -ηο, ή 
wagon 
άναμένω 
wait, stay 
άνδρείδ, -ffc, ή 
courage 
βαοίλεια, -flc, ή 
princess 
βλέπω 
see 
βοή, -f\c, ή 
shout 
γη, -ήο, ή 
land, earth, world 
δειμαίνω (+acc.) 
be afraid of, 
fear 
διαφθείρω 
destroy 
δίνη, -ης, ή 
whirlpool 
διότι (conj.) 
because 
εγείρω 
awaken, arouse 
έδωδή, -ήο, ή 
food 
εθελω 
be willing, wish 
ει (conj.) 
if 
ειο (prep.+acc.) 
into 
ειοβαλλω 
throw into, put 
into 
(prep.+gen.) 
out of 
εκπλήττω strike with panic, 
, frighten 
εκτόο (adv.) 
outside 
ελαδ, -cfo, ή 
olive-tree 
ε ν (prep.+dat.) 
in, on 
έξαίφνηο (adv.) 
suddenly 
έπειτα (adv.) 
then, next 
επί (prep.+acc.) 
on to 
έπιβαλλω 
throw upon 
έρπω 
creep, crawl 
έοθίω 
eat 
έταίρδ, -Gc, ή 
companion 
(female) 
έχω 
have 
ήκω have come 
ήμέρδ, -ffc, ή 
day 
άμα τη ήμέρςι 
at day-break 
or dawn 
θαυμάζω 
wonder 
καθεύδω 
sleep 
καί (conj.) 
and 
καρδίσ, -Gc, ή 
heart 
κόρη, -ηο, ή 
girl 
κρύπτω 
hide 
λεγω 
say, speak 
λούω 
wash (the body) 
μετά (prep.+gen.) 
along with, 
(in company) 
with 
oikiG, -tfc, ή 
house 
όναρ (adv.) 
in a dream 
ότι (conj.) 
that 
ου (conj.) 
where 
παίζω 
play 
πάλιν (adv.) 
back 
παρέχω 
provide (something 
to somebody) 
πίπτω 
fall 
Αθηνά, originally Άθηνάσ, has its genitive in -ac, -φ (not -ήο, -fj); cf. έλάα, -ac below. 

18 
c 
3. 
H> 
S 
πλύνω wash (clothes) 
ποΐ (interrog. adv.) 
(to) 
wheref 
ποΐ τηο γήο where in the 
world 
npoc (prep.) (+acc.) 
towards, 
to 
(+dat.) near, beside 
ρίπτω 
throw 
ΰτολή, -fjc, ή 
clothes 
ΰφαΐρα, -tfc, ή 
ball 
Οχερίσ, -flc, ή Scheria, the 
land of the Phaeacians 
τάχα (adv.) 
quickly 
Τροίδ, -Qc, ή 
Troy 
υπό (prep.+dat.) 
beneath 
φέρω carry, bring, take 
φεύγω flee, run away 
Ώγυγία, -Gc, ή 
Ogygia, the 
island of Calypso 
ώοτε (conj.) 
consequently, so 

3.1 Grammar 
3.1/1 Second declension and the masculine and 
neuter definite article 
The second declension is divided into two groups: nouns whose 
nominative singular ends in -oc, which, with a few exceptions, 
are masculine, and those whose nominative singular ends in -ov, 
which are all neuter. Both groups have identical endings except 
for the nominative, vocative, and accusative. For these cases 
second declension neuter nouns observe the rule which holds for 
all neuter nouns in Greek: 
The vocative and accusative of all neuter nouns are the same as 
the nominative, both in the singular and in the plural. In the 
plural the nominative, 
vocative, and accusative of all neuter 
nouns end in -a (for an apparent exception see 6.1/lc). 
ό ίππος the horse 
τό δώρον the gift 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
Now. ό 
ϊππ-oc 
οί 
ϊππ-οι 
τό 
δώρ-ον 
τά 
δώρ-α 
Voc. — 
ίππ-ε 
— 
ίππ-οι 
— 
δώρ-ον 
— 
δώρ-α 
Acc. 
τον 
ίππ-ον 
τούο 
ϊππ-ουο 
τό 
δώρ-ον 
τά 
δώρ-α 
Gen. 
του 
ίππ-ου 
των 
ϊππ-ων 
του 
δώρ-ου 
των 
δώρ-ων 
Dat. 
τω 
ίππ-ω 
TOIC 
ίππ-oic 
τω 
δώρ-ω 
τοιο 
δώρ-oic 
Notes 
1 Feminine nouns of the second declension are declined in 
exactly the same way as masculines but they require the 
feminine form of the definite article (and of adjectives; see 
below 3.1/3): ή vf\coc the island, τηο vocov of the disease. 
Only rarely can they be recognized as feminine by their 
meaning, e.g. ή παρθενοο the girl. 

2 A finite verb which has a plural neuter noun as its subject is 
almost always singular: τά δώρα έοτιν έν τη οικία the gifts are 
in the house (ecu is the 3rd s. pres. ind. of ειμί I am - see 
below 3.1/6). This curious idiom, which has not been 
satisfactorily explained, even applies when the neuter noun 
denotes human beings: τά άνδράποδα ουκ £CTIV έν τη άγορα 
the captives are not in the market place. 
3 In poetry an expanded form of the dative plural of both first 
and second declensions, -aici(v) -oici(v), often occurs, e.g. 
τΐμαια(ν), ίπποια(ν) (on the movable ν see 2.1/5 note 4). 
3.1/2 First declension (masculine nouns) 
These nouns have borrowed the -c of the nominative singular 
and the -ου ending of the genitive singular from second 
declension masculines. They are subdivided into those ending in 
-fxc (always preceded by ε, ι or p) and those in -r\c. 
νεδνίδο young man 
κριτής judge 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
Nom. 
νεδνί-Gc 
νεδνί-αι 
κριτ-^c 
κριτ-αί 
Voc. 
νεδνί-G 
νεσνί-αι 
κριτ-ά 
κριτ-αί 
Acc. 
νεδνί-δν 
νεδνί-Gc 
κριτ-ην 
κριτ-άο 
Gen. 
νεδνί-ου 
νεδνι-ων 
κριτ-ού 
κριτ-ων 
Dat. 
νεδνί-α 
νεδνί-aic 
κριτ-^η 
κριτ-aic 
Notes 
1 Most nouns in this class involve male occupations; cf. also 
ναύτηο sailor, οτρατιώτηο soldier. 
2 When used with these nouns the definite article (and 
adjectives) must be masculine. 
3 Nouns in -τηο (as well as compounds and names of peoples) 
have a vocative singular in -a (not -a). All other nouns in -ηο 
of this declension have a vocative in -η, e.g. ω Έρμη Ο 
Hermes! Contrast third declension proper names such as 
CcoKpa'nic (6.1/lc). 
4 The patronymic suffixes -ίδηο, -ιάδηο are added to the stem 
of proper names to mean son of (Κρονίδηο son of Kpovoc). 
In many names these suffixes have lost their original force: 
Θουκυδίδηο Thucydides, 'Αλκιβιάδης Alcibiades. 
3.1/3 First and second declension adjectives 
Adjectives in English, apart from this (pi. these) and that (pi. 
those), are invariable in form. In Greek, however, adjectives 
must agree with the nouns they qualify (i.e. go with and 

describe) in case, number and gender, and consequently they are 
declined in the same way as nouns, e.g. ό κακός νόμος the 
wicked law, την καλήν νίκην the fine victory (acc.), λόγων δεινών 
of clever speeches. 
The majority of Greek adjectives have their feminine form 
declined according to the first declension but their masculine 
and neuter according to the second or third. This latter feature 
allows us to classify them into first and second declension 
adjectives and first and third declension adjectives (10.1/3). First 
and second declension adjectives have, therefore, a feminine in 
-η (or -G, when preceded by ε, ι or p), a masculine in -oc and a 
neuter in -ov. καλός handsome, beautiful, fine is declined: 
Now. 
Voc. 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Dat. 
SINGULAR 
M. 
καλ-oc 
καλ-ε 
καλ-όν 
καλ-ού 
καλ-ώ 
F. 
καλ-ή 
καλ-η 
καλ-^ην 
καλ-ης 
καλ-η 
Ν. 
καλ-όν 
καλ-όν 
καλ-όν 
καλ-ού 
καλ-ώ 
PLURAL 
Μ . 
καλ-οί 
καλ-οί 
καλ-ούς 
καλ-ών 
καλ-oic 
F. 
καλ-αί 
καλ-αί 
καλ-άο 
καλ-ών 
καλ-αΐς 
Ν. 
καλ-ά 
καλ-ά 
καλ-α 
καλ-ών 
καλ-oic 
Now. 
Voc. 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Dat. 
Μ. 
δίκαι-oc 
δίκαι-ε 
δίκαι-ον 
F. 
δικαί-σ 
δικαί-G 
δικαί-<3ν 
δικαί-ου δικαί-Gc 
δικαί-ω 
δικαί-α 
Μ. 
F. 
αίςχρ-ός αίςχρ-ά 
αίςχρ-έ 
αίοχρ-ά 
αίοχρ-όν αίςχρ-άν 
αίςχρ-ού αίςχρ-ας 
αίςχρ-ώ αΐοχρ-α 
Ν. 
αίςχρ-όν 
αίοχρ-όν 
αίςχρ-όν 
αίοχρ-ού 
αίοχρ-ώ 
δίκαιος just and αίςχρός ugly, disgraceful are declined as follows 
in the singular: 
N. 
δίκαι-ον 
δίκαι-ον 
δίκαι-ον 
δικαί-ου 
δικαί-ω 
The plural is the same as for καλός.1 
The way in which these adjectives are given in the vocabulary 
(and in dictionaries) is καλός, -ή, -όν; δίκαιος, -G, -ον; αίςχρός, 
-fl, -όν. 
Some adjectives, however, have no separate feminine (the so-
called two termination adjectives) but employ the -oc forms for 
masculine and feminine alike. These are nearly all compounds, 
e-g. εύλογος reasonable 
(εύ + λόγος reason), 
έμπειρος 
experienced (έν + πείρα experience). Many have the negative ά-
(or αν- before a vowel; cf. English inun-) 
e.g. άλογος irrational 
+ λογος reason); ανάξιος unworthy 
(<xv + άξιος 
worthy). 
( a 
These adjectives are cited in the form εύλογος, -ov; έμπειρος, 
"^v. Examples of them in agreement with feminine nouns are: ή 
«οίκος νίκη the unjust 
victory, 
αί έμπειροι Μοΰςαι the 
experienced Muses. 
1 The 
δικακ 
note 4), 
SiKai~aCCeiu· ΐ 
8 e n ' ^ v e pl u r al feminine follows that of the masculine: δικαίων, not 
ων which we would have expected on the analogy of first declension nouns (2.1/2 

2 A finite verb which has a plural neuter noun as its subject is 
almost always singular: τά δώρα έςτιν έν τη οικία the gifts are 
in the house (έςτί is the 3rd s. pres. ind. of ειμί I am - see 
below 3.1/6). This curious idiom, which has not been 
satisfactorily explained, even applies when the neuter noun 
denotes human beings: τά άνδράποδα ουκ έςτιν έν τη άγορα 
the captives are not in the market place. 
3 In poetry an expanded form of the dative plural of both first 
and second declensions, -aici(v) -oici(v), often occurs, e.g. 
τϊμαΐςι(ν), ϊπποια(ν) (on the movable ν see 2.1/5 note 4). 
3.1/2 First declension (masculine nouns) 
These nouns have borrowed the -c of the nominative singular 
and the -ου ending of the genitive singular from second 
declension masculines. They are subdivided into those ending in 
(always preceded by ε, ι or p) and those in -ης. 
νεδνίδς young man 
κριτής judge 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
Nom. 
νεδνί-tfc 
νεδνί-αι 
κριτ-ης 
κριτ-αί 
Voc. 
νεδνί-<ϊ 
νεδνί-αι 
κριτ-ά 
κριτ-αί 
Acc. 
νεδνί-δν 
νεδνί-δς 
κριτ-ην 
κριτ-άς 
Gen. 
νεδνί-ου 
νεδνι-ων 
κριτ-ού 
κριτ-ων 
Dat. 
νεδνί-α 
νεδνί-aic 
κριτ-η 
κριτ-aic 
Notes 
1 Most nouns in this class involve male occupations; cf. also 
ναύτης sailor, ςτρατιώτης soldier. 
2 When used with these nouns the definite article (and 
adjectives) must be masculine. 
3 Nouns in -της (as well as compounds and names of peoples) 
have a vocative singular in -a (not -a). All other nouns in -ηο 
of this declension have a vocative in -η, e.g. ώ Έρμη Ο 
Hermes! Contrast third declension proper names such as 
€ωκράτης (6.1/lc). 
4 The patronymic suffixes -ίδηο, -ιάδηο are added to the stem 
of proper names to mean son of (Κρονίδηο son of Kpovoc). 
In many names these suffixes have lost their original force: 
Θουκυδίδης Thucydides, 'Αλκιβιάδης Alcibiades. 
3.1/3 First and second declension adjectives 
Adjectives in English, apart from this (pi. these) and that (pi. 
those), are invariable in form. In Greek, however, adjectives 
must agree with the nouns they qualify (i.e. go with and 

describe) in case, number and gender, and consequently they are 
declined in the same way as nouns, e.g. Ό KCIKOC νόμος the 
wicked law; την καλήν νίκην the ftne victory (acc.), λόγων δεινών 
of clever speeches. 
The majority of Greek adjectives have their feminine form 
declined according to the first declension but their masculine 
and neuter according to the second or third. This latter feature 
allows us to classify them into first and second declension 
adjectives and first and third declension adjectives (10.1/3). First 
and second declension adjectives have, therefore, a feminine in 
-η (or -fl, when preceded by ε, ι or p), a masculine in -oc and a 
neuter in -ov. KC^OC handsome, beautiful, fine is declined: 
SINGULAR 
M. 
F. 
N. 
Nom. καλ-oc καλ-^η 
καλ-όν 
Voc. καλ-έ 
καλ-ή 
καλ-όν 
Acc. καλ-όν καλ-^ην καλ-όν 
Gen. καλ-ού καλ-ηο καλ-ού 
Dat. 
καλ-ώ 
καλ-ή 
καλ-ώ 
PLURAL 
Μ . 
F. 
Ν . 
καλ-οί 
καλ-αί 
καλ-ά 
καλ-οί 
καλ-αί 
καλ-ά 
καλ-ούο καλΗϊο 
καλ-ά 
καλ-ών 
καλ-ών 
καλ-ών 
καλ-oic καλ-αις 
καλ-oic 
αιςχρ-ου aic/p-ac 
αίςχρ-ώ αίςχρ-α 
Ν. 
αίςχρ-όν 
αίοχρ-όν 
αίςχρ-όν 
αίςχρ-ού 
αίςχρ-ώ 
δίκαιοΰ just and aic%poc ugly, disgraceful are declined as follows 
in the singular: 
M. 
F. 
Ν. 
M. 
F. 
Nom. δίκαι-oc δικαί-G 
δίκαι-ον 
aicxp-oc αίςχρ-ά 
Voc. δίκαι-ε 
δικαί-G 
δίκαι-ον 
αίςχρ-έ 
αίςχρ-ά 
Acc. δίκαι-ον δικαί-Gv δίκαι-ον 
αίοχρ-όν αίςχρ-άν 
Gen. δικαί-ου δικαί-Cc δικαί-ου 
Dat. δικαί-ω δικαί-α 
δικαί-ω 
The plural is the same as for καλόα1 
The way in which these adjectives are given in the vocabulary' 
(and in dictionaries) is καA0c, -ή, -όν; δίκαιος -S, -ov; aic%poc, 
-8, -όν. 
Some adjectives, however, have no separate feminine (the so-
called two termination adjectives) but employ the -oc forms for 
masculine and feminine alike. These are nearly all compounds, 
e-g. εύλογοΰ reasonable 
(εύ + Xoyoc reason), 
έμπειροΰ 
experienced (έν + πείρα experience). Many have the negative ά-
(or αν- before a vowel; cf. English in-, un-) e.g. άλογοο irrational 
tu + 
reason); άνάξιοΰ unworthy 
(άν + άξιοΰ worthy). 
Ahese adjectives are cited in the form εύλογος -ov; έμπειρος 
"^v. Examples of them in agreement with feminine nouns are: ή 
GOIKOC νίκη the unjust 
victory, 
αί έμπειροι MoOcai the 
experienced Muses. 
T-pT 
; 
§ 
e . a c c e n t in the genitive plural feminine follows that of the masculine: δικαίων, not 
n o
 
1®V which we would have expected on the analogy of first declension nouns (2.1/2 
21 
c 
3 
h! 
s 

22 
c 
3 S 
δ 
Two important adjectives, πολύς much (pi. many), and μέγας 
great, big, show irregularities in the masculine and neuter 
nominative and accusative singular. Otherwise they are declined 
exactly as if their nominative singular masculine were πολλ-ός 
and μεγάλ-ος. So in the singular we find: 
M. 
Nom. πολύς 
Voc. — 
Acc. 
πολύν 
Gen. 
Dat. 
F. 
πολλ-ή 
πολλ-ην 
Ν. 
πολύ 
πολύ 
πολλ-ού 
πολλ-ω 
The plural is entirely regular. 
πολλ-οϋ πολλ-^ής 
πολλ-ω πολλ-η 
Μ. 
μέγας 
μεγάλ-ε 
μέγαν 
μεγάλ-ου 
μεγάλ-ω 
μεγάλ-η 
μεγάλ-η 
μεγάλ-ην 
μεγάλ-ης 
μεγάλ-η 
Ν. 
μέγα 
μέγα 
μέγα 
μεγάλ-ου 
μεγάλ-ω 
Position of adjectives 
(a) Where the definite article is absent, the adjective may appear 
either before or after its noun: εις οίκίδν καλήν into a 
beautiful house, περί δεινού λόγου concerning a clever 
speech. 
(b) When a noun is used with the definite article we have 
several possibilities. An adjective used as a simple attribute 
may occupy the same position as in English: ό δίκαιος 
νεδνίδς the just young man. But note that Greek may 
achieve exactly the same effect by writing ό νεσνίας ό 
δίκαιος with the article repeated. Both these positions are 
called attributive. Totally different, however; is the case 
where the adjective appears outside of the article-noun 
complex, ό νεδνίδς δίκαιος or δίκαιος ό νεδνίσς. In both 
these positions the adjective is considered as functioning as 
a predicate, and the meaning is the young man is just (on the 
omission of έςτί see below 3.1/6). Greek makes great use of 
this predicative position and can have a simple sentence 
where English would require a complex one. So whereas 
οίκίσν έχει καλήν means he has a beautiful house, την 
οίκίδν έχει καλήν or καλήν έχει τήν οίκίδν means the house 
which he has is beautiful, it is a beautiful house which he 
has (lit. beautiful the house he has). 
3.1/4 Adverbs 
Most adverbs are formed from adjectives by adding -ως to the 
stem. In effect this means changing the final ν of the gen. pi. m. 
of the adjective to c, e.g. δίκαιος (gen. pi. m. δικαίων) just, adv. 
δικαίως justly; άδικος (gen. pi. m. άδικων) unjust, adv. άδίκωο 
unjustly. 

Unlike in English, adverbs are nearly always placed immediately 
before the word they modify (l.U6a(i)); 
KCXKGDC καθεύδουαν 
they sleep badly. This is frequently a valuable clue in reading 
Greek. 
3.1/5 Prepositions 
We have already seen some prepositions which indicate motion 
or rest (2.1/3f, g, h). Many prepositions govern both the 
accusative and genitive, some the accusative, genitive and 
dative. There are always differences of meaning involved, e.g. 
παρά +acc. = to (wards); +gen. = from; +dat. = at, beside (παρά is 
used for persons, not places, e.g. παρά έμοί lit. beside me, i.e. at 
my house, cf. Fr. chez mot). The following are particularly 
common: 
(a) with accusative: 
διά 
on account of 
μετά 
after 
περί 
around (time, place, or number) 
(b) with genitive: 
άντί 
instead of 
διά 
through, by means of 
μετά 
(in company) with 
υπέρ 
on behalf of 
περί 
concerning 
Common idiomatic phrases involving παρά and another 
preposition κατά are: κατά γήν καί κατά θάλατταν by land and 
sea; κατά/παρά τούο νόμουο according to/contrary to the laws. 
3.1/6 Present indicative and infinitive of ειμί I am 
This verb is irregular in Greek as is its equivalent in other 
languages. It has little in common with other -μι verbs (18.1/1). 
SINGULAR 
1 ειμί 
lam 
PLURAL εομεν 
we are 
2 ει 
you (s.) are 
εοτε 
you (pi.) are 
3 έοτί(ν) he, she, it is 
είςί(ν) 
they are 
INFINITIVE 
είναι 
to be 
^ 
above forms are enclitic (see Appendix 8, d) except εί 
and είναι. 
ε ι μ ι never governs an accusative because it does not express an 
action inflicted by a subject on an object. What is said about the 
subject in clauses such as I am Aphrodite, wisdom is a skill, the 
&rls are beautiful is put into the nominative: ειμί 'Αφροδίτη, ή 
^οφια τέχνη έΰτίν, αί κόραι εί^ι καλαί. In clauses of this nature 
e appropriate form of ειμί (usually ecxi or εία.) is often 

omitted (cf. above 3.1/36): αθάνατος ή ψϋχή the soul [is] 
immortal; άνθρωπος μέτρον άπάντων a man [is] the measure of 
all things. Sometimes the ςοηίβχί requires that έςτί and είςί 
should be translated by there is and there are respectively; κόραι 
έν τη άγορα είαν there are girls in the agora (we would not 
normally say in English girls are in the agora). 
3.2 Greek reading 
An analysis of sentence 10 will be found in the key. 
Proverbs and short quotations 
By the end of antiquity the Greeks had accumulated an enormous 
number of proverbs and pithy sayings. Some have no identifiable 
origin, others are quotations, generally from poets. The following, 
and those included in future exercises, are nearly always in their 
original form. 
1 
ουκ ειςίν οί παμπλούςιοι (the very rich) άγαθοί. 
2 
έρημία μεγάλη έςτίν ή μεγάλη πόλις [city). 
3 
ή πενία τάς τέχνας έγείρει. 
4 
νεκρός ου δάκνει. 
5 
In these shorter sayings supply είςί in (*), έςτί in the rest: 
(*) πολλοί τραπέζης, ουκ άληθείας, φίλοι, (it) ή ευτυχία 
πολύφιλος. (iii) ό άνθρωπος πολιτικόν ζώον. (iv) άθάνατος ό 
θάνατος, (ν) ου ςχολή δούλοις. (νϊ) χωρίς ύγιείας άβιος 
βίος. (vii) νόςος φιλίας ή κολακεία, (viii) κακός άνήρ (man) 
μακρόβιος. 
6# τά μεγάλα δώρα της Τύχης έχει φόβον. 
7# κακόν φέρουςι καρπόν οί κακοί φίλοι. 
8# αύθαίρετος λύπη έςτίν ή τέκνων ςπορά. 
9 
δώρα θεούς πείθει. 
10 
ούτε ςυμπόςιον χωρίς ομιλίας ούτε πλούτος χωρίς άρετης 
ήδονήν έχει. 
11 
ό άνεξέταςτος βίος ού βιωτός άνθρώπω. 
12 
A fable of Aesop 
Aesop was a slave on the island of Samos in the early sixth 
century BC who composed animal fables. These were at 
first transmitted orally and became widely known. The 
collection that survives under Aesop's name seems to have 
been put into its present form early in the Christian era. 
The following is an adaptation. 
(/) 
πολλοί 
βάτραχοι άγγέλους πέμπουςι προς τον 
Κρονίδην διότι μονάρχου χρήζουςιν. 

(ii) οί άγγελοι τω Κρονίδη υπέρ των βατράχων λέγουαν· ω 
δίκαιε Κρονίδη, δεοπότηο ει των θεών. άρα έθέλειο 
τοιο βατράχοιο δεοπότην παρέχει ν; 
(iii) ό Κρονίδηο οφόδρα θαυμάζει καί μέγα ξύλον είο την 
των βατράχων λίμνην ρίπτει. 
(iv) τό ξύλον έκπλήττει τούο βατράχους καί ταχέωο 
άποτρέχουαν, άλλά ύποπτεύειν άρχουαν έπεί τό 
ξύλον έοτί ν άκίνητον. 
(ν) 
ϋοτερον τω ξύλω άνευ φόβου έπιβαίνουα 
καί 
λέγουαν ω ξένε, αρα θεόο ει ή άνθρωποο ή ζωον; 
(vi) έπεί ού λέγει ούδέν, νομίζουαν άνάξιον είναι εί 
τοιούτον δεοπότην έχουα καί άγγέλουο πάλιν πρόο 
τον Κρονίδην πέμπουαν περί νέου μονάρχου. 
(vii) οί άγγελοι τω Κρονίδη λέγουαν ω δέοποτα, δει άλλον 
μόναρχον τοΐο βατράχοιο πέμπειν έπεί ό πρώτόο έοτιν 
άκίνητοο καί άργόο. 
(viii) ό των θεών δεοπότηο έν οργή έχει τούο βατράχουο καί 
μεγάλην ύδραν πέμπει. 
(ix) ή ύδρα έοτί ν άπαραίτητοο καί τούο βατράχους έοθίει. 
(χ) 
ό μΰθοο οαφηνίζει ότι δει τούο άργούο δεοπόταο 
φέρειν έπεί οί δραστήριοι δεοπόται ταλαιπωρίαο 
πολλάκις φέρουαν. 
Notes 
2 ή μεγάλη πόλιο the article indicates a general class (2.1/2 
note 1); in English we would say a large city. 
3 With neither noun would we use an article in English (2.1/2 
note 1). The same applies in 5 (ii), (iii), (iv), and 7. 
6 # indicates that the sentence (or passage) is in verse. Poets 
often vary normal prose usage (but not in 6, 7, 8). Here (and 
in 9) a neuter plural subject is followed by a singular verb 
(3.1/1 note 2). 
(H) A question which does not involve an interrogative 
word (who? how?, etc.) may be introduced by άρα 
(10.1/2), which has no English equivalent; in such 
cases, we normally reverse subject and verb (are you a 
sailor? άρα ναύτηο ει;). 
(w) άρχουαν here begin. 
(v) τω ξύλω ... έπιβαίνουα they step on to the 
log, 
έπιβαίνω here takes the dative (cf. 13.1/26). 
(w) Certain compound negatives (here ούδέν) reinforce a 
preceding simple negative (ού) and the meaning here is 
it says nothing at all (see 7.1/6); άνάξιον (neuter) είναι 
ει ... lit. [ii] to be unworthy 
if ..., i.e. that it is 
despicable 
that... 

(viii) εν οργή εχει lit. has in anger; i.e. is angry with. 
(x) Note the pun on the two meanings of φέρω, endure 
and bring. 
3.2/1 Vocabulary 
άβιοο, -ov 
unlivable, 
intolerable 
αγαθός, -ή, -όν 
good 
άγγελος, -ου, ό 
messenger 
άθάνατος, -ov 
immortal 
άκίνητος, -ov 
motionless 
άλήθεια, -δς, ή 
truth 
άλλος, -η, -ov offor, another 
άνάξιος, -ov 
unworthy 
άνεξέταςτος, -ov 
without 
enquiry 
άνευ (prep.+gen.) 
without 
άνθρωπος, -ου, ό man, human 
being 
άπαραιτητος, -ov 
unmoved 
by prayer, pitiless 
άποτρέχω run away 
άρα (interrog. particle) see note 
to 12 (ii) 
άργός, -όν 
lazy, idle 
άρετή, -ής, ή excellence, virtue 
άρχω 
begin 
αυθαίρετος, -ov 
self-chosen, 
self-inflicted 
βάτραχος, -ου, ό 
frog 
βίος, -ου, ό life 
βιωτός, -όν worth living 
δάκνω 
bite 
δεςπότης, -ου, ό 
master 
δούλος, -ου, ό 
slave 
δραςτήριος, -ov 
active 
δώρον, -ου, τό 
gift 
έπεί (conj.) 
since 
έπιβαίνω (+dat.) 
step on to 
έρημία, -ας, ή 
desert, 
wilderness 
εύτυχίδ, -Cfc, ή good fortune 
ζώον, -ου, τό living being, 
animal 
ή (conj.) 
or 
ήδονή, -ής, ή 
pleasure 
θάνατος, -ου, ό 
death 
θεός, -ού, ό 
god 
κακός, -ή, -όν 
bad, evil 
καρπός, -ού, ό 
fruit 
κολακείσ, -Cte, ή 
flattery 
Κρονίδης, -ου, ό son of 
Cronos (i.e. Zeus) 
λίμνη, -ης, ή pool, marsh 
λύπη, -ης, ή grief 
μακρόβιος, -ov 
long-lived 
μόναρχος, -ου, ό 
monarch 
μύθος, -ου, ό story, fable 
νεκρός, -ού, ό 
corpse 
νέος, -σ, -ov 
new 
νομίζω think, consider 
νόςος, -ου, ή disease 
ξένος, -ου, ό 
stranger 
ξύλον, -ου, τό log 
όμΤλίσ, -Cfc, ή 
company 
οργή, -ής, ή 
anger 
έν όργή έχειν (+acc.) 
be 
angry with 
ού (ούκ, ούχ) 
no(t) (see 
2.1 /6α) 
ούδέν (neuter pron.) 
nothing 
ούτε ... ούτε 
neither ... nor 
παμπλούςιος, -ov very rich 
πείθω 
persuade 
πέμπω 
send 
πενίδ, H5c, ή 
poverty 
πλούτος, -ου, ό 
wealth 
πολιτικός, -ή, -όν 
political 
πολλάκις (adv.) 
often 
πολύφιλος, -ov having many 
friends 
πρώτος, -η, -ov 
first 
ςαφηνίζω make clear 
ςπορά, -ας, ή 
sowing, 
begetting 

ςυμπόαον, -ου, τό 
drinking 
party 
οφόδρα (adv.) 
very much, 
exceedingly 
ςχολή, -ης, ή leisure, res£ 
ταλαιπωρία, -3ς, ή 
hardship, 
distress 
ταχέως (adv.) 
quickly 
τέκνον, -ου, τό cfei'W 
τέχνη, -ης, ή λ rf, cra/ί, skill 
τοιούτος (adj. 21.1/3) 
of such 
a kind, such 
τράπεζα, -ης, ή 
table 
Τύχη, -ης, ή Fortune, Chance 
ύγίεια, -Gc, ή 
health 
ύδρδ, -σο,ή hydra, water-
serpent 
ύποπτεύω suspect, be 
suspicious 
ύςτερον (adv.) 
later, 
afterwards 
φέρω bear, bring 
φιλίδ, -Qc, ή 
friendship 
φίλος, -η, -ov dear, friendly; 
as a noun friend 
φόβος, -ου, ό fear 
χρήζω (+gen.) 
be in need of, 
desire 
χωρίο (prep.+gen.) 
without, 
apart from 
27 
c 
3 
H>' 
δ 

For this and every third subsequent unit a revision exercise will 
be found at the Internet website http://tyancientgreek.org 
4.1 Grammar 
4.1/1 Imperfect indicative active and weak 
aorist indicative active and infinitive active of 
-ω verbs 
Both the imperfect and the aorist (in the indicative) have 
reference to the past. The aorist has other moods, which we 
shall treat later, but the imperfect exists only in the indicative. 
The term weak aorist is used to distinguish the formation of this 
tense in λύω (and most other -ω verbs) from that in a minority of 
-ω verbs which have a strong aorist (7.1/1). There is no difference 
in meaning. The weak aorist is so named because its stem 
requires a suffix (c added to the present stem), whereas the stem 
of the strong aorist resembles that of the imperfect in having no 
suffix. The concept of verbal strength as shown in the presence 
(weak) or absence (strong) of suffixes is a somewhat whimsical 
notion of nineteenth-century grammarians. 
The aorist stem of λύω is λϋο- (the same as for the future), while 
the imperfect simply uses that of the present, λΐΗ The augment 
is prefixed to the stem in the indicative of both. This, in λύω and 
other verbs beginning with a consonant, consists of the vowel έ, 
giving us ελΌ- (imperfect), ελϋο- (aorist). The two sets of 
endings have similarities but the vowel immediately following 
the stem in the aorist is α in five of the six forms, whereas in this 
position in the imperfect we have the same pattern of o- and e-
sounds as in the present (cf. 2.1/5 note 3): 

IMPERFECT 
AORIST 
SINGULAR 
1 έλϋ-ον I was loosening, 
ελϋο-σ I loosened 
used to loosen 
2 ελϋ-εο 
3 έλϋ-ε(ν) 
ελϋο-ac 
έλϋο-ε(ν) 
PLURAL 
1 έλϋ-ομεν 
έλύο-αμεν 
2 έλύ-ετε 
3 έλΰ-ον 
έλύο-ατε 
έλϋο-αν 
λύο-αι 
INFINITIVE 
The imperfect and the aorist indicative both represent actions 
which occurred in the past, but, whereas the aorist simply tells 
us that an action took place, e.g. xovc νεδνίδο έπαιδεύοαμεν we 
educated the young men, the imperfect tells us that an action 
was continuous or repeated, e.g. τούο νείχνίίχο έπαιδεύομεν we 
were educating/used 
to educate the young men (the choice 
between continuous action were educating and habitual action 
used to educate will depend on the context).1 In other words, 
while the aorist indicative views a past action as a simple event, 
the imperfect indicative views it as a process, either continuous 
or interrupted (repeated or habitual). The difference between 
the two usually depends on our perception of the nature of the 
action or event described. We may, in a particular context, see it 
simply as something that happened in the past (it rained last 
summer). In another context we may see the same event as 
something continuous (it was raining last summer 
when 
Socrates visited us) or repeated (last summer it used to rain 
every time I went to the Acropolis). 
Naturally, many past 
actions and events are not normally viewed in more than one 
way (Pericles died during the plague). The term covering 
distinctions of this sort is aspect. We say that, although both 
these tenses of the indicative describe something that happened 
m the past, the aorist indicative expresses a momentary aspect, 
the imperfect a continuous or habitual aspect. 
This distinction in the indicative between the imperfect and the 
aorist also applies in the infinitive between the present and 
aorist, although there is no specific time reference (but see 
8-1/3* and 21.1/1 note). The present infinitive is used for an 
action which is seen as going on, in the process of happening or 
being repeated. The aorist infinitive is used for an action which 
^ seen simply as an event. Often both are to be translated in 
English simply by a present infinitive: ό Ιππόλυτοο τον Γλαΰκον 
εκελευοεν αίέν άριοτεύειν Hippolytus 
ordered Glaucus to be 
always best (αριστεύει ν to be best present infinitive, because the 
J he imperfect has two other meanings, which are less common: began 
to 
(I began to 
ncate etc. inceptive imperfect) and tried to (I tried to educate 
etc. conative imperfect). 

action is seen as one which is going on and continuing); ή 
Ξανθίππη τον δούλον έκέλευοε κρούοαι την θύραν Xanthippe 
ordered the slave to knock [on] the door (KpoOcai aorist 
infinitive, because Xanthippe envisages a simple (single) act; the 
present infinitive κρούειν would imply a continual action and 
require the translation to keep knocking). 
The imperfect has no infinitive because the present infinitive 
covers the meaning it would have had (i.e. to be loosening in a 
past context). For similar reasons the imperfect has no moods 
other than the indicative. 
1 The augment is prefixed to the indicative forms of the three 
historic tenses (the tenses whose indicative describes 
something in the past, viz imperfect, aorist, pluperfect 
(16.1/2)); it does not occur in the three primary tenses (the 
tenses whose indicative describes something in the present or 
future, viz present, future, perfect (15.1/1), and future 
perfect (16.1/4 note 2)). There is also a formal difference 
between the two categories in the 3rd pi. ind. act. ending. In 
historic tenses this has a final -v (e.£. έλϋον, ελϋοαν), but in 
primary tenses ends in -ci(v) (e.g. λϋουα(ν), λύςουα(ν)). 
2 There are two types of augment: 
(i) the syllabic augment, as described above, where a verb 
begins with a consonant. An initial ρ is doubled: ρίπτω 
throw, impf. έρρίπτον. This augment is so called because 
it adds a syllable to the forms where it is used. 
(ii) the temporal augment. This variety of the augment is 
called temporal (Latin tempus time) because it increases 
the time taken to pronounce (i.e. it lengthens) an initial 
vowel according to the following table. Note that α is 
lengthened to η and that i, when the second element of 
a diphthong, becomes subscript. As ι and υ (unlike ε/η 
and ο/ω) can represent both long and short vowels the 
temporal augment does not affect the spelling of verbs 
beginning with them. 
η and ω remain unchanged 
Examples are: ακούω hear, aor. ήκουςα; έλπίζω hope, impf. 
ήλπιζον; οικτίρω pity, impf. ωκτΓρον; ώδίνω be in labour, 
Notes 
α > η 
ε > η 
ι >Τ 
ο > ω 
υ > ϋ 
αι > η 
αυ > ηυ 
ει >η 
ευ > ηυ 
οι > ω 

impf. ωδϊνον (for other examples see Principal parts of 
verbs). A few verbs with initial ε take ει not η, e.g. έχω has 
impf. ειχον. ει and ευ are often not changed, e.g. ευρίσκω 
find, impf. εύριςκον or ηύριοκον. 
3 The endings of the 1st s. and 3rd pi. of the imperfect 
indicative active are the same. The context of a particular 
form will always make clear which person is meant. 
4 Like its present, the imperfect of ειμί is irregular: ή or fjv, 
ήοθα, ήν, ήμεν, ήτε, ήοαν. This is the only past tense of ειμί 
because the act of being was regarded as necessarily 
extending over a period of time. For all forms of ειμί see 
Appendix 3. 
4.1/2 First and second person pronouns, and 
αίιτό, -ην, -ό 
As in English, so in Greek we have pronouns of the first and 
second persons. These are declined as follows: 
First Person 
Second Person 
SINGULAR 
Nom. έγώ 
I 
ού (also voc.) 
you (s.) 
Acc. 
έμέ, με 
me 
ce, ce 
you 
Gen. 
έμοΰ, μου of 
me 
COO, cov 
of you 
Dat. 
έμοί, μοι to/for me 
coi, coi 
to/for you 
PLURAL 
Nom. ήμειο 
we 
ύμειο (also voc.) 
you (pi.) 
Acc. 
ήμάο 
us 
ύμάο 
you 
Gen. 
ημών 
of 
us 
ϋμών 
of you 
Dat. 
ήμιν 
to/for us 
ϋ μ ΐ ν 
to/for you 
The unaccented forms με, μου, μοι, οε, οου, coi are unemphatic 
and enclitic Appendix 8, d): διώκει με ή Άοπαοίσ Aspasia is 
chasing me. 
The other forms are emphatic: ού οέ, άλλα έμέ 
διώκει ή Άςπαάδ it's me, not you, that Aspasia is chasing (lit. 
Aspasia is chasing not you but me). With prepositions the 
emphatic forms are used, e.g. μετά cov with you, except for 
πΡοο: προς με towards me. Since the endings of verbs indicate 
the person involved, the nominative forms will occur only where 
eniphasis is required. 
Likewise, in the third person there is no need in Greek for an 
^emphatic form of the pronoun in the nominative since this 
is supplied by the personal endings of the verb: λέγει 
"e/she/it speaks (the gender of the subject will be clear from the 
context). The oblique cases (2.1/3), however; are supplied by 
αυτόν, -ην, -ό him, her, it (the nominative has another meaning 

32 
c 
3 
S 
see 9.1/3), which is declined exactly like the corresponding 
forms of καλόο (3.1/3) except that the neuter accusative singular 
is αυτό: ή 'AcnaciG, έχθέο έδίωκεν αυτόν Aspasia was chasing 
him yesterday. In the plural, whereas English has only one form 
(them), Greek distinguishes between the genders: m. αύτούΰ, f. 
αντάο, n. αυτά etc. (for the emphatic third person pronouns, see 
9.1/1). 
Note 
The possessive genitive of the unemphatic personal pronoun is 
placed after the noun which it qualifies, etc την οίκίσν μου into 
my house (lit. into the house of me); έκ τηο OIKIGC αυτών from 
their house (lit. from the house of them). For the position of the 
genitive of the emphatic personal pronouns see 9.1/5. 
4.1/3 Connecting particles 
A fundamental feature of Greek is the ubiquitous occurrence of 
particles. These are short, indeclinable words, many of which 
are postpositive, i.e. they cannot occur as first word in the 
phrase or sentence where they are used (these we shall mark 
here and in the vocabulary with an asterisk). Those such as καί 
and and άλλά but, which are not postpositive, are also called 
conjunctions. 
Particles have two basic functions: 
(a) to act as connectives linking grammatical elements of equal 
weight (words with words, phrases with phrases, sentences 
with sentences) 
(b) to add shades of tone, colour, or emphasis to individual 
words, phrases, or sentences, which in English would simply 
be conveyed by a variation in the tone or emphasis of the 
voice. 
Here we will concentrate mainly on connectives. Other particles 
will be explained as they occur in the reading and at 13.1/3. 
With very few well-defined exceptions, every sentence in Greek 
is connected to the preceding sentence by a connecting particle. 
The commonest of these is δέ* and, which is regularly used to 
connect a string of sentences where in English we would avoid 
any connecting word at all. In English it would be considered 
very bad style to begin sentence after sentence with and, but in 
Greek it is totally natural and acceptable, δέ* is also translatable 
as but, but when so used it denotes only a slight contrast: ό 
Άχιλλεύο ην έν τη οκηντγ ό δέ Πάτροκλοο έφερεν οννον Achilles 
was in the tent but (or and) Patroclus was bringing wine. A 

strongly contrasting but is expressed by άλλα, e.g. ού βραδέακ; 
αλλά ταχέωο oi βαρβαροι ήμάο έδίωκον the barbarians 
were 
chasing us not slowly but quickly. Note also γάρ* for, as, which 
introduces the reason for what goes before, ού μένομεν oi γάρ 
βάρβαροι rpac διώκουοιν we are not staying as the barbarians 
are chasing us. Similarly ούν* therefore, so, introduces the result 
of what goes before, οί βάρβαροι ήμάο διώκουαν ταχέακ: ούν 
τρέχομεν the barbarians are chasing us; therefore 
we are 
running quickly. 
καί and is frequently used as a simple conjunction connecting 
words, clauses or sentences, ήμεΐο καί ϋμεΐο you and we (Greek 
gives precedence to the 1st person, English is more polite). καί ... 
καί is used to express both ... and και ή 'Αφροδίτη και ό Aiovtfcoc 
both Aphrodite and Dionysos, and the same sense can also be 
conveyed by τε* ... καί, but since τε* is postpositive (and enclitic; 
see Appendix 8, d), the above phrase would become ή τε 
'Αφροδίτη καί ό AiovtJcoc. Less commonly τε* is used by itself as 
the equivalent of δέ or καί to connect a sentence to a preceding 
sentence. 
καί may also be used adverbially in the sense also, 
even, 
actually, καί συ, τέκνον even you (or you too), [my] child; τον 
βάρβαρον και έδιώκομεν we were 
actually 
chasing 
the 
barbarian. In this usage καί stands immediately before the word 
it modifies. The negative of adverbial καί is ούδέ, not even, e.g. 
ουδέ ό oivoc άγαθόο not even the wine [is] good. 
(As a 
conjunction ούδέ also means nor, and ... not). 
One of the most important combinations of particles is that of 
μεν* followed at a distance by δέ*. μέν*, however^ does not 
connect its own word group with anything preceding. For 
convenience, it is normally translated in dictionaries by on the 
one hand, which is somewhat too emphatic since μέν* simply 
introduces the first of a parallel pair of balanced or contrasted 
items. When we see μέν* we know to look ahead to find the 
corresponding δέ*. This tendency to place words in a formally 
balanced structure is fundamental to Greek. Any page of a 
week author will contain at least one μέν* ... δέ*. 
^ 
may think of the pair as meaning on the one hand... 
and/but 
Oft the other hand, but in most cases such a translation would 
be heavy or clumsy. Thus Οωκράτηο μέν λέγει έν τη άγορρ, έγώ 
ε βαδίζω μετά xf\c 'Araaciffc should not be translated by 
°frates 
on the one hand is speaking in the agora, but I on the 
0 ber hand am walking with Aspasia but by Socrates is speaking 
ut I am walking ... or whereas Socrates is speaking ... I am 
w<*lking ... 

The two elements balanced by μεν* ... δε* must always bt 
structurally parallel and the words they follow must be of equa 
grammatical weight. These can be nouns and pronouns (a< 
above), or adverbs, e.g. εύ μεν λέγει, κακώς δέ πράττει he speak 
well but acts badly, or verbs e.g. λέγει μέν εύ, πράττει δέ κακακ 
he speaks well but acts badly; here the change in the elements 
contrasted has meant that the adverbs εύ and κακώς have beer, 
placed after the words they qualify (cf. 2.1/6). Other parts or 
speech can also be contrasted in this way. 
4.2 Greek reading 
An analysis of sentence 5 will be found in the key. 
1 
αί μέν ήδοναί θνηταί, αί δ' άρεταί άθάνατοι. 
2 
άρτον ούκ ειχεν ό πτωχός καί τυρόν ήγόραζεν. 
3 
μιςθός άρετης έπαινος, κακίας δέ ψόγος. 
4# δεινοί πλέκει ν τοι μηχανάς Αιγύπτιοι. 
5 
τοις μέν δούλοις ή άνάγκη νόμος, τοις δέ έλευθέροιο 
άνθρώποις ό νόμος άνάγκη. 
6 
πάλαι ποτ' ήςαν άλκιμοι Μιλήςιοι. 
7 
άετός μυίας ού θηρεύει. 
8 
Futility 
(i) eic ούρανόν πτύεις, (ii) έξ άμμου ςχοινίον πλέκεις, (iii) 
θάλατταν ςπείρεις. (iv) ϊππον εις πεδίον διδάςκεις τρέχειν. 
(ν) κατόπιν έορτης ήκεις. (vi) νεκρόν μαςτίζεις. (vii) όνον 
κείρεις. (viii) προ της νίκης τό έγκώμιον φδεις. (ix) πρόο 
κέντρα λακτίζεις. (χ) τάς μηχανάς μετα τον πόλεμον 
κομίζεις. 
9 
The fall of Croesus 
Herodotus (fifth century BC) is the earliest surviving Greek 
historian and has been called the father of history. The subject 
of his work is the rise of the Persian empire and its fateful 
clash with the Greek world which culminated in the 
unsuccessful invasion of Greece in 480-479 BC. The following 
passage is based on Herodotus' description of the subjugation 
of Lydia (see map on p. xiv), which brought the Persians into 
contact with the Greeks of the Asia Minor coast. 
ό δέ Κροΐςος ό τών Λυδών βαςιλεύς (king) την τών Περςών 
άρχήν διαφθείρειν ήθελεν κατά γάρ τό έν Δελφοΐς 
χρηςτηριον άρχήν μεγάλην έμελλε παΰςαι. άλλά τέλος την 
μέν έαυτοΰ (his own) άρχήν έπαυςεν, την δέ τών Περςών ού. 
μετά δέ την τών Περςών νίκην ό Κύρος ό τών Περςών βαςιλεύς 5 
τον Κροίςον έπί πυράν μεγάλην άνεβίβαςεν (made ... go up). 
ό δέ Κροΐςος τούς λόγους τούς του Οόλωνος (of Solon) του 
'Αθηναίου έφρόντιζεν ούδείς (no-one) τών άνθρο)πων όλβιος 

jtpo του θανάτου, ήουχοο ούν έμενε την τελευτην άλλα ό 
Κύροο, διότι ό Kpoicoc καί ocioc ην καί άγαθόο, έκέλευοε 10 
μέν τούο οτρατιώταο άπό τηο πυράο αύτόν καταβιβάοαι (to 
bring down), έλεξε (spoke) δέ ώδε* ώ Κροΐοε, τίο (who?) οε 
ανθρώπων έπειοε (persuaded) πολέμιον άντι φίλου έπί την 
γήν μου ςτρατεΰοαι; ό δέ Kpoicoc, ώ Κΰρε, έφη (said), έγώ μέν 
έπί οε έοτράτευοα, ό δέ θεόο ό έν Δελφοΐο επειοε με 15 
οτρατεΰοαι. ού γάρ είμι άνόητοο ούδέ έθέλω τον πόλεμον 
έχειν άντί τηο είρηνηο. έν μέν γάρ τή ειρήνη οί νεανίαι τούο 
γεραιούο (the old) θάπτουοιν, έν δε τω πολέμω οί γεραιοί 
τούο νεανίαο. άλλά τοΰτο (lit. this thing) φίλον ην τοΐο θεοιο. 
ό ούν Κϋροο αύτόν έλυοε καί έγγύο καθειοεν (made ... sit), ό 20 
δέ Kpoicoc αύθιο έλεξεν ώ Κΰρε, τί (what?) πράττουαν οί 
οτρατιώταί cov; την πόλιν (city) οου, έφη ό KOpoc, άρπάζουοι 
καί τον πλοΰτόν cov έκφέρουοιν. ούχ άρπάζουοι την πόλιν 
μου, έφη ό Kpoicoc, ούδέ τον πλοΰτον ούδέν (nothing) γάρ 
έμοί έοτιν. άλλά οε άγονοι τε καί φέρουοιν. μετά δέ τοΰτο 25 
φίλοο ην αύτω. την γάρ οοφίαν αύτοΰ έν τιμή είχεν ό KOpoc. 
Notes 
1 
The appropriate part of ειμί is to be supplied (also in 3, 4, 
5). 
2 
Cheese (τϋρόο) would have been a luxury to the poor. 
3 
Take μιοθόο with the genitives άρετηο and κακίαο; normal 
prose usage would require ό μιοθόο but the definite article is 
often omitted in proverbs and in verse. 
4 
τοι is a particle conveying emphasis, commonly employed in 
proverbs; it is not to be translated, since in English we 
would convey the emphasis by tone of voice; μηχανάο here 
used metaphorically devices, ways and means (in S(x) below 
the word is used concretely). 
6 
Miletus, the city of the Μιλήοιοι, flourished in the seventh 
and sixth centuries BC; in later times it became symbolic of 
past greatness; Μιλήαοι does not have an article as this is 
optional with proper nouns (2.1/2,l(iii)). 
® Μ μηχαναί are here engines of war (siege weapons and the 
like). 
9 
/.I δέ connects this passage with what precedes in the 
original and need not be translated. 1.2 Δελφοί is a plural 
place name. There are many such names in Greek ('Αθήναι 
Athens, Θήβαι Thebes). 1.3 έμελλε was destined to, was 
going to. 11.7f Solon was an Athenian statesman who had 
visited Croesus and, in conversation with him, had 
enunciated the very Greek sentiment Call no man happy 
before he dies (only then can a true and full judgement be 
made); έφρόντιζεν began to ponder inceptive imperfect 

36 
c 
3 
s 
(4.1/1 footnote); ούδείο ... θανάτου are Solon's actual words 
(inverted commas are not normally used in printing Greek -
1.1/1 note 3)./.8 ήσυχος translate by an adverb quietly 
(Greek often uses an adjective where English would have an 
adverb). /. 12 Take TIC ... άνθρώπων together; take πολέμιο\ 
with ςε, [as an] enemy (Greek does not here need an 
equivalent to the English as). /.18 τούτο refers to what has 
happened to Croesus; φίλον +dat. dear to, pleasing to. 1.22 
ούχ 2.1/6<z(i). II.23-4 άγουςί τε καί φέρουαν lit. are both 
driving and carrying, i.e. are plundering and carrying off (a 
set expression; the τε need not be translated) but 
here 
translate simply by plunder. 
4.2/1 Vocabulary 
άγοράζω 
buy 
άγω καί φέρω 
plunder 
ςίδω 
sing 
άετός, -ού, ό eagle 
'Αθηναίος, -S, -ov 
Athenian 
Αιγύπτιος, -α, -ov 
Egyptian 
άλκιμος, -ov 
brave 
άμμος, -ου, ή 
sand 
άνάγκη, -ης, ή 
necessity 
άνόητος -ov 
foolish 
άντί (prep.+gen.) 
instead of 
άπό (prep.+gen.) 
from, away 
from 
άρπάζω 
seize, plunder, snatch 
άρτος, -ου, ό 
bread 
άρχή, -ήο, ή 
empire 
αύθις (adv.) 
again 
γάρ* (connecting particle) 
for, as 
δεινός, -ή, -όν 
clever at 
(+inf.) 
Δελφοί, -ων, οί 
Delphi 
διδάςκω 
teach 
έγγύς (adv.) 
near, nearby 
έγκώμιον, -ου, τό 
victory-
song 
έθέλω 
am willing, wish 
ειρήνη, -ης, ή 
peace 
έκφερω carry out 
έλεύθερος, -ix, -ov 
free 
έξ = έκ 
έορτή, -ής, ή 
feast 
έπαινος, -ου, ό 
praise 
έπί (prep.+acc.) 
on to, to, 
against 
ήςυχος, -η, -ov 
quiet, 
peaceful9 
θάπτω 
bury 
θηρεύω 
hunt 
θνητός, -ή, -όν 
mortal 
ίππος, -ου, ό 
horse 
κακία, -ας, ή 
wickedness 
κατά (prep.+acc.) 
according 
to 
κατόπιν (+gen.) 
after 
κείρω 
cut (the hair), shear 
κελεύω 
order 
κέντρον, -ου, τό 
goad 
κομίζω 
bring 
λακτίζω 
kick 
λόγος, -ου, ό 
word 
Λΰδός, -ού, ό 
Lydian 
μαςτίζω 
whip, flog 
μέλλω 
be destined to 
μένω wait (for) 
μετά (prep.+acc.) 
after 

μηχανή, -ήο, ή 
engine of war; 
device 
ΜΓλήοιοο, -ff, -ov of Miletus, 
Milesian 
μιςθός, -ού, ό /wy, reward 
μυια, -cte, η 
fly 
νίκη, -T]c, ή 
victory 
νόμος, -ου, ό 
law 
όλβιος, 
/wppy 
ovoc, -ου, ό/ή tfss 
ocioc, -fl, -ov 
pious, devout 
ουδέ (conj.) tfwd «οί, «or 
ούν* (particle) 
therefore, so, 
then 
ουρανός, -ού, ό s&y 
πάλαι (adv.) 
long ago 
παύω (tr.) 
stop, put an end to 
πεδίον, -ου, τό 
plain 
Πέρςης, -ου, ό 
Persian 
πλέκω 
plait; devise, contrive 
πολέμιος, -G, -ov 
hostile, 
enemy 
πόλεμος, -ου, ό 
war 
ποτέ* 
once 
πράττω 
do 
πρό (prep.+gen.) 
before 
πτύω 
spit 
πτωχός, -ού, ό 
beggar 
πυρά, -ας, ή 
funeral pyre 
ςοφίδ, -Gfc, ή 
wisdom 
ςπείρω sow (with seed) 
ςτρατεύω 
make an 
expedition 
ςτρατιώτης, -ου, ό 
soldier 
ςχοινίον, -ου, τό little rope 
τε* ... καί/τε* 
both ... and 
τελευτη, -ής, ή end, death 
τέλος (adv.) 
in the end, 
finally 
τιμή, -ής, ή 
respect 
τοι* see note on 4 
τρέχω 
run 
τϋρόο, -ού, ό 
cheese 
φροντίζω 
think about, 
ponder 
χρηςτήριον, -ου, τό 
oracle 
ψόγος, -ου, ό 
blame 
ώδε (adv.) 
thus, as follows 

36 
C D 
TV s 
(4.1/1 footnote); ουδείς ... θανάτου are Solon's actual worc 
(inverted commas are not normally used in printing Greek. 
1.1/1 note 3)./.8 ήσυχοο translate by an adverb quietl 
(Greek often uses an adjective where English would have ar 
adverb). /. 12 Take TIC ... άνθρώπων together; take πολέμιο 
with ce, [as an] enemy (Greek does not here need & 
equivalent to the English as). I.18 τούτο refers to what ha 
happened to Croesus; φίλον +dat. dear to, pleasing to. l.ll 
ούχ 2.1/6tf(i). //.23-4 άγουοί τε καί φέρουαν lit. are botl. 
driving and carrying, i.e. are plundering and carrying off (a 
set expression; the τε need not be translated) but here 
translate simply by plunder. 
4.2/1 Vocabulary 
άγοράζω 
buy 
άγω καί φέρω 
plunder 
ςίδω 
sing 
άετόο, -ου, ό eagle 
Άθηναΐοο, -α, -ov 
Athenian 
Αίγύπτιοο, -Q, -ov 
Egyptian 
άλκιμοο, -ov 
brave 
άμμοο, -ου, ή 
sand 
άνάγκη, -ηο, ή 
necessity 
άνόητοο -ov 
foolish 
άντί (prep.+gen.) 
instead of 
άπό (prep.+gen.) 
from, away 
from 
άρπάζω 
seize, plunder, snatch 
άρτοο, -ου, ό 
bread 
άρχή, -r\c, ή 
empire 
αύθιο (adv.) 
again 
γάρ* (connecting particle) 
for, as 
δει voc, -ή, -όν 
clever at 
(+inf.) 
Δελφοί, -ων, oi 
Delphi 
διδάοκω 
teach 
έγγύο (adv.) 
near, nearby 
έγκώμιον, -ου, τό 
victory-
song 
έθέλω 
am willing, wish 
ειρήνη, ^ηο, ή 
peace 
εκφερω 
carry out 
έλεύθεροο, -Q, -ov 
free 
έξ = έκ 
έορτή, -ήο, ή 
feast 
έπαινοο, -ου, ό 
praise 
έπί (prep.+acc.) 
on to, to, 
against 
ήουχοο, -η, -ov 
quiet, 
peaceful9 
θάπτω 
bury 
θηρεύω 
hunt 
θνητόο, -ή, -όν 
mortal 
ϊπποο, -ου, ό 
horse 
κακία, -ac, ή 
wickedness 
κατά (prep.+acc.) 
according 
to 
κατόπιν (+gen.) 
after 
κείρω 
cut (the hair), shear 
κελεύω 
order 
κέντρον, -ου, τό 
goad 
κομίζω 
bring 
λακτίζω 
kick 
λόγοο, -ου, ό 
word 
Λΰδόο, -ού, ό 
Lydian 
μαστίζω 
whip, flog 
μέλλω 
be destined to 
μένω wait (for) 
μετά (prep.+acc.) 
after 

μηχανη,-ήο, ή engine of war; 
device 
Μαήαοο,-β,-ον 
of Miletus, 
Milesian 
μιοθόο,-ου,ό 
pay, reward 
μυια, -cfo, ή 
fly 
ν ί κ η , - T i c , η , v i c t o r y 
νόμος, -ου, ό 
law 
όλβιοο, 
haPPy 
όνος, -ου, ό/ή ass 
ocioc, -δ, -ov 
p/'ows, devout 
ουδέ (conj.) 
and not, nor 
ούν* (particle) 
therefore, so, 
then 
ουρανός, -ου, ό 
sky 
πάλαι (adv.) 
long ago 
παύω (tr.) 
stop, put an end to 
πεδίον, -ου, τό 
plain 
Πέρςης, -ου, ό 
Persian 
πλέκω 
plait; devise, contrive 
πολέμιος, -Q, -ov 
hostile, 
enemy 
πόλεμος, -ου, ό 
war 
ποτέ* 
once 
πράττω 
do 
προ (prep.+gen.) 
before 
πτύω 
spit 
πτωχός, -ου, ό 
beggar 
πυρά, -ας, ή 
funeral pyre 
ςοφίδ, -fifc, ή 
wisdom 
ςπείρω sow (with seed) 
ςτρατεύω 
make an 
expedition 
ςτρατιώτης, -ου, ό 
soldier 
ςχοινίον, -ου, τό little rope 
τε* ... καί/τε* 
both ... and 
τελευτη, -ής, ή end, death 
τέλος (adv.) 
in the end, 
finally 
τΓμή, -ής, ή 
respect 
τοι* see note on 4 
τρέχω 
run 
τϋρός, -ου, ό 
cheese 
φροντίζω 
think about, 
ponder 
χρηςτηριον, -ου, τό 
oracle 
ψόγος, -ου, ό 
blame 
ώδε (adv.) 
thus, as follows 

5.1 Grammar 
5.1/1 Third declension - consonant stem 
nouns (1) 
The third declension contains nouns of all three genders. They 
are divided into two classes, those with stems ending in a 
consonant and those with stems ending in a vowel or diphthong. 
Within the various sub-groups of each class masculine and 
feminine nouns have the same case endings but neuters always 
follow the rule previously given (3.1/1) for the nominative, 
vocative and accusative (not every sub-group has each gender). 
The gender of a third declension noun is only sometimes 
predictable from its ending. 
With all consonant stem nouns we discover the stem by 
subtracting -oc from the genitive singular (e.g. γύψ vulture, gen. 
Ytfrcoc, stem γϋπ-) and the other case endings are added to this. 
As the stem is modified, occasionally beyond recognition, in the 
nominative singular, both nominative and genitive singular must 
be learnt. 
(a) Stems in κ, γ, χ (palatals), π, β, φ (labials), and τ, δ, θ 
(dentals) 
The declension of regular masculine and feminine noun> 
with stems ending in these consonants is given belo^· 
Masculine and feminine nouns in these sub-groups have a 
nominative singular in c, which combines with, or replaces· 
the final consonant of the stem as follows: 
κ/γ/χ + c > ξ; π/β/φ + c > ψ; τ/δ/θ + c > c 
The same changes occur before the dative plural ending 
(which can take a movable v; cf. 2.1/5 note 4); they al*0 
occur in verbs with similar stems (6.1/4). 

φύλαξ (m) 
guard 
stem φυλακ-
S I N G U L A R 
N.V. φυλαξ 
Acc. 
φύλακ-α 
Gen. φύλακ-oc 
Dat. 
φύλακ-ι 
PLURAL 
N.V 
φύλακ-ες 
Acc. 
φύλακ-ας 
Gen. φυλάκ-ων 
Dat. 
φύλαξι(ν) 
γύψ (m) 
έρως(m) 
πατρίς (f) 
vulture 
love 
native land 
γϋπ-
έρωτ-
πατριδ-
γύψ 
έρως 
πατρίς (ν. πατρί) 
γύπ-α 
έρωτ-α 
πατρίδ-α 
γϋπ-oc 
έρωτ-oc 
πατρίδ-ος 
γϋπ-ί 
έρωτ-ι 
πατρίδ-ι 
γύπ-ες 
έρωτ-ες 
πατρίδ-ες 
γύπ-ac 
έρωτ-ας 
πατρίδ-ας 
γϋπ-ων 
έρώτ-ων 
πατρίδ-ων 
γϋψί(ν) 
έρω-ςι(ν) 
πατρί-ςι(ν) 
Within these sub-groups the only neuters are those with a τ 
stem. The vast majority of these have a nominative singular in 
-μα and a genitive in -ματος. Of the others some have a sigma in 
the nominative singular (as κέρας), some do not (e.g. ήπαρ, 
ήπατος liver). 
stem 
N.V. 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Dat. 
ςώμα (n) body 
ςωματ-
SINGULAR 
ςώμα 
ςώμα 
ςώματ-ος 
οώματ-ι 
PLURAL 
ςώματ-α 
ςώματ-α 
ςωμάτ-ων 
ςώμα-ςι(ν) 
κέρας (n) horn 
κερδτ-
SINGULAR 
κέρας 
κέρας 
κέρατ-ος 
κέρατ-ι 
PLURAL 
κέρδτ-α 
κέρδτ-α 
κεράτ-ων 
κέρδ-ςι(ν) 
(b) Stems in ντ (all masculine) 
These have a nominative singular in -de or -ων. Unlike nouns of 
the preeeding sub-groups (except πατρίς), they have a separate 
voeative singular, which is formed by dropping τ from the stem. 
I heir dative plural has the change ντ + c > ς, with lengthening 
or the preceding α and ο to δ and ου (not ω) respectively. This 
engthening occurs to compensate for the reduction of three 
consonants to one. 
stem 
Nom. 
Voc. 
Acc. 
Sat. 
yWc (m) giant 
γιγαντ-
SINGULAR 
γίγσς 
γίγαν 
"/ίγαντ-α 
ϊίγαντ-oc 
ϊίγαντ-ι 
PLURAL 
γίγαντ-ες 
γίγαντ-ες 
γίγαντ-ας 
γιγάντ-ων 
γίγσςι(ν) 
λέων (m) lion 
λεοντ-
SINGULAR 
λέων 
λέον 
λέοντ-α 
λέοντ-ος 
λέοντ-ι 
PURAL 
λέοντ-ες 
λέοντ-ες 
λέοντ-ας 
λεόντ-ων 
λέουςι(ν) 

Notes 
1 
Some nouns with these stems are slightly irregular, mostly in 
the nominative singular. The most common are: 
γόνυ 
γόνατοο (η) 
knee 
γυνή 
γυναικόο (f) 
woman (voc. s. γύναι) 
θρίξ 
τριχός (f) 
hair (dat. pi. θριξί(ν) 
νύξ 
νυκτός (f) 
night (dat. pi. νυξί(ν)) 
οδούς 
οδόντος (m) 
tooth 
0\)C 
ώτός (η) 
ear 
παις 
παιδός (m or f) 
child (voc. sing, παι) 
πους 
ποδός (m) 
foot 
ύδωρ 
ύδατος (η) 
water 
2 
Stems in ιδ which are not accented on the t have -iv, not 
-ιδα, in the acc. s., e.g. epic, έριδοΰ (f) strife, acc. έριν. This 
also applies to xapic, χάριτοΰ (f) favour; acc. χάριν and 
opvlc, opvlGoc (m. or f.) bird, acc. δρνιν. 
3 
Third declension monosyllables are accented on their ending 
in the genitive and dative, both singular and plural (see γύψ 
above). 
5.1/2 Contracted verbs 
Unlike verbs with stems ending in ι and υ (έΰθίω eat, λύω 
loosen), verbs whose stems end in α, ε and ο contract their stem 
vowel with the initial vowel of the endings in the present and 
imperfect. A consonantal suffix is used to form the stem of the 
other tenses (e.g. c in the future and aorist - see note 2). 
Examples of contracted verbs are: τΐμά-ω honour, ποιέ-ω do, 
make, δηλό-ω make clear, show. Since all three types contract 
their stem vowels and the -ω of the 1st s. pres. ind. act. to -ώ 
(τιμώ, ποιώ, δηλώ), these verbs are always cited in vocabulary 
lists in their uncontracted form to make identification 
immediately obvious. For the rules governing the accentuation 
of contracted verbs see Appendix 8, b(i). Paradigms for the three 
types are given in Appendix 2. As the endings involved are the 
same as for λύω, it is the rules for contraction which are our 
principal concern here: 
(a) Stems in a (model τιμάω) 
α + an e-sound (ε, η) > α: έτΓμα (έτίμα-ε) 
α + an o-sound (ο, ου, ω) > ω: τιμάει (τϊμά-ουα); τϊμώμεν 
(τΐμά-ομεν) 
α + an ι- diphthong (ει, η, οι) obeys the above rules but 
retains the iota as a subscript in the contracted form: 
τίμα (τΐμά-ει) 
The combinations of α + η/η/οι occur in forms not yet treated. 

φ) Stems in ε (model πονέω) 
ε + ε > ει: ποιείτε (ποιέ-ετε) 
ε + ο > ου: έποίουν (έποίε-ον) 
ε disappears before a long vowel or diphthong: ποιώ 
(ποιέ-ω); ποιοΰοι (ποιέ-ουα). 
(c) Stems in ο (model δηλόω) 
ο + ε/ο/ου > ου: έδήλου (έδήλο-ε); δηλούμεν (δηλό-ομεν); 
δηλοΰα (δηλό-ουα) 
ο + η/ω > ω: δηλώ (δηλό-ω) 
ο + an i-diphthong (ει, οι, η) > οι: δηλοΐ (δηλό-ει) 
The combinations ο + η/οι/η occur in forms not yet treated. 
The above contractions, which cover all forms of contracted 
verbs, also occur in other parts of speech, e.g. the noun voOc (< 
vooc; 6.1/2). Contraction was a regular feature of Attic Greek 
but was not as rigorously applied in other dialects. 
Notes 
1 
The present infinitives of a- and o-stems contract to -αν and 
-ουν respectively, not -Qv and -oiv. This is because the -ειν 
of the pres. inf. act. of uncontracted -ω verbs (e.g. λό-ειν) is 
itself a contraction of ε + εν. With -αω and -οω verbs we 
therefore have the double contractions α + ε + ε ν > δ + εν> 
αν; ο + ε + εν > ου + εν > ουν, which give us τΐμάν, δηλοΰν. 
2 
All tenses other than the present and imperfect are formed 
by lengthening the stem vowel and proceeding exactly as 
with uncontracted verbs (α > η (except after ε, ι, ρ where we 
have α > α); ε > η; ο > ω). The fut. ind. act. of the model 
verbs is τΐμήΰω, ποιήΰω, δηλώΰω and the aor. ind. act. 
έτίμηΰα, έποίηΰα, έδήλωΰα. However, γελάω laugh does not 
lengthen its a: fut. γελάα>μαι (8.1/1 note 1) aor. eyeXaca. 
Likewise, καλέω call and τελέω complete do not lengthen 
their ε in the aorist: έκάλεΰα, έτέλεΰα; their future is, rather 
confusingly, the same as their present, καλώ, τελώ, because 
the expected καλέΰω, τελέΰω lost the intervocalic c and 
contraction resulted (cf. 6.1/lc). 
3 
A contracted future also occurs in most verbs in -ίζω 
(6.1/4&) and all verbs with stems in λ, μ, ν, ρ (11.1/3). Nearly 
all such futures have a stem in ε (i.e. the contraction is -ώ, 
-εις, 
etc<) exactly as the present of ποιέω). A few have a 
stem in a, as έλαύνω drive, fut. stem έλα- giving έλώ, έλόκ;, 
ελα, etc., exactly as the present of τιμάω. 
ζαω be alive contracts to η where other -άω verbs have S: 
Pres. ind. act. ζώ, ζήΰ, ζή, ζώμεν, ζήτε, ζακ:ι(ν), inf. ζην; impf. 
!nd. act. έζων, έζηΰ, έζη, έζώμεν, έζήτε, έζων. So also πεινάω 
be hungry and διψάω be thirsty. 

5 
Most disyllabic verbs in -εω (as δέω need, πλέω sail, πνέο 
breathe, ρέω flow) contract only when ε is followed by 8, 
The pres. ind. act. of πλέω is πλέω, πλεΐο, πλεΐ, πλέομεν. 
πλεΐτε, πλέουα(ν); impf. έπλεον, έπλειο, έπλει, έπλέομεν, 
έπλεΐτε, έπλεον. The 3rd s. act. of δέω need, pres. δει, impf. 
έδει, is used impersonally in the sense of it is/was necessary 
(examples have already occurred in the reading exercises). It 
is construed with the accusative of the person involved and 
an infinitive: δει με έν τη οικία μένει ν, it is necessary for me 
to remain in the house, i.e. I must remain ... 
6 
There is no movable ν in the 3rd s. of the impf. ind. act. of 
contracted verbs. 
5.1/3 Further uses of the definite article 
In English we can, to a limited degree, use the definite article 
with an adjective to form a noun-equivalent: only the good die 
young; only the brave deserve the fair. In Greek, however, the 
definite article can be used to create a noun-equivalent out of 
virtually any part of speech (adjective, adverb, prepositional 
phrase, infinitive) to which it is prefixed: ό οοφόο the wise [man]; 
ή οοφή the wise [woman]; οί τότε the then [men], i.e. the men of 
that time; οί νυν the now [men], i.e. the men of today; οί έν ττ\ 
οικία the [men] in the house (the last three examples can also 
mean the [people] ..., as Greek uses the masculine article to refer 
to mixed groups). The neuter singular article is used with 
adjectives to express abstractions: τό καλόν beauty, τό αίοχρόν 
ugliness. When prefixed to an infinitive (articular infinitive, i.e. 
! article + infinitive) it forms an equivalent of verbal nouns in 
English: τό λέγειν the [act of] speaking, speech; τό φεύγειν the 
[act of] fleeing, flight. Each of these noun-equivalents functions 
exactly like any normal noun, and the case of the article (and of 
an accompanying adjective) varies according to a particular 
context: φερω τον κακόν I am carrying the cowardly [man]; περί 
του παιδεύειν έλεγεν he was speaking 
about 
the [act of] 
educating, i.e. about education; έδιώκομεν τούο έν τη νηοω we 
were chasing the [men] in the island. 
Another very common type of noun-phrase consists of the 
neuter plural of the definite article followed by a genitive. Here 
the article may be translated in a wide variety of ways. Thus τά 
τών Αθηναίων (lit. the [things] of the Athenians) can mean the 
property/situation/condition/fortunes/interests, 
etc., of the 
Athenians; τά έν τη ΤΡώμη the things!events!circumstances, 
etc. in 
Rome. 
The context must determine the most appropriate 
rendering. 

The article can also be used as a third person pronoun when 
combined with the particles μέν* ... δέ; ό μέν ... ό δέ the one ... 
the other (one man ... another); oi μέν ... oi δέ some ... others: ό 
διώκει την δόξαν, ό δέ τό άργύριον one man chases fame, 
another money; οί μέν άπέθντ^κον, οί δέ έφευγον some were 
jying, others running away, ό δέ but/and he (and οί δέ, etc.) 
when used by itself refers to someone mentioned in the 
preceding sentence other than its subject: ό CiOKpdmic έκέλεικε 
την Ξανθίππην κροΰΰαι την μυΐαν ή δέ ουκ ήθελεν Socrates 
ordered Xanthippe to swat the fly but she refused (lit. was not 
willing). This use of the article is a survival from an earlier stage 
in Greek when it was employed solely as a third person pronoun 
(cf. 25.1/3*) 
We have already met three usages of the article in Greek where 
there is no corresponding article in English (2.1/2 note 1). There 
is also one important instance where the reverse holds true, viz 
where the noun or adjective is predicative. Thus, when 
Thucydides (6.2.11) is telling us that originally the Athenians 
called the Acropolis simply 'the polis', he writes καλείται (3rd s. 
pres. ind. passive) ή Άκρόπολιο έτι πόλιο the Acropolis is still 
called 'the polis', but there is no article with πόλια In such 
sentences, therefore, there should be no doubt as to which word 
is the subject and which is the complement. 
Notes 
1 
Adjectives without the definite article can also be used as 
nouns but they then have an indefinite sense: έν τφ πολέμω 
πολλοί κακά έφερον in the war many [people] were suffering 
hardships (lit. bad things). When used indefinitely in the 
singular an adjective is normally accompanied by the 
indefinite pronoun TIC (10.1/1). 
2 
In expressions such as 'Αλκιβιάδηΰ ό Κλεινίου Alcibiades, 
[son] of Cleinias the article is followed by the genitive and 
the word for son or daughter is omitted (cf. 24.1/1*). As 
Greeks, both male and female, had only one name, the name 
of a person's father is often given in this way to achieve 
greater precision. 
5.2 Greek reading 
1 
O xpovoc παιδεύει τονο ΰοφούο. 
2 
πόλλ* έχει αωπη καλά. 
πόλλ' έ ^ ι ν άνθρώποιαν, ώ ξένοι, κακά. 
ού δει φέρειν τά πρόΰθεν έν μνημη κακά. 

5 
Supply έοτί in the following: (i) καλόν ήςυχία. (it) χαλεπά 
τά καλά. (Hi) μέτρον άριςτον. (iv) μέγα βιβλίον μέγα κακόν. 
(ν) κοινά τά τών φίλων, (νϊ) κοινός Έρμης. (vii) μικρόν 
κακόν μέγα άγαθόν. (viii) άλλα άλλοις καλά. (ix) ή γλώττα 
πολλών αιτία κακών, (χ) χαλεπόν τό ποιεΐν, τό δέ κελεύςαι 
ράδιον. (*/)# κακόν τό μεθύειν πημονης λυτηριον. (χη) 
παθήματα μαθήματα, (xiii) κακοΰ κόρακος κακόν ωόν. (xiv) 
πιςτόν γή, άπιςτον θάλαττα. (χν) κάν μύρμηκι χολη. 
6 
(ϊ) δει γαμεΐν έκ τών όμοιων. (Μ) μώρος μώρα λεγει. (iii) έξω 
πηλού τον πόδα έχεις. (iv) ζει χύτρα, ζη φιλία, (ν) λέοντα 
ξυρεΐς. (νϊ) προς ςήμα μητρυιάς κλαίεις. 
7# φευ φευ, τά μεγάλα μεγάλα καί πάςχει κακά. 
8# όνου χρείαν έλέγχει τραχύτηο όδοΰ. 
9# άνθρωπόο έοτι πνεύμα καί οκιά μόνον. 
10# τύχη τέχνην ωρθωοεν, ού τέχνη τύχην. 
11# πολλών τά χρήματ' αίτί' άνθρώποιο κακών. 
12# γύναι, γυναιξί κόομον ή οιγή φέρει. 
13# καλόν δέ καί γέροντι μανθάνειν οοφά. 
14 
οί Αθηναίοι Θουκυδίδην τον Όλόρου έπεμψαν πρόο τον 
οτρατηγόν τών έν Θράκη. 
15 
ούτε παρά νεκρού όμιλιαν ούτε παρά φιλαργύρου χάριν δει 
ζητειν. 
16# ίκανόν τό νικάν έοτι τοΐο έλευθεροΐο. 
17# κάν τοιο άγροίκοιο έοτί παιδείαο έρωο. 
18 
ό λύκοο την τρίχα, ού την γνώμην, άλλάττει. 
19# τά χρήματ' άνθρώποιςιν εύρίςκει φίλους. 
20 
φαύλος κριτής καλού πράγματος όχλος. 
21 
The Egyptians and their crocodiles (from Herodotus) 
τοις μέν ούν τών Αιγυπτίων ίεροί είοιν οί κροκόδιλοι, τοις 
δ' ού, άλλ' άτε πολεμίους περιέπουςιν. οί δέ περί τε Θήβας 
καί την Μοίρεως (of Moeris) λίμνην ςφόδρα νομίζουςιν 
αύτούς είναι ιερούς, ένα (one) δέ έκάτεροι τρέφουςι 
κροκόδιλον καί διδάςκουςιν, άρτηματα δέ λίθινα χυτά εις 5 
τά ώτα έμβάλλουςι καί άμφιδέας περί τούς έμπροςθίους 
πόδας καί ςιτία άπότακτα παρέχουςι καί ίερεΐα. έως μέν 
ούν ζώςιν οί κροκόδιλοι μάλ' εύ πάςχουςιν, μετά δέ τον 
θάνατον ταριχεύουςιν αύτούς οί Αιγύπτιοι καί θάπτουςιν 
έν ίεραΐς θηκαις. άλλ' οί περί Έλεφαντίνην πόλιν (city) καί 1C 
έςθίουςιν αύτούς· ού γάρ νομίζουςιν ιερούς είναι. 
Notes 
2 
πόλλ' = πολλά (also in 3) 2.1 /6b. 
3 
άνθρώποιςιν dat. pi.; -οιςιν is the longer form of the ending 
(3.1/1 note 3). 

4 Take τά πρόοθεν ... κακά together and έν μνήμη with φέρει ν; 
dislocations of this sort are common in verse. 
5 (/) καλόν is neuter because the meaning is a fair [thing]; we 
would have expected the definite article with ήΰυχία (2.1/1 
note 1) - see note on 4.2.3. (iv) here, and in some of the 
following proverbs, it is necessary to decide which is subject 
and which is predicate, i.e. is a big book a big evil? or is a 
big evil a big book? Obviously the former is what is meant. 
(vi) An appeal to share in the luck that another is enjoying 
(e.g. in finding a coin in the street); Hermes, as god of luck, 
shares, or should share, his blessings equally, (viii) άλλα 
άλλοΐΰ ... lit. other [things] ... to other [people], i.e. different 
[things] ... to different people, (xiv) 7CICTOV, άπιοτον cf. καλόν 
in (/). (xv) κάν = καί έν (crasis 11.1/5); καί here means even 
(4.1/3). 
6 (iv) ζει < ζέω boil, ζη < ζάω live (the latter is irregular - 5.1/2 
note 4). 
7 Prose order would be τά μεγάλα καί πάοχει μεγάλα κακά; 
καί is here adverbial also (4.1/3); take the second μεγάλα 
with κακά. 
10 Translate ώρθακεν by a present; the aorist is often used to 
express general truths, particularly in proverbs (so-called 
gnomic aorist; cf. faint heart never won fair lady). 
11 Supply έοτί (and also in 13 and 20); χρήματ' αίτί' both have 
an elided a; the plural of χρήμα thing here means money (a 
very common use). 
13 δέ cf. note on 4.2.9 (there are many examples of such 
connectives at the beginning of verse and prose extracts in 
subsequent reading exercises); καί even 4.1/3. 
14 τον Όλόρου 5.1/3 note 2. 
17 κάν see above on 5 (xv). 
19 χρήματ(α) see on 11; άνθρώποιαν see note on 3. 
20 Only the sense can indicate which noun is subject and which 
predicate (cf. note on 5(iv)). 
21 11.If. TOIC μέν ... TOIC δέ for some ... for others (5.1/3); ούν 
connects this passage with what goes before in the original 
context (cf. 13 above); άτε πολεμίου as enemies; Θηβαι 
Thebes not to be confused with the city of the same name in 
Greece. /.4 Take ένα (m. acc. of elc (7.1/5)) with 
κροκόδιλον; έκάτεροι each of the two (i.e. those around 
Thebes and those around the swamp of Moeris). 1.8 ούν 
therefore, so shows that what follows is a consequence of 
what was said in the previous sentence, while μέν functions 
with the δέ of the next line to contrast έακ: ζώα ν... with μετά 
τον θάνατον ... 

46 
C 
3 S 
8 
5.2/1 Vocabulary 
άγροικος, -ov 
from the 
country, rustic, boorish 
αίτίδ, -&c, ή 
cause 
άλλάττω change (tr.) 
άμφιδέβ, -Ctc, ή 
bracelet, 
anklet 
άπιςτος, -ov 
untrustworthy 
άπότακτος, -ov set apart for 
special use 
aptcxoc, -η, -ov 
best 
άρτημα, -ατος, τό 
ear-ring 
άτε (particle) 
as i f , as 
βιβλίον, -ου, τό 
book 
γαμέω 
marry 
γέρων, -οντος, ό old man 
γλώττα, -ης, ή 
tongue 
γνώμη, -ης, ή 
mind 
γυνή, -αικός, ή 
woman 
διδάςκω 
teach, train 
έκάτερος, -G -ov 
each (of 
two) 
έλέγχω 
test 
Έλεφαντίνη, -ης, ή 
Elephantine (city in Egypt) 
έμβάλλω put in 
έμπρόςθιος, -ov 
(in) front 
έξω (+gen.) 
outside 
εύ (adv.) 
well 
εύρίςκω 
find; get 
έως (conj.) 
while 
ζάω be alive, live, pass one's 
life 
ζέω 
boil 
ζητέω look for, seek (+acc.) 
ήςυχίσ, -Gc, ή 
peace, quiet 
Θηβαι, -ων, αί 
Thebes (city in 
Egypt) 
θηκη, -ηο, ή 
tomb 
Θράκη, -ης, ή 
Thrace 
θρίξ, τριχός, ή 
hair 
ίερεΐα, -ων, τά 
offerings 
ίερόο, -ά, -όν sacred, holy 
IKOVOC, -Ή, -ΌΝ 
sufficient 
κλαίω 
weep 
κοι voc, -ή, -όν 
common, 
shared 
κόραξ, -ακοο, ό 
crow 
κόςμοο, -ου, ό 
decoration 
κροκόδΓλοο, -ου, ό 
crocodile 
λίθινος, -η, -ον (χυτόο) 
made 
of glass 
λύκοο, -ου, ό 
wolf 
λυτηριον, -ου, τό 
remedy 
μάθημα, -ατος, τό 
lesson 
μάλα (adv.) 
very 
μανθάνω 
learn 
μεθύω 
be drunk 
μέτρον, -ου, τό measure, due 
measure, moderation 
μητρυιά, -άς, ή 
step-mother 
μικρός, -ά, -όν 
small 
μνημη, -ης, ή 
memory 
μόνον (adv.) 
only, merely 
μύρμηξ, -ηκος, ό 
ant 
μώρος, -3, -ov stupid, foolish 
νικάω 
win 
ξυρέω 
shave 
οδός, -ου, ή 
road 
όμοιος, -α, -ov 
like 
όρθόω 
guide 
ούς, ώτός, τό 
ear 
όχλος, -ου, ό 
crowd, mob 
πάθημα -ατος, τό 
suffering, 
misfortune 
παιδεία, -Gfc, ή 
education, 
culture 
παιδεύω 
teach, educate 
παρά (prep.) (+gen.) 
from 
πάςχω 
suffer 
εύ πάςχω be well treated 
περί (prep.) (+acc.) 
around 
περιέπω 
treat 
πηλόΰ, -ού, ό 
mud 
πημονη, -ής, ή woe, misery 

TUCTOC, - Ή , - Ό Ν 
trustworthy 
πνεύμα, -axoc, τό 
breath 
ποιέω make, do 
πολεμιοο, -a, -ov 
hostile, 
enemy 
πούο, ποδόο, ό 
foot 
πράγμα, -axoc, τό 
thing, 
matter 
πρόο (prep.) (+ace.) 
ίο, 
towards; on, at 
πρόοθεν (adv.) 
previously 
ράδιοο, -G, -ov 
e<zs;y 
ςημα, -axoc, χό 
iorafc 
αγη, -ήο, ή 
silence 
clxia, -ων, τά 
provisions, 
food 
ςιωιρί, -^c, ή 
silence 
ςκιά, -ac, ή 
shadow 
ςοφόο, -η, -όν 
wise, clever 
ςτρατηγόο, -ού, ό 
general, 
commander 
χαριχεύω 
embalm, 
mummify 
τραχύτηο, -ητος, ή 
roughness 
τρέφω , rear 
φαύλος, -ov (also -η, -ov) 
poor, inadequate 
φευ (interjection) 
alas! 
φιλάργυρος, -ov 
avaricious, 
miserly 
χαλεπόο, -ή, -όν 
difficult, 
hard 
χάριο, -ixoc (acc. χάριν), ή 
favour 
χολη, -^c, ή 
bile; anger 
χρείδ, -<Xc, ή 
use, 
serviceability 
χρήμα, -axoc, χό thing; (pi.) 
money 
χρόνοc, -ου, ό 
time 
χυτός, -ή, -όν 
melted (with 
λίθινος, made of glass ) 
χύτρα, -Ctc, ή 
pot 
φόν, -ου, τό 
egg 

6.1 Grammar 
6.1/1 Third declension - consonant stem 
nouns (2) 
(a) Stems in ν (masculine and, rarely, 
feminine) 
These stems nearly all have a nominative singular in -ην or 
-ων with a genitive -£voc/-r|voc or -ovoc/-ovoc. There is no 
rule to determine whether a particular word has a long or 
short vowel in its stem. Those with a short vowel do not 
lengthen it in the dative plural because here we have ν + c > 
c, not ντ + c > c (cf. 5.1/1 b). 
λιμήν (m) 
μήν (m) 
δαίμων (m or f) 
άγων (m) 
harbour 
month 
divine being 
contest 
stem 
λιμεν-
μην-
δαιμον-
άγων-
SINGULAR 
Nom. λιμήν 
μήν 
δαίμων 
άγών 
Voc. 
λιμήν 
μήν 
δαΐμον 
άγων 
Acc. 
λιμέν-α 
μήν-α 
δαίμον-α 
άγών-α 
Gen. 
λιμεν-oc 
μην-oc 
δαίμον-οο 
άγών-oc 
Dat. 
λιμεν-ι 
μην-ί 
δαίμον-ι 
άγών-ι 
PLURAL 
N.V. 
λιμέν-ec 
μήν-εο 
δαίμον-εο 
άγών-εο 
Acc. 
λιμεν-ac 
μήν-ac 
δαίμον-αο 
άγών-ac 
Gen. 
λιμέν-ων 
μην-ων 
δαιμόν-ων 
άγών-ων 
Dat. 
λιμέ-οι(ν) 
μη-ςί(ν) 
δαίμο-οιίν) 
άγώ-οι(ν) 
Notes 
1 
There are a few such nouns in -Tc, -ivoc, e.g. pic, pTvoc (f) 
nose; δελφΐο, -ivoc (m) dolphin. 

2 
The vocative singular of v-stems is the same as the 
nominative when the nominative is accented on the final 
syllable (so λιμήν, but δαΐμον). 
3 
κύων, κυνός (m or f) dog has an irregular stem κυν-
(b) Stems in ρ (mainly 
masculine) 
The majority have a nom. s. -ηρ, gen. -ηρος or nom. s. -ωρ, 
gen. -opoc. Four nouns with a nom. s. in -ηρ form a special 
sub-group and are declined alike: πατήρ father; μήτηρ 
mother; θυγάτηρ daughter, γαςτηρ (f) stomach. Also given 
below is the slightly irregular άνήρ man, male. Of these 
nouns only those in -^ηρ, -ηρος do not have a distinct 
vocative singular (ςώτερ from ςωτηρ, -ήρος (m) saviour is an 
exception). 
θηρ Μ 
ρήτωρ (m) 
πατήρ (m) 
άνηρ (m) 
wild beast 
speaker 
father 
man 
stem 
θηρ-
ρητορ-
πατ(ε)ρ-
άνδρ-
SINGULAR 
Nom. θηρ 
ρήτωρ 
πατηρ 
άνηρ 
Voc. θηρ 
ρήτορ 
πάτερ 
άνερ 
Acc. 
θηρ-α 
ρήτορ-α 
πατέρ-α 
άνδρ-α 
Gen. θηρ-ός 
ρήτορ-ος 
πατρ-ός 
άνδρ-ός 
Dat. 
Οηρ-ί 
ρήτορ-ι 
πατρ-ί 
άνδρ-ί 
PLURAL 
N.V. 
θήρες 
ρήτορ-ες 
πατέρ-ες 
άνδρ-ες 
Acc. 
θηρ-ας 
ρήτορ-ας 
πατέρ-ας 
άνδρ-ας 
Gen. θηρ-ων 
ρητόρ-ων 
πατέρ-ων 
άνδρ-ών 
Dat. 
θηρ-ςί(ν) 
ρήτορ-ςι(ν) 
πατρά-ςι(ν) 
άνδράςι(ν) 
A few nouns with stems in ρ do not have a nom. s. in -ηρ/-ωρ. 
Of these, χειρ, χειρός (f) hand (stem χειρ-) can also have a stem 
χερ-, which is the more usual in the dat. pi., viz χερςί(ν); έαρ (n) 
(the season of) spring has gen. ήρος, dat. ήρι; πυρ (n) fire has 
gen. πυρός, dat. πυρί (see also 13.1/1 c). 
(c) Stems in ec (neuters in -oc, masculine proper names in -^c) 
Neuters in -oc, as γένος, γένους race, clan (stem γενεο-), form a 
large class. They appear to be irregular because they were 
affected by a sound change at an earlier stage of Greek whereby 
intervocal sigma was lost and in Attic the two previously 
separated vowels were contracted (in Homeric Greek and other 
dialects the uncontracted forms survived). 
49 
c 
3 S 
8 

SINGULAR 
Ν. 
γένος 
Acc. 
γένος 
Gen. γένους 
Dat. 
γένει 
J<yeve(c)-oc) 
(<γένε(ς)-ι) 
PLURAL 
γένη 
γένη 
γενών 
γένεςι(ν) 
(<γένε(ς)-α) 
(<γενέ(ς)-ων) 
(<γένε(ς)-ςι) 
Many masculine proper names are compounds with a stem in ες 
because their second element is a neuter noun of this type, e.g. 
Διογένης (γένοο), Οωκράτηο (κράτοο), Άριοτοτέληο (τέλος). 
These must be distinguished from first declension masculine 
proper names in -^c (see 3.1/2 notes 3 and 4). A complication 
arises with proper names containing the neuter κλέοο fame as 
their second element (e.g. Περικλήο, Ήρακλήο, Θεμιστοκλής) 
since a further contraction is required in the nom. voc. and dat. 
because of the additional ε in the stem (κλεεο-). Compare the 
declensions of Οωκράτηο and Περικλήο: 
Nom. 
Voc. 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Dat. 
Οωκράτης 
Οωκρατεο 
Οωκράτη 
Οωκράτους 
Οωκράτει 
(<-ε(ς)α) 
(<-ε(ς)ος) 
(<-ε(ς)ι) 
Περικλής 
Περίκλεις 
Περικλέσ 
Περικλέους 
Περικλει 
(<κλέης) 
(<κλεες) 
(<κλέε(ς)α) 
(<-κλέε(ς)ος) 
(<-κλέε(ς)ι) 
The acc. Περικλέδ has a final G (not η as in γένη) because of the 
preceding ε (cf. αργυρά < -εδ, 6.1/2). One noun in ^ηο which 
belongs here but is not a masculine proper noun is τριήρηο (f) 
trireme. (singular as for Οωκράτηο, plural n.v.a. τριήρειο, gen. 
τριηρών, dat. τριήρεα(ν)). 
6.1/2 Second declension contracted nouns and 
first and second declension contracted 
adjectives 
The few second declension masculine nouns in -ooc and neuters 
in -εον are contracted in Attic according to the rules given for 
contracted verbs (5.1/2; on ε + α, which does not occur in verbs, 
see below). The uncontracted forms, which are regular, occur in 
other dialects. Examples are: 
vooc mind 
Contracted 
Uncontracted 
όςτέον bone 
Contracted 
Uncontracted 
(Attic) 
(non-Attic) 
Attic) 
(non-Attic) 
SINGULAR 
Nom. νους 
vo-oc 
όςτούν 
όςτέ-ον 
Voc. 
νου 
νό-ε 
όςτούν 
όςτέ-ον 
Acc. 
νουν 
νό-ον 
όςτούν 
όςτέ-ον 
Gen. νου 
νό-ου 
όςτού 
όςτέ-ου 
Dat. 
νω 
νό-ω 
όςτω 
όςτέ-ω 

vol 
vovc 
νών 
voic 
vo-oi 
νό-οι 
νό-ODC 
νό-ων 
νό-oic 
octa 
ocxa 
octa 
όοτών 
ocxoic 
rocxe-a 
*, / 
octe-a 
ocxe-a 
όοτέ-ων 
ocxe-oic 
PLURAL 
Horn, 
vol 
Voc. 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Dat. 
In the nom. voc. acc. pi. of neuters ε + α produces Q on the 
analogy of the α-ending of normal second declension neuters 
(cf. χρΰςά below). 
Like voOc are declined poOc stream, 
πλοΰο voyage, 
and 
compounds of the latter such as περίπλουο 
circumnavigation. 
Most first and second declension contracted adjectives are 
formed with -εοο, -εα, -εον, e.g. χρϋοοϋο (< χρύοεοο) golden, 
which is declined: 
SINGULAR 
M. 
F. 
N. 
N.V. χρϋοούο (-eoc) 
χρϋση 
(-εα) 
χρίουν (-εον) 
Acc. χρϋοούν (-εον) 
χρϋοήν 
(-έδν) 
χρϋοούν (-εον) 
Gen. χρϋοού (-έου) 
χρϋσηο 
(-eGc) 
χρϋοοΰ (-εου) 
Dat. χρϋοω 
(-έω) 
χρϋοη 
(-έα) 
χρϋοω 
(-έω) 
PLURAL 
N.V. χρϋοοι 
(-εοι) 
χρϋοαι 
(-εαι) 
χρϋοά 
Acc. χρϋοούο (-έους) 
χρϋοάο (-έδο) 
χρϋοά 
Gen. χρϋοών (-έων) 
χρϋοών (-έων) 
χρϋοών 
Dat. xptfcoic (-eoic) 
xpflcaic (-έαιο) 
xptJcoic 
(-εα) 
(-εα) 
(-εων) 
(-έοιο) 
In the feminine singular ε + δ > η, except where ε is preceded by 
ε, ι, or ρ, e.g. άργυροΰο (-εοο), -α (-έδ), -οΰν, (-εον) [made of] 
silver, whose feminine singular is: nom. αργυρά, acc. άργυράν, 
gen. άργυράο, dat. αργυρά (here ε + δ > δ), 
άπλοΰο, -ή, -οΰν simple is contracted from άπλόοο but follows 
XpficoOc completely, even in the feminine. 
51 
c 3 S·' s 
6.1/3 Compound verbs formed with 
prepositional prefixes 
Many verbs form compounds by prefixing one, or sometimes 
more than one, preposition (e.g. έπιβαίνω, 3.2.12(f)). This 
involves important sound changes when certain vowels and 
consonants are juxtaposed: 
(a) With the exception of περί and προ, prepositions ending in 
a vowel drop this vowel (by elision) when compounded with 
a verb which begins with a vowel or diphthong: απάγω 
(άπό+άγω) lead away, παρέχω (παρά+έχω) provide, 
but 
προάγω lead forward, περιάγω lead round. 

(b) When, owing to the elision of the final vowel of the 
preposition, π, τ, or κ are brought into contact with an 
initial aspirated vowel or diphthong, these consonants must 
themselves adopt their aspirated forms, φ, θ and χ: άφαιρέω 
(άπό+αίρέω) take away; καθαιρέω (κατά+αίρέω) destroy. 
(c) When compounded with a verb beginning with a vowel or 
diphthong, έκ becomes έξ: έξάγω (έκ+άγω) lead out; 
έξαιρέω (έκ+αίρέω) take out. 
(d) When compounded with a verb beginning with a consonant, 
the ν of έν and ciiv is assimilated as follows: 
ν before π, β, φ, ψ and μ becomes μ: ουμβουλεύω 
(συν+βουλεύω) advise 
ν before γ, κ, χ, and ξ becomes nasal γ: έγγράφω (έν+γράφω) 
write in/on 
ν before λ becomes λ: ουλλαμβάνω (συν+λαμβάνω) gather 
together 
ν of cw is dropped before c: ουοτρατεύω (ουν+οτρατεύω) join 
in an expedition. 
(e) When a verb compounded with a preposition is used in a 
tense which requires the augment, the augment comes 
between the preposition and the verb, not in front of the 
preposition: προο-έ-βαλλον (<προοβάλλω) I was attacking. If 
the insertion of the augment results in the clash of two 
vowels, e.g. κατα + έ-γίγνωοκον the same process as in (a) 
above will apply: so κατεγίγνωοκον (<καταγιγνώοκω) I was 
condemning. In these circumstances προ normally contracts 
with the augment προύβαλλον1 (<προβάλλω; the expected 
form would be προέβαλλον) I was putting 
forward; 
προύπεμπον (<προπέμπω) I was escorting (the contracted 
diphthong is generally indicated by a sign identical with a 
smooth breathing (11.1/5b)). 
( f ) The assimilation of έν and ci>v described in (d) is blocked by 
the syllabic augment in the augmented tenses; thus 
ουμβουλεύω but ουνεβούλευον. 
Notes 
1 
The meaning of a compound verb is not always predictable 
from its constituent parts (cf. at a above παρέχω). 
Prepositions may retain their normal meanings (as απάγω, 
έγγράφω) but some have acquired a special sense, e.g. 
μεταγιγνώοκω change one's mind (from γιγνώοκω know) 
where μετα- conveys the idea of change. 
2 
In the augmented tenses of compound verbs the accent never 
goes further back than the augment, even when the last 

syllable is short: παρεΐχον they were providing; 
παρήοαν 
they were present; cf. Appendix 8, b(vi). 
3 
Greek has a few compound verbs which ^contain no 
prepositional element: οίκοδομέω build a house 
(OIKOC 
house); ναυμαχέω fight with ships (vaOc ship). 
These 
compounds are augmented at the beginning, not between 
the two elements (ωκοδόμηΰα, έναυμάχηΰα). 
6.1/4 -ω verbs with stems in palatals, labials, 
dentals 
The sound changes shown by nouns with these stems (5.1/1) 
also occur in the corresponding verbs when c is added to form 
the future or weak aorist. Some resemble λύω in having a simple 
present stem to which this c can be attached. Others, far more 
numerous, have a suffix in their present stem which is not kept 
elsewhere. 
(a) Verbs of the above type with no suffix in the present stem 
πλέκω 
plait 
fut. 
πλέξω 
aor. 
έπλεξα 
πέμπω 
send 
fut. 
πέμψω 
aor. 
έπεμψα 
πείθω 
persuade 
fut. 
πείοω 
aor. 
έπειςα 
(b) Verbs with a suffix in the present stem 
At a very early stage in its development Greek possessed a 
consonant which was pronounced as the y in the English yes. 
This sound no longer existed in the form Greek had taken by the 
time of the introduction of the alphabet. It had occurred in 
words inherited from Indo-European (1.3) and had also served 
as a suffix to form the present stem of many -ω verbs whose' 
primitive or original stem ended in a consonant. In this function 
it combined with the preceding consonant. The combinations 
which concern us here are κ/γ/χ + y > ττ; π/β/φ 
> πτ; τ/δ/θ + y 
> ζ. As this suffix (and others - see below) was only used to 
form the present stem, the future and weak aorist are formed by 
applying c to the original stem. Examples are (the original stem 
is given in brackets): 
PALATALS 
φυλάττω 
guard 
(φυλακ-) 
fut. 
φυλάξω 
aor. 
έφύλαξα 
αλλάτιω 
change (άλλαγ-) 
fut. 
αλλάξω 
aor. 
ήλλαξα 
LABIALS 
κόπτω 
cut 
(κοπ-) 
fut. 
κόψω 
aor. 
έκοψα 
βλάπτω 
harm 
(βλαβ-) 
fut. 
βλάψω 
aor. 
έβλαψα 
κρύπτω 
hide 
(κρυφ-) 
fut. 
κρύψω 
aor. 
έκρυψα 
CENTALS 
Φράζω 
tell 
(φραδ-) 
fut. 
φράοω 
aor. 
έφραοα 

(b) When, owing to the elision of the final vowel of 
preposition, π, τ, or κ are brought into contact with a-
initial aspirated vowel or diphthong, these consonants muv 
themselves adopt their aspirated forms, φ, θ and χ: αφαιρώ 
(άπό+αιρέω) take away; καθαιρέω (κατά+αιρέω) destroy. 
(c) When compounded with a verb beginning with a vowel o* 
diphthong, έκ becomes έξ: έξάγω (έκ+άγω) lead ont: 
έξαιρέω (έκ+αιρέω) take out 
(d) When compounded with a verb beginning with a consonant, 
the ν of έν and civ is assimilated as follows: 
ν before π, β, φ, ψ and μ becomes μ: ουμβουλευο 
(cw+βουλεύω) advise 
ν before γ, κ, χ, and ξ becomes nasal γ: έγγράφω (έν+γράφο· 
write in/on 
ν before λ becomes λ: ουλλαμβάνω (ουν+λαμβάνω) gathei 
together 
ν of civ is dropped before c: ουοτρατενω (ουν+οτρατεύω) join 
in an expedition. 
(e) When a verb compounded with a preposition is used in a 
tense which requires the augment, the augment comes 
between the preposition and the verb, not in front of the 
preposition: προ^έ-βαλλον (<προοβάλλω) I was attacking. If 
the insertion of the augment results in the clash of two 
vowels, e.g. κατα + έ^γίγνωοκον the same process as in (a) 
above will apply: so κατεγίγνωςκον (<καταγιγνώοκω) I was 
condemning. In these circumstances πρό normally contracts 
with the augment προύβαλλον1 (<προβάλλω; the expected 
form would be προέβαλλον) I was putting 
forward: 
προύπεμπον (<προπέμπω) I was escorting (the contracted 
diphthong is generally indicated by a sign identical with a 
smooth breathing (11.1/5b)). 
( f ) The assimilation of έν and cw described in (d) is blocked b\ 
the syllabic augment in the augmented tenses; thus 
ςυμβουλεύω but ουνεβούλευον. 
Notes 
1 
The meaning of a compound verb is not always predictable 
from its constituent parts (cf. at a above παρέχω) 
Prepositions may retain their normal meanings (as άπαγω. 
έγγράφω) but some have acquired a special sense, e.g 
μεταγιγνώοκω change one's mind (from γιγνώοκω knou'] 
where μετα- conveys the idea of change. 
2 
In the augmented tenses of compound verbs the accent n e v e r 
goes further back than the augment, even when the las 

syllable is short: παρεΐχον they were providing; 
παρήοαν 
they were present; cf. Appendix 8, b(vi). 
^ Greek has a few compound verbs which /contain no 
^ 
prepositional element: οίκοδομέω build a house 
(OIKOC 
house); ναυμαχέω fight 
with ships (voOc ship). 
These 
compounds are augmented at the beginning, not between 
the two elements (ωκοδόμτ^α, έναυμάχηΰα). 
6.1/4 -ω verbs with stems in palatals, labials, 
dentals 
The sound changes shown by nouns with these stems (5.1/1) 
also occur in the corresponding verbs when c is added to form 
the future or weak aorist. Some resemble λύω in having a simple 
present stem to which this c can be attached. Others, far more 
numerous, have a suffix in their present stem which is not kept 
elsewhere. 
(a) Verbs of the above type with no suffix in the present stem 
πλέκω 
plait 
fut. 
πλέξω 
aor. 
έπλεξα 
πέμπω 
send 
fut. 
πέμψω 
aor. 
έπεμψα 
πείθω 
persuade 
fut. 
πείςω 
aor. 
έπειοα 
(b) Verbs with a suffix in the present stem 
At a very early stage in its development Greek possessed a 
consonant which was pronounced as the y in the English yes. 
This sound no longer existed in the form Greek had taken by the 
tune of the introduction of the alphabet. It had occurred in 
words inherited from Indo-European (1.3) and had also served 
as a suffix to form the present stem of many -ω verbs whose 
primitive or original stem ended in a consonant. In this function 
!t combined with the preceding consonant. The combinations 
which concern us here are κ/γ/χ + y > ττ; π/β/φ +y > πτ; τ/δ/θ + y 
> ζ· As this suffix (and others - see below) was only used to 
r m the present stem, the future and weak aorist are formed by 
applying c to the original stem. Examples are (the original stem 
ls given in brackets): 
R A T A L S 
Φ^λάττω guard 
(φυλακ-) 
αλλαττω 
change (άλλαγ-) 
1 ^BIALS 
*°πτ(0 
cut 
(κοπ-) 
^απτω 
h a f m 
(β λ α ( μ ) 
^Ρυπτω 
hide 
(κρυφ-) 
I)FNTALS 
tell 
(φραδ-) 
fut. 
φυλάξω 
aor. 
έφύλαξα 
fut. 
άλλάξω 
aor. 
ήλλαξα 
fut. 
κόψω 
aor. 
έκοψα 
fut. 
βλάψω 
aor. 
έβλαψα 
fut. 
κρύψω 
aor. 
έκρυψα 
fut. 
φράοω 
aor. 
έφραοα 
53 
c 
3 
8 

54 
C 3 ϊϊ 
8 
The original stem can be seen in cognate words (e.g. φυλακή act 
of guarding, βλάβη damage). It need not be memorized as rhese 
verbs follow the above patterns. An exception is a few verbs in 
-ζω which are palatals, not dentals, as e.g. οφάζω slaughter 
(οφαγ-) fut. οφάξω, aor. έοφαξα (cf. ΰφαγή [act of] slaughtering). 
All dental-stem verbs in -ίζω of more than two syllables have a 
future in -ιέω (originally -ιέοω; cf. 5.1/2 note 3), which always 
contracts to -ιώ: νομίζω think, fut. νομιώ, νομιεΐο, νομιεΐ, etc., 
but κτίζω found, build, fut. κτίοω. A few verbs in -ίζω are 
palatals: μαοτίζω whip 
(stem μαοτιγ-), fut. μαοτίξω, aor. 
έμάοτιξα. 
Of the other present stem suffixes belonging here we may 
mention CK (as in διδάοκω (<διδαχ + CK-ω) teach, fut. διδάξω, 
etc.) and αν. The latter is often accompanied by a nasal infix (i.e. 
a nasal inserted before the final consonant of the root); neither 
αν nor the infix occur outside the present stem, e.g. λαμβάνω 
take, aor. stem λαβ- (in λα-μ-β-άν-ω the nasal infix takes the 
form of the labial nasal μ before the following labial; cf. 
μα-ν-θ-άν-ω learn, aor. stem μαθ; λα-γ-χ-άν-ω obtain, aor. stem 
λαχ-; see 7.1/1). 
6.2 Greek reading 
1 
As well as translating the following give the 1st s. present 
indicative of each verb: 
(i) οί φύλακεο τούο Πέρΰαο έφύλαξαν. (it) άρα έκρυψαο τον 
χρυοούν ϊππον; (iii) οί 'Αθηναίοι καί οί Λακεδαιμόνιοι 
ουνεοτράτευοαν. (iv) πολλά έν τη πέτρα ένέγραψεν. (ν) οί 
δαίμονεο πολλά καί μεγάλα πράξουαν. (νϊ) ο Οωκράτηΰ 
ήμάο έδίδαξεν. (vii) τήν οίκίαν του Περικλέουο έβλαψαν. 
(viii) έν τω λιμένι έναυμαχήοαμεν. 
2# κάτοπτρον ε'ίδουο χαλκόο έοτ\ οι voc δέ νου. 
3# χειρ χείρα νίπτει, δάκτυλοι δέ δακτύλουο. 
4 
ή μέν φωνή έοτιν άργυρά, ή δέ αγή χρυσή. 
5# ώ δαΐμον, a>c ουκ έοτ' άποοτροφή βροτοΐο 
τών έμφυτων τε καί θεηλάτων κακών. 
6 
Further futility 
(i) είο ύδωρ γράφειο. (ii) είο ψάμμον οίκοδομεΐο. (iii) γλαΰκ' 
Άθήναζε (sc. φέρειο). (iv) κύματα μετρεΐο. (ν) opviGoc γάλα 
ζητεΐο. (νϊ) οίδηρον πλεΐν διδάοκειο. (vii) ήλίω φώc 
δανείζειο. (viii) βατράχοιο οίνοχοεΐο. (ix) τον άέρα τύπτεισ 
(χ) έλεφαντα έκ μυίαο ποιεί. 

7 
Other short proverbs and aphorisms 
(/) ψυχήο μεγαο χαλινόο έοτιν ό νους (ii) "Ελληνεο άεί 
παιδεο, γέρων δέ "Ελλην ουκ έοτιν. (iii)# είοί μητρί παίδεο 
άγκυραι βίου. (iv) οίκοι λέοντεο, έν μάχη δ' άλώπεκεο. (ν) 
νοΰο όρα καί νοΰο άκούει. (vi) μακραί τυράννων χειρεο. 
(vii) ψεύδεαν "Αρηο φίλοο. (viii) Έλλάο Έλλάδοο αί 
Αθήναι, (ix) τέττιγι μέλιτταν συγκρίνειο. (χ) χαλεπόν 
θυγάτηρ κτήμα. 
8 
τό μέν πυρ ό άνεμοο, τον δέ έρωτα ή ουνηθεια έκκαίει. 
9 
κατά τον Οωκράτη ούδείο έκουοίωο άμαρτάνει. 
10 
ού μετανοεί ν άλλά προνοεί ν χρή τον άνδρα τον οοφόν. 
11 
The siege of Melos 
Thucydides, the other great historian of the fifth century 
BC, wrote a history of the Peloponnesian War, which was 
fought between Athens and Sparta (the major power in the 
Peloponnese) from 431 BC to 404 BC, when Athens fell. 
Melos was an island in the southern Aegean whose desire 
to stay neutral was brutally suppressed by the Athenians. 
καί οί μέν 'Αθηναίων πρέΰβεΐΰ (ambassadors) άνεχώρηΰαν 
eic τό ΰτράτευμα, οί δέ οτρατηγοί περιετείχιΰαν τονο 
Μηλίουα καί ύΰτερον φυλακή μέν όλίγη των ουμμάχων έκεΐ 
παρέμενε καί έπολιόρκει τό χωρίον, οί δέ άλλοι ^ρατιώται 
καί κατά γήν καί κατά θάλατταν άνεχώρηΰαν. έπειτα δέ οί 5 
Μήλιοι τό περιτείχιομα άνέαιαοαν των 'Αθηναίων, έπειδή 
παρήΰαν ού πολλοί των φυλάκων, άλλά ^ρατιάν ϋΰτερον έκ 
των 'Αθηνών άλλην έξέπεμψαν οί 'Αθηναίοι, καί κατά 
κράτοΰ ήδη έπολιόρκουν. προδοάα δέ ην έν τοιο Μηλίοιΰ 
καί ΰυνεχώρηΰαν TOIC Άθηναίοιο. οί δέ έcφαξαv Μηλίων 10 
τουο άνδραΰ, παΐδαΰ δέ καί γυναΐκαΰ ήνδραπόδιΰαν. καί 
ύστερον άποίκουΰ πoλλoύc έξέπεμψαν καί τό χωρίον 
<i)Kicav. 
Notes 
1 
(ν) πολλά καί μεγάλα lit. many and great [things] but 
translate many great [things]; when πολύΰ in the plural is 
combined with another adjective καί is regularly inserted 
between the two. 
2 
Greek mirrors were made of polished bronze or silver. 
5 
Take άποΰτροφή with the genitives in the next line. /.2 Take 
κακών as a noun and έμφύτων and θεηλάτων as adjectives; 
καί can be translated here by and or or because the evils 
are not necessarily both innate and sent by the gods. 
6 
(iii) The Acropolis at Athens was notorious as a haunt of 
small brown owls, the bird which was adopted as the 
Athenian emblem. 
55 
c 
3 
g 

11 
(it) This remark of an Egyptian priest to the Athenian 
statesman Solon implicitly contrasts the age of Greek 
civilization with that of the Egyptians, (iv) A phrase of 
abuse, not a sentence; foxes were symbolic of a low cunning 
devoid of courage, (viii) The Athenians liked to regard 
themselves as the quintessence of Greekness. (x) The 
patriarchal nature of most Greek societies meant that sons 
were more highly valued than daughters. 
//.4f. Translate the imperfects παρεμενε and έπολιόρκει by 
stayed and besieged (Greek prefers to regard both events as 
extending over a period of time than as single actions -
4.1/1). //.8f εξέπεμψαν < έκπέμπω (6.1/3); κατά κράτοο lit. in 
accordance with [their full] strength, i.e. energetically. II. 1 If. 
παίδαο καί γυναΐκαο the regular order in Greek for women 
and children; ήνδραπόδιοαν < άνδραποδίζω (4.1/1 note 2(ii)). 
6.2/1 Vocabulary 
άγκϋρα, -(xc, ή 
anchor 
άεί (adv.) 
always 
άήρ, -έροο, ό 
air 
Άθήναζε (adv.) 
to Athens 
'Αθήναι, -ων, αί 
Athens 
άκούω 
hear 
άλώπηξ, -εκοο, ή 
fox 
άμαρτάνω err; do wrong 
άναοπάω 
pull down 
άναχωρέω 
withdraw; retreat, 
retire 
άνδραποδίζω 
enslave 
άνεμοο, -ου, ό 
wind 
άνήρ, άνδρόΰ, ό 
man 
άποικοο, -ου, ό 
settler, 
colonist 
άποοτροφή, -ήο, ή 
turning 
away from, escape 
άργυροΰο, -α, -οΰν 
made of 
silver, silver 
"Αρηο, -ου, ό Ares (god of 
war) 
βλάπτω 
damage 
βροτόο, -ού, ό mortal man 
γάλα, -ακτοο, τό 
milk 
γλαύξ, -αυκόο, ή 
owl 
γράφω 
write 
δαίμων, -ovoc, ό 
god 
δάκτυλοο, -ου, ό 
finger 
δανείζω 
lend 
έγγράφω write in/on, inscribe 
είδοο, -ουο, τό 
appearance 
έκει (adv.) 
there 
έκκαίω 
kindle 
έκουοίωο (adv.) 
willingly 
έκπέμπω send out 
έλέφαο, -αντοο, ό 
elephant 
Έλλάο, -άδοο, ή 
Greece 
Έλλην, -ηνοο, ό a Greek 
έμφυτοο, -ov 
inborn, innate 
έπειδή (conj.) 
when 
ήδη (adv.) 
now 
ήλιοο, -ου, ό 
sun 
θεήλατοο, -ov sent by the gods 
θυγάτηρ, -τρόο, ή 
daughter 
κάτοπτρον, -ου, τό 
mirror 
κράτοΰ —OOC, τό 
strength, 
power 
κτήμα, -ατοο, τό (α) 
possession 

κύμα, -ατο°· τ 0 
wavf 
Λακεδαιμόνιος, -ου, ό 
lacedaentonian, 
Spartan 
μακρόο,-ά,-όν 
/o«g 
μάχη, - ^ c , η 
battle, fight 
μέλιττα, -ηο, ή fcee 
μετανοέω 
afterwards, 
change one's mind, repent 
μετρέω 
measure 
Μηλιοι, -ων, οί 
Melians 
μητηρ, -xpoc, ή 
mother 
ναυμαχέω fight a sea battle 
νίπτω M/tfsfe 
οίκίζω 
colonize 
οίκοδομέω 
ba/W Λ 
οίκοι (adv.) 
home 
οι voc, -ου, ό 
wine 
οίνοχοέω 
pour wine 
ολίγος, -η, -ov 
small 
όράω 
see 
opvlc, -iGoc, ό/ή 
bird 
ούδε^ 
no one (7Λ/5α) 
παις, παιδόc, ό/ή 
child 
παραμένω 
remain 
πάρειμι (παρά+είμί) 
be 
present 
περιτειχίζω 
build a wall 
round 
περιτείχ^μα, -aroc, τό 
blockading wall 
πέτρα, -ac, ή 
rock 
πλέω 
sail 
πολιορκέω 
besiege 
προδοάα, -tfc, ή 
treachery 
προνοέω 
think 
beforehand 
πυρ, πυρό^ τό 
fire 
°ιδηροΰ, -ου, ό 
iron 
ΰτρατευμα, -aroc, το 
army 
ΰτρατιά, -ac, ή 
army 
ΰυγκρίνω 
compare 
(something with something, 
acc. and dat.) 
συγχωρέω 
yield to (+dat.) 
σύμμαχος -ου, ό 
ally 
συνήθεια, -ffc, ή 
acquaintance, 
intimacy 
ςυςτρατεύω 
join an 
expedition, fight alongside 
ΰφάζω 
slaughter 
τέττιξ, -Ιγοο, ό 
cicada, 
grasshopper 
τυπτω 
hit, beat 
rupawoc, -ου, ό 
absolute 
ruler; tyrant 
ύδωρ, -aroc, τό 
water 
φυλακή, -f\c, ή 
guard, 
garrison 
φύλαξ, -aKoc, ό 
guard 
φυλάττω 
guard 
φωνή, -ήο, ή 
voice, speech 
φώΰ, φωτός, τό 
light 
χαλινός -ου, ό 
bit (for a 
horse's bridle) 
χαλκός -ου, ό 
bronze 
χείρ, χειρόΰ, ή 
hand 
χρή 
it is necessary 
χωρίον, -ου, τό 
place 
ψάμμοΰ, -ου, ή 
sand 
ψεύδος -ουΰ, τό 
falsehood, 
lie 
Ψ^χή» "ή^, ή 
soul 
G>C (exclamatory adv.) 
how.../ 

7.1 Grammar 
7.1/1 Strong aorist indicative and infinitive 
active of -ω verbs 
We have seen at 4.1/1 that -ω verbs have either a weak or a 
strong aorist and that the distinction between the two is soleh 
one of form. The indicative of the strong aorist has the same 
endings as the imperfect; the infinitive has the same ending as 
the present (as do all other parts). As the strong aorist takes no 
suffix its stem must necessarily undergo some internal 
modification to differentiate it from that of the present. An\ 
suffix attached to the latter is dropped (cf. 6.1/4b), and ει is 
reduced to i, and ευ to υ. Some strong aorist stems are simpl) 
irregular and must be learnt. 
The following list of the most common verbs with a strong 
aorist shows examples of each type. The present infinitive and 
the imperfect indicative are included for comparison. 
PRESENT 
INDICATIVE 
άγω lead, bring 
αίρέω take, capture 
βάλλω throw 
εύρίοκω find 
έχω have 
λαγχάνω obtain 
λαμβάνω take 
λέγω say 
IMPERFECT AORIST 
INDICATIVE INDICATIVE 
ηγον 
ηρουν 
έβαλλον 
εύριοκον 
(or ηά>-) 
ειχον 
έλάγχανον 
έλάμβανον 
έλεγον 
ηγαγον 
ειλον 
(stem έλ-) 
έβαλον 
εύρον 
(or ηύ-) 
έοχον 
έλαχον 
έλαβον 
ειπον 
(stem είπ-) 
PRESENT 
AORIST 
INFINITIVE INFINITIVE 
άγειν 
άγαγειν 
αίρειν 
έλειν 
βάλλειν 
βαλειν 
εύρίοκειν εύρειν 
έχειν 
οχειν 
λαγχάνειν λαχειν 
λαμβάνειν λαβείν 
λέγειν 
ειπείν 

έλειπον 
έλιπον 
λείπειν 
λιπειν 
έμάνθανον έμαθον 
μανθάνειν μαθειν 
έωρων 
είδον 
όράν 
ιδεΐν 
(stem ιδ-) 
έπαοχον 
έπαθον 
πάοχειν 
παθεΐν 
έπίπτον 
έπεοον 
πίπτειν 
πεοειν 
έτυγχανον έτυχον 
τυγχάνειν τυχειν 
έφερον 
ήνεγκον 
φέρειν 
ένεγκειν 
έφευγον 
έφυγον 
φεύγειν 
φυγείν 
λ£1ττω leave 
μ α ν θ ά ν ω learn 
οράω see 
καοχω suffer 
πίπτω fall 
τυγχάνω happen 
φέρω carry 
φεύγω flee 
Notes 
1 
The ending of the strong aorist infinitive active always has a 
circumflex accent. 
2 
The aorists of αιρέω, λέγω, όράω, φέρω come from roots 
entirely different from their presents (cf. English go/went). 
The unaugmented aorist stems of the first three (έλ-, είπ-, 
ίδ-) require particular attention, εΐπον and ήνεγκον quite 
irregularly take the weak aorist endings in the 2nd. s. and 
pi.: ειπαο, είπατε; ήνεγκαο, ήνέγκατε. We may sympathize 
with the Greeks who found είπον too complicated and gave 
λέγω a regular weak aorist έλεξα (good Attic but not as 
common). The strong aorist ήλθον I came/went likewise has 
a present tense from another root. This verb is peculiar in 
having an active aorist but a deponent present (έρχομαι 
8.1/2). 
3 
By this stage you should be confident enough to consult the 
table of Principal parts of verbs, which sets out the principal 
parts of important verbs which have some irregularity. A 
normal transitive verb in Greek has six principal parts and 
from these all possible forms can be deduced (see next note 
for the only exceptions). These parts are: 
(i) 1st s. present indicative active (λύω; 2.1/5) 
(ii) 1st s. future indicative active (λύοω; 2.1/5) 
(iii) 1st s. aorist indicative active (έλϋοα; 4.1/1; for strong 
aorist see above) 
(iv) 1st s. perfect indicative active (λέλυκα; 15.1/1) 
(ν) 1st s. perfect indicative middle and passive (λέλυμαι; 
16.1/3) 
(vi) 1st s. aorist indicative passive (έλύθην; 11.1/1). 
This list is not as formidable as it might seem at first sight 
as some verbs do not exist in every possible part, while 
many (such as λύω) are completely regular and all their 
principal parts can be deduced from their present stem. Do 
not, at this stage, try to digest the Principal parts of verbs (in 

any case, we have not yet dealt with principal parts (u 
(vi)), but familiarize yourself with its arrangement and ^ 
into the habit of using it. When individual principal paru 
are wildly irregular (e.g. είπον), they are given separar 
entries in the Vocabulary. 
4 
A few verbs have an imperfect which cannot be predict^ 
from their present stem. Thus όράω > έώρων, with both 
syllabic and temporal augment; έχω > ειχον (the origma 
form of έχω was οέχω with an imperfect έΰεχον, which ICK; 
its intervocalic sigma (6.1/1 c) and then contracted ε+ε t< 
ει (5.1/26)). 
7.1/2 φημί say (see also Appendix 3) 
This irregular -μι verb (2.1/4) is inflected as follows in the 
present and imperfect: 
PRESENT 
IMPERFECT 
SINGULAR 
1 φημί 
έφην 
2 φT|C 
έφηοθα or έφηο 
3 φηΰί(ν) 
έφη 
PLURAL 
1 φαμέν 
έφαμεν 
2 φατέ 
έφατε 
3 φαΰί (ν) 
έφαοαν 
INFINITIVE 
φάναι 
Notes 
1 
All the forms of the present indicative are enclitic (Appendix 
8) except the second person singular (cf. ειμί, 3.1/6). 
2 
The imperfect regularly has an aorist meaning, I said. 
3 
φημί, not λέγω, is regularly used in the direct quotation oi 
conversations (i.e. direct speech - see next subsection). 
When so used, φημί does not appear until after the 
beginning of the quotation: δοκεΐΰ, έφη, ώ CtDKporac, ευ 
λέγειν "You seem," he said, "to be speaking well, Socrates. 
4 
The φη/φα alternation in the forms of this verb is explained 
at 19.1/1. 
7.1/3 Indirect speech 
When we wish to report what someone has said (or thought, 
etc.) we may do this in one of two ways. We may either give his 
exact words (cf. 7.1/2 note 3): "Justice is the advantage of the 
stronger," 
said Thrasymachus; 
or we may grammatically 
subordinate the speaker's words to a verb of saying (or thinking, 
etc.): Thrasymachus said that justice was the advantage of the 

neer. The first form is called direct speech, the second 
indirect'(or reported) speech. 
Since speech may be conveniently divided into statement, 
1 
s t i o n a n j command, we therefore have three corresponding 
forms of indirect speech: 
(a) Indirect statement: He said that he was happy. (Direct I am 
happy-) 
φ) Indirect question: We asked if he was happy. (Direct Are you 
happy?) 
(c) Indirect command: I told him to cheer up. (Direct Cheer 
up!) 
These examples show the adjustments in pronouns that are 
nearly always necessary in English. Greek does the same but does 
not, as we shall see, make the tense adjustments required by 
English in (a) and (b). 
7.1/4 Indirect command 
For this construction Greek, like English, uses an infinitive after 
a verb of ordering: έκέλευΰε τον παΐδα τά γράμματα μαθεΐν he 
ordered the boy to learn [his] letters. If the infinitive is negated, 
the negative μή, not ού, is used: ό νόμοΰ ήμάΰ κελεύει μή αδικεί ν 
the law orders us not to do wrong. 
The two adverbs of negation, μή and ού, are always to be 
translated by no/not but have quite distinct uses (see 7.1/6). The 
rule here is that μή is always used to negate an infinitive except 
in indirect statement (8.1/3). 
The tense of the infinitive is a matter of aspect (4.1/1). In the 
above examples μαθεΐν simply conveys that the learning is to be 
done, whereas αδικεί ν indicates that we are not to do wrong on 
any occasion. 
7.1/5 Numerals (see also Appendix 7) 
There are three types of numeral: 
(tf) Cardinals (in English one, two, three, four, etc.) 
In Greek, as in English, these function as adjectives. The 
numbers one to four are declined as follows: 
εις one 
δύο two 
M. 
F. 
N. 
M.F.N. 
Nom. eic 
μία 
έν 
δύο 
^cc· 
ένα 
μίαν 
έν 
δύο 
Gen. evoc 
μιάο 
ένόο 
δυοΐν 
^at. 
ένί 
μια 
ένί 
δυοιν 
61 
C 3 
3 

τρεΐο three 
Μ. & F. 
Ν . 
τέτταρεο four 
Μ. & F. 
Ν . 
Nom. τρειο 
τρία 
Acc. 
τρεΐο 
τρία 
Gen. τριών 
τριών 
τέτταρεο 
τέτταρα 
τέτταραο 
τέτταρα 
τεττάρων 
τεττάρων 
Dat. 
τριοί(ν) 
τριοί(ν) 
τέτταρα(ν) 
τέτταρα(ν) 
So, e.g. έκ μιάο νηοου out of one island, eic τέτταραο οικίας int<, 
four houses. 
The numbers five to one hundred are indeclinable (i.e. have no 
variable inflections), except when they contain any of the 
numbers one to four (e.g. ε'ίκοα τέτταρεο twenty-four; where 
τέτταρεο would alter its ending as required: ε'ίκοα τέτταρα έργα 
twenty-four tasks). The words for two hundred, three hundred, 
etc. follow the plural of καλόο (3.1/3): so διδκόαοι, -αι, -α, two 
hundred; τριοχΤλιοι, -αι, -α three thousand. 
(b) Ordinals (in English, first, second, third, etc.) 
These also are first and second declension adjectives (3.1/3), e.g. 
ή πρώτη γυνή the first woman. 
(<c) Numeral adverbs (in English, once, twice, three times, etc.) 
All except άπαξ once, 5ic twice, τρίο three times, end in -cnac 
(cf. πολλάκιο often, lit. many times). 
1 
Like eic is declined the pronoun ούδείο (< ουδέ + eic not 
even one), ουδεμία, ουδέν, gen. ούδενόο, ούδεμιάο, ούδεν(Χ 
no-one, nobody, none. The neuter ουδέν means nothing, but 
is often used adverbially in the sense in no respect, not at all 
(20.1/5). ούδείο can also be used as an adjective meaning 
no, e.g. ουδεμία γυνή no woman. 
2 
Compound numbers over twenty are expressed by putting 
the smaller number first with καί (δύο καί ε'ίκοα two and 
twenty), or the larger number first without καί (ε'ίκοα δυο 
twenty-two). 
7.1/6 Negatives 
Unlike English, Greek has two negatives ού (ούκ, ούχ, 2Λ/6α(ι)ϊ 
and μή, and although we translate both by not their uses are 
quite distinct. These involve many constructions not yet 
described (for a summary see 24.1/2). We may, however, note: 
(α) ού is used to negate statements and so is the negative used 
with a verb in the indicative in main clauses (examples at 
Notes 
3.2.1, 3.2.4 etc.) 

μη is the negative used with infinitives except in indirect 
statement (see above 7.1/4 and 8.1/3<z). 
ic) For every compound of ού (e.g. ούδέ, ούδείΰ) there is a 
corresponding compound of μή (e.g. μηδέ, μηδείχ). The 
latter are used, where appropriate, in constructions 
otherwise requiring μή. 
We have already seen at 3.2.12(vi) (see note) that the compound 
negative ox&eic reinforces a simple preceding negative (ού λέγει 
ούδέν he says nothing). However when the order is reversed and 
a compound negative precedes a simple negative the two cancel 
each other to give a strong affirmative: ούδείΰ ούκ έπαθεν no-one 
did not suffer, i.e. everyone suffered. 
7.1/7 Phrases expressing time and space 
Many temporal phrases in English contain a preposition, e.g. on 
Wednesday, for six days (but cf. I will see you next week). In 
three types of temporal phrase of this sort Greek simply uses a 
particular case, provided that the noun involved signifies some 
period, point, or division of time (dawn, day, winter, year, etc.): 
(a) Time how long is expressed by the accusative: 
έννέα έτη οί 'Αχαιοί προ xr\c For nine years the 
Tpoiffc έΰτρατοπέδευον. 
Achaeans were 
encamped before Troy. 
(b) Time when is expressed by the dative: 
δεκάτω έτει ιερόν "Τλιον 
In the tenth year they 
έπόρθηΰαν. 
sacked holy Ilium (the 
definite article is generally 
omitted before ordinal 
numerals in this 
construction). 
(c) Time within which is expressed by the genitive: 
τριών ημερών έπλεκε 
Within three days Menelaus 
Μενέλδοΰ eic τήν 'Ελλάδα, 
sailed to Greece. 
ε'ίκοα έτών Όδυοοεύο τήν 
For (i.e. within the space 
Ίθάκην ούκ ειδεν. 
of) twenty years 
Odysseus did not 
see Ithaca. 
τέλοο eic τήν πατρίδα 
Finally he returned to [his] 
νυκτόο ένόοτηοεν. 
native land by night. 
With nouns which do not indicate a period, point, or division of 
time (e.g. war as in during the war) a preposition is generally 
u s ed (e.g. διά + gen.). 
63 
c 
3 3? 
Ο 
>1 

(d) Spatial extent is expressed by the accusative (this use 
similar to (a) above): 
απέχει if\c Tpoiac ή 'Ιθάκη 
Ithaca is many stades 
πολλούο οταδίουο. 
distant from Troy. 
οι σφατιώται δια του 
The soldiers walked four 
πεδίου έβάδιοαν οταθμούο 
stages through the plamt 
τέτταραο. 
7.2 Greek reading 
1 
ή παροιμία ήμάο κελεύει μή κινεΐν άκίνητα. 
2# εύρείν τό δίκαιον πανταχώο ού ράδιον. 
3 
ό δέ Ίοχόμαχοο είπεν, ώ (ΪΙώκρατεο, χειμώνοο μέν την οίκία\ 
δει εύήλιον είναι, του δέ θέρουο εύοκιον. 
4 
ούκ έχομεν ούτε δπλα ούτε ϊππουο. 
5# ούδέν έρπει ψεύδοο eic μήκοο χρόνου. 
6 
μίαν μέν ούν ήμέραν οί 'Αθηναίοι αύτοΰ έοτρατοπέδευοαν 
τή δέ ύοτεραία 'Αλκιβιάδηο έκκληάαν έποίηοε καί 
έκέλευοεν αύτούο καί ναυμαχεΐν καί πεζομαχεΐν και 
τειχομαχεΐν. ού γαρ έοτιν, έφη, χρήματα ήμΐν, τοΐο δε 
πολεμίοιο άφθονα. 
7 
ούδείο άνθρώπων ούκ άποθνήοκει. 
8 
Proverbs 
(/) μία χελιδών έαρ ού ποιεί, (ii) δίο παΐδεο οί γέροντες. (ui) 
έν δυοΐν τρία βλέπεις. (iv) ειο άνήρ ούδείο άνήρ. (ν) μία 
ήμέρα οοφόν ού ποιεί, (vi) ή γλώττα πολλούο eic δλεθρον 
ήγαγεν. (vii) έν πολέμω ούκ ένεοτι 6ic άμαρτεΐν. (viii) έξ 
ονύχων τον λέοντα ένεοτι μαθειν. 
9 
ό Κύρος ήλθε δια της Λυδίας ςταθμούς τρεις παραςάγγαο 
δύο καί ε'ίκοα έπί τον Μαίανδρον ποταμόν. τό δέ εύροο 
αύτου ήν δύο πλέθρα. 
10 
ό κόςμος ςκηνή, ό βίος πάροδος* ήλθες, είδες, άπήλθες. 
11 
είπέ τις (someone) τω Οωκράτει, κακώς ό Μεγακλής ce 
λέγει* ό δέ, καλώς γάρ, έφη, λέγειν ούκ έμαθεν. 
12 
A sea battle 
Thucydides did not finish his history of the Peloponnesian 
war but his account was taken up and completed by 
Xenophon, a versatile writer whose life straddled the fifth 
and fourth centuries BC. The battle described by him below 
took place in 406 BC. 
είχε δέ τό δεξιόν κέρας τών Πελοποννηάων Καλλικρατίδαο-
"Ερμων δέ ό κυβερνήτης, καλόν έςτιν, έφη, άποπλεΰςαι* οα 
γάρ τριήρειο τών 'Αθηναίων μάλα ίςχυραί είαν. άλλα 
Καλλικρατίδας, 
αίςχρόν 
έςτιν, 
έφη, 
τό 
φεύγειν. 

έναυμάχηοαν δέ αί τριήρεις χρόνον πολύν, πρώτον μέν 5 
άθρόαι, έπειτα δέ οποράδεο. έπεί δέ Καλλικρατίδαο τε 
απέπεοεν eic τήν θάλατταν καί απέθανε καί Πρωτόμαχοο ό 
Άθηναιοο καί οί μετ' αύτοΰ τω δεξιώ τό εύώνυμον ένίκηοαν, 
έντεύθεν φυγή ήν τών Πελοποννηοίων εϊο τε Χίον καί 
φώκαιαν οί δέ Αθηναίοι πάλιν είο τάο Άργινούοαο 10 
κατέπλευοαν. τών μέν ούν 'Αθηναίων τριήρειο πέντε καί 
ε'ίκοα κατέδυοαν οί Λακεδαιμόνιοι, τών δέ Πελοποννηοίων 
Λακωνικάο μέν έννέα οί 'Αθηναίοι, τών δέ άλλων ουμμάχων 
cbc έξήκοντα. 
A troublesome visitor 
In Athenian courts litigants were obliged to conduct their 
own cases, but they could use speeches written for them by 
professional writers. The following comes from such a 
speech composed by Lysias some time after 394 BC for a 
middle-aged homosexual defending himself against a 
charge of assault brought against him by a fellow 
Athenian, Simon, who was his rival for the affection of a 
young slave. 
έπεί γάρ έπί τήν οίκίαν μου τήο νυκτόο ήλθεν ό Οίμων, 
έξέκοψε τάο θύραο καί είοήλθεν eic τήν γυναικωνΐτιν, ού 
ήοαν ή τ' άδελφή μου καί αί άδελφιδαΐ. πρώτον μέν ούν οί έν 
τί\ οικία έκέλευοαν αύτόν άπελθεΐν, ό δ' ούκ ήθελεν. έπειτα 
δε έξέωοαν βία. άλλ' έξηΰρεν ού έδειπνοΰμεν καί πράγμα 5 
οφόδρα άτοπον καί άπιοτον έποίηοεν. έξεκάλεοε γάρ με 
ένδοθεν, καί έπειδή τάχιοτα έξήλθον, εύθύο με τύπτειν 
έπεχείρηοεν έπειδή δέ αύτόν άπέωοα, έβαλλέ με λίθοιο καί 
έμοΰ μέν άμαρτάνει, Άριοτόκριτον δέ έβαλε λίθω καί 
ουντρίβει τό μέτωπον. 
10 
Supply έοτί; τό δίκαιον (what is) right (5.1/3) 
χειμώνοο, του θέρουο the definite article can be omitted in 
such expressions; τήν οίκίδν indicates a general class 
(hence the definite article, 2.1/2 note 1) - trans, a house. 
ούδέν is here an adjective with ψεΰδοο; trans, no falsehood 
(cf. ούδείο in 8(iv)). 
1.1 αύτοΰ adv. there, in that place (not the gen. sing. m. or 
n. of αύτόο). II.3-4 ού ... έοτιν ... ήμΐν lit. there is not to us, 
i.e. we do not have. 
(vi) The aorist is gnomic and should be translated by a 
present (see note on 5.2.10). 
παραοάγγαο δύο καί εϊκοοι (22 parasangs) is in apposition 
to οταθμούο τρεΐο (three days' march) and explains how far 

66 
C 
3 
3 
Cyrus marched in three days; αύτοΰ gen. sing. m. of αΰχ υ 
(referring back to τον Μαίανδρον). 
10 
Gnomic aorists (see note on 8 above). 
11 
κακώο λέγω + acc. speak ill of, malign, abuse; ό δέ and ht 
(i.e. Socrates) 5.1/3; γάρ Socrates' reply sarcasticall. 
explains M's action and in English would be introduced b\ 
yes, for he ... (see 24.1/1) or well, he ...; καλώο λέγω car 
mean either speak well of or speak properly (κακώο λέγο, 
by itself can also mean speak badly) - Socrates is punning 
on the two senses. 
12 
/.I είχε had i.e. commanded; 
the first δέ connects this 
sentence with the preceding one in the original context and 
need not be translated (cf. the beginning of 4.2.9); 
Καλλικρατίδδο (nom. s.; = Attic -ίδηο - 3.1/2 note 3) was 
a Spartan and his name has the non-Attic (and non-Ionic) 
form of the patronymic suffix. 1.3 τριήρειο 6.1/lc. 11.6 ff. 
οποράδεο nom. pi. f. (this is a third declension ad]., 
10.1/4tf) scattered (agreeing with τριήρειο); Καλλικρατίδαο 
τε ... καί Πρωτόμαχοο ... lit. both Callicratidas ... and 
Protomachus 
... Greek is fond of linking clauses with 
particles such as τε ... καί (cf. 4.1/3 and άγουοί τε καί 
φέρουαν in /.23f. of 4.2.9) but in English we would not 
translate τε; notice that between this τε ... καί another καί 
occurs to join άπέπεοεν (< άποπίπτω) and απέθανε (< 
άποθνήοκω) but it is the second καί which picks up τε 
because the two elements, which must be parallel, are 
Callicratidas and Protomachus 
and those with him; τφ 
δεξιω with their right [wing] dat. of instrument (11.1/2). 
//.13f άλλων cannot here be translated other because the 
allies referred to are allies of the Spartans; the meaning is 
of their allies as well (cf. 'Αθήναι καί αί άλλαι νηοοι Athens 
and the islands as well not Athens and the other islands 
because Athens is not an island); o>c here 
about 
(22.1/Myii)). 
13 
1.2 xGc θυρδκ; i.e. the two leaves of the door at the h o u s e 
entrance; γυναικωνΐτιν in an Athenian house the women 
had separate quarters. //.3f ή τ'... καί the τε need not be 
translated (cf. 1.5 of previous passage); μέν is balanced by 
δέ after έπειτα, and ούν connects this sentence with the 
previous one (neither word would have an equivalent in 
idiomatic English). 1.5 έξέωοαν < έξωθέω (the temporal 
augment in the aorist of this verb is irregular, cf. 4.1/1 n o t e 
2(ii). //.9ff. άπέωοα < άπωθέω; έβαλλε started to pelt 
inceptive use of the imperfect (4.1/1 footnote); λίθοιο with 

stones (dat. of instrument, 11.1/2); /.9f άμαρτάνει ... 
ουντρίβει Greek often uses the present tense in narrative 
for vividness (vivid present); translate with the English 
simple past (missed ... gashed); take έμοΰ (/.9) with 
άμαρτάνει missed me (άμαρτάνω is followed by the gen., 
13.1/2a(iv)). 
7.2/1 Vocabulary 
αδελφή, -ήε, ή 
sister 
άδελφιδή, -ήο, ή 
niece 
άθρόοο, -ά, -ov 
all together, 
all at once, in a body 
αίοχρόο, -ά, -όν 
shameful, 
disgraceful 
άκίνητοο, -ov 
motionless, 
immovable 
άμαρτάνω make a mistake; 
(+gen.) miss 
άπεθανον aor. of άποθνηοκω 
die, be killed 
άπήλθον aor. of απέρχομαι 
go away, depart 
άποπίπτω (aor. άπέπεοον) 
fall 
overboard 
cuticxoc, -ov 
incredible 
αποπλέω (aor. άπέπλευοα) 
sail away 
απωθέω (aor. άπέωοα) 
push 
away 
Άργινοΰοαι, -ων, αί 
e Arginousae (islands) 
ατοποο, -ov 
extraordinary 
αυτού (adv.) 
there, in that 
v place 
αφθονοο, -ov 
abundant, 
plentiful 
βάλλω 
pelt 
-ac, ή force, violence 
ftoc, -ου, ό 
life 
Υ^ναικωνιτιο, -ιδοο, ή 
women's 
apartments 
δειπνέω 
dine 
δεξιός, -ά, —όν on the right 
hand 
διά (prep.+gen.) 
through, 
across 
δίκαιοο, -fx, -ov 
just 
δίο (adv.) 
twice 
έαρ, ήροο, τό (the season of) 
spring 
είδον aor. of όράω see, look 
at 
εϊκοα(ν) (indecl. adj.) 
twenty 
εΐπον aor. of λέγω 
say 
είοήλθον aor. of είοέρχομαι 
enter 
έκκαλέω 
call (someone) out 
έκκληάδ, -Qc, ή 
assembly 
έκκόπτω 
knock out 
ένδοθεν (adv.) 
from inside 
ένεστι (impers.) 
it is possible 
εννέα (indecl. adj.) 
nine 
έντεΰθεν (adv.) 
thereupon 
έξευρίοκω 
find out, discover 
έξήκοντα (indecl. adj.) 
sixty 
έξήλθον aor. of έξέρχομαι 
come out 
έξωθέω (aor. έξέωοα) 
push 
out 
έπεί (conj.) 
when 
έπειδή τάχιοτα 
as soon as 
επί (prep.+acc.) 
to 
έπιχειρεω 
attempt, take in 
hand 
έρπω 
spread 
εύήλιοο, -ov 
sunny, with a 
sunny aspect 
εύθυο (adv.) 
at once, 
straightaway 
εύροο, -ODC, τό 
breadth 

εύοκιοο, -ov 
well-shaded 
εύώνυμος, -ov left, on the left 
hand 
ήγαγον aor. of άγω 
lead, 
bring 
ήλθον aor. of έρχομαι 
go, 
come 
θέρος, -ους, τό 
summer 
θύρδ, -ac, ή 
door 
ίοχϋρόο, -ά, -6v 
powerful, 
strong 
κακώς/καλώς (+acc.) λέγω 
speak ill/well (of) (see note 
on 11) 
καταδύω 
make to sink, sink 
(tr.) 
καταπλέω sail back 
κέρας, -ατος, τό 
wing of a 
fleet 
κΐνέω 
move 
κόςμος, -ου, ό 
world 
κυβερνήτης, -ου, ό 
helmsman 
Λακωνικόο, -ή, -όν 
Laconian, 
Spartan 
λίθος, -ου, ό 
stone 
Λϋδία, -ac, ή Lydia (territory 
in west of Asia Minor) 
Μαίανδρος, -ου, ό 
Maeander 
(river in Phrygia) 
μέτωπον, -ου, τό 
forehead 
μήκος, -ους, τό 
length 
νύξ, νυκτός, ή 
night 
όλεθρος, -ου, ό 
destruction 
δνυξ, -υχος, ό 
claw 
όπλα, -ων, τά weapons, arms 
ού (conj.) 
where 
πανταχώο (adv.) 
in all ways 
altogether 
παραοάγγης, -ου, ό parasan% 
(a Persian measure of 
distance of about 30 stadev 
[= c. 6 km.] ) 
πάροδοο, -ου, ό 
passage, 
entrance 
παροιμία, -Sc, ή 
proverb 
πεζομαχέω 
fight on land 
Πελοποννηςιοι, -ων, οί 
Peloponnesians 
πέντε (indecl. adj.) 
five 
πλέθρον, -ου, τό plethron (c. 
30 metres) 
ποταμός, -ού, ό 
river 
οκηνη, -ής, ή 
stage (in 
theatre) 
ςποράς, -άδος (adj.) scattered 
ςταθμός, -ου, ό 
day's march 
ςτρατοπεδεύω 
make camp, 
encamp 
ςυντρίβω 
smash, gash 
τειχομαχέω 
fight against 
walls/fortifications 
τριήρης, -ους, ή 
trireme 
ύςτεραιος, -α, -ov 
following, 
next 
τή ύςτεραία on the following 
day 
φυγή, -ής, ή 
flight 
Φώκαια, -ας, ή 
Phocaea (city 
in Asia Minor) 
χειμών, -ωνος, ό 
winter 
χελΐδών, -όνος, ή 
swallow 
Χίος, -ου, ή 
Chios (island 
and city in the Aegean Sea) 

c 
3 
n a 
• 
f S · 
ο 
8.1 Grammar 
0 0 
8.1/1 Middle and passive voices 
In a clause where the verb is active the subject is the doer (the 
man bit the dog; Alcibiades is running through the agora). There 
may or may not be an object, depending on whether the verb is 
transitive or intransitive. In a clause with a passive verb the 
subject is the sufferer (the dog was bitten by the man; the 
Athenians were defeated in Sicily). The agent or instrument 
(11.1/2) may or may not be specified. The active and passive 
voices are used in Greek in much the same way as in English. 
Greek, however, has a third voice, the middle. This has no 
English equivalent because the meanings it conveys are 
expressed in English in different ways. These meanings are: 
(a) to do something to oneself, e.g. λούομαι I wash 
myselfI 
wash (intr.); παύομαι I stop myself, I cease, stop (intr.) 
(b) to do something for oneself, for one's own advantage, e.g. 
κομίζω (act.) carry, convey, κομίζομαι (mid.) I convey for 
myself, recover. 
έκατόν δραχμάο έκομίοατο. 
He recovered a hundred 
drachmas. 
(c) to cause something to be done (one's own advantage is 
always involved): 
διδάοκομαι τούο παιδαο την I am having [my] children 
τών Ελλήνων γλώτταν. 
taught the language of 
the Greeks. 
Of these three uses (a) is restricted to verbs with an appropriate 
leaning, (b) is very common, (c) is somewhat rare. Very often 
a verb when used in the middle voice in sense (b) acquires a 

70 
C 
• 
i 
special meaning, e.g. λύω loosen, free, λύομαι (mid.) free 
(someone) for one's own advantage, ransom; αίρέω tofe^ seize, 
αίρέομαι take for oneself choose. 
As will be seen in Appendix 1, the forms of the middle and 
passive indicative are identical in the present and imperfect (and 
also in the perfect and pluperfect - 16.1/3). This does not create 
ambiguity as the context of a particular verb normally shows its 
voice. The future and aorist passive differ in form from the 
middle and will be treated separately in 11.1/1. With regard to 
the forms of the indicative of the present middle and passive, the 
imperfect middle and passive, the future middle and the aorist 
middle, which can now be learnt (see p.265f.), we should note 
that: 
(d) in each case the stem is the same as for the active, and the 
link vowel between the stem and the ending proper (which 
is more easily distinguishable in these forms) is ο/ε in the 
present, imperfect (and strong aorist) and future, but α in 
the weak aorist (on -ω of the 2nd s., see below). 
(e) in each tense the 2nd s. ending has undergone contraction. 
The present and future ending was originally -εοαι, the 
imperfect -εοο and the aorist -aco. With the loss of 
intervocal c (cf. 6.1/lc) these became r\ (or ει), ου, ω 
respectively (we have already met the second and third 
contractions with contracted verbs - 5.1/2). 
( f ) when allowance has been made for the 2nd s., the endings, 
except for the 1st pi. and 2nd pi. which do not vary, fall into 
two classes. For the primary tenses they are -μαι, -cai, -ται, 
-νται and for the historic -μην, -co, -το, -ντο (cf. 4.1/1 note 1). 
(g) the endings of the strong aorist indicative middle are the 
same as those of the imperfect: αίοθάνομαι perceive, impf. 
ήοθανόμην, aor. ήοθόμην; and the infinitive ending of the 
strong aorist is the same as that of the present: αίοθάνεοθαι 
(pres.), αίοθέοθαι (aor.). 
Notes 
1 
Many common verbs have, for no perceptible reason, their 
future in the middle voice, not the active, e.g. ακούω hear, 
άκούοομαι; βοάω shout, βοήοομαι; διώκω pursue, διώξομαι; 
μανθάνω learn, μαθηοομαι. These are verbs which would not 
otherwise have had reason to be used in the middle. For 
other examples see Principal parts of verbs. 
2 
ειμί be also has a future middle, which is formed with the 
stem ec-: έοομαι, έοει (-η), έοται, έοόμεθα, έοεοθε, έοονται. 

The original form of the 3rd s., έοεται, occurs in dialects 
other than Attic. 
3 
Contracted verbs 
form their present 
and 
imperfect 
middle/passive according to the rules given at 5.1/2 (see 
Appendix 2). 
4 In Indo-European (1.3) there were only active and middle 
voices. In Greek the passive use of the middle led to the 
development of separate forms in the future and aorist, but 
even in Attic we occasionally meet the future middle used in 
a passive sense. 
8.1/2 Deponent verbs 
A linguistic peculiarity for which English offers no parallel is 
deponent verbs, which are middle or passive in form but active 
in meaning. They may be transitive (as κτάομαι acquire) or 
intransitive (as πορεύομαι march). In some cases the meaning of 
a deponent exemplifies one of the uses of the middle voice 
(κτάομαι originally meant procure for oneself), but elsewhere 
(as έπομαι follow) no explanation seems possible, although 
these verbs are among the most commonly used in Greek. 
As we have seen in the previous subsection, the forms of the 
middle and passive voices differ only in the future and aorist. 
This divergence allows a classification of deponents into two 
groups: 
(a) middle deponents, whose future and aorist are middle in 
form, as αίνίττομαι speak in riddles, fut. αίνίξομαι, aor. 
ηνιξάμην. This is the larger group 
(b) passive deponents, whose aorist is passive in form. Nearly , 
all passive deponents, however, have a middle, not passive, 
future. For the aorist passive and examples of passive 
deponents see 11.1/1. 
Examples of deponents in use are: άπό τών 'Αθηνών έρχονται 
they are coming from Athens (έρχομαι come, go; for the aorist 
of this verb see 7.1/1 note 2); τό άθλον δέχομαι I accept the prize 
(δέχομαι accept, receive). 
A very common deponent is γίγνομαι, which has the basic 
meanings be born, become, happen. In many contexts, however, 
English requires a more specific word: άνήρ άγαθόο έγένετο he 
showed himself a brave man (lit. he became a brave man); νύξ 
έγένετο night fell. 

8.1/3 Indirect statement 
In English we can say, with the same meaning, he considers that 
I am clever or he considers me to be clever. Both constructions 
a noun clause introduced by that or an infinitive phrase without 
that, have their equivalents in Greek, but, unlike English, Greek 
shows a distinct preference for the infinitive construction after 
most verbs of saying, thinking and the like (for verbs of 
knowing and perceiving, see \5.H2a): 
νομίζω, οϊομαι 
both 
think, consider; φάοκω state, declare; ήγέομαι consider. The first 
three are used 
almost exclusively with 
the 
infinitive 
construction. 
(a) Infinitive 
construction 
In this form there is no introductory word (like δτι that in the 
other construction - see below (b)) and the finite verb of the 
original statement is changed to the infinitive of the same tense 
(the present infinitive represents both the present and the 
imperfect indicative of the direct form). If the subject of the 
finite verb of the original direct statement is the same as the 
subject of the verb of saying or thinking introducing the indirect 
statement, it remains in the nominative, as do any words 
agreeing with it (nominative and infinitive). Such sentences are 
of the type Xerxes said that he was master. Since in the original 
direct statement (δεΰπότηΰ ειμί I am master) there is no need to 
state the subject explicitly (except for emphasis: έγώ είμι 
δεοπότχγ: I am master), so too the subject of the infinitive is 
normally not expressed: Ξερξτ^ έφη becn6xr\c είναι. When the 
two subjects are not identical, the subject of the infinitive is put 
into the accusative (accusative and infinitive): ό caxpa^c έφη 
Ξέρξην είναι δεοπότην the satrap said that Xerxes was master 
(lit. Xerxes to be master; original Ξέpξηc ecu becn0xr\c Xerxes 
is master). If the direct statement was negated, the same 
negative, ού (see 7.1/6), will appear with the infinitive. Further 
examples are: 
ή 'Acacia νομίζει καλή είναι. 
Aspasia thinks that she is 
ό Περικλήΰ ένόμιζε τήν 
'Acnaciav καλήν είναι. 
beautiful (original καλή 
είμι I am beautiful). 
Pericles used to think that 
Aspasia was beautiful 
(original ή 'Acnacia ecu 
καλή Aspasia is 
beautiful). 

I consider that Aspasia is 
not ugly (original ή 
'Aauacis ούκ έοτιν 
αίοχρδ. Aspasia is not 
ugly). 
Socrates said [his] wife 
would get a chiton 
(original ή γυνη χιτώνα 
κτηοεται lit. the wife 
will get a chiton). 
I suspect that 
Xanthippe 
got five chitons yesterday 
(original ή Ξανθίππη 
πέντε χιτώναο έχθέο 
έκτηοατο Xanthippe 
got 
five chitons 
yesterday). 
Notes 
1 
It is only in this construction that the distinction between 
the present and aorist infinitives is one of time, not aspect 
(cf. 4.1/1). In the last example κτηοαοθαι means literally to 
have got. If we were to substitute the present infinitive 
κτάοθαι to be getting (and eliminate έχθέο) the meaning 
would be I suspect that Xanthippe 
is getting... (original ή 
Ξανθίππη κτάται...). 
2 
Since, in the accusative and infinitive construction, the 
infinitive of a transitive verb has both its subject and its 
object in the accusative, there is obviously a possibility of 
ambiguity. When confronted with ce φημι 'Ρωμαίουο 
νΐκήοειν (the reply of the Delphic priestess to Pyrrhus of 
Epirus) one might well wonder whether the meaning was I 
say that you will conquer the Romans or I say that the 
Romans 
will conquer 
you. 
Normal Greeks left such 
equivocation to oracles. 
3 
φημί tends to occupy an unemphatic position and so, unlike 
in English, does not precede the indirect statement which it 
reports: Πέροηο έφη είναι he said he was a Persian (cf. 7.1/2 
note 3). 
4 
ού φημι means I say that ... not, I deny: ούκ έφη Πέρσηο 
είναι he denied he was a Persian; it never means I do not say 
that..., which would require a different verb, e.g. ού λέγω δτι 
... (on δτι see (b) below). 
5 
Verbs of hoping (έλπίζω), promising 
(ύπιοχνέομαι), 
swearing (δμνϋμι 20.1/1), threatening (άπειλέω) and the like 
ηγούμαι την 'Αοπααδν ούκ 
είναι αίςχράν. 
6 Οωκράτηο έφη την γυναίκα 
χιτώνα κτηοεοθαι. 
ύποπτεύω την Ξανθίππην πέντε 
χιτώναο έχθέο κτηοαοθαι. 
73 
C 
3 
8 

74 
regularly take the infinitive construction. When these verb 
have a future reference, as they generally do, they can h 
construed with the future infinitive (a present or aons> 
ο 
infinitive is also possible): έλπίζω νΤκήΰειν έν τη μάχη / hopl 
to conquer in the battle. For a negative hope of this sort th^ 
negative μή, not ού, is used because the original is really nor 
a statement but a wish (wishes are always negated by μη ^ 
21.1/1): έλπίζω xovc Λακεδαιμονίου μή καύΰειν τον έμο\ 
άγρόν I hope the Spartans won't burn my farm (original 
may the Spartans not burn my farm!). This use of μή ls 
extended to verbs of promising, swearing and threatening. 
(b) Construction with finite verb 
Indirect statements in Greek may also be expressed by a noun-
clause introduced by ότι or roc, that. Insofar as these two 
conjunctions can be differentiated, ότι is used to introduce a 
fact, whereas roc tends to convey the suggestion that the reporter 
considers the statement as a mere opinion, an allegation, or as 
untrue. As in the infinitive construction, the tense of the direct 
speech is retained in the indirect form even after a main verb 
which is in the past; in such cases we make a tense adjustment 
in English (see the second, third and fourth examples below). 
This is the regular construction after λέγω say (but see note 1) 
and certain other verbs. Examples are: 
λέγει roc ύβριστήΰ είμι. 
He claims that I am 
insolent. 
είπον ότι ό Κύροο διώκει. 
They said that Cyrus was 
pursuing (original Cyrus 
is pursuing). 
άπεκρίναντο ότι cxpaxov 
They replied that they 
πεμψουοιν. 
would send an army 
(original we will send an 
army). 
εϊπομεν ότι ό Περικλής ταύτα 
We said that Pericles 
ού ποιήςει. 
would not do this 
(original Pericles will 
not do this). 
Notes 
1 
For the impersonal English construction it is said that ... 
Greek uses a personal construction with the infinitive: ό 
C©Kp0^c λέγεται τούΰ νέοι^ βλάψαι it is said that Socrates 
harmed the young (lit. Socrates is said to have harmed ...). 
2 
Occasionally even a direct quote is introduced by ότι: ειπον 
ότι έτοιμοι έομεν they said, 'We are ready'. 

For the change of mood which may occur after a historic 
main verb see 14.1/4d. 
31/4 Third declension nouns - stems in ι and υ 
These stems differ from those in consonants (5.1/1, 6.1/1) in 
having v, not a, as the acc. s. ending for masculine and feminine 
nouns. 
Stems in ι consist of a large number of feminines (including 
many abstract nouns, mostly in -cic, e.g. φύας nature), a few 
masculines, but no neuters in normal use. All are declined alike, 
with the odd anomaly that the original ι of the stem has been 
lost in most forms. The -εως of the gen. s. was originally -x\oc 
(as occurs in Homer); the quantity of the two vowels was 
interchanged but the original accent was retained, i.e. πόληος 
> πόλεως. This accent was extended by analogy to the genitive 
plural. 
Masculine and feminine υ stems are divided into two sub-
groups, both very small. The declension of the first (πηχυς) is 
very close to πόλις, of the second (ιχθύς) to consonantal stems, 
aero, the only neuter^ follows πήχυς in the genitive and dative. 
πόλις (f) 
πηχυς (m) 
άστυ (η) 
ίχθύο (m) 
city 
forearm 
city 
fish 
SINGULAR 
Nom. πόλις 
πηχυς 
acru 
ιχθύς 
Voc. πόλι 
πηχυ 
άοτυ 
ίχθύ 
Acc. πόλιν 
πηχυν 
άοτυ 
ίχθύν 
Gen. πόλεως 
πηχεωο 
acxecoc 
ιχθύος 
Dat. πόλει 
πηχει 
άοτει 
ίχθύϊ 
PLURAL 
N.V. πόλεις 
πηχειο 
άοτη (<εα) 
ίχθύες 
Acc. πόλεις 
πηχειο 
άστη (<εα) 
ιχθύς 
Gen. πόλεων 
πήχεων 
άοτεων 
Ιχθύων 
Dat. πόλεα(ν) 
πηχεα(ν) 
άοτεα(ν) 
ίχθυςι(ν) 
The normal word for city is πόλις. άστυ means city, town as 
opposed to the country. 
Note 
πρεςβυς, which follows πηχυς, is a poetical word for old man 
iprose uses γέρων or πρεςβύτης). Its plural πρέςβεις, however, is 
the normal prose word for ambassadors 
(the singular 
ambassador is supplied by πρεςβευτης). 
75 
c 
3 
H? s 

8.2 Greek reading 
1 
ό θεόο καί ή φύαο ούδέν μάτην ποιούοιν. 
2# φύαν πονηράν μεταβαλεΐν ού ράδιον. 
3# πόλειο δλαο ήφάνιοε διαβολή κακή. 
4 
Ίηοοΰο Χριοτόο Θεού Tioc Οωτήρ (the name of an earl·, 
Christian symbol is concealed in the initial letters of 
this 
formula). 
5 
ό χρυοόο ού μιαίνεται. 
6 
οϊεοθε άλλους τήν Ελλάδα οώοειν, ύμεΐο δ' άποδράοεοθαι; 
7 
έκ του έοοράν γίγνεται άνθρώποιε έράν. 
8# άρετήο βέβαιαί είαν αί κτήοειο μόνηο. 
9# φευ φευ, παλαιόο aivoc G>C καλώο έχει* 
γέροντεο ούδέν έςμεν άλλο πλήν ψόφος 
καί ςχήμ', ονείρων δ' έρπομεν μιμήματα, 
νους δ' ούκ ένεςτιν, οίόμεςθα δ' εύ φρονεΐν. 
10 
έλέφας μύν ού δάκνει. 
11 
άταλαίπωρος τοις πολλοίς ή ζήτηςις τής άληθείac καί έπί τά 
έτοιμα μάλλον τρέπονται. 
12 
οί Λακεδαιμόνιοι κήρυκα έπεμψαν καί τούς νεκρούς 
διεκομίςαντο. 
13 
διά τό θαυμάζειν οί άνθρωποι καί νυν καί τό πρώτον 
ήρξαντο φιλοςοφειν. 
14 
ώδινεν όρος, είτα μΰν έτεκεν. 
15# πολλών ό λιμός γίγνεται διδάςκαλος. 
16 
οί (Γκύθαι ού λούονται ύδατι. 
17 
A Greek translation of the Old Testament was prepared at 
Alexandria in the third century BC. Legend tells us that the 
version acquired its name of Septuagint (Latin septuaginta 
seventy) from the number of those involved, of whom 
thirty knew Greek but not Hebrew, thirty Hebrew but not 
Greek, while the remaining ten were administrators w i t h 
no knowledge of either. This calumny probably arose from 
the colloquial nature of its language. The following are 
well-known passages. 
(i) έν άρχή έποίηςεν ό θεός τον ούρανόν καί τήν γήν. ή δέ γή Λν 
άόρατος καί άκαταςκεύαςτος, καί ςκότος έπάνω τηο 
άβύςςου, καί πνεύμα του θεού έπεφέρετο έπάνω του ύ δ α τ ο ς , 
καί είπεν ό θεός, γεννηθήτω (lit. let ... be born) φώς. και 
έγένετο φώς. καί ειδεν ό θεός τό φώς ότι καλόν, και-
διεχώριςεν ό θεός άνά μέςον του φωτός καί άνά μέςον του 
ςκότους. καί έκάλεcεv ό θεός τό φώς ήμέραν καί τό CKOXOC 
έκάλεςεν νύκτα. 

(ti) έπέοτρεψα καί ειδον υπό τον ήλιον δτι ού τοΐο κούφοιο ό 
δρόμοο, καί ού τοΐο δυνατοιο ό πόλεμοο, καί ού τοιο οοφοιο 
άρτοο, καί ού τοΐο ουνετοΐο πλούτοο. 
18 
Crime does not pay 
Hegestratus, a rascally owner-captain, had hired his ship to 
an Athenian who wished to import grain from Syracuse. 
After the grain had been loaded, Hegestratus, with 
Zenothemis, an accomplice in crime, went round Syracuse 
borrowing money against the cargo as though it were his. 
This type of loan (bottomry) was made to enable 
merchants to cover costs of transportation by sea, and was 
not recoverable if the ship sank. 
Ζηνόθεμιο 
δ' 
αδίκημα 
κακόν 
μεθ' 
Ήγεοτράτου 
ουνεοκευάοατο. χρήματα γάρ έν ταϊο Ουρακούοαιο 
έδανείζοντο. ώο δέ έλάμβανον τά χρήματα, ο'ίκαδε 
άπέοτελλον eic την Μαοοαλίαν, καί ούδέν eic τό πλοΐον 
είοέφερον. έπειδή δέ ήοαν αί ουγγραφαί άποδοΰναι (to 5 
repay) τά χρήματα μετά τον του πλοίου κατάπλουν, 
καταδΰοαι έβουλεύοαντο τό πλοιον έβούλοντο γάρ τούο 
δανειοτάο άποοτερήοαι. ό μέν ούν Ήγέοτρατοο, ώο άπό τηο 
γήο άπήραν δυοΐν ή τριών ημερών πλουν, τηο νυκτόο 
διέκοπτε του πλοίου τό έδαφοο, ό δέ Ζηνόθεμιο άνω μετά 10 
τών άλλων έπι βατών διέτριβεν. άλλά έπεί ψόφοο έγένετο, 
αίοθάνονται οί έν τω πλοίω δτι κακόν τι (some mischief) 
κάτω γίγνεται, καί βοηθούοιν. ώο δ' ήλίοκετο ό Ήγέοτρατοο 
καί κακώο πείοεοθαι ύπελάμβανε, φεύγει καί πηδά eic την 
θάλατταν. ούτωο ούν, ωοπερ άξιοο ην, κακόο κακώοΐδ 
άπέθανεν. 
Notes 
2 ράδιον (sc. έοτί) it is easy - when impersonal expressions 
involve an adjective the neuter singular form is used. 
3 ήφάνιοε < άφανίζω (4.1/1 note 2(ii)), the aorist is gnomic (see 
note on 5.2.10). 
6 άλλουο ... οώοειν acc. and inf., ύμεΐο ... άποδράοεοθαι nom. 
and inf.; άποδράοεοθαι < άποδιδράοκω, which has a middle 
future (8.1/1 note 1). 
7 έράν is the subject of γίγνεται. 
8 κτήοειο should be translated by a singular. 
9 1.1 how right the old saying is (ώο is exclamatory, 
22.1/l<z(ii)); Greek uses έχω + an adverb (here καλώο) to 
express a state where English has the verb to be + an 
adjective. /.3 μιμήματα is in apposition to the understood 
subject of έρπομεν we crawl [along] [as] copies ... /.4 -μεοθα 

(in οίόμεοθα) is an alternative ending used in verse for -μεθ0 
(1st pi.) of the middle and passive; εύ φρονεΐν think rigktl· 
i.e. be sane, be of right mind. 
11 xoic πολλοίς lit. for the many, i.e. for the majority, for most 
people; τρέπονται lit. they turn themselves (use (a) of tlx 
middle in 8.1/1). Whereas the English verb turn can bt 
either transitive (I turned 
my car towards 
him) or 
intransitive (I turned towards him), τρέπω in the active is 
transitive only (i.e. must be always followed by an object), 
and the middle (τρέπομαι lit. I turn myself, i.e. I turn) is 
employed for the intransitive use of the English turn. Here 
we would translate they turn. 
12 διεκομίχαντο could represent use (b) or (c) as given in 8.1/1. 
14 ώδΐνεν impf. (or aor.) of ώδίνω (4.1/1 note 2(ii)). 
16 λούονται wash; just as with τρέπω and turn (above 11), λούω 
is transitive only, whereas wash in English can be transitive 
(I washed the baby five times) or intransitive (I washed five 
times). 
17 (i) /.I έν αρχή the absence of the article gives the phrase a 
poetical ring. ll.Si. ειδεν... τό φώο ότι καλόν lit. saw the light 
that [it was] beautiful, i.e. saw that the light was ...; άνά 
μέΰον (+ gen. between) need only be translated once. 
(ii) έπέοτρεψα I turned (unlike τρέπω this verb can be either 
transitive or intransitive in the active mood) - the author, 
who was of a rather pessimistic nature, turned from one 
depressing observation to another; ύπό τον ήλιον i.e. here on 
earth. 
18 1.2 cm^c^mcaTO < οικ;κευάζομαι (6.1/3). O f f . roc when, 
as as also in 11.8 and 13 below (22.1/lfc(iv)); έλάμβανον ... 
άπέοτελλον ... είΰέφερον the imperfect indicates that they 
did these things on several occasions. 1.5 αί συγγραφαί the 
contracts - the infinitive phrase beginning with άποδούναι 
defines them. 11.9f. άπήραν < άπαίρω sail away; πλουν acc. of 
extent (7.1 /6d); διέκοπτε began to cut through; (inceptive 
imperfect, 4.1/1 footnote). //.12ff. αίοθάνονται... γίγνεται ... 
βοηθοΰαν vivid presents (cf. note on 7.2.13 /.9f); ήλίοκετο 
... ύπελάμβανε imperfect because these two actions were 
going on when Hegestratus escaped; the two following 
verbs are in the vivid present, which is more commonly used 
in main clauses than in subordinate clauses. 

g 2/1 V o c a b u l a r y 
άβυοοοο, -ου, ή 
abyss 
αδίκημα, -ατος, το 
crime, 
aivoc, -ου, ο 
tale, story 
αίςθάνομαι 
perceive, notice, 
realize 
άκαταοκεύαοτοο, -ov 
unformed 
άλίςκομαι fee awg/tf 
ανά μέοον see note on 17(ι) 
άνω (adv.) 
above, up above 
άξιος, -ά, -ov 
deserving 
αόρατος, -ov 
unseen, 
invisible 
άπαίρω (aor. άπήρα) 
sail 
away, depart 
άποδιδράοκω (fut. -δράοομαι) 
run away, escape 
άποοτέλλω 
send, send away 
άποοτερέω 
rob, defraud 
άρχομαι (mid.) 
begin (of 
something continued by 
oneself) 
άταλαίπωρος, -ov 
without 
taking pains, not 
painstaking 
αφανίζω make unseen, wipe 
put, destroy 
βέβαιος, -ff, -ov 
secure 
βοηθέω 
(run to) help 
βουλεύω 
plan, resolve; 
(mid.) plot 
βούλομαι 
wish, want 
γιγνομαι 
become, be, 
happen, take place 
δανείζω 
lend; (mid.) borrow 
δανειςτής, -ου, ό 
creditor 
διά (prep.+acc.) 
because of, 
on account of 
διαβολή, -ης, ή 
slander 
διακομίζομαι (mid.) 
carry 
across 
διακόπτω 
cut through 
διατρίβω pass (time) 
διαχωρίζω separate, divide 
διδάςκαλος, -ου, ό 
teacher 
δρόμοο, -ου, ό race 
δυνατός, -η, -όν 
strong 
έδαφος, -ους, τό 
bottom 
είςφέρω 
bring/carry into 
είτα (adv.) 
then, next 
ένειμι 
be in 
έπάνω (+gen.) 
upon 
έπιβάτης, -ου, ό 
passenger 
έπιςτρέφω 
turn about 
επιφέρομαι 
move (intr.) 
έράω 
love, desire 
passionately 
έςοράω (= είοοράω) 
behold, 
look at 
έτοιμοο, -η, -ov ready, ready 
to hand 
ζήτηςις, -εως, ή 
search, 
inquiry 
Ίηςοΰς, -ου, ό 
Jesus 
καλέω 
call, name 
καλώο έχω 
be right 
κατάπλους, -ου, ό arrival in 
port 
κατω (adv.) 
below, down 
κήρυξ, -υκος, ό 
herald 
κούφος, -η, -ov 
light, nimble 
κτηςις, -εως, ή 
possession 
λαμβάνω take, get 
λΤμός, -ου, ό hunger, famine 
λούω wash (the body); (mid.) 
wash oneself 
μάλλον 
rather 
Μαςςαλίδ, HSc, ή 
Marseilles 
μάτην (adv.) 
in vain; without 
reason 
μεταβάλλω 
change, alter (tr. 
and intr.) 
μιαίνω 
stain, pollute 

μίμημα, -axoc, τό 
imitation 
μόνοο, -η, -ov 
alone, only 
μΰο, μυόο, ό 
mouse 
νυν (adv.) 
now 
οϊκαδε (adv.) 
homewards 
ο'ίομαι (also οιμαι) 
think 
oAoc, -η, -ov 
whole, complete 
oveipoc, -ου, ό 
dream 
opoc, -ovc9 τό 
mountain 
oikroc (adv.) 
thus, in this 
way 
παλαιός -ά, -όν 
ancient, (of) 
old 
πάοχω (fut. neicecQat) 
experience, be treated 
πηδάω 
leap, jump 
πλην (adv.) 
but, except 
πλοΐον, -ου, τό 
vessel, ship 
πλοΰο, -ου, ό sailing, voyage 
πόλic, -εωο, ή 
city, city-state 
πονηρόο, -ά, -όν 
wicked, bad 
CKOTOC, -ovc, τό 
darkness 
(Γκύθη^ -ου, ό 
Scythian 
συγγραφαί, -ων, αί 
contract, 
bond 
ουνετόο, -ή, -όν 
intelligent 
ΟυρΒκοΰοαι, -ων, αί 
Syracuu 
ουΰκευάζομαι 
contrive, 
concoct 
οχήμα, -ατοο, τό form, 
shap, 
appearance 
οωζω 
save, keep safe 
croup, -ήροΰ, ό 
saviour 
τίκτω (aor. έτεκον) 
give birth 
to 
τρέπομαι see note on 11 
uioc, -ου, ό 
son 
υπό (prep.+acc.) 
under 
ύπολαμβάνω 
assume 
φιλοοοφέω 
pursue/study 
philosophy 
φρονέω 
think 
ευ φρονέω 
be sane 
φύαο, -εωο, ή 
nature/Nature 
Xptfcoc, -ου, ό 
gold 
ψόφοο, -ου, ό 
noise 
ώδΐνω 
be in labour (of 
childbirth) 
roc see notes to 9 and 18 
ωοπερ (conj.) 
as 

9.1 Grammar 
9.1/1 Demonstrative pronouns 
Demonstratives in Greek draw our attention to persons and 
things and are used not only as pronouns but also as adjectives. 
The English this and that have similar functions although their 
use as pronouns is restricted; this in this temple is an adjective, 
that in I do not like that is a pronoun. Greek has three 
demonstratives, each with a special shade of meaning. The 
basic differences between them when used as adjectives are: 
όδε this near me (the speaker); normally to be translated 
this; 
owoc this or that near you (the person spoken to); normally 
to be translated this or that; 
έκεΐνοΰ that over there (i.e. away from both speaker and 
person spoken to); normally to be translated that. 
When used as pronouns όδε will literally mean this man near 
me, oitoc this or that man near you, έκεΐνοο that man over 
there, but the first can generally be translated by this man, the 
third by that man, while the translation of oxnoc by this man or 
that man will depend on the context. 
°δε is simply a compound of the definite article and -δε. In this 
combination even the unaccented forms of the article bear an 
accent: όδε, ήδε, οϊδε, αίδε (cf. 2.1/2; 3.1/1). έκεΐνοΰ is declined 
as a first and second declension adjective (3.1/3), except that 
the neuter nom. and acc. s. is εκείνο (for other words with this 
ending -o see 9.1/3). oxnoc is similarly declined but the first 
syllable undergoes changes according to the following rules: 
(tf) an initial vowel with a rough breathing occurs in the same 
forms as in the definite article (2.1/2, 3.1/1) 

(b) an initial τ occurs in the same forms as in the definite article 
(c) where the ending contains α or η the diphthong of the first 
syllable changes from ου to αυ. 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
M. 
F. 
Ν. 
Μ. 
F. 
Ν. 
Nom. ούτος 
αύτη 
τούτο 
ούτοι 
αύται 
ταύτα 
Acc. 
τούτον 
ταύτην 
τούτο 
τούτουο 
ταύτας 
ταύτα 
Gen. τούτου 
ταύτηο 
τούτου 
τούτων 
τούτων 
τούτων 
Dat. 
τούτω 
ταύτη 
τούτω 
τούτοις 
ταύταις 
τούτοις 
In prose, when a demonstrative is used as an adjective, the noun 
which it qualifies must retain the definite article and the 
demonstrative must appear in the predicative position (3.1/36): 
έκεΐνος ό veGvitfc that young man; ή γυνη ήδε this woman. 
Notes 
1 
In certain contexts ούτος refers to what precedes, όδε to 
what follows: ταΰτα έλεξεν he said this (as already 
reported), but τάδε έλεξεν he spoke as follows. 
2 
έκεΐνος ... ούτος can mean the former ...the latter. 
9.1/2 The relative pronoun oc and adjectival 
clauses 
Adjectival clauses qualify nouns or pronouns, and so perform 
the same function as adjectives. They are introduced by a 
relative pronoun, which in English is who, which etc. 
I am the man who dedicated a bronze tripod at Delphi. 
The tripod which you dedicated is inferior. 
An adjectival clause normally has an antecedent, i.e. a noun or 
pronoun to which the clause refers and which it qualifies (in the 
above examples man and tripod). In English the forms of the 
relative pronoun are not interchangeable but are influenced by 
the antecedent (the man which or the tripod who are clearly 
impossible). Further we cannot say I know the man whom 
visited Delos because, although man, the antecedent of the 
adjectival clause, is the object of know (and so would be in the 
accusative in Greek), the relative pronoun is the subject of the 
clause it introduces and must take the nominative form who, 
not the accusative form whom. The same holds for Greek, 
where the rule is a relative pronoun takes its number and gender 
from its antecedent but its case from the function it performs in 
its own clause (but see note 2 below). Greek cannot, moreover, 
omit the relative pronoun as we so often do in English (the man 

M. 
F. 
Ν. 
Hom. 
oc 
ή 
ό 
Acc. 
ov 
ήν 
ό 
Gen. ού 
r\c 
ού 
Dat. 
ώ 
f\ 
Φ 
4polio cursed cannot come into my house; Greek must say the 
man whom). 
The n o r m a l relative pronoun in Greek is oc, which is declined as 
a first and second declension adjective (3.1/3) except that the 
neuter s. nom. and acc. is δ without ν (for other words with this 
ending see 9.1/3): 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
M. 
F. 
N. 
οί 
αί 
ά 
ovc 
He 
ά 
ών 
ών 
ών 
oic 
aic 
oic 
Unlike who, which etc. in English, which can also be used as 
interrogatives (which is your tripod?), the Greek relative 
pronoun has no other functions in prose. Examples of adjectival 
clauses are: 
Θάνατον είοορώ oc "Αλκηοτιν 
I see Death who is going 
eic "Αιδου δόμον μέλλει 
to (μέλλει) take Alcestis 
κατάξειν. 
down tothe house of 
Hades. 
opac τον μόρον του Άκταίωνοο 
You know (lit. see) the fate 
ov oi κύνεο ovc έθρέψατο 
of Actaeon whom the 
διεοπάοαντο. 
dogs whom he [had] 
reared tore apart. 
οί οτρατιώται oic ταύτα είπε 
The soldiers to whom 
Ξενοφών έπανήλθον πρόο 
Xenophon said this (lit. 
τούο TlepcGic. 
these things) returned to 
the Persians. 
Notes 
1 
The antecedent of an adjectival clause, if a pronoun, is often 
omitted: δν οί θεοί φιλοΰοιν άποθνηοκει veoc [he] whom the 
gods love dies young. 
2 
Contrary to the rule given above, the Greek relative 
pronoun is often put into the same case as its antecedent. 
This quite illogical attraction is most frequent when a 
relative pronoun in the accusative case has an antecedent in 
the genitive or dative: ήγαγεν οτρατόν από τών πόλεων ών (for 
Sc) έπειοεν he led an army from the cities which he [had] 
persuaded. Sometimes the antecedent, if a pronoun, is 
omitted (cf. note 1); έπαινώ ce έφ' oic (for έπί τούτοιο ά) 
λέγειο I praise you for what you are saying. 
3 
Sometimes when both the relative and its antecedent are in 
the accusative the latter is put into the adjectival clause: ούκ 

84 
C 
3 
Η·' s 
άπεκρύπτετο ήν είχε γνώμην he did not conceal the opinu 
which he had (= την γνώμην ήν είχε); here the relative is uSe(J 
as an adjective. 
9.1/3 Q U T O C and its uses 
For the terms attributive 
position and predicative position see 
3.1/3b. 
aixoc is a pronoun which, like demonstratives (9.1/1), is also 
used as an adjective, αύτόο is declined like καλόο (3.1/3) except 
that in the neuter its nom. and acc. s. is αυτό (the expected αυτόν 
only occurs in ταύτόν - see below). The -o ending for the nom. 
and acc. neuter singular also occurs in the definite article (τό), 
the relative pronoun (δ), τοΰτο, έκεΐνο (9.1/1), and άλλο other. 
αύτόο is used in three ways: 
(a) as an emphasizing adjective meaning self. Greek has no 
separate words corresponding to the English emphatic 
myself, yourself etc. (as opposed to the reflexive myself\ 
yourself 
etc., see 9.1/4) and instead uses αύτόο for all 
persons. When used with a noun it stands in the predicative 
position: αύτόο ό άνήρ the man himself, περί τηο γυναικόο 
αύτηο concerning the woman herself, αύτόο can also be used 
by itself in the nominative and agree with the understood 
subject: αύτόο ήκειο you yourself have come. 
Two idioms involving this use of αύτόο are: 
(i) with ordinal numbers: πρεοβευτήο ήλθε δέκατοο αύτόο 
he came as ambassador with nine others (lit. himself 
the tenth). 
(ii) with a dative to express the idea of accompaniment 
(23.1/2&), especially in connection with the loss or 
destruction of something; τών τριήρων μίδν κατέδΰοαν 
αύτοΐο άνδράαν they sank one of the triremes crew and 
all (lit. [with] men 
themselves). 
(b) ό αύτόο means the same. In the attributive position (i.e. 
between the article and the noun) αύτόο always has this 
meaning: τούο αύτούο δεοπότac εϊχομεν, we had the 
same 
masters; έγώ μέν ό αύτόο είμι, ύμεΐο δέ μεταβάλλετε, / am 
the same, [it is] you [who] change. The same as is e x p r e s s e d 
either by ό amoc καί or, more commonly, by ό aircoc and the 
dative: 
τά αυτά φρονεί έμοί he thinks the same as I do; τά αυτά και 
ό 'Αλκιβιάδης πείθουαν, they give the same advice as 
Alcibiades (lit. they persuade the same [things] ...). 

In this use arnoc may coalesce with those parts of the article 
ending in a vowel (crasis - 11.1/5), and where this is 
possible both contracted and uncontracted forms are found 
in normal use. The following table shows all possible 
variations. 
SINGULAR 
M. 
F. 
N. 
Horn, ο αΰτόο, αύτόο 
ή αύτη, αύτη 
τό αύτό, ταύτό, ταύτόν 
Acc. τον αύτόν 
την αύτην 
τό αύτό, ταύτό, ταύτόν 
Gen. του αύτού, ταύτού 
τηο αύτήο 
του αύτοΰ, ταύτοΰ 
Dat. τω αύτω, ταύτω 
τη αύτη, ταύτη 
τω αύτω, ταύτω 
PLURAL 
Now. οί αυτοί, αύτοί 
αί αύται, αύταί 
τά αύτό, ταύτα 
Acc. τούο αύτούο 
τόο αύτάο 
τά αύτά, ταύτα 
Gen. τών αυτών 
τών αυτών 
τών αυτών 
Dat. xoic αύτοιο 
ταΐο αύταιc 
τοιο αύτοΐο 
The alternative neuter in -ov occurs only in the contracted 
form. 
The shorter forms bear a confusing resemblance to the 
corresponding parts of ούτοο, e.g. αύτη the same 
woman, 
αύτη this/that 
woman; 
ταύτα the same things, 
ταύτα 
these/those things. The accent will always show which word 
is involved. 
(c) The oblique cases (2.1/3) of αύτόο are used to express the 
personal pronoun of the third person, him, her, it, them 
(4.1/2). In this use αύτόν, αύτην etc. are unemphatic and 
postpositive (just as are με, οε, etc., cf. 4.1/2): έκέλευοαν 
αύτην μένει ν they ordered her to remain. As an emphatic 
third person pronoun, Greek uses the demonstratives ούτοο 
or έκεΐνοο: 
ούτοο μεν τούο Άθηναίουο 
He likes the Athenians, 
but 
φιλεΐ, αύτη δέ τούο 
she likes the Spartans. 
Λακεδαιμονίου^ 
έκεΐνον φιλοΰμεν. 
We like him. 
Greek has no word which functions as an unemphatic third 
person pronoun in the nominative since the verbal 
inflections themselves already indicate the person involved. 
To illustrate all three principal uses of αύτόο learn the following 
sentence: 
ό οτρατηγόο αύτόο τω αύτω 
The general himself killed 
ξίφει αύτούο έοφαξεν. 
them with the same 
sword. 

9.1/4 Reflexive and reciprocal pronouns 
(a) A reflexive pronoun is one which refers back to the subjec* 
of a sentence or clause, as in the sentence he killed himseI* 
In English all reflexive pronouns end in -self (myself 
yourself, himself, themselves, etc.) and are to be carefulK 
distinguished from the emphatic adjectives of the same 
form, e.g. he himself killed the soldier. 
In the singular the reflexives of the first and second persons 
are formed by joining the stems of the personal pronouns 
(4.1/2) to the appropriate parts of αxnoc; in the plural the 
two components are written and declined separately. The 
normal third person reflexive is formed from the stem of the 
indirect third person reflexive έ (see below) and αύτόο 
Reflexive pronouns can occur only in the oblique cases and 
the possibility of a neuter exists only in the direct third 
person forms. 
First Person 
Second Person 
M. 
F. 
Μ. 
F. 
SINGULAR 
Acc. έμαυτόν 
έμαυτην 
ςεαυτόν, οαυτόν οεαυτην, ςαυτην 
Gen. έμαυτού 
έμαυτης 
οεαυτού, οαυτού ςεαυτης, ςαυτηο 
Dat. έμαυτώ 
έμαυτη 
ςεαυτώ, ςαυτώ 
ςεαυτη, ςαυτη 
PLURAL 
Acc. ημάς αυτούς ημάς αυτός ύμάς αυτούς 
ύμάς αυτός 
Gen. ημών αύτών ημών αύτών ϋμών αύτών 
ύμών αύτών 
Dat. ήμΐν αύτοιο ήμιν αύταις ύμιν αύτοιο 
ύμίν αύταΐς 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Dat. 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Dat. 
M. 
SINGULAR 
εαυτόν, αύτόν 
έαυτού, αυτού 
έαυτω, αύτω 
PLURAL 
έαυτούς, αυτούς 
έαυτών, αύτών 
έαυτοΐς, αύτοις 
Third Person 
Direct 
F. 
έαυτην, αύτην 
έαυτης, αύτης 
έαυτη, αύτη 
έαυτάς, αυτός 
έαυτών, αύτών 
έαυταις, αύταις 
Ν. 
έαυτό, αύτό 
έαυτού, αυτού 
έαυτω, αύτω 
έαυτά, αύτό 
έαυτών, αύτών 
έαυτοιο, αύτοιο 
Indirect 
Μ . & 
F. 
έ 
ού 
οί 
ςφάς 
ςφών 
ςφίςι(ν) 
person 
The contracted forms of the second and third 
reflexives are more common than the uncontracted ones; ε, 
ού and οί are usually enclitic. 

Examples of these pronouns in use are: 
βούλομαι έμαυτόν μέν 
I want to kill myself, not 
άποκτείνειν, ύμάο δ' ού. 
you. 
έαυτούο μέν φιλοΰαν οί 
Wicked people love 
κακοί, τούο δ' άλλουο οί 
themselves, good people 
αγαθοί. 
[love] others. 
opac οαυτόν έν τω κατόπτρω. You see yourself in the 
mirror. 
The third person direct reflexive is used as above. The third 
person indirect reflexive is used only in subordinate 
constructions referring back to the subject of the main 
clause: κελεύουαν ήμάο κοινή μετά οφών πολεμεΐν they urge 
us to make war in common with them (ήμάο is the subject 
of the infinitive πολεμεΐν but οφών refers back to the subject 
of the main verb, κελεύουοιν). Direct reflexive forms are, 
however, 
often 
substituted, 
Όρέοτηο 
έπειοεν 
τούο 
Άθηναίουο έαυτόν κατάγειν Orestes 
persuaded 
the 
Athenians to restore him(self). 
(b) For reciprocal action the reflexive pronoun can be used: 
ήμΐν αύτοΐο διαλεξόμεθα we shall converse with 
ourselves, 
i.e. each other. Greek does, however, have a special 
reciprocal pronoun which was formed by doubling the stem 
of άλλοο other: άλλήλουο, άλλήλδο, άλληλα one another, 
each other. It is declined like καλόο (3.1/3) except that its 
meaning excludes a nominative case and a singular number. 
With άλλήλουο no ambiguity is possible: άλλήλουο 
οφάζουοιν they are killing each other. It is used for all three 
persons. 
87 
c 
3 TV s 
9.1/5 Possessive adjectives and pronouns 
Possessive adjectives are of two types in English, attributive (my, 
your, his, her, its; our, your, their, which occur in phrases such as 
my house) and predicative (mine, yours, his, hers; ours, yours, 
theirs, which occur in clauses such as the house is mine). Greek 
has similar possessive adjectives for the first and second persons 
only, and these may be used either attributively or predicatively. 
the third person it uses the genitive of the personal and 
demonstrative pronouns. Significantly, however, where the 
context leaves no doubt as to who the possessor is and there is 
flo need for emphasis, the definite article alone suffices in Greek: 
^φεληοα τόν πατέρα I helped my father; εύ έποίηοε την πάλιν he 
benefited his city (cf. note on 2.1.1). In these cases no personal 
Pronoun or possessive adjective is employed. In cases where it is 

88 
C 3 
Η·' s 
desirable to clarify the reference, Greek proceeds as follows: 
(a) Where no emphasis is intended the genitive of th 
unemphatic personal pronouns (μου, cou, αυτού, αυτή 
ημών, ύμών, αύτών) is employed in the predicative position 
φιλει την μητέρα μου he loves my mother (lit. the mother 
me); eic την οίκίαν αύτοΰ είοήλθομεν we entered his houSi 
(the house of him); θαυμάζω τό κάλλοο αύτηο I admire be 
beauty (the beauty of her). 
(b) Where some degree of emphasis is desired: 
(i) For the first and second persons Greek uses the 
adjectives έμοο, -η, -ov (my, mine); coc, οη, cov {you 
when referring to one person); ήμέτεροο, -G, -ov (our)\ 
ύμέτεροο, -G, -ov (your when referring to more than one 
person), in the attributive position: 
eic xhc ύμετέραο OIKISC ήλθον they went into your 
houses; ο coc, Αίοχίνη, κοινωνόο, ούχ ό έμόο your 
partner, Aeschines, not mine. 
Note carefully that Greek requires both the definite 
article and the possessive adjective.1 
(ii) For the third person Greek uses the genitive of a 
demonstrative pronoun, e.g. τούτου of this/that man\ 
έκείνηο of that woman, 
again in the attributive 
position: 
περί τών τούτου λόγων 
concerning 
his 
words; 
άφικνούνται παρ' Άριαιον καί την έκείνου σιρατιάν 
they come up to Ariaeus and his army. 
(c) When a reflexive sense is involved (i.e. when the reference is 
to the subject of the clause to which the noun-group 
containing the possessive belongs), the genitive of the 
reflexive pronouns is used, again in the attributive position: 
τον έμαυτού άδελφόν έπεμψα I sent my own brother; την 
έαυτού γυναίκα ύβρίζει he misuses his own wife; άγαπώα 
τούο έαυτών ίππουο they love their own horses. 
In less emphatic contexts, however, the ordinary first and 
second person possessives, έμόο, coc, ήμέτεροο, ύμέτεροο ( a b o v e 
b(i)), may also be used: 
τούο ύμετέρουο παΐδαο αγαπάτε you love your children. 
1 But contrast ό έμόο δούλος my slave and έμόο ό δούλος (or ό δούλος έμός) the slave 
mine (predicative). The latter has no article immediately before the possessive. 

12 Greek reading 
1# καλόν τό θνηοκειν oic ύβριν τό ζην φέρει. 
2 
ό cotyoc έν αύτω περιφέρει την ούάαν. 
3# καρτερόο έν πολέμοιο Τιμόκριτοο ού τόδε οήμα* 
"Αρηο δ' ούκ αγαθών φείδεται, άλλά κακών. 
4 
ό Κλέων ούκ έφη αύτόο άλλ' έκεΐνον οτρατηγεΐν. 
5 
οί αύτοί περί τών αύτών τοιο αύτοιο τά αύτά (sc. λέγουαν). 
6 
τό έμόν έμοί λέγειο δναρ. 
7 
έπειτα έκεινοο ό άνηρ εΐπεν, άλλ' εί άλλου δει πρόο τούτοιο 
οίο λέγει Ξενοφών, αύτίκα έξεοτι ποιειν. μετά δέ ταύτα 
Ξενοφών είπε τάδε* δήλον ότι πορεύεοθαι ήμάο δει όπου 
έξομεν τά έπιτήδεια* άκούω δέ κώμαο είναι καλάο αί ε'ίκοοι 
οτάδια άπέχουοιν. 
8 
ό φίλοο έοτίν άλλοο αύτόο. 
9 
φιλοοοφίαν πρώτοο ώνόμαοε Πυθαγόραο καί 
έαυτόν 
φιλόοοφον. 
0 
παραβαλεΐν δει αύτούο παρ' άλλήλουο* ούτω γάρ οκεψόμεθα 
εί διοίοουοιν άλλήλων. 
1 
άπίοτωο έχουοι πρόο αύτούο οί Έλληνεο. 
2 
The Persian empire was founded in the sixth century BC by 
Cyrus the Great (died 530 BC). His achievements were such 
that in the following century Xenophon (7.2.6) wrote an 
account of his life (the earliest surviving biography). The 
following is an extract. 
μετά δέ δειπνον έπήρετο ό Κύροο, ώ Τιγράνη, πού δη 
έκεΐνόο έοτιν ό άνηρ oc ουνεθήρα ήμΐν; ού γάρ μοι μάλα 
έδόκειο θαυμάζειν αύτόν. έφόνευοεν αύτόν, έφη, ούτοο ό 
έμόο πατήρ, διαφθείρειν γάρ αύτόν έφη έμέ. καίτοι, ω Κύρε, 
καλόο κάγαθόο έκεΐνοο ην 
ότε γάρ άποθνηοκειν έμελλε 5 
προοεκάλεοέ με καί ειπε, ού δει οέ, ώ Τιγράνη, χαλεπαίνειν 
ότι ό coc πατήρ άποκτείνει με* ού γάρ διά κακόνοιαν τοΰτο 
ποιεί, άλλά δι' άγνοιαν ά δέ δι' άγνοιαν οί άνθρωποι 
έξαμαρτάνουαν, άκούαα ταύτ' έγωγε νομίζω. 
Δημοοθένηο δέ, oc έώρα τούο Λακεδαιμονίουο μέλλειν 
προοβάλλειν πλοίοιο τε άμα καί πεζώ, παρεοκευάζετο καί 
αύτόο, καί τάο τριήρειο αί'περιήοαν αύτω άνέοπαοε ύπό τό 
τείχιομα, καί τούο ναύταο έξ αύτών ώπλιοεν acnicι φαύλαιο 
καί oicui'vaic ταΐο πολλαΐο· ού γάρ ην όπλα έν χωρίω έρήμω 5 
πορίοαοθαι, άλλά καί ταύτα έκ ληοτρικήο Μεοοηνίών 
τριακοντέρου καί κέλητοο έλαβον, οί παρεγίγνοντο. 
όπλΐταί τε τών Μεοοηνίων τούτων a>c τετταράκοντα 
έγένοντο. τούο μέν ούν πολλούο τών οτρατιωτών έπί τά 
έχυρά του χωρίου πρόο τήν ήπειρον έταξε, αύτόο δέΐο 

άπελέξατο έξήκοντα όπλίταο καί τοξόταο ολίγους Kr< 
έχώρει έξω του τείχουο έπί την θάλατταν, ή μάλιο^. 
έκείνουο προοεδέχετο πειράοεοθαι αποβαίνει ν. κατά τον 
ούν προο αύτήν την θάλατταν έταξε τούο όπλίταο. 
Notes 
1 τό θνηοκειν (supply έοτί) and τό ζην are both 
articular 
infinitives (5.1/3); understand τούτοιο as the antecedent o; 
oic. 
3 /.I translate πολέμοιο by a singular; supply ήν with 
Τϊμόκριτοο and έοτί with σημα. 1.2 φείδεται is sparing of; 
spares takes the genitive (cf. 13.1/2). 
4 ούκ έφη 8.1/3a note 4; after έφη we have a combination of a 
nominative (αύτόο) + infinitive and accusative (έκεΐνον) + 
infinitive (8.1/3λ). 
7 /.I δει + gen. there is need of (21.1/4b and note 3); both 
άλλου (another thing) and τούτοιο (those things) are neuter. 
1.2 oic (= a) has been attracted into the case of its antecedent 
(τούτοιο) - 9.1/2 note 2; έξεοτι an impersonal verb (cf. δει, 
χρή) meaning it is possible (21.1/4a). 1.3 δήλον supply έοτί, 
[if is] clear, 1.4 έξομεν (note rough breathing) fut. of έχω. 
10 As this sentence comes from a conversation we can supply 
ήμάο (us, i.e. the speaker and his audience) with δει. 
11 άπίοτωο έχουα = άπιοτοί ε ί α (cf. note on 8.2.9). 
12 /.I έπήρετο < έπερωτάω. //.3f. ούτοο ό έμόο πατήρ my father 
here; we must tell from the context that αύτόν is the subject 
of διαφθείρειν and έμέ its object. 1.5 καλόο κάγαθόο (= καί 
άγαθόο) a set expression meaning fine fellow; gentleman (cf. 
13.3(ii) /.15). 1.6 ού δει ce ... i.e. you must not... //.8f. The 
relative clause ά ... precedes its antecedent ταΰτ'(α); νομίζω 
here has the acc. and inf. construction (8.1/3a) but the inf. 
είναι is understood. 
13 1.2 πλοίοιο ... πεζω dat. of instrument (11.1/2) lit. with both 
ships and infantry at the same time (άμα, which is here an 
adverb). 1.3 αύτω (to/for him) is dative with περιήοαν (< 
περίειμι). //.4f. αοπία ... πολλαΐο lit. with shields (dat. of 
instrument - see above) inferior and the many made of 
wickerwork, 
i.e inferior shields mostly made 
ofwickerwork 
(οί πολλοί can mean the majority as it does in 1.9); ήν = έξήν 
it was possible (ecu used in the sense of the impersonal 
έξεοτι (21.1/4a) is common). 11.6f. Μεοοηνίων, which is to 
be taken with both τριακοντέρου and κέλητοο in the sense 
belonging to [some] Messenians, is the antecedent of οϊ. IM-
τά έχυρά the strong [points]; πρόο towards, i.e. facing. ΙΛ2 

ή is here the relative adverb where, not the relative pronoun. 
//. I3f. έκείνουο i.e. the enemy; κατά τοΰτο at this [point] 
(κατά is used here of place where); πρόο ... την θάλατταν 
Greek regularly uses prepositions appropriate to motion 
towards (πρόο + acc., eic, etc.) with verbs logically requiring 
a preposition indicating position at, when some previous 
motion is to be understood (Demosthenes must have moved 
his troops to the seaside before drawing them up there). 
Consequently πρόο... την θάλατταν must be translated by the 
sea. This pregnant use of prepositions is so termed because 
the idea of motion towards is implied by (i.e. contained 
within) the preposition. 
9.2/1 Vocabulary 
άγαθόο, -η, -όν 
brave 
άγνοια, -Gc, ή 
ignorance 
SKOUCIOC, -OV 
against the 
will, involuntary 
άλλήλουο, -flc, -a (reciprocal 
pron.) 
each other, one 
another (9.1/4&) 
αμα (adv.) 
at the same time 
άναοπάω (aor. -έοπαοα) 
haul 
up 
απέχω 
be distant 
απίοτωο έχω 
be mistrustful 
αποβαίνω 
land 
αποκτείνω 
kill 
άπολέγομαι 
pick out 
άοπίο, -ίδοο, ή 
shield 
αύτίκα (adv.) 
at once, 
immediately 
δει (impers.) 
it is necessary 
(+ acc. and infin.); there is a 
need of (+ gen.) 
δείπνο ν, -ου, τό 
dinner 
δη* (particle) 
indeed, 
certainly 
δήλοο, -η, -ov 
clear, obvious 
διαφέρω (fut. διοίοω) 
differ 
from (+gen.) 
διαφθείρω 
corrupt 
δοκέω 
seem 
έγωγε (= έγώ + γε, 13.1/3b) 
I 
at least; I for my part 
εϊκοα(ν) (indecl. adj.) 
twenty 
έλαβον aor. of λαμβάνω 
take 
έξαμαρτάνω 
do wrong 
έξεοτι (impers.) 
it is possible 
έξήκοντα (indecl. adj.) 
sixty 
έπερωτάω (aor. έπηρόμην) 
ask (a question) 
έπιτηδεια, -ων, τά 
necessities 
of life, provisions 
έρημοο, -ov empty, deserted 
έχυρόο, -ά, -όν strong, secure 
έώρα 3rd s. impf. of όράω 
see 
TJ (adv.) 
where 
ήπειροο, -ου, ή 
mainland 
θν^οκω 
die 
καίτοι (particle) 
and yet, 
however 
κακόνοια, -Gc, ή 
malice 
κακόο, -ή, -όν 
cowardly 
καλόο κάγαθόο see note on 12 
καρτερόο, -ά, -όν 
strong, 
mighty 
κέληο, -ητοο, ό 
fast-sailing 
ship, pinnace 
κώμη, -ηο, ή 
village 

ληστρικός, -ή, -όν 
belonging 
to pirates 
μάλιοτα 
especially 
μέλλω 
be about to 
Μεοοήνιοο, -fl, -ov 
Messenian 
ναύτηο, -ου, ό 
sailor 
oicmvoc, -η, -ov 
made of 
osier/wickerwork 
όναρ, τό (nom. and acc. only) 
dream 
ονομάζω 
call, name 
οπλίζω 
equip, arm 
όπλίτηο, -ου, ό 
hoplite 
όπου (relative adv.) 
where 
ότε (conj.) 
when 
ούοίσ, -Gc, ή 
property, 
substance 
ούτω another form of ούτωο 
παραβάλλω 
compare 
παραγίγνομαι 
be present 
παραοκευάζω 
prepare, equip; 
(mid.) make one's 
preparations 
πεζόο, -ή, -όν 
on foot 
πεζοί 
infantry 
πειράομαι 
try 
περίειμι 
survive, remain 
περιφέρω 
carry round 
πορεύομαι 
march, journey 
πορίζομαι 
procure 
πρόο (prep.+dat.) 
in additUjn 
προοβάλλω 
attack 
προοδέχομαι 
expect 
προοκαλέω 
summon 
πού; (adv.) 
wherei 
οκέπτομαι 
examine, consider 
οτάδιον, -ου, τό 
stade (c. 200 
metres) 
οτρατηγέω 
be general 
συνθηράω 
hunt with (+ dat.) 
τάττω station, draw up, post 
τείχιομα, -aroc, τό 
fort 
τεΐχοο, -ουο, τό 
wall 
τετταράκοντα (indecl. numeral) 
forty 
τοξότηο, -ου, ό 
archer 
τρισκόντεροο, -ου, ή 
thirty-
oared ship 
ύβριο, -εωο, ή 
insult, 
humiliation 
φαΰλοο, -ov (also -η, -ον) 
cheap, of poor quality 
φείδομαι 
spare (+ gen.) 
φιλοοοφίσ, -Gc, ή 
philosophy 
φιλόοοφοο, -ου, ό 
philosopher 
φονεύω 
murder; slay 
χαλεπαίνω 
be angry 
χωρέω 
go 
(he (adv.+numerals) 
about, 
nearly 

10.1 Grammar 
10.1/1 Interrogative TIC and indefinite TIC 
The interrogative and indefinite pronouns belong to the third 
declension and have identical forms except for the accent. The 
interrogative pronoun xic who?, u what? is easily identifiable, 
since it always retains an acute accent on the first syllable (see 
Appendix 8, note 2). The indefinite pronoun TIC someone, 
anyone, τι something, anything, is enclitic and postpositive. 
Interrogative 
Indefinite 
M. & F. 
Ν. 
M. & F. 
N. 
SINGULAR 
Nom. 
x i c 
τ ί 
TIC 
τ ι 
Acc. 
τίνα 
τί 
τινά 
τι 
Gen. τίνοο, του τίνοο, του τινόο, του 
τι voc, του 
Dat. 
τίνι, τω 
τίνι, τω 
τινί, τω 
τινί, τω 
PLURAL 
Nom. τίνεο 
τίνα 
τινέο 
τινά 
Acc. 
τίναο 
τίνα 
τινάο 
τινά 
Gen. τίνων 
τίνων 
τινών 
τινών 
Dat. 
τία(ν) 
τίοι(ν) 
Tici(v) 
τιοί(ν) 
In the genitive and dative singular the shorter forms coincide 
with the corresponding masculine and neuter forms of the 
definite article (3.1/1; the indefinite forms have no accent). Both 
the interrogative and the indefinite pronouns may also be used 
as adjectives: TIC (TIC άνηρ) τούτο έποίηοεν; who (what man) did 
this? λέγει TIC τούτο someone 
says this; κλέπτηο xic τούτο 
εποιηοεν some thief did this. Used in this way, indefinite uc is 
°ften little more than the equivalent of the English indefinite 
article. 

Notes 
1 
The acc. sing, neuter τί (or, more fully, δια τί, lit. on acconnt 
of what?) means why (cf. 20.1/5). 
2 
άττα, which is not enclitic, sometimes replaces the indefinitt 
neuter pi. τινά. 
10.1/2 Questions, direct and indirect 
(a) Direct questions 
Direct questions are those which are directly asked of someone 
else. In Greek, as in English, they are, where appropriate, 
introduced by an interrogative pronoun or adjective (10.1/1) or 
adverb (e.g. πότε when?). Where there is no interrogative word 
and English uses inversion (are you sick?) Greek, as we have 
seen (e.g. 3.2.12(ii)), uses the interrogative particle άρα (άρα 
νοοεΐο;), which has no English equivalent. However, a question 
of this sort may simply be indicated by a different tone of voice 
without άρα: ταΰτα εΐπαο; you said this? (lit. these things). 
This latter type of direct question may also be framed in such a 
way as to invite (but not necessarily receive) a negative answer: 
you didn't say this, did you? or surely you didn't say this? In 
Greek such a question is prefixed with μών (<μή ούν) or μή: μών 
(or μή) ταύτα είπαο; We may also invite a positive answer by 
saying you did say this, didn't you? or surely you said this? In 
Greek we begin with άρα ού (άρ' ού) or ού: άρα ού ταύτα ειπαο; 
For alternative questions Greek uses as an introductory word 
for which English has no equivalent, πότερον or πότερα (there is 
no distinction between the two1): πότερον ταύτα ειπαο ή έκεινα 
did you say this or that? (lit. these things or those things). As 
with άρα, the introductory word can be omitted. 
(b) Indirect questions 
Indirect questions are another form of indirect speech (7.1/3) 
and are expressed in Greek by a subordinate clause, just as in 
English: έρωτα εί Περικλήο πρόο τον Πειραιά ήλθεν he is asking 
if Pericles went to Piraeus (direct question: άρα Περικλήο itpoc 
τον Πειραιά ήλθεν; did Pericles go to Piraeus?). 
The Greek interrogative pronouns, adjectives and adverbs, 
which, where appropriate, introduce questions, can have a 
direct form (TIC, πότε, πού, etc.) or an indirect form: 
1 They are respectively the n. acc. s. and n. acc. pi. of noxepoc which (of two)? The 
accusative is here used adverbially (20.1/5). 

PIRECT 
_ 
nC· wboh whichf 
,oioc; of what kind? 
,ococ; how high how 
much? pi. how 
many? 
πότεροο; M/W^A (of two)? 
The forms ending in 
οποι 
οπόθεν 
οπότε 
όπωο 
INDIRECT 
DIRECT 
INDIRECT 
όοτιο 
πού; (at) where? 
όπου 
όποΐοο 
ποΐ; (to) where? 
όπόοοο 
πόθεν; from where? 
πότε; when? 
όπότεροο 
πώο; fcow? 
-oc are declined as first and second 
declension adjectives (3.1/3); for the declension of ocxic see note 1. 
The difference between direct and indirect forms is one of use, 
not meaning. The indirect are used in indirect questions only, as 
έρωτα oeuc ει he is asking who you are (but see also note 2). 
The direct forms can be used in direct questions (TIC εΐ; who are 
you?) or in indirect ones (έρωτφ TIC εΐ he is asking who you are). 
When used in the latter context they give a touch of immediacy 
and vividness. 
Where the original question begins with άρα (άρα εύωχεΐ; are 
you holding a party?) or has no interrogative word at all 
(εύωχεΐ;) the indirect version is introduced by ει if/whether: 
έρωτα εί εύωχεΐ he is asking if (or whether) you are holding a 
party). 
As in indirect statements (8.1/3), the tense of the original direct 
question is retained in the indirect form.1 As will be seen in the 
third example below, an indirect question is not always preceded 
by a verb of asking. 
τούτων έκαοτον ήρόμην εί τι νέο 
εία μάρτυρεο. 
ό κήρυξ ήρώτσ TIC (or octic) 
άγορεύειν βούλεται. 
ου δει οε ειπείν πόοουο 
(or όπόοουο) πόνουο έχειο. 
Notes 
I asked each of them if 
there were any witnesses 
(direct: άρα μάρτυρέο 
τι νέο εία ν; Are there 
any witnesses?) 
The herald used to ask 
who wanted to speak 
(direct: τίο άγορεύειν 
βούλεται;). 
You don't have to say how 
many troubles you have 
(implying a direct 
question πόοουο πόνουο 
έχω; in the mind of the 
person addressed). 
όοτιο is a combination of the relative pronoun oc (9.1/2) and 
the indefinite TIC (10.1/1). There are some alternative forms: 
1 For the change of mood which may occur after an introduaory historic verb, see 14.1/4d. 

Μ. 
F. 
SINGULAR Nom. ocxic 
ήτις 
Acc. 
δντινα 
ήντινα 
Gen. ούτινος, ότου 
rjcxivoc 
Dat. 
ωτινι, δτω 
ήτινι 
PLURAL 
Nom. οϊτινεο 
αϊτινεο 
Acc. 
ούοτιναο 
Scxivac 
Gen. ώντινων, ότων 
ώντινων, δτων 
Ν. 
δτι 
δτι 
ούτινος, δτου 
ωτινι, δτω 
άτι να, άττα 
άτινα, άττα 
ώντινων, δτων 
oictici(v), ότοις 
Dat. 
OICTICI(V), δτοιο aiccici(v) 
The neuter singular δτι is sometimes printed ό τι in modern 
texts to avoid confusion with the conjunction δτι that, 
because. This distinction is not employed in this book; the 
context should show which is being used. 
The indirect interrogative OCTIC is also used as an indefinite 
relative with the meaning whoever; 
OCTIC γαμεΐ πονηράν, 
μώρόο έοτιν whoever marries an evil woman is stupid. The 
other indirect interrogatives are similarly used (όπου 
wherever; etc). For όπωο, which has additional meanings, see 
the Vocabulary. 
Just as the interrogative uc becomes, with a change in 
accentuation, the indefinite xic (10.1/1), so some other 
direct interrogatives can be converted to indefinite pronouns 
and adverbs. Very common are που somewhere, ποτέ at 
some time, once, πωο somehow (all enclitic). 
10.1/3 First and third declension adjectives 
The masculine and neuter of adjectives in this category belong 
to the third declension, but their feminine to the first. There are 
two types: 
(a) Stems in υ 
In this large class the nom. s. ends in -ύο, -εϊα, -ύ (always so 
accented), ήδύο sweet is declined: 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
M. 
F. 
Ν. 
Μ. 
F. 
Ν. 
Nom. ήδύο 
ήδεια 
ηδύ 
ήδεΐο 
ήδειαι 
ηδέα 
Voc. ηδύ 
ηδεία 
ηδύ 
ήδεις 
ήδειαι 
ηδέα 
Acc. 
ήδύν 
ήδειαν 
ηδύ 
ήδειο 
ήδείαο 
ηδέα 
Gen. ήδέοο 
ήδείσο 
ήδέοο 
ήδέων 
ηδειών 
ήδέων 
Dat. 
ήδεΐ 
ηδεία 
ήδεΐ 
ήδέοι(ν) 
ήδείαιο 
ηδέα (ν) 
(b) Stems in ντ 
This class contains only a few adjectives but very many 
participles (12.1/1). The ντ of the stem is lost in all feminine 

SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
M. 
F. 
Ν. 
Μ. 
F. 
Ν. 
nac 
πάοα 
πάν 
πάντεο 
πάοαι 
πάντα 
πάντα 
πάοαν 
πάν 
πάνταο 
πόοσο 
πάντα 
παντόο 
πάοηο 
παντόο 
πάντων 
πσοών 
πάντων 
παντί 
πάοη 
παντί 
πάοι(ν) 
πάοαιο 
πάοι(ν) 
forms and in the masculine and neuter dat. pi. (cf. yiy&c 5.1/1 b). 
nac all is declined: 
N.V. 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Dat. 
Like nac are declined its emphatic forms anQc and ουμπΰε 
(which we must also translate by all). The only other adjectives 
in this group end in -eic (gen. -evioc), -ecca, -εν, e.g. χαρίειο, 
χαρίεοοα, χαρίεν graceful, 
gen. s. χαρίεντοο, χαριέοοηο, 
χαρίεντοο, dat. pi. χαρίεα(ν), χαριέοοαιο, χαρίεα(ν). 
Notes 
1 In the predicative position nac means all: περί navxac τούο 
θεούο άοεβοΰαν they commit impiety with respect to all the 
gods. In the attributive position it means whole: ή naca 
Ο,κελία the whole of Sicily. Without the article it means 
every in the singular, but all in the plural: naca πόλιο every 
city; πάντεο πολΐται all citizens. 
2 μελδο, μέλαινα, μέλαν black has a stem in ν (not ντ); gen. s. 
μέλανοο, μελαίνηο, μέλανοο; dat. pi. μέλαα(ν), μελαίναιο, 
μέλαοι(ν). Exactly similar is τάλδο miserable. 
10.1/4 Third declension adjectives 
These adjectives are declined wholly within the third declension 
and fall into two groups. In both, the masculine and feminine 
have the same form. 
(Λ) Stems in ov 
These are declined like δαίμων (6.1/1<ζ), except that the nom. 
voc. and acc. neuter ends in -ov in the singular and -ova in the 
Plural. An example is άφρων senseless: 
Nom. 
Voc. 
Acc. 
Gen. 
Oat. 
SINGULAR 
M. & F. 
άφρων 
άφρον 
άφρον-α 
άφρον-oc 
αφρον-ι 
Ν. 
άφρον 
άφρον 
άφρον 
άφρον-οο 
άφρον-ι 
PLURAL 
Μ. & F. 
άφρον-εο 
άφρον-εο 
άφρον-αο 
άφρόν-ων 
άφρο-οι(ν) 
Ν. 
άφρον-α 
άφρον-α 
άφρον-α 
άφρόν-ων 
άφρο-οι(ν) 
Comparative adjectives in -ων (17.1/2b) are similarly declined. 

(b) Stems in sc 
These belong to the same type as neuter nouns in ec (6.1/] 
This is most obvious in the genitive and dative, where we flr 
similar endings, άληθηο true (stem άληθεο-) is declined: 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
M. & F. 
Ν. 
M. & F. 
N. 
Nom. 
άληθης 
αληθές 
αληθείς 
αληθή 
Voc. 
άληθέο 
αληθές 
αληθείς 
αληθή 
Acc. 
άληθη 
αληθές 
αληθείς 
άληθη 
Gen. 
αληθούς 
αληθούς 
αληθών 
αληθών 
Dat. 
άληθει 
άληθει 
άληθέςι(ν) 
άληθέα(ν) 
άληθη, άληθεΐο are contractions of άληθέ(ο)α, άληθέ(φο 
άληθεΐο as acc. pi. (m. and f.) is irregular; we would have 
expected άληθηο (< -ε(ο)αο). The n. pi. nom. voc. and acc. αληθή 
are only an apparent exception to the rule given at 3.1/1 (cf, 
γένοο: pi. γένη < γένεο-α, 6.1/lc). 
The few adjectives with other stems are mostly compounds 
whose second element is a third declension noun, e.g. εύχαρκ 
(εύ + χάριο) ch arming, stem εύχαριτ-; εύελπιο (εύ + έλπίχ) 
hopeful, stem εύελπιδ-. 
10.2 Greek reading 
1# παχεΐα γαοτηρ λεπτόν ού τίκτει νόον. 
2# coc ηδύ την θάλατταν άπό τηο γήο όράν. 
3# ό χρόνοο άπαντα τοΐαν ύοτερον φράοει. 
4 
ή εύδαιμονία έοτίν ένέργειά TIC τηο ψυχήο. 
5 
ώ Μένανδρε καί 
βίε, πότεροο άρ' ύμών πότερον 
άπεμιμήοατο; 
6# τίο δ' οιδεν (knows) εί τό ζην μέν έοτι κατθανεΐν, 
τό κατθανεΐν δέ ζην κάτω νομίζεται; 
7 
ό βίοο βραχύο, ή δέ τέχνη μακρή, ό δέ καιρόο όξύο, ή δε 
πείρα οφαλερή, ή δέ Kpicic χαλεπή. 
8 
ούντομοο ή πονηρία, βραδεία ή άρετη. 
9 
όπου εύ πράττει TIC, ένταύθα πάτριο. 
10# 
OCTIC δέ θνητών βούλεται δυοώνυμον 
eic γήραο έλθεΐν, ού λογίζεται καλωσ 
μακρόο γάρ αιών μυρίουο τίκτει πόνουσ 
11# coc ηδύ δούλοιο δεοπόταο χρηοτούο λαβείν 
καί δεοπόταιοι δούλον εύμενη δόμοιο. 
12# άπαντ' έπαχθη πλην θεοΐοι κοιρανεΐν 
έλεύθεροο γάρ ούτιο έοτί πλην Aioc. 
13 
οί αμαθείς ώοπερ έν πελάγει καί νυκτί φέρονται έν τω β1 Φ' 

4 ή ΥυνΠ έφη ότι αυτάρκης κόομοο μοι ή του άνδρόο άρετη. 
|5# όπου TIC άλγεϊ, κεΐοε καί τον νουν έχει. 
16 Other proverbs 
(i) μιοώ μνήμονα ουμπότην. (ii) δυομενηο ό τών γειτόνων 
όφθαλμόο. (iii) τον άτυχη καί πρόβατον δάκνει. (iv) άνηρ 
άτεχνοο TOIC πάοίν έοτι δούλοο. (ν) γλυκύο άπείρω πόλεμοο. 
(νϊ) χρόνω τά πάντα κρίνεται, (vii) έν νυκτί λαμπρόο, έν 
φάει δ' άνωφελήο. (viii) άλλήλαο νίπτουα χεΐρεο. (ix) υπό 
παντί λίθω οκόρπιοο καθεύδει. (χ) ράδια πάντα θεώ. (xi) 
anac έχινοο τραχύο. (χii) όν ή τύχη μέλανα γράψει τούτον ό 
nac xpovoc ού δύναται λευκάναι. 
17 Stories about Diogenes 
The Greeks were fond of short, pithy anecdotes ending in 
a bon mot. Diogenes, the philosopher of the fourth century 
BC whose eccentric lifestyle made him a tourist attraction 
in the Athens of his day, is the subject of a large collection. 
(i) ό Διογένης ήτει ποτέ άνδρίαντα* έρωτηθείο (having 
been asked) δέ διά τί τούτο ποιεί, μελετώ, είπεν, 
άποτυγχάνειν. 
(«) έρωτηθείο ποιον οινον ήδέωο πίνει, έφη, τον 
άλλότριον. 
(iii) φιλάργυρον ήτεν ότε δέ έβράδυνεν, ό Διογένης, 
άνθρωπε, ειπεν, eic τροφήν ce αιτώ, ούκ είο ταφήν. 
(iv) έρωτηθείο πόθεν έοτί ν, κοομοπολίτηο, έφη. 
(ν) ότε ειπέ TIC κακόν είναι τό ζην, ού τό ζην, έφη, άλλά 
τό κακώο ζην. 
Notes 
1 The uncontracted νόον (= νουν, 6.1/2) shows that this is 
Ionic Greek (1.3). 
3 TOICIV = TOIC (3.1/1 note 3). 
5 Menander was famous for his faithful representation of 
everyday life; πότεροο άρ' lit. which of you two then 
(άρ' 
= άρα an inferential particle which must be distinguished 
from άρα, 10.1/2a). 
^ κατθανεΐν shortened form of καταθανειν (aor. inf. act. of 
καταθνηοκειν). 1.2 δέ is postponed for metrical reasons 
(prose order would be τό δέ κατθανεΐν); κάτω below i.e. in 
Hades. 
' The well-known aphorism of Hippocrates, the famous 
doctor of the fifth century BC. He wrote in Ionic Greek and 
the η of μακρή and οφαλερή would be a in Attic. By τέχνη 
Hippocrates meant the art of medicine, 
όπου here (and in 15 below) is the relative adverb where, not 
the indirect interrogative. 

100 
c 
3 
10 Take δυοώνυμον with γήραο old age (acc. s., 13.1/1 
11 /.l λαβείν is to be understood. 1.2 δεοπόταια has the long 
form of the dat. pi. ending (3.1/1 note 3; cf. θεοια m ^ 
next sentence); δομοιο dat. without preposition to expre,c 
place where (23.1/2n) - translate by a singular. 
12 κοιρανεΐν here takes the dative, not the genitive as is norm-
after verbs of ruling (13.1/2<z); Axoc gen. of Zevc (11.1/4/ 
14 For δτι introducing a direct statement see 8.1/36 note 2. 
16 (iv) xolc πάαν the article is added for emphasis (as also ir. 
(vi)). (vi) χρόνω by time dat. of instrument (11.1/2); τά πάντα 
cf. (iv) above, (vii) A phrase of abuse, not a sentence (ct. 
6.2.7 (iv)). (xii) Although ov comes first, its antecedent is 
τούτον; δύναται is able from δύναμαι (on verbs with -αμαι 
instead οί-ομαι see 19.1/3b). 
17 (/) ήτει (< αίτέω) was begging [alms from] + acc.; ποιεί on 
the tense see 10.1/2& (this also applies to πίνει (it) and έοτί\ 
(iv)). (it) with τον άλλότριον supply ήδέωο πίνω. («ϊ) ήτει see 
(/); eic with regard to, i.e. for. 
10.3 Extra reading 
From this point extra reading will be included with certain 
units. Because it will consist of longer passages it will necessarih 
be somewhat harder than the other exercises. If you do not feel 
confident enough to tackle it when working your way through 
the book for the first time, it may conveniently be left until later. 
The wisdom of Socrates 
Socrates (469-399 BC) was to philosophy what Herodotus was 
to history. Previous thinkers had speculated on the 
physical 
nature of the world, but Socrates was the first to 
c o n c e r n 
himself with moral and ethical problems. His u n c o m p r o m i s i n g 
pursuit of truth made him so unpopular with his fellow citizen^ 
at Athens that, when he was brought to trial on a t r u m p e d - u p 
charge of corrupting the young, he was convicted and e x e c u t e d . 
The following is from his defence in court, as reported by hlS 
pupil Plato; here Socrates explains the origin of his r e p u t a t i o n 
(όνομα) for exceptional wisdom, which, he claims, is u n j u s t i f i e d -
έγώ γάρ, ώ άνδρεο 'Αθηναίοι, δι' ούδέν άλλ' ή διά οοφίαν τινα 
τούτο τό όνομα έχω. ποίαν δή οοφίαν ταύτην; ήπερ έοτιν ica)c 
άνθρωπίνη οοφία* τω όντι γάρ κινδυνεύω ταύτην είναι co0oc 
ούτοι δέ, ovc άρτι έλεγον, δαιμονίαν τινά οοφίαν οοφοί είαν, W ^ 
ούκ έχω διηγεΐοθαν ού γάρ δή έγωγε αύτην έπίοταμαι, άλλ' octic -

cl ψέυδεταί τε και έπί διαβολή τη έμη λέγει, καί έλπίζω ύμάο, 
/^ν'δρεο 'Αθηναίοι, μή θορυβήοειν μοι, μηδ' εί δοκώ τι ύμΐν μέγα 
λέγειν ού γαρ έμον έρώ τον λόγον δν λέγω, άλλ' είο άξιόπιοτόν 
άνοίοω. τηο γάρ έμήο, εί δη τίο έοτι οοφία καί οία, μάρτυρα 
• ί ν παρέξομαι τον θεόν τον έν Δελφοΐο. γνώριμοο γάρ που ύμΐν 10 
ην Χαιρεφών, ούτοο έμόο τε έταΐροο ην έκ νέου καί ύμών τω 
κληθεί, καί εύγνωοτον ύμΐν έοτιν oioc ην Χαιρεφών, ώο 
παντάπαοι οφοδρόο. καί δη ποτε καί είο Δελφούο ήλθε καί 
έτόλμηοε μαντευεοθαι, εί τίο έοτι οοφώτεροο ή (wiser than) εγώ. 
άνεΐλεν ούν ή Πυθία ούδένα οοφώτερον είναι. 
15 
Notes 
11 άλλ'= άλλο; ή than. 1.2 ποίσν etc. supply λέγω; ήπερ [the one] 
which, the suffix περ is added to the relative pronoun for 
emphasis. 1.3 τω δντι in reality, really (12.1/1 note 1); ταύτην (sc. 
την οοφίδν) accusative of respect (20.1/5) with οοφόο, lit. wise in 
respect of this [wisdom], i.e. possessed of this wisdom - the 
same construction occurs with οοφοί (1.4). ll.Si ούκ έχω I am not 
able; έγωγε cf. 9.2.12 1.9; έπίοιαμαι has -αμαι instead of -ομαι 
(19.1/3fe); φηοί sc. that this is so; έπί with a view ίο, i.e to 
arouse; διαβολή τη έμη not my prejudice but prejudice against 
me; this use of the possessive adjective is the same as that of the 
objective genitive (23.1/lc). 1.7 μή is used after έλπίζω (8.1/3a 
note 5) and consequently we also have μηδ'(έ) (7.1 /6c), which 
here means not even, but, as we would not normally repeat the 
negative in such a construction in English, simply translate by 
even; θορυβήοειν μοι lit. to be going to make a noise for me, i.e. 
to be going to interrupt me. 1.8 έμόν predicative with τον λόγον, 
lit. not [as] mine shall I tell the story which I am telling. ll.9i. 
avoicG) < άναφέρω; τηο ... έμήο (sc. οοφίδο) with μάρτυρα a 
witness of my [wisdom]; εί ... ο'ίδ two indirect questions to be 
taken with μάρτυρα [as to] whether it is some sort of (nc) 
wisdom and what sort of [wisdom it is] (the indefinite TIC has an 
acute accent because of the following έοτιν (see Appendix 8, 
^(ix)); it is not the interrogative τίο); τον θεόν, i.e. Apollo. 
U· 10ff. που I suppose, think, the original meaning, which is also 
common, is somewhere (10.1/2b note 3); τε ... καί (both ... and 
but trans, simply by and) joins έμόο and ϋμών; έκ νέου lit. from 
[being] young, i.e. from youth; ύμών τω πλήθει lit. to the people 
?/" you, i.e. to the [Athenian] democracy (to be taken with 
εταΐροο, which may be here translated by one word and by 
another word with έμόο); coc ... οφοδρόο how [he was] 
completely impetuous Chaerephon had died before the trial 
(hence ήν in the previous clause). /.13 καί δή and indeed, and as 
a matter of fact; ποτε καί ... once even/actually (he actually went 
to Delphi once). 1.15 άνεΐλεν < άναιρέω. 

102 
11.1 Grammar 
11.1/1 Root aorist, aorist passive and future 
passive 
A few -ω verbs form their aorist active by adding endings 
directly to their basic stem or root without a suffix (such as c in 
the weak aorist - 4.1/1) or a link vowel (such as ο/ε of the strong 
aorist endings - 7.1/1). The roots of all such verbs end in the 
long vowels δ, η, ϋ or ω, and the endings applied to form the root 
aorist are -v, -c, -, -μεν, -τε, -cav. As an example we may take 
the aorist of βαίνω go (root βη-). 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
1 
έβην I went 
έβημεν 
2 
έβης 
έβητε 
3 
έβη 
έβηοαν 
INFINITIVE 
βήναί 
Some other common verbs with root aorists are given below. 
Note that the form of the root cannot be predicted from the 
present stem. 
PRESENT STEM 
ROOT 
ROOT AORIST 
(άπο) διδράοκω1 run away 
διδραΰκ- 
δρα- 
-έδρδν 
φύω cause to grow; produce φυ- 
φϋ- 
έφϋν 
γιγνωοκω get to know 
γιγνωοκ- 
γνω- 
έγνων 
βιόω live 
βιο- 
βιω- 
έβίων 
φύω also has a regularly formed weak aorist active: έφϋοα. In 
such cases where a verb has two sets of aorist active forms, the 
root aorist is intransitive: έφΰν (I grew intr.); and the weak aorist 
transitive: έφϋοα (I caused to grow, I produced); cf. καταδύω 
1 This verb occurs only in compounds. 

cause to sink; κατεδϋοα I caused to sink, κατέδϋν I sank} 
Examples are: 
αί τρίχεο έρρεον Sc πριν 
The hairs fell out which the 
έφϋοε τό φάρμακον. 
drug 
previously 
made 
grow. 
έλάδ έντόο τηο αύλήο έφϋ 
An olive tree grew inside 
the courtyard. 
Another important verb with two aorists and a similar 
distinction between them is ίοτημι (19.1/1). 
Only a few verbs, however, have a root aorist with an active 
meaning. Elsewhere the root aorist has developed a passive 
meaning and is normally classified as an aorist passive. An 
example is πνίγω strangle, choke (tr.), which, like φύω, has a 
weak aorist έπνΤξα I strangled, choked (tr., e.g. έχθέο έπνΙξα τον 
του γείτονοο κύνα yesterday I choked the neighbour's dog) and 
what is really a root aorist έπνίγην I choked (intr., e.g. ό coc 
κύων, έφην, έπνίγη έν τω του πυρόο καπνω "Your dog," I said, 
"choked in the smoke of the fire"). The original contrast 
between the transitive and intransitive aorists in verbs of this 
sort developed into one of active/passive, and forms such as 
έπνίγην were used in contexts where they must be interpreted as 
passive (ό έμόο κύων, έφη, ούκ έπνίγη καπνω "My dog," he said, 
"was not choked by smoke" - on this use of the dative see 
11.1/2 below). Consequently, most root aorists in -ην, (but not 
in -fxv, tfv, or, with one exception, -ων) which could be 
interpreted as passive came to be so regarded and classified. 
This could not happen with intransitive verbs, such as βαίνω, 
whose meaning precludes any passive sense. 
The total number of aorist passives in -ην is also small, but they 
formed the model for the vast majority of transitive verbs, 
where a special aorist passive stem was created by attaching the 
suffix θη to the root.2 To this were added the same endings as for 
the root aorist. For this reason all aorist passive endings are of 
the active type; the aorist passive never has the passive endings of 
the other historic tenses (-μην, -co, -το etc. 4.1/1 note 1). 
The aorist passive indicative (and corresponding infinitive) of 
λϋω will be found in Appendix 1. This tense is included in the 
Principal parts of verbs which show some irregularity (7.1/1 
n°te 3) as the form it takes is not always predictable. We may, 
however, note: 
. in these verbs the 3rd plural of the root aorist and of the weak aorist active are identical: 
^OtJcav (from έφΐϊ-cav or έφΰο-αν). 
The η of the suffix undergoes change in some forms other than the indicative, e.g. the aor. 
Pas*· pple. λυθείο (12.1/1). 

(a) Most verbs whose present stem ends in a vowel ,. 
diphthong form their aorist passive stem regularly. In a f< , 
cases the suffix is enlarged to οθη on the analogy of dent 
stems (see below), e.g. ήκούοθην I was heard 
(άκουο· 
έκελεύοθην I was ordered (κελεύω). In regular contract^ 
verbs the final vowel of the present stem is lengthened in t^ 
same way as in the aorist active (5.1/2 note 2), e.g. έτΙμήοΓ, 
(τιμάω); έποιήθην (ποιέω); έδηλώθην (δηλόω). 
(b) In palatal and labial stems (6.1/4) final κ and γ become χ 
final π and β become φ (i.e. they are assimilated to thi 
following θ by becoming aspirates), e.g. έφυλάχθην I was 
guarded 
(φυλάττω, stem φυλακ-); έπεμφθην I was sent 
(πέμπω, stem πεμπ-). In dental stems the final consonant 
becomes c, e.g. έπείοθην I was persuaded 
(πείθω, stem 
πειθ-). 
Occasionally (and unpredictably) a verb has a root aorist 
passive, e.g. έπνίγην (see above); έκόπην I was cut (κόπτω), 
sometimes both, e.g. έβλάβην, έβλάφθην I was hurt (βλάπτω; 
there is no difference in meaning). 
The stem of the future passive is that of the aorist passive with 
an added c (λυθηο-, τϊμηθηο-, κοπηο-). The endings are those or 
the present middle and passive: λυθηοομαι I shall be loosened; 
τϊμηθηοομαι I shall be honoured; κοπήοομαι I shall be cut. Foi 
the full future passive of λύω see Appendix 1. 
Note 
As mentioned in 8.1/2 some deponents are classified as passive 
because their aorist is passive, not middle, in form (most, 
however, have a middle future). Among the most 
c o m m o n 
passive deponents are: 
βούλομαι wish; fut. βουλήοομαι; aor. έβουλήθην 
δύναμαι be able; fut. δυνηοομαι; aor. έδυνηθην 
πορεύομαι march; fut. πορεύοομαι; aor. έπορεύθην 
In the future and aorist of the first two η is inserted, δύναμαι h:-
-αμαι, -acai, -αται etc., not -ομαι -η, -εται etc. in the p r e s e n t (sc^ 
19.1/36). 
The difference between middle and passive deponents is simp1' 
one of form; both are active in meaning. 
11.1/2 Agent and instrument 
In English we can say the policeman was hit by a 
demonstrate 
and the policeman was hit by a placard but Greek make? · 
distinction between agent (demonstrator) and 
i n s t r u m ^ 1 

placard). 
An agent is a living being and agency is normally 
e x p r e s s e d by υπό with the genitive. An instrument is nearly 
a l w a y s inanimate and the construction used for it is the dative 
w i t h o u t a preposition (examples have already occurred at 
7 2.13 /.8, 9.2.13 /.3,10.2.16(vi); in English we use either by or 
with: 
Άοπαοια με τύπτει μήλοιο Aspasia is hitting me with 
apples (instrument); ή Τροίδ υπό τών Ελλήνων έπορθήβη Troy 
was sacked by the Greeks (agent). 
11.1/3 -ω verbs with stems in λ, μ, ν, ρ 
M o s t verbs with these stems originally formed their present with 
a y suffix (6.1/4b). This combined with a preceding λ to give λλ, 
but disappeared after μ, ν, ρ, although, by way of compensation, 
a preceding ε, ι, υ was lengthened and a preceding α became αι. 
The future of these verbs is of the contracted type (-ώ < -έω; 
5.1/2 note 3); where a y suffix has been used in the present the 
future reverts to the original stem. In the weak aorist (which 
occurs in all common verbs of this group, except βάλλω throw) 
the sigma is dropped and the preceding vowel lengthened (note 
that here we have α > η except after vowels and p, where α 
becomes a; also, ε becomes ει). The following table shows the 
different possibilities: 
PRESENT 
FUTURE 
AORIST 
βάλλω 
throw 
(< βάλ-y ω) 
βαλω 
έβαλον 
οτέλλω 
send 
(< οτέλ-y ω) 
οτελω 
έοτειλα 
νεμω 
apportion 
(no y suffix) 
νεμώ 
ένειμα 
μενω 
wait 
(no y suffix) 
μενώ 
έμεινα 
εημαινω 
indicate 
(< οημάν-^y ω) 
οημανώ 
έοήμηνα 
μιαινω 
stain 
(< μιάν-y ω) 
μιανώ 
έμίσνα 
αιεχΤ)νω 
dishonour 
(< αίοχύν-y ω) 
αίοχυνώ 
ήοχϋνα 
αιΡω 
lift 
(< αρ-y ω) 
άρω 
ήρα 
°ικτΓρω 
pity 
(< οίκτίρ-y ω) 
οικτίρω 
ωκτΓρα 
For the principal parts of έλαύνω drive and φέρω carry, which 
a r e ^regular, see Principal parts of verbs. 
The aorist passive of verbs in -αίνω and -ύνω ends in -άν^ην and 
^νθην, e.g. έοημάνθην (οημαίνω); ήοχύνθην (αίοχύνω). Likewise, 
have ήρθην from αϊρω, but the other verbs listed above 
vhich have an aorist passive are irregular. 
11-1/4 Third declension nouns -
stems in ευ, αυ, ου 
Λ 'arge number of masculine nouns end in -eve (always so 
Cented). Most common nouns of this type involve male 
105 
c 3 7V 

106 
c 3 
occupations, e.g. ίερεύο priest, iππεύο horseman. The names 
some Homeric heroes are also of this type, as Όδιχχε^ 
Άχιλλεύο. The genitive and dative singular endings are the sanx 
as for stems in ι (8.1/4). 
The only examples of stems in αυ and ου are those given below 
βααλεύο (m) 
va\jc (f) 
γραύο (f) 
βούο (m or 
king 
ship 
old woman 
οχ, cow 
SINGULAR 
Nom. 
βααλεύ-c 
ναύ-c 
γραύ-c 
βού-c 
Voc. 
βααλεύ 
ναύ 
γραύ 
βού 
Acc. 
βααλέ-G 
ναύ-ν 
γραΰ-ν 
βοί>-ν 
Gen. 
βααλέ-ωο 
νε-coc 
γρδ-oc 
βο-oc 
Dat. 
βααλεΐ 
νη-ΐ 
γρδ-ΐ 
βο-ΐ 
PLURAL 
Ν. V. 
βαοιλήΰ (or -eic) νη-ec 
γρά-ec 
βόεΰ 
Acc. 
βααλέ-ac 
ναύο 
γραύο 
βούΰ 
Gen. 
βααλέ-ων 
νε-ων 
γρδ-ων 
βο-ών 
Dat. 
βαΰΐλεύ-οι(ν) 
vai>-ci(v) 
ypai>-ci(v) 
βου-οί(ν) 
Note also Ζεύο Zeus, which is irregular: voc. Ζεΰ, acc. Δία, gen, 
Aioc, dat. Διί (in poetry there is an alternative stem, Ζην-, for 
the oblique cases, giving Ζήνα, Ζηνόο, Ζηνί). 
11.1/5 Crasis 
Crasis (Kpacic mixing, blending) is the contraction of a vowel or 
diphthong at the end of one word with a vowel or diphthong at 
the beginning of the following word. It is found chiefly in poetry 
but is not uncommon in the orators. Only a very small n u m b e r 
of words occur as the first element of crasis, viz the relevant 
parts of the definite article, καί and a few others. Examples we 
have already met are κάν (= καί έν 5.2.17) and αύτόο (= ό α ύ τ ο Ο . 
ταύτοΰ etc. (9.1/3fc). In all such cases elision (2.1/66), even it 
theoretically possible, is never used in preference to crasis. Thi 
rules for crasis are: 
(a) The first word loses its accent, if any. 
(b) A vowel (always long) or diphthong resulting from crasis 
marked with ' (technically called coronis but i d e n t i c a l π» 
form with a smooth breathing), e.g. τούνομα (τό όνομα1 
When the second word begins with a rough b r e a t h i n g * j 
consonant preceding it in crasis (always κ or τ) is aspiratj^ 
e.g. θοίμάτιον (τό ίμάτιον). When, however, the first w o r d ^ 
simply an aspirated vowel or diphthong (ό, οί, etc»), r H 
rough breathing is kept in crasis, e.g. ούν (ό έν). 

c) The rules that apply for internal contraction in verbs (5.1/2) 
are generally followed, as in the above examples. There are, 
however^ some combinations which do not occur in verbs, 
a s well as some exceptions. We should note: 
(i) When the definite article is combined with a word 
beginning with a, this a is always kept, e.g. δνθρωποο (ό 
άνθρωποο), αύτόο (ό αύτόο, 9.1/3fe). 
(ii) The at of καί is dropped in certain combinations, e.g. 
κού (καί ού), χή (καί ή). 
11.2 Greek reading 
1 ή rupawic άδικίαο μήτηρ έφυ. 
2 αεί εύ πίπτουαν οί Διόο κύβοι. 
3# ecu τι κάν κακοΐαν ήδονηο μέτρον. 
4# κούκ έμόο ό μύθοο, άλλ' έμήο μητρόο πάρα, 
ώο ούρανόο τε γαΐά τ' ήν μορφή μία* 
έπεί δ' έχωρίοθηοαν αλλήλων δίχα 
τίκτουα πάντα κάνέδωκαν (sent up) είο φάοο 
δένδρη, πετεινό, θηραο, ovc θ' άλμη τρέφει 
5 
γένοο τε θνητών. 
5# κακόν τό κεύθειν κού πρόο άνδρόο εύγενούο. 
6 είπέ τιο τω Cωκpάτει, θάνατον cox> κατέγνωοαν οί 
Αθηναίοι, ό δέ είπεν, κάκείνων ή φύαο (sc. θάνατον 
καταγιγνώοκει). 
7 άμαξα τον βούν έλκει. 
8 Advanced futility 
(i) γραΰο χορεύει, (ii) τυφλώ κάτοπτρον χαρίζη. (iii) 
άνεμον δικτύφ θηρφο. (iv) λίθοιο τον ήλιον βαλλειο. (ν) 
καλεί χελωνη τούο βούο βραδύποδαο. (νϊ) οπόγγφ πάτταλον 
κρούειο. (vii) πάτταλον έξέκρουοαο παττάλω. (viii) τήν 
αμιδα οανδάλφ έπιφράττειο. (ix) οϊνω οΐνον έξελαύνειο. (χ) 
αυτόο την οαυτοΰ θύραν κρούειο λίθφ. 
πάοιν γάρ άνθρώποιαν, ούχ ήμΐν μόνον, 
η καί παραυτίκ' ή χρόνφ δαίμων βίον 
εοφηλε, κούδείο διά τέλουο εύδαιμονεΐ. 
Odysseus explains to Neoptolemus that they must obtain 
the bow of Philoctetes if Troy is to be captured, 
τούτων γάρ ούδέν άλγυνεΐ μ'· εί δ' έργάοη 
μη ταύτα, λύπην πάοιν 'Αργείοιο βαλειο. 
ε\ Υαρ τά τούδε τόξα μή ληφθήοεται, 
Ι j 
ουκ έοτι (= έξεοτι) πέροαι coi τό Δαρδάνου πέδον. 
525 BC Egypt was conquered and permanently occupied 
by the Persians, whose power in the eastern Mediterranean 

108 
continued to increase until their unsuccessful invasion (J» 
Greece (480-479 BC). The subsequent rise of Athem 
encouraged the Athenians to invade Egypt (c. 461 u 
with disastrous results, as Thucydides tells us in the 
introduction to his history. 
ούτω μέν τά τών Ελλήνων πράγματα έφθάρη* καί ολίγοι άπο 
πολλών διά τηο Λιβύηο ec Κυρήνην έπορεύθηοαν και 
έοώθηοαν, οί δέ πλεΐοτοι άπέθανον. Αϊγυπτοο δέ πάλιν ύπο 
βαοιλεα έγένετο πλην Άμυρταίου του έν τοΐο έλεοι 
βααλέωο* τούτον δέ διά μέγεθόο τε του έλουο ούκ έδύναντο: 
έλειν καί άμα οφόδρα μάχιμοι είαν οί έλειοι. Ινάρακ; δέ ο 
Λιβύων βααλεύο, oc τά πάντα έπραξε περί τηο Αιγύπτου, 
προδοοία ελήφθη καί άνεοταυρώθη. έκ δέ τών 'Αθηνών και 
rfjc άλληο ξυμμαχίδοο πεντήκοντα τριήρειο διάδοχοι 
έπλευοαν ec Αϊγυπτον καί έοχον κατά τό Μενδήοιον κέραο. ι; 
άλλ' αύτοΐο έκ τε γήο έπέπεοον πεζοί καί έκ θαλάοοης 
Φοινίκων ναυτικόν καί διέφθειραν τάο πολλάο τών νεών. τά 
ούν κατά την μεγάλην οτρατείαν 'Αθηναίων καί τών 
ξυμμάχων ec Αϊγυπτον ούτωο έτελεύτηοεν. 
12 
Euxitheos and Herodes were fellow passengers on a voyage 
to Thrace. In the process of changing ships at Lesbos, 
Herodes disappeared and Euxitheos was subsequently 
charged with his murder. His speech of defence was written 
by Antiphon. 
έπειδή δέ μετεξέβημεν eic τό έτερον πλοΐον, έπίνομεν. και 
φανερόν μέν έοτιν ότι ό Ήρώδηο έξέβη έκ του πλοίου και 
ούκ είοέβη πάλιν έγώ δέ τό παράπαν ούκ έξέβην έκ του 
πλοίου τηο νυκτόο έκείνηο. τη δέ ύοτεραία, έπειδή άφανηο 
ήν ό άνήρ, έζητειτο ούδέν τι μάλλον ύπό τών άλλων ή και υπ 5 
έμού' καί ε'ί τω τών άλλων έδόκει δεινόν είναι, καί έμοι 
όμοίωο. καί eic τε τήν Μυτιλήνην έγώ α'ίτιοο ή πεμφθήναι 
άγγελον, καί έπεί άλλοο ούδείο ήθελε βαδίζειν, ούτε τών 
άπο του πλοίου ούτε τών αύτού του Ήρώδου έταίρων, εγω 
τον άκόλουθον τον έμαυτού πέμπειν έτοιμοο ή. έπειδή δε ο 
άνήρ ούτε έν τί| Μυτιλήνη έφαίνετο ού^ άλλοθι ούδαμου. 
πλούο τε ήμΐν εγίγνετο, καί τάλλ' άνήγετο πλοία άπαντα, 
ωχόμην κάγώ. 
Notes 
1 έφϋ < φύω (11.1/1) the primary meaning of this root aorist is 
was born but often, as here, it has the present sense is. 
2 Aioc gen. of Zevc (11.1/4). 
3 τι with μέτρον; κακοιαν = κακοΐο (3.1/1 note 1). 
4 /.I κούκ = καί ούκ (11.1/5); πάρα some disyllab^ 
prepositions can, in verse, be placed after the noun the) 

govern, cf. δίχα in 1.3; when they are normally accented on 
the final syllable (as with παρά, but not with δίχα), the accent 
is then thrown back on to the first syllable. 1.2 With a double 
subject (ούρανόο and γαία) the verb sometimes agrees only 
with the nearer; hence ήν; τε... τ(ε) lit. both ... and but simply 
trans, by and. 1.4 τίκτουα vivid present, trans, brought forth 
(τίκτω can be used of either parent); κάνέδωκαν = καί 
άνέδωκαν (έδωκαν is the 3rd pi. aor. ind. act. of δίδωμι give, 
18.1/2 note 3). 1.5 δένδρη acc. pi. of δένδρον (13.1/lc); ovc 
an antecedent meaning creatures is to be understood; Θ' i.e. 
τε; after the ε is elided, τ' becomes Θ' because of the rough 
breathing of άλμη. 
6 καταγιγνώοκω condemn 
takes the gen. of the person 
condemned and the accusative of what he is condemned to 
(23.1/lfe(i)); κάκείνων = καί έκείνων. 
8 (iv) λίθοιο instrumental dat. (11.1/2); βάλλειο here pelt, (vii) 
έξέκρουοαο < έκκρούω. 
9 1.1 The datives should be translated by for. 1.2 καί is here 
adverbial and emphasizes the following word but need not 
be translated; βίον English idiom requires the plural. 1.3 
έοφηλε gnomic aorist (see note on 5.2.10); οφάλλω trip up, 
cause to fall (as in wrestling) is here (and often elsewhere) 
used metaphorically; κούδείο = καί ούδείο. 
10 The future tense in εί clauses (/. 1 έργάοη and 1.3 ληφθήοεται) 
is to be translated into English by a present; μή (as in 11.2 
and 3) is the negative used in εί clauses (18.1/4) but in 1.2 it 
is somewhat unusually placed after the verb it negates (cf. 
2.1/6tf(i)). 1.3 Translate τά τόξα by a singular (the plural is 
often used for the singular in verse). 1.4 On έοτι = έξεοτι see 
21.1/4 note 1. 
11 Thucydides uses the non-Attic spelling cc for ττ (/.ll 
θαλάοσηο), the old Attic form ξύν (ξυμ- etc. in compounds) 
for the normal c\>v (1.9 ξυμμαχίδοο, /.14 ξυμμάχων), and the 
old Attic ec for eic (ll.2, 10, 14). /.I έφθάρη < φθείρω. II.3f. 
υπό lit. under, i.e. under the control of; βαοιλέά at this 
period the Persian king was a figure of supreme importance 
and the Greeks referred to him simply as βααλεύο. //.5f. τε ... 
καί join the two reasons why Amyrtaeus could not be 
captured and in English we would supply because after άμα. 
ΙΙ.βί. τα παντα see note on 10.2.16(iV); εληφ&η < λαμβανω. 
11.91 διάδοχοι lit. [as] relieving, i.e. as a relieving force; 
έοχον put in; τό Μενδήαον κέραο the north-east arm of the 
Nile delta, //.llff. Take αύτοιο with έπέπεοον (< έπιπίπτω), 
lit. fell upon them; τάο πολλάο the majority of, most of; τά ... 
κατά τήν ... cf. 5.1/3, lit. the [things] with respect to the ... 

110 
12 LI Translate μετεξέβημεν (< μετεκβαίνω) by a pluperfect 
had transferred (16.1/2); έπίνομεν we began to drink 
(inceptive imperfect 4.1/1). I.3 τό παράπαν ούκ not... at alU 
the adverb παράπαν is converted by τό to a noun equivalent 
(4.1/4), which functions here as an accusative of respect 
(20.1/5), lit. [with respect to] the altogether. 1.5 ούδέν n 
μάλλον ύπό ... ή ... ύπό, lit. nothing more by ... than by 
(ούδέν τι not at all is also an accusative of respect). //.6ff. ζφ 
= τι vi (indefinite, 10.1/1); the καί of καί eic τε joins this 
sentence to the preceding one; τε is to be taken with the καί 
before έπεί (/.8) and the two link έγώ αϊτιοο ή ... with έγώ 
... έτοιμοο ή; τε ... καί literally mean both ... and but 
translate here not only ... but also to give the necessary 
emphasis; πεμφθηναι άγγελον accusative and infinitive 
(8.1/3a) after αϊτιοο ή. ll.Si ούτε ... ούτε continue the 
preceding negative ούδείο, lit. no-one ... neither from ... nor 
of but in English we would say either ... or (the rule given 
at 7.1/6 does not apply because ούτε ... ούτε do not negate 
the verb of this clause; cf. 10.3 ll.li.). //. 1 Off. έπειδή is 
followed by three clauses with the second joined to the first 
by τε (/.12) and the third to the second by καί (/. 12); πλους 
[the time for] sailing; έγίγνετο, lit. was coming into being, 
i.e was starting τάλλ' = τά άλλα; άνήγετο impf. of άνάγομαι; 
κάγώ = καί έγω (11.1/5) 

12.1 Grammar 
12.1/1 Participles 
Participles are those parts of verbs which function as adjectives. 
They have tense (killing is present, going to kill future) and 
voice (killing is active, being killed passive). In Greek there are 
participles for all three voices in the present, future, and aorist 
(and also the perfect, 16.1/4) and they use the same stem as the 
corresponding indicatives (but the augment is dropped in the 
aorist). For the sake of completeness the following table 
includes perfect participles, which can be ignored until we treat 
these in 16.1/4. 
m. λύ-ων (gen. λύ-οντοο), f. λύ-ουοα, η. λν-ον loosening 
m. λύο-ων (gen. λύο-οντοο), f. λύο-ουοα, η. λύο-ον going to 
loosen, about to loosen 
m. Xtc-Gc (gen. λύο-αντοο), f. λύο-αοα, η. λύο-αν having 
loosened, after loosening 
m. λελυκ-ωο (gen. λελυκ-oxoc), f. λελυκ-Λ)ΐα, η. λελυκ-oc 
(in a state of) having loosened 
λϋ-όμενοο, -ομένη, -όμενον ransoming 
λϋο-όμενοο, -ομένη, -όμενον going to ransom, about to 
ransom 
λϋο-άμενοο, -αμένη, -άμενον having ransomed, 
after 
ransoming 
λελυ-μένοο, -μένη, -μένον (in a state of) having ransomed 
λΐΗ)μενοο, -ομένη, -όμενον being loosened 
ACTIVE 
Present 
future 
Aorist 
Perfect 
MIDDLE 
Present 
Puture 
Aorist 
Perfect 
PASSIVE 
^resent 

112 
c 3 
Future 
λυθης-όμενος, -ομένη, -όμενον going to be loosened, abou* 
to be loosened 
Aorist 
m. λυθ-είο (gen. λυθ-έντοο), f. λυθειοα, n. λυθέν bavin·, 
been loosened, after being loosened 
Perfect 
λελυ-μένοο, -μένη, -μένον (in a state of) having bee? 
loosened 
All active participles, together with that of the aorist passive, are 
declined like first and third declension adjectives (10.1/3). The 
declension of the aorist active participle is identical with that ot 
πάο (10.1/3b). The present active and aorist passive are declined 
as follows: 
SINGULAR 
M. 
F. 
Ν. 
Μ. 
F. 
Ν. 
N.V. 
λϋων 
λύουοα 
λύον 
λυθείο 
λυθεί ca 
λυθέν 
Acc. 
λύοντα 
λύουοαν 
λύον 
λυθέντα 
λυθείοαν λυθέν 
Gen. 
λύοντοο 
λϋούοηο 
λύοντοο 
λυθέντοο 
λυθείοηο λυθέντοο 
Dat. 
λύοντι 
λϋούσρ 
λύοντι 
λυθέντι 
λυθείση 
λυθέντι 
PLURAL 
N.V. 
λύοντεο 
λύουοαι 
λύοντα 
λυθέντεο 
λυθειοαι 
λυθέντα 
Acc. 
λϋονταο XVovcGc λύοντα 
λυθένταο λυθείΰδΰ λυθέντα 
Gen. 
λϋόντων 
λϋουοών λϋόντων λυθέντων λυθειοών λυθέντων 
Dat 
λύουοι(ν) λϋούοαιο λύουοι(ν) λυθειοι(ν) λυθείοαιο λυθεΐα(ν) 
The future active participle follows λύων. All middle participles 
and that of the future passive follow καλόο (3.1/3). The present 
(and perfect) participle passive has the same form as the middle. 
The meanings given above for the present and aorist participles 
simply 
reflect the 
temporal 
distinction 
between 
then 
corresponding indicatives: λύων loosening, 
Xtc&c having 
loosened. This difference of time occurs in a sentence such as 
έργαζόμενοι μέν ήρίοτων, έργαοάμενοι δέ έδείπνουν they used to 
have breakfast while they were working (lit. working), but used 
to dine after they finished work (lit. having worked), but the 
distinction is sometimes one of aspect (4.1/1), i.e. the present 
participle conveys the idea of continuation, the aorist of simple 
occurrence. An aorist participle so used can denote an action 
which happens at the same time as that of the finite verb of its 
clause (coincidental use), e.g. εύ έποίηοαο άναμνηοδο με you did 
well to remind me (lit. reminding, 
not having 
reminded^ 
ύπολαβών έφη he said in reply (lit. replying, not having replied>· 
Notes 
1 
The present participle of ειμί (I am) is ων, ούοα, ov bew&% 
gen. s. ovxoc, ούσηο, ovxoc; dat. pi. ούοι(ν), oucaic, ούα(ν) 
Its future participle is έοόμενοο, -η, -ov (cf. 8.1/1 note 2);ιΓ 

has no others. The idiomatic expression τό ov (lit. the 
[really] existing [thing]) has the meaning reality; τω δντι is 
used in the sense in reality, in truth (on this use of the dative 
see 23.1/2/). 
2 In tenses where they differ from λύω, contracted verbs, verbs 
with a contracted future, and verbs with stems in λ, μ, ν, ρ 
form their participles according to the rules already given 
for those tenses, e.g. the future active and aorist active 
participles of οτέλλω are σίελων (<έ + ων), οτελοΰοα (< έ + 
ouca), οτελοΰν (< έ + ov) and cxeiX-Qc, -3ca, -αν. 
3 Strong aorists take the participial endings of the present (cf. 
7.1/1), e.g. active λαβών, -ούοα, -ov;1 middle λαβόμενοο 
(< λαμβάνω). 
4 The participles of root aorists are similar to those of the 
weak aorist active or the aorist passive, as the following 
examples show: 
(i) έγνων (γιγνώοκω): m. yvovc (gen. γνόντοο), f. γνοΰοα, η. 
γνόν. 
(ii) έφϋν (φύω): m. φύο (gen. φύντοο), f. φΰοα, η. φύν. 
(Hi) -έδρδν (-διδράοκω, which occurs only in compounds): 
m. -δράο (gen. -δράντοο), f. -δράοα, η. -δράν. 
(iv) έπνίγην (πνίγω): m. πνιγείο (gen. πνιγέντοο), f. 
πνιγεΐοα, n. πνιγέν. 
(ν) έβην (βαίνω) follows -έδρδν: m. βάο (gen. βάντοο), f. 
βάοα, η. βάν (cf. έστην 19.1/1). 
12.1/2 Uses of participles 
Μ A participle in Greek can often be rendered by the same in 
English, but Greek regularly uses a participle and finite verb 
where English would more naturally have two verbs joined by 
and: τούτο ποιήοβο άπηλθεν he did this and went away (lit. 
having done this he went away). In many other cases a 
subordinate clause should be used to translate a participle. The 
negative, when required, varies as indicated. When used within 
a clause participles are used to express: 
(i) The temporal relation between two actions (negated by ού) 
άφικόμενοι eic τάο Άθηνδο 
When they arrived (lit. 
έλεξαν τάδε. 
having arrived) at 
Athens, they spoke 
as follows. 
Sometimes the temporal relation is made more precise by 
qualifying the participle with adverbs such άμα together 
with, εύθύο immediately, μεταξύ in the middle of: 
oiwll'k? 
present active participle, the strong aorist active participle is always accented 
n e first syllable of its ending, hence λαμβάνων (pres.) but λαβών (aor.). 

114 
c 
3 
μεταξύ θύων ληκύθιον 
άπώλεοεν; 
άμα φευγοντεο τουο 
Έλληναο έτίτρωοκον. 
Did he lose his little oil 
flask while (lit. in the 
middle of) sacrificing:f 
(on άπώλεοεν see 
20.1/1 note 2). 
While (lit. together with, -v 
the same time as) fleeing 
they kept wounding the 
Greeks. 
άγων leading, έχων having, φέρων carrying are often to bi 
translated simply by with: ήλθεν έχων ξίφοο he came with ο 
sword (lit. having a sword). 
(ii) Cause (negated by ου) 
A participle used in this sense is often preceded by άτε 
because for a reason the writer or speaker sees as valid, or 
by ώο as for a reason he does not vouch for. <i>c (which has 
many other uses - 22.1/1) here, and elsewhere, marks what 
follows as the subjective opinion of the person described 
and must often by translated by thinking 
that, on the 
grounds that, άτε is used only with phrases (with or without 
a participle): 
ό Κύροο, άτε τον χρϋοόν 
έχων πάντα, έπικούρουο 
έμιοθώοατο. 
ό βααλεύο τούο TlepcGc 
εΐρξεν ώο καταοκόπουο 
δνταο. 
ούχ ήγεμόναο έχων πλανά 
άνά τά δρη. 
Cyrus hired mercenaries 
because he had all the 
gold. 
The king imprisoned the 
Persians on the ground 
that they were spies. 
Because you have no 
guides you are 
wandering over the 
mountains. 
(iii) Concession (negated by ου) 
The participle is often preceded by καίπερ although, which 
like άτε, is used only with phrases: 
ταύτα φερειν αναγκη 
καίπερ όντα δύοφορα. 
δόξω γυναίκα, καίπερ ούκ 
έχων, έχει ν. 
It is necessary (lit. [there is\ 
necessity) to endure these 
things although they are 
(lit. although being) haru 
to bear. 
I shall seem to have [myI 
wife, although I do not 
have [her] (lit. although 
not having). 

καί and καί ταΰτα (and that [too]) are used as equivalents of 
καίπερ: 
έν τη Ίλιάδι οί ήρωεο ίχθυο 
In the Iliad the heroes do 
ούκ έοθίουα καί ταΰτα 
not eat fish although 
έπί τη θαλάττη δντεο. 
they are (lit. and that 
being) by the sea. 
(iv) Condition (negated by μή, as in conditional clauses, 18.1/5) 
No introductory word is required: άμαρτήοη μή bp&c(xc τάδε 
you will make a mistake if you do not do this (lit. not having 
done these things). 
(v) Purpose (negated by ού) 
With verbs of motion a future participle can be used by 
itself: ήκομεν τούο οούο άθλουο, Προμηθεΰ, όψόμενοι (< 
όράω) we have come to see your ordeals, 
Prometheus. 
Elsewhere the future participle is preceded by <i>c (cf. (ii) 
above; in both cases coc presents the attitude of the subject 
of the participle): ουλλαμβάνει Κύρον G>C άποκτενών he seizes 
Cyrus in order to kill [him]. In these examples English uses 
an infinitive phrase to express purpose (for clauses 
expressing purpose see 14.1/4c(i)). 
(vi) Noun equivalent 
If preceded by the definite article, adjectives may function as 
nouns, as ό κακάο the evil man (5.1/3). Since participles are 
adjectives, they can be treated in the same way. οί 
μανθάνοντεο literally means the learning [ones] and, 
depending on the context, could be translated those who are 
learning or (the) learners (in English the article is dropped if 
a general class is meant - 2.1/2 note 1): 
(be ήδύ λεύοοειν το φωο τοΐο 
How sweet [it is] both for 
τε καλωο πράττουα καί 
those who are faring well 
TOIC δυοτυχούαν. 
and for those who are 
unfortunate to look upon 
the light (i.e. be alive). 
This use is negated by μή if a general class meant, but by ού 
if the reference is to a specific person or group: 
οι μή εύτυχούντεο 
lit. the [class of] people 
who are not fortunate, 
i.e. the unfortunate; 
οι ούκ εύτυχούντεο 
those [particular] people . 
who are not fortunate. 
? Genitive absolute 
TH 
^ construction (absolute here means independent), in its 
Plest form, involves a noun or pronoun and a participle 

116 
c 
3 
which are both in the genitive case and which stand apart frorr 
(i.e. are grammatically independent of) the rest of the sentence 
there is, of course, a connection in sense as otherwise ther, 
would be no point in putting the two together. We have a 
absolute construction (the nominative absolute) in English 
Although it is a little clumsy, we can say the Persians havwo 
sailed 
away, 
Miltiades 
returned 
to 
Athens. 
In Greek 
this becomes τών Περοών άποπλευοάντων, ό Μιλτιάδη, 
έπανηλθεν eic zGc Άθήνδο. The genitive absolute is employed in 
uses (i) - (iv) as detailed above and can be accompanied by άτε. 
roc, καίπερ when appropriate. It is negated by ού except when it 
expresses a condition (above (iv)). 
ταΰτ' έπράχθη Kovrovoc 
These things were done 
οτρατηγούντοο. 
when Conon was general 
(lit. Conon being 
general) (temporal 
relation). 
άτε πυκνού ovroc τού άλοουο 
Because the grove was 
ούκ ειδον οί έντόο xovc έκτόο. 
thick those inside did not 
see those outside (lit. 
inasmuch as the grove 
being thick) (cause). 
He sails home although it 
is midwinter (lit. 
although [it] being 
midwinter) (concession). 
He went up on to the 
mountains as the enemy 
did not prevent [him] 
(lit. the enemy not 
preventing) (cause, hence 
ού). 
How sweet [is] life if 
fortune is not jealous ('!Γ 
fortune not being 
jealous) (condition, 
hence μή). 
άποπλεΐ ο'ίκαδε καίπερ μέοου 
χειμώνοο όντοο. 
άνέβη έπί τά όρη τών πολεμίων 
ού κωλυόντων. 
roc ήδύ τό ζην μή φθονούσηο 
τηο τύχηο. 
12.2 Greek reading 
1# άνήρ ό φεύγων καί πάλιν μαχήοεται. 
2 
άρκτου παρούοηο ού δει ϊχνη ζητειν. 
3# λίαν φιλών οεαυτόν ούχ έξειο φίλον. 

4 
έαυτόν ού τρέφων κύναο τρέφει. 
5# ο μή γαμών άνθρωποο ούκ έχει κακά. 
6 
καπνόν φεύγων ειο τό πυρ ένέπεοεο. 
7 
άνήρ φεύγων ού μένει λύραο κτύπον. 
8 
οί κύνεο άπαξ δή καυθέντεο λέγονται φοβεΐοθαι τό πυρ. 
9# θάψων γάρ ήκω Καίοαρ', ούκ έπαινέοων. 
10 ούδείο πεινών καλά ςίδει. 
11 άγροικόο είμι τήν οκάφην οκάφην λέγων; 
12 ό δηχθείο ύπό δφεωο καί οχοινίον φοβείται. 
13# ό γραμμάτων άπειροο ού βλεπει βλέπων. 
14 χαλεπόν έοτι πρόο γαοτέρα λέγειν ώτα ούκ έχουοαν. 
15# ΠΡΟΜΗΘΕΤΟ 
δέρκη θέαμα, τόνδε τον Διόο φίλον, 
οϊαιο ύπ' αύτοΰ πημοναΐοι κάμπτομαι. 
QKEANOC 
ορώ, Προμηθεύ, καί παραινέοαι γέ οοι 
θέλω τά λωοτα καίπερ όντι ποικίλω. 
16 ό Κύροο έντεύθεν έξελαύνει διά τηο Λυκαονίαο οταθμούο 
πέντε, παραοάγγαο τριάκοντα, ταύτην δέ τήν χώραν 
έπέτρεψε διαρπάοαι τοΐο "Ελληοιν ώο πολεμίαν ούοαν. 
17# Ήοιοδου ποτέ βίβλον έμαΐο ύπό χεροίν έλίοοων 
Πύρρην έξαπίνηο ειδον έπερχομένην 
βίβλον δέ ρίψαο έπί γήν χερί, τούτ' έβόηοα* 
έργα τί μοι παρέχειο, ώ γέρον Ήοίοδε; 
18# In this fragment from a lost play of Euripides the leader of 
a band of mystics greets Minos, the king of Cnossus in 
Crete, whose wife, Pasiphae, after an unfortunate 
experience with a bull, will give birth to the Minotaur. 
Φοινικογενούο τέκνον Εύρώπηο 
καί του μεγάλου Ζηνόο, άνάοοων 
Κρήτηο έκατομπτολιέθρου, 
ηκω ζαθέουο ναούο προλιπών... 
αγνόν δέ βίον τείνομεν έξ ού 
Διόο Ίδαίου μύοτηο γενόμην (= έγεν-), 
καί νυκτιπόλου Ζαγρέωο βούτηο 
ταο ωμοφάγουο δαιταο τελέοαο 
μητρί τ' όρεία δαδαο άναοχών 
μετά Κουρήτων, 
βάκχοο έκλήθην όαωθείο. 
10 
Notes 
2 
3 
5 
άρκτου παρούοηο gen. absolute (12.1/2&). 
Φιλών < φιλέων (pres. pple. m. nom. s. of φιλέω). 
because a general class is meant (12.1/2tf(vi)). 

6 
evenecec < έμπίπτω. 
8 
δή emphasizes άπαξ. 
a 
9 
A translation of a line of Shakespeare, not a piece 0* 
"" 
original Greek; θάψων, έπαινέοων 12.1/2a(v). 
10 
καλά (n. pi.) trans, by an adverb. 
13 
βλέπων is used here concessively, [though] seeing. 
14 
ώτα < ovc 
15 
Ll τόνδε τον Aioc φίλον this friend of Zeus (i.e me. 
Prometheus) is in appositon to θέίχμα (lit. spectacle). Ll 
o'iaic (with πημοναΐο) lit. with what sort of dat. or 
instrument (11.1/2). 1.3 παραινέω takes the 
dative 
(13.1/2fe(i)); γε (lit. at any rate (13.1/3b) need not be 
translated. 
16 
έξελαύνει vivid present (see note on 7.2.13 /.8); on the 
relation between οταθμούο and παραοάγγαο see note on 
7.2.9. 
17 
Hesiod, an early poet, wrote the 'Έργα καί Ήμέρσι 
(traditionally translated Works and Days but the real 
meaning is Fields and Days [for ploughing them]), which is 
the book referred to here. /.I Books in antiquity were 
written on papyrus rolls and the reader kept his hands on 
top of a roll to manipulate it (hence έμαΐο υπό χεράν under 
my hands). 1.2 έπερχομένην coming (for this use of a 
participle see 15.1/2). 1.4 έργα here troubles, but trans, by a 
singular - the author is punning on the title of the book he 
is reading (and wilfully misinterpreting the sense of έργα). 
18 
Europa, the daughter of Agenoi; king of Tyre in Phoenicia 
(hence Φοινικογενηο) was carried off by Zeus to Crete 
after the latter had taken the form of a bull (not related to 
the bull loved by Pasiphae); she subsequently gave birth to 
Minos, ll.If. τέκνον vocative - with it we must take 
άνάοοων; the m. pple. (άνάοοων) is used because τεκνο\ 
although neuter^ refers to a male being, viz Minos - slight 
violations of strict grammatical agreement on this pattern 
are not rare (agreement according to the sense); Ζηνοο set 
11.1/4; avaccco be king of9 rule over takes the geninu 
(13.1/2tf(i)). 1.4 προλιπων < προλείπω. 1.5 τείνομεν lit. ^ 
lead but as έξ ού (from what [time], i.e. since) folloyj 
English idiom requires have led. 1.6 Aioc see 11 
J^. 
νυκτιπόλου Ζαγρεωο βούτηο [as] a herdsman of 
roaming Zagreus. 1.8 ώμοφάγουο δαιταο meals of raw / 
were a regular feature of Dionysiac orgies (the beast ^ 
torn apart by the participants). 1.9 μητρί όρεία, i.e. 
L ^ ^ 
another divinity worshipped with nightly orgies 
έκλήθην < καλέω. 

12.3 Extra reading 
Epigrams 
For the Greeks an epigram was a short poem of two to twelve 
lines (we have already met examples at 9.2.3 and 12.2.17). The 
genre formed a sub-division of elegiac poetry because it was 
written in the elegiac metre (see Appendix 9; particular metres 
had, from an early stage in Greek literature, become the 
hallmarks of most poetical genres). Authors of epigrams used, 
although not very consistently, forms of words from Ionic and 
Homeric Greek (examples in 1, 3, 4, 8, 9). There was virtually 
no restriction on subject matter. 
1# χρυοόν άνήρ εύρων έλιπεν βρόχον αύτάρ ό χρυοόν 
δν λίπεν ούχ εύρων ήψεν δν εύρε βρόχον. 
2# ή Κύπριο την Κύπριν ένί Κνίδω είπεν ίδούοα, 
φευ, φευ, πού γυμνήν ειδέ με Πραξιτέληο; 
3# πάντεο μέν Κίλικεο κακοί άνέρεσ έν δέ Κίλιξιν 
eic άγαθόο Κινύρηο, καί Κινύρηο δέ Κίλιξ. 
4# ε'ίαδεν Άντίοχοο την Λυοιμάχου ποτέ τύλην 
κούκέτι την τύλην εϊοιδε Λυοίμαχοο. 
5# ε'ίκοα γεννήοαο ό ζωγράφοο Εύτυχοο υίούο 
ούδ' από τών τέκνων ούδέν όμοιον έχει. 
6# ή τά ρόδα, ροδόεοοαν έχειο χάριν* άλλα τί πωλεϊο, 
οαυτήν, ή τά ρόδα, ήέ ουναμφότερα; 
7# την ψυχήν, 'Αγάθωνα φιλών, έπί χείλεαν έοχον 
ήλθε γάρ ή τλήμων (oc διαβηοομένη. 
8# ή οοβαρόν γελάοαοα καθ' Έλλάδοο, ή τον έραοτών 
έομόν έπί προθύροιο Aaic έχουοα νέων, 
τη Παφίη τό κάτοπτρον έπεί τοίη μέν όράοθαι 
ούκ έθέλω, οϊη δ' ήν πάροο ού δύναμαι. 
They told me, Heraclitus, they told me you were dead ... 
είπε TIC, Ηράκλειτε, τεόν μόρον, ec δέ με δάκρυ 
f> ήγαγεν, έμνήοθην δ' OCC0KIC άμφότεροι 
ηλιον έν λέοχη κατεδύοαμεν* άλλα cv μέν που, 
ξεΐν' 'Αλικαρνηοεύ, τετράπαλαι οποδιή* 
αι δέ τεαι ζωουαν αηδονεο, ηαν ο πάντων 
5 
αρπακτήο Άίδηο ούκ έπί χείρα βαλεΐ. 
Notes 
λιπεν = έλιπεν (aorist of λείπω) in Homer the augment is 
optional in the imperfect and aorist, and unaugmented 
°£ms of these tenses are often found in literary genres 
tuch use features of Homeric language, cf. below 4. 

120 
c 
3 
ro 
2 
Κύπριο another name for Aphrodite because of he-
association with Cyprus (Κύπροο). 
3 
avepec (Homeric) = άνδρεο. 
4 
εϊαδεν = είοειδεν (< είοοράω) the augment is dropped as m 
λίπεν (above 1); κούκέτι = καί ούκέτι (11.1/5). 
5 
Eutychus apparently was a bad painter with an unfaithful 
wife; ούδ'(έ) not even, but trans, even (cf. 11.2.12 /.8). 
6 
ή τά ρόδα (sc. έχουοα) [you] the [woman having, i.e. with 
(12.1/2a(i))] the roses a concise form of address towards 
someone whose name the speaker does not know. 
7 
/. 1 φιλών kissing 
(despite 
some 
restrictions, male 
homosexuality was common in Greek society, cf. 7.2.13). 1.2 
As the future participle is used by itself to express purpose 
(12.1/2tf(v)) ώο διαβηοομένη means thinking that it was 
going to cross over (i.e. with the idea of... cf. 12.1/2tf(ii)). 
8 
Lais (fourth century BC), a beautiful courtesan now past her 
prime, dedicates her mirror to Aphrodite because she has no 
further use for it. The epigram consists of a single sentence 
and a main verb meaning I dedicate is to be supplied (the 
first two lines are in apposition to I, i.e. I, the one who.,.). 
1.1 οοβαρόν the n. acc. s. of the adjective is used adverbially, 
trans, haughtily; καθ', i.e. κατά with elision and aspiration 
before the following initial aspirate; καθ' Έλλάδοο lit. 
(laughing) 
against 
Greece, i.e. at Greece. 1.2 Trans, 
προθύροιο as singular (the plural is often used for the 
singular in verse); take νέων (< veoc) with έραοτών in the 
previous line. 1.3 τη Παφίη i.e. to Aphrodite, whose temple 
at Paphos in Cyprus was famous; τοίη (= Attic τοιαύτη 
(21.1/3)) of such a sort [as I am now], translate simply by ifs 
I am now; όράοθαι middle voice see myself (S.i/la). ΙΑ οιη 
(= Attic οία)... ην πάροο lit. of what sort I was before, trans. 
as I was before; with δύναμαι (on deponents in -αμαι see 
19.1/3b) supply όράοθαι from the previous line. 
9 
An epigram of Callimachus (third century BC), well known 
in its English translation (see Appendix 9). The person 
addressed is not the philosopher Heraclitus. /.I τεόο is ttu 
Homeric form of coc (cf. τεαί in 1.5). 1.2 έμνηοθην (aor. or 
μέμνημαι 19.1/3b) I remembered. 1.3 We sank the sun ^ 
conversation, 
i.e. we talked into the night. 15 ζωου^ι 
Homeric for ζώοιν (< ζάω); Heraclitus' nightingales were nis 
poems, which, ironically, have not survived; fjciv = aiciy (lρ 
aic) - the dat. is governed by έπί ... βάλει, on to which··j·^ 
έπί χείρα βάλει = χείρα έπιβαλεΐ; in Homer when the r^; 
element of a compound verb (as έπιβάλλω) is a prepositi^1 ^ 
prefix (here έπί), it can be separated from the verbal elen^ 
(here βάλλω) by one or more words (tmesis lit. a cutting 

13.1 Grammar 
13.1/1 Oddities of declension 
As we have now covered all regular nouns and adjectives, a few 
remaining oddities can be conveniently listed here. Only a very 
small number of nouns exist in each group. 
{a) Attic declension 
This subdivision of the second declension contains nouns which 
in Attic (and sometimes Ionic) end in -coc, but which in other 
dialects preserve the original -oc. Hence Homeric vcfoc (m) 
temple became first vr\oc (in Attic δ >η except after a vowel or 
P) and then veoic (cf. the gen. s. of πόλιο, 8.1/4). vecic is declined: 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
N.V. 
νεώο 
νεώ 
Acc. 
νεών 
νεώΰ 
Gen. νεώ 
νεών 
Dat. 
νεώ 
νεώο 
Other nouns of this class are λεώο (m; Homeric Xaoc) people, 
ϊενέλεωο (Homeric Μενέλαοο) Menelaus, λαγώο (m) bare, ecoc 
J dawn (singular only; the accusative is έω). The adjective 
^(oc propitious also belongs here (m.f. τλεωο, η. Ιλέων; η. pi. 
The masculine and neuter of πλέωο full follow Τλεωο but 
ts feminine, πλέα, follows δικαία (3.1/3). 
| Third declension nouns in -ωc, -ω, and -ac 
(l) ήρωο (m) hero is declined: 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
W· V- 
ήρωο 
ήρω-ec 
Acc. 
ήρω-α or ήρω 
ήρω-ac 
^en. 
ήρω-oc 
ήρώ-ων 
ήρω-ι or ήρω 
ήρω-οι(ν) 

Similarly declined are δμώο (m) slave and Τρώεο (m. ρ 
Trojans. αιδώο (f) shame is irregular: 
αιδώο; acc. αι<> 
αιδοΰο; 
αιδοΐ (no plural). 
(ii) πειθώ (f) persuasion 
has affinities with αίδώο and 
declined: η. πειθώ; v. πειθοι; acc. πειθώ; gen. πειθούς; 
πειθοΐ (no plural). So also ηχώ (f) echo and women's nan\-
such as Οαπφώ and Καλυψώ. 
(iii) In addition to neuter dental stems with a nominative in ^ 
(as κέραο horn, gen. κέρατοο, 5.1/la), there are a few neuu-
nouns in -ac whose declension is parallel to neuters in -<j 
(6.1/1 c, i.e. contraction has taken place after the loss <, 
intervocalic sigma). γέραο (n) prize is declined: 
Similarly declined are γήραο old age, κρέαο meat, and also 
κέραο when it means wing of an army (cf. 5.1/1Λ). 
(c) Nouns declined in two ways 
In English brothers and brethren are both plural forms o\ 
brother, even though we attach a broader meaning to the 
second. In Greek, anomalies of this sort sometimes reflect 
dialectal differences (as, e.g., between Homeric and Attic 
Greek), but some examples exist entirely within Attic. These 
may involve alternative forms (as in υίόο), or an apparent 
irregularity (as in δένδρον). The main examples are: 
δάκρυον, -ου (n) tear; alternative n.v.a. in the singular: δάκρυ 
(as in 12.3.9/.l). 
δένδρον, -ου (n) tree has an irregular dat. pi. δένδρεα(\>· 
δένδρε(α) in 13.2.22 1.2 is the Homeric and old Ionic forir 
of the n.v.a. plural, which can be contracted to δενδρ" 
(11.2.41.5). 
πυρ, πυρόο (n) fire (6.1/1 b); the plural πυρά is second-
declension (πυρών, πυροΐο) and means watch-fires. 
cixoc, -ου (m) grain (i.e. wheat or barley); the plural 
neuter: cixa. 
υίόο, -ού (m) son can be declined in the second declensi^ 
throughout but also has the following third 
d e c l e n s ^ 
forms from an original nom. s. vivc (declined like ηο^ 
10.1/3): gen. s. υίέοο; dat. s. υΐεΐ; nom. and acc. pi· υιΓι" 
gen. pi. υίέων; dat. pi. υίέα(ν). 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
N.V. 
γέραο 
Acc. 
γέραο 
Gen. γέρωο 
(<a(c)-oc) 
Dat. 
γέραι 
(<a(c)-i) 
γέρσ 
(<a(c)-a) 
γέρα 
γερών 
(<ά(ο)-ων) 
γέραοι(ν) 
(<a(c)-ci) 

13.1/2 Verbs used with the genitive or dative 
\ transitive verb is defined as one that can be followed by the 
ccusative case. Both the Greek πέμπω and the English send are 
transitive, and in the sentences Περικλήο δώρον έπεμψεν and 
Pericles sent a gift: both δώρον and gift are direct objects and 
therefore accusative. We might at first assume that if a verb is 
transitive in English its Greek equivalent will be the same. 
However, although this is true for the greater number of verbs, 
there are some which are transitive in one language but 
intransitive in the other. 
The verb δειπνέω (dine) is transitive in Greek and so we can say 
άρτον δειπνώ I am dining [on] bread, but we cannot say in 
English I dine bread because dine is an intransitive verb and 
must be followed by a preposition, not a direct object (in I am 
dining on bread, bread is accusative after the preposition on). 
Similarly, there are verbs which are transitive in English but not 
in Greek, but, whereas in English the logical object of an 
intransitive verb is preceded by a preposition (dine on bread), in 
Greek it is put into the genitive or dative. Greek verbs of this 
type can, to a large extent, be classified according to their 
meaning. The following are the main groups: 
(a) Verbs followed by the genitive (see also 23.1/1&) 
(i) Verbs of ruling, e.g. άρχω rule; κρατέω lit. have power 
(κράτοο) over; βααλεύω lit. be king (βααλεύο) of (all 
three are normally translated by rule): 
έν άμφιάλω 'Ιθάκη 
He will rule the Achaeans 
βααλεύοει 'Αχαιών. 
in sea-girt Ithaca. 
(ii) Verbs of desiring, needing, caring for, e.g. έπιθϋμέω 
desire; έράω love, desire (sexually); δέομαι need; 
έπιμελέομαι care for: 
ουκ έρφ άδελφόο άδελφήο 
A brother does not desire 
ούδέ πατήρ θυγατρόο. 
his sister, nor a father 
his daughter. 
(iii) Verbs of perceiving, remembering, forgetting, e.g. 
αιοθάνομαι perceive (also + acc.); πυνθάνομαι ascertain 
(+ acc. of thing ascertained and gen. of informant); 
ακούω hear, listen to (+ acc. of thing heard, gen. of 
person 
heard); 
μέμνημαι 
(19.1/3tf) 
remember; 
επιλανθάνομαι forget (also + acc.): 
ταύτα Κίρκηο ήκουοα 
I heard this from Circe 
(but Κίρκηο ήκουοα I 
heard (or listened to) 
Circe). 

124 
c 
3 
(iv) Verbs of reaching, obtaining, missing, e.g. τυγχάνο / . 
the mark, succeed, obtain; άμαρτάνω miss, fail / 
achieve: 
τίνοο πότμου έτυχεν; 
What fate did he meet 
(lit. obtain)? 
τών έλπίδων ήμάρτομεν 
We did not realize (lit. 
missed) our hopes. 
(v) Verbs of sharing, e.g. μετέχω share, have a share in: 
πάντεο οί πολΐται 
All the citizens take part 
μετέχουοι τηο έορτηο 
in (lit. share) the 
festival. 
(b) Verbs followed by the dative 
(i) Verbs indicating that the subject is asserting himself in 
some way over someone else, e.g. παραινέω advise: 
βοηθέω (run to) help, assist; οργίζομαι become angry 
with; άπειλέω threaten; φθονεω feel ill-will against, 
grudge: 
φθονεΐν φαοι μητρυιάο 
They say that step-
τέκνοιο. 
mothers feel ill-will 
against their children. 
(ii) Verbs indicating that the subject is submitting himself in 
some way to somebody else, e.g. πείθομαι (middle ot 
πείθω) obey; πιοτεύω trust; είκω yield: 
πατρί πείθεοθαι χρή τέκνα. Children must obey their 
father. 
(iii) Verbs indicating association of some sort, e.g. έπομαι 
follow; έντυγχάνω fall in with; άπαντάω meet; πληαα^: 
approach, 
associate 
with; μάχομαι fight; χραομαι 
associate with (people), use (things): 
ούδείο έτι ήμΐν μάχεται. 
No-one is fighting us an) 
longer. 
τω δεοπότη έοπόμην 
I followed my master: 
(< έπομαι) 
(iv) Verbs indicating likeness, e.g. όμοιόομαι, εοι^' 
(19.1/3a) both be like, resemble: ov χρή ce όμοιοΰοθο 
κακοΐο you should not be like bad men. 
Not all verbs which, by virtue of their meaning, we woul^ 
expect to belong to these groups do in fact take the genitne 
dative, e.g. φιλέω love and ώφελέω help both take the accUsar^U 
(we would have expected the genitive and dative respects 
Some of the verbs listed above (e.g. έπιλανθάνομαι) also take ^ 
accusative with no difference in meaning. Full details wi 
found in the vocabulary. 

13.1/3 Further particles 
The fundamental importance of particles (see 4.1/3) should now 
be clear. Their use, especially as connectives, has been widely 
jllustrated in the reading exercises, and we have now met αλλά 
but; άρα* then, so; γάρ* for, as; δέ* and, but; δήπου* I presume, 
I should hope, doubtless; καί and, even; ουδέ and not, nor, not 
even; ούν* therefore, so, then; τοι* in truth, be assured, you 
know; and που* perhaps, I suppose; as well as the combinations 
μέν*... δέ* on the one hand ... and/ but on the other hand, τε*... 
καί and καί... καί both ... and, and καί δή* and moreover. 
Some other particles of common occurrence are listed below: 
(a) Particles with a connective function 
δήτα*: (i) in answers, particularly emphatic negative answers, 
ού δήτα no indeed. 
(ii) in questions, πώο δήτα; how then?, τί δήτα; what (or 
why) thene.g. 
τί δήτά με ζήν δει; why then (or in that 
case) should I live? 
μην* may be used (like δήτα) to enliven a question, often in 
combination with αλλά, e.g. άλλα τί μην δοκεΐο; but (or well) what 
then do you think? By itself, τί μην; has the meaning of course: 
Α. μιοθωτω μάλλον 
A. Do they entrust the 
έπιτρέπουοιν ή col τούο 
horses to a hireling 
ϊππουο; 
rather than to you? 
Β. αλλά τί μην; 
Β. But of course (lit. But 
what then sc. if not 
that?). 
τοινυν*: the temporal adverb νυν (so accented) means now, at 
present. Unaccented νυν* is an inferential particle, now in the 
sense then, therefore, especially with imperatives (17.1/1): 
σπεύδε νυν hurry up then, τοινυν, a strengthened form of νυν, 
ukewise has a transitional or inferential force, now 
then, 
i^thermore, well now, e.g. έπειδή τοινυν έποιήοατο την είρήνην 
Ά πολιc ... well now, since the city made peace ... 
Particles which do not connect but convey shades of tone, 
c°lour or emphasis 
is an intensive and restrictive particle which affects the 
^ceding word. Its literal meaning is at least, at any rate, 
Certainly} indeed, e.g. έγωγε1 I for my part (examples have 
already occurred at 9.2.12 1.9 and 10.3 1.5), but in English we 
uld often simply use an emphatic tone of voice rather than an 
bivalent W O fd, e.g. ο'ίδε κρινούοί γε εί χρή ce μίμνειν they 
a r e combined to form one word (with a different accent). Cf. below μεντοι 
+ τ ο0, καίτοι (καί + τοι). 

126 
c 
3 
shall judge if you are to remain; συγχωρεΐο τούτο γε καί ού ei vy 
you admit this. It is also extremely common in replies r 
previous remarks, especially to questions, and is often to h 
rendered as yes: 
Α. άρα στενάζει; 
A. Is he groaning? 
Β. κλαίει γε. 
Β. Yes, he is weeping. 
Α. κενόν τόδ' άγγοο ή οτέγει τι; Α. [Is] this vessel empty\ {)i 
does it hold something: 
Β. οά γ' ενδυτα. 
Β. Yes, your garments. 
Sometimes it re-enforces a negative and must be translated h\ 
no: 
Α. έοτι TIC λόγοο; 
A. Is there some 
explanationf 
Β. ούδείο γε. 
Β. No, none. 
(On ways of saying yes and no in Greek see 24.1/1). 
δή* emphasizes the preceding word. Indeed, certainly are onl\ 
approximate translations; the force of the particle would 
normally be conveyed to the hearer in English by the loudness 
of the voice or some accompanying emphatic gesture, δή is 
particularly common with adjectives or adverbs, e.g. άπαντεο δη 
absolutely everyone; μόνοο δή quite alone; πολλάκιο δή yen 
often. It may also convey irony or sarcasm, Οωκράτηο ό οοφόο δη 
Socrates the wise (the tone of voice in English will indicate 
whether wise is complimentary or ironical). 
(c) Frequent combinations of particles 
καί δή*: as well as being used as a lively connective, and 
moreover (e.g. καί δή τό μέγιοτον and moreover the principal 
point) καί δή is common in replies to a command: 
Α. ούκουν έπείξει τωδε 
A. Hasten then to cast 
δεομά περιβαλειν; 
fetters round this fellow-
(lit. won't you 
hasten ...?) 
Β. καί δή πρόχειρα ψάλια. 
Β. There you are (lit. 
actually indeed), the 
chains [are] ready to 
hand. 
It is also used in making assumptions: καί δή πολέμιοι ειοιν tf'·-* 
suppose they are hostile. Note that καί δή καί means 
^ 
especially, and in particular; in this combination the stress is 1 w 
on the word following the second καί: 
καί δή καί τότε άμ' ήμέρα 
And on that particular 
ουνελεγημεν. 
occasion (lit. and then . < 
particular) we gather <" 
at dawn. 

Combinations with συν 
(i) 
(ii) 
ούκουν is merely a synonym for ούν*, 
therefore, 
accordingly, well then: 
ή τούο άμύνεοθαι κελεύονταο Or shall we say that 
πόλεμον ποιεΐν φήοομεν; 
ούκουν ύπόλοιπον 
δουλεύειν. 
those who urge [us] to 
defend ourselves are 
making war? Then (or 
in that case) it remains 
[for us] to be slaves. 
It is to be distinguished from ούκουν (so accented), in 
which the negative retains its full force: 
ούκουν, Προμηθεύ, τούτο 
Do you not know this 
γιγνώοκειο, δτι όργήο 
then, Prometheus, 
that 
vocoύσηο εία,ν ιατροί 
when a temperament is 
λόγοι; 
sick (lit. a 
temperament 
being sick gen. 
absolute, 12.1/2b) there 
are words [to act as] 
healers? (see also the 
example given in (c) 
above). 
δ' ούν has a resumptive force, be that as it may, used in 
dismissing a subject: 
εί δή δίκαια ποιήοω, 
ού γιγνώοκω* αίρήοομαι 
δ' ούν ύμάο. 
(iii) 
If indeed I shall do what 
is right (lit. just things) 
I do not know; 
however that may be, 
I shall choose you. 
μεν ούν: this combination sometimes has no other force 
than the value of its two constituent parts (μεν looking 
forward to δέ, and ούν therefore), but it can also be used 
to correct a previous statement, with the sense no, on the 
contrary: 
Α. ή ού ούδέν ήγή 
πράττει ν τον 
γραμματιοτήν; 
Β. έγωγε ήγούμαι μέν ούν. 
Qofnbinations with τοι* 
Α. Or do you think that 
the schoolmaster 
does 
nothing? 
B. On the contrary, I do 
think (sc. that he does 
something). 
127 
~*'«*nuns wtw τον" 
καίτοι means and yet, however: καίτοι τί φημι; and yet 
what am I saying? 

(ii) μέντοι* is used either to emphasize, e.g. Α. εγώ; Β. c 
μέντοι. A. Me i (lit. I) B. Yes, you; or in an adversatiu 
sense, however, yet, often with an added γε: ού μεντοι οί γε 
(Γκύθαι ταύτη είοέβαλον yet the Scythians did not invade 
by this route. 
Other uses of particles will be explained as they occur in the 
reading. 
13.2 Greek reading 
1# καλόν γε γασιρόο κάπιθυμίαο κρατεί v. 
2# 
τω γήρα φιλεΐ 
χω νούο όμαρτεΐν καί τό βουλεύειν ά δει. 
3 
τούτό τοι τάνδρεΐον, ή προμηθία. 
4# πανταχού γε πάτριο ή βόοκουοα γή. 
5# οοφόν γέ τοί τι πρόο τό βουλεύειν έχει 
τό γήραο, (be δή πόλλ' ίδόν τε καί παθόν. 
6# ώ τλήμον αρετή, λόγοο άρ' ήοθ'· έγώ δέ οε 
(be έργον ήοκουν ού δ' άρ' έδούλευεο τύχη. 
7# πατήρ μέν ήμΐν Οίδίπουο ό Λαΐου, 
έτικτε δ' Ίοκάοτη με, παΐο Μενοικέωσ 
καλεί δέ Πολυνείκη με Θηβαΐοο λεώο. 
8# ούκ έοτι Πειθούο ιερόν άλλο πλήν λόγοο, 
καί βωμόο αύτηο έοτ' έν άνθρωπου φύοει. 
9 
ό δύο λαγώο διώκων ούδέτερον καταλαμβάνει. 
10 
ό Κύροο άτε παΐο ων καί φιλόκαλοο καί φιλότιμοο ήδετο τη 
οτολή. 
11 
άνάγκη ούδέ οί θεοί μάχονται. 
12 
κακόν άναγκαΐον τό πείθεοθαι γαοτρί. 
13 
τήν Χάρυβδιν έκφυγών τη (ϋκύλλη περιέπεοεο. 
14 
ovoc πεινών ού φροντίζει ροπάλου. 
15# τοΰ ζην γάρ ούδείο (be ό γηράοκων έρα. 
16# μόνοο θεών θάνατοο ού δώρων έρφ. 
17# ό μηδέν άδικών ούδενόο δείται νομού. 
18 
τέτταραο δακτύλουο θανάτου οί πλέοντεο άπέχουαν. 
19 
ήροο χρήζειο έπειδή παλαιόν χιτώνα έχειο. 
20 
Γοργώ ή Λάκαινα, έρωτηθεΐοα ύπό τινοο Άττικήο, δια τ} 
ύμειο άρχετε μόναι τών άνδρών αί Λάκαιναι; ότι, έφη, κ α ι 
τίκτομεν μόναι άνδραο. 
21 
A noteworthy pun 
Άντιοθένηο ό φιλόοοφοο, πρόο μειράκιόν τι μέλλον φοιτ°Χ 
παρά αύτόν καί πυθόμενον τίνων αύτω δει, έφη, βιβλι0^ 
καινού καί γραφείου καινού καί πινακιδίου κ α ι ν ο ύ . 
τ° Χ 
νούν παρεμφαίνων. 

->2# ή γή μέλαινα πίνει, 
πίνει δέ δένδρε' αύτην; 
πίνει θάλαοοα κρουνούο, 
ό δ' ήλιοο θάλαοοαν, 
τον δ' ήλιον οελήνη. 
5 
τί μοι μαχεοθ', έταΐροι, 
καύτω θέλοντι πίνειν; 
Notes 
1 κάπιθϋμίσο = καί έπιθ^μίσο (11.1/5). 
2 φιλέω + infinitive be accustomed 
to; φιλεΐ is singular 
because it agrees with the closer of the two subjects; χω = καί 
ο (11.1/5); ά δει is the object of βουλεύειν. 
3 The subject τούτο (sc. ecxi) anticipates ή προμηθίδΓ; 
τάνδρεΐον = τό άνδρεΐον (11.1/5). 
5 Take οοφόν... τι together as the object of έχει (the subject is 
τό γήραο); <bc + participle to give a supposed reason 
(12.1/2tf(ii)); πόλλ' i.e. πολλά; ίδόν < όράω; παθόν < πάοχω 
(both aorist participles are neuter nom. s. agreeing with 
γήραο). 
6 άρετη virtue was the philosophical ideal of the Stoics. These 
lines, whose exact source is unknown, were the last words 
of the Roman Brutus before committing suicide; άρ' = άρα 
(distinguish from άρα); ήοθ= ήοθα; G>C as (22ΛΙ\α(\)). 
7 1.1 ήμΐν trans, by a singular (royal plural - Polyneices in fact 
continues in the singular). 1.2 έτικτε trans, as though aorist, 
bore (τίκτω is used idiomatically to mean be parent of). 
9 λαγώο acc. pi. (13.1/1*). 
12 τό πείθεοθαι is the subject; κακόν is used as a noun an evil. 
15 coc as (cf. 6 above). 
μηδέν, not ούδέν, because a general class is meant 
(12.1/2a(vi)), lit. the [person] doing wrong not at all 
(adverbial acc., 20.1/5), i.e. those who do no wrong. 
τέτταραο δακτύλουο acc. of extent of space (7.1/7d); the 
width of four fingers was the normal thickness of the sides 
of an ancient ship. 
J9 W 
< έαρ (6.1/1 b). 
^ Spartan men prided themselves on manly virtues; they were 
not, however, male chauvinists, as the story shows; δτι 
because. 
1 μέλλον acc. n. s. of the pres. act. pple. of μέλλω (here 
intend), to be taken with μειράκιον; δει there is need of + 
of thing needed and dat. of the person in need (cf. 
21.1/46 and note 3); in Antisthenes' reply the genitives 
depend on an understood δει (i.e. you need ...). 

22 A poem in imitation of Anacreon (22.3). It is written 
Ionic Greek as is shown by the forms θάλοκχα and θέλο\ -
/.I The prose order would be ή μέλαινα γή. 1.2 πίνει / 
draws nourishment from; δένδρε' i.e. δένδρεα. 1.6 μάχε . 
i.e. μάχεοθε. 1.7 καύτω = καί αύτω. 
13.3 Extra reading 
Plato (c. 429-347 BC) 
All Plato's philosophical writings (except the Apology) are m 
the form of discussions and arguments which are supposed to 
have taken place on a particular occasion between various 
contemporaries. For this reason they are called dialogues, but 
we have no way of telling where factual reporting stops and 
Plato's imagination (or his desire to expound his own ideas) 
begins. Some dialogues are in simple dramatic form, whereas in 
others the conversation is reported by one of the characters (the 
second extract is an example of the former, the first of the 
latter). In all his dialogues (except the Laws) Plato introduces 
his master; Socrates (8.2.13), as a protagonist, but nowhere does 
he introduce himself. 
(i) CQKPATHC 
έπορευόμην μέν έξ Άκαδημείαο εύθύ Λυκείου την έξω τείχουο ύπ 
αύτό τό τειχοο* έπειδή δ' έγενόμην κατά την πυλίδα η ή Πάνοποο 
κρήνη, ένταύθα συνέτυχον Ίπποθάλει τε τφ Ιερωνύμου καί Κτηαππω 
τω Παιανιεΐ καί άλλοιο μετά τούτων νεανίοκοια καί με προαοντα 
(approaching) ό Ίπποθάληο ίδών, ώ Οόκρατεο, έφη, ποι δή πορευτι και: 
πόθεν; 
έξ Άκαδημείαο, ην δ' έγώ, πορεύομαι εύθύ Λυκείου. 
δεύρο δή, ή δ' oc, εύθύ ήμών. ού παραβάλλεις άξιον μέντοι. 
ποΐ, έφην έγώ, λέγειο, καί παρά τίναο τούο ύμάο; 
δεύρο, έφη, δείξαο (showing) μοι έν τω καταντικρύ τού τειχοικ 
περίβολόν τέ τινα καί θύραν. διατρίβομεν δέ, ή δ' oc, αυτόθι 
ήμειο τε αύτοί καί άλλοι πάνυ πολλοί καί καλοί. 
έοτιν δέ δή τί τούτο, καί τίο ή διατριβή; 
παλαίστρα, έφη, νέα* ή δέ διατριβή τά πολλά έν λόγοιο ων c£ 
μετέχειν έθέλομεν. 
καλωο γε, ην δ' έγώ, ποιούντεο* διδάοκει δέ τίο αύτόθι; 
coc έταιρόο γε, ή δ' oc, καί έπαινέτηο, M I K K O C . 
μά Δία, ην δ' έγώ, ού φαύλόο γε άνήρ, άλλ' ίκανόο οοφιοτηο. 
βούλει ούν έπεοθαι, έφη, καί όράν τούο δνταο αύτόθι; 

, ETKAEIAHC - ΤΕΡΨΙΩΝ 
ΕΪ. άρτι, ώ Τερψίων, ή πάλαι έξ άγρού; 
ΤΕΡ έπιεικώο πάλαι, και ce γε έζήτουν κατ' άγοράν καί 
εθοώμαζον οτι ούχ oioc τ' ή εύρεΐν. 
0 ού γάρ ή κατά πόλιν. 
ΤΕΡ. πού μήν; 
, 
, , 
5 
είο λιμένα καταβαίνων Θεαιτητω ένετυχον φερομενω έκ 
Κορίνθου άπό τοΰ οτρατοπέδου Άθήναζε. 
ΧΕΡ. πότερον ζώντι ή ού; 
ΕΥ. ζώντι καί μάλα μόλιο* χαλεπώο μέν γάρ έχει καί ύπό 
τραυμάτων τινών, μάλλον μήν αύτόν αίρει τό νόοημα τό έν τω 10 
αρατεύματι. 
ΤΕΡ. μών ή δυοεντερία; 
ΕΤ. ναι. 
ΤΕΡ. οίον άνδρα λέγειο έν κινδύνω είναι. 
ΕΤ. καλόν τε καί άγαθόν, ώ Τερψίων, έπεί τοι καί νΰν ήκουόν 15 
τίνων μάλα έγκωμιαζόντων αύτόν περί τήν μάχην. 
ΤΕΡ. καί ούδέν γ' άτοπον, άτάρ πώο ούκ αύτοΰ Μεγαροΐ 
κατέλυεν; 
ΕΤ. ήπείγετο οίκαδε* έπεί έγωγ' έδεόμην καί ουνεβούλευον, άλλ' 
ούκ ήθελεν. καί δήτα προπέμψαο αύτόν, άνεμνήοθην καί 20 
έθαύμαοα Cωκpάτoυc ώο μαντικώο άλλα τε δή είπε καί περί 
τούτου, δοκεΐ γάρ μοι ολίγον προ τού θανάτου έντυχεΐν αύτω 
μειρακίω δντι, καί ουγγενόμενόο τε καί διαλεχθείο πάνυ 
άγαοθηναι αύτού τήν φύοιν. 
Notes 
(ι) 
The speaker is Socrates, who is going from the Academy, a park 
with sporting facilities (i.e. a γυμνάαον) lying north-west of 
ancient Athens, to the Lyceum, a similar establishment to the 
east. The road between the two skirted the north wall. 1.1 τήν 
εξω τείχουο sc. όδόν on/along the [road] outside the wall, this 
Use of the accusative without a preposition is classified as an 
acc. of spatial extent (7.1/7d). 1.2 ή where (sc. έοτί). ΙΑ Παιανιεΐ 
^ Παιανεύο) an adjective meaning of the deme Paeania; as the 
Fenians had only one personal name (cf. 5.1/3 note 2) they 
Were officially distinguished by the deme (local administrative 
J?mt) to which they belonged. 1.7 ήν δ' έγώ said I a stereotyped 
°rmula? often used by Plato, which employs the nearly defunct 
yerb ήμί say (18.1/1 α) (δ' is part of the formula and should not 
Jranslated). 1.8 δεύρο often used as an order [come] over here; 
^ oc said he the same formula as above but in its third person 
Slngular version (the use of the relative oc as a demonstrative 
131 
c 
3 

132 
c 
3 
W 
pronoun is archaic). 1.9 λέγειο do you mean; παρά τίναο το 
ύμάο sc. ovxac to whom the [group of] you being [am / . 
come]? i.e. who are you to whom, etc. /. 10 δείξαο shoiviv 
coincidental use of aor. pple. (12.1/1). /.13 Supply έοτί with 
διατριβή. /. 14 τά πολλά lit. for the many [times], i.e. MS/^'' 
(adverbial acc. 20.1/5); ων has λόγοιο as its antecedent and 
governed by μετέχει v, which takes the genitive of what is shai . 
(13.1/2*(v)). 1.16 καλώο γε ... ποιούντεο (sc. έθέλετε, to κ 
supplied from έθέλομεν in the previous line) doing well at ate 
rate [you wish this], an expression of gratitude for then 
invitation. 
(«) 
The speakers are Eucleides and Terpsion. /.I sc. ήλθεο the 
omission is typical of Plato's colloquial style. 1.3 oloc τ' ειμί an 
idiom meaning I am able (τ' is not to be translated; on oloc sec 
21.1/3). 1.4 Terpsion has not been able to find Eucleides in the 
agora; in English the latter's reply would be No, you couldn't, 
for I was not in the city, but Greek omits the words No, you 
couldn't (which confirm the previous statement) and simph 
gives the reason for I was not, etc. (24.1/1). 1.8 πότερο\ 
introduces two alternative questions (10.1/2*) but is not to be 
translated; with ζώντι supply ένέτυχεο from ένέτυχον in /.6., 
έχω + adv. to express a state (cf. note on 8.2.9 /. 1). /. 10 μην has 
an adversative sense (but) and balances the preceding μέν; the 
combination gives a stronger contrast than μεν ... δέ. /.12 μω\ 
(10.1/2*) in his anxiety Terpsion is hoping for a negatiu 
answer. /.14 οίον ... exclamatory what a man ...! (21.1/3). /.H 
The Athenian male ideal was summed up in the phrase κσλο: 
κάγαθόο (here slightly varied), which can be 
translated 
gentleman (cf. 9.2.12 1.5). 1.19 έπεί since introduces proof to1 
the fact that Theaetetus was hurrying home, and governs 
following three finite verbs; we would omit it in English· 
έδεόμην καί ουνεβούλευον i.e. him to stay. 1.20 καί δήτα in / ^ 
(lit. and indeed but more emphatic than καί δή); transit 
προπέμψαο by a finite verb and supply and before the 
clause. /.21 Οωκράτουο is genitive with άvεμvήcθηv an·-· 
έθαύμαοα, lit. remembered 
and admired 
Socrates, 
prophetically he spoke ... but English idiom requires >H · 
prophetically Socrates spoke ... (where appropriate, Greek ott<-
anticipates the subject of an indirect question in this way); a/ L 
τε ... καί περί τούτου lit. both other [things] and about 
in particular about him; άλλοο τε καί is often used in the s^i 
particularly, especially 1.22 δοκεΐ the subject is he (i.e. Socrat* 
1.23 διαλεχθείο < διαλέγομαι; άγαοθηναι < άγαμαι. 

14.1 Grammar 
14.1/1 Moods of the Greek verb 
Mood is a characteristic of all finite forms1 of the Greek verb 
(i.e. those that can stand alone in a clause). Up to now we have 
dealt only with the indicative, the mood used for facts. There 
are three other moods, the imperative, which expresses 
commands (17.1/1), and the subjunctive and optative. In a 
main clause the subjunctive can express the will of the subject, 
e.g. λύοωμεν (aor. subj. act.) xouc δούλουο let us free the slaves, 
while the optative can express the wish of the speaker, e.g. μή 
γένοιτο (aor. opt. mid.) may it not happen! These uses 
illustrate, in part, an original distinction between what is willed 
or expected (subjunctive) and what is desired or considered 
possible (optative), but the functions of both moods have been 
expanded to such a degree that neither can be brought under a 
single definition. 
In English we still possess some single-word subjunctive forms 
(be that as it may; if I were you) but the optative disappeared 
ln the Germanic branch of Indo-European (1.3) before the 
evolution of English. Apart from the few relics of the 
subjunctive, we use auxiliary verbs (let, may, would, etc.) for 
uses covered by these moods in Greek. 
The subjunctive and optative exist in the present and aorist 
(and perfect, 16.1/4 note 1). There is also a future optative, but 
n° fature subjunctive. The distinction between the present and 
a°rist forms of these moods is one of aspect (4.1/1) not time 
0 r an exception see 14.1/4J). As with infinitives, the present 
Mnrf non"finite forms of verbs (i.e. participles and infinitives) are not considered as 
l 0 n^ng to any mood. 

134 
c 3 
subjunctive or optative is used for an action which is seen />, 
going on, in the process of happening, or being repeated; tr 
aorist subjunctive or optative is used for an action which is sec 
as a single event (cf. 4.1/1). 
14.1/2 Subjunctive mood 
For complete table ο/"λύω see Appendix 1. 
The subjunctive has only one set of endings, which are applied 
to the present and aorist stems (the latter without the augment). 
The endings are formed by lengthening all the initial short 
vowels (even when the first element of a diphthong) of the 
present indicative endings: 
Active: -ω, -βc, -η, -ωμεν, -ητε, -ωα(ν). 
Middle and passive: -ωμαι, -^η, -ηται, -ωμεθα, -ηοθε, -ωνται. 
Note that ει becomes η but in ου > ω (3rd pi. act.) the second 
element of the diphthong disappears. As the aorist passive takes 
active endings (11.1/1), for the aorist passive subjunctive of λύω 
we have λυθώ,1 λυθηο etc. 
In the present subjunctive of contracted verbs the rules of 
contraction apply as for the indicative (5.1/2). Paradigms will be 
found in Appendix 2. 
The endings for the subjunctive are classified as primary (4.1/1 
note 1 and 8.1/1/; we have -ci(v) in the 3rd pi. act., -μαι in the 
1st s. mid./pass., etc.). This classification is relevant to the use of 
the subjunctive in certain subordinate clauses (14.1/4c). 
Notes 
1 
The indicative and subjunctive coincide in a few forms, e.g. 
λύω, τιμώ, τιμαο. 
2 
Strong aorists and root aorists have the normal s u b j u n c t i v e 
endings (i.e. -ω, -^c, 
etc.), except for a few root aorists in 
-ων, which have -ω, -G>C, -φ, -ωμεν, -ωτε, - Ω Α ( Ν ) . An 
example is έγνων (γιγνώοκω), subj. γνώ, γνώο, γνώ, γνώμεν 
γνώτε, γνώα(ν); cf. the present and aorist subjunctive acti^ 
of δίδωμι (18.1/2 note 1). 
3 
The subjunctive of ειμί is identical with the endings of the 
present subjunctive of λύω, viz ώ, fjc, fj, ωμεν, ήτε, ωα(ν) 
14.1/3 Optative mood 
For complete table of λύω see Appendix 1. 
1 The aorist passive subjunctive is always accented with a circumflex on the first 
of the ending (the circumflex indicates contraction, λυθώ < λυθεω etc.). 

The optative, like the subjunctive, uses the same stems as the 
ndicative, but its endings show some variety between tenses. 
For λϋω and other uncontracted -ω verbs we have: 
(a) Present and future active: -οιμι, -oic, -οι, -οιμεν, -οιτε, 
-οιεν; e.g. λύοιμι, λύοιο etc. (present); λύοοιμι, λύοοιο, etc. 
(future). 
φ) Present and future, middle and passive: -οιμην, -οιο, -οιτο, 
-οιμεθα, -οιοθε, -οιντο; e.g. λϋοίμην (pres. mid./pass.), 
λΰοοίμην (fut. mid.), λυ&ηοοίμην (fut. pass.). 
(c) Weak aorist active: -αιμι, -ειαο (or -aic), -ειε(ν) (or -ai), 
-αιμεν, -αιτε, -ειαν (or -αιεν); e.g. λύοαιμι, λύοειαο, etc. 
The bracketed forms are less common. 
(d) Weak aorist middle: -αιμην, -αιο, -αιτο, -αιμεθα, -αιοθε, 
-αιντο; e.g. λϋοαίμην, λύοαιο, etc. 
(e) In the aorist passive the final η of the stem is dropped (λυθη 
> λυθ) and to this are added: -ειην, -ειηο, -ειη, -ειμεν, -ειτε, 
-ειεν; e.g. λυθείην, λυθείηο, etc. 
Contracted -ω verbs have different endings for the singular of 
the present optative active: -οιην, -οιηο, -οιη. These, and the 
other present endings, contract according to the rules given at 
5.1/2 (for paradigms see Appendix 2). 
Present active 
Present middle/passive 
τΐμωην (τϊμα-οίην), τΓμωηο, etc. τΓμωμην (τΓμα-οιμην), τϊμωο, etc. 
ποιοίην (ποιε-οίην), ποιοίηο, etc. ποιοίμην (ποιε-οίμην, ποιοΐο, etc. 
δηλοίην (δηλο-οίην), δηλοίηο, etc. δηλοίμην (δηλο-οίμην), δηλοιο, etc. 
In the future, aorist, and perfect of contracted verbs the optative 
is formed by taking the appropriate stem and adding the normal 
endings. 
The endings of the optative are classified as historic (4.1/1 note 
1 and 8.1/1 f; we have -v in the 3rd pi. act., -μην in the 1st s. 
mid./pass., etc.). This classification is relevant to the use of the 
optative in certain subordinate clauses (14.1/4c). 
Notes 
* The optative of the strong aorist has the same endings as the 
present; e.g. the aorist optative active of μανθάνω is μάθοιμι, 
μαθοιο, μάθοι, μάθοιμεν, μάθοιτε, μάθοιεν. 
The root aorist έβην (βαίνω) has an optative βαίην, βαίηο, 
βαιη, βαΐμεν, βαΐτε, βαίεν (cf. the optative of -έδρδν which 
ls -δραίην, -δραίηο, etc.) but other root aorists in -ην have 
optative in -ειην, -ειηο, etc., just as that of the aorist 
Passive. The optative of root aorists in -ων has the endings 
-°ιην, -οιηο, etc., and so from έγνων (γιγνώοκω) we have 
Υνοιην, γνοίηο, γνοίη, γνοιμεν, γνοΐτε, γνοιεν. The optative 
°f root aorists in -υν is extremely rare. 

subjunctive or optative is used for an action which is sea-
going on, in the process of happening, or being repeated 
aorist subjunctive or optative is used for an action which is 
as a single event (cf. 4.1/1). 
14.1/2 Subjunctive mood 
For complete table ofXt® see Appendix 1. 
The subjunctive has only one set of endings, which are app^ 
to the present and aorist stems (the latter without the augrrkn* 
The endings are formed by lengthening all the initial sin. 
vowels (even when the first element of a diphthong) oi r 
present indicative endings: 
Active: -ω, -^c, -r|, -ωμεν, -ητε, -ωα(ν). 
Middle and passive: -ωμαι, ^η, -ηται, -ωμεθα, -ηοθε, -ωνται 
Note that ει becomes η but in ου > ω (3rd pi. act.) the secoiu 
element of the diphthong disappears. As the aorist passive tak^ 
active endings (11.1/1), for the aorist passive subjunctive of λϋο 
we have λυθώ,1 λυθηο etc. 
In the present subjunctive of contracted verbs the rules o* 
contraction apply as for the indicative (5.1/2). Paradigms will h 
found in Appendix 2. 
The endings for the subjunctive are classified as primary (4.1/i 
note 1 and 8.1/1/; we have -ci(v) in the 3rd pi. act., -μαι in thi 
1st s. mid./pass., etc.). This classification is relevant to the use ο 
the subjunctive in certain subordinate clauses (14.1/4c). 
Notes 
1 
The indicative and subjunctive coincide in a few forms, c.u 
λύω, τιμώ, τιμρο. 
2 
Strong aorists and root aorists have the normal subjuncr^ 
endings (i.e. -ω, -^c, -η etc.), except for a few root aorist^ 
-ων, which have -ω, -<»c, -φ, -ωμεν, -ωτε, -oci(v) 
example is έγνων (γιγνώοκω), subj. γνώ, γνώο, γνώ, 
γνώτε, γνώα(ν); cf. the present and aorist subjunctive a^ 
of διδωμι (18.1/2 note 1). 
rK 
3 
The subjunctive of ειμί is identical with the endings ο 1 
present subjunctive of λύω, viz ώ, fjc, fj, ωμεν, ήτε, cocil· 1 
14.1/3 Optative mood 
For complete table of λύω see Appendix 1. 
1 The aorist passive subjunctive is always accented with a circumflex on the ti> 
of the ending (the circumflex indicates contraction, λυθώ < λυθέω etc.). 

ntative, like the subjunctive, uses the same stems as the 
ϊ-ative, but its endings show some variety between tenses, 
/ΰο) and other uncontracted -ω verbs we have: 
Present and future active: -οιμι, -oic, κ>ι, -οιμεν, -οιτε, 
-οιεν; e.g. λύοιμι, λϋοιο etc. (present); λύοοιμι, Xtfcoic, etc. 
(future). 
Present and future, middle and passive: -οιμην, -οιο, -οιτο, 
-οιμεθα, -οιοθε, -οιντο; e.g. λϋοίμην (pres. mid./pass.), 
λυοοίμην (fut. mid.), λυ&ηοοίμην (fut. pass.). 
u) Weak aorist active: -αιμι, -ειαο (or -aic), -ειε(ν) (or -ai), 
-αιμεν, -αιτε, -ειαν (or -αιεν); e.g. λύοαιμι, λύοειαο, etc. 
The bracketed forms are less common. 
«/) Weak aorist middle: -αιμην, -αιο, -αιτο, -αιμεθα, -αιοθε, 
-αιντο; e.g. λϋοαίμην, λύοαιο, etc. 
(e) In the aorist passive the final η of the stem is dropped (λυ&η 
> λυθ) and to this are added: -ειην, -ειηο, -ειη, -ειμεν, -ειτε, 
-ειεν; e.g. λυθείην, λυθείηο, etc. 
Contracted -ω verbs have different endings for the singular of 
the present optative active: -οιην, -οιηο, -οιη. These, and the 
other present endings, contract according to the rules given at 
5.1/2 (for paradigms see Appendix 2). 
Present active 
Present middle/passive 
τΓμώην (τΐμα-οίην), τΓμωηο, etc. τΓμωμην (τΓμα-οιμην), τΓμωο, etc. 
ποιοίην (ποιε-οίην), ποιοίηο, etc. ποιοίμην (ποιε-οίμην, ποιοΐο, etc. 
δηλοίην (δηλο-οίην), δηλοίηο, etc. δηλοίμην (δηλο-οίμην), δηλοΐο, etc. 
In the future, aorist, and perfect of contracted verbs the optative 
formed by taking the appropriate stem and adding the normal 
endings. 
|he endings of the optative are classified as historic (4.1/1 note 
^d 8.1/1 f; we have -v in the 3rd pi. act., -μην in the 1st s. 
mid./pass., etc.). This classification is relevant to the use of the 
°Ptative in certain subordinate clauses (14.1/4c). 
Notes 
The optative of the strong aorist has the same endings as the 
Present; e.g. the aorist optative active of μανθάνω is μάθοιμι, 
2 
μάθοι, μάθοιμεν, μάθοιτε, μάθοιεν. 
he root aorist έβην (βαίνω) has an optative βαίην, βαίηο, 
^ βαιμεν, βαιτε, βαϊεν (cf. the optative of -έδρίχν which 
* ""δραιην, -δραίηο, etc.) but other root aorists in -ην have 
optative in -ειην, -ειηο, etc., just as that of the aorist 
Passive. The optative of root aorists in -ων has the endings 
-οιηο, etc., and so from έγνων (γιγνώοκω) we have 
^οιην> γνοίηο, γνοίη, γνοΐμεν, γνοιτε, γνοιεν. The optative 
r°ot aorists in -υν is extremely rare. 

3 
The present optative of ειμί is εϊην, ε'ίηο, ε'ίη, ειμεν, ει^ 
ειεν. The future optative is έοοίμην, έοοιο, έοοιτο, etc. 
14.1/4 Uses of the subjunctive and optative 
The subjunctive and optative complement each other in several 
types of subordinate clauses, but in main clauses their uses aie 
quite distinct. 
(a) Subjunctive in main clauses 
(i) The jussive subjunctive (negated by μή) is used for giving 
orders but, because we also have the imperative (17.1/1), its 
use is limited. In the first person plural (the singular is 
possible but not as common) it expresses self-exhortation or 
self-encouragement: μή, npoc θεών, μαινώμεθα in the name 
of (πρόΰ) the gods, let us not be mad! The use of the second 
and third persons of the jussive subjunctive complements 
the imperative mood in the aorist. Both are treated at 
17.1/1. 
(ii) The deliberative subjunctive (negated by μή) is used 
exclusively in questions and indicates the uncertainty of the 
speaker about the future and what must be done (in English 
we use the verb to be followed by an infinitive): 
ε'ίπωμεν ή οΤγώμεν; 
Are we to speak or keep 
silent? 
ποΐ φύγω μητpόc χέροκ;; 
Where am I to escape my 
mother's hands? 
(b) Optative in main clauses 
The two uses of the optative in main clauses, to express a future 
wish and to express a future potential, are complemented by the 
indicative, which is used for both constructions in the present 
and past. For this reason we shall treat all forms of wishes at 
21.1/1, of conditions at 18.1/5 and of potentials at 19.1/2. 
(c) Subordinate clauses where the subjunctive 
and optative 
complement each other 
In three types of subordinate clause the subjunctive is used after 
a main verb in a primary tense (4.1/1 note 1), the optative after 
a main verb in a historic tense. This reflects the fact that the 
subjunctive has primary endings (14.1/2) and the optative has 
historic endings (14.1/3). 
In uses (i) and (ii) both subjunctive and optative can be literal^ 
translated by may or might. In (iii) both are to be translated b^ 
an indicative in English: 

(ι) Purpose clauses (negated by μή) 
These can be introduced by ίνα or δπακ: (both conjunctions 
meaning in order that, so that). The negative is μή, but a 
negated purpose clause can also be introduced by μή alone. 
άποφεύγομεν ίνα (or όπαχ;) οί We are fleeing so that the 
βάρβαροι μή έλωοιν ήμάα 
barbarians may not 
capture us. 
άπεφύγομεν ίνα (or δπωο) oi We fled so that the 
βάρβαροι μή έλοιεν ήμάα 
barbarians might not 
capture us. 
In both cases ίναίόκωο ... μή could be replaced by μή at the 
beginning of the purpose clause (μή oi βάρβαροι έλακ:ιν/ 
έλοιεν ήμάΰ). 
The subjunctive is often retained after a historic main verb, 
as this was regarded as producing a vivid effect (cf. vivid 
present, see note on 7.2.13 /.8). The second of the above 
examples would then become: άπεφύγομεν ίνα (or όπωο) οί 
βάρβαροι μή έλωαν ήμάα As English has no way of 
bringing out the force of the subjunctive here, we must 
translate as previously, 
(ii) Noun clauses after verbs of fearing (negated by ού) 
The most common verb meaning to fear is φοβεομαι, which 
functions as a passive deponent with a middle future 
(11.1/1 note; it is not a true deponent as we also have an 
active φοβέω terrify), φοβεομαι and other verbs of fearing 
can be followed by a noun in the accusative: τον λέοντα 
φοβούμαι I fear (or am afraid of) the lion. They may also be 
followed by a clause which performs the same function as 
a noun (and hence is called a noun clause): I am afraid that 
the lion may eat me. Most (but not all) clauses of this sort 
have reference to a time subsequent to that of the main verb 
and in Greek are introduced by μή, which here, and 
elsewhere when used as a conjunction, can be literally 
translated by lest. The verb in the μή clause is put into the 
subjunctive after a main verb in a primary tense or into the 
optative after a main verb in a historic tense. As with 
purpose clauses, the subjunctive can be retained after a 
historic tense for a vivid effect. 
φοβούμαι μή ό λέων με φάγη. I am afraid that (lit. lest) 
the lion may (or will) 
eat me. 
έφοβήθην μή ό λέων με 
I was afraid that the lion 
φάγοι (or φάγη). 
might (or would) eat me. 

If the μή clause is negated, the negative is ού: 
ό λέων φοβείται μή τροφήν 
The lion is afraid that be 
ούχ εύρη. 
may not find food. 
The noun clause can also have reference to the same tin 
as, or a time anterior to, the verb of fearing. Here μη 
followed by the indicative because what is feared either Ν 
happening or has happened: 
φοβούμαι μή ό λέων τον 
I am afraid that the lion is 
έμόν φίλον νυν έοθίει/τήν 
now eating my friend / 
έμήν γυναίκα έχθέο έφαγεν. 
ate my wife yesterday. 
Where in English a verb of fearing is followed by an 
infinitive, Greek has the same construction: 
αί ψύλλαι ού φοβούνται 
The fleas are not afraid to 
φάγει ν τον λέοντα. 
eat the lion (or of eating 
the lion). 
(iii) Indefinite subordinate clauses (negated by μή) 
Certain temporal conjunctions (e.g. έπεί, ότε) ma\ 
introduce a subordinate clause referring to the present or 
past and be followed by the indicative. Greek idiom here is 
very similar to that of English and we have already met 
examples (e.g. at 7.2.12). These clauses refer to single 
definite events. Another type of subordinate clause is that 
with an indefinite sense and is expressed in English by the 
addition of ever. In I dislike 
what 
he is doing the 
subordinate clause refers to a specific thing (viz the thing 
that he is doing), but in I dislike whatever he does the 
subordinate clause refers to a general class of thing (viz 
whatever thing he does), and so is called indefinite. Such 
clauses may be adjectival (as above), or adverbial, e.g. I ®η 
going wherever my sister goes (contrast I am going to 
where my sister lives where the adverbial clause refers to a 
definite place). 
In Greek the construction used for these clauses in priman 
sequence (i.e. when the main verb is in a primary tense) ^ 
similar. The particle αν, which here1 is the equivalent ο 
ever, is added to the subordinate clause but in addition 
verb is put into the subjunctive, αν coalesces with certain 
conjunctions, e.g. δταν whenever (= ότε + άν), έπειδάν -
έπειδή + άν) whenever. Examples of indefinite clauses i1 
primary sequence are: 
δταν xic κλέπτη, ζημιούται. 
Whenever anyone steals /7( 
is punished. 
1 άν has an entirely different force when used in a main clause (18.1/5). 

πράττουαν ά άν βούλωνται. They do whatever they 
want [to do]. 
Compare the above with the definite relative clause in: 
πράττουαν ά βούλονται. 
They are doing [the things] 
which they want [to do]. 
Because we can never be completely certain of what is 
going to happen in the future, the construction of άν + 
subjunctive is very common in subordinate temporal 
clauses with a future reference (cf. 18.1/5). Often English 
idiom does not require us to translate άν: 
ή Δίκη μάρψει τοΐχ; KOKOOC Justice will seize the 
δταν τύχη. 
wicked men when (lit. 
whenever) she finds 
[them]. 
For indefinite subordinate clauses in historic sequence the 
optative without άν is used (we do not have the option of 
the primary construction as in (i) and (ii) above): 
ό Kupoc έθήρευεν από ίππου Cyrus used to hunt from 
όποτε γυμνάΰαι βούλοιτο 
horseback whenever (or 
έαυτόν καί τοίκ: ϊππουα 
simply when) he wanted 
to exercise himself and 
his horses. 
The negative for all indefinite clauses is μή: 
ό μωροΰ γελφ καί δταν τι 
Fools laugh (lit. the fool 
μή γέλοιον ή. 
laughs) even when 
something is not funny. 
(d) Optative in indirect speech 
The optative has two further uses in subordinate clauses, one of 
which we shall deal with here (for the other see 18.1/5). In 
^direct speech which is introduced by a verb in a historic tense 
\be said that...; he asked if... etc.) all finite verbs may be put 
l£to the optative. There is no change in sense, and optatives of 
a s s o rt are translated as indicatives: 
0 Κλεανδροΰ εΐπεν δτι 
Cleander said that he did 
Δεξιππον ούκ έπαινοίη 
not commend Dexippus 
(or ind. έπαινεΐ). 
(original: Δεξιππον ούκ 
έπαινώ I do not 
commend 
Dexippus). 

He said that he had caught 
sight of an army 
(original: κατεΐδον 
οτρατευμα I caught sight 
of an army; on the use or 
the English pluperfect 
had caught see 16.1/2). 
Xenophon did not ask 
what the misfortune was 
(original: τί ecu τό 
πάθοο; what is the 
misfortune?). 
Finite verbs in indirect speech always retain the tense of the 
original direct speech (8.1/3&), and consequently the distinction 
between the present and aorist optative here involves time, not 
aspect, as the above examples show. 
A verb in a future tense in direct speech can be put into the 
future optative when reported in historic sequence: ειπον ότι 
τούτο ποιήοοιμι (or ποιήοω) I said that I would do this (original: 
τούτο ποιήοω I shall do this). The future optative has no other 
uses. 
Notes 
1 
When an adverbial clause of reason (introduced by δτι 
because, έπεί since, etc.) occurs after a historic tense its verb 
is put into the optative if the speaker or writer wishes to 
ascribe a reason or motive to the subject of the main verb 
but does not vouch for it himself. This type of expression is 
called virtual indirect speech as no verb of saying, thinking, 
etc. is actually used. The subordinating conjunction is to bi 
translated by on the grounds that, thinking/saying that: 
οί Αθηναίοι τον Περικλέα 
The Athenians abused 
έκάκιζον δτι οτρατηγόο 
Pericles on the grounds 
ων ούκ έπεξάγοι. 
that, [though] being 
general, he did not lead 
[them] out. 
2 
When a deliberative question (τί ποιώμεν; what are we ^ 
do?) is reported after a verb in a historic tense its verb m& 
be put into the optative: 
ήπορούμεν τί (or δτι) 
We were at a loss [as ^ 
ποιοΐμεν 
to] what we shoula do· 
The subjunctive may, however, be retained. 
ειπεν δτι κατιδοι (or κατεΐδε, 
< καθοράω) στράτευμα. 
Ξενοφών ούκ ήρετο τί τό πάθοο 
εϊη (or έστιν). 

14.2 Greek reading 
In addition to translating, define each use of the subjunctive and 
optative. 
1# ένεοτι γάρ TIC καί λόγοιαν ήδονή, 
λήθην όταν ποιώα τών δντων κακών. 
2# πώο ούν μάχωμαι θνητόΰ ων θεία τύχη; 
3# νουν χρή θεάΰθαι, νουν* τί τχ\ο εύμορφίαΰ 
όφελος δταν TIC μή καλα,ο φρέναΰ έχη; 
4 
oc άν 5ic ναυαγήΰη, μάτην μέμφεται Ποΰειδώνα. 
5 
Οωκράτηΰ έφη τουο μέν πολλούΰ άνθρώπουΰ ζην ίνα 
έΰθίακΣΐν, αύτδΰ δέ έΰθίειν ίνα ζη. 
6 
φάγωμεν καί πίωμεν* αύριον γάρ άποθνήΰκομεν. 
7# 
Qsoc αίτίαν φύει βροτοΐΰ 
δταν κακώΰαι δώμα παμπήδην θέλη. 
8# (be χαρίεν έστ' άνθρωποΰ δταν άνθρωποΰ ή. 
9# Α. TIC έσην ouroc; Β. ίατρόΰ. Α. a>c KOKGJC έχει 
άπαc ιατρός έάν κακώΰ μηδε'^ έχη. 
10# ΰφόδρ' έΰτίν ήμών ό βίοΰ ο'ίνω προΰφερήσ 
δταν ή τό λοιπόν μικρόν, δξοΰ γίγνεται. 
11 οί μέν φοβούμενοι μή φύγωα πατρίδα καί οί μέλλοντεΰ 
μάχεΰθαι φοβούμενοι μή ήττηθώΰΐν ούτε ΰίτου ούτε ύπνου 
δύνανται λαγχάνειν διά τον φόβο ν οί δέ ήδη φυγάδες ήδη 
δέ ήττηθέντεο δύνανται καί μάλλον τών εύδαιμόνων έcθίειv 
καί καθεύδειν. 
5 
12 πίθηκοΰ ό πίθηκοΰ κάν (= καί έάν) χρυΰά έχη ΰάνδαλα. 
13 έφοβήθηΰαν οί ,Έλληvεc μή προΰάγοιεν οί Πέρΰαι προο τό 
κέραο καί περιπτύξαντεΰ άμφοτέρωθεν amove κατακόψειαν. 
14 ό δέ άνήρ, δν ΰυνέλαβον, έpωτώμεvoc ποδαπόΰ ε'ίη, Πέρσηΰ 
μέν έφη είναι, πορεύεΰθαι 
δ' άπό του Τιριβάζου 
^τρατεύματοΰ οπωο έπιτήδεια λάβοι. 
15 ό Διογένης ίδών τοξότην άφυή, παρά τον ΰκοπόν έκάθιΰεν 
ειπών, ίνα μή πληγώ. 
του θανεΐν άπειρία 
nac TIC φοβείται φώΰ λιπεΐν τόδ' ήλίου. 
γ 
έτρεχέ TIC μή βρεχθείη καί eic βόθρον άπεπνίγη. 
άμα δέ τη ήμέρα ΰυνελθόντεΰ οί ^ρατηγοί έθαύμαζον δτι 
Kypoc ούτε άλλον πέμποι ^μανοΰντα δτι χρή ποιεΐν, ούτε 
aircoc φαίνοιτο. έδοξεν ούν αύτοΐΰ cυcκευacaμέvoιc ά 
ειχον καί έξοπλίΰαμένοΐΰ ίέναι (to go) είc τό πpόcθεv. ήδη 
δε έν όρμή δντων, άμα ήλίω άνέχοντι ήλθε Πpoκλήc ό 5 
Τευθρανίαΰ άρχων καί Γλοϋΰ ό Ταμώ. ούτοι δέ ειπον δτι 
Κύροΰ μέν άποθάνοι, 'Apiaioc δέ έν τω ΰταθμώ ε'ίη μετά τών 

140 
c 3 
He said that he had caught 
sight of an army 
(original: κατεΐδον 
οτρατευμα I caught sight 
of an army; on the use of 
the English pluperfect 
had caught see 16.1/2). 
Xenophon did not ask 
what the misfortune was 
(original: τί ecu τό 
7KX6OC; what is the 
misfortune?). 
Finite verbs in indirect speech always retain the tense of the 
original direct speech (8.1/36), and consequently the distinction 
between the present and aorist optative here involves time, not 
aspect, as the above examples show. 
A verb in a future tense in direct speech can be put into the 
future optative when reported in historic sequence: εΐπον δτι 
τοΰτο ποιήΰοιμι (or ποιτ^ω) I said that I would do this (original: 
τοΰτο ποιήΰω I shall do this). The future optative has no other 
uses. 
Notes 
1 
When an adverbial clause of reason (introduced by δτι 
because, έπεί since, etc.) occurs after a historic tense its verb 
is put into the optative if the speaker or writer wishes to 
ascribe a reason or motive to the subject of the main verb 
but does not vouch for it himself. This type of expression is 
called virtual indirect speech as no verb of saying, thinking, 
etc. is actually used. The subordinating conjunction is to be 
translated by on the grounds that, thinking!saying that: 
οί 'Αθηναίοι τον Περικλέσ 
The Athenians abused 
έκάκιζον ότι ΰτρατηγόΰ 
Pericles on the grounds 
ων ούκ έπεξάγοι. 
that, [though] being 
general, he did not lead 
[them] out. 
2 
When a deliberative question (τί ποιώμεν; what are we to 
do?) is reported after a verb in a historic tense its verb ma} 
be put into the optative: 
ήποροΰμεν τί (or ότι) 
We were at a loss [as 
ποιοΐμεν 
to] what we should do. 
The subjunctive may, however, be retained. 
ειπεν ότι κατιδοι (or κατεΐδε, 
< καθοράω) στράτευμα. 
Ξενοφών ούκ ήρετο τί τό πάθοΰ 
ε'ίη (or έστίν). 

14.2 Greek reading 
In addition to translating, define each use of the subjunctive and 
optative. 
1# ένεοτι γάρ TIC καί λόγοιοιν ήδονή, 
λήθην δταν ποιώα τών δντων κακών. 
2# πώο ούν μάχωμαι θνητόο ων θεία τύχη; 
3# νουν χρή θεάοθαι, νουν τί τηο εύμορφίαο 
όφελοο, δταν TIC μή καλάο φρέναο έχη; 
4 
oc άν δίο ναυαγήοη, μάτην μέμφεται Ποοειδώνα. 
5 
Οωκράτηο έφη τούο μέν πολλούο άνθρώπουο ζην ϊνα 
έοθίωοιν, αύτόο δέ έοθίειν ϊνα ζή. 
6 
φάγωμεν καί πίωμεν* αύριον γάρ άποθνήοκομεν. 
7# 
θεόο αίτίαν φύει βροτοΐο 
δταν κακώοαι δώμα παμπήδην θέλη. 
8# ώο χαρίεν έοτ' άνθρωποο δταν άνθρωποο ή. 
9# Α. τίο έοτιν ούτοο; Β. ίατρόο. Α. ώο κακώο έχει 
άπαο ίατρόο, έάν κακώο μηδείο έχη. 
10# οφόδρ' έοτίν ήμών ό βίοο οϊνω προοφερήο* 
όταν ή τό λοιπόν μικρόν, όξοο γίγνεται. 
11 
οί μέν φοβούμενοι μή φύγωοι πατρίδα καί οί μέλλοντεο 
μάχεοθαι φοβούμενοι μή ήττηθώοιν ούτε οίτου ούτε ύπνου 
δύνανται λαγχάνειν διά τον φόβον οί δέ ήδη φυγάδεο, ήδη 
δέ ήττηθέντεο δύνανται καί μάλλον τών εύδαιμόνων έοθίειν 
καί καθεύδειν. 
5 
12 
πίθηκοο ό πίθηκοο κάν (= καί έάν) χρυοά έχη οάνδαλα. 
13 
έφοβήθηοαν οί "Ελληνεο μή προοάγοιεν οί Πέροαι πρόο τό 
κέραο καί περιπτύξαντεο άμφοτέρωθεν αύτούο κατακόψειαν. 
14 
ό δέ άνήρ, δν ουνέλαβον, έρωτώμενοο ποδαπόο εϊη, Πέροηο 
μέν έφη είναι, πορεύεοθαι δ' άπο του Τιριβάζου 
οτρατεύματοο όπωο έπιτήδεια λάβοι. 
15 
ό Διογένηο, ίδών τοξότην άφυή, παρά τον οκοπόν έκάθιοεν 
ειπών, ϊνα μή πληγώ. 
του θανεΐν άπειρία 
πάο τιο φοβείται φώο λιπεΐν τόδ' ήλιου, 
ετρεχέ τιο μή βρεχθείη καί είο βόθρον άπεπνίγη. 
18 
άμα δέ τη ήμέρα ουνελθόντεο οί οτρατηγοί έθαύμαζον ότι 
Κυροο ούτε άλλον πέμποι οημανούντα ότι χρή ποιεΐν, ούτε 
αύτόο φαίνοιτο. έδοξεν ούν αύτοιο ουοκευαοαμένοιο ά 
ειχον καί έξοπλιοαμένοιο ίέναι (to go) είο τό πρόοθεν. ήδη 
δέ έν ορμή όντων, άμα ήλίω άνέχοντι ήλθε Προκλήο ό 5 
Τευθρανίαο άρχων καί Γλούο ό Ταμώ. ούτοι δέ ειπον ότι 
Κύροο μέν άποθάνοι, Άριαΐοο δέ έν τω οταθμώ εϊη μετά τών 

άλλων βαρβάρων και λέγοι δτι ταύτην την 
ήμέραν 
περιμενοΐεν αύτούο. 
19 
ε'ί ποτε τούο οτρατιώταο εύτάκτωο βαδίζονταο 
ϊδοι, 
έπήνεοεν. 
20# νόμον φοβηθείς ού ταραχθηοη νόμω. 
Notes 
1 1.1 ένεοτι is in is followed by the dat. λόγοιοιν. Ll The first 
two words would be in reverse order in prose; δντων (< ων) 
lit. being, i.e. existing. 
3 The pi. φρένεο is very often used with the meaning of the 
singular (here mind). 
5 τους πολλούς άνθρώπουο most people, the majority of people 
(cf. note on TOIC πολλοΐο in 8.2.11 and on τά πολλά in 
13.3(i) /.14) 
7 φύει here plant; βροτοΐο in mortals (dat. to express place 
where, 23.1/2n); take παμπήδην with κακώοαι (ruin 
completely). 
8 (be exclamatory how (also in 9, see 22.1/ltf(ii)); χαρίεν (n.) 
lit. charming thing; άνθρωπος (penultimate word) i.e. a [realJ 
human being. 
9 A and Β hold this conversation on seeing a destitute doctor; 
A's second remark plays on two possible meanings of κακώς 
έχω (a) I am destitute, (b) I am sick (on έχω + adv. to express 
a state see note on 8.2.9 /.If.). 
11 φεύγω + acc. here means go/be in exile from (17.1/5); 
λαγχάνειν (+ gen., lit. get) should be translated take (the 
men spoken of can obtain food and have time for sleep, but 
their fear prevents them from taking either); δύνανται on 
deponents in -αμαι see 19.1/36; μάλλον + gen. more than 
(genitive of comparison 17.1/4^). 
13 προςάγω is here used intransitively, advance. 
14 συνέλαβον (< συλλαμβάνω) take as 3rd pi., not as 1st s. 
15 ειπών coincidental use of the aorist pple. (12.1/1); πληγώ 1st 
s. aor. subj. pass, of πλήττω. 
17 The pass, of βρέχω means to get wet; eic illustrates the 
pregnant use of prepositions (see on 9.2.13 /.14) - the 
person must have fallen into the hole before drowning in it. 
Consequently eic βόθρον is to be translated by in a hole. 
18 //.2f. πέμποι and φαίνοιτο opt. in indirect speech 14.1/4^; 
ςημανοΰντα fut. pple. to express purpose, 12.1/2tf(v); oti 
here the indirect interrogative pronoun (10.1/26 note 1)« 
trans, what; έδοξεν (< δοκέω) αύτοιο it seemed good t° 
them, i.e. they decided (21.1/4). //.4f. eic το πρόοθεν to t"e 
in front [place], i.e. forward; δντων is the pple. of a genitive 

absolute in which the subject (αυτών) is omitted, lit. [they] 
being already at the point of starting (ορμή); ήλθε is singular 
because it agrees with the nearer subject (Προκλήο) only. 1.6 
ό Ταμώ the son of Tamos (Ταμώο, which is declined like νεώο 
13.1/1 a), for this use of the definite article see 5.1/3 note 2. 
1.9 περιμενοΐεν the fut. opt. represents a fut. ind. in direct 
speech (14.1/4d). 
19 As the optative in itself makes the εί clause indefinite 
(14.1/4c(iii)), ποτέ is really superfluous. 
20 ταραχθήοη 2nd s. fut. ind. pass, of ταράττω. 
143 
c 3 

15.1 Grammar 
15.1/1 Perfect indicative active 
The perfect tense in both Greek and English expresses a present 
state resulting from an action in the past, κέκλεικα την θύραν I 
have closed the door means that the door is now closed as a 
result of my past action of closing it. The aorist έκλειοα την 
θύραν I closed the door describes a single past action, but tells 
us nothing about the present state of the dooi; not even whether 
it is still in existence. Because the perfect tense describes a 
present state it is classified as a primary tense (4.1/1 note 1). The 
perfect is by no means as common as the aorist and does not 
exist in every Greek verb. 
There are two types of the perfect active, called weak and 
strong; only in the few verbs with both is there a difference m 
meaning (see note 2). There is a common set of endings (in the 
indicative -a, -ac, -εν, -αμεν, -ατε, -Gci(v)), but, whereas the 
strong perfect, like the strong aorist, has no suffix, the weak 
perfect has a suffixed κ which is attached in a way similar to 
that of the c of the weak aorist (see below). 
The stem of the perfect is normally modified by reduplication 
Thus if a verb begins with a single consonant (except p) or with 
two consonants of which the second is λ, μ, ν, or ρ, the initial 
consonant is doubled with the insertion of ε; hence weak 
λέλυκα (λύω) I have loosened; πεπίοτευκα (πιοτεύω) I kal'e 
trusted; κέκλεικα (κλείω) I have closed; strong γέγραφα (γραΦίύ) 
I have written. When, however, the initial consonant is a n 
aspirate (θ, φ, χ), it is reduplicated in its unaspirated form· 
τεθηρακα (θηράω) I have hunted; πεφόνευκα (φονεύω) I haVi 
murdered; κεχόρευκα (χορεύω) I have danced. 

In other cases the perfect stem is not reduplicated but simply 
augmented by the temporal augment (4.1/1 note 2(ii)) for verbs 
with an initial vowel or diphthong: ήχα (άγω) I have led; ήρηκα 
(αίρέω) I have captured (see also note 3); or by the syllabic 
augment (4.1/1 note 2(i)) for verbs beginning with p, a double 
consonant (ζ, ξ, ψ), or two consonants (the second not being λ, 
μ, ν, ρ): έρρίφα (ρίπτω) I have thrown; έζήτηκα (ζητέω) I have 
sought; έκτικα (κτίζω) I have founded. 
The conjugation of λέλυκα (perf. ind. act. of λύω) will be found 
in Appendix 1. An example of a strong perfect is έρρίφα (ρίπτω 
throw), which is conjugated: έρρίφα, έρρΤφαϋ, έρρΤφε(ν), 
έρρίφαμεν, έρρίφατε, έρρίφffci(v). 
The weak perfect occurs mostly in: 
(a) stems ending in vowels or diphthongs. Here the κ suffix is 
added to the present stem: κέκλεικα (κλείω). As in the 
aorist, the final vowel of most contracted verbs is 
lengthened: δεδήλωκα (δηλόω). 
(b) stems ending in λ and p, where the κ suffix must be added to 
the original stem (i.e. the present stem stripped of any suffix, 
cf. 11.1/3): ήγγελκα (άγγέλλω, i.e. άγγέλ-^ω); ήρκα (αίρω, 
i.e. άρ-)/ω). 
(c) dental stems (6.1/4), where the final dental is lost before the 
κ suffix: πέπεικα (πείθω); κεκόμικα (κομίζω, stem κομιδ-). 
The strong perfect occurs in palatal and labial stems: πέφευγα 
(φεύγω); γέγραφα (γράφω). Often a final unaspirated consonant 
is aspirated (i.e. γ/κ > χ; β/π > φ): πέπρδχα (πράττω stem πραγ-); 
τετριφα (τρίβω rub stem τριβ-). In many strong perfects an ε in 
the present stem is changed to ο: λέλοιπα (λείπω); πέπομφα 
(πέμπω). A few verbs with stems in other consonants have a 
strong perfect, e.g. γέγονα (γίγνομαι - note change in voice; the 
verb has another perfect γεγένημαι, which has the same 
Cleaning as γέγονα). For other examples of all types see 
Principal parts of verbs. 
Notes 
1 
The strong perfect of some otherwise transitive verbs has an 
intransitive sense: έγείρω I wake (somebody) 
up (tr.), 
εγρήγορα (on this form see below note 3) I have woken up 
(intr.), i.e. I am awake. 
^ 
πείθω and πράττω each have both a transitive and an 
intransitive perfect: 
transitive: πεπεικα I have persuaded; πέπρδχα I have done. 
intransitive: πέποιθα I have confidence in (+ dat.), i.e. I 
trust; πέπρδγα I have fared. 

146 
c 3 
Note that πέποιθα can be translated by a present tense in 
English (I trust; cf. έγρήγορα above). A few other verbs 'e.g 
όλλϋμι, 20.1/1 note 2) follow πείθω and πράττω in having a 
transitive weak perfect and an intransitive strong perfect. 
3 
Some verbs which begin with α, ε, ο reduplicate their entire 
initial syllable in addition to lengthening their original initial 
vowel: 
άκήκοα (ακούω - the only common verb in a vowel stem 
which has a strong perfect) 
έγρήγορα (έγείρω - the reduplicated syllable έγρ- also 
contains the ρ of the stem). 
4 
Many perfects are slightly irregular, e.g. βέβληκα (βάλλω); 
κέκληκα (καλέω); πέπτωκα (πίπτω). 
15.1/2 Verbs used with participles 
In the sentence Περικλέδ ειδον έν τη άγορα βαδίζοντα I saw 
Pericles walking in the agora the participle is not used in any of 
the ways mentioned in 12.1/2, where participles qualify either 
the finite verb of their clause or the clause itself. Here βαδίζοντα 
gives us further information (I not only saw Pericles -1 saw him 
walking; cf. ex. in 12.2.17 1.2) and is called a supplementary 
participle. Participles can only be used in this way with verbs 
whose meaning permits it (as όράω in Greek and see in English). 
Most can be classified according to their meaning. With some 
the accompanying participle may occur in a case other than the 
accusative. 
(a) Verbs of knowing and perceiving, e.g. έπίοταμαι (present 
tense as for δύναμαι, 19.1/3b) know; γιγνώοκω recognise; 
όράω see; αίοθάνομαι perceive; πυνθάνομαι ascertain; άκουω 
hear; μανθάνω learn: 
τών οτρατιωτών τιο είδε 
One of the soldiers saw 
Κλέαρχον διελαύνοντα. 
Clearchus riding through· 
ήκουοαν αύτοΰ βοώντοο. 
They heard him shouting 
(genitive because ακούω is 
followed by the genitive 
of the person heard -
13.1/2a(iii)). 
These verbs can also be followed by a noun clause 
introduced by δτι (8.1/3b): 
ο Δωριεύο εύ ήπίοτατο ότι 
Dorieus knew well that he 
(αύτόο) οχήοει τήν 
(himself) would obtain 
βααλείδν. 
the kingship. 

All such δτι clauses can, however, be converted to a 
participial phrase. When the subject of the participle is the 
same as the subject of the finite verb (as in the converted 
form of this example), the participle is put into the 
nominative; the subject itself will only be expressed if 
emphasis is required (normally some form of avxoc; cf. 
nominative and infinitive, 8.1/3λ): ό Δωριεύο εύ ήπίσυατο 
(avxoc) οχήοων την βααλείσν (the meaning is the same as 
above). 
When the subject of the participle is not the same as that of 
the finite verb both the participle and its subject are put into 
the accusative: 
έμαθε την Χερρόνηοον 
He learnt that the 
πόλειο ένδεκα ή δώδεκα 
Chersonese had eleven or 
έχουοαν. 
twelve cities (= δτι ή 
Χερρόνηοοο έχει...). 
Verbs of knowing and learning can also be followed by an 
infinitive, but in the sense of know/learn 
how to ...: 
έπίοταμαι νειν I know how to swim. 
(b) Verbs of beginning, stopping, continuing, e.g. άρχομαι 
(mid.) begin (doing something; the middle is more common 
than the active in this use); παύω stop (someone doing 
something); παύομαι (mid.) stop (doing something oneself); 
διατελέω continue. With such verbs in English we have 
sometimes a participle, sometimes an infinitive. 
ο άνεμοο έπαύοατο θύων. 
The wind stopped raging. 
μόνοι Θρακών διατελούαν 
Alone of the Thracians they 
ovxec έλεύθεροι. 
continue to be free. 
γελώνταο έχθρούο παύοομεν 
With our present journey 
τη νυν όδώ. 
we will stop our enemies 
laughing. 
αΡχομαι regularly takes a participle: άρξομαι διδάοκων I 
shall begin teaching. However, as with the English begin, an 
infinitive is also found: ήρξαντο οίκοδομεΐν they began to 
build. 
(c) Verbs of emotion, e.g. ήδομαι, χαίρω both be pleased, take 
pleasure; άχθομαι be vexed; αίοχύνομαι be ashamed: 
ηδομαι άκούων cov φρονίμουο I am pleased to hear wise 
λογουο. 
words from you. 
ουκ αίοχύνη eic τοιαύτα 
Aren't you ashamed at 
αγων τούο λόγουο; 
bringing the argument to 
such a point? (lit. to such 
things). 

148 
c 3 
αιοχύνομαι may also be followed by an infinitive in the 
sense be ashamed to do something (and therefore not do it): 
αίοχύνομαί ce προοβλέπειν 
I am ashamed to look at 
έναντίον. 
you straight in the face. 
Verbs of emotion may be followed by ότι and a finite verb 
with the same sense as their use with a participle. The first 
example above could be ήδομαι ότι ακούω ... (lit. I am 
pleased that I hear ...). They are followed by the dative in 
clauses such as Πηνελοπεία άχθομαι I am annoyed with 
Penelope. 
(d) φαίνομαι seem, be seen, be obvious. Although φαίνομαι with 
an infinitive has the expected meaning seem (to be doing 
something), with a participle it means the same as 
δήλόο/φανερόο είμι + participle, viz I am obviously 
(doing 
something). 
φαίνονται ούδέν λέγειν. 
They seem to be speaking 
nonsense (lit. saying 
nothing). 
φαίνονται ούδέν λέγοντεο. 
They are obviously 
speaking nonsense (lit. 
they, saying nothing, are 
obvious). 
(e) τυγχάνω chance, happen (to be doing something, i.e. by 
chance I am [doing something]; there is an etymological 
connection with τυχη chance, fortune), τυγχάνω is often 
used with a participle to express the idea that something has 
occurred fortuitously.1 
έτυχε τότε έλθών. 
He happened to have come 
then (lit. he chanced 
having come then). 
δηλώοω τό πάν ό παρά τούδε 
I shall reveal the whole 
τυγχάνω μαθών. 
[matter] which I happen 
to have learnt from this 
man. 
( f ) λανθάνω escape the notice of (+ acc.) and φθάνω anticipate, 
be beforehand can also be accompanied by a participle 
agreeing with their subject (in this construction 
they 
generally, but not always, have an object). As the main idea 
is contained in the participle, this will become the finite verb 
of the clause in an idiomatic translation: 
1 This verb must be distinguished from γίγνομαι, which means happen in the sense o f t J 
place (for its range of meanings see 8.1/2). 

He sheds tears without 
anyone knowing (lit. he 
[in] shedding tears 
escapes the notice of all). 
Menelaus was present 
without us knowing (lit. 
Menelaus [in] being 
present escaped the 
notice of us). 
They hauled up their ships 
before winter (lit. they 
[in] hauling up their 
ships anticipated the 
winter). 
The Scythians arrived at 
the bridge before the 
Persians (lit. the 
Scythians [in] arriving 
at the bridge anticipated 
the Persians). 
The difference here between the present and aorist participle 
is one of aspect, not of time. A present participle indicates a 
condition or process (first and second examples), an aorist 
participle indicates an event (third and fourth examples). Cf. 
12.1/1 and, for a similar distinction between the present and 
aorist infinitive, 4.1/1. 
In sentences of this type it is, in fact, immaterial whether 
λανθάνω/φθάνω appear as the finite verb with an accom-
panying participle (as above), or as the participle (always 
aorist; the participle here has no temporal force) with an · 
accompanying finite verb. Thus in the first and third 
examples we could have, with identical meanings: πάντας 
λαθών δάκρυα λείβει (lit. escaping the notice of all, he sheds 
tears); φθάςαντες oi Οκύθαι τους Περςδς έπί την γέφϋραν 
άφίκοντο (lit. the Scythians, 
anticipating 
the 
Persians, 
arrived at the bridge). 
Ί5.2 Greek reading 
1 
οποδόν φεύγων εις πυρ έμπέπτωκα. 
~ 
ουδείς λανθάνει θεούς πονηρά ποιών. 
2 
καρκίνος ορθά βαδίζειν ού μεμάθηκεν. 
^ απαντέο έςμεν εις τό νουθετεΐν ςοφοί, 
αυτοί δ' άμαρτάνοντες ού γιγνώςκομεν. 
πάντας λανθάνει δακρυα 
λείβων. 
Μενέλεως ημάς έλαθε 
παρών. 
έφθαςαν τον χειμώνα 
άναςπάςαντες τάς ναΰς. 
έφθαςαν οί Οίύθαι τούς 
Περςδς έπί την γέφϋραν 
άφικόμενοι. 

150 
c 
3 
ΟΙ 
5 
εϊληφεν ή παγίο τον μΰν. 
6# άνήρ γάρ δοτιο ήδεται λέγων άεί, 
έλαθεν έαυτόν τοιο ουνοΰοιν ων βαρύο. 
7 
οκορπίουο βέβρωκεν. 
8# δοτιο καθ' έτέρου δόλια μηχανεύεται, 
αύτόο καθ' αύτού λανθάνει ποιών. 
9 
έτυχον έν τη άγορφ οί όπλιται καθεύδοντεο. 
10 
Μένων δήλοο ήν έπιθυμών πλουτεΐν ίοχυρώο. 
11 
The crucifixion of Jesus 
παρέλαβον ούν τον Ίηοούν καί βαοτάζων έαυτώ τον σταυρόν 
έξήλθεν 
eic τον λεγόμενον Κρανίου Τόπον, ό λέγεται 
έβραϊσυί Γολγοθά, όπου αύτόν έοταύρωοαν, καί μετ' αύτού 
άλλουο δύο έντεύθεν καί έντεύθεν, μέοον δέ τον Ίηοούν. 
έγραψεν δέ καί τίτλον ό Πιλάτοο καί έθηκεν (placed [it]) 5 
έπί του οταυροΰ, 'IHCOTC Ό NAZQPAIOC Ό BACIAETC 
ΤΩΝ ΙΟΥΔΑΙΩΝ, τούτον ούν τον τίτλον πολλοί άνέγνα^αν 
τών 'Ιουδαίων, ότι έγγύο ό τόποο τηο πόλεωο όπου έοταυρώθη 
ό Ίηοούο. έλεγον ούν τφ Πιλάτω οί άρχιερεΐο τών 'Ιουδαίων, 
μή γράφε (do not write), ό βααλεύο τών 'Ιουδαίων, άλλ' ότι 10 
έκεΐνοο ειπεν, βαοιλεύο είμι τών Ιουδαίων, άπεκρίθη ό 
Πιλατοο, ό γέγραφα γέγραφα. 
12 
έπτά ήμέραο, ac έπορεύοντο διά τών Καρδούχων, nacac 
μαχόμενοι διετέλεοαν. 
13 
Κλεάρετοο, παρακαλέοαο τούο στρατί ώταο, ήγεν έπί τό 
χωρίον πορευόμενον δ' αύτόν έφθαοεν ήμέρα γενομένη. 
14 
According to Plutarch intellectual pleasures are much 
superior to those of the body and therefore our reactions 
to the former are much more enthusiastic. 
ό Άρχιμήδηο λουόμενοο, <»c φααν, έκ τηο ύπερχύοεακ 
έννοήοαο τήν του οτεφάνου μέτρηαν, οίον έκ τι voc κατοχήο 
ή έπιπνοίαο, έξήλατο βοών, εύρηκα, καί τούτο πολλάκιχ 
φθεγγόμενοο έβάδιζεν. ούδενόο δ' άκηκόαμεν ούτε 
γαοτριμάργου ούτωο περιπαθώο βοώντοο, βέβρωκα, ουτε 5 
έρωτικού, πεφίληκα, μυρίων άκολάοτων γενομένων και 
όντων. 
15# Α. γεγάμηκε δήπου. Β. τί ού λέγειο; άληθινώο 
γεγάμηκεν, όν έγώ ζώντα περιπατούντά τε 
κατέλιπον; 
16 
τό δέ μέγα τειχοο έπαύοαντο οίκοδομούντεο φοβούμενοι μη 
ούχ ίκανόν εϊη άντέχειν. 
17# όρώ δέ τοΐο πολλοΐα,ν άνθρώποιο έγώ 
τικτουοαν ύβριν τήν πάροιθ' εύπραξίαν. 

Notes 
3 
ορθά acc. η. pi. used adverbially (= όρθώο, cf. 20.1/5). 
4 
eic with respect to. 
6 
άνηρ ... ocxic lit. whatever man (ocxic is here the indefinite 
relative - 10.1/2b note 2) but translate the man who; 
έλαθεν gnomic aor.; translate by present; CDVOOCI dat. pi. 
m. of the pres. pple of συνειμι. 
9 
As the subject is plural έτυχον must be 3rd pi. 
10 
δήλοο ην έπιθϋμών lit. was obvious desiring, i.e. it was 
obvious/clear that M. desired. 
11 
1.3 Γολγοθά has no accent because it is not a Greek word. 
1.4 εντεύθεν και έντεΰθεν lit. from here and from there, i.e. 
on each side. ll. 7f. Take πολλοί with τών Ιουδαίων and 
έγγύc with τηο πόλεως. 1.9 έλεγον said the imperfect is used 
because the subject is an unspecified number of individuals. 
13 
ήγεν inceptive imperfect began to lead. 
14 
The famous story of Archimedes' discovery of the principle 
of displacement (when two bodies of the same weight are 
submerged they will displace the same amount of liquid 
only if they are of identical composition). Using this he was 
able to establish that his patron, Hiero of Syracuse, had 
been cheated by a jeweller who had been commissioned to 
make a crown of pure gold (the crown did not displace the 
same volume of water as an amount of gold of exactly 
equal weight). //.4f. έβάδιζεν impf. to express repeated 
action went about; ούδενόΰ ... ούτε ... ούτε lit. of no-one ... 
neither... nor but translate neither of any ... nor of any ...; 
άκηκόαμεν royal (or author's) plural. 1.6 άκολάΰτων the 
adj. (unrestrained, licentious) is here used as a noun 
(sensualist). 
16 
φοβούμενοι μή ούχ ... see 14.1/4c(ii). 
1 7 
TOIC πολλοΐΰ for the majority (cf. 8 . 2 . 1 1 ) ; ύβριν is governed 
by τίκτουΰαν, which agrees with εύπρδξίδν; πάροιθ'(ε) is 
an adv. but translate by an adj. former. 
15.3 Extra reading 
Prometheus Bound (1) 
This is the first of two passages from the Prometheus Bound, a 
play which has come down under the name of the first great 
Attic tragedian, Aeschylus (525-456 BC). Its plot, like that of 
nearly all tragedies, is taken from mythology. 

152 
Prometheus, who belonged to an older but minor order of 
divinities called Titans, had helped Zeus wrestle supieme 
control of heaven from his father Cronos. At this stage mankind 
lived in primitive squalor, but Prometheus took pity on them 
and gave them fire. This he was obliged to steal from heaven as 
it had been the exclusive possession of the gods. Zeus, incensed 
by the theft, ordered that Prometheus be fastened to a rock at 
the ends of the earth. In the following scene, with which the play 
opens, Zeus' henchman Kpcxxoc (Might), who with his fellow 
lackey Βία (Violence) has escorted Prometheus to the rock, tells 
Hephaestus, the divine blacksmith, to execute Zeus' command. 
KPATOC 
χθονόΰ μεν ε ^ τηλουρόν ήκομεν πέδον, 
άκύθην ec οΐμον, άβροτον eic έρημίαν. 
'Ηφαΐΰτε, coi δέ χρή μέλει ν έπιΰτολάΰ 
ac coi πατήρ έφεΐτο (enjoined on), τόνδε πρόΰ πέτραΐΰ 
ύψηλοκρήμνοΐΰ τον λεωργόν όχμάΰαι 
5 
άδαμαντίνων ^ μ ώ ν έν αρρήκτου πέδαια 
τό cov γάρ 0v0oc, παντέχνου πυρόΰ ceXac, 
θνητοΐΰΐ κλέψαΰ ώπαΰεν. τοιάΰδέ τοι 
άμαρτίαΰ ΰφε δει θεοΐΰ δούναι (to give i.e. to pay) δίκην, 
G>C άν διδαχθη τήν Aioc τυραννίδα 
10 
ΰτέργειν, φιλάνθρωπου δέ παύεΰθαι τρόπου. 
ΉΦΑΐσΐΌΟ 
Κράτοΰ Βία τε, cφωv μέν έντολή Aioc 
έχει xekoc δή κούδέν έμποδών έτι, 
έγώ δ' άτολμος είμι ουγγενη θεόν 
δήcat βία φάραγγι πρόο δυοχειμέρω. 
15 
πάντωο δ' άνάγκη τώνδέ μοι τόλμαν οχεθειν 
εύωριάζειν γάρ πaτpόc λόγουο βαρύ. 
τηο όρθοβούλου Θέμιδοο αίπυμήτα παι, 
άκοντα c' άκων δυολύτοιο χαλκεύμαα 
προοπαοοαλεύοω τωδ' άπανθρώπω πάγω, 
20 
ϊν' ούτε φωνήν ούτε του μορφήν βροτών 
όψη, οταθευτόο δ' ήλιου φοίβη φλογί 
χροιάο άμείψειο άνθοσ άομένω δέ coi 
ή ποικιλείμων νύξ άποκρύψει φάοο 
πάχνην θ' έώαν ήλιοο οκεδα (will scatter) πάλιν* 
25 
άεί δέ του πaρόvτoc άχθηδών κακού 
τρύοει c\ ό λωφήοων γάρ ού πέφυκέ πω. 
Notes 
ll.If. In poetry the demonstrative adjective, as well as the 
definite article, can be omitted, and in English we would supply 

this with πέδον, οιμον and έρημίαν; take (ϋκύθην with οιμον and 
άβροτον with έρημίδν. I.3 δέ is here used idiomatically in a 
clause following a vocative and should not be translated; 
enιοτολάο is the subject of μέλειν (which governs the dative coi). 
1.4 πατήρ i.e. Zeus, whom Homer calls father of gods and men. 
/ 5 όχμάοαι aor. inf., to be taken after έπιοτολάο which it 
explains. 1.7 avGoc flower but here metaphorically glory, pride; 
παντέχνου lit. [required] for all arts because fire was seen as 
necessary for any technological progress. II. 8f. θνητοΐα = 
Ovrycoic (3.1/1 note 3); κλέψδο ώπαοεν lit. having stolen ... he 
gave [it]; τοιάοδέ ... άμαρτίδο gen. with δίκην (penalty for such 
a wrong); οφε = αύτόν, i.e. Prometheus. /. 10 g>C άν + subj. 
expresses purpose (= ϊνα + subj. 14.1/4c(i)). /.II παύεοθαι is 
followed by a gen. (φιλάνθρωπου ... τρόπου). 1.12 οφων for you 
two (24.1/4). /.13 κούδέν = καί ούδέν (11.1/5). /.15 δήοαι aor. 
inf. act. of δέω bind. U.16i. Supply ecu with both άνάγκη and 
βαρύ. 1.19 c' = ce (also in 1.27); δυολύτοιο χαλκεύμαα dat. of 
instrument (11.1/2). 1.20 τωδ'(ε) άπανθρώπω πάγω to this ... the 
dat. is governed by the προϋ- of προοπαοοαλεύοω. /.21 ϊν'(α) (+ 
ind.) where; του = τινόο (10.1/1). 1.22 όψη (< όράω) lit. you will 
see is appropriate to μορφήν but not to φωνην although it 
governs both - trans, you will perceive. 1.23 χροιάο άμειψειο 
avGoc you will alter (i.e. lose) the bloom (lit. flower) of [your] 
skin (through constant exposure to the sun Prometheus' skin 
will become tanned and rough); άομένω ... coi for you [being] 
glad dat. of reference (24.1/2e). 1.25 ff i.e. τε. 1.27 ό λωφήοων lit. 
the [one] going to relieve; γάρ can be placed after the first phrase 
rather than the first word; πέφϋκε (perf. of φύω is always 
intransitive) has been born. 

16.1 Grammar 
16.1/1 Phrases and clauses of result 
Result in English is usually expressed by a subordinate clause of 
the type (he was so poor) that he couldn't buy food, although 
we may omit that and say he was so poor he couldn't buy food. 
In Greek the corresponding conjunction, ωοτε that, so that, is 
always expressed. As in English, there is usually an anticipatory 
word in the main clause such as ούτωο so, to such an extent; 
τοιοΰτοο of this kind, of such a kind; 
TOCOUTOC SO much, pi. so 
many (on the declension of the last two see note 1 below), 
ωοτε is usually followed by an infinitive, particularly where the 
result is to be marked as merely contemplated or in prospect and 
not stressed as a fact (here ώστε is to be translated as - see first 
example). Where the subject of the infinitive is the same as the 
subject of the main verb, it is normally not expressed; where it 
is different, it is in the accusative (just as in the 
infinitive 
construction of indirect statement (8.1/3)). If the infinitive is 
negated, the negative is μή: 
ούτω CKOIOC ει ώοτε μή 
You are so stupid as not to 
δύναοθαι μανθάνειν. 
be able to understand. 
τοοαύτην κραυγήν έποίηοαν 
They made such a din that 
ώστε TOOC ταξιάρχουο έλθεΐν. 
the taxiarchs came (I.E. 
such a din as to cause 
the taxiarchs to come). 
ώστε + infinitive may also express an intended result. T^ 
distinction between this and a purpose clause can be tenuous, 
τούτο notouciv ώοτε μή άποθανειν they are doing this so as 
to die. 

ώ(;τε may also be followed by a finite verb in the indicative 
(negated by ού), but only where there is emphasis on the actual 
occurrence of the result; so ούτω CKOIOC ει ώοτε ού δύναοαι 
μανθάνειν would mean you are so stupid that you [actually] 
cannot understand; έπέπεοε χιών άπλετοο ωοτε άπέκρυψε και τά 
όπλα καί τούο άνθρώπουο an immense amount of (lit. boundless) 
snow fell so that it [actually] covered both the weapons and the 
men. 
Notes 
1 τοιούτοο and τοοούτοο are compounds of ούτοο (9.1/1) and 
are inflected in the same way, except that the initial τ which 
ούτοο has in most forms is dropped: τοιούτοο, τοιαύτη, 
τοιούτο(ν); τοοούτοο, τοοαύτη, τοοούτο(ν) (unlike τούτο, the 
neuter s. nom. and acc. can end in v). 
2 ώοτε may be used to introduce an independent sentence, 
with much the same force as ούν, i.e. and so, 
therefore, 
consequently: 
ούχ ήκεν ωοτε οί Έλληνεο έφρόντιζον he had 
not come; consequently, the Greeks were worried. 
3 The English phrase to such a pitch/point/degree of χ is expressed 
in Greek by είο τούτο or είο τοοούτο(ν) + genitive (cf. 23.1/1 d): 
είο τοοούτον ύβρεωο ήλθον ώοτε έπειοαν ύμάο έλαύνειν αύτόν 
they reached such a pitch of insolence that they persuaded you 
to drive him out. 
4 ώοτε may also be used in the sense on the condition that to 
express a condition or proviso: ύπέοχοντο ώοτε έκπλεΐν they 
made a promise on condition that they should sail away. 
However, on condition that is more usually expressed by έφ' 
ω or έφ' ωτε followed by an infinitive or, less frequently, by 
a future indicative: έποιήοαντο είρήνην έφ' ω τά μακρά τείχη 
καθελόντεο τοΐο Λακεδαιμονίου έπεοθαι (or έψονται) they 
made peace on condition that after taking down the long 
walls they would follow the Spartans. Both the infinitive and 
future indicative in conditions of this type are negated by μή. 
5 For the use of a comparative + ή ωοτε, see 17.114c. 
Ί6.1/2 Pluperfect indicative active 
The Greek pluperfect exists only in the indicative mood. It is 
n°rmally to be translated by the same tense in English (J had 
gashed before you came) but its use is much more restricted (see 
below). 
^ e pluperfect is a historic tense (4.1/1 note 1) and its active 
stem is formed from that of the perfect active. Where the latter 

contains reduplication (15.1/1), the pluperfect active stem κ 
formed by adding the augment, e.g. 
PERFECT ACTIVE STEM 
PLUPERFECT ACTIVE STEM 
λελυκ- (λύω) 
έλελυκ-
γεγραφ- (γράφω) 
έγεγραφ-
πεπομφ-(πέμπω) 
έπεπομφ-
Where, however, the perfect active stem is already augmented it 
is also used for the pluperfect without change, e.g. ήχ- (άγω). 
The pluperfect active endings are: -η, -TIC, -ει(ν), -εμεν, -ετε. 
-εοαν. For the conjugation of έλελύκη I had loosened see 
Appendix 1. 
The pluperfect is the past version of the perfect and thus 
expresses a state that existed in the past (cf. 15/1): 
έθϋον πρότερον οί Πελαογοι 
Formerly the Pelasgians 
TOIC θεοΐο, όνομα δέ 
used to sacrifice to the 
έποιοΰντο ούδενί αυτών 
gods but gave a name to 
ού γάρ άκηκόεοάν πω. 
none of them; for they 
had not yet (πω) heard 
Itheir names] (i.e. they 
were in a state of 
ignorance about the 
names of the gods). 
The pluperfect is relatively uncommon in Greek. In English we 
often use the pluperfect in subordinate clauses to denote an 
action which happened two stages back in the past, e.g. when 
the soldiers had assembled, Cyrus spoke as follows (if we regard 
Cyrus' speaking as one stage back in the past, then the soldiers 
assembling, which happened before Cyrus' speaking, is two 
stages back in the past). Greek, however, normally regards both 
actions as single past events and uses two aorists: επει οι 
οτρατιώται συνηλθον, Κύροο έλεξε τάδε (lit. when the soldier* 
assembled ..., which we can also say in English). It would be 
possible to regard the soldiers as being in a state of having 
assembled and so justify a Greek pluperfect, but in subordinate 
clauses of time and reason (and also relative clauses) this i> 
rarely done. 
16.1/3 Perfect and pluperfect indicative 
middle/passive 
In both the perfect and pluperfect the middle and passive voiw 
have the same forms. 

perfect 
fhe stem of the strong perfect active is retaind in the 
middle/passive, but that of the weak perfect active lses its κ. 
C o n s e q u e n t l y the distinction between strong and we& perfects 
is not maintained. As, however, the stem of tfc perfect 
middle/passive is not always predictable, the first per«>n perfect 
indicative middle/passive is included in the princip; parts of 
irregular verbs (7.1/1 note 3 and Principal parts of vcbs). 
When a perfect middle/passive stem ends in a vowel or 
diphthong1 (e.g. λελ\>-, νενΤκη-) the endings -μαι, -cat, -xai, 
-μεθα, ^θε, -νται are added (for the conjugation οΐλελυμαι I 
have ransomed 
(mid.), I have been loosened 
oass.) see 
Appendix 1). 
When a perfect middle/passive stem ends in a casonant, a 
sound change is necessary in certain cases to assimike the final 
consonant of the stem to the initial consonant of he ending. 
With all consonant stems a succession of three conso;ants in the 
second and third plural is avoided; in the second phral the c of 
the ending (-cQe) is dropped, but in the third plural tttic Greek 
sidesteps the difficulty by using a two-word periphrasis 
consisting of the perfect middle /passive participle see 16.1/4) 
and the third plural present of ειμί. 
Consonant stems are classified in the same way as for the 
present tense (6.1/4 and 11.1/3): 
(a) Palatal stems 
The final palatal of the stem appears as γ before -μα and -μεθα 
(and -μενοι of the participle), and as κ before -cat giving -ξαι) 
and -ται. In the second pi. κ + cθε > κθε > χθε (the κ is aspirated 
to assimilate it to Θ). From φνλάττω guard (perf. mi4./pass. stem 
πεφυλακ-) we have: 
s· 
1 
πεφυλαγμαι 
PL. πεφυλάγμεθα 
2 
πεφυλαξαι 
πεφύλαχθε 
3 
πεφύλακται 
πεφυλαγμενοι uci(v) 
^hen these forms are used as passives they mean I have been 
guarded, you have been guarded, etc. When they are used as 
middles their sense depends on the use of the middfe involved in 
* Particular context (8.1/1), i.e. I have guarded myself ttc., or I 
guarded for myself etc., or I have had (something) guarded 
The participle used in the third plural varies in gender 
Wording to the subject. This applies to all forms Df this type. 
n 
vow"?rs ° n l y i n v e r b s w i t h a w e a k P e r f e c t a c t i v e where the κ of tie stem is preceded 
(Tcck 
o r dlPhthong; the strong perfect άκηκοα (ακούω) has no passive in Classical 

(b) Labial stems 
The final labial of the stem appears as μ before -μαι and -μεθο 
(and -μένοι of the participle), and as π before -cat (giving -ψ0ι 
and -ται. In the second pi. π + c0e > πθε > φθε. From κρύπτω hid, 
(perf. mid./pass. stem κεκρυπ-) we have: 
s. 
1 κέκρυμμαι 
PL. 
κεκρύμμεθα 
2 κέκρυψαι 
κέκρυφθε 
3 κέκρυπται 
κεκρυμμένοι είά(ν) 
The passive meaning is I have been hidden, etc. 
(c) Dental stems 
The final dental of the stem becomes c before all endings. In the 
second person s. and pi. cc > c. From πείθω persuade (perf. 
mid./pass. stem πεπειθ-) we have: 
s. 
1 πέπειομαι 
PL. 
πεπείομεθα 
2 πέπειοαι 
πέπειοθε 
3 πέπειοται 
πεπεισμένοι είά(ν) 
The passive meaning is I have been persuaded, etc. 
(d) Stems in λ, μ, ν, ρ 
The final consonant of λ and ρ stems remains unchanged, 
άγγέλλω announce, αιείρω sow (perf. mid./pass. stems ήγγελ-
έαιαρ-; the α of the latter is irregular) have ήγγελμαι, ήγγελοσι 
etc. and έοπαρμαι, ecnapcai etc. The final consonant of ν stems 
is dropped in some verbs, but in others becomes c before -μαι. 
-μεθα, (and -μένοι). From κρίνω judge, φαίνω show (pert 
mid./pass. stems κεκρι-, πεφαν-) we have: 
s. 
1 κέκριμαι 
πέφαομαι 
2 κέκριοαι 
πέφανοαι 
3 κέκριται 
πέφανται 
PL. 1 κεκρίμεθα 
πεφάομεθα 
2 κέκριοθε 
πέφανθε 
3 κεκριμένοι εία(ν) 
πεφαομένοι εία(ν) 
The passive meaning is I have been judged, etc., I have bn 
shown, etc. 
-η is added to the few μ stems both in the perfect active ami 1 
the perfect middle/passive, e.g. νέμω apportion, 
ν ε ν έ μ η κ α 
νενεμημαι (mid./pass.), 3 pi. νενέμηνται. 
Pluperfect 
^ f 
The pluperfect indicative middle/passive uses the 
middle/passive stem except that the syllabic a u g m e n t is 
^ 
when the latter is reduplicated, e.g. έλελυ- (λύω), επεο^ 

(φυλάττω); but έοπαρ- (οπείρω) is used for both perfect and 
p l u p e r f e c t (cf. 16.1/2). The historic middle/passive endings are 
Ιμην, -co, -το, -μεθα, -cGe, -ντο (cf. 8.1/1/). For the conjugation 
of έλελύμην I had ransomed (mid.), I had been loosened (pass.) 
see Appendix 1. With stems ending in a consonant the same 
s o u n d changes are involved as with the perfect indicative 
middle/passive, and the perfect middle/passive participle with 
ήοαν is used for the third plural, e.g. 
s. 1 έπεφυλάγμην 
PL. 
έπεφυλάγμεθα 
2 έπεφύλαξο 
έπεφύλαχθε 
3 έπεφύλακτο 
πεφυλαγμένοι fjcav 
The passive meaning is I had been guarded etc. 
Note 
Third plural endings in -αται (< νται) and -ατο (< ντο) occur in 
early Attic and other dialects, e.g. πεφυλάχαται (perf. - its 
passive meaning is they have been guarded), 
έπεφυλάχατο 
(pluperf. - its passive meaning is they had been guarded). These 
endings must be carefully distinguished from third singular 
endings in -ται and -το. 
16.1/4 Other parts of the perfect tense 
The perfect infinitives and participles are formed from the same 
stems as the corresponding indicatives (the reduplication or the 
temporal/syllabic augment of the perfect indicative stem is not 
dropped). The infinitive endings are -έναι (act.) and -cGoa 
(mid./pass.; with consonantal stems this ending undergoes the 
same changes as -cde). The active participle is a first and third 
declension adjective (10.1/3) in -ώο, -υΐα, -oc (see below), and 
the m|ddle/passive participle is a first and second declension 
adjective (3.1/3) in -μένοο, -μένη, -μένον.1 In the following table 
07 ΑΛ5ω, φυλάττω, κρύπτω, πείθω, κρίνω only the masculine forms 
0[ the participles are given. 
In
c
finitiv« 
Participles 
^.TIVE, 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
ACTIVE 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
ίο?Κεναΐ 
λελύοθαι 
λελυκώο 
λελυμενοο 
Ve loosened mid. to have 
having 
mid. having ransomed 
ransomed 
loosened 
pass, having been 
pass, to have 
loosened 
, 
been loosened 
-αχεναι 
πεφυλάχθαι 
πεφυλαχώο πεφυλαγμενοο 
^Φέναι 
κεκρυφθαι 
κεκρυφωο 
κεκρυμμενοο 
—jtis of the perfect middle/pas 
iparoxytone, see Appendix 9. bit/)). 
1 
end 
^ o r m s 
perfect middle/passive participle is on the second syllable 

160 
πεποιθεναι 
πεποιθώΰ 
160 
πεπειοθαι 
πεπείΰμένοσ 
3 
πεπεικέναι 
πεπεικώΰ 
σ> 
κεκρικέναι 
κεκρίΰθαι 
κεκρικώο 
κεκριμενοο 
The corresponding forms of the aorist are sometimes to b 
translated in the same way as those of the perfect, but th 
meanings and uses of the two tenses are quite distinct. The 
perfect always expresses a state (on the meaning of the aorist sec 
4.1/1, 12.1/1). 
λελυκοίκ; is declined: 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
M. 
F. 
Ν. 
M. 
F. 
N. 
N.V. λελυκώο 
λελυκυΐα 
λελυκόο 
λελυκότεο 
λελυκυΐαι 
λελυκότα 
Acc. 
λελυκότα 
λελυκυΐαν λελυκόο 
λελυκότας 
λελυκυίδο λελυκότα 
Gen. λελυκότοο λελυκυίσο λελυκότοο λελυκότων 
λελυκυιών λελυκότων 
Dat. 
λελυκότι 
λελυκυίςι 
λελυκότι 
λελυκόα(ν) λελυκυίαιο λελυκόα(ν) 
Notes 
1 
A perfect subjunctive and perfect optative exist but are rare. 
The active is formed by adding to the active stem the 
endings -ω, -TIC, -η, -ωμεν, -ητε, -<DCI(V) (subj., giving λελύκο) 
etc.) and -οιμι, -oic, -οι, -οιμεν, -οιτε, -οιεν (opt., giving 
λελύκοιμι etc.). There are alternative active forms consisting 
of the perfect active participle and the appropriate part of 
ειμί: λελυκώΰ ώ, etc. (subj.); λελυκακ; εϊην etc. (opt.). In the 
middle/passive the subjunctive and optative follow the latter 
pattern (subj. λελυμένοΰ ώ etc., opt. λελυμένοΰ εϊην etc.) For 
tables see Appendix 1. 
2 
Greek has also a future perfect tense, which expresses a 
future state. For most verbs it exists only in the passive and 
is not common. Its stem is formed by adding c to the perfect 
middle/passive stem (e.g. λελϋΰ-), and to this are added the 
present middle/passive endings, viz λελ^ομαι I shall hai 
been loosened, 
λελύΰη 
(-ει), λελϋοεται, λελί^όμεθι.'· 
λελ^εΰθε, λελ^ονται The future perfect occurs mostly 
with verbs whose perfect has a present meaning (19.1/-*' 
and for this reason is not included in Appendix 1. 
16.2 Greek reading 
1 έπεί δέ έπί xac οκηνάο ήλθον, οί μέν άλλοι περί τά έπιτηδε 1 
rjcav, ΰτρατηγοί δέ καί λοχαγοί CDVT^6OV. καί ένταύθα πο/. 
άπορία ήν. ένθεν μέν γάρ όρη ήν ύπερύψηλα, ένθεν 
1 On the two perfect stems of πείθω see 15.1/1 note 2. 

ποταμόο τοοούτοο ωοτε μηδέ τά δόρατα 
ύπερέχειν 
πειρωμένοιο του βάθους. 
2 ό Διογένης, έρωτηθείο διά τί οί άθληταί άναίοθητοί είοιν, 
έφη ότι κρέααν ύείοιο καί βοείοιο άνωκοδόμηνται. 
3 γαμεΐν κεκρικότα δει. 
4 πάντα τον βίον έν κινδύνοιο διατελοΰμεν όντεο, ώοτε οί περί 
άοφαλείαο διαλεγόμενοι λελήθαοιν αύτούο τον πόλεμον είο 
άπαντα τον χρόνον καταοκευάζοντεο. 
5 κύνα δέρειο δεδαρμένην. 
6 οί 
Ποτειδεάται 
προοδεχόμενοι 
τούο 
Άθηναίουο 
έοτρατοπεδεύοντο πρόο Όλύνθου έν τω ίοθμώ, καί άγοράν 
έξω τηο πόλεωο έπεποίηντο. καί οτρατηγόν μέν του πεζού 
παντόο οί ξύμμαχοι ήρηντο Άριοτέα, τηο δέ ϊππου 
Περδίκκαν. 
7 έπεί οί βάρβαροι έκ τηο χώραο άπήλθον, οί 'Αθηναίοι τήν 
έαυτών πόλιν άνοικοδομεΐν παρεοκευάζοντο. τών γάρ οικιών 
αί μέν πολλαί έπεπτώκεοαν, όλίγαι δέ περιήοαν, έν αίο αύτοί 
έοκήνωοαν οί δυνατοί τών Περοών. 
8 είο ήκονημέναο μαχαίραο ή αΐξ ήκει. 
9 καί τήν μέν νύκτα ένταΰθα διήγαγον έπεί δ' ήμέρα 
ύπέφαινεν, έπορεύοντο οιγή ουντεταγμένοι έπί τούο 
πολεμίουο* καί γάρ ομίχλη έγένετο, ώοτε έλαθον έγγύο 
προοελθόντεο. 
10 έπειτα δέ καί πρόο άπανταο τούο μετά Δημοοθένουο ομολογία 
γίγνεται, έφ' ωτε μή άποθανειν μηδένα, μήτε βιαίωο, μήτε 
δεομοΐο, μήτε οίτου ένδεια. 
11 Τιρίβαζοο ειπεν ότι οπείοαοθαι βούλοιτο εφ' ω μήτε αύτόο 
τούο Έλληναο άδικεΐν, μήτ' έκείνουο καίειν τάο οίκίαο, 
λαμβάνειν τε τά έπιτήδεια ων δέοιντο. έδοξε ταύτα τοΐο 
οτρατηγοΐο καί έοπείοαντο έπί τούτοιο. 
12 ουδέ βουλεύεοθαι έτι ώρα, ώ Cώκpατεc, άλλά βεβουλεύοθαι. 
μια δέ βουλή* τηοδε γάρ τηο νυκτόο πάντα ταύτα δει 
πεπράχθαι. 
^ ούτωο ούν ού ταύτόν έοτι θάροοο τε καί άνδρεία* ώοτε 
ευμβαίνει τούο μέν άνδρείουο θαρραλέουο είναι, μή μέντοι 
τους γε θαρραλέουο άνδρείουο πάνταο* θάροοο μέν γάρ καί 
απο τέχνης γίγνεται άνθρώποιο καί άπό θυμού καί άπό 
μανιαο, ώοπερ ή δύναμιο, άνδρεία δ' άπό φύοεωο καί 5 
ευτροφίαο τών ψυχών γίγνεται. 
ρι Λακεδαιμόνιοι τάο οπονδάο προτέρουο λελυκέναι τούο 
j 5 Α^Πν«ίουο ήγοΰντο. 
Ι6
 η 
ούπω τέτοκεν. 
Φιλιπποο, ό πατήρ του μεγάλου 'Αλεξάνδρου, φρούριόν τι 
Ρουλόμενοο λαβείν όχυρόν, ώο άπήγγειλαν οί κατάοκοποι 

162 
c 
3 
χαλεπόν είναι παντάπαα καί άνάλωτον, ήρώτηοεν ει χαλεπο\ 
ούτωο έοτίν ωοτε μηδέ δνον προοελθειν χρυοίον κομίζοντα. 
Notes 
1 ήλθον had come (16.1/2); περί ... ήοαν were busy with; 
πειρωμένοιο του βάθουο lit. for [them] testing the depth. 
2 ότι here because; άνωκοδόμηνται < άνοικοδομέω. 
3 κεκρικότα agrees with άνδρα understood, lit. it is necessary 
for a man ... 
4 είο + acc. is used here instead of the plain acc. for emphasis 
(cf. 7.1/7*). 
6 ήρηντο < αίρέομαι choose (18.1/4); ή ϊπποο the cavalry 
7 αί πολλαί the majority, most (cf. 8.2.11 and 15.2.17); 
έπεπτώκεοαν < πίπτω. 
8 ήκονημένδο < άκονάω. 
9 ύπέφαινεν, έπορεύοντο inceptive imperfects (began to ...). 
11 βούλοιτο (and later δέοιντο) opt. in reported speech in 
historic sequence (14.1/4d); μητε ... μητ' introduce the 
negated conditions (that neither he ... nor they...); the 
subject of λαμβάνειν is έκείνουο from the previous phrase 
but note that it is not negated; έδοξε ταΰτα these things 
seemed good. 
12 ουδέ ... έτι ώρα supply έστί nor [is it] still [the] time; 
βεβουλεϋοθαι i.e. to have finished deliberating. 
13 if.l ταύτόν the same [thing]; the subject of έοτί is Qapcoc and 
άνδρείσ (with double subjects the verb may agree with only 
the nearer one). 
14 Take προτέρουο with τούο Άθηναίουο, which is the subject 
of λελυκέναι. 
16 ώο when; έοτίν present tense because in indirect speech 
Greek always retains the tense of the original direct speecn 
(7.1/3); Philip cynically implies that any fort can be captured 
if a sufficient bribe is offered to a potential traitor; 
προοελθεΐν the infinitive here denotes a possible resulr. 
could approach. 
16.3 Extra reading 
Heracles 
After an attack of madness, Heracles wakes up to find 
tied to a pillar and surrounded by destruction which he hup ^ 
has unwittingly perpetrated. The passage is from the Ηρακλή 
Euripides (485-406 BC), the third of the great Attic tragedian-

έμπνουο μεν ειμί και δέδορχ' άπερ με δει, 
αιθέρα τε καί γήν τόξα θ' ηλίου τάδε. 
(be δ' έν κλύδωνι καί φρενών ταράγματι 
πέπτωκα δεινώ καί πνοάο θερμάο πνέω 
μετάρα', ού βέβαια πλευμόνων άπο. 
ιδού, τί δεομοΐο ναύο όπωο ώρμιομένοο 
νεανίαν θώρακα καί βραχίονα 
πρόο ήμιθραύοτω λαΐνω τυκίοματι 
ήμαι, νεκροΐοι γείτοναο θάκουο έχων; 
πτερωτά δ' έγχη τόξα f έοπαρται πέδω, 
ά πριν παραοπίζοντ έμοΐο βραχίοαν 
έοωζε πλευράο έξ έμού τ' έοωζετο. 
ού που κατηλθον αύθιο είο "Αιδου πάλιν, 
Εύρυοθέωο δίαυλον έξ "Αιδου μόλων; 
άλλ' ούτε Οιούφειον είοορώ πέτρον 
Πλούτωνά τ' ούδέ οκήπτρα Δημητροο κόρηο. 
έκ τοι πέπληγμαν που ποτ' ών άμηχανώ; 
ωή, τίο έγγύο ή πρόοω φίλων έμών 
δύογνοιαν όοτιο την έμήν ίάοεται; 
Notes 
/.I δέδορχ' (= -κα) the perfect here is virtually an emphatic 
present I really see. ll.3ff. ώο ... exclamatory, lit. how I have 
fallen in a terrible wave ... i.e. into what a terrible wave ...; 
μετάρα'(α) ... βέβαια n. acc. pi. used adverbially (20.1/5), lit. 
bow (ώο 1.3) ... I breathe warm breaths shallowly, not steadily 
from my lungs (Heracles is panting but does not know why); 
απο on the accent of disyllabic prepositions when they follow 
the word they govern (see note on 11.2.4). 11.6f. Take vatic όπωο 
together like a ship; ώμιομένοο (< όρμίζω) anchored; νεδνίδν 
here used adjectivally in the sense sturdy (not youthful, Heracles 
being no longer young); θώρακα καί βραχίονα lit. with respect 
to cbest and arm this use of the accusative (called accusative of 
Aspect, 20.1/5) is used to clarify verbs and adjectives; here the 
?ccusatives tell where (i.e. with respect to what parts of his 
body) Heracles is anchored (ώρμιομενοο). 1.9 ήμαι (19.1/36) I 
θακουο trans, by a singular seat (the plural is often used for 
^e singular in verse; cf. τόξα in /. 10 and οκήπτρα in 1.16). 1.10 
^ winged weapons (πτερωτά έγχη) are arrows; έοπαρται 3rd s. 
r ' 
pass, οίοπείρω. l.ll πρίν (here an adverb) previously, 
sb Ίλ 
παραοπίζοντ'(α) governs the following dative, lit. 
kin ' c g m y a r m s ' 
^ 
= 
^ 
I-14 Eurystheus was the 
lab« 0 Mycenae for whom Heracles had to complete his twelve 
Cer|UrS 
die descent to Hades to bring back 
erus> is referred to here); Εύρυοθέωο δίαυλον lit. the double 
10 
163 
c 
3 
0> 
15 

course (i.e. the descent and return) of (i.e. prescribed b\ 
Eurystheus; 
μολών (aor. pple. of βλωοκω) to be taken with 
δίαυλον going [on] the double course (acc. of spatial extent, 
7.1/7d). II. 15f. Sisyphus was one of the sights of Hades. For his 
sins on earth he had to push a rock to the top of a hill, but when 
he reached the summit the rock invariably rolled down and he 
had to start afresh; ούτε ... τ'(ε)... ούδέ neither ... or (lit. and)... 
nor yet (ούδέ indicates a slight climax). /. 16 The daughter or 
Demeter was Persephone, who was the wife of Pluto (= Hades). 
/.17 έκ ... πέπληγμαι = έκπέπληγμαι (tmesis, see note on 12.3.9 
1.6); πού etc. lit. wherever being am I helpless? but the emphasis 
is on ων and we must translate wherever 
am I in my 
helplessness? 

17.1 Grammar 
17.1/1 Imperative mood: commands and 
prohibitions 
The imperative mood is used for commands. In Greek it exists 
in the present and aorist tenses (and also the perfect - see note 
4). The stem used is the same as that of the corresponding 
indicative. As well as second person imperatives (which we 
have in English), Greek also has imperatives in the third person 
with the meanings given below. 
The imperative of λύω is 
Present 
ACTIVE 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
s· 
2 λύε 
loosen! 
λύου 
mid. ransom! 
pass, be loosened! 
3 λϋέτω 
let him loosen! λϋέοθω mid. let him ransom! 
pass, let him be loosened! 
λύεοθε mid. ransom! 
pass, be loosened! 
λεόντων1 let them loosen! λϋέοθων mid. let them ransom! 
pass, let them be loosened! 
PL· 2 λύετε 
loosen! 
Aorist 
s. 
ACTIVE 
2 λύοον 
3 λΐΣοάτω 
PL· 2 λύςατε 
3 λϋοάντων 
MIDDLE 
λύοαι 
λϋΰάΰθω 
XtcacQe 
λϋΰάΰθων 
PASSIVE 
λύθητι 
λυθητω 
λύθητε 
λυθέντων 
neur°te ΐ 3 1 λΰό™>ν, λεόντων, and λυθέντων can also be the gen. pi. of masculine and 
ter of the corresponding participles. 

166 
c 
3 
The aorist is usually to be translated in the same way as the 
present but the two are not interchangeable. The difference, as 
elsewhere, is one of aspect. The present is used for an action 
which is seen as going on, in the process of happening or being 
repeated, the aorist for an action which is seen simply as an 
event. Sometimes this distinction can be brought out in English 
by using a verbal periphrasis: 
Kpoucov (aor.) έκείνην την 
Swat that fly! 
μυίαν. 
κρούε (pres.) έκείνην την μυιαν. Keep swatting that fly! 
Generally the present imperative is used with verbs which in 
themselves imply continual action, e.g. οπεύδε βραδέωο hasten 
slowly; while the aorist imperative is used with verbs which 
usually (but not necessarily) indicate a single act, e.g. καύοον πυρ 
έν τη έοτία light a fire in the hearth. 
Prohibitions (negative commands) are expressed with μή, e.g. μή 
πάα πίοτευε do not trust everyone; μηδείο τούτο άγνοείτω let 
no-one be unaware of this, but if the aorist aspect is appropriate 
the mood employed is always the subjunctive, not the 
imperative: 
μή έπί δουλείσν έκών έλθηα 
Do not go willingly to 
slavery. 
μηδείο θαυμάοη. 
Let no-one be surprised. 
For the other use of this (jussive) subjunctive see 14.1/4tf(i). 
To express a very strong prohibition ού μή and the future 
indicative is used, e.g. 
τί ποιεΐο; ού μή καταβήοει. 
What are you doing? You 
shall (or must) not come 
down. 
Notes 
1 
The imperative of the strong aorist has the same endings as 
the present. From μανθάνω (aor. έμαθον) the aor. imp. act 
μάθε, μαθέτω, μάθετε, μαθόντων. However^ five strong aorisr 
imperatives are irregularly accented on the last syllable m 
the second person singular: είπέ (λέγω), έλθέ (ερχομέ1 
εύρέ (εύρίοκω), ίδέ (όραω), λαβέ (λαμβάνω). 
^ 
2 
The imperative of the root aorist (11.1/1) follows that of the 
aorist passive except that the ending for the 2nd s. is -θι, J1^ 
-τι: from έγνων (γιγνώοκω) we have γνώθι, γνωτω, Υνίύ L 
γνόντων. 
biif 
3 
The present imperative of contracted verbs is regular 
^ 
because of contraction, the 2nd s. forms are easily contuse t 

Active 
τΓμδ (τίμαε) 
ποίει (ποίεε) 
δήλου (δήλοε) 
Mid./pass. τΓμώ (τΓμάου) ποιου (ποιέου) 
δηλού (δηλόου) 
The position of the accent can be important for distinguishing 
between different forms, e.g. ποίει (imp.), ποιεί (ind.). 
4 In addition to the present and aorist there is also a perfect 
imperative. The perfect imperative active consists of the 
perfect active participle and the imperative of ειμί (see 
below note 6), e.g. λελυκώο icOi (lit. be in a state of having 
loosened); but the perfect imperative middle/passive has 
single-word forms, e.g. λέλυοο (lit. be in a state of having 
been loosened). This is rare except in verbs whose perfect 
has a present meaning (19.1/3#), e.g. μέμνηοο remember! (< 
μέμνημαι). For these forms of λύω see Appendix 1. 
5 The infinitive is sometimes used instead of the second 
person imperative, (cf. English Not to worry, i.e. do not 
worry): παντωο, ώ Κριτόβουλε, άπαληθεύοαι πρόο ήμάο at 
any rate, Critobulus, tell the truth to us. 
6 The imperative of ειμί is ic9i be!, έοτω, έοτε, έοτων (or 
δντων). ic9i is also the 2nd s. imperative active of οίδα 
(19.1/3a), with the meaning know! 
7 Some imperatives have a fixed use: 
χαίρε, χαίρετε hello or goodbye (χαίρω rejoice) 
έρρε, έρρετε be damned! go to hell! έρρέτω let him/her/it be 
damned! (έρρω go to one's harm) 
άγε, άγετε; φέρε, φέρετε come on! come now! (by way of 
encouragement). 
17.1/2 Comparison of adjectives and adverbs 
Adjectives (and adverbs) have three degrees: positive bad, sick, 
wonderful; comparative worse, 
sicker, more 
wonderful; 
superlative worst, sickest, most wonderful. To give the three 
degrees of an adjective is to compare it. Some adjectives in 
English are compared regularly (sick, wonderful), 
some 
Regularly (bad). The same applies in Greek. By far the greater 
number of adjectives are compared by the addition of suffixes, 
a 
o f these Greek has two sets: 
|a) Comparative in -τεροο, superlative in -τατοο 
a* H^u ^P 6 kotk 
c o m P a r a t i v e i n -τεροο (f. -τερδ, n. -τερον) 
the superlative in -τατοο (f. -τατη, n. -τατον) are first and 
aj° n c? declension adjectives (3.1/3). All regularly compared 
tlVes belong here. The way in which -τεροο and -τατοο are 

168 
c 
3 
attached to the stem of an adjective depends on the class of its 
positive form: 
(i) First and second declension adjectives (3.1/3) add -oxepoc, 
-oxaxoc if the last syllable of their stem is long, but -ωτεροο, 
-ωτατοο if this is short (the stem is obtained by subtracting 
-oc from the nom. m. s., e.g. οοφόο, stem co<H. A syllable is 
long if it contains either a long vowel, or a diphthong, or a 
short vowel followed by two consonants (the second not 
being λ, μ, ν, or p); a syllable is short if it contains a short 
vowel followed by a single consonant (for further details 
see Appendix 9). Examples are: 
POSITIVE 
STEM 
COMPARATTVE 
SUPERLATIVE 
ΟΟφόΰ 
ΰοφ-
ΰοφώτεροΰ 
ςοφώτατοο 
wise 
wiser 
wisest 
δίκαιοΰ 
δικαι-
δικαιότερος 
δικαιότατος 
just 
more just 
most just 
έρημοΰ 
έρημ-
ερημότερος 
έρημότατος 
desolate 
more desolate 
most desolate 
Some 1st and 2nd declension adjectives belong to class (b) 
below. A few others belong to class (a) but are irregular, e.g. 
φίλοο dear, compar. φιλαίτεροο, supl. φιλαίτατοο or 
φίλτατοο. 
(ii) Third declension adjectives (10.1/4) with a stem in ov add 
-εσιεροο, -εστατοο, e.g. άφρων (stem άφρον-) stupid, 
άφρονέοτεροο more stupid, 
άφρονέοτατοο most stupid. 
Those with a stem in ec add ^τεροο, -^axoc, e.g. άληθηο 
(stem άληθεο-) true, άληθέοτεροο, άληθέοτατοο. 
(iii) First and third declension adjectives (10.1/3) in -eic follow 
χαρίειο, charming, χαριέοτεροο, χαριέοτατοο. Some in -vc 
follow γλυκύο, sweet, γλυκύτεροο, γλυκύτατοο but most are 
irregular (see below). 
(b) Comparative in -(ΐ)ων, superlative in -icxoc 
This group, which is much smaller, contains irregular adjectives 
from all classes. The stem of the positive form is sometimes 
changed for the other degrees of comparison. The following are 
the most common examples: 
POSITIVE 
COMPARATIVE 
SUPERLATIVE 
άγαθόΰ 
good 
άμείνων 
apicxoc 
βελιΤων 
βέλτιοτοο 
κρείττων 
icpaxicxoc 
aicxpoc 
ugly 
αίοχΐων 
άίοχιοτοο 
άλγε ivoc 
painful 
<χλγίων 
άλγιοτοο 
έχθρόο 
hostile 
έχθίων 
έχθιοτοο 

ηδύο 
κακόο 
καλόο 
μέγαο 
όλίγοο 
πολύο 
ράδιοο 
ταχύο 
sweet 
ήδίων 
ήδιοτοο 
bad 
κακίων 
KOKICTOC 
χείρων 
χείρΐϋτοο 
beautiful 
καλλίων 
κάλλιοτοο 
great 
μείζων 
μεγιςτος 
small, few 
έλάττων 
έλαχισιοο 
much 
πλείων 
πλεΐοτος 
easy 
ράων 
pgcxoc 
swift 
θάττων 
τάχιςτος 
Two adjectives (άγαθόο and KOKOC) are compared in more than 
one way; κρείττων, KpdmcToc (from άγαθοο) can also mean 
stronger; strongest (cf. κράτοο power). 
Comparatives in this class are declined as third declension 
adjectives in ov (10.1/4tf), but with some very important 
alternative forms (we can ignore the vocative, which is rare), e.g. 
SINGULAR 
M. & F. 
Nom. μείζων 
Acc. μείζονα/μείζω 
Gen. 
μείζονος 
Dat. 
μείζονι 
PLURAL 
Ν. 
M. & F. 
μείζον 
μείζονεο/μείζουο 
μείζον 
μείζοναο/μείζουο 
μειζόνων 
μείζοα(ν) 
Ν. 
μείζονα/μείζω 
μείζονα/μείζω 
The alternatives are contracted versions of forms without ν 
(μείζω < μείζοα). The acc. pi. μείζουο (< μείζοαο) has an 
irregular contraction (ο + α normally produces ω, as in the 
singular). It is important to note that the forms in -ouc may be 
nom. pi. as well as acc. pi. 
πλείων larger; (pi.) more has a stem πλει- before ω/ου but πλει-
or πλε- before ο (but always πλέον): 
SINGULAR 
M. & F. 
πλείων 
πλείονα 
πλεονα 
πλείω 
PLURAL 
Ν. 
Μ. & F. 
Ν. 
πλέον 
πλείονες 
πλείονα 
πλέονες 
πλέονα 
πλείους 
πλείω 
πλέον 
πλείοναο 
πλείονα 
πλεονας 
πλέονα 
πλείους 
πλείω 
πλείονος 
πλειόνων 
πλέονος 
πλεόνων 
πλείονι 
πλείοςι(ν) 
πλέονι 
πλέοςι(ν) 
Now. 
Acc. 
bat. 
c 
- 
iiuni dujccuvta 
tuywt 
uavt as LIIVII 
^'nparative the neuter singular nom./acc. of the comparative of 
adjective (οοφώτερον more wisely), and as their superlative 

170 
c 
3 
the neuter plural nom./acc. of the superlative (οοφώτατα mosi 
wisely). Of the few adverbs not formed from adjectives we ma\ 
note μάλα very, μάλλον more, μάλιοτα most. 
Notes 
1 
The meaning of some adjectives (e.g. nac all) precludes a 
comparative or superlative. 
2 
The adverbs μάλλον more and μάλιστα most are sometimes 
used to compare adjectives: μάλλον φίλοο more dear, dearer; 
μάλιοτα φίλοο most dear, dearest. 
3 
ήττων lesser, weaker, inferior has no positive. Its superlative 
(ήκιστοο) is only common as an adverb, ήκιοτα least of all, 
not at all. 
17.1/3 Meaning of the comparative and 
superlative 
Comparatives and superlatives in Greek are not always to be 
understood in the sense more X and most X. A comparative 
adjective is sometimes used where no comparison is expressed, 
and indicates a higher degree than the positive. English here uses 
rather or too (cf. also 17.1/4): 
ό KOpoc ήν πολυλογώτεροσ 
Cyrus was rather talkative. 
αί έμαί διατριβαί ύμιν 
My discourses have 
βαρύτεροι γεγόνδα και 
become too burdensome 
έπιφθονώτεραι. 
and odious for you. 
Likewise, the superlative (without the definite article) is often 
used to express a very high degree: 
καί ποτε δντοο πάγου 
And once when there was 
δεινοτάτου Οωκράτηο 
a very terrible frost 
έξήλθεν Τμάτιον έχων. 
Socrates went out 
wearing (lit. having) 
[only] a cloak. 
A s in English, a superlative adjective is preceded by the definite 
article when it means the most Χ: ό δεινότατοο πάγοο the most 
terrible frost. The article is omitted, however, when a s u p e r l a t i v e 
adjective is used as a predicate, e.g. ό Οωκράτηο οοφωτατο^ 
πάντων εστίν Socrates is wisest of all (cf. 5./3). 
17.1/4 Constructions involving the comparative 
and superlative 
(a) In comparisons in English a comparative 
adjective 
^ 
adverb is followed by than. In Greek ή than ( w h i c h m 
v 
elsewhere mean or) is used in the s a m e w a v · 

έν xoic όχλοιο πιθανώτεροι Among crowds the 
oi απαίδευτοι ή οί 
uneducated [are] more 
πεπαιδευμένοι. 
persuasive than the 
educated (lit. the having 
been educated [people]). 
τό μή είναι κρεΐττον ή 
Not existing [is] better 
τό ζην κακώο. 
than living badly. 
ή is here a conjunction and what follows must be in the 
same case as what precedes. Whereas in English we can 
nowadays say Socrates is wiser than me, in Greek we must 
have Οωκράτηΰ ΰοφώτερόο ecnv ή έγώ; the first member of 
the comparison ^ωκράτηΰ) is nominative and therefore the 
second member must also be nominative (hence έγώ). 
There is, however, another construction, the genitive of 
comparison, in which the second member of the 
comparison is put into the genitive and ή is omitted: 
ό xpftcoc κρείττων μορίων 
For mortals gold [is] 
λόγων βροτοΐο. 
stronger than countless 
words. 
ουδέν αωπηο ecu 
Nothing is more useful 
χρηαμώτερον. 
than silence. 
(b) A comparative may be accompanied by a dative of measure 
of difference: κεφαλή έλάττων shorter by a head; μείζων 
πολλω greater by much, i.e. much greater. 
(c) In sentences of the type he is too weak to help ... Greek 
uses a comparative adjective followed by ή ώοτε and an 
infinitive (ώστε here introduces a phrase of result -
16.1/1): μείζον ecu τό κακόν ή ώστε φέρει ν the evil is 
too great to bear (lit. greater than so as to ...). 
W) A superlative adjective or adverb is preceded by ώο or ότι 
(both used here adverbially) for expressions such as ώο (ότι) 
πλειοτοι as many as possible; ώο (ότι) τάχιοτα as quickly as 
possible. 
17.1/5 Active verbs used in a passive sense 
verb άποκτείνω does not occur in the passive. Instead, 
reek uses the active forms of άποθνήοκω (literally die, but in 
n i s context be killed): οί αιχμάλωτοι άπέθανον υπό τών 
£αΡβαρων the captives were killed by the barbarians. The 
Passive sense of άπέθανον is here made clear by the agent 
°nstruction υπό + gen. (11.1/2). Some indication of this sort is 
n°rmally present. 

172 
c 
3 
Similarly, φεύγω (literally flee) and έκπίπτω (literally fall out) are 
used as the passive of έκβάλλω banish, send into exile: 
έκ Νάξου έφυγον πλούαοί 
Some wealthy men were 
τινεο ύπό του δήμου. 
exiled from Naxos by 
the people. 
έκ γάρ τηο άλληο Ελλάδος 
For when the most 
οί πολέμω ή οτάοει 
influential men were 
έκπίπτοντεο παρ' Άθηναίουο 
driven out of the rest of 
oi δυνατώτατοι άνεχώρουν. 
Greece by war or 
sedition, they used to 
withdraw to the 
Athenians (lit. those 
exiled by war ..., the 
most 
influential,... 
used to ...). 
εύ/κακώο λέγω (+ acc.) speak well/badly of has the passive 
εύ/κακώο άκούω be well/badly spoken of (lit. hear well/badly): 
έμέ κακώο άκούοαντα ύπό 
I was deeply grieved when 
cou μεγάλη έδακε λύπη. 
you spoke badly of me 
(lit. great grief bit me 
being badly spoken of by 
you). 
Likewise, εύ/κακώο ποιέω (+ acc.) treat well/badly has the 
passive εύ/κακώο πάοχω be treated well/badly 
(lit. suffer 
well/badly): ούκ άεικέο κακώο πάοχειν ύπό έχθρών [it is] not 
shameful to be badly treated by enemies. 
17.2 Greek reading 
1 
A large number of pithy maxims current in antiquity were 
said to be inscribed on the columns of the temple of Apollo 
at Delphi. The following is a selection from surviving lists 
(the columns themselves no longer exist). The most famous 
are (y) and (x). 
(*') άδικούμενοο διαλλάττου. (ii) άλλοτρίων άπέχου. ι'" 
βραδέωο έγχείρει. (iv) γαμεΐν μέλλε, (ν) γνώθι οεαυτον. 
γονέαο αιδού. (vii) φρόνει θνητά, (viii) έπί νεκρω μη 
(ix) καιρόν γνώθι, (χ) μηδέν άγαν. (xi) πίνων μη ποΛΑ
() 
λάλει. (xii) πλούτει δικαίωο. (xiii) τύχην νόμιζε- ίν/ί 
ύβριζόμενοο τιμωρού, (χν) υίοΐο μή καταρώ. 
2# γύμναζε παΐδασ άνδραο ού γάρ γυμνάοειο. 
, 
, ή 
3 
φοβερώτερόν έοτι οτρατόπεδον έλάφων ήγουμένου λεοντο^ 
οτρατόπεδον λεόντων ήγουμένου έλάφου. 
Α 

4# φοβοΰ τό γήρασ ού γάρ έρχεται μόνον. 
5# καλωο άκούειν μάλλον ή πλουτεΐν θέλε. 
6# ρόδον παρελθών μηκέτι ζήτει πάλιν. 
7 
δύο ώτα έχομεν, οτόμα δέ έν, ίνα πλείω μέν άκούωμεν, ήττω 
δέ λέγωμεν. 
8 
Shorter proverbs 
(i) όξύτερον οί γείτονεο βλέπουοι τών άλωπέκων. (ii) πεζρ 
βαδίζων μή φοβού τά κύματα, (iii) φαγέτω με λέων καί μη 
άλώπηξ. (iv) ϊοθι καί λέων όπου χρή καί πίθηκοο έν μέρει. 
(ν) ήν TIC έμαξε μάζαν, ταύτην καί έοθιέτω. (νϊ) οτρατηγοΰ 
παρόντοΰ nac α άρχή παυΰάΰθω. (vii) ό πλεόνων έρών καί τών 
παρόντων άποοτερεΐται. (viii) 
cuiov eic 
άμίδα μή 
έμβάλλειν. (ix) ξένοΰ ών άκολούθει TOIC έπιχωρίοιο νόμοιο. 
(χ) τον φίλον κακώο μή λέγε, μηδ' ευ τον έχθρόν. (xi) μή 
καταφρόνηση του πένητοΰ εύτυχών. (xii) μή κρίνετε ίνα μή 
κριθητε. (xiii) αί δεύτεραί πωο φροντίδεο α>φώτεραι. (xiv) 
οί πλεΐοτοι κακοί, (χν) άεί τά πέρυα βελτίω. 
9# άοπίδι μέν Cai'oov TIC άγάλλεται, ήν παρά θάμνω, 
έντοο άμώμητον, κάλλιπον (= κατέλιπον) ούκ έθέλων 
αύτόΰ δ' έξέφυγον θανάτου τέλοσ acnxc έκείνη 
έρρέτω* έξαΰτιο κτήΰομαι ού κακίω. 
0 
ό βαάλειοΰ πήχυΰ του μετρίου έοτί πηχέωο μείζων τριοί 
δακτύλου. 
.1 
The Spartans (οί Λάκωνεο/Λακεδαιμόνιοι) were men of 
few words (hence our laconic) and had a reputation for a 
blunt, dry humour. Most of the following stories are about 
Spartan kings. 
(i) Εύδαμίδαΰ ίδών έν Άκαδαμείρ 
Ξενοκράτη ήδη 
πρεοβύτερον μετά τών μαθητών φιλοΰοφουντα καί 
πυθόμενοΰ ότι τήν άρετήν ζητεί, πότε ούν, ειπεν, αύτη 
χρήΰεται; 
(η) 'Αργείου δέ τι voc λέγοντος, coc φαυλότεροι γίγνονται 
κατά τάο άποδημίαΰ οί Λάκωνεΰ, άλλ' ούχ ύμεΐΰ γε, 
έφη, eic τήν Οπάρτην έλθόvτεc χείρονεο άλλά 
βελτίονεο γίγνεΰθε. 
(«V) ΤΑγ^ πρόΰ άνθρωπον πονηρόν έρωτώντα uc apiCTOC 
ε'ίη Οιαρτιάτηΰ, ειπεν, ό coi άνομοιότατοΰ. 
(iv) Άνταλκίδαο, ΰοφιοτού μέλλοντοΰ άναγιγνώΰκειν 
έγκώμιον Ηρακλέους TIC γάρ αύτόν, έφη, ψέγει; 
(ν) Θεαρίδαΰ ξίφοΰ άκονών ήρωτήθη, εί οξύ έοτιν, καί 
ειπεν, όξύτερον διαβολής 
(νϊ) Άρχελαοΰ, αδολεοχου κουρεακ; ερωτηΰαντοο αυτόν, 
πώΰ cε κείρω, ώ βαοιλεΰ; αωπών, έφη. 

12 
ό 'Αριστοτέλης άκούοαο υπό τινοο λοιδορεΐοθαι, απόντα με 
έφη, καί μαοτιγούτω. 
13 
οί οοφιοταί, τάλλα οοφοί όντεο, τούτο άτοπον έργάζονται 
πράγμα* φάοκοντεο γάρ άρετηο διδάοκαλοι είναι πολλάκις 
κατηγοροΰοιν τών μαθητών ώο άδικοΰα οφάο, τούο μιοθους 
άποοτεροΰντεο καίπερ ευ παθόντες ύπ' αύτών. 
14 
πολλή έχθρα καί μΐοοο άλλήλων τοΐο πολίταιο έγγίγνεται. 
δι' ά έγωγε μάλα φοβούμαι άεί μή τι μείζον ή ώοτε φέρειν 
κακόν τη πόλει ουμβή. 
15 
οί Λακεδαιμόνιοι έπρεοβεύοντο πρόο τούο 'Αθηναίους 
έγκλήματα ποιούμενοι, όπωο οφίοιν ότι μέγιοτη πρόφαοις 
ε'ίη του πολεμεΐν, ήν (= έάν) μή τι είοακούωαν. 
16 
Κλέανδροο έτυράννευοε μέν Γέλαο έπτά έτη, άπέθανε δέ 
ύπό Ca|&AAou άνδρόο Γελώου. 
17# Έλπίς καί ού Τύχη, μέγα χαίρετε· τον λιμέν' ηύρον 
ούδέν έμοί χ' ύμΐν* παίζετε τούο μετ' έμέ. 
Notes 
1 
(ii) άπέχομαι is followed by the gen. (20.1/4). (x) Supply an 
imperative such as ποίει. (xiii) νομίζω + acc. believe in. 
(xiv) τΓμωροΰ < τΐμωρέου. (xv) καταρώ < καταράου. 
2 γάρ is here placed third word in its clause (cf. 15.3 /.27). 
3 ήγουμένου λέοντος and ήγουμένου έλάφου are both genitive 
absolutes (12.1/26). 
8 (iv) ϊοθι is here the 2nd s. imp. of ειμί (17.1/1 note 6). (v) 
ήν... μάζαν lit. which bread (ήν is here the relative adjective, 
9.1/2 note 3); έμαξε < μάττω. (νϊ) αρχή as an abstract noun 
can mean magistracy but is used here concretely in the 
sense office. 
(vii) Both έράω desire (13.1/2<z(ii)) and 
άποοτερέομαι be deprived of (20.1/4) are followed by the 
genitive, cf. άπέχου in 1 (it) above, (viii) έμβάλλειν infinitive 
for imperative (17.1/1 note 5). (xv) Supply ήν. 
9 A poem of Archilochus (7th cent, BC), the earliest figure in 
Greek literature about whom we have any reliable 
information. 1.2 έντοο άμώμητον is in apposition to ήν in the 
previous line which, a blameless weapon, ... 1.3 θανατου 
τελοο [the] doom of death (a Homeric phrase). IΑ κακίω f. 
acc. s. to agree with άοπίδα understood. 
10 The royal cubit was that used by the Persians, the other was 
standard in the Greek world. 
11 (i) πυθόμενοο ascertaining; Xenocrates was looking 
for 
virtue in the sense that he was investigating its nature from 
a philosophical point of view, (ii) This story is also about 
Eudamidas, who is the subject of έφη; γε emphasises ϋμεΐ£· 
(iii) apicuoc ... Οιαρτιάτηο [the] best Spartan the article is 

not used with a predicate (5.1/3). (iv) For a down-to-earth 
Spartan, praising Heracles would have seemed as 
superfluous as praising motherhood; γάρ here introduces 
an ironical question "Well, who 
(vi) κείρω aor. subj. in 
a deliberative question (14.1/4<z(ii)) "How am I to cut 
12 After άκούοδο we have the infinitive construction for 
reported speech (8.1/3^), lit. having heard [himself] to be 
abused ...; απόντα < άπειμι. 
13 τάλλα (= τά άλλα) adverbial accusative (20.1/5), in other 
respects; τοΰτο refers to what follows but the meaning is not 
this extraordinary thing (there is no definite article with 
άτοπον... πράγμα), but an extraordinary thing [viz] this; γάρ 
explains what precedes, but we would omit it in English; 
οφac i.e. the sophists (9.1/4^); both άποοτεροΰντεο and 
παθόντεο agree with the subject of άδικοΰα (3 pi. pres. ind. 
act., not a pple.), i.e. the students; αυτών also refers back to 
the sophists and is used instead of οφών for variety. 
14 μlcoc άλλήλων hatred of each other (9.1/4b) i.e. mutual 
hatred. 
15 έπρεοβεύοντο impf. to express repeated action (4.1/1); 
ποιούμενοι making the middle of ποιέω is used with nouns 
to indicate the involvement of the subject, cf. πόλεμο ν 
ποιεΐοθαι to wage war; είρήνην ποιεΐοθαι to keep peace but 
πόλεμον ποιεΐν to cause a war (but not necessarily be 
involved in it); είρήνην ποιεΐν to impose peace (on 
belligerents); δπωο (= ϊνα) + opt. to express purpose after a 
historic tense (14.1/4c(i)). 
16 Γέλί& Doric gen. s. of Γέλα. 
17 χαίρετε (17.1/1 note 7) is qualified by μέγα (here an 
adverb), lit. farewell greatly (the author is pleased to be rid 
of them); χ' ύμιν elision for καί ύμΐν (English idiom reverses 
the order, you and me) - the clause means there is nothing 
for (i.e. between) you and me; παίζετε (here imp.) + acc. 
play with. 
17.3 Extra reading 
Prometheus Bound (2) 
Prometheus has revealed that he alone can save Zeus from a 
j^arriage which will rob him of his divine kingship. In the scene 
below, Hermes, the messenger of the gods, has come to force 
^ometheus to disclose his secret. Shortly after; the play ends 
Wlth Prometheus persisting in his refusal. 
175 
c 
3 

EPMHC 
ce τον οοφιοτήν, τον πικρώο ύπέρπικρον, 
τον έξαμαρτόντ' eic θεούο έφημέροιο 
πορόντα τιμάο, τον πυρόο κλεπτην λέγω* 
πατήρ άνωγέ c' ούστιναο κομπεΐο γάμουο 
αύδάν, πρόο ών τ' έκεΐνοο έκπίπτει κράτουσ 
καί ταΰτα μέντοι μηδέν αίνικτηρίωο, 
άλλ' αύθ' έκαοτα φράζε, μηδέ μοι διπλάο 
όδούο, Προμηθεΰ, προοβάλησ opac δ' ότι 
Ζεύο τοιο τοιούτοιο ουχί μαλθακίζεται. 
ΠΡΟΜΗΘΕΤΟ 
οεμνότομόο γε καί φρονήματοο πλέωο 
ό μύθόο έστιν, ώο θεών ύπηρέτου. 
νέον νέοι κρατείτε, καί δοκεΐτε δή 
ναίειν άπενθη πέργαμ'· ούκ έκ τώνδ' έγώ 
biccovc τυράννουο έκπεοόνταο ήοθόμην; 
τρίτον δέ τον νυν κοιρανούντ' έπόψομαι 
αϊοχιοτα καί τάχιοτα. μή τί coi δοκώ 
ταρβεΐν ύποπτήοοειν τε τούο νέουο θεούο; 
πολλού γε καί του παντόο έλλείπω. ού δέ 
κέλευθον ήνπερ ήλθεο έγκόνει πάλιν* 
πεύοη γάρ ούδέν ών άνιοτορεΐο έμέ. 
Notes 
/.I Hermes' words are aggressive and rude. This shows itself in 
the omission of the verb governing ce (καλώ I am addressing), 
trans, you there, the clever one ... //.2f. τον έξαμαρτόντ'(α) ... 
πορόντα lit. the one who offended ... [by] giving (πορόντα aor. 
pple. of a defective verb which only exists in the aor. and perf. 
and is listed under the aor. ind. έπορον); take έφημέροιο with 
πορόντα 
giving 
... 
to 
mortals; 
λέγω 
I 
mean. 
Μ 
πατήρ i.e. Zeus; άνωγε orders from άνωγα a verb perfect in form 
but present in meaning (cf. 19.1/3a); oucnvac 
(indirect 
interrogative, 10.1/2b) ... γάμουο plural for singular. 1.5 npoc (= 
ύπό) ών by which; έκπίπτει for vividness the present is used for 
the future in prophecies; κράτουο (gen.) is governed by έκ-. W 
Understand φράζε from the next line; καί ... μέντοι and indeed, 
and what is more; μηδέν adverbial acc. (20.1/5) in no way. /(·'*· 
αύθ' (= αύτά) έκαστα i.e. each thing, every detail; μηδε ·•· 
προοβάληο negative command (17.1/1). 1.9 TOIC τοιούτοιο lit. by 
such things (i.e. behaviour). 1.10 πλέωο 13.1/ltf. /.II ώο for [the 
talk] of a lackey, on this restrictive use of ώο see 21.1/ltf(vi). /.I ~ 
νέον is n. acc. s. used adverbially (20.1/5) and to be taken wit" 
κρατείτε, lit. you rule newly, i.e. you have only just come to 
power; δοκεΐτε you think, expect; δή adds a note of sarcasm 

indeed. /. 14 5icco\)c (= διττούο the non-Attic form is used in 
Tragedy) τυράννουο Uranus, the first king of the gods, had been 
d e t h r o n e d by his son Cronus, who in turn was dethroned by 
Z e u s (Prometheus sarcastically calls them τύραννοι). /.15 Supply 
έκπίπτοντα from έκπεοόνταο in the previous line; έπόψομαι 
< έφοράω. /.16 μή ... coi δοκώ is a question expecting a negative 
a n s w e r (10.1/2Λ), lit. surely I do not seem to you (μή here = 
surely not); τί (the accent is from the enclitic coi, see Appendix 
8, d(ix)) acc. s. n. of the indefinite xic, here used as an adverbial 
acc. (20.1/5) to some extent. /.18 έλλείπω takes the gen. I lack 
much (πολλού, i.e. of such behaviour), in fact (καί) all (lit. the 
whole, i.e. of such behaviour) - Prometheus is strongly 
emphasizing that he is not frightened of the new rulers of 
heaven. 1.19 κέλευθον acc. of space traversed along the road, 
after έγκόνει (2nd s. pres. imp. of έγκονέω); ήνπερ (< δοπερ, i.e. 
oc + περ) is an emphatic form of the relative. 1.20 ών = τούτων α 
of those things which the relative pronoun has been attracted 
into the case of the antecedent, and the latter then omitted 
(9.1/2 note 2). 

178 
C O 18.1 Grammar 
18.1/1 -μι verbs 
-μι verbs fall into two groups: 
(a) The suffixless class, where the endings of the present and 
imperfect are added directly to the stem without any suffix 
or link vowel, e.g. εί-μί (3.1/6) and φη-μί (7.1/2). There are 
nine other common verbs in this class: 
δίδωμι give and τίθημι put, place (18.1/2) 
είμι I shall go (18.1/3; distinguish from ειμί I am) 
ϊστημι make to stand (19.1/1) 
ΐημι let go, send forth (20.1/2) 
δύναμαι be able and έπίοταμαι know (19.1/36; the only 
common deponents of this type) 
πίμπλημι fill and πίμπρημι burn (19.1/1 note 2) 
From another such verb, ήμί say (obsolescent in Attic) Plato 
often uses the forms ήν I said, ή he/she said (13.3(i) 17; both 
forms were originally imperfect). 
(b) The -νϋμι class, where the stem of the present and imperfect 
has a vu suffix (20.1/1). 
Both classes differ from -ω verbs in the 
p r e s e n t 
and 
imperfect; of class (α) δίδωμι, τίθημι, ΐοτημι, ΐημι also differ 
in the aorist active and middle (ϊοτημι in the p e r f e c t and 
pluperfect as well). Elsewhere -μι verbs take the same 
suffixes and endings as -ω verbs. 

18.1/2 δίδωμι give, τίθημι put, place 
These two -μι verbs are closely parallel. In nearly all their forms 
an ο/ω in δίδωμι corresponds to an ε/η in τίθημι; and also oi to 
ει in optative forms, and ου to ει in forms other than those of 
the optative; the only exceptions are the 1st s. impf. act. 
(έδίδουν/έτίθην), the present and aorist subjunctive (see note 1) 
and the perfect mid./pass. (δέδομαι etc. but τέθειμαι etc.). 
Both verbs form their present stem by reduplication with iota 
(cf. γιγνώοκω); as in the perfect tense (15.1/1), an aspirated 
consonant is reduplicated with the corresponding non-aspirate, 
hence τιθη- (not θιθη-). In both, the aorist active is weak in the 
singular, with κ (not c) added to the long-vowel form of the root 
(δω-/θη-); in the plural the endings are added directly to the 
short-vowel form of the root (δο-/θε-; this is really a type of root 
aorist). 
Their principal parts are: 
PRES. 
FUT. 
AOR. ACT 
PERF. ACT 
PERF. MID./PASS 
AOR. PASS 
δίδωμι 
δώοω 
έδωκα 
δέδωκα 
δέδομαι 
έδόθην 
τίθημι 
θηςω 
έθηκα 
τέθηκα 
κειμαι 
(note 4) 
έτέθην 
(τεθειμαι) 
The future, perfect (act. and mid./pass.), and aorist passive are 
regular (see above 18.1/1). The present, imperfect, and aorist 
active forms, which require the greatest attention and should be 
mastered first, are set out here. The middle and passive forms 
are easily recognized from their endings (for full tables see 
Appendix 5) 
PRESENT 
AORIST 
INDICATIVE 
s· 
1 δίδωμι 
τίθημι 
έδωκα 
έθηκα 
2 δίδωο 
τίθηο 
έδωκαο 
έθηκαο 
3 δίδωα(ν) 
τίθηοι(ν) 
έδωκε(ν) 
έθηκε(ν) 
PL· 1 δίδομεν 
τίθεμεν 
έδομεν 
έθεμεν 
2 δίδοτε 
τίθετε 
έδοτε 
έθετε 
3 διδό<Χοι(ν) 
τιθέδα(ν) 
έδοϋαν 
έθεοαν 
AFFINITIVE 
διδόναι 
τιθέναι 
δούναι 
θειναι 
pARTlCIPLE 
διδούο, -όντοο 
τιθείο, -έντοο δούο, δόντοο 
θείο, θέντοο 
διδούοα, -ούσης τιθειοα, -είοηο δοΰοα, δούσης θειοα, θείσηο 
διδόν, -όντοο 
τιθέν, -έντοο 
δον, δόντοο 
θέν, θέντοο 
179 

180 
3 
IMPERATIVE 
s. 
2 
δίδου 
τίθει 
δόο 
θέο 
3 
διδότω 
τιθέτω 
δότω 
θέτω 
PL. 2 
δίδοτε 
τίθετε 
δότε 
θέτε 
3 
διδόντων 
τιθέντων 
δόντων 
θέντων 
SUBJUNCTIVE (see note 1) 
s. 
1 
διδώ 
τιθώ 
δω 
θώ 
2 
διδφο, etc. 
τιθηο, etc. 
δφο, etc. 
OTIC, etc. 
OPTATIVE 
s. 
1 
διδοίην 
τιθείην 
δοίην 
θείην 
2 
διδοίης 
τιθείηο 
δοίηο 
θείης 
3 
διδοίη 
τιθείη 
δοίη 
θείη 
PL. 1 
διδοΐμεν 
τιθεΐμεν 
δοιμεν 
θεΐμεν 
2 
διδοΐτε 
τιθεΐτε 
δοΐτε 
θεΐτε 
3 
διδοΐεν 
τιθεΐεν 
δοΐεν 
θεΐεν 
IMPERFECT ACTIVE 
έδίδουν, έδίδουο, έδίδου, έδίδομεν, έδίδοτε, έδίδοοαν 
έτίθην, έτίθειο, έτίθει, έτίθεμεν, έτίθετε, έτίθεοαν 
Notes 
1 
The present and aorist subjunctive active of δίδωμι have the 
endings -ω, -φο, -φ, -ώμεν, -ώτε, -ωοι(ν) (cf. 14.1/2 note 2). 
τίθημι has the regular endings (-ω, -ηο, -η etc.) but in both 
verbs the first syllable of the subjunctive endings has a 
circumflex as a result of contraction (διδώ < διδόω, τιθώ < 
ηθέω). 
2 
The present and imperfect active of δίδωμι can also mean 
offer. 
3 
The aorist active also has weak forms for the 3rd pi.: έδωκαν 
(= έδοοαν), έθηκαν (= έθεοαν); weak forms may also occur in 
the 1st and 2nd pi. (έδώκαμεν etc.) but are rare. 
4 
The present tense of the deponent κεΐμαι lie (19.1/3&) 1S 
generally used instead of the perfect passive of τίθημι in the 
sense to have been put, placed, established, e.g. οί νόμοι οι 
ύπό τών βααλέων κείμενοι (= τεθειμένοι) the laws 
established by the kings. Likewise έκείμην, the imperfect or 
κεΐμαι, is used for the pluperfect passive of τίθημι. 
1 8 . 1 / 3 είμι I shall come/go 
In Attic Greek prose the verb έρχομαι come/go occurs only in 
the present indicative. The remainder of its present tense 
(subjunctive, optative, imperative, infinitive, participle), and & 
future and imperfect are supplied by είμι which, though present 

in form, has in the indicative the future meaning I shall comet go 
(to be distinguished from ειμί I am): 
P E S E N T 
IND. 
SUBJ. 
OPT. 
IMP. 
INF. 
PPLE. 
έρχομαι 
ϊω 
ΐοιμι 
ΐθι 
ίέναι 
ίων 
I come/go 
pjTURE 
είμι 
— 
ΐοιμι 
— 
ίέναι 
ίων 
I shall come/go 
IMPERFECT 
f j a 
I was coming/going, used to come/go 
For a complete table of forms see Appendix 3. Note that ΐοιμι, 
ίέναι and ιών can be either present or future (the context will 
normally show which tense is meant). The aorist of έρχομαι is 
ήλθον (7.1/1 note 2), and the perfect έλήλυθα. 
18.1/4 Other verbs with principal parts from 
different roots 
The English verb to be is a combination of separate and 
etymologically distinct words (be, am, was, etc.). We have 
already seen the same in Greek with αίρέω, λέγω, όράω, φέρω 
(7.1/1 note 2) as well as έρχομαι; other examples are έοθίω eat, 
πωλέω sell, ώνέομαι buy (see Principal parts of verbs; the 
principal parts of all eight should now be learnt). 
A particularly troublesome set is that associated with αίρέω 
take, capture, whose passive is normally supplied by another 
verb, άλίοκομαι be captured, and whose middle αίροΰμαι has 
the special sense choose. When used as a passive αίροΰμαι 
normally means be chosen. These variations can be set out as 
follows: 
RESENT 
FUTURE 
AORIST 
PERFECT 
αιΡέω 
J take, 
αίρήοω 
ειλον (stem έλ-) ήρηκα 
, # 
capture 
αλιοκομαι (pass.) I am taken, άλώοομαι 
έάλων 
έάλωκα 
am being 
captured 
αΦούμαι (mid.) I choose 
αίρήοομαι 
είλόμην 
τίρημαι 
αιΡοΰμαι (pass.) I am being αίρεΟηοομαι ηρέθην 
ήρημαι 
chosen 
moods, infinitives and participles of είλον I took, captured 
|stem έλ-, cf. 7.1/1 note 2) and of the root aorist έάλων I was 
a*en, was captured are as follows: 

IND. 
SUBJ. 
OPT. 
IMP. 
INF. 
ppLE 
είλον 
έλω 
έλοιμι 
έλε 
έλειν 
έλών 
έάλων 
άλω 
άλοίην 
άλωθι 
άλωναι 
άλούς 
έάλων is exactly parallel to έγνων (11.1/1), e.g. ind. έα/oj 
έάλωο, έάλω etc. 
Jv 
Notes 
1 
Most compounds of λέγω have the meaning pick up, gatht> 
e.g. εκλεγώ pick out, συλλέγω collect, καταλέγω pick, cho^t 
(and also recount). These compounds have principal part, 
from the stem λεγ- only, e.g. έκλέγω, έκλέξω, έξέλεξα, etc. 
2 
The alternative principal parts of λέγω (έρώ, ειπον etc.) art 
however used in the compounds of άγορεύω speak m 
public, e.£. άπαγορεύω forbid (fut. άπερώ, aor. άπεΐπον 
προαγορευω proclaim. 
18.1/5 Conditional sentences 
Conditional sentences contain at least one main clause and one 
adverbial clause of condition; the latter is introduced by ει i f . 
They fall into two clearly defined categories which, in both 
English and Greek, are distinguished by the form of the main 
clause: 
Category 1 
In the main clause English has the auxiliary verb would or 
should (or occasionally could), and Greek has the particle άν 
(see below). An English example is: I would be sorry tf you 
were not to persist with Greek. 
Category 2 
In the main clause English does not have the auxiliary 
or should, and Greek does not have the particle άν. A*· 
English example is: I am sorry if you find Greek verfr 
difficult. 
There is a clear distinction between the two categories. The tiN 
is used in cases where something could have happened in 
c 
past, could be happening now, or could happen in the rut J ^ 
The cases covered by the second are also hypothetical 
conditional sentences must be), but here, by not using w 0 l i i\ 0^ 
should in English or άν in Greek, we express ourselves in a 
positive and confident way. 
Conditional clauses of both categories refer either to the futuι 
present, or past, ου is used to negate main 
c l a u s e s 
1 Unless these are in the form of a command (17.1/1) or wish (21.1/1)· 

crative in the ει clause is μή. άν is postpositive and therefore 
stands as first word in the main clause of conditional 
Juses of the first category. 
Xhe three time-frames of each category are given below: 
CATEGORY 1 
CATEGORY 2 
English would/should in the main 
verb without would/should in 
cjause 
the main clause 
Greek άν in the main clause 
no άν in the main clause 
FUTURE 
Conditional clause 
ei + optative (pres. or aor.) 
έάν (see note 2) + subjunctive 
(pres. or aor.) 
Main clause 
optative (pres. or aon) + άν 
future indicative 
εΐ τούτο πράξειας, άμάρτοις άν. 
έάν τούτο πράξης, άμαρτηςει. 
If you were to do this, you would 
If you do this, you will be 
be wrong. 
wrong. 
PRESENT 
Conditional clause 
ά + imperfect indicative 
εί + present indicative 
Main clause 
imperfect indicative + άν 
present indicative 
ει τούτο έπραττες, ήμάρτανες άν. 
εί τοΰτο πράττεις, άμαρτάνεις. 
If you were [now] doing this, you 
If you are doing this, you are 
would be wrong. 
wrong. 
PAST 
Conditional clause 
ει + aorist indicative 
εί + imperfect or aorist 
indicative 
Main clause 
a°nst indicative + άν 
imperfect or aorist indicative 
jfτουτο επρδξαο, ήμαρτες άν. 
εί τοΰτο έπραττες, ήμάρτανες. 
you had done this, you would have If you used to do this, you 
en wrong. 
Were (used to be) wrong. 
εί τοΰτο έπρδξας, ήμαρτες. 
If you did this, you were 
We h 
wrong. 
ub a v e already seen that the particle άν, when used with the 
r e p^ n c t i ve in subordinate clauses (14.1/4c(iii)), can be 
equ· 55ented in English by ever. Here, however, it has no semantic 
n the 
^ 
m English we wish to express potentiality (as 
m a i n clause of first category conditional sentences) we use 

an auxiliary verb (generally would or should), e.g. I would hai 
liked to see you. άν, however which expresses potentiality 
Greek, is an adverbial particle and modifies the verb to which > 
is attached: ούκ έγένετο means it did not happen; ούκ ο 
έγένετο means it would not have happened. 
Notes 
1 
The meaning of εί ... έπρδττεο/έπρδξαο depends on what 
follows, i.e. on whether it is in a category 1 or category 2 
sentence. 
2 
The conjunction έάν of the future time-frame of category 2 
is a contraction of εί + άν (cf. δταν < δτε + άν, 14.1/4c(iii)). 
It may also be written as δν (to be distinguished from the 
particle άν - the latter has a short vowel) or ήν in some 
dialects. 
3 
It is possible to combine certain time references within one 
sentence: 
εί τούτο έπρδξαο, 
If you had done that, you 
έκινδύνευεο άν. 
would [now] be in 
danger. 
εί τούτο έπρδξαο, 
If you did that, you are in 
κινδϋνεύειο. 
danger. 
4 
In category 2 sentences with a future reference εί + fut. ind. 
is substituted for έάν + subj. where a threat or warning is 
implied: 
άποκτενεΐο εί με yf\c έξω 
You will kill [me] if you 
βαλεΐο. 
throw me out of the 
country. 
18.1/6 QKpoc, μέοοο, έοχατοο 
These three adjectives vary in meaning according to whether 
they are used in the attributive or predicative position (3.1/3b): 
τό άκρον opoc the high 
άκρον τό opoc the top of the 
mountain 
mountain 
τό μέοον opoc the middle 
μέοον τό opoc the middle of 
mountain 
the 
mountain 
τό έοχατον opoc the furthest 
έοχατον τό opoc the furthest 
mountain 
part of the mountain 
For the predicative position we may also have τό opoc άκρον etc 

18.2 Greek reading 
1 
Κυμαιόο xic μέλι έπώλει. γευοαμένου δέ τι voc καί είπόντοο, 
πάνυ καλόν έσην, εί μή γάρ, έφη, μύο έvέπεcεv eic αύτό ούκ 
άν έπώλουν. 
2 
Λάκαινά TIC πρόο τον υίόν λέγοντα μικρόν έχειν τό ξίφοο 
είπε, καί βήμα πρόοθεο. 
3 
Proverbs 
(/) έάν ή λεοντή μή έξίκηται, τήν άλωπεκήν πρόοαψον. (ii) 
κυνί δίδωο άχυρα, δνφ δέ όοτά. (iii) έπ' άκρρ τη γλωττη τό 
φιλεΐν έχειο. (iv) άν (= έάν) τούο φίλουο μιcώμεv, τί 
ποιήΰομεν τούο μιοοΰνταο; (ν) εί τυρόν ειχον, ούκ άν 
έδεόμην όψου. (νϊ) # φίλον δι' όργήν έν κακοΐα μή προδώο. 
(vii) # τό κέρδοο ήδύ, κάν άπό ψευδών ϊη. (viii) δόο τι καί 
λαβέ τι. (ix) # πλάνη βίον τί&ηοι οωφρονέοτερον. (χ) αίοχρόν 
εύεργέταο προδοΰναι. (xi) έάν έχωμεν χρήματα, έξομεν 
φίλουο. (xii) ϊτω τά πράγματα δπη τφ θεφ φίλον. 
4 # eic Τόδον εί πλείν δει, TIC Όλυμπικόν ήλθεν έρωτών 
τον μάντιν, καί πώο πλεύοεται άοφαλεωσ 
χώ μάντιο, πρώτον μέν, έφη, καινήν έχε τήν ναΰν, 
καί μή χειμώνοο, του δέ θέρουο άνάγου* 
ταΰτα γάρ ήν ποιήο, ήξειο κάκεΐοε καί ώδε, 
5 
ήν μή πειρατήο έν πελάγει οε λάβη. 
5 
γέρων ποτέ ξύλα κόψαο καί ταΰτα φέρων πολλήν όδόν 
έβαδιζε. διά δέ τον κόπον άποθέμενοο τό φορτίον τον 
Θάνατον έπεκαλεΐτο. τοΰ δε Θανάτου φανέντοο καί 
πυνθανομένου διά τίνα αίτίαν έπεκαλεΐτο, ό γέρων έφη, ίνα 
τό φορτίον τοΰτο άραο έπιθηο μοι. 
6 # άπαν διδόμενον δώρον, άν καί μικρόν ή, 
μέγιοτόν έοτιν, άν μετ' εύνοίαο δοθή. 
7 
όφιο, ήν μή φάγη δφιν, δράκων ού γενήοεται. 
8 # γήο έπέβην γυμνόο, γυμνόο θ' ύπό γαιαν άπειμν 
καί τί μάτην μοχθώ, γυμνόν ορών τό τέλοο; 
9 
More stories about Diogenes 
(/) θαυμάζοντόο TIVOC τά έν Οαμοθράκη αναθήματα έφη, 
πολλφ άν ήν πλείω εί καί οί μή οωθεντεο άνετίθεοαν. 
(ii) είο Μύνδον έλθών καί θεαοάμενοο μεγάλαο τάο πύλαο, 
μικράν δέ τήν πόλιν, άνδρεο Μύνδιοι, έφη, κλείοατε 
τάο πύλαο μή ή πόλιο ύμών έξέλθη. 
(iii) δύοκολον ήτεν τοΰ δ' είπόντοο, έάν με πείοηο, έφη, εΐ 
οε έδυνάμην πεΐοαι, έπειοα άν οε άπάγξαοθαι. 
(iv) λύχνον μεθ' ήμέραν άψαο περιήει λέγων, άνθρωπον 
ζητώ. 
In order to lure the Syracusan army away from Syracuse, 
the Athenians sent an agent who persuaded the Syracusans 
185 
c 
3 

that they could surprise the Athenians at a neighbouring 
city, Catana. The ruse was totally successful. The passage is 
from Thucydides' account of the disastrous Athenian 
expedition to Sicily (415-413 BC). 
oi δέ οτρατηγοί τών Ουρακοοίων έπίοτευοαν τφ άνθρώπω 
πολλφ άπεριοκεπτότερον, καί εύθύο ήμέραν ξυνθέμενοι η 
παρέοονται άπέοτειλαν αύτόν, καί αύτοί προεΐπον πανδημει 
πάαν έξιέναι CupaKocioic. έπεί δέ έτοιμα αύτοιο τά της 
παραοκευήο ήν καί αί ήμέραι έν aic ξυνέθεντο ήξειν έγγύο 5 
ήοαν, πορευόμενοι έπί Κατάνηο ηύλίοαντο έπί τω Ουμαίθω 
ποταμφ. οί δ' 'Αθηναίοι, ci)c ήοθοντο αύτούο προαόνταο, 
άναλαβόντεο 
τό 
οτράτευμα 
άπαν 
τό 
έαυτών 
καί 
έπιβιβαοαντεο έπί τάο ναύο καί τά πλοία ύπό νύκτα έπλεον 
έπί τάο (ϋυρακούοαο. 
10 
Notes 
1 γάρ yes, for Greek has no word which corresponds exactly 
to the English yes and often the assent of a speaker is 
implied by particles (24.1/1). 
2 μΤκρόν is in the predicative position (3.1/3b), i.e. that he 
had his sword short, i.e. that the sword he had was short; 
καί is adverbial (as well) but need not be translated; πρόθεο 
< προστί&ημι. 
3 (ϊ) πρόοαψον < προοάπτω. (iv) ποιέω + two accusatives do 
[something] to/with (22.1/2/(ii)). (vii) κδν = καί έάν; ψευδών 
< ψεΰδοο. (ix) τί&ηοι here render (xi) έξομεν < έχω. (xii) ίτω 
3rd s. imp. of έρχομαι (18.1/3 and Appendix 3); τφ θεφ φίλον 
(n. s.) sc. ecu it is dear to God. 
4 /.I εί if would be first word of its clause in prose. 1.2 
πλεύοεται lit. he will sail, but translate he would sail, 
because Greek retains the original tense in reported 
(indirect) speech (8.1/3 and 10.1/26); άοφαλέωο, i.e. 
άοφαλώο the uncontracted form is Ionic (on Ionic forms in 
poetry see 1.3). 1.3 χώ = καί ό; καινην predicative as in 2 
above, lit. have the ship [which you sail in] new, i.e. get a 
new ship. 1.4 χειμώνοο ... θέρουο gen. of time within which 
(7.1/7c). 1.5 ήν = έάν (also in next line and in 7 below); 
κάκεΐοε (*καί έκεΐοε) καί ώδε lit. both thither and hither, 
i.e. both there and back. 
5 άποθέμενοο aor. mid. pple. of άποτίθημι; φανέντοο gen. m. 
s. of the aor. pple. of φαίνομαι; πυνθανομένου asking; άρδο 
nom. m. s. of the aor. act. pple. of αίρω; έπιθήο 2nd s. aor. 
subj. act. of έπιτίθημι. 

6 In both lines fiv = έάν; έάν (or si) καί normally although 
but here obviously even if (which is usually καί εί/έάν); 
δοθη 3rd s. aor. subj. pass, of δίδωμι. 
7 φάγη 3rd s. aor. subj. act. of έοθίω. 
8 θ' i.e. τε. 
9 (i) Samothrace, an island in the northern Aegean, was 
notorious for shipwrecks; the subject of έφη (and in (it) and 
(iii)) is Diogenes; πολλφ 
dat. of measure of difference 
(17.1/4b); take καί also with what follows; οί μή οωθέντεο 
(aor. pass. pple. of οφζω) the negative μή is used because 
Diogenes is referring to a general class (12.1/2tf(vi)); 
άνετίθεοαν had dedicated the imperfect, not the aorist, is 
used because the verb refers to repeated action in the past. 
(ii) μεγάλαο ... μΤκράν both adjectives are predicative as in 
2 above; μή introducing a negative purpose clause 
(14.1/4c(i)). (iii) τοΰ refers to the δύοκολοο; άπαγξαοθαι aor. 
inf. of άπάγχομαι (iv) περνηει 3rd s. impf. of περιέρχομαι 
(18.1/3); μεθ' ήμέρδν after day [break] i.e. by day; cf. άμα τη 
ήμέρρ. 
10 1.2 πολλφ (dat. of measure of difference, 17.1/4fe)ris~to be 
taken with the following word. 1.3 παρέοονται (< πάρειμι) 
on the future see note on πλεύοεται in 4 1.2 above (cf. ήξειν 
in 1.5). llAi. Take πάοιν ... Ουρακοοίοιο with προεΐπον (< 
προαγορεύω, 18.1/4 note 2)f.; τά τηο παραοκευηο lit. the 
[things] of their preparation but trans, their preparations. 
1.6 ηυλίοαντο < αύλίζομαι. 1.9 τά πλοία is acc. after έπί. 
18.3 Extra reading 
The sea, the sea! 
The Anabasis of Xenophon (7.2.12) tells how an army of Greek 
mercenaries, after becoming embroiled in a dispute between 
rivals for the Persian throne, had to make their way back from 
Persia to Greece. The following passage describes their elation 
when, after many months of hardship, they finally reached the 
Black Sea. 
και άφικνοΰνται έπί τό opoc τη πέμπτη ήμέρςτ όνομα δέ τφ δρει 
ην Θήχηο. έπεί δέ οί πρώτοι έγένοντο επί τοΰ opouc καί κατεΐδον 
τήν θάλατταν, κραυγή πολλή έγένετο. άκούοαο δέ ό Ξενοφών καί 
όπιοθοφύλακεο ωήθηοαν έμπροοθεν άλλουο έπιτίθεοθαι 
πρλ^μίουσ έπειδή δ' η βοή πλείων τε έγίγνετο καί έγγύτερον καί 5 
01 αεί έπιόντεο έθεον δρόμφ έπί τούο άεί βοώνταο καί πολλφ 

188 
e 
s π 
00 
μείζων έγίγνετο ή βοή oc<p δή πλείουο έγίγνοντο, έδόκει δή 
μείζον τι είναι τφ Ξενοφώντι, καί άναβάο έφ' ίππον καί τούς 
ίππεαο άναλαβων παρεβοήθει* καί τάχα δή άκούουοι βοώντων τών 
οτρατιωτών, θαλαττα θάλαττα, καί παρεγγυώντων. ένθα δή έθεον ίο 
παντεο καί οί όπιοθοφύλακεο, καί τά ύποζύγια ήλαύνετο καί οί 
Ιπποι, έπεί δέ άφίκοντο πάντεο έπί τό άκρον, ένταΰθα δή 
περιέβαλλον 
άλλήλουο 
καί 
οτρατηγούο 
καί 
λοχαγούς 
δακρύοντεο. 
Notes 
/.I άφικνοΰνται vivid present (see note on 7.2.13 /.9f.; cf. 
άκούουοι in 1.9). ΙΑ φήθηοαν < οΐομαι. 1.6f. οί αεί έπιόντεο (< 
έπέρχομαι) those who kept coming up refers to the different 
groups who went up the hill, but τούο άεί βοώνταο those who 
kept shouting refers to the ever-increasing group that could see 
the sea; δρόμφ at a run is redundant after έθεον (inceptive 
imperfect began to run 4.1/1 footnote). II.7f 6c<p etc. lit. by how 
much they became more [numerous]; on ococ see 21.1/3; έδόκει 
... τφ Ξενοφώντι lit. it seemed to Xenophon; μείζον τι something 
more serious. 1.9 παρεβοήθει and the imperfects in the following 
lines are inceptive (see above on έθεον). /.II ήλαύνετο has τά 
ύποζύγια and οί ίπποι as its subjects but it agrees with the nearer 
one, τά ύποζύγια, which as a neuter plural takes a singular verb 
(3.1/1 note 2; for another example of a double subject see 
16.2.13 1.1). 

19.1 Grammar 
19.1/1 ϊοτημι and its compounds 
ϊοτημι make to stand, set up was originally cicxCtyn with a 
present stem of the same formation as δίδωμι and τίθημι (i.e. 
reduplication with iota and no suffix). At an early stage in the 
history of Greek the initial sigma developed into a rough 
breathing; the resulting ϊοταμι (the form in most dialects) 
became ϊοτημι in Attic with the regular change of 0 > η.1 
Consequently, where the alternation δω/δο occurs in δίδωμι and 
θη/θε in τίθημι we have οτη/οτα in ϊοτημι; the alternation φη/φα 
in φημί (7.1/2) has the same explanation (the original form of 
the first person singular is φΰμί). 
The present and imperfect of ϊοτημι are almost completely 
parallel to δίδωμι and τίθημι. In the active we have: 
PRESENT 
IND. 
IMP. 
SUBJ. 
OPT. 
1 ϊοτημι 
ίοτώ 
ίοταίην 
2 ϊοτηο 
ϊοτη 
ίοτηο 
ίοταίηο 
3 ϊοτηοι(ν) 
ίοτάτω 
ίοτη 
ίοταίη 
1 ΐοταμεν 
ίοτώμεν 
ίοταιμεν 
2 ϊοτατε 
ϊοτατε 
ίοτητε 
ίοταιτε 
3 ίοτάοι(ν) 
ίοτάντων 
ίοτώοι(ν) 
ίοταιεν 
INFINITIVE ίοτάναι 
PARTICIPLE ίοτάο, ίοτάοα, ίοτάν; gen. ίοτάντοο, ίοτάοηο, ίοτάντοο 
^PERFECT Τοτην, ΐοτηο, ΐοτη, ΐοταμεν, Τοτατε, tcxacav 
1 
s t r i k
l s change, which occurs when d is not preceded by a vowel or p, is one of the more 
m 8 differences between Attic and most other dialects. 

190 
c 
3 3? 
-Λ 
<0 
The future στηοω I shall make to stand, shall set up is also 
parallel, but we meet a divergence in the aorist. ΐοτημι has two 
sets of forms (cf. the two aorists of φύω, 11.1/1): 
(a) A weak aorist έαηοα, which is transitive and means I made 
to stand, set up. 
(b) A root aorist έοτην (conjugated as έβην, 11.1/1), which is 
intransitive and means I stood. 
Examples of these two aorists are: 
έγχοο έστηοε πρόο κίονα. 
He stood his spear against 
a pillar (transitive). 
'Αλκμήνηο XOKOC έοτη αωπή. 
The son of Alcmene stood 
in silence (intransitive). 
The two aorists have identical forms in the 3rd pi. indicative 
active έοτηοαν (έοτηο-αν from έοτηοα; έστη-οαν from έστην). 
Where this form occurs, only the context will show whether it 
is transitive or intransitive. 
ϊστημι is also irregular in its perfect and pluperfect. Both tenses 
have a κ suffix in the singular of the indicative but elsewhere a 
stem without κ (έστα-) is normally used (see below). Because 
these tenses are intransitive (see below) they occur only in the 
active voice: 
PERFECT 
IND. 
IMP. 
SUBJ. 
ΟΡΤ. 
1 εοτηκα 
έςτώ 
έοταίην 
2 έοτηκαο 
έοταθι 
έοτ^ο 
έοταίηο 
3 έοτηκε(ν) 
έοτάτω 
έοτη 
έοταίη 
1 έοταμεν 
έοτώμεν 
έοταΐμεν 
2 έοτατε 
έοτατε 
έοτητε 
έσιαιτε 
3 έοτοκπ(ν) 
έοτάντων 
έοτώοι(ν) 
έοταΐεν 
INFINITIVE ECXAVAI 
PARTICIPLES Ecxiic, έοτώοα, ecxoc gen. έστώτοο, έοτώσης, έοτώτοο 
PLUPERFECT είοτηκη, είοτηκηο, είστηκει(ν), έοταμεν, έοτατε, έοταοαν 
Except for the imperative, forms with the stem έοτα- have 
alternatives in έοτηκ- (e.g. 3rd pi. ind. έστηκσοι(ν), inf. 
έστηκέναι) but these are less common. 
The first syllable of the perfect stem was originally cecx- with 
reduplication of c, but, as in the present stem, the initial c 
developed into a rough breathing, giving ecx-. Because έ is in 
fact the reduplication it is kept in all forms of the perfect 
(16.1/4). The initial είσι- of the singular of the pluperfect was 
originally έοεστ- with the syllabic augment and reduplication 
(quite irregularly the augment does not occur in the plural and 
hence the 1st and 2nd pi. forms are identical with those of the 
perfect). 

PERFECT 
FUT. PERF. 
PLUPERFECT 
Both perfect and pluperfect are intransitive and they are used as 
a present and imperfect tense respectively: έοτηκα I am standing 
and είοτηκη I was standing. The future perfect έοτηξω I shall 
stand (cf. 16.1/4 note 2) is also intransitive. 
We may summarize these forms as follows: 
Transitive 
PRESENT 
ϊοτημι I am making 
to stand 
FUTURE 
οτηοω I shall make to 
stand 
IMPERFECT 
Τοτην I was making to 
stand 
WEAK AORIST 
έοτηοα I made to stand 
A comprehensive table of ϊοτημι is given in Appendix 5. The 
present middle ϊοταμαι is intransitive and literally means I am in 
the process of making myself stand, i.e. it represents a present 
act as opposed to the perfect, which represents a present state (I 
am in a standing position). The imperfect middle (Τοτάμην) and 
future middle (οτηοομαι) are also intransitive but the weak aorist 
middle (έοτηοάμην) is transitive and means I made (something) 
stand for myself. 
ϊοτημι has many compounds and these retain the same 
distinctions between transitive and intransitive tenses. Among 
the most common are: 
Transitive tenses 
raise up; restore; cause to 
Intransitive 
εοτηκα I am 
standing 
έοτηξω I shall 
stand 
είοτηκη I was 
standing 
ROOT AORIST έοτην I stood 
ανιοτημι 
(άνά up) 
άφίοτημι 
(άπό away) 
καθίοτημι 
migrate, expel, uproot 
remove; cause to revolt 
Intransitive tenses 
rise up; be expelled; 
migrate 
go away from; revolt 
(κατά down) 
set down; put in a 
certain state; appoint; 
establish (laws etc.) 
settle down; come into a 
certain state; be 
appointed; be 
established 
The middle voice of compounds of ϊοτημι follows the pattern of 
the simple verb: οί βάρβαροι άφίοτανται the barbarians are in [the 
act of] revolt (cf. οί βάρβαροι άφεοτάαν (perfect) the barbarians 
**e in [a state of] revolt). 
Examples of the above compounds are: 
άνεοτηοαν καί ΑίγΤνητσο τω 
In this same summer the 
αύτω θέρει τούτφ έξ 
Athenians also expelled 
Αίγινηο 'Αθηναίοι. 
the Aeginetans from 
Aegina. 

192 
c 
3 7* 
<0 
Βοιωτοϊοί νυν έξηκοοτώ έτει 
μετά Ιλίου άλωοιν έξ "Αρνηο 
άναοτάντεο υπό Θεοοαλών την 
Βοιωτίδν φκιοαν. 
εί τούο ξυμμάχουο αύτών 
άφιοτάναι πειρσοόμεθα, 
δεήοει καί τούτοιο ναυοί 
βοηθεΐν τό πλέον ούοι 
νηοιώταιο. 
πρώτοι άπ' αύτών Μήδοι 
ήρξαντο άφίοταοθαι. 
κατεοτηοε τυραννον είναι 
παΐδα τον έαυτού. 
ec φόβον καταοτάντων 
διαφθείρονται πολλοί 
Χαόνων. 
In the sixtieth year after 
the capture of Troy the 
present Boeotians, after 
being expelled from Arne 
by the Thessalians, 
colonised Boeotia. 
If we try (lit. shall try) to 
make their allies revolt, 
we shall have to come to 
their assistance as well 
with a fleet because they 
are for the most part 
islanders (lit. it will be 
necessary to assist them 
also with ships, being 
[for] the greater [part] 
islanders). 
The Medes were the first 
to start to revolt from 
them (lit. the Medes first 
started...). 
He appointed his own son 
to be tyrant. 
When they were reduced 
to a state of panic many 
of the Chaonians were 
killed (vivid present). 
Notes 
To distinguish the different forms of ϊοτημι it is essential to 
remember that: 
(i) ίοτ- occurs in all forms of the present and imperfect but 
nowhere else. 
(ii) έοτ- occurs only in the aorist indicative. 
(iii) έοτ- occurs in all forms of the perfect and in the 
pluperfect plural but nowhere else. 
(iv) είοτ- occurs only in the pluperfect singular, 
πίμπλημι fill and πίμπρημι burn (tr.) follow ϊοτημι in the 
present and imperfect, e.g. the pres. ind. act. of the first is: 
πίμπλημι, πίμπληο, πίμπληοι(ν), πίμπλαμεν, πίμπλατε, 
πιμπλαοι(ν). 

19.1/2 Potential clauses 
Potential clauses express an action or state which has or had the 
potentiality of happening: I wouldn't like to meet him on a dark 
night; Alcibiades would have been a disaster at our last party. In 
Greek the construction is the same as for main clauses in 
category 1 conditional sentences (18.1/5; for the only 
complication see note 1 below); and the same is true in English, 
which uses would or could (although other auxiliaries such as 
might are also possible). As with conditional sentences (18.1/5) 
we have three time-frames: 
Future 
The optative (present or aorist as appropriate) with 
άν: τούτο ούκ άν γένοιτο that would not happen. 
Present 
The imperfect indicative with άν: τούτο ούκ άν 
έγίγνετο that would not be happening or happen 
[now - to make a distinction between future and 
present English may need to add an adverb^. 
Past 
The aorist indicative with άν: τούτο ούκ άν έγένετο 
that would not have happened. 
Notes ^ 
1 
A future potential can be used as a form of politeness to 
make a statement or request less blunt, e.g. βουλοίμην άν I 
should like (cf. βούλομαι I want), έβουλόμην άν I could wish 
(sc. that something were now the case) is also frequently 
used with a past reference I could have wished; this is a relic 
of older use. 
2 
In a particular context it is sometimes possible to translate a 
present or future potential by can, instead of could/would; 
the above examples would then be translated that can not' 
happen/be happening. 
19.1/3 Oddities in verbs 
(a) Perfects with a present meaning 
As we have seen (15.1.1), the perfect expresses a state in the 
present resulting from an action in the past. The perfect of some 
Greek verbs is best expressed in English by the present tense of 
verbs which in themselves indicate a state. The most common 
examples are: 
δέδοικα I am afraid (lit. I have become alarmed) from δείδω be 
alarmed. The aorist έδειοα is common and has the meaning 
I was afraid. 
193 
c 
3 
<0 

194 
c 
3 S·' 
—fc 
<0 
έγνωκα I know (lit. I have recognized) from γιγνώοκω recognise. 
έοικα I resemble, I seem exists only in a few forms outside the 
perfect. Poetical forms in είκ- occur in the infinitive (είκέναι, 
otherwise έοικέναι) and participle (είκώο, είκυΐα, εικός, 
otherwise έοικώο etc.). 
κέκτημαι,1 lit. I have acquired or I am in a state of having 
acquired (< κτάομαι acquire), is normally to be translated 
by I possess, own (plpf. έκεκτημην I possessed, owned; fut. 
perf. κεκτηοομαι I shall possess, own). 
μέμνημαι I remember 
(lit. I have reminded myself) from 
μιμνηοκομαι remind oneself. The aorist passive έμνηοθην 
means I remembered (ex. at 12.3.9 1.2). 
οΐδα I know exists only in the perfect, pluperfect, and future 
- see Appendix 3. 
τέθνηκα I am dead (lit. I have died) from άποθνηοκω die (the 
perfect is exceptional in never having the prefix άπο-, 
whereas the other tenses of the uncompounded verb are 
normally restricted to poetry). As with the perfect of ϊοτημι 
(19.1/1) shorter forms occur, e.g. inf. τεθνάναι (for 
τεθνηκέναι), pple. τεθνεώο (for τεθνηκώο), opt. τεβναίην. 
(b) Eccentric - μ α ι verbs 
A few deponents end in -αμαι, not -ομαι, because they belong 
to the -μι class of verbs (18.1/1; cf. ϊσυαμαι pres. mid./pass. of 
ϊοτημι, 19.1/1). The only common examples are δύναμαι be able 
and έπίοταμαι know 
how 
to, understand 
(both passive 
deponents with a middle future - see Principal parts of verbs; we 
have already met some forms, e.g. 10.3 IAL). These differ from 
-ω verbs only in the present and imperfect. In these tenses 
δύναμαι is conjugated: 
PRESENT 
INDICATIVE δύναμαι, δύναοαι, δύναται, δυνάμεθα, δύναοθε, δύνανται 
INFINITIVE δύναοθαι PARTICIPLE δυνάμενοο, -η, -ον 
IMPERFECT 
έδυνάμην, έδύνω (< -αοο), έδύνατο, έδυνάμεθα, έδύναοθε, έδύναντο. 
For έδυν- we may also have ήδυν-. The other moods of the 
present, where they occurs follow ϊοτημι (19.1/1). The forms of 
έπίοταμαι are parallel. 
Two similar verbs are κεΐμαι lie, be laid down and κάθημαι be 
seated, si? which, because they both describe a continual action, 
exist only in the present, imperfect, and future, κεΐμαι is 
conjugated: 
1 This reduplication is an exception to the rule given at 15.1/1 (we would have expected 
έκτη-). 
2 κάθημαι is used in prose but the uncompounded verb, ήμαι, is found in verse (e.g. 16.3 
1.9). 

PRESENT 
INDICATIVE κεΐμαι, κεΐοαι, κείται, κείμεθα, κεΐοθε, κείνται 
INFINITIVE κεΐςθαι PARTICIPLE κείμενος, -η, -ον 
IMPERFECT έκείμην, έκειοο, εκείτο, έκείμεθα, έκειοθε, έκειντο 
FUTURE INDICATIVE κείοομαι, κείοη , etc. 
The forms of κάθημαι follow the same pattern. The other moods 
of the present of both verbs are rare. On the use of κεΐμαι for 
the perfect passive of τίθημι see 18.1/2 note 4. 
19.2 Greek reading 
1 
λέγει που Ήράκλειτοο ότι πάντα χωρεί καί ούδέν μένει, 
καί ποταμού ροη άπεικάζων τά όντα λέγει ώο δίο eic τον 
αύτόν ποταμόν ούκ άν έμβαίηο. 
2# νηφε καί μέμνης' (= -co) άπιοτεΐν άρθρα ταΰτα τών φρενών. 
3 
Πύρρων ούδέν έφη διαφέρειν ζην ή τεθνάναι. είπόντοο δέ 
tivoc, τί ούν ούκ άποθνηοκειο; ότι, έφη, ούδέν διαφέρει. 
4# δοκεΐτε πηδάν τάδικήματ' eic θεούς 
πτεροΐα, κάπειτ' έν Διόο δέλτου πτυχαΐο 
γράφειν τι ν' αύτά, Ζήνα δ' είοορώντά νιν 
θνηΐοίο δικάζειν; ούδ' ό nac άν ούρανόο, 
Διός γράφοντοο τάο βροτών άμαρτίαο, 
5 
έξαρκέοειεν ούδ' έκεΐνοο άν οκοπών 
πέμπειν έκάοτω ζημίαν άλλ' ή Δίκη 
ένταύθά πούςτιν έγγύο, εί βούλεοθ' όράν. 
5 
Proverbs and famous sayings 
(/) έάν δύνη όδεύοαι, μή πλεύοης. (//) τοις ςεαυτού πτεροΐο 
έάλως. (iii) έκ παντός ξύλου Έρμης ούκ άν γένοιτο, (iv) 
ύδωρ πίνων ούδέν άν τέκοιο οοφόν. (ν)# ό χρήοιμ' είδώο, ούχ 
ό πόλλ' ειδώο, οοφόο. (vi)# θεού διδόντοο ούκ άν έκφύγοιο 
κακά. (vii) πάντεο άνθρωποι του είδέναι ορέγονται φύοει. 
(viii) όταν εύπλοτ|ο, μάλιοτα μέμνηςο ζάλης, (ix) δόο μοι πού 
οτώ καί κινηοω την γήν. (χ) πολυμαθίη (= -ία) νόον έχειν ού 
διδάοκει* Ήοίοδον γάρ άν έδίδαξε καί Πυθαγόρην (= -αν). 
(χϊ) τό φύοει πεφυκός ού μεθίοταται. (xii)# κούφως φέρειν 
δει τάο παρεοτώοας τύχαο. (xiii) άθυμούντεο άνδρεο ούπω 
τροπαΐον έοτηςαν. (χiv) άνθρωποο ων μέμνηοο. (χν) πάγην 
ίοτάο έν πάγη ληφθήοη. (χνϊ) πόρρω έοτώο ό θεόο έγγύθεν 
βλέπει, (xvii) έπί ξυρού ϊοταται. 
6# coc τοίο κακώο πραοοουαν ηδυ και βραχυν 
χρόνον λαθέοθαι τών παρεοτώτων κακών. 
7 
One of the most famous Spartan kings was Leonidas, who 
died with three hundred Spartan soldiers at Thermopylae 
195 
c 
3 

196 
in an attempt to defend the pass against the invading 
Persians (480 BC). The following are stories about him: 
(i) Λεωνίδαο πρόο τι να ειπόντα, πλην του βαοιλεύειν ημών 
ούδέν διαφέρεις άλλ' ούκ άν, έφη, εί μή βελτίων ύμών ήν, 
έβαοίλευον. 
(ii) γενόμενοο έν Θερμοπύλαιο πρόο τι να ειπόντα, άπό τών 
όϊοτευμάτων τών βαρβάρων ούδέ τον ήλιον ίδεΐν έξεοτιν, 
ούκοΰν, έφη, χαρίεν, ει ύπό οκια αύτοιο μαχούμεθα. 
(iii) Ξέρξου δέ γράψαντοο αύτω, έξεοτί οοι μή θεομαχούντι, 
μετ' έμού δέ ταττομένω, τηο Έλλάδοο 
μοναρχεΐν, 
άντέγραψεν, εί τά καλά τοΰ βίου έγίγνωοκεο, άπέοτηο άν 
τηο τών άλλοτρίων έπιθυμίαο* έμοί δέ κρείττων ό ύπέρ τηο 
Έλλάδοο θάνατοο του μοναρχεΐν τών ομοφύλων. 
(iv) πάλιν δέ τοΰ Ξέρξου γράψαντοο, πέμψον τά όπλα, 
άντέγραψε, μόλων λαβέ. 
The following epitaph for Leonidas and his men was 
written by Simonides: 
(v)# ώ ξεΐν', άγγέλλειν Λακεδαιμονίοιο ότι τηδε 
κείμεθα, τοΐο κείνων ρήμαοι πειθόμενοι. 
8 
The normal way of publishing an official document in the 
Greek world was to cut the text on stone (usually marble) 
and display it in a prominent place. Many thousands of 
such inscriptions have survived. The following is an extract 
from the record of the Athenian settlement with the 
Euboean city of Chalcis after the Euboean revolt from the 
Athenian empire in 446 BC, and it gives the wording of the 
oath to be sworn by all adult males in Chalcis. 
ούκ άποοτήοομαι άπό τοΰ δήμου τοΰ 'Αθηναίων ούτε τέχνη 
ούτε μηχανή ούδεμια ούδ' έπει ούδέ έργω, ούδέ τω 
άφιοταμένω 
πείοομαι, καί έάν άφιοτή τιο, 
κατερώ 
Άθηναίοιο, καί τον φόρον ύποτελώ Άθηναίοιο όν άν πείθω 
'Αθηναίους καί ξύμμαχοο έοομαι oioc άν δύνωμαι apicxoc 5 
καί δικαιότατος καί τω δήμω τω 'Αθηναίων βοηθήοω και 
άμυνώ, έάν τιο άδικη τον δήμον τον 'Αθηναίων, καί πείοομαι 
τω δήμω τω 'Αθηναίων. 
Notes 
1 
τά όντα neuter pi., lit. the being [things], i.e. existing things; 
ώο = ότι (8.1/36) 
2 
ταΰτα is subject and άρθρα predicate. 
. 3 
ούδέν έφη cf. ού φημί (8.1/3* note 4); ούδέν in no 
respect, 
not at all (20.1/5); ζην and τεθνάναι (19.1/3*) are the 
subjects of διαφέρειν; είπόντοο ... τινοο gen. 
a b s o l u t e 
(12.1/26). 

4 
/.I δοκεΐτε do you think; τάδικήματ'(α) (= τά άδ-) is the 
subject of πηδάν. 1.3 τιν'(α) someone is the subject of 
γράφειν and αυτά the object; viv an obsolete pronoun used 
solely in verse; it exists only in this form, which can 
function as the accusative of either the singular or plural of 
any gender of the 3rd person unemphatic pronoun (i.e. it 
can mean him, her, it, them); here it is the equivalent of 
αυτά (acc.), i.e. the άδικήματα. IA Take άν with 
έξαρκέοειεν. 1.6 έξαρκέοειεν (< έξαρκέω - the ε is not 
lengthened, cf. 5.1/2 note 2) is to be supplied after ούδ\ /.8 
πούοτιν crasis (11.1/5) for πού έοτιν; βούλεοθ' i.e. 
βούλεοθε. 
5 
(/) δύνη 2nd s. pres. subj. of δύναμαι (the subjunctive is 
required after έδν - 14.1/4c(iii)). (ii) έάλωο < άλίοκομαι 
(18.1/4). (iii) Not the god himself but a statue of him. (iv) 
ύδωρ πίνων is the equivalent of a conditional clause (if you 
drink water - 12.1/2*(iv)); τέκοιο 2nd s. aor. opt. act. of 
τίκτω, (ν) είδώο < οΐδα (19.1/3* and Appendix 3). (vii) τοΰ 
είδέναι articular infinitive (5.1/3 - other examples below 
in 7(i) and (iii)); ορέγομαι is followed by the genitive 
(13.1/2*(ii)). (viii) μέμνηοο cf.17.1/1 note 4. (ix) δόο 2nd s. 
aor.amp. act. of δίδωμι; στώ (1st s. intr. aor. subj. of ϊοτημι) 
deliberative subjunctive in indirect speech (14.1/4*(ii)), 
where I am to stand, (x) Written in Ionic (1.3); γάρ for 
[otherwise], (xi) πεφϋκόο < φύω. (xii) παρεοτώοαο f. perf. 
pple. of παρίστημι. (xiii) έστηοαν gnomic aor. (see note on 
5.2.10). (xiv) μέμνημαι is followed, where appropriate, by 
a participle, not an infinitive (cf. 15.1/2*). (xv) ληφθήοη 
2nd s. fut. ind. pass, of λαμβάνω. 
6 
παρεοτώτων n. perf. pple. of παρίστημι. 
7 
(i) Take ημών with διαφέρεις not with βααλεύειν. (ii) 
ούδέ not even; έξεσπ,ν (also in (iii)) an impersonal verb 
meaning it is possible (21.1/4*); χαρίεν sc. ecxai. (iii) Take 
ταττομένω (mid. of τάττω, drawing yourself up (with me)) 
with coi; τοΰ μοναρχεΐν gen. of comparison (17.1/4*). (iv) 
μόλων aor. pple. of βλώοκω. (ν) ξειν'(ε) = ξένε; άγγέλλειν 
infinitive used as imperative (17.1/1 note 5); κείνων = 
έκείνων. 
8 
ll.If. The first negative, ούκ, is reinforced by ούτε ... ούτε 
... ούδεμιφ and ούδ'... ούδέ, lit. I will not... neither in no 
... nor, etc. but trans. I will not... either in any ... or, etc. 
(ουδεμιφ goes with both τέχνη and μηχανη ); the fut. mid. 
ρποοτηοομαι (< άφίστημι) is intransitive; τοΰ δήμου τοΰ 
'Αθηναίων the people, [i.e.] the [people] of [the] Athenians 
a regular formula in inscriptions, trans, the people of 

198 
c 
3 
Athens; έπει dat. s. of έποο. //.3f. πείοομαι fut. of πείθομαι, 
not πάοχω; άφιοτη 3rd s. pres. subj. act., this is a transitive 
tense (19.1/1) but the verb here has no object expressed -
lit. causes [others] to revolt, i.e. tries to stir up revolt-
κατερώ < καταγορεύω (18.1/4 note 2); ύποτελώ fut. (5.1/2 
note 2); τον φόρον ... δν άν πείθω Άθηναίουο lit. the tribute 
whatever I persuade the Athenians, i.e. whatever tribute I 
persuade the Athenians (sc. is appropriate). //.5ff. oioc of 
what sort (21.1/3) is given a general reference (of whatever 
sort) 
because it is followed by άν and the sub). 
(14.1/4c(iii)), lit. of whatever sort best and most just I am 
able [to be]; The phrase ό δήμοο ό 'Αθηναίων is repeated to 
avoid any misunderstanding whatsoever. 

C 
3 
ΙΟ 
20.1 Grammar 
Ο 
20.1/1 Verbs in -νϋμι 
The -νϋμι class (18.1/1) constitutes the more numerous 
subdivision of -μι verbs but presents no especial difficulty. All 
forms of the present and imperfect contain the suffix νϋ or vt5; 
the present indicative, infinitive and participle, and the 
imperfect have endings without the o/e characteristic of -ω 
verbs (cf. 2.1/5 note 3), but the present subjunctive and optative 
have the same endings as λύω. The other tenses, which do not 
keep the νϋ/νΌ suffix, are formed in the same way as those of 
-ω verbs. An example is δείκνϋμι show; which has the principal 
parts δείκνϋμι, fut. δείξω, aor. act. έδειξα, perf. act. δέδειχα, 
perf. mid./pass. δέδειγμαι, aor. pass, έδείχθην. The present and 
imperfect of this verb are given in full in Appendix 6. 
Notes 
1 
A number of verbs in this class end in -ννϋμι rather than 
-νϋμι, e.g. κεράννϋμι mix, οκεδάννϋμι scatter, κρεμάννϋμι 
hang (tr.; the intransitive meaning of this verb is supplied by 
the passive κρέμαμαι, which is conjugated like ϊοταμαι 
(19.1/1)). 
1 
ολλϋμι (originally δλ-νϋμι) destroy, ruin, lose (fut. όλώ) has 
two aorist and two perfects. The weak forms of both are 
transitive and the strong intransitive (cf. 15.1/1 note 2): 
AORIST 
(weak) 
ώλεοα 
I 
destroyed/ruined/lost 
(strong) ώλόμην 
I perished (middle voice, not 
active!) 
PERFECT (weak) 
όλώλεκα 
I have 
destroyed/ruined/lost 
(strong) δλωλα 
I have perished, am ruined 
or lost 

όλλϋμι in its uncompounded form occurs only in verse. In 
prose we find the compound άπόλλϋμι, which has the same 
meaning. Cf. the use of θνήοκω in verse but άποθνήοκω in 
prose (19.1/3*). 
20.1/2 ϊημι and its compounds 
ιημι let go, send forth is another -μι verb of group (*) (18.1/1). 
Its present stem was originally αοη- (root οη/οε; cf. δίδωμι and 
τίθημι) but with the change of the initial sigma to a rough 
breathing (cf. ϊοτημι 19.1/1) and the loss of intervocal sigma (cf. 
6.1/lc) this was reduced to Τη- (root ή/έ). 
The principal parts of ιημι are: pres. ϊημι, fut. ήοω, aor. act ήκα, 
perf. act. εΐκα, perf. pass, είμαι, aor. pass, είθην. 
As will be seen from Appendix 5 its present and imperfect tenses 
are exactly parallel to those of τίθημι except in the 3rd pi. pres. 
ind. act., where contraction has taken place (taci < ίέαα). The 
parallelism extends to nearly every other form, although it is 
obscured in some cases by contraction. Note that the sing. aor. 
act. ind. has a κ suffix as in τίθημι. 
Almost all forms of ιημι, except those of the present and imperfect, 
exist only in compounds. The following are the most common: 
άφίημι 
send forth; discharge; let go 
έφίημι 
send; set on, send against; (mid.) aim at, desire 
μεθίημι 
let go, release; give up 
παρίημι 
pass over; let pass 
Examples of each of these compounds are: 
πρέπει coi την όργήν άφϊέναι 
It is fitting for you to vent 
είο τον βλάψαντά οε. 
your anger on the man 
who harmed you. 
έάν έλων TIC τινα άκουοίου 
If anyone convicts a man 
φόνου καί οαφώο έπιδείξσο 
of involuntary homicide 
μή καθαρόν, μετά ταΰτ' 
and clearly shows him to 
αίδέοηται καί άφή, ούκέτ' 
be polluted (lit. not 
έκβαλεΐν κϋριοο τον αύτόν 
pure), and then feels pity 
έοτιν. 
for him and releases him-
he no longer has the 
power to cast the same 
person into exile. 
έφήκε τήν ϊππον έπί τούο 
He sent the cavalry against 
Έλληναο. 
the Greeks. 

ού γάρ toic έθνεοιν έχθει 
έπίάαν, άλλά τών έν τη 
Ο,κελία άγαθών έφΐέμενοι. 
έλευθέραν δέ με, ώο έλευθέρδ 
θάνω, πρόο θεών μεθέντεο 
κτείνατε. 
εί μεθηοει την άρχήν, άλλος 
τις άντ' αύτού τύραννος 
καταςτηςεται. 
μή τοινυν γιγνώςκοντέο γε 
παρώμεν αύτό άρρητον. 
χρή ήμάο καταςκόπουο μή 
πέμπειν μηδέ διαμέλλειν 
καιρόν παρϊέντας. 
/ 
For they will not attack 
the races because of 
hatred but because they 
are aiming at the good 
things of Sicily. 
In the name of the gods, 
release me [to be] free, 
so that I may die free, 
and [then] kill me (a 
woman is speaking). 
If he gives up his power, 
someone else will set 
himself up as tyrant in 
his stead. 
Let us not then, since we 
know [it], pass it over 
unmentioned. 
We ought not to send 
inspectors or to delay, 
letting an opportunity 
pass. 
20.1/3 Genitive of price or value 
The genitive is used to express price or value with verbs and 
adjeetives denoting buying, selling, valuing, and the like: 
δταν δέη άργυρίου πρίαοθαι 
Whenever it is necessary to 
ή άποδόοθαι ίππο ν ... 
buy or sell a horse for 
money ... 
This is what Philip is 
buying with all the 
money which is being 
spent. 
A. What is his fee for 
teaching? (lit. for how 
much does he teach?) 
B. Five minae (lit. for five 
minae). 
He thinks us of no 
account. 
ΦΤκρα καί ολίγου άξια ανέρωτα. He asks petty, insignificant 
questions (lit. things 
small and worth little). 
τούτο δ' έοτίν δ τών 
άναλιοκομένων χρημάτων 
πάντων Φίλιππος ώνεΐται. 
Α. πόοου διδάοκει; 
Β. πέντε μνών. 
ημάο ούδενόο λόγου άξιοι. 

202 
c 
3 
To value highly/little/not 
at all etc. is commonly expressed b\ 
ποιεΐοθαι and a genitive governed by περί: περί πολλοί 
(πλέονοο, πλείστου) /ολίγου (έλάττονοο, έλαχίοτου)/ ούδενόο 
ποιεΐοθαι. Examples are: 
τά πλείοτου άξια περί 
έλαχίοτου ποιείται, τά δέ 
φαυλότερα περί πλεονοο. 
άναγκαϊον έδόκει είναι τό τοΰ 
θεοΰ περί πλείοτου ποιεΐοθαι. 
ούτοο άπανταο τούο πολίτδο 
περί ούδενόο έποιήοατο. 
He values least what is 
worth most, and [values] 
more highly what is 
more trivial 
It seemed essential to value 
most highly the god's 
[word]. 
He valued all the citizens 
at nothing. 
20.1/4 Genitive of separation 
The genitive is used with verbs and adjectives denoting 
separation, cessation, prevention, hindrance, difference, etc. It is 
common with verbs compounded with άπό and έκ: 
άπέχει τών Έπιπολών έξ ή 
It is six or seven stades 
έπτά οταδίουο. 
distant from 
Epipolae. 
έπαυοαν αύτόν τηο οτρατηγίδο. 
They deposed him from 
his generalship. 
They prevented him from 
passing (lit. from the 
passage). 
\ou voted that he be 
excluded from the agora 
and the temples. 
You will be no different 
from 
Chaerephon. 
έργων πονηρών χειρ' έλευθέρδν Keep your hand free from 
έχε. 
wicked 
deeds. 
έκώλϋον τηο πορείδο αύτόν. 
έψηφίοαοθε ύμεΐο αύτόν 
εϊργεοθαι τηο άγοράο καί 
τών ιερών, 
ούδέν διοίοειο Χαιρεφώντοο. 
20.1/5 Accusative of respect or specification 
The accusative may be used with a verb (usually intransitive) or 
an adjective to denote a thing with respect to which that verb or 
adjective is limited. A literal translation may be obtained by 
employing the words with respect to before the noun involved, 
but, to produce an idiomatic translation, it will often be necessary 
to recast the expression somewhat in English: 
τάο γνάθουο άλγήοετε. 
You will have a pain with 
respect to your jaws, i.e. 
you'll have sore jaws. 

πάδαο ώκύο Άχιλλεύο. 
τυφλοο τά τ' ώτα τον τε νουν 
τά τ* δμματ' ει. 
τεΐχοο πεντήκοντα μεν πήχεων 
τό εύροο, ϋψοο δέ διδκοοίων 
πήχεων. 
Swift-footed 
(lit. swift with 
respect to feet) Achilles. 
You are blind both in (lit. 
with respect to) ears and 
mind and eyes. 
A wall fifty cubits wide 
and two hundred cubits 
high (lit. of fifty cubits 
with respect to the 
width, and of two 
hundred with respect to 
height). 
Tell [me] who you are by 
race. 
Under this heading may also be included the so-called adverbial 
accusatives, e.g. ουδέν in no respect, not at all; τι to some extent; 
τί why (lit. with respect to what?); πολύ much, by far; τά άλλα, 
τάλλα in other respects; τούτον τον τρόπον in this way; τίνα 
τρόπον...; in what way..? how...? Examples of these have already 
occurred. We have also met the neuter accusative (both singular 
and plural) of adjectives employed in this way, e.g. όρθά 
βαδίζειν to walk straight (15.2.3, see also 16.3 /.5, 17.3 /.12). 
Adjectives so used are the equivalent of adverbs. 
λέξον OCTIC ει γενοο. 
20.2 Greek reading 
1 
νεανίαο TIC ποτε νοσηοαο είπε τω ίατρω ούτωο άλγεΐν ώοτε 
μή δύναοθαι μήτε καθηοθαι μήτε κεΐοθαι μήτε έοτάναν ό δέ 
ίατρόο, ώ φίλε, έφη, ούδέν άλλο coi λοιπόν έοτιν ή 
κρέμαοθαι. 
2# τίο δ' οιδεν εί ζην τούθ' ό κέκληται θανειν, 
τό ζην δέ θνηοκειν έοτί; πλήν όμωο βροτών 
vocouciv οί βλέποντεο, οί δ' όλωλότεο 
ούδέν vocouciv ούδέ κέκτηνται κακά. 
3 
Proverbs and famous sayings 
(ι) δραχμής μέν ηύλει, τεττάρων δέ παύεται, (it) ή κάμηλοο 
έπιθυμήοαοα κεράτων καί τά ώτα προοαπώλεοεν. (iii)# ούκ 
έοτιν ocxic πάντ' άνήρ εύδαιμονεΐ. (iv) πολλοί οτρατηγοί 
Καρίαν άπώλεοαν. (ν) άφείο τά φανερά μή δίωκε τά άφανη. 
(vi) χρόνοο δίκαιον άνδρα δείκνυοιν μόνοο. (vii) έλέφαντοο 
διαφέρειο ούδέν. (viii)# άπάτηο δικαίαο ούκ άποοτατεΐ 
θεόο. (ix)# πολλών ιατρών εϊοοδόο μ' άπώλεοεν. (χ) λέων ει 
τήν τρίχα, ovoc δέ τον βίον. 

4# An epic nose 
τοΰ γρυποΰ NIKCDVOC όρώ την ρίνα, Μένιππε, 
αύτόο δ' ούν μακράν φαίνεται είναι έτι* 
άλλ' ήξει, μείνωμεν όμωο* εί γάρ πολύ, πέντε 
τηο pivoc οταδίουο, οϊομαι, ούκ άπέχει. 
άλλ' αύτη μέν, όραο, προπορεύεται* ήν δ' έπί βουνόν 
5 
ύψηλόν οτώμεν, καύτόν έοοψόμεθα. 
5# τήν κεφαλήν βάπτων TIC άπώλεοε τάο τρίχαο αύτάο, 
καί δαούο ων λίαν ώόν άπαο γέγονεν. 
6 
έπί τούτω Κλεάνωρ άνέοτη καί έλεξεν ώδε* άλλ' όράτε μέν, 
ώ άνδρεο, τήν βααλέωο έπιορκίαν καί άοέβειαν, όράτε δέ 
τήν Τιοοαφέρνουο άπιοτίαν, όοτιο, λέγων ώο γείτων τε εϊη 
τηο Έλλάδαο καί περί πλείοτου άν ποιήοαιτο οώοαι ήμάο, 
καί έπί τούτοιο αύτόο όμόοαο ήμΐν, αύτόο δεξιάο δούο, 5 
αύτόο έξαπατήοαο ουνέλαβε τούο οτρατηγούο, καί ούδέ Δία 
ξένιον ήδέοθη, άλλά Κλεάρχω καί όμοτράπεζοο γενόμενος 
αύτοιο τούτοιο έξαπατήοαο τούο άνδραο άπολωλεκεν. 
7 
άλλ', ώ Οωκρατεο, πειθόμενοο τοΐο νόμοιο μήτε παΐδαο περι 
πλείονοο ποιοΰ μήτε τό ζην μήτε άλλο μηδέν προ του 
δικαίου, ίνα είο "Αιδου έλθών έχηο πάντα ταΰτα 
άπολογήοαοθαι τοΐο έκεΐ άρχουοιν. 
8 
ό C<OKp0/nic φανερόο ήν ού τών τά οώματα πρόο ωραν, άλλά 
τών τάο ψυχάο πρόο άρετήν εύ πεφυκότων έφιέμενοο. 
9# γραμματικού θυγάτηρ έτεκεν φιλότητι μιγεΐοα 
παιδίον άροενικόν, θηλυκόν, ούδέτερον. 
10# Ζεύο γάρ τά μέν μέγιοτα φροντίζει βροτών, 
τά μικρά δ' άλλοιο δαίμοοιν παρείο έφ. 
11 
ο ί δ ' έ ν τ η Χ ί ω μετά τοΰ Έτεονίκου οτρατιώται όντεο, έωο 
μέν θέροο ήν, άπό τε τηο ώραο έτρέφοντο καί έργαζόμενοι 
μιοθοΰ κατά τήν χώραν έπεί δέ χειμών έγένετο καί τροφήν 
ούκ εΐχον γυμνοί τε ήοαν καί άνυπόδητοι, ουνίοταντο 
άλλήλοιο ώο τη Χίω έπιθηοόμενοι. 
5 
12# Polymnestoi; who has been blinded by Hecuba, screams 
for vengeance but is restrained by Agamemnon. 
ΠΟ. ωμοι, τί λέξειο; ή γάρ έγγύο έοτί που; 
οήμηνον, είπέ ποΰ 'c0\ ϊν' άρπάοαο χεροΐν 
διαοπάοωμαι καί καθαιμάξω χρόα. 
ΑΓ. 
ούτοο, τί πάοχεισ, ΠΟ. πρόο θεών οε λίοοομαι, 
μεθεο μ' έφεΐναι τηδε μαργώοαν χέρα. 
5 
ΑΓ. 
ϊοχ'· έκβαλών δέ καρδίαο τό βάρβαρον 
λέγ', ώο άκούοαο οοΰ τε τηοδε τ' έν μέρει 
κρίνω δικαίωο άνθ' ότου πάοχειο τάδε. 

Notes 
1 vocricac having fallen sick not having been sick as is shown 
by the context (technically called an ingressive aorist); μή 
δύναοθαι... lit. not to be able neither to ... nor to, i.e. not to 
be able either to ... or ίο. 
2 /.I τούθ' (τοΰτο) is the subject of the first clause after ει 
(supply ecu from the next line). 1.2 πλήν όμωο except 
however (lit. except nevertheless). 1.3 οί βλεποντεο sc. the 
light of day, a regular expression for the living; οί όλωλότεο 
(20.1/1 note 2) i.e. the dead. 
3 (/) ηύλει inceptive imperfect (4.1/1 footnote) started to play 
the pipe, (ii) καί adv. also, (iii) Lit. there is not 
whatever 
man ..., i.e. there is no man who ... (on OCTIC, which is here 
used adjectivally, see 10.1/26 note 2). (ν) μή negates the 
whole sentence, i.e. άφείο (aor. pple. of άφίημι) and δίωκε. 
(χ) εί (< ειμί) you are. 
4 1.2 δ' ούν (13.1/3c(ii)) introduces a contrast 
but/however 
(ούν does not have its normal meaning here). II.3f. μείνωμεν 
jussive subj. (14.1/4<z(i)); with εί γάρ πολύ supply άπέχει 
from next line, lit. for [even] if he is far away; 
πέντε 
οταδίαυο acc. of spatial extent (7.1/7d); TT\C plvoc from his 
nose gen. of separation (20.1/4). 1.5 ήν = έάν (18.1/5 note 2), 
which is followed by the subj. 1.6 οτώμεν intr. aor. subj. of 
ϊστημι (19.1/1); καύτόν (= καί αύτόν) him too. 
5 The participle ων has a concessive force though being (we 
might have expected an accompanying καίπερ (12.1/2<z(iii)) 
but cf. λέγων, όμόοαο, δούο in the next passage, which are 
used in the same way); take λίδν with Sacvc (this unusual 
word order is dictated by metre). 
6 /.I ανεοτη < άνίοτημι. 1.3 The indefinite relative OCTIC , 
(10.1/2 note 2) is also used to introduce an adjectival clause 
which gives a reason, trans, since he; εϊη opt. in indirect 
speech in historic sequence (14.1/4d). 1.5 όμο^ 
< δμνϋμι. 
(.6 ούδέ not even; 1.7 ήδέοθη < αίδέομαι; Κλεάρχω dat. with 
ομοτράπεζοο (to share a meal automatically involved 
permanent ties of friendship and a violation of these was an 
offence against Ζεύο ξένιοο); καί actually; αύτοΐο τούτοιο 
(instrumental dat., 11.1/2) by these very means . 
7 μήτε άλλο μηδέν nor anything 
else (7.1/6); πρό lit. in 
preference to but trans, than; είο is used with the gen. to 
mean to the place/house of - the house of Hades is the 
Underworld, to which all souls (ψϋχαί) went after death; 
eXllc you may be able (έχω + an infinitive means be able). 
205 
c 
3 
m! 
8 

206 
C 3 
8 
8 φανερός ήν + pple. lit. was clear(ly) ... (cf. 15.2.10); 
πεφϋκότων must be taken with both phrases beginning with 
τών; εύ πεφϋκέναι (< φύω, the pple. is used here) means to bc 
well endowed by nature, to be naturally sound; τά οώματο 
and τάο ψϋχάο are acc. of respect (20.1/5), but trans, in body 
... in soul and trans, πρόο (lit. towards) by with respect to' 
9 μιγεΐοα f. aor. pass. pple. of μείγνΰμι; the lady gave birth to 
triplets, whose gender reflected her father's professional 
interests. 
10 παρείο aor. act. pple. of παρίημι. 
11 ωρδ [produce of] the season; γυμνοί lit. naked but here to be 
understood simply as badly clothed. 
12 /.I ή γάρ introduces a surprised question is she really ...? (ή 
= άρα). 1.2 'οθ' i.e. έοτί; χεροΐν is dat. dual (24.1/4), lit. with 
two hands. 1.3 καθαιμάξω aor. subj. (as is διαοπάοωμαι) after 
ίνα (14.1/4c(i)); χρόα acc. s. of χρώο. 1.4 The nom. ούτοο 
(which does not, in any case, have a voc.) expresses an 
impatient demand for the attention of the person addressed 
(here Polymnestor), trans, you there! or what's 
thisτί 
πάοχειο lit. what are you sufferingi.e. 
what's wrong with 
you?. 1.5 μέθεο 2nd s. aor. imp. act. of μεθίημι; έφεΐναι aor. 
inf. of έφίημι; 1.6 τό βάρβαρον the barbarous [element], i.e. 
savagery, ll. 7f. ώο (here = ίνα) introduces a purpose clause 
(22.1/lfc(ii)), and consequently κρίνω is subjunctive. 

207 
c 
to 
21.1 Grammar 
21.1/1 Wishes 
Like potential clauses (19.1/2) and conditional sentences 
(18.1/5), wishes can have reference to the present, past or 
future. TTie negative used in wishes is always μή. 
(a) Wishes for the future are expressed by the optative (present 
or aorist, according to the aspect involved - 14.1/1) and 
may be introduced by είθε or εί γάρ (if only ... /): 
ϋμινθεοί δοΐεν έκπεροαι 
May the gods grant that 
Πριάμου πόλιν. 
you sack (lit. give to you 
to sack) the city of 
Priam. 
είθε γράψειεν ώο χρή. 
I wish that he would 
write as he should (lit. 
would that he would 
write as is necessary or 
if only he would ...). 
(b) Wishes for the present are expressed by the imperfect 
indicative and must be introduced by είθε or εί γάρ: 
εί γάρ τοοαύτην δύναμιν 
I wish I had so much 
είχον. 
power (lit. would that I 
had ... or if only I 
had...). 
είθ' είχεο βελτΓουο φρέναο. 
I wish you had better 
thoughts. 
(c) Wishes for the past are expressed by the aorist indicative, 
also with an obligatory εϊθε/εί γάρ: 

208 
C 3 » 
ΙΟ 
εϊθ' εύρομέν οε, ώ "Αδμητε, 
I wish we had not found 
μή λϋπούμενον. 
you grieving, 
Admetus. 
είθε coi, ώ Περίκλειχ, τότε 
I wish I had been with yon 
ουνεγενόμην. 
then, Pericles. 
In the nature of things only wishes for the future can be fulfilled 
(and then not always). Wishes for the present and past are futile 
protests against what is happening or has happened. 
Note 
A present or past wish may also be expressed by ωφελον (the 
aorist of οφείλω owe, be obliged to), which has the meaning 
ought. It is followed by a present or aorist infinitive, depending 
on whether the wish is for the present or past, εϊθε/εί γάρ is 
optional: 
ώφελε Kupoc ζην. 
I wish Cyrus were alive 
(lit. Cyrus ought to be 
alive). 
μήποτ' ωφελον λιπειν τήν 
I wish I had never left 
Cicupov. 
Scyrus (lit. I ought never 
to have 
left...). 
21.1/2 Further temporal conjunctions (scoc, 
μ έ χ ρ ι , n p i v ) 
Each of these three words has more than one use, but all can be 
employed as subordinating conjunctions with the meaning until. 
έωο and μέχρι both take the same construction as certain other 
temporal conjunctions (ότε, έπειδή etc., see 14.1/4c(iii)). They 
are followed by the indicative when the clause they introduce 
refers to a definite event: 
ταΰτα έποίουν μέχρι CKOXOC 
They were doing these 
έγένετο. 
things until darkness fell 
(lit. happened). 
When the reference is to something anticipated (but we do not 
know if it eventuates or not), the indefinite construction is used 
(14.1/4c(iii)): 
περιμένετε έωο άν έλθω. 
Wait until I come (or for 
me to come); 
έδοξεν αύτοιο προϊέναι έωο 
They decided (lit. it 
Κύρω ουμμείξειαν. 
seemed good to them, 
IX.VAa) to advance 
until they should 
meet 
Cyrus. 

With these conjunctions the indefinite construction can also 
refer to repeated action: 
περιεμένομεν έκάοτοτε έωο 
On each occasion we used 
άνοιχθείη τό δεομωτηριον. 
to wait until the prison 
opened. 
πρίν has a wider range of constructions: 
(a) When the main verb is affirmative, πρίν is followed by an 
infinitive (usually aorist) and has the meaning before: 
έπί τό άκρον άνέβη 
Cheirisophus went up to 
Χειρίοοφοο πρίν τινα 
the peak before any of 
αίοθέοθαι τών πολεμίων. 
the enemy noticed. 
λέγεται 'Αλκιβιάδηο, πρίν 
Alcibiades is said to have 
ε'ίκοαν έτών είναι, 
conversed with Pericles 
Περικλεΐ διαλεχθηναι 
about laws before he 
περί νόμων. 
was twenty years old (lit. 
of twenty years). 
The rules governing the case of the subject of the infinitive 
are exactly the same as in the infinitive construction in 
indirect statement (8.1/3a); in the first example above, the 
subject (τινά) of the infinitive is not the same as the subject 
of the main verb and so is in the accusative. 
(b) When the main verb is negated and πρίν can be translated 
by until or before, it has the same construction as έωο and 
μέχρι: 
ούκ ήν γένοο άθανάτων πρίν 
There was not a race of 
"Epoc ξυνέμειξεν άπαντα. 
immortals until (or 
before) Love mixed 
everything 
together. 
μή απέλθετε πρίν άν μου 
Do not go away before (or 
άκούοητε. 
until) you hear me. 
(c) When the main verb is negated and πρίν must be translated 
by before, it has the same construction as in (a): 
ούδέ πρίν νΤκηθηναι έθάρρει Not even before being 
ό οτρατηγόο. 
defeated was the general 
confident (πρίν cannot 
here be translated by 
until). 
Notes 
1 έωο (and occasionally μέχρι) with the indicative can also 
mean while, as long as: 
209 
c 
3 H·' 
ro 

210 
c 
3 7+ 
ΙΟ 
Κλέαρχοο, έωο πόλεμοο ήν 
As long as the Spartans 
xoic Λακεδαιμονίου πρόο 
were at war (lit. there 
τούο Άθηναίουο, 
was war for the 
παρέμενεν. 
Spartans) with the 
Athenians, Clearchus 
remained 
loyal. 
2 μέχρι may also function as a preposition (+ gen.) with the 
meaning until, up to, as far as (with reference to time or 
space): μέχρι τοΰ γόνατοο up to the knee; μέχρι τούτου up to 
this [time]. 
3 πρίν can also be used as an adverb meaning before, 
formerly: έν τω πριν χρόνω in the previous time. 
4 ού is used to negate the indicative in the subordinate clauses 
described above, μή to negate the indefinite construction 
and also the infinitive after πριν. 
21.1/3 Further demonstrative and relative 
adjectives/pronouns 
Greek possesses two series of adjectives, each containing a 
demonstrative, relative (and exclamatory), and interrogative 
form. One series, with the element -oc-, refers to quantity, the 
other, with the element -οι-, refers to quality: 
DEMONSTRATIVE 
RELATIVE/EXCLAMATORY 
INTERROGATIVE 
τοοούτοο, τοοόοδε so 
ococ as much/many as; 
πόοοο how bigf pi. 
much/many 
how much/many! 
how many f 
τοιοΰτοο, τοιόοδε of 
oioc of what sort; 
ποιοο of what sortf 
this sort, such 
what a ... / 
The relative/exclamatory and interrogative forms are first and 
second declension adjectives (3.1/3). On the declension of 
τοοοΰτοο, τοιοΰτοο see 16.1/1 note 1. τοοόοδε and τοιόοδε are 
compounds of τοο/τοι + oc (declined as καλόο, 3.1/3) + δε. All 
can function as pronouns as well as adjectives. 
We have already dealt with the interrogatives (10.1/2) and the 
use of τοοοΰτοο and τοιοΰτοο to anticipate an adverbial clause or 
phrase of result (16.1/1). We must also note that: 
(α) τοιοΰτοο is used with reference to what precedes in a 
narrative, τοιόοδε with reference to what follows. This is the 
principal use of the lattery e.g. οί μέν τοιαΰτα είπον, οί δε 
'Αθηναίοι τοιάδε άπεκρίναντο they said this (lit. such things 
as precede) and the Athenians replied as follows (lit. such 
things as follow), ούτοο and όδε are used in the same way 
(9.1/1 note 1). 

φ) τοοόοδε, like τοιόοδε, can refer to what follows but is 
generally the equivalent of xocouxoc. 
(c) ococ and oloc can introduce exclamations: 
oca πράγματα έχειο. 
How much trouble (lit. 
how many things) you 
have! 
οία epdctfc οία λαγχάνει 
After what deeds what 
κακά. 
sufferings are his! (lit. 
what things having 
done what evil things he 
obtains!). 
(d) πάντεο ocoi is used in the sense all who (lit. all as many as) 
instead of the expected πάντεο οί: 
πάνταο έχθαίρω θεούο ocoi 
I hate all the gods who 
κακοΰοί μ' έκδίκωο. 
unjustly wrong me. 
Very often ococ is used by itself in this sense: 
οί Καδμείοι OCODC κακούο 
All the Cadmeans whom I 
εύρον ... 
found wicked ... (lit. the 
Cadmeans as many as I 
/ 
found...). 
(e) xocoOxoc/ococ and xoiouxoc/oioc are used in sentences where 
ococ and oioc introduce a comparison. As English does not 
have relatives of this sort some change is needed in 
translation: 
oioc ό πατήρ έοτιν, τοιοΰτοο 
Like father; like son (lit. of 
καί ό DIOC. 
what sort the father is, 
of that sort [is] the son 
too). 
έχετε τοοούτουο οτρατιώτσο 
You have as many soldiers 
OCODC οί Πέροαι. 
as the Persians (sc. have; 
lit. you have so many 
soldiers as many as the 
Persians). 
The relatives alone, without the corresponding demonstratives, 
may be used in this way: 
ού μοι ή δύναμίο έοτιν οίδ 
/ have not the same 
πάροο ήν. 
strength as I previously 
had (lit. there is not 
to me the strength of 
what sort (- of the sort 
which) there was 
previously). 
211 
c 
3 
IO 

212 
c 3 
Notes 
1 
In verse xococ and xoioc often occur as the equivalents of 
xocouxoc and xoiouxoc respectively. 
2 
oioc χ' ειμί I am able is a stereotyped formula (example in 
13.3(ii) /.3); χε here is purely idiomatic and is not to be 
translated, and oioc has no relative force. 
21.1/4 Further impersonal verbs 
Impersonal verbs have no real subject. In English they are given 
a grammatical subject it, which is purely idiomatic and does not 
refer to anything. In Greek impersonal verbs are simply put in 
the 3rd singular. We have already met δει and χρή it is necessary, 
which are followed by an infinitive whose subject, if expressed, 
is put into the accusative (examples at 3.2.12(x), 5.2.15 etc.). 
Other impersonals can be classified as follows: 
(a) Impersonals followed by the dative and infinitive 
δοκεΐ 
it seems good 
πρέπει 
it is fitting 
έξεοτι 
it is allowed/possible 
προσήκει it concerns/is fitting 
λϋοιτελει it is profitable 
ουμφέρει it is expedient 
πάρεοχι 
it is possible 
Examples of έξεοχι occur at 9.2.7 and 19.2.7(ii). Of the others 
we may cite: 
χαΰχα πρέπει μάλλον βαρβάροιο It is more fitting for 
ποιεΐν ή Έλληοιν. 
barbarians than Greeks 
to do these things. 
ού coi προσήκει φωνεΐν. 
You have no business 
speaking (lit. it does not 
concern you to speak). 
δοκεΐ is usually to be translated by think, intend, decide, e.g. coc 
έμοί δοκεΐ as I think (lit. as it seems good to me); δοκεΐ αύτω 
άπιέναι he intends to leave; έδοξε xoic Άθηναίοιο μάχεοθαι the 
Athenians decided to fight (another example at 14.2.18 1.3). 
Some of the above verbs can be used personally, sometimes with 
a different meaning, e.g. πάρειμι I am present. 
(b) Impersonals followed by the dative of the person 
involved 
and the genitive of the thing 
μέχεοχι μοι χούτου 
there is a share to me of this, i.e. I have 
a share in this 
μέλει μοι χούχου 
there is a concern to me of this, i.e. I 
am concerned about this 
μεχαμέλει μοι χούχου there is repentance to me of this, i.e. I 
repent of this 

Examples are: 
xoic θεοΐο δίκηο μέλει. 
The gods are concerned 
with justice. 
τί τούδέ coi μέτεοτι πράγματοο; What concern (lit. share) 
(c) Weather impersonate 
The various verbs for expressing weather conditions, as ϋει it is 
raining, νείφει it is snowing, 
are not strictly impersonals 
because Zeus, in his capacity as sky god, is their understood 
subject. We should, however, translate them by the impersonal 
English expression. 
1 
έοτι (always so accented) is often used in the sense of έξεοτι 
(examples at 9.2.13 1.5 and 11.2.10 1.4). For other cases of 
thi/accentuation see Appendix 8, d(x). 
2 
πάρα, μέτα (note accent!) are often used for πάρεοτι, μέτεση 
respectively. 
3 
When the impersonal δει means there is need of it takes the 
same construction as class (b) (example in 13.2.21); in the 
sense it is necessary it is always followed by the infinitive. 
21.1/5 Accusative absolute 
The participle of an impersonal verb stands in the accusative, in 
the neuter singular, in circumstances where other verbs would 
be placed in the genitive absolute (cf. 12.1/2b); it has no subject. 
Such accusative absolutes are δέον it being necessary; έξόν, παρόν, 
παρέχον it being possible; μέλον it being a care; προσήκον, 
πρέπον it being fitting; δόξαν it having been decided. Examples 
are: 
εξον είρήνην έχειν, αίρεΐται 
Although he can live in 
πολεμεΐν. 
peace (lit. it being 
have you in this 
business? 
ϋμιν μεταμεληοάτω τών 
πεπραγμένων. 
Repent of your deeds! (lit. 
let there be repentance 
[3rd s. aor. imp. act.] to 
you of the things done). 
Notes 
δήλον γάρ ότι oicGa, μέλον 
γέ coi. 
possible to have peace), 
he chooses to make war. 
For it [is] clear that you 
know, since you are 
interested [in the subject] 
(lit. it being a care to 
you). 

214 
c 
3 
ΙΟ 
ουνδόξαν τω πατρί καί τη μητρί, Since his father and 
γαμεΐ την Κυαξάρου 
mother approved (lit it 
θυγατέρα. 
having seemed good also 
to ...) he married (vivid 
present) the daughter of 
Cyaxares. 
The accusative absolute is also found with expressions 
consisting of a neuter adjective and ov, such as αδύνατον όν it 
being impossibley αίοχρόν όν it being disgraceful, άδηλον όν it 
being unclear, e.g. 
παρεκελεύοντο άλλήλοιο 
They encouraged each 
κραυγή ούκ όλίγη χρώμενοι, 
other with (lit. using) no 
αδύνατον όν έν νυκτί άλλω 
little shouting, since it 
τω οημήναι. 
was impossible (lit. it 
being impossible) by 
night to signal by any 
other [means]. 
21.2 Greek reading 
1 
(Γπαρτιάτηο TIC eic Άθήνac έλθών καί ίδών έν άποχωρήοει 
θακοΰνταο έπί δίφρων άνθρώπουο, μή μοι γένοιτο, ειπεν, 
ένταΰθα καθίοαι όθεν ούκ εστίν έξαναστηναι πρεοβυτέρω. 
2 
Proverbs 
(i) πριν τούο ίχθΰο έλεΐν τήν αλμην κυκάο. (ii) ού μέλει τη 
χελωνη μυιών. (iii) αεί με τοιούτοι πολέμιοι διώκοιεν. (iv) 
προοήκει τοΐο τέκνοιο έντόο θυρών λοιδορειοθαι. (ν) oioc ό 
τρόποο τοιοΰτοο ό λόγοο. (νϊ)# μηδένα νομίζετε εύτυχεΐν 
πριν άν θάνη . (vii)# οϊαπερ ή δέοποινα τοία χή κύων. (viii)# 
νέω δέ οιγάν μάλλον ή λαλεΐν πρέπει, (ix) ώ οία κεφαλή, 
και έγκέφαλον ούκ έχει. (*)# μέτεοτι τοΐο δούλοιαν 
δεοποτών νόοου. (xi)# μή μοι γένοιθ' ά βούλομ', άλλ' ά 
συμφέρει, (xii) "Αιδου πρωκτω περιπέοοιο. (xiii)# εϊθ' ήν 
άφωνον οπέρμα δυοτήνων βροτών. 
3# όοτιο δέ θνητών θάνατον όρρωδεΐ λίαν, 
μώροο πέφυκε* τη τύχη τώνδε μέλει, 
όταν δ' ό καιρόο τοΰ θανεΐν έλθών τύχη, 
ούδ' άν πρόο αύλάο Ζηνόο έκφύγοι μόλων. 
4 
ocoi γαμοΰοι γένει κρειττουο γάμουο ούκ έπίοτανται 
γαμεΐν. 
5 
οϊω xic άν τό πλείστον τηο ήμέραο ουνη, τοιούτον άνάγκη 
γενέοθαι καί αύτόν τούο τρόπουο. 

6 
avacTac αύθιχ Θώραξ ό Βοιώτιοο, oc περί οτρατηγίαο 
Ξενοφώντι έμάχετο, έφη, εί έξέλθοιεν έκ του Πόντου, 
έοεοθαι αύτοΐο Χερρόνηοον, χώραν καλήν καί εύδαίμονα, 
ώοτε έξειναι τω βουλομένω ένοικεϊν, τω δέ μή βουλομένω 
άπιέναι οϊκαδε. γελοΐον δέ είναι, έν τη Ελλάδι ούοηο 5 
χώραο πολλήο καί άφθονου, έν τη βαρβάρων μαοτεύειν. εωο 
δ' άν, έφη, έκεΐ γένηοθε, κάγω ύπιοχνοΰμαι ύμΐν τον μιοθόν. 
7 
Διογένηο ίδών ποτε γυναικαο άπ' έλάαο άπηγχονιομέναο, 
είθε γάρ, έφη, πάντα τά δένδρα τοιούτον καρπόν ήνεγκεν. 
8 # 
OCTIC δέ πράοοει πολλά, μή πράοοειν παρόν, 
μώροο, παρόν ζην ήδέωο άπράγμονα. 
9 
βουλευομένοιο τοιο οτρατιώταιο έδοξεν άποκρίναοθαι τάδε* 
καί έλεξε Χειρίοοφοο* ήμΐν δοκεΐ, εί μέν τιο έα 
ήμάο 
άπιέναι οϊκαδε, διαπορεύεοθαι τήν χώραν ώο άν δυνώμεθα 
άανέοτατα* ήν δέ TIC ήμάο τηο οδού άποκωλύη, διαπολεμεΐν 
τούτω ώο άν δυνώμεθα κράτιοτα. 
10# Prometheus laments his lot. 
ή δυοπετώο άν τούο έμούο άθλουο φέροιο, 
δτω θανεΐν μέν έοτιν ού πεπρωμένον 
αύτη γάρ ήν άν πημάτων απαλλαγή" 
νύν δ' ούδέν έοτι τέρμα μοι προκείμενον 
μόχθων πρίν άν Ζεύο έκπέοη τυραννίδοο. 
5 
11 
καί ό Kupoc άκούοαο του Γωβρύα τοιαύτα τοιάδε πρόο 
αύτόν έλεξεν. 
12# Medea resolves to murder her children, 
ειεν τί δράοειο, θυμέ; βούλευοαι καλώο 
πρίν έξαμαρτεΐν καί τά προοφιλέοτατα 
έχθιοτα θέοθαι. ποι ποτ' έξήξαο τάλαο; 
κάτιοχε λήμα καί οθένοο θεοοτυγέο. 
καί πρόο τί ταύτα δύρομαι, ψυχήν έμήν 
5 
όρώο' έρημον καί παρημελημένην 
πρόο ών έχρήν ήκιοτα; μαλθακοί δέ δή 
τοιαύτα γιγνόμεοθα πάοχοντεο κακά; 
ού μή προδώοειο, θυμέ, οαυτόν έν κακοΐο. 
οϊμοι δέδοκται* παΐδεο, έκτόο ομμάτων 
10 
άπέλθετ'· ήδη γάρ με φοίνιον νέα 
δέδυκε Xvcca θυμόν. ώ χέρεο χέρεο, 
πρόο οίον έργον έξοπλιζόμεοθα* φεύ 
ταλαινα τόλμηο, ή πολύν πόνον βραχεί 
διαφθερουοα τον έμόν έρχομαι χρόνω. 
15 
EIC Λακεδαίμονα παραγενόμενόο TIC καί τήν πρόο τούο 
πρεοβύταο τών νέων τιμήν θεαοάμενοο, έν (Γπάρτη μόνη, 
ειπε, λυοιτελεΐ γηράοκειν. 

216 
c 3 S ro 
14# έχρήν γάρ ήμάο ούλλογον ποιουμένουο 
τον φύντα θρηνεί ν eic oc' έρχεται κακά, 
τον δ' αύ θανόντα και πόνων πεπαυμένον 
χαίρονταο εύφημοΰνταο έκπέμπειν δόμων. 
Notes 
1 The Spartans, as well as living in a primitive simplicity 
where a public toilet would have been unheard of, prided 
themselves on old-fashioned virtues such as respect for 
people older than oneself (cf. 13 below); έσπ,ν = έξεοτιν; 
έξαναστηναι intr. aor. inf. of έξανίοτημι. 
2 (/) The brine is to boil the fish, (iv) Take τέκνοιο with 
λοιδορεΐοθαι, not with προοήκει. (ν) Supply έοτί with oioc 
and with τοιοΰτοο (cf. (vii) below), (vii) χή = καί ή. (ix) οία 
exclamatory, (x) Take δεοποτών with νόοου, and νόοου with 
μέτεοτι. (xi) γένοιθ' = γένοιτο; βούλομ' = βούλομαι (2.1/66 
note); συμφέρει is not here impersonal but has ά as its 
subject. 
3 1.2 τώνδε neuter these things. 1.3 έλθών τύχη (3rd s. aor. 
subj. of τυγχάνω) chances to come (15.1/2e). 
4 γένει in race (dat. of respect, 23.1/2ra). 
5 συνη 3rd s. pres. subj. of ούνειμι, which takes a dative (here 
οϊω); άνάγκη sc. έοτί; τούο τρόπουο acc. of respect (20.1/5) 
with τοιούτον. 
6 After έφη in 1.2 we have a passage of indirect speech, but the 
last sentence of the passage is in direct speech with an extra 
έφη inserted (cf. 8.1/3a and 7.1/2 note 3). 1.2 εί έξέλθοιεν 
represents in historic sequence έάν έξέλθωοι of the original 
direct speech (14.1/4c(iii)). 1.3 έοεοθαι αύτοιο lit. there to be 
going to be for them, i.e. they would have. 1.4 τω ... μη 
βουλομένω 
the negative is μή because a general class is 
meant (12.1/2tf(vi)), trans, anyone who did not [so] wish. 
1.7. έκεΐ γένηοθε i.e. you get there. 
7 άπηγχονιομένδο f. acc. pi. of the perf. pass. pple. of 
άπαγχονίζω; είθε + aor. expresses a wish for the past 
8 The old Athenian aristocratic ideal was a life of leisure. In 
both lines παρόν is an acc. absolute (21.1/5). /.I μή negates 
πρδοοειν. 
9 άπιέναι < άπέρχομαι (18.1/3); ώο ... άοινέσιατα lit. & 
whatever way (ώο άν) we can most harmlessly, i.e. doing the 
least possible harm. 
(21.1/1 c). 

10 1.2 δτω 
the relative δοτιο can be used to introduce an 
adjectival clause which gives a reason (cf. note on 20.2.6 
1.3). 1.3 αύτη this refers to what has just been mentioned (i.e. 
death), but is attracted into the gender of απαλλαγή. //.4f. 
νυν δ'(έ) but as it is; take μόχθων with τέρμα; έκπίπτω is here 
acting as the pass, of έκβάλλω throw out (cf. 17.1/5); 
τυραννίδοο gen. of separation (20.1/4). 
11 Take τοιαύτα with άκούοδο, τοιάδε with έλεξεν; Γωβρύδο 
(1st declension) has the non-Attic gen. s. Γωβρύδ. 
12 /.I βούλευοαι 2nd s. aor. imp. mid. of βουλεύω. 1.3 θέοθαι (< 
τίθημι) here make; έξήξαο 2nd s. aor. ind. act. of έξαΐοοω; 
τάλαο (10.1/3 note 2) is voc. (Medea is still addressing her 
θϋμόο). 1.5 πρόο τί lit. with a view to what, i.e. why. 1.6 
έρημον is f. and agrees with ψϋχήν (έρημοο is one of the few 
two termination 
adjectives (3.1/3) 
which 
are 
not 
compounds); παρημελημένην perf. pass. pple. of παραμελέω. 
//.7f. πρόο ών i.e. πρόο (= ύπό) τούτων ouc (9.1/2 note 2); 
δέ δή here introduces an emphatic question And so 
Then ... f; when a woman is using the royal plural, as with 
γιγνόμεοθα (= -μεθα, cf. 8.2.9 and έξοπλιζομεοθα in /.13 
belpw), she refers to herself with masculine pi. adjectives 
and participles, hence μαλθακοί and πάοχοντεο; take 
τοιαύτα ... κακά after πάοχοντεο. 1.9 ού μή + fut. ind. 
expresses a strong prohibition (17.1/1). /. 10 δέδοκται it is 
decided (i.e. by me, lit. it is in a state of seeming good [to 
me]) the impers. δοκεΐ (21.1/4^) is mid./pass. in the perfect; 
παιδεο voc. II.lli. άπέλθετ'(ε) 2nd pi. aor. imp.; με ... δέδϋκε 
... θϋμόν lit. has entered me [with respect to] my heart, i.e. 
has entered my heart (acc. of respect 20.1/5). Z.14 τόλμηο 
gen. of cause (23.1/l&(ii)) with τάλαινα wretched [that I am] 
because of my daring, Medea is talking about herself; πόνον 
i.e. the labour of bearing and raising her children. /.15 
διαφθεροΰοα fut. pple. to express purpose (12.1/2tf(v)). 
14 /.I έχρήν = έχρήν άν a common idiom which means it should 
be necessary, not it was necessary, because it expresses 
something which should be happening now (present 
potential,19.1/2), trans, we should ... 1.2 κακά is acc. of 
respect (20.1/5) after θρηνεΐν and the antecedent of eic 
oc'(a) έρχεται, lit. with respect to the troubles to how many 
he is coming, i.e. for all the toubles he is coming to 
(21.1/3J). //.3f. δ'(έ) αύ and in turn; πόνων, δόμων gen. of 
separation (20.1/4); δόμων is also an example of the plural 
used for the singular, from [his, i.e. the dead man's^ house. 
217 
c 
3 
to 

218 
c 
3 
ΙΟ 
21.3 Extra reading 
Love poetry 
Love poetry had a long history in Greek. The first example 
below is from Mimnermus (seventh century BC) but the others 
are much later (2 and 3 are attributed to Plato, whether 
correctly or not we have no means of telling; the authors of 4 
and 5 are unknown). All are written in elegiacs (Appendix 9), 
the metre most associated with this genre. 
1 xic δέ pioc, τί δέ τερπνόν άτερ xpucfjc Άφροδίτηο; 
τεθναίην, ότε μοι μηκέτι ταΰτα μέλοι, 
κρυπταδίη φιλότηο καί μείλιχα δώρα καί εύνή, 
οί' ήβηΰ άνθεα γίγνεται άρπαλέα 
άνδράαν ήδέ γυναιξίν έπεί δ' όδυνηρόν έπέλθη 
5 
γήραο, δ τ' αίοχρόν όμώο καί κακόν άνδρα τιθεΐ, 
αίεί μιν φρέναο άμφί κακαί τείρουοι μέριμναι 
ούδ' αύγάο προοορών τέρπεται ήελίου, 
άλλ' έχθρόο μέν παιοίν, άτίμαοτοο δέ γυναιξίν 
ούτωο άργαλέον γήραο έθηκε θεόο. 
10 
2 άοτέραο είοαθρεΐο άοτήρ έμόσ είθε γενοίμην 
ούρανόο, e>c πολλοίο όμμααν eic ce βλέπω. 
3 αστήρ πριν μέν έλαμπεο ένί ζωοΐαν Έωοσ 
νΰν δέ θανών λάμπειο "Εαιεροο έν φθιμένοισ 
4 πέμπω coi μύρον ηδύ, μύρω παρέχων χάριν, ού coi* 
αύτη γάρ μυρίοαι καί το μύρον δύναοαι. 
5 Ήοΰο άγγελε, χαίρε, Φαεοφόρε, καί ταχύο έλθοιο 
Έοπεροο, ήν άπάγειο, λάθριοο αύθιο άγων. 
Notes 
1 All deviations from Attic in this poem are Ionic (1.3). /.2 
τεθναίην the shorter form of the perf. opt. of 0VT|CKCO 
(19.1/3tf) - the opt. is used here to express a wish for the 
future (21.1/ltf); ταΰτα (referring to the nouns in /.3) is the 
subject of μέλοι, which is not impersonal here and should be 
translated as though ind. (the verb has been assimilated to 
the mood of τεθναίην). 1.3 κρυπταδίη = -ίδ. ΙΑ οί'(α) 
γίγνεται lit. of what sort are, i.e. the sorts of things which; 
άνθεα = άνθη (< άνθοο). l.S έπεί ... έπέλθη in this indefinite 
construction Attic would require άν (14.1/4c(iii)). 
αίοχρόν and κακόν (here lowly, base) are predicative afte* 
άνδρα τιθεΐ (= τίθηα), makes a man both (όμώο) ugly aw 
base - note here that we have όμώο, not όμωο 
nevertheless-
1.7 φρέναο άμφί = άμφί φρέναο. 

2 /.I άοτηρ έμόο is in apposition to you, the subject of 
eica9peic. 1.2 a>c = ϊνα (βλέπω is subj., 14.1/4c(i)). 
3 /.I πριν here an adverb formerly; αστήρ ... Έωοο the Morning 
Star. 1.2 "Eaiepoc the Evening Star; the Greeks knew that 
both were in fact the planet Venus (see 5 below), which 
makes the poet's fanciful identification of his lover with 
them all the more appropriate. 
4 /.I παρέχων χάριν doing a favour. 1.2 καί even (μύρον has a 
very strong scent). 
5 The poet, who supposes that the planet Venus in its guise as 
the Morning Star is taking away his girlfriend, expresses the 
wish that it return quickly as the Evening Star and bring her 
back. l.l 'Houc gen. of Ήώο. 1.2 "Eacepoc i.e. [as] the 
Evening Star; ήν άπάγει ... άγων bringing [the girl] whom 
you are [now] leading away. 
219 
c 
3 f¥ 
IO 

22.1 Grammar 
22.1/1 Summary of the uses of ωο 
ώο, originally an adverb of manner meaning in which way, how, 
came to have various uses as an adverb or as a conjunction. It 
may also occur as a preposition. 
(α) ώο as an adverb 
(i) ώο with participles and prepositional phrases 
We have already seen how ώο is used with participles of 
cause (12.1/2<z(ii)) and purpose (12.1/2tf(v)), reflecting the 
attitude (thought, opinion, intention, hope) of the subject 
of the participle without any implication of the belief or 
opinion of the writer or speaker. In this use, which also 
occurs with phrases introduced by a preposition, ώο 
expresses an alleged reason or assumed motive, and may be 
translated as i f , in the opinion that, under the impression 
that, with the (avowed) intention of, etc.: 
συλλαμβάνει Κΰρον ώο 
He seized (vivid present) 
άποκτενών. 
Cyrus with the intention 
of putting him to death. 
άγανακτοΰοιν (be μεγάλων 
They are annoyed in the 
τινών άπεοτερημένοι. 
belief that they have been 
deprived of some great 
[benefits]. 
άνηγοντο ώο έπί ναυμαχίδν. 
They put out to sea with 
the intention of fighting 
(lit. as for a sea-battle). 

(ii) 
άπέπλεον (be eic xQc Άθηναο. They sailed away as if for 
Athens. 
cbc exclamatory 
coc how ... / is used in exclamations with adjectives, adverbs 
and verbs: 
221 
roc acxeioc ό άνθρωποο. 
ώο άδεώο καί γενναίωο 
έτελεύτα. 
ώο μ' άπώλεοαο, γύναι. 
How charming the man is! 
How fearlessly and nobly 
he died! 
How you have destroyed 
me, woman! 
(iii) d>c with positive adverbs 
ώο may be used to emphasize positive adverbs: ώο άληθώο in 
very truth; ώο έτέρωο quite otherwise; ώο αΰτωο (often 
written ώοαύτωο) in the same way, just so. 
Note too the common idiom where ώο is added to the 
adverbs θαυμαοίωο and θαυμαοτώο (lit. 
marvellously, 
wonderfully) to express emphasis: 
νυν δέ θαυμαοίωσ ώο 
άθλιοο γέγονεν. 
ε# λέγει θαυμαοτώο ώο 
οφόδρα. 
But now he has become 
prodigiously 
wretched. 
He speaks marvellously 
well (lit. he speaks well 
marvellously very). 
(iv) coc with superlative adjectives and adverbs (see 17.1/4d) 
(ν) ώο EKacxoc/eKaxepoc 
ώο is often combined with έκαοιοο (or έκάτεροο) in the 
sense each by himself, each severally or individually: 
άλλοι παριόντεο έγκλήματα 
Others came forward and 
made their separate 
complaints (lit. each 
[group] by themselves). 
They ceased from fighting 
and on either side (lit. 
each side by themselves) 
remained quiet [but] on 
guard for the night. 
(vi) coc restrictive 
<oc may also be used to limit the validity of a statement, 
with the meaning for: 
εποιουντο coc εκαοτοι. 
παυοαμενοι τηο μαχηο coc 
έκάτεροι ήουχάοαντεο την 
νύκτα έν φυλακή ήοαν. 
ην ούδέ άδύνατοο, ώο 
Λακεδαιμόνιος ειπείν. 
He was not a bad speaker 
(lit. not unable to speak) 
either, for a Spartan (or 
considering that he was 
a Spartan). 
c 
3 
β 

222 
c 
3 
β 
μακρά ώο γέροντι όδόο. 
φρονεί ώο γυνή μέγα. 
A long road, for an old 
man. 
She has proud thoughts 
(lit. thinks big), for a 
woman. 
Restrictive ώο is also found with the infinitive in certain 
idiomatic expressions which stand independent of the 
overall grammatical construction and which express some 
limitation or qualification of the sentence as a whole. This 
use is particularly common in the phrase ώο έποο ειπείν (or 
ώο ειπείν) so to speak, which usually modifies a sweeping 
statement with πάο or ούδείο (or the like); occasionally it 
apologizes for a metaphor: 
αληθεο γε coc έποο ειπείν 
ούδέν είρήκδαν. 
Ίππόλυτοο ούκέτ' έοτίν, ώο 
ειπείν έποο. 
ίδιώται ώο ειπείν 
χειροτέχναιο 
άνταγωνιοάμενοι. 
They have spoken virtually 
no word of truth (lit. 
nothing true so to speak). 
Hippolytus is as good as 
dead (lit. is no longer 
alive, so to speak). 
Laymen, as it were, pitted 
against craftsmen (the 
metaphorical use of 
άνταγωνιοάμενοι is toned 
down). 
(vii) a>c with numerals 
ώο is used with numerals in the sense about, nearly: 
διέοχον άλλήλων βααλεύο 
The King and the Greeks 
τε καί οί "Ελληνεο ώο 
were about thirty stades 
τριάκοντα οτάδια. 
distant from each other: 
ώο is similarly used in the common phrase ώο έπί τό πολυ 
for the most part (lit. nearly so far as regards the much). 
(b) ώο as a conjunction 
(i) in indirect speech, that (see 8.1/3b) 
(ii) in purpose clauses, in order that (see 14.1/4c(i)) 
Purpose clauses are generally introduced by ίνα or όποκ, 
but ώο may also be used, especially in poetry and in 
Xenophon: 
διανοείται την γέφυραν 
He intends to break up the 
λΰοαι ώο μή διαβήτε. 
bridge in order that you 
may not cross. 

223 
iii) in clauses of reason, as, since, because 
Causal clauses are regularly introduced by δτι, διότι 
because, as, έπεί, έπειδη since, but may also be introduced 
by coc. As in its use with the participle (see a(i) above), CDC 
β 
sometimes carries the implication that the reason given is 
the subjective opinion of the person described: 
έπειτα δέ ξύμβααν 
Then, when they had made 
ποιηοάμενοι npoc τον 
an agreement with 
Περδίκκδν, (be αύτούο 
Perdiccas because (in 
κατηπειγεν ή Ποτείδαια, 
their opinion) [the 
άπανίοτανται έκ τηο 
situation in] Potidaea 
Μακεδονία. 
was pressing them, they 
withdrew (vivid present) 
from Macedonia. 
(iv) in temporal clauses, when, after 
(be may be used like έπεί (cf. 14.1/4c(iii)): 
(be ήοθετο Κΰρον 
When he perceived that 
πεπτωκότα έφυγεν. 
Cyrus had fallen, he fled. 
(be τάχιστα may be used for έπειδή τάχιστα in the sense as 
soon as: 
(be Τάχιστα ήκομεν eic 
As soon as we had come to 
Μακεδονίδν, συνετάξαμεν 
Macedonia, we arranged 
τον πρεοβύτατον πρώτον 
for the eldest man to 
λέγειν. 
speak first. 
(v) (be in clauses of manner 
(be may be used to introduce adverbial clauses of manner in 
the sense as, according as, in which way, often coupled with 
ούτω(ο) thus, so in the principal clause. In such clauses the 
verb in the subordinate clause will be in the indicative 
mood if the action is marked as a fact: 
έκέλευσε τούο "Ελληνασ, ώσ He ordered the Greeks to 
νόμοο αύτοιο ήν eic 
be drawn up as was their 
μάχην, ούτω ταχθηναι. 
custom for battle (lit. as 
was their custom, so ... to 
be drawn up). 
But if the action has a future reference or is indefinite, the 
mood of the verb will follow the rules for indefinite clauses 
(cf. 14.1/4c(iii)), i.e. subjunctive with άν in primary 
sequence, optative without άν in historic sequence: 
το πέραο roc άν ό δαίμων 
The end of all things 
βουληθή πάντων γίγνεται. 
comes about in whatever 
way the deity wishes. 

224 
c 
3 » 
β 
ξυνετίθεοαν coc έκαοτόν 
They put [them] together 
τι ξυμβαίνοι. 
as each [piece] fitted. 
The verb in the (be clause is often omitted, e.g. είθε πάντεο 
οε φιλοΐεν ώο έγώ would that all loved you as I (sc. do). 
Other examples occur at 13.2.6 and 15. ώο is likewise 
frequently used to introduce clauses which are parenthetical: 
ώο έοικε as it seems; ώο έγωμαι (= έγώ οιμαι) as I think; ώο 
έμοί δοκεΐ in my opinion (lit. as it seems to me). 
(c) was 
a preposition 
ώο as a preposition governs the accusative case and has the 
sense to, towards. It is used only with persons: 
ώο Περδίκκσν έπεμψαν 
Both sides sent 
αμφότεροι πρέοβειο. 
ambassadors to 
Perdiccas. 
22.1/2 Uses of cases (1) - accusative 
Apart from its use as the case of the direct object of transitive 
verbs (2.1/3c) and after certain prepositions (2.1/3f; 3.1/5a), the 
accusative can function in a number of ways, some of which 
require rephrasing to be turned into normal English. 
(a) Accusative and infinitive (see 8.1/3^, and cf. 16.1/1) 
(b) Accusative to express time how long (see 7.117a) 
(c) Accusative to express spatial extent (see 7.1/7d) 
(d) Accusative of respect or specification (see 20.1/5) 
(e) Accusative absolute (see 21.1/5) 
( f ) Verbs taking two accusatives 
These occur in Greek as in English (we chose him leader; they 
asked us our opinion) and can be divided into two categories: 
(i) Verbs 
of 
making, 
considering, 
naming, 
choosing, 
appointing, etc. (factitive verbs), which take a direct object 
and an object complement (also called a predicate): 
οί Θετταλοί καί οί Θηβαίοι 
The Thessalians and 
φίλον, εύεργέτην, οωτηρα 
Thebans considered 
τον Φίλιππον ήγοΰντο. 
Philip (direct object) a 
friend, benefactor and 
saviour (object 
complement). 

τρεΐο τών έμών έχθρών 
I shall make three of my 
νεκρούο θήοω. 
enemies corpses. 
When such expressions are put into the passive, both 
accusatives become nominative: 
Λαοθένηο φίλοο ώνομάζετο 
Lasthenes was called the 
Φιλίππου. 
friend of Philip. 
(ii) Verbs of asking for (αίτέω), teaching (διδάοκω), concealing 
(κρύπτω), depriving (άποοτερέω), taking away (άφαιρέομαι), 
and a few others, which may take two accusatives (one 
accusative of the person and the other of the thing 
involved). The construction of the corresponding verbs in 
English is not always the same: 
ό πόλεμοο άείμνηοτον 
The war taught them a 
παιδείαν αύτούο έπαίδευοεν. 
lesson never to be 
forgotten. 
άποοτερεΐ με την Αμήν. 
He takes the honour from 
me. 
τήν θυγατέρα έκρυπτε τον 
He concealed her husband's 
θάνατον τοΰ άνδρόο. 
death from his daughter. 
Wh£n such expressions are put into the passive, the thing 
involved remains in the accusative (retained accusative): 
έκεΐνοι ίππουο 
Those men have been 
άπεοτέρηνται. 
deprived of their horses. 
ούδέν άλλο διδάοκεται 
A man is taught nothing 
άνθρωποο ή έπιοτήμην. 
else except 
knowledge. 
Under this heading also belong the phrases άγαθά (κακά, 
etc.) λέγειν τινά to speak well (ill, etc.) of someone, and 
άγαθά (κακά, etc.) ποιεΐν τινα to do good (evil, etc.) to 
someone and the like: 
τούο Κορινθίουο πολλά τε 
He said many bad things 
καί κακά έλεγεν. 
about the Corinthians. 
Instead of the neuter pi. acc. of the adjective, however, we 
often find the adverbs εύ/κακώο, etc.: 
τον μέντοι καί λόγω καί έργω However, I would be able 
πειρώμενον έμέ άνιάν ούκ 
neither to speak well of 
άν δυναίμην ούτ' ευ λέγειν 
nor to do good to the 
ούτ' εύ ποιειν. 
man who tries to vex me 
both in word and in 
deed. 
For the passive of expressions using λέγω and ποιέω see 

(g) Cognate accusative 
This describes an expression in which a noun and the verb 
(usually otherwise intransitive) by which it is governed are both 
derived from the same root (as in English sing a song): voce! 
vocov άγρίδν he is ill with a cruel disease; έωράτε Οωκράτη 
πολλήν φλυδρίδν φλυσροΰντα you used to see Socrates talking 
much nonsense. Except in poetry, the cognate accusative is 
usually accompanied by an adjective or other attribute. 
Also included under this heading are accusatives used in exactly 
the same way with nouns not derived from the same root as the 
verb: ήοθένηοε ταύτην την vocov he fell sick with this disease. 
Instead of a cognate noun in the accusative we may also find the 
neuter of an adjective used as an equivalent: 'Ολυμπία (acc. pi. 
n.) νϊκάν to win an Olympic victory (lit. Olympic things). 
(h) Accusative in oaths 
The accusative is regularly found in oaths, especially after the 
particles μά and νή. νή conveys strong affirmation; νή τον Δία 
yes, by Zeus!, but μά may be either affirmative or negative, the 
choice being determined either simply by the context (as, e.g., in 
23.2.5 IA) or by adding ναί or ού: ναί μά τον Δία yes, by Zeus!; 
μά τον Άπόλλω, ούκ no, by Apollo! (cf. 24.1/lc). 
In these expressions we must understand the verb δμνϋμι sweat; 
which can also be used with the accusative of the god's name in 
the sense I swear by: ομνϋμι θεούο καί θεάο I swear by [the] 
gods and goddesses. 
(i) Accusative to express motion towards (see 2.1/3/) 
In poetry the accusative can be used with verbs of motion 
without any preposition: 
Μήδεια πυργουο γήο έπλευο' 
Medea sailed to the towers 
Ίωλκίδο. 
of the Iolcian land. 
22.2 Greek reading 
1# ού δ' ώ θεών τύραννε κάνθρώπων "Epcoc, 
ή μή δίδαοκε τά καλά φαίνεοθαι καλά, 
ή τοιο έρώαν εύτυχώο ουνεκπόνει 
μοχθούοι μόχθουο ών ού δημιουργόο εΐ. 
2 
έοπέρα μεν γάρ ήν, ήκε δ' άγγέλλων τιο (be τούο πρυτανεία 
ώο Ελάτεια κατείληπται. καί μετά ταΰτα οί μέν εύθυο 
έξαναοτάντεο μεταξύ δειπνούντεο τούο i έκ τών οκηνών τών 
κατά τήν άγοράν έξειργον καί τά γέρρα ένεπίμπραοαν, οι δε 

τούο οτρατηγούο μετεπέμποντο καί τον οαλπικτήν έκάλουν t 
5 
καί θορύβου πληρηο ήν ή πόλιο. τη δ* ύοτεραίρ άμα ττ\ 
ήμερα 
οί μεν πρυτάνειο τήν βουλήν έκάλουν είο το 
βουλευτήριον, ύμεΐο δ' eic τήν έκκληοίαν έπορεύεοθε, καί, 
πριν έκείνην χρηματίοαι καί προβουλεΰοαι, πάο ό δήμοο 
άνω καθητο. καί μετά ταΰτα ώο ήλθεν ή βουλή καί 
10 
άπήγγειλαν οί πρυτάνειο τά προοηγγελμέν' έαυτοΐο καί τον 
ήκοντα παρήγαγον κάκεΐνοο ειπεν, ήρώτα μέν ό κήρυξ, τίο 
άγορεύειν βούλεται; παρήει δ' ούδείο. 
3 
In addition 
to translating, 
define each use of the -
accusative: 
(i) α'ίτει καί τούο άνδρίανταο άλφιτα. (ii) έοτιν τιο Οωκράτηο ~ 
οοφόο άνήρ, τά τε μετέωρα φροντιοτήο καί τά ύπό γήο πάντα -
άνεζητηκώο. (iii) ήκει καί τά τοΰ πάππου χρήματα ήμάα-
άποοτερήοων. (iv)# ήλθε πατρόο άρχαΐον τάφον. (ν)# πολλα^ 
διδάοκει μ' ό πολύο βίοτοο. (νϊ) Μέλητοο με έγράψατο τήνν 
γραφήν ταύτην. (vii) ό Κΰροο ήν ειδοο μέν κάλλιοτοο, ψυχήν** 
δέ φιλανθρωπότατοο. (viii) μά Δια, ούκ ειδον έμαυτοί^ 
άμείνω ύλοτόμον. (ix) οπονδάο καί ξυμμαχίαν έποιήοαντς^ 
έκατόν έτη. (*)# δμνυμι δ' ιερόν αίθέρ', οϊκηοιν Διόο. 
4 
In addition to translating, define each use of ώο: 
(i)f ώο ήδύ τω μιοοΰντι τούο φαύλουο έρημία. («)# κρύπτη 
μηδέν, ώο πάνθ' όρων πάντ' άναπτύοοει χρόνοο. (iii)# τέκνο^ 
τοΰδ* έκατι τίκτομεν, ώο θεών τε βωμούο πατρίδα τ ^ 
ρυώμεθα. (iv) κατέλαβε τήν άκρόπολιν ώο έπί τυραννίδι. (ι/) 
πειράοθαι δέ χρή ώο ρφοτα τάναγκαΐα (= τά άν-) τοΰ βίον^ 
φέρειν. (νϊ)# πόνοο γάρ, ώο λέγουοιν, εύκλείαο πατήρ. (vii)i$ 
φεΰ, φεΰ, τό νικάν τάνδιχ' (= τά ένδικα) ώο καλόν γεραο, τ<^ 
μή δίκαια δ' ώο πανταχοΰ κακόν. (viii)# ώο ήδύο ό βίοο, ά ν 
τιο αύτόν μή μάθη . (/*)# δίδου πένηοιν ώο λάβηο θεόν δότην% 
(χ)# κρίνει φίλουο ό καιρόο, ώο χρυοόν τό πΰρ. (χήίφ 
μέμνηοο νέοο ων ώο γέρων έοη ποτέ. (xii)# ού ζώμεν ώ^ 
ηδιοτα μή λυπούμενοι; (xiii) άπέπλευοαν έξ Έλληοπόντο·^ 
ώο έκαοτοι κατά πόλειο. (xiv) άνδρεο οοφοί ώο άληθώο. 
5# ήν Οίδίπουο τό πρώτον εύτυχήο άνήρ, 
εΐτ' έγένετ' αύθιο άθλιώτατοο βροτών. 
Deianeira laments the absence of her husband Heracles, 
πάθη μέν ούν δή πόλλ' έγωγ' έκλαυοάμην 
εν δ', οίον ούπω πρόοθεν, αύτίκ' έξερώ. 
οδόν γάρ ήμοο τήν τελευταίαν άναξ 
ώρμάτ' απ' οίκων Ήρακλήο, τότ έν δόμοιο 
λείπει παλαιάν δέλτον έγγεγραμμένην 
5 
ξυνθήμαθ', άμοί (= ά έμοί) πρόοθεν ούκ έτλη ποτέ, 
πολλούο άγώναο έξιών, ούτω φράοαι, 
αλλ' ώο τι δράοων είρπε κού θανούμενοο. 

228 
c 
3 ϊ¥ 
IS 
7 
και πρώτον πρόο τούο Θράκαο έπολεμηοα, έκ της 
Χερρονηοου αύτούο έξελαύνων βουλομένουο άφαιρεΐοθαι 
τούο "Ελληναο την γήν. 
8# ώ γήραο, ο'ίαν έλπίδ' ήδονηο έχειο, 
καί πάο τιο είο οέ βούλετ' ανθρώπων μολείν 
λαβών δέ πεΐραν, μεταμέλειαν λαμβάνει, 
ώο ούδέν έοτι χείρον έν θνητώ γένει. 
9 
έγώ γάρ, ώ Κέβηο, νέοο ών θαυμαοτώο ώο έπεθύμηοα ταύτης 
τηο οοφίαο ήν δή καλούοι περί φύοεωο ίοτορίαν. 
Notes 
1 
/.I κάν- = καί άν- //.3f. ουνεκπόνει 2nd s. pres. imp. act., 
as the accent indicates (the 3rd s. pres. ind. act would be 
συνεκπονεΐ); έρώα, and μοχθούοι (the latter agrees with the 
former) are m. dat. pi. of the pres. act. pples. of έράω and 
μοχθέω respectively. 
2 
A famous passage of the orator Demosthenes in which he 
describes how the Athenians in 339 BC received the news 
that their enemy Philip of Macedon (father of Alexander 
the Great) had captured a town only three days march 
from Athens. //.If. ώο τούο πρυτάνειο to (22.1/lc) the 
prytaneis (a committee of the Council in charge of day-to-
day administration); take ώο (= δτι) Ελάτεια κατείληπται 
with άγγέλλων; κατείληπται 3rd s. perf. ind. pass, of 
καταλαμβάνω (the tense used in the original direct speech is 
kept, 8.1/3). //.3f. μεταξύ δειπνούντεο 12.1/2tf(i); τούο έκ 
τών οκηνών lit. those from the stalls but trans, those in the 
stalls; in this pregnant use of έκ (cf. note on 9.2.13 /. 14, 
where the use is somewhat different) the choice of 
preposition has been influenced by έξεΐργον; the imperfect 
is often used for vivid effect in narrative, hence έξεΐργον, 
ένεπίμπραοαν (< έμπίμπρημι) etc. - trans, by the simple 
past (cleared out, set fire to, etc.); the γέρρα (wicker-work 
of some kind) were set on fire to inform the Athenians of 
the emergency. /. 8 ϋμεΐο i.e. the people (referred to as ο 
δήμοο in 7.9). ΙΛΟ άνω above i.e. on the Pnyx, a hill to the 
south-west of the Athenian agora which was used for 
meetings of the Assembly; καθητο impf. (19.1/3&); ώο when 
(22.1/lfc(iv)). //.llf. τά προοηγγελμέν'(α) έαυτοΐο the things 
reported (perf.) to them (refl. because it refers back to the 
subject of the clause οί πρυτάνειο); τον ήκοντα the person 
mentioned in the first line as having brought the message. 
/.13 παρήει < παρέρχομαι (cf. 18.1/3). 
3 
(i) άίτει 2nd s. pres. imp. act. (ii) έοαν here there is; 
άνεζητηκώο perf. act. pple. of άναζητέω. (ix) Zeus dwelt in 
the heavens or upper air (αίθήρ). 

4 
Supply έοτί in (*), (vi), (vii), (viii). (ii) πάνθ' i.e. πάντα, (iii) 
Take τοΰδ' έκατι together - the phrase anticipates the (be 
clause, (vii) δ'(έ) is placed here after the first phrase, not 
the first word; with τά μή δίκαια supply τό νϊκάν. (viii) άν 
= έάν. (xi) έοη 2nd s. fut. ind. of ειμί. (xii) μή with a pple. 
to express a condition (12.1/2tf(iv)). (xiv) A phrase, not a 
sentence. 
5 
τό πρώτον acc. of respect (20.1/5), with respect to the first 
[period], i.e at first. 
6 
//.If. μέν and δέ contrast πάθη... πόλλ' (= πολλά) and έν (sc. 
πάθoc); ούν δή so then, well as you know; with οίον ούπω 
πρόοθεν supply έκλαυοάμην; έξερώ fut. of έξαγορεύω (cf. 
18.1/4 note 2). ll.3f. γάρ begins the explanation of the 
previous line and need not be translated; take όδόν ... τήν 
τελευταίων as virtual cognate acc. (22.1/2g) with ώρμάτ'(ο) 
was setting out on ...; οίκων ... δόμοιο plural for singular 
(a common use in poetry). 1.6 ξυνθήμαθ' (= -τα) a type 
of retained acc. (22.1/2/"(ii)) with έγγεγραμμένην (1.5), 
inscribed with signs (έγγράφει ξυνθήματα δέλτω means he 
inscribes signs on a tablet; this can, somewhat illogically, 
be mit into the passive δέλτοο έγγράφεται ξυνθήματα with 
the original accusative retained, but we must translate a 
tablet is inscribed with signs - this differs from the 
examples in 22.1/2/(ii) in that έγγράφω takes an acc. and 
dat., not two accusatives); έτλη root aor. of τλάω. 1.7 
πολλονσ άγώναο έξιών going out on many exploits virtual 
cognate acc. (22.1/2g); ούτω thus, like this as Deianeira 
goes on to explain later. /. 8 ώο ... under the impression of 
going to do something, as [one] going to do something (see 
note on 12.3.7). 
8 
1.2 nac uc emphatic for πάο, lit. every single one; βούλετ' 
i.e. βούλεται 1.4 ώο to introduce a clause of reason 
(22.1/l&(iii)). 
9 
θαυμασιώο ώο 22.1/ltf(iii). 
22.3 Extra reading 
Anacreontea 
Anacreon was an Ionic poet of the sixth century BC. His 
Personal poetry was famous but very little has survived. It 
^ttracted many imitators in antiquity and some of their poems 
1 below) have come down under his name. The second poem 
ls certainly genuine. 
229 
c 3 S·' 
β 

1 μακαρίζομέν ce, τέττιξ, 
ότε δενδρέων έπ' άκρων 
όλίγην δρόοον πεπωκώο 
βααλεύο όπωο άείδεισ 
ca γάρ έσα κείνα πάντα, 
5 
όπόοα βλέπειο έν άγροΐο, 
όπόοα τρέφουαν ύλαι. 
cx> δέ τίμιοο βροτοΐαν, 
2 πολιοί μέν ήμίν ήδη 
κρόταφοι, κάρη τε λευκόν, 
χαρίεοοα δ' ούκέτι ήβη 
πάρα, γηράλεοι δ' όδόντεο. 
γλυκερού δ' ούκέτι πολλοο 5 
βιότου χρόνοο λέλειπταν 
θέρεοο γλυκύο προφήτηο. 
φιλέουα μέν ce Μούοαι, 
φιλέει δέ Φοΐβοο αύτόο, 
λιγυρήν δ' έδωκεν οϊμην. 
τό δέ γήραο ού ce τείρει, 
οοφέ, γηγενέο, φίλυμνε, 
άπαθήο δ', άναιμόοαρκε, 
1: 
σχεδόν ει θεοΐο όμοιοο. 
διά ταύτ' άναοταλύζω 
θαμά Τάρταρον δεδοικώσ 
Άΐδεω γάρ έσπ, δει voc 
μυχόο, άργαλέη δ' ec αύτόν ic 
κάθοδοσ καί γάρ έτοΐμον 
καταβάντι μή άναβήναι. 
Notes 
1 
1.2 δενδρέων (Ionic for δένδρων, cf. 13.1/1 c) έπ' άκρων on the 
tops of trees (18.1/6). 1.4 βααλεύο όπωο = όπωο (like) 
βααλεύσ. 11.5f. πάντα, όπόοα (= oca, as also in 1.7) 21.1/3d. 1.8 
Supply ει (< ειμί); βροτοΐαν among mortals (dat. of 
reference, 23.1/2e). //.9ff. Three examples of the use of 
uncontracted forms in Ionic, θέρεοο (= θέρουο, cf. 6.1/lc), 
φιλέουα (= φιλούα), φιλέει (= φιλεΐ). /.12 λιγυρήν = -άν. 
2 
/.I Supply είσί; ήμίν (= ήμίν) plural for singular (the dative is 
one of possession, 23.1/2c). 1.2 κάρη, an irregular noun, is 
neuter hence λευκόν. 1.4 πάρα = πάρεση (cf. 21.1/4 note 2 
but here it is not used impersonally). II.7f. Take θάμα with 
άναοταλύζω; δεδοικώσ 19.1/3^. 1.9 Άΐδεω = Attic Άιδου (gen. 
of Άιδηο), on the ending cf. 25.1/2fe(i). /. 10 άργαλέη = -έδ. 
/.II έτοΐμον [it is] fixed the neuter singular adj. is used in 
impersonal expressions. 

23.1 Grammar 
23.1/1 Uses of cases (2) - genitive 
Apart from its use as the case of possession (2.1/3d) and after 
certain prepositions (2.1/3g, 3.1/5&), the genitive can function 
in a number of ways with another noun, verb, adjective or even 
adverb./Although the genitive is often to be translated by of, in 
some of its uses a different rendering in English is required. 
(a) Possessive genitive (see 2.1/3d) 
In this use the genitive denotes ownership, possession or some 
looser association: ή τοΰ Δημοοθένουο οίκίσ the house of 
Demosthenes (or Demosthenes' house); ot CoXcovoc νόμοι the 
laws of (made by) Solon; τά τηο πόλεωο the [affairs] of the city. 
In certain very restricted contexts a possessive genitive qualifies 
a missing noun, which can easily be supplied; the most 
common are wife, son!daughter (cf. 5.1/3 note 2) and place of 
abode: 
'Αλεξανδροο ό Φιλίππου. 
Alexander, [son] of Philip. 
"Αρτέμιο ή Διόο. 
Artemis, [daughter] of 
Zeus. 
έν Άρίφρονοο. 
At Ariphron's (in [the 
house] of Ariphron). 
έν Διονύοου. 
At [the shrine] of 
Dionysus (cf. at St. 
Paul's). 
(k) Genitive of characteristic 
In English we may say it is the part/duty/nature/characteristic, 
etc· °f someone to do something. In Greek this is expressed 
simply by the use of the third singular of είμι plus the genitive. 

In translation from Greek the appropriate English word to be 
supplied must be gauged from the context: 
(c) Subjective and objective 
genitive 
An objective genitive stands in the same relation to a noun or 
adjective as an object does to a transitive verb. In Socrates' love 
of the truth dominated 
his life, the genitive of the truth is 
objective because the sense connection between truth and love is 
the same as between an object and a verb (we could say, with 
the same meaning, Socrates loved the truth; this dominated his 
life). Examples in Greek are: φόβοο του γήρωο fear of old age, τό 
κράτοο τηο θαλάττηο the command of the sea, epcoc xr\c άρετηο 
love of virtue. Because this use is more extensive in Greek than 
in English we must sometimes translate it by a different 
preposition: ό του κυνόο λόγοο the story about the dog, νίκη τών 
ηδονών victory over pleasures. A subjective genitive, on the 
other hand, stands in the same relation to a noun as a subject 
does to a verb: νίκη τών βαρβάρων victory of the barbarians (i.e. 
οί βάρβαροι νΤκώαν the barbarians are victorious). This use is 
only a variety of the possessive genitive. 
Sometimes, however, we must decide from the context whether 
a genitive is subjective or objective, ό τών Ελλήνων φόβοο can 
mean the Greeks' 
fear (i.e. the fear felt by the Greeks) 
(subjective), as well as the fear of the Greeks (i.e. the fear 
inspired by the Greeks) (objective). A possessive adjective 
(9.1/5b) usually represents a subjective genitive, but may on 
occasion be the equivalent of an objective genitive: φιλία τη έμη 
can mean through friendship for me as well as through my 
friendship. Cf. έπί διαβολή τη έμή in 10.3 11.6f. 
(d) Partitive 
genitive 
In this construction the genitive denotes the whole and the n o u n 
or pronoun on which it depends denotes a part of that whole: 
μέροο τι τών βαρβάρων 
a part of the barbarians 
οί άδικοι τών άνθρώπων 
the unjust among men 
ολίγοι αυτών 
few of them 
οί πρεοβύτατοι τών οτρατηγών 
the oldest of the generals 
The partitive genitive may also occur by itself as the object of a 
verb: τηο γήο έτεμον they ravaged [part] of the land (τήν γήν 
έτεμον would mean they ravaged the [whole] land). It can also 
ούτοι γυναικοο εοτιν 
ίμείρειν μάχηο. 
δοκει δικαίου του^ είναι 
πολίτου. 
It is indeed not a woman's 
part to long for battle. 
This seems to be the duty 
of a just citizen. 

be used predicatively: 
θόλων τών έπτά οοφιοτών 
Solon was called [one] of 
έκλήθη. 
the Seven Sages. 
This use of the genitive also occurs in abstract nouns after the 
phrase eic τοΰτο (τοοοΰτο) άφικνεΐοθαι (ήκειν etc.) to reach this 
(such a) pitch/point/stage of (cf. 16.1/1 note 3): 
eic τοΰτο θράοουο καί 
He reached such a pitch of 
άναιδείδο άφίκετο. 
boldness and 
shamelessness. 
eic τοΰθ' ΰβρεωο ήκει. 
He has come to such a 
pitch of insolence. 
Under this heading also belongs the chorographic genitive, or 
genitive of geographic definition: 
έπλευοαν τηο Ίταλίσο eic 
They sailed to Tarentum in 
Τάραντα. 
Italy (lit. [a part] of 
Italy). 
τηο Ο,κελίαο οί OupCncocioi. 
The Syracusans in Sicily. 
Compare the use of the genitive with adverbs of place, e.g. 
είδέναι όπου γήο έοτιν to know where in the world he is (cf. 
2.2.11)/ 
(e) Genitive of explanation 
The genitive may be used as the equivalent of a noun in 
apposition which gives an explanation or definition of the 
preceding noun. The construction in English is generally the 
same: 
ω πόλι Θηβών. 
Ο city of Thebes (i.e. Ο 
city, viz Thebes). 
τέλοο θανάτου. 
The end of death (i.e. the ' 
end that is death), 
ύπνου δώρον. 
The gift of sleep. 
( f ) Genitive of price or value (see 20.1/3) 
(g) Genitive of time within which (see 7.1/7c) 
(h) Genitive absolute (see 12.1/26) 
(') Genitive of comparison (see 17.1/4*) 
(/) Genitive of separation (see 20.1/4) 
(k) Genitive with verbs (see 13.1/2*) 
At 13.1/2d we considered certain intransitive verbs which take 
the genitive. Two other groups are followed by an accusative 
and a genitive: 
233 
ro 
ω 

(i) Verbs of accusing, acquitting, condemning, prosecuting and 
the like are generally followed by an accusative of the 
person involved and a genitive of the crime or charge. Such 
verbs are αίτιάομαι accuse, γράφομαι indict, 
διώκο) 
prosecute: 
ό Μελητοο άοεβείδο έμέ 
Meletus indicted me for 
έγράψατο. 
impiety. 
διώξομαί ce δειλία. 
I shall prosecute you for 
cowardice. 
However, verbs of accusing and condemning which are 
compounded with κατά (such as κατηγορέω accuse, 
καταγιγνώοκω give judgement against, condemn, κατακρίνω 
give sentence against, καταψηφίζομαι vote against) reverse 
the normal construction, and so take a genitive of the 
person and an accusative of the crime or penalty: 
έγώ δ' ύμών δέομαι μή 
I request you not to 
καταγνώναι δωροδοκιών 
condemn me for bribery. 
έμοΰ. 
έμοΰ Φιλιππιομόν κατηγορεί. He accuses me of siding 
with Philip. 
(ii) A genitive of cause can follow verbs of emotion. Such verbs 
are θαυμάζω wonder at, ζηλόω admire, οικτίρω pity, etc.: 
τούτουο τηο τόλμηο θαυμάζω. I wonder at these men for 
(or because of) their 
boldness. 
του πάθουο ωκτΐρεν αύτόν. 
He pitied him for his 
suffering. 
A genitive of cause can also occur with adjectives: εύδαίμων 
τοΰ τρόπου happy in his way of life. 
(I) Genitive of exclamation 
This genitive, which is often coupled with an interjection (φευ 
alas (of grief), ah, oh (of astonishment); οϊμοι alas), is akin to 
the genitive of cause as it gives the reason for the speaker's 
astonishment or grief: 
οϊμοι ταλαίνηο τηοδε 
Alas for this wretched 
ουμφοράα 
plight! 
φευ φεΰ τηο ώρGc, τοΰ 
Ah, what youthful bloom, 
κάλλουο. 
what beauty! 
ειπε προο αυτόν, τηο τυχηο. 
He said to himself, "What 
luck!" 

23.1/2 Uses of cases (3) - dative 
The Greek dative is an amalgam of three cases: 
(i)the dative proper, generally to be translated to or for, 
indicating the person (or thing) involved in an action (the 
recipient, the person advantaged or disadvantaged, etc.); 
(ii)the old instrumental case, denoting that by which or with 
which an action is done or accompanied; 
(iii) the original locative case, which expressed place where and 
time when. 
Some of these uses were distinguished and made more precise by 
the use of prepositions (cf. 2.1/3/7, 3.1/5). 
Dative proper 
(a) Verbs governing the dative 
(i) Verbs followed by a direct object (accusative) and an 
indirect object (dative - 2.1/3e), such as verbs of giving, 
saying, promising: KOpoc δίδωαν αύτω μϋρίουο δδρεικούο 
Cyrus gives him 10,000 darics; ύπιοχνοΰμαί coi δέκα 
ταλαντα I promise you ten talents. However, many verbs of 
reproaching, blaming and the like, which in English take a 
direct object of the person involved, in Greek take a dative 
of tne person and an accusative of the thing (when 
expressed): 
μή πάθωμεν δ άλλοιο 
Let us not get into a 
έπιτΓμώμεν. 
situation for which we 
censure others (lit. let 
us not experience [the 
thing] which we censure 
in others). 
αίοχύνομαί coi τοΰτ' 
I am ashamed to reproach 
όνειδίοαι. 
you with this. 
τί άν μοι μέμφοιο; 
What would you blame me 
fori 
The English construction which allows the indirect object 
of a verb in the active voice to be made the subject of the 
same verb in the passive (I was given this land) is generally 
impossible in Greek, ταύτην την χώρδν μοι έδωκε he gave 
me this land becomes αύτη ή χώρΕ μοι ύπ' αύτοΰ βδόθη this 
land was given to me by him. έδόθην would mean I was 
given in the sense I was handed over. For an exception see 
note on 22.2.6 1.5. 
Intransitive verbs followed by the dative (see 13.1/2b) 
Uu) Impersonal verbs followed by the dative (see 21.1/4) 

(b) Dative with adjectives, adverbs and nouns 
The dative is used with certain adjectives whose English 
equivalent is usually followed by to or for These include φίλος 
dear, friendly; εχθρός hateful, hostile; (coc equal; όμοιος like, 
resembling; ανόμοιος unlike, dissimilar: 
τύραννος anGc έχθρόο 
Every tyrant [is] hostile to 
έλευθερίρ καί νόμοιο 
freedom and opposed to 
έναντίοσ 
laws. 
ποιείτε όμοια τοΐο λόγοις. 
You are acting in 
accordance with (lit. 
doing things like) your 
words. 
Compare ό αύτόο with the dative the same as (9.1/36). 
A similar use of the dative is found after some adverbs: 
ακολούθως τοις νόμοις 
In accordance with the 
laws. 
ομολογουμένως τη φύοει ζην 
To live in agreement with 
nature. 
as well as with some nouns, especially those related to verbs of 
similar meaning which take the dative: 
έπιβουλή έμοί. 
A plot against me. 
κοινωνίδ τοιο άνδράα. 
Association with men. 
(c) Dative of possession 
The dative is used with είναι (and verbs of similar meaning such 
as ύπάρχειν and γίγνεοθαι) to denote the owner or possessor: 
οικείοι μοί εία καί υίεΐο. 
I have relatives and sons 
(lit. relatives and sons 
are to me); 
τω δικαίω παρά θεών δώρα 
The just man has gifts (lit. 
γίγνεται. 
gifts come into being for 
the just man) from the 
gods. 
(d) Dative of advantage and 
disadvantage 
The dative is used to indicate the person or thing for whose 
advantage or disadvantage something is done: nac άνηρ αύτώ 
πονει every man works for himself (advantage); άλλο στράτευμα 
αύτώ ουνελέγετο another army was being gathered for hint 
(advantage); ήδε ή ήμέρδ τοΐο "Ελληα μεγάλων κακών άρξει this 
day will be the beginning of great troubles for the Greeks 
(disadvantage). Sometimes this use cannot be translated by for-

CVTOV αύτοιο άφείλεν he took food away from them (lit. he took 
food away to their disadvantage; for the other construction used 
with verbs meaning take away see 22.1/2/(ii)). 
(e) Dative of reference or relation 
Similarly, the dative may be used to denote a person or thing to 
whose case a statement is limited: τριήρει έοτί ν eic Ήράκλειαν 
ημερδο μακράο πλούο for a trireme it is a long day's voyage to 
Heraclea. This dative is often used to denote in the eyes of or in 
the judgement of. 
ήμΐν Άχιλλεύο άξιοο τϊμήο. 
In our eyes (lit. for us) 
Achilles [is] worthy of 
honour. 
ανάξιοι πάοιν έοτε δυοτυχεΐν. 
In the eyes of all (lit. for 
all) you are unworthy 
to 
suffer 
misfortune. 
A participle in the dative singular is used in this way with an 
indefinite reference: 
Έπίδαμνοο έν δεξιά έοτιν 
Epidamnus is on the right 
είοπλέοντι ec τον Ίόνιον 
as one sails into (lit. in 
κόλπρν. 
relation to one sailing 
into) the Ionian 
Gulf. 
έλεγον δτι ή όδόο διαβάντι 
They said that, when one 
τον ποταμόν έπί Λϋδίδν 
had crossed the river, the 
φέροι. 
road led to Lydia. 
Compare also the phrase ώο ουνελόντι ειπείν to speak concisely, 
in a word (lit. so to speak for one having brought [the matter] 
together). 
(f) Ethic dative (a purely conventional term, with no connection 
with ethics) 
The dative of the first or second person pronouns can be used 
simply to attract the attention of the person addressed. There is 
n o grammatical connection with the surrounding words. This 
so-called ethic dative is usually to be represented in English by I 
beg you, please, let me tell you, you know, and the like: 
κ«ι μοι μή θορυβήσητε. 
And, I beg you, don't 
make a clamour. 
Αρταφέρνηο ύμΐν Ύοτάοπου 
Artaphernes, you know, is 
eeri παΐο. 
Hystaspes' 
son. 
(g) Dative of the agent 
This use, replaced in most contexts by ύπό + gen., is found with 
Perfect and pluperfect passive (very rarely with other tenses): 

238 
C 
3 
8 
πάνθ' ήμίν πεποίηται. 
Everything has been done 
by us. 
έπειδή αύτοΐο παρεοκεύαοτο. 
When they had made then 
preparations (lit. it had 
been prepared by them). 
For the dative of the agent with verbal adjectives, see 24.1/56. 
Instrumental dative 
(h) Dative of instrument (see 11.1/2) 
(i) Dative of cause 
The dative may denote cause: ρίγει άπωλλύμεθα we were 
perishing from (or because of) cold. Often the noun in the dative 
denotes an emotional or mental condition: 
ύβρει και ούκ οϊνω τούτο 
ποιεί. 
He does this through 
insolence and not 
because he is drunk (lit. 
because of wine). 
They were hurrying 
towards the river 
because of their desire to 
drink (lit. because of a 
desire for drinking). 
Occasionally cause may also be expressed by ύπό with the 
genitive: 
ηπειγοντο προο τον ποταμον 
τοΰ πιεΐν έπιθϋμίρ. 
ούκ έδύνατο καθεύδειν ύπό 
λύπηο 
He could not sleep because 
of (or for) grief. 
(/) Dative of manner and attendant 
circumstances 
The dative may be used to denote the manner in which something 
is done or the circumstances accompanying an action: 
οί Αθηναίοι παντί οθένει 
The Athenians helped with 
έπεκούρηοαν. 
all their strength 
(manner). 
άτελεΐ τη νίκη άπήλθον. 
They went away with then 
victory 
incomplete 
(accompanying 
circumstance). 
Normally a noun used in this way is qualified by an adjective U-
above). Some nouns, however, are regularly employed ^ 
themselves as datives of manner and are virtually the equivale11 
of adverbs: 

βία by force, forcibly; δρόμω * ί * raw; έργω in fact, in deed; 
λόγω w word, m theory; οιγή w silence; οπουδή 
hastily; 
φύοει... νόμω by nature ...by convention; compare also τω 
όντι in reality (see 12.1/1 note 1); τούτω τω τρόπω in this 
way. 
Under this category are also included the datives of feminine 
adjectives with a noun understood: ταύτη 
in this way; ιδία 
privately; δημοοία publicly; πεζή on foot. 
(k) Dative of 
accompaniment 
We have already met this use of the dative with αύτόο (see 
9.1/3*(ii)). The dative by itself is particularly common in 
military contexts (the military dative) to denote the forces with 
which a journey or expedition is made: 
'Αθηναίοι έφ' ήμάο πολλή 
The Athenians have made 
οτρατια ώρμηνται. 
an expedition against us 
with a large force. 
(I) Dative of measure of difference (see 17.1/46) 
(m) Dative of respect 
As well a§/an accusative of respect (20.1/5) we may also find the 
dative used in a similar way: 
άνήρ ήλικία 
έτι νέοο a man still young in age; ονόματι 
οπονδαί a truce in name [alone]. 
Locative dative 
(n) Dative of place where 
In poetry place where may be expressed by the dative without a 
preposition: Κρονίδηο αίθέρι ναιων the son of Cronos living in 
the sky. In Attic prose, however, a preposition is generally 
required (2.1/36), except with some place names, e.g. Μαραθώνι 
<*t Marathon. Traces of the old locative endings remain in such 
forms such as: Άθήνηα (= έν Αθηναίο) at Athens; Φαληροΐ (= έν 
φαληρ<ρ ) at Phalerum; cf. οίκοι at home; these words are 
usually classified as adverbs. 
<°) Dative of time when (see 7.1/76) 
23.2 Greek reading 
1 
In addition to translating, define each use of the genitive 
and dative: 
(*)# ω φίλον ύπνου θέλγητρον, έπίκουρον νόοου. (ii) ήθελε τών 
Ενόντων είναι, (iii) ώ Ποοειδον, τηο τέχνηο. (iv)# πενίαν 
239 
C 
3 
δ 

240 
c 
3 
8 
(χχιι) ο cxpaxoc αφικετο τηο Αττικής ec Οινοην. (χχιιι) οράτε 
την βααλεωο έπιορκίαν. (xxiv) ούκ ειμί τοΐο πεπραγμένοι 
δύςθυμοο. 
2 
ό Διογένης, Άναξιμένει τω ρήτορι παχεΐ όντι προοελθών, 
έπίδος καί ήμίν, έφη, τοιο πτώχοιο της γασυρόσ καί γάρ αύτόο 
κουφιοθήοει καί ήμάο ωφελήοειο. 
3# ήν γάρ τιο αινοο ώο γυναιξί μέν τέχναι 
μέλχ>υοι, λόγχη δ' άνδρεο εύοτοχώτεροι. 
εί γάρ δόλοιοιν ήν τό νικητήριον, 
ήμειο άν άνδρών εϊχομεν τυραννίδα. 
4# καί νΰν παραινώ πάοι τοΐο νεωτέροιο 
μή πρόο τό γήραο άναβολάο ποιουμένουο 
οχολή τεκνούοθαι παΐδασ ού γάρ ήδονή, 
γυναικί τ' έχθρόν χρήμα πρεοβύτηο άνήρ· 
άλλ' ώο τάχιοτα. καί γάρ έκτροφαί καλαί 
καί ουννεάζων ήδύ παΐο νέω πατρί. 
5 
One of the accusations brought against Socrates (10.3) was 
that he did not believe in the traditional gods. In the 
Apology of Plato (see 13.3), which is an account of his trial 
he is represented as interrogating one of his accusers on this 
charge. 
MEAHTOC - CQKPATHC 
ME. ταύτα λέγω, ώο τό παράπαν ού νομίζειο θεούο. 
CQ. ώ θαύμααε Μέλητε, τί ταΰτα λέγεις; ούδέ ήλιον ουδε 
οελήνην άρα νομίζω θεούο είναι, ώοπερ οί άλλοι άνθρωποι; 
ΜΕ. μά Δι', ώ άνδρεο δικαοταί, έπεί τον μέν ήλιον λίθον 
είναι, τήν δέ οελήνην γήν. 
CQ. 'Αναξαγόρου ο'ίει κατηγορεΐν, ώ φίλε Μέλητε; καί ουτ0) 
καταφρονεΐο τώνδε καί οϊει αύτούο απείρους γράμμα 
είναι ώοτε ούκ είδέναι ότι τά 'Αναξαγόρου βιβλία τον 
Κλαζομενίου γέμει τούτων τών λόγων; καί δή καί οι νε°ι 
φέρειν ού παντόο, άλλ' άνδρόο οοφοΰ. (ν) τούτω πάνυ μ0 
προοέχετε τον νοΰν. (νϊ) πολλαί θεραπειαι τοίο ιατροί 
εύρηνται. (vii) ύπνος πέφυκε οωμάτων οωτηρία. (viii) το 
αύτόν αίνεΐν καί ψέγειν άνδρόο κακοΰ. (ix) τοιούτο ύμΐ ν 
εοτιν η τυραννις, ω Λακεδαιμόνιοι. (χ)# ταΰτα Ζεύο οιδε\ 
'Ολύμπιος, αίθέρι ναίων. (χϊ) αίτιώνται αύτόν κλοπηο. (ΧΗ) οι 
άνθρωποι διά τό αύτών δέος τοΰ θανάτου ψεύδονται, (xm 
έφοβοΰντο μή οί 'Αθηναίοι μείζονα παραοκευη έπέλθωςιν 
(xiv) κραυγή πολλή έπίααν. (χν) όνομα τφ μειρακίω ήν 
Πλάτων. (xvi)# τέχνη ανάγκης άοθενεοτέρα μακρώ. (χνιι)# 
ζηλώ ce τοΰ νοΰ, της δέ δειλίας οτυγώ. (xviii) έγώ τών κρεών 
έκλεπτον. (xix)# άρ' ύμιν ούτος ταΰτ' έδραοεν ένδικα; (χχ) 
θεοίς ταΰτα έποίηςαν. (χχϊ) στυγνόc ήν καί τη φωνη τραχύο. 

ταύτα παρ' έμοϋ μανθάνουαν, ά έξεοτιν δραχμήο έκ τηο 10 
ορχήοτραο 
πριαμένοιο 
Οωκράτουο 
καταγελάν, 
έάν 
προοποιήται έαυτού είναι, άλλωο τε καί ούτωο άτοπα δντα; 
άλλ', ω πρόο Διόο, ούτωοί οοι δοκώ; ούδένα νομίζω θεόν 
είναι; 
ΜΕ. ού μέντοι μά Δία ούδ' όπωοτιούν. 
15 
CO.. άπιοτόο γ' εί, ώ Μέλητε, καί ταΰτα μέντοι, ώο έμοί 
δοκεΐο, οαυτώ. έμοί γάρ δοκεΐ ούτοοί, ω άνδρεο 'Αθηναίοι, 
πάνυ είναι ύβριοτηο καί άκόλαοτοο, καί άτεχνώο την γραφήν 
ύβρει τινί καί άκολαοίρ καί νεότητι γράψαοθαι. έοικεν γάρ 
ώοπερ αίνιγμα ουντιθέντι διαπειρωμένω, άρα γνώοεται20 
Οωκράτηο ό οοφόο δή έμοΰ χαριεντιζομένου καί έναντι' 
έμαυτώ λέγοντοο, ή έξαπατηοω αύτόν καί τούο άλλουο τούο 
άκούονταο; ούτοο γάρ έμοί φαίνεται τά έναντία λέγειν αύτόο 
έαυτω 
έν τη γραφή ώοπερ άν εί είπον άδικεΐ Ca>Kp0^ic 
θεούο ού νομίζων, άλλά θεούο νομίζων. καίτοι τοΰτό έοτι25 
παίζοντοο. 
Notes 
1 
(ι) ύπνου θέλγητρον 23.1/le. (iv) Supply έοτί (cf. (viii) and 
(χνψ. 
2 
έπίδοο 2nd. s. aor. imp. act. of έπιδίδωμι; τηο γαοτρόο 
23.1/1J; κουφιοθήοει 2nd s. fut. ind. pass. 
3 
1.2 Supply είοί with άνδρεο. 1.3 Lit. for if the prize of victory 
were through guiles (dat. of instrument), i.e. were [won] by 
guiles. 
4 
//.2f. άναβολάο ποιοΰμαι (mid.) I make delays, i.e. for myself 
- the active would mean I make delays (for others), cf. 
8.1/16; the middle is used in the same way with τεκνοΰοθαι; 
ού ... ήδονή (έοτι), i.e. in producing children in old age. 1.5' 
ώο τάχιοτα is contrasted with οχολή (/.3), i.e. have children 
as quickly as possible; έκτροφαί (plural for singular) the 
rearing [of children], i.e. rearing children. 1.6 The neuter adj. 
ηδύ is predicate [is] a pleasant [thing] (ecu is understood), 
cf. 5.2.5(f). 
^ 
ΙΛ ταΰτα trans, this (the neuter plural is often used where we 
would have the singular in English); τό παράπαν ού not at 
all, cf. note on 11.2.12 1.3; νομίζειο believe in. 1.2 ούδέ ... 
ουδε not even ... nor (not neither ... nor which is ούτε ... 
ουτε) - note that this question is not marked by any 
introductory word (the same applies to all the questions in 
what Socrates says next). 1.4 μά Δι'(α) here no, by Zeus 
(22.1/2h). 1.6 Anaxagoras of Clazomenae was a philosopher of 
the generation before Socrates who taught that the sun and 
nioon were material bodies suspended in the sky (the sun 
241 
c 
3 
8 

242 
c 3 
to 
ω 
was a burning rock about the size of the Peloponnese); the 
traditional belief was that they were divinities, ll7f. τ'ονδε i.e. 
the jurymen; αύτούο ... ώοτε lit. them to be inexperienced m 
letters with the result..., i.e. that they are [so] illiterate that 
ούκ είδέναι an exception to the rule given at 24.1/2d - ώοτε -
inf. is often negated by ού when it follows the inf. construction 
of indirect speech (here αύτούο ... είναι); //. 1 Off. ά is the object 
of πριαμένοιο, lit. which having bought ... it is allowed 
(έξεοτιν) [to them] to mock (καταγελαν)..., i.e. which they can 
buy ... and [then] laugh at...; δραχμήο gen. of price (20.1/3); 
έκ τηο όρχήοτρδο lit. from the orchestra (a part of the Athenian 
agora where books were sold) but English idiom requires in 
the orchestra; έαυτού είναι [them, i.e. the doctrines of 
Anaxagoras/ to be his (lit. of himself possessive gen., 23.1/1^); 
άλλωο τε καί especially; άτοπα δντα agrees with the understood 
subject of είναι. /.16 καί ταύτα μέντοι and that (cf. note on Ll) 
too (ταύτα refers to the clause άπιοτόο / εί you are not to be 
believed), ll 19ff. ύβρει τινί, άκολαοία 
datives of 
cause 
(23.1/2/); ώοπερ (lit. as i f ) tones down the metaphor (cf. 
22.1/l<z(vi) for ώο used in the same way) and need not be 
translated; αίνιγμα object of ουντιθέντι which agrees with 
διαπειρωμένω, [a man] composing a riddle making trial [of 
me], i.e. [a man] making trial [of me] [by] composing ... (the 
actual riddle is άρα... άκούονταο); δή adds a note of sarcasm to 
ό οοφόο. //.21f έμού ... έναντί'(α) έμαυτώ λέγοντοο (saying 
[things] opposite to myself, i.e. contradicting myself) gen. 
absol. with two participles (will S. realise when I... ?). 124 
ώοπερ άν εί (= ώοπερ εί) ε'ίποι as if he were to say. 126 
παίζοντοο gen. of characteristic (23.1/16). 
23.3 Extra reading 
Further elegiac poetry 
Of the following, 1-5 are epitaphs, which were nearly always 
written in elegiac couplets (Appendix 9). Other examples ot 
epitaphs occur at 9.2.3 and 19.2.7(f). 
1 
ναυηγού τάφοο ειμί* ό δ' άντίον έοτί γεωργού* 
ώο άλί καί γαίη ξυνόο ύπεοτ Άΐδηο. 
2 
τηδε Ca<ov ό Δίκωνοο Άκάνθιοο ιερόν ύπνον 
κοιμάται* θνηοκειν μή λέγε τούο άγαθούο. 
3 
δωδεκετη τον παΐδα πατήρ άπέθηκε Φίλιπποο 
ένθάδε, τήν πολλήν έλπίδα, Νικοτέλην. 

4 
On the Spartans who died fighting the Persians at Plataea 
άοβεοτον κλέοο οϊδε φίλη περί πατρίδι θέντεο 
κυάνεον θανάτου άμφιβάλοντο νέφοο* 
ούδέ τεθνάοι θανόντεο, έπεί οφ' άρετη καθύπερθεν 
κυδαίνουο' άνάγει δώματοο έξ Άίδεω. 
5 Αιοχύλον Εύφορίωνοο 'Αθήναιον τόδε κεύθει 
μνήνα καταφθίμενον πυροφόροιο Γέλαο* 
άλκήν δ' εύδόκιμον Μαραθώνιον άλοοο άν ε'ίποι 
καί βαθυχαιτηειο Μήδοο έπιοτάμενοο. 
6 δάκρυα coi καί νέρθε διά χθονόο, Ήλιοδώρα, 
δωρούμαι οτοργάο λείψανον eic Άΐδαν, 
δάκρυα δυοδάκρυτα* πολυκλαύτω δ' έπί τύμβω 
οπένδω νάμα πόθων, μνάμα φιλοφροούνασ 
οικτρά γάρ οικτρά φίλαν ce καί έν φθιμένοιο Μελέαγροο 
αίάζω, κενεάν eic 'Αχέροντα χάριν, 
αίαι, πού τό ποθείνόν έμοί θάλοο; άρπαοεν Άιδαο, 
άρπαοεν, άκμαΐον δ' άνθοο έφυρε κόνιο. 
άλλά οε γουνοΰμαι, γά παντρόφε, τάν πανόδυρτον 
ήρέμα coic κόλποιο, μάτερ, έναγκάλιοαι. 
Notes 
1 
/.I o/sc. τάφοο. 1.2 ώο exclamatory (22.1/ltf(ii)); ύπεοτ'(ι) < 
ύπειμι. 
2 ό Δίκωνοο (23.1/1 α); ιερόν ύπνον cognate acc. (22.1/2g) 
with κοιμάται. 
3 /. 1 άπέθηκε < άποτίθημι. 1.2 την πολλήν έλπίδα is in 
apposition to παΐδα. 
4 /. 1 περι... θέντεο tmesis (12.3.9 1.6 note) for περιθεντεο (the 
image is from putting a wreath on a person's head). 1.2 
άμφιβάλοντο (= άμφεβάλοντο) a Homeric form without the 
augment (25.1/2^(i)) - the image here is of putting on a 
mantle. 1.3 τεθνάοι shorter form of τεθνηκίϊα (19.1/3^); 
cφ,(ε) here them. ΙΑ κυδαίνουο'(α) f. nom. pple.; in prose the 
order of the last three words would be έκ δώματοο Άΐδεω (= 
'Αιδου, cf. 22.3.2 1.9 and 25.1/2fe(i)). 
/.I Εύφορίωνοο [son] of E., 23.1/1 a (the article can be 
omitted). 1.2 καταφθίμενον (Homeric aorist mid. pple.) dead 
(trans, who died); πυροφόροιο (= -ου, 25.1/2fc(ii)) Tekec 
Homeric use of gen. to denote place where. II.3f. 
Μαραθώνιον άλοοο the grove at Marathon (a village to the 
north of Athens) which celebrated the Athenian victory Over 
a n invading Persian force in 490 BC. Aeschylus had 
distinguished himself in the battle and set more value on this 
than on any literary achievements, if the tradition assigning 
243 
c 
3 
δ 
10 

244 
ΙΟ 
ω 
the epitaph to him is correct. The subject of ε'ίποι is bot'-
akcoc and Μήδοο (with double subjects of this sort the 
may agree with the closer noun). 1.4 έπιοτάμενοο sc. it, u 
Aeschylus' άλκη. 
6 
The poem has a smattering of Doric forms, which ai\ 
sometimes used in elegiac poetry; these involve α for Attic η 
cxopyac, Άΐδαν (= "Αιδην) (1.2); μνάμα, φιλοφροσυναο (/.4 
"Axbdc (1.7); γά, τδν (1.9); μάτερ (1.10). II.2ί. Take cxop76 
with λείψανον, which is in apposition to δάκρυα. IΑ μνάμ<; 
is in apposition to νάμα. 1.5 οικτρά ... οικτρά n. pi. acc. used 
adverbially (20.1/5), piteously. 1.6 κενεάν ... χάριν is n 
apposition to the whole of the preceding clause; Acheron, 
one of the rivers of the Underworld, is used here to mean the 
Underworld itself. 1.7 έμοί indicates possession (23.1/2c); 
άρπαοεν = ήρπαοεν (cf. άμφιβάλοντο in 4 1.2 above). /. 10 
έναγκάλιοαι 2nd s. aor. imp. mid. of έναγκαλίζομαι. 

245 
24.1 Grammar 
24.1/1 Yes and no 
Greek has four ways of answering questions where in English 
we would use yes or no. In answer to the question άρα τούτο 
ειπαο; Did/you say thisi we may have: 
(a) the key word of the question repeated either affirmatively 
or negatively: 
ειπον 
yes (lit. I said [it]); 
ούκ ειπον 
no (lit. I did not say [it]). 
(b) the personal pronoun with γε: 
έγωγε 
yes (lit. I at any rate [said it]); 
ούκ έγωγε 
no. 
by ναί yes and ού no; or by a phrase such as πάνυ μέν ούν 
certainly; ούδαμώο certainly not. This can take the form of an 
abbreviated question, e.g. n&c γάρ ού; of course (lit. for how 
not?); or of an oath (22.1/2h). 
W) a short clause such as άληθη λέγειο you speak [the] truth 
(lit. true things). 
Sometimes one speaker in a conversation makes a comment on 
j^nat the other speaker has said (which may or may not have 
e e n a question), and we must infer from his words whether he 
ls a§reeing or not: 
A. c{> γ ούπω οωφρονεΐν 
Λ. You do not yet know 
επιοταοαι. 
prudence (lit. how to be 
u 
x 
prudent). 
Β· εε γάρ προοηύδων ούκ άν. Β. [No], for I would not be 
speaking to you (sc. if I did). 
ther examples have already occurred at 13.3(ii) 1.4 and 18.2.1. 

24.1/2 Summary of uses of ού and μή 
Both ού and μή are to be translated by not. Their uses, whicr 
involve distinctions which we do not make in English, can b. 
classified as follows: 
(a) In main clauses, ού is used as the negative in statements oi 
fact and in suppositions (i.e. in the main clause of a categon 
1 conditional sentence (18.1/5) and in potential clauses 
(19.1/2)); μή is used in constructions expressing an order or 
desire, i.e. prohibitions (17.1/1), exhortations (14.1/4<z(i)), 
and wishes (21.1/1). Also, ού is used in direct questions 
expecting the answer yes, μή in direct questions expecting 
the answer no (10.1/2^) and in deliberative questions 
(14.1/4d(ii)). 
(b) When the verb of an adverbial clause is negated, μή is used 
in clauses of purpose (14.1/4c(i)), condition (18.1/5), and 
for indefinite adverbial clauses (14.1/4c(iii) and 21.1/2 note 
4); elsewhere the negative is ού. 
(c) When the verb of an adjectival clause is negated, μή is used 
if the clause has an indefinite or general sense whether the 
indefinite construction (14.1/4c(iii)) is used or not, e.g. 
ού γάρ ά πράττουαν oi 
You are speaking not of those 
δίκαιοι, άλλ' α μή 
things which the just do, 
πράττουα, ταΰτα λέγειο. 
but [of those things] which 
they do not do. 
(d) ού is used to negate the verb of a noun clause, i.e. in indirect 
statements when expressed by a δτι/ώο clause (8.1/3b), 
indirect questions (10.1/2b), and clauses following verbs of 
fearing (14.1/4c(ii)). 
(e) Infinitives are always negated by μή, except in the infinitive 
construction for indirect statement after verbs of saying and 
thinking (8.1/3*). 
( f ) Participles are negated by ού except: 
(i) when used with the article to denote a general class 
(12.1/2tf(vi)); this also applies to adjectives, e.g. οί μη 
άγαθοί the [general class of] people who are not good, 
but οί ούκ άγαθοί the [particular] people who are not 
good. 
(ii) when used conditionally (12.1/2tf(iv)). 
(g) ού μή with the fut. ind. expresses a strong prohibition 
(17.1/1). 

οΰ μη with the aor. subj. expresses a strong denial: 
ού μή παύοωμαι φιλοοοφών. 
I shall certainly not stop 
studying philosophy. 
Or not as an alternative question in indirect speech is either 
ή ού or ή μή: 
ύμών δέομαι οκοπείν εί 
I ask you to examine 
δίκαια λέγω ή μή (or ή ού). 
whether I am speaking 
justly or not. 
24.1/3 Diminutives 
Nouns can be modified by the addition of a suffix to indicate 
something smaller, e.g. booklet (<book), islet (< isle). The 
modified form is called a diminutive. Greek has a number of 
diminutive suffixes but the most common is -ιον, e.g. παιδίον 
little child (παΐο, stem παιδ-). All diminutives in -ιον (including 
those from proper names) are 2nd declension neuters, even 
when they denote living beings. 
Very often diminutives are used to indicate affection and 
familiarity without any real connotation of smallness, e.g. 
πατρ-ίδιον daddy (< πατήρ with the suffix -ίδιον), CooKpa^iov 
dear little/old Socrates. Occasionally a diminutive has lost any 
special meaning and replaced the original noun, e.g. θηρίον wild 
beast (< θήρ, which has the same meaning but is used mainly in 
verse). 
Diminutives were a feature of the colloquial language, and 
consequently are not found in literary genres written in an 
elevated style, such as tragedy. They are, however; very common, 
in comedy, and in the dialogues of Plato, who aimed at 
reproducing the everyday speech of educated Athenians. An 
amusing example occurs in Aristophanes' Clouds 
where 
Strepsiades wakes his adult son by coaxing him with the 
diminutive of his name: 
πώρ δήτ' άν ήδιοτ' αύτόν 
How could I wake him 
έπεγείραιμι; πώο; Φειδιππίδη, 
most gently? How? 
Φειδιππίδιον. 
Pheidippides, dear little 
Pheidippides. 
24.1/4 Dual number 
In addition to the singular and plural, Indo-European (1.3) also 
had a dual number, which was used for two persons or objects. 
i h ) 
0 

In Homer it is still frequent, but in Attic Greek of the fifth and 
fourth centuries BC its use is generally confined to two persons 
or things closely associated or normally considered to form a 
pair, e.g. two brothers, sisters, hands, eyes, but even here it is 
optional. Its endings do not show anything like the same variety 
as either the singular or plural. 
In verbs the same stems are used as elsewhere. There is no first 
person dual. In the second person the dual endings are identical 
for the primary and historic tenses but in the third person 
endings there is a distinction between primary and historic 
forms (cf. 4.1/1 note 1 and 8.1/1/) : 
ACTIVE 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
Primary 
Historic 
Primary 
Historic 
2 
-τον 
-τον 
-οθον 
-οθον 
3 
-τον 
-την 
-οθον 
-οθην 
In -ω verbs the link vowel (cf. 8.1/1 d) is the same as in the 
singular and plural except that we have ε (not ο/ε) in the 
present, imperfect and future. 
For λύω in the indicative we have: 
ACTIVE 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
PRESENT 
2 
λύ-ετον you 
two loosen 
λύ-εοθον 
3 
λύ-ετον two 
λϋ-εοθον 
(people) loosen 
FUTURE 
2 
λϋο-ετον 
mid. λϋο-εοθον 
pass. λυθηο-εοθον 
3 
λύο-ετον 
λύο-εοθον 
λυθηο-εοθον 
IMPERFECT 
2 
έλύ-ετον 
έλύ-εοθον 
3 
έλϋ-ετην 
έλϋ-εοθην 
AORIST 
2 
έλϋο-ατον 
mid. έλύο-αοθον 
pass. έλύθη-τον 
3 
έλϋο-άτην 
έλϋο-άοθην 
έλυθη-την 
PERFECT 
2 
λελύκ-ατον 
λελυ-οθον 
3 
λελύκ-ατον 
λελυ-οθον 
PLUPERFECT 
2 
έλελύκ-ετον 
έλελυ-οθον 
3 
έλελυκ-ετην 
έλελύ-οθην 
The subjunctive mood takes the primary endings (cf. 14.1/2), 
giving for both second and third persons λύ-ητον (pres. act.) and 
λύ-ηοθον (pres. mid./pass.), etc. (the η represents the lengthening 
of ε in λύ-ε-τον, λύ-ε-οθον of the indicative). 
The optative takes the historic endings (cf. 14.1/3) with the same 
preceding diphthong as occurs in the singular and plural of the 
tenses which have an optative (i.e. οι/αι/ει), e.g. pres. act. 2 
λύ-οιτον, 3 λΐ5-οίτην; aor. act. 2 λύο-αιτον, 3 λϋο-αίτην; aor. 
pass. 2 λυθ-ειτον, 3 λυθ-είτην. 

The 2nd person dual of the imperative is the same as in the 
indicative. The 3rd person dual of the imperative is rare. 
The dual endings for nouns and the dual forms of the article and 
personal pronouns are: 
NOUNS 
ARTICLE 
PERSONAL PRONOUNS 
(Declension) 
M.F.N. 
1st 
2 n d 
3rd 
N.V.A. 
-β 
-ω 
-ε 
τώ 
vwwetwo 
c<(>is you two 
Gen. Dat. 
- α ι ν 
- ο ι ν 
- ο ι ν 
τοιν 
νων 
ΰφων 
The article has the same forms for all genders, and the 
demonstrative pronouns follow the same pattern (τούτω/τούτοιν 
from oxnoc; τώδε/τοΐνδε from δδε). In each declension adjectives 
(and αύτόο and participles) take the same endings as nouns. 
Because the dual is not obligatory we often find dual and plural 
forms used indiscriminately: 
δύο άνδρεο προοελθόντε 
Two men came forward 
"Αγιδι διελεγέοθην. 
and (lit. having come 
/ 
forward) were talking 
with Agis (we might 
have expected άνδρε 
instead of δύο άνδρεο). 
24.1/5 Verbal adjectives in -toc/-toc and -tcoc 
(a) We have already met many verbal adjectives in -TOC/-TOC. 
Most have a prefix, in many cases the negative ά-/άν- e.g. 
έμφυτοο (έν + φυτοο), άβατοο (ά + βατοο), but some have 
none, e.g. χυτόο. They can be either: 
(i)the equivalent of a perfect passive participle, e.g., 
εύγνωοτοο well-known, έμφυτοο inborn, χυτόο melted 
(ii) the equivalent of a present participle active, e.g. άνόητοο 
stupid (lit. not perceiving) 
(iii) an adjective denoting possibility, e.g. άβατοο impassable, 
βιωτόο livable. 
Some can be either (i) or (iii), e.g. άόρδτοο unseen/invisible. 
(b) The verbal adjective in -τέοο differs from the above in being 
considered a normal part of a verb, although, in its neuter 
singular form, it is given a separate listing in dictionaries. It 
is formed by replacing θη of the aorist passive stem with 
-τέοο, e.g. φιλητεοο (< φιλέω, aor. pass έφιλήθην), κελευοτέοο 
(< κελεύω, aor. pass, έκελεύοθην); and has the meaning of a 
present passive participle but with the added idea of 
necessity. The literal translation of φιλητέοο ειμί is I am 

needing-to-be-loved, 
i.e. I must be loved. The agent is 
expressed by the dative (23.1/2g), not by υπό + gen.: 
ό ποταμόο ήμΐν έοτι 
The river is needing-to-be-
διαβατέοο. 
crossed-over by us, i.e. 
we must cross over the 
river. 
εκείνη coi ού φιλητέδ. 
That woman [is] not 
needing-to-be-loved by 
you, i.e. you must not 
love that woman. 
The neuter singular (and occasionally the neuter plural) of 
the verbal adjective can be used impersonally: διαβατέον 
ήμΐν έοτιν it is needing-to-be-crossed-over 
(there must be a 
crossing over) by us, i.e. we must cross over. The verbal 
adjective of a transitive verb can, when used impersonally, 
take an object: τον ποταμόν ήμΐν έοτι διαβατέον it is needing-
to-be-crossed-over the river (there must be a crossing over 
the river) by us, i.e. we must cross over the river. There is no 
difference in meaning between ό ποταμόο έοτι διαβατέοο and 
τον ποταμόν ecu διαβατέον. 
Sometimes a literal translation of an impersonal verbal 
adjective is impossible: 
τω άδικοΰντι δοτέον έοτί 
The [person] doing wrong 
δίκην 
must pay the penalty (the 
closest translation is 
there must-be-a-paying 
of the 
penalty...). 
The neuter plural of the verbal adjective has exactly the 
same meaning. We may equally well have τον ποταμόν έοτι 
διαβατέα or τον ποταμόν ecu διαβατέον. 
24.1/6 Verbs of precaution and striving 
When these verbs, which include έπιμελέομαι, εύλαβέομαι both 
take care, οπουδάζω be eager/busy, οκοπέω consider; take heed, 
are followed by a clause (take care that..., be eager that..., etc.), 
this is expressed by δπωο with the future indicative. The future 
indicative is retained even after main verbs in a historic tense. 
The όπωο clause is negated by μή: 
όπωο άμυνούμεθα, ούδείο 
No-one is making 
παραοκευάζεται ούδέ 
preparations or taking 
έπιμελεΐται. 
care that we should 
defend ourselves. 

δει οκοπειν δπωο τά παρόντ' 
έπανορθωθήοεται. 
έοκόπουν δπωο αύτόο 
άπολυθηοομαι τηο έγγύηο. 
Less often δπωο is followed by the 
purpose clauses (14.1/4c(i)): 
ού φυλάξεοθε δπωο μή 
δεοπότην εύρητε; 
έπεμελεΐτο ό Κΰροο δπωο 
μήποτε οί οτρατιώται 
άνίδρωτοι γενόμενοι έπί 
τό άριοτον είοίοιεν. 
We must take heed that 
the present state of 
affairs be remedied. 
I was taking heed that I 
myself be freed from the 
pledge. 
subjunctive or optative, as in 
Will you not be on your 
guard that you do not 
find a master? 
Cyrus took care that the 
soldiers should never 
come to breakfast 
without working up a 
sweat (lit. being without 
a sweat). 
Note 
Sometimes a main verb in the imperative such as οκόπει/οκοπειτε 
see to it ίβ omitted and we are left with nothing but όπωο and the 
future indicative: 
δπωο έοεοθε άνδρεο άξιοι 
τηο έλευθερίδο. 
[See to it] that you show 
yourselves (lit. will be) 
men worthy of freedom! 
24.1/7 Verbs of hindering, preventing, 
forbidding, denying 
In English, verbs with these and similar meanings take various 
constructions (I prevented him from entering, we forbid you to 
do this). In Greek they are always followed by an infinitive 
which is accompanied by the negative μή; the latter is redundant 
from an English point of view: ε'ίργω ύμάο μή μάχεοθαι I hinder 
you from fighting; άπαγορεύομεν αύτόν μή οίκοδομεΐν we forbid 
bim to build. When the main verb is itself negated, the infinitive 
is accompanied by a double redundant negative μή ού: ούκ ε'ίργω 
μή ού μάχεοθαι / do not hinder you from 
fighting. 
However, κωλύω prevent ή usually followed by a simple 
infinitive without μή or μή ού: κωλύω αύτόν ίππεύειν / prevent 
him from riding; ού κωλύω αύτόν βαδίζειν I do not prevent him 
from walking. 

24.2 Greek reading 
1 
In addition to translating, explain each use of a negative: 
(/)# ό μηδέν είδώο ούδέν έξαμαρτάνει. (ii) μηδένα φίλον 
ποιου πριν άν έξετάοηο πώο κέχρηται xoic πρότερον φίλοιο. 
(iii) πάν ποιοΰοιν ώοτε μή δούναι δίκην. (iv) ούδέν έπράχθη 
διά τό μή τον άρχοντα παρεΐναι. (ν) ούκ οίδα πότερον 
πορευθώ ή μή. (νϊ) δέδοικα μή ούχ ίκανούο έχω oic τον 
χρυοόν δω. (vii) θάρρει, ω Κΰρε, ού μή ce κρύψω πρόο δντινα 
βούλομαι άφικέοθαι. (viii) οί δ' έφαοαν άποδωοειν τούο 
νεκρούο έφ' ω μή καίειν τάο κώμαο. (ix)# τό μή δίκαιον 
έργον ού λήθει θεούο. (χ) τί έμποδών μή ούκ άποθανεΐν 
αύτούο; (xi) φίλοο έβούλετο είναι τοΐο μέγιοτα δυναμένοιο 
ίνα άδικων μή διδοίη δίκην. (xii)# εί μή καθέξειο γλώτταν, 
έοται coi κακά. (xiii)# ούκ άν δύναιο μή καμών 
εύδαιμονεΐν. (χiv)# ού μή δυομενήο έοει φίλοιο. (χν) ειπών 
ά θέλειο, άντάκου' ά μή θέλειο. (χνϊ) ή δει χελωνηο κρέα 
φαγεΐν ή μή φαγεΐν. (xvii) δύναοαί μοι λέγειν εί διδακτόν ή 
άρετή ή ού; (xviii) ούδείο άπαρνήοεται μή ούχί έπίοταοθαι 
τά δίκαια, (xi:c) έφοβεΐτο μή ού δύναιτο έκ τηο χώραο 
έξελθεΐν. (χχ) μή άπέλθητε πριν άν άκούοητε. 
2 
θεραπευτέον τούο θεούο, τούο φίλουο εύεργετητέον, την 
πόλιν ωφελητέον, τήν Ελλάδα πειρατέον ευ ποιεΐν, τήν γην 
θεραπευτέον, τών βοοκημάτων έπιμελητέον, τάο πολεμικάο 
τέχναο μαθητέον. 
3# ό φόβοο, δταν τιο αίματοο μέλλη πέρι 
λέγειν καταοτάο είο άγων' έναντίον, 
τό τε οτόμ' eic έκπληξιν άνθρώπων άγει 
τον νοΰν τ' άπείργει μή λέγειν ά βούλεται. 
4 
ύμάο εύλαβεΐοθαι δει όπωο μηδέν ών ίδίςι φυλάξαιοθ' άν, 
τοΰτο δημοοίςι ποιοΰντεο φανήοεοθε. 
5 
ούτοι πάντεο οί νόμοι κείνται πολύν ήδη χρόνον, ώ άνδρεο 
δικαοταί, καί ούδείο πώποτ' άντεΐπεν μή ού καλώο έξειν 
αύτούο. 
6 
εύλαβοΰ μή φανηο κακόο γεγώο. 
7 
Socrates tells of an encounter with two sophists whom he 
has previously met (sophists were teachers who travelled 
about from one Greek city to another). 
ήοπαζόμην ούν αύτω άτε διά χρόνου έωρακώσ μετά δέ τούτο 
εΐπον πρόο τον Κλεινίαν ώ Κλεινία, τώδε μέντοι τω άνδρε 
οοφώ, Εύθύδημόο τε καί Διονυοόδωροο, ού τά ομικρά άλλα 
τά μεγάλα* τά γάρ περί τον πόλεμον έπίοταοθον. 
ειπών ούν ταΰτα κατεφρονήθην ύπ' αύτοΐν έγελαοάτην ούν 
άμφω βλέψαντε είο άλλήλω, καί ό Εύθύδημοο ειπεν* ούτοι 

έτι ταΰτα, ώ Οώκρατεο, οπουδάζομεν, άλλα παρέργοιο 
αύτοιο χρώμεθα. 
κάγώ θαυμάοαο ειπον* καλόν άν που τό έργον υμών εϊη, εί 
τηλικαΰτα πράγματα πάρεργα ύμιν τυγχάνει όντα, καί πρόο 10 
θεών ε'ίπετόν μοι τί έοτι τούτο τό καλόν; 
άρετήν, έφη, ώ Οώκρατεο, οίόμεθα οϊω τ' είναι παραδοΰναι 
κάλλιοτ' άνθρώπων καί τάχιοτα. 
ω Ζεΰ, οίον, ήν δ' έγώ, λέγετον πράγμα* πόθεν τούτο τό 
έρμαιον ηύρετον; έγώ δέ περί ύμών διενοούμην έτι, ώοπερ 15 
νυνδή έλεγον, ώο τό πολύ τούτο δεινοΐν όντοιν, έν όπλοιο 
μάχεοθαι, καί ταΰτα έλεγον περί οφών ότε γάρ τό πρότερον 
έπεδημήοατον, τούτο μέμνημαι οφώ έπαγγελλομένω. 
8 
μετά τοΰτον Ξενοφών είπεν* έγώ δ' ούτω γιγνώοκω. εί μέν 
άνάγκη μάχεοθαι, τούτο δει παραοκευάοαοθαι όπωο ώο 
κράτιοτα 
μαχούμεθα. 
εί 
δέ 
βουλόμεθα 
ώο ράοτα 
ύπερβάλλειν, τούτό μοι δοκεΐ οκεπτέον είναι όπωο ώο 
έλάχιοτα μέν τραύματα λάβωμεν, ώο έλάχιοτα δέ οώματα 5 
άποβάλωμεν. 
9 
οκεπτέον πότερον δίκαιον έμέ ένθένδε πειράοθαι έξιέναι 
μή άφιέντων 'Αθηναίων ή ού δίκαιον. 
10 
Α. είπέ μοι, έοτι οοι άγρόο ; Β. ούκ έμοιγε. 
11 
καί /)1ήν εί ύφηοόμεθα καί έπί βαοιλεΐ γενηοόμεθα, τί 
οίόμεθα πείοεοθαι; όο καί τοΰ όμομητρίου άδελφοΰ καί 
τεθνηκότοο ήδη άποτεμών τήν κεφαλήν καί τήν χείρα 
άνεοταύρωοεν* ήμάο δέ, οίο κηδεμών μέν ούδείο πάρεοτιν, 
έοτρατεύοαμεν δέ έπ' αύτόν ώο δοΰλον άντί βαοιλέωο 5 
ποιήοοντεο καί άποκτενοΰντεο εί δυναίμεθα, τί άν οίόμεθα 
παθεΐν; άρ' ούκ άν έπί πάν έλθοι ώο ήμάο τά έοχατα 
αίκιοάμενοο πάοιν άνθρώποιο φόβον παράοχη 
τοΰ 
οτρατεΰοαί ποτε έπ' αύτόν; άλλ' όπωο τοι μή έπ' έκείνω 
γενηοόμεθα πάντα ποιητέον. 
10 
Notes 
1 (i) ούδέν adverbial acc. (20.1/5). (ii) ποιοΰ 2nd s. pres. imp. 
mid.; κέχρηται < χράομαι; πρότερον here an adverb (cf. οί 
νΰν, 5.1/3) but trans, by an adjective, (ν) πορευθώ (aor. subj. 
of πορεύομαι) deliberative subj. (14.1/4<z(ii)) in indirect 
speech (cf. δώ in (vi)). (vii) θάρρει (< θάρρε-ε) pres. imp.; 
κρύψω is here aor. subj. (lA.Hlh). 
(viii) έφ' ω 16.1/1 note 4. 
(x) έμποδών sc. ecu; because the construction appropriate 
after a negated verb of hindering, preventing etc. (μή ού) is 
used here, we know that the question expects the answer 
nothing and so counts as a virtual negation, (xi) μέγιοτα 
adverb (17.1/2). (xii) καθέξειο < κατέχω, (xiv) ού μή + fut. 

ind., 17.1/1. (xv) άντάκου'(ε) imp. (xvi) κρέδ acc. pi. of 
Kpeac (13.1/lfc(iii)). 
2 έοτί is very often omitted with verbal adjectives and must be 
supplied with each example here. 
3 A murder trial is being described. /.I ό φόβοο is the subject 
of άγει (/.3); take πέρι with αίματοο (see note on 11.2.4 Ll). 
1.2 καταοτάο intr. aor. pple. of καθίοτημι. //.3f. Take 
άνθρώπων with οτόμ'(α) and νουν. 
4 δπωο ... φανήοεοθε (2nd pi. fut. pass, of φαίνω) see 24.1/6; 
φυλάξαιοθ'(ε) άν potential optative (19.1/2). 
5 κείνται is used here as the perf. pass of τίθημι (18.1/2 note 
4); έξειν fut. act. inf. of έχω. 
6 μή = δπωο μή. 
7 The passage has many dual forms (24.1/4). l.l έωρακώο 
perf. act. pple. of όράω. 1.2 μέντοι emphatic, not adversative 
(13.1/3c(v)). /.3 χά ομΤκρά ... τά μεγάλα acc. of respect with 
οοφώ in 1.3 (20.1/5). /.7f. παρέργοιο here predicative with 
αύτοιο, them (amolc) [as] subordinate issues. 1.9 θαυμάοαο 
coincidental use of the aor. pple. (12.1/1), marvelling; άν ... 
ε'ίη potential opt. (19.1/2), lit. would be, but trans, must be. 
l.ll ε'ίπετόν 2nd dual aor. imp. act. /.13 κάλλιοτ'(α) 
άνθρώπων καί τάχιοτα lit. most excellently and speedily of 
men, i.e. as excellently and speedily as is humanly 
possible. 
1.14 οίον exclamatory (21.1/3); ήν δ' έγώ said I (18.1.1#). 
1.16 ώο τό πολύ (= ώο έπί τό πολύ) for the most part, 
22.1/ltf(vii); τοΰτο (acc. of respect with δεινοιν (20.1/5)) 
anticipates έν ... μάχεοθαι; δεινοιν όντοιν agrees with ύμών 
in 1.15, although the latter is plural, not dual (note that 
Socrates somewhat illogically goes on to use the dual 
pronoun οφων). 
8 ούτω anticipates the following sentence, lit. I think 
(γιγνώοκω) thus; each τοΰτο anticipates the δπωο clause 
which follows it and need not be translated; ώο + supl. 
17.1/4 J. 
9 Supply έοτί with both οκεπτέον (see note on 2 above) and 
δίκαιον; άφΐέντων gen. pi. of the pres. act. pple. of άφίημι. 
10 έμοιγε 24.1/1 b. 
11 ll.Iff. καί μήν and further; ύφηοόμεθα fut. mid. of ύφίημι; τι 
etc. what do we think we shall suffer (cf. 8.1/3<z); oc lit. who 
(the antecedent is βααλεΐ) but trans, he (the relative 
pronoun is often used to join a sentence with what 
precedes); καί (before τοΰ and before τεθνηκότοο) even, but 
trans, the second by and that too for variety; take ήδη with 
τεθνηκότοο. //.4ff. ήμάο is the subject of παθειν in 1.7; oic . 

πάρεση, ν lit. for whom there is no protector at hand; before 
έοτρατεύοαμεν we must supply the relative οί from the 
preceding oic, and the two adjectival clauses can be 
translated who have no protector at hand but (δέ) who 
campaigned 
against him (έπ' αύτόν); ώο + fut. pple. 
(12.1/2a(v)); ει δυναίμεθα indefinite construction in historic 
sequence (14.1/4c(iii)), lit. if ever we could; άν ... παθεΐν 
represents άν πάθοιμεν in direct speech (potential opt., 
19.1/2), and the subject of the infinitive (ήμάο in 1.4) is, quite 
irregularly, inserted in the acc. although it is the same as the 
subject of οίόμεθα - trans, what do we think we would 
suffer. II.Hi. άρ' ούκ (10.1/2a); έπί πάν lit. to everything, i.e. 
to any lengths; ώο introduces a purpose clause (22.1/lfc(ii)); 
τά έοχατα acc. of respect (20.1/5), lit. in respect of the worst 
things, i.e. in the worst [possible] ways; take τοΰ οτρατεΰοαι 
... as objective gen. (23.1/lc) with φόβον, fear of campaigning; 
the clause όπωο ... γενηοόμεθα is governed by ποιητέον 
(έοτίν) - όπωο + fut. is used to express purpose (the normal 
construction with όπωο in this context would be the 
subjunctive, 14.14c(i)). 
/ 
24.3 Extra reading 
255 
c 3 
The Think Tank 
Old Comedy is the term given to the form of comic drama 
which flourished in Athens during the fifth century BC. Two of 
its main characteristics, comic situations and unbridled criticism 
of contemporaries, can be seen in the following passage from 
Aristophanes' Clouds, which was a stinging attack on Socrates 
and what were popularly supposed to be his intellectual 
interests. In this scene Strepsiades, a stupid and uneducated 
Athenian of the older generation, has just gained admittance to 
Socrates' Φροντιοτήριον (Think Tank) in order to improve 
himself. 
ΟΙΤΕΨΙAAHC - MA0HTHC 
CT· 
πρόο τών θεών, τί γάρ τάδ' έοτι; είπέ μοι. 
^Α· 
άοτρονομία μέν αύτηί. CT. τουτί δέ τί; 
^Α· 
γεωμετρία. CT. τοΰτ' ούν τί έοτι χρήαμον; 
u ' 
όναμετρεΐοθαι. CT. πότερα τήν κληρουχικήν; 
ούκ, άλλά τήν ουμπαοαν. CT. άοτειον λεγειο. 
5 
τό γάρ οόφιομα δημοτικόν καί χρήαμον. 

256 
Β 
ΜΑ. αύτη δέ coi yfjc περίοδοο πάσηο. oppc; 
αϊδε μέν 'Αθήναι. CT. τί ού λέγειο; ού πείθομαι, 
έπεί δικαοτάο ούχ όρώ καθημένουο. 
ΜΑ. ώο τούτ' άληθώο 'Αττικόν τό χωρίον. 
CT. 
φέρε τίο γάρ ούτοο ούπί τηο κρεμάθραο άνήρ; 
ΜΑ. αύτόο. CT. τίο αύτόο; ΜΑ. Οωκράτηο. CT. ώ C<OKp0^c. 
ίθ' ούτοο, άναβόηοον αύτόν μοι μέγα. 
ΜΑ. αύτόο μέν ούν ού κάλεοον* ού γάρ μοι οχολή. 
CT. 
ώ €ώκρατεο, 
ώ €ωκρατίδιον. 
CQKPATHC 
τί με καλεΐο, ώ 'φήμερε; 
CT. 
πρώτον μέν δτι δραο, άντιβολώ, κάτειπέ μοι. 
CQ. 
άεροβατώ καί περιφρονώ τον ήλιον. 
CT. 
έπειτ' άπό ταρρού τούο θεούο ύπερφρονεΐο, 
άλλ' ούκ άπό τηο γήο, ε'ίπερ; CΏ. ού γάρ άν ποτε 
έξηύρον όρθώο τά μετέωρα πράγματα, 
εί μή κρεμάοαο τό νόημα καί τήν φροντίδα. 
Notes 
The Φροντιοτήριον of Aristophanes' play (he seems to have 
coined the word himself) was a school where various sciences 
were both investigated and taught. In the opening lines a pupil 
shows Strepsiades pieces of equipment, which, for humorous 
effect, are given the names of the sciences (astronomy and 
geometry) for which they are used. l.l γάρ explains why 
Strepsiades has used the exclamation πρόο τών θεών (in the name 
of the gods) but should not be translated. 1.2 αύτηί, τουτί 
emphatic forms of αύτη, τούτο with the suffix I, before which a 
final short vowel is dropped. 1.3 ούν well, so; τί lit. in what 
respect. IA When the pupil replies that the purpose of geometry is 
to measure land, Strepsiades, who is unable to rise above self-
interested parochialism, asks if the land involved is for κλήροι, 
which were allotments of foreign land confiscated by the state and 
given to poorer Athenian citizens. The term for this allocation 
was κληρουχίδ cleruchy. πότερα introduces alternative questions 
(10.112a) but the second, ή ού or not, is omitted; κληρουχικήν sc. 
γήν land for cleruchies. ll.Si. Strepsiades finds the idea of 
measuring the whole earth attractive because he supposes that 
this would mean distributing it to needy Athenians. 1.7 coi ethic 
dat. (23.1/2f). 1.9 Large juries were a prominent feature of the 
Athenian legal system, which was often the butt of Aristophanes' 
humour. 1.10 A main clause meaning I assure you must be 
supplied, l.ll At this point Socrates appears overhead suspended 

from the end of a crane (see note on /.18); φέρε 17.1/1 note 7; 
= ό έπί. /.12 αύτόο was used to mean the master (cf. Irish use 
of himself); ω Οοκράτηο (nom. not voc.) an exclamation Ah, [it's] 
Socrates. /. 13 ίθ'(ι) 2nd s. pres. imp. of έρχομαι (18.1/3); ούτοο 
you thereI (see note on 20.2.12 1.4). 1.15 Οωκρατίδιον 24.1/3; ώ 
'φημερε i.e. ώ έφ- (initial elision of this type (prodelision) is 
poetical). 1.16 ότι indirect form of τί, 10.1/lb 
note 1. //.17f. 
Socrates, who is comically represented as some sort of divine 
being, says he is thinking about (περιφρονώ) the sun but 
Strepsiades perversely takes περιφρονώ in its other meaning 
despise and replies with the unequivocal ύπερφρονείο; από ταρροΰ 
from your mat although Strepsiades speaks of a basket in /.ll -
Socrates is apparently sitting on a mat which is suspended at each 
corner from the gib of the crane and so resembles a basket. 1.19 
άλλ'(ά) trans, and as there is no strong contrast; εϊπερ if indeed 
[that's what you're really doing] Strepsiades expresses himself 
cautiously because he cannot understand what Socrates is up to; 
ού γάρ άν ... lit. for I would not ... i.e. yes, for I would 
not... 
(24.1/1). /.21 εί μή κρεμάοδο except by (lit. if not) suspending (εί 
is here followed by a phrase, not a clause). 
/ 

25.1 Grammar 
25.1/1 Homeric Greek 
The language of the Iliad and Odyssey is an older version of 
Ionic (1.3) with elements from other dialects. It differs to some 
extent from Attic in phonology (the individual sounds of 
words), morphology (the different forms which some words can 
take), and syntax (grammatical constructions and uses). Listed 
below are the main differences which occur in the passages in 
25.2, together with examples from them. 
A good introduction to Homer is G.S. Kirk Homer and the Epic 
(Cambridge UP). 
25.1/2 Differences in phonology and 
morphology 
(a) Vowels and 
diphthongs 
(i) Contraction is not always observed, e.g. αίδέομαι (1 /.3 in 
25.2). 
(ii) 8 becomes η after ε, ι and p, e.g. κρατερή (1 1.19). 
(iii) Diphthongs are sometimes broken up into two vowels, e.g. 
έϋμμελίω (1 /. 10, = εύ-); χήτεϊ (1 /.24, = χήτει). 
(iv) Homeric Greek sometimes has cc where the Attic has c, 
e.g. occov (1 /.15) 
(b) Case endings 
(i) -εω, -ω (= Attic -ου) for the gen. s. of first declension 
masculines, e.g. έϋμμελίω (1 LlO). 
(ii) -οιο (= Attic -ου) for the gen. s. of the second declension, 
e.g. πολέμοιο (1 1.4). 

(iii) -ά®ν (= Attic -ων) for the gen. pi. of the first declension, 
e.g. ροδών (2 /.8). 
(iv) —8cci (= Attic -ci) for the dat. pi. of some third declension 
nouns, e.g. Τρώεοα (1 1.6). 
(ν) -flci (= Attic -ate) for the dat. pi. of the first declension, e.g. 
κονίηα (1 /.14) 
(vi) πολύο has an irregular nom. pi. m. πολέβο (1 /.13). 
(vii) The gen. s. of cv is οεΰ (1 /.15). 
(c) Verbal endings 
(i) -ηα(ν) (= Attic -η ) for the 3rd s. subj. act., e.g. εϊπηαν (1 
120). 
(ii) -ατο (= Attic -ντο) for the 3rd pi. mid. and pass, of certain 
tenses (cf. 16.1/3 note), e.g. ήατο (2 1.2). 
(iii) -εν (= Attic -^cav) for the 3rd pi. of the aor. ind. pass, and 
root aorists in -ην, e.g. έφανεν (2 1.5). 
(iv) -έμεν (= Attic -ειν) for the pres. (and strong aor.) inf. act., 
e.g. μενέμεν (4 /.16). 
(ν) The pres. inf. of ειμί is έμμεναι (1 /.5), not είναι. 
(d) Verbal stems 
(i) The Augment is frequently omitted, e.g. μάθον (1 1.5, = 
έμαθον). 
(ii) The aor. ind. stem of ειπον (< λέγω) is given a syllabic 
augment, προοέειπε (1 /. 1, = προοεΐπε). 
(iii) The pres. pple. of ειμί is έών, έοΰοα, έόν (see 1 1.17) 
(e) A few words have a different form, e.g. αί (1 /.4, = εί if); 
ήμαρ (1 /.9, = ήμέρδ). 
25.1/3 Differences in syntax 
(a) What became the definite article in Attic is a third person 
pronoun in Homer, e.g. την (1 l.l) her (= αυτήν). A relic of 
this use survives in Attic in the idiom οί μέν... οί δέ (5.1/3). 
(b) The future tense exists in Homer (e.g. eccexax 11.9), but the 
future can also be expressed by the subjunctive with or 
without άν or κε (an equivalent of άν which Homer often 
uses), e.g. κεν... άγηται (1 ll.lSi.) will lead; άν όλώλη (11.9) 
will be destroyed (the perfect expresses a future state, lit. 
will be in a state of having perished); εϊπηαν (1 1.20) will 
say. Further, the optative with άν (or κε) does not always 
have a strong future potential sense as in Attic, and is 
sometimes to be translated by a simple future, e.g. κεν ... 
ύφαίνοιο you will weave (1 1.17). 
259 
c 
3 A1 
£ 

260 
c 3 
ΙΟ ΟΙ 
25.2 Readings from Homer 
The Attic equivalent of certain Homeric words and endings 
is given in the ri^ht-hand margin. The Homeric forms so 
explained (e.g. Τρη, 1 1.9) are not listed separately in the 
vocabulary. 
The Homeric poems are written in hexameters (Appendix 9). 
1 Hector talks with his wife Andromache 
την δ' αύτε προοέειπε μεγαο κορυθαίολοο Έκτωρ· 
ή καί έμοί τάδε πάντα μέλει, γύναν άλλα μάλ' 
αίνώο αιδέομαι Τρώαο καί Τρφάδαο έλκεοιπέπλουο, 
αι κε κακόο ωο νόοφιν άλυοκάζω πολέμοιο* 
ούδέ με θυμόο άνίογεν, έπεί μάθον έιχιιεναι 
έοθλόο αίεί καί πρώτοιοι μετά Τρώεοοι μάχεοθαι, 
άρνυμενοο πατρόο τε μέγα κλέοο ήδ' έμόν αυτού, 
εΰ γάρ έγώ τόδε οιδα κατά φρένα καί κατά θυμόν · 
έοοεται ήμαρ ότ' άν ηοϊ όλώλη Ίλιοο ίρή 
καί Πρίαμοο καί λαόο έϋμμελίω Πριάμοιο. 
άλλ' ού μοι Τρώων τόοοον μέλει άλγοο ότήοοω, 
ούτ* αύτηο Έκάβηο ούτε Πριάμοιο άνακτοο 
ούτε κααγνήτων, οί κεν πολέεο τε καί έοθλοί 
έν κονίηοι πέοοιεν υπ' άνδράοι δυομενέεοοιν, 
occov οεύ, δτε κέν τιο 'Αχαιών χαλκοχιτώνων 
δακρυόεοοαν άγηται, έλεύθερον ήμαρ άπούραο· 
καί κεν έν "Αργεί έούοα πρόο άλληο ίοτόν ύφαίνοιο, 
καί κεν ύδωρ φορέοιο Μεοοηΐδοο ή Ύπερείηο 
πόλλ' άεκαζομένη, κρατερή δ' έπικείοετ' άνάγκη. 
καί ποτέ τιο εΐπηοιν ίδών κατά δάκρυ χέουοαν* 
Έκτοροο ήδε γυνή, oc άριοτεύεοκε μάχεοθαι 
Τρώων ίπποδάμων, δτε Ίλιον άμφιμάγοντο. 
ώο ποτέ τιο έρέει· οοί δ' αύ νέον έοοεται άλγοο 
χήτεϊ τοιούδ' άνδρόο άμύνειν δούλιον ήμαρ. 
άλλά με τεθνηώτα χυτή κατά γαία καλύπτοι, 
πρίν γέ τι οηο τε βοήο οού θ' έλκηθιιοΐο πυθέοθαι. 
-ειπε 
5 έμαθον, είναι 
Τρωοί 
έοται, ιερή (= -ά) 
10 -ίου,-ου 
τόοον, όπίοω 
-ου 
πολλοί 
-ίαιο, δυομενέαν 
15 ocov, οού 
ούοα 
φοροίηο (= φεροιο) 
20 είπη 
αμφεμαχοντο 
έρει, έοται 
25 τεθνεώτα 
-ου 
2 The Trojans camp on the the plain outside Troy 
oi δέ μέγα φρονέοντεο έπί πτολέμοιο γεφυραο 
ήατο παννυχιοι, πυρά δέ οφιοι καίετο πολλά, 
ώο δ' ότ' έν ούρανφ άοτρα φαεινήν άμφί οελήνην 
φαίνει άριπρεπέα, ότε τ' έπλετο νήνεμοο αίθήρ· 
έκ i έφανεν πάοαι οκοπιαί καί πρώονεο άκροι 
καί νάπαν ούρανόθεν δ' άρ' ύπερράγη άοπετοο 
αίθήρ, πάντα δέ εΐδεται άοτρα, γέγηθε δέ τε φρένα 
ποιμήν τόοοα μεοηγύ νεών ήδε Ξάνθοιο ροάων 
Τρώων και όντων πυρά φαίνετο Ίλιόθι πρό. 
-ουνιεο, πολέμου 
ήντο, έκαίετο 
Λ 
έφάνηοαν 
τοοα, -ου, ροών 
έφαίνετο, Ιλίου 

10 
χίλι' άρ' έν πεδίφ πυρά καίετο, παρ δέ έκάοτφ 
ίίατο πεντήκοντα ςέλςι πυρός αίθομένοιο. 
ίπποι δέ κρι λευκόν έρεπτόμενοι καί όλύραο 
έοταότες παρ' ογεοφιν έΰθρονον Ήώ μίμνον. 
The beginning of the Odyssey 
άνδρα μοι έννεπε, Μούςα, πολύτροπον, oc μάλα πολλά 
πλάγγθη, έπεί Tpoigc ιερόν πτολίεθρον έπερςε* 
πολλών δ' ανθρώπων ΐδεν άςτεα καί νόον έγνω, 
πολλά δ' ό γ' έν πόντω πάθεν άλγεα δν κατά θυμόν, 
αρνύμενοο ήν τε ψυχήν καί vocxov έταίρων. 
! 
άλλ' ούδ' ως έτάρουο έρρύοατο, ίέμενός περ· 
αυτών γάρ ςφετέρηαν άταςθαλίηαν ολοντο, 
νηπιοι, οι κατά βούς Ύπερίονος Ήελίοιο 
ήοθιον αύτάρ ό τοΐαν άφείλετο νόοτιμον ήμαρ. 
The Lotus-eaters 
ένθεν δ' έννημαρ φερόιιην όλοοις άνέμοιοι 
πόντον έπ' ίχθυόεντα* άτάρ δεκάτη έπέβημεν 
yainc Λωτοφάγων, οί 4 άνθινον ειδαρ έδουαν. 
ένθα δ' έπ' ηπείρου βήμεν καί άφυςςάιιεθ' ύδωρ, 
αιψα δέ δείπνοι έλοντο θοης παρά νηυαν έταιροι. 
αύτάρ έπεί οίτοιό τ* έπαςςάαεθ' ήδέ ποτητος, 
δή τότ' έγων έτάρους προΐειν πεύθεςθαι ίόντας 
οί τίνες άνέρες ειεν έπί χθονί ςιτον έδοντες, 
άνδρε δύω κρίναο, τρίτατον κήρυχ' άμ' όπάςς ac. 
οί δ* αιν/ οίχόμενοι ιιίγεν άνδράοι Λωτοφάγοιοιν 
ούδ' άρα Λωτοφάγοι μήδονθ' έτάροιςιν δλεθρον 
ήμετεροις, άλλα ςφι δόςαν λωτοιο πάςαςθαι. 
τών δ' OCTIC λωτοιο φάγοι μελιηδέα καρπόν, 
ούκέτ7 άπαγγειλαι πάλιν ήθελεν ούδέ νέεοθαι, 
άλλ' αύτού βούλοντο μετ' άνδράςι Λωτοφάγοιςι 
λωτόν έρεπτόμενοι μενέμεν νόοτου τε λαθέςθαι. 
τούς μέν έγων έπί νηαο άγον κλαίοντας άνάγκη, 
νηυςί δ' ένί γλαφυρηαν ύπό ζυγά δήοα έρύςς ac. 
αύτάρ τούο άλλους κελόμην έρίηρας έταίρους 
επερχόμενους νηών έπιβαινέιιεν ώκειάων, 
μή πώς τις λωτοιο φαγών νόοτοιο λάθηται. 
οι δ* al\j/ ειςβαινον καί έπί κληιςι καθιζον, 
έξης δ' έζόμενοι πολιήν άλα τυπτον έρετμοις. 
10 
εκαιετο, παρα 
ήντο, -ου 
έςτώτες, δχεςιν, 
έμιμνον 
έπλάγχθη, -ac 
ειδεν, άςτη, νουν 
έπαθεν, άλγη 
καίπερ 
-aic, -αις, ωλοντο 
Ήλιου 
261 
εφερομην 
γης 
έβημεν,ήφυςάμεθα 
5 είλοντο,-αις, 
ναυςίν 
-ου, έπαςάμεθα 
άνδρες 
όπάςας 
έμίγηςαν 
έμήδοντο 
έδοςαν, -ου 
-ού, μελιηδή 
νειςθαι 
15 έβούλοντο 
μενειν 
ήγον 
ναυςί, -αΐς, 
20 
έδηςα, έρύςας 
έκελόμην 
νεών,-βαίνειν,-ων 
-ού, -ου 
είςέβαινον . 
πολιάν, έτυπτον 
C 3 
Κ 

Notes 
1 
1.1 τήν = αύτην (25.1/3tf). L2 ή indeed; τάδε is the subject of 
μέλει. 1.4 αί κε = έάν (άλυοκάζω is subj.); κακόο ώο like a coward 
(ώο is accented when it follows the word it qualifies); take νόοφιν 
with πολέμοιο. l.S με ... άνωγεν order me [to do this]. 1.7 The 
genitives are to be translated for; έμόν αύτοΰ = έμοΰ αύτοΰ, lit. 
of me myself. 1.9 δτ^ε) when; translate άν... όλώλη (strong perf. 
subj. of όλλϋμι) as a future (IS.Hib). 
1.11 TOCCOV (= normal Attic 
τοοοΰτο) agrees with άλγοο (which is the subject of μέλει) and is 
balanced by occov in /.15 (21.1/3e). L12 Έκάβηο, Πριάμοιο 
(together with κααγνήτων (/. 13) and οεύ (1.15)) are objective 
genitives (23.1/lc) with άλγοο (/.ll), grief for ... ll. 13f. κεν ... 
πέοοιεν fut. potential (19.1/2) but trans, may fall; ύπ'(ό) + dat. 
(= gen. in Attic) by, at the hands of. ll. 15f. κεν ... άγηται lit. will 
lead for himself (25.1/3b); έλεύθερον ήμαρ lit. free day a regular 
Homeric expression for freedom, trans, day of liberty (similiar 
expressions occur in 1.24 below and in 3 1.9). ll. 17f. The two 
examples of κε + opt. are potential (Hector is stating something 
that may possibly happen), but are better translated will weave 
... and carry (25.1/3b); πρόο at the command of; Μεοοηΐδοο ή 
Ύπερείηο gen. of separation (20.1/4) from M. or H. 1.19 πόλλ' 
(i.e. πολλά) adverbial acc. (20.1/5) much; έπικείοετ'(αι). 1.20 
ε'ίπηα (subj., 25.1/2c(i)) will say (25.1/3b); κατά δάκρυ χέουοαν 
= καταχέουοαν δάκρυ (tmesis, 12.3.91.6 note). /.22f. Take Τρώων 
Ιπποδάμων with άριοτεύεοκε (= ήρίοτευε) was best of the, etc. 
/.23 ωο (= ούτωο) thus. 1.24 χήτεϊ (= χήτει) + gen. because of the 
lack (dat. of cause 23.1/2/); δούλιον ήμαρ cf. έλεύθερον ήμαρ 
(1.16). L25 κατά... καλύπτοι tmesis as in L20 - the opt. expresses 
a wish for the future (21.1/1). 
2 
1.1 The embankments 
of war apparently means the places where 
battles were normally fought. 1.2 παννύχιοι is an adj. (staying all 
night) but trans, all night long; οφιοι (= αύτοιο) is not here 
reflexive. 1.3 ώο ... δτ'(ε) as when introduces a simile. UAi. 
φαίνετ^αι); aorists such as έπλετο and έφανεν are often 
interspersed among presents in Homeric similes and should be 
translated by the present; έκ ... έφανεν tmesis (see on 1 1.20 
above). 1.6 ύπερράγη root aor. of ύπορρήγνϋμι. 1.7 τε is often 
used to mark similes and has no connective force; φρένα acc. of 
respect (20.1/5). l.S τόοοα agrees with πυρά (1.9) and brings out 
the point of the simile. L9 Τρώων καιόντων gen. abs. (12.112b); 
Ίλιοθι πρό = προ Ιλίου (the suffix -θι, which denotes place from 
which, is used as the equivalent of the genitive ending). 1.11 cελα 

- ςέλαι dat. s. of ceXac (cf. 13.1/lfc(iii)). /. 14 The ending of 
όχεοφιν (< οχοο) is peculiar to Homer and is generally the 
equivalent of the dat. pi., as here. 
3 
/.I πολλά much (20.1/5). 1.2 πλαγχθη 3rd s. aor. ind. (without 
augment) of πλάζομαι. IΑ ό γ'(ε) he (25.1/3α; γε is often added 
to ό in this use and is not to be translated); ov not the relative 
but a 3rd person reflexive possessive adjective, oc, ή, δν (his, her, 
its), which did not survive in Attic - take with θϋμόν, lit. his own 
heart but trans, simply by his heart (but ήν ... ψΐΣχήν (/.5) his 
own life because of the contrast with vocxov έταίρων). 1.5 
άρνύμενοο trying to win. 1.6 ώο so, thus (cf. 1 1.23 above); 
Γεμενόο (< ίημι) περ lit. although 
striving. 
1.7 αυτών ... 
ΰφετέρηϋΐν their own (αυτών lit. of them is added for particular 
emphasis); άταοθαλίηαν plural for singular. ll.Si. νήπιοι fools in 
apposition to the subject of ολοντο (1.7). /.8f. κατά ... ήοθιον 
tmesis; ό he, i.e. Helios; τοΐαν (= αύτοΐο) from them, dat. of 
disadvantage (23.H2d). 
4 
1.2 δεκάτη sc. ήμερρ. 1.3 οί τ^ε) who, not and who - in Homer 
τε is added to the relative when the antecedent is a class (here 
the Lotus-eaters), y.5 έλοντο lit. took for themselves (the mid. of 
αίρέω does not here have the meaning choose). 1.6 έπαοοάμεθ'(α) 
< πατέομαι. 1.7 δή here not postpositive as in Attic; προίειν 1st 
s. impf. ind. act. of προΐημι; ιόνταο (<ειμι) here fut. pple. 
(18.1/3) to express purpose (12.1/2<i(v)). /.8 οίτινεο indirect 
interrogative (10.1/2b note 1); ειεν opt. in historic sequence 
(14.1/4*/). 1.9 άνδρε acc. dual, 24.1/4; τρίτατον κήρυχ' άμ' (= 
κήρυκα άμα) lit. a third together (i.e. with them) [as] herald. 1.12 
οφι = αύτοιο; λωτοιο partitive gen. (23.1/1 d) with δόοαν, lit. gave 
of lotus, i.e. gave some lotus (cf. λωτοιο φαγών eating some lotus 
'.21 below). /.13 τών = αυτών; ocnc... φάγοι indefinite adj. clause 
(14.1/4c(iii)), whoever ate. /.15 αύτοΰ (adv.) there. 1.17 άγον ... 
ανάγκη I brought by force (the impf. here and in the following 
lines is used for vividness and should be translated by a simple 
Past). /.21 μή πώο xic ... lest somehow (πωο) anyone ... 
263 
c 
3 S·' 
8 
For suggestions for further study see the Internet website 
http://tyancientgreek.org 


302 Appendix 5 
Conjugation of λύω loosen 
pi. 
Pres. 
Indicative 
λύ-ω 
I loosen, 
etc. 
ACTIVE 
Impf. 
Future 
Aorist 
Perfect 
Pluperfect 
λϋ-eic 
λύ-ει 
λύ-ομεν 
λύ-ετε 
έλϋ-ον 
λύο-ω 
I was 
I will 
loosening, loosen 
etc 
ελϋ-εο 
λύο-ειο 
έλϋ-ε(ν) λύο-ει 
ελύ-ομεν λύο-ομεν 
έλύ-ετε λύο-ετε 
έλϋο-α 
λελυκ-α 
I loosened I have 
loosened 
έλϋο-αο 
λελυκ-ac 
έλΐ£-ε(ν) λελυκ-ε(ν) 
έλύο-αμεν λελυκ-αμεν 
έλύο-ατε λελυκ-ατε 
3 λύ-ουα(ν) έλϋ-ον 
λύο-ουοι(ν) έλΰο-αν 
λελύκ-δα(ν) 
έλελύκ-η 
I had 
loosened 
ελελυκ-ηο 
ελελυκ-ει(ν) 
έλελύκ-εμεν 
έλελυκ-ετε 
έλελύκ-εοαν 
Subjunctive 
s. 1 λύ-ω 
2 λύ-flc 
3 λύ-η 
ρ/, ί λύ-ωμεν 
2 λύ-ητε 
3 λύ-ωοι(ν) 
Optative 
s. 2 λύ-οιμι 
2 λύ-oic 
3 λύ-οι 
pi 1 λύ-οιμεν 
2 λύ-οιτε 
3 λύ-οιεν 
Imperative 
5. 2 λύ-ε 
3 λϋ-ετω 
Ρί 2 λύ-ετε 
3 λϋ-όντων 
Infinitive 
λύ-ειν 
Participle 
λύ-ων 
λύ-ουοα 
λύ-ον 
λύο-ω 
λελύκ-ω1 
λύο-ηο 
λελυκ-ηο 
λύο-ρ 
λελυκ-η 
λύο-ωμεν λελύκ-ωμεν 
λύο-ητε 
λελύκ-ητε 
λύο-ωα(ν) λελύκ-ωα(ν) 
λύο-αιμι 
λελυκ-οιμι1 
λύο-ειαϋ λελύκ-oic 
(λύο-αιο) 
λύο-ειε(ν) λελύκ-οι 
(λύο-αι) 
λύο-αιμεν λελυκ-οιμεν 
λύο-αιτε 
λελυκ-οιτε 
λύο-ειαν λελύκ-οιεν 
(λύο-αιεν) 
λύο-ον 
λελυκοχ; ίοθι 
λϋο-άτω 
λελυκωο έοτω 
λύο-ατε 
λελυκότεο έοτε 
λΰο-άντων λελυκότεο δντων 
λΰο-ειν 
λΰο-αι 
λελυκ-εναι 
/ 
λύο-οιμι 
λϋο-οιο 
λύο-οι 
λύο-οιμεν 
λύο-οιτε 
λύο-οιεν 
λύο-ων 
λύο-ουοα 
λΰο-ον 
Xtc-Gc 
Xtc-Gca 
λϋο-αν 
λελυκ-ioc 
λελυκ-υΐα 
λελυκ-oc 
1 See also 16.1/4 note 1. 

Pres. 
Indicative 
pi. 
pi. 
1 λϋ-ομαι 
2 λό-η(-ει) 
3 λϋ-εται 
1 λΰ-όμεθα 
2 λϋ-εοθε 
3 λύ-ονται 
Subjunctive 
1 λϋ-ωμαι 
λϋ-η 
λϋ-ηται 
λϋ-ωμεθα 
λσ-ηοθε 
λϋ-ωνται 
Impf. 
έλϋ-όμην 
ελϋ-ου 
ελύ-ετο 
έλϋ-όμεθα 
ελό-εοθε 
έλύ-οντο 
MIDDLE 
Future 
Aorist 
Perfect 
Pluperfect 
Optative 
pi. 
pi. 
λϋ-οιμην 
2 λύ-οιο 
3 λϋ-οιτο 
1 λϋ-οίμεθα 
2 λύ-οιοθε 
3 λϋ-οιντο 
Imperative 
2 λύ-ου 
3 λϋ-εςθω 
2 λύ-εοθε 
3 λϋ-εοθων 
Infinitive 
λύ-εςθαι 
Participle 
λΐ5-ομενοΰ, 
-ομενη, 
-όμενον 
λϋο-ομαι 
ελϋς-αμην λελυ-μαι 
λύΰ-η (-ει) ελύο-ω 
λελυ-cai 
λύΰ-εται 
έλύς-ατο 
λελυ-ται 
λΰΰ-όμεθα έλϋς-άμεθα λελύ-μεθα 
λόΰ-εοθε 
έλΐκχχςθε λελυ-οθε 
λύς-ονται 
έλύς-αντο 
λέλυ-νται 
έλελύ-μην 
ελελυ-co 
έλέλυ-το 
ελελύ-μεθα 
ελελυ-€θε 
έλελυ-ντο 
λελυμενος ώ 
λελυμενος fjc 
λελυμενος TJ 
λός-ωμαι 
λύς-η 
λύς-ηται 
λΰο-ωμεθα λελυμενοι ώμεν 
λύς-ηςθε 
λελυμενοι ήτε 
λύο-ωνται 
λελυμενοι ώοι(ν) 
λϋΰ-οιμην 
λύς-οιο 
λύς-οιτο 
λΟο-οίμεθα 
λύς-οιοθε 
λύς-οιντο 
λΰς-αιμην 
λύς-αιο 
λύς-αιτο 
λϋΰ-αίμεθα 
λϋς-αιςθε 
λός-αιντο 
λύΰ-αι 
λϋς-άςθω 
λύς-αςθε 
λελυμένος ειην 
λελυμενος εϊηο 
λελυμενος εϊη 
λελυμενοι είμεν 
λελυμενοι ειτε 
λελυμενοι ειεν 
λέλυ-co 
λελύ-οθω 
λελυ-ςθε 
λϋς-κχςθων λελυ-€θων 
λϋο-εςθαι 
λύς-αςθαι 
λελύ-ςθαι 
λϋΰ-όμενος, λϋς-άμενος, λελυ-μενοο, 
-ομενη, 
-αμενη, 
-μενη, 
-όμενον 
-άμενον 
-μενον 
Note 
In all forms of the perfect which are made up of a perfect participle and είμι 
the participle must agree with the subject of the verb in number and gender. 

PASSIVE 
The forms for the present, imperfect, perfect and pluperfect are the same as 
for the middle; for the future perfect passive see 16.1/4 note 2. 
Future 
Indicative 
1 
λυβηο-ομαι 
Optative 
λυ&ηο-οίμην 
λυθηο-ρ (-ει) 
λυθηο-οιο 
λυθηο-εται 
pi. 1 
λυθηο-ομεθα 
λυθηο-εοθε 
λυθηο-ονται 
λυθηο-οιτο 
λυθηο-οίμεθα 
λυθης-οιοθε 
λυβηο-οιντο 
Infinitive 
Participle 
λυθηο-εοθαι 
λυθηο-όμενοο, 
-ομένη, 
-όμενον 
Aorist 
Indicative 
s. 1 
ελυθη-ν 
2 
ελυθη-c 
3 
ελυθη 
pi. 1 
έλυβη-μεν 
2 
ελυθη-τε 
3 
έλύθη-cav 
Subjunctive 
λυθ-ώ 
λυθ-fjc 
λυθ-η 
λυθ-ωμεν 
λυθ-ήτε 
λυθ-ώα(ν) 
Optative 
λυθ-είην 
λυθ-είηο 
λυθ-είη 
λυθ-ειμεν 
λυθ-ειτε 
λυθ-ειεν 
Imperative 
λύβη-τι 
λυθη-τω 
λύβη-τε 
λυθε-ντων 
Infinitive λυθη-ναι Participle λυθ-είο, λυθ-εΐοα, λυθ-εν 
267 
ω 
Ό 
3 
α 
δ 

305 Appendix 5 
Conjugation of contracted verbs (present and 
imperfect) 
τιμάω honour 
ACTIVE 
Present 
Imperfect 
Indicative 
s. 1 ιΤμώ 
ετίμων 
2 ιΤμςϊο 
ετίμσο 
3 τίμα 
έιίμδ 
pi. 1 τΓμώμεν 
έχΓμώμεν 
2 τΓμάτε 
ειΤμάτε 
3 ΐΓμώα(ν) 
έτίμων 
Subjunctive 
s. 1 τΤμώ 
2 τΤμφο 
3 Ήμα 
pi 1 χίμώμεν 
2 τΤμάτε 
3 ΐΓμώα(ν) 
Optative 
5. 1 τΤμφην 
2 τΤμωηο 
3 τΤμωη 
pi. 1 ΊΤμωμεν 
2 ΐΓμφχε 
3 ιΤμώεν 
Imperative 
5. 2 ιΤμσ 
3 τΓμδχω 
pi 2 Άμαχε 
3 ιΤμώντων 
Infinitive 
ΐΓμάν 
Participle 
ιΤμών, τΐμάκια, τΤμών 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
Present 
Imperfect 
τϋμώμαι 
τΓμρ 
τιμάται 
ιΤμώμεθα 
τΤμάοθε 
ιΤμώνται 
τΓμώμαι 
τΤμςϊ 
τΤμαται 
ιΤμώμεθα 
τΓμάοθε 
τΓμώνται 
ιΤμωμην 
τΤμωο 
τΤμωχο 
τΤμωμεθα 
τΧμωοθε 
χΓμωνχο 
ιΤμώ 
τΤμάοθω 
τΤμάοθε 
τΤμδοθων 
τΧμάοθαι 
τΓμωμεν-oc, -η, -ον 
ειΤμωμην 
ετΓμώ 
έτΧμάτο 
έτΤμώμεθα 
έτΤμάοθε 
έΐΤμώντο 

ποιέω make, do 
ACTIVE 
Present 
Imperfect 
Present 
Indicative 
s 
1 ποιώ 
εποίουν 
ποιούμαι 
2 
ποιειο 
έποίεις 
ποιη (-ει) 
3 
ποιεί 
έποίει 
ποιείται 
pi ι 
ποιούμεν 
εποιούμεν 
ποιούμεθα 
2 
ποιείτε 
έποιειτε 
ποιειςθε 
3 
ποιούα(ν) 
έποίουν 
ποιούνται 
Subjunctive 
5. 1 ποιώ 
ποιώμαι 
2 
ποιήο 
ποιή 
3 
ποιη 
ποιήται 
pi 1 ποιώμεν 
ποιώμεθα 
2 
ποιήτε 
ποιήοθε 
3 
ποιώα(ν) 
ποιώνται 
Optative 
s. 1 ποιοίην 
ποιοίμην 
2 
ποιοίης 
ποιοιο 
3 
ποιοίη 
ποιοιτο 
pi 1 ποιοιμεν 
ποιοίμεθα 
2 
ποιοιτε 
ποιοΐςθε 
3 
ποιοΐεν 
ποιοιντο 
Imperative 
s. 2 
ποίει 
ποιού 
3 
ποιείτω 
ποιείΰθω 
pi 2 
ποιείτε 
ποιειςθε 
3 
ποιούντων 
ποιείςθων 
Infinitive 
ποιεΐν 
ποιειςθαι 
Participle 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
Imperfect 
εποιουμην 
εποιού 
εποιειτο 
εποιούμεθα 
εποιεΐςθε 
έποιούντο 
ποιων, ποιουςα, ποιούν 
ποιουμεν-ος, -η, -ον 

270 
ω 
Ό 
ϊ 
3 α 
8 
(Λ 
δηλόω make clear, show 
ACTIVE 
Present 
Imperfect 
Indicative 
s. 
1 
2 
3 
pi. 1 
δηλούμεν 
δηλώ 
δηλοΐς 
δήλοι 
δηλοΰτε 
3 
δηλούα(ν) 
Subjunctive 
1 
δηλώ 
2 
δηλοΐΰ 
δήλοι 
pi. 1 
δηλώμεν 
2 
δηλώτε 
3 
δηλώα(ν) 
Optative 
5. 
1 
δηλοίην 
2 
δηλοίης 
δηλοίη 
pi. 1 
δηλοΐμεν 
2 
δηλοΐτε 
3 
δηλοιεν 
Imperative 
5. 2 
δήλου 
3 
δηλούτω 
pi. 2 
δηλούτε 
3 
δηλούντων 
Infinitive 
δηλούν 
Participle 
δηλών, δηλοϋοα, δηλούν 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
Present 
Imperfect 
έδήλουν 
έδήλου€ 
έδήλου 
εδηλούμεν 
έδηλούτε 
έδήλουν 
δηλούμαι 
δήλοι 
δηλούται 
δηλούμεθα 
δηλούςθε 
δηλούνται 
δηλώμαι 
δήλοι 
δηλώται 
δηλωμεθα 
δηλώοθε 
δηλώνται 
δηλοίμην 
δηλοΐο 
δηλοίτο 
δηλοίμεθα 
δηλοιοθε 
δηλοΐντο 
δηλού 
δηλούΰθω 
δηλοϋοθε 
δηλούςθων 
δηλούςθαι 
δηλούμεν-oc, -η, -ον 
έδηλούμην 
έδηλού 
έδηλούτο 
έδηλούμεθα 
έδηλούοθε 
έδηλούντο 

308 Appendix 5 
Conjugation of ειμί be, έρχομαι (and είμι) 
come/go, φημί say, οίδα know 
(the last is perfect in form but present in meaning; it has been classified below 
according to its meaning) 
ειμι 
be 
Present indicative 
s. 1 
ειμί 
2 
εΐ , 
3 
έοτί(ν) 
pi 1 
εομεν 
2 
έοτε 
3 
είά(ν) 
Present subjunctive 
s. 1 ω 
2 fjc 
3 fl 
pi 1 
ωμεν 
2 
ήτε 
3 
ώα(ν) 
Present optative 
s. 1 
εϊην 
2 
εϊηο 
3 
είη 
pl· 1 
ειμεν 
2 
είτε 
3 
ειεν 
Present imperative 
2 
ιοθι 
3 
εοτω 
2 
εοτε 
3 
έοτων or όντων 
Present infinitive 
είναι 
Present participle 
ών, ούοα, ov 
έρχομαι 
come/go 
(18.1/3) 
έρχομαι 
ερχη (-ει) 
έρχεται 
έρχόμεθα 
έρχεοθε 
έρχονται 
ΐω 
ir\c 
'in 
ϊωμεν 
ϊητε 
ΐωα(ν) 
ΐοιμι 
IOIC 
ϊοι 
ϊοιμεν 
ϊοιτε 
ϊοιεν 
ϊθι 
ϊτω 
ιτε 
ιόντων 
Φημί 
say 
φημι 
φηο 
φηά(ν) 
φαμεν 
φατε 
φαοί(ν) 
φώ 
φηο 
Φη 
φωμεν 
φήτε 
φώα(ν) 
φαίην 
φαίηο 
φαίη 
φαιμεν 
φαΐτε 
φαιεν 
φαθί 
φάτω 
φάτε 
φόντων 
ιεναι 
φαναι 
ιών, ίοΰοα, ιόν # φδο, φάοα, φάν 
οιδα 
know 
(19.1/3 α) 
οιδα 
οίοθα 
οίδε(ν) 
ϊομεν 
ΐοτε 
icGci(v) 
είδώ 
ειδηο 
είδη 
είδώμεν 
είδήτε 
είδώα(ν) 
ειδείην 
ειδείηο 
είδείη 
εΐδειμεν 
ειδειτε 
είδειεν 
ιοθι 
ΐίοτω 
ιοτε 
ϊοτων 
εϊδέναι 
ειδώο, είδυΐα, είδόο 

272 
Q> 
Ό 
Ό 
Φ 3 
α ο 
φ (Α 
Imperfect indicative 
s. 
1 
ή or ήν 
η 
2 
ήοθα 
3 
ήν 
pi. 1 
ήμεν 
2 
ήτε 
3 
ήςαν 
Future indicative 
s. 
1 
έςομαι 
2 
ecr\ (-ει) 
3 icxai 
pi 1 
εςόμεθα 
2 έςεΰθε 
3 
έοονται 
11° 
ήεΐΰθα 
ήει(ν) 
ήμεν 
ήτε 
ήεςαν or ήςαν 
ειμι 
ει 
εία(ν) 
ϊμεν 
ίτε 
'iSci(v) 
έφην 
ήδη 
έφηοθα or έφηο ήδηςθα 
εφη 
έφαμεν 
έφατε 
έφαςαν 
φήοω 
φήοειο 
φήοει 
φήςομεν 
φήοετε 
φήοουα(ν) 
ήδει(ν) 
ήομεν 
ήςτε 
ήδεςαν or flcav 
εϊςομαι 
eicr\ (-ει) 
εΐοεται 
είςόμεθα 
είοεοθε 
The other parts of the future are regular, ειμί, φημί and οιδα do not exist in 
other tenses. For the other parts of έρχομαι see Principal parts of verbs. The 
optative, infinitive and participle of ειμι may also have a future meaning 
(18.1/3). 

310 Appendix 5 
Root aorists (11.1/1) 
έβην (βαίνω) and έγνων (γιγνώοκω) are conjugated: 
Ind. 
s. 1 έβην 
βάν 
έβηο 
έβη 
pi 1 
εβημεν 
εβητε 
έβηοαν 
s. 1 
έγνων 
2 
έγνωο 
3 
έγνω 
pi. 1 
έγνωμεν 
2 
έγνωτε 
3 
έγνωοαν 
Subj. 
βώ 
βήο 
Μ 
βωμεν 
βήχε 
γνω 
γνωο 
γνω 
Opt. 
βαίην 
βαίηο 
βαίη 
βαιμεν 
βαιτε 
βώα(ν) 
βαιεν 
γνοιην 
γνοίηΰ 
γνοίη 
γνωμεν 
γνοιμεν 
γνώτε 
γνοΐτε 
γνώα(ν) γνοιεν 
Imp. 
βήθι 
βήτω 
βήτε 
βάντων 
γνώθι 
γνώτω 
γνώτε 
γνόντων 
Infinitive βήναι 
Participle 
βόκα, 
Infinitive γνώναι 
Participle yyovc, 
γνούοα, γνόν 

274 
Ό 
ϊ 3 
α 
8 
Appendix 5 
Conjugation of δίδωμι give, τίθημι put, place, 
ΐημι let go, send forth, ϊοτημι make stand 
(for full details of which tenses of ϊοτημι are transitive and which are 
intransitive see 19.1/1). Many of the forms of Ιημι occur only in compounds. 
δίδωμι 
τίθημι 
ίημ ι 
ϊοτημι 
ACTIVE 
Present indicative 
5. 
1 
δίδωμι 
διδωο 
δίδωα(ν) 
pi 1 
δίδομεν 
διδοτε 
διδόδα(ν) 
τιθημι 
Ιημι 
τίθηο 
Τηο 
τίθηα(ν) Τηα(ν) 
τίθεμεν 
Τεμεν 
τίθετε 
Τετε 
τιθε5α(ν)"Γάα(ν) 
Present subjunctive 
s. 
1 
διδώ 
τιθώ 
διδφο 
τιθηο 
τιθή 
τιθώμεν 
διδώτε 
τιθητε 
διδώα(ν) 
τιθώοι(ν) 
2 
3 
pi. 1 
διδώμεν 
2 • " 
3 
Present optative 
1 
διδοίην 
2 
διδοίηο 
διδοίη 
pi 1 
διδοιμεν 
διδοιτε 
διδοιεν 
τιθειην 
τιθείηϋ 
τιθείη 
τιθειμεν 
τιθειτε 
τιθειεν 
Τω 
Τηο 
ft 
Τώμεν 
Τήτε 
ίώα(ν) 
Τείην 
ίείηο 
Τείη 
Τειμεν 
ίεΐτε 
"Γεΐεν 
Present imperative 
s. 
2 
δίδου 
τίθει 
Τει 
3 
διδότω 
τιθετω 
ίέτω 
pi 2 
δίδοτε 
τίθετε 
ΐετε 
3 
διδόντων 
τιθέντων Τεντών 
Present infinitive 
διδόναι 
τιθέναι 
ίέναι 
Present participle 
διδοιχ: 
τιθείο 
Τείο 
διδούοα 
τιθειοα 
teica 
διδόν 
τιθεν 
ΐέν 
ϊοτημι 
ϊοτηο 
ϊοτηα(ν) 
ΐοταμεν 
ϊοτατε 
ίοτάοι(ν) 
ιοτω 
ionic 
ίστη 
ΐοτώμεν 
ίοτητε 
ίοτώα(ν) 
ίοταίην 
ίοταίηο 
ίοταίη 
ΐοταιμεν 
ίοταιτε 
ίοταιεν 
ιοτη 
ίοτάτω 
ϊοτατε 
ίοτάντων 
ιοταναι 
icxGc 
icTOca 
icxav 

Imperfect indicative 
1 
έδίδουν 
ετίθην 
2 
έδίδοιχ: 
3 
έδίδου 
vl \ 
έδίδομεν 
ν ' 2 
έδίδοτε 
3 
έδίδοΰαν 
Future indicative 
s 
I 
eoiccoetc. 
θηοωεκ:. iicoetc. 
cnicioetc. 
The other parts of the future active are formed regularly with the same stems 
(δωο-, θης-, ήο-, c^c-). 
Aorist indicative 
Την 
έτίθεκ Teic 
ετίθει 
Χει 
έτίθεμεν Τεμεν 
έτίθετε 
Χετε 
έτίθεΰαν Τεοαν 
Τΰτην 
Icnic 
Τΰτη 
Τοταμεν 
Τοτατε 
Tcxacav 
5. 1 
έδωκα 
2 
έδωκαΰ 
3 
έδωκε(ν) 
pi 1 
έδομεν 
2 
έδοτε 
3 έδοΰαν 
έθηκα 
ήκα 
έθηκαο 
ήκαο 
έθηκε(ν) ήκε(ν) 
έθεμεν 
ειμεν 
έθετε 
ειτε 
έθεοαν 
ειοαν 
Transitive 
εοτψα 
ecxr\cac 
έΰτηοε(ν) 
έΰτηΰαμεν 
έΰτηςατε 
ecv(\cav 
Intransitive 
έΰτην 
έΰτης 
έΰτη 
έοτημεν 
έΰτητε 
έΰτηοαν 
On the alternative forms for the plural of έδωκα and έθηκα see 18.1/2 note 3. 
Aorist subjunctive 
s. 1 δω 
δφο 
δω 
pi 1 
δώμεν 
δώτε 
3 
δώα(ν) 
Aorist optative 
5. 
1 
δοίην 
2 
δοίηΰ 
δοίη 
θώ 
θηΰ 
% 
θώμεν 
θητε 
θώα(ν) 
ώα(ν) 
ψ 
ωμεν 
ήτε 
pi. 1 
δοιμεν 
δοιτε 
δοιεν 
θείην 
θειηΰ 
θείη 
θεΐμεν 
θειτε 
θειεν 
Aorist imperative 
s. 2 δόΰ 
Qec 
3 
δότω 
θέτω 
pl 2 
δότε 
θέτε 
3 
δόντων 
ειην 
εϊηο 
εϊη 
ειμεν 
είτε 
ειεν 
ec 
ετω 
έτε 
ΰτηΰω 
ΰτω 
CnjCflC 
CTflC 
ΰτηΰη 
CTfl 
ΰτηΰωμεν 
ΰτώμεν 
€τηοητε 
οτητε 
ctf|C(DCi(v) 
ΰτώα(ν) 
ΰτι^αιμι 
ΰταίην 
ΰτηοειαΰ (-aic) 
ΰταίηΰ 
ΰτηΰειε(ν) (-αι) 
ΰταίη 
ΰτηΰαιμεν 
οταΐμεν 
ΰτηΰαιτε 
οταϊτε 
cxi\ce ιαν (-αιεν) 
ΰταιεν 
θέντων 
έντων 
Aorist infinitive 
δούναι 
θειναι 
Aorist participle 
δοιχ: 
θείΰ 
δοΰοα 
θεΐΰα 
δόν 
θέν 
eic 
elca 
εν 
cnicov 
οτηοάτω 
ΰτηΰατε 
ΰτηΰάντων 
ccr\cai 
ccr|cflc 
ccfjcSca 
caicav 
ΰτηθι 
ΰτητω 
οτητε 
οτάντων 
ΰτηναι 
cxGc 
cxaca 
cxav 

276 
0) 
Ό 
Ό 
Φ 3 
α ο 
φ 
ω 
Perfect and pluperfect 
The perfect and pluperfect active of δίδωμι, τίθημι, Ιημι are formed regulark 
from the stems δεδωκ, τεθηκ-, είκ-. 
The perfect and pluperfect active of ϊοτημι (which are intransitive —see 
19.1/1) are conjugated as follows: 
pi. 
Perfect 
Indicative 
εοτηκα 
έοτηκαο 
έοτηκε(ν) 
εοταμεν 
εοτατε 
έοτάα(ν) 
Subjunctive 
έοτώ 
εοτηο 
εοτη 
έοτώμεν 
έοτήτε 
έοτώα(ν) 
Optative 
έοταίην 
έοταίηο 
έοταίη 
έοταιμεν 
εοταιτε 
έοταΐεν 
Imperative 
έοταθι 
έοτάτω 
εοτατε 
έοτάντων 
Infinitive έοτάναι Participle έοτώο, έοτώοα, ecxoc 
On alternatives for forms in έστηκ- see 19.1/1 
Pluperfect s. είοτηκη (I stood), είοτηκης, είστηκει, pi έοταμεν, έοτατε, 
έοταοαν. 
Present indicative 
s. 
1 
δίδομαι 
τίθεμαι 
2 
δίδοοαι 
τίθεοαι 
3 
δίδοται 
τίθεται 
pi 1 
διδόμεθα 
τιθέμεθα 
2 
δίδοϋθε 
τίθεοθε 
3 
δίδονται 
τίθενται 
Present subjunctive 
s. 
1 
διδώμαι 
2 
διδω 
3 
διδωται 
pi. 1 
διδώμεθα 
2 
διδώοθε 
3 
διδωνται 
Present optative 
s. 
1 
διδοίμην 
2 
διδοιο 
3 
διδοιτο 
pi 1 
διδοίμεθα 
2 
διδοΐοθε 
3 
διδοιντο 
Present imperative 
s. 
2 
δίδοοο 
τίθεοο 
3 
διδόοθω 
τιθέοθω 
pi 2 
δίδοοθε 
τίθεοθε 
3 
διδόοθων 
τιθεοθων 
MIDDLE 
Τεμαι 
ϊοταμαι 
Τεοαι 
ίοταοαι 
Τεται 
ϊοταται 
ίέμεθα 
ίοτάμεθα 
Τεοθε 
ίοταοθε 
Τενται 
ϊοτανται 
ίώμαι 
ίοτώμαι 
ft 
ίστη 
ίηται 
ίοτηται 
Τωμεθα 
ίοτωμεθα 
Τήοθε 
ίοτηοθε 
Τώνται 
ίοτώνται 
Τείμην 
ίοταίμην 
Τειο 
ίοταίο 
Τεΐτο 
ίοταΐτο 
Τείμεθα 
ίοταίμεθα 
Τειοθε 
ίοταιοθε 
Τεΐντο 
ίοταιντο 
Τεοο 
ϊοταοο 
Τεοθω 
ίοτάοθω 
Τεοθε 
ϊοταοθε 
ΐέοθων 
ίοτάοθων 
τιθώμαι 
τιθη 
τιθηται 
τιθωμεθα 
τιθηοθε 
τιθώνται 
τιθείμην 
τιθειο 
τιθειτο 
τιθείμεθα 
τιθειοθε 
τιθειντο 

Present infinitive 
δίδοοθαι 
τίθεοθαι 
Τεοθαι 
icxacGai 
-η, -ον 
έτιθεμην 
ίέμην 
Τοτάμην 
έτίθεΰο 
Τεοο 
Tcxaco 
ετίθετο 
Τετο 
Tcxaxo 
ετιθεμεθα 
Τεμεθα 
Τοτάμεθα 
έτίθεοθε 
Τεΰθε 
Τοταΰθε 
έτίθεντο 
Τεντο 
Tcxavxo 
θηοομαι etc. 
ήΰομαι etc. 
ϋτηΰομαι etc. 
Present participle 
διδομεν-oc, -η, -ov τιθεμεν-oc, -η, -ov ίέμεν-oc, -η, -ov ίοτάμεν-οΰ, 
Imperfect indicative 
s 
l 
έδιδόμην 
2 
έδίδοΰο 
3 
έδίδοτο 
pi 1 
έδιδόμεθα 
2 
εδίδοοθε 
3 
έδίδοντο 
Future indicative 
5. 1 
δώοομαι etc. 
The other parts of the future middle are formed regularly with the same stems 
(δωο-, θηο-, ήο-, cxt\c-). 
Aorist 
The only aorist middle of ιοτημι is weak (and transitive), έΰτηΰάμην, conjugated 
in exactly the same way as έλΐ3οάμην (see Appendix 1). The aorist middle of the 
other verbs are conjugated as follows: 
Aorist indicative 
s. 1 
έδόμην 
2 
έδου 
3 
εδοτο 
1 
έδόμεθα 
2 
έδοΰθε 
3 
εδοντο 
Aorist subjunctive 
s. 1 
δώμαι 
pi. 
δώται 
pl> 1 
δώμεθα 
2 
δώοθε 
3 
δωνται 
Aorist optative 
s· 
1 
δοίμην 
2 
δοιο 
3 
δοΐτο 
Ρί 1 
δοίμεθα 
2 
δοΐϋθε 
3 
δοΐντο 
Aorist imperative 
2 
δού 
3 
δόΰθω 
Pi. 2 
δόοθε 
3 
δόςθων 
έθέμην 
έθου 
εθετο 
έθεμεθα 
έθεϋθε 
έθεντο 
θώμαι 
®0 
θηται 
θωμεθα 
θηοθε 
θώνται 
θείμην 
θειο 
θειτο 
θείμεθα 
θεΐοθε 
θειντο 
θού 
θεςθω 
θέΰθε 
θεοθων 
ειμην 
ειοο 
είτο 
είμεθα 
εκθε 
είντο 
ωμαι 
ήται 
ώμεθα 
ήϋθε 
ειμην 
είο 
είτο 
είμεθα 
είΰθε 
είντο 
ου 
έοθω 
εΰθε 
έΰθων 

278 
•ο 
Ό 
Φ 3 
α 
Aorist infinitive 
δόοθαι 
θεοθαι 
έοθαι 
Aorist participle 
δόμεν-oc, -η, -ov 
θέμεν-oc, -η, -ov 
έμεν-oc, -η, -ov 
Perfect and pluperfect 
The perfect and pluperfect middle/passive of δίδωμι and Ιημι are formtc 
regularly from the stems δεδο- and εί- (e.g. perfect middle/passive indicate 
δέδομαι, δέδοοαι etc., είμαι, είοαι etc). Similar forms exist for τίθημι (τεθειμαι 
τέθεκαι etc.) but on the perfect passive of this verb see 18.1/2 note 4. The 
perfect middle/passive forms of ϊοτημι are rare. 
PASSIVE 
As with other verbs, the forms for the present, imperfect, perfect and pluperfect 
are the same as for the middle. The future and aorist passive follow λϋω (see 
Appendix 1): 
Future indicative 
δοθηοομαι 
τεθηοομαι 
έθηοομαι 
οταθηοομαι 
Aorist indicative 
έδόθην 
έτεθην 
εϊθην 
έοτάθην 

316 Appendix 5 
Conjugation of δείκνυμι (present and imperfect) 
For the other tenses of δείκνϋμι see 20.1/1. 
ACTIVE 
Imperfect 
εδείκνϋν 
εδείκνϋο 
εδείκνϋ 
εδείκνυμεν 
εδείκνυτε 
3 
δεικνύδα(ν) 
έδείκνυοαν 
Present 
Indicative 
5> 1 δείκνϋμι 
2 
δείκνί)θ 
3 
δείκν15α(ν) 
pi. 1 δείκνυμεν 
2 
δείκνυτε 
Subjunctive 
s. 1 δεικνύω 
2 
δεικνυηο 
δεικνυη 
pi 1 
δεικνυωμεν 
2 
δεικνυητε 
3 
δεικνυωα(ν) 
Optative 
s. 1 
δεικνυοιμι 
2 
δεικνύοιο 
δεικνύοι 
pi 1 
δεικνυοιμεν 
δεικνυοιτε 
δεικνύοιεν 
Imperative 
s. 2 
δείκνϋ 
3 
δεικνύτω 
pi 2 
δείκνυτε 
3 
δεικνύντων 
Infinitive 
δεικνύναι 
Participle 
δεικνόο, δεικνύοα, δεικνύν 
MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
Present 
Imperfect 
δείκνυμαι 
δείκνυοαι 
δείκνυται 
δεικνύμεθα 
δείκνυοθε 
δείκνυνται 
δεικνυωμαι 
δεικνυη 
δεικνυηται 
δεικνίΜΰμεθα 
δεικνυηοθε 
δεικνύωνται 
δεικνυοίμην 
δεικνυοιο 
δεικνυοιτο 
δεικν\κ)ίμεθα 
δεικνυοιοθε 
δεικνυοιντο 
δείκνυοο 
δεικνυοθω 
δείκνικθε 
δεικνυοθων 
δείκνυοθαι 
δεικνυμεν-oc, -η, -ον 
έδεικνυμην 
εδείκνυοο 
εδείκνυτο 
εδεικνυμεθα 
εδείκνυοθε 
έδείκνυντο 

317 Appendix 5 
Numerals 
Cardinals 
For the declension of eic, δύο, xpeic, xercapec see 7.1/5a. διδκόαοι, 
τριΟκόαοι etc. follow the plural of καλός (3.1/3). 
1 
eic 
20 
eiKoci(v) 
2 
δύο 
30 
τριάκοντα 
3 
τρειο 
40 
τετταράκοντα 
4 
τετταρεο 
50 
πεντήκοντα 
5 
πέντε 
60 
έξήκοντα 
6 
εξ 
70 
έβδομήκοντα 
7 
επτά 
80 
ογδοήκοντα 
8 
οκτώ 
90 
ένενηκοντα 
9 
έννέα 
100 
έκατόν 
10 
δέκα 
200 
διδκόαοι 
11 
ένδεκα 
300 
τριΟκόοιοι 
12 
δώδεκα 
400 
τετρακόοιοι 
13 
τρείο καί δέκα 
500 
πεντακόαοι 
14 
τέτταρες:καί δέκα 
600 
εξακόσιοι 
15 
πεντεκαίδεκα 
700 
έπτακ<κιοι 
16 
έκκαίδεκα 
800 
όκτακόαοι 
17 
έπτακαίδεκα 
900 
ένακόοιοι 
18 
όκτωκαίδεκα 
1,000 
φίλιοι 
19 
έννεακαίδεκα 
10,000 
μύριοι 
The cardinals two thousand, three thousand etc. are compounds of the 
appropriate numeral adverbs and φίλιοι, e.g. διοχίλιοι, τριο^ΐλιοι etc.; 
likewise we have διομύριοι twenty thousand, τριομύριοι thirty thousand 
etc. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Ordinals 
πρώτος 
δεύτερος 
τρίτος 
τεταρτοο 
πέμπτος 
έκτος 
έβδομος 
ογδοος 
ένατος 
δέκατος 
Adverbs 
άπαξ 
δίο 
χρί° 
τετράκις 
πεντάκις 
έξάκις 
έπτάκιο 
όκτάκις 
ένάκις 
δεκάκιc 
The ordinals are normal first and second declension adjectives (3.1/3), 
except that the feminine of όγδοος is όγδοη (not -fl). 

318 Appendix 5 
Accentuation 
The basic features of Greek accentuation are described at 1.1/2, 
and information given there is not repeated below. 
The following terms are used to describe words according to 
their accent: 
Oxytone - a word with an acute on its final syllable, e.g. 
ποταμόο. 
Paroxytone - a word with an acute on its penultimate (i.e. last 
syllable but one), e.g. λόγοο. 
Proparoxytone - a word with an acute on its last syllable but 
two, e.g. άνθρωποο. 
Perispomenon - a word with a circumflex on its final syllable, 
e.g. ποταμού. 
Properispomenon - a word with a circumflex on its penultimate, 
e.g. δώρον. 
Barytone - a word with a grave on its final syllable, e.g. ποταμόν 
ειδον I saw a river. 
These are the only places in which each accent can occur (we 
cannot, for example, have an acute on the last syllable but three, 
or a circumflex on the last syllable but two). 
For purposes of accentuation a syllable is long if it contains a 
long vowel or diphthong (1.1/1 b,c), and short if it contains a 
short vowel, except that all endings in -αι and -oi, apart from 
those of the optative, are counted as short.1 
The length of the final syllable of a word and, to a lesser extent,' 
of its penultimate is important for accentuation because: 
• 
a word can only be proparoxytone if its final syllable is 
short, e.g. άνθρωποο. 
• 
a word can only be properispomenon if its final syllable is 
short; as a circumflex must in any case stand on a long vowel 
or diphthong, a word so accented must end in - - , or be a 
disyllable consisting of - - , e.g. πολΐται, γλώττα. Conversely, 
if such a word is accented on its penultimate, the accent must 
be a circumflex, and this is why we get the change of accent 
from πολίτηο to πολιται (the reverse in γλώττα/γλωττηο). 
For purposes of accentuation words are divided into five categories: 
(a) Nouns, adjectives and pronouns 
There are no overall rules about the position of the accent in the 
nominative singular of nouns or in the nominative masculine 
1 The rules in verse are different· see AnnenHi-v 9 

singular of adjectives and pronouns, and we must simply learn 
that ποταμός is oxytone but λόγος is paroxytone. There are some 
rules for certain small groups which can be learnt by 
observation, e.g. nouns in -ευς are always oxytone (as 
βαςιλεύς); the accent of comparative and superlative adjectives 
is always as far from the end of the word as possible (ςοφός but 
ςοφώτερος, ςοφώτατος). 
Once, however, we know where a noun, adjective or pronoun is 
accented in the nominative (masculine) singular, it is easy to 
deduce how its other forms will be accented because the accent 
stays on the same syllable as far as this is allowed by the rules 
given above for proparoxytones and perispomenons. In λόγος, for 
example, the accent remains unchanged (λόγε, λόγον, λόγου, λογω, 
λόγοι, λόγουο, λόγων, λόγοις), but in άνθρωπος the accent must 
become paroxytone when the ending is long: άνθρωπε, άνθρωπον, 
άνθρωπου, άνθρώπω, άνθρωποι, ανθρώπους, άνθρώπων, άνθρώποις 
(άνθρωποι because -οι does not count as long—see above). 
In many third declension nouns the genitive singular is a syllable 
longer than the nominative singular, e.g. ςώμα (properispomenon, 
not paroxytone, because it is a disyllable of the form - - ; see 
above): ςώματος, ςώματι, ςώματα (the accent must change to an 
acute because the added short syllable makes all three forms 
proparoxytone), ςωμάτων (the added syllable is long and 
therefore the accent must become paroxytone), ςώμαςι. 
We must, however, note: 
(i) Where a first or second declension word has an acute on its 
final syllable in the nominative singular, this becomes a 
circumflex in the genitive and dative (in both singular and 
plural, cf. 2.1/2 note 3), e.g. from ποταμός we have ποταμέ, 
ποταμόν, ποταμού, ποταμώ, ποταμοί, ποταμούς, ποταμών, 
ποταμοΐς.1 For an example of an adjective so accented see 
καλός (3.1/3). 
(ii) All first declension nouns are perispomenon in the g e n i t i v e 
plural (2.1/2 note 4), e.g. χωρών (< χώρα), νεδνιών (< 
νεδνίδς). This does not apply to the gen. f. pi. of adjectives 
when this form would not otherwise differ from the 
masculine, e.g. μεγάλων is both gen. m. pi. and gen. f. pi. of 
μέγας. Where, however, the masculine and feminine f o r m s 
differ, the rule holds, e.g. χαρίεις, gen. m. pi. χαριέντων, 
gen. f. pi. χαριεςςών. 
(iii) In the third declension, monosyllabic nouns are accented on 
the final syllable of the genitive and dative, in both singular 
and plural, e.g. α'ίξ, αίγα, αίγός, αίγί, αίγες, αίγας, α ι γ ώ ν , 
αίξί. An exception is the gen. pi. of παίς (παίδων). Οι 
1 The Attic declension (13.1/1<ϊ) is an exception. 

polysyllabic nouns γυνη also follows this pattern (γυνη, 
γύναι (5.1/1 note 1), γυναίκα, γυναικός, γυναικί, γυναικεο, 
γυναΐκαο, γυναικών, γυναιξί), and άνηρ, μήτηρ and πατήρ 
follow it in the gen. s., dat. s., and gen. pi. (6.1/1 b). For the 
accentuation of πάο see 10.1/3b. 
(iv) The accent in the genitive (s. and pi.) of third declension 
nouns with stems in ι and of some with stems in υ (8.1/4) 
is quite irregular: πόλεωο, πόλεων (< πόλιο); πηχεωο, πήχεων 
(< πήχυο). 
(ν) Contracted nouns and adjectives (6.1/2) follow the same 
rules as for contracted verbs (below b(i)). 
(b) Verbs 
With verbs the accent falls as far from the end of a word as 
possible (here too final -αι and -οι count as short, except in 
optative endings). In forms such as άκουετε, άκουουοι, 
κελευεοθαι, έκελευοαν the final short syllable shows that they 
must be proparoxytone: άκουετε, άκουουοι, κελευεοθαι, 
έκελευοαν (in disyllabic forms such as έλε and λϋε the accent 
goes back to the penultimate but becomes properispomenon in 
λϋε because of its long 13: έλε but λΰε). In κελεύω, προφερει, 
έλυθην, where the final syllable is long, the accent is 
paroxytone: κελεύω, προφέρει, έλύθην. 
We must, however, note: 
(i) In the forms of contracted verbs where contraction occurs, 
the accent follows that of the original uncontracted form 
according to the following rules: 
• If the accent is on neither of the syllables to be contracted 
it remains unchanged, e.g. έποίει (< έποίε-ε). 
• If the accent is on the first of the two syllables to be 
contracted it becomes a circumflex on the contracted 
syllable, e.g. ποιεί (< ποιέ-ει); νΐκώμεν (< νΓκά-ομεν). 
• If the accent is on the second of the two syllables to be 
contracted it stays as an acute on the contracted syllable, 
e.g. έτΓμώμεθα (< έτΓμα-όμεθα); τΓμωην (< τίμα-οίην). 
(ii) Certain forms of uncontracted -ω verbs and of -μι verbs are 
in origin contracted and for this reason the first syllable of 
their endings is always accented. These are: 
• the aorist subjunctive passive of all verbs, e.g. λυθώ, 
λυθηο, λυθη, λυθώμεν, λυθητε, λυθώοι. 
• the subjunctive and optative of both present (act., 
mid./pass.) and aorist (act., mid.) of δίδωμι, τίθημι, ϊημι 
and their compounds, e.g. διδώ, διδοΐμεν, αποδώ, 
άποδοιμεν. 
283 
ω 
Ό 
3 
α δ" 
Φ 0) 

284 
ω 
TJ 
Ό Φ 
3 
α ο 
φ 
(Λ 
(iii) In all strong aorists the first syllable of the ending always 
carries the accent in the active participle (e.g. λαβών, 
λαβοΰοα, λαβόν), the active and middle infinitives (λαβείν, 
λαβέοθαι), and the 2nd s. imperative middle (λαβοΰ). 
(iv) The first syllable of the ending also carries the accent in 
participles in -ειο, -ουο and -(oc, e.g. λυθείο, λυθεΐοα, 
λυθέν; τιθείο, τιθεΐοα, τιθέν; διδούο, διδοΰοα, διδόν; 
λελυκώο, λελυκυΐα, λελυκόο. 
(ν) In certain participles and infinitives the accent is always 
either paroxytone or properispomenon, depending on 
whether it stands on a short or long syllable. These are: 
• infinitives in -cat (weak aorist active ), e.g. λΰοαι, 
νΤκήοαι, αίνέοαι. 
• infinitives in -ναι (perf. act., aor. pass., root aor. act., and 
certain active infinitives of -μι verbs), e.g. λελυκέναι, 
λυθηναι, γνώναι, διδόναι. 
• the infinitive and participle of the perf. mid./pass., e.g. 
νενΤκήοθαι, λελυμενοο. 
(vi) In compound verbs the accent cannot fall further back than 
the augment, e.g. άπηγον (< απάγω), παρέοχον (< παρέχω), 
or the last vowel of a prepositional prefix, e.g. παpάδoc (< 
παραδίδωμι). 
(c) Adverbs, conjunctions, interjections, particles, 
prepositions 
These have only one form and therefore their accent does not 
vary, e.g. οοφώο wisely; όταν whenever; εύ well, except for 
oxytones becoming barytones (1.1/2). A few words which 
would otherwise be included here are enclitic or atonic and so 
come under categories (d) or (e). 
(d) Enclitics 
An 
enclitic 
combines 
with 
the 
preceding 
word 
for 
pronunciation, and can affect its accentuation. When quoted by 
themselves (in paradigms, dictionaries, etc.) monosyllabic 
enclitics are written with no accent (e.g. γε), disyllabics as 
oxytone (e.g. ποτέ), except for τινών. 
The total number of enclitics is small and consists of: 
(i) The present indicative of ειμί I am and φημί say; with the 
exception in both cases of the 2nd singular. 
(ii) The unemphatic forms of the personal pronouns, viz με, 
μου, μοι; οε, οου, coi; έ, ού, οί. 
(iii) All forms of the indefinite τιο (10.1/1). 
(iv) The indefinite adverbs ποτέ, που, πω, πωο. 
(ν) The particles γε, νυν, περ, τε. 

The rules for enclitics are: 
(vi) An enclitic has no accent when it follows a word accented 
on its final syllable, e.g. ποταμών τίνων. If this word has a 
final acute (i.e. is oxytone), this accent is kept, e.g. ποταμόο 
TIC. 
(vii) If the preceding word is paroxytone a monosyllabic enclitic 
has no accent but a disyllabic enclitic keeps the accent on 
its final syllable, e.g. ϊπποο τιο, ίπποι τι νέο. 
(viii) If the preceding word is proparoxytone or properispomenon, 
an enclitic, whether monosyllabic or disyllabic, has the 
effect of adding an acute to the final syllable, e.g. άνθρωπόο 
TIC, άνθρωποι τινεο, δώρόν τι, δώρα τι να. 
(ix) In groups of two or more enclitics all are accented except 
the last, e.g. ήμεΐο γέ ποτέ πού τι εϊδομεν we at any rate 
once saw something 
somewhere. 
(χ) έοτί is accented on its first syllable (έοτι) when: 
it denotes existence, e.g. Ιππόλυτοο ούκέτ' έοτι ν Hippolytus 
is no longer alive. 
it stands for έξεστι (21.1/4 note 1) 
it follows άλλά, εί, καί, ούκ, μή, τρΰτο, ώο 
it begins a clause. 
(e) Atonies 
Atonies are monosyllables which have no accent unless followed 
by an enclitic. These are: 
• 
the nom. m. and f. (s. and pi.) of the article (ό, ή, oi, αί), εί, 
ο ύ , (DC 
• 
the prepositions είο, έκ, έν. 
Of these, however, ού is accented if it occurs as last word of a 
clause (ex. at 5.2.21 /. 1), and <oc if it occurs after word it 
qualifies or is used in the sense of thus (exx. at 25.2.1 //.4, 24) 
Notes 
1 
A 
few 
words 
which 
we 
would 
expect 
to 
be 
properispomenon are in fact paroxytone: ούτε, μήτε, είθε, 
ώςτε and compound demonstratives and relatives whose 
second element is -δε, -περ and -τιο (οϊδε, αϊπερ, ήτιο etc.). 
2 
τίο and τί never become barytone (10.1/1). 
3 
Certain disyllabic prepositions throw their accent back on 
to their first syllable when they follow the noun they govern 
(example at 11.2.4/. 1). 

286 
ω 
Ό 
Ό 
Φ 3 
α 
8 
Appendix 9 
Greek verse 
(a) The nature of Greek verse, long and short syllables 
Greek poetry was composed on an entirely different principle 
from that employed in English. It was not constructed by 
arranging stressed syllables in patterns, nor with a system of 
rhymes. Greek poets employed a number of different metres, all 
of which consist of certain fixed arrangements of long and short 
syllables. In English verse, whether rhymed or not, the length 
and rhythm of a line is determined by the number and 
arrangement oi its stressed syllables: 
They told me, Heraclitus, they told me you were dead; 
They brought me bitter news to hear and bitter tears to shed. 
I wept, as I remembered how often you and Γ 
Had tired the siin with talking and sent him down the sky. 
And now that thou art lying, my dear old Carian guest, 
A handful of grey ashes, long long ago at rest, 
Still are thy pleasant voices, thy nightingales, awake, 
For death he taketh all away, but them he cannot take. 
In this translation of a poem of Callimachus (12.3.9) the poet, 
William Johnston Cary, has changed the position of stressed 
syllables in some lines for purposes of rhythm and emphasis. No 
comparable variation is possible in Greek poetry because its 
structure is much more formal. Every line of verse consists of a 
succession of long and short syllables whose number and order 
are prescribed by the metre used; word accent, which in any case 
is different from that of English (1.1/2), plays no part. To scan 
a line (i.e. indicate its metre) syllables are marked with a macron 
C) when long and a micron 0 when short (to avoid a confusion, 
accents and breathings are omitted and capitals are not used for 
vowels when marking long and short syllables): 
εΤπ£ ftc ηρδκλεΤτ£ τ£δν μΟρΟν £c δ£ μ£ δδκρϋ (first line of 
12.3.9) 
The rules for determining the length of syllables are: 
(i) Vowels are classified as short (α, ε, ι, ο, υ) or long (δ, η, Τ, ϋ, 
ω). For metrical purposes all diphthongs are long (this is not 
true for accentuation - see Appendix 8). 
(ii) A short syllable must contain a short vowel followed by 
either a single consonant or no consonant at all. 
(iii) A syllable is long if it contains: 
either a long vowel or diphthong. When, however, either 
occurs at the end of a word and the following word does 

not begin with a consonant, the long vowel or diphthong is 
shortened, μοΌ εννβπβ.1 
or a short vowel followed by two consonants (ζ, ξ, ψ count 
as double consonants but θ, φ, χ do not; breathings have no 
metrical value). When a short vowel occurs before certain 
combinations of two consonants where the second is λ, μ, ν, 
ρ, the syllable may be long or short, 
(iv) In counting consonants after a final short vowel of a word 
no account is taken of word division, hence τεδν μορον, τΰ 
όχημα. 
(b) Metrical 
feet, the hexameter, 
pentameter 
and 
iambic 
trimeter 
A metrical foot is made up of certain combinations of long and 
short syllables. Of the numerous possibilities only the following 
need concern us: 
Dactyl 
- 
w ~ 
Iamb 
w — 
Spondee 
— — 
Trochee 
— w 
The metre used for epic and pastoral was the hexameter; the 
combination of one hexameter and one pentameter forms an 
elegiac couplet (see below). 
The hexameter (< έξ + μέτρον) consists of six feet. The first four 
can be either dactyls or spondees, the fifth is almost always a 
dactyl and the sixth can be either a spondee or trochee. This can 
be represented as follows: 
The upright lines show the syllable division between one foot 
and the next. They do not necessarily coincide with word 
division. The first two lines of the Odyssey (25.2.3) are scanned: 
Gv-δρα μοι I δν-νε-τce I Μοϋ-οα II πΟ-1 λϋτ-ρΟ-πΟν I δο μβ-λα I πδλ-λα 
πλαγ-χ&η e-1 πε! TpoT-1 f\c II ΐ-ε-1 ρϋν πτό-λχ-1 Εθ-ρΟν 
1 π£ρ-ο€. 
It was felt that the rhythm of a hexameter would be impaired if 
there were a break between words at the end of the third foot as 
a line so composed would fall into two equal halves. To avoid 
this, there is always a break between words (caesura cut or 
break ) either (a) after the first syllable of the third foot (as in 
the second line above), or (b) after the second syllable of the 
third foot when a dactyl (as in the first line above), or (c) after 
the first syllable of the fourth foot. The caesura is marked by 
two vertical lines, as in the above examples. 
1 Epic correption (i.e. shortening). It occurs in hexameters and pentameters but is 
completely avoided in iambic trimeters (on these terms see below). 

A pentameter following a hexameter makes up an elegiac 
couplet, and is by convention indented (e.g. 12.3). It does not 
occur by itself. The elegiac couplet was the metre of elegiac 
poetry, a broad literary genre which included epigram and 
certain narrative, didactic, and occasional poetry. The 
pentameter consists of two halves of two and a half feet each; 
the division between the two is marked by a break between 
words (here called diaeresis, not caesura, because it occurs at the 
end, not in the middle of a metrical unit; it also is marked by 
two vertical lines). The metrical pattern of the pentameter is: 
Examples (from 12.3.1 and 3) are: 
5v λΐ-π£ν I οϋχ εϋ- I ρύδν II ff-ψβν σν I εϋ-ρ£ βρσ- I χΟν 
eic α-γα- I G<5c Kt-vt>- I pffc II κατ Kt-vt>- I ρηο δε Kt- I λτξ 
The iambic trimeter is the chief metre used for dialogue and 
speeches in drama because it was considered the metre which 
came closest to the rhythm of normal speech. It consists of three 
pairs of iambs but more variation was allowed than in the 
hexameter or pentameter. Its basic form is: 
A caesura occurs after either the fifth or seventh syllables. 
Examples of iambic trimeters (from 15.2.4) are: 
CHtftv-xec Ec- I μ£ν II eic τό νοϋ- I θβ-τεΤν cO-φοΙ 
αϋ-τοΤ δ α-μδρ-Ι τα-νδν- x£c II οϋ\ γϊγ-ν®ο- κό-μ£ν 
Included in the reading are poems in some of the many other 
metres used by Greek poets (an example occurs at 12.2.18, 
which is written in anapaests). 

Explanations and more literal interpretations are given in round brackets. 
Some words which have no specific equivalent in the Greek original but 
which must be supplied in English are enclosed in square brackets. 
Translations from Greek authors are generally as literal as possible and 
should not be taken as reflecting the style of the original. 
When God is written with an initial capital letter, the Judeo-Christian 
deity should only be understood in passages from the Bible. Elswhere the 
Greek original (θεόο) does not indicate what particular divinity is meant. 
References are given for longer prose passages, for whole poems and for 
extracts from verse of more than two lines. In these references Roman 
numerals refer to books (e.g. of Thucydides), Arabic to chapters in prose 
works but in poetry to lines. Fragments of the Greek tragedians are given 
the number assigned to them in Nauck's edition (Fragmenta Tragicorum 
Graecorum). A.P. is the abbreviation of Anthologia 
Palatina, an 
enormous collection of shorter Greek poems whose present form dates 
from Byzantine times; it has a supplement entitled App(endix) Plan(udea). 
In both the latter works the reference is first to book (Roman), then to 
poem number (Arabic). 
1.2 
1 Aristoteles (Aristotle), Aristophanes, Demosthenes, 
Herodotos 
(Herodotus), Theokritos (Theocritus), Kallimachos (Callimachus), 
Pindaros (Pindar), Plat>n (Plato). 
2 akme, anathema, analusis, antithesis, asbestos, automaton, aphasia, 
bathos, genesis, diagnosis, dogma, drama, zone, ethos, echo, idea, 
klnema, kllmax, kosmos, krisis, kolon, metron, miasma, nektai; nemesis, 
orchestra, pathos, skene, stigma, hubris, hupothesis, chaos, charakter, 
psuche. 
3(a) Agamemn0n, Achilleus (Achilles), Hektor (Hector), Helene (Helen), 
Odusseus (Odysseus), Patroklos (Patroclus), Penelopeia (Penelope) (all 
are characters in Homer). 
V>) Athenai (Athens), Argos, Thebai (Thebes), Korinthos (Corinth), 
^Parte (Sparta), Krete (Crete), Rhodos (Rhodes), Samos (all are places in 
Greece). 

290 
S 3 
a * 
</> _ 
Φ Ο 
w <3 
Φ 
ΡΓ 
ω 
α 5* 
<α 
2.2 
(1) Odysseus has come from Troy, but Poseidon destroys his ship on (or at) 
Scheria. (2) Odysseus flees out of (or from) the sea and hides himself 
beneath [an] olive-tree near the shore. (3) In a dream Athena says to (or 
tells) the princess Nausicaa that she must (it is necessary [for her] to) wash 
the clothes on the shore. (4) At daybreak (or dawn) Nausicaa brings the 
clothes in [a] wagon from her house to the sea. (5) In the wagon there is 
also food for Nausicaa and her companions. (6) The girls quickly wash the 
clothes near the olive-tree where Odysseus is sleeping. (7) Then (or next) 
the girls throw the clothes on to the shore. (8) They wash themselves and 
eat the food which they have in the wagon. (9) While they are playing on 
the shore, Nausicaa throws [a] ball but the ball falls into [a] whirlpool. (10) 
The girls' shouts (the shouts of the girls) awaken Odysseus and frighten 
him. (11) Odysseus wonders where in the world he has come to, and 
suddenly creeps from the olive-tree. (12) He frightens Naucisaa and her 
companions. (13) But Nausicaa stays on the shore because Athena puts 
courage into her heart. (14) Odysseus says to (or tells) Nausicaa that he has 
come from Ogygia. (15) Nausicaa says to (or tells) her companions that 
they must (it is necessary [for them] to) provide Odysseus with food and 
clothes (provide food and clothes to Odysseus). (16) She wishes (or is 
willing) to bring Odysseus to her father's house (the house of her father) but 
she fears (or is afraid of) the citizens' blame (the blame of the citizens) if 
they see her with Odysseus. (17) So Nausicaa and the girls bring the clothes 
back to the house in the wagon, but Odysseus waits outside. 
In 2, 4 and 9 the indefinite article, which does not exist in Greek, has to be 
supplied in the English. 
Analysis of sentence 13 (according to the steps given in 2.2) 
άλλ' ή Ναυΰΐκάσ έν τη άκτη αναμένει διότι ή 'Αθηνά την άνδρείσν sic την 
καρδίδν εμβάλλει. 
(α) άλλ' (= αλλά) conjunction but; ή feminine nominative singular of the 
definite article (2.1/2); NaDCiKaG can be either nominative or vocative 
singular but, as ή precedes, it must be the former (the voc. would normally be 
preceded by ώ (2.1/3), never by the article) - note that the article must agree 
in number^ gender and case with the noun it qualifies (2.1/2 note 1; cf. τη 
άκτη, ή 'Αθηνά, την άνδρείδν, την καρδίδν); έν preposition governing the 
dative in, on, among, and we would expect the following words to be in this 
case, which they are: τη άκτη dative singular of ή άκτη the shore; άναμένει 3rd 
person singular present indicative active of άναμένω wait, stay (the 
corresponding form of λύω would be λύει); διότι conjunction because; η 
'Αθηνά nominative singular (the same reasoning applies as for ή Ναιχ^ικάδ); 
την άνδρείδν accusative singular of ή άνδρείδ lit. the courage; εκ: preposition 
governing the accusative to, into, and we would expect the following words 
to be in this case, which they are: την καρδίδν accusative singular of ή καρδιδ 
the heart; εισβάλλει 3rd person present indicative active of εισβάλλω throw 
into, invade. 
(b) There are two finite verbs, άναμένει and εισβάλλει; therefore we have 
two clauses. 
.(c) Because άλλ'(ά) stands as first word it must link this sentence with the 
previous one. As we have two clauses and διότι comes after the first finite 
verb, this conjunction must introduce the second clause. 
(d) In the first clause ή Να\χ;ικάα is nominative and therefore must be the 
subject of άναμένει (we note that the verb agrees with Ή NOOCIKOG in the 

1 
291 
(Ω 
way prescribed at the beginning of 2.1/4). έν τη άκτη on the shore (on seems 
more appropriate with shore than in or among) must be an adverbial 
phrase qualifying the verb. The clause therefore means but Nausicaa (the 
g g" 
definite article can be used with proper names in Greek (2.1/2 note l(iii)), 
§ ^ 
but is never so employed in English) stays (or waits) on the shore. In the 
« ο 
second clause ή 'Αθηνά, which is nominative, must be the subject of 
g $ 
εισβάλλει (note the agreement as in the previous clause), την άνδρείδν is 
§ 
accusative and is not preceded by a preposition; therefore it must be the 
object of the verb as it can have no other grammatical function in the 
clause. We may translate because Athena throws courage (the definite 
article is not to be translated - 2.1/2 note l(i)) into; the other meaning of 
εΐοβάλλω, invade, makes no sense in this context, exc την καρδίσν into the 
heart must be an adverbial phrase qualifying the verb but we have one too 
many in/into - the problem is solved by reference to the note on (7) and we 
can translate because Athena throws courage into the heart (ίο, the other 
meaning of eic, does not seem appropriate here). 
(e) The conjunction διότι shows that the second clause gives the reason for 
the first and we can put both together as but Nausicaa stays on the shore 
because Athena throws courage into the heart. English idiom requires that 
we specify whose heart is involved (obviously Nausicaa's, as otherwise the 
reason introduced by διότι would have no point - on this use of the Greek 
definite article see note on (1)). Also put seems more in accordance with 
English idiom than throw (all possible translations of some words cannot 
be given in either vocabularies or dictionaries). We now have: But Nausicaa 
stays on the shore because Athena puts courage into her heart. 
3.2 
(1) Millionaires (the very rich) are not good. (2) A large city is [a] large 
desert (or wilderness). (3) Poverty stimulates skills (i.e. necessity is the 
mother of invention). (4) [A] corpse does not bite (i.e. dead men tell no 
tales). (5) (/) Many [are] friends of [the] table, not of truth, (ii) Good 
fortune has many friends ([is] many-friended), (iii) Man [is] [a] political 
animal, (iv) Death [is] immortal (or deathless), (v) Slaves have no leisure 
([there is] not leisure to/for slaves), (vi) Without health life [is] no life (or 
unlivable). (vii) Flattery [is a] disease of friendship, (viii) [A] wicked man 
[is] long-lived. (6) Fortune's great gifts involve (have) fear. (7) Wicked 
friends bear wicked fruit. (8) The sowing (procreation) of children is a self-
inflicted (self-chosen) grief. (9) Gifts persuade [the] gods. (10) Neither [a] 
drin king-party without company nor wealth without virtue is pleasurable 
(»*. has pleasure). (11) For [a] human being the unexamined life [is] not 
worth living. (12) (i) A large number of (lit. many) frogs send messengers 
to the son of Cronos (i.e. Zeus) because they desire [a] monarch, (ii) The 
messengers say to the son of Cronos on behalf of the frogs, "J u s t son of 
Cronos, you are master of the gods. Are you willing to provide the frogs 
pwh [a] master?" (lit. provide [a] master to the frogs), (iii) The son of 
ylOT\os *s very surprised and hurls [a] large log into the frogs' marsh, (iv) 
ne log frightens the frogs and they quickly run away, but they begin to be 
Suspicious, since the log does not move (lit. is motionless), (v) Later they 
?teP o n to the log without fear and say "Stranger; are you [a] god or [a] 
uman being or [an] animal?" (vi) Since it says nothing at all, they consider 
a t lt is despicable that they have such a master and they send messengers 
t 0 ^ 
s o n 
Cronos about [a] new monarch, (vii) The messengers say 
the son of Cronos, "Master, you must (it is necessary [for you] to) send 

292 
Φ 
8 «2 
3 W 
Φ w 
the frogs (to the frogs) another monarch since the first is motionless and 
idle, (viii) The master of the gods is angry with the frogs and sends [a] great 
hydra. (/*) The hydra is pitiless and eats the frogs, (JC) The fable makes [it] 
clear that one (or we) must (it is necessary [for one/us] to) bear (i.e. put up 
with) idle masters since active masters often bear (i.e. bring) hardships. 
Analysis of sentence 10 (according to the steps given in 2.2) 
ούτε ςυμπόςιον χωρίς ομιλία ούτε πλούτος χωρίς αρετής ήδονην έχει. 
(α) ούτε ... ούτε conjunctions neither ... nor; ςυμπόςιον, which is neuter, 
could be either nominative or accusative singular (the vocative is virtually 
ruled out by the meaning of the word, drinking-party); χωρίς preposition 
governing the genitive without; όμΤλίας could be either genitive singular or 
accusative plural of όμίλίσ company, companionship, but as it is preceded 
by a preposition governing the genitive it must be the former; πλούτος 
nominative singular wealth; χωρίς as before; αρετής genitive singular of 
αρετή courage, excellence, virtue; ήδονην accusative singular of ηδονή 
pleasure; έχει 3rd person singular present indicative active of έχω have. 
(b) and (c) The one finite verb, έχει, indicates that we have only one clause. 
(d) and (e) ούτε ... ούτε (like neither... nor in English) join elements of equal 
grammatical weight. Therefore, since πλούτος is nominative, ςυμπόςιον is 
also nominative, and both are the subject of έχει (the verb is singular just 
as it would be in a similar construction in English, e.g. neither my wife nor 
my dog was waiting for me). As the accusative ήδονην is not preceded by a 
preposition it must be the object of έχει. We may now translate: neither 
drinking-party without company nor wealth without virtue has pleasure (of 
the possible meanings of αρετή courage and excellence are not appropriate 
as a combination of either with wealth would hardly seem to produce 
pleasure). English, however, would normally put the indefinite article 
(which does not exist in Greek) before drinking-party. Also, is pleasurable 
or is enjoyable would be more idiomatic than has pleasure. Our final 
version then could be: neither a drinking-party without company nor 
wealth without virtue is pleasurable. 
4.2 
(1) Pleasures [are] mortal, virtues immortal. (2) The beggar did not have 
bread, and was buying cheese. (3) Praise [is the] reward of virtue, and (or 
but) censure of wickedness. (4) [The] Egyptians [are] clever at contriving 
ways and means. (5) Necessity [is] law for slaves, but law [is] necessity for 
free men. (6) Once long ago [the] Milesians were brave. (7) [An] eagle does 
not hunt flies. (8) (/) You are spitting into [the] sky. (ii) You are plaiting [a] 
rope out of sand, (iii) You are sowing [the] sea. (iv) You are teaching [a] 
horse to run on to [a] plain, (v) You have come after [the] feast, (vi) You 
are whipping [a] corpse, (vii) You are shearing [an] ass. (viii) You are 
singing the victory-song before the victory, (ix) You are kicking against 
[the] pricks (i.e. of a goad), (x) You are bringing the war-engines after the 
war. (9) Croesus, the Lydian king (king of the Lydians), wanted to destroy 
the Persian empire (empire of the Persians). For; according to the Delphic 
oracle (lit. oracle at Delphi), he was destined to put an end to a mighty 
empire. But finally he put an end to his own empire, but not that (lit. the 
[empire]) of the Persians. After the Persians' victory Cyrus, the Persian king 
(lit. king of the Persians), made Croesus go up on to [a] great pyre, and 
Croesus began to consider the words of Solon the Athenian: no-one of men 
[is, i.e. can be considered] happy before his death. So he quietly awaited his 

death. But because Croesus was both pious and good, Cyrus ordered his 
soldiers to bring him down from the pyre and spoke as follows, "Croesus, 
who among (lit. of) men persuaded you to make an expedition [as anj 
enemy instead of [as a] friend against my land?" But Croesus said, "Cyrus, 
I (lit. I on the one hand) made an expedition against you, but the god (lit. 
but on the other hand the god) at Delphi persuaded me to make the 
expedition. For I am not foolish nor do I wish to have war instead of peace. 
For in peace-time the young men bury the old, but in war-time the old 
[bury] the young. But this was the god's pleasure (lit. this thing was dear to 
the gods)." So Cyrus set him free and made [him] sit nearby. And Croesus 
spoke once more, "Cyrus, what are your soldiers doing?" "They are 
plundering your city," said Cyrus, "and carrying off your wealth." "They 
are not plundering my city," said Croesus, "nor my wealth. For I have 
nothing (lit. nothing is to me). [It is] you [whom] they are plundering." 
After this he (i.e. Croesus) was dear to him; for Cyrus respected his wisdom. 
(Based on Herodotus i. 86-88.) 
Analysis of sentence 5 (according to the steps given in 2.2) 
xoic μέν δούλοιο ή ανάγκη νόμοο, xoic δέ έλευθέροιο άνθρώποιο ό νόμοο 
ανάγκη. 
(α) μέν ... δέ on the one hand... and/hut on the other hand indicate that we 
have two balanced grammatical elements (4.1/3); xoic ... δούλοιο dative 
plural to/for the slaves (on the meaning of the dative with living things see 
2A/3e); η ανάγκη nominative singular the necessity but to be translated 
necessity in view of 2.1/2 note l(i); νόμοο nominative singular law; xoic ... 
έλευθέροιο άνθρώποιο dative plural to/for the free men; ό νόμοο nominative 
singular the law; άνάγκη nominative singular necessity. 
(b) There are no finite verbs! However, even without the hint given in the 
note on (1), we learn from 3.1/3b and 3.1/6 that ειμί is often omitted in 
clauses where something is predicated of something else. The fact that in 
each half of the sentence we have two nominatives suggests that this is what 
we have here. Since we have two balanced elements the appropriate part of 
ειμί (viz έοχί) is to be supplied in each. Therefore we have two clauses. 
(c) The comma after νόμοο shows the division between clauses. 
(d) In xoic ... νόμοο the definite article with άνάγκτη shows that this is the 
subject; the absence of the definite article with νόμοο shows that it is the 
predicate. The basic meaning (leaving aside μέν) is therefore for the slaves 
(the other meaning of the dative, to, is not appropriate) necessity is law. In 
TOIC ... άνάγκη we realize that ό νόμοο must be translated by law and not the 
law because it is parallel with άναγκη and must mean the abstract concept 
of law, not a particular law. We then have for the free men law is necessity. 
(e) We can translate μέν... δέ by but with the second clause. However; when 
we put both halves together we realize that we are dealing with a proverb 
and that the general class of slaves and the general class of free men are 
meant. We must, therefore, omit the definite article with each in English 
(2.1/2 note l(ii)), and we have: Necessity is law for slaves, but law is 
necessity for free men. 
5.2 
W j u n e educates the wise. (2) Silence has many fine [points] (i.e. silence is 
golden). (3) Human beings have many troubles, strangers (lit. there are 
m*ny troubles to human beings). (4) [One] must not (it is not necessary to) 
293 
Φ 
S 3 
i f f 
φ ο 
Φ 
ω 
α 5* 
(Ω 

294 
S S 
<D < 
2. Ο 
(Λ _ 
Φ Ο 
w 3 
Φ 
3 
ω 
α 5" 
(Ω 
keep former evils in mind (lit. bear ... in memory)., (5) (i) Quietness (or 
peace and quiet) [is] a fine [thing], (ii) Fine [things] [are] difficult, (iii) 
Moderation [is] best, (iv) [A] big book [is] [a] big evil, (v) The property (lit. 
the [things]) of friends [is] shared, (vi) Hermes [is] shared, (vii) [A] small 
evil [is] [a] big blessing, (viii) Different [things] [are] beautiful to different 
[people] (i.e. some people like one thing, others another). (ix) The tongue 
[is] [the] cause of (or responsible for) many troubles, (x) Doing [is] difficult, 
giving the order (sc. to do it) [is] easy, (xi) Getting drunk (or drunkenness) 
[is] [a] bad remedy for (i.e. way to get rid of) woe. (xii) One learns by 
experience (lit. sufferings [are] lessons), (xiii) [A] bad egg comes from (lit. 
[is] of) [a] bad crow, (xiv) Trust the land, mistrust the sea (lit. [the] land [is] 
[a] trustworthy [thing], [the] sea [an] untrustworthy [thing]), (xv) Even an 
ant can get angry (lit. [there is] bile (anger) even in [an] ant). 6 (/) One must 
find a wife amongst one's own class (lit. it is necessary [sc. for a person] to 
marry from among those who are similar, (ii) [A] fool speaks foolish 
[things], (iii) You have your feet out of trouble (lit. foot outside mud), (iv) 
[The] pot boils, friendship lives, (v) You are shaving (or bearding) [a] lion. 
(vi) You are weeping on [your] step-mother's tomb (i.e. being hypocritical). 
(7) Alas, alas, greatness (lit. great things) also suffers great evils. (8) [The] 
roughness of [the] road tests [the] serviceability of [the] ass. (9) Man is only 
(or nothing but) breath and shadow. (10) Fortune guides art, not art 
fortune. (11) Money [is] responsible for many evils for men. (12) Woman, 
silence is becoming (lit. brings decoration) for women. (13) Even for [an] 
old man, [it is] [a] fine [thing] to learn wisdom (lit. wise things). (14) The 
Athenians sent Thucydides the [son] of Olorus to the general of those in 
Thrace. (15) One should seek neither companionship (or company) from 
[a] corpse nor [a] favour from [a] miser. (16) Victory is sufficient for the 
free. (17) Even among rustics there is love of culture. (18) The wolf changes 
his coat (lit. hair), not his mind. (19) Money finds friends for men. (20) [A] 
mob [is] [a] poor judge of [a] fine matter. (21) To some of the Egyptians, 
therefore, crocodiles are sacred, to others [they are] not, but they treat 
[them] as enemies. Those around Thebes and [those around] the swamp of 
Moeris strongly believe that they are (lit. them to be) sacred. Both groups 
keep (or rear) one crocodile and train [it], and put rings made of glass in its 
ears and anklets round its front feet, and provide special food and offerings. 
So while the crocodiles are alive, they are treated very well, and after their 
death the Egyptians embalm them and bury them in sacred tombs. But 
those around the city [of] Elephantine actually eat them; for they do not 
consider [them] to be sacred. (Adapted from Herodotus ii.69) 
6.2 
From this point on the definite and indefinite articles which must be 
supplied for translation are no longer bracketed. 
(1) (i) The guards guarded the Persians (φυλάττω). (it) Did you hide the 
golden horse? (κρύπτω), (iii) The Athenians and the Spartans joined in an 
expedition (σιχπρατεύω). (iv) He wrote many things on the rock (εγγράφω). 
(ν) The gods will do many great things (πράττω), (vi) Socrates taught us 
(διδάςκω). (vii) They damaged the house of Pericles (βλάπτω), (viii) We 
fought a sea-battle in the harbour (ναυμαχέω). (2) Bronze is the mirror or 
form (i.e. of the body), wine of the mind. (3) Hand washes hand, fingers 
[wash] fingers. (4) Speech is silver, silence is golden. (5) Ο God, how 
mortals have no escape from evils [which are] innate or (or and) sent by the 

gods! (lit. how there is not to mortals [an] escape...). (6) (/) You are writing 
on (lit. into) water, (ii) You are building on (lit. into) sand, (iii) [You are 
bringing] an owl to Athens (cf. coals to Newcastle), (iv) You are measuring 
the waves, (v) You are looking for bird's milk, (vi) You are teaching iron to 
float (lit. sail), (vii) You are lending light to the sun. (viii) You are pouring 
wine for frogs, (ix) You are beating the air. (x) He is making an elephant 
out of a fly (i.e. a mountain out of a molehill). (7) (/) The mind is a great 
check (lit. bit) of the soul, (ii) The Greeks [are] always children, an old 
Greek does not exist, (iii) For a mother (or for mothers) children are the 
anchors of [her] life, (iv) Lions at home, but foxes (i.e. cowards) in battle. 
(v) The mind sees and the mind hears, (vi) The arms (lit. hands) of tyrants 
[are] long, (vii) Ares (War) [is] a friend of falsehood (lit. friendly to false 
things), (viii) Athens [is] the Greece of Greece, (ix) You are comparing a bee 
with a cicada, (x) A daughter [is] a difficult possession. (8) The wind 
[kindles] fire, intimacy kindles love. (9) According to Socrates no-one errs 
willingly. (10) The wise man should not think after (i.e. repent) but before 
(lit. it is necessary for the wise man not to...). (11) The Athenian 
ambassadors withdrew to the army, but the generals built a wall around the 
Melians. Later, a small garrison of the allies remained there and continued 
to besiege (lit. was besieging) the place, while the rest of the soldiers 
withdrew by land and by sea. Afterwards the Melians pulled down the 
Athenians' blockading wall, since not many of the guards were present. But 
later the Athenians sent out another army from Athens, and they now 
vigorously prosecuted the siege. There was treachery (or treachery broke 
out) among the Melians, and they capitulated to the Athenians. And they 
(i.e. the Athenians) killed the men among (lit. of) the Melians, and enslaved 
the women and children. And later they sent out many settlers and 
colonised the place. (Adapted from Thucydides v.114-116.) 
295 
® 
£ 
a» 
</> _ 
Φ Ο 
w φ 
φ 7? 
Q) 
α 5" 
(Ω 
7.2 
(1) The proverb bids us not to move the immovable (lit. unmovable 
[things]) (2) [It is] altogether not easy to find what is right (or justice). (3) 
Ischomachus said, "Socrates, in winter a house should be well exposed to 
the sun, but in summer well-shaded." (4) We do not have either weapons 
or horses (or we have neither weapons nor horses). (5) No falsehood 
spreads for long (a length of time). (6) So for one day the Athenians 
encamped there. But on the following day Alcibiades called an assembly 
and ordered them to fight both at sea, on land and against the fortifications. 
"For," he said, "we have no money, whereas the enemy have plenty." (7) 
All human beings die (lit. no-one of human beings does not die). (8) (/) One 
swallow does not make a spring, (ii) Old men [ are] children for a second 
time, (iii) You see three things in two. (iv) One man [is] no man. (v) One 
day does not make (a man) wise, (vi) The tongue leads many [people] to 
destruction, (vii) In war it is not possible to make a mistake twice, (viii) It 
ls possible to recognize a lion from his claw-marks (i.e. to judge a person 
° m a characteristic mark). (9) Cyrus marched forth three stages (or days' 
larches) through Lydia, [a distance of] twenty-two parasangs, to the river 
Maeander. Its breadth was two plethra. (10) The world [is] a stage, life an 
prance: you come, you see, you depart. (11) Someone said to Socrates, 
Megacles speaks ill of you." And he replied, " Yes, for he does not know 
(lit. has not learnt) to speak well." (12) Callicratidas held the right 
lng of the Peloponnesians. His steersman, Hermon, said, "It is a good 

296 
Φ 7Τ 
Χ Φ 
Φ < 
2. ο 
(Λ _ 
Φ Ω 
Φ 
ω 
α 5' 
(Ω 
[idea] to retreat (lit. sail away); for the Athenian triremes are very strong." 
But Callicratidas said, "It is shameful to flee." The triremes fought [for] a 
long time, at first in close order, and then scattered. When Callicratidas fell 
overboard into the sea and was killed and Protomachus the Athenian and 
his men (lit. those with him) defeated the left wing with [their] right wing, 
thereupon the Peloponnesians fled (lit. there was a flight of...) to Chios and 
Phocaea, while the Athenians sailed back to Arginousae. And so of the 
Athenians the Spartans sank 25 triremes, whereas of the Peloponnesians the 
Athenians [sank] nine Laconian [triremes], and of their allies as well about 
60. (Adapted from Xenophon Hellenica i. 6. 32.) (13) For, when Simon 
came to my house at night, he forced (lit. knocked out) the doors and 
entered the women's apartments, where my sister and nieces were. At first 
the men in the house ordered him to go away, but he refused. Then they 
forcibly pushed him out. But he discovered where we were dining and did 
a thing most extraordinary and incredible. He called me out from inside, 
and as soon as I had come out, he immediately attempted to strike me; and 
when I pushed him away, he began to pelt me with stones (or throw stones 
at me). Although he missed me, he hit Aristocritus with a stone and gashed 
his forehead. (Adapted from Lysias Against Simon 6-8.) 
8.2 
(I) God and Nature do nothing without reason. (2) [It is] not easy to 
change a wicked nature. (3) Wicked slander wipes out whole cities. (4) 
Jesus Christ, son of God, Saviour (the symbol is the fish, ιχθύς being an 
acronym of the phrase). (5) Gold does not tarnish (lit. is not stained). (6) 
Do you think that others will save Greece, but you will run away? (7) As a 
result of looking at [someone] people fall in love. (8) The possession of 
virtue alone is secure. (9) Alas, alas, how true the old saying is: we old men 
are nothing but (no other thing except) noise and [outward] appearance; we 
creep along [as] copies of dreams; there is no sense in [us] but we think we 
are sane. (Euripides, fragment 25.) (10) An elephant does not bite a mouse. 
(II) For most people the search for truth [is pursued] without taking pains, 
and they turn rather to what is ready to hand. (12) The Lacedaemonians 
sent a herald and carried across the corpses (or had the corpses carried 
across). (13) It was wonder which made men begin to pursue philosophy 
both now and originally (lit. because of the fact of wondering men both 
now and at first began...). (14) The mountain laboured, and then gave birth 
to a mouse. (15) Hunger is (lit. becomes) the teacher of many [things]. (16) 
The Scythians do not wash with (or in) water. (17) (i) In the beginning God 
made the heaven and the earth. And the earth was invisible and unformed, 
and darkness [was] upon the abyss, and the spirit of God moved u p o n the 
water. And God said, "Let there be (lit. be born) light. And there was light 
(lit. light came into being). And God saw that the light was beautiful. And 
God made a division between the light and the darkness. And God called 
the light day and the darkness he called night. (Genesis 1.1-5.) (ii) I turned 
about and I saw beneath the sun that the race [is] not to the nimble, nor 
war to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor wealth to the intelligent. 
(Ecclesiastes 
9.11.) (18) Zenothemis contrived a wicked 
crime m 
collaboration with Hegestratus. They went around borrowing (lit. were 
borrowing) money in Syracuse. When they got the money, they used to send 
it home to Marseilles, and they loaded (lit. brought into) nothing on board 
(lit. into) the ship. Since the contract stipulated repayment of (lit. was to 

repay) the money after the arrival in port of the ship, they plotted to sink 
the ship; for they wished to defraud their creditors. Accordingly, when they 
were two or three days out from land (lit. had sailed away a voyage of ... 
days), Hegestratus began to cut through the bottom of the ship during the 
night, while Zenothemis passed the time on deck (lit. above) with the other 
passengers. But when a noise was heard (lit. happened), those on the ship 
perceived that some mischief was taking place down below, and went to the 
rescue. As Hegestratus was being caught and assumed that he would be 
badly treated, he took to his heels (lit. fled) and jumped into the sea. In this 
way then, as he deserved, a bad man, he came to a bad end (lit. he died 
badly). ([? Demosthenes] Against Zenothemis 4-6, slightly adapted.) 
9.2 
(1) Death [is] beautiful [for those] to whom life brings humiliation. (2) The 
wise man carries round his substance within (lit. in) himself. (3) Mighty in 
war [was] Timocritus, whose tomb this [is]; Ares spares not the brave, but 
the cowardly. (A.P. vii. 269). (4) Cleon said that not he himself but that 
man was general. (5) The same [people] [say] the same [remarks] about the 
same [subjects] to the same [people]. (6) You are telling me my [own] dream 
(i.e. nothing I don't already know). (7) Then that man said, "Well, if there 
is need of anything else (lit. another thing) in addition to what (lit. these 
things which) Xenophon says, it will be possible to do it immediately." 
After this Xenophon spoke as follows: "[It is] clear that we must march 
where we will have supplies; and I hear that there are fine villages which 
are twenty stades away." (Xenophon Anabasis iii. 2. 33-34.) (8) A friend is 
another self (or alter ego). (9) Pythagoras was the first to name philosophy 
and himself a philosopher. (10) [We] must compare them with each other; 
for thus we will consider if they will differ from each other. (11) The Greeks 
mistrust each other (lit. are mistrustful towards themselves). (12) After 
dinner Cyrus asked, "Tigranes, where then is that man who used to hunt 
with us? You seemed to me to admire him very much." "My father here put 
him to death," he said. "For he said that he was corrupting me. And yet, 
Cyrus, he was a fine man, for even when he was about to die, he summoned 
me and said, Tigranes, you must not be angry because your father is 
putting me to death; for he does this not because of malice, but because of 
ignorance. And what (lit. which things) men do wrong through ignorance, 
I believe [they do] this against their will'." (Xenophon Cyropaedia, iii.1.38, 
adapted.) (13) Demosthenes, who saw that the Lacedaemonians intended to 
attack by land and by sea (lit. both with ships and with infantry), began to 
make his own preparations (lit. make preparations himself also), and 
hauled up under the fortification the triremes which remained to him, and 
armed the sailors from them with shields of poor quality and mostly made 
osier; for it was impossible to procure arms in [this] deserted place, and 
even these (sc. which they had) they got from a thirty-oared pirate-ship and 
a Pinnace belonging to (lit. of) [some] Messenians, who were there. Of these 
jessenians there were about forty hoplites. Accordingly, he posted the 
ajority of his own men at the strong points of the place facing the 
^ainiand, while (lit. and) he himself picked out sixty hoplites and a few 
the 
anC* ^egan to go outside the wall (sc. of the fortification) towards 
me S\Ca' ' t 0 
P o i n t] w ^ e r e h e particularly expected the enemy (lit. those 
besH 
attempt to land. So he posted his hoplites at this point right 
lcJe the sea (lit. towards the sea itself). (Thucydides iv. 9, adapted.) 
297 
Φ 7Γ 
S 3 
i s 
</) _ 
Φ Ω 
• 3 
Φ 7Γ 

298 
2 £ 
S 3 
2.S 
CO -
Φ Ο 
" i 
ω 
α 5" 
(Ω 
10.2 
(1) A fat belly does not generate a fine mind. (2) How sweet [it is] to look 
at the sea from the land. (3) Time will explain everything to posterity (lit. 
those [who come] later). (4) Happiness is an activity of the soul. (5) Ο 
Menander and life, which one of you then imitated which? (6) Who knows 
if life is death, and [if] down below death is considered life? (7) Life [is] 
short, art long (i.e. the art of medicine is extensive and requires a long time 
to master), opportunity fleeting (lit. swift), experiment perilous, and 
judgement difficult. (8) Wickedness [is] quick, virtue slow. (9) Where a man 
fares well, there [is his] native-land. (10) Whoever of mortals wishes to 
arrive at (lit. go/come into) hateful old age, does not reckon well; for a long 
life begets countless woes. (11) How sweet [it is] for slaves to get decent 
masters and for masters [to get] a well-disposed slave in [their] house. (12) 
Everything [is] burdensome except to rule over the gods. For no-one is free 
except Zeus. (13) Ignorant [people] are carried along in life as if on the high 
sea and in darkness. (14) The woman said, "My husband's virtue is 
sufficient adornment for me." (15) Where a man has a pain, there he 
applies (lit. has) his mind too. (16) (/) I hate a drinking-companion who 
remembers (lit. a mindful drinking-companion). (ii) Hostile [is] the eye of 
neighbours, (iii) Even a sheep bites an unlucky man. (iv) An unskilled man 
is a slave of (lit. to) everyone, (v) War [is] sweet to the inexperienced, (vi) 
Time decides everything (lit. everything is decided by time), (vii) Bright in 
darkness, but useless in daylight, (viii) Hands wash each other, (ix) Under 
every stone sleeps a scorpion, (x) Everything [is] easy for God (or a god). 
(xi) Every hedgehog [is] prickly, (xii) The whole of time cannot whiten the 
man (lit. this [man]) whom Fate paints (lit. will paint) black. (17) (/) 
Diogenes was once begging [alms] from a statue. [When he was] asked why 
he was doing this, he said, "I am practising failure (lit. to fail to obtain)." 
(ii) [When he was] asked what kind of wine he liked to drink (lit. drank 
gladly), he said, "Someone else's", (iii) He was begging [alms] from a miser. 
When he hesitated (lit. was slow), Diogenes said, "Fellow, I'm begging 
[alms] from you for food, not for burial." (iv) [When he was] asked where 
he was from, he said, "[I am] a citizen of the world", (v) When someone 
said that life was bad, he said, "Not life, but a bad life". 
10.3 
For, gentlemen of Athens, I have this reputation for no other reason (lit. on 
account of nothing else) than a certain wisdom. What sort of wisdom [do I 
say] this [is]? [Just that] which is perhaps human wisdom. For in reality I 
am likely to be (or I am probably) wise in this wisdom. But these men, 
whom I was just now mentioning, are wise in a sort of 
superhuman 
wisdom, which I am unable to describe. For I, at any rate, do not 
understand it, and (lit. but) whoever says [that I do], is lying and speaking 
to arouse prejudice against me. I hope, men of Athens, that you will not 
interrupt me, even if I seem to you to be saying something extravagant (Ut. 
big). For the story which I will tell is not mine, but I will refer [you] to 
someone who is worthy of credit. For I shall furnish you with the god or 
(lit. at) Delphi [as] witness of my [wisdom], [as to] whether it is actuals 
some sort of wisdom and of what sort it is. Chaerephon was familiar to 
you, I think. He was a comrade of mine from youth and a partisan or the 
democracy. And it is well-known to you what sort [of a person! 

Chaerephon was, how impetuous in all respects. As a matter of fact, he 
actually went to Delphi once and dared to ask the oracle if anyone was 
wiser than I. The Pythian [priestess] answered that no-one was wiser. (Plato 
Apology 20d-21a, slightly adapted.) 
11.2 
From this point on the relevant part of the verb to be which must be 
supplied for translation is not normally bracketed, 
(1) Tyranny is the mother of injustice. (2) The dice of Zeus always fall 
luckily (lit. well). (3) There is some degree (lit. measure) of pleasure even in 
troubles. (4) And the story is not mine, but [comes] from my mother, that 
heaven and earth were one shape; but when they were separated apart from 
each other, they brought forth everything and sent up to the light trees, 
winged creatures, wild beasts and [the creatures] which the sea nourishes 
and the race of men. (Euripides, fragment 484.) (5) Concealment (lit. the 
act of hiding) is wicked and not the mark of a well-born man. (6) Someone 
said to Socrates, "The Athenians condemned you to the death," and he 
said, "And Nature [is condemning] them [to death]." (7) The wagon pulls 
the ox. (8) (/) An old woman is dancing, (ii) You are graciously giving a 
mirror to a blind man. (iii) You are hunting the wind with a net. (iv) You 
are throwing stones at the sun (lit. pelting the sun with stones), (v) The/a 
tortoise is calling the oxen slow-footed, (vi) You are striking a peg with a 
sponge, (vii) You knocked out a peg with a peg (i.e. in solving one problem 
you created another), (viii) You are blocking up (i.e. repairing) the chamber-
pot with a sandal, (ix) You are driving out wine with wine, (x) You yourself 
are striking your own door with a stone. (9) For, for all mankind, not only 
for us, either straightaway or in [the course of] time, God trips up [one's] 
life, and no-one is happy throughout (or forever). (Euripides, fragment 
273.) (10) For none of these things will distress me. But if you do not do 
this (lit. these things), you will inflict (lit. throw) grief upon all the Argives 
(i.e. Greeks). For if we do not get this man's bow (lit. this man's bow will 
not be taken), it is not possible for you to ravage the land of Dardanus. 
(Sophocles Philoctetes 66-69.) (11) Thus the venture (lit. things) of the 
Greeks came to naught (lit. was destroyed). And out of many a few made 
their way through Libya to Cyrene and were saved, but most were killed. 
Egypt again came (lit. became) under the control of the King [of Persia], 
except Amyrtaeus, the king in the marshes. They (i.e. the Persians) were 
unable to capture him both because of the extent of the marsh and at the 
same time [because] the marsh-people are particularly warlike. Inaros the 
Libyan king (lit. king of the Libyans), who had conducted (lit. done) the 
whole Egyptian venture (lit. everything with respect to Egypt), was 
captured by treachery and impaled. Fifty triremes from Athens and the rest 
the confederacy sailed [as a] relieving [force] to Egypt and put in at the 
Mendesian arm [of the Nile]. But foot-soldiers attacked them from the land 
Η Λ ^Cet 
Phoenicians from the sea and destroyed most of the ships. So 
ended the great expedition (lit. the [things] with respect to the great 
xpedition) of the Athenians and their allies against (lit. into) Egypt. 
Uhucydides i.110, adapted.) (12) When we had transferred to the other 
and HvT ^ e g a n t o d r i n k . i s cl e a r that Herodes disembarked from the ship 
fro 
k n o t· re~emhark (lit. go on board again). I did not disembark at all 
be ς1 
,ship that night. On the following day, when the man was not to 
een, he was looked for in no way more [vigorously] by the others than 
299 
8 2Γ 
2 ^ 
2. Ο 
<0 Ο 
Φ 7Γ 
δ ω 
α 

300 
$ δ" 
S 3 
a» 
S o 
• 3 
Φ 
ω 
α 
3 (Ο 
by me (i.e. I looked for him as vigorously as anyone); and if it (his 
disappearance) seemed serious to any of the others, [it did so] equally to me 
(i.e. if anyone considered it a serious matter; I did). Not only (lit. both) was 
I responsible for a messenger being sent to Mytilene, but (lit. and), since no-
one else was willing to go, either of those on (lit. from) the ship or of the 
companions of Herodes himself, I was prepared to send my own servant. 
But when the man did not appear either in Mytilene or anywhere else, and 
the wind was fair (lit. sailing [time] was coming into being) for us and all 
the other ships were putting out to sea, I too departed. (Antiphon Murder 
of Herodes 23-24, slightly adapted.) 
12.2 
Where participial phrases have been expanded into subordinate clauses 
(e.g. in 1-5; see 12.1/2a) the words added in English have not been enclosed 
in square brackets. 
(I) The man who runs away will also fight again (or lives to fight another 
day). (2) When a bear is present (or around) one need not look for tracks. 
(3) If you love yourself too much you will not have a friend. (4) Although 
he does not feed himself, he feeds his dogs. (5) The person who does not 
marry has no troubles. (6) In trying to flee (lit. fleeing) the smoke you fell 
into the fire. (7) A man who is running away does not wait for the sound 
of the lyre. (8) It is said that dogs burnt just once are afraid of fire (lit. dogs 
... are said to fear ...). (9) For I have come to bury Caesar, not to praise 
[him]. (10) No-one who is hungry sings sweet songs (lit. beautiful things). 
(II) Am I a bumpkin (lit. boorish) if I call a trough a trough? (12) The man 
who has been bitten by a serpent fears even a little rope. (13) The man who 
is illiterate (lit. inexperienced in letters) sees nothing although he has sight 
(lit. does not see [although] seeing). (14) It is difficult to speak to [one's] 
belly, since it does not have ears. (15) Prometheus: "You behold [this] 
spectacle, [me] this friend of Zeus, with what woes I am bent by him." 
Ocean: "I see, Prometheus, and I wish to give you the best advice (lit. advise 
the best things to you), subtle (or ingenious) as you are (lit. though being)." 
(Aeschylus Prometheus Bound 304ff.) (16) From there Cyrus marched out 
though Lycaonia five stages, [a distance of] thirty parasangs, and he 
allowed the Greeks to plunder this country on the grounds that it was 
hostile. (17) Once when turning a book of Hesiod beneath my hands I 
suddenly saw Pyrrha approaching; and throwing the book to the ground 
with my hand I shouted this, "Why do you give me trouble, old Hesiod?" 
(A.P. ix.161.) (18) Child of Phoenician-born Europa and great Zeus, ruling 
over Crete of a hundred cities, I have come leaving sacred (lit. very holy) 
temples ... And we have led a chaste life since I became a mystic of Idaean 
Zeus,and, having conducted feasts of raw flesh as a herdsman of night-
roaming Zagreus and held up torches for the mountain-wandering mother 
with the Curetes, I was sanctified and called an initiate of Bacchus. 
(Euripides, fragment 472.) 
12.3 
(1) A man, finding [some] gold, left a noose; but the man who did not find 
the gold which he had left, fastened the noose (i.e. to hang himself) which 
he had found. (A.P. ix.44.) (2) The Cyprian, seeing [the statue of] the 

Cyprian (i.e. of herself) in Cnidos, said, "Alas, alas, where did Praxiteles see 
me naked?" (App. Flan. 162.) (3) All Cilicians are bad men; but among the 
Cilicians [there is] one good man, [viz] Cinyres, but even Cinyres is Cilician. 
(A.P. xi· 236.) (4) Once Antiochus laid eyes on (lit. looked at) Lysimachus' 
cushion, and Lysimachus never again (lit. no longer) laid eyes on his 
cushion. (A.P. xi. 315.) (5) Although he produced twenty sons, Eutychus 
the painter has no likeness even among (lit. from) his children (i.e. he has 
as little success in producing lifelike paintings as in fathering children from 
a faithless wife). (A.P. xi. 215.) (6) You [with] the roses, you have a rosy 
charm. But what are you selling, yourself, or the roses, or both together? 
(A.P. v. 81.) (7) As I was kissing Agathon, I checked my soul at [my] lips; 
for it had come, poor wretch, with the idea of crossing over. (A.P. v. 78.) (8) 
I who laughed haughtily at Greece, I, Lais, who kept the swarm of young 
lovers in [my] porch, [dedicate] [my] mirror to the Paphian; since such [as 
I am now] I do not wish to see myself, and such as I was formerly I am 
unable [to see myself]. (A.P. vi. 1.) (9) Someone told [me], Heraclitus, of 
your death, and brought tears (lit. a tear) to me, and I remembered how 
often both of us laid the sun to rest in conversation. But you, I suppose, my 
friend from Halicarnassus, are ashes long, long ago. But your nightingales 
(i.e. poems) live on, upon which Hades, the ravisher of all things, shall not 
lay his hand. (Callimachus epigram 2.) 
301 
s i 
®<< 
3 
13.2 
(1) [It] is a fine [thing] indeed to be master of one's belly and one's desire [s]. 
(2) Both common-sense and proper deliberation (lit. deliberating on what it 
is necessary [to do]) are accustomed to accompany old age. (3) This is 
bravery (lit. the brave thing), [that is to say] forethought. (4) Everywhere 
the land which feeds [you is your] native-land. (5) Old age, you know, has 
a certain wisdom (lit. something wise) indeed with respect to deliberation 
(or planning), since indeed it has seen and experienced much (lit. as having 
seen and experienced many things). (6) Ο unfortunate virtue, you were [a 
mere] word then; yet I practised you as something real (lit. a fact, i.e. as 
though you really existed). But you were a slave to chance after all. (7) 
Oedipus, the son of Laius, is my father (lit. father for us), and Iocaste, the 
daughter of Menoeceus, bore me; and the Theban people call me' 
Polyneices. (Euripides Phoenissae 288-290.) (8) There is no temple of 
Persuasion other than speech, and her altar is in the nature of man. (9) He 
who chases two hares catches neither. (10) Cyrus, inasmuch as he was a 
child and liked elegance and distinction, was pleased with his clothes. (11) 
o t e v en the gods fight against necessity. (12) Obedience to one's stomach 
Js a necessary evil. (13) In escaping Charybdis you have fallen into (lit. in 
with) Scylla. (14) A hungry ass pays no heed to the cudgel. (15) No-one 
e^ l r ej life as much as the man who is growing old. (16) Death alone of the 
does not desire gifts. (17) The man who does no wrong needs no law 
w. to protect him). (18) Sailors (or those who sail) are [only] four fingers 
cjWa£ fr°m death. (19) You have a need of spring since you have an old 
clok 
I a nd n o t winter] is the right season for the threadbare 
Att 
r° U a r e w e a ri n8)· (20) The Spartan [woman] Gorgo, asked by an 
y
 
lc 
Athenian) [woman], "Why do you Spartan [women] alone rule 
m e n k u s b a n d s ) ? " said, "Because we alone also give birth to [real] 
ancj * (21) In reply to a certain lad who was intending to attend his classes 
A n t l-qu l red what he needed (lit. of what things there is a need to him), 
s nenes the philosopher said, "A new book and a new pencil and a new 

302 
IS 
Φ Ο 
3 
ω 
α 
3 (Q 
writing-tablet", stressing the nous. (The pun on καινού and και-νοΰ ts 
virtually untranslatable, 
although in American pronunciation 
it comes 
across in 'new' and 'nous'.) (22) The black earth drinks, and the t-ees drink 
it (i.e. from it); the sea drinks the streams, the sun the sea, and the moon 
the sun. Why do you fight with me [my] friends (or comrades), when I 
myself also wish to drink? (Anacreontea 19) 
13.3 
(/) I was making my way from the Academy straight to the Lyceum along 
the [road] outside the wall, close under the wall (lit. beneath the wall) itself. 
When I came to (lit. was in the region of) the postern gate where the spring 
of Panops is, there I fell in with Hippothales, the [son] of Hieronymus, and 
Ctesippus of Paiania, and [some] other young men [who were] with them. 
Seeing me approach, Hippothales said, "Socrates, where are you going and 
where [have you come] from?" "From the Academy," I said, "on my way 
(lit. I'm making my way) straight to the Lyceum." "[Come] over here", he 
said, "straight to us. Aren't you going to come over (lit. do you not come 
near)? Yet it's worthwhile." "Where do you mean," I said, "and who are 
you to whom [I am to come]?" "Over here," he said, showing me right 
opposite (lit. in the [spot] right opposite) the wall a sort of enclosure and 
door. "We spend our time here," he said, "both we ourselves and a lot of 
other fine [fellows]." "And what is this [place] then, and how do you spend 
your time (lit. what is [your] manner of spending time)?" "A new wrestling-
school," he said. "And we usually spend our time in discussions, in which 
we wish you to share." "That's very kind of you (lit. doing well indeed)," I 
said. "And who teaches here?" "Your own friend," he said, "and admirer, 
Miccus." "My goodness (lit. by Zeus)," I said, "he's not unimportant (lit. 
the man [is] not insignificant), he's a competent teacher." "Well then, do 
you want to follow [me]," he said, "and to see those who are here?" (Plato 
Lysis 203a-204a.) 
(ii) Eucleides. Just [in] from the country, Terpsion, or [did you arrive] some 
time ago? Terpsion. Quite some time ago. I was looking for you in (lit. 
throughout) the agora and was surprised that I could not find [you]. E. [No 
you couldn't], for I was not in the city. T. Where [were you] then? E. As I 
was going down to [the] harbour I met Theaetetus being carried to Athens 
from the camp at (lit. from) Corinth. T. Alive or dead? E. Alive, but only 
just (lit. and very hardly). For he's in a bad way actually because of some 
wounds, but more [than that] the disease which [has broken out] in the 
army is afflicting him. T. You don't mean dysentery, do you? E. Yes, I 
Τ. What a man [this is who] you say is in danger. E. A real gentleman {lit-
fine and good), Terpsion, and (lit. since), you know, just now I was listening 
to some [people] singing his praises (lit. praising him very much) in 
connection with the battle. T. And [that's] not at all strange. But how [is 
that] he did not stay (or lodge) here in Megara? E. He was hurrying [to get] 
home. I asked him and advised him [sc. to stay], but he refused. In fact, as 
I escorted [him home] I recalled with admiration how propheticall> 
Socrates had spoken in particular about him (lit I recalled and m a r v e l l e d at 
Socrates how prophetically he had spoken both other things indeed an 
about this man). For I think that (lit. he seems to me to...), a little b e f o r e 
his death, he (Socrates) met him when he was a lad, and after being wit 

ihiml and conversing [with him], greatly admired his character. (Plato 
Theaetetus 142a-c.) 
14.2 
the abbreviations P.S. (Primary sequence) and H.S. (Historic sequence) are 
used in defining the uses of the subjunctive/optative here. 
(I) For there is a certain pleasure even in words, if (lit. whenever) they 
create a forgetfulness of [one's] existing troubles (indefinite, P.S.). (2) How 
then am I, a [mere] mortal (lit. being mortal), to fight against divine fortune 
(or fortune sent by the gods)? (deliberative subjunctive). (3) [It is] the mind 
[that one] must look at, the mind; what advantage [is there] in (lit. of) 
bodily beauty, if (lit. whenever) a person does not have a beautiful (i.e. 
noble) mind? (indefinite, P.S.). (4) Whoever is shipwrecked twice, blames 
Poseidon without reason (i.e. he should have taken Poseidon's hint the first 
time) (indefinite, P.S.). (5) Socrates said that most men live in order that 
they may eat, whereas he himself ate in order that he might live (purpose, 
subjunctive retained in H.S.). (6) Let us eat and drink; for tomorrow we die 
(jussive subjunctive.). (7) God plants (lit. produces) a fault (lit. blame) in 
mortals whenever he wishes to ruin a family completely (indefinite, P.S.). 
(8) What a charming creature (lit. how charming) is a man when (lit. 
whenever) he is a [real] man (indefinite, P.S.). (9) A. Who is this man? B. A 
doctor. A. What a bad state every doctor is in if (lit. if ever) no-one [else] is 
in a bad state! (indefinite, P.S.). (10) Our life is very like wine: whenever 
what remains (or the remains) is small, it becomes vinegar (indefinite, P.S.). 
(II) Those who are afraid that they may go into exile from their native-land 
and those who, being about to fight, are afraid that they may be defeated 
are not able to take (lit. get) either food or sleep because of their fear; but 
those who are already in exile or (lit. and) already defeated can eat and 
sleep even more (or better) than those blessed with good fortune (fear for 
the future, P.S.). (12) A monkey is a monkey even if it has golden sandals 
Iindefinite, P.S.). (13) The Greeks were afraid that the Persians might 
advance agains the wing and, outflanking them on both sides, might cut 
them to pieces (fear for the future, H.S.). (14) When the man whom they 
had seized was asked from what country he came (lit. was; indirect 
question, H.S.), he said that he was a Persian, and that he was proceeding' 
i ° m ^*r*bazos' army in order that he might get provisions (purpose clause, 
H-S.).(lS) When Diogenes saw an archer with no natural skill, he sat down 
beside the target saying, "In order that I may not be hit" (purpose clause in 
direct quotation, hence notH.S.). (16) Through inexperience of death every 
m a n is afraid to leave the light of this sun (lit. this light of the sun). (17) A 
nl a n w as running so as not to get wet, and was drowned in a hole (purpose 
° ausey H.S.). (18) When the generals assembled at daybreak, they were 
urprised that Cyrus neither sent someone else to tell [them] what to do (lit. 
th 
Hecessary t o do> n o r appeared himself (indirect statement, H.S.). So 
ami 
t o Pack up what they had and put on their full (έξ-) armour 
su 
mov
1f forwards. When they were already on the point of starting, at 
Ta
nr,se i{}ere came Procles, the ruler of Teuthrania, and Glus, the [son] of 
the"]?8]' 
sported that Cyrus had been killed, but that Ariaeus was at 
would 
8· 
r e s t 
barbarians and was saying that they 
d 
Wait for them throughout this day (indirect statement, H.S.). 
303 
Φ 7T 
S 3 
I s 
So 
w 2 
3 
ω 
α 
5* 
(Ω 

ΙΓΤΊ 
(Xenophon Anabasis ii. 1. 2-3, slightly adapted.) (19) If ever he saw the 
soldiers going in good order; he praised [them] (indefinite, H.S.). (20) If you 
Φ 
fear the law (lit. fearing the law) you will not be troubled by the law. 
Φ < 
15.2 
φ 
jjj 
(1) [While] avoiding [the] ashes I have fallen into [the] fire (i.e. out of the 
o> 
frying-pan into the fire). (2) No-one does wicked [deeds] without the gods' 
5s 
knowing (lit. no-one escapes the notice of the gods doing wicked things). 
(3) A crab has not learned (i.e. does not know how) to walk straight. (4) 
We are all wise in giving warnings (lit. with respect to warning), but we do 
not realize when we ourselves make mistakes. (5) The trap has caught the 
mouse. (6) For the man who takes pleasure in constantly speaking does not 
realise (lit. escaped his own notice) that he is wearisome to his companions 
(lit. those who are with [him]). (7) He has eaten scorpions. (8) Whoever 
devises treachery (lit. crafty things) against another is doing this against 
himself unawares (lit. escapes [his own] notice doing this himself against 
himself). (9) The hoplites happened to be sleeping in the agora. (10) It was 
clear that Menon desired (lit. Menon was obvious desiring) to be 
exceedingly rich. (11) So they took Jesus; and carrying his own cross (lit. 
the cross for himself) he went forth to the so-called Place of a Skull, which 
in Hebrew is called Golgotha, where they crucified him, and with him two 
others one on each side (lit. from this side and from this side), and Jesus in 
the middle. Pilate also wrote a title (or inscription) and placed [it] on the 
cross, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. Many of the 
Jews read this title, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near 
the city. Accordingly, the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, "Do not 
write 'The King of the Jews', but 'He claimed to be the King of the Jews' " 
(lit. but that, "he said, Ί am the King ...'"). Pilate replied, "What I have 
written, I have written.'' (John 19.16-22.) (12) For all seven days during 
which they were marching through [the territory of] the Kurds they 
continued to fight. (13) When Clearetus had encouraged his soldiers, he 
began to lead them against the place, but day broke while he was still 
marching (lit. day happening anticipated him marching). (14) When 
Archimedes was washing himself, so the story goes (lit. as they say), he 
discovered from the overflow (sc. of the water-level in his bath) how to 
measure (lit. the measuring of) the crown, and as if possessed or inspired 
(lit. just as from some possession or inspiration), he jumped out shouting, 
"I've found [it]," and went about saying this over and over again (lit 
often). But we have heard neither of any glutton shouting so passionately. 
"I have eaten," nor of any lover [shouting] "I have kissed," 
though 
countless sensualists existed in the past and [still] exist [now]. (Plutarch 
Moralia 1094C.) (15) A. He is married, I believe. B. What are you saying? 
Is he really married, [the man] whom I left alive and on his feet (lit. living 
and walking about)? (16) They stopped building the large wall because they 
feared (lit. fearing) that it would not be sufficient to hold out. (17) I see that 
for the majority of people former prosperity gives birth to insolence. 
15.3 
Might. We have come to [this] distant region of the earth, to [this] Scythian 
tract, to [this] wilderness where no men live. Hephaestus, you must concern 

yourself with the commands (lit. it is necessary that the commands be of 
concern to you) which the Father (i.e. Zeus) enjoined on you, to bind fast 
this wrong-doer on [these] rocks with lofty cliffs in unbreakable fetters of 
adamantine bonds. For [it was] your glory, the flame of fire on which all 
arts depend, [which] he stole and bestowed on mortals. [It is] for such a 
wrong, you know, [that] he must pay the penalty to the gods, in order that 
he may be taught (or learn) to accept the sovereignty of Zeus, and cease 
from his man-loving ways. Hephaestus. Might and Violence, for you two 
the command of Zeus has indeed fulfilment (or has been fulfilled) and 
nothing is still in [your] way, but I lack the heart to bind by force to [this] 
stormy ravine a god [who is my] kinsman. Yet for all that, I must (lit. there 
is necessity for me to) get the heart for this; for [it is] a grievous [matter] to 
disregard the words of the Father. Ο lofty-minded son of straight-
counselling Themis, against your will and mine (lit. you being unwilling I 
being unwilling) will I fasten you in (or with) inextricable brazen bonds to 
this rock far from men, where you will perceive (lit. see) neither the voice 
nor the shape of anyone of mortals, but grilled by the sun's radiant flame 
you will alter the bloom of your skin; and you will be glad when (lit. to you 
being glad) night with her embroidered cloak will hide the light and [when] 
the sun will scatter the morning frost again; the burden of your present 
suffering (lit. the present trouble) will continually distress you; for the one 
who will relieve [it or you] is not yet born. (Aeschylus Prometheus Bound 
1-27) 
16.2 
(1) When they had come to their tents, the rest (sc. of the soldiers) were 
busy about the provisions, while generals and captains met together. And at 
this point there was much despondency. For on one side there lay (lit. were) 
very high mountains, and on the other side the river was so deep (lit. of 
such a size) that not even their spears were above [the water] when they 
tested the depth. (2) When Diogenes was asked why athletes were stupid, 
he said, "Because they have been built up with pork and beef." (3) One 
must marry [only] after making a [proper] choice. (4) We are involved in 
constant (lit. we continue being in) dangers throughout all our life, so that 
those who talk about security do not realize (lit. have escaped their own 
notice) that they are preparing for war for the whole of time. (5) You are 
flaying a flayed bitch (i.e. you are flogging a dead horse). (6) The Potideans, 
waiting for the Athenians, were camped on the isthmus on the side towards 
Olynthus, and they had established a market outside the city. And the allies 
had chosen Aristeus [as] general of the whole infantry and Perdiccas of the 
cavalry. (7) When the barbarians had left their land, the Athenians began to 
make preparations to rebuild their city. For of the houses most had 
collapsed, although a few survived, in which the chief men of the Persians 
had themselves lodged. (8) The goat has come to knives [already] sharpened 
one is asking for trouble). (9) They passed the night there. But when 
ay began to break, they proceeded to march in silence against the enemy, 
tawn up in battle-order; for a mist had also appeared, so that they came 
Ρ close without being seen (lit. escaped notice approaching near). (10) 
e n a n agreement was made (lit. comes into being (vivid pres.)) with 
w ^ ? 
t 0 
° s e w 
Demosthenes as well, on condition that no-one 
bo Η \ 
through violence (lit. violently) or imprisonment (lit. 
nds> o r lack of food. (11) Tiribazus said that he wished to make a treaty 
305 
Φ 
Χ Φ 
Φ «< 
<8 ο 
• 3 
Φ χ· 

306 
Φ 
£ Φ 
φ < 
2. ο 
Φ Ο 
(Α 2 
<Β 
ω 
α 5' 
(Ο 
on condition that neither he himself would harm the Greeks nor would they 
burn the houses but (lit. and) would take the provisions that they needed. 
These [terms] were accepted by (lit. seemed good to) the generals i.nd they 
made a treaty on these terms. (12) Nor is it still the time, Socrates, to be 
deliberating but to have finished deliberating. There is [only] one plan: all 
this must be completed (or over and done with) within this night. (13) So 
boldness and courage are not the same thing. Consequently the result is (lit. 
it results) that the courageous are bold but not that the bold are 
courageous, for boldness, like strength, comes to men from art and from 
anger and from madness but courage from nature and proper nurture of the 
soul (lit. souls). (14) The Spartans considered that the Athenians were first 
in violation of (lit. to be in a state of having broken) the treaty. (15) The 
goat has not yet given birth (i.e. don't count your chickens before they're 
hatched.) (16) Philip, the father of Alexander the Great, wanted (lit. 
wanting) to capture a strong fort. When his scouts reported that it was 
difficult in all respects and impregnable, he asked if it was so difficult that 
not even an ass carrying gold could approach [it]. 
16.3 
I am alive and I behold what I ought to, the sky, the earth and these shafts 
of sun [light]. But what a terrible turmoil (lit. wave, surf) and confusion of 
mind I have fallen into (lit. in) and what warm breath I breathe, shallow, 
not steady from my lungs. Look, why am I sitting anchored like a ship with 
bonds on (lit. with respect to) my sturdy chest and arms to this stone-carved 
pillar (lit. chiselled work made of stone) broken in half, sitting next to 
corpses (lit. having a seat neighbouring corpses)? My winged weapons and 
bow lie scattered on the ground, which formerly shielded my arms and 
protected my flanks and were protected by me. Surely I have not descended 
back to [the house] of Hades again, having [just] completed (lit. having 
gone) the double course from Hades set by Eurystheus? But neither do I see 
the stone of Sisyphus or Pluto nor yet the sceptre of Demeter's daughter. I 
am indeed bewildered. Wherever am I in my helplessness? Help, who is 
there of my friends near or far who will cure my bewilderment? (Euripides 
Heracles 1089-1107.) 
17.2 
(1) (/) If (or when) you are wronged (lit. being wronged), settle your 
differences, (ii) Keep away from other people's property, (iii) Don't hurry 
when you undertake something (lit. undertake slowly), (iv) Don't rush into 
marriage (lit. delay getting married), (v) Know yourself (i.e. your human 
limitations), (vi) Respect your parents, (vii) Think [only] mortal thoughts 
(lit. mortal things), (viii) Don't laugh over a corpse. (ix) Know the right 
moment, (x) Nothing in excess. (*/) When you drink, don't talk too much 
(lit. prattle many things), (xii) Use your wealth fairly (lit. be wealthy justly). 
(xiii) Believe in fortune, (xiv) If (or when) you are insulted, avenge yourself. 
(xv) Don't curse your sons. (2) Train your children; for you will not train 
[them when they are] men. (3) An army of deer led by a lion is more 
frightening than an army of lions led by a deer. (4) Fear old age; for it does 

not come alone. (5) Choose a good reputation rather than wealth (lit. wish 
to be well spoken of rather than to be rich). (6) When you have passed a 
rose do not seek it any longer again. (7) We have two ears but one mouth, 
in order that we may hear more but speak less. (8) (/) Neighbours have 
sharper eyes (lit. see more sharply) than foxes, (ii) When you are walking 
on foot do not fear the waves, (iii) Let a lion eat me, not a fox (i.e. if I come 
to grief may it be at the hands of a worthy opponent), (iv) Be both a lion 
where it is required (lit. necessary) and a monkey in turn (i.e. be prepared 
to assume a role suited to a particular situation), (v) What [ever] bread a 
man has kneaded, let him eat it as well, (vi) When the general is present, let 
all the officers stop (sc. giving orders), (vii) The man who desires more is 
also deprived of what he has (lit. the things which are present), (viii) Don't 
throw food into a chamberpot, (ix) When you are a foreigner follow the 
local customs, (x) Don't speak ill of your friend or well of your enemy, (xi) 
If (or when) you are prosperous, don't despise the poor, (xii) Judge not, that 
you be not judged, (xiii) Second thoughts are somehow wiser, (xiv) Most 
people are rogues, (xv) Things last year were always better. (9) One of the 
Saii exults in my shield, which I left unwillingly, a blameless weapon, by a 
thicket. But I myself escaped the doom of death; to hell with that shield; I'll 
get another just as good (lit. once more I shall obtain [one] not worse). 
(Archilochus 6.) (10) The royal cubit is three fingers greater (or longer) than 
the standard cubit. (11) (i) When Eudamidas saw Xenocrates, who was 
now rather old, studying philosophy in the Academy with his students and 
ascertained that he was searching for virtue, he said, "So when will he [be 
able to] use it?" (ii) When a certain Argive was saying that the Spartans 
became worse when they were abroad (lit. during their absences from 
home), he (i.e. Eudamidas) said, "But you, when you come to Sparta, do 
not become worse but better." (iii) To a wretch who was asking [him] who 
the best Spartan was Agis said, "The one who is most unlike you." (iv) 
When a teacher was about to read out an encomium of Heracles, 
Antalcidas said, "Well, who's criticizing him?" (v) When Thearidas was 
sharpening a sword he was asked if it was sharp, and he said, "Sharper than 
slander." (vi) When a garrulous barber asked Archelaus, "How would you 
like it, your Majesty (lit. how am I to cut your hair; Ο King)?" Archelaus 
said, "In silence (lit. keeping quiet)." (12) When Aristotle heard that he was 
being abused by someone, he said, "Let him also whip me when I'm not 
there (lit. being absent)." (13) Although they are wise in other respects, the 
sophists do something extraordinary viz (lit. do an extraordinary thing [viz] 
this) they claim to be teachers of virtue, yet they often accuse their students 
of wronging them (lit. that they wrong them), by withholding their fees, 
although they have been well-treated by them (i.e. if the sophists had really 
been able to teach their students virtue, the latter would not have failed to 
pay their fees). (14) Much enmity and mutual hatred is innate in our 
citizens, on account of which I am always fearful that some disaster too 
great to bear may fall upon the city. (15) The Lacedaemonians kept sending 
embassies to the Athenians to make complaints, in order that they might 
have (lit. there might be to them) as great a pretext as possible for going to 
War> m case they (the Athenians) did not pay any attention. (16) Cleander 
^as tyrant of Gela for seven years, but he was killed by Sabyllus, a man 
rom Gela. (17) Hope and you, Luck, a long farewell; I have found the 
«arbour. There's nothing [more] between you and me. Have your fun with 
those [who come] after me 
307 
8 
a ? 
Φ Ο 
w 3 
Φ JΓ 
ω Ω. 
Ξ 
(Ο 

308 
i f f 
(ft 
Λ 
Φ Ο 
• 3 
Φ 
7Γ 
Q) 
α 5" 
(Ω 
17.3 
Hermes. You there, the clever one, bitterly bitter to the extreme, you who 
offended against the gods by giving honours to mortals, you the thief of fire 
I mean; the Father orders you to tell [him] of the marriage of which you 
boast and by which he is [to be] cast out of his power. And what is more, 
do not [tell] it (lit. these things) in riddling fashion, but explain each detail 
as it is, and do not inflict a double journey on me, Prometheus. You see that 
Zeus is not softened by such behaviour. Prometheus. Haughty and full of 
arrogance is your talk, for a lackey of the gods. New you are and new your 
power (lit. you [being] new wield new power), and you think indeed that 
you dwell in citadels free from woe. [Yet] have I not seen two rulers cast 
out from them? And as the third I shall behold the present lord (sc. cast out) 
most shamefully and most speedily. You don't imagine, do you, (lit. surely 
I do not seem to you in some respect) that I am terrified and cower before 
these new gods? I'm far removed, indeed completely removed, from that. 
Hasten back along the road you came; for you will find out none of the 
things which you question me about. (Aeschylus Prometheus Bound 944-
963.) 
18.2 
(1) A man from Cyme was selling honey. When someone tasted it and said, 
"It's very nice," he said, "[Yes,] for if a mouse had not fallen into it, I would 
not be selling it." (2) A Spartan woman, in answer to her son who was 
saying that the sword which he had was short, said, "Add a step" (i.e. take 
a step closer to your enemy to make up for the shortness of your sword). 
(3) (/) If the lion-skin does not suffice, put on the fox-skin (i.e. if behaving 
like a lion doesn't help, behave like a fox), (ii) You are giving a dog bran, 
and an ass bones (i.e. you are doing things the wrong way), (iii) You keep 
your love on the tip of your tongue, (iv) If we hate our friends, what shall 
we do to those who hate [us]? (v) If I had cheese, I would not want a 
cooked meal (i.e. the small luxury of cheese would be enough—spoken of 
those who did not indulge themselves overmuch), (vi) [When] a friend [is] 
in trouble do not betray [him] because of anger, (vii) Gain is sweet, even if 
it comes from lies, (viii) Give something and take something, (ix) 
Wandering makes life more reasonable (i.e. travel broadens the mind), (x) 
[It is] disgraceful to betray one's benefactors, (xi) If we have money, we will 
have friends, (xii) Let matters proceed as God wills (lit. as is dear to the 
god). (4) A man came asking the seer Olympicus whether he should sail to 
Rhodes and how he would sail in safety; and the seer replied, "First, have 
a new ship, and put out to sea not in winter but in summer; for if you do 
this, you will go both there and [back} here, unless a pirate captures you at 
sea." (A.P. xi. 162.) (5) Once an old man had cut some wood and was 
walking a long road carrying it. Because of fatigue he laid aside the load 
and called upon Death. When Death appeared and asked for what reason 
he was calling upon him, the old man said, "So that you may lift up this 
load and put it on me." (6) Every gift which is given, even if it is small, is 
very great, if it is given with goodwill. (7) If a snake does not eat a snake, 
it will not become a dragon (i.e. to rise in the world one must be ruthless). 
(8) Naked I set foot upon the earth, and naked I shall go away below the 
earth; and why do I vainly toil when I see the end naked? (9) (/) When 
someone was surprised at [the number of] the dedications in Samothrace, 

he said, "There would be far more if those who were not saved had also 
made dedications." (ii) When he came to Myndus and observed that the 
gates were big whereas the city was small, "Men of Myndus," he said, 
"Shut the gates lest your city gets out (or escapes)." (iii) He was asking a 
bad-tempered man [for alms]. When [the latter] said, "[Yes,] if you 
persuade me", [Diogenes] replied, "If I were able to persuade you, I would 
have persuaded you to hang yourself." (iv) Lighting (lit. having lit) a lamp 
in broad daylight, he used to go about saying, "I'm looking for a [genuine] 
human being." (10) The Syracusan generals trusted the fellow much too 
incautiously and immediately agreed upon a day on which they would be 
present and sent him back, while (lit. and) they themselves gave warning to 
the Syracusans beforehand that they would all go out in full force. When 
their preparations were complete and the days were at hand on which they 
had agreed to come, proceeding in the direction of Catana they encamped 
at the river Symaethus. When the Athenians perceived that they were 
approaching, they took all their own army and, putting it on board the 
ships and boats, sailed under cover of night against Syracuse. (Thucydides 
vi. 65, slightly adapted.) 
309 
φ 
S 3 
2.S 
So 
* 3 
Φ 7C 
18.3 
They arrived at the mountain on the fifth day; the name of (lit. to) the 
mountain was Theches. When the vanguard got on to [the summit οή the 
mountain and looked down at the sea, much shouting arose. Hearing [this], 
Xenophon and the rearguard thought that other enemy forces were 
attacking up in front. But when (or since) the shouting was becoming 
greater and closer and those who kept coming up in succession were 
running quickly towards those who were continually shouting and the 
shouting became much louder in proportion as the numbers increased (lit. 
they were becoming more), it seemed to Xenophon to be something more 
serious. He mounted his horse and taking the cavalry set off to the rescue. 
And very soon they heard the soldiers shouting, "The sea, the sea!" and 
passing the word along. Thereupon all the rearguard also began to run, and 
the draught animals and the horses were driven along. When they had all 
arrived at the summit, they then began to embrace each other in tears, 
including generals and captains. (Xenophon Anabasis iv. 7. 21-25, slightly 
adapted.) 
19.2 
W Heraclitus says somewhere that everything is in motion (or flux) and 
nothing stays still, and likening existing things (lit. the being [things]) to the 
stream of a river he says that you could not (or cannot) step twice into the 
same river. (2) Keep sober and remember to distrust; these (i.e. sobriety and 
Qistrust) are the limbs of the mind. (3) Pyrrho said that there was no 
Terence between life and death (lit. being alive or being dead differed in 
no way). And when someone said, "Why then do you not die?", he said, 
^ecause it makes no difference." (4) Do you think that crimes (or sins) 
0
a E u P with wings to the gods, and then someone writes them on the leaves 
^eus' tablet, and Zeus looks at them and gives judgements for mortals? 
0f e w"ole of heaven would not suffice if Zeus were writing [down] the sins 
mortals nor would he (i.e. Zeus) examining [them] [suffice] to send a 

310 
8 S" 
Φ < 
i f f 
«Λ Λ 
Φ (?) 
φ 
ω 
α 5* 
(Ω 
penalty to each man. No (lit. but), Justice is here somewhere near, if you 
wish to see. (Euripides, fragment 506.) (5) (/) If you are able to travel (sc. 
by land), do not go by sea (lit. sail), (ii) You were caught by your own 
feathers (i.e. hoist with your own petard), (iii) A [statue of] Hermes cannot 
(lit. could not) be made out of every (or any) log. (i.e. you can't make a silk 
purse out of a sow's ear), (iv) If you drink water you will (lit. would) 
produce nothing wise, (v) The man who knows what is useful (lit. useful 
things), not the man who knows much (lit. many things), is wise, (vi) If God 
gives [it], you cannot (lit. could not) escape evil (lit. evil things), (vii) All 
men naturally (or by nature) strive after knowledge (Aristotle), (viii) 
Whenever you are having a fine voyage, be especially mindful of squalls (lit. 
a squall), (ix) Give me somewhere to stand (lit. where I am to stand) and I 
shall move the earth (Archimedes), (x) Much learning does not teach [one] 
to have wisdom; for (sc. otherwise) it would have taught Hesiod and 
Pythagoras (Heraclitus). (xi) That which exists naturally does not change. 
(xii) [One] must bear lightly [one's] present (lit. standing beside) fortunes. 
(xiii) Despondent men never yet (lit. not yet) set up a trophy, (cf. faint heart 
never won fair lady.) (xiv) Remember that you are a human being, (xv) If 
you set a trap, you will be caught in a trap, (xvi) Although he stands far off 
God sees from near at hand, (xvii) He stands on the razor['s edge] (i.e. he 
is in a difficult situation). (6) How sweet [it is] for those in distress to forget 
their present troubles even for a short time. (7) (/') To a man who said, 
"Except for the fact that you are King you are in no way different from us," 
Leonidas said, "But I wouldn't be King if I were not better than you." (//) 
When he arrived at Thermopylae, to a man who said, "Because of the 
barbarians' arrows it is not even possible to see the sun," he said, "So [it 
will be] nice, if we fight (lit. will fight) them beneath the shade." (iii) When 
Xerxes wrote to him, "It is possible for you by not fighting against God but 
by ranging yourself with me, to be sole ruler of Greece," he wrote in reply, 
"If you knew (i.e. understood) the fine things of life, you would have 
refrained from the desire for other people's possessions; for me death on 
behalf of Greece is better than being sole ruler over my own race (lit. those 
of the same stock)." (iv) When Xerxes wrote again, "Send (i.e. surrender) 
your arms," he wrote in reply, "Come and get them!" (v) Stranger, tell the 
Spartans that we lie here, in obedience to (lit. obeying) their commands (lit-
words). (8) I shall not revolt from the people of Athens (lit. of the 
Athenians) either in any way or means or in word or deed, nor shall I obey 
anyone who revolts (lit. the revolting man), and if anyone tries to stir up 
revolt, I shall denounce [him] to the Athenians; and I shall pay to the 
Athenians whatever tribute I persuade the Athenians [is appropriate]; and I 
shall be as excellent and just an ally as I am able (lit. I shall be an ally of 
whatever sort I may be able best and most just), and I shall come to the help 
of the people of Athens and I shall ward off anyone who (lit. if anyone) 
does wrong to the people of Athens, and I will obey the people of Athens. 
(Inscriptiones Graecae i3 40.21-32.) 
20.2 
(1) Once a young man fell sick and said to his doctor that he was in such 
pain that he was unable either to sit or lie [down] or stand; the doctor said. 
"My friend, you have no alternative but (lit. there is no other thing left to 
you than) to hang". (2) Who knows if what is called death [is] life, and wc 
is death? Except, however; [that] those of mortals who are alive (lit. see [sc-
the light of day]) fall sick, whereas those who are dead never (lit. not at ai > 

fall sick nor suffer ill (lit. possess troubles). (Euripides, fragment 833.) (3) 
(/) He started to play the flute for a drachma, and stops (sc. playing it) for 
four, (ii) The camel who conceived a desire for horns lost his ears too. (iii) 
There is no man who is fortunate in all respects, (iv) Many generals lost 
Caria (cf. too many cooks spoil the broth), (v) Do not let go what is visible 
and choose what is invisible, (vi) Time alone shows a just man. (vii) You are 
in no way different from an elephant, (viii) God does not stand aloof from 
a just deceit, (ix) A visit from (lit. entrance of) many doctors destroyed me. 
(x) Your appearance is like a lion's but your life is like an ass's (lit. you are 
a lion as regards your hair, but an ass as regards your life). (4) I see the nose 
of hook-nosed Nico, Menippus; however, he himself seems to be still far 
off; but he'll come, let's wait after all. For if [he is] far [away], he is not, I 
suppose, five stades from (i.e. behind) his nose. But, as you see, it precedes 
[him] itself. If we stand on (lit. on to) a high mound, we'll see him too. (A.P. 
xi. 406.) (5) When he was dyeing his head (i.e. his hair) a man lost his hair 
itself, and although he was very hairy he has completely become an egg. (6) 
Thereupon, Cleanor stood up and spoke as follows: "Come, gentlemen, 
you see the perjury and impiety of the King, and you see the faithlessness 
of Tissaphernes, since, although he used to say that he was a neighbour of 
Greece and that he would consider it most important to save us, and 
although he himself swore an oath to us to confirm this (lit. upon these 
things) and himself gave pledges, he himself deceived and seized our 
generals, and he did not even respect Zeus God of Hospitality, but after 
actually sitting at the same table as Clearchus deceived him by these very 
means and has [now] destroyed the men." (Xenophon Anabasis iii. 2.4.) (7) 
Well, Socrates, obey the laws and regard (lit. obeying the laws, regard) 
neither children nor life nor anything else more highly than justice, in order 
that, when you go [down] to [the house] of Hades you may be able to plead 
all this in your defence to those who rule there. (8) Socrates manifestly 
longed not for those who were naturally sound in body with respect to 
beauty but for those who were naturally sound in soul with respect to 
virtue. (9) The daughter of a grammarian, after making love (lit. having 
mingled in sexual intercourse), produced a masculine child, a feminine 
[child], [and] a neuter [child]. (10) For Zeus gives thought to the greatest 
[affairs] of mortals, but leaves unimportant [matters] to other gods and lets 
them be. (11) While it was summer; the soldiers who were in Chios with 
Eteonicus supported themselves both from [the produce of] the season and 
by working for hire around the countryside. But when winter came on, and 
they had no sustenance and they were badly clothed and without shoes, 
they began to conspire amongst themselves (lit. with each other) to attack 
Chios. (12) Polymnestor. Alas, what will you say? Is she really somewhere 
nearby? Show [me], tell [me] where she is, in order that I may seize [her] 
m 
hands and tear [her] apart and bloody [her] flesh. Agamemnon. 
What's this, what's wrong with you? Po. In the name of the gods I beseech 
jou> let me lay my raging hand[s] on her. Ag. Stop; cast [this] savagery from 
Lyour] heart and speak, so that, when I have heard both you and her in 
Ufn, I may fairly decide for what reason (lit. in return for what thing) you 
Seated thus (lit. suffer these things). (Euripides Hecuba 1124-1131.) 
311 
8 S 
Φ < 
2 ^ 
2. ο 
Φ Ο 
3 Q> 
α 5' 
<Q 
21.2 
•π aT^ui a c e r t a* n Spartan came to Athens and saw men sitting on stools 
wHich V/ 
t o ^ e t ' 
s a^> "May it not happen to me to sit in a place from 
\ut. there from where) it is not possible to rise up for (i.e. to give my 

312 
S 3 
(/) 
-
Φ Ο 
Φ 
JT 
ω α 5' 
(Ω 
seat to) an older man. (2) (/) You are stirring the brine before you catch the 
fish (cf. first catch your hare, then cook it), (ii) A tortoise is not concerned 
about flies, (iii) May such enemies always pursue me. (iv) One should (lit. 
it is fitting to) scold children indoors, (v) One's speech reflects one's way of 
life (lit. of what sort [is one's] way of life, of such a sort [is one's] speech). 
(vi) Count no man fortunate (lit. consider no-one to be fortunate) until he 
dies, (vii) Dogs resemble their mistresses (lit. of what sort the mistress, of 
such a sort also the bitch), (viii) It is fitting for a child to be silent rather 
than to chatter, (ix) Oh, what a head, and it does not have a brain! (χ) 
Slaves share their masters' sickness, (xi) May I not have (lit. may there not 
be to me) what I want but what it is advantageous (sc. for me to have), (xu) 
May you fall into (lit. in with) Hades' anus! (i.e may you die!) (xiii) Would 
that (or I wish that) the offspring of wretched men were dumb. (3) Whoever 
of mortals fears death too much, is by nature stupid; [for] this (lit. these 
things) is the concern of Chance. But whenever the moment of death 
chances to come, he could not escape [it] even if he went to the halls of 
Zeus. (Sophocles, fragment 865.) (4) All who marry above themselves (lit. 
as many as marry marriages better in race) do not know [how] to marry. 
(5) A man's character is of necessity affected by the sort of people with 
whom he spends most of his time (lit. with what sort of [a person] a man 
associates for the greatest part of the day, of such a sort as regards to 
character it is necessary for him too to become). (6) Next stood up Thorax 
the Boeotian, who was struggling with Xenophon about the generalship, 
and said that, if they got out of the Black Sea, they would have (lit. there 
would be to them) the Chersonnese, a beautiful and blessed country, so that 
it was possible for anyone who [so] wished to dwell there, and anyone who 
did not to go off home. It was ridiculous, when there was much bountiful 
land in Greece, to be searching for [it] in the [country] of the barbarians. 
"And until you get (lit. become) there, I too promise you pay." (Xenophon 
Anabasis v.6.25-26.) (7) Once when Diogenes saw [some] women hanging 
by nooses from an olive-tree, he said, "I wish that all trees had borne such 
a fruit." (8) Whoever does (or tries to do) many things if it is possible not 
to do [them], [is] foolish, if it is possible to live a quiet (lit. free from 
business) life pleasantly. (9) In deliberation (lit. deliberating) the soldiers 
decided to reply as follows (lit. the following things) and Cheirisophus was 
their spokesman (lit. spoke): "We are resolved, if we are allowed (lit. 
someone allows us) to go off home, to proceed through the country doing 
the least possible harm; but if anyone [tries to] hinder us from the journey, 
to fight it out with him as vigorously as possible." (10) Indeed [it is] with 
difficulty [that] you would bear my ordeals, to whom it is not fated to die 
(or since it is not fated for me to die); for this (i.e. death) would be a 
deliverance from [my] woes; but as it is, there is no end of toils appointed 
for me until Zeus is cast out from [his] sovereignty. (Aeschylus Prometheus 
Bound 752-756.) (11) When Cyrus had listened to such words from 
Gobryas he spoke to him as follows. (12) Well, what will you do, [mv] 
heart? Consider well before you err and make most hateful what is [now] 
most dear (lit. the dearest things). Wherever did you rush forth, you 
wretch? Check [your] arrogance and strength hated of the gods. And whv 
(lit. with a view to what) do I lament like this (lit. these things), seeing mv 
life desolate and abandoned by those who should least (sc. have a b a n d o n e d 
me)? Do we then become cowards when we suffer such evils? Do not betra* 
yourself, [my] heart, in [the midst of] troubles. Alas, it is decided; children, 
go away from [my] sight (lit. eyes); for already a new frenzy has entered m^ 
bloody heart; Ο [my] hands, [my] hands, for what a [terrible] task we are 

preparing ourselves; alas, wretched [that I am] because of [my] daring, [I] 
who go to destroy in a brief moment the [product of] my great labour. 
(Neophron, fragment 2.) (13) When a man came to Lacedaemon and 
beheld the respect shown by (lit. of) the young towards the old, he said, "In 
Sparta alone it is profitable to grow old." (14) We should meet together and 
(lit. making a meeting) lament over a new-born baby (lit. the one [just] 
born) for all the troubles it is coming to, and in turn farewell with sounds 
of triumph the man who has died and is freed from troubles as we send him 
forth from his house (lit. farewelling [and] shouting in triumph send forth). 
(Euripides, fragment 449.) 
21.3 
(1) What life [can there be], what joy without golden Aphrodite? May I die, 
when these things are no longer my concern (lit. a care to me), [viz] secret 
love and gentle gifts and bed (or sex), the sorts of things which are the 
attractive flowers of youth for men and women. But when distressing old 
age comes on, [old age] which makes a man both ugly and base, evil cares 
always distress him in his heart (or mind), nor is he glad when he looks 
upon the rays of the sun, but [he is] hateful to boys and dishonoured by 
women. So painful did God make old age. (Mimnermus 1.) (2) You, [who 
are] my star, gaze at the stars. Would I might become the sky, in order that 
I might see you with many eyes. (3) Formerly you shone among the living 
[like] the Morning Star; but now you have died you shine [like] the Evening 
Star among the dead. (4) I am sending you sweet perfume, [thus] doing a 
favour to the perfume, not to you; for you yourself are able to give 
fragrance even to perfume. (5) Hail, Messenger of Dawn, Bringer of Light, 
and may you come [back] quickly [as the] Evening Star, bringing secretly 
back again [the girl] whom you are [now] leading away. 
313 
Φ 2Γ 
IS 
S o 
w 3 
Φ 
0) 
α 
5" 
(Ο 
22.2 
You, Love, ruler of gods and men, either do not teach beauty to appear 
beautiful or assist lovers (lit. those who are in love) with good fortune, as 
they suffer the pains of which you are the author. (Euripides, fragment 
136.) (2) For it was evening, and someone had come to the prytaneis with 
the report (lit. announcing) that Elatea had been captured. After this some 
of them got up immediately in the middle of dinner, cleared out the people 
in the stalls throughout the market-place, and set fire to the wicker-work, 
while others sent for the generals and summoned the trumpeter. The city 
was filled with commotion. On the following day at dawn the prytaneis 
called the councillors (lit. the council) into the Council-chamber, while you 
Proceeded to the Assembly, and before they dealt with the matter and 
framed a draft resolution the whole people was seated on the hill (i.e. the 
nyx; lit, above). After this, when the Council had arrived and the prytaneis 
^ad announced what had been reported to them and had introduced the 
Messenger (lit. the one who had come) and he had spoken, the herald put 
question, "Who wishes to speak?" And no-one came forward, 
^emosthenes On the Crown 169-170.) (3) (i) Ask even statues for [your] 
any bread (double acc.) (i.e. you're not getting anything from me!). (/'/') 
e r e is a certain Socrates, a wise man, who speculates on (lit. a deep 

314 
Φ £ 3 
Φ < 
2. Ο 
8 ρ 
thinker about) the heavens above (lit. things high in the air; accusative of 
respect) and has investigated everything beneath the earth (direct object). 
(iii) He has come to take from us even the property of [our] grandfather 
(double acc.). (iv) He came to the ancient tomb of [his] father (acc. of 
motion towards). (v) [My] long life teaches me many things (double acc.). 
(vi) Meletus brought this indictment against me (direct object; cognate 
acc.). (vii) Cyrus was very handsome in appearance and very humane in 
spirit (acc. of respect), (viii) [No], by Zeus (acc. in oath), I did not see a 
woodcutter (direct obj.) better than myself. (ix) They made a treaty and 
alliance for a hundred years (acc. to express time how long), (χ) I swear by 
the holy sky, the dwelling of Zeus (acc. in oath).(4) (i) How sweet [a thing] 
[is] solitude to the man who hates common people (exclamatory adv.). (ii) 
Hide nothing, for all-seeing (lit. seeing everything) time unfolds everything 
(causal conjunction), (iii) We bear children for this reason [viz] that we may 
protect the altars of the gods and [our] native land (conjunction introducing 
purpose clause), (iv) He seized the acropolis to gain sole power (lit. as for 
tyranny; adv. introducing prepositional phrase), (v) [We/one] must try to 
bear the constraints (lit. the necessary things) of life as lightly (lit. easily) as 
possible (cbc+ supl.). (vi) Effort, as/so they say, is the father of fame 
(conjunction introducing a parenthetical clause, 22.1/lb(v)). (vii) Alas, alas, 
how fine a privilege is a just victory (lit. to win just things), but how 
absolutely evil is an unjust victory (lit. [to win] unjust things) (exclamatory 
adv.). (viii) How sweet is life, if a man does not understand it (exclamatory 
adv.). (ix) Give to the poor, in order that you find god a giver (conjunction 
introducing purpose clause), (x) Time judges friends as fire [judges] gold 
(conjunction introducing a clause of manner), (xi) When you are young 
remember that one day you will be old (tic = ότι, indirect statement), (xii) 
Do we not live as pleasantly as possible if we do not grieve? (CDC + supl.). 
(xiii) They sailed away from the Hellespont separately according to their 
cities (22.1/l(v)). (xiv) Really wise men (cbc with positive adv.). (5) At first 
Oedipus was a fortunate man, [but] then he became the most wretched of 
mortals. (6) Well, as you know, I have wept for many sufferings, but now I 
shall speak of one [suffering] such as [I have] not yet [wept for] before. 
When [my] lord Heracles was setting out on his last journey from home, at 
that time he left in the house an ancient tablet inscribed with signs, which 
he had never brought himself to explain to me like this before, when he 
went forth on [his] many exploits, but he used to go as one who was about 
to do something [notable] and not as one about to die. 
(Sophocles 
Trachiniae 153-160.) (7) I made war first against the Thracians, driving 
them from the Hellespont as they wanted to take the country from the 
Greeks. (8) Ο old age, what hope of pleasure you have, and every single 
man wishes to live through (lit. come) to you. But when he has made trial 
[of you], he regrets (sc. that he has; lit. takes regret) because there is no 
worse evil among the mortal race. (Euripides, fragment 1080.) (9) For I, 
Cebes, when young, had an enormous desire (lit. desired enormously) for 
this wisdom which they call the investigation into (lit. of) nature. 
22.3 
(/) We congratulate you, grasshopper, when on the tops of the trees you sing 
like a king, after drinking a little dew; for yours are all those things which 
you see in the fields, [all those things] which the woods nourish. You [are] 
held in honour among mortals, sweet harbinger of summer. The Muses love 

you, and Phoebus himself loves [you], and gave [you] a shrill power of 
_ - _ 
song. Old age does not distress you, ο skilful, earth-born lover of song, and 
^ 
since you know not suffering (lit. [being] unsuffering), ο [creature of] 
g J" 
bloodless flesh, you are nearly equal to the gods. (Anacreontea 34.) (ii) My 
2 ^ 
(lit. to us) temples [are] now grey, and my head white, and no longer is 
§· ο 
graceful youth at hand, and my teeth are aged. No longer is there left much 
g ® 
time of sweet life; for this reason (lit. on account of these things) I weep 
often in fear of Tartarus. For terrible is the inner chamber of Hades, and 
painful the path down to him; and further [it is] fixed for the man who has 
g 
gone down not to come up [again]. (Anacreon 50.) 
~ 
23.2 
(1) (/) Ο sweet charm of sleep (gen. of explanation), ally against sickness 
(objective gen.), (ii) He wanted to be [one] of those who remained (partitive 
gen.), (iii) Ο Poseidon, what skill! (gen. of exclamation), (iv) To bear poverty 
is not [the nature] of everyone, but of a wise man (gen. of characteristic), (v) 
Pay close attention (lit. apply the mind very much) to this man (dat. of 
indirect object), I beg you (ethic dat.). (vi) Many treatments have been found 
by doctors (dat. of agent), (vii) Sleep is naturally a safeguard of the body (lit. 
of bodies; objective gen.), (viii) [It is the mark] of a wicked man to praise and 
blame the same person (gen. of characteristic), (ix) Such is tyranny for you, 
Lacedaemonians (dat. of reference or ethic dat.). (x) Olympian Zeus, 
dwelling in the sky (dat. of place where), knows this, (xi) They accuse him 
of theft (verb of accusing, gen. of charge), (xii) Men lie because of their own 
(subjective/possessive gen.) fear of death (objective gen.), (xiii) They were 
afraid that the Athenians might attack with a greater force (military dat.). 
(xiv) They will approach with much shouting (dat. of manner), (xv) The 
boy's name (lit. the name to the boy; dat. of possession) was Plato, (x vi) Art 
is weaker by far (dat. of measure of difference) than necessity (gen. of 
comparison), (xvii) I admire you for [your] intelligence, but I loathe [you] 
for [your] cowardice (both gen. of cause), (xviii) I tried to steal [some] of the 
meat (partitive gen.), (xix) In your eyes (dat. of reference) did this man do 
these things justly? or Did this man do these things justly for you? (dat. of 
advantage), (xx) They did these things for the gods (dat. of advantage), (xxi) 
He was loathsome and rough in his voice (dat. of respect), (xxii) The artny 
arrived at Oenoe in Attica (chorographic gen.), (xxiii) You see the king's 
perjury (subjective/possessive gen.), (xxiv) I am not disheartened by what 
has happened (gen. of cause). (2) Diogenes went up to Anaximenes the 
orator who was fat and said, "Give [some] of your belly to us the poor too; 
for you will both be lightened yourself and will help us." (3) There was a 
saymg that wiles are the concern of women, whereas men are of surer aim 
with the spear. For if the prize of victory were [won] by guiles, we would 
have sovereignty over men. (Euripides, fragment 321.) (4) And now I advise 
all younger [men] not to produce children tardily, making delays up to old 
a8e (or until they are old). For [this] (i.e. producing children in old age) is no 
pleasure, and an old man is a hateful thing to (or for) a woman. But [do it] 
as quickly as possible. For rearing [children] is beautiful and a boy sharing 
y°uth with a youthful father is a pleasant [thing]. (Euripides, fragment 
(5) Meletus. This [is what] I say, that not at all do you believe in the 
8°ds. Socrates. You really amaze me in speaking like this, Meletus (lit. ο 
s
m a z i n 8 Meletus, why do you say this?). Do I not even believe then that the 
U n or the moon are gods, as the rest of mankind [do]? Me. [No], by Zeus, 

316 
2 £ 
S 3 
2. Ο 
Φ Ο 
ω 
α 5' 
(Ο 
gentlemen of the jury, since he says that the sun is a stone and the moon 
earth. So. Do you think that you are accusing Anaxagoras, my dear 
Meletus? And do you so despise these men and think that they ere [so] 
illiterate (lit. inexperienced in letters) that they do not know that the books 
of Anaxagoras of Clazomenae are full of such statements? And moreover the 
youth learn these [doctrines], do they, from me, which they can buy for a 
drachma in (lit. from) the orchestra and [then] laugh at Socrates if he claims 
they are his own, especially since they are so absurd? Well, for heaven's sake 
(lit. Ο by Zeus), is this what you think of me (lit. do I seem thus to you)? Do 
I not believe in any god? Me. No indeed, by Zeus, not in the very least. So. 
You are not to be believed, Meletus, and that too, as it seems (lit. you seem) 
to me, [even] by yourself. For this man appears to me, men of Athens, to be 
very violent and unrestrained, and simply to have brought this indictment 
through (or because of) violence and lack of restraint and youthful folly. For 
he seems like a man making trial [of me] [by] composing a riddle: "Will 
Socrates the wise recognize that I am joking and contradicting myself, or 
shall I deceive him and the rest of those who are listening [to me]?" For he 
appears to me to contradict himself in the indictment, as if he were to say," 
Socrates is a wrong-doer [by] not believing in the gods, but by believing in 
the gods." And yet this is the [mark or conduct] of a joker (lit. of [someone] 
joking). (Plato Apology 26c-27a.) 
23.3 
(1) I am the tomb of a ship-wrecked [sailor]; and the one opposite [is the 
tomb] of a farmer; for Hades lies beneath, common to [both] sea and land. 
(2) Here Saon, the [son] of Dico, of Acanthus, slumbers in holy sleep (lit. 
sleeps a holy sleep); do not say that the good die. (3) Philip, his father; laid 
(or buried) here his twelve-year-old son, his great hope, Nicoteles. (4) These 
men, having invested (lit. placed round) their dear native-land with 
imperishable glory, put on the dark cloud of death; but they are not dead 
in death (lit. having died), since from above their valour glorifies them and 
raises them from the house of Hades. (Simonides 121 D.). (5) This 
monument hides Aeschylus, son of Euphorion, the Athenian, who died in 
wheat-bearing Gela; but of his famous valour the grove of Marathon could 
tell, and the long-haired Mede who knew it. (6) Tears I give to you, 
Heliodora, even below through the earth, a remnant of love [sent] to 
Hades, tears sorely wept; and on [your] much-lamented tomb I pour the 
stream of [my] longing, the memorial of [my] affection. Piteously, piteously 
I Meleager lament you, my dear (lit. dear you), even among the dead, an 
empty favour to (or for) Acheron. Alas, where is my flower (lit. shoot or 
sprout) [sorely] missed? Hades snatched [her], snatched [her], and the dust 
marred the flower of her youth (lit. the blooming flower). But I implore 
you, all-nurturing Earth, gently clasp hei; all-lamented (lit. the all-lamented 
[girl]), to your bosom, Ο Mother. (Meleager A.P. vii.476.). 
24.2 
(1) Where a negative is involved, the relevant subsection of 24.1/2 is given 
after the appropriate explanatory term, (i) The man who knows nothing 
(generic (/)) makes no mistakes (statement (a)), (ii) Consider no-one a friend 
(prohibition/negative command (a)) until you examine how he has treated 

his previous friends, (iii) They do everything so as not to be punished 
(infinitive (e)). (iv) Nothing (statement (a)) was done because of the fact 
that the archon was not present (infinitive (e)). (ν) I do not know (statement 
(a)) whether to travel (lit. I am to travel) or not (deliberative question (a)). 
(vi) I am afraid that I do not have (noun clause (d)) sufficient [people] to 
whom I am to give the gold, (vii) Take courage, Cyrus, I shall not hide 
(strong denial (h)) from you [the person] to whom I wish to go (lit. arrive). 
(viii) And they said that they would give back the corpses on condition that 
[they] did not burn (infinitive (e)) the villages, (ix) The deed which is not 
just (generic (/)) does not escape (statement (a)) the notice of the gods, (x) 
What is to prevent them from dying? (verb of preventing is virtually 
negative because the answer nothing is expected (24.1/7)). (xi) He wanted 
to be a friend of (lit. friendly to) those who were most powerful in order 
that, when he did wrong, he might not be punished (purpose clause (b)). 
(xii) If you don't check (conditional clause (b)) your tongue, you will have 
troubles (lit. troubles will be to you), (xiii) You cannot (lit. could not) be 
prosperous if you do not toil (participle used conditionally (/)). (xiv) You 
shall not be hostile to your friends (strong prohibition (g)). (xv) If you say 
what you want (sc. to say), [then] hear in turn what you don't want (sc. to 
hear) (general adjectival clause (c)). (xvi) [We/one] must either eat tortoise 
meat or not eat [at all] (infinitive (e)). (xvii) Can you tell me whether virtue 
can be taught (lit. is a teachable [thing]) or not? (alternative question (i) -
μή is also possible). (xviii) No-one will deny that he knows what is just (lit. 
just things) (negated verb of denying (24.1/7). (xix) He was afraid that he 
would not be able to go out of the country (noun clause (d)). (xx) Do not 
go away until you hear (prohibition/negative command (a)). (2) We must 
worship the gods, benefit our friends, help the city, try to do good to 
Greece, cultivate the land, look after the cattle, [and] learn the arts of war. 
(3) When anyone is brought to (lit. into) a hostile (lit. opposing) trial and 
is about to speak about bloodshed, fear brings the mouth of men to 
consternation and hinders the mind from saying what it wishes. (Euripides, 
fragment 67.) (4) You must beware not to be obviously doing publicly any 
of things which you would privately guard against. (5) All these laws have 
been in existence (lit. made) for a long time now, gentlemen of the jury, and 
no-one ever yet denied that they would be good. (6) Take care not to reveal 
your low birth (lit. lest you may appear being born lowly). (7) So I greeted 
the two of them, since I had not seen them for some time (lit. as having seen 
[them] after a time); and after this I said to Cleinias, "Cleinias, these two 
men, you know, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, are skilled not in 
trivialities (lit. little things) but in important matters. For they know all 
about (lit. the things about) war." They despised me for saying this (lit. 
when I said this I was despised by them); so they both laughed, looking at 
each other, and Euthydemus said, "We do not, Socrates, concern ourselves 
with these things any longer, but deal with them [as] subordinate issues." 
And I said admiringly, "Your business must be a fine one, if such important 
m? t t e r s haPPen to be subordinate for you; in the name of the gods, tell me 
what this [fine] business is." "Virtue," he said, "Socrates, [is what] we 
nk w e are able to deliver as excellently and speedily as is humanly 
Possible." "Zeus," I said,"what a [splendid] affair. Where (lit. from where) 
a 
y°u find this treasure. I was still thinking about you, as I said just now, 
s tor the most part being clever at this, [i.e.] fighting under arms, and this 
[ls w"at] I was saying about you; for when you visited [us] before, I 
Member that this [is what] the pair of you professed." (Plato Euthydemus 
fol]
c-e;) (8) After him (lit. this man) Xenophon said, "And I am of the 
owing opinion (lit. think thus). If it is necessary [for us] to fight, we 
317 
8 φ 
Φ < 
*3 
w _ 
Φ Ω 
• Φ φ 7Γ 

318 
» 5" 
a ? 
(Λ 
_ 
Φ 
Ο 
w δ 
φ 
χ-
ω 
α 
5' 
(Ο 
must make preparations to fight as vigorously as possible; but if we wish to 
cross as easily as possible, I think we should consider how we may receive 
as few wounds as possible and lose as few lives as possible." (9) We must 
consider whether it is right or not (lit. just... or not just) for me to try to 
leave from here without the permission of the Athenians (lit. the Athenians 
not letting [me] go). (10) A. Tell me, do you have a field? B. No, I don't. 
(11) And further if we submit and come into the power of the king, what 
do you think we shall suffer? He cut off the head and hand of even his 
brother by the same mother and [that too] when already dead, and impaled 
them. As for us, who have no protector and [who] made an expedition 
against him with the intention of making him a slave instead of a king and 
of killing him if we could, what do you think we would suffer? Surely he 
would go to any lengths so that, by inflicting the worst outrages on us, he 
might instill in all men fear of ever campaigning against him? But 
everything must be done so that we do not come into his power. (Xenophon 
Anabasis iii. 1.17f.) 
24.3 
Strepsiades. In the name of the gods, what is this (lit. these things)? Tell me. 
Student. This is astronomy. Str. And what's this? St. Geometry. Str. So 
what's it (lit. this thing) useful for? St. To measure out land. Str. [Do you 
mean land] for cleruchies? St. No, [land] as a whole. Str. What you say is 
attractive (lit. you say an attractive [thing]). For the device is democratic (or 
popular) and useful. St. And this, notice, is a map of the whole world. Do 
you see? Here is Athens. Str. What do you mean? I don't believe [you], for 
I cannot (lit. do not) see [any] jurymen sitting [there]. St. [I assure you] that 
this area is truly Attic (or Attica). Str. Come now, who's this man in the 
basket? St. The master. Str. Who's the master? St. Socrates. Str. Ah, [it's] 
Socrates. You there, go [and] call him loudly for me. St. No, you call [him] 
yourself. I don't have the time. Str. Socrates! Dear little Socrates! Socrates. 
Why do you call me, creature of a day? Str. In the first place, tell me, I pray, 
what you are doing. So. I tread the air and my thoughts centre round the 
sun (lit. I think about the sun). Str. Then you're looking down on the gods 
from [your] mat, and (lit. but) not from the earth, if [indeed that's what 
you're doing]. So. [Yes] for I would never have correctly 
discovered 
heavenly phenomena, except by suspending [my] perception and thought. 
(Aristophanes Clouds 200-209, 218-229.) 
25.2 
(1) Again mighty Hector of the gleaming helmet addressed her: "Indeed all 
this is my concern, [my] wife; but I am terribly afraid of the Trojans and the 
Trojan women with their trailing robes, if, like a coward, I shrink away far 
from the fighting. Nor does my spirit [so] order me, since I have learned 
always to be brave and to fight among the foremost [ranks of the] Trojans, 
winning great glory both for my father and for myself. For I know this well 
in my heart and in my soul: there will come (lit. be) a day when holy Ilium 
will be destroyed, and Priam and the people of Priam of the fine ash-spear. 
But [it is] not so much grief for the Trojans hereafter [which] troubles me, 
neither for Hecuba herself nor for lord Priam nor for [my] brothers, who, 
many and brave, may fall in the dust at the hands of the enemy (lit. hostile 

men), as [grie£] for you, when one of the bronze-clad Achaeans will lead 
vou away in tears, taking away [your] day of liberty; and living (lit. being) 
in Argos you will weave a web at the command of another [woman] (i.e. a 
mistress), and carry water from [the spring] Messeis or Hypereia, much 
unwilling, but strong necessity will be upon [you]. And one day a man 
seeing you shedding tears will say: "This is the wife of Hector who was the 
best of the horse-taming Trojans at fighting [at the time] when they (i.e. the 
Greeks) besieged Ilium." Thus one day will someone speak; and for you it 
will be a fresh grief because of the lack of such a husband to ward off the 
day of slavery. But may earth heaped up cover me in death before I hear 
your scream when you are taken away by force (lit. both your scream and 
your being carried off)." (Iliad vi. 440-465.) (2) All night long they sat with 
high thoughts (lit. thinking big) along the embankments of war; and their 
fires blazed in great numbers (lit. many). Just as when in the sky the stars 
are seen conspicuous[ly] around the bright moon, when the air becomes 
windless; and there appear all the lookout-places and the tops of the 
headlands and the glens; and from heaven the boundless air is rent beneath, 
and all the stars are seen, and the shepherd rejoices in his heart. So many 
shone the fires as the Trojans lit [them] in front of Ilium, between the ships 
and the streams of Xanthus. A thousand fires then were blazing in the plain, 
and beside each one sat fifty [men] in the gleam of the blazing fire. And the 
horses, feeding on white barley and wheat, stood beside the chariots and 
waited for fair-throned Dawn. (Iliad viii. 553-565.) (3) Tell me, Muse, of 
the man of many wiles, who wandered far and wide (lit. very much), after 
he had sacked the holy citadel of Troy. He saw the cities of many men and 
came to know [their] minds, and on the sea he suffered many griefs in his 
heart, striving to win his own life and the home-coming of [his] 
companions. But not even so did he save [his] companions, strive as he 
might, for they perished by their own presumptuousness, fools, who 
devoured the cattle of Hyperion the Sun [God]; and he took from them the 
day of [their] homecoming. (Odyssey i.1-9.) (4) From there I was carried 
along for nine days by baneful winds over the sea full of fish; but on the 
tenth [day] we stepped on to the land of the Lotus-Eaters, who feed on 
[that] flowery food. There we set foot on the mainland and drew water, and 
[my] companions quickly took their meal beside the swift ships. But when 
we had partaken of food and drink, then I sent ahead [some of my] 
companions to go and find out what sort of men were living (lit. eating 
food) in [this] land, choosing two men and sending a third with [them] as 
herald. They went off and quickly fell in with the Lotus-Eaters (lit. the 
Lotus-eating men]. Nor did the Lotus-Eaters plot destruction for our 
companions, but gave them [some] lotus to taste. Whoever of them ate the 
honey-sweet fruit of the lotus was no longer willing to report back [to us] 
or return, but wished to remain there with the Lotus-Eaters, feeding on 
lotus, and to forget [his] home-coming. Forcibly I brought them [back] in 
tears to the ships, and I dragged [them] and bound [them] under the 
benches in the hollowed ships. Then I ordered the rest of my trusty 
companions to embark with haste (lit. hurrying) on the swift ships, lest any 
them might somehow eat of the lotus and forget their home-coming. 
I hey went quickly on board and sat down at the benches, and sitting in 
0rder they smote the grey sea with the oars. (Odyssey ix. 82-104.) 
319 
2 % 
S 3 
3.S 
Φ 
ο 


present 
Future 
αγγελλω 
announce 
άγω 
lead 
(έπ-) αίνέω 
praise 
αίρέω 
take; mid. choose 
αϊρω 
raise 
αίοθάνομαι 
perceive 
αΐοχύνω 
dishonour 
ακούω 
hear 
άλίοκομαι 
be captured 
άμαρτάνω 
err 
άμύνω 
wwif off 
άναλίοκω 
spend 
άνοίγνΰμι 
open 
αποκρίνομαι 
answer 
άρχω 
begin, rw/e 
άφικνέομαι 
arrive 
άγγελώ 
άξω 
αινεοομαι 
(αίνέοω) 
αίρήοω 
αρω 
αίοθηςομαι 
αίοχυνώ 
άκοΰοομαι 
άλωοομαι 
άμαρτηοομαι 
άμυνώ 
άνδλωοω 
ανοίξω 
άποκρινοΰμαι 
άρξω 
άφίξομαι 
βαίνω 
βάλλω 
throw 
βλάπτω 
Wf, m/ttre 
βοάω 
shout 
βούλομαι 
wish 
Υαμεω 
γαμώ 
έγημα 
(with man as subject) 
Υαμεομαι 
γαμοϋμαι 
έγημάμην 
(with woman as subject) 
Υελαω 
γελάοομαι 
έγέλαοα 
laugh 
βήοομαι 
βαλω 
βλάψω 
βοήοομαι 
βουλήοομαι 
Aorist 
Perfect 
Perfect 
Aorist 
mid. pass. 
passive 
ήγγειλα 
ήγγελκα 
ήγγελμαι 
ήγγέλθην 
ήγαγον 
ήχα 
ήγμαι 
ήχ&ην 
ήνεεα 
ήνεκα 
ήνημαι 
ήνέθην 
ειλον 
ήρηκα 
ήρημαι 
ήρέθην 
ήρα 
ήρκα 
ήρμαι 
ήρφην 
ήοθόμην 
ήοθημαι 
ήοχΰνα 
ήοχύνθην 
ήκουοα 
άκήκοα 
ήκούοθην 
έδλων 
έδλωκα 
ήμαρτον 
ήμάρτηκα 
ήμάρτημαι 
ήμαρτηθην 
ήμΰνα 
άνήλωεα 
άνήλωκα 
άνηλωμαι 
άνηλώθην 
άνέωξα 
άνέωχα 
άνέωγμαι 
άνεωχθην 
άπεκρίνάμην 
άποκέκριμαι 
ήρξα 
ήργμαι 
ηρχβην 
άφΤκόμην 
άφϊγμαι 
έβην 
βεβηκα 
έβαλον 
βέβληκα 
βεβλημαι 
έβλήθην 
έβλαψα 
βεβλαφα 
βέβλαμμαι 
έβλάφθην 
έβλάβην 
έβόηοα 
321 
βεβούλημαι 
έβουλήθην 
γεγαμηκα 
γεγαμημαι 
έγελάοθην CF 
ω 

Present 
Future 
Aorist 
γίγνομαι 
γενηςομαι 
έγενόμην 
become 
γιγνώοκω 
γνώοομαι 
έγνων 
know 
γράφω 
γράψω 
έγραψα 
write 
δάκνω 
δήξομαι 
έδακον 
bite 
δει 
δεήεει 
έδέηςε 
impers. it is necessary 
δείκνϋμι 
δείξω 
έδειξα 
show 
δέομαι 
δεήοομαι 
need, ask 
δέχομαι 
δέξομαι 
έδεξάμην 
receive, aw/art 
δέω (A) 
δεήοω 
έδέηοα 
want, /acfc 
δέω (Β) 
δήοω 
έδηοα 
bind 
διαλέγομαι 
διαλέξομαι 
converse 
διδάοκω 
διδάξω 
έδίδαξα 
teach 
δίδωμι 
δώοω 
έδωκα 
give 
έδιωξα 
διώκω 
διώξομαι 
έδιωξα 
pursue 
δοκέω 
δόξω 
έδοξα 
seem, think 
δύναμαι 
δυνηοομαι 
be able, caw 
έάω 
έδοω 
εΐδοα 
a//ow/, let alone 
έγειρω 
εγερώ 
ήγειρα 
arouse 
έθέλω 
έθελήοω 
ήθέληοα 
wish, fee willing 
ε'ίργω 
εΐρξω 
ειρξα 
imprison, prevent 
έλαύνω 
έλώ (= αω) 
ήλαοα 
drive 
έλέγχω 
έλέγξω 
ήλεγξα 
examine, confute 
έλκω 
έλξω 
ε'ίλκυοα 
Jrag, draw; 
έπίοταμαι 
έπιοτηοομαι 
understand 
έπομαι 
έψομαι 
έοπόμην 
follow 
Perfect 
Perfect 
mid. pass. 
Aorist 
passive 
γέγονα 
γεγένημαι 
έγνωκα 
έγνωομαι 
έγνώοθην 
γέγραφα 
γέγραμμαι 
έγράφην 
δέδηγμαι 
έδηχθην 
δέδειχα 
δέδειγμαι 
έδείχθην 
δεδέημαι 
έδεήβην 
δέδεγμαι 
έδέχθην 
δέδεκα 
δέδεμαι 
έδέθην 
διείλεγμαι 
διελέχθην 
δεδίδαχα 
δεδίδαγμαι 
έδιδάχθην 
δέδωκα 
δέδομαι 
έδόθην 
δεδίωχα 
δέδογμαι 
έδιώχ&ην 
δεδύνημαι 
έδυνηθην 
εΐδκα 
ειδμαι 
είδθην 
έγρήγορα (intr.) 
I am awake 
ήθέληκα 
ειργμαι 
εϊρχθην 
έλήλακα 
έλήλαμαι 
ήλάθην 
έλήλεγμαι 
ήλέγχθην 
εϊλκυκα 
είλκυςμαι 
είλκύοθην 
ήπιοτηθην 

present 
Future 
Aorist 
εργάζομαι 
έργάοομαι 
ήργαοάμην 
work 
έρχομαι 
ειμι 
ήλθον 
come, go 
ερωτάω 
έρωτηςω 
(ήρώτηοα) 
ask a question έρηοομαι 
ήρόμην 
έοθίω 
έδομαι 
έφαγον 
eat 
εύρίοκω 
εύρήοω 
ηύρον 
find 
έχω 
έξω 
έοχον 
have 
οχήςω 
ζάω 
ζήοω/ζήοομαι 
live 
βιώοομαι 
ήδομαι 
ήοθηοομαι 
be pleased 
θάπτω 
θάψω 
bury 
θαυμάζω 
θαυμάοομαι 
wonder 
(άπο-)θνηοκω θανούμαι 
die 
θύω 
θύοω 
sacrifice 
Τημι 
ήοω 
send 
ίοτημι 
ςτηοω 
place, make stand 
καίω 
καύοω 
burn 
καλέω 
καλώ 
call 
κελεύω 
κελεύοω 
order, bid 
κλαίω 
κλαύοομαι 
weep 
κλέπτω 
κλέψω 
steal 
κομίζω 
κομιώ 
convey,, bring 
κρίνω 
κρινώ 
judge 
κτάομαι 
κτηοομαι 
acquire 
(άπο-)κτείνω 
κτενώ 
kill 
Perfect 
Perfect 
Aorist 
mid. pass. 
passive 
ε'ίργαομαι 
ήργάοθην 
έλήλυθα 
ήρώτηκα 
ήρώτημαι 
ήρωτη&ην 
έδήδοκα 
έδήδεςμαι 
ηύρηκα 
ηϋρημαι 
ηύρέθην 
έοχηκα 
έοχημαι 
βεβίωκα 
ήοθην 
τέθαμμαι 
έτάφην 
τεθαύμακα 
τεθαύμαομαι έθαυμάοθην 
τεθνηκα 
τεθυκα 
τεθυμαι 
έτύθην 
είκα 
είμαι 
ε'ίθην 
έετηκα (intr.) έοταμαι 
έοτάθην 
κέκαυκα 
κέκαυμαι 
έκαύθην 
κέκληκα 
κέκλημαι 
έκλήθην 
κεκέλευκα 
κεκέλευομαι έκελεύοθην 
κέκλαυμαι 
κέκλοφα 
κέκλεμμαι 
έκλάπην 
κεκόμικα 
κεκόμιομαι 
έκομίοθην 
κέκρικα 
κέκριμαι 
έκρίθην 
κέκτημαι 
έκτηθην 
possess 
έκτονα 
έβίων 
έθαψα 
έθαύμαοα 
έθανον 
έθ13οα 
ήκα 
έοτηοα (tr.) 
έοτην (intr.) 
έκαυοα 
έκάλεςα 
έκέλευοα 
έκλαυοα 
έκλεψα 
έκόμιοα 
έκρΤνα 
έκτηςάμην 
έκτεινα 

Present 
Future 
Aorist 
Perfect 
Perfect 
Aorist 
mid. pass. 
passive 
λαγχάνω 
λήξομαι 
έλαχον 
εΐληχα 
εΐληγμαι 
έλήχθην 
obtain by lot 
λαμβάνω 
λήψομαι 
έλαβον 
εΐληφα 
εΐλημμαι 
έλήφθην 
take 
λανθάνω 
λήοω 
έλαθον 
λέληθα 
escape the notice of, lie hidden 
(έπι-) 
λανθάνομαι 
λήοομαι 
έλαθόμην 
λέληομαι 
forget 
λέγω (A) 
λέξω 
έλεξα 
λέλεγμαι 
έλέχθην 
say 
έρώ 
ειπον 
είρηκα 
εΐρημαι 
έρρήθην 
λέγω (Β) 
λέξω 
έλεξα 
εΐλοχα 
ε'ίλεγμαι 
έλέγην 
pick up, gather 
(λέλεγμαι) 
λείπω 
λείψω 
έλιπον 
λέλοιπα 
λέλειμμαι 
έλείφθην 
leave 
μανθάνω 
μαθηοομαι 
έμαθον 
μεμάβηκα 
learn 
μάχομαι 
μαχοϋμαι 
έμαχεοάμην 
μεμάχημαι 
fight 
μαχήοομαι 
μέλει 
μελήοει 
έμέληοε 
μεμέληκε 
impers. it is a care 
(επι-) 
μελέομαι 
μελήοομαι 
μεμέλημαι 
έμελήθην 
care for 
μέλλω 
μελλήοω 
έμέλληςα 
intend 
μένω 
μενώ 
έμεινα 
μεμένηκα 
remain 
(άνα-) 
έμνηοθην 
μιμνηςκω 
μνηςω 
έμνηοα 
μέμνημαι 
έμνηοθην 
remind 
remember 
remembered 
νέω 
νεύοομαι 
ένευοα 
νένευκα 
swim 
νομίζω 
νομιώ 
ένόμιοα 
νενόμικα 
νενόμιομαι 
ένομίοθην 
think 
οιδα 
εϊοομαι 
ήδη (19.1/3) 
know 
οίομαι 
οίήοομαι 
ώήθην 
(also οιμαι) think 
(άπ-) όλλϋμι 
όλώ 
ώλεεα 
όλωλεκα (tr.) 
destroy, lose 
όλωλα (intr. I am ruined ) 
(άπ-) όλλυμαι όλοΰμαι 
ώλόμην 
be lost, perish 
ώμό(ο)θην 
όμνϋμι 
όμοΰμαι 
ώμοοα 
όμώμοκα 
όμώμο(ε)μαι 
ώμό(ο)θην 
swear 
όράω 
όψομαι 
ειδον 
έόρδκα 
έώρδμαι 
ώφ&ην 
see 
έώρδκα 
ώμμαι 
ώργίςθην 
οργίζομαι 
όργιούμαι 
ώργιομαι 
ώργίςθην 
become angry 

Present 
οφείλω 
owe 
πάοχω 
suffer 
πείθω 
persuade 
πέμπω 
send 
πίμπλημι 
fill 
πίνω 
drink 
πίπτω 
fall 
πλέω 
sail 
πράττω 
do 
πυνθάνομαι 
ascertain 
πωλέω 
sell 
ρήγνϋμι 
break 
ρίπτω 
throw 
οκεδάννΰμι 
scatter 
οπείρω 
sow 
οτέλλω 
send, equip 
οφάλλω 
trip up 
οωζω 
save 
Future 
όφειλήοω 
πείοομαι 
πείοω 
πέμψω 
πλήοω 
πίομαι 
πεοούμαι 
πλεΰοομαι 
πράξω 
πεύοομαι 
άποδώεομαι 
ρήξω 
ρίψω 
οκεδώ (= άω) 
οπερώ 
οτελώ 
οφαλώ 
εώεω 
Aorist 
ώφείληοα 
ωφελον (21, 
έπαθον 
έπειοα 
έπεμψα 
έπληοα 
έπιον 
έπεοον 
έπλευοα 
έπρδξα 
έπυθόμην 
άπεδόμην 
έρρηξα 
έρρίψα 
έοκέδαοα 
έεπειρα 
έοτειλα 
έοφηλα 
1/1) 
Perfect 
ώφείληκα 
) 
πέπονθα 
Perfect 
mid. pass. 
πέπεικα (tr.) 
πέπειομαι 
πέποιθα (intr. trust) 
πέπομφα 
πέπεμμαι 
πεπληκα 
πέπωκα 
πέπτωκα 
πέπληομαι 
πέπομαι 
πέπλευκα 
πέπλευομαι 
πέπρδχα (tr.) πέπρδγμαι 
πέπρδγα (intr. have fared ) 
πέπυομαι 
πεπρδκα 
έρρωγα (intr. am broken ) 
έρρίφα 
έρρΤμμαι 
εοπαρκα 
έοταλκα 
Aorist 
passive 
έπείοθην 
έπέμφθην 
έπλήοθην 
έπόθην 
έπρδχθην 
πέπρδμαι 
έπρδθην 
έοκέδαομαι 
έοπαρμαι 
έοταλμαι 
έεφαλμαι 
ςέοωομαι 
ερραγην 
έρρίφθην 
έοκεδάοθην 
έοπάρην 
έετάλην 
έοφάλην 
έοώθην 
τελέω 
finish 
τελώ 
έτέλεοα 
τετέλεκα 
τετέλεομαι 
έτελέοθην 
τέμνω 
cut 
τεμώ 
έτεμον 
τέτμηκα 
τέτμημαι 
έτμήθην 
τιθημ! 
Place, put 
θηοω 
έθηκα 
τέθηκα 
τέθειμαι 
έτέθην 
^κτω 
. „ 
„ 
beget 
τεςομαι 
ετεκον 
τέτοκα 
ητΡώςκω 
wound 
τρώςω 
έτρωοα 
τέτρωμαι 
έτρώθην 
τΡεπω 
τρέψω 
τέτροφα 
turn 
τρέψω 
έτρεψα 
τέτροφα 
τέτραμμαι 
έτράπην 
325 
Ό 
2. 
3 
Ο 
Ι 
•ο 
ω 
& 
ο 
φ 
I 
ετρεφθην 

326 
Ό 
3. 3 Ο 
Ι 
Ό ω 
* 
a 
3 
3-<Λ 
Present 
Future 
Aorist 
Perfect 
Perfect 
Aorist 
mid. pass. 
passive 
τρέφω 
θρέψω 
έθρεψα 
τέτροφα 
τέθραμμαι 
έτραφην 
nourish 
έθρέφθην 
τρέχω 
δραμούμαι 
έδραμον 
δεδράμηκα 
τυγχάνω 
τεύξομαι 
έτυχον 
τετύχηκα 
happen 
τύπτω 
τυπτηοω 
έτύπτηοα 
strike 
ύπιοχνέομαι 
ύποοχήοομαι ΰπεοχόμην 
ύπέοχημαι 
promise 
φαίνω 
φανώ 
έφηνα 
πέφαγκα 
πέφαεμαι 
έφάνθην 
show 
(tr. I have 
(/ was shown 
shown ) 
[to be]) 
πέφηνα 
έφάνην 
(intr. I have 
(intr. I 
φέρω 
appeared) 
appeared) 
φέρω 
OICO) 
ήνεγκον 
ένηνοχα 
ένηνεγμαι 
ήνέχθην 
bring, carry 
φεύξομαι 
πέφευγα 
φεύγω 
φεύξομαι 
έφυγον 
πέφευγα 
flee 
φηοω 
φημί 
φηοω 
έφηοα 
say 
(έφην impf.) 
φθάνω 
φθηοομαι 
έφθαεα 
anticipate 
έφθην (like έοτην) 
έφθάρην 
(δια-)φθείρω 
φθερώ 
έφθειρα 
έφθαρκα 
έφθαρμαι 
έφθάρην 
destroy, corrupt 
πεφόβημαι 
έφοβήθην 
φοβεομαι 
φοβηοομαι 
πεφόβημαι 
έφοβήθην 
fear 
φύεω 
φύω 
φύεω 
έφΰοα (tr.) 
πεφΰκα (intr. am by nature, am ) 
produce 
έφϋν (intr. grew, was ) 
χαίρω 
χαιρήοω 
κεχάρηκα 
έχάρην 
rejoice 
έχρήοθην 
χράομαι 
χρήοομαι 
έχρηςάμην 
κέχρημαι 
έχρήοθην 
use 
ΧΡΆ 
χρήοται 
χρήν, έχρήν (both impf.) 
impers. it is necessary 
(έπριάμην) 
έωνηθην 
ώνεομαι 
ωνηεομαι 
(έπριάμην) 
έώνημαι 
έωνηθην 

In using the vocabulary the following should be noted: 
(a) In addition to the abbreviations explained on pp.xiif the sign f is 
used: 
(i) before a simple verb whose principal parts are given on 
pp.32 Iff. 
(ii) after a compound verb whose simple form is included in the 
same list. 
(b) The feminine and neuter forms of adjectives and the genitive of 
nouns are nearly always abbreviated and will not necessarily have 
the same accent as the form given in full, e.g. the genitive of apuccoc 
is apuccou, but these are listed below as aPuccoc, -ου ; in these cases 
the accent of the abbreviated form must be deduced from the rules 
for accentuation given in Appendix 8. 
(c) The form of the article which accompanies each noun indicates its 
gender. 
άβατος, -ov 
impassable 
apioc, -ov 
unlivable, 
unsupportable 
appotoc, -ov without men, 
># deserted by men 
apuccoc, -ου, ή 
abyss 
αγαγ- aor. stem of άγω 
αγαθός -η, -όν good, noble, 
brave 
άγαθά λέγω speak well of 
(+acc., 22.1/2/iii)) 
αγαθά ποιέω do good to 
(tacc., 22.1/2^(ii)) 
Αγαθών, —covoc, ο 
Agathon 
, (,tragic poet) 
αγαλλομαι %lory, exult in (+dat.) 
?γαμαι (aor. ηγάςθην) 
admire 
Αγαμέμνων, -ovoc, ό 
Agamemnon (Greek 
„ commander at Troy) 
αγ°ν (adv.) 
too much, 
, excessively 
^ανακτέω 
be annoyed 
αΎαπαω love 
Ιάγγέλλω 
report, announce 
άγγελος, -ου, ο 
messenger 
άγγος, -ouc, το vessel, urn 
TAyic, -i6oc, ό Agis (IGng of 
Sparta) 
άγκϋρα, HXc, ή 
anchor 
άγνοέω not to know, fail to 
understand 
άγνοια,-Oc, η 
ignorance 
άγνόΰ, -η, -όν 
chaste 
αγορά, -ac, ή place of assembly, 
market-place; agora 
αγοράζω 
buy in the market 
αγορεύω 
speak (in assembly); 
proclaim 
άγριος, -δ, -ov fierce, cruel 
άγροικος, -ov 
from the country, 
rustic, boorish 
αγρός, -οΰ, ό field, country, 
farm 
άγρυπνέω 
lie awake, pass 
sleepless nights 
+άγω 
lead, bring 
άγω καί φέρω 
plunder 

άγών, -CDVOC ό 
contest, trial, 
competition, exploit 
αδαμάντινος -ov adamantine, of 
steel 
αδελφή, -ης ή 
sister 
αδελφιδή, -ης ή niece 
αδελφός -ού, ό 
brother 
άδεώο (adv.) 
fearlessly 
άδηλος -ov 
unclear 
άδικέω 
be unjust, commit a 
crime; wrong, injure (+acc.) 
αδίκημα, -ατος τό crime, wrong 
αδικία, -<Zc, ή injustice, wrong-
doing 
άδικος -ov unjust, dishonest 
άδίκωο (adv.) 
unjustly 
"Αδμητος -ου, ό Admetus (king 
of Pherae, husband of Alcestis) 
άδολεοχηο, -ου, ό idle talker, 
babbler; (as. adj.) garrulous 
άδύνατοο -ov 
impossible; 
incapable 
φδω sing 
αεί (adv.) 
always, continually; 
in succession 
αείδω = ήδω 
άεικής -ec 
shameful 
άείμνηοτοο, -ov 
not to be 
forgotten 
#άεκαζόμενος -η, -ov 
unwilling(ly) 
#άεροβατεω 
tread the air 
αετός -ού, ό 
eagle 
αηδών, - ό ν ο ς ή 
nightingale 
αήρ, - έ ρ ο ς ό 
air 
αθάνατος -ov 
immortal 
'Αθηνά, -ac, ή 
Athena 
Άθήναζε (adv.) to 
Athens 
'Αθήναι, -ων, αί 
Athens 
'Αθηναίος -G, -ov 
Athenian 
Άθηνηθεν (adv.) 
from Athens 
'Αθήνηα(ν) (adv.) 
at 
Athens 
άθλητης -ού, ό 
athlete 
άθλιος -δ, -ov 
urretched, 
miserable 
άθλον, -ου, τό 
prize 
άθλος -ου, ό 
contest; ordeal 
αθροίζω 
gather together (tr.) 
αθρόος -G, -ov 
all together, all 
at once, in a body 
άθϋμεω be despondent 
#αί = εί 
#αίάζω 
bewail, lament 
#αΐαι 
(exclamation) alas! 
Αίγινα, -ης ή Aegina (island in 
the Saronic Gulf near Athens) 
Αιγινήτης -ου, ό man of Aegina 
Αιγύπτιος -G, -ov 
Egyptian 
Αίγυπτος -ου, ή 
Egypt 
αίδέομαι 
respect; feel pity for; 
stand in awe of, fear 
"Αιδης -ου (also # Άΐδηΰ), ό 
Hades (god of the underworld) 
eic "Αιδου to the house of 
Hades, to 
the underworld (23.1/1 a) 
αιδώς -ους ή sense of shame, 
modesty, respect (13.1/l6(i)) 
#αίεί = αεί 
#αίέν = αεί 
αίθήρ, -ερος ό 
upper air, sky 
α'ίθομαι 
burn, blaze 
αίκίσ, -Oc, ή suffering, misery 
αίκίζομαι 
maltreat 
αίμα, -awe, τό 
blood; bloodshed, 
murder 
Αίμων, -ωμος ό 
Haemon (son of 
Creon) 
|αίνέω 
praise 
αίνιγμα, ^-ατος τό 
riddle 
αίνικτηρίωο (adv.) 
riddlingly, in 
riddling fashion 
αίνίττομαι 
speak in riddles 
#aivoc, -ου, ό 
tale, story 
αίνώο (adv.) 
terribly 
αϊξ, αίγός ό/ή 
goat 
#αίπυμήτης -ου (adj.) 
with high 
thoughts, lofty-minded 
αίρέομαι 
choose, elect 
|αίρέω 
take, capture; convict 
v (18.1/4) 
|αϊρω 
lift, raise up; set sail; exalt 
ίαίΰθάνομαι 
perceive, notice, 
realize (+gen. or acc.,13.1/2tf(iii)) 
Αίοχίνης -ου, ό 
Aeschines 
(Athenian orator) 
aic%poc, -ά, -όν 
ugly (of people); 
base, shameful, disgraceful 
(compar. aic^Tcov, supl. 
aic^icTOc) 
Αίςχυλος -ου, ό 
Aeschylus 
(tragic poet) 
αίοχϋνη, -ης ή shame, disgrace 
αίοχύνομαι 
be ashamed 
(15.1 /2c); feel shame before 
taic^tfvco dishonour, disgrace 
αίτεω 
ask (for) (+double acc., 
22A/2f(ii)); ask alms of (+acc.) 
αιτία, -Oc, ή reason, cause; 
responsibility, blame; charge, 
accusation; fault 
αίτιάομαι 
accuse 

a'inoc, -a, -ov 
responsible (for), 
guilty (of) (+gen.) 
#αιψα (adv.) 
quickly, forthwith 
αιών, -ωvoc, ό 
life, lifetime; age 
Άκαδήμεια, -ac, ή 
the Academy 
(park and gymnasium in Athens) 
Άκάνθιος, -α, -ov 
of Acanthus 
(city in Macedonia) 
aKaxacK£\)acxoc, -ov 
unformed 
άκηκοα perf. ind. of ακούω 
ακίνητος, -ov 
motionless, 
immovable 
#άκμαιος, -a, -ov 
in full bloom, at 
the prime 
ακμή, -fjc, ή 
prime, zenith 
άκολαάσ, -ac, ή lack of restraint 
άκόλαςχος, -ov 
undisciplined, 
unrestrained, licentious 
άκολουθέω follow, accompany 
(+dat.) 
ακόλουθος, -ου, ό 
servant, slave 
ακολούθως (adv.) 
in accordance 
with (+dat.) 
ακονάω 
sharpen 
δκούςιος, -ov against one's will, 
involuntary 
Ιάκούω 
hear, listen (to) (+gen. of 
person, gen. or acc. of 
thing, 13.l/2tf(iii)); be spoken of 
f (17.1/5) 
άκρΤβως (adv.) 
accurately, 
exactly, carefully 
άκρον, -ου, τό peak, summit 
ακρόπολις, -εως, ή 
acropolis, 
citadel 
άκροΰ, -α, -ov 
high; top of 
(18.1/6) 
Άκταίων, -«voc, ό 
Actaeon 
, (mythological character) 
ακτη, ^ c , ή shore, coast 
Οκων, δκουςα, άκον 
unwillingly) 
αλγέω feel pain, be in pain; 
v grieve; suffer 
άλγος, -ους, τό 
grief, pain, 
, suffering 
ρλγϋνω grieve, distress (+acc.) 
Αλέξανδρος, -ου, ό 
Alexander 
, (the Great, of Macedon) 
αλήθεια, -Gc, ή 
truth 
αληθεύω tell the truth 
αληθής, -ες 
true 
, χά άληθη (τάληθη) 
the truth 
αληθινώς (adv.) 
truly, really 
αληθώς (adv.) 
truly, really 
®c αληθώς 
in very truth 
'Αλικαρναςςεύς, -έως, ό man 
from Halicarnassus 
|άλιςκομαι 
be caught; be 
convicted (18.1/4) 
αλκή, -ης, ή valour, bravery 
"Αλκηςτις, -i6oc, ή Alcestis (wife 
of Admetus) 
'Αλκιβιάδης, -ου, ό 
Alcibiades 
(Athenian general and 
statesman) 
άλκιμος, -ov 
brave 
άλλά (conj.) 
but; well, now 
άλλάχτω change 
άλλήλους, -ac, -<x (reciprocal 
pron.) 
each other, one another 
(9.1/4b) 
άλλοθι (adv.) 
elsewhere 
άλλομαι (aor. ήλάμην) 
leap 
άλλος, -η, -ο (9.1/3) 
other, the 
rest of; as well, besides (7.2.12 /. 
11) 
άλλοΰ . . . άλλον 
one . . . 
another 
(cf. note on 5.2.5(viii)) 
άλλοτε (adv.) 
at other times 
αλλότριος, -α, -ov 
someone 
else's; alien 
άλλως (adv.) 
otherwise; in vain 
άλλως τε καί 
especially 
άλμη, -ης, ή sea-water, brine; sea 
άλογος, -ov speechless; irrational 
aXct άλόο, ή sea 
αλςος, -ους, τό 
grove 
άλυςκάζω shun, shrink away 
άλφιτα, -ων, τά 
barley-groats; 
daily-bread 
αλωπεκή, -ης, ή 
fox-skin 
άλωπηξ, -εκος, ή 
fox 
ctoxoctc, -εως, ή 
capture 
άμα (adv.) 
at the same time; 
(prep.+dat.) at the same time as, 
together with 
άμα μεν ... άμα δέ 
partly ... 
partly 
άμα ηλίω άνέχοντι 
at sunrise 
άμα (τη) ήμερςι 
at dawn 
αμαθής, -ες 
ignorant 
άμαθία, -ac, ή 
ignorance, 
stupidity 
άμαξα, -^c, ή 
wagon 
άμαρτ- aor. 
stem of άμαρτάνω 
άμαρτάνω err; do wrong; make a 
mistake; (+gen.,13.1/2<*(iv)) 
miss, fail to achieve 
άμαρτία, -ac, ή fault, wrong, sin 

αμείβω change, alter 
άμείνων, -ov 
better (compar. of 
αγαθός) 
άμηχανέω be at a loss/helpless 
άμίς, -ίδος, ή 
chamber-pot 
άμμος, -ου, ή 
sand 
|άμϋνω 
keep I ward off\ (acc. of 
person kept off and dat. of 
person defended); in mid., 
defend oneself against (+acc.) 
'Αμυρταιος, -ου, ό 
Amyrtaeus 
άμφί (prep.+acc.) 
about, around 
#άμφίαλος, -ov 
sea-girt 
άμφιβάλλομαι! 
throw around, 
put on 
άμφιδέα, -tfc, ή bracelet, anklet 
#άμφψάχομαι| 
besiege 
άμφοτερος, -G, -ov 
both 
άμφοτερωθεν (adv.) 
from/on both 
sides 
άμ<|>ω, -οιν, τώ (dual) 
both 
άμώμητος, -ov 
blameless 
άν 
untranslatable particle: in a 
main clause (+ind. or opt.) with 
a potential/conditional sense 
(19.1/2,18.1/5); in a 
subordinate clause (+subj.) with 
an indef. sense (14.1/4c(iii)) 
#ν = έάν 
άνά (prep.+acc.) 
up, up along; 
throughout, over 
αναβαίνω! go up; come up; 
mount 
αναβιβάζω make go up 
άναβοάω| 
call upon 
αναβολή, -ης, ή 
putting o f f , 
delaying 
άναγιγνώςκω| 
read, read aloud 
αναγκάζω force, compel 
αναγκαίος, -G, -ov 
necessary, 
constraining 
άνάγκη, -ης, ή 
necessity, 
compulsion, force 
άνάγκη έςτί 
it is necessary 
(+dat. and inf.) 
άνάγω| 
bring up, raise; (mid.) set 
sail, put out to sea 
άναδίδωμι| 
give forth, send up 
άναζητεω 
investigate 
άνάθεμα, -ατος, τό 
anything 
dedicated (especially to evil); an 
accursed thing 
ανάθημα, -ατος, τό 
dedication 
άναίδεια, -Gc, ή 
shamelessness 
#άναιμόςαρκος, -ov 
with bloodless 
flesh 
άναιρέω| 
pick up; give a 
response (of an oracle) 
άναίςθητος, -ov without feeling, 
stupid 
αναίτιος,-ov 
innocent 
άναλαμβάνω| 
take up, take with 
one 
Ιάνσλίςκω 
spend 
άνάλΰςις, -εως, ή 
loosening, 
releasing; resolution (of a 
problem) 
άνάλωτος, -ov 
not able to be 
captured, impregnable 
αναμένω! wait, stay, wait for 
(+acc.) 
άναμετρεομαι 
measure carefully 
άναμιμνήΰκω| 
remind; (pass.) 
recall to mind, remember 
#άναξ, -ακτος, ό 
lord, king 
Άναξαγόρδς, -ου, ό 
Anaxagoras 
(philosopher of Clazomenae in 
Asia Minor) 
Άναξιμενης, -ους, ό 
Anaximenes 
(early philospher) 
άνάξιος, -ov 
unworthy 
άναπτυςςω 
unfold, disclose 
άναςπάω (aor. -εςπαςα) 
haul up; 
tear up, pull down 
άνάςςω 
rule over (+gen., 
13.1/2a(i)) 
#άναςταλύζω weep, sob 
άναςταυρόω 
impale 
άνατίθημι! 
dedicate, make a 
declication 
άναφερωΙ 
bring back, refer 
άναχωρέω 
withdraw, retreat, 
retire 
άνδρ- stem of άνήρ 
άνδραποδίζω 
enslave 
άνδράποδον, -ου, τό 
captive; 
slave 
άνδρείσ, -Gc, ή 
manliness, 
courage 
άνδρειος, -p., -ov 
manly, brave 
άνδριάς, -άντος, ό 
statue 
άνεμος, -ου, ό 
wind 
άνεξέταςτος, -ov 
without enquiry 
or investigation 
άνερ - = άνδρ -
άνερωτάω| 
ask questions 
άνευ (prep.+gen.) 
without 
άνεχοΐ 
hold up, lift up; intr. rise 
tP . . . . 
αμα ηλιω ανεχοντι 
at sunrise 
άνήρ, άνδρός, ό 
man, husband 
άνθινος, -η, -ov 
flowery 

άνθίστημι! (mid. and intr. tenses 
of act.) 
withstand, resist, 
oppose (+dat.) 
av0oc, -ους, τό flower, bloom; 
glory 
άνθρώπινος,-η,-ov 
human 
άνθρωπος, -ου, ό/ή human being, 
person; man; fellow 
#v0powioc crasis for ό άνθρωποΰ 
άνιάω distress, vex 
άνίδρωτος, -ov without raising a 
sweat 
άνίςτημι! 
raise up; restore; cause 
to migrate, expel, uproot; (mid. 
and intr. tenses of act.) rise up, 
stand up; migrate, go away 
(19.1/1) 
άνιςτορέω make enquiry about, 
ask about, (+double acc.) 
ανόητος -ov 
foolish 
|άνοίγνϋμι 
open 
άνοικοδομεω 
build up; rebuild 
άνόμοιος, -ov (also -a, -ov) 
unlike, dissimilar (+dat.) 
άνταγορεύω (aor. άντεΐπον, 18.1/4 
note 2) speak against, deny 
ανταγωνίζομαι 
struggle against, 
vie with (+dat.) 
άντακούω hear in turn 
'Ανταλκίδας, -ου, ό 
Antalcidas 
(Spartan general) 
άντειπον aor. of άνταγορεύω 
άντεχω! hold out, withstand 
αντί (prep.+gen.) 
instead of, in 
return for 
αντιβολέω 
entreat, beseech 
αντιγράφω 
write in reply 
αντιδίδωμι! give in return 
αντίθεας, -εως, ή 
opposition, 
antithesis 
αντιλέγω! argue against, oppose 
ρντίον (adv.) 
opposite 
'Αντίοχος, -ου, ό 
Antiochus 
Αντιςθένης, -ους, ό 
Antisthenes 
, (philosopher) 
ανυποδηςίσ, -Oc, ή 
going 
, barefoot 
ανυποδητος, -ov without shoes 
ανω (adv.) 
above, up above 
#ανωγα (perf. with pres. sense, 
, 19.1/3a) 
command, order 
ανωφελής, -ες 
useless 
αξιόπιςτος, -ov worthy of credit, 
„ trustworthy 
^ o c , -a, -ov 
worthy (of), 
deserving (+gen.), worthwhile 
άξιόω think worthy of 
αορΟτος, -ov unseen, invisible 
απαγγέλλω! 
announce, report 
απαγορεύω forbid (18.1/4 note 2) 
άπάγχομαι 
hang oneself 
άπαγχονίζω 
hang by a noose 
απάγω! lead/take away 
απαθής, -ες 
not suffering 
άπαίρω! sail away, depart 
απαλλαγή, -ης, ή 
deliverance 
απαλύνω make tender!delicate 
απάνθρωπος, -ov far from men, 
desolate 
άπανίςτημι! 
withdraw 
απαντάω go to meet, meet 
(+dat.,13.1/2fc(iii)) 
άπαξ (adv.) 
once only, once 
απαραίτητος -ov 
unmoved by 
prayer, inexorable 
άπαρνέομαι 
deny 
άπας, άπδςα, άπαν 
all, the whole 
, of. 
απαταω 
deceive 
απάτη, -ης, ή 
deceit 
άπέθανον aor. of άποθνήςκω 
άπεικάζω 
liken, compare 
άπειλεω 
threaten (+dat, 13.1/2fe(i)) 
άπειμι 
be absent 
άπείργω| 
hinder, prevent 
άτιειρια, -ας, ή 
inexperience 
άπειρος, -ov 
ignorant of, 
inexperienced in (+gen.) 
άπείρως έχω 
be without 
experience 
άτιενθής, -ες 
free from grief/woe 
ατιεριςκέπτως (adv.) 
incautiously 
απέρχομαι! go away, depart 
άπεχω! 
be distant from (+gen.); 
(mid.) keep one's hands o f f , 
keep away from (+gen.) 
άπιςτεω 
distrust 
άτηςτία, -ας, ή 
faithlessness 
άπιςτος, -ov 
incredible; 
untrustworthy, not to be 
believed; mistrustful 
άπίςτως έχω 
be mistrustful 
άπλετος, -ov 
boundless, immense 
απλούς, -η, -ούν simple (6.1/2) 
άπό (prep.+gen.) 
from, away 
from 
αποβαίνω! 
land 
άποβάλλω! throw away, lose 
άποδημία, -ac, ή 
being abroad or 
away from one's country 
άποδιδράςκω (fut. -δράςομαι aor. 
-έδρΟν) 
run away, escape, flee 

332 
< Ο 
Ο 
ω 
σ c 
ω 
άποδίδωμι! give back, return, 
repay; (mid.) sell 
άποθαν- aor. stem of άποθνηςκω 
άποθνηςκω! 
die, be killed 
(17.1/5; for the perfect see 
19.1/3*) 
άποικος, -ου, ό settler, colonist 
!άποκρ!νομαι 
answer 
άπόκριςις, -εως, ή answer, reply 
αποκρύπτω hide from sight; 
(mid.) conceal for one's own 
purposes 
αποκτείνω! 
kill 
άποκωλύω hinder from 
άπολέγομαι 
pick out 
άπολες- aor.stem of άπόλλϋμι 
άπόλλϋμι! kill, ruin, destroy, 
lose (20.1/1 note 2) 
άπωλόμην 
I was killed 
άπόλωλα 
I am lost/dead/ruined 
'Απόλλων, -covoc, ό Apollo (acc. 
either -ova or -ω) 
άπολογέομαι 
defend oneself, 
speak in one's defence; plead in 
one's defence (+acc.) 
άπολογίδ, -flc, ή speech in one's 
defence 
απολύω free, release 
άπομΤμέομαι 
imitate, copy 
άποπίπτω! fall overboard 
<χποπλεω| sail away 
άποπνίγομαι 
choke, suffocate, be 
drowned 
άπορέω be at a loss, be in 
difficulty 
απορία, -ac, ή 
lack of provisions, 
want; perplexity, difficulty 
άποςτατεω stand aloof from (+gen.) 
άποςτέλλω! 
send, send away 
άποςτερέω deprive of, rob, 
defraud, refuse payment of 
άποςτροφη, -ης, ή turning away 
from, escape 
άπότακτος, -ov set apart for 
special use 
άποτειχίζω 
wall off 
άποτέμνω! 
cut off 
άποτίθημι! put away, bury; 
(mid.) lay aside 
άποτρέχω! 
run away, run off 
αποτυγχάνω! fail to obtain 
#άπούρας (epic aor. pple. of 
άπαυραω) 
having taken away 
άποφαίνωί 
reveal, show 
αποφέρω! carry away 
αποφεύγω! flee, run off; be 
acquitted 
άποχωρέω go away, depart 
άποχώρηας -εως, ή 
privy, public 
toilet 
άπραγμόνως (adv.) 
without trouble 
άπράγμων, -ονος 
free from 
business, not meddling in public 
affairs 
άπτω 
fasten, fix; light (a lamp); 
(mid.) touch (+gen.) 
άπωθέω (aor. άπέωςα) 
push away 
άπώλεςα aor. of άπόλλϋμι 
άρα* (inferential particle) 
then, 
consequently, after all 
άρα interrog. particle (10.1/2j) 
άργαλέος, -α, -ov 
painful, 
troublesome 
'Αργεΐοι, -ων, oi 
Argives; (poet.) 
Greeks 
'Αργεΐος, -α, -ov 
Argive; (poet.) 
Greek 
'Αργινούςαι, -ων, αί 
Arginousae 
(islands) (scene of Athenian 
naval victory) 
"Αργός, -^ODC, τό 
Argos 
άργός, -όν 
idle, lazy 
άργύριον, -ου, τό 
silver, money 
άργυρούς, -α, -ούν 
made of 
silver, silver 
άρετη, -ης, ή courage; excellence, 
virtue 
"Αρης, -ου ό 
Ares (god of war) 
άρθρον, -ου, τό joint, limb 
'Αριαιος, -ου, ό 
Ariaeus 
άριθμός, -ού, ό 
number, amount, 
total 
#άριπρεπης, -ές 
very bright, 
conspicuous 
άριςτάω 
have breakfast 
'Αριςτεύς, -έως, ό 
Aristeus 
άριςτεύω 
be best, be best at 
(+inf.) 
'Αριςτόκριτος, ^ου, ό 
Aristocritus 
όριςτον, -ου, τό 
breakfast 
άριςτος, -η, -ov 
best; bravest 
(supl. of άγαθός) 
'Αριςτοτέλης, -ους, ό 
Aristotle 
(philosopher) 
'Αριςτοφάνης, -ους, ό 
Aristophanes (comic poet) 
'Αρίφρων, -ovoc, ό 
Ariphron 
άρκτοΰ, -ου, ή 
bear 
άρμόζει (impers.) 
it is fitting, it 
suits 

"Αρνη, 
ή 
Arne (place in 
Thessaly) 
άρνυμαι 
win 
αρπάζω 
seize, plunder; snatch 
άρπακτης, -ού, ό robber, ravisher 
#άρπαλεοο, -α, -ov 
attractive, 
alluring 
άρρηκχος, -ov 
unbroken, 
unbreakable 
άρρητοΰ, -ov 
unspoken, 
unmentioned 
0pceviKOc, -ή, -όν 
male, 
masculine 
'Αρταφέρνης, -ovc, ο 
Artaphernes 
"Αρτεμις, -i5oc, ή 
Artemis 
(goddess) 
άρτημα, -axoc, χό 
ear-ring 
άρχι (άρχίαχ:) (adv.) 
newly, 
recently, just now 
apxoc, -ου, ό 
bread 
άρχαΐος, -a, -ov ancient, old; 
former 
'Αρχέλαος, -ου, ό 
Archelaus 
(King of Sparta) 
άρχή, -ης, ή beginning; rule, 
power; empire; office, 
magistracy, board of 
magistrates, magistrate, officer 
άρχιερεύς, -έως, ό high priest 
'Αρχιμήδης, -ους, ό 
Archimedes 
(Syracusan mathematician and 
inventor) 
ίάρχω 
rule, rule over, command 
(+gen., 13.1/2j(i)) 
(+pple.) begin (of something 
continued by others); (mid.) 
begin (of something continued 
„ by oneself) 
αΡχων, -ovxoc, ό 
archon 
, (magistrate) 
αοαφής, -ec 
obscure, unclear 
αςβεςχος, -ov (also -η, -ov) 
unquenchable, inextinguishable, 
, imperishable 
α°έβεια, -ας, ή 
impiety, 
, irreverence (to gods) 
αεεβέω 
commit impiety 
^θενεια, -ας, ή weakness, illness 
αεθενέω 
be weak/ill 
«εθενής, -ές 
weak, ill 
α^ινεςχαχα (supl. adv.) 
most/very 
, harmlessly 
αοττεω be without food 
?CKeo) 
practise, exercise, train 
αεμενος, -η, -oV 
glad, pleased 
άςπάζομαι 
greet 
Άςπαςία, -ας, ή Aspasia (mistress 
of Pericles) 
άςπεχος, -ov enormously great, 
boundless 
άςπίς, -ίδος, ή 
shield 
άςχειος, -α, -ov 
charming, 
attractive 
άςτήρ, -ερος, ό 
star 
άςχρονομία, 
ή 
astronomy 
άςχυ, -εως, χό 
city, town 
άςφάλεια, -ας, ή 
safety, 
security 
άςφαλής, -ες 
safe, secure 
άςφαλως (adv.) 
safely 
άχαλαίπωρος, -ov without taking 
pains, not painstaking 
άχάρ (conj.) 
but 
άxαcθαλία, -ac, ή 
presumptuous 
sin, wickedness 
άτε (particle) 
as if, as; (causal) in 
as much as, since, seeing that, 
because, as (+pple. 12.1/2tf(ii)) 
άχελής, -ες 
incomplete 
#άχερ (prep.+gen.) 
without 
αχεχνος, -ov 
unskilled 
άτεχνώς (adv.) 
simply, just 
αχη, ^ης, ή ruin 
ατΤμάζω 
dishonour 
άΐίμαςτος, -ov 
dishonoured 
άιΤμία -ας, ή 
dishonour; loss of 
citizen rights 
άτΤμος, -ov 
dishonoured; 
deprived of citizen rights 
άχολμος, -ov not daring, lacking 
the heart to 
άχοπος,-ov 
out of place, 
extraordinary, strange, absurd 
Άτχικός, -ή, -όν 
Attic, Athenian 
Άχχική (sc. γη), -ης 
Attica 
άχυχής, -ες 
unlucky, unfortunate 
αΰ (adv.) 
again, moreover 
αυγή, -ης, ή ray, beam 
#αϋδάω speak, say, utter, tell 
αύθαίρεχος, -ov 
self-chosen, self-
inflicted 
αΰθις (adv.) 
again; in turn, next, 
on the other hand 
αύλεω play the flute 
αυλή, -ης, ή courtyard, hall 
αύλίζομαι 
encamp 
αύριον (adv.) 
tomorrow 
#αϋτάρ (conj.) 
but, then 
αυτάρκης, -ες 
sufficient 
#αύχε (adv.) 
again, in turn 

αύτίκα (adv.) 
at once, 
immediately 
αυτόθι (adv.) 
on the spot, here 
αύτόματον, -ου, τό 
accident 
αύτόν, --ην, -ό (pron.) 
him, her, it 
(4.1/2^ 9.1/3c) 
αύτόο, -η, -ό 
self (9.1/3 λ) 
ό αύτόο 
stfwe (9.1/36) 
αύτόο crasis for ό αύτοο 
αύτού (adv.) 
f/jere, on the 
spot 
άφαιρέω! 
take away (from), 
remove; (mid.) deprive (of) (+ 
double acc., 22.1/2/(ii)) 
άφανηο, -ec 
unseen, vanished, 
not to be seen 
αφανίζω make unseen, wipe out, 
destroy 
άφαάα, -Oc, ή 
speechlessness 
άφειναι aor. inf. of άφίημι 
άφθονος, -ov abundant, plentiful; 
bountiful 
άφίημι! send forth; discharge; let 
!αφικνεομαι 
arrive, come 
άφΤκόμην aor. of άφικνέομαι 
άφίοτημι! remove; make to 
revolt; (mid. and intr. tenses of 
act.) withdraw; revolt (19.1/1) 
'Αφροδίτη, -^ης, ή 
Aphrodite 
(goddess of love) 
άφρων, -ov 
senseless, foolish 
άφυής, -ec 
without natural 
talent/skill 
#άφύςςομαι 
draw (a liquid) for 
oneself 
άφωνοο, -ov dumb, speechless 
Άχαΐοι, -ων, οί 
Achaeans, 
Greeks 
Άχέρων, -οντος, ό Acheron (river 
in the underworld) 
άχθηδών, -όνος, ή 
burden 
άχθομαι 
be annoyed/displeased 
at (+dat.) 
Άχιλλεύς, -έως, ό Achilles (hero 
in Iliad) 
άχυρα, -ων, τά chaff, bran 
βαδίζω (fut. βαδιούμαι) 
walk, go 
βάθος, -ους, τό 
depth 
βαθύς, -εια, -ύ 
deep 
#βαθυχαιτηεις, -εςςα, -εν 
long-
haired 
t βαίνω 
go, come; walk 
Βάκχος, -ου, ό 
Bacchus (another 
name for Dionysus) 
#βάκχος, -ου, ό person initiated 
into the rites of Bacchus 
f βάλλω throw, hit, pelt; inflict 
βάπτω dip; dye 
βάρβαρος, -ov 
barbarian, foreign 
βαρύνομαι 
be weighed down 
βαρύς, -εια, -ύ 
heavy; wearisome 
βαςίλεια, -ας, ή 
princess, queen 
βαςιλείσ, -ας, ή 
kingship 
βαςίλειος, -a, -ov 
royal 
βαςιλεύς, -έως, ό 
king 
βαςιλεύω 
be king, rule (+gen., 
13.1/2tf(i)) 
#βαςτάζω 
lift up, carry 
βάτραχος, -ου, ο 
frog 
βέβαιος, -ov (also -α, -ov) secure, 
steady 
βέβρωκα perf. of βιβρώςκω 
βέλος, -ους, τό 
missile 
βέλτιςτος, -η, -ov 
best (supl. of 
άγαθός) 
βελιΤων, -ov 
better (compar. of 
άγαθός) 
βημα, -ατος, τό 
step 
βία, -ας, ή force, violence 
προς βίαν 
by force 
βιάζομαι 
use force, force one's way 
βιαίως (adv.) 
violently 
βιβλίον, -ου, τό 
book 
βίβλος, -ου, ή 
book 
βιβρώςκω (perf. βέβρωκα) 
eat 
βίος, -ου, ό 
life; means of life; 
livelihood 
#βίοτος, -ου, ό 
life 
βιόω 
live 
βιωτός, -όν 
to be lived, worth 
living 
βλάβη, -ης, ή 
damage 
t βλάπτω 
hurt, injure; damage 
βλέπω see, look (at); see the light 
of day, be alive 
βληθείς, -ειςα, -έν aor. pple. pass, 
of βάλλω 
#βλώςκω (fut. μολούμαι, aor. έμολον. 
perf. μέμβλωκα) 
go 
|βοαω 
shout 
βόειος, -α, -ov 
of beef 
βοή, -ης, ή shout, shouting 
βοήθεια, -ac, ή 
help, aid 
βοηθέω 
(run to) help (+dat., 
13.1/26(i)) 
βόθρος, -ου, ό hole, pit 
Βοιωτία, -ας, ή Boeotia (state in 
north central Greece) 
Βοιωτός -ού, ό a Boeotian 
βοςκήματα, -ων, τά 
cattle 

βόςκω 
feed, nourish 
βουλευτηριον, -ου, τό 
council-
chamber 
βουλεύω plan, resolve, determine, 
deliberate; (mid.) discuss, 
deliberate, consider; plot 
βουλή, -ηο, ή 
pfow, counsel, 
advice; council 
f βούλομαι 
wish, want 
#βουνός, -ού, ό 
hill, mound 
βούς, βοός, ό/ή 
οχ, 
COM/ 
#βούτηο, -ου, ό 
herdsman 
βραδέως (adv.) 
slowly 
βραδύνω 
be slow, hesitate 
#βραδύπουο, -πουν (gen. -ποδοο) 
slow-footed 
βραδύο, -εια, -ύ (compar. βραδίων, 
supl. βράδιςτος) 
slow 
βρα^Γων, -ovoc, ό 
drra 
βραχύς, -εία, -ύ 
short, brief; 
small, little 
βρέχω M/ef (tr.) 
#βροτός, -ού, ό 
mortal man 
βρόχος, -ου, ό 
woose 
βρώμια, -ατος, τό 
food 
βωμός, -ού, ό 
tf/tar 
#γαΐα, -ας, ή = γη 
γάλα, -ακτος, το 
milk 
Ιγαμέω (+acc.) 
marry (with the man 
as subject); (mid., +dat.) marry 
(with the woman as subject) 
γάμος, -ου, ό 
marriage 
γάρ* (connecting particle) 
for, as 
γαςτήρ, -τρός, ή 
stomach, belly 
(6.1/16) 
γαςτρίμαργος, -ov 
gluttonous 
γε* (particle) 
at least; at any 
rate, certainly, indeed (13.1/36) 
γεγένημαι perf. of γίγνομαι 
γεγενημενα, -ων, τα 
events, 
, occurrences, the past 
#Υεγηθα ( p e rf. with pres. sense, 
Λοπιγηθέω) 
rejoice 
γεγονα perf. of γίγνομαι 
*γεγως = γεγονώς (perf. pple. of 
Τ^γνομαι) 
Υειτων, -ovoe, ό 
neighbour; (as 
adj .+dat.) neighbouring 
J 
-ac, ή 
Gela (city in Sicily) 
'Υελαω 
laugh 
Κλοιός (also γελοίος), -α, -ov 
funny, ridiculous 
;?λφος,-<Χ,-κ>ν of Gela 
^Axoc, 
^ 
iaughter 
γέμω 
be full of (+gen.) 
γεν- aor. stem of γίγνομαι 
γένεςις, -εως, ή 
birth, coming 
into being 
γενναίος, -α, -ov 
noble, well-
born, 
noble-minded 
γενναίως (adv.) 
nobly 
γεννάω 
beget, produce 
γένος, -ους, τό 
race; kind 
γεραιός, -ά, -όν 
old 
γέρας, -ως, τό prize, privilege 
(13.1/1 b( iii)) 
γέρρα, -ων, τά 
wicker-work 
γέρων, -οντος, ό 
old man 
γεύομαι 
taste 
γέφϋρα, -ας, ή 
bridge, 
embankment 
γεωμετρία, -ας, ή 
geometry 
γεωργός, -ού, ό 
farmer 
γη, -ης, ή 
land, earth, ground 
κατά γην 
by land 
πού (της) γης; 
where on earth f 
γηγενής, -ες 
earth-born 
γημ- aor. stem of γαμέω 
#γηράλεος, -α, -ov 
aged, old 
γήρας, -CDC, τό 
old age (13.1/1 
b[ iii)) 
γηρΟςκω grow old 
γίγας, -αντος, ό 
giant 
Ιγίγνομαι 
become, be, be born; 
happen, take place 
Ιγιγνωςκω 
get to know, recognize, 
realize; think, resolve, decide 
γίνομαι = γίγνομαι 
Γλαύκος, -ου, ό 
Glaucus 
γλαύξ, -^αυκρς, ή 
owl 
#γλαφυρός, -ά, -όν 
hollow, 
hollowed 
Γλούς, -ού, ό 
Glus 
γλυκερός, -ά, -όν 
sweet 
γλυκύς, -εια, -ύ 
sweet 
γλώττα, -ης, ή 
tongue 
γνάθος, -ου, ή 
jaw 
γνούς, γνούςα, γνόν aor. pple. of 
γιγνωςκω 
γνώθι 2nd s. imp. of έγνων 
γνώμη, -ης, ή 
judgement, 
opinion, mind, purpose 
γνώριμος, (-η), -ov well-known, 
familiar 
γονεύς, -έως, ό 
parent 
γόνυ, -ατος, τό 
knee (5.1/5 note 
1) , 
Γοργώ, -ούς, ή 
Gorgo 
#γουνόομαι 
implore, entreat 

γράμμα, -axoc, τό 
written 
character; letter 
γραμματικός, -ού, ό 
grammarian 
γραμματιςτης, -ού, ό 
schoolmaster 
γραύς, γραός, ή 
old woman 
(11.1/4) 
γραφειον, -ου, τό 
pencil 
γραφή, —fjc, ή 
writing, drawing; 
indictment, charge, case 
Ιγράφω 
write; draw; paint; (mid.) 
indict, charge 
γρϋπός, -η, -όν 
hook-nosed, 
aquiline 
Γύλιππος, -ου, ό 
Gylippus 
(Spartan general) 
γυμνάζω 
exercise, train 
γυμνός, -η, -όν 
naked; 
lightly/poorly clad 
γυναικωνΐτις, -ιδος, ή 
women's 
apartments 
γυνη, -αικός, ή 
woman, wife 
(5.1/5 note 1) 
γύψ, ypnoc, ο 
vulture 
Γωβρύας, -α, ό 
Gobryas (Persian 
general) 
δαιμόνιοο, -α -ov 
miraculous, 
supernatural 
δαίμων, -ovoc, ό god, deity 
δαίς, δαιτός, ή 
feast 
δακ- aor. stem of δάκνω 
δάκνω 
bite; worry 
δάκρυ see δάκρυον 
δακρυόεις, -ecca, -εν 
weeping, in 
tears 
δάκρυον, -κ>υ, τό 
tear (alternative 
nom. δάκρυ 13.1/lc) 
δακρύω 
weep 
δακτύλιος, -ου, ό 
ring 
δάκτυλος, -ου, ό 
finger 
δανείζω 
lend; (mid.) borrow 
δανειςτης, -ού, ό 
creditor 
Δάρδανος, -ου, ό 
Dardanus 
(founder of Troy) 
δδρεικός, -ού, ό 
daric (Persian 
gold coin) 
δφο, δςιδός, ή 
torch 
δαςύς, -εια, -ύ 
hairy, shaggy 
δε* (connecting particle) 
and, 
but 
δ* οΰν* 
be that as it may 
(13.1/3 c) 
δέδαρμαι perf. mid./pass. of δέρω 
δέδοικα 
I fear, am afraid 
(19.1/3 a) 
#δέδορκα see, look upon (perf. of 
δέρκομαι) 
|δεί (impers.) 
it is necessary 
(+acc.and infin.); there is a need 
of (+gen., 21.1/4 note 3) 
#δείδω 
be alarmed 
Ιδείκνϋμι 
show (20.1/1 and 
Appendix 6) 
δείλια, -ac, η 
cowardice 
δειλός, -η, -όν 
miserable, 
wretched, 
cowardly 
δειμαίνω (+acc.) 
be afraid of, 
fear 
δεινός, -η, -όν 
terrible, serious, 
strange; clever at (+inf.) 
δειπνέω 
dine, have dinner, dine 
on (+acc.) 
δεΐπνον, -ου, τό 
dinner 
δέκα (indecl. adj.) 
ten 
δεκατός, 
-όν 
tenth 
δέλτος, -ου, ή 
writing-tablet 
δελφίς, -ινος, ό 
dolphin 
Δελφοί, -ων, οί 
Delphi 
δένδρον, -ου, τό 
tree (13.1/1 c) 
δένδρεον, -ου, τό 
tree 
δεξιά, -^ας, ή 
right hand 
δεξιάν δίδωμι 
give a pledge 
δεξιός, -ά, -όν 
on the right hand; 
clever 
Δεξιππος, -ου, ό 
Dexippus 
tδέομαι 
need, implore, ask (+gen., 
13.1/2^(ii)) 
δέον' (acc. absol.) 
it being 
necessary (21.1/5) 
δέος, -ους, το 
fear 
#δέρκομαι see, behold 
δέρω (perf. mid./pass. δέδαρμαι) 
flay 
δεςμος, ού, ο (alternative pi. δεομα. 
τά) 
bond 
δεςμωτηριον, -ου, τό 
prison 
δέςποινα, -ης, ή 
mistress 
δεςπότης, -ου, ό 
master 
δεύρο (adv.) 
here, over here 
δεύτερος, -α, -ov 
second 
t δέχομαι 
receive 
δέω (A) 
need, want, lack (+gen.) 
πολλού δέω 
I am far from 
πολλού δει 
far from it! 
|δέω (Β) 
bind, tie 
δη * (particle) 
indeed, certainly 
(13.1/3 b) 
δήλος, -η, -ov 
visible, clear, 
obvious 
δηλάω 
make clear, show, 
reveal 
Δημέας, -ου, ό 
Demeas 

δημηγορέω 
make a public speech 
Δημητηρ, -τρος, ή Demeter (corn-
goddess, mother of Persephone) 
δημιουργός, -ου, ό 
craftsman; 
maker, author 
δήμ<^, -ου, ό 
the people; 
democracy; deme 
Δημocθέvηc, -ovc, ο 
Demosthenes 
(fifth-century Athenian general; 
fourth-century orator) 
δημόαος, -δ, -ov public, of the 
state 
δημοάςι 
publicly 
δημοτικός, -η, -όν 
democratic, 
popular 
δήξομαι fut. of δάκνω 
δήπου* (particle) 
I presume, I 
should hope, doubtless 
δήτα* (particle) 
indeed; then 
(13.1/3 a) 
δηχθ- aor. pass, stem of δάκνω 
Δία acc. of Ζευς (11.1/4) 
διά (prep.+acc.) 
because of, on 
account of; (+gen.) through, 
across 
διά τί; why? 
διαβαίνω! cross, cross over 
διαβάλλω! 
slander 
διαβατέον 
one must cross 
(24.1/5) 
διαβολή, —ης, ή 
slander 
διάγνωςις, -εως, ή [act of] 
distinguishing, deciding 
διαγω| 
carry over; pass, spend 
(of time); live, pass one's life 
διάδοχος, -ov 
succeeding, 
relieving 
διαθρύπτω enervate, pamper 
διάκειμαι (+adv.) 
be in certain 
state/mood 
διακλέπτω! 
steal and secrete, 
appropriate 
διακομίζομαι! 
carry across 
διακόπτω cut through 
διδκόςιοι, -αι, -α 
200 
["διαλέγομαι 
converse with (+dat.) 
διαλλαττομαι 
reconcile one's 
differences 
διαμελλω! 
delay 
διανοέομαι 
intend, plan; think, 
suppose 
διανοια, -σς, ή intention, plan 
^απειράομαι 
make trial of 
^απιμπλημι! fill with (+gen.) 
όι«πολεμεω 
fight it out (with 
someone, dat.) 
διαπορεύομαι 
march/proceed 
through (+acc.) 
διαρπάζω 
plunder 
διαςπάομαι (aor. -εςπαςάμην) 
tear apart 
διατελέω! 
accomplish; continue 
διατίθημι! 
dispose; put in a 
certain state of body or mind 
διατριβή, -ης, ή way/manner of 
spending time 
διατρίβω pass/waste (time) 
δίαυλος, -ου, ό double course 
(i.e. the race up the stadium and 
back) 
διαφέρω! 
differ from (+gen.); 
make a difference; be superior 
to (+gen.) 
διαφθείρω! destroy; corrupt 
διαχωρίζω separate, divide 
διδακτός, -ή, -ov able to be 
taught 
διδάςκαλος, -ου, ό 
teacher 
!διδάςκω 
teach, train 
-διδρδςκω see άποδιδράςκω 
δίδωμι 
give, offer, grant (18.1/2) 
διελαύνω! 
ride through 
διεξέρχομαι! 
go through, relate 
διέχω! 
be separated!distant from 
(+gen.) 
διηγεομαι 
explain, relate, 
describe 
δικάζω 
be a juror; judge, give 
judgement 
δίκαιος, -σ, -ov just, honest, 
upright 
δικαιοςύνη, -ης, ή 
justice, 
honesty 
δικαίως (adv.) 
justly 
δικαςτήριον, -ου, τό 
law-court 
δικαςτής, -ού, ό juror, dicast, 
judge 
δίκη, -ης, ή 
lawsuit; (legal) 
satisfaction; justice; penalty; 
(personified, with cap.) Justice 
δικην δίδωμι 
be punished, pay 
the penalty 
δίκην λαμβάνω punish, exact 
one's due from (παρά+gen.) 
δίκτυον, -ου, τό 
net, hunting-net 
Δίκων, -ωνος, ό 
Dico 
δίνη, -ης, ή 
whirlpool 
Διογένης, -ους, ό 
Diogenes 
(philosopher) 
διόλλϋμι! 
destroy utterly 
Διονϋςόδωρος, -ου, ό 
Dionysodorus 
337 
ο 
ο ω 
σ 
c ΕΓ 
3 

338 
ο ο 
ω 
σ 
c 
ω 
3 
Διόνϋςος, -ου, ό 
Dionysus (god 
of wine) 
διότι (conj.) because 
διπλούς, -η, -ούν 
double 
δίο (adv.) 
twice 
διττός (διςςός), -η, -όν 
two-fold, 
two 
δίφροο, -ου, ό 
stool 
δίχα (adv., or prep.+gen.) 
apart, 
apart from 
διψάω 
be thirsty (5.1/2 note 4) 
|διωκω 
pursue, chase, prosecute 
#δμώς, -ωός, ό 
slave taken in war 
(13.1/16(i)) 
δόγμα, -ατος, τό 
opinion, belief; 
decision, judgement 
|δοκέω 
seem, seem good; be 
thought; consider (self) to be; 
think; 
δοκεΐ (impers., +dat. and inf.) it 
seems a good idea; so δοκει 
μοι I decide (21.1/4*) 
#δόλιος, -G, -ov 
crafty, deceitful 
#δόλος, -ου, ό 
trick, guile 
#δόμος, -ου, ό house, home 
δόξα, -ης, ή 
reputation, fame; 
opinion 
δόξαν (acc. abs.) 
it having been 
decided (21.1/5) 
δόρυ, —ατος, τό 
spear 
δοτέον 
one must give (24.1/5) 
δότης, -ου, ό 
giver 
δουλεία, -ας, ή 
slavery 
δουλεύω 
be a slave 
#δούλιος, -α, -ov 
of slavery 
δούλος, -ου, ό 
slave 
δουλόω 
enslave 
δούς, δούςα, δόν, aor. pple. of 
δίδωμι 
δράκων, -οντος, ό dragon, serpent 
δράμα, -ατος, τό play, drama 
δραμειν aor. inf. of τρέχω 
δραςτηριος, -ov 
active 
δραχμή, -ης, ή drachma (coin) 
δράω do, act 
δρόμος -ου, ό race; δρόμφ at a 
run, at full speed 
δρόςος, -ου, ή 
dew 
f δύναμαι 
be able (19.1/3b); be 
powerful 
μέγα δύναμαι 
be very powerful 
δύναμις, -εως, ή power, ability, 
force, strength 
δυνατός, -η, -ov able, possible; 
strong, powerful 
οί δυνατοί 
the chief men 
δύο 
two (7.1/5*) 
#δύρομαι (= οδύρομαι) 
lament 
δύςγνοια, -ας, ή 
ignorance, 
bewilderment 
#δυοδάκρϋτος, -ov sorely wept 
δυςεντερία, -ας, ή 
dysentery 
δύςθϋμος, -ov 
disheartened, 
despondent 
δύοκολος, -ov 
bad-tempered 
#δύςλυτος, -ov 
indissoluble, 
inextricable 
δυςμενης, -ες 
hostile 
δυοπετως (adv.) 
with difficulty 
δυςςεβης, -ές 
impious, ungodly, 
profane 
#δύοτηνος, -ov 
wretched 
δυςτυχέω 
be unlucky/unfortunate 
δυςτυχής, -ές 
unlucky, 
unfortunate 
δυςτυχία, -ας, ή 
misfortune 
δύςφορος, -ov 
hard to bear 
δυς^είμερος, -ov 
wintry, stormy 
#δυςωνυμος, -ov 
having an ill 
name, hateful 
δύω (A) 
enter, get into 
δύω (Β) = δύο 
two 
δώδεκα (indecl. adj.) 
twelve 
#δωδεκέτης, -ου 
twelve years old 
#δώμα, -ατος, τό house; family 
δωρέομαι 
present, give 
Δωριεύς, -έως, ό 
Dorieus (half-
brother of Spartan king 
Cleomenes) 
δωροδοκία, -ας, ή 
bribery 
δωρον, -ου, τό gift, bribe 
έ (indir. refl. pron.) 
him, her, it 
(9.1/4*) 
έάλων aor. of άλίςκομαι 
έάν (conj., +subj.) 
if, if ever 
v (14.1/4c(iii)) 
έαρ, ήροο, τό 
(the season of) 
spring 
έαυτόν, ^ην, -ό (refl. pron.) 
himself, herself, itself (9.1/4*) 
|έάω 
allow, permit; let alone, let 
v be 
έβην aor. of βαίνω 
έβραϊοτί (adv.) 
in Hebrew 
έγγελάω| 
laugh at (+dat.) 
έγγίγνομαι| 
be born in, appear 
among 
έγγράφω| 
write in/on, inscribe; 
enrol, enlist 
έγγύη, -ης, ή 
pledge, surety 
έγγυθεν (adv.) 
from nearby 

έγγύο (adv., or prep.+gen.) 
near; 
nearby 
•(•εγείρω arouse, awaken (perf. 
έγρήγορα = 1 am awake) 
έγενόμην aor. of γίγνομαι 
έγκέφαλοο, -ου, ό 
brain 
έγκλημα, -axoc, τό 
accusation, 
complaint 
έγκλημα ποιέομαι make a 
complaint 
#έγκονέω 
be quick, hasten 
έγκωμιάζω 
praise 
έγκώμιον, -ου, τό 
encomium, 
eulogy; victory-song 
έγνων aor. of γιγνωςκω 
έγρήγορα perf. of έγείρω 
έγχειρέω 
attempt, fry; attack 
(+dat.) 
έγ^ος, -ους, τό 
weapon, spe^r 
έγω (pron.) 
I (4.1/2) 
έγωγε 
I at least; I for my part 
έγφμαι = εγώ οίμαι 
#έγων = έγώ 
έδαφος, -ους, τό 
bottom 
έδόθην aor. pass, of δίδωμι 
εδομαι fut. of έςθίω 
#εδω 
eat 
έδωδή, -ης, ή 
food 
έδωκα aor. of δίδωμι 
εζομαι 
seat 
oneselfsit 
Ιέθέλω 
am willing, wish 
έθηκα aor. of τίθημι 
έθνος, -ους, τό 
nation, tribe, race 
έθρεψα aon of τρέφω 
ει (conj.) 
if 
εί γάρ or εϊθε 
would that, I 
wish that (to introduce wishes, 
21.1/1) 
εί δέ μή 
but if not, otherwise 
ει 2nd s. of ειμί be or είμι shall 
cornel go 
εϊδςα aor. of έάω 
#ειδαρ, -ατος, τό 
food 
είδείην opt. of οιδα 
είδέναι inf. of οιδα 
#ειδομαι 
be seen, appear 
είδον aor. of όράω 
είδος, -ους, τό 
form, shape, 
appearance; beauty 
ειδως, είδυια, είδός 
knowing 
τ (pple. of οιδα) 
ειεν (particle) 
well, well then 
εϊθε see εί 
εικοα(ν) (indecl. adj.) 
twenty 
εικω give way, yield 
(+dat.,13.1/2fc(ii)) 
είκώς, -υια, -ός 
like, resembling 
(+dat.,19.1/3 a) 
είληφα perf. of λαμβάνω 
είλόμην aor. of αίρέομαι 
ειλον aor. of αίρέω 
ειμί 
be (3.1/6 and Appendix 3) 
είμι 
shall cornel go (inf. ίέναι; 
impf. ήα, 18.1/3 and Appendix 
#είν = έν 
είναι 
to be (inf. of είμί) 
είπ- aor. act./mid. stem of λέγω or 
of αγορεύω in compounds 
ε'ίπερ (strengthened form of εί) 
if indeed 
εϊπον aor. of λέγω and of άγορεύω 
in compounds (18.1/4 note 2) 
Ιείργω 
shut up, imprison; prevent, 
hinder, exclude 
εϊρηκα perf. act. of λέγω 
ε'ίρημαι perf. mid./pass. of λέγω 
ειρήνη, -ηΰ, ή 
peace 
είρήνην άγω 
live inlbe at peace 
είρήνην ποιέομαι 
make peace 
είΰ (prep.+acc.) 
to, into, on to; 
with regard to, in relation to 
εις τοςούτο/τούτο (+gen., 
23.1/1 d) to such a pitchlpointl 
degree of 
εις, μία, έν 
one (7.1 /5a) 
#είς 2nd s. of ειμί or είμι 
είςάγωΙ 
introduce 
#είςαθρέω 
look/gaze at 
είςακούω| 
give ear, pay attention 
είςβαίνωΙ 
go into, go on board 
εΐςβάλλω| 
throw into; invade 
εϊςβολή, -ης, ή 
invasion 
εΐςέρχομαι| 
enter, go inside 
εΐςοδος, -ου, ή 
entrance; visit 
ειςομαι fut. of οίδα 
είςοράω| 
behold, look at 
ειςπί^ωί 
sail in 
είςφέρωί 
bring/carry into 
είτα (adv.) 
then, next 
είτε . . . είτε 
whether . . . or 
είχον impf. of έχω 
ειωθα 
I am accustomed 
είωθώς, -υια, -ός 
customary, 
usual 
έκ (prep.+gen.; before vowel έξ) 
out of, from 
Εκάβη, -ης, ή 
Hecuba (wife of 
Priam) 
έκαςτος, -η, -ov 
each, every 
ώς έκαςτος 
each individually 
(22.1/1 *(v)) 

340 
< Ο 
ο 
ω 
σ c ω 
έκάοτοτε (adv.) 
on each occasion 
έκάτερος -Q -ov each (of two) 
coc εκάτεροο 
each (of two) 
individually (22.1/l*(v)) 
#έκατι (prep.+gen.) 
on account of, 
for the sake of (usually comes 
after word it governs) 
#έκατομπτολίεθρος -ov 
with a 
hundred cities 
εκατόν (indecl. adj.) 
100 
έκβαίνω! step out, go forth; 
disembark 
έκ βάλλω t 
throw out, expel (into 
exile) 
#έκδίκωο (adv.) 
unjustly 
εκεί (adv.) 
there 
εκείθεν (adv.) 
from there 
έκείνος -η, -ο (pron. and adj. 
9.1/1) 
that 
έκείοε (adv.) 
(to) there 
έκκαίω! 
kindle 
έκκαλέω! 
call (someone) out 
έκκληάα, -Oc, ή 
assembly 
έκκόπτω 
knock out 
έκκρούω knock out 
εκλεγώ pick out (18.1/4 note 1) 
έκμανθάνω! learn thoroughly 
έκουοίωο (adv.) 
willingly 
εκπέμπω! send out 
#έκπέρθω 
destroy utterly 
εκπίπτω! 
fall out; be thrown out; 
be banished, be sent into exile 
(17.1/5) 
έκπλέω! 
sail out/off 
έκπληξις -εcoc, ή 
panic, 
consternation 
έκπλήττω strike with panic, 
frighten; amaze 
έκπρδττω! 
bring to pass, 
accomplish 
έκτόο (adv., and prep.+gen.) 
outside 
έκτροφη, -f\c, ή bringing up, 
rearing 
Έκτωρ, -opoc, ό Hector (Trojan 
hero in Iliad) 
έκφαίνομαι! 
appear, shine 
outlforth 
έκφέρω! 
carry out 
εκφεύγω! 
escape 
έκών, -ouca, -όν 
willing(ly), 
wittingly 
ελ- aor. act./mid. stem of αίρέω 
έλάο, -Oc, ή 
olive-tree 
έλαβον aor. of λαμβάνω 
έλαθον aor. of λανθάνω 
Ελάτεια, -Oc, ή Elatea (town in 
Phocis) 
έλάττων, -ov smaller; fewer; less 
Ιέλαύνω 
drive (tr. and intr.); drive 
out; march 
έλαφοο, -ού, ό/ή 
deer 
έλάχιοτοο, -η, -ov 
smallest, least·, 
fewest 
έλαχον aor. of λαγχάνω 
έλέγχω 
test, examine 
έλείν aor. inf. act. of αίρέω 
έλειοο, -ov 
living in the marshes 
Ελένη, -r\c, ή 
Helen 
έλευθερίδ, -Oc, ή 
freedom 
ελεύθερος, -0, -ov 
free 
έλευθερόω set free 
Έλεφαντίνη, -ηο, ή 
Elephantine 
(city in Egypt) 
έλέφΟο, -αντοο, ό 
elephant 
έλήλυθα perf. of έρχομαι 
έλήφθην aor. pass, of λαμβάνω 
έλθ- aor. stem of έρχομαι 
έλιπον aor. of λείπω 
έλίοοω 
turn 
#έλκεάτιεπλοο, -ov 
with trailing 
robes 
#έλκηθμόο, -ού, ό 
[act of] being 
carried o f f , seizure 
|έλκω 
pull, drag 
Έλλάο, -άδοο, ή 
Greece 
ελλείπω! 
be lacking in, fall short 
of(+gen.) 
Έλλην, -ηνοο, ό a Greek 
Ελληνικός -η, -όν 
Greek 
Έλλήοποντοο, -ου, ό 
the 
Hellespont 
έλος -ους τό 
marsh 
ελπίζω hope, expect 
έλπίς -ίδος ή 
hope 
έμαθον aor. of μανθάνω 
έμαυτόν, -ην (refl. pron.) 
myself 
(9.1/4 a) 
έμβαίνω! 
step on/into, embark, 
board 
εμβάλλω! 
throw in, put in 
εμολον aor. of βλώοκω 
έμόο, -η, -όν (poss. adj.) 
my, 
mine 
έμπειρος -ov experienced, skilled 
έμπίμπλημι! 
fill 
έμπίμπρημι 
burn, set on fire 
εμπίπτω! 
fall into/on/upon 
έμπνους -ουν 
alive 
έμποδών (adv.) 
in the way (+dat.) 

έμπροοθεν (adv.) 
in front, ahead 
έμπρόςθιος, -ov in front, fore 
εμφανής, -ες 
open, obvious 
έμφυτοο, -ov 
inborn, innate 
έν (prep.+dat.) 
in, on, among 
έν τούτω 
meanwhile 
έναγκαλίζομαι 
take in one's 
arms, clasp 
έναντίον (+gen.) 
opposite, facing; 
(as adv.) face to a face 
έναντιόομαι 
oppose, withstand 
(+dat.) 
ενάντιος, -<X, -ov 
opposite, 
facing, opposed to 
ένδεεςτέρως (compar. adv.) 
in a 
more/rather deficient/inadequate 
way 
ένδεια, -&c, ή lack 
ένδίδωμι| give in, surrender 
ένδικος, -ov just, legitimate 
ένδοθεν (adv.) 
from inside 
ένδον (adv.) 
inside 
#ένδυτα, -ων, τά clothes 
ένεγκ- aor. act./mid. stem of φέρω 
ένεδρεύω lie in ambush 
ένειμι 
be in (+dat.) 
ένεςτι (impers.) 
it is possible 
(+dat.) 
ένεκα (prep.+gen.) 
because of, 
for the sake of (usually follows 
its noun) 
ενέργεια, -(Χς, ή activity, operation 
ένθα (adv.) 
thereupon 
ένθάδε (adv.) here 
ένθεν (adv.) 
from there; 
thereafter 
ένθεν μέν . . . ένθεν δέ 
on one 
side . . . on the other 
#ενί = έν 
εννέα (indecl. adj.) 
nine 
#εννέπω (and ένέπω) 
tell, tell of 
#έννημαρ (adv.) 
for nine days 
εννοέω 
consider, understand; 
discover 
ένοικέω dwell in, inhabit 
ενταύθα (adv.) 
here, there, at this 
point 
εντεύθεν (adv.) 
from then; from 
, here/there; thereupon 
εντολή, -ης, ή order, command 
εντός (prep.+gen.) 
within, inside 
*εντος, -ους, το 
weapon 
εντυγχάνωί 
fall in with, meet 
with, come upon 
(+dat.,13.1/2fc(iii)) 
έξ = έκ 
εξ (indecl. adj.) 
six 
έξαγορεύω (fut. έξερώ, 18.1/4 note 
2) 
make known, speak of; 
speak out, utter aloud 
έξαγω| 
lead, bring out 
έξαιρέω! 
take out, remove 
εξαίρω 
rush forth 
εξαίφνης (adv.) 
suddenly 
έξακόςιοι, -αι, -α 
600 
έξάλλομαι (aor. έξηλάμην) 
jump 
out 
έξαμαρτάνω| 
make a mistake; do 
wrong against (εις+acc.) 
έξανί^τημι| (mid. and intr. tenses 
of act.) 
stand up from, get up 
from (a table) 
εξαπατάω 
deceive, trick 
έξαπίνης (adv.) 
suddenly 
έξαρκέω 
be quite enough, suffice 
#έξαύτις (adv.) 
once more, anew 
έξείργωΐ 
shut out from, drive 
out 
έξελαύνω| 
drive out, expel, 
exile; (intr.) march out 
εξέρχομαι! 
go out, come out 
#έξερώ fut. of έξαγορεύω 
έξεςτι (impers.) 
it is 
allowed/possible (+dat. and inf., 
21.1/4a) 
εξετάζω 
examine 
έξευριςκω| 
find out, discover 
εξήκοντα (indecl. adj.) 
60 
έξηκοςτός, -ή, -όν 
sixtieth 
έξηλάμην aor. of έξάλλομαι 
εξής (adv.) 
in order, in a row 
έξικνέομαι (principal parts as for 
άφικνέομαι) 
suffice 
έξόν (acc. absol.) 
it being 
permitted/possible (21.1/5) 
έξοπλίζομαι 
arm oneself 
completely 
έξω (+gen.) 
outside 
έξω fut. of έχω 
έξωθέω push out 
έοικα 
resemble, seem 
(+dat.,13.1/2fc(iv)), (19.1/3*) 
έοικε (impers.) 
it seems 
εορτή, -ης, ή feast, festival 
επαγγέλλομαι! 
profess, make 
profession of 
έπαθον aor. of πάςχω 
επαινετής, -ου, ό 
admirer 
έπαινέωΐ" praise, commend 
έπαινος, -ου, ό 
praise 

342 
s 
s σ c a> 
3 
επανέρχομαι! 
return 
έπανορθόω 
remedy (a situation) 
επάνω (prep.+gen.) 
upon 
έπαχθή c, -ες 
burdensome 
έπεγείρω! awaken, rowse «ρ 
έπει (conj.) 
smce, 
έπείγομαι 
hurry, hasten; 
etfger 
έπειδόν (conj.+subj.) 
(ei/er,) 
έπειδή (conj.) 
when, since, 
because 
έπειδή τάχιςτα 
as soon as 
έπειμι! 
be upon 
έπειτα (adv.) 
then, next 
έπεξάγω! 
lead out against 
επέρχομαι! go against, attack 
(+dat.); come on, approach 
έπερωτάω! 
ask (a question) 
έπέχω| 
hold back, check 
έπί (prep.) (+acc.) 
on to, to, 
against; (+gen.) on; in the 
direction of; in the time of; 
(+dat.) at, on, upon; with a view 
to; in the power of 
έπιβαίνω| 
step on to (+gen. or 
dat.) 
έπι βάλλω! throw upon, impose 
upon 
έπιβάτης, -ου, ό 
passenger 
επιβιβάζω put on board 
έπιβουλεύω plot against 
έπιβουλή, -ης, ή 
plot 
έπιγίγνομαι! 
come after 
Έπίδαμνος, -ου, ή 
Epidamnus 
(town on the east coast of 
Adriatic) 
Επίδαυρος -ου, ή 
Epidaurus 
(town in southern Greece) 
έπιδείκνϋμι! prove, show, 
demonstrate; exhibit, display 
έπιδημέω 
come to stay in a 
place, visit 
έπιδίδωμι! 
give in addition 
επιεικής, -ec 
reasonable, 
moderate, fair 
επιεικώς (adv.) 
fairly, quite 
έπιθόμην aor. of πείθομαι 
έπιθϋμέω 
desire, yearn for 
(+gen.,13.1/2*(ii)) 
έπιθϋμίσ, -Oc, ή 
desire, 
passion 
έπικαλέομαι! 
call upon, summon 
έπίκειμαι 
lie upon, be upon 
έπικουρέω help, remedy (+dat.) 
έπίκουροο, -ου, ό 
helper, ally; 
(pi.) mercenaries 
έπιλανθάνομαι! 
forget (+acc. or 
gen., 13.1/2^(iii)) 
επιμέλεια, HXc, ή concern, care 
!έπιμελέομαι 
care for 
(+gen.,13.1/2<i(ii)), take care 
έπιμελητέον 
one must take care 
% o^+^en.) (24.1/5) 
έπιορκισ, -Oc, ή 
perjury 
επιπίπτω! 
fall upon, attack (+dat.) 
έπίπνοια, -Oc, ή 
inspiration 
Έπιπολαί, -ων, αί 
Epipolae 
(plateau above Syracuse) 
έπιπονέω 
labour on 
έπιςκοπέω 
inspect, examine, 
observe 
!έτιίςταμαι 
know how to; 
understand (19.1/36) 
έπιςτέλλω! send to 
έπιςτήμη, -ης, ή 
understanding, 
knowledge 
έπιςτολή, -ης, ή 
order, command; 
(pi.) letter, epistle 
έπιςτρέφω! 
turn about 
επιτήδεια, -ων, τά 
necessities of 
life, provisions 
επιτήδειος, -O, -ov 
suitable, 
useful for; friendly 
έπιτίθημι! 
put/place upon 
(+dat.); (mid.) attack (+dat.) 
έτίΐ^άω 
censure (+dat.) 
επιτρέπω! 
entrust; allow (+dat.) 
έπιτρέχω! 
overrun 
έπιφέρομαι! move (intr.) 
έπίφθονος, -ov 
burdensome 
έπιφράττω 
block up 
έπιχαίρω! 
rejoice at (+dat.) 
έίαχειρέω 
attempt, take in hand 
(+dat., 13.1/26(iii)) 
έπιχώριος, -ov (also -O, -ov) 
of 
the country, local 
#έπλετο 3rd s. aor. of πέλομαι 
έπομαι 
follow (+dat., 
13.1/26(iii)) 
#έπορον (aor., no pres. exists) 
give, furnish 
έπος, -ους, τό 
word 
ώς έπος ειπείν 
so to speak 
(22.1/la(vi)) 
έπριάμην aor. of ωνέομαι 
έπτά (indecl. adj.) 
seven 
έραοτής -ού, ό 
lover 
έράω love, desire passionately 
(+gen.,13.1/2*(ii)) 
!έργάζομαι 
work, perform, 
do 

έργον, -ου, τό task, labour, job, 
deed, action; fact, achievement; 
field 
έργω 
in fact, indeed 
έργα παρέχω g/t/e trouble 
#έρέπτομαι 
/ m i ow (+acc.) 
#έρετμόν, ού, τό 
o*r 
έρέω fut. of λέγω 
έρημία, -^c, ή solitude, desert, 
wilderness 
έρημοο (also έρημος), -ov 
empty, 
deserted, desolate, devoid 
#έρίηροο, -ov (m. pi. nom. έρίηρες, 
acc. έρίηρας) 
trusty, faithful 
έρι^ -i5oc, ή strife (acc. έριν) 
έρμαιον, -ου, τό 
godsend, 
windfall, treasure 
έρμηνεύς, -έως, ό 
interpreter 
Έρμης, -ού, ό 
Hermes 
Έρμων, -ωνος, ό 
Hermon 
έρπω 
creep, crawl; move about, 
spread; go 
έρρω go to one's harm, go to hell 
#έρύω drag 
Ιέρχομαι 
come, go (18.1/3 and 
Appendix 3) 
έρως, -ωτος, ό love, desire; 
(personified, with cap.) Love 
Ιερωτάω 
ask (aor. ήρόμην) 
έρωτικόΰ, -η, -όν 
amorous, in 
love 
ec = eic 
έΰθίω eat 
#έΰθλόΰ, -η, -όν 
brave 
εςμός, -ού, ό 
swarm 
έςομαι fut. of ειμί (be) (3rd s. 
έςται) 
εςοράω see είςοράω 
έςπαρμαι perf. mid./pass. of 
Οίείρω 
εςπερα, -ας, ή 
evening 
εςπερος, -ov of/at evening; (as m. 
t noun with cap.) the Evening Star 
εοπομην aor. of έπομαι 
εςται 3rd s. fut. of ειμί (be) 
εΰτηκακ:, -υια, -oc standing (perf. 
pple. of ίίσυαμαι) (or έοτά;, -6ca, 
„ -oc) (19.1/1) 
εΰτι 
it is possible (21.1/4 notel); 
there is 
εοχατος, -η, -ov 
furthest, last; 
„ worst (18.1/6) 
^χον aor. of έχω 
εταίρα, -ac, ή female companion; 
prostitute, courtesan 
έταΐροΰ (epic also έταροΰ), -ου, ό 
companion, comrade 
ΈτεόνΤκος, -ου, ό 
Eteonicus 
(Spartan commander) 
έτεροΰ, -α-ον (pron. and adj.) 
one or the other of two 
έτέρως (adv.) 
in the other way 
ώς έτερως 
quite otherwise 
έτι (adv.) 
still, yet; further 
έτι καί νυν 
even now 
ετοιμάζω get ready, prepare 
έτοιμος, -η, -ov 
ready, ready to 
hand, prepared; fixed, certain 
έτος, -ους, τό 
year 
έτραπόμην aor. of τρέπομαι 
έτυχον aor. of τυγχάνω 
εύ (adv.) 
well 
εύ λέγω speak well of (+acc., 
22A/2f(n)) 
εύ ποιέω 
treat well, do good 
to (+acc., 22A!2f(\\)) 
εύ πράττω fare well, be 
prosperous 
εύγενης, -ές 
noble, well-born; 
generous 
ευγνωςτος, -ov 
well-known 
εύδαιμονέω 
prosper, thrive; be 
happy 
εύδαιμονία, -ας, ή 
prosperity, 
happiness 
εύδαιμων, -ov blessed with good 
fortune; happy; rich 
Ευδαμίδας, -ου, ό 
Eudamidas 
εύδόκιμος, -ov famous, glorious 
εύδω 
sleep 
εύελπις, -ι 
hopeful (stem 
εύελπιδ-) 
εύεργεςία, -ας, ή 
kindness, 
service 
εύεργετέω 
do good to, benefit 
ευεργέτης, -ου, ο 
benefactor 
εύεργετητέον 
one must benefit 
(24.1/5) 
εύηλιος, -ov 
sunny, with a sunny 
aspect 
#εύθρονος (epic έΰ-), -ov fair-
throned 
ευθύ (+gen.) 
straight towards 
Εΰθύδημος, -ου, ό 
Euthydemus 
εύθύς (adv.) 
at once, 
straightaway 
εύκλεια, -ας, ή fame, glory 
Ευκλείδης, -ου, ό 
Eucleides 
εύλαβέομαι 
be cautious, beware, 
take care 
343 
§ 
ο fi> 
σ 
c 
ω 

344 
ο ο ω 
σ c 
ω 
«2 
εύλογος, -ov 
reasonable, sensible 
ευμενής, -ες 
well-disposed, 
kindly, favourable 
#εύμμελίης (epic έύ-), -ου 
armed 
with a good ash spear 
εύμορφία, -Gc, ή 
beauty of form 
or body 
εύνή, -ης, ή 
bed; marriage; sex 
εύνοια, -Gc ή good will 
ευνους, -ουν 
well-disposed 
#εύπλοέω 
have a fine voyage 
εύπορία, -ας, ή 
abundance, 
means 
εύπραξία, -ac, ή 
prosperity 
ευρ- aor. act./mid. stem of εύρίςκω 
εύρηκα perf. of εύρίςκω 
ΕύρΤπίδης, -ου, ό 
Euripides 
(tragic poet) 
+εύρ^κω 
find; get; invent 
ευροΰ, -ους, τό 
breadth 
ευρύς, -εια, -ύ 
broad, wide 
Εύρυςθεύς, -έως, ό Eurystheus 
(King of Mycenae) 
Ευρώπη, -ης, ή 
Europa (character 
in mythology) 
εύclαoc, -ov 
well-shaded 
εϋςτοχος, -ov 
aiming well 
εύτάκτως (adv.) 
in good order 
εϋτροφία, -ας, ή 
proper nurture 
εύτυχεω 
be fortunate/lucky 
ευτυχής, -ές 
fortunate, lucky 
εύτυχία, -ας, ή good fortune 
Εύτυχος, -ου, ό 
Eutychus 
ευτυχώς (adv.) 
with good fortune 
εύφημέω shout in triumph 
Εύφορίων, -<DVOC, ό 
Euphorion 
(father of Aeschylus) 
εύχαρις, -ι 
charming (stem 
εύχαριτ-) 
εύχή, -ης, ή 
prayer 
εύχομαι 
pray 
εύωνυμος, -ov 
of good name or 
omen; euphemistically for left, 
on the left hand (the side of a 
bad omen) 
#ευωριάζω 
disregard, neglect 
εύωχεομαι 
have a jfeast/party 
έφ' = έπί 
εφ' ωτε 
on condition that (+inf. 
or fut. ind., 16.1/1 note 4) 
έφάνην aor. of φαίνομαι 
έφήμερο^ -ov 
living but a day; 
mortal 
έφην impf. of φημί (7.1/2) 
έφίημι+ send; set on, send against; 
allow; (mid.) aim at, long for, 
desire (+gen.) 
έφίςτημι| 
set over, appoint 
έφοράω| 
oversee, observe, watch 
έφυγον aor. of φεύγω 
έφϋν be naturally, was naturally 
(see φύω) 
#έχθαίρω 
hate 
έχθές (adv.) yesterday 
έχθιςτος supl. of έχθρός 
έχθος, -ους, τό 
hatred 
έχθρα, -ας, ή 
enmity, hostility 
έχθρός, -ά -ov 
hostile (supl. 
έχθιςτος) 
έχθρός, -ού, ό 
(personal) enemy 
έχΐνος, -ου, ό 
hedgehog 
έχρήν impf. of χρή 
έχυρός, -ά, -όν 
strong, secure 
|έχω 
have, hold, check; (intr.) 
land, put in; (+adv.) be in a 
certain condition; (+inf.) be 
able 
έώος, -α, -ov 
of the morning 
έωρακα perf. of όράω 
έώρων impf. of όράω 
έως (conj.) (+av~subj.) 
until; 
(+opt.) until; (+ind.) while, until 
(21.1/2) 
έακ:, έω (acc. έω), ή 
dawn 
(13.1/1*) 
Zαγpεύc, -έως, ό 
Zagreus 
(another name of Dionysus) 
#ζάθεος, -α, -ov 
very holy, sacred 
ζάλη, -ης, ή 
squall, storm 
Ί"ζάω 
be alive, live, pass one's life 
ζεύγνϋμι 
yoke, bind, join 
Ζεύς, Aioc, ό 
Zeus (poetical also 
Ζήνα, Ζηνός, Ζηνί) 
ζέω 
boil 
ζηλόω 
admire, envy, emulate 
ζημία, -ας, ή fine, penalty, loss 
ζημιόω fine, punish 
Ζηνόθεμις, -ιδος, ό 
Zenothemis 
ζητέω 
look for, seek (+acc.) 
ζήτηςις, -εως, ή 
search, inquiry, 
investigation 
ζυγόν, -ού, τό 
yoke; bench (of 
ship) 
ζώγραφος, -ου, ό 
painter 
ζωγρέω 
take prisoners (alive) 
ζώνη, -ης, ή 
belt, girdle 
ζώον, -ου, τό animal, creature 
ζωός, -ή, -όν 
alive, living 
ζώω = ζαω 
live, pass one's life 

ή or; than 
ή (particle) 
indeed, really 
ή 1st s. impf. of ειμί (be) 
ή δ' oc said he (see note on 13.3(i) 
1.7) 
ή (adv.) 
where 
ηα impf. of ερχομαι/ειμι 
ήβάω be a young man 
ήβη, -ηο, ή 
youth 
ήγαγον aor. of άγω 
ήγεμών, -όνος, ό leader, guide 
ήγέομαι 
lead (+dat.); think, 
consider 
Ήγέοτρατος, -ου, ό 
Hegestratus 
#ήδε (conj.) 
and 
ήδει 3rd s. past of οίδα (19.1/3 
and Appendix 3) 
ήδεςαν 3rd pi. past of οίδα (19.1/3 
and Appendix 3) 
ήδέως (adv.) 
with pleasure, 
gladly, sweetly, pleasantly 
ήδη (adv.) 
(by) now, already, 
from now on 
ήδη 1st s. past of οίδα (19.1/3 and 
Appendix 3) 
Ιήδομαι 
enjoy, be pleased with 
(+dat.) 
ηδονή,-ης, ή 
pleasure 
ηδύς, -εια, -ύ sweet, pleasant, 
enjoyable (supl. ήδιςτος) 
J10.1/3*) 
ήε(=ή) 
or 
#ηελιος = ήλιος 
ήθος, -ους, τό custom, usage, 
character; (in pi.) manners, 
customs 
ήκιςτα (adv.) 
least of all, no, not 
at all 
ήκονημενος, -η, -ov perf. 
mid./pass. pple. of άκονάω 
ήκω 
have come (fut. ήξω will 
come) 
ήλθον aor. of έρχομαι/ειμι 
ήλικία, -ας, ή time of life, age 
Ήλιοδώρα, ΗΧς, ή 
Heliodora 
ήλιος, -ου, ό sun; (personified, 
with cap.) Sun-god 
ήμαι 
be seated, sit 
#ημαρ, -ατος, τό 
day 
ήμεις (pron.) 
we (4.1/2) 
ήμερα, -<Χς, ή 
day 
άμα (τη) ήμέρρ 
at dawn 
καθ' ήμέραν 
daily, by day 
ήμέτερος, -α, -ov (poss. adj.) 
#ήμίθραυςτος, -ov 
half-broken, 
broken in half 
ήμιςυς, -εια, -υ 
half 
#ήμος (conj.) 
when 
ήν = έάν 
ήν 3rd s. impf. of ειμί 
be 
ήν δ' έγώ 
said I (see note on 
13.3(i) /. 6) 
ήνεγκον aor. of φέρω 
ήπαρ, -ατος, τό 
liver 
ήπειρος -ου, ή 
mainland; 
continent 
ήπιςτάμην impf. of έπίςταμαι 
"Ηρα, -ας, ή Hera (consort of 
Zeus) 
'Ηράκλεια, -ac, ή Heraclea (town 
on Black Sea) 
'Ηράκλειτος, -ου, ό 
Heraclitus 
Ηρακλής, -κλέους, ό 
Heracles 
(=Hercules) 
ήρέμα (adv.) 
gently, softly 
Ηρόδοτος, -ου, ό 
Herodotus 
(historian) 
ήρό|χην aor. of έρωτάω 
Ηρώδης, -ου, ό 
Herodes 
ήρως, -ωος, ό 
hero (13.1/l6(i)) 
ήςαν 3rd pi. impf. of ειμί 
be 
ήςθα 2nd s. impf. of ειμί 
be 
ηςθην aor. of ήδομαι 
ήςθόμην aor. of αίςθάνομαι 
Ήςίοδος, -ου, ό Hesiod (early 
Greek poet) 
ήςυχάζω 
be quiet, keep quiet 
ήςυχρ 
quietly, gently 
ήςυχια, -ας, ή peace, quiet 
ήςυχος, -η, -ov 
quiet, peaceful 
ήττάομαι 
be defeated 
ήττων, ήττον (compar. adj.) lesser,' 
weaker, inferior (17.1/2 note 3) 
ηύρον aor. of εύρίοκω 
"Ηφαιςτος, -ου, ο 
Hephaestus 
(god of fire) 
ή^ω, ^-ούς, η echo (13.1/16(ii)) 
#ήως, ήούς, ή dawn; (personified, 
with eap.) Dawn 
θακέω sit 
θακος, -ου, ό seat 
θάλαττα, -ης, ή (Ionic θάλαςςα) 
sea 
Θαλής, -ού, ό 
Thales 
(philosopher from Miletus) 
#θάλος, -ους, τό shoot, sprout 
our 
θαμά (adv.) 
often 
345 
§ 
ο 
ω 
σ 
c 

346 
ο ο 
ω 
σ c Οί 
3 
θάμνοο, -ου, ό 
bush, thicket 
θαν- aor. stem of θνήςκω 
θάνατος, -ου, ό 
death 
|θάπτω 
bury, honour with funeral 
rites 
θαρραλέος, -α, -ov 
bold 
θαρρέω 
be of good courage, take 
courage, be confident 
θάρςος (Attic θάρρος), -ους, τό 
boldness 
θάτερος, -α, -ov = ό έτερος 
θάττων, θάττον 
quicker (compar. 
of ταχυο,17 Λ/lb) 
θαύμα, -ατος, τό 
wonder; marvel; 
astonishment 
Ιθαυμάζω 
wonder; marvel at 
(+gen.); be surprised; admire 
(+acc.) 
θαυμάςιος, -α -ov 
wonderful, 
strange; extraordinary 
θαυμαςιως (adv.) 
marvellously, 
wonderfully 
θαυμαςιως ώς 
exceedingly, 
prodigiously (22.1/l*(iii)) 
θαυμαςτώς (adv.) 
marvellously, 
wonderfully 
θαυμαςτώς ώς 
marvellously 
(22.1/l*(iii)) 
θε- aor. act./mid. stem of τίθημι 
θέα, -ac, ή 
s/gfo 
θεά, -ac, ή 
goddess 
Θεαίτητος, -ου, ό 
Theaetetus 
θέαμα, -ατος, τό 
sight, spectacle 
θεάομαι 
watch, gaze at, look at, 
observe 
Θεαρίδας, -ου, ό 
Thearidas 
θεατής, -ού, ό 
spectator 
θεήλατος, -ov 
sent by the gods 
θειος, -a, -ov 
divine, of the gods 
θέλγητρον, -ου, τό 
charm, spell 
θέλω 
wish, be willing (Ionic for 
έθέλω) 
θέμενοΰ, -η, -ov aor. pple. of 
τίθεμαι 
θέμις, -ιδος, ή 
that which is meet 
and right; justice; right 
θέμις έςτί 
it is right 
θέμις, -ιδος, ή 
Themis (mother 
of Prometheus) 
Θεμιςτοκλής, -κλέους, ό 
Themistocles (Athenian 
statesman) 
Θεόκριτος, -ου, ό 
Theocritus 
(pastoral poet) 
θεομαχέω 
fight against (a) god 
θεος, -ού, ό'η 
goc/,,/. 
προς θεών 
m theZ ·, 
gods 
·'...·. 
#θεοςτυγής, -ές 
hated ,· . 
θεραπεία, -ας, η 
s e r i 
" 
treatment 
θεραπευτέον 
one mn.> 
after/worship (24.1 > 
θεραπεύω 
look after, / ,·< 
after the interests 
<•> \ 
#θεράπων, -οντος, 6 seri μ^ 
Θερμοπύλαι, -ών, αι 
Thermopylae 
θερμός, -ή, -όν 
hot 
θέρος, -ους, τό 
summei 
θές 
place! put! (2nd s aor - -
act. of τίθημι) 
θέςθαι aor. inf. of τίθεμα-
Θετταλός, -ού, ό a Thessaluw 
θέω run 
Θηβαι, -ών, αί 
Thebes 
Θηβαίοι, -ων, οί 
Thebans 
Θηβαίος, -α, -ov 
of Thehes. 
Theban 
θήκη, -ης, ή tomb 
θηλυκός, -η, -όν female, femur,* 
θήλυς, -εια, -υ 
female 
θήρ, θηρός, ό 
wild beast 
θηράω hunt 
θηρεύω hunt 
θηρίον, -ου, τό 
Θηχης, -ου, ό 
j-θνηςκω 
die 
θνητός, -ή, -όν 
θοίμάτιον crasis for τό ι μα τι 
#θοός, -ή, -όν 
quick, swij'* 
θορυβέω make a disturbs < 
θόpυβoc, -ου, ό noise, dm 
clamour; commotion 
Θουκυδίδης,-ου, ό 
V m ^ ' ^ 
(historian) 
Θρςίκη, -ηΰ, ή ThraCt 
Θρφξ, Θρςικός, ό 
θράςος, -ους, το 
.. t 
θραςύς, -εια, -ύ 
bold, 
^^ 
θρεψ- aor. act./mid. stem 
θρηνέω 
bewail, lament ι 
θρίξ,τριχό^ή 
θυγάτηρ, -τρος, η 
a a u* ' 
(6.1/lb) 
θϋμός,-ού,ό 
spiritJn- 
· 
θύρα,-ας, ή 
door 
θυςία,-ας,ή sacrifice 
|θύω (A) 
sacrifice 
θύω (Β) 
rage 
wild beast 
(Mt.) Thecht 
mortal 

-CXOC, Ο 
• I'V 
trunk, chest (of 
Thorax (a 
heal, cure 
ού ο 
doctor, healer 
icr./mid. stem of οραω 
I^-ov 
of Mt. Ida (in 
. Idaean 
- 
η form> 
shaPe> 
adv.) 
privately 
-a. -ov private, personal, 
;:ne ^ου, ό private individual; 
,i\man 
01. (adv.) 
look! here! hey! 
.an inf. of έρχομαι/είμι (18.1/3 
and Appendix 3) 
t pa. -ών, τά n'tes, sacrifices 
i pria. -ων, τά 
offerings 
iPtOC,-έωο,ό pries? 
. pov, -οϋ, τό temple, sanctuary 
, poc, -ά, -όν sacred, holy 
Ιι ρωνυμοο, -ου, ό 
Hieronymus 
w 
let go, launch, 
/οτΐ& 
.20.1/2); (mid., poet.) he eager; 
strive 
hu>ic, -οϋ, ό Jesus 
'°ακη, -ης, ή J ^ c a (island 
Home of Odysseus) 
2nd s. imp. of έρχομαι/είμι 
' 18.1/3 and Appendix 3) 
•^οο,-ή,-όν 
sufficient; 
competent, capable (+inf.) 
^υω 
beg, supplicate 
^c.-ου,ό 
suppliant 
:'c!)Q ~ων Propitious (13Λ/1α) 
- - δ ο ο , ή Iliad (epic poem 
T
jBl epic equivalent of gen. of 
" 
ίλιον 
- 01 · -ου, τό 
Ilium, Troy 
Ilium, Troy 
^•M^subj.oropt.) i„ 
. V^p0,0 
W o s (King of 
" 
l? c a s t a (mother 
ι . 
^ e of Oedipus) 
' 
Ionic, Ionian 
Ιουδαίος -ου, ό 
Jew 
innevc, -έως, ό 
horseman, 
cavalry; rider 
ιππεύω 
ride 
#ίππόδαμος -ov 
horse-taming 
Ίπποθαλης, -ους, ό 
Hippothales 
Ιπποκράτης, -ου, ό 
Hippocrates 
Ιππόλυτος, -ου, ό 
Hippolytus 
ΊππόνΤκος, -ου, ό 
Hipponicus 
Ιπποπόταμος, -ου, ό 
hippopotamus 
ίππος, -ου, ό 
horse; ή cavalry 
άπο (άφ') ίππου 
from 
horseback 
icGci 3rd pi. of οίδα (Appendix 3) 
ίςθι 2nd s. imp. of ειμί and οίδα 
(Appendix 3) 
ίςθμος, ού, ό 
isthmus 
ίςμεν 1st pi. of οίδα (Appendix 3) 
ίςος, -η, -ov 
equal to (+dat.) 
Ι'ίςτημι 
make to stand; (mid. and 
intr. tenses of act.) stand (19.1/1) 
ίςτορίσ, -ας, ή 
enquiry, 
investigation 
ίςτός, -ού, ό 
loom; web 
"Ιςτρος, -ου, ό 
Danube 
#ίςχε (2nd s. imp. of ίςχω, a form 
of έχω) 
stop! 
Ίςχόμαχος, -ου, ό 
Ischomachus 
ΐςχϋρός, -ά, -όν 
powerful, strong 
ίςχϋρώς (ad.) 
very much, 
exceedingly 
ιςως (adv.) 
perhaps 
Ιταλία, -ας, η 
Italy 
#'ίχθυόεις, -εςςα, -€ν 
full offish 
ιχθύς,-ύος,ό 
fish 
ίχνος, -ους, τό 
track, footstep 
ίω subj. of έρχομαι/είμι (Appendix 
Ίωλκιος, -α, -ov 
of Iolcus (city at 
east of Thessaly) 
ίων, ίούοα, ιόν pple. of 
έρχομαι/είμι (Appendix 3) 
κάγώ crasis for καί έγώ 
Καδμείος, -α, -ov 
Cadmean (i.e. 
Theban) 
καθαιμάττω 
make bloody, stain 
with blood 
καθαιρέω| 
take down, destroy 
καθαιρώ! 
cleanse, purify 
καθαρός, -ά, -όν 
free from 
guilt/defilement, pure 
καθεύδω 
sleep 
κάθημαι 
be seated (19.1/36) 

θάμνος, -ου, ό 
bush, thicket 
θαν- aor. stem of θνηςκω 
θάνατοο, -ου, ό 
death 
tθάπτω 
bury, honour with funeral 
rites 
θαρράλεοο, -α, -ov 
bold 
θαρρέω 
be of good courage, take 
courage, be confident 
θάρςος (Attic θάρρος), -ους, τό 
boldness 
θάτερος, -α, -ov = ό έτερος 
θάττων, θάττον 
quicker (compar. 
of ταχύς, 17.1/26) 
θαύμα, -ατος, τό 
wonder; marvel; 
astonishment 
tθαυμάζω 
wonder, marvel at 
(+gen.); be surprised; admire 
(+acc.) 
θαυμάςιος, -α -ov 
wonderful, 
strange; 
extraordinary 
θαυμαςιως (adv.) 
marvellously, 
wonderfully 
θαυμαςιως ώς 
exceedingly, 
prodigiously (22.1/l*(iii)) 
θαυμαςτώς (adv.) 
marvellously, 
wonderfully 
θαυμαςτώς ώς 
marvellously 
(22.1/Miii)) 
θε- aor. act./mid. stem of τίθημι 
θέα, -Gc, ή 
sight 
θεά, -ac, ή 
goddess 
Θεαίτητος, -ου,ό 
Theaetetus 
θέαμα, -ατος, τό 
sight, spectacle 
θεάομαι 
watch, gaze at, look at, 
observe 
Θεαρίδσς, -ου, ό 
Thearidas 
θεατής, -ού, ό 
spectator 
θεήλατος, -ov 
sent by the gods 
θειος, -a, -ov 
divine, of the gods 
θέλγητρον, -ου, τό 
charm, spell 
θέλω 
wish, be willing (Ionic for 
έθέλω) 
θέμενοΰ, -η, -ov aor. pple. of 
τίθεμαι 
θέμις, -ιδος, ή 
that which is meet 
and right; justice; right 
θέμις έςτί 
it is right 
Θέμις, -ιδος, ή 
Themis (mother 
of Prometheus) 
Θεμιςτοκλής, -κλέους, ό 
Themistocles (Athenian 
statesman) 
Θεόκριτος, -ου, ό 
Theocritus 
(pastoral poet) 
θεομαχέω 
fight against (a) god 
θεός, -ού, ό/ή 
god(dess) 
προς θεών 
in the name of the 
gods 
#θεοςτυγής, -ές 
hated by the gods 
θεραπεία, -ας, ή 
service, 
treatment 
θεραπευτέον 
one must look 
after/worship (24.1/5) 
θεραπεύω 
look after, tend; look 
after the interests of, protect 
#θεράπων, -οντος, ό 
servant 
Θερμοπύλαι, -ων, αί 
Thermopylae 
θερμός, -ή, -όν 
hot 
θέρος, -ους, τό 
summer 
θές 
place! put! (2nd s. aor. imp. 
act. of τίθημι) 
θέςθαι aor. inf. of τίθεμαι 
Θετταλός, -ού, ό 
a Thessalian 
θέω 
run 
Θηβαι, -ών, αί 
Thebes 
Θηβαίοι, -ων, οί 
Thebans 
Θηβαίος, -α, -ov 
of Thebes, 
Theban 
θήκη, -ης, ή 
tomb 
θηλυκός, -ή, -όν 
female, feminine 
θήλυς, -εια, -υ 
female 
θήρ, θηρός, ό 
wild beast 
θηράω 
hunt 
θηρεύω 
hunt 
θηρίον, -ου, τό 
wild beast 
Θηχης, -ου, ό 
(Mt.) Theches 
Ιθνηςκω 
die 
θνητός, -ή, -όν 
mortal 
θοίμάτιον crasis for τό ίμάτιον 
#θοός, -ή, -όν 
quick, swift 
θορυβέω 
make a disturbance/dm 
θόρυβος -ου, ό 
noise, din, 
clamour, commotion 
Θουκυδίδης, -ου, ό 
Thucydides 
(historian) 
Θρςικη, -ης, ή 
Thrace 
Θρφξ, Θρςικός, ό 
Thracian 
θράςος, -ους, τό 
boldness 
θραςύς, -εια, -ύ 
bold, brave 
θρεψ- aor. act./mid. stem οί tpt·. 
θρηνέω 
bewail,lamentover• 
θρίξ,τριχο^,η 
hair (5. lh 
^ 
θυγατηρ, -τροο, η 
dangler 
(6.1/1 b) 
, 
, „f 
θΰμόΰ,-ού,ό 
spirit, 
hearts* 
θύρα, -ac, ή 
door 
θυ^α, -ac, ή 
sacrifice 
+θύω (A) 
sacrifice 
θύω (Β) 
rage 

θώραξ, -SKOC, ό 
trunk, chest (of 
body) 
Θωραξ, -SKOC, Ο Thorax (a 
Boeotian) 
τάομαι 
heal, cure 
TGxpoc, -ού, ό 
doctor, healer 
ίδ- aor. act./mid. stem of όράω 
Ίδαίος, -α, -ov of Mt. Ida (in 
Crete), Idaean 
ιδέα, -ας, ή form, shape, type 
ίδί<? (adv.) 
privately 
ίδιος, -α, -ov private, personal, 
one's own 
ιδιώτης, -ου, ό 
private individual; 
layman 
ιδού (adv.) 
look! here! hey! 
ίέναι inf. of έρχομαι/είμι (18.1/3 
and Appendix 3) 
ιερά, -ών, τά 
rites, sacrifices 
ίερεία, -ων, τά 
offerings 
ιερεύς, -έως, ό 
priest 
ιερόν, -ού, τό temple, sanctuary 
ίερόο, -ά, -όν sacred, holy 
Ιερώνυμος, -ου, ό 
Hieronymus 
+Τημι let go, launch, send forth 
(20.1/2); (mid., poet.) be eager, 
strive 
Ίηςούς, -ού, ό Jesus 
'Ιθάκη, -ης, ή 
Ithaca (island 
home of Odysseus) 
ιθι 2nd s. imp. of έρχομαι/είμι 
. (18.1/3 and Appendix 3) 
ικανός, -η, -όν 
sufficient; 
. competent, capable (+inf.) 
ικετεύω 
beg, supplicate 
^ετης, -ου, ό 
suppliant 
^εως, -ων propitious (13.1/1 a) 
^iac, -αδος, ή Iliad (epic poem 
by Homer) 
ίλιοθι epic equivalent of gen. of 
,7 ΙλιοςΛϊλιον 
Uiov, —ου, τό 
Ilium, Troy 
Ilium, Troy 
"^wsaitssTi 
Ubya)^'6 
I war os (King of 
anH?'·^* ^ 
l°casta (mother 
i C o c ^ e o f Oedipus) 
* ' -°v 
Ionic, Ionian 
Ιουδαίος, -ου, ό Jew 
ίππεύς, -έως, ό 
horseman, 
cavalry; rider 
ιππεύω 
ride 
#ίππόδαμος, -ov 
horse-taming 
Κπποθαλης, -ους, ό 
Hippothales 
Ιπποκράτης, -ου, ό 
Hippocrates 
Ιππόλυτος, -ου, ό 
Hippolytus 
ΊππόνΤκος, -ου, ό 
Hipponicus 
ιπποπόταμος, -ου, ό 
hippopotamus 
ίππος, -ου, ό 
horse; ή cavalry 
άπο (αφ') ίππου 
from 
horseback 
icQcx 3rd pi. of οίδα (Appendix 3) 
ίςθι 2nd s. imp. of ειμί and οίδα 
(Appendix 3) 
ίοθμος, ού, ό 
isthmus 
ίςμεν 1st pi. of οίδα (Appendix 3) 
ϊςος, -η, -ov equal to (+dat.) 
Ιίςτημι 
make to stand; (mid. and 
intr. tenses of act.) stand (19.1/1) 
ίςτορία, -Cfc, ή 
enquiry, 
investigation 
ίςτός, -ού, ό loom; web 
"Ιςτρος, -ου, ό 
Danube 
#ίςχε (2nd s. imp. of ίςχω, a form 
of έχω) 
stop! 
Ίςχόμαχος, -ου, ό 
Ischomachus 
ίςχϋρός, -ά, -όν 
powerful, strong 
ίςχϋρώς (ad.) 
very much, 
exceedingly 
ίςως (adv.) 
perhaps 
Ιταλία, -ας, η 
Italy 
#ίχθυόεις, -εςςα, -εν 
full of fish 
ιχθύς,-ύος,ό 
fish 
ίχνος, -ους, τό track, footstep 
ϊω subj. of έρχομαι/είμι (Appendix 
,3) 
Ίώλκιος, -α, -ov 
of Iolcus (city at 
east of Thessaly) 
ίων, ίούοα, ιόν pple. of 
έρχομαι/είμι (Appendix 3) 
κάγώ crasis for καί έγώ 
Καδμείος, -α, -ov 
Cadmean (i.e. 
Theban) 
καθαιμάττω make bloody, stain 
with blood 
καθαιρέω| 
take down, destroy 
καθαίρω| 
cleanse, purify 
καθαρός -ά, -όν free from 
guilt/defilement, pure 
καθεύδω 
sleep 
κάθημαι 
be seated (19.1/36) 
347 
S 
ο to 
σ 
c 

καθίζω sit down (tr. and intr.); 
(mid.) sit down (intr.) 
καθίοτημιΙ 
set down; put in a 
certain state; appoint; establish; 
(mid. and intr. tenses of act.) 
settle down; come into a certain 
state; be appointed; be 
established 
κάθοδος, -ου, ή way down 
καθοράω| 
see, catch sight of, 
look down on 
καθυπερθεν (adv.) 
from above 
καί (conj.) 
and; (adv.) also; even; 
actually, in fact 
καί . . . καί 
both . . . and 
τε* . . . καί 
both . . . and 
και γάρ 
in fact; yes, certainly 
καί δή and really, moreover; as 
a matter of fact; look!; let us 
suppose (13.1/3c) 
καί δή καί 
and especially, and 
in 
particular 
καί μήν what's more; look! 
καινός, -ή, -όν fresh, new, novel 
καίπερ 
although (+pple. 
12.1/2a(iii)) 
καιρός, -ού, ό right time; 
opportunity; time; crisis 
Kaicap, -apoc, ό 
Caesar 
καίτοι (particle) 
and yet, 
however (13.1/3c(iv)) 
|καίω 
burn, kindle, set fire to 
κακηγορίσ, -flc, ή 
slander 
κακία, -ας, ή 
wickedness 
κακίζω 
abuse 
κακίων, -ov 
worse (compar. of 
κακός) 
κακοδαίμων, -ov 
unlucky, 
unfortunate 
κακόνοια, -Qc, ή 
malice 
KOKOC, -ή, -όν 
bad, evil, wicked; 
cowardly; mean, lowly; (neuter 
used as noun) trouble 
κακά (κακώς) λέγω speak ill of 
(+acc., 22A/2f(ii)) 
κακά (κακώΰ) ποιέω 
treat 
badly; do harm to (+acc., 
22.\!2f(\\)) 
κακόω 
ruin; wrong, maltreat 
κακώς (adv.) 
badly, wickedly 
κακώc έχω 
be in a bad 
state!condition 
καλεο- aon act./mid. stem of 
καλέω 
καλέω 
call, summon; name 
Καλλικρατίδας -ου, ό 
Callicratidas 
Καλλίμαχος -ου, ό 
Callimachus 
(Alexandrian poet) 
κάλλιοτος -η, -ov most beautiful 
(supl. of καλόο) 
καλλίων, -ov more beautiful 
(compar. of καλόΰ) 
κάλλος TOUC, τό 
beauty 
καλός, -ή, -όν 
beautiful, good, 
fine; honourable 
Καλυψώ, -ούς ή 
Calypso (nymph 
who detained Odysseus on the 
island Ogygia) (13.1/lfc(ii)) 
καλώς (adv.) 
well, rightly 
καλώς έχω 
be in a good 
statelcondition 
κάμηλος, -ου, ό/ή 
camel 
κάμνω (aor. έκαμον) 
toil, labour 
κάμπτω 
bend 
κάν crasis for καί αν and καί έάν 
κάν crasis for καί έν 
καπνός -ού, ό 
smoke 
καρδίδ, -<Χς ή 
heart 
Καρδούχοι, -ων, οί 
Kurds 
#κάρη, -ητος τό 
head 
Κσριδ, -ac, ή 
Carta (region in 
S.W. Asia Minor) 
καρκίνος -ου, ό 
crab 
καρπός, -ού, ό 
fruits, harvest 
καρτεράς, -ά, -όν 
strong, 
mighty 
#καςίγνητος, -ου, ό 
brother 
κατά (prep.) (+acc.) 
in, on, at; in 
the region of; by, according to; 
down, throughout, during; in 
relation to, with respect to 
κατά γην καί κατά θάλατταν 
by land and by sea 
(+gen.) below, down from; 
against 
καταβαίνω! go down, come 
down 
καταβιβάζω make go down, 
bring down 
καταγελάω| 
laugh at, mock 
(+gen.) 
καταγιγνώςκω| 
condemn (acc.of 
the charge, gen. of the person, 
23.1/lk(i)) 
καταγορεύω (fut. κατερώ, 18.1/4 
note 2) 
denounce 
κατάγω| 
take/lead down; bring 
back/restore (from exile) 
καταδουλόω 
enslave 

καταδύω 
make to sink, lay to rest 
#καταθνήςκω! 
die 
κατακαλύπτω 
cover over 
κατακειμαι 
lie down 
κατακόπτω 
cut to pieces 
κατακρίνω! give sentence against 
(acc. of penalty, gen. of person, 
23.1/l*(i)) 
καταλαμβάνω! 
overtake, come 
across; seize, catch, capture 
καταλέγω pick, choose; recount 
(18.1/4 note 1) 
καταλείπω! 
leave behind, 
bequeath 
κατάλυςις, -εως, ή 
overthrow, 
destruction 
καταλύω 
bring to an end, 
destroy; finish; (intr.) stay, lodge 
καταμείγνϋμι! 
mix in, combine 
Κατάνη, -ης, ή 
Catana (city in 
Sicily) 
καταντικρύ (prep.+gen.) 
right 
opposite 
καταπαύω 
put an end to (+acc.) 
καταπίπτω! fall down 
καταπλέω! sail down/back 
κατάπλους, -ου, ό arrival in port 
καταράομαι 
call down curses on 
(+dat.) # 
καταςκευάζω 
prepare, arrange 
κατάςκοπος, -ου, ό 
scout, spy; 
inspector 
καταςτρέφομαι 
subdue, subject 
to oneself 
καταστροφή, -ής, ή 
overthrowing; 
conclusion 
#καταφθίμενος, -η, -ov 
dead 
καταφρονέω 
despise, look down 
on (+gen.) 
καταχέω 
pour down, shed 
καταψηφίζομαι 
vote against 
(acc. of penalty, gen. of person, 
23.1/lk(i)) 
κατέλιπον aor. of καταλείπω 
κατεπείγω press hard 
κατέρχομαι! g° down/back; 
return from exile 
κατεςθίω! 
eat 
UP> devour 
κατέχω! hold back, check 
κατηγορέω 
accuse (acc. of 
charge, gen. of person, 
23.1/l*(i)) 
κατίςχω 
hold back, check 
κατόπιν (adv., and prep.+gen.) 
after 
κάτοπτρον, -ου, τό 
mirror 
κατοχή, -ής, ή possession (by a 
spirit) 
κάτω (adv.) 
below, down 
καυς- fut. and aor. 3ςί./π^. stem 
of καίω 
#κε(ν) = άν 
Κέβης, -ητος, ό 
Cebes 
κειμαι 
lie; be placed (19.1/3b) 
κείνος, -η, -ο = έκεΐνος 
κείρω cut (the hair), shear 
κειςε = έκειςε 
κέκρικα perf. of κρίνω 
κέκτημαι 
own, possess (perf. of 
κτάομαι 19.1/3 a) 
#κέλευθος, -ου, ή road, path 
κελευςτέον 
one must order 
(24.1/5) 
ίκελεύω 
order, urge, tell... 
to, 
bid 
κέλης, -ητος, ό fast-sailing ship, 
pinnace 
#κέλομαι 
urge, order, command 
#κενεός, -ά, -ov = κενός 
κενός, -ή, -όν 
empty 
κέντρον, -ου, τό 
goad 
κεραννϋμι 
mix 
κέρας, -ατος, τό horn; branch (of 
a river); with gen. κέρως, wing 
of an army/fleet (13.1 lb (iii)) 
κέρδος, -ους, τό gain; profit 
#κεύθω 
hide, conceal 
κεφαλή, -ής, ή 
head 
κηδεμών, -όνος, ό 
protector 
κήρυξ, -υκος, ό 
herald 
Κίλιξ, -ικος, ό 
a Cilician 
κινδυνεύω 
be in danger, run a 
risk; be likely to (+inf.) 
κίνδυνος, -ου, ό 
danger 
*Τνέω 
move 
κίνημα, -ατος, τό 
movement 
Κινυρης, -ου, ό 
Cinyres 
Κίρκη, -ης, ή 
Circe (enchantress 
in Odyssey on island Aeaea) 
κίων, -ovoc, ή 
pillar 
Κλαζομένιος, -0, -ov 
of/from 
Clazomenae 
!κλαίω 
weep; weep for, lament; 
(mid.) bewail to oneself 
κλαυς- aor. 3ςί./π^. stem of 
κλαίω 
Κλέανδροο, -ου, ό 
Cleander 
Κλεό^ωρ, -ορος, ό 
Cleanor 
Κλεάρετος, -ου, ό 
Clearetus 
Κλέαρχος, -ου, ό 
Clearchus 

Κλεινίας, -ου, ό 
Cleinias 
κλείω 
close, shut 
κλέος, -ους, τό 
glory 
κλέπτης -ου, ό 
thief 
tκλέπτω 
steal 
Κλέων, -ωνoc, ό 
Cleon (Athenian 
politician) 
κληθείς -^ειςα, -έν aor. pass. pple. 
of καλέω 
#κληΐς, -ΐδος ή 
rowing-bench 
κληρουχικός, -η, -όν 
belonging 
to a cleruchy 
κλΐμαξ, -ακος, ή 
ladder, stairway 
κλοπή, -ης, ή 
theft 
κλύδων, -ωνος, ό 
wave, surf; 
turmoil 
κλωπεύω 
steal 
Κνίδος, -ου, ή 
Cnidos (city in 
Asia Minor) 
κοιμάομαι 
sleep, slumber 
Koivfj (adv.) 
in common 
KOIvoc, -η, -όν 
common, shared, 
public 
κοινωνίδ, -δς, ή 
association, 
intercourse 
κοινωνός, -ού, ό 
partner 
#κοιρανέω 
be lord/master of, rule 
over (+gen.) 
κολάζω 
punish 
κολακεία, -ας, ή 
flattery 
κόλπος, -ου, ό bosom; gulf 
f κομίζω carry, convey, bring; 
(mid.) acquire, recover 
κομπέω boast of 
#κονία, -ας, ή 
dust 
#κόνις, -εως, ή 
dust 
Κόνων, -ωνος, ό 
Conon 
(Athenian admiral) 
κόπος, -ου, ό exertion, fatigue 
κόπτω 
cut; knock on 
κόραξ, -ακος, ό 
crow 
κόρη, -ης, ή maiden, girl 
Κορίνθιοι, -ων, οί 
Corinthians 
Κορίνθιος, -α, -ov 
from Corinth 
Κόρινθος, -ου, ή 
Corinth 
#κορυθαίολος, -ov 
with gleaming 
helmet 
κοςμοπολίτης, -ου, ό citizen of 
the world 
κόςμος, -ου, ό 
decoration, 
ornament; order; universe; 
world 
κού(κ) crasis for καί ού(κ) 
κουρεύς, -έως, ό 
barber 
Κουρήτες, -ων, οί 
Curetes (minor 
divinities associated with 
orgiastic rites) 
κουφιζω 
lighten, make light 
κούφος, -η, -ov light, nimble 
κούφως (adv.) 
lightly 
κρΟνίον, -ου, τό 
skull 
#κρατερός, -ά, -όν 
hard, strong 
κρατέω 
hold sway/power over, 
rule, control; defeat (+gen., 
13.1/2*(i)) 
κρατήρ, -ηρος, ό 
mixing-bowl 
κράτιςτος, -η, -ov 
best, strongest 
(supl. of αγαθός, κρείττων) 
κράτος -ους, τό 
strength, power; 
supremacy; (personified) Might 
κατά κράτος 
vigorously 
κρατϋνω 
strengthen 
κραυγή, -ης, ή shouting, din 
κρέας, -ως, τό meat (13.1/16(iii)) 
κρείττων, -ov 
stronger, greater; 
better (compar. of αγαθός) 
κρεμάθρα, -ας, ή hanging basket 
κρεμάννϋμι 
hang (tr.); (mid. 
κρέμαμαι) hang (intr.) 
κρήνη, -ης, ή 
spring 
Κρητη, -ης, ή 
Crete 
#κρΐ (nom. and acc. s. only), τό 
barley 
f κρίνω 
judge, decide; select, 
choose 
Kpicic, -εως ή 
judgement; 
decision; dispute; trial 
κριτής -ού, ό 
judge 
Κροιςος, -ου, ό 
Croesus (King of 
Lydia) 
κροκόδΓλος, -ου, ό 
crocodile 
Κρονίδης, -ου, ό son of Cronos 
(i.e. Zeus) 
κρόταφοι, -ων, οί 
temples (of 
forehead) 
#κρουνός, -ού, ό spring, stream 
κρούω 
strike, knock 
#κρυπτάδιος, -α, -ov 
secret, 
clandestine 
κρύπτω 
keep secret, hide; bury; 
cover 
f κτάομαι 
acquire, get; (perf.) own, 
possess (19.1/3a) 
|κτείνω 
kill 
κτήμα, -ατος, τό 
(a) possession 
Κτηςιππος, -ου, ό 
Ctesippus 
κτηςις, -εως, ή 
possession 
κτίζω 
found, build 

κτύπος -ου, ό 
din, noise 
κυάνεος, -α, -ov dark, black 
Κυαξάρης, -ου, ό 
Cyaxares (uncle 
of Cyprus) 
κυβερνήτης, -ου, ό 
helmsman, 
captain 
κύβος, -ου, ό 
(a) die; (mostly in 
pi.] dice 
#κϋδαινω 
glorify 
κυκάω 
stir 
κύμα, -ατος τό 
wave 
Κυμαιος -α, -ov 
of or from 
Cyme (city in Asia Minor) 
Κύπριο, -ιδος ή the Cyprian 
(goddess), Cypris (a name of 
Aphrodite, from the island of 
Cyprus) 
Κϋρήνη, -ης, ή 
Cyrene (city in N. 
Africa) 
κύριος, -α, -ov 
having 
power!authority 
Κύρος, -ου, ό 
Cyrus (1. founder 
of the Persian empire; 2. 
younger son of Darius Π) 
κύων, κυνός, ό/ή 
dog 
κώλον, -ου, τό 
limb 
κωλύω 
prevent, stop (+acc. and 
inf., 24.1/7) 
κώμη, -ης, ή 
village 
λαβ- aor. act./mid. stem of 
λαμβάνω 
λαγχάνω obtain by lot; win as a 
portion, get (+gen.) 
λαγώς -ώ, ο 
hare (13.1/1 a) 
λαθ- aor. act./mid. stem of 
λανθάνω 
λάθρςι (adv.) 
secretly 
#λάθριος -ov secret, secretly 
#λάινος, -η, -ov 
of stone 
Λάϊος, -ου, ό Laius (father of 
Oedipus) 
Λαΐς, -ΐδος, ή 
Lais 
Λάκαινα, -ης, ή 
Laconian 
(Spartan) woman 
Λακεδαιμόνιος, -ου, ό 
Lacediaemonian, Spartan 
Λακεδαίμων, -ονος, η 
Lacedaemon, Sparta 
λακτίζω 
kick 
Λάκων, -ωνος, ό 
Laconian, 
Spartan 
Λακωνικός, -ή, -όν 
Laconian, 
Spartan 
λαλέω talk, prattle, chatter 
tλαμβάνω 
take, get, capture 
δικην λαμβάνω 
punish, exact 
one's due from (παρά+gen.) 
λαμπρός, -G, -όν 
bright, brilliant, 
famous 
λάμπω 
shine 
tλανθάνω 
escape notice of 
(15.1/2/); (mid.) forget 
#λαος, -ού, ό 
people 
Λαςθένης, -ους, ό 
Lasthenes 
λαχ- aor. act./mid. stem of 
λαγχάνω 
λέγω 
speak, say, tell, mean 
ούδέν λέγω speak/talk nonsense 
λείβω 
pour; let flow, shed 
tλείπω 
leave, abandon 
λείψανον, -ου, τό 
remnant 
λέληθα perf. of λανθάνω 
λεοντή, -ης, ή 
lion-skin 
λεπτός, -ή, -όν 
subtle, fine; 
delicate, thin 
λέςχη,-ης, ή 
conversation 
λευκαίνω (aor. έλεύκανα) 
make 
white, whiten 
λευκός, -ή, -όν 
white 
#λεύςςω 
look upon, behold 
λέων, -οντος, ό 
lion 
Λεωνίδας, -ου, ό 
Leonidas 
(Spartan king) 
λεωργός, -όν villainous; (as 
noun) wrong-doer 
#λεώς, -ω, ό people (13.1/1*) 
λήθη, -ης, ή 
forgetfulness 
λήθω = λανθάνω 
ληκύθιον, -ου, τό little oil-flask 
#λήμα, -ατος, τό 
arrogance, 
audacity 
ληςτρικός, -ή, -όν 
belonging to 
pirates 
ληφθ- aor. pass, stem of λαμβάνω 
λήψομαι fut. of λαμβάνω 
λίδν (adv.) 
very, exceedingly; too 
much 
Λιβύη, -ης, ή 
Libya 
Λίβυς -υος ό * Libyan 
λιγυρός -ά, -όν clear, shrill 
λίθινος, -η, -ov 
made of stone 
(see also χυτός) 
λίθος, -ου, ό 
stone 
λιμήν, -ένος, ό 
harbour 
λίμνη, -ης, ή lake (especially 
marshy) 
λιμός -ού, ό hunger, famine 

352 
S Ο 
tt σ c 0) 
3 
#λίςςομαι 
beg, beseech 
λογίζομαι 
calculate, reckon, 
consider 
λόγος, -ου, ό 
speech, tale, word, 
account; argument; reason, 
explanation 
λόγχη, ^ης, ή spear, javelin 
λοιδορέω 
abuse, revile; (mid., 
+dat.) abuse, scold 
λοιπός, -η, -όν 
left, remaining 
λούω 
wash (the body); (mid.) 
wash oneself 
λόφος, -ου, ό 
hill 
λοχαγός, -ού, ό 
company 
commander, captain 
Λϋδία, -ας, ή 
Lydia (territory in 
west of Asia Minor) 
Λϋδός, -ού, ό 
Lydian 
Λυκαονία, -ας, ή 
Lycaonia 
(country in Asia Minor) 
Λύκειον, -ου, τό 
the Lyceum 
(park and gymnasium in 
Athens) 
Λύκιοο, -ου, ό 
Lycius 
λύκος, -ου, ό 
wolf 
Λυκούργος, -ου, ό 
Lycurgus 
(traditional Spartan legislator) 
λϋπεω 
cause distress to, annoy, 
grieve; (mid.) be distressed, 
grieve 
λύπη, -ης, ή pain, grief 
λύρα, -ας, ή 
lyre 
Λϋςίμαχος, -ου, ό 
Lysimachus 
λϋςιτελεΐ (impers.) 
it is 
profitable (+dat. and inf., 
21.1/4*) 
#λύςςα, ης, ή frenzy, raging 
madness 
λυτήριον, -ου, τό 
remedy, 
deliverance 
λύχνος, -ου, ό 
lamp 
λύω 
loosen, release; break up; 
(mid.) ransom 
λφςτος, -η, -ov (supl. adj.) 
best 
λωτός, -ού, ό 
lotus 
Λωτοφάγοι, -ων, οί 
Lotus-Eaters 
λωφάω lighten, relieve 
μά (particle of asseveration, 
affirmative or negative) 
yes by 
..., no by ... ! (+acc., 22.1/26)) 
μάζα, -T|c, ή 
barley bread 
μαθ- aor. act./mid. stem of 
μανθάνω 
μάθημα, -ατος, τό 
lesson 
μαθηςομαι fut. of μανθάνω 
μαθητεον 
one must learn (24.1/5) 
μαθητής, -ού, ό 
student 
Μαίανδρος, -ου, ό 
Maeander 
(river in Phrygia) 
μαίνομαι 
rage, be furious, be 
mad 
μακαρίζω 
congratulate 
μακάριος, -α, -ov 
blessed, happy 
Μακεδονία, -ας, ή 
Macedonia 
μακρόβιος, -ov 
long-lived 
μακρός, -ά, -όν 
long, large, big 
μακράν (adv. acc.) 
far off 
μακρω 
by far 
μάλα (adv.) 
very; quite 
μαλθακίζομαι 
be softened 
μαλθακός, -ή, -όν 
faint-hearted, 
cowardly 
μάλιςτα (supl. of μάλα) 
especially, particularly; yes 
μάλλον (compar. of μάλα) 
more; 
rather 
f μανθάνω 
learn, understand; 
(+inf.) learn how to 
μανία, -ac, ή 
madness 
μαντεύομαι 
consult an oracle 
μαντικώς (adv.) 
prophetically 
μάντις, ^εως, ό seer, prophet 
Μαραθών, -ωνος, ό Marathon (in 
Attica) 
Μαραθώνι 
at Marathon 
Μαραθώνιος, -α, -ov 
of 
Marathon 
#μαργών, -ωςα, -ων (pple. of 
μαργάω) 
raging 
#μάρπτω 
take hold of, seize 
μαρτυρέω 
give evidence, bear 
witness 
μαρτυρία, -ας, ή 
evidence, 
testimony 
μάρτυς, -υρος, ό/ή 
witness 
Μαςςαλία, -ας, ή 
Marseilles 
μαςτεύω 
seek, search after 
μαςιΤγοφόρος, -ου, ό 
whip-bearer 
μαςιΤγόω whip, flog 
μαςτίζω 
whip, flog 
μάτην (adv.) 
in vain; without 
reason 
μάτηρ = μήτηρ 
μάττω 
knead 
μάχαιρα, -ας, ή 
knife 
μάχη, -ης, ή 
battle, fight 
μάχιμος, -η, -ov 
warlike 

|μάχομαι 
fight (+dat., 13.1/26(iii)) 
Μεγακλής, -έους, ό 
Megacles 
Μεγαροι (adv.) 
in/at Megara 
μέγας, μεγάλη, μέγα (stem μεγαλ-; 
3.1/3) 
great, big; tall; 
important; loud 
μέγεθος - ο υ ς τό 
size 
μέγιοτος -η, -ov greatest (supl. of 
μέγαο) 
μεθΤημι| 
let go, release; give up; 
allow 
μεθίστημι+ (mid. and intr. tenses of 
act.) 
change, alter (intr.) 
μεθύω 
be drunk 
μείγνϋμι (also μΤγ-, aor. pass, 
έμίγην) 
mix, join; (pass.) 
be joined, mix with, have 
sexual intercourse with (+dat.) 
Μειδίδς, -ου, ό 
Meidias 
μείζων, -ov 
greater (compar. of 
μέγας) 
#μειλι^ος, -ov gentle, kind 
μειρακιον, -ου, τό 
lad, boy 
μέλας, -αινα, -αν 
black (10.1/3 
note 2) 
Μελέαγρος, -ου, ό 
Meleager 
(poet and philosopher) 
tμέλει (impers.) 
there is a 
care/concern (+dat. of pers. and 
gen. of thing, 21.1/46) 
μελετάω 
practise 
Μέλητος -ου, ό 
Meletus (accuser 
of Socrates) 
μέλι, -ιτος, τό 
honey 
#μελιηδής, -ές 
honey-sweet 
μέλιττα, -ης, ή 
bee 
tμέλλω 
be destined to; be about 
to, be going to; intend; hesitate 
μέλον (acc. absol.) 
it being a care 
(21.1/5) 
#μέλω (for principal parts see under 
μέλει) 
be of concern 
μέμνημαι (perf.) 
remember 
(+gen., 13.1/2*(iii)) (19.1/3*) 
μέμφομαι 
blame, criticize, find 
fault with (+dat. or acc.) 
μεν* . . . δέ* 
on the one hand 
. . . and/but on the other (4.1/3) 
μέν ούν 
no, on the contrary 
(13.1/3c(iii)) 
Μένανδρος, -ου, ό 
Menander 
(writer of New Comedy) 
Μενδηςιος -δ, -ov 
of Mendes (a 
town in the Nile Delta), 
Mendesian 
Μενέλδος, -ου, ό 
Menelaus 
(brother of Agamemmon, 
husband of Helen) 
Μενέλεως, -ω, ό 
Menelaus 
(13.1/1a) 
Μένιππος -ου, ό 
Menippus 
Μενοικεύς, -έως, ό 
Menoeceus 
μέντοι* (particle) 
really, you 
know; however, yet (13.1/3c(v)) 
Ί"μένω remain, stay, wait (for); be 
at rest, be still 
Μένων, -ωνος, ό 
Meno 
μέριμνα, -ης, ή 
care 
μέρος, -ους, τό 
share, part 
έν μέρει 
in turn 
#μεςηγύ (adv., and prep.+gen.) 
between 
μέςος, -η, -ov 
middle (of), in the 
middle (18.1/6) 
Μεςςηΐς, -ΐδος, ή 
Messeis (a 
spring) 
Μεςςηνιος, -δ, -ov 
Messenian 
μέτα = μέτεςτι (21.1/4 note 2) 
μετά (prep.) (+acc.) 
after; (+gen.) 
with; (+dat., poetic,) among 
μεταβάλλω! 
change, alter (tn and 
intn) 
μεταβολή, -ης, ή 
change 
μεταγιγνώςκωί 
change one's 
mind; repent (of) 
μεταδίδωμι| 
give a share of 
(+dat. of pers. and gen. of thing) 
μεταμέλει+ (impers.) 
there is 
repentance (+dat. of pers. and 
gen. of thing, 21.1/46) 
μεταμέλεια, -δς, ή 
regret 
μετανοέω 
think afterwards, 
change one's mind, repent 
μεταξύ (adv.) 
in the middle; 
(+pple.) in the middle of doing 
something (12.1/2j(i)) 
μεταπέμπομαι| 
summon, send for 
μετάρςιος, -ov 
superficial, 
shallow 
μετεκβαίνωΙ 
go from one place 
into another, transfer 
μέτεςτι (impers.) 
there is a share 
(+dat. of pers. and gen. of thing, 
21.1/46) 
μετέχω! 
share in (+gen., 
13.1/2*(v)) 
μετέωρος -ov 
high in the air 
τά μετέωρα 
things in the 
heaven above, 
astronomical 
phenomena 

354 
s ο 
ω 
σ 
c 
5Γ 
3 
μετρέω 
measure 
μέτρηςις, -εως, ή 
measurement 
μέτριος, -tf, -ov 
moderate, 
reasonable, fair, average; 
standard 
μετρίως (adv.) 
in moderation 
μέτρον, -ου, τό 
measure, due 
measure, 
moderation 
μέτωπον, -ου, τό 
forehead 
μέχρι (prep.+gen.) 
until, up to, 
as far as; 
μέχρι ού until; (conj.) until 
(21.1/2) 
μή no(t); (+imp. or aor. subj.) don't 
(17.1/1); (+subj.) lest; inviting a 
neg. answer (10.1/2**); (on other 
uses see 24.1/2) 
μηδαμώς (adv.) 
not at all, in no 
way 
μηδέ (conj.and adv.) 
nor, not 
even 
Μήδεια, -de, ή 
Medea (wife of 
Jason) 
μηδείς, μηδεμία, μηδέν 
no, no-
one, nothing 
Μηδικός, -ή, -όν 
of the Medes 
τά Μηδικά (sc. πράγματα) 
the 
Persian Wars 
#μήδομαι 
plot, plan, devise 
Μήδος, -ου, ό 
Mede; Persian 
μηκέτι (adv.) 
no longer 
μήκος, -ους, τό 
length 
Μήλιοι, -ων, οί 
Melians 
μήλον, -ου, τό 
apple 
μήν * (particle) 
then, indeed; 
further (13.1/3a) 
τί μην; of course 
μήν, -oc, ό 
month 
μηνϋτής, -ου, ό 
informer 
μηνύω give information 
μήποτε (adv.) 
never 
μήπω (adv.) 
not yet 
μήτε . . . μητε 
neither . . . nor 
μήτηρ, -^τρός, ή 
mother (6.1/16) 
μητρυιά, -ας, ή 
step-mother 
μηχανάομαι 
devise, contrive; 
procure for oneself 
μηχανεύομαι = μηχανάομαι 
μηχανή, -ης, ή 
device, plan; 
means; engine of war 
μιαίνω 
stain, pollute 
μίαςμα, -ατος, τό 
stain, pollution 
Μίκκος, -<>υ, ό 
Miccus 
μΤκρός, -ά, -όν small, short, little, 
petty 
ΜΤλήςιος, -α, -ov 
of Miletus, 
Milesian 
Μιλτιάδης, -ου, ό 
Miltiades 
(Athenian general) 
μίμημα, -ατος, τό 
imitation 
μιμνήςκομαι 
remind oneself 
μίμνω = μένω 
#μιν (acc. s. pron. of 3rd pers.) 
him, her, it 
μΤςέω 
hate 
μιςθόομαι 
hire 
μιςθός, -ού, ό 
hire, pay, reward 
μιςθωτός, -ού, ό 
hireling, hired 
servant 
μΐςος, -ους, τό 
hatred 
μνά, μνάς, ή 
mina (100 
drachmas) 
μνάμα = μνήμα 
μνήμα, -ατος, τό 
monument, 
tomb; memorial 
μνήμη, -ης, ή 
remembrance, 
memory 
μνήμων, -ονος 
mindful, 
unforgetting 
μοίρα, -<Χς, ή fate, lot, destiny; 
death 
Μοιρις, -εως, ή 
Moeris (lake in 
Egypt) 
μολιο (adv.) 
hardly, scarcely, with 
difficulty 
#μολων, -ούοα, -όν 
having come/ 
gone (aor. pple. of βλώοκω) 
μοναρχέω 
be sole ruler over 
(+gen.) 
μοναρχίσ, -Gc, ή 
monarchy 
μόναρχοο, -ου, ό 
monarch 
μόνον (adv.) 
only, merely 
ού μόνον ... άλλα καί 
not only 
... but also 
μόνος, -η, -ov 
alone, only 
#μόρος, -ου, ό fate, destiny, doom; 
death 
μορφή, -ης, ή 
shape, form 
Μούςα, -ης, ή 
Muse 
μουοική, -ης, ή 
music (including 
poetry) 
μοχθέω 
labour, toil 
μόχθοΰ,-ου, ό 
toil, hardship 
μύθος, -ου, ό 
story, fable 
μυΐα, -Cc, ή 
fly 
Μυκηναι, -ων, αί 
Mycenae (city 
in S. Greece) 
Μύνδιος, -σ, -ov 
Myndian 
Μύνδος, -ου, ό 
Myndus (city in 
Caria) 

μυρίζω 
make fragrant 
μύριοι, -αι, -α 
10,000 
μϋρίος, -α, -ov 
numberless, 
countless 
μύρμηξ, ^ηκοο, ό 
ant 
μύρον, ^ου, τό 
perfume 
μΰο, μυός, ό 
mouse 
μύςτης, -ου, ό 
initiate 
Μυτιλήνη, -ης, ή 
Mytilene (chief 
city of Lesbos) 
μυχός, -ού, ό 
inner chamber 
μών; (adv.) 
surely not? (10.1/2a) 
μώρος, -α, -ov 
stupid, foolish 
Ναζωραΐος, -α, -ov 
of Nazareth 
ναί (particle) 
yes (22.1/2h, 
24.1/1) 
ναίω 
dwell, abide 
νάμα, -ατος τό 
stream 
ναός, -ού, ό 
temple 
νάπη, γης, ή 
glen 
ναυΟγέω 
suffer shipwreck 
ναυηγός -όν 
ship-wrecked 
ναυμαχέω 
fight a sea battle 
ναυμαχία, -ac, ή 
naval battle 
vatic, νεώς, ή 
ship (11.1/4) 
Ναυοικάα, -ac, ή 
Nausicaa 
(daughter of Alcinous, King of 
Phaeacians) 
ναύτηο, -ου, ό 
sailor 
ναυτικόν, -ού, τό 
fleet 
ναυτικός -ή, -όν 
naval 
νεανίας -ου, ό young man 
νεανικός -ου, ό 
young man 
νείφει (impers.) 
it is snowing 
(21.1/4c) 
νεκρός -ού, ό 
corpse 
νέκταρ, -αρος τό 
nectar 
νέμεοις -εως, ή 
retribution 
νέμω 
distribute, apportion, 
allot, 
assign 
#νέομαι 
go back, return 
νεος -a, -ov 
young:; new; 
strange, unexpected 
εκ νέου from childhood 
νεότης -ητος, ή 
youthfulness, 
youthful folly 
#νέρθε (adv.) 
beneath, below 
νέφος -ους τό 
cloud 
fveco 
swim 
νεώς, -ω, ό 
temple (13.1/1 a) 
νή (particle of asseveration) 
yes 
by ... / (+acc.; 22.1/2/;) 
νήνεμος -ov 
windless, calm 
νηπιος, -α, -ov 
childish, foolish 
νηςιώτης, -ου, ό islander 
vfjcoc, -ου, ή 
island 
νήφω be sober (literally or 
metaphorically) 
νΤκάω 
win, defeat 
νίκη, - η ς ή 
victory, conquest 
νίκητήριον, -ου, τό 
prize of 
victory 
ΝΓκίας ου, ό 
Nicias 
ΝΓκοτέλης -ouc, ό Nicoteles 
Νίκων, -ωνος, ό 
Nico 
#νιν* (acc.) 
him, her, it, them 
νίπτω 
wash 
νοέω 
perceive 
νόημα, -ατος, τό 
thought, 
perception 
|νομίζω 
acknowledge, think, 
believe (in); treat as customary; 
(of a legislator) enact 
νόμος, -ου, ό 
law, convention, 
observance 
νόος = νους 
νοςέω 
be sick/ill 
νόςημα, -ατος, τό a disease, 
illness, plague 
νόςος, -ου, ή disease, illness 
νοςτέω 
return 
#νόςτιμος, -ov 
belonging to one's 
return/homecoming 
#νόςτος, -ου, ό 
homecoming 
#νόςφι(ν) (adv., and prep.+gen.) 
afar o f f , away from 
νουθετέω 
warn, rebuke 
νούς (νόος), νού, ό mind, sense, 
intelligence 
(6.1/2) 
έν νώ έχω 
have in mind, 
intend 
#νυκτιπόλος, -ov 
night-roaming 
νύν (adv.) 
now, at present 
νυν* 
well then; now then 
νυνδή (adv.; strengthened form of 
νύν) 
just now 
νύξ, νυκτός, ή 
night, darkness 
υπό νύκτα 
under cover of 
night 
Ξανθίππη, -ης, ή 
Xanthippe 
Ξάνθος, -ου, ό Xanthus (another 
name for river Seamander at 
Troy) 
ξεινος = ξένος 
ξένιος, -α, -ov 
belonging to 
friendship and hospitality (used 
as a title of Zeus, as god of 
hospitality) 
355 
S 
ο fi) 
σ 
c oT 
3 

Ξενοκράτης, -ους, ό 
Xenocrates 
ξένοο, -ου, ό 
foreigner; alien, 
stranger; guest; host 
Ξενοφών, -ώντος, ό 
Xenophon 
(Athenian historian and general) 
Ξέρξης, -ου, ό Xerxes (Persian 
king) 
ξίφος, -ους, τό 
sword 
ξυγ- = ςυγ-
ξύλον, -ου, τό 
(piece of) wood, 
log 
ξυμ- = ςυμ-
ξύν = ςυν 
ξυν- = ςυν-
ξϋνός, -η, -όν 
common 
ξυρέω 
shave 
ξυρόν, -ού, τό 
razor 
ό, η, τό 
the (2.1/2, 3.1/1) 
ό μέν ... ό δέ 
the one ... the 
other; 
one man ... another (5.1/3) 
οί μέν ... οί δέ 
some ... others 
(5.1/3) 
ό δέ 
and/but he (5.1/3) 
όδε, ήδε, τόδε 
this (pron. and 
adj., 9.1/1) 
οδεύω 
travel (by land) 
οδός, -ου, ή 
road, way, journey 
οδούς, -όντος, ό 
tooth 
οδυνηρός, -ά, -όν 
painful 
οδύρομαι 
lament 
Όδιχχεύς, -έως, ό 
Odysseus 
(hero of the Odyssey) 
όθεν (rel. adv.) 
from where 
οι (rel. adv.) 
(to) where 
οί see έ (9.1/4*) 
ίοίδα 
know (19.1/3 and Appendix 
3) 
χάριν οίδα 
be grateful to (+dat.) 
Οιδίπους, -ποδος, ό 
Oedipus (son 
of Laius, king of Thebes) 
οϊκαδε (adv.) 
homewards 
οικείος, -ff, -ov 
related, 
domestic; private; one's own 
οικείος, -ου, ό 
relative 
οίκέτης, -ου, ό 
house-slave 
οίκέω 
dwell (in), live, inhabit 
οίκημα, -ατος, τό 
room 
ο'ίκηςις, -εως, ή 
dwelling 
οίκίσ, -de, ή 
house 
οίκίζω 
colonize 
οίκοδομέω 
build a house 
οικοδόμημα, -ατος, τό 
building, 
structure 
οίκοδομίσ, -Gc, ή 
building, 
structure 
οίκοθεν (adv.) 
from home 
οίκοι (adv.) 
at home 
οίκος, -ου, ό 
house, home 
οικτίρω 
pity 
οικτρός, -G, -όν 
piteous 
f οι μαι, οίομαι 
think 
#οίμη, -ης, ή 
way/power of song 
οίμοι (interjection) 
alas! oh dear! 
#οίμος, -ου, ο 
tract, strip of land 
Οινόη, -ης, ή 
Oeno'e (town in 
Attica) 
οίνος, -ου, ό 
wine 
οίνοχοέω 
pour wine 
οίομαι see οίμαι 
οίον 
as, just as 
#oioc, -G, -ov (note smooth 
breathing) 
alone 
οίος, -G, -ov 
what a ..J 
(exclamation); of what sort, of 
the kind which (21.1/3) 
oioc J ειμί be able to (+inf., 
21.1/3 note 2) 
οίοςπερ strengthened form of oioe 
οίς- fut. stem of φέρω 
όΐοτευμα, -ατος, τό 
arrow 
οίςύϊνος, -η, -ov 
made of 
osier/wickerwork 
οίχομαι 
be o f f , depart, be gone 
οκτώ (indecl. adj.) 
eight 
όλ- aor. stem of όλλυμαι 
όλβιος, -O, -ov 
happy, blessed 
όλεθρος, -ου, ό 
destruction 
όλες- aor. stem of όλλϋμι 
ολιγαρχία, -σο, ή 
oligarchy 
ολίγος, -η, -ov 
small, few, little 
ίόλλϋμι 
destroy, kill, lose (20.1/1 
note 2) 
#όλοόο, -ή, -όν 
destructive, baneful 
"Ολορος, -ου, ό 
Olorus (father of 
Thucydides) 
όλος, -η, -jov whole, complete 
Όλυμπικός, -ού, ό 
Olympicus 
(name of a seer) 
'Ολύμπιος, -α, -ov 
Olympian 
'Ολύμπια νΤκάω win an 
Olympic 
victory (22.1/2g) 
Όλυνθος, -ου, ή 
Olynthus 
ολυραι, -ών, αί 
a one-seeded 
wheat (used as fodder for horses) 
#όμαρτέω 
accompany (+dat.) 
Όμηρος, -ου, ό 
Homer (author 
of Iliad and Odyssey) 

όμΤλέω 
be in company with, 
associate with (+dat.) 
όμΤλίσ, -Gc, ή 
company, 
companionship 
ομίχλη, -ης, ή 
mist, 
fog 
#δμμα, -axoc, τό 
eye 
|όμνϋμι 
swear, swear 
by (+acc., 
22.1/2/7) 
όμοιόομαι 
be like, resemble 
(+dat., 13.1/26(iv)) 
όμοιος, -G, -ov 
similar 
to 
(+dat.) 
ομοίως (adv.) 
in the same 
way, 
likewise 
όμολογέω 
agree 
ομολογία, -Gc, ή 
agreement 
ομολογουμένως (adv.) 
in 
agreement!conformity with (+dat.) 
όμομήτριος, -G, -ov 
born of the 
same mother 
ομόνοια, -Gc, ή 
agreement, 
harmony 
ομοτράπεζος -ov 
eating at the 
same table with (+dat.) 
όμοΰ (adv.) 
together (with) 
(+dat.) 
όμόφϋλος, -ov 
of the same race 
or stock 
όμως (adv.) 
nevertheless, 
however 
#όμώς (adv., accompanying t w o 
words joined by καί) 
both 
ov see ών 
όναρ (nom. and acc. only), τό 
dream; (as adv.) in a dream 
όνειδίζω 
reproach, chide, insult 
„ < + d a t·) 
όνειδος, -ους, τό 
insult, rebuke 
όνειρος, -ου, ό (also όνειρον, -ου, 
τό) 
dream 
όνομα, -ατος, τό 
name, 
reputation 
ονόματι 
in/by name 
ονομάζω 
call, name 
ονος, -ου, ό/ή 
ass 
ονυξ, -υχος, ό 
claw, 
nail 
οξος, -ους, τό 
vinegar 
°ξυς, -εια, -υ 
sharp, keen; quick, 
r
 
s,wif* 
^οπαζω give, bestow; make to 
follow 
(adv.) 
in what way, how, as 
?πιοθε (adv.) 
behind 
οπιςθοφύλαξ, -ακος, ό 
member 
of 
rear-guard 
#όπίςω (adv.) 
hereafter 
όπλα, -ων, τά 
weapons, arms 
έν όπλοις 
under arms 
οπλίζω 
equip, arm 
οπλίτης, -ου, ό 
hoplite 
οπόθεν (rel. adv.) 
from where 
δποι (rel. adv.) 
to 
where 
όποιος, -G, -ov 
of what kind 
(10.1/26) 
όπόςος, -η, -ov 
how big, 
how 
much; (pi.) how many (10.1/26) 
οπόταν (conj.+subj.) 
whenever 
(14.1/4c(iii)) 
όπότε (conj.) 
when; 
(+opt.) 
whenever (14.1/4c(iii)) 
όπου (rel. adv.) 
where, wherever; 
(indir. interrog.) 
where 
όπως (adv.) 
h o w (in answer to 
πώς); how; (poet.) like, as; 
(conj.+subj. or opt.) in 
order 
that, to (14.1/4c(i)) 
όπωςτιοΰν (adv.) 
in any 
way 
whatever 
|όράω 
see, look at 
οργή, -ης, ή 
temperament; anger 
εν οργή έχω 
be angry with 
(+acc.) 
ίόργίζομαι (aor. ώργίςθην) 
become 
angry with (+dat., 13.1/26(i)) 
ορέγομαι 
strive after 
(+gen.) 
όρειος, -α, -ov 
of the 
mountains, 
mountain-wandering 
Όρέςτης, -ου, ό 
Orestes 
(son of 
Agamemnon) 
#όρθόβουλος, -ov 
straight-
counselling, wise 
ορθός, -ή, -όν 
straight; correct; 
right 
όρθοω 
set upright; guide aright 
όρθώς (adv.) 
correctly 
όρκος, -ου, ό 
oath 
όρμάομαι 
set o f f , start out; make 
an expedition 
όρμή, -ης, ή 
setting oneself in 
motion 
έν όρμή είμί 
be on the 
point 
of starting 
όρμίζω moor, anchor 
όρνΤς, -Τθος (acc. όρνιν, 5.1/1 note 
2), ό/ή 
bird 
opoc, -ους τό 
mountain 
όρος -ου, ό 
boundary 
όρρωδέω 
fear, dread 
όρχήςτρσ, -ας, ή 
orchestra 
(the 
dancing-space in the theatre 
357 
< ο ο 0) 
σ 
c 
ω 

and also a section of the agora 
where books were sold) 
oc, ή, δ (rel. pron., 9.1/2) 
who, 
which 
#oc, ή, δν (refl. poss. adj.) 
his, her, 
its 
ocioc, -a, -ov 
holy, sacred; pious, 
devout 
όςιόω 
sanctify 
ococ, -η, -ov 
how 
much/many/great! 
(exclamation); as much/many 
as 
(21.1/3) 
δοοοπερ, δςηπερ, δοονπερ 
as 
great 
as, as many as 
δοπερ, ήπερ, όπερ (rel. pron.) 
the 
very one who/which 
#0ccaiac (interrog. adv.) 
how 
often 
octic, ήτις, δτι (indef. rel. pron. 
and indir. interrog., 10.1/26) 
who(ever), which(ever), 
what(ever) 
όςτούν, -ού, τό 
bone 
δοφ (+compar.) 
the more (lit. by 
how much) 
δταν (conj.+subj.) 
whenever 
(14.1/4c(iii)) 
δτε (conj.) 
when 
δτι (A) (conj.) 
that; because 
(+supl.) 
as ... as possible 
(17.1/4 d) 
δτι (Β) neuter nom./acc. s. of octic 
δτου = ούτινοο 
δτω = ωτινι 
ού (ούκ, ούχ) 
no(t) 
ού μόνον ... άλλα καί 
not 
only 
but also 
ού see έ (9.1/4*) 
ού (rel. adv.) 
where 
ούδαμοϋ (adv.) 
nowhere 
ουδαμώς (adv.) 
in no way; not at 
all 
ούδέ (conj.) 
and not, nor; (adv.) 
not even 
ούδείς, ούδεμία, ούδέν 
no, 
no-
one, nothing 
ούδέν (adverbial acc.) 
in no 
respect, not at all 
ούδέποτε (adv.) 
never 
ουδέπω (adv.) 
not 
yet 
ούδέτερος, -α, -ov 
neither of two; 
neuter (of gender) 
ούκ = ού 
ούκέτι (adv.) 
no 
longer 
ούκουν (particle) 
not... 
therefore 
(13.1/3c(i)) 
ούκουν (particle) 
therefore, 
accordingly (13. l/3c(i)) 
ούν* (particle) 
therefore, so, then 
οΰν δή well, as you know 
ούν crasis for ό έ ν 
ούνεκα = ένεκα 
ούποτε (adv.) 
never 
ούπω (adv.) 
not 
yet 
#ούρανόθεν (adv.) 
from heaven 
ούρανός, -ού, ό 
sky, heaven; 
(personified, with cap.) 
Uranus 
ouc, ώτόο, τό 
ear 
oucis, -de, ή 
property, wealth, 
substance, means 
ούτε ... ούτε 
neither 
... nor 
ούτις, ούτινος 
no-one 
ούτοι (adv.) 
indeed 
not 
ούτος, αύτη, τούτο (pron. and adj., 
9.1/1) 
this; ούτος can express 
you there! 
ούτοοί (strengthened form) this 
man here 
ούτω(ς) (adv.) 
thus, so, in this 
way; to such an extent, so much 
ούτωςί strengthened form of oincoc 
ούχ = ού 
ούχί emphatic form of ού 
οφείλω 
owe; be bound, ought 
(see 21.1/1 note) 
όφελοΰ, -ouc, τό 
help, use, 
advantage 
οφθαλμός, -ού, ό 
eye 
o<j>ic, -coc, ό 
serpent 
όχλος, -ου, ό 
crowd, mob 
#όχμάζω 
bind fast 
#δχος,-ους, τό 
chariot 
όχυρόο, -ά, -όν 
strong, secure 
όψέ (adv.) 
late 
δψις, -εως, ή 
vision, sight 
δψομαι fut. of όράω 
δψον, -ου, τό cooked food, a 
made dish; delicacies 
πάγη, -ης, ή trap, snare 
#παγίς, -ιδοο, ή 
trap, snare 
πάγος, -ου, ό 
crag, rock; frost 
παθ- aor. stem of πάςχω 
πάθημα, -ατος, τό 
suffering, 
misfortune 
πάθος, -ους, τό 
suffering, 
experience 

Παιανιεύς -έως ό 
of the deme 
Paeania 
παιδαγωγός -ού, ό 
tutor 
παιδεία, -Gc, ή 
education, 
teaching, lesson; culture; 
childhood 
παιδεύω 
ira/w, 
educate 
παιδίον, -ου, τό 
child; slave 
παίζω play, make sport of 
(+acc.), joke at 
fapoc+acc.) 
παις παιδος ό/ή 
child, boy, girl; 
slave 
πάλαι (adv.) 
long 
ago 
παλαιός, -ά, -όν 
ancient, (of) old 
παλαίστρα, -ac, ή 
wrestling-
school, palaestra 
παλαίτατος -η, -ov supl. of 
παλαιός 
πάλιν (adv.) 
back again, again 
παμπήδην (adv.) 
entirely, 
completely 
παμπλούςιος, -ov 
very rich 
πανδημεί (adv.) 
in a body, in full 
force 
παννύχιος -ov 
all night long 
#πανόδυρτος -ov 
all-lamented 
Πάνοψ, -οπος, ό 
Panops 
παντάπαςι(ν) (adv.) 
in 
every 
respect 
πανταχόθεν (adv.) 
from 
all 
directions 
πανταχού (adv.) 
everywhere; 
absolutely, altogether 
πανταχώς (adv.) 
in all 
ways, 
altogether 
παντελώς (adv.) 
completely, 
outright 
#πάντεχνος, -ov 
assisting all the 
arts 
παντοθεν (adv.) 
from every side 
#παντρόφος -ov 
all-nurturing 
πάντως (adv.) 
in all 
ways, 
especially 
πάνυ (adv.) 
very (much) 
πανυ γε, πάνυ μέν ούν 
certainly, of course (13.1/3c(iii)) 
πάππος, -ου, ο 
grandfather 
#παρ = π αρά 
π<*Ρα = πάρεςτι (21.1/4 note 2) 
π<*ρά (prep.) (+acc.) 
along, 
beside; against, contrary to; 
compared with; (+gen.) from; 
(+dat.) with, beside, in the 
presence of 
^Ραβαίνω! 
transgress 
παραβάλλω! 
compare 
(+παρά 
and acc.); (intr.) come near, 
approach 
παραβοηθέω 
come to help 
(+dat.); assist 
παραγγέλλω! 
give an order 
παραγιγνομαι! 
be present; come 
to, arrive at 
παράγω! 
bring forward, 
introduce 
παραδίδωμι! 
hand over, deliver 
παραδωο- fut. act./mid. stem of 
παραδίδωμι 
παραινέω! 
advise 
(+dat., 
13.1/26(i)) 
παρακαλέω! 
summon; invite; 
encourage 
παράκειμαι 
lie/be placed beside 
(+dat.) 
παρακελεύομαι! 
exhort, 
encourage (+dat.) 
παραλαμβανω! 
take/receive from 
παραμελεω (< παρά+άμελέω) 
disregard, pay no heed to 
παραμένω! 
remain; remain loyal 
παράπαν (adv.) 
altogether, 
absolutely 
(also τό παράπαν) 
παραπλέω! sail by, sail close to 
παραπλήςιος, (-α), -ov 
very 
similar to (+dat. or καί) 
παραςάγγης, -ου, ό parasang (a 
Persian measure of distance of 
about 3 0 stades) 
παραςκευάζω 
prepare, equip; 
(mid.) make one's preparations 
παραςκευή, -ης, ή 
preparation, 
equipping; force 
παραςπίζω 
bear a shield beside, 
shield (+dat.) 
παραυτίκα (adv.) 
immediately, 
straight away 
παρεγγυάω 
pass (the word) 
along 
πάρειμι 
be at hand; be present; 
be near (+dat.) 
πάρεςτι (impers.) 
it is 
possible 
for (+dat. and inf., 21.1/4*) 
παρελαύνω! drive past 
παρεμφαίνω! 
emphasize 
πάρεργον, -ου, τό 
subordinate 
issue 
παρέρχομαι! 
pass, go by; come 
forward 
παρέχον (acc. abs.) 
it being 
possible/allowed 
(21.1/5) 
359 
< ο s σ 
c ST 
3 

360 
ο ο Q) 
σ 
c 
ω 
3 
παρέχω! 
&ve to, provide; offer, 
furnish, cause 
πράγματα παρέχω 
cause 
trouble 
παρέχει (impers.) 
it is 
possible/allowed (+dat. and inf.) 
παρθένος, -ου, ή 
girl, maiden 
παρίημι| 
pass over; let pass; 
leave,allow, admit 
παρίοτημι| (mid. and intr. tenses 
of act.) 
stand beside, be 
near lot hand 
παριών, -ούοα, -ov pple. of 
παρέρχομαι 
πάροδος, -ου, ό passage, entrance 
πάροιθε (adv.) 
formerly 
παροιμία, -ac, ή 
proverb 
παρόν (acc. absol.) 
it being 
possible (21.1/5) 
πάρος (adv.) 
previously; before 
(=πρίν) 
παρών, -ούοα, -όν pple. of πάρειμι 
be present 
πάς, Ttaca, πάν (10.1/36) 
all, 
every 
ο πάς 
the whole 
ίπάςχω 
undergo; experience; 
suffer 
εύ/κακώς πάςχω 
be well/badly 
treated (17.1/5) 
#πατέομαι (aor. έπαςάμην) 
eat of, 
partake of (+gen.) 
πατήρ, -ipoc, ό father (6.1/16) 
πατριδιον, -ου, το 
daddy 
πατρίς, -ίδοο, ή 
fatherland, 
native land 
Πάτροκλος, -ου, ό 
Patroclus 
(friend of Achilles) 
πάτταλος, -ου, ό 
peg 
παύω (tr.) 
stop; depose; (mid., 
intr.) stop, cease from (+gen. or 
pple.) 
Παφιος, -α, -ov from Paphos, 
Paphian; (as fern, noun) the 
Paphian (sc. goddess, a name of 
Aphrodite derived from Paphos 
in Cyprus) 
πάχνη,-ης, ή 
hoar-frost 
παχύς, -εια, -ύ 
thick, stout, fat 
πέ&ρ, -ης, ή 
fetter 
πεδίον, -ου, το 
plain 
πέδον, -ου, τό 
ground, land, 
region 
πεζομαχέω 
fight on foot/land 
πεζός, -ή, -όν 
on foot 
πεζοί 
foot soldiers, infantry 
πεζή 
on 
foot 
|πείθω 
persuade; (mid.) believe, 
trust, obey (+dat., 13.1/26(ii)) 
πειθώ, -ους, ή 
persuasion; 
obedience (13.1/16(ii)) 
πεινάω 
be hungry (5.1/2 note 4) 
πείρα, -Ge, ή 
attempt, 
experiment, trial 
Πειραιεύς (acc. -αιά, gen. -αιώς, 
dat. -αιει), ό 
Piraeus (port of 
Athens) 
πειράομαι 
try; test (+gen.) 
πειρΟτέον 
one must try (24.115) 
πειρατής, -ού, ό 
pirate 
πείςομαι fut. of παςχω or πείθομαι 
πέλαγος, -ους, τό 
sea, high sea 
πέλας (adv.+gen.) 
near; nearby 
Πελαςγοί, -ων, οί 
Pelasgians 
#πέλομαι (έπλετο 3rd s. strong aor.) 
be 
Πελοποννήςιοι, -ων, οί 
Peloponnesians 
Πελοποννηςος, -ου, ή 
Peloponnese 
πέμπτος, -η, -ov 
fifth 
fπέμπω 
send 
πένης, -ητος 
poor (man) 
πένθος, -ους, τό grief, sorrow, 
mourning 
πενία, -ας, ή 
poverty 
πέντε (indecl. adj.) 
five 
πεντήκοντα (indecl. adj.) 
fifty 
πέποιθα (strong perf. of πείθω) 
trust, rely on (+dat.) 
πέπονθα perf. of πάοχω 
πεπρωμένος, -η, -ov 
destined, 
fated 
πέπτωκα perf. of πίπτω 
πέπυομαι perf. of πυνθάνομαι 
πέπωκα perf. of πίνω 
περ* = καίτιερ; -περ at the end of a 
word (e.g. όοπερ) is emphatie 
πέρας, -ατος, τό 
end 
#τιέργαμα, -ων, τά 
citadel, 
acropolis 
Περδίκκαο, -ου, ό 
Perdiccas 
#πέρθω 
ravage, destroy, sack 
περί (prep.) (+acc.) 
about, 
around; (+gen.) about, 
concerning; (+dat.) in, on, about 
7ΐερί (+acc.) ειμί 
be busy with 
περί πολλού ποιέομαι 
value 
highly (+acc.) (20.1/3) 
περιάγωί 
lead round 

περιβάλλω! 
throw round; 
embrace 
περίβολος -ου, ό 
enclosure 
περιγίγνομαι! 
remain over; excel 
περίειμι 
survive, remain 
περιέπω| 
treat 
περιεργάζομαι! 
waste one's 
labour 
περιέρχομαι! 
go round, walk 
round 
Περικλήο, -κλέους, ό 
Pericles 
(Athenian statesman) 
περιμένω! 
wait, wait for (+acc.) 
περίοδος, -ου, ή 
chart, map 
περιοράω! 
overlook, 
allow 
περιπαθως (adv.) 
passionately 
περιπατέω 
walk around 
περιτίίπτω! 
fall in with, 
encounter (+dat.) 
περίπλους, -ου, ό 
circumnavigation 
περιπτυςςω 
outflank 
περιτειχίζω 
build a wall round 
περιτείχιςμα, -ατος, τό 
wall of 
circumvallation, blockading wall 
περιτίθημι! 
put around, 
bestow 
on 
περιφέρω! 
carry round 
περιφρονέω 
think about/around; 
despise 
Πέρςης, -ου, ό 
Persian 
πέρυςι (adv.) 
last year 
πες- aor. stem of πίπτω 
#πετεινός, -η, -όν 
winged 
πέτομαι 
fly 
πέτρα, -ας, η 
rock, cliff 
πέτρος, -ου, ό stone, boulder 
πευθομαι = πυνθάνομαι 
πεύςομαι fut. of πυνθάνομαι 
πεφϋκα 
be by nature, be 
naturally (see φύω) 
πη (interrog. particle) 
wheref 
how? 
πηδάω 
leap, jump 
πηλός -ού, ό 
mud 
#πήμα, -ατος τό 
woe, misery, 
calamity 
#πημονη, -ης, ή 
woe, misery 
Πηνελοπεια, -ας, ή 
Penelope 
(wife of Odysseus) 
πη^υς, -εως, ό 
forearm; cubit 
πιέζομαι 
be 
oppressed/distressed 
πιθ- aor. act./mid. stem of 
πείθομαι 
πιθανός -η, -όν 
persuasive 
πίθηκος -^ου, ό 
monkey 
πικρός, -ά, -όν 
bitter, harsh, 
severe 
πικρώς (adv.) 
bitterly 
Πιλάτος, -ου, ό 
(Pontius) Pilate 
!πίμπλημι 
fill with (+gen. or dat.) 
(19.1/1 note 2) 
πίμπρημι 
burn (tr.) (19.1/1 note 
2> , 
πινακίδιον, -ου, τό 
writing-tablet 
Πίνδαρος, -ου, ό 
Pindar (lyric 
poet) 
!rttvco 
drink 
!πΤπτω 
fall 
πιστεύω 
trust (+dat., 13.1/26(ii)) 
πίcτιc, -εως ή 
pledge, assurance; 
good faith; trust 
πιςτός, -η, -όν 
reliable, 
trustworthy, 
faithful 
#πλάζομαι (aor. επλάγχθην) 
wander 
πλανάομαι 
wander 
πλάνη, -ης, ή 
wandering 
Πλάτων, -ωνος, ό 
Plato 
(philosopher) 
πλεθρον, -ου, τό 
plethron (c. 30 
metres) 
πλεΐΰτος, -η, -ov 
most (supl. of 
πολύς) 
πλείων, πλέον 
more (compar. of 
πολύς, 17.1/26) 
πλέκω 
plait; devise, contrive 
πλέον (adv.) 
more 
πλεύμων, -ονος, ό 
lung 
πλευρά, -άς, ή 
rib, flank 
πλεύςομαι fut. of πλεω 
πλέω 
sail 
πλέως -α, -ων 
full of (+gen.) 
(13.1/1*) 
πληγη, -ης, ή 
blow, stroke, lash 
πλήθος, -ους, τό 
number, crowd; 
the people 
πλήν (adv.) 
but, except; (also 
prep.+gen.) except, except for 
πληρης -ες 
full 
πληςιάζω 
approach (+dat., 
13.1/26(iii)) 
πληςίος, -α, -ov 
near, close to 
(+gen.) 
πληςμονη, -ης, ή 
repletion 
. 
πλήττω 
strike, hit 
πλοιον, -ου, τό 
vessel, ship, boat 
πλούς (πλόος), -ού, ό 
sailing, 
voyage; time for sailing (6.1/2) 
πλούςιος, -α, -ov 
rich, wealthy 
361 
< ο ο 
ω 
σ c 
ω 
3 

362 
s 
s σ 
c 5Γ 
3 
πλουτέω 
ta 
πλούτος, -ου, ό 
wealth 
Πλούτων, -ωνος, ό 
Pluto (god of 
the underworld) 
πλϋνω wash (clothes) 
πνεύμα, -ατος, τό 
breath 
πνέω (aor. έπνευςα) 
breathe 
πνίγω 
choke, strangle 
έπνίγην (root aor.) choked (intr.) 
πνοή, -r\c, ό 
breath 
ποδαπός, -ή, -όν from what 
country? 
ποθεί voc, -ή, -όν 
longed for,; 
desired 
πόθεν (interrog. adv.) 
from 
where? 
πόθος, -ου, ό longing, desire 
ποι (interrog. adv.) 
ίο where? 
ποι της γής 
to where in the 
world? 
ποιέω 
make, do; (mid.) make, 
think, consider 
αγαθά (εύ) ποιέω 
irazf we//, do 
good to (+acc., 22.1/2/(ii)) 
κακά (κακώο) ποιέω 
iraii 
6*rra (+acc., 22A/2f(n)) 
ποιητέον 
owe 
make/do 
(24.1/5) 
ποιητής, -ού, ό 
poet 
#ποικιλείμων, -ov 
with 
embroidered coat 
ποικίλος, -η, -ov 
many-coloured; 
subtle, ingenious 
ποιμήν, -ένος, ό 
shepherd 
ποιος, -α, -ov; 
of what sort? 
πολεμέω 
w/*r 
πολεμικός, -ή, -όν military, martial 
πολέμιοι, -ων, οί 
the enemy 
πολέμιος, -α, -ov 
hostile, enemy 
πόλεμος,-ου, ό 
war 
πολιορκέω 
besiege 
#πολιός, -ά, -όν 
grey 
πόλις, j-εως, ή 
city, city-state 
πολιτεία, -ας, ή 
citizenship; 
constitution 
πολιτεύομαι 
be a citizen 
πολίτης,-ου, ό 
citizen 
πολιτικός, -ή, -όν 
political 
πολλάκις (adv.) 
often 
πολλός Ionic for πολύο 
#πολύκλαυτος, -ov much lamented 
πολύλογος, -ov 
talkative 
πολυμαθία, -ας, ή much learning 
Πολυνείκης, -ους, ό 
Polynices 
(son of Oedipus) 
πολύς, πολλή, πολύ (stem πολλ-; 
3.1/3) 
much ( pi. many); long 
πολλού δει 
far from iti 
πολλού δέω 
I am far from 
πολλώ 
by far 
πολύ (adv. acc.) 
very, much 
οί πολλοί 
the majority; the 
mob 
(be έπί τό πολύ for the most part 
(22.1/l*(vii)) 
#πολύτροπος, -ov 
of many wiles 
(or much travelled) 
πολύφιλος, -ov 
having many 
friends 
πονέω 
toil, labour 
πονηρία, -ας, ή 
wickedness 
πονηρός, -ά, -όν 
wicked, bad; of 
poor quality; wretched 
πόνος, -ου, ό 
toil, labour; 
distress, trouble, stress, suffering 
πόντος, -ου, ό sea; (with cap.) the 
Black Sea 
πορεία, -ac, ή 
course, passage 
πορεύομαι 
march, journey, travel 
πορθέω 
destroy, plunder, sack 
πορίζομαι 
procure 
πόρρω (adv.) 
far away 
πορών pple. of έπορον 
Ποςειδών, -ώνος, ό 
Poseidon 
(god of the sea) (acc. Ποςειδώ) 
πόςος, -η, -ov; 
how bigf, how 
much?; pi. how many? 
ποταμός, -ού, ό 
river 
ποτέ* 
once, ever 
πότε; (interrog. adv.) 
when? 
Ποτείδαια, -ae, ή Potidea (city in 
northen Greece) 
Ποτειδεάται, -ών, οί 
Potideans 
πότερα = πότερον (introducing 
alternative questions, 10.1/2*) 
πότερον ... ή ... 
whether ... or .J 
πότερος, -α, -ov; 
which (of two)? 
#ποτής, -ητος, ή 
drink 
#πότμος, -ου, ό 
fate 
που* 
somewhere, anywhere; I 
suppose 
πού; (adv.) 
where? 
πούς, ποδος, ό 
foot 
πράγμα, -ατος, το 
thing; business, 
negotiation; affair; (in pi.) 
trouble 
πράγματα παρέχω 
cause 
trouble 
Πραξιτέλης, -ους, ό 
Praxiteles 
(sculptor) 

Ttpffccca = πράττω 
πράττω do, carry out, get on, fare 
εύ (or καλωο) πράττω fare well, 
be 
prosperous 
κακώο πράττω fare badly, be in 
distress 
πρέπει (impers.) 
it befits, it is 
proper for (+dat., 21.1/4*) 
πρέπον (acc. absol.) 
it being 
fitting (21.1/5) 
πρέοβεις, -εων, oi 
ambassadors 
(8.1/4 note) 
πρεςβεύομαι 
send an embassy 
πρεςβευτης, -ού, ό 
ambassador 
πρεςβύτεροο, -G, -ov older, rather 
old 
Πρίαμος, -ου, ό Priam (King of 
Troy) 
πρίαοθαι aor. inf. of ώνέομαι 
πρίν (adv.) 
before, formerly; 
(conj.) before, until (21.1/2) 
πρό (prep.+gen.) 
before, in front 
of. 
προτού 
previously 
προαγορεύω (aor. προεΐπον, 18.1/4 
note 2) 
proclaim 
προάγω! lead on/forward 
προαιρέομαι! 
choose in 
preference 
προαιςθάνομαι! 
perceive 
beforehand 
προβάλλω! 
Put
f forward; expose 
πρόβατον, -ου, τό 
sheep 
προβουλεύω 
make a preliminary 
resolution (of the Council, for 
referral to the Assembly) 
πρόγονος, -ου, ό 
forebear, 
ancestor 
προδίδωμι! 
betray 
προδοςία, -Gc, ή 
treachery 
προειπον aor. of προαγορεύω 
προέρχομαι! go forward, 
advance 
προθΌμέομαι 
be ready, eager 
προθϋμία, -Gc, ή 
desire, 
eagerness, goodwill 
πρόθυμος, -ov ready, eager, 
willing 
πρόθυρον, -ου, τό porch, front 
door 
προΓημι! send forth 
προκείμενος, -η, -ov 
proposed, 
appointed 
Προκλής, -έους, ό 
Procles 
προλείπω! 
leave, abandon 
προμάχομαι! fight in defence of 
Προμηθεύς -έως ό 
Prometheus 
(giver of fire to mortals) 
προμηθία, -Gc, ή 
forethought 
προνοέω think beforehand 
πρόνοια, -Gc, ή 
foresight, 
providence 
προπέμπω! 
escort 
προπορεύομαι 
go in front, 
precede 
πρός (prep.) (+acc.) 
to, towards; 
(+gen.) in name of, by; under 
protection of, at the command 
of; suiting, befitting, the mark 
of; (poet.) by (= ύπο), on the side 
of, towards; (+dat.) near, in 
addition to 
προςαγγέλλω! 
report to 
προςαγορεύω (aor. προςεΐπον, 
18.1/4 note 2) 
address 
προςάγω! 
bring 
towards/forward; (intr.) advance 
προςαπόλλϋμι! 
lose in addition 
προςάπτω 
fasten on, put on 
προςαυδάω speak to, address 
προςβάλλω! 
attack, assault 
(+dat.) 
προςβλέπω 
look at 
προςδέομαι! 
be in want/need of 
besides 
προςδέχομαι! await, wait for, 
expect 
προοδίδωμι! give in addition 
προοεθίζομαι 
accustom oneself 
πρόοειμι 
be present/at hand 
προοειπον aor. of προοαγορεύω 
προοέρχομαι! 
go/come towards, 
advance, approach 
προςέχω! 
bring near, apply to 
προοέχω τον νούν 
pay 
attention to (+dat.) 
προσήκει (impers.) 
it concerns, it 
is fitting (+dat. and inf., 
24.1/4*) 
προσήκον (acc. absol.) 
it being 
fitting (21.1/5) 
πρόςθε(ν) (adv.) 
previously; 
beforej (+gen.) in front of 
προΰκαλεω! 
summon 
προα>ράω! look at 
προοπααιαλεύω 
nail fast to, 
fasten 
προοτΑπτω! fall upon; meet; 
attack (+dat.) 
προσποιέομαι 
claim, pretend 
363 
ι n 
3 

364 
S 
ο 
ω 
σ 
c 5Γ 
3 
προςτάττω 
assign to 
προςτίθημιί 
put to, add 
προςτρέ^ωί 
run towards 
προςφερης, -EC similar, like 
(+dat.) 
προςφιλης, -ec 
dear, beloved 
πρόςω (adv.) 
far off 
πρότερον (adv.) 
formerly, 
previously 
πρότερος -<X, -ov first (of two); 
previous 
προτίθημι| 
set before 
προτρέπω! 
urg? on, impel 
πρόφαςις, -εcoc, ή 
pretext, excuse 
προφέρω! bring forward 
προφήτης, -ου, ό 
harbinger 
πρόχειρος, -ov 
ready to hand 
πρυτανείο, -εων, οί 
prytaneis (the 
50 members of the tribe presiding 
in the Council or Assembly) 
πρωκτός, -ού, ό anus 
#πρών, -ώνος (epic nom. pi. 
πρώονες), ό 
headland 
Πρωτόμαχος, -ου, ό 
Protomachus 
πρώτον (adv., also τό πρώτον) 
first, at first 
πρώτος, -η, -ov 
first 
πτερόν, -ού, τό 
wing 
πτερωτός, -η, -όν 
winged 
#πτολίερθρον, -ου, τό 
citadel 
πτυχή, -ης, ή leaf (of book) 
πτύω 
spit 
πτωχός, -ού, ό 
beggar 
πυθ- aor. stem of πυνθάνομαι 
Πϋθαγόρδς, -ου, ό 
Pythagoras 
(philosopher) 
Πϋθίσ, -Cc, ή 
the Pythia (the 
priestess of Pythian Apollo at 
Delphi) 
πυκνός, -ή, -όν 
thick, dense 
πύλη, -ης, ή 
gate 
πυλίς, -ιδος, ή 
postern gate 
tπυνθάνομαι 
inquire, ascertain, 
learn (+acc. and gen., 
13.1/2*(iii)) 
πύρ, πυρός, τό 
fire; (pi. πυρά, 
13.1/lc) watch-fires, beacons, 
fire-signals 
πυρά, -ας, ή 
funeral pyre 
πύργος, -ου, ό 
tower 
#πΟροφόρος, -ov 
wheat-bearing 
Πυρρη, -ης, ή Pyrrha (woman's 
name) 
Πύρρων, -ωνος, ό 
Pyrrho 
(philosopher of Elis) 
πω* 
yet 
πωλέω 
sell 
πώποτε* 
ever yet 
πως* 
somehow 
πώς; 
how* 
πώς γάρ ού; 
of course 
ρόδιος, -G, -ov 
easy 
ρςιδίως (adv.) 
easily, lightly 
ρφςτος, -η, -ov 
easiest, very easy 
(supl. of ρόδιος) 
ρςκον, -ov 
easier (compar. of 
ρόδιος) 
ρέω flow; fall/drop off 
Ιρήγνϋμι 
break, shatter, burst 
ρήμα, -ατος, τό 
word 
ρήτωρ, -ορος, ό 
orator, politician 
ρίγος, -ους, τό 
frost, cold 
f ρίπτω 
throw 
ρίς, ρΤνός, ή 
nose 
#ροδόεις, -εςςα, -εν 
rosy 
ρόδον, -ου, τό 
rose 
Τόδος, -ου, ή 
Rhodes 
ροή, -ης, ή 
stream 
ρόπαλον, -ου, τό 
club, cudgel 
ρούς (ρόος), -ού, ό 
stream (6.1/2) 
ρυθμός, -ού, ό 
rhythm 
#ρύομαι (aor. έρρυςάμην) 
save, 
rescue 
"Ρωμαίος, -ου, ό 
Roman 
Τώμη, -ης, ή 
Rome 
ρώμη, - ης, ή 
strength, force 
Οάβυλλος, -ου, ό 
Sabyllus 
Caioi, -ων, οί 
Saii (Thracian 
tribe) 
ςαλπικτής (and ςαλπιγκτής), -ού, ό 
trumpeter 
Οαμοθρςικη, -ης, ή 
Samothrace 
(island in Aegean) 
Οάμος, -ου, ή Samos (island in 
Aegean) 
ςάνδαλον, -ου, τό 
sandal 
Οαπφώ, -ούς, ή 
Sappho (poetess 
of Lesbos) (13.1/lfe(ii)) 
ςατράπης, -ου, ό 
satrap (Persian 
governor) 
οαφηνίζω 
make clear, explain 
ςαφής, -ές 
clear, plain, true 
τό ςαφές 
the truth 
ςαφώς (adv.) 
clearly 
Οάων, -ωνος, ό 
Saon 
ςεαυτόν, --ήν (also cam-; reflex. 
pron.) 
yourself (9.1/4*) 
ςέβομαι 
revere, worship 

ςειςμός, -ού, ό 
earthquake 
ςέλας, —coc, τό flame, gleam 
ςελήνη, -ης, ή 
moon 
ςεμνός, -η, -όν 
revered, holy; 
august, majestic 
#ςεμνοςτομος, -ov 
haughty 
ςημα, -ατοο, τό 
mound, tomb 
σημαίνω 
signal, indicate, show 
σημειον, -ου, τό 
signal, sign 
ςθένος, -ους, τό strength, might 
ςίγάω 
be quiet, keep silent 
ςΤγή, -ης, ή 
silence 
ςίδηρος, -ου, ό 
iron 
(Σικελία, -δς, ή 
Sicily 
(Γίκελοι, -ων, οί 
Sicels 
(indigenous Sicilians) 
Οίμων, -ωνος, ό 
Simon 
#Οιςύφειος, -δ, -ov of Sisyphus 
ςίτία, -ων, τά 
provisions, food 
ςιτος, -ου, ό 
food (pi. τά ςιτα 
(13.1/lc)) 
ςιωπάω 
be silent 
ςιωπή, -ης, ή 
silence 
ςκαιός, -δ, -όν 
clumsy, stupid 
ςκάφη, -ης, ή 
trough, tub, bowl 
Ιχκεδάννϋμι (fut. ςκεδώ[-άω]) 
scatter 
ςκεπτεον 
one must consider 
(24.1/5) 
ςκεπτομαι 
examine, look 
carefully at, consider 
ςκεύη, -ών, τά gear, furniture 
ςκηνη, -ης, ή 
tent; stage (in 
theatre); stall, booth 
οκηνόω lodge, take up one's abode 
ςκήπτρον, κ>υ, τό sceptre, staff 
CKIO, -ac, Ή shadow, shade 
οκοπέω consider, examine, take 
heed 
οκοπιδ, -ac, η 
lookout-place 
CKOTIOC, -ού, ό 
mark (at which 
one aims), target 
CKop7cioc, -ου, ό 
scorpion 
CKOTOC, -ου, ό (also -ouc, τό) 
darkness 
Οκυθης -ου, ό Scythian (also as 
adj. in poetry) 
Σκύλλα, -ης, ή Scylla (a sea-
monster) 
Σκύρος, -ου, ή Scyrus (island in 
Aegean) 
εμΤκρός, -δ, -όν 
small, short, 
little 
°οβαρός, -ά, -όν 
pompous, 
haughty 
θόλων, -ωνος, ό 
Solon (Athenian 
statesman and poet) 
ςός, ση, ςόν (poss. adj.) 
your (s.) 
ςοφίδ, -δς, ή 
wisdom 
ςόφιςμα, -ατος, τό clever device 
ςοφιςτης, -ού, ό 
sophist, thinker, 
teacher, sage 
ςοφός, -η, -όν 
wise, clever, 
brilliant, accomplished 
Οιάρτη, -ης, ή 
the city of 
Sparta 
Οιαρτιδτης, -ου, ό Spartiate (a 
full citizen of Sparta) 
Οπάρτωλος, -ου, ή Spartolus (city) 
Ιΰπείρω sow (with seed), 
engender; scatter 
croicaceai aor. inf. of ςπενδομαι 
ςπενδω pour (a drink offering); 
(mid.) pour libations; make a 
treaty 
ςπερμα, -ατος, τό seed; offspring 
#ςπερχομαι 
hurry, hasten 
ςπόγγος, -ου, ό 
sponge 
ςποδιδ, -ας, ή 
heap of ashes, 
ashes 
ςποδός, -ού, ή ashes, embers 
ςπονδή, -ης, ή 
libation; (pi.) 
treaty, truce 
ςπορδ, -ας, ή sowing; begetting 
ςποράς, -άδος (adj.) 
scattered 
ςπουδάζω 
be busy about, 
concern oneself about (+acc.) 
οπουδή, -ης, ή 
zeal, haste, 
seriousness 
ςτάδιον, -ου, τό (plur. -α and -οι) 
stade (c. 200 metres) 
#ςταθευτός, -η, -όν 
scorched, 
grilled 
ςταθμός, -ού, ό 
station, halting-
place; stage, day's march 
ςτδς, ςτάςα, ςτάν (root aor. pple. of 
ίςτημι) 
ςτάςις, -εως, ή faction, sedition, 
discord 
ςταυρός, -ού, ό stake; cross (for 
crucifixion) 
ςταυρόω 
crucify 
ςτεγω contain, hold 
|ςτελλω 
send; equip 
ςτενάζω 
groan 
ςτενω 
groan 
ςτεργω love; be content with, 
accept 
ςτέφανος, -ου, ό 
crown, wreath, 
garland 
365 
§ 
δ σ 
c ST 
3 

366 
§ 
s CT 
c 
Q> 
3 
ςτίγμα, -axoc, χό 
tattoo-mark 
ςτολή, -fjc, ή 
clothing, clothes 
ςχόμα, -axoc, χό 
mouth 
#ςτοργη, -ηο, ή 
love 
ςτρατείδ, -Gc, ή 
expedition, 
campaign 
ςτράτευμα, -axoc, χό 
army; 
expedition, campaign 
ςτρατεύομαι 
advance with an 
army or fleet; wage war 
ςτρατεύω serve in war; send a 
force, make an expedition 
ςχραχηγέω 
he general 
ςτρατηγίδ, -δς, η 
generalship 
ςχρατηγός, -ού, ό 
general, 
commander 
ςχρατιδ, -ac, ή 
army 
ςτρατιώτης, -ου, ό 
soldier 
ςχραχοπεδεύω 
make camp, 
encamp (also mid.) 
ςτρατόπεδον, -ου, χό 
camp, army 
cxpaxoc, -ού, ό 
army 
ςτρεπτός, -ού, ό 
collar 
Οχρεψιάδης, -ου, ό 
Strepsiades 
ςτυγέω 
loathe, hate 
ςχυγνός, -η, -όν 
hateful, 
loathsome 
ςύ (pron.) 
yo« (s.) (4.1/2) 
συγγενής, -ες 
related to, relative 
συγγενής, -ούς, ό 
relation, 
kinsman 
ςυγγίγνομαι! 
be 
intercourse with, have dealings 
with (+dat.) 
συγγιγνωςκω| 
pardon, forgive 
(+dat.) 
ςυγγνώμη, -ης, ή 
pardon, 
forgiveness 
ςυγγνώμην έχω 
forgive, pardon 
ςυγγραφαί, -ων, ai 
contract, 
bond 
ςυγκομίζω| 
bring/gather 
together 
ςυγκρίνω! 
compare (something 
with something, acc. and dat.) 
συγχωρέω 
agree to/with; concede, 
admit; yield to (+dat.) 
ςυλλαμβανω| 
collect; 
understand; seize, arrest 
συλλέγω! 
collect, gather 
ςύλλογος, -ου, ό 
meeting 
Ουμαιθος, -ου, ό 
Symaethus 
(river in Sicily) 
συμβαίνω! happen, occur, result; 
correspond with, fit 
σύμβαςις, -εως, ή 
agreement, 
arrangement 
ςυμβουλεύω 
advise, give advice 
(+dat. and inf.); (mid.) consult, 
discuss with (+dat.) 
ςυμμαχίσ, -δς, ή 
alliance 
ςυμμαχίς, -ίδος, ή 
alliance, 
confederacy 
ςύμμα^ος, -ου, ό 
ally 
ςυμμειγνΟμι 
mix together; (intr.) 
meet with (+dat.) 
ςυμπάρειμι 
be present together 
ςύμπδς, ςύμπδςα, σύμπαν (= πάς) 
all, all together, the whole 
ςυμπληρόω 
fill up 
ςυμπορεύομαι 
march in company 
with 
συμπόςιον, -ου, χό 
drinking-
party, symposium 
ςυμπόχης, -ου, ό 
drinking-
companion 
ςυμφέρει (impers.) 
it is 
useful/expedient (+dat. and inf., 
21.1/4*) 
συμφορά, -ας, ή 
event; disaster, 
mishap 
ςύν (prep.+dat.) 
together with; 
with the help of 
ςυναγορεύω (aor. συνεΐπον, 18.1/4 
note 2) 
advocate (a course of 
action) with (someone) 
ςυναιρέω! 
to bring together 
ώς συνελόνχι ειπείν 
to speak 
concisely, in a word 
ςυναμφόχερος, -G, -ov 
both 
together 
ςυνδοξαν (acc. absol.) 
it having 
seemed good also (21.1/5) 
σύνειμι 
be with, be joined with 
(+dat.) 
ςυνεκπονέω 
assist (+dat.) 
ςυνελών see συναιρέω 
ςυνέρχομαι! 
come together, 
assemble 
συνεχός, -η, -όν 
intelligent 
συνήθεια, -δς, ή 
acquaintance, 
intimacy 
σύνθημα, -αχος, χό sign 
συνθηράω hunt with (+dat.) 
ςυνίημι! 
understand 
συνίςχημι! (mid. and intr. tenses of 
act.) 
conspire (+dat.) 
#ςυννεαζω 
be young with (+dat.) 
συνχάχχω arrange, draw up in 
battle-order 

συντίθημι| put together; (mid.) 
arrange, agree upon 
σύντομος -ov concise, brief 
συντρίβω 
smash, gash 
συντυγ^άνωί 
meet with (+dat.) 
CupflKocioc, -G, -ov 
Syracusan 
Ουρσκούοαι, -ων, αί Syracuse 
ουοκευάζομαι 
up; contrive, 
concoct 
cixrcacic, -εωο, ή 
composition, 
constitution 
συοτρατεύω join *w expedition, 
fight alongside 
ςφαγη, —fjc, ή slaughter, 
slaughtering 
οφάζω 
slaughter, sacrifice 
οφαιρα,-Οο,η 
ball 
οφαλερόο, -G, -όν 
perilous, 
precarious 
|οφαλλω 
trip up, make to fall; 
(pass.) be tripped up, stumble, 
fall; be baffled /disappointed 
οφάο (οφων, c<j>ici) see ε (9.1/4*) 
#οφε (dat. οφι(ν)) (pron. acc. s. or 
pi.) 
him, her, them 
οφετεροο, -G, -ov (poss. adj., 
strengthened by αυτών, 
25.2.3 /. 7) 
their own 
ΰφόδρα (adv.) 
very much, 
exceedingly 
οφοδρόο, -G, -όν 
impetuous 
οφώ, οφων (pron.) 
you two (dual 
of ού, 24.1/4) 
οχ- aor. act./mid. stem of έχω 
οχεδόν (adv.) 
nearly, near, 
almost 
#οχεθειν poet. aor. act. inf. of έχω 
όχερία, ~Gc, ή 
Scheria (land of 
the Phaeacians) 
ΰχήμα, -moc, τό form, shape, 
appearance; character 
ΰχήοω fut. of έχω 
οχοινίον, -ου, τό little rope 
οχολή, -r\c, ή leisure, rest 
οχολη 
in a leisurely way, 
tardily 
"Ι^ωζω save, keep safe 
Οοκράτηο, -ouc, ό Socrates 
(philosopher) 
Οωκρατίδιον, -ου, τό (diminutive) 
dear little Socrates 
co^ia, -<lxoc, τό body, person 
Οωοιγένηο, -ouc, ό Sosigenes 
οωτηρ, -fjpoc, ό 
saviour 
οωτηρία, -Gc, ή 
safety 
οωφρονέω be discreet/prudent 
οωφροσύνη, -ηο, ή good sense, 
moderation 
οώφρων, -ov sensible, temperate, 
reasonable, moderate, discreet 
ταλαιπωρία, -Gc, ή 
hardship, 
distress 
τάλαντον, -ου, τό talent (= 6,000 
drachmas) 
#τάλαο, -αινα, -αν 
miserable, 
wretched, unhappy (10.1/3 note 
ταλλα (or ταλλα) crasis for τα αλλα 
ταμιειον, -ου, τό 
storeroom 
Ταμωο, -ώ, ό 
Tamos (13.1/1*) 
ταξιάρχου -ου, ό 
taxiarch, 
brigadier 
τάξιο, -εωο, ή 
arrangement, rank, 
battle-array 
#τάραγμα, -ατοο, τό 
confusion 
TapGc, -αντοο, ό Tarentum (town 
in southern Italy) 
ταράττω trouble, disturb 
ταρβέω be terrified 
ταριχεύω embalm, mummify 
ταρροο, -ού, ό 
mat 
#Τάρταροο, -ου, ό Tartarus; the 
underworld 
τάττω station, draw up; appoint, 
place in order; order, instruct 
ταύτη here; by this route; in this 
way 
ταφή, -ηο, ή burial 
τάφοο, -ου, ό grave, tomb 
τάχα (adv.) 
quickly 
ταχέακ (adv.) 
quickly, soon 
τάχιοτοΰ, -η, -ov 
quickest (supl. 
of ταχύο) 
την ταχίστην 
the quickest way 
έπειδή τάχιρτα as soon as 
τάχοο, -ouc, τό speed 
ταχύο, -εια, -ύ quick, fast 
τε* 
and 
τε* ... καί/τε* 
both ... and 
τέθνηκα 
I am dead (perf. of 
|άπο]θνήοκω 19.1/3*) 
τείνω stretch; lead (a life) 
#τείρω 
oppress, distress 
τείχιομα, -ατοο, τό wall, fort 
τειχομαχέω 
fight against 
walls/fortifications 
τειχοο, -ouc, τό wall 
τεκ- aor. stem of τίκτω 
τεκμαίρομαι 
conclude, infer 
367 
S 
ο fi> 
σ 
c 
ST 

τεκμήριον, -ου, τό 
evidence, 
proof 
τέκνον, -ου, τό 
child 
τεκνόομαι 
beget, produce 
τελευταίος, -G, -ov 
last 
τελευτάω 
end, finish; die 
τελευτη, -ης, ή 
end, death 
+τελέω 
accomplish, fulfil, 
complete; conduct 
τέλος, -ους, τό 
ewJ, 
consummation, 
fulfilment 
τέλος (adv. acc., 20.1/5) 
/« 
finally 
διά τέλους 
through to the end, 
throughout 
f τέμνω 
ravage 
#τέος = ςός 
#τέρμα, -ατος, τό 
τερπνός, -η, -όν 
delightful, 
pleasant 
τέρπομαι 
enjoy oneself 
Τερψίων, -ωνος, ό 
Terpsion 
τέταρτος, -η, -ov 
fourth 
τέτοκα perf. of τίκτω 
#τετράπαλαι (adv.) 
long, long ago 
τετταράκοντα (indecl. numeral) 
forty 
τέτταρες, -α 
four (7.1/5) 
τέττιξ, -Tyoc, ό 
cicada, 
grasshopper 
Τευθρανία, ~Gc, ή 
Teuthrania 
τέχνη, -ης, ή 
sfci//, *ri, expertise; 
w/tfy, manner, means; ir/cfc, 
τηδε (adv.) 
τηλικούτος, -αύτη, -ούτον 
so 
so important 
#τηλουρός, -όν 
distant 
τημερον (adv.) 
today 
τηρέω 
watch, guard; watch for, 
observe 
τί; 
what? why? (10.1/1 note 1); 
in what respect? 
Τιγράνης, -ου, ό 
Tigranes 
tτίθημι 
put, place; 
render 
(act. and mid.) (18.1/2) 
νόμους τίθημι 
down laws 
νόμους τίθεμαι 
make/adopt 
laws 
f τίκτω 
bear, beget, give birth to 
τΤμάω honour; value, reckon; 
(+dat.) //we 
ιΤμή, -ης, ή 
honour, privilege, 
respect 
έν τΤμη έχω 
respect, honour 
τίμιος, -β, -ov 
^e/J in honour 
ΤΓμόκριτος, -ου, ό 
Timocritus 
ιΤμωρεω avenge (+dat.); (3ςΐ. and 
mid.) take vengeance on, punish 
(+acc.) 
τΓμωρίσ, -Gc, ή 
revenge, 
vengeance 
Τιρίβαζος, -ου, ό 
Tiribazus 
τις, τι* (indef. pron.) 
a certain, 
someone, something (10.1/1) 
τι (adv. acc., 20.1/5) 
to some 
extent 
uc; τί; (interrog. pron.) 
who? 
which? what? (10.1/1) 
Τιςςαφέρνης, -ους, ό 
Tissaphernes (Persian satrap) 
τίτλος, -ου, ό 
title, inscription 
-(•τιτρώςκω 
wound 
#τλαω (aor. έτλην) 
venture, bring 
oneself to do something 
τλήμων, -ov 
wretched, 
unfortunate; patient, resolute 
τοι* (particle) 
in truth, be 
assured 
τοίνυν* (particle) 
now then, well 
now (13.1/3*) 
#τοιος, -G, -ov = τοιούτος 
τοιόςδε, -<Χδε, -όνδε 
of this sort, 
of such a sort, such (21.1/3) 
τοιούτος, -αύτη, -ούτο(ν) 
of this 
sort, of such a sort (21.1/3) 
τόκος, -ου, ό 
offspring 
τόλμα, -ης, ή 
daring 
τολμάω 
dare, be daring; 
undertake 
τόξον, -ου, τό 
bow (also in plur. 
τόξα, bow [and arrows]); 
(poetry) ray/shaft (of sunshine) 
τοξοτης, -ου, ό 
archer 
τόπος, -ου, ό 
place, region; topic 
#τόςος, -η, -ov = τοςούτος 
τοςόςδε, -ηδε, -όνδε 
so much, so 
large, so great (pi. so many) 
(21.1/3) 
τοςούτος, -αύτη, -ούτο(ν) 
so 
much, so large, so great (pi. so 
many) (21.1/3) 
τότε (adv.) 
then, at that time 
του = τίνος 
of 
someone/something 
τού can = τίνος; 
of whom/what? 
τουνομα crasis for τό όνομα 
τούτφ dat.of ouroc 
έν τούτφ 
meanwhile 
τράπεζα, -ης, ή 
table; bank 
τραύμα, -ατος, τό 
wound 

τράχηλοο, -ου, ό neck, throat 
τραχυο, -εια, -ύ 
rough, prickly 
τραχύτηο, -ητοο, ή 
roughness 
τρείο, τρία 
three (7.1/5) 
-(•τρέπω cause to turn, put to flight 
{τρέφω 
rear, raise, feed, nourish 
ίτρέ^ω 
run 
τριδκοντα (indecl. numeral) 
thirty 
τριβκόντεροο, -ου, ή (sc. vaOc) 
thirty-oared ship 
τριδκόοιοι, -αι, -a 
300 
τρίβω 
rub 
τριηραρχέω 
serve as trierarch 
τριήραρχος -ου, ό 
trierarch 
τριήρηο, -ODC, ή 
trireme 
τρίο (adv.) 
three times 
τριο^Γλιοι, -αι, -α 
3,000 
#τρίτατοο = τρίτοο 
τρίτοο, -η, -ov 
third 
τρίχεο, αί nom. pi. of θρίξ 
Τροία, -Qc, ή 
Troy 
τροπαιον, -ου, τό 
trophy 
τρόποο, -ου, ό 
way, manner, way 
of life; (in pi.) ways, habits, 
character 
τίνα τρόπον ; (adv. acc., 20.1/5) 
in 
what way?, how? 
τούτον τον τροπον (adv. acc.) 
in 
this way 
τούτφ τφ τρόπω 
in this way 
τροφή, -ηο, ή food, nourishment 
τρύω 
wear out, distress 
Τρωάο, -άδοο, ή 
Trojan woman 
Τρώεο, -ων, οί 
Trojans 
(13.1/l6(i)) 
Τρωικός -η, -όν 
Trojan 
τά Τρωικά (sc. πράγματα) 
the 
Trojan War 
|τυγχάνω (+gen., 13.1/2*(iv)) 
hit 
(the mark), succeed; 
chance/happen upon, obtain; 
(+pple.) happen to -, be actually 
-(15.1/2^) 
#τύκιομα, -orcoc, τό working or 
chiselling in stone 
τύλη, -T|c, η 
cushion 
τύμβοο, -ου, ό 
tomb 
τυπείο aor. pass. pple. of τύπτω 
τύπτω strike, hit, beat 
τυραννεύω 
be tyrant 
τυραννίο, -iSoc, η 
sovereignty; 
tyranny 
TUpawoc, -ου, ό 
absolute ruler, 
sovereign; tyrant 
ttfpoc, -ού, ό cheese 
τυφλόο, -η, -όν 
blind 
τυχ- aor. stem of τυγχάνω 
τύχη, -^c, ή 
chance, luck, good 
or bad fortune; (personified, 
with cap.) Chance, Fortune 
τω = τι vi 
to/for 
someone/something 
τφ can = τίνι; 
to/for whom/what? 
τω όντι 
in fact, really 
ύβρίζω 
treat violently/ 
disgracefully; humiliate 
ύβριο, -εωο, ή 
aggression, 
violence, insolence, insult, 
humiliation 
ύβριστηο, -ού, ό 
violent/ insolent 
person 
ύγιεια, -<Xc, ή 
health 
ύδρδ, -Gc, ή hydra (water 
serpent) 
ύδωρ, -ατοο, τό 
water 
fei (impers.) 
it is raining 
(21.1/4c) 
ύειοο, -σ, -yov of pigs, pork 
υίόο, -ού, ό son (13.1/1 c) 
ΰλη, ^ηο, ή wood, forest 
ϋλοτόμοο, -ου, ό 
woodcutter 
ϋμεΐο (pron.) 
you (pi., 4.1/2) 
ήιέτεροο, -Q, -ov (poss. adj.) your 
. (PL> 
ύπαρχω| 
be; begin (+gen.) 
ύπειμι 
be beneath (+dat.) 
ύπέρ (prep.) (+acc.) 
beyond; 
(+gen.) for, on behalf of 
υπερβαίνω! step over, cross 
(mountains) 
υπερβάλλω! pass over, cross 
Ύπερεια, -Gc, ή Hypereia (a 
spring) 
ύπερέχω! 
be above, stick out 
above 
Ύπερίων, -ovoc, ό Hyperion (the 
Sun-god) 
#ύπερμαχέω fight for 
#ύπέρπικροο, -ov 
exceedingly 
bitter 
ύπερύψηλοο, -ov 
very high 
ύπερφρονέω 
be overproud, look 
down on 
ύπέρχυοιο, -εωο, ή 
overflow 
ύπηρετέω 
perform a service 
υπηρέτηο, -ου, ό 
servant 
!ύπιοχνέομαι 
promise 
ύπνοο, -ου, ό 
sleep 

370 
§ s ο· 
c 5Γ 
3 
υπό (prep.) (+acc.) 
under, along 
under, up under; (+gen.) from 
under; by, at the hand of; (+dat.) 
under, beneath; (Homeric) at the 
hand(s) of 
υπόδικα, -axoc, χό 
sandal 
ΰποζύγιον, -ου, χό beast of 
burden, draught animal 
ύπόθεcic, -εως, ή 
proposal, 
supposition 
ύποκαχαβαίνω| 
descend 
gradually 
ύπολαμβάνωΙ 
take up, answer, 
reply; assume 
ύπολειπω| 
leave behind 
υπόλοιπος -ov 
remaining 
ύποπέμπω| send secretly 
ύποπχεύω 
suspect, be suspicious 
ύποπτήττω cower before (+acc.) 
#ΰπορρηγνϋμι| 
burst beneath 
ΰποχελεω| 
pay (tribute) 
ύποχίθημιΙ 
place under 
ΰποφαίνωΙ 
dawn, begin to break 
uc, υός, ό/ή 
pig 
Ύςτάςπης, -ου, ο 
Hystaspes 
ύςτεραιος, -α, -ov following, next 
τη ΰςτεραίρ 
on the following 
day 
έτερον (adv.) 
later, afterwards 
ύστερος -α, -ov 
later, last (of 
two) 
ύφ' = υπό 
ύφαίνω 
weave 
ύφαιρέομαι! (aor. act./ mid. stem 
ύφελ-) 
steal, take by stealth 
ύφίημι+ 
send; (mid. and intr. 
tenses of act.) submit, yield 
#ύψηλόκρημνος -ov with lofty 
, dtffs . , 
υψηλός -η, -ov 
high 
ϋψος, -ους, τό 
height 
φαγ- aor. stem of έςθίω 
#φαεινός -ή, -όν shining, radiant, 
bright 
φαεςφόρος -ov 
light-bringing; 
(personified, with cap.) the 
Light-Bringer, i.e the Morning 
Star 
tφαίνω 
reveal, declare; (pass.) 
appear, be seen, seem; (+pple.) 
obviously be; (+inf.) seem to be 
(15.1/2Λ) 
Φάληρον, -ου, τό Phalerum (a 
port of Athens) 
Φαληροΐ 
at Phalerum 
φάναι inf. of φημί 
φανερός, -ά, -όν 
clear, obvious, 
visible 
φάος, -ους, τό light, daylight 
φάραγξ, -αγγος, ή chasm, ravine 
φάρμακον, -ου, το 
poison; drug; 
remedy; potion 
φάςκω 
allege, state, declare, 
claim 
φαύλος, -ov (also -η, -ov) 
mean, 
poor, low; trivial, ordinary, 
indifferent, cheap 
Φειδιππίδης, -ου, ο 
Pheidippides 
Φειδιππίδιον, -ου, τό (diminutive) 
dear little Pheidippides 
φείδομαι 
spare (+gen.) 
φέρε (2nd s. imp. of φέρω) 
cornel 
+φέρω 
carry, bring; bear, endure; 
produce; lead (of a road) 
άγω καί φέρω 
plunder 
χαλεπώς φερω 
be annoyed at 
(+acc.) 
φεύ (interjection) 
alas!; (+gen.) 
alas for 
tφεύγω flee, flee from, escape 
(+acc.); be a defendant, be on 
trial; be proscribed, be banished, 
be in exile (17.1/5) 
+φη^ί 
say (7.1/2) 
Ιφθάνω 
anticipate (15.1/2f) 
φθέγγομαι 
speak, say, utter 
Ιφθείρω 
destroy, ruin 
#φθίμένος -η, -ov 
dead 
φθονέω 
feel ill-will/envy/jealousy 
against, grudge 
(+dat.,13.1/26(i)) 
φθονος -ου, ό 
envy, jealousy 
φιλάνθρωπος, -ov 
loving 
mankind, man-loving, humane 
φιλάργυρος, -ov 
avaricious, 
miserly 
φιλέω 
love, like, be a friend of; 
kiss; be accustomed to (+inf.) 
φιλητέον 
one must love (24.1/5) 
φιλία, -«c, ή 
friendship 
Φιλιππιςμός -ού, ό siding with 
Philip 
Φίλιππος, -ου, ό Philip (father of 
Alexander the Great) 
φιλόκαλος, -ov loving beauty, 
fond of elegance 
Φιλοκράτης, -ους, ό 
Philocrates 
φίλος, -η, -ov 
dear, friendly; 
pleasing to (+dat.) 

φίλος -ου, ό 
friend 
φιλοοοφεω 
pursue/study 
philosophy 
φιλοοοφίσ, -Gc, ή 
philosophy 
φιλόοοφος -ου, ό 
philosopher 
φιλότης -ητος ή love, friendship; 
sexual intercourse 
φιλόΐΓμος -ov 
loving distinction, 
ambitious 
φιλοφροούνη, -ης ή 
love, 
affection 
φίλτατος -η, -ov most dear (supl. 
of φίλοο) 
#φίλυμνος, —ov loving song 
φλόξ, -ογός, ή 
flame 
φλυδρεω 
talk nonsense 
φλυαρία, -ας, ή 
nonsense 
f φοβεομαι 
fear, be afraid of 
φοβεομαι μή 
fear lest/that 
(14.1/4c(ii)) 
φοβερός -ά, -όν 
terrible, 
frightening 
φόβος, -ου, ό fear, panic 
#φοΐβος, -η, -ov pure, bright, radiant 
Φοίβος, -ου, ό Phoebus (Apollo) 
#Φοινικογενής, -ες 
Phoenician-
born 
Φοίνιξ, -ικος, ό 
Phoenician 
#φοίνιος, -α, -ov 
bloody 
φοιτάω go regularly to, frequent, 
resort to (a person as a teacher) 
φονευς, -έως, ο 
murderer 
φονεύω murder, slay 
φόνος, -ου, ό 
murder, slaughter, 
homicide 
φορέω carry, bring 
φόρος, -ου, ό 
tribute 
φορτίον, -ου, τό 
load, burden 
φράζω explain, tell, declare 
#φρήν, φρένος, ή 
heart, mind (pi. is 
used in the same sense) 
φρονέω 
think, consider; be wise, 
sensible 
ευ φρονέω be sane 
μέγα φρονέω be proud, have 
high thoughts 
φρόνημα, -ατος, τό arrogance, pride 
φρόνιμος, -ov sensible, wise 
φροντίζω 
think, ponder, consider, 
worry; pay heed to (+gen.) 
φροντίς, -ιδος, ή 
thought, care, 
concern 
Φροντιςτήριον, -ου, τό 
Think 
Tank, Thinking shop 
φροντιςτής, -ού, ο deep thinker 
φρούριον, -ου, τό 
fort 
φρύγανα, -ων, τά 
dry wood, 
firewood 
φυγάς, -άδος, ό exile; runaway; 
fugitive 
φυγή, -ης, ή 
flight 
φυλακή, -ης, ή guard, guarding, 
garrison 
εν φυλακή είμι 
be on guard 
φύλαξ, -ακος, ό 
guard 
φυλάττω (perf. πεφύλαχα) 
guard, 
watch; (mid.) take care, be on 
one's guard against (+acc.) 
φύρω 
spoil, defile, mar 
φύςις, -εως, ή nature, character, 
temperament 
|φύω 
cause to grow, produce 
έφϋν 
was born; am naturally 
πεφϋκα 
am naturally, am 
inclined by nature 
Φώκαια, -ας, ή 
Phocaea (city in 
Asia Minor) 
φωνέω speak 
φωνή, —ης, ή voice, language, 
speech 
φώς, φωτός, τό 
light 
Χαιρεφών, -ώντος, ό 
Chaerephon 
(disciple of Socrates) 
Ιχαίρω 
rejoice 
χαίρε 
greetings! hello! 
farewell! (17.1/1 note 7) 
χαλεπαίνω 
be angry/annoyed at 
(+dat.) 
χαλεπός, -ή, -όν 
difficult, hard 
χαλεπώς έχω 
be in a bad way 
χαλεπώς φερω 
be 
angry I displeased at (+acc.) 
χαλινός -ού, ό 
bit (for a horse's 
bridle) 
#χάλκευμα, -ατος τό 
anything 
bronze; (pi.) brazen bonds 
χαλκός -ού, ό 
bronze 
χαλκούς, -ή, -ούν 
of bronze 
#χαλκοχίτων, -ωνος 
bronze-clad 
Χάονες -ων, oi 
the Chaonians 
(tribe in Ejpirus) 
χάος -ους το 
chaos 
χαρακτήρ, -ηρος ό 
engraved 
mark; characteristic, character 
χαρίεις -ecca, -εν 
graceful, 
elegant, charming, nice 
χαριεντίζομαι 
jest, joke 
χαρίζομαι 
oblige, do a favour to 
(+dat.); give graciously 

372 
< Ο 
ο Q) 
σ 
c 
ω 
χόριο, -ixoc (acc. χάριν), ή 
grace, 
charm; favour; recompense, 
thanks 
χάριν οιδα / έχω 
he grateful to 
(+dat.) 
Χάρυβδις -εως ή 
Charybdis (a 
whirlpool) 
χείλος -ους τό 
lip 
χειμών, -ωνος ό storm; winter 
χειρ, χειρός ή 
hand 
Χειρίοοφος ου, ό 
Cheirisophus 
(Lacedaemonian general of 
Cyrus) 
χείριστος -η, -ov 
worst (supl. of 
KCtKOC) 
χειροτέχνης -ου, ό 
craftsman 
χειρών, -ov worse (compar. of 
Kcncoc) 
χελΤδών, -όνος ή 
swallow 
χελώνη, -ης ή 
tortoise 
Χερρόνηοος -ου, ή 
the 
Chersonese (the Gallipoli 
peninsula) 
χή crasis for καί ή 
χήτος -ους τό want, lack, need 
χθέο 
yesterday 
#χθών, χθονός ή earth, land 
χίλιοι, -αι, -α 
thousand 
Χίος -ου, ή 
Chios (island and 
city in the Aegean) 
χιτών, -κονος ό tunic, shirt 
χιών, -όνος ή 
snow 
χολή, -ής ή 
bile, gall; anger 
χορεύω 
dance 
Ιχράομαι 
deal with, associate 
with, treat, use (+dat., 
13.1/26(iii)) 
χρεία, -ac, ή use, serviceability 
|χρή 
it is necessary (+acc. and inf.) 
χρήζω desire, want, need (+gen.) 
χρήμα, -ατος τό 
thing; (pi.) 
money, goods 
χρηματίζω 
deal with business (in 
the Council or Assembly) 
χρήΰθαι inf. of χράομαι 
χρήαμος -η, -ov 
profitable, 
useful 
χρηομός -ού, ό 
oracle 
χρηστήριον, -ου, τό 
oracle 
χρηοτός -ή, -όν 
good, fine, 
serviceable 
χρήται 3rd s. pres. of χράομαι 
χρΤοτός -ή, -ov 
anointed 
χροιά, - α ς ή 
skin 
χρόνος -ου, ό 
time 
δια χρόνου 
after a time 
χρΐΚ;ίον, -ου, τό 
a piece of gold, 
gold 
χρϋϋός -ού, ό 
gold 
χ ρ έ ο υ ς -ή, -ούν 
golden 
#χρώς -ωτοο (also χρόα, χροός 
χροΐ), ό 
skin, flesh 
χυτός -ή, -όν 
poured; 
melted 
(with λίθινος made of glass); 
piled, heaped up 
χύτρα, -ac, η 
pot 
χω crasis for και ό 
χώρα, -Oc, ή 
land, country 
χωρέω 
go, come; be in motion 
χωρίζω 
separate 
χωρίον, -ου, τό 
place, 
space; 
region; farm 
χωρίο 
without, apart, separately 
(from) (+gen.) 
ψάλια, -ων, τά 
curb-chain 
of 
bridle, bridle 
ψάμμος -ου, ή 
sand 
ψέγω blame, censure 
ψευδής -έο false, lying 
ψεύδομαι 
lie, tell lies; cheat, 
deceive 
ψεύδος -ους τό 
falsehood, lie 
ψευδώο (adv.) 
falsely 
ψηφίζομαι 
vote 
ψήφιομα, -ατος τό 
decree 
ψήφος -ου, ή voting-pebble, vote 
ψΤλοί, -ων, οί 
light-armed troops 
ψόγος -ου, ό 
blame 
ψόφος -ου, ό 
noise 
ψύλλα, -ης ή flea 
ψϋχή, -ής ή 
soul, life, spirit 
ψύχος -ους τό 
cold, period of 
cold weather 
ψϋχρός ά, -όν 
cold 
ώ what! (+gen.) 
ώ Ο (addressing someone); ah! 
(exclamation of surprise) 
Ώγυγία, -ac, ή 
Ogygia (island of 
Calypso) 
ώδε 
(adv.) 
thus, 
as 
follows; 
(poet.) to here, hither 
ώδΤνω 
be in labour (of childbirth) 
ώή (exclamation) 
help! 
'Ωκεανός -ού, ό 
Ocean (son of 
Heaven and Earth) 

#ώκύο, -εια, -ύ 
swift, quick 
ώλόμην aor. of δλλυμαι 
ωμην impf. of οιμαι 
ώμοι (exclamation) 
ah me, woe 
is me, alas 
#ώμοφάγος, -ov 
eating raw flesh, 
where raw flesh is eaten 
ών, ουca, όν pres. pple. of ειμί 
τό όν 
reality 
τω όντι 
in fact, really 
Ιωνέομαι (aor. επριάμην) 
buy 
ώόν, -ού, τό 
egg 
ώρδ, Hie, ή season (of the year); 
time; beauty 
ώρμίΰμενος -η, -ov perf. mid./pass. 
pple. of όρμιζω 
(DC (for a summary of uses see 
22.1/1) 
(adv.) 
as; like 
(exclamatory) 
how! (+adj. 
or adv.) 
(•numerals) 
about, nearly 
(+pples.) 
on the grounds 
that, under the impression 
that; with the intention of 
(fut. pple.) 
(12.1/2a(ii) and (v)) 
(restrictive) 
for, considering 
that 
(+supl.) 
as . . . as possible 
(conj.) 
that (= ότι); in order 
that (= ίνα, oncoc); when, as 
(cbc τάχιcτα as soon as, lit. 
when quickest, but if this 
expression is used adverbially 
it means as quickly as 
possible, 17.1/4 d); 
since 
(prep.) to, towards, to the house 
.. of 
(DC (adv.) 
thus, so 
(Dcairccoc (also coc arncoc) (adv.) 
in 
the same way, just so 
ώαιερ (adv./conj.) 
like, as, as if 
ώστε (conj.) 
so that, that, with 
the result that, consequently 
(+inf. or ind., 16.1/1) 
ώτ- stem of ouc 
ear 
ωτε see εφ' 
ωφελεω help, assist, be of use to, 
benefit 
ώφελητεον 
one must help 
(24.1/5) 


abbreviations p. ix 
accents 1.1/2; Appendix 8 
accusative 2.1/3c; 22.1/2 
absolute 21.1/5 
adverbial 20.1/5 
cognate 22A/2g 
double 22.1/2f 
and infinitive 8.1/3a; cf. 16.1/1 
motions towards 2.1/3f; 22.1/2/ 
in oaths 22.1/2Λ 
with prepositions 2.1/3f; 3.1/5a 
of respect or specification 20.1/5 
space 7.1 Πό 
time 7.1/7a 
active voice, see verbs 
adjectival clauses 9.1/2 
indefinite 14.1/4c(iii) 
adjectives 
agreement 3.1/3 
instead of adverbs 4.2.9 note 
with article, as noun equivalent 
5.1/3 
without article, as noun equivalent 
5.1/3 note 1 
comparison of 17.1/2 
declension: 1st and 2nd 3.1/3; 
contracted 6.1/2; irregular 3.1/3; 
two-termination 3.1/3; 3rd 
10.1/4; 1st and 3rd 10.1/3 
demonstrative 9.1/1; 21.1/3 
exclamatory 21.1/3 
indefinite 10.1/1 
interrogative 10.1/1; 21.1/3; 
indirect 
interrogative 10.1/26 
numerals 7.1/5a and b\ Appendix 
7 
position 3.1/3a and b; attributive 
and predicative 3.1/3b; 18.1/6 
possessive 9.1/5 
relative 21.1/3 
verbal 24.1/5 
adverbial clauses 
of cause 22.1/1b(iii); cf. 14.1/4d 
note 1 
of condition 18.1/5 
manner 22.1 /1b(v) 
purpose 14.1/4c(i); 22.1/1b(ii) 
result 16.1/1 
time 14.1/4c(iii); 21.1/2; 22.1/1b(iv) 
adverbs 
adverbial καί 4.1/3 
comparison of 17.1/2 
emphasized with due 22.1/1a(iii) 
formation of 3.1/4 
indefinite 10.1/25 note 3 
interrogative (direct and indirect) 
10.1/2 
numerals 7.1/5c 
position of 2.1/6a(i); 3.1/4 
agent 11.1/2 
agreement 
between adjective and noun 3.1/3 
between article and noun 2.1/2 
note 1 
between double subject and verb 
11.2.4 note 
between neuter plural subject and 
verb 3.1/1 note 2 
between participle and noun 
12.1/1 
between subject and verb 2.1/4 
alphabet 1.1/1 
antecedent (in adjectival clauses) 
9.1/2 
omission of 9.1/2 note 1 
attraction of relative pronoun to 
case of 9.1.2 note 2 

376 
3 
α 
s 
aorist tense, see tense 
article 2.1/2; 3.1/1 
with abstract nouns 2.1/2 note 1 
generic 2.1/2 note 1 
neuter plural of + genitive 5.1/3 
to create noun equivalent 5.1/3 
with proper nouns 2.1/2 note 1 + 
genitive of proper nouns 5.1/3 
note 2 
omitted with predicative noun or 
adjective 5.1/3 
omitted in proverbs and poetry 
4.2.3 note 
with participles 12.1/2a(vi) 
equivalent to 3rd person pronoun 
5.1/3 
aspect 4.1/1 
in imperative 17.1/1 
in infinitive 7.1/4 
in participle 12.1/1; 15.1/2f 
in subjunctive/optative 14.1/1; 
21.1/1a 
attributive position 3.1/3b; 18.1/6 
augment 4.1/1 note 1 
double 7.1/1 note 4 
irregular 7.1/1 note 4; 15.1/1 
optional 12.3.1 note 
syllabic 4.1/1 note 2(i) 
temporal 4.1/1 note 2(ii) 
in perfect tense 15.1/1 
in pluperfect tense 16.1/2 and 3 
in verbs compounded with 
prepositions 6.1/3e 
in compound verbs with no 
prepositional element 6.1/3 
note 3 
cases 
basic uses of 2.1/3 
commands 
direct 17.1/1 
indirect 7.1/4 
comparative 
meaning of 17.1/3 
constructions with 17.1/4a-c 
comparison 
of adjectives 17.1/2 
of adverbs 17.1/2 
constructions with 17.1/4 
meaning of 17.1/3 
. conative imperfect 4.1/1 footnote 1 
conditional sentences 18.1/5 
conjugation, see verbs 
contracted futures 5.1/2 note 3 
contracted verbs, see Tenses (-ω 
verbs contracted) 
crasis 11.1/5 
dative 2.1/3e; 23.1/2 
of accompaniment 9.1/3a(ii), 
23.1/2/c 
of advantage/disadvantage 23.1/2d 
with adjectives 23.1/25 (cf. 9.1/35) 
with adverbs 23.1/25 
of agent 23.1/2g; 24.1/5 
of attendant circumstances 23.1/2/ 
of cause 23.1/2/ 
ethic 23.1/2 f 
with impersonal verbs 21.1/4 
of instrument 11.1/2 
of manner 23.1/2/ 
of measure of difference 17.1/45 
with nouns 23.1/25 
of place where (without preposition) 
10.2.11 note; 23.1/2r? 
of possessor 23.1/2c 
with prepositions 2.1/3/7 
of reference or relation 23.1/2e 
of respect 23.1/2m 
of time when 7.1/75 
with verbs 13.1/25; 23.1/2a 
declension, see adjectives, nouns, 
pronouns 
deponent verbs 8.1/2 
deponent futures 8.1/1 note 1 
passive deponents 11.1/1 note 
dialects 1.3; 25.1/1-2 
diminutives 24.1/3 
direct ob'ect, see accusative 2.1/3c 
dual 24.1/4 
elision 2.1/65 
in verbs compounded with 
prepositions 6.1/3 
enclitics 3.1/6; 4.1/2; 4.1/3; 
Appendix 8, d 
exclamations 22.1/1a(ii), 23.1/1/ 
fear: constructions after verbs of 
fearing 14.1/4c(ii) 
future tense, see tense 
gender 2.1/1 
genitive 2.1/3d; 23.1/1 
absolute 12.1/25 
of cause 23.1/1/c(ii) 
of characteristic 23.1/15 
chorographic (geographic 
definition) 23.1/1d 
of comparison 17.1/4 
of exclamation 23.1/11 
of explanation 23.1/1e 
objective 23.1/1c 
partitive 23.1/1d 
possessive 2.1/3d; 23.1/1 a 

with prepositions 2.1/3g; 3.1/55; 
11.1/2 
of price or value 20.1/3 
of separation 20.1/4 
subjective 23.1/1c 
time within which 7.1 /7c 
with verbs 13.1/2a; 23.1/1/c 
gnomic aorist 5.2.10 note 
historic 
endings: of active 4.1/1 note 1; of 
middle/passive 8.1/1f 
optative classed as 14.1/3 
sequence 14.1/4c(iii) 
tenses 4.1/1 note 1 
imperative 17.1/1 
imperfect tense, see tense 
impersonal verbs 5.1/2 note 5; 21.1/4 
inceptive imperfect 4.1/1 footnote 1 
indefinite clauses 14.1/4c(iii); 21.1/2 
indirect command 7.1/4 
indirect object, see dative 2.1/3e 
indirect question 10.1/26 
indirect speech 7.1/3 
virtual indirect speech 14.1/4of 
note 1 
indirect statement 8.1/3 
with finite verb 8.1/36 
with infinitive 8.1/3a 
use of optative mood in historic 
sequence 14.1/4d 
with participle 15.1/2a 
with verbs of hoping, promising, 
swearing 8.1/3a note 5 
infinitive 
-ω verbs (uncontracted) 
present active 2.1/5 
future active 2.1/5 
aorist active: weak 4.1/1; strong 
7.1/1; root 11.1/1 
perfect active 16.1/4 
present middle/passive 8.1/1 
future middle 8.1/1 
aorist middle 8.1/1 
perfect middle/passive 16.1/4 
future passive 11.1/1 
aorist passive 11.1/1 
(contracted) 5.1/2 note 1 
-μι verbs 18.1/2; 19.1/1; 20.1/1; 
20.1/2 
articular 5.1/3 
as imperative 17.1/1 note 5 
in indirect command 7.1/4 
in indirect statement 8.1/3a 
negative with 7.1/4; 8.1/3 
in parenthetical phrases 22.1/1a(vi) 
in result clauses 16.1/1 (cf. 17.1/4c) 
subject in accusative 8.1/3a; 
16.1/1; 21.1/2 
with verbs of knowing/learning how 
to 15.1/2a 
ingressive aorist 20.2.1 note 
instrument, dative of 11.1/2 
intervocalic sigma 5.1/2 note 2; 
6.1/1c; 8.1/1e 
middle voice 8.1/1 
motion 
from 2.1/3g 
towards 2.1/3 f 
movable nu 
in nouns 3.1/1 note 3; 5.1/1 
in verbs 2.1/5 note 4; 5.1/2 note 6 
negatives 24.1/2 
accumulation of 7.1/6 
in conditional clauses 18.1/5 
with deliberative subjunctive 
14.1/4a(ii) 
in direct questions 10.1/2a 
in indefinite clauses 14.1/4c(iii) 
in indirect command 7.1/4 
in indirect statement 8.1/3 
with jussive subjunctive 14.1/4a(i) 
in noun clauses after verbs of 
fearing 14.1/4c(ii) 
with participles 12.1/2 
position of 2.1/6a(i) 
in purpose clauses 14.1/4c(i) 
in result clauses 16.1/1 
in wishes 21.1/1 
nominative 2.1/3a 
after copulative 3.1/6 
with infinitive 8.1/3a (cf. 21.1/2a) 
noun clauses 
after verbs of fearing 14.1/4c(ii) 
in indirect question 10.1/26 
in indirect statement 8.1/36 
nouns 2.1/1 
1st declension 2.1/2; 3.1/2 
2nd 3.1/1; contracted 6.1/2; 'Attic' 
13.1/1a 
3rd 5.1/1; 6.1/1; consonantal stems 
5.1/1; 6.1/1; stems in -ec 6.1/1 c; 
stems in ι and υ 8.1/4; stems in 
ευ, αυ and ου 11.1/4; in -ωο, -ω 
and -ac 13.1/16 
declined in two ways 13.1/1c 
plural place names 4.2.9 note 
numerals 7.1/5; Appendix 7 
adverbs 7.1/5c 
cardinals 7.1/5a 
ordinals 7.1/56; 9.1/3a(i) 
377 
3 α s 

378 
α 
8 
oaths 22.1/2ft 
oblique cases 2.1/3 
optative 14.1/1; 14.1/3;16.1/4 note 1 
in adverbial clauses of reason 
14.1/4d note 1 
in conditional clauses 18.1/5 
use of future 14.1/4d 
in indefinite clauses 14.1/4c(iii) 
in indirect speech 14.1/4d 
in potential clauses 19.1/2 
in purpose clauses 14.1/4c(i) 
after verbs of fearing 14.1/4c(ii) 
in wishes 21.1/1 a 
participles 12.1/1; 16.1/4 
causal 12.1/2a(ii); 22.1/1a(i) 
concessive 12.1/2a(iii) 
conditional 12.1/2a(iv) 
in genitive absolute 12.1 /2b 
as noun equivalent 12.1/2a(vi) 
of purpose 12.1/2a(v); 22.1/1a(i) 
temporal 12.1/2a(i) 
with verbs 15.1/2; of beginning, 
stopping, continuing 15.1/26; of 
emotion 15.1/2c ; of knowing, 
perceiving 15.1/2a 
particles 4.1/3; 13.1/3 
interrogative 10.1/2a 
passive voice, see Verbs 
patronymics 3.1/2 note 3 
perfect tense 
meaning of 15.1/1 
with present meaning 19.1/3a 
transitive and intransitive 15.1/1 
note 2 
pluperfect tense, meaning and use of 
16.1/2 
possession 9.1/5 
postpositives 4.1/3 
potential clauses 19.1/2 
predicative position 3.1/35; 18.1/6 
prepositions (see also website 
http://tyancient greek.org) 
with accusative 2.1/31 3.1/5a 
with dative 2.1/3/? 
with genitive 2.1/3g; 3.1/55 
placed after noun they govern 
11.2.4 note 
pregnant use of 9.2.13 note on /. 
13; 22.2.2 note on /. 3 
with pronouns 4.1/2 
.present tense, see tense 
primary 
endings: of active 4.1/1 note 1; of 
middle/passive 8.1/1f 
sequence 14.1/4c(iii) 
subjunctive classed as 14.1/2 
tenses 4.1/1 note 1 
prohibitions (negative commands) 
17.1/1 
pronouns 
demonstrative 9.1/1; 16.1/1 note 1 
emphatic 9.1/3a 
indefinite 10.1/1 
indefinite relative 10.1/25 note 2 
interrogative 10.1/1 and 2; 21.1/3; 
indirect interrogative 10.1/25 
personal: 1st and 2nd person 
4.1/2; 3rd 4.1/2; 9.1/3c 
possessive 9.1/5 
reciprocal 9.1/45 
reflexive (direct and indirect) 9.1/4a 
relative 9.1/2; 21.1/3 
pronunciation 1.1/1 
purpose expressed by 
adverbial clauses 14.1/4c(i); 
22.1/15(ii) 
future participle 12.1/2a(v) 
questions 
alternative 10.1/2a, 24.1/2/ 
deliberative 14.1/4a(ii) 
direct 10.1/2a 
indirect 10.1/25 
reason 
adverbial clause of 14.1/4d note 
reduplication 15.1/1 (and note 3) 
result 
clauses and phrases of 16.1/1; 
17.1/4c 
root aorists 
imperative 17.1/1 note 2 
indicative and infinitive 11.1/1 
optative 14.1/3 note 2 
participles 12.1/1 note 4 
subjunctive 14.1/2 note 2 
spatial extent 
accusative of 7.1/7c/ 
strong aorist 
imperative 17.1/1 note 1 
indicative and infinitive 7.1/1 
optative 14.1/3 note 1 
participles 12.1/1 note 3 
subjunctive 14.1/2 note 1 
strong perfect 15.1/1 
with intransitive sense 15.1/1 note 
1; 20.1/1 note 2 
subjunctive 14.1/1-2; 16.1/4 note 1; 
18.1/2 note 1 
deliberative 14.1/4a(ii) 
jussive 14.1/4a(i) 
in indefinite clauses 14.1/4c(iii) 

in negative commands 17.1/1 
in purpose clauses 14.1/4c(i) 
after verbs of fearing 14.1/4c(ii) 
superlative 
constructions with 17.1/4d 
meaning of 17.1/3 
temporal clauses 14.1/4c(iii); 21.1/2 
tenses 
-ω verbs (uncontracted) 
indicative active: present 2.1/5; 
future 2.1/5; contracted future 
5.1/2 note 3; 11.1/3; imperfect 
4.1/1; 7.1/1 note 4; weak 
aorist 4.1/1; strong aorist 
7.1/1; root aorist 11.1/1; 
perfect 15.1/1; pluperfect 
16.1/2; future perfect 16.1/4 
note 2 
indicative middle: future 8.1/1; 
aorist 8.1/1 
indicative middle/passive: 
present 8.1/1; imperfect 8.1/1; 
perfect 16.1/3; pluperfect 
16.1/3 
indicative passive: aorist 11.1/1; 
11.1/3; future 11.1/1 
-ω verbs (contracted) 
present and imperfect 5.1/2; 
14.1/3; 17.1/1 note 3 
other tenses 5.1/2 note 2 
irregular futures 5.1/2 note 2 
irregulars in -αω 5.1/2 note 4 
disytlables in -εω 5.1/2 note 5 
rules for contraction 5.1 /2a-c 
-μι verbs 
defihition 18.1/1 
δίδωμι 18.1/2 
ΐημι 20.1/2 
ΐοτημι 19.1/1 
τίθημι 18.1/2 
verbs in -νϋμι and -ννύμι 20.1/1 
deponents in -αμαι 19.1/3b 
thematic vowel 2.1/5 note 3; 8.1/1d 
time 
adverbial clauses of 14.1/4c(iii); 
21.1/2 
how long 7.1/7a 
when 7.1 /7b 
within which 7.1/7c 
tmesis 12.3.9 note 
transitive and intransitive senses 
in aorist 11.1/1; 19.1/1 
in perfect 15.1/1 notes 1 and 2 
in same tense 11.1/1 
οΠοτημι 19.1/1 
verbs 2.1/4 
aspect 4.1/1; 7.1/4; 12.1/1; 14.1/1; 
15.1/2ή 17.1/1 
augment, see augment 
compound with prepositional 
prefixes 6.1/3 
conjugation 2.1/4 
deponent 8.1/2; 11.1/1 
of hindering, preventing, forbidding, 
denying 24.1/7 
moods 14.1/1 
oddities 19.1/3 
of precaution and striving 24.1/6 
principal parts 7.1/1 note 3; from 
different roots 18.1/4 
stems in palatals, labials, dentals 
6.1/4; 11.1/16; 16.1/3; in λ, μ, ν, 
ρ 11.1/3; 16.1/3 
syntax: with dative 13.1/26; with 
genitive 13.1/2a; with participles 
15.1/2 
tenses: primary and historic 4.1/1 
note 1 
relationship: of imperfect and 
aorist 4.1/1; of present and 
aorist: infinitive 4.1/1; 8.1/3a note 
1; imperative 17.1/1; subjunctive 
14.1/1; 17.1/1; optative 
14.1/1 ;14.1/4d; participle 15.1/2f 
transitive/intransitive 13.1/2; 19.1/1; 
20.1/1 note 2 
voice: active 2.1/4; middle and 
passive 8.1/1 
active verbs with a middle 
future 8.1/1 note 1 
active verbs with passive 
sense 17.1/5 
vivid present 7.2.13 note on /. 8 
vocative 2.1/36 
weak aorist 4.1/1 
wishes 21.1/1 
word order 
with adjectives 3.1/3a, 6 
with adverbs 2.1/6a(i); 3.1/4; 4.1/3 
first person before second 4.1/3 
with genitive of unemphatic 
personal pronouns 4.1/2- note 
(See also attributive/predicative 
position; postpositives) 
yes and no 24.1/1 


Afrikaans 
Access 2002 
Accounting, Basic 
Alexander Technique 
Algebra 
Arabic 
Arabic Script, Beginner's 
Aromatherapy 
Astronomy 
Bach Flower Remedies 
Bengali 
Better Chess 
Better Handwriting 
Biology 
Body Language 
Book Keeping 
Book Keeping & Accounting 
Brazilian Portuguese 
Bridge 
Buddhism 
Buddhism, 101 Key Ideas 
Bulgarian 
Business Studies 
Business Studies, 101 Key Ideas 
C++ 
Calculus 
Calligraphy 
Cantonese 
Card Games 
Catalan 
Chemistry, 101 Key Ideas 
Chess 
Chi Kung 
Chinese 
Chinese, Beginner's 
Chinese Language, Life & Culture 
Chinese Script, Beginner's 
Christianity 
Classical Music 
Copywriting 
Counselling 
Creative Writing 
Crime Fiction 
Croatian 
Crystal Healing 
Czech 
Danish 
Desktop Publishing 
Digital Photography 
Digital Video & PC Editing 
Drawing 
Dream Interpretation 
Dutch 
Dutch, Beginner's 
Dutch Dictionary 
Dutch Grammar 
Eastern Philosophy 
ECDL 
E-Commerce 
Economics, 101 Key Ideas 
Electronics 
English, American (EFL) 
English as a Foreign Language 
English, Correct 
English Grammar 
English Grammar (EFL) 
English, Instant, for French Speakers 
English, Instant, for German Speakers 
English, Instant, for Italian Speakers 
English, Instant, for Spanish Speakers 
English for International Business 
English Language, Life & Culture 
English Verbs 
English Vocabulary 
Ethics 
Excel 2002 
Feng Shui 
Film Making 
Film Studies 
Finance for non-Financial Managers 
Finnish 
Flexible Working 
Flower Arranging 
French 
French, Beginner's 
French Grammar 
French Grammar, Quick Fix 
French, Instant 
French, Improve your 
French Language, Life & Culture 
French Starter Kit 
French Verbs 
French Vocabulary 
Gaelic 
Gaelic Dictionary 
Gardening 
Genetics 
Geology 
German 
German, Beginner's 
German Grammar 
German Grammar, Quick Fix 
German, Instant 
German, Improve your 
German Language, Life & Culture 
German Verbs 
German Vocabulary 
Go 
Golf 
Greek 
Greek, Ancient 
Greek, Beginner's 
Greek, Instant 
Greek, New Testament 
Greek Script, Beginner's 
Guitar 
Gulf Arabic 
Hand Reflexology 
Hebrew, Biblical 
Herbal Medicine 
Hieroglyphics 
Hindi 
Hindi, Beginner's 
Hindi Script, Beginner's 

Hinduism 
Norwegian 
Spanish, Instant 
History, 101 Key Ideas 
Origami 
Spanish, Improve your 
How to Win at Horse Racing 
Panjabi 
Spanish Language, Life & Culture 
How to Win at Poker 
Persian, Modern 
Spanish Starter Kit 
HTML Publishing on the WWW 
Philosophy 
Spanish Verbs 
Human Anatomy & Physiology 
Philosophy of Mind 
Spanish Vocabulary 
Hungarian 
Philosophy of Religion 
Speaking on Special Occasions 
Icelandic 
Philosophy of Science 
Speed Reading 
Indian Head Massage 
Philosophy, 101 Key Ideas 
Statistical Research 
Indonesian 
Photography 
Statistics 
Information Technology, 101 Key Ideas 
Photoshop 
Swahili 
Internet, The 
Physics 
Swahili Dictionary 
Irish 
Piano 
Swedish 
Islam 
Planets 
Tagalog 
Italian 
Planning Your Wedding 
Tai Chi 
Italian, Beginner's 
Polish 
Tantric Sex 
Italian Grammar 
Politics 
Teaching English as a Foreign Language 
Italian Grammar, Quick Fix 
Portuguese 
Teaching English One to One 
Italian, Instant 
Portuguese, Beginner's 
Teams and Team-Working 
Italian, Improve your 
Portuguese Grammar 
Thai 
Italian Language, Life & Culture 
Portuguese, Instant 
Time Management 
Italian Verbs 
Portuguese Language, Life & Culture 
Tracing your Family History 
Italian Vocabulary 
Postmodernism 
Travel Writing 
Japanese 
Pottery 
Trigonometry 
Japanese, Beginner's 
Powerpoint 2002 
Turkish 
Japanese, Instant 
Presenting for Professionals 
Turkish, Beginner's 
Japanese Language, Life & Culture 
Project Management 
Typing 
Japanese Script, Beginner's 
Psychology 
Ukrainian 
Java 
Psychology, 101 Key Ideas 
Urdu 
Jewellery Making 
Psychology, Applied 
Urdu Script, Beginner's 
Judaism 
Quark Xpress 
Vietnamese 
Korean 
Quilting 
Volcanoes 
Latin 
Recruitment 
Watercolour Painting 
Latin American Spanish 
Reflexology 
Weight Control through Diet and 
Latin, Beginner's 
Reiki 
Exercise 
Latin Dictionary 
Relaxation 
Welsh 
Latin Grammar 
Retaining Staff 
Welsh Dictionary 
Letter Writing Skills 
Romanian 
Welsh Language, Life & Culture 
Linguistics 
Russian 
Wills and Probate 
Linguistics, 101 Key Ideas 
Russian, Beginner's 
Wine Tasting 
Literature, 101 Key Ideas 
Russian Grammar 
Winning at Job Interviews 
Mahjong 
Russian, Instant 
Word 2002 
Managing Stress 
Russian Language, Life & Culture 
World Faiths 
Marketing 
Russian Script, Beginner's 
Writing a Novel 
Massage 
Sanskrit 
Writing for Children 
Mathematics 
Screenwriting 
Writing Poetry 
Mathematics, Bas'c 
Serbian 
Xhosa 
Media Studies 
Setting up a Small Business 
Yoga 
Meditation 
Shorthand, Pitman 2000 
Zen 
Mosaics 
Sikhism 
Zulu 
Music Theory 
Spanish 
Needlecraft 
Spanish, Beginner's 
Negotiating 
Spanish Grammar 
Nepali 
Spanish Grammar, Quick Fix 


teach 
yourself 
ancient greek 
gavin betts 
• Are you a beginner looking for an introduction to Ancient Greek? 
• Or do you have some previous knowledge of the language? 
• Do you want to read and enjoy original Greek texts? 
Ancient Greek is equally suited to complete beginners or those 
with some knowledge of the language. Each unit introduces new 
grammar, followed by Greek sentences and passages. Original 
texts are studied at an early stage and enable the reader to form 
an idea of the wealth and extent of ancient Greek literature. 
A glossary of grammatical terms, revision exercises, further 
reading and other material are available on a free website. 
Gavin Betts and Alan Henry were members of the Department 
of Classical Studies, Monash University, Victoria, Australia, the 
former as Associate Professor, the latter as Professor. 
Why not try · New Testament Greek · Latin · or visit 
www.teachyourself.co.uk? 
Cover · © Gail Mooney/Corbis · White Masks, Rhodes, Greece 
the leader in self-learning with more than 300 
titles, covering all subjects 
be where you want to be with teach yourself 
teach 
yourself 
UK £15.99 
ISBN 0-340-86785-X 
A 
•Tr** 
9 , 
ν , ν , , ^ 

