
S tereochemistry 
DAVID G. M O R R I S  
University of Glusgow 
RSeC 
ROYAL SOCIl3Y OF CHEMISTRY 

Cover images 0 
Murray Robertson/visual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-602-X 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001 
All rights reserved 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or 
review as permitted under the terms of the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, this publication may not be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, without the prior permission in writing of The Royal Society of Chemistry, 
or in the case of reprographic reproduction only in accordance with the terms of the 
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the 
terms of the licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization out- 
side the UK. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should be 
sent to The Royal Society of Chemistry at the address printed on this page. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 2 I, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

E D I T O R - I N - C H I E F  
Professor E W Abel 
E X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
Professor A G Davies 
Projessor D Phillips 
Professor J D Woollins 
E D U C A T I O N  A L C O N  S U  L T A N T  
Mu M Berry 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  I N  T H E  S E R I E S  
F O R T H C O M I N G  T I T L E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Barrett 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hunson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Sainsbury 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Barrett 
S E Dann 
D 0 Hayward 
J D Gale and J M Seddon 
R A Jackson 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
Basic Spectroscopy 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Chemistry of Solid Surfaces 
Biology for Chemists 
Multi-element NMR 
Further information ubout this series is uvuiluble at www.chemsoc.orgltct 
Orders and enquiries should be sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 423429; Ernail: sales@rsc.org 

Preface 
Stereochemistry, first recognized by van? Hoff and Le Bel, now perme- 
ates organic chemistry. For a full appreciation of the subject, an under- 
standing of stereochemistry is necessary in terms of both the relevant 
conventions and definitions that are in use, and also what is happening at 
a molecular level during a reaction. It is hoped that this self-contained 
text will provide a means by which undergraduate students (and maybe 
others) become conversant with stereochemistry. The text being limited in 
size, it has been necessary to be selective in the choice of topics. 
Particular thanks are due to one of my former teachers, Professor 
Alwyn G. Davies FRS, than whom no-one could have been more helpful 
and courteous, for reading the manuscript and for his comments. Thanks 
are likewise due to Mr Martyn Berry. I am grateful to Professor Keiji 
Gamoh, Dr Sean Higgins, Dr Susan Armstrong and Dr David Rycroft, 
who read selected chapters and for discussions. I also thank Professor Zvi 
Rappoport and Dr David Procter for a discussion. The diligence of all the 
above prevented some errors and infelicities from featuring in the text. 
For any that remain, I alone am culpable. Gratitude is due to Dr Colin 
Drayton for help with editing and to Mrs Janet Freshwater of the Royal 
Society of Chemistry for overseeing the project with benign efficiency. 
Space considerations meant that some material had to be omitted. 
Accordingly, a Glossary of useful stereochemical terms has been placed 
on the RSC web site (http://www.chemsoc.org/pdf/tct/stereochemgloss. 
pdf). A further such list that derives from IUPAC may be found at the web 
site address of Dr G. P. Moss (g.p.moss@qmw.ac.uk). 
Finally, I thank my wife Brenda for her assistance with the preparation 
of the manuscript, during which she sacrificed several months of her life 
on the altar of Stereochemistry. 
David G. Morris 
Glasgow 

Contents 
1.1 Introduction 
1.2 Hybridization: Methane 
1.3 Hybridization: Ethene and Alkenes 
1.4 Hybridization: Ethyne 
1.5 Bonding and Anti-bonding Orbitals 
1.6 Conformation: Ethane 
1.7 
1.8 Cyclohexane: Chair Conformation 
1.9 Cyclohexane: Boat Conformation 
1.10 Inversion of Cyclohexane 
1.1 1 Monosubstituted Cyclohexanes 
Conformation of Propane and n-Butane 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 Enantiomeric Excess, Enantiomeric Ratio 
2.4 Racemization 
2.5 Homochiral Molecules 
Chirality, Enantiomers and Optical Activity 
How to Specify a Configuration 
3.1 Enantiomers and Diastereoisomers 
3.2 
Meso Configuration 
3.3 ErythrolThreo and SynlAnti Configurations 
1 
2 
3 
5 
6 
7 
9 
10 
12 
14 
15 
19 
23 
27 
29 
30 
37 
39 
41 
V 

vi 
Contents 
3.4 Caged Compounds with Two Stereogenic Bridgehead 
Carbons 
43 
3.5 Epimers, and the Nomenclature of Bicyclic Compounds 
44 
3.6 Separation of Enantiomers: Resolution 
46 
3.7 Separation of Enantiomers by Chromatography 
48 
3.9 Structure of Polypropene 
52 
3.8 Resolution with Enzymes 
49 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
Configuration and Relative Stability of Alkenes and Dienes 
60 
Cyclohexene 
62 
Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
63 
Amides 
64 
Cis Hydroxylation of Alkenes 
67 
Trans Hydroxylation of Alkenes 
67 
Addition of Bromine to Alkenes 
69 
Hydration of Alkenes 
72 
5.1 Allenes and Related Molecules 
5.2 Biphenyls 
5.3 
5.4 Hexahelicene 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
Absolute Configuration of Allenes and Biphenyls 
Silicon, Germanium and Tin Compounds 
Amines, Ammonium Salts, Phosphorus and Arsenic 
Compounds 
Sulfoxides, Sulfonium Salts and Selenoxides 
80 
83 
85 
86 
87 
88 
91 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
6.7 
6.8 
Cyclic Molecules, Configurational Assignment and Strain 
99 
C yclo pro pane 
100 
Cyclobutane 
101 
Cyclopen t ane 
102 
Cyclohexanes 
102 
Decalins 
111 
Steroids 
113 
Anomeric Effect 
114 

Contents 
vii 
7.1 Nucleophilic Substitution 
125 
8.1 Prochiral Molecules, Enantiotopic Groups and Faces 
140 
8.2 Diastereotopic Compounds 
143 
8.3 Reactivity Difference of Enantiotopic Hydrogens and 
in Enzyme-mediated Reactions 
144 
8.4 Non-enzymatic Selectivity in Addition to C=O and 
C=C Bonds 
145 
8.5 Stereochemical Information from NMR Spectroscopy 
147 

Simple Molecules: 
Hybridization, Conformation 
and Configuration 
I .I Introduction 
Chemistry, like everyday life, takes place overwhelmingly in three dimen- 
sions. Stereochemistry embraces the spatial aspects of chemistry and can 
be considered in two parts. The first deals with the shapes and proper- 
ties of mainly three-dimensional molecules and involves a knowledge of 
the terms 
and 
which are intro- 
duced in the first two chapters. The second aspect deals with reactivity 
and includes the preferred or obligatory direction of approach of 
reagents, and also the consequences for the nature of the products. In 
respect of reactivity, it can be said that except for spherical reactants, 
e.g. H+ and Cl-, there is almost always a preferred direction of approach 
of one molecule or ion toward another. 
We consider first the simplest organic molecule methane, CH,, in 
I 

2 
Stereochemistry 
H 
I 
,/Cp, 
H 
1 
particular its geometry, its representation in two dimensions and its 
make-up from the component atoms. In methane, all four carbon-- 
hydrogen bonds are equivalent and are directed toward the corners of a 
regular tetrahedron with carbon at the centre. The HCH bond angles 
are all 109”28’, a value that is found only in molecules with ‘tetrahedral’ 
symmetry. The normal depiction of methane is given in 1 and the 
convention, which is applied generally, for representing this three- 
dimensional molecule in two dimensions is now described. The central 
carbon is taken to lie in the plane of the paper, together with any two 
hydrogens. Most commonly these are the upper and left hydrogens and, 
as shown in 1, bonds between each of these two hydrogens and.carbon 
are represented by lines of ‘normal’ thickness. The thick ‘wedge’ repre- 
sents a bond between carbon and the hydrogen in front of the page, and 
the dashed line indicates a bond between carbon and the hydrogen 
behind the page. 
Note that any three atoms must lie in a plane. One can always draw 
a plane through three points; in the everyday world, for example, a three- 
legged stool never rocks. The three atoms that lie in the plane of the 
paper in 1 are chosen for convenience. 
1.2 
Hybridization: Methane 
When a bond is formed between, say, C and H, the electronic distribu- 
tion in the orbitals is perturbed and two atomic orbitals that normally 
each contain an electron are said to overlap. In the case of a simple mol- 
ecule such as in methane, the question arises: how does one reconcile the 
equivalence of the four C-H bonds in methane with the outer shell 
electron configuration, 2s22p2, of carbon? Hydrogen contributes its one 
electron in a 1s orbital, whereas carbon has four atomic orbitals of appro- 
priate energy available for bonding. These four orbitals are one 2s and 
three 2p orbitals, which are designated 2p,, 2py and 2pz according to 
their different directions in space; x, y and z refer to the directions 
of a Cartesian coordinate system. A 2s and a 2py orbital are shown in 
Figure 1.1. 
The 2s orbital is spherically symmetrical, and its electron density is 
highest at the nucleus. Each 2p orbital is cylindrically symmetrical 
Figure 1 .I 

Simple Molecules: Hybridization, Conformation and Configuration 
3 
and, in contrast to its 2s counterpart, has zero electron density at 
the nucleus. If one 2s and three 2p orbitals were used without modifi- 
cation in bonding, then four equivalent bonds would not be found in 
methane. 
A slightly higher energy state of carbon is described by the electron 
configuration ls22s2p3, and from the 2s and the three 2p orbitals 
four equivalent mixed or 'hybrid' orbitals are obtained. In the case of 
carbon in methane, and saturated carbon in most other molecules, the 
is described as sp3. These orbitals have some characteris- 
tics of the component atomic orbitals. Accordingly, an sp3 orbital has 
finite charge density at the nucleus, as does the 2s (but not the 2p) orbital; 
also it has directionality, in common with the 2p orbitals, with lobes now 
of unequal size. 
The structure of methane that indicates the equivalent sp3 hybrid 
orbitals of carbon bonding with four hydrogens is shown in Figure 1.2. 
The observed HCH bond angles in methane are such as to place the 
hydrogen atoms as far apart as possible. The same angles are observed 
in, say, CF,, but in general the C-C-C bond angles in acyclic saturated 
molecules are slightly greater, and an example is propane where the value 
is ca. 112". 
Figure 1.2 
I .3 Hybridization: Ethene and Alkenes 
Analysis of the geometry of methane does not explain that of ethene, 
C2H,, which contains two equivalent carbons. From electron diffraction 
data (see Thompson'), ethene is known to be a flat molecule with all six 
atoms in a plane and with bond angles of 120". The bonding of ethene 
can be rationalized by using the same orbitals, one 2s and three 2p (2px, 
2py, 2p,), but with the difference that one of the 2p orbitals does not par- 
ticipate in the hybridization. The net result is that there are three sp2 
hybrid orbitals and one p orbital per carbon. There are a number of 
significant differences about bonding in ethene compared to that in 
methane. The sp2 hybrid orbitals in ethene and indeed all alkenes pos- 
sess a greater percentage 's' character, and consequently the electrons 
reside closer to the carbon nucleus. Additionally, the change of hybridiza- 
tion brings about a change of bond angle. In ethene, and around the sp2 

4 
Stereochemistry 
Figure 1.3 
Figure 1.4 
hybrid carbons of alkenes, the bond angles are 120°, which leads to the 
flat structure. This geometrical arrangement means that the substituents 
around the alkene carbons are as far away from each other as possible, 
a feature that is true also of methane (see Section 1.2). It follows that in 
cyclohexene, for instance, four of the six carbon atoms (and two hydro- 
gens) ’are coplanar. 
What then of the p orbitals that did not participate in the formation 
of sp2 hybrid orbitals? These remain as p orbitals, one at each carbon, 
and each p orbital contains one electron. Together they form a bond, 
termed a 7c bond, between the carbon atoms. The mode of overlap is 
‘sideways on’. This contrasts with the end-on overlap that results in for- 
mation of (J bonds, and which in the present context involves C-H bonds 
in methane (Figure 1.2) and ethene, and the other bond between carbon 
and carbon in ethene. 
The sp2 hybrid orbitals in ethene and the p orbital are shown in Figure 
1.3. The sp2 hybrid orbitals form one carbon<arbon 0 bond and two 
carbon-hydrogen (T bonds. Ethene may be drawn as in Figure 1.4a; in 
Figure 1.4b ethene is drawn to highlight the overlap of the p orbitals of 
the two carbons that give rise to the n: bond. 
I 
(4 
The presence of the n: bond confers properties on an alkene that mark 
it out as different from an alkane. In particular, the n: bond, by the nature 
of its sideways overlap of the constituent p orbitals, is weaker than a 
(J bond. Moreover, the electrons of the n: bond are relatively exposed, 
above and below the plane of the alkene. These electrons are the source 
of reactivity of the alkene toward electrophiles, as in, say, electrophilic 
addition of bromine (Chapter 4). The n: bond in ethene (and other 
alkenes) is, however, sufficiently strong that it prevents rotation around 
the carbonxarbon (J bond, which is a well-documented property of the 
carbon-carbon bond in ethane (Section 1.6). The bonding between sp2 

Simple Molecules: Hybridization, Conformation and Configuration 
5 
hybrid carbons of an alkene consists of one 0 bond and one n; bond; col- 
lectively, these are referred to as a double bond. 
Double bonds are also formed between carbon and nitrogen to give 
imines (R,C=NR), and also between carbon and oxygen to give alde- 
hydes and ketones. In both these cases also there is one 0 bond and one 
n; bond. In aldehydes, ketones and imines, oxygen especially, and nitro- 
gen, are more electronegative than carbon. Accordingly, the electrons of 
the n; bond in particular are drawn toward the oxygen and the nitrogen, 
respectively. This has the effect of making oxygen and nitrogen partially 
negatively charged, and the carbons of these double bonds are 
correspondingly partially positive. 
I .4 
Hybridization: Ethyne 
For completeness, we consider briefly the triple bond in ethyne (acetyl- 
ene, HC= CH), though its stereochemical significance is limited. The car- 
bons of ethyne utilize one s and one p orbital to form two sp hybrid 
orbitals. This leaves two unhybrid p orbitals. The sp hybrid orbitals are 
used to form the (T bonds, one to the other carbon, and one to hydro- 
gen. The p orbitals at each carbon form two separate, and independent, 
n bonds that are at right angles to each other as viewed along the axis 
of the molecule. Such n; bonds are called 
Bonding in nitriles, 
RC=N, is similar with the triple bond again made up of one CJ bond 
and two orthogonal n; bonds. The bonding in ethyne is shown diagram- 
matically in Figure 1.5. 
Figure 1.5 
Along the series ethane (carbons sp3), ethene (sp2) and ethyne (sp) 
there is an increase in the percentage s character of the carbon hybrid 
orbitals. This implies a greater electron density at the carbon nucleus as 
one moves along this series, which is in accord with the progressively 
shorter carbon4arbon bond lengths observed. Average values of 0.154 
nm (ethane), 0.133 nm (ethene) and 0.12 nm (ethyne) have been found. 
Table 1.1 lists some bond angles in hydrocarbons. 

6 
Stereochemistry 
Table 1.1 Bond angles in hydrocarbonsa 
Bond type 
Bond angle 
c-c-c 
109'28' (ideal) 
GC-H 
120" 
C = G H  
180" 
1 1 1-1 12" (found) 
aValues can vary by a few degrees from those cited 
I .5 
Bonding and Anti-bonding Orbitals 
A further general point about molecular orbitals is illustrated with the 
hydrogen molecule. This is composed of two hydrogen atoms, each of 
which contributes one electron from a 1s orbital to form the molecular 
orbital. Two electrons in this molecular orbital form the 0 bond in the 
hydrogen molecule. It may appear that two atomic orbitals, that togeth- 
er are capable of containing four electrons, form one molecular orbital 
that is only capable of containing two electrons. The combination of 
atomic orbitals is slightly more involved. 
When two atomic orbitals combine they produce two 
of unequal energy (Scheme 1.1). The lower energy molecular 
orbital is lower in energy than the component 1s atomic orbitals; it is 
called a 
(MO) and contains the two electrons 
that form the 0 bond. Additionally, a second molecular orbital is formed 
that is higher in energy than the 1s orbitals, and in the ground state 
hydrogen molecule it is unoccupied. This higher energy orbital is known 
as an 
and in this case is given the symbol o*. 
, 
(3" MO 
Anti-bonding 
'".+ 
Bonding 
(3 Mo 
Scheme 1.1 
Similar behaviour is also shown by p orbitals, which form 'TC and IT* 
molecular orbitals. 
I .6 
Conformation: Ethane 
Unlike methane with its fixed geometry, ethane is not rigid and rotation 
occurs around the carbon4arbon bond. Conformations of a molecule are 

Simple Molecules: Hybridization, Conformation and Configuration 
7 
three-dimensional arrangements that differ only by rotation around a sin- 
gle bond. Each increment of rotation, however small, produces a change 
of conformation. In particular, the atoms remain connected in the same 
order during conformational change, with bonds being neither made nor 
broken. To explore conformation it is necessary to define terms and to 
examine ways of representing molecules, or their key parts, in two dimen- 
sions. Molecules containing saturated carbon will be considered here. 
Ethane can have a continuous series of conformations as rotation pro- 
ceeds around the carbon-carbon bond. In order to analyse this rotation 
it is appropriate here to present two different conventions for repre- 
senting ethane, and other molecules, so that their three-dimensional char- 
acter can be appreciated. One is the 
2, in which 
ethane is viewed along the carbon-carbon bond. The C-H bonds of the 
'front' methyl group are joined to the centre of the circle, which signi- 
fies the carbon-carbon bond axis. The corresponding C-H bonds of the 
rear CH, group are differentiated in that they finish at the circumference 
of the circle. In the 
conformation the dihedral angle 
Ha-C(1)-C(2)-Hb is 0" (carbon atom numbering as in diagram 3). The 
dihedral angle is the angle between planes Ha-C( 1)-C(2) and 
C(1)-C(2)-Hb, but is conveniently referred to as above. The dihedral 
angle is sometimes simply known as the 
angle. 
The second representation is known as a 
and is shown in 3. 
Here the molecule is observed from an oblique angle, 
As the C-C bond in ethane rotates about its axis the value of the dihe- 
dral angle @ increases gradually. When @ is 60°, the conformation is 
termed 
and the hydrogens are now as far apart as possible. 
Accordingly, this conformation corresponds to an energy minimum and 
is represented by 4 (Newman) and 5 (sawhorse) projections. Hydrogens 
Ha and Hb (and also the other pairs) are as close as possible in the eclipsed 
conformation, which therefore represents an energy maximum. 
A clockwise rotation of 120" of the rear methyl group from the eclipsed 
position in 2 and 3 gives a second eclipsed conformation identical with 

8 
Stereochemistry 
Figure 1.6 Torsion strain 
energy versus bond rotation in 
ethane 
2 and 3, and therefore with the same energy. A further 120" clockwise 
rotation gives a third identical conformation. These are shown in saw- 
horse projection in 6 and 7, respectively. A still further 120" clockwise 
rotation completes the revolution, with the original pair of eclipsed 
hydrogens Ha and Hb now again coincident. 
conformations in which the rotation around the C-C axis, from the posi- 
tion shown in 2 (or 3), has occurred such that the hydrogens of the rear 
methyl group have moved in a clockwise direction by an amount 0 < @ < 
60". This rotation around the carbonsarbon bond in ethane is rapid at 
room temperature, and is sometimes described as 'free rotation'. This is 
not strictly true as a small, though definite, energy barrier is encountered. 
We now consider the energy profile of an ethane molecule as the car- 
bonxarbon bond is tracked through one revolution. For our purposes 
the front CH, group in the Newman projection is kept constant and the 
rear CH, group rotates as the C-C bond itself rotates around its axis. 
As this happens the Ha-C( 1)-C(2)-Hb dihedral angle varies, and this 
angle forms the x-axis in the energy profile diagram (Figure 1.6). 
The conformation shown in 8 represents one of a number of 
0 
60 
120 
180 
230 
300 
360 
Degrees of rotation (+) 

Simple Molecules: Hybridization, Conformation and Configuration 
9 
It is clear from Figure 1.6 that eclipsed conformations are of highest 
energy, skewed conformations are of intermediate energy, and staggered 
conformations are the most stable. The energy difference between the 
highest and lowest energy conformations is 12.2 kJ mol-' at 25 "C, and 
is referred to as the 
In more complicated molecules than 
ethane, e.g. Cabc-Cxyz, the rotational barrier will differ from that shown 
in Figure 1.6; the peaks and troughs are now all of unequal height and 
depth and, depending on the substituents, the energy profile may only 
be repeated once per revolution. 
1.7 
Conformation of Propane and n-Butane 
Consideration of the Newman projection of propane (9) suggests that 
the energy profile associated with rotation around the CH,-CH, bond 
contains both three identical maxima and three identical minima per rev- 
olution. In eclipsed conformations there is now a non-bonded repulsion 
between a methyl and a hydrogen; accordingly, the torsional barrier, at 
14.2 kJ mol-', is a little higher than in ethane. 
The case of butane, C( 1)H,-C(2)H2-C(3)H2-C(4)H3, 
is more involved. 
Three conformations are shown in 10-12, in which the methyl groups 
are, for convenience, represented by X. In 10 the C( l)-C(2)-C(3)-C(4) 
dihedral angle, @, is 0" and this corresponds to the 
conformation of 
butane. If one rotates the rear group clockwise, then when 4 = 60" a 
staggered conformation 11 is obtained; this is known as a 
con- 
formation. A further 120" clockwise rotation of the rear group leads, via 
an eclipsed conformation, to 12, known as 
since the dihedral angle, 
$, is now 180". In butane this conformation has a plane of symmetry. A 
further 120" clockwise rotation yields a gauche conformation 13, that is 
equal in energy to 11. 
cis 
gauche 
anti 
gauche 
10 
11 
12 
13 
In the vast majority of appropriately constructed molecules, for 
example derivatives of butane, the anti conformation, e.g. 12, in which 
the groups X are each flanked by two hydrogens, is the most stable; how- 
ever, there are a few exceptions. The anti conformation of butane is more 
stable than the cis by ca. 18.8 kJ mol-I. An energy profile of rotation 
around the central C-C bond of butane is given in Figure 1.7. 
H H$c 
H 
H 
9 

10 
Stereochemistry 
Figure 1.7 Torsion strain ener- 
gy versus bond rotation about 
the central, C(2)-C(3), bond in 
butane 
The conformations of longer, unbranched hydrocarbons become more 
complicated the greater the number of carbons. For example, pentane 
has nine staggered conformations. 
I .8 
Cyclohexane: Chair Conformation 
Cyclohexane is a saturated cyclic hydrocarbon, C6HI2, in which all the 
carbons are sp3 hybridized and tetrahedral. 
Benzene, C,H,, is an unsaturated hydrocarbon with a six-membered ring 
in which all carbon atoms are now sp2 hybridized. 

Simple Molecules: Hybridization, Conformation and Configuration 
1 1 
The cyclohexane ring, either alone or as part of a more complex 
structural unit, occurs in certain natural products and, accordingly, 
cyclohexane is the most important saturated cyclic hydrocarbon. Two 
principal conformational isomers exist. The more stable is called the 
(see Section 
1.9). In both these conformations the C-C-C bond angles are close to 
the tetrahedral value of 109'28 ' ; consequently, cyclohexane has little 
Angle strain becomes significant in saturated hydrocarbons 
if there are meaningful departures from the above value. 
The chair conformation of cyclohexane also has minimum torsion 
strain, as can be confirmed both from a Newman projection and molec- 
ular models. The Newman projection 16, derived from 15, in which one 
looks along the C(1)-C(2) bond of cyclohexane, reveals an almost exact- 
ly staggered local conformation. This situation is reproduced if one 
inspects the Newman projections along the other five carbon-carbon 
bonds in chair cyclohexane. Inspection of 14 indicates that of the 12 
hydrogens in a molecule of cyclohexane, six are parallel to a three-fold 
axis of symmetry (C3 axis) that passes through the molecule as indicat- 
ed. These six hydrogens are therefore termed 
and are further dif- 
ferentiated in that three are above an approximate plane through the 
molecule and three are below. A molecular model of cyclohexane will 
accordingly rest on a table by either the three upper or the three lower 
hydrogens. 
14, and the less stable the 
The three upper axial hydrogens in cyclohexane are termed cis to each 
other; likewise the three lower axial hydrogens are mutually cis. These 
cis relationships are at the origin of the phrase 
that is used in appropriate 1,3-disubstituted cyclohexanes (Chapter 
6). It may be helpful to insert an imaginary C(l)-C(3) bond to confirm 
with the aid of a model that the dihedral angle is 0". 
It is noteworthy also that axial hydrogens on adjacent carbons, e.g. 
H'" and H2" in 16 and 17, are said to be 
by virtue of the dihedral 
angle H1"-C( 1)-C(2)-H2" being 180". These relationships are quite gen- 
eral whether the relevant sites are occupied by hydrogen or another sub- 
stituent(s). Relationships between hydrogens in other positions of the 
cyclohexane ring are considered later (Chapter 6). 

12 
Stereochemistry 
The remaining six C-H bonds of cyclohexane are more or less per- 
pendicular to its C3 axis, and are termed 
bonds. Inspection of 
a model will confirm that they are directed away from the core of the 
molecule and do not experience significant non-bonded interactions. 
1.9 
Cyclohexane: Boat Conformation 
The boat conformation of cyclohexane (18) can be constructed from a 
molecular model of the chair form by holding the right-hand three 
carbons C(2), C(3) and C(4) of 15, clamped from the top with the hand 
and moving the left-hand three carbons upward. A Newman projection 
of the boat form looking along the C(l)-C(2) bond, and shown in 19, is 
reminiscent of the highest energy cis conformation of butane. 

Simple Molecules: Hybridization, Conformation and Configuration 
13 
18 
H 
19 
Further, the boat conformation of cyclohexane is usually thought to pos- 
sess an unfavourable transannular non-bonded interaction between the 
two hydrogens marked H’ in 18; this is known as a 
Recently it has been claimed that the magnitude of the 1’4-interaction 
in 18 is negligible, but that there is a 1’4-repulsive interaction between 
C(l) and C(4) in the boat conformation (see Sauers2). 
On account both of this interaction and the two sets of eclipsed inter- 
actions the boat conformation is less stable than the chair counterpart 
by 27.5 kJ molk’. A further conformation of cyclohexane, the 
is known and is relevant in ring inversion (Section l.lO), but is not con- 
sidered further here. It is mentioned briefly in Chapter 6. 
An appreciation of the 1’4-interaction is best achieved if space-filling 
models are used. ‘Normal’ molecular models, though excellent for an 
understanding of conformations, often under-represent the ‘size’ of 
atoms. For example, in Fieser models of cyclohexane, hydrogen atoms 
are not included, and hence no account is taken of the size of hydrogen 
and the ‘size’ of carbon in, for example, cyclohexane is under- 
represented, except in space-filling models. The size of an atom is given 
by its van der Waals’ radius. When another atom intrudes into the space 
of an atom, i.e. closer than its van der Waals’ radius, a repulsion occurs 
and this is destabilizing. 
The van der Waals’ radii of a number of common groups are given 
in Table 1.2. Space-filling molecular models take account of the van der 
Waals’ radii and should be used when matters of non-bonded interaction 
are involved or suspected. 

14 
Stereochemistry 
Table 1.2 van der Waals' radii of common groups 
~ 
~~~~~ 
~ 
Group 
van der Waals' radius (nm) 
0.12 
0.20 
0.20 
0.135 
0.14 
0.15 
0.18 
0.20 
0.22 
1. I 0  Inversion of Cyclohexane 
' H Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a sensitive tech- 
nique in which the absorption (at higher or lower fields) of different pro- 
tons in a molecule reflects the 'different environment of the protons. 
However, the 'H NMR spectrum of cyclohexane at ambient tempera- 
ture shows only a single absorption. The reason for this is that cyclo- 
hexane is interconverting rapidly between two chair conformers of equal 
energy. This is shown by the equilibration of 20 and 21 in which only 
one pair of geminal hydrogens, H1 and H2, is shown. After 
an 
axial hydrogen, H' in 20, has become equatorial in 21 and vice versa. 
This behaviour is quite general for all hydrogens in cyclohexane. 
At room temperature, inversion of cylcohexane is so rapid that its 'H 
NMR spectrum shows only a single averaged absorption for the 12 pro- 
tons. At low temperatures, less than 230 K, when the rate of intercon- 
version of 20 and 21 is slow, it is possible to observe separate absorptions 
for the axial and equatorial protons. 
If one examines the 'H NMR spectrum of cyclohexane at tempera- 
tures in the range in which the changeover takes place from a single 
average absorption to separate axial and equatorial absorptions, it is 
possible to estimate the rate constant for the ring inversion of cyclo- 
hexane. One can translate this result to room temperature and say that 
here cyclohexane is undergoing ring inversion more than 100,000 times 

Simple Molecules: Hybridization, Conformation and Configuration 
15 
per second. For further details see Eliel and Wilen3 (and the references 
cited therein). 
Ring inversion of cyclohexane occurs by a route that involves twist- 
boat, and possibly boat, conformations and which is not reproduced 
accurately in the manual inversion outlined below. 
I .I I Monosubstituted Cyclohexanes 
The most stable form of a monosubstituted cyclohexane is, like cyclo- 
hexane itself, a chair conformation. There are, however, two valid chair 
conformations and again, like cyclohexane, these are interconvertible by 
ring inversion. In the particular case of methylcyclohexane, they are 
shown by 22 and 23. 
It can be seen that in 22 there are two destabilizing cis 1,3-diaxial 
interactions between Me and H. The molecule responds to these inter- 
actions by undergoing ring inversion to produce 23 in which the methyl 
group is now in the relatively 'open' equatorial position. At 25 "C the 
equilibrium ratio of 23 to 22 is ca. 18:1, and this corresponds to a free 
energy difference of AGO ,= -7.1 kJ mol-'. 
The equilibrium constant, K, is related to the standard free energy, 
AGO, by equation (1). In Table 1.3, values of AGO for a number of val- 
ues of K are presented; it will be useful to become familiar with the range 
of values of AGO involved. For example, if K is 9, the derived value of 
AGO, ca. -5.5 kJ mol-l, is quite modest. 

16 
Stereochemistry 
Table 1.3 Relationships between free energy and equilibrium constants 
% More stable isomer 
K 
-AGO (kJ mol-I) 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
99 
99.9 
1 
1.22 
1.50 
1.86 
2.33 
3.00 
4.00 
5.67 
9.00 
19.00 
99.00 
999.00 
0 
0.49 
1.01 
1.54 
2.1 0 
2.72 
3.44 
4.30 
5.44 
7.29 
11.39 
17.12 
In 1 -methylethylcyclohexane (isopropylcyclohexane) the conformer with 
the equatorial substituent (shown in 24) is now favoured over its axial 
counterpart by a factor of ca. 35 because of the larger size of the alkyl 
substituent, and this ratio corresponds to AGO = -8.8 kJ mol-'. 
24 
25 
Two more examples merit consideration. In 1,l -dimethylethylcyclo- 
hexane (25, t-butylcyclohexane) the very bulky substituent group has an 
overwhelming preference for the equatorial position on account of its 
severe cis 1,3-diaxial interaction with two hydrogens when it is axial; this 
can be verified with space-filling models. In effect, 25 is locked in the 
chair conformation with the 1,l -dimethylethyl group equatorial, incap- 
able of inversion; this substituent is discussed further in Chapter 6. 
By way of contrast, in iodocyclohexane, iodine has little preference as 
to whether it is axial or equatorial. The reason is that although iodine 
is a large atom, the C-I bond length of ca. 0.195 nm is much longer than 
the axial C-H bonds (ca. 0.11 nm), and although the van der Waals' 
radius of iodine, ca. 0.22 nm, is large, 1,3-diaxial interactions that involve 
iodine are not significant. 
A list of conformational preferences of substituents for the equatori- 
al position in monosubstituted cyclohexanes, expressed in terms of AGO, 
and often known simply as 
, is available (see Bushweller") and 
a selection of A values is presented in Table 6.1. 
A note on diagrams is relevant here. Hydrogens are either shown 
explicitly, usually to demonstrate a point, as in 22 and 23, or they may 

Simple Molecules: Hybridization, Conformation and Configuration 
1 7 
be omitted, again as in 22 and 23. It is therefore in order to show some 
hydrogens, but not others, in a diagram of a given molecule. An un- 
annotated line in a structure represents a methyl group. Examples of this 
are in the 1-methylethyl group in 24 and the 1,l-dimethylethyl group in 
25. Of course, the methyl groups may be written as in 22 and 23. Diagram 
23 may equally well be drawn as in 26. All other groups, e.g. C1, NO,, 
are annotated. 
- 
26 

i8 
Stereochemistry 

Chiral Molecules: 
One S tereogenic Centre 
2.1 
Chirality, Enantiomers and Optical Activity 
When an sp3 hybridized tetrahedral carbon is attached to four different 
groups, as in 1 (see below), the molecule cannot be superimposed on its 
mirror image. This is the same property that a right hand, say, placed 
in front of a plane mirror possesses. Molecules such as 1 are said to be 
then is the property of handedness, and the adjective ‘chi- 
ral’ refers to the molecule as a whole, rather than to a particular atom. 
Molecules such as CC1, and CH,Cl, that can be superimposed on their 
mirror images are said to be ‘achiral’. 
Molecules such as 1 and 2 are termed ‘enantiomers’, from the Greek 
‘enantio’ meaning opposite. 
are defined as a pair of mole- 
cules related as nun-superimpusable mirror images; note that it is essen- 
tial to include ‘non-superimposable’ in the definition. It can be seen that 
enantiomers are a particular sub-class of stereoisomers. Each enantiomer 
of a pair has the same physical properties (e.g. m.p., b.p. and solubility) 
with one exception. This distinguishing feature arises when, in separate 
experiments, plane polarized light is passed through a solution of each 
(or handed), from the Greek word ‘cheir’ for hand. 
19 

20 
Stereochemistry 
enantiomer in the same solvent, and using the same cell. If the concen- 
tration of the two enantiomers is the same, then the plane of polarized 
light is rotated in opposite senses and by the same amount. This differ- 
ence in behaviour has important diagnostic value. 
Although this chapter deals with chirality in certain molecules, one 
should be aware that chirality is to be found in the wider world. As men- 
tioned above, the word chirality comes from the Greek for hand. A hand, 
and a foot, are chiral and fulfil the same criteria as chiral molecules. 
Accordingly, a left hand placed in front of a mirror gives a right hand 
as its mirror image (Figure 2.1). These cannot be superimposed, as can 
readily be demonstrated with one’s own hands. Also, a glove is chiral 
and a pair of gloves consists of two enantiomeric gloves. Likewise, a shoe 
or a sandal is chiral. A plain sock is not chiral but it will of course read- 
ily adapt to the chirality of the foot. 
Figure 2.1 
Another common chiral object is a cylindrical helix, such as a bed- 
spring. A helix with its mirror image is shown in Figure 2.2 and again 
object and mirror image are not superimposable. The thread of a screw 
ensures that it too is chiral. The body shell of a car as it enters the 
assembly line is not chiral, and it has a plane of symmetry. When the 
car leaves the assembly line it has acquired, for example, a steering wheel 
on one side or another. The finished car is now not superimposable on 
Figure 2.2 

Chiral Molecules: One Stereogenic Centre 
21 
its mirror image, and it is therefore chiral; it has also lost its plane of 
symmetry. 
A rowing boat is clearly not chiral, but note that it possesses a plane 
of symmetry. An engine, presumed symmetrical, fitted to this boat will 
have a propeller, almost certainly with three blades. The propeller itself 
is chiral (verify this by observation if possible) and after the engine with 
its propeller is fitted, the boat as a whole has now become chiral by 
virtue of its propeller, which has also caused the boat to lose its plane 
of symmetry. 
Some types of aircraft use one or more propellers that each have four 
blades; each propeller is again chiral. Is a jet engine chiral? (Consider 
the engine, not running, viewed from the front of the plane). 
Light may be regarded as a wave motion that contains oscillating elec- 
tric and magnetic fields. The electric field of light oscillates in all planes 
at right angles to the direction of propagation of the light wave. When 
a beam of normal light is passed through a device called a 
that 
in effect acts as a filter, only light waves that are oscillating in a single 
plane are allowed to pass through. The polarizer thus serves to block the 
passage of light that is oscillating in all other planes. The light that 
emerges from the polarizer is said to be plane polarized. 
In 18 15 the French physicist Biot made the important observation that 
when a beam of 
is passed through a solution of cer- 
tain naturally occurring organic compounds, the plane of polarized light 
is rotated either to the left or to the right. Molecules that induce this 
rotation are said to be 
The simplest class of optically active molecules has one carbon bond- 
ed to four different substituents, and of course it is necessary for one 
enantiomer to be in excess over the other. Measurements of optical activ- 
ity are carried out with a polarimeter, which is shown schematically in 
Figure 2.3. The direction and extent of the rotation of the plane of polar- 
ized light is the basis of specific rotation, which is dealt with in this 
section. 
Each enantiomer undergoes chemical reactions at the same rate as 
long as the other reagent (and the solvent) is not chiral. However, in the 
Figure 2.3 

22 
Stereochemistry 
case in which the other reagent is chiral, the two enantiomers will react 
at different rates; this is the basis for enzymic selectivity, which is dis- 
cussed later (Section 3.8). 
A pair of enantiomers is represented by 1 and 2, in which the carbons 
shown in colour are called 
They are also less justi- 
fiably called ‘chiral centres’; the term ‘asymmetric carbon’ is now encoun- 
tered less frequently. 
1 
2 
The opposite configurations of the stereogenic centres in 1 and 2 are 
indicative of the opposite directions in which they rotate the plane of 
polarized light. However, it is not possible from inspection of a partic- 
ular enantiomer to say in which direction the plane is rotated. 
Enantiomers that rotate the plane to the right, i.e. clockwise, are called 
and are sometimes given the symbol ‘8; those that rotate 
to the left, anti-clockwise, are correspondingly called 
with 
the symbol ‘I’. It should be made clear that the terms dextrorotatory and 
laevorotatory are defined with the observer looking into the propagat- 
ing beam. These names and their symbols are empirical and have no fun- 
damental significance. Also, those compounds that rotate the plane of 
polarized light to the right are frequently given the symbol (+), and those 
that rotate to the left the symbol (-). 
In order to characterize the extent of rotation, an index called 
[a],, 
is used; this is given by equation (1): 
t 
100a 
z x c  
[a], =- 
In equation (l), ‘a’ 
(alpha) refers to the observed rotation in degrees, ‘I’ 
to the length of the polarimeter cell in decimetres, and ‘c’ refers to the 
concentration of the sample in g 100 ~ m - ~ ,  
i.e. g per 100 cm3. On the left- 
hand side of the equation, ‘t’ refers to the temperature in “C at which 
the measurement takes place, and the subscript ‘D’ indicates that light 
from the D line of a sodium lamp with a wavelength of 589.6 nm was 
used. Sometimes the concentration c is expressed as g ~ m - ~ ;  
in this case, 
equation (2) is employed: 
a 
[a]:, 
=- zxc 
If a measurement is made as a check on a published value of the spe- 

Chiral Molecules: One Stereogenic Centre 
23 
cific rotation, care must be taken to ascertain whether the concentration 
relates to equation (1) or equation (2). For example, a reasonable con- 
centration, such as 2 g in 100 cm3 in respect of equation (l), might well 
exceed the solubility of the compound if taken to be concentration c = 
2 g in 1 cm3, as used in equation (2). 
Values of specific rotation are expressed as in equation (3) for the 
amino acid cysteine (compound 30 in the Problems section of this 
chapter): 
(3) 
[a]:: 
=- 16.5 (conc. 2 g in 100 cm3 H,O) 
cysteine 
The units of [a] 
are lo-' deg cm2 g-' but are not usually included; until 
recently, values were expressed in deg. The conditions used are given 
because [a] 
can vary with (a) wavelength (sometimes the incident light 
is from a mercury lamp and has wavelength 546.1 nm.), (b) temperature 
and (c) solvent; effects of polarity of the solvent and hydrogen bonding 
between solvent and substrate can affect [a] markedly. 
The use of g ~ m - ~  
to express concentration in equation (l), though 
common in polarimetry, is unusual; concentration is more commonly 
expressed in mol dm-3. A molar rotation [MI is known, but is used less 
frequently. 
The example shown by 1, i.e. a stereogenic carbon bonded to four 
different groups, is the most common reason for a molecule to show 
chirality, and of course there can be several stereogenic centres in a mol- 
ecule. However, the need for a stereogenic centre is not an absolute 
requirement for a molecule to be chiral, and this is considered in Chapter 
5. All cases must, however, fulfil the fundamental condition: for a 
molecule to be chiral and to display optical activity, it must be non- 
superimposable on its mirror image. 
The stereochemistry that is possible at saturated carbon is also dis- 
cussed by McMurry.' 
2.2 
How to Specify a Configuration 
2.2.1 Fischer Projections 
Two conventions are in use to describe the configuration of a stereogenic 
centre. The older system uses the symbols D and L, and is still employed 
for two important classes of compound, namely amino acids and sug- 
ars; otherwise it has been superseded. The D/L system will be considered 
first. The use of capital letters here serves to distinguish this convention 
from d/Z (page 22), which relates only to the sense in which the plane of 
polarized light is rotated. 

24 
Stereochemistry 
In the early 1900s it was not possible to assign an absolute configu- 
ration to a chiral molecule with even a single stereogenic centre, although 
the need for a system of assignment was appreciated. Accordingly, an 
arbitrary standard was put in place; this consisted of the molecule (+)- 
glyceraldehyde (3), selected because of its close relationship to sugars. 
The representation of the three-dimensional structure was addressed as 
follows. 
(+)-Glyceraldehyde was drawn as 3, using what is known as a 
The convention is that a stereo drawing of this molecule is 
shown as in 4. The vertical bonds are directed behind the page from the 
stereogenic carbon (which is not shown in a Fischer projection) and the 
horizontal bonds in 3 resemble a bow tie in 4 projecting out of the page. 
Fischer was the second Nobel laureate in chemistry in 1902. 
The decision was taken to assign (+)-glyceraldehyde (3) the absolute 
configuration shown, which was termed ‘D’, and the enantiomer (-)-glyc- 
eraldehyde was then represented by 5, and given the symbol ‘L’. The 
terms D and L refer to the molecule as a whole. In 1951, Bijvoet and his 
group in Utrecht showed by X-ray structure analysis that the original 
arbitrary assignments, happily, were correct. This finding was significant 
because the configurations of many compounds had been designated by 
relating them to (+)-glyceraldehyde. One example involves the configu- 
ration of (-)-glyceric acid (6), obtained by oxidation of (+)-glyceralde- 
hyde [typically with mercury(I1) oxide]. Since the oxidation has taken 
place away from the stereogenic centre and the oxidizing agent is mild, 
one can conclude that there has been no change in configuration of the 
stereogenic centre during formation of 6 from 3. 
(+)-D-3 
(-)-D-6 
The configuration of (-)-6 is as shown and is accordingly termed 
D-glyceric acid. This result shows that there is no correlation between 
configuration and the sign of rotation. 

Chiral Molecules: One Stereogenic Centre 
25 
Except for glycine, the alpha amino acids derived from proteins of 
higher living organisms have at least one stereogenic centre. Those with 
a single such centre are represented by Fischer projection formulae 7 (or 
the corresponding stereo diagram S), and all have the L configuration 
shown at the alpha carbon. In these amino acids, e.g. serine (7, R = 
CH,OH), assignment of configuration was achieved by chemical con- 
versions that related it to L-(-)-glyceraldehyde using L-lactic acid (9) as 
a relay. 
C02H 
I 
C02H 
I 
C02H 
I 
7 
8 
9 
There are further rules for the use of Fischer projections: (a) where 
relevant the vertical direction is that of the carbon chain; (b) in the vast 
majority of cases the carbon in the highest oxidation state is located at 
the top of the diagram. 
Care must be exercised in testing whether two structures are, or are 
not, superimposable. Thus, a Fischer projection diagram of a chiral 
molecule with one stereogenic centre may be rotated only through 180" 
around the central carbon with preservation of configuration. Rotation 
of the Fischer projection by 90" inverts the stereogenic centre to give the 
other enantiomer; exchange of any two groups also produces the other 
enantiomer. A discussion of the D/L convention is given by Buxton and 
Roberts.2 
A limitation of the D/L system may be seen from the example of (+)- 
camphor (lo), which was assigned configuration D. Comparison with the 
formula 3 for D-glyceraldehyde reveals that the inter-relationship is, at 
best, tenuous. Some suppliers still offer D-camphor for sale. 
4 
0 
10 

26 
Stereochemistry 
2.2.2 The Cahn-lngold-Prelog R/S convention 
11 (R)-butan-2-01 
Cahn, Ingold and Prelog developed a new convention for assignment of 
configuration at a stereogenic centre (and other more involved cases). 
Cahn was editor of the then Journal of the Chemical Society, Ingold from 
University College London initiated and established the study of organ- 
ic reaction mechanisms, and Prelog from ETH Zurich was a’distinguished 
organic chemist and Nobel laureate in 1975. Frequently referred to by 
the initials of its proponents, the 
(also known as the RIS 
convention) was proposed in 1966,3 following an earlier paper by Cahn 
and Ingold in 1951 .4 The convention is now in almost universal use and 
forms part of the IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied 
Chemistry) rules of nomenclature? In a clean break with previous sym- 
bolism the symbols ‘R’ (Latin, ‘rectus’ = right) and ‘S’ (Latin, ‘sinister’ 
= left) were adopted. Interestingly, the symbol ‘R’ was taken from the 
Latin word for ‘right’ in the sense of ‘just’ or ‘correct’, since the Latin 
for right (as in direction) is ‘dexter’, and use of this word would have 
maintained an undesired continuity with previous nomenclature. 
The rules firstly require that the stereogenic centre be specified; next 
the groups attached to this centre are arranged in a sequence and given 
numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, corresponding to decreasing atomic number of the 
atom bonded to the stereogenic carbon. If, in a chiral molecule, two 
atoms directly bonded to the stereogenic centre are the same, e.g. 
-CH,-CH, and -CH,-CH,Cl, 
the priority sequence is determined by the 
relative atomic numbers at the first further point along the chains at 
which a distinction can be made. The convention thus operates in much 
the same manner as when one looks up a name in a telephone directo- 
ry. One can, of course, have a chiral molecule in which the priority rank- 
ings are the same at all four carbons bonded to the stereogenic carbon, 
provided that each substituent is distinct by virtue of its characteristics 
further away from the stereogenic centre. 
In the case of a simple molecule, e.g. butan-2-01 (11), the relevant pri- 
orities are assigned as shown. The molecule is then viewed looking 
toward the atom of lowest priority (H in 11) along a projection of the 
H-C bond, through a ‘triangle’ constructed of atoms 1, 2 and 3 The 
sense of decreasing priority 1 + 2 + 3 is clockwise for 11, which has R 
configuration. Strictly speaking, the symbol R applies to one carbon but 
in molecules with one stereogenic centre this is often not specified. 
Assignments of configuration are easier if the atom of lowest priority, 
4, typically H, is shown behind the plane of the paper. In cases in which 
the atom with priority 4 is shown in the plane of, or in front of, the 
paper, extra care is required, and it is beneficial to use a model and 
re-position the molecule so that it can be re-drawn with the atom of 
priority 4 behind the plane of the paper, 

Chiral Molecules: One Stereogenic Centre 
27 
In a wider context, multiple bonds, such as those in C=O, C=CH,, 
C,H,, C=NH and CEN are treated as multiple single bonds and the 0 
and n: bonds are given equal status. These five functional groups become, 
respectively, as shown in Figure 2.4. Rings are treated similarly; for 
details see Eliel and Wilen? 
(C) 
I 
/O 
c=o - 
c. 
NH 
/ 
C=NH - 
C 
‘(“ 
Table 2.1 shows the CIP priority sequences for a number of typical 
organic groups. A compound such as C13C-CH(OH)-CH2Br provides 
an instructive example on priorities. The group OH clearly has the high- 
est priority, and H has the lowest. The decision between the other two 
groups cannot be made at the atoms bonded to the stereogenic carbon, 
as both these are carbon. However, it can be made on the basis of the 
substituents at these carbons; in particular, one looks for the single high- 
est atomic number (and not the aggregate). Therefore, -CH,Br takes 
precedence over -CCl,. 
For two isotopes, which of course have the same atomic number, pri- 
ority is assigned on the basis of greater atomic mass, i.e. for the isotopes 
of hydrogen the priority is T > D > H. In the case of sulfoxides, for 
example, the lone pair is a formal substituent, and has the lowest prior- 
ity of all. 
Panic0 et aE.’ give a survey of the R/S convention. 
2.3 
Enantiomeric Excess, Enantiomeric Ratio 
Figure 2.4 
A sample that consists of one enantiomer of a chiral compound is said 
to be 
. This term has mainly replaced ‘optically 
pure’ that historically was used because the enantiomer content of a sam- 

28 
Stereochemistry 
Table 2.1 CIP sequence rule order for commonly encountered groups (the lower the 
position of a group in the Table, the greater its priority) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
H 
D 
T 
CH,CH, 
CH,CH,CH, 
CH,CH,CH,CH, 
CH,CH,CH(CH,), 
CH3 
CH,CH(CH3)2 
CH,CH=CH, 
CH2C(CH3)3 
CH,CzCH 
C6H11 
CH=CHCH, 
C(CH,), 
(CH,)C=CH, 
C=CH 
C6H5 
4-CH3C,H, 
4-NO,C,H, 
2-CH3C,H, 
CHO 
COCH, 
COC,H5 
OCOCH, 
OCOC(CH,), 
+NH, 
NHCH, 
NHC,H, 
NHCOCH, 
NHCOC,H5 
NO 
OH 
OCH, 
OCH,C,H, 
OCOCH, 
F 
SH 
SCH, 
SO,CH, 
CI 
SeCH, 
Br 
I 
NH2 
NWJ, 
NO2 
OC6H5 
hydrogen 
deuterium 
tritium 
methyl 
ethyl 
ProPYl 
butyl 
3-met hylbutyl (isopentyl) 
2-methylpropyl (isobutyl) 
prop-2-enyl (allyl) 
2,2-dimethylpropyl (neopentyl) 
prop-2-ynyl (propargyl) 
phenylmethyl (benzyl) 
1 -methylethyl (isopropyl) 
ethenyl (vinyl) 
1 -methylpropyl (s-butyl) 
cyclohexyl 
prop-1 -enyl 
1,l -dimethylethyl (t-butyl) 
1 -methylethenyl (isopropenyl) 
et hynyl 
phenyl 
p-tolyl 
p-nitrophenyl 
0-tolyl 
methanoyl (formyl) 
ethanoyl (acetyl) 
be n z o y I 
methoxycarbonyl 
t- butoxycarbonyl 
amino 
ammonio 
met hylamino 
phenylamino (anilino) 
acetylamino 
benzoylamino 
dimethylamino 
n i troso 
nitro 
hydroxy 
methoxy 
benzyloxy 
phenoxy 
acetoxy 
fluoro 
mercapto (sulfanyl) 
methylsulfanyl (methylthio) 
methylsulfonyl 
chloro 
methylselenanyl 
bromo 
iodo 

Chiral Molecules: One Stereogenic Centre 
29 
ple was always determined polarimetrically. Nowadays, other more accu- 
rate methods are employed in many instances (see Chapter 8). 
, which gives a measure of the enan- 
tiomeric makeup of a sample that contains enantiomers A and B, is given 
by: 
The term 
no. of moles enantiomer A - no. of moles of enantiomer B 
no. of moles of both enantiomers 
% enantiomeric excess = 
The terms in the numerator arise because what the polarimeter registers 
is a measure of the difference in population of the enantiomers in a sam- 
ple. An enantiomeric excess of 50% signifies that the sample contains 
75% of the enantiomer with, say, R configuration and 25% of S, that is 
50% of a 1 : 1 mixture and 50% of the R enantiomer. 
Since other techniques (e. g. NMR spectroscopy and gas-liquid chro- 
matography) are used to derive enantiomer proportions under conditions 
in which each enantiomer gives its own ‘signal’ (Chapter S), these are 
now more rationally expressed as a ratio rather than as an excess (this 
view was projected by Professor D. Seebach, ETH Zurich, at a collo- 
quium at the University of Glasgow, 20 November 1998). 
2.4 
Racemization 
A 
is defined as a 1: 1 ratio of enantiomers. 
This corresponds to an enantiomeric excess of O%, or an enantiomeric 
ratio of 1. 
involves the progressive loss of optical activity 
with time, usually in accord with a well-defined kinetic process. 
In practice, spectra of racemic and enantiomeric forms are indistin- 
guishable, though in principle this will only be true at infinite dilution. 
In the solid state the difference between a racemate and one enantiomer 
has features in common with a large box filled with (a) pairs of shoes 
and (b) left shoes only. Thus the packing in the two instances is not the 
same. This is reflected in different melting points and densities of the 
racemate and either enantiomer; these properties are the same for the 
two enantiomers. 
Racemic compounds, or dl pairs, arise from (a) deliberate racemiza- 
tion of enantiomers by interconversion (the mechanism is not usually 
significant), (b) mixing the enantiomers in a 1:1 molar ratio, and (c) 
synthesis in the absence of a biassing influence that would cause one 
enantiomer to predominate. 
It should be noted that on a molar basis a racemate is more stable 
than either enantiomer on account of the entropy of mixing (see Alberty 
and Silbey8). The entropy of mixing, AmixS, for the two enantiomers A 
and B present in equal amounts is given by equation (4): 

30 
Stereochemistry 
d,,S = -nR(xAlnxA + xBlnxB) 
(4) 
where n = total number of moles present, and xA and xB represent the 
mole fractions of A and B. The contribution of the entropy of mixing 
to the free energy of mixing is given by equation (5): 
TAmixS = -nRT(xAlnxA + xBlnxB) 
For n = 1, and xA = xB = 0.5 and a room temperature of 298 K, the free 
energy of mixing has the value of TAmixS = 1.71 kJ mol-’. This is the 
amount by which a mole of racemate is more stable than a mole of either 
enantiomer . 
It should also be noted: 
(9 
(ii) 
that for a molecule with one stereogenic centre it is not possible to 
have a single molecule of a racemate; one needs at least both a mol- 
ecule in which the stereogenic centre has R configuration and a mol- 
ecule in which it has S (one can alternatively say that one needs both 
a molecule of D configuration and one of L configuration). 
that a racemic sample of a compound is composed of chiral mole- 
cules, just as is the case for a sample of either enantiomer. 
A term now in use to describe a sample that is partially racemized (or, 
alternatively, enantiomerically enriched), i. e. the sample consists of, say, 
70% of enantiomer A and 30% of B, is 
(from the Greek ‘scale- 
~ O S ’  
= lopsided), proposed by Brewster from Purdue University, Indiana 
(communication to Heathcock et ~ 1 . ~ ) .  
Separation of one or both enantiomers from a racemic mixture is 
called 
and it is the converse of racemization. Since resolution 
usually involves molecules or systems with more than one stereogenic 
centre, it is dealt with in Chapter 3. 
2.5 
Homochiral Molecules 
The term 
was introduced by Kelvin in the 1904 publication 
of his Baltimore Lecture of 1884 and represented a relationship between 
molecules (see Mislowlo). Molecules are homochiral if ‘they possess the 
same sense of chirality. For example, the right hands of a group of peo- 
ple are homochiral (or alike). More recently, and unfortunately, 
homochiral has been used in the sense of enantiomerically pure, i.e. one 
reads of a ‘homochiral compound’, which clearly violates the original 
definition. Since some journals permit the latter usage, readers should be 
aware of the potential for confusion. 
To illustrate this, the enzyme hog-kidney acylase hydrolyses the nat- 
ural enantiomers of N-acylamino acids, regardless of the structure of the 

Chiral Molecules: One Stereogenic Centre 
31 
R group in RCH,N(COMe)CO,H; N-acyl-L-amino acids are thus 
homochirally related (see Mislow and Bickart"). 

32 
Stereochemistry 

Chiral Molecules: One Stereogenic Centre 
33 

34 
Stereochemistry 

Chiral Molecules: One Stereogenic Centre 
35 

36 
Stereochemistry 

Molecules with Two (or More) 
S tereogenic Centres 
3. I Enantiomers and Diastereoisomers 
In the previous chapter it was shown that a molecule with one stereo- 
genic centre gives rise to two enantiomers. A molecule with two stereo- 
genic centres gives rise to a maximum of four stereoisomers; a molecule 
with three stereogenic centres can have a maximum of eight stereoiso- 
mers, and so on. In general, if a molecule contains n stereogenic centres, 
a maximum of 2" stereoisomers can exist. 
The molecule 1 has two stereogenic centres and has a different set of 
substituents at each centre; accordingly, there are four stereoisomers of 
1. Four stereoisomers also result if in 1 one replaces, say, an NH, by an 
37 

38 
Stereochemistry 
Figure 3.1 
F, so that one substituent, i.e. F, is now common to both stereogenic 
centres. 
In designating the stereochemistry of, say, 1, the molecule is first num- 
bered systematically. The configuration at each stereogenic centre is 
determined in the same way as for molecules with one stereogenic cen- 
tre (Chapter 2). The symbol R or S is then associated with a particular 
carbon by its number and the pair of symbols is placed in brackets. 
Accordingly for 1 the four stereoisomers can be (1 R,2R), ( 1  R,2S), ( 1  S,2S) 
and (lS,2R), and these are shown schematically in Figure 3.1. 
It can be seen that the stereoisomers with configuration (lR,2R) and 
(1S,2s) are related as enantiomers, and the (1R,2S) and (lS,2R) 
stereoisomers are also related as enantiomers. What then is the rela- 
tionship between the stereoisomers of 1 with configurations (1 R,2S) and 
(lR,2R), for example? With respect to each other, these have one stere- 
ogenic centre of common, (IR), configuration, and the other of oppo- 
site, ( 2 9  and (2R), configuration. Clearly these stereoisomers are not 
enantiomers. Instead, they are related as 
and the same 
can be said for the (lS,2R) and (lS,2S) stereoisomers. The most concise 
definition, given in the plural, is: ‘diastereoisomers are stereoisomers that 
are not enantiomers’. 
For a compound that has two stereogenic centres, and has different 
groups attached to each such centre as in 1, the representation in Figure 
1 shows that molecules related vertically are enantiomers, whereas those 
related either diagonally or horizontally are diastereoisomers. The inter- 
relationships in Figure 1 show that whereas a given chiral molecule can 
possess only one enantiomer, it can have more than one diastereoisomer. 
Molecules that are related as diastereoisomers have different melting 
points and solubilities, and have different rates of reaction. In some cases, 
these different rates of reaction can lead to a particular product being 
formed from a reaction of one diastereoisomer but not the other. Use is 
made of differences of, for example, solubility of diastereoisomers in the 
resolution of a racemic mixture (Section 3.6). 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
39 
3.2 
Meso Configuration 
In contrast to the general case of 1, we now consider molecules with two 
stereogenic centres, but which carry an identical set of substituents at 
each carbon. We then analyse the relative configurations of these sub- 
stituents and the stereochemical consequences. 
As a prototype molecule, tartaric acid (2; 2,3-dihydroxybutanedioic 
acid), shown here without stereochemical specification, is chosen. 
Tartaric acid is a compound of considerable historical importance 
(Section 3.6), and derivatives of tartaric acid are still compounds of con- 
temporary research interest (see Seebach et aZ.l). (2R,3R)-(+)-Tartaric 
acid is shown in sawhorse projection in 3. 
HC(0H)- 
C(0H)H 
C02H 
C02H 
2 
I 
I 
3 
4 
The enantiomer of 3 is shown in 4 and is (2S,3S)-(-)-tartaric acid. Of 
course, in principle any conformation of 3 may be used, with its mirror 
image, to demonstrate that the compounds in the pair are enantiomers; 
however, use of the eclipsed forms 3 and 4 is visually easier. 
Fischer projections of 3 and 4 are given in 5 and 6, respectively, and 
the corresponding Newman projections, looking along the C(2)-C(3) 
bond, are shown in 7 and 8, but now with the rotation of the ‘back’ 
groups around the C(2)-C(3) bond such that the molecules are shown 
in staggered and visually less cramped conformations. 
5 
6 
7 
8 
We now consider the other configurations of tartaric acid, i.e. (2R,3S) 
9 and (2S,3R ) 10. Here, the presence of identical sets of substituents at 
C(2) and C(3) brings about a difference from the general case which was 
shown by 1. Inspection of 9 and 10 reveals that 10 is a mirror image of 
9 (and vice versa). However, 9 and 10 are identical and superimposable. 

40 
Stereochemistry 
9 
10 
Therefore, and importantly, this molecule is achiral despite containing 
two stereogenic centres. This can be shown in two ways. 
(a) If one focuses on 9, in the conformation shown, there is seen to 
be a plane of symmetry in this molecule half-way along the C(2)-C(3) 
bond, such that -CO,H reflects on to -CO,H, -OH on to -OH, and -H 
on to -H. 
(b) Take a molecular model of 9, and break the C(2)-C(3) bond in 
half, and then mark the ‘break’ on both sides with tape, or similar, and 
regard the taped ends as identical substituents. Examination of the result- 
ant taped fragments clearly reveals that C(2) and C(3) are of opposite 
configuration. 
In Chapter 2, a number of everyday objects were considered; some 
are chiral and some are not. Those that are not chiral have a plane of 
symmetry. The same characteristics operate at a molecular level and one 
can therefore state that if a molecule possesses a plane of symmetry it is 
not chiral. It is possible to see this for simple molecules such as methane 
and dichloromethane and also for meso-tartaric acid 9, drawn so that 
the plane of symmetry may readily be recognized. In assessment of 
whether a molecule is, or is not, chiral it is advisable to check for both 
(a) the presence of stereogenic centres and (b) the presence of a plane of 
symmetry. 
However, 9 is not chiral and one can accordingly amplify the definition 
above to state: if a molecule possesses a plane of symmetry in any ener- 
getically available conformation, it cannot be chiral. This statement holds 
whatever the complexity of the molecule. However, it should be noted 
that chiral molecules can possess axes of symmetry, and such molecules 
are considered in Chapter 5. 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
41 
The achiral nature of 9 is also implicit in the designation of configu- 
rations (2R,3S) or (2S,3R) with identical sets of substituents at the stereo- 
genic centres. As regards optical activity, the effects of C(2) and C(3) in 
9 are self-cancelling because the stereogenic centres have opposite con- 
figuration; indeed, in early literature compounds such as 9 were described 
as ‘internally compensated’. Nowadays, such compounds are given the 
prefix 
, and use of the term is general; meso compounds are always 
achiral (and optically inactive) even though they have two or more stereo- 
genic carbons. 
3.3 €rytht=o/Threo and Syn/Anti Configurations 
Let us now look at molecules with two stereogenic centres, usually adja- 
cent, which have two common substituents. The names of the two con- 
figurations are taken from two carbohydrates, but are now used quite 
generally. D-Erythrose shown in Fischer 11 and sawhorse 12 projections 
in its open-chain forms is such a compound. In 12 the pairs of like sub- 
stituents are shown in an eclipsed conformation. 
11 
12 
Firstly, one might ask: why is 11 given the configuration D? This 
assignment is based on the configuration of the stereogenic carbon that 
is furthest from the carbonyl group [i.e. C(3) in 111 with respect to that 
of D-glyceraldehyde (13). Since they are the same, 11 is given D config- 
uration. This protocol can also be applied to longer chain sugars such 
as pentoses and hexoses (erythrose and threose are themselves tetroses). 
If, as in 12, it is possible to eclipse each of the like substituents, H with 
’ H, OH with OH, and also the ‘unlike’ substituents CHO and CH,OH, 
the configuration is 
The nomenclature is quite general; thus ery- 
thro-3-phenylbutan-2-01 is shown in 14. Of course, 12 and 14, and indeed 
all erythro compounds, have enantiomers, but this does not concern us 
here. 
and originates from the 
sugar ‘threose’; D-threose is shown in Fischer 15 and sawhorse 16 pro- 
jections. With respect to D-erythrose (ll), only the configuration at C(2) 
The second configuration is termed 

42 
Stereochemistry 
13 
14 
has changed. Two consequences follow from this: (i) 11 and 15 are relat- 
ed as diastereoisomers and (ii) the stereochemical symbol is D in both 
11 and 15. 
15 
16 
17 
The configurations at C(2) and C(3) in D-threose are now such that 
in sawhorse projections one can eclipse only (a) the H atoms, or (b) the 
OH groups or (c) the unlike substituents, CH,OH and CHO, at any one 
time. Again the nomenclature is quite general, and one enantiomer of 
threo-3-phenylbutan-2-01 
is shown in 17. 
An aide-memoire to assist in assignment of erythro and threo config- 
urations is this: if one takes erythrose (ll), the product obtained after 
oxidation of both the CH,OH and CHO groups to COOH is meso-tar- 
taric acid (9). 
Use of the terms erythro and threo is quite explicit in the context of 
two adjacent stereogenic centres, each of which has two sets of sub- 
stituents in common. However, some confusion has arisen when the ery- 
throlthreo nomenclature has been applied to systems in which there is 
only one common substituent on the two adjacent carbons. Such a case 
is found in the products of asymmetric aldol reactions. The mechanism 
of this reaction lies outside the scope of this chapter; however, we give 
here the basis of an alternative nomenclature system, which is now 
becoming more common for products of this reaction, and which was 
introduced by Masamune et aZ.2 The main chain is drawn as a zig-zag, 
and lies in the plane of the paper. Substituents that lie on the same side 
of the plane are termed 
Thus 
in the case of 18 the 3,4 stereochemistry is syn and in 19 it is anti; 18 
can be fully described as syn,syn and 19 as syn,anti. The drawings here 
represent essentially a telescoping of sawhorse projections, and the posi- 
tion of the eye has moved so as to view the molecule from a more ‘side- 
ways on’ aspect. The wedges imply that the bond comes out from the 
paper toward the viewer and the ‘hatched’ (or broken) lines imply that 
the bond is directed behind the paper. Although sawhorse projections 
are ideal for inspection of the configurations around a two-carbon unit, 
, and those that do not are termed 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
43 
they become unwieldy when chains of more than two carbons are 
involved, and in such cases stereo drawings are now preferred. A saw- 
horse projection of 19 along the C(4)-C(3) bond is given in 20 (R' = 
cyclohexyl). 
As an alternative to erythro and threo, two further conventions have 
been introduced for the specification of relative configuration in mole- 
cules that contain two (or more) stereogenic centres. In a molecule such 
as (2R,3R)-tartaric acid (3) or (2S,3S)-tartaric acid (4), the configura- 
tions are described as 1 for like. meso-Tartaric acid (9) has configuration 
(2R,3S) [or (2S,3R)] and is described as u for unlike. Compounds with 
more than two stereogenic centres, e.g. (1 R,2R,3S), have relative con- 
figurations specified by a comparison of their configurations in sequence. 
A compound with the above configuration, and its enantiomer, can be 
collectively described as 1. u. (see Seebach and Prelog3). 
Alternatively, in a convention employed by Chemical Abstracts, the 
two enantiomers (2R,3R)- and (2S,3S)-tartaric acid can be specified by 
(2R*,3R*). The symbols (2R*,3R*) indicate that if C(2) has R configu- 
ration, so does C(3), and likewise that if C(2) has S configuration, so 
does C(3). meso-Tartaric acid can formally be described as having 
(2R*,3S*) configuration and this indicates that if C(2) has R configura- 
tion, C(3) has the S and vice versa. 
Note that whereas R and S symbols apply to specific carbons, D and 
L apply to particular reference carbons, as has been described for sug- 
ars in this section. In the case of amino acids the configuration, D or L, 
is always taken from the a carbon, which is bonded to both NH, and 
C0,H. This applies even when there is more than one stereogenic cen- 
tre in the amino acid, as in the case of, for example, threonine. Further 
discussion of this point lies outside the scope of this text but is dealt with 
explicitly in the text by L ~ u d o n . ~  
3.4 
Caged Compounds with Two Stereogenic 
Bridgehead Carbons 
An example of a compound with two stereogenic carbons in a rigid caged 
structure is camphor, a naturally occurring bicyclic ketone which is more 
abundant in the (+)-form 21. The presence of the carbonyl group in cam- 
phor results in two stereogenic centres, at C(l) and C(4). 

44 
Stereochemistry 
Accordingly, in 21, C(l) has R configuration, as has C(4). It is not pos- 
sible to construct a camphor in which C(l) has R configuration and C(4) 
has S configuration. The (+)-camphor shown in 21 is (lR,4R)-camphor, 
but on account of the cage structure it is sufficient to specify 21 as (1R)- 
camphor. The only other possibility is the more expensive enantiomer 
22, which is (lS,4S)-camphor, and this enantiomer is often referred to 
as (1 9-camphor. Camphor and other chiral caged molecules with stere- 
ogenic centres at bridgehead carbons, e.g. a-pinene (23), which is extract- 
ed from pine trees, are examples of molecules that possess two stereogenic 
centres, but which have only two stereoisomers, related as enantiomers 
of each other. Of course, derivatives of such molecules may contain addi- 
tional stereogenic centres. If there are additional stereogenic centres, 
these are independent of the restriction on the number of stereoisomers 
that may exist, which is imposed by the bridgehead stereogenic centres. 
3.5 
Epimers, and the Nomenclature of Bicyclic 
Compounds 
The term epimer originated in sugar chemistry and can be illustrated 
with the examples of D-lyxose (24) and D-xylose (25). There are three 
stereogenic centres in each of these molecules; the configurations at C(3) 
and C(4) are the same in both, whereas the configuration of C(2) in 24 
differs from that in 25. 
Two diastereoisomers that differ in configuration at only one stereo- 
genic carbon are called 
The term is quite general, though it is 
24 
25 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
45 
rarely applied to molecules with only two stereogenic centres. Consider, 
for example, reduction of (1R)-camphor (21) with LiAlH, to give two 
alcohols, isoborneol (26) and borneol (27). These alcohols fulfil the cri- 
teria for being epimers; their configurations are the same at C(l) and 
C(4), and are opposite at the hydroxyl-bearing carbon, C(2). Although 
the configurations at C(2) in 26 and 27 can, of course, be specified by 
the usual R,S convention, there is an alternative and convenient way to 
describe them. This uses the terms 
, and makes use of the 
number of ring carbons that constitute the bridges which connect the 
bridgehead carbons at C( 1) and C(4). A substituent on a particular bridge 
is called exo if it is on the same side as the smaller bridge, i.e. the one- 
carbon bridge formed by C(7) [and in which C(7) is bonded to two methyl 
groups]. On the other hand, the OH group in 27 is described as endo 
because it is opposite the smaller bridge. In reduction of 21, the preferred 
approach of LiAlH, to the carbonyl group is from the less-hindered endo 
direction with the resultant formation of the exo alcohol 26 as the major 
product. The designations endo and exo thus serve as internal markers 
only, i.e. in specifying that the OH group is syn (same side as) or anti 
(opposite) to the shorter bridge. These terms do not specify whether the 
configurations of the OH-bearing carbons in 26 and 27 are R or S. 
The systematic naming of bicyclic compounds is now considered with 
norbornane (28), a C,H,, compound, used to demonstrate the protocol, 
which is due to the German chemist von Baeyer. Firstly, the bridgehead 
carbons C(l) and C(4) are marked for reference. Secondly, the number 
of carbons between the bridgehead carbons in each of the three bridges 
is counted, and the molecule positioned so that the number in the right 
(r), left ( I )  and top (t) bridges are in the sequence r 2 I2 t and placed in 
brackets. Compound 28 is thus known as bicyclo[2.2. llheptane. 
The sum of the numbers inside the bracket is two less than the total 
number of carbons because the two bridgehead carbons C(l) and C(4) 
are not included. The term ‘bicyclo’ is used because although 28 contains 
a total of three rings, any two rings embrace all ring carbons; however, 
with this approach, ambiguity can arise in compounds with more than 
two rings. More rigorously, the term ‘bicyclo’ in 28 is used because the 
compound has two double bond equivalents; that is its molecular 
formula (C,H,,) corresponds to two pairs of hydrogens fewer than hep- 
tane, C,H,,. 
Four further examples are given here. Compound 29, C8HI4, is bicy- 
clo[3.2. lloctane; compound 30 (X = H) is bicyclo[2.2.2]octane; and in 
the case of 31 (X = OH) the hydroxyl group is neither endo nor exo as 
both the unsubstituted bridges contain equal numbers of carbons; the 
molecule is, however, chiral solely because of the stereogenic centre at 
C(2), the hydroxyl-bearing carbon. Compound 32, whether the ring junc- 
tion is cis or trans (Section 6.6), is bicyclo[4.4.0]decane, though it is more 
and 

46 
Stereochemistry 
commonly known as decalin. The case of an additional ring is exem- 
plifed by the C,HIo compound nortricyclene (33). The systematic name 
for 33 is tricyclo[2.2.1 .02.6]heptane, the last entry within the bracket sig- 
nifies that, compared to 28, an additional zero-carbon bridge has been 
introduced between C(2) and C(6) to form the three-membered ring. 
29 
30 X = H  
32 
31 X=OH 
33 
There are a couple of further points, one of which is exemplified by 
camphor (21) and the borneols. These molecules have the functional 
groups on one of two two-carbon bridges. Accordingly, the numbering 
is arranged to be as low as possible, and so in camphor, for example, 
the carbonyl carbon is C(2). 
If a substituent on the smallest bridge is directed toward the next 
smallest bridge, it is termed 
; if the substituent points toward the 
largest bridge, it is termed 
. However, camphor, for example, has 
two bridges that both contain two carbons, viz. C(2)-C(3) and C(5)-C(6). 
Now if the substituent on the smallest bridge points toward the bridge 
that itself carries substituents [in camphor C(2) is part of the carbonyl 
group], it is called syn. Where the substituent on the smallest bridge in 
camphor points toward the unsubstituted bridge, it is called anti. In cam- 
phor (21) the methyl groups containing C(8) and C(9) are therefore 
labelled syn and anti, respectively. 
3.6 
Separation of Enantiomers: Resolution 
Resolution can be thought of as the converse of racemization (Section 
2.4). One starts with a 50:50 mixture of both enantiomers and separates 
this mixture into the individual enantiomers. Of course, for some pur- 
poses one may only want one enantiomer, and recovery of the second 
enantiomer can be painstaking. Since enantiomers have identical prop- 
erties, including solubility, separation of enantiomers by recrystallization 
is quite rare. It was, however, such a crystallization by Pasteur in 1848 
that opened up the field of resolution. Pasteur’s key observation was that 
two distinct but related types of crystal were obtained from an aqueous 
solution of the sodium ammonium salt of racemic tartaric acid. The two 
types of crystal were related as object and non-superimposable mirror 
image, and one type was identical to the dextrorotatory crystals of sodi- 
um ammonium tartrate obtained from (+)-tartaric acid, itself obtained 
as a by-product of wine-making. 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
47 
Pasteur separated his crystals manually with the aid of a magnifying 
glass and tweezers. Moreover, he demonstrated that solutions of the two 
types of crystals had the same value of specific rotation, though of oppo- 
site sign. In correlating the macroscopic with the molecular, the impor- 
tant and fundamental conclusion was drawn that the molecules from 
which the two crystals were composed were likewise non-superimposable 
mirror images. Like many important discoveries, Pasteur's work was a 
combination of perceptiveness, tenacity and happenstance, the last 
because he worked with the only known tartrate salt that gives enan- 
tiomeric crystals with different crystal forms. Additionally, these differ- 
ent crystals form only at temperatures below 25 "C. From a knowledge 
that he worked in Paris, one can conclude that Pasteur did not carry out 
his experiments at the height of summer. 
Typically, resolution depends on the conversion of enantiomers, which 
possess identical physical properties, into diastereoisomers, which do not, 
and then exploiting the difference in physical properties in order to sep- 
arate the diastereoisomers. Finally, the diastereoisomers are reconvert- 
ed to the component, and now separated, enantiomers. 
In schematic terms the separation of racemic compound R,S into 
enantiomers by reaction with a single enantiomer of R* is represented 
in Scheme 3.1. RR* and SR* are diastereomers, and can be covalent 
compounds or salts. R* is chosen so that the solubilities of RR* and SR* 
in a particular solvent are different. The racemic mixture, now in com- 
bination with R*, i.e. RR* and SR*, is now recrystallized and one 
diastereoisomer, say RR*, will crystallize out whereas the other, SR*, 
will stay in solution. Sometimes when the first crop of crystals is merely 
enriched in RR*, a number of further recrystallizations will be necessary. 
Salts are the preferred diastereoisomers (RR* and SR*), because 
they are both easily formed' and readily re-converted to the starting 
enantiomers, following separation. 
R,S 
+ 
R* - 
RR* 
+ 
SR* 
(-+> 
I 
resolve by 
recrystallization 
I 
R 
+ 
R* - 
RR* 
pure crystals 
Resolution of a carboxylic acid can be achieved directly by formation 
of diastereomeric salts with an amine. Naturally occurring bases such as 
brucine (34) or ephedrine (35) are often used, though it should be men- 
tioned that choice of a suitable amine is usually a matter of trial and 
Scheme 3.1 Resoloution of a 
racemic compound R,S ?o give 
the more insoluble RR" as crys- 
tals, whereas the diastereoisomer 
SR* remains in solution 
~ 

48 
Stereochemistry 
error and is probably related to crystal packing of the diastereoisomeric 
salts. In common with camphor, brucine, a naturally occurring alkaloid, 
has its stereogenic centres in fused ring systems; nature makes only one 
enantiomer, (-)-brucine (34). 
36 
MeNH+z 
HO 
Ph 
35 
Resolution of alcohols requires a more ingenious approach in order to 
acquire suitable diastereomeric salts for resolution by recrystallization. 
The racemic alcohol, ROH, to be resolved is first converted to its phthal- 
ate monoester 36 (phthalic acid is benzene-l,2-dicarboxylic acid). The 
strategy here is to leave one carboxylic acid group free, and available to 
form diastereoisomeric salts with an amine such as 34 or 35. Once the 
appropriate ammonium salt of 36 has been resolved, the amine is 
removed by acidification to give one enantiomer of 36, and this ester is 
then hydrolysed with alkali to give one enantiomer of ROH. The more 
soluble diastereomeric ammonium salt can then, in principle, be 
processed similarly to yield the other enantiomer. 
3.7 Separation of Enantiomers by Chromatography 
It is also possible to resolve enantiomers by means of column chro- 
matography. If a column consists of, or contains, a suitable chiral 
stationary phase, the enantiomers should be eluted, i. e. washed from the 
column, at different rates. This is because, although there is no forma- 
tion of chemical bonds, the enantiomers now experience diastereomeric 
interactions with the chiral stationary phase. If there is a high degree of 
‘chiral recognition’ of one particular enantiomer by the stationary phase, 
then it will be preferentially adsorbed on the chiral stationary phase and 
accordingly eluted more slowly. Good separations of quite sizeable quan- 
tities (50 g per elution) can be achieved in some cases. Column chro- 
matography is described in the books by Harwood et U Z . ~  and Armarego 
and Perrin;6 chiral chromatography is the subject of a paper by Pirkle 
et ~ 1 . ; ~  
see also Lochmuller.8 
Chiral stationary phases can consist of starch, which for instance 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
49 
allows almost complete resolution of mandelic acid (2-hydroxy-2- 
phenylethanoic acid), PhCH(OH)CO,H. Synthetic stationary phases 
such as 37, derived from the enantiomerically pure amino acid alanine, 
and 38, likewise from valine, are effective in resolution of alcohols, 
amines and amino acids (both a and p), with the proviso that these com- 
pounds first be derivatized, e.g. an alcohol must be transformed into an 
ester before being passed down the column. 
37 R = M e  
38 R=Pr' 
3.8 
Resolution with Enzymes 
Enzymes are compounds of high molar mass, generally contain many 
amide groups, and catalyse certain reactions in living cells. All enzymes 
are catalysts; they are themselves chiral, and in their natural aqueous 
environment are very stereoselective. Some enzymes are highly selective 
in the reactions that they catalyse, whereas others are more broadly 
receptive, and in general enzyme-catalysed reactions tend to be rapid. A 
discussion of the characteristics of enzymes and their mode of action is 
given by S t r ~ e r . ~  
Furthermore, enzymes have been instrumental in bring- 
ing about resolution of enantiomers under laboratory conditions. A 
quantitative analysis of biochemical kinetic resolutions of enantiomers 
has been made by Chen et uZ.l0 
In order to give a flavour of the method, three examples are present- 
ed here. 
As part of a project to synthesize one enantiomer of a chiral insect 
pheromone, resolution of 39 was required. This was achieved by enan- 
tioselective hydrolysis of racemic 39 to produce alcohol 40 (Scheme 3.2). 
0.1 mol 
PCL 
dm-3 *Qp+Q- 
OH 
OCOMe 
OCOMe 
phosphate 
buffer, acetone 
(&)-39 
40 
41 
Scheme 3.2 

50 
Stereochemistry 
Scheme 3.3 
Scheme 3.4 
The other enantiomer was left untouched by Pseudomonas cepacia lipase 
(PCL), the enzyme of choice. After reaction is complete, the resolved 
alcohol must be separated from its enantiomeric acetate 41. It is note- 
worthy that the enzyme functions in a buffered aqueous acetone medium; 
acetone does not interfere with the action of the enzyme. 
There is now a sufficient data bank of enzymic resolutions for these 
to guide the choice of enzyme for a new resolution. Although at 18 "C 
and after 60% conversion it was possible to obtain acetate 41 of 99% 
enantiomeric excess (ee), it should be recognized that use of enzymes 
is not always the complete answer. In the above resolution, smaller ee 
values were obtained at higher temperatures and at larger conversions, 
findings that are perhaps not surprising if one considers that the enzymes 
are here operating outside their natural environment (see Kang et al."). 
In a second investigation, racemic 2-hydroxy-4-phenylbutanoic 
acid 
(42) was reacted with lipase PS (LPS) and vinyl acetate (VA) (ethenyl 
ethanoate) in t-butyl methyl ether (2-methoxy-2-methylpropane) to give 
acetate (29-43 in 35% yield and in 99% ee; unreacted alcohol 44 was 
found to have 99% ee with R configuration predominant (Scheme 3.3). 
I 
I 
OCOMe 
LPS 
PhdC02H 
+ Ph dC02H 
Ph dC02H 
VA 
* 
43 
44 
(A)-42 
Me3COMe 
In this resolution involving transesterification, the enzyme is catalysing 
the acetylation by vinyl acetate of the hydroxyl group of 42 with S con- 
figuration. This use of vinyl acetate is now fairly common in enzymatic 
resolution (see Chadha and Manohar12); hexanoic anhydride is also 
sometimes used in this context. 
Thirdly, the lipoprotein lipase from Psuedomonos species (PSL) react- 
ed with racemic cyanohydrin 45 to give the acetate (ethanoate) 46 of S 
configuration with 98% ee after 59% conversion (Scheme 3.4). The unre- 
acted alcohol, effectively now resolved into the enantiomer of R config- 
uration 47, because of its rejection by the enzyme, was then converted 
into the hydroxy ester 48, which is an important intermediate in the syn- 
thesis of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (see Wang et ~1.'~). 
OH 
(+)-45 
OCOMe 
OH 
46 
47 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
51 
Enzymic resolutions involve acceptance by the enzyme, which is a very 
Ph -C02Et 
finely honed chiral system, of one enantiomer of a racemic compound, 
but not the other. The selective acceptance arises because interactions 
between the enzyme and the enantiomers are diastereomeric. In its 
natural environment, the ability of an enzyme to discriminate between 
enantiomers is virtually absolute. In addition to their stereoselectivity, 
some enzymes can react at very high rates. Each round of catalysis by 
the enzyme carbonic anhydrase with its physiological substrate occurs in 
about 1.7 ps at room temperature, although for a small number of other 
enzymes, best exemplified by the more lethargic lysozyme, the corre- 
sponding figure is about a million times slower. Accordingly, the enzyme- 
catalysed hydrolysis of, say, one enantiomer of an ester proceeds at a 
finite rate and hydrolysis of the other not at all. Resolutions such as 
those of 39,42 and 45 therefore have a kinetic basis and are also known 
as kinetic resolutions. 
It should be evident that the maximum yield of a particular enan- 
tiomer normally available from a racemic mixture is 50%. However, in 
some enzymic catalysed kinetic resolutions it is possible to obtain >50% 
yield of one enantiomer from a racemate. For this to occur, it is neces- 
sary to have the desired chemical reaction, e. g. enzyme-catalysed stereo- 
selective esterification, occurring at the same time as the enantiomers of 
the racemic starting compound are interconverting under equilibrium 
conditions. A successful example of this technique is provided by ben- 
zaldehyde cyanhydrin (2-hydroxy-2-phenylacetonitrile), whose R and S 
enantiomers, 49 and 50, respectively, equilibrate in the presence of a basic 
anion-exchange resin (Scheme 3.5). In the presence of lipase, (9-ben- 
zaldehyde cyanhydrin acetate 51 was formed in 95% yield and in 84% 
enantiomeric excess (see Inagaki et aZ.14 and WardI5). 
OH 
48 
lipase 
OCOMe 
VA 
P h n C N  
OH 
-OH, resin 
h . 
P h n C N  
(S)-50 
51 
Ph ‘CN 
- 
(R)-49 
As an alternative to resolution, one can start with an enantiomerical- 
ly pure compound that occurs naturally, and the most common exam- 
ples of these are amino acids, sugars and terpenes. This group of 
compounds is known collectively as the ‘chiral pool’. The procedure then 
is to transform the compound of choice from the above group into the 
desired product by chemical synthesis, with care taken to avoid racem- 
ization at stereogenic centres. 
Scheme 3.5 

52 
Stereochemistry 
3.9 
Structure of Polypropene 
Polymerization of propene gives polypropene (52), with creation of one 
stereogenic centre per monomer unit. Three possibilities exist for the 
structure of 52 and 
Compound 53 has a 
along the chain, and 
these are shown in the stereo drawings 53-55. 
random distribution of configurations at carbons 
this type of polymer is known as 
In polymer 54, all methyl groups are on the same side of the polymer 
backbone, which is drawn in the plane of the page; this type of 
polymer is known as 
. The methyl groups alternate regularly 
from one side of the chain to the other in polymer 55, which is known 
as 
In general, atactic polymers tend to be soft, amorphous material, 
whereas the more regular structures of isotactic 54 and syndiotactic 55 
polymers permit chains to lie closer together, and accordingly these poly- 
mers have a greater tendency to be crystalline. The terms atactic, iso- 
tactic and syndiotactic are quite general and are used for other similarly 
subs tit u ted polymers . 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
53 

54 
Stereochemistry 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
55 

56 
Stereochemistry 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
57 

58 
Stereochemistry 

Molecules with Two (or More) Stereogenic Centres 
59 

Stereochemistry of 
Carbon-Carbon and 
Carbon-Nitrogen Double 
Bonds 
4.1 
Configuration and Relative Stability of Alkenes 
and Dienes 
Alkenes were considered in Chapter 1 in the context of hybridization. In 
ethene, all six atoms are co-planar. In general, one can state that alkenes 
have two adjacent sp2 hybridized carbons, and these carbon atoms 
together with the four atoms to which they are attached are co-planar. 
Above and below the plane defined by these six atoms there exists a 
region of electron density, the 7c bond, which arises from sideways-on 
overlap of p orbitals on the adjacent alkene carbons. 
In but-2-ene the two methyl groups can lie either on the same side or 
on opposite sides of the double bond. Compound 1 is cis-but-2-ene and 
60 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
61 
compound 2 is trans-but-2-ene. Alkenes can be viewed either (a) from 
‘above’, in which case the wedges and dashed wedges are not included, 
or (b) from almost sideways-on; in this case, wedges and dashed wedges 
are included, These indicate that substituents are directed toward or away 
from the viewer, respectively. Both representations are equally valid and 
are shown for cis-but-2-ene (1) in both ways. The second representation 
is more common when addition of reagents to the top (or bottom) face 
is described. 
Compounds 1 and 2 can be regarded as non-interconvertible and are 
called 
; they also fulfil the definition of diastereoiso- 
mers, though they are only occasionally so called. The cis and trans 
nomenclature is unambiguous for disubstituted alkenes; however, the sit- 
uation is not clear-cut for tri- and tetrasubstituted alkenes. With these 
latter compounds, problems arise in the definition of which substituent 
is cis or trans to which. 
In order to circumvent this problem, Blackwood et al.’ took part of 
the Cahn-Ingold-Prelog (CIP) convention, in particular the rules for 
assignment of priorities, and applied them to tri- and tetrasubstituted 
alkenes. In the case of the tetrasubstituted geometric isomers 3 and 4, 
consider the substituents at C(2). In the CIP convention, Br ranks high- 
er than C and so is given priority; at the other carbon, C(3), F ranks 
higher than C and it too is given priority. Now the two atoms, Br and 
F, which were assigned priority at the respective alkene carbons, are on 
opposite sides of the double bond. Accordingly, the geometric isomer 3 
is given the symbol ‘ ’ from the German ‘entgegen’ for ‘opposite’. 
Using the same idea, in 4 the higher priority groups Br and F are now 
on the same side of the double bond. This geometric isomer is now given 
the symbol ‘ ’, from the German ‘zusammen’ for ‘together’. Compound 
3 is named (E)-2-bromo-3-fluorobut-2-ene; similarly, 4 is (9-2-bromo- 
3-fluorobut-2-ene. 
Of course, there is no objection to using this nomenclature to replace 
cis and trans in disubstituted alkenes, even where cis and trans is ade- 
quate. The disubstituted alkenes 5 and 6 are named with the systematic 
(EIZ) nomenclature . 

62 
Stereochemistry 
Earlier in this section we mentioned that 1 and 2 were essentially non- 
interconvertible, and this is generally true for alkenes. However, it is 
worth keeping in mind that isomerization can occur in certain cases, and 
this is usually brought about by irradiation with light of a particular 
wavelength. An example is isomerization of cis- and trans-retinal, which 
is considered briefly in the Problems section. 
If one considers the examples of 1 and 2, or 5 and 6, one might ask: 
which geometric isomer is more stable? Do the cis alkyl substituents get 
in each other's way at all, so that mutual non-bonded repulsion occurs 
with introduction of strain? The question has been addressed in the case 
of 1 and 2, and answered by measurement of the enthalpy (heat) of 
hydrogenation of each alkene. This experiment is meaningful because 
both 1 and 2 give the same product, butane, after hydrogenation. Any 
difference in the enthalpies of hydrogenation is due to different enthalpy 
contents of the starting materials (enthalpies of hydrogenation do not, 
of course, measure free energies). 
For (q-but-2-ene the enthalpy of hydrogenation is AH" = -119.6 kJ 
mol-', and for (E)-but-2-ene the corresponding value is AH' = -1 15.5 kJ 
mol-'. Even though the difference between the two values is not large, 
it is significant. Since the (2) 
geometric isomer 1 releases about 4 kJ mol-' 
more heat on hydrogenation than does 2, it follows that 1 is more 
strained because the methyl groups are closer together. Of course, with 
larger substituents, differences greater than 4 kJ mol-' are encountered. 
In molecules with two or more double bonds the configuration of each 
is determined independently, and the EIZ symbols are incorporated into 
the name as for 7 and 8. In some dienes, one double bond has EIZ stereo- 
chemistry and the other does not because two groups on one carbon are 
the same. Such an example is 9, which therefore has the name (2)-3- 
chloropenta- 1,3-diene. 
7 (2Z74E)-hexa-2,4-dienoic 
acid 
8 (2E74E)-hepta-2,4-diene 
9 
4.2 
Cyclohexene 
In cyclohexene (10) the enforced planarity of four carbons (and of course 
two attached hydrogens) means that the ring is not free to adopt the 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
63 
chair shape that is a characteristic of cyclohexane. The result is that 
cyclohexene exists as a half-chair, as shown in 10, and this interconverts 
rapidly with 11. 
5 
10 
11 
Cyclohexene is a cis alkene, and necessarily so, as the chain with four 
sp3 hybrid carbons is not long enough to link C(1) and C(2) with 
formation of a trans alkene. The smallest monocyclic trans alkene is 
trans-cyclooctene (12). 
12 
13 
4.3 
Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
Carbon-nitrogen double bonds are present in imines 14, and other 
carbonyl derivatives such as oximes 15, semicarbazones 16 and dinitro- 
phenylhydrazones (DNPs) 17. These carbon-nitrogen double bonds are 
formed by sideways overlap of p orbitals in the same manner as in 
alkenes. However, nitrogen is more electronegative than carbon, and 

64 
Stereochemistry 
imines are rather prone to hydrolysis. Compounds 14-17 are capable of 
existence as geometric isomers, as in the case of alkenes, and the lone 
pair on the imino nitrogen is generally taken to be approximately where 
a bond between sp2 hybrid carbon and hydrogen is in an alkene. 
14 
R1\ 
R2/C=N 
'NH-CA 
II NH2 
0 
16 
R'\ 
R2/C=N 
'OH 
15 
One can make an oxime, for example, from reaction between a ketone 
or aldehyde and hydroxylamine (NH,OH), with liberation of water. It is 
rare to find that one has produced both geometric isomers of 15. In the 
solid state, oximes nearly always exist as hydrogen-bonded dimers in which 
the hydroxyl hydrogen of one molecule forms a hydrogen bond with the 
nitrogen of its partner. The urea residue (-NH-CO-NH,) 
in 16 establish- 
es polar hydrogen-bonded networks; in the case of 17 the dinitrophenyl 
group is strongly polar. These features make for crystalline compounds, 
and so the three derivatives are used for characterization of ketones and 
aldehydes. The rates of interconversion of geometric isomers of, for exam- 
ple, oximes are very low, so that they are configurationally stable. 
4.4 
Amides 
Amides have the general structure shown in 18, in which R can be H, 
alkyl or aryl. The amide group is part of a six-atom planar entity, which 
contains, of course, the three atoms N-C=O together with the three 
atoms directly bonded to the N and to carbonyl carbon. In addition, the 
bond angles around N and C are 120". In this section we consider main- 
ly secondary amides, RHNCOR. The planarity and bond angles found 
in amides suggest that the hybridization of nitrogen in these compounds 
is sp2. Now nitrogen is the strongest neutral conjugative electron donor, 
and the adjacent carbonyl group is correspondingly an excellent electron 
acceptor. Also, and importantly, the parallel alignment of the p orbital 
on N and the 71: bond of the carbonyl group, evidence for which comes 
from the six-atom plane of atoms mentioned above, means that exten- 
sive conjugation can occur. Accordingly, a secondary amide has the 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
65 
shown in 19a and the dipolar form 19b. These can 
alternatively be represented by a single structure 20, in which H and the 
two R groups are found to have the less congested trans relationship. 
R 
\
I
?
 
\ 
R /"-" 
R 
18 
R\+ 
/O- 
H 
\R 
/N=C 
19a 
19b 
As the carbonyl oxygen in an amide is more negatively charged than 
in, say, a ketone, it forms strong hydrogen bonds, but these must be 
either intermolecular or with a distant and suitable hydrogen in the same 
large molecule since intramolecular hydrogen bonding to H by the oxy- 
gen atom in the amide is normally precluded by the trans geometry. The 
importance of certain secondary amides in nature is well known, and this 
has its origins in the characteristics of structure 20. Amides are the build- 
ing blocks of polypeptides and proteins, and these adopt conformations 
that maximize intermolecular hydrogen-bonded interactions. One such 
conformation is a coil known as an a-helix, which is quite commonly 
found in peptide chains. A schematic representation of a right-handed 
a-helix is shown in Figure 4.1. Helical objects possess chirality, having 
essentially the same key features as a screw, and the right-handed helix 
the right-handed a-helix of a 
polypeptide 

66 
Stereochemistry 
is found with L-amino acids. Furthermore, the a-helix is closely associ- 
ated with the structure of proteins. It is worth mentioning that the helix 
itself is inherently chiral, though chiral components with stereogenic cen- 
tres are an integral part of its construction. 
An interesting and relevant question is: how much double bond char- 
acter is in the nitrogen-carbon bond in an amide? The carbon-nitrogen 
double bond is clearly sufficiently strong for a trans to cis interconver- 
sion not to occur at physiological temperatures, since this would disrupt 
the structures of polypeptides and proteins. The energetics of the trans 
to cis interconversion of amides have been investigated in a number of 
instances. We describe briefly the case of N,N-dimethylformamide (21, 
DMF; N,N-dimethylmethanamide), which can also be represented by the 
canonical form 22. To the extent that 22 contributes to the actual struc- 
ture, there is partial double bond character between N and carbonyl 
carbon. This has the effect of preventing rotation around the N-C bond, 
and as a consequence the two methyl groups are not in equivalent envi- 
ronments. This non-equivalence can be measured by the 'H NMR spec- 
trum of DMF, which at room temperature shows that the absorptions 
of the protons of the two methyl groups occur at different fields. 
However, as the temperature is raised sufficiently, rotation around the 
N-C(1) bond starts to occur and, after it has become sufficiently rapid, 
the magnetic shielding experienced by the two methyl groups becomes 
the same. At this point the discrete absorptions previously observed at 
room temperature are replaced by one unified signal. It is then possible 
to calculate the energy barrier to rotation, and in DMF this was found 
to be 89.1 kJ mol-'. Values similar to this have been found for other 
amides. 
\ 
H 
Me 
\ 
Me' 
21 
22 
This interconversion raises an interesting point. At room temperature, 
an amide represented by 20 (or 19b), in the general case, can exist in two 
configurations, trans and cis, because of the partial C-N double bond. 
When the temperature is raised sufficiently, rotation starts to occur 
around the C-N bond, and conformational changes now take place. This 
is the only point in this text where such behaviour is found. 
Here we note that the bond strength of a C-N double bond is ca. 
615 kJ mol-' (about the same as a C-C double bond), and rather less 
than the ca. 748 kJ mol-' of a carbonyl group (see Sandorfy2). 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
07 
4.5 
Cis Hydroxylation of Alkenes 
Hydroxylation of alkenes with osmium tetroxide, OsO,, involves net 
addition of two hydroxyl groups to the same face of the alkene; this is 
addition. In the case of 1,2-dirnethylcyclopentene (23), addition pro- 
ceeds by way of a cyclic osmate ester 24, whose formation is the result 
of a single-step addition to the alkene. Therefore, the cis nature of the 
methyl groups is maintained in 24 (see Scheme 4.1). The osmate ester is 
cleaved by NaHSO, (sodium hydrogensulfite), and this process involves 
breaking of both the single bonds between osmium and oxygen. 
oso4 
aMe 
- 
- 
I 
Me 
Me 
Me 
I 
23 
24 
25 
The 0-C bonds are not broken, and therefore the stereochemistry 
induced by formation of the osmate ester is maintained in the diol 25. 
An analogous reaction occurs between 23 and permanganate [man- 
ganate(VII)] ion, MnO,; 
now the corresponding intermediate is 26, 
which breaks down in water to the cis-diol 25, which is rneso. Better 
yields are obtained with the more toxic reagent OsO,; however, KMnO, 
is significantly less expensive. 
4.6 
Trans Hydroxylation of Alkenes 
Oxiranes (or epoxides) are conveniently formed by delivery of elec- 
trophilic oxygen to one of the faces of an alkene. This is achieved with 
a peroxy acid (peracid) in a single-step reaction (Scheme 4.2) that nec- 
essarily delivers oxygen syn to the double bond. Isotope labelling exper- 
iments have shown that the oxygen atom that is transferred to the alkene 
is the one that is further from the carbonyl group of the peroxy acid. 
R'%,,,, 
,\\\' R' + R-C, Go 
OH 
R2 7 '\,' 
~2 
0 
Scheme 4.1 
Me 
Me 26 
Scheme 4.2 

68 
Stereochemistry 
In this reaction the C=C double bond acts as a nucleophile, and in 
most acyclic or monocyclic molecules oxygen is added with equal facility 
to the top or bottom face of the alkene. Oxiranes are the most reactive 
ethers, and are readily susceptible to nucleophilic attack, which results 
in ring opening. This is in contrast to diethyl ether (ethoxyethane), which 
is inert even in the presence of, for example, LiAlH,. Likewise, 1,2- 
dimethylcyclohexene (27) reacts with peroxy acids to give cis- 1,2- 
dimethylcyclohexene oxide (28). 
Oxiranes, when protonated, are subject to nucleophilic attack by water 
to give a 1,2-diol as a ring-opened product. An example is shown by the 
reaction (Scheme 4.3) of the simplest oxirane, ethylene oxide (29), with 
water in the presence of acid to give initially the conjugate acid 30, 
Nucleophilic attack by water, accompanied by ring opening, gives 
ethane-1,2-diol(31, ethylene glycol) (which is used as anti-freeze in cars). 
0 
H30' 
('0 
PH 
PH 
/CH2-cH2 
- H,C/-'CH2 - 
CH2-CH2 - 
HO 
H2C/-'CH2 
/ 
H20' 
31 
OH2 
29 
30 
Scheme 4.3 
Indeed, this is the method of choice for the industrial manufacture of 
31. The second step has wider relevance and accordingly is discussed 
briefly. In acidic solution, water is protonated to give H,O+, and the pro- 
ton does not owe special allegiance to a particular water molecule, but 
instead migrates continually, from one water molecule to another 
(Scheme 4.4). Also present in the solution is 29, and the proton will there- 
fore spend a certain amount of time in 30, having bonded to 29. For the 
fraction of time that 30 exists in solution, it is susceptible to nucleophilic 
attack by water to produce 31. This behaviour pattern is in operation 
for many acid-catalysed reactions of other oxygen-containing substrates. 
Ring-opening of 32 proceeds along similar lines (see Scheme 4.3, via 
Scheme 4.4 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
69 
a protonated intermediate which is subject to nucleophilic attack by 
water (S,2) with inversion of configuration at C(l), with the result that 
the vicinal hydroxyl groups are trans in the diol 33. This inversion of 
configuration is responsible for the difference in relative configuration of 
the diol function in 33 compared to those of the diols produced from 
alkenes by either OsO, or KMnO,. 
33 
In the previous reaction scheme an oxirane was converted into its con- 
jugate acid by protonation, and in so doing a better leaving group was 
created. However, oxiranes, especially those with a primary carbon, will 
react with aqueous sodium hydroxide preferentially at the less-hindered 
primary carbon to give diols, as shown in the reaction of 34 to produce 
35 (Scheme 4.6). In general, acidic conditions are preferred for the ring 
opening of oxiranes to produce anti- 1,2-diols from alkenes. 
U 
l0O0C 
- 
Scheme 4.5 
34 
35 
Scheme 4.6 
4.7 
Addition of Bromine to Alkenes 
Alkenes react with bromine to give the products of 1,2-addition. The 
reaction is classified as an electrophilic addition of bromine, and the two 
bromine atoms in the product, 1,2-dibrornoalkane, are mutually trans. 
Therefore from the addition of bromine to trans-but-2-ene (2) the 
product is meso-2,3-dibromobutane (37). This result is explained as 
follows: the initial step is nucleophilic attack by the double bond of the 
alkene on one bromine, with displacement of the other as bromide ion. 
The organic intermediate is a bromonium ion 36, whose formation is 
rationalized in Scheme 4.7. The bromide that was expelled in formation 
of 36 now becomes a nucleophile and attacks 36 with equal probability 
at C(2) or C(3). In each case the reaction occurs with inversion of con- 
figuration to produce 37. 

70 
Stereochemistry 
Scheme 4.7 
Scheme 4.8 
\'4Br-Br 
36 
' 
Br 
/ 
Br 
Br 
Me, 
' - 
H+-c,,,,, 
\ 
/ 
\ H  
Br 
Me 
37 
Me 
In Scheme 4.8 we consider the related reaction of (q-but-2-ene (1) with 
bromine. The intermediate bromonium ion 40 is similarly converted into 
41, which has the configuration (2R,3R), and 42 which has the configu- 
ration (2S,3S), and since equal amounts of these enantiomers are formed, 
the product is racemic. The same conclusion is obtained if the bromo- 
nium ion is formed on the top side of 1, as drawn. That 41 and 42 are 
enantiomers can be seen from Newman projections, looking in the 
C(3)-C(2) direction. Noteworthy features of the electrophilic addition of 
h AP 
I 
40 
-Br , 
G 
40 
42 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
7 1 
bromine to alkenes are: (i) the IT bond acts as a nucleophile toward 
bromine in the first step to give a bromonium ion; (ii) in the product- 
forming step, nucleophilic attack of bromide ion at C(3) [or C(2)] pro- 
ceeds with inversion of configuration. 
Consistent with the mechanism proposed, Strating et aL3 isolated a 
bromonium ion from addition of bromine to the hindered alkene 43; in 
fact the hindrance was such that the second stage, which would normally . 
give the vicinal dibromoalkane product, did not occur. For an X-ray 
crystallographic structure determination of this bromonium ion, see 
Slebocka-Tilk et aL4 
In the bromination of an alkene, one might ask: can bromine approach 
the alkene sideways on, rather than from either the top or bottom? 
Consider firstly the electron density of the double bond; this is directed 
well away from, and perpendicular to, the plane of the molecule, as 
described in Chapter 1. 

72 
Stereochemistry 
4.8 
Hydration of Alkenes 
4.8.1 Markovnikov Orientation 
In conventional hydration of alkenes by water in the presence of a strong 
acid, there is little direct stereochemical consequence, but we mention it 
as a useful contrast to the content of the next section. A proton initially 
adds to the alkene, and in the case of 2-methylpropene (44) gives the 
intermediate carbocation 45 (Scheme 4.9), which is then captured by the 
nucleophile, water, and yields the product 2-methylpropan-2-01 (46). 
\\\\\ 
+,Me 
+ 
- 
Me-C, 
Me3C-OH2 - 
Me$-OH 
H /,, 
'#, "', 
Me 
44 
,c=c 
46 
I Me 
H 
'Me 
H20 
45 
Scheme 4.9 
A key point is that in the first step the proton is bonded to the less 
alkylated carbon. This is because the carbocation 45 is tertiary and sta- 
ble. The alternative possibility is to produce a primary carbocation 
Me2CHCH2+ that is significantly less stable. The order of relative 
stabilities of carbocations is tertiary > secondary > primary, and it is 
this relative sequence that dictates the site of proton attachment. 
Accordingly, one can state 
, proposed in 1869: in the 
addition of H-X to a double bond, H becomes bonded to the carbon 
with fewer alkyl groups and X becomes attached to the more alkylated 
carbon. 
A further example concerns reaction of but-1-ene (47) with aqueous 
acid. From this example (Scheme 4.10) the more stable carbocation is 
48, which reacts with water to give butan-2-01 (49). The carbocation 48 
is planar and water can approach from either side with equal ease and 
so the product is racemic. 
Scheme 4.10 
I 
49 
I 
4.8.2 Anti-Markovnikov Hydration 
Another possibility is addition of the H and OH of water to an alkene 
so that H bonds to the carbon with more alkyl groups, and OH to the 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
73 
less alkylated carbon. Clearly intermediate carbocations are to be 
avoided. Such 
has been achieved by a two- 
stage reaction: (i) the first stage is addition of the elements of borane, 
BH,, across the double bond to give an organoborane; (ii) this organo- 
borane is then transformed into an alcohol. 
Hydroboration is usually carried out in the ether tetrahydrofuran, in 
which borane exists as a complex 50, from which BH, is added to an 
alkene, e.g. 2-methylpropene (44) in Scheme 4.11. Addition takes place at 
a face of the alkene by means of a four-centre transition state, as shown 
in 51. The partial bonds in 51 represent progressive formation of bonds 
between C and H, and between C and B, together with simultaneous weak- 
ening of the 'TC bond and the B-H bond. In Scheme 4.1 1 the reaction of 
borane 52 is detailed; this borane has two remaining B-H bonds, and a 
similar reaction of these two bonds with two further molecules of alkene 
results in exhaustive alkylation, with formation of the trialkylborane 53. 
The nature of the transition state 51 implies that H and B are delivered 
syn (to the same face), and simultaneously, to the double bond. 
Me ,, 
Scheme 4.11 
The trialkylborane 53 is converted to alcohol 54 by reaction with an 
aqueous solution containing -OH and H202 (Scheme 4.12). Inspection 
of the structures of the alkene 44 and the alcohol 54 shows that addi- 
tion of water has taken place in an anti-Markovnikov sense; in particu- 
lar, hydrogen has now been added to the more alkylated carbon. One 
important feature of the hydroboration is transformation of 53 into 54, 
which occurs with retention of configuration. 
Scheme 4.12 
H202, NaOH 
25 O C  
R3B - 
3ROH + Na3B03 
n 
P 
R3B + -0-0-H 
R26-0-0-H - 
R2B-0-R 
+OH- 
+ B(OR)3 
I-J 
R 
-OH, H20 - 
ROH +Na3B03 

74 
Stereochemistry 
The examples given below illustrate the synthetic utility of the hydro- 
boration reaction for anti-Markovnikov hydration of the double bonds 
in compounds 55-58, with formation of alcohols 59-62, and with pre- 
dominant net delivery of the elements of water to the less-hindered alkene 
face, where relevant. Alcohols 61 and 62 are threo and erythro, respec- 
tively. Cis hydration of the double bonds of cyclic alkenes is described 
in the papers of Brown et al. and Alldred et al. and the text of Pelter et 
al. (see Further Reading). 
threo-61 
56 
60 
erythro-62 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
75 

76 
Stereochemistry 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
77 

78 
Stereochemistry 

Stereochemistry of Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Double Bonds 
79 

Chirality without 
S tereogenic Carbon 
5.1 
Allenes and Related Molecules 
Nearly all the examples of chiral molecules so far encountered possess 
one or more stereogenic carbons. In this chapter the scope is widened, 
and organic molecules are considered that are chiral but do not have 
stereogenic centres, as also are some molecules in which the stereogenic 
centre is not carbon. In all cases the condition for chirality, namely that 
a molecule and its mirror image are not superimposable, is met. 
. Allene (propa- 1,2-diene) 
itself is represented in 1, and as a Newman projection in 2; allene is iso- 
meric with propyne. The two hydrogens at each terminal carbon have a 
bond angle, HCH, of 120°, and of course these three atoms lie in a plane. 
However, in allene the two HCH planes are at right angles to each other, 
and are said to lie in 
planes. This is apparent from the 
Newman projection 2. It follows that the two n; bonds are also orthog- 
onal, and accordingly there is no conjugation between the 7c bonds. A 
representation of the bonding in allene is given in 3; note that the cen- 
tral carbon is sp hybridized. Allenes are not alone in having n; bonding 
of this type; other examples include ketenes, R,C=C=O, isocyanates, 
The first class to be considered is the 
80 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
81 
RN=C=O, diimides, RN=C=NR, the nitronium ion, [O=N=O]+ and, 
most commonly, carbon dioxide, O=C=O. 
H 
2 
The prediction that certain allenes could exist as enantiomers was 
made by van't Hoff in 1875; Maitland and Mills finally verified his pre- 
diction (in 1935/36) after intense effort in many laboratories. 
We consider the example of 1,3-dichloropropa- 1,2-diene, which is 
shown with its mirror image in 4a and 4b. These two structures are related 
as enantiomers. 
Enantiomers of chiral allenes are well documented and these molecules 
are not prone to racemization. 
4a 
4b 
4c 
5 
Although we have shown that 4 is chiral, and that it has no stereo- 
genic centre, it is not without symmetry. This is best seen with the aid 
of a Newman projection of 4, which is shown in 5. A two-fold (CJ axis 
of symmetry exists as shown; this passes through the central carbon, 
C(2), and bisects the right angle between the two chlorine atoms (and 
likewise the two hydrogen atoms). Rotation about this axis by 180" gives 
an identical molecule. Because of the axis of symmetry, 4 cannot be said 
to be asymmetric, and similar situations are found in certain other chi- 
ral molecules. This has had implications for stereochemical nomencla- 
ture. In particular, to avoid confusion the term 'asymmetric carbon' is 
now little used even for an sp3 hybridized carbon that carries four 

82 
Stereochemistry 
different substituents, and the term has been superseded by ‘ 
’. The phrase ‘ 
’ survives, however. The 
demonstration that chirality can exist in a molecule with an axis of sym- 
metry, e.g. 4, is in direct contrast to the case of a molecule with aplune 
of symmetry (Chapter 3), in which chirality is not possible. 
In order for an allene to be chiral a minimum of two different groups, 
both of which must be present at each terminal carbon, as in 4, is 
required. This situation contrasts with the four different atoms or groups 
that must be bonded to an sp3 hybridized carbon to create a chiral mol- 
ecule. However, chiral allenes may, of course, carry three, or four, dif- 
ferent groups, and enantiomers of such examples are known. 
Compounds such as the alkylidenecyclohexane 6 are distinct from, but 
related to, chiral allenes. Here, one of the double bonds of the allene is 
replaced by a six-membered ring in which the substituents at the 4-posi- 
tion are the same as those at the terminal vinyl (ethenyl) carbon. 
Compound 6, as with disubstituted allenes such as 4, illustrates the min- 
imum requirements for chirality, but alkylidenecyclohexanes are known 
in which * four different substituents occupy the key positions. 
Interestingly, the carboxylic acid 7 was the first example of this type of 
compound to be resolved into enantiomers, and this feat was achieved 
over 25 years before the resolution of an allene. One can, of course, con- 
sider other than six-membered rings in the context of chirality without 
stereogenic centres, and examples of alkylidenecyclobutanes are well doc- 
umented (see Rossi and Diversi’ and Runge2). 
6 
7 
8 
We have previously seen how geometric isomerism can exist around 
both the carbon-carbon double bond in an alkene and the carbon-nitro- 
gen double bond in, for example, an oxime (Chapter 4), and we have 
now seen how an alkylidenecyclohexane such as 6 can be chiral without 
the need for a stereogenic carbon. Can one therefore obtain a chiral 
molecule in which the alkene part of 6 is replaced by, say, an oxime? 
Oxime 8 has four different groups in the key positions. The nature of 
the oxime group, in particular the lone pair on N, makes it impossible 
to construct a stable chiral oxime with only two different groups. 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
83 
5.2 
Biphenyls 
Another class of molecules that does not possess stereogenic centres, and 
which when appropriately substituted can be chiral and resolvable, is the 
biphenyls; biphenyl itself is shown in 9. We consider biphenyls with only 
ortho substituents and these can be chiral if two conditions are met. It 
is tacitly assumed that the substituents do not themselves contribute to 
any chirality, i.e. they do not contain stereogenic centres. These two con- 
ditions are: 
1. 
2. 
Resolvable biphenyls must each contain bulky ortho substituents of 
sufficient size that rotation around the single bond that connects the 
aromatic rings is prevented by the ‘collision’ of substituents. If rota- 
tion around the single bond does occur, then one conformation, that 
in which the two aromatic rings are co-planar as in 10, has a plane 
of symmetry and this rules out chirality. 
Resolvable biphenyls must contain two different ortho substituents 
on each ring (hydrogen can, of course, count as a substituent, though 
it is diminutive). If one, or both, rings contain two identical sub- 
stituents, the molecule is not chiral. In order to make this point clear, 
consider the molecule 11 and make a model of it. In 11 the mole- 
cule is represented in a key conformation with the two aromatic rings 
mutually perpendicular. 
The problems outlined in condition (2) can be overcome by interchang- 
ing one NO, group in 11 for a C02H group; this gives the isomeric mol- 
ecule 12. 
x
x
 
Y
Y
 
NO? 
9 
10 
11 
H02C 
NO2 
H02C 
R 
NO2 C02H 
NO2 H 
12 
13 

84 
Stereochemistry 
The demonstration of chirality in 12, and in other similarly substituted 
compounds, represents a new situation in that the chirality is caused by 
restricted rotation around a single bond [see condition (1) above], sub- 
ject to the substituent patterns in the biphenyl [see condition (2) above]. 
The names given generally to isomers so derived are 
, and 
to the phenomenon 
. ‘Atropisomer’ is derived from the 
Greek, ‘without turning’. Hindrance to rotation at normal working tem- 
peratures may be very severe, in which case the atropisomers will be con- 
figurationally stable indefinitely. Alternatively, racemization may occur 
over time if the sizes of the relevant ortho substituents are such that they 
can slip past each other and permit rotation around the carbon-carbon 
single bond that connects the aromatic rings. If this happens, condition 
(1) above is no longer fulfilled, because there is a plane of symmetry in 
the conformation in which both aromatic rings are co-planar. Rates of 
racemization have been measured for certain combinations of sub- 
stituents, in the case of 13, with variable R; half-life times for the first- 
order racemizations are given in Table 5.1. As might be expected, there 
is a clear indication from the data in Table 5.1 that racemization is eas- 
ier the less bulky the substituent. 
Table 5.1 Half-live(s) for racemization, t,,,(rac), 
of substituted biphenyls 13 
R 
T (“C) 
t,,&ac) 
(min) 
Me 
118 
179 
NO, 
118 
125 
OMe 
25 
9.4 
CO,H 
118 
91 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
85 
5.3 
Absolute Configuration of Allenes and 
Biphenyls 
5.3.1 Allenes 
In order to describe the absolute configuration of chiral allenes, the 
Cahn-Ingold-Prelog (C1P)‘rules are first used to ascertain the priorities 
at the each terminal carbon, as is done for alkenes; at this point the sim- 
ilarity with alkenes ends. The method will be demonstrated with the 
trisubstituted allene 14a: 
1. Look along the three-carbon allene unit from one end (either end can 
be chosen), and put uppermost the higher priority group at the ‘near’ 
end. Initially we look from the left in this example, which already 
has the ‘front’ substituents in a vertical plane. 
2. Represent 14a as a projection 15, with the ‘near’ substituents verti- 
cal, and the ‘back’ substituents horizontal. 
3. The ‘front’ substituents, prioritized, take precedence over the ‘back’ 
substituents, themselves prioritized. This gives Br > Me; CO,H > H. 
4. The overall sequence is as shown in 16. Track this sequence alpha- 
betically, noting especially the angular direction taken in going from 
‘b’ to ‘c’, i.e. from the lower priority front substituent to the higher 
priority back substituent. If the sense of turn is clockwise, the allene 
has R configuration, whereas if the turn is anti-clockwise the allene 
has S configuration. The enantiomer shown in 14a therefore has S 
configuration. 
Br 
I 
a 
H-9-co2H 
Me 
15 
b 
16 
The last step is an adaptation of the original protocol (see Cahn3) and 
the method can also be conveniently applied to chiral biphenyls. 
To assign configuration with the carboxylic acid group as a ‘near’ sub- 
stituent, proceed as follows. Place the eye at the right-hand side of 14a 
as drawn, and look toward and along the three-atom allene unit. Rotate 
the molecule clockwise around the axis defined by the three allenic car- 
bons, in order to place the higher ranked ‘near’ substituent uppermost. 
The molecule now looks as in 14b, with corresponding projection in 17. 
Substituent ranking is as in 16, and one again finds that the allene has 
S configuration. 

86 
Stereochemistry 
14b 
I 
H 
17 
Just as the smallest carbocyclic ring that can incorporate a trans alkene 
is eight membered (Chapter 4), so the smallest sized ring that can con- 
tain an allene has nine carbons. One enantiomer of this compound is 18. 
Rotate the molecule clockwise around the allene axis in order to place 
the higher ranked ‘near’ substituent uppermost. The projection from the 
right-hand side now has the form 19, which is of general type 20. 
Tracking the substituents alphabetically involves a clockwise turn 
between substituents ‘b’ and ‘c’; hence the enantiomer of cyclonona- 1,2- 
diene shown in 18 has R configuration. 
18 
19 
20 
5.3.2 Biphenyls 
Consider the case of the first chiral biphenyl to be resolved, one enan- 
tiomer of which is shown in 21. To determine the configuration of this 
enantiomer, one draws a projection formula similar to that previously 
shown for allenes, but with inclusion of relevant ortho groups; this is shown 
in 22. If one tracks the substituents alphabetically, then the sense of turn 
between ‘b’ and ‘c’ is anti-clockwise, as in 16, and so 22 has S configura- 
tion. It is possible to construct molecules that additionally contain sub- 
stituents at the unsubstituted aromatic carbons of 21; however, any 
additional substituents are not relevant to the question of atropisomerism. 
H0;C 
21 
5.4 
Hexahelicene 
H02C 
COzH 
22 
Hexahelicene (23) exists in two enantiomeric forms because of over- 
crowding, which affects the end two rings. The congestion is relieved 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
87 
by part of one of the end rings taking a position above the other so 
that the molecule starts to resemble the thread of a screw or helix. 
Hexahelicene can be resolved, either with the aid of a chiral chro- 
matography column, or by formation of charge transfer complexes with 
a chiral complexing agent. The diastereomeric complexes are then sepa- 
rated by recrystallization, and very high values of the specific rotation 
are observed, [a], = 3700 (note that this is not the observed rotation, but 
the specific rotation calculated as shown in Chapter 2). 
/ \ 68 
\
/
 
23 
5.5 
Silicon, Germanium and Tin Compounds 
I 
A number of organosilicon compounds with chiral silicon atoms have 
been obtained as single enantiomers by routes involving: 
1. Diastereoisomer formation and separation 
2. Kinetic resolution 
3. Asymmetric synthesis 
Examples are shown in 24-26. The stereospecificity of substitution 
reactions at silicon indicates a viable route to other enantiomerically 
pure silicon compounds. All examples of chiral molecules of the type 
R1R2R3R4Si and R1R2R3SiH have high configurational stability, and in 
addition halides such as PhSi(Me)(Et)Br do not readily racemize (see 
Corriu et aL4). 
(S)-24 
(S)-25 
(R)-26 1 -Nap = 1 -Naphthyl 
Single enantiomers of a small number of organogermanium com- 
pounds, with a chiral germanium atom, have been isolated and an 
example is the configurationally stable compound 27 (see Marshall and 
Jablonski5). 
1 -Nap 
CH2CMe2Ph 
I 
I 
(R)-27 
28 
Tetraorganotin compounds with a stereogenic tin atom have been 
obtained as single enantiomers variously by resolution, asymmetric 
synthesis or, as in the example of 28, separation of the enantiomers 
has been achieved by chiral chromatography on cellulose acetate. 
Compounds such as 28 exhibit no tendency to racemize, in contrast to 

88 
Stereochemistry 
Scheme 5.1 
those of general type R1R2R3SnOR in which an alkoxy group has 
replaced one organic ligand (see Davies6). 
5.6 
Amines, Ammonium Salts, Phosphorus and 
Arsenic Compounds 
It is not generally possible to observe optical activity in amines of the 
type NR'R2R3, in which groups R', R2 and R3 are independent and 
acyclic even though, with the lone pair on nitrogen classed as a formal 
substituent, all the requirements for existence of a stereogenic centre have 
been met. The problem is that the amino nitrogen is undergoing rapid 
pyramidal inversion (Scheme 5.1) and the energy barrier to inversion is 
usually small, about 25 kJ mol-I. However, two factors diminish the rate 
of inversion of nitrogen in amines. Nitrogen has been shown to have 
configurational stability if it is part of a three-membered ring, and also 
to invert more slowly if an adjacent atom carries at least one lone pair 
of electrons, e.g. C1, 0 or N. A number of chiral molecules that incor- 
porate these features have been designed, and it has been possible to iso- 
late both enantiomers of the chiral oxaziridine 29, for example. These 
enantiomers do not racemize at room temperature (see Formi et a1.'). 
Chiral compounds have been synthesized in which nitrogen has been 
incorporated, as the only stereogenic centre, into a rigid cage structure, 
which prevents inversion. One such example is 30, Troger's base, which 
has two chiral nitrogens of interdependent configuration, since they are 
at the bridgehead positions of a bicyclic part structure. In one of the 
very first resolutions by chiral column chromatography, Troger's base 
was separated into its enantiomers by means of the chiral disaccharide 
lactose. 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
89 
Brucine (Chapter 3) and quinine (31), one of the first anti-malarial drugs 
and isolated from the bark of the cinchona tree in South America, are 
examples of naturally occurring alkaloids that contain a stereogenic 
nitrogen; additionally, these molecules contain a number of stereogenic 
carbons. 
A quaternary ammonium salt has a tetrahedral nitrogen and if, as with 
carbon, this carries four different groups, it is chiral. A number of such 
salts have been resolved into their enantiomers, the earliest example being 
32. In general, these salts do not racemize, although reversible dissocia- 
tion (Scheme 5.2) has been used to explain the few cases in which racem- 
ization does occur. The tertiary amine NR1R2R3 so formed inverts 
configuration rapidly, and recombination with R4X produces a racemic 
salt. The less nucleophilic the counterion X-, the more the quaternary 
salt is configurationally stable. 
R'R2R3R4$ X- 
R1R2R3N + R4X 
Single enantiomers of a number of chiral phosphines, 33 and 34, have 
been obtained by reaction of the corresponding phosphine oxides with 
halosilanes. These compounds do not racemize readily, and in accord 
with this finding the barrier to inversion has been found to be much 
greater in the case of PH, (and also ASH,) than in that of NH,. 
Phosphonium salts, such as 35, have been obtained by classical resolu- 
tion routes. It is possible to abstract a benzylic proton from 35 to give 
an ylide that reacts with benzaldehyde to produce 36, as a supposed inter- 
mediate. This sequence, the well-documented Wittig reaction, is com- 
pleted by breakdown of 36 into the phosphine oxide 37, with retention 
of configuration at phosphorus, and provides a convenient route to enan- 
tiomerically pure phosphine oxides. 
A second route to phosphine oxides consists of a reaction between a 
diastereomerically enriched menthyl phosphinate 38. This reaction 
proceeds with inversion of configuration at phosphorus, even though in 
31 
PhCH2 \&/ 
Me 
I- 
Ph' 
'CH2-CH=CH2 
32 
Scheme 5.2 

90 
Stereochemistry 
*i 
Me 
33 R=CH2Ph 
34 R = B u t  
Me 
I 
-BPh4 
As+,,ll 
p h y  \ 
CH2Ph 
Pr 
40 
Ph 
I 
Ph 
1 .  
I- 
1. PhLi 
E 
I 
35 
Ph 
36 
Ph 
37 
this example the CIP symbol for the phosphine oxide 39 is the same as 
that for the starting ester 38 (see Korpium et aZ.8). 
0 
0 
II 
MeMgCl 
II 
(S)-38 
(9-39 
ph( 
p;;."' 
pr 
ph( 
'T1l 
Me 
OMen 
Pr 
Men = menthyl 
The first enantiomerically pure quaternary arsonium salts were iso- 
lated in the 1960s, and an example is shown in 40. Importantly, the coun- 
terion here is the non-nucleophilic -BPh,. Earlier attempts to isolate salts 
that carried the nucleophilic counterion Br- led to racemization, pre- 
sumably by a route analogous to that shown by Scheme 5.2 above. 
Acyclic arsines have been obtained in enantiomerically pure form 
and, on account of their high inversion barrier, these compounds hold 
configuration indefinitely. We illustrate two methods for their formation 
from enantiomerically pure arsonium salts, and these are shown for 41 
and 43. Salt 41 is converted into 42 by cathodic reduction, and 43 is 
transformed into 44 by reaction with aqueous cyanide ion; also formed 
in the latter case is 45, which accounts for the ally1 (prop-2-enyl) group 
(see Wild9). 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
91 
Pr 
I 
Pr 
I 
-Br 
cathodic reduction 
Ph’ 
As:,, “CH:!-CCH=CH2 
* ph,Ap,, . 
Me 
Me 
(R)-41 
(R)-42 
CH2Ph 
CN 
Me 
(S)-43 
Me 
44 
45 
5.7 
Sulfoxides, Sulfonium Salts and Selenoxides 
Sulfoxides have a tetrahedral structure about the sulfur atom in which 
there are two alkyl and/or aryl substituents, an oxygen and a lone pair. 
The lone pair in sulfoxides does not undergo inversion, unlike its coun- 
terpart in amines, and so sulfoxides are configurationally stable; several 
examples of enantiomerically pure sulfoxides, e.g. 46, have been 
obtained. 
46 
47 
In sulfinic acids, RS(O)OH, sulfur is in the same oxidation state as in 
sulfoxides, and many esters of sulfinic acid (sulfinates) are known in 
which separate enantiomers have been isolated. If the ester is composed 
0 
of a chiral alcohol, e.g. menthol, the resultant sulfinate is diastereomeric. --;..-o\\
:’1,,,// 
I I 
Menthyl p-toluenesulfinate (48) has been used in synthesis. 
Sulfonium salts are of general form R1R2R3S+X-. In these salts, pos- 
itively charged sulfur has a lone pair of electrons, in addition to the 
substituent groups indicated. Sulfur is tetrahedral in sulfonium salts and 
salts of the above general type are accordingly chiral. Sulfonium sulfur 
does not undergo rapid inversion, and sulfonium salts have been 
Me 
48 

92 
Stereochemistry 
resolved; 49 is an example of an enantiomerically pure salt whose struc- 
ture has been verified experimentally by X-ray analysis. In a few 
instances, ions such as 50 (episulfonium ions) have been isolated; these 
ions are intermediates in addition of sulfenyl halides (R-S-Hal) 
to 
alkenes, and as such have a generic similarity to bromonium ions 
(Chapter 4). One important sulfonium salt is S-methylmethionine (51), 
whose configuration is indicated. This compound functions as an impor- 
tant biological methylating agent, in which the methyl group can be 
transferred to, say, an oxygen atom. 
X- 
N 
OH' 
'', OH 
X- 
SlllllMe 
,C,, 
H2N 
\'"H 
But 
C02H 
51 
+ x- 
Pr 
Et 
49 
50 
Enantiomerically pure sulfonium salts can undergo racemization, 
though the process is not usually rapid. Three processes have been impli- 
cated in racemization; these are: (1) reversible dissociation (Scheme 5.3a), 
similar to that suggested for the racemization of tetraalkylammonium 
salts (Section 5.6); (2) pyramidal inversion at sulfur, analogous to nitro- 
gen inversion in amines; and (3) reversible dissociation into a carboca- 
tion and a sulfide (Scheme 5.3b) (see Andersen'O). 
R'R2R3i X- 
R'R2S + R3X 
Scheme 5.3 
In contrast to the corresponding sulfoxides, selenoxides of the type 
R1R2Se0 are not usually chiral. The reason is that selenoxides react with 
water to produce structures of type 52 that are, of course, achiral. If the 
52 
(S)-53 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
93 
substituents are carefully chosen, a chiral selenoxide that does not racem- 
ize can be obtained. An example is 53; the bulky substituents on one 
aromatic ring are sufficient to prevent attack by water at selenium that 
would lead to a 'hydrate' structure like 52 (see Shimizu and Kobayashi"). 

94 
Stereochemistry 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
95 

96 
Stereochemistry 

Chirality without Stereogenic Carbon 
97 

98 
Stereochemistry 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic 
Structures 
6.1 
Cyclic Molecules, Configurational Assignment 
and Strain 
Acyclic molecules can readily minimize strain simply by changing 
conformation. There is less freedom to make large changes of confor- 
mation in cyclic molecules and so the incidence of strain is much more 
99 

100 
Stereochemistry 
H 
H
*
:
 
H 
1 
widespread. Nearly all cyclic molecules possess some strain, though the 
amounts can often be small. 
Strain has been encountered previously, e.g. in Chapter 1, and it is 
appropriate to collate the three types since cyclic molecules that are 
strained will experience one or more of the types outlined below. 
(formerly known as Baeyer strain) occurs when C-C-C 
single bond angles deviate significantly from the ideal value of 109'28'. 
These deviations occur either as a compression, or an expansion, of this 
angle. 
2. 
(formerly known as Pitzer strain) is introduced when 
two substituents X and Y, bonded to adjacent carbons C(1) and C(2), 
are such that the dihedral angle X-C(1)-C(2)-Y 
is less than 60". Torsion 
strain reaches a maximum when the above dihedral angle is 0'. 
. Two given atoms X and Y have specific van der 
Waals' radii, and if X and Y approach closer than the sum of their van 
der Waals' radii, a non-bonded repulsion is set up with the introduction 
of steric strain. If possible the molecule will respond by adopting a con- 
formation in which the X and Y are further apart than the sum of their 
van der Waals' radii. 
In disubstituted cyclopropanes, cyclobutanes and cyclopentanes, 
assignment of configuration, cis or trans, is made with respect to a plane 
through the molecule. Cyclopentanes and most cyclobutanes are not pla- 
nar, but this does not pose a significant problem. Cyclohexanes are also 
non-planar. Using the above method it can take a while to decide whether 
the relative configurations of some disubstituted cyclohexanes are cis or 
trans. For these compounds we employ an alternative method based on 
dihedral angles. 
1. 
3. 
6.2 
Cyclopropane 
Cyclopropane, C,H,, b.p. -33 'C, is the simplest cyclic hydrocarbon and 
was used as an anaesthetic. The C-C-C bond angles of cyclopropane (1) 
are 60°, much smaller than the ideal tetrahedral value of 109'28'. The 
three carbons of cyclopropane necessarily lie in a plane, and all the C-H 
bonds are eclipsed. 
Cyclopropane possesses both significant angle and torsion strain. 
Strain in saturated cyclic hydrocarbons is determined from the heat of 
combustion, and comparisons are made per CH, group in a molecule. 
For cyclopropane the molar enthalpy change of combustion is 
2090 kJ mol-', i.e. 696.5 kJ mol-' per CH, group. The corresponding fig- 
ure for cyclohexane is 3948 kJ mol-', i.e. 658 kJ mol-' per CH,. If cyclo- 
hexane is taken to be strain free (which is a reasonable approximation), 
one can conclude that the strain in cyclopropane is (696.5 - 658) = 38.5 
kJ mol-' per CH,. It should be noted that these experimentally deter- 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
I01 
mined heats of combustion represent enthalpies rather than free ener- 
gies. A discussion of the hybridization and bonding of carbon in cyclo- 
propane is given by Bernett.' 
Cyclopropane can be drawn as in 1 to show perspective, or as in 2-5 
(for its derivatives), in which the cyclopropane ring is in the plane of the 
paper. Monosubstituted cyclopropanes, such as 2, are not chiral. The 
disubstituted cyclopropane 3 is also not chiral; it has two stereogenic 
11,,11' H 
%cl 
centres with identical substituents and of opposite configuration, and is 
therefore meso. Compound 3, which has a plane of symmetry through 
the mid-point of the C( 1)-C(2) bond, is cis- 1,2-dichlorocyclopropane. 
H
A
c
1
 
\\O" 
c1 
3 
If, for example, there are two trans substituents, as in 4, the molecule is 
chiral. The configurations of the stereogenic centres of this trans com- 
pound are (1 R,2S) and 4 is therefore (1 R, 2S)-2-chlorocyclopropanecar- 
boxylic acid. A trans cyclopropane in which both substituents' are the 
same is also chiral, and an example is shown in 5. 
6.3 Cyclobutane 
Cyclobutane (6) is not flat and one carbon is ca. 25" above the plane 
defined by the other three. The internal CCC angles are 88", a departure 
of ca. 21" from the normal tetrahedral value. A planar structure would 
have internal bond angles of 90" and eclipsed C-H bonds. Cyclobutane 
has a strain energy of 27.5 kJ mol-' per CH,. The above values pre- 
sumably represent an energy minimum and involve a slight increase in 
angle strain and a slight decrease in torsion strain with respect to a pla- 
nar structure. Certain substituted cyclobutanes, e.g. trans-cyclobutane- 
1 ,3-dicarboxylic acid are, however, planar. 
Nomenclature of cyclobutanes follows that of cyclopropanes. 

i02 
Stereochemistry 
6 
7 
8 
Compounds 7 and 8 (cyclobutanes are usually drawn in this style) are 
termed cis and trans, respectively. Further, 7 and 8 are 
though neither is chiral; this is significant in that diastereoisomers 
encountered previously, e.g. (R,R) 
and meso tartaric acids, have at least 
one chiral member. Indeed, this observation is general for disubstituted 
saturated cyclic hydrocarbons provided that the number of carbon atoms 
in the ring, n, is even and that the substituents are located at carbon 
atoms 1 and 1 + (n/2). For cyclobutanes this corresponds to C(l) and 
C(3), and for cyclohexanes C(l) and C(4). The stereochemistry of 1,2- 
disubstituted cyclobutanes is analogous to that of cyclopropanes. 
6.4 
Cyclopentane 
Cyclopentane is appreciably less strained than cyclobutane and cyclo- 
propane, and the strain energy relative to cyclohexane is ca. 6.45 kJ mol-' 
per CH, group. In order to lessen the torsion strain that would occur in 
a planar conformation, in which every C-H bond is involved in two 
eclipsing interactions, cyclopentane adopts a puckered conformation (see 
Dunitz, Further Reading). This has four carbons approximately planar, 
with the fifth carbon bent out of this plane in such a way that the mol- 
ecule resembles a small near-square envelope 9. A Newman projection 
of 9 is shown in 10. 
P 
, 
H Hw 
H 
H 
h'- 
9 
10 
In this envelope-type conformation the puckering moves rapidly 
around the ring so that each carbon in rapid succession becomes the flap 
of the envelope. This process is known as 
(see Fuchs, 
Further Reading). 
6.5 
Cyclo h exa nes 
In Chapter 1 the conformations of ethane, propane and butane were con- 
sidered and then extended to cyclohexane and its (more stable) chair and 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
103 
(less stable) boat conformations. This was done in order to show how 
the concepts applicable to acyclic molecules can be extended and applied 
to the most common cyclic saturated hydrocarbon. Cyclohexane has lit- 
tle strain and its derivatives, monocyclic or polycyclic, are abundant in 
nature. Indeed, this abundance is probably related to the approximate- 
ly strain-free nature of cyclohexane. Whether cyclohexane is totally free 
of strain is a moot point, which has been addressed by Schleyer et aL2 
Cycloalkanes with rings consisting of seven to eleven carbon atoms are 
strained to the extent of 3.8-5.8 kJ mol-l per CH,, and in higher 
cycloalkanes the strain becomes very small. 
Cyclohexane was originally postulated to be non-planar by the 
German chemist Sachse in 1890. Definitive proof was provided in ca. 
1950 by Hassel in Oslo, from analysis of X-ray structures, and by Barton 
in London from correlations with steroid reactivities (see also Dunitz 
and Weser, Further Reading). The distinction between 'axial' and 'equa- 
torial' positions was also made at that time (see Barton3). 
In Chapter 1 we also considered how a bulky substituent prefers to 
be equatorial, and how (1) two hydrogens that are 1,2-diaxial are trans 
and (2) two hydrogens that are 1,3-diaxial are cis. In this chapter we 
develop these themes (see also Eliel and Wilen, Further Reading). 
6.5.1 Disubstituted Cyclohexanes 
We now consider the chair conformations of cyclohexanes that carry two 
substituents and examine their stereochemistry and nomenclature. Where 
appropriate, chirality is considered. We deal firstly with cases in which 
both substituents can be axial, and then those in which only one sub- 
stituent can be axial at any one time. Attention is focused principally on 
chair conformations. 
6.5.2 Disubstituted Cyclohexanes in which Both 
Substituents can be Axial 
1,2-Disu bstituted Cyclo hexanes 
1,2-Disubstituted cyclohexanes are probably the most challenging of the 
disubstituted cyclohexanes. We consider 1,2-dimethylcyclohexane with 
both substituents axial in order to define configuration, although it 
should be recognized that it is the less stable chair conformation. 
Structure 11 represents the trans isomer because the dihedral angle 
Ca-C( l)-C(2)-CP is 180". The ring-inverted form 12, arrived at from 11 
solely by a series of interdependent bond rotations, and no bond cleav- 
ages, is therefore also trans. The chair conformation shown in 12 is the 
more stable because the methyl groups occupy equatorial positions where 

I04 
Stereochemistry 
they experience only slight non-bonded interactions. One can also derive 
the configuration from the conformation shown in 12, in which the ter- 
tiary hydrogens, H1 and H2, are bonded to C(1) and C(2), respectively. 
Now the dihedral angle H1-C( 1)-C(2)-H2 is 1 80°, and so both chair con- 
formations can be used to define trans- 1,2-dimethylcyclohexane. 
CPH3 
1 -  
H' 
1 -  
CaH3 
11 
12 
Me 
14 
I 
Me 
13 
Accordingly, 11/12 and 13/14 are a pair of enantiomers; for a substituent 
X, one can make a general statement that trans- 1,2-di-X-cyclohexanes 
exist as a pair of enantiomers. 
1,3-Disubstituted Cyclohexanes 
Here we consider 1,3-dimethylcyclohexane (15) and assign its stereo- 
chemistry. This compound has another chair conformation 16, derived 
from 15 by ring inversion, and we now assign configuration from both 
conformers. 
15 
H3 
16 
As in the previous sub-section, we search for a chair conformation in 
which there is a dihedral angle of 0" or 180". Conformation 15, with 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
105 
diaxial methyl substituents, has a dihedral angle Ca-C( 1)-~(3)-C0 of 0" 
if one considers an imaginary bond between C(1) and C(3); according- 
ly, 15 represents the cis configuration. 
The ring-inverted chair conformation 16 is much more stable than 15 
because both methyl substituents are now equatorial. If one focuses on 
the tertiary hydrogens H1 and H3 at C(l) and C(3), respectively, and 
again considers an imaginary C(l).-C(3) bond, then in 16 the dihedral 
angle H'-C( 1)--C(3)-H3 is 0" and both conformations indicate that 15 
and 16 represent the cis configuration. 
1,4-Disubstituted Cyclohexanes 
The chair form of a diaxially 1,4-disubstituted cyclohexane with two 
identical substituents is shown in 17. This pair of conformers is defined 
as trans from either 17 or 18, as follows. From 17 insert an imaginary 
C(l).--C(4) bond and it is readily seen that the dihedral angle 
Ca-C( l)-.-C(4)-Cp is 1 80", in accord with a trans configuration. 
H4 
I 
H
I
+
+
 
H4 --- 
H3ccf.@cpH3 
H' 
17 
CPH3 
18 
Alternatively, take the diequatorial form 18 and, as before, insert an 
imaginary C(l).-C(4) bond. One can now identify a dihedral angle 
H1-C( 1)--C(4)-H4 of 1 80°, which again indicates a trans configuration. 
Conformations 17 and 18 together therefore represent trans-l,4- 
dimethylcyclohexane. This compound has a plane of symmetry that 
passes through C(l) and C(4), and also through Ca and CP; according- 

106 
Stereochemistry 
ly, it is not chiral. Furthermore, it follows that no 1,4-trans-disubstitut- 
ed cyclohexane is chiral as long as the substituents themselves do not 
induce chirality. 
The configuration of disubstituted cyclohexanes considered so far can 
most readily be determined from analysis of those conformations in 
which the substituents (or alternatively the tertiary hydrogens at the car- 
bons that carry the substituents) are diaxial. If the dihedral angles (nor- 
mal, or extended in the 1,3- and 1,4-disubstituted cases) are 180", the 
configuration is trans; if the dihedral angle is 0", it is cis. 
6.5.3 Disubstituted Cyclohexanes in which only One 
Substituent can be Axial 
The cases of two identical substituents located, respectively, 1,2, 1,3 and 
1,4 in chair cyclohexanes will now be addressed, in each case with relative 
configurations such that only one substituent can be axial at a time. At 
this point it is useful to consider cyclohexane 19, resting on a horizon- 
tal surface by the axial hydrogens at C(2), C(4) and C(6); these three 
hydrogens lie in a reference plane. The axial C(1)-H bond is at right 
angles to the reference plane and directed away from it, whereas the 
equatorial C(1)-H is slightly, ca. 30", inclined toward the plane. The 
axial C(2)-H bond is at right angles to, and directed toward, the plane 
and the equatorial C(2)-H bond is directed away from the reference 
plane by ca. 30". With a molecular model of cyclohexane verify the above 
statements. 
It follows, for example, that the axial C(1)-H and equatorial C(2)-H 
bonds, both being inclined away from the reference plane, are cis. The 
equatorial C( 1)-H bond is inclined toward the reference plane whereas 
the equatorial C(2)-H bond is inclined away from the plane; the dispo- 
sition of these bonds is therefore trans. In the present section we use two 
methods to assign the relative configuration of substituents. One is based 
on the angular inclination of bonds, described above, and the other 
derives from the relationship to examples, discussed previously, in which 
the substituents are diaxial. 
19 
1 ,2- 
Di su bst i t u t ed C yclo h exanes 
With one methyl group axial, and the other equatorial, we obtain 20 
together with the inverted chair structure 21. The structures here are 
equal in energy, and this is always the case when both substituents are 
identical. The compound 20 (or 21) is described as cis, and this conclu- 
sion can be arrived at in two ways: 
1. A molecular model reveals that the bonds between the ring car- 
bons and the attached methyl groups are inclined away from the plane 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
107 
that passes through the hydrogens attached to C(1), C(3) and C(5) of 20 
[or C(2), C(4) and C(6) of 211. 
2. The structure is derived from the trans isomer by change of con- 
figuration at one carbon only, and the trans isomer has the 180" dihe- 
dral angle previously mentioned. 
Cis- 1,2-dimethylcyclohexane represents an interesting case. The rapid 
rate of ring inversion means that it is impossible to separate the enan- 
tiomers. There is a further relevant point about cis- 1,2-dimethylcyclo- 
hexane. The configurations of C(l) and C(2) in 20 and 21 are opposite, 
(1 S,2R), and these configurations stay with the carbons whatever the 
conformation. Since the substituents at 20 and 21 are the same, cis-1,2- 
dimethylcyclohexane is meso. One can see this in another way: the boat 
conformation 22, readily obtainable with models from either 20 or 21, 
clearly has a plane of symmetry between the stereogenic carbons. 
This assignment as a meso compound holds only for molecules in 
which both 1,2-ring substituents are the same. In this respect, cis-1,2- 
dimethylcyclohexane therefore follows the corresponding cyclopropane, 
cyclobutane and cyclopentane. 
1,3-Disubstituted Cyclohexanes 
With one substituent axial and one equatorial, 23 and its ring-inverted 
form 24 are obtained when the substituents are 1,3. For identical sub- 
stituents the conformations are equal in energy. Moreover, 23 and 24, 
being identical, are superimposable; however, this compound is chiral, 
and 23 and 24 together represent one of a pair of enantiomers. 
I 24 
23 

108 
Stereochemistry 
Assignment of 23 (or 24) as trans can be made as follows: (1) in the 
chair form of 23 (or 24), one of the bonds between a ring carbon and a 
methyl group is inclined toward the reference plane defined at the start 
of this section, and the other is inclined away from it; (2) 23 (or 24) is 
derived from 15 (which is cis) by a change of configuration at one ring 
carbon atom. 
1,4-Disubstituted Cyclohexanes 
These are represented by 25 and 26, which are the two chair conforma- 
tions of cis- l ,4-dimethylcyclohexane, so called (1) because the bonds 
between the ring carbons and the attached methyl groups in 25 and 26 
are both inclined toward the plane defined above, or (2) because 25 (or 
26) is derived from the trans diaxial isomer 17 by a change in configu- 
ration at one carbon. 
I 
26 
All cis- 1,4-disubstituted cyclohexanes are achiral (providing that the 
substituents are not themselves chiral), because a plane of symmetry pass- 
es through C(1), C(4) and, of course, the substituents. 
Cis- 1,4-dimethylcyclohexane, 25 and 26 collectively, is therefore a 
diastereoisomer of its trans-l,4-dimethyl counterpart, 17 and 18, 
although neither is chiral. This relationship therefore parallels that pre- 
viously mentioned in respect of 1,3-disubstituted cyclobutanes (Section 
6.3). The six configurational possibilities are summarized in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1 Configurational and conformational relationships in disubstituted cyclohexanes 
Conformation of substituents 
Relative configuration of substituents 
1,2-Diaxial/l,2-diequatorial 
trans 
1,3-Axial-equatorial/1,3-equatorial-axial 
trans 
1,4-Diaxial/l,4-diequatorial 
trans 
1,2-Axial-equatorial/l,2-equatorial-axial 
cis 
1,3-Diaxial/1,3-diequatorial 
cis 
1,4-Axial-equatorial/l,4-equatorial-axial 
cis 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
I09 
6.5.4 Other Disubstituted Cyclohexanes 
If two substituents are not identical, the same principles of cisltrans 
nomenclature still apply. However, the degeneracy is removed in the case 
of cis- 1,3- and cis- 1,2-disubstituted compounds. For example, cis-3- 
fluorocyclohexanecarboxylic acid (27), shown in the more populated 
chair conformation, is now chiral, unlike the meso 15/16. 
ec
27 
In monosubstituted cyclohexanes, the substituent prefers to be equato- 
rial to an extent that is greater the larger the substituent. The substituent 
experiences destabilizing 1,3-diaxial interactions when axial, and so by 
ring inversion assumes the equatorial position (see Chapter 1). This inver- 
sion is an equilibrium process and the equilibrium ratios, of course, can 
be expressed as a free energy difference; in the present context they are 
known as 
The A values make it possible to obtain realistic estimates of relative 
axia1:equatorial ratios in disubstituted cyclohexanes in which one sub- 
stituent is axial and the other is equatorial. For example, from a knowl- 
edge of the preferences of the Me and OH groups to be equatorial one 
can assess approximately the conformational make-up, 28 vs. 29, of trans- 
3-me t h ylc yclohexanol. 
and these are collected in Table 6.2. 
28 
29 
Me 
The tert-butyl (1,l-dimethylethyl) substituent is very bulky and exists 
solely in the equatorial position. The result is that the ring is unable to 
invert into the chair form that has this substituent axial, and so in effect 
the ring is locked. Winstein and Holne~s,~ 
who first recognized this prop- 
erty of the tert-butyl group, noted that it offered ‘a compelling but remote 

1 10 
Stereochemistry 
Table 6.2 ‘A’ Values of common substituents in cyclohexane~~ 
Substifuent A value (kJ mol-I) 
Substituent 
A value (kJ mol-I) 
F 
CI 
Br 
I 
OH 
OMe 
OCOMe 
SMe 
Me 
Pr’ 
NO, 
CF3 
1.46 
2.22 
2.22 
2.05 
3.77 
2.64 
2.97 
4.18 
4.39 
6.70 
10.46 
9.25 
But 
Ph 
C=CH 
C-N 
COMe 
C0,Me 
S0,Me 
OS0,Me 
MgBr 
CH=CH, 
NH2 
20.50 
12.01 
1.72 
1 .oo 
6.23 
4.27 
5.48 
10.46 
2.34 
6.02 
1.92 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~ ~  
~ 
aThese A values are valid as a guide but, since they were measured in a variety of sol- 
vents, and at different temperatures, detailed comparison is not appropriate. For a 
comprehensive table of A values, including solvents used and experimental tempera- 
tures, see C. H. Bushweller in Conformational Behavior of Six-Membered Rings, ed. 
E. Juaristi, VCH, Weinheim, 1995, p. 25. 
control of conformation’. Consider the tert-butyl group as part of a di- 
substituted c yclo hexane, e. g. trans- 1 - t- butyl- 3 -met h ylc yclohexane. In 
principle, the methyl group can be axial and the t-butyl group equator- 
ial, or vice versa. 
The assessments based on A values should be used with caution. 
Sometimes there is not a correspondence between experiment and cal- 
culation. For example, an excess population of the diaxial conformation 
of 1,3-diaxial cyclohexanes, over what is expected on the basis of indi- 
vidual A values, can be brought about by an attractive interaction, e.g. 
hydrogen bonding, between the substituents. 
Occasionally, an apparent problem is encountered with the nomen- 
clature of some 1,2-disubstituted cyclohexanes. This can be illustrated 
with 30 and 31, trans- 1,2-diethylcyclohexane. With a molecular model 
of 30 it is possible for the extremities of the two ethyl groups to touch, 
and so it may be intuitively difficult to accept that 30 is trans. However, 
the assignment of trans configuration is supported by: (i) the presence of 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
I 1  1 
tertiary diaxial hydrogens at C(1) and C(2) in 30; (ii) observation that 
in the inverted conformer 31, both ethyl groups are now 1,2-diaxial. We 
will return to this compound in Section 6.6.1. 
30 
/ 
31 
6.5.5 Trisubstituted Cyclohexanes 
Cyclohexane may obviously carry more than two substituents, and the 
question arises of how to name these compounds. One may specify each 
centre (if it is stereogenic) by the RlS convention, or one may use the 
cisltrans system, described in previous sections. In the cisltrans system 
one substituent, the CO,H group in the example 32, is taken as a stan- 
dard and given the prefix ‘r’ (for reference), and all configurations in this 
molecule are given with respect to C0,H. In this convention compound 
32 is trans-3-fluoro-cis-2-methylcyclohexane-r- 
1 -carboxylic acid. The 
trans relationship between the fluoro and methyl groups is not consid- 
ered in this convention, but can be deduced from their relationship to 
the carboxylic acid. This convention, of course, gives no information 
about the absolute configuration. 
32 
Me 
6.6 
Decalins 
The decahydronaphthalenes (decalins), C,,H,,, have two cyclohexane 
rings fused together with two carbons common to each ring. This fusion 
can be brought about in two ways and the resulting compounds are 
stereoisomers. They can be thought of as reduction products of naph- 
thalene, though they are more commonly synthesized in other ways. 
6.6.1 trans-Decalin 
trans-Decalin is represented by 33, or more commonly by 34, and is 
seen to be trans in the following ways. In 34, the vicinal ring-junction 
H 
33 
I 
H 
34 

i i 2 
Stereochemistry 
hydrogens are mutually trans. Consider also trans- 1,2-diethylcyclohexa- 
ne in the diequatorial conformation, as shown in 30. 
6.6.2 cis-Decalin 
The ring junction may form in a different way to give cis-decalin, which 
exists as two conformers 35 and 36. These conformers are seen to be cis 
because the hydrogens Ha and Hb are cis to each other. Each is equator- 
ial with respect to one ring, and axial with respect to the other. 
Hb 
' 
37 
' 
38 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
113 
6.7 
Steroids 
Of course, it is possible to fuse together more than two cyclohexane (or 
related) rings. Nature does this very efficiently in the synthesis of steroids, 
which are widely distributed in the animal kingdom. Cholestanol (39) 
possesses four fused rings; three are six-membered and one is five-mem- 
bered. In steroids such as 39 the rings are labelled A, B, c and D from 
the left, as drawn. In cholestanol, the A/B, B/C and C/D ring junctions 
are all trans. The two methyl groups at the ring junctions of 39 are termed 
‘angular methyl groups’. The closely related and important compound 
cholesterol (40), a necessary intermediate compound in the in vivo syn- 
thesis of steroid hormones, has a double bond in ring B; this induces a 
slight change in the geometry of cholesterol compared to 39. 
39 
a-face 
\ 
I 
JP 
I 
40 
In steroids, groups that are cis to the angular methyl groups are above 
the plane of the molecule, as drawn, and are termed p, whereas those 
that are below the plane and are trans to the angular methyl groups are 
known as a. These designations are used in naming steroids; thus chol- 
esterol (40) is also known as 5-cholesten-3P-01. 
Bile acids are found, as their name suggests, in bile, which is formed 
in the liver and then stored in the gall bladder. Of these acids, cholic 
acid (41) is the most abundant. A structural feature which cholic acid 
shares with the other bile acids is a cis A/B ring fusion, which is seen in 
the structure of 41. 

114 
Stereochemistry 
6.8 
Anomeric Effect 
We have discussed how substituents in chair cyclohexanes prefer to be 
equatorial rather than axial in order to avoid 1,3-diaxial interactions. The 
preferences are expressed as ‘conformational free energy differences’ or 
A values, and are mainly steric in origin. Certain sugars, such as the hex- 
ose D-(+)-glucose, exist in aqueous solution mainly as two cyclic struc- 
tures, 42 (36%) and 44 (64%), which are interconverted via an open-chair 
structure 43 (0.02%) as shown in Scheme 6.1. Anomers 42 and 44 have 
been isolated separately, and have different melting points and specific 
rotations. In addition, both 42 and 44 exist as chair forms, similar to 
cyclohexane except that one ring member is now oxygen. The minor cyclic 
structure 42, as drawn, has the OH group at C(1) axial and ‘down’; in 
this structure the OH group at C(1) is trans to the CH,OH group and 42 
is given the symbol a. Similarly, in 44 the OH group at C(l) is ‘up’ and 
equatorial; it is cis to the CH,OH group and this structure is given the 
symbol p. Structures 42 and 44 differ only in their configuration at C(l), 
which is the aldehyde carbon in the ring-open form 43. Carbon C(1) is 
known as the 
and 42 and 44 are known as a and p 
anomers, respectively. The anomeric carbon is easily recognized, as it is 
the only carbon bonded to two oxygen atoms. Compounds such as 42, 
the simplest member of which is MeOCH,OH, are called hemiacetals. 
Both 42 and 44 have been isolated as separate compounds. The a- 
anomer 42 has [aID = +112.2 and the p-anomer 44 has [a], = + 18.7. 
When either anomer is dissolved in water, it is slowly converted into the 
equilibrium mixture of anomers which has [a], = +52.6. With this infor- 
mation it is possible to determine the ratios of a- and P-anomers at equi- 
librium. If x is the percentage of a-anomer, one can write: x x 112.2 + 
(100 - x) x 18.7 = 100 x 52.6. Solving for x gives: x = 36.2%. With the 
justified assumption that the concentration of the open-chain form is ca. 
O%, it follows that the amounts of the cyclic forms present at equilibrium 
are: 42 (a-form) 36.2% and 44 (p-form) 63.8%. 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
I 15 
42 a-anomer (36%) 
[a]D 
+112.2 
CHO 
HO 
= H,$ZH 
HO 
CHO 
OH 
HO 
43 
II 
H T O H  
CH20H 
43 (0.02%) 
I1 
HO& 
HO 
HO 
OH 
44 p-anomer (64%) 
[ a ] ~  
+18.7 
45 a-anomer (69%) 
46 p-anomer (3 1 %) 
A further example is provided by the methyl mannosides 47 and 48. 
In 1% methanolic HCl, equilibration of the anomers was achieved and 
the ratio a$ = 94:6 (see Senderowitz et aL5). 
1 
HO 
OMe 
7- 
HO 
HO 
48 6% 
OMe 
47 94% 
In these and other examples, the percentage occupancy of the axial 
position by OH, OMe, OCOMe and Cl significantly exceeds expectations 
based on the corresponding cyclohexyl derivatives (see Table 6.2 for a 
list of substituent A values). This excess population of the axial position, 
first observed with sugars, is known as the 
it is exhibit- 
ed only by electronegative substituents. 
Scheme 6.1 
Similar behaviour, again mediated by an open-chain aldehyde form, 
has been observed with the related sugar D-mannose, in which the a- 
anomer 45 (69%) now predominates over the P-anomer 46 (31%). 
OH 

116 
Stereochemistry 
If most of the ring substituents are removed from a sugar, a 2-X-sub- 
stituted tetrahydropyran remains and the enhanced population of the 
conformation in which X is axial is observed here also, and is shown for 
the case of 49 and 50. The anomeric effect is now expressed as a free- 
energy difference, which is derived from the equilibrium axia1:equatori- 
a1 ratios of X in, for example, tetrahydropyrans (THPs) 49 and 50. 
Tetrahydropyrans are used in preference to cyclohexanes because the 
C-0 bond (ca. 0.14 nm) in a THP is shorter than its C-C counterpart 
(0.154 nm) in a cyclohexane. 
The shorter C-0 bond length in the THP has the effect of increasing 
1,3-diaxial repulsion. This means that, on steric grounds alone, the 2-X 
substituent in a THP would be equatorial to a greater extent than in a 
corresponding cyclohexane. Alkyl substituents, not being electronega- 
tive, do not exhibit an anomeric effect. These substituents show a greater 
preference for the equatorial position in THPs than in cyclohexanes. 
With the assumption that all substituents experience related pro-equa- 
torial steric effects as alkyl substituents, it is therefore possible to cali- 
brate the steric effects of the electronegative substituents. These steric 
effects are, of course, over-ridden by the opposing anomeric effect to 
give the observed axial preferences exhibited by THPs. 
The relevant data are collected in Table 6.3. From the A value and 
the corresponding AGO value for the 2X-THP when X = Me, one can 
generalize this finding for Me and conclude that AGo(THP) = 1.5 x A 
value for all substituents. It is then possible to deduce the 'real' value of 
the anomeric effect. From Table 6.3 one can see that the anomeric effect 
Table 6.3 Anomeric effects (in kJ mol-l) of electronegative substituents in 2-X-tetrahy- 
dropyrans 
Substituent (X) 
A value 
AG "(THP)a 
Anorneric 
effect 
H 
0 
Me 
7 
OH 
3.5 
OMe 
2.5 
OCOMe 
3 
CI 
2.5 
0 
12 
-0.5 
-3.6 
-2.0 
-7.5 
0 
0 
4.5 
7.3 
6.5 
11.25 
aNegative values for AG"(THP) indicate an axial preference 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
1 17 
increases with greater substituent electronegativity. In THPs and sugars, 
therefore, a given substituent, X, exerts two opposing effects: 
(1) A steric effect, which leads to a preferred equatorial population 
of x 
(2) An ‘electronegativity’ effect, which increases the axial population 
of x 
The anomeric effect is general in that broadly the same effects are 
shown, whether the saturated six-membered ring contains an oxygen, a 
nitrogen or a sulfur as the heteroatom. In the case of sulfur the C-S 
single bond (0.182 nm) is longer than its C-0 counterpart, and so 
1,3-diaxial interactions are less important in the thiacyclohexane case. 
Solutions of the trithiacyclohexane 51 do not contain any equatorial 
isomer. 
OCOPh 
Q o n  
0 0 
I 
R 
R 
52 
PS 
s-s 
51 
Although the anomeric effect was first recognized with the hemiacetal 
group in certain sugars, one explanation is found in the behaviour of 
acetals. In general, as the R groups show, an acetal has a gauche con- 
formation with respect to both C-0 bonds as in 52. Importantly, this 
places a lone pair on one oxygen, 
to the bond between 
the ‘central’ carbon and the other oxygen, that is the dihedral angle lone 
pair-0-C-0 
in 53 is 180”. This conformation is known to be optimum 
for conjugative electron release (Scheme 6.2). 
One interpretation of the origin of the anomeric effect can therefore 
be considered to be a two-electron stabilizing shift (Scheme 6.2) from a 
lone-pair of electrons on one oxygen to the vacant o* orbital of the adja- 
cent C-0 bond. Significantly, the antiperiplanar arrangement here (and 
elsewhere) permits maximum overlap of the relevant orbitals. The pre- 
ferred gauche conformation (Scheme 6.2, left-hand structure) only exists 
in heterocycles if the group attached to the ring is axial (see Kirby6). 

1 18 
Stereochemistry 
However, this interpretation is open to some doubt (see Box, Further 
Reading). One investigation that used compounds 54 and 55 gave results 
that are not in accord with the proposal above. 
I 
OMe 
OMe 
54 
55 
It is known that nitrogen is: (1) a very good conjugative electron donor 
(as shown for amides in Chapter 4) and certainly better than oxygen; (2) 
less electronegative than oxygen. One would expect from (1) that n+o* 
interactions would be stronger in 54 than in 52, and from (2) that 
dipole-dipole interactions would be weaker in 54. No enhanced axial 
population was observed for 54 with respect to 55. Values of the free 
energy difference between equatorial and axial conformations are 1.9 k 
0.2 kJ mol-' for 54 and 2.6 & 0.6 kJ mol-' for 55. The n+o* effect, if it 
is present in 54, is clearly not dominant. 
When the substituent in 54 or 55 is axial, and also in the case of the 
a-anomer of a sugar, it is clear that the destabilizing C-0 dipole effects, 
present when oxygen of OMe is equatorial, are minimized when this oxy- 
gen becomes axial. The absence of any significant dipolar repulsions in 
the latter case has been proposed as the cause of the anomeric effect (see 
Perrin et aZ.7). Though its cause is still uncertain the anomeric effect is 
well documented and it commonly has a magnitude of ca. 8-10 kJ mol-', 
and is solvent dependent. 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
1 I 9  

120 
Stereochemistry 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
121 

122 
Stereochemistry 

Stereoisomerism in Cyclic Structures 
123 

124 
Stereochemistry 

Substitution Reactions at 
Saturated Carbon 
7.1 
Nucleophilic Substitution 
7Am1 The S,2 Reaction 
In this type of reaction a group X at a saturated carbon is replaced by 
a group Y. Typically, X = C1, Br, I, +OH2, OSO,C,H,Me-4 (OTs), 
OSO,C,H,Br-4 (OBs) or +SR,; examples of good nucleophiles, Y, include 
HO-, RO- (R = alkyl), Me,N, -CN, RS- or I-. Note that iodide is both 
a good leaving group and a good nucleophile. This heterolytic reaction 
(which involves two-electron shifts) occurs by one of two mechanisms. 
125 

126 
Stereochemistry 
Scheme 7.1 
Scheme 7.2 
These are distinguishable by both kinetic and stereochemical criteria; the 
kinetic criteria are employed for the designation of the reactions as S,l 
(substitution, nucleophilic, unimolecular) and SN2 (substitution, nucleo- 
philic, bimolecular) . 
Firstly, we consider the SN2 reaction at saturated carbon, which is a 
one-step process that always proceeds with inversion of configuration. 
This reaction is shown in Scheme 7.1 with the inversion taking place at 
C(2) of compound 1. Inversion of configuration in what we now know 
as S,2 reactions was first suspected in 1895 by the Latvian-born chemist 
Walden. He reacted hydroxysuccinic acid (2, malic acid) with the acyl 
chlorides shown in Scheme 7.2, and realized that one of the steps shown 
in Scheme 7.2 was associated with inversion of configuration, but at that 
time he was unable to specify which. 
H 
H 
NrC: 
.,\C(2)-Br - 
N=C-C[2) 
--\ 
p 
1 
C02H 
C02H 
C02H 
CHCl - 
CH(0H) - 
CHCl 
I 
I 
I 
I 
soc12 
I 
PC15 
I 
Proof that an S,2 reaction proceeds with inversion of configuration 
was provided by Kenyon et al.' in a three-step reaction sequence 
in which, importantly, the starting material and the product were 
enantiomers. The reaction sequence is shown in Scheme 7.3, and has the 
following features: (1) compound 3 has a stereogenic centre; (2) it is con- 
verted into the 4-methylbenzenesulfonate (also known as toluene-4- 
sulfonate or tosylate, and abbreviated in structures as OTs) ester 4 by 
the appropriate acyl chloride in a reaction that does not involve bond 
cleavage at the stereogenic centre; one can therefore say that 4 and 3 
have the same configuration; (3) transformation of 4 into the ethanoate 
(acetate) 5 involves displacement of OTs by ethanoate ion, and it is here 
that inversion of configuration takes place. Note that ethanoate ion is a 
good nucleophile, in contrast to the poor nucleophilicity of ethanoic 
(acetic) acid; (4) the final step, hydrolysis of the ethanoate to produce 
6, occurs with retention of configuration, and this is now known 
to be the case under the conditions used for the hydrolysis of most 
ethanoates. 

Substitution Reactions at Saturated Carbon 
127 
Me 
Me 
I 
TsCl 
I 
PhCH2-CH-OH - 
PhCH2-CH-OTs 
3 [a]~+33.02 
4 [a]~+31.11 
-0COMe 
PhCH2-CH-Me - 
PhCHZ-CH-Me 
I 
OH 
OCOMe 
I 
-OH 
1 
6 [a]~-32.08 
5 [a]~-7.06 
TS = --SO2 
The above example, a so-called Kenyon-Phillips cycle, was one of a 
number that this group carried out, including some with the more power- 
ful nucleophile EtO-, and self-consistent results were obtained through- 
out. Apart from their role in providing proof that concerted nucleophilic 
reactions proceed with inversion of configuration, analogues of the 
Kenyon-Phillips cycles have been very useful in inverting the configura- 
tion of alcohols. 
After this work, a further elegant experiment was carried out by 
Hughes et aZ.,2 with the measurement of the second-order rate constant 
for a concerted nucleophilic substitution reaction, and this was done in 
two ways. The substrate was one enantiomer of 2-iodooctane (7) and the 
nucleophile was radioactive iodide anion, *I-, in propanone (acetone). 
The nature of the reaction is outlined in Scheme 7.4. Firstly, the rate 
constant was determined polarimetrically to give a rate constant ka; then 
the rate constant for exchange of *I- was determined; this is represent- 
ed by kex. The ratio of these rate constants within experimental error was 
2:l. 
Scheme 7.3 
7 
Scheme 7.4 
Now each act of nucleophilic substitution (1) occurs at a rate that is 
in accord with the observed value of kex and (2) produces a molecule of 
inverted configuration, and the polarimeter monitors this aspect of the 
reaction. For, say, the first 1% of reaction, the polarimeter will indicate 
98% of the original optical activity, as the solution now contains 2% of 
the racemic compound. This explains why the polarimetric rate constant 
is twice that for exchange of the radiolabel (see Hughes et aL2). 

128 
Stereochemistry 
Figure 7.1 Transition state for 
the S,2 reaction Y- + Me-X -+ 
Y-Me + X- 
13 
14 
Inversion of configuration always accompanies SN2 reactions; the 
transition state is shown schematically in Figure 7.1. An everyday anal- 
ogy of this inversion is shown by an umbrella that blows inside out on 
a windy day; of course, the umbrella has more spokes than a carbon 
atom has valencies. This analogy has some further merit in that the 
nucleophile, the ‘central’ carbon and the leaving group are collinear, and 
remain so in the transition state for the reaction. 
The S,2 reaction is almost always observed for primary halogenoalk- 
anes (alkyl halides) 8, tosylates 9 and other related compounds. Inversion 
of stereochemistry in the SN2 reaction of primary compounds has been 
investigated by the use of deuterium to create a stereogenic centre in, for 
example, 10. 
RCH2-X 
Me-C( 
I
D
 
8 X=hal 
X 
- 
9 X = O S O * v M e  
10 
Most secondary compounds, such as 11 and 12, will undergo the SN2 
reaction (in which the substituents are alkyl groups). When at least one 
of the groups is aromatic there is some tendency for the group X, the 
leaving group, to leave of its own accord (this is the basis of the SN1 
reaction, Section 7.1.3) rather than to be expelled by the nucleophile in a 
concerted S,2 reaction. However, the experiments that defined the stereo- 
chemistry of the SN2 reaction were performed on secondary substrates. 
For tertiary substrates, e.g. t-butyl chloride (13, 1-chloro-1,l- 
dimethylethane), significant non-bonded steric repulsion prevents an 
incoming nucleophile from approaching carbon C( 1) from the rear to 
form the collinear arrangement of atoms required in the S,2 reaction. 
For this reason, tertiary substrates instead undergo the alternative S, 1 
pathway for substitution. 
This question of collinearity is paramount for SN2 reactions. There 
are even some primary substrates for which the SN2 reaction occurs very 
slowly on account of severe non-bonded interactions experienced by the 
nucleophile as it attempts to gain access to the carbon that is bonded to 
the leaving group while maintaining the necessary collinearity shown in 
Figure 7.1. One important example is neopentyl chloride (14, 1 -chloro- 
2,2-dimethylpropane). 

Substitution Reactions at Saturated Carbon 
129 
Table 7.1 Relative rate constants for the reaction R-l + CI- + R-CI + I- in 
propanone 
R 
Rate 
Me 
1 .oo 
Et 
0.089 
Bui 
0.0034 
CH,But 
1.2 x 10-6 
~ 
~~~~~ 
~~ 
Table 7.1 shows relative rate constants for halide exchange reactions 
in acetone, and the progressively slower reactions observed as one looks 
down this table are purely a reflection of the difficulty in achieving the 
requisite collinear three-atom unit (cf. Figure 7.1). 
Caged compounds in which the leaving group is located at a bridge- 
head position, e.g. 15, do not undergo S,2 reactions for two reasons: (1) 
the cage structure prevents approach of the nucleophile to C(l) by the 
required route; (2) even if it could, it is not possible to invert the con- 
figuration of the carbon that is bonded to the leaving group. 
In all the cases covered so far, the nucleophile acts as an entity that 
is separate from the leaving group X, and the carbon, C,, that the nucleo- 
phile attacks. Can the nucleophile be part of the same molecule as C, 
and X? Such a reaction would, of course, be a concerted nucleophilic 
displacement, but since both the nucleophile and the leaving group 
are part of the same molecule, the term S,2 is not in order. In such 
intramolecular displacements, two sub-categories can be envisaged. 
Eschenmoser's group describe these in a paper (see Tenud et aL3), and 
the schematic representations are termed exocyclic (Figure 7.2a) and 
endocyclic (Figure 7.2b), respectively. In Figure 7.2, N and L refer to 
the nucleophile and leaving group, respectively, and Ca is the carbon that 
is subject to nucleophilic attack. 
exocyclic 
endocyclic 
There is little restriction on intramolecular exocyclic substitutions; this 
is because N, C, and L can readily become collinear. This does not hold, 
however, in the case of the endocyclic reaction. An important question 
is: what is the smallest size of ring in the transition state for a concert- 
ed endocyclic substitution? 
Br 56 
15 
Figure 7.2 

130 
Stereochemistry 
Eschenmoser's group addressed this question with the carbanion 16 
and its hexadeuterio counterpart 17, in which two separate methyl groups 
are labelled as CD, and the carbanion brings about a concerted nucleo- 
philic displacement, endocyclic or exocyclic, at a sulfonate methyl group. 
An equimolar mixture of 16 and 17 was allowed to react and the car- 
banion acts as a nucleophile; the sulfonate ester acts as the leaving group. 
The product can be described as Do, D, or D, according to the number 
of deuterium atoms that it contains. If the reaction proceeds by an endo- 
cyclic substitution, which is intramolecular, the deuterium labelled 
groups will not be separated and the product distribution will be Do and 
D, in equal amounts, i.e. D,:D,:D, is 1:O:l. 
.Me 
16 
17 
An intermolecular reaction of the above equimolar mixture will give 
mainly D,, but also some Do and D, since in this case the ion reacts with 
either an unlabelled molecule (no deuterium), or a labelled molecule (six 
deuterium atoms). The distribution from an intermolecular reaction is 
given by the ratio D,:D,:D, = 1 :2: 1. The two mechanisms can readily be 
distinguished by mass spectrometric analysis of the product. The result 
indicated that the reaction was intermolecular. The reason for this is that 
in the transition state for substitution it is not possible to have a collinear 
arrangement for the atoms, C-C-0, in 16 that corresponds to N, C, and 
L in Figure 7.2b. 
This raises the question: what is the smallest ring size that can be tol- 
erated in the transition state for the intramolecular endocyclic nucleo- 
philic substitution as shown in Figure 7.2b? The answer was shown by 
two experiments. 
Firstly, an alkaline solution of the thebaine derivative 18 is rapidly 
converted into 19 by a reaction that involves an eight-membered endo- 
cyclic transition state, if one counts around the smallest available ring, 
Secondly, in a systematic investigation, low concentrations of the amino 
ester 20 were converted into 21 to the extent of 16% by an intramolec- 
ular nine-membered endocyclic pathway. The lower homologue 22, how- 
ever, undergoes a corresponding reaction exclusively by way of an 

Substitution Reactions at Saturated Carbon 
131 
intermolecular reaction. It is interesting that whereas the endocyclic 
eight-membered transition state cannot be formed from 20, it is not a 
problem in the reaction of 18, presumably because here the constraining 
multiple ring system assists in bringing about the necessary collinear 
alignment, corresponding to N, C, and L in Figure 7.2b (see King and 
McGarrity” and Kirby et aL5). 
Me0 
N-Me 
OH 
18 
(CH&S02 -0Me 
a
C
H
2
 
/ NMe2 
20 n = 2  
22 n = l  
7.1.2 The S,2’ Reaction 
When an allylic compound such as 23 is subjected to nucleophilic attack 
as shown in Scheme 7.5, the product is that of the S,2 reaction. If the 
allylic compound now has the structure shown in 24, there is significant 
steric hindrance to approach of the nucleophile to the chlorine-bearing 
carbon. There is, however, an alternative site, available to the nucle- 
ophile, and this is shown in Scheme 7.6. 
-OH 
Me2C=CH 
Me2C=CH 
\ 
\ 
CH2-Cl 
CH2-OH 
23 
I 
I 
Scheme 7.5 
Me - 
HzC-CH=CHMe 
I 
H2C-CH-CH 
0
1
 
C 
HNEt2 
25 
‘3 
24 
Et2NH 
Scheme 7.6 

132 
Stereochemistry 
This involves attack by a nucleophile at the terminal carbon of the 
double bond with the leaving group, chloride, expelled by an intramol- 
ecular relay of electrons along the molecule. As a result, the product is 
25. A similar series of electron shifts is involved in the initial step of the 
Michael addition. 
The stereochemistry of the S,2' reaction has been shown to be vari- 
ously syn (the nucleophile and leaving group are on the same face of the 
allylic system) or anti, depending on the nature of the nucleophile and 
leaving group. For example, the cis isomer 26 with piperidine gave 27, 
in a clean syn allylic displacement, whereas Na+-SPr gave a ca. 2:l mix- 
ture of isomers in which the trans isomer 28 was the major product: This 
trend toward anti substitution with RS- is more pronounced (almost 
exclusive) in the acyclic case 29. 
26 
27 
(Ar = aromatic group) 
28 
29 
30 
7.1.3 The S,1 Reaction 
In contrast to the SN2 reaction, which always shows clear-cut inversion 
of configuration at the carbon that is attacked by the nucleophile, the 
stereochemical outcome of the SNl reaction is variable. 
In this second type of nucleophilic substitution at saturated carbon, 
a two-stage reaction occurs in which the leaving group departs to give a 
carbocation (that is, two electrons short of an octet) as an intermediate. 

Substitution Reactions at Saturated Carbon 
133 
The S,1 reaction shown in Scheme 7.7 consists of a slow initial step fol- 
lowed by a second and rapid step in which the carbocation regains its 
octet of electrons by reaction with a nucleophile. 
The S,l reaction is almost always followed by tertiary halides, and 
also by secondary halides and, for example, tosylates, especially when at 
least one of the substituents is an aryl group. From this latter case the 
carbocation is now benzylic. The nature of the intermediate carbocation 
in an S,l reaction is illustrated in Figure 7.3, which shows the three sub- 
stituents in a coplanar arrangement and with an empty p-orbital. This 
structure provides a clue as to the stereochemistry of the subsequently 
formed tetrahedral product. 
If the carbocation has a long life, one would expect a racemic product. 
The nucleophile, which may include solvent, e.g. ethanol, can approach 
with equal probability from either face. One can describe the carbocat- 
ion as prochiral (see Chapter 8), though it is not easy to realize large 
preferences for one enantiomer over the other in the product. However, 
it has been known foi some time that the product is not always fully 
racemic, and an example is the ethanoate (acetate) ester derived from 
reaction of one enantiomer of 1-phenylethyl tosylate (31) with ethanoic 
(acetic) acid; such reactions are known as acetolyses. The product 33 is 
formed with ca. 12% net inversion. Since ethanoic acid (MeC0,H) is a 
poor nucleophile (unlike the ethanoate anion, MeCOJ, this stereo- 
chemical result is most likely to arise from shielding of one face of the 
carbocation as it develops, by the anion -0Ts. The shielding means that 
the incoming solvent, acting as a nucleophile, will attack the carbocat- 
ion to give product with the net inversion stated. 
In 
Ph, 
/H 
Me/'\X 
31 X=OTs 
32 X=C1 
slightly later pape 
Ph, 
,OCOMe 
But\ 
,Ph 
H/"X 
33 
34 X=OTs 
35 X=OAc 
C 
Me' 
'H 
Steigman and Hammett6 found a correspon- 
ding figure of 15% net inversion for the product of acetolysis of the 
corresponding chloride 32. Winstein and Morse' reported a value of 10% 
net inversion for the ethanoate 35, obtained after reaction of 34 with 
ethanoic acid. 
7.1.4 S,1 Reactions with Retention of Configuration 
The preferred structure of a carbocation is planar, and the nature of the 
bridgehead position is such that any carbocation formed at the bridge- 
head is unable to become planar. This raises the question of how easy 
is it to form a bridgehead carbocation? The role of kinetics is simificant 
R-X 
R+ + X -  
R+ + Y- + 
R-Y 
Scheme 7.7 
Figure 7.3 Diagram of a carbo- 
cation with three R groups copla- 
nar and a vacant p-orbital 

134 
Stereochemistry 
X 
36 X=OTs 
37 X = H  
here. Consider the bridgehead adamantyl tosylate (36). The parent 
hydrocarbon adamantane, C,,H,,, can be constructed with models from 
the all-axial conformation of cis,& 1,3,5-trimethylcyclohexane; if one 
bonds the three methyl groups of this molecule to a single carbon, 
adamantane (37) results. As inspection of a model reveals, there are four 
fused chair cyclohexane rings in adamantane. Adamantane is the basis 
of the diamond structure and has an extremely high melting point, 268 
"C, for its relative molecular mass. 
In the SNl reaction of 36, departure of the tosylate group leaves a car- 
bocation that cannot become planar. The molecule 36 responds to this 
situation by forming the carbocation more slowly than might be expect- 
ed for an analogous acyclic molecule. However, the SN1 reaction does 
occur; this is in contrast to the corresponding SN2 reactions at bridge- 
head positions which are totally ruled out. The slowest S,l reaction from 
a tertiary bridgehead substrate is exhibited by the tricyclyl structure 38, 
whose rate constant for ionization is ca. 10-14 that of 36. The rate retar- 
dation is almost solely due to the bond angles at C(4) of 38 being more 
'tied-back' than in 36; that is, they are further from the 120" that is pre- 
ferred for carbocations (see Sherrod et aZ.*). 
Interestingly, there is one substrate that is predicted by molecular 
mechanics calculations to ionize still more slowly than 38. This com- 
pound is 39, a derivative of the hydrocarbon known as cubane, and in 
which the CCC bond angles are 90". However, in contrast to 36, and 
especially 38, the ester 39 undergoes SNl reaction in methanol much 
faster than expected. The product from 39 is the corresponding methyl 
ether 40 (see Eaton9). 
One of the reasons that tosylates, or related sulfonate esters, are 
employed as leaving groups rather than, say, chlorides is that from an 
enantiomerically pure alcohol, with a stereogenic carbon that is bonded 
to OH, the tosylate is also enantiomerically pure since the bond between 
oxygen and the stereogenic carbon is not broken. 
Chloride is a convenient leaving group, and alkyl chlorides (chloroalka- 
nes) are usually prepared from an alcohol, by reaction with thionyl chlo- 
ride (sulfur dichloride oxide), SOC1,. The reaction is outlined in Scheme 
7.8; step (1) involves formation of a chlorosulfite ester 41; this contains a 
good leaving group, -0-S(0)-Cl, 
which is displaced with inversion of con- 
figuration to give 42 and a chloride ion which then acts as a nucleophile 
toward 42; the alkyl chloride (chloroalkane) 43 is formed, again with inver- 
sion of configuration. Therefore the overall formation of 42 from ROH 
involves two inversions of configuration, and this corresponds to net reten- 
tion. Butan-2-01 is known to be converted into 2-chlorobutane with ca. 
98% retention of configuration by thionyl chloride in dioxane. 
The bicyclic brosylate (4-bromobenzenesulfonate) 44 undergoes acet- 
olysis to give ethanoate 46, with complete retention of configuration. 
x 
A @  
OTs 
39 X=OTS 
4o X = M e  
38 

Substitution Reactions at Saturated Carbon 
135 
0 
II 
41 
R-OH 
+ SOCl2 - 
R-0-S-Cl 
+ C1- 
n 
n+ 
0 
0, 
,O-R 
+ SO2+ C1- 
u 0 I  n f n  
R-0-S-Cl - 
This sequence of events is explained as follows. The leaving group is 
expelled with assistance of the suitably oriented n;-bond present in the 
same molecule, as indicated in Scheme 7.9; a delocalized carbocation 45 
is formed. Note that the electrons of the x-bond of 44 act as an internal 
nucleophile, to produce 45 in a concerted reaction with inversion of con- 
figuration. The reaction of 45 to give 46 can again be regarded as a con- 
certed reaction with inversion of configuration, in which two partial 
bonds to C(7) in 45 act as a leaving group with respect to the incoming 
ethanoic acid as nucleophile. In the bromination of alkenes, a broadly 
similar function of the double bond is observed during formation of a 
bromonium ion and its subsequent conversion to the trans-dibromide 
(see Section 4.7). 
Evidence of a kinetic nature points to involvement of the double bond 
as shown in Scheme 7.9. The rate constant for the acetolysis of 44 is ca. 
10" greater than that for 47, because of the involvement of the electrons 
of the n;-bond in facilitating the ionization of 44. A small note of caution 
is in order here: since the C-C double bond is shorter than its single 
bond counterpart, the free energies of 44 and 47 will be different. 
However, any difference is relatively small, and will not account for the 
observed rate constant ratio. 
The much greater than expected rate constant for acetolysis of 44 (note 
Scheme 7.8 
Scheme 7.9 

136 
Stereochemistry 
that the rate-limiting step is ionization of 44) together with the net reten- 
tion of configuration are brought about by the optimally positioned IT- 
bond. For this reason, rate constant enhancement by 44 is probably the 
most dramatic example attributed to a n;-bond. 

Substitution Reactions at Saturated Carbon 
137 

138 
Stereochemistty 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic 
and Diastereotopic Groups 
and Faces: Use of NMR 
Spectroscopy in 
S tereochemistry 
139 

140 
Stereochemistry 
8. l Prochiral Molecules, Enantiotopic Groups and 
Faces 
This chapter is concerned in part with prochirality. In order to define 
terms we consider sp3 and sp2 hybridized carbons separately. 
8.1 .I Prochirality at sp3 Hybridized Carbons 
Consider the case of an sp3 hybridized carbon bonded (1) to two groups, 
typically protons that are chemically identical under achiral conditions, 
and (2) to two further groups that are identical neither to the groups 
above, i.e. the protons, nor to each other. An example is provided by 
ethanol (1). The two hydrogen atoms in 1 that are bonded to C(l) are 
termed 
This is because replacement of each of these hydro- 
gens, separately, by a group other than the CH, and OH groups, already 
present, will give enantiomers. For the purpose of definition, it is usual 
to replace the hydrogens bonded to C(1), separately, by deuterium, D. 
The two molecules so obtained are 2 and 3. Since compound 2 has (S) 
configuration, the H atom that was replaced by D in 2 is given the sym- 
bol H, in 4. In the same way, 3 has (R) configuration, and in 4, there- 
fore, the symbol H, is given to the hydrogen that was replaced by D 
to give 3. 
Me 
Me 
Me 
I 
I 
I 
A molecule such as 1 is said to be 
and the H, and H, atoms 
in 4 are called pro-R and pro-S, respectively. The same analysis can be 
pursued for any molecule of type 5 (with A not the same as B) in which 
the X groups are enantiotopic. Other examples of prochirality include 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
141 
the methyl groups of dimethyl sulfoxide (6) and the oxygens of methyl 
phenyl sulfone (7). The enantiotopic hydrogens in 4 are to be contrast- 
ed with those of, for example, dichloromethane (8). In 8, the identity of 
the two chlorine atoms means that the hydrogens in this molecule are 
identical under all conditions, and they are said to be 
Hansonl introduced the term prochiral and related definitions applied to 
both sp3- and sp2-hybridized carbons. 
A 
C1 
8.1.2 Prochirality at sp2 Hybridized Carbons 
Organic molecules that contain sp2 hybridized carbons can also be 
prochiral if the substituent pattern is correct. An example is provided by 
phenylethanone (acetophenone, 9), which has three different groups 
attached to the carbonyl carbon. After reduction with, say, LiAlH,, the 
product is the chiral alcohol 10 and a 50:50 mixture of enantiomers is 
observed. The same racemic mixture is obtained from the reaction of the 
Grignard reagent MeMgBr with benzaldehyde (11). In contrast, the 
product of reduction of propanone (12) with LiAlH, is propan-2-01 (13), 
which is not chiral. 
Therefore, an sp2 hybridized carbon bonded to three different groups 
will become chiral as the result of an addition reaction (which may also 
be a reduction) that results in formation of a bond between the sp2 
hybridized carbon and a fourth group that differs from the other three. 
Such sp2 hybridized carbons are called prochiral. This raises an inter- 
esting point of nomenclature. A chiral molecule that has four different 
groups attached to a carbon atom is said to have a 
cent re, 
this term being preferred to ‘chiral centre’. However, a prochiral mole- 
cule is said to have a prochiral centre; the term ‘pro-stereogenic’, pre- 
ferred by Helmcheq2 is not yet widely adopted. 
The racemic mixture that results from 9 and LiAlH, arises because 
one enantiomer is formed by attack of LiAlH, at the top face of 9, and 
the other from attack at the bottom face. It is possible to characterize 
the faces of the carbonyl carbon of 9 by means of a modification of the 
Cahn-Ingold-Prelog (CIP) RIS (rectuslsinister) convention. 

i42 
Stereochemistry 
Consider the case of phenylethanone, re-drawn in 14; the CIP sequenc- 
ing of substituents is 0 > Ph > Me. One looks down on the carbonyl 
group from the top face, and since the priorities decrease in an anti- 
clockwise sense, this face is described as Si (the first two letters of sinister). 
Looking at the carbonyl carbon from the bottom face, the substituent 
priorities decrease in a clockwise sense, and so the lower face, as drawn, 
of the carbonyl carbon is described as Re (the first two letters of rectus). 
Previously, the symbols used were re and si; now, Re and Si are pre- 
ferred (see Eliel and Wileq3 Helmchen2 and Aitken and Kilenyi4). Both 
Eliel and Wilen and Helmchen suggest that re and si be used in a dif- 
ferent context, which is not relevant here. 
The RelSi symbols can similarly be applied to the carbon atoms that 
make up C=C double bonds. If one considers the alkene 15, the top face 
can be described by Re-Re and the lower face by Si-Si. (E)-Butenedioic 
acid (fumaric acid, 16) has a top face configuration (as drawn) of Si-Si, 
and the lower face has a configuration of Re-Re. 
A molecule such as 14 is said to have two enantiotopic faces. Attack 
by, say, LiAlH, at the Re face will produce one enantiomer, and attack 
at the Si face will produce the other. There is no correlation between the 
configuration of the carbonyl face and that of the tetrahedral product 
after addition of a reagent. It all depends on the priority rating of the 
added reagent with respect to the groups in the original carbonyl 
compound. 
Consider attack at the lower, Re, face of the carbonyl carbon of 14. 
When the reagent is LiAlH,, the product is 17, which has (S) configu- 
ration. In contrast, attack on the same Re face of 14 by EtMgBr gives 
the tertiary alcohol 18, which has (R) configuration. 
ph_ 
M e ~ z  
phc ,OH 
Me\, 
,OH 
C 
C 
I 
I 
H 
Et 
(S)-17 
(R)-18 
When a carbonyl carbon is attached to two identical groups as in 
methanal (formaldehyde) or propanone (acetone), attack at the top face 
is identical to attack at the bottom. Therefore attack at either face (by 
an achiral reagent) gives a product that is achiral. The carbonyl-con- 
taining group is called homotopic. 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
143 
8.2 
Diastereotopic Compounds 
If one takes a molecule such as 19, in which C(2) is a stereogenic cen- 
tre, and separately replaces Ha with D, and then Hb with D, one obtains 
20 and 21, respectively. The compounds 20 and 21 are diastereoisomers, 
and so the protons Ha and Hb in 19 are termed 
This name 
gives an indication that the reactivity of Ha and Hb toward achiral 
reagents is different. 
In addition, as protons Ha and Hb in 19 are chemically inequivalent, 
they necessarily, in principle, experience different magnetic shielding, and 
so have different chemical shifts in achiral solvents. Since Ha and Hb are 
magnetically non-equivalent, one can observe a coupling constant 2JHaHb 
between these nuclei. However, the shielding differences between Ha and 
Hb are generally small, and there are instances in which it is zero. When 
this happens, Ha and Hb have the same chemical shift and, of course, no 
coupling is now observed between these protons. Where diastereotopic 
protons show the same chemical shift, they are said to be accidentally 
equivalent or 
and where they have different chemical shifts 
the protons are described as 
In the similar way that 19 has diastereotopic protons, it is possible for 
by the acyclic ketone 22, as well as by camphor (23). These two mole- 
cules both have one or more stereogenic centres. 
Gunther? 
22 
23 
Ph 
I 
H-C-Me 
I 
OH 
molecules to have diastereotopic faces. Examples of these are provided 
The effect of chirality on the NMR spectrum is also discussed in 
c=o 
I 
J=$ 
0 

144 
Stereochemistry 
Scheme 8.1 
Scheme 8.2 
26 
Me 
- 
HO /I./, 
H 
27 
8.3 
Reactivity Difference of Enantiotopic 
Hydrogens and Faces in Enzyme-mediated 
Reactions 
Enantiotopic hydrogens react at identical rates in an achiral environ- 
ment. In order to bring about a difference in their reactivity, an exter- 
nal chiral influence has to be involved. This can be provided by enzymes, 
as shown in the following two reactions. 
Conventional laboratory oxidation of the monodeuteriated ethanol 24 
gives ethanal (acetaldehyde), which contains 50% of the deuterium pres- 
ent in 24 (Scheme 8.1). However, enzymes are chiral, and enzymic oxi- 
dation (by yeast alcohol dehydrogenase and NAD’) 
removes H, 
exclusively in the oxidation of ethanol to ethanal; H, is labelled as ‘D’ 
in Scheme 8.2. Clearly, the molecule of ethanol is presented to the chi- 
ral enzyme so as to form a unique diastereoisomeric complex in which 
only the H, proton can be removed in the oxidative elimination. 
u 
24 
50% 
50% 
HO 
25 
u 
b . H  
n 
H’ 
Addition to the two faces of a carbonyl group shows a similar dual 
behaviour. Firstly, reduction of ethanal (25) with LiAlD, gives ethanol 
in which the H, and H, sites are both populated with deuterium to the 
extent of 50%. This is because reduction occurs with equal ease at the 
Re and Si faces. However, it has been shown that the deuteriated ethanal 
26 undergoes reduction with yeast alcohol dehydrogenase and its coen- 
zyme NADH to give exclusively the (8 
enantiomer 27 (despite their 
name, dehydrogenases are effective in both oxidations and reductions). 
Formation of 27 arises because of delivery of hydrogen exclusively to 
the Re face of the carbonyl carbon in the enzyme complex. 
Similarly, (8-phenylmethanol (benzyl alcohol, 29) is produced exclu- 
sively by reduction of deuteriated benzaldehyde 28 by the liver alcohol 
dehydrogenase-NAD+ reduction system. 
Ph 
29 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
145 
With this background, one can ask: what are NAD+ and NADH? These 
are complex chiral molecules, and the part structure of NAD+ is shown 
in 30. NAD+ contains two ribose sugar units, one of which is shown in 
order to demonstrate that the aromatic ring is prochiral. A more con- 
densed structure is shown in 31 and the product of reduction of NAD' 
is 32, known as NADH. In 32, the two hydrogens Ha and Hb are 
diastereotopic because R is chiral. Biological oxidations of organic com- 
pounds that involve NAD+ and an enzyme catalyst always proceed 
with completely diastereoselective transfer of hydrogen (with its bond- 
ing electrons) to one face of 30. 
30 
31 
32 
The face to which the hydrogen is delivered is a function of the reac- 
tion. Oxidation of glucose with NAD+ and enzymes from the liver gives 
32, in which the transferred hydrogen is located exclusively at Hb. On 
the other hand, enzymic oxidation of ethanol, now using NAD' and 
enzymes from yeast, gives 32, in which the transferred hydrogen is locat- 
ed exclusively at Ha. 
8.4 
Non-enzymatic Selectivity in Addition to C=O 
and C=C Bonds 
In the previous section we have seen that enzyme-mediated reductions 
of carbonyl groups proceed with complete facial selectivity. Enzymes 
are complicated chiral molecules and synthetic organic chemistry is 
challenged to come consistently close to matching their selectivity. What 
we do here is merely point to some of the general directions that are 
followed in order to achieve selectivity. 
Within the context of ketones and alkenes as substrates one must do 
either of the following: 
(1) Set up a prochiral ketone (or alkene) with structural features that 
direct the reagent preferentially to one face. In the product, it will prob- 
ably be necessary to have present in the molecule the features that made 
one face more attractive to the incoming reagent. Clearly, for purposes 
of synthesis this may not be desirable 

146 
Stereochemistry 
H 
33 
OH 
34 
(2) Alternatively, one can structure the reagent so that it attacks the 
double bond of either a carbonyl or an alkene at one face preferentially. 
Examples of both reaction types, one with a carbonyl and one with an 
alkene, are now given. 
In the case of camphor, shown as the (1R) enantiomer in 23, the exo 
face is Re, and is shielded to a greater extent than the lower endo face, 
which is Si. Note that in the enantiomer of 23 the upper face is still exo, 
but is now described as Si, and the lower endo face is Re. In 23, the 
greater shielding of the exo face suggests that reduction with LiAlH, 
involves preferential delivery of hydride to the endo, Re, face. It is found 
that the major product 33 has the OH group exo (2R) and the ratios of 
33:34 are 75:25. A more bulky reducing agent, LiA1(OBut3)H, is more 
selective still, and gives a 99:l ratio of 33:34. 
If a prochiral ketone or alkene does not have any significant inbuilt 
structural characteristics that induce a reagent to attack one face or the 
other, it is still possible to achieve a high degree of facial selectivity, and 
so one can obtain a product of high enantiomeric purity. An example is 
provided by the asymmetric hydroboration of prochiral alkenes. 
The background to this method is provided by the hydroboration of 
alkenes with diborane, B2H, (Section 4.8.2). A borane from the very 
bulky chiral alkene a-pinene (35) is 36, which is of general form R,BH. 
This borane is monomeric, and is formed by cis addition of diborane to 
the double bond in each of two a-pinene molecules. In this chiral dibor- 
ane, the bulk of a-pinene prevents formation of a trialkylborane of type 
R3B. However, addition of R2BH 36 (Scheme 8.3) to a smaller prochi- 
ral alkene occurs preferentially to one face, and is the basis of a syn- 
thesis of alcohols with a high degree of enantiomeric purity. 
Scheme 8.3 
35 
36 (R2BH) 
37 
H 
38 
H 
39 
For example, (G-but-2-ene (37) reacts with the chiral dialkylborane 
36 to produce 38 as the result of the addition of the borane to the upper 
(Re) face of C(2), or the equivalent lower (Re) face of C(1). Conventional 
work-up of the borane 38 with alkaline hydrogen peroxide (Scheme 8.3) 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
147 
gave 39. This was predominantly of R configuration; an enantiomeric 
excess of 87% (or an enantiomeric ratio of 14.4:l) was observed. This is 
a remarkably high figure when one considers the relatively modest bias 
provided by the hydrogen versus methyl differential on (q-but-2-ene. 
Another example is provided by reaction of phenylethene (styrene, 40) 
with the reagent 41 in methanol. Reagent 41 contains a chiral aromatic 
group (Ar*) and selenium is also bonded to the trifluoromethylsulfonate 
(triflate) group, OSO,CF,, which is similar to, but better than, tosylate 
as a leaving group. Reaction takes place as indicated in Scheme 8.4, to 
give the chiral seleniranium ion intermediate 42 (see Wirth et aL6). This 
ion is of the same general form as a bromonium ion (Section 4.7). Ion 
42 then reacts with methanol, as indicated, and the product 
43 is formed with a diastereoisomeric ratio (dr) of 96:4 in favour of the 
isomer 43. 
Ar* 
I 
Ph. 
PhCHZCH2 + Ar*SeOSOZCF3 
Hdc-CH2SeAr* 
I 
OMe 
43 
40 
41 
Me 
Ar* = $ 
42 
Scheme 8.4 
8.5 
Stereochemical Information from NMR 
Spectroscopy 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy can provide stereo- 
chemical information, both conformational and configurational, as 
described in the following sections. A working knowledge of NMR spec- 
troscopy is assumed. 
8.5.1 Vicinal Coupling Constants 
The EIZ ratio in a mixture of disubstituted alkenes can readily be deter- 
mined from the relevant integrated signals once the absorptions have 
been assigned. We can use the knowledge that when substituents are 
more electronegative than hydrogen, vicinal coupling constants in cis- or 
(2)-alkenes of type 44 are in the range 3JHH 
= 7-1 1 Hz, whereas the cor- 
responding values for trans- or (E)-alkenes such as 45 are given by 3JHH 
= 12-18 Hz (see Friebolin’). The magnitudes of the coupling constants 
vary slightly with electronegativity of the substituents, but the above 3J 
values for (E) and (2) disubstituted alkenes do not overlap, and so 
assignments can be made with confidence. 

148 
Stereochemistry 
H 
C02H 
H\ , H\ 
/ 
/c=c, 
,c=c, 
H\ 
/ 
,c=c, 
H 
H\ 
/ 
,c=c \ C02H 
C1 
H 
F 
H
F
 
F 
c1 
44 
45 
46 
47 
The same order holds when the vicinal coupling constants are between 
a proton and fluorine. This is shown in the cis coupling constant 3JHF 
between -4 and 20 Hz in molecules such as 46, and the corresponding 
trans coupling constants 3JHF 
between 20 and 100 Hz in, for example, 
47 and related molecules. 
In saturated cyclic molecules that are rigid, information about struc- 
ture can be obtained from vicinal coupling constants 3JHH. 
In cyclo- 
hexane, for example, there are three vicinal coupling constants and the 
values were determined at -103 "C, at which temperature ring inversion 
is very slow. To simplify matters, the compound used was labelled with 
deuterium at four adjacent carbons and is named 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4-0ctadeu- 
teriocyclohexane (see Garbisch and Griffith8). 
The proton-proton coupling constants were measured and found to be: 
generally observed values for conformationally rigid cyclohexanes 
ca. 2-5 Hz. 
Karplus9 recognized that vicinal coupling constants between protons 
Ha and Hb are a function of the dihedral angle Ha-C-C-Hb, denoted by 
41, and this angular dependence is shown in Figure 8.1. The value of 3JHH 
is slightly higher at 180", and the graph in Figure 8.1 is closely repro- 
duced by the Karplus (sometimes referred to as the Karplus-Conroy) 
equations (1) and (2) (see Breitmaier'O and Haasnoot et al."). In an 
unknown molecule that has a rigid ring structure of, say, six carbons, it 
is possible to determine dihedral angles to within approximately 5" from 
a knowledge of vicinal coupling constants, if electronegativity effects are 
taken into account. 
- 
- 13.1 Hz; 3JH,x-Heq 
= 3.65 Hz; and )JHeqPHeq 
= 2.96 Hz. More 
are in the ranges 3JHax-Hax 
= ca. 10-1 3 Hz and 3JH,,-Heq 
and 3J Heq-Heq - 
JHax-Hax 
- 
(1) 
3JHH = Acos2@ - 0.28 
where A = 8.5 for 41 < 90". 
(2) 
3JHH = Bcos2$ - 0.28 
where B = 9.5 for 90" < 4 < 180". 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
149 
Degrees of rotation 
8.5.2 Diastereomeric Compounds and Interactions: 
Enantiomer Recognition 
Analogously, one can determine the relative amounts of two diastereoiso- 
mers, of general formula 48, by integration of a pair of comparable 
signals in a mixture. The data can be expressed as either (1) a diastere- 
omeric ratio or (2) a diastereomeric excess in a similar manner to 
enantiomeric excess. The diastereomeric excess (de) of one diastereoiso- 
mer, X, over another, Y, is given in equation (3). Although one can deter- 
mine the de values from NMR spectroscopy, no information on the 
particular configurations is obtained. 
%X-%Y 
%X + %Y 
de = 
(3) 
In a normal NMR experiment in, say, CDC1, or CCl,, it is not possible 
to distinguish enantiomers or estimate enantiomeric purities. However, 
by the use of three separate techniques that all involve some diastereo- 
meric component, it is possible to determine enantiomeric purities of, for 
example, alcohols, esters, ketones and amines. 
(CSA) in which one relies 
on diastereomeric interactions, or complexations, to give a chemical shift 
difference for the two enantiomers. The method was first used to demon- 
strate 19F 
(Section 8.2) for the enantiomers of 2,2,2-trifluo- 
ro- 1 -phenylethanol (49) in the presence of (S)-(-)- 
1 -phenylethylamine 
(50) (see Pirkle12). CSA-induced chemical shift differences in 'H NMR 
spectra are generally small. 
(CLSR). Addition of certain lanthanide chelates, most commonly those 
of europium(III), to a solution of an organic compound in CDCl, or 
Firstly, one can use a 
The second technique is to use a 
Figure 8.1 Karplus curve show- 
ing dependence of the vicinal 
coupling constant 3J,a-,b 
(in 
Hz) on the dihedral angle 9 
H 
C02Me 
48 
OH 
Ph 
F $ + P h  
H+NH2 
H 
Me 
49 
50 

150 
Stereochemistry 
CCl, brings about large downfield shifts of proton absorptions (see 
Hinckley13). The shifts are known to be dependent on the concentration 
of europium chelate, and addition of excess chelate, or use of a high field 
such as that at 500 MHz, gives line-broadened spectra of low precision. 
The use of an enantiomerically pure chiral ligand bonded to, say, 
europium(III), gives the CLSR. Of these, 51, in which the ligand is a 
fluorinated camphor derivative, has been extensively used, though anal- 
ogous complexes of praseodymium and ytterbium have been advocated 
as preferred alternatives (see Parker14 and Rina1dil5). The purpose of the 
CLSR is to interact with the two enantiomers in a distinct manner, 
possibly by formation of weak diastereomeric complexes. This differen- 
tial interaction together with the shift properties of the CLSR enables 
the 'H absorptions of the respective enantiomers to be integrated with 
certainty. 
Thirdly, in the case of completely or partially racemic alcohols, it is 
possible to create diastereomeric esters by reaction with one enantiomer 
of a chiral carboxylic acid. One acid that gives consistently good results 
is Mosher's acid, 3,3,3-trifluoro-2-methoxy-2-phenylpropanoic 
acid (52) 
(see Dale et a1.16). With a chiral alcohol, e.g. 1-phenylethanol, a pair of 
diastereoisomers, 53 and 54, is formed (Scheme 8.5). 
( ' 
O k E u  
0 
51 
&3F7 
52 
53 
54 
Scheme 8.5 
An advantage of this ester is that the diastereoisomer ratio can be 
measured in two ways: (1) from the 'H NMR spectrum, e.g. by integra- 
tion of the methoxy proton absorptions of 53 and 54; (2) by integration 
of the 19F absorptions of the CF, groups of this pair of compounds. With 
the aid of esters 53 and 54 it is possible to determine the ratio of two 
enantiomeric alcohols in a mixture. However, assignment of absolute 
configuration to the alcohols can be problematic. 
Other carboxylic acids such as 55 have been used to make corre- 
sponding diastereoisomeric esters. The choice of aromatic substituent in 
55 is made on the basis of the greater anisotropy of the three fused aro- 
matic rings in 55 with respect to phenyl. It has recently been possible to 
assign configuration to a pair of enantiomeric alcohols directly from the 
'H NMR spectra of their esters with 55. The discussion goes beyond 
the scope of this text, but for details the work of Fukushi et aZ.," 
Takahashi et aZ? and Seco et all9 should be consulted. 
55 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
151 
8.5.3 Nuclear Overhauser Effect 
A commonly observed interaction of two magnetically non-equivalent 
nuclei is the coupling constant J. The coupling mechanism is brought 
about by electronic interactions that pass through intervening bonds. A 
through-space interaction is considered to account for long-range 
couplings (see Figure 8.2 on page 153, in which H3exo shows a doublet 
as a result of coupling with HSeXo). 
It is possible to have a further through- 
space interaction between two non-equivalent nuclei, Ha and Hb, in the 
same molecule and for these nuclei to be well separated in terms of num- 
bers of intervening bonds. This interaction can be shown by irradiation 
of the sample at the resonance frequency of, say, Ha, and observation of 
the integrated intensity of Hb. One can observe an enhanced integral for 
Hb when the molecule in question has a relative molecular mass (MJ of 
less than approximately 300. It is also helpful if the nuclei Ha and Hb 
are closer than 0.4 nm, although slightly greater distances are possible 
in the case of more slowly tumbling biopolymers. The enhanced 
integration outlined above is known as the 
The effect has its origins in the dipolar relaxation of the proton 
Hb. 
It is possible to observe NOEs for protons that are bonded to sp3, sp2 
or sp carbons. The effect is best observed for methine (R,C-H) protons, 
though it can be demonstrated for methylene (R2CH2) protons also. It 
is less easy to observe for methyl (CH,) protons, because methyl protons 
contribute mutually to the dipole-dipole relaxation of each other. A 
methine proton, being bonded to three carbons that do not assist in 
dipoledipole relaxation, shows an NOE more readily. Therefore, in the 
case of a closely separated proton, Ha, and a methyl group C(Hb), in a 
molecule, irradiation at the methyl proton frequency results in an 
enhancement of the Ha absorption, whereas irradiation of Ha will not 
usually result in a meaningful enhancement of the methyl group absorp- 
tion. However, as indicated later in this section, it is possible to obtain 
small NOEs for certain methyl groups. 
In the case of 'H NMR spectroscopy, the maximum signal enhance- 
ment is 50%, though typical values are in the range 8-15%. The magni- 
tude of NOEs falls off rapidly with separation, r, of the nuclei Ha and 
Hb, and an 
dependence has been reported (see Bell and Saunders20921), 
and is also predicted theoretically. 
One of the largest NOE effects was shown by 56; here the methine 
proton Ha experiences a 45% NOE on irradiation of Hb, and vice versa. 
In the case of 57, the NOE of the proton attached to C(8) is 8% when 
the protons of the C(20) methyl group are irradiated. Models indicate 
that the relevant hydrogens here are separated by ca. 0.3 nm, on aver- 
age (see Anet and Bourn22). 

152 
Stereochemistry 
0 
H 
Cl Cl 
56 
57 
The conformation of 2,4-dioxabicyclo[ 3.3. llnonane (58) was investigated 
in [2H,]benzene. NOE enhancements of about 5% were found for both 
H3P and H9syn when the other was irradiated, and absence of a corre- 
sponding effect for H3a and H7a indicates that the predominant confor- 
mation is shown in 58; this is called a chair-boat conformation because 
one six-membered ring is in the chair form, and the other is in the boat 
form (see Peters et ~2.”). 
It has been claimed that the parent hydrocarbon corresponding to 58, 
bicyclo[3.3. llnonane, exists in a twin-chair conformation. The basis for 
this proposal came from the ‘H NMR spectrum of the hydrocarbon (see 
Peters et aZ.24) and also from the infrared (IR) spectrum, which showed 
a distinct band at ca. 1490 cm-l, indicative of a strong transannular inter- 
action of the methylene groups at C(3) and C(7) (see Eglinton et ~ 1 . ~ ~ ) .  
Although results from IR spectra are probably less incisive than those 
from NOE experiments, they are mutually supportive. 
NOES can be revealed by computer subtraction of the ‘normal’ spec- 
trum from that recorded while a particular proton is being irradiated. 
The resulting difference spectrum shows only the enhanced signals (as 
well as that of the irradiating frequency). Even though difference spec- 
tra involve a decrease in sensitivity, they permit detection of NOE 
enhancements of the order of 1%. In particular, in the case of closely 
separated intramolecular methine and methyl groups, it is now possible 
to observe a NOE enhancement of the methyl proton signal, as well as 
that of the more readily observed methine proton. At present, a 1D-NOE 
experiment using a pulsed field gradient selective excitation (PFGSE) 
avoids problems of sensitivity loss but still gives a ‘difference’ presenta- 
tion (see Stonehouse et aZ.26 and Stott et ~2.~’). Here the NOE signal is 
generated as usual by distance-dependent H/H cross relaxation. The 
PFGSE spectra of 3-endo-bromo-4-chlorocamphor (59, Figure 8.2) 
Ha*o 
HPH+H 
H 
58 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
153 
reveal the usefulness of the technique in stereochemical assignments. For 
historical reasons the signals are nevertheless sometimes referred to as 
'enhancements'. However, inspection of Figure 8.2 spectra a and b 
(6 4.64), spectra a and c (6 1.74 and 6 2.09) and spectra a and d 
(6 0.966) suggest that this term might not always be appropriate. 
d I 
C 
-i- 
If- 
/ .  
It is worth mentioning that larger molecules with Mr greater than 
approximately 1000 give negative NOEs, and this reduction in signal 
intensity is found also with increased solvent viscosity, e.g. with [2H]6- 
DMSO. 
Texts on the Overhauser effect by Neuhaus and Williamson, Noggle 
and Schirmer (see Further Reading) and Freeman28 should be consulted 
for more details. That by Freeman gives a graphic ski-slope analogy to 
some of the mechanics of NOEs. Henmann et aZ.29 give an example of 
the use of NOEs in determining the stereochemistry of a compound. 
Br 
59 
Figure 8.2 PFGSE 'H NMR 
spectrum of a 0.1 M solution of 
3-endo-bromo-4-chlorocamphor 
(59) in CDCI, at 400 MHz. (a) 
Normal spectrum. (b) After irradi- 
ation of the C(8) methyl protons 
at 6 0.966. This results in 
enhancement of the H*"O 
signal 
at 6 4.641. Signals for the meth- 
ylene protons are absent. (c) After 
irradiation of the C(9) methyl pro- 
tons at 6 1.1 28. NOE signals for 
the C(5) and C(6) ex0 methylene 
protons are observed. Signals for 
the endo methylene protons and 
the HBxo proton are absent. (d) 
After irradiation of HBxO at 6 
4.461 a NOE signal for the C(8) 
methyl proton is observed at 6 
0.966 

154 
Stereochemistry 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
155 

156 
Stereochemistry 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
157 

158 
Stereochemistry 

Prochirality, Enantiotopic and Diastereotopic Groups and Faces 
159 

160 
Stereochemistry 

Answers to Problems 
161 

162 
Stereochemistry 

Answers to Problems 
163 

104 
Stereochemistry 

Answers to Problems 
165 

166 
Stereochemistry 

Answers to Problems 
167 

Subject Index 
‘A’ values 16, 109, 110 
Achiral 
19 
Alkenes 
bromination, 
meso product 69 
trans bromination 
69, 75 
catalytic 
hydrogenation 
76 
halohydrin formation 
75 
hydration, anti- 
Markovnikov 
72-73 
hydration, 
Markovnikov 72 
cis hydroxylation 
67 
trans hydroxylation 
racemic product 
69 
Alky lidenec yclohexanes 
82 
Allenes 
85 
Amides 
67, 74 
absolute configuration 
chiral 80, 85 
H-bonding 65-66 
helix 65-66 
structure 65-66 
Amines, chiral 88 
Ammonium salts, chiral 
Anomeric effect 
88 
114-1 18 
magnitude 
1 16 
Anomers 
114 
Arsenic compounds, 
chiral 88 
Atactic 52 
Axis of symmetry 81 
2,2’-Binaphthol 93 
Biphenyls 
absolute configuration 
atropisomerism 
84 
racemization, isotope 
85 
effect 94 
Bromonium ion, 
structure 70 
t-Butyl chloride 
128 
Camphor 43 
Carbonxarbon bond 
lengths 5 
Carvone 
55 
Chiral amines 88 
Chiral ammonium salts 
88 
Chiral arsenic 
compounds 88 
Chiral lanthanide shift 
reagents 
149 
Chiral organogermanium 
compounds 87 
Chiral organosilicon 
compounds 87 
Chiral organotin 
compounds 87 
Chiral phosphorus 
compounds 88 
Chiral selenoxides 92 
Chiral solvating agents 
149 
Chiral stationary phase 
48 
Chiral sulfonium salts 
91 
Chiral sulfoxides 9 1 
Chirality 
19 
Chlorosulfite esters 134 
CIP convention 61 
RIS 
2628 
Cis 61 
Configuration 
anti 42 
erythro 41 
inversion 128 
meso 39-41 
threo 41 
syn 42 
Conformation 
anti 9 
eclipsed 7 
gauche 9, 117 
skewed 8 
staggered 7 
Cubane 
134 
Cyclobutanes 
10 1 
Cyclo hexanes 
1,4-interaction 13 
all-cis-hexamethyl 
all-trans-hexamethyl 
axial bonds 
11 
120 
120 
t-butyl 
109 
168 

Index 
169 
conformation, boat 
12 
conformation, chair 
10, 14 
conformation, 
twist-boat 
15, 121 
cis- 1,3-diaxial 
interaction 
11, 15 
trans- 1,2-diaxial 
hydrogens 
11 
cis 1,2-disubstituted 
106 
cis 1,3-disubstituted 
1 04 
cis 1,4-disubstituted 
108 
trans 1,2-disubstituted 
103 
trans 1,3-disubstituted 
107 
trans 1,4-disubstituted 
105 
equatorial bonds 
12 
inversion 
14 
strain 
103 
trisubstituted 
11 1 
Cyclohexene 62-63 
half-chair 63 
Cyclopentane 
102 
Cyclopropanes 
100 
D/L convention 
23 
Decalins 
cis 112 
trans 111 
Dextrorotatory 
22 
Diastereoisomers 38, 
47 
Diastereomeric 
excesshati0 
147, 
149 
154 
Diastereotopic 143, 
Dihedral angle 7 
Dipolar repulsions 
1 18 
Endo 45, 146 
Entropy of mixing 29 
Enzymic 
oxidationheduct ion 
144-145 
Enzymic resolution 
Epimers 44 
Equilibrium free energy 
relationships 
16 
Erythro 
49-5 1 
anti 42, 4546 
syn 42, 45-46 
D-Erythrose 41 
Ex0 45, 146 
Fischer projections 
23-25 
D-Glucose 1 14 
Glyceraldehyde, absolute 
configuration 24 
H,, H, 
144 
Halolytic fission 137 
Hemiacetals 
1 14 
Hexahelicene 86 
Homochiral 30 
Homotopic 
141, 
154-1 55 
Hydroboration 
73 
chiral 
146 
Inversion, configuration 
Isochronous 
143, 155 
Isotactic 52 
128 
Karplus equation 
148 
Kenyon-Phillips cycles 
126127 
Laevorotatory 22 
Lanthanide shift 
reagents, chiral 
149 
E (entgegen) 61-62 
Enantiomeric excess 27, 
Enantiomeric ratio 29 
Enantiomers 19 
Enantiotonic 
140. 154 
29 
Methanethiolate, 
Mosher’s acid 
150 
nucleophile 
136 
1
-
 
~ 
- 7  
~~ 
NAD+, NADH 144 
Neopentyl chloride 
128 
Nerol 78 
Nuclear Overhauser 
Nucleophilic substitution 
effect 151-1 53 
125 
at bridgehead 
endocyclic 129 
exocyclic 129 
129-1 34 
Odour 55 
Orbitals 
anti-bonding 6 
bonding 6 
SP 
5 
sp* 3 
sp3 3 
Organogermanium 
compounds, chiral 
87 
Organosilicon 
compounds, chiral 
87 
Organotin compounds, 
chiral 87 
Orthogonal 
5 
Osmium tetroxide 67 
Oxaziridine, chiral 88 
Oximes 63, 64 
chiral 82 
PFGSE Overhauser 
spectrum 
152 
1 -Phenylethyl tosylate 
133 
Phosphorus compounds, 
chiral 88 
Phthalate monoester 
48 
a-Pinene 146 
Plane polarized light 
19, 21 
Polarimeter 
2 1 
Polypeptide a-helix 65 
Polypropene 
52 
pro-R, pro-S 140 
Prochirality 
140, 157 
sp3 C 
140, 157 
Projection 
Newman 7 
sawhorse 7 

170 
Index 
Pseudoaxial bonds 
63 
Pseudoequatorial bonds 
Pseudorotation 
102 
63 
Racemization 29 
Re 142 
Resolution 46 
cis-Retinal 79 
SN1 reaction 
132 
stereochemistry 
with retention 
133-136 
132-1 33 
SN2 reaction 
125-1 3 1 
SN2’ reaction 
13 1-1 32 
stereochemistry 132 
Scalemic 30 
Seleniranium ion 
147 
Selenoxides, chiral 92 
Semicarbazones 63 
Si 142 
Solvating agents, chiral 
Specific rotation 21 
Stationary phase, chiral 
48 
Stereogenic bridgehead 
carbons 43 
Stereogenic centres 22 
Steroids 
cis A/B ring fusion 
149 
113 
113 
trans A/B ring 
Strain 
angle (Baeyer) 
steric 100 
torsion (Pitzer 
usion 
100 
100 
Sulfonium salts, chiral 
Sulfoxides, chiral 9 1 
Syndiotactic 52 
91 
Tartaric acid 39, 46 
Tetrahydropyrans 
1 16 
Thebaine 
130 
D-Threose 41 
Torsion barrier 9 
Trans 61 
Tricyclene 134 
Troger’s base 88 
Van der Waals’ radius 
13, 14 
Von Baeyer 
nomenclature 45 
Z (zusammen) 61-62 


