Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
1
 
CONCEPTS IN ENDOCRINOLOGY 
Emma Jakoi, Ph. D.  
 
 
 
LEARNING  OBJECTIVES 
 Define hormone, target cell, and receptor. 
 Contrast the terms endocrine, paracrine, autocrine, and neuroendocrine based on the site of 
release and the pathway to the target tissue. 
 Contrast peptide, steroid and amine hormones in terms of receptor location and signal 
transduction, solubility in blood and transport in blood. 
 Explain the effects of hormone binding proteins (carriers) on access of hormones to their sites of 
action, degradation, and the regulation of hormone secretion. 
 Explain the effects of secretion, excretion, degradation, and volume of distribution on the 
concentration of a hormone in blood plasma. 
 Explain how endocrine cells act as signal integrators. 
 Explain how negative feedback, feed-forward, and positive feedback systems work. 
 Describe the principles and limitations of RIA and bioassays (stimulation/suppression tests). 
 Explain the classification of endocrine pathologies. 
 
HOMEOSTATIC CONTROL 
 
Homeostatic control mechanisms include reflex loops in which the response decision is made at a 
distance from the target cell.                          
 
There are two general classes: endocrine and neuroendocrine. 
Endocrine: hormone reaches its site of action via the blood circulation. 
Neuroendocrine: hormone is secreted from neurons into the blood to act at a distance. 
 
The other homeostatic control mechanism is the local response in which the signal and action occurs close 
to or at the target cell. 
 
Paracrine: cytokine is secreted into the interstitial fluid to act locally on target cells. 
Autocrine: cytokine is secreted into interstitial fluid to act on the cell that produced it. 
hormone 
into blood 
neurotransmitter
 neuron or  
effector cell 
target cell 
Endocrine  
cell 
Neuron 
neurotransmitter
    into blood 
target cell
Neuron
autocrine
paracrine 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
2
FUNCTIONS OF HORMONES  
Endocrine system coordinates and integrates cellular activity within the whole body by chemicals 
(hormones) delivered by blood.  
Specific missions are to:  
 
Regulate sodium and water balance 
 
Regulate calcium balance 
 
Regulate energy balance 
 
Coordinate processes that cope with stressful environments 
 
Coordinate growth and development. 
 
Coordinate processes associated with reproduction and lactation. 
 
EFFECT DEPENDS ON BLOOD LEVEL 
Hormones are secreted into the blood stream and circulate throughout the body at very low concentrations 
(pMolar to nMolar). Therefore, their rate of production, delivery, and turnover are important control sites. 
 
Rate of production 
 
A. most regulated aspect 
 
B. mediated by (+) and (-) feedbacks 
 
Rate of delivery 
 
A. dependent on perfusion and blood flow 
 
B. follows mass action laws (carriers) 
 
Rate of degradation and /or excretion 
 
 
CLASSIFICATION BY STRUCTURE & SOLUBILITY IN PLASMA 
There are three general types of hormone molecules: peptides, steroids, and amines. They differ in their 
relative solubility in plasma.  
Peptide hormones consist of three or more amino acids and are soluble in blood.  
Steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol and are insoluble in blood.  
Amine hormones are derivatives of amino acids and some are soluble in blood. 
 
Peptides and proteins: are synthesized, packaged, and transported as other secretory proteins. Most are 
synthesized initially as preprohormones which in the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) are cleaved to 
remove the signal sequence forming the prohormone (Fig 1). Later in the Golgi, the prohormones are 
packaged, trimmed into an active hormone, and stored in vesicles.  Peptide hormones are usually secreted 
in bursts in response to stimuli.    
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
3
 
Figure 1. Peptide hormone processing.  
Steroid hormones: are derived from cholesterol. They are made only in the adrenal cortex, gonads and in 
pregnant women in the placenta. The first and rate limiting step in the synthesis of all steroid hormones is 
conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone. Pregnenolone is formed on the inner membrane of the 
mitochondrion, and then shuttled between the mitochondrion and the smooth endoplasmic reticulum for 
further enzymatic transformations. Steroid hormones are synthesized on demand. They are not stored. 
Steroid hormones can be converted to more active (or less) active hormones within their target tissues.  
 
 Amine hormones: are derivatives of amino acids.     
 
 
Thyroid hormones (T3 and T4) contain “double tyrosines” covalently bound to iodine atoms. T4 
can be converted to T3 within target tissues.   
 
 
Catecholamines: Epinephrine (Epi) is a hormone; norepinephrine (NorEpi) functions as a 
hormone and as a neurotransmitter.  
  
DELIVERY BY TRANSPORT CARRIERS 
  
 Peptide hormones are soluble in blood. They are degraded by the liver and then cleared by the kidney with 
half-lives of a few minutes. 
Steroid hormones and thyroid hormone are not soluble in blood. They circulate bound to protein carriers. 
Binding to the transport carrier protein extends the half-life of the hormone in the blood (60-90 minutes 
for steroids, several days for thyroid hormone).  
The carrier-hormone complexes sequester the hormone from its target cell with most of the hormone in 
the bound state. The concentration of free plus bound equals total hormone concentration in the blood but 
only free is active. 
RECEPTORS DETERMINE SPECIFICITY 
Hormones are widely distributed throughout the body and have access to all cells but only target cells 
respond because they possess a receptor for the hormone. The receptor contains a recognition site that 
binds its hormone with high affinity and selectivity. A cell may express thousands to tens of thousands of 
receptors for a single hormone.  
The lipid solubility of the hormone dictates the cellular location of its receptor. Plasma insoluble 
hormones bind to intracellular receptors; plasma soluble hormones bind to cell surface receptors.  
Thyroid and steroid hormones bind to intracellular receptors to activate transcription. This results 
in synthesis of new proteins and therefore is a slow response (30 minutes or more).  
Peptide hormones bind to cell surface receptors which activate a second messenger (Fig 2).  This 
results in a rapid (seconds) change in function/metabolism. Second messengers are important because 
they provide: 
 
Amplification: One hormone molecule can generate thousand of copies of second 
 
messenger (e.g., cAMP) and thereby affect many copies of responsive target molecules 
 
(effectors) in the cell. 
+
+
prohormone
hormone 
preprohormone 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
4
 
Memory: Once activated the second messenger stays on for several seconds to minutes.  
 
Complex regulation: Multiple pathways can be initiated by binding one hormone to a single 
receptor type (Fig 2).   
 
Figure 2. Typical signal transduction pathways for hormone receptors.  
The duration of a response depends on how long the hormone is available (i.e., its half life) and the time 
period of its biological response.  
Adaptation or desensitization of receptors: diminishes the cell’s response when the level of hormone is 
chronically elevated.                 
Rebound: is increased sensitivity of the target cell to a hormone due to its prolonged absence. In this 
instance the target cell increases its receptor numbers in an attempt to “find” the hormone and so is 
“hyperactive” with return of the hormone.  
 
REGULATION OF HORMONE SECRETION 
 
Hormone secretion is governed by one of three types of regulatory stimuli: neural, hormonal, and nutrient 
(or ion). These stimuli activate a reflex loop in which the endocrine cell(s) is the effector. These reflex 
loops are typically negative feedback loops.  
Hormones seldom work alone. Other interactions include: 
Feed forward primes a target tissue. For example, the smell of food alone causes gastrin to be secreted 
by the stomach (antrum) which stimulates HCl secretion from the corpus/fundic stomach.     
 
 
Synergy occurs when the net effect of several hormones acting a on a target tissue causes a bigger 
response than simple addition of each independent hormonal effect. 
 
 
Re-enforcement occurs when the actions of a single hormone on multiple tissues converge to regulate a 
process such as glucose production (see Fig 3). 
 Permissiveness (or tropism) occurs when the actions of a tropic hormone sensitize the target tissue to a 
second hormone. For example, maturation of the male gonads is dependent on the presence of the sex 
hormone, testosterone. However, the fetus will not grow unless thyroid hormone is present. Thyroid 
hormone (a tropic hormone) itself can not trigger maturation of the gonads but leads to the expression of 
testosterone receptors that govern this differentiation process.    
DNA  
 
STEROID and
THYROID 
HORMONES 
Cytosolic or 
Nuclear 
Receptor 
+/- TRANSCRIPTION
Enzyme-  
linked 
Inherent 
enzyme 
activity 
G protein  
coupled 
RAPID METABOLIC CHANGES 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
5
 
Figure 3.  Cortisol acts on muscle and fat to re-enforce the production of glucose from the liver.  
 
INACTIVATION OF HORMONE SIGNALLING  
Inactivation of the hormone signaling occurs at two levels. Cellular inactivation involves the termination 
of the receptor’s response. Systemic inactivation involves homeostatic control mechanisms such as 
negative feedback (most common) which removes the initial stimulus (see Fig 4). 
 
Figure 4. Negative feedback loops eliminate the initiating stimulus. 
 
For example, the pituitary and adrenal glands are in a negative feed-back loop (Fig 5). The stimulus, 
hypoglycemia (low blood glucose level) leads to the secretion of cortisol from the adrenal gland. Cortisol 
acts on liver, muscle, and fat to raise blood glucose levels. Over ride of the set points for this loop occurs at 
the hypothalamus (brain) in response to inputs such as circadian rhythm and stress. Why is this important?  
 
 
 Figure 5. Negative feedback loops such as the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis have positive 
inputs (circadian rhythm) that transiently override the set point to govern blood glucose levels.  
Muscle 
Amino acids 
Liver 
Cortisol 
Fat 
Gycerol & free fatty acids 
Glucose
Integrating Center 
     (set point)
Receptor
Stimulus
Afferent pathway 
Effector
Response
Efferent pathway
Negative 
feedback

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
6
IMPORTANCE OF HORMONE LEVELS  
 
Disorders of the endocrine system result from too little or too much hormone or target cell resistance.  
 
Hypo-secretion: results in an insufficiency of hormone.  
 
Hyper-secretion: results in an excess of hormone.  
 
Resistance: is an abnormal target organ response due to receptor and/or second messenger 
dysfunction despite adequate active hormone levels.  
The hormone and its regulated substance (another hormone or another parameter) do not change 
independently. By monitoring both the hormone and its regulated substance, one can readily deduce the 
nature of the dysfunction. When the target endocrine gland itself is misbehaving, then it is referred to as a 
primary pathology. If the problem occurs in the regulating gland (pituitary), then it is a secondary 
pathology, and those due to the more distal regulator (hypothalamus) are tertiary. Shown in the table 
below are the findings indicative of pathologies associated with the cortisol axis (diagrammed in Fig 5). 
 
 Dysfunction Site: 
Tertiary Pathology 
Secondary Pathology  
Primary Pathology 
Hypothalamus 
High CRH levels 
Low CRH 
Low CRH 
Anterior pituitary 
High ACTH 
High ACTH 
Low ACTH 
Adrenal cortex 
High cortisol 
High cortisol 
High cortisol 
Because hormones are present at very low concentrations (nM) in body fluids and many have related 
structures, their measurement requires very high sensitivity and high specificity. Two common types of 
assays are used:  
 
Radio-immune assay (RIA) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent (ELISA) assay measure the 
immuno-reactivity of the hormone in the body fluid.  
 
Bioassay (suppression and stimulation) measures the biological activity to a challenge dose of 
hormone or substrate such as glucose (glucose tolerance test).  
The results from these two assays can differ. Specifically,  
 
RIA measures total hormone (carrier-bound hormone plus free) but only free is active.   
 
RIA will detect both active and inactive hormones but the cell receptor does not. 
 
The hormone can be modified which alters its bio-activity but not its immuno-reactivity (and 
conversely).  
 
Certain hormones are secreted at regular intervals (pulsatile) so a randomly taken sample may 
have assayed either a peak or trough.  
 
GENERAL CONCEPTS  
• 
Peptide hormones are soluble in plasma, act via surface receptors, are fast-acting and short-lived.  
• 
Thyroid hormones and steroid hormones are insoluble in plasma, act via intracellular receptors to 
change transcription, are slow-acting and are long-lived. 
• 
Thyroid and steroid hormones can be converted to more active (or less active) hormones within 
target tissues. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
7
• 
Transport carriers regulate hormone availability, physiologic function, and half lives. 
• 
Hormone release can be governed by neuronal input, other hormones, nutrients and ions. 
• 
Regulation of hormone signaling occurs most often by negative feedback to control plasma 
concentration of the hormone and at the target cell where hormone actions are integrated. 
• 
Pathology in endocrinology occurs when there is either too little or too much hormone or 
resistance to the hormone due to receptor dysfunction. 
• 
Interpretation of hormone levels requires consideration of either the tropic hormone(s) or of the 
ion/nutrient controlled by the hormone.  
 
SUMMARY OF HORMONE CLASSES 
Chemical  
Response time 
Effect time 
Carrier 
Response 
function 
example 
peptides 
fast-acting  
(sec-min) 
short-lived  
No 
2o messenger 
cascades 
homeostatic 
glucagon & 
insulin 
steroids 
Slow (hours) 
long-lived 
Yes 
transcription & 
translation 
development 
homeostatic 
Estrogen 
Cortisol 
amines 
 
fast 
 
slow 
short-lived 
 
long-lived 
No 
 
Yes 
2o messenger 
cascades 
transcription 
homeostatic 
 
development 
tropic 
EPI 
 
T4 & T3 
 
 
QUESTIONS 
A 25 year old male comes in to your office for evaluation. The following results were found. 
 
 
Plasma cortisol at 4PM: 25 µg/dL (normal 3-15 µg/dL) 
 
To suppress the HPA axis, you administer dexamethasone at 11PM. Sixty minutes later, the results are: 
 
 
Plasma cortisol levels are 35 µg/dL (normal <5 µg/dl).  
 
Plasma ACTH: 7pg/mL (normal, >20 mg/mL) 
 
1. These results are consistent with an overproduction of: 
A. CRH from the hypothalamus 
B. ACTH from a pituitary  
C. Cortisol from the adrenal  
 
2. You would classify this state as: 
A. primary endocrine pathology 
B. secondary endocrine pathology 
C. tertiary endocrine pathology 
 
 
 ANSWERS 
1. C 
2. A 

