R E S E A R C H  R E P O R T
Creating a Culture of Diversity, 
Equity, and Inclusion:
Real Progress Requires Sustained Commitment
Sponsored by

S P O N S O R  P E R S P E C T I V E
Trusaic first partnered with Harvard Business Review 
Analytic Services in 2019 to learn how companies here 
and abroad were preparing to navigate new pay equity 
laws. While countries around the world continue to 
advance legislation aimed at accelerating gender- and 
race-based pay equity, effective implementation and 
enforcement remain a challenge. Still, compliance 
with these critical “equal work for equal pay” laws is 
merely a starting point. Organizations must examine 
their diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) policies and 
practices holistically to achieve a truly diverse, equitable, 
and inclusive workplace.    
Social and political discourse around equality has only 
intensified since we published our initial research.1 Pay 
data laws, growing public pressure, and widespread 
activism have pushed the issue of workplace disparity 
front and center. Pay transparency advocates argue that 
secrecy around wages reinforces discrimination and 
obscures structural inequalities. In sport, prominent 
voices are fueling efforts to overhaul pay policies for 
female athletes through proposed legislation such 
as the Even Playing Field Act and Equal Pay for Team 
USA Act. Against this backdrop, a global pandemic has 
inflicted disproportionate damage on the earnings of 
women and women of color and exacerbated the crisis of 
economic inequality.
Our latest research, conducted with Harvard Business 
Review Analytic Services and the Society for Human 
Resource Management  (SHRM), explores the 
extent to which diversity, equity, and inclusion is a 
strategic priority in organizations, how companies are 
implementing DEI initiatives, and how successful they 
are (leaders) or are not (laggards) in creating a DEI-
conducive culture. Companies reporting greater success 
have by no means conquered the complex challenges 
that improving DEI poses. Yet the clear takeaway from 
the strides they’re making is that two key factors are 
driving forward progress: a commitment from leadership 
and a commitment to data. 
DEI is most effective when it’s embedded within the 
culture of an organization.2 This commitment starts at 
the top. Senior leadership must wholeheartedly commit 
to fostering a fair workplace and take an intentional, 
actionable, and measurable approach to creating 
an environment of equity and inclusion. When DEI 
initiatives come from the top down, they become a 
fundamental part of the business. Leaders must drive 
DEI as a strategic priority, build real accountability into 
their programs, and communicate goals with frequency 
and transparency. Without this commitment from the 
C-suite, the effectiveness and impact of any program are 
diminished. 
Yet the best intentions won’t affect change without real, 
measurable action. Data supports firms hold themselves 
to account. To truly make a difference, companies must 
regularly monitor DEI metrics to understand their current 
state of play, establish benchmarks, gauge progress, 
identify interventions, and course correct. Access to 
timely and reliable data is central to closing the gap. In 
our study, higher-performing organizations go broader 
and deeper in monitoring how equitable they really 
are; they track all three aspects of diversity, equity, and 
inclusion; and they measure DEI progress across a wider 
range of metrics. Data is the critical compass that can 
lead your organization to a safer, more welcoming, more 
representative, and more participatory place.
As a July 2021 report from the Financial Conduct 
Authority (FCA) noted,3 an inclusive culture is “necessary 
to enable the benefits of diversity to flourish in thought 
and practice.” John Davidson of the FCA further stated, 
“Without safety, without inclusion, the value of diversity 
is lost and diversity will eventually wither and die.” 
Achieving diversity, equity, and inclusion respects our 
fundamental right to health, safety, and dignity. More 
than complying with the law or improving performance, it 
is simply the right thing to do. We hope this study serves 
as a valuable resource in advancing your organization’s 
DEI efforts.
Learn more at www.trusaic.com/payparity/.
Footnotes
1	 Sheen, Robert, “How Social Movements Impact DEI in the Workplace,” Trusaic, December 23, 2020, https://trusaic.com/blog/
how-social-movements-impact-dei-in-the-workplace/. 
2	 Sheen, Robert, “5 Strategies for Effectively Advancing DEI Initiatives,” Trusaic, July 21, 2021, https://trusaic.com/blog/5-
strategies-for-effectively-advancing-dei-initiatives/.
3	 “Diversity and inclusion in the financial sector—working together to drive change”—Financial Conduct Authority, Bank of 
England, Prudential Regulation Authority, July 2021.

1
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Creating a Culture of Diversity, 
Equity, and Inclusion
Real Progress Requires Sustained 
Commitment
H I G H L I G H T S
67% of respondents say 
their organization is, at best, 
only somewhat successful 
at creating a workplace that 
is diverse, equitable, and 
inclusive.
65% of respondents say 
diversity, equity, and inclusion 
(DEI) is a high strategic 
priority.
50% of respondents from DEI-
laggard companies say a lack 
of leadership commitment 
hinders their diversity, equity, 
and inclusion efforts. Only 5% 
from DEI-leader companies say 
they have this issue. 
The Covid-19 pandemic and the MeToo and Black 
Lives Matter social movements have led many leaders 
to reassess their relationships with their employees. 
Organizations in sectors as diverse as retail, technology, 
manufacturing, and government want their workforces 
to better represent the broader communities in which 
they operate. These organizations are making it a 
priority to treat all employees equitably, and to create 
the conditions to make everyone feel welcomed and 
included. Two-thirds of respondents to a recent survey of 
1,115 North American organizational leaders conducted 
by Harvard Business Review Analytic Services say that 
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI)* is a high strategic 
priority for their organization. 
*For purposes of this research, Harvard Business Review Analytic Services defined 
DEI as follows:
Diversity: Having a heterogeneous mix of identities (race, ethnicity, nationality, 
gender, gender identity, veteran status, physical and cognitive ability, age, sexual 
orientation, socioeconomic class, experience, etc.). 
Equity: Regardless of identity, all employees are compensated fairly and have the 
opportunity and support to succeed and grow in their jobs.
Inclusion: The identities of all employees are respected and valued. Employees 
have the opportunity to participate and contribute regardless of their identity.

Harvard Business Review Analytic Services
2
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
However, many organizations that have tried to improve 
DEI over the past few years have failed to make meaningful 
progress. Only one-third of respondents say their organization 
is very successful at creating a workplace that is diverse, 
equitable, and inclusive. “A lot of companies started having 
aspirations around diversity a few years ago,” says Diana 
Ellsworth, a partner at management consulting firm McKinsey 
& Co. These aspirations “spurred various activities, but many 
didn’t treat it as a strategic imperative for the business. It’s 
important to have a strategic plan, know what success looks 
like, and be doing the right things to deliver.” It’s equally 
important to track the impact of those actions on DEI.
The murder of George Floyd in 2020 was a galvanizing 
moment for many, including Doug Palladini, global brand 
president at skateboarding apparel maker Vans, headquartered 
in Costa Mesa, Calif. “George Floyd’s murder changed 
everything for our brand,” he says. “Just saying we’re not 
racist isn’t enough; we had to make the switch to being a more 
anti-racist brand and take an active role to end the systemic 
parts of racism. We moved off our heels onto our toes.”
Social justice isn’t the only reason leaders want to improve 
DEI within their organizations. In addition to helping overcome 
systemic inequities that have existed for centuries, those 
who are furthest ahead attribute a range of organizational 
benefits to their DEI work, including higher levels of employee 
engagement, team diversity leading to innovation, success 
in recruiting and retaining top talent, and more satisfied 
customers. And there is growing evidence that taking enough 
of the right actions to improve DEI leads to better financial 
outcomes as well.1
The challenges to improving DEI are multidimensional. 
They start at the top, with a lack of diversity among executives, 
and run deep, encompassing everything from the need for 
greater accountability to the right kind of training and good 
standards and tools for measuring DEI. Indeed, a key lever to 
move the needle on DEI is to regularly monitor DEI metrics; 
communicate progress or the lack thereof to decision makers 
and other key stakeholders, including employees and external 
entities; and use that data to manage and improve DEI. Access 
to timely and reliable data is central to closing the gap.
This report examines the programs and practices 
organizations employ to increase DEI, what’s getting in 
the way, and how greater diversity, equity, and inclusion 
influences an organization’s success. It identifies DEI leaders 
(the 33% of respondents who rate their organization as being 
very successful at improving DEI), followers (the 38% who 
are moderately successful), and laggards (the 29% who rate 
their organization as unsuccessful), and it compares their 
experiences with DEI.
“You’ve got to run DEI like a business function, not like 
an HR program,” says Kathi Enderes, vice president of 
research at The Josh Bersin Company, a research, advisory, 
and professional development company headquartered in 
Oakland, Calif. “You need to have a strategy around DEI. 
You’ve got to have executive commitment to it. You need 
measures against it. And you can’t stop doing it just because 
you got some good results.”
Commitment Starts at the Top 
If the CEO and other senior leaders aren’t committed to 
creating a culture that values diversity and is equitable and 
inclusive, progress will stall. “Leadership engagement is 
really critical,” says Enderes. “You can’t run any business 
function without senior leadership support. The CEO needs 
to be personally involved and driving that.”
According to the Harvard Business Review Analytic Services 
survey, successful organizations drive DEI as a strategic priority 
from the top, put a senior leader in charge of DEI efforts, and 
share accountability for DEI more broadly than others. What’s 
more, according to Enderes, when the CEO sets the strategy 
and frequently communicates DEI progress, the company is 
6.3 times more likely to have a diverse leadership team and is 
also more likely to be a leader in its industry segment. 
The biggest problem for those who are not successful is a 
lack of both representation and genuine commitment among 
senior leaders. Half of survey respondents from laggard 
organizations say they are hindered by a lack of commitment 
among leadership, and 72% say they are held back by a lack 
of diversity at senior levels of the organization.
DEI leaders are significantly more likely than followers 
or laggards to set goals for levels of diversity among senior 
executives and board members, with 44% setting such goals, 
compared with 32% of followers and only 17% of laggards. 
Some organizations have set goals to increase representation 
at the vice president or director level and above. 
At Vans, “the employee base is incredibly diverse from 
entry level to managers,” says Palladini, with store associates 
reflecting the communities in which they are based. “But the 
higher you go in the ranks, the worse diversity gets. There’s a 
lot of work to be done.” Vans publishes its current diversity 
numbers on its website. The company has committed to 
doubling Black representation in its corporate office and to 
achieving 25% representation of Black, Indigenous, and people 
of color (BIPOC) at the director level and above by 2025.2
Publicly sharing DEI numbers is still more the exception 
than the rule; only 12% of respondents share these metrics 
with the general public. Salesforce, which is one of those, 
intends to double the U.S. representation of Black leaders 
(vice president or above) by 2023,3 according to Molly Ford, 
vice president of global equality at the San Francisco-based 
technology company. 

3
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
McKinsey & Co. and others have identified a clear link 
between companies that have diverse and inclusive leadership 
teams and improved financial performance.4 “Companies in 
the top quartile for diversity in their executive teams have 
a higher likelihood of top performance,” says Ellsworth. 
Specifically, they have a 36% greater chance of outperformance 
if they are in the top quartile for diverse race and ethnicity, 
and a 25% chance of outperformance if in the top quartile 
for gender diversity.
While representation at the executive level is important, DEI 
leaders interviewed for this report place even more emphasis 
in the short term on having the commitment of executive 
leaders, regardless of their race or gender.
“Organizations that have CEOs who are not afraid to speak 
out, to tackle this topic, to incorporate it in discussions and not 
shy away from questions, that’s where I’ve seen cultures thrive 
and truly become inclusive,” says Timitra Hildebrand-Jones, 
vice president of DEI and talent acquisition at Albemarle 
Corp., a global chemical manufacturing company based in 
Charlotte, N.C. 
There is an enormous gap between leaders (75%), followers 
(49%), and laggards (18%) when it comes to having a culture 
that consistently supports DEI. FIGURE 1 “Culture building 
takes constant communication, education, and awareness,” 
says Hildebrand-Jones. “It takes time.” Executives at leader 
organizations are nearly twice as likely as those at laggard 
organizations to regularly communicate the value of DEI 
(73% versus 38%). 
Boston Beer Co. hosts a series called “courageous 
conversations,” where during a live call, executives address 
any issues coworkers might have—including about DEI— 
according to Mariah Calagione, the company’s social impact 
leader. The CEO frequently weighs in on DEI and other social 
issues in his biweekly email to the entire company.
For the past year and a half, Vans’ Palladini has included 
content about DEI in the company’s “off-the-wall town hall” 
meetings, which all office-based employees around the world 
attend.  “Company culture is not an event. It’s not a poster you 
hang in the lunchroom. It’s not just something you write into 
your objectives once a year,” he says. “It’s the way you show 
up every single day.” Being consistent is crucial, he says. “It 
has to be always on, constantly and consistently reinforced, 
and it starts with me.”
Making Progress with DEI
Boston Beer Co. began its journey to become more diverse, 
equitable, and inclusive two years ago, when it formed a 
task force made up of coworkers to explore all aspects of 
the company’s DEI, according to Carissa Sweigart, leader 
of diversity, equity, and inclusion. The task force’s research 
Visible executive support
A culture that is supportive of DEI 
DEI training for managers
DEI training for all employees
Safe mechanisms to report DEI incidents
People resources
ERGs/afﬁnity groups
Trends in DEI metrics shared with employees
DEI measurement solutions
Little/no support for DEI
FIGURE 1
Executive Support, Culture, and Training Are Key
What organizational support is available to improve DEI? 
■ Leaders      ■ Followers      ■ Lagards
Source: Harvard Business Review Analytic Services survey, May 2021
77%
65%
34%
75
49
18
68
64
67
60
63
52
27
59
52
55
56
35
27
13
20
13
2
4
38
37
37
36
7
25
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services

Harvard Business Review Analytic Services
4
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
The Power of Data to Drive Outcomes 
Good leaders know that what gets measured gets managed. Executives who 
want to improve DEI use data and analytics in the following ways.
Establish a baseline and set goals for the future.  
Understanding their baseline helped DEI leaders at 
Boston Beer Co. determine the organization’s readiness 
and capabilities to make sustainable change—a 
necessary step to set achievable goals.
Measure progress on a regular basis. Forty-seven 
percent of respondents to the Harvard Business Review 
Analytic Services survey measure progress toward their 
diversity and equity goals at least twice a year. Forty-
three percent measure progress toward inclusion goals 
at least twice a year.
Communicate progress widely. Sharing DEI 
metrics with all employees reinforces commitment 
and accountability. DEI leaders are twice as likely as 
laggards to do so (47% compared with 24%).
Go beyond high-level metrics to identify areas 
for intervention. Being able to segment data by 
individual departments or units makes it possible to 
identify areas of concern hidden in otherwise positive 
trends. The same idea applies to specific intersections 
of identities (e.g., the experience of Asian women 
might be very different from that of women overall or 
Asians overall).
Hold the organization accountable. Being able 
to view DEI data at the department level makes it 
possible to hold people accountable for results. 
However, incentives should be introduced with care 
in order to drive the desired outcomes, according to 
experts interviewed for this report. Currently, very few 
organizations surveyed (12%) offer financial incentives 
for DEI improvements.
included recruiting practices, representation on the company’s 
social sites, and how people progress through the organization. 
Externally, they examined “how the brand is marketed to 
consumers and how the company works with and supports 
the communities it profits from,” says Sweigart, who co-led 
the task force. 
At the end of nine months, the task force presented its 
findings and made three requests to senior leadership: to 
designate a full-time leader for DEI, to provide more resources 
and support for a more diverse recruiting pipeline, and to 
continue and grow the task force as a committee to drive 
change throughout the company.
Whether working with managers or individual contributors, 
a critical aspect of DEI is to recognize that people have varying 
degrees of understanding of DEI issues and to “meet coworkers 
where they are,” says Boston Beer Co.’s Calagione. This 
recognition helps companies target their communications 
and training appropriately to help bring people along on the 
DEI journey.
At the beginning, companies may need to focus on the 
basics, says Jennifer Brown, CEO of Jennifer Brown Consulting, 
a global diversity and inclusion firm based in New York. 
Foundational issues include why DEI is important, what the 
terminology means, who is underrepresented and the history 
of that exclusion, and what unconscious bias looks like. “Then 
there’s a middle group that gets it and wants to take it to the 
next level,” she explains. “Training has to be targeted.” More 
than half of survey respondents provide training for both 
managers (58%) and all employees (55%). Laggards are much 
less likely to do so, at 38% and 37%, respectively. As different 
groups of cohorts progress in their level of understanding, 
organizations can introduce more advanced training. For 
instance, Salesforce offers managers a training module on 
inclusive leadership that helps them be more equitable in 
how they assign promotions and stretch assignments.
At the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOAA), Kenneth Bailey, director of the office of inclusion and 
civil rights, uses data to engage senior leaders. “Presenting 
them with the data has helped drive commitment among 
agency leaders,” he says. It opens the door to conversations 
about what those leaders will do to improve representation, 
and Bailey’s team serves as a resource if they need help 
moving forward.
Line managers are an especially important group to focus 
on, since they have a daily and direct impact on employees. 
Brown uses a “skill and will” matrix to assess where managers 
are. “Is it a skill challenge [or lack of understanding] or is 
it a will challenge?” she says. Knowing the answer to that 
question will help the organization provide appropriate 
training and coaching. 
Even leaders who are committed to supporting DEI 
can benefit from a reality check. Albemarle is planning to 
introduce an employee engagement survey with a DEI index 
to help convey employee sentiment to leaders about their DEI 

“A leader may believe 
they are inclusive and 
that they value diversity, 
but when they hear from 
employees, it makes 
them pause and consider 
where the gap is.” 
Timitra Hildebrand-Jones, vice president,  
DEI and talent acquisition, Albemarle Corp.

Harvard Business Review Analytic Services
6
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
posture. “A leader may believe they are inclusive and that 
they value diversity, but when they hear from employees, 
it makes them pause and consider where the gap is,” says 
Hildebrand-Jones.
Efforts to expand DEI can fail if leaders and managers are 
not held accountable for implementing DEI practices. Laggard 
organizations are three times as likely as those classified as 
DEI leaders to suffer from a lack of accountability (57% versus 
19%). Conversely, DEI leaders are much more likely to assign 
accountability beyond HR to include the CEO (71%), business 
unit heads (54%), department heads (50%), and even managers 
(44%). FIGURE 2 
DEI leaders are also much more likely to track whether 
their executives support all staff equitably, with 56% 
doing so compared with only 35% of followers and 11% of 
laggards. FIGURE 3 
Human resources head
CEO
Business unit heads
Department heads
Managers 
DEI team leader 
FIGURE 2
Leaders Extend DEI Accountability Beyond HR
Who is accountable for meeting DEI objectives? 
[RESPONSES FROM THOSE WHO HAVE SOMEONE ACCOUNTABLE]
■ Leaders      ■ Followers      ■ Lagards
Source: Harvard Business Review Analytic Services survey, May 2021
73%
66%
64%
71
60
54
44
50
40
44
37
21
28
37
44
26
26
36
Inclusive leadership (leaders support all staff equitably)
Participation in training
Compensation
Accommodation for different needs/abilities
Promotions
Receiving development and feedback
Receiving recognition and praise
Equity sentiment among employees
Participation in mentorship programs
Access to opportunities such as special projects, overtime, etc.
None—we do not track equity
FIGURE 3
DEI Leaders’ Executives Support Staff Equitably
Does your organization track equity in any of the following areas?
■ Leaders      ■ Followers      ■ Lagards
Source: Harvard Business Review Analytic Services survey, May 2021
56%
35%
11%
54
34
19
53
48
49
34
48
38
16
46
27
43
25
41
33
40
25
11
37
22
11
21
26
16
11
11
12
7
51

Harvard Business Review Analytic Services
7
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Creating an Equitable and 
Inclusive Culture
Many organizations began putting more work into equity 
and inclusion when they found their efforts to increase 
diversity going nowhere. It is difficult to attract and retain 
good people when they don’t feel welcomed and included, 
or when they perceive opportunities to be unfairly weighted 
against them. These are systemic issues that must be attacked 
in a systematic way. 
“Equity is about promoting justice, impartiality, and 
fairness,” says Yemi Akisanya, global head of DEI at Groupon, 
the global e-commerce marketplace based in Chicago. “[This 
applies] specifically within procedures, policies, processes, 
and the systems that govern us and that distribute resources 
within our corporation. There’s a lot of work that needs to be 
done there.”
Two-thirds of DEI leaders who track equity and inclusion 
have seen improvement in equity (65%) in the past two years, 
compared with only a quarter of laggards (25%). FIGURE 4 
Similarly, 64% have seen improvement in inclusion sentiment 
in the past two years, compared with only 26% of laggards. In 
fact, nearly half of laggards (48%) don’t track inclusion at all. 
Leaders go broader and deeper in monitoring how 
equitable their organizations really are. They are twice as 
likely as laggards to regularly review compensation decisions 
and retention rates for equity, and four times as likely to 
regularly review performance evaluations and promotion 
decisions for equity.
One way organizations can facilitate the shift to a more 
equitable and inclusive culture is by encouraging and 
supporting open conversations about DEI among employees 
themselves. Eighty-two percent of respondents from leader 
companies do, compared with 47% of laggards. In addition to 
its “courageous conversation” series, Boston Beer Co. provides 
resources and events designed to spur conversations across the 
company. “We’re trying to make uncomfortable conversations 
comfortable,” says Sweigart. 
Organizations can gain a lot by paying attention to these 
conversations. At Albemarle, Hildebrand-Jones began her 
work with a three-month listening campaign that included 
a culture survey, 25 focus groups, and more than 100 one-on-
ones. Her goal was to understand the current state, challenges 
and roadblocks, and the vision people had for the culture and 
environment five years in the future. In addition to forming 
the core of the company’s DEI strategy, this campaign helped 
to build awareness, commitment, and engagement.
Changing culture means taking on the ingrained norms 
that exist in organizations. For example, professional services 
firms have long had a “work comes first” ethos. That culture 
can lead to inequities of opportunity for women who take 
time off to have children. So when PwC introduced six weeks 
of paid parental leave for all employees, it spent a year doing 
“training and role play with all teams around how they would 
deal with absences and returns,” says Ariane Hegewisch, 
program director of employment and earnings, Institute for 
Women’s Policy Research (IWPR), and scholar in residence at 
American University. The training encouraged men to take 
advantage of the benefit and was explicit that “if you’re a father 
and you don’t take your six weeks of leave, that’s not a virtue.” 
To help influence the culture at Groupon, the company 
established a “culture workstream team,” says Akisanya. “It’s 
led by leaders and influencers and mavens from a diverse array 
of locations and teams and functions.” The team’s charter 
is to change commitment from words into action. “We’re 
focused on performance, engagement, diversity, inclusion, 
and communication,” he says. “These are the ingredients 
that will help create that aspirational culture that is authentic 
and inclusive.”
A strong area of focus this year is to shift the organization 
away from the idea of “culture fit” to “culture add,” Akisanya 
says. Rather than seek individuals to fit the existing culture, 
Groupon wants people to “bring their uniqueness, their 
differences, their skills, and their perspectives—to add those 
into our culture to continue to create it” while preserving the 
fundamental values of the company.
Improved
Stayed the same
Worsened
Don’t know
FIGURE 4
Leaders’ Equity Is on the Rise
How has overall equity changed in the past two years? 
[RESPONSES FROM THOSE WHO TRACK EQUITY]
■ Leaders      ■ Followers      ■ Lagards
Source: Harvard Business Review Analytic Services survey, May 2021
44
12
19
8
65%
48%
25%
27
36
0
2
14

Harvard Business Review Analytic Services
8
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Using Data and Metrics to Achieve Goals
Closing the DEI gap requires being able to collect reliable data 
and make it available to all stakeholders, especially senior 
leaders. “What gets measured gets done,” says Brown. “If you 
wait to get buy-in without measuring progress, you’re going 
to be waiting a long time.”
DEI leaders are more than twice as likely as laggards to track 
all three aspects of diversity, equity, and inclusion (70% versus 
30%). They measure DEI progress across a wider range of 
metrics and are more likely to share results with all employees. 
The most common area in which organizations track 
diversity is in their hiring; 74% of all respondents track the 
diversity of new hires. Recruiting is next at 64%, followed by 
retention at 47%. All other aspects of diversity are tracked by 
less than 40% of respondents. 
Leaders are significantly more likely than laggards to track 
diversity across all categories. FIGURE 5 “We’re measuring 
representation among new hires, exits, promotions—every 
imaginable cut you can have of the data—and publishing what 
we can about representation,” says Palladini. 
The most notable difference between what leaders track and 
the rest is in development opportunities. Among respondents 
who track diversity, 45% of leaders do so for development 
opportunities compared with only 10% of laggards and 26% 
of followers. Leaders also measure progress toward their 
diversity goals more frequently, with 45% doing so quarterly, 
and another 18% doing so monthly. 
Goal setting must be done carefully to avoid the perception 
of setting arbitrary quotas, says Enderes. “It does diverse 
members of the team a disservice because they get disqualified 
in some people’s minds,” she says. A critical aspect of DEI 
training is to help managers understand how to hire the best 
candidate while also increasing diversity. If specific targets 
are introduced too soon, managers may be tempted to short-
circuit their search in order to make those numbers. 
For that reason, Hildebrand-Jones is waiting to introduce 
targets at Albemarle. The first phase was about building 
commitment and engagement. In the second phase, the 
company is putting in place more formal learning and 
development around DEI. “We want the foundation to be 
strong before introducing targets and metrics so we can achieve 
them in the right way,” she says. Goals will be developed this 
year to be launched in 2022.
Once those metrics are in place, many companies employ 
dashboards to supply busy executives with up-to-date 
information about their workforce that they can access 
whenever they like. At Salesforce, this includes data on head 
count, new hires, attrition, and promotions, sliced by gender, 
race/ethnicity (in the U.S.), and grade (e.g., vice president and 
above). Ford and her team also “get in front of leaders once a 
quarter to let them know what’s happening in their business,” 
Hiring
Recruitment/candidate sourcing
Retention
Representation across job positions
Development opportunities
Promotions
Representation across business units
Compensation
Succession planning
Performance ratings
None—we do not track diversity
FIGURE 5
Tracking Diversity Across the Employee Experience
Within which of the following areas does your organization track diversity? 
[RESPONSES FROM THOSE WHO TRACK DIVERSITY]
■ Leaders      ■ Followers      ■ Lagards
Source: Harvard Business Review Analytic Services survey, May 2021
82%
79%
57%
75
65
51
56
53
50
42
45
26
10
44
38
43
32
41
37
33
24
8
22
19
5
9
28
23
16
18
17
8
26

74% 
of all respondents 
track the diversity 
of new hires. 
Recruiting is next 
at 64%, followed by 
retention at 47%. 

Harvard Business Review Analytic Services
10
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
10 Practices to Improve DEI
Insights from executives and findings from the Harvard Business Review 
Analytic Services survey uncovered many practices for increasing DEI, 
including the following.
Provide a hotline for reporting DEI incidents. 
Leaders from the survey are more than twice as likely as 
laggards to provide mechanisms for employees to report 
DEI incidents without fear of reprisal (63% versus 27%).
Add a warmline for advice and coaching. Warmlines 
provide early intervention and support for non-crisis 
situations. Salesforce’s warmline helps employees deal 
with challenging situations like being passed over for 
promotion or handling microaggressions. Staffers coach 
employees in how to have courageous conversations 
and advocate for themselves. The warmline also helps 
the company spot problems that might need to be 
addressed on a larger scale.
Make full use of employee resource groups (ERGs) 
or networks. ERGs have evolved into powerful groups 
that provide a voice for employees and help leaders 
understand the challenges people face. Most successful 
ERGs have executive sponsors who participate in 
meetings, help with resources, and advocate on 
employees behalf. At the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), ERG leaders sit on 
the agency’s DEI management advisory committee, and 
there is also an executive diversity advisory council.
Change up recruiting. DEI leaders go beyond the 
usual sources of Ivy League colleges and LinkedIn, 
which aren’t especially diverse. Groupon is partnering 
with Grasshopper, Girls Who Code, the National Black 
MBA Association, and the Hispanic Alliance for Career 
Advancement to expand its talent pool. Boston Beer Co. 
is looking to community colleges and unemployment 
agencies to find good talent who might have barriers 
to entry. They also make sure job descriptions and 
postings are easily accessible on mobile phones.
Employ diverse hiring panels. In order to ensure 
hiring panels are diverse, NOAA’s Office of Inclusion 
and Civil Rights has advised the agency’s hiring official 
to expand hiring panels, when necessary, beyond 
subject matter experts and the specific office or agency 
the position is being hired for.
Provide just-in-time nudges about bias. In addition 
to training about unconscious bias, Salesforce sends 
a reminder to hiring managers before interviews about 
biases that can creep in, and the company provides 
leaders with a bias primer as they are calibration-
ranking their talent and doing promotions.
Encourage advancement and provide clear 
development pathways. Vans encourages store 
associates to let store managers know if they want 
to build a career with the company, and it provides a 
clear development pathway from store work to a role 
in marketing, for example. To increase the diversity 
of applicants and candidates to its leadership 
development program, NOAA no longer requires 
supervisor endorsement to apply—a prerequisite 
that was getting in the way of advancement 
efforts. If a candidate is accepted, they still need 
supervisor approval, but the supervisor must give a 
nondiscriminatory reason for a denial.
Offer DEI-inclusive mentorship and sponsorship 
programs. At Salesforce, leaders are encouraged to 
“mentor someone who doesn’t look like you,” says Molly 
Ford, vice president of global equality. Many Black 
professionals in the company don’t have the kind of 
network that others have in order to help them advance. 
Mentorship helps with things like getting to know hiring 
managers, knowing how to jump to another position, 
having someone who can coach them, and connecting 
with people who might be on their career path.
DEI leaders go beyond the usual 
sources of Ivy League colleges 
and LinkedIn, which aren’t 
especially diverse.
Create a DEI steering committee. To ensure 
consistency while taking into account regional 
differences, global companies like Albemarle have 
created DEI steering committees with members from 
different regions and functions to inform, encourage, 
and monitor progress of their DEI strategy.
Share practices with DEI peers. Timitra Hildebrand-
Jones, vice president of DEI and talent acquisition at 
Albemarle, participates in a DEI council of her peers 
to share ideas and get guidance. Yemi Akisanya, global 
head of DEI at Groupon, participated in a call with 
DEI leaders from other e-commerce giants to share 
experiences and ideas about “what’s most pressing to 
move the needle going forward.”

Harvard Business Review Analytic Services
11
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
she says, and they email business leaders a monthly reminder 
to check their dashboard.
More than half of respondents who track DEI metrics share 
them with their board, executives, and senior leadership. 
Leaders are twice as likely as laggards to share these numbers 
with all employees, as well (47% versus 24%). FIGURE 6
A powerful use of metrics is to look for gaps between overall 
company trends and what’s happening in individual units 
or departments. “The devil is in the details,” says Groupon’s 
Akisanya. For instance, the company overall may have 
increased representation of a specific race or ethnic group by 
20% while one department dropped 6%. Once he’s identified 
that gap, Akisanya walks through the data with the leader 
of that business unit to discuss what might be happening. 
“I’m not telling them what to do,” he says. “We’re having a 
conversation about how we could improve. So it’s almost like 
they’re the ones to come up with the program. That way there’s 
buy-in, since they own it. It’s not a DEI thing where I tell them, 
‘Best practice says you should have a sponsorship program.’”
At Salesforce, Ford uses data to better understand and 
improve equity and inclusion at the intersections of particular 
identities—Black women, for example. She overlays employee 
opinion survey data with the company’s equal employment 
opportunity data and creates a heat map to identify areas 
of opportunity. Specific questions about feeling a sense 
of psychological safety or whether or not someone has 
experienced microaggressions on the job can reveal issues 
for Black, Latinx, or Asian women, for example, that might be 
very different from what white women experience—or even 
the roll-up of women’s experience overall. Being able to see 
this greater level of detail is critical.
Outside experts can help companies with these kinds 
of equations. Two-fifths of respondents (40%) say their 
organization has proactively employed outside experts to help 
with DEI within the past two years; a similar percentage (44%) 
have not, and 16% don’t know. Even though leaders are no more 
likely to employ outside experts than others, they are much 
more likely to have seen benefits from doing so, particularly in 
improved measuring and tracking DEI, where they are roughly 
three times as likely as laggards to have benefited. The most 
common benefits from using outside experts are developing 
DEI strategies and accelerating progress to DEI goals.
Working Across Ecosystems and 
Stakeholder Groups
Because inequity is often systemic, leaders committed to 
improving DEI look beyond their own walls to their larger 
ecosystem of contractors and suppliers. For instance, a few 
years ago, Microsoft began extending its parental leave policy 
to many of its contractors, requiring that those employers 
provide 12 weeks of paid leave to employees working for 
Microsoft after the birth or adoption of a child. The company 
did so “understanding that this would have an impact on 
contracts and price,” says IWPR’s Hegewisch. 
Vans’ DEI interests go beyond employees to encompass the 
athletes it supports and its vendors—“the people who work in 
front of and behind the camera,” says Palladini. Vans tracks 
the diversity of those groups quarterly. Similarly, Groupon 
considers the systemic barriers its vendors face as part of its 
Senior leadership
Board of directors/executive leadership
All employees
External entities
Legal team
General public
Marketing team
Outside consultants
FIGURE 6
Leaders Are More Likely to Share Metrics 
With whom does your organization share its DEI metrics? 
[RESPONSES FROM THOSE WHO TRACK DEI METRICS]
■ Leaders      ■ Followers      ■ Lagards
Source: Harvard Business Review Analytic Services survey, May 2021
59%
60%
47%
57
54
45
47
39
17
14
17
17
10
15
12
13
9
9
10
24
5
7
6
9

Harvard Business Review Analytic Services
12
Research Report  |  Creating a Culture of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
DEI efforts. “We must do everything we can to create equity 
among our vendors,” Akisanya says.
Organizations have to think about the communities in 
which they operate, as well. Palladini started a working 
group of his peers from the large companies headquartered 
in Orange County, Calif., to discuss “what would have to 
be true for Orange County to become a place that was truly 
diverse, inclusive, equitable, and welcoming of all BIPOC 
cohorts,” he says.
Many CEOs, including Albemarle’s, are deepening their 
understanding and commitment by participating in initiatives 
such as CEO Action for Diversity and Inclusion,5 a coalition of 
over 2,000 CEOs who have committed to advance DEI in the 
workplace, and the UN Global Compact,6 through which CEOs 
commit to take action supporting principles on human rights, 
labor, the environment, and more, according to Hildebrand-
Jones. Participating in these efforts “demonstrates leadership 
and a public commitment to DEI.” 
DEI leaders also make an impact by supporting the work 
of other organizations at the local and national levels. For 
example, Vans takes advantage of its large fan base and social 
media following to help amplify the messages of organizations 
such as the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People (NAACP) and, locally, the Orange County 
Human Relations Council.
Conclusion
The work that DEI leaders have been doing is paying off. 
Leaders are much more likely than laggards and followers 
to have seen improvements over the past two years in 
representation of race and gender. The data suggests that age, 
ability, and sexual orientation have also shown improvements, 
though these are certainly harder to track. The benefits of 
increasing DEI have been well-documented. “Increasing DEI is 
a win across multiple dimensions,” says McKinsey’s Ellsworth. 
Not only is it the right thing to do, but research from 
multiple sources, including McKinsey and Bersin, also shows 
that DEI leaders outperform their competitors financially. 
Endnotes
More and more, customers, employees, and investors 
expect the companies they do business with to embrace and 
demonstrate DEI. 
Even leaders who are committed to increasing DEI face 
challenges on a daily basis. It’s a lot of work to change the 
many policies and practices that get in the way. For instance, 
a policy that requires managers to fill positions before the end 
of the quarter or lose those positions often leads managers to 
hire people who are already in their own network. 
Business pressures in fast-paced industries like technology 
can drive leaders to bypass some of the steps required to get 
DEI right, even when they support DEI efforts. For example, 
sales managers need to be trained in how to effectively 
incorporate diverse talent into their hiring process. But if it’s 
the fourth quarter and business is pressing, sales leaders may 
not be willing to take managers away from selling and hiring 
for the two to three days such training requires, says Ford.
The answer for executives and their DEI leaders is to be 
transparent about conflicting priorities and to work through 
them as best they can. Getting to the point where diversity, 
equity, and inclusion are ingrained in company culture and 
practices will take years. 
To ensure that DEI continues to improve, executives 
must regularly monitor DEI metrics, use that data to better 
manage their efforts, and communicate progress throughout 
the organization. Sharing trends with employees and other 
stakeholders, internal and external, demonstrates that DEI 
progress matters and that the organization’s commitment 
to it is ongoing.
“You’d never say, ‘We did really well at marketing and 
our customer outcomes went up, so I’m never going to do 
marketing again,’” Enderes says. “You keep at DEI and run it 
as a function, not as a project that’s ever complete, because 
it’s not ever complete.” And that means having a strategy with 
real executive commitment, and measuring and monitoring 
those things that will truly make a difference. 
1	  Bersin, Josh, “Elevating Equity: The Real Story of Diversity and Inclusion,” 2020. https://joshbersin.com/dei-
research-report/.
2	  Vans, Public Diversity Page, https://www.vans.com/empower.html.
3	  Salesforce, “Equality Data,” 2020. https://equalitydata.herokuapp.com/.
4	  Sundiatu Dixon-Fyle, Kevin Dolan, Vivian Hunt, and Sara Prince, “Diversity Wins,” McKinsey & Co., May 19, 2020.
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/diversity-and-inclusion/diversity-wins-how-inclusion-matters.
5	  CEO Action for Diversity and Inclusion, https://www.ceoaction.com/. 
6	  United Nations Global Compact, https://www.unglobalcompact.org/.

M E T H O D O L O G Y  A N D  P A R T I C I P A N T  P R O F I L E
A total of 1,115 respondents drawn from the HBR audience (magazine/newsletter 
readers, customers, HBR.org users) and SHRM’s membership completed the survey. 
All respondents presently reside in North America.
Size of Organization
30% 
10,000 or more 
employees
8% 
5,000 – 9,999 
employees
24% 
1,000 – 4,999 
employees
12% 
500 – 999 
employees
27% 
100 – 499 
employees
Seniority
17% 
Executive 
management/
board members
41% 
Senior 
management
26% 
Middle 
management
15% 
Other grades
Industry
15% 
Government/
not-for-profit
12% 
Education 
11% 
Health care  
11% 
Financial services 
10% 
Manufacturing
9% 
Technology
All other sectors 
less than 8% each.
Job Function
48% 
Human resources
All other functions 
less than 8% each.
Regions
100%
North America
Figures may not add up to 100% due to rounding.

A B O U T  U S
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services is an independent commercial research 
unit within Harvard Business Review Group, conducting research and comparative 
analysis on important management challenges and emerging business opportunities. 
Seeking to provide business intelligence and peer-group insight, each report is 
published based on the findings of original quantitative and/or qualitative research 
and analysis. Quantitative surveys are conducted with the HBR Advisory Council, 
HBR’s global research panel, and qualitative research is conducted with senior 
business executives and subject matter experts from within and beyond the Harvard 
Business Review author community. Email us at hbranalyticservices@hbr.org.
hbr.org/hbr-analytic-services
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing.
MCCRE21560921

