C.A.E. LUSCHNIG
Second Edition
Revised by C.A.E. Luschnig and Deborah Mitchell
AN INTRODUCTION TO
ANCIENT GREEK
A Literary Appro a c h

AN
INTRODUCTION
TO
ANCIENT GREEK
A Literary Approach
Second Edition


C.A.E. Luschnig
AN
INTRODUCTION
TO
ANCIENT GREEK
A Literary Approach
Second Edition
Revised by
C.A.E. Luschnig
Deborah Mitchell
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc.
Indianapolis/Cambridge

Copyright © 2007 by Hackett Publishing Company, Inc.
 
All rights reserved
10 09 08 07    1 2 3 4 5 6 7
For further information, please address
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc.
P.O. Box 44937
Indianapolis, Indiana 46244-0937
www.hackettpublishing.com
Cover design by L. J. Luschnig and Deborah Mitchell
Interior design by Elizabeth L. Wilson and Deborah Mitchell
Composition by Agnew’s, Inc.
Printed at Hamilton Printing Company
The Greek fonts used to create this work are available from www.linguistsoftware
.com/lgku.htm, +1-425-775-1130.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Luschnig, C.A.E.
Introduction to ancient Greek : a literary approach / C.A.E. Luschnig. — 2nd ed.
p.  cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-87220-889-6 (pbk.) — ISBN 978-0-87220-890-2 (cloth)
1. Greek language—Grammar.  2. Greek language—Readers.  I. Title.
PA258.L87 2007
485—dc22
 
                                                                                                           2007014145                 
 
 
 eISBN 978-1-60384-024-8  (e-book)
 
 
 
 
 
                               

CONTENTS
v
Preface
ix
Abbreviations and Reference Works
xiii
Introduction
1
Alphabet and Sounds of Greek
1
Grammatical Outline
13
Lesson I
21
Present Indicative Active and 
Middle-Passive of ‑ω Verbs:
The First Principal Part
21
Nouns of the First (‑η) and 
Second (‑ο) Declensions; Article
28
Lesson II
43
Imperfect Active and Middle-
Passive; εἰμί
43
Adjectives: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον and 
‑ος, ‑ον Types
48
Lesson III
63
Future Active and Middle: 
The Second Principal Part
63
First Declension Nouns
68
Lesson IV
83
Aorist Active and Middle:
The Third Principal Part
83
Indirect Statement
93

Lesson V
105
Third Declension Nouns
105
Lesson VI
121
Third Declension Adjectives
121
Third/First Declension Adjectives
122
Irregular Adjectives
124
Syntax
126
Lesson VII
135
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist 
Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
135
Lesson VIII
157
Pronouns: Interrogative, Indefinite, 
Relative Indefinite, Reciprocal
157
Perfect Active: The Fourth 
Principal Part
162
Lesson IX
175
Pronouns: Personal and Reflexive; 
Possessive Adjectives
175
Perfect Middle-Passive: 
The Fifth Principal Part
184
Lesson X
193
Comparison of Adjectives, 
Adverbs
193
Aorist and Future Passive: The 
Sixth Principal Part
205
Lesson XI
213
Contract Verbs
213
Lesson XII
231
-ΜΙ Verbs
231
Lesson XIII
249
Subjunctive
249
Optative
258
vi
Contents

Sequence of Moods and 
Dependent Clauses
266
Lesson XIV
271
Imperative
271
Vocative
274
Verbals in -τέος and -τέον
275
Appendix I: Paradigms
281
Appendix II: Syntax
315
Greek–English Vocabulary
329
English–Greek Vocabulary
355
Authors of the Readings
361
List of Sources for the Readings
363
Index
369
Contents
vii


PREFACE
ix
Learning Greek is lifelong education. When the opportunity to work on a sec-
ond edition of Introduction to Ancient Greek was presented to me by friends
and strangers from California to Pennsylvania, I had already retired from
classroom teaching after thirty-eight years at the blackboard (which morphed
into the overhead projector and finally the Elmo). I had no idea how much I
would learn from this undertaking, about Greek, about myself and my writ-
ing, about approaches to teaching, and about changes in the world since I
worked on the first edition, beginning in 1971. My colleagues and I have made
hundreds of changes for the new edition: corrections of errors or infelicities;
improvements in clarity, consistency, and pedagogy; additions of gender-
 inclusive material and helpful hints to learners and teachers. The changes are
based on decades of teaching beginning Greek and learning from students
what works for them. 
The Book’s Approach
I have assumed that students who study Greek at the university level really
want to learn Greek, and learn Greek so that they will be able to read Greek
or some particular thing(s) in Greek, not in order to recite paradigm after
paradigm in endless and meaningless succession. Yet the paradigms must
still be learned. When I began writing this book, the beginning Greek text-
books then in use tended to give students little more than the bare bones of
Greek, and not in a very interesting way. The choice of Xeno phon’s Anabasis
(and that Xenophon adapted so that it was barely recognizable) struck me
as an unfortunate pick for the main or only reading. Readings from Greek
authors chosen to introduce students to Greek literature should be intellec-
tually stimulating: they should make the students want to read Greek. The
readings in this book were chosen because they illustrate grammatical
points; but many were selected in the hope that they would be interesting
to the students, encouraging them to learn the new paradigms, and expand-
ing their consciousness of Greek, so that they would read more. The read-
ings are taken from a variety of sources representing different eras and
different philosophies, some of which most students will not have heard of
before reading them.
Languages, Living and Dead
To call Greek a dead language is to take a narrow-minded, exclusively prag-
matic view of time and of life and death (at least of the life and death of lan-
guages). A language is only dead when it has passed from human memory,

leaving no literature and no living descendants. Perhaps we could say that
Hittite and Tocharian are dead languages, because their literatures are scanty
and they are known by few, though even they live for ardent Indo-European
philologists, after their fashion. The life of a language is a relative thing. To
call Greek a dead language is to admit that one knows no Greek and to imag-
ine that it cannot be known and, indeed, is not worth knowing.
Greek is a living language not only because it never died but continues to
develop and change and can still be heard in its heir, Modern Greek, but also
because it has left us a literature that is part of our common heritage and that
continues to influence the way we think, speak, and write.
A Traditional Approach
On the other hand the Attic Greek spoken in fifth-century Athens is no longer
spoken in the same way. There is nowhere we can hear it and no one with
whom we can speak it. For this reason I have taken the traditional, rational
approach to teaching Greek, rather than a “natural method.” The study of
Greek has long been a bookish pursuit, and rightly so. For this language we
have only the books (and other writings) of the ancient Greeks to study. We
have only part of a language, the part that can be written down. I have there-
fore tried to present the forms in a reasonable order and hope students learn
them through use, repetition, and review. I have also intended to treat the stu-
dents as intelligent, rational human beings, who will one day be better than
their teachers.
For the Second Edition
I used An Introduction to Ancient Greek: A Literary Approach for nearly thirty
years to help undergraduates learn Greek, mostly at the University of Idaho,
where, as it may surprise the world to learn there has been for many years a
dedicated band of classical studies students. The book had a small and loyal
following outside, but although at first it had its enthusiasts it never gained
wide circulation. Until I heard from Richard Hamilton, Professor of Greek at
Bryn Mawr, and Deborah Mitchell, computer programmer, book designer, and
faithful guide to Internet language learners, early in 2005, each independently
of the other, I thought my book was destined to languish in obscurity. That
same year I heard from several other interested teachers and learners. I was
amazed at the interest and jumped at the chance, first presented by Professor
Hamilton, to revise the book for the publication of a second, more aesthetic,
more gender-inclusive, more streamlined, and less flawed 21st-century edi-
tion. The book was tested in a beta-version at Bryn Mawr, Haverford College,
and St. John’s College, Santa Fe, in 2006–7. Many suggestions and corrections
from both students and teachers have been incorporated. One aspect which I
have kept from the old edition is the preview of coming attractions, intro-
ducing new material from the next lesson in readings with explanatory
glosses and notes. In this way the new material will be a little less strange,
since the students will already have seen it.
x
Preface

Acknowledgments
For this opportunity, I would like to thank Richard Hamilton and Deborah
Mitchell for staying with the project they helped initiate, for their continued
enthusiasm and encouragement, and above all for the Herculean labor that
has gone into designing, formatting, and editing the new edition. I would also
like to thank Professor Hamilton’s graduate student, Dennis McHenry, to
whom I owe a huge debt of thanks for entering and formatting the text, and
his two teaching assistants, Andrew Beer and Sean Mullin, who worked with
the new version. Thanks, too, to teachers who have used the book, Karelisa
Hartigan, Deborah Roberts, Sherry Martin, Bruce Perry, and others in the past,
who kindly contributed suggestions for the new edition. Thanks to students,
my own and others, who have been, knowingly or not, contributors to this
project; among them most recently, Robert Haas, Tracy Cogsdill, Billy O’Dell,
Ivan Peterson, Travis Puller, and Aaron Mayhugh. Thank you, especially, beta-
testers, both students and teachers, for taking such joy in finding and correct-
ing errata. Finally I would like to thank once again all the friends named in the
first published book and especially Harry Fulton who typed and formatted the
manuscript that remained in use for three decades. Only now do I fully ap-
preciate what an enormous task it was and how well he performed it.
WorldWideGreek
For online help, supplements, interactive forums, useful links, and study
guides, visit the official Web site: http://www.worldwidegreek.com/.
Students and teachers of Greek are invited to contribute to the Web site by
sending submissions to admin@worldwidegreek.com or by writing to Cecelia
Luschnig at cluschnig@moscow.com, and to discuss anything related to Greek
in the Forum on WorldWideGreek. We are hoping to publish syllabi, sugges-
tions for classroom use, and anecdotes about teaching and learning Greek. We
are especially interested in additional unadapted readings from Greek au-
thors with notes and glosses geared to the different lessons and vocabularies
for texts for elementary and intermediate students. 
This book is dedicated to learners of Greek everywhere.
Preface
xi


ABBREVIATIONS AND
REFERENCE WORKS
xiii
<
is derived from 
>
produces 
*
important Reading Vocabulary (Lesson IX
forward)
+
used with (of cases, constructions) 
[I], [II], [III], etc.
refer to lesson numbers 
1 or 1st
first person 
2 or 2nd
second person 
3 or 3rd
third person 
A or acc.
accusative 
abs.
absolute 
act.
active 
adj.
adjective 
adv.
adverb 
aor.
aorist 
aor. 1
first aorist 
aor. 2
second aorist 
art.
article 
attrib. pos.
attributive position 
aug.
augment 
compar.
comparative 
conj.
conjunction
cpd.
compound 
D or dat.
dative 
decl.
declension 
dimin.
diminutive
encl.
enclitic 
Ex.
Exercise 
f. or fem.
feminine 
frg.
fragment
fut.
future 
G or gen.
genitive 
imper.
imperative 
impers.
impersonal 
impf.
imperfect 
ind.
indicative 
inf. or infin.
infinitive 
intens. 
intensive 

interrog.
interrogative
intrans.
intransitive 
irreg.
irregular 
m. or masc.
masculine 
mid.
middle 
Mod. Gr.
Modern Greek 
mid.-pass. or m.-p.
middle-passive 
n.
noun
n. or neut.
neuter 
N or nom.
nominative 
neg.
negative 
obj.
object 
opp.
opposite 
opt.
optative 
part. or partic. or ptcpl.
participle 
pass.
passive 
pers.
person, personal 
pf.
perfect 
pl.
plural 
plpf.
pluperfect 
pos.
position 
poss.
possessive 
postpos.
postpositive 
pred.
predicate 
pred. pos.
predicate position 
prep.
preposition 
pres.
present 
princ. pts. or PP
principal parts 
pron.
pronoun
rel.
relative 
reg.
regular 
sg.
singular 
subj.
subjunctive 
superl.
superlative 
trans.
transitive 
vb.
verb
xiv
Abbreviations and Reference Works
Recommended Grammars and Lexicon
G&G = Goodwin and Gulick: William Watson Goodwin, Greek Grammar, re-
vised by Charles Burton Gulick.
LSJ = Liddell, Scott, Jones: Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott, A Greek–
English Lexicon, revised by Henry Stuart Jones (Oxford).
Smyth = Herbert Weir Smyth, Greek Grammar, revised by Gordon M. Messing.

INTRODUCTION
The Greek Alphabet
and the Structure of Greek
In this lesson you will learn the letters and sounds of Greek, the diacritical marks, the
classification of letters, the parts of speech, and useful definitions. You will be able
to read words, recite the alphabet song, translate selected sentences, and read signs.
1
ALPHABET AND SOUNDS OF GREEK
The Greek alphabet has twenty-four letters (γράμματα: grammata), given be-
low with their names, usual transliterations into the Roman alphabet, and a
recommended pronunciation.
The Alphabet
Character
Name
Transliteration
Pronunciation
Α
α
ἄλφα
alpha
a
short: cup; long: father
Β
β
βῆτα
beta
b
b
Γ
γ
γάμμα
gamma
g (ng)
hard g, ng, going
Δ
δ
δέλτα
delta
d
d
Ε
ε
ἒ ψιλόν
epsilon
e
short e, bet
Ζ
ζ
ζῆτα
zeta
z
sd, wisdom; dz, adze
Η
η
ἦτα
eta
e
long ε (cf. French fête)
Θ
θ
θῆτα
theta
th
t-h
Ι
ι
ἰῶτα
iota
i
short: bin; long: bean
Κ
κ
κάππα
kappa
k, c
k
Λ
λ
λάμβδα
lambda
l
l
Μ
μ
μῦ
mu
m
m
Ν
ν
νῦ
nu
n
n
Ξ 
ξ
ξῖ
xi
x
ks/x: tacks, tax
Ο
ο
ὂ μικρόν
omicron
o
short o: pot (German Gott)
Π
π
πῖ
pi
p
p
Ρ
ρ
ῥῶ
rho
r, rh
trilled r (as in Italian)
Σ
σ, ς
σίγμα
sigma
s
as in say
Τ
τ
ταῦ
tau
t
t
Υ
υ
ὖ ψιλόν
upsilon
y
French u; German ü
Φ
φ
φῖ
phi
ph
p-h
Χ
χ
χῖ
chi
ch
k-h
Ψ
ψ
ψῖ
psi
ps
hips
Ω
ω
ὦ μέγα
omega
o
go

The capitals are the original forms, but the small letters are used in modern
printed texts except for proper nouns and the beginnings of paragraphs.
Punctuation
In Greek printed texts, the period (.) and comma (,) have the same use in
Greek as in English. A raised period (·) is equivalent to both our semicolon (;)
and colon (:). The semicolon (;) is used in Greek as a question mark (?).
Attic Greek
In Greek a variety of both literary and spoken dialects persisted. Attic, the di-
alect used by the Athenians, gradually became the standard for prose. Koine¯,
the common dialect, developed from Attic. The exercises in this book are
based on Attic Greek. In the readings, words in other dialects (Doric, Ionic,
Aeolic, Homeric) are explained. 
Exercise A
1.
Learn the names, sounds, and shapes of the Greek letters (concentrating
on the small letters).
2.
Pronounce the following words. Transliterate them into the Roman al-
phabet. Do you recognize any words that are similar to English words? For
the time being, stress or raise the pitch of the syllable that has the accent mark
(΄ ` ῀).
Example: πάθος: pathos; Engl. pathos, -path, patho-
1. ψυχή
5. μικρός
9. ποταμός
13. βάρβαρος
2. ξένος
6. θεός
10. ἀγορά
14. ζῷον
3. δένδρον
7. λόγος
11. φίλος
4. δρᾶμα
8. σκηνή
12. ἀρχή
3.
Pronounce the following and write English derivatives.
1. ἀλφάβητος
5. συμβίωσις
9. μητρόπολις
13. ἄνθρωπος
2. βαρβαρισμός
6. ῥινόκερως
10. τεχνολογία
14. ἀδελφός
3. ζωδιακός
7. ἐτυμολογία
11. ἐπιτομή
15. γυμνάσιον
4. ὀρθογραφία
8. Κύκλωψ
12. ἀποθέωσις
16. ἰσοσκελής
Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος.
In [the] beginning was the word.
—Gospel of John
2
Introduction

Vowels, Diphthongs, and Iota-subscript
1. Vowels
The vowels (φωνήεντα) are α, ε, η, ι, ο, υ, ω. Of these, α, ι, and υ are of variable
quantity, that is, they can be either long or short. Of the others, ε (ἒ ψιλόν
plain e), and ο (ὂ μικρόν little o) are always short; and η and ω (ὦ μέγα big o) are
always long. Long vowels were originally pronounced for about twice as long
as short ones. Vowel length affects pronunciation, accent, and the meters of
poetry.
2. Diphthongs (δίφθογγοι) and Vowel Combinations
A diphthong is a combination of vowel sounds that starts as one vowel and,
within the same syllable, changes gradually to another vowel.
The diphthongs in Greek are:
Diphthong
Transliteration
Pronunciation
αι
ai, ae, e
(ai)
aisle, high [ī]
αυ
au
(au)
sauerkraut 
ει
ei, e, i
(ei)
sleigh [ā]
ευ (also ηυ)
eu
(ε + υ)
οι
oi, oe, e, i
(oi)
coin, toy
ου
ou, u
(ou)
soup [oo]
υι
ui
(uy)
(cf. New York)
(The combination υι in Attic Greek always occurs before another vowel and
is pronounced as υ followed by the semi-vowel y; there is no exact English
equivalent.)
3. The Long Diphthongs: Iota-subscript
When a long vowel (ᾱ, η, or ω) combines with ι to form a diphthong, the ι is
(in most modern texts) written under the line: this is called iota-subscript or
ι-subscript, ᾳ, ῃ, ῳ. This is not an ancient custom, but dates from the Byzan-
tine Age, when scholars were attempting to standardize the spelling of an-
cient Greek, although the pronunciation had changed over the years. Most
but not all modern texts follow the Byzantine practice.
Note on ι‑subscript
In the Classical period, and in fact until the ninth century C.E., the
capital letters were used for all formal writing. The small letters are
simplified forms of these for faster writing, and began in the ninth
century C.E. to be used as a formal (or book) hand. Before this time
the long diphthongs were written with iota on the line with the other
letters: ΑΙ, ΗΙ, ΩΙ, as in ΤΗΙ ΚΩΜΩΙΔΙΑΙ, ΤΗΙ ΤΡΑΓΩΙΔΙΑΙ (τῇ κωμῳδίᾳ,
τῇ τραγῳδίᾳfor the comedy, for the tragedy), and iota was pronounced:
spelling originally represents pronunciation (i.e., language), but of-
ten becomes standardized (or fossilized) as pronunciation changes.
Alphabet and Sounds of Greek
3

By the second century B.C.E. this iota had been lost from the pronun-
ciation in Attica, and it gradually ceased to be written. The Byzantines
put it under the line to show that it no longer affected the pronunci-
ation. When this little iota occurs, it must be learned as part of the
spelling. Thus, it is necessary to distinguish -ῃ(a dative ending) from
-η (a nominative ending). After a capital letter, this ι is still written on
the line in modern texts, Αι, Ηι, Ωι (= ᾳ, ῃ, ῳ).
Breathings
1. In Greek, the symbol ῾, though not a letter, represents one of the sounds of
the language, the h-sound (or aspiration).
2. Every word beginning with a vowel or diphthong must be marked with
either the ῾(rough breathing for h) or the ᾿(smooth breathing for the absence
of an h): εἰς (eis) into; εἷς (heis) one; ὀδός (odos) threshold; ὁδός (hodos) road. The
breathing mark goes over the second member of a diphthong: οὐnot; οὗof
whom.
3. Words beginning with ρ and υ always have the rough breathing: ῥόδον rose;
ὑπέρ over (hyper).
Note on the Breathings
The alphabet given above is the Ionic alphabet, which was the one used
by the Ionian Greeks and adopted by the Athenians (officially in 403
B.C.E.), and gradually by all the Greeks. Before this universal accept-
ance of the Ionic alphabet, a city-state might not only have its own di-
alect, but some even had their own versions of the alphabet. Now the
Ionic alphabet is the one used both for Modern Greek and for classi-
cal Greek texts. The old Attic alphabet (and some others as well) used
the Η symbol for the h-sound (the aspiration), but the Ionians used the
same symbol to represent the long e-sound: in their dialect, speakers
tended to drop their h’s. In some places, a new symbol was developed
to represent the h-sound, at first used only to differentiate words that
were otherwise the same—such as ὅρος (horos) boundary from ὄρος
(oros) mountain—but later adopted universally. This symbol was de-
veloped from the Η, by splitting it in half: ˫ (used in inscriptions from
the Greek colonies in Southern Italy, ˫ορος). It was later adopted in the
form by the Alexandrian scholars from which it developed into our
῾, the rough breathing (πνεῦμα δασύ hairy breath). The Alexandrian
grammarians also introduced the complementary ˧ (which became 
and then ᾿) to indicate the absence of aspiration (calling it πνεῦμα
ψιλόν plain breath, bald breath) again to indicate the correct reading of
words otherwise spelled the same. It is now conventional to mark
every word beginning with a vowel or diphthong with a rough (῾) or
smooth (᾿) breathing. It must be learned as part of the spelling of the
word. It is written beside (to the left of) a capital letter: Ἠ, Ἡ, Ἀ, Ἁ.
The rough breathing is pronounced and transliterated as the letter
h; the smooth breathing is not heard and is not transliterated.
4
Introduction

Ὀρέστης, Orestes
Ὅμηρος, *Homer
*Note: in English the endings of personal names are often dropped.
The rough breathing is also used over an initial ρ, to indicate that
it is aspirated. We represent this by trilling the ρ and transliterating ῥ
as rh: ῥήτωρ (rhetor), orator.
Classification of Consonants
The consonants (σύμφωνα) are divided into Mutes (or stops) and Continuants
(including liquids, nasals, a spirant, and double consonants).
There are nine Mutes (ἄφωνα), divided according to (1) where they are pro-
duced, into labials, dentals, and palatals; and (2) the effort in breathing, into
unvoiced, voiced, and aspirated (or rough).
The following chart shows the two classifications:
Unvoiced
Voiced
Aspirated
Produced With
Labials
π
β
φ
the lips
Palatals
κ
γ
χ
the soft palate and tongue
Dentals
τ
δ
θ
the teeth and tongue
Unvoiced or voiceless (ψιλά) consonants are produced without vibration
of the vocal cords.
Voiced consonants (called μέσα in Greek) are produced with vibration of
the vocal cords: the difference between τ and δ, or κ and γ, or π and β (t and d,
or k and g, or p and b) can be felt if you place your fingers on your Adam’s
 apple; you will feel δ, γ, and β, but not τ, κ, π.
Aspirated (δασέα) consonants are followed by a blast of air, or the h sound
(῾), the rough breathing in Greek.
Note on the Aspirated Consonants
The three aspirates, φ, θ, χ, are equivalent to the three unvoiced mutes
π, τ, κ plus the h sound. This means that they are pronounced more
or less as follows: φ like ph in flop-house; θ like th in pot-head; and χ
like kh in block-head; except that in Greek the two sounds would be
in the same syllable. Actually in English our initial p is aspirated (and
so probably very much like Greek φ): if you hold your hand in front
of your mouth when saying put or pot, you will feel a blast of air
(which is the aspiration). Then try spot or stop, and you will find that
p in these positions is much less heavily aspirated. The same is true
of English t and k sounds, as in top, stop; cat, scat. English does not
make the distinction in spelling between these two variants of p, t, k,
but Greek does. An English speaker would have difficulty in hearing
the difference between π and φ, τ and θ, κ and χ in the ancient pro-
nunciations of these letters. Knowing that φ = π῾ ; θ = τ῾; χ = κ῾will be
helpful later on.
Alphabet and Sounds of Greek
5

The Nasals. There are three nasals in Greek: μ (a labial nasal), ν (a dental
nasal), and nasal γ (a palatal nasal).
Nasal γ: when γ occurs before another palatal (i.e., γ, κ, χ, or ξ), it is pro-
nounced ng (as in sing):
Example
Translation
Description
ἄγγελος
messenger (angel)
γγ as in anger.
ἀνάγκη
necessity
γκ as in ink, ankle
σύγχορος
partner in the chorus
γκ as in sink-hole, Bankhead
Σφίγξ
Sphinx
γξ as in inks, Sphinx
The Liquids are ρ and λ.
The only Spirant in Greek is σ. Note that sigma at the end of a word is writ-
ten ς, anywhere else σ. Some modern editors print the open or lunate form (ϲ)
found in papyri for sigma in all its positions.
The Double Consonants (διπλᾶ): ζ, ξ, and ψ, are each two consonant sounds
represented by one letter.
Labial mutes combine with sigma to become ψ: π, β, or φ + σ > ψ.
Palatal mutes combine with sigma to become ξ: κ, γ, or χ + σ > ξ.
The symbol ζ represents the sound combination σδ. There is, however,
some dispute over the pronunciation of this letter: it may originally have in-
dicated the sound dz and it is pronounced in this way by most English-speak-
ing Greek scholars. The continual change in language often makes it difficult
to find exactly how a given letter was pronounced at a given time: either com-
bination (sd or dz) is acceptable for classroom use.
Exercise B: Diphthongs, etc.
1.
Pronounce the following words aloud. (Try to guess at their meanings or
find English words derived from them.)
1. δαίμων
6. ψευδής
11. Σφίγξ
16. ἵππος
2. αἰθήρ
7. ἄγγελος
12. ηὕρηκα
17. οὐρανός
3. εἰρήνη
8. εἰρωνεία
13. χαρακτήρ
18. οἶκος
4. οἰκονομικός
9. ἔκλειψις
14. ῥαψῳδός
19. αὐτόματος
5. φαινόμενον
10. αὐστηρός
15. ἐγκώμιον
20. ὑποκριτής
2.
Read the following proper names aloud and try to write English equiva-
lents. Because there are many variant spellings of Greek names in English,
there is no one right answer for each.
1. Αἴσωπος
9. Ἥρα
17. Ἡσίοδος
25. Αἴγυπτος
2. Ἀγαμέμνων
10. Κάδμος
18. Σωκράτης
26. Οἰδίπους
3. Εὐκλείδης
11. Ὄλυμπος
19. Μήδεια
27. Ἀθῆναι
4. Ἰφιγένεια
12. Ἀριστοφάνης
20. Ἡρακλῆς
28. Κλυταιμνήστρα
5. Ἀθηνᾶ
13. Διογένης
21. Αἰσχύλος
29. Ἄρτεμις
6. Ἕκτωρ
14. Σοφοκλῆς
22. Δελφοί
30. Ἐπίκουρος
7. Βάκχος
15. Ῥόδος
23. Εὐριπίδης
31. Ζεύς
8. Θουκυδίδης
16. Ἀλκιβιάδης
24. Ἀπόλλων
32. Ἀριστοτέλης
6
Introduction

Ἄνθρωπος φύσει πολιτικὸν ζῷον.
A human being [is] by nature [a] political/
social animal. 
—Aristotle, Politics
Obsolete letters
In the earliest Greek alphabets, three other letters are found in some
inscriptions, but not in manuscripts. They are (1) ϝ (also written ϛ)
called digamma from its shape; it was pronounced like English w;
(2) ϙ, called koppa (corresponding to q) and used in place of κ before
ο and υ; and (3) ϡ, san or sampi, whose original sound is a little more
obscure: it was probably another spirant (perhaps the sh sound). In
the alphabet, ϝ is the sixth letter (between ε and ζ); ϙ is between π and
ρ; and ϡ comes at the end, after ω. These were used for numerical no-
tation along with other letters of the alphabet (see below for numer-
als and numerical notation). The sounds these three obsolete letters
represent were lost very early in the history of the Greek language,
though traces of the digamma sound are found in Homer, the earliest
Greek poetry, and the letter itself occurs in early papyri, most notably
those of lyric poets, such as Alcman, Corinna, and Sappho.
Accents (τόνοι)
The predominant accent of classical Greek was one of pitch rather than one
of stress (until about the fourth century C.E., by which time it had probably
become a stress accent like that of Modern Greek). We know that it was a mu-
sical pitch accent from the descriptions of it by Greek grammarians begin-
ning in the Hellenistic Age, and from the very terminology used to describe it.
Stephen G. Daitz offers helpful suggestions in The Pronunciation & Reading of
Ancient Greek: A Practical Guide with accompanying tapes. It is recommended
that this be available in the library or language laboratory and that the use of
pitch accents be encouraged from the beginning.
There are three accent marks in Greek:
Kind
English Name
Greek Name
Translation
΄
acute
ὀξύς
sharp
`
grave
βαρύς
heavy, deep
῀
circumflex
περισπώμενος
pulled around
which represent respectively a rising pitch (΄), a flat pitch (`), and a rising-
falling pitch (^). Most Greek words have one accent mark to indicate the dom-
inant accent (κύριος τόνος) of the word. There are many rules on the placing
of the accent, some of which will be given in this book, as they are needed,
beginning now.
Alphabet and Sounds of Greek
7

Placing the Accent Mark
The accent is written over a vowel or diphthong (over the second
member of the diphthong): θάνατος death; νῆσος island; πλοῦτος wealth.
Should the accent and breathing mark fall on the same letter, the
acute or grave is written to the right of the breathing mark, the cir-
cumflex above it: ὅς or ὃς who; ᾧto whom; οἷς to whom (pl.). With cap-
ital letters, both accent and breathing are put to the left of the letter:
Ὅμηρος Homer; ὮOh! If the word begins with an accented diph-
thong, the breathing and accent are put over its second member as
usual: Αἴγυπτος Egypt.
Accent Rules
1. The accent mark can fall only on one of the last three syllables of a word
(see below for the definition of a syllable). These are usually called by Latin
names: the last syllable is called the ultima (last in Latin); the next to last syl-
lable the penult[ima] (almost the last); and the third from the last is called the
antepenult (before the next to last). These terms are briefer than the awkward
English phrases, and will be easy once they become familiar. (We need not
bother with the anteante‑ or any others further back than the antepenult, since
they are out of the running for the accent mark.)
2. The acute (τόνος ὀξύς) can fall on any of the last three syllables; the cir-
cumflex (τόνος περισπώμενος) only on one of the last two; the grave (τόνος
βαρύς) only on the ultima.
3. The circumflex (which required a rising and falling pitch within the same
syllable) can fall only on a long vowel or diphthong. The acute and grave can
fall on either long or short vowels or diphthongs.
4. How far back (i.e., away from the end of the word) the accent can go is de-
termined by the length of the ultima. For purposes of accent a syllable is long
if it contains a long vowel (η, ω, ᾱ, ῑ, ῡ) or a diphthong, short if it contains a
short vowel (ε, ο, ᾰ, ῐ, ῠ). The diphthongs ‑αι and ‑οι as endings are considered
short in determining accent (except in the optative mood of verbs). (Note,
however, that ‑οις, ‑αις are long and that ‑οι‑, ‑αι‑ in other positions are long,
as in Ἀθηναῖος.)
5. If the ultima is short, the acute can fall as far back as the antepenult and
the circumflex no farther than the penult:
ἄνθρωπος, ἄνθρωποι
man, men
παιδίον, παιδία
child, children
θεός, θεοί
god, gods
δῶρον, δῶρα
gift, gifts
Ἀθηναῖος, Ἀθηναῖοι
Athenian, Athenians
6. If the ultima is long, the acute can fall only as far back as the penult and
the circumflex only on the ultima (i.e., the circumflex cannot fall on the penult
if the ultima is long):
ἀνθρώπου man’s, παιδίου child’s, δώρου of a gift, ἀρετή goodness, θεοῦ
god’s.
These rules will be treated again when we deal with the declension and ac-
cent of nouns.
8
Introduction

7. The grave accent falls only on the ultima and is used only when a word that
normally has the acute on the ultima is followed by another word with no in-
tervening punctuation (to lead into the next word, the pitch is slightly lower
than the normal acute).
ἀγαθός
good
ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἄνθρωπος
the good man
Notes on the Accents
The accent of nouns and adjectives is inherent, that is, it belongs to
the word and is not imposed on it by the rules for accent. The accent
of nouns or adjectives may fall on any one of the last three syllables
and it is persistent, that is, it remains in the same place unless forced,
by the rules of accent, to move forward.
In classical times, the accent marks were unnecessary, and they are
not found in inscriptions. Native speakers of Greek did not need to
be told where to raise and lower their pitch, any more than we nor-
mally need to have the stress marked in order to pronounce familiar
English words correctly. According to tradition, the marking of ac-
cents was started about 200 B.C.E. in Alexandria by the great Homeric
scholar, Aristophanes of Byzantium. There are two explanations of
why accent marks became necessary at this time: either Aristophanes
instituted them, in connection with his work on Homer, to guide even
native speakers in the proper pronunciation of the ancient epic forms
that had by then become unfamiliar; or, because Greek had become
an international language in the Hellenistic world, accent marks may
first have been developed for teaching foreigners the correct accen-
tuation. Whatever the reason, accent marks are a great help to us all,
since we must all learn classical Greek as a foreign language. The sys-
tem used now in all texts was developed by Byzantine scholars from
the Alexandrian systems and is a very practical and economical way
of indicating an important aspect of the Greek language: its tonal
accent.
Syllables
1. For each separate vowel or diphthong in a Greek word there is a syllable
(i.e., there are no silent vowels in Greek).
2. A syllable consists of a vowel or diphthong alone or with one or more
consonants.
3. Some rules for syllabification:
a. A single consonant between two vowels in one word goes with the
second vowel (e.g., ἄ-φω-να, φαι-νό-με-νον).
b. Any group of consonants that can begin a word in Greek goes with
the following vowel, as does a mute before μ or ν (e.g., πρᾶ-γμα, μη-τρός,
τύ-πτω).
c. If the group of consonants cannot begin a word, it is divided, as are
double consonants (e.g., ἄν-θος, ἐλ-πίς, ἄγ-γε-λος, ἵπ-πος).
Alphabet and Sounds of Greek
9

Exercise C: Accents
According to the rules of accent given above, only one in each group is cor-
rectly accented: choose it. Be prepared to say why the other two are wrong.
Be rational. 
1.  a. ἄνθρωπου
b. ἄνθρωποι
c. ἀνθρῶπου
2.  a. πλοῦτου
b. πλουτo῀ς
c. πλοῦτος
3.  a. περίσπωμενος
b. περισπῶμενος
c. περισπώμενος
4.  a. λo῀γος
b. λόγος
c. λὸγος
5.  a. τό δῶρον
b. τὸ δῶρον
c. τοῦ δῶρου
6.  a. ἀρετή
b. ἄρετη
c. ἆρέτη
7.  a. o῟ις
b. οἷς
c. ὃις
8.  a. Θουκυδίδης
b. Θοῦκυδιδῆς
c. Θουκύδιδης
9.  a. δαῖμων
b. δαὶμων
c. δαίμων
10.  a. τόν θεόν
b. τὸν θεo῀ν
c. τὸν θεόν
11.  a. μᾶχη
b. τὴν καλήν ψυχήν
c. κῶμαι
12.  a. ἄθανατος
b. ἀθάνατοι
c. ἀθάνατους
13.  a. ροδον
b. ρ῟οδον
c. ῥόδον
14.  a. ἀθάνατοις
b. ἀθάνατῳ
c. ἀθάνατον
15.  a. καλός καί ἀγαθός
b. καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθός
c. καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθὸς
Vocabulary
Numbers
The earliest system of Greek numerical notation was alphabetic, that is, they
used the letters of the alphabet (including the three that have since become
obsolete, ϝ, ϙ, ϡ) as numbers, with the sign (′) to mark them as numbers. The
following list gives the names of the numbers one to twelve and twenty,
 together with the letter used to represent each one. This system of numerical
notation lacks a sign for zero and is therefore inferior to the Arabic system in
use today. The Greek system was an additive system rather than a place sys-
tem, using a separate figure for 10: ι′; 11 is then 10 + 1: ια′, etc.
Learn the names for the numbers 1‒12 and 20.
Value
Name
Value
Name
α′
1
εἷς, μία, ἕν
ζ′
7
ἑπτά
β′
2
δύο
η′
8
ὀκτώ
γ′
3
τρεῖς, τρία
θ′
9
ἐννέα
δ′
4
τέτταρες, τέτταρα
ι′
10
δέκα
ε′
5
πέντε
ια′
11
ἕνδεκα
ς′
6
ἕξ
ιβ′
12
δώδεκα
κ′
20
εἴκοσι
The first four, εἷς, δύο, τρεῖς, τέτταρες, and their compounds are declinable
(i.e., change endings according to gender and case).
10
Introduction

Readings
The Alphabet Song of Callias
Callias was an Athenian comic poet of the fifth century B.C.E. This choral song
comes from a comedy called the Alphabet Tragedy (γραμματικὴ τραγῳδία).
τὸ ἄλφα, βῆτα, γάμμα, δέλτα, θεοῦ γὰρ εἶ
ζῆτ᾿, ἦτα, θῆτ᾿, ἰῶτα, κάππα, λάβδα, μῦ,
νῦ, ξεῖ, τὸ οὖ, πεῖ, ῥῶ, τὸ σίγμα, ταῦ, τὸ ὖ
παρὸν φεῖ χεῖ τε τῷ ψεῖ εἰς τὸ ὦ.
The letters we call epsilon, upsilon, omicron, and omega were at this period called εἶ,
ὖ, οὖ, and ὦ. Epsilon or εἶ(end of line 1) is called the god’s letter because of a large
E dedicated to Apollo at Delphi. The scholar Plutarch wrote a treatise on this mon-
ument (Moralia 392, called περὶ τοῦ ΕΙ τοῦ ἐν Δελφοῖς) in which he gives various
explanations for the E, which also represents the number 5. Especially charming
is the suggestion that it is a greeting to Apollo. Instead of using the usual Hello, in
Greek, χαῖρε, Apollo greets those who come to his temple with the inscribed words
γνῶθι σαυτόν (know yourself) and the worshiper answers with the word εἶwhich
means you are. τὸ (also, in another form, τῷ) the is added before some of the letters
to maintain the rhythm. Line 4: παρὸν being next to; τε and; εἰς to, up to. After singing
the alphabet, the chorus in pairs went through the letters, making syllables by com-
bining each consonant with each vowel in turn and in this way imitating the fa-
vored method of teaching young Greek children how to read.
βῆτα ἄλφα· βα
βῆτα εἶ· βε, κ.τ.λ. (καὶ τὰ λοιπάis Greek for etc.)
The Grammar of Dionysius Thrax
Dionysius Thrax (Διονύσιος Θρᾷξ, c.166–90 B.C.E.) was the author of the
 earliest Greek grammar textbook, τέχνη γραμματική. His treatise became a
standard and continued to be used until the 18th century. The work is an ad-
mirable example of brevity and organization, beginning with a definition of
grammar, listing its parts and discussing the letters and syllables (γράμματα
καὶ συλλαβαί), from which the first readings have been excerpted. Later he
defines the parts of speech, which you will sample at the end of the intro-
duction. The most remarkable thing about this early grammar book is that,
for all its faults and omissions, much of it is still useful. Although you prob-
ably will not be able to get everything in these readings, the learning and the
fun come from the attempt.
Read aloud and try to understand these short sentences about the letters
and sounds of Greek.
1. Letters: Γράμματά ἐστιν εἰκοσιτέσσαρα ἀπὸ τοῦ α μέχρι τοῦ ω.
[εστιν (he/she/it) is, (they/there) are. τεσσαρα = τέτταρα. απο from. τοῦ the (gen.).
μέχρι to.]
Alphabet and Sounds of Greek
11

2. Vowels: τούτων φωνήεντα μέν ἐστιν ἑπτά α ε η ι ο υ ω.
[τουτων of these (refers to γρά μματα). μεν . . . δέ (in sentence 3) point to two
parts of a contrast or items in a list.]
3. φωνήεντα δὲ λέγεται ὅτι φωνὴν ἀφ ̓ἑαυτῶν ἀποτελεῖ.
[λέγεται is/are called. ὅτι because. φωνὴν (acc. obj.) voice, sound. ἀφ᾿ε#αυτῶν from
themselves. ἀποτελεῖ[it/they] produce/s.]
4. Longs/shorts: τῶν δὲ φωνηέντων μακρὰ μέν ἐστι δύο, η καὶ ω, βραχέα δύο,
ε καὶ ο, δίχρονα τρία, α, ι, υ.
[τῶν φωνηέντων of the . . . (gen. pl.). μακρὰlong. καὶand, plus. βραχέα short.
δίχρονα of variable quantity (sometimes long and sometimes short).]
5. Diphthongs: δίφθογγοι δέ εἰσιν ἕξ· αι αυ ει ευ οι ου.
[εἰσιν (they/there) are.]
6. Consonants: σύμφωνα δὲ τὰ λοιπὰ ἑπτακαίδεκα· β γ δ ζ θ κ λ μ ν ξ π ρ σ τ
φ χ ψ.
[τὰ λοιπάthe remaining, the rest.]
7. σύμφωνα δὲ λέγεται, ὅτι αὐτὰ μὲν καθ’ ἑαυτὰ φωνὴν οὐκ ἔχει,
συντασσόμενα δὲ μετὰ τῶν φωνηέντων φωνὴν ἀποτελεῖ.
[“They are called consonants [σύμφωνα] because they do not have a sound
[φωνή] by themselves, but arranged with the vowels they produce a sound.”]
8. Mutes: ἄφωνα δέ ἐστιν ἐννέα· β γ δ κ π τ θ φ χ.
[ἄφωνα: a-privative: a-, un-, non-, without, -less + φων-.]
9. Unvoiced, aspirated, voiced mutes: τούτων ψιλὰ μέν ἐστι τρία, κ π τ,
δασέα τρία, θ φ χ, μέσα δὲ τούτων τρία β γ δ. 
[μέσα in between: in Latin they are called mediae (middles), in English, unvoiced.]
10. Double consonants: ἔτι δὲ τῶν συμφώνων διπλᾶ μέν ἐστι τρία· ζ ξ ψ.
[ἔτι furthermore, besides. -ων endings imply of (gen. case in the pl.).]
11. διπλᾶ δὲ εἴρηται ὅτι ἓν ἕκαστον αὐτῶν ἐκ δύο συμφώνων σύγκειται, τὸ μὲν
ζ ἐκ τοῦ σ καὶ δ τὸ δὲ ξ ἐκ τοῦ κ καὶ σ, τὸ δὲ ψ ἐκ τοῦ π καὶ σ.
[εἴρηται is/are called. ὅτι because. ἕν ἕκαστον αὐτῶν each one of them. ἐκ from,
of. σύγκειται consists (+ ἐκ of).]
12. Accents: τόνοι μὲν οὖν εἰσι τρεῖς· ὀξύς   ́, βαρύς   ̀, περισπώμενος   ͂. χρόνοι
δύο· μακρός ¯ καὶ βραχύς   ̆.
Notes on the Alphabet
How important the art of writing was to the Greeks can be seen in the
fact that it was the subject of myth, its invention being attributed to
one of the gods or a folk-hero. One of the most popular stories of the
origin of writing (told as history by Herodotus, V. 58–9) is that Cad-
mus (founder of Thebes) brought the alphabet from Phoenicia to
Greece. This explains why the letters are called Φοινικήια γράμματα
(Phoenician letters).
12
Introduction

GRAMMATICAL OUTLINE
Γραμματική ἐστιν ἐμπειρία τῶν παρὰ
ποιηταῖς τε καὶ συγγραφεῦσιν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ
λεγομένων.
Grammar is a practical knowledge of the usage
of poets and writers of prose.
—Dionysius Thrax
English and Greek
The Greek language is very different from English: this is one thing that
makes it endlessly exciting (and exacting) to learn. In studying Greek, we
must study grammar. Grammar, though no longer stylish, is a good thing. A
knowledge of grammar enables us to speak and write correctly, clearly, and
elegantly, and to recognize the same qualities in others. Studying a foreign
grammar forces us to see and to ponder the different ways in which things
can be and have been said. It gives us a chance to look at other modes of ex-
pression than our own and to glimpse other modes of thought behind them.
It makes us more aware (and more wary) of what we are reading and writ-
ing, hearing and saying.
To begin with, Greek is a highly inflected language. English is not. English
has lost most of its inflections. In English often only the context (environment
of words) can tell us even what kind of word (noun, adjective, adverb, verb,
etc.) we are dealing with. Take, for example, the word right in the following
phrases:
1. the right of way
2. to right a wrong
3. go west and turn right
4. the right way to do something
5. do it right away/right now
In (1) right is a noun; in (2) it is a verb; in (3) and (5) it is an adverb; and in
(4) an adjective. We cannot take the word right out of its environment and say
that it is a particular part of speech. In Greek, on the other hand, it is usually
possible to recognize what part of speech a word is by how it looks: its form
goes a long way in telling what part of speech it is, and what it is doing in the
sentence.
English syntax is one of position. If we were to say such a thing as, “the
warden gave Socrates a cup of hemlock,” we would know who gave what to
whom by the order of the words: the subject is first, then the verb, followed
by the indirect object (to whom) and the direct object. Change that order and
you change the meaning. In Greek, however, it is not the order of the words,
Grammatical Outline
13

but their form which indicates their relationships to each other (i.e., their syn-
tax). Socrates will have a different case-ending from the warden. The warden will
be nominative because he is the subject; Socrates as indirect object (the recipient
of the cup) will be dative; the cup (the direct object) will be in the accusative case
in Greek. The order of the words will make very little difference because the
endings (or inflections) tell the whole story. Of course English does have some
inflections left: the personal and relative pronouns change their forms from
subject to object. We must say “I like you,” but “you like me.” Even so, we can-
not reverse or meddle with the word order (“me like you,” “you me like,” or
“you like I”) because the syntax of word order in English has taken precedence
over that of case inflection to such an extent that these series of words are not
only ungrammatical but nonsensical. And although the order of words in
Greek is more flexible, some words are more mobile than others.
English still has some (though simple) verb inflection: add -s to form the third
person singular of the present (work, works), add -d or -ed to form the regular
simple past (worked) and so forth. Greek has a very elaborate verb system,
expressing by inflectional variations all the subtleties for which English uses
its rich system of auxiliary verbs and compound verb formations (shall, will,
may, might, should, would, used to, going to, etc., besides the forms of be and have).
Both English and Greek are rich and subtle languages, but their richness lies
in different directions. For the varieties of tense, mood, and voice, Greek has
an abundance of verb endings and English of compound and periphrastic
expressions. It is a tendency of language to simplify, to regularize, to analo-
gize (to get rid of the differences). Greek and English are languages at differ-
ent stages of development. There is no sense in making value judgments about
whether an inflected language is better or worse than a noninflected one. In the
19th century, linguists and comparative grammarians considered our mod-
ern spoken languages the decadent progeny of the pure Aryan (an earlier
name for the parent language of the Indo-European tongues) mother tongue.
And they considered English among the worst of a bad lot. Now in our own
less romantic age, it is recognized that languages tend to move in the same
direction, from complexity of form to simplicity.
It is sobering for Greek scholars and beginning Greek scholars to bear in
mind the opinion of the great Danish scholar of the English language, Otto
Jespersen: “The so-called full and rich forms of the ancient languages are not
a beauty but a deformity.” This is perhaps going too far in the other direction,
but, considered and judged in the only way a language can be judged, as a
means of expressing thought, Greek will not be found wanting.
Note
The material treated below will be considered in more detail through-
out the book. It is given now in the hope that you will feel safer and
happier after getting a rational overview of the parts of speech of the
Greek language and their equivalents in English.
14
Introduction

The Parts of Speech (τὰ τοῦ λόγου μέρη)
In English the parts of speech are usually listed as these eight: noun, pronoun,
adjective, verb, adverb, preposition, conjunction, and interjection. In Greek
there are also eight parts of speech (by some ancient accounts at least), but the
Greeks listed them differently: noun (ὄνομα), pronoun (ἀντωνυμία), verb (ῥῆμα),
adverb (ἐπίρρημα), article (ἄρθρον), participle (μετοχή), preposition (πρόθεσις),
and conjunction (σύνδεσμος). In English we define our parts of speech ac-
cording to what role(s) each can play in a sentence. In Greek it is possible to
define them according to their form (the shapes they can take = morphology).
A noun (ὄνομα) is the name of a thing, anything that has been given a name.
In Greek a noun is described as a word that has case, number, and gender.
Case-declension (πτῶσις: literally, a falling) tells what part a noun is play-
ing in a sentence. In English we use prepositional phrases and word order to
show the relationship between a noun and other words in a sentence. Greek
uses cases. Greek also has prepositions used with the cases to further define
the relationships—it would be impossible to have a separate case for every
possible relationship a noun can have with the other members of its sentence.
The cases in Greek are:
Nominative (ὀρθή) for the subject of the sentence
Genitive (γενική) for one noun depending on another noun in rela-
tionships for which we use the preposition of (such as possession or
origin); or the preposition from (for separation)
Dative (δοτική) for the indirect object and other relations for which
we use to and for; for the locative (the place at which a thing is located:
by, at, in, on, etc.); for the instrumental (the means by which, the man-
ner in which)
Accusative (αἰτιατική) for the direct object of the verb; for the end of
motion (to, into).
These are the important cases to learn now. There is a fifth case in Greek,
the vocative (κλητική), the case of direct address (for calling people or ad-
dressing them).
We are fortunate that Greek reached such an advanced stage of develop-
ment and had dropped some of its original cases by the time it became a lit-
erary language. Indo-European, the parent of Greek and of English (and the
other Germanic languages), as well as of Latin (and the Romance languages),
and of the Indo-Iranian, Slavic, Armenian, Albanian, and Celtic languages, had
more than these five. This parent had at least eight cases: Nominative, Geni-
tive, Dative, Accusative, Ablative (for separation), Instrumental (for means by
which), Locative (for place where), and Vocative.
In Greek, the genitive and ablative became melded into one form, and the da-
tive, instrumental, and locative uses all drifted into one form (the dative). Old
English had an elaborate case system too, but modern English has lost the case
endings for all its adjectives and nouns, except for the genitive or possessive
endings of nouns, -’s, -s’ (we do have a plural of nouns, but that is not a case).
Grammatical Outline
15

There are three genders (γένη) in Greek:
Masculine (m.), ἀρσενικόν
Feminine (f.), θηλυκόν
Neuter (n.), οὐδέτερον, neither
In English we do not have grammatical gender: if we know or believe (or
wish to say) that a person or animal or thing (such as a ship, machine, or hur-
ricane) is male or female, we use he or she (respectively); all other things are
it. Greek and many other languages have grammatical gender: a noun is mas-
culine, feminine, or neuter (and must have its article and adjective in agree-
ment with that gender), sometimes quite regardless of its sex or lack thereof.
For persons, grammatical gender usually follows natural gender; but things
(things which we do not think of as having gender) are often either masculine
or feminine grammatically, and sometimes people are neuter, grammatically
(e.g., diminutives such as παιδίον a small child).
There are three grammatical numbers (ἀριθμοί) in Greek:
Singular, ἑνικός, for one
Dual, δυϊκός, for two
Plural, πληθυντικός, for more than two
We need not worry about the dual in Greek because it had grown obsolete
by classical times and was used mainly for such natural pairs as hands and
feet, or a yoke of oxen. Usually in Greek the plural is used for more than one.
Since adjectives have the same properties as nouns in Greek (i.e., they un-
dergo changes in form to indicate case, gender, and number), they are con-
sidered to belong to the same part of speech as the noun (ὄνομα). Furthermore,
any adjective in Greek can be used as a noun when the article is put before
it. In English we say that an adjective modifies a noun (or better, that it gives
an attribute of a noun). The adjective does not really change the meaning of
the noun, but rather offers a subclass: good people are none the less people for
their goodness, but they are a part of the class of people. In Greek if we want
to say the good people, we can actually leave out the word for people because
the gender of the article and adjective tells us that we mean people as opposed
to neuter things: οἱ ἀγαθοὶ ἄνθρωποι the good people, or simply οἱ ἀγαθοίthe
good, with people understood from the gender. The masculine plural is used
generically for human beings in general. If we want to narrow this down to
good women, we change the gender of the article and adjective to feminine, αἱ
ἀγαθαί.
A pronoun (ἀντωνυμία) is a word used instead of a noun: it has no mean-
ing of its own, but is used when we choose not to name, or not to repeat the
name of, whatever we are speaking or writing about. The reader is expected
to know what the noun is to which the pronoun refers. Pronouns in Greek
undergo declension with respect to case, number, and gender.
The article (τὸ ἄρθρον) we recognize (in English grammar) as belonging to
the same class as adjectives. In Greek (ὁ, ἡ, τό) and in English (the), it is really
16
Introduction

a demonstrative (cf. this, that): in both languages the article is etymologically
related to the demonstrative. The definite article is used when we want to re-
fer to a particular (definite) member or members of a class. Greek has no in-
definite article (a, an), which we use in English to indicate that we do not mean
a particular member of a class. In Greek the noun by itself suffices.
A verb (ῥῆμα) in Greek is a word showing the following properties: tense,
voice, mood, person, and number. The Greek verb has many forms to ex-
press these properties. In English too we can express them all, not through
changes in the form of the verb, but through auxiliary verbs and compound
tenses.
The tense in Greek tells us two things: time and aspect. Time tells us
whether the action or state expressed by the verb is past, present, or future.
Aspect tells us the relationship of the action or state to the passage of time: is
it going on, momentary, or complete?
Greek has seven tenses of the indicative mood: present, imperfect, future,
aorist, perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect, which we can chart according
to their aspect and time:
Time
Aspect
Present
Past
Future
Durative
Present
Imperfect
Future
Momentary
Aorist
Completed
Perfect
Pluperfect
Future Perfect
Voice tells us the relationship of the subject to the action, whether the sub-
ject acts or is acted upon. The Greek verb has three voices: active, middle, and
passive. (It will probably occur to you that the Greek verb has more than its
share of everything.)
Active voice: the subject performs the action (I stop the car).
Passive voice: the subject receives (suffers) the action (I am stopped).
Middle voice: the subject is both the doer and the receiver of the ac-
tion (I stop myself, I cease). It can be reflexive: the subject does some-
thing directly to himself, but usually it is more subtle; the subject does
something for herself/himself or for something belonging to him/
her (thus the middle voice can have an object). The middle voice im-
plies that the subject is more directly (or more deliberately) involved
in the activity.
The moods, or modes, (ἐγκλίσεις) tell us the manner of the action. Greek
has four moods: Indicative, Imperative, Subjunctive, and Optative, besides
the Infinitive (a verbal noun) and Participle (a verbal adjective).
The Indicative is, generally speaking, used to state a fact, the Imperative
to give an order. The other two moods are less distinct. The Subjunctive was
originally used for futurity, and many of its relationships have to do with
the future: for exhortations, prohibitions, purpose, after verbs of fearing, in
conditions (both future and general). The Optative is used for wishes and
Grammatical Outline
17

pos sibilities and in the same types of clauses as the subjunctive. Which is used
depends on the tense of the main verb.
Person and Number: the Greek verb changes its form to express the sub-
ject of the action. First, second, or third person, singular or plural (I, you,
he/she/it; we, you, they) are expressed by the ending, and the pronoun can be
omitted unless special emphasis is needed. Greek also has a dual form for the
second (you two) and third (the two of them) persons.
Infinitives are formed from the various verb stems, but are not inflected.
They are verbal nouns and share the characteristics of both nouns and verbs:
as nouns they can be used with the article (τό) in different cases and they can
be subjects or objects; as verbs they have tense and voice and can take objects.
Infinitives are fairly common in English, with or without to.
The Participle (μετοχή) shares the characteristics of verb and adjective: it
was considered a separate part of speech by the Greek grammarians. The
Greek language is φιλομέτοχος (fond of participles). Their uses are numerous,
though not very difficult, once the concept is grasped that the same word can
be two parts of speech. The participles are formed from the different tense
stems of the verb and they are declined (according to case, gender, and num-
ber) because they are adjectives.
The possible forms of a (full) verb:
Present
Imperfect
Future
Aorist
Perfect
Pluperfect
Fut. perf.
Indic.
Indic.
Indic.
Indic.
Indic.
Indic.
Indic.
Subj.
Subj.
Subj.
Opt.
Opt.
Opt.
Opt.
(Opt.)
Imper.
Imper.
Imper.
Infin.
Infin.
Infin.
Infin.
(Infin.)
Partic.
Partic.
Partic.
Partic.
(Partic.)
All tenses and moods have the active voice, although the future perfect is
very rare. The middle and passive voices are combined into one form (mid-
dle-passive, m.-p.) for the present, imperfect, and the perfect tenses. Aorist
and future have separate forms for the passive and middle. (See Appendix I
for a complete verb.)
Definition of principal parts
Every verb has principal parts which show what type of verb it is
(active, deponent, thematic, etc.); the changes in stem for different
forms; what kind of future, aorist, perfect it has; and whether it has
all the possible tenses and voices.
The other parts of speech present no difficulties: an adverb (ἐπίρρημα) indi-
cates an attribute (such as time, manner, degree, place) of a verb, adjective,
another adverb, or may affect a whole sentence; a conjunction (σύνδεσμος) is
used to join; a preposition (πρόθεσις) is used with a noun case to further de-
fine the use of the case. Interjections are outside the grammatical structure of
the sentence. None of these elements is inflected even in Greek.
18
Introduction

Readings
Dionysius Thrax and Zeno on the Parts of Speech
1. Parts of Speech: τοῦ δὲ λόγου μέρη ἐστιν ὀκτώ· ὄνομα, ῥῆμα, μετοχή, ἄρθρον,
ἀντωνυμία, πρόθεσις, ἐπίρρημα, σύνδεσμος.
[τοῦ λόγου of speech. μέρη plural of μέρος part.]
2. τοῦ δὲ λόγου ἐστὶ μέρη πέντε· ὄνομα, προσηγορία, ῥῆμα, σύνδεσμος, ἄρθρον.
[Zeno the Stoic offers a shorter list (in Diogenes Laertius). προσηγορία proper
noun as opposed to ὄνομα name, common noun.]
3. Nouns: ὄνομά ἐστι μέρος λόγου πτωτικόν, σῶμα ἢ πρᾶγμα σημαῖνον, σῶμα
μὲν οἷον λίθος, πρᾶγμα δὲ οἷον παιδεία, κοινῶς τε καὶ ἰδίως λεγόμενον, κοινῶς
μὲν οἷον ἄνθρωπος ἵππος, ἰδίως δὲ οἷον Σωκράτης.
[“A noun is a part of speech with case declension (πτωτικόν), signifying an
object (σῶμα body) or an abstraction (πρᾶγμα action, deed), object such as
stone (λίθος), abstraction such as education (παιδεία), called common and
proper, common such as human being (ἄνθρωπος), horse (ἵππος), proper such
as Socrates.”]
4. Gender: γένη μὲν οὖν ἐστι τρία· ἀρσενικόν, θηλυκόν, οὐδέτερον.
[οὖν then, therefore, in fact.]
5. Number: ἀριθμοὶ τρεῖς· ἑνικός, δυϊκός, πληθυντικός· ἑνικὸς μὲν ὁ Ὅμηρος,
δυϊκός δὲ τῶ Ὁμήρω, πληθυντικός δὲ οἱ Ὅμηροι.
[ὁthe (article, nom. sg. masc.). Ὅμηρος Homer. τῶthe (nom. dual masc.). οἱ
the (nom. pl. masc.)]
6. Case: πτώσεις ὀνομάτων εἰσὶ πέντε ὀρθή, γενική, δοτική, αἰτιατική, κλητική.
[πτώσεις cases (literally, fallings). ὀνομάτων of nouns.]
7. Person: πρόσωπα τρία, πρῶτον, δεύτερον, τρίτον· πρῶτον μὲν ἀφ ̓οὗ ὁ λόγος,
δεύτερον πρὸς ὃν ὁ λόγος, τρίτον δὲ περὶ οὗ ὁ λόγος.
[πρόσωπα pl. of πρόσωπον person, face, mask. πρῶτον, δεύτερον, τρίτον first,
second, third. ἀφ οὗfrom whom. ὁ λόγος the speech, the word. πρὸς ὃν to whom.
περὶ οὗabout whom.]
8. Participles: μετοχή ἐστι λέξις μετέχουσα τῆς τῶν ῥημάτων καὶ τῆς τῶν
ὀνομάτων ἰδιότητος.
[λέξις word. μετέχουσα sharing (+ gen.). τῆς . . . ἰδιότητος (gen.) the peculiarity.]
κύριε, ἀγαθὸν νοῦν χάρισαί μοι, ἵνα μαθῶ τὰ
γράμματα καὶ νικῶ τοὺς ἑταίρους μου.
Lord, grant me a good mind so that I will learn
my letters and outshine my peers.
—Eustratius
Grammatical Outline
19

Reading Signs
This is a typical Greek street sign. ΟΔΟΣ
(ὁδός in classical Greek) means road or way.
In English we have many derivatives, for
example, odometer, exodus, method, pe-
riod, cathode, anode, synod, episode, par-
odos (side entrance), electrode. In Greece
you will see others, such as ΕΙΣΟΔΟΣ (en-
trance), ΑΝΟΔΟΣ (ascent). In Greek cities,
towns, and villages, an open central square
is called a Plateia, which comes from
πλατεῖα ὁδός (wide way). From this English
derives piazza (from Italian), plaza (from
Spanish), and place (from French).
On the sign above, from the modern town of Delphi, the Street of the Phil-
hellenes is named. Philhellenism, admiration for classical Greek culture, was
a 19th-century movement in Britain and America that supported the Greek
struggle for independence from the Ottoman Empire. Closer to home, sur-
vivals of the Philhellenic fashion are seen in the Greek letters of college fra-
ternities and sororities.
20
Introduction
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

LESSON I
Verbs and Nouns
In this lesson you will learn the present tense of verbs (the first principal part), the
declensions of the article and nouns, important vocabulary, and how to read sim-
ple sentences. Most important, you will expand your understanding of the concepts
of grammatical voice (the relation of subjects to verbs) and case (the relation of nouns
to other words in a sentence). Learn these and the rest of Greek will be easier.
21
PRESENT INDICATIVE ACTIVE AND
MIDDLE-PASSIVE OF ‑ω VERBS:
THE FIRST PRINCIPAL PART
Characteristics of Verbs: Definitions, Forms
A verb shows person, number, tense, voice, and mood. The endings show the
subject, that is, they include person and number: I/we; you; he, she, it/they.
The stems and endings show tense and voice. In this lesson we will treat the
present active and middle-passive.
In Greek there are two types, or conjugations, of verbs: (1) -ω verbs (or
thematic verbs) and (2) ‑μι verbs (non-thematic or athematic). The ‑ω verbs
are characterized by the thematic vowel ο/ε (that is, ο or ε), which connects
the endings to the stem; the ‑μι verbs on the other hand lack the thematic
vowel (in certain tenses, as will be explained later).
There are three voices in Greek: active, middle, and passive. Voice indicates
the relation of the subject to the action. In the active voice, the subject per-
forms the action; in the passive voice, the subject suffers or experiences the
action (is acted upon); in the middle voice, the subject acts upon himself (the
reflexive use of the middle), or she acts for herself or in her interest, or on
something belonging to herself: the subject is intimately involved in the ac-
tion of the verb.
Uses of the Voices: Examples
1. The Greek verb form παύω (active voice, first person singular, present in-
dicative) means I stop, in the sense of I bring to a stop (i.e., I bring someone or
something to a stop). In the passive sense παύομαι (a form which is middle
or passive, first person singular, present indicative), means I am stopped; in
the middle sense, παύομαι means I stop myself or I come to a stop. The differ-
ence between the middle and passive is that the middle implies that I stop of

my own free will, the passive that I am forced to stop by someone or some-
thing outside myself. The active form is transitive (that is, it takes an object: I
stop someone or something other than myself). In this example the middle is
intransitive (since it is used reflexively).
2. πείθω I persuade (the active voice); πείθομαι in the middle voice means I per-
suade myself, and in the passive I am persuaded. From this, the middle and pas-
sive come to mean I trust in, believe, or obey.
3. Often the middle voice means to have something done for oneself. For ex-
ample, παιδεύω means I educate; παιδεύομαι (as middle), I have (someone) ed-
ucated or trained: for instance, the parents have (are having) their children educated
in the best institutions. In this example, the middle voice is transitive, that is, it
takes an object; and there is no implication that the parents are actually doing
the teaching, but rather that they are having it done (i.e., are sending their chil-
dren to the best teachers or schools).
λύω means I release; λύομαι (the middle form), I have (someone) released (by
ransom); it can also mean I release something of my own. These uses of the
middle are not reflexive and may take objects.
4. Other examples:
1. γράφω I write; γράφομαι I write for myself, i.e., I write something down
for my own use (e.g., of taking notes).
2. πέμπω I send; πέμπομαι I send for.
3. φέρω I bear or carry; φέρομαι I carry or bring (with me for my own use).
4. ἄρχω I make a beginning; the middle voice, ἄρχομαι, is used where per-
sonal action is emphasized.
5. βουλεύω I plan; βουλεύομαι I take counsel with myself, make plans for
myself.
Note
Although in some of these examples the meaning of the verb appears
to change significantly from the active to the middle or passive, a
close look will show that these changes are only logical progressions
caused by the differences in the uses of the voices. It is always pos  -
sible to translate the word literally when you are unsure of the exact
meaning, and then, as the context becomes clearer, to substitute a more
suitable word in the translation. On the other hand, in some of the
examples given above, the translations of the active and middle will
be identical. Differences in meaning will be clear in the Greek but
will be lost in the translation into English. This is but one of the many
subtleties of the Greek language which make it difficult to translate
adequately, but worth the effort of reading and understanding.
The same forms are used for middle and passive in the present system
(which includes present and imperfect) and in the perfect system (perfect and
pluperfect), but the meaning will usually be clear from the context. Just as in
English, if you take the word sets by itself, you cannot tell whether it is a noun
or a verb, but in a sentence its meaning will usually be clear; in the same way,
παύομαι in isolation may mean either I stop (myself) or I am stopped, but in a
sentence the surrounding words will tell you which is meant.
22
Lesson I

Tenses
The Greek verb has seven tenses, divided into primary and secondary tenses.
The primary tenses are present, future, perfect, and future perfect; the sec-
ondary tenses, aorist, imperfect, and pluperfect.
The present tense is used for action going on in the present time. The Greek
present tense can be translated by any of the three English present tenses: λύω
may mean I am freeing, I do free, or I free; λύεις; are you freeing?, do you free?
Formation of Present Indicative and Infinitive
Formation: present stem + thematic vowel + primary endings
Endings with thematic vowel
Active
Sg.
Middle-Passive
‑ω
1st
‑ο ‑μαι
I
‑εις
2nd
‑ει/‑ῃ[< -ε-σαι]
you
‑ει
3rd
‑ε ‑ται
he/she/it
Pl.
‑ο ‑μεν
1st
‑ο ‑μεθα
we
‑ε ‑τε
2nd
‑ε ‑σθε
you
‑ουσι(ν)
3rd
‑ο ‑νται
they
‑ειν
Inf.
‑ε ‑σθαι
to
Notes
1. Note that the thematic vowel is absorbed in the long endings, ‑ω,
‑εις, ‑ει, ‑ουσι. Otherwise it can be seen quite clearly as an element
used to join the endings to the stem.
2. It is a characteristic of the Greek language that ‑σ‑ between two
vowels tends to drop out. In the second person singular of the
middle-passive the ending was originally ‑σαι, but the ‑σ‑ comes
between the ‑αι of the ending and the thematic vowel, so it drops out;
the resulting ‑ε‑αι contracts to ‑ει, for which the alternative form ‑ῃis
also found.
3. ‑ουσι(ν): the movable ν. Certain forms ending in vowels add ν if the
word following begins with a vowel, or if the form ends a sen tence.
This is true of words ending in ‑σι (whether nouns or verbs) and third
person singular forms ending in ‑ε [II]. Compare the ν‑movable to the
indefinite article: a confrontation, an ultimatum.
Example: λύω in the Present Indicative and Infinitive: Present Stem, λυ‑
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
λύω
1st
λύομαι
λύεις
2nd
λύει or λύῃ
λύει
3rd
λύεται
Present Indicative Active and Middle-Passive of ‑ω Verbs
23

Active
Middle-Passive
Pl.
λύομεν
1st
λυόμεθα
λύετε
2nd
λύεσθε
λύουσι(ν)
3rd
λύονται
Infinitive
λύειν
λύεσθαι
Accent
The accent of verbs is recessive. This means that the accent goes as far
back as the length of the ultima permits. If the ultima is long, the ac-
cent will be an acute on the penult; if the ultima is short, the accent
will go back to the antepenult, if there is one. The few exceptions to
this rule will be noted as they come up.
Deponent Verbs
Many verbs in Greek lack active forms for some or all of their tenses. If a verb
has no active forms, it is called deponent; if it lacks the active in only some of
its tenses, it is called semi-deponent. Such verbs are easily recognized be-
cause they will show principal parts in the middle-passive ending (‑ομαι)
rather than in the active ending (‑ω). Although deponent verbs are middle and
passive in form, they are translated as active.
Vocabulary
In the following vocabulary list, the first principal part is given for each verb.
This is the first person singular present active indicative, or the first person
singular present middle-passive indicative, if the verb is deponent.
The present stem of the verb is found by removing the first person ending,
‑ω or ‑ομαι. Examples: λύω: stem, λυ‑; λείπω: stem, λειπ‑; ἔρχομαι: stem, ἐρχ‑;
γίγνομαι: stem, γιγν‑.
In the list below, find the present stem of each verb.
➞Which of the verbs below are deponent?
Verbs
ἄγω
lead, drive, bring (paedagogue, παιδαγωγός)
ἄρχω
begin; rule (+ gen.) (archaeology; anarchy)
βουλεύω
plan (+ inf., resolve to do) (βουλευτήριον, council chamber)
βούλομαι
wish, want (+ inf.) (cf. Lat. volo, Ger. wollen, Eng. will)
24
Lesson I

γίγνομαι
become, be born, be, turn out to be (+ nom.) (the root of this
word is γεν‑, γν‑, > γένεσις)
γράφω
write (epigraphy, palaeography)
ἐθέλω
wish, be willing (+ inf.) (not found in m.-p.)
ἔρχομαι
come, go
ἔχω
have, hold, keep
κρίνω
judge; decide, separate (critic)
λέγω
say, speak, mean (cf. Lat. lego; Greek, λόγος word)
λείπω
leave (eclipse, ellipse)
λύω
free, loosen, release; destroy, break; mid. ransom (catalyst,
analysis)
μένω
remain, wait (not found in m.-p.)
νομίζω
think, believe (< νόμος)
παιδεύω
educate, train (< παίς, παιδός child)
παύω
stop; mid. cease (pause)
πείθω
persuade; in m.-p. obey, trust (+ dative) (Πειθώ, Peitho,
 Persuasion, patron goddess of politicians)
πέμπω
send (pomp)
πιστεύω
trust (+ dat.)
πράττω
do, make; mid. exact for oneself (as a fee) (practical,
 pragmatic)
φέρω
bring, carry, bear (cf. Lat. fero, Eng. bear)
Conjunctions / Adverbs
καί
and, even, also, too, actually
καί. . . καί
both . . . and
ἤ
or
ἤ. . . ἤ
either . . . or
Vocabulary Notes
1. ἄρχω means be first, whether of time (begin, make a beginning) or of
place or station (govern, rule). The word ἄρχων, the present participle
of ἄρχω, is used in the masculine as a noun to mean ruler, commander,
archon, and is the title of the top administrative magistrates in ancient
Athens and many other city-states.
2. βούλομαι and βουλεύω are related. From βούλομαι (wish) comes
the noun βουλή, which means (1) will, determination, and (2) the Council
or Senate of Athens, referring to the Council of Five Hundred, es -
tablished by Cleisthenes in 507 B.C.E. From the noun βουλήis derived
the verb βουλεύω, take counsel, deliberate, be a member of the βουλή.
Present Indicative Active and Middle-Passive of ‑ω Verbs
25

3. βούλομαι and ἐθέλω both mean wish, but βούλομαι implies choice
or preference (εἰ βούλει, . . . if you please, if you like), and ἐθέλω is used
of consent rather than desire: εἰ βούλει, ἐγὼ ἐθέλω: if you want to, I am
willing to go along (εἰ if, ἐγώI).
4. νομίζω is derived from the noun νόμος meaning usage, custom, law.
The original meaning of νομίζω is use customarily, as in the expression
νομίζειν γλῶσσαν, to have a language in common use; but it has the
secondary meaning of own, acknowledge, believe, as in νομίζειν θεοὺς
εἶναι, to believe that the gods exist.
5. Verbs ending in ‑ιζω and ‑ευω are called denominatives, that is,
they are derived from nouns: νομίζω from νόμος, βουλεύω from βουλή.
παιδεύω,derived from παῖς (child), means bring up, rear a child; πιστεύω,
from πίστις (trust, faith), means put faith in.
Learning by Rote
Sit down with your textbook and go over the new forms a few times; write
them down from memory. This is a good start, but only a start. Later in the
day, say them over to yourself, sing them in the shower (paying attention to
the pitch accents), mutter them at breakfast, mumble them in rhythm as you
walk along, count them over as you fall asleep (you may even begin to dream
in Greek, a good sign). Make them a part of your memory, and you will never
forget them. Learning a new language necessitates taxing your memory to the
utmost, because you cannot know the language in the abstract. You must
know its forms and structure (i.e., grammar) and its vocabulary. 
Exercise A
1.
Fill in the correct accents.
1. ἀγομαι
7. γραφει
12. λεγεται
17. παιδευειν
2. ἀρχεσθαι
8. ἐθελομεν
13. λειπουσι
18. παυει
3. βουλευεις
9. ἐρχεσθαι
14. λυονται
19. πειθεσθαι
4. ἀγομεθα
10. ἐχομεν
15. μενειν
20. πεμπομεθα
5. βουλεται
11. κρινετε
16. νομιζω
21. πιστευομεν
6. γιγνονται
2.
Conjugate (i.e., write out all the forms you have learned so far, in the or-
der given; including infinitives) in the pres. act. (where it exists) and m.-p.
1. ἄγω
4. ἔρχομαι
7. ἔχω
9. παύω
2. βούλομαι
5. γράφω
8. φέρω
10. πέμπω
3. γίγνομαι
6. λείπω
26
Lesson I

3.
a. Parse the following (i.e., identify them grammatically) and then trans-
late them. (e.g., πέμπεσθαι: pres. m.-p. inf. of πέμπω; meaning to send for, to be
sent; ἄγετε: pres. act. ind., 2nd pers. pl. of ἄγω; meaning you lead, are leading.)
b. Change 1–10 to the opposite voice, if it exists (act. to m.-p.; m.-p. to ac-
tive). Deponents have no active; ἐθέλω has no m.-p.
c. Change 11–20 to the opposite number (sg. to pl.; pl. to sg.). (An infini-
tive has no person or number.) 
1. φέρεσθαι
16. πιστεύεις 
2. ἀρχόμεθα
17. παυόμεθα
3. βούλει
18. μένει 
4. ἐθέλεις;
19. λείπεται
5. πέμπομεν
20. ἔχειν
6. ἄγομεν;
21. φέρεις καὶ ἄγεις.
7. ἔχετε
22. βουλευόμεθα καὶ κρίνομεν.
8. γίγνεται
23. τί πράττεις; (τίwhat?)
9. βουλεύεσθε;
24. βουλεύουσι γράφειν.
10. ἔρχονται
25. λύετε ἢ λύεσθε;
11. ἔρχει;
26. βούλεται ἔρχεσθαι ἢ μένειν;
12. νομίζουσιν
27. τί βούλονται γράφεσθαι;
13. γράφεσθε
28. τίνι πείθεσθε; (τίνι [to] whom?, dat.)
14. λύειν
29. βούλει λύεσθαι;
15. λέγεσθαι
30. βούλομαι ἄρχειν. ἐθέλεις ἄρχεσθαι;
4.
Translate the following into Greek verb forms. (It may help to decide what
voice, person, number, and verb to use. For example: They are being sent: they
= 3rd pers. pl.; are being = pass.; sent = πέμπω > πέμπονται.)
Present Indicative Active and Middle-Passive of ‑ω Verbs
27
1. we are being taught
2. she trusts (persuades herself)
3. we are being led
4. you (sg.) begin
5. we are ruled
6. do you wish?
7. you (sg.) become
8. are you (sg.) going?
9.  he has
10. they are being sent
11. you (pl.) say
12. she is being released
13. I think
14. do you (pl.) believe?
15. to wish
16. I cease (stop myself)
17. they are being carried
18. you (pl.) persuade
19. they plan
20. you (sg.) obey (are
 persuaded)
21. he is writing
22. they make plans for
 themselves
23. I am willing (consent)
24. are you (pl.) writing?
25. he judges
26. it is said
27. to remain
28. to become
29. to plan
30. to be left
31. He wants to write.
32. Do you (pl.) wish to be led?
33. Is he writing or speaking?
34. They are willing to remain.
35. We wish to be educated.
36. They are either coming or
 remaining.
37. Are you (sg.) willing to stop
(yourself)?
38. He is willing both to rule and
to be ruled.
39. Do you (pl.) wish to plan
(make plans for yourselves)
or to judge?
40. I both wish and consent to
obey.

ἔργον δ’ οὐδὲν ὄνειδος.
No shame in work.
—Hesiod
NOUNS OF THE FIRST (‑η) AND SECOND
(‑ο) DECLENSIONS; ARTICLE
Characteristics of Nouns
Number tells how many: one (singular) or more than one (plural). There is
one set of endings for singular and another for plural. Besides the singular
and plural, Greek has a third number, the dual, for two persons or things. You
will not be burdened with learning the dual at this time, since it was archaic
in the classical period and is not very common even in the earliest Greek lit-
erature. By the classical age, the dual was used mainly for certain obvious
pairs, such as feet, hands, a team of oxen.
There are three genders in Greek: masculine, feminine, and neuter. All
nouns have gender, either natural gender or purely grammatical gender. Usu-
ally nouns for males are masculine, those for females feminine: ὁ ἀνήρ the man,
ἡ γυνή the woman. But the names of things are very often masculine or femi-
nine and nouns for people are sometimes neuter: e.g., all diminutive nouns
in ‑ιον are neuter, as τὸ παιδίον little child. The gender of every noun must be
learned. Each noun in the vocabulary is accompanied by a form of the article
(in the nominative) that tells you what gender it is: ὁ(m.), ἡ(f.), τό(n.).
The case tells the relationship of a noun or pronoun to the other words in
the sentence. There are five cases in Greek: nominative, genitive, dative, ac-
cusative, and vocative. The nominative is the case of the subject and of the
predicate nominative (used with copulative verbs such as be, become). The gen-
itive is the case of possession, denoting the relationship expressed by the
preposition of, or by -’s, -s’ in English. The dative is the case of the indirect ob-
ject or the person interested, expressed in English by to or for. The accusative
is the case of the direct object. The vocative is the case of direct address.
There are other meanings for the genitive, dative, and accusative cases be-
sides the basic ones given above. As was mentioned in the Introduction, there
were three other cases in the Proto-Indo-European language from which Greek
was developed: the ablative, the instrumental, and the locative. (In Latin, the
ablative assumed the meanings of the instrumental and locative.) In Greek,
the genitive took over the meaning of separation ( from) of the old ablative
case, and the dative has the meanings of the instrumental (by, with) and of
the locative (in, on, at). The accusative expresses the meaning of the end of
motion (called the terminal accusative: the place, thing, or person motion is
directed toward). These relationships in English are, for the most part, ex-
pressed by the use of prepositions.
28
Lesson I

It is impossible to have a separate case for every possible relationship a
noun can have in a sentence. Finnish has sixteen cases and even that is not
enough. In Greek, there are a number of prepositions that further define how
the cases are used. Some of these prepositions are used with one case only, as
ἐν in, which is used only with the dative case (the locative dative, the case for
place at which); or εἰς into, to, used only with the accusative case (the terminal
accusative, the case for place to which). Other prepositions are used with more
than one case, and the word we use to translate them depends on which case
follows. One such preposition is παρά alongside of (at the side of, near). With the
genitive, παράmeans from beside, from the side of, or simply from: this is the gen-
itive of separation. With the dative, παρά means at the side of, with, beside, near:
this is the locative dative. With the accusative, παράmay be translated to the
side of, to: the terminal accusative. It is important to remember that the mean-
ing of the case is generally retained when a preposition is used with it. As we
go along the cases and their special uses will be treated in more detail.
It is important to become familiar with the case endings and with their uses,
for it is only the cases that tell you what part a noun plays in a sentence. Greek,
as an inflected language, is not bound by the place system of syntax as Eng-
lish is. The use of a word is not dependent on the order in which it appears in
the sentence, but on its form.
Noun Endings
There are three declensions of nouns in Greek. First declension, or η/α nouns,
are so called because ‑η or ‑α is characteristic of their declension; the ‑η type
will be introduced in this lesson, the ‑α type in Lesson III. Second declension,
or ‑ο‑ type nouns, characterized by the vowel ‑ο‑, are divided into two types,
‑ος and ‑ον. The third declension will be introduced in Lesson V.
First, –η type
Second, –ος type
Second, –ον type
Sg.
Pl.
Sg.
Pl.
Sg.
Pl.
N
‑η
‑αι
‑ος
‑οι
‑ον
‑α
G
‑ης
‑ῶν
‑ου
‑ων
‑ου
‑ων
D
‑ῃ
‑αις
‑ῳ
‑οις
‑ῳ
‑οις
A
‑ην
‑ᾱς
‑ον
‑ους
‑ον
‑α
V
‑ε
The vocative will be given separately only when it differs from the nominative.
Examples:
ἡ γνώμη thought
ὁ πόνος toil
τὸ μέτρον measure
Sg.
Pl.
Sg.
Pl.
Sg.
Pl.
N
γνώμη
γνῶμαι
πόνος
πόνοι
μέτρον
μέτρα
G
γνώμης
γνωμῶν
πόνου
πόνων
μέτρου
μέτρων
D
γνώμῃ
γνώμαις
πόνῳ
πόνοις
μέτρῳ
μέτροις
A
γνώμην
γνώμᾱς
πόνον
πόνους
μέτρον
μέτρα
V
πόνε
Nouns of the First (‑η) and Second (‑ο) Declensions; Article
29

The Definite Article
Corresponding to the English definite article, the, is ὁ, ἡ, τό in Greek. Like any
other adjective, the article is declined: it has singular and plural, all three
genders, and all the cases (except the vocative). Its endings are similar to those
of the ‑η‑ and ‑ο‑ declensions, though not identical with them. It should be
learned thoroughly, the sooner the better.
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
ὁ
ἡ
τό
οἱ
αἱ
τά
G
τοῦ
τῆς
τοῦ
τῶν
τῶν
τῶν
D
τῷ
τῇ
τῷ
τοῖς
ταῖς
τοῖς
A
τόν
τήν
τό
τούς
τάς
τά
Remarks on the Article
Notice that the forms of the nominative masculine and feminine, both
singular and plural (ὁ, ἡ, οἱ, αἱ), the forms without τ, have no accent.
They are proclitics, that is, they lean on the word following them for
their accent.
Uses of the Article
1. In general, the definite article corresponds to English the, but is used in
some instances where English would omit it.
2. Often proper names are accompanied by the article, e.g., ὁ Πλάτων (Plato).
3. Abstract nouns may be used with or without the article: ἡ ἀρετή or ἀρετή
(excellence).
4. Demonstrative adjectives are always used with the article in prose: oὗτος
ὁ ἀνήρ (this man). [III]
5. The definite article is used with a noun in a generic sense, when a person
or thing represents a class, ὁ ἄνθρωπος (man, in general), οἱ ἄνθρωποι (mankind,
people).
6. The article can also be used as a possessive, to indicate that a thing belongs
to someone mentioned in the sentence: that is, it may sometimes be translated
as my, your, his/her/its, their, etc.
7. Greek has no indefinite article equivalent to our a/an. However, τις, τι (the
indefinite pronoun) is sometimes used in a way similar to the indefinite
article.
Nouns declined with the article
To find the base of a noun, remove the genitive singular ending. For this rea-
son, the genitive is always given with a new noun in the vocabulary.
30
Lesson I

1. Nouns of the first declension [-η type]
All nouns of this type are feminine. The examples are chosen to show the dif-
ferent accents.
Formation: to the base of the noun, add ‑η type endings
ἡ δίκη justice
ἡ ἀρετήexcellence
Sg.
Pl.
Sg.
Pl.
N
ἡ δίκη
αἱ δίκαι
ἡ ἀρετή
αἱ ἀρεταί
G
τῆς δίκης
τῶν δικῶν
τῆς ἀρετῆς
τῶν ἀρετῶν
D
τῇ δίκῃ
ταῖς δίκαις
τῇ ἀρετῇ
ταῖς ἀρεταῖς
A
τὴν δίκην
τὰς δίκας
τὴν ἀρετήν
τὰς ἀρετάς
2. Nouns of the second declension (-ος and -ον types) 
The examples below show the different accents and genders.
Examples: -ος type
Formation: to the base of the noun, add ‑ος type endings
ὁ λόγος
ἡ ὁδός
ὁ πλοῦτος
ὁ/ἡ ἄνθρωπος
word
road
wealth
human being
Sg.
N
ὁ λόγος
ἡ ὁδός
ὁ πλοῦτος
ὁ ἄνθρωπος
G
τοῦ λόγου
τῆς ὁδοῦ
τοῦ πλούτου
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου
D
τῷ λόγῳ
τῇ ὁδῷ
τῷ πλούτῳ
τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ
A
τὸν λόγον
τὴν ὁδόν
τὸν πλοῦτον
τὸν ἄνθρωπον
V
λόγε
ὁδέ
πλοῦτε
ἄνθρωπε
Pl.
N
οἱ λόγοι
αἱ ὁδοί
οἱ πλοῦτοι
οἱ ἄνθρωποι
G
τῶν λόγων
τῶν ὁδῶν
τῶν πλούτων
τῶν ἀνθρώπων
D
τοῖς λόγοις
ταῖς ὁδοῖς
τοῖς πλούτοις
τοῖς ἀνθρώποις
A
τοὺς λόγους
τὰς ὁδούς
τοὺς πλούτους
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
Examples: -ον type
Formation: to the base of the noun, add ‑ον type endings
τὸ ἔργον deed
τὸ δῶρον gift
Sg.
Pl.
Sg.
Pl.
N
τὸ ἔργον
τὰ ἔργα
τὸ δῶρον
τὰ δῶρα
G
τοῦ ἔργου
τῶν ἔργων
τοῦ δώρου
τῶν δώρων
D
τῷ ἔργῳ
τοῖς ἔργοις
τῷ δώρῳ
τοῖς δώροις
A
τὸ ἔργον
τὰ ἔργα
τὸ δῶρον
τὰ δῶρα
Nouns of the First (‑η) and Second (‑ο) Declensions; Article
31

Remarks on the endings
Be sure to learn the ι‑subscript of the dative singular endings, ‑ῃand
‑ῳ: the forms are not correct without it. ‑ι‑ is characteristic of the dative
case: ‑ῃ, ‑ῳ, ‑οις, ‑αις.
The endings for the ‑ος type and the ‑ον type are the same except
for the nominative singular and the nominative and accusative plural.
Neuters always have the same ending in the nominative and
accusative.
The numerous examples given above have been chosen to illustrate
the accentuation of nouns; the endings are the same within each type,
and should be your primary concern at this point.
Noun Accents
The accent of nouns is persistent, that is, it regularly stays on the syllable on
which it starts, unless forced to move. You can learn where it starts by obser-
vation and by repeating new words to yourself.
An exception to this rule is that nouns of the first declension have the cir-
cumflex on the ultima in the genitive plural (regardless of where the accent
falls in the other forms). Historically the ‑ῶν ending is the result of a contrac-
tion from ‑άων or ‑έων to ‑ῶν.
Some Accent Rules
Using the nouns declined above as examples, study these rules:
1. The accent of nouns is persistent, and will stay where it starts. In the word
δίκη the accent is on the penult, which is short, and remains there, except in
the genitive plural (see above). Study δίκη, λόγος, and ἔργον.
2. In the first and second declensions, if the accent falls on the ultima, the cir-
cumflex is used in the genitive and dative, singular and plural. In the word
ἀρετή, the accent is on the ultima and remains there throughout the declen-
sion. In the genitive and dative cases, however, the accent changes from the
acute to the circumflex. Study the examples ἀρετή and ὁδός.
3. a. If the penult is long and accented, and the ultima is short, then the ac-
cent on the penult must be the circumflex. In the words πλοῦτος and δῶρον,
the accent is on the penult. In these two words, the penult is long. Remember
that the endings ‑αι and ‑οι are short for the purpose of accentuation. What is
the length of the ‑α in the neuter plural, long or short? Study the declensions
of πλοῦτος and δῶρον.
b. The circumflex can fall on the penult only if the ultima is short. If the
ending is long (as are ‑ου, ‑ῳ, ‑αις, ‑οις, ‑ους, ‑ων), the accent changes from the
circumflex to the acute. 
4. An accent can go as far back as the antepenult only if the ultima is short.
In the declension of ἄνθρωπος, you will notice that the accent shifts from the
antepenult to the penult. The accent is forced to move by the length of the ul-
32
Lesson I

tima. If the ultima is long, the furthest back an accent can go is the penult: thus
ἄνθρωπος, ἄνθρωποι, but ἀνθρώπῳ, ἀνθρώπου.
5. The grave accent is used when a word, accented with the acute on the
 ultima, is followed immediately by another word, without any intervening
punctuation mark, e.g., τὸν ἄνθρωπον; ὁ λόγος καὶ τὸ ἔργον.
Vocabulary
You can recognize nouns in the vocabulary because they are given in the fol-
lowing way: nominative singular, genitive singular, article (in the nominative
singular): e.g., ἄνθρωπος, ἀνθρώπου, ὁ/ἡ human being. The article given with
each noun tells what gender it is. It is not always possible to determine the
gender from the nominative form (e.g., ὁδός, feminine). Try not to think of de-
clensions as having gender. As you will learn in Lesson III, there is a class of
nouns of the first declension that is masculine; and, as you already know, a
few nouns of the second declension are feminine. Therefore it is a good idea
to get in the habit of learning the article with each new noun. The genitive
should be learned as well, because the base of a noun is usually found from
the genitive singular. As you will see [V], the base is not always clear from the
nominative. The nominative and genitive together show you what paradigm
(pattern) the noun will follow. Always learn the accent of a noun (by saying
it aloud) when you study it, and notice what changes (if any) in accent take
place from the nominative to the genitive. Some nouns are common gender
(e.g., ἄνθρωπος and θεός), that is, they appear as either m. or f.
Nouns
ἀνάγκη, ἀνάγκης, ἡ
necessity
ἄνθρωπος, ἀνθρώπου, ὁ/ἡ
person, human being, man, with article;
humankind; of individuals and generically
(anthropomorphic)
ἀρετή, ἀρετῆς, ἡ
goodness, excellence, virtue
ἀρχή, ἀρχῆς, ἡ
beginning, origin; power, empire, office; first
principle (cf. the meanings of ἄρχω)
βίος, βίου, ὁ
life, livelihood (macrobiotic)
βουλή, βουλῆς, ἡ
will, determination; Council, Senate
γνώμη, γνώμης, ἡ
thought, opinion (gnomic)
δίκη, δίκης, ἡ
justice, order, right; lawsuit, trial
δῶρον, δώρου, τό
gift (Pandora)
εἰρήνη, εἰρήνης, ἡ
peace (Irene)
εἰρήνην ἄγειν
live in peace
ἔργον, ἔργου, τό
deed, work (erg, energy)
ἥλιος, ἡλίου, ὁ
sun (helium; Helius, the sun god)
θάνατος, θανάτου, ὁ
death (euthanasia, thanatopsis)
Nouns of the First (‑η) and Second (‑ο) Declensions; Article
33

θεός, θεοῦ, ὁ/ἡ
god, goddess (voc. sg., θεός)
πρὸς θεῶν
good heavens!, in the name of the gods!
λίθος, λίθου, ὁ
stone (lithograph)
λόγος, λόγου, ὁ
reason, word; speech; account; principle
μέτρον, μέτρου, τό
measure, moderation (meter)
νῆσος, νήσου, ἡ
island (Peloponnesian)
νόμος, νόμου, ὁ
usage, custom, law (cf. νομίζω)
κατὰ νόμον
according to law
παρὰ νόμον
contrary to law
νόμῳ
by custom, conventionally
ξένος, ξένου, ὁ
guest-friend, stranger, foreigner (xenophobic)
ὁδός, ὁδοῦ, ἡ
road, street, way (period, method)
οὐρανός, οὐρανοῦ, ὁ
heaven, sky (uranium, Uranus)
παιδίον, παιδίου, τό
little child, young slave (pediatrician)
πλοῦτος, πλούτου, ὁ
wealth, riches (Πλοῦτος, Plutus, god of
wealth)
πόλεμος, πολέμου, ὁ
war
πόνος, πόνου, ὁ
toil, labor
φίλη, φίλης, ἡ
friend, loved one (includes family)
φίλος, φίλου, ὁ
friend, loved one (includes family)
φίλος, -η, -ον
adj. [II] dear, loved
χρόνος, χρόνου, ὁ
time (can refer both to time in the abstract
and to a definite period of time) 
(anachronism)
ψυχή, ψυχῆς, ἡ
life, soul (psyche, metempsychosis)
Particles
Many particles are postpositive (postpos.): they cannot come first in a sen-
tence, clause, or phrase and are usually put second. In translation they may
seem to begin a sentence, but in Greek they connect a sentence or thought to
what comes before it.
γάρ
for, postpos. conjunction. Note that γάρ is not a preposi-
tion (the English preposition for is usually expressed in
Greek by the dative case without a preposition), but a
causal conjunction, a milder way of saying because.
δέ
and, but, postpos. conjunction
μέν . . . δέ
on the one hand . . . on the other hand (both μέν and δέ are
postpositives and are used to point out that the words
with which they are associated are being contrasted or
differentiated, as in a list)
34
Lesson I

Prepositions
Prepositions are given with their basic meanings, the case(s) they take, spe-
cial meanings if they take more than one case, and where applicable a selection
of idiomatic meanings.
εἰς
into, to, + acc.: (terminal acc., place to which)
ἐν
in, on, + dat.: (locative dat., place where)
παρά
alongside, by, near (used of persons) + gen., dat., acc.
+ gen. from the side of, from beside, from
+ dat. by the side of, beside, with, near
+ acc. to the side of, to, along; in addition to, contrary to
σύν
with; along with, by means of (of accompaniment or means) 
+ dat. (older Attic spelling ξύν)
Vocabulary Notes
1. ἀρετή (excellence) is a very important word and concept in the
Greek language and in the Greek mind. It is the word that comes to
mind when we think of the Greek ideal—striving for perfection of the
mind and body, and for the fullest development of human capabilities.
Naturally the understanding of the word changed over the years. In
Homer’s heroic world, ἀρετή was martial valor, the quality of the
hero, the ideal for which men lived and died. Later it came to have a
more political connotation: under the influence of the Sophists, man’s
highest goal came to be political ἀρετή. Socrates’ mission was spiritual
perfection (ἀρετή), which he believed could be attained through
knowledge of the truth. Ἀρετή became less sexist and more gener -
alized, as is attested in the words of Antisthenes: ἀνδρὸς καὶ γυναικὸς
ἡ αὐτὴ ἀρετή, of male and female, the same excellence.
2. γνώμη (cf. γιγνώσκω, root γνω‑, know), although often defined as
mean ing opinion, has as its first meaning a means of knowing, and so
an organ by which one knows or perceives, and thence intelligence, thought,
judgment, opinion. The phrase γνώμην ἔχειν means to under stand (to
have intelligence rather than to have an opinion). The philosopher
Heraclitus (fragment 41) wrote, ἕν τὸ σοφόν· ἐπίστασθαι γνώμην
(Knowledge is one thing: to know true judgment). Here the meaning of
γνώμη is obviously quite different from our use of the word opinion.
γνῶμαι are maxims, the opinions of wise men: cf. English gnome (not the
garden variety), a short saying which expresses a general truth. To
express a general truth (or a habitual action) in a vivid way, the aorist
tense is often used in Greek, hence the designation gnomic aorist.
3. δίκη is another word for which the usual translation (in this
instance justice) is somewhat misleading. The first meaning of δίκη
is custom or usage, that is, the normal rule of behavior. In a technical
sense, δίκη refers to a lawsuit or trial (that is, the proceedings in -
stituted to determine legal rights). In the writings of the Greek
tragedians, especially Sophocles, the word δίκη seems to represent a
Nouns of the First (‑η) and Second (‑ο) Declensions; Article
35

balance: if this balance is upset, all nature rebels until it is set right. A
great crime against nature or society (such as Oedipus’ murdering his
father and marrying his mother, or Creon’s refusal to bury the dead
Polyneices, while burying Antigone alive) destroys the balance of
δίκη. This in turn brings disaster, sometimes upon the whole city,
until the balance is restored.
4. λόγος (derived from λέγω): in LSJ one finds six long columns
under the entry for λόγος.
These have been condensed into the
following ten items, to give an idea of the ways this word is used.
1. computation, reckoning, account
2. relation, correspondence, ratio, proportion
3. explanation, plea, case; statement of a theory, argument, thesis,
reason, formula, law, rule of conduct
4. debate (internal): reason, abstract reasoning
5. continuous statement, narrative, story, speech
6. verbal expression, opposite to ἔργον; common talk, repute
7. a particular utterance: saying, oracle, proverb
8. the thing spoken of: subject matter (in art, the subject of a
painting)
9. expression, speech: intelligent utterance: language
10. the Word or Wisdom of God: in the New Testament, λόγος is
identified with the person of Christ: ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος.
5. ξένος guest-friend: the word ξένος applies to persons or states
bound by treaty or ties of hospitality. When applied to a person, it
means guest or host (though most commonly guest), i.e., a person
giving or receiving hospitality. The people you stay with when you
go to another town and who stay with you when they come to yours
are your ξένοι. The relationship between guest and host was a sacred
one and very important to survival in a land that was divided into
many separate political entities. To harm or betray one’s guest or host
was considered a serious and unholy crime: many tales from Greek
legend and folklore are concerned with the guest-host relationship
(e.g., the cause of the Trojan War in Paris’ theft of his generous host’s
beautiful wife). The stranger, wanderer, or refugee is also a ξένος
and was under the special protection of Ζεύς ξένιος. Any stranger or
foreigner, as opposed to a native or citizen, is called ξένος, and one
addresses any stranger ὦ ξένε. The word is also used as opposite to
φίλος, that is, the ξένος is not a member of the family. Thus we have
the anomaly of the same word meaning both friend and stranger.
6. ψυχήlife or the force of life that escapes from the person at death:
from this the word carries the idea of the departed spirit, the shadow
or ghost of the person that goes to Hades after death. In Homer, this
shadowy realm is described as a place where spirits flit around in a
36
Lesson I

vague and bleak eternity, clinging to the life they have lost. For Homer
the real life of human beings was spent on earth under the sun. But
this is not so for many later writers: the ψυχή becomes the more
important part, the immaterial and immortal soul, one of the eternal
verities. At death it escapes from the pollution of the body and
returns to its essence: here we see the division into body and soul
(σῶμα καὶ ψυχή). To Plato, the ψυχή is the immaterial principle of life
and movement. To him we owe the tripartite division of the soul into
λογισμός (reason), θυμός (spirit), and ἐπιθυμία (appetite), in which
reason must rule. ψυχή can also mean the conscious self or person -
ality, whence our use of the term psyche.
7. Diminutives (e.g., παιδίον from παῖς, child, stem: παιδ‑), formed from
noun stems by adding ‑ιον, are all neuter, even when they denote
a person. They may be used to express endearment or contempt:
πατρίδιον (from πατήρ, father), Daddy, is a term of affection; but the
names Σωκρατίδιον and Εὐριπίδιον (little Euripides and little Socrates)
are used by Aristophanes in ridicule. Many diminutive forms are not
diminutive in meaning (e.g., βιβλίον book, πεδίον plain; this is espe -
cially true in Modern Greek, where diminutives abound).
Exercise B
1.
Decline (i.e., give all the cases, in the order given in the paradigms).
1. ἡ νῆσος
4. ὁ οὐρανός
7. τὸ μέτρον
9. ὁ θάνατος
2. ὁ ἥλιος
5. τὸ παιδίον
8. ἡ γνώμη
10. ὁ φίλος
3. ὁ βίος
6. ἡ βουλή
➞What happens to the accent in the nominative plural of γνώμη? What is the
length of ι in φίλος? How can you tell?
2.
a. Parse the following (example: ὁδῷ, dat. sg. of ὁδός, ἡ, road).
b. Change to the opposite number (example: ὁδῷ, dat. sg., ὁδοῖς, dat. pl.).
c. Give the form of the article to be used with each noun in 2a (NB: There
is no article in the vocative).
1. ἀνθρώπους
9. ἀρχῇ
17. λόγος
24. εἰρήναις
2. νόμῳ
10. ἀρετῆς
18. ἀνάγκῃ
25. ὁδόν
3. χρόνου
11. δῶρα
19. ἀρχῶν
26. θεόν
4. φίλου
12. ὁδῶν
20. λίθῳ
27. μέτρα
5. βουλῇ
13. παιδίον
21. πολέμους
28. ξένους
6. ξένε
14. νήσων
22. βίοις
29. ψυχαί
7. πλούτῳ
15. θανάτου
23. θανάτους
30. πόνοις
8. γνωμῶν
16. οὐρανός
Nouns of the First (‑η) and Second (‑ο) Declensions; Article
37

Syntax
Study the following points before doing the translation exercises.
1. Instrumental Dative: Besides being used for the indirect object, and with
many prepositions (e.g., ἐν, in; παρά, by the side of) denoting place where
(locative), and with the preposition σύν (with) denoting accompaniment, the
dative is also commonly used for means or manner: the instrumental dative.
A. Dative of Means
The means by which anything is or is done is in the dative case. (It
answers the question: “with what?”):
τοὺς θεοὺς πείθομεν δώροις.
“We persuade the gods by means of gifts.”
ὁρῶμεν τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς.
“We see with our (the) eyes.”
B. Dative of Manner
The manner in which anything is done is in the dative case. (It an-
swers the question: “How, in what way?”):
τῇ ἐμῇ γνώμῃ
in my opinion
δρόμῳ
on the run
σιγῇ
in silence
2. Verbs of ruling such as ἄρχω take the genitive case.
3. The verb πιστεύω and the verb πείθω in the middle (πείθομαι) take the da-
tive case.
4. A neuter plural subject takes a singular verb: the neuter plural is thought
of collectively. It’s like spaghetti: you would never say “spaghetti are.”
Exercise B (continued)
3.
a. Translate the following.
1. ἡ μὲν εἰρήνη φέρει τὸν βίον, ὁ δὲ πόλεμος θάνατον.
2. ὁ ἥλιος τοῖς ἀνθρώποις τὴν ἀρχὴν τοῦ βίου φέρει.
3. ὁ πλοῦτος τὴν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ψυχὴν λύει.
4. ἀνάγκη μέτρον ἔχειν. [ἀνάγκη (ἐστί) + inf.: it is necessary]
5. τὸ παιδίον ἐθέλει παιδεύεσθαι.
6. ὁ δὲ χρόνος παιδεύει τὸ παιδίον.
7. ὁ ἄνθρωπος παιδεύεται τὸ παιδίον.
8. τὰ παιδία εἰς τὴν νῆσον πέμπεται.
9. τοῖς γὰρ θεοῖς ἀνάγκη τὰ δῶρα ἄγειν.
10. οἱ μὲν ἄνθρωποι τῷ νόμῳ πείθονται· τὰ δὲ παιδία τοῖς φίλοις πείθεται.
11. ὁ λόγος ἐστὶ παρὰ τῶν θεῶν. [ἐστίis]
12. τὰ γὰρ δῶρα ἄγομεν παρὰ τοὺς θεούς.
13. σὺν ταῖς φίλαις ἔρχονται.
14. εἰς ἀνθρώπους λέγει ὁ θεός. [εἰς here: before]
15. σὺν θεῷ εἰρήνην πράττετε. [πράττω bring about]
38
Lesson I

16. ὁ μὲν ἄνθρωπος λέγει, ὁ δὲ θεὸς πράττει.
17. τὸν πόνον λείπομεν.
18. οἱ ἐν ταῖς νήσοις ἄνθρωποι ἡμῶν ἄρχουσιν. [ἡμῶν us; gen.]
19. παρὰ τοῖς φίλοις βουλόμεθα μένειν.
20. παρὰ τῇ ὁδῷ τὸν φίλον λείπετε;
3.
b. Translate. Change appropriate nouns and verbs to the opposite num-
ber. (1–10 into the plural; 11–24 into the singular.)
1. ἡ μὲν ὁδὸς ἄγει εἰς τὸν θάνατον, ἡ δὲ εἰς τὸν βίον. [ἡ μὲν . . . ἡ δὲ. . .,
the one . . . the other . . .]
2. ὁ ἄνθρωπος τὸ παιδίον λύεται τῷ δώρῳ.
3. ὁ μὲν θεὸς ἄρχει τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπος ἄρχεται ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ.
[ὑπό+ gen. by]
4. ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἄγει τὸν φίλον εἰς δίκην παρὰ νόμον.
5. εἰς λόγους ἔρχομαι τῷ ξένῳ. [εἰς λόγους ἔρχεσθαι + dat. enter into
speech with]
6. ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἐθέλει φίλος γίγνεσθαι.
7. ἡ ψυχὴ κρίνεται ἐν οὐρανῷ.
8. ἡ γὰρ ἀρετὴ γίγνεται ἡ τοῦ βίου ἀρχὴ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ.
9. βούλει Ἑλλάδα λείπειν; βούλει μένειν; [Ἑλλάδα Greece; acc.]
10. πιστεύεις τῷ θεῷ;
11. οἱ ἄνθρωποι ἄγουσι τὰ δῶρα καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ ταῖς θεοῖς.
12. δώροις γὰρ πείθομεν τοὺς θεούς.
13. οἱ θεοὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἄρχουσιν.
14. βουλεύονται καὶ κρίνουσιν.
15. βούλονται οἱ ἄνθρωποι φίλους ἔχειν.
16. νομίζουσι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους εἶναι ξένους. [εἶναι to be]
17. εἰς λίθους γράφομεν τοὺς λόγους καὶ τὰς γνώμας.
18. οἱ γὰρ ἄνθρωποι γράφουσι τοῖς παιδίοις.
19. αἱ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ψυχαὶ εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν ἔρχονται.
20. τοῖς μὲν τῶν θεῶν λόγοις πιστεύομεν· τοῖς δε τῶν ἀνθρώπων νόμοις
πειθόμεθα.
21. τοῖς μὲν λόγοις φίλοι εἰσίν· τοῖς δὲ ἔργοις οὔ. [εἰσί(ν) they are; οὔnot]
22. οἱ θεοὶ παύουσι τὸν πόλεμον· ὁ μὲν πόλεμος παύεται, ἡ δὲ εἰρήνη
γίγνεται.
23. καὶ οἱ θεοὶ καὶ οἱ ἄνθρωποι βούλονται εἰρήνην ἄγειν.
24. σὺν θεοῖς εὖ πράττομεν. [εὖwell]
4.
a. Write in Greek (review Syntax, p. 38).
1. The man brings gifts to his [= the] guests.
2. The gods bring both life and death to people.
3. Does man rule [over] the god?
4. Do you trust the opinions of men?
5. Do we judge our friends by [= by means of] the gifts?
6. Both men and gods wish to stop the war and to have peace.
7. Does the road lead to the island?
8. I am willing to wait, but I wish to leave.
9. Is justice destroyed by gifts?
10. Do the gifts of human beings persuade the god?
Nouns of the First (‑η) and Second (‑ο) Declensions; Article
39

4. b. Make up some Greek sentences using the following words. Change the
forms of the nouns and verbs. Think out the sentences in Greek. Be creative.
1. τὸ δῶρον, ἐν, θεός, οὐρανός, φέρω
2. ἡ γνώμη, γράφω, ὁ φίλος
3. ὁ ἄνθρωπος, κρίνω, καί, τὸ ἔργον, ὁ λόγος, φίλος
4. βούλομαι, βίος, εἰρήνη, ἔχω, καί
5. μέν, δέ, ἐθέλω, βούλομαι, ἔρχομαι, μένειν, εἰς, ἡ νῆσος
Elision
In both prose and verse, a final short vowel is often dropped before a word
beginning with a vowel. This is called elision; it is marked by the apostrophe.
For example:
μὶ’ ἐστιν for μία ἐστιν
δ’ ἔργοις for δὲ ἔργοις 
Readings
1. Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος, καὶ ὁ λόγος ἦν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος. οὗτος
ἦν ἐν ἀρχῇ πρὸς τὸν θεόν.
—Gospel of John
[The noun with the article is the subject; the one without the article is the
predicate nominative. ἦν was (3rd sg. impf.). πρός prep. with acc. to, with, in
the presence of. οὗτος this (refers to λόγος).]
2. Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν.
—Genesis
[ἐποίησεν made (3rd sg. aorist tense). γῆν (acc. sg. of γῆ) earth.]
3. ὁδοὶ δύο εἰσί, μία τῆς ζωῆς καὶ μία τοῦ θανάτου, διαφορὰ δὲ πολλὴ μεταξὺ
τῶν δύο ὁδῶν.
—Didache (Teaching of the Twelve Apostles)
[εἰσίare (3rd pl.). μία one. ζωήlife. διαφοράdifference. πολλήmuch (with
διαφορά). μεταξύbetween (+ gen.).]
4. ἀνάγκῃ οὐδὲ θεοὶ μάχονται.
—Greek Proverb
[οὐδέand not, not even. μάχομαι fight (+ dat.: i.e., fight against).]
5. ὁ θεὸς ὄνομα οὐκ ἔχει ὡς ἄνθρωπος.
—Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History
[ὄνομα name (acc.). οὐ, οὐκ, οὐχ not. ὡς as.]
40
Lesson I

6. πόνος πόνῳ πόνον φέρει.
πᾷ πᾷ
πᾷ γὰρ οὐκ ἔβαν ἐγώ;
—Sophocles, Aias (Ajax)
[πᾷDoric for πῇwhere. οὐχ ἒβαν. have I not gone? (The chorus is searching for
Aias, fearing the worst.)]
7. βίος βίου δεόμενος οὐκ ἔστιν βίος.
—Menander
[δεόμενος lacking, in need of (+ gen.). ἔστιν is. Both meanings of βίος are used.]
8. ἔστι γὰρ [ἡ ψυχή] οἷον ἀρχὴ τῶν ζῴων.
—Aristotle, περὶ ψυχῆς (On the Soul) 
[ἡ ψυχήis bracketed because it is supplied from previous sentences. οἷον
such as, as if, as it were. ζῷον, -ου, τόliving being, animal.]
9. εἰρήνη γεωργὸν κἀν πέτραις τρέφει
καλῶς, πόλεμος δὲ κἀν πεδίῳ κακῶς.
—Menander
[γεωργός, -οῦ, ὁfarmer (γῆ+ ἔργον). κἀν = καὶ ἐν. πέτραις (dat. pl.) rocks, rocky
terrain (πέτρα, -ας, ἡrock). τρέφω nourish. καλῶς well. κακῶς badly. πεδίον,
-ου, τόplain (the best land).]
10. μί’ ἐστιν ἀρετὴ τὸν ἄτοπον φεύγειν ἀεί.
—Menander
[μί’ = μία. τὸν ἄτοπον the wicked (person). φεύγω flee, avoid. ἀείalways.]
11. δῶρα θεοὺς πείθει.
—Greek Proverb
12. θάνατον ἢ βίον φέρει;
—Sophocles, Ajax
13. ἡ γὰρ δικαιοσύνη, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἀρετή ἐστιν.
—Plato, Meno
[δικαιοσύνη justice. (ὦ) Σώκρατες, voc. of Socrates.]
14. Πυλάδη, σε γὰρ δὴ πρῶτον ἀνθρώπων ἐγὼ
πιστὸν νομίζω καὶ φίλον ξένον τ’ ἐμοί.
—Euripides, Electra 
[Πυλάδη Pylades, a name in the vocative. The speaker is Orestes. σε you (acc.).
γάρ: in the context the speaker uses the particle to say, “[I’m saying this] be-
cause. . . .” ἐγώ I, nom. subj. πιστόν faithful, loyal, agrees with σε. τ’ and for τε.
καί . . . τε both . . . and. Translate τε before the word it follows. καί Α Β τε means
“both A and B.” ἐμοί to me, translate after πιστόν.]
Nouns of the First (‑η) and Second (‑ο) Declensions; Article
41

Conversation
χαῖρε (χαῖρε, ὦ φίλε)
Hello. (Hello, my friend.)
καὶ σύ, χαῖρε.
Hello to you too.
τί πράττεις; (πῶς ἔχεις)
How are you?
καλῶς πράττω (καλῶς ἔχω).
I’m well, and how are you?
καὶ σύ, τί πράττεις;
κακῶς πράττω.
Not well.
From Menander, The Misogynist:
Α. χαῖρ’ ὦ Γλυκέριον.
Hello, Glycerium.
Γλ. καὶ σύ.
Same to you.
Α. πολλοστῷ χρόνῳ ὁρῶ σε.
Long time, no see.
νόμῳ ψυχρόν, νόμῳ θερμόν, ἐτεῇ δὲ ἄτομα
καὶ κενόν.
By convention hot, by convention cold, in
 reality atoms and void. 
—Democritus
“AND”
Conjunctions are used to connect words, phrases,
clauses, or sentences. They are among the easier
parts of speech because they are not declined or
conjugated. The only changes they undergo are eli-
sion and crasis or combining with the words that
follow, for example: κἀγώ crasis for καὶ ἐγώ, χἠ cra-
sis for καὶ ἡ, κοὐκ crasis for καὶ οὐκ. The sign for
crasis looks like the smooth breathing. If you see a word beginning κ᾿–, it is
from καί combining with another word. 
Even conjunctions have their idiomatic uses. Some useful expressions us-
ing καί are: 
καὶ τά λοιπά and the rest; abbreviated κτλ. = etc. 
καὶ ἐγώ me too! 
καὶ δὴ τί but then what? (in questions it raises an objection) 
Καί is used for plus in numbers and addition (for example, fifteen is πεντε -
καίδεκα; one plus two is ἓν καὶ δύο. The only common English word using καί
is triskaidekaphobia, “the fear of the number thirteen.” Καί is still used in mod-
ern Greek, pronounced ke. 
42
Lesson I
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

LESSON II
Verbs, Adjectives, Relative Pronoun
In this lesson you will learn the imperfect tense, how to augment verbs, the verb to
be, adjectives, and the relative pronoun. The most important concepts you will learn
are agreement, predication, and the definition of a pronoun.
43
IMPERFECT ACTIVE AND
MIDDLE-PASSIVE; εἰμί
The imperfect tense is formed from the present stem (found by removing the
personal ending from the first principal part) and is therefore said to belong
to the present tense system.
The imperfect is a secondary (historical) tense, used for a continuous, ha-
bitual, or repeated act in past time (i.e., for action going on in the past) as op-
posed to the aorist tense [IV] which is used for a single act in past time (or
action simply taking place in the past).
The Augment
Like all secondary tenses (in the indicative), the imperfect receives the aug-
ment (or increase, at the beginning of the form). The augment was originally
an adverbial particle used to indicate past time, but became attached to the
verb to mark past tense. The augment occurs in two ways: the syllabic aug-
ment (ε‑) and the temporal augment. The syllabic augment adds a syllable to
the word; the temporal augment lengthens an initial vowel but does not add
a syllable. It is called temporal because the vowel takes longer to say. 
1. Syllabic Augment. Verbs beginning with a consonant simply prefix the
 syllable ε‑ to the tense stem:
λύω
stem λυ‑
ἐλυ‑
imperfect ἔλυον
λείπω
stem λειπ‑
ἐλειπ‑
imperfect ἔλειπον
βούλομαι
stem βουλ‑
ἐβουλ‑
imperfect ἐβουλόμην
Note: verbs beginning with ῥdouble the ρ after the augment:
ῥίπτω (throw)
stem ῥιπτ‑, ἐρριπτ‑
imperfect ἔρριπτον

2. Temporal Augment. Verbs beginning with a vowel or diphthong are usu-
ally augmented by lengthening the initial vowel according to the following
pattern:
*α

η
αι

ῃ
ᾳ

ῃ
αυ

ηυ
ἄγω: ἦγον
*ε

η
ει

ῃ
ευ

ηυ
ἔρχομαι: ἠρχόμην
ο

ω
οι

ῳ
ι

ῑ
υ

ῡ
*These are the most common and you should concentrate on them.
Note
There are several instances in which verbs beginning with a vowel
take the syllabic (ε‑) augment. These will be treated as irregular
forms. They occur when an initial consonant, ϝ (w-sound), or σ has
been lost; and the most common is ε augmenting to ει (contraction of
ε + ε): ἔχω, imperfect, εἶχον.
Formation and Meaning of Imperfect
Formation: Augment + present stem + thematic vowel + secondary endings.
Endings with Thematic Vowel
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
-ο‑ν
1st
-ο‑μην
I
-ε‑ς
2nd
-ου < [-ε‑σο]
you
-ε‑(ν)
3rd
-ε‑το
he/she/it
Pl.
-ο‑μεν
1st
-ο‑μεθα
we
-ε‑τε
2nd
-ε‑σθε
you
-ο‑ν
3rd
-ο‑ντο
they
There is no imperfect infinitive.
Example:
λύω in the imperfect active and middle-passive:
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
ἔλυον
1st
ἐλυόμην
ἔλυες
2nd
ἐλύου
ἔλυε(ν)
3rd
ἐλύετο
Pl.
ἐλύομεν
1st
ἐλυόμεθα
ἐλύετε
2nd
ἐλύεσθε
ἔλυον
3rd
ἐλύοντο
44
Lesson II

Translation of the imperfect: ἔλυον may be translated in the following ways:
I was freeing, I used to free, I kept on freeing. (It also sometimes has the meaning
I tried to free. This is known as the conative imperfect.)
Irregular Imperfect: as noted above, certain verbs augment irregularly.
Among these is ἔχω, which has εἶχον as the imperfect. When a verb deviates
from the norm in the imperfect, the form will be given in the vocabulary.
Accent: remember that the accent of verbs is recessive, i.e., it goes back as far
as the length of the ultima will permit.
➞Explain the accent of εἶχον and ἦγον.
Irregular Verb: εἰμί, Present and 
Imperfect Indicative
The Greek verb εἰμί, like the English verb be, is very irregular. Learn by rote
the present and imperfect indicative and the present infinitive of εἰμί.
Present
Imperfect
Sg.
εἰμί
I am
1st
ἦν/ἦ
I was
εἶ
you are
2nd
ἦσθα
you were
ἐστί(ν)
he, she, it is; 
3rd
ἦν
he, she, it was; 
there is
there was
Pl.
ἐσμέν
we are
1st
ἦμεν
we were
ἐστέ
you are
2nd
ἦτε
you were
εἰσί(ν)
they are
3rd
ἦσαν
they were
Pres. Inf.
εἶναι
to be
Accenting Enclitics
The forms of the present indicative of εἰμί, except for εἶ, the second person
singular, are enclitics; that is, they lean on the preceding word for their accent.
Often enclitics are not accented at all, but are pronounced with the preceding
word. Under certain circumstances, an enclitic will cause changes in the ac-
cent of the preceding word.
Study these rules explaining the accent of enclitics, along with the exam-
ples. Remember that the enclitic affects the accent of the word before it. The
accent of a word, as you know, can fall no further back than the third syllable
from the end of the word: the enclitic, as it were, adds one or more syllables
to the end of the word.
Imperfect Active and Middle-Passive; εἰμί
45

a. Two accents will be marked on the word preceding the enclitic if the pre -
ceding word has either an acute on the antepenult or a circumflex on the
penult. In either case an acute is added to the ultima.
ἄνθρωπός εἰμι
ἄνθρωπος: acute on the antepenult
δῶρόν ἐστι
δῶρον: circumflex on the penult
b. If an enclitic of two syllables follows a word with the acute on the penult,
then the enclitic has an accent on the ultima. (But the preceding word remains
unchanged.) Under these circumstances, an enclitic of one syllable will not
have an accent.
ξένοι εἰσίν
but
ξένος τις*
*τις is the indefinite pronoun-adjective some, any; and is enclitic [VIII]. 
c. An accent on the ultima of the preceding word remains unchanged. That
is, an acute does not change to a grave. The enclitic itself does not take an
accent in this instance.
θεός ἐστιν
θεοί εἰσιν
θεῶν τινων
θεοῦ τινος
d. In a series of enclitics, the first ones are accented and the last remains
unaccented. (In the example, the enclitics are underlined.)
εἴ πούτίς τινα ἴδοι ἐχθρόν 
—Thucydides
Since enclitics lean for their accent upon the word that comes before them,
they usually do not come first in the sentence. ἔστι and a few other enclitics
can come first for emphasis, and are accented.
Exercise A
1.
Accent the following words or phrases (Enclitics other than forms of εἰμί
are underlined).
1. ἐβουλου
8. εἰχε
15. ξενοι ἐσμεν
2. ἐγραφον
9. ἐβουλευετο
16. βουλης τινος
3. ἠρχομεθα
10. ἐφεροντο
17. θεοι ἐστε
4. ἐμενετε
11. λογοι τινες
18. ἀνθρωπου τινος
5. ἐπιστευομεν
12. ἐστιν ἀνθρωπος
19. δωρον τι
6. ἐγιγνεσθε
13. ἀνθρωπος ἐστιν
20. θεων τις
7. ἠθελες
14. βουλη τις
2.
a. Form and conjugate the imperfect.
1. ἄρχω
3. κρίνω
5. νομίζω
7. ἔρχομαι
2. ἐθέλω
4. λέγω
6. πράττω
8. γίγνομαι
2.
b. Conjugate in full (pres. and impf.) including infinitives.
1. ἄγω
4. ἔρχομαι
2. ἔχω (irreg. impf.)
5. βούλομαι
3. παύω
46
Lesson II

3.
a. Parse and translate. 
b. Change to the opposite number. 
c. Give the corresponding forms of the present or imperfect (except inf.).
1. ἐκρίνου
6. εἶ
11. ἐφέρετε
16. πιστεύουσιν
2. γίγνεσθε
7. ἦγεν
12. φέρεσθαι
17. ἐπείθετο
3. ἐβουλευόμεθα
8. ἔλειπον
13. ἐπαύοντο
18. ἦ
4. βούλονται
9. ἔμενες
14. ἐσμέν
19. ἤρχετε
5. ἦσαν
10. ἐθέλεις
15. ἦσθα
20. ἤρχοντο (2)
4.
Translate.
1. ἤγομεν τὰ δῶρα εἰς τὴν νῆσον.
2. οἱ ἄνθρωποι ἐνόμιζον τὸν ἥλιον εἶναι θεόν.
3. τοὺς γὰρ φίλους παρὰ τῇ ὁδῷ ἐλείπομεν.
4. σὺν τοῖς φίλοις εἰς τὴν νῆσον ἔρχεσθαι ἐβούλοντο.
5. οἱ μὲν ἤθελον εἰρήνην ἄγειν, οἱ δὲ ἐβουλεύοντο πόλεμον ποιεῖν. 
[οἱ μὲν . . . οἱ δέ some . . . others; ποιεῖν to make, inf.]
6. ἡ τοῦ πλούτου ὁδὸς ἔφερε θάνατον τῇ ψυχῇ.
7. ἔλεγε τοὺς τῶν θεῶν λόγους ἐν ἀνθρώποις. [ἐν among]
8. οἱ ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ θεοὶ ἔφερον τὴν δίκην τοῖς ἀνθρώποις.
9. ὁ ἄνθρωπος πόνους εἶχεν.
10. τοὺς θεοὺς δώροις ἔπειθον.
11. οἱ ξένοι φίλοι ἦσαν καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις.
12. θεὸς μὲν ἦν ὁ πλοῦτος, φίλος δ’ οὔ. [δ’see p. 40; οὐ, οὔ not. Note: usu-
ally the subject has the article; the predicate nominative usually
does not]
13. ἐβούλεσθε ἄρχειν μέν, ἄρχεσθαι δ’ οὔ;
14. ὁδοὶ ἦσαν δύο· ἡ μὲν ἦγεν εἰς τὴν ἀρετήν, ἡ δὲ εἰς τὸν πλοῦτον.
15. τὰ δῶρα ἦν παρὰ τῶν φίλων.
16. οἱ γὰρ ἄνθρωποι τὸν πλοῦτον εἶχον ἐν ταῖς ψυχαῖς.
17. παρὰ τῇ ὁδῷ ἐμένομεν.
18. παρὰ τοὺς ξένους ἠρχόμεθα σὺν τῷ παιδίῳ.
19. τὰ παιδία δώροις ἐλύοντο. τὰ παιδία δώροις ἐλύετο.
20. καὶ λόγοις καὶ ἔργοις φίλοι ἦτε.
5. Write in Greek.
1. Justice was a gift of the gods.
2. We were taking counsel for ourselves and we were judging.
3. Were you a friend to people and gods?
4. The children were writing to their friends.
5. Were the men bringing gifts to their guests?
6. The friends of the gods used to go into the heavens.
7. Men used to want to live in peace.
8. Were we left on [ἐν] the island?
9. There were two roads; the one led to war, the other to peace.
10. They were persuading the gods with gifts.
ἔστι ἡ ψυχὴ τοῦ ζῶντος σώματος αἰτία καὶ ἀρχή.
The soul is the cause and the first principle of
the living body.
—Aristotle, περὶ ψυχῆς (On the Soul)
Imperfect Active and Middle-Passive; εἰμί
47

ADJECTIVES: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον
AND ‑ος, ‑ον TYPES
1. Adjectives are words used to modify nouns (or, better, to name attributes
of nouns). In Greek they must agree grammatically (i.e., in gender, number,
and case) with the nouns they modify. The endings of the noun and adjective
are not necessarily identical, since the noun and adjective may belong to
different declensions. (A declension in itself does not have gender.)
The good man in Greek is ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἄνθρωπος, but the good road is ἡ
ἀγαθὴ ὁδός, because ὁδός is feminine, second declension.
2. Although there are several types of adjectives, the most common is the
‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον type (or the second-first declension type: that is, the masculine
and neuter forms are declined in the second declension like λόγος and ἔργον,
and the feminine is declined in the first declension like δίκη). The accent of
adjectives is persistent, like that of nouns. The endings are the same as those
you have already learned, and will give you an opportunity to review the
declensions.
3. Endings for the ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον adjectives: 
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
‑ος
‑η
‑ον
‑οι
‑αι
‑α
G
‑ου
‑ης
‑ου
‑ων
‑ων
‑ων
D
‑ῳ
‑ῃ
‑ῳ
‑οις
‑αις
‑οις
A
‑ον
‑ην
‑ον
‑ους
‑ας
‑α
V
‑ε
Example: καλός, καλή, καλόν good, fine, fair
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
καλός
καλή
καλόν
καλοί
καλαί
καλά
G
καλοῦ
καλῆς
καλοῦ
καλῶν
καλῶν
καλῶν
D
καλῷ
καλῇ
καλῷ
καλοῖς
καλαῖς
καλοῖς
A
καλόν
καλήν
καλόν
καλούς
καλάς
καλά
V
καλέ
Adjectives will be given in the vocabulary in the three genders: as καλός,
καλή, καλόν, and thus will be easily recognizable. Some adjectives, mostly
compounds, have only two sets of endings, ‑ος and ‑ον, with ‑ος serving for
both masculine and feminine, e.g., ἀθάνατος, ἀθάνατον immortal, deathless. They
are declined in the same way as καλός, omitting the feminine (‑η) endings:
48
Lesson II

Singular
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
ἀθάνατος
ἀθάνατον
ἀθάνατοι
ἀθάνατα
G
ἀθανάτου
ἀθανάτου
ἀθανάτων
ἀθανάτων
D
ἀθανάτῳ
ἀθανάτῳ
ἀθανάτοις
ἀθανάτοις
A
ἀθάνατον
ἀθάνατον
ἀθανάτους
ἀθάνατα
V
ἀθάνατε
Of this same type are ἄλογος, ἄλογον and ἄδικος, ἄδικον.
The Position of Adjectives
There are two possible positions (with certain variations) which the adjective
may occupy. These are—simply stated—(1) directly after the article or (2) not
directly after the article.
The first position is called the attributive position and is used when the
adjective is simply qualifying the noun. The most common order is article-
adjective-noun (the same as the usual English order):
ὁ σοφὸς ἄνθρωπος
the wise man
ἡ ἀθάνατος ψυχή
the immortal soul
τὸ καλὸν παιδίον
the good child
But this position can be varied in the following ways: the article and the noun
may be followed by a second article:
ὁ ἄνθρωπος ὁ καλός
the good man
or the first article may be omitted:
ἄνθρωπος ὁ καλός
the good man
κατὰ γνώμην τὴν ἐμήν
in my opinion
without changing the meaning; only the emphasis is slightly changed. The
first arrangement is by far the most common, the most direct and natural.
The second is formal, putting the emphasis on the noun, with the attributive
being used as a further explanation, almost as an afterthought: the man, i.e.,
the good one. The third is common in poetry but less so in prose. The impor-
tant thing to remember is that the adjective must come directly after the article
for it to be in the attributive position.
Other words and phrases that are used in the same way as adjectives are
put in the attributive position (any one of the three arrangements). That is,
any expression that tells an attribute of a noun, or qualifies its meaning in the
same way as an adjective does, goes into the attributive position. Genitives
and prepositional phrases are commonly used in this way.
Adjectives: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον and ‑ος, ‑ον Types
49

Examples:
Adjectives and Genitive
ἡ ψυχή
the soul
ἡ ἀθάνατος ψυχή
the immortal soul
ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου* ψυχή
the soul of man
τὰ καλὰ παιδία
the good children
τὰ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου παιδία
the person’s children
*Note that the article τοῦ is used with man (generic article, ὁ ἄνθρωπος, man in
general). The dependent genitive usually has the article if the noun on which
it depends has it. It is not uncommon to have a series of articles, each agree-
ing with its own noun:
τὰ γὰρ τῆς τῶν πολλῶν ψυχῆς ὄμματα
the eyes of the soul of the many 
—Plato
Adverbs
οἱ τότε ἄνθρωποι
the people of that time (the then people)
οἱ νῦν ἄνθρωποι
people of the present day (now people)
τότε and νῦν are adverbs and are not declined. In these expressions they are
used in the same way as adjectives, i.e., they tell which people.
Phrases
ὁ ἐξ ὁδοῦ ἄνθρωπος
the man from the street
οἱ ἐν ἄστει ἄνθρωποι
οἱ ἄνθρωποι οἱ ἐν ἄστει }
the people in the city
Which people?—the people in the city: considered in the Greek mind as the
same type of expression as the good man.
Other examples:
τὸ παρὰ τὸν Ἀλφειὸν ποταμὸν πεδίον
the plain by the river Alpheius
ὁ ἐν τῇ ἐμῇ ψυχῇ πλοῦτος
the wealth in my soul (Xenophon)
50
Lesson II

The second position the adjective may occupy (i.e., not directly following the
article) is the predicate position. A predicate adjective may precede the article
or follow the noun and its article.
A whole sentence may be formed, with the verb to be understood:
σοφὸς ὁ ἄνθρωπος
ὁ ἄνθρωπος σοφός }
the man is wise
The forms ἐστί and εἰσί are often omitted, especially in short sentences and
proverbial sayings. It is not common to leave out other forms of εἰμί.
Adjectives Used as Nouns
The Noun-Making Power of the Article: attributive adjectives together with the
article are often used as nouns. 
οἱ ἀγαθοί means the good (people): the masculine gender of the article and
adjective makes it clear that men/people is understood. (Cf. also οἱ τότε, those of
former times, those then, and οἱ νῦν, people of the present day, those now.)
ἡ ἀριστή
the best woman (the best of women)
ὁ σοφός
the wise man
ἡ σοφή
the wise woman
τὰ καλά
good things
τὰ κακά
evils
Note: in the plural the masculine is used for common gender, as in οἱ σοφοί,
the wise. This is called the generic masculine. In tragedy even a woman speak-
ing of herself in the plural will use the masculine.
The neuter singular of an adjective (and sometimes the neuter plural) is
very commonly used as an abstract noun:
τὸ καλόν
the beautiful, beauty
τὸ ἄδικον
injustice
In the sentence χαλεπὰ τὰ καλά, the verb ἐστί is omitted (neuter plurals take
a singular verb), in the short proverbial statement. The article and adjective
(τὰ καλά) are used as a noun. Note that although the word order does not tell
which of the adjectives is the subject and which the predicate nominative ad-
jective, we can tell that the sentence means good things are hard, rather than
hard things are good, because the subject is usually accompanied by the article,
the predicate rarely so.
An extension of this use of the article with an adjective (omitting the noun)
may be seen in the expression ὁ μέν . . . ὁ δέ, the one . . . the other, and οἱ μέν . . .
οἱ δέ, some . . . others, αἱ μέν . . . αἱ δέ, some women . . . other women. This
Adjectives: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον and ‑ος, ‑ον Types
51

 expression can, of course, be used in any gender and any case; so do not be
surprised to see τὰ μέν . . . τὰ δέ, some things . . . other things, or τοῦ μέν . . . τοῦ
δέ, of the one . . . of the other.
In this instance, the article retains an original demonstrative force [III] which
has largely been lost in Attic Greek (but is generally still retained in Homer,
the earliest Greek literature). Thus, the original force of ὁ μέν  ὁ δέ would have
been this (man), on the one hand, this (man), on the other hand (or simply this one
. . . that one).
The Articular Infinitive
Under the Noun-Making Power of the Article we may include the articular in-
finitive: the infinitive used as a noun with the article. It can be used in any
case, as subject or object, with prepositions, etc., in the neuter singular. It is
the equivalent to the gerund in English:
τὸ λυπεῖν
to hurt; hurting
ἕνεκα τοῦ λαβεῖν
for the sake of gain
τὸ μὴ δύνασθαι
not to be able
The negative used with the articular infinitive is μή.
The Relative Pronoun
The Greek relative pronoun (corresponding to the English who, whose, whom;
which, that) is ὅς, ἥ, ὅ. The inflection is similar to that of the first and second
declensions: see if you can discover where the differences are.
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
English
N
ὅς
ἥ
ὅ
οἵ
αἵ
ἅ
who, which, that
G
οὗ
ἧς
οὗ
ὧν
ὧν
ὧν
whose, of whom/which
D
ᾧ
ᾗ
ᾧ
οἷς
αἷς
οἷς
to whom/which
A
ὅν
ἥν
ὅ
οὕς
ἅς
ἅ
whom, which, that
The relative pronoun introduces a relative clause and refers to a noun or pro-
noun (called the antecedent) in the main clause. In the sentence
The man to whom you are writing is coming.
ὁ ἄνθρωπος ᾧ γράφεις ἔρχεται.
the man is the antecedent and (to) whom is the relative pronoun.
52
Lesson II

The relative pronoun agrees with its antecedent in number and gender,
but its case depends on the part it plays in its own clause. In our example, the
man is masculine singular, and nominative, since it is the subject of the main
clause: ὁ ἄνθρωπος. (To) whom will therefore be masculine and singular, but in
its own clause it is the indirect object, and so is dative: ᾧ.
Be careful not to confuse the forms of the relative with the definite article. 
➞Set the relative and the article side by side and list the differences between
them, including differences in accent.
A note on the relative pronoun
The antecedent is often omitted, especially when it is indefinite and
can be supplied from the context: e.g., ἔχει ἃ βούλεται, he has (those
things) that he wants, or he has what he wants. Often the relative pro-
noun can best be translated by the one who, that which, or some such
phrase. Cf. the saying from Hippocrates, χρόνος ἐστὶν ἐν ᾧ καιρός, καὶ
καιρὸς ἐν ᾧ χρόνος οὐ πολύς, “Time is that in which there is a critical
time [καιρός], and a critical time is that in which there is not much
time.”
Vocabulary
Adjectives
Adjectives are easily recognized in the vocabulary because their three (or two)
genders are given.
ἀγαθός, ἀγαθή, ἀγαθόν
good
ἄδικος, ἄδικον
unjust
ἀθάνατος, ἀθάνατον
immortal, deathless (< θάνατος)
ἄλογος, ἄλογον
irrational (< λόγος)
ἄριστος, ἀρίστη, ἄριστον
best (superlative of ἀγαθός) (aristocrat)
δεινός, δεινή, δεινόν
fearful, terrible; clever (dinosaur)
Ἑλληνικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
Greek (Journal of Hellenic Studies)
ἐσθλός, ἐσθλή, ἐσθλόν
noble, good, brave
κακός, κακή, κακόν
bad, evil (cacophony)
καλός, καλή, καλόν
good, fine, fair, beautiful (calligraphy)
κοινός, κοινή, κοινόν
common, public (koinē)
μόνος, μόνη, μόνον
alone, only (monotheistic)
ὅλος, ὅλη, ὅλον
whole, entire, complete (holograph)
πρῶτος, πρώτη, πρῶτον
first, foremost (protocol)
σοφός, σοφή, σοφόν
wise, clever, skilled (sophisticated)
χαλεπός, χαλεπή, χαλεπόν
hard, difficult
χρηστός, χρηστή, χρηστόν
good
Adjectives: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον and ‑ος, ‑ον Types
53

Nouns
βιβλίον, βιβλίου, τό
book (bibliography; βιβλιοθήκη, library)
γάμος, γάμου, ὁ
marriage (monogamous)
ἡδονή, ἡδονῆς, ἡ
pleasure (hedonist)
ἰατρός, ἰατροῦ, ὁ
physician, healer (pediatrician, psychiatrist)
κόσμος, κόσμου, ὁ
order, ornament, credit, world-order, universe
κατὰ κόσμον
in order, duly
οἶνος, οἴνου, ὁ
wine (cf. Latin vinum)
τύχη, τύχης, ἡ
fortune, luck
ὕπνος, ὕπνου, ὁ
sleep (hypnosis)
Adverbs, Pronouns, Prepositions, Conjunctions
διά
prep., through
+ gen.
through, by means of
+ acc.
because of, on account of
εἰ
if
νῦν 
now; as it is (also, enclitic νυν, νυ, which
does not have temporal significance)
καὶ νῦν
even so
οἱ νῦν
men of the present day
ὅς, ἥ, ὅ
who, which, that (relative pronoun)
ὅσπερ, ἥπερ, ὅπερ
the very one who (accented like ὅς, ἥ, ὅ)
οὐ(οὐκ, οὐχ, οὐχί, οὔ)
not (οὐκ before smooth breathing; οὐχ
before rough breathing; οὐχίemphatic; οὔ
with accent, as last word or as answer, No!)
οὐδέ
but not, not even, nor
περί
preposition, about, around
+ gen.
about, concerning
+ dat.
about (mostly poetic)
+ acc.
about, around, near (of place or
time)
πρός
preposition expressing direction, on the
side of, in the direction of
+ gen.
from
+ dat.
at, near, besides, in addition to
+ acc.
to, towards, with respect to
τότε
at that time
54
Lesson II

Vocabulary Notes
1. Greek for good: ἀγαθός, ἐσθλός, καλός, and χρηστός. 
Ἀγαθός good, is used as widely as the English word good. It generally
means good in the sense of capable, well-fitted to something. In Homer
ἀγαθός usually refers to physical excellence, hence the meanings
valiant, brave (in battle); but it is extended to moral goodness as well.
Frequently ἀγαθός is used with the accusative of respect to show
what specific thing it refers to. οἱ ἀγαθοίin the political sense are the
aristocrats (i.e., the well-born), especially in the phrase καλοὶ κἀγαθοί
(καλοὶ καὶ ἀγαθοί). Ἐσθλός is equivalent to ἀγαθός, in all its senses,
but is mainly poetic. Καλός properly means beautiful and may be
used either of persons or things. In the moral sense (extending its
meaning from beautiful to good, virtuous, honorable), it refers to noble
deeds, differing from ἀγαθός, which would mean advantageous, use-
ful. In Attic Greek, the word καλός is added to the name of a person
(usually a boy) as a token of love: this is commonly seen on painted
vases (Λέαγρος καλός), appearing again and again for the favorite of
the day. Χρηστός also means good, but more definitely in the sense of
useful, serviceable, good of its kind; it is in fact derived from χράομαι use.
2. Κοινός: the Κοινή(Koinē Dialect). The ancients cite five major di-
alects of Greek: διάλεκτοί εἰσι πέντε, Ατθὶς Δωρὶς Αἰολὶς Ἰὰς καὶ κοινή,
that is, Attic (spoken in Athens and environs), Doric (used in the Pelo-
ponnese and Northwest Greek), Aeolic (used in Lesbos, and with
variations in Boeotia and Thessaly), Ionic (spoken on the coast of Asia
Minor and on some of the islands), and Koinē, the common dialect as
opposed to the four local dialects. It is not a combination of the other
dialects, but is the common, or universal Greek language that had
spread over the world as a result of the conquests of Alexander. The
Koinē is based largely on the Attic dialect (both the written and the
vulgar, or spoken, forms) with some Ionian influence. From the fourth
century B.C.E. there was a gradual disappearance of the local dialects
as the κοινήcame into general use. Koinē is the language of the New
Testament and of the Septuagint (the Greek translation of the Old Tes-
tament), and of the Jewish historian Josephus, but it was used by many
secular writers as well: for example, Polybius, Diodorus, Plutarch,
Dio. Modern Greek is descended from Koinē.
Exercise B
1.
Decline in full, paying some attention to accents, the following adjectives,
in all genders.
1. ἀγαθός
4. ἄριστος
2. ἄδικος
5. πρῶτος
3. χαλεπός
2.
Noun-adjective combinations: translate into Greek and decline.
1. the wise man
4. the immortal soul
2. the only opinion
5. the beautiful island
3. the difficult child
6. the irrational
Adjectives: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον and ‑ος, ‑ον Types
55

3.
Parse the following words. (Examples: adjective: ἀγαθῷ, dative singular
masculine or neuter of ἀγαθός, good; pronoun: ᾗ, dative singular feminine of
ὅς, relative pronoun, to whom.)
1. ὅν
7. αἱ
13. ὅς
19. τά
2. ὅλη
8. τοῖς
14. ἅ
20. τόν
3. μόνῳ
9. κοινά
15. αἷς
21. τῷ
4. δεινοῖς
10. ἄδικος
16. ὁδόν
22. ἥ
5. κακούς
11. ἐσθλόν
17. νήσου
23. οὗ
6. Ἑλληνικοῦ
12. σοφῆς
18. ἄλογα
24. οἵ
4.
Relative pronouns-antecedents fill-ins. Translate the underlined words.
1. The gods to whom we gave offerings were unjust.
2. I saw the man who did it.
3. He does not give presents to the children who are naughty.
4. Is that the woman [γυνή] whose book you are reading?
5. The island which we see is very beautiful.
6. The evils that men do live after them.
7. Where is the book which I was reading?
8. The man whom we saw was Socrates. The woman [γυνή] whom
we trusted was Aspasia.
9. Did you see the goddess whose temple you were in?
10. The gods who made heaven and earth are just.
Accusative and Dative of Respect
1. Accusative of Respect
The accusative is used to tell in what specific respect an expression is true.
If we say ἀγαθός ἐστι (he is good), it is a general statement; but if we want to
say that someone is good in or at something, we use the accusative for the
quality or the part:
ἀγαθὸς γνώμην
good in intellect
ἀγαθή ἐστιν πᾶσαν ἀρετήν
she is good in every (πᾶσαν) virtue
βουλὴν κακός ἐστιν
he is bad in council
This accusative is very common with adjectives, but can also be used of
parts of the body with nouns or stative verbs (i.e., verbs expressing a condi-
tion of being; this is called the accusative of the part affected):
ἀλγῶ τὴν κεφαλήν
I have a pain in my head
(I hurt as to my head)
56
Lesson II

2. Dative of Respect
The dative of respect, used similarly to the accusative of respect, is a form of
the dative of manner [I].
Examples:
λόγῳ μὲν φίλοι εἰσίν, ἔργῳ δ’ οὔ.
They are friends in word, but not in deed.
ἀγαθός ἐστι πολέμῳ.
He is good at war.
Exercise B (continued)
5.
Translate.
1. οἱ μὲν ἦσαν ἀγαθοί, οἱ δὲ κακοί.
2. ἀγαθαὶ ἦτε γνώμην;
3. πλοῦτος ἄδικος ἔφερε τύχην κακήν.
4. ἀθάνατος ἡ ἀρετή.
5. ὁ ἄνθρωπος ὁ σοφὸς οὐκ ἐπείθετο τῷ ἀδίκῳ λόγῳ.
6. ἔργον ἐστὶ τοῦ χρηστοῦ ἀνθρώπου παύειν τὸν πόλεμον. [ἔργον ἐστί +
gen. it is the business of ]
7. οὐκ εἶχον ἃ ἐβούλοντο. 
8. καλὴ γὰρ ἦν ἡ νῆσος εἰς ἣν ἤγομεν τὰ δῶρα.
9. καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθὸς ὁ σοφὸς ἄνθρωπος.
10. ἔλεγεν ὁ σοφὸς κακά; ἡ δὲ σοφὴ ἀγαθά ἔπραττεν.
11. ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἐβούλετο τοὺς κακοὺς φίλους ἄγειν πρὸς τὴν δίκην.
12. ἄδικον ἦν πλοῦτον ἔχειν παρὰ νόμον.
13. ὁ ὕπνος φέρει ἡδονήν.
14. κακόν ἐστι ὃ λέγεις. κακὸν ἦν ὃ ἔλεγες.
15. ἐλέγομεν ὅτι ὁ σοφὸς ἦν ἀγαθὸς καὶ γνώμαις καὶ βουλαῖς. [ὅτι that]
16. τὰς μὲν ἀγαθὰς ἔλυον, τοὺς δὲ κακοὺς ἦγον πρὸς τὴν δίκην.
17. οἱ θεοὶ ἔφερον τὰ καλὰ δῶρα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις.
18. οἱ τότε ἤρχοντο εἰς τὴν νῆσον.
19. οἱ ἀγαθοὶ ἄνθρωποι τὰ παιδία ἐπαιδεύοντο τοῖς τῶν σοφῶν λόγοις καὶ
ταῖς γνώμαις.
20. οἱ τότε Ἑλληνικοὶ ἔγραφον εἰς λίθους.
21. οἱ μὲν τότε τῷ νόμῳ ἐπείθοντο, οἱ δὲ νῦν πείθονται τοῖς φίλοις.
22. ὁ ἄδικος ἦν δεινὸς λέγειν. [δεινὸς λέγειν clever at speaking]
23. οἱ ἄριστοι ἦρχον τῶν ἀνθρώπων.
24. οἱ ἄνθρωποι οἷς ἐπιστεύομεν ἦσαν φίλοι.
25. ὁ ἥλιος ὃς ἔφερε τὸν βίον τοῖς ἀνθρώποις θεὸς ἐνομίζετο.
26. εἶχεν ἡ θεὸς μόνον παιδίον.
27. ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις λόγοις ἔλεγε πολλὰ καὶ καλὰ καὶ ἀγαθά. [πολλά
many things]
28. χαλεπόν ἐστι τὰς γνώμας τὰς τῶν σοφῶν λύειν.
29. καλαὶ μὲν αἱ τῶν σοφῶν γνῶμαι, χαλεποὶ δὲ οἱ λόγοι.
Adjectives: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον and ‑ος, ‑ον Types
57

30. ὁ σοφὸς ἔλεγεν ὅτι ὁ βίος ἐστὶ χαλεπόν. [ὅτι that; χαλεπόν is neuter: 
a difficult thing]
31. οἱ ἰατροὶ σὺν τοῖς φίλοις ἤρχοντο παρὰ τὴν ὁδόν.
32. ὁ ἀγαθὸς ὃς τῷ νόμῳ ἐπείθετο εἶχε τοὺς θεοὺς ὡς φίλους. [ὡς as]
33. ὁ σοφὸς ἐγράφετο πέντε βιβλία περὶ ψυχῆς.
34. ἀγαθοὶ οἱ νόμοι οἱ περὶ τοὺς γάμους.
35. πρὸς δὲ πλούτῳ φίλους ἔχειν ἐβουλόμεθα.
6.
Write in Greek.
1. We did not have what we wanted.
2. The soul of the wise man is immortal
3. Some [women] were good in deed, others in word.
4. It is the business of the wise man to have good opinions. 
(See. Ex. 5.6.)
5. Did you wish to live in peace? The war is being stopped.
6. We used to trust the gods, who used to bring good [things] to men
of former times. 
7. The men who were saying wicked things were being led to court 
[= justice].
8. The man to whom we were bringing gifts was our [= the] guest.
9. On account of wealth, they did not wish to have peace. 
Readings
1. κοινὰ τὰ τῶν φίλων.
—Plato
[τά+ gen. of possession the possessions of.]
2. ὅ τι καλὸν φίλον ἀεί.
—Euripides
[ὅ τι whatever, anything which: understand is. ἀείalways.]
3. ἀθάνατος ὁ θάνατός ἐστιν.
—Amphis (a comic writer)
4. ψυχῆς ἀγαθῆς πατρὶς ὁ ξύμπας κόσμος.
—Democritus
[πατρίς homeland, country. ξύμπας whole.]
5. πάντα γὰρ οὐ κακός εἰμι.
—Homer, Odyssey
[πάντα: acc. of respect, in everything, all things (n. nom./acc. pl.).]
6. μέγα βιβλίον, μέγα κακόν.
—Callimachus
[μέγα big (n. nom./acc. sg.).]
58
Lesson II

7. Kαλλίμαχος ὁ γραμματικὸς τὸ μέγα βιβλίον ἴσον ἔλεγεν εἶναι τῷ μεγάλῳ
κακῷ. 
—Athenaeus
[ὁ γραμματικός the grammarian. ἴσον equal (to, + dat.). μεγάλῳbig (m./n. da-
tive sg.).]
8. ὕπνος δεινὸν ἀνθρώποις κακόν.
—Menander
9. λύπης ἰατρός ἐστιν ὁ χρηστὸς φίλος.
—Menander
[λύπη, -ης, ἡpain, grief.]
10. ἐν νυκτὶ βουλὴ τοῖς σοφοῖσι γίνεται.
—Menander
[ἑν νυκτίin the night. σοφοῖσι = σοφοῖς. γίνεται = γίγνεται.]
11. ἄδικον τὸ λυπεῖν τοὺς φίλους ἑκουσίως.
—Menander
[τὸ λυπεῖν to hurt (inf. used as a noun). ἑκουσίως willingly, on purpose.]
12. λέγεις, ἃ δὲ λέγεις ἕνεκα τοῦ λαβεῖν λέγεις.
—Menander
[ἕνεκα τοῦ λαβεῖν for the sake of gain.]
13. τότ’ ἦν ἐγώ σοι πάνθ’ ὅτε φαύλως ἔπραττες.
—Menander
[πάνθ’ (= πάντα) all things. φαύλως badly. ὅτε when. σοι to you (dat.). ἔγω I
(nom.).]
14. εἴ τίς ἐστιν ἐν Μεγάροις, οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν Ἀθήναις. ἄνθρωπος δ’εστὶν ἐν
Μεγάροις. οὐκ ἄρ’ ἐστὶν ἄνθρωπος ἐν Ἀθήναις.
—Diogenes Laertius (quoting a paradox of Chrysippus)
[τις anyone (masc. nom. sg.). Μέγαρα, -ων, τάMegara (a city). Ἀθῆναι, -ῶν, αἱ
Athens. ἄρα therefore.]
15. μέγα κακὸν τὸ μὴ δύνασθαι φέρειν κακόν.
—Diogenes Laertius (a saying of Bion)
[μέγα big, great (neut. nom./acc. sg.). μὴ δύνασθαι not to be able.]
16. τῶν ὄντων τὰ μέν ἐστι κακά, τὰ δὲ ἀγαθά, τὰ δὲ οὐδέτερα.
—Diogenes Laertius (quoting Plato)
[τῶν ὄντων of the things that exist. ουδέτερος neither, neut.]
17. τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἐστι τὰ μὲν ἐν ψυχῇ, τὰ δὲ ἐν σώματι, τὰ δὲ ἐκτός.
— Diogenes Laertius (quoting Plato)
[σώματι body (dat. of σῶμα). ἐκτός outside (an adverb).]
Adjectives: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον and ‑ος, ‑ον Types
59

18. τὰ μέγιστα τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἡμῖν γίγνεται διὰ μανίας.
—Plato, Phaedrus
[μέγιστος, -η, -ον greatest. μανία, μανίας, ἡmadness. ἡμιν to us (dat. pl.)]
19. τῶν ἀγαθῶν οὐ δεχόμεσθα κόρον.
—Greek Anthology
[δεχόμεσθα = δεχόμεθα from δέχομαι, receive. κόρος, -ου, ὁa surfeit (i.e., too
much).]
20. χαλεπὰ τὰ καλά.
—Greek Proverb (quoted by Plato)
21. χαλεπὸν ὁ βίος.
—Xenophon
22. Σωκράτης γὰρ σοφὸς ἦν καὶ δίκαιος.
—pseudo-Aristotle
[δίκαιος just.]
Conversation
A. τί ἐστι καινόν;
A. What’s new?
B. οὐδὲν καινότερον.
B. Nothing (newer).
A. πῶς ἔχεις;
A. How are you?
B. ἔχω κακῶς.
B. I’m ill.
A. τί πάσχεις, ὦ φίλε;
A. What’s wrong, my friend?
B. ἀλγῶ τὴν κεφαλήν· 
B. I have a headache. For I got 
χθὲς γὰρ ἐμεθύσθην.
drunk yesterday.
Some Sayings on the Art of Drinking
1. τί μικρόλογος εἶ; πλεῖαί τοι οἴνου κλισίαι.
Why are you so stingy? Your tents are full of wine. 
—Athenaeus
2. οἴνῳ τὸν οἶνον ἐξελαύνειν.
A hair of the dog that bit you. (Lit. to drive out wine with wine.) 
—Antiphanes
3. οἶνος, ὦ φίλε παῖ, καὶ ἀλάθεα (= ἀλήθεια).
Wine, dear boy, and truth. (In vino veritas) 
—Alcaeus
4. οἱ μὲν ἄρ’ οἶνον ἔμισγον ἐνὶ κρητῆρσι καὶ ὕδωρ.
Some were mixing wine and water in craters (mixing bowls).
—Homer, Odyssey (I. 110)
60
Lesson II

Adjectives: ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον and ‑ος, ‑ον Types
61
5. οὐδεὶς φιλοπότης ἐστὶν ἄνθρωπος κακός.
No one who is fond of drinking is a wicked man.
—Athenaeus (quoting Alexis)
6. ἄριστον μὲν ὕδωρ . . .
Water is best . . .
—Pindar
τυφλὸς τά τ’ ὦτα τόν τε νοῦν τά τ’ ὄμματ’ εἶ.
[τὰ ὦτα, τὸν νοῦν, τὰ ὄμματα are acc. of
 respect]
You are blind in your ears, your mind, and
your eyes.
—Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus
The Bacchus Bar 
The ancient word for wine is οἶνος (cognate to Latin
vinum, the origin of English wine); from it is derived
oenologist (also spelled enologist), a specialist in wine.
In Modern Greek the most common word for wine
is κρασί, which comes from the practice of mixing
wine with water in craters (mixing bowls, see say-
ing 4). To drink wine unmixed (οἶνος ἄκρατος) was
a synonym for hard-drinking, except for breakfast which often consisted of
bread dunked in pure wine. 
ΤΑΒΕΡΝΑ (pronounced taver´na) is not originally Greek but entered Greek
through Latin and may be of Oscan origin. It meant a booth, stall, or inn. There
was a famous one about thirty miles from Rome called Tres Tabernae. From it
we get tavern and tabernacle (the latter from the Latin diminutive tabernacu-
lum, tent). 
Bacchus, or Dionysus, was the god of wine and much more.
“[Dionysos’] domain is . . . the whole of hugra phusis [the principle of
moisture], not only the liquid fire of the grape, but the sap thrusting
in a young tree, the blood pounding in the veins of a young animal,
all the mysterious and uncontrollable tides that ebb and flow in the
life of nature.”
—E. R. Dodds, in his edition of the Bacchae.
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.


LESSON III
Future, First Declension Variations,
Demonstrative Pronouns
In this lesson you will learn the future (active and middle: second principal part),
the variations of the first declension, and the demonstrative pronouns.
63
FUTURE ACTIVE AND MIDDLE:
THE  SECOND PRINCIPAL PART
The second principal part of most verbs is the first person singular future
active indicative; of deponent verbs, it is the future middle indicative. The
future belongs to a different tense system from the present and has a differ-
ent stem. When a new verb is introduced, the future will be given along with
the present. The future middle and passive voices are different in form (the
future passive is formed from the sixth principal part and will be treated in
Lesson X).
The future is regularly formed from the present stem by adding ‑σ‑ before
the endings. For irregular verbs, you must learn special forms. For verbs with
stems ending in consonants, certain changes in spelling take place when ‑σ‑
is added, as described below.
Formation of Future
Rule for formation: present stem + σ + thematic vowel + primary endings
Active
Middle
Sg.
λύσω
1st
λύσομαι
λύσεις
2nd
λύσει or λύσῃ
λύσει
3rd
λύσεται
Pl.
λύσομεν
1st
λυσόμεθα
λύσετε
2nd
λύσεσθε
λύσουσι(ν)
3rd
λύσονται
Inf.
λύσειν
λύσεσθαι

Orthographic Changes for Verbs with
Mute Stems
No problem arises in the regular formation of the future of verbs with stems
ending in a vowel, as λύω, λύσω; παύω, παύσω; κτλ. When the verb stem ends
in a consonant, certain changes take place, depending on the type of conso-
nant involved.
a labial
(π, β, φ) + σ  ψ
a palatal
(κ, γ, χ) + σ  ξ
a dental
(τ, δ, θ) drops out before σ
Examples:
Type 
Verb
Stem
Future
Labial
πέμπω
πεμπ‑
πέμψω
Palatal
ἄγω
ἀγ‑
ἄξω
Dental
πείθω
πειθ‑
πείσω
➞Form the futures of the following:
ἄρχω, παιδεύω, βουλεύω, παύω, γράφω, πιστεύω, λέγω, δέχομαι (receive,
deponent), λείπω, θύω (sacrifice)
Principal Parts
These verbs, from previous lessons, have irregular futures. They are conju-
gated regularly.
Verb
Future
βούλομαι
βουλήσομαι
γίγνομαι
γενήσομαι
ἐθέλω
ἐθελήσω
ἔρχομαι
ἐλεύσομαι
ἔχω
σχήσω (I shall get), ἕξω (I shall have)
πράττω
πράξω (stem: πραγ‑)
φέρω
οἴσω
64
Lesson III

Deponent Futures
There are a number of verbs that have their futures in the middle (though they
have other forms in the active). These are usually verbs of perception or phys-
ical activity, such as:
ἀκούω, ἀκούσομαι
hear
μανθάνω, μαθήσομαι
learn
ὁράω, ὄψομαι
see [present, XI]
ἀποθνῄσκω ἀποθανοῦμαι
die [contract future, XI]
λαμβάνω, λήψομαι
take
These futures are translated as if they were active.
Among the verbs with a deponent future is εἰμί, be, future ἔσομαι, I shall be:
Deponent Future of εἰμί
Singular
Plural
ἔσομαι
1st
ἐσόμεθα
ἔσει or ἔσῃ
2nd
ἔσεσθε
ἔσται
3rd
ἔσονται
Inf.: ἔσεσθαι
The forms are conjugated regularly except for ἔσται, which lacks the the-
matic vowel. This completes the principal parts of εἰμί.
Vocabulary
Along with the new verbs, you should study the futures of all verbs given
so far. Some verbs with liquid or nasal stems (μ, ν, λ, ρ) have a special kind of
future that will be treated in Lesson XI (of the verbs given previously, this
affects κρίνω, μένω, and νομίζω). These are given in brackets. Others form the
future by adding a vowel before the σ: ἐθελήσω, γενήσομαι.
Verbs
ἀγγέλλω [ἀγγελῶ]
announce (angel; evangelist)
ἀκούω, ἀκούσομαι
hear (+ gen. of person) (acoustics)
ἀποθνῄσκω [-θανοῦμαι] die, be killed (< θάνατος) (contract future)
ἀποκτείνω [-κτενῶ]
kill
βάλλω [βαλῶ]
throw, hit (ballistics)
δέχομαι, δέξομαι
receive (cf. Mod. Gr. ξενοδοχεῖον, hotel)
θύω, θύσω
sacrifice
λαμβάνω, λήψομαι
take, seize (epilepsy; syllable)
Future Active and Middle: The Second Principal Part
65

μανθάνω, μαθήσομαι
learn, understand (stem: μαθ‑, mathematics)
πάσχω, πείσομαι
suffer, be affected (stem: παθ‑, pathos)
φαίνω [φανῶ]
bring to light; pass., appear (phantom)
Note: the imperfects of ἀποθνῄσκω (die) and ἀποκτείνω (kill) are
ἀπέθνῃσκον and ἀπέκτεινον, the verb being augmented rather than
the prefix (ἀπο‑ in these two examples). The final vowel of the prefix
is elided before the vowel of the augment. [IV]
Adverbs, Conjunctions
ἀεί(αἰεί)
always
οὔτε . . . οὔτε
neither . . . nor
οὔ ποτε or οὔποτε
never, not ever
Exercise A
1. Conjugate the futures of the following verbs.
1. ἄρχω
3. πάσχω
5. πείθω
7. ἐθέλω
2. βούλομαι
4. δέχομαι
6. λείπω
8. ἀκούω
2. Conjugate in full (all voices and tenses that you have learned).
1. παύω
4. ἔχω
2. πέμπω
5. γίγνομαι
3. φέρω
3. Parse the following, then change them to the opposite number where ap-
plicable. (Remember: the infinitive does not have number.)
66
Lesson III
1. ἔσται
2. οἴσουσι
3. ἄξομαι
4. ληψόμεθα
5. οἴσειν
6. ἐβουλεύετο
7. ἐλείπετε
8. ἐγίγνεσθε
9. ἔκρινεν
10. ἐθελήσεις
11. ἤθελες
12. ἔσομαι
13. ἦσθα
14. γράψονται
15. ἐλάμβανον
16. βουλήσεσθαι
17. ἦρχον
18. ἐμένομεν
19. νομίζειν
20. ἐπαύοντο
21. ἕξει
22. πείθεται
23. πιστεύεις
24. πράξω
25. εἶ
26. ἦν
27. φαίνομαι
28. φέρεσθαι
29. ἔθυε
30. μαθήσεται
31. λέξονται
32. δέχεσθαι
33. ἤκουον
34. ἔπασχον
35. ἐλευσόμεθα
36. δέξεται
37. κρίνειν
38. γράψεται
39. σχήσομεν
40. ἀποθνῄσκειν
4. Translate.
1. ὁ χρόνος ἄξει τοὺς κακοὺς καὶ ἀδίκους πρὸς τὴν δίκην.
2. ἡ δίκη τοὺς τῶν ἀνθρώπων βίους κρίνει.
3. ὁ μὲν ἄδικος ἄνθρωπος σχήσει πλοῦτον, ὁ δὲ ἀγαθὸς ἕξει ἀρετὴν καὶ
φίλους.
4. ὁ γὰρ ἄνθρωπος ὁ ἀγαθὸς οὐ βουλήσεται ἔχειν ἄδικον πλοῦτον.
5. τὸ γὰρ ἄδικον ἔσται ἄδικον ἀεί.
6. ἐν ὕπνῳ φαίνεται ὁ θεός.
7. ἀγγέλλεις πόλεμον;

8. ἀκουσόμεθα τοὺς λόγους τῆς σοφῆς.
9. οἱ καλοὶ καὶ ἀγαθοὶ ἀπέθνῃσκον ὑπὸ τῶν κακῶν καὶ ἀδίκων.
[ὑπό + gen. by, at the hands of]
10. ἐβάλλετε τοὺς ξένους τοῖς λίθοις;
11. ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἄνθρωπος οὐ θύσει τὸ παιδίον τοῖς θεοῖς.
12. οἱ ἄδικοι λήψονται τὰ τῶν φίλων παρὰ νόμον. [τά + gen. the
 possessions of]
13. τὰ γὰρ δῶρα δεξόμεθα.
14. ἔστι καὶ ἦν καὶ ἔσται ἀεὶ ὁ θεός.
15. τὸ παιδίον γράψει τῷ φίλῳ.
16. ἀεὶ οἱ θεοὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἄρξουσιν· οὐ γὰρ ἀποθνῄσκουσιν οἱ θεοί.
17. βουλεύσομαι καὶ κρινῶ. [κρινῶ = future of κρίνω, 1st sg.]
18. ἐθελήσεις θύειν τὰ δῶρα τῷ ἡλίῳ;
19. ἐλεύσεται ὁ ἄριστος εἰς τὴν νῆσον καὶ λύσεται τὰ παιδία, ἃ ὁ κακὸς
ξένος τοῖς θεοῖς βούλεται θύειν.
20. ταῖς καλαῖς θεοῖς τὰ χρηστὰ δῶρα οἴσουσιν, αἳ πέμψουσιν ἀγαθὰς
βουλὰς πρὸς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους.
21. ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ βιβλίῳ γράψομαι τὰς γνώμας.
22. τὰ δῶρα φέρει ἡδονὴν τοῖς παιδίοις.
23. τὰ δῶρα ἄγεται παρὰ τοὺς θεοὺς ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων. [ὑπό + gen., 
Ex. 4.9]
24. οὔποτε ἀποθνῄσκει ἡ θεός.
25. οἱ θεοὶ ἀπέκτεινον τοὺς ἀδίκους οἳ οὐκ ἔθυον.
26. τὰ παιδία τοὺς σοφοὺς ἔβαλλε λίθοις· οὐ γὰρ ἐπείθετο τοῖς τῶν σοφῶν
λόγοις.
27. δέξῃ τὰ δῶρα ἐκ τοῦ φίλου. [ἐκ from]
28. τῶν κακῶν ἀνθρώπων μαθησόμεθα ἔργα κακά.
29. μανθάνεις ἃ λέγω;
30. ἐλευσόμεθα εἰς τὴν νῆσον ἧς ἄρχουσιν οἱ φίλοι.
5. Translate into Greek.
1. Shall we sacrifice to the gods in heaven?
2. Will you hear the wise [men/women]?
3. We shall trust the opinion of the good, but not of the wicked.
4. The island [over] which we shall rule is beautiful.
5. Were you hitting the unjust men with stones?
6. The island of the sun is ruled by the best people. (ὑπό + gen.)
7. Good [men] and good [women] will have their children educated.
8. The possessions of the wise and good [people] will be in common.
(Ex. 4.12)
9. Unjust wealth will bring war and unjust deeds.
10. What [= that which] you are saying is unjust.
ἀεὶ κολοιὸς παρὰ κολοιῷ ἱζάνει.
Birds of a feather flock together.  [Lit. A crow
always perches beside a crow.]
—Democritus
Future Active and Middle: The Second Principal Part
67

FIRST DECLENSION NOUNS
The first declension has many variations. Type I has ‑η as characteristic of the
singular, as in δίκη, ἀρετή, etc. (1). 
If the base of a first declension noun ends in ε, ι, or ρ, however, ‑α is found
rather than ‑η in the singular (2). This ‑α is long in some words (‑ᾱ) and short
in others (‑ᾰ), which does affect the accent in certain places. It is always long
in the genitive and dative singular, but the length of the ‑αν in the accusative
singular will be the same as that of the ‑α in the nominative. 
There are also a few nouns with bases ending in letters other than ε, ι, or ρ
which have ‑ᾰ in the nominative and accusative singular, but η in the genitive
and dative singular (3). Nouns of these first three types are all feminine.
In addition, there are a number of masculine nouns of the first declension
which end in ‑ης in the nominative singular (4), or in ‑ᾱς if the base ends in ε,
ι, or ρ (5), with the genitive in ‑ου for both types (as in the 2nd decl. gen. sg.).
Summary of Endings
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
‑η
(ε, ι, ρ) ‑α
‑ᾰ/‑ης
‑ης (m.)
‑ας (m.)
Sg.
N
‑η
‑α
‑ᾰ
‑ης
‑ᾱς
G
‑ης
‑ας
‑ης
‑ου
‑ου
D
‑ῃ
‑ᾳ
‑ῃ
‑ῃ
‑ᾳ
A
‑ην
‑αν
‑ᾰν
‑ην
‑ᾱν
V
‑ᾰ
‑ᾱ
Pl.
N
‑αι
Plural endings are the same for all types.
G
‑ῶν
D
‑αις
A
‑ᾱς
Examples:
(1)
(2)
(2)
δίκη justice
μοῖρᾰ fate
χώρᾱ land
Sg.
N
ἡ δίκη
ἡ μοῖρα
ἡ χώρα
G
τῆς δίκης
τῆς μοίρας
τῆς χώρας
D
τῇ δίκῃ
τῇ μοίρᾳ
τῇ χώρᾳ
A
τὴν δίκην
τὴν μοῖραν
τὴν χώραν
Pl.
N
αἱ δίκαι
αἱ μοῖραι
αἱ χῶραι
G
τῶν δικῶν
τῶν μοιρῶν
τῶν χωρῶν
D
ταῖς δίκαις
ταῖς μοίραις
ταῖς χώραις
A
τὰς δίκας
τὰς μοίρας
τὰς χώρας
68
Lesson III

(3)
(4)
(5)
θάλαττα sea
πολίτης citizen (ῑ)
νεανίας young man (ῐ)
Sg.
N
ἡ θάλαττα
ὁ πολίτης
ὁ νεανίας
G
τῆς θαλάττης
τοῦ πολίτου
τοῦ νεανίου
D
τῇ θαλάττῃ
τῷ πολίτῃ
τῷ νεανίᾳ
A
τὴν θάλατταν
τὸν πολίτην
τὸν νεανίαν
V
πολῖτα
νεανία
Pl.
N
αἱ θάλατται
οἱ πολῖται
οἱ νεανίαι
G
τῶν θαλαττῶν
τῶν πολιτῶν
τῶν νεανιῶν
D
ταῖς θαλάτταις
τοῖς πολίταις
τοῖς νεανίαις
A
τὰς θαλάττας
τοὺς πολίτας
τοὺς νεανίας
Besides these nouns, the adjectives with bases ending in ε, ι or ρ have ‑ᾱ in
the feminine.
δίκαιος, δικαία, δίκαιον, just
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
δίκαιος
δικαία
δίκαιον
δίκαιοι
δίκαιαι
δίκαια
G
δικαίου
δικαίας
δικαίου
δικαίων
δικαίων
δικαίων
D
δικαίῳ
δικαίᾳ
δικαίῳ
δικαίοις
δικαίαις
δικαίοις
A
δίκαιον
δικαίαν
δίκαιον
δικαίους
δικαίας
δίκαια
V
δίκαιε
Note on the Accent of Adjectives
The accent of adjectives, like that of most nouns, is persistent. In the
genitive plural, the feminine form, if it is the same as the masculine
and neuter, is accented like them.
First Declension Nouns
69

Demonstrative Adjective-Pronouns
The three most important demonstratives are οὗτος (this, that), ὅδε (this [here]),
ἐκεῖνος (that [there]). They are declined as follows:
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
οὗτος
αὕτη
τοῦτο
οὗτοι
αὗται
ταῦτα
G
τούτου
ταύτης
τούτου
τούτων
τούτων
τούτων
D
τούτῳ
ταύτῃ
τούτῳ
τούτοις
ταύταις
τούτοις
A
τοῦτον
ταύτην
τοῦτο
τούτους
ταύτας
ταῦτα
Observations
1. Notice that οὗτος has initial τ where the article has it, but not where
the article does not have it.
2. The endings are like those of the relative pronoun (i.e., the same
as the ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον adjectives except for the neuter singular nominative
and accusative).
3. The spelling of the base is -ου where the ending is in an -ο-sound
and -αυ where the ending is in an –a or e-sound.
4. οὗτος refers to what is near in place, time, or thought, and so can
mean the latter (i.e., the one more recently mentioned). It can also mean
the aforesaid and generally refers to what precedes.
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
ὅδε
ἥδε
τόδε
οἵδε
αἵδε
τάδε
G
τοῦδε
τῆσδε
τοῦδε
τῶνδε
τῶνδε
τῶνδε
D
τῷδε
τῇδε
τῷδε
τοῖσδε
ταῖσδε
τοῖσδε
A
τόνδε
τήνδε
τόδε
τούσδε
τάσδε
τάδε
Observations
1. ὅδε is formed by the article plus the enclitic particle ‑δε. It is, there-
fore, declined like the article, except that all forms are accented.
2. The fact that ‑δε is enclitic explains the accent of ἥδε, τήνδε, τούσδε,
etc., which according to the rule should be circumflexed.
3. Meanings: ὅδε points with emphasis at someone or something. It
also generally refers to what is near. It is sometimes used to mean the
following. ὅδε may be used to call attention to the presence or ap-
proach of a person and in this sense should be translated here or there:
Πλάτων δ’ ὅδε . . . but Plato here . . . (and the speaker, Socrates in this
case, would point to Plato).
70
Lesson III

Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
ἐκεῖνος
ἐκείνη
ἐκεῖνο
ἐκεῖνοι
ἐκεῖναι
ἐκεῖνα
G
ἐκείνου
ἐκείνης
ἐκείνου
ἐκείνων
ἐκείνων
ἐκείνων
D
ἐκείνῳ
ἐκείνῃ
ἐκείνῳ
ἐκείνοις
ἐκείναις
ἐκείνοις
A
ἐκεῖνον
ἐκείνην
ἐκεῖνο
ἐκείνους
ἐκείνας
ἐκεῖνα
Observations
1. ἐκεῖνος has the same endings and accents as οὗτος.
2. ἐκεῖνος sometimes appears as κεῖνος (especially in Herodotus and
in poetry).
3. Meanings: that, ἐκεῖνος, generally refers to what is remote in place,
time, or thought. Thus it can mean the former, and sometimes refers
to what is to follow, as being unfamiliar and therefore remote.
Position
The demonstratives may be used as pronouns or as adjectives.
When used as adjectives in prose, they are used with the article, but are put
in the predicate position:
οὗτος ὁ πολίτης or ὁ πολίτης οὗτος
this citizen
The use of demonstratives is flexible and varies from writer to writer. You
will learn more about them gradually by observation, but for the present
should be content with knowing their forms and basic meanings.
Vocabulary
Nouns
ἀλήθεια, ἀληθείας, ἡ
truth, reality
γλῶττα, γλώττης, ἡ
tongue, language (polyglot, glottology)
also: γλῶσσα
δέσποινα, δεσποίνης, ἡ
mistress, lady (fem. form of δεσπότης)
δεσπότης, δεσπότου, ὁ
master (despot)
δημοκρατία, δημοκρατίας, ἡ
democracy
δικαστής, δικαστοῦ, ὁ
judge, juryman
Εὐριπίδης, Εὐριπίδου, ὁ
Euripides
ἡμέρα, ἡμέρας, ἡ
day (ephemeral)
ἡσυχία, ἡσυχίας, ἡ
rest, quiet, stillness
First Declension Nouns
71

θάλαττα, θαλάττης, ἡ
sea (thalassocracy)
also: θάλασσα, θαλάσσης
θεά, θεᾶς, ἡ
goddess
μοῖρα, μοίρας, ἡ
fate, part, portion, lot
Μοῦσα, Μούσης, ἡ
Muse
ναύτης, ναύτου, ὁ
sailor (cf. Latin nauta, -ae, m.)
νεανίας, νεανίου, ὁ
youth, young man (< νέος)
οἰκία, οἰκίας, ἡ
house, dwelling (economic)
πεῖρα, πείρας, ἡ
test, trial, attempt (empiric)
ποιητής, ποιητοῦ, ὁ
poet (maker)
πολίτης, πολίτου, ὁ
citizen (politics, < πόλις city-state)
σκηνή, σκηνῆς, ἡ
tent, stage (scene)
στρατιώτης, στρατιώτου, ὁ
soldier (strategy)
συμφορά, συμφορᾶς, ἡ
misfortune (< φέρω)
ταμίας, ταμίου, ὁ
steward, dispenser, treasurer
τιμή, τιμῆς, ἡ
honor, esteem, office (timocracy)
ὑγίεια, ὑγιείας, ἡ
health (hygiene)
φιλία, φιλίας, ἡ
friendship (< φίλος)
χώρα, χώρας, ἡ
land, country; place, position, (one’s) post,
station
ὥρα, ὥρας, ἡ
time (any fixed period), season, hour
ὥρα [ἐστί] + inf. 
it is time to . . .
Adjectives
αἰσχρός, αἰσχρά, αἰσχρόν
shameful, ugly
ἄξιος, ἀξία, ἄξιον
worthy (axiom) (ἄξιός εἰμι, I deserve to)
δίκαιος, δικαία, δίκαιον
just (< δίκη) (δίκαιός εἰμι, I have the 
right to)
μικρός, μικρά, μικρόν
small (microwave)
νέος, νέα, νέον
new, young (Neoplatonic)
παλαιός, παλαιά, παλαιόν
ancient, old (palaeography)
πονηρός, πονηρά, πονηρόν
wicked (< πόνος)
φίλιος, φιλία, φίλιον
friendly (to + dative)
ἐκεῖνος, ἐκείνη, ἐκεῖνο
that
ὅδε, ἥδε, τόδε
this
οὗτος, αὕτη, τοῦτο
this, that
Prepositions
ἀπό
+ gen., away from, from
ἐκ
+ gen., out of, from
72
Lesson III

Vocabulary Note
1. On dialect differences. It is the ‑α which is originally the character-
istic ending for the first declension. In the Attic and Ionic dialects it
changed to ‑η; in Ionic even after ε, ι, and ρ. In an Ionic writer such as
Herodotus one finds χώρη, οἰκίη, ἡμέρη where Attic has χώρα, οἰκία,
ἡμέρα. In other dialects (Doric, Aeolic, etc.), ‑α is retained (ἀλάθεια,
ἁμέρα, σκανά for ἀλήθεια, ἡμέρα, and σκηνή.
Another characteristic of Attic is the spelling ττ for σσ, as in θάλαττα
for θάλασσα; γλῶττα for γλῶσσα of the other dialects. The tragedians
and early writers of Attic prose, such as Thucydides, did not use the
ττ, although it is known to have been in use at that time from in-
scriptions. Probably ττ seemed too provincial in the early period, when
Ionic culture and literature were still the most important. Atticisms
became respectable, however, when Attic became the top dialect.
2. A δικαστής is a member of a jury. Juries were made up of up to
five hundred men, chosen by lot, fifty from each of the ten tribes. All
(male) citizens over thirty were eligible for jury duty. Six thousand
(six hundred from each tribe) were chosen annually as panels from
which the jury would be drawn for each case, by an elaborate system
of selection designed to prevent bribery (which nevertheless remained
a problem). The great Athenian statesman Pericles introduced pay for
the jury. The δικασταί not only heard the case and made the verdict,
but set the penalty as well. The defense and the prosecution would
each propose a sentence and the δικασταί would make a choice be-
tween the two possible penalties.
3. The original meaning of μοῖρα is part: a portion of land, a division
of a people, a political party, a geographical or astronomical degree;
and then the lot or share which falls to each person, especially in the
distribution of booty. The word means the lot or rightful portion of
an individual, but from this it came to mean the doom of death, man -
kind’s inescapable lot. Thus μοῖρα came to have a fatalistic connota-
tion and was personified first as the goddess of fate and then as the
three Fates: Lachesis, who assigns the lot; Clotho, who spins the
thread of life; and Atropos, who cuts it. In Greek folklore, the Μοῖραι
come to the room where a child is born and at the time of birth de-
termine his/her destiny, the whole course of life between birth and
death.
4. The Muses were daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne (Memory)
and acted as patron deities of music, poetry, literature, and dance; in
heaven they provided the gods with entertainment at the Olympian
feasts. (Feasting being the Olympians’ chief activity, the Muses kept
very busy.) They inspired poets and gave them true knowledge.
Homer calls on the Muse to tell him the story, to refresh his memory:
Memory personified was their mother. Poets (both Greek and Latin)
from Homer to the end of the Roman Empire celebrated the Muses
as the inspiration for their art. Hesiod in the Theogony (lines 75 ff.)
gives the following list of them:
First Declension Nouns
73

ταῦτ’ ἄρα Μοῦσαι ἄειδον Ὀλύμπια δώματ’ ἔχουσαι
ἐννέα θυγατέρες μεγάλου Διὸς ἐκγεγαυῖαι,
Κλείω τ’ Εὐτέρπη τε Θάλειά τε Μελπομένη τε
Τερψιχόρη τ’ Ἐράτω τε Πολύμνιά τ’ Οὐρανίη τε
Καλλιόπη θ’· ἡ δὲ προφερεστάτη ἐστὶν ἁπασέων.
These things then the Muses sang, who have their homes 
on Olympus,
Nine daughters born of great Zeus,
Clio and Euterpe and Thalia and Melpomene and
Terpsichore and Erato and Polymnia and Urania and
Calliope; she is the greatest of them all.
A museum (μουσεῖον) is a place connected with the Muses and their
arts, but, even in antiquity, the word had a literary and educational
significance rather than a strictly religious one. Plato and Aristotle
both organized their schools as associations of the Muses and their
cult. The Museum at Alexandria was the most famous in antiquity.
Scholars from all parts of the civilized world (i.e., the Mediterranean
area) congregated there, and were generously supported by the
government.
5. The word σκηνήoriginally meant tent or booth (a booth in the mar-
ketplace). Perhaps the Greek plays—before permanent theaters with
stage buildings were erected—were first performed in front of a tent
or hut from and to which the actors made their entrances and exits
and in which they changed masks. Later the word continued to refer
to the stage building or scene, as the background for the plays. οἱ ἀπὸ
σκηνῆς are actors (as opposed to the chorus who enter or exit along
the parodoi or side passages).
6. The article was originally a demonstrative and is generally so used
in Homeric Greek. In Attic this original meaning can still be seen in
such expressions as ὁ μέν . . . ὁ δέ, the one . . . the other. (Also in the ex-
pressions τὸ καὶ τό, this and that, and τὸν καὶ τόν, this man and that one.)
The relationship between article and demonstrative can be seen in the
fact that ὅδε, ἥδε, τόδε is formed from the article, by the addition of
the particle ‑δε. οὗτος is also from the article, perhaps with the article
doubled as τούτου.
Exercise B
1. Determine to which of the five types of first-declension nouns each of the
nouns in the vocabulary belongs.
2. Decline.
1. ὁ ποιητής
3. ἄξιος, -α, -ον
5. ἡ ἡμέρα
7. Εὐριπίδης (sg.)
2. ἡ θεά
4. ὁ ταμίας
6. ἡ εἰρήνη
8. ἡ γλῶττα
74
Lesson III

3. Choose the correct adjective/article/demonstrative form to agree with
the noun forms.
1. πολῖται
a. καλός
b. καλαί
c. καλοί
2. θάλατταν
a. κακήν
b. κακάν
c. κακάς
3. ταμίᾳ
a. ἀξία
b. ἀξίᾳ
c. ἀξίῳ
4. θεᾶς
a. τῆς
b. τᾶς
c. τοῦ
5. σκηνήν
a. νεόν
b. νέην
c. νέαν
6. δεσπότου
a. ταύτης
b. οὕτου
c. τούτου
7. ποιητής
a. πονηρός
b. πονηρῆς
c. πονηρά
8. πεῖρα
a. ταύτη
b. αὕτη
c. ταῦτα
9. νεανίας
a. ταύτης
b. τούτου
c. τούτους
10. ναύταις
a. αἰσχραῖς
b. αἰσχρῷ
c. αἰσχροῖς
11. συμφοράν
a. ἄδικαν
b. ἄδικον
c. ἀδίκην
12. δικασταί
a. ταί
b. αἱ
c. οἱ
13. ὁδός
a. παλαιός
b. παλαιόν
c. παλαιά
14. γλώττης
a. φιλίας
b. φιλίης
c. φιλίου
15. Εὐριπίδῃ
a. αἰσχρᾷ
b. καλῷ κἀγαθῷ
c. ἀδίκῃ
16. Μουσῶν
a. τούτων
b. ταυτῶν
c. αὕτων
4. Translate and decline in Greek.
1. this citizen
4. the immortal goddess
2. that misfortune
5. the shameful tongue
3. the small tent
6. the dishonest (unjust) treasurer
Genitives of Separation and Agent; ὑπό
1. Genitive of Separation
The genitive case is used to denote separation (from). It can be used with verbs
meaning remove, deprive, release, cease, etc., and with adjectives (as a rule
with those that imply deprivation, or some such thing). With verbs of motion,
a preposition is used: two of the most common prepositions used with a gen-
itive of separation are:
ἀπό
away from, from
ἐκ
out of, from (from within)
Cf. also παράand πρός with the genitive.
2. The Genitive of Agent with ὑπό
A subdivision of the genitive of source is the genitive of agent. The person by
whom the action of a passive verb is performed is put into the genitive case,
in prose, usually with the preposition ὑπό, by.
πέμπονται ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν
they are sent by the gods
First Declension Nouns
75

3. Other uses of ὑπό(under)
With gen. of place: under, from under
ὑπὸ γῆς
under the earth
τὰ ὑπὸ γῆς
the things under the earth
With dat.: beneath, under, at the foot of (locative dat.)
With acc.: under (to a place under: terminal acc.); of time: at, during
ὑπὸ Τροίαν ἰέναι
to go under [the walls of] Troy
ὑπὸ νύκτα
at nightfall
ὑπὸ τὴν εἰρήνην
at the time of peace
Exercise B (continued)
5. Translate.
1. ὁ σοφὸς βούλεται τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγειν ἀεί.
2. οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος οὐ μὲν σοφός ἐστι, γλώσσῃ δὲ δεινός.
3. ὁ δὲ κόσμος ἤρχετο ὑπὸ τῆσδε τῆς θεᾶς;
4. ἐκεῖνος ὁ θεὸς ἦν ὁ δεσπότης ὁ τῆς θαλάττης.
5. ὁ δεσπότης καὶ ὁ δοῦλος οὐκ ἔσονταί ποτε φίλοι. [δοῦλος slave]
6. ὅδε ὁ ἀγαθὸς δικαστὴς οὐκ ἐλάμβανεν ἄδικα δῶρα.
7. Εὐριπίδης ἦν ὁ τῆς σκηνῆς σοφός.
8. οἱ ἐκ τῆς θαλάσσης εἰσὶν αἰσχροὶ καὶ ἄδικοι.
9. τὰ δὲ τῶν τῆς θαλάσσης θεῶν ἔργα ἐστὶ καλά.
10. Εὐριπίδης ὁ ποιητὴς ἔλεγε τάδε· ὅ τι καλὸν φίλον ἀεί. [ὅ τι that which]
11. τῇδε τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐλευσόμεθα εἰς ἐκείνην τὴν μικρὰν νῆσον. [τῇδε τῇ
ἡμέρᾳ: dative of time when, on this day]
12. ὁ ἥλιος φέρει τὴν ἡμέραν.
13. καλὰ ἡ ἡσυχία καὶ ἡ εἰρήνη.
14. κακῶν θάλατταν ὁ κακὸς ἄνθρωπος φέρει.
15. οἱ θεοὶ καὶ αἱ θεαὶ πέμπουσι καὶ καλὰ καὶ κακά.
16. ὑπὸ τούτων τῶν δικαστῶν ἐκεῖνος ὁ σοφὸς κρίνεται.
17. ἀγαθῇ γὰρ μοίρᾳ ἄξεσθε ἡσυχίαν.
18. ὁ δίκαιος δικαστὴς κρίνει δίκῃ.
19. μοῖρα γάρ ἐστι ἀποθνῄσκειν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους καὶ δικαίους καὶ
ἀδίκους. [acc. subject of inf.]
20. ὁ ναύτης ἔχει τὸν βίον ἐκ τῆς θαλάττης.
21. οὗτος ὁ νεανίας ἦν ποιητής.
22. οἱ ποιηταὶ ἐπαίδευον τοὺς πολίτας καλὰ καὶ ἀγαθά.
23. ἐν δημοκρατίᾳ οἱ πολῖται βουλεύονται.
76
Lesson III

24. ὁ γὰρ νόμος καὶ ἡ βουλὴ ἄρχουσι τῶν πολιτῶν ἐν δημοκρατίᾳ.
25. ἡ ἡμέρα ἥδε ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακὸν οἴσει;
26. οἱ ποιηταὶ ἐλέγοντο τῶν Μουσῶν ταμίαι. [ἐλέγοντο were said to be,
were called]
27. ὁ σοφὸς ἄνθρωπός ἐστι ταμίας τῆς γνώμης καὶ τῆς γλώσσης.
28. οἱ θεοὶ καὶ αἱ θεαὶ ἦσαν οἱ ταμίαι οἱ τῶν ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς.
29. συμφορά ἐστι κακὰ πράττειν.
30. ὁ Ζεὺς ἦν ταμίας τῶν ψυχῶν καὶ τῶν ἀγαθῶν καὶ τῶν κακῶν.
31. τοῖς φίλοις τιμὰς ἐφέρομεν.
32. ὁ σοφὸς λόγος ἕξει τιμὴν ἀεί.
33. οἱ ἐν τιμαῖς ἄρχουσι τούτων τῶν πολιτῶν.
34. ὁ ἄδικος δικαστὴς ἐξεβάλλετο ἐκ τῆς τιμῆς. [ἐκ-βάλλω cast out]
35. ἡ ὑγίεια νομίζεται ἀγαθὸν τῷ βίῳ.
36. ἄριστον ἀνθρώποις ἡ ὑγίεια ἡ τῆς ψυχῆς.
37. ὁ κακὸς στρατιώτης λείψει τὴν χώραν.
38. ὥρα ἐστὶ βουλεύεσθαι καὶ κρίνειν.
39. καλὰ τὰ ἔργα ἃ ἔπραττετο ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ποιητοῦ.
40. τῶν ἐν τιμαῖς ἔργον ἐστὶν ἄρχειν τῶν πολιτῶν δίκῃ καὶ ἀγαθῇ βουλῇ.
41. τὸ δίκαιον διορίζει τὰ καλὰ καὶ τὰ αἰσχρά. [διορίζω distinguish]
42. τὰ ἔργα τὰ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ποιητοῦ ἄξιά ἐστι τιμῆς.
43. ὁ τῆς σοφῆς λόγος ἄξιος τιμῆς τοῖς ἀνθρώποις.
44. ὁ ἄνθρωπος ὃς ἄδικα ἔπραττεν ἄξιος ἦν θανάτου;
45. οἱ δίκαιοι ἄξιοι ἔσονται τιμὴν καὶ δῶρα λαμβάνειν.
46. δίκαιοι οἱ πολῖται κολάζειν τοὺς ἀδίκους. [κολάζειν to punish]
47. δίκαιός εἰμι λέγειν τάδε. δίκαιαί ἐσμεν τάδε λέγειν.
48. οἱ πολῖται οὓς ἀπεκτείνετε οὐκ ἦσαν ἄξιοι θανάτου.
49. ἡ γὰρ θεὰ ᾗ θύετε ἀξία τῶν δώρων.
50. οὐκ ἔστιν αἰσχρὸν τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγειν.
51. οὐ δίκαιος εἶ ἀποκτείνειν τούσδε τούς ἀνθρώπους.
52. οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος ξένος παλαιός ἐστιν.
53. τὸ μικρὸν παιδίον τοὺς μικροὺς λίθους οἴσεται.
54. ἡ μὲν τῶν νέων ἀρετή ἐστιν ἀνδρεία, ἡ δὲ τῶν παλαιῶν ἐστιν ἀγαθὴ
βουλή. [ἀνδρεία courage]
55. ὁ πονηρὸς ἄξιος μικροῦ.
56. οἱ γὰρ ποιηταὶ νέοι ἀεί.
57. αἱ γνῶμαι αἱ τῶν παλαιῶν ἄξιαί εἰσι πιστεύεσθαι;
58. ἄξιόν ἐστι πείθεσθαι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις οἳ λέγουσι τὰς ἀληθείας.
59. ἥδε ἡ χώρα φιλία ξένοις.
60. ἐκεῖνος ὁ στρατιώτης ὃς εἰρήνην ἄγειν ἐβούλετο φίλιος ἦν τοῖς
πολίταις.
61. ἄξια λόγου τὰ ἔργα τὰ τῶν θεῶν καὶ τὰ μικρά.
62. οὗτοι μὲν ἐκείνοις ταῦτα ἔλεγον· ἐκεῖναι δὲ τούτοις ἔλεγον τάδε.
63. οὐ δίκαια ἃ λέγεις· ἄδικον γὰρ πλοῦτον ἐθέλεις ἔχειν.
First Declension Nouns
77

6. Translate into Greek.
1. It is time to go to that small island. (Ex. 5.38)
2. This man will not be a friend to his master.
3. The work of the good poet will be immortal forever.
4. On that day we were bringing gifts to the gods. (Ex. 5.11)
5. Will you sacrifice to the goddess who is killing the young men?
6. The good citizen will never have unjust wealth.
7. The wise [woman] said this [the aforesaid], but the poet said the
following.
8. The opinion of the wise man will have honor.
9. The good soldier will never leave his place. (Ex. 5.37)
10. Do you wish to have the friendship of these people, but not of the
gods?
11. This [woman] who is freeing that [man] is worthy of honor.
7. Make up sentences in Greek using the following words.
1. ἀγαθός, ἡμέρα, ὅδε, φέρω
2. θεά, θύω, ὅς/ἥ/ὅ, ἄδικος, ὅδε/ἥδε/τόδε
3. ἀλήθεια, ἀγαθός, λέγω
4. ἄνθρωπος, δῶρον, ἐκεῖνος, οὗτος, φέρω
5. ἄνθρωπος, βουλεύω, ὥρα
Crasis
In both prose and verse, a vowel or diphthong at the end of one word may
contract with a vowel or diphthong at the beginning of another word. This is
called crasis (a mixing); an apostrophe, called the coronis (᾽), is used to mark it:
τἀγαθά
for τὰ ἀγαθά
καλὸς κἀγαθός
for καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθός
ὤριστε
for ὦ ἄριστε
τἀνθρώπων
for τὰ ἀνθρώπων
ὥνθρωποι
for οἱ ἄνθρωποι
Readings
1. κόσμον τόνδε οὔτε τις θεῶν οὔτε ἀνθρώπων ἐποίησεν, ἀλλ’ ἦν ἀεὶ καὶ ἔστιν
καὶ ἔσται πῦρ.
—Heraclitus
[τις one, anyone (m. nom. sg.). ἐποίησεν made (3rd sg. aor.). πῦρ fire (neut.
nom./acc. sg.).]
78
Lesson III

2. ἄγει δὲ πρὸς φῶς τὴν ἀλήθειαν χρόνος.
—Menander
[φῶς light (acc.).]
3. ὥρα τὰ πάντα τοῦ βίου κρίνει καλῶς.
— Menander
[τὰ πάντα all things (acc.). καλῶς adverb (-ως = -ly).]
4. ξένους ξένιζε, καὶ σὺ γὰρ ξένος γ’ ἔσῃ.
—Menander
[ξένιζε entertain! (2nd sg. imper.). σύyou (nom.). γ’ = γε at least.]
5. ἀνὴρ δίκαιος πλοῦτον οὐκ ἔχει ποτέ.
—Menander
[ἀνήρ man (masc. nom. sg.).]
6. θάλασσα κλύζει πάντα τἀνθρώπων κακά.
—Euripides
[κλύζει washes (3rd sg. pres.). πάντα all (n. nom./acc. pl.). τἀνθρώπων = τὰ
ἀνθρώπων.]
7. οὐδὲν κακὸν μικρόν ἐστιν.
—Demetrius (On Style)
[οὐδέν nothing (neut. nom./acc. sg.).]
8. ὁ νέος ἔσται νέος.
—Greek Proverb
9. οὐ πόλεμον ἀγγέλλεις.
—Greek Proverb (meaning that is good news)
10. θύειν με μέλλει καὶ κελεύει βῆ λέγειν.
—Aristophanes
[με me (m./f. acc. sg.). μέλλω be about to, intend to (+ inf.). κελεύω order, bid.
βῆba-a-a.]
11. οὐ γὰρ δοκεῖν ἄριστος, ἀλλ’ εἶναι θέλει.
—Aeschylus
[δοκεῖν to seem (infinitive). θέλει = ἐθέλει.]
12. ὃν οἱ θεοὶ φιλοῦσιν ἀποθνῄσκει νέος.
—Menander
[φιλοῦσιν (they) love (3rd pl.).]
13. χαῖρε, θάλασσα φίλη.
—Greek Anthology
[χαῖρε hail, hello.]
First Declension Nouns
79

14. πρὸς υἱὸν ὀργὴν οὐκ ἔχει χρηστὸς πατήρ.
—Menander
[υἱός, -οῦ, ὁson. ὀργή, -ῆς, ἡanger; πατήρ father (m. nom. sg.).]
15. οὗτός ἐστιν Ἀγαμέμνων, ἐμὸς
πόσις, νεκρὸς δὲ τῆσδε δεξιᾶς χερός
ἔργον δικαίας τέκτονος. τάδ’ ὧδ’ ἔχει.
—Aeschylus, Agamemnon
[Clytemnestra over Agamemnon’s dead body. ἐμὸς πόσις my husband (nom.
sg.). νεκρός corpse (nom. sg.). δεξιός, -ά, -όν right. χερός (= χειρός) hand
(gen.). τέκτονος worker (m./f. gen. sg.). τάδ’ ὧδ’ ἔχει this is how it is.]
16. αἱ συμφοραὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἄρχουσι, καὶ οὐκὶ ὥνθρωποι τῶν συμφορῶν.
—Herodotus
[οὐκί = οὐχί. ὥνθρωποι = οἱ ἄνθρωποι.]
17. αἵ τε γὰρ συμφοραὶ ποιοῦσι μακρολόγους.
—Appian
[τε and (enclitic). ποιοῦσι make (3rd pl.). μακρολόγος = μακρός (long) + λόγος.]
18. πάντα μὲν τὰ νέα καὶ καλά ἐστιν.
—Demetrius (On Style)
[πάντα see readings 3 and 6 above.]
19. ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἄνθρωπος ἐκ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ θησαυροῦ τῆς καρδίας προφέρει τὸ
ἀγαθόν, καὶ ὁ πονηρὸς ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ προφέρει τὸ πονηρόν.
—Luke
[θησαυρός, -οῦ, ὁtreasury. προφέρω bring forth. καρδία, ας, ἡheart.]
An invitation to dinner (from a 3rd c. C.E. papyrus)
καλεῖ σε Εὐδαίμων δειπνῆσαι ἐν τῷ γυμνασίῳ ἐπὶ τῷ στέψει τοῦ υἱοῦ
αὐτοῦ Νείλου τῇ α ἀπὸ ὥρας η.
Eudaimon invites you to dine in the gymnasium at the crowning of his son Neilos
on the 1st starting at 2:00 p.m. [Lit. from the eighth hour].
ἐτεῇ δὲ οὐδὲν ἴδμεν· ἐν βυθῷ γὰρ ἡ ἀλήθεια.
In reality we know nothing: for the truth is in
an abyss. 
—Democritus
80
Lesson III

GREETINGS 
When Aigeus, king of Athens, makes his entrance
in Euripides’ Medea (663), these are his first words.
This is a clear example of the use of everyday speech
combined with the formal diction of tragedy in Eu-
ripidean dialogue.
Αἰγεύς:
Μήδεια, χαῖρε· τοῦδε γὰρ προοίμιον
κάλλιον οὐδεὶς οἶδε προσφωνεῖν φίλους.
Μήδεια: ὦ χαῖρε καὶ σύ, παῖ σοφοῦ Πανδίονος, Αἰγεῦ.
Aigeus: Medea, hello. For no one knows a better way
than this to address friends and wish them well.
Medea: Hello to you too, Aigeus, son of Pandion the wise. 
These ancient greetings are still heard in Modern Greek: χαῖρε (familiar form,
for close friends and relatives, young children, and animals), χαίρετε (polite
form for everybody else: αι is now pronounced like ε, and χ is more like a
heavy h-sound or a light ch-sound, though the exact sound depends on ge-
ography). Καλημέρα and καλησπέρα (good day and good evening) are more
common greetings. The pronunciation is nearly the same as in classical Greek,
except that η is now pronounced the same as ι, as are ει, οι, υ. By far the most
common greeting, used for both hello and good-bye, is γειά σου, also short-
ened to just γειά [from ὑγίεια health + σου your].
First Declension Nouns
81
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.


LESSON IV
Aorist Active and Middle,
Aspect, Indirect Statement
In this lesson you will learn the aorist active and middle (the third principal part),
the concept of aspect, and the syntactical construction of indirect statement. Most
important, you will be ready for your first extended reading, from Plato’s Meno.
83
AORIST ACTIVE AND MIDDLE:
THE THIRD PRINCIPAL PART
The Aorist is a secondary (or past) tense. It is used for a single act in past time,
or one regarded as a single act, as opposed to the imperfect, which is used for
continuous or habitual action in past time.
Imperfect
ἔλυον
I was releasing, used to release, kept on releasing,
tried to release
Aorist
ἔλυσα
I released
The aorist, like the future, has separate forms for the middle and passive.
There are two forms of the aorist called, for convenience, first and second
aorist. These differ in formation and conjugation, but not in meaning and use.
If a verb has a first aorist, it will not have a second aorist (there are a few
exceptions to this rule, but they will be dealt with as needed).1 The first aorist
is formed regularly from the present stem. To form the second aorist, changes
usually take place in the verb stem. The two types correspond to our regular
and irregular (weak and strong) verbs:
Present
Past (= aorist)
Past Participle
Regular
look
looked
looked
Irregular
sing
sang
sung
see
saw
seen
drink
drank
drunk
1 English hang has two pasts, hung (general) and hanged (used of an execution): they
hung the picture but they hanged the man.

Note that in the three irregular verbs there is a variation in the stem vowel
in the different forms. This is also common in the Greek verbs with second
aorists: it is known as vowel gradation or ablaut.
Like the imperfect and the other secondary tense, the pluperfect, the aorist
(both first and second) is augmented, but only in the indicative. The infinitive
and all moods other than the indicative are not augmented.
The aorist active indicative, first person singular, is the third principal part
of a verb. Fully deponent verbs, of course, have no aorist active. Deponents
are divided into two classes, those that have their aorists in the middle and
those with passive aorists, called respectively middle or passive deponents.
Formation and Conjugation of the First Aorist
1. Vowel and Mute Stems (Sigmatic Aorist)
Vowel Stems
Augment (ε) + stem + σ + ‑α (tense sign) + secondary endings (the secondary
endings show slight modifications in the active of the first aorist):
First Aorist Endings
Active
Middle
Sg.
‑σ‑α
1st
‑σ‑αμην
I
‑σ‑ας
2nd
‑σω <[‑σ‑ασο]
you
‑σ‑ε(ν)
3rd
‑σ‑ατο
he/she/it
Pl.
‑σ‑αμεν
1st
‑σ‑αμεθα
we
‑σ‑ατε
2nd
‑σ‑ασθε
you
‑σ-αν
3rd
‑σ‑αντο
they
Inf.
‑σ‑αι
‑σ‑ασθαι
to
Note
These endings differ from the other secondary endings mainly in that
they do not have the thematic vowel ο or ε; rather, ‑α‑ is the char -
acteristic vowel of the first aorist endings. Notice that this α is short.  
Example: λύω, aorist ἔλυσα
Active
Middle
Sg.
ἔλυσα
1st
ἐλυσάμην
ἔλυσας
2nd
ἐλύσω
ἔλυσε(ν)
3rd
ἐλύσατο
Pl.
ἐλύσαμεν
1st
ἐλυσάμεθα
ἐλύσατε
2nd
ἐλύσασθε
ἔλυσαν
3rd
ἐλύσαντο
Inf.
λῦσαι
λύσασθαι
84
Lesson IV

Note: the first aorist infinitive active is accented on the penult: λῦσαι,
βουλεῦσαι, γράψαι.
Mute (Consonant) Stems
Before the ‑σ‑ of the first aorist, mute stems undergo the same orthographic
changes as in the future:
a labial (π, β, or φ) + σ becomes ψ
πέμπω:
ἔπεμψα
(future, πέμψω)
γράφω:
ἔγραψα
(future, γράψω)
a palatal (κ, γ, or χ) + σ becomes ξ
ἄρχω:
ἦρξα
(future, ἄρξω)
πράττω:
ἔπραξα
(future, πράξω) (stem: πραγ‑)
a dental (τ, δ, or θ) drops out before σ (ζ also drops out)
πείθω:
ἔπεισα
(future, πείσω)
These forms are conjugated in the same way as the vowel stems; the ‑σ‑ is
present in the double consonants ψ and ξ.
2. The Liquid/Nasal First Aorist
Many verbs with stems ending in μ, ν, λ, or ρ (the nasals and liquids) do not
add ‑σ‑ to form the first aorist. The combinations μσ, νσ, λσ and ρσ were
generally avoided in Greek.
Note on the stem of the liquid first aorist
Compensatory Lengthening: In the formation of the liquid first aorist,
the sigma is lost and, to make up for this loss, the stem vowel of the
verb is often lengthened, according to the following pattern: ε be-
comes ει; α becomes η.
Formation: Augment + stem + ‑α‑ with the secondary endings:
Stem
Aorist
μένω
μεν‑
ἔμεινα
ἀγγέλλω
ἀγγελ‑
ἤγγειλα
φαίνω
φαν‑
ἔφηνα
κρίνω
κριν‑
ἔκρῑνα
These are conjugated in the same way as ἔλυσα.
Aorist Active and Middle: The Third Principal Part
85

Active
Middle
Sg.
ἤγγειλα
1st
ἠγγειλάμην
ἤγγειλας
2nd
ἠγγείλω
ἤγγειλε(ν)
3rd
ἠγγείλατο
Pl.
ἠγγείλαμεν
1st
ἠγγειλάμεθα
ἠγγείλατε
2nd
ἠγγείλασθε
ἤγγειλαν
3rd
ἠγγείλαντο
Inf.
ἀγγεῖλαι
ἀγγείλασθαι
Exercise A
1. a. Fill in the accent. 
b. Parse and translate. 
c. Give each in the opposite number.
1. ἠγγειλας
11. ἐπεισω
21. ἐτειναμεν*
2. ἠκουσαμεν
12. ἐμεινα
22. ἐστειλατο*
3. ἀπεκτειναν
13. ἠθελησατε
23. ἠκουσας
4. ἠρξαντο
14. ἐθυσαμεθα
24. ἐλεξεν
5. ἐπραξατε
15. ἐνομισαντο
25. ἐπεμψω
6. ἐγραψατο
16. ἐκρινασθε
26. ἐπαυσαν
7. ἐβουλευσαμεθα
17. ἐλεξαν
27. ἐτειναν*
8. ἐδεξαμην
18. ἐλυσω
28. ἠρξας
9. ἐπεμψασθε
19. ἐφηνα
29. ἐκριναν
10. ἐπαυσε
20. ἐπαιδευσαμην
30. ἠθελησε
* τείνω stretch; στέλλω send
2. a. Fill in the accent.
b. Parse and translate the form. 
c. Give each in the corresponding form of the middle.
1. ἀκουσαι
4. λεξαι
7. πεμψαι
9. ἀρξαι
2. ἀγγειλαι
5. κρῑναι
8. πεισαι
10. βουλευσαι
3. φηναι
6. παυσαι
3. For each of the following present forms, give the corresponding form in
the imperfect, future, and aorist.
Example: λύεις — impf. ἔλυες, fut. λύσεις, aor. ἔλυσας
1. λύετε
6. νομίζειν*
11. παύομαι
2. δέχει
7. γράφουσι
12. φαίνομεν*
3. μένεις*
8. δέχεσθαι
13. πέμπεσθε
4. παιδευόμεθα
9. ἀγγέλλει*
14. βουλεύεσθε
5. ἀποκτείνω*
10. πείθεται
15. ἄρχονται
*omit future
86
Lesson IV

Formation and Conjugation of 
The Second Aorist
The second aorist is a thematic tense: it has a vowel, ο or ε, added to the stem
before the endings. Note the accent of the infinitive.
Formation: Augment + second aorist stem + secondary endings (the same
endings as for the imperfect):
Active
Middle
Sg.
‑ον
1st
‑ο‑μην
‑ες
2nd
‑ου < [ε-σο]
‑ε(ν)
3rd
‑ε‑το
Pl.
‑ο‑μεν
1st
‑ο‑μεθα
‑ε‑τε
2nd
‑ε‑σθε
‑ο‑ν
3rd
‑ο‑ντο
Inf.
‑εῖν
‑έσθαι
The Second Aorist Stem
There is no one way in which second aorists are formed, but variation in the
stem vowel of the verb is a general characteristic. Learn the second aorist from
the principal parts: the stem is found by removing the augment and personal
ending. Often the second aorist stem shows the root (the most basic part) of
the verb:
Aorist Stem
Second Aorist
λείπω
λιπ‑
ἔλιπον
λαμβάνω
λαβ‑
ἔλαβον
βάλλω
βαλ‑
ἔβαλον
γίγνομαι
γεν‑
ἐγενόμην
μανθάνω
μαθ‑
ἔμαθον
There are some other kinds of changes which certain verbs undergo in the
formation of the second aorist. 
Examples:
Aorist
Stem
Second Aorist
ἄγω
ἀγαγ-
ἤγαγον
A reduplication (doubling) of the present stem
ἀγ‑ to ἀγαγ‑.
Aorist Active and Middle: The Third Principal Part
87

Aorist
Stem
Second Aorist
ἔχω
σχ‑
ἔσχον
This stem is related to that of the future σχήσω.
φέρω
ἐνεγκ‑
ἤνεγκον.
This is also a reduplication, but unrelated to the
 present; a comparison could be made between
this verb and the English verb go, went, in which
the parts are taken from different verb stems. 
ἔρχομαι
ἐλθ‑ 
ἦλθον
Note that the second aorist of this verb is active 
in form as well as in meaning, and has a
different root from the present.
Example of Second Aorist, λείπω, aorist stem, λιπ‑:
Active
Middle
Sg.
ἔλιπον
1st
ἐλιπόμην
ἔλιπες
2nd
ἐλίπου
ἔλιπε(ν)
3rd
ἐλίπετο
Pl.
ἐλίπομεν
1st
ἐλιπόμεθα
ἐλίπετε
2nd
ἐλίπεσθε
ἔλιπον
3rd
ἐλίποντο
Inf.
λιπεῖν
λιπέσθαι
Note
The endings are the same as those of the imperfect, but even so, it is
generally easy to distinguish the two tenses, because the imperfect
is always formed from the present stem, and the second aorist from
a different, usually simplified, stem.
Exercise A (continued)
4. a. Fill in the accent. 
b. Translate. 
c. Change to the opposite number.
1. ἠγαγοντο
4. ἐλαβεσθε
7. ἐγενετο
2. ἠλθομεν
5. ἠνεγκον
8. ἐλιπου
3. ἐσχον
6. ἐλιπες
9. ἐμαθον
5. a. Fill in the accent. 
b. Give corresponding present and future forms.
1. λιπειν
3. ἐνεγκειν
5. λαβειν
2. γενεσθαι
4. μαθειν
6. ἐλθειν
88
Lesson IV

6. For each of the present forms give the corrresponding imperfect, future,
and aorist.
1. ἄγω
4. φέρουσι
6. λείπομεν
2. ἔχεις
5. ἔρχεται
7. μανθάνετε
3. γίγνει
Principal Parts
A review of the principal parts, both regular and irregular, of verbs given in
the previous lessons follows. Forms not yet treated are in brackets. An asterisk
(*) indicates irregular verbs: pay special attention to the verbs so marked. Be
sure that you know the meanings of all the verbs. Many of these verbs, though
irregular, do follow a pattern.
*ἀγγέλλω
[ἀγγελῶ]
ἤγγειλα
*ἄγω
ἄξω
ἤγαγον (ἀγαγ‑)
*ἀκούω
ἀκούσομαι
ἤκουσα
*ἀποθνῄσκω
[-θανοῦμαι]
ἀπέθανον
*ἀποκτείνω
[-κτενῶ]
ἀπέκτεινα
ἄρχω
ἄρξω
ἦρξα
*βάλλω
[βαλῶ]
ἔβαλον
βουλεύω
βουλεύσω
ἐβούλευσα
*βούλομαι
βουλήσομαι
(passive aorist [X])
*γίγνομαι
γενήσομαι
ἐγενόμην
γράφω
γράψω
ἔγραψα
δέχομαι
δέξομαι
ἐδεξάμην
*ἐθέλω
ἐθελήσω
ἠθέλησα
*ἔρχομαι
ἐλεύσομαι
ἦλθον (ἐλθ‑)
*ἔχω
ἕξω / σχήσω
ἔσχον (σχ‑)
θύω
θύσω
ἔθυσα
*κρίνω
[κρινῶ]
ἔκρινα
*λαμβάνω
λήψομαι
ἔλαβον
λέγω
λέξω
ἔλεξα (εἶπον)
*λείπω
λείψω
ἔλιπον
λύω
λύσω
ἔλυσα
*μανθάνω
μαθήσομαι
ἔμαθον
*μένω
[μενῶ]
ἔμεινα
νομίζω
[νομιῶ]
ἐνόμισα
παιδεύω
παιδεύσω
ἐπαίδευσα
*πάσχω
πείσομαι
ἔπαθον
παύω
παύσω
ἔπαυσα
πείθω
πείσω
ἔπεισα
πέμπω
πέμψω
ἔπεμψα
πιστεύω
πιστεύσω
ἐπίστευσα
*πράττω (πραγ‑)
πράξω
ἔπραξα
*φαίνω
[φανῶ]
ἔφηνα
*φέρω
οἴσω
ἤνεγκον (ἐνεγκ-), ἤνεγκα
Aorist Active and Middle: The Third Principal Part
89

Note on finding the aorist stem
The aorist stem is found by removing the augment and the personal
ending. You have to know what the form looks like without its aug-
ment to form and recognize infinitives and the other dependent
moods, and to recognize at a glance what verb a particular aorist is
from. You may have some difficulty recognizing augmented forms
beginning with η, which represents lengthened ε or α. In most cases
it can be determined whether an η represents an augmented ε or α
from the relationship of the aorist to the present. For example: ἦρξα,
first aorist of ἄρχω, will have ἀρξ‑ as its aorist stem because the η
simply represents a lengthened α. Similarly ἤγγειλα (ἀγγειλ‑) from
ἀγγέλλω; ἤκουσα (ἀκουσ‑) from ἀκούω; ἤγαγον (ἀγαγ‑) from ἄγω;
ἠθέλησα (ἐθελησ‑) from ἐθέλω. The only real difficulty arises in
aorists that bear little or no resemblance to the other principal parts,
such as ἤνεγκον (ἐνεγκ‑), aorist of φέρω; or ἦλθον (ἐλθ‑) from ἔρχομαι.
In such cases, the aorist stem is given in the vocabulary along with
the aorist indicative.
Notes on Time and Aspect
The second aorist stem often represents the simplest form of the verb.
It is frequently the present that has something added: λείπω, ἀγγέλλω,
etc. are lengthened forms. μανθάνω and λαμβάνω, and several other
verbs of their class, have the whole syllable ‑αν‑ as well as an addi-
tional nasal added to form the present stem; their roots are μαθ‑ and
λαβ‑, respectively. We may say that this simplest form of the verb (the
root) contains the basic meaning of the verb—but why is it found in
the aorist rather than the present? The aorist is in fact the simplest
tense. The meaning of the term aorist (from the Greek ἀόριστος) is un-
limited, and it is so called because it has none of the limitations of rep-
etition, continuance, or completion that the other tenses have: it refers
to a simple act (in the indicative, in past time). The present refers to
action going on, in progress; the imperfect to continued or repeated
action, again, action in progress; the perfect to completed action. This
is what we mean by the aspect of Greek tenses: the tenses refer not
only to time (as present, past, or future) but also to the character of
the action, whether it is in progress, simply taking place, or finished.
As has been mentioned above, the augment was originally a float-
ing temporal particle and only later became attached to the verb. In
Homer, secondary tenses of the indicative often appear without the
augment. Only the indicative has the augment, and it is only in the
indicative that the aorist is strictly a past tense. That is, the infinitive,
optative, subjunctive, and imperative (all unaugmented forms) usu-
ally express aspect rather than time. An aorist infinitive (except in
indirect statement, which will be treated below) differs in meaning
from a present infinitive only in that the present refers to the action
as going on, the aorist to a single act. (The present and aorist infini-
tives are by far the most commonly used of the infinitives.) The in-
finitive is a verbal noun and therefore does not express time any more
than a noun does.
90
Lesson IV

Examples:
λύειν
to be releasing
λῦσαι
to release
γίγνεσθαι
to go through the process of becoming
γενέσθαι
to become
A linguistic note
The original stem of the verb ἔχω is σεχ‑. Initial σ often changes to the
rough breathing, leaving us with ἕχω. The difficulty in pronouncing
two successive aspirations (the rough breathing and the aspirated
consonant χ) caused the change to ἔχω. In the future, however, when
the second aspiration is lost in the combination of χ + σ = ξ, the first
aspiration is free to return, giving ἕξω. The aorist ἔσχον, with the stem
σχ‑, is from the original stem σεχ‑, with the stem vowel’s total dis -
appearance (by vowel gradation). The irregular imperfect εἶχον has
also been affected by the original initial σ that dropped out. The
augment ει is really a syllabic (or ε) augment resulting from ε‑ε
(ε‑σ‑εχον): ει is the regular contraction for ε‑ε.
Compound Verbs
Compound verbs are most commonly formed by prefixing a preposition to
the verb. In these compounds, the meaning of the verb is the fundamental
part, with the prepositional prefix modifying it more or less. The most im -
portant thing to remember at this point is that the augment is added after the
preposition: that is, the verb is augmented and not the preposition, as
ἀποκτείνω, aorist ἀπ-έκτεινα. Prepositions ending in a vowel drop that vowel
before the vowel of the augment, by elision (περί and πρό are exceptions to
this rule). There are some other changes that take place when prepositions are
added to verbs.
1. ἀπό, κατά, ἐπί, μετά, ὑπό before a rough breathing change their final con-
sonant to an aspirated form (having dropped the vowel by elision):
ἀφαιρέω
take down, take away
ἀπό + αἱρέω
καθίστημι
set down
κατά + ἵστημι
ἐφίημι
send to
ἐπί + ἵημι
μεθίστημι
change
μετά + ἵστημι
ὑφαρπάζω
filch, snatch away from under
ὑπό + ἁρπάζω
2. ἐξ before a vowel, ἐκ before a consonant:
ἐκβάλλω
throw, put out 
aorist, ἐξέβαλον
ἐκφέρω
bring forth
future, ἐξοίσω
Aorist Active and Middle: The Third Principal Part
91

3. ἐν, σύν before a labial (π, β, φ) become ἐμ- and συμ-:
ἐμβάλλω
throw, put in
aorist, ἐνέβαλον
συμβαίνω
come to pass, happen
aorist, συνέβην
συμβάλλω
throw together
aorist, συνέβαλον
ἐν, σύν before a palatal (γ, κ, χ) become ἐγ‑, συγ‑:
ἐγγράφω
inscribe
aorist, ἐνέγραψα
συγχρονέω
be contemporary with
(cf. χρόνος)
συγγίγνομαι
keep company with
aorist, συνεγενόμην
συγκομίζω
bring together
aorist, συνεκόμισα
συν before λ becomes συλ‑ (ἐλ‑ is not very common, but ἐλλείπω, ἐνέλιπον):
συλλέγω
collect
aorist, συνέλεξα
συλλύω
help in loosing
aorist, συνέλυσα
συλλαμβάνω
take with one
aorist, συνέλαβον
συν before σ or ζ becomes συ‑ (this does not happen to ἐν):
συζῶ
live with
(σύν + ζάω, live)
συστέλλω
draw together
(σύν + στέλλω)
Exercise B
1. a. Put in the correct accent. 
b. Parse and translate. 
c. Give the opposite number for each form.
1. ἠγαγε
9. ἀπεθανον
17. ἐπεισας
24. ἐγενοντο
2. ἐγενομην
10. ἐλαβομεθα
18. ἐλαβομην
25. ἠγαγομεθα
3. ἠλθετε
11. ἐγενετο
19. ἠγαγετε
26. ἠγαγου
4. ἐλιπομεν
12. ἐλιποντο
20. ἐμαθομεν
27. ἐφηνα
5. ἠνεγκεσθε
13. ἐσχετε
21. ἐλιπες
28. ἐσχομεν
6. ἐμαθες
14. ἐλιπεν
22. ἐλυσω
29. οἰσουσιν
7. ἐλαβον
15. ἠνεγκου
23. ἐπαθον
30. ἀπεθνῃσκον
8. ἐβαλου
16. ἐμαθετο
2. Parse.
1. λαβεῖν
5. γενέσθαι
9. βαλέσθαι
13. μαθεῖν
2. σχεῖν
6. ἐνεγκεῖν
10. ἀποθανεῖν
14. λαβέσθαι
3. ἀγαγεῖν
7. βαλεῖν
11. λιπέσθαι
15. ἐνεγκέσθαι
4. μαθέσθαι
8. ἐλθεῖν
12. παθεῖν
92
Lesson IV

3. For each of the following imperfect forms, give the corresponding form
in the aorist.
1. ἐλάμβανον
4. ἐγίγνοντο
7. ἐγίγνου
9. ἠρχόμεθα
2. ἔφερες
5. ἐμανθάνομεν
8. ἐλειπόμην
10. εἶχε
3. ἤγετε
6. ἐβάλλετο
4. Compounds: for each of the following present forms, give the corres -
ponding imperfect, future, and aorist.
1. ἀπέχω
be away
2. ἐκφέρεσθε
carry out/away
3. εἰσβάλλει
throw into (fut. εἰσβαλεῖ)
4. ἀποφαίνομεν
show forth (fut. ἀποφανοῦμεν)
5. περιγίγνομαι
get the better of
6. προφέρετε
bring forth
7. ἐμβάλλεται
throw into (fut. ἐμβαλεῖται)
8. ὑποτείνουσι
stretch under, strain tight (ὑπό + τείνω,
ἔτεινα)(fut. ὑποτενοῦσι)
9. ἀποθυόμεθα
pay off a vow
10. εἰσπράττεις
get in, exact a debt
11. συλλαμβάνονται
collect, gather together
12. ἐγγράφει / -ῃ
inscribe
INDIRECT STATEMENT
Irregular Verb, φημίsay
Principal Parts: φημί, φήσω, ἔφησα
Only the present system is irregular; the future and first aorist are con -
jugated like λύσω, ἔλυσα. φημί, like εἰμί, belongs to the class of verbs known
as ‑μι verbs, and like εἰμίis enclitic in the present indicative (except for the
second person singular).
Present
Imperfect
Sg.
φημί
1st
ἔφην
φῄς
2nd
ἔφησθα or ἔφης
φησί
3rd
ἔφη
Pl.
φαμέν
1st
ἔφαμεν
φατέ
2nd
ἔφατε
φασί
3rd
ἔφασαν
Inf.
φάναι
Indirect Statement
93

Constructions after verbs of saying and thinking
There are in Greek several ways of quoting a statement or thought indirectly.
The construction to be used depends on the introductory verb of saying or
thinking. The three ways of expressing indirect quotations are: (1) with ὅτι or
ὡς, that and a finite verb (similar to English usage); (2) with the infinitive and
subject accusative (similar to Latin usage); and (3) with the participle (see
Lesson VII).
Of the verbs of saying, φημί regularly takes the infinitive construction; εἶπον
(infinitive εἰπεῖν), I said, takes ὅτι or ὡς with the indicative (or optative); and
λέγω in the active usually takes the ὅτι/ὡς construction; in the passive, the
infinitive. Verbs of thinking or believing such as νομίζω usually take the infini -
tive construction. Verbs of seeing, hearing, and learning usually take the par -
ticiple construction [VII].
1. In indirect statements after ὅτι or ὡς, each verb retains both the mood and
tense of the direct quotation. (After past tenses the optative is often used [XIII]):
Direct
Indirect
μανθάνω, I understand
λέγω ὅτι μανθάνω, I say that I understand
λέγει ὅτι μανθάνει, he/she says that he/she
 understands
Sometimes ὅτι introduces a direct quotation (quotation marks had not yet
been invented): εἶπον ὅτι ἱκανοί ἐσμεν, they said “we are able” (Xenophon,
Anabasis).
2. The verbs φημί and νομίζω (among others) take a construction in which the
verb of the original statement is changed to the infinitive of the correspon-
ding tense, as the following examples illustrate:
Direct
Indirect
γράφω, I am writing
νομίζω γράφειν, I think that I’m writing
νομίζει γράφειν, he thinks that he is writing
*ἐνόμισα γράφειν, I thought that I was writing
*ἐνόμισε γράφειν, she thought that she was writing
γράψω, I shall write
νομίζω γράψειν, I think that I will write
νομίζομεν γράψειν, we think that we will write
*ἐνόμισα γράψειν, I thought that I would write
ἔγραψα, I wrote
νομίζω γράψαι, I think that I wrote
νομίζει γράψαι, he thinks that he wrote
*ἐνόμισα γράψαι, I thought that I had written
*Note: the tense of the English translation changes to comply with the
rules of English tense sequence. In Greek, the tense of the infinitive
remains the same because the infinitive still represents the same tense
of the indicative. The present infinitive can also be used to stand for
the imperfect indicative. In Greek, the tense of the indirect statement
is relative to the time of the main verb: present tense for action at the
same time, future for later action, aorist for earlier action.
94
Lesson IV

The Subject of the Infinitive in 
Indirect Statement
1. In the examples given above, the subject of the indirect statement has been
omitted. If the subject of the infinitive is the same as the subject of the main
verb (i.e., the verb of saying or thinking), then it is usually omitted, unless it
is to be emphasized. In that case it will be in the nominative (because it agrees
with the subject of the main clause), and anything that agrees with it will be
nominative.
The infinitive can stand for any person and number: ἔφην γράφειν, I said that
I was writing; the infinitive stands for the first person singular. ἔφασαν γράφειν,
they said that they were writing; the infinitive stands for the third person plural.
2. If the subject of the infinitive is different from that of the main verb, then
it goes into the accusative case and it may not be omitted:
αὕτη γράφει, this woman is writing
νομίζω ταύτην γράφειν, I think that this woman is writing
ὁ πολίτης ἐστὶ καλός, the citizen is good
νομίζω τὸν πολίτην εἶναι καλόν, I think that the citizen is good
But, ὁ πολίτης νομίζει εἶναι καλός, the citizen thinks that he (himself) is
good
In the last example, καλός is nominative because it refers to the same subject
as that of the main verb.
Exercise C
1. Go over the list of principal parts (p. 89) and classify the various verbs.
Which have first aorist, liquid first aorist, second aorist? Which are deponent,
which semi-deponent? Which have futures in the middle?
2. a. Conjugate the following in the aorist (active and middle); include
infinitives.
1. παύω
4. κρίνω
2. μανθάνω
5. δέχομαι (mid. only)
3. ἀποθνῄσκω (act. only)
6. ἀποκτείνω (act. only)
2. b. Conjugate orally in full, giving all forms you know.
1. λύω
4. λαμβάνω
2. ἔρχομαι
5. ἀκούω
3. φαίνω
Indirect Statement
95

3. Parse and translate.
1. ἔφη
16. ἐβουλευσάμεθα
31. ἐπράξατε
46. βάλλειν
2. ἦρχον
17. λείπειν
32. ἐλύσαντο
47. πέμψουσι
3. ἔφερεν
18. γράψαι
33. ἤρχετο
48. ἐκρίνομεν
4. μεῖναι
19. ἐλεύσει
34. σχεῖν
49. φησί
5. λύεις
20. νομίσαι
35. γίγνεσθαι
50. ἐξέφερεν
6. ἐλύσω
21. ἔρχεσθε
36. γενήσεσθαι
51. δέξασθαι
7. λιπεῖν
22. σχήσειν
37. φῆναι
52. βουλήσονται
8. λήψει
23. νομίζειν
38. ἕξουσιν
53. ἔσεσθαι
9. βαλεῖν
24. ἀπέκτειναν
39. πάσχομεν
54. εἶναι
10. φέρεις
25. ἤνεγκον
40. ἐλεύσεται
55. ἐκρίναμεν
11. παύσω
26. ἀκοῦσαι
41. ἔθυσαν
56. ἀπέθνῃσκον
12. πεῖσαι
27. γενέσθαι
42. ἐπαύσω
57. οἴσειν
13. γράψει
28. ἐδέξαντο
43. οἰσόμεθα
58. φαίνεται
14. ἔφηναν
29. φάναι
44. κρίνομεν
59. ἀπέκτεινον
15. πείσειν
30. ἄρχονται
45. εἶ
60. ἔφασαν
4. Translate the following (direct followed by indirect statement).
1. σοφή ἐστιν. νομίζουσι τήνδε εἶναι σοφήν.
2. οὗτος ὁ πολίτης ἐστὶ ἀγαθός. νομίζω τοῦτον τὸν πολίτην εἶναι ἀγαθόν.
3. ἐκεῖνος ὁ νεανίας ἐστὶ ποιητής. ἐκεῖνος ὁ νεανίας νομίζει εἶναι
ποιητής. νομίζεις ἐκεῖνον τὸν νεανίαν εἶναι ποιητήν;
4. ἐλευσόμεθα εἰς τὴν νῆσον. ἐνομίζομεν ἐλεύσεσθαι εἰς τὴν νῆσον.
ἔφαμεν ταύτας εἰς τάσδε τὰς νήσους ἐλεύσεσθαι.
5. ὁ λίθος ἔχει ψυχήν. ὁ σοφὸς νομίζει τὸν λίθον ἔχειν ψυχήν. ἔφη τὸν
λίθον ἔχειν ψυχήν.
6. οἱ ποιηταὶ ἐπαίδευον τοὺς πολίτας. ἐνόμισαν τοὺς ποιητὰς παιδεύειν
τοὺς πολίτας.
7. οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἤνεγκε καλὰ δῶρα τοῖς θεοῖς. νομίζετε τοῦτον τὸν
ἄνθρωπον ἐνεγκεῖν καλὰ δῶρα τοῖς θεοῖς; οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἔφη
ἐνεγκεῖν καλὰ δῶρα τοῖς θεοῖς.
8. ὁ πονηρὸς ἀπέκτεινε τοὺς φίλους. τὸν πονηρόν φαμεν ἀποκτεῖναι τοὺς
φίλους.
9. ἄγει δὲ πρὸς φῶς τὴν ἀλήθειαν ὁ χρόνος. ὁ ποιητὴς ἔφη τὸν χρόνον
ἄγειν πρὸς φῶς τὴν ἀλήθειαν. [φῶς, τό light]
10. ἐλύσατο αὕτη τὸ παιδίον. ἔφασαν ταύτην λύσασθαι τὸ παιδίον.
5. Translate into Greek (to practice indirect statement).
1. The children will bring stones.
We think that the children will bring stones.
The children said that they would bring stones.
2. We went to that island.
We think that we went to that island.
They said that they had gone to that island.
3. The soul of man is immortal.
The poets say that the soul of man is immortal.
96
Lesson IV

4. That wise man was put to death [ἀποθνῄσκω, active voice] by the
unjust citizens.
I thought that the wise man had been put to death by the unjust
citizens.
5. This man whom they wish to kill speaks the truth.
They denied that this man whom they wished to kill was speaking
the truth. [deny = say not = οὔ φημι]
6. Write the following as indirect statements, using forms of φημί or νομίζω.
1. ὁ σοφὸς ἄνθρωπος λέγει τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἀεί.
2. ὁ ἀγαθὸς δικαστὴς οὐκ ἔλαβε τὰ ἄδικα δῶρα.
3. οἱ χρηστοὶ ἤνεγκον τιμὰς τοῖς φίλοις.
4. ὁ ἀγαθὸς στρατιώτης οὐ λείψει τὴν χώραν.
7. Translate.
1. ἤγγειλεν ὁ ἄγγελος πόλεμον; [ὁ ἄγγελος the messenger]
2. ἠγάγομεν τὰ δῶρα ταῖς θεοῖς, αἳ ἔχουσι τὰς οἰκίας ἐν οὐρανῷ.
3. ἤκουσα τοῦ σοφοῦ, ὃς τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἔλεγεν.
4. ἀπέθανον οἱ ἀγαθοὶ στρατιῶται ὑπὸ τῶν ἀδίκων πολιτῶν.
5. οὗτοι γὰρ ἐκείνους ἀπέκτειναν λίθοις παρὰ νόμον.
6. οἱ θεοὶ ἦρχον τοῦ κόσμου.
7. οἱ ξένοι ἔβαλον τοὺς πολίτας λίθοις.
8. ὁ μὲν ποιητὴς ἔφη τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγειν. οἱ δὲ πολῖται οὐκ ἐπείσαντο
αὐτῷ. [αὐτῷ = him, dat.]
9. ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐβουλεύσασθε. [dative of time when: on, at]
10. ἔγραψας τῷ φίλῳ;
11. ἐδεξάμην τοὺς ξένους οἳ ἔφερον τὰ καλὰ δῶρα.
12. λιπεῖν μὲν Ἑλλάδα ἠθελήσαμεν· μεῖναι δὲ ἐβούλου. [Ἑλλάδα Greece,
acc.]
13. εἰς λόγους τοῖς πολίταις ἦλθον οἱ ξένοι.
14. ἐνόμισα μὲν τοῦτον τὸν ποιητὴν πλοῦτον σχεῖν· ἔσχε δὲ οὔ.
15. ἔφασαν τοὺς πολίτας παθεῖν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀδίκων λόγων.
16. οὐκ ἔκριναν· οὐ γὰρ κρίνεσθαι ἐβούλοντο.
17. τῇδε τῇ ὥρᾳ ἔλαβε τὴν χώραν.
18. τὰ παιδία ἔμαθεν ἐσθλὰ ἀπ’ ἐσθλῶν.
19. οἱ χρηστοὶ ἐπαιδεύσαντο τὰ παιδία ὑπὸ τῶν ποιητῶν.
20. οἱ μὲν ἄνθρωποι ἔθυσαν καλὰ δῶρα τοῖς θεοῖς· οὗτοι δ’ οὐκ ἤκουσαν
ἐκείνων.
21. ὁ νόμος ἔπαυσε τὸν δικαστὴν τῶν κακῶν ἔργων.
22. ἐνόμισαν γὰρ τὸν δικαστήν, ὃς δῶρα ἔλαβεν, ἄξιον εἶναι θανάτου.
23. οἱ ἀγαθοὶ ἐπίστευσαν τῇ ἀρετῇ.
24. ὁ ἥλιος ἤνεγκε τὸν βίον.
25. ἡ αἰσχρὰ ἔπεμψε κακὰ δῶρα πρὸς τὴν βασίλειαν ἣν ἀποκτεῖναι
ἐβούλετο.
26. ὁ ταμίας ἔπραξεν ἀγαθά.
27. ἀεὶ ἔφηνε τὴν ἀρετὴν ὁ σοφός.
28. αἱ μὲν ἐκεῖνά φασιν, αἱ δὲ ταῦτα.
Indirect Statement
97

Vocabulary
ἀλλά(ἀλλ’)
but, but rather
ἄλλος, ἄλλη, ἄλλο
other, another (declined like ἐκεῖνος) 
(τί ἄλλο, what else)
γε
at least (postpos., enclitic particle, 
used to emphasize a word; sometimes
attached to the word: ἔμοιγε, to me at
least. In conversation it is often to be
translated yes.)
γιγνώσκω, γνώσομαι
know (cf. γνώμη) (aor. [XII])
δή
of course, indeed, quite (postpos.
 emphatic particle)
δήπου
probably, doubtless, I presume (often with
a touch of irony) (οὐ δήπου certainly not,
is it not so)
δικαιοσύνη, -ης, ἡ
righteousness, justice
δικαίως
justly (adv. of δίκαιος)
ἀδίκως
unjustly (adv. of ἄδικος)
δοκεῖ
it seems, he/she seems (from δοκέω [XI])
(δοκοῦσι(ν) they seem; δοκεῖν to seem;
δοκεῖ μοι it seems to me)
εἶπον
said (aorist, defective vb. for present
λέγω)
μάλιστα
especially; an emphatic yes, of course
μή
not (to be further explained)
οἴομαι
think
οἷος, οἵα, οἷον
such, what a
οἷός τέ εἰμι
be able
οἷον
as, such as
οὖν
therefore, then, in fact, at all events (post-
pos. particle)
σωφροσύνη, ‑ης, ἡ
soundness of mind, discretion, moderation,
self-control
τε
and (postpos. enclitic, follows the word
it is connecting) (. . . τε . . . καίboth . . .
and; . . . τε . . . τε both . . . and)
τοιοῦτος, τοιαύτη, τοιοῦτον
such, of such a kind, such as this
χαίρω
rejoice (+ dat., rejoice in, enjoy; χαῖρε
(sg.), χαίρετε (pl.), hello)
98
Lesson IV

Exercise C (continued)
8. Translate.
1. οἱ ἄνθρωποι οὐκ ἐπιθυμοῦσι τῶν κακῶν. [‑οῦσι, 3rd pl. ending of
contract verb, ἐπιθυμέω desire, + gen.]
2. οὐκ οἴομαι τὰ κακὰ ἀγαθὰ εἶναι.
3. οἱ μὲν ἐπιθυμοῦσιν τῶν ἀγαθῶν, οἱ δὲ τῶν κακῶν.
4. εἶπεν ὁ Μένων ὅτι ἡ ἀρετή ἐστι βούλεσθαι τὰ ἀγαθά.
5. ἐνόμισε τὰ ἀγαθὰ εἶναι ὑγίειάν τε καὶ πλοῦτον.
6. οἱ ἄνθρωποι βούλονται τὰ ἀγαθὰ γενέσθαι αὐτοῖς. [γενέσθαι + dat.,
to belong. αὐτοῖς to them, dat.]
7. οὐ γιγνώσκουσι τὰ κακὰ ὅτι κακά ἐστιν.
8. ὁ ἄδικος οὐχ οἷός τε ἐστὶ πορίζεσθαι τὰ ἀγαθά. [οἷός τε εἶναι to be
able; πορίζω provide; mid. procure]
9. οὐδεὶς βούλεται κακὸς εἶναι. [οὐδείς no one]
10. ὁ ποιητὴς ἔφη τὴν ἀρετὴν εἶναι καλοῖς χαίρειν.
Vocabulary For Readings
ἄρα
then (postpositive particle, denoting
 interest or surprise)
ἆρα
an interrogative particle which leaves the
question open (need not be translated)
ἀργύριον, ἀργυρίου, τό
silver, coin
ἐγώ/ ἐμοί, μοι
I / to me (dat.)
εἴπερ
if in fact, even if, if indeed (emphatic form
of εἰ, if)
ἐπιθυμέω
set one’s heart upon (a thing), long for,
 desire (+ gen.) (contract verb [XI])
ἐπιθυμητής, ἐπιθυμητοῦ, ὁ
one who longs for; lover, follower
ἕτερος, ἑτέρα, ἕτερον
one or the other of two
ἦ
in truth (affirmative particle); is it that?
(interrogative particle)
καίπερ
even, although (usually with participles)
καλέω
call (contract verb [XI])
κινδυνεύω
run the risk, be likely to
ναί
yes
ὁμοίως
in like manner
ὅμως
still, nevertheless, all the same
ὁσίως
piously
οὐκοῦν
(not) . . . then?; therefore (interrogative)
πορίζω
bring about, provide; mid. furnish oneself
with, procure
Indirect Statement
99

πόρος, πόρου, ὁ
means of passing; way, means of achieving,
acquiring
πότερον
introduces a double question, whether
πότερον . . . ἤ
whether . . . or
σύ / σοι
you / to you (dat.)
τοίνυν
well then, well now, then (a colloquial
 particle used mostly in dialogue)
χρυσίον, χρυσίου, τό
gold, piece of gold (dimin. of χρυσός)
Reading
Selections from Plato’s Meno (77b–c; 78a–b and c–e)
Socrates (Σωκράτης) and Meno (Μένων), a young Thessalian gentleman, are
discussing the problem of whether virtue (ἀρετή) can be taught. Socrates,
disclaiming any knowledge of his own, first wants to discover what virtue
is. Because this is your first reading of connected prose, you may not grasp
everything the first time through it. Since this is a conversation, aiming at
some degree of verisimilitude, there are a number of elliptical sentences.
Pay special attention to the use of the particles.
Meno:
Δοκεῖ τοίνυν μοι, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἀρετὴ εἶναι, καθάπερ ὁ ποιητὴς
λέγει, ‘χαίρειν τε καλοῖσι καὶ δύνασθαι·’ καὶ ἐγὼ τοῦτο λέγω
ἀρετὴν, ἐπιθυμοῦντα τῶν καλῶν δυνατὸν εἶναι πορίζεσθαι.
Socrates: Ἆρα λέγεις τὸν τῶν καλῶν ἐπιθυμοῦντα ἀγαθῶν ἐπιθυμητὴν εἶναι;
Meno:
Μάλιστά γε.
[καθάπερ just as. καλοῖσι = καλοῖς. δύνασθαι to be capable (of it). ἐπιθυμοῦντα
(participle, m. acc. sg.) desiring; with τὸν the one who desires (+ gen.). δυνατὸν
εἶναι to be able (to).]
Socrates: Ἆρα ὡς ὄντων τινῶν οἳ τῶν κακῶν ἐπιθυμοῦσιν, ἑτέρων δὲ οἳ τῶν
ἀγαθῶν; οὐ πάντες, ὤριστε, δοκοῦσί σοι τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἐπιθυμεῖν;
Meno:
Οὐκ ἔμοιγε.
[ὡς ὄντων τινῶν (assuming) that there are some. . . . πάντες all (people: m. nom.
pl.). ὤριστε = ὦ ἄριστε (voc.) my good man.]
Socrates: Ἀλλά τινες τῶν κακῶν;
Meno:
Ναί.
[τινες (encl.) some (people: m./f. nom. pl.). Understand ἐπιθυμοῦσι. ναί= yes.]
Socrates: Οἰόμενοι τὰ κακὰ ἀγαθὰ εἶναι, λέγεις, ἢ καὶ γιγνώσκοντες ὅτι κακά
ἐστιν, ὅμως ἐπιθυμοῦσιν αὐτῶν;
[οἰόμενοι thinking (participle, m. nom. pl.). γιγνώσκοντες (participle, m.
nom. pl.). αὐτῶν them (gen. pl.).]
100
Lesson IV

Meno:
Ἀμφότερα ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ.
[ἀμφότερα both (things).]
Socrates: Ἦ γὰρ δοκεῖ τίς σοι, ὦ Μένων, γιγνώσκων τὰ κακὰ ὅτι κακά ἐστιν
ὅμως ἐπιθυμεῖν αὐτῶν;
Meno:
Μάλιστα.
[τις anyone (m. nom. sg.). γιγνώσκων (participle m. nom. sg.).]
Socrates: Τί ἐπιθυμεῖν λέγεις; ἦ γενέσθαι αὐτῷ;
Meno:
Γενέσθαι· τί γὰρ ἄλλο;
[γενέσθαι αὐτῷto be/belong to him (dat. of possession).]
Socrates: Ἔστιν οὖν ὅστις βούλεται ἄθλιος καὶ κακοδαίμων εἶναι;
Meno:
Οὔ μοι δοκεῖ, ὦ Σώκρατες.
[ὅστις anyone who (m. nom. sg.). ἄθλιος, -α, -ον unhappy. κακοδαίμων unlucky
(m./f. nom. sg.).]
Socrates: Οὐκ ἄρα βούλεται, ὦ Μένων, τὰ κακὰ οὐδείς, εἴπερ μὴ βούλεται
τοιοῦτος εἶναι. τί γὰρ ἄλλο ἐστὶν ἄθλιον εἶναι, ἢ ἐπιθυμεῖν τε τῶν
κακῶν καὶ κτᾶσθαι.
[Repeated negatives reinforce the negative idea. οὐδείς no one (m. nom. sg.).
κτᾶσθαι to possess (pres. inf.).]
Meno:
Κινδυνεύεις ἀληθῆ λέγειν, ὦ Σώκρατες· καὶ οὐδεὶς βούλεσθαι τὰ
κακά.
Socrates: Οὐκοῦν νῦν δὴ ἔλεγες, ὅτι ἔστιν ἡ ἀρετὴ βούλεσθαί τε τἀγαθὰ καὶ
δύνασθαι;
[ἀληθῆthe truth (true things) (n. nom./acc. pl.). οὐδεὶς understand is likely.
νῦν δὴjust now. τἀγαθά(crasis).]
Meno:
Εἶπον γάρ.
[γάρ in conversation is often equivalent to yes.]
Socrates: Τἀγαθὰ φῂς οἷόν τ’ εἶναι πορίζεσθαι ἀρετὴν εἶναι;
Meno:
Ἔγωγε.
Socrates: Ἀγαθὰ δὲ καλεῖς οὐχὶ οἷον ὑγίειάν τε καὶ πλοῦτον;
Meno:
Καὶ χρυσίον λέγω καὶ ἀργύριον κτᾶσθαι καὶ τιμὰς ἐν πόλει καὶ
ἀρχάς.
[ἐν πόλει in the city.]
Socrates: Εἶεν· χρυσίον δὲ δὴ καὶ ἀργύριον πορίζεσθαι ἀρετή ἐστιν, ὥς φησι
Μένων, ὁ τοῦ μεγάλου βασιλέως πατρικὸς ξένος. πότερον
προστιθεῖς τούτῳ τῷ πόρῳ, ὦ Μένων, τὸ δικαίως καὶ ὁσίως, ἢ οὐδέν
σοι διαφέρει, ἀλλὰ κἂν ἀδίκως τις αὐτὰ πορίζηται, ὁμοίως σὺ αὐτὰ
ἀρετὴν καλεῖς;
Meno:
Οὐ δήπου, ὦ Σώκρατες.
[εἶεν O.K., very well. τοῦ μεγάλου βασιλέως of the great king (the King of Per-
sia: gen. sg.). πατρικός hereditary, ancestral. προστιθεῖς you add to (+ dat.).
οὐδέν nothing (n. nom./acc. sg.). οὐδὲν διαφέρει it makes no difference. κἄν . . .
even if one acquires them unjustly. . . αὐτάthem.]
Indirect Statement
101

Socrates: Ἀλλὰ κακίαν.
[κακία, -ας, ἡ(opp. of ἀρετή).]
Meno:
Πάντως δήπου.
[πάντως absolutely, altogether.]
Socrates: Δεῖ ἄρα, ὡς ἔοικε, τούτῳ τῷ πόρῳ δικαιοσύνην ἢ σωφροσύνην ἢ
ὁσιότητα προσεῖναι, ἢ ἄλλο τι μόριον ἀρετῆς· εἰ δὲ μή, οὐκ ἔσται
ἀρετή, καίπερ ἐκπορίζουσα τἀγαθά.
[δεῖit is necessary + inf. ὡς ἔοικε as it seems. ὁσιότητα piety (acc. sg.).
προσεῖναι, inf. of πρόσειμι be added to, belong to. ἄλλο τι μόριον some other part.
εἰ δὲ μὴbut if not, otherwise. ἐκπορίζουσα acquiring (f. nom. sg.).]
Σύνταξις γὰρ ἐμοὶ καὶ θάνατον παρέχει.
Syntax is the death of me.
—Palladas
Meno and Mathematics
Plato’s early dialogues make frequent use of mathematical examples. In the
Meno, Socrates tries to demonstrate his contention that knowledge is innate
in humans and that what we seem to be learning is really remembering. To
do this he questions a young slave from Meno’s household, who has no
formal schooling, about a geometrical problem. Socrates draws a square
(τετράγωνον χωρίον) in the dirt.
Then he draws lines that go through the middle of each side.
He asks the slave how to make a square that is double the size of the smaller
square and the boy suggests doubling the length of the smaller square’s sides.
But the larger square (the length of whose sides is double that of the smaller
squares) clearly contains four squares equal in size, making it four times
(τετράκις) the size of the smaller square.
102
Lesson IV

Finally, having demonstrated the boy’s ignorance, Socrates draws a line
from corner to corner (γράμμη ἐκ γωνίας εἰς γωνίαν) called a diagonal (διάμετρον)
which cuts the first square in half. The square of this diagonal will produce a
square that is half the size of the larger square and therefore twice the size of
the smaller square. The young slave agrees to the truth of this demonstration.
Q.E.D. or not? That part is trickier because Socrates is trying to prove that the
boy’s new understanding comes, not from anything Socrates has taught him,
but from recovering knowledge he already had.
Put another way, the proof amounts to the Pythagorean theorem: in any
right triangle, the area of the square whose side is the hypotenuse is equal to
the sum of the areas of the squares on the other two sides. Besides their interest
in mathematics, Pythagoras and Plato shared a belief in metem psychosis or
transmigration of souls.
Indirect Statement
103


LESSON V
Third Declension
In this lesson you will learn the third declension, and complete the major patterns
of nouns.
105
THIRD DECLENSION NOUNS
The third declension presents some difficulties because of the variety of base
endings, which bring about some variations in the declension. Familiarity
will resolve the difficulties.
The endings given below are added to the base of the noun, which is usu-
ally found by removing the ‑ος ending from the genitive singular, which is
always given in the vocabulary. If you learn these basic endings thoroughly,
the variations will make more sense. It is now more important than ever to
learn both nominative and genitive, as the pattern which a word is to follow
is only clear if both forms are known. The base is often not complete in the
nominative.
m. and f.
n.
Sg.
variable; often ‑ς
N
base
‑ος
G
‑ος
‑ῐ
D
‑ῐ
-ᾰ [or ‑ν]
A
same as nom.
(like nom. or base)
V
same as nom.
Pl.
‑ες
N
‑ᾰ
‑ων
G
‑ων
‑σῐ(ν)
D
‑σῐ(ν)
‑ᾰς
A
‑ᾰ
For convenience in teaching and learning, we divide the third declension nouns
into consonant bases and vowel bases. 

Third Declension Consonant Bases
The examples below show some of the more common types of consonant
bases. Look at each example, then consult the notes about it.
The accent of these nouns is usually persistent, but monosyllabic bases ac-
cent the ultima in the genitive and dative, singular and plural (e.g., κλώψ, base
κλωπ‑, gen. sg. κλωπός, dat. sg. κλωπί, gen. pl. κλωπῶν, dat. pl. κλωψί).
Labial
Palatal
Dental (1)
Dental (2)
ὁ κλώψ
ἡ κύλιξ
ἡ ἐλπίς
ὁ/ἡ ὄρνις
κλωπ‑
κυλικ‑
ἐλπιδ‑
ὀρνιθ‑
Base
thief
drinking cup
hope
bird
Sg.
N
κλώψ
κύλιξ
ἐλπίς
ὄρνις
G
κλωπός
κύλικος
ἐλπίδος
ὄρνιθος
D
κλωπί
κύλικι
ἐλπίδι
ὄρνιθι
A
κλῶπα
κύλικα
ἐλπίδα
ὄρνιν
V
κλώψ
κύλιξ
ἐλπί
ὄρνι
Pl.
N
κλῶπες
κύλικες
ἐλπίδες
ὄρνιθες
G
κλωπῶν
κυλίκων
ἐλπίδων
ὀρνίθων
D
κλωψί
κύλιξι
ἐλπίσι
ὄρνισι
A
κλῶπας
κύλικας
ἐλπίδας
ὄρνιθας
Rules
1, 2
1, 2
1, 2, 4
1, 2, 4
ν‑base
‑οντ‑
Neuter dental
ὁ/ἡ δαίμων
ὁ ἄρχων
τὸ ὄνομα
δαιμον‑
ἀρχοντ‑
ὀνοματ‑
Base
divinity
ruler
name
Sg.
N
δαίμων
ἄρχων
ὄνομα
G
δαίμονος
ἄρχοντος
ὀνόματος
D
δαίμονι
ἄρχοντι
ὀνόματι
A
δαίμονα
ἄρχοντα
ὄνομα
V
δαῖμον
ἄρχον
Pl.
N
δαίμονες
ἄρχοντες
ὀνόματα
G
δαιμόνων
ἀρχόντων
ὀνομάτων
D
δαίμοσι
ἄρχουσι
ὀνόμασι
A
δαίμονας
ἄρχοντας
ὀνόματα
Rules
2, 3
2, 3
2, 3
Notes on the Consonant Bases
1. ‑ς is the nominative singular ending of masculine and feminine
nouns of the third declension except those with the base ending in ν,
ρ, or ‑οντ‑.
106
Lesson V

2. ‑ς of the nominative and ‑σι of the dative plural cause the same or-
thographic changes as in the futures and first aorists of verbs, that is:
a. A labial (π, β, φ) + σ  ψ (e.g., κλώψ, base κλωπ‑, dat. pl. κλωψί).
b. A palatal (κ, γ, χ) + σ  ξ (e.g., κύλιξ, base κυλικ‑, dat. pl. κύλιξι).
c. A dental (τ, δ, θ) is dropped before ‑σ‑ (e.g., ἐλπίς, base ἐλπιδ‑,
dat. pl. ἐλπίσι; ὄρνις, base ὀρνιθ‑, dat. pl. ὄρνισι). (Cf. also the neuter
plural nouns of the ὄνομα type: base ὀνοματ‑, dat. pl. ὀνόμασι.) ‑οντ‑
bases have ‑ουσι in the dative plural, for ‑οντσι: both ν and τ are
dropped before ‑σ‑, and the base vowel is lengthened to compen-
sate for the loss of two consonants: ο is lengthened to ου.
3. To form the nominative of bases in ν, ρ, σ, and ‑οντ‑, no σ is added,
but the last vowel is lengthened to form the nominative:
Nominative
Base
δαίμων
δαιμον‑
ἄρχων
ἀρχοντ‑
ῥήτωρ
ῥητορ‑
Note that ν, ρ, and σ are the only consonants which can end a word
in Greek. So, τ is dropped from the ‑οντ‑ type for the nominative sin-
gular, e.g., ἄρχων, base ἀρχοντ‑; and from the ‑ατος (genitive) type of
neuter nouns, as ὄνομα, ὀνόματος: base ὀνοματ‑.
4. The accusative singular ending is usually ‑α for consonant bases,
both masculine and feminine, but ‑ν is used for dental bases if the
dental is preceded by an unaccented ι or υ (in which case, the dental
is dropped from the acc. singular):
Nom.
Base
Acc. sg.
Accent on -ι-
ἐλπίς
ἐλπιδ‑
ἐλπίδα
yes
BUT:
ὄρνις
ὀρνιθ‑
ὄρνιν
no
χάρις
χαριτ‑
χάριν
no
This will be easier to remember if you are in the habit of pronounc-
ing the words aloud.
There are a number of other types of third declension consonant
base nouns, but the ones given are the most common and will be suf-
ficient for now.
Exercise A
1. Parse and give form of article to agree with each.
1. κλῶπα
6. ἐλπίδα
11. ὄνομα
2. ὀνόματι
7. ἄρχοντι
12. δαίμοσι
3. ἄρχοντος
8. κύλικος
13. ἄρχουσι
4. δαίμονες
9. ἐλπίσι
14. ῥήτορες
5. ὄρνιν
10. ὄρνιθος
15. κλωπῶν
Third Declension Nouns
107

2. Decline with the article.
1. θεράπων, θεράποντος ὁ
attendant
2. ἀσπίς, ἀσπίδος, ἡ
shield
3. θαῦμα, θαύματος, τό
marvel
4. χάρις, χάριτος, ἡ
grace
5. νύξ, νυκτός, ἡ
night
6. ὕδωρ, ὕδατος, τό
water
7. Ἕλλην, Ἕλληνος, ὁ
Greek
Third Declension Vowel Bases
neuters in ‑ος:
‑ευς nouns
‑ι or ‑υ bases
‑εσ‑ base
ὁ βασιλεύς
ἡ πόλις
τὸ ἄστυ
τὸ γένος
king
city
town
race
Sg.
N
βασιλεύς
πόλις
ἄστυ
γένος
G
βασιλέως
πόλεως
ἄστεως
γένους
D
βασιλεῖ
πόλει
ἄστει
γένει
A
βασιλέα
πόλιν
ἄστυ
γένος
V
βασιλεῦ
πόλι
Pl. 
N
βασιλεῖς /‑ῆς
πόλεις
ἄστη
γένη
G
βασιλέων
πόλεων
ἄστεων
γενῶν
D
βασιλεῦσι
πόλεσι
ἄστεσι
γένεσι
A
βασιλέας
πόλεις
ἄστη
γένη
Syncopated Nouns
ὁ πατήρ father
ὁ ἀνήρ man
Sg.
Pl.
Sg.
Pl.
N
πατήρ
πατέρες
ἀνήρ
ἄνδρες
G
πατρός
πατέρων
ἀνδρός
ἀνδρῶν
D
πατρί
πατράσι
ἀνδρί
ἀνδράσι
A
πατέρα
πατέρας
ἄνδρα
ἄνδρας
V
πάτερ
ἄνερ
Declined like πατήρ are: ἡ μήτηρ, μητρός mother; ἡ θυγάτηρ, θυγατρός daughter;
and ἡ γαστήρ, γαστρός belly.
Notes for Vowel Bases and Syncopated Nouns
1. ‑ευς nouns
a. all nouns of this type are masculine
b. ‑υ‑ (of ‑ευς) drops out before a vowel (i.e., in all cases except
nominative and vocative singular and dative plural)
108
Lesson V

c. ‑ως in the genitive singular instead of ‑oς
d. ε + ε contracts to ‑ει (in nom. pl., thus ‑εις; the ‑ης form was,
however, more common until 350 B.C.E.)
2. ‑ι and ‑υ bases
a. bases in ι and υ have ε in place of ι or υ in all cases except nom-
inative, accusative, and vocative singular
b. ‑ως in genitive singular (for ‑ος)
c. masculines and feminines have ‑εις in nominative and accusative
plural (the accusative ending is borrowed from the nominative).
Neuters have ‑η for ‑εα in nominative and accusative plural.
d. accent of gen. in ‑εως is explained by transfer of quantity from
‑ηος
3. Neuters in ‑ος originally had base in ‑εσ‑: γένος, original base
γενεσ‑
a. ‑σ‑ between two vowels drops out
b. contraction occurs: ε + ο becomes ου; ε + α becomes η
Sg.
N
γένος
G
[γένεσος 

γένεος]

γένους
D
[γένεσι

γένε‑ι]

γένει
A
γένος
Pl.
N
[γένεσα

γένε‑α]

γένη
G
[γενέσων

γενέων]

γενῶν
D
[γένεσ‑σι]

γένεσι
A
[γένεσα

γένε‑α]

γένη
4. Syncopated nouns
a. drop ε of base in genitive and dative singular and dative plural
(μήτηρ, base μητερ‑, gen. sg. μητρός, dat. sg. μητρί, dat. pl. μητράσι)
b. dative plural in ‑ασι (πατράσι, μητράσι, θυγατράσι, γαστράσι,
ἀνδράσι)
c. ἀνήρ drops ‑ε and inserts δ in all cases but nom. and voc. sin-
gular (i.e., decline as if the base were ἀνδρ‑)
You are not expected to memorize these notes. Their purpose is to
help you make sense of the patterns by pointing out the similarities
and differences among them. Your time is better spent practicing the
nouns themselves.
Exercise A (continued)
3. Decline.
1. ἱππεύς, ἱππέως, ὁ
horseman
2. τέλος, τέλους, τό
end
3. θυγάτηρ, θυγατρός, ἡ
daughter
4. ὄψις, ὄψεως, ἡ
vision
5. ἱερεύς, ἱερέως, ὁ
priest
6. ἔτος, ἔτους, τό
year
Third Declension Nouns
109

Vocabulary
Learn the words marked with an asterisk (*) first and study the others for
recognition. Irregularities in declension or accent are noted.
Nouns and Verbs Derived from Nouns
*ἀνήρ, ἀνδρός, ὁ
man, husband (polyandry)
*ἄρχων, ἄρχοντος, ὁ
archon, ruler
ἀσπίς, ἀσπίδος, ἡ
shield (aspidistra)
*ἄστυ, ἄστεως, τό
city, town (Astyanax)
*βασιλεύς, βασιλέως, ὁ
king (Basil)
*γένος, γένους, τό
race, birth (genealogy, genesis)
*γέρων, γέροντος, ὁ
old man (geriatrics) (γέρον, voc. sg.)
*γυνή, γυναικός, ἡ
woman, wife (gynecocracy)
*δαίμων, δαίμονος, ὁ
divinity (eudaemonism)
δράκων, δράκοντος, ὁ
snake, serpent (Draco, a constellation)
ἔθνος, ἔθνους, τό
nation, tribe (ethnic)
ἔθος, ἔθους, τό
custom (ethics) (also ἦθος)
εἰκών, εἰκόνος, ἡ
image (icon)
*Ἑλλάς, Ἑλλάδος, ἡ
Greece (Hellas)
Ἕλλην, Ἕλληνος, ὁ
Greek (man) (Hellenic, Hellene)
Ἑλληνίς, Ἑλληνίδος, ἡ
Greek (woman)
*ἐλπίς, ἐλπίδος, ἡ
hope
ἔπος, ἔπους, τό
word (epic)
*ἔτος, ἔτους, τό
year (Etesian)
θαῦμα, θαύματος, τό
marvel (thaumaturgy, thaumatology),
τὰ θαύματα
magic tricks
θαυμάζω
wonder at
*θεράπων, θεράποντος, ὁ
attendant, servant (therapeutic)
θεραπεύω
wait on, attend, serve, treat, tend
*θυγατήρ, θυγατρός, ἡ
daughter
ἱερεύς, ἱερέως, ὁ
priest (hieratic, hierarchy)
ἱππεύς, ἱππέως, ὁ
horseman, knight
ἵππος, ἵππου, ὁ
horse
*κάλλος, κάλλους, τό
beauty (from καλός; calligraphy)
κέρδος, κέρδους, τό
gain, profit
*κῆρυξ, κήρυκος, ὁ
herald (kerygma)
*κλέος, τό
fame, glory (only nom. & acc.)
κλώψ, κλωπός, ὁ
thief
κλέπτω
steal
κτῆμα, κτήματος, τό
possession
κύλιξ, κύλικος, ἡ
drinking cup (kylix)
110
Lesson V

λέων, λέοντος, ὁ
lion (Leo) (λέον, voc. sg.)
μάθημα, μαθήματος, τό
lesson, learning, knowledge (mathematics,
polymath)
*μαθητής, μαθητοῦ, ὁ
learner, pupil, disciple (cf. ἔμαθον, aorist of
μανθάνω)
μάντις, μάντεως, ὁ/ἡ
seer (praying mantis, mantic)
*μέρος, μέρους, τό
part (isomer)
*μήτηρ, μητρός, ἡ
mother (metropolis)
νύξ, νυκτός, ἡ
night (Mod. Gk. καληνύχτα; nyctophobe)
ὀδούς, ὀδόντος, ὁ
tooth (orthodontist)
ὄμμα, ὄμματος, τό
eye (ommatophore)
*ὄνομα, ὀνόματος, τό
name, noun (onomatopoeia, -onym words)
ὀνομάζω
name, call by name
ὄρνις, ὄρνιθος, ὁ/ἡ
bird (ornithology)
ὄρος, ὄρους, τό
mountain (orogeny, orology)
*πάθος, πάθους, τό
experience, suffering (pathos, pathology) 
(cf. ἔπαθον, aorist of πάσχω)
*παῖς, παιδός, ὁ/ἡ
child, slave (orthopedics, pediatrics) 
(gen. pl. παίδων, voc. sg. παῖ)
*πατήρ, πατρός, ὁ
father (patronymic)
*πατρίς, πατρίδος, ἡ
native land, country
πνεῦμα, πνεύματος, τό
breath, breeze (pneumonia)
τὸ ἅγιον πνεῦμα
the Holy Spirit
*πόλις, πόλεως, ἡ
city-state (politics)
*πούς, ποδός, ὁ
foot (tripod, Oedipus)
*πρᾶγμα, πράγματος, τό
deed, affair, thing (pragmatism) (cf. πράττω,
stem πραγ‑)
πῦρ, πυρός, τό
fire (pyromaniac) (pl. τὰ πυρά, dat. πυροῖς:
declined in 2nd decl., watch fires)
ῥήτωρ, ῥήτορος, ὁ
orator (rhetoric)
στόμα, στόματος, τό
mouth (stomatopod)
*σῶμα, σώματος, τό
body (psychosomatic)
τεῖχος, τείχους, τό
wall (teichoscopy)
*τέλος, τέλους, τό
end (teleology) (acc. as adv., τέλος finally)
τυραννίς, τυραννίδος, ἡ
tyranny
τύραννος, τυράννου, ὁ
tyrant
*ὕδωρ, ὕδατος, τό
water (dehydrated)
υἱός, υἱοῦ, ὁ
son
φύλαξ, φύλακος, ὁ
watchman (phylacteries)
*χάρις, χάριτος, ἡ
grace, favor (charisma) (acc. sg. χάριν)
*χείρ, χειρός, ἡ
hand (chiropractor) (dat. pl. χερσί)
*χρῆμα, χρήματος, τό
thing, pl. money (chrematheism)
Third Declension Nouns
111

Adverbs and Conjunctions
ἔτι
still, yet, besides (adv.)
ὅτι
that (conj.); because
οὕτως
in this way, thus, so (οὕτω, before consonants)
ὡς
as (rel. adv.)
ὥσπερ
just as, even as (adv.)
Vocabulary Notes
1. ἀνήρ man, corresponds to the Latin vir (as ἄνθρωπος is the equiv -
alent of homo). Ἄνθρωπος means man in the sense of human being, or
man as opposed to animals, but ἀνήρ is primarily used of man as op-
posed to woman, or man as opposed to the gods (cf. Homer’s epithet
for Zeus, πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε). Usually ἀνήρ is a man in the prime
of life rather than a youth (Xenophon gives the ages of man as παῖς,
μειράκιον, ἀνήρ, πρεσβύτης: i.e., child, youth, man, elder).
2. ἄρχων is the participle of ἄρχω (see Lesson VII on participles),
used as a noun, one who rules, ruler, chief, commander, etc. As an offi-
cial title, it meant one of the chief magistrates at Athens, οἱ ἐννέα
ἄρχοντες (the nine archons). Archons were also found in most states of
central Greece, and the term generally refers to the highest office of
the state. In Athens at first there were three ἄρχοντες, ὁ (ἄρχων)
βασιλεύς, ὁ Ἄρχων (or ὁ ἄρχων ἐπώνυμος), and ὁ πολέμαρχος, who
were elected yearly; and later their number was increased to nine
(the other six being called θεσμοθέται, lawgivers). In 487 B.C.E. they
began to be chosen by lot, and at this time seem to have lost any real
political power and to have become administrators merely; at this
time, the elected στρατηγοί(generals) became the most important of-
ficials. The ἄρχων ἐπώνυμος (eponymous) gave his name to the year:
from 683 B.C.E. on, a continuous list of the archons was kept, by
which the year was referred to (e.g., ἄρχοντος Ἀθήνησι Δαμασίου, when
Damasias was archon at Athens, that is, in the year 582 B.C.E.). The Ar-
chon remained the nominal head of the state even after 487. The
ἄρχων βασιλεύς seems to have had primarily religious duties, and the
πολέμαρχος, though originally head of military affairs, later per-
formed only judicial and sacrificial functions.
3. δαίμων: it is hard to give an exact definition of the word δαίμων,
perhaps because even in antiquity it was a vague term, used in dif-
ferent ways by different writers. It can be applied to one of the great
gods, but more usually corresponds to divine power, not exactly as
an abstract idea but rather in its specific manifestations to men; the
word θεός on the other hand refers to a god in person. Sometimes
the word δαίμων comes near to meaning fate (as in κατὰ δαίμονα by
chance). And more particularly it may refer to the destiny of an indi-
vidual, his fortune or lot (as in δαίμονα δώσω I will give [you your] fate,
that is, I will kill you, from the Iliad). The poet Hesiod (whose works
112
Lesson V

along with those of Homer are sometimes considered the Bible for the
ancient Greeks because Hesiod organized the myths about the origin
of the gods and the ages of man) tells us that δαίμονες are the souls
of men of the Golden Age acting as protective deities.
For Plato and other philosophers, the δαίμονες had a more exact
position in the universe. Being intermediate in nature, between gods
and men, they had an intermediate dwelling place, in the air between
heaven and earth. To the philosophers (though not to the poets, to be
sure!) a god had to be morally perfect. This was a major bone of con-
tention between the two, that the poets depicted the gods as being
even more wicked than men (and enjoying it more); and this was one
reason Plato considered the poets corrupting influences and would
ban them from his ideal state. But though a god must be perfect, a
δαίμων need not be so, and thus many later philosophers used δαίμονες
to explain certain difficulties in the moral order and to help them to a
solution of the problem of evil. Ancient stories about amorous, cruel,
and vindictive behavior on the part of the divinities could be trans-
ferred to δαίμονες and not to genuine gods. Late Greek philosophy,
particularly Neoplatonism, contained a large admixture of magic: real
gods could not be influenced by sorcerers, but maybe δαίμονες could
be; anyway it would not hurt to try. To the Olympians, these spirits
were both good and evil, but to the Christians, since they were rivals
to their one God, they became all bad, hence our demons are devils.
4. Word formation: we have now had a number of words derived
from παῖς, παιδ‑: παιδίον, παιδίου, τόlittle child, is the diminutive of
παῖς, the ending ‑ιον being the most common diminutive ending.
Παιδεύω (teach, educate) bring up a child, is a denominative verb, i.e.,
derived from a noun, as the ‑ευω ending indicates. Other examples
are βουλεύω from βουλή; βασιλεύω be king, from βασιλεύς; πιστεύω
from πίστις. Παίδευμα, παιδεύματος that which is taught (can mean
 either a pupil or a lesson), is derived from παιδεύω, with the suffix
‑μα (‑ματ‑) added, denoting the result of an action. E.g., πρᾶγμα act,
from πράττω, stem πραγ‑, do; μάθημα from μαθ‑, root and aorist stem
of μανθάνω learn.
5. πόλις and ἄστυ: the territory of a πόλις included both the town and
the country, what we call the city-state. The center of the government
is in the town, and the surrounding country is politically, economi-
cally, and militarily dependent upon it, and is called after it. Ἄστυ is
the actual city or town as opposed to the ἀγρός (the country), both of
which make up the πόλις. The Athenians used the word ἄστυ as the
city, that is Athens, just as the Romans used urbs to mean Rome. Some-
times πόλις is used more specifically to mean πόλις ἄκρη (or ἀκρόπολις),
that is, the fortified part of the city, or citadel; while the lower town is
called ἄστυ. But usually when ἄστυ and πόλις are used together, the
former is the town in the material sense, buildings and so forth, while
πόλις is the citizen body. (Who among the populace were actually cit-
izens depended on the constitution of the particular state.)
Third Declension Nouns
113

6. τυραννίς: tyranny is a form of government in which the sovereignty
is obtained by force or fraud, rather than by legitimate succession.
Aeschylus in Prometheus Bound speaks of the tyranny of Zeus, ἡ Διὸς
τυραννίς, because Zeus had seized the throne by violence, and his rule
is furthermore given all the characteristics of a tyranny in the worst
sense: might makes right, and justice is only for the strong. But the orig-
inal tyrants (τύραννοι), who usurped the power in many oligarchic
city-states (πόλεις) throughout Greece in the seventh and sixth cen-
turies B.C.E. (during what is called the age of tyrants), generally brought
improvement to their states. Sometimes tyranny was a step toward
democracy, because the early tyrants came to power through politi-
cal and economic championship of the lower classes, opposing the
feudal rule of the nobles. The first tyrants did not change the consti-
tutions but, as a rule, used the laws and institutions they had received
as instruments of their own policy: their major contributions lay in
economic modernization. They also contributed to culture, attracting
the great musicians, painters, poets, and philosophers to their courts.
Of course there is a danger inherent in tyranny, because the absolute
ruler is potentially unlimited by law or constitution, and so there is
no appeal beyond the man in power: everything depends upon the
character of the tyrant. It is noteworthy that most tyrannies did not
last beyond the second generation. (There is a story, no doubt apoc-
ryphal but amusing nevertheless, that Thales the philosopher, when
asked what was the strangest thing he had ever seen, replied, “γέροντα
τύραννον” an old tyrant.) The bad sense of the word tyranny was
 attached to it by the Athenian philosophers of the fifth and fourth
centuries, especially Plato, who considered it the worst form of gov-
ernment, and finally by the later tyrants (especially the Syracusan dy-
nasty) who proved that Plato was right. Thus, like the word δαίμων,
which for religious reasons has given us demon, τυραννίς for philo-
sophical and political reasons has deteriorated from a technical word
for monarchy (whether good or bad) obtained through extra-legal means
into tyranny, a wicked and despotic rule.
Exercise B
1. Go over the vocabulary and determine to which paradigm (if any) each
noun conforms.
114
Lesson V

2. Parse the following, giving the proper form of the article.
1. τυραννίδα
20. γένει
39. ἐλπίδι
58. πόλιν
2. ἀσπίσι
21. ἔθνη
40. βασιλεῖς
59. τυραννίδες
3. ἱερέως
22. Ἑλλάδι
41. κήρυξιν
60. ὄρνιθος
4. γύναι
23. θαύματα
42. γένεσι
61. πρᾶγμα
5. ἄνδρας
24. ἔτει
43. πόλεων
62. ῥήτορες
6. ἄστυ
25. θεράποντος
44. μαθητοῦ
63. πάθη
7. πατέρες
26. ἄστει
45. ἄνδρας
64. χάριν
8. γένους
27. ἐλπίδα
46. δαιμόνων
65. πατρίδα
9. χερσί
28. θυγάτηρ
47. μάντιν
66. πυρός
10. τέλους
29. ἀνδρῶν
48. ἔθους
67. πνεύματα
11. βασιλέα
30. ἱερεῦσι
49. θυγατράσι
68. τεῖχος
12. γυναιξί
31. κάλλος
50. μητρός
69. χάριτος
13. δαίμονι
32. κλῶπα
51. νυκτί
70. ὄρνιν
14. γέρουσιν
33. γένη
52. ὀνόμασιν
71. χειρός
15. ἀνδρί
34. κύλικι
53. πυρά
72. χρήματα
16. ἄρχοντες
35. ἀνδράσι
54. μαθηταί
73. πῦρ
17. βασιλέας
36. μέρους
55. πατρί
74. ὕδατι
18. πατράσι
37. κέρδους
56. παισί
75. παίδων
19. ἀσπίδα
38. γυναῖκα
57. πάθει
3. Translate.
1. οὐκ ἔστιν ὑγίεια ἐν τυραννίδι.
2. κήρυκες ἦσαν οἱ ἄγγελοι οἱ τῶν θεῶν καὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν.
3. ὁ στρατιώτης ἀπέβαλε τὴν ἀσπίδα, οὐ γὰρ χρηστὴ ἦν.
4. ἔφη ὁ ποιητὴς τὸν νόμον εἶναι τὸν πάντων βασιλέα. [πάντων of all]
5. ὁ δὲ σοφὸς ἔφη πόλεμον εἶναι πάντων βασιλέα.
6. ὁ πονηρὸς λέγεται ἄρχων τοῦ κόσμου τούτου.
7. οἱ στρατηγοὶ ἦσαν ἄνθρωποι, οὐ δὲ ἄνδρες.
8. Ζεύς ἐστι πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε.
9. ἤλθομεν τότε ἐξ ἄστεως εἰς θάλατταν.
10. ὁ παῖς ἐστι Ἕλλην γένος. [γένος by birth]
11. ἀθάνατον τὸ τῶν θεῶν γένος.
12. τῶν γερόντων ἔργον ἐστὶ συμβουλεύειν. [συμβουλεύειν to advise]
13. τί τῶν βασιλέων ἔργον ἐστίν; [τίwhat?]
14. οὐ θεοὶ μέν, οὐκ ἄνθρωποι δὲ οἱ δαίμονες.
15. σὺν δαίμονι ἕξομεν εἰρήνην.
16. τοὺς λόγους τοὺς ἐκείνων τῶν ἀνδρῶν εἰς ὕδωρ γράψω.
17. λεγέται ὁ Ζεὺς εἶναι βασιλεὺς τῶν θεῶν τε καὶ τῶν δαιμόνων.
18. περὶ τῆς ψυχῆς οὐκ ἐλπίδας εἶχεν ὁ κακὸς ἀνήρ.
19. ἐλπίς ἐστί μοι σχήσειν τὰ χρήματα. [μοι to me]
20. ἔτος εἰς ἔτος οἱ ἄνδρες ἀποκτείνουσιν ἄνδρας.
21. τοὺς ποιητάς φασι θεράποντας εἶναι Μουσῶν.
22. θεράποντες τῶν θεῶν οἱ ἱερεῖς, οἳ θύουσι καὶ χάριν φέρουσι τοῖς θεοῖς
καὶ ταῖς θεαῖς.
Third Declension Nouns
115

23. ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἀνὴρ οὔποτε βούλεται ἐκ πονηροῦ πράγματος κέρδος
λαβεῖν.
24. κέρδος ἐστί μοι μανθάνειν τοὺς τῶν σοφῶν λόγους.
25. ἡ ἀρετὴ λέγεται κάλλος τῆς ψυχῆς.
26. τὸ ταύτης τῆς γυναικὸς κλέος εἰς οὐρανὸν ἔρχεται.
27. ἐκ μικρῶν ἔργων ἔρχεται μικρὸν κλέος.
28. ὁ χρόνος κλώψ ἐστι τῶν ἐν βίῳ ἀγαθῶν.
29. τούτῳ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ὄνομά ἐστιν Οὖτις. [οὔτις no one; as a name, ac-
cented Οὖτις]
30. ὁ ἀγαθὸς οὐκ ἐβούλετο μαθεῖν τὰ τῶν πονηρῶν ἤθη.
31. βιβλίον ἀγαθόν ἐστι κτῆμα εἰς ἀεί.
32. ἡ ἡμέρα ἐστὶν ἡ τῆς νυκτὸς θυγάτηρ.
33. λέγει ἡ μάντις τὴν τῶν θεῶν καὶ δαιμόνων βουλήν.
34. οἱ γὰρ δαίμονες λέγουσι διὰ τοῦ στόματος τοῦ τῆς μάντεως, ἣ μόνη
ἀκούει τοὺς τῶν δαιμόνων λόγους, καὶ μανθάνει.
35. ὁ παῖς τῆς νυκτός ἐστὶν ὕπνος.
36. ἡ πόλις ἐστὶν οἱ ἄνδρες καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες καὶ οἱ παῖδες.
37. τέλος δὲ εἰς τὴν κοινὴν πατρίδα πάντες ἐλευσόμεθα.
38. πρᾶγμά ἐστί μοι ἀρετὴν μανθάνειν.
39. ἔφη ὁ ποιητὴς τὸ ὕδωρ εἶναι ποταμοῦ σῶμα, καὶ τὸν ἥλιον εἶναι πῦρ
ἀθάνατον.
40. ὅδε ὁ ἀνὴρ βουλεύεται τυραννίδα, φύλακας γὰρ ἔχειν τοῦ σώματος
βούλεται. ἥδε ἡ γυνὴ τοὺς τυράννους ἀπέκτεινεν, ἐβούλετο γὰρ τὴν
τυραννίδα παύειν.
4. Translate into Greek.
1. The poets say that heralds are the servants of men and gods.
2. The divinities are children of the gods.
3. They bring both good and evil to men and women.
4. The birds wished to become divinities, for they wished to receive
gifts.
5. In a tyranny the city is not ruled by an archon.
6. The good father and mother want their child to learn virtue.
7. On account of money evils come into being.
8. The whole world is the native land of the wise and good man.
9. An old man wants to listen to an old man and a child [wants to lis-
ten to] a child.
10. Was it profitable [i.e., a gain, ex. 3.24] for that man to kill his father?
Readings
1. Θουκυδίδης Ἀθηναῖος συνέγραψε τὸν πόλεμον τῶν Πελοποννησίων καὶ
Ἀθηναίων.
—Thucydides 
[συνέγραψε = σύν + γράφω (put together in writing). Opening sentence, His-
tory of the Peloponnesian War.]
116
Lesson V

2. ἦν Λακεδαιμόνιος Χίλων σοφός, ὃς τάδ’ ἔλεξε· μηδὲν ἄγαν· καιρῷ πάντα
πρόσεστι καλά.
—Quoted in Diogenes Laertius
[Lacedaemonian is another name for Spartan. μηδὲν ἄγαν nothing in excess.
καιρός, -οῦ, ὁthe proper time. πρόσεστι belongs to (πρός + ἐστί). πάντα all things
(n. nom./acc. pl.).]
3. πρὸς υἱὸν ὀργὴν οὐκ ἔχει χρηστὸς πατήρ.
—Menander 
[ὀργή, -ῆς, ἡanger.]
4. διὰ τὴν τῶν χρημάτων κτῆσιν πάντες οἱ πόλεμοι ἡμῖν γίγνονται.
—Plato
[κτῆσις, -εως, ἡ possession. πάντες all (m. nom. pl.). ἡμῖν to us (dat. pl.).]
5. τοῦ πατρὸς τὸ παιδίον.
—Greek Proverb 
[“A chip off the old block.”]
6. ἄνδρες γὰρ πόλις, καὶ οὐ τείχη, οὐδὲ νῆες ἀνδρῶν κεναί.
—Thucydides
[νῆες ships (f. nom. pl. of ναῦς). κενός, -ή, -όν empty (+ gen.).]
7. γέρων γέροντι γλῶσσαν ἡδίστην ἔχει.
—Greek Comic Fragment
[ἥδιστος, -η, -ον sweetest.]
8. δὶς παῖδες οἱ γέροντες.
—Menander
[δίς twice.]
9. ἀνὴρ γάρ ἄνδρα καὶ πόλις σῴζει πόλιν.
—Menander
[σῴζω save.]
10. βίου δικαίου γίνεται τέλος καλόν.
—Menander
[γίνεται = γίγνεται.]
11. κοὔτε τις ἄγγελος οὔτε τις ἱππεῦς ἄστυ τὸ Περσῶν ἀφικνεῖται.
—Aeschylus, The Persians
[κοὔτε = καὶ οὔτε. τις any. ἀφικνεῖται arrives at, reaches (3rd sg., contract verb
[XI]).]
12. Εἴ τι λαλεῖς, τοῦτο διὰ τοῦ στόματός σου διέρχεται· ἅμαξαν δὲ λαλεῖς·
ἅμαξα ἄρα διὰ τοῦ στόματός σου διέρχεται.
—Diogenes Laertius (quoting a paradox of Chrysippus)
[διέρχεται from διά + ἔρχομαι. ἅμαξα, -ης, ἡwagon. τι anything; λαλεῖς you
talk of (+ acc.). σου of you, your. ἄρα therefore.]
Third Declension Nouns
117

13. καὶ ταῦτα μὲν δὴ νυκτὸς εἰσιδεῖν λέγω.
—Aeschylus, 
[εἰσιδεῖν to see (aor. inf.). νυκτός during the night.]
14. ἀνδρὸς χαρακτὴρ ἐκ λόγου γνωρίζεται.
—Menander
[γνωρίζω make known.]
15. ἀνάγκη γάρ ἐστι καὶ βουλεύεσθαι καὶ λέγειν ἡμᾶς ἐν βουλῇ καὶ δήμῳ ἢ
περὶ ἱερῶν ἢ περὶ νόμων ἢ περὶ τῆς πολιτικῆς κατασκευῆς, ἢ περὶ τῶν πρὸς
ἄλλας πόλεις συμμαχιῶν καὶ συμβολαίων ἢ περὶ πολέμων ἢ περὶ εἰρήνης ἢ περὶ
πόρου χρημάτων.
—pseudo-Aristotle, Rhetoric to Alexander
[ἡμᾶς us (acc., subj. of inf.). δῆμος the popular assembly. ἱερός holy. τὰ ἱερά
offerings, rites. κατασκεύη construction, condition. συμμαχία, ἡalliance.
συμβόλαιον mark, contract. πόρος way, means, revenue.]
16. κρίνει φίλους ὁ καιρός, ὡς χρυσὸν τὸ πῦρ.
—Menander
17. πάντων χρημάτων μέτρον ἐστὶν ἄνθρωπος.
—Protagoras
[πάντων of all (m./n. gen. pl.).]
18. ἄνθρωπός ἐστι πνεῦμα καὶ σκιὰ μόνον.
—Sophocles
[σκιά, -ᾶς, ἡshadow.]
19. ὅρκους γυναικὸς εἰς ὕδωρ γράφω.
—Sophocles
[ὅρκος, -ου, ὁoath.]
20. Ἕλλην μέν ἐστι καὶ ἑλληνίζει.
—Plato, Meno
[ἑλληνίζω speak Greek.]
21. σύ μὲν ἀττικίζεις, οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ἑλληνίζομεν.
—Posidippus (comic poet)
[σύyou (nom. sg.). ἀττικίζω (cf. ἑλληνίζω) speak Attic Greek.]
22. ἔτι ἐν αὐτοῖς εἰσιν ἐλπίδες, νέοι γάρ.
—Plato, Protagoras
[αὐτοῖς them (dat.).]
23. ἄριστον μὲν ὕδωρ.
—Pindar
118
Lesson V

24. φυλακὴν ἀσφαλεστάτην ἡγοῦ τοῦ σώματος εἶναι τήν τε τῶν φίλων ἀρετὴν
καὶ τὴν τῶν πολιτῶν εὔνοιαν καὶ τὴν σαυτοῦ φρόνησιν.
—Isocrates
[φυλακή, –ῆς, ἡa watching/guarding, guard. ἀσφαλέστατος most secure. ἡγοῦ
consider! (imperative). εὔνοια goodwill, favor. σαυτοῦof yourself. φρόνησις,
-εως, ἡgood sense, wisdom.]
25. ‘Ὦ Σόλων, Σόλων, Ἕλληνες ἀεὶ παῖδές ἐστε, γέρων δὲ Ἕλλην οὐκ ἔστιν.’
Ἀκούσας οὖν, ‘Πῶς τί τοῦτο λέγεις;’ φάναι.
‘Νέοι ἐστέ,’ εἰπεῖν, ‘τὰς ψυχὰς πάντες. . . .’
—Plato, Timaeus
[ἀκούσας having heard (participle). πῶς τίhow and what. φάναι, εἰπεῖν: inf. in
indirect statement introduced earlier; translate as if indicative, ἔφη, εἶπε.]
A passage for reading in class:
ΘΕΡΑΠΑΙΝΑ
[woman servant]: κόσμος γ’ ἕτοιμος, ᾧ σφε συνθάψει πόσις.
ΧΟΡΟΣ [chorus]:
ἴστω νυν εὐκλεής γε κατθανουμένη
150
γυνή τ’ ἀρίστη τῶν ὑφ’ ἡλίῳ μακρῷ.
ΘΕΡΑΠΑΙΝΑ:
πῶς δ’ οὐκ ἀρίστη; τίς δ’ ἐναντιώσεται;
τί χρὴ λέγεσθαι τὴν ὑπερβεβλημένην
γυναῖκα; πῶς δ’ ἂν μᾶλλον ἐνδείξαιτό τις
πόσιν προτιμῶσ’ ἢ θέλουσ’ ὑπερθανεῖν;
155
καὶ ταῦτα μὲν δὴ πᾶσ’ ἐπίσταται πόλις·
ἃ δ’ ἐν δόμοις ἔδρασε θαυμάσῃ κλύων.
—Euripides, Alcestis
[149: ἕτοιμος ready. σφε her. συνθάπτω bury along with (somebody), as of
grave gifts. πόσις husband. 150: ἴστω . . . εὐκλεής γε κατθανουμένη let her
know that she will die in good renown. 151: μακρῷby far. 152: πῶς how. τίς who?
ἐναντιώσεται, fut. of ἐναντιόομαι oppose. 153: ὑπερβεβλημένην pf. pass.
participle of ὑπερβάλλω surpass. 154–5: How could anyone better show that she
puts her husband first than by willingly dying for him? 156: πᾶσ’ = πᾶσα whole
(f. nom. sg.). ἐπίσταται he/she knows. 157: δόμος house (often in the pl. for a
single house). ἔδρασε aor. of δράω do. κλύων hearing, participle with θαυμάσῃ.]
ὕβρις φυτεύει τύραννον.
Hubris produces the tyrant.
—Sophocles
Third Declension Nouns
119

COLORS: χρῶμα, χρώματος, τόcolor
English derivatives include: chrome, chromium,
chromosome, Mercurochrome, monochrome, poly-
chrome, chromatic, chromatics, and the more ob-
scure and technical: chromodynamics, chromo genic,
chromolithograph, chromomere, chromonemal,
chromophil, chromophore, chromoplast, chromo-
protein, chromosphere, chromous, adrenochrome,
cytochrome, fluorochrome, phytochrome, side-
rochrome, stereochrome, trichrome, urochrome,
chroma, chromaffin, chromate, chromatin, chro-
matogram, 
chromatograph, 
chromatography,
chromatolysis, chromatophilic, chromatophore.
It has long been noticed that Greek terms for
color, especially where hue, rather than brightness,
is concerned, are deficient. Color terms are too few
and those they have cover too much ground.
Some Greek color terms (these are just three examples):
BLACK (also dark, obscure: μέλας, μέλαινα, μέλαν) is used for wine, blood, a
wave, water, the earth, ships (perhaps from the pitch they are sealed with),
people, evening or night, and metaphorically of death, pain, fate, and neces-
sity: θανάτου μέλαν νέφος, “a black cloud of death.”
WHITE (also clear, bright: λευκός, -ή, -όν cognate with Latin lux, light) is used
of light, air, water, writing, snow, dust, marble, milk, teeth, bones, sails, hair,
skin. White skin is a sign of beauty in women and effeminacy in men. λευκὴ
ἡμέρα is a “happy day.”
GREENISH YELLOW (also yellow, green, pale, fresh: χλωρός, -ά, -όν) is used of
plants, wood, sea-water, honey, sand, cheese, fish (not pickled), fruit (just
picked), fresh (living) blood, skin that is sickly, fresh tears, wine, and fear. In
a famous phrase of Sappho, the poet says she is “greener than grass”:
χλωροτέρα δὲ ποίας
ἔμμι. . . .
—Sappho, fragment 31.14–5.
For more on this fascinating subject, see E. Irwin, Colour Terms in Greek Poetry
(Toronto: Hakkert, 1974).
120
Lesson V
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

LESSON VI
Third Declension Adjectives,
Result and Temporal Clauses
In this lesson you will learn adjectives of the third declension, completing the major
patterns of adjectives, and some new constructions using verbs: result and tempo-
ral clauses, and conditions.
121
THIRD DECLENSION ADJECTIVES
Two important types of adjectives are declined in the third declension only:
the ‑ης, ‑ες type and the ‑ων, ‑ον type. Both are of two terminations (cf.
ἀθάνατος, ‑ον), the same form being used for the masculine and feminine.
Many of these adjectives are compounds.
As you practice these adjectives, refer to the rules and examples of third
declension nouns in the previous lesson.
Types and Forms
1. ‑ης, ‑ες type. Review γένος (stem γενεσ‑) for the declension: these adjectives
also have bases in ‑εσ‑, but ‑σ‑ drops out as in γένος and the ‑ε‑ contracts with
the vowel of the endings:
ἀληθής, ἀληθές (base ἀληθεσ‑) true
Singular
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
ἀληθής
ἀληθές
ἀληθεῖς [έ‑ες]
ἀληθῆ[έ‑α]
G
ἀληθοῦς [έ‑ος]
ἀληθοῦς
ἀληθῶν
ἀληθῶν
D
ἀληθεῖ
ἀληθεῖ
ἀληθέσι
ἀληθέσι
A
ἀληθῆ[έ‑α]
ἀληθές
ἀληθεῖς
ἀληθῆ
V
ἀληθές

The masculine-feminine accusative plural (ἀληθεῖς) takes the form of
the nominative (as also happens with πόλις and some other types of third-
 declension nouns).
2. ‑ων, ‑ον type. Review δαίμων:
εὐδαίμων, ‑ον happy
Singular 
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
εὐδαίμων
εὔδαιμον
εὐδαίμονες
εὐδαίμονα
G
εὐδαίμονος
εὐδαίμονος
εὐδαιμόνων
εὐδαιμόνων
D
εὐδαίμονι
εὐδαίμονι
εὐδαίμοσι
εὐδαίμοσι
A
εὐδαίμονα
εὔδαιμον
εὐδαίμονας
εὐδαίμονα
V
εὔδαιμον
Besides compound adjectives like εὐδαίμων (base εὐδαιμον‑), certain com-
paratives are declined similarly [X].
THIRD/FIRST
DECLENSION ADJECTIVES
Several types of adjectives are declined in the third and first declensions: that
is, masculine and neuter forms follow the third declensions while the femi-
nine ones follow the first.
1. Bases in ‑υ‑, with the nominative in ‑υς (m.), ‑εια (f.), ‑υ (n.). Review πόλις,
ἄστυ, and the notes on ‑ι‑ and ‑υ‑ bases, for help with the masculine and
neuter. The feminine is declined in the first declension [III], but with short ‑α‑
in the nominative and accusative singular:
εὐρύς, εὐρεῖα, εὐρύwide
Singular 
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
εὐρύς
εὐρεῖα
εὐρύ
εὐρεῖς
εὐρεῖαι
εὐρέα
G
εὐρέος
εὐρείας
εὐρέος
εὐρέων
εὐρειῶν
εὐρέων
D
εὐρεῖ
εὐρείᾳ
εὐρεῖ
εὐρέσι
εὐρείαις
εὐρέσι
A
εὐρύν
εὐρεῖαν
εὐρύ
εὐρεῖς
εὐρείας
εὐρέα
V
εὐρύ
122
Lesson VI

2. Bases in ‑ντ‑: a few adjectives and many participles [VII] have bases in ‑ντ‑.
A very common adjective of this sort is πᾶς, πᾶσα, πᾶν all, with the base παντ‑
(ν and τ dropping out before σ). The feminine is of the α/η type (like θάλαττα,
θαλάττης sea [III]):
πᾶς, πᾶσα, πᾶν all
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
πᾶς
πᾶσα
πᾶν
πάντες
πᾶσαι
πάντα
G
παντός
πάσης
παντός
πάντων
πασῶν
πάντων
D
παντί
πάσῃ
παντί
πᾶσι
πάσαις
πᾶσι
A
πάντα
πᾶσαν
πᾶν
πάντας
πάσας
πάντα
πᾶς (or σύμπας) usually is found in the predicate position, as in οἱ ἄνδρες
πάντες all the men. In the attributive position it is used to mean the entire num-
ber, or the whole amount, or the sum total, as ἡ πᾶσα Σικελία the whole of Sicily,
οἱ πάντες ἄνθρωποι all mankind. These distinctions are not very great. πᾶς can
also be used without the article to mean all, every.
Vocabulary
Adjectives
ἀληθής, ἀληθές
true
ἅπας, ἅπασα, ἅπαν
quite all, everyone (cf. πᾶς)
ἀσθενής, ἀσθενές
weak, feeble, poor (cf. σθένος, strength)
ἀσφαλής, ἀσφαλές
safe, steadfast, sure (asphalt)
βαρύς, βαρεῖα, βαρύ
heavy, tiresome, oppressive (baritone)
βραχύς, βραχεῖα, βραχύ
short, brief (brachycephalic)
γλυκύς, γλυκεῖα, γλυκύ
sweet, pleasant (glucose)
δυστυχής, δυστυχές
unfortunate, unlucky (cf. τύχη)
εὐτυχής, εὐτυχές
lucky, fortunate, successful
εὐγενής, εὐγενές
well-born, generous (cf. γένος, γίγνομαι)
εὐδαίμων, εὔδαιμον
lucky, happy, wealthy (cf. δαίμων)
δυσδαίμων, δύσδαιμον
ill-fated
εὐκλεής, εὐκλεές
glorious, of good fame, famous (cf. κλέος)
εὐρύς, εὐρεῖα, εὐρύ
wide, spacious, far-reaching (eurypterid)
ἡδύς, ἡδεῖα, ἡδύ
sweet, pleasant (cf. English sweet, Latin
suavis)
ἥμισυς, ἡμίσεια, ἥμισυ
half (hemisphere, cf. Latin semis)
θῆλυς, θήλεια, θῆλυ
female, feminine, soft, effeminate (epithelium)
ὁμοῖος (or ὅμοιος),
like, resembling, equal (homeopathy)
ὁμοία, ὁμοῖον
ὀξύς, ὀξεῖα, ὀξύ
sharp, keen (oxytone, oxygen)
Third/First Declension Adjectives
123

πᾶς, πᾶσα, πᾶν
every (sg.), all, with art. all, whole
 (pandemonium)
σαφής, σαφές
clear, plain, distinct
ταχύς, ταχεῖα, ταχύ
swift, fleet (tachygraphy)
ὑγιής, ὑγιές
healthy, sound (cf. ὑγίεια)
ψευδής, ψευδές
false, lying, untrue (pseudo-)
μέγας, μεγάλη, μέγα*
big, large, great (megaton, omega)
πολύς, πολλή, πολύ*
much, pl. many (polygamy)
Nouns
καιρός, καιροῦ, ὁ
proportion, critical time, opportunity
παιδεία, παιδείας, ἡ
rearing of a child, training and teaching, education
(encyclopedia, Wikipedia)
Prepositions, Adverbs
κατά
down (prep. with gen. and acc.)
+ gen.:
down from, down upon, beneath, against
+ acc.:
down along, over, against, through, during, according
to, opposite
οὐκέτι
no more, no longer, not now
*These irregular adjectives are declined below.
IRREGULAR ADJECTIVES
1. μέγας, μεγάλη, μέγα big, base μεγαλ‑:
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
μέγας
μεγάλη
μέγα
μεγάλοι
μεγάλαι
μεγάλα
G
μεγάλου
μεγάλης
μεγάλου
μεγάλων
μεγάλων
μεγάλων
D
μεγάλῳ
μεγάλῃ
μεγάλῳ
μεγάλοις
μεγάλαις
μεγάλοις
A
μέγαν
μεγάλην
μέγα
μεγάλους
μεγάλας
μεγάλα
V
μεγάλε
The irregular forms are underlined. Otherwise these are declined in the 2nd
and 1st declensions with bases μεγαλ- and πολλ-.
124
Lesson VI

2. πολύς, πολλή, πολύmuch, many, base πολλ‑:
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
πολύς
πολλή
πολύ
πολλοί
πολλαί
πολλά
G
πολλοῦ
πολλῆς
πολλοῦ
πολλῶν
πολλῶν
πολλῶν
D
πολλῷ
πολλῇ
πολλῷ
πολλοῖς
πολλαῖς
πολλοῖς
A
πολύν
πολλήν
πολύ
πολλούς
πολλάς
πολλά
V
(no voc.)
Exercise A
1. Decline in all genders and numbers.
1. ἅπας
4. γλυκύς
2. θῆλυς
5. δυσδαίμων
3. ψευδής
2. Which is the proper adjective form to agree with the following article-
noun groups?
1. τῷ________ ἀνδρί
a. εὐγένῳ
b. εὐγενὴς
c. εὐγενεῖ
2. τὴν ________ ψυχήν
a. θήλειαν
b. θῆλυν
c. θηλείην
3. τοῖς _______ μαθηταῖς
a. ὀξαῖς
b. ὀξέσι
c. ὀξείαις
4. τὸ________ δῶρον
a. ἡδὺ
b. ἡδὸν
c. ἡδὺν
5. τῇ________ ὁδῷ
a. παντὶ
b. πάσῃ
c. πάσᾳ
6. τοῦ________ γένους
a. ἀληθοῦς
b. ἀληθὲς
c. ἀληθοῦ
7. ἡ________ πόλις
a. εὐδαίμων
b. εὐδαιμόνη
c. εὐδαίμονα
8. τοῦ_______ βασιλέως
a. μέγους
b. μεγαλέως
c. μεγάλου
9. τὸν ________ δαίμονα
a. ἡμίσονα
b. ἡμίσεον
c. ἥμισυν
10. τὰς ________ χάριτας
a. ἀληθείας
b. ἀληθεῖς
c. ἀληθῆ
11. τοὺς ______ πολέμους
a. μεγάλους
b. μεγάλου
c. μέγας
12. τὰ________ ἤθη/ἔθη
a. πολλὰ
b. πολλαὶ
c. πολὺ
13. οἱ________ ξένοι
a. ἅπαντοι
b. ἅπαντες
c. ἅπασοι
14. ταῖς _____ συμφοραῖς
a. βάρεσι
b. βαρύσι
c. βαρείαις
15. ὁ________ πολίτης
a. ἀσθενοῦς
b. ἀσθενὴς
c. ἀσθενὲς
16. τῇ________ γυναικί
a. δυσδαιμόνῃ
b. ἡδεῖ
c. εὐδαίμονι
➞Which of the above are not proper forms at all of the words in question?
3. Decline the following groups for review.
1. ὁ ἀγαθὸς βασιλεύς
6. τὸ βραχὺ μέτρον
2. ἡ ψευδὴς μάντις
7. ὁ ἡδὺς ποιητής
3. τὸ εὔδαιμον γένος
8. ἡ εὐγενὴς γυνή
4. ὁ πᾶς Ἕλλην
9. τὸ ἀσθενὲς σῶμα
5. ἡ ἀληθὴς ὁδός
10. ἡ μεγάλη θάλασσα
Irregular Adjectives
125

4. Compose Greek sentences using the following word groups (add appro-
priate verbs, articles, pronouns, etc. to make sentences).
1. ἅπας παῖς
7. πόλις ὑγιής
2. βαρεῖα χείρ
8. λόγοι ψευδεῖς
3. ἡ ὁδὸς ἡ ἀσφαλής
9. ὁ βίος ὁ δυστυχής
4. ὕπνος γλυκύς
10. οὐρανὸς εὐρύς
5. ἀληθὴς λόγος
11. ἡ ἀρίστη γυνή
6. βασιλεὺς ὁ μέγας
5. Translate.
1. οὐκ αἰσχρὸν τὸ ἀληθὲς εἰπεῖν ἀεί.
2. αἵδε γὰρ αἱ γυναῖκες ἃς ἐκρίνατε ἦσαν εὐκλεεῖς.
3. ἥδε ἡ ὁδὸς ἀσφαλὴς ἦν γυναιξὶ καὶ παισίν.
4. ἐν βραχεῖ εἶπον μακρὸν λόγον.
5. κατὰ βραχὺ μανθάνομεν τὸ ἀληθές. [κατὰ βραχύlittle by little]
6. ἅπας γὰρ βούλεται εὐδαίμων εἶναι καὶ εὖ πράττειν.
7. γλυκύ ἐστι πολλὰ μανθάνειν.
8. δυστυχὴς ὁ τοῦ χρήμασι ἀσθενοῦς βίος.
9. ἐνομίζομεν τὰς Ἀθήνας εἶναι πόλιν μεγάλην καὶ εὐδαίμονα.
10. αἱ γλαῦκες ὄρνιθες εὐγενεῖς εἰσίν. [γλαῦξ, ‑κός, ἡowl]
11. τὸ τούτου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς κλέος εἰς εὐρὺν οὐρανὸν ἔρχεται.
12. οἱ δικασταὶ κατὰ τοὺς νόμους κρίνουσιν.
13. ὁ ὕπνος ἡδύς ἐστι πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις.
14. ἡ νέα γυνὴ ἔσχεν εὐρείας ἐλπίδας.
15. ἡ γῆ ἐστι μεγάλη μήτηρ τῶν θεῶν τε καὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων.
16. οὐ ψευδῆ λέγει ὁ πολίτης ὁ καλὸς κἀγαθός.
17. βασιλεὺς ὁ μέγας ἦρχε πάντων τῶν βαρβάρων.
18. ταχὺν ἄγγελον ἔπεμψας;
19. ψευδεῖς λόγοι οὔκ εἰσι τῆς ὑγιοῦς ψυχῆς.
20. νέος μὲν καὶ ὀξὺς εἶ· γέρων δὲ καὶ βραδύς εἰμι. [βραδύς slow]
21. κατὰ θάλατταν ἠρχόμεθα εἰς τὴν νῆσον.
22. ὁ κῆρυξ τὸ ἥμισυ τοῦ λόγου ἤγγειλε καὶ ἀπέθανεν.
23. λίθους ἔβαλλον κατὰ τοῦ τείχους.
24. ὁ ῥήτωρ ὁ ἄδικος πολλὰ καὶ ψευδῆ ἔλεγεν κατὰ τῶν δικαίων πολιτῶν.
25. ἐκεῖνος ὁ νεανίας ἐθέλει ἀρετὴν κατὰ πάντα ἔχειν.
SYNTAX
Result Clauses
The conjunction ὥστε (or sometime ὡς), so that, so as to, is used to express re-
sult, either (1) the actual result, or (2) the result which the action of the main
verb tends or intends to produce or is capable of producing.
126
Lesson VI

1. ὥστε with the indicative expresses the actual result, that is, it implies that
the second action actually happened or is happening as a result of the first. The
negative with this type of result clause is οὐ.
2. ὥστε with the infinitive implies a possible or intended result or a tendency,
rather than an actual fact. The negative after ὥστε with the infinitive is μή.
Examples:
1. τὸ ἀληθὲς λέγει ὥστε πιστεύεται.
He tells the truth with the (actual) result (so that, and so) he is trusted.
2. τὸ ἀληθὲς λέγει ὥστε πιστεύεσθαι.
He tells the truth so as to be trusted (so that it is natural for him to be
trusted).
3. οὕτως αἰσχρός ἐστιν ὥστε τὸν ξένον ἀπέκτεινεν.
He is so shameless that he killed his guest.
4. οὕτως αἰσχρός ἐστιν ὥστε τὸν ξένον ἀποκτεῖναι.
He is so shameless that he would kill his guest. (He is shameless enough to
do it; but there is no implication that he actually did it. The indicative,
on the other hand, emphasizes the actual occurrence of the result.)
Some examples from Greek authors:
πᾶν ποιοῦσιν ὥστε δίκην μὴ διδόναι.
They do everything so as not to be punished.
—Plato, Gorgias
οὕτως ἀγνωμόνως ἔχετε, ὥστε ἐλπίζετε αὐτὰ χρηστὰ γενήσεσθαι;
Are you so witless that you (actually) expect them to become good?
—Demosthenes
Temporal and Causal Clauses
A temporal clause is introduced by a conjunction of time:
ὅτε
when
ἕως
as long as, until
ἐπεί
after, when
ἐπειδή
after, when
πρίν
before, until
When the clause refers to a definite time in the present or past, the indica-
tive mood is used (except for πρίν; see below). For temporal clauses referring
to indefinite time, see the section on the uses of the subjunctive and optative.
The negative is οὐ, unless the clause is conditional.
Examples of temporal clauses:
1. τὴν πόλιν ἐλίπομεν ἐπειδὴ (ἐπεὶ) ἔλαβον τὰ δῶρα.
We left the city when they took the gifts.
2. ὅτε τὸ ἀληθὲς ἐμάθομεν, τοὺς ἀδίκους ἐκρίναμεν.
When we had learned the truth, we judged the guilty.
3. ἐμείναμεν ἕως Ἑλλάδα ἐλίπετε.
We waited until you left Greece.
Syntax
127

ἐπείand ἐπειδήalso have a causal sense:
γράφω ἐπειδὴ(ἐπεὶ) γράφειν οὐκ ἐθέλεις.
I am writing since you do not wish to write.
πρίν before, until:
1. After a negative clause, πρίν means until and takes the indicative (of a def-
inite time), in the aorist or imperfect.
2. After an affirmative clause, πρίν means before and takes the infinitive.
Examples:
1. οὐκ ἤλθομεν πρὶν Ἑλλάδα ἐλίπετε.
We did not come until you left Greece.
2. Ἑλλάδα ἐλίπομεν πρὶν τῶν σοφῶν ἀκούειν.
We left Greece before hearing the philosophers.
Conditions
A condition consists of two clauses, the protasis (or if-clause) and the apo-
dosis (or conclusion-clause). The negative used in the protasis is usually μή;
in the apodosis, οὐ.
1. A simple condition has εἰ(if ) with the indicative in the protasis, and the
indicative (or whatever mood the sense requires) in the apodosis. A simple
condition implies nothing as to actual fulfillment:
a. εἰ βούλει, ἐγὼ ἐθέλω.
If you wish, I am willing.
b. εἰ μὴ τῷδε πιστεύεις, σοφὸς οὐκ εἶ.
If you do not trust this man, you are not wise.
2. A condition contrary-to-fact has εἰwith a past tense of the indicative (im-
perfect or aorist) in the protasis, and a past tense of the indicative with ἄν in
the apodosis. A condition contrary-to-fact (or unreal condition) implies that
the supposition cannot be or could not be fulfilled. The imperfect refers to
present time (or sometimes to continued action in the past) and the aorist to
simple action in the past.
a. εἰ ταῦτα ἔλεγες, οὐκ ἂν τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἔλεγες.
If you were saying these things, you would not be speaking the truth.
b. εἰ μὴ ἤλθετε, ἐλίπομεν ἂν τὴν χώραν ἐκείνην.
If you had not come, we would have left that place.
c. εἰ οἱ δικασταὶ δίκαιοι ἦσαν, οὐκ ἂν τὰ ἄδικα δῶρα ἔλαβον.
If the jurors were just, they would not have received the unjust gifts.
128
Lesson VI

Exercise B
1. Translate.
1. οὗτος ὁ ἀνὴρ οὕτως κακὸς ἦν ὥστε μὴ ἔχειν φίλους.
2. πολλοὺς δὲ φίλους ἔχει ὥστε εὐτυχής ἐστιν.
3. οὕτως σοφὸς εἶ ὥστε πάντα ἐπίστασθαι. [ἐπίστασθαι to know: pres.
inf.]
4. ἐκεῖνος ὁ βασιλεὺς ἦν οὕτως αἰσχρὸς ὥστε τὴν καλὴν θυγατέρα τοῖς
θεοῖς τοῖς τοῦ πολέμου ἔθυσεν.
5. ἐκεῖνος ὁ πολίτης οὕτως ἐστὶ δεινὸς λέγειν ὥστε πάντας πεῖσαι.
6. οἱ δικασταὶ οἵδε οὕτως ἦσαν ἄδικοι ὥστε παρὰ νόμον πολλὰ καὶ
ἄδικα δῶρα ἔλαβον.
7. ἐπειδὴ οὐκ ἤθελες, οὐκ ἤλθομεν εἰς τὴν μικρὰν σκηνήν.
8. εὐτυχεῖς ἐστε ἕως ἔτι νέοι ἐστέ.
9. ἐπειδὴ ταύτην τὴν χώραν ἔλιπον, κατὰ θάλατταν πρὸς τὰς νήσους
ἦλθον.
10. ὅτε τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἔλεγε, ἤκουον τὸν πάντα λόγον.
11. οἱ γὰρ δικασταὶ οὐκ ἔκριναν πρὶν τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἔμαθον.
12. οἱ πολῖται ἐβουλεύσαντο πρὶν κρίνειν.
13. ἀπεθάνομεν ἄν, εἰ μὴ οἵδε οἱ ἄνδρες ἦλθον.
14. εἰ ἦτε ἄνδρες δίκαιοι, οὐκ ἂν ἐλέγετε ταῦτα.
15. εἰ τοῖς θεοῖς ἐθύσαμεν, οὐκ ἂν ταῦτα τὰ κακὰ ἐπάσχομεν.
16. τῷδε τῷ στρατιώτῃ ἂν ἐπίστευον, εἰ ἐνόμιζον αὐτὸν δίκαιον εἶναι.
[αὐτόν him]
17. εἰ εὐδαίμονές ἐστε, εὐδαίμων εἰμί.
18. εἰ μέγα ἐστὶ τὸ βιβλίον, κακόν ἐστιν.
19. οὐκ ἂν ἔχειν πολὺν πλοῦτον ἐβούλου, εἰ σοφὸς ἦσθα.
20. εἰ ἀγαθοὶ δικασταί εἰσιν, κατὰ τοὺς νόμους κρίνουσιν.
21. εἰ γυνὴ ἀγαθὴ ἦσθα, ταῦτα οὐκ ἂν ἔπραξας.
2. Translate into Greek.
1. If you had left that place, we would not have remained.
2. He would have died, if his friends had not come.
3. He is so wicked that he would take away [ἀπάγω] his host’s wife.
4. If we had money, we would be going by sea to the islands.
5. He did not come until his father died.
6. They wished to judge before they knew the truth about this
woman.
7. If they had freed that man, he would have fled. [flee = φεύγω, aor.
ἔφυγον]
8. If he were unjust, he would not do these things.
Readings
1. κλέος οὐρανὸν εὐρὺν ἵκανε.
—Homer, Odyssey
[ἵκανε reached (3rd sg. impf.).]
Syntax
129

2. μικροῦ δ’ ἀγῶνος οὐ μέγ’ ἔρχεται κλέος.
—Sophocles 
[ἀγών, ἀγῶνος, ὁcontest, struggle.]
3. ὁ βίος βραχύς, ἡ δὲ τέχνη μακρά,
ὁ δὲ καιρὸς ὀξύς, ἡ δὲ πεῖρα σφαλερά.
—Demetrius, quoting aphorisms of Hippocrates
[σφαλερός, -ά, -όν perilous. cf. Ars longa, vita brevis.]
4. ἣν γὰρ καλοῦσιν οἱ πλεῖστοι τῶν ἀνθρώπων εἰρήνην, τοῦτ’ εἶναι μόνον ὄνομα,
τῷ δ’ ἔργῳ πάσαις πρὸς πάσας τὰς πόλεις ἀεὶ πόλεμον ἀκήρυκτον κατὰ φύσιν
εἶναι.
—Plato, Laws
[καλοῦσι (they) call. πλεῖστος, -η, -ον most. πάσαις: understand πόλεσι.
ἀκήρυκτον unheralded, undeclared. κατὰ φύσιν according to nature.]
5. γῆ πάντα τίκτει καὶ πάλιν κομίζεται.
—Menander
[τίκτω bring forth. πάλιν again. κομίζω conduct, in mid. take back for oneself.]
6. γίνεται γὰρ δόξα καὶ ἀληθὴς καὶ ψευδής.
—Aristotle, περὶ ψυχῆς
[δόξα, -ης, ἡreputation, opinion.]
7. ὅλον τὸν κόσμον πνεῦμα καὶ ἀὴρ περιέχει.
—Anaximenes
[ἀὴρ air.]
8. ἔχω δὲ πολλὴν οὐσίαν καὶ πλούσιος καλοῦμ’ ὑπὸ πάντων, μακάριος δ’ ὑπ’
οὐδενός.
—Menander
[οὐσία substance, wealth. πλούσιος adj., cf. πλοῦτος. καλοῦμαι I am called.
μακάριος, -α, -ον happy. οὐδενός no one (gen.).]
9. ἄριστόν ἐστι πάντ’ ἐπίστασθαι καλά.
—Menander
[ἐπίστασθαι know (pres. inf.)]
10. ὡς αἰεὶ τὸν ὁμοῖον ἄγει θεὸς ὡς τὸν ὁμοῖον.
—Homer, Odyssey
[ὡς how, as preposition, to.]
11. ὅμοιον ὁμοίῳ φίλον.
—Greek Proverb
12. τὴν παιδείαν εἶπε τοῖς μὲν νέοις σωφροσύνην, τοῖς δὲ πρεσβυτέροις
παραμυθίαν, τοῖς δὲ πένησι πλοῦτον, τοῖς δὲ πλουσίοις κόσμον εἶναι.
—Diogenes Laertius (the subject is Diogenes)
[πρεσβύτερος, -α, -ον elder. παραμυθία, -ας, ἡconsolation. πένης, πένητος, ὁ
poor man, pauper.]
130
Lesson VI

13. τῆς παιδείας ἔφη τὰς μὲν ῥίζας εἶναι πικράς, τὸν δὲ καρπὸν γλυκύν.
—Diogenes Laertius (a saying of Aristotle)
[ῥίζα, -ης, ἡroot. πικρός, -ά, -όν bitter. καρπός, -οῦ, ὁfruit.]
14. ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὸ πᾶν ἐστι σώματα καὶ κενόν.
—Diogenes Laertius (quoting Epicurus)
[ἀλλὰ μὴν yet truly. κενός, -ή, -όν empty. n. as a noun void.]
15. ἐρωτηθεὶς τί γηράσκει ταχύ, ‘χάρις’ ἐφη.
—Diogenes Laertius (a saying of Aristotle)
[ἐρωτηθείς asked, having been asked (aor. pass. ptcpl.). τί γηράσκει what grows
old? ταχύ(as adv.) quickly.]
16. ἐλευθέρου γάρ ἐστι τἀληθῆ λέγειν.
—Menander
[ἐλεύθερος, -α, -ον free (as noun in m., free man). ἐλευθέρου predicate geni-
tive of characteristic.]
17. πολλῶν ὁ καιρὸς γίνεται διδάσκαλος.
—Menander
[διδάσκαλος teacher.]
18. μήτηρ ἁπάντων γαῖα καὶ κοινὴ τροφός.
—Menander
[γαῖα, -ας, ἡearth. τροφός, -οῦ, ὁnurse.]
19. ἐκ τῶν φοβερῶν τῶνδε προσώπων
μέγα κέρδος ὁρῶ τοῖσδε πολίταις.
—Aeschylus, Eumenides
[φοβερός, -ά, -όν fearful. πρόσωπον, -ου, τόface, mask. ὁρῶI see.]
20. σκηνὴ πᾶς ὁ βίος.
—Euripides
21. μεγάλη πόλις μεγάλη ἐρημία.
—Greek Proverb
[ἐρημία, -ας, ἡdesert.]
22. εἰ μὴ γὰρ ἦν Χρύσιππος, οὐκ ἂν ἦν στοά.
—Diogenes Laertius
[στοά, -ᾶς, ἡstoa, Stoic school (of philosophy).]
23. εἰ δ’ ἡ Διὸς παῖς παρθένος Δίκη παρῆν
ἔργοις ἐκείνου καὶ φρέσιν, τάχ’ ἂν τόδ’ ἦν.
—Aeschylus, Seven against Thebes 
[Eteocles is referring to the claim of his brother, Polynices, that he will return
home with justice; but justice is only pictured on his shield, she is not in his
heart. παρθένος, -ου, ἡmaiden, virgin. φρέσιν, dat. pl. of φρήν mind, heart. τάχα
(adv. cf. ταχύς) quickly, soon.]
Syntax
131

132
Lesson VI
24. εἰ ἦσαν ἄνδρες ἀγαθοί, ὡς σὺ φῄς, οὐκ ἄν ποτε ταῦτα ἔπασχον.
—Plato, Gorgias
25. Ἄδμηθ’, ὁρᾷς γὰρ τἀμὰ πράγμαθ’ ὡς ἔχει,
λέξαι θέλω σοι πρὶν θανεῖν ἃ βούλομαι.
—Euripides, Alcestis
[Alcestis is about to make her last request to Admetus. ὁρᾷς you see (pres. of
ὁράω, 2nd sg.). τἀμὰ= τὰ ἐμάmy. ὡς ἔχει how it is/they are. σοι to you (dat. sg.).
θανεῖν = ἀποθανεῖν.]
26. ἔμειναν ἕως ἀφίκοντο οἱ στρατηγοί.
—Xenophon
[ἀφίκοντο (aor. of ἀφικνέομαι) arrive (3rd pl.). στρατηγός, -οῦ, ὁgeneral.]
27. πολλὰ διδάσκει μ’ ὁ πολὺς βίοτος.
—Euripides
[διδάσκω teach. μ’ = με me (acc. sg.). βίοτος = βίος.]
ἐὰν ᾖς φιλομαθής, ἔσει πολυμαθής.
If you are a lover of learning, you will be
learned.
—Isocrates, To Demonicus
Ἄνθος, -ους, τόflower, pl. ἄνθη
Several English words relating to flowers come
from Greek ἄνθος, including: ailanthus (the “tree
of heaven,” the weed tree of the title A Tree Grows
in Brooklyn), chrysanthemum (golden flower),
agapanthus (love flower, the African lily), and Di-
anthus (< diosanthos, Zeus’ flower, a genus that
includes carnations and pinks), as well as words
for flower parts such as anther and perianth. 
Anthology comes from Greek ἀνθολογία < ἀνθο -
+ λέγειν (to gather). 
The Greek Anthology, also called the Palatine
Anthology, is a collection of more than 6000 short
poems (epigrams, songs, epitaphs) by over three
hundred authors from the seventh century B.C.E. to
about 1000 C.E. The term anthology comes from the
name the first-century poet Meleager gave to his
compilation, στέφανος (the Garland or Crown of Flowers, in which each poet
was compared to a flower), which became the basis of the Palatine Anthol-
ogy. Its importance lies in the excellence of many of the poems, the continu-
ity of the Greek poetic tradition that it illustrates, and its influence on poets
in many languages and through the centuries. 
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

Compare, for example, this anonymous Greek “valentine” to the second
stanza of Ben Jonson’s “To Celia.”
πέμπω σοι μύρον ἡδύ, μύρῳ παρέχων χάριν, οὐ σοί·
αὐτὴ γὰρ μυρίσαι καὶ τὸ μύρον δύνασαι.
I am sending you a sweet perfume, a favor to it, not you. 
You can make even perfume smell sweet. 
I sent thee late a rosy wreath,
Not so much honouring thee
As giving it a hope that there 
It could not wither’d be;
But thou thereon didst only breathe, 
And sent’st it back to me; 
Since when it grows, and smells, I swear,
Not of itself but thee!
Syntax
133


LESSON VII
Participles
In this lesson you will learn the forms and uses of participles (present, future, aorist
active, and middle or middle-passive). Because Greek is φιλομέτοχος (fond of par-
ticiples), use of participles is an important form of subordination.
135
PARTICIPLES:
PRESENT, FUTURE, AORIST ACTIVE
AND MIDDLE/MIDDLE-PASSIVE
Definition
Participles are verbal adjectives. That is, they have the qualities of both verbs
and adjectives. Dionysius Thrax defines the participle as follows: Μετοχή ἐστι
λέξις μετέχουσα τῆς τῶν ῥημάτων καὶ τῆς τῶν ὀνομάτων ἰδιότητος: A participle
is a part of speech which shares (lit. sharing) the peculiarities of both verbs and
nouns/adjectives (adjectives are classed under ὀνόματα in Greek grammatical
theory). As adjectives they are declined in gender, number, and case and agree
with a noun (whether expressed or implied). As verbs they have tense and
voice, and can take an object. Participles are very common in English, but
even more so in Greek.
Some examples of the uses of participles in English:
1. As adjective (Attributive Use)
The established Church
The ruling class
The missing link
2. In a descriptive clause or phrase (Circumstantial Use)
The soup is on the stove, boiling away.
The Greek troops, led by Agamemnon, defeated Troy in ten years’ time.
3. Objective and Supplementary
He stopped talking.
4. Treatment of  participles in forming compound tenses, such as “I  wasn’t
talking”; “I have never done that”—since this use is so well known—will be
omitted.

It is important to keep in mind that participles are adjectives derived from
verbs. A participle can thus have tense, as is evident in the first two examples
above: established is a past participle while ruling is present. Greek has pres-
ent, future, aorist, and perfect participles. The participle also has voice; of the
previous examples, established is passive and ruling active. Greek has sepa-
rate forms for active, middle/middle-passive, and—in the aorist and future
tenses—passive participles.
Forms
Review ὁ ἄρχων [V] and πᾶς πᾶσα πᾶν [VI] for the declension.
All tenses of participles are formed from the corresponding tense stem.
Thus, the present participle of λύω is formed by adding the proper particip-
ial endings to the present stem λυ‑. Likewise the future participle is formed
from the future stem λυσ‑ (from λύσω); the aorist from the stem λυσ(α)- (from
ἔλυσα: participles are not augmented). Review the principal parts of the verbs
you have studied so far (p. 89).
Active Participles
All active participles (except the perfect, VIII) have bases in ‑ντ‑. Thematic
tenses (present, future, and second aorist) form active participles in ‑οντ‑ (cf.
ἄρχων). The first aorist, with its characteristic α, has ‑αντ‑ (as in πᾶς, base
παντ‑). The masculine and neuter are declined in the third declension, the
feminine in the first.
a. Participles of λύω: present, future, first aorist
Stem
m.
f.
n.
Base
Present
λυ‑
λύων
λύουσα
λῦον
λυοντ‑
Future
λυσ‑
λύσων
λύσουσα
λῦσον
λυσοντ‑
1st Aorist
λυσ‑α
λύσας
λύσασα
λῦσαν
λυσαντ‑
b. of λείπω: second aorist (ἔλιπον):
Stem
m.
f.
n.
Base
2nd Aorist
λιπ‑
λιπών
λιποῦσα
λιπόν
λιποντ‑
136
Lesson VII

Paradigms
Present Active Participle of λύω: λύων releasing
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λύων
λύουσα
λῦον
G
λύοντος
λυούσης
λύοντος
D
λύοντι
λυούσῃ
λύοντι
A
λύοντα
λύουσαν
λῦον
Pl.
N
λύοντες
λύουσαι
λύοντα
G
λυόντων
λυουσῶν
λυόντων
D
λύουσι(ν)
λυούσαις
λύουσι(ν)
A
λύοντας
λυούσας
λύοντα
Future Active Participle of λύω: λύσων being about to release,
in order to release
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λύσων
λύσουσα
λῦσον
G
λύσοντος
λυσούσης
λύσοντος
D
λύσοντι
λυσούσῃ
λύσοντι
A
λύσοντα
λύσουσαν
λῦσον
Pl.
N
λύσοντες
λύσουσαι
λύσοντα
G
λυσόντων
λυσουσῶν
λυσόντων
D
λύσουσι(ν)
λυσούσαις
λύσουσι(ν)
A
λύσοντας
λυσούσας
λύσοντα
First Aorist Active Participle of λύω: λύσας having released,
after releasing
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λύσας
λύσασα
λῦσαν
G
λύσαντος
λυσάσης
λύσαντος
D
λύσαντι
λυσάσῃ
λύσαντι
A
λύσαντα
λύσασαν
λῦσαν
Pl.
N
λύσαντες
λύσασαι
λύσαντα
G
λυσάντων
λυσασῶν
λυσάντων
D
λύσασι(ν)
λυσάσαις
λύσασι(ν)
A
λύσαντας
λυσάσας
λύσαντα
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
137

Second Aorist Active Participle of λείπω:
λιπών having left, after leaving
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λιπών
λιποῦσα
λιπόν
G
λιπόντος
λιπούσης
λιπόντος
D
λιπόντι
λιπούσῃ
λιπόντι
A
λιπόντα
λιποῦσαν
λιπόν
Pl.
N
λιπόντες
λιποῦσαι
λιπόντα
G
λιπόντων
λιπουσῶν
λιπόντων
D
λιποῦσι(ν)
λιπούσαις
λιποῦσι(ν)
A
λιπόντας
λιπούσας
λιπόντα
Present Active Participle of εἰμί: ὤν being
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
ὤν
οὖσα
ὄν
G
ὄντος
οὔσης
ὄντος
D
ὄντι
οὔσῃ
ὄντι
A
ὄντα
οὖσαν
ὄν
Pl.
N
ὄντες
οὖσαι
ὄντα
G
ὄντων
οὐσῶν
ὄντων
D
οὖσι(ν)
οὔσαις
οὖσι(ν)
A
ὄντας
οὔσας
ὄντα
This paradigm acts as a review of the endings of the participles in ‑οντ‑.
Note that the accent of the second aorist participle is like that of εἰμί.
Middle and Middle-Passive Participles
The middle and middle-passive participles are formed quite simply by
adding ‑μενος, ‑η, ‑ον to the appropriate stem: ‑ομενος to the thematic tense
stems; ‑αμενος to the first aorist.
λύω
λείπω (ἔλιπον)
Present
Future
1st Aorist
2nd Aorist
(m.-p.)
(m)
(m)
(m)
m.
λυόμενος
λυσόμενος
λυσάμενος
λιπόμενος
f.
λυομένη
λυσομένη
λυσαμένη
λιπομένη
n.
λυόμενον
λυσόμενον
λυσάμενον
λιπόμενον
ransoming;
in order
having ransomed,
having left
being freed
to ransom
after ransoming
behind
138
Lesson VII

Example: Present Middle-Passive Participle of λύω: λυόμενος.
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λυόμενος
λυομένη
λυόμενον
G
λυομένου
λυομένης
λυομένου
D
λυομένῳ
λυομένῃ
λυομένῳ
A
λυόμενον
λυομένην
λυόμενον
Pl.
N
λυόμενοι
λυόμεναι
λυόμενα
G
λυομένων
λυομένων
λυομένων
D
λυομένοις
λυομέναις
λυομένοις
A
λυομένους
λυομένας
λυόμενα
Participles are not so very difficult once you recognize the logic of them and
understand what they are: adjectives derived from verbs. The word “par-
ticiple” comes from the Latin word participium (a sharing or partaking), which
is a direct translation of the Greek word μετοχή. The Greeks thought of the
participle as a separate part of speech, but as the name implies they recog-
nized clearly enough that it shared the characteristics of two other parts of
speech. We do not usually think of the participle as a separate part of speech,
but we should realize that the parts of speech are not necessarily mutually
exclusive.
Exercise A
1. a. Practice in the forms of the participles. Review verbs on p. 89 and trans-
late these phrases, using the nom. sg. form, m., f., n.
Example: after learning—μαθών, μαθοῦσα, μαθόν
1. after announcing
7. planning for onself
2. in order to lead
8. in order to write
3. in order to hear
9. being thrown
4. dying
10. ransoming
5. after killing
11. after judging
6. being ruled
12. having become
1. b. Translate (for present participles use “-ing”/ “being”; for future “in or-
der to”; for aorist “after –ing”). After reading the section on uses of participles,
see if you can identify the use of each participle in these sentences.
1. πεμψάμεναι οὖν τὰ νέα βιβλία ἐμείναμεν.
2. ἀκούοντες τῶν γε πολιτ͂ ων οἱ ξένοι ἦσαν εὐτυχεῖς.
3. ἔρχεται γὰρ εἰς τήνδε τὴν νῆσον ἀκουσομένη τῆς σοφῆς λεγούσης περὶ
τοῦ κόσμου.
4. ἐπαύσαντο δῶρα πέμποντες.
5. ἤγαγε δὲ οὗτος ὁ νεανίας τὰ παιδία εἰς τὴν νῆσον πεμπόμενα.
6. βουλεύσαντες ἔκριναν.
7. ταῦτα πράττουσα εὖ[well] πράξει.
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
139

Uses of Participles
There are in general three ways of using participles.
General Usage
1. Attributive. The participle is used as an adjective, modifying the noun in
the same way as the adjective does, often with the article (e.g., a moving ve-
hicle, a dangling participle).
2. Circumstantial. The participle, used without the article, in agreement with
a noun or pronoun (expressed or implied) and introducing a clause which de-
fines the circumstances of an action (i.e., an action as expressed by the main
verb). “He went home, disgusted at the behavior of his colleagues.” Under this
heading also comes the genitive absolute.
3. Supplementary. The participle is used to complete the idea expressed by
the verb; there are a number of Greek uses that differ from English usage. Un-
der this heading we may also place the use of the participle after verbs of per-
ception and in indirect statement. Examples: “Stop doing that!” or “Keep on
going!” or “He finished eating,” all of which correspond to Greek usage.
Examples of the Uses of Participles in Greek
1. Attributive (as adjective)
a. Used with a noun and usually with an article:
ὁ παρὼν χρόνος, the present time (παρών, present participle of πάρειμι,
being present)
Many English participles do not lend themselves to this use, and for this
reason, many of the Greek participles must be paraphrased in the English
translation either by a relative clause or by an adjective or noun; this is espe-
cially true of the attributive participle used as a noun (b).
b. Like the adjective, the participle may be used as a noun with the article (the
man, woman, or thing being omitted; cf. οἱ ἀγαθοί, the good: the masculine gen-
der makes it clear that the good people is implied).
Examples:
οἱ φεύγοντες
those who flee/are fleeing; the fugitives, the exiles
ὁ διώκων and ὁ φεύγων
the one who pursues and the one who flees: in a
courtroom context, the prosecutor and the
 defendant
ὁ ἄρχων
the one who rules, originally a participle from
ἄρχω (the ruling man), hence the ruler, so
 common that it is considered a noun.
140
Lesson VII

τὸ ἄρχον
in the neuter, that which rules (the ruling thing
can best be translated as the ruling party.)
ἡ θανοῦσα
the [woman who] died, the dead woman
μῶν τὴν θανοῦσαν ὠφελεῖν τι προσδοκᾷς;
Do you expect to benefit the dead woman in any way?
—Euripides, Alcestis
Interesting too are the uses of the neuter participles of εἰμί: τὸ ὄν and τὰ
ὄντα that which is/exists; those things which are/exist (lit. existing things) respec-
tively; but both may be translated as the universe. Cf. also τὰ πάροντα the pres-
ent circumstances.
οἱ ἔχοντες and οἱ οὐκ ἔχοντες those who have and those who do not have,
i.e., the rich and the poor, or the haves and the have-nots.
c. Remember that the participle is a verbal form and so can take an object:
ὁ ταῦτα εἰπών (lit. the one having said these things) the one who said these things.
Exercise A (continued)
2. a. Study the examples and translate these sentences.
1. οἱ γὰρ διώκοντες τὴν φεύγουσαν ἔλαβον.
2. ἡ γε ἀποθανοῦσα οὐ λέξει.
3. οἱ ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ πόλει ἄρχονται ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρχόντων.
4. ὁ ταῦτα ἀγγείλας ἀπῆλθεν.
5. εἶπες οὖν τοῖς τοῦ ποιητοῦ ἀκούσασι;
6. τοὺς δὲ οὐκ ἔχοντες ἐπέμψασθε;
2. b. Make up sentences using the following.
1. αἱ γραφόμεναι
4. ἡ πείθασα
2. τὰ πάροντα
5. ὁ βουλόμενος
3. τὰ βουλευόμενα
6. οἱ λύοντες
2. Circumstantial
The circumstantial participle defines the circumstances surrounding the ac-
tion of the main verb and may express time, manner/means, cause, condition,
concession: that is, when, in/by, since/because, if, although. It can also be merely
descriptive. The context (or sense) of the sentence will usually tell you which
is intended, though sometimes more than one of these relations may be im-
plied. These different types of the circumstantial participle do not differ from
one another except in context; therefore you need not make sharp distinctions
among them. When translating them, first translate them literally, even though
it may be awkward in English (having done, doing, having been done, etc.), and
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
141

then as the whole sentence becomes clearer, you may add an appropriate
word, such as if, when, although. There are, to be sure, clues which will some-
times make the meaning clearer (e.g., whether οὐor μήis used, and a number
of particles).
A. Time (when, after): Temporal
In narration, the participle is very common for a series of events. The use of
participles can extend the sentence indefinitely, as you will see when you read
long passages from Thucydides and Isocrates.
In English, when narrating a series of events, we tend to use a series of
 finite verbs in separate clauses, whether coordinate or subordinate. We may
say, for example, “After killing the man, he got away,” or “He killed the man
and got away,” or “After he killed the man, he got away.” The first uses a par-
ticiple, the second two coordinate clauses, and the third a subordinate clause.
In Greek the verb of the first clause would be expressed by a participle in the
aorist, that of the second by a finite verb:
τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἀποκτείνας, ἔφυγεν.
There are other ways of expressing this in Greek, but this would be the most
common and the easiest. 
➞Note that in translating an English phrase or clause introduced by the
word after, it is best to use the aorist participle.
Another example:
φεύγοντες ἀπέθανον fleeing (while they were fleeing) they were killed.
Participles used with temporal particles:
ἅμα
at once, at the same time
ἅμα εἰπὼν ἔβαλε τὸν λίθον, at the same time as speaking, 
he threw the stone.
αὐτίκα
at once
αὐτίκα γενόμενος, as soon as born
μεταξύ
in the midst of, while
μεταξὺ θύων, while sacrificing
λέγοντα μεταξύ, in the midst of the discourse
B. Causal (because, since)
Example:
πολλὰ εἶπε, βουλόμενος τὸν βασιλέα πεῖσαι.
He said many things because he wished to persuade the king.
142
Lesson VII

The causal particles that can be used with participles are:
ἅτε
inasmuch as, seeing that, since
ὡς, ὥσπερ
as causal particles give an alleged cause for which the
speaker/writer does not wish to take credit. They may be
translated as as if, as though, as thinking, on the grounds that.
Example:
ἅτε τὰ χρήματα ἔχων
seeing that he has the money
θαυμάζονται ὡς σοφοὶ ὄντες
They are admired as if (on the grounds that) they are wise.
δεδίασι τὸν θάνατον ὡς εὖ εἰδότες ὅτι μέγιστον τῶν κακῶν ἐστι.
They fear death as though they know well that it is the greatest of evils.
—Plato, Apology 
C. Manner and Means (in, by)
τὴν ἀσπίδα ἀποβαλών, ἔφυγε τὸν θάνατον.
By throwing away his shield, he escaped death. (means)
—Xenophon
ἥκει τὰ χαλεπὰ φερόμενα.
The troubles have come with a rush. (manner) (lit. The troubles have come
being carried. An idiomatic use of the middle–passive participle of
φέρω.)
D. Conditional (if )
ταῦτα λέγων, οὐκ ἂν τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἔλεγες.
If you were saying these things, you would not be speaking the truth. (lit.
Saying these things you would not be speaking the truth.)
The negative in the participial clause (which represents the if-clause or pro-
tasis of the condition) is μή: this will give you a hint to translate it as a condi-
tion, since most other uses of the participle take οὐas negative.
σοφοὶ μὴ ὄντες, οὐχ ἕξετε μαθητάς.
If you are not wise, you will not have pupils. (lit. Not being wise, you will
not have pupils.)
E. Concession (although)
πολλὰ χρήματα ἔχων, οὔκ εἰμι εὐτυχής.
Although I have much money, I am not happy.
The particles καίπερ and καί(although, even though) can also be used with the
circumstantial participle of concession.
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
143

F. Purpose (to, in order to) is usually expressed by the future participle,
sometimes with ὡς.
ἦλθε . . . λυσόμενος τε θύγατρα (= θυγατέρα)
He came to ransom his daughter.
—Iliad I.13
ὁ ἡγησόμενος οὐδεὶς ἔσται.
There will be no one to lead/who will lead [us].
—Xenophon
G. Description
ἦλθε πολλὰ δῶρα φέρων (or ἔχων)
He came bearing many gifts.
The participles ἔχων, φέρων, ἄγων, λαβών are often used idiomatically and
may be translated as with.
ἔρχεται τὸν υἱὸν ἔχουσα.
She comes bringing her son, or she is coming with her son.
—Xenophon
The Genitive Absolute
The genitive absolute is a special use of the circumstantial participle. A noun
or pronoun and a participle are put into the genitive case in an absolute con-
struction (so called because it does not agree with any other words in the sen-
tence, and stands by itself, grammatically). It is translated by a clause and can
be used to express any of the attendant circumstances a circumstantial par-
ticiple does. In English we have a similar construction, called the nominative
absolute (English being severely limited in the number of its cases): for ex-
ample (from Eric Partridge, Usage and Abusage), “On the door being opened, she
perceived a couch.” The clause in italics is an absolute construction: grammat-
ically it stands outside the main clause. On the other hand, had we written
“Upon opening the door, she perceived the couch,” the participial clause would
be a descriptive, adjectival one agreeing with she. Common expressions in
English using a nominative absolute are “other things being equal” and “that
said.” In the absolute construction, then, the participial clause which describes
the circumstances stands outside the main sentence grammatically. The gen-
itive absolute in Greek (like the ablative absolute in Latin) is very common
and very versatile, owing to the many forms and uses of the Greek participle.
It can express time, manner, means, cause, condition, concession, purpose,
and description. It can be used plain or with any of the particles that can ac-
company the participles.
144
Lesson VII

Examples:
καὶ τῶν φίλων τὴν χώραν λιπόντων, ἐμείναμεν.
Although our friends left the place, we remained.
τῆς φίλης μὴ ἐλθούσης, ἐλίπομεν ἂν τὴν χώραν.
If our friend had not come, we would have left the place.
τῶν πολιτῶν δικαίων ὄντων, δικαία ἐστὶν ἡ πόλις.
Because the citizens are just, the city is just.
τοῦ πατρὸς οὐ βουλομένου, ταῦτα οὐ πράξομεν.
Since father does not wish it, we will not do these things.
λόγων γενομένων, ἀπῆλθον οἱ νεανίαι καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες.
The conversation having taken place (after the conversation), the young
men and the women departed.
Some examples from Greek authors:
1. καὶ Πολυφόντου κελεύοντος ἐκχωρεῖν, . . . Οἰδίπους καὶ Πολυφόντην καὶ
Λάϊον ἀπέκτεινε.
And when Polyphontes ordered [him] to get out of the way, Oedipus killed both
Poly phontes and Laius.
—Apollodorus
2. Ἀθηναίων δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ τοῦτο παθόντων, διπλασίαν ἂν τὴν δύναμιν εἰκάζεσθαι
(οἶμαι).
If the Athenians should experience this same thing, I think their power would be
estimated as double.
—Thucydides
3. πῶς δίκης οὔσης ὁ Ζεὺς οὐκ ἀπόλωλεν;
If justice exists, how is it that Zeus has not perished?
—Aristophanes
Note: A rarer construction is the accusative absolute, which is used
in the same way as the genitive absolute, but is restricted to the par-
ticiples of impersonal verbs: these are put into the accusative in the
neuter singular, παρόν μοι, it being possible for me; δέον ἡμῖν ἀπιέναι, it
being necessary for us to depart. δέον is the neuter accusative participle
of the impersonal verb δεῖ.
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
145

Exercise A (continued)
3. a. Study the examples of circumstantial participles and translate. For the
genitive absolute it may help to begin: with + the noun + the verb + -ing (e.g.,
“with poets be-ing present”) and then try to make it more elegant as you un-
derstand the context (“because/when/if poets are present”). 
1. τῶν ποιητῶν ἀκούσασα ἦλθον ὡς ἀκουσομένη τῆς σοφῆς.
2. καὶ τὸν πατέρα ἀποκτείνας ἑκείνης τῆς πόλεως βασιλεὺς ἐγένετο.
3. τὴν δὲ μητέρα ἀποκτείναντες ἔφυγον ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος.
4. ταῦτα ἔπραξα ὡς ὄντα δίκαια.
5. τῶν παίδων ἀποθανόντων ἡ μήτηρ ἔφυγεν εἰς τήνδε τὴν πόλιν.
6. δῶρα φέροντες ἐρχόμεθα ὡς τὸν βασιλέα πείσοντες.
7. ὁ γέρων ἦλθε ὡς τὴν παῖδα λυσόμενος.
8. τοῦ πολέμου παυομένου εἰρήνην ἄγειν οἷόν τ’ ἔσται.
9. ξένων ἐλθόντων οὐκ ἂν ἐλίπομεν.
3. b. Make up sentences using the following words.
1. λυσομένη
4. ἀκούουσα
2. ὡς ὤν
5. παρόντων
3. λέγοντες μεταξύ 
6. ἀποθανόντος
3. Supplementary
The supplementary participle is more closely related to the verb: it is used to
complete the meaning of the verb, and without it the idea is incomplete. The
supplementary participle may go with either the subject or the object of the
verb, for example:
παύω (active): παύω τὸν ἄνδρα λέγοντα
I stop the man (from) speaking.
παύομαι (middle): παύομαι λέγων/λέγουσα
I stop (myself) speaking or I cease speaking.
This construction is found with verbs meaning begin, continue, stop (cf. in
English “keep on keeping on”), and with those meaning repent, be weary, be
pleased or displeased, allow.
ἄρξομαι λέγων I shall begin speaking.
παύσω τοῦτο γιγνόμενον I shall stop this from happening.
—Plato
146
Lesson VII

Some of these verbs may take both the supplementary participle and the
supplementary infinitive con structions, but with different meanings:
αἰσχύνομαι
I am ashamed
αἰσχύνομαι λέγων/λέγουσα
I am ashamed speaking, I speak with shame
αἰσχύνομαι λέγειν
I am ashamed to speak (and so, do not
speak)
In the first example, the participle speaking (λέγων/λέγουσα) implies that I
am actually speaking, ashamed or not; in the second, the infinitive to speak
(λέγειν) implies that my shame prevents me from speaking. This subtle dif-
ference in construction makes a great deal of difference in meaning.
There are several verbs in Greek which take a supplementary participle in
a way that seems odd to us at first, because it differs from English usage. In
these sentences the participle tells what the main action is, while the main
verb tells something about how the action is occurring.
τυγχάνω happen (we use the infinitive, Greek uses the participle):
τυγχάνει δίκαιος ὤν, He happens to be (lit. being) honest or He really is
honest. (Often forms of τυγχάνω are used to emphasize that some-
thing is indeed true.)
λανθάνω escape the notice of (we usually translate the participle by a
finite verb and express the form of λανθάνω by an adverb, unawares,
without being observed):
οὐ λανθάνει κακὸς ὤν
lit. He does not escape notice being wicked
ἔλαθον ἐσελθόντες
They got in secretly.
—Thucydides 
φθάνω anticipate, come/do/be first or before (the action in which one is
ahead of somebody else is expressed by the participle):
ἔφθασαν τοὺς φίλους ἐλθόντες
lit. They anticipated their friends
having come. Or, They got there before their friends / They got the jump
on their friends . . . .
Other uses of the supplementary participle:
In Indirect Statement: with verbs of knowing (and the opposite, those mean-
ing be ignorant, forget) and showing, and with verbs of sense perception (see,
hear, feel) the participle is used in indirect statement.
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
147

Examples:
ἡ ψυχὴ ἀθάνατος φαίνεται οὖσα.
It is apparent that the soul is immortal (i.e., it really is immortal).
—Plato
ὁρῶμεν πάντα ἀληθῆ ὄντα ἃ λέγετε.
We see that everything you say is true.
—Xenophon
ἤκουσε Κῦρον ἐν Κιλικίᾳ ὄντα.
He heard that Cyrus was in Cilicia.
—Xenophon
With Verbs of Perception, the participle not in indirect statement can be used
to modify the object of the verb, as in these English sentences: “I saw Mommy
kissing Santa Claus,” or “I hear him coming”; compare with “I hear that he is
coming.”
The verbs ἀκούω and αἰσθάνομαι take their object in the genitive case (ex-
cept in indirect statement). Consider the following examples:
ἀκούω τοῦ σοφοῦ λέγοντος.
I hear the wise man speaking. (That is, 
I actually hear him.)
ἀκούω τὸν σοφὸν λέγοντα.
I hear that the wise man is speaking.
Exercise A (continued)
4. Translate.
1. τυγχάνομεν οὖσαι δίκαιαι γυναῖκες.
2. πράττοντες ἄδικα οὐκ ἐλάνθανον.
3. ἔφθασαν δῶρα ἐνεγκοῦσαι.
4. φθάνουσιν ἐκείνας φεύγοντες.
5. ἤρξατε βουλευόμενοι.
6. ταῦτα λέγοντες οὐκ αἰσχύνεσθε;
Tenses of the Participle
The tenses of the participle (except in indirect statement) represent time only
as relative to the main verb. The present refers to an action at the same time as
that of the main verb (while); the aorist refers to time previous to that of the
main verb (after, having). The future participle is used for expressing purpose
or intention, and is rarely used otherwise.
148
Lesson VII

In indirect statement, however, the participle’s tense represents the same
tense as that of a finite verb, that is, the tense of the original statement, as in
the infinitive construction [IV].
Notes on Participles
1. “There is but one difference between the supplementary and cir-
cumstantial participles. It lies in the fact that the circumstantial par-
ticiple is an additional statement and does not form an essential part
of the verbal notion of the principal verb [as does the supplementary
participle]. The circumstantial participle may be removed and the
sentence will not bleed.” (A. T. Robertson, A Grammar of the Greek New
Testament in the Light of Historical Research [New York: Hodder &
Stoughton, Doran, 1914] p. 1124)
2. The Greeks, as mentioned before, were φιλομέτοχοι (fond of par-
ticiples), and Greek has a rich system of participles, richer than Latin
or English, for example. Latin has no present passive nor perfect ac-
tive participles. And English must resort to long periphrases to trans-
late some of the participles (notably the future participle). It may be
said that wherever a participle is possible, Greek has one. This wealth
of participles gives a great deal of flexibility to the language, as you
will see, the more you read.
3. The dangling participle: For most of us our introduction to par-
ticiples in our own language—if in fact we are introduced to them
at all—is usually in connection with the problem of the dangling par-
ticiple. This is a problem that does not occur in Greek.
➞Consider why not. 
I saw the Grand Canyon driving through Arizona, contains an example
of a dangling participle in English. Actually we know what this means,
that I saw it while I was driving, because the grammatically correct
alternative, that the Grand Canyon was driving, is absurd or the re-
sult of sampling the local hallucinogens. On the other hand, if, in the
sentence I saw that man driving my car, I mean I saw him while I was
driving, I do not say so, because, by the placement of the words, driv-
ing goes with that man. In the first example the intended meaning
is clear, and a speaker of this sentence would only risk not under-
standing the hearers’ laughter. In the second, carelessness could lead
to confusion, because in English the placement of words is very im-
portant. In Greek there is no confusion about what words the par-
ticiple goes with because it will be in the same case and gender as
these words. If it goes with the subject it will be nominative. If it goes
with the object it will be accusative. Its place in the sentence does not
matter. Thus, if I saw that man while I was driving, driving is nomi-
native to agree with I. If I saw him actually in the driver’s seat of my
car with his foot on the gas, driving is accusative to agree with the
object of saw.
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
149

Vocabulary
Verbs
αἰσθάνομαι, αἰσθήσομαι,
perceive, sense, understand, learn, hear
ᾐσθόμην
(+ gen.) (aesthetic)
αἰσχύνομαι
be ashamed (cf. αἰσχρός, also in act.
αἰσχύνω, to disgrace)
βασιλεύω (reg. prin. pts.)
be king, rule (+ gen., cf. βασιλεύς)
βλέπω, βλέψομαι, ἔβλεψα
look, see
γιγνώσκω, γνώσομαι
come to know, perceive, know (aor. will
be given later, cf. γνώμη)
διώκω, διώξω, ἐδίωξα
pursue; chase
διαφέρω (see φέρω)
carry over/across; differ, surpass
εἶδον
saw (2nd aor., stem ἰδ‑: part. ἰδών, inf.
ἰδεῖν, related to Latin video)
εὑρίσκω, εὑρήσω, εὗρον
find (pf. εὕρηκα Eureka!; heuristic)
(or ηὗρον)
κελεύω, κελεύσω, ἐκέλευσα
urge, exhort, bid, order
λανθάνω, λήσω, ἔλαθον
escape notice (+ part., cf. λήθη Lethe)
μέλλω, μελλήσω, ἐμέλλησα
be about to, intend, delay (+ fut. inf.)
πυνθάνομαι, πεύσομαι,
learn
ἐπυθόμην
τυγχάνω, τεύξομαι, ἔτυχον
happen (+ part.), meet (+ gen., cf. τύχη)
ὑπάρχω
begin, exist, belong to (cf. ἄρχω)
φεύγω, φεύξομαι
flee, take flight, avoid, escape (cf. Latin 
(φευξοῦμαι), ἔφυγον
fugio, Engl. fugitive)
φθάνω, φθήσομαι, ἔφθασα
be/do first, outstrip, anticipate (+ part.)
Compounds of εἰμί: conjugated like εἰμί
ἄπειμι
be away, be absent
ἔξεστι(ν)
it is possible
πάρειμι
be present, be near, stand by 
πάρεστι + dat.
(impersonal) it depends on
πρόσειμι
be added to, belong to
σύνειμι
be with, live with, have dealings with
Noun
Ζεύς, Διός, ὁ ; dat. Διί, acc. Δία, voc. Ζεῦ
Zeus
μὰ τὸν Δία
by Zeus!
150
Lesson VII

Particles (used with participles)
ἅμα
at once, at the same time as
ἅτε
since, inasmuch as
αὐτίκα
at once
μεταξύ
in the midst of, while
ὡς
as if, as, on the ground that
Exercise B
1. Review the verbs you have had so far, and form the participles for each.
For a complete verb there will be six participles (so far; there are more yet to
come). Remember that the participle is not augmented.
2. Form and decline the following participles.
1. Present active of ἔχω
2. Aorist active of βάλλω
3. Future active of φέρω
4. Aorist active of παύω
5. Future middle of γίγνομαι
3. Parse the following. Example: λύσαντα—aorist active participle of λύω,
masc. acc. sg. or neuter nom./acc. pl.
1. γενομένου
17. ἰδόντας
33. πυθομένας
2. παρόν
18. πέμψασαν
34. λύσοντι
3. αἰσθανομένη
19. λαβουσῶν
35. ἀκούσῃ
4. γιγνώσκοντες
20. φερόμεναι
36. οὔσῃ
5. ἔχοντες
21. εἰπόντος
37. λανθανόντων
6. ὄντας
22. εὑρόντες
38. μέλλοντος
7. ὄντων
23. βουλόμενα
39. συνόντες
8. λέγοντες
24. πυνθανόμενος
40. ἀγαγόντος
9. κτείνας
25. ἀκούσας
41. λύσαντας
10. ὤν
26. νομίζων
42. πείσουσαν
11. γενόμενος
27. κελεύοντος
43. ἄρχουσι
12. μανθανόντων
28. κτείναντος
44. πάσχοντα
13. λεγομένην
29. βασιλεύων
45. ἐσομέναις
14. ἔχουσαι
30. βασιλεύοντος
46. βαλόντες
15. ἀποθανόντος
31. μαθοῦσα
47. βαλλούσης
16. εἰπών
32. ὑπάρχοντος
48. πραξάσας
Recognizing participles
1. -οντ- tells you that it is an active participle of one of the thematic
tenses: future, present, or second aorist.
a. most futures will have σ before the -οντ-.
b. the second aorist is usually accented on the o-sound of the par-
ticipial ending.
2. -αντ- tells you that you are dealing with the first aorist participle.
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
151

3. -ομενος is the sign of the middle/middle-passive of a thematic
tense.
4. -αμενος is the sign of the middle of the first aorist.
4. Translate these sentences and identify the use of each participle.
1. ὁ γέρων ἦλθεν ἔχων πολλὰ δῶρα.
2. πάρεστιν ἡ γυνὴ ἄγουσα τὸν παῖδα.
3. οἱ φεύγοντες ὑπὸ τῶν διωκόντων διώκονται.
4. ὁ ἄρχων ἄρχει τῶν ἀρχομένων.
5. ὁ κόσμος ἐλέγετο τὸ ὄν καὶ τὰ ὄντα.
6. ὁ γὰρ ἱερεὺς ἦλθεν ὡς λυσόμενος τὴν θυγατέρα πολλοῖς χρήμασιν.
7. ἀλλ’ ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐθέλων τὴν γυναῖκα ἔχειν, οὐκ ἔλαβε τὰ χρήματα.
8. οἱ οὐκ ἔχοντες οὔποτε φίλοι ἔσονται τοῖς ἔχουσιν.
9. τὸν λίθον βαλὸν τὸ παιδίον ἔφυγεν.
10. εἶπε πολλὰ ὡς πείσουσα τὸν βασιλέα.
11. ὁ δαίμων τὸν ἄνδρα λέγοντα μεταξὺ ἔπαυσεν.
12. παύσομαι λέγουσα καὶ ἄρξεσθε λέγοντες.
13. τὸν πατέρα μεταξὺ θύοντα ἀπέκτειναν.
14. εἶπον ὅτι ἀπέκτειναν τοῦτον ὡς ἄδικον ὄντα.
15. ξένοι ὄντες ἐρχόμεθα εἰς ταύτην τὴν χώραν.
16. τυγχάνω ὢν δίκαιος ἀνήρ. τυγχάνω οὖσα δικαία γυνή.
17. οὖσα κακὴ οὐκ ἔλαθε τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους.
18. τούτου παρόντος ἤρξαντο λέγοντες.
19. οὐκ αἰσχύνει ταῦτα πράττων;
20. τῶν ποιητῶν τὴν ἀλήθειαν λεγόντων, ἀθάνατος ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ψυχή.
21. ἠκούσαμεν τοὺς ποιητὰς λέγοντας.
22. ἤκουον τοῦ σοφοῦ περὶ ἀρετῆς λέγοντος/τῆς σοφῆς περὶ τῶν δικαίων
λεγούσης.
23. ᾐσθόμεθα οὐ σοφοὶ ὄντες.
24. καίπερ οὐκ ἰδών, ᾐσθόμην ἐκεῖνον τὸν ἄνδρα παρόντα.
25. ᾐσχύνοντο οἱ δικασταὶ λαβεῖν δῶρα καὶ χρήματα.
26. οὐκ ἔξεστιν εὑρεῖν ἄνδρα δίκαιον ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ χώρᾳ.
27. χαλεπόν ἐστι γιγνώσκειν τοὺς θεοὺς εἴ εἰσιν εἴτε μή.
28. ὁ γὰρ νόμος τὸν διώκοντα λέγειν κελεύει.
29. εὗρον τὴν γυναῖκα οὖσαν ἄδικον.
30. ἡ ἐλπὶς ἀποῦσα οὐ τὸν φεύγοντα λανθάνει.
31. τῆς ἐλπίδος ἀπούσης καὶ οἱ ἀγαθοὶ ἔφευγον.
32. τῆς γυναικὸς παρούσης ὁ ἀνὴρ οὐκ ἠθέλησε ψευδῆ λέγειν.
33. ἐκείνην τὴν χώραν λιπόντες, κατὰ θάλασσαν πρὸς τὰς νήσους
ἤλθομεν.
34. καίπερ τὴν χώραν λιπεῖν βουλόμεναι, ἔμενον.
35. ἄξιόν ἐστι πείθεσθαι τῷ τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγοντι.
36. καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν εἰρήνην ἄγειν βουλομένων, οὐκ ἐπαύσατο ὁ
πόλεμος.
37. νέοι ὄντες εὐτυχεῖς ἐστε.
38. οἱ δικασταὶ τὴν ἀλήθειαν μαθόντες ἐβουλεύσαντο καὶ ἔκριναν.
39. ἀπεθάνετε ἄν, τῶν ἀνδρῶν μὴ ἐλθόντων.
40. τῶν παίδων ὄντων εὐδαιμόνων, ὁ πατὴρ καὶ ἡ μήτηρ εἰσὶ εὐδαίμονες.
152
Lesson VII

5. a. Translate into Greek.
1. He did not kill his mother without being observed.
2. I happen to be speaking to the citizens about war and peace.
3. Although the poets were present, we listened to the philosophers.
4. I heard that that woman was in Greece.
5. He came to find an honest man.
6. We admired this man on the ground that he was brave and just.
7. After killing the old man, he became king.
8. The one who said these things was the father of the poet.
5. b. Compose some sentences using the following expressions.
1. τυγχάνω + a participle of ἔρχομαι
2. παύω or παύομαι + a participle of βλέπω
3. αἰσθάνομαι + a participle of εἰμί
4. a genitive absolute using a participle of ἄπειμι
Readings
1. ἡ δὲ μνήμη τοῦ γενομένου. τὸ δὲ παρὸν ὅτε πάρεστιν, οὐδεὶς ἂν φαίη
μνημονεύειν.
—Aristotle, περὶ μνήμης
[μνήμη, -ης, ἡmemory. Understand ἐστί. γενόμενον that which has been, the past.
οὐδείς no one (m. nom. sg.). φαίη (with ἄν) would say from φημί(3rd sg. opt.).
μνημονεύω remember.]
2. τοῦ δὲ νῦν ἐν τῷ νῦν οὐκ ἔστι μνήμη, καθάπερ εἴρηται καὶ πρότερον, ἀλλὰ
τοῦ μὲν παρόντος αἴσθησις, τοῦ δὲ μέλλοντος ἐλπίς, τοῦ δὲ γενομένου μνήμη.
διὸ μετὰ χρόνου πᾶσα μνήμη. ὥσθ’ ὅσα χρόνου αἰσθάνεται, ταῦτα μόνα τῶν
ζῴων μνημονεύει, καὶ τούτῳ ᾧ αἰσθάνεται.
—Aristotle, περὶ μνήμης
[καθάπερ as. εἴρηται (it) has been said. πρότερον before. αἴσθησις, -έως, ἡfeel-
ing, perception (cf. αἰσθάνομαι). διόand therefore. ὅσα as many as (n. nom./acc.
pl.). ζῷον, -oυ, τό animal.]
3. πρῶτον μὲν οὐν σκεπτέον τί τῶν βασιλευόντων ἔργον ἐστίν.
—Isocrates
[σκεπτέον it is necessary to consider.]
4. μὴ σπεύδετε πλουτεῖν μᾶλλον ἢ χρηστοὶ δοκεῖν εἶναι, γιγνώσκοντες ὅτι καὶ
τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων οἱ μεγίστας ἐπ’ ἀρετῇ δόξας ἔχοντες πλείστων
ἀγαθῶν δεσπόται καθίστανται.
—Isocrates, Nicocles 
[μὴ . . . ἤdo not be eager to be wealthy rather than. δοκεῖν to seem (pres. inf.). δόξα,
-ης, ἡreputation. βάρβαροι those who are not Ἕλληνες. μεγίστoς, -η, -ον biggest,
greatest. πλεῖστος, -η, -ον most. καθίστανται are established, become, are appointed.]
5. πάντων χρημάτων μέτρον ἐστὶν ἄνθρωπος, τῶν μὲν ὄντων ὡς ἔστιν, τῶν δὲ
οὐκ ὄντων ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν.
—Protagoras
Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
153

6. ἄνθρωπος ὢν μέμνησο τῆς κοινῆς τύχης.
—Menander
[μέμνησο remember! (imperative + gen.).]
7. ὅστις στρατηγεῖ μὴ στρατιώτης γενόμενος, οὗτος ἑκατόμβην ἐξάγει τοῖς
πολεμίοις.
—Menander
[ὅστις whoever, anyone who (m. nom. sg.). στρατηγέω be general (-εῖ, 3rd sg.).
ἑκατόμβη, -ης, ἡhecatomb, sacrifice. ἐξάγει ἐκ + ἄγω. πολέμιος, -α, -ον hostile,
οἱ πολέμιοι the enemy.]
8. μιᾶς γὰρ κοπτομένης κεφαλῆς δύο ἀνεφύοντο.
—Apollodorus
[μιᾶς, gen. sg. of εἷς, μία, ἕν one. κόπτω chop off. κεφαλή, -ῆς, ἡhead. ἀνεφύοντο,
impf. m.-p. of ἀναφύω grow up/back.]
9. θνῄσκω, παρόν μοι μὴ θανεῖν ὑπὲρ σέθεν
ἀλλ’ ἄνδρα τε σχεῖν Θεσσαλῶν ὃν ἤθελον
καὶ δῶμα ναίειν ὄλβιον τυραννίδι.
—Euripides, Alcestis
[θνῄσκω = ἀποθνῄσκω. παρόν: acc. abs. σέθεν = σου (gen. sg.), you. Θεσσαλῶν
of the Thessalians. δῶμα, δώματος, τόhome. ναίειν to dwell in, to live in. ὄλβιος,
-α, -ον wealthy, prosperous.]
10. The story of Deucalion (the Greek Noah): 
Προμηθέως δὲ παῖς Δευκαλίων ἐγένετο. οὗτος βασιλεύων τῶν περὶ τὴν Φθίαν
τόπων γαμεῖ Πύρραν τὴν Ἐπιμηθέως καὶ Πανδώρας, ἣν ἔπλασαν θεοὶ πρώτην
γυναῖκα. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀφανίσαι Ζεὺς τὸ χαλκοῦν ἠθέλησε γένος, ὑποθεμένου
Προμηθέως, Δευκαλίων τεκτηνάμενος λάρνακα, καὶ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἐνθέμενος,
εἰς ταύτην μετὰ Πύρρας εἰσέβη. Ζεὺς δὲ πολὺν ὑετὸν ἀπ’ οὐρανοῦ χέας τὰ
πλεῖστα μέρη τῆς Ἑλλάδος κατέκλυσεν, ὥστε διαφθαρῆναι πάντας ἀνθρώπους,
ὀλίγων χωρὶς οἳ συνέφυγον εἰς τὰ πλησίον ὑψηλὰ ὄρη.
[Deucalion: son of Prometheus, husband of Pyrrha (daughter of Epimetheus
and Pandora). Προμηθέως gen. of Prometheus. τόπος, -ου, ὁplace, region.
ἔπλασαν: aor. of πλάττω. πλάττω (πλάσσω) make, form. γαμεῖhe marries.
ἀφανίζω destroy. ὑποθέμενος having instructed. τεκτηνάμενος: aor. partic. of
τεκταίνομαι build. λάρναξ, -ακος, ἡark. ἐπιτήδειος, -α, -ον suitable. τὰ ἐπιτήδεια
provisions. ἐνθέμενος having put in. εἰσέβη went into, embarked (3rd sg.). ὑετός,
-οῦ, ὁrain. χέας having poured (m. nom. sg.). πλεῖστος most. κατακλύζω inun-
date, flood. διαφθαρῆναι to be destroyed. ὀλίγος, -η, -ον few. χωρίς except (+ gen.).
σύν + φεύγω. πλησίον nearby, near (adv.). ὑψηλός, -ή, -όν high.]
τότε δὲ καὶ τὰ κατὰ Θεσσαλίαν ὄρη διέστη, καὶ τὰ ἐκτὸς Ἰσθμοῦ καὶ Πελοπον -
νήσου συνεχέθη πάντα. Δευκαλίων δὲ ἐν τῇ λάρνακι διὰ τῆς θαλάσσης
φερόμενος ἡμέρας ἐννέα καὶ νύκτας ἴσας τῷ Παρνασσῷ προσίσχει, κἀκεῖ τῶν
ὄμβρων παῦλαν λαβόντων ἐκβὰς θύει Διὶ φυξίῳ. Ζεὺς δὲ πέμψας Ἑρμῆν πρὸς
αὐτὸν ἐπέτρεψεν αἱρεῖσθαι ὅ τι βούλεται. ὁ δὲ αἱρεῖται ἀνθρώπους αὐτῷ
γενέσθαι. καὶ Διὸς εἰπόντος ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆς ἔβαλλεν αἴρων λίθους, καὶ οὓς μὲν
ἔβαλλε Δευκαλίων, ἄνδρες ἐγένοντο, οὓς δὲ Πύρρα, γυναῖκες. ὅθεν καὶ λαοὶ
μεταφορικῶς ὠνομάσθησαν ἀπὸ τοῦ λᾶας ὁ λίθος.
—Apollodorus
154
Lesson VII

Participles: Present, Future, Aorist Active and Middle/Middle-Passive
155
[διέστη were divided (3rd sg.). συνεχέθη were demolished (aor. pass. of συγχέω).
ἴσος, -η, -ον equal. προσίσχω put in to shore at (+ dat.). ἐκεῖthere (adv.). ὄμβρος,
-ου, ὁstorm. παῦλα, -ης, ἡrest, pause. ἐκβάς having disembarked (m. nom. sg.).
φυξίος, -ον putting to flight. ἐπιτρέπω refer to, leave to. αἱρεῖσθαι choose;
αἱρεῖται he chooses. αἴρων < αἴρω pick up, lift. ὑπέρ over (+ gen.). ὅθεν whence.
λαός -οῦ, ὁpeople. μεταφορικῶς metaphorically (-ως: adv.). ὠνομάσθησαν were
named (from ὀνομάζω, cf. ὄνομα). λᾶας stone.]
11. Perseus and the Gorgons:
[Περσεὺς] πετόμενος εἰς τὸν Ὠκεανὸν ἧκε καὶ κατέλαβε τὰς Γοργόνας
κοιμωμένας. ἦσαν δὲ αὗται Σθένω Εὐρυάλη Μέδουσα. μόνη δὲ ἦν θνητὴ
Μέδουσα· διὰ τοῦτο ἐπὶ τὴν ταύτης κεφαλὴν Περσεὺς ἐπέμφθη. εἶχον δὲ αἱ
Γοργόνες κεφαλὰς μὲν περιεσπειραμένας φολίσι δρακόντων, ὀδόντας μεγάλους
ὡς συῶν καὶ χεῖρας χαλκᾶς, καὶ πτέρυγας χρυσᾶς, δι’ ὧν ἐπέτοντο. τοὺς δὲ
ἰδόντας λίθους ἐποίουν.
[The story of Perseus’ decapitation of Medusa. Ὠκεανός, -οῦ, ὁOceanus.
πέτομαι fly. ἥκω have come. κατά+ λαμβάνω catch. κοιμάω put to sleep, in
mid. fall asleep. θνητός, -ή, -όν mortal. ἐπέμφθη (aor. pass.) (he) was sent.
περιεσπειραμένος coiled around. ἐπί+ acc. for, after (of purpose). φολίς, -ίδος,
ἡscale. αὐτός, αὐτή, αὐτό(in oblique cases) he, she, it. σῦς, συός, ὁ, ἡswine.
χαλκοῦς of bronze. πτέρυξ, πτέρυγος, ἡwing. χρυσοῦς golden. ἐποίουν they made
(3rd pl. impf.).]
ἐπιστὰς οὖν αὐταῖς ὁ Περσεὺς κοιμωμέναις, κατευθυνούσης τὴν χεῖρα
Ἀθηνᾶς, ἀπεστραμμένος καὶ βλέπων εἰς ἀσπίδα χαλκῆν, δι’ ἧς τὴν εἰκόνα τῆς
Γοργόνος ἔβλεπεν, ἐκαρατόμησεν αὐτήν. ἀποτμηθείσης δὲ τῆς κεφαλῆς ἐκ τῆς
Γοργόνος ἐξέθορε Πήγασος πτηνὸς ἵππος, καὶ Χρυσάωρ ὁ Γηρυόνου πατήρ·
τούτους δὲ ἐγέννησεν ἐκ Ποσειδῶνος. ὁ μὲν οὖν Περσεὺς ἐνθέμενος εἰς τὴν
κίβισιν τὴν κεφαλὴν τῆς Μεδούσης ὀπίσω πάλιν ἐχώρει, αἱ δὲ Γοργόνες ἐκ τῆς
κοίτης ἀναστᾶσαι τὸν Περσέα ἐδίωκον, καὶ συνιδεῖν αὐτὸν οὐκ ἠδύναντο διὰ
τὴν κυνῆν. ἀπεκρύπτετο γὰρ ὑπ’ αὐτῆς.
—Apollodorus
[ἐπιστάς standing over (aor. part., m. nom. sg.). κατευθύνω guide, direct.
ἀπεστραμμένος turned away (pf. part). ἐκαρατόμησεν beheaded (3rd sg. aor.
act). ἀποτμηθείσης having been cut off (gen. abs.). ἐξέθορε, aor. of ἐκθρῴσκω,
leap out of. πτηνός, -ή, -όν winged. Chrysaor, son of Medusa and Poseidon, was
born holding a golden sword (as his name signifies). He became the father
of Geryon, the three-bodied giant. ἐγέννησεν (she) bore. ἐνθέμενος having put
in (aor. mid. part.). κίβισις, -έως, ἡpack. ὀπίσω back (adv.). πάλιν back, again
(adv.). ἐχώρει (he) was going (3rd sg. impf.). κοίτη, -ης, ἡsleep. ἀναστᾶσαι
having  gotten up. συνιδεῖν to see. ἠδύναντο (they) were [not] able. κυνῆ, -ῆς, ἡ
helmet. ἀποκρύπτω conceal, hide.]
ἀργὸς γὰρ οὐδεὶς θεοὺς ἔχων ἀνὰ στόμα 
βίον δύναιτ’ ἂν ξυλλέγειν ἄνευ πόνου.
A lazy lout with the gods on his lips 
cannot eke out a livelihood without hard work.
—Euripides, Electra

Gorgon Stories
What happened next to the Gorgon’s severed head?
Medusa’s head was ultimately fixed to Athena’s
shield or in the middle of her aegis, a grim medal-
lion. It remained an image of horror because of its
ability, even after the decapitation, to turn anyone
who looked at it into stone. In John Barth’s Chimera,
it figures in the foundation of a sculpture museum. 
In Euripides’ Alcestis it is a symbol of revulsion to
Admetus who says (1118), when he is asked to re-
ceive a new woman after his wife has died for him:
Καὶ δὴ προτείνω, Γοργόν’ ὡς καρατομῶν
Then, I reach out my hand, as if to behead a Gorgon,
only to discover a moment later that the woman is his wife, returned from the
grave. In Euripides’ Electra, the Gorgon appears on Achilles’ shield in a choral
ode and is later (855–8) referred to when Orestes brings his sister the head of
Aegisthus (their father’s murderer and the usurper of his throne). Whether
the head is still attached to the body is a subject of debate among critics:
ἔρχεται δὲ σοὶ
κάρα ’πιδείξων οὐχὶ Γοργόνος φέρων,
ἀλλ’ ὃν στυγεῖς Αἴγισθον.
[Orestes] is coming now
bringing not the Gorgon’s head to show you,
but Aegisthus whom you hate. 
At the end of the play Orestes is told to go to Athens, where Athena will
protect him from the Furies by shaking the Gorgon face at them.
In Phoenician Women, a later play of Euripides, the Gorgon figures again as
a symbol of hatred and lack of communication in that most dysfunctional of
families, the household of Oedipus, when Jocasta says to her son Eteocles,
who is set on killing his brother Polynices (455–6):
οὐ γὰρ τὸ λαιμότμητον εἰσορᾷς κάρα
Γοργόνος, ἀδελφὸν δ’ εἰσορᾷς ἥκοντα σόν.
You are not looking at the Gorgon’s severed head
but at your brother who has come here.
156
Lesson VII
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

LESSON VIII
Pronouns; Perfect, Pluperfect, and Future Perfect Active; Aspect
In this lesson you will learn more pronouns, the perfect active (the fourth principal
part), and more about aspect. You will also begin writing synopses which help you
see a verb in all its glory at a glance and practice six verbs in the time of one.
157
PRONOUNS:
INTERROGATIVE, INDEFINITE,
RELATIVE INDEFINITE, RECIPROCAL
The interrogative pronoun who?, what? is τίς, τίin Greek. It always takes the
acute on the first syllable (and this never changes to the grave).
The indefinite pronoun anyone, someone, anything, something is enclitic, but
otherwise is spelled in the same way as the interrogative. Both are declined
in the third declension with the base τιν‑.
Interrogative
Indefinite
m./f.
n.
Sg.
m./f.
n.
τίς
τί
N
τις
τι
τίνος (τοῦ)
G
τινός (του)
τίνι (τῷ)
D
τινί (τῳ)
τίνα
τί
A
τινά
τι
m./f.
n.
Pl.
m./f.
n.
τίνες
τίνα
N
τινές
τινά
τίνων
G
τινῶν
τίσι
D
τισί
τίνας
τίνα
A
τινάς
τινά

The alternate forms given in parentheses are fairly common. You should be
aware of them, and use the context to distinguish τοῦand τῷfrom the forms
of the article that look the same. The accent and punctuation will help you to
distinguish the interrogative from the indefinite.
The interrogative τίς and the indefinite τις may be used as either pronouns
or adjectives:
τίς ἔρχεται;
or
τίς ἀνὴρ ἔρχεται;
Who is coming?
What man is coming?
λέγει τις
or
λέγει γυνή τις
Someone says.
Some woman says.
The indefinite is sometimes equivalent to the English indefinite article (a, an):
εἶδον ἄνθρωπόν τινα. I saw a man (or, a certain man).
The relative indefinite pronoun ὅστις (whoever, whatever, anyone who, any-
thing which) consists of the relative pronoun (ὅς, ἥ, ὅ) and the indefinite pro-
noun (τις, τι) combined into one word (except for ὅ τι, the nominative and
accusative neuter singular), in which both elements are declined. Note that
the accent of the relative is retained throughout the relative indefinite.
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
ὅστις
ἥτις
ὅ τι
G
οὗτινος (ὅτου)
ἧστινος
οὗτινος (ὅτου)
D
ᾧτινι (ὅτῳ)
ᾗτινι
ᾧτινι (ὅτῳ)
A
ὅντινα
ἥντινα
ὅ τι
Pl.
N
οἵτινες
αἵτινες
ἅτινα (ἅττα)
G
ὧντινων (ὅτων)
ὧντινων
ὧντινων (ὅτων)
D
οἷστισι (ὅτοις)
αἷστισι
οἷστισι (ὅτοις)
A
οὕστινας
ἅστινας
ἅτινα (ἅττα)
The short forms are common in verse, but rarely found in Attic prose. ὅ τι
is written as two words in modern texts to distinguish it from ὅτι, the con-
junction meaning that, because.
Example of ὅστις:
οὐκ ἔστιν ὅστις βούλεται κακῶς πράττειν.
There is not anyone who wishes to do badly.
The indefinite relative is usually used in indirect questions:
οὐ μανθάνω ὅ τι λέγεις. I do not understand what you mean.
θαυμάζω ὅστις ἐστὶν ὁ βασιλεὺς ὁ τῆς χώρας τῆσδε.
I wonder who is king of this land.
158
Lesson VIII

The reciprocal pronoun ἀλλήλων, (of ) each other is used only in the oblique
cases of the plural (and dual). The plural (perhaps derived from ἄλλος doubled:
ἀλλ‑αλλο‑) is declined as follows:
m.
f.
n.
G
ἀλλήλων
ἀλλήλων
ἀλλήλων
D
ἀλλήλοις
ἀλλήλαις
ἀλλήλοις
A
ἀλλήλους
ἀλλήλας
ἄλληλα
οἱ ξένοι δῶρα πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔπεμψαν.
The strangers sent gifts to each other.
Vocabulary
The fourth principal part is included with new verbs.
Pronouns
ἀλλήλων
(of) each other (reciprocal pronoun)
 (parallel)
ὅστις, ἥτις, ὅ τι
anyone who, anything which, whoever,
 whatever (indefinite relative)
τίς, τί
who?, what? (interrogative pronoun)
διὰ τί, τί (acc. of respect)
why?
τις, τι
someone, something, anyone, anything; a, a
certain (indefinite pronoun; enclitic)
Nouns, Verbs, Adverbs
αἰτία, αἰτίας, ἡ
cause, responsibility; guilt, blame; credit
(aetiology)
ἁμαρτάνω, ἁμαρτήσομαι,
miss (the mark) + gen.; fail, go wrong; err
ἥμαρτον, ἡμάρτηκα
ἐνθάδε
(adv.) to this/that place, hither, thither
κύων, κυνός, ὁ/ἡ
dog; Cynic philosopher (voc. κύον)
φυλάττω, φυλάξω,
keep watch, guard, defend
ἐφύλαξα, πεφύλαχα
φύσις, φύσεως, ἡ
nature, origin (physics)
χθών, χθονός, ἡ
earth (poetic word) (chthonic)
Pronouns: Interrogative, Indefinite, Relative Indefinite, Reciprocal
159

Exercise A
Remember that τις, τι (some, any, a certain) is enclitic and does not come first
in the sentence. E.g., a certain woman γυνή τις; some men ἄνδρες τινές; I saw some
gifts δῶρά τινα εἶδον.
1. Fill in (pronouns).
1. Whom εἶδες;
2. To whom ταῦτα λέγεις;
3. Who ἔρχεται;
4. What εἶπεν;
5. ἔρχεται anyone;
6. Anyone who ταῦτα λέγει, οὐκ ἀληθὲς λέγει.
7. What πράττετε;
8. Who ἔρχονται;
9. Whom ἀκούεις;
10. What βούλει;
11. What gift φέρεις;
12. τοὺς ἵππους ἄγουσι some men.
13. Who οὐ βούλεται ἀγαθὰ ἔχειν;
14. What ἤγγειλεν ὁ ἄγγελος;
15. οὐκ ἔστιν anyone who οὐ βούλεται ἀγαθὰ ἔχειν.
16. οὐ λέγω anything ἄδικον.
17. ἔστιν anyone who οὐ νομίζει τὴν ψυχὴν εἶναι ἀθάνατον;
18. ᾐσθόμην something.
19. ὁ σοφὸς βούλεται φεύγειν anything αἰσχρόν.
20. What λέγων αἰσχύνεται;
21. λέγει anyone τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἀεί;
22. οὗτος ὁ λόγος ἔχει ἄλογον something.
23. ἀνάγκη ἐστὶν εὑρεῖν ἄξιον someone.
24. ἔχουσι ἅπαντα whatever βούλονται.
25. νομίζω some of the women ἀπεῖναι.
26. ἔστιν anyone who ἀποθνῄσκειν ἐθέλει;
27. Whom ἀπέκτεινον;
28. ἤκουσα τοῦ σοφοῦ λέγοντος something περὶ ἀρετῆς.
29. What πράττων ἄρξομαι καὶwhat λέγων παύσομαι;
30. Why νομίζεις ταυτὴν τὴν ἀρχὴν εἶναι ἀρίστην;
31. ἔτυχον someone ἐξ ἄστεως.
32. Whoever ἔχει ἀσπίδα ἀσθενῆ οὐκ ἔστι ἀσφαλής.
33. Who τοὺς λίθους ἔβαλλεν;
34. Whose ἐστὶ τόδε τὸ βαρὺ βιβλίον;
35. Why ταῦτα λέγεις;
36. What βασιλεὺς ἄγει βίον εὐδαίμονα;
37. ἐβουλεύσασθε anything;
38. Which/what ἐστι ἡ βραχεῖα ὁδός;
39. Whom ἄγεται πρὸς γάμον;
40. A certain γέρων ταῦτα γιγνώσκει.
41. αἱ γυναῖκες to each other ἔγραφον.
160
Lesson VIII

42. οἱ ξένοι each other ἐδέχοντο.
43. Who διώκει τὴν δικαιοσύνην;
44. From one another μανθάνομεν.
45. A certain δαίμονα οἱ θεοὶ ἔβαλον ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ.
46. What ἐστι ὄνομα ἐκείνῃ τῇ γυναικί;
47. To whom χάριν φέρετε;
48. By whom ἀπέθανον οἱ φεύγοντες;
49. Whom οἱ παῖδες πείσονται;
50. οἱ πολλοὶ εἰρήνην πρὸς each other ἔχοντες χαίρουσιν.
Readings
1. μακάριος ὅστις οὐσίαν καὶ νοῦν ἔχει.
—Menander
[μακάριος -α, -ον happy, blessed. οὐσία, -ας, ἡproperty. νοῦς, νοῦ, ὁmind (dat.
νῷ, acc. νοῦν).]
2. ἀνελεύθερος πᾶς ὅστις εἰς δόξαν βλέπει.
—Cleanthes, the Stoic
[ἀνελεύθερος, -ον not free, slavish. δόξα, -ης, ἡopinion, reputation.]
3. οὐκ ἔστιν οὐδεὶς ὅστις οὐχ αὑτῷ φίλον.
—Menander
[The double negative reinforces the negative idea. οὐδείς no one (m. nom.
sg.). αὑτῷto himself.]
4. περὶ μὲν οὖν μνήμης καὶ τοῦ μνημονεύειν, τίς ἡ φύσις αὐτῶν καὶ τίνι τῶν τῆς
ψυχῆς μνημονεύει τὰ ζῷα, καὶ περὶ τοῦ ἀναμιμνήσκεσθαι, τί ἐστι καὶ πῶς
γίνεται καὶ δία τίν’ αἰτίαν εἴρηται.
—Aristotle, περὶ μνήμης
[μνήμη, -ης, ἡmemory. μνημονεύω call to mind. αὐτῶν their. ἀναμιμνήσκω re-
mind, in pass. remember, recollect. πῶς how? εἴρηται it has been said.]
5. ἀργύρου πηγή τις αὐτοῖς ἐστι, θησαυρὸς χθονός.
—Aeschylus, Persians
[ἄργυρος, -ου, ὁsilver. πηγή, -ῆς, ἡsource, fount. αὐτοῖς to them (i.e., they have).
θησαυρός, -ου, ὁtreasury.]
6. ἐρωτώμενος διὰ τί ὀλίγους ἔχει μαθητάς, ἔφη ‘ὅτι ἀργυρέᾳ αὐτοὺς ἐκβάλλω
ῥάβδῳ.’
—Diogenes Laertius (quoting Antisthenes)
[ἐρωτώμενος asked (pres. m.-p. part.). ὀλίγος, -η, -ον little, in pl. few. αὐτοὺς
them. ἐκ + βάλλω. ῥάβδος, ἡrod, staff, cane.]
7. ἔστιν οὖν ὅστις βούλεται ὑπὸ τῶν συνόντων βλάπτεσθαι;
—Plato, Apology
[βλάπτω harm.]
Pronouns: Interrogative, Indefinite, Relative Indefinite, Reciprocal
161

τίς δὲ βίος, τί δὲ τερπνὸν ἄτερ χρυσῆς Ἀφροδίτης;
What life, what joy is there without golden Aphrodite?
—Mimnermus, an elegiac poet
PERFECT ACTIVE:
THE FOURTH PRINCIPAL PART
The fourth principal part is the perfect active, first person singular. The per-
fect active stem is used only for the perfect and pluperfect active, there being
another stem for the perfect middle-passive (the fifth principal part). You
need to learn the fourth principal part to master the perfect active system.
Use of the perfect: The Greek perfect is a primary tense: it refers to pres-
ent, not to past time. It expresses a present state resulting from a past act. For
example, τέθνηκε he has died or he is dead. The perfect is used for a completed
action with the effect of the action still continuing in the present. Often it
stresses the lasting result of an action rather than the action itself, as in πέποιθα
(perfect of πείθω) I am confident.
Aspect: Remember that Greek tenses show aspect (character of the action)
as well as time.
The present and imperfect are used for ongoing, continuous action, the
aorist for simple action, the perfect for completed action, for action that is
finished in present time, or for a present state; the pluperfect is used for ac-
tion finished in past time; and the future perfect (which is rare) for action to
be finished in future time or for a future state.
Past
Present
Future
Simple
Aorist
Future
Progressive (ongoing)
Imperfect
Present
Perfective (completed)
Pluperfect
Perfect
Future Perfect
Formation of the Perfect Active System
The perfect stem is formed by reduplication.
162
Lesson VIII

First Perfect
Formation: Reduplication + stem + κ + perfect endings.
Perfect Endings:
Singular
Plural
‑α
1st
‑αμεν
‑ας
2nd
‑ατε
‑ε(ν)
3rd
‑ασι(ν)
Infinitive: ‑έναι
Participle: ‑ώς, ‑υῖα, ‑ός (m./n. base, ‑οτ‑)
Second Perfect
Formation: Reduplication + stem + perfect endings (which are the same as
the first perfect, above).
The perfect of many verbs (especially mute and liquid stems) is formed
without κ; this is called the second perfect. The same endings are used. The
perfect stem of these verbs is also formed by reduplication, but the stem of-
ten shows a vowel change (often to ‑ο‑), as λείπω, perfect λέλοιπα. Sometimes
the final mute appears in its rough form (π, β  φ; κ, γ  χ) (a dental or a nasal
will often be dropped and a first perfect formed). Examples: πέμπω, pf. πέπομφα;
πείθω, first pf. πέπεικα, second pf. πέποιθα.
How to Reduplicate
1. For verbs beginning with a single consonant or a mute and a liquid, double
the first consonant with ε: λύω, pf. λέλυκα; γράφω, pf. γέγραφα; θνῄσκω, pf.
τέθνηκα. (An aspirated consonant reduplicates with its unaspirated form, θύω,
perfect τέθυκα.)
2. Verbs beginning with a vowel usually lengthen the vowel: ἀγγέλλω, pf.
ἤγγελκα; ἄγω, pf. ἦχα. (Note the aspirated final consonant for the second
perfect).
3. Verbs beginning with two or more consonants (unless a mute and a liquid),
a double consonant (ψ, ζ, ξ), or with ῥ, reduplicate with ε (ρ is doubled):
Perfect
στέλλω (send)
ἔσταλκα
ῥίπτω (throw)
ἔρριφα
ζητέω (seek)
ἐζήτηκα
Do not confuse this with the augment. The reduplication is part of the per-
fect stem and is retained throughout the perfect system, including the infini-
tive, the participle, and all moods.
Perfect Active: The Fourth Principal Part
163

The Perfect Active of λύω: λέλυκα, I have released
Formation: λε + λυ + κ + endings
Singular
Plural
λέλυκα
1st
λελύκαμεν
λέλυκας
2nd
λελύκατε
λέλυκε(ν)
3rd
λελύκασι(ν)
Infinitive: λελυκέναι
Participle: λελυκώς, λελυκυῖα, λελυκός
The base of the pf. part. m. and n. is in ‑οτ‑, gen. λελυκότος, see below.
The inflection of the second perfect is no different.
The Second Perfect of πέμπω: πέπομφα, I have sent
Formation: πε + πομφ + endings
Singular
Plural
πέπομφα
1st
πεπόμφαμεν
πέπομφας
2nd
πεπόμφατε
πέπομφε(ν)
3rd
πεπόμφασι(ν)
Infinitive: πεπομφέναι
Participle: πεπομφώς, πεπομφυῖα, πεπομφός
The Perfect Participle
The perfect participle is formed by adding the endings ‑ώς, ‑υῖα, ‑ός to the
perfect stem. It is declined in the third declension with base in ‑οτ‑ in the mas-
culine and neuter. The feminine is in the first declension with base in ‑υια:
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λελυκώς
λελυκυῖα
λελυκός
G
λελυκότος
λελυκυίας
λελυκότος
D
λελυκότι
λελυκυίᾳ
λελυκότι
A
λελυκότα
λελυκυῖαν
λελυκός
Pl.
N
λελυκότες
λελυκυῖαι
λελυκότα
G
λελυκότων
λελυκυιῶν
λελυκότων
D
λελυκόσι(ν)
λελυκυίαις
λελυκόσι(ν)
A
λελυκότας
λελυκυίας
λελυκότα
164
Lesson VIII

The Pluperfect Active
The pluperfect is used for a completed action in past time. The pluperfect is
less common in Greek than in Latin or English, because in Greek the aorist
tense is used for a verb in a subordinate clause that is more past than another
verb. Since the pluperfect is rare, you need not memorize it now but should
learn to recognize it and include it in your synopses (Ex.B4, p. 169).
Meaning of the pluperfect:
γέγραφα (pf.)
I have written, i.e., my writing is now finished.
ἐγεγράφη (plpf.)
I had written, i.e., my writing was finished at some
time in the past.
The pluperfect is a secondary tense and so is augmented. Like the imper-
fect, the pluperfect has only the indicative mood.
Formation: Augment + perfect stem (incl. reduplication) + endings.
Pluperfect Endings:
Singular
Plural
‑η
1st
‑εμεν
‑ης
2nd
‑ετε
‑ει(ν)
3rd
‑εσαν
Example: pluperfect of λύω: ἐλελύκη, I had released
Singular
Plural
ἐλελύκη
1st
ἐλελύκεμεν
ἐλελύκης
2nd
ἐλελύκετε
ἐλελύκει(ν)
3rd
ἐλελύκεσαν
The Future Perfect Active
Even rarer is the future perfect, which is used for an action to be completed
in future time. For most verbs there is no special form for the future perfect,
a periphrastic construction of the perfect participle and ἔσομαι (the future of
εἰμί) being used instead.
Example: fut. pf. of λύω: λελυκὼς/‑υῖα ἔσομαι, I shall have released
Singular
Plural
λελυκὼς ἔσομαι
1st
λελυκότες ἐσόμεθα
λελυκὼς ἔσει
2nd
λελυκότες ἔσεσθε
λελυκὼς ἔσται
3rd
λελυκότες ἔσονται
Perfect Active: The Fourth Principal Part
165

The participle must agree in gender and number with the subject of the verb. 
Verbs with a special future perfect are: 
Future Perfect
Translation
(ἀπο)θνῄσκω
τεθνήξω
I shall be dead
ἵστημι [XII]
ἑστήξω
I shall stand
The Fourth Principal Part (Irregular)
The following verbs have irregularly formed perfects:
ἀγγέλλω
ἤγγελκα
ἄγω
ἦχα
ἀκούω
ἀκήκοα
ἀποθνῄσκω
τέθνηκα
ἀποκτείνω
ἀπέκτονα
ἄρχω
ἦρχα
βάλλω
βέβληκα
γίγνομαι
γέγονα; note perfect active of deponent; pf. pt. γεγώς
γράφω
γέγραφα
ἐθέλω
ἠθέληκα
ἔρχομαι
ἐλήλυθα
εὑρίσκω
ηὕρηκα or εὕρηκα
ἔχω
ἔσχηκα (regular reduplication for stem in σχ‑)
κομίζω
κεκόμικα
κρίνω
κέκρικα
λαμβάνω
εἴληφα
λανθάνω
λέληθα
λέγω
εἴρηκα (cf. εἶπον, used as aorist of λέγω)
λείπω
λέλοιπα
μανθάνω
μεμάθηκα
μένω
μεμένηκα
νομίζω
νενόμικα
πάσχω
πέπονθα
πείθω
πέποιθα (I trust, i.e., have put confidence in); also 
πέπεικα (I have persuaded )
πέμπω
πέπομφα
πράττω
πέπραχα (I have done); also πέπραγα (I have fared)
στέλλω
ἔσταλκα (send )
τείνω
τέτακα (stretch)
τυγχάνω
τετύχηκα
φαίνω
πέφαγκα (I have shown) and πέφηνα (I have appeared)
φέρω
ἐνήνοχα
φεύγω
πέφευγα
166
Lesson VIII

Verb stems and vowel gradation
As has been noted in previous lessons, many verbs show vowel gra-
dation (or a change in the stem vowel from one form to another).
1. The second aorist usually shows a shortening of the stem vowel;
this is known as the weak grade. The present and future have the nor-
mal or full grade (often in ε) as does the first perfect; but the second
perfect often has ο.
Examples:
λείπω, λείψω
present and future have ‑ει‑
ἔλιπον
aorist has ι (weak or zero grade)
λέλοιπα
perfect οι (o-grade)
2. Another common grade can be seen in the liquid and nasal stems
which often show ‑α‑ in the perfect.
Examples:
στέλλω
pf. ἔσταλκα (send)
τείνω
pf. τέτακα (stretch)
3. Some of the other irregularities can be explained by stem variations:
many verbs add to the stem to form the present.
a. ‑λ added to form the present:
Present:
ἀγγέλλω
Stem:
ἀγγελ‑
βάλλω
βαλ‑, βλη‑
στέλλω
στελ‑, σταλ‑
b. Many verbs add ‑ι‑ to form the present stem:
Present:
φαίνω
Stem:
φαν‑, φην‑
τείνω
τεν‑, τα‑
ἀποκτείνω
κτεν‑, κτον‑
χαίρω
χαιρ‑, χαρ‑
c. Some verbs add ‑ν‑ or ‑αν‑ to form the present:
Present:
μανθάνω
Stem:
μαθ‑
λαμβάνω
λαβ‑, ληβ‑
λανθάνω
λαθ‑, ληθ‑
τυγχάνω
τυχ‑
φθάνω
φθα‑
d. Some add ‑σκω (or ‑ισκω)
Present:
ἀποθνῄσκω
Stem:
θνη‑, θαν‑
γιγνώσκω
γνω‑, γνο‑
εὑρίσκω
εὑρ‑
Perfect Active: The Fourth Principal Part
167

Irregular Verbs
The verb οἶδα (know) is an irregular second perfect in form with a present mean-
ing. (It is related to εἶδον I saw, and to the Latin verb video.) The perfect form
is translated as a present, the pluperfect as an imperfect.
Perfect
Pluperfect
Sg.
οἶδα
1st
ᾔδη
οἶσθα (οἶδας)
2nd
ᾔδησθα
οἶδε(ν)
3rd
ᾔδει(ν)
Pl.
ἴσμεν
1st
ᾖσμεν
ἴστε
2nd
ᾖστε
ἴσασι(ν)
3rd
ᾖσαν
Infinitive: εἰδέναι
Participle: εἰδώς, εἰδυῖα, εἰδός
The future is εἴσομαι (a deponent future form).
The verb δέδια/δέδοικα ( fear) is a second perfect used in a present sense.
First perfect forms are also found for some persons (first perfect infinitive and
participle are in parentheses):
Second perfect
First perfect
Sg.
δέδια
1st
δέδοικα
δέδιας
2nd
δέδοικας
δέδιε(ν)
3rd
δέδοικε(ν)
Pl.
δέδιμεν
1st
δέδιτε
2nd
δεδίασι(ν)
3rd
δεδοίκασι(ν)
Infinitive: δεδιέναι (δεδοικέναι)
Participle: δεδιώς, δεδιυῖα, δεδιός (δεδοικώς, δεδοικυῖα, δεδοικός)
Vocabulary
δέδια/δέδοικα
fear (pf. with pres. meaning)
διδάσκω, διδάξω,
instruct, teach (didactic)
ἐδίδαξα, δεδίδαχα
ἔοικα
be like, look like (+ dat.); seem (+ inf.) (pf. with
pres. meaning)
ἔοικε
impersonal, it seems
μέμφομαι, μέμψομαι
blame, censure (aorist to be given later)
οἶδα, εἴσομαι
know (pf. with pres. meaning) (with part., 
know that; with inf., know how to)
168
Lesson VIII

πίνω, πίομαι, ἔπιον,
drink
πέπωκα
σχολή, σχολῆς, ἡ
leisure, rest (school)
σχολὴν ἄγειν
be at rest, enjoy leisure
φύω, φύσω, ἔφυσα,
in pres., fut., and 1st aor. act., bring forth,
πέφυκα
produce; in pf. act. and pass., grow, be born
φυτόν, -οῦ, τό
plant
φύσις, φύσεως, ἡ
nature
Exercise B
1. Form the (regular) perfects.
1. βουλεύω
4. πιστεύω
2. θύω 
5. παύω
3. παιδεύω
2. a. Conjugate in the perfect active with infinitive and participle.
1. ἄγω
4. μανθάνω
2. φέρω
5. κρίνω
3. ἔρχομαι
2. b. Conjugate in the pluperfect.
1. γράφω
2. ἀγγέλλω
2. c. Conjugate in the future perfect.
πάσχω
3. Form the perfect active participles of all and decline any two.
1. ἀκούω
5. ἐθέλω
8. λαμβάνω
2. ἀποθνῄσκω
6. ἔχω
9. λείπω
3. ἄρχω
7. νομίζω
10. πράττω
4. βάλλω
4. Synopses: to give a synopsis, list together all the forms for a given person
(all tenses, moods, and voices).
Write the following synopses:
1. λύω: 2nd person sg.  2. ἔχω: 3rd person pl.  3. λαμβάνω: 1st
 person sg.
Note: if a verb lacks certain forms, leave the spaces for those forms
blank: e.g., λαμβάνω lacks a future active. Write down the principal parts
first. Omit forms you have not had, but leave space to fill them in later.
A sample synopsis: παύω in 3rd sg.
Principal parts: παύω, παύσω, ἔπαυσα, πέπαυκα, πέπαυμαι [IX], ἐπαύθην [X]
Perfect Active: The Fourth Principal Part
169

Active
Pres.
Impf.
Fut.
Aor.
Pf.
Plpf.
IND
παύει
ἔπαυε
παύσει
ἔπαυσε
πέπαυκε
ἐπεπαύκει
SUB
[XIII]
—
—
[XIII]
[XIII]
—
OPT
[XIII]
—
[XIII]
[XIII]
[XIII]
— 
INF
παύειν
—
παύσειν
παῦσαι
πεπαυκέναι
— 
PART
παύων
—
παύσων
παύσας
πεπαυκώς
— 
Middle/Middle-Passive
Pres.
Impf.
Fut.
Aor.
(m.-p.)
(m.-p.)
(m)
(m)
Pf.
Plpf.
IND
παύεται
ἐπαύετο
παύσεται
ἐπαύσατο
[IX]
[IX]
SUB
[XIII]
— 
— 
[XIII]
[XIII]
— 
OPT
[XIII]
— 
[XIII]
[XIII]
[XIII]
— 
INF
παύεσθαι
— 
παύσεσθαι
παύσασθαι
[IX]
— 
PRT
παυόμενος
— 
παυσόμενος
παυσάμενος
[IX]
— 
(Passive: Future, Aorist [X])
5. a. Parse.
b. Change to the opposite number (except inf.).
1. ᾔδει
13. οἶδεν
25. λέληθε
2. νενομίκατε
14. γέγραφε
26. τεθνηκότες
3. πεπωκότα
15. πέποιθας
27. πεπράχαμεν
4. εἰδέναι
16. πεφευγέναι
28. ἐνήνοχας
5. δεδιέναι
17. ἴσασιν
29. εἴληφε
6. πεπόμφατε
18. εἰδυῖαι
30. ἐμεμαθήκη
7. εἰρήκασιν
19. πεπιστεύκασι
31. ἀκηκόατε
8. δεδίδαχεν
20. ἐγεγράφειν
32. γέγραφα
9. εἴρηκεν
21. εἰδότες
33. ἔοικε
10. τέθνηκεν
22. λέλοιπε
34. πεφυκότων
11. ἐμεμαθήκεσαν
23. βεβλήκασι
35. δεδοικέναι
12. πεπονθὼς ἔσομαι
24. ἐλήλυθας
36. πεπόνθαμεν
6. Translate.
1. τί ἀκηκόατε; ἀκηκόαμεν μὲν ὡς Σωκράτης παιδεύει ἀνθρώπους· ἴσμεν
δὲ τοῦτο οὐκ ὂν ἀληθές.
2. οἶδα ὅ τι πέπονθας.
3. γέγραφεν ὁ ἀνὴρ ἐκεῖνα.
4. ἴσασιν οἱ θεοὶ πάντα.
5. οἱ σοφοὶ θάνατον οὐ δεδίασιν.
6. τί γέγραφας; γέγραφα λόγους τινάς. ἔφη γεγραφέναι τοὺς λόγους
τούσδε.
7. μεμαθήκατέ τι; ναί, πολλὰ μεμαθήκαμεν. [ναίyes]
170
Lesson VIII

8. σοφὸς ὁ ἄνθρωπος ὃς πολλὰ καὶ ἀγαθὰ μεμάθηκε;
9. ὁ σοφὸς ἀνὴρ τὴν ἀληθῆ γνώμην οἶδεν.
10. οἱ τότε ἔχειν αἴσθησιν τοὺς τεθνηκότας ἐνόμιζον.
11. ἀκηκόατε γὰρ τοὺς λόγους· ὥρα δ’ ἐστὶ βουλεύεσθαι καὶ κρίνειν.
12. οὐκ οἶδε δεδιέναι.
13. οἶδα τούτους ὄντας ἀδίκους.
14. ἐκείνη ἡ γυνὴ θεαῖς ἔοικε κάλλος καὶ σοφίαν.
15. τίς ἀνὴρ οὐ μέμφεται τύχην;
16. οὗτος ὁ ἀνὴρ ἀπὸ μητρὸς θεᾶς πέφυκεν.
17. ἡ Ἑλλὰς φύει ἄνδρας καὶ γυναῖκας ἀγαθοὺς καὶ καλοὺς καὶ
ἐλευθέρους.
18. πολὺν οἶνον πεπωκὼς ἀπέθανεν.
19. πολλὰ πολλοὺς διδάσκει ὁ βίος.
20. τίνα πέπομφας; πέπομφα γυναῖκά τινα ὡς τὴν παῖδα διδάξουσαν.
7. Write in Greek.
a. Compose sentences using perfects.
1. λαμβάνω
4. λείπω
2. ἀκούω
5. πέμπω
3. βάλλω
b. Translate into Greek.
1. Has the wise old man died?
2. I have found what I wanted.
3. You have heard many poets speaking.
4. In whom are you confident?
5. What do you fear? Whatever I do not know.
6. I have not done these things.
7. She said that she had not done these things.
Readings
1. ἀλλὰ γὰρ οὔτε τούτων οὐδέν ἐστιν, οὐδέ γ’ εἴ τινος ἀκηκόατε ὡς ἐγὼ
παιδεύειν ἐπιχειρῶ ἀνθρώπους καὶ χρήματα πράττομαι, οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἀληθές.
—Plato, Apology
[ἀλλὰ γὰρ but in fact. ἐπιχειρῶI try (+ inf.). οὐδέν nothing (n. nom./acc. sg.
of οὐδείς, cf. εἷς, μία, ἑν one). A double negative confirms the negative.]
2. ὡς δὲ εἴδομεν πίνοντα καὶ πεπωκότα, οὐκέτι οἷός τε ἦν κατέχειν.
—Plato, Phaedo
[οἷός τε ἦν < idiom: οἷός τε εἶναι be able. κατέχω hold back.]
3. Σωκράτης γὰρ ἡγεῖτο πάντα θεοὺς εἰδέναι, τά τε λεγόμενα καὶ τὰ πραττόμενα
καὶ τὰ σιγῇ βουλευόμενα.
—Xenophon, Memorabilia
[ἡγεῖτο (he) thought (3rd sg. impf. of ἡγέομαι). σιγή, -ῆς, ἡsilence.]
Perfect Active: The Fourth Principal Part
171

4. τὸ γάρ τοι θάνατον δεδιέναι, ὦ ἄνδρες, οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἐστὶν ἢ δοκεῖν σοφὸν
εἶναι μὴ ὄντα. δοκεῖν γὰρ εἰδέναι ἔστιν ἃ οὐκ οἶδεν. οἶδε μὲν γὰρ οὐδεὶς τὸν
θάνατον οὐδ’ εἰ τυγχάνει τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ πάντων μέγιστον ὂν τῶν ἀγαθῶν, δεδίασι
δ’ ὡς εὖ εἰδότες ὅτι μέγιστον τῶν κακῶν ἐστί.
—Plato, Apology
[τοι you know, for your information. ἤthan. δοκεῖν to seem.]
5. δεδίδαχεν δὲ μάλιστα Ὅμηρος καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ψευδῆ λέγειν ὡς δεῖ.
—Aristotle, Poetics
[δεῖit is necessary.]
6. πολλοὶ γοῦν μέτρα ἰαμβικὰ λαλοῦσιν οὐκ εἰδότες.
—Demetrius
[γοῦν = γε + οὖν. μέτρα ἰαμβικάiambic meter (iambics). λαλοῦσι speak, talk (3rd
pl. of λαλέω).]
7. Davus: εἴρηκα τόν γ’ ἐμὸν λόγον.
Syriscus: εἴρηκεν;
Smicrines: οὐκ ἤκουσας; εἴρηκεν.
Syriscus: καλῶς. οὐκοῦν ἐγὼ μετὰ ταῦτα.
—Menander, Arbitrants
[ἐμὸν my. ἐγώI (nom. sg.).]
8. οὐκ ἔστιν ὅστις τὴν τύχην οὐ μέμφεται.
—Menander
9. καὶ ἐὰν ταῦτα ποιῆτε δίκαια πεπονθὼς ἐγὼ ἔσομαι ὑφ’ ὑμῶν αὐτός τε καὶ
οἱ υἱεῖς.
—Plato, Apology
[ἐὰν ποιῆτε if you do. ὑφ’ = ὑπό. ὑμῶν, gen. pl. (of) you. αὐτός -self (here, my-
self). υἱεῖς = υἱοί.]
10. ἀπεκρίθη ὁ Πιλᾶτος. ὃ γέγραφα, γέγραφα.
—Gospel of John
[ἀπεκρίθη he answered (aor. of ἀποκρίνομαι). ὁ Πιλᾶτος Pontius Pilate.]
11. ἔτη γὰρ ἤδη βεβίωκεν ἐνενήκοντα καὶ τέτταρα.
—Aeschines
[ἤδη already, by this time. βεβίωκεν, pf. of βιόω live. ἐνενήκοντα ninety.]
12. παύσομαι κατηγορῶν. ἀκηκόατε, ἑωράκατε, πεπόνθατε, ἔχετε. δικάζετε.
—Lysias
[κατηγορέω accuse. ἑώρακα, pf. of ὁράω see. δικάζετε imperative of δικάζω
judge.]
172
Lesson VIII

13. ἅτε οὖν, οἶμαι, φιλότιμοι ὄντες καὶ σφοδροὶ καὶ πολλοί, καὶ ξυντεταγμένως
καὶ πιθανῶς λέγοντες περὶ ἐμοῦ ἐμπεπλήκασιν ὑμῶν τὰ ὦτα καὶ πάλαι καὶ νῦν
σφοδρῶς διαβάλλοντες.
—Plato, Apology
[φιλότιμος, -ον ambitious. σφοδρός, -ά, -όν vehement. ξυντεταγμένως vigorously.
πιθανῶς persuasively. ἐμοῦ, gen. sg. me. ἐμπίμπλημι (pf. ἐμπέπληκα) fill full of.
ὑμῶν of you, your (gen. pl.). οὖς, ὠτός, τόear. πάλαι long ago. διαβάλλω slander.]
14. πολλάκις ἀκήκοά σου λέγοντος, ὅτι ταῦτα ἀγαθὸς ἕκαστος ἡμῶν, ἅπερ
σοφός, ἃ δὲ ἀμαθής, ταῦτα δὲ κακός.
—Plato, Laches
[πολλάκις often. ταῦτα: review acc. of respect. ἕκαστος, -η, -ον each, every.
ἡμῶν of us (gen. pl.). ἀμαθής, -ές ignorant.]
15. ὅ τι μὲν ὑμεῖς, ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, πεπόνθατε ὑπὸ τῶν ἐμῶν κατηγόρων,
οὐκ οἶδα.
—Plato, Apology
[ὑμεῖς you (nom. pl.). ἐμός, -ή, -όν my (adj.). κατήγορος, -ου, ὁaccuser.]
16. ‘εἴρηκα, ἀκηκόατε, ἔχετε, κρίνατε.’
—Aristotle, Rhetoric
[κρίνατε aor. imperative. An appropriate ending for a speech.]
17. εἰ ταῖς ἀληθείαισιν οἱ τεθνηκότες
αἴσθησιν εἶχον, ἄνδρες ὥς φασίν τινες,
ἀπηγξάμην ἄν, ὡστ’ ἰδεῖν Εὐριπίδην.
—Greek Anthology (Philemon)
[ἀληθείαισιν = ἀληθείαις. αἴσθησις sense perception. ἀπηγξάμην, aor. mid. of
ἀπάγχω strangle; review conditions (VI).]
18. πᾶς δὲ προφήτης διδάσκων τὴν ἀλήθειαν, εἰ ἃ διδάσκει οὐ ποιεῖ,
ψευδοπροφήτης ἐστί.
—Διδαχή(Teaching of the Twelve Apostles)
[ποιεῖhe does/practices.]
19. ἔνεστι γάρ πως τοῦτο τῇ τυραννίδι
νόσημα, τοῖς φίλοισι μὴ πεποιθέναι.
—Aeschylus, Prometheus
[ἔνειμι be present in. πως somehow. νόσημα, -ατος, τόdisease.]
20. τίς οὐ τέθνηκε;
—Aeschylus, Persae
[Atossa, not daring to ask directly if her son Xerxes is still alive.]
21. διδάξω καὶ διδάξομαι λόγους.
—Euripides, Andromache
[Menelaus speaking.]
Perfect Active: The Fourth Principal Part
173

174
Lesson VIII
22. τοιοῖσδε χρησμοῖς ἆρα χρὴ πεποιθέναι;
κεἰ μὴ πέποιθα, τοὖργον ἐστ’ ἐργαστέον.
—Aeschylus, Choephoroe
[χρησμός, -οῦ, ὁoracle. κεἰ= καὶ εἰ. τοὔργον = τὸ ἔργον. ἐργαστέον it must be
done. Orestes speaking.]
ὃς ᾔδει τά τ’ ἐόντα τά τ’ ἐσσόμενα πρό τ’ ἐόντα.
He knew the things that are, that will be, and that were before.
— Homer, Iliad
Navel of the Earth
After their friendly greetings [III] in Euripides’ Medea, Medea asks Aigeus
(visiting king of Athens): What brings you to this country?
AIGEUS: I have just come from the time-honored oracle of Phoebus Apollo.
MEDEA: And why did you visit the oracular navel of the world?
ΜΗΔ. πόθεν γῆς τῆσδ ̓ἐπιστρωφᾷ πέδον;
ΑΙΓ. Φοίβου παλαιὸν ἐκλιπὼν χρηστήριον.
ΜΗΔ. τί ὀμφαλὸν γῆς θεσπιῳδὸν ἐστάλης;
Delphi, the site of the most important oracle
(χρηστήριον) of Apollo was considered the navel
(ὀμφαλός) of the earth. Votive omphaloi (of monu-
mental size) are found at Delphi. There the god
Apollo often spoke to humans in riddles through
his priestess, the Pythia (or Pythias). In classical
times the sounds of the Pythia were interpreted by
priests.
A brief history of the oracle opens Aeschylus’ Eu-
menides, in which its origin as a chthonic site (be-
longing to Gaia) is stressed, but the common story
of Apollo’s slaying of the monster Πυθών is omit-
ted. The Delphic oracle was visited by Laius of Thebes concerning his father-
ing of a child and later by Oedipus concerning his parentage.
Besides its prominence in Greek legends, Delphi had a political importance,
being visited by both Greeks and foreigners on matters of state, such as colo-
nization, law-making, and war. The ambiguous oracle to Croesus is one of the
most famous: “If Croesus crosses the river Halys, he will destroy a mighty
empire.”
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

LESSON IX
Pronouns, Perfect Middle-Passive
In this lesson you will learn the personal and reflexive pronouns, expand your under-
standing of possession, add the perfect middle-passive (the fifth principal part), and
learn more about the assimilation of consonant sounds.
175
PRONOUNS: PERSONAL AND
REFLEXIVE; POSSESSIVE ADJECTIVES
Personal Pronouns
Singular
Plural
1st Pers.
N
ἐγώ
I
ἡμεῖς
we
G
ἐμοῦ, μου
of me, my
ἡμῶν
of us, our
D
ἐμοί, μοι
to me
ἡμῖν
to us
A
ἐμέ, με
me
ἡμᾶς
us
2nd Pers.
N
σύ
you
ὑμεῖς
you
G
σοῦ, σου
of you, your ὑμῶν
of you, your
D
σοί, σοι
to you
ὑμῖν
to you
A
σέ, σε
you
ὑμᾶς
you
The unaccented forms are unemphatic and enclitic; they are generally not
used after prepositions. The nominative of the personal pronoun is usually
omitted (since it is supplied by the verb ending) unless it is emphatic (for con-
trast or emphasis). For the personal pronoun of the third person, forms of
αὐτός (given below) are used in the oblique cases (that is, cases other than the
nominative).
The genitive of the personal pronouns goes in the predicate position (the
possessive genitives of other pronouns and of nouns usually take the attribu-
tive position):
ἡ μήτηρ μου my mother
but    ἡ τοῦ παιδὸς μήτηρ the child’s mother

αὐτός, αὐτή, αὐτό: Forms and uses
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
αὐτός
αὐτή
αὐτό
αὐτοί
αὐταί
αὐτά
G
αὐτοῦ
αὐτῆς
αὐτοῦ
αὐτῶν
αὐτῶν
αὐτῶν
D
αὐτῷ
αὐτῇ
αὐτῷ
αὐτοῖς
αὐταῖς
αὐτοῖς
A
αὐτόν
αὐτήν
αὐτό
αὐτούς
αὐτάς
αὐτά
αὐτός has three uses:
1. In all cases it can be used as an intensive adjective-pronoun, ‘‑self.’ With
this meaning it is found with another pronoun, as ἐγὼ αὐτός I myself, or with
a noun, in the predicate position, αὐτὸς ὁ ἀνήρ the man himself. αὐτός, αὐτή,
αὐτόin the nominative may be used without another pronoun to agree with
the subject (as expressed in the verb ending): αὐτὸς ἔφη (cf. Latin ipse dixit) he
himself said [it].
2. In all cases, when preceded by the article (i.e., in the attributive position),
αὐτός means the same: ὁ αὐτὸς ἀνήρ the same man. (Note: αὐτός often unites by
crasis with the article: αὑτός, αὑτή, ταὐτόor ταὐτόν the same.)
3. In the oblique cases (all except the nominative), the forms of αὐτός are the
usual personal pronouns of the third person, him, her, it, them, etc. (Note that
the nominative is not so used because the nominative, if used strictly as a
pronoun, is used as the intensive, ‑self.)
εἶδον αὐτόν
I saw him
Reflexive Pronouns
The reflexive pronouns are compounded from the stems of the personal pro-
nouns (first ἐμ‑, second σε‑, third ἑ‑) and the oblique cases of αὐτός. In the plu-
ral of the first and second persons, the two forms are declined separately (the
personal pronoun and the form of αὐτός). There is no nominative of the re-
flexive pronoun. The reflexive pronoun refers back to the subject of its clause
(or sometimes in a dependent clause it refers to the subject of the main clause).
First person reflexive myself, ourselves
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
m.
f.
G
ἐμαυτοῦ
ἐμαυτῆς
ἡμῶν αὐτῶν
ἡμῶν αὐτῶν
D
ἐμαυτῷ
ἐμαυτῇ
ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς
ἡμῖν αὐταῖς
A
ἐμαυτόν
ἐμαυτήν
ἡμᾶς αὐτούς
ἡμᾶς αὐτάς
176
Lesson IX

Second person reflexive yourself, yourselves
m.
f.
Sg.
G
σεαυτοῦ
(σαυτοῦ)
σεαυτῆς
(σαυτῆς)
D
σεαυτῷ
(σαυτῷ)
σεαυτῇ
(σαυτῇ)
A
σεαυτόν
(σαυτόν)
σεαυτήν
(σαυτήν)
Pl.
G
ὑμῶν αὐτῶν
ὑμῶν αὐτῶν
D
ὑμῖν αὐτοῖς
ὑμῖν αὐταῖς
A
ὑμᾶς αὐτούς
ὑμᾶς αὐτάς
Third person reflexive him/her/itself, themselves
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
G
ἑαυτοῦ
(αὑτοῦ)
ἑαυτῆς
(αὑτῆς)
ἑαυτοῦ
(αὑτοῦ)
D
ἑαυτῷ
(αὑτῷ)
ἑαυτῇ
(αὑτῇ)
ἑαυτῷ
(αὑτῷ)
A
ἑαυτόν
(αὑτόν)
ἑαυτήν
(αὑτήν)
ἑαυτό
(αὑτό)
Pl.
G
ἑαυτῶν
(αὑτῶν)
ἑαυτῶν
(αὑτῶν)
ἑαυτῶν
(αὑτῶν)
D
ἑαυτοῖς
(αὑτοῖς)
ἑαυταῖς
(αὑταῖς)
ἑαυτοῖς
(αὑτοῖς)
A
ἑαυτούς
(αὑτούς)
ἑαυτάς
(αὑτάς)
ἑαυτά
(αὑτά)
To avoid confusing the alternate forms of the reflexive with forms of αὐτός,
notice the difference in breathing.
Οἰδίπους τὸν ἑαυτοῦ πατέρα ἀπέκτεινε.
Oedipus killed his own father.
Note: The ἑ- prefix is the root of the third person personal pronoun,
of which only the dat. sg. (οἷ) and pl. (σφίσι) are common in Attic
prose. Instead of this pronoun, the demonstratives are used for the
nominative and the forms of αὐτός in the other cases.
Possessive Adjectives
The possessive adjectives my, your, and our are derived from the personal
pronouns:
ἐμός, ἐμή, ἐμόν
my
σός, σή, σόν
your (sg.)
ἡμέτερος, ‑α, ‑ον
our
ὑμέτερος, ‑α, ‑ον
your (pl.)
These are declined like other adjectives in ‑ος, ‑η, ‑ον or ‑ος, ‑α, ‑ον; and like
any adjective they must agree with their noun in gender, number, and case.
(That is, they agree with the thing possessed, not with the possessor.)
For his, her, its, their, the genitive forms of αὐτός are used: αὐτοῦ(his, its), αὐτῆς
(her), αὐτῶν (their).These are not adjectives but pronouns and so agree in gen-
der and number with the possessor; their case is the genitive (of possession).
Pronouns: Personal and Reflexive; Possessive Adjectives
177

The possessive adjectives and the genitive of the reflexive pronoun go into
the attributive position:
ὁ ἐμὸς πατήρ
my father
ἡ ἐμὴ μήτηρ
my mother
ὁ ἐμαυτοῦ/ἐμαυτῆς πατήρ
my own father
ἡ ἐμαυτοῦ/ἐμαυτῆς μήτηρ
my own mother
But the possessive genitive of the personal pronoun goes into the predicate
position:
ὁ πατήρ μου
my father
ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ/αὐτῆς
his/her father
Vocabulary
Pronouns and Possessive Adjectives
αὐτός, αὐτή, αὐτό
1 ‑self (intens. pron.); 2 same (with art.
in attrib. pos.); 3 him, her, it, them
(pers. pron.)
ἑαυτοῦ, ἑαυτῆς, ἑαυτοῦ
(of) himself, herself, itself (reflexive)
ἐγώ, ἐμοῦ(μου), κτλ.
I, of me, etc.
ἐμαυτοῦ, ἐμαυτῆς
(of ) myself (reflexive)
ἐμός, ἐμή, ἐμόν
my (poss. adj.)
ἡμεῖς, ἡμῶν, κτλ.
we, of us, etc.
ἡμέτερος, ἡμετέρα, ἠμέτερον
our (poss. adj.)
σεαυτοῦ, σεαυτῆς
(of) yourself (reflexive)
σός, σή, σόν
your (sg.: poss. adj.)
σύ, σοῦ(σου) κτλ.
you, of you (sg.: pers. pron.)
ὑμεῖς, ὑμῶν, κτλ.
you, of you, etc. (pl.: pers. pron.)
ὑμέτερος, ὑμετέρα, ὑμέτερον
your (pl.: poss. adj.)
General Vocabulary
ἀγάπη, ἀγάπης, ἡ
love, charity (Agape)
βλάπτω, βλάψω, ἔβλαψα,
hinder (from, + gen.); harm, hurt
βέβλαφα, βέβλαμμαι
δεῖ
impersonal, there is need, it is necessary
(+ acc. of pers. and inf.) (ἔδει, impf.)
διαβάλλω
throw over/across; attack, slander (< βάλλω)
δόξα, δόξης, ἡ
expectation, estimation, repute, opinion
178
Lesson IX

δύναμις, δυνάμεως, ἡ
power, ability, influence; forces (for war) 
(dynamic)
ἕκαστος, -η, -ον
each, every (in pred. pos., if used with art.)
ἐπιστολή, ἐπιστολῆς, ἡ
message, letter (anything by messenger); 
pl. may be used of one letter (epistle)
ἤδη
already, by this time, now
μέλλω, μελλήσω,
be likely, be destined, be about to (+ inf.); 
ἐμέλλησα
delay (usually + fut. inf.)
μετά
prep., with, among; as a prefix shows change
with gen.
in the midst of, with
with dat.
poetic, between, among, with
with acc.
after
μεταβάλλω
throw into a different position, change
μεταβολή, μεταβολῆς, ἡ
change, transition
μνῆμα, μνήματος, τό
remembrance, memorial; memory
μνήμη, μνήμης, ἡ
memory (mnemonic)
ὀνειδίζω, —, ὠνείδισα,
make a reproach, reproach (usually with acc. 
ὠνείδικα
of thing, dat. of person)
ὄνειδος, ὀνείδους, τό
reproach, blame
οὔπω (οὐ . . . πω)
not yet
παρέχω
furnish, supply (cf. ἔχω)
περί
prep., round about
with gen.
about, concerning
with dat.
mostly poetic, around, about, concerning
(of place or cause)
with acc.
about, near
πολλάκις
often, many times
πῶς;
how?
ὑπέρ
prep., over
with gen.
over, beyond
with acc.
over, in defense of
χρή
impers., it is necessary (impf. ἔχρην, inf.
χρῆναι/χρῆν)
χρήσιμος, -η, -ον
useful (also ‑ος, ‑ον)
Syntax: Dative of Possession
With the verbs εἰμίand γίγνομαι (and similar verbs), the dative may be used
to denote the possessor. The thing possessed is then in the nominative.
Example: I have friends may be expressed as
ἔχω φίλους.
or    ἐμοί εἰσι φίλοι.
Pronouns: Personal and Reflexive; Possessive Adjectives
179

When the dative is used for the possessor, it emphasizes the interest of the
possessor in the thing he/she possesses. Cf. this example from Thucydides:
ἄλλοις μὲν χρήματά ἐστι πολλά, ἡμῖν δὲ ξύμμαχοι ἀγαθοί.
Others have a lot of money, but we have good allies.
Exercise A
1. Translate.
1. τίς σε βλάπτει ἀγάπης;
2. εἰ μεγάλη ἦν ἡ πόλις ἡμῶν, ἡμῖν ἂν πολλοὶ πόλεμοι ἐγίγνοντο.
3. τίνα πατρίδα φυγόντες ἤλθετε παρ’ ἡμᾶς;
4. τί δεῖ πράττεσθαι;
5. ταύτην γε τὴν χώραν λείπειν ἡμᾶς δεῖ.
6. τί γὰρ δεῖ τάδε λέγειν;
7. ἔδει ἡμᾶς ἐκεῖνον τὸν ἄνδρα ἰδεῖν καὶ πάντα αὐτῷ εἰπεῖν.
8. δεῖ γὰρ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἑαυτοὺς γιγνώσκειν.
9. ὁ διώκων διέβαλε τὸν φεύγοντα.
10. τί δ’ ἐμέ διαβάλλεις;
11. ἡ πόλις ἡμῶν ἔχει τὴν δόξαν μεγάλης δυνάμεως.
12. πᾶσαι δόξαν ἔχειν ἀγαθὴν βούλονται.
13. παῦσαί γε δεῖ ἡμᾶς τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως δύναμιν.
14. ἑκάστη ἐθέλει τὰ ἑαυτῆς ἔχειν.
15. καθ’ ἑκάστην τὴν ἡμέραν ἐπιστολὴν γράψομεν.
16. ἐπιστολὰς ἀλλήλαις ἔγραφον.
17. ἤδη αὐτὸν ἐρχόμενον αἰσθανόμεθα.
18. τοῦ μέλλοντος χρόνου οὐκ αἰσθάνεσθε.
19. ἔμελλόν γε παρεῖναι.
20. οἱ μετὰ ἀνθρώπου τινὸς οὐκ ἀεὶ φίλοι.
21. μεθ’ ἡμέρας τρεῖς ὑμᾶς δεῖ λιπεῖν.
22. μετὰ ταῦτα ἔφυγεν.
23. δεῖ σε τοὺς τρόπους μεταβαλέσθαι.
24. τὰ μὲν ὀνόματα μετέβαλον, οὐ δὲ ἑαυτούς.
25. χαίρομεν μνῆμα ἀγαθῶν ἔχουσαι.
26. οὐ βούλομαι κακῶν ἔχειν μνήμην.
27. δεῖ σὲ ταῦτα ἐν μνήμῃ λαβεῖν.
28. ἡ ἀρίστη γυνὴ ἔλιπε κλέος πάσαις γυναιξί.
29. οὐ πολλὰ ἔξεστι μοι εἰπεῖν ἀπὸ μνήμης.
30. αἰσχύνει τοῦτό μοι ὀνειδίζων;
31. χρήματα μὲν παρέσχεν ὁ βασιλεύς· σώματα δὲ παρέσχον οἱ πολῖται.
32. οὐκ ὄνειδος φέρει ἡ ἀρετή.
33. ὄνειδός ἐστι κακὰ πράττειν.
34. πολλὰ καὶ ἀγαθὰ ἔφη περὶ τοῦ πατρός σου.
35. χρή με λέγειν.
36. ὁ χρηστὸς πολίτης χρήσιμός ἐστι πόλει.
37. ἡμῶν μὴ ἐρχομένων, τί πράξεις;
38. τὴν πατρίδα ἔλιπεν οὐ βουλόμενος τὸν ἑαυτοῦ πατέρα ἀποκτεῖναι.
39. οὐ χαίρετε ἡμᾶς ἰδοῦσαι;
40. μετὰ τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ φίλων εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν σου ἦλθον.
180
Lesson IX

2. Fill in.
1. We μὲν ἔχομεν χρήματα, you δὲ οὐκ ἔχετε.
2. εἴδομεν him/her.
3. οὐ γιγνώσκομεν ourselves.
4. τί you πεπόνθατε;
5. I myself ἐθέλω εἶναι to you φιλία.
6. οἱ ἄρχοντες (over) us ἄρχουσιν. [What case follows ἄρχω?]
7. Them οὐκ ἐπίστευσαν. [What case is used with verbs of trusting?]
8. (He) himself τάδε ἔφη. (She) herself ἐκεῖνα ἔγραψεν.
9. ἐπιστολὰς to us ἔπεμψεν.
10. αὕτη ἐστιν my mother.
11. ἐνόμισα (that) he/she παρεῖναι.
12. ἀκηκόαμεν you λέγοντος.
13. εἶπες to me;
14. ἡ θυγάτηρ ἠθέλησε ἀποκτείνειν τὴν her own μητέρα;
15. οὐ πείθεται ὑπὸthem.
16. ὁsame πολίτης ταῦτα ἔπραξεν.
17. The poet himself ἔγραψε τάδε.
18. ἔχομεν the same opinion.
19. They themselves ἀπέκτειναν τοὺς ξένους.
20. τυγχάνω ἰδοῦσα these same (things).
21. The god himself ἐφαίνετο.
22. οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι us εἶδον.
23. We δὲ οὐκ εἴδομεν ourselves.
24. ἔβαλον them λίθοις.
25. οἱ γέροντες you καὶthem πεπαιδεύκασιν, us δ’ οὔ.
3. a. Write in Greek.
1. He killed his (someone else’s) father.
2. He killed his own father without knowing (it).
3. This is my mother. [Express my in two ways]
4. I saw my (own) mother doing these things.
5. The same man came to find me.
6. We ourselves are hurting each other.
7. Who knows himself/herself?
8. The king himself did not wish to rule over us.
9. I myself happened to be present.
10. You are not a friend to yourself.
3. b. Compose sentences using the following.
1–3
The reflexive pronoun of each person.
4–6
The three uses of αὐτός.
3. c. Write each of the following in two ways.
7–8
We had fine houses, but you did not.
9–10
They have much money, but we have good friends.
Pronouns: Personal and Reflexive; Possessive Adjectives
181

Readings
Beginning with this lesson, important vocabulary will be marked with an
asterisk.
1. ἥδ’ ἡμέρα φύσει σε καὶ διαφθερεῖ.
—Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus
[διαφθερεῖfut. 3rd sg. of διαφθείρω destroy utterly. Teiresias is speaking.]
2. οὐκ ἀκηκόατε, ὅτι οὐ σχολὴ αὐτῷ;
—Plato, Protagoras
3. Socrates: ἐθελήσεις οὖν καὶ σύ ἐμοὶ εἰπεῖν περὶ τῆς ἀρετῆς;
Meno: ἔγωγε.
—Plato, Meno
4. τὸ γνῶθι σαυτὸν πᾶσίν ἐστι χρήσιμον.
—Menander
5. τί κέρδος ἦν αὐτῷ διαβάλλειν ἐμὲ πρὸς ὑμᾶς οὕτω προθύμως;
—Lysias
[προθύμως zealously.]
6. περὶ τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ ψυχῆς οὐ πολλὰς ἐλπίδας ἔχω.
—Dionysius of Halicarnassus
7. καὶ πολλὰς μεταβολὰς μεταβαλοῦσα ἡ τραγῳδία ἐπαύσατο, ἐπεὶ ἔσχε τὴν
αὑτῆς φύσιν.
—Aristotle, Poetics
8. ἀνδρὸς καὶ γυναικὸς ἡ αὐτὴ ἀρετή.
—Diogenes Laertius, on Antisthenes
9. ἐκεῖνος [ἔφη] μὲν γὰρ ἁπλῶς ταὐτὸν ψυχὴν καὶ νοῦν.
—Aristotle, περὶ ψυχῆς (On the Soul)
[ἐκεῖνος refers to Democritus. ἁπλῶς simply. ταὐτόν often occurs instead of
ταὐτό (<τὸ αὐτό). νοῦν acc. of νοῦς [XI] mind.]
10. τῶν δὲ φυσικῶν τὰ μὲν ἔχει ζωήν, τὰ δ ̓οὐκ ἔχει· ζωὴν δὲ λέγομεν τὴν δι ̓
αὑτοῦ τροφήν τε καὶ αὔξησιν καὶ φθίσιν.
—Aristotle
[ζωήlife. τροφήnurture. αὔξησις growth. φθίσις decay.]
11. φίλος με βλάπτων οὐδὲν ἐχθροῦ διαφέρει.
—Menander
[ἐχθρός -ά, -όν hated, hostile; as a noun ἐχθρός, -οῦ, ὁenemy.]
12. Ἐμπεδοκλέους δὲ εἰπόντος αὐτῷ ὅτι ἀνεύρετός ἐστιν ὁ σοφός, ‘εἰκότως,’
ἔφη· ‘σοφὸν γὰρ εἶναι δεῖ τὸν ἐπιγνωσόμενον τὸν σοφόν.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Xenophanes
182
Lesson IX

[Ἐμπεδοκλέους gen. of Empedocles. ἀνεύρετος, -ον not able to be found. εἰκότως
reasonably, that’s right. ἐπιγνωσόμενον fut. part. of ἐπιγιγνώσκω discover.]
13. αὐτὸς γὰρ ἐφέλκεται ἄνδρα σίδηρος.
—Homer, Odyssey
[ἐφέλκω draw to one, attract. σίδηρος, -ου, ὁiron, weapon.]
14. Socrates: ἀλλ ̓ ἐκεῖνο μὴν δοκεῖ σοι, ὅστις γε ἀγαθὸς ῥαψῳδός, καὶ
στρατηγὸς ἀγαθὸς εἶναι;
Ion: πάνυ γε.
Socrates: οὐκοῦν σὺ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἄριστος ῥαψῳδὸς εἶ;
Ion: πολύ γε, ὦ Σώκρατες.
Socrates: ἦ καὶ στρατηγός, ὦ Ἴων, τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἄριστος εἶ;
Ion: εὖ ἴσθι, ὦ Σώκρατες· καὶ ταῦτά γε ἐκ τῶν Ὁμήρου μαθών.
Socrates: τί δή ποτ ̓οὖν πρὸς τῶν θεῶν, ὦ Ἴων, ἀμφότερα ἄριστος ὢν τῶν
Ἑλλήνων, καὶ στρατηγὸς καὶ ῥαψῳδός, ῥαψῳδεῖς μὲν περιιὼν τοῖς Ἕλλησι
στρατηγεῖς δ ̓οὔ; ἢ ῥαψῳδοῦ μὲν δοκεῖ σοι χρυσῷ στεφάνῳ ἐστεφανωμένου
πολλὴ χρεία εἶναι τοῖς Ἕλλησι, στρατηγοῦ δὲ οὐδεμία;
—Plato, Ion
[ῥαψῳδός performer of epic poetry, lit. “song-stitcher.” *στρατηγός, -ου, ὁgen-
eral. πάνυ γε yes, by all means (*γε in conversation, yes). εὖ(adv. of ἀγαθός)
well. ἴσθι (imperative) know!, be assured! τί δή ποτε why in the world? πρὸς τῶν
θεῶν in the gods’ name. ἀμφότερα at both. ῥαψῳδέω recite/perform poetry. περιιών
going around. στρατηγέω serve as a general. στέφανος, -ου, ὁcrown, wreath.
ἐστεφανωμένος crowned (pf. m.-p. part.). χρεία, -ας, ἡneed. οὐδεμία (adj.,
agrees with χρεία) no, none.]
15. μέρη δὲ φιλοσοφίας τρία, φυσικόν, ἠθικόν, διαλεκτικόν· φυσικὸν μὲν τὸ
περὶ κόσμου καὶ τῶν ἐν αὐτῷ· ἠθικὸν δὲ τὸ περὶ βίου καὶ τῶν πρὸς ἡμᾶς·
διαλεκτικὸν δὲ τὸ ἀμφοτέρων τοὺς λόγους πρεσβεῦον.
—Diogenes Laertius
[*ἀμφότερος, -α, -ον both of two. πρεσβεῦον part. of πρεσβεύω rank before (+ acc.
and gen.).]
16. ἡ μὲν οὖν ὁδὸς τῆς ζωῆς ἐστιν αὕτη.
—Διδαχή(Teaching of the Twelve Apostles)
17. ἔστιν ὁ φίλος ἄλλος αὐτός.
—Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics
18. Teiresias: Κρέων δέ σοι πῆμ ̓οὐδέν, ἀλλ ̓ αὐτὸς σὺ σοί.
—Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus
[*πῆμα, -ατος, τόmisery, calamity.]
19. ἔστι δὲ δικαιοσύνη μὲν ἀρετὴ δι ̓ ἣν τὰ αὑτῶν ἕκαστοι ἔχουσι, καὶ ὡς ὁ
νόμος, [ἀδικία δὲ δι ̓ἣν τὰ ἀλλότρια, οὐχ ὡς ὁ νόμος.]
—Aristotle, Rhetoric
[ἀλλότριος, -α, -ον of/belonging to another.]
Pronouns: Personal and Reflexive; Possessive Adjectives
183

20. Clytemnestra: τὴν παῖδα τὴν σὴν τὴν τ ̓ἐμὴν μέλλεις κτενεῖν;
—Euripides, Iphigenia at Aulis
[κτενεῖν fut. inf. of ἀπο-κτείνω.]
21. οἱ αὐτοὶ περὶ τῶν αὐτῶν τοῖς αὐτοῖς τὰ αὐτά.
—Greek proverb about pedants
[Understand: λέγουσι.]
νεκρὸν ἰατρεύειν καὶ γέροντα νουθετεῖν
ταὐτόν.
To cure a corpse and to advise an old man: it is
the same thing.
—Greek proverb
PERFECT MIDDLE-PASSIVE:
THE FIFTH PRINCIPAL PART
The perfect and pluperfect middle-passive are formed by adding the middle
endings to the reduplicated stem. Complications arise because these endings
are added directly to the stem: no thematic vowel is used in the perfect.
Forms: Perfect, Pluperfect, Future Perfect
Perfect
Formation: reduplicated stem + primary endings:
Primary Endings
Singular
Plural
‑μαι
1st
‑μεθα
‑σαι
2nd
‑σθε
‑ται
3rd
‑νται
Infinitive: ‑σθαι
Participle: ‑μένος (accent on the penult)
184
Lesson IX

Pluperfect
Formation: augment + reduplicated stem + secondary middle endings:
Secondary Middle Endings
Singular
Plural
‑μην
1st
‑μεθα
‑σο
2nd
‑σθε
‑το
3rd
‑ντο
Perfect and Pluperfect Middle-Passive of λύω, λυ‑
λέ‑λυ‑μαι I have ransomed / I have been released
ἐ‑λε‑λύ‑μην I had ransomed / I had been released
Perfect
Pluperfect
Singular
λέλυμαι
1st
ἐλελύμην
λέλυσαι 
2nd
ἐλέλυσο
λέλυται
3rd
ἐλέλυτο
Plural
λελύμεθα
1st
ἐλελύμεθα
λέλυσθε
2nd
ἐλέλυσθε
λέλυνται
3rd
ἐλέλυντο
Infinitive: λελύσθαι
Participle: λελυμένος, -η, -ον
Since these endings are added directly to the verb stem, without a thematic
vowel, certain orthographic changes occur in verbs with consonant stems:
Labials
Palatals
Dentals
Nasals
β, π, φ
κ, γ, χ
τ, δ, θ, ζ
ν, μ
Before
become
become
become
become
μ
μαι, μην, μεθα, μένος
‑μ
‑γ
‑σ
‑σ
σ
σαι, σο 
‑ψ
‑ξ
drops out
—
τ
ται, το
‑π
‑κ
‑σ
‑ν
θ
*σθε, σθαι
‑φ
‑χ
‑σ
‑ν
*σ between two consonants is dropped in the endings ‑σθε and ‑σθαι.
The endings of the third plural ‑νται and ‑ντο are not used, but rather peri-
phrastic forms consisting of the perfect middle participle (in the nominative
plural, masculine or feminine) and the third plural of the verb εἰμί(that is,
εἰσίor ἦσαν).
Liquid stems drop -σ- between two consonants and use the periphrastic form
of the third plural, but undergo no other changes.
Perfect Middle-Passive: The Fifth Principal Part
185

Perfect and Pluperfect of Consonant Stems
Perfect Middle-Passive
Labial
Palatal
Dental
Nasal
Liquid
γράφω
ἄγω
πείθω
φαίνω
ἀγγέλλω
Sg.
1
γέγραμμαι
ἦγμαι
πέπεισμαι
πέφασμαι
ἤγγελμαι
2
γέγραψαι
ἦξαι
πέπεισαι
πεφασμένος 
ἤγγελσαι
εἶ
3
γέγραπται
ἦκται
πέπεισται
πέφανται
ἤγγελται
Pl.
1
γεγράμμεθα
ἤγμεθα
πεπείσμεθα
πεφάσμεθα
ἠγγέλμεθα
2
γέγραφθε
ἦχθε
πέπεισθε
πέφανθε
ἤγγελθε
3
γεγραμμένοι
ἠγμένοι
πεπεισμένοι
πεφασμένοι
ἠγγελμένοι
εἰσί
εἰσί
εἰσί
εἰσί
εἰσί
Inf.
γεγράφθαι
ἦχθαι
πεπεῖσθαι
πεφάνθαι
ἠγγέλθαι
Part.
γεγραμμένος
ἠγμένος
πεπεισμένος
πεφασμένος
ἠγγελμένος
Pluperfect Middle-Passive
Labial
Palatal
Dental
Nasal
Liquid
γράφω
ἄγω
πείθω
φαίνω
ἀγγέλλω
Sg.
1
ἐγεγράμμην
ἤγμην
ἐπεπείσμην
ἐπεφάσμην
ἠγγέλμην
2
ἐγέγραψο
ἦξο
ἐπέπεισο
πεφασμένος 
ἤγγελσο
ἦσθα
3
ἐγέγραπτο
ἦκτο
ἐπέπειστο
ἐπέφαντο
ἤγγελτο
Pl.
1
ἐγεγράμμεθα
ἤγμεθα
ἐπεπείσμεθα
ἐπεφάσμεθα
ἠγγέλμεθα
2
ἐγέγραφθε
ἦχθε
ἐπέπεισθε
ἐπέφανθε
ἤγγελθε
3
γεγραμμένοι
ἠγμένοι
πεπεισμένοι
πεφασμένοι
ἠγγελμένοι
3
ἦσαν
ἦσαν
ἦσαν
ἦσαν
ἦσαν
Note: If the verb stem ends in μπ (as πέμπω), drop the π before μ of the
ending; otherwise π is retained, according to the rule for labial stems.
Example: πέμπω -perfect middle stem πεπεμπ‑, πέπεμμαι.
Singular
Plural
πέπεμμαι
1st
πεπέμμεθα
πέπεμψαι
2nd
πέπεμφθε
πέπεμπται
3rd
πεπεμμένοι εἰσί
Infinitive: πεπέμφθαι
Participle: πεπεμμένος, ‑η, ‑ον
186
Lesson IX

Future Perfect
The future perfect is formed by adding ‑σομαι to the perfect tense stem: re -
duplicated stem + σ + ο/ε (thematic vowel) + primary middle endings.
Examples:
λύω
λελύσομαι
γράφω
γεγράψομαι
λείπω
λελείψομαι
πράττω
πεπράξομαι
The future perfect usually has a passive meaning: I shall have been released,
I shall be released.
Syntax: Dative of Agent
The dative that denotes the person interested (cf. the dative of possession and
dative of interest) also appears as the dative of agent with the perfect and plu-
perfect passive (that is, instead of ὑπόwith the genitive, we find the dative
without a preposition).
ταῦτα πέπρακται αὐτῷ. These things have been done by him.
ἐμοὶ καὶ τούτοις πέπρακται. It has been done by me and these men. 
—Demosthenes
Fifth Principal Part
➞Fill in the blanks (which are regular).
ἀγγέλλω
ἤγγελμαι
ἄγω
ἦγμαι
ἄρχω
ἦργμαι
βάλλω
βέβλημαι
βουλεύω
βούλομαι
βεβούλημαι
γίγνομαι
γεγένημαι
γιγνώσκω
ἔγνωσμαι (acts as a dental)
γράφω
γέγραμμαι
δέχομαι
δέδεγμαι
εὑρίσκω
ηὕρημαι
ἔχω
ἔσχημαι
θύω
τέθυμαι
κομίζω
κεκόμισμαι (ζ acts as a dental)
Perfect Middle-Passive: The Fifth Principal Part
187

κρίνω
κέκριμαι (some nasal stems drop the nasal and
form a vowel stem pf. mid.)
λαμβάνω
εἴλημμαι (cf. pf. act. εἴληφα)
λέγω
(λέλεγμαι) εἴρημαι (cf. εἴρηκα and εἶπον)
λείπω
λέλειμμαι
λύω
νομίζω
νενόμισμαι (acts as a dental)
παιδεύω
παύω
πείθω
πέπεισμαι
πέμπω
πέπεμμαι
πιστεύω
πράττω (stem πραγ‑)
πέπραγμαι
στέλλω
ἔσταλμαι
τείνω
τέταμαι
φαίνω
πέφασμαι
φέρω
ἐνήνεγμαι
χαίρω
κεχάρημαι, κέχαρμαι
Recognizing Stem Types
If the perfect middle has a vowel before ‑μαι, then it is a vowel stem, to be con-
jugated like λύω in the perfect middle. If it ends in ‑μμαι, then it is a labial stem,
to follow the pattern of γράφω: γέγραμμαι. If it ends in ‑γμαι, then it is a palatal
stem and follows ἄγω: ἦγμαι. Finally, if it ends in ‑σμαι, it can be either a dental
or a nasal stem. Usually you can determine which it is (and so, which pattern
to follow) by going back to the original stem.
Syntax: Time Constructions
1. Genitive of time within which:
ταῦτα τῆς ἡμέρας ἔπραττον. They were doing these things during the day.
πέντε ἡμερῶν γράψω. I shall write within five days.
νυκτός during the night
2. Dative of time when:
ταύτῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ γράψω. I shall write on this day.
τῷ αὐτῷ ἔτει ἀπέθανεν. He died in the same year.
Often ἐν is used when there is no modifying word, as ἐν νυκτί, at night.
3. Accusative of extent of time or space:
ταῦτα τὴν ἡμέραν ἔπραττον. They were doing these things throughout the day.
πέντε ἡμέρας ἐμείναμεν. We remained for five days.
188
Lesson IX

Vocabulary
Verbs
(A dash indicates a form does not exist for that verb.)
θάπτω, θάψω, ἔθαψα, —,
honor with funeral rites (by burial or 
τέθαμμαι
cremation)
κωλύω
hinder, prevent
μαίνομαι, —, μέμηνα,
rage, be furious, be mad
μεμάνημαι
μιμνήσκω, μνήσω, ἔμνησα, 
act., remind; m.-p., call to mind, remember
—, μέμνημαι
(pf. with pres. meaning) (+ gen.)
στρέφω, στρέψω, ἔστρεψα, 
turn; m.-p. turn oneself, be engaged in
—, ἔστραμμαι
ἀποστρέφω
turn back/away, avert
Exercise B
1. Conjugate in the perfect middle.
1. παύω
4. φαίνω
6. κρίνω
2. λαμβάνω
5. δέχομαι
7. νομίζω
3. λείπω
2. Fill in the perfect and pluperfect middle of the synopses from Lesson VIII.
New Synopses:  1. φέρω: 3rd sg.  2. ἄγω: 1st pl.  3. πέμπω: 2nd pl.
3. Parse.
1. λελεῖφθαι
17. πεπαίδευνται
33. ηὕρησθε
2. γεγενῆσθαι
18. τέθαπται
34. πέπεισθε
3. πεπραγμένων
19. εἴρηται
35. ἐνήνεκται
4. βεβληκότας
20. πέπεισμαι
36. εἴληπται
5. γεγενημένων
21. πεπραγμένων
37. νενομίσθαι
6. γεγόνασι
22. ἐπέπεισθε
38. ἐπεπέμμην
7. γεγραμμένας
23. τέθαμμαι
39. ἐνηνέχθαι
8. γέγραπται
24. κεκόμισαι
40. τέθυται
9. βεβλήκασιν
25. ἔστραψαι
41. ἐγέγραψο
10. εἴληφεν
26. ἦκται
42. κέκριται
11. πεπίστευται
27. πέφανθε
43. λέλειφθε
12. πέπαυμαι
28. νενόμισται
44. βεβλημένη
13. εἰρημένα
29. ἦρχθαι
45. ἐκεκόμιστο
14. ἔσχηνται
30. ἠγγέλμεθα
46. δεδεγμένοι ἦσαν
15. πεπρᾶχθαι
31. ἐδεδέγμεθα
47. πεφασμένοι εἰσί
16. μεμνημένος
32. ἀπεστράμμεθα
48. ἐσταλμένοι εἰσίν
Perfect Middle-Passive: The Fifth Principal Part
189

4. Translate.
1. μέμνηται τῶν φίλων καὶ παρόντων καὶ ἀπόντων.
2. μεμάνηνται γὰρ αἱ τῆς πόλεως γυναῖκες τῷ θεῷ.
3. τῶν φίλων τὸ σῶμα αὐτοῦ οὐχ εὑρόντων, οὗτος ὁ ἀνὴρ οὐκ ἐτέθαπτο.
4. ὁ κόσμος οὐκ αὐτὸς στρέφει ἑαυτόν, ἀλλ’ ὑπὸ θεοῦ στρέφεται.
5. τῇ τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀρχόντων βουλῇ ὁ πόλεμος ἀπέστραπται.
6. ὁ μὲν στρατιώτης βεβλαμμένος τὸ σῶμα ἀπέθανεν.
7. ὁ δὲ ποιητὴς βεβλαμμένος τὴν ψυχὴν ἐπαύσατο γράφων.
8. τί πέπαυσαι γράφων ἐπιστολὰς τῇ μητρί;
9. γέγραπται ἡ ἐπιστολὴ καὶ ἤδη ἔσταλται.
10. οἱ νόμοι τῷ σοφῷ γεγραμμένοι ἦσαν.
Readings
1. φαίνεται μὲν ὁ ἥλιος ποδιαῖος, πεπίστευται δ ̓εἶναι μείζων τῆς οἰκουμένης.
—Aristotle, περὶψυχῆς
[ποδιαῖος a foot high/wide/long. μείζων bigger (+ gen., than). οἰκουμένη, -ης, ἡ
the (inhabited) world.]
2. φησὶ δ ̓ Ἡρακλείδης ἐν μὲν τοῖς δόγμασι Πλατωνικὸν εἶναι αὐτόν, διαπαίζειν
δὲ τὰ διαλεκτικά · ὥστε Ἀλεξίνου ποτὲ ἐρωτήσαντος εἰ πέπαυται τὸν πατέρα
τύπτων, ‘ἀλλ ̓οὔτ ̓ἔτυπτον,’ φάναι, ‘οὔτε πέπαυμαι.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Menedemus
[δόγμα, -ατος, τόopinion. διαπαίζω joke, play. τὰ διαλεκτικάdialectics. ἐρωτήσας
having asked (aor. part. of ἐρωτάω [XI]). τύπτω beat.]
3. ἀλλὰ βουλεύου, μᾶλλον δὲ οὐδὲ βουλεύεσθαι ἔτι ὥρα, ἀλλὰ βεβουλεῦσθαι.
μία δὲ βουλή. τῆς γὰρ ἐπιούσης νυκτὸς πάντα ταῦτα δεῖ πεπρᾶχθαι. εἰ δ ̓ ἔτι
περιμενοῦμεν ἀδύνατον καὶ οὐκέτι οἷόν τε. ἀλλὰ παντὶ τρόπῳ, ὦ Σώκρατες,
πείθου μοι καὶ μηδαμῶς ἄλλως ποίει.
—Plato, Crito
[βουλεύου pres. mid. imperative. ἐπιούσης pres. partic. of ἔπειμι come (on).
περιμενοῦμεν fut. of περιμένω wait around. ἀδύνατος, -ον impossible. *τρόπος,
-ου, ὁway. πείθου pres. mid. imperative. μηδαμῶς in no way. ἄλλως otherwise.
ποίει pres. act. imperative of ποιέω [XI, XIV] do.]
4. τό τε τὸν θάνατον μηδὲν εἶναι πρὸς ἡμᾶς εἴρηται μὲν ἴσως τῷ Σώφρονι,
ἀποδέδεικται δὲ Ἐπικούρῳ, καὶ ἔστιν οὐ τὸ εἰπεῖν ἀλλὰ τὸ ἀποδεῖξαι
θαυμαστόν.
—Sextus Empiricus
[μηδέν nothing. ἴσως equally; perhaps. ἀποδέδεικται pf. mid.; ἀποδεῖξαι aor.
act. inf. of ἀποδείκνυμι [XII] prove. θαυμαστός, -ή, -όν amazing, to be wondered at.]
5. πρὸς τὸν μικρολόγον πλούσιον, ‘οὐχ οὗτος,’ ἔφη, ‘τὴν οὐσίαν κέκτηται, ἀλλ̓
ἡ οὐσία τοῦτον.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Bion
[μικρολόγος, -ον stingy. οὐσία, -ας, ἡsubstance, property. κέκτηται pf. mid. of
κτάομαι possess.]
190
Lesson IX

Perfect Middle-Passive: The Fifth Principal Part
191
6. πέπεισμαι ἐγὼ ἑκὼν εἶναι μηδένα ἀδικεῖν ἀνθρώπων, ἀλλὰ ὑμᾶς τοῦτο οὐ
πείθω· ὀλίγον γὰρ χρόνον ἀλλήλοις διειλέγμεθα· ἐπεὶ ὡς ἐγῷμαι, εἰ ἦν ὑμῖν
νόμος, ὥσπερ καὶ ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις περὶ θανάτου μὴ μίαν ἡμέραν μόνον
κρίνειν, ἀλλὰ πολλάς, ἐπείσθητε ἄν· νῦν δ ̓οὐ ῥ ᾴδιον ἐν χρόνῳ ὀλίγῳ μεγάλας
διαβολὰς ἀπολύεσθαι.
—Plato, Apology
[ἑκών εἰναι willingly, intentionally. μηδένα no one (acc. sg). ἀδικεῖν inf. of
ἀδικέω [XI] do wrong. διειλέγμεθα pf. mid. of διαλέγομαι converse with. ἐγῷμαι
= ἐγὼ οἶμαι. ἐπείσθητε aor. pass. [X] of πείθω. διαβολή, -ῆς, ἡslander.]
7. πάλιν γέγραπται· οὐκ ἐκπειράσεις Κύριον τὸν Θεόν σου.
—Matthew
[*πάλιν again. ἐκπειράζω tempt. κύριος, -ου ὁ lord.]
γέγραπται· οὐκ ἐπ’ ἄρτῳ μόνῳ ζήσεται ὁ
ἄνθρωπος.
It is written: a human being shall not live by
bread alone.
—Matthew
Σωκράτης was a citizen of Athens, son of a sculptor,
probably a sculptor himself, married to Xanthippe,
father of three sons, hoplite in the army. In his early
adulthood he was interested in the scientific ideas
of his time, but gave that up to become an eccentric.
He devoted his life to a mission which involved an-
noying his fellow residents of Athens with ques-
tions and more questions in a self-appointed (or
divinely commissioned) quest for the right way to
live. He compares himself to a gadfly (μύωψ) and is
hardly surprised when his fellow citizens decide
they would be better off swatting him (κρούσαντες
ἄν με) so they can sleep away the rest of their lives
(Plato, Apology 30e–31a). 
Because he left no writings, we know about his
life and thought from his younger contemporaries, especially Plato, Xeno -
phon, and Aristophanes. His mission is described in Plato’s version of his
words —for it impossible to say where Socrates ends and Plato begins—as
“every day making words about virtue (περὶ ἀρετῆς) and the other matters
about which you have heard me conversing and examining both myself and
others—for the unexamined life is not worth living for a human being: ὁ
ἀνεξέταστος βίος οὐ βιωτὸς ἀνθρώπῳ” (Apology 38a). Socrates is the protagonist
of most of Plato’s dialogues.
In 399 B.C.E. he was prosecuted on the charges of not believing in the gods
of the city, introducing strange gods, and corrupting the youth: ὡς οὓς μὲν ἡ
πόλις νομίζει θεοὺς οὐ νομίζοι, ἕτερα δὲ καινὰ δαιμόνια εἰσφέροι καὶ τοὺς νέους
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

διαφθείροι (Xenophon, Apology 9). He was convicted and put to death. Plato’s
Crito and Phaedo take place in his prison cell.
Socrates was a familiar enough figure about town that the comic poet
Aristophanes in the Clouds represents him as being head of a school, the
Φροντιστήριον (Think Tank), dedicated to scientific speculation. The hero of the
play, Strepsiades, plans to enroll in this phrontisterion in order to learn how to
argue so that he can avoid paying his debts. He goes inside and during a con-
versation with one of Socrates’ μαθηταί he sees someone swinging around in
a basket:
Στρ.: φέρε, τίς γὰρ οὗτος οὑπὶ τῆς κρεμάθρας ἀνήρ;
Μαθ.: αὐτός. Στρ.: τίς αὐτός; Μαθ.: Σωκράτης.
Στρ.: ὦ Σώκρατες, ἴθ ̓οὗτος, ἀναβόησον αὐτόν μοι μέγα.
Μαθ.: αὐτὸς μὲν οὖν σὺ κάλεσον. οὐ γάρ μοι σχολή.
Στρ.: ὦ Σώκρατες, ὦ Σωκρατίδιον. Σωκ.: τί με καλεῖς, ὦ̓φήμερε;
Στρ.: πρῶτον μὲν ὅ τι δρᾷς, ἀντιβολῶ, κάτειπέ μοι.
Σωκ.: ἀεροβατῶ, καὶ περιφρονῶ τὸν ἥλιον.
Str.: Tell me, who is that suspended in the basket?
Stu.: Himself. Str. Who’s himself? Stu. Socrates.
Str.: Hey, Socrates. C’mon, call up to him in a loud voice.
Stu.: Call him yourself. I’m busy.
Str.: Socrates, my sweet little Socrates. Soc. Why do you call me, mortal?
Str.: First, tell me, please, what are you doing?
Soc.: I tread on air and contemplate the sun.
Socrates returns the compliment by quoting from these lines in the speech
he makes in his defense (the Apology). Socrates keeps current in Maxwell
Anderson’s Barefoot in Athens, I. F. Stone’s The Trial of Socrates, at the Socrates
Cafe and in Christopher Phillips’ book by the same name.
192
Lesson IX

LESSON X
Comparison of Adjectives,
Adverbs; Future, Aorist Passive
In this lesson you will learn how to add more and most to all types of adjectives,
how to construct adverbs, how to make comparisons, and how to say nobody and
nothing. You will also fill in the last tenses and voices of verbs with the future and
aorist passive and complete the principal parts.
193
COMPARISON OF
ADJECTIVES, ADVERBS
In English, adjectives are compared (1) by adding ‑er for the comparative and
‑est for the superlative (with spelling changes when necessary): nice, nicer,
nicest; big, bigger, biggest; lovely, lovelier, loveliest. Or (2) by putting more or most
before the adjective (this is common for words of more than two syllables):
beautiful, more beautiful, most beautiful. (3) Some adjectives are compared ir-
regularly, among them the very common: good, better, best; bad, worse, worst.
In Greek the most common method of comparison is:
(1) For the comparative, add ‑τερος, ‑τέρα, ‑τερον to the masculine base of the
adjective. And for the superlative, add ‑τατος, ‑τάτη, ‑τατον. These are declined
regularly, the comparative like δίκαιος, the superlative like ἄριστος.
Notes
If the penult of an adjective in ‑ος is short (in the positive degree), ‑ο‑
is lengthened to ‑ω‑ for both comparative and superlative. The syl  -
lable is long if it contains a long vowel or diphthong, two or more
consonants, or a double consonant (ζ, ξ, or ψ).
The masculine base of ‑ος adjectives is found by removing ‑ς from
the masculine nominative.
Adjectives in ‑ης, ‑ες have their bases in ‑εσ‑ to which the regular
‑τερος/‑τατος is added.
On the analogy of these, ‑εστερος/‑εστατος is added to adjectives
in ‑ων (base in ‑ον).

Examples:
Positive
Comparative
Superlative
‑ος type, long penult
δεινός, ‑ή, ‑όν
δεινότερος, ‑ᾱ, ‑ον
δεινότατος, ‑η, ‑ον
terrible
more terrible
most terrible
ἐσθλός, ‑ή, ‑όν
ἐσθλότερος, ‑ᾱ, ‑ον
ἐσθλότατος, ‑η, ‑ον
noble
nobler
noblest
‑ος type, short penult
σοφός, ‑ή, ‑όν
σοφώτερος, ‑ᾱ, ‑ον
σοφώτατος, ‑η, ‑ον
wise
wiser
wisest
ἄξιος, ‑ᾱ, ‑ον
ἀξιώτερος, ‑ᾱ, ‑ον
ἀξιώτατος, ‑η, ‑ον
worthy
worthier
worthiest
‑ης, ‑ες type (base in ‑εσ‑)
ἀληθής, ἀληθές
ἀληθέστερος, ‑ᾱ, ‑ον
ἀληθέστατος, ‑η, ‑ον
true
truer
truest
‑ων, ‑ον type (base in ‑ον‑)
εὐδαίμων, -ον
εὐδαιμονέστερος, ‑ᾱ, ‑ον
εὐδαιμονέστατος, ‑η, ‑ον
lucky
luckier
luckiest
(2) Adjectives in ‑υς and a few in ‑ρος have a different comparison. For the
comparative, add ‑ίων, ‑ιον to the root (in the ‑ρος type, ‑ρ‑ drops out, in the
‑υς type, ‑υ‑ is lost: the root is found for these types by removing ‑ρος or ‑υς).
For the superlative, add ‑ιστος, ‑ίστη, ‑ιστον:
ἡδύς, ἡδεῖα, ἡδύ
ἡδίων, ἥδιον
ἥδιστος, ἡδίστη, ἥδιστον
sweet
sweeter
sweetest
αἰσχρός, -ά, -όν
αἰσχίων, -ιον
αἴσχιστος, -ίστη, -ιστον
base
baser
basest
The ‑ίων, ‑ιον type of comparative is a two-termination adjective (‑ίων for
m. and f., ‑ιον for n.) of the third declension (review ‑ων, ‑ον type in Lesson VI).
It is declined like εὐδαίμων but has some alternate shorter forms.
αἰσχίων, αἴσχιον, more shameful, baser
Singular
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
αἰσχίων
αἴσχιον
αἰσχίονες 
αἰσχίονα 
(αἰσχίους)
(αἰσχίω)
G
αἰσχίονος
αἰσχίονος
αἰσχιόνων
αἰσχιόνων
D
αἰσχίονι
αἰσχίονι
αἰσχίοσι
αἰσχίοσι
A
αἰσχίονα
αἴσχιον
αἰσχίονας 
αἰσχίονα
(αἰσχίω)
(αἰσχίους)
(αἰσχίω)
V
αἴσχιον
194
Lesson X

(3) Irregular Comparison
Several of the most important adjectives are compared irregularly. In some
cases there are several comparisons for one positive. (Most of the following
are of the ‑ιων, ‑ιστος type, though in many cases the ‑ι‑ of the comparative
has been lost.)
1. ἀγαθός, ‑ή, ‑όν good
better
best
ἀμείνων, ἄμεινον
ἄριστος, ἀρίστη, ἄριστον (able, brave)
βελτίων, βέλτιον
βέλτιστος, βελτίστη, βέλτιστον (virtuous)
κρείττων, κρεῖττον
κράτιστος, κρατίστη κράτιστον (strong)
2. κακός, ‑ή, ‑όν bad
worse
worst
κακίων, κάκιον
κάκιστος, κακίστη, κάκιστον (cowardly)
χείρων, χεῖρον
χείριστος, χειρίστη, χείριστον (lacking, less good)
inferior, less
least
ἥττων, ἧττον
ἥκιστος, ἡκίστη, ἥκιστον (weak)
3. καλός, ‑ή, ‑όν fine
finer
finest
καλλίων, κάλλιον
κάλλιστος, καλλίστη, κάλλιστον
4. μέγας, μεγάλη, μέγα great
greater
greatest
μείζων, μεῖζον
μέγιστος, μεγίστη, μέγιστον
5. μικρός, μικρά, μικρόν small
smaller
smallest
ἐλάττων, ἔλαττον,
ἐλάχιστος, ἐλαχίστη, ἐλάχιστον
μείων, μεῖον
6. ὀλίγος, ‑η, ‑ον little; pl. few
fewer
fewest
ἐλάττων/μείων
ὀλίγιστος, ὀλιγίστη, ὀλίγιστον
7. πολύς, πολλή, πολύmuch; pl.many
more
most
πλείων, πλεῖον
πλεῖστος, πλείστη, πλεῖστον
Comparison of Adjectives, Adverbs
195

8. ῥᾴδιος, ῥᾳδία, ῥᾴδιον easy
easier
easiest
ῥᾴων, ῥᾷον
ῥᾷστος, ῥᾴστη, ῥᾷστον
9. ταχύς, ταχεῖα, ταχύswift
swifter
swiftest
θάττων, θᾶττον
τάχιστος, ταχίστη, τάχιστον
Adverbs: Formation and Comparison
Adverbs of manner are generally formed from adjectives by changing the ‑ων
of the masculine genitive plural to ‑ως.
For example:
Adjective
Genitive Plural
Adverb
δίκαιος
δικαίων
δικαίως
justly
σοφός
σοφῶν
σοφῶς
wisely
ἡδύς
ἡδέων
ἡδέως
sweetly
ἀληθής
ἀληθῶν
ἀληθῶς
truly
εὐδαίμων
εὐδαιμόνων
εὐδαιμόνως
happily
μέγας
μεγάλων
μεγάλως
greatly
πᾶς
πάντων
πάντως
in any case
ἄλλος
ἄλλων
ἄλλως
otherwise, in vain
There are many other adverbial endings, but they can be learned as they
come up. The ‑ως type forms the largest class.
Adverbs of manner are compared in the following way:
For the comparative, use the neuter singular accusative of the comparative
of the adjective (‑τερον, -ον). For the superlative, use the neuter plural accu-
sative of the superlative of the adjective (‑τατα, -ιστα).
Positive
Comparative
Superlative
δικαίως
δικαιότερον
δικαιότατα
justly
more justly
most justly
σοφῶς
σοφώτερον
σοφώτατα
wisely
more wisely
most wisely
ἡδέως
ἥδιον
ἥδιστα
sweetly
more sweetly
most sweetly
ἀληθῶς
ἀληθέστερον
ἀληθέστατα
truly
more truly
most truly
ῥᾳδίως
ῥᾷον
ῥᾷστα
easily
more easily
most easily
196
Lesson X

Syntax
1. Than is expressed in two ways in Greek.
a. By the conjunction ἤ, than. In this construction the two words com-
pared are in the same case.
οὗτος ὁ υἱός ἐστι νεώτερος ἢ ὁ ἀδελφός.
This son is younger than his brother.
νομίζω τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα εἶναι σοφώτερον ἢ τὸν πατέρα.
I think that this man is wiser than his father.
b. Instead of ἤ, the genitive of comparison may be used.
οὗτος ὁ υἱός ἐστι νεώτερος τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ.
This son is younger than his brother.
νομίζω τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα εἶναι σοφώτερον τοῦ πατρός.
I think that this man is wiser than his father.
2. The degree of difference between the two things compared is in the da-
tive case: How much younger is the boy than his brother? How much wiser
is this man than his father?
οὗτος ὁ υἱός ἐστι πέντε ἔτεσι νεώτερος τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ.
This son is five years younger than his brother.
νομίζω τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα εἶναι πολλῷ σοφώτερον τοῦ πατρός.
I think that this man is much wiser than his father.
3. The Partitive Genitive (or Genitive of the Whole): The whole of which a part
is taken is in the genitive. This genitive is used with nouns, adjectives, and
verbs, and is especially common with superlatives and indefinite pronouns.
πολλοὶ τῶν ποιητῶν
many of the poets
οἱ σοφοὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων
the wise of/among human beings,
people who are wise
πάντων τῶν πολιτῶν σοφώτατος
wisest of all the citizens
θεῶν τις
one of the gods
The partitive genitive goes into the predicate position.
Comparison of Adjectives, Adverbs
197

Further Notes on Adjectives and Adverbs
1. The superlative may be used absolutely (that is, with no comparison im-
plied) to mean very.
σοφώτατος ὁ Σωκράτης.
Socrates is very wise.
As opposed to:
ὁ Σωκράτης ἦν ὁ σοφώτατος πάντων.
Socrates was the wisest of all.
2. ὡς with the superlative forms a super-superlative, meaning as . . . as possible.
ὡς τάχιστα
as quickly as possible
3. Adjectives may also be compared by using μᾶλλον and μάλιστα with the
positive:
μᾶλλον σοφός
more wise
μάλιστα κακός
most bad
μᾶλλον ἑκών
more willing(ly)
ἑκών has no regular comparison; this is the only way to compare it.
4. Adverbs with ἔχω:
ἔχω with an adverb is often used as an equivalent to an adjective with εἰμί.
καλῶς ἔχει
it is going well
ὡς εἶχε
as he/she/it was
Declension of Numerals
One is naturally declined only in the singular.
m.
f.
n.
N
εἷς
μία
ἕν
εἷς, μία, ἕν,
G
ἑνός
μιᾶς
ἑνός
one
D
ἑνί
μιᾷ
ἑνί
A
ἕνα
μίαν
ἕν
198
Lesson X

Two is declined in the dual only (‑οιν being a common dual ending for gen.
and dat.). δύο is often treated as indeclinable.
m./f./n.
N
δύο
G
δυοῖν
δύο, two
D
δυοῖν
A
δύο
Three and four are both declined in the plural only. They belong to the third
declension and are of the two-termination type.
m./f.
n.
N
τρεῖς
τρία
τρεῖς, τρία,
G
τριῶν
τριῶν
three
D
τρισί(ν)
τρισί(ν)
A
τρεῖς
τρία
m./f.
n.
N
τέτταρες
τέτταρα
τέτταρες, τέτταρα,
G
τεττάρων
τεττάρων
(τέσσερες, τέσσερα),
D
τεττάρασι(ν)
τεττάρασι(ν)
four
A
τέτταρας
τέτταρα
Declension of οὐδείς and μηδείς
The words for no one, nothing, οὐδείς, μηδείς, are declined like εἷς, μία, ἕν. (Which
of them should be used depends on whether οὐor μήis the suitable negative.)
οὐδείς
m.
f.
n.
N
οὐδείς
οὐδεμία
οὐδέν
G
οὐδενός
οὐδεμιᾶς
οὐδενός
D
οὐδενί
οὐδεμιᾷ
οὐδενί
A
οὐδένα
οὐδεμίαν
οὐδέν
μηδείς
m.
f.
n.
N
μηδείς
μηδεμία
μηδέν
G
μηδενός
μηδεμιᾶς
μηδενός
D
μηδενί
μηδεμιᾷ
μηδενί
A
μηδένα
μηδεμίαν
μηδέν
Comparison of Adjectives, Adverbs
199

Vocabulary
ἀδελφή, ἀδελφῆς, ἡ
sister
ἀδελφός, ἀδελφοῦ, ὁ
brother
ἄλλως
(adv.) otherwise, in vain, at random (ἄλλος)
ἄλλως τε καί . . .
both otherwise and, . . . especially
ἀμφότερος, -α, -ον
both of two
βέβαιος, -ον
firm, steady, steadfast, sure, certain
βροτός, ‑ου, ὁ
mortal man (rare in prose) (ambrosial)
δεύτερος, -α, -ον
second
ἑκάτερος, -α, -ον
each (of two) (cf. ἕκαστος)
ἑκών, ἑκοῦσα, ἑκόν
readily, willing(ly), on purpose (base, ἑκοντ-)
ἄκων, ἄκουσα, ἆκον
involuntarily, unwilling(ly) (also ἀέκων; base,
ἀκοντ-)
εὖ
well (adv. of ἀγαθός)
κράτος, κράτους, τό
strength, might, power, rule (autocrat)
μακρός, -ά, -όν
long, large, great
ὀλίγος, ὀλίγη, ὀλίγον
little (sg.), few (pl.)
ὀλίγου [δεῖν]
almost, all but
ὅλος, ὅλη, ὅλον
whole, entire
ὅλως
wholly, altogether, on the whole (holograph)
πάντως
in all ways, in any case, by all means (<πᾶς)
πότερος, -α, -ον
whether (of two)
πότερον/πότερα . . . ἤ
whether . . . or
ῥᾴδιος, ῥᾳδία, ῥᾴδιον
easy, ready, easy-going
σώφρων, σῶφρον
of sound mind, discreet, prudent, self-controlled
(σωφροσύνη)
ὕβρις, ὕβρεως, ἡ
hubris, wanton violence, insolence, lust
ὕστερος, -α, -ον
latter, next, later (hysteron-proteron: he put
on his shoes and socks)
Exercise A
1. Compare (give comparative and superlative nominative).
1. σώφρων
4. πονηρός*
7. νέος
9. φοβερός*
2. μακρός*
5. ψευδής
8. βραχύς
10. γλυκύς
3. ἀσφαλής
6. ἐσθλός
*Note: these are compared regularly, with -τερος, -τατος.
2. Decline.
1. ἡ ὕβρις
4. the comp. of μέγας
6. the comp. of καλός
2. ἑκών
5. ταχύς (all genders)
7. σώφρων
3. τὸ κράτος
200
Lesson X

3. Form and compare the adverbs of the following words.
1. μέγας
3. δίκαιος
5. ῥᾴδιος
7. ἄξιος
2. ἀγαθός
4. ἀληθής
6. εὐδαίμων
8. νέος
4. Choose the correct adjective form to agree with each of the following nouns.
1. τοὺς πολίτας
a. ῥᾴους
b. ῥαδίονες
c. ῥᾴονε
2. τὴν θάλασσαν
a. καλλιόνην
b. καλλίονα
c. καλλίοναν
3. τὸν ξένον
a. μείζονα
b. μείζους
c. μεῖζον
4. τὰ δῶρα
a. ἥττωνα
b. ἥττονα
c. ἧττα
5. τοῦ ποιητοῦ
a. ἀληθεστέρης
b. ἀληθεστέρου
c. ἀληθεστέρους
6. ταῖς σχηναῖς
a. ἐλαττώναις
b. ἡδιόναις
c. ἐλάττοσι
7. τῷ νεανίᾳ
a. νεοτέρᾳ
b. νεωτέρᾳ
c. νεωτέρῳ
8. τοῦ γένους
a. βελτίους
b. βελτίονος
c. βελτίου
9. τῆς ὁδοῦ
a. μακροτέρου
b. μακρότης
c. μακροτέρας
10. τῆς ὕβρεως
a. αἰσχιόνης
b. αἰσχίονος
c. αἰσχιόνως
11. τοῖς βίοις
a. ὀλίγοις
b. ὀλίγαις
c. ὀλιγίσταις
12. τὰ κράτη
a. κρατίστη
b. κρείττων
c. κρείττω
5. Translate.
1. ἄλλως λέγεις λέγων ταῦτα.
2. λίθους ἔβαλλεν ἀμφοτέραις χερσί.
3. βροτοῖς θανάτου βεβαιότερόν ἐστι οὐδέν.
4. ἄμεινόν ἐστι βεβαίους φίλους ἔχειν ἢ χρήματα.
5. κρεῖττον τὸ κράτος τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς ἢ τὸ τοῦ σώματος.
6. πάντες γὰρ βέβαιον ἀγαγεῖν εἰρήνην ἐθέλουσιν.
7. εἰρήνης οὐδέν ἐστι εὐδαιμονέστερον.
8. οὐ βέβαιος ὁ βίος βροτῶν.
9. ἑκοῦσα ταῦτα ἑκούσαις ἤγγειλα.
10. οὔποτε ἕκων οὐδένα βέβλαφα.
11. ταῦτα πράττοντες εὖ πράττετε.
12. δευτέρᾳ ἡμέρᾳ ἄκοντες παρεσόμεθα.
13. ἑκάτερος ἡμῶν βούλεται εὐδαίμων εἶναι καὶ εὖ ἔχειν.
14. εὖ οἶδα ταύτην οὖσαν δικαίαν γυναῖκα.
15. ὁ δίκαιος μέγα κράτος ἔχει.
16. κρείσσων τοῦ κράτους ἡ σωφροσύνη.
17. τὸ πᾶν κράτος ἔχει ὁ τῶν θεῶν βασιλεύς.
18. νομίζω τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ κράτος κρεῖττον εἶναι ἢ τῶν ἀνθρώπων.
19. πῶς ἔχεις; ἄμεινον ἔχω.
20. αὕτη ἡ ὁδὸς πάντως μακροτέρα ἦν ἐκείνης.
21. μακρὸς βίος οὐκ ἀεί ἐστι εὐδαίμων.
22. ἐν ὀλίγῳ χρόνῳ παυσόμεθα.
23. ἦσαν πολλοὶ μὲν ἄνθρωποι ἐν τῇ πόλει, ὀλίγοι δὲ ἄνδρες.
24. ὁ κόσμος λέγεται τὸ ὅλον.
25. τὸν τύραννον τὸν δίκαιον εὑρεῖν οὐ ῥᾴδιον.
26. ἡ ῥᾴστη ὁδὸς ἄγει εἰς τὸν θάνατον.
27. ἡ ὁδὸς ἡ ῥᾳδία οὐκ ἔστιν ἀρίστη.
28. ἐκεῖνος ὁ ἄνθρωπος σοφώτατός ἐστι ὃς οἶδεν οὐδὲν εἰδώς.
29. ὕβρις τόδ’ ἐστί, θεὸν εἶναι βούλεσθαι.
30. ἄκοντος θεοῦ, οὐδὲν γίγνεται.
Comparison of Adjectives, Adverbs
201

6. Write in Greek.
1. There is no one who is more wicked than this man.
2. Socrates is the wisest of all people, but he knows nothing.
3. It is necessary to hurt our enemies, who are more wicked than we.
4. He wrote not wisely but well.
5. Some women are good, but others are better.
6. It is easier to avoid death than wickedness.
7. In no respect [in nothing] is he wiser than you.
8. She is a little taller [bigger] than her sister.
9. Not every man is taller than his wife. [tall μέγας]
10. I myself wish to become better in all things.
εἷς ἀνήρ, οὐδεὶς ἀνήρ.
One man, no man.
—Greek proverb
Readings
1. ἐγὼ δὲ μεγίστην ἡγοῦμαι συμμαχίαν εἶναι καὶ βεβαιοτάτην τὸ τὰ δίκαια
πράττειν.
—Isocrates, Archidamus
[*ἡγοῦμαι think + inf. συμμαχία alliance.]
2. ἀναρχίας δὲ μεῖζον οὐκ ἔστιν κακόν.
—Sophocles, Antigone
3. πολλὰ τὰ δεινὰ κοὐδὲν ἀνθρώπου δεινότερον πέλει . . .
—Sophocles, Antigone
[κοὐδέν = καὶ οὐδέν. πέλει is.]
4. πάρειμι δ’ ἄκων οὐχ ἑκοῦσιν οἶδ’ ὅτι·
στέργει γὰρ οὐδεὶς ἄγγελον κακῶν ἔργων.
—Sophocles, Antigone
[στέργω love, be pleased with.]
5. (οἷον) εἰ ὁ μέγιστος ἀνὴρ γυναικὸς τῆς μεγίστης μείζων καὶ ὅλως οἱ ἄνδρες
τῶν γυναικῶν μείζους· καὶ εἰ οἱ ἄνδρες ὅλως τῶν γυναικῶν μείζους, καὶ ἀνὴρ
ὁ μέγιστος τῆς μεγίστης γυναικὸς μείζων.
—Aristotle, Rhetoric
[*οἷον for example.]
6. πειθαρχεῖν δεῖ θεῷ μᾶλλον ἢ ἀνθρώποις.
—Eusebius
[πειθαρχεῖν to obey.]
202
Lesson X

7. οὐδέν ἐστιν ἄμεινον εἰρήνης, ἐν ᾗ πᾶς πόλεμος καταργεῖται ἐπουρανίων καὶ
ἐπιγείων.
—St. Ignatius
[καταργεῖται is abolished. ἐπουράνιος, -ον in heaven. ἐπίγειος, -ον on earth.]
8. οὐ γὰρ οἶμαι θεμιτὸν εἶναι ἀμείνονι ἀνδρὶ ὑπὸ χείρονος βλάπτεσθαι.
—Plato
[θεμιτός, -ή, -όν lawful, natural.]
9. πολλοὶ μαθηταὶ κρείσσονες διδασκάλων.
—Greek Anthology
[*διδάσκαλος, -ου, ὁteacher.]
10. οὐδὲν ἔφη τὸν θάνατον διαφέρειν τοῦ ζῆν. ‘σὺ οὖν,’ ἔφη τις, ‘διὰ τί οὐκ
ἀποθνῄσκεις;’ ‘ὅτι,’ ἔφη ‘οὐδὲν διαφέρει.’
—Diogenes Laertius, about Thales (and others)
[*διαφέρω + gen. of comparison differ from. οὐδὲν διαφέρει it makes no difference.]
11. τὸ γὰρ ζῷον τοῦ μὴ ζῴου κρεῖττον· οὐδὲν δὲ τοῦ κόσμου κρεῖττον· ζῷον
ἄρ’ ὁ κόσμος.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Zeno
[*ζῷον, -ου, τό living thing, animal.]
12. κρεῖττον ἔλεγεν ἕνα φίλον ἔχειν πολλοῦ ἄξιον ἢ πολλοὺς μηδενὸς ἀξίους.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Anacharsis
13. ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, τῶν μὲν σοφώτερος, τῶν δὲ ἀνδρειότερός εἰμι· σοφώτερος
μὲν τῶν τὴν ἀπάτην τοῦ Πεισιστράτου μὴ συνιέντων, ἀνδρειότερος δὲ τῶν
ἐπισταμένων μὲν, διὰ δέος δὲ σιωπώντων.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Solon
[ἀνδρεῖος, -α, -ον manly, brave. ἀπάτη deceit, strategem. συνιέντων pres. act.
part. of συνίημι perceive, understand. ἐπισταμένων pres. mid. part. of ἐπίσταμαι
know. δέος, -ους, τό fear. σιωπώντων pres. act. part. of σιωπάω keep silent.]
14. φέρεται δὲ καὶ ἀποφθέγματα αὐτοῦ τάδε·
πρεσβύτατον τῶν ὄντων θεός, ἀγενητὸν γάρ.
κάλλιστον κόσμος· ποίημα γὰρ θεοῦ.
μέγιστον τόπος· ἅπαντα γὰρ χωρεῖ.
τάχιστον νοῦς· διὰ παντὸς γὰρ τρέχει.
ἰσχυρότατον ἀνάγκη· κρατεῖ γὰρ πάντων.
σοφώτατον χρόνος· ἀνευρίσκει γὰρ πάντα.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Thales
[φέρεται are recorded. ἀπόφθεγμα terse saying. πρέσβυς old man; as adj. old.
ἀγενητός, -όν unborn. ποίημα poem, creation. τόπος place. χωρεῖmakes room for
(3rd sg.). νοῦς mind. τρέχω run. ἰσχυρός, -ά, -όν strong. κρατεῖis master of (3rd
sg.). ἀνευρίσκω < ἀνα (up, throughout) + εὑρίσκω.]
15. γνώμη γερόντων ἀσφαλεστέρα νέων.
—Menander
Comparison of Adjectives, Adverbs
203

16. ἐν ταῖς ἀνάγκαις χρημάτων κρείττων φίλος.
—Menander
17. ἔστιν δὲ μήτηρ φιλότεκνος μᾶλλον πατρός·
ἡ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῆς οἶδεν ὄνθ’, ὁ δὲ οἴεται.
—Menander
[φιλότεκνος, -ον loving one’s children. ὄνθ’ = ὄντα.]
18. κάλλιστόν ἐστι κτῆμα παιδεία βροτοῖς.
—Menander
19. σχολὴ δὲ πλείων ἢ θέλω πάρεστί μοι.
—Aeschylus, Prometheus
20. ἣ τέξεταί γε παῖδα φέρτερον πατρός.
—Aeschylus, Prometheus
[*τίκτω, τέξομαι bring forth, bear. φέρτερος better, mightier.]
21. οἱ πλειστοὶ κακοί.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Bias
22. ἐς πάντας αὔδα· τῶνδε γὰρ πλέον φέρω
τὸ πένθος ἢ καὶ τῆς ἐμῆς ψυχῆς πέρι.
—Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus
[ἐς = εἰς. αὔδα imperative of αὐδάω speak, tell. πένθος, -ους, τό grief. τῶνδε (re-
ferring to the people of Thebes gathered as suppliants) and ψυχῆς depend
on πέρι = περί (the accent shifts when the preposition follows the noun).]
23. ἀλλὰ μὴ οὐ τοῦτ’ ᾖ χαλεπόν, ὦ ἄνδρες, θάνατον ἐκφυγεῖν, ἀλλὰ πολὺ
χαλεπώτερον πονηρίαν· θᾶττον γὰρ θανάτου θεῖ. καὶ νῦν ἐγὼ μὲν ἅτε βραδὺς
ὤν καὶ πρεσβύτης ὑπὸ τοῦ βραδυτέρου ἑάλων, οἱ δ’ ἐμοὶ κατήγοροι ἅτε δεινοὶ
καὶ ὀξεῖς ὄντες ὑπὸ τοῦ θάττονος, τῆς κακίας. καὶ νῦν ἐγὼ μὲν ἄπειμι ὑφ’ ὑμῶν
θανάτου δίκην ὄφλων, οὗτοι δ’ ὑπὸ τῆς ἀληθείας ὠφληκότες μοχθηρίαν καὶ
ἀδικίαν. καὶ ἐγώ τε τῷ τιμήματι ἐμμένω καὶ οὗτοι. ταῦτα μέν που ἴσως οὕτως
καὶ ἔδει σχεῖν, καὶ οἶμαι αὐτὰ μετρίως ἔχειν.
—Plato, Apology
[μὴ οὐwith the subjunctive of cautious negation: not. ᾖsubjunctive of εἰμί
(3rd sg.) is, may be. θεῖruns. ἑάλων I have been caught. βραδύς, -εῖα, -ύ slow.
κατήγορος, -ου, ὁaccuser. κακία evil. ἄπειμι I will go away. ὄφλων convicted of
(aor. part.). ὠφληκότες convicted of (pf. part.) + acc. < ὀφλισκάνω incur a
penalty, owe. μοχθηρία wickedness. τίμημα, -ατος, τό penalty. ἐμμένω abide by.
μετρίως fairly; μετρίως ἔχειν be fair.]
24. χειμὼν μεταβάλλει ῥᾳδίως εἰς εὐδίαν.
—Menander
[χειμών -ῶνος, ὁwinter, storm. εὐδία, -ας, ἡfair weather.]
25. βροτοῖς ἥδιστον ἀείδειν.
—Musaeus
[ἀείδω sing.]
204
Lesson X

AORIST AND FUTURE PASSIVE:
THE SIXTH PRINCIPAL PART
The Passive System
Aorist Passive
The First Aorist Passive
Formation: augment + stem + θη/θε + endings (a type of secondary ending)
θη is used for the indicative and infinitive. θε is used for the participle, the
subjunctive, and the optative.
Aorist Passive Endings:
Singular
Plural
‑ν
1st
‑μεν
‑ς
2nd
‑τε
‑
3rd
‑σαν
Infinitive: ‑ναι
Participle: ‑είς, ‑εῖσα, ‑έν (base in ‑έντ‑)
The Aorist Passive of λύω: ἐλύθην, I was released
Example: ἐ+ λύ+ θη + ν
Singular
Plural
ἐλύθην
1st
ἐλύθημεν
ἐλύθης
2nd
ἐλύθητε
ἐλύθη
3rd
ἐλύθησαν
Infinitive: λυθῆναι
Participle: λυθείς, λυθεῖσα, λυθέν (λυθεντ‑)
Aorist and Future Passive: The Sixth Principal Part
205

Before ‑θ‑ consonant changes take place (as in the perfect middle) by
 assimilation:
π, β,  φ
κ, γ  χ
τ, δ, θ, ζ  σ
Examples:
Stem
Aorist passive
πέμπω
πεμπ‑
ἐπέμφθην
ἄγω
ἀγ‑
ἤχθην
πείθω
πειθ‑
ἐπείσθην
νομίζω
νομιζ‑
ἐνομίσθην
The Second Aorist Passive
A second aorist passive is formed without ‑θ‑ (cf. the second perfect active
without ‑κ‑).
Formation: augment + stem (often with vowel gradation) + η/ε + endings
Both first and second aorist passive systems are conjugated in the same way.
Examples:
Aorist passive
στέλλω
ἐστάλην
φαίνω
ἐφάνην
γράφω
ἐγράφην
The Aorist Passive Participle
The aorist passive participle is declined in the same way as the active par-
ticiples with bases in ‑ντ‑ except that the base is in ‑εντ‑ rather than ‑οντ‑ or
‑αντ‑. The masculine nominative singular and the dative plural masculine
and neuter are in ‑είς and ‑εῖσι, formed by the lengthening of the vowel when
‑ντ‑ is dropped before ‑σ‑. The feminine is declined in the first declension (like
θάλαττα).
Example: λυθείς, base (m./n.) λυθεντ-; (f.) λυθεισ‑ (having been freed)
m.
f.
n.
Singular
N
λυθείς
λυθεῖσα
λυθέν
G
λυθέντος
λυθείσης
λυθέντος
D
λυθέντι
λυθείσῃ
λυθέντι
A
λυθέντα
λυθεῖσαν
λυθέν
Plural
N
λυθέντες
λυθεῖσαι
λυθέντα
G
λυθέντων
λυθεισῶν
λυθέντων
D
λυθεῖσι
λυθείσαις
λυθεῖσι
A
λυθέντας
λυθείσας
λυθέντα
206
Lesson X

The Future Passive
Formation: aorist passive stem (‑η‑ form) + σ + ο/ε + primary middle endings
The long form of the stem (in ‑θη or ‑η) is used throughout the future pas-
sive. Note that active endings are used in the aorist passive and that middle
endings are used in the future passive.
Future Passive of λύω: λυθήσομαι (I shall be released)
Example: λυ + θή + σ + ο + μαι
Singular
Plural
λυθήσομαι
1st
λυθησόμεθα
λυθήσει/‑ῃ
2nd
λυθήσεσθε
λυθήσεται
3rd
λυθήσονται
Infinitive: λυθήσεσθαι
Participle: λυθησόμενος, -η, -ον
Vocabulary
διαφθείρω, διαφθερῶ,
destroy utterly, corrupt
διέφθειρα, διέφθαρκα,
διέφθαρμαι, διεφθάρην
ἐρρήθην
I was said (used as aor. pass. of λέγω)
ἐχθρός, ἐχθρά, ἐχθρόν
hated, hateful, hostile
ἐχθρός, -ου, ὁ
enemy
οἴομαι (οἶμαι), ᾠόμην (impf.),
think, believe (+ inf.)
οἰήσομαι, ᾠήθην
σῴζω, σώσω, ἔσωσα, σέσωκα,
save; pass., be saved, escape 
σέσωμαι, ἐσώθην
The Sixth Principal Part: Aorist Passive
ἀγγέλλω (stem ἀγγελ‑)
ἠγγέλθην
ἄγω
ἤχθην
ἀκούω
ἠκούσθην
ἄρχω
ἤρχθην
βάλλω (stems βαλ‑ and βλη‑)
ἐβλήθην
βουλεύω
ἐβουλεύθην
βούλομαι
ἐβουλήθην(βούλομαιis a pass. deponent)
γιγνώσκω
ἐγνώσθην
γράφω
ἐγράφην
Aorist and Future Passive: The Sixth Principal Part
207

εὑρίσκω
ηὑρέθην
ἔχω
ἐσχέθην
θύω
ἐτύθην (θυ‑ becomes τυ‑ before ‑θην)
κομίζω
ἐκομίσθην
κρίνω
ἐκρίθην
λαμβάνω
ἐλήφθην
λέγω
ἐλέχθην, ἐρρήθην
λείπω
ἐλείφθην
λύω
ἐλύθην
νομίζω
ἐνομίσθην
παιδεύω
ἐπαιδεύθην
παύω
ἐπαύθην
πείθω
ἐπείσθην
πέμπω
ἐπέμφθην
πιστεύω
ἐπιστεύθην
πράττω (stem, πραγ-)
ἐπράχθην
φαίνω
ἐφάνην, ἐφάνθην
φέρω
ἠνέχθην
χαίρω
ἐχάρην
Exercise B
1. Form the future passive of the verbs given above.
2. a. Conjugate in the aorist passive.
1. γράφω
4. πράττω
2. νομίζω
5. λαμβάνω
3. παιδεύω
2. b. Decline the aorist passive participle of the following words.
1. βάλλω
2. βούλομαι
3. πέμπω
2. c. Conjugate in the future passive.
1. ἀκούω
2. παύω
3. Fill in the aorist passive and future passive in the synopses given in Les-
sons VIII and IX.
New Synopses:  1. γράφω: 2nd sg.  2. παύω: 1st sg.  
3. βούλομαι: 3rd sg.
208
Lesson X

4. Parse.
1. πεμφθεῖσιν
13. ἐβλήθη
25. ἐσχέθησαν
2. σωθήσεσθαι
14. ἐλέχθητε
26. νομισθῆναι
3. ἐσώθησαν
15. βουλευθήσει
27. ἐφάνην
4. πεμφθέντες
16. ἐλήφθη
28. παιδευθείσης
5. σωθῆναι
17. βουληθέντι
29. ἐτάθησαν (τείνω)
6. ἠγγέλθημεν
18. ἐκρίθησαν
30. ἀκουσθέντα
7. γραφησόμενος
19. γνωσθείς
31. παυθεῖσαι
8. ἐλύθης
20. ἐκομίσθης
32. ἐπράχθημεν
9. ἀκουσθῆναι
21. ἐχάρην
33. πεμφθήσονται
10. ἤρχθην
22. ἐνεχθεῖσι
34. πιστευθησόμεθα
11. λειφθέντος
23. γραφθήσεσθαι
35. ἠνέχθημεν
12. ἤχθησαν
24. τυθήσομαι
36. ἐγράφη
5. Translate.
1. εἰς τήνδε τὴν χώραν ἐπέμφθημεν.
2. οὗτοι οἱ ἵπποι ἅμα λυθέντες ἔφυγον.
3. αὗται αἱ ἐπιστολαὶ ἐγράφησαν ὑφ’ ἡμῶν.
4. τῶν ὑπὸ τῶν τότε λεχθέντων τὰ μὲν ἀληθῆ ἐστι, τὰ δὲ ψευδῆ.
5. ἐν δημοκρατίᾳ οὐκ ἤρχθησαν ὑπὸ τῶν ὀλίγων.
6. εἰς λίθους ἐγράφησαν οἱ νόμοι οἱ τῶν Ἑλλήνων.
7. ἐβουλήθημεν τοῦ σοφοῦ ἀκούειν.
8. ᾠήθησαν οἱ ποιηταὶ τὴν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ψυχὴν εἶναι ἀθάνατον.
9. ὑφ’ ἡμῶν ἐσώθητε.
10. ὁ φεύγων ὑπὸ τῶν δικαστῶν κριθήσεται.
11. ταῖς θεαῖς τὰ δῶρα ἐνεχθήσεται τῇδε τῇ ἡμέρᾳ.
12. ἄκων ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ὁ γέρων ἐλείφθη ὑπὸ τῶν ἐχθρῶν.
13. ἐπείσθητε τοῖς λόγοις τοῖς τῶν πολλὰ καὶ ψευδῆ λεγόντων;
14. καλὰ τὰ ὑφ’ ὑμῶν πραχθέντα.
15. τῇ θεᾷ ἡ καλλίστη θυγάτηρ ἡ τοῦ στρατηγοῦ ἐτύθη.
16. τὰ παιδία ἐπαιδεύθη ὑπο τῶν πατέρων καὶ τῶν μητέρων.
17. ἐπέμφθην ὡς οἴσουσα ὑμῖν ταῦτα.
18. ἄμεινόν ἐστι τὸ σωθῆναι ἢ τὸ ἀποθνῄσκειν.
19. τούτων πραχθέντων ἑκόντες σοι πιστεύσομεν.
20. τοῦ ἀδίκου ληφθέντος ἔξεστιν ἠμῖν εἰρήνην ἄγειν.
21. σωθήσεσθαι γὰρ οἱ κακοὶ ᾠήθησαν φεύγοντες.
22. οἱ διώκοντες ᾠήθησαν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ τοὺς νέους διαφθαρῆναι.
23. οἱ σωθέντες χάριν ταῖς σωζούσαις οὐκ ἴσασιν. [χάριν εἰδέναι τινί 
feel grateful to someone]
Aorist and Future Passive: The Sixth Principal Part
209

6. Write in Greek.
1. By whom were you sent?
2. We wished to be led to the king.
3. What was written on the stones?
4. By whom are the citizens ruled in this city?
5. They thought that they had been saved.
6. She happened to have been found in the same place.
7. They were not persuaded by the gifts, but by the words and deeds
of the just.
8. Why were you left alone in this place?
9. He was brought here by wicked men who wished to kill him, but
he was saved by his friends.
10. I was sent to find a just man.
Readings
1. Neoptolemus: οὐκ αἰσχρὸν ἡγεῖ δῆτα τὸ ψευδῆ λέγειν;
Odysseus: οὐκ εἰ τὸ σωθῆναί γε τὸ ψεῦδος φέρει.
—Sophocles, Philoctetes
[ἡγεῖyou think (< ἡγέομαι). *δῆτα then, indeed.]
2. εἶδον γὰρ θεὸν πρόσωπον πρὸς πρόσωπον, καὶ ἐσώθη μου ἡ ψυχή.
—Eusebius
[πρόσωπον face, person, mask.]
3. μένω ἀκοῦσαι πῶς ἀγὼν κριθήσεται.
—Aeschylus, Eumenides
[*πῶς how. ἀγών, -ῶνος, ὁstruggle, contest.]
4. ἐρωτηθεὶς τίς ἐστι φίλος, ‘ἄλλος,’ ἔφη, ‘ἐγώ.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Zeno
[ἐρωτηθείς asked, when [he was] asked (aor. pass. part.) < ἐρωτάω ask.]
5. ἐρωτηθεὶς ὑπό τινος, ‘ποῖός τίς σοι Διογένης δοκεῖ;’ ‘Σωκράτης,’ εἶπε,
‘μαινόμενος.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Diogenes the Cynic
[ποῖος, -α, -ον what sort of, what?]
6. ἐρωτηθεὶς ποῖον οἶνον ἡδέως πίνει, ἔφη ‘τὸ ἀλλότριον.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Diogenes the Cynic
[ἀλλότριος, -α, -ον of/belonging to another.]
7. ἐρωτηθεὶς τίνι διαφέρουσιν οἱ πεπαιδευμένοι τῶν ἀπαιδεύτων, ‘ὅσῳ,’ εἶπεν,
‘οἱ ζῶντες τῶν τεθνεώτων.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Aristotle
[ἀπαίδευτος, -ον uneducated. ὅσος, -η, -ον as great as, as much as. οἱ ζῶντες the
living. τεθνεώτων perf. act. part. < -θνῄσκω.]
210
Lesson X

8. ἐρωτηθεὶς τί ἐστι φίλος, ἔφη ‘μία ψυχὴ δύο σώμασιν ἐνοικοῦσα.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Aristotle
[ἐνοικοῦσα inhabiting (pres. act. part. of ἐνοικέω).]
9. ἐρωτηθεὶς ὑπό τινος τί αὐτοῦ ὁ υἱὸς ἀμείνων ἔσται παιδευθεὶς, ‘καὶ εἰ μηδὲν
ἄλλο,’ εἶπεν, ‘ἐν γοῦν τῷ θεάτρῳ οὐ καθεδεῖται λίθος ἐπὶ λίθῳ.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Aristippus
[*γοῦν (γε + οὖν) at least then. θέατρον, -ου, τό theater. καθεδεῖται fut. of
καθέζομαι sit.]
10. ἐρωτηθεὶς τί γλυκὺ ἀνθρώποις, ‘ἐλπίς,’ ἔφη. ἥδιον ἔλεγε δικάζειν μεταξὺ
ἐχθρῶν ἢ φίλων· τῶν μὲν γὰρ φίλων πάντως ἐχθρὸν ἔσεσθαι τὸν ἕτερον, τῶν δὲ
ἐχθρῶν τὸν ἕτερον φίλον.
—Diogenes Laertius, on Bias
[*δικάζω judge.]
11. Θαλῆς ᾠήθη πάντα πλήρη θεῶν εἶναι.
—Aristotle, περὶ ψυχῆς
[πλήρης, -ες full of + gen.]
12. ἀεὶ δ’ ὁ σωθείς ἐστιν ἀχάριστος φύσει.
—Menander
[ἀχάριστος, -ον thankless, ungrateful.]
13. The Book Burning: καὶ ἀλλαχοῦ δὲ τοῦτον ἤρξατο τὸν τρόπον· ‘περὶ μὲν
τῶν θεῶν οὐκ ἔχω εἰδέναι οὐθ’ ὡς εἰσίν, οὐθ’ ὡς οὐκ εἰσίν· πολλὰ γὰρ τὰ
κωλύοντα εἰδέναι, ἥ τε ἀδηλότης καὶ βραχὺς ὢν ὁ βίος τοῦ ἀνθρώπου.’ διὰ
ταύτην δὲ τὴν ἀρχὴν τοῦ συγγράμματος ἐξεβλήθη πρὸς Ἀθηναίων· καὶ τὰ βιβλί’
αὐτοῦ κατέκαυσαν ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ ὑπὸ κήρυκι ἀναλεξάμενοι παρ’ ἑκάστου τῶν
κεκτημένων.
—Diogenes Laertius, on Protagoras
[ἀλλαχοῦelsewhere, somewhere else. *ἔχω + inf. be able. ἀδηλότης -ητος, ἡun-
certainty, obscurity. σύγγραμμα, -ατος, τό composition, writing, book. ἐξεβλήθη
< ἐκ + βάλλω. κατέκαυσαν aor. of κατακαίω burn. ἀναλέγω gather up.
κεκτημένων pf. m.-p. part. of κτάομαι possess; pf. have acquired.]
14. ἐγὼ Ἶσίς εἰμι ἡ βασίλισσα πάσης χώρας, ἡ παιδευθεῖσα ὑπὸ Ἑρμοῦ, καὶ
ὅσα ἐγὼ ἐνομοθέτησα, οὐδεὶς αὐτὰ δύναται λῦσαι. ἐγώ εἰμι ἡ τοῦ νεωτάτου
Κρόνου θεοῦ θυγάτηρ πρεσβυτάτη· ἐγώ εἰμι γυνὴ καὶ ἀδελφὴ Ὀσίριδος
βασιλέως· ἐγώ εἰμι ἡ πρώτη καρπὸν ἀνθρώποις εὑροῦσα· ἐγώ εἰμι μήτηρ ῞Ωρου
τοῦ βασιλέως . . . χαῖρε Αἴγυπτε ἡ θρέψασά με.
—Diodorus Siculus (inscription on the stele of Isis)
[βασίλισσα = βασίλεια queen. νομοθετέω make laws. δύναται is able (3rd sg.).
καρπός, -οῦ, ὁfruit, agricultural crops. θρέψασα < τρέφω, θρέψω, ἔθρεψα,
τέτροφα, τέθραμμαι, ἐτράφην nourish, nurture.]
Aorist and Future Passive: The Sixth Principal Part
211

212
Lesson X
μάντις δ’ ἄριστος ὅστις εἰκάζει καλῶς.
The best soothsayer is the one who guesses well.
—Greek proverb
θέατρον< θεάομαι view, look at
The theater at Epidaurus is one of the best pre-
served of the older Greek-style theaters. Dramas
are still performed there every summer. Although
modern productions take place at night with artifi-
cial lighting, in classical times the action was per-
formed outdoors in broad daylight, in front of a
temple or house (for tragedies, usually a palace, but
sometimes a military hut, a cave, or even a farmer’s
cottage).
The ὀρχήστρα (dancing floor) was the center of a
Greek theater and perhaps the oldest part. Origi-
nally the orchestra was circular. Here the chorus
did its routines (singing and dancing); some of the action also took place in
the orchestra. It is very likely that an altar was a permanent fixture there.
At the back of the orchestra was the σκηνή(scene, stage building), a flat-
roofed building (originally temporary), where actors changed costumes and
masks and from which they made their entrances and exits. The top of the
stage building (θεολογεῖον or “god-platform”) furnished another level of ac-
tion. From here the gods and, occasionally, mortals delivered speeches. Two
stage devices were used in classical times, the ἐκκύκλημα (eccyclema, “thing
rolled out”): a device rolled out of the skene to reveal what had taken place in
the house where most of the violent actions took place and the μηχανή(“fly-
ing machine” cf. deus ex machina): a crane used to fly in gods who took part in
the plays.
The Greek tragedies and comedies were popular entertainment. Every-
body went: men, women, children; free and slave; citizen and foreigner. Tick-
ets were subsidized by the state. Wealthy citizens were called upon to finance
the training of the chorus: this was a public service (λειτουργία) similar in im-
portance to the fitting out of a warship. There is some dispute over whether
women attended the theater, but the weight of the evidence suggests that
they did.
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

LESSON XI
Contract Verbs
In this lesson you will learn the contract verbs and increase your vocabulary with
many important new verbs, including several ways to say “I love you.”
213
CONTRACT VERBS
In Attic Greek, ω‑type verbs with stems ending in α, ε, or ο contract the stem
vowel with the thematic vowel in the present system (present and imperfect
tenses).
The rules for each type of contract verb should be memorized, since they
apply to all the contracted forms of that type (with only a few exceptions).
Accent of Contract Verbs
1. If the accent does not fall on one of the original syllables of the contraction,
it remains unchanged.
ἐνίκα‑ον  ἐνίκων
2. If the accent falls on the first of the original syllables of the contraction, the
contracted syllable receives the circumflex.
νικά‑ουσι  νικῶσι
3. If the accent falls on the second, the contraction receives the acute.
νικα‑όμενος  νικώμενος
The uncontracted forms of these verbs were not used in Attic Greek, but are
found in other dialects.

Forms of -αω, -εω, -οω verbs
α‑contracts (-αω)
Rules for contraction:
νικάω: stem, νικα-
1. An iota of the ending is written subscript.
νικά‑εις

νικᾷς
2. α contracts with any o-sound (ο, ω, ου, οι) to become ω (or ῳfor α-οι):
νικά‑ομαι

νικῶμαι
νικά‑ω

νικῶ
3. α contracts with any e-sound (ε, η, ει, ῃ) to become ᾱ:
ἐνίκα‑ε

ἐνίκᾱ
νικά‑ει

νικᾷ
νικά‑ῃ

νικᾷ
The one exception (in fact, only an apparent exception) is that the present
active infinitive does not have ι‑subscript: νικάειν becomes νικᾶν (not νικᾷν).
The explanation of this is that the ‑ειν infinitive ending is itself a contraction
for ‑ε‑εν, so that the ι was not originally part of the ending.
Present system of νικάω (conquer) (stem, νικα‑)
Present
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
(νικά‑ω)
νικῶ
1st
(νικά‑ομαι)
νικῶμαι
(νικά‑εις)
νικᾷς
2nd
(νικά‑ει/‑ῃ)
νικᾷ
(νικά‑ει)
νικᾷ
3rd
(νικά‑εται)
νικᾶται
Pl.
(νικά‑ομεν)
νικῶμεν
1st
(νικά‑όμεθα)
νικώμεθα
(νικά‑ετε)
νικᾶτε
2nd
(νικά‑εσθε)
νικᾶσθε
(νικά‑ουσι)
νικῶσι
3rd
(νικά‑ονται)
νικῶνται
Infinitive:
(νικά‑ειν)
νικᾶν
(νικά‑εσθαι)
νικᾶσθαι
Participle:
(νικά‑ων)
νικῶν
(νικα‑όμενος)
νικώμενος
214
Lesson XI

Imperfect
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
(ἐνίκα‑ον)
ἐνίκων
1st
(ἐνικα‑όμην)
ἐνικώμην
(ἐνίκα‑ες)
ἐνίκας
2nd
(ἐνικά‑ου)
ἐνικῶ
(ἐνίκα‑ε)
ἐνίκα
3rd
(ἐνικά‑ετο)
ἐνικᾶτο
Pl.
(ἐνικά‑ομεν)
ἐνικῶμεν
1st
(ἐνικα‑όμεθα)
ἐνικώμεθα
(ἐνικά‑ετε)
ἐνικᾶτε
2nd
(ἐνικά‑εσθε)
ἐνικᾶσθε
(ἐνίκα‑ον)
ἐνίκων
3rd
(ἐνικά‑οντο)
ἐνικῶντο
Exception:
ζάω (live) contracts to ‑η‑ instead of ‑α‑:
Present
Imperfect
Sg.
ζῶ
1st
ἔζων
ζῇς
2nd
ἔζης
ζῇ
3rd
ἔζη
Pl.
ζῶμεν
1st
ἐζῶμεν
ζῆτε
2nd
ἐζῆτε
ζῶσι
3rd
ἔζων
Infinitive: ζῆν
Participle: ζῶν, ζῶσα, ζῶν
A few other verbs in -αω have -η rather than -α in the contracted forms.
Among them are διψάω be thirsty, πεινάω be hungry, χράω give oracles, χράομαι
use.
χράομαι (use) is thus conjugated:
Present
Imperfect
Sg.
χρῶμαι
1st
ἐχρώμην
χρῇ
2nd
ἐχρῶ
χρῆται
3rd
ἐχρῆτο
Pl.
χρώμεθα
1st
ἐχρώμεθα
χρῆσθε
2nd
ἐχρῆσθε
χρῶνται
3rd
ἐχρῶντο
Infinitive: χρῆσθαι
Participle: χρώμενος, -η, -ον
Contract Verbs
215

ε-contracts (-εω)
Rules for contraction:
φιλέω: stem, φιλε-
1. ε + ε becomes ει
φιλε‑ετε

φιλεῖτε
2. ε + ο becomes ου
φιλε‑όμεθα

φιλούμεθα
3. ε before any long vowel or diphthong is absorbed
φιλέων

φιλῶν
Present system of φιλέω love (stem φιλε-)
Present
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
(φιλέ‑ω)
φιλῶ
1st
(φιλέ‑ομαι)
φιλοῦμαι
(φιλέ‑εις)
φιλεῖς
2nd
(φιλέ‑ει/‑ῃ)
φιλεῖ/-ῇ
(φιλέ‑ει)
φιλεῖ
3rd
(φιλέ‑εται)
φιλεῖται
Pl.
(φιλέ‑ομεν)
φιλοῦμεν
1st
(φιλε‑όμεθα)
φιλούμεθα
(φιλέ‑ετε)
φιλεῖτε
2nd
(φιλέ‑εσθε)
φιλεῖσθε
(φιλέ‑ουσι)
φιλοῦσι
3rd
(φιλέ‑ονται)
φιλοῦνται
Infinitive:
(φιλέ‑ειν)
φιλεῖν
(φιλέ‑εσθαι)
φιλεῖσθαι
Participle:
(φιλέ‑ων)
φιλῶν
(φιλε‑όμενος)
φιλούμενος
Imperfect
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
(ἐφίλε‑ον)
ἐφίλουν
1st
(ἐφιλε‑όμην)
ἐφιλούμην
(ἐφίλε‑ες)
ἐφίλεις
2nd
(ἐφιλέ‑ου)
ἐφιλοῦ
(ἐφίλε‑ε)
ἐφίλει
3rd
(ἐφιλέ‑ετο)
ἐφιλεῖτο
Pl.
(ἐφιλέ‑ομεν)
ἐφιλοῦμεν
1st
(ἐφιλε‑όμεθα)
ἐφιλούμεθα
(ἐφιλέ‑ετε)
ἐφιλεῖτε
2nd
(ἐφιλέ‑εσθε)
ἐφιλεῖσθε
(ἐφίλε‑ον)
ἐφίλουν
3rd
(ἐφιλέ‑οντο)
ἐφιλοῦντο
There are a few verbs of two syllables which have uncontracted forms: πλέω
sail, δέω need, want, contract only before -ε or -ει.
216
Lesson XI

Present of πλέω:
Singular
Plural
πλέω
1st
πλέομεν
πλεῖς
2nd
πλεῖτε
πλεῖ
3rd
πλέουσι
Infinitive: πλεῖν
Participle: πλέων, πλέουσα, πλέον
Other verbs of this type are: θέω run; ῥέω flow; πνέω breathe; χέω pour.
ο-contracts (-οω)
Rules for contraction:
δηλόω: stem, δηλο-
1. ο + η or ω becomes ω
δηλό‑ω 
 
δηλῶ
2. ο + ε, ο, ου becomes ου
δηλό‑εσθε

δηλοῦσθε
δηλό‑εται

δηλοῦται
3. ο + any ι-diphthong becomes οι
δηλό‑εις

δηλοῖς
Again the exception is that the present infinitive does not have οι: δηλό-ειν
contracts to δηλοῦν (not δηλοῖν).
Present system of δηλόω make visible, show (stem δηλο-)
Present
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
(δηλό‑ω)
δηλῶ
1st
(δηλό‑ομαι)
δηλοῦμαι
(δηλό‑εις)
δηλοῖς
2nd
(δηλό‑ει/‑ῃ)
δηλοῖ
(δηλό‑ει)
δηλοῖ
3rd
(δηλό‑εται)
δηλοῦται
Pl.
(δηλό‑ομεν)
δηλοῦμεν
1st
(δηλο‑όμεθα)
δηλούμεθα
(δηλό‑ετε)
δηλοῦτε
2nd
(δηλό‑εσθε)
δηλοῦσθε
(δηλό‑ουσι)
δηλοῦσι
3rd
(δηλό‑ονται)
δηλοῦνται
Infinitive:
(δηλό‑ειν)
δηλοῦν
(δηλό‑εσθαι)
δηλοῦσθαι
Participle:
(δηλό‑ων)
δηλῶν
(δηλο‑όμενος)
δηλούμενος
Contract Verbs
217

Imperfect
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
(ἐδήλο‑ον)
ἐδήλουν
1st
(ἐδηλο‑όμην)
ἐδηλούμην
(ἐδήλο‑ες)
ἐδήλους
2nd
(ἐδηλό‑ου)
ἐδηλοῦ
(ἐδήλο‑ε)
ἐδήλου
3rd
(ἐδηλό‑ετο)
ἐδηλοῦτο
Pl.
(ἐδηλό‑ομεν)
ἐδηλοῦμεν
1st
(ἐδηλο‑όμεθα)
ἐδηλούμεθα
(ἐδηλό‑ετε)
ἐδηλοῦτε
2nd
(ἐδηλό‑εσθε)
ἐδηλοῦσθε
(ἐδήλο‑ον)
ἐδήλουν
3rd
(ἐδηλό‑οντο)
ἐδηλοῦντο
The Present Active Participles 
of Contract Verbs
The participles of contract verbs follow the rules for contraction.
1. -αω
α-contracts have -ω- throughout the declension of the participle, result-
ing from α contracting with the ο-sound (-ω-, -ο-, -ου-) of the participial
ending.
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
νικῶν
νικῶσα
νικῶν
G
νικῶντος
νικώσης
νικῶντος
D
νικῶντι
νικώσῃ
νικῶντι
A
νικῶντα
νικῶσαν
νικῶν
Pl.
N
νικῶντες
νικῶσαι
νικῶντα
G
νικώντων
νικωσῶν
νικώντων
D
νικῶσι
νικώσαις
νικῶσι
A
νικῶντας
νικώσας
νικῶντα
2. -εω
ε-contracts have -ου- throughout (ε + ο  ου) except that ε is absorbed
before ω.
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
φιλῶν
φιλοῦσα
φιλοῦν
G
φιλοῦντος
φιλούσης
φιλοῦντος
D
φιλοῦντι
φιλούσῃ
φιλοῦντι
A
φιλοῦντα
φιλοῦσαν
φιλοῦν
Pl.
N
φιλοῦντες
φιλοῦσαι
φιλοῦντα
G
φιλούντων
φιλουσῶν
φιλούντων
D
φιλοῦσι
φιλούσαις
φιλοῦσι
A
φιλοῦντας
φιλούσας
φιλοῦντα
218
Lesson XI

3. -οω
Present participles of ο-contracts are declined like those of ε-contracts.
(ο + ο  ου, ο + ω  ω)
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
δηλῶν
δηλοῦσα
δηλοῦν
G
δηλοῦντος
δηλούσης
δηλοῦντος
D
δηλοῦντι
δηλούσῃ
δηλοῦντι
A
δηλοῦντα
δηλοῦσαν
δηλοῦν
Pl.
N
δηλοῦντες
δηλοῦσαι
δηλοῦντα
G
δηλούντων
δηλουσῶν
δηλούντων
D
δηλοῦσι
δηλούσαις
δηλοῦσι
A
δηλοῦντας
δηλούσας
δηλοῦντα
Principal Parts of Contract Verbs
The principal parts of most contract verbs are regular.
1. α- and ε-contracts regularly lengthen α or ε to η in the principal parts.
νικάω
νικήσω
ἐνίκησα
νενίκηκα
νενίκημαι
ἐνικήθην
φιλέω
φιλήσω
ἐφίλησα
πεφίληκα
πεφίλημαι
ἐφιλήθην
2. ο-contracts regularly lengthen the ο to ω.
δηλόω
δηλώσω
ἐδήλωσα
δεδήλωκα
δεδήλωμαι
ἐδηλώθην
Not all contract verbs have regular principal parts; the irregular ones are
given in the vocabulary and are learned the usual way.
Note that the contract verbs have contracted forms in the present system
only. Their other tenses are conjugated regularly. There are some exceptions,
such as καλέω, and γαμέω which have contracted futures (treated below).
The Contract Futures
1. Liquid and Nasal Stems (stems ending in λ, μ, ν, ρ) originally formed their
futures by adding -εσ- + thematic vowel + endings. Between two vowels, -σ-
drops out, resulting in an ε-contract future (contracted like the present of φιλέω).
Example: 
Future
μένω (stem, μεν-)
[μενέσω  μενέω] μενῶ
κρίνω (stem, κριν-)
κρινῶ
Contract Verbs
219

Often the verb stem appears in a simpler form in the future than in the present.
Examples:
Future
ἀγγέλλω (stem, ἀγγελ-)
ἀγγελῶ
φαίνω (stem, φαν-)
φανῶ
τείνω (stem, τεν-)
τενῶ
The liquid aorists, which are also formed without -σ-, often appear in an ex-
tended form because of compensatory lengthening, e.g., μένω, aorist ἔμεινα;
ἀγγέλλω, aorist ἤγγειλα.
2. Verbs ending in -ίζω in the present usually drop the ζ and form the future
like the liquids and nasals.
Example: νοίζω: future [νομίσω νομιέω] νομιῶ.
3. The Attic Future: In Attic Greek, contraction is more prevalent than in
other dialects. Certain types of verbs, which show the sigmatic future in other
dialects, have contract futures in Attic. Among these are some ε-stem verbs,
such as καλέω and γαμέω, which in Attic have futures identical to their pres-
ents. Like the liquid and nasal futures, these Attic Futures are ε-contract forms,
and will present no difficulty. There are, however, certain -α- stems (not al-
ways immediately apparent as such) that have α-contract futures.
Example: ἐλαύνω, stem ἐλα- (aorist ἤλασα) which has the future [ἐλάσω 
ἐλάω] ἐλῶ. The few verbs of this sort will be identified in the following way:
ἐλαύνω, ἐλῶ (-άω), ἤλασα, etc.
Examples of the Liquid Future and Attic Future
κρίνω
ἐλαύνω
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
Sg.
κρινῶ
κρινοῦμαι
1st
ἐλῶ
ἐλῶμαι
κρινεῖς
κρινεῖ/-ῇ
2nd
ἐλᾷς
ἐλᾷ
κρινεῖ
κρινεῖται
3rd
ἐλᾷ
ἐλᾶται
Pl.
κρινοῦμεν
κρινούμεθα
1st
ἐλῶμεν
ἐλώμεθα
κρινεῖτε
κρινεῖσθε
2nd
ἐλᾶτε
ἐλᾶσθε
κρινοῦσι
κρινοῦνται
3rd
ἐλῶσι
ἐλῶνται
Infinitive: κρινεῖν, κρινεῖσθαι
ἐλᾶν, ἐλᾶσθαι
Participle: κρινῶν, κρινούμενος
ἐλῶν, ἐλώμενος
220
Lesson XI

Vocabulary
ἀγαπάω (< ἀγάπη)
love, greet with affection
ἀδικέω
be ἄδικος, do wrong (often used
with a part. giving the charge)
αἱρέω, αἱρήσω, εἷλον (ἑλ-),
take, mid. choose
ᾕρηκα, ᾕρημαι, ᾕρέθην
ἀξιόω (< ἄξιος)
think worthy, expect, claim
ἀποκρίνομαι, ἀποκρινοῦμαι,
answer
ἀποκέκριμαι, ἀπεκρίθην
ἀφικνέομαι, ἀφίξομαι, ἀφικόμην,
arrive at, come to, reach
ἀφῖγμαι
δέω
lack, want, stand in need of
δέομαι
beg, ask
δεῖ
there is need, one ought (impers.)
δηλόω (< δῆλος)
make visible, show, reveal
διανοέομαι, διανοήσομαι, — ,
intend, have in mind, think
διενοήθην (< νοῦς)
διάνοια, (διανοία) -ας, ἡ
thought, intellect, mind, intention,
belief
δοκέω, δόξω, ἔδοξα, —, δέδογμαι
expect, think (+ acc. and inf.), seem
δοκῶ μοι
I seem to myself, I am determined
δοκεῖ
impers., it seems, seems best; in
 formulas, it is decided by + dat.
δράω, δράσω, ἔδρασα, δέδρακα,
do, accomplish
δέδραμαι, ἐδράσθην
ἐλαύνω, ἐλῶ(-αω), ἤλασα,
drive, march
ἐλήλακα, ἐλήλαμαι, ἠλάθην
ἐάω (impf. εἴων)
suffer, permit (+ acc. and inf.); let
alone
ἐπιθυμέω
set one’s heart (θυμός) upon (a
thing), long for, desire (+ gen.) 
ἐράω (impf. ἤρων aor. pass.
love, be in love with (+ gen.) (only 
ἠράσθην)
pres. and impf. in act.)
ἐρωτάω
ask (+ 2 acc.), question
ζητέω
seek, inquire, search into/after,
 demand
ζάω, ζήσω/ζήσομαι
live, pass one’s life (ἔζησα, ἔζηκα
late forms)
ἡγέομαι
go before, lead; believe
καλέω, καλῶ, ἐκάλεσα, κέκληκα,
call, summon; invoke (act. or mid.); 
κέκλημαι, ἐκλήθην
pass. be called
κατηγορέω
speak against, accuse
Contract Verbs
221

μισέω
hate
νικάω (< νίκη)
conquer, prevail, win
νοέω
think, intend
ὁράω (impf. ἑώρων), ὄψομαι,
see, look, comprehend 
εἶδον (ἰδ-), ἑόρακα (ἑώρακα),
ὦμμαι (ἑώραμαι), ὤφθην
ποιέω
make, produce, cause (ποιητής)
σκοπέω/σκέπτομαι
contemplate, inspect, examine, look to
τιμάω (< τιμή)
honor, esteem, value
φιλέω
love, kiss (show outward signs of
love)
φοβέομαι, φοβήσομαι,
fear, be frightened; be afraid to
πεφόβημαι, ἐφοβήθην (< φόβος)
(+ inf.) 
φρονέω
be minded, be wise, + adv. be in such
and such frame of mind
χράομαι (contracts to η)
use (+ dat), make use of, take part in 
χράω (contracts to η)
proclaim (of oracles); mid. consult
an oracle
Recognition Vocabulary
βοάω, βοήσομαι, ἐβόησα
cry aloud, shout, howl
γαμέω, γαμῶ, ἔγημα, γεγάμηκα,
marry (act. of the man; mid. of the 
γεγάμημαι
woman or the parents)
γεννάω
beget; mid. create (causal of
γίγνομαι)
διψάω (contracts to η)
be thirsty (+ gen.), thirst after
 (dipsomaniac)
δουλόω (< δοῦλος)
enslave 
εὐτυχέω (< εὐτυχής)
be prosperous
θέω, θεύσομαι
run (other forms are from τρέχω)
νοσέω (< νόσος)
be sick
οἰκέω (< οἶκος)
inhabit, colonize; live, dwell 
πεινάω (contracts to η)
be hungry
πλέω, πλεύσομαι, ἔπλευσα,
sail, go by sea
πέπλευκα, πέπλευσμαι,
ἐπλεύσθην
πνέω, πνεύσομαι, ἔπνευσα,
blow, breathe
πέπνευκα, (πέπνυμαι),
ἐπνεύσθην (< πνεῦμα)
ῥέω (ῥυήσομαι, ἐρρύην, ἐρρύηκα)
flow, run
σιγάω
keep silence
σιωπάω
keep silence; keep secret
222
Lesson XI

συμμαχέω
be an ally (to) (+ dat.)
τεκνόω
furnish with children; (of the man,
act.) beget; (of the woman, mid.)
bear
τελευτάω
bring to pass, come to an end (die);
pass. happen
τελέω (< τέλος)
accomplish, fulfill; pay; initiate
τολμάω
undertake; (+ inf.) dare, bring oneself
(to do)
ὑπισχνέομαι
promise (+ fut. inf.); profess (+ pres.
inf.)
Contract Nouns
γῆ, γῆς, ἡ[γῇ, γῆν]
earth
νοῦς, νοῦ, ὁ
mind
N
G
D
A
V
Sg.
νοῦς
νοῦ
νῷ
νοῦν
νοῦ
Pl.
νοῖ
νῶν
νοῖς
νοῦς
Etymology of Contract Verbs: Denominatives
Most of the contract verbs are denominative, that is, derived from
nouns.
1. The -αω verbs are often derived from -α (or -η) base nouns:
-αω Verb
Noun
διψάω
δίψα, δίψης, ἡ
thirst
σιγάω
σιγή, σιγῆς, ἡ
silence
νικάω
νίκη, -ης, ἡ
victory
τιμάω
τιμή, -ῆς, ἡ
honor
2. The -εω verbs are sometimes derived from -ο bases:
-εω Verb
Noun
φιλέω
φίλος, -ου, ὁ
friend, friendly, dear
οἰκέω
οἶκος, -ου, ὁ
house
γαμέω
γάμος, -ου, ὁ
marriage
μισέω
μῖσος, -ους, τό
hate, hatred
τελέω
τέλος, -ους, τό
end
3. The -οω verbs are derived from nouns or adjectives in -ο.
-οω Verb
Noun
δηλόω
δῆλος, -η, -ον
clear
δουλόω
δοῦλος, -ου, ὁ
slave
ἀξιόω
ἄξιος, -α, -ον
worthy
Contract Verbs
223

Exercises 
1. Conjugate in full.
1. ὁράω
3. οἰκέω
2. δοκέω
4. ἀγαπάω
2. Conjugate in the present system only.
1. ἀξιόω
4. τελέω
2. ἐράω
5. τιμάω
3. πλέω
3. Decline the present active participles of the following words.
1. ποιέω
3. δουλόω
2. τιμάω
4. δέω
4. Synopses.
1. ἐλαύνω: 1st pl.   2. νομίζω: 2nd pl.   3. βάλλω: 3rd pl.
5. Parse.
1. ζῶμεν
6. βοῶμεν
11. ἑώρα
16. τιμᾶν
2. ἠδίκεις
7. ἐλῶ
12. ὑπισχνεῖται
17. ἠξιοῦντο
3. ἐφοβεῖσθε
8. ἐποίουν
13. ἀξιοῦν
18. ᾠκεῖτο
4. καλεῖς
9. σιγᾷς
14. ἐτελεύτα
19. νοσοῦμεν
5. ἀφικνοῦνται
10. ἐγάμει
15. νοεῖν
20. φοβεῖσθαι
6. Translate.
1. οἱ πατέρες τὰ παιδία ἀγαπῶσι.
2. οἱ μὲν τὰ χρήματα, οἱ δὲ τὴν ἀρετὴν ἀγαπῶσι.
3. πᾶσαι τὸ ἀγαθὸν καὶ καλὸν ἀγαπῶμεν καὶ ζητοῦμεν.
4. οὐ γὰρ τοῖς παροῦσιν ἀγαπᾷ. (ἀγαπάω + dat. be contented with)
5. ταῦτα ποιῶν ἀδικεῖς.
6. ὁ δικαστὴς ὁ ἄδικος πολλὰ ἠδίκει.
7. οὐ νομίζοντες τοὺς θεοὺς ἀδικοῦσιν.
8. ἀδικήσας οὐδὲν ἄξιον θανάτου ἐλύθη ὑπὸ τῶν πολιτῶν.
9. πολλὰ καὶ καλὰ πράξασαι οὐχ ἑαυτὰς κακοῦ τινος ἠξίουν.
10. ἀξιῶ σε ἀληθῆ λέγειν.
11. τὸ ἐκείνου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς κλέος εἰς οὐρανὸν ἀφικνεῖται.
12. ἐβόων ὅτι ἀφικόμεθα.
13. ἐβοῶμεν ἀλλήλοις μὴ φεύγειν.
14. τί βοᾷς; τί οὐ σιγᾷς;
15. τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως θυγατέρα ἔγημεν.
16. οἱ Ἕλληνες οὔποτε δουλωθήσονται ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων.
17. ὁ πλοῦτος τὰς τῶν ἀνθρώπων ψυχὰς δουλοῖ.
18. αἱ γυναῖκες ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἐδουλοῦντο.
19. πολλοῦ δεῖ τὰ ἀληθῆ λέγειν. (πολλοῦ δεῖlacks much, is far from)
20. ἡ μὲν τεκνουμένη ἐστίν ἡ μήτηρ σου, ὁ δὲ γεννήσας ἐστί ὁ σὸς πατήρ.
21. πολλοῦ δέουσι ἄνθρωποι δίκαιοι εἶναι.
224
Lesson XI

22. αὐτὸν δηλώσω καλὸν καὶ ἀγαθὸν ὄντα.
23. τῷ πατρὶ ἐσθλὸς ὢν ἐβουλήθη δηλοῦν.
24. οἱ δίκαιοι δικαιοσύνης διψῶσιν.
25. ζῶν καὶ ὁρῶν τὸν ἥλιον, οὐ παύσομαι τὴν ἀλήθειαν ζητῶν.
26. ταῦτα πράξομεν ὡς ἡμῖν δοκεῖ εἶναι ἄριστα.
27. ἐν ὑπνῷ τάδε ἰδεῖν ἐδόκουν.
28. οὐκ ἐμὲ ἐᾷ ἐλθεῖν.
29. πάντες οἱ ἄνθρωποι τῆς δικαιοσύνης ἐπιθυμοῦσιν.
30. ὁ δὲ ἀνὴρ ὁ δίκαιος τοῦ ἀδίκου πλούτου οὐκ ἐπιθυμεῖ.
31. ὁ νεώτερος ἀδελφὸς τυραννίδος ἤρα.
32. ὁ ἐρῶν καὶ ὁ ἐρώμενος οὔκ εἰσιν οἱ αὐτοί.
33. ἠρωτῶμεν αὐτὸν τὸ ὄνομα.
34. τί ἐρωτᾷς με τὸ ὄνομά μου;
35. ἡ μὲν ἐρωμένη ὑπὸ τοῦ ἐρῶντος ἐρᾶται, ὁ δὲ ἐρῶν οὐκ ἐρᾶται ὑπὸ τῆς
ἐρωμένης.
36. ἐρωτῶμεν· τίς εἶ καὶ τί ζητεῖς;
37. οἱ εὐτυχοῦντες πολλοὺς φίλους ἔχουσιν.
38. μὴ ζητῶν οὐχ εὑρήσεις.
39. εὐτυχοῦντες τοὺς θεοὺς οὐ καλούμεθα.
40. ἐκείνοι τοὺς ξένους ἐπὶ δεῖπνον ἐκάλουν.
41. ἡ μήτηρ αὐτοῦ καλοῦμαι.
42. ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν ὁ θάνατος ἐμισεῖτο.
43. τὸν μισοῦντά σε δεῖ ἀγαπᾶν.
44. ὁ μὲν νικήσας ὑπὸ πάντων τιμᾶται, ὁ δὲ νικηθεὶς μισεῖται.
45. αὕτη πάσας γυναῖκας κάλλει καὶ σωφροσύνῃ ἐνίκα.
46. τῆς κακῆς βουλῆς νικησάσης οἱ πολῖται τὸν πόλεμον οὐκ ἔπαυσαν.
47. ταῖς συμφοραῖς νικῶμαι.
48. νοεῖς γὰρ ἔρχεσθαι;
49. νοσεῖ ἡ πόλις ᾗ οὐκ ἔστι ἄρχων.
50. οἰκοῦμεν τὰς πλείστας τῶν νήσων.
51. τί ὁρᾷς; θαῦμά τι ὁρῶ.
52. ὁρᾶτε ὅ τι λέγω;
53. οἱ ἄδικοι χρημάτων πεινῶσιν.
54. ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ πλέομεν.
55. εἰς τὴν νῆσον πλεῖτε;
56. τόνδε τὸν ἄνδρα ποιεῖν βασιλέα βούλει;
57. τὰ ἑαυτοῦ σκοπεῖν δεῖ.
58. ταῦτα ποιεῖν τολμᾷς;
59. δεῖ τοὺς ἐχθροὺς φιλεῖν, οὐ μόνον τοὺς φίλους.
60. ἐφίλει τοὺς αὐτὸν μισοῦντας.
61. ὑπισχνοῦμεθα σιωπήσειν.
62. μεγάλα ποιεῖν ἐτόλμησεν.
63. οὐδὲν καὶ οὐδένα ἐφοβοῦντο.
64. οὐ λέγεις ἃ φρονεῖς.
65. οὐ φοβούμεθα τοὺς εὖ φρονοῦντας.
7. Write in Greek.
1. We love those who love us.
2. He is guilty of corrupting the young men. (He does injustice by
corrupting the young men.)
Contract Verbs
225

3. I think you worthy to receive these gifts.
4. The good help (are allies to) each other.
5. In silence (keeping silent) they dared to do many fine deeds.
6. Do you promise to finish these works?
7. We ourselves were seeking the same man, but we did not find
him.
8. We do not see the soul, but we think it exists (is).
9. Good men honor each others’ opinions.
10. If you were doing these things, you would be doing well.
Readings
1. ἐμοῦ γὰρ ζῶντος οὐ κτενεῖς ποτε τοὺς Ἡρακλείους παῖδας.
—Euripides, Heracles
[Ἡράκλειος, -α, -ον of Heracles.]
2. ὥσπερ . . . οἱ ποιηταὶ τὰ αὑτῶν ποιήματα καὶ οἱ πατέρες τοὺς παῖδας
ἀγαπῶσι.
—Plato, Republic
[ποίημα, -ατος, τόpoem, creation.]
3. ἐλεύθερος πᾶς ἑνὶ δεδούλωται, νόμῳ.
—Menander
[*ἐλεύθερος, -α, -ον free.]
4. χαλεπὸν τὸ ποιεῖν, τὸ δὲ κελεῦσαι ῥᾴδιον.
—Philemon (a comic poet)
5. βέλτιόν ἐστι σῶμά γ ̓ἢ ψυχὴν νοσεῖν.
—Menander
6. φιλεῖ δ ̓ἑαυτοῦ πλεῖον οὐδεὶς οὐδένα.
—Menander
7. ὃν γὰρ θεοὶ φιλοῦσιν ἀποθνῄσκει νέος.
—Menander
8. λίαν φιλῶν σεαυτὸν οὐχ ἕξεις φίλον.
—Menander
[λίαν (adv.) too much.]
9. οὐδεὶς ὃ νοεῖς μὲν οἶδεν, ὃ δὲ ποιεῖς βλέπει.
—Menander
10. μισῶ πένητα πλουσίῳ δωρούμενον.
—Menander
[πένης, -ητος, ὁpoor man. δωρέω make gifts.]
226
Lesson XI

11. ἔστιν Δίκης ὀφθαλμός, ὃς τὰ πάνθ ̓ὁρᾷ.
—Menander
[*ὀφθαλμός, -οῦ, ὁeye.]
12. ὥρη ἐρᾶν, ὥρη δὲ γαμεῖν, ὥρη δὲ πεπαῦσθαι.
—Dionysius (in Greek Anthology)
[ὥρη = ὥρα.]
13. σοφία γάρ ἐστι καὶ μαθεῖν ἃ μὴ νοεῖς.
—Menander
14. ἡδύ γε δικαίους ἄνδρας εὐτυχεῖς ὁρᾶν.
—Menander
15. τούτους ἀγαπᾷ καὶ περὶ αὑτὸν ἔχει.
—Demosthenes
16. ἔρχεται τἀληθὲς ἐς φῶς ἐνίοτ ̓οὐ ζητούμενον.
—Menander
[ἐνίοτε at times, sometimes.]
17. καὶ μὴν ὁρᾶν μοι δύο μὲν ἡλίους δοκῶ.
—Euripides, Bacchae
18. τὸ δὲ ἀδικεῖν καὶ ἀπειθεῖν τῷ βελτίονι, καὶ θεῷ καὶ ἀνθρώπῳ, ὅτι κακὸν
καὶ αἰσχρόν ἐστιν οἶδα.
—Plato, Apology
[ἀπειθέω disobey, be disobedient to.]
19. Socrates: σκόπει δή· οὐχ ἱκανῶς δοκεῖ σοι λέγεσθαι, ὅτι οὐ πάσας χρὴ τὰς
δόξας τῶν ἀνθρώπων τιμᾶν, ἀλλὰ τὰς μέν, τὰς δ ̓οὔ; τί φῄς; ταῦτα οὐχὶ καλῶς
λέγεται;
Crito: καλῶς.
Socrates: οὐκοῦν τὰς μὲν χρηστὰς τιμᾶν, τὰς δὲ πονηρὰς μή;
Crito: ναί.
Socrates: χρησταὶ δὲ οὐχ αἱ τῶν φρονίμων, πονηραὶ δὲ αἱ τῶν ἀφρόνων;
Crito: πῶς δ ̓οὔ;
—Plato, Crito
[σκόπει (imperative) consider. ἱκανῶς sufficiently. φρόνιμος, -ον wise, prudent.
ἄφρων, -ον (gen. ἄφρονος) mindless.]
20. ἀλλὰ καὶ ὑμᾶς χρή, ὦ ἄνδρες δικασταί, εὐέλπιδας εἶναι πρὸς τὸν θάνατον,
καὶ ἕν τι τοῦτο διανοεῖσθαι ἀληθές, ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν ἀνδρὶ ἀγαθῷ κακὸν οὐδὲν
οὔτε ζῶντι οὔτε τελευτήσαντι, οὐδὲ ἀμελεῖται ὑπὸ θεῶν τὰ τούτου πράγματα·
οὐδὲ τὰ ἐμὰ νῦν ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτομάτου γέγονεν, ἀλλά μοι δῆλόν ἐστι τοῦτο, ὅτι
ἤδη τεθνάναι καὶ ἀπηλλάχθαι πραγμάτων βέλτιον ἦν μοι.
[εὔελπις of good hope, hopeful. ἀμελέω neglect, be careless about. ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτο -
μάτου by chance, out of the blue. *δῆλος, -η, -ον clear. ἀπηλλάχθαι pf. m.-p. inf.
of ἀπαλλάττω set free, release from.]
Contract Verbs
227

διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ἐμὲ οὐδαμοῦ ἀπέτρεψεν τὸ σημεῖον, καὶ ἔγωγε τοῖς κατα -
ψηφισαμένοις μου καὶ τοῖς κατηγόροις οὐ πάνυ χαλεπαίνω. καίτοι οὐ ταύτῃ τῇ
διανοί ᾳ κατεψηφίζοντό μου καὶ κατηγόρουν, ἀλλ ̓ οἰόμενοι βλάπτειν· τοῦτο
αὐτοῖς ἄξιον μέμφεσθαι.
[ἀποτρέπω turn away from. *σημεῖον, -ου, τόsign (Socrates’ personal daimon).
καταψηφίζομαι vote against. χαλεπαίνω be angry. καίτοι and yet.]
τοσόνδε μέντοι αὐτῶν δέομαι· τοὺς υἱεῖς μου, ἐπειδὰν ἡβήσωσι, τιμωρήσασθε,
ὦ ἄνδρες, ταὐτὰ ταῦτα λυποῦντες, ἅπερ ἐγὼ ὑμᾶς ἐλύπουν, ἐὰν ὑμῖν δοκῶσιν
ἢ χρημάτων ἢ ἄλλου του πρότερον ἐπιμελεῖσθαι ἢ ἀρετῆς, καὶ ἐὰν δοκῶσί τι
εἶναι μηδὲν ὄντες, ὀνειδίζετε αὐτοῖς, ὥσπερ ἐγὼ ὑμῖν, ὅτι οὐκ ἐπιμελοῦνται ὧν
δεῖ, καὶ οἴονταί τι εἶναι ὄντες οὐδενὸς ἄξιοι. καὶ ἐὰν ταῦτα ποιῆτε δίκαια
πεπονθὼς ἐγὼ ἔσομαι ὑφ ̓ὑμῶν αὐτός τε καὶ οἱ υἱεῖς.
[τοσόσδε, -ήδε, -όνδε so great, so much. υἱεῖς = υἱούς. ἡβάω reach young manhood.
τιμωρήσασθε aor. mid. imperative of τιμωρέω punish. λυπέω give grief to, pain.
ἐπιμελέομαι pay attention to. ἐὰν δοκῶσιν if they seem. ὀνειδίζετε imperative
of ὀνειδίζω reproach, scold. ἐὰν ταῦτα ποιῆτε if you do these things (fut. more
vivid condition [XIII]).]
ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἤδη ὥρα ἀπιέναι, ἐμοὶ μὲν ἀποθανουμένῳ, ὑμῖν δὲ βιωσομένοις·
ὁπότεροι δὲ ἡμῶν ἔρχονται ἐπὶ ἄμεινον πρᾶγμα, ἄδηλον παντὶ πλὴν ἢ τῷ θεῷ.
—Plato, Apology
[ἀπιέναι (inf.) to go away. βιόω live. ὁπότερος, -α, -ον which of two. ἄδηλος, -ον
unknown, uncertain. πλὴν ἤexcept.]
21. φονεὺς γὰρ εἶναι μητρὸς ἠξιώσατο.
—Aeschylus, Eumenides
[φονεύς, -έως, ὁmurderer.]
22. οὖλος ὁρᾷ, οὖλος δὲ νοεῖ, οὖλος δὲ τ ̓ἀκούει.
—Xenophanes
[οὖλος Ionic for ὅλος. Supply as subject θεός.]
23. οὐ χαλεπὸν Ἀθηναίους ἐν Ἀθηναίοις ἐπαινεῖν.
—Aristotle, Rhetoric
[ἐπαινέω approve, praise.]
24. πρὸς τὸν εἰπόντα, ‘πολλοί σε ἐπαινοῦσι,’ ‘τί γάρ,’ ἔφη, ‘κακὸν πεποίηκα;’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Antisthenes
25. ἐκ γαίης γὰρ πάντα καὶ εἰς γῆν πάντα τελευτᾷ.
—Xenophanes
[γαίη Ionic for γῆ/γαία.]
26. πάντα χρήματα ἦν ὁμοῦ· εἶτα νοῦς ἐλθὼν αὐτὰ διεκόσμησε.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Anaxagoras
[ὁμοῦtogether. εἶτα then. διακοσμέω separate, arrange in order.]
27. νοῦς ἐστὶ βασιλεὺς ἡμῖν οὐρανοῦ τε καὶ γῆς.
—Plato, Philebus
228
Lesson XI

28. εὐδαιμονία τοῦτ ̓ἐστιν υἱὸς νοῦν ἔχων.
—Menander
[εὐδαιμονία, -ας, ἡhappiness.]
29. Darius: αὐτὴ γὰρ ἡ γῆ ξύμμαχος κείνοις πέλει.
Chorus: πῶς τοῦτ ̓ἔλεξας, τίνι τροπῳ δὲ συμμαχεῖ;
—Aeschylus, Persians
[κείνοις = ἐκείνοις. πέλει is.]
30. πάλιν δὲ ἰδὼν τὸν Κράτητα χειμῶνος συγκεκαυμένον, ‘ὦ Κράτης,’ εἶπε,
‘δοκεῖς μοι χρείαν ἔχειν ἱματίου καινοῦ.’
—Diogenes Laertius on Stilpo
[*πάλιν again. Κράτητα: acc. of Κράτης, the Cynic philosopher Krates. χειμών,
-ῶνος, ὁwinter, cold weather. συγκεκαυμένον pf. m.-p. part. of συγκαίω burn
up with (used of both heat and cold). χρεία, -ας, ἡneed. ἱμάτιον, -ου, τόcloak.
καινοῦor καὶ νοῦ? *καινός, -ή, -όν new.]
μία χελιδὼν ἔαρ οὐ ποιεῖ.
One swallow does not make a spring.
—Greek proverb
The speech of foreigners to the Greek ear was like
the swallow’s twittering and the word χελιδών was
actually used in Greek to mean βάρβαρος (non-Greek-
speaking person), a double ethnic slur. In Aeschylus’
Agamemnon, Clytemnestra says of the captive Tro-
jan princess and priestess Cassandra
ἀλλ’ εἴπερ ἐστὶ μὴ χελιδόνος δίκην
ἀγνῶντα φωνὴν βάρβαρον κεκτημένη,
ἔσω φρενῶν λέγουσα πείθω νιν λόγῳ. (1050–52)
Unless she is like a swallow with unintelligible foreign cry, I will persuade
her by speaking within her understanding.
In early spring the children on Rhodes went trick-or-treating, pretending
to be swallows and singing:
ἦλθ ̓ἦλθε χελιδὼν 
καλὰς ὥρας ἄγουσα. . . .
The seasons in Greek besides spring are:
θέρος (< θέρω heat) summer
ὀπώρα late summer or autumn
χειμών winter
Contract Verbs
229
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.


LESSON XII
Athematic Verbs:
The -ΜΙ Conjugation
In this lesson you will learn the other conjugation of Greek verbs, the -μι or athematic
conjugation, which includes some of the most frequently used verbs in Greek.
231
-ΜΙ VERBS
A second type of Greek verb is the -μι or athematic conjugation. A character-
istic of the -ω (or thematic) conjugation is the thematic vowel (ο/ε) before the
personal endings (in certain tenses). The -μι verbs, on the other hand, have no
thematic vowel in the present, imperfect, and second aorist: they add their
endings directly to the stem in these tenses. Other tense systems of these verbs
are usually of the same type as those of -ω verbs (whether thematic or not: for
example, the future is a thematic tense, the first aorist, perfect, and aorist pas-
sive are not).
The -μι conjugation is so called because the first person singular, present ac-
tive indicative ending is -μι (rather than -ω). The -μι verbs are divided into
three categories.
1. Irregular (also called Root class), such as εἰμί, φημί.
2. The -νυμι type, in which the syllable -νυ- is inserted before the endings (in
the present system only). The -νυμι class is the most regular type of the -μι
verbs. Except for the present system, they follow the -ω conjugation.
3. Reduplicating class, so called because in the original form, the first con-
sonant was reduplicated with ι in the present system. (These verbs are also
called the -ωμι/-ημι type, because their first forms end in either -ωμι or -ημι.)
Although there are a few irregularities in the verbs of this type, they do fol-
low a pattern, which will be described below.

-μι Verb Endings
Active
Middle
Primary
Secondary
Primary
Secondary
Sg.
-μι
-ν
1st
-μαι
-μην
-ς
-ς
2nd
-σαι
-σο
-σι(ν)
-
3rd
-ται
-το
Pl.
-μεν
-μεν
1st
-μεθα
-μεθα
-τε
-τε
2nd
-σθε
-σθε
-ασι(ν)
-σαν
3rd
-νται
-ντο
Inf.
-ναι
-ναι
-σθαι
-σθαι
Note that the middle endings are the same as those for other verbs.
Verbs in -νυμι
One type of -μι verb is that in which the syllable -νυ- is added before the end-
ings to form the present stem. In all other tense systems they are conjugated
like -ω verbs. These are the most regular of the -μι verbs.
δείκνυμι (root δεικ-; principal parts δείξω, ἔδειξα,
δέδειχα, δέδειγμαι, ἐδείχθην), show
Active
Middle
Present
Imperfect
Present
Imperfect
Sg.
δείκνυμι
ἐδείκνυν
1st
δείκνυμαι
ἐδεικνύμην
δείκνυς
ἐδείκνυς
2nd
δείκνυσαι
ἐδείκνυσο
δείκνυσι
ἐδείκνυ
3rd
δείκνυται
ἐδείκνυτο
Pl.
δείκνυμεν
ἐδείκνυμεν
1st
δεικνύμεθα
ἐδεικνύμεθα
δείκνυτε
ἐδείκνυτε
2nd
δείκνυσθε
ἐδείκνυσθε
δεικνύασι
ἐδείκνυσαν
3rd
δείκνυνται
ἐδείκνυντο
Infinitive: δεικνύναι
δείκνυσθαι
Participle: δεικνύς, δεικνῦσα, δεικνύν
δεικνύμενος, -η, -ον
Reduplicating Class
The four most common verbs of the reduplicating class are: ἵστημι, δίδωμι,
τίθημι, and ἵημι. The conjugations that follow are of the special athematic forms
of these verbs.
I. ἵστημι stem: στη-/στα-, make to stand, stand.
Principal parts: ἵστημι, στήσω, ἔστησα (1st aor.), ἔστην (2nd aor.), ἕστηκα,
ἕσταμαι, ἐστάθην.
232
Lesson XII

Active
Present
Imperfect
2nd Aorist
1st Aorist
Perfect Active
Sg. 1st
ἵστημι
ἵστην
ἔστην
ἔστησα
ἕστηκα
2nd
ἵστης
ἵστης
ἔστης
ἔστησας
ἕστηκας
3rd
ἵστησι
ἵστη
ἔστη
ἔστησε
ἕστηκε
Pl. 1st
ἵσταμεν
ἵσταμεν
ἔστημεν
ἐστήσαμεν
ἕσταμεν
2nd
ἵστατε
ἵστατε
ἔστητε
ἐστήσατε
ἕστατε
3rd
ἱστᾶσι
ἵστασαν
ἔστησαν
ἔστησαν
ἑστᾶσι
Inf.
ἱστάναι
στῆναι
στῆσαι
ἑστάναι
Part.
ἱστάς
στάς
στήσας
ἑστῶς, ἑστῶσα,
ἑστός
Middle/M.-P.
Present
Imperfect
1st Aorist
Sg. 1st
ἵσταμαι
ἱστάμην
There is no  ἐστησάμην
2nd
ἵστασαι
ἵστασο
2nd Aorist 
ἐστήσω
3rd
ἵσταται
ἵστατο
middle
ἐστήσατο
Pl. 1st
ἱστάμεθα
ἱστάμεθα
ἐστησάμεθα
2nd
ἵστασθε
ἵστασθε
ἐστήσασθε
3rd
ἵστανται
ἵσταντο
ἐστήσαντο
Inf.
ἵστασθαι
στήσασθαι
Part.
ἱστάμενος
στησάμενος
Variable Stems
One very important thing to remember about ἵστημι and the other
verbs of its class is that the stem is variable, showing a long and a
short form. The stem of ἵστημι is στη-/στα-. In the present, it is redu-
plicated. The original form was *σίστημι, but initial σ often changes
to the rough breathing, resulting in ἵστημι: present stem ἱστη-/ἱστα-.
Study the present, imperfect, and second aorist until their pecular-
ities are familiar. In the present system active, the long (-η) form of
the stem is used in the singular, the short (-α) in the plural.
The middle voice of ἵστημι and the other verbs of its type is very
simple: the middle endings are added to the short form of the stem.
Special Peculiarities of ἵστημι
1. ἵστημι has two aorist forms. A few verbs have both first and sec-
ond aorists, and when they do, the two aorists usually have different
meanings. So it is with ἵστημι. The first aorist is transitive, I made/
caused to stand, I set up; the second aorist is intransitive, I stood. There
is no second aorist middle. The transitive forms of ἵστημι (make to
stand, set, place) and of its compounds, are the present, imperfect, fu-
ture, and first aorist active. The intransitive forms (stand, be set) are
the second aorist, the perfect and pluperfect (ἕστηκα, εἱστήκη), and the
passive forms of the present, imperfect, and future.
-ΜΙ Verbs
233

Explanation of the principal parts
Reduplicated forms (present and perfect systems) have the rough
breathing. The forms that are only augmented (aorists) have the
smooth breathing.
Transitive and Causal:
ἵστημι I set/am setting, I place
στήσω I shall set
ἔστησα I set, brought to a stop, caused to stand
Intransitive and Passive:
ἵσταμαι I am standing, set for myself
ἔστην I stood (set myself), came to a stand
ἕστηκα I stand (have set myself), stand firm, am standing
εἱστήκη I stood, was standing
ἑστήξω I shall stand
ἕσταμαι I am set (rare, used in passive sense)
ἐστάθην I was placed, was set
The intransitive and passive forms can serve as a stronger form of
εἶναι to be (in such and such state or place). Compounds of ἵστημι
show the same distinctions of intransitive and transitive (or causal)
forms.
2. There is a special form of the perfect (given above) and of the 
pluperfect:
Singular
Plural
εἱστήκη
1st
ἕσταμεν
εἱστήκας
2nd
ἕστατε
εἱστήκει
3rd
ἕστασαν
3. ἵστημι is one of the few verbs that have a future perfect active,
ἑστήξω.
II. δίδωμι stem: δω-/δο-, give.
Principal parts: δίδωμι, δώσω, ἔδωκα, δέδωκα, δέδομαι, ἐδόθην.
The second aorist ἔδωκα is irregular. -κ- is dropped from all forms except
the active singular. In all other forms of the aorist the stem is δω- / δο-.
Active
Middle
Present
Imperfect
2nd aorist
Present
Imperfect
2nd aorist
Sg. 1st
δίδωμι
ἐδίδουν
ἔδωκα
δίδομαι
ἐδιδόμην
ἐδόμην
2nd
δίδως
ἐδίδους
ἔδωκας
δίδοσαι
ἐδίδοσο
ἔδου
3rd
δίδωσι
ἐδίδου
ἔδωκε
δίδοται
ἐδίδοτο
ἔδοτο
Pl. 1st
δίδομεν
ἐδίδομεν
ἔδομεν
διδόμεθα
ἐδιδόμεθα
ἐδόμεθα
2nd
δίδοτε
ἐδίδοτε
ἔδοτε
δίδοσθε
ἐδίδοσθε
ἔδοσθε
3rd
διδόασι
ἐδίδοσαν
ἔδοσαν
δίδονται
ἐδίδοντο
ἔδοντο
Infinitive: διδόναι
δοῦναι
δίδοσθαι
δόσθαι
Participle: διδούς
δούς
διδόμενος
δόμενος
234
Lesson XII

Special Peculiarities of δίδωμι
δίδωμι has the stem δω/δο, which is reduplicated to δίδω-μι for the
present system (giving the present stem διδω-/διδο-). Again, the long
form is used in the singular (with the variation ου in the imperfect),
the short form in the plural and throughout the middle voice.
III. τίθημι stem θη-/θε-, set, place.
Principal parts: τίθημι, θήσω, ἔθηκα, τέθηκα, τέθειμαι, ἐτέθην.
The second aorist ἔθηκα is irregular. -κ- is dropped from all forms except
the active singular. In all other forms of the aorist the stem is θη- / θε-.
Active
Middle
Present
Imperfect
2nd aorist
Present
Imperfect
2nd aorist
Sg. 1st
τίθημι
ἐτίθην
ἔθηκα
τίθεμαι
ἐτιθέμην
ἐθέμην
2nd
τίθης
ἐτίθεις
ἔθηκας
τίθεσαι
ἐτίθεσο
ἔθου
3rd
τίθησι
ἐτίθει
ἔθηκε
τίθεται
ἐτίθετο
ἔθετο
Pl. 1st
τίθεμεν
ἐτίθεμεν
ἔθεμεν
τιθέμεθα
ἐτιθέμεθα
ἐθέμεθα
2nd
τίθετε
ἐτίθετε
ἔθετε
τίθεσθε
ἐτίθεσθε
ἔθεσθε
3rd
τιθέασι
ἐτίθεσαν
ἔθεσαν
τίθενται
ἐτίθεντο
ἔθεντο
Infinitive: τιθέναι
θεῖναι
τίθεσθαι
θέσθαι
Participle: τιθείς
θείς
τιθέμενος
θέμενος
Special Peculiarities of τίθημι
τίθημι has the stem θη/θε, reduplicated for the present system to
*θίθη-μι. But the initial aspirated consonant changes to its unaspi-
rated form for ease in pronunciation before another aspiration, hence
τίθημι (present stem, τιθη-/τιθε-). Note the use of the diphthong -ει
for -η (as ου for ω in forms of δίδωμι) in some forms of the imperfect
and in the aorist infinitive.
IV. ἵημι stem: ἡ-/ἑ-, throw, send.
Principal parts: ἵημι, -ἥσω, -ἧκα, -εἷκα, -εἷμαι, -εἵθην. (The dash, -ἧκα etc., in-
dicates that the form is found only in compounds, such as ἀφῆκα.)
The second aorist ἧκα is irregular. -κ- is dropped from all forms except the
active singular. In all other forms of the aorist the stem is ἡ- / ἑ- (-εἱ- is the
augmented form).
Active
Middle
Present
Imperfect
2nd aorist
Present
Imperfect
2nd aorist
Sg. 1st
ἵημι
ἵην
-ἧκα
ἵεμαι
ἱέμην
-εἵμην
2nd
ἵης
ἵεις
-ἧκας
ἵεσαι
ἵεσο
-εἷσο
3rd
ἵησι
ἵει
-ἧκε
ἵεται
ἵετο
-εἷτο
Pl. 1st
ἵεμεν
ἵεμεν
-εἷμεν
ἱέμεθα
ἱέμεθα
-εἵμεθα
2nd
ἵετε
ἵετε
-εἷτε
ἵεσθε
ἵεσθε
-εἷσθε
3rd
ἱᾶσι
ἵεσαν
-εἷσαν
ἵενται
ἵεντο
-εἷντο
Infinitive: ἱέναι
-εἷναι
ἵεσθαι
ἕσθαι
Participle: ἱείς
-εἵς
ἱέμενος
ἕμενος
-ΜΙ Verbs
235

Special Peculiarities of ἵημι
ἵημι has the stem ἡ/ἑwhich is reduplicated to ἵη-μι (present stem,
ἱη/ἱε). Again, the diphthong (-ει) is found in the imperfect and in the
aorist infinitive.
The Reduplicating Class of -μι Verbs: Review
Although you need to study the verbs of the reduplicating class carefully to
learn their individual peculiarities, the following summary of their similarities
may be useful:
1. All of them end in -ημι or -ωμι in the first form.
2. All have a long and a short form of the stem (the short form being used in
the present and imperfect plural, in the present infinitive, and throughout the
middle). The long form is usually the stem vowel in its long form, but some-
times a diphthong is substituted (ου for ω and ει for η).
3. A syllable (originally a reduplication) is added to each to form the present
stem. This extra syllable occurs throughout the present system and only there.
4. δίδωμι, ἵημι, and τίθημι have irregular second aorists, with -κα, -κας, -κε and
the long form of the stem in the singular, but -μεν, -τε, -σαν with the short form
in the plural.
The Active Participles of -μι Verbs
The active participles of -μι verbs are declined in the same way as those of
other verbs, but are formed with the characteristic vowel of the verb.
δείκνυμι
present
δεικνύς, -ῦσα, -ύν
base: δεικνυντ-
ἵστημι
present
ἱστάς, -ᾶσα, -άν
base: ἱσταντ-
second aorist
στάς, -ᾶσα, -άν
base: σταντ-
(first aorist)
στήσας, -ασα, -αν
base: στησαντ-
δίδωμι
present
διδούς, -οῦσα, -όν
base: διδοντ-
second aorist
δούς, -οῦσα, -όν
base: δοντ-
τίθημι
present
τιθείς, -εῖσα, -έν
base: τιθεντ-
second aorist
θείς, -εῖσα, -έν
base: θεντ-
ἵημι
present
ἱείς, ἱεῖσα, ἱέν
base: ἱεντ-
second aorist
-εἵς, -εἷσα, -ἕν
base: -ἑντ-
These participles are not difficult if you bear in mind that the characteris-
tic active participial ending (-ντ-) is added to the stem of the verb (short form,
except when compensatory lengthening takes place). Form the aorist partici-
ples of δίδωμι, τίθημι, ἵημι from the aorist stem rather than from the principal
parts with the intrusive -κ-.
236
Lesson XII

The Participles Declined
1. δείκνυμι
Present
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
δεικνύς
δεικνῦσα
δεικνύν
G
δεικνύντος
δεικνύσης
δεικνύντος
D
δεικνύντι
δεικνύσῃ
δεικνύντι
A
δεικνύντα
δεικνῦσαν
δεικνύν
Pl.
N
δεικνύντες
δεικνῦσαι
δεικνύντα
G
δεικνύντων
δεικνυσῶν
δεικνύντων
D
δεικνῦσι
δεικνύσαις
δεικνῦσι
A
δεικνύντας
δεικνύσας
δεικνύντα
2. ἵστημι
Present
2nd aorist
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
ἱστάς
ἱστᾶσα
ἱστάν
στάς
στᾶσα
στάν
G
ἱστάντος
ἱστάσης
ἱστάντος
στάντος
στάσης
στάντος
D
ἱστάντι
ἱστάσῃ
ἱστάντι
στάντι
στάσῃ
στάντι
A
ἱστάντα
ἱστᾶσαν
ἱστάν
στάντα
στᾶσαν
στάν
Pl.
N
ἱστάντες
ἱστᾶσαι
ἱστάντα
στάντες
στᾶσαι
στάντα
G
ἱστάντων
ἱστασῶν
ἱστάντων
στάντων
στασῶν
στάντων
D
ἱστᾶσι
ἱστάσαις
ἱστᾶσι
στᾶσι
στάσαις
στᾶσι
A
ἱστάντας
ἱστάσας
ἱστάντα
στάντας
στάσας
στάντα
3. δίδωμι
Present
2nd aorist
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
διδούς
διδοῦσα
διδόν
δούς
δοῦσα
δόν
G
διδόντος
διδούσης
διδόντος
δόντος
δούσης
δόντος
D
διδόντι
διδούσῃ
διδόντι
δόντι
δούσῃ
δόντι
A
διδόντα
διδοῦσαν
διδόν
δόντα
δοῦσαν
δόν
Pl.
N
διδόντες
διδοῦσαι
διδόντα
δόντες
δοῦσαι
δόντα
G
διδόντων
διδουσῶν
διδόντων
δόντων
δουσῶν
δόντων
D
διδοῦσι
διδούσαις
διδοῦσι
δοῦσι
δούσαις
δοῦσι
A
διδόντας
διδούσας
διδόντα
δόντας
δούσας
δόντα
-ΜΙ Verbs
237

4. τίθημι
Present
2nd aorist
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
τιθείς
τιθεῖσα
τιθέν
θείς
θεῖσα
θέν
G
τιθέντος
τιθείσης
τιθέντος
θέντος
θείσης
θέντος
D
τιθέντι
τιθείσῃ
τιθέντι
θέντι
θείσῃ
θέντι
A
τιθέντα
τιθεῖσαν
τιθέν
θέντα
θεῖσαν
θέν
Pl.
N
τιθέντες
τιθεῖσαι
τιθέντα
θέντες
θεῖσαι
θέντα
G
τιθέντων
τιθεισῶν
τιθέντων
θέντων
θεισῶν
θέντων
D
τιθεῖσι
τιθείσαις
τιθεῖσι
θεῖσι
θείσαις
θεῖσι
A
τιθέντας
τιθείσας
τιθέντα
θέντας
θείσας
θέντα
5. ἵημι
Present
2nd aorist
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
ἱείς
ἱεῖσα
ἱέν
-εἵς
-εἷσα
-ἕν
G
ἱέντος
ἱείσης
ἱέντος
-ἕντος
-εἵσης
-ἕντος
D
ἱέντι
ἱείσῃ
ἱέντι
-ἕντι
-εἵσῃ
-ἕντι
A
ἱέντα
ἱεῖσαν
ἱέν
-ἕντα
-εἷσαν
- ἕν
Pl.
N
ἱέντες
ἱεῖσαι
ἱέντα
-ἕντες
-εἷσαι
- ἕντα
G
ἱέντων
ἱεισῶν
ἱέντων
-ἕντων
-εἱσῶν
-ἕντων
D
ἱεῖσι
ἱείσαις
ἱεῖσι
-εἷσι
-εἵσαις
-εἷσι
A
ἱέντας
ἱείσας
ἱέντα
-ἕντας
-εἵσας
- ἕντα
Note that for each verb the present and aorist participles are declined ex-
actly alike, the only difference being that the present participle has one more
syllable than the aorist.
Deponent Verbs of the -μι type
There are a number of deponent verbs of the athematic type, but these usu-
ally present no difficulty, since the middle voice is regular. For example,
δύναμαι be able, ἐπίσταμαι (impf. ἠπιστάμην) understand keep -α- before their
endings throughout the present system. Similarly, κάθημαι sit and κεῖμαι lie
retain their stem vowels η or ει.
Irregular Second Aorist
A few verbs of the -ω conjugation have athematic second aorists. For example:
γίγνωσκω
aorist ἔγνων
βαίνω
aorist ἔβην
ἁλίσκομαι
aorist ἑάλων or ἥλων
φθάνω
aorist ἔφθην
πέτομαι ( fly)
aorist ἔπτην
238
Lesson XII

These are inflected like second aorists of -μι verbs, by adding the personal
endings directly to the stem.
Examples:
βαίνω
γιγνώσκω
Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural
ἔβην
1st
ἔβημεν
ἔγνων
1st
ἔγνωμεν
ἔβης
2nd
ἔβητε
ἔγνως
2nd
ἔγνωτε
ἔβη
3rd
ἔβησαν
ἔγνω
3rd
ἔγνωσαν
Infinitive: βῆναι
Infinitive: γνῶναι
Participle: βάς, βᾶσα, βάν
Participle: γνούς, γνοῦσα, γνόν
(stem βαντ-)
(stem γνοντ-)
Vocabulary
ἁλίσκομαι, (impf. ἡλισκόμην)
be caught (passive in meaning; for 
ἁλώσομαι, ἑάλων, ἑάλωκα
active use forms of αἱρέω)
ἀνοίγνυμι or ἀνοίγω, ἀνοίξω,
open; pass.: be open, stand open (the 
ἀνεῴξα, ἀνέῳχα, ἀνέῳγμαι,
simple verb οἴγνυμι/οἴγω is much less 
ἀνεῴχθην
common in prose)
βαίνω, βήσομαι, ἔβην, βέβηκα
walk, step, go
συμβαίνω
meet, come to pass, happen, result
δείκνυμι, δείξω, ἔδειξα,
show, explain
δέδειχα, δέδειγμαι, ἐδείχθην
ἐπιδείκνυμι
exhibit, display
δύναμαι, δυνήσομαι,
be able, be strong enough (to do) (+ inf.)
δεδύνημαι, ἐδυνήθην
δίδωμι, δώσω, ἔδωκα, δέδωκα,
give, grant
δέδομαι, ἐδόθην
ἀποδίδωμι
give up or back, concede; mid.: sell
(+ gen. of price)
προδίδωμι
betray, give up
ἐπίσταμαι (impf. ἠπιστάμην),
understand
ἐπιστήσομαι, ἠπιστήθην 
ἐπιστήμη, ἐπιστήμης, ἡ
understanding, knowledge
ἵημι, -ἥσω, -ἧκα, -εἷκα, -εἷμαι,
send, release, throw
-εἵθην
ἀφίημι
send forth; release from (+ partitive
gen.)
-ΜΙ Verbs
239

ἵστημι, στήσω, ἔστησα, ἔστην,
transitive, causal (act. pres., impf., 
ἕστηκα, (ἕσταμαι), ἐστάθην
fut., aor. 1 act. & mid.): make to stand,
set, establish, appoint
intransitive (aor. 2, perfect, and
 passive): stand, halt
ἀφίστημι
causal: put away, cause to revolt
intransitive: stand away, revolt from
καθίστημι
causal: set down, establish, restore
intransitive: set oneself down, settle
κάθημαι, impf. ἐκαθήμην
(present system only) sit, lie idle, reside
or καθήμην
οἱ καθήμενοι
those who sit, the court, the audience
κεῖμαι, κείσομαι
(no other principal parts) lie, lie down
to rest, be situated
ὄλλυμι (or ὀλλύω), ὀλῶ,
transitive (active, 1 aor. & 1 perf.): 
ὤλεσα, ὠλόμην, ὀλώλεκα,
kill, destroy
ὄλωλα
intransitive (middle, 2 aor. & 2 perf.):
be destroyed, perish
ἀπόλλυμι
transitive: destroy utterly, kill
intransitive: perish, die; fall into ruin
(the simple verb, ὄλλυμι, is found
only in poetry and late prose.)
πίμπλημι, πλήσω, ἔπλησα,
fill (+ gen., fill full of; + dat. fill with)
πέπληκα, πέπλησμαι,
ἐπλήσθην
ῥήγνυμι, ῥήξω, ἔρρηξα,
break, shatter, tear
ἔρρωγα, —, ἐρράγην
τίθημι, θήσω, ἔθηκα, τέθηκα,
set, place, put, make
τέθειμαι, ἐτέθην
ἀνατίθημι
lay upon, refer, dedicate, attribute, 
set up
Exercises
1. Write the following synopses.
1. ἀνατίθημι: 1st sg.
4. δύναμαι: 1st pl.
2. ἐπιδείκνυμι: 2nd sg.
5. καθίστημι: 2nd pl.
3. προδίδωμι: 3rd sg.
6. ἀφίημι: 3rd pl.
240
Lesson XII

2. Parse.
-ΜΙ Verbs
241
1. εἷναι
2. τιθέντων
3. δοθέντα
4. ἀποδούς
5. ἀναθήσεις
6. δόντες
7. βάντος
8. πίμπλησι
9. ἀνέθηκε
10. ἀνοίγνυται
11. ἱᾶσι
12. κεῖται
13. ἐδίδοσαν
14. ἁλώσεται
15. ἀφέστηκα
16. ἑάλωκε
17. ἱείς
18. ἀνέῳξε
19. ἀφιᾶσι
20. ἀνατιθέναι
21. εἶναι
22. δείκνυσι
23. ἑάλωσαν
24. ἀπεδίδοτο
25. ἐπιστάμενα
26. ἵης
27. ἔκειντο
28. ἐδείκνυν
29. ἐδύνατο
30. ἡλισκόμεθα
31. ἀφῆκα
32. ἐδίδουν
33. διδόναι
34. βέβηκα
35. δεικνύμενος
36. ἔδωκας
37. δύναται
38. ἀφεῖναι
39. ἀπεῖναι
40. ἀποστήσαντες
41. δοῦναι
42. ἱστάντα
43. στάντι
44. θέντος
45. προυδίδους
46. ἐδόμην
47. ἐπέδεικνυ
48. ἵστασαν
49. καθημένη
50. ἠπίσταντο
51. τιθεῖσα
52. ἀφέντες
53. ἱέντα
54. γνῶναι
55. ἀνατεθῆναι
56. ἱέντος
57. ἀφίεσαν
58. δόσθαι
59. στάσης
60. καταστῆναι
61. ἀφίης
62. κατέστην
63. ἐπέδειξαν
64. κειμένοις
65. στησόμεθα
66. ἦσθα
67. ἐδυνήθη
68. δυνήσεται
69. ἑστῶς
70. καθεστάναι
71. ἔβη
72. ἱστᾶσι
73. ἀπέστην
74. προύδωκε
75. ἐπιδείκνυντος
76. θέσθαι
77. θείσης
78. ἀπεδίδους
79. στῆσαι
80. καταστῆσαι
81. στῆναι
82. ἱστᾶσαν
83. ἱστάναι
84. κείμεθα
85. ἀποστάντος
86. θέν
87. προδοθέν
88. θεῖναι
89. ἐκάθησο
90. ἐδείκνυσαν
91. δόντα
92. διδοῦσαν
93. δώσοντα
94. ἔφασαν
95. ἀνεῳγμένος
96. θήσεις
97. ἐτέθην
98. ἔβησαν
99. γνοῦσαι
100. καθιστάναι
3. Translate (some special meanings of the verbs are in brackets).
1. οἱ ἐχθροὶ θανάτῳ ἑάλωσαν.
2. τοῦτο πράττων ἑάλως.
3. ἀδικοῦντες οὐχ ἁλωσόμεθα.
4. ὁ ποιητὴς ταῖς σοφαῖς τὸ ἑαυτοῦ βιβλίον ἀνέθηκε.
5. τῇ θεᾷ ταῦτα τὰ δῶρα ἀναθήσομεν.
6. τοῖς θεοῖς οἱ πολῖται ἀνέθεσαν τάδε.
7. οὐ γὰρ σοὶ ἀνατιθέασι τὴν αἰτίαν ἐκείνης τῆς συμφορᾶς.
8. οὐχ ὁρᾷ τὰς Ἅιδου πύλας ἀνεῳγμένας. [αἱ Ἅιδου πύλαι the gates of
Hades]
9. αὐτὸν ἀνοιγνύναι τὰς πύλας τὰς τῆς οἰκίας νομίζω.
10. τί οὐκ ἀνοίγνυς τὴν θύραν; [θύρα, -ας, ἡdoor]
11. ταῖς φίλαις χάριτας ἀπεδίδοσαν.
12. οὐκ αἰσχύνει τὴν ἐπιστήμην ἀποδιδόμενος;

13. τὸν τοῦ φίλου βίον ἀπέδοτο.
14. οἱ κακοὶ τῶν κινδύνων ἀφίσταντο.
15. ὁ ἄρχων τῆς ἀρχῆς ἀπέστη. [resigned/was deposed from]
16. οἱ σοφοὶ τοὺς πολίτας ἀπὸ τοῦ τυράννου ἀπέστησαν.
17. χαλεπόν ἐστι ἔργων καὶ κινδύνων καὶ πόνων ἀποστῆναι.
18. ὁ γὰρ βασιλεὺς τὸν ἱερέα ἀφῆκεν οὐ βουλόμενος τὴν θυγατέρα αὐτοῦ
λύειν.
19. ὁ δὲ γέρων ἀφίει δάκρυα. [δάκρυ, -υος, τόtear]
20. ὁ ἀνὴρ βουλόμενος γαμεῖν τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως θυγατέρα τὴν γυναῖκα
ἀφῆκεν. [divorced]
21. τοῖς σοῖς λόγοις κινδύνου ἀφιέμεθα.
22. ταῦτα ὁ χρόνος δείξει.
23. ἐδείκνυσαν φίλοι ὄντες/ἀγαθαὶ οὖσαι.
24. πολλὰ ὁ θεὸς ἡμῖν δείκνυσιν.
25. τὴν ὁδὸν ὑμῖν δείξομεν.
26. εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν βαίνεις;
27. βαίνομέν γε ὡς ὀψόμεναι τὰ θαύματα.
28. ἔβησαν φεύγοντες.
29. τί μοι δίδως;
30. οὗτος ὁ ἀνὴρ ἑαυτὸν ταῖς τοῦ σώματος ἡδοναῖς ἐδίδου.
31. οἱ θεοὶ τοῖς δικαίοις τὴν νίκην διδόασιν;
32. δῶρα γὰρ πολλὰ καὶ καλὰ τοῖς δαίμοσι δώσομεν.
33. τὰ διδόμενα οὐ βουλόμεθα λαβεῖν.
34. δίκην ἔδωκε ὁ ἄδικος. [δίδωμι δίκην pay the penalty]
35. ὁ πατὴρ καὶ ἡ μήτηρ τὴν θυγατέρα τούτῳ τῷ ἀνδρὶ γυναῖκα ἔδοσαν.
[δίδωμι γυναῖκα give as a wife, give in marriage]
36. οἱ φεύγοντες τοῖς διώκουσιν ἑαυτοὺς ἔδοσαν.
37. ταῦτά γε ἡμῖν ἐδόθη ὑπὸ τῶν γερόντων.
38. δύνασαι ταῦτα πράττειν; δύναμαι μέν, ἐθέλω δ’ οὔ.
39. Ζεὺς ἅπαντα δύναται.
40. τί μοι δοῦναι δύνασθε;
41. ἐδύνατο δὲ τὸν βασιλέα ὁρᾶν;
42. ταῦτα γὰρ ποιῶν πολλὰ χρήματα λαμβάνειν δυνήσομαι.
43. ὁ τύραννος τὴν αὑτοῦ δύναμιν ἐπεδείκνυτο.
44. ἐπέδειξά σε ἄδικον ὄντα/αὐτὴν δικαίαν οὖσαν.
45. τοῖς ξένοις πᾶσαν τὴν πόλιν ἐπιδείξουσιν.
46. ὁ ἄδικος δικαστὴς οὐκ ἐδυνήθη τὴν δικαιοσύνην ἐπιδείκνυσθαι.
47. ἡ μάντις τὸ μέλλον ἐπίσταται.
48. πολλὰ δὲ ἠπίσταντο οἱ σοφοί.
49. οὗτοι οὔκ εἰσιν οἱ λόγοι ἀνδρὸς ἐπισταμένου/γυναικὸς ἐπισταμένης.
50. πάντες γὰρ τὰ γράμματα ἐπιστάμεθα.
51. τίς γὰρ ἡμῖν τοῦτον τὸν ἄγγελον ἧκε;
52. πολλοὺς δὲ λίθους ἐφ’ ἡμῖν ἵεσαν.
53. οἱ ἵπποι ἔστησαν ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ.
54. τοὺς ἵππους ἵσταμεν.
55. οἱ πολῖται αὐτὸν ἔστησαν βασιλέα.
56. ἱστάμην παρὰ τῷ ἀδελφῷ/τῇ ἀδελφῇ.
242
Lesson XII

57. οὐδὲν γὰρ λέγοντες κάθησθε.
58. ὑμεῖς οἱ καθήμενοί με κρινεῖτε.
59. ἐπὶ τῶν ἵππων ἐκάθηντο.
60. οἱ πολῖται δημοκρατίαν καθιστάναι ἐβούλοντο.
61. χαλεπόν ἐστι καλοὺς νόμους καθιστάναι.
62. κατέστη ἡ θάλαττα.
63. τὰ ἄνθη ἐπὶ τὴν ὁδὸν κεῖται. [ἄνθος, -ους, τόflower]
64. ἡμᾶς χρὴ πείθεσθαι τοῖς ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν κειμένοις νόμοις. [κεῖμαι lie, be
placed, be laid down]
65. ἡ νῆσος ἐν μέσῃ τῇ θαλάττῃ κεῖται.
66. ἐν ταύταις ταῖς οἰκίαις κεῖται πολλὰ κτήματα.
67. ἄθαπτοι οἱ ἐν ἐκείνῳ τῷ πολέμῳ ἀποθανόντες κεῖνται. [ἄθαπτος, -ον
unburied]
68. φόβῳ πιμπλήμενοι ἐφύγομεν καὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα προύδομεν.
69. ἐπίμπλη τὰς κύλικας οἴνου.
70. ὑπὸ τῶν φίλων προδοθέντες ἥλωσαν.
71. οὔ σέ ποτε προδώσομεν.
72. τί ταῦτα πράττων προδίδως τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὴν μητέρα καὶ τὰ παιδία;
73. ἡ θεὰ τὸν ἄνδρα ἀθάνατον ἔθηκεν.
74. ἐν μὲν δημοκρατίᾳ οἱ πολῖται τοὺς νόμους τίθενται.
75. ἐν δὲ τυραννίδι τοὺς νόμους τίθησιν ὁ τύραννος.
76. ὁ σοφὸς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἀγαθοὺς καὶ καλοὺς βούλεται θεῖναι.
77. βούλομαί σε φίλον ἐμὸν θέσθαι.
78. ἡ μήτηρ τῇ παιδὶ ὄνομα τίθεται.
79. τιμὴν τοῖς σοφοῖς ἔθεσαν.
80. εἰ τὰ χρήματά μοι ἔδωκεν, εἶχον ἂν αὐτά.
4. a. Translate into Greek.
1. The citizens made [i.e., set/put for themselves] good laws.
2. Are you able to know the future?
3. The gods reveal all things to men during the night. [IX]
4. We were caught telling many lies.
5. You have given me the greatest of gifts.
6. It is good to understand all things.
7. We are not always able to live well.
8. The poet attributed all things to the gods.
9. Do wives stand beside their husbands?
10. After they had been victorious [having won] the soldiers set up
their shields to the gods.
4. b. Compose sentences using the following words.
1. ἵστημι (as causal)
2. ἵστημι (as intransitive)
3. ἵημι
4. βαίνω
5. προδίδωμι
-ΜΙ Verbs
243

Readings
1. πάντα τύχη καὶ μοῖρα, Περίκλεεις, ἀνδρὶ δίδωσιν.
—Archilochus
2. εἶπεν ὁ Σωκράτης· ‘νὴ Δἴ, ὦ Καλλία, τελέως ἡμᾶς ἑστιᾷς. οὐ γὰρ μόνον
δεῖπνον ἄμεμπτον παρέθηκας, ἀλλὰ καὶ θεάματα καὶ ἀκροάματα ἥδιστα
παρέχεις.’
—Xenophon, Symposium
[νὴ Δία by Zeus. τελέως perfectly. ἑστιάω entertain, feast. δεῖπνον, -ου, τόdin-
ner. ἄμεμπτος, -ον blameless. παρέθηκας < παρατίθημι place before, provide.
θέαμα, -ατος, τόsight, spectacle. ἀκρόαμα, -ατος, τόsound, anything heard.]
3. πρὸς τῶν ἐχόντων, Φοῖβε, τὸν νόμον τίθης.
—Euripides, Alcestis
[πρός to the advantage of (+ gen.). Φοῖβε voc. of Phoebus (= Apollo).]
4. Κροῖσος Ἅλυν διαβὰς μεγάλην ἀρχὴν καταλύσει.
—Herodotus
[The oracle to Croesus. Ἅλυς the Halys (a river in Asia Minor). διαβάς < δια-
+βαίνω. καταλύω destroy.]
5. ὅμως δ ̓ἀνάγκη πημονὰς βροτοῖς φέρειν θεῶν διδόντων.
—Aeschylus,
[πημονή, -ῆς, ἡ= πῆμα.]
6. ἀρχὴ ἄνδρα δείκνυσιν.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Pittacus
7. Αἰσχίνου δὲ εἰπόντος, ‘πένης εἰμὶ καὶ ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν ἔχω, δίδωμι δέ σοι
ἐμαυτόν,’ ‘ἆρ ̓ οὖν,’ εἶπον, ‘οὐκ αἰσθάνῃ τὰ μέγιστά μοι δίδους;’
—Diogenes Laertius on Socrates
[Αἰσχίνης, -ου, ὁAeschines. πένης, -ητος, ὁpoor man.]
8. θέλομεν καλῶς ζῆν πάντες ἀλλ ̓ οὐ δυνάμεθα.
—Menander
[*θέλω = ἐθέλω.]
9. ζῶμεν γὰρ οὐχ ὡς θέλομεν, ἀλλ ̓ὡς δυνάμεθα.
—Menander
10. ὡς μέγα τὸ μικρόν ἐστιν ἐν καιρῷ δοθέν.
—Menander
11. τούτοις πεποιθὼς εἶμι καὶ ξυστήσομαι
αὐτός· τίς ἄλλος μᾶλλον ἐνδικώτερος;
ἄρχοντί τ ̓ ἄρχων καὶ κασιγνήτῳ κάσις,
ἐχθρὸς σὺν ἐχθρῷ στήσομαι. φέρ ̓ ὡς τάχος
κνημῖδας αἰχμῆς καὶ πέτρων προβλήματα.
—Aeschylus, Seven against Thebes
244
Lesson XII

[Eteocles announces he will fight his brother. εἶμι I will go. ξυστήσομαι (ξυν-
= συν-) < συνίστημι stand with (here, stand to face in battle). ἔνδικος, -ον having
right. κασίγνητος, -ου, ὁbrother. κάσις, -ιος, ὁbrother. φέρ’ = φέρε bring (imper-
ative). ὡς τάχος with all haste. κνημίς, -ῖδος, ἡgreave (leg-armor). αἰχμή, -ῆς, ἡ
spear. πέτρος, -ου, ὁstone, rock. πρόβλημα, -άτος, τόdefense against (+ gen.).]
12. Λάϊος ὁ Θηβῶν βασιλεὺς γήμας Ἰοκάστην τὴν Κρέοντος, καὶ χρόνον
ἱκανὸν ἄπαις ὤν, ἐπηρώτησε τὸν θεὸν περὶ τέκνων γενέσεως. τῆς δὲ Πυθίας
δούσης χρησμὸν αὐτῷ μὴ συμφέρειν γενέσθαι τέκνα (τὸν γὰρ ἐξ αὐτοῦ
τεκνωθέντα παῖδα πατροκτόνον ἔσεσθαι καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν οἰκίαν πληρώσειν
μεγάλων ἀτυχημάτων), ἐπιλαθόμενος τοῦ χρησμοῦ καὶ γεννήσας υἱόν, ἐξέθηκε
τὸ βρέφος διαπερονήσας αὐτοῦ τὰ σφυρὰ σιδήρῳ· δι’ ἣν αἰτίαν Οἰδίπους
ὕστερον ὠνομάσθη.
[Θῆβαι, -ῶν, αἱThebes. τὴν Κρέοντος daughter of Creon. ἱκανός, -ή, όν sufficient,
long. ἄπαις childless. ἐπερωτάω consult, question. *τέκνον, -ου, τόchild. Πυθία
The Pythia (prophetess of Apollo at Delphi). χρησμός, -οῦ, ὁ oracle. συμφέρω be
useful. τεκνόω bear, beget. πατροκτόνος, -ον murdering one’s father. πληρόω fill.
ἀτύχημα, -άτος, τόmisfortune. ἐπιλανθάνομαι forget. ἐκτίθημι expose. βρέφος,
-ους, τόinfant. διαπερονάω pierce through. σφυρόν, -οῦ, τόankle. The name
Oidipous (Oedipus) is taken to mean “swollen foot.”]
οἱ δ’ οἰκέται λαβόντες τὸ παιδίον ἐκθεῖναι μὲν οὐκ ἠθέλησαν, ἐδωρήσαντο
δὲ τῇ Πολύβου γυναικί, οὐ δυναμένῃ γεννῆσαι παῖδας. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
ἀνδρωθέντος τοῦ παιδός, ὁ μὲν Λάϊος ἔκρινεν ἐπερωτῆσαι τὸν θεὸν περὶ τοῦ
βρέφους τοῦ ἐκτεθέντος, ὁ δὲ Οἰδίπους μαθὼν παρά τινος τὴν καθ’ ἑαυτὸν
ὑποβολήν, ἐπεχείρησεν ἐπερωτῆσαι τὴν Πυθίαν περὶ τῶν κατ’ ἀλήθειαν γονέων.
κατὰ δὲ τὴν Φωκίδα τούτων ἀλλήλοις ἀπαντησάντων, ὁ μὲν Λάϊος ὑπερηφάνως
ἐκχωρεῖν τῆς ὁδοῦ προσέταττεν, ὁ δ’ Οἰδίπους ὀργισθεὶς ἀπέκτεινε τὸν Λάϊον,
ἀγνοῶν ὅτι πατὴρ ἦν αὐτοῦ.
—Diodorus Siculus
[οἰκέτης, -ου, ὁservant. δωρέω give. ἀνδρόω in pass. become a man, reach man-
hood. ὑποβολή, -ῆς, ἡ(allegation of) substitution (i.e., of being a supposititious
child, not the child of Polybus and his wife). ἐπιχειρέω try. γονεύς, -έως, ὁ
father; pl. parents. Φωκίς, -ίδος, ἡPhocis. ἀπαντάω meet. ὑπερηφάνως arro-
gantly. ἐκχωρέω get out of the way. προστάττω order. ὀργίζω provoke. ἀγνοέω
not know, be ignorant.]
13. πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον ἐπιστάντα καὶ εἰπόντα, ‘οὐ φοβῇ με;’ ‘τί γάρ,’ εἶπεν, ‘εἶ
ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακόν;’ τοῦ δὲ εἰπόντος, ‘ἀγαθόν,’ ‘τίς οὖν,’ εἶπε, ‘τὸ ἀγαθὸν φοβεῖται;’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Diogenes
[Ἀλέξανδρος is Alexander the Great. ἐφίστημι set/stand over.]
14. ὀνειδιζόμενός ποτε ὅτι πονηρῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ἐλεημοσύνην ἔδωκεν, ‘οὐ τὸν
τρόπον,’ εἶπεν, ‘ἀλλὰ τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἠλέησα.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Aristotle
[ἐλεημοσύνη, -ης, ἡpity, alms. ἠλέησα aor. of ἐλεέω have pity on.]
15. τότ ̓ ἔφη τὰς πόλεις ἀπόλλυσθαι, ὅταν μὴ δύνωνται τοὺς φαύλους ἀπὸ τῶν
σπουδαίων διακρίνειν.
—Diogenes Laertius, on Antisthenes
[ὅταν μὴ δύνωνται whenever they cannot. *φαῦλος, -η, -ον mean, petty.
*σπουδαῖος, -α, -ον serious, good. διακρίνω separate, distinguish.]
-ΜΙ Verbs
245

246
Lesson XII
16. συνιστάντος τινὸς αὐτῷ υἱὸν ᾔτησε πεντακόσιας δραχμάς· τοῦ δὲ εἰπόντος
‘τοσούτου δύναμαι ἀνδράποδον ὠνήσασθαι,’ ‘πρίω,’ ἔφη, ‘καὶ ἕξεις δύο.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Aristippus
[συνίστημι set together, introduce (as a student). πεντακόσιοι five hundred.
*τοσοῦτος, -αύτη, -οῦτο so great, so much; τοσούτου for that much. ἀνδράποδον,
-ου, τόslave. ὠνέομαι buy. πρίω aor. imper. buy.]
17. Ion: οὐ γάρ σε ἀποκρυψάμενος ἐρῶ. ἐγὼ γὰρ ὅταν ἐλεεινόν τι λέγω,
δακρύων ἐμπίμπλανταί μου οἱ ὀφθαλμοί · ὅταν τε φοβερὸν ἢ δεινόν, ὀρθαὶ αἱ
τρίχες ἵστανται ὑπὸ φόβου καὶ ἡ καρδία πηδᾷ.
—Plato, Ion
[ἀποκρύπτω hide from, conceal. *ἐρῶI will tell. ὅταν whenever. ἐλεεινός, -ή, όν
pitiful. δάκρυ, -υος, τόtear. ἐμπίμπλημι fill up with (+ gen.). *ὀρθός, -ή, -όν
straight, on end. αἱ τρίχες hair. καρδία, -ας, ἡheart. πηδάω leap, throb.]
τῶν ὤτων ἔχω τὸν λύκον, οὔτ’ ἔχειν, οὔτ’
ἀφεῖναι δυνάμαι.
I have the wolf by the ears: I can neither hold
him nor let him go.
—Greek proverb
ΔΙΟΓΕΝΗΣ, the Cynic Philospher
(In the words of Diogenes Laertius)
λύχνον μεθ’ ἡμέραν ἅψας περιῄει λέγων ‘ἄνθρωπον
ζητῶ.’
He lit a lamp and went around in broad daylight assert-
ing, “I’m looking for a human being.”
Θεασάμενός ποτε παιδίον ταῖς χερσὶ πῖνον ἐξέρριψε
τῆς πήρας τὴν κοτύλην, εἰπών, ‘παιδίον με νενίκηκεν
εὐτελείᾳ.’
Once he saw a small child drinking with his hands. He threw the cup from his pack
with the words, “A child has surpassed me in simplicity.”
συνελογίζετο δὲ καὶ οὕτως τῶν θεῶν ἐστι πάντα φίλοι δὲ οἱ σοφοὶ τοῖς θεοῖς
κοινὰ δὲ τὰ τῶν φίλων. πάντ’ ἄρα ἐστὶ τῶν σοφῶν.
This is one of his syllogisms: All things belong to the gods. The wise are friends of the
gods. Possessions of friends are shared in common. Therefore all things belong to the wise.
Πλάτωνος ὁρισαμένου ‘Ἄνθρωπός ἐστι ζῷον δίπουν ἄπτερον’ καὶ εὐδοκιμοῦντος,
τίλας ἀλεκτρυόνα εἰσήνεγκεν αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν σχολὴν καί φησιν, ‘οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ
Πλάτωνος ἄνθρωπος.’ ὅθεν τῷ ὅρῳ προσετέθη τὸ πλατυώνυχον.
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

When Plato came up with the definition, “A human being is a two-footed animal with-
out feathers,” and was applauded for it, he plucked a rooster, brought it into the school,
and said, “Here’s Plato’s human being.” From this the phrase with broad nails [a
pun on “Platonic”] was added [to the definition].
The Cynics were called “dogs,” allegedly because they did in public the
sorts of things that dogs do, some of which are now considered committing
a nuisance or even indecent exposure.
In this epitaph from the Greek Anthology, the passerby is imagined ad-
dressing the monument (as is common), which depicts a dog. The dog answers.
εἰπέ, κύον, τίνος ἀνδρὸς ἐφεστὼς σῆμα φυλάσσεις;
τοῦ κυνός. ἀλλὰ τίς ἦν οὗτος ἀνὴρ ὁ κύων;
Διογένης. γένος εἰπέ. Σινωπεύς. ὃς πίθον ᾦκει;
καὶ μάλα νῦν δὲ θανὼν ἀστέρας οἶκον ἔχει.
Tell me, dog, on whose memorial do you stand guard?
The Dog’s. Well, who was this man, the Dog?
Diogenes. Where was he born? In Sinope. The one who lived in a jar [pithos]?
Yes indeed, but now that he’s dead his home is in the stars.
A pithos is a very large storage jar, equivalent to a modern packing
crate or appliance carton in which homeless people sometimes find
shelter.
-ΜΙ Verbs
247


LESSON XIII
Subjunctive and Optative Moods;
Subordinate Clauses
In this lesson you will learn more about what mood means, how to form the sub-
junctive and optative of all types of verbs, and the major uses of these two moods.
You will also learn new ways of making subordinate clauses.
249
The Subjunctive and Optative Moods
The subjunctive and optative are two moods expressing degrees of unreality
(as opposed to the indicative mood, which, generally speaking, expresses a
statement of fact). Mood, you may remember, indicates the manner (or mode)
in which the speaker/writer conceives of the assertion made by the verb. The
use of the subjunctive or optative implies that this assertion is not strictly fac-
tual: an intention, a wish, an order, a maybe, or a might have been is implied.
SUBJUNCTIVE
The subjunctive is found in the present, aorist, and perfect tenses. It has no
future, but the basic idea of the subjunctive is future. The tenses of the sub-
junctive have no time value, but express aspect. The present is used for an
action going on, the aorist for a single action, the perfect for a completed ac-
tion or a present state. The most commonly used tenses of the subjunctive
are the present and the aorist. The subjunctive, having no time value, is never
augmented.
Forms: Present, Aorist, Perfect
Formation of the Subjunctive
The subjunctive is formed by lengthening the thematic vowel. The indicative
has ο/ε, the subjunctive ω/η:

Singular
Plural
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
Act. Ind.
-ω
-εις
-ει
-ομεν
-ετε
-ουσι
Act. Subj.
-ω
-ῃς
-ῃ
-ωμεν
-ητε
-ωσι
Mid. Ind.
-ομαι
-ει
-εται
-ομεθα
-εσθε
-ονται
Mid. Subj.
-ωμαι
-ῃ
-ηται
-ωμεθα
-ησθε
-ωνται
Primary endings are always used for the subjunctive, which refers to the fu-
ture and is associated with primary tenses. Even the aorist subjunctive uses
primary endings. Most athematic verbs, by analogy with -ω verbs, also use
these endings with the long thematic vowel. Contract verbs follow their rules
for contraction. The perfect subjunctive usually consists of the perfect par-
ticiple and the subjunctive of εἰμί.
Subjunctive Forms of εἰμί
Singular
Plural
ὦ
1st
ὦμεν
ᾖς
2nd
ἦτε
ᾖ
3rd
ὦσι
Each tense of the subjunctive, optative, etc. is formed from the correspon-
ding tense stem (from the appropriate principal part).
Subjunctive forms of λύω
Present
Aorist
Perfect
Active
Sg. 1st
λύω
λύσω
λελυκὼς ὦ
2nd λύῃς
λύσῃς
λελυκὼς ᾖς
Passive
3rd
λύῃ
λύσῃ
λελυκὼς ᾖ
Aorist
Pl. 1st
λύωμεν
λύσωμεν
λελυκότες ὦμεν Sg. 1st
λυθῶ
2nd λύητε
λύσητε
λελυκότες ἦτε
2nd
λυθῇς
3rd
λύωσι
λύσωσι
λελυκότες ὦσι
3rd
λυθῇ
Middle
Sg. 1st
λύωμαι
λύσωμαι
λελυμένος ὦ
Pl. 1st
λυθῶμεν
2nd λύῃ
λύσῃ
λελυμένος ᾖς
2nd
λυθῆτε
3rd
λύηται
λύσηται
λελυμένος ᾖ
3rd
λυθῶσι
Pl. 1st
λυώμεθα λυσώμεθα
λελυμένοι ὦμεν
2nd λύησθε
λύσησθε
λελυμένοι ἦτε
3rd
λύωνται
λύσωνται
λελυμένοι ὦσι
250
Lesson XIII

Note that in the compound forms the participle must agree with the sub-
ject of the verb in number and gender so that if the subject is feminine or
neuter λελυκυῖα ὦ, ᾖς, ᾖor λελυκὸς ᾖis used. For the perfect active subjunctive
there is another set of forms: λελύκω, λελύκῃς, λελύκῃ, λελύκωμεν, λελύκητε,
λελύκωσι, which is less common than the periphrastic form given above.
The aorist passive is inflected as a contract verb. The short form of the aorist
passive stem in θε- (or ε-) is used for the subjunctive (and the optative); the
ε- is then absorbed before the long vowel of the endings.
2nd Aorist Subjunctive of λείπω: ἔλιπον, aor. stem, λιπ-
Active
Middle
Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural
λίπω
λίπωμεν
1st
λίπωμαι
λιπώμεθα
λίπῃς
λίπητε
2nd
λίπῃ
λίπησθε
λίπῃ
λίπωσι
3rd
λίπηται
λίπωνται
Present Subjunctive of Contract Verbs
Review of Contractions Used for Subjunctive
-αω:
α + o-sound becomes ω. α + e-sound becomes α.
-εω:
ε is absorbed before a long vowel.
-οω:
ο + η or ω contracts to ω. ο + any ι-diphthong yields οι.
-αω
-εω
-οω
Active
Sg. 1st
νικῶ
φιλῶ
δηλῶ
2nd
νικᾷς
φιλῇς
δηλοῖς
3rd
νικᾷ
φιλῇ
δηλοῖ
Pl. 1st
νικῶμεν
φιλῶμεν
δηλῶμεν
2nd
νικᾶτε
φιλῆτε
δηλῶτε
3rd
νικῶσι
φιλῶσι
δηλῶσι
Middle-Passive
Sg. 1st
νικῶμαι
φιλῶμαι
δηλῶμαι
2nd
νικᾷ
φιλῇ
δηλοῖ
3rd
νικᾶται
φιλῆται
δηλῶται
Pl. 1st
νικώμεθα
φιλώμεθα
δηλώμεθα
2nd
νικᾶσθε
φιλῆσθε
δηλῶσθε
3rd
νικῶνται
φιλῶνται
δηλῶνται
Subjunctive
251

Subjunctive of -μι Verbs
-νυμι verbs
Active
Middle-Passive
Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural
δεικνύω
δεικνύωμεν
1st
δεικνύωμαι
δεικνυώμεθα
δεικνύῃς
δεικνύητε
2nd
δεικνύῃ
δεικνύησθε
δεικνύῃ
δεικνύωσι
3rd
δεικνύηται
δεικνύωνται
Reduplicating verbs
Active
ἵστημι
τίθημι
ἵημι
δίδωμι
Pres.
Aor.
Pres.
Aor.
Pres.
Aor.
Pres.
Aor.
Sg. 1st
ἱστῶ
στῶ
τιθῶ
θῶ
ἱῶ
-ὧ
διδῶ
δῶ
2nd
ἱστῇς
στῇς
τιθῇς
θῇς
ἱῇς
-ᾗς
διδῷς
δῷς
3rd
ἱστῇ
στῇ
τιθῇ
θῇ
ἱῇ
-ᾗ
διδῷ
δῷ
Pl. 1st
ἱστῶμεν
στῶμεν
τιθῶμεν
θῶμεν
ἱῶμεν
-ὧμεν
διδῶμεν
δῶμεν
2nd
ἱστῆτε
στῆτε
τιθῆτε
θῆτε
ἱῆτε
-ἧτε
διδῶτε
δῶτε
3rd
ἱστῶσι
στῶσι
τιθῶσι
θῶσι
ἱῶσι
-ὧσι
διδῶσι
δῶσι
Middle/Middle-Passive
*ἵστημι
τίθημι
ἵημι
δίδωμι
Pres.
Pres.
Aor.
Pres.
Aor.
Pres.
Aor.
Sg. 1st
ἱστῶμαι
τιθῶμαι
θῶμαι
ἱῶμαι
-ὧμαι
διδῶμαι
δῶμαι
2nd
ἱστῇ
τιθῇ
θῇ
ἱῇ
-ᾗ
διδῷ
δῷ
3rd
ἱστῆται
τιθῆται
θῆται
ἱῆται
-ἧται
διδῶται
δῶται
Pl. 1st
ἱστώμεθα
τιθώμεθα
θώμεθα
ἱώμεθα
-ὥμεθα διδώμεθα
δώμεθα
2nd
ἱστῆσθε
τιθῆσθε
θῆσθε
ἱῆσθε
-ἧσθε
διδῶσθε
δῶσθε
3rd
ἱστῶνται
τιθῶνται
θῶνται
ἱῶνται
-ὧνται
διδῶνται
δῶνται
*There is no second aorist middle of ἵστημι.
Review of the Subjunctive Forms
Characteristics of the Subjunctive:
1. Long thematic vowel
2. Primary endings
Nearly all the subjunctive forms have the same set of endings, the pri-
mary endings with the long form of the thematic vowel. Even the -μι
verbs are for the most part inflected in the same way as the others and
are accented like the ε-contracts (the stem vowel contracting with the
long thematic vowel). The exceptions are (1) α-contracts whose sub-
252
Lesson XIII

junctive and indicative are identical; (2) ο-contracts, which have -ω-
except where there is an ι-subscript in the ending (in which case they
have -οι-); and (3) the -μι verb δίδωμι, which has -ω throughout the
present and aorist subjunctive (-ω supersedes any other vowel).
Some Uses of the Subjunctive
The subjunctive in general refers to the future. Among its uses are exhorta-
tions, commands, expressions of purpose, and conditions. In most of these
uses, the idea of futurity can still be seen: a command refers to the future, a
purpose is future relative to another action. In conditions, the subjunctive
refers either directly to the future, or to an indefinite time (it is never strictly
present).
Independent Uses of the Subjunctive
The three most common uses of the subjunctive in the main clause are:
1. Hortatory
The first person (usually plural) of the subjunctive is used in exhortations.
The negative is μή.
ἴδωμεν
Let us (Let’s) see!
μὴ ταῦτα ποιῶμεν
Let us not do these things!
2. Prohibitive
A negative command is expressed by the aorist subjunctive in the second per-
son with μή(or by the present imperative with μή: XIV).
μὴ ποιήσῃς τοῦτο
Do not do that!
3. Deliberative
The first person of the subjunctive is used in questions in which a person asks
himself/herself what he/she is to do. The negative is μή.
τί εἴπω;
What am I to say?
ταῦτα ποιῶμεν;
Are we to do these things?
Subjunctive
253

The Subjunctive in Conditions
1. Future More Vivid Conditions
When a hypothetical future case is stated distinctly and vividly (that is, as
likely to occur) the subjunctive is used with ἐάν (also spelled ἄν or ἤν) in the
protasis, the conditional (or if) clause, and the future indicative (or its equiv-
alent) is used in the apodosis, the conclusion (or then) clause. The negative in
the protasis is μή, in the apodosis, οὐ.
Protasis: ἐάν + subjunctive
Apodosis: future indicative
ἐὰν εἴπῃ τι, αὐτοῦ ἀκουσόμεθα. 
If he says anything, we will hear him.
ἐὰν μὴ ἔλθῃ, ταῦτα οὐ ποιήσομεν. If he does not come, we shall not do
these things.
2. Present General Conditions
This type refers to a customary or repeated action or to a general truth. The
time is  indefinite.
Protasis: ἐάν + subjunctive
Apodosis: present indicative
ἐὰν ἔλθῃ τις, ταῦτα ποιοῦμεν.
If (ever) anyone comes, we (always)
do these things.
ἐὰν εἴπῃς τι, οὐκ ἀκούομεν.
If (ever) you say anything, we do not
listen.
Relative Conditions
Conditions may also be expressed with a relative pronoun (who, etc.) or a rela-
tive adverb (when, etc.). The subjunctive relative conditions follow the patterns
for their simple counterparts.
1. Future (More Vivid)
Protasis: relative word + ἄν + subj.
Apodosis: future indicative
ὅταν ἔλθῃ ταῦτα ποιήσομεν.
When he comes, we will do these
(ὅταν = ὅτε + ἄν)
things.
2. Present General
Protasis: relative word + ἄν + subj.
Apodosis: present indicative
ὅταν τις ἔλθῃ, ταῦτα ποιοῦμεν.
Whenever anyone comes, we do 
these things.
Other uses of the subjunctive will be treated in the final section of this lesson.
254
Lesson XIII

Exercise A
1. Form and conjugate the following subjunctives.
1. Present active and middle of δοκέω
2. Aorist active, middle, and passive of τίθημι
3. All the subjunctive forms of παιδεύω
2. Fill in the subjunctive forms of the synopses given in Lessons IX, X, XI,
and XII.
3. Parse the following forms.
1. εἴπω
8. ἕλωμαι
15. βάλωμαι
2. δοκῶμεν
9. γράψωμεν
16. βουλεύσῃς
3. ἔλθωσι
10. τεθνηκότες ὦσι
17. γένηται
4. τιμῶνται
11. διδῷς
18. ἀποθνῄσκῃ
5. ἀξιῶσθε
12. λίπωσι
19. ἀγάγωσι
6. θῶ
13. ἔρχῃ
20. κληθῇς
7. παυθῆτε
14. δεικνύῃς
4. Read/Translate the following sentences.
1. τί ποιῶμεν;
2. ἀλλήλας ἀγαπῶμεν.
3. μὴ τούτῳ πιστεύσητε.
4. μηδὲν ποιήσῃς.
5. ἐάν μοι ταῦτα διδῷς, φιλήσω σε.
6. ἐὰν τὴν πατρίδα προδῶτε, οὐδεὶς ὑμᾶς τιμήσει.
7. τί βουλευώμεθα;
8. τούτου τοῦ σοφοῦ ἀκούωμεν.
9. μὴ θάψῃς τοῦτον τὸν νεκρόν. [νεκρός corpse]
10. ἐὰν ἀποθάνῃ ὁ ἀδελφός, βουλόμεθα αὐτὸν θάψαι.
11. τὸν τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ νεκρὸν θαψώμεθα.
12. μὴ τὸν μὲν τοῦ βασιλέως νόμον φοβώμεθα.
13. τῷ δὲ τῶν θεῶν νόμῳ πειθώμεθα.
14. ἐὰν τὴν ἀλήθειαν μὴ λέγητε, οὐδεὶς ὑμῖν πιστεύει.
15. ταύτην τὴν ἐσθλὴν ἀδελφὴν εἶναι κακὴν καὶ αἰσχρὰν μὴ νομίσῃς.
16. ἐὰν ἀδικῶσιν, δίκην δώσουσιν.
17. μηδὲν ψευδὲς εἴπῃς. μηδὲν αἰσχρὸν εἴπωμεν.
18. ἐὰν ἐκείνην τὴν χώραν λίπῃς, οὐ μενοῦμεν.
19. ἐὰν χρήματα σχῶμεν, εἰς τὰς νήσους κατὰ θάλασσαν ἐλευσόμεθα.
20. ἐὰν αὐτὸν ἴδω, ἀποφεύγω.
21. ἐὰν ζητῇς τι, εὑρήσεις.
22. ὅταν οὖν ξένοι ἔλθωσιν, αὐτοὺς ἑκοῦσαι δεχόμεθα.
23. εὐδαιμονέστεροί γε ἔσεσθε ἵν’ ἂν ἄμεινον πράττητε. [ἵν’ = ἵνα where]
24. ὅταν γὰρ ἀκούσωσιν ἡμῶν ταῦτα λεγόντων, θαυμάζουσιν.
25. ἅτινα ἂν μὴ φιλῶσι, ἀλλήλαις διδόασιν.
Subjunctive
255

Readings
1. βίον καλὸν ζῇς, ἂν γυναῖκα μὴ ἔχῃς.
—Menander
2. ἐὰν δ ̓ἔχομεν χρήμαθ ̓, ἕξομεν φίλους.
—Menander
3. καλὸν τὸ διδάσκειν, ἐὰν ὁ λέγων ποιῇ.
—Ignatius
4. ἀλλ ̓ἴωμεν ἀγαθῇ τύχῃ . . .
—Plato, Laws
[ἴωμεν subjunctive of εἶμι (will) go.]
5. ἐὰν ᾖς φιλομαθής, ἔσει πολυμαθής.
—Isocrates
[φιλομαθής, -ές fond of learning. πολυμαθής, -ές very learned.]
6. οἷον ἱέρεια οὐκ εἴα τὸν υἱὸν δημηγορεῖν· ἐὰν μὲν γάρ, ἔφη, τὰ δίκαια λέγῃς,
οἱ ἄνθρωποί σε μισήσουσι, ἐὰν δὲ τὰ ἄδικα, οἱ θεοί. δεῖ μὲν οὖν δημηγορεῖν·
ἐὰν μὲν γάρ τὰ δίκαια λέγῃς, οἱ θεoίσε φιλήσουσιν, ἐὰν δὲ τὰ ἄδικα οἱ
ἄνθρωποι.
—Aristotle, Rhetoric
[οἷον for example. ἱέρεια, -ας, ἡpriestess. εἴα impf. of ἐάω. δημηγορέω be a pub-
lic orator.]
7. ἐὰν κακῶς μου τὴν γυναιχ ̓οὕτω λέγῃς,
τὸν πατέρα καὶ σὲ τούς τε σοὺς ἐγὼ πλυνῶ.
—Menander
[πλύνω wash, scrub; slang: drub, abuse.]
8. νῦν ἴωμεν καὶ ἀκούσωμεν τοῦ ἀνδρός.
—Plato, Protagoras
9. εἴπωμεν ἢ σιγῶμεν;
—Euripides, Ion
10. ὡς οὐδὲν ἡ μάθησις, ἂν μὴ νοῦς παρῇ.
—Menander
[*ὡς how. μάθησις, -εως, ἡlearning.]
11. ὑπὲρ σεαυτοῦ μὴ φράσῃς ἐγκώμιον.
—Menander
[φράζω speak. ἐγκώμιον, -ου, τόspeech of praise, encomium.]
12. γελᾷ δ ̓ὁ μῶρος, κἄν τι μὴ γέλοιον ῇ.
—Menander
[μῶρος, -α, -ον stupid; as a noun fool. γέλοιος, -α, -ον funny, humorous.]
256
Lesson XIII

13. ἃ ψέγομεν ἡμεῖς, ταῦτα μὴ μιμώμεθα.
—Menander
[ψέγω blame. μιμέομαι imitate.]
14. ἢν ἐγγὺς ἔλθῃ θάνατος, οὐδεὶς βούλεται θνῄ σκειν.
—Euripides, Alcestis
[*ἐγγύς (adv.) near.]
15. Ismene: ἦ γὰρ νοεῖς θάπτειν σφ ̓, ἀπόρρητον πόλει;
Antigone: τὸν γοῦν ἐμὸν καὶ τὸν σόν, ἢν σὺ μὴ θέλῃς,
ἀδελφόν· οὐ γὰρ δὴ προδοῦσ ̓ἁλώσομαι.
—Sophocles, Antigone
[ἦintroduces a question. σφ’ = σφε him. ἀπόρρητος, -ον forbidden.]
16. ἀρετὴ δὲ κἂν θάνῃ τις οὐκ ἀπόλλυται.
—Euripides (fragment)
17. ὡς ἡδὺ κάλλος, ὅταν ἔχῃ νοῦν σώφρονα.
—Menander
18. ἐρωτηθεὶς τί περιγίνεται κέρδος τοῖς ψευδομένοις, ‘ὅταν,’ ἔφη, ‘λέγωμεν
ἀληθῆ, μὴ πιστεύεσθαι.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Aristotle
[περιγίγνομαι (περιγίνομαι) survive, result.]
19. τὸ φρικωδέστατον οὖν τῶν κακῶν, ὁ θάνατος, οὐθὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς, ἐπειδήπερ
ὅταν μὲν ἡμεῖς ὦμεν, ὁ θάνατος οὐ πάρεστιν· ὅταν δ ̓ὁ θάνατος παρῇ τοθ ̓ ἡμεῖς
οὐκ ἐσμέν.
—Diogenes Laertius, on Epicurus
[φρικώδης, -ες awful, horrible. οὐθέν = οὐδέν. ἐπειδήπερ since really. τοθ’ = τοτε.]
20. ἀεὶ καλὸς πλοῦς ἔσθ ̓ὅταν φεύγῃς κακά.
—Sophocles, Philoctetes
[πλοῦς, ὁa sailing voyage.]
21. μισῶ πονηρόν, χρηστὸν ὅταν εἴπῃ λόγον.
—Menander
22. πατρὶς γάρ ἐστι πᾶσ ̓ἵν ̓ ἂν πράττῃ τις εὖ.
—Greek proverb
[ἵνα (relative adv.) where.]
23. ὅταν γὰρ ἀκούσωσιν παρ ̓ἡμῶν, ὅτι λέγει ὁ θεός· οὐ χάρις ὑμῖν, εἰ ἀγαπᾶτε
τοὺς ἀγαπῶντας ὑμᾶς, ἀλλὰ χάρις ὑμῖν, εἰ ἀγαπᾶτε τοὺς ἐχθροὺς καὶ τοὺς
μισοῦντας ὑμᾶς· ταῦτα ὅταν ἀκούσωσιν, θαυμάζουσιν τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς
ἀγαθότητος· ὅταν δὲ ἴδωσιν ὅτι οὐ μόνον τοὺς μισοῦντας οὐκ ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλ ̓
ὅτι οὐδὲ τοὺς ἀγαπῶντας, καταγελῶσιν ἡμῶν, καὶ βλασφημεῖται τὸ ὄνομα.
—Clement of Rome
[ὑπερβολή, -ῆς, ἡexcess. ἀγαθότης, -τητος, ἡgoodness. καταγελάω laugh at (+
gen.). βλασφημέω blaspheme, revile.]
Subjunctive
257

φάγωμεν καὶ πίωμεν· αὔριον γὰρ
ἀποθνῄσκομεν.
Let us eat and drink; for tomorrow we die.
—Paul, I Corinthians
(Supposedly quoting the
Doctrine of Epicurus)
OPTATIVE
The optative is found in the present, future, aorist, and perfect tenses. It is a
somewhat vaguer mood than the subjunctive; some of its uses will be dis-
cussed below. The tenses of the optative usually refer to aspect rather than
time. There is, however, one exception to this generalization: namely in indi-
rect statement (see below). The future optative is not common and is used
only in indirect statement, to represent the future indicative.
The optative is not augmented.
There are two forms of the optative (i.e., two sets of endings).
1. The ι-type: used for -ω verbs, -νυμι verbs, and all middles (and generally
in the plural of the active).
2. The -ιη-type: for the present of contract verbs (and liquid futures), for the
present and aorist of -μι verbs (except -νυμι verbs), and for the aorist passive.
Thus one characteristic of the optative is the presence of ι. Another is that
the optative has secondary endings and is often associated with past tenses.
Forms: Present, Future, Aorist, Perfect
I. ι-type
Present, Future, and Second Aorist
Formation: Tense stem + thematic vowel -ο- + ι + endings:
Active
Middle-Passive
Sg.
οι -μι
1st
οι -μην
οι -ς
2nd
οι -ο (< οισο)
οι -
3rd
οι -το
Pl.
οι -μεν
1st
οι -μεθα
οι -τε
2nd
οι -σθε
οι -εν
3rd
οι -ντο
258
Lesson XIII

Present and future optative of λύω; second aorist of λείπω
Present
Future
2nd Aorist
Active
Sg. 1st
λύοιμι
λύσοιμι
λίποιμι
2nd
λύοις
λύσοις
λίποις
3rd
λύοι
λύσοι
λίποι
Pl. 1st
λύοιμεν
λύσοιμεν
λίποιμεν
2nd
λύοιτε
λύσοιτε
λίποιτε
3rd
λύοιεν
λύσοιεν
λίποιεν
Middle
Sg. 1st
λυοίμην
λυσοίμην
λιποίμην
2nd
λύοιο
λύσοιο
λίποιο
3rd
λύοιτο
λύσοιτο
λίποιτο
Pl. 1st
λυοίμεθα
λυσοίμεθα
λιποίμεθα
2nd
λύοισθε
λύσοισθε
λίποισθε
3rd
λύοιντο
λύσοιντο
λίποιντο
First Aorist Optative
Formation: 1st aor. stem (in -α-) + ι + endings
Active
Middle
Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural
λύσαιμι
λύσαιμεν
1st
λυσαίμην
λυσαίμεθα
λύσαις (λύσειας)
λύσαιτε
2nd
λύσαιο
λύσαισθε
λύσαι (λύσειε)
λύσαιεν (λύσειαν)
3rd
λύσαιτο
λύσαιντο
The forms given in parentheses are the more common ones in prose, and it
is recommended that you learn to recognize them.
Note that the -οι and -αι of the optative third person singular (as in λύοι,
λύσοι, λίποι, and λύσαι) are considered long for the purposes of accent.
The present optative of δείκνυμι is formed by adding the endings in -οι to
the stem δεικνυ-: δεικνύοιμι, δεικνύοις, etc.
II. The ιη-type
Formation: Singular, stem + ιη + endings; plural, stem + ι or iη+ endings
Singular
Plural
-ιη-ν
1st
-ι-μεν
or
-ιη-μεν
-ιη-ς
2nd
-ι-τε
or
-ιη-τε
-ιη-
3rd
-ι-εν
or
-ιη-σαν
The ιη endings are used in the singular, but are seldom found in the plural.
The ι type is used throughout the middle.
Optative
259

Present Optative of εἰμί
Singular
Plural
εἴην
1st
εἶμεν
or
εἴημεν
εἴης
2nd
εἶτε
or
εἴητε
εἴη
3rd
εἶεν
or
εἴησαν
The perfect optative is formed by using the perfect participle (active or mid-
dle) with the optative of εἱμί: λελυκὼς εἴην (active), λελυμένος εἴην (middle-
passive).
Present Optative of Contract Verbs and Liquid Futures
The thematic vowel ο, joined with ιη (or ι), contracts with the stem vowel:
α + οι(η)

ῳ(η)
ε + οι(η)

οι(η)
These two types have the same 
ο + οι(η)

οι(η)
}
form in the optative, though it
 results from different contractions.
Examples:
νικάω
φιλέω
δηλόω
Active
Sg. 1
νικῴην
φιλοίην
δηλοίην
2
νικῴης
φιλοίης
δηλοίης
3
νικῴη
φιλοίη
δηλοίη
Pl. 1
νικῷμεν
φιλοῖμεν
δηλοῖμεν
(νικῴημεν)
(φιλοίημεν)
(δηλοίημεν)
2
νικῷτε
φιλοῖτε
δηλοῖτε
(νικῴητε)
(φιλοίητε)
(δηλοίητε)
3
νικῷεν
φιλοῖεν
δηλοῖεν
(νικῴησαν)
(φιλοίησαν)
(δηλοίησαν)
Middle-Passive
Sg. 1
νικῴμην
φιλοίμην
δηλοίμην
2
νικῷο
φιλοῖο
δηλοῖο
3
νικῷτο
φιλοῖτο
δηλοῖτο
Pl. 1
νικῴμεθα
φιλοίμεθα
δηλοίμεθα
2
νικῷσθε
φιλοῖσθε
δηλοῖσθε
3
νικῷντο
φιλοῖντο
δηλοῖντο
The liquid futures follow the paradigm for φιλέω in the optative.
Monosyllabic stem verbs like πλέω, δέω, which contract only before ε or ει,
show the ι-type optative: πλέοιμι, πλέοις, πλέοι, etc.
260
Lesson XIII

The Present and Aorist Optative of -μι Verbs
-μι verbs use the short form of the stem before ι of the optative. The vowel be-
fore the ι depends on the stem vowel of the verb.
ἵστημι
Present
Aorist
Active
Sg. 1st
ἱσταίην
σταίην
2nd
ἱσταίης
σταίης
3rd
ἱσταίη
σταίη
Pl. 1st
ἱσταῖμεν (ἱσταίημεν)
σταῖμεν (σταίημεν)
2nd
ἱσταῖτε (ἱσταίητε)
σταῖτε (σταίητε)
3rd
ἱσταῖεν (ἱσταίησαν)
σταῖεν (σταίησαν)
Middle-Passive
Sg. 1st
ἱσταίμην
2nd
ἱσταῖο
3rd
ἱσταῖτο
Pl. 1st
ἱσταίμεθα
2nd
ἱσταῖσθε
3rd
ἱσταῖντο
Other -μι verbs
δίδωμι
τίθημι
ἵημι
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
Pres.
διδοίην
διδοίμην
τιθείην
τιθείμην
ἱείην
ἱείμην
Aor.
δοίην
δοίμην
θείην
θείμην
-εἵην
-εἵμην
For full conjugation of these and other verbs, see Appendix I.
The Aorist Passive Optative
Formation: Stem + θε + ιη + endings
Singular
Plural
λυθείην
1st
λυθεῖμεν (λυθείημεν)
λυθείης
2nd
λυθεῖτε (λυθείητε)
λυθείη
3rd
λυθεῖεν (λυθείησαν)
Optative
261

The Future Passive Optative
Formation: Stem + θη + σο + ι-type endings in the middle
Singular
Plural
λυθησοίμην
1st
λυθησοίμεθα
λυθήσοιο
2nd
λυθήσοισθε
λυθήσοιτο
3rd
λυθήσοιντο
Some Uses of the Optative
The Optative in Independent Clauses
1. The Potential Optative
The optative with ἄν expresses a future possibility. This use corresponds to
the English potential forms using such auxiliaries as may, can, might, could,
would.
ἔλθοι ἄν.
He may/might/could/would come.
The negative used with the potential optative is οὐ.
2. Optative of Wish
The Optative Optative: the name optative is derived from the Latin “opto,”
wish. A future wish is expressed by the optative; εἴθε or εἰ γάρ, if only, would
that may be used with this construction. The negative is μή.
ἔλθοι.
εἴθε ἔλθοι.
May he/she come!
μὴ ἔλθοι.
εἴθε μὴ ἔλθοι.
May he/she not come!
Wishes that refer to the past are expressed by the secondary tenses of the
indicative (imperfect or aorist) with εἴθε or εἰ γάρ (which cannot be omitted).
The negative is μή.
εἴθε ἤρχετο.
If only he were coming!
εἴθε ἦλθεν.
If only he had come!
262
Lesson XIII

Conditions: Past General, Future Less Vivid
1. Past General Conditions
For a customary or repeated action, or for a general truth in past time, use εἰ
with the optative in the protasis and (usually) the imperfect indicative in the
apodosis.
Protasis: εἰ+ optative
Apodosis: imperfect indicative
εἰ ἔλθοι τις, ταῦτα ἐποιοῦμεν.
If (ever) anyone came, we (always)
did/used to do/would do these things.
A relative word may be substituted for εἰ:
ὅτε ἔλθοι τις, ταῦτα ἐποιοῦμεν.
Whenever anyone came, we did these
things.
2. Future Less Vivid Conditions
When the future condition is stated less distinctly (that is, as less likely to oc-
cur) the optative is used in both clauses. Compare this with the English
should-would condition: If I should go (or if I went, were to go), I would do these
things.
Protasis: εἰ+ optative
Apodosis: optative + ἄν
(cf. potential opt.)
εἰ ἔλθοιμι, ταῦτα ἂν ποιήσαιμι.
If I should come, I would do these
things.
This can also be expressed as a relative condition:
ὅτε ἔλθοιμι, ταῦτα ἂν ποιήσαιμι.
Whenever I should come, I would do
these things.
Exercise B
1. a. Give all the optative forms of παύω: pres. act. and m.-p.; fut. act., mid.,
and pass.; aor. act., mid., and pass.; perf. act and m.-p.
b. Give present optative of τιμάω and ποιέω.
c. Give present and aorist optative of ἀποδίδωμι, ἀφίστημι, ἀνατίθημι.
2. Fill in the optative forms in the synopses given in Lessons IX, X, XI, and XII.
Optative
263

3. Parse.
1. γένοιτο
8. γένοιο
15. βουλεύσαιντο
2. βάλοιμι
9. ἀγαπῷμεν
16. τεθήσοιο
3. τιθείην
10. ἀποκτείναιμεν
17. πέμψοις
4. τιμήσειαν
11. δοῖεν
18. λειφθεῖεν
5. λαμβάνοιτε
12. δοκοίης
19. ἀκουσοίμην
6. ζῴην
13. εἴησαν
20. βουληθείη
7. λάβοιεν
14. βάλλοισθε
4. Translate.
1. πάντες τήνδε τὴν γυναῖκα ἂν τιμήσειαν.
2. εἰ γὰρ νικῷμεν.
3. μὴ γένοιτο.
4. εἴποι ἄν τις τάδε.
5. καλῶς ἔχοιτε.
6. οὐκ ἂν εἴη ἄλογον εἰ τούτῳ τῷ ἀνδρὶ πιστεύοιτε;
7. τίς ἂν ὑμῖν πείθοιτο;
8. εἴ τις ψευδῆ εἴποι, οὐκ ἐπιστεύετο.
9. ὑμῖν βίον μακρὸν καὶ εὐτυχῆ θεοὶ δοῖεν.
10. αἰσχρὸν γὰρ ἂν εἴη εἰ ταῦτα ποιήσαιμεν.
11. εἰρήνην ἄγοιτε ἀεί.
12. ἡδέως ἂν μάθοιμι καὶ ἡδέως διδάσκοιμι.
13. ἡδέως ἄν σε ἴδοιμι.
14. τί ἂν ἔχειν βούλοιο;
15. εἴ τι ποιεῖν δύναιντο, ἐποίουν.
16. τί ἂν εἴη ἡ ἀρετή;
17. εἰ αὐτὸν ἴδοιμεν, ἀπηρχόμεθα.
18. εἰ γὰρ καλὸς κἀγαθὸς γένοιο.
19. οὐ ταῦτα ποιοίην ἄν.
20. εἰ γάρ μοι χρήματα πολλὰ εἴη.
Readings
1. A Prayer to Pan
ὦ φίλε Πάν τε καὶ ἄλλοι ὅσοι τῇδε θεοί, δοίητέ μοι καλῷ γενέσθαι τἄνδοθεν·
ἔξωθεν δὲ ὅσα ἔχω, τοῖς ἐντὸς εἶναί μοι φίλια. πλούσιον δὲ νομίζοιμι τὸν σοφόν·
τὸ δὲ χρυσοῦ πλῆθος εἴη μοι ὅσον μήτε φέρειν μήτε ἄγειν δύναιτο ἄλλος ἢ ὁ
σώφρων.
—Plato, Phaedrus
[ἔνδοθεν (from) within. ἔξωθεν (from) without. ἐντός inside. πλῆθος amount.
*ὅσος, -η, -ον as great as, as much as; pl. as many as.]
2. ὦ παῖ, γένοιο πατρὸς εὐτυχέστερος.
—Sophocles, Ajax
3. εἴθε φίλος ἡμῖν γένοιο.
—Xenophon
264
Lesson XIII

4. ἄτοπον γὰρ ἂν εἴη εἰ τις φαίη φιλεῖν τὸν Δία.
—Aristotle, Magna Moralia
[ἄτοπος, -ον strange. φαίη pres. opt. of φημί.]
5. ἀρετὴ ἂν εἴη κάλλος ψυχῆς.
—Plato, Republic
6. δοῦλοι γὰρ ἂν καὶ δεσπόται οὐκ ἄν ποτε γένοιντο φίλοι.
—Plato, Laws
7. εἰ μή ἐστι ζῷον ὁ ἄνθρωπος, λίθος ἂν εἴη ἢ ξύλον. οὐκ ἔστι δὲ λίθος ἢ ξύλον·
ἔμψυχον γάρ ἐστι καὶ ἐξ αὑτοῦ κινεῖται· ζῷον ἄρα ἐστίν.
—Diogenes Laertius, on Plato
[Animal, vegetable, or mineral? ξύλον, -ου, τό wood. ἔμψυχος, -ον animate.
κινέω set in motion; mid. move. ἄρα therefore.]
8. καὶ μὴν καὶ τὸ πᾶν ἀεὶ τοιοῦτον ἦν οἷον νῦν ἐστι, καὶ ἀεὶ τοιοῦτον ἔσται.
οὐθὲν γάρ ἐστιν εἰς ὃ μεταβαλεῖ. παρὰ γὰρ τὸ πᾶν οὐθέν ἐστιν, ὃ ἂν εἰσελθὸν
εἰς αὐτὸ τὴν μεταβολὴν ποιήσαιτο.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Epicurus
[καὶ μὴν καίand truly also. τοιοῦτον . . . οἷον such . . . as. οὐθέν = οὐδέν.]
9. ἔπειτα εἴ τις ἐν ὁδῷ κατὰ τὴν χώραν ἰδὼν φονευόμενον ἄνθρωπον ἢ τὸ
καθόλου βίαιόν τι πάσχοντα μὴ ῥύσαιτο δυνατὸς ὤν, θανάτῳ περιπεσεῖν
ὤφειλεν.
—Diodorus Siculus
[A law of the Egyptians. φονεύω murder. καθόλου (adv.) in general. βίαιος, -α,
-ον violent. ῥύομαι rescue, protect. περιπεσεῖν aor. inf. of περιπίπτω meet with
(+ dat.). ὀφείλω owe, be obliged.]
10. εἰ δέ γ ̓ἐστὶν ἐπιστήμη τις ἡ ἀρετή, δῆλον ὅτι διδακτὸν ἂν εἴη.
—Plato, Meno
[*δῆλον ὅτι it is clear that. διδακτός, -όν taught, teachable.]
11. τούτῳ μὲν οὕτως εὐτυχεῖν δοῖεν θεοί.
—Aeschylus, Seven against Thebes
12. θεῶν διδόντων οὐκ ἂν ἐκφύγοις κακά.
—Aeschylus, Seven against Thebes
[ἐκφύγοις < ἐκ + φεύγω.]
13. Prometheus: νοσοῖμ ̓ἄν, εἰ νόσημα τοὺς ἐχθροὺς στυγεῖν.
Hermes: εἴης φορητὸς οὐκ ἂν, εἰ πράσσοις καλῶς.
Prometheus: ὤμοι.
Hermes: ὤμοι; τόδε Ζεὺς τοὔπος οὐκ ἐπίσταται.
Prometheus: ἀλλ ̓ἐκδιδάσκει πανθ ̓ ὁ γηράσκων χρόνος.
—Aeschylus, Prometheus
[νόσημα, -ατος, τό = νόσος. στυγέω hate. φορητός, -όν bearable. ὤμοι a cry of
distress. τοὔπος = τὸ ἔπος. ἐκ + διδάσκω. γηράσκω grow old.]
Optative
265

14. ὑμῖν θεοὶ δοῖεν ἐκπέρσαι Πριάμοιο πόλιν.
—Homer, Iliad
[ἐκπέρσαι aor. inf. of ἐκπέρθω destroy utterly. Πριάμοιο = Πριάμου of Priam.]
15. οὐ πολλὴ ἂν ἀλογία εἴη, εἰ φοβοῖτο τὸν θάνατον ὁ τοιοῦτος;
—Plato, Phaedo
[ἀλογία, -ας, ἡlack of reason, folly. *τοιοῦτος, τοιαύτη, τοιοῦτον such, of such a
kind.]
16. Creon: ἀλλ ̓ἐν χρόνῳ γνώσει τάδ ̓ἀσφαλῶς ἐπεὶ
χρόνος δίκαιον ἄνδρα δείκνυσιν μόνος· 
κακὸν δὲ κἂν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ γνοίης μιᾷ.
—Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus
[ἀσφαλῶς firmly. γνοίης aor. opt. of γιγνώσκω.]
17. Watchman: τὰ δ ̓ἄλλα σιγῶ · βοῦς ἐπὶ γλώσσῃ μέγας
βέβηκεν· οἶκος δ ̓αὐτός, εἰ φθογγὴν λάβοι,
σαφέστατ ̓ ἂν λέξειεν· ὡς ἑκὼν ἐγὼ
μαθοῦσιν αὐδῶ κοὐ μαθοῦσι λήθομαι.
—Aeschylus, Agamemnon
[βοῦς, βοός, ὁ/ἡbull, cow, ox. φθογγή, -ῆς, ἡvoice. σαφής, -ές clear. αὐδάω speak.
κοὐ= καὶ οὐ. λήθομαι = ἐπιλαν́ θανομαι forget.]
18. εὖ γὰρ ἴστε, ἑὰν ἐμὲ ἀποκτείνητε τοιοῦτον ὄντα οἷον ἐγὼ λέγω, οὐκ ἐμὲ
μείζω βλάψετε ἢ ὑμᾶς αὐτούς· ἐμὲ μὲν γὰρ οὐδὲν ἂν βλάψειεν οὔτε Μέλητος
οὔτε Ἄνυτος· οὐδὲ γὰρ ἂν δύναιτο· οὐ γὰρ οἶμαι θεμιτὸν εἶναι ἀμείνονι ἀνδρὶ
ὑπὸ χείρονος βλάπτεσθαι. ἀποκτείνειε μεντἂν ἴσως ἢ ἐξελάσειεν ἢ ἀτιμώσειεν·
ἀλλὰ ταῦτα οὗτος μὲν ἴσως οἴεται καὶ ἄλλος τίς που μεγάλα κακά, ἐγὼ δ ̓οὐκ
οἴομαι, ἀλλὰ πολὺ μᾶλλον ποιεῖν ἃ οὗτος νυνὶ ποιεῖ, ἄνδρα ἀδίκως ἐπιχειρεῖν
ἀποκτεινύναι.
—Plato, Apology
[ἴστε imperative of οἶδα be assured. θεμιτός, -όν lawful, in the scheme of things.
μεντἂν = μέντοι ἄν. ἐξελάσειεν aor. opt. of ἐξ-ελαύνω. ἀτιμόω dishonor, de-
prive of civic rights. ἀποκτείνυμι = ἀποκτείνω.]
SEQUENCE OF MOODS
AND DEPENDENT CLAUSES
Sequence of Moods
In certain types of subordinate clauses, either the subjunctive or the optative
may be used. Which mood is to be used depends upon the tense of the verb
266
Lesson XIII

in the main clause. The subjunctive, you will remember, has primary endings
and is associated with primary tenses of the indicative. The optative has sec-
ondary endings and is used, as a rule, with secondary tenses of the indicative.
Primary Tenses
Secondary Tenses
present
imperfect
future
aorist
perfect, future perfect
pluperfect
subjunctive (all tenses)
optative (all tenses)
Some examples:
1. Purpose Clauses
Purpose clauses express the purpose of the action of the verb. They take the
subjunctive if the tense of the main verb is primary, the optative if it is sec-
ondary. ἵνα or ὅπως (in order that/that) is used in this construction. The negative
is μή.
ἐρχόμεθα ἵνα ταῦτα ποιῶμεν/ποιήσωμεν.
We are coming so that we may do these things.
ἤλθομεν, ἵνα ταῦτα ποιοῖμεν/ποιήσαιμεν.
We went so that we might do these things.
2. Object Clauses with μήafter verbs of fearing
After verbs of fearing, μήintroduces a construction in which the subjunctive
is used if the main verb is in a primary tense, the optative if it is secondary.
μήin this type of clause means that, lest. The negative is μὴ οὐ.
φοβούμεθα μὴ αὐτὸν ἴδωμεν.
We fear that we may see him.
φοβούμεθα μὴ οὐκ αὐτὴν ἴδωμεν.
We fear that we may not see him.
ἐφοβούμεθα μὴ οὐκ αὐτὸν ἴδοιμεν.
We feared that we might not see him.
The Optative in Indirect Statement after ὅτι
or ὡς
After secondary tenses (of the verb of saying), a tense of the optative is usu-
ally substituted for the same tense of the indicative after ὅτι or ὡς in indirect
statement. The indicative may be retained for a vivid recreation of the tense
of the original. This construction is the only common use of the future opta-
tive, which is used as a substitute for the future indicative.
Sequence of Moods and Dependent Clauses
267

Examples:
εἶπεν ὅτι ταῦτα ποιεῖ./ εἶπεν ὅτι ταῦτα ποιοίη.
He said that he was doing these things. (ταῦτα ποιῶ)
εἶπεν ὅτι ταῦτα ποιήσει./ εἶπεν ὅτι ταῦτα ποιήσοι.
He said that he would do these things. (ταῦτα ποιήσω)
εἶπεν ὅτι ταῦτα ἐποίησεν./ εἶπεν ὅτι ταῦτα ποιήσαι/ποιήσειεν.
He said that he did/had done these things. (ταῦτα ἐποίησα)
εἶπεν ὅτι ταῦτα πεποίηκεν./ εἶπεν ὅτι ταῦτα πεποιηκὼς εἴη.
He said that he had done these things. (ταῦτα πεποίηκα)
Exercise C
1. Write in Greek.
1. Oh, may that wicked man not come!
2. Let us go so that we may see the philosopher. [wise man/wise
woman]
3. I would like to see her. [I would gladly . . .]
4. If you should leave this place, you would not see them.
5. If you leave this place, you will not see them.
6. It would be difficult to know all things well.
7. We went to the philosopher’s house in order that we might learn
many fine things.
8. A wise and just man would not say the things which you are
 saying.
9. If (ever) a man speaks the truth, he is (always) believed by good
men.
10. We wrote letters to our absent friends so that we might tell them
that these things had taken place.
11. She said that she would write. (Two forms)
12. We feared that something bad might happen.
Readings
1. καὶ ὃς εἶπεν· ‘ὁ πατὴρ ἐπιμελούμενος ὅπως ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς γενοίμην, ἠνάγκασέ
με πάντα τὰ Ὁμήρου ἔπη μαθεῖν· καὶ νῦν δυναίμην ἂν Ἰλιάδα ὅλην καὶ
Ὀδύσσειαν ἀπὸ στόματος εἰπεῖν.’
—Xenophon, Symposium
[ὃς εἶπεν he said. ἐπιμελέομαι take care of, pay attention to. ἀναγκάζω compel.
ἀπὸ στόματος from the mouth, by heart.]
2. πρὸς τὸ φλυαροῦν μειράκιον, ‘διὰ τοῦτο,’ εἶπε, ‘δύο ὦτα ἔχομεν, στόμα δὲ
ἕν, ἵνα πλείονα μὲν ἀκούωμεν, ἥττονα δὲ λέγωμεν.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Zeno
[φλυαρέω babble, talk nonsense. μειράκιον, -ου, τόadolescent, teenager. οὖς, ὠτός,
τόear.]
268
Lesson XIII

3. Deianeira: ταῦτ ̓οὖν φοβοῦμαι μὴ πόσις μὲν Ἡρακλῆς
ἐμὸς καλῆται, τῆς νεωτέρας δ ̓ἀνήρ.
—Sophocles, Trachinian Women
[πόσις (no gen.), ὁhusband, spouse.]
4. λόγοι δὲ ἐκεῖνοι οἱ περὶ δικαιοσύνης τε καὶ τῆς ἄλλης ἀρετῆς ποῦ ἡμῖν
ἔσονται; ἀλλὰ δὴ τῶν παίδων ἕνεκα βούλει ζῆν, ἵνα αὐτοὺς ἐκθρέψῃς καὶ
παιδεύσῃς. τί δέ εἰς Θετταλίαν αὐτοὺς ἀγαγὼν θρέψεις τε καὶ παιδεύσεις,
ξένους ποιήσας, ἵνα καὶ τοῦτο ἀπολαύσωσιν; ἢ τοῦτο μὲν οὔ, αὐτοῦ δὲ
τρεφόμενοι σοῦ ζῶντος βέλτιον θρέψονται καὶ παιδεύσονται, μὴ ξυνόντος
σοῦ αὐτοῖς; οἱ γὰρ ἐπιτήδειοι οἱ σοὶ ἐπιμελήσονται αὐτῶν. πότερον ἐὰν εἰς
Θετταλίαν ἀποδημήσῃς, ἐπιμελήσονται, ἐὰν δὲ εἰς Ἅιδου ἀποδημήσῃς, οὐχὶ
ἐπιμελήσονται;
—Plato, Crito
[The laws (νόμοι) speak to Socrates. ποῦwhere? ἀλλὰ δήoh, but. ἕνεκα (with
a preceding gen.) for the sake of. ἐκθρέψῃς < ἐκτρέφω: τρέφω, θρέψω, ἔθρεψα
rear, bring up. Θετταλία, -ας, ἡThessaly. ἀπολαύσω enjoy, profit. αὐτοῦhere.
θρέψονται καὶ παιδεύσονται future middles used in a passive sense.
ἐπιμελέομαι (+ gen.) take care of. ἐπιτήδειος, -ου, ὁclose friend. εἰς Ἅιδου to
(the house of) Hades. ἀποδημέω go abroad.]
5. ἠρώτησέ τις αὐτὸν εἰ λήθοι θεοὺς ἄνθρωπος ἀδικῶν· ‘ἀλλ ̓ οὐδὲ διανοούμενος,’
ἔφη.
—Diogenes Laertius, on Thales
[λήθω = λανθάνω.]
6. πρὸς τὸν πυθόμενον τί πρότερον γεγόνοι, νὺξ ἢ ἡμέρα, ‘ἡ νύξ,’ ἔφη, ‘μιᾷ
ἡμέρᾳ πρότερον.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Thales
[πρότερον earlier.]
7. ἔλεγέ τε τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους ζῆν ἵν ̓ἐσθίοιεν· αὐτὸς δὲ ἐσθίειν ἵνα
ζῴη.
—Diogenes Laertius, on Socrates
[ἐσθίω eat.]
ὑμεῖς μὲν οὐχ ὁρᾶτε, ἐγὼ δ ὁρῶ.
ἐλαύνομαι δὲ κοὐκέτ ̓ἂν μείναιμ ̓ἐγώ.
You do not see them, but I see them.
I am hounded and cannot stay any longer.
—Aeschylus, Libation Bearers
Sequence of Moods and Dependent Clauses
269

ΤΑ ΠΑΝΤΑ ΡΕΙ
Heraclitus, one of the Ionian philosophers, was
born in Ephesus, a major city on the west coast of
what is now Turkey, and was in his prime toward
the end of the 6th century B.C.E. His philosophy
centers around the Logos, according to which all
things happen, and for this reason he is credited
with being the first of the Greek philosophers to
concern himself with what is beyond the physical.
He is ranked with Parmenides as one of the two
most significant philosophers before Socrates.
Heraclitus believed in the unity of all things:
Frag. 50 οὐκ ἐμοῦ ἀλλὰ τοῦ λόγου ακούσαντας
ὁμολογεῖν σοφόν ἓν πάντα εἶναι.
It is wise for those listening, not to me, but to the Logos to agree that all things are one.
And in the unity of opposites:
Frag. 60 ὁδὸς ἄνω κάτω μία καὶ ὡυτή.
The road up and down is one and the same.
Frag. 67 ὁ θεός ἡμέρη εὐφρόνη, χειμὼν θέρος, πόλεμος εἰρήνη, κόρος λιμός. . . .
God is day-night, winter-summer, war-peace, satiety-famine. . . .
Change is real and there is unending war (or strife) between opposites to
maintain balance in the universe:
Frag. 53 πόλεμος πάντων μὲν πατήρ ἐστι, πάντων δὲ βασιλεύς. . . .
War [strife] is the father of all and king of all.
On change and the river:
Frag. 218 (Plato, Cratylus 402a) λέγει που Ἡράκλειτος ὅτι πάντα χωρεῖ καὶ ὀυδὲν
μένει, καὶ ποταμοῦ ῥοῇ ἀπεικάζων τὰ ὄντα λέγει ὡς δὶς ἐς τὸν αὐτὸν ποταμὸν οὐκ
ἂν ἐμβαίης.
Somewhere Heraclitus says that everything is in motion and nothing stays put, and
comparing existing things to the flow of a river he says that you cannot step into the
same river twice.
The world is eternal fire:
Frag. 220 κόσμον τόνδε οὔτε τις θεῶν οὔτε ἀνθρώπων ἐποίησεν, ἀλλ’ ἦν ἀεὶ καὶ
ἔστιν καὶ ἐσται· πῦρ ἀείζωον, ἁπτόμενον μέτρα καὶ ἀποσβεννύμενον μέτρα.
Neither god nor man created this world-order, but it was always, is, and will be: ever-
lasting fire, kindling in measures and dying out in measures.
It is not easy to know:
Frag. 54 φύσις κρύπτεσθαι φιλεῖ.
Nature has a tendency to hide itself.
The Greek shop sign was photographed in the 1990s outside a boutique in
Athens. Besides being a tribute to the great philosopher was it an invitation
to passersby to come in and see what is new or an optimistic reference to the
flow of merchandise? One wonders if the shop is still there.
270
Lesson XIII
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

LESSON XIV
Imperative Mood, Vocative Case
In this lesson you will learn how to address other people with the imperative mood
and the vocative case. Among other useful things, you will learn to pray for rain.
271
IMPERATIVE
One last mood of the Greek verb remains to be studied, the imperative. Its
meaning is simple enough: it gives a command or issues a prohibition. It is
found in three tenses: present, aorist, and perfect. All commands refer to fu-
ture time, and so, once more, the tenses of the imperative refer to aspect rather
than time. The imperative is not augmented.
Present Imperative:
Do it: keep on doing, be doing!
Aorist Imperative:
Do it (once)!
Perfect Imperative:
Get it done!
The perfect imperative expresses a command that is meant to be decisive or
permanent. (It is very rare.)
The imperative is found in the second and third persons: (you) do it; let
him/her/it do it; let it be done. There is no first person imperative, the hortatory
subjunctive (let’s do it) being used instead.
The negative used with the imperative is μή. But μήwith the aorist sub-
junctive is used instead of the aorist imperative. That is to say, for a prohibi-
tion use:
μή+ the present imperative or μή+ the aorist subjunctive
The future indicative can also be used to express a command that is famil-
iar in tone; the negative is οὐ. This is common in New Testament Greek (for
commandments) but is also used in classical Greek.

Forms of the Imperative
Act. and Pass.
Middle
Sg.*
Pl.
Sg.*
Pl.
2nd
-
-τε
-
-σθε
3rd
-τω
-ντων
-σθω
-σθων
*The 2nd sg. endings need to be memorized individually: -ε, -ου,
-[σ]ον, -[σ]αι.
Imperatives of -ω verbs
Present
1st Aorist
2nd Aorist Perfect 
Active
Sg.
2nd
λῦε
λῦσον
λίπε
λελυκὼς ἴσθι
(λέλυκε) 
3rd
λυέτω
λυσάτω
λιπέτω
λελυκὼς ἔστω
(λελυκέτω)
Pl.
2nd
λύετε
λύσατε
λίπετε
λελυκότες ἔστε
(λελύκετε)
3rd
λυόντων
λυσάντων
λιπόντων
λελυκότες
ὄντων
Middle
Sg.
2nd
λύου
λῦσαι
λιποῦ
λέλυσο
3rd
λυέσθω
λυσάσθω
λιπέσθω
λελύσθω
Pl.
2nd
λύεσθε
λύσασθε
λίπεσθε
λέλυσθε
3rd
λυέσθων
λυσάσθων
λιπέσθων
λελύσθων
Aorist
Passive
Sg.
2nd
λύθητι
3rd
λυθήτω
Pl.
2nd
λύθητε
3rd
λυθέντων
Note: the 2nd singular aorist active imperative of several common
verbs has an accent shift: εἰπέ (εἶπον); ἰδέ (ὁράω); ἐλθέ (ἔρχομαι); λαβέ
(λαμβάνω); εὑρέ (εὑρίσκω).
The periphrastic forms of the perfect active imperative are the ones
in general use.
Imperatives of contract verbs follow the rules for contraction. The endings
with thematic vowel, as given with the present of λύω, are the ones to be used
to form the present imperative of contract verbs.
272
Lesson XIV

Present Imperative of Contract Verbs
-αω
-εω
-οω
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
Sg.
2nd
νίκα
νικῶ
φίλει
φιλοῦ
δήλου
δηλοῦ
3rd
νικάτω
νικάσθω
φιλείτω
φιλείσθω
δηλούτω
δηλούσθω
Pl.
2nd
νικᾶτε
νικᾶσθε
φιλεῖτε
φιλεῖσθε
δηλοῦτε
δηλοῦσθε
3rd 
νικώντων
νικάσθων
φιλούντων
φιλείσθων
δηλούντων
δηλούσθων
The Present Imperative of εἰμί
Singular
Plural
ἴσθι
2nd
ἔστε
ἔστω
3rd
ἔστων or ὄντων
Imperatives of -μι verbs
-νυμι Present Imperatives
Active
Middle
Sg.
2nd
δείκνυ
δείκνυσο
3rd
δεικνύτω
δεικνύσθω
Pl.
2nd
δείκνυτε
δείκνυσθε
3rd
δεικνύντων
δεικνύσθων
Reduplicating -μι Present and 2nd Aorist Imperatives
Present
2nd Aorist
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
ἵστημι
Sg.
2nd
ἵστη
ἵστασο
στῆθι
3rd
ἱστάτω
ἱστάσθω
στήτω
Pl.
2nd
ἵστατε
ἵστασθε
στῆτε
3rd
ἱστάντων
ἱστάσθων
στάντων
δίδωμι
Sg.
2nd
δίδου
δίδοσο
δός
δοῦ
3rd
διδότω
διδόσθω
δότω
δόσθω
Pl.
2nd
δίδοτε
δίδοσθε
δότε
δόσθε
3rd
διδόντων
διδόσθων
δόντων
δόσθων
τίθημι
Sg.
2nd
τίθει
τίθεσο
θές
θοῦ
3rd
τιθέτω
τιθέσθω
θέτω
θέσθω
Pl.
2nd
τίθετε
τίθεσθε
θέτε
θέσθε
3rd
τιθέντων
τιθέσθων
θέντων
θέσθων
Imperative
273

Notes on the imperative
The only forms of the imperative which will present any difficulty are
the second person singular forms. The others are easily recognizable
from their distinctive endings which are added with the thematic
vowel in thematic tenses, or directly to the stem in non-thematic forms.
The second plural of the present is identical to the second plural in-
dicative, but in most instances the context will tell which is intended.
The second person singular. Active and passive: The original ending
is -θι which is retained in some -μι verbs and in the aorist passive
(where it changes to -τι after -θη-). The thematic tenses of -ω verbs
(present and second aorist) have only the thematic vowel -ε as end-
ing. The -εω verbs have -ει (ε-ε > ει), but the accent will be on the
penult: δοκεῖseems; δόκει think!, seem! The first aorist active has -ον.
A mnemonic device for the first aorist imperative is ἐλέησον (as in
Κύριε ἐλέησον, Kyrie Eleison, part of the Christian liturgy and a pop-
ular song). Middle or m.-p.: the ending is -σο. In the thematic tenses -
σ- drops out: -εσο > -εο > -ου. The -μι verbs usually retain the -σ-. The
first aorist has -σαι.
An imperative (or hortatory subjunctive) may be strengthened by
having ἄγε, φέρε, ἴθι (the present active second singular imperatives
of ἄγω, φέρω, εἶμι go) precede it. They are translated come! or come on!
and may be used with 2nd or 3rd person singular or plural.
VOCATIVE
The vocative case is used for direct address and in exclamations. In conver-
sation, ὦis added for politeness, but usually need not be translated.
The first declension -η or -α types, all neuters, and all plurals (of any de-
clension) have vocatives like the nominative.
ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι
gentlemen of Athens!
ὦ Μοῦσα
Oh Muse!
ὦ δόξα, δόξα
Ah, reputation, reputation!
ὦ Σώκρατες, ὦ Σωκρατίδιον
Socrates, my dear (little) Socrates
—Aristophanes, Clouds
The first declension masculines in -ης or -ας have vocative singular in -α.
(Those in -της have short -ᾰ: most others have long -ᾱ.)
ὦ πολῖτα (-ᾰ)
ὦ νεανία (-ᾱ)
274
Lesson XIV

The second declension nouns in -ος have vocative in -ε.
ὦ ἄνθρωπε
sir!
The third declension vocative singular presents some variety. It is sometimes
the same as the nominative and sometimes the same as the base.
Most nouns ending in a mute (except those in -ιδ-), in a nasal, or a liquid (if
accented on the ultima) have vocative like the nominative.
ὦ φύλαξ
ὦ ποιμήν
Most others have vocative like the base:
ὦ δαῖμον
(δαίμων)
ὦ ἐλπί
(ἐλπίς)
(base ἐλπιδ-)
ὦ παῖ
(παῖς)
(base παιδ-)
ὦ πόλι
(πόλις)
(base πολι-)
ὦ Σώκρατες
(Σωκράτης)
ὦ πάτερ
(πατήρ)
ὦ ἄνερ
(ἀνήρ)
VERBALS IN -τέος AND -τέον
Verbal adjectives ending in -τέος and -τέον are derived from verb stems. Most
are formed from the aorist passive stem, omitting the -θη; but some are de-
veloped from the present stem.
ποιητέος
(ἐποιήθην)
ἀκουστέος
(ἠκούσθην)
They express necessity and are used with the dative of agent. The neuter is
used as an impersonal.
ἐμοὶ ἀκουστέον
It is necessary for me to hear 
ποιητέον
It must be done 
Verbals in -τέος and -τέον
275

Exercises
1. Fill in the imperative forms of the synopses given in Lessons IX, X, XI,
and XII.
2. Form all the imperatives.
1. παύω    
2. ὁράω      3. ποιέω
Readings
1. ἢ λέγε τι σιγῆς κρεῖττον ἢ σιγὴν ἔχε.
—Menander
2. φέρε δή μοι ἀπόκριναι, ἔφη· ἔστιν ὅ τι ἐπίστασαι; πάνυ γε ἦν δ’ ἐγώ, καὶ
πολλά, σμικρά γε.
—Plato, Euthydemus
[The subject of ἔφη is Euthydemus; ἐγώrefers to Socrates. ἦν δ’ ἐγω I said.
σμικρός = μικρός.]
3. ὑπολάβοι ἂν οὖν τις ὑμῶν ἴσως· ἀλλ’, ὦ Σώκρατες, τὸ σὸν τί ἐστι πρᾶγμα;
πόθεν αἱ διαβολαί σοι αὗται γεγόνασιν; . . . λέγε οὖν ἡμῖν τί ἐστιν, ἵνα μὴ ἡμεῖς
περὶ σοῦ αὐτοσχεδιάζωμεν. ταυτί μοι δοκεῖ δίκαια λέγειν ὁ λέγων, κἀγὼ ὑμῖν
πειράσομαι ἀποδεῖξαι, τί ποτ’ ἔστιν τοῦτο ὅ ἐμοὶ πεποίηκε τό τε ὄνομα καὶ τὴν
διαβολήν. ἀκούετε δή. καὶ ἴσως μὲν δόξω τισὶν ὑμῶν παίζειν, εὖ μέντοι ἴστε,
πᾶσαν ὑμῖν τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἐρῶ. ἐγὼ γὰρ, ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, δι’ οὐδὲν ἀλλ’ ἢ
διὰ σοφίαν τινὰ τοῦτο τὸ ὄνομα ἔσχηκα.
—Plato, Apology
[ὑπολαμβάνω suppose, interpose. *πόθεν (from) where. *διαβολή, -ῆς, ἡslander.
αὐτοσχεδιάζω jump to conclusions. ταυτί= an emphatic form of ταῦτα.
*πειράομαι try. παίζω play, joke, kid. *ἴστε imperative of οἶδα. *ἐρῶI will tell.]
4. ἄρκτου παρούσης ἴχνη μὴ ζήτει.
—Bacchylides
[ἄρκτος, -ου ὁ/ἡbear. ἴχνος, -ους, τόtrack, footprint.]
5. Eteocles: μῆτερ, πάρειμι· τὴν χάριν δὲ σοὶ δίδους
ἦλθον. τί χρὴ δρᾶν; ἀρχέτω δέ τις λόγου.
—Euripides, Phoenician Women
6. πιστεύω γὰρ δίκαια εἶναι ἃ λέγω καὶ μηδεὶς ὑμῶν προσδοκησάτω ἄλλως.
—Plato, Apology
[προσδοκάω expect, think.]
7. φεῦγε, φεῦγε
κριθή σε διώκει.
—A charm to cure sties.
[Take nine barley-corns and prick the sty with each as you chant. κριθή, -ῆς,
ἡbarley.]
276
Lesson XIV

8. ὗσον, ὗσον, ὦ φίλε Ζεῦ,
κατὰ τῆς ἀρούρας τῆς Ἀθηνῶν
καὶ κατὰ τῆς Πεδιῶν.
—Folk Song
[ὗσον aor. imperative of ὕει it is raining. ἀρούρα, -ας, ἡfarmland. Πεδιῶν the
plain (called The Plains) of Attica.]
9. ὑπὸ παντὶ λίθῳ σκορπίον, ὦ ᾿ταῖρε, φυλάσσεο.
—Praxilla
[᾿ταῖρε = ἑταῖρε. σκορπίος, ἡscorpion. φυλάσσεο = φυλάττου.]
10. ἀλλ’ εἰπὲ πᾶν τἀληθές.
—Sophocles, Trachinian Women
11. ἔστω δὴ τὸ ἀδικεῖν τὸ βλάπτειν ἑκόντα παρὰ τὸν νόμον.
—Aristotle, Rhetoric
12. μέμνησο, μὴ φόβος σε νικάτω φρένας.
—Aeschylus, Eumenides
[*φόβος, -ου, ὁfear. *φρήν, φρενός, ἡheart, mind; wits, senses.]
13. καὶ βάδιζε μετ’ εἰρήνης.
—Eusebius
[βαδίζω go, walk.]
14. ὑμεῖς δὲ ἀγαπᾶτε τοὺς μισοῦντας ὑμᾶς, καὶ οὐχ ἕξετε ἐχθρόν.
—Διδαχή (Teaching of the Twelve Apostles)
15. ἡ μὲν οὖν ὁδὸς τῆς ζωῆς ἐστιν αὕτη· πρῶτον ἀγαπήσεις τὸν θεὸν τὸν
ποιήσαντά σε, δεύτερον τὸν πλησίον σου ὡς σεαυτόν· πάντα δὲ ὅσα ἐὰν
θελήσῃς μὴ γίνεσθαί σοι, καὶ σὺ ἄλλῳ μὴ ποίει.
—Διδαχή
[The future can be used for a command that is personal in tone. *ὁ πλησίον
(ὤν) one’s neighbor.]
16. ὦ παῖδες Ἑλλήνων ἴτε
ἐλευθεροῦτε πατρίδ’, ἐλευθεροῦτε δὲ
παῖδας, γυναῖκας, θεῶν τε πατρῴων ἕδη
θήκας τε προγόνων, νῦν ὑπὲρ πάντων ἀγών.
—Aeschylus, Persians
[ἴτε imperative of *εἶμι go. ἐλευθερόω set free. πατρῷος, -α, -ον of/from one’s
father. *ἕδος, -ους, τόseat, abode. θήκη, -ης, ἡgrave. πρόγονος, -ου, ὁancestor.]
17. σκόπει δέ με ἐξ ἐμαυτοῦ.
—Diogenes Laertius, quoting Bion
[*σκοπέω look for.]
Verbals in -τέος and -τέον
277

18. ὦ ξεῖν’, ἄγγειλον Λακεδαιμονίοις ὅτι τῇδε
κείμεθα, τοῖς κείνων ῥήμασι πειθόμενοι.
—Simonides
[In memory of the Spartans who died at Thermopylae. ξεῖν’= ξένε. τῇδε here,
in this place. *κείνων = ἐκείνων. ῥῆμα, -ατος, τόword.]
19. χάριτας δικαίας καὶ δίδου καὶ λάμβανε.
—Menander
20. μέμνησο νέος ὢν ὡς γέρων ἔσῃ ποτέ.
—Menander
[*ποτέsome day.]
21. ἀνδρῶν δὲ φαύλων ὅρκον εἰς ὕδωρ γράφε.
—Menander
[*φαῦλος, -η, -oν cheap, petty, bad. *ὅρκος, -ου, ὁoath.]
22. Ζεῦ σῶτερ, εἴπερ ἐστὶ δυνατόν, σῷζέ με.
—Menander
[*σωτήρ, -ῆρος, ὁsavior, deliverer.]
23. εἰς Μύνδον ἐλθὼν καὶ θεασάμενος μεγάλας τὰς πύλας, μικρὰν δὲ τὴν
πόλιν, ‘ἄνδρες Μύνδιοι,’ ἔφη, ‘κλείσατε τὰς πύλας, μὴ ἡ πόλις ὑμῶν ἐξέλθῃ.’
—Diogenes Laertius, on Diogenes the Cynic
[θεάομαι look at/upon. πύλη, -ης, ἡgate. κλείω close.]
24. βασιλεὺς βασιλέων Ὀσυμανδύας εἰμί. εἰ δέ τις εἰδέναι βούλεται πηλίκος
εἰμὶ καὶ ποῦ κεῖμαι, νικάτω τι τῶν ἐμῶν ἔργων.
—Diodorus Siculus
[“Look upon my works, ye mighty, and despair.” πηλίκος, -η, -ον how great.]
25. τὸ γνῶθι σαυτόν ἐστιν, ἂν τὰ πράγματα
εἰδῇς τὰ σαυτοῦ καὶ τί σοι ποιητέον.
—Menander
[εἰδῇς subjunctive of οἶδα.]
26. Herdsman: οἴμοι, πρὸς αὐτῷ γ’ εἰμὶ δεινῷ λέγειν.
Oedipus: κἄγωγ’ ἀκούειν· ἀλλ’ ὅμως ἀκουστέον.
—Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus
[δεινόν, τόterror, danger. κἄγωγ’ = καί ἐγωγε.]
27. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν πολέμῳ καὶ ἐν δικαστηρί ῳ καὶ πανταχοῦ ποιητέον, ἃ ἂν
κελεύῃ ἡ πόλις καὶ ἡ πατρίς, ἢ πείθειν αὐτὴν ᾗ τὸ δίκαιον πέφυκε, βιάζεσθαι
δὲ οὐχ ὅσιον μητέρα οὔτε πατέρα, πολὺ δὲ τούτων ἔτι ἧττον τὴν πατρίδα;
—Plato, Crito
[*δικαστήριον, -ου, τόcourt (of justice). πανταχοῦeverywhere. ᾗin what way.
βιάζομαι do violence to. *ὅσιος, -α, -ον sanctioned by the law of nature.]
28. ἤδη σοι τέλος ἐχέτω ὁ λόγος.
—Plato, Phaedrus
278
Lesson XIV

Verbals in -τέος and -τέον
279
δός που στῶ καὶ τὴν γῆν κινήσω.
Give [me] a place to stand and I will move the
earth.
—Archimedes
Translate the following, and rejoice:
τὸ δὲ τέλος μέγιστον ἁπάντων.
—Aristotle, Poetics
Two Women Poets
Sappho, a lyric poet of the sixth century B.C.E., was
born on the island of Lesbos. Of her Byron wrote:
The isles of Greece, the isles of Greece 
where burning Sappho loved and sung. . . .
Almost nothing is known for certain about her
life, and of her nine volumes of poetry very little,
and most of that tattered, is extant. Still, it is enough to show us why she was
so admired that she was called ἡ δεκάτη Μοῦσα, the tenth Muse. Ancient critics
praised her most for her skillful arrangement of sounds, “the natural kinships
and combinations of her letters” (in the words of Dionysius of Halicarnassus).
A few examples must suffice here, but read them aloud.
160  τάδε νῦν ἐταίραις
ταῖς ἐμαῖς τέρπνα κάλως ἀείσω
[1-2 τάδε τέρπνα < τερπνός delightful. 1 ἐταίραις = ἑταίραις: the Aeolic dialect
drops rough breathings. 2 κάλως = καλῶς: in the Aeolic dialect the accent is
recessive. ἀείσω < ἀείδω sing. ]
168B  δέδυκε μὲν ἀ σελάννα
καὶ Πληΐδες· μέσαι δὲ
νύκτες, παρὰ δ’ ἔρχετ’ ὤρα,
ἔγω δὲ μόνα κατεύδω.
[1 δέδυκε < δύω sink, set. ἀ σελάννα = ἡ σελήνη the moon. 2–3 μέσαι νύκτες the
middle of the night, midnight. 3 παρὰ δ’ ἔρχετ’ = παρέρχεται < παρέρχομαι go by,
pass. 4 μόνα = μόνη. κατεύδω = καθεύδω sleep, lie down in bed, pass the night.]
Photo by L. J. Luschnig.

Praxilla, a lyric poet of the fifth century B.C.E. from Sicyon, was best known
for her drinking songs and hymns. In this poem, the dying Adonis laments
the things he will miss. The poem was famous for its supposed bathos: “more
vapid than Praxilla’s Adonis” became proverbial. But one person’s bathos is
another’s pathos. Individual details of everyday life make popular songs ap-
pealing. The poem survives because Zenobius (second century C.E.) quotes it
in explaining the proverb ἠλιθιώτερος τοῦ Πραξίλλης Ἀδώνιδος. ἠλίθιος silly.
κάλλιστον μὲν ἐγὼ λείπω φάος ἠελίοιο,
δεύτερον ἄστρα φαεινὰ σεληναίης τε πρόσωπον
ἠδὲ καὶ ὡραίους σικύους καὶ μῆλα καὶ ὄγχνας.
[1 φάος ἠελίοιο = φῶς ἡλίου. 2 φαεινά(φανός) radiant, shining. σεληναίης =
σελήνης < σελήνη. 3 ἠδὲ καίand also. ὡραῖος timely, ripe. σίκυος cucumber.
μῆλον apple. ὄγχνη pear.] 
280
Lesson XIV

APPENDIX I: PARADIGMS
281
1. ARTICLE
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n
N
ὁ
ἡ
τό
οἱ
αἱ
τά
G
τοῦ
τῆς
τοῦ
τῶν
τῶν
τῶν
D
τῷ
τῇ
τῷ
τοῖς
ταῖς
τοῖς
A
τόν
τήν
τό
τούς
τάς
τά
2. NOUNS
1st Declension
-η type (f.)
ἡ γνώμη
ἡ δίκη
ἡ ἀρετή
thought
justice
excellence
Sg.
N
ἡ γνώμη
ἡ δίκη
ἡ ἀρετή
G
τῆς γνώμης
τῆς δίκης
τῆς ἀρετῆς
D
τῇ γνώμῃ
τῇ δίκῃ
τῇ ἀρετῇ
A
τὴν γνώμην
τὴν δίκην
τὴν ἀρετήν
Pl.
N
αἱ γνῶμαι
αἱ δίκαι
αἱ ἀρεταί
G
τῶν γνωμῶν
τῶν δικῶν
τῶν ἀρετῶν
D
ταῖς γνώμαις
ταῖς δίκαις
ταῖς ἀρεταῖς
A
τὰς γνώμας
τὰς δίκας
τὰς ἀρετάς

-α type (f.)
-α/-η type (f.)
ἡ μοῖρᾰ
ἡ χώρᾱ
ἡ θάλαττα
fate
land
sea
Sg.
N
ἡ μοῖρα
ἡ χώρα
ἡ θάλαττα
G
τῆς μοίρας
τῆς χώρας
τῆς θαλάττης
D
τῇ μοίρᾳ
τῇ χώρᾳ
τῇ θαλάττῃ
A
τὴν μοῖραν
τὴν χώραν
τὴν θάλατταν
Pl.
N
αἱ μοῖραι
αἱ χῶραι
αἱ θάλατται
G
τῶν μοιρῶν
τῶν χωρῶν
τῶν θαλαττῶν
D
ταῖς μοίραις
ταῖς χώραις
ταῖς θαλάτταις
A
τὰς μοίρας
τὰς χώρας
τὰς θαλάττας
-ης type (m.)
-ας type (m.)
ὁ πολίτης
ὁ νεανίας
citizen (ῑ)
young man (ῐ)
Sg.
N
ὁ πολίτης
ὁ νεανίας
G
τοῦ πολίτου
τοῦ νεανίου
D
τῷ πολίτῃ
τῷ νεανίᾳ
A
τὸν πολίτην
τὸν νεανίαν
V
πολῖτα
νεανία
Pl.
N
οἱ πολῖται
οἱ νεανίαι
G
τῶν πολιτῶν
τῶν νεανιῶν
D
τοῖς πολίταις
τοῖς νεανίαις
A
τοὺς πολίτας
τοὺς νεανίας
2nd Declension
-ος type (m./f.)
ὁ λόγος
ἡ ὁδός
ὁ πλοῦτος
ὁ/ἡ ἄνθρωπος
word
road
wealth
man
Sg.
N
ὁ λόγος
ἡ ὁδός
ὁ πλοῦτος
ὁ ἄνθρωπος
G
τοῦ λόγου
τῆς ὁδοῦ
τοῦ πλούτου
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου
D
τῷ λόγῳ
τῇ ὁδῷ
τῷ πλούτῳ
τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ
A
τὸν λόγον
τὴν ὁδόν
τὸν πλοῦτον
τὸν ἄνθρωπον
V
λόγε
ὁδέ
πλοῦτε
ἄνθρωπε
Pl.
N
οἱ λόγοι
αἱ ὁδοί
οἱ πλοῦτοι
οἱ ἄνθρωποι
G
τῶν λόγων
τῶν ὁδῶν
τῶν πλούτων
τῶν ἄνθρώπων
D
τοῖς λόγοις
ταῖς ὁδοῖς
τοῖς πλούτοις
τοῖς ἀνθρώποις
A
τοὺς λόγους
τὰς ὁδούς
τοὺς πλούτους
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
282
Appendix I: Paradigms

-ον type (n.)
τὸ ἔργον deed
τὸ δῶρον gift
Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural
N
τὸ ἔργον
τὰ ἔργα
τὸ δῶρον
τὰ δῶρα
G
τοῦ ἔργου
τῶν ἔργων
τοῦ δώρου
τῶν δώρων
D
τῷ ἔργῳ
τοῖς ἔργοις
τῷ δώρῳ
τοῖς δώροις
A
τὸ ἔργον
τὰ ἔργα
τὸ δῶρον
τὰ δῶρα
3rd Declension
Mute stems
labial
palatal
dental(1)
dental(2)
ὁ κλώψ
ἡ κύλιξ
ἡ ἐλπίς
ὁ/ἡ ὄρνις
thief
drinking cup
hope
bird
Sg.
N
κλώψ
κύλιξ
ἐλπίς
ὄρνις
G
κλωπός
κύλικος
ἐλπίδος
ὄρνιθος
D
κλωπί
κύλικι
ἐλπίδι
ὄρνιθι
A
κλῶπα
κύλικα
ἐλπίδα
ὄρνιν
V
κλώψ
κύλιξ
ἐλπί
ὄρνι
Pl.
N
κλῶπες
κύλικες
ἐλπίδες
ὄρνιθες
G
κλωπῶν
κυλίκων
ἐλπίδων
ὀρνίθων
D
κλωψί
κύλιξι
ἐλπίσι
ὄρνισι
A
κλῶπας
κύλικας
ἐλπίδας
ὄρνιθας
-ον- type
-οντ- type
neuters in -μα
ὁ/ἡ δαίμων
ὁ ἄρχων
τὸ ὄνομα
divinity
ruler
name
Sg.
N
δαίμων
ἄρχων
ὄνομα
G
δαίμονος
ἄρχοντος
ὀνόματος
D
δαίμονι
ἄρχοντι
ὀνόματι
A
δαίμονα
ἄρχοντα
ὄνομα
V
δαῖμον
ἄρχον
Pl.
N
δαίμονες
ἄρχοντες
ὀνόματα
G
δαιμόνων
ἀρχόντων
ὀνομάτων
D
δαίμοσι
ἄρχουσι
ὀνόμασι
A
δαίμονας
ἄρχοντας
ὀνόματα
2. Nouns
283

Vowel stems
-ευς
-ι or –υ
neuters in –ος
ὁ βασιλεύς
ἡ πόλις
τὸ ἄστυ
τὸ γένος
king
city
town
race
Sg.
N
βασιλεύς
πόλις
ἄστυ
γένος
G
βασιλέως
πόλεως
ἄστεως
γένους
D
βασιλεῖ
πόλει
ἄστει
γένει
A
βασιλέα
πόλιν
ἄστυ
γένος
V
βασιλεῦ
πόλι
Pl.
N
βασιλεῖς /‑ῆς
πόλεις
ἄστη
γένη
G
βασιλέων
πόλεων
ἄστεων
γενῶν
D
βασιλεῦσι
πόλεσι
ἄστεσι
γένεσι
A
βασιλέας
πόλεις
ἄστη
γένη
Syncopated Nouns
ὁ πατήρ father
ὁ ἀνήρ man
Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural
N
πατήρ
πατέρες
ἀνήρ
ἄνδρες
G
πατρός
πατέρων
ἀνδρός
ἀνδρῶν
D
πατρί
πατράσι
ἀνδρί
ἀνδράσι
A
πατέρα
πατέρας
ἄνδρα
ἄνδρας
V
πάτερ
ἄνερ
Irregular Noun
ἡ γυνήwoman
Singular
Plural
N
γυνή
γυναῖκες
G
γυναικός
γυναικῶν
D
γυναικί
γυναιξί
A
γυναῖκα
γυναῖκας
V
γύναι
284
Appendix I: Paradigms

3. ADJECTIVES
1st–2nd Declensions
-ος, -η, -ον
καλός, καλή, καλόν  beautiful, good, fine
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
καλός
καλή
καλόν
καλοί
καλαί
καλά
G
καλοῦ
καλῆς
καλοῦ
καλῶν
καλῶν
καλῶν
D
καλῷ
καλῇ
καλῷ
καλοῖς
καλαῖς
καλοῖς
A
καλόν
καλήν
καλόν
καλούς
καλάς
καλά
V
καλέ
-ος, -α, -ον
δίκαιος, δικαία, δίκαιον
just
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
δίκαιος
δικαία
δίκαιον
δίκαιοι
δίκαιαι
δίκαια
G
δικαίου
δικαίας
δικαίου
δικαίων
δικαίων
δικαίων
D
δικαίῳ
δικαίᾳ
δικαίῳ
δικαίοις
δικαίαις
δικαίοις
A
δίκαιον
δικαίαν
δίκαιον
δικαίους
δικαίας
δίκαια
V
δίκαιε
2nd Declension
-ος, -ον
ἀθάνατος, ἀθάνατον
deathless
Singular
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
ἀθάνατος
ἀθάνατον
ἀθάνατοι
ἀθάνατα
G
ἀθανάτου
ἀθανάτου
ἀθανάτων
ἀθανάτων
D
ἀθανάτῳ
ἀθανάτῳ
ἀθανάτοις
ἀθανάτοις
A
ἀθάνατον
ἀθάνατον
ἀθανάτους
ἀθάνατα
V
ἀθάνατε
3. Adjectives
285

1st–2nd Declensions: contracted adjectives
χρυσοῦς (< χρύσεος), χρυσῆ, χρυσοῦν
made of gold
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
χρυσοῦς
χρυσῆ
χρυσοῦν
χρυσοῖ
χρυσαῖ
χρυσᾶ
G
χρυσοῦ
χρυσῆς
χρυσοῦ
χρυσῶν
χρυσῶν
χρυσῶν
D
χρυσῷ
χρυσῇ
χρυσῷ
χρυσοῖς
χρυσαῖς
χρυσοῖς
A
χρυσοῦν
χρυσῆν
χρυσοῦν
χρυσοῦς
χρυσᾶς
χρυσᾶ
3rd Declension
-ης, -ες
ἀληθής, ἀληθές
true
Singular
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
ἀληθής
ἀληθές
ἀληθεῖς
ἀληθῆ
G
ἀληθοῦς 
ἀληθοῦς
ἀληθῶν
ἀληθῶν
D
ἀληθεῖ
ἀληθεῖ
ἀληθέσι
ἀληθέσι
A
ἀληθῆ
ἀληθές
ἀληθεῖς
ἀληθῆ
V
ἀληθές
-ων, -ον
εὐδαίμων, ‑ον
happy
Singular
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
εὐδαίμων
εὔδαιμον
εὐδαίμονες
εὐδαίμονα
G
εὐδαίμονος
εὐδαίμονος
εὐδαιμόνων
εὐδαιμόνων
D
εὐδαίμονι
εὐδαίμονι
εὐδαίμοσι
εὐδαίμοσι
A
εὐδαίμονα
εὔδαιμον
εὐδαίμονας
εὐδαίμονα
V
εὔδαιμον
286
Appendix I: Paradigms

1st and 3rd Declension
-υς, -εια, -υ
εὐρύς, εὐρεῖα, εὐρύ
wide
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
εὐρύς
εὐρεῖα
εὐρύ
εὐρεῖς
εὐρεῖαι
εὐρέα
G
εὐρέος
εὐρείας
εὐρέος
εὐρέων
εὐρειῶν
εὐρέων
D
εὐρεῖ
εὐρείᾳ
εὐρεῖ
εὐρέσι
εὐρείαις
εὐρέσι
A
εὐρύν
εὐρεῖαν
εὐρύ
εὐρεῖς
εὐρείας
εὐρέα
V
εὐρύ
Irregular
πᾶς, πᾶσα, πᾶν
all
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
πᾶς
πᾶσα
πᾶν
πάντες
πᾶσαι
πάντα
G
παντός
πάσης
παντός
πάντων
πασῶν
πάντων
D
παντί
πάσῃ
παντί
πᾶσι
πάσαις
πᾶσι
A
πάντα
πᾶσαν
πᾶν
πάντας
πάσας
πάντα
μέγας, μεγάλη, μέγα
big, great
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
μέγας
μεγάλη
μέγα
μεγάλοι
μεγάλαι
μεγάλα
G
μεγάλου
μεγάλης
μεγάλου
μεγάλων
μεγάλων
μεγάλων
D
μεγάλῳ
μεγάλῃ
μεγάλῳ
μεγάλοις
μεγάλαις
μεγάλοις
A
μέγαν
μεγάλην
μέγα
μεγάλους
μεγάλας
μεγάλα
V
μεγάλε
πολύς, πολλή, πολύ
much, pl. many
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
πολύς
πολλή
πολύ
πολλοί
πολλαί
πολλά
G
πολλοῦ
πολλῆς
πολλοῦ
πολλῶν
πολλῶν
πολλῶν
D
πολλῷ
πολλῇ
πολλῷ
πολλοῖς
πολλαῖς
πολλοῖς
A
πολύν
πολλήν
πολύ
πολλούς
πολλάς
πολλά
V
(no voc.)
3. Adjectives
287

4. PARTICIPLES
Present Active Participle of εἰμί: ὤν
being
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
ὤν
οὖσα
ὄν
G
ὄντος
οὔσης
ὄντος
D
ὄντι
οὔσῃ
ὄντι
A
ὄντα
οὖσαν
ὄν
Pl.
N
ὄντες
οὖσαι
ὄντα
G
ὄντων
οὐσῶν
ὄντων
D
οὖσι
οὔσαις
οὖσι
A
ὄντας
οὔσας
ὄντα
Present Active Participle of λύω: λύων
releasing
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λύων
λύουσα
λῦον
G
λύοντος
λυούσης
λύοντος
D
λύοντι
λυούσῃ
λύοντι
A
λύοντα
λύουσαν
λῦον
Pl.
N
λύοντες
λύουσαι
λύοντα
G
λυόντων
λυουσῶν
λυόντων
D
λύουσι
λυούσαις
λύουσι
A
λύοντας
λυούσας
λύοντα
Future Active Participle of λύω: λύσων
in order to release, about to release
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λύσων
λύσουσα
λῦσον
G
λύσοντος
λυσούσης
λύσοντος
D
λύσοντι
λυσούσῃ
λύσοντι
A
λύσοντα
λύσουσαν
λῦσον
Pl.
N
λύσοντες
λύσουσαι
λύσοντα
G
λυσόντων
λυσουσῶν
λυσόντων
D
λύσουσι
λυσούσαις
λύσουσι
A
λύσοντας
λυσούσας
λύσοντα
First Aorist Active Participle of λύω: λύσας
having released, after releasing
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λύσας
λύσασα
λῦσαν
G
λύσαντος
λυσάσης
λύσαντος
D
λύσαντι
λυσάσῃ
λύσαντι
A
λύσαντα
λύσασαν
λῦσαν
Pl.
N
λύσαντες
λύσασαι
λύσαντα
G
λυσάντων
λυσασῶν
λυσάντων
D
λύσασι
λυσάσαις
λύσασι
A
λύσαντας
λυσάσας
λύσαντα
288
Appendix I: Paradigms

Second Aorist Active Participle of λείπω: λιπών
having left, after leaving
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λιπών
λιποῦσα
λιπόν
G
λιπόντος
λιπούσης
λιπόντος
D
λιπόντι
λιπούσῃ
λιπόντι
A
λιπόντα
λιποῦσαν
λιπόν
Pl.
N
λιπόντες
λιποῦσαι
λιπόντα
G
λιπόντων
λιπουσῶν
λιπόντων
D
λιποῦσι
λιπούσαις
λιποῦσι
A
λιπόντας
λιπούσας
λιπόντα
Perfect Active Participle of λύω: λελυκώς
having released
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λελυκώς
λελυκυῖα
λελυκός
G
λελυκότος
λελυκυίας
λελυκότος
D
λελυκότι
λελυκυίᾳ
λελυκότι
A
λελυκότα
λελυκυῖαν
λελυκός
Pl.
N
λελυκότες
λελυκυῖαι
λελυκότα
G
λελυκότων
λελυκυιῶν
λελυκότων
D
λελυκόσι
λελυκυίαις
λελυκόσι
A
λελυκότας
λελυκυίας
λελυκότα
Aorist Passive Participle of λύω: λυθείς
after being released, having been released
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
λυθείς
λυθεῖσα
λυθέν
G
λυθέντος
λυθείσης
λυθέντος
D
λυθέντι
λυθείσῃ
λυθέντι
A
λυθέντα
λυθεῖσαν
λυθέν
Pl.
N
λυθέντες
λυθεῖσαι
λυθέντα
G
λυθέντων
λυθεισῶν
λυθέντων
D
λυθεῖσι
λυθείσαις
λυθεῖσι
A
λυθέντας
λυθείσας
λυθέντα
Recognizing Participles
-ντ- is the sign for active participles (except the perfect active) and the aorist
passive participle in m. and n. [VII, X]
-οντ-, f. -ουσ- for the thematic tenses (present, future, 2nd aorist) and for
present and aorist of δίδωμι [VII, XII]
-ουντ-, f. -ουσ- for ε-contracts and ο-contracts and for liquid futures [XI]
-ωντ-, f. -ωσ- for α-contracts [XI]
-αντ-, f. -ασ- for the 1st aorist and for the present and 2nd aorist of ἵστημι
[XII]
4. Participles
289

-εντ-, f. -εισ- for the aorist passive and for the present and 2nd aorist of
τίθημι and ἵημι [X, XII]
-υντ-, f. -υσ- for present of -νυμι verbs [XII]
-οτ-, f. -υι- is the sign for the perfect active participle [VIII]
-μενος, -η, -ον is used for middle and middle-passive participles and for the
future passive [VII, X]
-όμενος for thematic tenses (present, future, 2nd aorist, future passive) and
for present and aorist of δίδωμι. [VII, XII]
-ούμενος for ε-contracts and ο-contracts and for liquid futures [XI]
-ώμενος for α-contracts [XI]
-άμενος for the 1st aorist and for the present of ἵστημι [VII, XII]
-έμενος for the present and 2nd aorist of τίθημι and ἵημι [XII]
-ύμενος for present of -νυμι verbs [XII]
-μένος (note accent) for perfect middle-passive [IX]
5. PRONOUNS AND ADVERBS
A. Types and Forms
1. Relative [II]
ὅς, ἥ, ὅ
who, which, that
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
ὅς
ἥ
ὅ
οἵ
αἵ
ἅ
who, which, that
G
οὗ
ἧς
οὗ
ὧν
ὧν
ὧν
whose, of whom/which
D
ᾧ
ᾗ
ᾧ
οἷς
αἷς
οἷς
to whom/which
A
ὅν
ἥν
ὅ
οὕς
ἅς
ἅ
whom, which, that
2. Demonstratives [ΙΙΙ]
οὗτος, αὕτη, τοῦτο
this
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
οὗτος
αὕτη
τοῦτο
οὗτοι
αὗται
ταῦτα
G
τούτου
ταύτης
τούτου
τούτων
τούτων
τούτων
D
τούτῳ
ταύτῃ
τούτῳ
τούτοις
ταύταις
τούτοις
A
τοῦτον
ταύτην
τοῦτο
τούτους
ταύτας
ταῦτα
290
Appendix I: Paradigms

ὅδε, ἥδε, τόδε
this
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
ὅδε
ἥδε
τόδε
οἵδε
αἵδε
τάδε
G
τοῦδε
τῆσδε
τοῦδε
τῶνδε
τῶνδε
τῶνδε
D
τῷδε
τῇδε
τῷδε
τοῖσδε
ταῖσδε
τοῖσδε
A
τόνδε
τήνδε
τόδε
τούσδε
τάσδε
τάδε
ἐκεῖνος, ἐκείνη, ἐκεῖνο
that
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
ἐκεῖνος
ἐκείνη
ἐκεῖνο
ἐκεῖνοι
ἐκεῖναι
ἐκεῖνα
G
ἐκείνου
ἐκείνης
ἐκείνου
ἐκείνων
ἐκείνων
ἐκείνων
D
ἐκείνῳ
ἐκείνῃ
ἐκείνῳ
ἐκείνοις
ἐκείναις
ἐκείνοις
A
ἐκεῖνον
ἐκείνην
ἐκεῖνο
ἐκείνους
ἐκείνας
ἐκεῖνα
3. Reciprocal [VIII]
ἀλλήλων
each other
m.
f.
n.
G
ἀλλήλων
ἀλλήλων
ἀλλήλων
D
ἀλλήλοις
ἀλλήλαις
ἀλλήλοις
A
ἀλλήλους
ἀλλήλας
ἄλληλα
4. Interrogative [VIII]
τίς, τί
who? what? why?
Singular
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
τίς
τί
τίνες
τίνα
G
τίνος (τοῦ)
τίνων
D
τίνι (τῷ)
τίσι
A
τίνα
τί
τίνας
τίνα
5. Indefinite [VIII]
τις, τι
someone, anyone, anything, something
Singular
Plural
m./f.
n.
m./f.
n.
N
τις
τι
τινές
τινά
G
τινός (του)
τινῶν
D
τινί(τῳ)
τισί
A
τινά
τι
τινάς
τινά
5. Pronouns and Adverbs
291

6. Relative Indefinite [VIII]
ὅστις, ἥτις, ὅ τι
anyone who, whoever, anything which, whatever
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
N
ὅστις
ἥτις
ὅ τι
G
οὗτινος (ὅτου)
ἧστινος
οὗτινος (ὅτου)
D
ᾧτινι (ὅτῳ)
ᾗτινι
ᾧτινι (ὅτῳ)
A
ὅντινα
ἥντινα
ὅ τι
Pl.
N
οἵτινες
αἵτινες
ἅτινα (ἅττα)
G
ὧντινων (ὅτων)
ὧντινων
ὧντινων (ὅτων)
D
οἷστισι (ὅτοις)
αἷστισι
οἷστισι (ὅτοις)
A
οὕστινας
ἅστινας
ἅτινα (ἅττα)
7. Personal [IX]
ἐγώ/ἡμεῖς
I/we
Singular
Plural
N
ἐγώ
I
ἡμεῖς
we
G
ἐμοῦ, μου
of me, my
ἡμῶν
of us, our
D
ἐμοί, μοι
to me
ἡμῖν
to us
A
ἐμέ, με
me
ἡμᾶς
us
σύ/ὑμεῖς
you/y’all
Singular
Plural
N
σύ
you
ὑμεῖς
you
G
σοῦ, σου
of you, your
ὑμῶν
of you, your
D
σοί, σοι
to you
ὑμῖν
to you
A
σέ, σε
you
ὑμᾶς
you
αὐτοῦ, αὐτῆς, αὐτοῦ/αὐτῶν
him, her, it/them
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
G
αὐτοῦ
αὐτῆς
αὐτοῦ
αὐτῶν
αὐτῶν
αὐτῶν
D
αὐτῷ
αὐτῇ
αὐτῷ
αὐτοῖς
αὐταῖς
αὐτοῖς
A
αὐτόν
αὐτήν
αὐτό
αὐτούς
αὐτάς
αὐτά
292
Appendix I: Paradigms

8. Intensive [IX]
αὐτός, αὐτή, αὐτό  -self
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N
αὐτός
αὐτή
αὐτό
αὐτοί
αὐταί
αὐτά
G
αὐτοῦ
αὐτῆς
αὐτοῦ
αὐτῶν
αὐτῶν
αὐτῶν
D
αὐτῷ
αὐτῇ
αὐτῷ
αὐτοῖς
αὐταῖς
αὐτοῖς
A
αὐτόν
αὐτήν
αὐτό
αὐτούς
αὐτάς
αὐτά
9. Reflexive [IX]
ἐμαυτοῦ, ἐμαυτῆς/ἡμῶν αὐτῶν
myself/ourselves
First Person Reflexive  myself, ourselves
Singular
Plural
m.
f.
m.
f.
G
ἐμαυτοῦ
ἐμαυτῆς
ἡμῶν αὐτῶν
ἡμῶν αὐτῶν
D
ἐμαυτῷ
ἐμαυτῇ
ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς
ἡμῖν αὐταῖς
A
ἐμαυτόν
ἐμαυτήν
ἡμᾶς αὐτούς
ἡμᾶς αὐτάς
σεαυτοῦ σεαυτῆς/ὑμῶν αὐτῶν
yourself/yourselves
Second Person Reflexive yourself, yourselves
m.
f.
Sg.
G
σεαυτοῦ
(σαυτοῦ)
σεαυτῆς
(σαυτῆς)
D
σεαυτῷ
(σαυτῷ)
σεαυτῇ
(σαυτῇ)
A
σεαυτόν
(σαυτόν)
σεαυτήν
(σαυτήν)
Pl.
G
ὑμῶν αὐτῶν
ὑμῶν αὐτῶν
D
ὑμῖν αὐτοῖς
ὑμῖν αὐταῖς
A
ὑμᾶς αὐτούς
ὑμᾶς αὐτάς
ἑαυτοῦ, ἑαυτῆς, ἑαυτοῦ
him-/her-/it-self/themselves
Third Person Reflexive  him-/her-/it-self, themselves
m.
f.
n.
Sg.
G
ἑαυτοῦ
(αὑτοῦ)
ἑαυτῆς
(αὑτῆς)
ἑαυτοῦ
(αὑτοῦ)
D
ἑαυτῷ
(αὑτῷ)
ἑαυτῇ
(αὑτῇ)
ἑαυτῷ
(αὑτῷ)
A
ἑαυτόν
(αὑτόν)
ἑαυτήν
(αὑτήν)
ἑαυτό
(αὑτό)
Pl.
G
ἑαυτῶν
(αὑτῶν)
ἑαυτῶν
(αὑτῶν)
ἑαυτῶν
(αὑτῶν)
D
ἑαυτοῖς
(αὑτοῖς)
ἑαυταῖς
(αὑταῖς)
ἑαυτοῖς
(αὑτοῖς)
A
ἑαυτούς
(αὑτούς)
ἑαυτάς
(αὑτάς)
ἑαυτά
(αὑτά)
5. Pronouns and Adverbs
293

10. Negative [X]
οὐδείς, οὐδεμία, οὐδέν
no one, nothing, no
m.
f.
n.
N
οὐδείς
οὐδεμία
οὐδέν
G
οὐδενός
οὐδεμιᾶς
οὐδενός
D
οὐδενί
οὐδεμιᾷ
οὐδενί
A
οὐδένα
οὐδεμίαν
οὐδέν
μηδείς μηδεμία μηδέν
no one, nothing, no
m.
f.
n.
N
μηδείς
μηδεμία
μηδέν
G
μηδενός
μηδεμιᾶς
μηδενός
D
μηδενί
μηδεμιᾷ
μηδενί
A
μηδένα
μηδεμίαν
μηδέν
B. Correlatives (Pronouns and Adverbs)
I. Pronouns that correspond to each other in form
and meaning:
Indefinite 
Relative/Indirect 
Interrogative
Indefinite
Demonstrative
Relative
Interrogative
τίς, τί
τις, τι
ὅδε; οὗτος;
ὅς, ἥ, ὅ
ὅστις
who, what?
someone,
ἐκεῖνος
who, which
anyone who
anyone
this, that
πότερος
πότερος 
ἕτερος
ὁπότερος
which of two?
ποτερός
one or the other 
whichever 
one of two
of two
of the two
πόσος
ποσός
τοσόσδε
ὅσος
ὁπόσος
how much/
of some 
so much/many
as much/
of whatever size/ 
many?
amount
many as
number
ποῖος
ποιός
τοιόσδε; τοιοῦτος
οἷος
ὁποῖος
of what sort?
of some sort
such
of which 
of whatever sort
sort, as
πηλίκος
πηλίκος
τηλικόσδε;
ἡλίκος
ὁπηλίκος
how old/large?
of some
τηλικοῦτος
of which 
of whatever age/size
age/size
so old/young, 
age/size
so large
294
Appendix I: Paradigms

II. Adverbs that correspond to each other in form
and meaning:
Indefinite 
Relative/Indirect 
Interrogative
Indefinite
Demonstrative
Relative
Interrogative
Place
ποῦ
που
ἐνθάδε, ἐνταῦθα,
οὗ
ὅπου
where?
somewhere
ἐκεῖ
where
wherever
there
πόθεν
ποθέν
ἐνθένδε,
ὅθεν
ὁπόθεν
where from?
from some
ἐντεῦθεν,
from where
wherever from, from
place
ἐκεῖθεν
whatever place
from there
ποῖ
ποι
ἐνταῦθα, ἐκεῖσε
οἷ
ὅποι
where to?
to some
to that place
to which 
to whatever place
place
place
Time
πότε
ποτε
τότε
ὅτε
ὁπότε
when?
some time
then
when
whenever
Way and Manner
πῇ
πῃ
τῇδε; ταύτῃ
ᾗ
ὅπῃ
how? which 
somehow, 
this way
in which 
in which way; as
way?
some way
way; as
πῶς
πως
ὥδε, οὕτως,
ὡς
ὅπως
how?
somehow
ἐκείνως
how
how
thus, so, in this/ 
that way
6. PREPOSITIONS
A. The Prepositions with basic meanings, the cases used with them, and their
meanings in compounds.
G = with the genitive
D = with the dative; (D) = with the dative only in poetry
A = with the Accusative
neg. = negative
intens. = intensive (very, completely, thoroughly)
6. Prepositions
295

Prep.
Cases
Basic Meaning Meaning in Compounds
ἀμφί
G A
on both sides
about, on both sides, in two ways
ἀνά
A (D)
up
up, back, again
ἀντί
G
in the face of, 
against, in opposition to, in return, instead
opposite to
ἀπό
G
off
from, off, in return, back; neg., intens.
διά
G A
through
through, apart; intens., indicating
 endurance and rivalry
εἰς, ἐς
A
into, to
into, to, in
ἐν
D
in, on
in, at, on, among
ἐξ, ἐκ
G
from within
out, from, away, off; intens.
ἐπί
GDA
upon
upon, after, toward, to, over, against, besides
κατά
G A
down
down, against; intens.
μετά
G(D)A 
amid, among
with, after; change
παρά
GDA
alongside
beside, along, by, wrongly
περί
GDA
around, about
around, about, over
πρό
G
before
before, for, in preference
πρός
GDA
in front of, at, by
to, toward, against, besides
σύν, ξύν
D
with
with, together, altogether
ὑπέρ
G A
over
over, above, beyond, in defense of
ὑπό
GDA
under
under, gradually
B. The prepositions arranged according to the cases used with them. The
basic meaning is in capitals.
1. With genitive only:
ἀντί
OPPOSITE TO, in the face of, for, instead of, in return for
ἀπό
OFF, from, off from, away from
ἐξ, ἐκ
OUT, from, out of, from within
πρό
BEFORE, in front of, in defense of, in preference to
2. With dative only:
ἐν
IN, at, near, on, by, among, during (of time)
σύν, ξύν
WITH, along with, with the help of
3. With accusative only:
ἀνά
UP, up to, up along, over, through [ἀνάis used in poetry with
the dative for upon]
εἰς 
INTO, TO, against, up to, until
4. With genitive and accusative:
ἀμφί
ON BOTH SIDES
with genitive: about, concerning (of cause)
with accusative: about (of place), towards (of time), with (of
 attendance on a person)
296
Appendix I: Paradigms

διά
THROUGH
with genitive: through and out of, through (of place and time),
by (means or agency)
with accusative: through, over, because of, on account of
κατά
DOWN
with genitive: down from, down toward, under, against
with accusative: down, throughout, during, for the purpose of,
 according to, about (approximately)
μετά
AMID, AMONG
with genitive: among, together with, amid, in accordance with
with accusative: into the midst of, after, next to
[in epic, with dative amid (locative)]
ὑπέρ
OVER
with genitive: from over, in defense of, concerning
with accusative: over, beyond, exceeding
5. With genitive, dative, and accusative:
ἐπί
UPON
with genitive: upon (of place), in the time of
with dative: on, by (proximity), in addition to, on condition of,
because of
with accusative: to (of a goal), against, for (time or purpose)
παρά
ALONGSIDE
with genitive: from (separation or source)
with dative: with, by the side of
with accusative: to (of persons), along, by, past, throughout (of
time), in consequence of, depending on, in comparison to, beyond,
contrary to
περί
AROUND, ABOUT
with genitive: about, concerning
with dative: about (of place or cause)
with accusative: around, about (of position), approximately (of
time), engaged in, connected with
πρός
IN FRONT OF, AT, BY
with genitive: facing, from, from the point of view of
with dative: at, near (of place rather than persons), in addition
to, in the presence of
with accusative: to, towards, against, with, for (purpose), with
reference to, in consequence of
ὑπό
UNDER
with genitive: out from under, by (agent)
with dative: under, beneath, subjected to
with accusative: under, to (a place) under, toward (of time)
6. Prepositions
297

7. VERBS
λύω, λύσω, ἔλυσα, λέλυκα, λέλυμαι, ἐλύθην unbind
Active Voice of λύω
IND
Present
Imperfect
Future
Aorist
Perfect
Pluperfect
Sg.
1
λύω
ἔλυον
λύσω
ἔλυσα
λέλυκα
ἐλελύκη
2
λύεις
ἔλυες
λύσεις
ἔλυσας
λέλυκας
ἐλελύκης
3
λύει
ἔλυε
λύσει
ἔλυσε
λέλυκε
ἐλελύκει
Pl.
1
λύομεν
ἐλύομεν
λύσομεν
ἐλύσαμεν
λελύκαμεν
ἐλελύκεμεν
2
λύετε
ἐλύετε
λύσετε
ἐλύσατε
λελύκατε
ἐλελύκετε
3
λύουσι
ἔλυον
λύσουσι
ἔλυσαν
λελύκασι
ἐλελύκεσαν
SUBJ
Present
Aorist
Perfect
Sg.
1
λύω
λύσω
λελυκὼς ὦ/λελύκω
2
λύῃς
λύσῃς
λελυκὼς ᾖς/λελύκῃς
3
λύῃ
λύσῃ
λελυκὼς ᾖ/λελύκῃ
Pl.
1
λύωμεν
λύσωμεν
λελυκότες ὦμεν/λελύκωμεν
2
λύητε
λύσητε
λελυκότες ἦτε/λελύκητε
3
λύωσι
λύσωσι
λελυκότες ὦσι/λελύκωσι
OPT
Present
Future
Aorist
Perfect
Sg.
1
λύοιμι
λύσοιμι
λύσαιμι
λελυκὼς εἴην/λελύλοιμι/-οίην
2
λύοις
λύσοις
λύσαις/λύσειας
λελυκὼς εἴης/λελύκοις/-οίης
3
λύοι
λύσοι
λύσαι/λύσειε
λελυκὼς εἴη/λελύκοι/-οίη
Pl.
1
λύοιμεν
λύσοιμεν
λύσαιμεν
λελυκότες εἴημεν, εἶμεν/
λελύκοιμεν
2
λύοιτε
λύσοιτε
λύσαιτε
λελυκότες εἴητε, εἶτε/
λελύκοιτε
3
λύοιεν
λύσοιεν
λύσαιεν/λύσειαν
λελυκότες εἴησαν, εἶεν/
λελύκοιεν
IMPF
Present
Aorist
Perfect
Sg.
2
λῦε
λῦσον
λελυκὼς ἴσθι/λέλυκε
3
λυέτω
λυσάτω
λελυκὼς ἔστω/λελυκέτω
Pl.
2
λύετε
λύσατε
λελυκότες ἔστε/λελύκετε
3
λυόντων
λυσάντων
λελυκότες ὄντων
Present
Future
Aorist
Perfect
INF
λύειν
λύσειν
λῦσαι
λελυκέναι
PT
λύων (–οντ-)
λύσων (-οντ-)
λύσας (-αντ-)
λελυκώς (-οτ-)
λύουσα
λύσουσα
λύσασα
λελυκυῖα
λῦον
λῦσον
λῦσαν
λελυκός
298
Appendix I: Paradigms

Middle/Middle-Passive of λύω
Present
Imperfect
Future
Aorist
Perfect
Pluperfect
IND
(M.-P.)
(M.-P.)
(M)
(M)
(M.-P.)
(M.-P.)
Sg.
1
λύομαι
ἐλυόμην
λύσομαι
ἐλυσάμην
λέλυμαι
ἐλελύμην
2
λύει / ῃ
ἐλύου
λύσει / ῃ
ἐλύσω
λέλυσαι 
ἐλέλυσο
3
λύεται
ἐλύετο
λύσεται
ἐλύσατο
λέλυται
ἐλέλυτο
Pl.
1
λυόμεθα
ἐλυόμεθα
λυσόμεθα
ἐλυσάμεθα
λελύμεθα
ἐλελύμεθα
2
λύεσθε
ἐλύεσθε
λύσεσθε
ἐλύσασθε
λέλυσθε
ἐλέλυσθε
3
λύονται
ἐλύοντο
λύσονται
ἐλύσαντο
λέλυνται
ἐλέλυντο
Present
Aorist
Perfect
SUBJ
(M.-P.)
(M)
(M.-P.)
Sg.
1
λύωμαι
λύσωμαι
λελυμένος ὦ
2
λύῃ
λύσῃ
λελυμένος ᾖς
3
λύηται
λύσηται
λελυμένος ᾖ
Pl.
1
λυώμεθα
λυσώμεθα
λελυμένοι ὦμεν
2
λύησθε
λύσησθε
λελυμένοι ἦτε
3
λύωνται
λύσωνται
λελυμένοι ὦσι
Present
Future
Aorist
Perfect
OPT
(M.-P.)
(M)
(M)
(M.-P.)
Sg.
1
λυοίμην
λυσοίμην
λυσαίμην
λελυμένος εἴην
2
λύοιο
λύσοιο
λύσαιο
λελυμένος εἴης
3
λύοιτο
λύσοιτο
λύσαιτο
λελυμένος εἴη
Pl.
1
λυοίμεθα
λυσοίμεθα
λυσαίμεθα
λελυμένοι εἴημεν / εἶμεν 
2
λύοισθε
λύσοισθε
λύσαισθε
λελυμένοι εἴητε / εἶτε
3
λύοιντο
λύσοιντο
λύσαιντο
λελυμένοι εἴησαν / εἶεν
Present
Aorist
Perfect
IMP
(M.-P.)
(M)
(M.-P.)
Sg.
2
λύου
λῦσαι
λέλυσο
3
λυέσθω
λυσάσθω
λελύσθω
Pl.
2
λύεσθε
λύσασθε
λέλυσθε
3
λυέσθων
λυσάσθων
λελύσθων
Present
Future
Aorist
Perfect
(M.-P.)
(M)
(M)
(M.-P.)
INF
λύεσθαι
λύσεσθαι
λύσασθαι
λελύσθαι
PT
λυόμενος,
λυσόμενος,
λυσάμενος,
λελυμένος,
-η, -ον
-η, -ον
-η, -ον
-η, -ον
Passive Voice of λύω
Indicative
Subjunctive
Future Perfect
Aorist
Future
Aorist
Sg.
1
λελύσομαι
ἐλύθην
λυθήσομαι
λυθῶ
2
λελύσει/λελύσῃ
ἐλύθης
λυθήσει/‑ῃ
λυθῇς
3
λελύσεται
ἐλύθη
λυθήσεται
λυθῇ
Pl.
1
λελυσόμεθα
ἐλύθημεν
λυθησόμεθα
λυθῶμεν
2
λελύσεσθε
ἐλύθητε
λυθήσεσθε
λυθῆτε
3
λελύσονται
ἐλύθησαν
λυθήσονται
λυθῶσι
7. Verbs
299

Optative
Imperative
Future Perfect
Aorist
Future
Aorist
Sg.
1
λελυσοίμην
λυθείην
λυθησοίμην
2
λελύσοιο
λυθείης
λυθήσοιο
λύθητι
3
λελύσοιτο
λυθείη
λυθήσοιτο
λυθήτω
Pl.
1
λελυσοίμεθα
λυθεῖμεν/λυθείημεν
λυθησοίμεθα
2
λελύσοισθε
λυθεῖτε/λυθείητε
λυθήσοισθε
λύθητε
3
λελύσοιντο
λυθεῖεν/λυθείησαν
λυθήσοιντο
λυθέντων
Future Perfect
Aorist
Future
INF
λελύσεσθαι
λυθῆναι
λυθήσεσθαι
PT
λελυσόμενος
λυθείς
λυθησόμενος
λελυσομένη
λυθεῖσα
λυθησομένη
λελυσόμενον
λυθέν
λυθησόμενον
2nd Aorist of λείπω
leave
Indicative
Subjunctive
Optative
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
Sg.
1
ἔλιπον
ἐλιπόμην
λίπω
λίπωμαι
λίποιμι
λιποίμην
2
ἔλιπες
ἐλίπου
λίπῃς
λίπῃ
λίποις
λίποιο
3
ἔλιπε
ἐλίπετο
λίπῃ
λίπηται
λίποι
λίποιτο
Pl.
1
ἐλίπομεν
ἐλιπόμεθα
λίπωμεν
λιπώμεθα
λίποιμεν
λιποίμεθα
2
ἐλίπετε
ἐλίπεσθε
λίπητε
λίπησθε
λίποιτε
λίποισθε
3
ἔλιπον
ἑλίποντο
λίπωσι
λίπωνται
λίποιεν
λίποιντο
Imperative
Active
Middle
Singular
Plural
INF
λιπεῖν
λιπέσθαι
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
PT
λιπών
λιπόμενος
λίπε
λιποῦ
2
λίπετε
λίπεσθε
λιποῦσα
λιπομένη
λιπέτω
λιπέσθω
3
λιπόντων
λιπέσθων
λιπόν
λιπόμενον
Contract Verbs : Present System
νικάω win
φιλέω love
δηλόω reveal
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
νικῶ
νικῶμαι
φιλῶ
φιλοῦμαι
δηλῶ
δηλοῦμαι
2
νικᾷς
νικᾷ
φιλεῖς
φιλεῖ/-ῇ
δηλοῖς
δηλοῖ
3
νικᾷ
νικᾶται
φιλεῖ
φιλεῖται
δηλοῖ
δηλοῦται
Pl.
1
νικῶμεν
νικώμεθα
φιλοῦμεν
φιλούμεθα
δηλοῦμεν δηλούμεθα
2
νικᾶτε
νικᾶσθε
φιλεῖτε
φιλεῖσθε
δηλοῦτε
δηλοῦσθε
3
νικῶσι
νικῶνται
φιλοῦσι
φιλοῦνται
δηλοῦσι
δηλοῦνται
300
Appendix I: Paradigms

Indicative Imperfect 
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
ἐνίκων
ἐνικώμην
ἐφίλουν
ἐφιλούμην
ἐδήλουν
ἐδηλούμην
2
ἐνίκας
ἐνικῶ
ἐφίλεις
ἐφιλοῦ
ἐδήλους
ἐδηλοῦ
3
ἐνίκα
ἐνικᾶτο
ἐφίλει
ἐφιλεῖτο
ἐδήλου
ἐδηλοῦτο
Pl.
1
ἐνικῶμεν
ἐνικώμεθα
ἐφιλοῦμεν
ἐφιλούμεθα
ἐδηλοῦμεν
ἐδηλούμεθα
2
ἐνικᾶτε
ἐνικᾶσθε
ἐφιλεῖτε
ἐφιλεῖσθε
ἐδηλοῦτε
ἐδηλοῦσθε
3
ἐνίκων
ἐνικῶντο
ἐφίλουν
ἐφιλοῦντο
ἐδήλουν
ἐδηλοῦντο
Subjunctive Present
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
νικῶ
νικῶμαι
φιλῶ
φιλῶμαι
δηλῶ
δηλῶμαι
2
νικᾷς
νικᾷ
φιλῇς
φιλῇ
δηλοῖς
δηλοῖ
3
νικᾷ
νικᾶται
φιλῇ
φιλῆται
δηλοῖ
δηλῶται
Pl.
1
νικῶμεν
νικώμεθα
φιλῶμεν
φιλώμεθα
δηλῶμεν
δηλώμεθα
2
νικᾶτε
νικᾶσθε
φιλῆτε
φιλῆσθε
δηλῶτε
δηλῶσθε
3
νικῶσι
νικῶνται
φιλῶσι
φιλῶνται
δηλῶσι
δηλῶνται
Optative Present
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
νικῴην
νικῴμην
φιλοίην
φιλοίμην
δηλοίην
δηλοίμην
2
νικῴης
νικῷο
φιλοίης
φιλοῖο
δηλοίης
δηλοῖο
3
νικῴη
νικῷτο
φιλοίη
φιλοῖτο
δηλοίη
δηλοῖτο
Pl.
1
νικῷμεν
νικῴμεθα
φιλοῖμεν
φιλοίμεθα
δηλοῖμεν 
δηλοίμεθα
2
νικῷτε
νικῷσθε
φιλοῖτε
φιλοῖσθε
δηλοῖτε
δηλοῖσθε
3
νικῷεν
νικῷντο
φιλοῖεν
φιλοῖντο
δηλοῖεν
δηλοῖντο
Imperative
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
2
νίκα
νικῶ
φίλει
φιλοῦ
δήλου
δηλοῦ
3
νικάτω
νικάσθω
φιλείτω
φιλείσθω
δηλούτω
δηλούσθω
Pl.
2
νικᾶτε
νικᾶσθε
φιλεῖτε
φιλεῖσθε
δηλοῦτε
δηλοῦσθε
3
νικώντων
νικάσθων
φιλούντων
φιλείσθων
δηλούντων
δηλούσθων
Infinitive
νικᾶν
νικᾶσθαι
φιλεῖν
φιλεῖσθαι
δηλοῦν
δηλοῦσθαι
Participle
νικῶν
νικώμενος
φιλῶν
φιλούμενος
δηλῶν
δηλούμενος
νικῶσα
νικωμένη
φιλοῦσα
φιλουμένη
δηλοῦσα
δηλουμένη
νικῶν
νικώμενον
φιλοῦν
φιλούμενον
δηλοῦν
δηλούμενον
7. Verbs
301

Liquid Future (κρίνω judge)
Indicative
Optative
Active
Middle
Active
Middle
Sg.
1
κρινῶ
κρινοῦμαι
κρινοίην/κρινοῖμι
κρινοίμην
2
κρινεῖς
κρινεῖ(-ῇ)
κρινοίης/κρινοῖς
κρινοῖο
3
κρινεῖ
κρινεῖται
κρινοίη/κρινοῖ
κρινοῖτο
Pl.
1
κρινοῦμεν
κρινούμεθα
κρινοῖμεν
κρινοίμεθα
2
κρινεῖτε
κρινεῖσθε
κρινοῖτε
κρινοῖσθε
3
κρινοῦσι
κρινοῦνται
κρινοῖεν
κρινοῖντο
INF
κρινεῖν
κρινεῖσθαι
PT
κρινῶν
κρινούμενος
κρινοῦσα
κρινουμένη
κρινοῦν
κρινούμενον
-ΜΙ Verbs
-νυμι Verbs: Present System of δείκνυμι show
Indicative
Present
Imperfect
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
δείκνυμι
δείκνυμαι
ἐδείκνυν
ἐδεικνύμην
2
δείκνυς
δείκνυσαι
ἐδείκνυς
ἐδείκνυσο
3
δείκνυσι
δείκνυται
ἐδείκνυ
ἐδείκνυτο
Pl.
1
δείκνυμεν
δεικνύμεθα
ἐδείκνυμεν
ἐδεικνύμεθα
2
δείκνυτε
δείκνυσθε
ἐδείκνυτε
ἐδείκνυσθε
3
δεικνύασι
δείκνυνται
ἐδείκνυσαν
ἐδείκνυντο
Subjunctive Present
Optative Present
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
δεικνύω
δεικνύωμαι
δεικνύοιμι
δεικνύοιμην
2
δεικνύῃς
δεικνύῃ
δεικνύοις
δεικνύοιο
3
δεικνύῃ
δεικνύηται
δεικνύοι
δεικνύοιτο
Pl.
1
δεικνύωμεν
δεικνυώμεθα
δεικνύοιμεν
δεικνυοίμεθα
2
δεικνύητε
δεικνύησθε
δεικνύοιτε
δεικνύοισθε
3
δεικνύωσι
δεικνύωνται
δεικνύοιεν
δεικνύοιντο
Imperative
Infinitive
Sg.
2
δείκνυ
δείκνυσο
δεικνύναι
δείκνυσθαι
3
δεικνύτω
δεικνύσθω
Pl.
2
δείκνυτε
δείκνυσθε
3
δεικνύντων
δεικνύσθων
Participle
δεικνύς
δεικνύμενος
δεικνῦσα
δεικνυμένη
δεικνύν
δεικνύμενον
302
Appendix I: Paradigms

ἵστημι cause to stand, stand
Indicative
Present
2nd Aorist
Perfect
Active
M.-P.
Active
Active
Sg.
1
ἵστημι
ἵσταμαι
ἔστην
ἕστηκα
2
ἵστης
ἵστασαι
ἔστης
ἕστηκας
3
ἵστησι
ἵσταται
ἔστη
ἕστηκε
Pl.
1
ἵσταμεν
ἱστάμεθα
ἔστημεν
ἕσταμεν
2
ἵστατε
ἵστασθε
ἔστητε
ἕστατε
3
ἱστᾶσι
ἵστανται
ἔστησαν
ἑστᾶσι
Imperfect
Pluperfect
Active
M.-P.
Active
Sg.
1
ἵστην
ἱστάμην
εἱστήκη
2
ἵστης
ἵστασο
εἱστήκης
3
ἵστη
ἵστατο
εἱστήκει
Pl.
1
ἵσταμεν
ἱστάμεθα
ἕσταμεν
2
ἵστατε
ἵστασθε
ἕστατε
3
ἵστασαν
ἵσταντο
ἕστασαν
Subjunctive
Present
2nd Aorist
Perfect
Active
M.-P.
Active
Active
Sg.
1
ἱστῶ
ἱστῶμαι
στῶ
ἑστῶ
2
ἱστῇς
ἱστῇ
στῇς
ἑστῇς
3
ἱστῇ
ἱστῆται
στῇ
ἑστῇ
Pl.
1
ἱστῶμεν
ἱστώμεθα
στῶμεν
ἑστῶμεν
2
ἱστῆτε
ἱστῆσθε
στῆτε
ἑστῆτε
3
ἱστῶσι
ἱστῶνται
στῶσι
ἑστῶσι
Optative
Sg.
1
ἱσταίην
ἱσταίμην
σταίην
ἑσταίην
2
ἱσταίης
ἱσταῖο
σταίης
ἑσταίης
3
ἱσταίη
ἱσταῖτο
σταίη
ἑσταίη
Pl.
1
ἱσταῖμεν / ἱσταίημεν
ἱσταίμεθα
σταῖμεν /σταίημεν
ἑσταῖμεν / ἑσταίημεν
2
ἱσταῖτε / ἱσταίητε
ἱσταῖσθε
σταῖτε / σταίητε
ἑσταῖτε / ἑσταίητε
3
ἱσταῖεν / ἱσταίησαν
ἱσταῖντο
σταῖεν /σταίησαν
ἑσταῖεν / ἑσταίησαν
Imperative
Sg.
2
ἵστη
ἵστασο
στῆθι
ἕσταθι
3
ἱστάτω
ἱστάσθω
στήτω
ἑστάτω
Pl.
2
ἵστατε
ἵστασθε
στῆτε
ἕστατε
3
ἱστάντων
ἱστάσθων
στάντων
ἑστάντων
Infinitive
ἱστάναι
ἵστασθαι
στῆναι
ἑστάναι
7. Verbs
303

Participle
Present
2nd Aorist
Perfect
Active
M.-P.
Active
Active
ἱστάς
ἱστάμενος
στάς
ἑστώς
ἱστᾶσα
ἱσταμένη
στᾶσα
ἑστῶσα
ἱστάν
ἱστάμενον
στάν
ἑστός
τίθημι put, place, give
Indicative
Present 
2nd Aorist
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
τίθημι
τίθεμαι
ἔθηκα
ἐθέμην
2
τίθης
τίθεσαι
ἔθηκας
ἔθου
3
τίθησι
τίθεται
ἔθηκε
ἔθετο
Pl.
1
τίθεμεν
τιθέμεθα
ἔθεμεν
ἐθέμεθα
2
τίθετε
τίθεσθε
ἔθετε
ἔθεσθε
3
τιθέασι
τίθενται
ἔθεσαν
ἔθεντο
Imperfect
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
ἐτίθην
ἐτιθέμην
2
ἐτίθεις
ἐτίθεσο
3
ἐτίθει
ἐτίθετο
Pl.
1
ἐτίθεμεν
ἐτιθέμεθα
2
ἐτίθετε
ἐτίθεσθε
3
ἐτίθεσαν
ἐτίθεντο
Subjunctive
Present
2nd aorist
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
τιθῶ
τιθῶμαι
θῶ
θῶμαι
2
τιθῇς
τιθῇ
θῇς
θῇ
3
τιθῇ
τιθῆται
θῇ
θῆται
Pl.
1
τιθῶμεν
τιθώμεθα
θῶμεν
θώμεθα
2
τιθῆτε
τιθῆσθε
θῆτε
θῆσθε
3
τιθῶσι
τιθῶνται
θῶσι
θῶνται
Optative
Present
2nd Aorist
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
τιθείην
τιθείμην
θείην
θείμην
2
τιθείης
τιθεῖο
θείης
θεῖο
3
τιθείη
τιθεῖτο
θείη
θεῖτο
Pl.
1
τιθεῖμεν/τιθείημεν
τιθείμεθα
θεῖμεν/θείημεν
θείμεθα
2
τιθεῖτε/τιθείητε
τιθεῖσθε
θεῖτε/θείητε
θεῖσθε
3
τιθεῖεν/τιθείησαν
τιθεῖντο
θεῖεν/θείησαν
θεῖντο
304
Appendix I: Paradigms

Imperative
Present
2nd Aorist
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
2
τίθει
τίθεσο
θές
θοῦ
3
τιθέτω
τιθέσθω
θέτω
θέσθω
Pl.
2
τίθετε
τίθεσθε
θέτε
θέσθε
3
τιθέντων
τιθέσθων
θέντων
θέσθων
Infinitive
τιθέναι
τίθεσθαι
θεῖναι
θέσθαι
Participle
τιθείς
τιθέμενος
θείς
θέμενος
τιθεῖσα
τιθεμένη
θεῖσα
θεμένη
τιθέν
τιθέμενον
θέν
θέμενον
δίδωμι give
Indicative
Present
2nd Aorist
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
δίδωμι
δίδομαι
ἔδωκα
ἐδόμην
2
δίδως
δίδοσαι
ἔδωκας
ἔδου
3
δίδωσι
δίδοται
ἔδωκε
ἔδοτο
Pl.
1
δίδομεν
διδόμεθα
ἔδομεν
ἐδόμεθα
2
δίδοτε
δίδοσθε
ἔδοτε
ἔδοσθε
3
διδόασι
δίδονται
ἔδοσαν
ἔδοντο
Imperfect
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
ἐδίδουν
ἐδιδόμην
2
ἐδίδους
ἐδίδοσο
3
ἐδίδου
ἐδίδοτο
Pl.
1
ἐδίδομεν
ἐδιδόμεθα
2
ἐδίδοτε
ἐδίδοσθε
3
ἐδίδοσαν
ἐδίδοντο
Subjunctive
Present
2nd Aorist
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
διδῶ
διδῶμαι
δῶ
δῶμαι
2
διδῷς
διδῷ
δῷς
δῷ
3
διδῷ
διδῶται
δῷ
δῶται
Pl.
1
διδῶμεν
διδώμεθα
δῶμεν
δώμεθα
2
διδῶτε
διδῶσθε
δῶτε
δῶσθε
3
διδῶσι
διδῶνται
δῶσι
δῶνται
7. Verbs
305

Optative
Present
2nd Aorist
Active
M.-P.
Active
M.-P.
Sg.
1
διδοίην
διδοίμην
δοίην
δοίμην
2
διδοίης
διδοῖο
δοίης
δοῖο
3
διδοίη
διδοῖτο
δοίη
δοῖτο
Pl.
1
διδοῖμεν/διδοίημεν
διδοίμεθα
δοῖμεν/δοίημεν
δοίμεθα
2
διδοῖτε/διδοίητε
διδοῖσθε
δοῖτε/δοίητε
δοῖσθε
3
διδοῖεν/διδοίησαν
διδοῖντο
δοῖεν/δοίησαν
δοῖντο
Imperative
Sg.
2
δίδου
δίδοσο
δός
δοῦ
3
διδότω
διδόσθω
δότω
δόσθω
Pl.
2
δίδοτε
δίδοσθε
δότε
δόσθε
3
διδόντων
διδόσθων
δόντων
δόσθων
Infinitive
διδόναι
δίδοσθαι
δοῦναι
δόσθαι
Participle
διδούς
διδόμενος
δούς
δόμενος
διδοῦσα
διδομένη
δοῦσα
δομένη
διδόν
διδόμενον
δόν
δόμενον
Irregular Verbs
εἰμί be
Present
Imperfect
Future
Ind
Subj
Opt
Imp
Ind
Ind
Opt
Sg.
εἰμί
ὦ
εἴην
ἦν/ἦ
ἔσομαι
ἐσοίμην
εἶ
ᾖς
εἴης
ἴσθι
ἦσθα
ἔσει
ἔσοιο
ἐστί
ᾖ
εἴη
ἔστω
ἦν
ἔσται
ἔσοιτο
Pl.
ἐσμέν
ὦμεν
εἴημεν/εἶμεν
ἦμεν
ἐσόμεθα
ἐσοίμεθα
ἐστέ
ἦτε
εἴητε/εἶτε
ἔστε
ἦτε
ἔσεσθε
ἔσοισθε
εἰσί
ὦσι
εἴησαν/εἶεν
ἔστων/ὄντων
ἦσαν
ἔσονται
ἔσοιντο
INF
εἶναι
ἔσεσθαι
PT
ὤν
οὖσα
ὄν
ἐσόμενος, -η, -ὄν
306
Appendix I: Paradigms

εἶμι go
Present
Imperfect
Ind
Subj
Opt
Imp
Ind
Sg.
εἶμι
ἴω
ἴοιμι/ἰοίην
ᾖα/ᾔειν
εἶ
ἴῃς
ἴοις
ἴθι
ᾔεισθα/ᾔεις
εἶσι
ἴῃ
ἴοι
ἴτω
ᾔειν/ᾔει
Pl.
ἴμεν
ἴωμεν
ἴοιμεν
ᾖμεν
ἴτε
ἴητε
ἴοιτε
ἴτε
ᾖτε
ἴασι
ἴωσι
ἴοιεν
ἰόντων
ᾖσαν/ᾔεσαν
INF
ἰέναι
PT
ἰών
ἰοῦσα
ἰόν
φημίsay
Present
Imperfect
Ind
Subj
Opt
Imp
Ind
Sg.
φημί
φῶ
φαίην
ἔφην
φῄς
φῇς
φαίης
φαθί/φάθι
ἔφησθα/ἔφης
φησί
φῇ
φαίη
φάτω
ἔφη
Pl.
φαμέν
φῶμεν
φαῖμεν/φαίημεν
ἔφαμεν
φατέ
φῆτε
φαίητε
φάτε
ἔφατε
φασί
φῶσι
φαῖεν/φαίησαν
φάντων
ἔφασαν
INF
φάναι
PT
φάς
φᾶσα
φάν (poetic)
Attic prose uses φάσκων
8. PRINCIPAL PARTS OF VERBS
Definition of principal parts
The principal parts of verbs show the type of verb (active, deponent, thematic,
etc.), the changes in stem for different forms, what kind of future, aorist, per-
fect a verb has, and whether it has all the usual tenses and voices. For exam-
ple, is it deponent or does it have a deponent future? Is it thematic or
athematic? Is its aorist first or second? Is it missing some tenses or voices?
The principal parts are given in first person singular forms:
I Present: active indicative; middle indicative
II Future: active indicative; middle indicative
III Aorist: active indicative; middle indicative
8. Principal Parts of Verbs
307

IV Perfect: active indicative
V Perfect: middle indicative
VI Aorist: passive indicative
Tense systems and the endings of principal parts
Present (1st Principal Part [PP]) for present and imperfect active, middle, and
passive
thematic verbs, active -ω
thematic verbs deponent -ομαι
contract verbs -αω, -εω, -οω
athematic verbs -μι
athematic deponent -μαι
Future (2nd PP) for future active and middle
active -σω
deponent -σομαι
contract -ῶ, -οῦμαι
Aorist (3rd PP) for aorist active and middle
first aorist (sigmatic) -σα, (liquid/nasal) -α, -αμην
second aorist -ον, -ομην
irregular (athematic) aorist -ν
Perfect Active (4th PP) for perfect, pluperfect, future perfect active
first perfect -κα
second perfect -α
Perfect Middle (5th PP) for perfect, pluperfect, future perfect middle and
passive
vowel stems (vowel) -μαι
consonant stems -μμαι, -γμαι, -σμαι
Aorist Passive (6th PP) for aorist and future passive
first passive -θην
second passive -ην
Regular Principal Parts
-ω
λύω, λύσω, ἔλυσα, λέλυκα, λέλυμαι, ἐλύθην  unbind
-αω
τιμάω, τιμήσω, ἐτίμησα, τετίμηκα, τετίμημαι, ἐτιμήθην honor
-εω
ποιέω, ποιήσω, ἐποίησα, πεποίηκα, πεποίημαι, ἐποιήθην make, do
-οω
ἀξιόω, ἀξιώσω, ἠξίωσα, ἠξίωκα, ἠξίωμαι, ἠξιώθην deem worthy, ask
Irregular (Unpredictable) Principal Parts
The most important are marked with an asterisk (*). If unclear from the in-
dicative, aorist stems are given in parentheses. Imperfects and pluperfects are
given only if irregular. A Roman numeral refers to the lesson in which the verb
or the form is treated.
308
Appendix I: Paradigms

Α
*ἀγγέλλω, ἀγγελῶ, ἤγγειλα, ἤγγελκα, ἤγγελμαι, ἠγγέλθην
announce
*ἄγω, ἄξω, ἤγαγον (ἀγαγ-), ἦχα, ἦγμαι, ἤχθην (ἀχθ-)
lead
ᾀδω (= ἀείδω), ᾄσομαι, ᾖσα, ᾖσμαι, ᾔσθην
sing
αἰδέομαι, αἰδέσομαι, ᾔδεσμαι, ᾐδέσθην
respect, feel shame
*αἱρέω, αἱρήσω, εἷλον (ἑλ-), ᾕρηκα, ᾕρημαι, ᾑρέσθην
take, mid. choose
αἴρω, ἀρῶ, ἦρα, ἦρκα, ἦρμαι, ἤρθην
raise
*αἰσθάνομαι, αἰσθήσομαι, ᾐσθόμην, ᾔσθημαι
perceive
αἰσχύνω, αἰσχυνῶ, ᾔσχυνα, ᾐσχύνθην
disgrace, mid. feel ashamed
*ἀκούω, ἀκούσομαι, ἤκουσα, ἀκήκοα (plpf. ἠκηκόη / ἀκηκόη), ἠκούσθην
hear
ἁλίσκομαι, ἁλώσομαι, ἑάλων / ἥλων [XII], ἑάλωκα / ἥλωκα
be captured
ἁμαρτάνω, ἁμαρτήσομαι, ἥμαρτον, ἡμάρτηκα, ἡμάρτημαι, ἡμαρτήθην
err
*ἀνοίγνυμι / ἀνοίγω (impf. ἀνέῳγον), ἀνοίξω, ἀνέῳξα, ἀνέῳχα / ἀνέῳγα,
ἀνέῳγμαι (fut. pf. ἀνεῴξομαι), ἀνεῴχθην
open [XII]
*ἀποθνῄσκω, ἀποθανοῦμαι, ἀπέθανον, τέθνηκα (fut. pf. τεθνήξω)  die
*ἀποκρίνομαι (< κρίνω), ἀποκρινοῦμαι, ἀποκέκριμαι, ἀπεκρίθην
answer
*ἀποκτείνω, ἀποκτενῶ, ἀπέκτεινα, ἀπέκτονα
kill
*ἀπόλλυμι, ἀπολῶ, ἀπώλεσα, ἀπωλόμην (2 aor. mid.), ἀπολώλεκα / ἀπόλωλα
destroy [XII]
ἅπτω, ἅψω, ἧψα, ἧμμαι, ἥφθην
fasten, kindle, mid. touch
ἁρπάζω, ἁρπάσομαι, ἥρπασα, ἥρπακα, ἥρπασμαι, ἡρπάσθην
snatch
*ἄρχω, ἄρξω, ἦρξα, ἦρχα, ἦργμαι, ἤρχθην
begin, rule
*ἀφικνέομαι, ἀφίξομαι, ἀφικόμην, ἀφῖγμαι
arrive
Β
*βαίνω, βήσομαι, ἔβην [XII], βέβηκα
go
*βάλλω, βαλῶ, ἔβαλον, βέβληκα, βέβλημαι, ἐβλήθην
throw, hit
βλάπτω, βλάψω, ἔβλαψα, βέβλαφα, βέβλαμμαι, ἐβλάφην/ἐβλάβην
harm
βλέπω, βλέψομαι, ἔβλεψα
see
βοάω, βοήσομαι, ἐβόησα
shout
*βούλομαι, βουλήσομαι, βεβούλημαι, ἐβουλήθην
will, wish
Γ
*γαμέω, γαμῶ, ἔγημα, γεγάμηκα, γεγάμημαι
marry (act. of a man, mid. of a
woman)
γελάω, γελάσομαι, ἐγέλασα, ἐγελάσθην
laugh
γηράσκω or γηράω, γηράσομαι, ἐγήρασα, γεγήρακα
grow old
*γίγνομαι, γενήσομαι, ἐγενόμην, γέγονα (I am; pf. part. γεγώς), γεγένημαι,
(late: ἐγενήθην)
become, be
*γιγνώσκω, γνώσομαι, ἔγνων [XII], ἔγνωκα, ἔγνωσμαι, ἐγνώσθην
know
*γράφω, γράψω, ἔγραψα, γέγραφα, γέγραμμαι, ἐγράφην
write
Δ
δέδια or δέδοικα < δείδω [VIII]
fear
*δείκνυμι or δεικνύω, δείξω, ἔδειξα, δέδειχα, δέδειγμαι, ἐδείχθην
show [XII]
*δέχομαι, δέξομαι, ἐδεξάμην, δέδεγμαι, -εδέχθην
receive, await
δέω, δήσω, ἔδησα, δέδεκα, δέδεμαι, ἐδέθην
bind
*δέω, δεήσω, ἐδέησα, δεδέηκα, δεδέημαι, ἐδεήθην
need, lack, mid. ask; im-
pers. δεῖ, (ἔδει impf.), δεήσει, ἐδέησε
it is necessary
*διανοέομαι (<νοέω) διανοήσομαι, διενοήθην
think, perceive
8. Principal Parts of Verbs
309

*διαφθείρω, διαφθερῶ, διέφθειρα, διέφθαρκα and διέφθορα, διέφθαρμαι,
διεφθάρην
corrupt, destroy; 2 pf. be ruined
διδάσκω, διδάξω, ἐδίδαξα, δεδίδαχα, δεδίδαγμαι, ἐδιδάχθην
teach
*δίδωμι [XII], δώσω, ἔδωκα, (aor. pl.) ἔδομεν, δέδωκα, δέδομαι, ἐδόθην
give
διώκω, διώξω or διώξομαι, ἐδίωξα, δεδίωχα, ἐδιώχθην
pursue, prosecute
*δοκέω, δόξω, ἔδοξα, δέδογμαι -εδόχθην
think, seem
δράω, δράσω, ἔδρασα, δέδρακα, δέδραμαι, ἐδράσθην
do
*δύναμαι, δυνήσομαι, δεδύνημαι, ἐδυνήθην
be able
δύω, -δύσω, -έδυσα and ἔδυν, δέδυκα, δέδυμαι, -εδύθην
enter, go down
Ε
*ἐάω (impf. εἴων), ἐάσω, εἴασα, εἴακα, εἴαμαι, εἰάθην
permit, let alone
*ἐθέλω (θέλω), ἐθελήσω, ἠθέλησα, ἠθέληκα
wish, be willing
εἶδον
saw (see under ὁράω)
*εἰμί, ἔσομαι
be
*εἶμι
will go
*εἶπον
said (see under λέγω)
ἐλαύνω, ἐλῶ[XI], ἤλασα, -ελήλακα, ἐλήλαμαι, ἠλάθην
drive
*ἔοικα [VIII]
seem
ἐπιλανθάνομαι (< λανθάνω), ἐπιλήσομαι, ἐπελαθόμην ἐπιλέλησμαι
forget
*ἐπισκοπέω, ἐπισκέψομαι, ἐπεσκεψάμην, ἐπέσκεμμαι
look over
ἐπίσταμαι (impf. ἠπιστάμην), ἐπιστήσομαι, ἠπιστήθην
understand
ἕπομαι (impf. εἱπόμην), ἕψομαι, ἑσπόμην (aor. stem σπ-)
follow
ἐράω (impf. ἤρων), aor. ἠράσθην
love
ἐρρήθην
was said (see under λέγω)
*ἔρχομαι, ἐλεύσομαι, ἦλθον, ἐλήλυθα
come, go
ἐσθίω (impf. ἤσθιον), ἔδομαι, ἔφαγον, ἐδήδοκα, -εδήδεσμαι, ἠδέσθην
eat
*εὑρίσκω, εὑρήσω, ηὗρον/εὗρον, ηὕρηκα/εὕρηκα, εὕρημαι, εὑρέθην
find
εὔχομαι, εὔξομαι, ηὐξάμην, ηὖγμαι
pray, boast
*ἔχω (impf. εἶχον), ἕξω and σχήσω, ἔσχον (aor. stem σχ-), ἔσχηκα, -έσχημαι,
ἐσχέθην
have
Ζ
ζάω, ζήσω/ζήσομαι, ἔζησα, ἔζηκα
live
Η
ἥδομαι, ἡσθήσομαι, ἥσθην
be pleased
ἥκω (impf. ἧκον), ἥξω
have come, be here
Θ
θάπτω, θάψω, ἔθαψα, τέθαμμαι, ἐτάφην
bury
θαυμάζω, θαυμάσομαι, ἐθαύμασα, τεθαύμακα, ἐθαυμάσθην
wonder, admire
θέω, θεύσομαι (other tenses from τρέχω)
run
θνῄ σκω (see under ἀποθνῄ σκω)
die
θύω, θύσω, ἔθυσα, τέθυκα, τέθυμαι, ἐτύθην
sacrifice
Ι
*ἵημι [XII], -ἥσω, -ἧκα, εἷκα, -εἷμαι, -εἵθην
send
ἱκνέομαι (see under ἀφικνέομαι)
come
310
Appendix I: Paradigms

*ἵστημι [XII], στήσω, ἔστησα and ἔστην, ἕστηκα (plpf. εἱστήκη, fut. pf. ἑστήξω),
ἕσταμαι, ἐστάθην
stand, make stand
Κ
καθέζομαι or καθίζομαι (impf. ἐκαθεζόμην), καθεδοῦμαι or καθιζήσομαι,
ἐκαθισάμην
sit
κάθημαι (< ἧμαι) (impf. ἐκαθήμην)
sit
καίω, καύσω, ἔκαυσα, -κέκαυκα, κέκαυμαι, ἐκαύθην
burn
*καλέω, καλῶ[XI], ἐκάλεσα, κέκληκα, κέκλημαι, ἐκλήθην
call
*κεῖμαι, κείσομαι [XII]
lie
κελεύω, κελεύσω, ἐκέλευσα, κεκέλευκα, κεκέλευσμαι, ἐκελεύσθην
command
κλέπτω, κλέψω/κλέψομαι, ἔκλεψα, κέκλοφα, κέκλεμμαι, ἐκλάπην
steal
κομίζω, κομιῶ, ἐκόμισα, κεκόμικα, κεκόμισμαι, ἐκομίσθην
care for, carry
κόπτω, κόψω, ἔκοψα, -κέκοφα, κέκομμαι, -εκόπην
cut
*κρίνω, κρινῶ, ἔκρινα, κέκρικα, κέκριμαι, ἐκρίθην
judge
κρύπτω, κρύψω, ἔκρυψα, κέκρυμμαι, ἐκρύφθην
hide
*κτάομαι, κτήσομαι, ἐκτησάμην, κέκτημαι
acquire, pf. possess
κτείνω (see under ἀποκτείνω)
kill
Λ
*λαμβάνω, λήψομαι, ἔλαβον, εἴληφα, εἴλημμαι, ἐλήφθην
take
λανθάνω, λήσω, ἔλαθον, λέληθα
escape notice, lie hidden
*λέγω, λέξω and ἐρῶ, ἔλεξα and εἶπον, εἴρηκα, λέλεγμαι and εἴρημαι, ἐλέχθην
and ἐρρήθην
say
λέγω, -λέξω, -έλεξα, -είλοχα, -είλεγμαι and -λέλεγμαι, -ελέγην
collect, count
*λείπω, λείψω, ἔλιπον, λέλοιπα, λέλειμμαι, ἐλείφθην
leave
Μ
μαίνομαι, ἔμηνα, μέμηνα, ἐμάνην
be mad
*μανθάνω, μαθήσομαι, ἔμαθον, μεμάθηκα
learn
μάχομαι, μαχοῦμαι, ἐμαχεσάμην, μεμάχημαι
fight
μέλει, μελήσει, ἐμέλησε, μεμέληκε
it is a care
*μέλλω, μελλήσω, ἐμέλλησα
intend, be about to
*μένω, μενῶ, ἔμεινα, μεμένηκα
remain
μιμνῄ σκω, -μνήσω, -έμνησα, μέμνημαι, ἐμνήσθην
remind, mid. remember
Ν
*νέμω, νεμῶ, ἔνειμα, νενέμηκα, νενέμημαι, ἐνεμήθην
distribute
*νομίζω, νομιῶ, ἐνόμισα, νενόμικα, νενόμισμαι, ἐνομίσθην
believe, think
Ο
οἴγνυμι (see under ἀνοίγνυμι)
open
*οἶδα [VIII] plpf. ᾔδη, εἴσομαι
know
*οἴομαι (1st person: οἶμαι, impf. ᾤμην), οἰήσομαι, ᾠήθην
think
ὄλλυμι (see under ἀπόλλυμι)
destroy
*ὁράω (impf. ἑώρων), ὄψομαι, εἶδον (aor. stem ἰδ-), ἑόρακα/ἑώρακα, ἑώραμαι/
ὦμμαι, ὤφθην
see
ὀφείλω, ὀφειλήσω, ὠφείλησα, 2 aor. ὤφελον (would that, if only!), ὠφείληκα
owe
8. Principal Parts of Verbs
311

Π
*πάσχω, πείσομαι, ἔπαθον, πέπονθα
suffer, experience
*πείθω, πείσω, ἔπεισα (2 aor. ἔπιθον), πέπεικα/πέποιθα (trust), πέπεισμαι,
ἐπείσθην
persuade, mid. obey
πειράομαι, πειράσομαι, ἐπειρασάμην, πεπείραμαι, ἐπειράθην
try
*πέμπω, πέμψω, ἔπεμψα, πέπομφα, πέπεμμαι, ἐπέμφθην
send
πίμπλημι, -πλήσω, -έπλησα, -πέπληκα, -πέπλησμαι, -επλήσθην
fill
πίνω, πίομαι, ἔπιον, πέπωκα, -πέπομαι, -επόθην
drink
*πίπτω, πεσοῦμαι, ἔπεσον, πέπτωκα
fall
πλέω [XI], πλεύσομαι/πλευσοῦμαι, ἔπλευσα, πέπλευκα, πέπλευσμαι
sail
πνέω, πνευσοῦμαι/-πνεύσομαι, ἔπνευσα, -πέπνευκα
breathe blow
*πράττω, πράξω, ἔπραξα, πέπραχα/πέπραγα, πέπραγμαι, ἐπράχθην
do
*πυνθάνομαι, πεύσομαι, ἐπυθόμην, πέπυσμαι
learn, inquire
Ρ
ῥήγνυμι, -ῥήξω, ἔρρηξα, -έρρωγα, ἐρράγην
break
ῥίπτω, ῥίψω, ἔρριψα, ἔρριμμαι, ἐρρίφθην
throw
ῥύομαι, ῥύσομαι, ἐρρυσάμην
rescue, defend
Σ
σιγάω, σιγήσομαι, ἐσίγησα, σεσίγηκα, σεσίγημαι, ἐσιγήθην
be silent
σκεδάννυμι, -σκεδῶ, -εσκέδασα, ἐσκέδασμαι, ἐσκεδάσθην
scatter
*σκέπτομαι/σκοπέω, σκέψομαι, ἐσκεψάμην, ἔσκεμμαι
view
*στέλλω, στελῶ, ἔστειλα, -έσταλκα, ἔσταλμαι, ἐστάλην
send
*στρέφω, -στρέψω, ἔστρεψα, ἔστραμμαι, ἐστρέφθην/ἐστράφην
turn
σῴζω, σώσω, ἔσωσα, σέσωκα, σέσωμαι, ἐσώθην
save
Τ
τάττω, τάξω, ἔταξα, τέταχα, τέταγμαι, ἐτάχθην
arrange
τείνω, τενῶ, -έτεινα, τέτακα, τέταμαι, -ετάθην
stretch
τέμνω, τεμῶ, ἔτεμον, -τέτμηκα, τέτμημαι, ἐτμήθην
cut
*τίθημι, θήσω, ἔθηκα (pl. ἔθεμεν), τέθηκα, τέθειμαι, ἐτέθην
put
*τίκτω, τέξομαι, ἔτεκον, τέτοκα
bring forth
τιτρώσκω, τρώσω, ἔτρωσα, τέτρωμαι, ἐτρώθην
wound
*τρέπω, τρέψω, ἔτρεψα, ἐτραπόμην (2 aor. mid.), τέτροφα, τέτραμμαι, ἐτρέφθην/
ἐτράπην
turn, mid. flee
*τρέφω, θρέψω, ἔθρεψα, τέτροφα, τέθραμμαι, ἐθρέφθην/ἐτράφην
nourish
τρέχω, δραμοῦμαι, ἔδραμον, -δεδράμηκα, -δεδράμημαι
run
τρίβω, τρίψω, ἔτριψα, τέτριφα, τέτριμμαι, ἐτρίφθην/ἐτρίβην
rub
*τυγχάνω, τεύξομαι, ἔτυχον, τετύχηκα
happen, hit, obtain
Υ
ὑπισχνέομαι, ὑποσχήσομαι, ὑπεσχόμην, ὑπέσχημαι
promise
Φ
*φαίνω, φανῶ, ἔφηνα, πέφαγκα/πέφηνα, πέφασμαι, ἐφάνθην/ἐφάνην
show
*φέρω, οἴσω, ἤνεγκον/ἤνεγκα, ἐνήνοχα, ἐνήνεγμαι, ἠνέχθην
carry, bear
*φεύγω, φεύξομαι/φευξοῦμαι, ἔφυγον, πέφευγα
flee
*φημί, φήσω, ἔφησα
say
φθάνω, φθήσομαι, ἔφθασα, ἔφθην
anticipate
312
Appendix I: Paradigms

φθείρω (see under διαφθείρω)
corrupt
*φοβέομαι, φοβήσομαι, πεφόβημαι, ἐφοβήθην
fear
φράζω, φράσω, ἔφρασα, πέφρακα, πέφρασμαι, ἐφράσθην
tell, mid. devise
*φυλάττω, φυλάξω, ἐφύλαξα, πεφύλαχα, πεφύλαγμαι, ἐφυλάχθην
guard
*φύω, φύσω, ἔφυσα/ἔφυν, πέφυκα
produce; 2 aor. grew, was; pf. be by nature
Χ
χαίρω, χαιρήσω, κεχάρηκα, ἐχάρην
rejoice
χέω, fut. χέω, ἔχεα, κέχυκα, κέχυμαι, ἐχύθην
pour (mostly in compounds)
*χράομαι, χρήσομαι, ἐχρησάμην, κέχρημαι, ἐχρήσθην
use
χράω, χρήσω, ἔχρησα, κέχρηκα
utter an oracle, mid. consult an oracle
χρή(subj. χρῃ , opt. χρείη, inf. χρῆναι) impf. χρῆν or ἔχρην
it is necessary
Ψ
ψεύδω, ψεύσω, ἔψευσα, ἔψευσμαι, ἐψεύσθην
deceive, mid. lie
Ω
ὠνέομαι (impf. ἐωνούμην), ὠνήσομαι, ἐώνημαι, ἐωνήθην
buy
8. Principal Parts of Verbs
313


APPENDIX II: SYNTAX
315
1. CASES
Most of the examples are from Euripides’ Alcestis and Plato’s Euthyphro.
Nominative
Most Common Nominative Endings
First declension: -η, -α, -[τ]ης, -ας; -αι
Second declension: -ος, -ον; -οι, -α
Third declension: -ς [-ξ, ψ], -ων, -ος, -[μ]α; -ες [-εις], -α [-η]
Uses of the Nominative Case
a. Subject: the subject of a finite verb is nominative. A finite verb is one in
which the ending defines the subject, as opposed to an infinitive.
Examples:
ἀπωλόμεσθα πάντες, οὐ κείνη μόνη. We are all lost, not she only.
–Alcestis 825
ἔσται, τάδ ̓ ἔσται. These things will be, (they) will be
—Alcestis 327
b. Predicate nominative: a nominative is used in the predicate after verbs
meaning be, become, appear, be named and the like, in agreement with the sub-
ject. A few of these verbs in Greek are εἰμί, γίγνομαι, φαίνομαι, δοκέω, αἱρέομαι
(be chosen), καλέομαι (be called), λέγομαι (be said, be called).
Examples:
μαθητὴς δὴ γέγονα σός . . . I have, then, become your pupil.
—Euthyphro 5a

οὐχ ὁμολογήσω ἄκλητος ἥκειν. I shall not admit that I have come
 uninvited.
—Plato, Symposium 174d
Genitive
Most Common Genitive Endings
First declension: -ης, -ας, -ου; -ῶν
Second declension: -ου; -ων
Third declension: -ος [-ους, -ως]; -ων
Uses of the Genitive Case
Most uses of the genitive come under two headings: the defining (or adjec-
tival) genitive, which is used for one noun depending on another; and the
ablatival genitive, used for separation.
a. Possession: The genitive (in the attributive position) is used for possession
and other close relationships.
Examples:
γυνὴ μὲν οὖν ὄλωλεν ̓Αδμήτου, ξένε. Rather the wife of Admetus is dead,
stranger.
—Alcestis 821
τοῦ ἡμετέρου προγόνου, ὦ Εὐθύφρων, ἔοικεν εἶναι Δαιδάλου τὰ ὑπὸ
σοῦ λεγόμενα. The things said by you, Euthyphro, seem to me of our
 ancestor, Daedalus (i.e., seem to belong to our ancestor, Daedalus; this is
also called the predicate genitive of characteristic).
—Euthyphro 11c
b. Partitive Genitive: (in the predicate position) used for the whole from
which a part is taken. It can be used with nouns, adjectives, and verbs.
Examples:
οἶσθα γὰρ εἴπερ τις ἄλλος ἀνθρώπων. For you know if anyone else of
men [does].
—Euthyphro 15d
This genitive is common with verbs of touching, remembering, and
forgetting.
ἔθιγες ψυχᾶς, ἔθιγες δὲ φρενῶν. You have touched my soul, you have
touched my senses. [ἔθιγες < θιγγάνω touch; ψυχᾶς = ψυχῆς]
—Alcestis 109
316
Appendix II: Syntax

c. Genitive of Comparison: used with comparative adjectives and adverbs
and with verbs implying comparison.
Example:
ψυχῆς γὰρ οὐδέν ἐστι τιμιώτερον. For nothing is more precious than life.
—Alcestis 301
d. Genitive of Agent: the one by whom something is done is expressed by
ὑπό(by) with the genitive.
Example:
φιλεῖται ὑπὸ θεῶν πάντων. It is loved by all the gods.
—Euthyphro 10d
e. Genitive of Cause: verbs of emotion take a genitive of the cause of the
feeling.
Examples:
οὗδὴ χολωθεὶς τέκτονας Δίου πυρὸς / κτείνω Κύκλωπας. Angered at
which, I killed the Cyclopes, workers of Zeus’ fire.
—Alcestis 5–6
This genitive is often used in exclamations.
ἰώ μοι τύχας [= τύχης]. Ah me for my [ill] fortune.
—Alcestis 398
f. Genitive of Source: with verbs of hearing, the genitive is used for the per-
son or thing heard; the sound heard is accusative.
Example:
ἀλλ ̓ ἄκουέ μου. But hear me.
—Alcestis 781
g. Genitive with verbs: Verbs of ruling take the genitive, which depends on
the nominal idea of the verb (e.g., βασιλεύω be king of).
Verbs of reaching and obtaining take a genitive of the thing attained.
Examples:
πολλῶν μὲν ἄρχεις. You rule over many.
—Alcestis 687
ὁσίου γὰρ ἀνδρος, ὅσιος ὢν ἐτύγχανον. Being holy I met with a holy man.
—Alcestis 10
1. Cases
317

h. Genitive of Separation (ablatival use): the genitive is used with verbs, ad-
jectives, adverbs, and prepositions implying separation from.
Examples:
ἐσθλῆς γάρ, οὐδεῖς ἀντερεῖ, καὶ σώφρονος/γυναικὸς ἡμάρτηκας. For
you have lost a noble—no one will deny it—and chaste wife.
—Alcestis 615–16
ἀλλὰ σμικροῦ τινος ἔτι ἐνδεής εἰμί. But I am still in need of a little
 something.
—Euthyphro 12e
i. Genitive of Time within which: The genitive is used of the period of time
within which something happens.
Example:
ταῦτα τῆς ἡμέρας ἐγένετο. These things happened during the day.
—Xenophon, Anabasis 7.4.14
j. Genitive Absolute: a participial clause (noun/pronoun and participle) in
the genitive gives attendant circumstances of the main action.
Example:
τόδε δέ σου ἐνενόησα ἅμα λέγοντος. While you were speaking, I was
thinking about this.
—Euthyphro 9c
k. Other uses of the Genitive: subjective, objective, material.
Examples:
The subjective genitive is used for the subject of a feeling. τῶν
βαρβάρων φόβος, the barbarians’ fear (the fear that they feel)
—Xenophon, Anabasis 1.2.17
The objective genitive is used for the object of a feeling or action.
τοῦ ὕδατος ἐπιθυμία desire for water
—Thucydides 2.52
The genitive is used for material or contents. ἕρκος ὀδόντων the
 barrier of teeth (i.e., consisting of teeth)
—Homer, Iliad 4.850, etc.
Dative
Most Common Dative Endings
First declension: -ῃ, -ᾳ; -αις [-αισι]
Second declension: -ῳ; -οις [-οισι]
Third declension: -ι; -σι [ν]
318
Appendix II: Syntax

Uses of the Dative Case
The dative is used for the party interested (including the indirect object, the
dative of advantage, and the dative of possession, to, for, of), for the instru-
ment (means or manner, by, with), and for the locative (place where and time
when, in, on, at).
a. Indirect object: the person or thing indirectly affected by the verb goes into
the dative.
Example:
θάψεις δ ̓αὐτὸς ὢν αὐτῆς φονεύς,/δίκας τε δώσεις σοῖσι κηδεσταῖς ἔτι.
You will bury her though you are yourself her murderer and you will still
pay the penalty to your in-laws.
—Alcestis 730–1
b. Dative with Verbs: many intransitive and impersonal verbs take the dative:
verbs meaning benefit, obey, serve, assist, please, satisfy, advise, and their oppo-
sites; and those expressing friendliness, hostility, blame, anger, reproach, likeness,
accompaniment, and agreement. Compounds in συν- and some in προς-, παρα-,
ἐν- and ἐπι- take the dative.
Examples:
οὐκ ἤρεσκέ σοι μόρον Ἀδμήτου / διακωλῦσαι; Wasn’t it enough for you
to have prevented the death of Admetus?
—Alcestis 32
καὶ τοῖσδέγ ̓οἴκοις ἐκδίκως προσωφελεῖν. And to help this house
 unjustly.
—Alcestis 41
οὐχ ἕπομαι, ὦ Σώκρατες, τοῖς λεγομένοις. I do not follow the things
 being said, Socrates.
—Euthyphro 12a
c. Dative with Adjectives: the dative is used with adjectives expressing
friendliness, hostility, likeness, and meanings similar to those of verbs in b.
Example:
σὺ δ ̓εἶ παλαιὸς δεσπόταις ἐμοῖς φίλος. You are a friend of long standing
to my masters.
—Alcestis 212
d. Dative of Advantage/Disadvantage: The person or thing to whose advan-
tage or disadvantage something is or is done is in the dative and is usually
translated with the English preposition for.
Example:
πάσαις δ ̓ἔθηκεν εὐκλεέστατον βίον/γυναιξίν, ἔργον τλᾶσα γενναῖον
τόδε. She has made life most glorious for all women, having undergone
this noble deed.
—Alcestis 623–4
1. Cases
319

The Ethical dative is a special type of the dative of advantage/disadvan-
tage, in which a personal pronoun in the dative has the force of for my sake, for
your sake, etc.
Example:
οὐ γὰρ ἐθέλουσι σοι μένειν, ὡς καὶ αὐτῷ σοι δοκεῖ. For they are not
willing to stand still for you, as it seems to you yourself.
—Euthyphro 11c
e. Dative of Possession: with εἰμί and γίγνομαι, the dative is used of the pos-
sessor, with the thing possessed in the nominative.
Example:
μόνος γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἦσθα, κοὔτις ἐλπὶς ἦν / σοῦ κατθανόντος ἄλλα
φιτεύσειν τέκνα. For you were alone to them (you were their only child)
and there was no hope (they had no hope)—once you were dead—to pro-
duce more children.
—Alcestis 293–4
f. Dative of Agent: used with the perfect and pluperfect passive (and rarely
with other passive tenses).
Example:
πολλαὶ θεραπεῖαι τοῖς ἰατροῖς ηὕρηνται. Many cures have been found by
the doctors.
—Isocrates 8.39.
g. Instrumental Dative: cause, manner, and means are expressed by the dative.
Examples:
οὐδ ̓ἁλίσκεται τέχνῃ. . . . And it is not grasped by art. . . .
—Alcestis 786
The Dative of Respect is a form of the dative of manner.
λόγῳγὰρ ἦσαν οὐκ ἔργῳφίλοι. For they were friends in word, not in
deed.
—Alcestis 339
The Dative of Degree of Difference is a form of the dative of manner used
with comparatives.
κινδυνεύω ἄρα, ὦ ἑταῖρε, ἐκείνου τοῦ ἀνδρὸς δεινότερος γεγονέναι
τὴν τέχνην, τοσούτῳ ὅσῳὁ μὲν τὰ αὑτοῦ μόνα ἐποίει οὐ μένοντα, ἐγὼ
δὲ πρὸς τοῖς ἐμαυτοῦ, ὡς ἔοικε, καὶ τὰ ἀλλότρια. I am likely, then, my
friend, to be more clever than that man, insofar as [by so much as] he made
only his own [creations] not to stay put, but I, as it seems, in addition to
my own, also [make] other people’s [not to stay put].
—Euthyphro 11d
320
Appendix II: Syntax

h. Locative Dative: The dative is used for place where (with a preposition)
and time when (with or without a preposition).
Examples:
Ἄδμητον ἐν δόμοισιν κιγχάνω; Do I find Admetus in the house?
—Alcestis 477
θάπτειν τιν ̓ἐν τῇ δ  ̓ἡμέρᾳμέλλω νεκρόν. I am going to bury a dead
 person on this day.
—Alcestis 513
Accusative
Most Common Accusative Endings
First declension: -ην, -αν; -ας
Second declension: -ον; -ους, -α
Third declension: -ν, -α, -ος, -μα; -ας, -εις, -α
Uses of the Accusative Case
The accusative is used for the direct object, for the end of motion (terminal,
to, toward), as subject of an infinitive, and in various adverbial relationships.
a. Direct Object: the direct object is in the accusative. Two accusatives may
be used with one verb.
Examples:
ὀνομάζουσι μέντοι αὐτόν, ὡς ἐγᾦμαι [= ἐγὼ οἶμαι], Μέλητον. They call
him, I think, Meletus.
—Euthyphro 2b
τίδῆτα σ ̓[= σε] ἠδίκησα; What wrong have I done you?
—Alcestis 689
b. Cognate Accusative (internal object): the cognate accusative repeats the
meaning already contained in the verb and can be used with both transitive
and intransitive verbs.
Example:
καὶ δὴ καὶ τὸν ἄλλον βίον ὅτι ἄμεινον βιωσοίμην. And in particular that
I will live the rest of my life better. 
—Euthyphro 16a
c. Subject of Infinitive: the accusative is used as the subject of an infinitive.
Example:
φησὶ γάρ με ποιητὴν εἶναι θεῶν. For he says that I am a maker of gods.
—Euthyphro 16a
1. Cases
321

d. Terminal Accusative: the place to which (usually with a preposition, εἰς,
πρός, παρά, etc., but in poetry often without a preposition) is accusative.
Example:
εἰς Ἅιδου δόμους into the house of Hades
—Alcestis 25
e. Accusative of respect: an adverbial accusative that tells in what respect
something is true.
Example:
οὔτ᾿ εἶδος ἄλλως ἐκπρεπεστάτη γυνήnor a woman in form otherwise
most beautiful
—Alcestis 333
f. Extent of Time or Space is in the accusative.
Example:
ἡδὺ γὰρ φίλους/κἀν νυκτὶ λεύσσειν, ὅντιν’ ἂν παρῇ χρόνον. For it is
sweet to see loved ones even at night for whatever time he/she is there.
—Alcestis 355–6
g. Accusative Absolute: used instead of the genitive absolute when the par-
ticiple represents an impersonal verb.
Example:
θνῄσκω, παρόν μοι μὴ θανεῖν ὑπὲρ σέθεν. I am dying, it being possible
[although it is possible] for me not to die on your behalf.
—Alcestis 284
Vocative
Most Common Vocative Endings
First declension: -η, -α; -αι same as nominative
Second declension: -ε, -ον; -οι, -α
Third declension: like nominative or like base
Use of the Vocative Case
Direct Address: the vocative is used for direct address either with or without
ὦ, oh!
Example:
ΑΔ. χαῖρ’, ὦ Διὸς παῖΠερσέως τ’ ἀφ’ αἵματος.
ΗΡ. Ἄδμητε, καὶ σὺ χαῖρε, Θεσσαλῶν ἄναξ.
Admetus: Hello, son of Zeus of the blood of Perseus.
Heracles: Admetus, hello to you too, king of the Thessalians.
—Alcestis 509–10
322
Appendix II: Syntax

2. VERB CONSTRUCTIONS
Examples have been taken from Plato’s Crito unless otherwise noted.
Conditions
Present General
ἐάν [ἄν, ἤν] + SUBJUNCTIVE – PRESENT INDICATIVE
44d  οἷοί τ’ εἰσὶν οἱ πολλοὶ οὐ τὰ σμικρότατα τῶν κακῶν ἐξεργάζεσθαι
. . . ἐάν τις ἐν αὐτοῖς διαβεβλημένος ᾖ. The many are able to do no slight
harm, if anyone is slandered among them.
47a–b  τὸν νοῦν προσέχει . . . ὃς ἂν τυγχάνῃἰατρὸς ἢ παιδοτρίβης ὤν;
Does he pay attention to [only the one] who happens to be a doctor or a per-
sonal trainer?
Past General
εἰ+ OPTATIVE – IMPERFECT INDICATIVE
50e  ἢ πρὸς μὲν ἄρα σοι τὸν πατέρα οὐκ ἦν τὸ δίκαιον . . . ὥστ’ ἅπερ
πάσχοις, ταῦτα καὶ ἀντιποιεῖν . . . it was not right for you to do in return
to your father whatever you happened to suffer. . . .
Future More Vivid
ἐάν [ἄν, ἤν] + SUBJUNCTIVE – FUTURE (or equivalent)
Relative (pronoun or adverb) + ἄν + SUBJUNCTIVE – FUTURE (or equivalent)
44a  τῇ γάρ που ὑστεραίᾳ δεῖμε ἀποθνῄσκειν ἢ ᾖ ἂν ἔλθῃτὸ πλοῖον. For
I am to be put to death on the day after (that on which) the ship comes.
44b  ἐὰν σὺ ἀποθάνῃς . . . ἔτι δὲ καὶ πολλοῖς δόξω. . . . If you die, I will
seem to many. . . .
45b–c  πολλαχοῦ καὶ ἄλλοσε ὅποι ἂν ἀφίκῃ ἀγαπήσουσίσε. Also in
many other places, wherever you go they will love you.
54d  ἐὰν λέγῃς παρὰ ταῦτα, μάτην ἐρεῖς. If you say [anything] besides
this, you will speak in vain.
Future Less Vivid
Present: εἰ + OPTATIVE – OPTATIVE + ἄν
should–would
Phaedo 69b  οὐ πολλὴ ἄν ἀλογία εἴη, εἰ φοβοῖτο τὸν θάνατον ὁ τοιοῦτος;
Wouldn’t it be a great absurdity if such a person should fear death?
2. Verb Constructions
323

Contrary to Fact
Present: εἰ + IMPERFECT – IMPERFECT + ἄν
were – would be
52b  οὐ γὰρ ἄν ποτε . . . ἐν αὐτῇ ἐπεδήμεις, εἰ μή σοι διαφερόντως
ἤρεσκε. . . . for you would not continue to stay in it, if it were not pleasing
to you more than to others. . . .
Past: εἰ + AORIST – AORIST + ἄν (or PLUPERFECT)
had – would have
Apology 36a  νῦν δ’, ὡς ἔοικεν, εἰ τριάκοντα μόναι μετέπεσον τῶν
ψήφων, ἀποπεφεύγη ἄν. But now, as it appears, if only thirty of the votes
had been cast differently, I would stand acquitted.
Infinitive Constructions
Articular Infinitive
The infinitive used as a noun (like a gerund). The article allows the use of dif-
ferent cases of the infinitive.
43a  διὰ τὸπολλάκις δεῦρο φοιτᾶν on account of coming here often
47e  ἐκτὸς εἶ τοῦμέλλειν ἀποθνῄσκειν αὔριον. You are outside the like-
lihood of being put to death tomorrow.
49d  τὸγάρ που κακῶς ποιεῖν ἀνθρώπους τοῦ ἀδικεῖν οὐδὲν διαφέρει
for to treat people badly is no different from doing injustice
Indirect Statement (Infinitive Construction)
Verb of Saying/Thinking: (SUBJECT ACCUSATIVE) | INFINITIVE
43d  οὐ μέντοι οἶμαι ἥξειν αὐτὸτήμερον. In fact I think it will not come
today.
47d  ὑπὸ τῶν οἰομένων τι λέγειν by those who think they are saying
something
πρίν with the Infinitive
The use of before before an affirmative clause
46d  πρὶν μὲν ἐμὲ δεῖν ἀποθνῄσκειν καλῶς ἐλέγετο, νῦν δὲ. . . . before it
was necessary for me to die it was well said, but now. . . .
Result clauses (Indicative or Infinitive)
Actual Result ὥστε + INDICATIVE
48a  ὥστε πρῶτον μὲν ταύτῃ οὐκ ὀρθῶς εἰσηγεῖ. . . . so that first you are
not correctly introducing (an argument) in this way. . . .
324
Appendix II: Syntax

Natural Result ὥστε + INFINITIVE
45c  ἀσφάλειάν σοι παρέξονται ὥστε σε μηδένα λυπεῖν τῶν κατὰ
Θετταλίαν. They will provide you security so that no one of all those in Thes-
saly would harass you.
Participles and Verbals
Future Participle of Purpose
51b  ἐάν τ’ εἰς πόλεμον ἄγῃ τρωθησόμενον ἢ ἀποθανούμενον. . . . if it
leads (you) into war, to be wounded or killed. . . .
Genitive Absolute
A noun or other substantive in the genitive with a participle in the genitive
shows the circumstances (time, cause, concession, condition) surrounding or
attending the main action.
NOUN/PRONOUN – PARTICIPLE IN GENITIVE
43d  ἢ τὸ πλοῖον ἀφῖκται ἐκ Δήλου, οὗδεῖ ἀφικομένου τεθνάναι με; Or
has the ship arrived from Delos, which, when it arrives (at the arrival of
which) I must die?
44c  ἡμῶν προθυμουμένων (though) we are eager
48b  μὴ ἀφιέντων Ἀθηναίων if the Athenians do not permit (it)
Accusative Absolute
Impersonal verbs go into the accusative absolute rather than the genitive
absolute.
45c  ἐξὸν σωθῆναι it being possible to be rescued
45d  οὕς σοι ἐξὸν καὶ ἐκθρέψαι καὶ ἐκπαιδεῦσαι οἰχήσει καταλιπ́ ων.
. . . it being possible for you to rear and educate them, you will leave them in
the lurch. . . .
Verbals in -τέον
it is necessary, one must
46b  σκοπεῖσθαι οὖν χρὴ ἡμᾶς εἴτε ταῦτα πρακτέον εἴτε μή. We must
consider whether it is necessary to do these things or not.
47b  ταύτῃ ἄρα αὐτῷ πρακτέον καὶ γυμναστέον καὶ ἐδεστέον γε καὶ
ποτέον In this way, he must act and exercise and eat and drink
2. Verb Constructions
325

Subjunctive: Independent Uses
Deliberative Subjunctive
are we to . . .
52d  τί φῶμεν πρὸς ταῦτα, ὦ Κρίτων; What are we to say to this, Crito?
Prohibitive Subjunctive
In second person and less commonly in third person (Smyth 1800b): Don’t, let
not
54d  ἀλλὰ μή σε πείσῃΚρίτων ποιεῖν ἃ λέγει μᾶλλον ἢ ἡμεῖς. But let not
Crito convince you to do what he says rather than [what] we [say].
Hortatory Subjunctive
Let’s
54e  καὶ πράττωμεν ταύτῃ, ἐπειδὴ ταύτῃ ὁ θεὸς ὑφηγεῖται. And let us do
[it] this way, since the god guides [us] this way.
Subjunctive of Doubtful (Cautious) Assertion
“The present Subjunctive with μὴ may express a doubtful assertion, with μὴ
οὐ a doubtful negation. . . . A touch of irony often marks this use which is
chiefly Platonic.” (Smyth 1801)
48c  μὴ ὡς ἀληθῶς ταῦτα, ὦ Κρίτων, σκέμματα ᾖτῶν . . . I’m wondering
if maybe these might really be the considerations of those who . . .
48c  μὴ οὐδὲν ἄλλο σκεπτέον ᾖmaybe nothing else should be considered
48d  μὴ οὐ δέῃmaybe it isn’t necessary
Optative: Independent Uses
Optative of Wish
Phaedrus 279c πλούσιον δὲ νομίζοιμι τὸν σοφόν. And may I believe the
wise man wealthy.
Potential Optative
The optative with ἄν shows possibility: may, might, would, could.
43b  καὶ γὰρ ἄν, ὦ Κρίτων, πλημμελὲς εἴη. . . . and really, Crito, it would
be out of tune. . . .
43c  ἣν ἐγὼ . . . ἐν τοῖς βαρύτατ’ ἂν ἐνέγκαιμι which I of all of them would
bear most grievously.
44c  καίτοι τίς ἂν αἰσχίων εἴη ταύτης δόξα; And yet what reputation
could be more disgraceful than this?
48a  φαίη γ’ ἄν τις someone might say
326
Appendix II: Syntax

Subjunctive or Optative: Sequence of Moods
The usage of the subjunctive versus the optative in some constructions de-
pends on the sequence of moods:
1. If the leading verb is primary, use the subjunctive [MAY] in the subordi-
nate clause.
Primary Verb Tenses: present, future, perfect, future perfect
2. If the leading verb is secondary, use the optative [MIGHT] in the subordi-
nate clause.
Secondary Verb Tenses: imperfect, aorist, pluperfect
See also Conditions.
Object Clause After A Verb Of Fearing
After a verb of fearing: μή (that, lest); μὴ οὐ(that . . . not) + the subjunctive or
optative
44e  ἆρά γε μὴ ἐμοῦ προμηθεῖ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτηδείων, μὴ. . . οἱ
συκοφάνται ἡμῖν πράγματα παρέχωσιν ὡς σὲ ἐνθένδε ἐκκλέψασιν, καὶ
ἀναγκασθῶμεν. . . .
Do not then worry about me and your other friends, that the informers
may cause us trouble on the ground that we sneaked you out [of prison],
and we be compelled to. . . .
Purpose Clauses
Used with the subjunctive or optative following ἵνα, ὅπως, ὡς that, to, in order
that. The negative is μή.
Subjunctive if the introductory verb is present, future or perfect.
Optative if the introductory verb is imperfect, aorist, or pluperfect.
ἵνα, ὅπως, ὡς — SUBJUNCTIVE, OPTATIVE
47c  ἵνα μὴπάντα διίωμεν so that we do not go over everything
After a secondary tense the subjunctive is used in place of the optative to set
“forth a person’s previous purpose in the form in which he/she conceived
his/her purpose” (Smyth 2197a, gender inclusiveness added).
43b  καὶ ἐπίτηδές σε οὐκ ἤγειρον ἵνα ὡς ἥδιστα διάγῃς. And on purpose
I did not wake you, so that you may continue spending your time as pleas-
antly as possible.
Other
Neuter plural subject takes a singular verb
44e  ταῦτα μὲν δὴ οὕτως ἐχέτω. Let these things be so.
2. Verb Constructions
327

Philosophical Imperfect
The results of a previous argument spread over time
47d  λωβησόμεθα ὃ τῷ μὲν δικαίῳ βέλτιον ἐγίγνετο, τῷ δὲ ἀδίκῳ
ἀπώλλυτο. We will do harm to the very thing which [according to our ar-
gument] was becoming better through justice but was being corrupted by
injustice.
328
Appendix II: Syntax

GREEK–ENGLISH VOCABULARY
329
Asterisks indicate verbs listed in the Principal Parts List, 309–13
A
ἀγαθός, ‑ή, ‑όν
good, well-born, brave, capable,
serviceable
τὰ ἀγαθά
goods, wealth
ἀγαθότης, ‑τητος, ἡ
goodness
ἄγαν
very much, too much
ἀγάπη, ‑ης, ἡ
love, brotherly love, alms, charity
ἀγαπάω
love, greet with affection, desire
ἀγένητος, ‑ον
unborn, uncreated
ἄγγελλος, -ου, ὁ
messenger, envoy
ἀγγέλλω
announce, bring news
ἀγνοέω
not to perceive, be ignorant
ἄγνοια, -ας, ἡ
ignorance
ἀγορά, ‑ᾶς, ἡ
assembly, market-place, agora
ἄγραφος, ‑ον
unwritten
ἄγχω
press tight, strangle, hang
*ἄγω
lead, drive, bring, carry
ἀγών, ἀγῶνος, ὁ
gathering, assembly, place for
 contests, contest, struggle
ἀγωνίζομαι
contend for a prize, struggle
ἀδελφή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
sister
ἀδελφός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
brother
ἄδηλος, ‑ον
unknown, ignoble, unseen
ἀδηλότης, ‑τητος, ἡ
uncertainty
ἀδικέω
be unjust
ἄδικος
do wrong (with participle of particular
charge of wrong-doing)
ἄδικος, ‑ον
unjust
ἀδίκως
unjustly
ἀδυνατέω
be unable, lack ability
ἀδύνατος, ‑ον
unable, impossible
τὸ ἀδύνατον
impossibility
ἀεί
always, ever
*ᾄδω (ἀείδω)
sing, sing of, chant
ἀετός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
eagle
ἀήρ, ἀέρος, ὁ/ἡ
mist, haze, lower air; air; pl.:
climates
ἀθάνατος, ‑ον
immortal, deathless, everlasting
οἱ ἀθάνατοι
the immortals
Ἀθήναζε
to/towards Athens
Ἀθῆναι, Ἀθηνῶν, αἱ
the city of Athens
Ἀθηναῖος, ‑α, ‑ον Athenian
ἄθλιος, ‑α, ‑ον
struggling, unhappy, wretched,
sorry
ἀθῷος, ‑ον
unpunished
αἰανῆς, ‑ές
everlasting, wearisome
*αἰδέομαι
be ashamed, respect
Ἅιδης, ‑ου, ὁ(ᾅδης)
Hades
αἰδώς, -οῦς, ἡ
respect, shame, modesty
αἷμα, αἵματος, τό
blood
αἴνιγμα, ‑ατος, τό
dark saying, riddle
*αἱρέω
take, prove; mid.: choose
*αἴρω (ἀείρω)
lift, raise up
*αἰσθάνομαι
perceive, apprehend by the senses;
 understand, learn
αἴσθησις, ‑εως, ἡ
sense-perception, sensation
αἰσχρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
shameful, base, causing shame;
ugly

αἰσχύνη, ‑ης, ἡ
shame, disgrace
αἰσχύνομαι
be dishonored, be ashamed
*αἰσχύνω
make ugly, disfigure
αἰτέω
ask, claim
αἰτία, αἰτίας, ἡ
responsibility, guilt, blame, cause,
motive, credit
αἰτιάομαι
accuse, censure
αἰτιατικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
causal
ἡ αἰτιατική(πτῶσις)
accusative case
αἴτιος, ‑α, ‑ον blamable, guilty
αἰχμή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
the point of a spear, spear
αἰών, αἰῶνος, ὁ
lifetime, age, generation, epoch
(eon)
ἄκαιρος, ‑ον
ill-timed, unseasonable; importunate
ἀκήρυκτος, ‑ον
unannounced, unproclaimed,
 undeclared
ἀκμάζω
be in full bloom
ἀκουσίως
involuntarily
*ἀκούω
hear, listen (with acc. of thing heard; gen.
of person heard from)
ἀκριβής, -ες
exact, accurate, precise
ἀκρόαμα, ‑ματος, τό
anything heard; a play,
 musical piece
ἀκρόπολις, -εως, ἡ
upper city
ἄκων, ἄκουσα, ἆκον (ἀκοντ‑)
involuntary,
unwilling(ly)
ἀλγέω, ‑ήσω
feel pain, suffer
ἀλήθεια, ἀληθείας, ἡ
truth, reality, sincerity
ἀληθής, ‑ές
true
*ἁλίσκομαι
be caught (used as the passive of
αἱρέω)
ἀλλά(ἀλλ’)
but
ἀλλαχοῦ
elsewhere, somewhere else
ἀλλήλων
each other, one another
ἄλλος, ‑η, ‑ον
other, another
ἄλλοσε
elsewhere
ἀλλότριος, ‑α, ‑ον
of/belonging to another
ἄλλως
otherwise, at random, in vain
ἀλογία, ‑ας, ἡ
want of reason, folly, contempt
ἄλογος, ‑ον
irrational, unreasoning, without speech
ἄλφιτον, ‑ου, τό
barley, one’s daily bread
ἅμα
at once, at the same time
ἀμαθής, ‑ές
ignorant, stupid
ἅμαξα, ‑ας, ἡ
wagon
*ἁμαρτάνω
miss (the mark), fail, go wrong, err
ἁμαρτία, ‑ας, ἡ
failure, error, sin
ἀμείβω
change, exchange
ἀμείνων, -ον
better (irregular comparative of
ἀγαθός)
ἀμελέω
neglect, be careless
ἄμεμπτος, -ον
blameless
ἀμπέχω
surround, cover, enclose, embrace; mid.: put
around oneself
ἀμφί
on both sides (+ gen.: about, concerning; 
+ acc.: about)
ἀμφισβητέω
stand apart, disagree, dispute
οἱ ἀμισβητοῦντες
the parties in a lawsuit
ἀμφότερος, ‑α, ‑ον
both of two
ἄν = ἐάν
if
ἄν
conditional particle
ἀνά
up (+ dat.: upon; + acc.: up, throughout)
ἀναγιγνώσκω
know well, perceive, read
ἀναγκάζω
force, compel, constrain
ἀναγκαῖος, ‑α, ‑ον
constraining, necessary,
connected by blood
ἀνάγκη, ‑ης, ἡ
necessity, force, constraint, tie of blood
ἀναιρέω
take up or away, destroy; mid.: gain, win
ἀναλέγω
pick up, gather; read aloud
ἀναμιμνῄσκω
remind; pass.: remember, recall
ἀναμνηστικός, ‑όν
able to call to mind readily
ἄναξ, ἄνακτος, ὁ
lord, master, king
ἀνάξιος, ‑α, -ον
unworthy
ἀναρχία, ‑ας, ἡ
anarchy
ἀνατίθημι (< *τίθημι)
lay upon, refer, attribute,
entrust, dedicate, set up, put back
ἀναφαίρετος, ‑ον
not to be taken away
ἀναφύω (< φύω)
produce again; pass.: grow up
ἀναχορεύω
begin a choral dance, celebrate in the
chorus
ἀνδραποδισμός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
enslaving, selling into
slavery
ἀνδράποδον, ‑ου, ὁ
slave
ἀνδρεία, ‑ας, ἡ
manliness, manly spirit; pl.: brave
deeds
330
Greek–English Vocabulary

ἀνδρεῖος, ‑α, ‑ον belonging to a man, manly
ἀνδρόω
rear up into manhood; pass.: become a man
ἀνελεύθερος, -ον
not free, slavish
ἄνευ
without (+ gen.)
ἀνεύρετος, ‑ον
undiscovered
ἀνευρίσκω
find out, discover
ἀνήρ, ἀνδρός, ὁ
a man, husband
ἄνθος, ‑ους, τό
flower, bloom
ἀνθρώπινος, ‑η, ‑ον
of, from or belonging to a
human being; human
ἄνθρωπος, ‑ου, ὁ/ἡ
man, human being; pl.:
mankind, people
ἀνίστημι (< *ἵστημι)
make to stand up, set up; 
stand up
ἄνοια, ‑ας, ἡ
lack of understanding; folly
*ἀνοίγνυμι (= ἀνοίγω)
open; pass.: be open, stand
open
ἀνόσιος, (-α), ‑ον
unholy
ἀντασπάζομαι
welcome, greet in return
ἀντί
over against, opposite (+ gen.)
ἀντιβολέω
meet, entreat; partake of (+ gen.)
ἀντιλέγω
speak against, contradict, dispute
ἀντωνυμία, ‑ας, ἡ
pronoun
ἀξιομνημόνευτος, ‑ον
worthy of mention
ἄξιος, ‑α, ‑ον worthy, deserving, counterbalancing
ἀξιόω
think/deem worthy of, think fit, expect,
consent, dare, make a claim
ἀπάγχω
strangle, throttle; mid.: hang oneself; pass.:
be hanged
ἀπαίδευτος, ‑ον
ignorant, uneducated
ἄπαις (gen.) ἄπαιδος
childless
ἀπαλλάσσω
set free, release; mid.: be set free from
ἀπαντάω
meet, encounter
ἀπανταχοῦ
everywhere
ἀπαρνέομαι
deny utterly, reject, refuse
ἅπας, ἁπᾶσα, ἅπαν
quite all, everyone, the whole
ἀπατεύω
cheat, deceive
ἀπάτη, ‑ης, ἡ
cheating, trickery, fraud, stratagem
ἀπειθέω
be disobedient
ἄπειμι (< *εἰμί)
be away, be far from, be absent
ἄπειμι (< *εἶμι)
go away, depart
ἀπευθύνω
make straight, restore, direct, correct
ἁπλῶς
singly, in one way, simply, generally
ἀπό
from, off from, away from (+ gen.)
ἀποβλέπω
look away from, gaze steadily, regard
ἀποδείκνυμι
point out, show forth, bring forward,
prove
ἀποδημέω
go abroad
ἀποδίδωμι
give up or back, return, pay, assign,
concede, allow; mid.: sell
*ἀποθνῄσκω
die, be killed
ἀποκρίνομαι
answer
ἀποκρύπτω
hide from, keep hidden, conceal
*ἀποκτείνω
kill, slay, put to death
ἀπολαύω
enjoy, profit by
ἀπολείπω (< *λείπω)
be wanting, leave behind, lose,
forsake
*ἀπόλλυμι
act.: destroy utterly, kill, lose; mid.:
perish, die, fall into ruin
ἀπολογία, ‑ας, ‑ἡ
speech in one’s defense
ἀπολύω
loose from; mid.: release for oneself, 
redeem
ἀπονέμω, ἀπονεμῶ
portion out, assign
ἀπορέω
be at a loss
ἀπορία, ‑ας, ‑ἡ
difficulty (of passing), perplexity,
embarrassment, lack of resources, question for
discussion
ἄπορος, ‑ον
without passage, impassable,
unmanageable, impossible
ἀπόρρητος, ‑ον
forbidden, not to be spoken
ἀποστέλλω (< *στέλλω)
send away, banish; pass.:
go away, depart
ἀποστρέφω (< *στρέφω)
turn back or away, avert
ἀποτελέω
bring to an end, complete, produce,
accomplish
ἀποτέμνω
cut off
ἀποτρέπω (< *τρέπω)
turn away from, dissuade
from
ἀποφθέγμα, ‑ατος, τό
a thing uttered, terse saying
ἀπρεπής, ‑ές
unseemly, unbecoming
*ἅπτω
fasten; kindle; mid.: grasp, undertake, touch
upon
ἄρα
(postpos. particle denoting interest or
surprise) then, therefore, so it seems, of course
Greek–English Vocabulary
331

ἆρα
(interrog. particle which leaves the question
open)
ἀρά, ‑ᾶς, ἡ
prayer, curse
ἀργύριον, ‑ου, τό
a piece of silver, a coin
ἄργυρος, ‑ου, ὁ
white metal, silver
ἀρετή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
goodness, excellence, moral virtue
ἀρήγω
aid, succor
ἄρθρον, ‑ου, τό
joint; connecting word; the article
(grammar)
ἀριθμός, ‑ου, ὁ
number
ἄριστος, ‑η, ‑ον
best, noblest, bravest
ἄρκτος, ‑ου, ὁ/ἡ
bear
ἀρνέομαι, ‑ήσομαι
deny, disown
ἀρούρα, ‑ας, ἡ
tilled land, corn land
ἀρσενικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
male; of masculine gender
ἄρτι
just, exactly, just now
ἄρτιος, ‑α, ‑ον
complete, exactly fitted; active, ready
ἀρχαῖος, ‑α, ‑ον original, ancient, primitive
ἀρχή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
beginning, first principle; rule, office,
empire
*ἄρχω
begin; rule (+ gen.)
ἄρχων, ‑οντος, ὁ
archon, ruler
ἀσεβής, ‑ές
ungodly, unholy, profane
ἀσθενής, ‑ές
weak, feeble, poor
ἀσπάζομαι
welcome, greet
ἀσπίς, ἀσπίδος, ἡ
shield
ἀστήρ, ἀστέρος, ὁ
star; flame, fire
ἄστυ, ἄστεως, τό
city, town
ἀσφαλής, ‑ές
safe, steadfast, sure
ἅτε
just as, as if, inasmuch as, since (with
participle)
ἄτερ
absolutely, simply
ἄτεχνος, ‑ον
without art, unskilled
ἀτεχνῶς
simply, absolutely
ἀτιμόω
dishonor, punish with ἀτιμία (i.e., deprive 
of civil rights)
ἄτομος, ‑ον
uncut, that cannot be cut
ἄτοπος, -ον
out of place, strange, unnatural; bad
ἅττα = ἅτινα
ἀττικίζω
Atticize, speak in the Attic dialect
ἀτυχέω
be unlucky
ἀτύχημα, ‑ατος, τό
misfortune, mishap
αὖ
back, again; moreover, besides, in turn
αὐδάω
talk, speak, say
αὖθις
again, later, back again
αὐλή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
open court, hall; dwelling
αὐξάνω (= αὔξω)
increase; pass.: grow
αὔξησις, ‑εως, ἡ
growth, increase; the verbal
augment (grammar)
αὔριον
(adv.) tomorrow
αὐτίκα
at once, immediately
αὖτις/αὖθις
back, anew, again; moreover
αὐτόθι
on the very spot, there
αὐτόματος (‑G η) ‑ον
acting of one’s own will, self-
moving; without cause, accidental
αὐτός, -ή, -ό
–self; with article: same; in oblique
cases: him, her, it, etc.
αὐτοσχεδιάζω
act/speak offhand, improvise; judge
unadvisedly
αὐτοῦ
there, here
αὑτοῦ, αὑτῆς = ἑαυτoῦ, ἑαυτῆς
(of) himself,
herself
αὐτόφωρος, ‑ον
caught in the act of theft
ἀφανίζω
make unseen, do away with, destroy
ἀφίημι (< *ἵημι)
send forth, discharge, release from
*ἀφικνέομαι
arrive at, come to, reach
ἀφίστημι (< *ἵστημι)
put away, remove; cause to
revolt; pay; stand away, revolt from
ἄφρων, ‑ον (gen. ‑ονος)
senseless, witless, foolish,
crazed
ἄφωνος, ‑ον
voiceless, mute
τὰ ἄφωνα
consonants (especially mutes)
Ἀχαιός, ‑ά, ‑όν
Achaean
ἀχάριστος, ‑ον
unpleasing, thankless, without grace
ἀχώριστος, ‑ον
not parted, undivided, inseparable
Β
βαδίζω
go on foot, walk, go
*βαίνω
walk, step, go
βαιός, ‑ά, ‑όν
little, slight, short
βάκχιος, ‑α, ‑ον Bacchic, inspired
ὁ βάκχιος (θεός)
the Bacchic God, Bacchus
*βάλλω
throw, hit
332
Greek–English Vocabulary

βάρβαρος, ‑ον
barbarous, non-Greek, foreign
οἱ βάρβαροι
all non-Greek-speaking peoples
βαρύς, βαρεῖα, βαρύ
heavy, tiresome, oppressive
βασιλεύς, βασιλέως, ὁ
king
βασιλεύω
be king, rule, reign (+ gen.)
βασίλισσα, ‑ας, ἡ(= βασίλεια)
queen
βάτος, ‑ου, ὁ/ἡ
bramble
βέβαιος (‑α) ‑ον
firm, steady, steadfast, durable, sure
βέλτιστος, ‑η, -ον best (irreg. superl. of ἀγαθός)
βελτίων, -ον
better (irreg. comp. of ἀγαθός)
βιάζω/βιάζομαι
force, do violence to
βίαιος (‑α) ‑ον
forcible, violent, acting with violence
βιβλίον, ‑ου, τό
paper, book
βίος, ‑ου, ὁ
life, livelihood, mode of life
βίοτος, ‑ου, ὁ
life, means of living
βιόω
live, pass one’s life
βλάβη, ‑ης, ἡ
harm, damage, hurt
*βλάπτω
disable, hinder, harm, hurt, damage
βλασφημέω
blaspheme, speak profanely
*βλέπω
see, have the power of sight, look
*βοάω
cry aloud, shout, roar, howl
βοηθέω
assist, come to the rescue
βόλβος, -ου, ὁ
a bulbous plant
βορά, ‑ᾶς, ἡ
food
βοτάνη, ‑ης, ἡ
grass, pasture
βουλεύω
plan, take counsel, deliberate
βουλή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
counsel, will, determination; Senate
βουλιμιάω
be as hungry as an ox
*βούλομαι
wish, be willing, be used to (doing
something) 
βοῦς, βοός, ὁ/ἡ
bull, cow, ox; pl.: cattle
βραδύς, ‑εῖα, ‑ύ
slow, heavy, late
βραχύς, ‑εῖα, ‑ύ
short, brief
βρέφος, ‑ους, τό
new-born baby
βροντάω
thunder; impers.: it thunders
βροτός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
mortal man
βυθός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
the depth, bottom, abyss
Γ
γαῖα, ‑ας (‑ης), ἡ
land, country, earth (poetic for
γῆ)
γαμβρός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
in-law, any connection by marriage
*γαμέω
marry (act. of the man, mid. of the
woman)
γάμος, ‑ου, ὁ
wedding, marriage, wedlock
γάρ
for (postpos. particle)
γε
at least, indeed; yes (postpos. particle)
γελάω
laugh, laugh at, sneer at
γέλοιος, ‑α, ‑ον
absurd, laughable, humorous
γέλως, γέλωτος, ὁ
laughter
γέμω
be full, be laden (only pres. and impf.)
γένεσις, γενέσεως, ἡ
origin, source, birth, descent,
generation
γενικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
of/belonging to the γένος, typical
ἡ γενική(πτῶσις)
genitive case
γενναῖος, (-α), -ον
noble, generous
γεννάω
beget; mid.: create
γένος, γένους, τό
race, birth, offpring, stock, clan
γέρας, γέραος, τό
gift of honor, prize, prerogative
γέρων, γέροντος, ὁ
old man
γεωργός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
farmer
γῆ, γῆς, ἡ
earth (land and sea); land, country
γῆρας, γήραος, τό
old age
γηράω
grow old
*γίγνομαι
become, be born, be, come into being
*γιγνώσκω
know (by observation), come to know,
perceive
γλαύξ, γλαυκός, ἡ
the little owl, Athene noctua
γλυκύς, -εῖα, -ύ
sweet, pleasant
γλῶσσα, -ης, ἡ / γλῶττα, -ης, ἡ
tongue, language
γνήσιος, ‑α, ‑ον
genuine, legitimate, true
γνώμη, -ης, ἡ
thought, opinion; means of knowing,
organ by which one perceives; intelligence
αἱ γνῶμαι
pl.: practical maxims
γνωρίζω
make known, gain knowledge of
γνώρισις, γνωρίσεως, ἡ
a making known; a getting
to know
γονεύς, -έως, ὁ
father; pl.: parents
γόνυ, γόνατος, τό
knee
γοῦν (γε οὖν)
at least then, at any rate
γράμμα, ‑ατος, τό
that which is drawn, letter
γραμματικός, ‑ή, ‑ον
knowing one’s letters
Greek–English Vocabulary
333

ἡ γραμματική
grammar
ὁ γραμματικός
grammarian; teacher of reading
and writing
γραφή, -ῆς, ἡ
criminal charges, indictment
γραφικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
of painting, drawing, or writing
ἡ γραφική the art of writing
*γράφω
scratch, draw, write
γυμνός, ‑ή, ‑όν
naked; unarmed
γυναικεῖος (‑α), ‑ον
of/belonging to women,
feminine
γυνή, γυναικός, ἡ
woman, wife
Δ
δαίμων, δαίμονος, ὁ/ἡ
divinity
δάκρυ, δάκρυος, τό(δάκρυον)
tear, drop
δασύς, ‑εῖα, ‑ύ
hairy, shaggy; hoarse, aspirated
δέ
but, and (postpos. conjunction)
*δέδια (= δέδοικα)
fear (perfect in present sense)
δεῖ(< *δέω)  (impers.) there is need
δείδω
fear
*δείκνυμι
show, bring to light, explain
δεῖμα, δείματος, τό
fear, terror; object of fear
δεινός, ‑ή, ‑όν
fearful, dreadful, terrible, awful
δειπνέω
make or take a meal, entertain
δεῖπνον, ‑ου, τό
meal, dinner, supper
δέκα
ten
δέμας, δέματος, τό
the body
δένδρον, -ου, τό
tree
δεξιός, ‑ά, ‑όν
on the right hand or side; ready,
skillful, fortunate; northerly
δέομαι
need, ask
δέος, δέους, τό
fear, alarm, awe, reverence
δέρμα, -ατος, τό
skin, hide
δεσμός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
bond(s), fetter(s)
δέσποινα, δεποίνης, ἡ
mistress, lady of the house,
queen
δεσπότης, -ου, ὁ
master, lord, master of the house
δεῦρο
here, to this place
δεύτερος, ‑α, ‑ον
second
*δέχομαι
receive, take, accept, welcome, await
*δέω
lack, want, stand in need of (+ gen.); δέομαι
beg, ask; δεῖthere is need, one ought
*δέω
bind, tie, fetter
δή
of course, indeed, quite (postpos.)
δηλαδή
clearly, manifestly (adv.)
δῆλος, ‑G η, -ον visible, clear, manifest, evident
δῆλον ὅτι
it is clear that, clearly
δηλόω
make visible, show, reveal
δημηγορέω
be a public orator, harangue the people
δημοκρατία, -ας, ἡ
democracy, popular government
δῆμος, δήμου, ὁ
district, common people, popular
assembly
δήπου
probably, doubtless, I presume; οὐ δήπου
certainly not, is it not so?
δῆτα
indeed, truly; then, certainly, of course
διά
through; through, over, in the midst of (+ gen.);
because of, for the sake of (+ acc.)
διαβαίνω (< *βαίνω)
stand firm, step across or over,
cross over
διαβάλλω (< *βάλλω)
throw or carry over or across,
set against; bring  discredit; attack, slander
διαβολή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
false accusation, misrepresentation,
slander, calumny
διάθεσις, διαθέσεως, ἡ
arrangement, composition,
delivery, condition
διαίρεσις, διαιρέσεως, ἡ
division, a dividing
διαιρέω (< *αἱρέω)
take apart, divide, distinguish,
determine
διακοσμέω
divide, arrange
διακριβόω
portray exactly, examine with precision
διακρίνω (< *κρίνω)
separate, divide, distinguish
διαλέγω
pick out
διαλέγομαι
talk, hold conversation with, talk back
and forth
διαλεκτικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
skilled in discourse
ἡ διαλεκτική
the art of debating
διάλογος, ‑ου, ὁ
dialogue, conversation
διαλύω
loose, part; reconcile
διανίστημι (< *ἵστημι)
awaken, arouse; stand up,
rise
διανοέομαι
be minded, intend, have in mind, think
διάνοια, ‑ας, ἡ(also διανοία)
thought, intellect,
mind, intention, belief
διαπαίζω
jest
διαπερονάω
pierce through
334
Greek–English Vocabulary

διατριβή, -ῆς, ἡ
pastime, pursuit, way of life
διατρίβω (< *τρίβω)
rub between, rub away; waste,
spend time
διαφερόντως
differently from, extremely, especially
διαφέρω (< *φέρω)
carry over or across, differ,
surpass
οὐδὲν διαφέρει
it makes no difference
διαφεύγω
flee through, get away, escape
*διαφθείρω
destroy utterly, corrupt; pass.: be
destroyed
διαφορά, ‑ας, ἡ
difference
διάφορος, ‑ον
different; superior
διδακτός, ‑ή, ‑όν
taught; teachable
διδάσκαλος, ‑ου, ὁ
teacher, master
*διδάσκω
instruct, teach
*δίδωμι
give, grant
διέρχομαι (< *ἔρχομαι)
go or pass through
διίστημι (< *ἵστημι)
set apart, separate; stand apart,
be divided
δικάζω
judge, decide, determine
δίκαιος, ‑α, ‑ον
just
δικαιοσύνη, ‑ης, ἡ
righteousness, justice
δικαίως
justly
δικαστήριον, οῦ, τό
court (of law)
δικαστής, ‑οῦ, ὁ
judge, juryman, juror
δίκη, ‑ης, ἡ
justice, order, right; lawsuit, trial,
indictment, penalty
διό
wherefore, therefore
διορίζω
draw a boundary through, distinguish,
define, separate
διπλοῦς, ‑ῆ, ‑οῦν
twofold, double
δίς
twice, doubly
διφθέρα, ‑ας, ἡ
leather, leather garment worn by
peasants
δίφθογγος, ‑ον
with two sounds
ἡ δίφθογγος
diphthong
δίφρος, ‑ου, ὁ
chariot-board, seat, couch, stool
δίχρονος, ‑ον
of two quantities
διψάω
thirst, be thirsty, thirst after (+ gen.)
*διώκω
pursue, chase
δόγμα, ‑ατος, τό
opinion, resolution, decree
*δοκέω
expect, think, suppose, imagine
δοκῶ μοι
I seem to myself, I am determined, 
I think
δοκεῖ
it seems, it seems best to (+ dat.)
δολιχός, ‑ή, ‑όν
long
δόμος, ‑ου, ὁ
house, temple, room (often in the
plural for one house)
δόξα, ‑ης, ἡ
expectation, opinion, estimation; glory
δοτικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
inclined to give
ἡ δοτική(πτῶσις)
dative case
δουλεύω
be a slave
δοῦλος, ‑ου, ὁ
slave
δουλόω
enslave
δράκων, δράκοντος, ὁ
snake, serpent
δραχμή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
drachma
*δράω
do, accomplish
δυϊκός, ‑ή, ‑όν
dual
*δύναμαι
be able, be strong enough (to do + inf.)
δύναται
it is possible
δύναμις, ‑έως, ἡ
power, might, ability, influence,
authority
δυναστεία, ‑ας, ἡ
power, lordship; pl.: mighty deeds
δυναστεύω
hold power or lordship, be lord over
(+ gen.)
δυνατός, ‑ή, ‑όν
strong, mighty, possible
δύο
two
δυσδαίμων, δύσδαιμον
ill-fated
δυσμαθής, ‑ές
slow at learning
δυστυχής, ‑ές
unfortunate, unlucky
δυσχερής, ‑ές
hard to take in hand, troublesome
δώδεκα
twelve
δῶμα, ‑ατος, τό
house; chief room, hall
δωρέω
give, present
δῶρον, ‑ου, τό
gift
Ε
ἐάν (ἤν)
if (used in future more vivid and
present general conditions)
ἐάνπερ
if indeed
ἑαυτοῦ, ἑαυτῆς (αὑτοῦ, αὑτῆς)
(of) himself,
herself
*ἐάω
allow, permit (+ acc. & inf.), let alone
ἐγγύς
near, nearly, like
Greek–English Vocabulary
335

ἐγκώμιον, ‑οῦ, ὁ
hymn of praise, encomium
ἐγώ
I (first person pronoun)
ἐγᾦμαι < ἐγὼ οἶμαι [*οἶμαι think]
ἕδος, ‑ους, τό
seat, abode (esp. of a god)
*ἐθέλω
wish, be willing, consent
ἔθνος, ‑ους, τό
nation, tribe
ἔθος, ‑ους, τό
custom
εἰ
if, whether
εἰδέναι < *οἶδα
know (inf.)
εἶδον
I/they saw (used as the 2nd aorist of
*ὁράω see)
εἶδος, -ους, τό
form, appearance, shape
εἴδωλον, -ου, τό
phantom, reflected image 
εἴθε
introduces a wish: if only!
εἶεν
(particle) well, so far so good, okay
εἴκοσι
twenty
εἰκότως
fairly, reasonably, suitably
εἰκών, ‑όνος, ἡ
likeness, image
εἱμαρμένος: see μείρομαι
εἰμί
be, exist
εἶμι
will go (used in prose as the future of
ἔρχομαι)
εἴπερ
even if; if indeed
εἶπον
said (used as the 2nd aorist of λέγω)
εἰρήνη, ‑ης, ἡ
peace, time of peace
εἰς
into, to (+ acc.)
εἷς, μία, ἕν
one
εἰσάγω (< *ἄγω)
lead in or into, bring in, bring
before
εἰσβαίνω (< *βαίνω)
go on board, embark, enter
εἰσοράω (< *ὁράω)
look into, behold, discern, look
upon
εἴσω
into, within (+ acc.); inside
εἶτα
then, after, and so on, indeed?
εἴτε
whether
εἴτε . . . εἴτε
whether . . . or
εἴωθα
be accustomed
ἐκ
out of, from (+ gen.)
ἕκαστος, ‑η, ‑ον
every, every one, each, each one
ἑκάστοτε
(adv.) on each occasion, each time
ἑκάτερος, ‑α, ‑ον
each of two, either, each singly
ἑκατόμβη, ‑ης, ἡ
an offering of a hundred oxen;
sacrifice
ἑκατοντάπυλος, ‑ον
hundred-gated
ἐκβαίνω (< *βαίνω)
step out, disembark
ἐκβάλλω (< *βάλλω)
throw or cast out, produce,
put forth
ἐκγίγνομαι (< *γίγνομαι)  be born of (+ gen.), be
born to (+ dat.), come into being
ἐκδέχομαι (< *δέχομαι)
take, receive from, wait for,
expect; take or  understand in a certain sense
ἐκδιδάσκω (< *διδάσκω)
teach thoroughly
ἐκεῖ
there, in that place; then
ἐκεῖνος, ἐκείνη, ἐκεῖνο
that person or thing
ἐκεῖσε
there, to that place
ἔκθαμβος, ‑ον
amazed, astounded
ἐκθρῴσκω (aor. ἐξέθορον)
leap out of
ἐκκλησία, -ας, ‑ἡ
assembly
ἐκμανθάνω (< *μανθάνω)
learn thoroughly
ἑκούσιος, ‑α, ‑ον
voluntary
ἐκπειράζω
tempt
ἐκπίπτω (< *πίπτω)
fall out, be driven out, throw
oneself out of, jump up from
ἐκπορίζω
invent, contrive, provide, furnish, procure;
mid.: provide for oneself
ἐκτίθημι (< *τίθημι)
set out, expose, exhibit
ἐκτός
without, outside (adv.); beyond, outside of
(+ gen.)
ἐκφεύγω (< *φεύγω)
flee away, escape
ἐκχωρέω
go out or away, depart, give way
ἑκών, ἑκοῦσα, ἑκόν
readily, willingly, purposely
ἐλαττόω
make less, worse, smaller; lessen, damage
ἐλάττων, -ον
smaller, less
*ἐλαύνω
drive, set in motion
ἐλαφρός, -ά, -όν
light, easy
ἐλεέω (aor. ἠλέησα)
have pity on, show mercy to;
feel pity
ἐλεεινός, ‑ή, ‑όν
pitiable, pitied
ἐλεημοσύνη, -ης, ἡ
pity, mercy, alms
ἐλεύθερος, ‑́ α, ‑ον free
ἐλευθερόω
set free, deliver
ἕλκος, ‑ους, τό
wound, sore, ulcer
ἕλκω
drag, draw
336
Greek–English Vocabulary

Ἑλλάς, Ἑλλάδος, ἡ
Hellas, Greece
Ἕλλην, Ἕλληνος, ὁ
a Greek man
ἑλληνίζω
speak Greek
Ἑλληνικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
Greek, Hellenic
τὰ Ἑλληνικά
the history of Greek affairs; Greek
literature
Ἑλληνίς, Ἑλληνίδος, ἡ
a Greek woman
ἐλπίς, ἐλπίδος, ἡ
hope, expectation
ἐμαυτοῦ, -ῆς
(of) myself
ἐμμένω
abide by, stand by
ἐμός, -ή, -όν
my, mine
ἐμπειρία, ‑ας, ἡ
practice, experience
ἐμπίπλημι (< *πίμπλημι)
fill quite full, fill full of
(+ gen.)
ἔμπροσθεν
in front
ἔμψυχος, ‑ον
having life in one, animate; vivid
ἐν
in, among (+ dat.)
ἐναντίον
opposite, facing (used as a preposition 
+ gen.)
ἐναντίος, ‑α, ‑ον
opposite, face to face
ἐνδεής, ‑ές
wanting, lacking, in need of
ἕνδεκα
eleven
ἔνδικος, ‑ον
according to right, legitimate
ἔνδοθεν
from within, within (+ gen.)
ἔνδον
within, at home (+ gen.)
ἔνειμι (< *εἰμί)
be among, be present in a place; be
possible
ἕνεκα
for the sake of, on account of (+ gen.)
ἐνενήκοντα
ninety
ἔνθα
where, there
ἐνθάδε
thither, hither
ἐνθένδε
from here, hence
ἐνιαυτός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
anniversary, year
ἑνικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
single
ἀριθμὸς ἑνικός
the singular number
(grammar)
ἔνιοι, ‑αι, ‑α
some
ἐνίοτε
at times, sometimes
ἐννέα
nine
ἐνοικέω
dwell in, inhabit
ἐνταῦθα
there, then 
ἐντίθημι (< *τίθημι)
put in, into, or on
ἐντολή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
command, commandment
ἐξ (= ἐκ)
out of, from (+ gen.)
ἕξ
six
ἐξαγγέλλω (< *ἀγγέλλω)
tell out, proclaim
ἐξάγω (< *ἄγω)
lead out or away; bring out or
forth
ἐξαμαρτάνω (< *ἀμαρτάνω)
mistake utterly, err
greatly; pass.: be  mismanaged
ἔξειμι (< *εἶμι)
come out
ἔξεστι (<  *εἰμί)
it is possible
ἐξόν
it being possible: acc. abs.
ἐξελαύνω (<  *ἐλαύνω)
drive out, chase out
ἐξεργάζομαι
work out, accomplish, finish
ἐξερέω
I shall speak out, proclaim (future without
a present form)
ἐξέρχομαι (<  *ἔρχομαι)
go or come out, go forth
ἑξήκοντα
sixty
ἐξοῖδα (<  *οἶδα)
know thoroughly, know well
ἐξομολογέομαι
confess in full, admit, make full
acknowledgment of
ἐξορμάω
set out, start from, send forth, stir up
ἐξουσία, -ας, ἡ
permission, authority, power
ἔξω
out, outside
ἔξωθεν
outside
ἔοικα
be like, look like (+ dat.); seem
ἐπαινέω
approve, sanction, agree to
ἐπάν (ἐπήν)
whenever
ἐπεί
after, since, seeing that
ἐπειδάν
whenever
ἐπειδή
when
ἐπειδήπερ
since really
ἔπειμι (<  *εἶμι)
go or come to; come upon, attack
ἔπειτα
thereupon, then, after that, next, second
ἐπέξειμι (<  *εἶμι)
go out against, prosecute X
(dat.) for Y (gen.)
ἐπερωτάω
inquire of, question, consult
ἐπί
on, upon (+ gen., dat., or acc.)
ἐπιβαίνω (<  *βαίνω) set foot on (+ gen.); arrive at,
come to
ἐπιβοάω (<  *βοάω)
call upon, cry out to, call for
help
Greek–English Vocabulary
337

ἐπίγειος, -ον
on or of the earth
ἐπιγιγνώσκω (<  *γιγνώσκω)
observe, witness; find
out, discover, learn, know; find out too late 
ἐπιδείκνυμι (<  *δείκνυμι)
exhibit as a specimen,
exhibit, display
ἐπιθυμέω
set one’s heart (θυμός) upon a thing, long
for, desire (+ gen.)
ἐπιθυμητής, ‑οῦ, ὁ
one who longs for, lover, follower
ἐπιθυμία, ‑ας, ἡ
desire, longing, lust
ἐπικρατέω
rule over, govern, prevail, conquer
ἐπίκτητος, ‑ον
gained in addition, acquired
ἐπιλανθάνω (<  *λανθάνω)
escape notice, mid.:
forget; pass.: be forgotten
ἐπιμελέομαι
take care of, pay attention to
ἐπιορκέω
swear falsely
ἐπίπονος, -ον
painful, toilsome, laborious
ἐπίρρημα, ‑ατος, τό
that which is said afterward;
adverb
*ἐπισκοπέω
look over
*ἐπίσταμαι
know how (to do), understand
ἐπιστάμενος, ‑η, ‑ον
knowing, understanding,
skillful
ἐπιστέλλω (<  *στέλλω)
send to, enjoin, command
ἐπιστήμη, ‑ης, ἡ
understanding, skill, knowledge
ἐπιστολή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
anything sent by a messenger:
message, order, letter
ἐπισφαλής, ‑ές
prone to fall, unsteady, precarious
ἐπιτάττω (<  *τάττω)
put upon one as a duty, enjoin,
order, place next to or beside
ἐπιτήδειος, ‑α, ‑ον
suitable, useful
τὰ ἐπιτήδεια
supplies, provisions
ὁ ἐπιτήδειος
close friend
ἐπιτρέπω (<  *τρέπω)
turn to, transfer, refer to,
leave to
ἐπιτυγχάνω
hit the mark, meet (+ gen.)
ἐπιχειρέω
put one’s hand to, try, attempt
*ἕπομαι
follow
ἔπος, ‑ους, τό
word
ἐπουράνιος, ‑α, ‑ον
in heaven, heavenly
ἐπριάμην
I bought (used as aor. of ὠνέομαι)
ἑπτά
seven
ἐραστής, -οῦ, ὁ
lover, partisan
*ἐράω
love, be in love with
*ἐργάζομαι
work, do, make
ἐργαστέον
it must be done, one must do it
ἔργον, ‑ου, τό
deed, work
ἐρημία, ‑ας, ἡ
a solitude, desert, wilderness,
desolation
ἐρῆμος, ‑η, ‑ον lone, lonely, desert
ἔρομαι
ask, inquire
ἐρρήθην
I was said (used as the aor. pass. of
εἷπον)
*ἔρχομαι
come, go
ἐρῶ(ἐρέω)
I will say, tell, or speak (fut. with no
pres.)
ἔρως, ἔρωτος, ὁ
love, desire
ἐρωτάω
ask (with two accusatives), question
*ἐσθίω
eat
ἐσθλός, ‑ή, ‑όν
noble, good, brave
ἔσοπτρον, ‑ου, ὁ
looking glass, mirror
ἔστε
until
ἑστία, -ας, ἡ
hearth, fireplace
ἑταῖρος, -ου, ὁ
comrade, companion
ἐτεός, -ά, -όν
true, genuine
ἐτεή, ἡ
reality; ἐτεῇin reality
ἕτερος, ‑α, ‑ον
one or the other of two
ἔτι
yet, still, besides, already
ἑτοιμάζω
get ready, prepare
ἕτοιμος, ‑η, -ον
ready
ἔτος, ‑ους, τό
year
εὖ
well (adv. of ἀγαθός)
εὐγενής, ‑ές
well-born, noble-minded, generous
εὐδαιμονία, ‑ας, ἡ
prosperity, good fortune,
happiness
εὐδαίμων, εὔδαιμον
lucky, happy, wealthy
εὐδία, ‑ας, ἡ
fair weather
εὔελπις, εὔελπι
of good hope, hopeful, cheerful
εὐεξία, ‑ας, ἡ
good habit of body, good health or
condition
εὐεργεσία, ‑ας, ἡ
service, good deed
εὐεργέτης, ‑ου, ὁ
benefactor, do-gooder
εὐκλεής, ‑ές
glorious, of good fame, famous
εὐκνήμις, (gen. ‑ιδος)
well-greaved
338
Greek–English Vocabulary

εὔκολος, -ον
good-natured; of good digestion
εὐκταῖος, ‑α, ‑ον of/for prayer, votive; prayed for,
desired
εὐλάβεια, -ας, ἡ
caution
εὐλαβέομαι
be cautious, be discreet, beware of
εὐμαθής, ‑ές
quick at learning, easy to learn,
well-known
εὐνή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
bed, lair; marriage bed, wedlock
εὔνοια, ‑ας, ἡ
good-will, favor
εὐπιθής, ‑ές
ready to obey, obedient, compliant
Εὐριπίδης, Εὐριπίδου, ὁ
Euripides
*εὑρίσκω
find
εὐρύς, εὐρεῖα, εὐρύ
wide, spacious, far-reaching
εὐσέβεια, ‑ας, ἡ
reverence toward the gods, piety
εὐσεβής, ‑ές
pious, religious
εὐτυχέω
be prosperous
εὐτυχής, ‑ές
lucky, fortunate, successful
εὐτυχία, ‑ας, ἡ
good luck, success, prosperity
*εὔχομαι
pray (for), vow
εὔφρων, ‑ον
cheerful, merry, well-disposed, gracious
ἐφέλκω (<  ἕλκω)
drag after one, lead, bring on,
attract
ἐφευρίσκω (<  *εὑρίσκω)
find by chance, discover
ἐφήμερος, ‑ον
living but a day, short-lived
ἐφίπταμαι (<  ἐπιπέτομαι)
fly to or toward, fly 
over
ἐφίστημι (<  *ἵστημι)
set or place upon, stand upon
or over
ἔχθρα, ‑ας, ‑ἡ
hatred, enmity
ἐχθρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
hated, hateful; noun: enemy
*ἔχω
have, possess, keep, be able (+inf.)
ἕως
until; while, so long as
Ζ
*ζάω
live, pass one’s life
ζεύγνυμι
yoke together
Ζεύς, Διός, ὁ
Zeus (dat.: Διί; acc.: Δία); μὰ Δία, 
by Zeus!
ζητέω
seek, ask for, search after or into, require
ζωή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
living; one’s substance, property; life,
existence
ζῷον, ‑ου, τό a living being, animal
Η
ἤ
or
ἤ . . . ἤ
either . . . or
ἦ
surely, in truth (affirmative); is it that?
(interrog.)
ἡβάω
be young, be in the prime of life
ἡγεμών, -όνος, ὁ
guide, leader, chief
ἡγέομαι
go before, lead the way, command; believe
ἠδέ
and
ἤδη
already, by this time
*ἥδομαι enjoy oneself, be glad (+ participle)
ἡδονή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
enjoyment, pleasure
ἡδύς, ἡδεῖα, ἡδύ
sweet, pleasant
ἠθικός, ‑ή, όν
moral, showing moral character
ἦθος, ‑ους, τό
an accustomed place (pl.: haunts,
abodes); custom, usage (pl.: manners); character
ἥκιστα
least
ἥκω
have come, be present
ἥλιος, ἡλίου, ὁ
sun, sunlight; pl.: sunbeams
ἦμαρ, ‑ατος, τό
day (cf. ἡμέρα)
ἡμέρα, ‑ας, ἡ
day, time
ἡμέτερος, ‑α, -ον
our
ἥμισυς, ἡμίσεια, ἥμισυ
half
ἡνίκα
at the time when
ἧπαρ, ἥπατος, τό
liver
ᾗπερ
in which way, as (adv.)
Ἡράκλειος (‑α), ‑ον
of Heracles
ἥσσων, ἧσσον/ἥττων, ἧττον
worse, less, weaker
ἡσυχία, ‑ας, ἡ
stillness, rest, quiet, silence
Θ
θάλαττα, θαλάττης, ἡ(θάλασσα)
sea
θάνατος, ‑ου, ὁ
death
*θάπτω
honor with funeral rites, bury, cremate
θάρσος, -ους, τό
courage, confidence
θαῦμα, ‑ατος, τό
marvel
*θαυμάζω
wonder at, marvel
θαυμαστός, ‑ή, ‑όν
wondrous, admirable
θεά, θεᾶς, ἡ
goddess
θέαμα, ‑ατος, τό
sight, spectacle
θέαομαι
gaze at, view, look at
Greek–English Vocabulary
339

θέατρον, ‑ου, τό
place for seeing, theater
θεῖος, ‑α, ‑ον of/from the gods, divine
θελκτήριον, ‑ου, τό
charm, spell
θέλω (= *ἐθέλω)
wish, be willing, consent
θέμις, θέμιστος/θέμιτος, ἡ
what is lawful, right
θεμιτός, ‑ή, ‑όν
lawful
θεός, θεοῦ, ὁ/ἡ
god, goddess (voc. θεός)
θεοφιλής, ‑ές
dear to the gods, loving the gods
θεραπεύω
be an attendant, do service, pay court to
θεράπων, θεράποντος, ὁ
henchman, companion in
arms, attendant, servant
θερμός, ‑ή, ‑όν
hot; n: heat
θεσμοθέτης, ‑ου, ὁ
lawgiver
Θετταλία (‑σσ‑), ‑ας, ἡ
Thessaly
*θέω
run
θήκη, ‑ης, ἡ
box, chest, grave, vault
θηλυκός, ‑ή, ‑όν
like the female, feminine
θῆλυς, θήλεια, θῆλυ
female, feminine, of or
belonging to a woman, soft, gentle, effeminate
θησαυρός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
treasure, treasury, strong room,
safe
θνῄσκω = *αποθνῄσκω
θνητός, ‑ή, ‑όν
mortal
θούριος, ‑α, ‑ον
rushing, impetuous, furious
θρίξ, τριχός, ἡ
hair
θυγάτηρ, θυγατρός, ἡ
daughter
θυμός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
spirit
θυμόω
make angry
θύννος, ‑ου, ὁ
tunny-fish, tuna
θύρα, ‑ας, ἡ
door; pl.: double or folding doors
*θύω
sacrifice
Ι
ἰαμβικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
iambic
ἰατρεύω
treat medically, cure, practice medicine
ἰατρός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
physician
ἰδ-
aorist stem of *ὁράω
ἴδιος, ἰδία, ἴδιον
one’s own, private, peculiar
ἰδιότης, ἰδιότητος, ἡ
peculiar nature or property,
special character
ἰδίως
peculiarly; as a proper noun
ἰδοῦ
behold! look!
ἱέρεια, ‑ας, ἡ
priestess
ἱερεύς, ἱερέως, ὁ
priest
ἱεροπρεπής, ‑ές
sacred, holy
ἱερός, ‑ά, ‑όν
supernatural, consecrated, holy
τὰ ἱερά
offerings, rites
*ἵημι
release, let go; utter; throw, hurl, send; mid.:
hasten, desire to
ἱκανός, ‑ή, ‑όν
becoming, befitting, sufficient, able,
enough
ἱκάνω
come, reach, attain to
ἱκανῶς
sufficiently
ἱκετεύω
approach as a suppliant, supplicate, beseech
*ἱκνέομαι
come
ἰλύς, ἰλύος, ἡ
mud, slime, dirt
ἱμάτιον, ‑ου, τό
outer garment, cloak, mantle
ἱμερτός, ή, ‑όν
longed for, lovely
ἵνα
where; that, in order that
ἱππεύς, ἱππέως, ὁ
rider, horseman, knight
ἱππεύω
be a horseman; ride
ἵππος, ‑ου, ὁ
horse
ἰσόθεος, ‑ον
equal to the gods, godlike
ἴσος, ‑η, ‑ον
equal
*ἵστημι
intrans.: stand, halt, stand firm; trans.:
make to stand, set up
ἰσχυρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
strong, mighty, powerful
ἰσχύς, ‑ύος, ἡ
strength, might, power
ἰσχύω
be strong
ἴσχω
keep back, restrain, hold fast, conceive
ἴσως
equally; probably, perhaps
ἴχνος, ‑ους, τό
track, trace, clue
Κ
καθά
just as
καθαίρω
cleanse, purify
καθάπερ
as, exactly as, like, as if
*καθέζομαι
sit down, take up a position
*κάθημαι
be seated, sit, lie idle; reside
*καθίζω
make to sit down, seat
καθίστημι (<  *ἵστημι)
trans.: set down, establish,
restore; intrans: set  oneself down, settle, stand before
340
Greek–English Vocabulary

καθόλου
on the whole, in general
καί
and; even, also, just
καὶ . . . καί
not only . . . but also; both . . . and
καινός, ‑ή, ‑όν
new, fresh, novel
καίνω
kill, slay
καίπερ
even, although
καιρός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
due measure, proportion, exact time,
critical time,  opportunity
καίτοι
and indeed, and yet, although
κακία, ‑ας, ἡ
badness, cowardice; pl.: defects
κακοδαίμων, ‑ον
ill-starred
κακός, ‑ή, ‑όν
bad, evil, base, cowardly, ugly,
worthless
*καλέω
call, summon, invoke; pass.: be called
Καλλίμαχος, -ου, ὁ
Callimachus (Hellenistic 
poet and librarian)
κάλλος, ‑ους, τό
beauty; pl.: beautiful things
καλός, ‑ή, ‑όν
good, fine, fair, beautiful
κἀν = καί ἐν
κἄν = καί ἐάν
καρατομέω
behead
καρδία, ‑ας, ἡ
heart
καρπός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
fruit, profit, returns
καρτερός, ‑ά, ‑όν
strong, staunch
κασίγνητος, ‑ου, ὁ
brother; any blood relative
κάσις, κάσιος, ὁ/ἡ
brother, sister
κατά
down; + gen.: down from, down upon, against;
+ acc.: down along, over, through, during, according
to, against, opposite
καταγελάω (<  *γελάω)
laugh at, mock
καταγιγνώσκω (<  *γιγνώσκω)  remark or observe
against; condemn, lay as a charge against (+ gen. of
person, acc. of crime)
καταθνῄσκω (cf. *ἀποθνῄσκω)
die away, be 
dying
κατακαίω (<  *καίω)
burn, burn down, consume
κατακλείω (<  *κλείω)
shut in, enclose
κατακλύζω
deluge, inundate, overwhelm
καταλαμβάνω (<  *λαμβάνω)
seize upon, lay hold
of, catch, overtake
καταλείπω (<  *λείπω)
leave behind
καταλύω (<  λύω)
dissolve, destroy
καταπίνω (<  *πίνω)
gulp, swallow down or
drink up
καταργέω
make barren or useless; pass.: be
abolished, be set free
κατασκευάζω
equip, furnish, construct, build
κατασκευή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
preparation, construction,
furniture, state, condition, constitution
κατατοξεύω
shoot down (with bow and arrow)
καταφρονέω
disdain, scorn, despise
καταψεύδομαι
tell lies against, speak falsely of
καταψηφίζομαι
vote against or in condemnation of;
pass.: be condemned
κατευθύνω
make or keep straight, guide, direct
κατέχω (<  *ἔχω)
hold back, withhold
κατηγορέω
speak against, allege in accusation
κατήγορος, ‑ου, ὁ
accuser
κατοικτίζω
have compassion for
*κεῖμαι
lie, be laid down, be set up; lie sick, lie
buried, be situated
κεῖνος = ἐκεῖνος
*κελεύω
urge, drive on; exhort, bid
κεν or κε
Epic and Ionic for ἄν
κενός, ‑ή, ‑όν
empty, void (+ gen.)
τὸ κενόν
the void
κεράννυμι
mix, blend
κερδαίνω
gain, make a gain or profit from
κέρδιστος, ‑η, ‑ον
most cunning or crafty; most
profitable
κέρδος, ‑ους, τό
gain, profit
κεφαλή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
head
κῆρυξ, κήρυκος, ὁ
herald, public messenger, envoy,
crier
κίβισις, ‑εως, ἡ
pouch, wallet
κινδυνεύω
run the risk, be likely to
κίνδυνος, -ου, ὁ
danger
κινέω
move, set in motion
κλείω
shut, close
κλέος, τό
rumor, report, fame (only nom. and acc.,
sg. and pl.)
*κλέπτω
steal
κλητικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
of or for invitation; ἡ κλητική
(πτῶσις) vocative
Greek–English Vocabulary
341

κλύζω
wash, dash over, wash away, purge
κλώψ, κλωπός, ὁ
thief
κνημίς, κνημῖδος, ἡ
greave
κοιμάω
lull, put to sleep; m.-p.: go to sleep
κοινός, ‑ή, ‑όν
common, public; shared in common
κοιρανέω
be lord or master; rule, command
κοίτη, ‑ης, ἡ
bed
κολάζω
check, chastise, punish
*κομίζω
carry, convey; take care of, provide for,
conduct, bring back; mid.: get back
κόπρος, ‑ου, ἡ
dung, dirt
κόπτω
smite, cut off, chop off
κόρος, ‑ου, ὁ
satiety, surfeit; insolence
κοσμέω
embellish
κόσμιος, ‑α, ‑ον
well-ordered, moderate, regular,
modest
κόσμος, ‑ου, ὁ
order, good order, discipline;
ornament, honor, credit; world-order, universe
κοῦφος, ‑η, ‑ον
light, nimble
κρατέω
be strong, rule, prevail against
κράτιστος, ‑η, -ον strongest, best (irreg. superl. 
of ἀγαθός)
κράτος, ‑ους, τό
strength, might, power, rule
κρείττων, -ον
better, stronger (irreg. comp. of
ἀγαθός)
κριθή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
barley
*κρίνω
judge, distinguish, separate, decide, choose,
give judgment
κρίσις, κρίσεως, ἡ
a separating, decision,
judgment, trial
Κρόνος, ‑ου, ὁ
Kronos, father of Zeus
κρυπτός, ‑ή, ‑όν
hidden, secret
*κρύπτω
hide, cover
*κτάομαι
procure for oneself, get, acquire; incur
κτείνω = *ἄποκτείνω
κτῆμα, κτήματος, τό
anything gotten, a piece of
property, a possession
κτῆσις, κτήσεως, ἡ
acquisition
κυβερνάω
act as pilot or helmsman
κύκλος, ‑ου, ὁ
ring, circle
κύκνος, ‑ου, ὁ
swan
κύλιξ, κύλικος, ἡ
cup, wine-cup
κυνῆ, ‑ῆς, ἡ
dog’s skin, helmet
κύριος, ‑α, ‑ον having power or authority over
(+ gen.); lawful
ὁ κύριος
lord, master, guardian
οἱ κύριοι
those in authority
κύων, κυνός, ὁ/ἡ
dog, Cynic (voc.: κύον)
κωλύω
hinder, prevent (with inf., hinder from)
Λ
λᾶας, λᾶος, ὁ
stone (dat.: λᾶι; acc.: λᾶαν)
λάθρα
secretly, by stealth; unknown to (+ gen.)
Λακεδαιμόνιος, ‑α, ‑ον
Spartan, Lacedaemonian
Λακεδαίμων, ‑ονος, ἡ
Sparta, Lacedaemon
λαλέω
talk, chat, prattle, speak
*λαμβάνω
take, seize, receive
λάμπω
give light, shine
*λανθάνω
escape notice (+ participle)
λαγχάνω
obtain by lot
λαός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
men, people
λάρναξ, ‑ακος, ἡ
box, ark
*λέγω
say, mean
*λείπω
leave, quit, leave behind, spare
λέξις, λέξεως, ἡ
speech, word, diction, style
λευκός, ‑ή, ‑όν
white; light, bright, brilliant
λέων, λέοντος, ὁ
lion
λήγω
allay, abate
λήθομαι
forget
λίαν
too much
λίθος, ‑ου, ὁ
stone
λιμήν, ‑ένος, ὁ
harbor, haven, retreat
λιμός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
hunger, famine
λιπαρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
oily, shiny, fatty; sleak, rich, 
easy
λοβός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
lobe (of ear or liver)
λογισμός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
calculation, counting
λοιπός, ‑ή, ‑όν
remaining over
καὶ τὰ λοιπά(κτλ.)
et cetera (etc.)
λυπέω
give pain; pain, grieve, annoy
λύπη, ‑ης, ἡ
pain, grief
λύχνος, ‑ου, ὁ
light, lamp
λύω
free, loosen, untie, release, destroy, break
342
Greek–English Vocabulary

Μ
μάγειρος, ‑ου, ὁ
cook
μάθημα, ‑ατος, τό
that which is learned; lesson,
knowledge
μάθησις, μαθήσεως, ἡ
act of learning, acquiring
information
μαθητής, μαθητοῦ, ὁ
a learner, pupil, disciple
*μαίνομαι
rage, be furious, be mad
μακαρίζω
call or consider happy; bless
μακάριος, ‑α, ‑ον
blessed, happy
μακρολόγος, ‑ον
speaking at length
μακρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
long, large, great
μάλα
very, exceedingly; yes, certainly
μάλιστα
especially; yes, of course
μᾶλλον
more
*μανθάνω
understand, learn (esp. by study, but
also by practice or  experience)
μανία, ‑ας, ἡ
madness
μάντις, μάντεως, ὁ/ἡ
seer, prophet
μάτην
in vain
μάχη, -ης, ἡ
battle
μάχομαι
fight, fight with (+ dat.)
Μέγαρα, ‑ων, τά
Megara
μέγας, μεγάλη, μέγα
big, great
μεθίημι (<  *ἵημι)
let go, hand over
μέθοδος, ‑ου, ἡ
pursuit, investigation, method,
system
μεθύσκω
make drunk, intoxicate; pass.: get drunk
(aor. pass.: ἐμεθύσθην)
μειδιάω
smile
μείζων, μεῖζον
bigger, greater, taller (irreg.
compar. of μέγας)
μειράκιον, ‑ου, τό
lad, youth
μείρομαι
receive one’s portion, share, or lot; pf.
part.: εἱμαρμένος, allotted, decreed by fate, appointed
μείων, μεῖον
less (comp. of μικρός or ὀλίγος)
μελάγχιμος, ‑ον
black, dark
μέλει
impers.: it is a care to (+ dat.)
μελετάω
care for (+ gen.), practice, exercise oneself
*μέλλω
be destined, be likely; delay
μεμπτός, ‑ή, ‑όν
blameworthy, contemptible
μέμφομαι
blame, censure
μὲν . . . δέ
on the one hand . . . on the other hand;
postpos. conj. used for  contrast
μέντοι
yet, nevertheless, of course
*μένω
remain, wait (for); stand fast (in battle) (no
mid. or pass.)
μέρος, μέρους, τό
share, portion, heritage, lot,
destiny
μεσημβρία, ‑ας, ἡ
midday
μέσος, ‑η, ‑ον
middle, in the middle
μετά
+ gen.: in the midst of, among; + acc.: in
pursuit of, after (of place or time)
μεταβάλλω (<  *βάλλω)
throw into a different
position, change
μεταβολή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
change, transition
μετάγω (<  *ἄγω)
convey from one place to another;
change one’s course
μεταξύ
in the midst; between, meanwhile
μετατίθημι (<  *τίθημι)
place among; change;
change one’s mind
μεταφορικώς
metaphorically
μετέχω (<  *ἔχω)  partake of (+ gen.), share
μετοχή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
sharing, participation; participle
μετρίως
moderately, modestly, on fair terms
μέτρον, ‑ου, τό
measure; due measure, limit,
proportion
μέχρι
up to, as far as
μή
not
μή οὐ
not (used after verbs of hindering)
μηδαμῶς
in no way, not at all
μηδέ(= οὐδέ)
and not
μηδείς, μηδεμία, μηδέν
not one, not even one,
nobody, nothing
μηδέποτε
never
μηκέτι
no longer
Μήλιος, ‑ου, ὁ Melian, inhabitant of Melos
μήν
surely, truly, indeed, then
μήτηρ, μητρός, ἡ
mother
μήτοι
in no way
μία: see εἷς, μία, ἕν
μίγνυμι, μίξω, ἔμιξα mix
μικρολόγος, ‑ον
mean, stingy
μικρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
small, little, petty, trivial; young
Greek–English Vocabulary
343

μιμέομαι
imitate, mimic, copy
μίμνω (= μένω)
remain, stay, wait
μιμνήσκω
act: remind; m.-p.: call to mind, remember
μισέω
hate
μνῆμα, μνήματος, τό
remembrance, memory;
memorial, mound
μνήμη, ‑ης, ἡ
memory, remembrance
μνημονεύω
call to mind, remember, think
μνημονικός, ‑όν
of memory, of good memory
μοῖρα, ‑ας, ἡ
a part, portion, division, political
party; lot, share, destiny
μοιχεύω
commit adultery
μοναρχία, ‑ίας, ἡ
monarchy, government by a
single ruler
μόνιμος (‑η), ‑ον
staying in one’s place, stationary,
lasting, stable, steady, steadfast
μόνος, ‑η, ‑ον
alone, solitary, only, single
μόριον, ‑ου, τό
piece, portion, constituent part,
member
μόρσιμος, ‑ον
appointed by fate, doomed, destined
μορφή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
form, shape, figure; beauty, appearance
Μοῦσα, Μούσης, ἡ
Muse; music, song
μοχθέω
be weary with toil, suffer greatly
μοχθηρία, ‑ας, ἡ
wretchedness; badness, wickedness
μυθέομαι
say, speak, tell, name
μύλος, ‑ου, ὁ
mill
μυρίζω
rub with ointment; mid.: annoint oneself
μυρίος, ‑α, -ον
countless
μύρον, ‑ου, τό
sweet oil, unguent, perfume
μῶν (< μὴοὖν)
question particle that expects the
answer “no”
μωρός, ‑ά, ‑όν/μῶρος
dull, heavy, stupid, foolish
Ν
ναί
yes
νάρθηξ, ‑ηκος, ὁ
giant fennel
ναῦς, νεώς, ἡ
ship (νηί, ναῦν, pl. νῆες/ναῦς, νεῶν,
ναυσί, ναῦς/νῆας)
ναύτης, ναύτου, ὁ
sailor
νεανίας, νεανίου, ὁ
youth, young man
νεανίσκος, ‑ου, ὁ
youth, young man (diminutive)
νεκρός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
corpse, body, dead person
*νέμω
deal out, distribute; graze
νέος, ‑α, ‑ον
new, young; strange, unexpected
νεότης, ‑ητος, ἡ
youth, youthful spirit, rashness
νή yes! (particle of strong affirmation)
νὴ τοὺς θεούς
yes, by the gods!
νῆσος, νήσου, ἡ
island
νικάω
conquer, prevail, win
νίκη, -ης, ἡ
victory
νιν (= μιν)
him, her, them
νοέω
perceive, observe, think, intend
νομή, -ῆς, ἡ
pasture; distribution
*νομίζω
think, believe
νομοθετέω
make law
νομοθέτης, ‑ου, ὁ
lawgiver
νόμος, ‑ου, ὁ
usage, custom, law
κατὰ νόμον
according to law
παρὰ νόμον
contrary to law
νόος, νόου ὁ, (= νοῦς, νοῦ)
mind
νοσέω
be sick, suffer
νόσημα, ‑ατος, τό
disease
νόσος, ‑ου, ἡ
disease, sickness
νοστέω return, come back home
νουθετέω
put in mind, admonish, warn, advise
νοῦς, νοῦ, ὁ(= νόος)
mind
νύμφη, -ης, ἡ
bride
νυν
then (enclitic particle)
νῦν
now, as it is
νύξ, νυκτός, ἡ
night
Ξ
ξενίζω
receive or entertain as a guest
ξένος, ‑ου, ὁ
stranger, guest-friend, foreigner
ξηρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
dry, parched
ξίφος, ‑ους, τό
sword
ξύλον, ‑ου, τό
wood
ξύν (= σύν)
with
ξύμπας (= σύμπας)
all together, all at once; whole
Ο
ὁ, ἡ, τό
the (definite article)
ὅδε, ἥδε, τόδε
this, that
344
Greek–English Vocabulary

ὁδηγέω
show the way, lead the way, guide
ὁδός, ὁδοῦ, ἡ
road, street, way; manner
ὀδούς, ὀδόντος, ὁ
tooth
ὀδύνη, ‑ης, ἡ
pain, grief
ὄζω
smell
ὅθεν
whence, from which
οἷ
where (to which place)
οἴγνυμι/οἴγω (= *ἀνοίγνυμι)
open
οἶδα
know (by reflection)
οἰκέτης, ‑ου, ὁ
a house-slave, servant; pl.: one’s
family
οἰκέω
inhabit, colonize; live, dwell
οἰκία, ‑ας, ἡ
a building, house, dwelling; household
οἰκονομέω
be a householder, manage, order, arrange
οἰκεῖος, ‑α, ‑oν one’s own, private
οἶκος, ‑ου, ὁ
house
οἰκτρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
pitiable
οἶμαι (= οἴομαι)
think, believe (+ inf.)
οἶνος, ‑ου, ὁ
wine
οἷος, οἷα, οἷον
such, what a
οἷός τε εἰμί
be able
οἷον
such as, for example
ὀκταμηνιαῖος, ‑α, ‑ον
eight months old
ὀκτώ
eight
ὄλβιος, -α, ‑ον
happy, blessed, prosperous, wealthy
ὄλβος, ‑ου, ὁ
happiness, wealth
ὄλεθρος, ‑ου, ὁ
ruin, destruction; bane, pest
ὀλίγος, -η, -ον
little; pl.: few
ὀλίγου δεῖν
almost, all but
ὄλλυμι (= *ἀπόλλυμι)
destroy, make an end of, kill;
perish
ὅλος, ὅλη, ὅλον  whole, entire, complete
κατὰ ὅλον
on the whole
ὅλως
wholly, altogether, on the whole
ὄμβρος, ‑ου, ὁ
storm of rain, thunderstorm, heavy
rain
ὁμιλέω
be in company with, consort with, speak to
ὄμμα, ‑ατος, τό
eye
ὄμνυμι, ὀμοῦμαι, ὤμοσα
swear
ὁμοίως
in like manner
ὁμολογέω
speak together, allow, admit
ὁμοῦ
together, along with; near, almost
ὅμως
still, nevertheless, all the same
ὀνειδίζω
impute blame, reproach
ὄνειδος, ‑ους, τό
reproach, censure, blame
ὄνομα, ‑ατος, τό
name, fame
ὀνομάζω
speak or call by name; name
ὀξύς, ‑εῖα, ‑ύ
sharp, keen
ὀπάζω aor. ὤπασα
make to follow; send with one;
give
ὀπίσω
(adv.) backward, back, hereafter
ὁπλίζω
equip, arm
ὅπλον
tool, armor
ὁπότε
when
ὁπότερος, ‑α, ‑ον
which of two, one of two
ὅπως
how, in what way, in order that
*ὁράω
see, look
ὀργή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
natural impulse, temperament, anger
ὄργια, ‑ίων, τά
secret rites, orgies, mysteries
ὀργίζω
provoke, make angry; mid.: be angry
ὀρθός, ‑ή, ‑όν
straight, upright; ἡ ὀρθή(πτῶσις)
nominative case
ὅρκος, ‑ου, ὁ
oath; the object by which one swears
ὄρνις, ὄρνιθος, ὁ/ἡ
bird; omen
Ὀρόντας, Ὀρόντα, ὁ
Orontas
ὄρος, ‑ους, τό
mountain, hill
ὅρος, ‑ου, ὁ
boundary, limit, frontier; rule, standard
ὀρχέομαι
dance
ὅς, ἥ, τό
who, which
ὅσιος, ‑η, ‑ον
sanctioned by the law of nature; pious,
devout, scrupulous
ὁσιότης, ‑ητος, ἡ
piety
ὁσίως
piously
ὅσος, ‑η, ‑ον
as great as, how great, as long as, 
how long, as much as, as many as, how much, how
many
ὅσπερ, ἥπερ, ὅπερ
the very one who, the very 
thing which
ὅστις, ἥτις, ὅ τι
whoever, whatever, anyone who,
anything which
ὁστισοῦν, ὁτιοῦν
anybody (anything) whatsoever
ὅταν
whenever, when
ὅτε
when, at the time when
Greek–English Vocabulary
345

ὅτι
that, because
ὅττι
Epic form for ὅτι or ὅ τι
οὐ (οὐκ, οὐχ, οὐκι, οὐχι)
not
οὐδαμοῦ
nowhere
οὐδαμῶς
in no way, by no means
οὐδέ(μηδέ)
and not, but not, not even
οὐδείς, οὐδεμία, οὐδέν
no one, nothing, none, no
(adj.)
οὐδέτερος, ‑α, ‑ον
not either, neither of the two;
neuter
οὐθείς, οὐθέν
later forms of oὐδείς, οὐδέν
οὐκέτι
no more, no longer, not now
οὔκουν
not therefore?, not then?, and so not?
οὐκοῦν
therefore, then
οὖν
therefore, then, in fact, at all events (postpos.)
οὕνεκα
because, because of (+ gen.)
οὔποτε (οὔ . . . ποτε)
not ever, never
οὔπω (οὔ . . . πω)
not yet
οὐρανός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
heaven, sky
οὖς, ὠτός, τό
ear
οὐσία, ‑ας, ἡ
that which is one’s own, property; reality
οὔτε
and not
οὔτε . . . οὔτε
neither . . . nor
οὔτις (Οὖτις)
no one, nobody (Noman)
οὔτοι
indeed not
οὗτος, αὕτη, τοῦτο
this
οὕτως (= οὕτω)
in this way or manner, so, thus
*ὀφείλω
owe, have to pay, be obliged
ὀφθαλμός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
the eye
ὀφλισκάνω (aor. part. ὄφλων)
owe, incur a debt,
lose (a case); be found guilty of
ὄχλος, ‑ου, ὁ
throng, multitude, mob, crowd
ὀψαρτυσία, ‑ας, ἡ
cookbook
ὄψις, -εως, ἡ
sight, appearance; eyesight
Π
πᾷ(Doric for πῇ)
how, where? whither?
πάθος, πάθους, τό
that which happens to a person
or thing, experience, emotion, state, condition
παίγνιον, ‑ου, τό
plaything, toy, game
παιδεία, ‑ας, ἡ
the rearing of a child, education;
youth
παιδεύω
educate, bring up or rear a child, teach,
train
παιδιά, ‑ᾶς, ἡ
child’s play, sport, pastime, game
παιδίον, ‑ου, τό
little child, young slave
παίζω
play, jest, sport
παῖς, παιδός, ὁ/ἡ
child, slave (gen. pl. παίδων,
voc. sg. παῖ)
πάλαι
long ago, once upon a time
παλαιός, ‑ά, ‑όν
ancient, old
πάλιν
back, backward; again, in turn
παμμεγέθης, -ες
of enormous size
πανήγυρις, πανηγύρεως, ἡ
festival
πανόπτης, ‑ου, ὁ
all-seeing (one)
παντάπασι
all in all, altogether, wholly
πανταχοῦ
everywhere
πάντως
in all ways, in any case, by all means
πάνυ
altogether, by all means
παρά
+ gen.: from the side of, from beside, from; 
+ dat.: by the side of,  beside; + acc.: to the side of,
along, past, beyond
παράδειγμα, ‑ατος, τό
pattern, model, plan,
exemplar, example
παραδίδωμι (<  *δίδωμι)
give or hand over, deliver;
betray, hand down
παραινέω
exhort, recommend, advise
παρακελεύομαι
exhort, cheer, encourage by
shouting
παραλαμβάνω (<  *λαμβάνω)
receive from another,
succeed to, entertain
παραμυθία, ‑ας, ἡ
encouragement, reassurance,
consolation
παραπύθια, ‑ων, τά
an allergy to the Pythian games
(comic word)
παρασκευάζω
get ready, prepare, provide; mid.:
prepare for oneself
παρατίθημι (<  *τίθημι)
place beside or before,
provide, set before
παρατυγχάνω (<  *τυγχάνω)
happen to be by, be
present at
πάρειμι (<  *εἰμί)
be present, be near, stand by
πάρεστί μοι
it depends on me
παρέρχομαι (<  *ἔρχομαι)
pass away, pass
παρέχω (<  *ἔχω)
furnish, supply
346
Greek–English Vocabulary

παρθένος, ‑ου, ἡ
maiden, girl, marriageable young
woman
παρίσθμια, ‑ων, τά
tonsils, inflammation of the
tonsils
παρίστημι (<  *ἵστημι)
place beside, by; stand beside
παρό(παρ’ ὅ)
wherefore
παρουσία, ‑ας, ἡ
presence, arrival, occasion
πᾶς, πᾶσα, πᾶν
sg.: every; pl.: all; + article: all, the
whole
*πάσχω
suffer, be affected
πατήρ, πατρός, ὁ
father
πατρικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
hereditary, belonging to one’s
father
ἡ πατρική(οὐσία)
patrimony
πατρίς, πατρίδος, ἡ
fatherland, country
πατροκτόνος, ‑ον
murdering one’s father, parricide
πατρῷος, (-α), -ον
of or from a father, hereditary
παῦλα, ‑ης, ἡ
rest, pause
παύω
stop, bring to an end, check; mid.: cease
πεδίον, ‑ου, τό
plain
πειθαρχέω
obey one in authority, be obedient
*πείθω
persuade; m.-p.: obey, trust in
Πειθώ
Peitho, the goddess Persuasion
πεινάω
be hungry
πεῖρα, ‑ας, ἡ
test, trial, attempt
*πειράομαι
try, attempt
πέλας
near, hard by (+ gen.)
οἱ πέλας
one’s neighbors
Πελοποννήσιοι, οἱ
the Peloponnesians
Πελοπόννησος, -ου, ἡ
the Peloponnese (Πέλοπος
νῆσος)
πέλω
go, come, rise; be, become
*πέμπω
send, conduct, escort
πένης, ‑ητος, ὁ
one who works for a living, laborer, 
a poor man
πενία, ‑ας, ἡ
poverty, need
πένθος, ‑ους, τό
grief, sorrow, mourning,
misfortune
πεντακόσιοι, ‑αι, α
five hundred
πέντε
five
πέπλος, -ου, ὁ robe, pl.: robes, clothing
πέρην (= πέραν)
on the other side of, across
περί
+ gen.: about, concerning; + dat.: about
(poetic); + acc.: about, around, near
περιβάλλω (<  *βάλλω)
throw round, embrace;
mid.: put on
περιγίγνομαι (<  *γίγνομαι)
be superior, survive,
result from
περίειμι (<  *εἶμι)
go around, go about
περιέχω (<  *ἔχω)
encompass, surround, embrace,
excel
περιμένω (<  *μένω)
wait for, await, expect, wait,
abide
περίμετρον, ‑ου, τό
circumference
περιπατέω
walk around, walk; live
περιπίπτω (<  *πίπτω)
fall around, fall foul of, fall
into
περισπώμενος (τόνος)
the circumflex (from
περισπάω, draw around)
περισσός, -ή, -όν
oversize, excessive
πέτομαι
fly
πέτρα, ‑ας, ἡ
rock, cliffs
πέτρος, ‑ου, ὁ
piece of rock, stone
πηγή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
running water, source, fount
πηδάω
spring, leap, throb
πηλίκος, ‑η, ‑ον
how great, how much, how old
πῆμα, ‑ατος, τό
misery, calamity, bane
πημονή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
suffering
πηνίκα
(adv.) at what point in time? at what 
hour?
πιθανός, ‑ή, ‑όν
persuasive, plausible
πίθος, ‑ου, ὁ
pithos, large wine jar
πικρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
pointed, sharp; pungent, bitter
*πίμπλημι
fill
*πίνω
drink
*πίπτω
fall
πιστεύω
trust, put one’s faith in, rely on (+ dat.)
πιστός, ‑ή, ‑όν
be trusted, faithful, trusty, genuine,
trustworthy, sure,  credible
πλάττω (πλάσσω)
form, mold
*πλεῖστος, -η, -ον
most (superl. of πολύς)
*πλείων, πλέον
more (comp. of πολύς)
*πλέω
sail, go by sea
πλῆθος, ‑ους, τό
multitude, mass, populace, mob,
size
Greek–English Vocabulary
347

πληθυντικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
plural
πλήν
except (+ gen.)
πλήρης, ‑ες
full (of), infected
πληρόω
fill, make full
πλησίον
near
ὁ πλησίον (ὤν)
one’s neighbor
πλοῦς (πλόος), ὁ
a sailing, voyage
πλούσιος, ‑α, ‑ον
wealthy, opulent
πλουτέω
be rich, wealthy
πλοῦτος, πλούτου, ὁ
wealth, riches
Πλοῦτος
Plutus, god of wealth 
πλύνω
wash, beat
πνεῦμα, πνεύματος, τό
blast, wind, breath,
breathing, spirit
*πνέω
blow, breathe, smell of something
ποδιαῖος, ‑α, ‑ον
a foot long, high, or broad
πόθεν
whence, from what place?
ποῖ
where [to], to what place?
ποιέω
make, produce, cause
περὶ πολλοῦ/πλείονος ποιοῦμαι
consider of
great/greater importance
ποίημα, ‑ατος, τό
anything made or done; poem, 
act, deed
ποιητής, ‑οῦ, ὁ
poet, author
ποῖος, ‑ α, ‑ον
of what kind or sort? what? which?
πολεμέω
be at war, wage war with, fight, attack
πολέμιος, ‑α, ‑ον of or belonging to war, of or like
an enemy, hostile
οἱ πολέμιοι
the enemy
πόλεμος, ‑ου, ὁ
war
πόλις, πόλεως, ἡ
city-state
πολιτεύω
be a citizen, administer a state; pass.:
be governed
πολίτης, πολίτου, ὁ
citizen
πολιτικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
of, for, or relating to citizens;
civic, political
πολλάκις
often, many times
πολλοστός, ‑ή, ‑όν
long (of time)
πολυμαθής, ‑ές
knowing much
πολυμαθία, ‑ας, ἡ
much learning
πολύς, πολλή, πολύ
many, much
ἐπὶ τὸ πολύ
for the most part
πονηρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
oppressed by toils; wicked,
worthless
πόνος, πόνου, ὁ
toil, labor, hard work; trouble, 
pain
πορεύω
bring, carry; mid.: go, walk, march
πορίζω
bring about, provide; mid.: furnish oneself
with, procure
πόρος, ‑ου, ὁ
means of passing; way or means of
achieving
πόσις, ὁ
husband, spouse (no gen. in Attic; dat.
πόσει, voc. πόσι)
ποτέ
at some or any time, some day
πότερον . . . ἤ
whether (whether . . . or)
πότερος, ‑α, ‑ον
which of two
που
anywhere
ποῦ
where?
πούς, ποδός, ὁ
foot (acc. πόδα, dat. pl. ποσί)
πρᾶγμα, πράγματος, τό
deed, act, occurrence,
thing, concrete reality; pl.: affairs, circumstances
πραγματεύομαι
busy oneself, be engaged in
business, undertake,  elaborate
πρᾶξις, ‑εως, ἡ action, transaction
*πράττω/πράσσω
do, make, achieve, fare, suffer
πρεσβεύω
be elder, rank before; represent, urge
πρέσβυς, ‑εως, ὁ
old man, elder; as adj.: old
πρεσβύτης, ‑ου, ὁ
old man
πρίν
until, before
πρό
before, on behalf of, in preference to (+ gen.)
πρόβατον, ‑ου, τό
sheep
πρόβλημα, ‑ατος, τό
anything that juts out, barrier,
defense
πρόγονος, -ου, ὁ
ancestor
προδίδωμι (<  *δίδωμι)
betray, give up, give
beforehand
προεῖδον (aor. of προοράω)
foresee, portend
πρόθεσις, ‑εως, ἡ
placing in public, placing first;
preposition
προθύμως
zealously, readily, actively
προίξ, προικός, ἡ
gift, dowry
πρόνοια, ‑ας, ἡ
foresight
προοράω (<  *ὁράω)
foresee
προπέτεια, ‑ας, ἡ
rashness, reckless haste
348
Greek–English Vocabulary

πρός
+ gen.: from; + dat.: at, near, by; + acc. to,
toward
προσδέχομαι (<  *δέχομαι)
accept, receive, expect
προσδοκάω
expect, think
πρόσειμι (<  *εἰμί)
be added to, belong to, be present
as well
προσεπιμετρέω
assign over and above
προσέρχομαι (<  *ἔρχομαι)
come or go to, approach
προσευχή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
prayer
προσέχω
hold toward, direct, offer
προσηγορία, ‑ας, ἡ
friendly greeting, familiarity;
common noun
προσήκω
have come to, be at hand; impers.:
προσήκει it concerns, befits, has reference to
προσηλόω
nail, rivet, fix to
πρόσθεν
before
προσίσχω (= προσέχω)
hold against
προσκεφάλαιον, -ου, τό
cushion, pillow
προσπέμπω
send to
προστάττω (<  *τάττω)
place or post, assign, order
προστίθημι (<  *τίθημι)
put to, hand over, add,
impose, give besides
πρόσωπον, ‑ου, τό
face, mask, character, person
πρότερος, ‑α, ‑ον
before, in front, former, earlier
πρότερον (. . . πρίν)
adv. before, earlier than
προφέρω (<  *φέρω)
bring before or forward,
propose, publish; throw in one’s teeth
προφήτης, ‑ου, ὁ
interpreter, prophet
πρώην
lately, just now, not long ago, the day before
yesterday
πρῶτος, ‑η, ‑ον
foremost, first
πτέρυξ, πτέρυγος, ἡ
wing
πτηνός, ‑ή, ‑όν
flying, winged
πτῶσις, πτώσεως, ἡ
falling, fall; mode, modification,
case
πτωτικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
capable of inflection
πύλη, ‑ης, ἡ
gate
*πυνθάνομαι
learn (by hearsay or inquiry)
πῦρ, πυρός, τό
fire (not used in pl.)
τὰ πυρά(dat. πυροῖς)
watch-fires
πως
somehow, in any way, at all
πῶς how?
Ρ
ῥάβδος, ‑ου, ἡ
rod, wand, staff
ῥᾴδιος, ‑α, ‑ον
easy, ready; easy-going
ῥᾳθυμία, ‑ας, ἡ
easiness of temper, relaxation,
indifference
ῥαψῳδέω
recite/perform poems
ῥαψῳδός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
reciter of Epic poems, professional
reciter
ῥέω
flow, run, stream, gush
*ῥήγνυμι
break, shatter, rend
ῥῆμα, ῥήματος, τό
word, saying; phrase; verb
ῥήτωρ, ῥήτορος, ὁ
public speaker
ῥίζα, ‑ης, ἡ
root
*ῥίπτω
throw, fling
ῥόδον, ‑ου, τό
rose
*ῥύομαι
rescue, deliver, protect
ῥώμη, ‑ης, ἡ
bodily strength, might
Σ
σᾶμα, ‑ατος, τό
Doric for σῆμα
σάτυρος, ‑ου, ὁ
satyr
σαυτοῦ, ‑ῆς/σεαυτοῦ, -ῆς
yourself
σάφα
clearly, plainly, truly
σαφής, ‑ές
clear, plain, distinct
σελήνη, ‑ης, ἡ
moon
σεμνόθεοι, οἱ
Druids
σημεῖον, ‑ου, τό
mark, sign, token, omen, signal
σῆμα, ‑ατος, τό
sign, mark, omen; mound, cairn,
tomb
σημαίνω
show, indicate, signify
*σιγάω
keep silence, keep secret
σιγή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
silence
σίδηρος, ‑ου, ὁ
iron; tool, sword, knife
σῖτος, ‑ου, ὁ food
σιωπάω
keep silent, keep secret
σκεπτέον
one must reflect/consider
σκηνή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
tent, stage
σκηνογραφία, ‑ας, ἡ
scene-painting
σκιά, ‑ᾶς, ἡ
shadow, reflection, image, phantom
Σκιωναῖος, ‑α, ‑ον
Scionean, of Scione (a city in
Macedonia)
Greek–English Vocabulary
349

*σκοπέω
behold, contemplate, examine, look to
σκορπίος, ‑ου, ἡ
scorpion
Σκύθης, ‑ου, ὁ
Scythian; (at Athens) police
σμικρός (= μικρός)
small
σός, σή, σόν
your (sg.)
σοφία, ‑ας, ἡ
cleverness, skill, practical wisdom,
learning
σοφός, ‑ή, ‑όν
clever, learned, wise, skilled (in any
handicraft or art)
σπαργανόω
wrap in swaddling bands
σπεύδω
hasten, seek eagerly, strive after
σπουδαῖος, ‑α, ‑ον
serious, grave, earnest, good
σπουδή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
haste, speed, eagerness, seriousness
στάσις, ‑εως, ἡ
placing, setting, position; party,
faction
*στέλλω
send
στενάζω
groan, moan, bemoan, bewail
στένω
sigh, groan, moan
στέργω
love, be fond of, like, be content or pleased
στερέω
deprive, rob; pass.: be deprived of
στέφανος, ‑ου, ὁ
crown, wreath
στεφανόω
crown, wreathe
στοά, ‑ᾶς, ἡ
stoa, roofed colonnade; the Stoic school
(of philosophy)
στόλος, ‑ου, ὁ
equipment for war; expedition,
journey, army
στόμα, ‑ατος, τό
mouth
στρατηγέω
be general
στρατηγός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
general, commander of an army
στρατιώτης, ‑ου, ὁ
soldier
στρατόπεδον, -ον, τό
camp, encampment; army
*στρέφω
turn; m.-p.: turn oneself, be engaged in
στυγέω
hate
σύ, σοῦ, σοί, σέ
you (sg.)
συγγνώμη, ‑ης, ἡ
fellow-feeling, pardon,
forgiveness, excuse
σύγγραμμα, ‑ατος, τό
a written paper, book, prose-
work
συγγραφεύς, ‑έως, ὁ
historian, prose writer
συγγράφω (< *γράφω)
write or note down; compose
a work in writing
συγκαίω (< *καίω)
set on fire with, burn up,
inflame; συγκεκαυμένον perf. m.-p. part.
σύγκειμαι (<*κεῖμαι)
lie together; be composed of
συγχέω (< *χέω)
pour together, confound, obliterate
συμβαίνω (< *βαίνω)
meet, come to an agreement;
happen, result
συμβόλαιον, ‑ου, τό
mark, sign, contract, 
covenant
συμβουλεύω
advise; mid.: take counsel with
συμμαχέω
be an ally, be in alliance with, help,
succor (+ dat.)
συμμαχία, ‑ας, ἡ
alliance
συμφέρω (<  *φέρω)
bring together, collect; be useful
συμφέρων (part. of συμφέρω)
useful, expedient,
fitting, profitable
συμφεύγω (<  *φεύγω)
flee along with, take refuge
συμφορά, ‑ᾶς, ἡ
mishap, misfortune; event,
circumstance
συμφύω (<  *φύω)
make to grow together; pf. &
pass.: grow together, grow into one
σύμφωνος, -ον
agreeing in sound; n. pl.: the
consonants
σύν (= ξύν)
with, in company with
συναποδημέω
go abroad, travel with
συναπολείπω (<  *λείπω)
leave behind along with
συνάπτω
tie, join together, unite; mid.: take part
with
σύνδεσμος, ‑ου, ὁ
that which binds; conjunction
σύνειμι (<  *εἰμί)
be with, live, have dealings with
συνεχής, ‑ές (ξυν‑)
holding together; continuous,
successive
συνηβάω
be young together
συνήθεια, ‑ας, ἡ
acquaintance, intimacy, habit,
custom
συνήθης, ‑ες
dwelling or living together; intimate,
accustomed
συνίημι (<  *ἵημι)
bring, set, or come together;
perceive, understand
συνίστημι (<  *ἵστημι)
place together, introduce,
recommend; stand  together
συνοράω (<  *ὁράω)
be able to see, see, comprehend
συνουσία, ‑ας, ἡ
a being with, intercourse
συντάσσω (συντάττω)
put in array, arrange
συντεταγμένως
arranged carefully, in set terms
350
Greek–English Vocabulary

συντεταμένως
earnestly, eagerly, vigorously
συντόμως
concisely, shortly
σῦς (= ὗς), συός, ὁ/ἡ
swine
συστεφανηφορέω wear a crown with
σφαῖρα, ‑ας, ἡ
ball, globe, sphere
σφαλερός, ‑ά, ‑όν
slippery, perilous, uncertain,
precarious
σφε him, her, them (acc. sg. or pl.)
σφόδρα
very, very much, exceedingly
σφοδρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
vehement, excessive, violent
σφυρόν, ‑οῦ, τό
ankle
σχεδόν
near, almost, nearly, about
σχῆμα, ‑ατος, τό
form, shape, appearance, figure 
(in dance: steps),  pretense, fashion
σχολάζω
be at leisure
σχολή, ‑ῆς, ἡ leisure, rest, ease
*σῴζω
save; pass.: be saved, escape
σῶμα, ‑ατος, τό
body
σωτήρ, ‑ῆρος, ὁ
savior, deliverer
σωτηρία, ‑ας, ἡ
deliverance, preservation, safe
return, survival
σωφρονέω
be sound of mind, practice self-control, 
be discreet, be temperate
σωφροσύνη, ‑ης, ἡ
soundness of mind, prudence,
discretion, moderation, self-control
σώφρων, σώφρον
of sound mind, discreet,
temperate, prudent, self-controlled
Τ
ταμίας, ‑ου, ὁ
steward, dispenser, treasurer
*τάττω (ταγ-)
arrange, station, set, appoint
ταῦρος, ταύρου, ὁ
bull
ταύτῃ
in this way, thus, so
τάφος, ‑ου, ὁ
funeral rites; grave, tomb
τάχα
quickly, soon
τάχα ἄν
probably, perhaps
τάχος, ‑εος, τό
speed, quickness
ὡς τάχος with all speed
ταχύς, ταχεῖα, ταχύ
swift, fast
τε
and (enclitic)
*τείνω
stretch, tend, extend, direct
τεῖχος, τείχους, τό
a wall, esp. a city wall
τεκμήριον, -ου, τό
sure sign, proof, evidence,
demonstration
τέκνον, ‑ου, τό
child
τεκνόω
furnish with children, beget; mid.: bear
τεκταίνομαι frame, devise, plan
τέκτων, -ονος, ὁ/ἡ
carpenter, craftsman, 
workman, master in any art
τελευτάω
bring to pass, accomplish, fulfill,
finish; die; pass.: be fulfilled; happen; come to 
an end
τελέω fulfill, accomplish; pay; initiate
τελέως
completely, perfectly
τέλος, τέλους, τό
a coming to pass, fulfilment,
result, end
*τέμνω cut
τερπνόν, ‑οῦ, τό
enjoyment
τερπνός, ‑ή, ‑όν
pleasant, delightful
τέρπω
delight; m.-p.: be cheered, enjoy oneself
τέτταρες, τέτταρα (τέσσαρες, -α)
four
τέχνη, ‑ης, ἡ
art, skill, craft; treatise
τεχνίτης, ‑ου, ὁ
artist, craftsman
τηνικάδε
at this time; so early
τηλικόσδε, -ήδε, -όνδε
of such an age
τήμερον (<  ἡμέρα) today (adv.)
τί δή ποτε;
why ever? why in the world? what do
you mean?
*τίθημι
set, place, put, set up, establish, make,
institute, order, dispose
*τίκτω
bring forth, bear, beget
τιμάω
honor, esteem, revere, value; estimate
τιμή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
honor, esteem, dignity; office, worth,
value
τίμημα, ‑ατος, τό
worth, price, value; penalty
τίμιος (‑G α), ‑ον
valued, esteemed, held in honor,
precious
τιμωρέω
help, avenge; mid.: punish
τιμωρία, ‑ας, ἡ
help, aid, vengeance, retribution,
torture
τίνω
pay a price, penalty, or debt
τίς, τί
who? what? (pronoun or adjective)
τις, τι
any one, any thing; some one, some thing;
any, some
*τιτρώσκω
wound, hurt
Greek–English Vocabulary
351

τλάω (aor. ἔτλην)
endure, dare
τοι (enclitic particle) let me tell you; you know
τοιγάρ
so then, wherefore, therefore
τοίνυν
well then, well, now then, again
τοῖος, -α, -ον
such
τοιόσδε, τοιάδε, τοιόνδε
of such a kind or quality
τοιοῦτος, τοιαύτη, τοιοῦτο
such, such as this
τοιοῦτος . . . οἷος
such as
τολμάω
undertake, dare, endure, bring oneself to do
τόνος, ‑ου, ὁ
that which can be stretched; pitch,
accent
τόπος, ‑ου, ὁ
place, region
τοσόσδε, -ήδε, -όνδε
so great, so large
τοσόνδε
(adv.) so very, so much, to such a degree
τοσοῦτος, τοσαύτη, τοσοῦτο
so great, so large, so
much
τότε
at that time, then, next
οἱ τότε
men of that time
τραγικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
tragic, stately
τράγος, ‑ου, ὁ
goat
τρεῖς, τρία
three
*τρέπω
turn; mid.: flee
*τρέφω
nourish, feed; cherish, foster; mid.: rear for
oneself; pass.: grow (up)
*τρέχω
run
τριακοσίοι, ‑αι, ‑α
three-hundred
*τρίβω
rub
τρίπους, (gen. ‑ποδος)
three-footed; as noun:
tripod
τρίτος, ‑η, -ον
third
τρόμος, ‑ου, ὁ
trembling, quaking
τρόπος, ‑ου, ὁ
turn, direction, way, manner
τροφή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
nourishment, food, nurture, rearing
τροφός, ‑οῦ, ὁ/ἡ
feeder, rearer, nurse
*τυγχάνω
happen; meet (+ gen.); attain, obtain
τύπτω
beat, strike
τυραννίς, ‑ίδος, ἡ
monarchy, sovereignty, tyranny
τύραννος, ‑ου, ὁ
absolute ruler, monarch, tyrant
τυφλός, ‑ή, ‑όν
blind
τῦφος, ‑G ου, ὁ smoke, mist, cloud, conceit, vanity
τύχη, ‑ης, ἡ
fortune, fate, chance, success; ill fortune
Υ
ὕβρις, ὕβρεως, ἡ
hubris, violence, insolence, lust,
rape
ὑγιαίνω
be healthy
ὑγίεια, ‑ας, ἡ
health
ὑγιής, ‑ές
healthy
ὑδρωπικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
suffering from edema
ὕδωρ, ὕδατος, τό
water
ὕει (impers. of ὕω)
it is raining
ὑετός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
rain
υἱός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
son (also in third declension as
ι-stem)
ὕλη, ‑ης, ἡ
forest, woodland; material, stuff
ὑπαί(= ὑπό)
poetic
ὑπάρχω
begin, exist, belong to, accrue, be, become,
be sufficient for
ὑπείκω
yield
ὑπέρ
+ gen.: over; in defense of; + acc.: over, beyond
ὑπερβάλλω (<  *βάλλω)
throw over or beyond a
mark, overshoot, outdo, surpass, exceed; cross
ὑπερβολή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
a throwing beyond, excess,
excessive praise
ὑπερηφάνως
arrogantly, magnificently
ὑπερμεγέθης, ‑ές
excessively large, enormous
ὑπεύθυνος, ‑ον
liable to give account, accountable,
responsible
ὑπήκοος, ‑ον
giving ear, obedient, subject
οἱ ὑπήκοοι
subjects
*ὑπισχνέομαι
promise, profess
ὕπνος, ‑ου, ὁ
sleep
ὑπό
+ gen.: under, by, through; + dat.: beneath,
under, below; + acc.: under, to (a place) under, toward
ὑποβολή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
a throwing under, substitution by
stealth, suggestion; foundation
ὑποδείκνυμι (<  *δείκνυμι)
show secretly, mark out;
make a display
ὑποδέω (<  *δέω)
bind under, shoe
ὑποκριτής, ‑οῦ, ὁ
one who answers; actor, player,
hypocrite
ὑπολαμβάνω (<  *λαμβάνω)
take up by getting
under, take up, seize;  interpret, understand, accept,
believe
ὑπομαίνομαι
be somewhat mad
352
Greek–English Vocabulary

ὑπομένω (<  *μένω)
stay behind, remain alive, abide,
submit, bear, dare
ὑποπτεύω
be suspicious, suspect; pass.: be suspected
ὑποτίθημι (<  *τίθημι)
place under, suggest, propose;
mid.: instruct
ὕστερος, ‑α, ‑ον
latter, next, last
ὑφίστημι (<  *ἵστημι)
place or set under; stand
under, sink; promise,  submit; undertake
ὑψηλός, ‑ή, ‑όν
high, lofty
Φ
*φαίνω
bring to light; pass.: appear, seem
φανερός (‑ά), ‑όν
visible, shining, illustrious,
conspicuous
φαρμακοπώλης, ‑ου, ὁ
druggist, apothecary
φαῦλος, ‑η, ‑ον
cheap, easy, mean, bad, petty
φαύλως πράττειν
be in a sorry plight
φείδομαι
spare; pay heed to
*φέρω
bring, carry, bear
φεῦ
alas, woe
*φεύγω
flee, take flight, avoid, escape
*φημί
say
*φθάνω
be beforehand, outstrip (+ part.)
φθαρτός, ‑ή, ‑όν
corruptible, destructible, mortal,
transitory
φθείρω = *διαφθείρω
φθίνω
wither, perish, die
φθίσις, ‑εως, ἡ
wasting away, perishing, decay,
atrophy
φθογγή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
voice, cry
φθόνος, -ου, ὁ
envy, grudge, ill-will
φθορά, ‑ᾶς, ἡ
destruction, ruin, seduction
φιλέω
love, welcome, kiss
φιλία, ‑ας, ἡ
friendship, affection
φίλιος, ‑α, ‑ον
friendly
φιλομαθής, ‑ές
fond of learning, eager for learning
φίλη, -ης, ἡ/φίλος, ‑ου, ὁ
friend, loved one
(including family)
φίλος, -η, -ον
dear, beloved, loving; as a noun,
friend, loved one; compar. φίλτερος; superl.
φιλτατος
φιλότεκνος, ‑ον
loving one’s children or offspring
φιλότιμος, -ον
loving honor, ambitious
φιλοφροσύνη, ‑ης, ἡ
friendliness, kindliness,
welcome
φλογωπός, ‑όν
fiery-looking, flaming red
φλυαρέω
talk nonsense, trifle
*φοβέομαι
be seized with fear, be frightened
φοβερός, ‑ά, ‑όν
fearful, afraid, timid
φολίς, ‑ίδος, ἡ
scale (of a snake skin)
φονεύς, ‑έως, ὁ
slayer, murderer
φονεύω
murder, kill, slay
φορητός (‑ή), ‑όν
borne, carried, bearable
*φράζω
tell, declare, advise, bid, order
φρήν, φρενός, ἡ
midriff, heart, mind
φρίκη, ‑ης, ἡ
a shuddering
φρικώδης, ‑ες
awful, horrible
φρονέω
be minded, have understanding, be wise
φρόνησις, ‑εως, ἡ
purpose, intention, thought,
sense, judgment, pride, wisdom, prudence
φρόνιμος, ‑ον
understanding, discreet, sensible, wise
φροντίζω think of, consider
φυγή, -ῆς, ἡ
flight, escape
φύλαξ, φύλακος, ὁ
watcher, guard, sentinel
*φυλάττω
keep watch, guard, defend
φυξίος, ‑ον
of banishment, putting to flight
φυσικός, ‑ή, ‑όν
natural, physical
φύσις, φύσεως, ἡ
nature, origin
φυτεύω
plant, beget, engender, produce, cause
φυτόν, ‑οῦ, τό
plant, tree
*φύω
bring forth, produce; pass. & pf. act: grow, 
be born
Φωκίς, ‑ίδος, ἡ
Phocis
φωνέω
produce a sound or tone, speak, tell of
φωνή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
voice, sound
φωνήεις, ‑εσσα, ‑εν
endowed with speech, vocal
τὰ φωνήεντα
the vowels
φώς, φωτός, ὁ
man
φῶς (= φάος), φωτός, τό
light, daylight
Χ
*χαίρω
rejoice
χαλεπαίνω
be hard, angry
χαλεπός, ‑ή, ‑όν
difficult, hard to bear, painful
Greek–English Vocabulary
353

χαλινός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
bridle, bit
χαλκοῦς, ‑ῆ, ‑οῦν
of copper or bronze
χαρακτήρ, ‑ῆρος, ὁ
distinctive mark, type, character
χαρίεις, ‑εσσα, ‑εν
graceful, pleasant, lovely
χάρις, χάριτος, ἡ
grace, favor
χειμών, ‑ῶνος, ὁ
winter, storm, tempest
χείρ, χειρός, ἡ
hand
χειροτονία, ‑ας, ἡ
extension of the hand, voting by
show of hands
*χέω
pour
χθές
yesterday
χθών, χθονός, ἡ
earth, land, country
χορεύω
dance, set dancing
*χράομαι
use (+ dat.)
*χράω
proclaim (an oracle); mid.: consult an oracle
χρεία, ‑ας, ἡ
need, want (of + gen.)
χρέων
it is necessary
*χρή
it is necessary
χρῆμα, ‑ατος, τό
thing, matter, affair; pl.: money
τί χρῆμα
why?
χρήσιμος, ‑η, ‑ον
useful, serviceable
χρησμός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
oracular response, oracle
χρηστός, ‑ή, ‑όν
useful, good, honest; n. pl.: benefits
χρόνος, ‑ου, ὁ
time; tense
χρυσίον, ‑ου, τό
gold
Χρύσιππος, ‑ου, ὁ
Chrysippus
χρυσός, ‑οῦ, ὁ
gold
χρυσοῦς, ‑ῆ, ‑οῦν
of gold, golden
χώρα, χώρας, ἡ
space, place; land, country
χωρέω
make room for another, go, come, advance
χώριον, ‑ου, τό
place, spot, country
χωρίς
separately, apart, without, apart from
(+ gen.)
Ψ
ψέγω
blame, find fault with
ψευδής, ‑ές
false, lying, untrue
ψευδοπροφήτης, ‑ου, ὁ
false prophet
ψεύδω
deceive; mid.: lie
ψηφηγορία, ‑ας, ἡ
vote by ballot
ψιλός, ‑ή, ‑όν
bare, bald, smooth
ψόγος, ‑ου, ὁ
blame, censure
ψυχή, ‑ῆς, ἡ
life, soul
ψυχρός, ‑ά, ‑όν
cold
Ω
ὦ
oh!
ὧδε
in this way, so, thus; hither, here
ᾠδή, ‑ῆς, ἡ(ἀοιδή)
song
ὠνέομαι
buy, purchase
ὥρα, ὥρας, ἡ
season, time of day, hour (any fixed
period)
ὥρα [ἐστί]
it is time
ὡς
as, as if; how; prep.: to (+ acc.)
ὡσαύτως
in the same way, just so
ὡσεί
as if, as though, just as
ὥσπερ
just as, even as
ὥστε
so that, so as to, and so
ὠφελέω
help, aid, benefit, be of service to
ὠφελία, -ας, ἡ
help, assistance
ὠφέλιμος, (-η), -ον
helpful, useful
354
Greek–English Vocabulary

ENGLISH–GREEK VOCABULARY
355
For translation exercises
Asterisks indicate verbs listed in the Principal Parts List, 309–13
A
about
περί + gen.
absent  use the ptcpl. of ἄπειμι
admire  θαυμάζω
aforesaid, the
ταῦτα
after  (use the aor. ptcpl. [VII])
all  πᾶς, πᾶσα, πᾶν [VI]
alone
μόνος, -η, -ον
although
καί, καίπερ (with ptcpl. [VII])
and  καί
anyone
τις [VIII]
anyone who
ὅστις [VIII]
anything
τι [VIII]
anything which
ὅ τι [VIII]
archon
ἄρχων, ἄρχοντος, ὁ [V]
attribute
ἀνατίθημι [XII] (princ. pts. follow τίθημι*)
avoid
φεύγω*
B
bad
κακός, -ή, -όν
be
εἰμι*, γίγνομαι*
be able
δύναμαι* [XI], οἷός τέ εἰμι [IV]
be absent
ἄπειμι
be caught
ἁλίσκομαι* [ΧΙΙ]
be confident
πέποιθα + dat.
be guilty
ἀδικέω [XI]
be present
πάρειμι (cf. εἰμί)
be victorious
νικάω [XI]
be willing  ἐθέλω*
beautiful
καλός, -ή, -όν
become
γίγνομαι*
before πρίν [VI]
begin
ἄρχω*, + gen.; + ptcpl. [VII]
believe
νομίζω*, πιστεύω
best
ἄριστος, -η, -ον
the best of men
οἱ ἄριστοι
better
ἀμείνων, βελτίων, κρείττων [X]
bird  ὄρνις, ὄρνιθος, ὁ/ἡ[V]
both . . . and
καί . . . καί
brave
ἀγαθός, -ή, -όν; ἐσθλός, -ή, -όν
bring
φέρω*, ἄγω*
brother
ἀδελφός, -οῦ, ὁ
business
ἔργον, -ου, τό
it is the business of
ἔργον ἐστί + gen.
but  ἀλλά; δέ (postpos.)
by  dat. of means [I]; agent: ὑπό + gen. [III]
C
carry
φέρω*
catch
αἱρέω*
be caught
ἁλίσκομαι*
cease, (i.e., stop oneself)
παύομαι
certain (a certain one)
τις, τι [VIII]
child
παιδίον, -ου, τό; παῖς, παιδός, ὁ/ἡ[V]
citizen  πολίτης, -ου, ὁ[III]
city  πόλις, πόλεως, ἡ[V]

come
ἔρχομαι*
come into being
γίγνομαι*
common, in common
κοινός, -ή, -όν
concerning
περί (+ gen.)
confident, be
πέποιθα + dat.
consent  ἐθέλω*
corrupt διαφθείρω*
court  δικαστήριον, δίκη
to take someone to court
ἄγειν πρὸς τὴν δίκην
D
dare
τολμάω
death
θάνατος, -ου, ὁ
deed
ἔργον, -ου, τό
deny
οὔ φημι
destroy
λύω, ἀπόλλυμι*
die  ἀποθνῄσκω*
difficult
χαλεπός, -ή, -όν
divinity
δαίμων, -ονος, ὁ/ἡ [V]
do  πράττω*, ποιέω [XI]
E
each other  ἀλλήλων [VIII]
educate
παιδεύω
have (someone) educated  παιδεύομαι
either . . . or
ἤ . . . ἤ
enemy
ἐχθρός, -οῦ, -ὁ
as adj., hostile, hated
ἐχθρός, -ά, όν
evil
κακός, -ή, -όν; πονηρός, -ά, -όν
the evils
τὰ κακά
F
father
πατήρ, πατρός, ὁ [V]
fear
δέδια, δέδοικα [VIII], φοβέομαι* [XI]
find  εὑρίσκω*
fine  καλός, -ή, -όν
flee
φεύγω*
following, the
τάδε
for (conj.)
γάρ (postpos.); (prep.) use dative
forever  ἀεί, εἰς ἀεί
former times in expression
οἱ τότε men of former
times
free
λύω
friend
φίλος, -ου, ὁ; φίλη, -ης, ἡ
friendship
φιλία, -ας, ἡ
future
τὰ μέλλοντα, ὁ μέλλων χρόνος
G
gain  κέρδος, -ους, τό
gift
δῶρον, -ου, τό
give
δίδωμι [XII]
gladly  ἡδέως
go
ἔρχομαι*, εἶμι
god
θεός, -οῦ, ὁ/ἡ; δαίμων, -ονος, ὁ/ἡ
goddess  θεά, -ᾶς, ἡ; θεός, -οῦ, ἡ
good
ἀγαθός, -ή, -όν; καλός, -ή, -όν; ἐσθλός, -ή,
-όν; χρηστός, -ή, -όν
good things
τὰ ἀγαθά
good men
οἱ ἀγαθοί
greatest
μέγιστος, -η, -ον
Greece
Ἑλλάς, -άδος, ἡ[V]
ground as in the expression on the ground that
ὡς + ptcpl. [VII]
guest
ξένος, -ου, ὁ
guilty, be
ἀδικέω
H
happen
γίγνομαι*, συμβαίνω [XII], τυγχάνω [VII]
have  ἔχω*
have (someone) educated
παιδεύομαι (mid. of
παιδεύω)
hear
ἀκούω* + gen. (of person heard from), + acc. 
(of thing heard)
heaven(s)
οὐρανός, -οῦ, ὁ
help (be ally to)
συμμαχέω + dat. [XI]
her  oblique cases of αὐτος, -ή, -ό in fem. [IX];
her(self), as refl., ἑαυτῆς, -ῇ, -ήν [IX]; her, as posses-
sive, use article [I], αὐτῆς [IX], ἑαυτῆς
here
ἐνθάδε, ἐνταῦθα
herald
κῆρυξ, -κος, ὁ[V]
him  oblique cases of αὐτός, -ή, -ό in masc. [IX]; him-
self, as emphatic, αὐτός [IX]; as refl., ἑαυτοῦ[IX]; his,
use article [I], αὐτοῦ[IX], ἑαυτοῦhis own
hit  βάλλω*; hit with, + dat. of means
honest (just)  δίκαιος, -α, -ον
356
English–Greek Vocabulary

honor  (n.) τιμή, -ῆς, ἡ; (vb.) τιμάω [XI]
host  ξένος, -ου, ὁ
house
οἱκία, -ας, ἡ[III]
hurt  βλάπτω*
husband  ἀνήρ, ἀνδρός, ὁ
I
I
ἐγώ [IX]; unless emphatic, expressed by first person
verb ending in the singular
if
εἰ, ἐάν (conditions [VI, XIII])
immortal  ἀθάνατος, -ον [II]
in  loc. prep., ἐν + dat., as dat. or acc. of respect [II]
in common (common)
κοινός, -ή, -όν
into
εἰς + acc.
is  ἐστί = he/she/it is, there is [II]
island  νῆσος, -ου, ἡ
it is necessary
ἀνάγκη (ἐστί), δεῖ, χρή
J
judge  (n.) δικαστής, -οῦ, ὁ; (vb.) κρίνω
justice
δίκη, δικαιοσύνη
K
keep silence  σιγάω, σιωπάω
kill
ἀποκτείνω*
be killed
ἀποθνῄσκω*
king
βασιλεύς, βασιλέως, ὁ
know
γιγνώσκω*, οἶδα* [VIII], ἐπίσταμαι* [XII]
L
law  νόμος, -ου, ὁ
lead
ἄγω*
learn  μανθάνω*
leave  λείπω*
letter (epistle)  ἐπιστολή, -ῆς, ἡ
letters of the alphabet
τά γράμματα
lie  (n.) ψευδές, τό; (vb.) κεῖμαι
life
βίος, -ου, ὁ
listen to
ἀκούω* (+ gen.); listen
heed, obey
πείθομαι + dat.
little  μικρός, -ά, -όν; ὀλίγος, -η, -ον; a little (adv.)
ὀλίγῳ, ὀλίγον
live
ζάω* [XI]
love  ἀγαπάω, φιλέω, ἐράω [XI]
M
make  τίθημι* [XII]; make for oneself, τίθεμαι
(mid.), ποιέω [XI], πράττω*
man
ἄνθρωπος, ἀνήρ [V]
many  πολλοί, -αί, -ά (pl. of πολύς [VI])
master  δεσπότης, -ου, ὁ [III]
me  oblique cases of ἐγώ [IX]
men of former times
οἱ τότε
money
χρήματα, -ων, τά (pl. of χρῆμα, [V])
mother  μήτηρ, μητρός, ἡ [V]
much
πολύς, πολλή, πολύ [VI]
my  ἐμός, -ή, -όν [IX], μου, ἐμοῦ [IX], ἐμαυτῆς,
-οῦ [IX]
myself  as emphatic, αὐτός, αὐτή [IX]; refl.,
ἐμαυτῆς, -οῦ [IX]
N
native land  πατρίς, -ίδος, ἡ[V]
necessary, it is  ἀνάγκη (ἐστί), χρή, δεῖ
never
οὔποτε, οὐ . . . ποτε
night
νύξ, νυκτός, ἡ
during the night
νυκτός
no one
οὐδείς, οὐδεμία; μηδείς, μηδεμία [X]
not  οὐ (οὐκ, οὐχ); μή
nothing
οὐδέν, μηδέν [X]
O
obey  πείθομαι (mid. of πείθω*) + dat.
observe
as in the expression, without being
 observed [VII] λανθάνω*
of  use genitive case
old man  γέρων, γέροντος, ὁ[V]
on  ἐν + dat., ἐπί + gen. or dat.; on, with expression
of time use dat. [IX]
on account of
διά + acc.
on the ground that  ὡς + ptcpl. [VII]
one another
ἀλλήλων [VIII]
opinion  γνώμη, -ης, ἡ
or  ἤ
English–Greek Vocabulary
357

ourselves
ἡμῶν αὐτῶν [IX]
over  as in rule over ἄρχω + gen.
P
peace  εἰρήνη, -ης, ἡ
live in peace
εἰρήνην ἄγειν
people
ἄνθρωποι, οἱ
persuade
πείθω*
person  ἄνθρωπος, ὁ/ἡ
philosopher
σοφός, -οῦ, ὁ; σοφή, -ῆς, ἡ
place
χώρα, -ας, ἡ; τόπος, -ου, ὁ
plan
βουλεύω
plan for oneself
βουλεύομαι
poet
ποιητής, -οῦ, ὁ[ΙΙΙ]
possessions  τά + gen. (e.g., the possessions of 
the wise = τὰ τῶν σοφῶν)
present  use ptcpl. of πάρειμι
be present
πάρειμι (cf. εἰμί*)
profit  κέρδος, -ους, τό
it is profitable
κέρδος ἐστί [V]
R
receive  λαμβάνω*
release  λύω
remain
μένω*
reveal
ἐπιδείκνυμι [XII]
road  ὁδός, -οῦ, ἡ
rule
ἄρχω
rule over
ἄρχω + gen.
S
sacrifice
θύω
sacrifice to
θύω + dat.
same
αὐτός, αὐτή, αὐτό (in attributive position
[IX])
save  σῴζω*
say
λέγω*, φημί* [IV], εἶπον* (said)
sea  θάλαττα (θάλασσα), -ης, ἡ [III]
by sea  κατὰ θάλατταν
see
ὁράω* [XI]
seek  ζητέω [XI]
send
πέμπω*, στέλλω*
servant  θεράπων, θεράποντος, ὁ [V]
set up
τίθημι*, ἀνατίθημι [XII]
shield  ἀσπίς, -ίδος, ἡ[V]
silence  σίγη, -ης, ἡ
keep silence
σιγάω, σιωπάω
sister
ἀδελφή, -ῆς, ἡ
small
μικρός, -ά, -όν [III]
so  οὕτω/οὕτως
soldier
στρατιώτης, -ου, ὁ [III]
some  τις, τι [VIII]
some . . . others
οἱ/αἱ/τὰ μέν . . . οἱ/αἱ/τὰ δέ
someone
τις [VIII]
something  τι [VII]
soul  ψυχή, -ῆς, ἡ
speak
λέγω*
stand  ἵστημι* [ΧΙΙ]
stone  λίθος, -ου, ὁ
stop
παύω
stop oneself (cease)
παύομαι
sun
ἥλιος, -ου, ὁ
T
take
λαμβάνω*, αἱρέω*
take away  ἀπάγω (ἄγω*)
take place
γίγνομαι*
tall
μέγας, μεγάλη, μέγα [VI]
teach  παιδεύω, διδάσκω*
tell
λέγω*
than  gen. of comparison; ἤ [Χ]
that  ἐκεῖνος, -η, -ο; οὗτος, αὕτη, τοῦτο [ΙΙΙ]
that (in order that)  ὡς + fut. ptcpl. [VII];
ἵνα + subj. or opt. [XIII]
that  (introducing indirect statement) IV, VII, 
XIII]
the  ὁ, ἡ, τό [I]
the one . . . the other  ὁ/ἡ/τὸ μέν . . . ὁ/ἡ/τὸ δέ [II]
their  article [I]; not refl., αὐτῶν [IX]; refl., ἑαυτῶν
[IX]
them  oblique cases of αὐτός, αὐτή, αὐτό in plural
[IX]
there is  ἐστί; there are, εἰσί; there was, ἦν; there
were, ἦσαν
358
English–Greek Vocabulary

thing  expressed by neuter of adj.; χρῆμα, -ατος, τό
think
νομίζω*
think worthy  ἀξιόω [ΧΙ]
this  οὗτος, αὕτη, τοῦτο; ὅδε, ἥδε, τόδε [ΙΙΙ];
this man
οὗτος
time
χρόνος, ὥρα
it is time
ὥρα [ἐστί] + inf.
to  dat. case without prep.; εἰς + acc.; παρά + acc.;
πρός + acc.; (vb.) infinitive
trust  πιστεύω + dat.; πείθομαι (mid. of πειθω*) 
+ dat.
truth  ἀλήθεια, -άς, ἡ; ἀληθῆ, τά [VI]
two
δύο
tyranny
τυραννίς, -ίδος, ἡ[V]
U
unjust  ἄδικος, -ον
unjust men  οἱ ἄδικοι
understand
ἐπίσταμαι* [XII], μανθάνω*
until
πρίν [VI]
us  oblique cases of ἡμεῖς [IX]
used to  use impf. tense [II]
V
victorious, be
νικάω [XI]
virtue
ἀρετή, -ῆς, ἡ
W
wait
μενω*
want  βούλομαι*
war  πόλεμος, -ου, ὁ
we
ἡμεῖς [IX]; implied in –μεν, -μεθα endings
wealth  πλοῦτος, -ου, ὁ
well
εὖ, καλῶς
what  (= that which: rel.) ὅς, ἥ, ὅ[II]
what  (interrog.) τίς, τί [VIII]
whatever  ὅστις, ἥτις, ὅ τι [VIII]
which  (rel.) ὅς, ἥ, ὅ[II]
whichever  ὅστις, ἥτις, ὅ τι [VIII]
who  (rel.) ὅς, ἥ, ὅ[II]
who  (interrog.) τίς [VIII]
whoever
ὅστις, ἥτις [VIII]
whole  ὅλος, -η, -ον; πᾶς, πᾶσα, πᾶν [VI]
why
τί, διά τί 
wicked
κακός, -ή, -όν; πονηρός, -ά, -όν
wicked things
τὰ κακά
wickedness
πονηρία, -ας, ἡ; κακία, -ας, ἡ; τὸ
κακόν
wife
γυνή, γυναικός, ἡ[V]
willing
ἑκών, ἑκοῦσα, ἑκόν
be willing
ἐθέλω*
win
νικάω [XI]
wise  σοφός, -ή, -όν
wise man
ὁ σοφός
wisely
σοφῶς
wish
βούλομαι*, ἐθέλω*
with  dat. of means; σύν + dat.; μετά + gen.
woman
γυνή, γυναικός, ἡ[V]
word  λόγος, -ου, ὁ
world
κόσμος, -ου, ὁ
worthy
ἄξιος, -α, -ον
think/deem worthy
ἀξιόω [XI]
write  γράφω*
Y
you  sg. σύ, pl. ὑμεῖς [IX]
young  νέος, -α, -ον
young man
νεανίας, -ου, ὁ [III]
yourself  as emphatic, αὐτός, -ή, -ό [IX]; as refl.,
σεαυτοῦ, σεαυτῆς; ὑμῶν αὐτῶν [IX]
English–Greek Vocabulary
359


AUTHORS OF THE READINGS
361
Dates are B.C.E. unless noted.
Aeschines, philosopher, 5th–4th c., Athens 
Aeschylus, tragic poet, 5th c., Athens
Amphis, comic poet, 4th c., Athens
Anaximenes, philosopher, 6th c., Miletus
Apollodorus, author of Bibliotheca, a handbook on mythology, ?1st–2nd c. C.E.
Appian, historian, 2nd c. C.E., Rome (born in Alexandria) 
Archilochus, lyric poet, 7th c., Paros
Aristophanes, comic poet, 5th–4th c., Athens
Aristotle, philosopher, scientist, 4th c., Athens (born at Stagira in Thrace)
Athenaeus, author of Deipnosophistae, a miscellany, ca. 200 C.E., from
Naucratis in Egypt
Bacchylides, lyric poet, 6th–5th c., Ceos (Kea)
Callias, comic poet, 5th c., Athens
Callimachus, poet and librarian, 3rd c., Alexandria (born in Cyrene)
Cleanthes, Stoic philosopher, 4th–3rd c., from Assos in Asia Minor 
Clement, letters, ?1st c. C.E., ?Rome
Demetrius, philosopher, literary critic, reputed author of On Style, 4th c.,
from Phalerum
Democritus, philosopher (atomist), 5th c., from Abdera in Thrace 
Demosthenes, orator, 4th c., Athens
Didache, Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, anonymous, ?1st c. C.E., ?Syria
Diodorus Siculus, historian, 1st c., Sicily
Diogenes Laertius (DL), biographer, Lives of the Philosophers, ? 3rd c. C.E., 
? Cilicia
Dionysius Thrax, grammarian, 2nd–1st c., Alexandria
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, historian, 1st c., Rome
Euripides, tragic poet, 5th c., Athens
Eusebius, Church historian, author of Ecclesiastical History, 3rd c. C.E.,
Caesarea
Greek Anthology (see Palatine Anthology)
Heraclitus, philosopher, 6th–5th c., Ephesus

Herodotus, historian, 5th c., Halicarnassus
Hesiod, didactic poet, ca. 700, Boeotia
Homer, epic poet, 8th or 7th c., Ionia
Ignatius, bishop, letter writer, 1st c. C.E., Antioch
Isocrates, rhetorician, 5th–4th c., Athens
John, evangelist, 1st c. C.E., Galilee
Libanius, rhetorician, 4th c. C.E., Antioch
Luke, evangelist, 1st c. C.E., Antioch
Lysias, rhetorician, 5th–4th c., Athens
Marcellus Empiricus, physician, writer of On medicines in Latin, 4th or 
5th c. C.E., Gaul
Marcus Aurelius, Roman emperor, Meditations, 2nd c. C.E.
Matthew, Evangelist, 1st c. C.E., Capernaum
Menander, comic poet, 4th–3rd c., Athens, monostichoi (one-liners from his
comedies) 
Musaeus, poet, semi-mythical, Athens
Palatine Anthology (Pal. Anth., also called Greek Anthology, Anthologia
Graeca), collection of poems from 7th c. B.C.E. to about 1000 C.E.
Pindar, epinician poet, 6th–5th c., Boeotia (near Thebes)
Plato, philosopher, 5th–4th c., Athens
Posidippus, poet, 3rd c., Alexandria (born in Pella)
Praxilla, lyric poet, 5th c., Sicyon
Protagoras, philosopher, 5th c., Abdera 
Sappho, Lyric poet, 6th c., Lesbos (Mytilene)
Septuagint, Greek translation of the Old Testament, 3rd–1st c. 
Sextus Empiricus, physician, philosopher, ?2nd/3rd c. C.E.,?Alexandria,
Rome 
Simonides, lyric poet, 6th–5th c., Ceos (Kea) 
Sophocles, tragic poet, 5th c., Athens 
Strabo, geographer, 1st c. 
Thucydides, historian, History of the Peloponnesian War, 5th c., Athens 
Xenophanes, poet, philosopher, 6th–5th c., Colophon 
Xenophon, historian, philosopher, memoirist, 5th–4th c., Athens
Zeno, Stoic philosopher, 4th–3rd c., Citium in Cyprus 
362
Authors of the Readings 

LIST OF SOURCES FOR THE READINGS
363
For a list of standard abbreviations and editions of authors and works, see LSJ (Abbreviations
and Reference Works). For online searchable texts in Greek (with language helps), browse The
Perseus Digital Library at http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/.
Abbreviations used in this list:
DL
Diogenes Laertius
Diels
Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, H. Diels, ed.
frg.
Fragment
K
Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta, T. Kock, ed.
M, m
Meander monostichoi, or one-liners, A. Meineke, Fragmenta Comicorum Graecorum
Pal. Anth.
Palatine Anthology or Greek Anthology (also called Anthologia Graeca)
Introduction pp. 11–12, 19
Callias, Alphabet Tragedy (cited in Athenaeus,
Deipnosophistae x. 453d)
Dionysius Thrax, selections from Grammar 6,
11, 12, 13, 15
Lesson I pp. 40–1
1. Gospel of John 1.1
2. Genesis (Septuagint) 1.1
3. Didache 1
4. DL 1.77
5. Eusebius, 5.1.52
6. Sophocles, Ajax 866–8
7. M, m 74
8. Aristotle, On the Soul 1.402a7
9. Menander 719K
10. M, m 339
11. Hesiod frg. 272
12. Sophocles, Ajax 802
13. Plato, Meno 73d
14. Euripides, Electra 82–3
Lesson II pp. 58–60
1. Plato, Phaedrus 279c
2. Euripides, Bacchae 881
3. Amphis 8K
4. Democritus 247
5. Homer, Odyssey 8.214
6. Callimachus frg. 358
7. Athenaeus 3.72
8. M, m 523
9. M, m 577
10. M, m 150
11. M, m 9
12. Menander 776K
13. Menander, Samia 167–8
14. DL 7.187
15. DL 4.48
16. DL 3.102
17. DL 3.80
18. Plato, Phaedrus 244a
19. Pal. Anth. 7.575
20. Plato, Hippias Major 304e

21. Xenophon, Memorabilia 2.9.1
22. Aristotle, Rhetorica ad Alexandrum 1.2.18
Lesson III pp. 78–80
1. Heraclitus frg. 30
2. M, m 11
3. M, m 753
4. M, m 400
5. M, m 52
6. Euripides, Iphigenia among the Taurians,
1193
7. Demetrius 11.122
8. Libanius, Epistulae 910.3
9. Plato, Laws 702d
10. Aristophanes frg. 642K
11. Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 592
12. Menander 125K
13. Pal. Anth. 7.256
14. M, m 451
15. Aeschylus, Agamemnon 1404–6
16. Herodotus 7.49
17. Appian, Foreign Wars 12.83
18. Demetrius 2.70
19. Luke 6.45
Lesson IV pp. 101–2
Plato, Meno 77b–c, 78a–b, and c–e
Lesson V pp. 116–19
1. Thucydides 1.1.1
2. DL 1.41
3. M, m 701
4. Plato, Republic 460a
5. Proverb: Comica Adespota 672
6. Thucydides 7.77.7
7. Fragmenta Comicorum Graecorum 5, p. 668
A. Meineke, ed. 
8. Menander 517K
9. M, m 29
10. M, m 67
11. Aeschylus, Persians 14–15
12. DL 7.187
13. Aeschylus, Persians 200
14. M, m 26
15. Aristotle, Rhetorica ad Alexandrum
1423a22–6
16. M, m 276
17. Protagoras Diels 11 p. 219
18. Sophocles frg. 13
19. Sophocles frg. 811
20. Plato, Meno 82b
21. Posidippus 28K
22. Plato, Protagoras 328d
23. Pindar, Olympian 1.1
24. Isocrates, Nicocles 21
25. Plato, Timaeus 22b
26. Euripides, Alcestis 149–57
Lesson VI pp. 129–32
1. Homer, Odyssey 8.74
2. Sophocles frg. 938
3. Demetrius 4.238
4. Plato, Laws I.626a
5. M, m 89
6. Aristotle, On the Soul 428a20
7. Anaximenes 2
8. Menander 612K
9. M, m 33
10. Homer, Odyssey, 17.218
11. Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics 1165b
12. DL 6.68
13. DL 5.18
14. DL 10.39
15. DL 5.18
16. M, m 162
17. M, m 449
18. M, m 617
19. Aeschylus, Eumenides 990–1
20. Greek Anthology (Pallados) 10.72
21. Greek Proverb (Strabo, Geography 8.8.1,
etc.)
22. DL 7.183
23. Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 662–63
24. Plato, Gorgias 516e
25. Euripides, Alcestis 280–1
26. Xenophon, Hellenica 1.1.29
27. Euripides, Suppliants 252
364
List of Sources for the Readings

Lesson VII pp. 153–55
1. Aristotle, On Memory 449b15
2. Aristotle, On Memory 449b26–30
3. Isocrates, Nicocles 9
4. Isocrates, Nicocles (2) 50
5. Protagoras Diels 11 p. 219
6. M, m 8
7. Menander 640K
8. Apollodorus 2.5.2
9. Euripides, Alcestis 284–86
10. Apollodorus 1.7.2
11. Apollodorus 2.4.2
Lesson VIII [A] p. 161
1. M, m 114
2. Cleanthes 5.1 (Stoicorum veterum
 Fragmenta I)
3. M, m 407
4. Aristotle, On Memory 463b8
5. Aeschylus, Persians 238
6. DL 6.4
7. Plato, Apology 25c
[B] pp. 171–74
1. Plato, Apology 19e
2. Plato, Phaedo 117d
3. Xenophon, Memorabilia 1.1.19
4. Plato, Apology 29a
5. Aristotle, Poetics 24.18
6. Demetrius 43
7. Menander, Epitrepontes 75–6
8. M, m 621
9. Plato, Apology 41e
10. Gospel of John 22
11. Aeschines 2.147
12. Lysias 12.100
13. Plato, Apology 23e
14. Plato, Laches 194d
15. Plato, Apology 17a
16. Aristotle, Rhetoric 3.19.6
17. Greek Anthology 9.250
18. Didache 9.10
19. Aeschylus, Prometheus 224–25
20. Aeschylus, Persians 296
21. Euripides, Andromache 739
22. Aeschylus, Libation Bearers 297–8
Lesson IX [A] pp. 182–84
1. Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus 438
2. Plato, Protagoras 314d
3. Plato, Meno 75b
4. M, m 584
5. Lysias 8.13
6. Dionysius of Halicarnassus 5.27
7. Aristotle, Poetics 4.15
8. DL 6.12
9. Aristotle, On the Soul 404a28
10. Aristotle, On the Soul 412a13–15
11. M, m 530
12. DL 9.20
13. Homer, Odyssey 19.13
14. Plato, Ion 541 b–c
15. DL 1.18
16. Didache 1.2
17. Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics 1166a31
18. Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus 379
19. Aristotle, Rhetoric 1.9.7
20. Euripides, Iphigenia at Aulis 1131
21. Greek Proverb
[B] pp. 190–91
1. Aristotle, On the Soul 404a28
2. DL 2.135
3. Plato, Crito 46a
4. Sextus Empiricus, Against the Professors
1.284
5. DL 4.62
6. Plato, Apology 37a
7. Gospel of Matthew 4.7
Lesson X [A] pp. 202–4
1. Isocrates, Archidamus 59
2. Sophocles, Antigone 672
3. Sophocles, Antigone 332
4. Sophocles, Antigone 286–87
5. Aristotle, Rhetoric 1.7.4
6. Eusebius 7.9.5 [Acts 5.24]
List of Sources for the Readings
365

7. Ignatius, Epistulae 1.13.2
8. Plato, Apology 30d
9. Greek Anthology 11.176 (Lucillius)
10. DL 1.36
11. DL 7.143
12. DL 6.12
13. DL 1.49
14. DL 1.35
15. M, m 107
16. M, m 143
17. Menander 657K
18. M, m 275
19. Aeschylus, Prometheus 818
20. Aeschylus, Prometheus 768
21. DL 1.88
22. Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus 93–4
23. Plato, Apology 39 a–b
24. M, m 751
25. Musaeus (in Aristotle, Politics)
[B] pp. 210–11
1. Sophocles, Philoctetes 108–9
2. Eusebius 1.2.9
3. Aeschylus, Eumenides 677
4. DL 7.23
5. DL 6.54
6. DL 6.54
7. DL 5.19
8. DL 5.20
9. DL 2.72
10. DL 1.87
11. Aristotle, On the Soul 411a8
12. M, m 34
13. DL 9.51–2
14. Diodorus Siculus 1.27.4
Lesson XI pp. 226–29
1. Euripides, Heracles 261–62
2. Plato, Republic 330c
3. M, m 699
4. Philemon 27
5. M, m 75
6. M, m 528
7. M, m 425
8. M, m 310
9. M, m 424
10. M, m 360
11. M, m 179
12. Greek Anthology 10.38
13. M, m 481
14. M, m 218
15. Demosthenes 2.19
16. Meander 433K
17. Euripides, Bacchae 918
18. Plato, Apology 29b
19. Plato, Crito 47a
20. Plato, Apology 41c–42a
21. Aeschylus, Eumenides 425
22. Xenophanes 24
23. Aristotle, Rhetoric 1.9.30
24. DL 6.8
25. Xenophanes 27
26. DL 2.6
27. Plato, Philebus 28c
28. Menander 60K
29. Aeschylus, Persians 792–93
30. DL 2.118
Lesson XII pp. 244–46
1. Archilochus 8
2. Xenophon, Symposium 2.2
3. Euripides, Alcestis 57
4. Herodotus 1.53.91
5. Aeschylus, Persians 293–94
6. DL 1.77
7. DL 2.34
8. M, m 236
9. M, m 190
10. M, m 752
11. Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 672–75
12. Diodorus Siculus 4.64.3
13. DL 6.68
14. DL 5.17
15. DL 6.5
16. DL 2.72
17. Plato, Ion 535c
366
List of Sources for the Readings

Lesson XIII [A] pp. 256–57
1. M, m 78
2. M, m 165
3. Ignatius 1.15.1
4. Plato, Laws 1.625c
5. Isocrates, To Demonicus 18
6. Aristotle, Rhetoric 2.23.15
7. Menander 608K
8. Plato, Protagoras 314b
9. Euripides, Ion 758
10. M, m 557
11. M, m 516
12. M, m 108
13. M, m 5
14. Euripides, Alcestis 671–72
15. Sophocles, Antigone 45–7
16. Euripides frg. 734
17. M, m 555
18. DL 5.17
19. DL 10.124
20. Sophocles, Philoctetes 641
21. Menander 767K
22. Aristophanes, Wealth 1151
23. 2 Clement 13.4
[B] pp. 264–66
1. Plato, Phaedrus 279b–c
2. Sophocles, Ajax 550
3. Xenophon, Hellenica 4.1.38
4. Aristotle, Magna Moralia 1208b30
5. Plato, Republic 444d
6. Plato, Laws 757a
7. DL 3.54
8. DL 10.39
9. Diodorus Siculus 1.77.3
10. Plato, Meno 87c
11. Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 422
12. Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes 719
13. Aeschylus, Prometheus 978–982
14. Homer, Iliad 1.18
15. Plato, Phaedo 69b
16. Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus 613–15
17. Aeschylus, Agamemnon 36–9
18. Plato, Apology 30c–d
[C] pp. 268–69
1. Xenophon, Symposium 3.5
2. DL 7.23
3. Sophocles, Trachiniae 550–51
4. Plato, Crito 53e–54b
5. DL 1.36
6. DL 1.36
7. DL 2.34
Lesson XIV pp. 276–78
1. M, m 208
2. Plato, Euthydemus 293b
3. Plato, Apology 20c
4. Bacchylides 15 Bergk, ed. 
5. Euripides, Phoenissae 446–47
6. Plato, Apology 17c
7. Charm in Marcellus Empiricus, 279 
(Lyra Graeca 3.544, J. Edmonds, ed.)
8. Folk song in Marcus Aurelius, Medita-
tions 5.7 (Lyra Graeca 3.517, J. Edmonds,
ed.)
9. Praxilla 4
10. Sophocles, Trachiniae 453
11. Aristotle, Rhetoric 1.9.10
12. Aeschylus, Eumenides 88
13. Eusebius 7.15.4
14. Didache 3
15. Didache 2
16. Aeschylus, Persians 402–5
17. DL 4. 46–7
18. Simonides 92d
19. M, m 748
20. M, m 354
21. M, m 25
22. Menander 692K
23. DL 6.57
24. Diodorus Siculus 1.47.4
25. Menander 307K
26. Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus 1169–70
27. Plato, Crito 51c
28. Plato, Phaedrus 276b
List of Sources for the Readings
367


INDEX
369
ablative. See genitive of separation; Indo-
 European cases 
absolute. See genitive; accusative; nominative 
accents 
defined/types (acute, grave, circumflex), 2, 7–9 
accent rules, general, 7–9
accent exercises, 10, 26, 46, 55, 86, 88, 92
of adjectives, 9, 69, 157 
of contract verbs, 213
with enclitics, 45–6
of imperatives, irregular, 272
of nouns, 8–9, 32–3
of preposition following noun, 204
of verbs, 24, 45
accusative, 321–22 
absolute, 145, 322, 325 
cognate accusative, 321 
as direct object, 14–15, 28, 321 
endings, summary of, 321
of extent of space or time, 188, 322 
of part affected 56 (see accusative of respect) 
of respect, 56, 322 
as subject of infinitive, 95, 
terminal (place to which), 15, 28–9, 35, 76, 322 
see also cases
active. See voices 
acute. See accents 
adjectives 
defined, 15, 16, 30, 48–52, 135 
comparative, declension of, 194
comparison of, 193–96; irregular comparison
of, 195–96, 198 
first–second declension, 48, 69, 285 
contracted, 286 
first–third declension, 122–23, 287 
irregular, 124–25, 287 
paradigms 285–87
positions of: attributive position, 49–50;
 predicate position, 51 
second declension, 49, 285 
third declension, 121–22, 286 
used as nouns, 16, 51 
adverbs 
in attributive position, 50 (see also adjectives,
positions of) 
correlatives, 295 
defined, 18 
formation and comparison, 196 
used with ἔχω, 198 
Aeolic. See dialects 
agreement 
of adjectives, 48, 135
of gender, 16
with neuter plural subject, 38, 51, 327
in periphrastic tenses, 166, 199, 251
of relative and antecedent, 52–3
alphabet, the, 1 
Alphabet Song, 11 
use as numbers, 7, 10 
see also classification of letters
antecedent, 52–3, 56 
omission of, 53 
aorist, 17–18, 23, 35, 43, 136–38, 142, 148, 162, 165,
167 
aorist active and middle (3rd PP), 83–8 
aorist stem, 84–5, 87–8
first aorist, 84–6, 259
irregular second aorist, 238–39
liquid first aorist, 85–6
second aorist, 87–8
aorist passive (6th PP), 205–6, 207–8, 261 
apodosis, defined, 128, 254. See also conditions 
article (definite), 16–17, 28, 30–1, 74, 281 
declined with nouns, 30–1
forms of, 30
not used with predicate nominative, 40, 51
noun-making power of, 51–2: with infinitive
(articular infinitive), 52; with μέν and δέ,
51–2 
uses of, 30 
article, indefinite, τις used as. See pronouns:
 indefinite 
articular infinitive, 52, 324 
aspect, 17, 43, 83, 90, 162, 249, 258, 271 

aspirates, 5, 91, 163, 235. See also consonants;
 classification of letters 
aspiration (breathing), 4–5, 91, 235 
assimilation, 91–2, 185, 206 
athematic verbs, 231–40 
basic endings of, 232
deponent, 238
imperative, 273
irregular, see irregular verbs: εἰμί, φημί
-νυμι, 232
optative, 261
paradigms, 302–6
participles, 237–38
reduplicating, 232–36
subjunctive, 252–53
types of, 231
Attic. See dialects 
Attic future. See future active and middle
attributive. See participles: uses of 
attributive position, 49–50 
augment, 43–4, 45, 66, 84, 87, 89–90, 91, 136, 165,
185, 205–6, 234, 235, 249, 258, 271
syllabic, 43 
temporal, 43–4 
breathings (aspiration), 4–5, 91, 235 
cases, 14–15, 28–9, 315–22. See also individual list-
ings for nominative, genitive, dative, accusative,
vocative
causal clauses, 127–28
participles used as, 142–43
alleged cause, 143 
circumflex. See accent 
circumstantial. See participles: uses of
classification of letters, 2–7, 64 
clauses. See individual listings for causal, conditions,
object, purpose, relative, result, temporal
commands. See imperative mood: uses of;
 subjunctive mood: independent uses of 
common gender, 16, 33, 51 
comparison of adjectives and adverbs, 193–96 
comparatives, 193–96. See also adjectives; adverbs 
compensatory lengthening, 85, 107, 206, 236 
compound verbs, 66, 91–3, 239–40 
of εἰμί, 150 
concession. See participles: circumstantial uses of 
conditions, 323–24 
contrary-to-fact, 128, 324 
future, 323: more vivid, 254, 323; less vivid,
263, 323
general conditions, 323: present, 254, 323; past,
263, 323
negatives in, 128, 143, 254, 263
participles in, 143
relative, 254, 263
simple, 128
conjugation, defined, 17–18, 21
conjunctions, 15, 18, 25, 34, 42, 54, 66, 112, 127–28,
197 
consonants, 5–6
assimilation 91–2, 185
see also classification of letters
context, 13, 22, 53, 141–42, 274 
contract adjectives, 286 
contract futures, 220, 260, 302 
contract nouns, 223 
contract verbs, 213–19, 300–302 
accent of, 213 
imperative, 273 
indicative, 214–19 
optative, 260 
participles, 218–19 
principal parts of, 219 
rules for contraction, 214, 216, 217 
subjunctive, 251 
correlatives, 294–95 
crasis, 42, 78, 176, 178 
dative, 4, 14–15, 28, 318–21 
with adjectives, 72, 319 
of advantage/disadvantage (for), 15, 28, 319–21 
of agent, 187, 275, 320 
of degree of difference, 197, 320 
endings, summary of, 318 
ethical dative, 320 
as indirect object, 28, 319 
instrumental (means, manner), 15, 28, 37–8, 320 
of interest, 28, 319 
locative (of place where), 15, 28–9, 35, 37, 76,
321 
of manner, 38, 320 
of means, 38, 320 
of possession, 179–80, 320 
of respect, 57, 320 
with special verbs, 25, 38, 319 
of time when, 97, 188, 321 
see also cases
declensions, 281–89. See also nouns; adjectives 
first: nouns, 29, 31, 68–9, 281–82; adjectives, 48,
69, 285–87 
second: nouns, 29, 31, 282–83; adjectives, 49,
285–86 
third: nouns, 105–11, 283–84; adjectives, 121–24,
286–87 
definite article. See article 
deliberative. 253, 325. See also subjunctive mood:
independent uses of 
370
Index

demonstrative adjective-pronouns, 70–1, 290–91.
See also pronouns 
denominatives, 26, 113, 223 
dentals, 6 
deponent verbs, 18, 24, 84, 95, 238 
futures, 65 
dialects, 2, 4, 55, 73, 213, 220, 279 
digamma, 7, 10 
diminutives, 16, 28, 37, 113 
Dionysius Thrax, 11–12, 13, 19, 135 
diphthongs, 3, 8, 9, 12, 44, 78 
(‑αι, ‑οι) counted as short, 8 
counted as long 259 
long diphthongs 3–4 (see also iota-subscript) 
double consonants. See classification of letters 
Doric. See dialects 
dual, 16, 18, 19, 28, 159, 199 
εἰμί. See irregular verbs 
elision, 40, 91 
enclitics, 45–6, 157 
fearing, verbs of. See object clauses 
first aorist. See aorist active and middle 
future active and middle (2nd PP), 63–4 
Attic future, 220 
contracted futures, 220 
formation of, 63–4 
liquid and nasal future, 220 
future infinitive and future optative in indirect
statement, 94, 267–68 
future passive, 207 
future perfect
active, 165–66
middle-passive, 187 
future participle used for purpose, 144, 325 
γ as nasal, 6 
gender 
common gender, 16, 33, 51  
defined, 16, 38 
generic article, 30, 50 
generic masculine, 16, 51 
genitive, 15, 28, 316–18 
absolute, 144–45, 318 
of agent (with ὑπό), 75, 317 
of cause, 317 
of characteristic, 131, 316 
of comparison, 197, 317 
endings, summary of, 316  
material, 318 
objective, 318 
partitive (of the whole), 197, 316 
possession, 15, 28, 316 
of separation, 15, 28, 75, 318 
of source, 65, 75, 317 
subjective, 318 
of time within which, 188, 318 
with verbs of ruling, 38, 317 
see also cases
gnomic aorist, 35 
grave. See accent 
hortatory, 253, 326. See also subjunctive mood:
 independent uses of 
imperative mood, 271–74 
forms of, 272–73
tenses of, 271
uses of, 271
imperfect active and middle-passive (1st PP), 
17–18, 22, 23, 43, 66, 94 
formation of, 44, 87–8 
irregular, 44 
meanings, 45, 83, 84, 90, 328 
impersonals, 145, 150, 168, 178, 275, 319, 322, 325 
indefinite article, τις used as, 158 
indefinites. See pronouns 
indicative mood, 17, 90, 94, 249 
indirect question, 158 
indirect statement 
indicative, optative construction, with ὅτι, ὡς,
93–4, 267–68
infinitive construction, 93–7, 324
participial construction, 147–48, 149
Indo-European cases, 15, 28 
inflection, defined, 13–14 
infinitives, 17–18, 27, 44, 52, 84, 85, 87, 89, 90, 93–5,
324 
instrumental, 15, 28, 37. See also dative 
intensives. See pronouns 
interjections, 15, 18 
interrogatives. See pronouns 
intransitive, 22, 233–34, 240, 319, 321 
Ionic alphabet, 4 
Ionic dialect. See dialects 
iota-subscript (ι-subscript), 3, 32, 214, 253 
irregular second aorist, 238–39 
irregular verbs 
εἰμί: present, imperfect, 45; future, 65; subjunc-
tive, 250; optative, 260; imperative, 273, 306:
compounds of, 150
εἶμι (will go), 307
φημί: present, imperfect, 94, 307
οἶδα: perfect, pluperfect, 168
δέδια/δέδοικα, 168
Koine¯. See dialects 
Index
371

labials. See classification of letters 
letters, 1–7 
capital letters, 1–2
obsolete letters, 7, 10
see also classification of letters
liquid/nasal first aorist, 85 
liquid/nasal future, 234 
liquids, 6 
linking verb, 28, 193, 315. See also irregular verbs:
εἰμί
locative. See dative 
lost sigma, 23, 65, 85, 109, 121, 185, 220, 233, 258, 274 
-μι verbs, 231–40 
imperative, 273
optative, 261
paradigms, 302–6 
subjunctive, 252–53
see also athematic verbs
middle, 17–18, 21–2, 63, 83, 84, 184–87. See also voices 
moods, 21–2 
imperative, 271–74
indicative, 17, 90, 94, 249
optative, 258–63, 266–68 
sequence of, 266–67
subjunctive, 249–54, 266–67
movable ν, 23 
mutes, 5–6 
nasal γ, 6 
nasals, 6 
negatives 
with articular infinitive, 52
in conditions, 128, 143, 254, 263
with future indicative in command, 271
with imperatives, 271
in object clauses, 267
with optative of wish, 262
with potential optative, 262
in purpose clauses, 267
repetition of, 101, 161
in result clauses, 127
with subjunctive in hortatory, prohibitive, and
deliberative sentences, 253
in temporal clauses, 127
neuter, 16, 28, 32, 37, 51, 52, 58, 70, 107, 109, 141,
145, 158, 196, 274, 276. See also gender; noun-
making power of the article
neuter plural subject with singular noun, 38, 327 
nominative, 14, 15, 28, 32, 33, 53, 68 
absolute, 144
endings, summary of, 315
predicate nominative, 28, 40, 47, 51, 315–16
as subject of finite verb, 14, 15, 28, 40, 315
as subject of infinitive, 95
see also cases
nouns
contract nouns, 223 
defined, 15–16, 28–9
first declension, 29, 31, 68–9, 281–82 
paradigms, 281–84 
second declension, 29, 31, 282–83 
third declension, 105–9, 283–84: basic endings
105; consonant (mute) bases 106–7, 283;
 irregular noun γυνή, 284; syncopated nouns
108–9, 284; vowel bases 108–9, 284
noun-making power of the article 51–2 
number (singular, dual, plural) 
agreement, 48, 53, 66, 95
defined, 15–16, 17–19, 21, 27, 28
numbers and numerals, 10 
declension of, 198–99 
oblique cases, 159, 175, 176 
object clauses, 267, 327. See also subjunctive mood:
uses in subordinate clauses; optative mood:
uses in subordinate clauses 
obsolete letters, 7, 10 
omission
of antecedent, 53
of noun, 51, 140
of pronouns, 175
of subject in indirect statement, 95
of verb to be, 51 
optative mood, 258–63, 266–68 
forms of, 258–62
tenses of, 258
uses of, 262–63, 267–68, 323, 326–27: indepen -
dent, 262, 326; in conditions, 263, 323; in
 indirect statement, 267–68; in subordinate
clauses, 266–68, 327
orthographic changes, 64, 85, 107, 163, 185 
palatals. See classification of letters 
paradigms, defined, 33
article, 281
nouns, 281–84
adjectives, 285–87
participles, 288–90
prepositions, 295–97
pronouns and adverbs, 290–95
verbs, 298–307 
see also paradigms under individual parts of speech 
parsing, defined, 27 
participles 
dangling, 149 
defined, 15, 17–18, 19, 135–36 
paradigms, 288–89 
372
Index

participles (continued)
forms (present, future, aorist active, and mid-
dle), 136–39: aorist passive, 206; contract
verbs (present active), 218–19; future pas-
sive, 207; of -μι verbs 236–38; perfect active,
164; perfect m.-p., 184–85
identification of, 151–52, 289–90
tenses of, 148
uses of, 140–48: attributive, 140–41; circumstan-
tial, 140–46; supplementary, 140, 146–48
particles 
postpositive, 34, 41, 43, 70, 74, 90, 98, 99–100 
used with participles, 142–44, 151 
partitive genitive, 197, See also genitive
parts of speech, defined, 13–14, 15–18
passive, 17–18, 21–2, 63, 75, 83, 84, 136, 184–87,
205–8. See also voices
perfect active (4th PP), 162–64
first perfect, 163–64
second perfect, 163–64
uses of, 162
perfect middle-passive (5th PP), 184–87 
recognizing stem types, 185, 188 
periphrastic forms of verbs, 165–66, 185, 250–51,
272 
persistent accent, 9, 32, 48, 69, 106. See also accent:
of adjectives, of nouns 
person, 18–21 
personal pronouns. See pronouns 
philosophical imperfect, 328 
phonetic changes. See spelling changes, classifi -
cation of letters 
pitch, 2, 7–9, 26. See also accent 
pluperfect 
active, 165 
middle-passive, 185–86 
plural subject with singular verb, 38 
position, syntax of, 14, 29, 149 
position 
of adjectives, 49–51 
of αὐτός, 176
of demonstratives, 71
of genitive, 50, 175, 178, 197
possessive adjectives, 177–78 
postpositives. See particles; enclitics 
potential, 262. See optative mood: independent
uses of 
predicate nominative, 28, 40, 47, 51 
predicate position, 51, 71 
prepositions
defined, 18, 29 
list of, 296–97
use with specific cases, 29, 35, 54, 75–6, 295–97
used in compounds, 91–92, 296
present indicative and infinitive (1st PP), 23–4 
primary tenses. See tenses 
principal parts (PP) 
of contract verbs (regular), 243, 308 
defined, 18, 24, 307–8
list of, 308–13 
first, 24–5
second, 63–6 
third, 89
fourth, 166
fifth, 187–88
sixth, 207–8
proclitics, 30 
prohibitive, 253, 326. See subjunctive: independent
uses of
pronunciation, 1–6
pronouns 
αὐτός, 176, 292 
defined, 16,
demonstrative, 17, 30, 52, 70–1, 290–91:
 position of, 71
indefinite, 157–58, 291
intensive, 176, 293
interrogative, 157–58, 291
negative, 199, 294 
paradigms, 290–94
personal, 175–76, 292
reciprocal, 159, 291
reflexive, 176–77, 293: article used as 30
relative, 52–3, 290
relative indefinite, 158, 292
protasis, defined, 128, 254. See also conditions 
punctuation, 2 
purpose clauses, 144, 267, 325, 327. See also sub-
junctive mood: uses in subordinate clauses;
optative mood: uses in subordinate clauses;
participles: circumstantial 
quantity (long and short), 3, 12, 109, 193, 259 
questions 
indirect, 158
particles used in, 99, 100, 253, 257 
recessive accent, 24, 45, 279. See also accents: of verbs 
reciprocal pronouns. See pronouns 
reduplication, 87–8, 162–63, 165, 166, 184–85, 
231–36 
reflexives. See pronouns 
relative clauses, 52–3, 140 
relative conditions, 254, 263. See also conditions 
relative indefinite. See pronouns 
relative. See pronouns 
result clauses, 126–67, 324 
rote, learning by, 26, 45 
Index
373

second aorist. See aorist active and middle 
secondary tenses. See tenses 
semi-deponents, 24, 88 
sequence of moods, 266–67 
sounds of Greek. See pronunciation
spelling changes, 64, 85. See also classification of
letters 
stops. See mutes 
subject of infinitive, 95 
subjunctive mood, 249–54, 266–67 
forms of, 249–53
tenses, 249
uses of: in conditions, 254, 323; independent,
253, 325–26; in subordinate clauses, 267, 327
superlatives, 193–96, 198 
used to mean very, 198 
with ὡς, 198 
see also adjectives, adverbs
supplementary, 146–48. See also participles: uses of 
syllables, 9 
long and short, 193–94 
syllabic augment, 43 
syncopated nouns, 108–9 
synopsis, 169–70 
syntax, 14, 29, 37–8, 126–28, 179–80, 187, 188, 197,
315–28 
temporal augment, 43–4 
temporal clauses, 127–28, 142 
tenses, 17, 23. See also individual listings
endings, primary, 23, 63, 184, 187, 207, 250,
252–53, 267: perfect as primary, 162
endings, secondary, 23, 44, 84, 87, 165, 185, 205,
258, 
of participles, 136
primary and secondary, 23, 43, 83–4, 90, 165,
205, 250, 262, 267, 327
systems, 22, 43, 63, 162–63, 205–6, 213–19, 
231–38, 250, 308
thematic, 87, 136, 151, 258–59, 274, 289–90, 
307–8 
than, ways of expressing, 197 
thematic verbs, 21, 307–8 
thematic vowel, 21, 23, 44, 63, 65, 84, 184–85, 187,
213, 220, 231, 249–50, 253, 258, 260, 272, 
time constructions, 188 
transitive, 22, 233–34, 240, 321 
transliteration, 1, 3, 5, 7 
unvoiced consonants, 5 
verbs
compound verbs 66, 91–3
contract verbs 213–23, 300–302
defined, 2, 17–18, 21–24
deponents 18, 24, 65, 84, 95
-μι verbs 231–40, 302–6 (see also athematic
verbs)
paradigms, 298–313
properties of, 17–18, 20–23
thematic, paradigms of, 298–302
see also tenses; moods; voices
verbals in -τέος, -τέον, 275, 325 
vocabulary lists, 10, 24, 33, 53–4, 65, 71, 98, 99–100,
110–12, 123–24, 150–51, 159, 168–69, 178–79,
189, 200, 207, 221–23, 239–40 
vocative, 15, 28, 29, 30, 274–75 
endings, summary of, 322
see also cases 
voices, 17, 21–2, 62, 135–36, 205, 238, 307–8 
voiced consonants, 5 
vowels, 3. See also classification of letters
vowel gradation, 84, 87, 91, 163, 167
wishes, 262, 326. See also optative mood:
 independent uses of
word formation, 26, 37, 91–3, 113, 223
374
Index

780872 208896
9
90000
ISBN-13: 978-0-87220-889-6
C.A.E. Luschnig’s An Introduction to Ancient Greek: A Literary Approach prepares
students to read Greek in less than a year by presenting basic traditional grammar without
frills and by introducing real Greek written by ancient Greeks, from the first day of study.
The second edition retains all the features of the first but is more streamlined, easier on the
eyes, more gender-inclusive, and altogether more 21st century. It is supported by a Web site
for teachers and learners at http://worldwidegreek.com/.
“I have used C.A.E. Luschnig’s text for my beginning Greek sequence for over twenty years.
I find that her approach brings students to competency quickly and efficiently. The new
version improves what was already a good text, keeping the many exercise sentences,
providing a realistic selection of ‘real Greek’ readings with translation aids conveniently
below. The proof is in the pudding: after doing beginning Greek with Luschnig’s text, my
Greek students have been able to move easily to the second year reading classes in either
Euripides or Plato.”
—Karelisa Hartigan, Professor of Classics, University of Florida
“Luschnig’s excellent An Introduction to Ancient Greek offers a thorough and clear account
of grammar and syntax, copious exercises for practice, and a wonderful array of brief
passages from ancient authors for translation and discussion. My students and I have used
the text happily for years, and this new edition is even better than its predecessor.”
—Deborah H. Roberts, William R. Kennan, Jr. Professor of 
Comparative Literature and Classics, Haverford College
“An Introduction to Ancient Greek: A Literary Approach is the most successful of the more
than half-dozen beginning Greek grammars I have used in the classroom, especially in this
revised edition. Students meet ‘real Greek’ early and often, and the exercises are ample and
varied. What I appreciate particularly is that this grammar has personality, even a sense of
humor, so that my students feel they are learning ancient Greek from Cecelia Luschnig
rather than an anonymous textbook. The Web site associated with this book is an
invaluable resource.”
—Sherry Gray Martin, Faculty, St. John’s College, Santa Fe
“This accessible and reliable presentation of the essential grammar (backed by numerous
exercises and readings) is so well-paced that a class, if it wishes, can speed through in fifteen
or sixteen weeks and have the rest of the year to read a Plato dialogue or a Lysias speech.”
—Richard Hamilton, Paul Shorey Professor of Greek, Bryn Mawr College
C.A.E. Luschnig is Professor Emerita of Classics, University of Idaho.
Cover photo: Stoa of Attalos Museum in the Athenian Agora.
Copyright © L. J. Luschnig. Reprinted by permission.

