

TUTORIAL CH EM ISTRY TEXTS 
Reactions and 
Characterization 
of Solids 
S A N D R A  E DANN 
Loughborough University 
R S C  
ROYAL SOCIETY OF CHEMISTRY 

Cover images 0 
Murray Robertsodvisual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-6 12-7 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000 
All rights reserved 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or 
review as permitted under the terms of the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, this publication may not be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, without the prior permission in writing of The Royal Society of Chemistry, 
or in the case of reprographic reproduction only in accordance with the terms of the 
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the 
terms of the licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization out- 
side the UK. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should be 
sent to The Royal Society of Chemistry at the address printed on this page. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 21, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
Materials is one area of research which brings together all the physical 
sciences: chemists to synthesize and characterize the solids, physicists to 
investigate their properties and engineers to fabricate them into useful 
devices. 
Since the last decade, when I studied my degree, the materials subject 
has become an essential part of a chemistry degree, as the relationship 
between chemical structure and inherent physical properties has been 
recognized. 
This book is designed as an introductory text to the synthesis and char- 
acterization of materials in the solid state, which are rather different to 
their solution-made, mononuclear counterparts. The text covers the 
salient information in a way which I would have found useful when I was 
studying for my degree. In addition, the last chapter introduces some 
recent discoveries, e. g. the superconducting oxides, which have been devel- 
oped owing to the collaboration of chemists, physicists and engineers. 
I have many people to thank in the conception and writing of this text. 
Firstly, Professor J. Derek Woollins for his invitation and, not least of all, 
Dr Mike Webster for his endless help and encouragement when I started 
teaching at Southampton. I would also like to thank Dr Paul Andrews, 
Deana McDonagh-Philp and Jennifer Armstrong for their proofreading 
and help, when I was less than gracious at the time, and a generation of 
Southampton and Loughborough University students, who were 
unknowing guinea-pigs for the questions in this book. Finally, I would 
like to thank my parents, for finding the money to send me to university, 
and the continual support of my family. 
S .  E .  D A N N  
Loughborough 

TUTORIAL CH EM ISTRY TEXTS 
E D I T O R - I N - C H I E F  
E X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
E D U C A T I O N A L  C O N S U L T A N T  
Professor E W Abel 
Professor A G Davies 
Professor D Phillips 
Professor J D Woollins 
Mr M Berry 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  I N  T H E  S E R I E S  
F O R T H C O M I N G  T I T L E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hunson 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C Jones 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
S E Dann 
D 0 Hayward 
J D Gale and J M Seddon 
R A Jackson 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
Electrochemistry 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Structure and Bonding 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Spectroscopy 
Biology for Chemists 
Further information about this series is available at www. chemsoc. orgltct 
Orders and enquiries should be sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 423429; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
I 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
Solid State Structure 
Types of Solid 
Properties of Large Crystals 
Crystal Lattices 
Unit Cells and Symmetry Elements 
Structures Formed by the Close Packing of Spheres 
Ionic Radius Ratios and Predicting Structure 
Solid State Energetics 
Assemblies of Ions and the Ionic Model 
Lattice Formation; Electrostatic Interaction of Ions 
Born-Haber Cycles 
Bond Enthalpies and Stability 
Bond Dissociation Energies and Bond Enthalpy Terms 
Characterization of Solids 
X-ray Diffraction 
Neutron Diffraction 
Electron Microscopy 
X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy 
Solid State (Magic Angle Spinning) Nuclear 
Magnetic Resonance 
Thermal Analysis 
Other Spectroscopic Techniques 
1 
1 
2 
3 
5 
11 
20 
26 
26 
31 
35 
39 
40 
48 
48 
65 
70 
72 
74 
75 
77 

vi 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
4.9 
5 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
6 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
7 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
81 
High-temperature (Ceramic) Method 
Sealed Tubes 
Controlled Atmospheres 
Hydrothermal Methods 
High Pressure 
Single Crystals 
Nanomaterials 
Amorphous Materials 
Phase Diagrams and Melt Reactions 
81 
88 
89 
91 
94 
95 
97 
99 
99 
Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
102 
Useful Properties of Solids 
Electronic Behaviour of Solids 
Magnetic Behaviour 
103 
103 
117 
Non-stoichiometry 
128 
Thermodynamics and Imperfect Crystals 
Types of Defect 
Anion Vacancies in More Complex Systems 
Colour Centres 
Crystallographic Shear 
Solid Solutions 
129 
130 
138 
141 
141 
143 
Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important 
Solid State Materials 
150 
Superconductivity 
Magnetoresistors 
Zeolites 
Intercalation Reactions 
Buckminsterfullerene, C,, 
Answers to Problems 
Subject Index 
151 
161 
164 
170 
177 
185 
199 

Solid State Structure 
Although the majority of this book will be concerned with crystalline 
inorganic materials, background knowledge of the different types of 
structures and bonds is essential for an understanding of the properties 
of any material. 
Until recently, the structures of inorganic systems have been relatively 
mysterious, since the large number of possible coordination numbers and 
geometries, as well as possible combinations of elements, made these 
materials more difficult to characterize than their organic counterparts. 
This was particularly true of glassy and disordered materials, which 
could not be investigated using standard techniques such as X-ray 
diffraction. 
Many industrially and technologically important materials are solids. In 
addition to the magnetic, optical or mechanical properties and anything 
else which makes them interesting, a chemist would also want to know 
1 

2 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
about their 
are relative to each other and how they are bonded together. 
All materials fall into two groups: 
: which atoms and/or ions are involved, where they 
Crystalline: 
long-range order (> lo3 molecules) 
Non-crystalline small particles with no long-range order 
(amorphous): 
(100 A, 
where 1 A = 
cm) 
Nearly all materials can be prepared in the amorphous state. Interest in 
amorphous materials has grown with the development of techniques 
which can be used to characterize them. Glasses are a special type of 
amorphous material which melts at the 
; here 
the rate of cooling and the viscosity of the liquid, when the material solid- 
ifies, are too great to allow the atoms to rearrange into an ordered crys- 
talline state. 
Although glasses and other amorphous materials are difficult to char- 
acterize, this does not make them useless. For example, amorphous silicon 
can be used to transform solar energy into electricity, and glasses obvi- 
ously find applications in window panes, bottles, drinking glasses, etc. 
In the crystalline state, regular atomic order persists over distances 
which are very large in comparison with interatomic distances. However, 
even in the most perfect of crystals there are some small and usually 
random departures from regularity. These imperfections result in minor 
changes to physical properties, such as resistance and conductivity, but 
are a feature of solid state materials in general. It is noteworthy that reac- 
tions of materials often involve the whole crystal lattice, imperfections 
and all, rather than just the atoms of the ‘pure’ substance. 
Crystals can be formed in numerous ways, including cooling from 
molten salts and deposition from vapours. Whether the material is 
obtained as a single crystal or a polycrystalline mass depends on the 
conditions used. The polycrystalline mass often has random directional 
properties, so it is better to characterize physical properties using a single 
crystal rather than the mass. However, the external symmetry of even the 
smallest crystallite is characteristic of that particular substance, and is 
normally related to the arrangement of the atoms in the crystal. The 
macroscopic appearance of the crystal therefore gives information on 
the microscopic arrangement of its atoms. 
1.2 
Properties of Large Crystals 
The word crystal is derived from the ancient Greek word for ice. The 
ancient Greeks believed that quartz (SiO,) was water so deeply frozen it 
would never melt. Although quartz was found much later to contain sili- 
con and oxygen rather than hydrogen and oxygen, the name ‘crystal’ is 
still used as a general term today. 

Solid State Structure 
3 
1.2.1 Characteristics of Macroscopic Crystals 
Some properties of large crystals found in museums or grown in the 
laboratory are given below: 
Flat faces (to a good approximation) 
Relative sizes of faces can vary from crystal to crystal of the same sub- 
stance 
The angle between similar faces is found experimentally to be a 
constant 
Crystals break (cleave) parallel to certain well-defined faces 
Although the angles between faces remain constant, the relative sizes of 
faces may vary from crystal to crystal. This behaviour is described as 
, and the growth of the same substance from different solu- 
tions can result in different shapes. For example, sodium chloride crystals 
grown in water are cubic, but if urea is added to the water they become 
octahedral (a regular octahedron and a cube have the same overall 
symmetry). 
occurs when different structures can occur for the same 
chemical formula. The atoms are the same but their atomic arrangement 
differs between the structures. Although ultimately thermodynamics (the 
minimum Gibbs free energy) dictates which of the probable structures is 
formed at a particular temperature and pressure, other factors such as 
electrostatic interaction mean that a variety of different structures is 
possible. Polymorphism applies not only to elements, e.g. black and red 
phosphorus, but also to compounds such as calcium carbonate, which can 
exist in a number of forms including calcite, aragonite and vaterite. 
1.3 
Crystal Lattices 
A classification of crystals which is based on bonding is useful in under- 
standing structure-property relations in solids. Five types of solid are read- 
ily defined by considering the bonding in them: ionic, covalent, metallic, 
molecularly bonded and hydrogen bonded. The last two are concerned with 
molecules rather than with lattices and will not be discussed here. They are 
discussed in detail in other texts (e.g. Rao and Gopalakrishnam'). 
Important properties of the particular lattices are summarized in Table 1.1. 
1.3.1 Ionic Crystals 
Ionic crystals are formed between highly electropositive and highly elec- 
tronegative elements when electron transfer has occurred between 
the atoms, resulting in oppositely charged ions with closed shell (octet) 
electronic configurations. Ionic crystals such as potassium chloride 

4 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Table I .l Important properties of particular lattices 
Type 
Particles 
Characteristics 
Examples 
Ionic 
Ions 
Brittle, insulating, high 
NaCI, CaF, 
melting point 
Covalent 
Atoms 
Rigid, high melting point, 
Diamond 
non-conducting (pure) 
Sic 
Metallic 
Positive ions 
High conductivity 
Na, Au 
in a ‘sea’ of 
electrons 
consist of spherical ions, where charged ions are surrounded by ions of 
the opposite charge. This results in highly symmetrical structures in which 
like charges are as far apart as possible. 
I .3.2 Covalent Crystals 
When the elements in a crystalline material have similar electronegativi- 
ties, bond formation occurs through the sharing of electrons, each atom 
contributing one electron to the bond. The force of attraction between 
two atoms of similar electronegativity arises from the overlap of atomic 
orbitals and the consequent net lowering of energy. This results in the for- 
mation of an electron pair, where the electrons are shared between neigh- 
bouring atoms. Typical examples of covalently bonded solids include 
those in Group 14, where sharing of the four s2p2 electrons achieves a 
closed shell electronic configuration, e. g. Sic. Hybridization of the atom- 
ic orbitals results in a tetrahedral arrangement of the four covalent bonds. 
I .3.3 Metallic Crystals 
Metals are significantly different from non-metallic solids both in 
structure and physical properties. They usually crystallize with dense 
structures (see Section 1.5) with large coordination numbers (eight to 
twelve). Typically they consist of positively charged ions in a ‘sea’ of elec- 
trons, in which the outer electrons of the metal atoms are free to move, 
hence giving high electrical and thermal conductivity. The properties of 
metallic crystals cannot be accounted for in terms of localized bonds or 
electron clouds, and are best described by a ‘delocalized electron’ 
approach. 
A simple explanation for the many characteristic features of the metal- 
lic state is given by ‘ 
’ theory. In metallic crystals the atoms 
are assumed to take part collectively in bonding, where each atom pro- 
vides electrons from outer electron energy levels to the bond. The crystal 

Solid State Structure 
5 
is considered to be 'held together' by electrostatic interaction between the 
resulting cations and the free electrons. Within the boundaries of the crys- 
tal, the free electrons move under a constant potential, while at the 
boundaries there is a large potential difference which prevents escape of 
the electrons. 
Polymorphism in metals is common, often occurring as the tempera- 
ture of the metal changes, and the different forms are normally (though 
not exclusively) labelled a, p, y . . . with increasing temperature. In some 
cases, metals can revert to a lower temperature form at high temperature. 
For example a-Fe is stable up to 906 "C and then alters to y-Fe at 1401 "C 
before reverting to a-Fe at 1530 "C. In this case, p-Fe is not stable under 
normal conditions and is only found at high pressure. 
1.4 
Unit Cells and Symmetry Elements 
The properties observed for large macroscopic crystals suggested to early 
observers that crystals were made up by the regular repetition in space of 
the same unit of structure. Each 
displays the full symmetry of the 
structure. 
A three-dimensional unit cell is described as a small volume defined 
by six faces. Each face is a parallelogram and there are three identical 
pairs. The bulk material is made up by translation (displacement) along 
the unit cell axes by an integral number of lengths of the axes. For exam- 
ple, Figure 1.1 gives a picture of a two-dimensional repeating pattern. For 
a two-dimensional pattern the unit cell is a parallelogram with two pairs 
Figure 1.1 Two-dimensional 
repeating lattice 

6 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
of identical sides which must show the full symmetry of the structure. 
Although any of the cells A, B or C could be chosen, the unit cell D is not 
a suitable choice as translation by the distance x translates an apple on to 
an orange. Movement of the other cells by a distance equal to their cell 
edges always maps apple on to apple or orange on to orange. The fact 
that the points chosen here are apples and oranges is irrelevant, as unit 
cells and symmetry apply to any set ofpoints and do not necessarily relate 
directly to atoms. Any identical array of repeating points can be referred 
to as a lattice and hence can show symmetry and possess a unit cell. 
Although cells A, B and C all show the full symmetry of this lattice, C 
is twice the size of the other cells. This introduces the principle ofpoint 
counting and sharing to calculate how many lattice points a cell contains. 
In order to count points, the number of cells each point is shared between 
must be considered. Point i in cell A is on a corner, and if cells were drawn 
in both directions it could be seen that i is shared between four cells. This 
means that i is only worth one quarter of a whole point to the cell A. If we 
repeat this procedure for the whole of A, this generates one whole orange 
and one whole apple inside A. Thus for apples: 4 x '/4 = 1 apple; for 
oranges = 1 x 1 = 1 orange 
For a three-dimensional unit cell, the lengths ( 
) and 
angles are conventionally given the symbols a, b, c, a, p and y, and are 
defined as shown in Figure 1.2. In three-dimensional unit cells, atom shar- 
ing leads to the proportional quantities given in Table 1.2. 
The unit cell shown in Figure 1.2 has no symmetry in that the cell para- 
meters and angles may take any values. All the cell parameters (a, b, c) have 
different lengths and all the angles are not right angles (90"). Increasing the 
level of symmetry produces relationships between the various cell parame- 
ters. For example, if a, b and c are all the same length and all the angles are 
right angles, then the shape of the unit cell is 
. Seven crystal classes are 
obtained by the different possible combinations of cell parameters and 
angles which are given in Table 1.3 and illustrated in Figure 1.3. 

C 
Table 1.2 Proportional quantities in three-dimensional unit 
cells 
Position 
point 
Fraction of lattice 
Comer 
Edge 
Face 
Inside Cell 
1 /8 
1 14 
1 /2 
1 
Figure 1.2 Three-dimensional 
unit cell with conventional lattice 
parameters 

a 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
c = a  
: a  
a 
Cubic 
a 
Monoclinic 
a 
Tetragonal 
a 
Hexagonal 
a 
Orthorhombic 
7 
a 
Rhombohedral 
a 
Triclinic 
C 
Figure 1.3 The seven crystal systems 

Solid State Structure 
9 
Table 1.3 Crystal classes 
~~ 
Cell parameter relationship 
Crystal class 
~~~~~ 
~ 
a = b = c  
a=p=y=g00 
a = p = y = 90" 
a = p = y = 90" 
a # p # y# 90" 
a = p =goo, y= 120" 
a = p = y# 90" 
a = b # c  
a # b + c  
a # b # c  
a = b # c  
a = b = c  
a z b + c  
a=y=90", p 9 o 0  
Cubic 
Tetragonal 
Orthorhom bic 
Monoclinic 
Triclinic 
Hexagonal 
Trigonal (rhombohedral) 
Three-dimensional figures such as these can be difficult to draw in 
an unambiguous way, so these diagrams are simplified by drawing a 
. In this, the structure is drawn by viewing it from a particular 
direction, normally along one of the unit cell axes. Viewing along an axis 
means that one of the faces of the unit cell is nearest to the viewer, and the 
distance of each atom from that face is written on the projection; the dis- 
tance is measured as a fraction of the cell parameter along the axis of 
viewing. For example, Figure 1.4 shows a cube containing a lattice point 
at each corner and one at the centre of the cell and its two-dimensional 
projection. If we view the cube from the top face and consider first the 
atoms on the corners, for each corner there is one on the top face at 0 and 
one at the bottom at 1 (i. e. the whole unit cell away). The atom at the cen- 
tre of the cube is half-way down the unit cell, so it is shown at a distance 
of l/2 on the projection. 
This procedure is rather limited as it can only really be useful for unit 
cells with at least one 90" angle. A more universal approach involves the 
use of 
. With these, each atom in the unit cell is giv- 
en an x, y and z coordinate, where the atom is positioned at (xla, ylb, zlc) 
with respect to the origin of the unit cell. For example, in Figure 1.4 the 
atom at the centre of the unit cell would have a fractional coordinate of 
('12, 
l/2, 
corresponding to a translation of half way along x, half way 
along y and half way along z with respect to the unit cell origin. 
Figure 1.4 Orthographic 
projection of a body-centred 
cubic unit cell 

10 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 1.5 (i) Primitive tetragonal 
(a = b # c, a = p = y = 90") and (ii) 
primitive hexagonal (a = b # c, a 
= p = go", y = 120") unit cells 
In addition to different types of crystal system there are also different 
types of lattice within those crystal systems, which correspond to specific 
arrangements of the atomdions within them. As discussed earlier, the two- 
dimensional system with the simplest sort of lattice which contains only one 
lattice point, is termed 
. Similarly, for each three-dimensional 
crystal system there is always a primitive unit cell which consists of atoms 
located at the comers of the particular parallelepiped (i. e. a solid figure with 
faces which are parallelograms). For example, Figure 1.5 shows primitive 
lattices (symbol P) for both tetragonal and hexagonal systems. 
i 
11 
For the remaining lattice types, as well as the translational symmetry 
from these corner points there is additional symmetry within the unit cell. 
The simplest of these is the 
example seen in Figure 1.4, 
where there is also an atom at the centre of the unit cell (with fractional 
coordinates (%, '/2, %). For a lattice to be body-centred therefore, if an 
atom or ion is placed on x, y ,  z there must be an identical one placed at 
x+%, y+%, z+%. A body centred lattice is given the symbol I. 
In additional to body-centred, there are also two possible types of 
unit cells. A lattice where all the faces have a centrally placed 
atom is given the symbol F. If only one pair of faces is centred, then the 
lattice is termed A, B or C depending on which face the centring occurs. 
For example, if the atom or ion lies on the face created by the a and b 
axes, the lattice is referred to as C-centred. Examples of face-centred lat- 
tices are given in Figure 1.6. 
Not all types of lattice are allowable within each crystal system, 
because the symmetrical relationships between cell parameters mean a 
smaller cell could be drawn in another crystal system. For example a C- 
centred cubic unit cell can be redrawn as a body-centred tetragonal cell. 
The fourteen allowable combinations for the lattices are given in Table 
1.4. These lattices are called the 
lattices. 

Solid State Structure 
11 
1 
11 
Table 1.4 Bravais lattices 
Crystal system 
Lattice types 
Cubic 
Tetragonal 
Orthorhombic 
Monoclinic 
Triclinic 
Hexagonal 
Trigonal (rhombohedral) 
* Often the primitive rhombohedral lattice is referred to as R. 
1.5 
Structures Formed by the Close Packing 
of Spheres 
In molecular chemistry, octahedral and tetrahedral molecules can link 
together to form clusters. One way in which we can visualize solid 
structures is as semi-infinite lattices built up from unlimited numbers of 
tetrahedral and octahedral units (atoms or ions). We can consider poly- 
hedra packing in various ways by sharing edges or vertices to fomrdense 
structures. This procedure is covered in many texts?s3 and will not be 
described in detail here. 
Another way in which many solids can be described is by thinking of 
atoms as hard spheres which can pack together as tightly as geometry will 
allow. This close-packing procedure creates holes which can be then filled 
by other atoms, and this principle can be used to explain many simple 
structures. 
If identical hard spheres such as ball bearings are placed in a flat box to 
form a single layer, each sphere is soon surrounded by six others. This 
arrangement provides the most efficient packing model. In general, in 
structural chemistry the number of nearest neighbours around an atom is 
Figure 1.6 (i) Face-centred 
cubic (F) and (ii) face-centred 
orthorhombic (C) 

12 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
known as its 
layer the coordination number is six (Figure 1.7). 
. For these ball bearings in a single 
Figure 1.7 Packing of hard 
spheres in a single layer 
However, once we have filled the bottom of the box, the ball bearings 
start forming the next layer. The most efficient packing arrangement 
involves the newly added ball bearings falling into the depressions crest- 
ed by the first layer (Figure 1.8). 
Figure 1.8 Second layer of 
spheres lying in depressions 
created by the first 
Figure 1.9 Tetrahedral hole 
created by four spheres and 
octahedral hole created by six 
M 
W 
This procedure creates two sorts of hole as the round ball bearings do 
not fill all the space: a tetrahedral hole which is surrounded by four 
spheres and an octahedral hole which is surrounded by six spheres 
(Figure 1.9). 
'-' 
Octahedral 
Tetrahedral 

Solid State Structure 
13 
Once the second layer is completed, the third layer can be laid down in 
two different ways to create two different structural 
. When the 
layer is placed with all atoms directly above those of the first layer, the 
result is an ABA structure which is known as 
(hcp). Alternatively, if the third layer is displaced so that each atom is 
above a hole in the first layer, the resulting ABC structure is called 
(ccp) (Figure 1.10). The unit cell of the latter is actually a 
face-centred cube. In both cases the coordination number of any sphere is 
12, because the atom is surrounded by six atoms in its own layer with 
three atoms in the layer above and three in the layer below. 
Figure 1.10 Hexagonal (two-layer) 
and cubic (three-layer) close 
packing 
The hexagonal structure shown in Figure 1.1 1 shows a section of the 
unit cell. The reason for the hexagonal label is clear: hexagons share ver- 
tical faces to form the three-dimensional lattice. The unit cell for hexago- 
nal close packing is, however, only a third of this and is much less 
obvious. The hexagonal unit cell contains eight atoms on the corners 
(each counting one-eighth by the rules of atom counting) and one atom 
inside the unit cell. This means the number of atoms in a hexagonal unit 
cell is two. 
The cubic part of the cubic close-packed structure is more difficult to 
see, but can be visualized by considering the alternating layers of six 
Figure 1.1 1 Hexagonal close- 
packed unit cell 

14 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
atoms which, with two further atoms (one above and one below), pro- 
duce the cube shown in Figure 1.12. In this case, counting of atoms gives 
four per unit cell. This diagram shows that the unit cell for cubic close 
packing is a face-centred cube. 
Figure 1.12 Cubic close-packed 
unit cell 
Many ionic crystals can also be described in terms of filling the holes 
(sometimes termed 
) in the close-packed structure which are 
created by packing the spheres. In a way similar to atom sharing, the 
interstices or holes are shared. A projection of the positions of the holes 
in cubic and hexagonal close packing is shown in Figure 1.13. For each 
atom or ion, one octahedral hole and two tetrahedral holes are created by 
the packing of the atoms in both types of close packing. 
Figure 1.13 Position of octahedral 
and tetrahedral holes in hcp and 
CCP 

Solid State Structure 
15 
The structures of binary ionic compounds (those consisting of two ele- 
ments) can be explained by considering the larger ions (normally the 
anions) forming the lattice and the smaller ions (normally the cations) fill- 
ing the holes. This leads to a number of structures which are considered 
typical of a particular group. For example, the sodium chloride structure 
is found in more than 60 binary compounds which share the same pack- 
ing arrangement. 
1.5.1 Sodium Chloride (NaCI) (Cubic Close Packed, 
Octahedral Holes Fully Occupied) 
The ‘rock-salt’ or ‘halite’ structure is one of the most simple and well- 
known structures, with many halides and oxides showing a similar 
arrangement. A three-dimensional picture and projection of the structure 
is shown in Figure 1.14. All the octahedral holes created by the ions are 
filled, creating a ratio of 4Na:4Cl by atodhole counting. This is charac- 
teristic of all face-centred cubic lattices; four formula units (e.g. 4NaC1) 
are present in the unit cell. 
Another way of visualizing this structure is two interpenetrating face- 
centred cubes, where one is displaced by half a unit cell relative to the 
other. Each sodium ion is surrounded by six chlorides, and each chloride 
is surrounded by six sodium ions. This structure is often referred to as a 
6% structure from the coordination number of the two ions. 

16 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 1.14 Sodium chloride 
(halite) structure 
1.5.2 Calcium Fluoride (Cubic Close Packed, All 
Tetrahedral Holes Fully Occupied) 
This is another very common structure with more than 50 examples, 
including UO,, CeO, and TiH,. As there are twice as many fluoride ions 
in the unit cell as calcium ions, the anions must logically fill the tetrahe- 
dral holes and the calcium ions form the lattice to give the correct ratio of 
ions. Cations and anions are therefore the opposite way round to what 
would normally be expected in a binary ionic compound (see above). 
Ca:F has a ratio of 4:8 (or 1:2) since there are twice as many tetrahedral 
holes as atoms in the structure. As expected, the fluoride ion must have a 
coordination number of four as it is in a tetrahedral hole. A projection 
and diagram are given in Figure 1.15. 

Solid State Structure 
17 
1.5.3 Zinc Blende (Cubic Close Packed, Tetrahedral 
Holes Half Occupied) 
(fluorite) structure 
Figure 1.1 5 Calcium fluoride 
The structure of zinc blende is given in Figure 1.16. This is a relatively 
common structure, with more than 30 examples. It is found in many pnic- 
tides (compounds containing anions of Group 15) and chalcogenides 
(compounds containing anions of Group 16). The tetrahedral holes are 
filled in an ordered manner so they alternate throughout the structure. 
The coordination number of both ions is four. 
Figure 1.10 Zinc blende structure 

10 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
1.5.4 Caesium Chloride (not Close Packed) 
The structure of caesium chloride is included here because, although it is 
not close packed, it is often confused with, and written as, body centred 
when it is not. The structure of caesium chloride is shown in Figure 1.17. 
The chloride ions are on the cube corners and the ion at the centre is a 
caesium. In Section 1.4 we saw that a body-centred cubic lattice refers to 
an identical set of points with identical atoms at the corners and at the 
centre of the cube. This means that the structure of caesium chloride is 
not body-centred cubic. Many alloys, such as brass (copper and zinc) pos- 
sess the caesium chloride structure. 
Figure 1 .I7 Caesium chloride 
structure (not close packed and 
not body centred) 
1.5.5 Nickel Arsenide (Hexagonal Close Packed, 
Octahedral Holes Fully Occupied) 
The nickel arsenide structure is shown in Figure 1.18. Arsenide ions in 
identical close-packed layers are stacked directly over each other, with 
nickel ions filling all the octahedral holes. The larger arsenide anions are 
in a trigonal prism of nickel cations. Both types of ion have a coordina- 
tion number of six. 

Solid State Structure 
I 9  
Figure 1.18 Nickel arsenide 
structure 
1.5.6 Wurtzite (Hexagonal Close Packed, Tetrahedral 
Holes Half Occupied) 
The wurtzite structure is the high-temperature form of zinc sulfide, where 
only half of the tetrahedral holes are filled in an ordered manner, such 
that either 3/8 and 7/8 or 5/8 and 1/8 are filled (Figure 1.19). It is note- 
worthy that there is no hexagonally close-packed fluorite equivalent, as 
Nature never simultaneously fills holes which are only one quarter of the 
unit cell apart. 
Figure 1.19 Wurtzite structure 
1.5.7 Rutile (Distorted Hexagonal Close Packed, Half 
Octahedral Holes Occupied) 
The structure typified by the rutile form of TiO, is shown in Figure 1.20. 
It has distorted TiO, octahedra that form columns by sharing edges, 
resulting in coordination numbers of six and three respectively for titan- 
ium and oxygen. The titanium ions are in a body-centred arrangement, 
with two oxygens in opposite quadrants of the bottom face, two oxygens 
directly above on the top face and two oxygens in the same plane as the 
central titanium inside the unit cell. 

20 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 1.20 Distorted hexagonal 
close-packed structure of nrtile 
1.6 
Ionic Radius Ratios and Predicting Structure 
Owing to the wave nature of electrons, the ionic radius of an element is 
not an easily measured quantity. The numbers which appear in tables are 
essentially empirical values, such that when the ionic radii of an anion 
and cation are added together the result is the distance apart the ions 
would be if measured in an ionic compound. Evidence for this idea of 
fixed size of ions is derived from interionic distances measured by X-ray 
diffraction methods (Table 1.5). 
Table 1.5 Differences between the sodium and potassium bond distances for the metal 
halides 
Pairandmeasured 
KF 
2.66 
KCI 
3.14 
KBr 
3.29 
KI 
3.53 
interionicdistance 
NaF 
2.31 
NaCl 
2.81 
NaBr 
2.98 
Nal 
3.23 
(8.) 
Difference 
0.35 
0.33 
0.31 
0.30 
In Table 1.5, since the MX distance is simply the sum of the ionic radii, 
where 
MX = r(M+) + r(X-) 
KX = r(K+) + rw-) 
NaX = r(Na+) + r(X-) 
then for KX: 
and for NaX: 
The difference must just be r(K+) - r(Na+), which is approximately 0.30 
%i. However, even though the differences can be calculated, it is not pos- 
sible to calculate the absolute values. 
One strategy to solve this problem was put forward by Pauling4 and 
often forms the basis for tabulated values. Pauling argued that on theo- 

Solid State Structure 
21 
retical grounds the size of an ion is inversely proportional to its effective 
nuclear charge (Z*): 
Z * = Z - S  
where Z is the atomic number and S is the effect from shielding by the 
inner electrons; S is determined by a number of rules formulated by 
Slater. 
I 
m6.1 Predicting Structures 
Previous work in this chapter has shown that a number of possible struc- 
tures exist for a particular formula. For example, AB, could form either 
the rutile or fluorite structures. Although differences between the elec- 
tronegativity of the ions is important, the vital factor is the relative size of 
the ions. This can be used to predict which structure is most likely to 
form. 
So that energy is minimized, the cations and anions must be in contact; 
as many anions as possible must surround the cations (as anions are nor- 
mally bigger than cations); and the geometry of the anions around the 
cation must minimize anion-anion repulsions. 
1.6.2 Ionic Radius Ratios 
The catiodanion radius ratio, r+lr, provides a simple, but at best approx- 
imate, approach to predicting coordination numbers and hence struc- 
tures. This uses the data from empirical tables (which treats the ions as 
hard spheres) to predict which is the most favoured structure. Particular 
ratios thus favour particular coordination numbers, as given in Table 1.6; 
however, the information should be treated with caution, as actual struc- 
tures do not always conform to those which are predicted in this way. 
Table 1.6 Calculation of radius ratios 
t+/r 
Coordination number 
r/t+ 
1.000-0.732 
0.732-0.41 
4 
0.41 4-0.225 
0.225-0.1 
55 
0.155-0 
8 (cube) 
6 (octahedron) 
4 (tetrahedral) 
3 (triangle) 
2 (linear) 
1 .ooo-1.37 
1.37-2.42 
2.42-4.44 
4.44-6.45 
6.45- 

22 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 1.21 Cubic arrangement 
of eight anions packed around a 
central cation 

Solid State Structure 
23 

24 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 

Solid State Structure 
25 

Solid State Energetics 
In Chapter 1 the differences between ionic and covalent bonding were 
briefly discussed. This chapter looks more closely at the principles and 
energetics of the 
, in particular how ions are assembled to 
form structures and what factors can be used to predict the stability of 
theoretical structures. 
2.1 
Assemblies of Ions and the Ionic Model 
In Chapter 1 an ionic solid was defined as a lattice composed of anions 
and cations, where the atoms have lost or gained electrons to become 
ions. The loss or addition of electrons effectively completes a stable octet 
of outer electrons to create the ion. 
The general structure of ionic solids results in the following properties: 
1. 
. Ionic compounds contain strong non- 
directional interactions where the electrostatic attraction of 
26 

Solid State Energetics 
27 
oppositely charged ions creates a network which requires a lot of 
energy to break down. 
. Although ionic solids have high melting points, they also 
cleave relatively easily along certain directions. This can be observed 
from the flat faces seen in many mineralogical samples. A force suf- 
ficient to displace the ions slightly will map the negative ions on to 
negative ions and positive ions on to positive ions, e.g. in Figure 2.1 
for sodium chloride, and the electrostatic forces which made the 
bonds previously so strong become repulsive and the material 
cleaves. 
2. 
1 
* 
Figure 2.1 Effect of mechanical 
force on an ionic lattice 
3. 
. In the solid the ions are fixed on their lat- 
tice sites and electrical conductivity is poor. However, in the molten 
state the ions are free to move and conduct electricity in the pres- 
ence of an electric field. 
. Ionic compounds generally dissolve easily in polar sol- 
vents such as water. At first sight, the energy lost in breaking up the 
ionic lattice could be considered to be too high for dissolution; how- 
ever, the solvation energy from interaction between the polar solvent 
and the ions, together with the increase in entropy as the lattice 
breaks up, compensates for the lattice energy. 
. Ionic compounds containing cations and 
anions tend to show much lower coordination numbers than metal- 
lic lattices, but higher than covalently bonded compounds. This is 
due to the relatively small size of the cations and relatively large size 
of the anions. It is not geometrically feasible to locate many large 
anions closely around each cation. 
4. 
5. 

28 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
These properties should be treated with caution and are not definitive 
for ionic solids in general, since some ionic compounds do not show all 
these properties. For example, ammonium salts such as ammonium 
nitrate have low melting points (ca. 150-300 "C), and some compounds 
containing doubly charged ions such as magnesium oxide, MgO, have 
very low solubility. 
2.1 A Evidence for the Ionic Model 
Some evidence for ionic, rather than covalent, bonding can be gathered 
from electron density distribution maps determined by X-ray diffraction 
(Chapter 3). Ions are observed as essentially spherical, highly concen- 
trated distributions of electron density on the lattice points, with a small 
diffuse halo around the outside containing few electrons between the 
ions. This contrasts markedly with covalent bonding, where the shared 
electrons between the atoms generate a much higher electron density 
between the extremes. 
Figure 2.2 Schematic electron 
density maps for ionic and 
covalent bonding 
A Diagram (ii) is the ionic lattice, as there is very low electron 
density between the lattice points and the contours show an 
essentially spherical electronic distribution. 
Such experimental evidence is not always available, so determination of 
a compound as fundamentally ionic is usually achieved by comparison 
with a model: the 
. The ionic model treats an ionic solid as 

Solid State Energetics 
29 
an array of oppositely charged spheres held together by electrostatic 
(coulombic) attraction. Comparison of the thermodynamic properties of 
this theoretical arrangement with those determined by experiment, with 
a margin for experimental error, allows the compound to be classed ionic 
if agreement is good. 
It should be noted at this stage that thermodynamic calculations are 
only as reliable as the experimental data placed in them. As science pro- 
gresses, tabulated values for energetic terms continually change, and the 
most up-to-date tables should be used. Similarly, this is also true for 
ionic radii, which are continually being updated as the data available 
through use of the X-ray diffraction technique increase. 
Ionization Energy 
The molar 
energy at 0 K for the process: 
is defined as the change in internal 
in which one mole of gaseous atoms becomes one mole of gaseous 
monopositive ions. The second ionization energy therefore involves the 
loss of another electron from the already positively charged ion also at 
0 K, i.e. 
Ionization energies are often referred to as 
and are 
given the unit the eV (electronvolt). This is the energy an electron requires 
when it falls through a potential difference of one volt (1 eV = 96.485 
kJ mol-I). 
Several points should be noted about ionization energies. Firstly, these 
reactions are always endothermic processes, because energy is always 
required to remove an electron from an atom. Secondly, subsequent ion- 
ization energies are always greater and progressively larger than the first. 
It becomes more difficult to remove the negative electrons when the atom 
has gained one or more positive charges. Also removal of electrons 
reduces inter-electron repulsion: the remaining electrons become closer 
to the nucleus and increasingly harder to remove. Finally, this process 
refers to an atom in the gas phase. Therefore, if the material is not 
gaseous and atomized, additional energy must be put into the system to 
generate gaseous atoms before the ionization energies can be used. 
As the size of the atom increases the electrons are in general easier to 
remove, because the outer electrons are held less tightly as they are fur- 
ther away from the nucleus and shielded by the inner electrons. 

30 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Table 2.1 Ionization potential for the Group 2 elements 
Element 
Magnesium 
Calcium 
Strontium 
Barium 
1st I.P. (kJ mol-’) 
738 
590 
550 
503 
2nd I.P. (kJ mot-’) 
1451 
1149 
1064 
965 
Data taken from C. E. Moore, Ionization Potential and Ionization Limits Derived from 
the Analyses of Optical Spectra, National Bureau of Standards, Washington, 1970. 
Therefore, the ionization energies generally decrease as a particular peri- 
odic group is descended. Table 2.1 gives the first and second ionization 
energies for Group 2. 
Electron Affinity 
The molar first 
for the process 
is defined as the energy released at 0 K 
This is somewhat confusing, as normally thermodynamics uses a nega- 
tive sign to indicate an exothermic reaction and here apositive Ea is actu- 
ally an exothermic process. An element has a positive electron affinity if 
the incoming electron can enter an orbital where it experiences a strong 
attraction to the nucleus. For example, in the case of fluorine, only one 
electron is requires to complete a full outer shell and the electron affinity 
is +3.40 eV. Some electron affinities are summarized in Table 2.2. 
In a similar way to the ionization energies, the sign of the electron 
affinity changes as more electrons are added. For the second and suc- 
cessive electron affinities, the negatively charged electrons are being 
added to an already negatively charged ion, and additional energy is 
Table 2.2 Table of some elements and their electron affinities (ev) 
Element 
Electron affinity 
Element 
Electron affinity 
N 
-0.07 
P 
0 
1.46 
S 
F 
3.40 
CI 
Ne 
-1.2 
Ar 
0.75 
2.08 
3.62 
-1 .o 
From H. Hotop and W. C. Lineberger, J. Phys. Chem. Ref Data, 1985, 14, 731 

Solid State Energetics 
31 
required to overcome the electrostatic repulsion. The effect of the elec- 
trostatic interaction is overwhelming, and means that second, third and 
higher electron affinities are always 
, although the first elec- 
tron affinity can be exothermic or endothermic. 
For example, the formation of 02- 
ions from 0 atoms is perhaps sur- 
prisingly endothermic, considering that under conventional terms one 
would expect oxygen to 'want' a complete octet of electrons: 
E ,  = +142kJmol-' 
E ,  = -844 kJ mol-' 
Formation of an oxide ion from a gaseous oxygen atom is an endother- 
mic process with an overall electron affinity of -702 kJ mol-I: 
E, = -702 kJmol-' 
It is worth pointing out that ionization energies are always much larger 
than the corresponding electron affinities, so that for any pair of species 
the energy required to ionize the more electropositive element is greater 
than the energy obtained by adding one electron to the more electroneg- 
ative element (since the first ionization energy is greater than the first elec- 
tron affinity). Therefore, in the gas phase, if there is no external means 
of gaining energy, the elements exist as neutral atoms and not as ions. 
2.2 
Lattice Formation; Electrostatic Interaction of 
Ions 
The forces which hold an ionic idealized lattice together are entirely 
electrostatic, and may be calculated by summing together all the elec- 
trostatic repulsions and attractions of cations and anions in the lattice. 
The attractive force (F) between a cation of charge +z,e and an anion 
of charge -z2e separated by a distance r, as shown in Figure 2.3, is given 
by Coulomb's law: 
-z1z2e2 
F = -  
4m0r2 
where e is the charge on an electron and E, is the permeability of free 
space. 
The attractive potential energy (&) of the system (the work required 
Figure 2.3 Interaction of two 
ions separated by the distance r 

32 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 2.4 Overall attractive 
energy ($J resulting from the 
electrostatic interaction of two 
to go from r = 
this equation over the limits r = 00 to r = r with respect to r, giving 
to some value of r) can be determined by integrating 
. 
,=’ 4 c  
, 
ions 
This expression produces the graph shown in Figure 2.4 for two ions 
being brought together from infinity. Clearly the ions are preventing 
from coalescing at r = 0 by some repulsive force. A repulsive force is set 
up owing to ‘overlap’ of the filled electron shells of the ions. The system 
comes to equilibrium where the attractive force is balanced by the repul- 
sive force, which can be modelled using the expression: 
where b andp are constants, r is the distance between the two ions and 
er is the repulsive term. Then: 
2 
+ 
#t = #c + #r = - 
4m0r 
-z,z2e 
Differentiation of this expression with respect to r, where the repulsive 
and attractive forces are in equilibrium, produces the Born-Lande poten- 
tial for one pair of ions. For one mole of ions the expression must be 
multiplied by Avogadro’s number (NJ. 

Solid State Energetics 
33 
This equation now gives the energy required to generate one mole of 
ion pairs each separated by the equilibrium value of r (rJ from the 
gaseous ions brought together from infinity. This is opposite in sign and 
equal in magnitude to the 
(Ub which is defined as the 
change in internal energy at 0 K when one mole of crystals breaks down 
into constituent ions in the gas phase: 
Using this definition, since appropriately charged ions are being sepa- 
rated, the value of UL is always positive (re. breaking of an ionic lattice 
is always endothermic). 
, A, is also added to the equation. This is a 
factor which takes into account all the interactions between the ions, 
since an ion in a lattice is influenced by more than just one other single 
ion of opposite charge, as considered above. Fortunately, these attrac- 
tions and repulsions form a mathematical series which depends on the 
lattice type. The values of the Madelung constant have been calculated 
by computer and some are shown in Table 2.3. The final expression of 
the Born-Lande equation then becomes: 
The 
ANAzlz2e2 
4m0rO 
UL 
= 
The equation can then be used to calculate lattice energies, providing the 
Madelung constant is known and the minimum distance between cation 
and anion can be calculated. 
Table 2.3 Madelung constants for selected structures 
Lattice tvpe 
Coordination numbers 
Madelung constant 
Sodium chloride 
Calcium fluoride 
Zinc blende 
Wurtzite 
Rutile 
Caesium chloride 
6:6 
814 
4:4 
4:4 
6:3 
8:8 
1 .74756 
2.51 939 
1.63806 
1.641 32 
2.408 
1.76267 

34 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Although in this example we can easily calculate the inter-ion distance 
in sodium chloride, the value of r,, can also be estimated from tabulated 
ionic radii. 
There is much confusion about the definition of lattice energy. In some 
textbooks it is described in terms of the formation of the latticefrom the 
gaseous ions. Throughout this text the lattice energy will be described 
as a positive endothermic quantity which involves the separation of ions 
(bond breaking) rather than lattice formation. 
The use of the Born-Lande equation requires the structure type to be 
known, as the Madelung constant for a specific structure is used in the 
equation. If the structure of the theoretical compound is not known, or 
the Madelung constant is not readily available, the lattice energy can be 
estimated using the Kapustinskii equation: 
(1.214 x 10s)Vzlz2 
r1+ r2 
UL = 
where z1 and rl are the charge and radius of the first ion, z2 nd r2 are 
the radius of the second ion and Vis the number of ions in the formu- 
la of the compound. This expression uses the fact that the Madelung 
constant is similar for compounds with the same coordination numbers. 
For example, sodium chloride has 6:6 coordination, and zinc blende has 
4:4 coordination; in each compound both cation and anion have the 
same coordination number. Both sodium chloride and zinc blende have 
Madelung constants about 1.7, as do wurtzite and caesium chloride. 

Solid State Energetics 
35 
2.3 
Born-Haber Cycles 
Since energy is always conserved, the application of the First Law of 
Thermodynamics means that the change in enthalpy for a process does 
not depend on the way the energy change is carried out (this is often 
quoted as Hess's law). In 1919, Born' and Haber2 working independently 
applied the First Law of Thermodynamics to the formation of ionic 
solids from their elements (e.g. Figure 2.5, for a simple binary ionic solid, 
A+B-). To calculate an unknown quantity is therefore just a matter of 
following the arrows in the cycle, provided all other values are known 
and the correct sign is used for each value (+ for endothermic processes 
and - for exothermic). 
It should be noted that thermochemical cycles are often calculated at 
298 K, whereas the energy terms such as electron affinity or ionization 
energy are defined at 0 K. Therefore, the values calculated by thermo- 
chemical cycles have an error of approximately 2-5 kJ mol-'. 
In Figure 2.5, each side of the cycle can be considered, so for energy 
to be conserved 
- A +  B + C + D = F - E  
or 
-A+ B + C + D  + E - F = O  
In addition to the lattice energy, electron affinity and ionization energy 
which have already been defined in this chapter, Born-Haber cycles also 
contain other quantities which allow for the fact, for example, that met- 
als are not in the gaseous state at 298 K and that the halogens do not 
exist as mononuclear species. 

36 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
I 
A 
E 
A 
F 
Figure 2.5 Born-Haber cycle for 
the formation for a Group 1 
halide 
2.3.1 Enthalpy of Formation, AHf 
The enthalpy change required to produce one mole of any compound 
from its constituent elements in their standard state 
is called the 
for that compound (A). From Figure 
2.5, the first stage of the cycle is formation of the elements in their stan- 
dard state from the ionic lattice, i.e. -AHr 
A general method is being introduced here, in which enthalpies rather 
than free energies are being considered. However, the energetics of lattice 
formation are governed by the equation for Gibbs free energy, i.e. 
where AG is the Gibbs free energy change, A H  is the enthalpy change 
and A S  is the entropy change during the reaction. A negative 
value of AG (energy given out during the process) indicates a lower 
energy state for the system after the reaction and hence reaction is 
favoured. 
The formation of a lattice from its gaseous ions is, however, very 

Solid State Energetics 
37 
~~ 
~ 
exothermic (AH is negative) so the loss in entropy is of negligible impor- 
tance. The thermodynamic properties of crystal lattices therefore often 
focus on changes in enthalpies rather than in free energies. 
2.3.2 Enthalpy of Sublimation, AHsub 
The formation of one mole of gaseous atoms from one mole of the atoms 
in the standard state of the element 
is called the 
, as in stage B. 
2.3.3 Dissociation Enthalpy, AHdim 
In many cases, element B will exist as a diatomic molecule in its stan- 
dard state (e.g. the halogens). To include it in the cycle the element must 
be dissociated to form monoatomic atoms, as in stage C: 
Since we only have a singular X atom in the cycle we only need one half 
of the dissociation enthalpy in order to have one mole of X atoms. This 
value, for an element such as chlorine which normally exists as a diatom- 
ic molecule, is often known as the enthalpy of atomization, AHa,. This 
process is represented as: 
If X is a Group 16 element (chalcogenide), e.g. sulfur, instead of a halo- 
gen, then the vaporization of the solid sulfur to the gaseous sulfur would 
have to be included in the cycle instead of AHdiss. 
Stage D is the change in internal energy for the electron transfer to 
the non-metal element (-EJ and stage E is the lattice enthalpy. The lat- 
tice energy (U,> and the lattice enthalpy (H,) vary by -5 kJ mol-I due 
to the calculation being carried out at 298 K rather than 0 K. The dif- 
ference is so small compared with the magnitude of the quantity that the 
two terms are often interchangeably. 
This whole cycle can be summarized as: 
AHL = AH(atomization) + AH(ionization) - AHf 
If any five of the quantities A-F are known, the sixth can be calculated. 

38 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 2.6 Born-Haber cycle for 
the formation of KCI 

Solid State Energetics 
39 
Some caution should be applied when using data of this kind to pre- 
dict the stability of compounds. The routes under which those com- 
pounds can decompose should be considered. For example, calculation 
of a lattice energy for the theoretical compound CaCl, produces an 
exothermic enthalpy of formation of approximately -200 kJ mol-l. The 
compound CaCl ought therefore to exist. Chemical knowledge dictates 
that this compound does not exist. The reason becomes apparent by con- 
sidering the equation: 
2CaCl(,, + CaCl, 
+ Ca 
This reaction is more exothermic, with an enthalpy change of more than 
-600 kJ mol-l. Any CaCl which might be formed disproportionates: the 
Ca' species become Ca2' and CaO. 
2.4 
Bond Enthalpies and Stability 
In understanding the chemistry of the main group elements, an appreci- 
ation of the factors which affect the stability of compounds is paramount. 
Just as lattice energies can be used to predict stabilities of ionic lattices, 
can be used to explain wide-ranging variations in the 
properties of the main group elements. For example, the differences in 
the physical and chemical properties of the dioxides of carbon and sili- 
con can be explained by considering bond enthalpy terms. Similarly, why 
CH, is a very stable compound while PbH, is extremely unstable can be 
explained. In addition, other trends which occur in the chemistry of the 
main group elements can be understood in terms of simple energetics. 
2.4.1 Stability and Instability; Kinetic and Thermodynamic 
Sta bi I ity 
In order to define the stability of an inorganic material we need to be 
precise about what we mean by stability. For example, CaCl, could con- 
ceivably decompose to a range of known or hypothetical compounds, 
e.g. to Ca + Cl,, or to CaCl + '/2C12, or to CaC1, + 2Ca. All of these 
routes would involve a large increase in the free energy of the system. 
We can therefore describe CaC1, as being thermodynamically stable with 
respect to other calcium chlorides/calcium/chlorine. A compound may 
be thermodynamically unstable, but kinetically stable, i.e. it has a nega- 
tive free energy with respect to all possible decomposition products. For 
example, a sample of NO in a sealed container at room temperature does 
not decompose. However, the free energy change for the reaction 
2N0 - +N2 + i0, 

40 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
is -87 kJ mol-', indicating that NO is thermally unstable with respect to 
its constituent elements. Therefore, NO can be referred to as being kinet- 
ically stable; it is unstable in terms of energy, but the rate at which the 
change occurs at room temperature is so slow as to be undetectable. 
However, if NO is exposed to air, reaction with oxygen takes place to pro- 
duce NO,. NO is therefore not stable in air, i.e. with respect to oxidation. 
In conclusion, when referring to the stability of a compound one must 
be precise. Many inorganic compounds can be prepared which are 
thermodynamically unstable but kinetically stable with respect to decom- 
position along various routes. In addition, inorganic compounds which 
react with oxygen or water can often be handled in inert atmospheres, 
where they can be regarded as perfectly stable. 
2.5 
Bond Dissociation Energies and Bond 
Enthalpy Terms 
Before any discussion about the application of bond enthalpy terms, it 
is important to check the definitions of 
and 
The bond dissociation energy is defined as the enthalpy change 
associated with the reaction in which one mole of bond is homolytically 
broken, reactants and products being in the ideal gas state at 1 atm and 
298 K. 
Thus for methane, the bond dissociation energy for the first C-H bond 
is the energy change for the process: 
CH4M + CH3W + Hk) 
AH= +432 kJ mol-' 
This bond dissociation energy is specific to the reaction above, i.e. the 
energy for this C-H bond-breaking process depends on factors such as 
the other atoms attached to the carbon atom and the geometry of CH, 
and CH,. For example, if the remaining C-H bonds in methane are 
broken: 
While bond dissociation energies are important in terms of the general 
understanding of physical chemistry, they are of little general use in 
predicting the stability of inorganic compounds, as they cannot be trans- 
ferred between compounds. 

Solid State Energetics 
41 
Bond enthalpy terms, on the other hand, are quantities assigned 
to each bond in a molecule such that the sum over all bonds is equal to 
the enthalpy change associated with the conversion of the molecule 
into separate atoms. Bond enthalpy terms are assumed to be constant, 
and therefore transferable from molecule to molecule. So for methane: 
so that the bond enthalpy term B(C-H) is %AH = 416 kJ mol-', i.e. the 
average for the four C-H bonds in CH,. 
Bond enthalpy terms are not precise, particularly where there are 
changes in bond valency. For example, the value for C=C is +612 kJ 
mol-', which is considerably less than twice the value for C-C. The Val- 
ues for B(C-H) and B(C-C), typically given in the literature as +413 kJ 
mol-l and 347 kJ mol-l, respectively, are good for working out the 
enthalpies of formation of a wide range of alkane hydrocarbons. This is 
because carbon always forms four covalent tetrahedral bonds in these 
compounds. For many inorganic systems, the valency of a particular ele- 
ment can vary markedly, and with it the number of bonds and the geo- 
metrical distribution of those bonds. For example, consider ClF, and 
ClF. The bond enthalpy terms for the Cl-F bond, derived from the 
enthalpies of formation of these compounds, are very different at +174 
and +255 kJ mol-', respectively. This demonstrates that transporting a 
chlorine-fluorine bond enthalpy term from one oxidation state of chlo- 
rine to another would produce considerable errors. Therefore, bond 
enthalpy terms are a useful guide, but their use should be treated with 
caution. 
Some homolytic (between the same element) and heterolytic (between 
different elements) bond enthalpies are summarized in Table 2.4. 
2.5.1 Variations in Bond Enthalpy Terms down a Main 
Group 
Some general trends in bond enthalpies down a main group can be noted 
from Table 2.4. In Groups 14, 15, 16 and 17, if the element in the peri- 
od from Li to F is A,, the period Na to Cl is A,, etc., then 
1. In any vertical group A,, A,, etc., the bond enthalpy B(A-X) dimin- 
ishes down the group (A, to An) provided there are no lone pairs on 
X (e.g. H, C, but not N, 0 or F). So, for example, we have the data 
in Table 2.4 for the hydrides (A-H). 
2. When there are lone pairs on X, the bond enthalpy order is usually: 
B(A,-X) < B(A,-X) > B(A,-X) > B(A4-X) 

42 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Table 2.4 Selected homolytic and heterolytic bond enthalpies (kJ r n ~ l - ’ ) ~ ~  
Homolytic bond enthalpies 
H-H 
432 
Li-Li 
205 
Na-Na 
72 
K-K 
49 
Rb-Rb 
45 
Be-Be 
208 
Mg-Mg 
129 
Ca--Ca 
105 
Sr-Sr 
84 
B-B 
293 
AI-AI 
183 
Ga-Ga 
115 
In-In 
1 00 
c-c 
346 
Si-Si 
222 
Ge-Ge 
188 
Sn-Sn 
146 
N-N 
167 
P-P 
201 
AS-AS 
146 
Sb-Sb 
121 
0-0 
142 
s-s 
226 
S e e  
172 
TeTe 
126 
F-F 
158 
CI-CI 
249 
Br-Br 
190 
1-1 
149 
Heterolytic bond en thalpies 
C 
Si 
Ge 
N 
P 
As 
Sb 
0 
S 
Se 
F 
CI 
Br 
I 
A-H 
41 1 
3123 
28!5 
386 
322 
24’7 
459 
364 
276 
56.5 
428 
362 
295 
- 
A-F 
485 
565 
452 
31 3 
490 
406 
402 
190 
284 
303 
158 
249 
248 
278 
A-CI 
346 
381 
349 
283 
322 
309 
31 4 
21 8 
255 
25 1 
249 
240 
21 6 
21 0 
A-Br 
290 
31 0 
276 
263 
256 
264 
201 
21 7 
201 
248 
21 6 
190 
177 
- 
A 4  
358 
466 
385 
201 
335 
301 
144 
468 
190 
218 
201 
201 
- 
- 
A=O 
736. 
638 
607 
544 
389 
498 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Trend (1) is reasonably expected. As we proceed down a group, for 
example from carbon to lead, the atoms get larger and the orbitals 
involved in the bond have a more diffuse electron cloud, a poorer over- 
lap with orbitals of X and thus form weaker bonds. 
Trend (2) is more complex, but two factors contribute to inversion of 
the stability of A,-X and A,-X. One factor is repulsion between non- 
bonding electrons. The F-F bond is much weaker than the Cl-C1 bond 
for this reason. The non-bonding pairs for fluorine lie much closer to 
the nucleus and thus closer to the non-bonding pairs on the other nucle- 
us, causing more repulsion and weakening the F-F bond relative to the 
Cl-Cl bond. The second factor is the possibility of d-orbital involvement 
in x-bonding for second-row elements. The second-row elements have 
vacant low-lying d-orbitals which can form a dn-pn interaction with 

Solid State Energetics 
43 
p-orbitals on X, which are normally filled. This acts to strengthen the 
bond from the second-row element to X (where X has lone pairs), and 
helps account for trend (2). Such dn-pn bonding can occur for heavier 
elements in a group, but since the orbitals are larger and the interaction 
is spread out over a larger volume, it will be a weaker effect. 
Application of trends (1) and (2) can explain some obvious differences 
between chemical reactivity and structure in the main groups. 
Double and Single Bonds 
A major difference in the chemistries of first- and second-row elements 
is apparent in the relative stability of compounds with double and single 
bonds. Carbon-carbon double bonds are well known, whereas only 
recently have compounds with silicon-silicon double bonds been 
synthesized. Such compounds readily react to form other compounds in 
which the double bond is broken. 
Figure 2.7 Formation of four sin- 
gle M-O bonds from the decom- 
position of two double 
M=O bonds 

44 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Stability of Gaseous Halides AXn and the Inert Pair Effect 
Among the heavy post-transition metals there is a definite reluctance to 
exhibit the highest possible oxidation state. For example, boron is always 
trivalent, but thallium shows significant chemistry of the + 1 oxidation 
state, leaving a pair of electrons coordinatively inert. This is known as 
the 
The reasons for the differences can be explained using bond 
enthalpies. As we have seen, the values of the first ionization energies 
fall as a group is descended. Bond enthalpies to a particular element also 
decrease. 
For example, Table 2.5 contains the first four ionization energies for 
the Group 14 elements. There are only small differences between the ion- 
ization energies for silicon, which primarily forms compounds in the +4 
oxidation state, and lead which forms both divalent (+2) and tetravalent 
(+4) compounds. 
A better understanding of the occurrence of the inert pair effect can 
be observed by considering the tendency for the following reaction to 
proceed either in the solid or gas phase: 
Consider the values, in kJ mol-', for the gas phase reaction in Table 
2.6. Although all these values for the decomposition are endothermic, 
the trend to decreasing stability of the high-valent (+4) fluoride com- 
pared with the low-valent (+2) iodide can be clearly seen. This is due to 
longer bonds and more diffuse orbitals giving poorer overlap and weaker 
bonds. Hence, as a group is descended the bonds to X become weaker, 
Table 2.5 Ionization energies for the Group 14 elements (kJ mol-I) 
1 st 
2nd 
3rd 
4 th 
C 
1090 
2350 
461 0 
6220 
Si 
786 
1580 
3230 
4360 
Ge 
762 
1540 
3300 
4390 
Sn 
707 
1410 
2940 
3930 
Pb 
71 6 
1450 
3080 
4080 

Solid State Energetics 
45 
Table 2.6 Bond enthalpies for the Group 14 halides (kJ mol-l) 
Element 
Fluoride 
Chloride 
Bromide 
lodide 
C 
467 
346 
290 
21 3 
Si 
565 
38 1 
31 0 
234 
Ge 
452 
349 
276 
21 1 
Sn 
41 4 
323 
272 
205 
Pb 
33 1 
243 
201 
142 
and their formation does not compensate for the endothermic energy 
terms such as breaking the X-X bond and the electron promotion 
(hybridization) energies s2p + ( s P ~ ) ~ .  
It is also worth noting that, as more 
bonds form around an atom, each successive bond normally gets weaker. 
For example, the series: 
C1F 
ClF, 
ClF, 
B(C1-F) 
+255 
+174 
+151 
kJ mol-I 
So the weakening bonds as the group is descended is really the origin of 
the tendency of an element to form the n - 2 oxidation state. 

46 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 

Solid State Energetics 
47 
Figure 2.8 Thermochemical cycle 
for the formation of aluminium 
sub- halides 

Characterization of Solids 
The total characterization of a new material is an essential part of any 
investigation, not only the chemical and physical properties, such as its 
reactivity or its magnetic properties, but also its 
. Typically, the 
structure of a solid material governs its observed properties. Copying 
and modelling of these structural features can lead to the development 
of new materials; for example, this procedure led to new and improved 
superconducting materials. 
A new functional material not only has to fulfill the desired task, e.g. 
as a pigment or an ion exchanger, but it also has to be thoroughly inves- 
tigated for stability and toxicity. Since cost effectiveness is particularly 
important for industrial materials, the preparative conditions must also 
be optimized to reduce the cost of starting materials and synthetic 
met hods. 
3. I X-ray Diffraction 
X-ray diffraction is the most widely used and least ambiguous method 
for the precise determination of the positions of atoms in molecules and 
48 

Characterization of Solids 
49 
solids. Spectroscopic information (NMR, IR and mass spectrometry), 
which often suffices for organic chemistry, does not give such a complete 
picture for inorganic materials, owing to much greater structural diver- 
sity in terms of coordination numbers and geometries. Particularly in 
inorganic chemistry, the distances derived from the structure give addi- 
tional information on bonding within and between molecules. For exam- 
ple, particular bond lengths and angles are indicative of certain oxidation 
states. 
3. I. I Principles of X-ray Diffraction 
X-rays interact with 
in matter. When a beam of X-rays impinges 
on a material it is scattered in various directions by the electron clouds 
of the atoms. If the wavelength of the X-rays is comparable to the sep- 
aration between the atoms, then interference can occur. For an ordered 
array of scattering centres (such as atoms or ions in a crystalline solid), 
this can give rise to interference maxima and minima. The wavelengths 
of X-rays used in X-ray diffraction experiments therefore typically lie 
between 0.6 and 1.9 A. 
Generation of X-rays 
A beam of electrons striking a metal target will eject electrons (‘core elec- 
trons’) from the energy levels close to the nucleus of some of the metal 
atoms (providing the beam is higher in energy than the energy needed 
to - remove such electrons). Once vacancies have been created, electrons 
from higher energy levels fall down (decay) into these orbitals. The dif- 
ference in energy between these higher and lower energy levels is then 
emitted as an X-ray of precise energy (AE = hv, where AE is the energy 
difference, v is the frequency of the emitted radiation and h is Planck’s 
constant). 
The X-ray Tube 
A schematic diagram of a typical X-ray tube is shown in Figure 3.1. The 
electrons are created by heating a tungsten filament in a vacuum 
(thermionic emission) and then accelerated by a high voltage (typically 
30,000 V) towards a metal target. Core electrons are knocked out of the 
metal target and the X-rays, characteristic of the metal target, are pro- 
duced by decay. By making a beryllium window in the tube, because 
beryllium has a low atomic number and is transparent to X-rays, the X- 
ray beam escapes from the tube. 
A spectrum of the output from an X-ray tube is shown in Figure 3.2. 
The background is known as 

50 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 3.1 Schematic diagram of 
an X-ray tube. 
Figure 3.2 Output from an X-ray 
tube 
K I 
Ka2 L 
Wavelength 
which is caused by the energy loss of the X-rays as they enter the metal. 
This is often called ‘white radiation’ as it is emitted over the full wave- 
length range. On top of the braking radiation are sharp lines generated 
by the 
transitions (see above). The labels describe which orbital 
the decaying electron has come from, the orbital being filled and the spin 
state of the electron. 

Characterization of Solids 
51 
X-ray Experiment 
A single wavelength must be selected from the output from the tube to 
carry out the X-ray experiment. Simple filtering can get rid of some 
of the unwanted X-rays; for example, by using a film consisting of a 
metal with atomic number one below that of the metal target, the K, 
lines and the white radiation can be removed. However, to obtain a sin- 
gle wavelength a 
is used. This utilizes 
Braggs Law (see Section 3.1.2) to select a single wavelength. Generally 
the a, 
line is selected, if possible, as it has the greatest intensity. 
passing it through a slit to remove wavelengths other than the desired 
one, before interaction with the sample and, finally, detection of the scat- 
tered X-rays. 
Once a single wavelength has been selected, the beam is 
by 
Miller Indices 
X-rays interact with planes of atoms in the three-dimensional lattices 
which show the translational symmetry of the structure. Each plane is a 
representative member of a parallel set of equally spaced planes, and 
each lattice point must lie on one of the planes. 
and are given the descriptions h, k and I, where h,k,l take values of pos- 
itive or negative integers or zero. Consider the two planes shown in Figure 
3.3. The Miller indices of these two members of a family of planes are 
given by the reciprocals of the fractional intercepts h,k,Z along each of 
the unit cell directions, i.e. cutting at alh, blk and cll. So the 2,8,1 plane 
would cut one half of the way along a, one eighth of the way along b 
and all the way along c. The parallel plane on the diagram has the same 
Miller indices as it stretches across two unit cells, this time cutting the 
axes at a, b/4 and 2c, respectively. For planes which are parallel to one 
of the unit cell directions the intercept is at infinity, and therefore the 
The labels used for describing these planes are known as 
,,~~...*..................................................,.....................~ 
f .  
**.f 
I 
.li 
Figure 3.3 Representation of the 
281 family of planes 

52 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 3.4 Tetragonal unit cell 
showing the 231 plane and the 
d-spacing 
Miller index for this axis is zero. The separation of the planes is known 
as the 
and is normally denoted dhkl. From the diagram, it is 
apparent that this is also the perpendicular distance from the origin to 
the plane. 
Q Draw a tetragonal unit cell and mark on the diagram the 231 
plane and the distance 
A See Figure 3.4. The 231 plane cuts the unit cell axes at a/2, b/3 
and c, and the distance d231 is the perpendicular distance from the 
origin to the plane. Note that, although in a tetragonal unit cell 
the a and b axes are equivalent in length, they should be distin- 
guished when drawing planes. 
\ 
7 
7 
3.1.2 Scattering from Crystalline Solids and the Bragg 
Equation 
The scattering of X-rays from a set of planes defined by the Miller indices 
h,k,l is shown in Figure 3.5. In order to observe useful data from the X- 
ray experiment the scattered X-ray beam from the points X and Z must 
produce diffracted beams which are 
. This is only possible if the 
extra distance travelled by the X-ray photon from W to X and X to Y 
is an integral number of wavelengths. The path difference is dependent 
on both the lattice spacing d,jkl and the angle of incidence of the X-ray 
beam, 9: 

Characterization of Solids 
53 
X 
Path difference = WX + XY = 2dhklsin 8 = nA 
where n is an integer, and h is the X-ray wavelength. This equation is 
the 
. The n is normally dropped (i.e. treated as l), as high- 
er order (n = 2, etc.) diffraction maxima are just equivalent to diffrac- 
tion from the n = 1 set but at shorter d spacing. 
Q Second-order scattering from the 100 plane is equivalent to first- 
order scattering from which plane? 
A Using the Bragg equation: 
200 
n =  1 
i 
I 
I 
I 
n = 2  
100 
100 
nA = 2dhkrsin8 
Figure 3.5 Scattering of X-rays 
from a parallel set of planes 
See Figure 3.6. The plane must 
be the 200. 
Figure 3.6 First- and second- 
order diffraction 

54 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
In any crystalline material an infinite set of planes exists with differ- 
ent Miller indices, and each set of planes has a particular separation. 
For any set of planes there will be a diffraction maximum at a particu- 
lar angle, 8. By combining the equation relating dhkl to the lattice para- 
meter for a particular system with the Bragg equation, a direct 
relationship between the diffraction angle and the lattice parameters can 
be derived. 
For example, for a cubic system, combining the geometric equation 
for a cubic system (where a is the lattice parameter): 
1 
h2+k2+l2 
d2 
a2 
-- - 
with the Bragg equation 
nh = 2dsin0 
where n = 1 and rearranging for d gives 
1 
2sin0 
d
h
 
- =- 
which means 
Substituting for lld2 in the first equation and rearranging gives 
h2 
4a2 
sin2€) = -(h2 
+ k2 + 1’) 
By using this equation, structural information about the crystals under 
study can be obtained. 
3.1.3 Single Crystal Diffraction 
By far the dominant technique in solid state/materials chemistry is 
powder diffraction since single crystals are often difficult to synthesize 
and not representative of the bulk, which can show non-stoichiometry 
and disorder. However, for definitive characterization of physical prop- 
erties such as magnetic ordering or electron transport, single crystals are 
often used, as the directional properties of these processes are lost in a 
polycrystalline sample. 

Characterization of Solids 
55 
The single crystal diffraction technique is covered well in many other 
 text^^^^ and will not be discussed in detail here. The preparation of sin- 
gle crystals from solid state materials is rather different from the prepa- 
ration of single crystals from molecular systems and is therefore described 
in Chapter 4. 
3.1.4 Powder Diffraction 
In a single crystal experiment the alignment of the crystal, source and 
detector have to be correct to observe any reflections, as scattering from 
one particular plane at a time is measured by aligning the crystal appro- 
priately. In contrast, a powdered sample contains an enormous number 
of very small crystallites, typically 10-7-104 m in size, which randomly 
adopt the whole range of possible orientations. Therefore, when an X- 
ray beam strikes a powdered (often termed polycrystalline) sample, it is 
diffracted in all possible directions (as governed by the Bragg equation) 
simultaneously. Each lattice spacing in the crystal gives rise to a cone of 
diffraction, as shown in Figure 3.7. 
Sample 
Each cone is a set of closely spaced dots, where each dot represents 
diffraction from a single crystallite within the sample. With a large 
number of crystallites, these join together to form a continuous cone. 
Experimental Met hods 
To analyse the data, the positions of the cones need to be measured. This 
can be achieved by using photographic film or, more often than not, by 
a radiation detector (diffractometer). The use of film and camera has 
become very limited as diffractometer technology has advanced. 
Although camera methods are fast to employ and require very little 
sample, the superior resolution and electronic storage capability of the 
diffractometer is preferred. For example, since each cone of dots repre- 
sents diffraction from a plane of atoms, when the structure become 
complex the lines become too numerous and overlap, making it impos- 
Figure 3.7 Continuous diffraction 
cone derived from scattering from 
a polycrystalline sample 

56 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
sible to discern from camera methods alone which line applies to which 
set of atoms. 
A schematic diagram of a powder diffractometer is shown in Figure 
3.8. The X-rays produced by the X-ray tube are aligned to fall on the 
sample through a slit and are scattered in all directions. By scanning 
the detector around the sample along the circumference of a circle, it is 
made to cut through the diffraction cones at various diffraction maxi- 
ma. The X-ray diffraction pattern (Figure 3.9) displays intensity as a 
function of the detector angle, 28. The reflection geometry of powder 
diffractometers enables slits close to the detector to remove noise and 
leads to well-resolved data, where the sample behaves like a mirror which 
focuses the beam on to the detector. 
Focusing 
Figure 3.8 Schematic diagram of 
a powder X-ray diffractometer 
Powder X-ray Diffraction Patterns 
The actual pattern resulting from powdered samples is similar to the 
single crystal experiment, in which the data are generated from the par- 
ticular arrangement of atoms within the unit cell. 
Factors which affect the intensity and number of peaks (reflections) 
include: 
1. Crystal class 
2. Lattice type 
3. Symmetry 
4. Unit cell parameters 
5. The distribution and type of atoms in the unit cell 
As a result of the enormous range of different structures which materials 

Characterization of Solids 
57 
adopt, nearly all crystalline solids have a unique powder X-ray diffrac- 
tion pattern in terms of the positions and intensities of the observed reflec- 
tions (not peaks). Even in mixtures of compounds, each phase will have 
its own set of reflections, so the relative intensities of one set of lines 
compared with another depends to a certain extent on the amount of 
each phase present. 
Figure 3.9 Powder X-ray diffrac- 
tion pattern 
3.1.5 Uses of Powder X-ray Diffraction Data 
I dent if icat ion of Unknown Materials 
Over 150,000 unique powder diffraction data sets have been collected 
from organic, organometallic, inorganic and mineral samples. These have 
been compiled into a database known as the JCPDS (Joint Committee 
on Powder Diffraction Standards). The experimental diffraction data can 
be cross-matched by on-line search or by comparing the three most 
intense reflections. This methodology is used as a quick method for the 
identification of impure materials, and it is also used widely in industry, 
e.g. for quality control in drug samples or the partition of minerals in 
clays. 

58 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Phase Purity 
As all crystalline phases will contribute to an overall powder X-ray dif- 
fraction pattern, the X-ray technique is routinely used to follow reac- 
tions and to monitor the purity of products. For example, the reaction 
of lanthanum oxide with iron oxide is shown in Figure 3.10. At the start 
of the reaction the pattern is just a combination of that of La,O, and 
Fe,O,. After some time, a new set of reflections appear, corresponding 
to the product, LaFeO,. On completion of the reaction the only set of 
reflections remaining is that of the product. Phase purity can be moni- 
tored in this way down to a level of ca. 3%. 
However, there are limitations to the technique when assessing phase 
purity and also in general. Since X-rays are scattered by electrons, light 
elements with few electrons scatter Doorlv in comDarison with heavv 
Figure 3.10 Reaction of iron 
I 
.' 
I 
elements. Therefore, if several phases are present and one contains a 
heavy element and the others do not, e.g. lead carbonate mixed with 
oxide (bottom) with lanthanum 
oxide (second from bottom) to 
form lanthanum iron oxide (top 
three patterns) 
magnesium oxide and carbon, then the former will produce a much 
300 
-__I 
1 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 

Characterization of Solids 
59 
stronger pattern. Secondly, reflections giving diffraction patterns are only 
observed from crystalline phases. No matter how much amorphous sub- 
stance is present, it will not produce a diffraction pattern except a dif- 
fuse halo in the background, as shown in Figure 3.11. 
28 
~ 
~~ 
~~ 
Determination and Refinement of Lattice Parameters (Indexing) 
If Miller indices can be assigned to the various reflections in the powder 
pattern, it becomes possible to determine the cell constants. This assign- 
ment is readily achieved for cubic crystal systems with a simple 
relationship between the diffraction angles and lattice parameters. 
The equation relating the diffraction angle to the Miller indices is given 
below: 
A2 
4a2 
sin28 = -(h2 
+ k2 + 12) 
The wavelength and the cell parameter are just constants, so this can be 
rewritten as: 
sin 6 = C(h2 + k2 + Z2) 
Dividing the sin26values of all of the other reflections by that of the first 
reflection removes C and gives a number corresponding to the ratio of 
the Miller indices. If the first reflection is at an angle 2@ with Miller 
indices h,k,l, and a general reflection is at 20 with Miller indices h,,k,,+l,, 
then: 
sin26 hf +k: +Z: 
sin ’@ 
h2 + k2 + Z2 
-- - 
Figure 3.11 Scattering from a 
non-crystalline sample 
Using this procedure for a set of reflections in an unknown cubic mate- 
rial gives the columns of data tabulated in Table 3.1. For a primitive lat- 
tice the first reflection is the 100; therefore the ratio is just: 

60 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
sin28 h: +k: +I: 
-- - 
sin ’@ 
l2 
So the values of h,, k, and I, can be calculated. 
Q Given that dividing the sin28 value for the 48.266 reflection in 
Table 3.1 by the first reflection gives 6, what are h, k and I? 
A 
sin28 
h: + k f  +I: = 6  
-- - 
sin 
l2 
So we are simply looking for three squared numbers which add up 
to six, i.e. 2, 1 and 1, because 22 + l2 + l2 = 6. Thus the reflection 
is the 21 1. It is equally correct to say the 121 or the 1 12 as the 
material is cubic and a, b and c are the same, but by convention 
the highest number normally comes first. 
Table 3.1 Indexing powder diffraction data 
28 
sin2 8 
Ra ti0 
Miller indices 
~~ 
~~ 
19.21 3 
27.302 
33.602 
38.995 
43.830 
48.266 
56.331 
60.093 
63.705 
67.21 3 
70.634 
~ 
0.0279 
0.0557 
0.0836 
0.1 114 
0.1 393 
0.1671 
0.2228 
0.2507 
0.2785 
0.3064 
0.3342 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
100 
110 
111 
200 
21 0 
21 1 
220 
300 
31 0 
31 1 
222 
Repeating this procedure for all the reflections is called 
of 
the data, assigning Miller indices to the 28 reflections. 
Note that there are some values which are not possible for the sum 
of the indices, e.g. 7 or 15, as there is no combination of the squares of 
three integral numbers which adds up to 7 or 15. 
After indexing, one of the peaks can be used to calculate the cell para- 
meter if the wavelength is known. As the error in measuring the 28 angle 

Characterization of Solids 
61 
is the same for any reflection (systematic error), the last reflection is used 
as it has the smallest percentage error. 
Q Given that the X-ray wavelength was 1.54 A, use the 222 reflec- 
tion in Table 3.1 to calculate the lattice parameter, a. 
1 2  
A 
h 
sin2B = -(h2 
+ k2 + 12) 
4a2 
Therefore 
1.542 
4a2 
0.3342 = -(22+ 
22+ 22) 
Giving a = 4.613 A for the unit cell parameter. 
Lattice Type and Systematic Absences 
The pattern we have just indexed is for a 
lattice where all reflec- 
tions are observed. In the other types of cubic lattice, certain types of 
reflection are absent and these are called 
The origin of the absences is due to destructive interference occurring 
between the diffracted waves, meaning that the intensity cancels out. For 
example, Figure 3.12 shows diffraction from the 100 plane of a body- 
centred cubic lattice. 
absences. 
B 
Figure 3.12 Diffraction from the 
100 plane in a body-centred 
lattice 

62 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
The scattering from A and B (the atoms at the corners of the cell) will 
always be in phase, but there is also an atom at the centre of the cell. 
Diffraction from this atom will be exactly half a wavelength out of phase 
with the diffracted beam from the atoms at the corners. As we know 
from atom counting in Chapter 1, these sets of atoms occur in pairs 
throughout the lattice (i.e. 2 = 2). This means that there will be total 
destructive interference for the 100 reflection and no intensity will be 
seen. For any body-centred (I) lattice this condition will hold. Extension 
of this principle to other reflections generates the following rule, For a 
reflection to be seen for a body-centred lattice, then the sum of the Miller 
indices must be even: 
h + k + l = 2 n  
So, the 1 10 reflection would be seen, but the 11 1 would be absent. 
The analogous condition for a face-centred cubic lattice is: 
h,k,l must be all odd or all even 
So here the 110 is absent, but the 111 will be seen. 
centred lattice the first reflection is not the 100 but the 110. 
This can lead to problems in the indexing procedure, as for a body- 
How Do You Know When the Lattice is Not Primitive? 
If the lattice you are trying to index is body centred rather than primitive, 
then when you take the ratios a seven will appear in the list, which is 
equivalent to taking the ratio of the 321 reflection over the 110 reflec- 
tion. As no three squared integers add up to seven, this is the best 
indication that the lattice is body centred, and the ratios must be mul- 
tiplied by two before the assignment of Miller indices can begin. 
If the ratios appear as thirds, then the lattice is face centred and the 
ratios should be multiplied by three before assigning the indices (where 
the first reflection allowed in a face-centred cubic lattice is the 111 and 
the second the 200, giving 1.3333 as the ratio). 
Q Reaction of buckminsterfullerene with potassium affords a com- 
pound which contains 75.4% carbon and 24.6% potassium. The 
powder diffraction pattern recorded with copper radiation gives the 
following 20 reflections: 10.97, 15.54, 19.06, 22.05, 24.69, 27.09, 

Characterization of Solids 
63 
29.30, 3 I .38. Determine the lattice type and calculate the lattice 
parameter . 
A See Table 3.2. The seven in the ratio results from the lattice being 
body centred, where 
sin28 
h: + k: + 1; 
h: + k: + 1: 
- - 
-- - 
sin2# 
12+ 12+ o2 
2 
Table 3.2 Ratio of sin28for K6C6, 
28 
sin2@ 
Ratio 
x 2  
10.97 
15.54 
19.06 
22.05 
24.69 
27.09 
29.30 
31.38 
0.0091 
0.01 82 
0.0274 
0.0366 
0.0457 
0.0549 
0.0640 
0.0730 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
To produce a ratio which is the sum of the squares of the unknown 
Miller indices requires the ratios to be multiplied by two. Using 
the largest sin28 value, the lattice parameter can be calculated. 
Now 
1.542 
4a2 
0.0730 = -(16) 
Giving a = 1 1.400 A. 
lsoelectronic Elements 
The scattering of the X-ray beam is directly proportional to the number 
of electrons an element has. In any X-ray-based technique, elements 
which are 
(have the same number of electrons) are 
indistinguishable to X-rays. This can cause problems in assigning sites 
in single crystal diffraction, and can lead to additional absences in the 
powder X-ray diffraction pattern. 
For example, MgO contains the magnesium cation and the oxide 
anion, which both have ten electrons. MgO forms the halite face-centred 
cubic lattice with alternating magnesium cations and oxide anions 

64 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
throughout the structure. The reflections actually observed are for a 
primitive lattice with a lattice parameter of half the size. This is because 
the unit cell observed by the X-rays views the two species as the same. 
Similar problems arise with many neighbouring elements such as 
phosphorus and chlorine, and assignments of such atoms to a particu- 
lar site typically is achieved by considering the bond lengths, angles and 
coordination geometry . 
Structure Refinement 
In the powder experiment all the reflections occur along the same axis 
and so they frequently overlap. Extracting the intensities of individual 
reflections therefore becomes very difficult, so the pattern is refined as a 
whole rather than using the reflections individually. This is called the 
Rietveld m e t h ~ d . ~  
A trial structure is postulated and a theoretical pattern generated from 
the trial structure and compared to the experimental data, By refinement 
of the trial structure by moving atoms, changing lattice parameters, etc., 
the trial structure is then changed until the theoretical pattern becomes 
a good match to the experimental data. 
Although very complex structures can be solved in this way, a trial 
structure is always needed to start the process. This generally means that 
for new structures a single crystal determination is needed. 
Crystallite Size 
In order to observe sharp diffraction maxima in the powder X-ray dif- 
fraction experiment, the crystallites must be sufficiently large so that 
slightly away from the 28 maximum, destructive interference occurs and 
the intensity returns to background level. This condition is not met when 
the crystallites are too small, there are few diffraction planes and the 
reflection broadens. Figure 3.13 shows the effect of decreasing particle 
size on the width of the reflections. 
The Scherrer formula relates the thickness of a crystallite to the width 
of its diffraction peaks, and is widely used to determine particle size dis- 
tributions in clays and polymers: 
Where t is the crystallite thickness (A), B, and B, are the width in radi- 
ans of the diffraction peaks (at half maximum height) of the test sample 
and a highly crystalline standard sample, respectively, and h (A) is the 
wavelength of the X-ray beam. 

Characterization of Solids 
65 
Decreasing 
particle 
size 
Figure 3.13 Evolution of peak 
width with decreasing particle 
size 
3.2 
Neutron Diffraction 
Neutrons in thermal equilibrium at 298 K can be used for diffraction in 
a similar way to X-rays, since they also have wavelengths comparable to 
interatomic spacings. In contrast to X-ray diffraction, the powder 
neutron diffraction experiment is much more common than single crystal 
neutron diffraction, since the beam intensity tends to be 1000 times less 
than for X-ray diffraction, so that single crystals of a sufficient size to 
collect good data are difficult to grow. 
The neutron technique is very much a complementary technique to 
the X-ray experiment as neutrons can interact very differently with 
isotopes and also, unlike X-rays, interact strongly with light elements. 
The neutron diffraction experimental technique varies slightly and is 
described below, but the general principles are similar to the X-ray 
experiment. 
3.2.1 Experimental Methods 
The Bragg equation is utilized in two different ways in two sorts of pow- 
der neutron diffraction experiment: 
1. Fixed wavelength (similar to X-rays), using a 
2. Fixed theta (angle of incidence), using a 
Reactor Source 
High-energy neutrons are created by the nuclear fission process from a 
uranium target : 

66 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 3.14 Double single-crystal 
monochromator 
U + n -+ Fragments + 3 neutrons 
wave1 en g t h 
This produces high-energy neutrons of variable wavelength, but a single 
wavelength of much lower energy is needed for the diffraction experi- 
ment. Firstly, the overall energy is reduced by passing the beam into a 
(which is a fluid or solid kept at constant temperature); here 
the neutrons undergo inelastic collisions, resulting in the loss of energy 
until thermal equilibrium is attained. The energies of the longer wave- 
length neutrons now follow a Boltzmann distribution, the maximum of 
which is dependent on the moderating fluid. To perform an experiment 
analogous to X-ray diffraction, a single wavelength must be selected from 
the band available. According to Bragg’s law, if a beam of neutrons is 
reflected off a single plane (fixed d) of atoms at afixed angle, then a single 
wavelength will be transmitted: 
h = 2dsin8 
This is achieved in practice using a double single-crystal monochromator 
(Figure 3.14) which uses two single crystals, parallel to each other, at a 
fixed angle to transmit a single wavelength. The now monochromatic 
beam can be used for diffraction and is scattered in a way similar to a 
powder X-ray experiment, with intensity as a function of scattering angle 
(28) as in Figure 3.9, 
Spallation Source 
The reactor source experiment is extremely wasteful as most of the new 
trons are discarded at the monochromation stage. Spallation sources use 
all the neutrons produced after the moderation stage, but the neutrons 
are first produced in a slightly different way. 
Hydrogen gas is fed into a ring and ionized to H . The H ions are 
then accelerated around a ring and the electrons stripped off to give a 

Characterization of Solids 
67 
high-energy proton beam. The proton beam is then pulsed at 50 Hz using 
an alumina valve towards a uranium (or rarely tantalum) target. In the 
same way as in the reactor-based experiment, fission products and vari- 
able wavelength neutrons are produced from the uranium target, which 
are then moderated. The entire moderated beam is then used and the 
diffraction pattern recorded as a function of the 
, as seen 
in Fig~re~3.15. I
i 
I 
rh 
As distance (D) 
= time (t) x velocity (v), and from the De Broglie 
relation h = h h v ,  then: 
Figure 3.15 Time-of-flight pow- 
der neutron diffraction pattern 
Thus 
A = (constant) x t 

68 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 3.16 Variation of scatter- 
3.2.2 The 
and 
I 
Differences between the Behaviour of X-rays 
rleutrons 
Scattering Power 
Variation with angle. The source of X-ray scattering is via interaction of 
the X-ray photon with the electron cloud of the scattering atom by elec- 
trostatic force over a distance of 10-lo m. Unfortunately, this distance is 
comparable both to the X-ray wavelength and the dimensions of the 
electron cloud, such that scattering from different parts of the cloud is 
not always in phase. This gives rise to the 
, which is a tail- 
off in intensity as the size of the scattering angle increases (Figure 3.16). 
sin Olh 
ing amplitude with angle 
Neutrons interact with the nucleus and because they possess zero 
charge the interaction occurs over a much shorter distance ( 
instead 
of 10-lo m). The nucleus acts as a point scatterer, and there is no form 
factor as a function of angle. The difference in scattering as a function 
of angle is shown in Figure 3.16. 
Figure 3.17 Variation of scattering 
length for X-rays and neutrons 
with atomic number 

Characterization of Solids 
69 
Vuriation with element. X-rays are scattered by electrons; therefore the 
more electrons something possesses, the better scatterer it will be. To a 
first approximation, scattering is proportional to the atomic number (2). 
Neutrons are scattered by the nucleus, and this is dependent to a first 
degree on the size of the nucleus (i.e. the cross section it presents to the 
incoming neutron). Nuclei vary very little in size throughout the Periodic 
Table, so to a first approximation neutron scattering is nominally pro- 
portional to .Z1l3. However, this is not the full neutron story; superim- 
posed on the scattering amplitude as a function of the atomic number is 
the 
. In this the neutron is absorbed by the nucleus 
and released later. This is a random effect and varies from isotope 
to isotope and can even lead to negative scattering, as shown in Figure 
3.17, 
3.2.3 Neutron Experiments 
Neutron diffraction allows the following three types of experiment, which 
are impossible (or nearly impossible) with X-ray diffraction. 
Distinguish Isotopes and Neighbours 
Resonance scattering means that neighbours and isotopes can have very 
different scattering lengths, e. g. two nickel isotopes, 55Ni (0.87) and 62Ni 
(1.44), or the transition elements Fe (0.95), Co (0.25) and Ni (1.02) (all 
x 10-l2 m), whereas for X-rays, scattering would be closely proportion- 
al to the atomic numbers 26, 27 and 28, respectively. Neutron diffrac- 
tion is therefore particularly useful in the study of alloys. 
Similar Scattering for All the Elements 
Relative scattering in X-rays and neutrons is given in Table 3.3 for some 
very different elements. In neutron diffraction, all elements have a scat- 
tering amplitude of the same order of magnitude, i.e. between -0.4 and 
1.6 x 10-l2 m. The similar scattering lengths for neutron diffraction for 
all the elements means that the scattering of light elements (e.g. D) can 
be detected in the presence of heavy ones (e.g. U). 
Real Bond Lengths 
X-rays are scattered by the electron cloud, so polarized bonds distort the 
cloud and a true representation of the atomic position is not given. The 
electron density is distorted towards the electronegative element, and the 
measured distance is always too short. For example, 0-H typically is 
measured at 0.8 A, which is less than the sum of the ionic radii! Neutron 

70 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Table 3.3 Comparison of relative X-ray and neutron scattering8 
Element 
X-ray 
Neutron 
Deuterium 
Phosphorus 
Sulfur 
Chlorine 
Tin 
Tungsten 
1 
15 
16 
17 
50 
74 
0.667 
0.51 3 
0.285 
0.958 
0.623 
0.486 
diffraction measures the distance between the nuclei, and so the true 
value of ca. 0.96 A is measured. 
3.2.4 Bond Valence  calculation^^^^ 
The method of assignment of single, double and triple bonds which is 
applicable to organic chemistry cannot be used in crystalline, non- 
molecular chemistry. To overcome this problem, an empirical method 
has been developed by a number of workers to describe bonds in non- 
molecular solids. In a similar way to valence bond theory, this model 
attempts to assign valences or strengths using the individual bonds. The 
difference between the two methods is that this procedure allows non- 
integral values to be assigned, where the valence is summed by consid- 
eration of all the bonds around a particular atom, using the equation: 
sq = ..p(--) 
Yo - rij 
where so is the valence of a particular bond, rq is the measured bond 
length and ro is the bond length unit derived for unit bond valence (i.e. 
a single bond between atoms i andj); B is a constant (0.37). Determining 
the valence is then just a matter of summing over all the bonds. The 
calculated effective valence should be within 0.2 of the expected valence 
for the atom. For example, for Sr, which normally exists in the 2+ 
oxidation state, the calculated bond valence should lie between 1.8 and 
2.2. This procedure provides a method which allows new structures to 
be checked for chemical sense, where all atoms in the crystal structure 
should obey the valence sum rule. 
3.3 
Electron Microscopy 
The electron microscope has become a very important part of materials 
structure determination, yielding information on both the morphology, 

Characterization of Solids 
7 1 
surface structure and element composition of new or known phases. The 
very small amount of material needed for such experiments means that 
electron microscopy can be used not only for fault analysis and routine 
determinations on bulk materials, but also on single crystals. 
The principle involves using X-rays (beam of electrons) to image atom- 
ic structures. The very short wavelengths allow much higher resolution 
than with a standard optical microscope. There are several types of elec- 
tron microscope which allow different types of image to be formed. They 
operate in either transmission mode (electrons pass through the sample) 
or reflection mode (electrons are reflected from the surface) 
3.3.1 Transmission Electron Microscope 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) uses both elastic and inelastic 
scattering of the electrons to form an image which can be interpreted 
either on screen or on a photographic plate. The image produced has no 
depth profile, as the electrons pass through the sample; so surface fea- 
tures cannot be investigated, and the area viewed is fixed but is well 
resolved. The image available from TEM is very dependent on how the 
sample is prepared, as very thin sample films are required (-2000 A) 
to produce a good image. These films can be achieved in a number of 
ways, including ion bombardment. TEM allows crystal defects such as 
dislocations, stacking faults and phase boundaries to be seen directly. 
In addition, with appropriate stages the effect of high and low temper- 
ature or chemical treatment on the sample can be observed in situ. The 
TEM readily resolves images in the range 10-1000 A. 
3.3.2 Scanning Electron Microscope 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) uses the electrons reflected from 
the surface of a material to form the image, such that the thickness of 
the sample is not important and sample preparation is less difficult than 
for TEM. The probe produces a high-intensity focused electron beam, 
which backscatters from the surface and is continuously measured as the 
microscope moves from point to point over the surface (similar to a 
television screen). In a non-conducting sample the surface is coated with 
gold or graphite to prevent build-up of surface charge. SEM can be used 
to image over a very large magnification range from 1 pm (100 A> to 
100 pm, allowing study of particle morphology and size, surface texture 
and detail and defects in surfaces such as faults and cavities caused by, 
for example, etching or corrosion. 

72 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
3.3.3 
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy 
(STEM) 
This technique combines the features of the TEM (high resolution) and 
the SEM (surface scanning) to produce a superior instrument. The 
STEM can be used not only for imaging but also for analytical work; 
since several scanning signals are collected simultaneously, the contrast 
is enhanced relative to the standard instruments. The high-resolution 
picture gives information on structure, absorbed species and depth. 
The X-rays emitted from the surface of a sample in both SEM and 
TEM can be used diagnostically to determine the partition of species, 
since they are characteristic of the elements in the sample. This process 
is known as EDAX (energy dispersive analysis of X-rays) and can be 
performed not only on areas of sample but also on individual crystal- 
lites, although light elements (with atomic numbers less than sodium) 
cannot be assessed as the X-rays produced are too soft and are easily 
absorbed. 
3.4 
X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy 
When a beam of X-rays travels through matter (crystalline or non-crys- 
talline) it loses intensity through interaction with the material. A pro- 
portion of the beam is absorbed as a function of increasing energy, but 
on top of this smooth variation is a series of sharp jumps which are 
caused by ejection of a core electron. These steps are characteristic of 
the both the element and the oxidation state of that element, and have 
been used for studying materials for a long time. However, superimposed 
on these 
, from just before the edge to some 30 eV 
beyond it, are sharp spikes and oscillations which also contain a lot of 
information about the material under study. These are caused by elec- 
tronic transitions between bound states (before the edge) and backscat- 
tering effects (beyond the edge), as shown in Figure 3.18. 
3.4.1 X-ray Absorption Near-edge Structure (XANES) 
The computational analysis of the XANES region is very complex, 
and hence it is often used mainly for qualitative comparison to give 
information on both oxidation states and coordination numbers. It is 
particularly used in the analysis of transition metal oxidation states and 
coordination numbers in catalysts 

Characterization of Solids 
73 
+ + u 4  
b 
Pre- Edge 
EXAFS 
edge 
3.4.2 Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure 
(EXAFS)’Og’’ 
Figure 3.18 Variation of 
absorption with incident X-ray 
photon energy 
Once an electron has been displaced by an X-ray photon, the ejected 
electron can be considered as an outgoing spherical photoelectron wave 
which can be backscattered by any neighbouring atoms. Superimposition 
of the outgoing and backscattered waves will give rise to interference 
effects in the final state which can be constructive or destructive (Figure 
3.19). As the X-ray energy changes, so does the wavelength of the 
photoelectron wave, causing an oscillation between constructive and 
destructive interference. These oscillations can be analysed to give infor- 
mation on the number of backscattering atoms and the distance between 
them. 
destructive interference 
Figure 3.19 Constructive and 
X-ray 
wavelength 
X-ray 
w av el en g th 
Constructive interference 
Destructive interference 

74 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 3.20 Static solid state 
NMR spectrum 
These effects occur irrespective of phase (gas, solid, liquid), tempera- 
ture and crystalline state, and occur on a very short timescale; so gases, 
working catalysts, amorphous materials and disordered solids can be 
studied. 
3.5 
Solid State (Magic Angle Spinning) Nuclear 
Magnetic Resonance1* 
Solution phase NMR is a common technique applied to many molecu- 
lar compounds on a routine basis.13.14 Although similar experiments can 
be performed on solid samples, the bands tend to be very broad (Figure 
3.20) as a result of incomplete averaging of the external magnetic field 
owing to the shielding created by the other nuclei in the sample (this 
effect is termed chemical shift anisotropy). 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
PPm 
In order to recreate the molecular tumbling which occurs in solution 
and which creates an averaged magnetic field, the solid is spun at the 
so-called 
of 54" 44' and is derived from the equation: 
The spinning eliminates the chemical shift anisotropy provided the spin- 
ning frequency is close to the frequency spread of the signal. Typically, 
a spinning rate of between 2 and 25 kHz is used. When the spectra are 
particularly broad and the spinning rate cannot match the spread of the 
signal, a series of spinning side bands are observed (such as for ah- 
minium or vanadium), which are separated by the spinning frequency 
(Figure 3.21). In order to be sure which resonance is the central band 
and which are the spinning side bands, the spectrum is then collected 
at two speeds where the spinning side bands move with changing speed 
but the central resonance remains fixed. 
In general, MAS (magic angle spinning) NMR spectra also take longer 
to record, as spin relaxation is slow. This is particularly true for spin-'/? 
nuclei such as silicon, where relaxation times of between 120 to 600 s 

Characterization of Solids 
75 
I 
t
'
 
4.5 kHz 
2.5 kHz 
are not unusual between pulses. For quadrupolar nuclei, with more 
relaxation pathways, pulsing can be faster. 
When the nucleus under study has poor abundance, such as for car- 
bon-13, the 
technique is used. This uses a complex 
pulse sequence to transfer the polarization from a nucleus with high 
abundance (normally hydrogen, but phosphorus and aluminium are also 
used) to the second nucleus, enhancing its signal. 
MAS NMR is particularly suited to the characterization of zeolites, l 5  
where the similarity of aluminium and silicon means that the structural 
make-up cannot be determined by any other method. Here the position 
of the silicon resonance is crucial in determining the environment, with 
a move to more positive chemical shift as the Si-0-Si links are replaced 
by Si-0-A1 links (referred to as QO through to Q4, for zero through to 
four aluminium atoms in the immediate shell). For example, the spec- 
trum for zeolite P is shown in Figure 3.22. 
Figure 3.21 9Be MAS NMR run 
at 2.5 and 4.5 kHz 
3.6 
Thermal Analysis 
Thermal methods are used in many areas of chemistry to determine both 
phase changes as a function of temperature and to determine unknown 
quantities, such as levels of hydration or oxygen content. Although 
thermal analysis could be thought of as any technique which measures 
a property of material as a function of temperature, only the two major 
thermal analysis techniques will be discussed. 

76 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 3.22 Solid state NMR 
spectrum of zeolite P 
Al 
A1 Si Si 
29Si MAS NMR 
Al 
A1 
Si Si Si 
Si 
si 
Si Si Si 
si 
n I 
A1 
Si Si Si 
Al 
Al 
AlSi A1 
I 
I
l
l
 I
l
l
 1 
-105 
-95 
-75 
ppm 
3.6.1 Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) 
This technique monitors the change in weight of a sample, as it is heated 
in gadair, as a function of temperature. Providing the final products are 
known, the difference between the final and the starting compositions 
can be determined, where the additional atoms have been evolved as 
gadwater. 
Q The TGA trace for the decomposition of A12Si20,.xH20 in air 
is given in Figure 3.23. Given that after heating the final product 
is A12Si207, determine the value of x. 
A 
22.7 
- 
- 
26.4 
RMM Al,Si,O,. xH,O 
RMM Al2Si2O7 
If the relative formula mass of Al,Si,O, is A ,  then rearranging gives: 
A(26.4 - 22.7) 
X =  
(22.7)( 1 8) 
Therefore x = 2. 

Characterization of Solids 
77 
3.6.2 Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA) 
When a material goes through a phase change during the heating cycle, 
the act of changing phase costs energy, such that energy is put in but 
the temperature of the sample remains constant. If a sample is heated 
against a standard sample, which exhibits no such change, then a dif- 
ferential between the two is apparent whilst the active sample melts or 
changes phase. A DTA curve for kaolinite decomposition (trough, 
endothermic) and recrystallization to mullite (peak, exothermic) is shown 
in Figure 3.23. 
26.4 
n 
U 
? 
5 
.r( 
F 
22.7 
3 
.,d 
cd 
c 
c, 
g 
8 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
Temperature ("C) 
3.7 
Other Spectroscopic Techniques 
Clearly, both vibrational and UV-visible spectroscopy also play an 
important role in materials chemistry, and are well described in other 
texts.16J7 The principles involved in carrying out these experiments on 
solids rather than in solution are similar, but often experimental methods 
vary. For example, an IR spectrum of a zeolite would be carried out by 
dispersing the solid in a matrix of potassium bromide and pressing into 
a disk, rather than in solution. Typically, a UV-visible spectrum of a 
solid would be carried out in 
mode, where the solid 
is dispersed in a white matrix (such as barium carbonate) and the UV 
light is reflected off the surface rather than passing through a solution. 
Figure 3.23 TGA and DTA spec- 
tra of the decomposition of kaoli- 
nite as a function of temperature 

78 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
These methods give the same characteristic lines you would expect 
from a solution species, for example a hydroxide band would be expect- 
ed at 3300-3600 cm-I. However, the bands are often much broader for 
solids. 
1. Powder diffraction methods are the crucial techniques involved 
in materials chemistry. They are used in the determination of struc- 
ture, phase purity and in the monitoring of reactions. 
2. Powder dflraction patterns can be indexed to determine cell con- 
stants in simple crystal systems. 
3. Neutron diffraction and X-ruy dflraction are complementary, e. g. 
powder X-ray diffraction to find heavy atom positions, and pow- 
der neutron diffraction to find light atoms. 
4. Electron microscopy can provide useful information on structure, 
morphology and chemical composition. 
5. Spectroscopic. methods such as IR/Raman are used routinely in 
the characterization of solids, but tend to be used to complement 
other techniques where bands are often too broad to be used 
diagnostically. 
1. Draw the 101 plane of an orthorhombic unit cell and mark on 
the distance d,,,,. 
2. Given that the lattice parameter of primitive cubic zeolite is 
12.400 A, calculate the 20 positions of the 301, 400 and the 11 1 
reflections determined by copper radiation (h = 1.54 A). 
3. P-Tungsten crystallizes with a body-centred cubic structure. 
What h, k,l values would you expect the first ten reflections to have? 
4. The spinel ZnFe 0 has reflections at the following 20 values in 
its neutron diffraction pattern: 22.593, 26.145, 37.3 11, 44.059, 
46.129, 53.792. Determine the lattice type, and given that the neu- 
2. 

Characterization of Solids 
79 
tron wavelength was 1.90 A, calculate the lattice parameter. 
58 (i) Potassium chloride crystallizes with a face-centred cubic lat- 
tice similar to sodium chloride. If the X-ray powder pattern was 
recorded, what restrictions, if any, would be expected on /z,k,Z'? 
(ii) If the powder neutron diffraction pattern was recorded instead, 
would the restrictions change? 
6. On a TGA, 24.20 mg of SrFe03-x decomposed in a stream of 
hydrogen at 700 "C to give 23.34 mg of a mixture of Fe,03 and 
SrO. Use these data to determine the value of x. 
7. What type of cubic lattice would have a diffraction pattern where 
the 110 reflection would be observed but the 234 would be absent? 
Give reasons for your answer. 
8. LiSrH, crystallizes as a white cubic solid after the reaction of 
lithium and strontium under a flow of hydrogen at 500 "C. 
(i) What factors affect the scattering of X-rays by crystalline solids? 
Why might this compound be difficult to characterize? 
(ii) The powder X-ray diffraction pattern of this materials shows 
the following reflections: 
2 8 =  23.25, 40.84, 47.53, 53.56, 69.49, 74.38 
Index the data, determine the lattice type and calculate a cell para- 
meter (A = 1.54 A.). 
1. I. D Brown and D Aldermatt, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 1976, 32, 
1957. 
2. W. Clegg, Crystal Structure Determination, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1998. 
3. M. F. C. Ladd and R. A. Palmer, Structure Determination by X-ray 
Crystallography, 3rd edn., Plenum, New York, 1993. 
4. H. M. Rietveld, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1969, 2, 65. 
5. H. M. Rietveld, Acta Crystallogr., 1967, 22 151. 
6. R. A. Young, The Rietveld Method, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1997. 
7. A. C. Larson and R. B. von Dreele, GSAS: Generalized Structural 
Analysis System, Los Alamos, NM, 1990. 

80 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
Neutron News, 1992, 3(3), 29. 
I. D. Brown, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1975, 4, 359. 
B. K. Teo, Acc. Chem. Res., 1980, 13, 412. 
B. K. Teo and P.A. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 2815. 
C. A. Fyfe, Solid State NMR for Chemists, CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, FL, 1983. 
R. K. Harris and B. E. Mann, NMR and the Periodic Table, 
Academic Press, London, 1978. 
P. J. Hore, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1995. 
G. Englehardt and D. Michel, High Resolution NMR ofSi1icute.s 
and Zeolites, Wiley, New York, 1987. 
A. K. Brisdon, Inorganic Spectroscopic Methods, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1998. 
E. A. V Ebsworth, D. W. H. Rankin and S. Craddock, Structural 
Methods in Inorganic Chemistry, Blackwell, Oxford, 1986. 

Preparation of Materials in the 
Solid State 
The preparation of materials in the 
1 
- 
is rather different from 
the synthesis of discrete molecules. The properties of inorganic and 
organic molecular systems can be altered by reaction in solution, to add 
or remove particular groups, and the products can be purified by recrys- 
tallization. The synthesis and alteration of solids is very different. It 
involves treatment of the 
. Often, post-synthesis purifica- 
tion of the materials is not possible owing to the low solubility of the 
phases formed. Hence, every effort must be made to avoid excesses of 
reagents. 
This chapter aims to outline particular techniques which are avail- 
able for the creation of solid state materials. By the end of this 
chapter you should be able to: 
Identify suitable methods to prepare different solid materials 
Choose techniques to alter the ‘as prepared’ stoichiometry of a 
material 
Understand the particular methodology for preparation of sin- 
gle crystals from solid materials 
Distinguish between different sorts of precursor method 
4.1 
High-temperature (Ceramic) Method 
The most widely used method for the preparation of solid materials is 
by reaction of solid components in the correct molar proportions at ele- 
vated temperature over a long period. Many mixed metal oxides, chalco- 
genides (sulfides, selenides and tellurides) and pnictides (phosphides and 
nitrides) have been prepared using this method. Accurate weighing of 
81 

82 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
the starting materials is of utmost importance because the material 
cannot be purified after the synthesis. For this reason, the choice of 
reactants is important, and care must be taken not to use hygroscopic 
(water absorbing) or non-stoichiometric (variable composition) starting 
materials. 
Care should also be taken to avoid volatile or air-sensitive com- 
pounds, if possible. In cases where there is no alternative, 
(Section 4.3) can be used. 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
83 
Since solid state reactions can require temperatures up to 2000 "C, 
conventional glassware is often not suitable. For example, borosilicate 
glass (Pyrex) softens above approximately 600 "C. Instead, high melting 
point materials such as precious metal capsules (gold, platinum), alumi- 
na and zirconia crucibles (Figure 4.1) and silica are used as containers 
in solid state synthesis. Vessel selection depends on the reactants and the 
temperature, as shown in Table 4.1. In some cases, vessels are coated 
with graphite before use to prevent reaction with the material under 
study, as at such high temperatures even the containers can become reac- 
Table 4.1 Containers for materials samples 
~~ 
~ 
Vessel 
Maximum temperature ("C)* 
Melting point ("C) 
~~ 
~ 
Borosilicate glass (Pyrex) 
Gold tubing 
Silica (quartz) 
Platinum 
Alumina (A1203) 
Zirconia (ZrO,) 
Magnesia (MgO) 
51 5 
1013 
1405 
1719 
1900 
2000 
2400 
820 
1063 
1853 
1769 
2072 
2700 
2852 
* Nominal working temperature for empty container; actual working temperature will 
be sample dependent. 
Figure 4.1 Alumina and zirconia 
crucibles 
(Kindly donated by John Savage, 
Technical Glass Company) 

84 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
tive. This is achieved by using a small amount of a low boiling point sol- 
vent such as propanone, surface wetting, and then heating to white heat 
using a blow torch to decompose the organic solvent to carbon. This 
method is particularly effective in preventing the reaction of alkali met- 
als and alkaline earth metals with glass. 
The usual laboratory methods of heating, such as using mantles or 
ovens, do not provide high enough temperatures to allow the solids to 
react. Very high temperatures (4000 "C) can be achieved using lasers, 
but most reactions do not require such extreme conditions. Generally, 
temperatures up to 2000 "C are achieved in 
which use resis- 
tance heating to reach the required temperature. Examples of the two 
sorts of furnace are shown in Figure 4.2. The 
I 
(or muffle) furnace 
heats a large volume to a fixed temperature. The w furnace has a 
smaller heated area at the centre of the tube (typically 2-5 cm) and the 
temperature falls off rapidly towards the ends of the tube. The tube fur- 
nace can be used to heat samples under different gases by placing inside 
it a tube connected to a gas cylinder. Single crystals can also be grown 
in tube furnaces (Section 4.6). 
The majority of useful complex materials are oxides, but the ceram- 
ic method can also be used to prepare metal halides and nitrides by using 
controlled atmospheres and appropriate reaction vessels. For example, 
the formation of calcium gold nitride from calcium nitride and gold1 in 
a sealed gold capsule under nitrogen: 
2Ca3N2,,, + 3Au,, 3 3Ca2AuN(,, + N,, 
4.1.1 Reactions in the Solid State 
Ceramic methods are very slow. This is mainly because, with no melt 
formed, the entire reaction occurs in the solid state and requires diffu- 
sion across the points of contact in a mixture. For example, Figure 4.3 
shows a schematic diagram of the reaction between solid particles. 
The reaction mixture consists of a collection of particles and voids. The 
cations migrate across the points of contact and form the new structure 
at the phase boundary (normally the cations are the mobile ions as they 
are much smaller than the anions, e.g. 0.95 A for Na+ compared with 
1.4 
for 02-). 
As more of the new compound forms, the cations have 
to migrate further, through the product, to form the new phase. 
Therefore, the reaction becomes slower and slower, as the diffusion path 
gets longer and longer. 
Decreasing the length of the diffusion path and increasing the num- 
ber of points of contact between the particles in the mixture can speed 
up the reaction. This can be achieved by: 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
85 
Figure 4.2 Box and tube 
furnaces 
(Kindly donated by Pyrotherm 
Furnaces Ltd .) 

86 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Nucleation point 
Figure 4.3 Schematic diagram of 
the reaction of solid particles 
Regrinding the mixture periodically to improve homogeneity, after 
every 16-24 hours 
Improve contact between the particles by forcing the particles closer 
together, e.g. by pressing the mixture into pellets to reduce the num- 
ber of voids 
Increasing the temperature to give the particles more energy to move 
In practice, a combination of all three methods is used. Pressing the mix- 
ture into pellets is particularly useful, as it can also reduce the volatility 
of the reactants. A typical reaction scheme for the formation of LaFeO, 
is shown in Figure 4.4. The process of regrinding and heating is often 
referred to as the ' 
' method. It is a feature of most 
reactions carried out in the solid state. 
The long reaction time is only one of the problems associated with 
the ceramic method. Finding the right annealing conditions and 
temperature is primarily a matter of trial and error, as the method of 
preparation of new materials cannot be easily predicted. Often, the 
product is not totally homogeneous in composition, even when the reac- 
tion proceeds almost to completion. If there is any impurity left at the 
end of the reaction, it is normally impossible to remove, 
The other way to overcome the very slow diffusion process is to 
decrease the particle size so the cations have a shorter distance to travel. 
By mechanical grinding the smallest particle size achievable is between 
10,000 and 100,000 A, which is roughly 1000-10,000 unit cells. This is 
istance for the diffusing cation. In the following 
is created, normally by solvation in a suitable sol- 
vent. This allows mixing on an atomic scale before the solvent is removed, 
leaving the solids thoroughly mixed, and a much smaller particle size. 
The residue is then heated using the normal ceramic methodology, but 
the reaction temperature can often be significantly lowered. 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
87 
n 
Weigh accurately 
Fe,O&a,O, 
E3 
Press into 
pel lets 
Grind up 
+ 
Pack down 
in crucible 
Heat 
strongly 
re-heat 
LaFe03 4 
Regrind and repellet 
Figure 4.4 Reaction scheme for 
the formation of lanthanum iron 
oxide using the ceramic method. 
Spray and Freeze Drying 
In both cases, the reactants are dissolved in a common solvent and then 
either sprayed into a hot chamber, where the solvent evaporates instan- 
taneously ( 
), or frozen in liquid nitrogen and the solvent 
removed at low pressure ( 
1. 
Solvation of Metal Salts 
This method involves dissolving metal salts (often nitrates, hydroxides 
or oxalates) in a suitable solvent and then evaporating the mixture to 
dryness. The dried residue is then reacted as in the ceramic method. This 
procedure only works well if the components have similar solubilities, 
otherwise the solid with the lowest solubility starts precipitating out first, 
giving no better mixing than the normal ceramic method. 

88 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Co-precipitation 
Mixed ion solutions can be precipitated to produce a solid containing 
the required ions, although care must be taken to ensure that the uw- 
recf ratio of ions precipitates. For example, oxalic acid can be used 
to precipitate zinc iron oxalate from a solution of the ions dissolved in 
acetic acid: 
The spinel ZnFe,O, is then produced by heating the precipitated mix- 
ture to 800 "C. Although this method does allow a significantly lower 
firing temperature to be used than in the direct ceramic method, it is 
particularly difficult to use for many ion systems. 
Sol-Gel Methods 
This method is particularly important, and is used widely in the prepa- 
ration of zeolites, thin films and abrasive coatings. The process involves 
preparation of a concentrated solution (sol) of the reaction components. 
This mixture is then converted to an almost rigid gel by removing the 
solvent or by adding a component which causes the gel to solidify. The 
gel can then be treated in some way to produce the desired material. 
This methodology can also be used to produce 
materials, 
where organic and inorganic species can be trapped in an inert matrix. 
The properties of both the inert matrix and the trapped species are coni- 
bined in the product. 
4.2 
Sealed Tubes 
In some cases, direct reaction under ambient conditions (in air at one 
atmosphere pressure) to form materials cannot be performed. This may 
be due to a number of reasons, including volatility of the reactants, air 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
89 
sensitivity of the starting materials and/or products, or the desire to form 
a compound with a metal in an unusually low oxidation state. 
For example, powdered manganese and sulfur will react together at 
500 "C to form MnS: 
but if heated at this temperature in air, all the sulfur would volatilize by 
110 "C. In order to keep manganese and sulfur in the same vicinity, they 
must be reacted together in a sealed vessel. 
Typically, for this type of reaction the components are loaded into a 
glass or quartz ampoule in a glass box, evacuated and then sealed off by 
melting the gladquartz using a blow torch. The whole tube is then heat- 
ed subsequently in a tube or box furnace. The tube is then scored and 
broken open to remove the product after cooling. Similarly, reactions 
can take place in precious metal capsules sealed by welding. These reac- 
tions can be a bit hazardous as the tubes can react with the materials 
placed in them, which causes the tube to weaken. Significant pressure 
can also build up inside the tubes, which can cause minor explosions. 
Typically, these reactions are performed inside a 
made of metal 
to prevent damage to the furnace if the reaction vessel breaks. 
4.3 
Controlled Atmospheres 
< 
I
e
w
 
O r -  
* 
I 
_v 
Some materials cannot be generated by heating in air at one atmosphere 
pressure. To prepare such materials a controlled atmosphere is used, 
where a particular gas is passed over the reaction mixture in a tube fur- 
nace. For example, the only readily available oxide of vanadium is V2.05. 
To prepare VO, where vanadium is in the +2 oxidation state, requires 
hydrogen to be passed over V20, at approximately 1000 "C: 
Alternatively, to prepare a compound containing nickel in the +3 oxi- 
dation state, e.g. LaNiO,, requires oxygen annealing, since under normal 
conditions nickel would be in the +2 state: 
LaNi02.5,s, - LaNiO,, 
This reaction is quite characteristic of compounds with extended lattices, 
rather than discrete structures, in that LaNiO,,, is 
This means that not all the available sites in the lattice are filled, giving 
a non-integral number of atoms in the chemical formula. Different types 
of non-stoichiometry, and the effect it has, are discussed further in 

90 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
~ 
~ 
~~~~~~ 
Chapter 6. It should be noted that non-stoichiometry in solid state 
compounds can affect both the preparative conditions and the physical 
properties of the material. 
(heat treating of a prepared phase) reactions take 
place at much lower temperature than the initial preparation. This is 
simply because samples prepared at high temperature and 
(rapidly cooled) are often disordered, particularly when the phase is non- 
stoichiometric. Annealing is used for all sorts of materials to remove 
defects, improve homogeneity and reduce strain. For example, newly 
blown glassware is annealed to remove imperfections to improve 
strength. While phase preparation is typically carried out in a box fur- 
nace, annealing reactions are often carried out in a tube furnace equipped 
with a tube of ceramic or silica to allow a gas to be passed over the mix- 
ture. To create a positive pressure inside the tube, a bubbler containing 
a viscous liquid is sometimes placed after the work tube, as shown in 
the schematic drawing (Figure 4.5) 
Often 
Silica 
Tube furnace 
Bubbler 
Gas 
cylinder 
Figure 4.5 Tube furnace 
annealing reaction 
Unfortunately, the conditions provided by tube furnace annealing are 
sometimes insufficient to produce high or unusual oxidation states. 
Higher pressures are required. For example, high-pressure nitrogen has 
been used to generate ternary nitrides, and high-pressure oxygen has 
allowed unusual oxidation states to be accessed:2 
Sr,Fe,O, + 0, - Sr,Fe,O, 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
91 
The stored energy of high-pressure gas systems makes such reactions 
quite hazardous, and so they are performed on a small scale (ca. 1 g). 
The maximum pressure available for each gas is dependent on the gas 
in question, as phases liquefy at different pressures. The upper limit of 
these reactions is 18 kbar (1.8 GPa) for argon-based vessels. Here it is 
the absolute pressure that is the important factor, and not the type of 
gas. 
4.4 
Hydrothermal Methods 
Relatively low-temperature solutions can be used to produce insoluble 
materials by direct reaction. For example, metal halides at room 
temperature, e.g. 
Such reactions can take place at low temperature in an open vessel. 
However, the range of these reactions can be extended by using closed 
vessels and heating the solvent above its boiling point in a 
reaction. This type of reaction is particularly important in the prepara- 
tion of a family of aluminosilicate materials known as the zeolites 
(Chapter 7). The zeolites are framework structures constructed of ver- 
tex-linked aluminium and silicon tetrahedra. They are formed from an 
aluminium and silicon source heated in the presence of a 
agent. The templating agent is a anion or cation of particular shape. 
The tetrahedra in solution use the templating agent to form the frame- 
work by linking together around it. For an aluminosilicate framework, 
the aluminium and silicon sources are typically mixed with the template 
and allowed to ‘age’ by standing the reaction mixture for a period 
of time before heating. During this time the molecules organize them- 
selves into amorphous conglomerations. The pre-organized mixture 
then crystallizes within the conglomeration by using up the amorphous 
materiaL3 
Q What is the chemical formula of a tetrahedral unit, AX,, which 
shares all vertices? 
A If the unit was isolated the formula would be AX,, but if each 

92 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 4.6 Vertex-sharing 
tetrahedra 
X is shared between two atoms (Figure 4.6), then to each A it is 
only worth one half ('just like point sharing in Chapter 1). The for- 
mula of each tetrahedron is AX,, ',> ) = AX,. 
0 I 
0 I 
0 I 
0 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
The tetrahedral units 
I 
I 
0 
0 
0 
link together through their vertices, using the 
shape of the template as a guide to form a network. For each silicon- 
based tetrahedral unit, i.e. SiO,, there is charge balance (Si4+ and 2 x 
0, = SiO,). However, for each aluminium there is a one negative charge 
(A13' and 2 x 0, = A10;). Therefore, inside the network, both water 
molecules and 
are incorporated. Under differ- 
e a range of structures, but, in 
general, large templates create large pores. 
Although crystallization does occur at low temperatures, hydrother- 
mal methods are often used to speed up the reaction by raising the tem- 
perature to 160-250 "C. Numerous templating agents have been used in 
the formulation of zeolite materials. 
materials (highly crys- 
talline, pores <12 A) often use organic bases such as TEA (tetraethyl- 
ammonium), while mesoporous materials (larger pores but lower 
crystallinity, pores > 12 A) often use liquid crystal templates: 
12NaAI02,,, t 12Na2Si0,,,, --* Na12[A112Si1204R]. 
xH20,,, 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
93 
The symmetry of the crystal network then reflects the symmetry of the 
catiodanion used as a template. For example, the channel structure of 
the cancrinite system is shown in Figure 4.7. The three-fold symmetry 
of the carbonate anion is used to direct the same symmetry in the frame- 
work. 
Figure 4.7 Picture of the cancri- 
nite structure showing the three- 
fold axes of the framework, 
templated by anions with three- 
fold symmetry. The small black 
atoms are the framework tetrahe- 
dra and the light grey atoms are 
the framework oxygen. The 
orange atoms are the sodium 
cations, related by three-fold 
rotation about the centre of the 
large ring 
Similar reactions are used in the formation of the 
They also 
have framework structures, but contain other elements rather than alu- 
minium and silicon. For example, substitution of phosphorus for silicon 
produces the ALP0 family of materials. These require no counterions 
in the mixture, but need mildly basic or slightly acidic conditions for 
crystallization. Often a small amount of hydrogen fluoride is added as a 
Once the zeolite or zeotype is formed, the template can often be 
removed by heating to decompose and vaporize the organic material or 
by chemical treatment (e.8. ethanol/ethanoic acid). The pore system of 
the zeolite or zeotype can then be used for molecular sieving, ion 
exchange or catalysis. 
More often than not, the solvent used for reactions of this type is 
water, but other solvents such as liquid ammonia and organic solvents 
have also been used. For example, by heating sodium silicate with ethane- 
1,2-diol, a framework consisting totally of silicon tetrahedra can be 
formed. 
) and water heated above its 
critical point ( 
* t )  are often considered too acidic for synthe- 
sis. Superheated and supercritical water are well known for their ability 
(a material used to encourage crystallization). 
Water heated above 100 "C ( 

94 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 4.8 Tuttle cold-seal bomb 
to destroy toxic organic chemicals, e. g. polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs) or 
chemical warfare gases (e.g. sarin). However, the unusual state between 
gas and liquid is a particularly good regime for mineral synthesis. 
Temperatures up to 800 "C and pressures up to 3 kbar (300 MPa) have 
been exploited for decades by geologists using Tuttle cold-seal bomb 
hydrothermal apparatus (Figure 4.8). 
1 
I 
Pressure 
vessel 
Water inlet 
Space-reducing steel 
rod (to minimize 
heated volume) 
# 
apparatus 
4.5 
High Pressure 
High-pressure chemistry is a somewhat expensive and dangerous activ- 
ity. It can also be highly rewarding. The conditions created allow unusu- 
al oxidation states and structures to be accessed. The high pressure 
favours dense structures. 
The simplest sort of reaction uses highly oxidized, and normally 
relatively unstable, compounds such as potassium chlorate. By heating 
potassium chlorate in a fixed volume, decomposition occurs according 
to the equation: 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
95 
The decomposition causes a large increase in pressure (1-10 kbar, 
100-1000 MPa) owing to the creation of the oxygen gas. These reactions 
are frequently used to generate high pressures in order produce com- 
pounds containing high oxidation states, e.g. Pro,. 
Beyond this range, the pressures are normally created by static pres- 
sure devices, such as piston-cylinder apparatus, solid state presses or 
anvil devices (opposed, tetrahedral and cubic anvil), when the sample is 
simply squeezed to create pressure up to 150 kbar (15 GPa) (Figure 4.9). 
These methods have allowed the synthesis of compounds which could 
not be created in any other way. However, only very small samples are 
produced (50 mg) in these expensive reactions, and so industrial appli- 
cations of the materials produced are unlikely. 
Pressure 
I 
Pressure 
4.6 
Single Crystals 
f a W " . s ~ U I 1  
Many of the techniques used for producing single crystals in molecular 
systems are simply not applicable to solid state materials. For example, 
solid state oxides such as the spinels (AB,O,) are not soluble in any 
solvent, at any temperature, so cannot be grown by solidification. 
However, there are two methods which are frequently used to produce 
single crystals from such materials. 
Figure 4.9 Schematic diagram of 
opposed tetrahedral anvil device 

96 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
4.6.1 Solidification from a Melt 
There are several different ways of producing single crystals from 
They are all variations on a theme. The solid material is heat- 
ed to slightly above its melting point in an inert crucible. Then the crys- 
tals are grown either by slow cooling or surface extrusion (see pulling 
method below). 
Pulling Method 
The material is placed in an unreactive crucible and heated to just above 
its melting point. A seed crystal is then dipped into the surface and slowly 
raised from the melt. Continuous growth then occurs at the interface. 
Floating Zone 
A rod of the material is held vertical and heated to cause melting at one 
end, By moving the heat source along the rod, melting and recrystal- 
lization occur as the source is moved. By placing a seed crystal at one 
end the whole rod can be converted into a single crystal. 
Tern perature Gradient 
A large temperature gradient is created across the sample, so that crys- 
tals nucleate in the colder part of the crucible. 
Flame Fusion 
The solid is placed in a hopper, heated with an oxy-hydrogen torch and 
allowed to drip on to a seed crystal. This method is often used to grow 
synthetic gemstones, such as sapphires, because the other methods are 
not possible owing to the very high melting point of the material. 
It is important to note that these methods are only applicable to solids 
which melt 
(i.e. to form one phase). For multiphase systems, 
the 
must be studied to ensure that the correct stoi- 
chiometry results at the temperatures generated. 
Solution Methods 
For growing single crystals from solution, the methodology is similar to 
that used in normal hydrothermal synthesis, except that the solution is 
typically supersaturated and the vessels are cooled very slowly (1 "C per 
min) to facilitate slow growth of large crystals. 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
97 
4.7 
Nanomaterials 
Nanomaterials are simply small clusters of material which have proper- 
ties distinct from both molecular species and materials with long-range 
order. Typically, these clusters are formed by a sudden change of state, 
e.g. liquid 
solid, consist of about 500 units and are 50-200 A in size. 
The physical properties of these materials show particular deviation 
from the bulk. For example, the magnetic properties of nanoparticles of 
iron oxide are weaker than those of the bulk material. This is particu- 
larly true of semiconducting metal chalcogenides (compounds of the 
heavy metals with Group 16 elements). 
4.8 
Amorphous Materials 
* L 1  *a*.*- 
I 
1 
I
L
 
Nearly all materials can be prepared in the amorphous state, The 
principle involves rapid quenching, which prevents the material from 
crystallizing in an ordered manner. This can be achieved in a number of 
(cooling below the freezing point), 
majority of these methods lead to materi- 
als which cannot be easily characterized by normal techniques such as 
X-ray diffraction. 
Probably the most common technique for producing amorphous 
materials is vapour deposition, where the material is vaporized and then 
deposited on to a surface at a very low temperature. This is similar to 
the freeze drying discussed in Section 4.1. Once it is on the surface, the 
material can be encouraged to crystallize by heating the surface. 
Very low density glasses, with very precise stoichiometries, can be 
synthesized using sol-gel  technique^.^ By using an organic reagent, 
an aerogel (a bit like expanded polystyrene) can be formed from the sol. 
Removal of the organic reagent then leads to an expanded glass. 
4.9 
Phase Diagrams and Melt Reactions 
~~~~~~~* 
* 
r 
If solid state reactions are so slow, why don’t we just melt the materials 
together and speed things up? Unfortunately, it is very rare that two 
materials A and B melt together and cool to form the solid AB. This 
process is called congruent melting and means AB (liquid) goes to AB 
(solid) on cooling. Most materials melt 
, where one of the 
components crystallizes first on cooling, leaving a liquid more rich in the 
other. Cooling of this type of material produces a mixture of A, AB and 
B, as shown in Figure 4.10. 
In order to make sense of such problems, phase diagrams are used to 
investigate the partition of species at a particular temperature. 
To understand the basic principles, the phase diagram for two solids 

98 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 4.11 Phase diagram for A 
/ 
100% A 
50% A 
0% A 
0% B 
50% B 
100% B 
AB liquid I\
/ 
AB liquid 
B liquid 
A solid 
AB solid El 
Congruent 
B liquid 
AB solid 
A solid 
4 
B solid 
AB solid 
A solid 
Incongruent 
Figure 4.10 Schematic diagram 
of the crystallization of congruent 
and incongruent solids 
A and B which do not react together is shown in Figure 4.11. Point X 
is the 
, which is the lowest temperature at which the whole 
system is molten. The curved line separating the solid and liquid region 
is called the 
. The x axis simply represents the ratio of the two 
components. As A and B do not react, there are no vertical lines with- 
in the diagram. 
Figure 4.12 represents two different cases where A and B do react to 
form AB. Part (i) shows a phase diagram for a compound AB which 
+ liquid 
+ liquid 
X 
Solid A + solid B 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
99 
1 
Liquid 
Solid A + solid AB 
Solid AB + solid B 
100% A 
0% B 
SO% A 
SO% B 
0% A 
100% B 
Solid A + solid AB 
Solid AB + solid B 
100% A 
0% B 
SO% A 
50% B 
0% A 
100% B 
melts congruently. Raising the temperature beyond T,, with equal pro- 
portions of A and B, will lead to solid AB on cooling. Obviously, mov- 
ing to the right would produce a mixture of AB and B. In an analogous 
diagram for an incongruently melting material, part (ii), cooling a 50:50 
mixture of AB from the liquid state first deposits solid A (below TJ, and 
then beyond T2 starts depositing AB. However, now the liquid is rich in 
B, so at any reasonable rate of cooling, a mixture of solid products, A, 
AB and B, is obtained. In these cases it is advisable to keep below T,, 
Figure 4.12 Phase diagrams for 
solids A and B which (i) melt 
congruently, (ii) melt incongruently 

100 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
known as the 
temperature. This means that incongruently melt- 
ing mixtures cannot be allowed to melt and the synthesis must be per- 
formed in the solid state. 
1. The majority of solid materials are prepared by solid state reac- 
tion of the appropriate constituents at elevated temperature. 
Suitable choice of starting materials and their purity are impera- 
tive in order to produce good quality products. 
2. The use of special atmospheres (such as hydrogen) or vessels (such 
as sealed tubes) can be used to access unusual oxidation states, or 
to produce air-sensitive materials. 
3. Precursor methods, such as co-precipitation, can be used to gen- 
erate smaller particle sizes and allow reactions to proceed faster or 
at lower temperature. 
4. Hydrothermal methods can be used to form solid state materials, 
providing the reactants are soluble. Slow cooling from solution can 
be one way to form single crystals. 
5. Phase diagrams can be used to identify likely preparative tem- 
peraturektate conditions for materials synthesis. 
M. T. Weller, Inorganic Materials Chemistry, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1994. 
C. N. R. Rao and J. Gopalakrishnam, New Directions in Solid State 
Chemistry, Cambridge University Prerss, Cambridge, 1999. 
A. R. West, Basic Solid State Chemistry, Wiley, New York, 1997. 
1 What would be suitable starting materials for the preparation 
of the superconductor YBa,Cu,O,? 

Preparation of Materials in the Solid State 
101 
2. Preparation of cobalt aluminate from COO and A1,0, requires 
a reaction temperature of 1200 "C. How could the reaction tem- 
perature be lowered? 
3. How could a pure sample of the compound Li2Ti03 be prepared 
from a mixture of lithium oxide and titanium dioxide when the 
lithium oxide is hygroscopic? 
4. How could a sample of V,03 be prepared from a mixture of 
V,O, and V (metal)? 
5. If a sample of cobalt aluminate was prepared as in question (2) 
via the high-temperature method, what would be a suitable choice 
of reaction vessel? 
6. If a 20:80 mixture of A and B was cooled to room temperature 
in the phase diagram in Figure 4.10(ii), what solids would precip- 
itate? 
7. How could a single crystal of a zeolite be prepared for structure 
determination? 
1. P. F. Henry and M. T. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1998, 
2. S. E. Dann, D. B. Currie and M. T. Weller, J. Solid State Chem., 
3. S. Mintova, N. H. Olsen, V. Valtchev and T. Bein, Science, 1999, 
4. D. M. Bibby and M. P. Dale, Nature, 1985, 317, 157. 
5. R. A. Laudise, The Growth of Single Crystals, Prentice-Hall, 
6. J. M. Honig and C. N. R. Rao, Preparation and Characterization of 
7. E. Banks and A. Wold, Solid State Chemistry, Dekker, New York, 
8. S Mroczkowski, J. Chem. Educ., 1980, 57, 537. 
9. D. J. Hamilton and C. M. B. Henderson, Silicate Synthesis, 1968, 
37, 2855. 
1992, 97, 179. 
283, 958. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1970. 
Materials, Academic Press, New York, 1981. 
1974. 
832. 

Electronic and Magnetic 
Behaviour of Solids 
Many of the industrial applications of materials make use of their par- 
ticular 
and 
properties. These properties are often 
directly related to their physical structure. Since the atomshons in the 
structure of these materials are very close together, the inter- 
actions between them occur throughout the lattice. 
The idea of metallic conductivity should now be familiar. Electrons 
are the 
which move through a lattice consisting of metal- 
lic ions. The term ‘metallic conductivity’ is somewhat confusing, as this 
behaviour is not limited to metals and alloys. It is also shown by many 
oxide and sulfide materials. Two other types of conductors will also be 
discussed in this chapter: 
, where electrons move coop- 
eratively (possibly as pairs), and 
, where the charge car- 
riers are 
By the end of this chapter you should be able to: 
Use band theory to explain the differences in electronic prop- 
erties of conductors and semiconductors with temperature 
Understand the differences between electronic and ionic con- 
ductivity 
Explain the differences between paramagnetism, ferromagnet- 
ism and antiferromagnetism 
Understand the similarities and differences between conductiv- 
ity and superconductivity 
102 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
103 
Finally, different sorts of magnetic behaviour will be discussed. 
Initially electron spins acting discretely in molecules and lattices will be 
compared, before we move on to different types of 
5 1  Useful Properties of Solids 
Many of the useful properties of solids result from their physical char- 
acteristics. For example: 
1. 
2. Diamonds are used for cutting owing to their physical 
3. Alumina is used for crucibles owing to its high 
and 
metals and alloys are used for making implements 
However, a large number of materials also find uses owing to the behav- 
iour of some of the 
4. Copper is used extensively in electrical circuitry owing to its low cost 
and high 
5. Ultramarine is a pigment which contains the S,- anion as part of its 
structure. 
in the anion, caused by visible light, 
give a strong blue colouration 
6. Barium ferrite is used in permanent magnets owing to the strong 
interaction of the unpaired electrons of the iron ions in the 
lattice 
within them. For example: 
These properties can be understood by considering how the ordered array 
of atomshons in a lattice causes interaction between the electrons in the 
orbitals on the individual lattice points. 
5 2  Electronic Behaviour of Solids 
The combination of atomic orbitals to form molecular orbitals can be 
used to describe the properties of molecules. For example, the two 
unpaired electrons in the oxygen molecule, 0,, can be explained by mol- 
ecular orbital theory. Simple electron sharing cannot account for these 
unpaired electrons (Figure 5.1). This approach can also be extended to 
infinite lattices, where n atomic orbitals create n molecular orbitals, divid- 
ed equally between :’. 
- 
and 
combinations. The bond- 
ing and antibonding levels are so closely spaced that they appear 
continuous. This arrangement generates certain characteristic properties, 
The differences in conductivity of conducting and semiconducting 
materials as a function of temperature is shown in Figure 5.2. Two obser- 
vations follow from the graph: 
depending on whether the material is 
or 
i
t
 
1 

104 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
A 
E 
Molecular orbital model: two unpaired electrons 
Lewis model: electrons all paired 
Figure 5.1 Comparison between 
molecular orbital model and 
Lewis model for the bonding 
of 0, 
I 
Temperature 
Figure 5.2 Conductivity of semi- 
conductors and conductors as a 
function of temperature 
Conductor: the curve indicates that the conductivity falls off with 
increasing temperature, but persists down to very low temperature. 
Semiconductor: a semiconductor is a substance with an electric con- 
ductivity that increases with increasing temperature. Below a particular 
temperature the material is no longer conducting. This suggests that a 
minimum temperature is required before the electrons or ions are given 
enough energy to move. 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
105 
Q Why does the resistance of a metal increase with temperature? 
A As the temperature rises, the atoms or ions in the lattice are 
given more thermal energy. This energy would normally be shared 
between rotation, translation and vibration. In the lattice the atom 
or ion is fixed on its lattice site and cannot rotate or translate. 
Therefore, the vibration of the atom or ion increases dramatically 
with temperature, effectively making the cross-section of the atom 
bigger (Figure 5.3). The electrons or ions passing through the lat- 
tice have a greater chance of colliding with the ‘larger’ atoms and 
not passing through the lattice. This means the resistance of the 
conduct or gradually increases with temperature. 
Lattice 
at low 
temperature 
0 . .  
0 . 0  
& 
1. 4: 
.c 
As the temperature 
rises the particles 
vibrate, so acting as . 
though they are larger 
Figure 5.3 Increase in particle 
cross-section as temperature 
rises 
Q Why have insulators not been included on the graph in Figure 
5.2? 
A Insulators have not been included on the graph as they are just 
a special sort of semiconductor and would have a similar shaped 
graph. The temperature required to give the conducting species 
enough energy to move in an insulator is just much greater than 
for a semiconducting material. 
As discussed in Chapter 1, the fundamental properties of a metallic lat- 
tice can be described by the process of each atom contributing one or 
more electrons to a delocalized sea of electrons. This concept can be 

106 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 5.4 Schematic represen- 
tation of the formation of bonding 
and antibonding combinations of 
two s-orbitals 
explained more fully using an extension of molecular orbital theory 
known as 
, : J !  
I 
j 
<;$;::. 
5.2.1 
Band Theory 
In a diatomic molecule formed from two atoms, an atomic orbital on 
one atom combines with an atomic orbital on the another atom, pro- 
viding the orbitals have the correct symmetry. They generate 
and 
\ ) *  - combinations, as shown in Figure 5.4. Each atomic 
orbital creates one molecular orbital. Extending this to 2, 8 or 32 atoms 
generates 2,8 or 32 molecular orbitals (Figure 5.5). Every pair of orbitals 
creates a bonding and antibonding combination. With increasing num- 
bers of atoms, the separation between the levels above (antibonding) and 
below (bonding) the non-bonding line becomes smaller and smaller. For 
an infinite number of atoms (as in a solid state lattice), the difference 
between the energies of the molecular orbitals becomes indistinguishable, 
and the levels are more conveniently drawn as a block to represent the 
virtually continuous band. In between the bands are gaps, where they 
are no molecular orbitals. These are called 
(Figure 5.6). 
0 D 4 
Antibonding 
0 
0 
Bonding 
2 
8 
32 
Figure 5.5 Formation of n mole- 
cular orbitals from n atomic 
orbitals 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
107 
A 
E 
Band gap 
Figure 5.6 Bands and band 
gaps 
Providing the atomic orbitals are large enough, each set of orbitals 
will create a band by overlap with the orbitals on neighbouring atoms 
in the lattice. These can be derived from 
levels. For 
example, sodium has the electronic structure ls22s22p63s1. The first two 
shells of the sodium are held close to the nucleus and do not extend out 
far enough from the lattice point to interact with the orbitals of the atoms 
on neighbouring lattice points. However, the 3s (partially filled) and 3p 
(empty) orbitals are sufficiently large enough in size to overlap with the 
corresponding orbitals on neighbouring atoms to produce a band. 
The outer electrons from the atoms are then placed in the bands in a 
similar way to molecular orbital theory. This electronic arrangement 
leads to different properties, depending on the level of filling of the bands. 
The highest energy band containing electrons is referred to as the 
as it contains the outer (valence) electrons. The lowest energy empty 
band above the valence band is called the 
The sepa- 
ration between the valence and conduction bands dictates the overall 
electronic properties. 
For conduction to occur, an electron must be able to move to a new 
energy level. A material with a filled valence band and a large energy 
gap between this level and the conduction band is an insulator, since 
there is a large energy barrier for movement of an electron to a new level. 
I 
. : 
+ ; this is given the symbol N(E), and is determined for a small 
increment of energy dE. Figure 5.7 shows three different band diagrams. 
The shaded portion of the band is occupied and the unshaded portion 
of the band is empty. The width of the band depends on the degree of 
overlap between the atomic orbitals. 
and 
The concentration of energy levels within a band is called the 

108 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
I 
A 
E ‘ I  
B 
b 
E ‘ I  
B 
A 
E 
‘
I
 
~~~ 
Figure 5.7 Density of states dia- 
grams for (i) and (iii) conductors 
and (ii) semiconductodinsulator 
Q The band structures of two solids are shown in Figure 5.8. Which 
band structure is indicative of good overlap? 
E 
Figure 5.8 Density of state dia- 
grams for good and poor overlap 
I 
I1 
A Strongly overlapping atomic orbitals produce broad bands, as 
in (i). Weakly overlapping atomic orbitals produce narrow bands. 
For this reason, for orbitals with the same principal quantum num- 
ber (main energy level), the s bands tend to be broader than p, 
owing to better overlap. 
The separation of the bands depends on the original separation of the 
atomic orbitals. If the original atomic orbitals were very close in energy, 
the bands will also be very close in energy. If the overlap of the orbitals 
is good and the original orbitals were close in energy, the bands can 
overlap as shown in Figure 5.7(iii). 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
109 
The change in conductivity with temperature in Figure 5.2, for a con- 
ductor and semiconductor, can now be explained. For conduction to 
occur, the electrons must have enough energy to move to a vacancy in 
another energy level. For this reason, conduction does not occur in filled 
bands as the electrons have no vacancy to move to. The energy separa- 
tion between the valence and conduction levels in a conductor is very 
small, as the bands are overlapping or partially filled. This means very 
little energy is required to move an electron to a new level where it can 
move. Movement of an electron also results in a vacancy (or hoic) in the 
level it has just moved from. In a semiconductor, the band gap between 
bands is significant but small, typically 1-3 eV. At low temperature, there 
is not enough energy to overcome this gap and the material is not con- 
ducting. However, as the temperature rises the electrons gain enough 
energy to jump the gap and the material becomes conducting. An insu- 
lating material would have a band gap of much greater than 3 eV (e.g. 
for diamond the band gap is 6 eV). There is not enough energy to jump 
this gap at practical temperatures which would allow the material to be 
used as a semiconductor. 
Table 5.1 Typical band gaps (ev) of insulators and semiconductors 
Insulators 
Semiconductors 
C (diamond) 
6 
NaCl 
9 
NaBr 
8 
KF 
11 
KCI 
9 
Si 
1 
Ge 
0.7 
GaAs 
1.4 
InP 
1.3 
Sn (grey) 
0.1 
Materials which naturally have a small band gap, like silicon and ger- 
manium, are called h fn-iri i5ic semiconductors. Examples of some intrin- 
sic semiconductors with their band gaps are given in Table 5.1. Elements 
and compounds which are not semiconducting in the pure state can be 
made semiconducting by d o ~ k g .  These materials are called extr.ini.;k 
semiconductors. Doping involves replacing a very small amount of the 
element in the lattice with another element with either fewer or more 
electrons per atom. The doping element must have energy levels similar 
to those of the host. Figure 5.9 shows the effect of doping silicon, with 
electronic configuration 1 s22s22p63s23p2, with aluminium (one less 
electron) and phosphorus (one more electron). The valence band of 
phosphorus creates a donor band, which lies at higher energy than the 
valence band of the silicon host (owing to the higher effective nuclear 
charge). The donor band is closer in energy to the conduction band of 

1 10 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
silicon than the silicon valence band. Hence, promotion of an electron 
from the donor band to the conduction band in the doped material 
requires less energy, and will occur at a lower temperature than in the 
pure material. This process creates a ' 
' extrinisic semiconductor, 
where the n stands for negative. This is because the charge carriers added 
by the phosphorus are electrons which are negatively charged. The oppo- 
site is true for addition of aluminium. Addition of very small amounts 
of aluminium creates a conduction band lower in energy than the host 
silicon lattice. For each aluminium, a hole (a vacancy for an electron) is 
added. These holes can accept an electron from the valence band, again 
decreasing the energy barrier for conduction. This type of extrinsic semi- 
conductor is called ' 
', where p stands for positive, because the 
charge carriers added by the aluminium are positive holes. 
E 
A 
E 
I 
Conduction 
I band 
Donor 
E n 
-f4.rfL. Acceptor 
1 - - 
... 
11 
111 
Figure 5.9 Effect on the band 
structure of doping silicon (i) with 
phosphorus (ii) and aluminium (iii) 
Q Why does the aluminium conduction band lie at lower energy 
than the silicon conduction band? 
A Aluminium lies to the left of silicon in the Periodic Table. Its 
atom has one fewer proton and so the nuclear charge is more effec- 
tively screened. The conduction band of aluminium will, therefore, 
lie at lower energy. 
At T = 0 K the electrons sequentially fill the molecular orbitals accord- 
ing to the Aufbau principle (two at a time, with opposing spin). The 
level to which a band structure is filled is call the 
. If the 
Fermi level lies within a band the material is expected to be conducting. 
If the Fermi level lies at the top of a band, it is normally drawn mid- 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
Ill 
way between this band and the next (Figure 5.10). In this case the mate- 
rial is semiconducting or insulating. 
I 
I 
EF 
InEF 
I 
Conductor 
Semiconductor 
Figure 5.10 Fermi levels of a 
conductor and semiconductor 
At temperature above T = 0 K the population (P) of the orbitals has 
a Boltzmann-type distribution which is described by the Fernii-Diratr 
distribution function: 
1 
where p is the zhcmicid poteritia! (the energy level for which P = lh). 
Band Theory: A Case Study of the First-row Transition 
Metal Oxides 
Band theory can successfully be used to explain the marked difference 
in conduction behaviour of the oxides of the early and late transition 
Figure 5.1 1 Sodium chloride 
metals of the first period. The first-row transition metal monoxides 
structure of the first-row transition 
form the halite structure as shown in Figure 5.11. Each metal ion is in 
metal monoxides 
Transition metal in octahedral hole 
(positions - underlined numbers) 
Oxide 

112 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
V2+ 
02- 
% 
fig 
Figure 5.12 Overlap of tZg 
orbitals to form a band for an 
early transition metal monoxide 
an octahedral ligand field which splits the d-orbitals into tZg and e, levels. 
The close proximity of the metal atoms mean that these levels should 
overlap and form bands (Figure 5.12). 
The differences in conductivity of the transition metal monoxides can 
easily be observed from their colour. Nickel(I1) oxide is green, which is 
the same colour expected for a discrete nickel(I1) complex in solution. 
Visible light of a specific wavelength is absorbed, corresponding to the 
difference between two well-separated energy levels. This indicates that 
the nickel ions within the structure are behaving diwch$, just like they 
would do in solution. In contrast, vanadium(I1) oxide is black. When a 
material appears black to the eye it is absorbing light over the full visi- 
ble range, implying that there are a lot of energy levels close together. 
This is the colour expected for a conductor with a band structure, where 
the titanium ions are acting cooperatif elis. 
These differences can be explained by considering the different location 
of the valence d-electrons. For the vanadium, the valence electrons are in 
the 
orbitals. These orbitals point towards each other and can overlap 
to form a band. This creates a partially filled band and hence a good con- 
ductor, as expected from Figure 5.12. In contrast, the unpaired valence 
electrons for nickel are in the eg level. These orbitals are separated from 
each other by oxygen atoms, which prevents good overlap. These orbitals 
remain localized on the nickel ions, as shown in Figure 5.13. Hence in 
nickel oxide the atoms behave discretely, and it is an insulator. 
Band theory should be treated with some caution. The presence of 
bands in solid state structures is well supported by X-ray emission 
and absorption data where energy is emitted (or absorbed) over a range 
relating to the band structure. However, even in this simple case, band 
theory fails to explain why MnO is insulating. In the argument used 
above, MnO has electron vacancies in the t,, and should be conducting. 
As a general guide, the following rules can be used to predict whether 
overlap is likely to be good between the d-orbitals of transition metal 
compounds: 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
113 
Localized orbitals 
% 
t2B 
2P 
1. The formal charge on the cation should be small 
2. The cation should occur early in the transition series 
3. The cation should be in the second (or third) transition series 
4. The difference in electronegativity between the cation and anion 
should be small (for the same reasons noted for ionic solids in Section 
5.2.3) 
5.2.2 Superconductivity 
Superconductors are a special sort of material which conducts with no 
resistance below a temperature called the : 
!-i I 1 c,;i I c ~ a  
'1 z r - - .  
* 
9 : \. (Figure 
5.14). As we have seen, the conductivity of conductors falls with increas- 
ing temperature, as the lattice vibrations increase and hinder the flow of 
current. In a superconductor the electrons are thought to move in pairs 
with the lattice vibrations in a ctmertcd process, so there is no resis- 
tance. Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer' proposed a theory (called BCS 
theory) to explain superconductivity involving the movement of electrons 
with opposite spin in pairs. When an electron moves past a lattice point, 
Semiconductor 
0 2 
2 
.- 
m 
Temperature 
Figure 5.13 Discrete molecular 
orbitals of nickel(l1) oxide 
Figure 5.14 Resistance of con- 
ductors, semiconductors and 
superconductors as a function of 
temperature 

1 14 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
the nearest positively charged atom is drawn towards it slightly. The 
local distortion of the lattice creates an area rich in positive charge which 
a second electron is attracted towards. This effect continues throughout 
the lattice, allowing movement of the electrons in pairs. Therefore, the 
weak lattice vibrations which occur at low temperature assist the super- 
conducting mechanism. However, above the critical temperature, the lat- 
tice vibrations become too strong and overcome the slight attraction 
between the electrons, and the superconductivity is lost. 
5.2.3 
Ionic Conductivity 
Ionic compounds, like sodium chloride, are normally considered 
insulating in the solid state. This is due to the marked difference in 
electronegativity of the cations and anions, which creates a large band 
gap of typically 6-12 eV between the valence and conduction bands. 
Therefore, ionic solids have a band structure similar to an insulator 
(Figure 5.15). The ions and their associated electrons can be thought of 
as fixed on their lattice sites. 
E 
I 
Conduction band 
based on cation 
I 
t 
Large band gap 
Figure 5.15 Band structure of 
sodium chloride 
Q Would you expect orbitals based on the sodium cation or the 
chloride anion to be larger? 
A The chloride anion is negatively charged, and owing to the 
greater electrostatic repulsion between electrons the orbitals will be 
larger and lie at lower energy. 
However, most lattices are not totally perfect, as will be seen in 
, 
in the lattice. At high temper- 
Chapter 6. There are often 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
115 
ature, often close to the melting point, ionic solids can become con- 
ducting. The thermal treatment gives the ions enough energy to move 
from their lattice sites into a vacancy, as shown schematically in Figure 
5.16. Some typical conductivities for electronic and ionic conductors are 
given in Table 5.2. It is apparent that ionic conductivities in solids are 
many orders of magnitude less than electronic conductivities. 
I 
Table 5.2 Typical electrical conductivities 
Type of material 
Electronic ( n l  cm-9 
lonic ( W  cm-l) 
Metal 
10-1-1 0 5  
Semiconductor 
10-5-1 02 
Insulator 
<10-’0 
Ionic solids, e.g. NaCl 
- 
Fast ion conductor 
- 
Molten salts 
- 
- 
10-18-1 0-4 
10-3-1 0’ 
10-3-1 01 
I 
Figure 5.1 6 Schematic diagram 
of ionic conduction in sodium 
chloride 
Conduction can occur by ions either moving to an empty lattice site 
site. An interstitial site is a gap in the lattice 
or moving to an ; t : i a  
i - 1 -  

I 16 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
which is large enough to accept an ion, but is not a norrnal lattice site. 
This type of behaviour will be discussed further in Chapter 6. 
Solid Electrolytes or Fast Ion Conductors 
A small number of solids have an unusual structure, where only one set 
of ions is fixed on its lattice sites. The other ions are free to muve through 
the lattice. These materials are intermediate between the ionic solids 
(where all the ions are fixed on their sites) and a liquid electrolyte (where 
both sets of ions move). 
Ionic conductors do not pass the same level of current as normal 
electronic conductors. However, as they are often very high melting point 
ceramic materials (1500 "C), they can be used at temperatures at which 
metallic conductors would melt. Typically, they consist of non-stoichio- 
metric materials (Chapter 4) with open tunnels or layers containing 
vacant sites. Conduction occurs by the ions moving between the sites 
which are not totally filled. 
As previously discussed, ions on fixed lattice sites normally only vibrate 
and do not translate or rotate. In the fast ion conductors this is not the 
case: one set of ions can migrate. This type of behaviour normally only 
occurs at high temperature, and is more common with cations than 
anions, owing to the smaller size of the cations. It is noteworthy that this 
phenomenon is therefore often linked to only one particularly high tem- 
perature polymorph of a material. For example, silver iodide is practi- 
cally insulating at room temperature but at high temperature becomes 
conducting. This is due to a structural change to the a-AgI polymorph, 
which has an open structure in which the silver ions can move. 
One extremely important member of this class is sodium P-alumina. 
P-Alumina has a structure based on close-packed layers of oxygen with 
ordered oxygen vacancies. Sodium cations reside in the vacancies creat- 
ed by the oxygen deficiency and migrate from site to site. This process 
is particularly easy, as there are many more sites available than sodium 
atoms and the sodium cation is small compared with the oxygen anion. 
Schematically this could be represented as shown in Figure 5.17 
Anion conductors are more unusual owing to the much larger size of 
anions. Most are a result of defect lattices and in many cases these 
materials have structures related to the fluorite lattice (Chapter 1); for 
example, the high-temperature polymorphs of PbF, or ZrO,. Anion 
vacancies on the lattice points increase with temperature and give more 
empty sites to which the anions can move. The cubic polymorph of zir- 
conia, with the fluorite structure, can be stabilized at lower temperature 
by using dopants to produce \i,.hili/uci 
J I I  LWW. The introduction of 
calcium or yttrium on the zirconium site creates anion vacancies for 
charge balance. 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
I17 
0 Sodium cation 
C:l 
Vacancy 
0 Oxide anion 
Figure 5.1 7 Schematic diagram 
of sodium cation conduction in 
sodium p-alumina 
Q Would ionic conductors or electronic conductors have the high- 
er conductivity? 
A Electronic conductors. Ionic conductivity is much lower as the 
ions are much larger. This means ions require more energy to move 
through the lattice and overcome energy losses, such as collision 
with the fixed lattice ions. 
In principle, a whole range of applications can be envisaged using 
these solid electrochemical cells in situations where cells containing liq- 
uids could not function, e.g. some fuel cells. 
. ” 
c 
I** Y C S n u n M e .  . 
ri+.swM*r--*~ 
.-2 * I - OI 
7 
e we- 
*-,%a 
,V*r. 
I
”
 
5.3 
Magnetic Behaviour 
In a similar way to their electronic properties, the magnetic properties 
of three-dimensional solids result from the interaction of the metal 
centres. For example, transition metals have partially filled d-orbitals and 
interactions of the electrons in these orbitals can lead to magnetic behav- 
iour. 
In a discrete molecule in solution, the unpaired electrons act totally 
independently and are randomly oriented. For example, divalent nickel 
in both an octahedral and square-planar ligand field is shown in Figure 
5.18. Random orientation of the unpaired electrons and their associat- 
ed magnetic fields, as in the case of octahedral nickel, is known as pa 
maenctwl When all the electrons are paired, as in the case of the 
square-planar nickel complex, the material is called diim,’irneiic. 
In an ordered solid at high temperature, or when the metal centres 
are far apart, the electrons will also behave paramagnetically. The change 
in magnetic moment of a material with temperature is called its 1ikag- 

1 18 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Octahedral 
Square planar 
Figure 5.18 Crystal field diagram 
for octahedral and square-planar 
nickel(l1) 
j . The magnetic susceptibility graph for a paramagnetic 
solid is shown in Figure 5.19. As the temperature is lowered, thermal 
effects can no longer overcome the ordering of the electrons and the level 
of magnetization rises. This behaviour is adopted by the majority of com- 
pounds at high temperature, where thermal disordering overcomes any 
magnetic interaction between the metal centres. The magnetic suscepti- 
bility for a paramagnetic compound is inversely proportional to the tem- 
perature, as described by : 
, .  
where C is a constant 
c 
- -  
X M  - T 
T 
Figure 5.19 Change in 
magnetic susceptibility k) with 
temperature (T) 
In a solid lattice, where the unpaired electrons on neighbouring ions 
are close together, the spins can couple together and lead to a number 
of magnetic ordering mechanisms, as summarized in Table 5.3. 
Interaction of these spins leads to a modification of the Curie law to 
include the temperature at which these mechanisms occur, 8. This is 
called the q. 
t : 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
119 
Table 5.3 Field and temperature dependence of magnetism 
Magnetism 
Effect of external 
Temperature 
Field 
Diamagnetism 
Weak repulsive 
None 
None 
Paramag net ism 
Weak attractive 
1/T 
None 
Ferromagnetism 
magnetic field 
dependence 
dependence 
Antiferromagnetism 
Tc 
T 
tttttttt 
5.3.1 Ferromagnetism 
If all the unpaired electrons align themselves parallel with the external 
magnetic field, the magnetic material is said to be : 
. This 
leads to the magnetic susceptibility graph shown in Figure 5.20. A sharp 
rise occurs in the magnetization when the electrons align with the field. 
The temperature at which this occurs is called the 
<r,>* 
5.3.2 Antiferrornagnetism 
If the magnetic spins on neighbouring atoms align antiparallel, the mate- 
rial is described as 
' 
: 
and there is an overall drop in the 
magnetization. This behaviour shows itself in a sudden drop in the mag- 
Figure 5.20 Magnetic suscepti- 
bility curve for a ferromagnetic 
material 

120 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 5.21 Magnetic suscepti- 
bility curve for an antiferromag- 
netic material 
Figure 5.22 Structure of a spinel 
and ordering of its magnetic 
moments. Larger arrows repre- 
sent more electrons than do 
smaller ones, giving an overall 
moment despite the antiferro- 
magnetic ordering 
Magnetic 
moment 
TN 
T 
tltltltl 
netic susceptibility at a particular temperature, as shown in Figure 5.21. 
The temperature at which this occurs is called the 
(TN)' 
5.3.3 Ferrimagnetism 
The structure of a spinel and the magnetic moments of its electrons is 
shown in Figure 5.22. Spinels such as CoFe,O, contain two magnetic 
ions on two different sites, one octahedral and one tetrahedral in the 
ratio 2: 1. When these materials order antiferromagnetically, there is an 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
121 
overall positive magnetic moment as there are more unpaired electrons 
on one site than on the other. 
These three magnetic ordering mechanisms are the simplest and rely 
on the 180" pairing of spins. This is not necessarily always the case. For 
example, a 
Y 
o ; a r  
-
8
 'r 
-1: 
~ has its spins aligned at an angle to 
the field. The arrangement can be quite complex, leading to a magnetic 
unit cell much bigger than the nuclear unit cell, with unusual structures, 
e.g. in the shape of a helix. 
5.3.4 Strength of Magnetic Interactions 
The magnetic ordering temperatures (T, and TN) 
are generally depen- 
dent on a number of factors, some of which are directional. Therefore, 
magnetic ordering may not occur simultaneously in all directions. The 
following lists some of the factors which affect the magnetic ordering 
temper at ure . 
Number of Unpaired Electrons 
As the number of unpaired electrons increases, the magnetic ordering 
temperature rises. For example, in Table 5.4: as the number of d-elec- 
trons increases the magnetic ordering temperature rises. 
Table 5.4 Effect of number of unpaired electrons on magnetic ordering temperature 
for Sr,MO,*- 
~~~~~~~~~~~ 
~ 
Number of unpaired d-electrons in M4+ 
1 
2 
4 
Ordering temperature (K) 
10 
35 
60 
Distance between the Interacting Metal Centres 
In a way similar to holding bar magnets close together, the closer the 
distance the stronger is the interaction. This can lead to materials which 
magnetically order in two dimensions at much higher temperature than 
they order in three dimensions. For example, Figure 5.23 shows a double 
layer of magnetic centres which are closely separated in two dimensions 
but are much further apart in the third. This type of structure can lead 
to different magnetic ordering mechanisms in the different directions. 
For example, Rb,M,F, (M = Co, Mn)596 orders antiferromagnetically in 
the layers but ferromagnetically between them. 

122 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 5.23 Ferromagnetic 
ordering between the layers and 
antiferromagnetic ordering in the 
layers of a bidimensional magnet 
Figure 5.24 Superexchange 
mechanism 
5.3.5 Superexchange Mechanism 
The transition metal monoxides, e.g. NiO, FeO and COO, magnetically 
order by a process known as ' 
'. This process involves inter- 
action of the transition metal d-electrons with the oxygen p-electrons, 
resulting in an antiferromagnetic arrangement of the spins on the tran- 
sition metal ions (Figure 5.24). 
Ni 
0 
Ni 
Spin of electron 
in Ni dX2-y2 orbital 
1 
In NiO, for example, divalent nickel has eight d-electrons, which gives 
rise to two unpaired electrons in the eg set for octahedral coordination. 
It crystallizes with the sodium chloride structure, where the nickel 
d-orbitals overlap with the oxide p-orbitals along each cell edge. For 
example, each nickel has one electron in the d,, orbital which can inter- 
act with the electron in the oxygen p, orbital and form an antiparallel 
spin pair. The other electron in the oxygen p, orbital must be antipar- 
allel to that, as it is in the same orbital as the other oxygen electron and 
each orbital can contain only two electrons of opposite spin. The other 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
I23 
electron in the oxygen p, in turn interacts with the next electron in a d,, 
orbital on the next nickel, which must be antiparallel. This creates a chain 
of antiparallel spins running through the structure. This process occurs 
simultaneously in all three directions, and gives a magnetic lattice as 
shown in Figure 5.25. The magnetic unit cell must have an identical elec- 
tron with the same spin on each corner (i.e the definition of a unit cell 
is the smallest repeating unit, which shows the full symmetry of the sys- 
tem). The magnetic unit cell is therefore 42 times the nuclear cell para- 
meter, as shown in the diagram. 
Nuclear unit cell 
- - - - -  1
-
1
-
 Magnetic unit cell 
Figure 5.25 Nuclear and mag- 
netic unit cell for nickel oxide 
5.3.6 Magnetic Frustration 
Magnetic frustration was first recognized in sodium titanate, NaTiO,. It 
results from triangularly related lattice points which house magnetic ions 
as shown in Figure 5.26. A typical antiferrornagnet would rotate freely 
to adjust the neighbouring spins, so they are exactly antiparallel to each 
other. The arrangement (topology) of the atoms in this material, with 
triangular arrays of magnetic ions, means the pairwise exchange cannot 
be satisfied for all three pairs at once. The lattice is described as 
Q , and normally a compromise is reached where the spins lie at 
120" to each other. 

124 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 5.26 Magnetic frustration 
5.3.7 Spin Glass 
Figure 5.27 Exclusion of mag- 
netic field from a superconductor 
A spin glass is a material which below a particular temperature locks its 
spins into a random orientation. This means there is no regular order- 
ing, and the spins just seem to have frozen in a way reminiscent of a 
glass (hence the name). 
5.3.8 The Meissner Effect 
Magnetism was believed to destroy superconductivity until very recently. 
Superconductors have a unique way of preventing magnetic flux 
penetrating the sample. When a magnet is brought close to a super- 
conductor below the critical temperature, a current of electrons is set up 
on the surface (Figure 5.27). As a moving charge creates a magnetic field, 
this exactly opposes the external magnetic field and prevents the exter- 
nal magnetic flux penetrating the sample. This is known as the Meissner 
effect. This effect is observed as repulsion of a magnet, and is strong 
enough to cause a magnet to levitate above the superconductor. This 
effect is dependent on the applied field and can occur in two different 
ways: 
Above the 
Below the 
critical 
critical 
temperature 
temperature 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
125 
Type I :  The transition between the normal state and the superconduct- 
ing state is a one-step process, and the material is either perfectly dia- 
magnetic or not at a particular applied field. 
Type 2: This behaviour is not so clear cut. At small values of the applied 
field, the material behaves in the same way as a type 1 superconductor 
and there is not penetration by the field. Similarly, at high values of the 
applied field the field readily penetrates the whole sample. However, at 
intermediate values, between the two extremes, there is partial penetra- 
tion by the field and the sample exhibits a complex structure. There are 
mixed regions in the superconducting and normal state. This is known 
as the 
* t  . 
. . This means that in type 2 materials the magnetiza- 
tion diminishes gradually rather than suddenly (Figure 5.28) 
z! 
E 
0 
Normal 3 
Superconducting 
Temperature 
Type 1 
z! 
iE; 
0 
Normal 
juperconducting 1 
Temperature 
Type 2 
I .  Band Theory 
The differences in properties between semiconductors and conduc- 
tors explained by the interaction of the whole lattice. Intrinsic and 
extrinsic semiconductors and donor/acceptor bands. Simple exam- 
ple of band theory in action. 
2. Ionic Conductivity 
Differences between normal ionic solids and ionic conductors. 
Temperature dependence of conductivity. 
3. Magnetic Ordering Mechanisms 
Paramagnetism, diamagnetism, ferromagnetism and antiferromag- 
Figure 5.28 Field and tempera- 
ture dependence of type-1 and 
type-2 superconductivity 

126 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
A. R. West, Basic Solid State Chemistry, Wiley, New York, 1997. 
D. W. Bruce and D. O’Hare, Inorganic Materials, Wiley, New York, 
M. T. Weller, Inorganic Materials Chemistry, Oxford University Press, 
J. E. Huheey, E. A. Keiter and R. L. Keiter, Inorganic Chemistry, 4th 
1992. 
Oxford, 1994. 
edn., Harper/Collins, New York, 1993. 

Electronic and Magnetic Behaviour of Solids 
127 
6. Sketch the shape of graph you would expect for the type-2 super- 
conductor YBa,Cu,O, for each of the following: 
(a) Conductivity versus temperature. 
(b) Resistance versus temperature. 
1. J. Bardeen, L. Cooper and J. R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev., 1957, 108, 
2. B. L. Chamberland, M. P. Herrero-Fernandez and T. A. Hewston, J. 
3. P. Adler, J. Solid State Chem., 1994, 108, 275. 
4. S. E. Dann, D. B. Currie, M. T. Weller, M. F. Thomas and A. D. 
5. E. Gurewitz and J. Makovsky, Phys. Rev. B, 1976, 14, 2071. 
6. R. Navarro, J. J. Smit, L. J. De Jongh, W. J. Craman and D. J. W. 
1175. 
Solid State Chem., 1985, 59 111. 
Al-Rawwas, J. Muter. Chem., 1993, 12, 1231. 
Idjo, Physicu B, 1976, 83, 97. 

Non- s toichiometry 
The existence of coloured specimens of normally colourless minerals, 
such as sodium chloride and alumina, has been known for centuries. 
Some sodium chloride crystals appear yellow due to the selective absorp- 
tion of blue light, and sapphireshubies are coloured forms of a-alumi- 
na. The coloured forms of these minerals are due to 
. In sodium 
chloride, excess sodium can lead to additional mobile electrons which 
can be trapped on vacant anion sites, giving the solid a yellow hue. In 
the gemstones, the colour is generated by substitution of a few of the 
aluminium cations by other trivalent cations, such as chromium, in a 
The purpose of this chapter is to explain the difference between 
and 
i 
and the effect these mechanisms have on 
solid state structure and properties. The principal of solid solutions will 
also be introduced to show how the solid state scientist can use the size 
and preferred geometry of cations to synthesize new materials. 
By the end of this chapter you should be able to: 
Understand the differences between point and extended defects 
Describe the differences between Schottky and Frenkel defects 
Use the principal of crystallographic shear to explain the clus- 
tering of defects 
Describe the principles involving the formation of a solid solu- 
tion of compounds 

Non-stoichiometry 
129 
6.1 
Thermodynamics and Imperfect Crystals 
~~ 
In Chapter 1, we discussed the ;wi-ic; t crystal. A perfect crystal has all its 
atomslions at rest, firmly rooted on their lattice sites. Even if the temper- 
ature was at absolute zero, and there were no lattice vibrations, this situ- 
ation would not exist. As the temperature rises, as we have seen in Chapter 
5, atomslions vibrate on their lattice sites and can even gain enough ener- 
gy to leave their position in the lattice altogether. Therefore, the perfect 
arrangement certainly does not exist at any reasonable temperature. 
The major reason for this is that a certain concentration of defects 
cause an increase in the overall !‘r.cc mcrgj of the system: 
AG = AH - TiU 
At first thought the introduction of vacancies in an ionic lattice looks 
detrimental; removing ions decreases the number of electrostatic inter- 
actions and the lattice enthalpy. This means AH becomes mure positive 
and less favoured. However, this also leads to defects in the lattice 
which increases the entropy of the system. The effect is most marked 
when the lattice is strongly disturbed when the first defects are intro- 
duced. As the concentration of defects increases, the disruption is not as 
serious. The overall effect of this process is shown in Figure 6.1, where 
a AG minimum is reached for a certain number of defects. As the equa- 
tion contains a TAS term, it follows that the defect concentration is also 
temperature dependent. 
I 
Equilibrium 
number of 
defects 
Number of defects 
Figure 6.1 Change in energy 
terms with an increasing number 
of defects 

130 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
As might be expected, compounds with high lattice energies such as 
highly ionic lattices have relatively few defects, as AH is strongly affect- 
ed by the introduction of vacancies. However, there would be approxi- 
mately 10,000 vacancies in one mole of sodium chloride (1.2 x 
ions), 
at room temperature, which is a significant number! 
6.2 
Types of Defect 
Defects can be broadly classified into two types: 
Intrinsic defects do not effect the stoichiometry of the compound and 
so cannot be ascertained from the chemical formula. Often, intrinsic 
defects also do not affect the long range symmetry of the crystal. 
and 
Q If an intrinsic defect does not affect the stoichiometry, what is 
an extrinsic defect? 
A An extrinsic defect does affect the stoichiometry. This can lead 
to a non-stoichiometric ratio of the cations and anions or the intro- 
duction of other atomshons into the pure crystal. 
The simplest sorts of defect are those based on 
Cations and 
anions are removed, or displaced, randomly in two sorts of defect. 
6.2.1 Schottky Defect 
Figure 6.2 shows a schematic diagram of a 
defect in sodium 
chloride. To maintain charge neutrality, equal numbers of cations and 
anions are removed from the crystal lattice. Although these defects have 
been drawn remotely separated, the defects often 
+ together. The 
reason for this is simple electrostatics: an anion vacancy has a net positive 
charge as it is surrounded by six positively charged cations; conversely, 
a cation vacancy will have a net negative charge as it is surrounded by 
six negatively charged anions. These vacancies and therefore attracted 
towards each other by electrostatic interaction. 

Non-stoichiometry 
131 
6.2.2 Frenkel Defects 
The second type of stoichiometric defect involves the movement of an 
ion on to an + : c -  
t i  i 
‘ 3  site. An interstitial site is a gap in the lattice, 
which is not a normal lattice site. The silver halides most commonly pos- 
sess this type of defect, where the silver cation moves on to the intersti- 
tial site. The cation moves into a site in the centre of a cube of cations 
and anions, as shown in Figure 6.3. 
o Cation 
Anion 
Figure 6.2 Schottky defects con- 
sisting of pairs of cation and 
anion vacancies 
Figure 6.3 Formation of cation 
interstitial in a Frenkel defect. 

132 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
- 4.31- 
5, 
8 
CI 
0 [ 
4.29 
0 
u 
.H 3i 
4.27 
Figure 6.4 Change in lattice 
parameter with x for Fe,,O 
:\ 
Q What is the coordination number of the silver cation in the cen- 
tre of the cube of cations and anions? 
A The silver cation is coordinated to four cations and four anions. 
The Group 1 alkali metal cations, such as sodium, are small and 
highly charged and hence do not form this type of defect. Since the 
interstitial cations are in close proximity to other cations, the elec- 
trostatic repulsion of highly charged species would destabilize this 
structure. 
Frenkel defects also occur in the fluorite structure, where the anion 
normally moves on the interstitial site, such as in CaF,. 
6.2.3 Extrinsic Defects: Non-stochiometry 
Schottky and Frenkel defects do not alter the stoichiometry of the mate- 
rial as they are intrinsic. In non-stoichiometric materials, both types of 
point defect occur, but: 
1. Cation and anion vacancies do not form in pairs 
2. Vacancies and interstitials do not form in pairs 
3. Additional dopant ions can be inserted in the structure 
In general, a non-stoichiometric compound can be defined as one with 
variable composition. However, the major structural features are main- 
tained. For example, Figure 6.4 shows the variation in the cubic lattice 
parameter (a) with oxygen content of Fe,+O, which crystallizes with the 
rock-salt structure. A smooth variation is apparent, gradually reducing 
as the iron content decreases. 

Non-stoichiometry 
133 
Q Why should the lattice parameter shrink in a gradual fashion? 
A As iron is lost from the structure, the remaining iron in the struc- 
ture is oxidized from Fe2+ to Fe3+. The more oxidized ion is small- 
er owing to the contraction caused by the effect of the higher charge 
on the electron cloud. Also, as the defects are introduced randomly 
in the structure, the same overall structure is maintained. 
Such behaviour is distinct from that of stoichiometric materials with 
fixed ratios such as Fe,O,, and Fe,O,, which have different structures. 
There are four different ways in which non-stoichiometric compounds 
can form from a compound AB, as given in Table 6.1. These are 
oxidation and reduction of the metal cation, introduction of vacancies 
or introduction of interstitials. Most examples are in the category where 
the metal is oxidized and more anions are added. The formation of 
more bonds produces an increase in the lattice energy, which compen- 
sates for the energy required to form the defect 
Table 6.1 Formation of non-stoichiometric compounds in the system AB 
Oxidize A 
Reduce A 
Excess anions 
Cation vacancies 
Excess cations 
Anion vacancies 
AB, +X 
A,-XB 
A1 +xB 
A1 +xB 
VO,,, 
x = 0.20 
Fel-xO, x = 0.14 
Zn1,O, 
x = 106 
ZrS,,, 
x = 0.1 
Oxidation of the Metal (Insert Anion lnterstitials) 
Uranium(1V) oxide, UO,, crystallizes with the fluorite structure as shown 
in Figure 6.5. On heating in oxygen, additional oxygen can be taken up 
by the lattice to form the non-stoichiometric material U02+x. There is a 
gradual increase in the lattice parameters as additional oxygen is added 
to the structure. 
As discussed in Chapter 1, fluorite is a structure based on the close 
packing of spheres and it is not immediately obvious how the unit cell 
could accept extra oxygen. The biggest void in the structure is at the cen- 
tre of the cube formed by the eight oxygen ions. 

134 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 6.5 Fluorite structure of 
uranium(lV) oxide 
Figure 6.6 Interstitial site in ura- 
nium(lV) oxide 
I 
I 
e o  
o u  
Q Given that the cell parameter of uranium dioxide is 5.47 A, cal- 
culate the distance from one of the oxide ions to the centre of the 
cube. 
A See Figure 6.6. This distance is just half the body diagonal of a 
cube with cell parameter */2 the cell parameter. This gives a distance 
of approximately 2.37 A. 
fl Interstitial site 
I
1
 
I
1
 
'
I
 
at (%,%,%) 
The oxide ion has a radius of approximately 1.4 A. The void at the 
centre of the cube would not be large enough to accept additional 
oxygen, as the anions would be too close together, without movement of 
the existing lattice anions. The host lattice has to 'make room' for the 
interstitials by creating an oxide vacancy in the host lattice. However, if 
the structure remained the same, this would not create enough room to 
put in extra oxygen, only to put in one interstitial. The stoichiometry 
would remain the same. The extra oxygen can only be inserted after a 
rearrangement of the fluorite lattice, where defects cluster together as 

Non-stoichiometry 
135 
shown in Figure 6.7(ii). For every vacancy created in the anion sublat- 
tice of the fluorite structure, two interstitials can now be inserted. The 
actual position of the interstitial anions is not precisely on (%,%,%), 
but 
is displaced relative to two specific directions. Formation of groups of 
defects is known as a 
1 
.. 
11 
Oxygen 
EI Interstitial 
i- Vacancy 
Q What is the formula of the compound formed from this defect 
cluster? 
A From atom counting, the original formula would be U,O,: 
U = (8 x '/8) + (6 x %) = 4 and 0 = (8 x 1) = 8 
However, formation of the cluster results in two interstitials for 
every one vacancy in the fluorite lattice. Therefore host lattice = 
U,O, + 0, 
= U,O, = UO,,,. 
Figure 6.7 Formation of a defect 
cluster 
By alteration of the host lattice and an ordered incorporation of 
extra oxygen, the compound has now become non-stoichiometric. 

136 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Oxidation of the Metal (Cation Vacancies) 
Fe,-xO or wiistite has probably the most studied defect structure. The 
hypothetical compound where x = 0 would crystallize with a perfect 
version of the halite structure where iron lies in an octahedral site 
surrounded by oxygen atoms. Removal of some of the iron should just 
give iron vacancies with the remaining irons remaining in an octahedral 
environment. 
Diffraction studies have shown that there are more iron vacancies on 
the octahedral sites than required by the formula of the compound. In 
addition, some of the iron ions appear to be in tetrahedral sites. 
Q At what position would you expect there to be vacant tetrahe- 
dral sites in this face-centred cubic lattice? 
A The halite structure consists of a cubic close-packed lattice where 
all octahedral holes are filled. However, the tetrahedral holes which 
are generated by a cubic close-packed array of spheres (Chapter 1) 
will be empty. There are a number of available holes, for example 
at (%,'A,%). 
The ions in the tetrahedral sites have been shown by Mossbauer 
spectroscopy to have an oxidation state of +3. In a way similar to the 
uranium oxide structure, the distance between the closest octahedral 
holes and the tetrahedral hole is too short to allow both sites to be occu- 
pied simultaneously. In this case, four vacancies on the octahedral sites 
are created for every interstitial tetrahedral ion, as shown in Figure 6.8. 
This type of cluster occurs at low values of x. As x increases, larger clus- 
ters form in which there are thirteen vacancies and four interstitial ions. 
This is called a 
(Figure 6.9). 
Reduction of the Metal (Interstitial Cations) 
Both types of reduction mechanism are more rare than the analogous 
oxidation mechanisms. In particular, the concentration of cation inter- 
stitials is very small. For example, x would be 0.00001 for Zn,+xO. When 
zinc oxide is heated above 600 "C, the solid changes colour from white 
to yellow. This colour change is due to an electron transfer. On heating, 
the entropy term in the equation for free energy (Section 6.1) increases 
dramatically, resulting in oxygen vacancies. To balance the charges, 

Non-stoichiometry 
137 
0 Fe 
0 0  
S Vacancy 
Cation interstitial 
0 Normal cation 
o Oxygen 
Cation vacancy 
some divalent zinc ions must be reduced. These ions migrate to intersti- 
tial positions in the lattice closer to other zinc ions. The formation of 
the mixed valence ions in close proximity allows electron transfer between 
the ions. In zinc oxide, this transition is in the visible region, and hence 
zinc oxide appears to be yellow when hot. 
Reduction of the Metal (Anion Vacancies) 
Figure 6.8 Formation of vacan- 
cies in the halite structure of 
Fe,$ 
Figure 6.9 Koch-Cohen cluster 
VO,,, x = 0.1, has an oxygen-deficient lattice based on the halite struc- 
ture. The distribution of vacancies is random at very high temperature, 
but they cluster together, along certain directions, as the temperature 
falls. 

138 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 6.10 The perovskite cube 
6.3 Anion Vacancies in More Complex Systems 
I x c  
s-T.9 
~ 
.,I 
7. 
I 
.
_
”
 
Ordered anion vacancies are partly responsible for some important solid 
state phenomena, such as superconductivity, as well as unusual cation 
geometries. For example, the supercondu 
YBa,Cu,O, is built from 
three oxygen-deficient blocks of the 
(ABO,) structure (Figure 
6.10). In the parent structure, B is in an octahedral hole, coordinated to 
I 
B cation 
0 Anion 
A cation 
0 
Q What is the coordination number of the A cation in Figure 6. lo? 
A The coordination number is 12 (as A is in the close-packed 
layers, it must be 12; as a reminder see Chapter 1). 
Ordering of the cations, and anions as shown in Figure 6.1 lb, and 
ordered removal of the oxygen from the BO, octahedra (Figure 6.1 lc) 
produces an orthorhombic material. This leads to copper-oxygen square 
planes and square pyramids. This arrangement is thought to be the 
source of its unusual electronic behaviour, where the superconducting 

Non-stoichiometry 
139 
o Oxygen 
Copper 
0 
Barium 
0 Yttrium 
planes (CuO square pyramids) are separated by insulating one- 
Figure 6.1 1 'Formation of 
dimensional chains (Cu-0 planes). The recurring structural features of 
orthorhombic YB%%o~ by (b) 
cation ordering and (c) ordered 
... . .... .. ... .. 
-. 
. . 
. . . .. .. .. __. 
. . _ _  , . . __ 
. .. 
-. . . 
.... . . 
- - 
~ 
j 
Q What are the coordination numbers of the two different A 
cations in Figure 6.1 lc? 
A Owing to the systematic removal of oxygen from the lattice, yttri- 
um and barium have different coordination numbers. For yttrium 
the coordination number is eight, but for barium it is ten. 
superconducting oxides are discussed further in Chapter 7. 
As the superconductivity depends largely on both the oxygen content 
and ordering, the preparation of a good sample of YBa,Cu,O, requires 
a low-temperature oxygen anneal at approximately 450-500 "C. 
The so-called Ruddlesden-Popper phases are based on ordered 
arrangements of perovskite blocks and halite layers of the form 
(ABO,),(AO), where n = 1, 2, 3. The compound Sr,Fe,O,, which con- 
tains iron(IV), has this structure and is shown in Figure 6.12. A graph 
of the change in its cell parameters with increasing oxygen content sug- 
removal of oxygen 

140 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 6.13 Change in the c 
parameter with increasing oxygen 
content 
Perovskite 
double layer 
Halite 
Sr,Fe,O, oxygen content 
8 
6
0
 
Contract 
1 
0
0
 
6
0
 
v 
Figure 6.12 Contraction of the 
unit cell on removal of the oxy- 
gen between the perovskite 
blocks 
20.20 
t 
Contract 
20.15 
a 
2 
g 20.10 
a 
0 
u 
3 20.05 
- 
gests a dramatic change in the structure when a whole oxygen has been 
removed from the structure (Figure 6.13). This can be explained in terms 
of ordered removal of the oxygen ions from the oxygen site linking the 
two perovskite blocks. Initially, the lattice parameter expands as oxygen 
is randomly removed from the site where the iron(1V) is reduced to 

Non-stoichiometry 
141 
iron(III), where trivalent iron has a larger size due to the lower nuclear 
charge and hence poorer electrostatic force on the electrons. However, 
when all of the oxygen is removed from this site, the cell parameter 
shrinks dramatically. This occurs to allow better coordination of the A 
cation to the remaining oxygens in the square pyramids. 
One problem with any material with a layered structure is that these 
materials often exhibit stacking faults. As the structure is the same in 
two dimensions, it can easily be disrupted to produce the wrong stack- 
ing sequence. As the layer sequence becomes more complex, the likeli- 
hood of stacking faults increases. Many Ruddlesden-Popper phases exist 
for n = 1, but as n increases the number of known phases decreases. This 
is likely to be related to the increased formation of stacking faults, which 
prevents isolation of the perfectly ordered phase for characterization 
purposes. 
6.4 
Colour Centres 
Coloured sodium chloride crystals are due to the formation of non- 
stoichiometric vacancies in the anion lattice. This vacancy is capable of 
trapping an electron, which can then move between a number of quan- 
tized levels. These transitions occur in the visible region and generate the 
yellow colour. This type of vacancy in the anion sublattice of an alkali 
metal halide is called a Farbcnrcentre or F centre. F centres can be 
generated by irradiation to ionize the anion, or by exposure of the lattice 
to excess alkali-metal cation vapour. Both procedures result in more 
alkali-metal cations than halide anions in the lattice. 
6.5 
Crystallographic Shear 
Point defects and defect clusters occur randomly throughout the 
structure. However, it should not be surprising that these defects often 
cluster together. For example, the mismatch of cations and anions 
produced by Schottky defects produces a charge imbalance which could 
be eliminated by putting two defects together. 
In the ReO, structure, the lattice is composed of corner-sharing ReO, 
octahedra. Reduction of the compound in a mixture of hydrogen and 
nitrogen at high temperature produces oxygen vacancies in the lattice. 

142 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Q What is the formula of an infinite structure made up of corner- 
sharing octahedra? 
A As in all infinite structures, the formula can be derived by con- 
sidering the formula of a single unit cell derived from atom shar- 
ing. In a ReO, octahedron, all the oxygens are shared by two Re 
atoms. Therefore, to each Re the oxygen is only worth one-half. 
This gives the formula ReO, 
Every vacancy that is introduced affects two octahedra. Each rheni- 
um atom becomes five coordinate. Dislocation of the remaining struc- 
ture in the plane, perpendicular to the vacancy, produces edge-sharing 
octahedra. By performing this process, called crystallographic sfnear, 
each rhenium atom becomes surrounded by six oxygens (Figure 6.14). 
Anion + 
Figure 6.14 Crystallographic 
shear 
Q What is the formula of the new sheared portion of the cell? 
A Consider the sheared cluster of four atoms shown in Figure 6.14. 
In the plane, six atoms are shared outside of the cluster with one 
other atom, giving 6 x l/2 = 3, and four are within the cluster, count- 
ing one each. There are eight atoms above and below the cation in 
the plane (as it is octahedral). Hence the formula is A,O,, or 
An03n-l. 
Such shearing can occur randomly or in an ordered fashion. A ran- 
dom distribution of such shearing planes are call Wadsky cfefccts. They 
give a continuous range of non-stochiometric compositions. 
A family of materials exists with the formula An03n-2 
(n = 20, 24, 25 

Non-stoichiometry 
143 
and 40) in which this shearing process does not occur randomly. Here 
sheared units are clustered together and separated by portions of AO, 
in an ordered fashion. These phases are stoichiometric ordered phases 
where each sheared plane is separated by a constant number of normal 
units. For example, A,,O,, 
has one sheared plane separated by eleven 
normal units. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
- ................. 
.............. 
. . . . .  
.
.
.
 
.
.
 
I 
I 
Q Show how the stoichiometry A,,O,, 
results from the ordered 
1 
arrangement of these planes. 
I 
A Eleven normal units: 11 x AO, = A,,O,,. One sheared unit: 1 x 
AO, = AO,. Added together = A,,O,,. Multiplying the formula by 
I 
two gives A,,O,,. 
............... 
- 
......... - . . . . . . .  
-. ............ 
- ... ... 
..................... 
The defects we have discussed in this chapter are largely microscopic 
and cannot be observed from the macroscopic structure of the materials. 
However, there are various sorts of macroscopic defect which can be 
examined using electron microscopy, and which explain certain physical 
characteristics. For example, metals are generally malleable and ductile 
but their ordered solid state structure implies that they should be rigid. 
Sometimes heating metals makes them more brittle in a process known 
as ‘work hardening’. These characteristics indicate that the structures of 
the metals are not perfect. The malleability of metals is an indication 
that the structure contains defects which occur in lines and planes, allow- 
ing the atoms to slip over each other. As the temperature rises or the 
metal is worked (as by a blacksmith), the metal becomes harder as the 
defects are removed. 
6.6 
Solid Solutions 
If two liquids are mixed, then providing they have comparable densities 
and polarities, a single phase is formed with no boundary between the 
phases. All the molecules are mixed up, and a sample of the mixture will 
contain the two liquids in the ratio in which they were added together. 
A solid solution is very similar. Atoms or ions are introduced into a 
parent structure and essentially disappear into it. 
1. Substitional solid solution: atoms are introduced to directly replace 
an atom or ion in the parent structure 
There are two types of solid solutions: 

144 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
2. Interstitial solid solution : atoms are introduced on to interstitial sites 
Both types of mechanism can also occur simultaneously. 
6.6.1 Substitional Solid Solutions 
One of the simplest types of solid solution involves the substitution of 
ions of the same charge as those already present in the lattice. This 
process occurs in nature where a-alumina is doped with chromium to 
produce rubies. Al,O, and Cr,O, have the same high-temperature struc- 
ture and chromium can easily substitute for aluminium in the lattice. 
Instead of pinpointing where the few atoms are, the composition is just 
written as an average, e.g. (AlCr) 0 , where the substitution occurs ran- 
domly throughout the lattice. This is similar to taking a sample of the 
liquid solution where we do not know the positions the molecules are 
2. 
? 
exactly, but we know that it must be a mixture of what we put in. 
same charge, similar size and preferred coordination geometries. 
This is the simplest sort of solid solution, where both cations have 
.. 
. . . .  __ .. - ...... -. . . . . . . . .  .- _- 
..... 
.. _. 
..... - - __ ... - ... -. ... 
he 
Q Why might the substitution of octahedral iron(I1) with cop- 
per(I1) have structural implications? 
A Copper(I1) is a Jahn-Teller ion and normally sits in a distorted 
lattice site. The configuration of copper is d9, which leads to an 
unpaired electron in the eg level in an octahedral crystal field. The 
eg level consists of the degenerate dxLy2 and d, orbitals. According 
to the Jahn-Teller theorem, the system distorts to remove the 
degeneracy and lower the overall energy of the system. Hence one 
set of bonds (four in-plane, or two axial) become longer than the 
others and the copper ion has a distorted geometry. 
- - .. .- 
- 
. - 
- .- . -. . . . . . . .  
........... 
....... 
.... 
. 
Changes in Valency 
Substitution of an ion in a lattice with another ion of different charge 
has implications in terms of charge balance. For example, if we substi- 
tuted fluoride for oxide, then either the corresponding cations would 
have to be reduced or a cation vacancy would have to be introduced. 
More often than not, changes in oxidation state occur. Introduction of 
cations of different charge results either in anion vacancies (if the intro- 
duced cation has a lower charge) or anion interstitials (if the charge is 
higher) 

Non-stoichiometry 
145 
Size and Coordination Geometry 
Substitutional solid solutions also require the ions replacing each other 
to be similar in size. To a certain extent this is also a size consideration. 
For example, larger ions typically have higher coordination numbers. 
~~~~~~~ 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
~ 
~~~~~~ 
Q Which ion would you expect to have the higher coordination 
number, lithium or potassium? 
A Potassium has an ionic radius of 1.5 A compared with lithium 
at 0.9 %i. This difference is reflected in their coordination numbers, 
where potassium is normally six- or eight-coordinate and lithium 
is often found to be four-coordinate. For example, lithium oxide 
forms the antifluorite structure with lithium in the tetrahedral holes 
in a close-packed lattice of oxygen ions. 
It is reasonable to assume that a difference of 30% in the radii will 
not allow the compound to form. A solid solution would be expected to 
form easily if there were very small differences in the radii, up to 10%. 
There is a grey region between 10% and approximately 20% where a 
solid solution may form. In this region, formation of solid solutions is a 
matter of trial and error. 
A very important factor in the formation of solid solutions is the tem- 
perature. There are many solid solutions which exist at high temperature 
which separate into individual phases at lower temperatures. Such phases 
can sometimes be isolated by rapid quenching of the system, but often 
these phases gradually separate with time. The major reason for this is 
the entropy change which occurs when a solid solution is formed. The 
random distribution of atoms or ions over different sites in one solid 
has a much greater entropy than that of a mixture of the two separate 
phases. Owing to the temperature dependance of the entropy term, this 
factor dominates at high temperature. If the enthalpy term is negative, 
this reinforces the entropy term, and phase formation is likely to be 
favoured at all temperatures. However, if the enthalpy term is positive, 
the entropy and enthalpy are opposing, and it is only at high tempera- 
ture that the entropy term wins and a solid solution is formed. 
The entropy term can lead to different structures at different temper- 
atures. For example, the alloy FeCo has a disordered structure at high 
temperature, and from the absences in the neutron diffraction pattern 
the unit cell appears to be body-centred cubic. As the temperature falls, 

146 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 6.15 Change in the sym- 
metry of the FeCo cubic unit cell 
with temperature. Shaded atoms 
~~ 
the iron and cobalt atoms order, and a primitive unit cell is observed 
(Figure 6.15). 
Disordered body-centred 
cubic arrangement 
Ordered primitive cubic 
arrangement 
indicate the disordered body-cen- 
tred unit cell 
Q Why would neutron diffraction have to be used for this exper- 
iment rather than X-ray diffraction? 
A Iron and cobalt are neighbours in the Periodic Table, and they 
would be indistinguishable by X-rays. The unit cell would look diy 
ordered at all temperatures, and the pattern expected for a body- 
centred cube would be observed. 
- 
-. . - - - 
- 
- . - . _. - 
- - - 
6.6.2 Interstitial Solid Solution 
An interstitial solid solution is one in which extra atoms occupy vacant 
interstitial sites in a host lattice without significant movement of the host 
lattice ions. This process occurs with small atoms such as hydrogen 
and carbon in simple metal structures, as well as in more complex systems 
such as C,. 
The doping of interstitial atoms on to the empty tetrahe- 
dral and octahedral sites in C, is discussed in detail in Chapter 7. 
. 
. -... .. 
. . . .- . 
. .. 
- 
~ --- . - ..... .- 
..~ 
Q Steel is one of the most important everyday materials which 
depend on the interstitial solid solution of iron with carbon. 
Although iron exists in three polymorphs, two body-centred cubic 
and one face-centred cubic, only one of these forms readily absorbs 

Non-stoichiometry 
147 
-- - - __ 
. __ 
- 
. _  
chemical formula, which becomes non-stoichiometric. Extrinsic 
defects are caused by external influences on the lattice of the pure 
carbon. By considering the structure of the body-centred cubic and 
face-centred cubic lattices, explain why this could be predicted. 
A The face-centred cubic lattice forms octahedral and tetrahedral 
holes. Although it is more densely packed that the body-centred 
cubic version, in which the coordination numbers are 12 rather than 
8, there are fewer larger holes, as shown in Figure 6.16. 
H Interstitial site 
Ironatom 
The distance from the nearest iron atom to the interstitial site is 1.4 
A and 1.8 
respectively for body-centred and face-centred polymorphs. 
While the site in the body-centred cubic lattice is too small to accom- 
modate the carbon without significant distortion, the site in the face- 
centred cubic lattice is suitable, and the carbon can be accommodated. 
Approximately one-third of the empty octahedral sites can be occupied, 
giving the formula Fe,C. 
Many different lanthanides and early transition metals form A,C com- 
pounds by this type of reaction, as described for the face-centred cubic 
iron polymorph. The limiting factor appears to be the size of the radius 
of A. A critical radius of 1.35 A seems to be required to form the face- 
centred cubic lattice with twelve coordinate ions at room temperature. 
I 
1 
1 
body-centred and face-centred 
I 
cubic unit cells 
Figure 6.16 Interstitial sites in 
... . . .. . 
.... -. 
_____ 
. 
. . .  

148 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
2. Defect Processes 
Intrinsic defects can form by the loss of pairs of cations and anions 
(Schottky) or by the movement of anions or cations on to intersti- 
tial sites (Frenkel). Both mechanisms can occur simultaneously. 
3. Non-stoichiometry 
Non-stoichiometric defects can occur by oxidation and reduction 
of the cations, by introduction of interstitials, or by loss of the 
anions. 
4. Clusters 
Defects often cluster together. This can occur randomly, as in 
Koch-Cohen clusters, or in an ordered way by crystallographic 
shear to form, for example, Mo,,O,,. 
5. Energetics 
The energetics of defect formation can be exploited to make solid 
solutions to form new compounds. 
A. R. West, Basic Solid State Chemistry, Wiley, New York, 1997. 
A. K. Cheetham and P. Day, Solid State Chemistry: Compounds, 
M. T. Weller, Inorganic Materials Chemistry, Oxford University Press, 
N. N. Greenwood, Ionic Crystals, Defects and Non-Stoichiometry, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1992. 
Oxford, 1994. 
Butterworths, London, 1968. 
1. By exposing potassium chloride to an excess of potassium 
vapour, a compound forms which appears violet in colour. Explain 
the source of the colour. What sort of defect is formed? 
2. 3.5 g of cerium metal reacts with 600 cm3 of deuterium gas to 
form compound A, which crystallizes as a white crystalline solid. 
A powder neutron diffraction pattern shows that the compound 
crystallizes with a face-centred cubic lattice. Heating A in a stream 

Non-stoichiometry 
149 
of deuterium gas on a thermogravimetric analyser causes a weight 
gain corresponding to the uptake of a further 75 cm3 of gas for the 
3.5 g original sample and formation of B. 
(a) Determine the formula of A and predict what structure has been 
formed. 
(b) What sort of defect is being formed in compound B? 
(c) How could the extra deuterium be incorporated into the struc- 
ture? 
(RMM Ce = 140; 1 mole gas occupies 24,000 cm3 at 298 K) 
3. TiOx, where 0.7 c x 
1.25, crystallizes with the sodium chlo- 
ride structure. By consideration of the incorporation of vacancies 
into the halite structure, describe how defects could be incorporat- 
ed to give the formulae at the extremes of the values of x. 
4. What are the differences between intrinsic and extrinsic defects. 
Illustrate your answer with an example of each. 
5. Palladium metal crystallizes with a face-centred cubic structure. 
Heating palladium in hydrogen causes uptake of hydrogen into the 
lattice. 
(a) What sites are being filled in the palladium structure? 
(b) What type of solid solution is being formed? 
6. What would be the formula of a compound consisting of nine 
normal blocks of MOO, separated by one plane of crystallograph- 
ically sheared defect octahedra? 
7. What kind of defects, if any, would you expect in the following 
crystals: 
(a) KF. 
(c) AgBr. 
(b) MOO,,. 
8. If a small amount of yttrium fluoride was heated over an extend- 
ed period with calcium fluoride, would you expect a substitution- 
al solid solution to form? How could the difference in charge of 
yttrium and calcium be accommodated? 
. . -. . . 
. 
.- . 

Selected Topics: An 
Introduction to Some Important 
Solid State Materials 
In the last 20 years, many headline-stealing discoveries have been made 
in the area of solid state science. For example, Nobel prizes have been 
awarded to two physicists, Bednorz and Muller, for their work in wjli 
c r f i i t f t i ~ ~ ~ t i - \  
and to three chemists, Curl, Kroto and Smalley, for their 
work on huc.krriirl~bt,9"!'liiitI'(-i)~.C;. 
Many of these discoveries lie on the 
boundaries between chemistry, physics and materials science. Therefore, 
they have required collaboration across these traditional borders to 
develop the new materials. This chapter selects five areas in which sig- 
nificant advances have been made relatively recently. 
The superconductors are one of the major discoveries of the 20th cen- 
tury. The progress from the metals and alloys to the superconducting 
oxides, or so-called ! i : ~ h  
- t  c w  ~ r t b i - ; r  f t i  rc i i i  j r t n  w r f  IJC k s  t v  , demonstrate the 
relationship between physical structure and properties. A second group 
of complex oxide materials which exhibit dramatic changes in their resis- 
tance with applied magnetic field, known as the 9iat.nr 
i I C I O T C - ~ W ~ ~ ,  will be used to illustrate another relationship between 
electronic and physical properties. 
Finally, three different sorts of compound which can insert and 
exchange cations and ions in their structures will be discussed. Of these, 
the /co!itt.*i have been developed from minerals, and are used as ion 
exchangers, catalysts and sorbents. The use of their framework struc- 
tures for h i > c - w w t i \  :+- c m i !  4% 
will be discussed. The unique proper- 
ties of both layered and three-dimensional compounds which can accept 
extra ions, such as graphite and C,, 
will also be examined. 
150 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
151 
By the end of this chapter you should be able to: 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7.1 
Describe the differences between superconducting and con- 
ducting materials and their important structural attributes 
Use the Zener mechanism to explain the magnetoresistance of 
the doped lanthanum manganate perovskites 
Understand the features of zeolites which make them useful for 
ion exchange and catalysis 
Differentiate between the properties of two- and three-dimen- 
sional intercalation compounds 
Superconductivity 
As discussed in Chapter 5, the conductivity of some compounds changes 
abruptly at a particular temperature. Below this critical temperature, they 
conduct with no appreciable resistance. These compounds are called 
superconductors. In the superconducting state, the compound offers no 
resistance to the flow of conducting species. A current started in a loop 
will therefore continue to flow indefinitely, without significant loss. This 
property, and others particularly associated with the superconducting 
state, could theoretically allow superconducting materials to be used for 
many applications, such as: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
By replacing copper circuitry with superconductor circuitry, no ener- 
gy would be wasted. 
Infinite current could be passed in an electromagnet, creating much 
stronger magnetic fields. 
Using the Meissner effect, trains could levitate above magnetic rails 
and require only minimal electricity to move. 
7.1.1 A Brief History 
While Onnes' was experimenting on the liquefaction of helium in 191 1, 
he found the resistance of mercury dropped dramatically from 0.08 R at 
4.2 K to less than 3 x lo4 R at 4 K over a temperature interval of 0.01 
K (Figure 7.1). He named this phenomenon superconductivit~. This 
behaviour is the most striking feature of superconducting materials, in 
which below a critical temperature, Tc, the electrical resistance suddenly 
drops to effectively zero. 
Over the next 60 years, superconductivity was observed in many 
alloys, metallic elements and intermetallic compounds with Tc values in 

152 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 7.1 Change in resistance 
of mercury with temperature 
I 
Temperature (K) 
the range 1-18 K. However, a limit seemed to have been reached with 
the intermetallic compound Nb,Ge, with a critical temperature of 23.3 
K (Figure 7.2). 
x 
Nb 
I 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
 
Figure 7.2 Critical temperatures 
of some elements and 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
Year 
intermetallics 
I 
~ 
This stood as a maximum until 1986, when Bednorz and Muller2 
reported 'the possibility' of superconductivity in the Ba-La-Cu-0 
system. Soon, confirmation of the superconducting phase La2:YBaxCu04 
was heralded by many other laboratories worldwide, and a record Tc of 
35 K was achieved with x = 0.4. 
A few months later the superconductor YBa,Cu30, was discovered,, 
with a Tc of 93 K. The discovery of this compound was the birth of high- 
temperature superconductivity (superconductivity above the boiling 
point of nitrogen). Frenzied activity spanning many countries and 
multimillions of pounds then led to a variety of high-temperature super- 
conductors with higher and higher Tc values (Figure 7.3). 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
153 
Liquid nitrogen 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
i 
Lowest recorded ground temperature 
................................. 
150 20'i 
8 HgB%c%C%O, 
$1001 
2 i  
8% Tl,B~Ca$u,O,, 
3% Bi,Sr,CaCyO, 
% YBa$u,O, 
50i 
8 (LaSr),CaCu,O, 
% (LaBa),CuO, 
m,Ge 
34 (BaK)BiO, 
' 
%g (NdCe),CuO, 
Hg 
Liquid helium 
,...%....................... ..... 
Figure 7.3 Evolution of T, with 
time 
1900 
1925 
1950 
1975 
2000 
Year 
Although the rapid increases in Tc were not sustained, the under- 
standing of the chemical features and formation of high-Tc materials has 
made major advances in the last decade. 
?.I 
.2 Properties of Superconductors 
Critical Temperature 
In a normal metallic conductor the electrons move through the lattice, 
giving the conducting current. The flow of electrons is interrupted by 
defects and vibrations of the atoms on the lattice points. As the tem- 
perature increases the vibrations increase and the resistance rises. In the 
superconducting state, below the critical temperature, the conducting 
current is thought to move with the lattice vibrations in a concerted 
process, so that there is no resistance. This is the Bardeen, Cooper and 
Schieffer (BCS) theory: which was discussed in detail in Chapter 5. This 
theory was developed before the advent of high-temperature super- 
conductors. It explains type 1 superconductivity well; type 1 supercon- 
ductors are either superconducting or not superconducting at a particular 
temperature and applied field. However, it fails to explain the gradual 
loss of superconductivity observed for the type 2 materials. 

154 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Magnetism: The Meissner Effect5 
Magnetic flux is excluded from the sample by the setting up of surface 
currents which exactly oppose the magnetic field. This results in a strong 
repulsive force, similar to the poles of a magnet. The Meissner effect is 
powerful enough to deflect a permanent magnet, and can even 
a magnet above the superconductor surface. 
t :  
78183 Elements and Alloys 
Table 7.1 indicates some elements of the Periodic Table which have been 
shown to have a superconducting transition under normal conditions of 
temperature and pressure. Other elements exhibit superconductivity 
under exceptional conditions, e.g. under pressure (Si, Y), or when pre- 
pared as thin films (Li, Cr) or irradiated by a-particles (Pd). Tc for the 
elements is generally below 10 K (maximum Nb, Tc = 9.25 K). Small 
increases in these critical temperatures can be achieved by using high 
pressure to force the atoms closer together. 
Table 7.1 Selected elements and their critical temperatures (K) 
Element 
Tc 
Element 
Tc 
Nb 
Pb 
Hg 
In 
Re 
9.25 
7.2 
4.15 
3.40 
2.57 
Al 
0s 
U 
Rh 
1.18 
0.66 
0.20 
0.0003 
The first indicator as to what does not make a superconductor is found 
in the transition elements; those elements with incomplete d or f shells 
which order ferromagnetically are not superconductors at any tempera- 
ture. In fact, until very recently (1997), magnetism and superconductivity 
were thought to be mutually exclusive. However, two intermetallics 
consisting of rutheniudcopper and indiudgold have recently been 
discovered which are both magnetic and superconducting. 
Solid solutions between elements in the Periodic Table which are 
superconductors are very important materials. Some of the most 
common superconducting materials are in this class, in particular those 
containing niobium. For example, NbTi and NbZr are fabricated to form 
superconducting wires for use in coils. 
Intermetallic compounds composed of metal/metal or metahon- 
metal form another group of superconducting compounds. The most 
. 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
155 
~~ 
~ 
important of these crystallize with the P-tungsten structure. The 
stoichiometric formula is A,B, where the A element is nearly always a 
transition metal of Groups 4, 5 or 6. The B atoms lie in a body-centred 
cubic arrangement, and two equidistant A atoms sit in the middle of 
each face. They form three non-intersecting continuous chains (Figure 
7.4). The overall lattice is primitive as the A atoms are not related by 
l/2,l/2,l/2 translation (see Chapter 1). To date, Nb,Ge has the highest Tc 
of these materials at 23.3 K6 
7.1.4 Superconducting Compounds 
There are a vast number of different sorts of superconducting compound. 
Examples of these are summarized in Table 7.2. They include organic 
polymers and intercalation compounds (such as Rb,C,), 
as well as 
ceramic oxides and sulfides. In all these compounds the critical 
temperature is still below the boiling point of liquid nitrogen. Hence, 
these materials would be very expensive to use in everyday life (as a litre 
of liquid helium costs 20 times as much as liquid nitrogen). 
Table 7.2 Examples of non-cuprate-based superconductors 
structure 
Symmetry 
Example compound 
T, (ma) (K) 
NaCI-type 
Cubic 
NbN, SrN, GeTe, PdH 
17.3 
WO, (tungsten bronze) 
Hexagonal 
RbxWO, 
7 
Spinel 
Cubic 
Vk-XO.3 
13.7 (X = 1) 
Perovskite 
Cubic 
Ba,,KxBiO, 
30 
Chevrel phase 
Tetragonal 
PbMo,S, 
15.2 
Cubic 
(RbCs),C, 
33 
- 
(BEDO-TTF*),ReO, 
13 
cso 
Complex 
* Bis(ethy1enedioxy)tetrathiafulvalene. 
Figure 7.4 /&B structure 

156 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 7.5 The perovskite 
structure 
Figure 7.6 Rock-salt layer 
One important point to note is that, despite the great diversity of these 
compounds, their structures are relatively simple (except for the organ- 
ic materials). This meant that in the hunt for new superconductors, many 
new materials were rapidly synthesized in these families of compounds. 
The real breakthrough came in 1986, with the discovery of high-tem- 
perature superconductivity in materials containing copper and oxygen 
(hereafter called ciipi aiu materials). Since then, a variety of materials 
have been discovered which are, at first sight, bewildering in their com- 
plexity. However, all these structures are actually relatively simple. Most 
are built from j-)~i-msttite (ABO,) structural units, as shown in Figure 
7.5, together with, in some cases, I-ock-wlt-like layers (Figure 7.6). The 
perovskite structure is based on closed-packed layers of alternating A 0  
and 0, with the octahedral holes filled with the smaller B cations. 
Combining this structure with rock-salt layers produces compounds with 
very long c-axes (in comparison with a and b) owing to the stacking of 
different layers. 
B 
0 
A 
0 
Unfortunately, many of these materials contain unusual and toxic ele- 
ments such as mercury, thallium and lead. The current record is for a 
mercury-based compound with a Tc of 133 K at atmospheric pressure, 
increasing to 160 K under pressure. Some superconducting cuprates are 
summarized in Table 7.3. 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
157 
I 
Table 7.3 Examples of high-temperature superconducting cuprates 
1 
Compound type 
Structural base 
Highest T, 
La2-paxcu0, 
Perovskite and halite 
x = 0.4, 35 K 
Yttrium based 
Perovski t e 
YBa+2u30,, 93 K 
Bismuth based 
Perovskite and halite 
Bi,Sr,-xC~+xCu30,,, 
1 10 K 
Thallium based 
Perovskite and halite 
T12Ba&a2Cu30,,, 
125 K 
Mercury based 
Perovskite and halite 
HgBa.&a&u,O,, 
160 K 
Nomenclature 
Owing to both the complexity of the superconducting structures and the 
number of closely related materials containing essentially the same 
elements, a way of simplifying the names was quickly found. This uses 
the number of moles of element in the formula, preceded by a qualify- 
ing element. For example, the thallium family would start ‘thallium’. All 
the other elements (excluding oxygen) are then given numbers. 
Bi2Sr2-xCa2+xC~3010 
would therefore be called bismuth 2223. If one of 
the alkaline earth elements is missing, a 0 would be included. 
Q How could the phases YBa2Cu40, and Bi,Sr,CuO, be given a 
, 
shorter name? 
A YBa,Cu,O, is simple and would just be called yttrium 124 from 
the cations in the formula. Bi,Sr,CuO, is slightly more difficult. The 
calcium normally present in the formula of the bismuth materials 
is absent. This phase would therefore be called bismuth 2201 where 
the 0 corresponds to the missing calcium. 
Structural Aspects 
Certain structural, magnetic and electrical features have been recognized 
as recurrent in the cuprate-based materials: 
1. Electronically actiye copper-oxygen sheets, which are thought of as 
the cen t r oi d of s u per co n d u c t i v i t y . 
alternating with: 
2 
Insulating block layers, which are as important as they act as reser- 
voirs of positive or negative charge. They control the electronic 

158 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
make-up of the material, adding to or removing electrons from the 
copper-oxygen planes. 
3. The interspacing of the layers is generally 3.6 A. 
A schematic diagram of a superconducting oxide is shown in Figure 7.7, 
together with some actual superconductors, indicating the important 
structural features . 
Copper-ox ygen 
laver 
Copper-ox y gen 
layer 
a 
b 
C 
d 
Figure 7.7 Schematic diagram of 
7.1.5 Charge Carriers 
a superconductor (a) and some 
cuprate materials: 
(b) L%J-~B~~CUO& 
(C) YBa2Cu3Oi 
(d) Bi2Sr2C%Cu30,, 
The high-temperature superconductors can be classified by the two dif- 
ferent types of charge carrier: positive and negative. In the former the 
charge carriers are positive holes, but in the latter they are electrons. 
Positive charge carriers are the most common. 
Positive-type: Holes 
The mechanism of hole-based charge carriers is simple. If you take a 
parent compound which is non-metallic and non-superconducting and 
introduce holes in the copper-oxygen sheets in a controlled manner (e. g. 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
159 
by changing the chemistry of the insulating layer), then you create a hole. 
If these holes can move, a conductor is produced. 
For example, La,CuO, is an antiferromagnetic insulator. Holes can 
be introduced in the copper sheets by doping in divalent barium, or stron- 
tium, for trivalent lanthanum or by introducing oxygen interstitials. For 
each divalent ion we have either one Cu3+ or one 0-. Therefore, for 
La,-xSrxCuO, the hole concentration is directly proportional to x. At x 
= 0, the compound is an antiferromagnetic insulator. As x increases, the 
material becomes a non-magnetic insulator and at x = 0.4 a super- 
conductor. This generates a compositionaZZy controlled insulator-metal 
transition. 
Hole-based superconductors have an average copper oxidation state 
of approximately 2.2. The holes are normally introduced by oxygen 
vacancies in the apical oxygens of the copper-oxygen layers. 
Q Calculate the average copper oxidation state in the compounds 
YBa2Cu30, and YBa,Cu,O, and hence predict whether they could 
be hole-based superconductors. 
A Taking the oxidation states of yttrium, barium and oxygen as 3, 
2 and -2, respectively, the average copper oxidation states are 
2 and 2.33 for the two compounds. The first compound has an inte- 
gral copper oxidation state and would not be expected to be super- 
conducting. In fact, as oxygen is lost from YBa2Cu,0, the critical 
temperature falls until the compound becomes non-superconduct- 
ing when the oxygen content in the formula drops to 0,. 
Negative-type: Electrons 
Electron superconductors, such as Nd,CeXCuO,, 
do not have oxygen 
vacancies and the formal oxidation state of copper in these compounds 
is less than 2. Conduction is by the electron current. 
7.1.6 Superconducting Oxide Tape 
Unlike the alloys and elements discussed previously, it is not immedi- 
ately clear how a superconducting oxide could be made into a wire. 
Superconducting oxides are powders. The problem is overcome by 
making tapes, rather than wires, and using an exterior coating of silver. 
Silver is used as it is practically the only material which does not react 

I60 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
with the superconductor during heating. The powder is poured into a 
silver tube and then rolled down, in a similar way to rolling dough, to 
form a thinner tube. The tube is then heated and flattened to form a 
tape. Many tapes are then bundled together to form a superconducting 
wire. A direct comparison of a superconducting wire and a conducting 
wire of the same thickness is startling. The superconducting wire can 
carry 1000 times the current! 
7.1.7 Uses of Superconductors 
There have been many projected uses for superconducting compounds, 
including ax. and d.c. cables, generators, motors, transformers, energy 
storage, wires, computers and magnetically levitating trains to name just 
a few. Some detailed examples are given below. 
Magnetic Resonance Imagers 
Superconductors have revolutionized the field of biomagnetism. 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive way of examining 
soft tissue. Using a strong magnetic field, the hydrogen atoms in 
water and fat molecules accept magnetic energy, which can be detected 
when the energy is released. The technique was developed in the late 
1940s, but conventional magnets created a field approximately one 
quarter of the strength of those possible with superconducting magnets. 
This meant the early MRI machines were closed devices, where the 
patient was enclosed for long periods inside the magnet. Owing to the 
higher field of the superconducting magnets, the devices can be more 
open and data collected in a fraction of the time, with increased patient 
comfort. 
Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storage (SMES) 
The purpose of these storage systems is to damp power fluctuations in 
the power grid to prevent computer crashes and equipment failure. 
Energy is stored in powerful electromagnets and can be retrieved 
whenever there is a need to stabilize line voltage during unanticipated 
disturbance in the power grid. 
Electronic Filters 
The discrimination provided by normal electronic filters is limited. 
Addition of each filter to reduce noise diminishes the overall signal. As 
superconductors have zero resistance, superconducting filters do not 
diminish the overall signal, and hence many more filter stages can be 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
161 
added. One possible use for this technology would be in cellular tele- 
phone systems, where it would allow more remote areas to be accessed. 
MagLev Trains 
Magnetic levitation is an application which could theoretically be used 
for people transport. Transportation vehicles, such as trains, would be 
made to float on strong superconducting magnets, eliminating friction 
between the train and its tracks. This would mean extremely high speeds 
could be achieved. This was realized in 1990, with a nationally funded 
project in Japan to develop just such a train. The Yamanashi test line 
opened in April 1997. On 14 April 1999 a speed of 340 miles per hour 
was achieved with the MLXOl. 
7.2 
Magnetoresistors 
The change in the electrical resistance of a material in the presence of a 
magnetic field is called its magnetoresistance (MR). For certain groups 
of materials, termed giant (GMR) or even colossal magnetoresistors 
(CMR), the difference in resistance is enormous (lo6 a). The term ‘giant’ 
or ‘colossal’ just refers to the different orders of magnitude of the change 
in resistance. Until recently, these effects were thought to be limited to 
intermetallics and doped semiconductors. 
The discovery of giant magnetoresistance in the perovskite-based 
material La-Sr-Mn-0 
prompted intense research similar to that for new 
high-temperature superconductors. Magnetoresistance has since been 
found in many other oxide and sulfide materials, such as Tl,Mn,O; 
and 
FeCr,S,.* However, it is the manganese perovskites which have received 
the most attention. Possible uses for magnetoresistors include actuators, 
superior capacity hard-disks and sensors. 
7.2.1 The Zener Mechanism’ 
The doped perovskite structure is shown in Figure 7.8. It consists of an 
infinite network of manganese-oxygen octahedra. According to the 
stoichiometry, and for charge balance in the formula Lao.7Mn0.303, 
the material must contain Mn3+ and Mn4+. If we consider the electron- 
ic configuration of these ions in a octahedral ligand field (Figure 7.9), 
it is immediately apparent that trivalent manganese contains four 
d-electrons. This would give manganese the typical electronic structure 
expected to undergo Jahn-Teller distortion, where manganese has one 
electron in the degenerate eg set (upper level on the figure). According 
to the Jahn-Teller theorem, the site will undergo distortion to remove 
the degeneracy. This is where the source of magnetoresistance is thought 

162 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 7.8 (LaSr)Mn03 structure 
containing vertex-linked MnO, 
octahedra 
Figure 7.9 Electronic configura- 
tion and Jahn-Teller distortion of 
to lie. When an electron hops from the symmetrical octahedral arrange- 
ment of Mn4+ to the asymmetric, Jahn-Teller distorted, arrangement of 
Mn3+, the new site has the wrong symmetry (see Figure 7.9). Therefore, 
local distortion must occur around the manganese centres when the elec- 
tron moves. This is shown schematically in Figure 7.10 and is called the 
Zener mechanism. 
I 
1 
Mn3+ 
I 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
163 
e- 
n 
e- 
Double-exchange 
Structural distortion 
of electrons 
around Mn centres 
Figure 7.10 Schematic diagram 
of the Zener mechanism 
However, the mobile or localized behaviour of the electrons changes 
so dramatically with only minor changes in the stoichiometry (Figure 
7.11) that the Zener mechanism is thought to be too simple. It also fails 
to explain the magnetoresistance in compounds in which there are no 
Jahn-Teller distorted ions. 
Ferromagnetic 
Sr substitution 
I 
metal 
t 
Ca substitution 
1 
increase 
X 
~~ 
~ 
Ferromagnetic 
metal 
1 
increase 
X 
Q What is the oxidation state of Mn in Tl,Mn,O,? 
A With thallium trivalent, manganese must be present as Mn4+. 
This is not a Jahn-Teller ion, since there are three d-electrons, one 
each for the t,, set of d-orbitals, and so the Zener mechanism would 
not explain the magnetoresistance of this compound. 
Figure 7.11 Changes in electron- 
ic behaviour with composition for 
the alkali-earth doped lanthanum 
manganate perovsKites 

164 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
7.3 
Zeolites 
The zeolites are a group of compounds, some of which occur naturally, 
which are named after their ability to evolve water when heated. The 
name ‘zeolite’ comes from the Greek zeo to boil and Zith stone. These 
materials form an extensive group. Both natural and synthetic zeolites 
are used for ion exchange, absorption and catalytic purposes. Although 
Cronstedt discovered the naturally occurring minerals as far back as 
1756,’O and some were used in the early 1800s in Japan as air purifiers, 
it was not until this century that the real potential of zeolites was rec- 
ognized. Much of the development of zeolites is credited to Barrer, whose 
pioneering work began in the late 193Os.l1 
Zeolites are compounds with low molar masses. Their structure con- 
sists of frameworks that form cavitieslchannels, which may incorporate 
a range of small inorganic and organic species. The frameworks are con- 
structed from linked tetrahedra. Many elements which form TO, groups, 
where T is a tetrahedral atom, can be the building block in zeolites. The 
most common groups are AlO,, SiO,, BO, and PO,, but T can also be 
beryllium, gallium, germanium, etc. The majority of the materials are 
solely based on silicon and aluminium. These also form the largest group 
of naturally occurring materials, which are the true zeolites. Materials 
containing elements other than aluminium and silicon are correctly 
termed zeoty pes, reflecting the similar structure. 
The general formula for zeolites may be obtained by starting from 
pure silica, in which all the tetrahedra are vertex linked. Replacement 
of some of the SiO, tetrahedra with AlO, tetrahedra upsets the charge 
balance, so countercations have to be inserted inside the framework to 
maintain charge neutrality; for example, if you replace an ‘SiO,’ unit 
(where each of the four oxygens in the tetrahedron is shared with one 
other unit, so giving Si + [4 x ‘ / 2 ] 0  = SiO,) with an ‘A10,’ unit, then a 
monovalent cation has to be added to maintain the charge. 
Mathematically, this gives the following formula: 
Typically, when the cations are introduced they are hydrated. Variable 
amounts of water are represented by modification of this formula to also 
include an ‘.mH,O’ term. A schematic diagram of a zeolite structure with 
cavities and cations is shown in Figure 7.12. 
By dehydrating the zeolite, the cations are forced closer to the frame- 
work in order to achieve better coordination to the framework oxygen 
atoms. This means that dehydrated zeolites can often absorb small mol- 
ecules other than water in their pores. Obviously, the larger the cavities 
in the zeolite, the larger the molecules it can absorb. 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
165 
Figure 7.13 Rings constructed 
I 
from tetrahedral units 
@ Framework 
0 Cation 
H20 Water molecule 
Figure 7.12 Schematic diagram 
l 
of a zeolite 
7.3.1 Ring Size and Structure 
The tetrahedral units can link together to form a number of different 
sized rings, the most common of which are shown in Figure 7.13. Each 
black line represents a T-O-T link. These rings are then linked together 
to form three-dimensional structures. As there are a variety of ways in 
which the rings can be linked, and the T-0-T links are flexible, many 
structures and many different cations can be incorporated. 
The most common zeolite structure, which is made up from four- and 
six-membered rings, is the sodalite cage, which is shown in Figure 7.14. 
This unit is often called the P-cage, and is itself a building block in the 
4-ring 
6-ring 
8-ring 

166 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 7.14 Sodalite cage 
structures of other zeolites. Some larger zeolites contain the sodalite cage 
as a building block, for example zeolite A, shown in Figure 7.15. The 
sodalite cage is separated by other rings in these structures; in zeolite 
A these rings are four membered, and in faujasite they are six membered. 
Other examples of the linking units, or secondary building blocks, are 
shown in Figure 7.16. The effect of these linking units is to increase the 
size of the cavities and pores. 
Figure 7.15 Zeolite A containing 
the sodalite cage as a building 
block 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
167 
17 
Figure 7.1 6 Secondary building 
blocks 
Although many zeolite structures are cubic and their channels are the 
same in all three lattice directions, materials such as ZSM-5 have more 
complex structures. Here the channels, which are parallel to the axes, 
have different sizes. Large channels parallel to the b-axis intersect small- 
er channels in the other two directions. ZSM-5 is unusual in that the 
synthetic form of the structure was synthesized some 20 years before 
the natural form was discovered in the mineral mutinaite. 
7.3.2 Lowenstein’s Rule12 
Lowenstein’s rule states that the formation of Al-O-Al links is thermody- 
namically unfavoured. This means that the majority of zeolites (which are 
prepared at low temperatures using hydrothermal methods) have ordered 
frameworks, with no Al-0-A1 links, and the highest Si:Al ratio is 1 : 1. 
7.3.3 The Properties of Zeolites 
Absorption 
The open framework structure of the zeolites allows small molecules to 
be absorbed into their structures. The size and shape of the molecules 
absorbed depends on the structure of the zeolite, and hence the geome- 
try of its pores. For example, zeolite A readily absorbs water but ethanol 
is excluded. Figure 7.17 demonstrates the effect of cavity size on the 
molecules which can be absorbed. 

168 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 7.17 Effect of cavity 
size on absorbed species for 
zeolite A. 
Figure 7.18 Zeolite usage 
6 -  
5 
8 
0 
N 
m 
.C( 
2 
4- 
2 -  
Small di- and 
t ri atomi c s 
e.g. water 
Na-A 
Small 
organics 
e.g. CH4, 
CH30H 
The ability of a zeolite to absorb water is strongly correlated to its 
a1uminium:siZicon ratio. The higher the aluminium content, the better the 
absorption capability. Zeolite A, with an aluminium ratio of l:l, is used 
widely as a drying agent for drying both gases and solvents. The drying 
capacity falls off with time as the zeolite becomes more hydrated, but 
can be restored by heating to drive off the absorbed water. 
Zeolites which are almost totally silicon based have few cations in the 
cavities and are hydrophobic. These materials readily absorb non-polar 
solvents such as benzene. 
Ion Exchange 
Undoubtedly the most widescale use of zeolites is as ion-exchange 
reagents. Approximately 60% of the zeolite market is used for ion 
exchange (Figure 7.18). 
Ion exchangers 
Adsorbents 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
169 
For example, naturally occurring clinoptilolite is used by BNFL to 
remove radioactive caesium and strontium from spent pile eflluent. 
However, the synthetic zeolites, A and P, have had the greatest impact 
on the home. Sodium zeolite A rapidly exchanges its sodium atoms for 
the divalent hard water ions calcium and magnesium at room tempera- 
ture. This discovery led to the replacement of the polyphosphates 
previously used in washing powder, which were damaging to the envi- 
ronment, by zeolite A about 20 years ago. More recently, Unilever intro- 
duced MAP (maximum aluminium zeolite P) as a replacement for. zeolite 
A. MAP has a lower water content, and is lighter in the packet: 
Na-Zeolite A + iCa2+ + Cao.s-Zeolite A + Na+ 
Catalysis 
The acidic derivatives of zeolites, H-zeolites, are excellent catalysts and 
are widely used in industry. The acidic form is easily obtained by direct 
exchange with weak acids. However, since many zeolites are broken 
down by acids, exchange with ammonium salts, followed by removal of 
ammonia at 500 "C, is often used to generate the H-zeolite. 
The nature of this catalytically active zeolite can be either Brrzrnsted 
(proton donor) or Lewis (electron-pair acceptor) acidic, with protons 
attached to the framework tetrahedra or not (Figure 7.19). 
Figure 7.19 Lewis and Brernsted 
acid sites 

170 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Once generated, the acidic zeolites can absorb molecules into the 
cavities and behave like strong acids. Major reaction types are rearrange- 
ment and dehydration. 
However, a very specific sort of catalytic behaviour peculiar to clays 
and zeolites is shape-selective catalysis. Essentially, owing to the fixed 
nature of the framework channels and cavities, only molecules of the 
right geometry can pass through. As only certain molecules will have the 
right geometry to pass into the zeolite, only these molecules will reach 
the active sites. The selectivity can occur either in reactant or product, 
or even the transition state. 
For example, in the isomerization of dimethylbenzene the 1,4-isomer 
is the only isomer which can pass through the channels unhindered. 
The other molecules get stuck and interact with the active sites. 
Hydrogenation of the benzene ring allows the methyl groups to migrate 
round the ring. This means that gradually the mixture of isomers (race- 
mate) is converted to the single isomer 1,4-dimethylbenzene. 
7.4 
Intercalation Reactions 
Intercalation reactions are reactions of solids in which a guest molecule 
or ion is inserted into a solid lattice without major rearrangement of the 
solid state structure. This process is unusual for solid state chemistry as 
it does not require excessive bond breaking, but the host structure must 
have special chemical and structural features. In particular, intercalation 
reactions require the host lattice to have: 
1. A strong covalent network of atoms which remain unchanged dur- 
ing the reaction. 
2. Vacant sites which are interconnected, and of suitable size to allow 
diffusion of the guest species into the host lattice. 
As a consequence, some of these reactions occur at room temperature, 
but higher temperatures can be used as long as sufficient energy is not 
imparted to destroy the covalent lattice. 
Despite these restrictions, many families of compounds undergo inter- 
calation reactions including: chain structures, layered lattices and three- 
dimensional connected frameworks with tunnels or channels. 
7.4.1 Layered Structures 
The layered structures form the largest group of compounds which 
undergo intercalation reactions. Some of the commonly observed 
examples are given in Table 7.4. The special feature of these materials 
is that very large molecules can be incorporated by free adjustment of 
the interlayer separation. All these materials have very strong intralayer 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
171 
Table 7.4 Intercalation compounds 
Neutral layers 
Graphite 
Ni(CN), 
M = Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Mo, W; X = S, Se, Te 
M = Mg, V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Cd, In; X = S, Se 
M = V, Nb, Ta, Mo; X = P, As 
M = Ti, V, Cr, Fe; X = CI, Br 
MX2 
MPX, 
Moo,, 
V20, 
MOXO, 
MOX 
Negatively charged layers 
AM% 
A = Group 11; M =Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni; X = 0, S 
Clays and layered silicates 
~~~~~~ 
~~ 
~ 
Titanates 
e.g. $Ti,O, 
Niobates 
M(HPOJ, 
e.g. K[C%Nan-3Nbn0,+,]; 
3 < n c 7 
M = Ti, Zr, Hf, Ce, Sn 
Positively charged layers 
Hydrotalcites 
LiAI,(OH),OH. 2 H20 , Zn,Cr(OH),CI 
.2 H20 
bonding (in the layers) but weak interlayer interactions (between the 
layers). 
1. Neutral compounds: the interactions between the layer are primarily 
of the van der Waals type, and the interlayer space is an array of 
empty lattice sites. 
2. Charged compounds: the layers are held together by weak electro- 
static forces, and the interlayer sites are partially or completely filled 
with ions and/or solvent molecules. 
The layered compounds fall into two categories: 
Two possible types of reaction occur on intercalation: 
1. Ion exchange or molecule exchange reactions, where the charge on 
the framework layer remains unchanged, e. g. sheet silicates, clays. 
2. Intercalation into structures such as transition metal structures or 
graphite, where the layer is oxidized or reduced. 

172 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 7.20 Schematic diagram 
of the muscovite mica 
Type 1: Muscovite 
The clay muscovite undergoes simple ion exchange reactions by substi- 
tution of the ions between the layers, as shown schematically in Figure 
7.20. It consists of lamellar-like layers with water molecules and cations 
between the strata. These cations can be easily exchanged. 
- 00 
00 
Strong intralayer 
bonding 
Weakly held cations 
Strong intralayer 
bonding 
Weakly held cations 
Strong intralayer 
bonding 
Type 2: TaS, 
Many transition metal sulfides have layer-type structures which consist 
of layers of edge-sharing MS, octahedra held together by weak van der 
Waals forces, as shown in Figure 7.21. 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
173 
1 
Strong intralayer bonding 
Weak van der Waals forces 
Strong intralayer bonding 
Q Show that the formula for an infinite layered lattice of edge- 
sharing octahedra is AB,. 
A Each of the four B atoms in the plane is shared between four 
octahedra. To each octahedron they are worth one quarter. At the 
apex of each octahedron is another B which is shared between two 
octahedra. For each unit, A = 1, B = (4 x l/4) + (2 x '/z) = 2. Hence 
AB,. 
Figure 7.21 (i) Layer of edge- 
sharing MS, octahedra, (ii) per- 
pendicular view of the slab 
structure 
These layered materials can insert a variety of other materials between 
the layers, including: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Alkali metals, by direct reaction with the metal and sulfide in a sealed 
tube, by electrochemical reaction in a non-aqueous solvent or by 
reaction in liquid ammonia. 
Transition metal salts, e.g. FeC1,. 
Amines, e.g. pyridine or C2,H2fl+lNH2 
(n = 0-9). When n = 9 the 
expansion of the lattice parameter is in excess of 50 A. The chains 
lie perpendicular to the layers, giving a structure reminiscent of a 
concertina (Figure 7.22). 
Organometallics, e.g. cobaltocene, which is an unstable 19-electron 
system and reacts at room temperature with TaS, by donating the 
extra electron to the layers. 

174 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 7.23 Graphite structure 
Figure 7.22 Concertina shape of 
RNH, inserted in TaS, 
Type 2: The Staging of Graphite 
I 
The structure of graphite is shown in Figure 7.23. The hexagonal rings 
of graphite form infinite layers separated by 3.5 A. Adjacent layers are 
displaced relative to each other, so the repeat distance is twice the layer 
separation. The weak van de Waals interactions between the layers 
means that ions and molecules can be readily intercalated between them. 
By reaction with potassium vapour at 64 "C the compound C,K is 
formed. The driving force for the reaction is the electron transft:r between 
potassium and the graphite host. 
While most compounds fill the sites between layers randomly, graphite 
does so in an ordered fashion. This process is known as stagirig. The first 
stage compound is C,K, as shown in Figure 7.24, where potassium lies 
between all the carbon layers. The other compounds of potassium and 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
175 
carbon that exist are C,,K, C,,K and C,,K. In C,,K, instead of remov- 
ing potassium randomly from all the layers, alternate layers are emptied, 
and the remaining layers become two-thirds filled. Within the layers con- 
taining potassium ions, the arrangement of potassium ions is random. 
C,,K is the second stage intercalate. C,,K and C,,K are the third and 
fourth stage intercalates, respectively, having potassium ions every third 
and fourth layer. The staging process is shown in Figure 7.25. 
Figure 7.24 First stage interca- 
late 
.I 
Figure 7.25 The 2nd 3rd and 
4th stages of graphite 
-
-
 a 
- - -  a- 
s!zzzzF 
- - - - -  
a 

176 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Q Show how the stoichiometry of the third stage intercalate can 
be calculated, using the information that every third layer is two- 
thirds filled. 
A C,K is the formula of a compound with filled layers. Therefore 
a compound with layers two-thirds filled would have a formula 
C,K2/,. The other two layers would not have any potassium in them. 
The repeat would therefore be: C,K2,,C,C, which is CZ4K2/?. 
Dividing the formula through by two-thirds produces the stoi- 
chiometry C,,K. 
, 
Similar behaviour occurs with bromine, forming C,Br, where the layers 
are positively charged. The intercalated materials appear gold coloured 
and they are metallic conductors. 
7.4.2 Oxide Intercalates 
A number of metal oxides undergo intercalation reactions, typically with 
small ions. They have the following features: 
1. High oxidation state oxides with relatively open structures, e.g. V,O,, 
2. Only small ions such as Li+ or H+ can be inserted. 
3. The metal cations in the host can normally be easily reduced, but 
reaction temperatures should be low to avoid complete reduction to 
the metal. 
wo,. 
Lithium Reactions 
Lithium can be inserted into a host structure by simple reactions. For 
example, grinding up LiI with V,O, in a pestle and mortar at room 
temperature gives LixV,O, (Figure 7.26). This produces a dramatic 
colour change as the intercalate forms and iodine is produced. 
Lithium can also be intercalated using an electrochemical reaction in 
an organic solvent and also by using butyllithium. 
Hydrogen Reactions 
Hydrogen is another element with a small ion which can intercalate into 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
177 
Figure 7.26 Layered structure of 
oxide structures relatively easily. Several routes can be used to introduce 
the hydrogen into the structure: 
1. Generation of hydrogen with metal/acid: 
W03 + Zn/HCl- xH + W03 + H,WO, 
Hydrogen is created in situ to generate the intercalate. x can take values 
between 0 and 0.6. The parent material is a white insulator, and the 
colour of the intercalate ranges from blue to gold as x increases. 
2. Activation with platinum; under a direct stream of hydrogen, using 
platinum as a catalyst. 
3. Electrochemically, using sulfuric acid and a platinum electrode. 
The last two methods are not so effective. For the tungsten compound 
above, the maximum value of x achievable is 0.3 by these methods. 
7.5 
Buckminsterfullerene, C,, 
~~~~ 
Buckminsterfullerene has been hailed as one of the most important dis- 
coveries of recent times. An accolade to its importance was the award 
of the Nobel Prize to its discoverers in 1996. It is peculiar in that it crosses 
all the borders of chemistry, from solid state, where it acts as an inter- 
calation host, to organic/organometallic chemistry, where it acts as a lig- 
and. Its unusual magnetic and electronic properties have also led to many 
physical studies. Interestingly, it is not named after its discoverers, but 
according to its shape. Buckminster Fuller designed a number of geo- 
desic dome structures based on hexagons and pentagons, which are also 
apparent in C, and the ordinary spherical football. 
7.5.1 Preparation 
Before 1985, six forms of carbon were known. Since the discovery of the 
closed-shell configuration of C,, 
many other closed-shell forms have 

178 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Figure 7.27 C, 
~ 
been found. c 6 0  was initially prepared by vaporization and condensa- 
tion of carbon in an inert atmosphere. However, it is even thought to 
be present in candle soot. The first crystals of C ,  were grown from 
benzene solutions by the physicists Kratschmer and Huffman. l3 The 
experiment involved causing an arc between two graphite rods 
surrounded by helium, removing the carbon condensate and extracting 
it using benzene. Isolating pure C,, from the molecules of organic solvent 
contained in the crystals is extremely difficult, requiring repetitive 
sublimation. 
The C,, molecule in the gas phase has perfect icosahedral, Ih, sym- 
metry. The carbon atoms lie on a sphere of radius 3.55 A, and each 
is in an identical environment with three neighbours. The structure is 
shown in Figure 7.27, and consists of 20 six-membered hexagonal rings 
and 12 five-membered pentagonal rings on the surface of a sphere. The 
pentagons are isolated from each other on the surface of the molecule 
to avoid the strain of two adjacent pentagons. There are two sorts of 
carbon-carbon bond, which are given the nomenclature 6 5  and 6:6. 
These numbers describe the bonds which connect the hexagons to the 
pentagons and hexagons, respectively. The 6:5 bonds are 1.45 A in 
length, with the 6:6 slightly shorter at 1.40 A. A 13C NMR spectrum of 
c 6 0  dissolved in methylbenzene shows each carbon is in an identical 
environment. 
One of the most unusual properties of c, is its solid state structure: 
how the molecules pack in a solid state lattice. Surprisingly, the mole- 
- 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
179 
: 
A 
c m  
Octahedral 
hole 
Tetrahedral 
hole 
cules simply form a normal face-centred cubic lattice just as is observed 
for cubic close-packing of spheres (Figure 7.28). 
The solid state NMR spectrum is even more perplexing, as Tycko et 
al. di~c0vered.l~ 
Instead of a broad line, expected for a normal solid, C,, 
gives a sharp single line at 143 ppm without any magic angle spinning 
(Chapter 3). This means the solid is acting like a liquid, and the mole- 
cules must be tumbling on their lattice sites. 
X-ray diffraction shows this to be true. The molecules have enough 
energy at room temperature to freely tumble on their lattice sites, behav- 
ing essentially like a molecule in solution. 
Cooling C, down to very low temperatures causes the molecules to 
lock in a particular conformation. Below 90 K, the static solid state pat- 
tern broadens into the spectrum expected for a normal solid with fixed 
lattice sites. 
Figure 7.28 Face-centred cubic 
array, of C, 
creating octahedral 
and tetrahedral holes 
7.5.2 Intercalation Chemistry 
Solid C, 
is a redox-active array, with relatively weak intermolecular 
forces (comparable to interlayer forces in graphite). Therefore, it is a 
potential host for intercalation chemistry, like graphite or the transition 
metal sulfides. 
As with a normal face-centred cubic lattice, the C, 
array generates 
tetrahedral and octahedral holes which can accept intercalated species 

180 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
(Figure 7.28). If we consider C, as spheres, this leads to the normal four 
spheres, eight tetrahedral holes and four octahedral holes per unit cell 
of a face-centred cubic lattice. The two holes have significant size dif- 
ferences, and as a result C,, has extensive intercalation chemistry. For 
example, caesium is too large to be accommodated in the tetrahedral 
holes but fits comfortably into the octahedral holes. Once C, has been 
reduced it is known as a fulleridc. The intercalated ions are mostly either 
metals of Group 1 or 2, where the former is most common. 
Preparation of Fullerides 
Fullerides can be prepared in a number of ways: 
1. Directly using metal vapour and C,, in a sealed tube (as metal 
vapours are extremely volatile). This method is always employed 
when preparing compounds from Group 2. 
2. Dissolution of the Group 1 metals in liquid ammonia and adding 
C60. This route caused considerable confusion for a while, as ammo- 
nium ions as well as the Group 1 cations were being intercalated. 
The size and number of intercalated cations have a pronounced effect 
on the electronic structure of C6,,. C, has a low-lying acceptor orbital 
which it uses for bonding. The band filling (by virtue of the anion) and 
the band width (by virtue of the separation of the molecules) are strong- 
ly affected by the ions intercalated. The maximum number of electrons 
that can be accepted by this acceptor orbital is 6; therefore, for the 
general formula AxC,, where A is an alkali metal, if A is less than 6 the 
intercalate should be conducting (partially filled bands). 
Up to and including x = 3 the intercalates maintain the face-centred 
cubic structure and fill the octahedral and tetrahedral sites accordingly. 
However, the materials A C (where A = K, Rb, Cs) transform and 
form a new structure, consisting of a body-centred cubic array of C,, 
molecules with a cluster of metal atoms at the centre. 
6 .  69 
4C,,: Conductors and Superconductors 
This composition has produced the class of superconductors which has 
the highest T' of any non-cuprate based system. The phases K,C,,, 
Rb,C,, and CsRb,C,, (maximum Tc = 33 K) have the intercalated face- 
centred cubic structure at all temperatures, with both octahedral and 
tetrahedral holes filled. 
Although the basic structure is the same, the intercalated ions cause 
the molecule orientation to become fixed and non-rotating, with a 
six-membered ring pointing towards each cation. The effect of the 
intermolecular separation of the C, on Tc is striking and is illustrated 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
181 
in Figure 7.29. This trend indicates that Tc is controlled by the density 
of states at the Fermi level. The higher density of states, the higher the 
Tc. The width of the conduction band and hence the density of states at 
the Fermi level depends on the orbital overlap. If the C ,  molecules are 
close together, the overlap is good and the band is broad, giving a low 
density of states at the Fermi level. As the atoms are forced apart by 
larger intercalated species, the band narrows and the density of states at 
the Fermi level rises (Figure 7.30). 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
690 
750 
810 
Volume (A? 
Poor overlap 
Figure 7.29 Change in critical 
temperature with volume of C,, 
unit cell 
Figure 7.30 Schematic diagram 
of the density of states diagrams 
for C, 

182 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Higher Fullerenes 
Separation of the higher fullerenes is extremely difficult owing to the 
existence of multiple isomers. C,, is reasonably well known, and is similar 
to C,, with an extra band of 10 carbons added in the middle, making 
a rugby ball shape. Other materials such as C,, are known. The symmetry 
has been reduced to D,, in these rugby ball-type materials, and inter- 
calation experiments have shown the existence of K,C,,. No supercon- 
ducting higher fulleride has yet been discovered. 
C. N. R. Rao, The Chemistry of the High Temperature Superconducting 
R. M. Barrer, Zeolites and the Clay Minerals, Academic Press, New 
R. M. Barrer, Hydrothermal Chemistry of Zeolites, Academic Press, 
G. Englehardt and D. Michel, High Resolution Solid State NMR of 
D. W. Breck, Zeolite Molecular Sieves: Structure, Chemistry and Use, 
H. H. Ma1 and K. H. J Buschow, Intercalation Chemistry, Academic 
R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1988, 242, 1017. 
H. Kroto, Science, 1988, 242, 1139. 
I. Hargittai, Discoverers of Buckminsterfullerene, in The Chemical 
Copper Oxides, Springer, Heidelberg, 199 1. 
York, 1978. 
New York, 1982. 
Silicates and Zeolites, Wiley, New York, 1987. 
Wiley, New York, 1974. 
Press, New York, 1982. 
Intelligencer, Springer, New York, 1995. 
lm 
(a) Describe briefly how you would synthesize the solid state 
(b) The 13C MAS NMR spectrum of c 6 0  recorded at room tem- 
perature shows a single narrow resonance, but as the temperature 
falls the spectrum broadens to a feature covering several kHz. 
Describe the origin of the differences iil the spectra. 
(c) Reaction of c60 with rubidium and caesium produces an inter- 
calation compound with the formula, Rb,CsC,,. Describe, with the 
aid of a diagram, why you would expect this compound to be a 
tvpe I1 superconductor. 
(d) Explain what is meant by the underlined terms in part (c). 
compound Na,C,,. 

Selected Topics: An Introduction to Some Important Solid State Materials 
183 
2. Reaction of a mixture of yttrium oxide, barium carbonate and 
copper oxide in a stream of oxygen produces A. Elemental analy- 
sis of the oxide A gave 11.9% Y, 36.8% barium and 34.1% copper. 
(a) Calculate the empirical formula of A, assuming the rest of the 
molecular YO is oxygen. 
(b) Determine the average oxidation state of the copper. 
(c) If you brought a pellet of A at very low temperature towards a 
permanent magnet, what would you expect to happen and why? 
(d) Draw the graph expected for the change in resistance with tem- 
perature for A. Explain the salient features of the graph, with the 
aid of diagrams where necessary. What type of superconductor 
would you expect A to be? 
3. Cu(OH), reacts with Au(OH), in a 3:l molar ratio to form A. 
The IR spectrum of A shows a strong absorption at 3400 cm-l. 
0.541 g (1 mmol) of A decomposes in a stream of hydrogen at 500 
"C to produce B and water (0.162 g). Elemental analysis of the 
intermetallic B revealed 50.8% Au. 
(a) Using the information given above, identify A and B. 
(b) Given that B is a superconductor which conducts at liquid heli- 
um temperatures, predict a likely structure for B. 
4. (a) Describe the structural features of graphite which make it 
suitable for intercalation reactions. 
(b) How does the structure of the first stage intercalate of graphite 
differ from that of the parent material? 
(c) Reaction of excess potassium with graphite produced the gold- 
coloured compound A which contained 28.9% potassium. Describe 
the type of reaction occurring, and explain the differences in 
appearance and conductivity of the new material compared with 
graphite . 
5. (a) Briefly describe the important features of zeolites which make 
them suitable for ion exchange. Why do siliceous zeolites make 
poor water softeners? 
(b) Describe two ways in which an H-zeolite could be prepared. 
(c) Describe the two sorts of acid site which form in zeolites. 
(d) Explain why zeolites can be used for shape-selective catalysis. 

184 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
1 1 .  
12. 
13. 
14. 
H. K. Onnes, Akad. Van Wetenschappen, 191 1, 14, 1 13. 
J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Muller, 2. Phys. B, Condens. Matter., 
1986, 64, 189. 
M. K. Wu, J. R. Ashburn, C. J. Torrig, P. H. Hor, R. L. Meng, Z. 
J. Huang, Y. Q. Wang and C. W. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 
908. 
J. Bardeen, L. Cooper and J. R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev., 1957, 108, 
1175. 
W. Meissner and R. Ochsenfield. Naturwissenschaften, 1933, 21, 
787. 
C. P. Poole, H. A. Farach and R. J. Creswick, Superconductivity, 
Academic Press, San Diego, 1996, p. 22. 
Y. Shimakawa, Y. Kubo and T. Manako, Nature, 1996,379, 53. 
A. P. Ramirez, R. J. Cava and J. Krajewski, Nature, 1997, 386, 
156. 
C. Zener, Phys. Rev., 1951, 82, 403. 
A. F. Cronstedt, Kongl. Svenka Vetenskaps. Acad. Hundlinger., 
1756, 17, 120. 
C. Williams (ed.), R. M. Barrer 1910-1996, Founding Father of 
Zeolite Science, British Zeolite Association, University of 
Wolverhampton, 1999. 
W. Lowenstein, Am. Miner., 1954, 39, 92. 
W. Kratschmer, L. D. Lamb, K. Foshropoulos and D. F. Huffman, 
Nature, 1990, 629, 354. 
R Tycko, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 1994, 3, 303. 

Answers to Problems 
1. Figure 1.23 
00000000 
00000000 
00000000 
00000000 
000000000000 
000000 
000000 
000000 
0 0000 
00 000 
*OO 
000000000000 
000000000000 
000000000000 
000000000000 
Figure 1.23 Primitive (P) and non-primitive unit cell 
185 

186 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
2. (i) Formula A = 4 atoms, C = 814 = 2 tetrahedral holes. Formula 
= A4C2 or A2C. Coordination number of C must be four as it is 
in a tetrahedral hole. If all the holes were filled, then A would be 
eight coordinate; however, since only one quarter of the holes are 
filled, A must have a coordination number of two. 
(ii) Using the same reasoning as above, the formula is A4C and the 
coordination numbers are one and a half and six, respectively. 
3. Figure 1.24. For a tetragonal unit cell a = b f c and a = p = y 
= 90". 
Figure 1.24 Body-centred tetragonal unit cell 
4. Figure 1.25. 
Figure 1.25 Outline of hexagon in hexagonal close-packing 
5. There are two octahedral holes within the unit cell, each count- 
ing one. Eight tetrahedral holes lie on the edges, each contributing 
one quarter, and two lie within the unit cell, each contributing two 

Answers to Problems 
187 
(four in total). There are eight atoms on the corners, each con- 
tributing one eighth, and one within the unit cell, contributing one. 
This gives a ratio of octahedral ho1es:tetrahedral ho1es:atoms of 1:2: 1. 
6. Figure 1.26. The coordination number of the tungsten atoms is 
only eight, so it cannot be close packed as the coordination num- 
ber must be 12. The ionic radius is just half the distance between 
the two closest atoms. This is just one quarter of the body diago- 
nal of the cube = l/4 d3a. 
A 
C a 
Figure 1.20 Body-centred cubic unit cell of B-tungsten 
7. 
R.A.M 
NA 
19.5 = (3.15 x 10")' 
Therefore R.A.M. = 183.5. 
8. (i) Hexagonal close packed: two-layer repeating sequence, 
ABABAB . . . 
Cubic close packed: three-layer repeating sequence, ABCABCABC- 
... 
Both have a coordination number of 12, with 12 sphere nearest 
neighbours. 
(ii) Figure 1.27. 
( 1 90) 
'12 
(LO) 
Figure 1.27 Projection of HgSe forming the zinc blende structure 

188 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
(iii) Fluorite is cubic close-packed structure with all tetrahedral 
holes filled, whereas no hexagonal close-packed structure exits with 
all tetrahedral holes filled. 
9. (i) A tetrahedral hole is created by four spheres placed sym- 
metrically, three in the plane and one in the depression produced 
by them. A hole is created between them since the round spheres 
do not fill all the space. The hole can be filled by other ions to form 
compounds. 
(ii) Lithium is much smaller than the oxide ion so the positions of 
cations and anions are reversed compared to the fluorite structure, 
i.e. where the smaller ions fill the holes and the larger ions make 
up the lattice. 
(iii) Coordination number of Li = 4 and 0 = 8: 
Li = 8 x 1 = 8; 0 = (8 x 1/8) + (6 x l/2) = 4 
Formula = LiO and there is L&04 [4(L40)] in the unit cell, so 2 = 4. 
10. r + / r  = 0.611 for FeO. There the material is likely to contain 
six-coordinate ions. This means the halite structure would be suit- 
able. 
1 . (i) Using the Kapustinskii equation, V = 2, Ca and 0 both have 
a charge of 2. Since the cell edge of CaO is 483 pm and it forms 
the halite structure, then the shortest distance between cation and 
anion is 241.5 pm. Then 
(1.214 x los) x V x z1 x z2 
r1+ r2 
UL = 
- - (1.214xlo~)x2x2x2[1 -- 34.51 
24 1.5 
241.5 
= 3447 kJ mol-l 
(ii) See Figure 2.9. 
AH, = 590 + 1100 + 249 - 142 + 844 - 3447 = -806 kJ mol-' 

Answers to Problems 
I89 
t 
I 
AH, I 
1 
Figure 2.9 Born-Haber cycle for the formation of RbCl 
(iii) Ionization potentials and electron affinities are defined at 0 K 
and thermochemical cycles are determined at 298 K. 
(iv) The second ionization potential for calcium is much greater 
that the first despite forming a closed shell configuration because 
it involves removing an electron from a positively charged ion. The 
electrostatic interaction is therefore much greater and the electron 
is held closer to the nucleus. 
2. From data tables, the ionic radius for Sr2+ = 113 pm and for 
02- = 140 pm. This gives an approximate minimum cation-anion 
distance of 253 pm. Using the Kapustinskii equation as in question 
1 gives UL = 3315 kJ mol-l. 
3. Using the Kapustinskii equation as in question 1 gives 530 kJ 
mol-I . 
4. The exact value depends on the data book used, but using a sim- 
ilar Born-Haber cycle as given in Figure 2.6 and substituting Rb 
for C1 gives a value in good agreement with the ionic model (510 
kJ mol-l). 
5. 3UL(A1X) + Z2 + Z3 - UL(A1X3) - 2Z1(Al) - 2Wat = AHdec. 
Using the data given for fluoride = 3(910) + 1816 + 2743 - 6380 - 

190 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
2(577) - 2(324) = -893 kJ mol-l. Using the data given for iodide = 
3(696) + 1816 + 2743 - 4706 - 2(577) - 2(324) = +159 kJ mol-'. 
The most stable species in each case is AlF, and A11 as the AHdec 
is exothermic for the fluoride but endothermic for the iodide. 
6. (i) The double bond is strong for C=O as the elements are in 
the same period and the pn-pn interaction is strong. For Si=O this 
interaction is weaker as the elements are in different periods. 
However, the low-lying d-orbital on silicon strengthens the single 
bond of Si-0 by p7C-d~ interaction. C has no low-lying d-orbital, 
and the bond is weak. 
(ii) Heterolytic bond enthalpies are generally larger than homolyt- 
ic bond enthalpies because the bonds are strengthened by the 
electrostatic interaction. Since C and F have different electronega- 
tivities, the bond is strong. 
(iii) The N-N bond is weaker than the F-F single bond as the lone 
pairs on the nitrogen destabilize the bonding interaction by elec- 
tron repulsion. 
(iv) The silicon is larger than carbon and has a low-lying empty d- 
orbital. This means it can be attacked by nucleophiles such as 
water. The Si-Cl bond is weaker than the Si-0 bond. In contrast, 
the C is very small and has no empty orbitals and is not easily 
attacked. The C-F bond is stronger than C-O, and the compound 
is not easily hydrolysed. 
. .. 
1 . See Figure 3.24: 
all angles 90" 
A2 
4a2 
2. 
sin2@ = -(h2+ 
k2 + 1') 
sin28 for the (301), (400) and (111) = 0.0386, 0.0617 and 0.0154, 
respectively; therefore 28 = 22.661,28.765 and 14.257, respectively. 
3. Since the unit cell is body-centred cubic, h+k+Z = 2n. The first 
ten reflections are therefore 
110, 200, 211, 220, 310, 222, 321, 400, 411 and420. 

Answers to Problems 
191 
4. Angle 
8 
sin28 
ratio 
x3 
h,kJ 
22.593 
11.297 
0.0384 
1 
3 
111 
26.145 
13.073 
0.0512 
1.33 
4 
200 
37.311 
18.656 
0.1023 
2.66 
8 
220 
44.059 
22.030 
0.1406 
3.66 
11 
31 1 
46.129 
23.065 
0.1535 
4 
12 
222 
53.792 
26.896 
0.2046 
5.33 
16 
400 
The lattice type is face-centred cubic (thirds in the initial ratio). 
Using the last reflection to calculate the lattice parameter gives 
8.401 A. 
58 (a) The potassium cation and the chloride anion are isoelectronic 
and will be indistinguishable in X-ray diffraction, since the X-rays 
are scattered by the electron cloud. In a similar way to MgO (given 
in the text), the unit cell observed by X-rays is a primitive cubic 
with a lattice parameter half that expected for KCl. No restrictions 
on the observed reflections. 
(b) The potassium cation and the chloride anion have very differ- 
ent scattering lengths in neutron diffraction and the true face-cen- 
tred cube will be observed. Hence h,k,Z must be all odd or all even. 
23.34 
mass ($ Fq03 + SrO) 
- - 
24.2 
mass SrFe03 - 
6. 
Therefore 
24.2 
23.34 
- 
143.467 + (3 - ~(16)) 183.467 
On rearranging 
24.2(183.467) - 23.34(143.467) 
3-x = 
23.34(16) 
Therefore 3 - x = 2.92, which gives x = 0.08. 
78 The 110 would be observed for both body-centred cubic (h+k+Z 
= 2n) and primitive (no restrictions) systems, but not for a face- 
centred system (as h,k,Z must be all odd or all even). However, since 
the 234 is not observed, this implies the system must be bcc. 

192 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
8. X-rays are scattered by electrons. Since this compound contains 
one heavy element (Sr) and two light ones (Li, H), in an X-ray dif- 
fraction pattern most of the scattering will be generated by the Sr: 
20 
e 
sin28 
ratio 
h, k, 1 
23.25 
11.63 
0.040 
1 
100 
40.84 
20.42 
0.121 
3 
111 
47.53 
23.77 
0.162 
4 
200 
53.56 
26.78 
0.203 
5 
210 
69.49 
34.75 
0.324 
8 
220 
74.38 
37.19 
0.365 
9 
300 
The lattice is primitive as there are no systematic absences. Using 
the last reflection gives 3.822 A. 
1. Yttrium barium copper oxide has been prepared in a 
number of ways using both conventional ceramic and co- 
precipitation methods. The classic laboratory method uses yttrium 
oxide, barium carbonate (not barium oxide as it is hygroscopic) 
and copper oxide. 
2. The reaction temperature could be lowered by using the 
precursor method of preparation, e.g. dissolve cobalt acetate and 
aluminium acetate in acetic acid. Evaporate to dryness and heat 
the residue. 
3. Lithium titanate could be prepared by using a sealed tube 
method. As the alkali metals can react with glass, the tube must 
be coated with graphite by decomposition of an organic solvent on 
the surface. Then a mixture of lithium oxide and titanium dioxide 
could be weighed out in a glove box, placed in the tube and the 
tube evacuated. Once sealed off, the whole tube could be heated 
in a furnace. Alternatively, a mixture of lithium carbonate (in 
excess) and titanium dioxide could be pressed into pellets and heat- 
ed. The required excess of lithium carbonate would have to be 
determined by trial and error. 
4. This reaction just requires the reactants to be mixed in the cor- 
rect molar proportions to give the right ratio and to make sure 
there is no oxygen left over. The reactants would then be reacted 

Answers to Problems 
193 
in a sealed tube, in a similar way to that described in question 3, 
to prevent aerial oxidation: 
5. This reaction uses cobalt oxide and alumina as starting materi- 
als. Choice of an alumina crucible would therefore by unsuitable. 
This is because raising the temperature sufficiently to get the alu- 
mina starting material to react would also allow the crucible to 
react. Any other reaction vessel with a melting point higher than 
1200 "C would be suitable (Table 4.1). 
6. Solid B and solid AB using the phase diagram. 
7. A single crystal of zeolite could be prepared hydrothermally 
using slow cooling from the reaction temperature. 
1. This should be the same diagram as silicon doped with alu- 
minium (Figure 5.9iii), since germanium is in Group 14 and galli- 
um in Group 13. The type of charge carrier is a positive hole and 
the semiconductor is p-type. 
2. In the carbon layers in graphite, each carbon is sp2 hybridized. 
This arrangement uses three of the four available orbitals on car- 
bon for bonding. Each carbon centre is trigonal planar, which pro- 
duces the layered structure. However, this also means there is one 
p-orbital (containing one electron) remaining on each carbon which 
is not involved in bonding. These orbitals can overlap with p- 
orbitals on the carbons in other layers to form bands. In diamond 
the carbons are sp3 hybridized. All the orbitals which contain the 
outer electrons are used for bonding and there are no orbitals 
remaining which contain outer electrons to form a band. Therefore 
diamond is insulating. 
3. Increasing the number of anions creates cation vacancies (i.e. the 
formula ZnO becomes Zn,-xO as there are less cations than anions). 
There are positive holes created where the cations should be. 
4. (a) No, as an insulator is just a semiconductor with a very large 
band gap. 

194 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
(b) Yes, the semiconductor has a small band gap compared with 
an insulator and will conduct at a lower temperature. 
(c) The band gap will be smaller, but the actual picture will be very 
similar. 
5. (a) MnO will antiferromagnetically order using the superex- 
change mechanism (Figure 5.21). 
(b) Co metal has unpaired d-electrons and orders ferromagnetically 
(Figure 5.20). 
6. (a) Initially, conductivity is metal-like. Once beyond the critical 
temperature the conductivity increases dramatically. 
(b) Resistance falls with falling temperature, just like a metal, until 
the critical temperature is passed. Below this point, the resistance 
falls away faster, but gradually (as it is a type 2 superconductor 
and in the vortex state). Finally, the resistance reaches zero and all 
of the material is superconducting. 
1. Potassium chloride will have Schottky defects. Exposing the 
sample to excess potassium vapour causes potassium to be insert- 
ed on to the empty sites. The colour results from electron trapping 
(i.e. K is inserted as a cation and the electron is trapped in the lat- 
tice) in an empty site. This is an extrinsic defect. 
2. (a) Number of moles of Ce = 0.025. Number of moles of deu- 
terium (D,) = 600/24000 = 0.025. Therefore A = CeD,, which is 
likely to form the fluorite structure by analogy with UO,. 
(b + c) B forms by insertion of anions on to an interstitial site in 
an extrinsic defect. It forms by the clustering of vacancieshntersti- 
tials, such that two interstitials are incorporated for every vacan- 
cy (by analogy with UO,+J. An extra 75 cm3 of D, corresponds to 
0.003125 moles of D,, which gives the formula CeD,,,. 
3. Defects are incorporated into the halite structure by formation 
of vacancies on the normal lattice sites. When x = 0.7, there are 
simply vacancies in the oxide sublattice. When x = 1.25, which can 
be rewritten by dividing the formula by 1.25 as Ti,.,O, the vacan- 
cies are on the cation sublattice. 
4. An intrinsic defect does not affect the stoichiometry, e.g. the 

Answers to Problems 
195 
Schottky defects in NaCl where the ion vacancies occur in pairs. 
Extrinsic defects do affect the stoichiometry and are often formed 
by exterior influences on the lattice, e.g. by heating NaCl in potas- 
sium vapour. F centres are formed as the potassium is incorporat- 
ed on to empty cation sites. 
5. (a) This is similar to the formation of iron carbide. Hydrogen 
is incorporated into the structure by filling the empty octahedral 
sites created by the face-centred cubic array of palladium atoms. 
(b) This is an interstitial solid solution. , 
. 
6. Formula = 9 x MOO, + 1 x MOO, = Mo,,O,,. 
7. (a) Intrinsic defects: Schottky. 
(b) Extrinsic defects: oxygen vacancies. 
(c) Intrinsic defects: Frenkel. 
8. The difference in size between the divalent calcium cation and 
the trivalent yttrium cation is less than 10?40. This means that a sub- 
stitutional solid solution should form. The fluorite structure would 
probably accommodate the difference in charge between the two 
cations by incorporation of interstitial anions. 
I . (a) Combination of the pure fullerene (repetitively sublimed) 
with sodium, in the correct molar proportions in a graphite coat- 
ed silica tube. Evacuate tube and seal and heat to 70 "C. 
(b) At room temperature the molecules of fullerene are tumbling 
on their lattice sites. The spectrum produced is therefore similar to 
that achieved for a liquid (where molecules tumble in solution). As 
the temperature falls the molecules lose energy and lock on their 
lattice sites. The spectrum broadens and becomes the same as a 
normal solid (Chapter 3: MAS NMR). 
(c) Similar to type 1, except that the transition to the supercon- 
ducting state is a gradual slope rather than a sharp fall. The large 
molecules force the C, molecules apart and lead to poor overlap 
of the orbitals, giving a high density of states at the Fermi level 
(Figure 7.30). 
(d) A superconductor is a compound which conducts with no resis- 
tance below a certain temperature (critical temperature). The con- 
ducting current moves with the lattice vibrations in a concerted 

196 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
process such that there is no resistance. Type 2 superconducters 
allow partial penetration of the magnetic flux at intermediate Val- 
ues of the applied field, which leads to a gradual loss of resistance. 
This means there are both superconducting and non-supercon- 
ducting areas in the same sample (vortex state). An intercalation 
compound forms without major rearrangement of the host lattice, 
which has strong (intra) and weak (inter) interactions and vacant 
sites which can accept ions/atoms. 
2. (a) By division of the percentages by the relative molecular 
weights of yttrium, barium and copper, a ratio of 1:2:4 is obtained. 
By assuming the rest of the mass is oxygen, a formula of 
YBa,Cu,O, is achieved, i.e. Y (11.9/88.9 = 0.134), Ba (36.W137.3 
= 0.268), Cu (34.1/63.5 = 0.534) and 0 (17.2/16 = 1.075) gives 
0.134:0.268:0.534: 1.075 = 1 :2:4:8. 
(b) Average copper oxidation in state n in Gun+: (8 x -2) + 3 + 
(2 x 2) + (4 x n) = 0. Therefore n = 9/4 = 2.25. 
(c) Copper oxidation state is non-integral; therefore a possible 
superconductor. A permanent magnet would be repelled from the 
superconductor at low temperature. A surface current is set up on 
the surface of the superconductor to exactly oppose the external 
magnetic field and exclude magnetic flux from the sample (Meissner 
effect). Beyond a critical field the effect can no longer be overcome 
and the material would return to the normal state. 
(d) See Figure 7.3 1. See question Id for explanation of type 2 super- 
conductivity. 
t 
superconducting 
state 
Temperature (K) 
Figure 7.31 

Answers to Problems 
197 
3. (a) IR absorption: characteristic of OH. On reduction in hydro- 
gen, A produces 0.162 g of water which is exactly 9 mmol. This 
implies that A contains 9 moles of 0, probably as OH. From the 
reaction stoichiometry, 3 moles of Cu and 1 mole of Au are prob- 
ably in the product. Since 1 mmol of A weighs 0.541 g, the RMM 
of A should be 541. Now 3 x RMM (Cu) + 1 x RMM (Au) + 9 x 
RMM (OH) = RMM A. Therefore RMM A = (3 x 63.54) + 196.97 
+ (9 x 17) = 540.6. Thus A = AuCu,(OH),. B is formed from the 
reduction of A in hydrogen. B is an intermetallic. This implies loss 
of OH to give water with the formation of AuCu,. If B is 50.8% 
Au then it must be 49.2% Cu. Therefore Au (50.8119697 = 0.257) 
and Cu (49/2/63.54 = 0.774); 0.257:0.774 = 1:3, i.e. AuCu,. 
(b) Since B is superconducting and has the formula A,B, it implies 
the structure given in Figure 7.4, i.e. a body-centred cube of Au 
atoms with two equidistant Cu atoms on the middle of each face, 
forming three non-intersecting chains. 
4. (a) Graphite consists of strong covalently bonded layers of sp2 
hybridized C atoms with weak van der Waals forces between the 
layers. The layer structure provides an array of empty lattice sites 
and the layers are redox active. 
(b) In the parent material the repeat distance is twice the distance 
between the layers, as the layers are askew. In the first stage inter- 
calate the layers are aligned and the repeat distance is the same as 
the interlayer separation. 
(c) 28.9% K and therefore 71.1% C. This gives the formula C,K 
from: K (28.9/39.1 = 0.739) and C (71.1/12 = 5.925); thus 
0.7395925 = 1:8. This is a redox reaction where the potassium is 
oxidized and the graphite is reduced. The driving force for the reac- 
tion is the loss of the electron from the potassium. The intercalat- 
ed material has a conductivity 1000 times that of graphite and 
shows true metallic conductivity, where the resistance rises with 
temperature. 
5. (a) A zeolite consists of a three-dimensional framework which 
is constructed from vertex-linked silicate and aluminate tetrahedra 
and voiddchannels. For every aluminium there will be one mono- 
valent cation for change balance and hydrating water molecules. 
Siliceous zeolites make poor water softeners as they contain few 
cations, since cations are occluded for charge balance to compen- 
sate for the aluminium substitution, i. e. where aluminium is triva- 
lent and silicon is tetravalent. 

198 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
(b) Acidic zeolites can be prepared (1) by exchange in dilute acid, 
(2) by exchange with an ammonium salt and then heating to remove 
the ammonia. 
(c) Brarnsted and Lewis acid sites (Figure 7.19). 
(d) The windows and channels in zeolites result in a restriction on 
size and shape. Molecules of the wrong geometry or size cannot 
pass through the zeolite. This means if molecules are generated in 
situ inside the zeolite of the wrong geometry, they can often be con- 
verted into other isomers using the acid sites. 

Subject Index 
Amorphous 2’97 
Annealing 90 
Antiferromagnetism 1 19 
Anvil 95 
Atom counting 6 
Bandgap 106 
Band theory 106 
BCS theory 113, 153 
Body centred 10,62 
Bond dissociation 
energies 40 
Bond enthalpies 39 
Bond valence calculations 
Born-Haber cycles 35 
Born-Lande equation 
Box furnace 84 
Bragg equation 53 
Bremstrahlung radiation 
Buckminsterfullerene 
70 
33 
49 
178 
C,, 
178 
Caesium chloride 18 
Calcium fluoride 17 
Canted anti ferr omagne t - 
Cell parameters 6 
Ceramic method 8 1 
Close packing 1 
Colour centres 141 
Conduction band 107 
Conductor 103 
ism 121 
Congruent 96 
Controlled atmospheres 
Coordination number 
Co-precipitation 88 
Coulomb’s law 3 1 
Covalent crystals 4 
Critical temperature 
113,153 
Cross polarization 75 
Crucibles 83 
Crystal 2 
Crystal habit 3 
Crystal size 64 
Crystalline 2 
Crystallographic shear 
Cubic close packing 133 
Cubic unit cell 6,9 
Curie’s law 1 18 
Curie temperature 1 19 
Curie-Weiss law 1 18 
89 
12 
141 
d-spacing 52 
Defect concentration 
Defects 128 
Density of states 107 
Diamagnetism 1 17 
Differential thermal 
Diffuse reflectance 77 
Dissociation enthalpy 37 
129 
analysis 77 
Electron affinity 30 
Electron density map 
(schematic) 28 
Electron microscopy 70 
Electronic properties 
Enthalpy of formation 
Enthalpy of sublimation 
Eutectic point 98 
Extended X-ray absorp- 
tion fine structure 
(EXAFS) 73 
Extrinsic defects 130 
Extrinsic semiconductors 
102 
36 
37 
109 
f-centre 141 
Face centred 10’62 
Fast ion conductors 1 16 
Fermi-Dirac distribution 
Fermi level 110 
Ferrimagnetism 120 
Ferromagnetism 120 
Flame fusion 96 
Fluorite 17 
Form factor 68 
Fractional coordinates 9 
Free electron theory 4 
Freeze drying 87 
Frenkel defect 13 1 
Fulleride 180 
Furnaces 84 
111 
Graphite 174 
199 

200 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Halite structure 15 
Hexagonal 9 
Hexagonal close packing 
High pressure 90,94 
Hydrothermal methods 
13 
91 
Incongruent 97 
Indexing 60 
Inert pair effect 44 
Infrared spectroscopy 77 
Insulator 105 
Intercalation 170 
Interstices 14 
Interstitial site 115 
Interstitial solid solution 
Intrinsic defects 130 
Intrinsic semiconduct or 
Ion vacancies 1 14 
Ionic bonding 3 
Ionic conductivity 102, 
Ionic crystals 3,26 
Ionic model 28 
Ionic radius ratio 20 
Ionization energy 29 
Ionization potential 29 
Isoelectronic 63 
146 
109 
114 
JCPDS (Joint 
Committee on Powder 
Diffraction Standards) 
57 
Kapustinskii equation 
Koch-Cohen cluster 136 
34 
Lattice energy 33 
Lattice enthalpy 37 
Lowenstein’s rule 167 
Madelung constant 33 
Magic angle 74 
MagLev 161 
Magnetic frustration 123 
Magnetic properties 102 
Magnetic resonance 
imagers 160 
Magnetic susceptibility 
Magnetoresistors 161 
Meissner effect 124, 154 
Mesoporous 92 
Metallic crystals 4, 102 
Microporous 92 
Miller indices 5 1 
Monclinic 9 
Monochromator 5 1 
Muscovite 172 
118 
n-type semiconductor 
Nanomaterials 97 
Nee1 temperature 120 
Neutron diffraction 65 
Nickel arsenide 18 
Non-stoichiometry 89, 
110 
128,132 
Octahedral hole 12 
Orthorhombic 9 
p-type semiconductor 
Paramagnetism 1 17 
Peritectic temperature 
Phase diagrams 97 
Polymorphism 3,5 
Powder diffraction 55 
Precipitation method 87 
Primitive lattice 6, 59 
Projection 9 
110 
100 
Reactor source 65 
Reflections 57 
Resonance scattering 69 
Ruddlesden-Popper 
Rutile 19 
phases 139 
Scanning electron micro- 
scope 71 
Scanning transmission 
electron microscope 
72 
Scattering power 68 
Schottky defect 130 
Sealed tube method 85, 
88 
Secondary building block 
Semiconductor 103 
Shake and bake method 
Shape selective catalysis 
Single crystal 54,95 
Sodalite 166 
Sodium chloride 15, 134 
Sodium titanate 123 
Sol-gel method 88 
Solid electrolytes 1 16 
Solid solution 143 
Solid state nuclear 
166 
86 
170 
magnetic resonance 
74 
Spallation source 65 
Spin glass 124 
Spinel 95 
Spray drying 87 
Stabilized zirconia 1 16 
Stacking faults 141 
Staging 174 
Superconductors 102, 
39,151 
Supercritical method 93 
Superexchange 122 
Systematic absences 61 
Template 91 
Tetragonal 9 
Tetrahedral hole 12 
Thermal analysis 75 
Thermogravimetric 
Transmission electron 
Triclinic 9 
Trigonal 9 
Tube furnace 84 
Tuttle cold-seal bomb 94 
analysis 76 
microscope 7 1 
Ultravioletlvisible spec- 
troscopy 77 
Unit cell 5, 123 
Valence band 107 
Vortex state 125 
Wadsley defects 142 
Wurtzite 19 

Subject Index 
201 
X-ray absorption near 
X-ray diffraction 48 
Zeolites 75,91, 164 
edge structure 
X-ray diffractometer 55 
Zeotype 164 
(XANES) 72 
X-ray tube 49 
Zinc blende 17 
troscopy 72 
Zener mechanism 161 
X-ray absorption spec- 




