 
 
 
1
BLOCKING UNNECESSARY ADVERTISING WEB 
CONTENT 
Cyber adversaries can leverage malicious advertising (“malvertising”) to install malware. Exploit kits in malicious ads can 
take advantage of unpatched vulnerabilities to silently install malware1. Administrators should ensure that software 
updates are implemented promptly to prevent malware installation. Blocking potentially malicious web advertisements 
further mitigates malvertising. Additionally, blocking such content can decrease traffic across the network boundary, 
streamlining incident forensics and enhancing network performance. 
BACKGROUND 
Web browsers present a major cyber security risk due to their frequent interaction with untrusted, Internet-based content. 
Due to the vast Internet landscape, it is generally not possible to predict and catalog the “good” websites that a user may 
visit. Instead, blacklisting approaches (such as Microsoft® SmartScreen®2 and Google Safe Browsing™3) enhance 
security by blocking known malicious websites. Content that is neither inherently useful nor known to be malicious in 
nature, such as advertisements, often go unrestricted. Many websites include space for third party advertisers to display 
content. Despite the benign nature of most advertising content, advertising has been a known malware distribution vector4 
for over a decade5. This attack, known as "malvertising," allows a malicious actor to target users based on location, 
interests, browsing habits, and system specific identifiers, such as software versions1. 
RECOMMENDATION 
Organizations which have already implemented a comprehensive and rapid patching regime6 can further address 
malvertising by blocking potentially malicious, internet-based advertisements. While both network and host based 
solutions are outlined below, network-based solutions provide a similar level of protection to host solutions without 
introducing additional risk.  
There are a variety of advertisement blocking strategies with significant differences in user impact, cost, and infrastructure 
requirements. Administrators should use this guidance to determine the best strategy for their environment based on 
existing network infrastructure. 
AD-BLOCKING THROUGH NETWORK FUNCTIONS 
Blocking access to advertisements at the network boundary can often be achieved using technologies already deployed 
on the network. Many firewalls and DNS servers provide the necessary building blocks to implement the end goal. An 
organization can choose to incorporate more than one of the below network implementations depending on the feature set 
of the deployed systems. 
 
                                                
1 I’ll Make You an Offer You Can’t Refuse (2017-01-04). https://ncsc.gov.uk/blog-post/ill-make-you-offer-you-cant-refuse  
2 Microsoft and SmartScreen are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corp. 
3 Google Safe Browsing is a trademark of Google, Inc. 
4 Weekly Threat Report (2017-06-02). https://ncsc.gov.uk/report/weekly-threat-report-2nd-june-2017  
5 Malvertising (2007-12-06). William Salusky SANS ISC. https://isc.sans.edu/diary/Malvertising/3727  
6 Security Configuration Guide for Browser Updates (2016-10-25). https://www.iad.gov/iad/library/ia-guidance/security-
configuration/applications/security-configuration-guide-for-browser-updates.cfm  

 
 
2
U/OO/176814-18          PP-18-0495          05 July 2018 
 
General Network Solutions 
Some boundary products like firewalls and proxies provide universal resource locator (URL) classification engines as part 
of an Intrusion Prevention Service. These products have domains organized into categories, which are either defined by 
the vendor themselves or can be subscribed to from a third-party vendor. The firewall will then perform an action based on 
pattern matches; an example would be blocking the client request for the ad domain, which would generate a TCP reset. 
This solution requires the least amount of custom engineering due to the native functionality provided in IT products. 
However, if this service was not purchased, there exist freely available solutions described below. 
DNS Servers 
Domain Name System (DNS) servers are an effective means of blocking publicly-known advertising domains due to 
advertisers' reliance on domain name lookups. To accomplish DNS ad-blocking, organizations should first ensure that all 
DNS requests are routed through corporate DNS servers. A firewall rule denying DNS traffic except through corporate 
servers ensures that misconfigured systems cannot bypass ad-blocking protection. 
Publicly-available ad server lists generally need to be transformed because they were primarily designed for use with host-
based software. Because of this, organizations can maintain granular control of the internally hosted list. It is important to 
note that these types of lists are managed by a community of enthusiasts, and additional work may be needed to obtain 
broader coverage.  
Ingesting these lists will require the parsing of domain names from each line. NSA recommends that network administrators 
script the downloading, parsing, and formatting of a reputable, public advertiser list to maintain a current advertiser list. This 
parsed list can be utilized in the firewall solution above if it is determined that the commercial list is missing domains. 
Response Policy Zones (RPZ) allow DNS Servers to substitute query answers. When using RPZ, it is recommended to 
follow the walled garden approach7 by returning a canonical name (CNAME) to an internally owned webserver that will 
serve minimal content to the end user. This will ensure that web requests do not hang while waiting for a response. However, 
a black-hole approach is not discouraged. 
If RPZ is not implemented in your organization’s DNS server, then standard Forward Lookup Zones can be defined for 
each domain to be altered, and a black-hole IP address should be returned. A boundary device upstream should then 
reset the connection so the client’s connection does not hang waiting for resources to load. 
ADVERTISEMENT BLOCKING AT THE HOST LEVEL 
Host Based Ad-Blocking 
Some Host/Endpoint-level security systems offer ad-blocking functionality that is bundled with or readily deployed from 
enterprise endpoint security implementations. Organizations may be able to leverage ad-blocking software provided by 
solutions already within their infrastructure. 
Because of their privileged position in the operating system, endpoint ad-blockers can filter content by blocking DNS 
requests or HTTP requests to known advertising domains or IP addresses. Some systems implement their ad-blocking as 
a browser extension, which is described in greater detail below. 
Ad-Blocking Browser Extensions 
Web based advertisements are primarily targeted at web browsers and browser extensions can block such content. 
Browser extensions are able to incorporate some detection techniques infeasible at the network layer, such as de-
obfuscation and behavioral heuristics. However, some of these extensions adopt a free-to-use business model that 
generates revenue by collecting user information and browsing data. Because browser extensions operate at a privileged 
level in the browser environment, they have access to most data entering and exiting the browser. Implementing a 
malicious ad-blocking extension should be done with considerable caution. Such software could cause a greater 
compromise to network security than a malvertising attack, even when installed from reputable browser app stores8. 
                                                
7 Walled Garden for Remote Access (2015-10). https://ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/walled-garden-remote-access-architectural-pattern-2  
8 Over 20 million Users Installed Malicious Ad Blockers From Chrome Store (2018-04-19). https://thehackernews.com/2018/04/adblocker-chrome-extension.html 

 
 
3
U/OO/176814-18          PP-18-0495          05 July 2018 
AD-BLOCKING CONCERNS 
Breaking Webpage Dependencies 
Some websites restrict content if an ad-blocker is detected. Though this is currently a rare practice, it could prevent users 
from accessing legitimate, useful web content. If ad-blocking is implemented at the host level, the user may have the 
ability to temporarily permit ads allowing access to the desired content. Ad-blocking implemented at the network level, 
however, does not provide users with an immediate means to access the protected content. Depending on how ad-
blocking is implemented, administrators should ensure that users are trained on adding exceptions to host based ad-
blocking or are aware of potential content degradation when network based ad-blocking occurs. Most ad-blockers allow 
administrators to whitelist specific domains if ad-blocking is hindering a mission essential resource. 
Malicious Denial of Service Attacks 
Ad-blocking is accomplished through the use of domain/IP blacklists that are frequently updated by communities of 
individuals. These lists may not be well-vetted by the ad-blocking vendor themselves creating the potential for untrusted 
individuals to introduce non-advertisers to the blacklist. In extreme cases, a malicious user could list reputable domains 
(such as *.mil) as known advertisers which could cause the ad-blocker to deny mission critical communications with those 
domains. To counter this threat, system administrators should whitelist regularly used or highly trusted domains within the 
ad-blocking software. Care should be taken not to override blacklists that may match these rules. Suggested whitelisting for 
government customers includes: 
 
Trusted top level domains: *.mil, *.gov, *.edu 
 
Operating System vendors (such as *.microsoft.com and *.apple.com) 
 
Productivity websites used by the organization (such as *.office.com and *.salesforce.com) 
 
Internal/external organization websites and websites regularly used by the organization 
Careful establishment of such a whitelist will greatly reduce the denial of service risk from malicious ad-blocking 
contributors. 
Incomplete Advertiser Coverage 
Due to the increasing impact of ad-blocking lists to advertisers, some ad-blockers have productized domain whitelisting. 
Advertisers can pay these ad-blockers to remove domains from their known advertiser list. When this occurs, products 
using the lists will no longer block malvertising attacks from these domains. Administrators are encouraged to use 
reputable advertiser lists which do not engage in the "pay to advertise" practice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer of Warranties and Endorsement 
The information and opinions contained in this document are provided "as is" and without any warranties or guarantees.  Reference herein to any  
specific commercial products, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply its endorsement,  
recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government, and this guidance shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes. 
Contact Information 
Client Requirements or General Cybersecurity Inquiries 
Cybersecurity Requirements Center (CRC), 410-854-4200, email: Cybersecurity_Requests@nsa.gov  
 

