CISA | DEFEND TODAY, SECURE TOMORROW 
@cisagov 
Facebook.com/CISA 
@CISAgov | @cyber | @uscert_gov 
cisa.gov 
CyberLiaison@cisa.dhs.gov 
Linkedin.com/company/cisagov 
CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT GUIDE 
Securing Web Browsers and Defending 
Against Malvertising for Federal Agencies
AUDIENCE AND SCOPE 
➢
This guidance advises federal agencies on the
threat posed by malicious advertisements
(malvertising) and recommends actions to
protect web browsers from malicious
advertising.
➢
This guide provides information to inform
federal agencies’ executive leadership about
this threat and also provides sufficient detail to
support a technical discussion with
implementation teams.
➢
For federal agencies, network-based
technologies and controls are addressed, in
part, by services provided by CISA—such as
EINSTEIN 3 Accelerated (E3A)—and are
services provided outside of the concise scope
of this guidance. CISA encourages
organizations to also manage access to
advertisements through their own network-
based technologies, such as web proxies,
centralized Domain Name System sink-holing,
web filtering, and firewalls.
➢
Capacity Enhancement Guides support CISA’s
role as the Nation’s cybersecurity risk advisor
by sharing high priority recommendations, best
practices, and operational insights in response
to systemic threats, vulnerabilities, and risks.
AT-A-GLANCE RECOMMENDATIONS 
✓Standardize and Secure Web Browsers
✓Deploy Advertisement Blocking Software
✓Isolate Web Browsers from Operating Systems
✓Implement Protective Domain Name System
Technologies
OVERVIEW 
Web browsers are the primary mechanism for user 
interaction with the internet. As such, their security is a 
constant concern due to the ease of exploitation and the 
ability of adversaries to interact directly with users. 
Common vulnerabilities associated with browsers include 
unsecure configurations, exposure to malicious websites 
and applications, and unsecure browsing habits due to 
poorly trained or unaware users.  
WHAT IS MALVERTISING 
Malvertising is the use of malicious or hijacked website 
advertisements to spread malware and is a significant 
vector for exploitation. It bypasses built-in browser 
protections against pop-ups and forced redirects and 
inserts malicious ads into legitimate ad networks. These 
ads spawn a forced redirect or load a payload for 
malicious purposes. Adversaries can use carefully crafted 
and tailored malicious ads as part of a targeted campaign 
against a specific victim, not just as broad-spectrum 
attacks. 
HOW TO DEFEND AGAINST MALVERTISING 
For federal agencies, defending against these attacks is complicated by variations in control selection, 
implementation, and standardization across the Federal Government and the different sectors of critical 
infrastructure; these complications result in inconsistent mitigation. Failure to implement effective browser security 
inhibits mitigation of web browser risks—including malvertising—and increases the possibility that federal networks 
will suffer data breaches, mission degradation, increased response costs, and loss of public trust. 
With many agencies greatly expanding telework options, agencies should increase attention on securing federal 
endpoints, including associated web browsing capabilities.  

2
CISA | DEFEND TODAY, SECURE TOMORROW  
CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT GUIDE
Securing Web Browsers and Defending Against Malvertising for Federal Agencies
@cisagov 
Facebook.com/CISA 
@CISAgov | @cyber | @uscert_gov 
cisa.gov 
CyberLiaison@cisa.dhs.gov 
Linkedin.com/company/cisagov 
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) recommends the following actions to protect web 
browsers from malicious advertising. 
Standardize and Secure Web Browsers 
Simplify your web browser infrastructure via 
standardization. This is often the easiest, quickest, 
and most cost-effective approach.  
Permitting the use of multiple web browsers, browser 
versions, and browser configurations results in several 
disadvantages for agencies. These include a larger 
attack surface, increased complexity in implementing 
web browser security controls, and a compromised 
ability to maintain situational awareness within the 
agency. Implementing managed approvals for browser 
version and configuration options can reduce the risks 
associated with deprecated technologies and 
establish strict exception policies with enhanced compensating controls for legacy applications that need to run 
outdated or difficult-to-secure code. Additional guidance can be found in National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-28 v2, Guidelines on the use of Active Content and Mobile Code.1 
The National Security Agency (NSA) has also produced an open-source tool—deployable on agency networks—to 
block outdated browser versions.2
CISA recommends securing web browsers according to the configuration guidance defined in NIST SP 800-70 r4, 
National Checklist Program for IT Products – Guidelines for Checklist Users and Developers3 and managing 
configurations on an ongoing basis as technology changes and checklists are updated. CISA recommends 
implementing a comprehensive and efficient patching program. NIST’s SP 800-40 r3, Guide to Enterprise Patch 
Management Technologies, can assist in developing and refining approaches to patching.4 
1 https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-28ver2.pdf
2 https://github.com/nsacyber/Blocking-Outdated-Web-Technologies  
3 https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-70r4.pdf
4 See also: NIST SP 800-40 r3, Guide to Enterprise Patch Management Technologies, July 2013 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-40r3.pdf
Standardizing and securing web browsers according 
to leading practices provides the following benefits: 
•
Reduces agency attack surface by specifically
addressing multiple web browser and plug-in
vulnerabilities—many current browser exploits can be
addressed with the execution of applicable browser
checklists
•
Enables increased agency efficiency in monitoring
and update and patch management, and may 
improve response efforts to newly disclosed 
vulnerabilities by simplifying the number of types and 
configurations in use 
• Streamlines and facilitates software configuration
management and patch management processes 
Deploy Advertising Blocking Software 
An additional measure is to implement advertisement 
blocking. In most cases, this solution is generally more 
complex and expensive to implement than browser 
standardization. 
Ad-blocking software prevents advertisements from 
displaying or removes different types of ads (e.g., pop-
ups, banner ads) when a user visits a website or uses
an application. This software reduces a user’s risk in
receiving malicious ads or being redirected to malicious websites. One common ad-blocking technique is the use of
web browser extensions that enable a user or agency to customize and control the appearance of online ads. CISA
encourages agencies to evaluate solutions that would enable malicious ad blocking.
  
  
  
 
The benefits of using advertising blocking software 
include the following: 
•
Reduced risk of malicious advertisements or
redirects to malicious or phishing sites
•
Enhanced client-side performance and faster page
loading 
• Reduced risk of data collection by third parties

3
CISA | DEFEND TODAY, SECURE TOMORROW  
| 
|
 
Note: ad-blocking browser extensions operate with high 
levels of privilege and have access to all data traffic 
between the client and the network, allowing them to 
collect data or perform other potentially malicious actions. 
Additionally, some browser extensions are known to 
accept payment from advertisers to ensure their ads are 
allowlisted from blocking.5 
5 See also: Senator Ron Wyden’s letter concerning these practices https://www.wyden.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/011420 Wyden Ad Blocking 
Letter to FTC.pdf
Consider Isolating Web Browsers from Operating 
Systems  
Embraced by the Department of Defense and major 
corporations, browser isolation is a strategic architectural 
decision. The breadth of options and functionality makes 
the design, implementation, and maintenance of web 
browser isolation more complex than the other 
recommended actions in this guidance. Also, it potentially 
carries the greatest initial cost of the three 
recommendations. However, over its lifecycle, browser 
isolation may have a lower cost, based on reduced costs 
for maintaining ad blocking software, lower incident 
response and recovery costs, and bandwidth efficiencies. 
In most cases, this option should be considered as part of 
a broader architectural change or network refresh.  
Web browser isolation creates a logical barrier—between 
the browser and the operating system—that operates 
under the premise that all web traffic is untrusted.
Separating the browser from the operating system
decreases the impact of exploits by limiting malicious
code to a temporary environment. Remote browser
isolation takes this a step further and transfers the 
processing of web data off the local system to a secure, virtualized environment or isolated cloud-based platform 
with sandbox-like containers. Data transfer from the web occurs in the container or virtualized environment, 
malicious code—if present—is removed, and the cleaned transmission is forwarded to the user. Isolation is highly 
customizable and can be combined with web content filtering, data loss prevention solutions, secure email/web 
gateways, and other security approaches. Browser isolation is available from third-party service providers or as a 
software-as-a-service offering. 
Internet browser isolation provides the following 
benefits: 
•
Isolates potential malicious code and content
within the “protected” cloud platform,
separating the threat from direct connections to
the host operating system, eliminating
ransomware attacks, and allowing users to click
on any website
•
Reduces the need for website allowlisting and
blocklisting and for web browser security user
training
•
Gives administrators the flexibility to set tunable
policies ranging from isolating a portion of traffic
to isolating every download, attachment, and
link
•
Diminishes significant attack avenues by
substantially reducing file risk content when
coupled with a file-transfer solution to permit
webmail and webpage document downloads
(i.e., a “save as” to local storage)
•
Provides a rich source of insider threat
intelligence within the virtual browser logs
because it allows users to visit high-risk
websites
•
Neutralizes existing malware in the network by
disrupting the link to the command and control
site 
•
Does not increase the browser’s memory usage,
slow processing, or adversely impact the user’s 
web browsing experience—unlike the site 
isolation capability currently offered by most 
web browsers 
Consider Implementing Protective Domain Name System Technologies 
Agencies should consider deploying protective Domain Name System (DNS) technologies (also known as DNS 
firewall) to block malicious content associated with malvertising. Studies suggest that more than 91 percent of 
cyberattacks use DNS and that protective DNS services could mitigate one out of every three incidents from 
occurring. Protective DNS technologies diminish attack vectors by preventing redirects to and DNS resolution of 
known malvertising domains, preventing user interface with domains identified as malicious.  
@cisagov 
Facebook.com/CISA 
@CISAgov @cyber  @uscert_gov
cisa.gov 
CyberLiaison@cisa.dhs.gov 
Linkedin.com/company/cisagov 
CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT GUIDE
Securing Web Browsers and Defending Against Malvertising for Federal Agencies

