Introduction to 
Attic Greek 

BOEOTIA 
Oro·pus 
Plataea 
. 
.MT. 
CITHAERON 
Eleusis 
Dccclcia 
• MT. • 
PARNES 
Marathon 
Achamae 
• MT. 
PENTELICUS 
ATTICA 
~egarwa 
I) 
Athens 
'? 
Peiraeus • 
$' 
C7 
• 
~halerum. MT. 
Brauron "" 
",\" 
HYMETIUS 
• 
.p 
c Sf>. 
-1,.p 
ON Ie 
d>\J 
G l/ l p 
~ 
00 .,0 ~ 
Attica in the Classical Period 
!? 
l/ 

Introduction to 
Attic Greek 
Donald J. Mastronarde 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 
BERKELEY 
LOS ANGELES 
LONDON 


Contents 
Preface 
vii 
Introduction: The Ancient Greek Languaxe and Attic Greek 
I 
UNIT ONE: The Alp/whet; Pronunciation 
6 
UNIT TWO: Accentuation 
16 
UNIT THREE: Nouns: The O-Declension 
22 
UNIT FOUR: Nouns: The A-Declension I 
30 
UNIT FIVE: Nouns: The A-Declension II 
34 
UNIT SIX: The Article; Prepositions I 
38 
UNIT SEVEN: Vowel-Declension Adjectives; Attrihution and 
Predication 
45 
UNIT EIGHT: .Q-Verbs: Present Active Indicative 
54 
UNIT NINE: Infinitive; Adjectives with Two Endings 
63 
UNIT TEN: Present Indicative of clj.</; Some Uses of the Genitive 
and Dative 
70 
UNIT ELEVEN: !.2-Verbs: Present Middle/Passive Indicative 
77 
UNIT TWELVE: Adverbs; Conjunctions; Prepositions II; Relative 
Pronoun 
83 
UNIT THIRTEEN: Contract Verhs in -/w; Demonstratives 
93 
UNIT FOURTEEN: Consonant-Declension Nouns I 
99 
UNIT FIFTEEN: Consonant-Declension Nouns II; Interroxative 
Pronoun 
106 
UNIT SIXTEEN: !.2-Verhs: Imperfect Indicative 
113 
UNIT SEVENTEEN: Indefinite Tlf; Uses of the Accusative 
120 
UNIT EIGHTEEN: .Q-Verhs: Future Active and Middle Indicative 
128 
UNIT NINETEEN: .Q-Verbs: Aorist Active and Middle Indicative 
137 
UNIT TWENTY: Tense and Aspect; Indirect Discourse 
145 
UNIT TWENTY -ONE: Consonant-Declension Nouns 111; Pronoun 
aUTOS' 
154 
v 

VI 
UNIT TWENTY -TWO: Consonant-Declension Adjectives; Personal 
Pronouns 
161 
UNIT TWENTY-THREE: MI-Verbs: Present System 
169 
UNIT TWENTY-FOUR: MI- Verbs: Athematic Aorists 
176 
Contents 
UNIT TWENTY-FIVE: Adjectives with Variant Stems; Numerals; Reflexive 
and Reciprocal Pronouns; Result Constructions 
182 
UNIT TWENTY -SIX: Participles: Formation and Declension 
191 
UNIT TWENTY-SEVEN: Uses of the Participle 1 
199 
UNIT TWENTY -EIGHT: Uses of the Participle 1/; %a 
207 
UNIT TWENTY-NINE: Contract Verbs in -aw and -ow; Further Uses 
of the Genitive and Dative 
215 
UNIT THIRTY: Comparison of Adjectives and Adverbs 
226 
UNIT THIRTY -ONE: The Subjunctive 
234 
UNIT THIRTY -TWO: The Optative 
243 
UNIT THIRTY -THREE: Optative of Contract Verbs; Indirect Discourse 
with OTt; Indirect Questions and Indirect lnterro?,atil'e 
251 
UNIT THIRTY -FOUR: Simple, General, and Future Conditions 
259 
UNIT THIRTY -FIVE: Aorist Passive and Future Passive 
267 
UNIT THIRTY -SIX: Contrary-to-F act Conditions; Indicative with av; 
Correlatives 
273 
UNIT THIRTY -SEVEN: Perfect System 
280 
UNIT THIRTY -EIGHT: Object Clauses with Verbs of Effort; Subordinate 
Clauses in Indirect Discourse; Attraction 
292 
UNIT THIRTY -NINE: Temporal Clauses with fwr and the Like; 7Tp/V; 
Assimilation of Mood 
300 
UNIT FORTY: Imperative Mood 
308 
UNIT FORTY -ONE: Pluperfect and Future Perfect; Irregular Perfects 318 
UNIT FORTY -TWO: Contract- Vowel Declension; Attic Declension; Verbal 
Adjectives in -Tor and -TEor 
327 
APPENDIX ONE: Table of Contractions 
337 
APPENDIX TWO: Verb List 
338 
APPENDIX THREE: Paradigms 
349 
Greek-English Glossar.\' 
382 
English-Greek Glossary 
403 
Index 
415 

Preface 
There is no one best way to teach elementary Greek or to learn it. Any 
successful course will depend on a complex interaction among the classroom 
teacher, the textbook, and the students, with their varying learning-styles and 
differing degrees of dedication to a challenging project. The present book was 
inspired by frustration with a standard textbook and began several years ago as 
a typewritten manual prepared as part of an Undergraduate Instruction 
Improvement Project at the University of California, Berkeley. In my teaching 
I have worked with students of all levels and been keenly aware of the gaps 
and deficiencies with which many students arrive at advanced undergraduate 
and graduate courses. In writing this book, it was my desire to provide to the 
mature college student a reliable and relatively complete presentation of 
ancient Attic Greek. With a foundation comprising sufficient coverage of 
morphology and syntax, a substantial body of the central vocabulary 
(especially of verbs and their principal parts), and preliminary exposure to the 
reading of authentic connected passages, the student should be well prepared 
to face the transition to reading a continuous text with commentary and 
dictionary. 
This book is adaptable to several formats of instruction. It is tailored 
primarily for a one-year college course in beginning Greek, in which the text-
book may be covered in somewhat less than the full year and the remainder of 
the year may be devoted to reading some Xenophon or simple Plato or other 
straightforward Attic prose. Concomitant reading of a separate Greek text may 
indeed be assigned (time permitting) for Units 34 and beyond. I have myself 
normally taught from this book in more intensive courses, such as a two-quar-
ter sequence covering the same material as a full-year (three-quarter) course, 
or (with more pressure and no time for reading from another book) in a one-
semester version (counting at Berkeley as a double course). With very highly 
motivated students, the book should work well also at colleges where it is the 
custom to cover all or most of the textbook in a single semester-long course. I 
have not taught from it in a "workshop" setting (i.e., all of elementary Greek 
in six weeks) and do not claim that it is suited to that. 
vii 

Vlll 
Preface 
It should be emphasized that I have not aimed to make the units equal and 
that I do not think equal time should be spent on all units. I recommend a 
brisker pace through the first 10 or 11 units, which are relatively short, and in 
a two-semester course I would aim to complete either 24 or 22 units in the first 
semester. For the longer units, it is possible, with planning, to divide the 
material over several classes: one may, for instance, save some of the exercises 
of the previous unit (e.g., the reading selection in the later units) to be assigned 
while the students are studying the first half of the next unit, or one may at any 
time profitably give an assignment for vocabulary review or principal part 
memorization. If a class is pressed for time toward the end of the course, it is 
possible to move from Unit 35 to Unit 37 and Units 40-41 and advise the 
students to use the remaining units for reference when they begin reading 
Greek texts in their next course. In some courses there will not be time to 
assign and correct all the exercises, and the instructor should make a selection 
suitable to the goals of the particular class. There are other classes that want as 
many exercises as possible, and it is for these that I have expanded the 
exercises in this revision. I have striven to provide both a gradual buildup of 
knowledge and an alternation of material, emphasizing, for instance, now 
nouns and now verbs, now morphology and now syntax. I have tried to put as 
many fundamental features as possible as early as possible, but there have 
inevitably been compromises: not everything can come early. 
My presentation is based on the belief that college students who are 
trying to learn Greek deserve full exposure to the morphology and grammar 
that they will encounter in real texts and full explanations of what they are 
asked to learn. To expect the student to learn such things as if by osmosis from 
annotated readings or to postpone a large portion of the more sophisticated 
concepts and constructions does not, in most cases, serve the long-range needs 
of the student. I believe that at least some students will find the conceptual or 
historical understanding of a linguistic phenomenon to be an aid to the chore 
of memorization which is unavoidable in beginning to master ancient Greek, 
and that the availability of such explanations need not be any obstacle to the 
other students. On the other hand, I have tried to indicate clearly what the 
student must learn as a necessary minimum, and the lengthier historical and 
grammatical explanations are intended for the students' information rather 
than memorization. I retain (and explain) many traditional terms (which the 
student will encounter anyway in commentaries and reference works), since 
provided that the book and the instructor lay emphasis on the true nature of 
each phenomenon the traditional terminology will be harmless. It is, of course, 
up to each instructor to gauge the abilities and level of motivation of his or her 
class, and to decide accordingly such questions as how far and when to press 

Preface 
IX 
for accuracy in the use of accents, for which verbs the class must have the 
principal parts firmly committed to memory, how much of the vocabulary the 
students will be responsible for on a test, or how much emphasis to put on 
English-to-Greek exercises as compared to Greek-to-English. 
The exercises are keyed to the grammar and vocabulary for which the 
student has been prepared by the units completed. Especially in the first half of 
the book I have tended to avoid introducing new words or constructions in a 
reading exercise, so that a student who has truly mastered the material to date 
should be well equipped to do the reading with a minimum of annotation or 
reference to the glossary. For this reason I refrain from introducing "genuine 
Greek" in the early units; but once the students' knowledge has been built to a 
certain point, many of the sentences are taken from Attic prose texts or 
patterned on sentences in such texts. In the later units, I emphasize reading 
from actual texts rather than made-up readings with untypically simple 
sentence-structure and artificially limited vocabulary. To ensure that the 
student begins with a sound grasp of what is prosaic or colloquial as opposed 
to poetic or recondite, I have avoided almost entirely poetic passages in the 
exercises. The vocabulary is intended to familiarize the student with a fairly 
large sample of basic and frequently occurring words, memorization of which 
will facilitate reading of all kinds of Greek as the student progresses. 
Because this book treats concepts of language and grammar so thor-
oughly, there is not room in it for the cultural and anecdotal material that an 
experienced teacher of Greek brings to the classroom situation as an enrich-
ment. It is my hope that instructors who use this book will provide such en-
richment and that, even before the class reaches the reading selections in the 
later units, some items of vocabulary and sentences of the exercises may serve 
to inspire impromptu digressions on history, literature, mythology, society, or 
culture. 
For the improvements made to this book over the years and for the 
encouragement to seek wider distribution I am grateful to a number of col-
leagues, graduate student instructors, and students in my own and others' 
classes. Many of the most user-friendly features of this book are due to their 
kind suggestions. I myself am responsible for all final decisions about inclu-
sion and exclusion and ordering of material. Every user of the book will no 
doubt wish that this or that detail were handled differently or sooner or later, 
but I hope that there will be enough advantages to outweigh such irritations. 
Finally, I would like to acknowledge here the meticulous care shown by 
my copy editor, Paul Psoinos, and the help provided by Mary Lamprech and 
other members of the staff of the University of California Press. 


Introduction: The Ancient Greek 
Language and Attic Greek 
l. Greek is an Indo-European tongue. Since the early nineteenth century 
linguists have demonstrated the existence of and studied a large family of 
European and Asian languages, ancient and modem, which are closely related 
to one another and not similarly related to languages outside the group. It is 
assumed that the kinship among Indo-European languages reflects a prehis-
toric kinship among the speakers of these tongues. A few of the language 
groups classified as Indo-European are Indic (Old Indic = Sanskrit), Slavic, 
Italic (including Latin), Germanic, and Greek. English, with its Germanic 
ancestry and admixture of Latinate elements via French, is also an Indo-
European tongue. 
2. Before about 2000 B.C.E. the inhabitants of the Balkan peninsula and 
the Aegean islands were probably non-Indo-European-speaking peoples. 
Among them were the Minoans on Crete, who had a script (as yet undeciph-
ered) now known as Linear A; the Eteocypriots on Cyprus; and Pelasgians, 
Leleges, Tyrseni, and Carians on the mainland, the islands, and the coast of 
Asia Minor. 
The Greek language inherited some words from these earlier inhabitants 
of the lands which became the Greek world. Many place names are thought to 
be non-Indo-European survivals: for example, those containing either -nth- (or 
its equivalent -nd- in the Ionic dialect) or -ss- (or its equivalent -tt- in the Attic 
dialect), such as Korinthos, Zakynthos, Aspendos, Pamassos, Halikamassos, 
Hymettos; and those with a nasal ending, such as Athenai, Mykenai, Kalymna. 
Some personal names may also be survivals: for example, masculine names in 
-eus such as that of the hero Achilleus (Achilles) or feminine names in -0 such 
as that of the poetess Sappho. A few basic items also seem to have names sur-
viving from the pre-Greek period: for example, plinthos (brick), kolossos 
(statue), thalassa (sea). 

2 
INTRODUCTION 
---~--
-
-
-
-- - - -------
3. Greek-speaking peoples migrated into the "Greek world" as we know 
it in two waves. An "Achaean" migration (from the north or east) took place 
between 2000 and 1500 B.C.E. (perhaps ca. 1900 B.C.E.). Mycenean 
civilization, which flourished from 1600 to 1200 or 1100, was one part of the 
"Achaean" culture. The Myceneans used an adaptation of Minoan Linear A in 
their written documents (clays tablets have survived); this script, called Linear 
B, was deciphered in 1952, revealing a Greek tongue (the earliest form known 
to us). The use of Linear B was probably limited to official documents and 
inventories and was apparently practiced only by a specially trained class of 
scribes within the palace societies of the time. Knowledge of Linear B seems 
to have died out ca. 1100 B.C.E., after the collapse of Mycenean civilization. 
The end of Mycenean civilization is somehow related to volcanic eruption and 
earthquakes and the influx of a new wave of Greek-speaking peoples (the 
"Dorians") ca. 1100. The exact details and chronology of the collapse are, 
however, variously reconstructed. The Greeks themselves remembered the 
Mycenean Age as an age of heroes and great warriors and associated its end 
with famous wars at Thebes and at Troy and with a "Dorian invasion." 
4. Scholars have deduced that early Greek (ca. 1500 B.C.E.) had several 
characteristics not found in classical Greek in general or the Ionic-Attic dialect 
family in particular. "Open vowels," that is, those occurring together without 
an intervening consonant, were retained rather than contracted, as in many 
dialects of classical Greek. Etymologically original long vowel a still 
maintained itself in all contexts, whereas later a change of this vowel was 
characteristic of some dialects. The w-sound (vau or digamma) and the h-
sound were still present, whereas most classical dialects had lost the wand 
some had lost the h as well. Semi vocalic i (like English consonantal y in you or 
beyond) was still used after consonants, whereas in the later dialects other 
sounds developed from such combinations. There was not yet an aorist passive 
system based on the theta-suffix used in classical Greek, and there were more 
irregularities in declension of nouns. 
Greek distinguished itself from other Indo-European tongues in several 
important ways. It had a tonal rather than a stress accent, and this provided for 
a better survival of inflectional endings than in some other languages. Initial 
Indo-European s developed into h in Greek, while initial semivocalic i became 
either h or Greek zeta. Of the original eight Indo-European cases for nouns, 
three (ablative, instrumental, locative) were lost in the development of clas-
sical Greek, and their uses were absorbed by other cases. 

The Ancient Greek Language and Attic Greek 
3 
5. The classical period of the ancient Greek language extends from ca. 
750 to ca. 350 B.C.E. Its beginning is marked by the spread of the Greek 
alphabet, the first surviving traces of which are from the second half of the 
eighth century B.C.E. Its end is marked by the dying out of many classical 
dialects and the development of a new common dialect (see §7 below). For the 
classical period numerous dialects can be documented thanks to the evidence 
of inscriptions, graffiti, and literary remains. The dialects often differed widely 
in spelling, accentuation, pronunciation, vocabulary, and even syntax, but their 
speakers still recognized each other as fellow Greek speakers. 
The dialects of this period are shown on the map on the next page. There 
are three major dialect groups. The Ionic-Attic group includes the regions 
labeled 1-4. Regions 5-10 comprise the "Achaean" group (5-7 North 
Achaean; 8-10 South Achaean). These two groups are believed to correspond 
to the pre-Dorian layer of migrations. The third major group, Doric-NW 
Greek, corresponds to the Dorian migration and includes the regions labeled 
11-23 (11-17 Doric; 18-19 NW Greek; 20-23 other). Not shown on the map 
are the Greek-speaking regions in Sicily, southern Italy, northern Africa, and 
the Black Sea region, colonized during the classical period. 
6. The Attic dialect was that spoken by the natives of Attika, the penin-
sula jutting from the southeastern part of the mainland above the Pelopon-
nesos. The major city and political center of Attika was Athens. The Greek 
taught in this book is basically Attic Greek of the fifth and fourth centuries 
B.C.E. It is the most convenient form of ancient Greek to master first. 
Knowledge of Attic makes accessible to the student both Attic drama and a 
vast amount of historical, oratorical, and philosophical prose. Once Attic is 
mastered, it is relatively simple to learn the variations to be found in the 
dialects of Homeric poetry, choral lyrics, Ionic prose, and pastoral poetry. It is 
even easier to move from Attic to the later Greek of the New Testament. 
Attic shares with Ionic several features which distinguish Ionic-Attic 
from other dialects and shows other features which distinguish it in turn from 
Ionic. One of the most notable features (which you will find important already 
in Unit 4) is the development of original long vowel a: this sound has become 
a long e-vowel (eta) in all positions in Ionic and in all positions except after e, 
i, or r in Attic. Certain sequences of long vowel and short vowel in word 
endings have undergone an exchange of quantities (metathesis), that is, long-
short has become short-long. The w-sound has disappeared in both Ionic and 
Attic; but in Ionic when vau has disappeared after I, n, or r, a short vowel in 
the preceding syllable has become long (compensatory lengthening), whereas 

:(:: ..... ;: 
( 
6 
<> 
I\r 
~ 
.0 ~~ 
\1 
,,/ uc::;;?: 
0"""0 
if 
<:::) 
G 621;V 
!i't 
\J\) ~<Q,o~ 
., dO <;).,V'Q) 
'\) 
17 
~ 6 
17 
: 
.' 
: ..... \\ 
Greek Dialects in the Classical Period 
(Mainland Greece and Aegean Area) 
l. East Ionic 
13. Argive/Aeginetan 
2. Central Ionic 
14. Corinthian 
3. West Ionic 
15. Megarean 
4. Allic 
16. Cretan 
5. Aeolic 
17. Theran/Melian 
6. Thessalian 
18. Rhodian/Carpathian 
7. Boeotian 
19. dialect of other Dorian islands 
8. Arcadian 
20. Epirote/Acamanian/Aetolian 
9. Cyprian 
21. Locrian and Phocian 
10. Pamphylian 
22. Achaean 
I l. Laconian 
(north coast of Peloponnesos) 
12. Messenian 
23. Elean 
10 

The Ancient Greek Language and Attic Greek 
5 
in Attic such a short vowel is unchanged (e.g., Attic koros, but Ionic kouros 
from original korwos). Ionic-Attic dialects add an optional n (nu ephelkus-
tikon) to certain inflectional endings when the following word begins with a 
vowel (this is done to prevent "hiatus," the pronunciation of two vowels 
without intervening consonant). As opposed to other dialects, Ionic and Attic 
have the infinitive ending -nai (instead of -menai), ei for "if" (instead of ai), 
and the modal particle an (instead of ke). As opposed to Ionic, Attic has -u-
instead of -ss- and -rr- instead of -rs-, continues to use the dual number (rather 
than the plural) to refer to pairs of things, and in general preserves more 
irregular forms. 
7. Because of the military, commercial, and intellectual prominence of 
Athens in the second half of the fifth century B.C.E., the use of Attic became 
more widespread. As it was used by more and more people outside of Attika, it 
lost some of its most peculiarly Attic features except among native Athenians. 
By the end of the fourth century, a new, "common" dialect had emerged: the 
Koine. This was the language that spread to Asia and Egypt with Alexander 
the Great and then underwent further modifications. From the mid-fourth 
century on, spoken Greek begins a long and gradual process of change 
affecting pronunciation, accentuation, vocabulary, and syntax, with the Koine 
eventually suppressing the old dialects. These changes in the language are also 
evident in nonliterary works written in Greek of the time, such as private 
letters, contracts, and writings without high cultural aspirations, including the 
Greek New Testament. But educated writers tried for centuries to stay as close 
as possible to classical Attic Greek, creating a split between the living spoken 
language and the artificial (mainly written) language of a cultural elite, a split 
which manifested itself even in modem times. For an excellent brief discus-
sion of the development of Koine and later changes in the Greek language, see 
Robert Browning, Medieval and Modern Greek (London 1969). 

UNIT ONE 
The Alphabet; Pronunciation 
I. The Alphabet. In the late ninth or early eighth century B.C.E. the 
Greeks borrowed a group of 22 letter symbols from the Phoenicians.' They 
reinterpreted symbols for sounds not present in Greek to serve as symbols for 
the vowel sounds (Phoenician, like other Semitic tongues, represented only 
consonants in writing). The earliest Greek alphabets included the letters vau V 
or F), koppa (9), and san (an alternative to sigma that looked much like our 
capital M and followed n in some alphabets). At this stage, the symbol H 
stood for the h-sound, and the letters xi, phi, chi, psi, and omega were not yet 
invented. The inherited forms (with san ignored) were originally arranged as 
follows: 
ABr~EFZHeIKAMNOn9P~TY 
In the early period there were many local variations in letter forms and 
even in correspondence of Jetter to sound, especially among the symbols added 
in some dialects to represent double consonants. For instance, X = ks in the 
west, whence it passed into the Latin and the modern "Roman" alphabet as x, 
whereas in the east (including Attic and Koine) X = kh (chi). The Attic 
alphabet before about 450 lacked omega, xi, and psi and still used H for the h-
sound. The Ionians, however, had generally lost the h-sound and used the 
symbol H instead for a long open e-vowel; their alphabet had added omega (to 
represent a long open a-vowel) and the double-consonant symbols. From 
about 450 some of the Ionic letters were used sporadically in Athens, more 
often by private citizens than by the public secretaries who provided texts (of 
laws and decrees) for stonemasons to carve as inscriptions. In 403, the Athen-
ian government officially made the transition to the Ionian alphabet (although 
use of the old system continued sporadically until about 350). During the 
I. The date of the origin of the Greek alphabet is still debated. Some experts in alphabetic 
writing assign an earlier date, mainly on the basis of similarity of a few letter forms to Semitic 
forms known in the tenth or eleventh century. But the evidence on the Greek side favors the date 
given here. 
6 

The Alphabet; Pronunciation 
7 
fourth century the 24-letter Ionian/New Attic alphabet won acceptance 
throughout most of the Greek world and became the standard in Koine. 
The ancient Greeks used only what we call capital letters (although after 
the fourth century there were more and less formal or cursive ways of writing 
them): 
ABr~EZH0IKAMNZOnpLTY~X~Q 
The lowercase letter forms of present-day Greek type-fonts are more or less 
closely derived from cursive letter forms of handwritten Greek used in the 
Middle Ages and Renaissance: 
a f3 yo E CYJ eLK A. jJ. v to 7r P (J" T V cp X'" w 
Lowercase handwritten forms of some letters may differ slightly from those of 
the Greek font of this book. The instructor will demonstrate the handwritten 
forms for the class. 
2. Classification of Sounds. [NOTE: the technical terminology intro-
duced here is provided for the sake of explanation only and is not to be memo-
rized by the student. The essential thing to learn is the recommended pronun-
ciation, but some of the concepts in this section will turn out to be helpful in 
understanding features of morphology and word formation.] 
The number of syllables in an utterance generally corresponds to the 
number of high points in a diagram of sonority or acoustic power. Sounds 
characteristically occurring at high points in the diagram are vowels. Those 
that occur at low points are consonants. A sound which can occur in both 
positions is a semivowel. 
Vowels are classified in two important ways. (I) They are termed frOllt, 
central, or back according to the areas of the tongue and palate involved in 
pronunciation. (2) They are termed close, mid, or open according to the degree 
of raising of the tongue, which determines the size of the passage through 
which air must pass during pronunciation of the sound. In addition, the quality 
of a vowel can be altered by lip rounding or by nasali-::.ation (the velum or soft 
palate is not raised, with the result that the nasal passages are open when the 
vowel is pronounced). 
A diphthong is the coalescence of two vowel sounds within a single 
syllable. The speaker begins by articulating the first vowel. which is normally 
relatively more open, and glides into the articulation of the second vowel. 
which is normally relatively more close. 
Vowels have length or quantity, long or short corresponding more or less 
to a greater or a lesser duration of pronunciation. Note that the vowels a, L, and 
v may be long or short, while E and 0 are short and YJ and ware long. 

8 
UNIT ONE 
The relations of the vowel sounds of classical Attic can be conveniently 
displayed on a vowel diagram: 
front 
central 
back 
< 
i v 
au 
ffi close 
EL 
E 
a 
mid 
w 
\y open 
Consonants are classified in three important ways. First, according to 
whether or not the vocal cords draw together and vibrate, they are termed 
voiced or voiceless. To understand this distinction, pronounce b, then p, either 
with your ears closed or with a finger on your throat: you should hear or feel a 
vibration when the voiced consonant b is uttered, but not when the voiceless p 
is pronounced. 
Secondly, according to the position or organ of articulation, consonants 
are described as follows: 
labial or bilabial 
labio-dental 
dental 
alveolar 
palatal 
velar 
lips 
upper teeth and lower lip 
tongue-tip and upper teeth 
tongue-tip and upper gums 
mid-tongue and hard palate 
back-tongue and soft palate 
Thirdly, consonants are classified according to the manner in which air is 
released during pronunciation. When there is a complete closure of the speech 
organs, the sound is called a stop; when the stop is released suddenly, the con-
sonant is termed a plosive (p, b, t, d, k, g). The nine classical Greek plosives 
may be arranged in a table as follows: 

The Alphabet; Pronunciation 
9 
a.\pirated 
voiced 
voiceless 
(voiceless) 
labial 
!3 
7r 
1> 
velar 
y 
K 
X 
dental 
0 
T 
e 
When there is no complete closure of the speech organs, the sound is a 
continuant. One type of continuant is the nasal, pronounced with tongue or 
lips closed but air escaping through the nose (m, n). A second type of 
continuant is the liquid (a term taken over from the Latin grammarians, who 
thus translated the Greek grammarians' term hugros, which was probably in 
origin a metrical term): for example, I, a lateral continuant (air escapes on one 
side of the tongue); r, an alveolar continuant. If the air passage is so narrow as 
to create an audible effect, the continuant is termed a fricative (only s in 
classical Greek). The aspirate (h-sound) is also a continuant. 
For further details on reconstructing the pronunciation of classical Attic, 
W. Sidney Allen, Vox Graeca: A Guide to the Pronunciation of Classical 
Greek (3rd ed., Cambridge 1987), is highly recommended. 
3. Recommended Pronunciations 
alpha 
ii 
av 
like the first a in English aha (or the first a in Italian arnare); a 
short open central vowel 
like the second a in English aha (or the second a in Italian arnare); 
a long open central vowel 
like the vowel in English high; a diphthong 
generally pronounced by present-day students exactly like a plain 
long alpha; a so-called "long diphthong."1 The practice of writ-
ing a small iota under the vowel ("iota SUbscript") was deve-
loped in the Middle Ages and has been followed in most printed 
texts, though you will also eventually meet texts with the iota 
written after the long vowel ("iota adscript"), which was the 
classical practice. 
like the vowel in English how; a diphthong 
I. The tenn "long diphthong" is slightly misleading: all diphthongs are nonnally long vowels. 
but the three "long diphthongs" q TI ~ are formed from the combination of a long vowel and 
iota. In classical times these were true diphthongs (long alpha gliding into iota. eta gliding into 
iota, omega gliding into iota), but between the fourth and second centuries B.C.E. the iota 
weakened to a mere glide (like a consonantal ,v-sound) and then was not pronounced at all. 
Hence the modem pronunciation. 

10 
bela 
~ 
f?amma 
y 
delta 
o 
epsilon' 
E 
::.eta 
(" 
theta 
e 
EV 
1JV 
UNIT ONE 
like English b; a voiced labial plosive 
like hard I? in go; a voiced velar plosive, except before y. K. X, and 
perhaps p.., where it is a velar nasal, like n in ink or nl? in song 
like French d (similar to English d, but English d tends to have a 
slight aspiration absent in the Greek); a voiced dental plosive 
like e in English pet; a short front mid vowel 
like the vowel of German Beet (similar to the vowel in English 
eight); a digraph (two-letter symbol) representing a single sound 
(monophthong); a long front close-mid vowel2 
a diphthong pronounced by combining E with lui (= (0) in one 
syllable (cf. the vowel in Englishfeud) 
like Izd] in English wisdom; a monograph (single symbol) re-
presenting a double-consonant group. From about 350 B.C.E. on, 
e came to be pronounced as a single fricative, Izl as in English 
do;.e or rose, and you will often hear it pronounced that way. 
like the e in French tere; a long open vowel (similar to EL, but 1) is 
more open and more central) 
generally pronounced nowadays exactly like plain 1), though this is 
a postclassical practice; a "long diphthong" (see above on Cf) 
a diphthong very similar in sound to tV, made up of 1) gliding into 
[u] (= (0); very hard for English speakers to distinguish from EV, 
and the Greeks themselves lost the distinction of sound in the 
fourth century B.C.E. 
pronounced by most people today like fricative til in English thin; 
but pronounced in classical Attic like the t in English top, an 
I. The classical Greeks called this letter Ei.; the Byzantines used the name E' 'VItAOV = "plain e" 
to distinguish E from the letter pair aL. which in postclassical times became identical in 
pronunciation to E. 
2. In earlier Attic H represented a real diphthong (the sound of E gliding into the sound of L). 
but the sound became single during classical times. The long vowel eventually represented by H 
also occurred in some words as a result of contraction or compensatory lengthening. In the 
former places H is (historically) a genuine diphthong. while in the latter it is traditionally 
referred to as a "spurious" diphthong. This distinction will turn out to be significant in U29 and 
elsewhere. 
3. In western Greek alphabets and in early Attic, the letter H was heta. the h-sound. See § I 
above. 

The Alphabet; Pronunciation 
I I 
iota 
L 
L 
kappa 
K 
lambda 
A 
mu 
J1. 
nu 
v 
xi t 
omicron I 
a 
pi 
rho 
p 
aL 
av 
aspirated voiceless dental plosive (i.e., an aspirated tau). The th-
pronunciation arose in the Roman Imperial period (even earlier 
in some dialects) and is recommended in this course because it 
avoids confusion between T and e for English speakers. 
like i in French vite; a short close front vowel, unrounded (the 
sound in English bit is similar, but more open) 
like i in French vive; a long close front vowel, unrounded 
like English k (but completely unaspirated); a voiceless velar 
plosive. In the preposition EK kappa is assimilated in pronun-
ciation to the following consonant: aspirated to [ekh I before 0 or 
cp, or voiced to reg] before /3. o. or A.. 
like a clear I in French or like English I before vowels; a liquid 
like English m; a bilabial nasal 
like n in English net; a dental nasal. Nu is often assimilated to the 
following consonant in compounds or in phrases pronounced as 
a unit: it is assimilated to the following consonant before A.. j1. 
p. (J"; labialized to j1 before labial plosives /3. n. cp; converted to 
the velar nasal y before velar plosives K. y. X. 
like English x in/ox; a double consonant [ksl 
like 0 in German Gott; a short back mid vowel 
like the vowel in English boy or coin, a diphthong 
like 00 in English pool or ou in French rouge,a digraph represent-
ing (during most of the classical period) a long close back vowel 
[uj2 
like French p or non-initial p in English (that is, totally unaspirat-
ed); a bilabial voiceless plosive 
rolled r as in Italian or Scottish; a trilled alveolar liquid 
I. Originally called by the Greeks au; but the Byzantines called it 0 /.!lKPOV = "little 0" when 
omega, W /lEya = "big 0," was no longer distinct from it in pronunciation. 
2. As was the case with H (see above), in earlier Attic av represented a real diphthong (Ioul. the 
sound of a gliding into the originally back sound of v), but the sound became single during 
classical times. The long vowel eventually represented by av also occurred in some words as a 
result of contraction or compensatory lengthening. In the former places av is (historically) a 
genuine diphthong, while in the latter it is traditionally referred to as a "spurious" diphthong. 

12 
sigma 
(T, S'. C 
tau 
T 
upsilon' 
v 
phi 
cp 
chi 
x 
psi 
'it 
omega 
w 
UNIT ONE 
like the English soft s in mouse; a voiceless fricative lsI. except 
before the voiced consonants /3. y. o. fJ.. when it is a voiced fri-
cative [z]. like the s in English muse. In most printed books. 
following an orthographic convention of late Byzantine times. 
sigma appears as (J" at the beginning of a word or within it, but as 
S' at the end of a word. In some books you will also see the older 
letter form ( (lunate sigma) printed in all positions. 
like French t or non-initial English t (totally unaspirated), a voice-
less dental plosive 
like short French u or German ii, pronounced like the /I in French 
lune; a short close front rounded vowel; in earlier Attic, a close 
back rounded vowellu], the value it retained in diphthongs 
like long French u or German ii, pronounced like the /I in French 
ruse; a long close front rounded vowel 
a diphthong combining the rounded vowel 10] with semivocalic i = 
Iy]. The full pronunciation was [Oy] or [Oyyl. but in classical 
times the iota was weakened to a glide between vowels and 
sometimes omitted in spelling.2 
pronounced by most people today as fricativej(as in Englishjoot), 
but in classical times equivalent to an aspirated pi, like p in 
English pot, an aspirated voiceless bilabial plosive. Phi became 
fricative in postclassical times, and the j-pronunciation is recom-
mended in this course because it avoids confusion between 7f 
and cf> for English speakers. 
pronounced like the c of English cat or like eh in Scottish loch; an 
aspirated voiceless velar plosive (aspirated kappa) 
like ps in English lapse; a monograph representing a double 
consonant Ipsl 
like aw in English saw; a long open central-back vowel (but you 
will also hear it pronounced iike English long 0 in xo) 
I. The ancient Greeks called the letter v, but by Byzantine times it shared the same 
pronunciation with OL and was given the name v ,/nhov = "plain 1/'" to distinguish it from 
"diphthong" OL-
2. Pronunciation like English we is sometimes heard, but is not correct. 

The Alphabet; Pronunciation 
13 
Breathing Signs 
a "long diphthong," generally pronounced nowadays exactly like 
plain w, though this is a postclassical practice (see above on q.) 
aspirate or rough breathing: a sign placed over an initial vowel or 
initial rho to indicate an initial h-sound. The sign derives from 
the use of the left half of H to indicate [h] after H had been con-
verted to a vowel symbol. 
smooth breathing: a sign placed over an initial vowel to indicate 
the absence of aspiration 
4. Punctuation and Capitali~ation. The Greek comma (,) and period (.) 
are the same as are used in English. The Greek semicolon or colon is a single 
dot raised above the line ('). The Greek question mark looks like the English 
semicolon (;). 
The Athenians of classical times used only capital letters and rarely punc-
tuated; often they left no space between words. Punctuation was gradually in-
troduced in books in postclassical times, but was consistently applied only in 
Byzantine and modem times. In printed editions of Greek, punctuation is used 
throughout, and lowercase letters are used except for the first letter of proper 
names or proper adjectives and sometimes for the first letter of a section, para-
graph, or quoted speech. 
5. Elision and Crasis. A short vowel at the end of a word (especially of 
certain relatively weak words, such as particles, adverbs, and prepositions) is 
usually eliminated (elided) before a following word beginning with a vowel. 
Elision is marked by an apostrophe C), a symbol invented in postclassical 
times but applied consistently only in Byzantine and modern times. For 
example: 
aAAa WCPE A ?juw -> aAA' WCPE A ?juw 
napa VfJ.WV -> nap' VfJ.WV 
If the following word begins with a vowel that has rough breathing, then an 
unaspirated unvoiced plosive (n, T. K) at the end of the elided word is changed 
to the corresponding aspirated plosive (cp. e. X): 
vno VfJ.WV -> vcp' VfJ.WV 
Similar elisions and spelling changes occur in compound words fonned with 
prepositional prefixes: I 
I. But the final iota of 7T€pi is never elided. 

14 
7Tapa- + ayw -> 7Tapuyw 
KaTa- + ZaTYJ!J.L -> Ka8i(JTYJ!J.L 
UNIT ONE 
In other cases a final vowel is not elided but undergoes contraction or 
crasis ("mixing") with a following vowel: this occurs, for instance, with the 
prefix 7TpO- and with the article. The symbol called coronis ("crown"), 
identical to the smooth breathing sign (,), is usually placed over the vowel 
formed by contraction: 
7TpOEOO(Jav -> 7TpOVOO(Jav 
TO f.AaTTOV -> TOVAaTTOV 
But when the first vowel in crasis is a form of the article with a rough breath-
ing, the resulting vowel has a rough breathing rather than a coronis: 
6 alJTo) -> aiJTo) 
6 av8pW7To) -> Q.V8PW7TO) 
Finally, when the second vowel in crasis has a rough breathing, the aspiration 
is transferred to any unaspirated consonant of the preceding syllable and the 
coronis replaces the rough breathing: 
Kd 6 7TOVO) -> xw 7TOVO) 
TO. i!J.una -> 8ai!J.una 
6. Some Typographic Conventions. The following information is for 
later reference. Not all of the phenomena described here will be seen in this 
book, but students will meet them in reading Greek texts. 
a. Diacritical marks (accents, breathings, coronis) belonging to a diph-
thong or vowel digraph are conventionally printed over the second of the 
two vowels: alJTo). ofJTo). 7TE'ipa. YJVPO!J.EV. 
b. When such a word is capitalized, only the first vowel of the diphthong 
is capitalized, and the diacritical marks remain on the second vowel: for 
example, alno) -> AlJTo) 
c. When an initial single vowel is capitalized, its diacritical marks are 
printed before it: aV8pW7To) ->" Av8pw7To). 
d. When a "long dipthong" is capitalized, the main vowel is printed as a 
capital, lowercase iota is printed beside it, and diacritical marks are 
placed before the capital: q.oYJ) -->" ALOYJ). 
e. When two adjacent vowels that could form a diphthong are pro-
nounced as separate, the second vowel has a mark of separation 
(diaeresis: two dots) printed over it: for example, ypat. f30t (two 
syllables, not one). 

The Alphabet; Pronunciation 
15 
WHAT TO STUDY 
1. Learn to write the Greek alphabet, especially the lowercase fonns. 
2. Learn to recite the Greek alphabet. 
3. Practice pronunciation by reading aloud the vocabulary words found in 
Units 3, 4, etc. It is recommended that you give a slight stress to the 
accented syllable. You may also want to begin memorizing the meanings 
of the words in Units 3 and 4. 

UNIT TWO 
Accentuation 
1. Ancient Greek had a tonal accent or pitch accent, not a stress accent 
such as is found in Latin, English, and many European languages, including 
Modern Greek. The accent of a word or phrase consisted in a raising of the 
pitch of the voice at the accented syllable. The classical Greeks used no accent 
marks: they needed none since the language was their native tongue, and the 
tradition of writing and reading books was relatively young and the format not 
very "user-friendly." The practice of marking accents was initiated by literary 
scholars in Alexandria ca. 200 B.C.E. Accent marking was needed to help in 
the correct pronunciation of unfamiliar words in the great poetry of the past, to 
eliminate ambiguities which would be present in an unaccented text, to help in 
dealing with divergences between dialects, and perhaps to facilitate the 
teaching of Greek to foreigners. Accents were at first sporadically used and 
were especially applied to prevent ambiguities. 
2. Gradually the Koine of the Hellenistic and Roman periods underwent 
a change in accentuation along with many other linguistic changes. By 400 
C.E. a stress accent had fully supplanted the pitch accent. Subsequently, accent 
marking became even more necessary for dealing with the great literature of 
the past. In the ninth century C.E. Byzantine scholars modified the accent-
marking system, producing the conventions we now follow. 
3. Although scholars can deduce how the tonal accent worked on single 
words and short phrases that were treated as an accentual unit, there is no way 
to discover how the accents sounded in longer utterances, and it is therefore 
idle (as well as very difficult) for the beginner to attempt a tonal rendering of 
Greek accents. One approach to pronunciation by a modern student of the lan-
guage is to ignore the accent; but for mnemonic purposes it is more practical 
and helpful to give a slight stress to the accented syllable (this practice will 
also be useful if you later learn Modern Greek). In writing and reading, how-
ever, accents should be used and attended to: although some accents are not of 
16 

Accentuation 
17 
crucial importance for understanding, there are also many which prevent ambi-
guities, and the accents do mirror important facts about the ancient language. 
The beginner should not be worried if the rules for accentuation given 
here seem complicated and difficult to master. It takes time and practical 
application before a beginner starts to feel comfortable with accents; but it 
does not help to ignore them entirely at the beginning and try to repair the 
omission at a later stage. In learning accents, there should be a happy medium 
between insouciance and an obsession which detracts from the learning of 
other elements of the language. 
Read this section carefully now, then tackle the succeeding units one by 
one, observing and learning the accentuation of various nouns and verbs. 
Review this unit after a few weeks and periodically thereafter until it makes 
sense to you. 
4. Contonation and Mora. The apparently complex "rules" of Greek ac-
centuation can be understood in terms of a single general principle involving 
the concepts of contonation and mora. Contonation is the combination of the 
rise of pitch generally thought of as the accent with the necessary return or fall 
to standard pitch which follows it. In the case of an acute accent, the con-
tonation includes both the syllable on which the accent is written (and on 
which the pitch rises) and the entire following syllable (on which the pitch 
falls), if any, whether it counts as long or short. In the case of the circumflex 
accent, the contonation occurs on the one syllable on which the accent is 
written, for there are both a rise in pitch and a return to standard pitch on that 
syllable. A mora is the (theoretically assigned) "standard" length of a short 
vowel (ii, E, t, 0, v, and final aL and OL in most cases). A long vowel (a, EL, Y], 
t, OV, w, D) or a diphthong (except final aL and OL in most cases) occupies 
(theoretically) a time span equivalent to two morae. 
The general principle of Greek accentuation is that the contonation may 
be followed by no more than one mora before the end of the word (or phrase 
pronounced as one word unit). This principle is in many respects similar to 
rules in other languages (e.g., Latin) which constrain the position of accent 
according to the nature of the final syllables of a word. In Greek this principle 
limits the position of the acute and circumflex accents (see §6-9 below) and 
requires the addition of an extra accent in some phrases consisting of word + 
enclitic (see §12 below). 
5. Only the last three syllables of a word may be accented. These syl-
lables are traditionally referred to by terms derived from Latin: ultima = "the 
last syllable" (abbreviated in this book as U); penult = "almost last, second-to-

18 
UNIT TWO 
last syllable" (abbreviated here as P); and antepenult = "before the penult, 
third-to-Iast syllable" (abbreviated here as A). In what follows, the phrase 
"long ultima" ("long penult," etc.) will mean "ultima (penult, etc.) containing 
a long vowel or diphthong." 
6. The acute accent (') represents a simple rise in pitch over a short or 
long vowel. It may appear on A, P, or U. 
The circumflex accent ( ~, also" or - ) represents a rise of pitch over the 
first mora of a long vowel followed by a return to standard pitch over the 
second mora. It cannot appear over a short vowel (a short vowel is too short to 
allow time for both rise and fall). It may appear on P or U (never on A). 
The grave accent (') occurs only on U. What it represented in terms of 
pitch in classical pronunciation is uncertain. In a connected utterance, the 
grave replaces an acute accent over U of a word not followed by punctuation 
(or an enclitic). 
7. The ultima, if short and accented, has an acute when a word is written 
in isolation or occurs immediately before a pause (or an enclitic). In a 
connected context, a short accented ultima has the grave instead. 
If long and accented, U may have a circumflex (whether in isolation or 
not) or an acute (in isolation or before punctuation [or encliticl; otherwise a 
grave is substituted). In this case the type of accent must be learned for each 
word or particular form. 
8. The penult, if short and accented, has the acute. If long and accented, 
then P has the acute if U is long, the circumflex if U is short. 
9. The antepenult may be accented only if U is short and may receive 
only the acute. 
10. Examples of Accentuation 
aya8oS' 
short U accented with acute, in isolation 
aya8oS' Q.V8pW7TOS' 
aya80v 
(no mora follows the contonation on U) 
short U accented with grave in connected phrase 
(no mora follows the contonation on U) 
long U accented with acute, in isolation 
(no mora follows the contonation on U) 
long U accented with grave in connected phrase 
(no mora follows the contonation on U) 
long U accented with circumflex, regardless of 
position (no mora follows the contonation on U) 

Accentuation 
AOy0S'. AOYOV 
owpov 
oWPOV 
aVepW7TOS' 
19 
short accented p. acute regardless of quantity of U 
(no mora follows the contonation on P + U) 
long accented P, short U, circumflex 
(one mora follows the contonation on P) 
long accented P, long U, acute 
(no mora follows the contonation on P + U) 
accented A, short U, acute 
(one mora follows the contonation on A + P) 
11. Proclitics. Certain monosyllabic words normally lack their own ac-
cent and attach themselves in pronunciation to the following word to form a 
single word unit. These words are called proclitics (because they are consid-
ered to "lean forward" on the following word for their accent). Proclitics are 
normally written without an accent and do not affect the accentuation of the 
following word. In Attic the common proclitics (to be learned in later units) 
are the negative adverb OV, the conjunctions EL ("if") and wS' ("as"), the 
prepositions EiS', EV, EK, and the nominative singular and plural masculine and 
feminine forms of the article (6, ~, oi, at). (A proclitic receives an acute 
accent when it is followed by an enclitic: see below.) 
12. Enclitics. Certain words (mostly monosyllabic, a few disyllabic) 
normally lack their own accent and attach themselves in pronunciation to the 
preceding word to form a single word unit. These words are called enclitics 
(because they are considered to "lean upon" the previous word for their 
accent). In Attic the common enclitics (to be learned in later units) are the 
indefinite pronouns, indefinite adjectives, and indefinite adverbs, most present 
indicative forms of the irregular verbs ELjJ..i ("to be") and cpy/jJ..i ("to say"), 
certain particles, and certain unstressed forms of the personal pronouns. 
Enclitics sometimes affect the accent of the preceding word. 
a. A word accented on U keeps its circumflex or acute (the acute is not 
changed to a grave, because it is no longer felt to be on the final syllable 
of its word unit). 
Ex. 
ayaeoS' HS'. ayae0 I~ 
b. A word accented with an acute on P is unchanged in accent before a 
monosyllabic or disyllabic enclitic. But a disyllabic enclitic following 
such a word receives on its second syllable either an acute (in isolation or 
before punctuation) or a grave (in a connected context): that is, the word 
unit receives a second accent if more than one mora follows the 
contonation. 
Ex. 
AOyOS' H2.. AOY'P Hvi. AOY'P HVt KaA0 

20 
UNIT TWO 
-. ----------
-- --- -
-
- - --- -----
c. A word accented with a circumflex on P or with an acute on A 
receives an extra accent on U. Again, this means that the word unit 
receives a second accent if more than one mora follows the contonation. 
Ex. 
owpov .[t, av8pw7Too; Ho; 
d. A proclitic followed by an enclitic receives an acute accent. 
Ex. 
'I' 
" 
, 
H "[15, OVK ~L([L 
13. For the student's information, the following terms, often used in 
traditional Greek grammars and in commentaries, are defined here, though 
they are not used in this book: 
a word with acute on U 
a word with acute on P 
a word with acute on A 
oxytone: 
paroxytone: 
proparoxytone: 
perispomenon: 
propenspomenon: 
a word with circumflex on U 
a word with circumflex on P 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Read this unit carefully more than once. Return to review it every now and 
then during the course. (Further aids to accentuation will be given in later 
units.) 
2. Continue to practice the alphabet. 
3. Practice pronunciation by reading aloud the vocabulary words found in 
Units 3, 4, etc. It is probably best to give a slight stress to the accented 
syllable. You may also want to begin memorizing the meanings of the 
words in Units 3 and 4. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
EXERCISES 
1. For each of the following, identify the type of accent and the syllable on 
which it occurs, and give the length of U. Optional: tell which rule(s) given in 
*6 -9 or * I 1-12 the example illustrates. 
Ex. 
av8pw7ToL: 
acute accent on A (antepenult); U is short 
I. aVEJ.i.ov 
2. 'frr,cpoo; 
3. ,/njcpoL'> 
(recall that final - OL counts as short) 
Optional part: 
§9 (acute accent on A only when U is short) 
4. ayopuo; 
7. 
7TE~pa Ho; 
5. apx~v 
6. H}D7 
8. 
7TOAEJ.i.Oo; 7TOV 
9. 
8avaToo; 

Accentuation 
21 
10. 7fOTajJ.o) 
12. E7fEjJ.7fE 
14. 000) 
11. 7fOTajJ.o) paev) 
13. 
"'vX~ aeavaTo) 
15. njJ.aL) 
II. For each of the following, place the correct accent (acute, circumflex, or 
grave) on the indicated syllable. 
Ex. 
7fEjJ.7fEL 
P: 
7fEjJ.7fEL 
(U long, so accented P must have acute) 
1. owpa 
P 
5. YAwTTav 
P 
9. 7fWOELq. 
P 
2. aVepW7fE 
A 
6. YAWTTll) 
P 
10. aVEjJ.0) 
A 
3. AajJ.f3avE ~ 
P 
7. AOYOV 
P 
11. ayaeov 
U 
4. 
f3ovAHa~ A 
8. AOYOV) 
P 
12. KaAov (U) owpov 

UNIT THREE 
Nouns: The O-Declension 
-~--~---------------------
PRELIMINARIES' 
A. The Parts of Speech. The words of a language are commonly classi-
fied, according to their function in a sentence, into categories called parts of 
speech. This categorization was developed in classical times in Greece (though 
similar classifications were developed, independently and contemporaneously, 
by Indian grammarians for Sanskrit), formalized by the Stoics in postclassical 
times, and passed via the Romans into modern linguistics. 
The generally recognized parts of speech are noun, pronoun, adjective, 
article, verb, adverb, preposition, and conjunction. In Greek grammar certain 
connective and logical adverbs and conjunctions are also referred to as par-
ticles. The parts of speech will be individually introduced in the appropriate 
units. 
B. Noun. A noun [Greek ovop.a, Latin nomen, both = "name"] is that 
part of speech which names or refers to a person, place, or thing. In the most 
obvious instances, the person, place, or thing is concrete and can be pointed 
out. But other nouns are used to "name" or refer to a quality or an action, 
something intangible or abstract: 
Ex. 
intelligent: 
to select: 
to move: 
intelligence 
selection 
movement 
I. The section called "Preliminaries" to be found at the beginning of some units is designed to 
provide the student with a review of (or introduction to) some basic terminology and concepts of 
grammar. It is impractical to study ancient Greek, a language rich in inflectional forms and 
permitting a highly variable word order, without an understanding of these concepts. References 
to other languages are given both for the purpose of comparison to benefit students who may 
have studied other languages and in order to demonstrate that English inflection and grammar 
are anomalous in their simplicity and that the richness and complexity of Greek are paralleled in 
many other languages. 
22 

Nouns: The O-Declension 
23 
A proper noun is the name of an individual creature, place, or thing (e.g., Julia 
Child, Newfoundland) and is capitalized in English and many other lan-
guages (also in printed Greek by modern convention). A common noun is a 
generic term that can be applied to many individuals (e.g., chef, island). 
In Greek and many other languages, nouns have gender. In many lan-
guages gender is reflected in the form of the noun (e.g., Italian ~io, Spanish t(o 
= "uncle" vs. Italian ~ia, Spanish t(a = "aunt") and in the form of its modifiers. 
The gender of nouns in English is usually not related to the form (but cf. actor 
vs. actress), and grammatical gender is significant only when a noun serves as 
antecedent to a singular pronoun (such as she, him, it): nouns referring to 
female creatures have feminine pronouns associated with them, those referring 
to male creatures have masculine, and all others have neuter (unless there is 
some personification). In Greek, however, every noun has grammatical gen-
der: things may be referred to by masculine, feminine, or neuter nouns, and 
some neuter nouns refer to male or female creatures. The gender of a Greek 
noun must thus be learned and memorized when the noun itself is first learned. 
Nouns are inflected in many languages, including Greek. Inflection is the 
modification of the form of a word (in its suffix or stem or both) to indicate 
which of a fixed set of variables is being employed. The inflection of a noun, 
pronoun, or adjective is called declension. For a noun the variables are number 
and case. 
In most languages nouns have singular and plural number to distinguish 
between a reference to one person or thing and a reference to more than one. 
In English most plurals are formed by adding s, but there are also irregular 
formations: day, dan; woman, women. Greek nouns have singular, dual, and 
plural numbers. The dual is used to refer to a pair of persons or things. In 
many dialects use of the dual died out before the classical period, but Attic 
preserved the dual, especially for natural pairs (like "hands" or "eyes") or 
inseparable pairs (like "the Itwo] goddesses" for Demeter and Kore). Even in 
Attic the plural is often used to refer to two persons or things, and an author 
may switch between dual and plural with no distinction in meaning in the 
same sentence or passage. The dual is so rare in proportion to the singular and 
plural that beginners are usually not required to learn it. Since students will 
soon meet the dual if they continue beyond this book, the dual forms are 
presented in paradigms in this book, always in parentheses, for information 
and reference. But dual forms are not used in the exercises. 
In many languages, including Greek, nouns also are characterized by 
variation in case. Case identifies the grammatical function of the noun in its 
sentence or phrase. Nouns in Modern English show only vestiges of case 
declension: there are two cases in both singular and plural, an all-purpose form 

24 
UNIT THREE 
----------------------
and a possessive fonn (e.g., doctor, doctor's, doctors, doctors '; man, man's, 
men, men's). In classical Attic there are five cases (Greek 7fTJ)(TU I) , Latin 
casus = "failings [from a standard], modifications of ending"), which indicate 
functions such as subject, object, indirect object, or possession. The Greek 
cases are presented in detail in §2 of this unit. Since there are five cases and 
three numbers in Greek, each noun theoretically can be inflected into 15 
fonns; but in fact some fonns serve more than one case, and most nouns have 
9 endings to learn (or II if one includes the dual). 
Another tenn often used to refer to nouns is substantive. Substantive is a 
more general tenn. It includes nouns, pronouns, verbal nouns, and any other 
noun-equivalent (e.g., the ugly, the beautiful; the why and the wherefore). 
I. Greek nouns are in general inflected according to three systems or 
declensions. Two of these are vowel declensions: the o-declension and the a-
declension. The third declension is called the consonant declension, though 
this is in fact a grouping of various vowel and consonant declensions. 
Inflection is based on a noun stem, to which is added a series of case endings' 
to indicate each of the five cases in singUlar, dual, and plural. The stem of a 
Greek noun is always accurately obtained by removing the ending from the 
genitive singular fonn. 
2. The five cases (see above) in Attic Greek are: 
nominative: the subjective case, used for the subject of a finite verb and 
for predicate nouns after a finite fonn of the copula (this construction 
will be learned in Units 5 and II). Abbreviated nom. or n. 
genitive: the case used to indicate possession, source, origin, and many 
other relations (many of the uses will be learned in Units IO and 29). A 
catch-all English translation for the genitive is a prepositional phrase 
with of Abbreviated gen. or g. 
dative: the case used for the indirect object (whence its name, from its 
frequent use with the verb to give) and for a variety of other relations 
(many of these will be learned in Units IO and 29). A catch-all English 
translation for the dative is a prepositional phrase with to or for. 
Abbreviated dat. or d. 
accusative: the case used for the direct object, the internal object, and a 
few other relations (these will be learned in Unit 17). Abbreviated acc. 
or a. 
I. Sometimes these really consist of a combination of final stem-vowel and case ending. 

Nouns: The O-Declension 
25 
vocative: the case used to address someone or call a person by name. For 
all types of Greek nouns the vocative plural is identical to the 
nominative plural. Abbreviated voc. or v. 
3. Nouns whose stems end in -0 belong to the o-declension (also called 
the "second" declension). Every case ending (except the voc. sing. of mas-
culine and feminine nouns and the nom. acc. voc. pl. of neuter nouns) contains 
an o-sound (0. w. ov. Ot. or '{J)' 
4. There are two groups of o-declension nouns. 
a. Masculine and feminine nouns with nominative in -OS'. (Genders are 
often abbreviated masc., fern., neut. [or m., f., n.].) The vast majority of nouns 
in this group are masc., but names in - OS' of countries, cities, islands, trees, 
plants, and plant products are fern., as are a few isolated words such as OODS' = 
"road" and vO(J'oS' = "sickness." 
Ex. 
"human 
"road" (/) 
"word" (m.) 
being" (m.) 
endings 
sing. 
nom. 
oooS' 
r..oyoS' 
o.V$pW7TOS' 
-OS' 
gen. 
oooi) 
r..oyov 
Q.v$pOJ7TOV 
-ov 
dat. 
000 
r..oycp 
Q.v$pOJ7Tcp 
-cp 
ace. 
ooov 
r..oyov 
o.V$pW7TOV 
-ov 
voc. 
oOE 
I\OyE 
o.V$pW7TE 
-E 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
oow 
r..oyw 
Q.V$pW7TW) 
( -w) 
(g. d. 
OOOl.V 
I\oyow 
Q.V$pW7TOW) 
(-ow) 
plur. 
n. v. 
0001. 
l\oYOt 
o.V$pW7TOt 
-Ot 
gen. 
oowv 
I\oywv 
Q.v$pOJ7TWV 
-wv 
dat. 
000l.S' 
r..oYOtS' 
Q.V$pW7TOtS' 
-OtS' 
acc. 
ooovS' 
l\oyovS' 
Q.V$pW7TOVS' 
-OVS' 
b. Neuter nouns with nominative in -ov. The paradigm is shown at the 
top of the next page. Three facts which apply to all neuter forms (o-declension 
nouns, consonant-declension nouns, and adjectival forms) should be noted: (I) 
the genitive and dative endings of all numbers are identical with those of masc. 
nouns of the same type; (2) the nom., acc., and voc. of each number have a 
single form; (3) the nom. acc. voc. plural ending is always -a. 
5. Accentuation. The accentuation of all nouns and adjectives is per-
sistent: that is, the same syllable tends to be accented in all forms except when 
the changing length of the ultima forces the contonation to move, either by the 
change of a circumflex on P to an acute or by the displacement of the acute 

26 
UNIT THREE 
NEUTER NOUNS IN -{)v 
Ex. 
"work" (n.) 
"gift" (n.) 
endings 
sing. 
nom. 
EPYOV 
owpov 
-ov 
" 
owpov 
gen. 
EPYOV 
-ov 
dat. 
" 
oWP<r 
EPY<r 
-<r 
acc. 
EPYOV 
owpov 
-ov 
" 
owpov 
voc. 
EPYOV 
-ov 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
EPYW 
owpw) 
(-w) 
(g. d. 
EPYOW 
owpow) 
( -ow) 
" 
owpa 
-a. 
n. v. 
Epya 
plur. 
gen. 
EPYWV 
owpwv 
-wv 
dat. 
" 
OWPDL> 
EpyOt> 
-Ot> 
" 
owpa 
acc. 
Epya 
-a 
closer to the end of the word (from A to P). For example, the accent of 
o.v8pw7r0') is persistent on A, except when U is long, forcing accentuation on P 
instead of A. Remember that final -{)l in the nom. pI. masc. counts as short for 
the purposes of accentuation, hence o.V8PW7f"Ol (but in the dat. pI. Ol in -Ol') is 
not final, hence CW8pW7f"Ol,). The accent of owpov is persistent on P, but 
changes from circumflex to acute (still on P) whenever the ultima is long. 
Since the accent is persistent, you should learn the position and type of accent 
of the nominative when you first learn a noun. 
Special rule for accentuation of o-declension nouns: any noun of the 0-
declension with an accented ultima (acute on U in nom. sing.) has the 
circumflex on U in the gen. and dat. of all numbers (e.g., 606') above). 
6. Identification of Noun Forms. When you learn a noun, you need to 
learn the nom. sing. form (including the accent), the gen. sing. form, the gen-
der, and the English meaning. 
Ex. 
o.YYEAO,), aYYEAov, m., "messenger" 
When you are asked to identify a noun form, first specify the variables (case 
and number) and then give the "dictionary" information about the noun, 
namely, the nom. sing., gen. sing. (in full, or just the ending), and gender, and 
add one definition if the English meaning is requested. 
Ex. 
identify VO(]"Ol,) and give one meaning 
answer: 
dat. pI. of vo(]"o,), vo(]"ov, f., sickness 
or dat. pI. of vo(]"o,), ~V, f., sickness 

Nouns: The O-Declension 
27 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the patterns of the two types of o-declension nouns. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
ADVICE ABOUT VOCABULARY AND EXERCISES 
People differ in the ease with which they memorize and in the manner in 
which they do so most effectively. Some people have excellent visual memory 
and need only to look at paradigms and vocabulary repeatedly and carefully; 
others do better by repeatedly pronouncing and hearing the items to be 
memorized; others may find that writing out inflections and words helps 
memorization. Use whatever techniques suit you, and drill yourself (or 
collaborate with a fellow student), because in a college course there will never 
be time for enough in-class drill. The vocabulary is typed in separate columns 
to facilitate drill. A published set of ancient Greek flash cards is available I 
(there is a large degree of overlap between the words in the set and those 
assigned in this book). Or you may make your own drill cards: cut small index 
cards in half, write a Greek word on one side, the definition on the other. For 
inflections, make yourself set the paradigm aside after a while and try to write 
it out from memory. No matter what techniques you use, reciting and reading 
your Greek out loud are strongly recommended. 
The exercises are designed to help the student put into use the voca-
bulary, inflections, and grammatical rules learned so far. Doing the exercises, 
however, is no substitute for the task of basic memorization which is necessary 
in the beginning stages of any language. There are several ways to com-
plement the exercises given in the units if you need more practice: 
1. Repeat the exercises after an interval (avoid writing the answers in the 
book). 
2. Write paradigms. 
3. Do an exercise in reverse, working back from the corrected answers. 
4. Vary the given exercises by altering the instructions according to a fixed 
pattern (e.g., interchange singular and plural, active and middle/passive; 
transpose the case of a noun or the tense of a verb). 
5. Apply a sequence of instructions to the words listed in the vocabulary (e.g., 
proceed through a list of nouns giving gen. pI. of the first, acc. sing. of the 
second, dat. pI. of the third, etc.). 
I. Vis-Ed Classical Greek Vocabularr Cards (Visual Education Assn .. Springfield, Ohio), often 
available in college bookstores. 

28 
UNIT THREE 
VOCABULARY 
In the vocabulary lists, English words derived from a Greek word (or 
from a closely related root) are given in square brackets after the definitions. 
The words in brackets are not definitions, but they may help you learn Greek 
vocabulary by association, and in any case will provide some enrichment of 
your English vocabulary, or occasionally amusement. 
o-declension: masculine nouns 
aYYEAo,>, aYYEAov, m. 
" 
'I 
, 
aVEJJ.0'>, aVEJJ.0V, m. 
av8pw7ro,>, av8pw7rov, m. 
/31.0'>, /31.0V, m. 
~AW'>, Y,AI.OV, m. 
8avaTo,>, 8avaTOv, m. 
8E<J<;, 8wu, m.l 
L7r7rO<>, L7r7rOV, m. 
AOY0'>, AOYOV, m. 
V0JJ.0'>, v0JJ.0v, m. 
7rOAEJJ.0'>, 7rOAEJJ.0V, m. 
messenger, herald 
[angel] 
wind 
[anemometer] 
human being, man (occasionally fern. = "woman") 
[anthropology] 
life, manner of living, livelihood 
[biology] 
sun 
[helium] 
death 
[euthanasia] 
god, divinity (occasionally fern. = "goddess") 
[theology] 
horse (also fern. = "mare") 
[hippopotamus] 
word, speech, tale, story; reckoning, account, 
proportion; reason, rationality 
[philology] 
custom; law 
[economic] 
war 
[polemic] 
o-declension: feminine nouns 
VO(To,>, VO(TOV, f. 
000'>, ooof;, f. 
"'f7cjJo,>, ",ricjJov, f. 
o-declension: neuter nouns 
PLPAI.OV, /3Lj3AI.OV, n. 
owpov, owpov, n. 
" 
" 
f.pyOV, f.pyOV, n. 
JJ.ETpOV, JJ.ETpOV, n. 
7raLOI.OV, 7raLOI.OV, n. 
sickness, disease 
road, path, way; journey 
[odometer, method] 
small stone, pebble (used in reckoning, in games, in 
voting); vote 
[psephologist] 
book 
[bibliophile] 
gift 
[Eudora] 
work, action, deed 
[erg, energy] 
measure, size, distance; moderate amount, 
proportion 
[meter) 
child 
[pediatrics] 
I. In classical Greek no vocative singular fonn is found; in postclassical Greek both 8Hl> and 
8EE are used as vocative. 

Nouns: The O-Declension 
29 
EXERCISES 
I. Identify the following noun fonns and give at least one meaning. 
Ex. 
" 
nom. (or acc.) pI. of EPYOV. EPYOV, n., "work" 
Epya: 
1. 1]AWV 
9. 
, 
17. 
, 
25. 7fOAEp..<.p 
vop..ov 
vOO"ov,> 
2. 7fOAEp..OL 
10. aYYEAOL'> 
18. " 
26. 8WL 
aVEp..E 
3. j3Lj3ALOL'> 
I I , 
, 
19. AOYOV 
27. f3LOV 
p..ETpa 
4. 7faLOLOV 
12. owpa 
20. " 
28. aYYEAoL 
EpyOL'> 
5. eEr{> 
13. f3iwv 
21. owpov 
29. 7faLOLa 
6. 
, 
14. GOWV 
22. f3Lf3ALOV 
30. 8avuTwv 
VOO"OL 
7. 'Ini<p<.p 
15. " 
23. GOOL'> 
31. 
, 
L7f7fOV 
p..ETpOV 
8. 8avuTov,> 
16. av8pw7f<.p 
24. ti]<pOL 
32. AOYOV'> 
II. Give the requested fonn of the Greek noun and indicate its gender. 
Ex. 
gen. pI. of wind: 
aVEp..wv, m. 
1. nom. pI. of stone, vote 
15. gen. pI. of word 
2. gen. sing. of war 
16. acc. pI. of messenger 
3. acc. pI. of child 
17. voc. sing. of life 
4. nom. sing. of sickness 
18. acc. sing. of law 
5. acc. sing. of measure 
19. nom. sing. of story 
6. nom. pI. of child 
20. gen. sing. of work 
7. acc. sing. of gift 
21. dat. pI. of gift 
8. nom. sing. of sun 
22. voc. pI. of law 
9. voc. pI. of god 
23. nom. pI. of wind 
10. dat. sing. of death 
24. gen. sing. of horse 
11. dat. pI. of deed 
25. acc. pI. of measure 
12. gen. pI. of man 
26. dat. pI. of messenger 
13. dat. pI. of horse 
27. dat. sing. of child 
14. dat. sing. of road 
III. 
In the following list, the first of each pair of fonns is the nominative 
singular of an o-declension noun. Following the principle of persistent 
accentuation, place the correct accent on the second fonn in each pair. 
Ex. 
KLVOVVO'> 
KWOVVOV 
answer: KWOVVOV 
(length of U forces accent to move from A to P) 
I. 7fAOVTO,> 
7fAOVTOV 
6. 
, 
7fOTap..o'> 
7forap..<.p 
2. 
, 
7. 
, 
xpovo,> 
XPOVOL'> 
TP07fO'> 
TP07fWV 
3. 
, 
8. AL8o'> 
AL80L 
O"TpaTYJY°'> 
O"TpaTYJYE 
4. oLoaO"KaAo'> 
oLoaO"KaAov 
9. O"TUOWV 
O"TaOLa 
5. O"TpaT07fEOOV 
O"TpaT07fEOoL'> 
10. 
' , 
, 
VW'> 
VLWV 

UNIT FOUR 
Nouns: The A-Declension I 
1. Nouns whose stems end in alpha belong to the a-declension (or alpha-
declension), also known as the "first" declension. The alpha-vowel appears in 
some form in almost all the cases of the dual and plural: a, ii, a~, or q.. In the 
singular, however, because of the vowel shift from long alpha to eta in the 
Ionic-Attic dialects (see Introd. §6), long alpha has been replaced by eta in the 
Attic case endings except after E, ~, or p. 
2. The nouns of the a-declension may be divided into three groups, each 
of which has two subgroups because of the alpha-eta vowel shift. The three 
groups differ in declension only in the singular. The dual and plural of all a-
declension nouns have the same endings. The first group consists of the long-
vowel feminine nouns: in these the vowel of the nom., acc., and voc. sing. is 
long. 
a. Alpha subgroup: when the noun stem ends in E, 
~, or p, the vowel 
alpha appears throughout the singular and in most of the plural. 
Ex. 
"goddess" (f) 
"education" (l) 
"land" (l) 
endings 
sing. 
nom. 
eECI. 
7TaLOEl.a 
xwpa 
-a 
gen. 
eEQ.'> 
7TaLOEl.a~ 
xwpa~ 
-a~ 
dat. 
eEq. 
7TaLOEI.q. 
xwpq. 
-q. 
acc. 
eE(W 
7TaLOEl.aV 
xwpav 
-av 
voc. 
eEa 
7TaLOEl.a 
xwpa 
-a 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
eEa 
7TaLOEl.a 
xwpa) 
( -a) 
(g. d. 
eWtV 
7TaLOEl.aW 
xwpaw) 
(-aw) 
plur. 
n. v. 
ewl. 
7TatOEtat 
xwpaL 
-at 
gen. 
eEWV 
7TatOELWV 
xwpwv 
-wv 
dat. 
eWt~ 
7TaLOEl.aL~ 
xwpaL~ 
-at~ 
acc. 
eEa~ 
7TatOEl.a~ 
xwpa~ 
-a~ 
30 

Nouns: The A-Declension I 
31 
b. Eta subgroup: when the noun stem ends in any other letter, eta appears 
in the singular endings, but alpha in most of the plural. 
Ex. 
"opinion" (/) 
"flight" (/) 
endings 
sing. 
, 
cpvy~ 
nom. 
yvwJJ:T] 
-YJ 
, 
cpvyr" 
gen. 
yvwJJ.YJ' 
-YJ' 
dat. 
, 
cpvyg 
yvwJJ.T/ 
-T/ 
, 
cpvy~v 
acc. 
yvwJJ.YJv 
-YJv 
voc. 
yvwJJ.YJ 
cpvy~ 
-YJ 
(dual 
, 
cpvya) 
(-a) 
n. a. v. 
yvwJJ.a 
(g. d. 
, 
cpvya/:v) 
(-aw) 
yvwJJ.aw 
plur. 
n. v. 
yvwJJ.at 
cpvyai 
-at 
gen. 
yvwJJ.wv 
cpvywv 
-wv 
dat. 
, 
cpvya/:, 
yvwJJ.at, 
-at, 
, 
cpvya, 
-a, 
acc. 
yvwJJ.a, 
3. Accentuation. There are two special rules for all nouns of the a-
declension. (1) All a-declension nouns have a circumflex accent on the omega 
of the gen. pI. (the form was originally -awv and has been contracted to -wv). 
(2) Any noun of the a-declension with an accented ultima (acute on U in the 
nom. sing.) has the circumflex on U in the genitive and dative of all numbers 
(examples: eEa. qwy1j). 
4. The long alpha which appears in the acc. pI. has not shifted to eta in 
the second subgroup because the long alpha there is not original, but rather a 
product of compensatory lengthening which took place when v was dropped 
from the original ending -av~. (The long alpha in the n. v. a. dual is a relatively 
recent analogical formation based on the o-declension and so did not undergo 
the vowel shift.) 
5. Note the general similarities of case formation in the 0- and a-
declensions: 
a. Nominative plural has iota-diphthong, counted as short: -Ot. -at. 
b. Genitive plural has -wv. 
c. Dative singular has a long stem-vowel with iota subscript: -~. -q.. -Tl' 
d. Dative plural has iota-diphthong with sigma: -Ol~. -al~. 
e. Accusative singular has stem vowel plus nu: -ov. -fw. -YJV. 
f. Accusative plural is derived from stem vowel plus v~: -ov~ -> -OV~. 
-av~ -> -a~. 
g. If accented on U, these nouns have circumflex in genitive and dative 
of all numbers. 

32 
UNIT FOUR 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the patterns of the long-vowel feminine a-declension nouns. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
a-declension: long-vowel feminine nouns in a 
ayopa., ayopo.<;, f. 
07]}.I.OKpaTia, 07]}.I.OKpaTia<;, f. 
7]}.I.Epa, 7]}.I.Epa<;, f. 
eEa, eEo.<;, f. 
evpa, evpa<;, f. [v II 
7fmoEia. 7TaLoEia<;, f. 
(J'Tpana. (J'Tpano.<;, f. 
o"V}.l.cpopa., O"V}.I.cpopo.<;, f. 
cpLAia, cpLAia<;, f. 
xwpa. xwpa<;, f. 
assembly, place of assembly; marketplace 
[agoraphobia] 
democracy 
day 
[ephemeral] 
goddess 
door; (freq. pI.) double, folding doors 
education, training, culture 
[propaedeutic 1 
army 
[strategy] 
event, happening, circumstance; unlucky event, 
misfortune 
friendship 
[bibliophily] 
land, country; space, room, place 
[chorology] 
a-declension: long-vowel feminine nouns in 1'/ 
apET~. apETi}<;, f. 
apx~. apxi}<;, f. 
OiK7]. OiK7]<;, f. 
7]Oov~. 7]oovi}<;, f. 
ViK7]. ViK7]<;, f. [ L I 
o"K7]V~. O"K7]vi}<;, f. 
TL}.I.~. n}.l.i}<;, f. 
cpvy~. cpvyi}<;, f. 
cpwv~. cpwvi}<;, f. 
"'iJX~. "'vxi}<;, f. 
excellence; valor; virtue 
[aretalogy] 
beginning; rule, office; realm, province 
[monarchy] 
faculty of judgment; opinion, decision. verdict 
[gnomic] 
justice, right; lawsuit; punishment (levied in a suit) 
[syndic] 
pleasure 
[hedonist] 
victory 
[epinician] 
tent, booth; stage building; stage 
[scene] 
honor; esteem; price 
[timocratic] 
running away. flight; exile 
sound; voice 
[phonetic] 
breath of life; life; soul 
[psyche] 
I. The long or short quantity of a, t, v is sometimes indicated in the vocabulary, especially 
when the quantity must be known for correct accentuation (e.g., in this case, nom. pI. 8vpat, not 
8vpat). In general an unmarked vowel may be assumed to be short (e.g., OLK7] has short L). Long 
vowels in endings are marked only in the paradigm. The student need not use long marks when 
writing Greek. 

Nouns: The A-Declension I 
33 
EXERCISES 
I. Give the requested fonn of the Greek noun and indicate its gender. 
1. acc. sing. of friendship 
16. dat. sing. of voice 
2. nom. pI. of pleasure 
17. acc. pI. of day 
3. gen. sing. of education 
18. nom. sing. of child 
4. gen. pI. of flight 
19. acc. sing. of justice 
5. gen. sing. of honor 
20. nom. pI. of day 
6. ace. pI. of opinion 
21. gen. sing. of road 
7. gen. pI. of war 
22. voc. sing. of soul 
8. dat. pI. of justice 
23. dat. pI. of pleasure 
9. acc. pI. of tent 
24. gen. sing. of anny 
10. nom. pI. of door 
25. voc. pI. of goddess 
11. voc. pI. of messenger 
26. acc. sing. of honor 
12. dat. sing. of sickness 
27. nom. pI. of word 
13. voc. sing. of man 
28. dat. sing. of victory 
14. dat. pI. of road 
29. acc. pI. of wind 
15. gen. pI. of opinion 
30. gen. pI. of door 
II. Identify the following noun fonns and give at least one meaning. 
1. tvxfl 
9. ' 
, 
17. aYYEAE 
25. tvXryv 
apxr/V 
2. 
, 
10. $EQS 
18. ' 
~ 
26. apETr,<; 
(TTpaTLaV 
ayopwv 
3. 
, 
11. oWPOt<; 
19. $EOV 
27. i]oovai 
VtKT/ 
4. ayopal.<; 
12. 7TatOEiq. 
20. (J"KT/V1]<; 
28. apx~v 
5. TLjJ.wv 
13. AOYOV<; 
21. cpwvfl 
29. TLjJ.at 
6. 
' 
, 
14. /3t/3Aia 
22. oiKat 
30. ' 
, 
apETa<; 
T/jJ.Epat<; 
7. (J"l)jJ.cpopai 
15. TLjJ.fl 
23. cpvyas 
8. $vpa<; 
16. (J"vjJ.cpopal.<; 
24. 
, 
VtKat<; 
III. In the following list, the first of each pair of fonns is the nominative sin-
gular of an a-declension noun. Following the principle of persistent accen-
tuation and the special rules applying to such nouns, place the correct accent 
on the second fonn in each pair. 
1. 
' , 
, 
6. (J"ocpia 
(J"ocpwv 
avaYKT/ 
avaYKT/v 
2. 
, 
7. 7TAT/Yry 
7TAT/yat 
jJ.aXT/ 
jJ.axat <; 
3. E7Tt$vjJ.ia 
E7Tt$VjJ.tq. 
8. EAEv$Epia 
EAEV$EPW<; 
4. 
' , 
, 
9. i](J"vXia 
, 
ELPT/vT/ 
EtPT/VWV 
T/(J"vXtq. 
5. 
' 
, 
, 
10. KEcpaAry 
KEcpak{7 
EVXT/ 
EVXT/<; 

UNIT FIVE 
Nouns: The A-Declension II 
I. The second group of a-declension nouns consists of short-vowel fem-
inine nouns: in these the alpha in the nom., acc., and voc. sing. is short. The 
gen. and dat. sing. vary between long alpha and eta depending on the final 
letter of the stem. The dual and plural have alpha throughout (except gen. pI. 
-wv) and have the same endings as the long-vowel feminines learned in Unit 4. 
a. Alpha subgroup: stems ending in E, L, or p 
Ex. 
"trial, 
"health" (f) 
attempt" (/) 
endings 
sing. 
nom. 
vyLHa 
7TE'ipa 
-a 
, 
-as' 
gen. 
VyLEWS' 
7THpaS' 
dat. 
' 
, 
, 
vymq. 
7THPq. 
-q. 
ace. 
VyLEwv 
7TE'ipav 
-av 
, , 
7TEtpa 
v()e. 
VyLEW 
-a 
(dual 
II. a. v. 
VyLEw 
7TELpa) 
( -a) 
(g. d. 
VyLEWW 
7TELpaw) 
(-aw) 
plur. 
n. v. 
VyLEWL 
7TEtpaL 
-aL 
gen. 
UyLHwV 
7THpWV 
-wv 
dat. 
, 
VyLEWLS' 
7THpaLS' 
-aLS' 
, 
-as' 
ace. 
VyLEWS' 
7THpaS' 
b. Eta subgroup: stems ending in any other letter 
Ex. 
"sea" (/) 
"tongue" (f) 
elldings 
-
------- -- ----
sing. 
nom. 
eaAaTTa 
YAwTTa 
-a 
gen. 
eaAaTT1)S' 
yAWTT1)S' 
-1)S' 
dat. 
eaAaTTTI 
YAWTTTI 
-TI 
acc. 
eaAaTTav 
YAwTTav 
-av 
voc. 
eaAaTTa 
YAwTTa 
-a 
34 

Nouns: The A-Declension II 
35 
"sea" (f) 
"tongue" (/) 
endings 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
8aAO.TTa 
YAwTTa) 
( -a.) 
(g. d. 
8aAaTTaw 
YAwTTaw) 
(-aw) 
plur. 
n. v. 
8aAaTTaL 
YAwTTaL 
-aL 
gen. 
8aAaTTwv 
YAWTTWV 
-WV 
dat. 
8aAaTTaL, 
YAwTTaL, 
-aL, 
ace. 
8aAaTTa, 
YAwTTa, 
-as 
Note that the accentuation of the nom. sing. usually indicates a short-alpha 
noun: acute on A or circumflex on long P is possible only with the short alpha 
in U. 
2. The third group of a-declension nouns consists of masculine nouns. 
These nouns have nominative singular in -os or -Tl'i>, and the gen. sing. ending 
is -OV, borrowed from the o-declension. The dual and plural endings are the 
same as for all other a-declension nouns. 
a. Alpha subgroup: stems ending in E, L, or p. The sing. endings other 
than nom. and gen. ~re like those of long-alpha feminines. Many proper names 
belong to this subgroup, but few common nouns. 
b. Eta subgroup: stems ending in any other letter. The eta appears in 
nom. dat. acc. sing., but the voc. has -a. 
Ex. 
(a) "young 
endings 
(b) "soldier" 
"judge " 
endings 
man" (m.) 
(a) 
(m.) 
(m.) 
(b) 
sing. 
, 
-as 
nom. 
VEaVLa, 
(npanwT71' 
KpLT71' 
-71' 
, 
KpLTOV 
gen. 
VEavwv 
-ov 
CTTpanwTov 
-ov 
dat. 
, 
KpLTfi 
VEaVLq. 
-q. 
CTTpanwT!1 
-!1 
, 
acc. 
VEaVLaV 
-av 
CTTpanwT71v 
KpLT71V 
-71V 
, 
-a. 
CTTpanwTa 
, 
-a 
voc. 
VEaVLa 
KpLTa 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
VEaVLa) 
( -a.) 
(CTTpanWTa 
KpLTa) 
( -a) 
(g. d. 
VEaVLaw) 
(-aw) 
«(J"TpanwTaw 
KpLTaI.V) 
(-aw) 
plur. 
, 
(npanWTaL 
, 
n. v. 
VEaVLaL 
-aL 
KpLTaL 
-aL 
gen. 
vEavLwv 
-wv 
CTTpanwTwv 
KpLTWV 
-wv 
dat. 
, 
, 
KpLTal., 
VEaVLaL, 
-aL, 
CTTpanwTaL, 
-aL, 
, 
, 
-a, 
acc. 
VEaVLa, 
-a, 
CTTpanwTa, 
KpLTa, 
3. Note that the rules for accentuation mentioned in U4.3 apply to all a-
declension nouns. 

36 
UNIT FIVE 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
l. Learn the patterns of the short-vowel feminine and the masculine a-declen-
SIon nouns. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
a-declension: short-vowel feminine nouns in a 
U..\ r/8ELa. U..\ 1)8E La<;, f. 
y{cpvpa. yEcpvpa<;, f. 
JlOLpa. JlOLpa<;, f. 
7l'ELpa. 7l'ELpa<;, f. 
vyLELa. vYLELa<;, f. 
truth; truthfulness 
[Alethea] 
bridge 
portion, lot; destiny, fate 
[Moira] 
attempt, trial 
[empirical] 
health, soundness 
[hygiene) 
a-declension: short-vowel feminine nouns in TJ 
y..\WTTa. y..\WTT1)<;, f. 
oo~a. OO~1)<;, f. 
8a...\aTTa. 8aA6.TT1)<;, f. 
Tpa.7l'E(a. Tpa7l'{(1)<;, f. 
tongue; language 
[isogloss, glottalJl 
opinion; reputation 
[orthodoxy) 
sea 
[thalassocracy] 
table; money changer's table, "bank" 
[trapeze] 
a-declension: masculine noun in a 
VEQ.vLa<;. VEaVLOV, m. 
young man 
[neologism (from base-root neo-)] 
a-declension: masculine nouns in TJ 
OEIT7l'OT1)<;. OEIT7l'OTOV, m.2 
OLKaITTr/<;. OLKaITTOV, m. 
KpLTr/<;. KpLTOV, m. 
, 
, 
vaVT1)<;. vaVTOV, m. 
07l'..\LT1)<;. 07l'..\LTOV, m. I i: I 
7l'OL 1)Tr/<;. 7l'OL 1)TOV, m. 
7l'O..\LT1)<;. 7l'O..\LTOV, m. [i: I 
ITTpanwT1)<;. ITTpanWTov, m. 
master, lord; absolute ruler 
[despot) 
juryman, judge (in court) 
judge (in a contest), umpire 
[critic] 
sailor 
[nautical) 
heavy-armed soldier, hoplite 
maker, poet 
citizen 
[politics] 
soldier 
I. Ionic and Koine have -(J"(J"- where Attic has -TT- (cf. Introd. §6), and in dictionaries such 
words are usually listed under the -(]"(J"- fonn (yAw(J"(J"a. 8aAa(J"(J"a). 
2. The voc. sing. is accented O€(J"7rOTa. 

Nouns: The A-Declension II 
37 
EXERCISES 
I. Give the requested fonn of the Greek noun and indicate its gender. 
I. dat. pI. of citizen 
2. gen. pI. of table 
3. acc. sing. of truth 
4. nom. pI. of fate 
5. gen. sing. of juror 
6. acc. pI. of umpire 
7. nom. sing. of young man 
8. dat. sing. of reputation 
9. voc. sing. of poet 
10. acc. sing. of sailor 
II. acc. pI. of lawsuit 
12. gen. pI. of wind 
13. dat. pI. of faculty of judgment 
14. dat. sing. of health 
15. gen. sing. of sailor 
16. acc. sing. of law 
17. nom. pI. of land 
18. nom. pI. of book 
19. voc. sing. of hoplite 
20. nom. pI. of goddess 
21. gen. sing. of bridge 
22. voc. pI. of master 
23. dat. pI. of table 
24. gen. sing. of health 
25. voc. sing. of truth 
26. acc. sing. of young man 
27. nom. pI. of poet 
28. dat. sing. of citizen 
29. acc. pI. of soldier 
30. gen. pI. of tongue 
II. Identify the following noun fonns and give at least one meaning. 
1. em "ALTy/') 
, 
I 
2. vyuwv 
3. 
8a"AuTT~ 
4. (TTpanwTa') 
I 
5. xwpat') 
6. y"AwTTwV 
7. 7Tf.Lpat 
8. aPXIJ') 
9. <pwvfl 
10. 
oo~a') 
II. yE<pVpq. 
12. 7TO"ALTat 
13. OErT7TOTOV 
14. vavTwv 
15. <pvyaL 
16. (TTpanWTat 
17. 7TO"ALTa 
18. Vytf:Lq. 
19. }1oipar; 
20. oHT7T(STa') 
21. 
06~y/') 
22. y"AwTTat') 
23. 07T"ALTy/V 
24. 7TELpav 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
va-lJTat 
r,oovwv 
8a"AuTTa') 
I 
VO(TOV 
I 
xwpat') 
KptTOV 
a"AY/8dq. 
IJ.OtpwV 

UNIT SIX 
The Article; Prepositions I 
PRELIMINARIES 
A. Articles. An article (Latin articulus, Greek ap8pov = "joint, connect-
ing word") is a small modifier placed before a noun or a noun phrase to limit. 
individualize, or give definiteness or indefiniteness to the application of the 
noun. English, like many modern languages, has both a definite article (the) 
and an indefinite article (a, an), and the English articles are not declined. In 
other languages the article is declined in number and gender to agree with the 
number and gender of the noun it accompanies (e.g., French la femme, Italian 
il tempo, Spanish Los An!?eles), and in Greek, as in German, the article also is 
inflected in the cases in agreement with its noun. Greek has no indefinite 
article, and its definite article is used in ways (e.g., with abstract nouns and in 
a generic sense) that are paralleled in other languages but not in English. 
B. Prepositions. A preposition (Greek npo8uTL', Latin praepositio = "a 
word placed in front") is that part of speech which expresses a relation be-
tween a noun or pronoun (the object of the preposition) and some other word, 
with either adverbial or adjectival force. English has several dozen preposi-
tions, such as in, oj, at, he/ow, up, through. Prepositions are in origin adverbs 
and are found in English and Greek (and other languages) also as adverbs 
more or less closely attached to the verb. Compare the following: 
He went down the ladder. 
He knocked the door down. 
(preposition) 
(adverb) 
The word group consisting of the preposition and the noun or pronoun it 
governs is called a prepositional phrase. The object of a preposition is in a 
case other than the nominative (or "straight" case), that is, in an "oblique" 
case. Such case usage is evident in Greek as well as, for instance, German and 
Latin. English, like other languages, no longer distinguishes the objective case 
of nouns; but in formal English a pronoun that is the object of a preposition 
must be in the objective case: to me, from whom, with us, hefore them. 
38 

The Article; Prepositions I 
39 
1. The definite article (the) in Attic has masculine, feminine, and neuter 
fonus whose endings are basically those of the 0- and a-declensions. The stem 
of the article varies between T- (found in almost all fonus) and the h-sound, 
written as a rough breathing (found in the masc. and fern. nom. sing. and pl.). 
mase. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
nom. 
a 
1] 
TO 
gen. 
TOV 
Tfj, 
TOV 
dat. 
T0 
T~ 
T'I-l 
, 
, 
, 
ace. 
TOV 
T1]V 
TO 
(dual 
n. a. 
TW 
TW 
TW) 
(g. d. 
TOl.V 
TOl.V 
TOl.v) 
. 
nom. 
at 
at 
Ta 
plural 
gen. 
TWV 
T(;JV 
TWV 
dat. 
Tal., 
Tal., 
Tal., 
, 
ace. 
TaU, 
Ta, 
Ta 
There is no vocative fonu of the article. The masc. and fern. nom. sing. and pI. 
fonus are treated as proclitics (U2.11): they have no accent of their own.' 
Differentiated feminine dual forms in alpha (TCi, Ta(;v) also existed in the 
fourth century B.C.E. and perhaps earlier. 
2. Concord. (Concord will be discussed more fully in U7.) The article 
agrees with its noun in gender, number, and case. It does not necessarily agree 
with its noun in ending. Examples: TryV yvw}J-T]V, T0 i\oyer, but also TOV, 
vavTa" Ta(;,ooo(;,. 
3. Some Uses of the Article 
a. The Greek article may individualize or make definite the noun it mod-
ifies, just as the English article the does. This is the particular article. In Greek 
the particular article is often used with proper names. 
Ex. 
, 
nat T]TT], 
. 
, 
a nat T]TT], 
o ~oi\wv 
poet, a poet 
the poet 
Solon 
I. This difference in treatment of the nom. case of the article is actually a postclassical graphic 
convention designed to distinguish the masc. and fern. nom. of the article from the same forms 
of the relative pronoun (which look the same but are accented). In fact, all cases of the definite 
article. when used as straightforward article, were probably proclitic within their word groups. 

40 
UNIT SIX 
b. The Greek article, in the context of a sentence, often has the force of 
an English possessive adjective (my, our, your, his, her, its, their). The proper 
English translation is obvious from the context (normally the subject of the 
sentence is the possessor). 
Ex. 
a (TTpanWT17r; TOV L7T7TOV aYEL. 
The soldier is leading his horse. 
c. Abstract nouns and abstract substantives are often accompanied by the 
definite article in Greek, a use found in other languages, but not in English (cf. 
French la beaute, German die SchOnheit, English beauty). 
Ex. 
~ vyiELa 
health 
~ clA1j8EW 
truthfulness 
TO KaAov 
beauty, the beautiful 
d. Substantives that refer to an entire class and make a general statement 
usually are accompanied by the definite article in Greek. The generic article is 
found in other languages as well, but rarely in English except with proper 
names (cf. Italian l'uomo, Spanish la mujer). 
Ex. 
a av8pw7Tor; 
man, mankind, 
or oi aVepW7TOL 
men in general 
Note that in English a noun with the indefinite article a(n) sometimes refers to 
a class and is equivalent to the generic definite article in Greek: contrast (inde-
finite) A poet visited out class with (generic) A poet ought to speak piously of 
the gods. 
4. The nom. sing. forms of the article are often used in Greek dictionaries 
and vocabulary lists instead of the abbreviations m., f., and n. to indicate the 
gender of a noun: for instance, aOOr;, aoou, ~ is the same as aOOr;, aoou, f. 
5. Some Prepositions. Greek prepositions were in origin adverbs which 
were optionally added to a sentence to reinforce a grammatical relationship 
already conveyed by the case of a noun. By classical times, the use of these 
words became standard in spoken Greek and prose, while verse sometimes still 
reflected the older custom of letting the case of a noun act on its own. The 
words themselves acquired a fixed position in front of the noun they rein-
forced. 
Greek prepositions govern one or more of the three "oblique" cases (gen., 
dat., acc.). When a preposition can govern more than one case, there is usually 
a clear distinction in meaning conveyed by the difference. In general, the geni-
tive with a preposition often conveys motion away from; the dative often con-
veys static position; the accusative often conveys motion toward. The follow-

The Article; Prepositions I 
41 
ing definitions are only rough indications of some of the most common uses of 
the various prepositions. The finer distinctions of usage can be perceived only 
after some experience in reading Greek. Note that the prepositions EK. EV. and 
Ei~ are proclitics (U2.11). 
a7TO + gen. 
EK + gen. (E~ before vowels) 
EV + dat. 
Ei~ or E~ + acc. 
(J"VV + dat. 
j1.ETa + gen. 
j1.ETa + acc. 
OLa + gen. 
E7TL + gen. 
E7TL + dat. 
E7TL + acc. 
7Tapa + gen. 
7Tapa + dat. 
7Tapa + acc. 
7TPO~ + gen. 
7TPO~ + dat. 
7TPO~ + acc. 
away from, from 
out of, forth from 
in, within, on, at, among 
into, to, toward 
together with, with 
among, with 
into the middle of; in pursuit of; after 
through (of space or time); through, by 
(of agent or means) 
by aid of, by reason of, on account of 
upon; in the time of 
upon, over; next to; in addition to 
onto, up to, toward; against 
from the side of, from (usually with a 
person as object) 
by the side of, at the house of 
to the side of; beside; past, beyond 
from, proceeding from 
near, beside; in addition to 
to, toward; against; in respect to, 
regarding 
6. Examples of Usage of These Prepositions 
a7To T'iJ~ yEcpvpa~ 
(movement or distance) away from the 
bridge 
a7TO T'iJ~ (J"K'lJVf]~ 
(movement) away from (the vicinity) of 
the tent 
a7To TaVT'IJ~ Tf]~ ~j1.Epa~ 
from this day (onward) 
EK Tf]~ eaAaTT'IJ~ 
E~ apxf]~1 
(movement) out from (the inside oj) the 
tent 
out of the sea 
from the beginning 
I. The article is omitted in this phrase because it is an old expression, predating the develop-
ment of the article. 

42 
, 
, 
EK TOVTWV 
EV TV xwpq 
EV TV <TKy/VV 
EV TOL) 8EOL) 
EV KEpKVpq 
EV OlX[1 
" 
, 
H) Ty/V <TKy/Vy/V 
EL) T~V 8aAaTTav 
EL) 7TaLOEiav 
<TVV TOL) <TTpaTY/yoL) 
, 
, 
<TVV 7T'OV'f1 
<TVV OiK!1 , 
jJ.ETU TOV 7T'aLoiov 
jJ.ETU cj>8ovov 
jJ.ETU TOV) 67T' Ai Ta) 
jJ.ETU TOV 7T'OAEjJ.ov 
jJ.ETU TaVTa 
OLU TOVTOV TOV xpovov 
OLU f3iov 
OL' ayyEAwv 
OLU YAwTTy/) 
OLU TOV) 8wv) 
OLU TOV cj>of3ov 
OLU T~V ootav 
OLU T~V VO<TOV 
E7T'/. T1]) Tpa7T'E(y/) 
E7T'/. KaAAiov 
Ecj>' t7T'7T'OV 
E7T'/. TV 8aAaTT'[1 
E7T'/. TOL) <TTpanWTaL) 
" 
, 
E7T'L TOVTOL) 
E7T'/. TOV 7T'OTajJ.OV 
as a result of or after these things 
in (within) the land 
in (within) the tent 
among the gods 
at Corcyra 
in justice = justly 
into the tent 
into or toward the sea 
with respect to training 
with the generals 
with toil 
with justice = justly 
UNIT SIX 
(in the midst of and so) among, with the 
umpires 
with the child 
with envy = enviously 
(movement) in pursuit of or after the 
hoplites 
(temporal) after the war 
(temporal) after these things 
(movement) through the land; (location) 
throughout the land 
throughout this period of time 
throughout life 
through or by means of messengers 
by means of the tongue 
by aid of or thanks to the gods 
because of or by reason of fear 
because of the reputation 
because of or on account of the sickness 
upon the table [superposition] 
in the time of (the archon) Callias 
upon a horse, on horseback 
(position) by or next to the sea 
over, i.e., in charge of the soldiers 
in addition to these things 
up to the river 

The Article; Prepositions I 
hrt 7TOAVV xpOVOV 
E7Tt TOV~ nEpCTa~ 
(up to the limit of, i.e.)jor a long time 
(warlike campaign) against the Persians 
43 
7Tapa Kvpov 
from Cyrus's presence or from the vicinity 
of Cyrus 
7Tapa K vPU? 
7Tapa Kvpov 
" 
, 
7Tapa TOV 7TOTa}J.OV 
7TPO~ TWV 7TOALTWV 
7TPO~ T0 7TOTa}J.0 
, 
, 
7TpO~ TOVTOL~ 
7TPO~ T7JV YE<pvpav 
" 
, 
7TpO~ TOV~ CTTpaTLWTa~ 
7TPO~ TOV~ 7TOA{Ta~ 
in Cyrus's presence or with Cyrus or on 
Cyrus's side 
among or in the eyes (judgment) of all 
men 
to or into Cyrus's presence 
(movement or extension) alongside the 
river 
beyond or contrary to expectation 
(e.g., hear, receive) from the citizens 
(position) near the river 
in addition to these things 
(direction) toward the bridge 
(fighting, war) against the soldiers 
(speak) to the citizens; (behave in a 
certain way) with regard to the citizens 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the declension of the article. 
2. Study the examples of prepositional usage presented above. 
3. Learn as vocabulary the prepositions presented above in §5 and the words 
presented below. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
further masculine o-declension nouns 
7rAOVTO>. 7rA01JTov. m. 
, 
, 
7rOVO>. 7rOVov. m. 
7rOTaWJr;. 7rOTa}J.ov. m. 
(JTpar'lYo>. (JTpar'lYov. m. 
, 
, 
TP07rO>. TP07rOV, m. 
V7rVO>. V7rVOV, m. 
cj>8ovo>. cj>8ovov, m. 
cj>oJ3o>. cj>opov, m. 
xpovo>. xpovov, m. 
wealth, riches 
[plutocrat] 
hard work, toil; suffering 
[geoponics] 
river 
[Mesopotamia] 
general 
[strategic] 
tum; way, manner, fashion; habits, character 
[tropics, hel iotrope] 
sleep 
[hypnotism] 
envy, jealousy 
fear 
[phobia, Phobos] 
time; period of time 
[chronology] 

44 
UNIT SIX 
EXERCISES 
I. Give the requested form of the Greek noun with the article. 
Ex. 
dat. sing of the road 
Tn OOW 
, 
, 
I. acc. pI. of (the) fear 
12. gen. sing. of the honor 
2. gen. sing. of the general 
13. dat. pI. of the table 
3. dat. pI. of (the) character 
14. nom. pI. of the juryman 
4. nom. pI. of (the) jealousy 
15. gen. pI. of the door 
5. gen. pI. of the toil 
16. acc. sing. of the poet 
6. acc. sing. of (the) sleep 
17. dat. sing. of the god 
7. dat. sing. of the hoplite 
18. nom. sing. of the office 
8. nom. sing. of the gift 
19. gen. pI. of the measure 
9. gen. pI. of the day 
20. nom. pI. of the horse 
10. nom. pI. of the citizen 
21. acc. pI. of the vote 
11. acc. pI. of the wind 
22. dat. pI. of the road 
II. Write out the declension of "the sickness" in the singular only, of "the 
sailor" in the plural only, and of "the book" in both singular and plural. 
III. Translate the following into English. 
I. 0:11'0 T11'> 8aAaTTYJ'> 
10. hrt. TO~'> OWpOL'> 
2. (J'uv 7O~'> onAiTaL'> 
11. Ei'> TOV 1]AWV 
3. Ent. TOU'> (J'TpanWTa'> 
12. EK T11'> xwpa,> 
4. }lETa TO. naLoia 
13. }lETa TWV oLKa(J'Twv 
5. EV Tf7 ayopq 
14. EV T0 nOTa}l0 
6. npo,> TWV oLKa(J'Twv 
15. Ei'> T1JV ooov 
7. EK T11'> q:HAia'> 
16. Ent. TWV TpanE(wv 
8. napa T0V (J'TpaTYJYov 
17. napa T7JV OOOV 
9. OLa TOV cp8ovov 
18. npo,> TO~'> OWpOL'> 
IV. Translate the following prepositional phrases into Greek. (For some ex-
pressions there is more than one correct rendering.) 
I. on account of the hard work 
8. regarding the Fates 
2. in the house of the children 
9. next to the table 
3. beside the doors 
10. upon the horse 
4. from the general 
11. beyond reason 
5. in pursuit of the soldier 
12. out of the land 
6. toward the sea 
13. by means of the voice 
7. among the gods 
14. with fear 

UNIT SEVEN 
Vowel-Declension Adjectives; 
Attribution and Predication 
PRELIMINARIES 
A. Adjectives. An adjective (Greek E7Ti8nov, Latin adiectivum = "word 
added to [a noun]") is that part of speech which modifies (or describes or qual-
ifies) a noun. Examples: the large book; The food is good. 
In many languages adjectives are inflected to mark concord (see below) 
with the nouns they modify. English has no inflection showing gender, num-
ber, and case of adjectives (the large house, the large men), but inflection in 
number and gender occurs, for instance, in Spanish, French, and Italian (e.g., 
French un vieux livre vs. la vie lie nourrice). In Greek, as in Latin or German, 
adjectives are inflected to indicate not only gender and number, but also case. 
Another characteristic of adjectives is that they have three degrees. The 
positive degree is the standard form. The comparative degree is used to com-
pare one noun with another in regard to their possession of the same quality: 
for example, English stronger, more virtuous. The superlative degree is used 
to mark an excess or supremacy in the possession of a quality: for instance, 
English strongest, most virtuous. The formation of the comparative and super-
lative degrees is sometimes called "comparison of adjectives" (Unit 30). 
B. Concord. Concord is the agreement in various grammatical cate-
gories between words which are associated in the grammar of a sentence or in 
the logic of an extended passage. 
There may be agreement in number. The singular noun farmer agrees in 
number with the verb form plows in the sentence The farmer plows, whereas 
the plural farmers agrees with the verb form plow in The farmers plow. Or the 
plural pronoun they is used to refer to the farmers, while the singular he refers 
to the farmer. These types of concord are also evident in Greek. 
There may be agreement in gender. The feminine pronoun she is used to 
refer to a feminine noun such as actress, whereas the neuter it is used to refer 
to a neuter noun like car. This type of concord is also evident in Greek. 
45 

46 
UNIT SEVEN 
There may be agreement in case as well, although this is rarely evident in 
English (cf. however I expect the winner to be him.). In a highly inflected lan-
guage like Greek, agreement in case is widespread. The most common type is 
the agreement of an article or an adjective with its noun in gender, number, 
and case. 
C. Phrases and Clauses. A clause is a group of words which contains a 
subject and a finite verb (to be discussed in detail in Unit 8). A phrase is a 
group of grammatically or semantically associated words that does not contain 
a subject-finite verb group. 
A noun, taken by itself, is used only to refer to, to identify, or to specify a 
person or thing. Without departing from this function of referring, a noun may 
have associated with it an article and/or adjectival elements (adjective, 
adjectival prepositional phrase, participle, relative clause). The resulting group 
of words may be called a noun phrase. The adjectival elements in such a 
phrase are said to be attributive (or are called attributes). The speaker's 
application of these adjectival elements is called attribution. Attribution 
simply makes the act of referring more detailed and precise. 
Ex. 
man 
the man 
the tall man 
the tall man 
the dancing figure 
the young man 
the old man 
by the window 
by the window 
now leaving the room 
who left the room 
no attribute 
article 
article, adjective 
art., adj., prep. phrase 
art., participle, prep. phrase 
art., adj., participial phrase 
art., adj., relative clause 
In noun phrases the word order varies in different languages. In English, 
adjectives come between the article and the noun, participles precede or follow 
the noun, and relative clauses follow the noun. In German, attributive adjec-
tives and adjectival phrases are placed between article and noun. In French, 
Spanish, or Italian, most attributive adjectives immediately follow their nouns. 
In Greek, attributive words accompanying a noun that has the article are re-
stricted to a couple of positions, but an attributive word accompanying a noun 
without the article is less restricted. Inflection clarifies most grammatical rela-
tionships in Greek, so that, in general, word order in Greek is freer than in less 
inflected tongues. 
In order to utter a complete and meaningful sentence or clause (in written 
English or formal spoken English), a speaker must not only refer (by means of 
a noun or other substantive) to a person or thing which is the subject or topic 

Vowel-Declension Adjectives; Attribution and Predication 
47 
of his or her utterance, but also predicate something of that subject, that is, the 
speaker must comment on the given topic, must assert or affirm an action or a 
state of being as applicable to the subject. The main verb of a sentence or 
clause carries the force of predication, and the predicate of a sentence or 
clause includes the verb itself and all its modifiers and/or complements. 
Whereas a reference can be successful or unsuccessful (if we don't understand 
to what the speaker is trying to refer), a predication has a truth value: what the 
speaker asserts is either true or false. 
D. Predicate Nouns and Adjectives. Verbs that express a state of being 
(such as be, seem, look, smell, sound) often serve to link the subject noun ei-
ther to another noun in the predicate (which is identified with the subject or 
otherwise asserted to apply to it) or to an adjective in the predicate. In the tra-
ditional terminology used in many Greek grammars and commentaries, such a 
verb is called a copula (Latin for "link"). 
Ex. 
predicate nouns: 
That man is my father. 
She was an astronaut. 
The students became experts in Greek. 
predicate adjectives: The man is tall. 
This seems correct. 
The restaurant smelled fishy. 
She looked tired. 
Note the difference between a phrase containing an attributive adjective and 
performing the function of reference only and a sentence in which the adjec-
tive is in the predicate and (along with the verb) is essential to the act of pre-
dication: 
the blue hook 
The hook is blue. 
(reference only, attributive adjective) 
(reference and predication, predicative adj.) 
I. Adjective Declension. Greek adjectives are inflected in two general 
classes: the vowel-declension adjectives (also called "first-and-second-declen-
sion" adjectives), and the consonant-declension adjectives (also called "third-
declension" adjectives). The latter will be treated in Unit 22. The vowel-de-
clension adjectives, treated in this unit, have a single stem to which masc., 
fern., and neut. endings are added to form all the cases and numbers. The mas-
culine endings are the same as those of o-declension nouns in -o~ (learned in 
U3). The feminine endings are the same as those of the long-vowel feminine 

48 
UNIT SEVEN 
nouns of the a-declension (learned in U4): in the singular long alpha appears 
when the stem ends in E, t, or p; eta appears when the stem ends in any other 
letter. The neuter endings are the same as those of the o-declension neuter 
nouns in -ov (learned in U3). 
Ex. 
a. with alpha-type feminine singular: atw() = "worthy" 
masc. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
nom. 
a~w~ 
a~ia 
a~wv 
gen. 
a~iov 
a~ia~ 
a~iov 
dat. 
a~iO? 
a~ia.: 
a~iO? 
acc. 
a~wv 
a~iav 
a~wv 
voc. 
a~t{: 
a~ia 
a~wv 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
a~iw 
a~ia 
a~iw) 
(g. d. 
a~iow 
a~iaw 
a~iow) 
plur. 
n. v. 
a~wL 
a~LaL 
a~La 
gen. 
a~f.wv 
a~iwv 
a~iwv 
dat. 
a~ioL~ 
a~iaL~ 
a~ioL~ 
acc. 
a~iov~ 
a~ia~ 
a~La 
b. with eta-type feminine singular: ciya8o() = "valorous, good" 
masc. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
nom. 
aya8o~ 
aya8~ 
aya80v 
gen. 
aya80v 
aya8iJ~ 
aya80v 
dat. 
aya80 
aya8f1 
aya80 
acc. 
aya80v 
aya8~v 
aya80v 
voc. 
aya8i 
aya8~ 
aya80v 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
aya8w 
aya8ci 
aya8w) 
(g. d. 
aya8oi:v 
aya8ai:v 
aya8oi:v) 
plur. 
n. v. 
aya80i 
aya8ai 
aya8ci 
gen. 
aya8wv 
aya8wv 
aya8wv 
dat. 
aya8oi:~ 
aya8ai:~ 
aya8oi:~ 
acc. 
aya8ov~ 
aya8ci~ 
aya8ci 
2. Accentuation. The accentuation of adjectives (like that of nouns) is 
persistent (see U3.5): that is, the same syllable tends to be accented in all 
forms except when the changing length of the ultima forces a change. The 
special rule that applied for nouns of the 0- and a-declensions with accented 
ultima also applies to the adjectives of this class: an adjective of this type with 
acute on U in the masc. nom. sing. has the circumflex in the gen. and dat. of all 

Vowel-Declension Adjectives; Attribution and Predication 
49 
numbers and genders (example: aya8os'). Note, however, that the fern. gen. pI. 
of adjectives of this class is not treated like the gen. pI. of the corresponding 
nouns: the nouns always have -wv, but in the adj. the accentuation is assimi-
lated to that of the masc. gen. pI. (thUS -wv appears only if the ultima is 
accented, as in aya8o), not in adjs. accented like Citw)). I 
3. Attributive Adjectives. The simplest form of noun phrase in Greek 
consists of a noun without the article and an adjective agreeing with it in 
gender, number, and case (concord}. The adjective is normally adjacent to the 
noun, but the order is variable. 
7TOAiTy/) Citw) 
/J.LKpal, iJoovai 
a worthy citizen 
small pleasures 
More common is the noun phrase with definite article. The position of an ad-
jective in relation to the definite article and the noun serves to mark it as an 
attribute: an attributive adjective is inside the article-noun group. Three 
possible attributive positions are found: 
a. (most common) article -
modifier -
noun 
b. (less common) article -
noun -
article (repeated) -
modifier 
c. (uncommon) noun -
article -
modifier 
The attributive modifier may be not only an adjective, but also a prepositional 
phrase or a participle or (occasionally) even an adverb or certain dependent 
genitives. 
Ex. 
6 aya8o) /3io) 
6 EV Tn ayop~ (TTpanWTy/) 
Ot Civ8pW7TOL ot TOTE 
ot OLKaCTTQI, Ot OiKaWL 
the good life 
the soldier in the marketplace 
the people of that time 
the just jurymen 
4. Substantive-creating Force of the Article. A frequent idiomatic use of 
the Greek article is the creation of a substantive by placement of any type of 
modifier in attributive position with the article but with no noun expressed. 2 
The modifier can thus become a masc., fern., or neut. substantive when used 
with the appropriate form of the article. For instance, the masc. sing. article 
plus attribute may form a singular substantive referring to a male (e.g., 6 
I. The contrast in accentuation is semantically important when a fern. noun in -La coexists with 
an adjective in -LO, -La -LOV from the same root: e.g., cittwv. QCHWV, cpduwv, gen. pI. of fern. 
nouns citLa, QULa, cptt..La vs. citLwV, O(J"LWV, CPtt..LWV, gen. pI. of any gender. including feminine, 
of adjectives from the same root. 
2. In some contexts an adjective may be used without the article as an indefinite substantive: 
e.g .. KaKov = "a bad thing. harm." 

50 
UNIT SEVEN 
-----~~--- --- ---
(J"0cp0'> = "the wise man" or "a wise man" [in general]); the fern. pI. may form a 
plural substantive referring to women (e.g., ai OiKawL = "[thel just women"); 
or a neuter sing. may form an abstract substantive (e.g., TO KaAov = [literally 1 
"the beautiful thing" = "beauty" or "that which is beautiful"). Compare also 
the following: 
, 
, 
OL TOTE 
oi 7TPO'> Til 8aAuTT?} 
TO. xaAE7TU 
TO. OiKaw 
the people of that time 
the people near the sea 
(the) difficult things 
the just things = just deeds = what is just 
5. Predicate Adjective. When an adjective falls outside the article-noun 
unit it is predicative rather than attributive. In Greek (especially in poetry, in 
proverbial sayings, and on any occasion of concise utterance) a nominative 
noun plus an agreeing adjective in predicate position may form a sentence 
without the appropriate form of the copula be being expressed: 
The juryman is just. (predication) 
(Contrast 6 OiKaLO'> (JLKa(J"nj,> = the just juryman [attributionl.) 
Because ancient Greek is so highly inflected, the word order is not rigid. The 
subject-predicate relationship is sufficiently clear from the forms of the noun 
and adjective. The order of words may be altered to suit stylistic goals or to 
affect the emphasis: 
non-emphatic adj.: 
emphatic adj.: 
6 oLKa(J"T'l]'> oiKaw'>. 
oiKaw'> 6 OLKa(TTrl'>. 
The juryman is just. 
The juryman is iust [not 
unjust]. 
6. Predicate Noun. Another simple form of sentence consists of subject 
noun and predicate noun linked by the copula be. As with the predicate-
adjective construction, the verb is sometimes omitted in Greek. A predicate 
noun in Greek must agree with its subject noun in case. Usually the subject 
noun is accompanied by the definite article and the predicate noun is without 
the article. 
Ex. 
6 oLKa(J"T'l]'> vaVTIJ,>. 
, 
, 
, 
7TOLYJTIJ,> 0 (J"TpaTYJYO'>. 
The juryman is a sailor. 
The general is a poet. 
(Note the case: nominative subject, predicate noun is also nominative. Because 
this is the most frequent construction, a predicate noun is sometimes called 
"predicate nominative.") 

Vowel-Declension Adjectives; Attribution and Predication 
51 
7. Possessive Genitive. The genitive of a noun (with its article and other 
modifiers, if any) may be placed in attributive position to express possession. 
(More details about this construction will be learned in U1O.) 
the general's tent or 
TO TOV ClLKaiov ClLKaCTTOV {:3L{3A.iov 
the tent of the general 
the just juror's book or 
the book of the just juror 
8. Identification of Adjective Forms. When you learn an adjective, you 
need to learn all the nom. sing. fonns (including the accent), and the English 
meaning. 
Ex. 
OiKaLO~, clLKaia, OiKaLOV, just 
When you are asked to identify an adjective fonn (or article), first specify the 
three variables (case and number and gender) and then give the "dictionary" 
infonnation about the word, namely, the nom. sing. fonns (either all in full, or 
the masc. in full and the other endings abbreviated), and tell what noun the 
adjective modifies, specifying it as attributive or predicative (or say that the 
adj. is used as a substantive if it does not modify an expressed noun). 
Ex. 
identify the adj. in TV jJ.aKpq. 000 
answer: dat. sing. fern. of jJ.aKpo~, jJ.aKPo., jJ.aKpov 
(or jJ.aKpo~, -a, -ov), attributive modifying 00c{> 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the declension of vowel-declension adjectives. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
vowel-declension adjectives 
aya8o~, aya8~, aya80v 
aia-xpo<;, aia-xpa, ai(J"xpov 
atw<;, atta, atwv 
OryAO<;, O~Ary, OryAov 
OtKaw<;, oLKata, OtKaWv 
KaKo<;, KaKr], KaKov 
good; well-born; brave 
[Agatha) 
ugly; shameful, base 
worth; worthy, deserving of (takes a genitive 
complement: atw<; TLJ.l.ry<; = "worthy of honor") 
[axiom] 
clear, manifest 
[psychedelic] 
just 
bad; evil; low-born 
[cacophony) 

52 
KaAO" KaAr" KaAOV 
J.WKPO" J.WKpo., j.J.aKpOV 
-, -, 
-
, 
j.J.tKPO" j.J.tKpa, j.J.tKpOV 
7rOVT/PO" 7rOVT/Po., 7rOVT/POV 
CTO~O" CTO~r" CTO~OV 
~iAW', ~tAia, ~iAWV 
xaAE7rO" XaAE7rr" xaAmOV 
beautiful; fine, noble 
[calligraphy] 
long, tall, large; far 
[macroscopic] 
UNIT SEVEN 
small, little 
[microscopic, microcomputer] 
worthless; knavish; evil, base 
skilled, clever, wise 
[sophomore 1 
friendly; beloved 
difficult, hard; harsh, cruel 
some vowel-declension adjectives often used substantivally 
TO tEpOV 
Ta tEpa 
7rEeO" 7rE er, , 7rEeOV 
67rEeO, 
Ot 7rEeoi 
7rAOVCTW" 7rAOVCTia, 
7rAOVCTWV 
Ot 7r AOVCTWt 
7rOAEj.J.W" 7rOAEj.J.ia, 
7rOAEj.J.WV 
Ot 7rOAEj.J.tOt 
~iAO" ~iAT/, ~iAOV 
6 ~iAO" ~ ~iAT/ 
EXERCISES 
holy, consecrated 
[Hieronymus = Jerome, 
hierarchy] 
holy place, shrine 
offerings; omens; sacred rites 
on foot, on land 
infantry 
foot soldiers 
wealthy, rich 
rich men 
hostile; belonging to war 
the enemy 
beloved, dear 
[cf. 7r AOUTO, 1 
(male) friend, (female) friend 
I. Give the requested fonn of each phrase in Greek. 
l. shameful deeds (dat.) 
6. the wealthy umpires (acc.) 
2. the harsh misfortune (acc.) 
7. a beautiful river (gen.) 
3. the base men (nom.) 
8. a good portion (dat.) 
4. a clear measure (gen.) 
9. the consecrated roads (gen.) 
5. the friendly messenger (dat.) 
10. the just manner (acc.) 
II. For each sentence or phrase (a) translate into English; (b) identify fully all 
adjective fonns; (c) specify the use of the adjective (either attributive modi-
fying which noun, or predicative modifying which noun, or used as a sub-
stantive). 
Ex. 
6 xaA.E7Ta~ 7rI]AE}J-O~ 
(a) the cruel war; (b) xaAE7Ta~ is nom. sing. masc. of xaAE7Ta~, 
-~, -av; (c) attributive modifying 7TaAE}J-o~. 
1. 
7Tpa~ Tav oiKawv Aayov 
2. }J-LKpo. TO. 7TaLoia. 

Vowel-Declension Adjectives; Attribution and Predication 
53 
3. ena TWV }.J.aKpwv 8vpwv 
10. npo') TrW noAE}.J.iav (JTpau(w 
4. 6 oiKaw') atw') Tf)') apxf)')· 
11. (T'VV TOL,) av8pwnOL') TOL,) aya8oL,) 
5. }.J.ETa TWV KaAWV 8EWV 
12. OLa TO ai(J"xpov 
6. r, napa TOV nOTa}.J.ov 600') 
13. (J"ocpry r, yvw}.J.Yf r, TWV ECP' Lnn{J)v 
XaAE7fr,. 
(J"TpaTYfYwv. 
7. atwL KaKwv OL novYfpoi. 
14. r, npo') TWV 8EWV }.J.o'ipa Or,AYf. 
8. 
Ei') Tryv TOV (J"TpaTYfYov (J"KYfVr,V 
15. noAE}.J.wL OL npo') Tn 8aAQ.TTT/. 
9. 6 TOV VEaviov cpeovo') ov [= not] 
16. LEpa TO. (3L{3Aia TO. TWV KpLTWV. 
, 
}.J.LKPO'). 
III. Translate the following phrases and sentences into Greek. 
1. upon the small bridge 
2. because of the valor of the foot soldiers 
3. next to the holy books 
4. throughout the long life 
5. with the small children of the messenger 
6. The poet's exile is disgraceful. 
7. The deeds of wise men are worthy of honor. 
8. Good books are worthy friends. 
9. The soldiers in the tent are handsome. 
10. The envy of the young men is shameful. 

UNIT EIGHT 
n-Verbs: Present Active Indicative 
PRELIMINARIES 
A. Verbs. A verb (Greek pr,jJ.a, Latin verbum = "that which is said, 
predicate") is that part of speech which affinns or predicates (see U7 Prelim. 
C) by expressing an action or a state of being. 
The inflection of a verb is called conjugation. The finite forms of a verb 
are those whose inflectional ending defines precisely the person and number 
of the subject, or, in an uninflected or slightly inflected language like English, 
those which combine with a subject to fonn a clause: for example, we see, they 
saw, the man is walking. There are also two important non-finite forms of a 
verb: verbal noun (infinitive [e.g., to see] and/or gerund [e.g., seeing]) and 
verbal adjective (participle: e.g., seeing, seen). Finite and non-finite fonns 
share such features as tense and voice and the ability to govern objects and be 
modified by adverbs. Non-finite fonns, however, cannot serve as the predicate 
of a clause and carry no distinction of person. 
B. Finite verb forms have five important variable features: 
1. Person expresses the relation of the verb's subject to the speaker and 
listener of the utterance. 
first person: the subject is the speaker or a group including the speaker (I, 
we). 
second person: the subject is the listener or listeners (you). 
third person: the subject is a person or thing other than the speaker or 
listener (he, she, it, they). 
Most English verbs now show distinction of person only in third person 
singular present fonns (walks, has vs. walk, have), and thus the person 
must be expressed in English by a subject noun or a personal pronoun 
separate from the verb itself. 
2. Number marks whether the verb's subject is singular or plura\. The subject 
and the verb are in concord. Again, most English verbs now distinguish 
54 

.f2-Verbs: Present Active Indicative 
55 
number only in the case of the third person present forms: she goes, they 
go vs. I go, we go. And again, the number is made clear in English by the 
necessary presence of the subject noun or pronoun. (Greek has not only 
singular and plural verb forms, but also dual, as for nouns. The dual is rare, 
and beginning students are not usually required to learn it. In this book the 
dual forms are given in parentheses and are not used in exercises or 
reading; but students who go on in Greek will soon meet dual forms.) 
3. Tense expresses the time distinction of the verbal action (present, past, 
future: for instance, I teach, she taught, they will teach). In Greek as in 
some other languages tense also conveys a distinction in verbal aspect, 
sometimes even to the exclusion of a distinction in time. Aspect will be 
discussed in detail in Unit 20. The seven Greek tenses (present, imperfect, 
future, aorist, perfect, pluperfect, future perfect) will be discussed sepa-
rately in the units in which they are learned. 
4. Voice expresses the relationship of the subject of the verb to the action ex-
pressed by the verb. The active voice is used when the subject is the doer 
of the action (or the one who experiences a state of being). Some active 
verbs, called transitive, express actions which are carried through to a 
recipient or object, while others, called intransitive, are used absolutely, 
without such a complement. Transitive verbs can also be used in the 
passive voice, in which the scheme doer-action-recipient of action is 
reversed so that the recipient of the action becomes the subject, the verb is 
made passive, and the doer is left unexpressed or is expressed in a 
subordinate element of the sentence (in English in a prepositional phrase 
with by). 
Ex. 
The man walks. 
The boy throws the ball. 
The cavalry lost the battle. 
The ball is thrown b.v the boy. 
active (intransitive) 
active (transitive) 
active (transitive) 
passive 
The battle was lost. 
passive 
Greek has a third voice, the middle, which is lacking in English and many 
other languages. The middle is used when the subject is the doer of the 
action but acts upon itself or for itself. The middle will be discussed in 
detail in Unit 11. 
5. Mood expresses the manner in which the action or state of being denoted 
by the verb is conceived by the speaker, namely, whether as fact, as as-
sumption, as wish, or the like. Greek has four moods, three of which are 
paralleled in English: 
indicative: for the assertion of fact (as in English) 
subjunctive: for mere assumption or possibility (as opposed to assertion); 
often used in subordinate clause constructions. (The English sub-

56 
UNIT EIGHT 
junctive is now largely defunct, replaced by the indicative or by verb 
phrases using modal helper verbs; but cf. It is necessary that he gQ 
now.) 
optative: originally for expression of a wish, but also used for expression 
of a possibility and in subordinate clause constructions. (There is no 
English equivalent, nor is there such a separate mood in Latin, German, 
French, etc.) 
imperative: for expressing a command (as in English) 
C. The principal parts of a verb are those forms from which the major 
tense stems can be derived and from which, thereby, all the conjugational 
forms of a verb can (in theory) be generated. The number of principal parts 
varies from language to language. English verbs have three: present, simple 
past, and past (passive) participle (e.g., go, went, gone; break, broke, broken; 
bake, baked, baked). The normal Greek verb has six principal parts (to be 
learned as they arise in future units). 
1. lu-Verbs and w-Verbs. There are two basic systems of conjugation in 
Greek, and the distinction is readily apparent in the present tense. A limited 
number of very basic verbs are conjugated in certain tense systems, including 
the present, by the addition of personal endings directly to the verb stem: these 
are known as lu-verbs (because the first person singular ending is -fJ..L) or 
athematic verbs (because the ending is added directly to the stem). Other verbs 
(the w-verbs or the thematic verbs) are conjugated with a theme vowel inter-
vening between the verb stem and the personal endings. 
2. The Present System. The present system consists of all forms which 
can be generated from the first principal part, including the present active and 
middle/passive indicative, SUbjunctive, optative, imperative, participle, and 
infinitive, and the imperfect active and middle/passive indicative. All these 
forms contain the present stem, which is obtained by removing the ending -w 
from the first principal part (the form in which the verb is listed in a 
dictionary). The present system of w-verbs features the theme vowel OlE, that 
is, it shows two grades or variable forms, a and E (and also lengthened forms w 
and 7]). 
3. Present Active Indicative. Any Greek verb form can be analyzed into 
a tense stem (consisting of a form of the verb stem plus prefixed or suffixed 
tense signs), prefixes, and suffixes (indicating, e.g., mood, voice, person, and 
number for a finite form). The present active indicative consists of present 

.!2-Verbs: Present Active Indicative 
57 
stem plus theme vowel plus personal endings. The theme vowel 0/ E appears as 
o when the first letter of the personal ending is JJ. or v, and as E otherwise. 
Because of linguistic developments, it is more difficult to separate theme 
vowel from personal ending in many forms of the present active than in some 
other tenses. Therefore, the beginner should simply learn the combined ending 
(theme vowel plus personal ending). 
sing. 
(dual 
plur. 
sing. 
(dual 
plur. 
Ex. 
"release," principal part: A:VW, stem: Av- + O/E 
endings 
1st pers. 
AVW 
1 release 
2nd pen. 
AVEtS· 
you (s.) release 
3rd pers. 
AVEt 
he (she, it) releases 
2nd pers. 
AVETOV) 
(3rd pers. 
AVETOV) 
1st pers. 
AVOJ.lEV 
we release 
2ndpers. 
AVETE 
you (pl.) release 
3rd pers. 
Avovm(v) 
they release 
Ex. 
"send, " principal part: 7rEJJ.7rW, stem: 7rEJJ.7r- + 0/ E 
1st pers. 
7rEJ.l7rW 
2ndpers. 
7rEJ.l7rEt' 
3rd pers. 
7rEJ.l7rEt 
2nd pers. 
7rEJ.l7rETOV) 
(3rdpers. 
7rEJ.l7rETOV) 
1st pers. 
7rEJ.l7rOJ.lEV 
2ndpers. 
7rEJ.l7rETE 
3rd pers. 
7rEJ.l7rOV(]'L(V) 
1 send 
you (s.) send 
he (she, it) sends 
we send 
you (pl.) send 
they send 
-W 
-Et, 
-Et 
( -ETOV) 
( -ETOV) 
-OJ.lEV 
-ETE 
-ov(]'L(v) 
endings 
-W 
-Et, 
-Et 
( -ETOV) 
( -ETOV) 
-OJ.lEV 
-ETE 
-ov(]'[(v) 
4. English Equivalents. The present indicative of Greek is equivalent to 
the English simple present (I send), the progressive present (I am sending), and 
the present emphatic (I do send, more commonly used in the negative, I don't 
send, or in interrogative form, Do I send?). Context and English idiom deter-
mine which equivalent is appropriate in any given case. Note that the Greek 
finite verb form indicates number and person by itself and may be used with-
out an explicit pronoun subject (cf. Latin and Italian). When a pronoun subject 
is expressed, it is emphatic. 
AEYW 
I say 
Eyw AEyw 
1 say 
5. Nu Movable. The third person plural of the present active indicative 
may have nu added when the verb occurs at the end of a clause or when it is 
followed by a word beginning with a vowel (or in verse when it is more con-

58 
UNIT EIGHT 
venient to the poet to add it). The optional nu was added to avoid hiatus, the 
pronunciation of two vowels in succession, a phenomenon often avoided in 
everyday speech and almost completely eliminated by the fussiest Greek prose 
stylists (such as the orator and teacher of rhetoric Isocrates). (Another term 
used for this optional nu is nu ephelkustikon, "attracted, suffixed nu.") 
6. Accentuation. The accent of all finite forms of the Greek verb is re-
cessive. That is, it falls as far from the end of the word as is permitted by the 
general rules of accentuation: acute on A when U is short, acute on P when U 
is long. The circumflex accent appears only when a contraction is involved 
(some verbs with contraction will be learned in Unit 13) or in a two-syllable 
form with long P and short U. For the present active indicative, it turns out 
that the accent falls on the last (or only) syllable of the stem in every form. 
7. Negation. Indicative verbs in main clauses and in most dependent 
clauses are normally negated with the adverb OV, and a simple unemphatic 
negative usually precedes the verb it negates. When the word following ov be-
gins with a vowel, ov takes the form OVK (before an unaspirated vowel) or OVX 
(before an aspirated vowel). 
, 
, 
OV fJ.EVW 
OVK E8EAw 
OVX ap7Tatw 
I do not remain 
I am not willing 
I am not seizing 
8. Concord. As one would expect, a Greek verb agrees with its subject 
in person and number (see U7, Prelim. B). But when the subject is a neuter 
plural noun or pronoun, the Greek verb is normally third person singular 
rather than plural, apparently because the neuter plural was originally felt to 
express a single collective concept. 
9. Direct and Indirect Objects. As mentioned in connection with voice 
in Preliminaries of this unit, transitive verbs are those which express an action 
that is carried through to a recipient of the action (person or thing) or to an 
enduring effect or result of the action. The recipient of the action may in 
general be called the direct object of the verb. In English the direct object is 
expressed in the objective case, which is noticeable only in pronouns. In Greek 
the direct object is expressed in the accusative case (the principal use of this 
case). Examples: 
He trained the children. 
She wrote this poem. 
The general sent them. 
The man whom we saw . .. 
We built a house. 
(; (TTpaT''lY05J TOV5J rTTpanWTQ5J EL5J T~V iqopav 7TEfJ.7TH. 
The general sends the soldiers into the marketplace. 

.Q-Verbs: Present Active Indicative 
59 
OV A..Ei7rETE T1JV xwpav; 
Are you not leaving the country? 
Some transitive verbs also govern a secondary object of the person (much less 
often the thing) more indirectly affected by the action than is the direct object. 
This is the indirect object. In English it is again in the objective case 
(noticeable only in pronouns) and either follows the verb immediately or is 
governed by the preposition to or for. In Greek the indirect object is expressed 
by the dative case without a preposition. Examples: 
They gave the boy some money. 
The gave some money to the boy. 
They gave him some money. 
Tell me a story. 
TO. {3tf3A..La T~ 7rOt!]Tfi OVK E7rtTpE7rOV(J"w. 
They are not entrusting the books to the poet. 
10. Word Order. The word order of a Greek sentence is very flexible. In 
a majority of sentences in which no special emphasis is being sought, the 
normal order is subject (if expressed), direct object (if any), indirect object (if 
any), verb. But in fact speakers and writers are more often than not trying to 
convey some special emphasis, and adjust the word order to suit. The first 
word or phrase normally carries the greatest emphasis: 
T0 7rOtYJTfj TO. (:3t(3A..La OVK E7rtTpE7rOVCTtV. 
They are not entrusting the books to the poet. 
Here the poet is emphasized in contrast to some other person or persons whom 
they find more trustworthy: English uses stress on the word or phrase more 
often than a shift of word order to convey such emphasis. 
11. Identification of Verb Forms. When identifying a finite verb form, 
specify the five variable features (person, number, tense, voice, mood) and 
give the first principal part of the verb, and add the definition if it is requested. 
Ex. 
EXETE: 
2nd pI. pres. act. indo ofExw, to have 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the conjugation of the present active indication of w-verbs. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. For now, you are presented with only the 
first principal part of each verb. If your instructor prefers that you begin to 
memorize the first three principal parts from this unit onward, consult the 
Appendix to U 18 or Appendix 2 for the other principal parts. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 

60 
UNIT EIGHT 
VOCABULARY 
Vocabulary-building Hints. Greek has a very large vocabulary, but this 
richness is in large part due to the readiness with which the same root 
manifests itself in several shapes and the frequency with which words are 
formed by compounding of familiar elements. Knowledge of the relationships 
between roots can make the acquisition of new vocabulary much easier. Two 
observations can be made about some words in the very limited vocabulary 
presented up to this point. (1) Different vowel grades within the same root are 
common. One of the basic variations is between E and 0 grades. The "say" root 
produces o-grade noun AOyO~ and E-grade verb AEYW, The same relationship 
exists with Tp07fO~ and E7fLTpE7fW. and (if we consider some words not yet 
learned) VOJ.lo~ and VEJ.lW. cpopo~ and cpEpW. 7fOJ.l7f1j and 7fEJ.l7fW. A different 
vowel variation is seen in cpvy~ and CPElJyw. (2) A root of the same form may 
also appear with various suffixes or compounding elements. For instance, the 
root ()TpaT- = "army" forms the collective noun ()TpaHG. with the common 
suffix -La (cf. cp~Aia. 01JJ.lOKpaTia), the individual noun ()TpaHwT1J~ with a 
form of the -T1J~ suffix, meaning "person who does X" (cf. 7fOAf.T1J~. VaVT1J~. 
O~Ka()T~~, etc.), and the compound noun ()TpaT1JYo~, in which -1JYo~ is a form 
of the root of ayw = "lead" (the lengthening of the vowel in composition is 
common). Later you will also meet ()TpaTo~. ()TpaT07fEOOV, ()TpaTEvw. 
, 
()TpaTEvJ.la. 
w-verbs 
" ayw 
G.7T08vnCTKW (a7TO) 1 
apxw 
ypacpw 
E8EAW 
EAavvw 
E7TtTPE7TW (E7Td 
EXW 
Aallj3avw 
AEYW 
AEt7TW 
lead; carry 
[pedagogy] 
die 
begin (+ gen.);2 rule. be leader of (+ gen.) 
[monarchy] 
scratch; inscribe; write 
[graphic] 
be willing, wish 
drive, set in motion; (intrans.) ride, march 
[elastic] 
tum over to, entrust 
have, hold 
[echeneis] 
take, grasp; receive 
[narcolepsy] 
say, speak; recount 
leave, abandon 
[ellipsis] 
1. Compound verbs are indicated by addition of the prepositional prefix in parentheses. It will 
become apparent in later units (e.g., UI6.2) why one needs to know that a verb is a compound. 
2. When a verb takes a complement other than the usual accusative object, that fact will be 
mentioned in the vocabulary. Here, for instance, where English uses an ordinary direct object in 
They begin the war or He rules the land, the Greek verb governs the genitive: Toil 7rOAf.}lOV 
aPXOV(TL. T17' xwpu, aPXH. 

.!2-Verbs: Present Active Indicative 
lI:vw [v J 
, 
J.l.EVW 
loosen, release 
[analysis] 
remain, stay; wait for, wait 
persuade, urge 
send 
[pomp] 
61 
TrEi8w 
TrEJ.l.TrW 
CPEPW 
CPEVYW 
bear, carry, bring; endure 
[pheromones, euphoria] 
flee, be in exile 
negative adverb 
au, aUK, auX 
not (for negation of statements) 
[Utopia] 
EXERCISES 
I. Give the requested Greek verb fonn. 
Ex. 
we are dying 
answer: G.7TOeV!JO"KOjJ.EV 
, 
1. they do persuade 
16. you (pI.) entrust 
2. she is sending 
17. you (sing.) are dying 
3. you (pI.) are speaking 
18. he is not urging 
4. they rule 
19. I send 
5. I am entrusting 
20. we are speaking 
6. you (sing.) have 
21. you (pI.) rule 
7. we are remaining 
22. she is entrusting 
8. he is releasing 
23. it has 
9. it carries 
24. I do not receive 
10. you (sing.) are leaving 
25. they abandon 
11. I wish 
26. he leaves 
12. they are willing 
27. you (pI.) drive 
13. we march 
28. you (sing.) are in exile 
14. she is writing 
29. we do not endure 
15. they are leading 
30. she says 
II. Translate the following verb fonns into English. 
Ex. 
A.EYETE 
you (pI.) are saying 
1. 
fA.aVVH'~ 
10. ayojJ.EV 
19. 
., 
apxH'~ 
2. CPEpOjJ.EV 
11. OVK EXW 
20. A.EYH 
3. ypacpw 
12. CPEVYOVO"L 
21. A.VOjJ.EV 
4. A.ajJ.j3avH 
13. A.VH~ 
22. ov jJ.EVW 
5. jJ.EVOVO"L 
14. CPEPH 
23. feEA.ETf. 
6. 
EXH~ 
15. E7TLTpE7TOjJ.EV 
24. 
., 
EXOVO"W 
7. 7TELeW 
16. ov 7TEjJ.7TETE 
25. EA.aVVETf. 
8. CPEVyOjJ.EV 
17. A.E L 7TOVO"L 
26. A.EL7TW 
9. 
, 
18. A.ajJ.pavw 
27. 
., 
7TEjJ.7TH 
apx°jJ.EV 

62 
UNIT EIGHT 
--------
28. 
EeEAOV(n 
33. 
, 
38. 
}J.EVE L~ 
OVK aYEL 
29. " 
34. EAaVVEL 
39. ov Aa}J.pavETE 
apXETE 
30. 
AEYEL~ 
35. ~ 7rOeVn(J"KOV(J"L 
40. CPEPEL~ 
31. AEi7rEL 
36. ayw 
32. 
' 
, 
37. " 
E7rLTpE7rETE 
EX°}J.EV 
III. (a) Translate each sentence into English. Then (b) give a full identification 
of any underlined word(s), and, if the word is a noun, explain its case (why is 
it in the case it is in?). 
Ex. 
6 (J"TpaTYJYo~ TOV~ ayaeov~ Q7rA(TQ,5 Ei~ TryV TWV 7rOAE}J.iwv 
xwpav 7rE}J.7rEL. 
(a) The general is sending the brave hoplites into the land of the enemy. 
(b) 67rAiTa~ is acc. pI. of 67rAiTYJ~, -ov, m.; it is acc. because it is the 
direct object of 7rE}J.7rEL. xwpav is acc. sing. of xwpa, -a~, f.; it is acc. 
because it is object of the preposition El~. 
I. TOS M~iEQ.£ OV 7rEi80v(J"w Ot 8mi. 
2. Ot (J"ocpo~ TryV aAu8ELaV AEYOV(J"W. 
3. 
~ 8Ea EAaVVEL TOV~ 7rE(OV~ EK TO£' tEPO£'. 
4. OLa TO aya80v EPYOV 6 oLKa(J"Try~ TOV KaKOV AV_EL. 
5. Ot aV8pW7rOL TOV~ 7r6vov~ 7rapa TWV 8EW~ EXOV(n. 
6. Ot vwviaL TO. owpa TOt~ atioL~ cpEPOV(J"W. 
7. Ot 7rOAtTaL TOV~ v6}J.ov~ }J.ETa yvw}J.YJ~ ([Ockfu ypacpov(J"L. 
8. AEi7roV(J"L 7rapa Tfl yEcpVpq. TOV~ TWV (J"TpanwTwv Z7r7rOV~ Ot 7rOAE}J.WL. 
9. AEYOV(J"W Ot aYYEAoL Ta~ Tr,~ (J"TpaTLa~ (J"V}J.cpopa~ TOt) EV Tfl ayopq. 
7rQA(,Ta.t ). 
IV. Render the following sentences into Greek. 
Ex. 
The goddesses do not receive the offerings. 
The goddesses is subject of the sentence, so will be nominative plural (at 
8wi). The verb receive is third person plural present active indicative, 
with negative adverb (ov Aa}J.pavov(J"L). The direct object of receive is 
the offerings, which will thus be in the accusative case (TO. tEpa). 
Therefore, a correct answer is: 
at 8w~ TO. tEpa OV Aa}J.pavov(J"L. (other word orders are possible) 
I. The horses are dying because of the disease. 
2. The wicked men are not persuading the jurors. 
3. The general is leading his soldiers toward the sea. 
4. The citizens entrust their laws to the judges. 
5. You (pI.) are not leading the children of the poet out of the large tent. 

UNIT NINE 
Infinitive; Adjectives with Two 
Endings 
------------
PRELIMINARIES 
The infinitive, a non-finite fonn of the verb (see U8 Prelim.), is a verbal 
noun. As a verb fonn it has tense and voice and can govern noun complements 
and adverbial modifiers. As a noun, it can serve as subject, object, and the like. 
In English the infinitive (fonned with to plus the verb) shares the job of verbal 
noun with the gerund (fonned from the present stem of a verb plus -ing). In 
Greek there is only the infinitive to fulfill the verbal noun function. 
Ex. 
To see is to believe. 
Seeint: is believint:. 
Learnint: Greek is not difficult. 
In addition to functioning as a noun in these simple uses, the infinitive is used 
(1) as a complement to many verbs and (2) in dependent phrases which are 
transfonnations of simple sentences embedded in a more complex sentence. 
You like to swim. 
They are willing to lead. 
(complementary infinitive) 
(complementary infinitive) 
Wilson is president. 
They want Wilson to be president. 
They chose Wilson to be president. 
They believe Wilson to be president. 
(simple sentence, finite verb) 
(embedded sentence, infinitive) 
(embedded sentence, infinitive) 
(embedded sentence, infinitive) 
1. Present Active Infinitive. The present active infinitive is fonned by 
adding -EW to the present stem. (-EW is a contraction of the theme vowel E and 
the infinitival ending -EV.) 
Ex. 
ayw -> aynv = to lead; 7fEL8w -> 7fd8nv = to persuade 
Accentuation: the non-finite fonns of the verb do not have recessive 
accentuation (U8.6). The accentuation of each type of infinitive and participle 
63 

64 
UNIT NINE 
must be learned separately. The present infinitive of w-verbs is always 
accented on the final syllable of the stem. 
2. Some Uses a/the Greek Infinitive 
a. The complementary infinitive is used to complete the meaning of a 
variety of verbs, such as those expressing will or desire, request, permission, 
choice, command, and the like. In the simplest examples the verb has no other 
complement: 
E8EAOVCH P.EVHV. 
They are willing to stay. 
OVK E8EAETE CPEpHV TOV 7TOVOV. 
You are not willing to endure the toil. 
Some verbs (e.g., those of asking, commanding, persuading) take an accu-
sative object (of the person who is to do the action of the infinitive) plus the 
complementary infinitive: 
TOV~ CTVP.P.a.xov~ P.EVHV 7TEi8oP.EV. 
KEAdJW T~V CTTpanuv EAavvEw. 
We are urging the allies to remain. 
I am ordering the army to march. 
b. The infinitive, as a verbal noun, often serves as the subject of a sen-
tence, usually with a predicate adjective (the copula is being sometimes ex-
pressed and sometimes omitted) or with an impersonal verb. In English this 
usage is somewhat concealed by the use of the expletive it (a "filler" or 
apparent subject): 
It is just to take the horses. 
= To take the horses is just. 
= Taking the horses is just. 
Ot.Kawv Aap.(3a.vEw TOV~ Z7T7TOV~. 
aPXEw xaAE7Tov. 
(expleti ve - copula - pred. adj. - info 
phrase) 
(inf. phrase-copula-pred. adj.) 
(gerund phrase-copula-pred. adj.) 
(pred. adj.-inf.-direct obj. of inf.) 
It is difficult to lead. 
= To lead is difficult. 
Note that the infinitive as noun is considered neuter singular: thus the 
predicate adj. is neuter singular nom. to agree with the subject infinitive. 
Impersonal verbs are verbs normally used only in the third person 
singular with an unspecifiable subject it (e.g., it is raining) or with an expletive 
it with an infinitive as the true subject: 
OEt. 7TEP.7TEW owpa. 
It is necessary to send gifts. 
= To send gifts is necessary. 
It is not seemly to take gifts (bribes). 
= To take bribes is not seemly. 

Infinitive; Adjectives with Two Endings 
65 
What is expressed in Greek idiom by an impersonal verb and infinitive is often 
idiomatically conveyed in English by a personal construction with a modal 
verb using must, should, or ought. For example, OE~ 7TfP_7TEW owpa may also be 
translated One must (should, ought to) send gifts. 
c. The substantival force and case usage of an infinitive used as a noun 
are sometimes marked more strongly by the use of the neuter singular definite 
article to introduce the infinitive phrase (articular infinitive). The article must 
be used when the infinitive functions as a substantive in the genitive or dative 
or as the object of a preposition. In the nominative and many uses of the 
accusative, either the articular infinitive or the bare infinitive (as exemplified 
in a and b above) is allowed. 
nom. 
gen. 
dat. 
acc. 
TO aPXEW 7TOVOV cpfpEL. 
EK TOV CPE'lJyEW 
7TPO,) T0 owpa Aap.(3avEw 
7TPO,) TO EAaVVEW TOS L7T7TOV') 
To rule brings toil. 
as a result ojfieeing 
in addition to taking bribes 
with regard to driving the 
mares 
3. Negation. The negative adverb p.ry is used to negate an infinitive in 
any of the above uses. 
7TpE7TEL owpa p.ry Aap.j3avEw. 
It is fitting not to take bribes. 
4. Subject of Infinitive. When the subject of the action expressed by the 
infinitive is expressed in Greek, it is normally in the accusative case unless it 
is the same person or thing as the subject of the finite verb (there are further 
exceptions to be learned later). 
ov oLKawv TOV') 7ToALTa') AEL7TEW TO. 7TatOLa. 
It is not right for the citizens to leave the children. 
(It is not right that the citizens leave the children.) 
OE~ TOV') av8pw7ToV') 7TOVOV') cpEPEW. 
It is necessary for men to endure toil. 
or (personal form) Men must endure toil. 
EK TOV TOV KaKov VaVTYfV aPXEw 
as a result of the bad sailor's being leader 
(as a result of the fact that the bad sailor is leader) 
Note that in English the subject of an infinitive is often expressed in a pre-
positional phrase with for or as the possessive with a gerund, or that English 
idiom may prefer a personal construction (like men must). In other cases the 
infinitive phrase of Greek may be equivalent to a that-clause in English with 
subject and finite verb. 

66 
UNIT NINE 
5. Dative of Reference. The person to whose case a statement is limited 
or in whose opinion a statement is true is expressed in the dative case. Such a 
dative of reference is often used in sentences with infinitive phrase as subject. 
T0 O"ocp0 6 f3io~ ou xaAf7T6~. 
For a wise man life is not difficult. 
ou KaAov T0 ayae0 7TOAiT[I CPfVYfLV. 
Being in exile is not afine thing for the good citizen. 
(Compare the slightly different emphasis of: 
ou KaAOV TO TOV ayaeov 7TOAiTr]V CPfVYfLV. 
It is not afine thing that a good citizen be in exile.) 
6. Vowel-declension Adjectives with Two Endings. Some vowel-declen-
sion adjectives (usually ones formed by compounding two roots, or prefix and 
root) have no separate feminine endings, the "masculine" endings serving as 
endings for a common non-neuter gender. Thus in a~JLKO~ 7TOAiT1J~ the 
adjective is masculine, but in aOLKo~ yvwJ.l.1J the same form is feminine. These 
adjectives thus have only two endings: masc'/fem. and neuter. 
Ex. 
"unjust" 
sing. 
nom. 
gen. 
dat. 
ace. 
voc. 
(dual 
n.a.v. 
(g. d. 
plur. 
n. v. 
gen. 
dat. 
ace. 
mase./fem. 
neuter 
aOLKo~ 
aOLKov 
aOLKov 
aOLKov 
aOLKcp 
aOLKcp 
aOLKov 
aOLKov 
aOLKE 
aOLKov 
aOLKw 
aOLKw) 
aOLKow 
aOLKow) 
aOLKoL 
aOLKa 
aOLKwv 
aOLKwv 
aOLKoL~ 
aOLKoL~ 
aOLKov~ 
aOLKa 
7. Alpha Privative. The commonest negative compounding element in 
Greek is the prefix a- (or av- before a vowel): compare the English derivatives 
atypical and anhydrous and the corresponding negative prefixes in- and un- in 
English. Many compound adjectives meaning "not X" or "without X" are 
formed from the root X and the alpha-privative prefix, and many of these are 
vowel-declension adjs. of two endings. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the formation and uses of the infinitive. 

Infinitive; Adjectives with Two Endings 
67 
2. Learn the declension of two-ending adjectives of the vowel declension. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
w-verbs 
pt..G..7TTW 
KEt..E'UW 
, 
K07TTW 
TG..TTW I 
impersonal verbs 
otl: 
7TPE7TH 
negative adverb 
vowel-declension adjectives 
D(no<;, QULa, DULOV 
/J40LO<;. /Jq.oia. !J40LOV 
I. Non-Attic Tll(]"(Tw (cf. Intro. §6). 
hann, damage 
order, command (+ acc. of person + inf.) 
strike, chop, beat 
[syncope 1 
marshal, draw up (troops); arrange; appoint 
[tactics, syntagmatic 1 
it is necessary, it is needful (for one to do something) 
(+ acc. of person + inf.) (often to be translated 
with ought to, must, should in a personal 
construction) 
[deontology 1 
it seems good, it seems best (+ dat. of person + inf.) 
it is pennitted, it is possible (+ acc. or dat. of person 
+inf.) 
it is fitting, becoming, seemly (+ acc. or dat. of 
person + inf.) 
it is necessary (+ acc. of person + inf.) (often to be 
translated with ought to, must, should in a personal 
construction)3 
not (for negation of most infinitives, individual 
words, many types of subordinate clauses) 
hallowed; pious, pure 
easy 
2. This word was in origin a noun, with the copula omitted, but the Greeks came to treat it as an 
impersonal verb form. The infinitive of XpT, is XpT,VUL, a contraction of XpT, with ElVUL, the 
infinitive of Ei)J.L (U 10.4). 
3. XpT, and oEL are sometimes used synonymously, but in classical Attic there is a tendency for 
XpT, to denote an obligation related to internal constraints of an ethical nature and OEL to imply 
external constraints. Compare TL XPl? opav; = What should I do? (in an ethically ambiguous 
situation) with TL OEL A.EYEW; = Whv should I mention? (the matter being so obvious) or OEL 
CPEPHV TO. TWV OEWV = One must endure what the gods gil·e. 

68 
vowel-declension adjectives with two endings 
aOLKO>. aOLKOV 
a8aVaTO>. a8aVaTOV 
" 
" 
avo(J"w>. avo(J"wv 
unjust 
undying, immortal 
unholy, profane 
UNIT NINE 
pa.ppapo>. pap(3apov 
OL pappapoL 
(J"v~~axo>. (J"v~~axov 
non-Greek-speaking, foreign; (pejorative) barbarian 
foreigners, esp. the Persians 
fighting along with, allied with 
. , 
OL (J"vIJp.aXOL 
allies 
EXERCISES 
I. Write in Greek. 
\. to lead 
6. they strike 
2. you (pI.) order 
7. to loosen 
3. we are not hanning 
8. to persuade 
4. to arrange 
9. she rules 
5. as a result of speaking 
10. I ride 
II. Translate the following sentences. 
1. T1JV (TTpanaV jJ.EVEW 7TEL8ETE. 
2. 6 valmr; TOl» (TTpanWTa) TOS L7T7TOV) AEL7TEW KEAEVH. 
3. hrupE7TEw E8EAH TO. XaAE7Ta Epya TOL) KaAOL) VEaVLW). 
4. OVK E8EAW (1.7T08VVCTKEW EV Til 8aAaTT[l. 
5. jJ.ry pAa7TTEw TOl» 7TAOVCTLOV) 7TOALTa) KEAEVH) TOl>, 07TALTa). 
6. 0 8Ea, OVK E8EAH K07TTEW TryV 8Eav. 
7. OOKEL TOL, CTOCPOL, TryV aAry8Ewv AEyEW. 
8. TOl>, avoCTLov) OEL EAavvHv a7Ta Tr" TWV 7TaLoLwv CTKTWr". 
9. oi CTvjJ.jJ.axoL TOl>, pappapov) TryV ayopav AajJ.pavEw KEAEVOVCTW. 
10. oi a8avaToL jJ.ry AEyHV avoCTw TOl>, av8pw7ToV, 7TEL80VCTW. 
1 I. OLa Ta TOl» 7TOAEjJ.LOV, EV Til XWpq. jJ.EVEW CPEVYOVCTW oi 7TOALTaL. 
12. TOL) aya80L' PiOLOV vOjJ.ov) ypacpEw. 
13. TOl>, vavTa, xpry aVEjJ.ov KaAaV jJ.EVEW. 
14. TOl>, 7TOAEjJ.LOV, [3Aa7TTEw EtECTn TOL, CTTpaT1JYOL,. 
III. Render the following sentences into Greek. 
Ex. 
It is unseemly for an unjust person to rule the just (people). 
ov 7TPE7TH 
TaV aOLKov 
TWV oLKaLwv apXEw. 
1. With friends it is easy to endure evils. 
2. The general of the enemy anny is marshaling his hoplites. 
3. The poet urges the citizens to entrust their fate to the gods. 
4. It is impossible for the immortal gods to feel [= have] jealousy. 

Infinitive; Adjectives with Two Endings 
69 
5. It is possible for a wicked man not to have a bad reputation. 
6. It isn't wise to damage one's health. 
7. Because of their wealth the rich are permitted to flee difficult tasks. [Hint: 
convert to impersonal form: "it is permitted ... "] 
8. A poet ought to be unwilling [= not + be willing] to say bad things. 
9. In addition to honor, ruling brings envy. 

UNIT TEN 
Present Indicative of E lILl; 
Some Uses of the Genitive and Dative 
1. The Verb "to be." One of the most commonly used words in the 
language, the Greek verb to be shows irregularities of conjugation in all dia-
lects. The Attic forms of the present active indicative are: 
sing. 
/st pers. 
2nd pers. 
3rd pers. 
(dual 
2nd pers. 
(3rd.pers. 
plur. 
Jst pers. 
2nd pers. 
3rd pers. 
' , 
H}.I.L 
" 
H 
E(TTi(v) 
E(TTOV) 
ECTTOV) 
' 
, 
EOp.EV 
' 
, 
HTTE 
fi(J"i(v) 
Jam 
you (s.) are 
he (she, it) is 
we are 
you (pl.) are 
they are 
Note that the third person sing. and pI. forms may take nu movable (see U8.5). 
2. Accentuation. All forms of the present indicative of E ijJ.L except 
second singular El (and the third singular in some uses: §3) are enclitic (see 
U2.12). This is traditionally indicated in paradigms by the use of the acute on 
the ultima. The enclitic forms are accented with acute or grave on U when the 
preceding word has acute on P: 7rOALTy/I) f(lTL; 6 7rOALTy/I) f(TTL KaAOl). In other 
circumstances, the enclitic forms have no accent, but they may affect the 
accent of the previous word (review the rules given in U2.12): aV8pW7rOL 
f(J"jJ.EV; owpov f(J"TL; KaKoL d(J"L; TWV (J"TpaTLWTWV f(J"TW i] (J"Ky/Vry. 
3. Emphatic E(J"TL. When used emphatically, that is, placed at the begin-
ning of the sentence, the third person singular form is accented on P: E(J"Tdv). 
This form is also used when the proclitic OVK, Ei (if), or WI) (as, that) or the 
conjunction KaL (and) or aAAa (but) or the demonstrative T01h' (this) 
immediately precedes. Emphatic E(J"TL may stress existence ("there is ... ") or 
may be used with an infinitive subject in the same sense as the compound 
EtE(J"TL ("it is possible to X"). 
70 

Present Indicative of fl~/; Some Uses of the Genitive and Dative 
71 
4. Infinitive ElvaL The present active infinitive of EijJ.{ is ElvaL When an 
infinitive phrase with ElvaL includes a predicate noun or predicate adjective, 
the word in the predicate must agree in case with the subject of the infinitive. 
Since the subject of an infinitive is normally accusative, the predicate noun or 
adjective will normally be accusative. 
Ex. 
EK TOV TOVS 7rOA{TaS oLKa{ovs dvaL 
as a result of the fact that the citizens are just 
xaAE7rOV aya80v ElvaL. 
It is difficult to be brave. 
(The unexpressed subject of ElvaL, "one," "a man," or whatever, is felt to 
be acc., so the adjective is acc.) 
Occasionally the predicate adj. will be in another case: 
Ex. 
OVK EtHTTL T0 oLKa{cr avo(J{cr ElvaL. 
It is not possible for the just man to be unholy. 
5. Some Uses of the Genitive. The genitive in general limits the meaning 
of the substantive, adjective, adverb, or verb on which it depends. The Latin 
name genitivus is a translation of the Greek YEVLKry (7rTW(JLS) = "the case de-
noting the class [to which something belongs 1." 
a. Genitive of Possession. Like the English possessive or prepositional 
phrase with of, the genitive may denote ownership, possession, or the like. 
(I) Attributive Use. The genitive of a noun or of a demonstrative or 
reflexive pronoun placed in attributive position (i.e., within article-
noun phrase)] may denote possession. (Personal pronouns denoting 
possession fall outside of the article-noun group: see U22.6.) 
01. TWV 'A8nva{wv VOjJ.OL 
TO (3L(3A{OV TO TOV 7raLOtOV 
TO. TWV vaVTWv 
the Athenians' laws 
the child's book 
the affairs, possessions, 
or deeds of the sailors (see U7.4) 
An attributive genitive of possession may also be attached to a noun 
that is not accompanied by the article: 
Ai(Jw7roV AOYOL 
fables of Aesop 
(2) Predicate Use. The genitive of a noun or pronoun in the predicate 
may denote possession. 
i] L7r7rO) {(JTL TOV oLKa(JTov. 
The mare belongs to the juryman. (The mare is of the juryman.) 
I. This is the normal position. but the gen. of possession is occasionally found outside the 
article-noun group. 

72 
TOV (J"Ocpov E(J"n </>EPELV 7rovov,>. 
It is characteristic of the wise man to endure toils. 
[literally, To endure toils is of, belongs to, the wise man.] 
UNIT TEN 
b. Partitive Genitive. The genitive is used to denote the whole, a part of 
which is expressed by the noun it limits. This genitive takes the predicate posi-
tion, that is, it falls outside the article-noun group. 
oi 7rAEL(J"TOL TWV (J"vggaxwv 
most of the allies 
c. Subjective and Objective Genitive. When a noun expresses a verbal 
notion, the subject of the action referred to by the noun may be expressed by 
the subjective genitive (often in attributive position). 
clause form: 
The unjust man committed perjury. 
(subject-verb) 
verbal noun form: the unjust man's perjury 
ry TOV aOLKov E7rWpKLa 
(verbal noun with gen.) 
clause form: 
The foreigners are afraid. 
(subject-verb) 
verbal noun form: the foreigners' fear 
6 TWV [3ap/3&pwv </>0130'> 
(verbal noun with gen.) 
(The subjective genitive is easily confused with the possessive genitive and in 
many cases such confusion makes no difference.) 
The object of the action referred to by a noun expressing a verbal notion 
may be expressed by the objective genitive (normally in predicate position). 
verb--<>bject form: to desire pleasures 
verbal noun form: the desire of (for) pleasures 
ry E7rLeVjJ.La TWV izoovwv 
(verbal noun with gen.) 
verb--<>bject form: to be afraid of the Athenians 
verbal noun form: fear of the Athenians 
</>0130'> TWV 'Ae!]VaLwv 
(verbal noun with gen.) 
6. Some Uses of the Dative. The Greek dative (oonKry, Latin dativus, 
case of "giving to") has instrumental and locative uses (Greek having lost 
these cases at an early stage: see Introd. §4) as well as uses belonging to the 
dative proper. 
a. Dative of Indirect Object. See U8.9. 
b. Dative of Interest. The dative is used to denote the person for whom 
something is or is done. Several uses of the dative are classified under this 
general heading: 

Present Indicative of elfa'; Some Uses of the Genitive and Dative 
73 
(1) Dative of Possession. With verbs meaning to be, to become, to be 
available, and the like, the dative may be used to denote the 
possessor. 
Iii! oLKai'{J 7Tapa TWV eEWV owpa E(}TW. 
There are gifts from the gods for the just man. 
or 
The just man has gifts from the gods. 
TO'i~ 'A()Y)vaioL~ (}vjJ.jJ.axoL aya()oi Ei(}w. 
There are brave allies for the Athenians. 
or 
The Athenians have brave allies. 
The dative of possession emphasizes having vs. not having some-
thing; the genitive of possession, on the other hand, emphasizes that 
something belongs to X and not to anybody else. 
E(}TL {3L{3Aia T0 7TOLY/TfI· 
OVK E(}H {3L{3Aia T0 7TOLY/TfI· 
TO. (3L{3Aia E(}Ti wi) 
OLKa(}TOV, OV TOV 7TOLy/TOV. 
The poet has books. 
The poet has no books. 
The books belong to the 
juryman, not to the poet. 
(2) Dative of Advantage or Disadvantage. The dative is used to denote 
the person or thing for whose advantage or disadvantage something 
is or is done. 
TO. 7TaLoia aLTLa 7TOVWV TO'i~ av()pw7ToL~. 
Children are a cause of toil for mankind. 
6 aya()o~ 7TAOV(}LO~ E(}TL TO'i~ 7TOAiTaL~, ovX~. 
The virtuous man is rich for (in the interest of, to the advan-
tage of) his fellow citizens, not for himself. 
(3) Dative of Reference. See U9.5. 
c. Dative of Means (or Instrument). The dative is used to denote that by 
which or with which an action is done (instrument, means, or cause). 
{3aAAOV(}L TOV (}TpaT1JYov Ai()OL~. 
They strike the general with stones. 
OWpOL~ 7TEi()H TOV~ OLKa(}Ta~. 
He persuades the jurymen by means of bribes. 
d. Dative of Time When. The dative is used to denote the point in time 
when or at which an action occurred. 
on the previous day 

74 
UNIT TEN 
-------~-
-~-------
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the present of ELjJ.l.. 
2. Study the uses of the genitive and dative. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
verbs 
j36.Mw 
H/J-L 
nouns 
av6.yK~, av6.YK~~,f 
av6.YK~ (f(n/.) 
Eip'rjv~, Eip~v~~, f 
f.7n8v/J-La, E7rL8v/J-La" f 
E7rLOpKLa, f.7rWpKLa~, f 
AL8o" Ai8ov. m. 
(as fern.) 
/J-6.X~' /J-6.X~" f 
adjectives 
• A8~val,o" • A8~vaLa, 
'A8~val,ov 
OL 'A8~vaI,OL 
aLno" aiTia, ai'nov 
TrAEI,O"TO" 
TrAEio"T~, 
TrAEI,O"TOV 
OL TrAEI,O"TOL 
throw, strike 
[ballistics] 
be 
lontology (from the participial stem)] 
find, find out, discover 
[heuristic. Eureka] 
have (something) done to one, experience; suffer 
Isympathy] 
effect, accomplish, do; experience (a certain fortune), 
fare 
I practical] 
force, constraint, necessity 
(impersonal expression) it is necessary (compuls-
ory, unavoidable)2 (+ dat. or acc. of person + inf) 
(often to be translated with must in a personal 
construction) 
peace; peace treaty 
[Irene] 
desire, yearning 
false swearing, perjury 
stone 
[monolith] 
a particular variety of stone, e.g., magnet, crystal 
battle, combat 
[Titanomachy] 
Athenian 
the Athenians 
responsible; responsible for, cause of (+ objective 
gen.) 
[aetiology] 
most, greatest, largest; (often with art.) the greatest 
number, the most 
[pleistocene] 
the majority, the greatest part (of a group) 
I. Non-Attic 7rpu(]"(]"w (or Ionic 7rPr,(]"(]"w): cf. Intro. §6. 
2. o.VUYKrI in this use connotes strong external constraint, whereas CEl and Xpr, connote 
needfulness, propriety, moral obligation, and the like. 

Present Indicative of ~l'p./; Some Uses of the Genitive and Dative 
75 
, 
, 
7rPOTEpO'. 7rpOTEpa. 
fonner, earlier, previous 
[hysteron proteron] 
, 
7rpOTEpOV 
V(J"TEPO>. v(J"TEpa. V(J"TEPOV 
latter, later, next 
EXERCISES 
I. Translate the following short sentences. 
l. a8avaToi EL(n. 
6. 
, " 
7TOVTJPO'} EL. 
2. OUK aya80i EaTE. 
7. ou (Jocpoi E(JjJ.EV. 
3. aOLKov E(JTL. 
8. (Jocpry E(JTW. 
4. cpiAO') ELjJ.i. 
9. ~aAE;r?V E(JTL. 
5. Or,AOV E(JTL. 
10. O(JWL E(JH. 
II. Render the following sentences into Greek, using the appropriate fonn of 
ELjJ.i. Think carefully about the accentuation and review the rules if necessary. 
Ex. 
I am harsh. 
xaAE7To'} ELjJ.L. 
or 
xaAE7Try ELjJ.L. 
l. It is worthy. 
6. You (sing.) are pious. 
2. The Athenians are responsible. 
7. You (pI.) are just. 
3. The battle is long. 
8. Perjury is not just. 
4. We are immortal. 
9. She is responsible. 
5. I am a sailor. 
10. The pebble is small. 
III. 
(a) Translate the following sentences. Then (b) name the case of the un-
derlined word and give the reason for the case. 
Ex. 
T0 (Jock.k {3L{3Aia E(JTiv. 
(a) The wise man has books. 
(b) dative of possession 
I. Ot 7TAEL(JToL TWV 7TOALT0R ELm oiKawL. 
2. T0 7TOV~ Ot VOjJ.OL OVK EL(JL' KaAoi. 
3. ry E7TL8vjJ.ia TOV 7TA01JTOV TO'v'} av8pw7ToV'} KaKG. 7Ta(JXEw 7TEi8EL. 
4. Til V(JTfpq. ~ 
ELpryVTJV ypacpov(Jw. 
5. Ot a8avaToi EL(Jw arnOL TWV a}'Q-8~ TOL'} av8pw7ToL'}. 
6. TWV 'A8nvaiwv E(JTLV ry ViKTJ. 
7. Ot aVO(JWL TO tEPOV Ai80L,} (3aAAov(Jw. 
8. ou oEL AfYEW TOV TWV 7ToAEillwR cpof3ov. 
9. E(Jn TO KaAOv. 
10. EV Til7TpOTfpq. jJ.aX?7 Ot 7TAEL(JTOL TWV 07TALTWV OU CPEVYOV(JW. 
IV. Render into Greek. 
I. By means of difficult toils the allies are taking the marketplace. 
I. Remember that a proclitic followed by an enclitic receives an acute accent (lJ2.12d). 

76 
UNIT TEN 
2. It is necessary for men to do what is just [= just things]. 
3. After the battle the soldiers flee into the land of the Athenians. 
4. The desire for peace persuades the citizens not to harm the enemy's 
messengers. 
5. The jurors are discovering the majority of the unjust deeds. 
6. It is characteristic of wise men to discover the fine pleasures. 
7. On account of the war against the foreigners the citizens must suffer. 
8. It does not befit a virtuous man to be unjust. 
9. In the eyes of the majority pleasure is not the measure of virtue. 

UNIT ELEVEN 
o· Verbs: Present MiddlelPassive 
Indicative 
1. Middle and Passive. At an early stage Greek had two sets of personal 
endings which served to mark two voices (cf. U.8 Prelim.): active and middle. 
In the active voice the subject is the agent. In the middle voice the subject is 
agent but acts with some special reference to himself/herself, or to his/her 
possessions or own interest (to or for or within himself/herself or the like). 
The middle sometimes has a reflexive or reciprocal meaning: 
YV/J.va(o/J.aL 
I exercise myself. (direct reflexive) 
7T'apaaxEVa(o/J.aL T~V aKIJV~v. 
I prepare the tent for myself. 
or I prepare my tent. 
(indirect reflexi ve) 
oi (J"Tpan(iJTaL 7T'apaKEAE1JOVTaL. 
The soldiers encourage one 
another. (reciprocal) 
From the reflexive force of the middle there developed the passive use of 
the middle form, so that in classical Greek most middle forms also serve as 
passive (that is, the subject is acted upon by some other agent). The devel-
opment may be thought of as follows: 
7T'EL8o/J.aL: I persuade myself. -> I get myself persuaded. -> I am per-
suaded (by someone else). 
cpEpETaL: It carries itself. - > It gets itself carried. - > It is carried. 
(Compare reflexive formations in other languages that are translated by the 
English passive, such as French if se trouve or German es sich findet = "it is 
located" or Italian mi chiamo = "I am called. ") 
In the context of a Greek sentence, a middle/passive verb will usually be 
identifiable as either middle or passive in sense; but in isolation these forms 
are referred to in this book as middle/passive. 
When a Greek verb is used in the passive, the personal agent, if men-
tioned, is usually expressed in a prepositional phrase with lJ7T'O + gen. (equi-
valent to English by someone). 
77 

78 
UNIT ELEVEN 
2. Present Middle/Passive Indicative. This is fonned from the present 
stem plus the theme vowel 0/ E (0 before p. or v, E before other sounds) plus the 
middle/passive personal endings (-p.al, -(Tal, -Tal, [-(TeOV, -(TeOV, I -p.Eea, 
-(TeE, -VTal). The personal endings are clearly recognizable except in the sec-
ond person singular, where the elimination of intervocalic sigmal in -E(Tal 
allows contraction of -Eal to -n. 
Ex. 
sing. 
(dual 
plur. 
"ransom," "be 
released" 
present stem: 
AV- + olE 
1st pers. 
AVojJ.at 
2ndpers. 
AV'[l 
3rdpers. 
AVETat 
2ndpers. 
AVHJBov 
(3rdpers. 
AVHJ-eOV 
1st pen. 
AVOjJ.Eea 
2nd pen. 
AVHJ·eE 
3rdpers. 
AVOVTaL 
"obey," "be 
persuaded" 
7rELe- + olE 
7TEieojJ.at 
7TEie'[l 
7TEieETat 
7TEieHJ-eov) 
7TEieHreOV) 
7THeOjJ.Eea 
7TEieE(TeE 
7TEieoVTaL 
theme vowel 
+ endin~ 
( -HreOV) 
(-weov) 
-OjJ.Eea 
-E(JeE 
-OVTaL 
Note that the accentuation is recessive, as for all finite fonns. In the present 
middle/passive indicative it turns out that the accent is on the verb stem in all 
fonns except the first person plural, where the number of syllables in the 
ending forces the accent to move to the theme vowel. 
3. Present Middle/Passive Infinitive. The middle infinitive ending is 
-(TeaL When this is added to the present stem with theme vowel E, the result is 
the present middle/passive infinitive. Like the present active infinitive, it is 
accented on the final syllable of the verb stem: for example, AVE(Teal = "to 
ransom" or "to be released." 
4. Deponent Verbs. Many Greek verbs are found only in middle/passive 
fonns and have no active fonns. Such verbs are called deponent (a not very 
helpful tenn coined by Latin grammarians). You will recognize deponent 
I. Sigma "between vowels" (intervocalic) was lost in the development of many Greek forms, 
and in Attic this loss usually resulted in the contraction of the vowels. 
2. From about 350 H.C.E. the second person singular middle/passive ending was often spelled 
(and pronounced) -H rather than -TI in Attic, and the form in -H will be found in modem editions 
of some Greek authors (either under the influence of the manuscripts or because the editor 
believes the particular author originally used this form). Note that such middle/passive forms as 
AVH, 7rd8H look exactly like the third sing. active form; but in the context of a sentence there is 
usually no ambiguity. 

.f2-Verbs: Present Middle/Passive Indicative 
79 
verbs in vocabulary lists or a dictionary because the first principal part is the 
first person singular present middle/passive form (-o}1a~ instead of -w). 
Ex. 
, 
y~yvo}1a~ 
;30VA0}1a~ 
a ia-$(wo}1a ~ 
I become. I am born 
I desire. I want 
I perceive 
5. Idiomatic Meanings of the Middle. It takes time for the student to get 
an adequate sense of the range of implications conveyed by the middle voice. 
Here are some examples of common verbs to illustrate shifts in meaning 
noticeable between active and middle. 
EXW + acc. 
EX0}1a~ + gen. 
ypacpw 
ypacpo}1aL 
CPEPW 
cpEpO}1a~ 
o~Ka(w 
o~Ka(O}1a~ 
(T7rEVOW 
(T7rEVOO}1a~ 
AVW 
AVO}1a~ 
POVAEVW 
pOVAEVO}1a~ 
7rOA~TEVW 
7rOA~ TEvO}1a~ 
7rEiew + acc. 
7rEieo}1a~ + dat. 
I have. hold 
I hold on to, cling to 
I write 
I indict, bring a suit against (literally, I get Xl's 
name J recorded by the magistrates) 
I carry 
I carry off for myself, I win (a prize) 
I (as a judge) decide a suit 
I (as a plaintiff) conduct a suit 
I pour a libation 
I make a truce (solemnized by a libation) 
I release 
I ransom 
I plan 
I deliberate 
I am a citizen 
I behave like a citIzen, I participate in public 
affairs. I am a politician 
I persuade. urge 
I obey. trust, believe (a person) 
As can be seen, the middle usually implies that the subject is more closely 
involved or interested in the action. The middle is common when emphasis is 
laid on mental or perceptual activities (note the deponent ai()eavo}1a~ and 
several verbs of intellectual activity which lack a future active but possess a 
future middle l U 18.9]). 

80 
UNIT ELEVEN 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Learn the conjugation of the present middle/passive indicative and the for-
mation of the present middle/passive infinitive. 
2. Study the idiomatic meanings of the middle (§5). 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
w-verbs 
, 
, 
aKOVW 
a7ToKTEivw (a7To) 
j30VAElJW 
YV!J.va{W 
7TOALTEVW 
deponent verbs 
aia-eavo!J.aL 
f3ovAo!J.aL 
" EpX°!J.aL 
!J.aX°!J.aL 
oLo!J.aL or oZ!J.aL.l 
hear (usually with acc. of thing heard + gen. of 
person from whom it is heard, usually with prep. 
a7To. EK, etc.) 
[acoustics] 
kill, put to death 
plan, devise; (mid.) take counsel, deliberate 
[probouleutic] 
train (naked), exercise; (mid.) exercise oneself, be in 
trammg 
[gymnastics, gymnasium] 
judge; serve as judge or juror; (mid.) plead a case, 
participate in a suit 
prepare, provide, procure; (mid.) prepare for oneself, 
make preparations 
be a citizen; have a certain form of government; 
(mid.) live or behave as a free citizen; participate 
in politics 
pour a libation;' (mid.) exchange libations, make a 
truce, make peace 
[spondaic] 
perceive, sense, understand 
[esthetics] 
want, desire, wish (+ complementary inf.)2 
come into being, be born, become 
[genus] 
come, go 
fight (+ dat. of the enemy person or + prep. phrase) 
think, suppose, believe 
I. In Greco-Roman antiquity a "libation" was a ritual offering of liquid to the gods; it was made 
by pouring the liquid on an altar or on the ground. The liquid could be wine, milk. honey, oil, or 
a mixture. 
2. In poetry povll.OfJ.aL and i.OElI.w may be synonymous, but in classical prose there is often a 
clear distinction between active desire V30vll.0fJ.aL) and willingness or consent (i.OElI.W). 
3. OLfJ.aL is a contracted form of OLOfJ.aL. The remaining forms of the present are normal: OLT/, 
oLHaL, etc .• inf. OLHTOaL. 

.Q-Verbs.' Present Middle/Passive Indicative 
EXERCISES 
exhort, encourage (+ dat. of person, sometimes + 
inf.) 
learn, hear; learn by inquiry, inquire 
81 
I. Give a complete identification of each verb fonn and translate it precisely. 
Ex. 
7fapa(JKEva(ojJ.EOa: 1 st pI. pres. mid/pass. indo of 7fapa(JKEvci(w, 
we are making preparations 
I. (J7TEVOOjJ.EV 
11. A.EyETaL 
21. CPEpOVTaL 
2. 
, 
12. OLWOE 
22. pA.o.. 7TTETE 
jJ.~xn 
3. 
13. 
, 
23. po..AA.ETaL 
K07fT0jJ.aL 
n.a~XETE 
4. ypo..CPOVTaL 
14. 
24. " 
H(JL 
ayn 
5. A.ajJ.(3o..vw; 
15. 7fOA.L TEvwOaL 
25. 7fapaKEA.EvE(JOE 
6. 
, 
16. pOVA.ETaL 
26. 7fVVOo..vovTaL 
YLyvETaL 
7. 
, 
17. OLKo..(ovm 
27. oLKo..(ETaL 
7TpaTTEw 
8. (3oVA.EvojJ.aL 
18. (J7fEVoojJ.EOa 
28. 
' 
, 
aKOVOjJ.EV 
9. " 
19. 
' 
, 
29. A.EL7TETaL 
EpxovTaL 
a7fOKTEWEL 
10. Exn 
20. aL(JOo..Vn 
30. yiyvOVTaL 
, 
II. Render into Greek. 
1. we are going 
16. they are fighting 
2. he serves as judge 
17. you (s.) suppose 
3. you (pI.) cling to 
18. it is being led 
4. they desire 
19. we are indicting 
5. you (s.) are making preparations 
20. they become 
6. he is pleading a case 
21. we are being ruled 
7. they pour a libation 
22. to learn by inquiry 
8. you (pI.) are deliberating 
23. I am not willing 
9. you (s.) exhort 
24. to prepare 
10. we inquire 
25. she supposes 
11. she is ransoming 
26. we are 
12. they hear 
27. to be 
13. you (pI.) are being marshaled 
28. he is being stricken 
14. to be in training 
29. to be carried 
15. I participate in politics 
30. you (pI.) are finding 
III. Translate. 
1. EV TC{; 7fpa'.> TOU'.> pappo..pov'.> 7fOA.EjJ.'{J ayaOoL'.> 7TOA.~jJ.ioL'.> jJ.o..xovTaL oL 
, AOryvaLOL. 
2. TOU'.> (JTpaTryyou'.> xpry POVA.EVWOaL. 
3. TOU'.> o7fA.iTa'.> KEA.EVOV(JL To..TTwOaL 7Tapa Tav 7TOTajJ.OV. 

82 
UNIT ELEVEN 
4. OV CPEVYEW E8EAovrnv oi 7fAE'i(J"TO~ TWV (J"TpanwTwv. 
5. 
xaAE7fo'i~ EPYO~~ VtKYJ TO'i~ 'A8YJvato~~ ytyvETa~. 
6. 
(J"7fEVOOVTa~ Tn V(J"TEpq. r,}J-Epq.. 
7. 
EXE(J"8a~ XP7] Tr,~ n}J-r,~. 
8. V7fO [= by] TWV 7fOAE}J-tWV ov pAa7fTE(J"8E. 
9. OVK EtE(J"Tl TO'i~ 7fa~oio~~ TO'i~ eEO~~ (J"7fEVOHV. 
10. oi vafJTa~ 7fPO~ T7]V TWV j3apj3apwv xwpav TO'i~ aVE}J-o~~ EAaVVOVTat. 

UNIT TWELVE 
Adverbs; Conjunctions; 
Prepositions II; Relative Pronoun 
PRELIMINARIES 
A. Adverbs. An adverb (Greek hrippiJjJ.a, Latin adverbium = "word 
added to the verb") is that part of speech which modifies (qualifies, limits) a 
verb, an adjective, or another adverb. Adverbs usually express ideas of manner 
or degree or time or place. 
They walk quickly. 
The pitcher is fairly good. 
The house is very poorly constructed. 
(modifying verb walk) 
(modifying adj. good) 
(modifying adverb poorly) 
In many languages a large number of the adverbs are derived from adjectives 
by the addition of a standard suffix. In English the suffix is -ly (cf. German 
-lich, French -ment, Spanish and Italian -mente). 
B. Sentences and Clauses. A simple sentence contains one subject-verb 
unit (although subject or verb or both may be multiple). It consists of a single 
independent or main clause (a clause that can stand by itself). 
Ex. 
The sailor leaves the marketplace. 
The sailor picks up his gear and leaves. 
The sailor and the merchant leave the marketplace. 
The woman and her daughter hug and kiss. 
A compound sentence consists of two (or more) independent clauses 
joined together (though each clause is capable of standing on its own). 
Ex. 
The woman waves. and her daughter waves back. 
A complex sentence consists of an independent or main clause and one or 
more dependent or subordinate clauses, that is, clauses which do not by them-
selves form a sentence and cannot be uttered in isolation. In the following 
examples the subordinate clauses are underlined: 
When the sailor arrived. they called a meeting. 
83 

84 
UNIT TWELVE 
The messenger who came yesterday told a different story. 
C. Conjunctions. A conjunction (Greek (rVVoEOp .. O~, Latin coniunctio = 
"bond, joining") is that part of speech which joins together two or more words, 
phrases, or clauses. There are two kinds of conjunctions. A coordinating 
conjunction links two elements (words, phrases, clauses) which are on an 
equal footing. A subordinating conjunction links a dependent clause to a 
clause of more independent standing (either an actual independent clause or 
another dependent clause which is grammatically superordinate). For instance, 
the boy and his dog 
in the city or in the country 
He knocked, but nobody answered. 
(coordinating two nouns) 
(coordinating two phrases) 
(coordinating two independent 
clauses) 
!i he is found guilty, he will pay a large fine. 
(subordinating the conditional clause to the main clause he will pay a 
large fine) 
The truce which was concluded after Cleon died lasted more than a year. 
(subordinating the temporal clause after Cleon died to the relative clause 
which was concluded, which is itself subordinate to the main clause the 
truce lasted) 
A number of common Greek conjunctions and adverbs with connective and 
emphatic force are traditionally termed particles. In a beginning course a 
student is exposed to only a few particles, but they are an important part of 
Greek idiom and should be studied in detail in conjunction with the student's 
later reading of Greek texts. 
D. Pronouns. A pronoun (Greek o.vTwvvp..ia, Latin pronomen = "sub-
stitute for a noun") is that part of speech which takes the place of a noun 
already used or obvious from the context. The noun which a pronoun replaces 
(or the person or thing to which it is understood to refer) is its antecedent. 
Jane called Jim, who had called her earlier. 
(The antecedent of who is Jim; the antecedent of her is Jane.) 
Like nouns, pronouns have gender (he, she, it; who, which), number (I, we), 
and case (she, her, hers; who, whom, whose). Normally, a pronoun has the 
same gender and number as its antecedent, but its case is determined by its 
function in its own sentence or clause. 
There are seven types of pronouns: personal, demonstrative, relative, in-
terrogative, indefinite, reflexive, and reciprocal. The relative pronoun is pre-
sented in this unit; the others will be considered in detail in later units. 

Adverbs; Conjunctions; Prepositions II; Relative Pronoun 
85 
E. 
Relative Clauses. A dependent clause which serves as an adjective 
modifying a noun is called a relative clause and is introduced by a relative 
pronoun (who. which. that) or a relative adverb (where. when). These words 
are called relative because while introducing a subordinate clause they refer 
back to (relate to) an element of the main (or other superordinate) clause. 
Ex. 
The man whom we saw looked familiar. 
(whom is masculine and singular to agree with its antecedent 
man, but it is in the objective case because it is the object of the 
verb saw in its own clause) 
This is the thing that bothers me. 
Leave it in the place where you found it. 
Note that in English the relative pronoun may be omitted (The man we saw 
looked familiar), but that other languages, including Greek, require that it al-
ways be expressed. 
l. Formation of Adverbs. Adverbs expressing manner are formed from 
adjectival stems by the addition of the adverbial ending -WS" (in origin an 
ablative case ending). The stem of vowel-declension adjectives is obvious 
from the nominative singular forms. The accentuation of the adverb always 
follows the pattern of the gen. pI. form of the adjective. 
Ex. 
adjective 
(gen. pl.) 
adverb 
KaAo, 
(KaAwv) 
KaAW, 
l1obly. beautifully. well 
, 
(KaKwv) 
KaKw, 
badly. poorly. ill 
KaKO, 
atw, 
(atiwv) 
atiw, 
worthily 
p4'6w, 
(PCfoiwv) 
PCfoiw, 
easily 
Although adverbs can be formed in this way from virtually any adjective in 
Greek, no -WS" adverb is formed from ayaBoS" in classical Greek, the adverb fV 
(= well) being used instead. 
2. Coordinating Conjunctions. There are five common coordinating 
conjunctions in Greek. 
a. Kat = and, joining words, phrases, or clauses. In addition to the simple 
use as a conjunction, there are other uses of Kat to note: 
Kat. X Kat. y = both X and Y 

86 
UNlTTWELVE 
adverbial Kai: Kai was in origin an adverb meaning also, and is often still 
used as adverb adding emphasis to the word or phrase that follows it. In 
its adverbial use, Ka~ X may be translated even X, X too, X also, or in 
English one may simply give extra emphasis to X in pronunciation. 
Ex. 
Q.vaYKy/ Kd T0 croCP0 7TacrXEw KaKa. 
It is necessary that even the wise man suffer hardships. 
or The wise man, too, must suffer hardships. 
b. TE = and, an enclitic postpositive conjunction joining clauses, phrases, 
or single words. A postpositive is a word which cannot be placed first in its 
clause or phrase but normally follows the first word of its clause or phrase. 
This conjunction is etymologically related to and similar in usage to Latin 
-que. TE may be used alone or in combination with Kai. (TE is elided to T' 
before a vowel with smooth breathing or to e' before a vowel with rough 
breathing. ) 
Ex. 
X Y TE = X and Y 
ocrw<) 'OiKaU)<) TE = pious and just 
X TE Y TE = both X and Y 
i]'O0V17 TE HfJ.ry TE = both pleasure and honor 
X TE Ka~ Y = both X and Y 
EXH TE Ka~ EXETaL = she (both) holds and is held 
c. 'OE = and, but, a postpositive conjunction most often found joining 
clauses, but occasionally linking phrases or single words. 'OE can be either neu-
trally connective (and) or adversative in sense (but); the context normally 
helps decide which English equivalent is appropriate. ('OE is elided to '0' before 
a vowel.) 
d. X fJ.EV ... Y 'OE. A very important use of 'OE, and one which is espe-
cially characteristic of Greek thought and idiom, is its use in combination with 
the postpositive particle fJ.EV to create a contrast between antithetic elements 
(or sometimes simply an emphatic link between enumerated elements). The 
force of fJ.EV is to anticipate an antithesis by marking its beginning; the second 
element is most often joined by 'OE. The contrasted elements may be single 
words, parallel phrases, or entire clauses. A common, but clumsy, English 
translation of fJ.EV ... 'OE is on the one hand . .. on the other hand; often it is 
more idiomatic to convey the antithesis by emphasis in pronunciation or by 
turning one of the paired clauses into an English subordinate clause introduced 
by while or whereas. 

Adverbs; Conjunctions; Prepositions II; Relative Pronoun 
87 
Ex. 
6 ].LEV (JTpaTT/Yo~ a7ToBvI1(JKEt. oi oE (JTpanWTaL CPEVYOV(JW. 
The general is dying. but the soldiers are fleeing. 
Ot fJ-EV 'ABT/va'ioL 7TEiBoVTaL TO'i~ VOfJ-OL~. oi oE pappapoL T0 
OE(J7TOT?1' 
The Athenians obey their laws. whereas the Persians obey their 
master. 
(Note the position of the postpositives in these sentences: words like TE. fJ-Ev. 
and oE often intervene between an article and its noun or between a preposition 
and its object; less commonly, the postpositive may be placed after the phrase 
unit, for instance, after article-noun unit.) 
e. yap = for. because, a postpositive joining clauses (be careful to dis-
tinguish between English for as a conjunction and as preposition). 
Ex. 
TOV oLKa(JT~v i;EAaVVEtV (3ovAOfJ-EBa' owpa yap AafJ-!3aVEL. 
We want to drive out the judge. for he is taking bribes. 
f. aAAa = but. but rather, a strong adversative joining clauses or less 
often phrases or words, usually following a stated or implied negative. (aAAa 
is elided to aAA' before a vowel.) 
Ex. 
OVK E(JTL 7TOTafJ-O~. aAAa BaAaTTa. 
It is not a river. but rather the sea. 
3. Pronominal Use of the Article. The Attic article o. ;,. TO was 
originally a demonstrative pronoun (this is the usual function of the word in 
Homeric Greek and other early poetry). The pronominal use survives in 
classical Attic in certain restricted circumstances: namely, preceding fJ-EV and 
oE when they are paired, or preceding oE used alone. With fJ-EV ... oE the 
pronominal article usually means the one . .. the other . .. or (plural) some . .. 
others . .. ; with oE alone. the pronominal article usually makes a change of 
grammatical subject from the previous sentence and may be translated by he. 
she. it. they. The pronominal article may be used in any of the three genders, 
agreeing in gender and number with its antecedent. 
Ex. 
TOV~ gb! a7TOKTEivoV(JL. '[Ol!5~' ayov(Jw. 
They kill some and carry off others. 
at !lEV ].LEvov(Jw. Q.~OE CPEVYOV(JW. 
These women are staying. but the other women are fleeing. 
TOV 7TOLT/T~V !3ovAEVE(JBaL 7TEiBofJ-ElJ" 00' OVK EBEAEL. 
We are urging the poet to take counsel. but he is unwilling to do 
so. 
(note change of subject from we to he) 

88 
4. Prepositions 1/ 
aVa + acc. 
G.vTi + gen. 
KaTa + gen. 
KaTa + acc. 
7fEpi + gen. 
7fEpi + dat. 
7fEpi + acc. 
7fPO + gen. 
iJ7fEP + gen. 
iJ7fEP + acc. 
lJ7fO + gen. 
iJ7fO + dat. 
lJ7fO + acc. 
UNIT TWELVE 
up, up along, throughout 
instead of, in place of, in return for 
down from, down upon; against (the interests 
of a person); concerning 
down along, over, throughout; in accordance 
with 
about, concerning; above, beyond 
around (position); about (an object for which 
one struggles) 
around (motion); about, concerning 
in front of; in defense of; before (of time or 
preference) 
over, above (of motion or position); in 
defense of; concerning 
over, across, beyond (of motion or position) 
from under, under; by (agent with passive 
verb or expression) 
under; under the power of 
under; during, in the course of 
5. Examples of Usage of These Prepositions 
aVel Tav 7fOTa}J-ov 
av' 'EAAaoa 
, 
, 
, 
avn TOVTWV 
aVT' G.yaewv 
KaTU Tr,,> KEcpaAr,,> 
KaT' 'OAV}J-7fOV 
KaTel TOV (J'TpaT1]yov 
KaTU TWV (3ap{3apwv 
KaTel Tav 7fOTa}J-OV 
KaTU T~V xwpav 
KaTel Tav 7fPOTEPOV 7fOAE}J-OV 
KaTel }J-o'Lpav 
KaTel AOYOV 
7fEPL Tr,'> aPETr,,> 
7fEPL 7faVTWV TWV aAAwv 
up (upstream) along the river 
throughout Greece 
in return (exchange) for these things 
instead of good men (they have become 
bad men) 
(something poured) down upon the head 
down from Olympus 
(speak, accuse) against the general 
(speak) about, concerning the foreigners 
down (downstream) along the river 
throughout the land 
all during the previous war 
in accordance with destiny 
in accordance with reason 
concerning virtue 
(superiority) above all others 

Adverbs; Conjunctions; Prepositions II; Relative Pronoun 
89 
7ffpt Tfl Kf¢aAfl 
7ffpt Tfl H}J-fl 
7fEpt flfA07f()VV1]O'"OV 
7fEpt T7JV apETr]V 
7fPO TWV 8vpwv 
7fPO Tf]~ xwpa~ 
7fPO TOV 7fOAE}J-OV 
imEp TOV 7fOTa}J-OV 
imEp TWV 7fa~of.wv 
imfp TOll 'EAA~0'"7fOVTOV 
imEp }J-o'ipav 
imo yf]~ 
imo TWV 7fOA~ TWV 
( 7fE}J-7fE0'"8ad 
imo TO'i~ 'A81]vaf.o~~ 
. , 
~ 
V7fO y1]V 
imo TOV aiJTov xpOVOV 
(a crown) around one's head 
(compete) over, concerning honor 
(a fleet sailing) around the Peloponnese 
in relation to, concerning virtue 
in front of the doors 
on behalf of the land 
before the war 
(position) over, across the river I 
on behalf of, in defense of the children 
(motion or position) across, beyond the 
Hellespont 
beyond (in violation of) fate 
(position) under the earth 
(personal agent) (to be sent) by the 
citizens 
(be ruled, controlled, enslaved, etc.) 
under the power of the Athenians 
(motion) under the earth 
during the same period of time 
6. Relative Pronoun. The Attic Greek relative pronoun has the stem h-
(that is, rough breathing) and is inflected in all three genders with the vowel-
declension endings. The declension of ck 17. 0, who. which. that, is as follows: 
singular 
plural 
mase. 
fern. 
neut. 
mase. 
fern. 
neut. 
051 
" 
(5 
" 
" 
nom. 
TJ 
Ot 
at 
a 
'i' 
'i' 
'i' 
'i' 
'i' 
l' 
Ren. 
ov 
TJ, 
ov 
wv 
wv 
wv 
dat. 
'i' 
'i' 
'i' 
'i' 
l' 
l' 
cr 
!I 
cr 
Ot, 
at, 
OL, 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
ace. 
ov 
TJV 
0 
OV, 
a, 
a 
(dual, all genders 
flom. acc. 
w) 
(gen. dat. 
OLV) 
Note that the fern. sing. nom. and masc. and fern. pI. nom. are different from 
the same forms of the article only in that these forms of the article are con-
ventionally written without accents. Similarly the masc. sing. nom. article 6 is 
distinguifhed from neut. sing. nom. relative 0 by the accent. 
I. For this sense, the accusative is also found in phrases like iJ7TfP Tav 7rOTU/ . .(()V. esp. in 
postclassical Greek. 

90 
UNIT TWEL VE 
7. Use of the Relative Pronoun. Relative pronouns serve as subordi-
nating conjunctions introducing adjectival clauses. The relative pronoun 
agrees with its antecedent in gender and number; but the case of the relative 
pronoun is usually determined by its use in its own clause (an idiomatic 
exception will be learned later, in U38). 
Ex. 
The soldier whom the general is striking is a coward. 
(antecedent of whom is soldier; whom is dir. obj. of is striking) 
(; (TTpanwT1l'> ov (; CTTparqyo,> K07rTH KaKo'> ECTTW. 
(ov is masc. sing. because antecedent CTTpanWTr/'> is masc. sing.; 
it is acc. because it is direct object of K07rTH) 
We do not want to abandon the woman with whom we are 
fleeing. 
ov JjOvAop.EBa AEi7rEW T~V avBpw7rov p.EB· Vi cpE1JyOP.W. 
(1]'> is fern. sing. because antecedent avBpu)7f'ov is fern. sing.; it is 
gen. because it is object of preposition P.ETG.. = with) 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Learn the formation of adverbs and declension of the relative pronoun. 
2. Study the examples of usage of the conjunctions and prepositions 
presented above. 
3. Learn as vocabulary the conjunctions and prepOSitIOns and relative 
pronoun presented above (§2, 4, 6) and the remaining words presented 
below. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
Cd-verb 
strike. beat 
[tympanum I 
adverbs not formed from adjectives 
cut (early Attic + poetic aift. 
always 
also poetic aiEv) 
a~ 
again; in tum 
. , 
aVTLKa 
~ 
fV 
aVet'> 
again; in turn; hereafter, in the future 
f 7TH Ta 
at once, immediately 
then. next; accordingly. therefore 
then. next; therefore 
here. there 
well 

Adverbs; Conjunctions; Prepositions 1/; Relative Pronoun 
91 
1/011 
llaAU 
vvv 
Ton 
already; immediately; actually, now 
very, exceedingly 
now, presently 
at that time, then 
EXERCISES 
I. Translate the following phrases. 
1. 7rPO TWV ()KTJVWV 
9. aVTt TWV 7rDVWV 
2. V7rO Ti{l avo()iO! OW'7rDT[1 
10. iJ7rf.p T~V (3aAaTTav 
3. KaTo. T1JV TOU OtKa()TOU yvw}J.TJv 
II. 
t 
,\ 
I 
V7rO TTJV ()KTJvrJV 
4. 7rEpt Tr,~ TWV 'AOTJvaiwv n}J.r,~ 
12. 
' 
" 
I 
7TEpt TTJV a yopav 
5. V7TEP TWV cpiAWV 
13. KaTo. TWV KptTwV 
6. V7TO TOl~ 7TOAE}J.iOL~ 
14. 7TPO Tr,~ }J.aX77~ 
7. avO. TrJU OODV 
15. aVTt TOU 7TA01JTOV 
8. 
" 
, 
16. 7TEpt Tn viK!1 
KaTa T77v 7TpoTEpav 77}J.Epav 
II. Translate. 
I. oi }J.EV ()OCPOt Ell 7TpaTTOVCTLV. oi OE KaKOt oV. I 
2. OV 7TDAE}J.OV pOvAo}J.EBa EXEW aAA' ELpryVTJV. 
3. oi 7TOALTat ()7TEVOOV()t TOL~ BWLI) oi' }J.axovTat V7TEP Tr,~ xwpal)' arnOt yap 
EL()t TOU KaAWI) 7TpaTTHv. 
4. 
KaA~ 1] xwpa 1] V7TEP TOU 7ToTa}J.ou ELI) ~V TO. 7Tatoia EPXETat. 
5. V7TO TwV T' 'ABTJvaiwv Kat TWV ()v}J.}J.axwv ij077 OLKaiw~ pAa7TTOVTaL Ot 
pappapoL. 
6. TO oiKaW 7TpaTTHV xaAE7TOV }J.EV TOLl) 7TAEi()TOL~. pqowv OE TOL~ ()O<POL~, 
7. TOLl) 7TOAl.TaLI) 7TapaKEAEVETaL O()LOtl) ELvaL Kat VUV Kat avetl).2 
8. oi ayaBot T1JV n}J.~v aVTL TOU 7TAOiJTOV EXHV aEt POVAOVTaL 
III. Render into Greek. 
1. wisely, shamefully, badly, easily, unjustly 
2. on behalf of the allies 
3. in accordance with the laws of the foreigners 
4. concerning democracy 
5. The hoplites to whom we are entrusting the children are both just and 
pious. 
6. One is telling the truth~ the other is not. 
I. Note that a proclitic receives an acute accent when it precedes a pause at a mark of 
punctuation, as here. 
2. For the agreement of the predicate adj. here, review U 10.4. 

92 
UNIT TWELVE 
7. The sailors are going up (along) the river with difficulty, for they are 
being pelted with stones by the enemy. 
8. The mares about which you are speaking belong not to the citizens, but 
to the gods. 
9. One must always deliberate exceedingly wisely on behalf of the citizens. 
10. It is not easy to obey a harsh law. 

UNIT THIRTEEN 
Contract Verbs in -ECJJ; 
Demonstratives 
1. Contract Verbs. A large number of Greek verbs have present stems 
which end in one of the three vowels a. E. o. The present-tense forms of these 
verbs have personal ending preceded by the theme vowel, preceded in turn by 
the final vowel of the stem. In Attic, as in several other dialects, the final a. E. 
or 0 of the stem contracts with the theme vowel (or theme vowel plus personal 
ending, where these have coalesced). 
2. Verbs in -EW. These are the most common type. The Attic contrac-
tions which are relevant to the present indicative are: 
E +E ->H 
E +H ->H 
E + 0 ->ov 
E+OV ->ov 
E+W ->w 
(Fuller general schemes for contraction are set out in Appendix 1.) 
In the following paradigm the uncontracted form is illustrated in paren-
theses next to the contracted form which results from it in Attic: 
Ex. 
7rOtEW. "make" 
present active indo 
present middle/passive indo 
sing. 
1st 
( 7roLEW) 
7roLw 
(7TOLEOjJ.ud 
7TOWVjJ.UL 
2nd 
(7TOLEH';-) 
7TOLEt, 
( 7TOLETI) 
7TOL i7 
3rd 
( 7TOLEEd 
7TOLEt 
(7TOLEETUd 
7TOLEtTUL 
[dual 
2nd 
(7TOLfETOV) 
7TOLEtTOV 
(7TOLE weov) 
7TOLE l:a-eOV 1 
[3rd 
(7TOLEETOV) 
7TOLEtTOV 
(7TOLEWeOV) 
7TOLELa-eOV 1 
plur. 
1st 
(7TOLfOjJ.EV) 
7TOWVjJ.EV 
( 7TOLEOjJ.Eea) 
7TOWVjJ.Eea 
2nd 
( 7TOLEETtl 
7TOLELTE 
(7TOLEWeE) 
7TOLELa-eE 
3rd 
( 7TOLfOVa-d 
7TOWVa-L(V) 
( 7TOLEOVTad 
7TowvvTaL 
93 

94 
UNIT THIRTEEN 
The present active infinitive ends in -ELV (e.g., 7rOLELV from 7rOLEEw); the 
present middle/passive infinite ends in -ELcreaL (e.g., 7rOLELcreaL from 7rOLE-
EcreaL). 
Accentuation: the uncontracted forms of the indicative have the recessive 
accentuation that is normal in finite forms of the verb (in the infinitive the 
accent of the uncontracted form is on the last syllable of the stem, as for other 
w-verbs). In contraction a circumflex accent results when the first of the two 
original vowels has the acute (as happens in all the forms above except 1 st 
plural middle/passive -EOjJ.Eea). An acute accent results when the second of the 
two original vowels has the acute (as in 7rOWVjJ.Eea). When the two original 
vowels are both unaccented, the resulting vowel is also unaccented: this does 
not occur in the present, but you will encounter it in the imperfect in U16. 
3. Demonstratives. Demonstratives are words which refer with extra em-
phasis, as if by pointing (hence the name): in English, this, that, these, those. 
Demonstratives function either as pronouns (standing alone, with an ante-
cedent expressed or implied) or as adjectives (modifying a noun). The pronoun 
which became the Attic article was originally a demonstrative. There are three 
demonstratives in Attic. 
a. o~k ryOE, TOOE = this or that, referring to something near, usually pre-
sent or in sight. In some contexts it refers forward and may be translated as the 
following. OOE consists of the old demonstrative a that became the Attic article 
plus an indeclinable demonstrative suffix -OE. The fact that -OE was originally a 
separate enclitic element accounts for the accentuation of forms like ryOE or 
TovcrOE, which are apparent exceptions to the rule that long accented P 
followed by short U must have the circumflex. 
masc. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
nom. 
OOE 
~OE 
TOOE 
gen. 
TOUOE 
T11CTOE 
TOUOE 
dat. 
To/OE 
TfJOE 
To/OE 
acc. 
TOVOE 
T~VOE 
TOOE 
(dual 
n. a. 
TWOE 
TWOE 
TWOE) 
(g. d. 
TOLVOE 
TOLVOE 
TOl.VOE) 
plural 
nom. 
OLOE 
aLOE 
TelOE 
gen. 
TWVOE 
TWVOE 
TWVO<: 
dat. 
TOLCTOE 
TaLCTOE 
TOLCTOE 
ace. 
TOVCTOE 
TelCTOE 
TelOE 

Contract Verbs in -fW; Demonstratives 
95 
b. o lJTO <;, alJTy/, TOVTO = this, the nearer. When contrasted with EKEI.VO<;, 
OlJTo<; means the latter vs. the former. When contrasted with ODE, 01)TO<; refers 
backward (the foregoing vs. the following). When used by itself, 01)TO<; may 
refer either backward or forward. Note two oddities of declension: (1) the stem 
of most forms begins with tau, but the masc. and fern. nom. sing. and pI. have 
initial rough breathing (h-) instead (the same forms have h- instead of tau in 
the article); (2) the diphthong of the stem varies between av and ov depending 
on whether there is an a-vowel or a-vowel in the ending (phonetic assimila-
tion): hence av appears in most of the fern. and in the neut. pI. nom. and 
accusative. 
masc. 
fern. 
neut. 
'i' 
aVT'1l 
TOVTO 
nom. 
OVTO~ 
sing. 
gen. 
T01JTOV 
Ta{JTT/~ 
TOVTOV 
dat. 
TOVTCr 
TaVT'(I 
, 
TOVTcr 
acc. 
TOVTOV 
TaVTT/V 
TOVTO 
(dual 
n. a. 
TOVTW 
TOVTW 
TOVTW) 
(g. d. 
TOVTOW 
TOVTOW 
TOVTOW) 
'i' 
'i' 
TaVTa 
nom. 
OVTOL 
aVTaL 
plural 
, 
TOVTWV 
TOVTWV 
gen. 
TOVTWV 
dat. 
TOVTOL~ 
, 
TOVTOL~ 
TaVTaL~ 
TOVTOV~ 
, 
TaVTa 
acc. 
TaVTa~ 
c. EKEI.VO<;, EKEivy/, EKEI.VO = that one there, the more distant. When con-
trasted with OVTO<;, EKEI.VO<; means the former vs. the latter. It is declined like a 
normal vowel-declension adjective except that the neuter sing. nom./acc. have 
the ending -0, not -ov (also, dual forms of the fern. are the same as the masc.). 
masc. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
nom. 
EKELVO, 
EKEivT/ 
EKELVO 
gen. 
EKEivov 
EKELVT/~ 
EKEivov 
dat. 
EKELVcr 
EKEivTI 
EKEivcr 
acc. 
EKELVOV 
EKEivT/v 
EKELVO 
(dual 
n. a. 
EKEivw 
EKEivw 
EKEivw) 
(g. d. 
EKELVOW 
EKEI.VOW 
EKEivow) 
plural 
nom. 
EKELVOL 
EKELvaL 
EKELva 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
gen. 
EKEWWV 
EKEWWV 
EKHVWV 
dat. 
' 
, 
, 
, 
EKEiVOL, 
EKEWOL~ 
EKEwaL, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
EKELva 
acc. 
EKEWOV~ 
EKEwa~ 

96 
UNIT THIRTEEN 
4. Position of Demonstrative Adjectives. When a demonstrative is used 
as an adjective, the noun modified by the demonstrative has the definite article 
and the demonstrative is placed in the predicate position (outside the article-
noun group). If a regular attributive adjective modifies the same noun, it has 
its usual position inside the article-noun group. 
Ex. 
t 
..... 
'''' 
,,, 
, 
..... 
on this day 
those sailors 
Ot vaVTat EKHVOt or EKEWOt Ot vavTat 
7rPOl) TfloE Tfl }.J.aKpq. (J"KYlVfl or 
7rPOl) Tfl }.J.aKpq. (J"KYlvfl TfloE 
next to this long tent 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the present indicative and infinitives of verbs in -EW. 
2. Learn the declension and use of the demonstratives. 
3. Learn as vocabulary the demonstratives presented above and the remaining 
words presented below. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
Vocabulary-building Hints. A great many of the verbs in -EW are denomi-
native verbs, that is, verbs formed from noun or adjective roots, meaning to do 
or to be whatever the root conveys. In this unit, note cptl\Ew from cpil\ol), 
CPOj3Ew from cpoj30l), VO(J"EW from vO(J"Ol), aOtKEw from aOtKOl). 
contract verbs in -iw I 
, , 
aLpEW 
acf>LKVE0J.l.aL (a7TO) 
OEW2 
be unjust, do wrong; harm, do wrong to (someone 
[ace. ]) 
take, grasp, seize; (mid.) choose, elect 
[heresy I 
arrive at, come to, reach 
lack, be in need of (+ gen.) (rare outside of certain 
fixed idioms) 
it is necessary (already learned in U9) 
want, be in need of (+ gen.) (more common than 
the active); beg, ask for (+ gen. of person + inf.) 
I. In dictionaries and vocabulary lists contract verbs are traditionally listed under the 
uncontracted fonn, because this makes clear the stem of the verb (and the non-Attic forms). In 
the readings and exercises of this course the student should of course use the contracted fonns. 
2. Verbs in -Ew with a monosyllabic stem, such as oEw, suffer contraction only when the theme 
vowel plus personal ending begins with f. Thus the present active is, e.g .. oEw. Ofl>. Ofl. 
OEO}ltv. oElTE. OEOVCTL; present middle/passive oEo}laL. oEn. OElTaL. OdJ}lEOa. oElaBE. OEOVTaL. 

Contract Verbs in -lw; Demonstratives 
97 
Kpanw 
. 
7roLEW 
qnt..Ew 
CPO{3Ew 
cpopEOJ1aL 
WCPEt..EW 
(impersonal) there is need of (+ dat. of person and 
gen. of thing needed) 
(commonly) seem (sometimes + dat. of person + 
inf.); (rarely in prose) think, suppose 
it seems best (already learned in U9) 
be strong; rule over (+ gen.); conquer (+ acc. or gen.) 
[democratic] 
be sick 
inhabit, settle; manage (a house or a government); 
dwell, live 
[economy, ecology] 
make, produce; do 
[poet] 
love, like 
put to flight; terrify, frighten 
be afraid, be afraid of 
help, aid 
adverbs formed from demonstratives 
~OE 
OVTW, (before vowel) OVTW~ 
Edi 
EXERCISES 
I. Write in Greek. 
I. we seem 
2. they fear 
3. you (s.) help 
4. she arrives 
5. he likes 
6. I conquer 
7. it is inhabited 
8. we desire 
9. they are sick 
10. you (pI.) make a truce 
11. to be afraid 
12. they terrify 
13. it is being produced 
14. to seem 
15. we are being aided 
in this way, thus, so very 
in this manner, thus, so 
in that place, there 
16. they order 
17. I like 
18. to be harmed 
19. you (s.) become 
20. you (pI.) seize 
21. she is wronged 
22. they are being led 
23. they arrive 
24. to be in need of 
25. we make 
26. you (s.) indict 
27. you (s.) choose 
28. it seems 
29. I help 
30. we are afraid 

98 
UNIT THIRTEEN 
II. 
Translate each form precisely and give a complete identification of any 
ten of the forms. 
I. VO(H'iTE 
II. aOLKE'irT8E 
21. KpaTOVrTL 
2. OEOVTaL 
12. acpLKvE'iTaL 
22. OiKOVVTaL 
3. OOKE'iV 
13. CPOf3ELV 
23. aipOvfJ.E8a 
4. cpLAOVf1aL 
14. 7TOLEL) 
24. CPLAELTE 
S. aipOVf1EV 
IS. cpof3ovf1E8a 
2S. :;OALTEVT/ 
6. WCPEAE'i 
16. 7Tvv8cLVETaL 
26. apXETE 
7. acpLKvE LrT8aL 
17. 
' 
, 
27. 7ToLELTaL 
aKOVEL) 
8. Kparfl 
18. EVpLrTKT/ 
28. OOKEL) 
9. OOKOVrTL 
19. aOLKELv 
29. WcpEAOVf1aL 
10. 
' 
~ 
20. OEL 
30. YLyvOf1E8a 
OLKW 
III. Render each phrase into Greek in the designated case. 
I. the following brave Athenians (acc.) 
6. the former bad reputation (nom.) 
2. that worthless ally (dat.) 
7. these wealthy people (acc.) 
3. this noble victory (nom.) 
8. this hostile army (dat.) 
4. these harsh toils (gen.) 
9. those evil misfortunes (gen.) 
S. those beloved children (acc.) 
10. that clever deed (acc.) 
IV. Translate. 
I. oi j3apj3apoL OV) EKELVOL KpaTOVrTW E7TL Tfl 8aAaTTT/ OiKOVrTW. 
2. aVTaL f1EV TO. 7TaLoia cpof30VrTLv. EKE'ivaL OE CPOPOVVTW. 
3. TaVTT/ Tfl r,f1EPCf OOKEL TOL) 7TOAiTaL) EipryvYJv 7TOLEtrT8aL 7TpO) TOV) 
7TOAEf1iov)' VOrTOVrTL yap oi 7TAEtrTTOL TWV rTTpanwTwv. 
4. EKEtVOL TOV) f1EV aya80v) aOLKOVrTL. TOV) oE KaKov) WCPEAOVrTW. 
S. T0 rTocp0 rTTpaTYJYct: OELTaL. oLf1aL. TWVOE' T0V KaAw) POvAEvw8aL 7TPO 
Try) f1axYJ) KaL TOV d) 7TpaTTHv EV Tfl f1aXT/. 
6. OVTO) PCfoiw) TLf17JV cpEpETaL' oiJTW oiKaw) Kat rTOCPO) TOt) 7TOAiTaL) OOKEt 
OLa TOV) WAOV) V0f10V) OV) ypacpH. 
V. Render into Greek. 
1. This country is inhabited both by the Persians and by the Athenians. 
2. Because of the earlier peace treaty the general is not permitted to help the 
people in the temple of the goddess. 
3. Base men rule over most people, for good men are always unwilling to 
hold office [use aPXHv]. 
4. As a result of doing wrong but seeming virtuous, the unjust man wins for 
himself wealth and honor. 
S. Of the young men, some are now arriving, others are already in training. 

UNIT FOURTEEN 
Consonant-Declension Nouns I 
I. Consonant Declension. The consonant declension (also referred to as 
the third declension) is so tenned because most of its nouns have stems ending 
in a consonant. But it is actually a diverse family of declension types (includ-
ing some vowel stems) that share certain case endings. The consonant declen-
sion shows much more variety than the 0- and a-declensions because some of 
its nouns have variable stems, with different fonns of the stem appearing in 
different sets of cases, and some feature contraction of vowels in the endings. 
The various types will be learned over the course of several units. In the 
consonant declension it is essential to know both the nominative singular and 
the genitive singular in order to understand to which family a particular noun 
belongs and what fonn or fonns of stem to use in the declension. 
CONSONANT-DECLENSION ENDINGS 
masc.ljem. 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
- or-, 
gen. 
-0, 
-0, 
dat. 
-l 
-l 
ace. 
-
I 
-a or -v 
voc. 
- or-, 
(dual 
n. a. v.) 
(-d 
(g. d.) 
(-ow) 
plur. 
flom.lvOc. 
-{, 
-a 
gen. 
-wv 
-wv 
dat. 
-u(v) 
-ui(v) 
ace. 
-as' 
-a 
I. The alternative masc'/fem. acc. sing. endings are in origin the same (a zero-grade n-sound). 
but have developed to vowel -a or consonant -v depending on the context. 
99 

100 
UNIT FOURTEEN 
The case endings shown on the previous page are historically valid, but in 
Attic Greek may appear in somewhat different forms because of various 
phonetic developments. In general, students need to pay special attention for 
each type of noun to the nom., acc., and voc. in the sing. and to the dat. pl. For 
instance, when the nom.!voc. sing. ending -'i' or the dat. pl. ending -en is added 
to a stem ending in a consonant, the sigma may combine with the previous 
consonant to form '" or ~ or may produce a more extensive change. When 
there is no case ending added to the stem (as for some nouns in nom. and voc. 
sing.), the stem may lose its final consonant because in ancient Greek it is a 
phonetic law that words must end either in a vowel or in v, p, or'i'. 
2. Labial and Velar Plosive Stems (On plosives [also called mutes], see 
U1.2.) Nouns of this type, all masculine or feminine, have stems ending in 7f, 
(3, or cp (labial plosives) or in K, y, or X (velar plosives). The original case 
endings are all well preserved. The nom. and voc. sing. have -'i'; the acc. sing. 
has -ii. In the nom.!voc. sing. and the dat. pl., the final plosive of the stem 
combines with sigma to form either'" (labial) or ~ (velar). 
Ex. 
"thief" (m.) 
"guard" (m.) 
stem: 
KAW7f-
cpvAaK-
sing. 
nom. 
KAW'" 
cpvAa[ 
gen. 
KAW7fO, 
cpvAaKo, 
dat. 
KAW7f{ 
cpvAaKL 
acc. 
KAW7fa 
cpvAaKa 
voc. 
KAW'" 
cpvAa[ 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
KAW7fE 
cpvAaKE) 
(g. d. 
KAW7fo'iv 
cpVAO.KOW) 
plural 
n. v. 
KAW7fE, 
cpvAaKE, 
gen. 
KAW7fWV 
cpvAaKwv 
dat. 
KAW"'{(V) 
cpvAa[L(v) 
acc. 
KAw7fa, 
cpvAaKa, 
Accentuation: as for other nouns, the accent is persistent. But there is a 
special rule for all monosyllabic-stem nouns of the consonant declension: 
monosyllabic stems (e.g., KAW7f-) have the ultima accented in the gen. and dat. 
of all numbers (acute on short U, circumflex on long U: e.g., KA.W7fL, 
KA.W7fWV), while in the nom., acc., and voc. the accent falls on the first or only 
syllable (acute on any short vowel or on a long vowel in the nom. and voc. 
sing.; circumflex on a long vowel in acc. sing. or nom., acc., and voc. pl.). 

Consonant-Declension Nouns I 
101 
3. Dental Plosive Stems. Nouns in this group have stems ending in T, 0, 
or e, the dental plosives. 
a. Masculine and Feminine Nouns. Dental plosives of this group are for 
the most part nouns with nominative in -tS that were in origin i-stems without a 
dental plosive. The original stem is always used in the nom. and voc. sing. and 
the dat. pI. In the remaining cases a longer stem ending in T, 0, or e (seen in 
the gen. sing.) is used. The treatment of the acc. sing. has a noteworthy 
variation. For disyllabic stems ending in t T, to, te, (1) if the second syllable of 
the stem is accented, the longer stem (with dental consonant) is used, and the 
acc. sing. ending is -a (as funris -> ao-7Tioa); (2) if the first syllable of the 
stem is accented. the shorter form of the stem (without dental consonant) is 
used, and the ending is -v (as XaptS -> xapw). Dental plosive stems in which 
a vowel other than iota precedes the consonant (as 'EAAas) have a similar 
pattern (the dental is not seen in nom. voc. sing. or dat. pl.), but the voc. sing. 
has -s and the acc. singular is always -a. 
Ex. 
"favor" (/) 
"shield" (/) 
"bird" (m . .!) "Greece" (/)1 
stems: 
XapLT-. XaPL-
ao-7TLo-. atT7TL-
opvL8-. 0PVL-
'EMao-. 'EMa-
sing. 
nom. 
XaPL, 
atT7ri, 
°PVL, 
'EMa, 
gen. 
XaPLTO, 
atT7rioo, 
0pvL8o, 
'EMaoo, 
dat. 
xapm 
atT7riOL 
0pvL8L 
'E'\'\aoL 
acc. 
xapw 
atT7rioa 
opvw 
'E'\'\aoa 
voc. 
XaPL 
atT7ri 
OPVL 
'E'\'\a, 
(dual n. a. v. 
XaPLTE 
atT7riOE 
0pvL8E 
'EMaoE) 
(g. d. 
XapiTOW 
atT7rioow 
opvi8ow 
'E'\'\aoow) 
plur. 
n. v. 
xapm, 
atT7riOE, 
0pvL8E> 
'EMaoE, 
, 
atT7rLOWV 
0pvL8wv 
'E'\'\aowv 
gen. 
xapLTwv 
dat. 
XaPLtTL(V) 
atT7rLtTL(V) 
°PVLtTL(V) 
'EMatTL(v) 
acc. 
XaPLTa, 
atT7rioa, 
0pvL8a, 
'EMaoa, 
b. Masculine Nouns with Stem in -VT-. The full form of the stem is 
visible, as usual, in the gen. sing. (and many other cases). In the nom. sing. 
nouns of this type have either the normal stem with -s, which causes the VT to 
be dropped and the preceding vowel to be lengthened in compensation (e.g., 0 
becomes ov in ooovs, a becomes a in yiyas), or a strong-vowel form of the 
stem (e.g., w for 0 in YEPWV) with no ending, the tau being dropped for 
I. This noun in fact nonnally has only singular fonns, but the dual and plural are shown here 
for the pattern as seen in other nouns in -a,. -aoo,; a few of the plural fonns are found in 
postc\assical Greek, usually in an adjectival sense. 

102 
UNIT FOURTEEN 
phonetic reasons. The voc. sing. is either like the nom. or has the weak-vowel 
(normal) form of the stem with no ending (and the final tau is simply 
dropped). In the dat. pi. the ending -en causes elimination of VT and com-
pensatory lengthening of the preceding vowel. 
"old man" (m.) 
"giant" (m.) 
"tooth" (m.) 
stem: 
YEPOVT-
yLyiivT-
600VT-
, 
600vs 
nom. 
yEpwv 
yLyas 
sing. 
gen. 
YEPOVTO, 
yiyavTos 
600VTO, 
dat. 
, 
, 
600VTL 
yEpOVTL 
yLyaVTL 
, 
, 
600VTU 
acc. 
yEpOVTU 
yLyavTU 
, 
, -
6oov, 
voc. 
yEpOV 
yLyav 
, 
, 
600VTE) 
n. a. v. 
yEpOVTE 
yLyavTE 
(dual 
(g. d. 
yEpOVTOW 
YLyavTow 
600VTOW) 
, 
600VTE, 
n. v. 
yEpOVTE' 
yLyavTE' 
plur. 
yEpOVTwV 
, 
OOOVTWV 
gen. 
yLyavTwv 
dat. 
YfPOV(]"L(v) 
yiyQ.(]"L(v) 
6oov(TL(v) 
, 
, 
ooovTa, 
acc. 
YEpovTa, 
YLyavTu, 
c. Neuter Nouns with Stem in T. The full form of the stem is visible again 
in the gen. sing. (and many other cases). Neuters have no ending in the nom. 
acc. and voc. sing., and either the final tau is dropped (7fpaYiJ-a) or an alter-
native stem is used in these cases (TEpa" vowp, cpw,). The nom. acc. voc. pI. 
form has short alpha, like all neuter forms. In the dative plural the tau does not 
appear. 
"thing" (n.) 
"portent" (n.) 
stem: 
7rPUYIlUT-
TEpaT-
nom. 
7rpaYllu 
TEpa, 
gen. 
7rpaYllaTo, 
TfpaTo, 
dat. 
, 
7rpaYllan 
TEpan 
7rpaYlla 
, 
acc. 
TEpa, 
7rpaYlla 
, 
voc. 
TEpa, 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
7rpaYllaTE 
TEpaTE) 
(g. d. 
, 
TEpaTow) 
7rpaYllaTow 
7rpaYllaTU 
, 
n. v. 
TEpaTa 
plur. 
, 
, 
gen. 
7rpaYllaTwv 
TEpaTwv 
dat. 
7rpaYIlUl]"L(v) 
TEpaC]"L(v) 
, 
acc. 
7rpaYllaTa 
TEpaTa 

Consonant-Declension Nouns I 
103 
4. The Suffix -jJ.aT -. A large number of neuter nouns of the consonant de-
clension are formed from verb stems by adding the suffix -}J.aT- (nom. sing. 
-jJ.a). The usual meaning of such a noun is "thing created by the action X." 
Ex. 
j30VAEVW 
to plan 
pOVAEVp..U 
7rpuYJ-la 
plan, proposal 
I 
to do 
7rPUTTW 
(root 7rpuy-) 
I 
7rOLEW 
to make 
action, event, 
circumstance, thing 
creation; poem 
writing, letter 
ypacpw 
to write 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the various consonant-declension patterns presented above. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
consonant-declension nouns 
labial or velar plosive stems 
8wpat, eWpaKO'>, m. 
KAW't, KAW7T(5~, m. 
cpaAuyt, cpaAayyo~, f. 
cpvAat, cpvAaKo~, m. 
breastplate; breast, trunk (of the body) 
[thoracic] 
thief 
[kleptomania] 
line of battle; line of hoplites 
[phalanx, Falangistj 
guard, sentinel 
[prophylactic] 
masc. and fern. dental plosive stems 
a.(J7ri~, a.(J7rioo~, f. 
'EAAci~, 'EAAaoo~, f. 
f.A7ri~, f.A7rioo~, f. 
fPL~, fPLOO" f. 
OpVL', opvdJo" m. or f. 
7ruTpi" 7raTpioo" f. 
xapL', XaPLTO" f. 
dental plosive stems in VT 
yfpwV, YfPOVTO" m. 
yiya" yiyavTo" m. 
AfWV, AfOVTO" m. 
OOOV" OOOVTO" m. 
neuter dental plosive stems 
j3ovAw/J-a, povAEv/J-aTo" n. 
shield 
[aspidistra] 
Hellas, Greece 
[Helladic] 
hope, expectation 
strife, quarrel, rivalry 
[eristic] 
bird; omen 
[ornithology] 
fatherland 
[patriotic] 
grace, beauty; favor, kindness; gratitude 
[charisma, 
Eucharist] 
old man 
[geriatrics] 
earth-born monster, giant 
[gigantic, gigabyte] 
lion 
tooth 
[orthodontist] 
plan; proposal, resolution 

104 
, 
, 
ypa}J.}J.a, ypa}J.}J.aTO'>, n. 
, 
, 
7rOL1J}J.a, 7rOl1J}J.aTo,>, n. 
7rpG.YJ.i.a, 7rpaY}J.aTo<;, n. 
, 
, 
TEpa<;, TEpaTo<;, n. 
vowp, voaTo<;, n. 
cpw<;, cpwnk n.' 
EXERCISES 
UNIT FOURTEEN 
line, picture; letter (of alphabet); piece of writing 
[grammatical, grammatology] 
work, product; poem 
deed, action; event, circumstance, thing; (pl.) toil, 
trouble 
[pragmatic 1 
portent, sign, marvel; monster 
[teratogenesis] 
water 
[hydrofoil] 
light 
[photon, photograph] 
I. Write in Greek the requested fonn of each noun. 
1. voc. sing. of favor 
16. gen. sing. of shield 
2. dat. pI. of old man 
17. acc. pI. of fatherland 
3. acc. sing. of water 
18. voc. pI. of portent, monster 
4. gen. pI. of poem 
19. nom. sing. of piece of writing 
5. nom. pI. of lion 
20. gen. pI. of plan 
6. dat. sing. of tooth 
21. dat. sing. of breastplate 
7. voc. pI. of hope 
22. acc. sing. of bird 
8. gen. sing. of phalanx 
23. voc. sing. of giant 
9. dat. sing. of omen 
24. dat. pI. of piece of writing 
10. acc. pI. of strife 
25. acc. sing. of light 
11. gen. pI. of giant 
26. gen. pI. of water 
12. nom. pI. of thief 
27. nom. pI. of bird 
13. nom. sing. of event, action 
28. dat. sing. of gratitude 
14. dat. sing. of Greece 
29. voc. pI. of guard 
15. dat. pI. of sentinel 
30. gen. sing. of portent, monster 
II. Give a complete identification of each of the following fonns. 
1. 8wpaKwv 
9. cpvi\aKl 
17. 'Ei\i\aoa 
2. i\Eovaw 
10. EPLOO<; 
18. cpai\aytL 
3. cpwTi 
11. 
, 
19. VoaTwV 
7raTpL,) 
4. oOovTaS' 
12. 
' 
, 
20. 
, 
a(T7TUH 
YLyavTa') 
5. Povi\EvjJ.aTa 
13. Ki\w7TE,) 
21. 
, 
yEpovTwV 
6. cpai\ayyo') 
14. 
, 
22. OOOVITLV 
7TOL rtjJ.acn 
7. Ei\7TioES' 
15. 7TpnyjJ.a 
23. CPWTO,) 
8. " 
16. XapLV 
24. voan 
OpVLV 
1. The non-Attic fonn is cpo.o,; in Attic the stem is contracted and treated like a monosyllabic 
stem except in the gen. pI., which is accented cpdJTwv. 

Consonant-Declension Nouns I 
105 
III. 
Sentences for reading. (From this point on it is recommended that the 
student cease to write out translations of Greek sentences. In order to learn to 
read Greek rather than decipher it, one must practice translating mentally or 
orally from the text.) 
1. (no. Ta<; KaAa<; opvt$a<; 0-0 cpof3oUfJ.E$a TOV 7fPO<; EKELVOV<; 7faAEfJ.ov. 
2. KaKov AEL7fEW TryV o.(J"7fLOa, 0.11.11.' o.ya$ov (J"0(EW [save] Tryv tvx'ljv. 
3. fJ.ETG. TafJTa vowp CPEPOV(J"W OL yEpOVTH TOtl) VEaVLatl) 0;" lJ7fEP rr,1) 
7faTpLOo<; fJ.o.XOVTat. 
4. OL cpuAaKEI) OVI) OL 7fOAEfJ.Wt aLpov(J"w o.7fo$viwKOV(J"w. 
S. OEt TOV 'HpaKA1] [HeracIes, acc. case] KpaTEtV Tav T' EV NEfJ.Eq. AEOVTa 
TOU<; TE yiyavTaI) TO. TE Ka$' 'EAAo.oa TEpaTa. 

UNIT FIFfEEN 
Consonant-Declension Nouns II; 
Interrogative Pronoun 
------ ---------
1. Consonant Stems Ending in Liquid (A., p) or Nasal (v). Almost all 
nouns in this group are masculine or feminine. The nom. and voc. sing. may 
have no case ending (and the nom. then has a strong-vowel form of the stem, 
e.g., w for 0 in FJ77TWP and oaiJ-twv) or -" (e.g., 0.A.,,). Acc. sing. has -a. Stems 
with final v do not exhibit it in the dat. pI., but there is no compensatory 
lengthening in (e.g.) oaiJ-tocn. I 
Ex. 
"orator" (m.) 
"divinity" (m.) 
"contest" (m.p 
"salt" (m.) 
stem: 
PT/TOp-
OaLjWV-
aywv-
0.11.-
--_. 
._-------- ------- ----
---- ----
sing. 
oaLjJ.wv 
' 
, 
UA.<; 
nom. 
PT/TWP 
aywv 
gen. 
PT/TOP°<; 
oaLjJ.ovo<; 
aywvo<; 
0.11.0<; 
dat. 
iJ11TopL 
oaLjJ.ovL 
aywvL 
o.A.L 
, , 
oaLjJ.ova 
' 
~ 
uA.a 
acc. 
prJTopa 
aywva 
iJ'r,TOP 
oal.jJ.ov 
' 
, 
VOL 
aywv 
(dual 
' , 
oaLjJ.OV€ 
' 
~ 
UA.t) 
n. a. v. 
PT/TOP€ 
aywvE 
(g. d. 
oaLjJ.OvoLV 
' 
, 
o.A.oiv) 
PT/TOPOLV 
aywvoLV 
plur. 
' , 
oaLjJ.OVt<; 
, 
~ 
aA.€<; 
n. v. 
PT/TOP€<; 
aywvt, 
!-!en. 
PT/TOPWV 
oaLjJ.Ovwv 
aywvwv 
o.A.(i)v 
dat. 
jnjTOPCTL(V) 
oaLjJ.O(n(v) 
aywO"L(v) 
o.II.O"L(V) 
ace. 
pT/Topa<; 
oaLjJ.ova, 
aywva<; 
uII.a, 
2. Irregular Stems in p. Three important words have variable stems 
ending in p: a strong-vowel form in -T"IJP, a normal grade with short vowel 
-up, and a weak grade realized as -TP- (or -Tpa- in dat. pl.). The strong-vowel 
I. This fonn may derive from a dat. pI. ending -<l(T( borrowed from another type of noun (cf. §2 
below), but with the vowel assimilated to that of the other cases. 
2. Note the accentuation of stems in -wv - with accent on the final syllable of the stem (aywv): 
acute in nom. and voc. sing .. circumflex in most other forms. because an accented long P 
followed by short U musi have a circumflex. 
106 

Consonant-Declension Nouns II; Interrogative Pronoun 
107 
fonn appears in the nom. sing, the weak fonn in gen. and dat. sing. and dat. 
pI., the nonnal grade in the rest of the cases. The common noun av~p is sim-
ilar, but the Attic fonns have 0 inserted before p in all but nom. and voc. 
singular. 
Ex. 
"father" (m.) 
"mother" (/) 
"daughter" (/) 
"man" (m.) 
stems: 
71"aT(dp-
J.i.YJT(E)p-
8vyaT(E)p-
aVEp-. avop-
sing. 
71"aTr,p 
, 
8vyaTYJp 
, , 
nom. 
J.i.YJTYJP 
avYJp 
71"aTpo'> 
, 
8vyaTpo,> 
avopo,> 
gen. 
J.i.YJTpO'> 
dat. 
, 
, 
8vyaTpi 
avopi 
71"aTpL 
J.i.YJTPL 
, 
8vyaTEpa 
o.vopa 
ace. 
71"anpa 
J.i.YJnpa 
J.i.r,np 
8vyanp 
" 
voc. 
71"anp 
aVEp 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
71"anpE 
J.i.YJnpE 
8vyaTEpE 
o.VOpE) 
(g. d. 
71"anpOLV 
J.i.YJTEpOLV 
8vyaTEpoLV 
avopotv) 
plur. 
, 
, 
8vyaTEpE,> 
o.VOPE'> 
n. v. 
71"anpE'> 
J.i.YJnpE'> 
, 
, 
8vyaTEpwv 
o.vopwv 
gen. 
71"anpwv 
W/TEPWV 
dat. 
71"aTpaIJ"L(v) 
J.i.YJTpaIJ"L(v) 
8vyaTpaIJ"L(v) 
aVOpaIJ"L(v) 
ace. 
71"anpa'> 
J.i.YJnpa,> 
8vyaTEpa'> 
o.vopa,> 
Note the variations in accentuation of these nouns. The voc. sing. of 7TaT~p 
has recessive accentuation, as do both the nom. and voc. sing. of J.i.~T'fJP and 
evyaTYfp. Elsewhere the accent of these three words falls on the stem-ending 
-EP- (or -pa- in dat. pI.) or on the case ending (in the gen. and dat. sing., where 
the rule about monosyllabic stems applies nonnally to J1.~TYfP and 7TaT~p, 
while evyaTYfp is treated similarly by analogy). The accentuation of av~p 
follows the rule for monosyllabic stems of the consonant declension (U 14.2), 
except that nom. sing. and dat. pI. (based on disyllabic stem) are accented on 
the second syllable of the stem and the voc. sing. has recessive accentuation. 
3. Stems in Sigma. Many sigma-stems originally ended in -fCT-: this is 
still visible in the voc. sing. of masc. and fern. nouns (e.g., Tp6,!PE'>. ~wKpa­
Tf.'», and is present in a long-vowel fonn -Yf'> in nom. sing. (TpL~PYf'>. ~wKpa­
TYf'». In a large group of neuter nouns the -E(J"- ending appears in the o-grade 
fonn -0'> in nom. acc. voc. sing. (e.g., yEVO,». In the other cases the sigma of 
-fCT- has dropped out between vowels and contraction has taken place. The acc. 
pI. of masc'/fem. nouns in -Yf'>. however. is assimilated to the nominative rather 
than based on the usual ending -as. A few sigma-stem neuters have final -alJ"-
(e.g., YEpa'»: again, whenever the sigma drops out, contraction takes place. In 
the paradigms on the next page, the uncontracted fonns (sometimes found in 
poetry and in other dialects) are shown in parentheses after the Attic prose 
fonns. 

108 
Ex. 
"trireme" (f) 
stem: 
TpL7]pdrr)-
sing. 
nom. 
TPL~P7]') 
gen. 
TPL~POVS 
dat. 
TPL~PEL 
ace. 
TPLYJP7] 
voe. 
Tptr,pE,) 
[dual 
II. a. v. 
TPt~PEL 
[g. d. 
Tpt7]pOW 
plur. 
n. v. 
TPL~PEt,) 
gell. 
TPL~PWV 
dat. 
TPt~pErTt(v) 
ace. 
TPt~PEt') 
stem: 
sing. 
nom. 
gen. 
dat. 
ace. 
V()C. 
[dual 
n. a. v. 
[g. d. 
plur. 
n. v. 
gen. 
dat. 
ace. 
UNIT FIFTEEN 
~.------ -----
(TpL~PfO<;) 
(TpL~pfL) 
(TpL~pW) 
(TpL~pH) 
(TPLTJP~OW) 
(TpL~PH<;) 
(TPLTJP~WV) 
(TpL~pE(J(TL) 
"pri~e, honor" (n.) 
YEpa(rr)-
, 
yEpa,> 
yEPW') 
YEpaL orYEpq 
yEpa<; 
, 
yEpa<; 
yEpa 
yEPr{W 
YEpii 
yEpwV 
YEparrt(v) 
, -
yEpa 
"kind, race" (n.) 
YEVdrr)-
, 
YEVO') 
YEVOV') 
, 
'lEVEL 
YEVO,) 
, 
YEVO,) 
'lEVEL 
YEVO'iV 
'lEV 7] 
yEVwV 
YEVErTL(V) 
'lEV 7] 
(y~pao<;) 
(yfparl 
(yipadl 
(Yfpaow) I 
(YEpaa) 
(Yfpawv) 
( YEpa(J(TL) 
(YEpaa) 
(YEVW<;) 
( y~vfI) 
(YEVHli 
(ywEow)1 
(YEvw) 
(YWfWV) 
(YEvfO'O'd 
(YEvw) 
Note that the accent of the contracted form of the gen. pi. (and gen. dat. dual) 
of TPL17PT]'> is assimilated to that of the other cases and does not derive from the 
uncontracted form. For proper names in -T]'> like '2:wKpaTT]'>, the voc. is accent-
ed recessively, on A ('2:wKpan'». 
4. Interrogative Pronoun. (On pronouns in general, see U 12 Prelim. D.) 
Interrogative pronouns are pronouns used to introduce questions. In English 
the interrogative pronouns are who, which, what. Note that who and which are 
also used as relative pronouns and that which and what can also be used with a 
noun as interrogative adjectives. 
Ex. 
Who is winning the prize for boxing? 
Whom are they selecting as general? 
personal (masc.lfem.) 
personal (objective) 

Consonant-Declension Nouns 1/; Interrogative Pronoun 
109 
What are you doing? 
Which is the just citi::.en? 
Which daughter is the sailor marrying? 
impersonal (neuter) 
pronoun 
interrogative adj. 
The Greek interrogative pronoun/adjective TLr;, TL, equivalent to all three Eng-
lish interrogatives, has a nasal consonant stem (nv-) in most cases and a 
simple i-stem in the masc.!fem. nom. sing. form and the neuter nom. acc. sing. 
form. Like some consonant-declension adjectives (to be learned in U22), the 
interrogative has a common personal gender that serves as masculine and 
feminine. In such a declension, the gen. and dat. forms are identical for all 
three genders, and the neuter is distinguished from the masc'/fem. only in nom. 
and acc. (and voc., if any). 
sinRular 
plural 
masc.lfem. 
neuter 
mase.ltem. 
neuter 
---
--
, 
nom. 
H, 
H 
TW~, 
Twa 
Ren. 
TWO, 
(TOD) 
TLVO, 
(TOD) 
TWWV 
TWWV 
dat. 
(T0) 
, 
(T0) 
TL(n(v) 
TLcn(v) 
TWL 
TWL 
ace. 
Twa 
H 
Twa, 
Twa 
(dual, all Renders: nom. ace. TLV~, ReI!. dat. TLUOW) 
Note that there are alternative forms for the gen. and dat. sing. (shown in par-
entheses). These are o-stem forms and look just like the corresponding forms 
of the article. 
Accentuation: because of the interrogative intonation (and perhaps also to 
distinguish the forms from similar indefinite enclitic forms), the interrogative 
is accented with the acute on its first (or only) syllable, and this acute never 
changes to a grave even though the one-syllable interrogative is normally 
followed by another word without pause. (The alternative forms in gen. and 
dat. sing. have the circumflex, just like the article; in context, the interrogative 
and articular uses are usually easily distinguishable.) 
Ex. 
Tiva pt...a7fTojJ.w; 
, " 
nr; EpxnaL; 
T0 E7fLTpE7fHr; TO. 7faLoia; 
, 
" 
Twa (TTpanryov 7fEjJ..7fEL; 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
Whom are we hurting? 
Who is coming? 
To whom are you entrusting the 
children? 
Which general is he sending? 
1. Learn the various consonant-declension patterns presented above. 
2. Learn the interrogative TLr;, Ti. 

110 
UNIT FIFTEEN 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
consonant-dec1ension nouns: liquid and nasa) stems 
aywv. aywvo>. m. 
ails. ciAo>. m. 
aA>. ciAo>. f. 
aV17P. avopo>, m. 
oaiflwv. oaiflovo>. m. or f. 
"EAA17v. "EAA1]vo>. m. 
evyaT1]p. evyaTp0<;. f. 
fl~T1]p. fl1]TPO>. f. 
7TaT~p. 7TaTpo>. m. 
p~TWp. p~TOpO>, m. 
contest. struggle; assembly. national games 
[agony. agonistic] 
salt, grain of salt 
[halides] 
(poetic) sea 
man. male; warrior; husband; "real man." "man" (in 
contexts emphasizing sexist or macho traits)! 
[android. androgynous] 
god. divinity; tutelary divinity, the power controlling 
an individual's destiny; one's destiny. lot [demon] 
a Greek (man), Hellene 
[Hellenic] 
daughter 
mother 
[metropolis. metronymic] 
father 
[patriarchy 1 
speaker. orator 
[rhetoric] 
consonant-dec1ension nouns: sigma-stems 
6.1]flOO"eEV1]>. 6.1]fl°O"eEVOV>. 
m. 
LWKpaT1]>. LWKpaTov>. m. 
TPL~P1]>. TPL~POV>. f. 
yEVO<;. YEVOV>, n. 
yEpa>. yEpW>. n. 
yi}pa>. y~pw>, n. 
" 
" 
ETO>. ETOV>. n. 
KpaTo>. KpaTov<;,n. 
flEpO>. flEPOV<;, n. 
7TAi}eo>. 7TA~eov>. n. 
Demosthenes (Athenian orator and politician, 4th 
cent. S.C.E.) 
Socrates (Athenian philosopher, teacher of Plato) 
trireme (a military vessel with three banks of oars) 
[trierarch] 
race, stock; offspring; class, sort, kind 
[genocide, 
genealogy] 
gift of honor, privilege 
old age 
[geriatrics] 
year 
[etesian] 
strength, power; victory 
[timocratic] 
share, portion; part; one's tum 
[meroblastic. 
penthemimeral] 
multitude; the masses, the majority; quantity; size 
[plethora] 
wall 
[teichoscopy] 
I. Contrast av8pw7To,. which refers to human beings as a species. Herodotus (7.120) 
commented on the repelling of numerous Persian forces by the few Spartan defenders of 
Thermopylae that it showed 7TOA.A.Ot fJ.EV av8pw7Toi €i(TLv. OA.iYOL o· avop€'>. 

Consonant-Declension Nouns II; Interrogative Pronoun 
I I I 
fulfillment, completion; end, finish; authority; (pI.) 
service, duty; offerings, rites; taxes 
[ teleological] 
interrogative pronoun/adjective 
n<;,n 
(pronoun) who? which? what?; (adj.) which? what? 
EXERCISES 
I. Give a complete identification of each of the following. 
I. " 
II. jJ.EpWV 
21. 
, 
ETH 
TWWV 
2. 2.WKpaTOv~ 
12. 
, 
22. avopa~ 
Y1JPo. 
3. 
, 
13. 
, 
23. 
, 
THX1J 
TpL1JpUH 
7TaTEp 
4. 
, 
14. avopi 
24. 
, 
7TaTpo~ 
TpL1JP1J 
5. "EAA1JVL 
IS. (iAa 
25. 
, 
Y1JPw~ 
6. oaLjJ.ovwv 
16. aywva 
26. 
, 
Twa 
7. 
' , 
17. 6.1J jJ.O(T(3EVE ~ 
27. 
, 
P1JTOP(TW 
KpaTEL 
8. 
, 
18. 
, 
28. oaijJ.ovH 
jJ.1JTEpa~ 
yEpa 
9. (3vyaTEp 
19. 
7TAr,(3ov~ 
29. ayw(Tw 
10. 
, 
20. TEAO~ 
30. 
, 
KpaT1J 
TL(TL 
II. Render into Greek. 
1. what portion? (nom.) 
9. the wise plan (dat.) 
2. the un just orators (dat.) 
10. what hopes? (nom.) 
3. most (acc.) of the triremes 
II. this multitude (gen.) 
4. which Greeks? (gen.) 
12. after the contest 
5. a small privilege (gen.) 
13. which mothers? (dat.) 
6. evil strife (ace.) 
14. toward that wall 
7. large teeth (nom.) 
IS. with the husband 
8. during that year 
III. Sentences for reading. 
1. 
Ti~ E(TTW 6 pr,TWP; 6.1JjJ.O(T(3EV1J~. O~ TO 7TAr,(30~ 7TEi(3H TOS TPLr,PH~ TOL~ 
7TAOV(TiOL~ E7TLTPE7TEW KaL TEA1J Ei(}(j>EPHV. I 
2. Ti XP1] 7TOLELV; OL jJ.Ev yap TWV 'EAAr,VWV EV Tn TWV pappapwv xwpo. 
wixw{3aL <pOfjOVVTaL. OL oE T0 TWV 'A{31Jvaiwv (TTpaT1Jy0 7TEi(3E(T{3aL OUK 
E(3EAOV(TW. 
3. 6 7TaT1]p KaL ry jJ.r,T1JP Tr,V TE (3vyaTEpa <pLAOV(TL KaL inr' 
EKEiv1J~ 
<pLAovvTaL. 
I. Compound of CPfPW and ti>. "into (the public treasury)." 

112 
UNIT FIFfEEN 
4. Tiv' aywva napaa"KEVa(ovcHv oi KPLTai; TivE>; VEaViaL YEpa CPEPOVTaL; 
5. avoO"Lov EO"n jJ.ry EXHV xapw TWV ayaewv EpywV a imEp Try>; Oy/jJ.OKpaTia>; 
EKELVOL npaTTovO"w. 
IV. Render into Greek. 
1. The men have breastplates and shields, but are not brave. 
2. Being just and telling the truth are parts of virtue for the race of men. 
3. This year is the beginning of a long and difficult war. 
4. We await the end of the court case [= suit], for the thief is responsible for 
the fact that the citizens do not fare well. 
5. From those walls the mother of Socrates hears the voice of the speaker in 
the marketplace. 

UNIT SIXTEEN 
o· Verbs: Imperfect Indicative 
1. Secondary Tenses. The tenses of the indicative which refer to present 
or future time are called the primary tenses, while those which refer to past 
time are called secondary tenses. The distinction between the two types is 
apparent in three ways. (1) The personal endings of secondary tenses differ in 
some persons and numbers from those of primary tenses. (2) Secondary tenses 
show augment (explained in §2 below). (3) In many forms of complex sen-
tence, the mood used in the subordinate clause may differ according to wheth-
er the main verb is primary or secondary (sequence of moods, presented in 
U31.5). The primary tenses are the present, future, perfect, and future perfect 
(also for some purposes the gnomic aorist, U20.5c); the secondary tenses are 
the imperfect, aorist, and pluperfect (also for some purposes the historical 
present, U20.5b). 
2. Augment. Augment is a modification of the beginning of a tense stem 
which marks an indicative verb as referring to past time. Augment is found in 
the imperfect indicative (presented below), in the aorist indicative (UI9), and 
in the pluperfect indicative (U41). Augment takes one of two forms: 
a. Syllabic augment is the addition of the syllable E- to the beginning of a 
tense stem that begins with a consonant. 
Ex. 
present stem 
7T(Jl7T-
f3ovt..-
TaTT-
imperfect stem 
E7T(Jl7T-
Ef30Vt..-
ETaTT-
Note that a few stems which begin with a vowel in classical Greek originally 
began with a consonant (e.g., initial sigma or vau [U1.4]) and so have syllabic 
augment, but the vowel E- has contracted with the following vowel after the 
disappearance of the intervening consonant. For instance, from EXW with its 
113 

114 
UNIT SIXTEEN 
present stem EX- based on original *O'"EX- is derived the imperfect stem EiX- (by 
way of*EO'"EX- -> *EEX-).1 
b. Temporal augment is the lengthening of the initial vowel or diphthong 
of a stem that begins with a vowel. If the stem already begins with a long 
vowel or a "long" diphthong or OV, no change is made; but otherwise the 
vowel is changed as follows: ii -> Y/, E -> Y/, [ -> f, 0 -> w, V -> ii, at 
-> n, EL -> n, av -> Y/V, EV -> Y/V, Ot -> <p. 2 
Ex. 
present stem 
, ay-
aLpf.-
imperfect stem 
7JY-
TlPE-
oiKE-
~KE-
WCPf.Af.-
WCPEAE-
(no change) 
Augment is applied directly to the verb stem. Consequently, in com-
pounds consisting of prepositional prefix and verb stem, the augment appears 
between the preposition and the verb stem, often with elision of the final 
vowel of a two-syllable preposition (for elision review U 1.5): 
Ex. 
present stem 
a:rrO/KTELV-
f.'TrL iT pm-
7rapa/ Kf.AEV-
acp/ LKVE-
imperfect stem 
a7r/E/KTELV-
E7r/E/TPE7r-
7rap/ E/ KEAEV-
acp/i:KvE-
3. Imperfect Indicative. The Greek imperfect indicative refers to action 
in the past which is incomplete (hence the name, from the Latin for "unfin-
ished"), in progress, or repeated or customary. It corresponds to the English 
past progressive (I was sending), verb phrases with used to (I used to send), 
and in some contexts the English simple past (I sent). 
The imperfect is formed from the imperfect stem (= present stem with 
augment) plus theme vowel 0/ E plus secondary personal endings. Recall that 
theme vowel 0 is used before }J. or v; otherwise E is used. The secondary 
endings are worth memorizing, as they will reappear in later units. Note that 
the second person singular middle/passive ending -0'"0, when combined with 
theme vowel E, loses the intervocalic sigma, and the remaining 0 contracts 
I. An asterisk (*) placed before a form indicates that the form is a reconstructed historical 
precursor of a known form and is not actually found in surviving Greek documents. 
2. Outside of Ionic/Attic, ii -> a instead of 1] and aL -> q. instead of T/. In postc\assical Greek 
there are two verbs beginning with VL-, and the augmented form is also VL-. 

[2-Verbs: Imperfect Indicative 
115 
with E to fonn av Oust as in the second person singular primary ending in the 
present middle/passive: -n from -d<T)at). 
SECONDARY PERSONAL ENDINGS 
active 
middle/passive 
sing. 
1st 
-v 
-JlTJV 
2nd 
-S' 
-(JO 
3rd 
-TO 
(dual 
2nd 
-TOV 
-(Jeov) 
(3rd 
-TTJV 
-(JeTJv) 
plur. 
1st 
-Jlw 
-JlEea 
2nd 
-TE 
-(JeE 
3rd 
-v 
-VTO 
CONJUGATION OF IMPERFECT ACTIVE 
Ex. 
4Csend" 
"lead" 
theme vowel 
stem: 
f.7TEJl7T- + olE 
~Y- + olE 
+ pers. ending 
1st 
E7TEJl7roV 
';' 
TJYov 
-ov 
sing. 
2nd 
E7TEJl7TES' 
';' 
TJYES' 
-ES' 
3rd 
E7TEJl7Tdv) 
~ydv) 
-dv) 
(dual 
2nd 
f.7TfJl7TETOV 
~YETOV) 
( -ETOV) 
(3rd 
f.7TEJl7TfTTJV 
~YfTTJV) 
(-ETTJV) 
1st 
f.7Tfll7TOJlW 
" TJyoJlw 
-OJlW 
plur. 
2nd 
f.7TfJl7TETE 
~YfTf: 
-ETE 
3rd 
E7TEJl7TOV 
';' 
TJYov 
-ov 
CONJUGATION OF IMPERFECT MIDDLE/PASSIVE 
sing. 
1st 
f.7TEJl7TOJl TJV 
~YOJlTJV 
-oJlTJv 
2nd 
' , 
~yov 
-ov [-d(J)ol 
E7TEJl7TOV 
3rd 
f.7TfJl7TETO 
" 
TJYETO 
-ETO 
(dual 
2nd 
f.7TfJl7TE(JeOV 
~YE(JeOV) 
( -E(JeOV) 
(3rd 
f.7TEJl7Tf(JeTJV 
~Yf(JeTJV) 
( -{(JeTJv) 
plur. 
1st 
f.7TEIl7TOJlEea 
~y6JlEea 
-OJlEea 
2nd 
f.7TfJl7TE(JeE 
~YE(Je{ 
-{(JeE 
3rd 
f.7TfJl7TOVTO 
~YOVTO 
-OVTO 

116 
UNIT SIXTEEN 
Note the similarities and differences between the secondary endings (plus 
theme vowel) and the primary endings (plus theme vowel), which are most 
obvious in the middle/passive. 
Accentuation: the accent is recessive, as for all finite forms. An apparent 
exception arises in compounds of verbs with monosyllabic stems that begin 
with a vowel. It is a rule that when a Greek verb has more than one preverb 
(prefixed element: e.g., augment or prepositional prefix) the accent cannot 
precede the first preverb element (namely, the augment). For instance, from 
Cl7TEXW = to be distant is derived the imperfect a7Tf.Lxov (not G.7TEtXOV, because 
the accent cannot precede the augment contained in Et), and from 7Tapayw = to 
lead astray is derived the imperfect 7Tapr,yov (not 7Tap1JYov, because the 
accent cannot precede the augmented vowel1J). 
The imperfect indicative is part of the present-stem system of the verb 
(which consists of all forms derived from the first principal part). You will 
learn later how the present infinitive and participle sometimes serve to convey 
"imperfect" meanings. 
4. Imperfect of Verbs in -EW. Review the possible contractions of -EW 
verbs and the explanation of their accentuation presented in U 13.2. Here is an 
example of the imperfect indicative of a verb in -EW (OLKEW = inhabit). In the 
following paradigm the uncontracted form is illustrated in parentheses next to 
the contracted form which results from it in Attic: 
[dual 
plur. 
5. 
active 
1st 
'tlKOVV 
2nd 
'tlKEl~ 
3rd 
" 
'tlKEl 
2nd 
0KELTOV 
[3rd 
' 
, 
'tlKEl TT/V 
1st 
0WVj.iEV 
2nd 
0KELTE 
3rd 
" 
'tlKOVV 
Imperfect of f. i!J.i 
1st 
2nd 
3rd 
singular 
(0KWV) 
(0Km) 
(0w) 
(0KfETOV) 
(0KffTT]V) 
(0KfO,uW) 
(0KfETd 
(0KWV) 
(dual) 
( ~ITTOV) 
( ~ITTT/V) 
middle/passive 
0KO'uj.iT/V 
0KO'v 
0KELTO 
0KELa-8ov 
0KEtIT8T/v 
0KO'Uj.iE8a 
0KELIT8E 
0KO'VVTO 
plural 
~j.iEV 
~TE or ~ITTE 
~ITav 
(0W),uT]v) 
(0KfOV) 
(0KEETO) 
(0KfEU8ov)I 
(0KEfU8T]v)I 
(0w),u€8a) 
(0KfEU8d 
(0KfOVTO) 

.!2-Verbs: Imperfect Indicative 
117 
6. Imperfect of XP'r7 and oLojJ.aL. The imperfect it was necessary has the 
fonn xpfJV or ExpfJV. The fonner is a contraction of xp~ (noun) + ryv (imperfect 
of ELjJ.L); the latter is xpf]v with augment added on the analogy of ordinary 
imperfect fonns. The imperfect of oLojJ.a~ has both the regular fonns (00jJ.y/v. 
etc.) and a contracted first sing. 0jJ.y/v (like the present form oIjJ.a~). 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the imperfect active and middle/passive indicative. 
2. Learn the imperfect of the irregular verb ELjJ.i. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
consonant-stem nouns 
r,YEJ.lWV. r,YEJ.l0VM. m. 
8~p. 8YJpor;. m. 
8YJpiov. 8YJpiov. n. 
7TaLr;. 7TatOOr;. m. or f. I 
adjectives 
apXaLOr;. apXaia. apXaLOV 
{3i1.a{3Epor;. {3 il.a{3 EPa.. 
{3i1.apEpov 
DEwOr;. DEtV~. DEWOV 
DEwor; il.EYEW 
, 
, 
, 
Kowor;. KOWYJ. KOWOV 
, 
, 
TO KOWOV 
, 
, 
Ta Kowa 
cpaVEpOr;. cpaVEpa.. cpavEpov 
verbs 
. , 
atTEw 
Q.7Tayw (<17T0) 
a7TEXW (a7TO) 
E7TawEw (E7Td 
E7Tt8vJ.lEw (E7Td 
(YJTEW 
leader. guide 
[hegemony] 
beast of prey. wild animal 
wild animal 
[theriomorphic, megatherium] 
child, boy, girl; slave, servant 
[pedagogy] 
ancient, old; old-fashioned 
[archaeology] 
harmful 
fearful, terrible; wondrous; clever, skillful 
clever at speaking 
common, public 
[Koine, epicene] 
public authority, state, league 
public affairs; public funds 
visible, manifest 
ask for (+ acc. of person and acc. of thing or inf.) 
lead away; arrest, carry off to prison 
hold off; (intrans.) be away from, be distant from 
approve, praise 
long for, desire (+ gen. of object desired) 
seek, seek for; examine, investigate 
I. The vocative singular is 7Tui:; the genitive plural is accented 7TUtOWV. 

118 
KwAvw I v I 
napayw (napa) 
napf.xw (napa) 
TptnW 
tpvAaTTw l 
EXERCISES 
UNIT SIXTEEN 
lead, guide (usually + dat. of person); command. rule 
(usually + gen. of person); consider. think 
hinder. prevent (+ acc. + inf.) 
lead by; lead astray. mislead; bring forward. 
introduce 
furnish, supply. afford 
tum, direct; change; put to flight (in battle) [trophy I 
guard, defend; watch for; (mid.) be on one's guard 
(against) 
I. Translate each form precisely and give a complete identification of any ten. 
1. nTEL(J"eE 
15. r,C)lKELTE 
29. WcpEAEL(J"eE 
2. CI.7r17YE 
16. nr;eavoJJ.YJv 
30. cpEpETaL 
3. . , 
17. 
31. . , 
a7TEXH~ 
yLyVT/ 
E7TETpE7TOV 
4. E7TnVOVV 
18. EOH 
32. 7TowvJJ.aL 
5. E7T~eVJJ.ELV 
19. EOOKOVV 
33. E(~TH 
6. E(YJTOVJJ.EV 
20. . 
~ 
34. KwAVWeaL 
':JKHTO 
7. "hYOVVTO 
21. 7TapEKEAEVOJJ.YJV 
35. ci7T~yOVTO 
8. EKWAVETO 
22. 7TVVeCWOVTaL 
36. EyiYVETO 
9. " 
23. E(J"7TEVOE~ 
37. at TE L(J"eaL 
YJV 
10. 7TapaYE(J"eaL 
24. ECPEVYE 
38. E;3oVAO}-J.Eea 
11. 
,,!ap~LXE 
25. ECPOf30VJJ.YJv 
39. . , 
EVO(J"OVV 
12. ETpE7TOJJ.EV 
26. E7TpaTTETo 
40. E7TVVeavov 
13. "hyovvTaL 
27. " 
41. " 
YJ(J"av 
':Jov 
14. EcpvAaTTov 
28. ETaTToJJ.Eea 
42. EAaJJ.f3avoJJ.EV 
II. Write in Greek. 
1. it was being carried 
12. they were being misled 
2. we were afraid 
13. we are seeking 
3. to be loved 
14. she was perceiving 
4. I was helping 
15. I was inquiring 
5. they used to suffer 
16. we used to seem 
6. you (s.) were fighting 
17. it is being made 
7. to march 
18. she used to say 
8. you (pI.) were 
19. you (pI.) were leaving 
9. he was leading away 
20. you (5.) supposed 
10. they used to arrive 
21. they were remaining 
11. you (pI.) were guiding 
22. I desired 
I. Non-Attic CPVAQ.(J"(J"W. 

.Q-Verbs: Imperfect Indicative 
119 
23. I hindered 
27. it was being written 
24. to be furnished 
28. we used to harm 
25. you (s.) are on your guard 
29. it is being heard 
26. it is distant from 
30. you (s.) were finding 
III. Reading. 
l. EVeaoE Ot !J.Ev KaAOt KaL ayaeOt T~V 7TaTpioa j3Aa7TTELV Kat 7TAOlJTOV 
Aa!J.j3avEw OVK iJeEAOV. aAAa 
!J.~ aOLKELaBaL 1mo TWV 7TOV7JpWV 
Ej30VAOVTO' TOL~ OE 7TOV7JpOL~. oi.' aEt apxfl~ TE Kat 7TAOVTOV E7TEeV!J.OVV, 
n)TE Etflv TflCTOE Tfl~ xwpa~ KpaTELV' TOV~ !J.Ev yap (TTpaT7JYov~ a7To-
KTEivOV(H. TOV~ oE MTOpa~ Ei~ TO tEPOV a7TaYOV(rL Kat EKEL cpvAaTTOV(HV. 
E7TELTa TO 7TAfleo~ 7TEpt TWV 7TpaY!J.aTWV j30vAEvwBaL EKWAvOV. 
2. TaVTa TO. OELVa EK TOV yEpOVTO~ at TOV t::.7J!J.OCTeEVOV~ evyaTEpE~ aKOVOVCTL 
Kat aVTiKa TOV~ vEavia~ nTOVV ~yELCTeaL EK Tfl~ xwpa~ EKEiV7J~. EV f, 17CTav 
eflpE~ TE Kat OpVLeE~ j3Aaj3Ep0i. 
3. E7TELTa 6 f1avCTavia~1 TOL~ 'Ae7JvaioL~ 7TapEKEAEVETO K~pvKa~ 7TE!J.7TELV 
7TEpt Tfl~ Eip~v7J~' Ot oE E7TEieoVTO. 
4. E7TEt [when] oE 17CTav E7Tt TaL~ eVpaL~ TaL~ TLCTCTacpEpvov~. 2 Ot !J.Ev CTTpa-
T7JYOt Ei~ T~V CTK7JV~V EPxovTaL. Ot oE CTTpanWTaL E7Tt TaL~ eVpaL~ E!J.EVOV. 
!J.ETa OE ov !J.aKpov xpovov EKELvoi TE npOVVTO Kat OVTOL EK07TTOVTO. 
E7TELTa OE Ot j3apj3apoL OLa TOV 7TEOiov [plain] iJAavvov Kat. TOV~ "EAA7J-
, 
, 
va~ a7TEKTELVOV. 
I. Pausanias, king of the Lacedaemonians at the end of the Peloponnesian War. 
2. Gen. ofTtlTlTo.</>EPVT/~, Tissaphernes, a Persian governor. 

UNIT SEVENTEEN 
Indefinite TL~; Uses of the Accusative 
~.--- .. --------------- ---
I. The Greek Indefinite. Indefinite pronouns and indefinite adjectives re-
fer to an unspecified, uncertain, or vague person or thing or portion of a group 
of persons or things. In English the indefinite words include pronouns an}', 
some, anyone, someone, anything, something, and adjectives any, some. The 
idiomatic use of a certain or certain (with plural noun), by which the speaker 
refers to someone definite without making the identification precise, is also 
equivalent to use of an indefinite adjective. The Greek indefinite pronoun/ 
adjective n." n is identical in form to the interrogative pronoun/adjective 
(learned in U 15.4), except that the indefinite is an enclitic, whereas the inter-
rogative always has the acute on its first syllable. 
sin!tular 
plural 
mase./jem. 
neuter 
mase.lfem. 
neuter 
, 
(aTTa) 
nom. 
H') 
H 
TWE') 
Twa 
, 
(TOV) 
, 
(TOV) 
HVWV 
HVWV 
!ten. 
TWO,) 
TWO,) 
dat. 
(T'r) 
, 
( Tcr) 
H(J"[(V) 
H(J"[(V) 
TWL 
TWL 
, 
(aTTa) 
ace. 
Twa 
H 
Twa') 
Hva 
(dual. all !tenders: nom. ace. HVE, !ten. dat. HVOI.V) 
Remember that in paradigms disyllabic enclitics are shown with an accent on 
the second syllable, though they will not always have an accent in actual use. 
The use of the circumflex on the second syllable of nvwv may be an ortho-
graphic convention rather than a reflection of classical pronunciation. Note the 
alternative forms given in parentheses for the gen. and dat. sing. (as for the 
interrogative) and also for the neuter nom. and acc. pI. (aTTa is not treated as 
an enclitic and usually follows an adjective with its neuter pI. -a elided).) 
I. aTTa actually derives from adjective ending in -0. plus enclitic *rya redivided (e.g., DELVa 
T ya -> DE LV' aTTa (y = semivocal ic iota). (Note that the accent on P in DE LV' is the result of 
elision: when a final vowel accented with a grave is elided, an acute accent is placed on P.) 
120 

Indefinite Ttl); Uses of the Accusative 
121 
2. Accentuation of the Indefinite. Review U2.12 on the accentuation of 
enclitics and be sure that you understand the accentuation of the indefinite in 
the following examples: 
, , 
aV1Jp n~ 
AOy~ nvi 
av(3pw7Toi TWE~ 
7TELpa n, 
j.l1JTEpWV TLVWV 
a certain man 
by a certain account 
some people 
any attempt 
of some mothers 
An additional peculiarity in the accentuation of enclitics occurs when two or 
more enclitics appear in a series. In such a series, the convention is usually that 
every enclitic except the last in the series receives an acute on its final syllable. 
Ex. 
j3aAAEL Ti~ TLva T~. 
Someone is striking someone with something. 
'" 
(3' 
EL n Twa 
Aa7TTEL~, ... 
If you are doing any harm to anyone, ... 
Recall [U2.12d] that a proclitic that precedes an enclitic receives an acute, as 
EL in the second example here. 
3. Uses of the Accusative Case. The accusative case (Greek ainaTLK7] 
7TTW(n~, "case of effect," misleadingly translated as accusativus by Latin 
grammarians because of the ambiguity of the Greek word aiTia) in general 
serves to define or qualify the action expressed by a verb. 
a. Accusative of the Object of a Verb. The use of the accusative to 
express the direct object of a transitive verb was introduced in brief in U8.9. It 
is now time to learn the finer details of grammar related to objects of a Greek 
verb. 
(l) External object, object of the thing affected, or "direct object": a per-
son or thing existing prior to an action and directly affected by the 
action is normally expressed in the accusative case. 
j3aAAEL Tav Ai(3ov. 
j3aAAEL Tav avopa. 
Tiva (3Aa7TTOj.lEV; 
He throws the stone. 
He strikes the man. 
Whom are we hurting? 
(2) Object of the thing effected, accusative of result, or (loosely) "direct 
object": a thing (often but not always concrete) which is brought into 
existence, produced, or effected by an action and which continues to 
exist as a temporary or enduring result is expressed in the accusative 
case. 
7TOL7}j.lam ypaqm. 
She writes poems. 

122 
a(J7rioa<; 7roLEt. 
cpoj3ov 7fOLOVa"W. 
UNIT SEVENTEEN 
He makes shields. 
They create (cause) fear. 
(3) Internal object, internal accusative, "cognate" object or accusative, 
accusative of the content: 1 an abstract thing (usually a noun of 
action) which is brought into existence by an action and the existence 
of which is coextensive with the action (that is, the object has no 
existence external to the action of the verb) is expressed in the 
accusative case. The internal accusative is sometimes etymologically 
related (cognate) to the verb itself, but is often a noun of related 
meaning or a neuter pronoun or neuter adjective (a noun of related 
meaning being understood). Stylistically, the motivation for using an 
internal object is often the desire to attach adjectives to the internal-
object noun. 
He lived a long and peacejullJk.. 
You ran a very fast race. 
He struck several blows upon the boy's back. 
OL7fAryv 7fAYTY~V E7fAYTTTE. 
OL7fAryv 7fAYTY~V ETV7fTE. 
EVX0/J-aL T~V EVX~V T~VOE. 
cpopov cpEpOVcrW. 
He was striking a double stroke. 
He was striking a double blow. 
I pray the following prayer. 
They pay tribute. 
Ti j3AG.7fTO/J-W; 
What harm are we doing? 
[in English we cannot idiomatically say What (harm) are 
we harming?] 
You do good (doings). 
= You do good things. 
= You benefit . .. [someone]. 
She does bad (doings). 
= She does bad things. 
= She harms . .. [someone]. 
\. As the lists of terms show, there is considerable variety in the terminology used by 
grammarians to describe the different types of accusative object. Note that type (2) shares some 
characteristics of both type (I) and type (3). The object of the thing effected, type (2), may be 
considered an "external object" (in a wider sense) because the object is something which exists 
after the action has ceased and so is "external" to it; cf. type (I). On the other hand, type (2) 
shares with type (3) the characteristic that the object does not exist prior to the action and is 
thus, in origin, "internal" to the action. Moreover, an object of the thing effected can be 
"cognate" with its verb just as type (3) is: 7T"onlJ.1.aTa 7T"OLEL. But type (2) again sides with type 
(I) in the distinction between transitive and intransitive verbs: verbs with objects of these two 
types are transitive, they need the object to complete the sense of the verb. Intransitive verbs, on 
the other hand, may have only an internal object, type (3): this object is either dispensable to the 
sense or present only to make possible the use of a modifier qualifying the action. 

Indefinite TtS'; Uses of the Accusative 
123 
TOlno EiJX0/J-aL. 
I pray this prayer. 
= I make this prayer. 
A transitive verb may have both an internal accusative (double un-
derline below) and a direct object (single underline) at the same time: 
TOVI) 7roAiTal) ayal1a7rOLELI). 
You do good doings (to) the citizens. 
= You benefit the citizens. 
, 
, 
", 
TOVI) 7raTEpal) KaKaE7rOWVV. 
They were doing bad doings (to) their 
fathers. 
= They were harming their fathers. 
(In) what are we harming those women? 
= What harm are we doing to those 
women? 
Verbs that normally govern a complement in the genitive or dative 
may take an internal accusative: 
KaT'flYopw TOV (TTpaT71YOV. 
I accuse the general. (gen. complement) 
TOVTO KaT71YOpw TOV (TTpaT71YOV. 
I make this accusation against the general. 
(I accuse the general this accusation.) 
E7rEiI1HrI1E TOLl) 'AI171vaioLI). You used to obey 
the Athenians. (dat. complement) 
mvm E7rEiI1EfTI1E TOLl) 'AI171vaioLI). 
You used to obey the Athenians in these matters. 
(You used to obey the Athenians these obeyings.) 
The internal accusative construction is much more at home in Greek 
idiom than in English. Note that it is often convenient or necessary to 
translate a Greek verb with internal accusative other than literally. In 
some cases it is best to use the English catch-all verbs make or do 
and express the verbal action in a noun (What harm are we doing? I 
make this accusation.); in others, a prepositional phrase (esp. with in 
or in respect to) may be appropriate (I obey them in this). 
b. Internal Accusative with Adjectives. Verb phrases consisting of cop-
ula (to be) and predicate adjective sometimes take an internal accusative, and 
this usage is also extended sometimes to the adjective alone used outside such 
a copula phrase. 
fToCPOI) EfTTW. 
He is wise. 
fToCPOI) EfTTL TrJV TWV 7rOL71TWV fTocpiav. 
He is wise in the wisdom of the poets. 

124 
UNIT SEVENTEEN 
o TaVT1JV T~V ()ocpiav ()ocpor; EV 7TpaTTH. 
The man who is wise in this wisdom fares well. 
c. Accusative of Extent of Space or Duration of Time 
( 1) The space over which a motion takes place or the extent of space 
(how far?) is expressed in the accusative case. 
aYH T~V ()TpanaV ()TEVar; ooovr;. 
He leads the army along (over) narrow roads. 
ayH T~V ()TpanaV ()TaOW OKTw. 
He leads the army eight stades (= one mile). 
o 7TOTaJJ.or; OEKa ()TaOW a7TELXE. 
The river was ten stades (= 1.25 miles) away. 
(2) Duration of time (how long?) is expressed in the accusative case. 
EVTav8a JJ.EVOV()W E7TTa r,JJ.Epar;. 
They remain there (for) seven days. 
d. Accusative of Respect or Specification. The accusative case is used to 
express the thing in respect to which an adjective or verb phrase denoting a 
state is applicable. 
oi 'AerJVa'io~ OWCPEpOV()L T~V ()ocpiav. The Athenians excel in cleverness. 
7ToOar; wKvr; 
swift in respect to the feet, swift-footed 
7TOTaJJ.or; Kvovor; ovoJJ.a 
a river Kydnos by name 
e. Adverbial Accusative. Some words and phrases originally used as in-
ternal accusatives became frozen as abverbial forms, and this usage is known 
as the adverbial accusative. Here are some typical, idiomatic examples: 
, 
n; 
TOVTOV TOV TP07TOV 
TEAor; 
TO apxa'iov 
why? (neuter sing. acc. of interrogative) 
in this manner, in this way 
finally, at last 
formerly, in the old days 
f. Accusative Subject of Infinitive. This use was presented in U9.4. 
4. Two Accusatives. In various circumstances there may be two accusa-
tive complements with one verb. 
a. Some verbs have both an internal and an external (direct) object, as 
illustrated in §3a(3) above. 
b. Certain verbs (e.g., of asking, concealing, reminding) take two direct 
objects, one a person and one a thing. (English idiom will have only one object 
and a prepositional phrase for the other noun.) 

Indefinite Ttl); Uses of the Accusative 
Tav 7fa'ioa Tav Tr,~ }J.YJTpa~ eavaTov EKPV7fTOV. 
They concealed from the boy his mother's death. 
xp7}}J.QTa aLTEi TO'V~ 7foAiTa~. 
He asks the citizens for money. 
125 
c. Verbs meaning to appoint, to choose, to consider, to make, to render, 
or the like may take both a direct object (single underline below) and a 
predicate accusative (either predicate noun or predicate adjective: double un-
derline).' 
TOlnov Tav !LQ.~{D1l!.- (njJaT!rya~ VpOVVTO. 
They were choosing (electing) this citizen (as, to be) general. 
ciyQeOV~7fO~EiTE TOV~ (npaTLwTa~. 
You are making the soldiers brave. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the indefinite pronoun TL(), H. 
2. Study the uses of the accusative. 
3. Learn the adverbial phrases under §3e above and the vocabulary of this 
unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
o-declension nouns 
(nOG.oxaAo'>. (nOaCTKaAov, m. 
CTTaowv. CTTQOLOV, n. 
alternative plural CTTaow~. 
CTTaoLwv, m. 
CTTpan)7rEOov. CTTpaT07rEOOV, 
n. 
<popo'>. <popov. m. 
teacher; trainer of a chorus, producer of a play 
l Didaskal ia, didactic] 
stade (unit of length. about 600 ft. or 1/8 mile); race 
course, single course (without a tum) 
[stadium] 
camp (of an army) 
payment, tribute 
I. A construction of this kind may be considerd a transformation and embedding of a 
subjectlcopulalpredicate-noun (or adj.) clause with the copula suppressed. In fact, in Greek the 
infinitive f~vaL is sometimes expressed in this construction, just as to be may appear in English 
versions. 
Socrates is !?eneral. 
They choose Socrates to be !?etleral. 
They elect Socrates !?eneral. 
o };wKpaT1» rnpaT1)yo> f(J"TW. 
atpOVVTaL TOV };wKpaT1)V (J"TpaT1)yov f~VaL. 
atpOVVTaL TOV };wKpaT1)v (J"TpaT1)yov. 

126 
a-declension nouns 
EVX~. EVX77~,f. 
7TA.7]y~. 7TA.7]y77~, f. 
rrocpia. rrocpia~, f. 
consonant-declension nouns 
OVOlla. ovollaTo~, n. 
7TOV~. 7To06~, m.' 
XP771la, xp~llaTO~, n. 
verbs 
oWCPEpw (ow) 
adjectives, etc. 
irrxvpo~. irrxvpa. irrxvpov 
, 
, 
, 
rrTEVO~. rrTEV7]. rrTEVOV 
n~. n 
E7TTa 
, 
, 
OKTW 
OEKa 
, 
7TOTE 
7TOTE 
" 
, 
OV7TOTE. 1l7]7TOTE 
7TOV 
7TOV 
7TW~ 
UNIT SEVENTEEN 
prayer, vow 
blow. stroke 
[paraplegic] 
cleverness, skill; intelligence, wisdom, learning 
[philosophy] 
name 
[synonym, onomatopoeia] 
foot 
[octopus, podiatrist] 
thing, matter, affair; (pl.) goods, property, money 
[chrematistic] 
carry across; endure; differ, excel (+ gen. of person 
or thing compared; sometimes + acc. of respect) 
pray, pray for; profess openly, boast 
speak against, accuse (+ gen. of person accused) 
[category] 
hide, cover, conceal 
[ cryptographer] 
strike 
[apoplexy] 
strong, forceful, violent 
narrow; close, confined 
[stenography] 
(enclitic) (pron.) any, some, anyone, someone, 
anything, something; (adj.) any, some, (a) certain 
(indeclinable)3 seven 
[heptagon] 
(indeclinable) eight 
[octopus] 
(indeclinable) ten 
[decade] 
when? (interrogative) 
(enclitic) at any time, ever; (idiomatically 
reinforces a preceding interrogative: e.g., n~ 7TOTE 
= who in the world?) 
never 
where? (interrogative) 
(enclitic) somewhere, anywhere; to some degree, 
perhaps 
how? (interrogative) 
(enclitic) somehow, in any way, at all 
1. The dat. pl. of 7TOVS' is 7TOcr[(V); the voc. sing. is 7TOVS'. 
2. Non-Attic 7TA:rj(TlJ"w. 
3. "Indeclinable" means that the word does not vary with case: the same fonn can accompany 
any case of a noun. 

Indefinite rtf; Uses of the Accusative 
127 
EXERCISES 
I. 
Write in Greek. Remember that an enclitic cannot be placed first in a 
sentence or isolated phrase: thus a certain measure by itself should be j.J.f.TpOV 
TL, in that order (within a sentence one might find n j.J.f.TpOV, provided some 
other element of the sentence precedes). 
1. any leaders (dat.) 
7. in return for a certain blow 
2. a certain daughter (gen.) 
8. next to a certain narrow road 
3. certain Greeks (nom.) 
9. some (acc.) ofthe hoplites 
4. a certain clever soldier (acc.) 
10. in the presence of any teacher 
5. some small power (nom.) 
11. with some goddesses 
6. because of a certain one of the 
12. in a certain one of the tents 
prayers 
II. Reading. 
1. 6 TWV 'EA)u7VWV (JTpaTTJYo~ EV EKEtVTl Tn xWpq. OEKa i]j.J.Epa~ j.J.EVH KaL 
xp~j.J.aTa Aaj.J.(3aVEL 7Tapa TWV (3ap(3apwv oi' f.7TL Tn 8aAaTTTl OLKOV(JW. 
E¢0(30VVTO 0' oi YEPOVTE~ KaL ai j.J.TJTEPE~ imEp TWV 7TatOwV, aAA' 67TAI.Tat 
TWE~ aya80L TOV~ vavTa~ KaKOV n 7TOLEI.V EKEtVOV~ EKWAVOV. 
2. j.J.ETa TaVTa i] (JTpana EAaVVEL f7TTa (JTaOLa KaL a</nKVEl.TaL Ei~ 7TOTaj.J.OV 
XaAov ovoj.J.a KaL EL~ YE¢vpav TLV' apXataV 17v E¢vAaTTE 7TAf]8o~ avopwv 
L~VPWV, 
3. KaTTJYOPH j.J.EV 6 oLoa(JKaAo~. E¢EVYEI 0' 6 KAwt. EOtKa(OV 0' oi 
7T AOV(JLOL. 
4. TO j.J.EV 7TPOTEPOV (3ovAEVj.J.a oiJTW~ yt YVETaL. TO 0' V(JTEPOV ~OE' TO 
7TAf]8o~ T<{1 6.TJj.J.O(J8EVEL E7TEt8ETO. 
5. 
E(~TOVV oi yEpOVTH TO. apXal.a ypaj.J.j.J.aTa. aAA' imo 7TaLotwv TLVWV 
, 
, 
EKpV7TTETO. 
III. Render into Greek. 
1. Who must excel in this wisdom? A teacher. 
2. At that time you (pI.) were making those dreadful accusations against the 
guide. 
3. Somebody was guiding the soldiers away from the enemy's camp along a 
narrow road. 
4. He wanted to conceal his feet somehow, but his (tutelary) divinity always 
used to prevent (it). 
5. They are asking the beast [i.e., Chiron, the only just and wise centaur] for 
water, for he is in a certain way friendly to human beings. 
6. How and where must one seek the truth? 
1. Here cpdryw is used in a legal idiom, "flee a charge," so "be a defendant (in a court case)." 

UNIT EIGHTEEN 
n-Verbs: Future Active and Middle 
Indicative 
I. Future Principal Part. The second principal part of a Greek verb is 
the first person singular future active indicative form (or if the active is lack-
ing, the first person singular future middle indicative form). This form 
provides the tense stem from which are formed the future indicative, optative, 
infinitive, and participle in both active and middle voices. 
2. Formation of Future Stem. The safest way to recognize or to be able 
to form the future of a given verb is to know the principal parts of the verb. 
But it is also useful to know some of the basic patterns involved in formation 
of the future stem, as this helps in learning principal parts and helps in 
interpreting future forms you come across for the first time in reading. 
The future stem is commonly formed by the addition of sigma to a simple 
form of the verb stem (the verb stem is not always obvious from the present: 
further discussion of this in U 19.8). 
Ex. 
present 
stem + (J 
future stem 
" 
ut-
ayw 
ay- + (J 
aKOVW 
aKOV- + (J 
UKOV(J-
PAG.7rTW 
pAa(3- + (J 
pAa'-f!-
7rEi8w 
7rEL8- + (J 
7rEL(J-
, 
7rpat-
7rpaTTW 
7rpay- + (J 
, 
7rOtEW 
7rOtE - + (J 
7rOt YJIJ-
cptAEw 
cptAE - + (J 
cptA YJIJ-
Note that stems ending in labial (;3, 7T, <p) or velar (y, K, X) plosives form a 
double consonant (t, ~) in-the future stem, whereas stems ending in a dental 
(0, 8) plosive lose the dental before the sigma of the future. In verbs in -EW it is 
normal for the E of the stem to be lengthened to I) in the formation of the other 
principal parts, though there are a few verbs which show no lengthening (e.g., 
E7TawEw, E7TawE(Jw). 
128 

.12-Verbs: Future Active and Middle Indicative 
129 
Under the influence of verbs in -EW, a number of verbs which do not have 
E in the present stem nevertheless have YJ (i.e., lengthened E) inserted before the 
sigma of the future (and in some other principal parts as well): 
jJ.av8o..vw 
jJ.a8- + E + CT 
jJ.a81]CT-
poVAOjJ.aL 
;30VA- + E + CT 
f30VA1]CT-
yLyvOjJ.aL 
YEV- + E + CT 
yEVrw-
E8EAW 
E(JEA-+E+CT 
E(JEA1]CT-
3. Conjugation of Future Indicative. The future is conjugated by the ad-
dition of theme vowel 0/ E and primary personal endings to the future stem. 
Primary endings are used because the future refers to future time or to inten-
tion in present time. The combinations of theme vowel plus personal endings 
are thus exactly the same as in the present indicative (only the stem differs). 
The accent is recessive, as usual for finite forms. The English equivalent of the 
future uses the modal verb shall or will, as in I shall lead, you will go, and so 
on. 
FUTURE INDICATIVE OF ayw AND clKOVW 
active 
middle ---
sing. 
1st 
atw 
aKOVCTOjJ.aL 
2nd 
atm 
aKovCTTI 
3Td 
atH 
aKOVCTETaL 
(dual 
2nd 
atETov 
clKOVCTW(JOV) 
(3Td 
atETov 
clKOVCTW(JOV) 
plur. 
1 st 
atojJ.EV 
clKOvCTojJ.E(Ja 
2nd 
attTE 
clKOVCTW(JE 
3Td 
atovCTL(V) 
aKOVCTOVTaL 
4. Future Infinitives. The future active and future middle infinitives have 
the same endings as the corresponding present infinitives (-EW, -WeaL), and 
the accent again falls on the final syllable of the stem . 
future active 
future middle 
. d "t 
.if. "t 
In .: asw 
In .: asEW 
ind.: ypatw 
in/: ypatEw 
ind.: atOfJ-aL 
ind.: aKolxTOfJ-aL 
in/: atweaL 
in/: aKOV(}ECTeaL 
The uses of the future infinitive will be learned later. When the future infin-
itive is used in isolation in an exercise, it is convenient to translate it with the 
paraphrase about to X (AEtEW = about to say). 

130 
UNIT EIGHTEEN 
5. Contract Futures. Some verbs, especially those whose stems end in a 
liquid (A.. p) or nasal (j1.. v), have E inserted between the verb stem and the 
tense suffix sigma. In this case the E was not lengthened and (as often happens 
in the development of Greek forms) the intervocalic sigma dropped out and (in 
Attic) the remaining vowels suffered contraction. The resulting endings are the 
same as those of the present of verbs in -EW. 
present 
stem + E + 0-
future stem 
(o:rro)8vilo-Kw 
8av + E + (0-) 
8avE-
(3aAAw 
j3aA- + E + (0-) 
(3aAE-
, 
J.lEV- + E + (0-) 
J.lEVW 
J.lEVE-
, 
J.lax- + E + (0-) 
J.laX°J.lat 
J.laXE-
7TL7TTW 
7TEo-- + E + (0-) 
7TEo-E -
FUTURE OF j3aAAw AND ().7T08Vilo-KW 
active indo 
middle indo 
stem: 
j3aAE-
C!.7T08aVE -
sing. 
1st 
j3aAw 
cJ.7To8avovJ.lat 
2nd 
j3aMis 
cJ.7To8avii 
3rd 
j3aMi 
cJ.7To8aVElTat 
(dual 
2nd 
j3aAElTov 
cJ.7To8avElo-8ov) 
(3rd 
j3aAElTOv 
cJ.7To8avElo-8ov) 
plur. 
1st 
(3aAOVJ.lEV 
cJ.7To8avoVJ.lE8a 
2nd 
j3aAElTE 
cJ.7To8avElo-8E 
3rd 
j3aAovo-d v) 
cJ.7To8avovVTat 
infinitive 
j3aAElv 
cJ.7To8avElo-8at 
6. Attic Futures. In certain verbs the future involves contraction in Attic 
and some other dialects, but not in Koine. Later grammarians called this class 
of futures the Attic future because they encountered it most often in Attic 
literature. There are two types of Attic future: 
a. A few verbs with stems ending in E or a lose the sigma of the future 
and undergo contraction. The a-type will be learned later (U29). The most 
common word of the E-type is KaA.EW, present stem KaA.E-, future stem KaA.E- + 
(0-) = KaA.E- (for this verb the present and future forms end up looking identical 
in Attic). 

.f2-Verbs: Future Active and Middle Indicative 
131 
b. Verbs of more than two syllables with present-tense suffix -i(w have 
an alternative future-tense suffix (J"E- (instead of (J").l (was eliminated before 
the future suffix, the sigma dropped out, and contraction took place. For 
instance, vO}J-i(w -> fut. *VO}J-L(J"EW -> VO}J-LEW -> VO}J-LW (inflected like 
f3aAw). 
7. Note on Terminology. The future middle is called "middle" rather 
than "middle/passive" because there is a separate future form, based on a dif-
ferent tense stem, that has traditionally been termed "future passive" by gram-
marians (to be learned in U35). In fact the future "middle" is a middle/passive 
form and in many verbs it can be translated as a passive: 
Ex. 
6 OiKaw) TOU) 7TOAiTa) WCPEAEl:V ad AEtETaL. 
The just man will always be said to benefit his fellow citizens. 
8. Future of Ei}J-i and xpr,. Ei}J-i has a future middle, with stem E(J"-; the 
future middle info is E(J"E(J"8aL. 
singular 
(dual) 
plural 
1st 
EO"O}laL 
EO"O}lE8a 
2nd 
" 
(EO"w8ov) 
EO"E0"8E 
EO"?1 
3rd 
" 
(EO"w8ov) 
" 
EO"TaL 
EO"OVTaL 
Note the elimination of theme vowel E in 3rd sing. E(J"TaL. The future of xpr, is 
XP17(J"TaL = it will be necessary, a contraction of xpr, (noun) + E(J"TaL (fut. of 
E i}J-i). 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the various types of future conjugation presented above. 
2. Learn the future principal parts of the verbs learned to date (these are 
compiled in the Appendix at the end of this unit). Note that in this book the 
future principal part is always given in its uncontracted form for the sake 
of clarity; in many books and dictionaries only the contracted form is 
listed. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
1. This alternative suffix produces variant futures in a few other verbs: e.g., cf>f1;yw has future 
middle (future active lacking) cf>Ev~O/Aat (with normal suffix) or cf>EV~ofj/Aat (from cf>EV~{O/Aat, 
from the suffix O"E-), 

132 
UNIT EIGHTEEN 
VOCABULARY 
Studying the principal parts of the verbs learned to date will be a major 
assignment in the next two units as well. You may wish to begin learning the 
third principal part along with the second as you study the list in the appendix 
of this unit, and from this unit on the first three principal parts are given for 
new verbs in the Vocabulary. 
w-verbs 
KaAEW, KaAEw, EKuAE~a 
JlaVeUVw, Jlae~~OJlaL, 
EJlaeOV' 
JlEAAW, JlEAA~~W, 
EJlEAA1wa2 
vOJli(w, VOJlLEW, EVOJlL~a 
negative conjunctions 
OVOE, JlTJOE 
OVTE . .. OVTE, 
, 
, 
flYl TE . . . Jl1JTE 
particle 
9 
W 
EXERCISES 
call, summon; call by name, name 
[ecclesiastic] 
learn; perceive; understand 
[mathematics] 
be destined to, be likely to (+ inf.); be about to (+ fut. 
inf.); delay (+ pres. inf.) 
have as a custom; acknowledge, consider as; believe, 
think (+ info of indirect discourse [U20]) 
[numismatics] 
fall 
[peripety] 
and not, but not; (adverb) not even 
neither ... nor 
o! (exclamatory particle that often accompanies 
vocatives, often best left untranslated in English) 
I. Translate each form precisely. 
1. 
KaAEL(]-ea~ 
7. f3aAELv 
13. a 7TOeavE L~eE 
2. J.laerWo J.lE ea 
8. EvtHTeE 
14. 
KotETa~ 
3. V0J.lWl)(TL 
9. 
OE~(TOJ.la~ 
15. 
EtE(TTa~ 
4. 
7TE~ovvTa~ 
10. 
Owi(TEL~ 
16. 
7TapaKEAd)(TETa~ 
5. 
aO~K~(TEL 
11. AEitw 
17. 
E7T~eVJ.l~(TW 
6. 
12. 
' , 
18. KpvtTl 
a~T""(TETE 
O~""(TETa~ 
I. Note that many verbs with active forms in the present have only middle forms in the future 
(with the same meaning as the active). This is often true of verbs of perception or mental 
activity (aKov(J"ol.t.aL, j1ae~(J"Oj1aL), but is also found in other verbs (cpEvtOj1aL, A~"tOj1aL, etc.). 
2. This verb sometimes shows double augmentation: imperfect 17WAAOV as well as Ej1EAAOV, 
aorist T,j1f.AATWa as well as Ej1f.AATwa. 

.Q-Verbs: Future Active and Middle Indicative 
133 
19. 
, 
23. " 
27. 
A~if!OVTaL 
~1]()ELV 
HTTI 
20. acpEtojJ.EV 
24. cpEVtovp.aL 
28. 
CPOf3~(TELV 
21. 
a7rOKTEVEL~ 
25. 7rEP.if!ELV 
29. AEtETE 
22. acpitTl 
26. 7rEiO"HT8aL 
30. , 
, 
E7raLVEO"H 
II. Render into Greek. 
1. we shall not fare well 
11. you (s.) will prevent 
2. they will make a truce 
12. they will guide 
3. he will not fear 
13. it will be written 
4. about to be on one's guard 
14. we shall be wronged 
5. you (pI.) will be 
15. she will carry 
6. I shall be in training 
16. I shall never fall 
7. we shall throw 
17. you (pI.) will tum 
8. you (pI.) will be in need of 
18. they will obey 
9. it used to seem 
19. it will be possible 
10. about to have as a custom 
20. he will suppose 
III. Reading. 
1. b..apEiov Kat. ITapv(J"(iTLoo~ [gen. of Parysatis, wife of Dareios II, king of 
Persia 423-404 B.C.E.] yiYVOVTaL 7raLOE~ ovo [two]. E7rEt. [when] o· 6 
b..apELo~ EP.EAAE a7r08avEL0"8aL, Ef3ovAETo TOV~ 7raLOa~ 7rapELVaL [be 
present, from 7rapa + Eip.i]. ayyEAov~ Of 7rEP.7rH oi.' KaAOVO"L Kvpov, 6 o· 
acpLKVELTaL 7rapa TOV 7raTEpa. Vo"TEpOV o· 6 Kvpo~ 7rEPt. Tfi apxfi 7rPO~ TOV 
aOEAcpov [brother] aoiKw~ p.aXELTaL Kat. o'ih' EV 7rpatH OVTE ViK1]V OrO"E-
TaL, aAA' EV Tfi p.aXTl7rHTELTaL. TEAO~ o· 6 aOEAcpo~ aptH aVT' EKEivov. 
2. OV7rOTE p.a8~O"Tl' ;;; 7rOV1]PE, ovo' EKELva TO. p.LKpa· KaAOV yap oatH TOL~ 
7rOAiTaL~ p.1] 7rEi8E()8aL TaVTa AEYELV P.~TE xp~jJ.a()L jJ.~TEI 7rA1]yaL~. 
3. 
KEcpaAo~, 6 TOV Av()iov [gen. of Lysias] 7raT~p, 7rEi8ETaL P.fV 1mo ITEPL-
KAEOV~ [gen. of Pericles] Ei~ T1]V TWV 'A8YJvaiwv xwpav EPXE0"8aL, xpovov 
Of p.aKpov EKEL oiKEL Kat. 7rAOVo"LO~ yiyvETaL. 
IV. Render into Greek. 
1. The Greeks will choose the Athenians to be leaders. 
2. This thing which I am about to say is wondrous, but I shall not conceal the 
truth. 
3. Neither the sailor nor the juror will ever do any harm to any of those rich 
citizens. 
4. The fact that not even the children are afraid will aid the army. 
5. For the duration of those years we had ten triremes. 
I. 
}J-~T€ •.• }J-~T€ is here to be translated as either . .. or. Formal English does not tolerate 
double negatives; but Greek idiom often employs multiple negatives within a sentence for 
el1}phasis. 

134 
UNIT EIGHTEEN 
APPENDIX TO UNIT EIGHTEEN 
The following list presents all the verbs learned in Units 8-20 with their 
present, future, and aorist principal parts. The number preceding each verb 
indicates the lesson in which it was first introduced. Use this list while 
studying Units 18-20 to learn the principal parts. A long dash indicates that 
the verb lacks a principal part and has no forms for that tense system. Contract 
futures, like contract presents, are given in uncontracted form. 
19 
8 
13 
13 
II 
16 
II 
16 
16 
8 
II 
8 
13 
10 
9 
II 
II 
announce 
lead 
do wrong 
seiz.e 
perceive 
ask/or 
hear 
lead away 
be distant 
die 
kill 
lead 
arrive 
throw 
harm 
plan 
desire 
II 
become 
19 
recogniz.e 
8 
write 
II 
exercise 
9 
be necessary 
13 
lack 
17 
excel 
II 
judge 
9 
seem best 
13 
seem 
8 
be willing 
19 
saw 
10 
be 
19 
said 
ayyf.AAw 
" ayw 
aOLKf.W 
aipf.W 
aiu8avoJlaL 
aiTf.w 
aKovw 
a7Tayw (a7To): see ayw 
a7Tf.xW (a7To): see EXW 
a7To8viWKW (a7To) 
a7ToKTEivw (a7To) 
apxw 
acpLKVf.OJlaL (a7To) 
j3aAAw 
j3Aa7TTw 
j30VAEvw 
j3ovAOJlaL 
YLyvoJlaL 
yLyvwUKw 
ypacpw 
yVJlva(w 
OEL: see Of.W 
aYYEAf.W 
a~w 
aOLKryuw 
aipryuw 
aiu8ryuoJlaL 
, , 
aLTYJUW 
aKOVUOJlaL 
a7To8avf.OJlaL 
a7TOKTEVf.W 
ap~w 
acpi~OJlaL 
j3aAf.W 
j3Aa",w 
j30VAEVUW 
j3ovAryuOJlaL 
, 
YWYJuoJlaL 
yvwUOJlaL 
ypa"'w 
, 
YVJlvauw 
Of.W 
oE1juw 
owCPf.pW (ow): see CPf.pW 
oLKa(w 
oLKauw 
OOKEL: see OOKf.W 
, , 
" 
HJlL 
EUOJlaL 
~yYHAa 
~yayov 
~oiKYJua 
EiAOV (stem f.A-) 
iW80JlYJv 
nTYJua 
~Kovua 
a7Tf.8avov 
, , 
a7TEKTHva 
;'p~a 
acpLKOJl YJV 
Ej3aAov 
Ej3Aa",a 
Ej30vAEVua 
, 
, 
EYEVOJlYJV 
EYVWV (U24) 
Eypa"'a 
Eoo~a 
~8f.AYJua 
ELOOV: see opaw 

fl- Verbs: Future Active and Middle Indicative 
135 
8 
drive 
EAavvw 
EAaw (U29) 
~Aa(m 
19 
hope 
EA7ri(w 
EA7rtEW 
~A7TL(m 
9 
be possible 
"t 
ct) 
" 
E EOTt E : see EtfJ.t 
16 
praise 
hratvEw (hrtl 
' 
, 
, 
, 
E 7m tv EfT W 
E7rIlvEfm 
16 
desire 
hrt8vfJ.EW (hrt) 
E7l"t8vfJ.-r]aw 
E7rE8vvrwa [ v J 
8 
entrust 
E7l"tTPE7rW (E7rtl: see TpE7rW 
19 
[no present in Attic] 
, , 
" 
" 
say 
EpEW 
Et7rOV or Et7ra 
(stem E17r-) 
II 
go 
EPX°fJ.at 
EAEVa0fJ.at 
~Mov (stem 
EM-) 
JO 
find 
' , 
, , 
'" 
EVptaKw 
EVpYJaw 
YJvpov 
17 
pray 
EVX°fJ.at 
EVt°fJ.at 
YJvtafJ.YJv 
8 
have 
EXW 
Etw and aX-r]aw 
Eaxov 
16 
seek 
(YJTEW 
(YJT-r]aw 
E(-r]TYJaa 
16 
lead. believe 
~yEOfJ.at 
' 
, 
, 
, 
YJYYJa0fJ.at 
YJYYJaafJ.YJv 
18 
call 
KaAEw 
KaAEw 
EKaAEaa 
17 
KaTYJyopEW (KaTa) 
KaTYJyop-r]aw 
, 
accuse 
KaTYJyopYJaa 
9 
order 
KEAEVW 
KEAEvaw 
EKEAEVaa 
9 
beat 
, 
KO"'W 
EKo"'a 
K07rTW 
13 
be strong 
KpaTEw 
, 
EKpaTYJaa 
KpaTYJaw 
17 
hide 
, 
KPV"'W 
EKpv"'a 
KPV7rTW 
16 
prevent 
KWAVW [ v I 
KWAvaw [ v J 
EKwAvaa 
8 
take 
AafJ.j3avw 
A-r]"'0fJ.at 
EAaj30v 
8 
say 
AEYW 
AEtw 
EAEta 
8 
leave 
AEi7rw 
AEi",w 
EAt7l"OV 
8 
release 
AVW [ v J 
Avaw [ v J 
EAvaa 
18 
learn 
fJ.av8avw 
fJ.a8-r]a0fJ.at 
EfJ.a8ov 
II 
fight 
fJ.aX°fJ.at 
fJ.axE0fJ.at 
EfJ.aXEaafJ.YJv 
18 
be about to 
fJ.EAAW 
fJ.E AA -r]a W 
EfJ.EAAYJaa 
8 
remain 
" 
fJ.EVW 
fJ.EVEW 
EfJ.Etva 
18 
believe 
v0fJ.i(w 
, 
EVOfJ.taa 
V0fJ.tEW 
13 
be ill 
, 
, , 
voaEW 
voaYJaw 
EVoaYJaa 
13 
dwell 
01KEW 
' 
, 
" 
OtKYJaw 
~KYJaa 
II 
" 
" 
, , 
suppose 
otOfJ.at or otfJ.at 
Ot YJa0fJ.at 
19 
see 
opaw (U28) 
O"'0fJ.at 
E(OOV (stem 10-) 
16 
lead astray 
7rapayw (7rapa): see ayw 
II 
exhort 
7rapaKEAEV0fJ.at (7rapa): see KEAEVW (use middle forms) 
I 1 
7rapaaKEva(w (7rapa) 
, 
7rapEaKEvaaa 
prepare 
7rapaaKEvaaw 
16 
furnish 
7rapEXW (7rapa): see EXW 
10 
suffer 
, 
E7ra8ov 
7raaxw 
7rEta0fJ.at 

136 
UNIT EIGHTEEN 
8 
persuade 
7TEiew 
7TEirrw 
" E7THrra 
8 
send 
, 
7TEjJ."'W 
E7TEjJ."'a 
7TEjJ.7TW 
18 
fall 
7Ti7TTW 
7TErrEojJ.aL 
E7TErrov 
17 
strike 
-7TAryTTw 
-7TArytw 
-E7TAT/ta 
13 
make 
7TOtf.W 
7ToLryrrw 
E7TOiT/ua 
II 
be a citizen 
7TOALTf.VW 
7TOALTf.VrrW 
E7TOAi Tf.vrra [ ;: I 
10 
do 
7TpaTTw [ a I 
7Tpatw [a I 
E7Tpata 
9 
befitting 
, 
7TpE7TH 
II 
inquire 
7Tvv8avojJ.aL 
7TEvrrojJ.aL 
E7TV8ojJ.T/v 
II 
pour libation 
rr7TEvow 
, 
EU7THrra 
rr7THrrw 
9 
, 
Tatw 
hata 
arrange 
TaTTW 
16 
turn 
TPE7TW 
TPE"'W 
ETpE",a and 
hpa7Tov' 
12 
strike 
, 
, 
TV7TTW 
TV7TTT/rrw 
8 
bear 
CPEPW 
oLrrw 
7]VEYKOV and 
" T/vEYKa 
(stem EVEYK-) 
8 
flee 
CPEVYW 
cpEvtojJ.aL and 
ECPVYOV 
cpEVtEojJ.aL 
20 
say 
cp1/jJ.i 
cpryrrw 
ECPiWa 
13 
love 
CPLAEW 
CPLAryuw 
EcpiAT/rra 
13 
frighten 
CPOPEW 
cpopryrrw 
EcpopT/Ua 
16 
guard 
cpvAaTTw 
cpvt..6.tw 
EcpvAata 
9 
be necessary 
xpry2 
XP7]UTaL 
13 
help 
WCPEAEW 
wcpEAryrrw 
wcpEAT/rra 
1. The second aorist is poetic and intransitive in sense; in prose the second aorist middle is used 
with the intransitive meaning "fled." 
2. Imperf. xp~v or Exp~V. inf. xp~vaL. 

UNIT NINETEEN 
o· Verbs: Aorist Active and Middle 
Indicative 
1. Aorist Principal Part. The third principal part of a Greek verb is the 
first person singular aorist active indicative form (or if the active is lacking, 
the first person singular aorist middle indicative form). This form provides the 
tense stem from which are formed the aorist indicative, subjunctive, optative, 
imperative, infinitive, and participle in both active and middle voices. 
2. Formation of Aorist Stem. The safest way to recognize or to be able 
to form the aorist of a given verb is to know the principal parts of the verb. But 
it is also useful to know some of the basic patterns involved in formation of 
the aorist stem, as this helps in learning principal parts and helps in recogniz-
ing aorist forms you come across for the first time in reading. 
There are two types of aorist stem and two corresponding schemes of 
aorist conjugation. 
a. Strong aorist, traditionally called second aorist. This is the more 
primitive type of inflection and is found in many of the most common and 
basic verbs. (Cf. "irregular" verbs in modem languages, such as English break, 
broke; teach, taught; bring, brought.) The strong aorist stem is usually a sim-
ple form of the verb stem itself with a weak-grade vowel, such as ii, E, C, V. 
Ex. 
present 
aorist stem 
j3o.Mw 
j3ur..-
r..UJ.l.j3o.vw 
r..uj3-
YLYVOJ.l.UL 
yEV-
7Ti7TTW 
7THj-
r..Ei7TW 
r..L7T-
, 
7TU$-
7TU(jXW 
CPElJyw 
cpvy-
say (no pres.) 
, 
EL7T-
see (no pres.) 
LO-
137 

138 
present 
" uyw 
EXW 
cpipw 
EPXOjlUL 
aorist stem 
, ayuy-
ax-
EVEYK-
Et..e-
UNIT NINETEEN 
The root form of a verb is not always obvious from the present principal part 
(see further details on stem formation in §8 below). A few verbs (to see, to 
say) have no present stem from the same root in Attic Greek. For a few verbs a 
full conjugation is created by using etymologically distinct roots in different 
principal parts: for instance, three separate roots in CPEPW, OL<TW, ijVEYKOV; two 
separate roots in EPX0jJ.aL, hE"l)<TojJ.aL, l,Mov. A few primitive verbs show 
reduplication (repetition of an identical or nearly identical syllable) in the 
formation of the strong aorist: for instance, ayay- from root ay- of ayw; 
EVEYK- from root *EYK-/*EVEK-. 
b. Weak aorist, traditionally called first aorist. This is the (historically) 
more recent type of inflection and is found in "younger" and derivative verbs. 
(Cf. "regular" verbs in modem languages, such as English narrate, narrated; 
walk, walked; type, typed.) The weak aorist stem commonly consists of a 
simple form of the verb stem with sigma added, whence it is also sometimes 
called sigmatic aorist. In some forms, however, the sigma has disappeared or 
its presence has caused some modification in the verb stem. In particular, 
(1) stems ending in labial (f3. 7T. cp) or velar (y. K. X) plosives form a 
double consonant (t, ~) in the aorist stem; 
(2) stems ending in a dental (0. 8) plosive or in t lose the consonant be-
fore the sigma of the aorist; 
(3) stems ending in a liquid (A. p) or nasal (jJ., v) lose the sigma, but the 
vowel of the preceding syllable is lengthened in compensation; 
(4) in verbs in -EW it is normal for the E of the stem to be lengthened to YJ 
in the formation of the aorist (as of other principal parts), though 
there are a few verbs which show no lengthening (e.g., E7TawEw. 
aorist E7T?1vE<Ta). 
Ex. 
present 
stem + (J" 
aorist stem 
, 
UKOVW 
UKOV- + (J" 
UKOV(J"-
f.,:uw 
'A.v- + (J" 
'A.v(J"-
{3'A.G..7rTW 
{3'A.u{3- + (J" 
{3'A.u",-
7rPUTTW 
7rpuy- + (J" 
7rput-
7rEi$w 
7rEL$- + (J" 
7rEL(J"-
vOlli(w 
VOjlL(- + (J" 
vOIlL(J"-

.Q-Verbs: Aorist Active and Middle Indicative 
present 
, 
j.l.WW 
aYYEAAw 
7TOLEW 
stem + 0" 
j.l.W + 0" 
aYYEA- + 0" 
7TOLE- + 0" 
aorist stem 
j.l.EW-
ayyELA-
7TOLTJO"-
139 
Note that in some cases the aorist stem turns out to be identical to the future 
stem (the actual conjugated fonns will nevertheless almost always be distinct). 
When you know a verb's principal parts, you know the aorist stem: to ob-
tain it, simply remove the augment and remove the ending. 
3. Conjugation of Aorist Indicative. The aorist indicative is more or less 
equivalent to the English simple past tense and so is a secondary tense in 
Greek. Accordingly the aorist indicative has augment, like the imperfect, and 
the personal endings are secondary endings. The accent is recessive, as usual 
for finite fonns. 
a. The strong aorist indicative is fonned by adding syllabic or temporal 
augment to the front of the aorist stem and adding theme vowel 0/ E and sec-
ondary personal endings at the end of the stem. The combinations of theme 
vowel plus personal endings are thus exactly the same as those found in the 
imperfect indicative, but the tense stem differs. 
STRONG AORIST INDICATIVE 
active of AEi7TW 
middle ofyiyvoj.l.aL 
aorist stem: 
Am-
yw-
sing. 
1st 
EAmov 
' 
, 
EYwoj.l.TJv 
2nd 
EAmE> 
EyEvovl 
3rd 
EAmdv) 
, , 
EywHO 
(dual 
2nd 
EAi7THOV 
EyEVE0"8ov) 
(3rd 
EAmhTJv 
EYWE0"8TJv) 
plural 
1st 
EAi7TOj.l.EV 
EywOj.l.E8a 
2nd 
EAi7TETE 
EyEVE0"8E 
3rd 
EAmov 
' , 
EYWOVTO 
b. The weak aorist indicative is fonned by adding syllabic or temporal 
augment to the front of the aorist stem and by adding tense vowel ii and sec-
ondary personal endings at the end of the stem. The tense vowel appears in all 
fonns except the third person singular active, where E appears (with no per-
I. From *fyEVda-)o. 

140 
UNIT NINETEEN 
sonal ending, but nu movable may be added). The personal endings are the 
same as those learned in U 16.3, except for the first person singular active 
(where nothing is added to a). In the second person singular middle, the sigma 
is dropped from -acro, and -0.0 contracts in Attic to -w. 
WEAK AORIST INDICATIVE 
AV(JJ, aorist stem: AlXT-
active 
endings 
middle 
endings 
sing. 
Jst 
EAv(ja 
-ii 
EAV(j(J.j.J."I)V 
-aj.J."I)V 
2nd 
EAv(ja, 
-ii, 
EAV(j(JJ 
-(JJ I*-iik)o] 
3rd 
EAV(jdv) 
-((v) 
EAv(jaTo 
-iiTO 
[dual 
2nd 
EAv(jaTov 
(-iiTOV) 
EAv(ja(j8o!J 
(-ii(j8ov) ] 
[3rd 
EAv(jaT"I)V 
(-iiT"I)V) 
EAV(j(J.(j8"1)v 
(-ii(j8"1)v) ] 
plur. 
Jst 
EAV(jaj.J.f.V 
-ii)J.f.V 
EAV(ja)J.E8a 
-iij.J.E8a 
2nd 
EAv(jaTE 
-aTE 
EAv(ja(j8E 
-ii(j8E 
3rd 
EAv(jav 
-av 
EAv(javTo 
-aVTO 
4. Aorist Infinitives 
a. The strong aorist infinitives are fonned by adding to the aorist stem 
(N.B. no augment) the active ending -EW (= theme vowel E + EV) or the middle 
ending -E(JBa~ (= theme vowel E + creu~) and accenting the theme vowel (pro-
ducing a circumflex in the contracted active fonn). Accentuation of the theme 
vowel is a distinguishing trait of strong aorist infinitives and participles.' 
Ex. 
(active) 
AmEi:v, ioEi:v, ayuYELv, crXELV 
(middle) 
yEVE(JBu~, ayuyEcreu~ 
b. The weak aorist infinitives are fonned by adding to the aorist stem 
(N.B. no augment) the active ending -UL or the middle ending -ucreuL (= tense 
vowel a + creaL) and accenting the final syllable of the stem (the accent of the 
active info will be a circumflex if it falls on a long vowel, since final -UL counts 
as short). 
Ex. 
(active) 
AVcrUL, POVAEVIJUL, vO}J.icru~. pAcnvuL 
(middle) AvcrUIJeUL, (3ovAEVIJucreuL 
The uses of the aorist infinitive will be learned later. When the aorist infinitive 
is used in isolation in an exercise, it should be translated in the same way as 
the present, to X (AEtUL = to say). 
I. And as will be seen later (U41) also in a very few imperative fonns. 

.Q-Verbs: Aorist Active and Middle Indicative 
141 
----------- -------------- ------------
5. Translation of Aorist Indicative. The aorist indicative corresponds in 
general to the English simple past: EAv(J"a = I released, EAV(J"UIll]V = I ran-
somed. A more detailed discussion of aorist aspect and possible translations 
will be presented in U20. 
6. Note on Terminology. The aorist middle is called "middle" rather than 
"middle/passive" because there is a separate aorist passive form, based on a 
different tense stem (to be learned in U35). In fact, strong aorist middle forms 
are sometimes found with passive meaning in early poetry and early prose, but 
in classical Attic usage this passive use of the aorist middle form is confined to 
EaXOIll]V, from EXW (and compounds). The weak aorist middle is sometimes 
used intransitively or reflexively, but it cannot be used with a passive meaning. 
7. Two Aorists of CPEPW and ELnov. From the earliest period of classical 
Greek there already existed weak aorist alternative forms for 1jVEYKOV (aorist 
of cpEpW) and ELnov, namely 1jvEYKa and ELna. For instance, ELna'>, and not 
ELnE'>, was the normal second singular form in Attic. In postc\assical Greek 
prose the a-endings also appear sometimes in other strong aorist verbs (e.g., 
Enwav for EnE(J"ov in Polybius). 
8. The Formation of Tense Stems. This section contains optional infor-
mation for the curious student. It may make the variety of Greek principal 
parts somewhat more understandable and learnable. 
a. Present stems are derived from verb roots in a variety of ways: 
(l) simple root without suffix: e.g., AVW. IlEVW. nEi8w. nOLEw; 
(2) labial plosive stems with present suffix T: e.g., (3AanTW from f3Aa(3-, 
KCJ7rTW from Kon-. KpvnTw from KpVcp-; 
(3) with present suffix semi vocalic iota (y), which has always disap-
peared while producing euphonic changes (changes made for the 
sake of ease of pronunciation): 
(a) added to dental stems, such as KOlli(w from KOIlLO-. EAni(w from 
EA7rLO- [but note that -L(W and -a(w were productive suffixes in 
their own right, as in vOlli(w from VOIlO'> or napa(J"KEvu(W from 
(J"KEV1j] ; 
(b) added to stems in y, such as apnu(w from apnay-; 
(c) added to velar plosive stems, producing Attic -TT- and non-Attic 
-(J"(J"-, e.g., CPVAUTTW (cpvAaK-). npuTTw (npay-), TUTTW (TaY-); 
(d) added to stems in liquid or nasal, producing either a doubling of 
A or a compensatory lengthening and alteration of the vowel 
preceding v: e.g., ayyEAAw (aYYEA-). PUAAW (paA-). cpaivw 
(cpav-). KTdvw (KTEV-); 

142 
UNIT NINETEEN 
(4) with present suffix ending in v, often involving the insertion of jJ. or v 
within the present-tense verb stem (nasal infix): e.g., AajJ.[3cww from 
Aa(3- (suffix av, infix jJ.), EAavvw from EAa-, 7rVv8cwojJ.aL from 7rv8-
(suffix av, infix v), jJ.av8uvw from jJ.a8- (suffix av, infix v); 
(5) with present suffix -U"KW or -LU"KW (usually with inceptive meaning, 
i.e., "beginning to X, becoming X," or the like): e.g., 8vfwKW from 
root 8v1]- (a variant of root 8av-), YLYVWu"KW from root yvw-, 7ruU"xw 
from root 7ra8- (*7ra8U"Kw - > 7ruU"xw by elimination of 8 and trans-
ference of its aspiration to K [assimilation]). 
b. Reduplication (repetition of the initial sound) occurs in some tense 
stems. In the perfect stem reduplication with the vowel E is regular, as will be 
seen in U37 (e.g., AEAoma, yEyova). Some present stems feature iota-redupli-
cation: for instance, yiyvojJ.aL from root y(dv-, YLYVWu"KW from root yvw-, 
7ri7rTW from root 7r(dT- (alternative form 7rEU"-), and several jJ.L-verbs (to be 
learned in U23). As mentioned above (§2a), a few aorist stems are formed by 
reduplication criyayov, 1/VEYKOV). 
c. Variation in vowel grade is common in the different tense stems from 
the same root. The consonants of the root stay the same, but the central vowel 
shifts in quality or quantity (cf. in English sink, sank, sunk; eat, ate). For 
example, AEi7rw (strong E-grade), EAL7rOV (weak grade), perfect AEAoL7ra 
(strong o-grade); AajJ.(3uvw, ArytojJ.aL (strong grade), EAapov; yiyvojJ.aL (zero 
grade yv), EyWOjJ.1]V (E grade), perfect YEyova (0 grade). In some verbs the 
shift in quantity of the vowel is accompanied by a shift in position of the 
consonants (metathesis): weak grade 8av- in future and aorist, strong grade 
8v1]- in present and perfect; weak grade KaA- in present, future, and aorist, 
strong grade KA1]- in perfect. 
d. The verb EXW has interesting variations of stem. The root was *U"EX-
(with zero grade U"X-, still evident in the aorist). Initial sigma before a vowel 
normally disappeared in Greek, replaced by the h-sound. But the expected root 
*EX- does not appear in the present because of a phonetic rule (Grassmann's 
law): normally in Greek when two successive syllables contain an aspiration, 
one of the aspirations is lost (dissimilation). Thus the present is EXW, but in the 
future, where the aspiration of the X is lost in its combination with suffix u", the 
initial aspiration survives in E~W. The alternative future of EXW is formed from 
the root U"X- with E (lengthened) added before the suffix U": U"XryU"w. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the two types of aorist conjugation presented above. 

.Q-Verbs: Aorist Active and Middle Indicative 
143 
2. Learn the aorist principal parts of the verbs learned to date (these are com-
piled in the Appendix of Unit 18). 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
w-verbs 
ayyEAAw. aYYEAEw. 
~YYHAa 
bear a message, announce, report 
, 
, 
yLYVWU"KW. YVWU"OjJ.aL. 
come to know, get to know; perceive; think, judge 
t'yvwv l 
EZOOV (stem io-), fut. o"ljlojJ.aL2 
EZ7TOV (stem Ei7T-), fut. EPEW3 
EA7Ti(w. EA7TLEW. ~A7TLU"a 
adjective/pronouns 
[agnostic] 
(aorist) saw 
[optics] 
(aorist) said 
expect; hope for, hope 
G.AAo<;. G.AAT/. G.AAo4 
another, other 
[allomorph, allegory] 
ETf.pO~t {TEpa, ETEPOV 
one of two, the other of two 
[heterodox] 
EKaTEpo), EKaTEpa, EKaTEpov 
each of two 
EKaU"To<;. EKQ.U"TT/. EKaU"Tov 
each (of more than two) 
EKQ.G"TOTE 
(adv.) on each occasion, each time 
EXERCISES 
I. Translate each form precisely. 
1. ayyEAELv 
11. 
" 
21. EKpvtaTE 
YJvpojJ.w 
2. aYYELAaL 
12. 
' 
, 
22. OL71VEYKOV 
YJYYJU"aTo 
3. " 
13. jJ.WELV 
23. ELAOjJ.W 
YJyayE'~ 
4. EAEU"8aL 
14. 
, 
24. 
, 
jJ.WEW 
yVjJ.vaU"w 
5. iw8ojJ.E8a 
15. 7TapEKEAE1)U"W 
25. 
, 
, 
EyvjJ.vaU"w 
6. 7TapEU"Xov 
16. ' 
, 
26. (YJTfWaL 
EU"7TELU"allTO 
7. 
E(3aAE'~ 
17. ' , 
27. .ryMw 
EjJ.axov 
8. 
Ef3aAAE~ 
18. a7Toax~U"w 
28. jJ.axEU"aU"8aL 
9. YJVqKHE 
19. ~afaU"XELv 
29. E7TV8ov 
10. EOOtE 
20. EyWHO 
30. jJ.a(Mv 
I. A }.tL-verb aorist, to be learned in U24; for now simply learn the principal part. 
2. Present (from another stem) opaw, to be learned in U29; you may wish to learn this now as 
first principal part. 
3. No present from these roots in Attic; for present system AEyw or cj>1)}.tL is used. 
4. Note the pronominal ending -0 instead of -ov in the neuter nom. acc. voc. sing. 

144 
UNIT NINETEEN 
31. (J.7TE8aVE 
33. EL7fE'iV 
35. EcpvAatavTO 
32. 
~A7fi(mTE 
34. " 
36. 
~ptajJ.EV 
TJjJ.EV 
II. Render into Greek. 
I. to provide (aor.) 
19. about to kill 
2. we fell 
20. to choose (aor.) 
3. to bear (aor.) 
21. she died 
4. we fled 
22. you (sing.) throw 
5. you (sing.) saw 
23. I shall hope 
6. they led astray 
24. we saw 
7. they were leading astray 
25. they led away 
8. to acquire [= aor. of to have] 
26. to entrust (aor.) 
9. they announce 
27. it was necessary 
10. about to have as a custom 
28. we learned by inquiry 
II. she said 
29. I shall fall 
12. you (pI.) became 
30. to hope (aor.) 
13. to summon (aor.) 
31. it was possible 
14. we arrived 
32. to praise (aor.) 
15. we deliberated 
33. to ransom (aor.) 
16. she will hear 
34. you (sing.) went 
17. to prevent (aor.) 
35. I shall excel 
18. they participated in a lawsuit 
36. we wrote 
III. Reading. 
I. Ot E7f1. Tfl 8aAaTTTl TO. jJ.Ev aAAa EV E7fpaTTOV, KaKW~ oE E7faCTXOV iJ7fo 
TWWV TWV 7fOAEjJ.iwv oi' T~V xwpav aEI. ECPEPOV Kal. ~yOV. J 
2. 6 KEcpaAo~ Kal. Ot 7faiOH hTJ TpLaKovm [30] EKE'i C(JKTJCTaV Kal. OiKTJV OVTE 
EOLKaCTavTo 7fOTE OVTE ECPVYOV' 2 OVTE yap EKE'iVOL TOV~ aAAOV~ KaKa 
E7foiTJCTaV OVTE Ot aAAOL EKEivov~ ~OiKTJCTav. E7fEI. [when] oE Ol)TOL Ot 
7fOVTJpOI. T~V apx~v ELAOV, TOV jJ.Ev OoAEjJ.apxov OLa TO. 
xp~jJ.aTa 
a7fEKTEWaV, 6 OE AVCTia~ xaAE7fW~ T~V xwpav EAL7fEV. aAAa TEAO~ Ot Tr,~ 
OTJjJ.oKpaTia~ CTVjJ.jJ.axoL 
EKpaTTJCTaV 
Kal. 
EKE'iVO~ TWV avoCTiwv 
KaTTJyop~CTaTo' OEWO~ yap ~v AEyELV. 
3. 
7fPO~ TOV CTTpaTTJYov ~MEV 6 aYYEAo~ Kal. E/,7fEV' "ELOOV TOV~ 7fOAEjJ.iov~ 
7fPO~ m'i~ E7fTa 7fVAaL~ [gates]. Ti~ EV EKaCTTTl 3 Tfl 7fVATl iJ7fEp TWV 7fOAL-
TWV jJ.aXE'imL; TiCTL 
8EO'i~ KEAEVCTW Ta~ jJ.TJTEpa~ EVXEIJ8aL; 7fW~ ViKTJ 
yEV~CTETaL; Ti xp~ 7fOLE'iV;" 6 oE EL7fEV' "Ol! OE'i cpoj3E'iCT8aL' CTOCPW~ yap 
TOV~ CTTpaTLWm~ 7fEPI. TO. TEiXTJ hata. " 
1. Idiom cptiPHV KaL a yHV = plunder. 
2. For the idiom OLKTJV t'cpvyov. cf. UI7 Ex. II.3. 
3. EKaO"To> as adjective may be used either with a noun without the article or in predicate 
position with a noun with the article. as here. 

UNIT TWENTY 
Tense and Aspect; Indirect Discourse 
1. Time versus Aspect. Greek tense stems convey time distinctions in 
most uses of the indicative and in a few uses of the infinitive and participle. 
But the fundamental distinction conveyed by Greek tense stems is one of 
aspect, that is, of the type of action or state of being denoted in terms of 
completion vs. noncompletion, customary action vs. single occurrence, general 
truth vs. a specific occurrence, or some similar distinction. 
Aspectual distinctions of the type of action denoted by a verb are espe-
cially clear in the case of certain verbs which are used exclusively or predom-
inantly with one kind of aspect or which have noticeably different senses in 
different tense systems. Certain actions by their very nature must take place 
over an extended period of time (the occurrence cannot be fixed at one point 
on a time line) or do not include conceptually the intended completion of the 
action. Other actions by their very nature must take place at an instant (at one 
point on a time line), or they include conceptually the intended completion of 
the action. For illustration, consider the contrasts between the following pairs 
of verbs: 
to seek 
to look 
to believe 
to go, to travel 
to urge 
to be 
to cry 
to be dying 
to find 
to perceive, to see 
to realize, to learn 
to arrive, to depart 
to persuade, to convince 
to become 
to burst into tears 
to die 
The type of action exemplified by the left-hand column is that expressed by 
the present stem; some verbs with such meanings have a present stem but no 
aorist stem (EijJ.l., EPX0jJ.aL). The type of action exemplified by the right-hand 
column is that expressed by the aorist stem; some verbs with such meanings 
have an aorist stem but no present stem (Eioov, ryA(1ov), or the aorist may show 
most clearly the verbal root while the present stem is formed secondarily by 
145 

146 
UNIT TWENTY 
the addition of reduplication and/or a suffix that marks the change in aspect 
(EyEVOjJ.YlV vs. yi yvojJ.a~. E/.w8ov vs. jJ.av8avw. a7TE8avov vs. a7To8vyl(]"Kw). 
2. Present-stem Aspect. The present stem has the aspect of action not yet 
completed, or in progress, repeated, customary, or pertaining to general truth: 
AEYW 
I am talking (action in progress) 
7TEi8w 
I am urging (persuasion, the intended effect of the action on the speaker, 
is not yet complete) 
7TOAAaK~1) owpa <PEpW. 
I often bring gifts. (repeated action) 
OL f3apf3apo~ TOLl) 7TaTpam 7TEi8oVTa~. 
The foreigners obey their fathers. (customary action) 
6 (J"o<POI) T~V aA1j8Ewv (YITEL. 
A wise man (always, in general) pursues the truth. (general truth) 
This force of the present stem is evident throughout the present system, not 
just in the present indicative. The imperfect is a past tense with the aspect of 
continuous or incomplete or repeated or customary action: 
TaVTa EAqOV. 
I was saying these things (at a particular moment). 
7TOAAaK~1) owpa E<PEPOV. 
I often used to bring gifts. 
EKa(J"ToTE TOV (J"TpaTYlYov E7TylVOVV. 
On each occasion they praised the general. 
Likewise the present infinitive in most uses has aspect meaning rather than 
time meaning: it refers to continuous or customary action: I 
OL 7ToA'iTa~ aya80L ELva~ f30VAOVTa~. 
The citizens want to be brave (on all occasions, in general). 
xaAE7TOV TO <PEVYEW. 
It is difficult to be in exile. (exile is a lasting state, not isolated at one 
point in time) 
Because the present stem implies action not yet completed, its meaning is 
often conative, that is, it expresses an action begun, attempted, or intended 
(often translated into English with the phrase try to X): 
I. Thus. some of the examples of info usage in the exercises of earlier units were not fully 
idiomatic, for in some cases real Greek would have used an aorist infinitive, which the student 
was then not yet ready to use: e.g., in Ex. 1.4 of U9, idiom actually requires aorist D.7To8avELv. 

Tense and Aspect; Indirect Discourse 
147 
TaVTa TOl:l) (J"TpaTLWTa~I) o[OWIl~. 
I give/offer the soldiers these things. 
(In the proper context, if it is unclear whether the soldiers will accept the 
gift, the verb is better translated with try to give or offer [conative pre-
sent].) 
TOVI) 7ral:oal) f7rEL8E. 
He was trying to persuade the children. 
(If it is unclear whether the children will be convinced, the verb is best 
translated with was trying to persuade or was urging [conative im-
perfect].) 
3. Aorist-stem Aspect. The aorist stem conveys an action which is in-
stantaneous and includes conceptually its completion. In the indicative, since 
the aorist carries no suggestion of duration or of permanent results of the 
action, it is used to refer to simple, unique occurrence in the past (for instance, 
for the statement of historical fact): 
oi 'A87]val:0~ Tav 2,WKpaT7]V ~OiK7](J"av. 
The Athenians wronged Socrates. 
a7rE8avov EV Ti7llaXTI f.7rTa 67rAI:Ta~. 
Seven hoplites died in the battle. 
Outside the indicative the aorist stem normally has aspect meaning only and 
does not refer to past time. The aorist infinitive, for example, in most of its 
uses refers to a self-complete, instantaneous, or unique occurrence: 
oi 7rOA'iTa~ aya80L yEvE(J"8a~ EV TaVT'(l Ti7llaXTI pOVAOVTa~. 
The citizens want to be (become, prove themselves, show themselves) 
brave in this battle. 
foOtE TOl:l) 'A87]vaio~I) E7raWE(J"a~ Tav tl7]1l0(J"8EV7]. 
The Athenians resolved to praise Demosthenes (on some particular 
occasion). 
Verbs which denote a state of being or an action which by its nature is usually 
continuous may require a somewhat different English translation in the aorist, 
which refers to action at a single moment in time. Often the aorist of such 
verbs refers to the single moment in time at which the subject enters into the 
state of being or begins the continuous action (ingressive or inceptive aorist): 
present stem 
t:xW, EtXQV, I have, I had 
j:3ucHAEVW, I am king 
OUKPVW, I am crying 
VQ(Jw, I am ill 
aorist 
t(JXQV, I came to have, I acquired, I got 
Epu(JiAEv(Ja, I became king 
EOcJ.Kpv(Ja, I began to cry. I burst into tears 
EVQ(JYWU, I became ill. I fell ill 

148 
UNIT TWENTY 
4. Perfect-stem Aspect. The distinction between present and aorist aspect 
is by far the most important in Greek idiom, but there is a third significant 
variety of verbal aspect, that of the perfect stem. The Greek perfect stem 
conveys a completed action with results that continue in the present, and the 
Greek perfect is a primary tense, like the present. For instance, fJ.EfJ.a8YIKa = I 
have learned (and now know), PEPOVAEVfJ.at = I have deliberated (and am 
now resolved). Further illustration and discussion of perfect aspect will be 
provided in U37, when the conjugation of the perfect is learned. 
5. Exceptions to Aspect 
a. The future stem conveys no distinction of aspect; that is, it may con-
vey either continuous/repeated action in future time or unique/instantaneous 
action in future time. l (For the rare occasions when the Greeks wanted to 
convey a perfect aspect in future time, there was a separate future perfect, to 
be learned in U41.) Because the future stands outside the aspect system, Greek 
had no use for a future imperative or subjunctive, and the future optative is of 
quite restricted use compared to the present and aorist optative. Similarly, the 
future infinitive is rarely used for complementary or articular or other substan-
tival purposes, since the present and aorist infinitives sufficiently serve these 
functions: the future infinitive is thus found mainly in indirect discourse and 
occasionally as a complementary infinitive with fJ.f.AAW (where it is "hyper-
characteristic," that is, "overdoes" the marking of futurity, which could have 
been conveyed with a present or aorist complementary infinitive). 
b. In historical narrative the present indicative is sometimes used without 
its usual aspect to convey historical fact, as a stylistic variation on the aorist of 
historical narrative. This use is called the historical present (and the student 
has already seen it in exercises, e.g., U16 Ex. 111.1 or U18 Ex. III.3), and it 
may be translated in English with a similar present or with a past tense. 
c. In poetry and proverbs, the aorist indicative is sometimes used to ex-
press a "timeless" general truth, translated in English as a present tense. This 
use is called the gnomic aorist. Example: (Pindar) [:3ia Kal fJ.EYaAaVXov E(J"cpa-
AW EV xpov'{), in time violence trips up even a supremely confident man. 
I. In some uses of the futures of fXW there appears to be a distinction of aspect between E'tw, 
fonned from the root of the present stem, "will have, will possess" (present aspect), and crx~a-w, 
fonned from the root of the aorist stem, "will acquire, will stop (hold)" (aorist aspect). But this 
distinction is not absolute. Some grammarians fonnerly suggested that there was an aspectual 
distinction between future middle fonns used with passive meaning and future passive fonns 
(based on an aorist stem), but this is not borne out by Greek usage. 

Tense and Aspect; Indirect Discourse 
149 
6. Indirect Discourse. Indirect discourse is the embedding of a thought 
or of an actual statement as a subordinate element in an independent sentence. 
The most common form of indirect discourse in English is the subordinate 
noun-clause introduced by that. The English indirect discourse construction is 
a clause because it contains a subject and a finite verb; it is subordinate be-
cause it cannot stand on its own and must depend on an independent clause; it 
is a noun clause because the whole clause performs the function of a noun in 
the main sentence, whether as object, subject, or appositive to a noun (as in the 
phrase the fact that . .. ). 
Ex. 
(direct quotation) "The soldier is ill. " 
(indirect) He says that the soldier is ill. 
(indirect) I believe that the soldier is ill. 
Note that the subject of the statement sometimes changes person in the trans-
formation from direct to indirect form: 
(direct) H[ am ill," says Bill. 
(indirect) Bill says that he is ill. 
Furthermore, in English, the verb of the statement sometimes changes tense in 
the transformation from direct to indirect form: 
(direct) "There are no seats." 
(indirect) The man said that there were no seats. 
(direct) "He will come." 
(indirect) They believed he would come.' 
7. Indirect Discourse with the Infinitive. In Greek there are three indirect 
discourse constructions: with infinitive; with participle (U28); with on or OJ'> 
and a finite verb (U33). The choice among these three is determined by the 
type of verb introducing the indirect discourse and by idiom (some verbs may 
take two of the three constructions). 
The infinitive construction for indirect discourse is found with certain 
verbs of saying, thinking, believing, hoping, swearing, promising, and the like 
(e.g., cflYljJ.i, oLojJ.at, vOjJ.i(w, ~yEojJ.at, EA:rri(w). In this construction the sub-
ject-finite verb unit of the direct form is converted into an infinitive phrase 
with subject either unexpressed or expressed in the accusative case. 
direct 
6 (TTpanc;JTYl'> VO(TEt. 
The soldier is ill. 
I. Note that English is not always consistent or unambiguous in these changes: sometimes a 
present tense of the direct form remains present in the indirect form; moreover, the indirect form 
of There were no seats would also be The man said that there were no seats. 

150 
UNIT TWENTY 
indirect 
TOV (TTpaTLWTTlV oijJ.aL VO(J"E~V. 
I believe that the soldier is ill. 
direct 
oi oLKa(J"TaL owpa AajJ.j3avov(J"L. 
The jurymen are taking bribes. 
indirect 
TOV!> OLKa(J"Ta!> <P'l(J"L owpa AajJ.j3aVELv. 
He says that the jurymen are taking bribes. 
In the transformation from direct to indirect form, the finite verb of the state-
ment or thought is always changed to the infinitive of the same tense (or same 
tense stem: imperfect indo of direct becomes present info of indirect) and same 
voice. The subject of the statement or thought is left unexpressed if it is the 
same as the subject of the main verb (of saying, believing, etc.) but is other-
wise expressed in the accusative (as usual for the subject of a Greek infinitive). 
direct (imperfect indicative) 
TOTE 0pXEV 6 EEpfrJ!>. 
Xerxes was then ruler. 
indirect (present infinitive; different subject) 
TOTE aPXELv <pa(J"L TOV EEptrJV. 
They say that Xerxes was then ruler. 
direct (future indicative) 
Kpa T~(J"W TOV!> 7TOAEjJ.iov!>. 
I'll conquer the enemy. 
indirect (future infinitive; same subject) 
KpaT~(J"Ew <P'ljJ.L TOV!> 7TOAEjJ.iov!>. 
I say that I'll conquer the enemy. 
KpaT~(J"Ew f<P'lV TOV!> 7TOAEjJ.iov!>. 
I said that I would conquer the enemy. 
direct (aorist indicative) 
6 KAwt TO. xp~jJ.aTa fAL7TE. 
The thief left the money. 
indirect (aorist infinitive; different subject) 
~YE~TaL TOV KAw7Ta TO. xp~jJ.aTa AL7TE~V. 
She believes that the thief left the money. 
EVOjJ.L(OV TOV KAw7Ta TO. xp~jJ.aTa AL7TE~V. 
They believed that the thief(had) left the money. 
In the indirect discourse construction, the infinitive is negated with ou (where-
as in its other uses it is negated with jJ.~): 
TOV (J"TpaT'lYov OVKETL VO(J"E~V ~yovVTaL. 
They believe that the general is no longer ill. 
8. Predicate Nouns and Adjectives in Indirect Discourse with Infinitive. 
Nouns or adjectives in the predicate after an infinitive copula in indirect dis-

Tense and Aspect; Indirect Discourse 
151 
course follow the usual rules of concord (cf. U 10.4). A predicate noun must be 
in the same case as its subject; a predicate adjective must agree with its subject 
noun in gender, number, and case. Thus, if the subject of the indirect statement 
is expressed in the accusative, the predicate noun or adjective will also be 
accusative; if the subject is unexpressed because it is the same as that of the 
main verb, the predicate noun or adjective will be nominative, agreeing with 
the subject of the main verb (of saying, etc.). 
OI.KaWV Tav avopa cpallEV ElvaL. 
We say that the man is just. 
o ~wKpaTYJ'> OUK OrETaL erocpa,> ElvaL. 
Socrates does not believe that he is wise. 
Ot 'A8YJva'ioL OI.KaWL ElvaL ryYOVVTaL. 
The Athenians believe that they are just. 
9. The Verb CPYJIlI.. The verb CPYJIlI., say, normally takes the infinitive of 
indirect discourse and (like EillL) has enclitic forms in the present active indi-
cative (except 2nd sing. CPV,». The present system (stems cpa-. CPYJ-, info cpavaL) 
is conjugated as follows (the future cpryerw and aorist EcpYJera are regular): 
sing. 
1st 
2nd 
3rd 
present active 
CPYJ}J.L 
CPrl" 
CPYJO"L(V) 
imperfect active 
ECPYJV 
EcpYJ0"8u or EcpYJ" 
ECPYJ 
(dual 
2nd 
cpun)v 
EcpUTOV) 
(3rd 
CPUTOV 
EcpaTYJv) 
plural 
1 sf 
CPU}J.EV 
ECPU}J.EV 
2nd 
CPUTE 
Ecpun 
3rd 
cpa.O"L(V) 
ECPUO"UV 
Note that the other common verbs of saying, AEYW and El7rov, are not normally 
used with the indirect-discourse infinitive construction in Attic prose. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the examples of aspect meaning and study indirect discourse with 
the infinitive. 
2. Learn the present system of CPYJlll. 
3. Study again the first three principal parts of all verbs learned to date (use 
the list in the Appendix of Unit 18). 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 

152 
UNIT TWENTY 
.. ------- ---
EXERCISES 
I. Translate each form precisely. 
1. E (J7TE UTa}J.EOa 
8. 'AEtat 
15. cpaTE 
2. E7T'AryTTOVTO 
9. }J.a8ry(Jw8at 
16. EVo(J1](Jar:; 
3. 
~yyEt'Aav 
10. 
, 
17. 
' , 
yt YVW(JKE tr:; 
1]VX°}J.1]v 
4. 'Ow i(JE TE 
11. Ka'AELTat 
18. Epov'AEv(Ja(JOE 
5. 'AapELv 
12. " 
19. acpitETat 
1]PX°}J.EV 
6. E'Amov(Jw 
13. Ep'Aatar:; 
20. " w?1 
7. Ecpa(Jav 
14. E7Ta8E 
21. cpt'Aw 
II. Render into Greek. 
1. we are leading 
12. I was ordering 
2. you (pI.) threw 
13. he learned 
3. it will be necessary 
14. they make preparations 
4. I praised 
15. you (s.) will die 
5. about to guide 
16. to write (aor.) 
6. they say 
17. you (pI.) were 
7. we used to dwell 
18. they pray 
8. you (s.) perceived 
19. it will be concealed 
9. she wanted 
20. you (s.) will remain 
10. they used to seem 
21. we urged 
11. we shall say 
22. to find (aor.) 
III. Reading. 
1. 'EpaTo(JOEv1]r:;, or:; DiK1]v cpovov [murder] EcpEVyE, I TaD' El7TE TOLr:; DtKa(J-
TaLr:;' "Et aPX11r:; 'AEtw TO. 7Tpa y}J.a TQ Kat OVK a 7TOKpvtO}J.at." 2 OVTW yap 
ryYELTO 7TEi(JEtV TOVr:; 7To'AiTar:; }J.ry a7TOKTELVat EaVTOv [him(self), acc.], 
a'A'Aa 'Av(Jat T11r:; aiTiar:; [charge].3 
2. 7TWr:; ov OEWV nr:; TryV TOVTOV yvw}J.1]V Ep'AatEV, or:; E'AEyE }J.Ev avo(Jw 7TEpt 
TOV O' ry'Aiov TWV T' avE}J.WV Kat TWV a'A'Awv }J.ETEWpWV [celestial phenom-
ena], E7TOiEt DE 7T'AEL(JTQ KaKa TO. [Epa TO. TWV 'E'A'Aryvwv; 
3. "Kat OV7TOT' EPEL ovDEir:; [no one, nom. sing.], ~ aVDpEr:; (JTpanWTat, wr:; 
[that] "E'A'A1]var:; ~yayov Eir:; TO'vr:; [3ap[3aPOvr:; Kat E7TEtTa E'Amov }J.Ev TOVr:; 
"E'A'A1]var:;, TryV DE TWV pappapwv cpt'Aiav d'Ao}J.1]v. a'A'A' E7TEt [since] E}J.Ot 
[me, dat.] OVK EOE'AETE 7TdOwOat, 7Td(Jo}J.at V}J.LV [you, dat. pl.]." TaVT' 
El7TEV 6 K'AEapxor:;. EVO}J.t(E yap TOVr:; (JTpanWTar:; EaVT0 [him(self), dat.] 
1. For the idiom OLKT/V EcpWyf. cf. U17, Ex. 11.3. 
2. You should be able to guess the meaning of this U7TO- compound; the sense is here middle, 
not passive. 
3. The reflexive pronoun iuvTt)v is better translated in this sentence (and sentence 3) simply as 
English him. The gen. UiTLU, here expresses separation,from. 

Tense and Aspect; Indirect Discourse 
153 
EZvaL Kat! 7raTpL'Oa Kat <p[i\OV) Kat (J"VjJ.jJ.axov). oi 'OE (TTpanWTaL Ot T' 
EKELVOV Kat oi aAA.DL TafJT' E7r?7Vwav. 
4. 6 yEpwV TOU) KAW7ra) E<Py/ ~EAAEW TO. xpryjJ.aTa a7ra~EW, aAAo. Tav 
<pVAaKa KwAv(J"at. 
5. TOU) 8EOU) Ot!! W<pEAry(J"EW TOU) 'OLKaLov) EV T0 7rOAEjJ.I.J,J; 
6. TOVTOV Tav KryPVKa VLKy/V aYYEAELV EA7rL(OjJ.EV. 
IV. Render into Greek. (Hint: when translating indirect discourse from English 
into Greek, always determine first what is the direct form of the thought or 
statement and use the direct form to decide the tense of the Greek infinitive. 
Remember that an English past tense may represent a present tense in direct 
discourse, indirect would may represent direct will, indirect had Xed may 
represent a direct simple past [aorist 1.) 
I. One must not obey those orators in these matters, but one must deliberate 
well and justly and seek the truth. 
2. We used to believe that different men excelled in different things [use 
aAAO) I. 
3. The young men resolved [use impersonal 'OOKE'Ll to marry luse middle of 
a yw I the daughters of the chorus trainer, for they hoped that each one 
would be both beautiful and wealthy. 
4. Do you suppose that the Greeks will choose the Athenians to be leaders'? 
5. They did not believe that an orator must excel in this wisdom. 
6. This woman said that the soldiers had led the jurymen away to the shrine 
next to the walls. 
I. This Kat introduces the series of three coordinate nouns, 1ra1pL0a, </>LAOV" and ITv!J.p.axov\'. 
The first Kat in the series can be omitted in English or translated as hOflz. In a series of coordi-
nate words, Greek style usually prefers a conjunction between each pair of words, whereas 
Engl ish often has a conjunction only between the final pair of words. 

UNIT TWENTY -ONE 
Consonant-Declension Nouns III; 
P 
, , 
ronoun a VTOS' 
PRELIMINARIES 
Personal Pronouns. The pronouns which refer without special demon-
strative emphasis to persons or things are personal pronouns. For the concept 
of person, review U8 Prelim.; for pronouns in general, U12 Prelim. D. 
Personal pronouns occur in all three persons: (1 st) I, me, we, us; (2nd) you; 
(3rd) he, him, she, her, it, they, them. In English (as in some other languages), 
the personal pronouns are very common, because English verbs must have ei-
ther a noun subject or an explicit pronoun as subject; but there are also other 
uses of the personal pronouns. Greek verbs normally do without an explicit 
pronoun subject, but a personal pronoun may be used as subject for purposes 
of emphasis. and there are other uses for the oblique cases. 
1. Third-declension Vowel Stems. Some nouns of the consonant or third 
declension have stems ending in a vowel. The case endings are the same as for 
other consonant-declension nouns, but in many forms contraction has taken 
place with the final vowel of the stem or the quantities of two consecutive 
vowels have been exchanged (short-long becoming long-short by quantitative 
metathesis). Many of these nouns also show a variation in stem vowel. 
2. Stems in ~ or v. There are two types: 
a. Nouns in which stem vowel ~ or v appears only in nom., acc., and voc. 
sing., but an alternative stem vowel E appears in the other cases. The paradigm 
is shown on the next page. Note that the gen. sing. form derives from an alter-
native stem with strong vowel 1] (e.g., 7r0A1]-), the ending -1]0>; becoming -EW>; 
by quantitative metathesis without change of accent (the accent is still on A 
despite the long vowel in U). The unusual accent in the gen. pI. is by analogy 
with the gen. sing. Contraction has occurred in dat. sing. and also in 
154 

Consonant-Declension Nouns III; Pronoun aVTr}t, 
155 
masc'/fem. nom pI. and nom. acc. dual (E + E - > EL) and in the neuter nom. 
acc. pi. (E + ii -> ,,). The masc'/fem. acc. pi. is probably borrowed from the 
nom. pi. (some explain it instead as derived from *-EV~). 
Ex. 
"city" (f) 
'jorearm" (m.) 
"town" (n.) 
stems: 
7fo/u-, 7fOAE-
7f1JXV-, 7f1JXE-
' 
, 
UO"TV -, UO"TE-
sing. 
7fOAL~ 
7ff]xv~ 
" 
nom. 
UO"TV 
7fOAEW~ 
7f~XEW~ 
" 
gen. 
Uo"TEW~ 
dat. 
7fOAH 
7f~XH 
aO"TH 
7fOAW 
7ff]xvv 
" 
acc. 
UO"TV 
7fOAL 
7ff]xv 
" 
voc. 
UO"TV 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
7fOAH 
7f~XH 
aO"TE L) 
(g. d. 
7fOAf.OW 
7f1JXf.OW 
aO"Tf.Ow) 
plur. 
7fOAH~ 
7f~xm 
" 
n. v. 
UO"T1J 
7fOAEWV 
7f~XEWV 
" 
gen. 
UO"TEWV 
dat. 
7fOAWL(V) 
7f~XEo"L(V ) 
aO"TEO"L(v) 
7fOAH~ 
7f~xm 
" 
acc. 
UO"T1J 
b. Nouns in which L or v appears in all forms. These are not common, 
and since pure L-stems are especially rare, only the v-stem is demonstrated 
here, with the example iX8v~,fish (m.) (stem: iX8v-). 
singular 
(dual) 
plural 
nom. 
iX8v~ or -v~ 
(n. a. v. 
iX8vE) 
n. v. 
iX8vE~ 
gen. 
iX8vo~ 
(g. d. 
iX8vow) 
gen. 
iX8vwv 
dat. 
iX8vrl 
dat. 
iX8vO"L(V) 
ace. 
iX8vv 
acc. 
iX8v~ 
voc. 
iX8v 
In this noun the v is short in trisyllabic cases, long in the disyllabic cases (in 
poetry sometimes short in acc. sing.). The accentuation of the nom. sing. is un-
certain (and the acc. sing. is also sometimes written iX8vv). The acc. pi. ending 
is from *-vv~. 
3. Stems in EV, av, av. In this type, too, the stem vowel varies (paradigm 
on next page). The diphthong appears in nom. acc. voc. sing. and dat. pI. (and 
also in acc. pi. of nouns in av or av). In the remaining cases there is found an 
alternative stem: namely, EV is replaced by E or strong vowel" in hf7TEV~, av 
by a. or" (or E) in ypav~ and vav~, av by a in pav~. 
I. Recall that the mark over the iota (diaeresis) indicates that the v and L are in separate 
syllables and do not form a diphthong: cf. U 1.6e. 

156 
UNIT TWENTY -ONE 
~~~----
"cavalry-
man" (m.) 
"old woman" (/) "ship" (/) 
"ox" (m . .!) 
stems: 
' 
, 
ypav-, ypli-
j3ov-, 130-
L7r7rEV-, L7r7r1)-, 
vav-, V1)-, 
, L 7r7rE-
VE-
sing. 
nom. 
t7r7rEV~ 
ypav~ 
vav~ 
pov~ 
, 
, 
, 
poo~ 
gen. 
L7r7rEW~ 
ypao~ 
VEW~ 
dat. 
t 7r7rEL 
-
.~ 
.. 
j30t 
ypaL 
V1)L 
, 
,-
ypavv 
viJa 
f30vv 
ace. 
L 7r7rEa 
VOL'. 
t7r7rEV 
ypav 
vav 
f30v 
(dual n. a. v. 
t 7r7riJ 
ypo.E 
ViJE 
pOE) 
(g. d. 
' 
, 
ypliOLV 
VEOLV 
f300LV) 
L7r7rEOW 
plUTo 
n. V. 
t 7r7riJ~, -E L ~ 
ypo.E~ 
ViJE~ 
j30E~ 
, 
, 
ypliwv 
, 
powv 
gen. 
L7r7rEWV 
VEWV 
dat. 
t7r7rEVC]'L(V) 
ypavO'i(v) 
vavO'i(v) 
j3ovO'i(v) 
ace. 
t 7I'7I'EIi~ 
ypav~ 
vav~ 
j3ov~ 
Quantitative metathesis is apparent in several forms (e.g., ~7r7r(iw'), VEW'), 
I.7T7Tfii from 1.71'71'1]0'), vY'/6'), I.7T7T1]ii). The nom. pI. ending of -EV,) nouns was -1]') 
in the fifth century, but in the course of the fourth century this was replaced by 
-EL<>- Note the shifting accentuation of the nouns with monosyllabic stems 
(review UI4.2). 
4. Some Irregular Nouns 
"woman" (/) 
sing. 
, 
nom. 
yvv1) 
gen. 
yvvaLKo~ 
dat. 
yvvaLKL 
ace. 
yvvaLKa 
, 
voe. 
yvvaL 
(dual 
n. a. V. 
yvvaLKE 
(g. d. 
yvvaLKoLv 
plur. 
n. V. 
yvvaLKE~ 
gen. 
yvvaLKwv 
dat. 
yvvaLti(v) 
ace. 
yvvaLKa~ 
"hand" (/) 
, 
XHpO~ 
XHpi 
XELpa 
XEip 
XELPE 
XEPOLV 
XELPE~ 
XHPWV 
XEpO'i(v) 
XELpa~ 
"son" (m.) 
VtO~ or vo~ 
, 
I 
f 
I 
mEO~ or VEO~ 
VtEL or VEL 
VtEL or VEL) 
VtOLV or VOLV) 
VtEL~ or VEL~ 
, 
I 
" 
mEWV or VEWV 
VtE(]'L(V) or VEO'L(V) 
VtEL~ or VEL~ 
Note the unusual accentuation of U in the gen. and dat. forms of yvvry. In 
poetry the two stems of hand (XHp-, XEp-) are used as variants in all cases to 
suit metrical requirements. The noun son has o-declension inflection (vI.6'), 
vl.oi), etc. or v6'), voi) etc.} as well as the consonant-declension inflection 

Consonant-Declension Nouns Ill; Pronoun aVn)f 
157 
shown above. Only the o-declension fonns viov and viE are found for the acc. 
and voc. sing. In addition, the iota of the initial diphthong VL was usually so 
weakened in pronunciation that the word was often spelled without it. 
5. Pronoun alna). The pronoun alna), aim], aina is declined like EKE'i-
vo) (that is, like a vowel-declension adj. except for pronominal neuter -0 in 
place of adjectival-ov). It has several uses. 
a. In origin this pronoun is reflexive (himself, herself, itself, myself, 
yourself, etc., according to context) and is used in conjunction with the per-
sonal pronouns to fonn reflexive pronouns (to be learned in U25). 
b. When used in agreement with a noun in any case or when used in the 
nominative in agreement with the subject pronoun implied in the personal 
ending of the verb, it is emphatic or intensive. In this use it must be in predi-
cate position (outside the article-noun group). 
TO. pLpAia ryG"av alJToD ToD oLoaG"KaAov. 
The books belonged to the teacher himself 
(pred. position, agrees with oLoaG"KaAov) 
TaVT"'lV T1JV G"v/J-cpoPo.v alJTry E~OOV. 
I mvselfsaw this disaster. (woman speaking; with a man speaking, alJTo) 
(agrees with implied [fern. sing. nom.] subject) 
c. When placed in attributive position (with article), alJTa) is adjectival 
and means the same, the very. 
t 
" ,  
~ 
o aVTO) /J-aVTL) EL7TEV ... 
E7TE/J-tE TOV) alJTov) i7T7TEa). 
The same prophet said . .. 
He sent the same cavalrymen. 
d. The oblique cases (that is, all except the nominative) are used in Attic 
as the personal pronoun of the third person (him, her, it, them). 
, 
I 
, 
, 
a7TEKTEwavaVTOV. 
TO. 7TaLoia aln1]) ATJta/J-Eea. 
They put him to death. 
We'll seize her children. 
Note that when used as possessive (as in the second example above) the geni-
tive of alno) takes predicate position. Do not confuse alJT~ (herself) with 
ai.!TTJ (this woman), or aiJTai (fern. themselves) with alnaL (these women): 
both breathing and accent are different. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the various declensional patterns presented above. 
2. Study the uses of pronoun alna). 

158 
UNIT TWENTY -ONE 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
Vocabulary-building Hints. With this unit you learn the declensional pat-
terns used with two very productive suffixes. (l) The suffix -ElJS, -EWS (m.) is 
added to many noun roots to form a noun meaning "person who is involved 
with or works with X": so I.EpE7JS for the person involved with sacred rites and 
sacrifices (I.Epa), 1.7T7TElJS for the person involved with horses, xaAKE1JS for the 
person who works with xaAKDs, so bronzesmith, and so forth. (For many of 
these nouns there are corresponding verbs in -ElJW, like (3aenAE"lJw, 1.7T7TElJW, 
and the -ElJW suffix also forms verbs for which there is no -EVS noun, like 
7ToALTEVW.) (2) The suffix -ens, -(J"EWS (f.) is added to verbal roots to form an 
abstract noun of action: for instance, 7TOLy/(J"LS from 7TOLEW, (J"Ta(J"Ls from the 
root to stand, j30VAEV(J"LS (deliberation) from j30VAEVW. Note also in this unit 
the word L(J"XVS, which provides the root for the adj. L(J"XVPOS, previously 
learned: -pos and -EPOS are common adjectival suffixes, seen also in, for in-
stance, 7TOVy/POS (7TOVOS), {3Aa{3Epos ({3Aa7TTw, root j3Aa{3-), CPOj3EPOS (cpo-
(3os), ai(J"xpos (aL(J"Xos). 
nouns in t or v (variant stems) 
oVvu}.m, ovva}J.Ew'>, f. 
7TOL1/ITL'>, 7T0L71ITEw,>, f. 
7TOII.L'>, 7TOII.EW'>, f. 
ITTalTL'>, ITTaITEw,>, f. 
VPPL'>, VPPEW'>, f. 
UITTV, UITTEW'>, n. 
7TryXV,>, 7T~XEW'>, m. 
nouns in v (pure stems) 
iITXv'>, iITXvo'>, f. 
iX8v'>, iX8vo'>, m. or f. 
(rik ITvo'> or v,>, va'>, m. or f. 
nouns in EV. avo av 
PUITLII.EV,>, purTLII.f.w,>, m. 
pov,>, 1300'>, m. or f. 
ypuv,>, ypao" f. 
f 
, 
f 
I 
LEPEV'>, LEPEW" m. 
power; authority; capacity, ability 
[dynamic] 
creation, production; writing of poetry; poem 
city; citadel 
[metropolis] 
position, standing; party (with political interests), 
faction; party strife, discord 
[apostasy] 
violence, insolence; assault, rape 
[hybristic] 
town 
forearm, arm; cubit (a unit of measure equal to 
average length from elbow to tip of middle finger) 
strength 
fish 
[ichthyologist] 
swine, hog 
king 
[Basil] 
ox, cow 
[Euboea] 
old woman 
priest, sacrificer 

Consonant-Declension Nouns Ill; Pronoun aVT(J" 
i7r7rEv". i7r7rEw", m. 
vav". VEW", f. 
cpOVEV". cpovEw", m. 
irregular nouns 
YVVrl. yvvaLKa", f. 
via" (va,,), viov or viEo", m. 
XELp. XELpa", f. 
pronoun/adjective 
aiJTa". aiJTrl. aim) 
EXERCISES 
I. Reading. 
cavalryman; (pI.) the cavalry 
ship 
[naumachy] 
murderer 
woman; lady; wife l 
[gynecology] 
son 
hand 
[surgeon, chiropractor] 
self; him, her, it, them; the same, the very 
[tautology, autocrat] 
159 
I. OlJTOL }J-Ev V7rO TWV pappapwv (l7rEeavov. 2 E7rEL [after] oE TO/JTOV'> 
EK7rOOWV [adv.: out of the way] E7rOLry(TaTO 6 paCHAElJ'>, OEwa p.ETa TafJTa 
Tfl 7r()AEL EYEVETO' ~v DOE aLno'> E(J'TW' aiJTo'> yap E7rEL(J'E TOV pa(J'LAEa 
E7TL T1JV 'EAAaoa EMEI.v. 
2. KaL 6 'AyrwiAao,> TPLryPYJ 7rapWKEva(J'E KaL KaAAiav EKEAEV(J'E cmayaYE'iv 
TrW 7ra'ioa, aiJTo'> 0' (J.7r17Mw [compound of a7rO-] Ei'> T1JV I.EpaV 7rOAW, EV 
f, cPKEL 6 T17'> pappapov eEOS I.EPEV,>. a7TE'iXE 0' aUTYJ (J'Taow OEKa a7TO TOV 
pa(J'LAEw'> a(J'TEw'>, EV aiJTfl 0' ryv 7rOTa}J-o'> P.LKpWV iXevwv 7TAryPYJ'> [adj., 
nom. sing. masc.: full of + gen.]. 
3. 6 7TAOV(J'W'> Ta'> TE pov,> KaL Ta'> (J'V'> Tip Vl.ip aiJTiKa E7rL TphfrEW E<pYJ, 
aAAa Ta'> L7T7rOV'> OVK EtE'ivaL. 
4. aAAoL aAAov,> TP07TOV'> E7Tawov(J'w. 
5. TWV TELXWV TO p.Ev ETEPOV TOI:,> 1.7T7TEV(J'L <pVAaTTEW 7TapEKEAEV(J'aTO, 
TOVTO 0' a VTO'> KaL 01. 7TE(OL E<pVAa TTOV. 
6. OUTW'> OVX 1.I7T0 TWV 7TOAEP.iwv p.ovov [adv.: only], aAAa KaL 1mo TOVTWV 
TWV 7TOALTWV f.7TEPOVAEVWeE [from E7rLPOVAEVW = plot against] KaL 
ayaeov TL 7TpataL EKWAVWeE. KaL v}J-a,> [you, acc. pl.] ryYOVVTO TWV T17'> 
7rOAEW'> KaKwv E7rLeV}J-El:v a7raAAaY17VaL [com pI. inf., to be rid of + gen. 
TWV KaKwv] KaL 7TEpL TWV aAAwv 7Tpayp.aTwv OVK EVeVP.ry(J'WeaL [fut. inf., 
feel concern]. T1JV yap OYJp.OKpaTiav AVEW EP.EAAOV. 
I. Just as Q.v~p implies male traits and social roles, so yvv~ implies traits, roles, and stereotypes 
connected with females. 
2. As the u7To-phrase shows. Q.7TOeVyiITKW is here equivalent to a passive verb, be put to death. 

160 
UNIT TWENTY -ONE 
II. Render into Greek. 
1. For that day the cavalry guarded the camp. but on the next day they rode 
against the enemy. for they believed they would easily defeat them. 
2. Strife and violence are harmful to a city in the same way: each is respon-
sible for the death of I:ood men [use articular inf.l 
3. We begged the king to entrust these affairs to the women themselves. 
4. The old men said that the women must obey the laws, while the old women 
said that the men had proven themselves [use appropriate tense of yiyvo-
j.l.aL] responsible for terrible evils to the city. 

UNIT TWENTY -TWO 
Consonant-Declension Adjectives; 
Personal Pronouns 
1. Consonant-declension Adjectives with Two Endings. One of the two 
major groups of consonant-declension adjectives features consonant-declen-
sion inflection in all genders. Like the vowel-declension adjectives with two 
endings, these adjectives have a common masc'/fem. form and a separate 
neuter, and again only the nom. acc. voc. actually show distinction between 
masc'/fem. and neuter, the gen. and dat. being the same in all genders. There 
are two types: 
a. Stems in rT. The two nominative forms end in -y/~. -ES, and declension 
is similar to that of TPL17Py/<; and YEVO~ (U15.3). 
Ex. 
aAy/e~~. aAy/eE~, "true" 
stem: aAy/edrT)-
masc./fem. 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
at..1]e~<; 
at..1]ei<; 
gen. 
at..1]eov<; 
at..1]eov<; 
dat. 
at..1]eEt 
at..1]eEt 
acc. 
at..1]ef] 
at..1]ei<; 
voc. 
at..1]ei<; 
at..1]ei<; 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
at..1]eEt 
at..1]eEt) 
(g. d. 
at..1]eOtV 
at..1]eOtv) 
plur. 
n. v. 
at..1]eEt~ 
at..1]ef] 
gen. 
at..1]eWV 
at..1]eWV 
dat. 
at..1]eirTL(V) 
at..1]eirTL(V) 
ace. 
at..1]eEt<; 
at..1]ef] 
b. Stems in v. The two nominative forms end in -wv. -OV, and declension 
is similar to that of oai}1wv (UlS.I). 
161 

162 
Ex. 
(J"WCPPWV, (J"wcppov, "prudent" 
masc./jem. 
sing. 
nom. 
(J"wcppwv 
gen. 
(J"wcpPovo'> 
dat. 
(J"WCPPOVL 
acc. 
(J"wcppova 
voc. 
(J"wcppov 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
(J"WCPPOVE 
(g. d. 
(J"WCPPOVOLV 
plur. 
n. v. 
(J"WCPPOVE'> 
gen. 
(J"wcppovwv 
dat. 
(J"WCPPO(J"L(V) 
acc. 
(J"wcppova'> 
UNIT TWENTY
stem: (J"wcppov-
neuter 
(J"WCPPOV 
(J"wcppovo'> 
(J"WCPPOVL 
(J"wcppov 
(J"wcppov 
(J"WCPPOVE) 
(J"WCPPOVOLV ) 
(J"wcppova 
(J"wcppovwv 
(J"WCPPO(J"L(V) 
(J"wcppova 
2. Consonant-declension Adjectives with Three Endings. The othe
jor group of consonant-declension adjectives shows consonant-decle
inflection in the masculine and neuter, but has a separate feminine with 
alpha-declension endings. (The fern. stem consists of the masc. stem
suffix semivocalic iota [y], which combines with the preceding sylla
euphonic change.) There are three main types: 
a. Stems in v. The nominative endings are -v~, -ELa, -v, and decle
of the masc. and neuter is similar to that of 7Tr,XV~ and Q.(J"TV (U21.2a). 
Ex. 
~ov~. ~oE'ia, ~ov, "pleasant" 
stems: ~OV-/~OE-, fern. 
masc. 
fem. 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
~ov,> 
~oELa 
~ov 
gen. 
~Of.o,> 
~oEf.a,> 
~Of.o,> 
dat. 
~OEL 
~oEiq. 
~OEL 
acc. 
~ovv 
~oELav 
~ov 
voc. 
~ov 
~oELa 
~ov 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
~Of.E 
~oEia 
~Of.E) 
(g. d. 
~Of.OLV 
~oEf.aLV 
~Of.OLV) 
plur. 
n. v. 
~OEL'> 
~oELaL 
~of.a 
gen. 
~Of.WV 
~OELWV 
~Of.WV 
dat. 
~Of.(J"L(V) 
~oEiaL'> 
~Of.(J"L(V) 
acc. 
~OEL'> 
~oEf.a,> 
~of.a 
Note that, unlike the similar nouns, these adjectives have -EO~ in the 
t
i
F
th
i
th
dj
ti
th
i
t
ti

Consonant-Declension Adjectives; Personal Pronouns 
163 
gen. sing. -EO!>, gen. pI. -EWV, and neuter pI. nom. acc. -Ea. Also note that the 
feminine of consonant-declension adjectives (of all types) always has the 
circumflex on the gen. pI. (from -awv), thus behaving like a-declension nouns 
and unlike the fern. of vowel-declension adjectives. 
b. Stems in v. Various nom. forms are found, and the declension of the 
masc. and neuter is generally similar to that of oaijJ.wv (UI5.1). Note that the 
fern. has eta-type inflection (gen. and dat. sing.) because the stem ends in v. 
Ex. 
jJ.EAOS. jJ.EAawa, jJ.EMw, "black" 
stems: jJ.EAiiv-, fern. jJ.EAaw- (from jJ.EAiivy-) 
masc. 
fern. 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
j.l.EAaS 
j.l.EAaWa 
j.l.EAaV 
gen. 
j.l.EAaVOC; 
J.l.EAaiv7J<; 
j.l.f.Aavo') 
dat. 
j.l.EAaVL 
j.l.EAaiv"[I 
j.l.EAaVL 
acc. 
j.l.EAaVa 
j.l.EAaWaV 
j.l.f.AaV 
voc. 
j.l.EAaV 
j.l.EAaWa 
j.l.EAaV 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
j.l.EAaVE 
j.l.EAaiva 
j.l.EAavE) 
(g. d. 
j.l.EAaVOW 
j.l.EAaivaw 
j.l.EAavow) 
plur. 
n. v. 
j.l.EAaVE<; 
j.l.EAaWaL 
j.l.EAaVa 
gen. 
j.l.EAaVwV 
j.l.EAaWwV 
j.l.EAaVWv 
dat. 
j.l.f.Aal]"L(v) 
j.l.EAaivaLc; 
j.l.EAal]"L(v) 
acc. 
j.l.EAaVaC; 
j.l.EAaivac; 
j.l.f.AaVa 
c. Stems in VT. Various nom. forms are found, and the declension of the 
masc. and neuter is generally similar to that of YEPWV or yiya!> (UI4.3b). 
Ex. 
XapiEL!>, XapiEeJ"(Ta. Xapiw, "graceful" 
stems: XaPtEVT-, fern. XaptE(J"()- (from XaptEVTY-) 
masc. 
fern. 
neuter 
XapiELC; 
, 
xapiEv 
nom. 
XapLE()()a 
sing. 
XapiWTO<; 
, 
gen. 
XapLE()()7J<; 
XaPLWTO<; 
dat. 
, 
XaPLWTL 
XapLE()()"[I 
XaPLEVTL 
acc. 
XaPLWTa 
XapLE()()aV 
xapiEv 
voc. 
Xapiw 
XapiE()()a 
Xapiw 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
XapiEVTE 
XaptE()()a 
XapiWTE) 
(g. d. 
XaptEVTOW 
, 
XaptEVTOW) 
XaptE()()aW 
, 
, 
XapiwTa 
n. v. 
XaptWTE<; 
XaptE()()at 
plur. 
gen. 
XaptWTWV 
XaPtE()()WV 
XaPLEVTWV 
dat. 
XapiE()t(V) 
Xaptf.()()aLC; 
XapiE()t(V) 
acc. 
XapiwTa<; 
XaptE()()aC; 
XaptWTa 

164 
UNIT TWENTY -TWO 
Note that the feminine has eta-type inflection (gen. and dat. sing.) because the 
stem ends in u. 
3. Declension and Use of 7TOS. A very important and common conso-
nant-declension adjective with VT-stem is 7TU~, 7Tuua, 7TUV, all. The stems are 
masc.!neut. 7TUVT-, fern. 7TUU- (from 7TavTY-). 
rnasc. 
fern. 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
nos 
nuua 
nuv J 
gen. 
naVTf), 
nuuY], 
naVTO, 
dat. 
, 
, 
naVTI. 
naVTL 
nauTi 
, 
nuuav 
nuv 
acc. 
naVTa 
voc. 
nu, 
nuua 
nuv 
(dual lacking) 
plur. 
nuvTE, 
nuuat 
, 
n. v. 
naVTa 
nuvTwv 
nauwv 
, 
gen. 
naVTWV 
dat. 
nuut(v) 
nuuat, 
nuut(v) 
, 
nuua, 
nuvTa 
acc. 
naVTa, 
Note that the feminine has eta-type inflection (gen. and dat. sing.) because the 
stem ends in u. Note also the accentuation of the masc'!neuter gen. and dat. pI. 
(not following the usual rule for monosyllabic stems). 
The most common use of 7TU~ is in the predicate position with a noun that 
has the definite article; it then means "all" or "the whole": 
7Tuua ~ 7f()A.~~ 
the whole city 
or 7TOA.'iTa~ 7f(!WTE~ 
all the citizens 
When used with a noun that lacks the article, 7Ta~ may mean "any" or "every" 
or "all (conceivable)": 
7Tuua 7TOA.~~ 
every city 
7TaVTE~ 7TOA.'iTa~ 
all (conceivable) citizens 
In the attributive position 7Ta~ emphasizes totality or entirety: 
TO 7TUV 7T A. r,eo~ 
~ 7Tuua ~~KEA.ia 
the entire multitude 
the whole of Sicily 
4. Adverbs from Consonant-declension Adjectives. Adverbs are formed 
from consonant-declension adjectives in the same way as for vowel-declension 
adjectives (U 12.1). The ending -w~ is added to the stem as it occurs in the 
masc. gen. pI., and the adverb has the same accentuation as that form. 
I. The long vowel of neuter no.v is anomalous; some other dialects have the expected niiv 
(ml.v), and the short alpha is sometimes seen in compound a.nav in Attic poets. 

Consonant-Declension Adjectives; Personal Pronouns 
165 
-----~---------
~--------~ 
Ex. 
G.A1]8r,» 
G.A1]8w» 
(Tw<ppwv 
(Tw<ppovw» 
ry'Ov» 
ry'OEW» 
, 
, 
XapLEL» 
xapLEVTw» 
7fOS 
, 
7TaVTW» 
5. Personal Pronouns of the First and Second Persons. For personal 
pronouns in general, review U21 Prelim. The oblique cases of alJTo» serve as 
the third-person pronoun in classical Attic. Here is the declension of the 
pronouns of the first and second persons: 
1st person 
1st person 
unemphatic 
-----
sing. 
' 
, 
nom. 
Eyw 
gen. 
EJ.l.OV 
J.l.ov 
dat. 
EJ.l.OL 
J.l.0L 
ace. 
EJ.l.E 
W 
( dual 
n. a. 
vw 
(g. d. 
V~lV 
Plur. 
nom. 
1Wt, 
gen. 
1J.1.wV 
dat. 
1J.1.tV 
ace. 
1J.1.U, 
2nd person 
, 
(TV 
(TOV , 
(TOL 
(TE 
(T<pw) 
(Tcf>ijlV ) 
VJ.l.Et, 
VJ.l.WV 
VJ.l.tV 
VJ.l.U, 
2nd person 
unemphatic 
(TOV 
(TOL 
(FE 
The singular unemphatic forms (oblique cases only) are enclitic, and these are 
in fact the more commonly used forms. Unemphatic pronouns tend to come 
second in their clause or phrase. The nominative forms (sing. and plural) are 
used only when the subject is emphatic; otherwise the personal ending of the 
verb suffices. 
Ex. 
Ti }J.OL AEtEL»; 
What will you say to me? 
TOV }J.Ev 7faTEpa }J.OV E7fiJVE(Ja», E}J.E '0' oV. 
You praised my father, but not me. 
Eyw TOV 7fOL1]T1]V E7faWW, V}J.E'i» 'OE TOV pr,Topa. 
l praise the poet, you praise the orator. 
Note that when a personal pronoun is used in the possessive genitive, it takes 
predicate position (outside the article-noun group), as in the second example 
above (TO V 7faTEpa }J.OV). 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the inflectional patterns of consonant-deciension adjectives. 

166 
UN IT TWENTY -TWO 
2. Learn the personal pronouns of the first and second persons. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
noun 
TVXYJ, TVXYJ'>, f. 
fate; chance; fortune (good, bad, or neutral); 
happening, event 
[Tyche) 
consonant-declension adjectives: sigma-stems 
all. YJ8~,>, all. YJ8EI; 
aa-eEV~'>, a0"8EVE'> 
aO"cpaA~'>, aO"cpaAE'> 
OVo"TVX~'>' OVO"TVXE'> 
EVYEV~'>, EVYEVE'> 
EVTVX~'>' EVTVXE'> 
7TA~PYJ'>' 7TAr,PE'> 
O"acp~,>, O"acpE'> 
"'EVO~,>, ",EVOE'> 
true, genuine; truthful 
without strength, weak 
[myasthenia] 
steadfast; safe, secure; trustworthy 
unlucky, unfortunate 
well-born; noble, noble-minded 
[eugenics I 
lucky, fortunate 
full, full of (+ gen.) 
sure, reliable; clear, distinct 
lying, false, untrue 
[pseudonym) 
consonant-declension adjectives: nu-stems with two endings 
acppwv, acppov 
EvoaijJ.wv, EvoaLjJ.ov 
senseless, foolish 
blessed with a good oaijJ.wv; fortunate, happy; 
wealthy 
[eudaemonism) 
of sound mind; prudent; self-controlled; temperate, 
chaste 
consonant-declension adjectives: upsilon-stems 
pa8v'>, pa8E'ia, pa8v 
deep, high 
[bathyscaph) 
papv'>, [3apELa, papv 
heavy 
[barometer) 
[3paxv'>, ppaXELa, (3paxv 
short; small 
[brachylogy, brachistochrone) 
YAvKv,>, YAvKELa, YAvKv 
sweet, pleasant, delightful 
[glycerine I 
~ov,>, ~oELa. ~ov 
pleasant, welcome; glad, pleased 
~jJ.tCTV~, ~}li(TEta, ijjJ.t(TV 
half 
[hemisphere]1 
consonant-declension adjectives: nu-stem with three endings 
black, dark 
[melanin] 
I. 
~}.I.LITV> may be used as an attributive adjective (e.g .. at 7]}.I.lITELUL v7)E> = "half (of) the ships"') 
or it may be used as a substantive (with article) accompanied by the partitive genitive (e.g .. at 
7]}.I.lITELaL TWV VEWV Ithe gender and number of the substantive ~}.I.LITV> are the same as those of 
the word that expresses the whole)). 

Consonant-Declension Adjectives; Personal Pronouns 
consonant-declension adjectives: VT-stems 
7TOS, 7To.rTQ, 7To.V 
all, every, the whole 
[pantomime] 
U7Ta'>, U7TarTQ, u7Tav 
all, the whole (strengthened form of 7To.,» 
xapiH'>, Xapiw(TQ, Xapiw 
graceful, beautiful, elegant; clever 
possessive adjectives (1st and 2nd person)l 
, 
, 
, 
(TO'>, (Try, (TOV 
~)J.ETEPO'>, ~)J.ETEpa, 
~)J.ETEPOV 
f i t  
I 
V)J.ETEpO'>, V)J.ETEpa, 
V)J.ETEpOV 
EXERCISES 
I. Render into Greek. 
1. of these weak cattle 
my, mine 
your, yours (sing.) 
our, ours 
your, yours (plural)2 
2. a certain city (acc.) full of strife 
3. toward the foolish thieves 
4. for a short time 
5. all women (nom.) 
6. in the presence of the elegant king 
7. of the blessed priest 
8. of heavy misfortune 
9. the entire strength (acc.) of this town 
10. in accordance with the true account 
II. by means of some steadfast measure 
12. my unfortunate sons (nom.) 
13. into a deep river full of sweet water 
14. concerning your false victory 
15. for ten prudent old women 
16. black ships (nom.) 
17. Our life is pleasant. 
18. Half the soldiers died. 
19. Your daughter did not arrive. 
20. on our behalf 
167 
I. Use of the possessive adjective (0 f./lO~ 7raT"iJp) is stylistically more formal than use of the 
possessive gen. of the personal pronoun (0 7raT~p /lou), which is informal and colloquial. 
2. Hint for avoiding confusion between r,/lf'i~ and V/lf'i~ or r,/lf.TfPO~ and V/lf.Tfpo~: associate 
we with the long elY], associate you with the Greek u/u. 

168 
UNIT TWENTY -TWO 
II. Reading: Herakles at the Crossroads. 
E(:30VA.E1JETO 7TOTE 0 'HpaKA.1]S' 7TEpt TOV f3iov ~OE 7TWS" "Ti x.pry 7TOLELV; 
dpfwofJ.aL TryV OL' o.PET1]S' oMv, 7J [or] Tryv ETEpav:" yvvaLKES' OE ovo [two] 
7TpOS' aiJTov r,Mov, i) fJ.EV [supply participle being] (Jwcppwv Kat EVYWryS', i) OE 
XapiE(J(Ja 0.11.11.0. 7Tovrypa. E7THeOV OE TOV aVOpa EV fJ.EpH· aUTry fJ.Ev "EfJ.E" ECPry 
"cpiA.ryv 7ToLryrTa(Jeai (TE x.pry. TryV yap i)oELav TE Kat /Jq.oiav oMv a~w (TE, Kat 
TO. fJ.Ev yA.VKEa 7TaVTa E~ELS', TO. OE XaA.E7Ta 7TaVTa cpd)~'[l. " Kat 0 'HpaKA.1]S' ,,~ 
yvvaL, " ECPry "ovofJ.a (TOL Ti E(JTW;" i) OE "OL fJ.EV EfJ.Ot CPiA.OL" ECPry "KaA.ov(Ti fJ.E 
EVOaLfJ.Oviav [happy prosperity], OL o· aA.A.OL KaKiav [vice]. " i) 0' ETEpa yvvry 
EL7TEV' "i) oMS' l}V Eyw (JE EA.E(JeaL cpryfJ.t OELV OVTE {3paXELa OVT' o.(TCPaA.ryS' 
OVTE /Jq.oia. 0.11.11.' OVK E~E(Jn avopa o.A.ryewS' KaA.OV Kat o.yaeov YWE(TeaL aVEv 
[without + gen.] 7TOVWV. XaA.E7Ta yap TO. KaA.a, 0.11.11.' E7TaWE(TOv(Ti (TE 7TaVTES' 
OL aVepW7TOL Kat 7TaVTES' OL eWL. " TaVT'[l OE TO ovofJ.a r,v 'APETry. 
III. Render into Greek. 
1. It is necessary for all of our hoplites to exercise themselves; for this makes 
them strong in hand and brave in spirit. I 
2. The old women said that the man was rich, ugly, and difficult, while his 
wife was graceful and pleasant. 
3. The general did all these good deeds to the city, but he was put to death by 
you because of the wicked orators who made false accusations against him. 
I. Hint: for in hand and in spirit review U 17. 

UNIT TWENTY -THREE 
MI-Verbs: Present System 
1. p..L-Verbs. In classical Attic a limited number of basic verbs form the 
present and/or aorist systems by adding personal endings directly to the tense 
stem without intervening theme vowel or tense vowel. These verbs form the 
second major conjugational class in Greek (alongside the w-verbs) and are 
called athematic ("without theme vowel") verbs or p..L-verbs (from the primary 
personal ending of the 1 st person sing.). You have already learned two p..L-
verbs which feature slightly irregular inflection: Eip..i (U 10) and <p1]p..i (U20). 
2. Personal Endings. The personal endings are readily apparent in p..L-
verbs, and those used in the active are slightly different from those you have 
learned for the thematic conjugation, while the middle or middle/passive per-
sonal endings are exactly the same. 
MI-VERB PERSONAL ENDINGS 
primary 
primary 
secondary 
secondary 
active 
middle/passive 
active 
middle/passive 
sing. 
1st 
-}It 
-}lat 
-v 
-fJ.7]V 
2nd 
-, 
--{]"at 
-, 
-(TO 
3rd 
--{]"t(V) 
-Tat 
-TO 
(dual 
2nd 
-TOV 
--{]"Bov 
-TOV 
--{]"Bov) 
(3rd 
-TOV 
--{]"Bov 
-TT)V 
--{]"BT)v) 
plur. 
1st 
-}lEV 
-wBa 
-}lEV 
-}lEBa 
2nd 
-TE 
--{]"BE 
-TE 
--{]"BE 
3rd 
-am(v) 
-VTat 
--{]"av 
-VTO 
The active infinitive ending for p..L-verbs is -vaL (with the accent always on the 
syllable preceding -vaL); the middle infinitive ending is -(TeaL (with the accent 
on A in the present and on P in the aorist). 
3. The Major p..L-Verbs. The four most common p..L-verbs are Tie1]p..L. 
L1]p..L. L(TT1]p..L. and oiowp..L. All have present stems derived from the verb root 
169 

170 
UNIT TWENTY -THREE 
with iota-reduplication (defined in UI9.7b). It is also characteristic that the 
present stem of these verbs has two forms: a strong. long-vowel form in the 
singular of the active. and a normal. short-vowel form in the other forms 
(plural ofthe active. all middle/passive forms; infinitive and participles). 
verb root 
. 
E-
present stem1 
n(}YJ-, n(}E-
iYJ-, iE-
(TTa-
00-
irrTYJ- [non-Attic-Ionic irrT(l-], irrTa-
ow-, 00-
PARADIGMS 
TI.(}YJjJ.t, "place" 
pres. act. info n(}EVat 
pres. mJp info TI.(}Err(}at 
pres. act. 
pres. m/p 
imperf act. 
imperf m/p 
s. 
1st 
TI.(}YJjJ.t 
TI.(}EjJ.at 
hi(}YJv 
En(}EjJ.YJv 
2nd 
TI.(}YJe; 
TL(}Errat 
hl.(}Ete; 
hl.(}Erro 
3rd 
TL(}YJrrt(v) 
TL(}ETat 
hi(}Et 
hi(}ETO 
(d. 
2nd 
TL(}ETOV 
TI.(}Err(}ov 
hi(}ETOV 
hi(}Err(}ov) 
(3rd 
TI.(}ETOV 
TI.(}Err(}ov 
En(}ETYJv 
En(}Err(}YJv) 
pl. 
1st 
Ti(}EjJ.EV 
n(}EjJ.E(}a 
hl.(}EjJ.EV 
En(}EjJ.E(}a 
2nd 
Ti(}ETE 
TI.(}Err(}E 
hl.(}ETE 
hi(}Err(}E 
3rd 
n(}EQm(v) 
TI.(}EVTat 
hi(}Errav 
hi(}EVTO 
Note: the 2nd and 3rd sing. imperf. act. are explained as from *hi(}EEe;, *hi(}EE, with 
endings borrowed from w-conjugation and contracted. 
LYJjJ.t, "let go, throw" 
pres. act. inf. iEVat 
pres. mJp info LErr(}at 
pres. act. 
pres. m/p 
imperf act. 
imperf m/p 
s. 
1st 
LYJjJ.t 
" tEjJ.at 
" 
. , 
lYJV 
lEjJ.YJV 
2nd 
" 
" 
lYJe; 
lErral 
" 
LErro 
lEte; 
3rd 
LYJrrl(V) 
LETal 
" 
" 
lEt 
lETO 
2nd 
" 
LErr(}ov 
lETOV 
(d. 
" 
LErr(}ov) 
lETOV 
(3rd 
" 
LErr(}ov 
lETOV 
ihYJv 
iErr(}YJV) 
1st 
" 
iEjJ.E(}a 
lEjJ.EV 
pl. 
" 
iEjJ.E(}a 
lEjJ.EV 
2nd 
" 
LErr(}E 
lETE 
" 
LErr(}E 
lETE 
3rd 
iurrl(v) 
" lEVTal 
" 
LEVTO 
lErrav 
1. n8€- from *8L8€- by Grassmann's law (U19.7d); the original root OfL1)}J.L was *y€-, which 
became *h€-, forming *(h)L(h)€-; itTTa- is from *(tT)LtTTa-. 

MI-Verbs: Present System 
171 
Note: the 3rd pI. pres. act. is a contraction of *LEQ.(]'L(V); the 2nd and 3rd sing. imperf. 
act. are explained as from *LW'. * LEE , with endings borrowed from w-conjugation and 
contracted. In Attic the initial iota is usually long in the present (and of course always 
long when augmented in the imperfect); in Homeric Greek the initial iota is short, 
unless augmented. 
LG'T1)}.J.L, "make stand" pres. act. inf. LG'TavaL 
pres. act. 
pres. m/p 
imperj act. 
imperj m/p 
s. 
1 st 
" 
" 
LG'T1)}.J.L 
LG'TajJ.aL 
LG'T1)V ( t) 
LG'TajJ.1)V ( t) 
2nd 
" 
" 
LG'T1)<; 
LG'TaG'aL 
" 
LG'TaG'o 
LG'T1)<; 
3rd 
LG'T1)G'L(V) 
LG'TaTaL 
" 
" 
LG'T1) 
LG'TaTO 
2nd 
LG'TaTov 
LG'TaG'8ov 
(d. 
" 
LG'TaG'8ov) 
LG'TaTOV 
(3rd 
" 
LG'TaG'8ov 
LG'TaTOV 
, 
, 
LG'TaG'81)v) 
LG'TaT1)V 
1st 
" 
LG'TajJ.E8a 
LG'TajJ.EV 
pl. 
" 
LG'TajJ.E8a 
LG'TajJ.EV 
2nd 
LG'TaTE 
LG'TaG'8E 
LG'TaTE 
LG'TaG'8E 
3rd 
LG'TQG'L(V) 
" LG'TaVTaL 
" 
LG'TavTo 
LG'TaG'av 
Note: the 3rd pI. pres. act. is a contraction of *LG'TaQ.G'L(v). 
OLOWjJ.L, "give" 
pres. act. info oL06vaL 
pres. m/p inf. oLooG'8aL 
pres. act. 
pres. m/p 
imperj act. 
imperj m/p 
S. 
1st 
OLOWjJ.L 
oLoojJ.aL 
EOLOOVV 
EOL06jJ.1)v 
2nd 
OLOW<; 
oLooG'aL 
EOLOOV<; 
EOLOOG'O 
3rd 
OLOWG'L(V) 
OLOOTaL 
EOLOOV 
EOLOOTO 
(d. 
2nd 
OLOOTOV 
oLooG'8ov 
EOLOOTOV 
EOLOOG'8ov) 
3rd 
OLOOTOV 
oLooG'8ov 
EOL06T1)v 
EOL06G'81)v) 
pI. 
1st 
OLOOjJ.EV 
o L06jJ.E8a 
EOLOOjJ.EV 
EOLoojJ.E8a 
2nd 
OLOOTE 
oLooG'8E 
EOLOOTE 
EOLOOG'8E 
3rd 
oL06aG'L(v) 
oLoovTaL 
EOLooG'av 
EOLOOVTO 
Note: the sing. imperf. act. forms are explained as from *EOLOOOV, *EOLOOE<;. *EOLOOE, 
with endings borrowed from w-conjugation and contracted. 
4. Verbs in -VVjJ.L Another group of jJ.L-verbs has present stem with suf-
fix vv (or vvv after a vowel) and shows no reduplication: for example, OELKVV-
jJ.L (OELK-). P~YVVjJ.L (p1JY-), KEpavvvjJ.L (KEpa-). Note that in these verbs the v 
is long in the singular present active and imperfect active forms, short in all 
the other forms (compare the major jJ.L-verbs). 

172 
UNIT TWENTY -THREE 
Ex. 
OELKVVjJ.L, "show" 
infinitives: OELKV1JVaL, OELKVV(J"eaL 
pres. act. 
pres. mlp 
imperj act. 
imperj mlp 
s. 
1st 
OEiKVV/lL 
oEiKVV/laL 
EOEiKVVV 
EOHKVV/lT/V 
2nd 
oEiKVV<; 
oEiKvvO"aL 
EOEiKVV<; 
EOEiKVVO"O 
3rd 
OdKVVO"L(V) 
OEiKVVTaL 
EOEiKVV 
EOEiKVVTO 
(d. 2nd 
oEiKVVTOV 
oEiKVV(J"$OV 
EOEiKVVTOV 
EOEiKVVO"$OV) 
(3rd 
OdKVVTOV 
oEiKVVO"$OV 
EOHKVVTT/V 
EOHKVVO"$T/V) 
pl. 1st 
OdKVV/lEV 
OHKVv/lE$a 
EOEiKVV/lEV 
EOHKVV/lE$a 
2nd 
oEiKVVTE 
oEiKVVO"$E 
EOEiKVVTE 
EOEiKVVO"$E 
3rd 
oHKvvom(v) 
OdKVVVTaL 
EOEiKvvO"av 
EOEiKVVVTO 
5. ELjJ.L, "to go." The Greek verb "to go" has slightly irregular jJ.L-verb 
inflection. The stems used in the present are EL- (augmented n-), ELE-
(augmented nE-), L-, and LE-. The present active infinitive is LEvaL. 
pres. act. 
imperj act. 
s. 
1st 
-. 
-. 
" 
H/lL 
'(Ia 
or 
!lEW 
2nd 
-. 
~HO"$a 
" 
H 
or 
!lW; 
3rd 
EiO"L(V) 
" 
" 
'(lEW 
or 
!lH 
(d. 
2nd 
LTOV 
~TOV) 
(3rd 
LTOV 
~TT/V ) 
pl. 
1 st 
L/lEV 
~JlEV 
v 
9 
2nd 
LTE 
'(ITE 
3rd 
LiiO"L(V) 
~O"av 
or 
ilEO"av 
In Attic prose ELjJ.L and its compounds normally have a future meaning in the 
present indicative (and in indirect discourse transformations of the present 
ind.): ELjJ.L = I am going, /' II go. In the imperfect indo and in the other moods 
the tenses of ELjJ.L have normal meaning. The most commonly used forms to 
express to go (simple verb and compounds of it) in Attic are thus: present 
EPX0jJ.aL, imperfect va, future ELjJ.L, aorist 11 A.eo V .' 
Note that some forms of ELjJ.L can be confused with similar or identical 
forms of ELjJ.L or LYJjJ.L unless close attention is paid to breathing, accent, and 
presence or absence of iota subscript: LEvaL = to throw vs. LEvaL = to go; ELO"t = 
they are vs. EL(J"L = he'll go; l1(J"av = they were vs. V(J"av = they went; the form EL 
may be either you (s.) are or you (s.) will go (context will usually make clear which 
translation to use). 
I. Imperfect r,Px0p.T/V in Attic prose is always from apxw rather than EPX0P.Ut; the future 
EAEvCTop.at is much rarer than EI.P.L. 

MI- Verbs: Present System 
173 
6. Other Tenses of Jl.L- Verbs. Verbs that have athematic conjugation in 
the present system have ordinary w-conjugation in the future, as is obvious 
from the future principal parts; in the aorist some have athematic conjugation 
and some have regular weak aorist in -era. You must learn the principal parts 
to know what kind of aorist each verb has. Athematic aorist conjugation will 
be treated in the next unit (for now, simply learn the principal parts). 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the inflectional patterns of the Jl.L-verbs presented above. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
J.L,.verbs 
oiow/.J.L. OWlJw. EOWKa 
a:Trooiow}J-t (a7To) 
}J-f:TaOiOW}J-L (}J-Ha) 
7Tapaoiow}J-t (7Tapa) 
7TpOOLOW}J-t (7TpO) 
Z1]}J-t. ~lJw. -ryKa I 
acpi1]}J-t (a7To) 
lIJT1]}J-t. IJT~IJW. EIJT1]lJa and 
EIJT1]V 
give; (pres. + imperf.) offer; grant, allow 
[antidote, 
apodosis] 
give back, return; pay; (mid.) sell 
give a part of, give a share of (+ gen. of thing 
shared) 
give over, hand over; surrender, deliver over 
give in advance; (more commonly) give up, betray, 
abandon 
let go; throw, hurl; utter (words); (mid.) hasten, rush 
send forth, send away; release, set free; leave 
alone, neglect 
send on, against; let go, yield; (mid.) command, 
give orders; (mid.) aim at, long for (+ gen.) 
let come to; (more commonly mid.) let come to 
oneself, admit 
(act and 1 st aor., transitive) make stand. set up; 
cause to stand, stop. check 
(pass. and 2nd aor., intrans.) be placed, be set up. 
stand; stand still, halt 
[hypostasis, rheostat] 
(trans.) put out of the way; cause to revolt; 
(intrans.) keep (oneself) away from, apart from; 
revolt from (+ a7To + gen.) 
I. The hyphen indicates that this fonn occurs only in compounds in Attic prose (the simple 
fonn is found in poetry). 

174 
ava Tl.eTJ}J.L (ava) 
f:TnT l.eT/J.J.L ( E 
7T d 
OEI.KVV}J.L, OEl.tw, EOEtta 
a7TOOEI.KVVjJ.L (a7TO) 
(EVYVVjJ.L, (EVtw, E(EVta 
pr,YVVjJ.L, p~tw, EPPTJta I 
c,' 
EtjJ.L 
G.7TEtjJ.L (a7TO) 
EtEtjJ.L (EK) 
EXERCISES 
UNIT TWENTY -THREE 
(trans.) set upon, set in charge of; cause to stop; 
(intrans.) stand upon, by, against; be in charge of 
(+ dat.) 
(trans.) set down; set in order; appoint; establish; 
(intrans.) set oneself down, in order; settle; 
become; be established 
set, place, put; set up, establish; bring to pass; make, 
cause 
[thesis, hypothesis] 
set up as an offering, dedicate 
[anathema] 
place upon; add to; (mid.) make an attempt upon, 
attack ( + dat.) 
[epithet] 
put down; pay down; (mid.) lay aside, store up; put 
an end to; put away in a safe place 
put together; (mid.) make an agreement with (+ 
dat. of person), agree on, conclude (a pact, etc.) 
[synthetic J 
show, point out 
[deictic J 
display, make known; appoint, proclaim, create 
[apodeictic, apodictic J 
exhibit, display; show, point out, prove 
[epideictic I 
yoke, join together 
[zeugmaJ 
break, shatter 
[hemorrhage] 
go, will go [ion] 
go away 
go out 
I. Translate the following fonns precisely, and for any ten give a complete 
identification. 
I. hnoEt:tw 
10. " 
19. " 
wT17eH 
LP.EV 
2. 7TapaOlOWI} 
II. oweTEw 
20. ' 
, 
EPP17yvVTO 
3. 
acp~CTovcH 
12. aVETieH 
21. a7TEoElKVVCTO 
4. ECPlHI} 
13. (EVYVVVTaL 
22. OElKVVI} 
5. 
' 
, 
14. ' 
, 
23. Ka Ta8~CTETE 
a7TLEVaL 
EPP17YvV 
6. Ka8lCTTaTo 
IS. EtVECTav 
24. 7Tapaoloop.EV 
7. acpLEvaL 
16. E7TLTl8Ep.aL 
25. EcplEp.aL 
8. 
'" 
17. 7TpooLooaCTL 
26. 
, 
HCTL 
KaTaCTT17CTOVCTL 
9. p.ETaolooTE 
18. EOlOOVI} 
27. p.ETaOiowCTL 
I. Verbs which begin with rho double the rho when augmented with epsilon (ipp-). 

MI-Verbs: Present System 
175 
28. " 
33. acpi(TTa}J-aL 
38. ECPL(TTU(TL 
L7]'iJ 
29. Ecpi(TTa(TaL 
34. Ti()7]'iJ 
39. (TVVT i()w()aL 
30. 7fpoDi'oo(T()aL 
35. EDLOO}J-7]V 
40. EtLTE 
31. 
, 
36. " 
41. E(EVYVVV 
7fPO(TLWTO 
LWTaL 
32. a 7fo'OiDo(T()aL 
37. DLDW'iJ 
42. E7fETi()H'iJ 
II. Render into Greek. 
1. they will go 
13. it was being yoked 
2. we were setting free 
14. she is admitting 
3. you (s.) pay down 
15. I revolt from 
4. to shatter (pres.) 
16. you (pI.) attack 
5. it was being set up 
17. they prove 
6. you (pI.) are betraying 
18. you (s.) were breaking 
7. about to make an agreement 
19. you (s.) will go away 
8. to shatter (aor.) 
20. we aim at 
9. they were giving a share of 
21. we hurl 
10. we are yoking 
22. it is being placed 
11. he appoints 
23. I was selling 
12. to go away (pres.) 
24. they cause to stand 
III. Reading. 
1. Ot }J-EV (Tv}J-}J-axoL acpi(TTaVTaL acp' ~}J-wv, Ot DE 7fOAE}J-WL E7fLTieWTaL TaL'iJ 
TEiXE(TW ~}J-wv, Ot '0' ~}J-ETEpOL (TTpaT7]YOt 7fpoDLOOa(TL TOS 7fOAH'iJ, aAA' 
V}J-EL'iJ Ot 7fOALTaL ov 7fPO(TiE(T()E mv'iJ 7fEpt Tl1'iJ ELpryV7]'iJ ayyEAOV'iJ. 
2. Ot }J-EV acppoVE'iJ ad EVTVXEL'iJ E(TE(T()aL ~yOVVTaL, Ot DE (TWCPpOVE'iJ TO. TWV 
av()pW7fWV OV7fOT' a(TcpaAi] vO}J-i(ov(Tw. 
3. 6 87]pa}J-EV7]'iJ aVf.7fryD7](TW [jumped up] E7ft TOV (3w}J-ov [altar] Kat El7fw' 
"EyW, ;;; aVDpE'iJ, ~yov}J-aL DELv }J-7] T0 KPLTiq. EtELvaL E}J-E a7fOKTELVaL, 
aAAo. KaTo. TOVTOV TOV vO}J-ov QV OlJTOL Eypa"'av 7fEpt TWV EV T0 
KaTaAoy~ !register (of citizens)] Kat V}J-LV Kat E}J-Ot T7]V Kpi(TW [legal 
judgment] ELvaL. Kat TOVTO }J-EV O1]AOV E(TTW, on [that] ovDEv [adv., not at 
all] }J-E WCPEAry(TH oDE 6 (3w}J-O'iJ, aAAo. (3ovAO}J-aL Kat TOVTO E7fLDELtaL, on 
[that] OlJTOL ov }J-ovov [only] EL(Tt 7fEpt av()pw7fOV'iJ aDLKoL, aAAo. Kat 7fEpt 
()WV'iJ aVO(TWL. " 
, 

UNIT TWENTY -FOUR 
MI -Verbs: Athematic Aorists 
1. Aorist 0/ fU- Verbs. The aorist systems of the Iu-verbs that you have 
learned contain forms derived from various origins. (1) Some forms are 
straightforwardly athematic forms (called strong aorist or "second" aorist); 
that is, secondary J..tL-verb personal endings are added directly to the simplest 
form of the verb root (with augment added in the indicative): for example, 
E(J"TTfV (from (J"TTf-), info (J"T11vaL In many cases, athematic aorists of this type 
have intransitive or quasi-passive meanings (e.g., E(J"TTfV, I stood, E{3TfV, I 
walked, EaA.WV, I was captured). (2) Some forms (in Attic, normally the 
singular active forms only) have weak-aorist a-endings added to a stem that 
has the suffix K (e.g., E8TfKa, I placed, EOWKa, I gave). (3) Some forms are true 
weak (first) aorist forms with suffix (J" (e.g., E(J"TTf(J"a, I caused to stand [from 
(J"TTf- + (J"-], info (J"T11(J"aL; EOELta, I showed). 
2. Aorist o/the Major J..tL-Verbs 
(SECOND) AORIST ACTIVE 
Ti81]J.l.L 
OiOWJ.l.L 
" 
L 1]J.l.L 
UTT1]J.l.L 
"place" 
"let go" 
"give" 
"stand" 
stems: 
8E-, 81]K-
E-, 1]K-
00-, OWK-
(J"T1]-
infinitive: 
8El.VaL 
cicpELvaL 
OovvaL 
(J"Tr,vaL 
1st 
E81]Ka 
cicpr,Ka 
EOwKa 
" 
s. 
EUT1]V 
2nd 
E81]Ka<; 
cicpr,Ka<; 
EOwKa<; 
" HTT1]<; 
3rd 
E81]Kdv) 
cicpr,KE(V) 
EOWKdv) 
" HTT1] 
(d. 
2nd 
E8ETOV 
ciCPEl.TOV 
EOOTOV 
EUT1]TOV) 
(3rd 
E8h1]v 
ciCPE i T1]V 
E06T1]v 
Eu"T~T1]V) 
pl. 
1st 
E8EJ.l.EV 
ciCPEl.J.l.EV 
E00J.I.EV 
EU"T1]J.l.EV 
2nd 
E8ETE 
ciCPEl.TE 
EOOTE 
Eu"T1]TE 
3rd 
E8EU"av 
ciCPE l.U"av 
EOoU"av 
EUT1]U"av 
176 

MI- Verbs: Athematic Aorists 
(SECOND) AORIST MIDDLE 
stem: 
infinitive: 
s. 
1st 
2nd 
3rd 
(d. 
2nd 
(3rd 
pl. 
1st 
2nd 
3rd 
TieT)}J.L 
"place" 
eE-
eEaeaL 
EeEjJ.T)V 
f!eov l 
Eeno 
EeWeOV 
EeEaeT)V 
EeEjJ.Eea 
f!eweE 
EeWTO 
" L T)jJ.L 
"let go" 
E-
ac/>faeaL 
ac/>EijJ.T)v 
ac/>Elao 
ac/>ElTo 
ac/>ELaeOV 
ac/>EiaeT)v 
ac/>EijJ.Eea 
ac/>ELaeE 
ac/>ELvTo 
177 
OiOWjJ.L 
Hgive" 
00-
ooaeaL 
EOOjJ.T)V 
EOOV 
EOOTO 
EooaeOV) 
EOOaeT)V) 
EOOjJ.Eea 
EooaeE 
EOOVTO 
Notes: (I) In Attic LaTT)jJ.L has no athematic aorist middle (see next paragraph). (2) The 
aorist of LT)jJ.L is shown in a compound since the simple verb is not used in the aorist in 
Attic prose; recall that the accent cannot precede the first preverb (augment [UI6.3, at 
end]), hence the accentuation of ac/>i]Ka, etc.; the EL of the aor. indo represents aug-
mented E (recall that a consonant has been lost from this root). The aor. act. inf. of LT)jJ.L 
differs from the pres. act. inf. of EtjJ.i only in the breathing: contrast ac/>ElvaL = to let go 
(aor.) with a7TElvaL = to be absent (pres.). (3) The aorist active infinitives of TieT)jJ.L, 
LT)jJ.L. OiOWjJ.L are derived from forms with alternative ending -EvaL, with contraction. 
3. The Two Aorists ojLarl}lu. The verb L<rTI}IU and its compounds have 
two aorists: 2 a transitive weak (first) aorist, causative in meaning, sharing the 
transitive meanings of the present, imperfect, and future active; and an intran-
sitive strong (second) aorist, sharing the intransitive or quasi-passive meanings 
of the present, imperfect, and future middle/passive. 
Ex. 
TOVTOV KaTE<Tnj<rap.EV KpLnjv. 
(trans. 1st aor.) 
We appointed this man judge. 
(We caused this man to be established as judge.) 
OlJTO~ KPLTry~ KaTf.<rTy]. 
(intrans. 2nd aor.) 
This man became (was appointed, was established as) judge. 
I. From *Eet{CT)O, with contraction; likewise EOOV from *EOO(CT)O. 
2. Note that the 3rd pI. aor. act. indo forms of i'ITT1)}J.L are identical in appearance, though 
derived from different combinations of elements: I st aorist ECTT1)CTaV from augment E - plus tense 
stem CTT1)CT- (= root ITT1)- + weak aorist suffix CT) plus tense vowel a plus personal ending v; 2nd 
aorist ECTT1)CTaV from augment E- plus tense stem ITT1)- plus personal ending CTav. 

178 
UNIT TWENTY -FOUR 
-------------------------- -------
There is no second aorist middle, but the first aorist middle is found: 
oi 'AeTJvaZo~ TOV tlTJfJ.O(JBEVTJ KaTHTT~(JavTo (JTpaTTJYov. 
The Athenians appointed Demosthenes as general for themselves. 
4. Other Athematic Aorists. A few verbs which are w-verbs in the pre-
sent system have athematic (second) aorist conjugation (in the active only, no 
middle). The secondary personal endings are added to the simplest form of the 
verb root, with augment added. These aorists, like E(JTTJV, are usually intran-
sitive or passive in sense (but EYVWV is transitive).l Four aorists of this kind are 
found in Attic prose: 
ar...i(JKOjJ.aL 
paivw 
, 
OVw 
YLYVW(JKW 
"be captured" 
"go, walk" 
"get to know " 
"enter, sink" 
aor. stem: 
ar...w-
1317-
yvw-
oiJ-
aor. infin.: 
ar...wvaL 
f3r,vaL 
yvwvaL 
ovvaL 
1st 
Ear...wv 
Ef3l7V 
" 
EOUV 
s. 
qvwv 
2nd 
Ear...wS' 
Ef3l7S' 
EyVWS' 
EOUS' 
3rd 
Ear...w 
Ef3l7 
" 
EOV 
qvw 
(d. 
2nd 
Ear...wTov 
Ef31JTOV 
" 
EOVTOV) 
EYVWTOV 
(3rd 
Ear...wTl7V 
Ef3r,Tl7V 
' 
, 
E01JTl7v) 
qVWTl7V 
pl. 
1st 
Ear...wjJ.Ev 
Ef3l7jJ.EV 
" 
EOVjJ.EV 
qVWjJ.EV 
2nd 
Ear...wTE 
Ef3l7TE 
" 
EOUTE 
EyvwTE 
3rd 
Ear...w(Jav 
Epl7(Jav 
" 
Eou(Jav 
Eyvw(Jav 
Note that the aorist of aAi(JKOfJ.a~ has a passive translation in English, I was 
captured, etc., despite the active personal endings. There are also forms of this 
aorist with the initial syllables contracted: 7]AWV, 7]AWS', etc. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the aorist inflections presented above. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
I. There is also a transitive 1st aorist of ovw found in Attic prose (EouCTa, caused to enter or 
sink); in poetry and outside Attic one may also meet transitive 1st aorists Et31/CTa, caused to 110, 
and (ciV)EyvwCTa. caused to realize. 

MI-Verbs: Athematic Aorists 
VOCABULARY 
nouns 
[3acnAEia. [3acnAEia>, f. 
i.AEveEpia. i.AEveEpia>, f. 
~(J"vxia. ~(jvxia>, f. 
adjectives 
7](J"vxo>. 7](J"vxov 
, 
, 
, 
7rLKPO>. 7rLKpa. 7rLKpOV 
verbs 
aAi(J"KOjlaL. aAw(J"OjlaL. 
EaAwv (or 7]AWV) 
j:3aivw. -j:3~(J"OjlaL. -Ej:3.,.,V 
ava(3aivw (ava) 
ow(3aivw (ow) 
Kamj:3aivw (Kam) 
napa(3aivw (napa) 
aVaytYVW(J"KW (ava) 
OWYLYVW(J"KW (ow) 
OVw (poetic OVVW). -ov(J"w. 
-Eov(J"a and EOVV [v in all 
three stems] 
anOOVW (ano) 
kingdom, dominion; kingship, monarchy 
freedom, liberty 
quiet, rest, calm 
quiet, calm, inactive 
[Hesychast] 
sharp, pungent; bitter, painful; spiteful, mean 
[picrate] 
be captured, be seized [used as passive of aipEw] 
walk, step, go 
[basis] 
179 
go up; board (a ship), mount (a horse); go inland 
[anabasis] 
step across; go over, cross 
[diabetes] 
step down; dismount; go down to the sea from 
inland 
[katabasis] 
go beside; overstep, transgress, violate 
[parabasis I 
come together; come to an agreement, come to 
terms; (impersonal) come to pass, happen 
read (aloud), recite (from a written document) 
know apart, distinguish; determine, decide (a suit) 
[diagnosis] 
(intrans. and non-causal, including 2nd aor.) enter; 
get into (clothes, armor); sink into the sea, set (of 
sun, stars) 
(trans. and causal, including 1 st aor.) cause to enter, 
cause to sink (more commonly in compounds) 
[ecdysiast] 
(act. and 1st aor.) strip off (someone else's armor 
or clothes) 
(mid. and 2nd aor.) take off (one's own clothes), 
undress 
(intrans. and 2nd aor.) set (of sun); plunge into 
(causal 1st aor.) cause to sink (ships) 

180 
UNIT TWENTY -FOUR 
EXERCISES 
I. Translate precisely. 
I. (JLE/3rwav 
15. EtiacH 
29. 7TPOELVTO 
2. a:7f'EooaBE 
16. 
E<pEaBa~ 
30. jJ.ETEOOTE 
3. hneEaBa~ 
17. avayvwva~ 
31. " 
1]O'"av 
4. a 7TEovO'"aS' 
18. " 
~TE 
32. aVEe1]KaS' 
5. a7Tooovva~ 
19. 
aAwva~ 
33. 
oHKv{1Va~ 
6. E<P17KE 
20. 
7Tapa/3~O'"EO'"eaL 
34. 
, 
yvwO'"ovTa~ 
7. O'"V jJ. /3 17 va ~ 
21. a7TEowKaS' 
35. 
O'"VVeELva~ 
8. ' 
, 
22. KaeiO'"T1] 
E7TEO'"T1]O'"aTE 
36. ~AWTE 
9. KaTEe1]Ka 
23. O'"vvE/3aLVov 
37. 
, 
KaTE O'"T1] O'"a jJ.EV 
10. a7TEovS' 
24. 
aAiO'"KOVTa~ 
38. ' , 
E7TEO'"T1] 
11. 
, 
25. 7TapE/31]S' 
Ka TEO'"T1]V 
39. E7TEeOV 
12. 
O~EYVW 
26. " EyvwO'"av 
40. 7TapEooTo 
13. a 7TOO'"T17O'"a~ 
27. KaTEov 
41. 
o~EY~ yVWO'"KOjJ.EV 
14. EaAwjJ.Ev 
28. E7TEe1]KE 
42. 
O'"VVeEO'"ea~ 
II. Render into Greek. 
I. Seven ships sank. 
10. you (s.) were attacking 
2. We sank ten triremes. 
11. they boarded 
3. you (pI.) attacked 
12. you (pI.) read aloud (aor.) 
4. to betray (aor.) 
13. we handed over 
5. we became [give two versions] 
14. you (s.) caused to revolt 
6. they were being captured 
15. They were all captured. 
7. to let come to oneself (aor.) 
16. he transgressed 
8. you (pI.) will cross 
17. The king' s wife undressed. 
9. That young man aimed at being 
18. we did not recognize 
chaste. 
III. Reading. 
I. EV EKEivV? T<{; 7TOAEjJ.v? aAAa TE oHva EYEVETO EV TaLS' jJ.axa~S' KaL 'AAKaLOS" 
6 7TO~1]TryS' ainoS' jJ.EV EtE<pVYE, I TryV 0' aO'"7Tioa EAt7TEV, oi 0' 'Ae1]VaLO~ av-
TryV EAa/3ov KaL TOLS' eEOLS' avEeEO'"av. 
2. OZOE jJ.EV EK 7TavToS' TP07TOV [by every conceivable means] /3ovAovTai jJ.E 
TfJ OiKTl aAwva~, VjJ.ELS' 0' ov 7TapayEO'"eE TOLS' "'EVOEO'"~ AOyO~S' aAA' ad (1]-
TELTE otayvwva~ TOVS' aA1]eWS' o~KaiovS' Kat TOVS' aoiKovS'. 
3. 
KaTa/3~O'"EO'"ea~ jJ.EAAW, (J; avopES' o~KaO'"Tai, aAAG. 7TPOTEPOV (3ovAojJ.a~ 
oAiya [a few (words)] EKaTEpmS' EL7TELV, TOLS' T' Et aO'"TEWS' Kat TOLS' EK 
I. Compound of EK-: guess the meaning. 

MI-Verbs: Athematic Aorists 
181 
nELpa~w'i" I EA:rr/{w yap Vj.l.U'i' 7rapaof.iYj.l.aTa [as examples] Etf.W Ta'i' 
(J"vj.l.cpopa'i' aL' Vj.I./'v o~a TOVTWV EYEVOVTO Kat TiJV trycpov o~Kaiw'i' Kat 
(J"OCPW'i' or(J"f.LV" OL j.l.EV Et Q.(J"Tf.W'i' XaAf.7rW'i' r,PXf.(J"8f. V7rO TOVTWV Kat o~a 
TOVTOV'i' aOf.Acpo/''i' [brothers] Kat VLE(J"~ Kat 7rOAi Ta~'i' 7rOAf.j.l.OV E7rOAf.-
j.l.f./'Tf.. 2 OL O· EK nf.tpa~W'i' Etf.7rE(J"f.Tf. 3 EK Try'i' 7raTpioo'i' Kat OV j3paxvv 
xpovov EOf./'(J"8f. 7raVTWV, Kat xprJj.l.aTWV Kat cpiAWV, aAAa TEAO'i' 
KanjA.8f.Tf.4 Ei'i' TiJV 'ATTLK~V. 
4. OVX 01JTOL TOV'i' Tf. 7roAf.j.l.iov'i' i(J"Xvpov'i' 7rOWV(J"L Kat TOV'i' cpiAOV'i' 7rPOO~­
OoaCTLV, 0L' EX8pov'i' [enemies] KWAVOV(J"~ 7rOAAOV'i' [many, numerous] 7r0~­
f./,(J"8a~, aAAa EKf./'VO~, 0L' aOiKW'i' Tf. xp~j.l.aTa acpa~povvTa~ [take away: a7ro 
+ aipEw] Kat TOV'i' o~Kaiov'i' a7roKTf.ivOV(J"Lv. 
1. Peiraieus, nHpUL~V,>. gen. n€LpULW,>. was and is the port town of Athens. In 404/3 the 
Athenians were forced into civil war by the actions of the "Thirty Tyrants," right-wing 
extremists who were installed as a puppet regime by the Lacedaemonians at the end of the 
Peloponnesian War (referred to in this adapted extract of an oration of Lysias as "these men"). 
The two sides in the strife eventually held Peiraieus and the town (Athens) respectively. 
2. 
7TOA~J.l..f.W = wage war with + dat. 
3. Compound of ~K-: guess the meaning. 
4. Compound of KUTU-: guess the meaning. 

UNIT TWENTY -FIVE 
Adjectives with Variant Stems; 
Numerals; Reflexive and Reciprocal 
Pronouns; Result Constructions 
1. Adjectives with Variant Stems. Two frequently used adjectives are in-
flected in Attic with two different stems, one using consonant-declension end-
ings (in rnasc. and neut. nom. and acc. sing.), the other using vowel-declension 
endings (in fern. and all other cases of rnasc. and neut.). 
a. 7fOAV'i. 7fOAAr,. 7fOAV, "much. many" 
stems: 7fOAV-. 7fOAA-' 
mase. 
fern. 
neut. 
sinf.:. 
nom. 
TrOAV'> 
TrOAA~ 
TrOAV 
gen. 
TrOAAOU 
TrOAA.Tj'> 
TrOAAOU 
dar. 
TroM(;,; 
TrOMfi 
TrOAA(;,; 
ace. 
TrOAVV 
TroM~v 
TrOAV 
(no dual) 
plur. 
nom. 
TrOAAOt 
TroAAat 
TrOAA.Q. 
f.:en. 
TrOAAWV 
TrOAAWV 
TrOAAWV 
dar. 
TrOAAOt'> 
TroAAat'> 
TrOAAOt'> 
ace. 
TrOAAov,> 
TrOAA.QS 
TroMa 
b. jJ.Eya'i. fJ.EyaAYJ. jJ.Eya, "great. large" 
stems: jJ.Eya-. fJ.qaA-
mase. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
, 
J.tEYaA1] 
nom. 
wya,> 
J.tEya 
f.:en. 
J.ttyaAov 
J.tEYaA1]'> 
J.tEYaAov 
dar. 
J.tEYaA<r 
J.tEyO.A-[7 
J.tEyaA<r 
, 
J.tEyaA1]v 
, 
ace. 
J.tEYav 
J.tEYa 
I. In poetry forms from both stems are found in all cases (the consonant stem has alternative 
form 7rOAE-; cf. t3apu<;); in Ionic all the forms are vowel-declension: 7rOAAlj." 7rOAA..q. 7rOAAOV. 
182 

Adjectives with Variant Stems; Reflexive; Result Constructions 
183 
mase. 
fem. 
neut. 
(dual 
n. a. 
JJ.qai\w 
JJ.qai\a 
JJ.EYai\w) 
(g. d. 
JJ.qai\ow 
JJ.Eyai\aw 
JJ.Eyai\ow) 
plur. 
nom. 
JJ.qai\ot 
JJ.Eyai\at 
JJ.EYai\a 
gen. 
JJ.qai\wv 
JJ.Eyai\wv 
JJ.EYai\wv 
dar. 
JJ.EYai\ot> 
JJ.Eyai\at> 
JJ.EYai\ot> 
ace. 
JJ.Eyai\ov> 
JJ.Eyai\a> 
JJ.Eyai\a 
2. Numerals. The cardinal numbers one, two, three, four are inflected as 
adjectives; the remaining cardinal numbers (through 200) are indeclinable, that 
is, they are used in all the cases and genders with no variation in form. Cor-
responding to each cardinal is an ordinal adjective (first, second, third, etc.); 
all of these have vowel-declension inflection -0" -1/, -ov (except lkunpo" 
which has alpha-feminine oEvTEpa). There are also numerical adverbs (once, 
twice, thrice, four times, etc.); from four times on these all have the suffix 
-aKt" found also in 7rOAAaKt" many times, often, and oALyaKL,,few times, 
rarely. 
cardinal 
ordinal 
adverb 
" 
1st 
71'PWTO> 
Q,7I'at 
one 
Wi', JJ.w. EV 
once 
two 
ovo 
2nd 
OEVTEPO> 
twice 
oi> 
three 
TpEL>, Tpia 
3rd 
thrice 
, 
TPtTO> 
Tpt> 
four 
, 
4th 
, 
4 times 
, 
TETTapE>. 
TETapTO> 
TETpaKt> 
, 
TETTapa 
five 
, 
5th 
5 times 
, 
71'EVTE 
71'EJJ.7I'TO> 
71'EVTaKt> 
six 
Et 
6th 
EKTO> 
6 times 
Etam 
, 
, 
7th 
EpOOJJ.O> 
7 times 
' 
, 
seven 
E7I'Ta 
E7I'TaKt> 
eight 
' 
, 
8th 
oyooo> 
8 times 
' 
, 
OKTW 
OKTaKt> 
nine 
' 
, 
9th 
9 times 
' , 
EVVEa 
EvaTO> 
EVaKt> 
ten 
OEKa 
10th 
oEKaTo> 
10 times 
oEKaKt> 
eleven 
EvoEKa 
11th 
EvoEKaTo> 
11 times 
EvoEKaKt> 
twelve 
owoEKa 
12th 
owoEKaTo> 
12 times 
owoEKaKt> 
The declension of the first four cardinals is as follows: 
"one": masc.!neut. stem EV-; short-vowel fern. stem jJ.L-
masc. 
fem. 
neut. 
sing. 
" 
,-
nom. 
E(> 
JJ.W 
EV 
, , 
JJ.tu> 
' , 
gen. 
EVO> 
EVO> 
dat. 
JJ.t~ 
, , 
EVt 
EVt 
" 
acc. 
Eva 
JJ.WV 
EV 

184 
UNIT TWENTY -FIVE 
"no one": a compound of OVDE and Er~, sometimes found written sepa-
rately; the accent of the compound is the same as that of simple E r~ 
except in nom. sing. masc.; masc.!neut. stem OVDEV-; short-vowel fern. 
stem OVDEjJ.L-. 
mase. 
fem. 
neut. 
sing. 
nom. 
OVOEL~ 
OVOEfJ.La 
OVOEV 
gen. 
ovow6~ 
OVOEfJ.la~ 
ovow6~ 
dat. 
OVOWL 
OVOEfJ.l9: 
OVOWL 
ace. 
ovoEva 
OVOEfJ.LaV 
OVOEV 
Exactly similar is the declension of jJ.7]DE[~, used in clauses and phrases 
which require negative jJ.-ry instead of ov.) 
"two": nom. acc. Mo, gen. dat. declined Dvotv or indeclinable Dvo; used 
with both dual and plural nouns. 
"three" 
'jour "2 
plur. 
nom. 
gen. 
dat. 
ace. 
plur. 
nom. 
gen. 
dat. 
acc. 
mase·lfem. 
TPEIS 
TplWV 
TPl(J'L(V) 
TPEI.~ 
mase.lfem. 
, 
TETTapE~ 
TETTClPWV 
TETTap(J'l(v) 
TETTapa~ 
3. Reflexive and Reciprocal Pronouns 
neut. 
, 
Tpta 
TplWV 
TPl(J'L(V) 
, 
Tpta 
neut. 
, 
TETTapa 
TETTapwv 
TETTap(J'l(v) 
, 
TETTapa 
a. A reflexive pronoun is one which refers back to the subject of its 
clause. Because of this relationship with the subject, the reflexive pronoun it-
self occurs only in the oblique (objective) cases, never in the nominative (sub-
jective) case. The English reflexive pronouns are myself, ourselves. yourself, 
yourselves. himself, herself, itself, themselves (the same forms as those used as 
intensive pronouns in apposition to noun or pronoun). 
I. Plural fOnTIS are occasionally found (cf. English nobodies); OVO~VH, OVOEVWV, 
OVO~ITt, 
ovo~va<;; }J:'10EVE<;, J.L1/o~va>. 
2. The non-Attic and Koine fonn is Tf.ITITapE<;, Tf.ITITapa. 

Adjectives with Variant Stems; Reflexive; Result Constructions 
185 
Ex. 
She talks to herself out loud. 
You should be ashamed o/yourselves. 
In Greek, what is translated into English as a reflexive action may often be 
expressed by the middle voice (UIU); for instance, 
r,YEjJ.ova aiJTov ELAOVTO. 
They chose him as leader for themselves. 
But Greek also has reflexive pronouns, and reflexive actions may be expressed 
with an active verb and reflexive pronouns. In Attic there is both a direct re-
flexive (one which has the subject of its own clause as antecedent) and an indi-
rect reflexive, that is, a reflexive within an indirect statement or subordinate 
clause that refers back to the subject of the main clause of the complex sen-
tence. Because of a difference of idiom, the Greek indirect reflexive will 
normally appear in English as a plain personal pronoun: 
Ex. 
They thought that the general would give them the prizes. 
The commonest reflexive, normally used directly and occasionally indi-
rectly, consists of personal pronoun stem (or pronoun, in 1st and 2nd person 
plural) strengthened by emphatic aiJTo~. 
first person: "myself, ourselves " 
second person: "yourself, yourselves" 
mase. 
fem. 
mase. 
fem. 
s. 
g. 
Ej.J.aVTOV 
EjJ.avTr,,> 
CTEaVTOV (O'aVToi)) 
CTEa VTr,'> (O'a VT71') 
d. 
EjJ.avTo/ 
EjJ.avTfI 
CTEaVTo/ (O'aVTer) 
CTEaVTfI (O'avTii) 
, 
, 
, 
, 
CTEaVT()V (O'aVTOV) 
CTEaVT~V (O'avT~v) 
a. 
EjJ.aVTOV 
EjJ.aVT'l)V 
pl. g. 
~jJ.wv alJTWV 
~jJ.wv alJTWV 
vjJ.wvalJTWV 
vjJ.wvalJTWV 
d. 
~jJ.LV ainoL" 
~jJ.LV ainaL" 
VjJ.LV alnoL" 
vjJ.LvalnaL" 
a. 
~jJ.u,> avwu,> 
~jJ.u" avn:ls 
vjJ.u" avwu" 
vjJ.u,> avn:ls 
third person: "himself, herself, itself, themselves" 
masc. 
fem. 
neuter. 
sing. 
gen. 
EaVTOV (alJToi)) 
EavTr,,> (alJT71') 
EaVTOV (alJToi)) 
dat. 
EavTo/ (alJTi{J) 
EavTfI (alJTii) 
EavTo/ (atJTi{J) 
acc. 
EaVTOV (alJT()v) 
EavT~v (auT~v) 
EaVTO (aUTO) 
pI. 
gen. 
EaVTWV (aUTWV) 
EaVTWV (aUTWV) 
EaVTWV (aiJTwv) 
dat. 
EavToL,> (auTOl,) 
EavTais (aUTaL,) 
EavToL'> (auToL,) 
ace. 
EavTov,> (auT01),) 
EavnJs (auTel,) 
favn). (auTel) 

186 
UNIT TWENTY -FIVE 
The alternative, contracted fonns for the second person singular and third 
person singular and plural reflexives are shown in parentheses. Note that the 
contracted fonns a1JTOU, etc., are distinguishable from the oblique cases of 
aVT(5~ only by the breathing sign.! The third plural reflexive may also be 
expressed by a combination of the third plural personal pronoun (TCPEIs (rare in 
classical Attic) with aVTo~: gen. (Tcpwv aVTwv; dat. (Tcpi(TW aVToL~ or avmL~; 
acc. (Tcpa~ avTOv~ or aVTOS; neuter (TcpEa avnl. 
Ex. 
7rPO~ EavTov AEyEt .. . 
He says to himself . . . 
OVTW~ WCPEA~(TETE V}1a~ avTOv~. 
In this way you will help yourselves. 
mum TO. xp~}1am ry}1LV aVTOL~ OLEOO}1EV. 
We distributed this money among ourselves. 
The indirect reflexive of the third person is sometimes expressed in Attic 
by the old personal pronoun of the third person, which survived in other 
dialects and in poetry, but was replaced by oblique cases of aVTo~ in classical 
Attic. The fonns are as follows (enclitic fonns in parentheses): 
gen. 
dat. 
ace. 
Ex. 
sin/? 
'i' 
OV 
'i' 
at 
" 
E 
plur. mase.lfem. 
plur. neuter 
(ov) 
O"epwv 
O"epwv 
(aD 
O"epLO"L(V) 
(O"epLO"dv]) 
O"epLO"L(V) 
W 
O"epa, 
(O"epa,) 
O"epf.a 
6 t:J.apELo~ EPOVAETO Ot TOV~ 7raLOa~ 7rapELVaL. 
Darius wanted his sons to be with him( self). 
(O"epLO"dv]) 
kepEa) 
b. A reciprocal pronoun is used to refer to the persons involved in a re-
ciprocal action, that is, one in which one person or group acts upon another 
person or group and is in turn acted upon by that other person or group. In 
English the compound pronouns each other and one another serve this func-
tion. In Greek a reciprocal action may be conveyed simply by the middle voice 
(UII.2), but there is also a reciprocal pronoun, aAA~Awv. This pronoun is 
ultimately derived from a compound phrase in which aAAo~ appeared twice, 
both in the nominative and in an oblique case. The reciprocal pronoun is 
declined only in the (dual and) plural and only in the oblique cases, as shown 
on the next page. 
I. Note also the difference between nom. ai)T(j~ or aim] and aVT(j~. the same man (from 6 
ai)T(j~ by crasis). or aVT~. the same woman (from ~ aVT~ by crasis). and ailT1/. this woman. 

Adjectives with Variant Stems; Reflexive; Result Constructions 
(dual 
plural 
Ex. 
RECIPROCAL PRONOUN 
gen., dar. 
(acc. 
masc. 
ci.A,\:ryAOW 
ci.AA~Aw 
gen. 
ci.AA~AwV 
dar. 
ci.,\,\~AOt" 
acc. 
ci.AA~AOV" 
Q.A.A.7}A.ovS' ciCnKOf)(TLv. 
They are wronging each other. 
fern. 
ci.,\,\~Aaw 
ci.AA~Aa 
ci.AA~Awv 
ci.,\,\ ~ Aat" 
ci.AA~Aa" 
neut. 
ci.,\,\~AOW) 
ci.,\,\~AW) 
ci.,\,\~AWV 
ci.AA~AOt" 
a'\'\y/Aa 
187 
4. Result Constructions. A result construction expresses one (subordi-
nate) action as the result of another action (the main action, which expresses 
the cause or antecedents of the result). In English a result is normally ex-
pressed by an infinitive phrase introduced by so as to, in such a way as to, 
enough to, sufficient to, or the like, or by a that-clause, usually anticipated in 
the main clause by the use of so or such. 
Ex. 
They are so foolish as to expect a miracle. 
They are foolish enough to be tricked by anyone. 
They are so foolish that everyone tricks them. 
They are such fools that everyone can trick them. 
In Greek there are two kinds of result contructions: 
a. Actual result construction: W(TTE (or wS') with the indicative (or some-
times another finite verb form, such as imperative). When the result is empha-
sized as an actual event, it is expressed in a clause, normally containing the 
indicative and introduced by W(TTE = and so, and thus, so that, and often antici-
pated in the antecedent or main clause by the use of oiJTW (or [KavaS', suffi-
cient, or the like). An actual result clause in Greek mayor may not be 
separated from its main or antecedent clause by a comma or semicolon; in the 
English translation there may be no punctuation, or a comma or period, 
depending on how closely the resulting action is tied to the antecedent action. 
Ex. 
OVTWS' acppovES' E(TTE, W(TTE EA.7Tf{ETf TOV <l>iA.L7T7TOV cpiA.wV YfV7}(Tf(jeat. 
You are so foolish that you (actually) expect that Philip will become 
friendly. 
OVTWS' aOLKoL EYEVOVTO, W(TTE 7TOA.iTaS' Q.7rEKTfWaV Q.KpiTOVS'. 
They proved to be so unjust that they put citizens to death without a trial. 

188 
UNIT TWENTY -FIVE 
}J-Eya ovvaTat 6 paCHAEV'l' WCJTE (YJTELTE [imperative] 7rELam a1JTOV v}J-U'l 
WcpEAELV. 
The king has great power. So seek to persuade him to aid you. 
The negative in actual result clauses is normally ov: 
XaAE7rO'l f(TTW' W(TT' OVK f7rEi(Ta}J-EV aVTov T?JV 7rOAW wcpEAi](TaL 
He is a harsh man, and thus we did not persuade him to aid the city. 
b. Natural result contruction: W(TTE (or tV'l) with the infinitive. When the 
result is emphasized as a potential or natural consequence of the cause or ante-
cedent action instead of as an actual event, it is expressed by W(TTE with the 
infinitive. The subject of the infinitive of result is in the acc. if it differs from 
the subject of the finite verb of the sentence and is left unexpressed if it is the 
same. The negative with the infinitive of result is }J-ry. In this construction the 
cause and the result are very tightly connected and the greater emphasis falls 
on the antecedent action or state of being, stressing that it is one that is likely 
to have a certain consequence (thUS punctuation in Greek is either absent or a 
comma and in English is usually absent). The infinitive of result does not 
assert that the result actually took place on any specific occasion, although 
actual occurrence is often implied by the context. Actual occurrence would in-
stead be asserted by the indicative in the actual result construction. 
Ex. 
01JTW'l acppoVE'l f(TTE W(TTE pq.oiw'l aOtKEL(T8at V7rO 7raVTwv. 
You are so foolish that you are easily wronged by everyone. 
[note omission of subject of aOtKEL(T8at, same as that of f(TTE] 
OVTW xaAE7roi €l(TW Ot 'A8YJvaLOt W(TTE }J-ry7rOTE pq.Oiw'l 7rEi8w8at TOL'l 
ayyEAOL'l. 
The Athenians are so difficult that they never easily trust messengers. 
[note negative }J-ry7rOTE 1 
6 pryTwp f(TTL }J-Eya'l, W(TTE 7ravTa'l iOELV TrJV KEcpaAryv. 
The speaker is tall enough so that everyone sees his head. 
[note 7ravTa'l subject acc. of iOELV 1 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Learn the declension and use of the adjectives. numerals, and pronouns 
presented above. 
2. Study result constructions. 
3. Learn as vocabulary the numerals and pronouns presented above as well as 
the words given below. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 

Adjectives with Variant Stems; Reflexive; Result Constructions 
189 
VOCABULARY I 
nouns 
wpaA:rj. KEcf>aAi}>, f. 
adjectives 
aKpno>. aKpLTov 
jJ.Eya>. jJ.Eya.A-l/. jJ.Eya 
AaKEoaLjJ.ovw>. -jJ.ovLa. 
-jJ.ovwv 
OL AaKEoaLjJ.ovwL 
DALYO>, DALYI/, DALYOV 
OL DALyOL 
DALyaKL> 
7roAV>. 7TOAA~. 7TOAV 
verbs 
OL 7TOAAOL 
7ToAAaKL> 
OWOLOWjJ.L (ow) 
ovvajJ.aL. OVV~rTOjJ.aL 2 
conjunctions 
WrTTE 
w> 
EXERCISES 
I. Reading. 
head 
[encephalitis] 
undecided; unjudged, without trial 
large, tall; great, mighty 
[megalomania, megabyte] 
Lacedaemonian [official term for the inhabitants of 
Laconia, the chief city of which was Sparta; 
sometimes loosely translated as Spartan] 
the Lacedaemonians, the Spartans 
little, small; few 
[oligarchy] 
oligarchs, oligarchical party 
few times, rarely, seldom 
much, many 
[polychromatic] 
the multitude, the greater number 
[hoi polloi] 
often, many times 
hand over; distribute 
be able, be strong enough (+ inf.); have power 
(frequently with internal acc., e.g., jJ.Eya OVVarT8aL. 
to have great power) 
so as, so that, that (of result) 
so that 
1. OV7TOTE (Unj>aA.'r, TO. J.i.EYaA.a. 
2. 7TPWTO\;3 T]vpOV TaVTT]V T1JV TLJ.i.~v. 
3. a<!>pwv EO'TI.V OVTO\;, 8\; EavT0 bOKEL 7TaVTa Mvad3aL. 
I. Note the many English derivatives of Greek numerals: e.g .. hendiadys. deuterium. 
Deuteronomy. tritium. triad. tetrahedron. tetralogy. pentagon. hebdomadal. hendecasyllabic. 
Dodecanese. 
2. This verb is a passive deponent ilL-verb; for present-system conjugation (similar to L(},TallaL) 
see Appendix 3: Paradigms. The aorist (passive) will be learned later. 
3. In Greek idiom. when 7TPWTO, agrees with the subject of a verb X. the sense is "be the first to 
X." 

190 
UNIT TWENTY -FIVE 
4. 6 nHo-LITTpaToS' f:3ao-~AEa TWV 'AeYJvaLwv TPI.S' EavTov KaTEo-TYJo-E' 01.S' yap 
EtE7fEo-EV. I aAAa TEAOS' o~a jJ..EyaAwv 7rOVWV KVPWS' [having power over + 
gen.] Q.7raVTWV KaTEo-TYJ. 
5. 7rOAAOVS' ALeOVS' Ef3aAAov OL f3apf3apo~. Wo-T' EOH EKao-Tov TWV 'EAAry-
vwv cpvAaTTWeW Kal. imEp Tr,S' KEcpaAr,S' T~V ao-7rLOa avEXHV. 2 
6. 6 jJ..EV 7raT~p CPLA~OS' TE Kat XaPLHS' .ryv Wo-e' imo 7raVTWV cp~AE~o-ea~. TWV 
OE OVO VEWV EKaTEpoS' EKaTEpov 7rOAAa KaKa AEYH Wo-e' V7rO jJ..YJOEVOS' 
E7raWE ~o-ea~. 
7. 6 jJ..EV ~WKAr,S' ov oLKawv -ryyE~o-ea~ ECPYJ TOVS' AaKEoa~jJ..ovLoVS' f3ao-~AELaS' 
Kae~o-Tava~ ELS' TaS' 7rOAHS'. OL o· aAAo~ 7ravTES' 7rpWTOV jJ..EV Elxov EV -ryo-v-
XLa, EavTOvS'. E7rHTa o· a7raS' TtS'3 aVTwv cpwv~v EPPYJtE [let loose his voice 
= broke into speech] Kal. ilpE~TO T~V EKELVOV yvwjJ..YJv. Kal. 01.JTwS' EKEAEVOV 
OL 
o-vjJ..jJ..axo~ TOVS' AaKEoa~jJ..ovLoVS' jJ..YJOEV 
7rO~E~V OHVOV 7rEPI. 7rOAW 
'EAAYJV~KryV. 
8. 6 'Ap~o-TocpavYJS' aEI. E7rOA~TEVETO Kal. TtjJ..r,S' EcpLETO. Wo-TE TOTE jJ..ETa 
EvvojJ..ov vYJi' a7rr,AeEV ELS' T~V ~~KEALav' ijA7r~(E yap 7rE~o-a~ TOV LlWvv-
o-wv [Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse] KYJOEo-T~V [kinsman by marriage] jJ..EV 
yEVEo-ea~ Evayopa, [Euagoras, ruler of Cyprus]. 7rOAEjJ..WV OE AaKEoa~­
jJ..OVLO~S'. CPLAOV OE Kal. o-vjJ..jJ..axov Tfl 7rOAH Tfl VjJ..ETEpa,. Kal. 7rOAAOI. 
KLVOVVO~ [dangers] .ryo-av 7rpoS' T~V eaAaTTav Kal. TOVS' 7rOAEjJ..LOVS'. aAAa 
ojJ..wS' [nevertheless] TQfJTa E7rpaTTE. Kal. TEAOS' E7rHo-E Llwvvo-wv jJ..~ 
7rEjJ.."'a~ Tp~ryPHS' as TOTE 7rapEo-KEVao-aTO AaKEOa~jJ..ovLo~S'. 
II. Render into Greek. 
1. Will the thieves be clever enough to conceal any of their many unjust 
deeds from the others? 
2. Wise men say that human beings ought to help one another, and so we do 
this. 
3. We seem to ourselves to be so virtuous that no one surpasses us. 
4. By the fact that [use articular infinitive] you fled, fellow soldiers, you 
made the battle bitter for yourselves and sweet for the enemy. 
5. For four days the sailors were able to prevent the hoplites from boarding 
(the ship), but on the fifth day a few fell ill, so that it was necessary for 
them to surrender themselves. 
I. EK- compound: guess the meaning. 
2. ava- compound: guess the meaning. 
3. The idiom 7TU, H, or D.7Ta, H, is a strengthened form of 7TU,. meaning "every single one (no 
matter who)." 

UNIT TWENTY -SIX 
Participles: Formation and Declension 
PRELIMINARIES 
A participle is a verbal adjective and is one of the non-finite fonns of the 
verb. Like such finite fonns as the indicative, the participle has such features 
as tense and voice and the ability to govern objects and be modified by ad-
verbs. Unlike finite fonns, however, the participle carries no distinction of 
person and cannot fonn the predicate of a clause. As an adjective, a participle 
modifies (and in inflected languages agrees with) a noun or pronoun, 
expressed or implied. 
In English, participles vary according to tense and voice. There are two 
simple fonns, the active in -ing and the (past) passive, which ends in -ed for 
regular verbs and is otherwise fonned for irregular verbs (the third principal 
part of an English verb is its past participle). English supplies other participles 
by using compound fonns with the auxiliaries being, having, and been. 
present active: seeing, helping 
present passive: being seen, being helped 
past active: having seen, having helped 
past passive: seen, having been seen; helped, having been helped 
In Greek, participles, like infinitives, may be fonned from any tense stem in all 
available voices. For the tenses you know so far, therefore, one can fonn pre-
sent active, present middle/passive, future active, future middle, aorist active, 
and aorist middle participles. 
I. Active Participles. Most active participles (and the aorist passive par-
ticiple, to be learned later) are fonned by the addition of the consonant-stem 
suffix VT to the tense stem plus theme vowel or tense vowel, if any. The masc. 
and neuter fonns have VT-stem declension, but (as in consonant-declension ad-
jectives with three endings) the feminine has an additional suffix (semivocalic 
iota = y, leading to euphonic changes) and short-alpha declension. 
191 

192 
UNIT TWENTY -SIX 
a. w-Verb Participles in -WV, -OV(Ta, -ov. In the present active, future 
active, and strong aorist active, -VT- is added to tense stem plus theme vowel 
o. The masc'!neuter stem thus ends in -OVT- and the declension is like that of 
yEpWV (UI4.3b). Euphonic changes produce a fern. stem ending in -OV(T-. 
Since participles are adjectives, their accent is persistent, not recessive. For the 
present and future, the accent is persistent on the final syllable of the tense 
stem, but in the strong aorist, by contrast, the accent is persistent on the theme 
vowel that precedes the participial suffix (cf. the treatment of strong aorist 
infinitives: ayaYELv vs. present ayuv). In present or future stems with -EW 
contraction, the E of the stem contracts with the theme vowel 0 to form OV, 
except in the nom. sing. masc., where -EWV produces -wv. 
masc.!neut. 
verb 
tense stem 
participle 
part. stem 
, 
" 
" 
" 
" 
ayw 
pres. 
ay-
aywv, ayovIJa ayov 
ayovT-
fut. 
at-
atwv, atovIJa atov 
atovT-
2nd aor. 
, 
ayaywv, ayayovIJa, ayayov 
ayay-
ayayovT-
, 
jJ.EVWV, jJ.EvOVIJa, jJ.EVOV 
jJ.EVW 
pres. 
jJ.EV-
jJ.EVOVT-
fut. 
jJ.EVE-
/lEVWV, /lEVOVIJa, /lEVOVV 
/lEVOVVT-
7ro~EW 
pres. 
7rO~E-
7rO~WV, 7rotOvIJa, 7rOtOVV 
7rOtOVVT-
fut. 
7rO~ ~IJWV, 7rO~ ~IJOV(Ja, 7rotf]lJ"ov 
, 
7rO~ r]lJ"-
7rO~ YJIJOVT-
ELOOV 
2nd aor. 
io-
iowv, ioovIJa, ioov 
iOOVT-
DECLENSION: PRESENT OR FUTURE, UNCONTRACTED 
masc. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
" 
" 
n. v. 
aywv 
ayovIJa 
ayov 
ayovTO'l 
" 
g. 
ayovIJYJ'l 
aYOVTO, 
d. 
ayovTL 
' 
, 
ayovIJ!1 
aYOVTL 
" 
ayovIJav 
" 
a. 
aYOVTa 
ayov 
(dual 
ayovTE 
' 
, 
ayovTE) 
n. a. v. 
ayovIJa 
(g. d. 
' 
, 
, 
, 
ayovToLV ) 
ayovToLV 
ayovIJaLV 
plur. 
" 
" 
" 
n. v. 
ayovTE'l 
ayovIJa~ 
ayovTa 
, , 
ayovIJwv 
' 
, 
g. 
ayovTwv 
ayovTwv 
d. 
ayovIJ~(v) 
ayovIJa~'l 
ayovIJ~(v) 
a. 
ayovTa'l 
ayovIJaS' 
ayovTa 

Participles: Formation and Declension 
193 
DECLENSION: PRESENT OR FUTURE, CONTRACTED 
mase. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
n. v. 
jlEVWV 
jlEVofHJ"a 
jlEVOVV 
g. 
WVOVVTO'> 
, 
jlEVOVVTO'> 
jlEVOV(J7]'> 
d. 
jlEVOVVTL 
, 
jlEVOVVTL 
jlEVOV(JT! 
a. 
jlEVOvVTa 
jlEVov(Jav 
jlEVOVV 
n. a. v. 
jlEVOVVH 
, 
jlEVOVVH) 
jlEVOV(Ja 
(dual 
(g. d. 
jlEVOVVTOW 
, 
jlEVOVVTOW) 
jlEVOV(Jaw 
plur. 
n. v. 
jlEVOVVH'> 
jlEVov(Jat 
jlEVOVvTa 
, 
jlEVOV(JWV 
, 
g. 
jlEVOVVTWV 
jlEVOVVTWV 
d. 
jlEVOV(Jt(V) 
, 
jlEVOV(Jt(V) 
jlEVOV(Jat'> 
jlEVOVvTa,> 
, 
jlEVOvvTa 
a. 
jlEVov(Ja,> 
DECLENSION: STRONG AORIST ACTIVE 
mase. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
n. v. 
At7TWV 
At7TOV(Ja 
At7TOV 
g. 
At7TOVTO'> 
At 7TOV(JTf'> 
At7TOVTO,> 
d. 
At7TOVTL 
At7TOV(JT! 
At7TOVTL 
a. 
At7TOVTa 
At7TOv(Jav 
At7TOV 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
At7TOvH 
At7TOv(Ja 
At7TOVH) 
(g. d. 
At7TOVTOW 
At7Tov(Jaw 
At7TOVTOW) 
plur. 
n. v. 
At7TOVH'> 
At7Tov(Jat 
At7TOVTa 
g. 
At7TOVTWV 
At7TOV(Jwv 
At7TOVTWV 
d. 
At7TOV(Jt(V) 
At7TOv(Jat'> 
At7TOV(Jt(v) 
a. 
At7TOVTa'> 
At7TOv(Ja'> 
At7TOVTa 
b. Weak Aorist Active Participles in -0.5", -Q.(Ja, -avo In the weak aorist 
active, -VT- is added to tense stem plus tense vowel a. The masc.lneuter stem 
thus ends in -aVT- and the declension is like that of yiyQ.~ (U14.3b). Euphonic 
changes produce a fern. stem ending in -Q.(J"-. The accent is persistent on the 
final syllable of the tense stem. 
masc.!neut. 
verb 
tense stem 
participle 
part. stem 
AVw 
AV(J-
AV(JU'>, AV(Ju(Ja, AV(Jav 
AV(JavT-
7TEjl7TW 
7TEjl"'-
7TEjl"'U,>. 7TEjl",u(Ja. 7TEjl"'aV 
7TEjl "'avT-
, 
jlEtVU,>. jlEtVu(Ja. jlEtVaV 
jlEVW 
jlEW-
jlEwaVT-

194 
UNIT TWENTY -SIX 
DECLENSION: WEAK AORIST ACTIVE 
rnase. 
fern. 
neut. 
sing. 
n. v. 
AVrTOS 
AVrTQrTa 
AVrTaV 
g. 
AVrTUVTOr; 
AV(J(1.rT1Jr; 
AVrTUVTOr; 
d. 
AVrTUVn 
AV(J(1.rTTI 
AVrTUVn 
a. 
AVrTUVTa 
AVrTUrTaV 
AVrTUV 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
AVrTUVTE 
AV(J(lrTU 
AVrTavTE) 
g.d. 
AVrTaVTOW 
AVrTarTaW 
AVrTaVTow) 
plur. 
n. v. 
AVrTUVTEr; 
AVrTUrTU~ 
AVrTUVTa 
g. 
AVrTaVTWV 
AVrTUrTWV 
AVrTaVTWV 
d. 
AVrTQrT~(V ) 
AVrTarTa~r; 
AVrTQrT~(V ) 
a. 
AVrTUVTar; 
AVrTarTar; 
AVrTaVTa 
c. 
Jl.~-Verb Participles: in Jl.~-verbs the participial suffix is added directly 
to the tense stem, which already ends in a vowel. Euphonic changes in the 
fern. produce stems endings in -a(J"-, -(t(J"-, -OV(J"-, -VrT-. The accent of athe-
matic participles is persistent on the final vowel of the stem. Full declensional 
patterns for participles of these kinds are given in the Appendix 3: Paradigms. 
" 
~rTT1JIJ.L 
" 
~ 1J1J.L 
(compounds 
only) 
OELKVVIJ.L 
present active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
aorist active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
present active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
aorist active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
present active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
aorist active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
present active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
aorist active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
present active part. 
masc.!neut. stem 
o~oovr;, O~OOVrTU, o~06v 
o~06vT-; dat. pI. O~OOVrT~(v) 
oovr;, OOVrTU, oov 
OOVT-; dat. pI. OOVrT~(v) 
irTTar;, irTTUrTU, irTTaV 
irTTaVT -; dat. pI. irTTUrT~(V) 
rTTar;, rTTUrTU, rTTaV 
rTTaVT -; dat. pI. rTTUrT~(V) I 
neELr;, neELrTU, neEV 
neEVT-; dat. pI. neELrT~(V) 
eELr;, eELrTa, eEV 
eEVT-; dat. pI. eELrT~(V) 
idr;, iELrTU, iEV 
iEVT -; dat. pI. iELrT~(V) 
(acp)ELr;, (acp)ELrTU, (acp)Ev 
(acp)EvT-; dat. pI. (acpMrT~(v) 
oHKvvr;, OHKVVrTU, OHKVVV 
OHKVVVT-; dat. pI. OHKVVrT~(V) 
I. Similar is poetic present active part. of cp7]J.d: cpas, cpnCTu, cpa.v, stem cpa.VT-, dat. pI. cpnCTL(v); 
but in prose the participle cpa.CTKWV from cpa.CTKW is used instead. 

Participles: Formation and Declension 
, , 
present active part. 
Et}.(t 
masc./neut. stem 
,. 
present active part. 
Et}.(t 
masc./neut. stem 
f3aivw 
aorist active part. 
masc./neut. stem 
uAierKo}.(at 
aorist active part. 
masc./neut. stem 
ytyvwerKw 
aorist active part. 
masc./neut. stem 
ovw 
aorist active part. 
masc./neut. stem 
" 
.,. 
'I' 
WV. overa. ov 
OVT-; dat. pI. o~crt(v) 
iwv, tOl}(TU, i6v 
iOVT-; dat. pI. iovert(v) 
f3a.r;. paera. f3cw 
f3avT-; dat. pI. f3aert(v) 
UAOV~. UAovera. UAOV 
UAOVT-; dat. pI. UAOVert(V) 
yVOV~. yvovera. yvov 
YVOVT-; dat. pI. yvovert(v) 
OV~. overa. ovv 
OVVT-; dat. pI. ovcrt(v) 
195 
2. Middle/Passive Participles. All middle/passive or middle participles 
have the suffix -J.l.EVO~, -J.l.EV1) , -J.l.EVOV. This is added to the tense stem plus 
theme vowel 0 in present, future, and strong aorist; to tense stem with tense 
vowel a in weak aorist; or directly to the tense stem in J.l.t-verbs. In contract 
verbs in -EW the final E of the stem contracts with theme vowel 0 to produce ov 
before the suffix. The accent is persistent on the syllable preceding the suffix. 
The declension of middle/passive participles is like that of eta-feminine vowel-
declension adjectives such as ayaea~. -ry. -avo 
verb 
" ayw 
ayyEAAw 
, 
7TOtEW 
terT1]}.(t 
tense and voice 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
weak aor. mid. 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
strong aor. mid. 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
weak aor. mid. 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
weak aor. mid. 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
aor. mid. 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
weak aor. mid. 
participle 
, 
7TE}.(7TO}.(EVO~. -1], -OV 
7TE}.("'O}.(EVO~. -1]. -ov 
7TE}.(",a}.(EVo~. -1]. -ov 
, , 
ayo}.(EVo~. -1]. -ov 
, c' 
ac;o}.(EVo~. -1]. -ov 
, 
, 
ayayo}.(EVo~. -1]. -ov 
aYYEAAo}.(EVO~. -1]. -ov 
aYYEAov}.(EVO~. -1]. -ov 
ayyEtAa}.(EVo~. -1]. -ov 
7TOWV}.(EVO~. -1]. -ov 
7TOt1]ero}.(Evo~. -1]. -ov 
7TOt1]era}.(EVo~, -1]. -ov 
ot06}.(EVo~. -1]. -ov 
owero}.(EVo~, -1]. -ov 
06}.(EVo~, -1]. -ov 
~erTa}.(Evo~. -1]. -ov 
, 
erT1]ero}.(EVo~. -1]. -ov 
, 
erT1]era}.(EVO~. -1]. -ov 

196 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
(compounds) aor. mid. 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
aor. mid. 
pres. mid./pass. 
fut. mid. 
weak aor. mid. 
UNIT TWENTY -SIX 
, , 
LEjJ.EVO>. -1/. -ov 
1/CT0jJ.EVO>. -1/. -ov 
(acp)EjJ.EVo>. -1/. -ov 
nBEjJ.EVO>. -1/. -ov 
B1/CTOjJ.EVO>. -1/. -ov 
BEjJ.EVO>. -1/. -ov 
OHKVVjJ.EVO>. -1/. -ov 
OH~OjJ.EVO>. -1/. -ov 
OH~cljJ.EVO>. -1/. -ov 
3. Identification of Participles. When asked to identify a participial 
fonn, the student should supply seven items: case, number, gender, tense, 
voice, the word participle, and the first principal part of the verb from which 
the fonn comes. For example, a complete identification of fJ.aXHTafJ.EVov> is 
acc. pI. masc. aor. mid. participle of fJ.clXOfJ.aL 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Study the fonnation and declension of participles. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
w-verbs 
ap7Tcl(w. ap7TclCTojJ.aL. 
1/p7TaCTa 
ECTBiw, fut. EOojJ.aL. Ecpayov 
Kaiw or KclW. KavCTw. EKavCTa 
Kpivw Ill. KpLVEW. EKplva 
7Tivw I [ I, fut. 7TiojJ.aL or 
7TLEojJ.at I L I. E7TLOV 
CTTpEcpW. CTTpE",W. ECTTpE",a 
TEjJ.VW. TEjJ.EW. ETEjJ.OV (or 
poetic hajJ.ov) 
TpEcpW. BpE",W. EBpE"'a J 
snatch away, carry off; seize 
[Harpy] 
eat 
[esophagus, anthropophagy] 
kindle; set on fire, bum 
[caustic] 
pick out, choose; decide, judge 
[crisis] 
drink 
[symposium] 
tum, twist 
[strophe, catastrophe] 
cut 
[anatomy, atom] 
bring up, rear (children); nourish, maintain; cherish 
[atrophy, dystrophy] 
I. The root is 8PECP-, and Grassmann's law (U 19.5) operates in the present stem to produce 
TpEcp-. 

Participles: Formation and Declension 
197 
lnrwxvEO/.l.aL, v7TocrxrWO/.l.aL, 
undertake (to do, + compl. inf.); promise, profess (+ 
V7TEcrx0J.I.YJV 1 
indirect discourse inf.) 
EXERCISES 
I. Give the three nominative singular forms of the participle of the indicated 
tense and voice: 
1. fut. mid. of j1QXOj1aL 
7. aor. act. of EK~),VW 
2. aor. act. of (3aAAw 
8. fut. act. of vOj1i(w 
3. pres. mJp of (3ovAOj1aL 
9. pres. mJp OfE</>iYJj1L 
4. pres. act. of 7TapaTi8Ylj1L 
10. pres. act. of EtELj1L 
5. aor. mid. of E7TLOEiKVVj1L 
11. fut. mid. of 7Tapa(3aivw 
6. fut. act. of VO()EW 
12. aor. mid. of E7TL Ti8Ylj1L 
II. Write the designated form of the participle of the indicated verb. 
1. nom. s. m. fut. mid. of ap7Ta(w 
17. nom. s. m. fut. mid. of r,YEOj1aL 
2. gen. s. f. aor. act. of TEj1VW 
18. gen. s. f. aor. act. of (J.7T08Vil()KW 
3. dat. s. m. pres. m/p of TpE</>W 
19. acc. pI. m. aor. act. of (J.7TEXW 
4. acc. s. m. fut. act. of OWOiOWj1L 
20. acc. s. m. fut. act. of (3 Aa7TTw 
5. nom. pI. f. aor. mid. of yiyvOj1aL 
21. acc. pI. m. aor. act. of ow(3aivw 
6. gen. pI. n. pres. act. of /njyvVj1L 
22. gen. pI. n. pres. act. of OiKEW 
7. dat. pI. m. fut. mid. of 7Ta()xW 
23. dat. pI. m. fut. mid. of a</> [Ylj1L 
8. acc. pI. f. aor. act. of K07TTW 
24. acc. pI. f. aor. act. of ELOOV 
9. nom. s. n. pres. m/p of E7TawEw 
25. nom. s. n. pres. m/p of yiyvOj1aL 
10. gen. s. m. fut. act. of KaAEw 
26. gen. s. m. fut. act. of a7TOKTELVW 
II. dat. s. f. aor. mid. of j1aXOj1aL 
27. dat. s. f. aor. mid. of Ka8[()TYlj1L 
12. acc. s. n. pres. act. of OOKEW 
28. acc. s. n. pres. act. of vOj1i(w 
13. nom. pI. m. fut. mid. of ayw 
29. nom. pI. m. fut. mid. of Eij1i 
14. gen. pI. f. aor. act. of apxw 
30. gen. pI. f. aor. act. ofTi8Ylj1L 
15. dat. pI. n. pres. m/p of ypa</>w 
31. dat. pI. n. pres. mJp of 7TOLEW 
16. dat. s. n. pres. mJp of 7TVV-
32. nom. pI. f. aor. mid. of 
8aVOj1aL 
7TapaKEAEvOj1aL 
III. Identify completely the following participial forms. 
1. 
' 
, 
7. 
, 
13. V7TWXVOVj1EVTl 
E()Oj1EVYl 
7TOWVVTWV 
2. </>EvtOj1EVaL() 
8. EVEYKOV()a 
14. </>ayovTa 
3. EtLOVTL 
9. TL8Ej1EVa 
15. KaV()OV()wV 
4. 
, 
10. OV()L 
16. E</>wTaVTL 
()7TEwaj1Evov 
5. 
, 
11. 7TEL()OV 
17. EpOVVTa() 
TaTTOV()L 
6. a</>EVTa 
12. (3aAOV()L 
18. " OVTa 
I. The present stem of this deponent is a byform of (Xu;: stem oX- has iota-reduplication and 
nasal suffix added, *O"LOXVE- -> *iO"XVE- -> iO"XVE- (again by Grassmann's law). 

198 
UNIT TWENTY -SIX 
-------
19. 
, 
23. 
, 
27. a<ptKojJ.EVOV 
7TapayayoVTt 
(TTaVTa~ 
20. 
, 
24. f...EitoV(TaV 
28. <ptf... ry(Ja ~ 
(JXOVTO~ 
21. w<pE f... ry(JavTa 
25. 
, 
29. a 7TooojJ.wat 
(JT1J(Ja(Jat 
22. oov(J"(';;v 
26. 
f...af3ovTE~ 
30. 
7Tv80jJ.EVOV~ 
IV. Reading: The fifth-century historian Herodotus discusses theories on the 
flooding of the Nile (adapted passage). 
af...f...· 'Ef...f...ryvwv jJ.EV TWE~, oi' E7Ti(J1]IJ.Ot EPOVf...OVTO YEvE(J8at (Jo<piav, 
Ef...Etav 7TEPL TOV voaTo~ TOVTOV TPEL~ ooov~, ;:;v TOS jJ.Ev ovo OVK atwv Ei7TELV 
Eipil Ota f3paxEwv. TOVTWV 1] ETEpa jJ.Ev TOV~ Q1](Jia~ avEjJ.ov~ <P1J(JLV ELVat 
aiTiov~ T0V 7Tf...1]8vHV TOV 7TOTajJ.OV (KWf...VHV yap TOV~ avEjJ.ov~ Ei~ 8af...aTTaV 
EKPELV TOV NELf...OV). 7TOf...f...aKt~ o· h1J(Jiat jJ.Ev OVK E7TvEv(Jav, 0 oE NELf...o~ TO 
aVTO 7TOtEL. 1] o· ETEpa aVE7Tt(JT1]gOVE(JTEpa E(JTiv, ~ a7TO TOV 'QKEayov <P1J(Jt 
pELvaVTOV, TOV O· 'QKEaVOV 7TEpL7TQ.(Jav }ii.l!. pELV. 1] OE TpiT1J TWV OOwv 7TOf...V 
E7TtEtKE(JTaTJl E(JTiv, af...f...a tEVOry~' f...EYH yap Ovo' aVT1J OVOEV' TOV yap 
NELf...Ov <P1J(Jt PELV a7TO T1]KO/J.EV1]~ ~.vo~. 
af...f...· E7Td OEL T~V EjJ.aVTOV YVWjJ.1JV 7TEPL TOVTOV a7T00Eita(J8at, f...Etw 
Ota Ti jJ.Ot OOKEL 7Tf...1J8vEW 0 NELf...O~ imo TO 8EPO~' T~V XftgEPW?W wpav 0 
1]f...W~ EK TfJ~ apxaia~ ooov 1mo TWV Xftgwv~!!.. a7TEf...aVVETat KaL EPXETat 7TPO~ 
TO. avw TfJ~ Atf3V1]~. KaL 0 NELf...O~ govo~ OVTW~ E'f...KETat 1mo T0V 1]f...iov W(JTE 
TOVTOV TOV xpOVOV Of...iyCJ? voan pELV. TO OE 8EPO~ jJ.ETa 7TaVTWV TWV af...f...WV 
7TOTajJ.WV L([91' E'f...KETat KaL 7Tf...EOVt voan pEL. 
Underlined Words 
Q.VE7WJTy/jJ.OVE(JTf.PM = less 
scientific 
avw = (adv.) upward; TO. avw = the 
inland parts 
Q.7TEAavvw = drive away 
yi], YlJ>, f. = earth 
Ei jJ.ri = except, ifnot 
{KPEW = flow out 
f'AKw = draw, (here) cause to 
evaporate 
{7TEl. = since 
{7TLELKE(JTaTO~ = most reasonable 
(7Tl.(Ty/jJ.O> = notable 
ETy/(Tl.aL, -wv, m. = Etesian (annual) 
winds (blowing from north to 
south in the Aegean and eastern 
Mediterranean) 
8EPO>, 8EpOV>. n. = summer 
L(TO>, L(Ty/, L(TOV = equal (here neuter 
acc. as adv.) 
AL(3Vy/, ALPVy/>, f. = Africa 
jJ.ovo>, jJ.ovy/, jJ.()VOV = alone 
000> = (here) way of explaining 
7TAEOVL = dat. s. neut. more 
7TAY/8Vw = be full, become full 
7TVEW, aor. t7TVEV(Ta = blow 
pEW = flow 
Ty/KOjJ.EVO> = melting 
XELjJ.EPWO>, -rio -ov = stormy 
XELjJ.wv. XELjJ.wvo>, m. = (winter) 
storm 
XLWV. XLOVM, f. = snow 
wpa. wpa>, f. = season 
'.!:lKwvo>, -ov, m. = Ocean 

UNIT TWENTY -SEVEN 
Uses of the Participle I 
1. Tenses of the Participle. The Greek participle is found in all four of 
the major tense-systems: present, future, and aorist (presented in U26), and the 
perfect (to be learned in U37). In most constructions, the participle (like the 
infinitive) conveys by its tense a distinction in verbal aspect (U20) rather than 
a distinction in time. Again like the infinitive, the participle does have time 
meaning when it is used in an indirect discourse transformation representing 
an indicative of direct speech (U28.2). 
The present participle conveys the aspect of the present stem, that is, 
continuous or repeated action. In practice, it most often refers to an action 
contemporaneous with the action of the main verb of the sentence and is 
usually translated in English by a present participle (Xing, being Xed). But in 
the proper context, the present participle may refer to an action antecedent to 
or subsequent to that of the main verb; for example, a Greek present participle 
may be translated into English as an imperfect: 
TOV~ n)TE 7Tap6vTa~ ov 7Tapaow()"Et. 
He will not surrender those who were present at that time. 
The present participle may also have conative force (U20.2). 
The future participle conveys will or intention or purpose and so looks to 
the future. Just as the future indicative stands outside the aspect system of the 
present, aorist, and perfect, so does the future participle. 
The aorist participle conveys the aspect of the aorist stem, that is, simple 
occurrence or completion of an action. In practice, it most often refers to an 
action antecedent to that of the main verb of the sentence and is usually trans-
lated in English by a past participle (having Xed, having been Xed). In the pro-
per context, however, the aorist participle may refer to an action contempo-
raneous with or subsequent to the action of the main verb. The aorist participle 
sometimes has ingressive force (U20.3). 
The perfect participle conveys the aspect of completed action with per-
manent result in the present. The difference between aorist and perfect is seen 
in the contrast between 01. (l7TOeaV6VTE~ EV Tfl jJ.aXTI = those who died in the 
199 

200 
UNIT TWENTY -SEVEN 
battle (referring to a particular occasion) and 01. TE8vy/KOTE~ (perfect part.) = 
those who have died, the dead (in general). Consider also OELtw a1JTOV owpa 
EiAy/cpom (from AajJ.(3avw) = I'll show that he is guilty of having taken bribes 
(more or less, has taken bribes and is now in the state of having done so). 
2. Attributive Participle. There are three broad classifications of the uses 
of the Greek participle. The first to be considered is the attributive use. Like 
any other adjective form, the participle may be used as an attribute of a noun, 
that is, as a modifier that helps identify or qualify the noun without (primarily) 
asserting something about the noun. In English the attributive use of the parti-
ciple is somewhat limited, and in English idiom attributive relative clauses 
(those not set off by commas) are usually the equivalent of an attributive 
participle: 
the dancing women 
the expended cartridge 
the man who came into the room (clause instead of participle) I 
In Greek the attributive participle is very common (more common than the 
relative clause). The participle falls within the article-noun group and agrees 
with the noun in gender, number, and case: 
ai. 0PxovjJ.EVaL ypa.E~ 
the dancing old women, the old women who are dancing 
6 av~p 6 Ei(JEMwv 
the man who came in 
6 7Tp0(J8EV apta~ (JTpaTy/yo~ 
the general who held office previously 
3. Attributive Participle as Substantive. Like any other adjectival form, 
the attributive participle may be used without an expressed noun as a sub-
stantive. The article (which is usually present, but may be absent in poetry or 
when the substantive is indefinite) and the participle itself convey gender, 
number, and case, so that the person or thing referred to is clear to the listener 
or reader. The substantival use of the attributive participle is extremely com-
mon in Greek, and many attributive relative clauses in English are most idiom-
atically rendered into Greek as article and participle: 
~ Ei(JEMov(Ja 
, " ° apxwv 
TO. AqojJ.EVa 
the woman who came in 
the ruler, the officeholder 
the things that are said 
I. Contrast the equivalent German idiom, with the attributive participle: der in das Zimmer 
kommende Mann = the man who is coming into the room. 

Uses of the Participle I 
201 
6 CPEVYWV [T1]V OiK1)vl 
the defendant (the man fleeing the suit) 
6 OLi.VKWV [Tr]V OLK1)vl 
the plaintiff (the man pursuing the suit) 
OL EV rfl7ToAEL 1.J7TO TWV TpLaKOVTa a7To8avovTE~ 
those who were put to death in the city by the Thirty Tyrants 
4. Circumstantial Participle. The other two main uses of the participle 
involve its use in predicate position, outside the article-noun group. In this 
position, the participle asserts something about the noun it modifies and is 
therefore equivalent to a (subordinate) clause containing a finite-verb predi-
cate. The main predicative use of the participle is called circumstantial 
because, in modifying its noun, the participle describes the circumstances 
under which that noun is involved in the action of the main verb of the 
sentence. The circumstantial participle may agree with the subject, the direct 
or indirect object, the object of a preposition, or any other noun or pronoun ex-
pressed or implied in the sentence. In English it is often more idiomatic to use 
a dependent clause (temporal, concessive, causal, conditional, etc.) or a prepo-
sitional phrase with a gerund (verbal noun in -ing) than to use a circumstantial 
participle; but Greek idiom often favors the circumstantial participle over an 
equivalent subordinate clause. Note the following examples: 
a. temporal (expressing time) 
EKmVE TOV OLKa(TT1]V EtEPX0}J.EVOV. 
He struck the juryman as (when, while) he was coming out. 
cpvywv TOV~ !3apf3apov~ 1.J7TO TWV 'A(1)vaiwv EaAw. 
Having fled from (after fleeing from) the foreigners, he was captured by 
the Athenians. 
b. concessive (Greek participles with concessive force are often, but not 
always, marked as such by the use of the particle Kai7TEp preceding the 
participle or participial phrase.) 
Kai7TEP vO(J"wv xaAE7T~v vO(J"ov Ei~ T~V ayopav r,ME. 
Although he was ill with a serious disease, he came to the agora. 
c. causal (Greek participles with causal force are often, but not always, 
marked as such by the use of the particle W~ preceding the participle or 
participial phrase.) 
TOV YEPOVTa W~ 7TPOOLOOVTa T~V 7TOAW EtEpaAov. 
They drove the old man into exile because he was trying to betray the 
city. 
d. conditional 
a(J"7Tioa~ }J.EYaAa~ EXOVTE~ pq.oiw~ }J.axov}J.E8a. 
Having large shields (if we have large shields), we'll fight easily. 

202 
UNIT TWENTY -SEVEN 
Choosing which kind of meaning to give to a circumstantial participle when 
translating it into English requires close attention to the context: in the proper 
context, the example just given could be causal (Because we have large 
shields, we'll fight easily). In some cases the exact force may be uncertain. 
5. Absolute Participle Constructions. Occasionally, in English, Greek, 
and other languages, the noun with which the circumstantial participle agrees 
has no grammatical function in its sentence (it is not subject, object, or any-
thing else). In such a case, the noun-participle phrase forms an absolute con-
struction (absolute because the noun is free of grammatical connection). 
The f:eneral having fled, the soldiers surrendered themselves to the king. 
This being the case, they made a truce. 
(Compare Latin ablative absolute: His rebus factis nuntios mittunt.) 
In Greek the most common form of absolute construction is the genitive 
absolute: both the noun (the subject of the participial action) and the circum-
stantial participle are in the genitive case, the genitive has no other function in 
the sentence, and the phrase may have temporal, concessive, causal, or condi-
tional meaning. The most idiomatic English translation is often a subordinate 
clause. 
TOV (JTpaTTJYov ¢VYOVTO), Ot (JTpanWTaL EavTov) T0 pa(TLII.E/; 7TapE-
oO(J"av. 
After the general fled, the soldiers surrendered themselves to the king. 
TOVTWV OVTW) EXOVTWV E(J"7TEL(J"avTo. 
This being the case, they made a truce. 
TWV yvvaLKwv EV T0 (J"TpaTo7TEoCfJ oV(J"wv Ot avopE) Kall.w) jJ.axovvTaL. 
If the women are in the camp, the men willfight well. 
Less common than the genitive absolute is the accusative absolute. This 
is the normal construction when an impersonal expression is involved: the 
participle of the impersonal verb appears in its neuter singular form, and the 
subject substantive of the phrase is usually either an expressed or implied 
infinitive or a noun clause (rarely a neuter pronoun). 
OEOV 7TELOE(J"OaL TO/;) (J"O¢O/;) TWV a¢povwv aKOVOV(J"W. 
It being necessary to obey the wise, they pay heed to the fools. 
(or Although they ought to obey the wise, they pay heed to the fools.) 
OVOEL) TO KaKOV atpry(J"ETaL EtOV TO ayaOov. 
No one will choose the bad when it is possible to choose the good. 
(note that infinitive atpE/;(J"OaL or EII.E(J"OaL is understood with EtOV.) 

Uses of the Participle I 
203 
aAAO TL oo~av 6 f:ly/jJ.O(J-efVy/~ TO (TTpaTEVjJ.a a:rrr,YE. 
Something else having been decided (having seemed best), Demosthenes 
led the army back. 
A second use of the accusative absolute is with noun and personal-verb parti-
ciple introduced by W~ or W(rTrEP = as if, in the belief that. 
vjJ.a~ E~aLnkovTaL, W~ EKELVOV 7T'OAAWV aya8wv aAA' ov 7T'OAAWV KaKwv 
" 
, 
aLTWV yEVOjJ.EVOV. 
They will beg you for a pardon, just as if that man had been responsible 
for many good things and not for many evils. 
6. Future Participle Expressing Purpose. The principal use of the future 
participle (apart from indirect discourse: U28.2) is as a circumstantial parti-
ciple expressing purpose or intention. In this use the participle is often 
introduced by w~. 
E7T'EjJ.tav L7T'7T'fa~ ayyEAOVVTa~ Tr]V VLKy/V. 
They sent cavalrymen to announce the victory. 
OVK ijMojJ.Ev W~ TI{> pa(TLAEL 7T'OAEjJ.ry(J"OVTE~. 
We have not come with the intention of waging war against the king. 
7. Negation of Participles. Participles are negated by either ov or jJ.ry, 
usually with a clear distinction in meaning. 
The negative ov is used when the participle refers to a fact, a specific 
event, or an actual occurrence, for example, with participles that have causal or 
concessive meaning and attributive participles used as substantives when a 
definite person or thing is meant. 
OVK EXWV xpryjJ.aTa 6 yfpwV owpa OVK or(J"EL. 
Because (in fact) he does not have money, the old man will not bring 
gifts. 
E7T'Tlvf(J"ajJ.EV wv~ ov cpvyOVTa~ EV Tfi jJ.aXTl· 
We praised those who did not (in fact) flee during the (specific) battle. 
The negative jJ. ry is used when the participle refers to an action that is 
conditional or generic, for example, with participles that have conditional 
meaning and attributive participles used as substantives when an indefinite 
person (thing) or a class of people (things) is meant. 
jJ.~ EXWV xpryjJ.aTa 6 yfpwV owpa OVK or(J"EL. 
If he doesn't have any money, the old man will not bring gifts. 
OL jJ.~ CPEVyOVTE~ EV Tfi jJ.aXTl KaAoL 7T'OALTaL Ei(J"w. 
Those who do not flee in (any) battle are fine citi-::.ens. 
6 jJ.~ VO(J"WV 
any man who is not sick, whoever is not sick 

204 
UNIT TWENTY -SEVEN 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the uses of the attributive and circumstantial participle. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
noun 
, 
, 
(J"TpaTEV}J-a, -EV}J-aTO" n. 
anny 
numerals 
EtKOC)"L(V) 
TptaKOVTa 
TETTapaKOVTa 
7rEVT~KOVTa 
Et~KOVTa 
Er300}J-~KOVTa 
oyoo~KovTa 
EVEV~KOVTa 
haTov 
adverbs/particles 
Kai7rEp 
w, 
verbs 
OL£.oKW, oLwto}J-aL or rarely 
OLwtw, Eoiwta 
EtaLTEw (h) 
EXW + adverb 
Kat..w, EXW 
KaKw, EXW 
OVTW, EXW 
oPXEo}J-aL, opx~(]"o}J-aL, 
wPX17(]"(lWIV 
twenty 
[icosahedron] 
thirty 
forty 
fifty 
[Pentecost] 
sixty 
seventy 
eighty 
ninety 
hundred 
[hecatomb, Hecatompedon, hectoliter] 
(usually with participle) although 
(with participle, marking causal or purposive 
meaning) as, as if, in the belief that, on the ground 
that 
as, as if, just as if 
(of place) before, in front of (occasionally governs 
gen. like a preposition); (of time) before, fonnerly 
pursue, chase, drive; (law) sue, prosecute 
ask for from (+ double acc.); (mid.) demand for 
oneself; (mid.) beg off, appeal for pardon 
be in a certain condition or state 
be well 
be in bad shape, feel bad 
[cachexia] 
be in this state, be this way 
dance 
[orchestra] 

Uses of the Participle I 
205 
be by, be present 
71'apEL}.l.l (71'apa + E ijJ./J 
TO 71'apov 
that which is at hand, the present circumstance or 
time 
Ta. 71'apovTa 
Q.71'ELjJ.L (0.71'0 + EijJ./J 
71'OAEjJ.EW, 71'OAEjJ.~UW, 
E71'0AEjJ.T/Ua 
EXERCISES 
present circumstances, the present state of affairs 
be away, be distant, be absent 
make war, make war against (+ dat.) 
I. Render into Greek. Use participles wherever possible instead of relative 
clauses or temporal clauses. 
\. At the command of the general [use absolute participle construction], 
everyone marched along the river, keeping on guard. 
2. Those who killed my father will pay the penalty [idiom: oiKYJV (nOOva~ 1. 
3. Having left town, she went down to the sea. 
4. He who is not willing to learn is sick in the soul. 
5. Although he made all these promises, he did nothing. 
6. Turning about [use middle1, the army came to a halt. 
7. A deep sleep held those who drank a lot. 
8. While we were pursuing those who had crossed the river, the Athenians 
burned the tents and seized the horses. 
9. We believe the foreigner, although he is reporting many terrible things. 
10. They will be unable to equip triremes because they are not rich. 
II. Reading. 
1. 01. acppovE~ TWV av8pw71'wv TO. 7fapOVTa acpEVTE~ TO. a7fOVTa (JLWKOVUW. 
2. TWV apxovTwV 7fEL80VTWV, 01. 7fOA'iTa~ Eipryv,!v E7fO~rycmvTo 7fpa~ TOV~ 
CPE1)yOVTa~. 
3. Kai7fEp 7fOAAWV 1.7f7fEWV Emn8Ep.EvwV, TOV~ a7f08avovTa~ aVELAop.E8a. I 
4. lJ7fE(JXETO TaUTa 7fO~ry(TEW 6 t::.'!P.O(J-eEV,!~, tEVOW~ AEywV. 
5. OEOV TPECPELV Tav 8pEtaVTa E7ft yrypw~, 01. 7fOAAOt OVK E8EAOVCJ"LV. 
6. 
Ti~ ovvry(J"ETa~ ViK,!V CPEPEW EV T0 aywVL, P.?] p.Eya~ Kat i(Jxvpa~ wv; 
7. 6 f3a(J"LAEV~ Kupov (}VAAap.paVEL 2 W~ a7fOKTEVwv. 
I. Compound of ava- (and what verb?); the meaning here is take up (hodiesi/or burial. 
2. Compound of (J"vv- (and what verb?); the meaning here is arrest. 

206 
UNIT TWENTY -SEVEN 
8. [Parody of a funeral epigram, ascribed to Simonides] 1 
7rOAAa 7rLWV Kat 7rOAAa cpaywv Kat 7rOAAa KO.K' El.7rWV 
aVepW7rOV~ KE'i}laL TL}lOKPEWV 'Poow~. 
9. EYW OE, (;; avopE~ 'Aeryva'ioL, ov T7W aVT7]V yvw}lryv EXW 7rEpt EKaTEpwv' 
TO{JTOV~ }lEV, ot' EAEVeEpia~ Kat TOV OLKaiov E7rLeV}lOVVTE~ Kat TOV~ VO}lOV~ 
iaxvEw [to be strong, to be valid] f3ovAO}lEVOL Kat TOV~ aOLKOVVTa~ 
}lL<TOVVTH [hating] TWV V}lETEPWV KWOVVWV [dangers] }lETE<TXOV [had a 
share of, + gen.], ov 7rovrypov~ vO}li(w EivaL 7roAiTa~' EKEivwv OE, oi' 
KaTEMovTE~2 EV ory}lOKpaTiq. TO }lEV V}lETEPOV 7rAiieo~ aOLKOV<TL, TOV~ OE 
l.Oiov~ [personal, own] OrKOV~ [households] EK TWV V}lETEPWV }lEYG..AOV~ 
7rOWV<TL, }lG..Aa l.<TXvpw~ OE'i KaTryyopE'iv, W<T7rEP TWV TPLG..KovTa. 
I. KaK' in the first line is KaKQ. elided; it is conventional to place an acute accent on P when a 
final vowel with a grave is elided. K£L}laL in the second line is (here) I lie (buried). TL}loKpf.WV is 
a man's name (nom. case); 'PaoLO> is a proper adjective, Rhodian. of Rhodes. The epigram is 
written in the elegiac couplet: the first line is a dactylic hexameter (the meter used in Homer); 
the second line is actually two shorter dactylic units. Greek meter is quantitative, that is, based 
on the length of syllables. The scheme of this couplet is 
2. Compound of Kara- (and what verb?); the meaning here is return from exile (to one's native 
city). 

UNIT TWENTY -EIGHT 
Uses of the Participle II; olaa 
1. Supplementary Participle. The third major use of the Greek participle 
is its supplementary use. With certain verbs, a participle in predicate position 
agreeing with the subject or direct object completes the idea of the verb, which 
would otherwise be vague or incomplete. The supplementary participle is 
found with several well-defined classes of verbs. 
a. with TVYXo.VW, A.av8o.vw, </>8o.vw. In sentences containing TVYXo.VW 
(happen, be just now), A.av8o.vw (escape notice, be unobserved), or </>8o.vw 
(anticipate, be before [someone or something/) the important word is the sup-
plementary participle agreeing with the subject. Note that English translations 
of these constructions must often be other than literal in order to convey the 
meaning of the Greek. 
, , 
, 
ETvyxavE 7TWWV. 
[Lit.: Drinking, he happened to be.] 
He happened to be drinking or He was by chance drinking 
or He was just then drinking. 
0PXOVfJ-WaL ETVXOV. 
[Lit.: Dancing, the women happened to be.] 
The women happened to be dancing 
or The women were just then dancing. 
6 KA.~nfr EA.a8EV ap7To.CTaIJ TO. xpryfJ-aTa. 
[Lit.: Having snatched the money, the thief escaped notice (was unseen).] 
The thief snatched the money without being seen. 
G.7TEA.ewV EA.a8E TOVIJ </>VA.aKaIJ. 
[Lit.: Going away, he escaped the notice of the guards.] 
He went away without being noticed by the guards 
or The guards didn't notice him go away. 
EA.av8o.v0fJ-EV r,fJ-aIJ aVTOvIJ (J'O</>OL QVTEIJ. 
[Lit.: Being wise, we escaped our own notice.] 
We didn't realize that we were wise 
or We were wise without realizing it. 
207 

208 
UNIT TWENTY -EIGHT 
cp8aVOV(H TOV~ 7TOAEjJ.iov~ Aa(3ovTE~ TO aKpOV. 
[Lit.: Having captured the summit, they anticipate the enemy.] 
They captured the summit ahead of the enemy. 
b. with verbs meaning begin, continue, cease, or the like: 
ap~ojJ.aL TOV~ 7TaTEpa~ f.7Tawwv. 
I'll begin (by) praising our fathers. 
oi yEpovTE~ jJ.av8avovTE~ OLajJ.EVOV(HV. 
Old men continue learning (or continue to learn). 
7Tav(J"ojJ.aL AEywV. 
I'll stop talking. 
TOlJTOV E7Tav(J"av 7TpooLoovm T7JV 7TOAW. 
They stopped him from betraying the city 
or They stopped his betraying the city. 
c. with verbs of emotion: 
Xaipw TalJTa aKovwv. 
I enjoy hearing these things. 
oi CPLAO(J"OCPOL aE/. jJ.av8avovTE~ ryoovmL. 
Lovers of wisdom take pleasure in constantly learning. 
aOLKovjJ.EVOL oi av8pw7ToL opyi(ovTaL. 
People get angry at being treated unjustly. 
d. with verbs meaning do well, do ill, behave rightly, behave wrongly, 
surpass, be inferior, or the like: 
KaAw~ f.7ToirWEV OVTW TEAEVTr7(J"a~ TOV f3iov. 
He did well in ending his life thus. 
G.jJ.apTavETE vOjJ.i(OVTE~ TOlJTO KaAOV. 
You err in believing that this is a noble thing. 
e. with verbs meaning permit, endure, put up with, or the like: 
OUK aVE~E(J"8E mum aKovovTE~. 
You will not endure hearing these things 
or You won't put up with listening to this. 
TOV~ (J"vjJ.jJ.axov~ ou 7TEpwtojJ.E8a aOLKovjJ.EVOV~. 
We will not (watch without concern and) permit our allies to be wronged. 
2. Supplementary Participle Expressing Indirect Discourse. The second 
of the Greek indirect discourse constructions (U20.6-7) to be learned employs 
the supplementary participle, either in agreement with the object of a verb or 

Uses of the Participle II; o?oa 
209 
in agreement with the subject of the verb if the subject of the indirect state-
ment is the same as the subject of the main verb. 
Verbs meaning know, be ignorant, learn, remember, forget, show, prove, 
announce, appear, or the like may take the supplementary participle to express 
indirect discourse. (Most of these verbs may also take a noun clause, the 
construction to be learned in U33.) In this construction the participle always 
has the same tense (or tense stem: present part. for imperfect indo of direct 
discourse) and same voice as the verb of the direct statement. 
direct 
6 aYYEAo~ acpitETaL 
The messenger will arrive. 
indirect 
'i!.yvw(J"av TOV aYYEAov acpLtojJ.EVOp. 
They realized the messenger would arrive. 
direct 
TafJTa El7fEV (; (J"TpaTYJYo~. 
The general said these things. 
indirect 
ayvoE~TE TafJTa Ei7foVTa TOV (J"TpaTYJYov; 
Don't you know that the general said these things? 
direct 
(; <l>iAL7f7fO~ ~jJ.a.~ aOLKE~. 
Philip wrongs us. 
indirect 
oEitw TOV <l>iAL7f7fOV ~jJ.a.~ aOLKOVVTa. 
I'll show that Philip is wronging us. 
Note that in the above examples the subject of the direct form becomes the 
accusative direct object and the finite verb becomes the participle of same 
tense and voice agreeing with the accusative noun. In the following examples, 
the main verb is passive or consists of copula and predicate adjective: the 
subject may be unexpressed, and the participle is in the nominative, agreeing 
with the subject. Greek idiom favors personal verbs in these constructions, but 
English idiom prefers an impersonal verb with it followed by a that-clause. 
direct 
6 <l>iAL7f7fO~ ~jJ.a.~ aOLKE~. 
Philip wrongs us. 
indirect 
(; <l>iAL7f7fO~ EOEiKVVTO ~jJ.a.~ aOLKwv. 
Philip was being shown to be wronging us 
or It was being shown that Philip wrongs us. 
direct 
OL ' AeYJva~oL EviKYJ(J"av. 
The Athenians won. 
indirect 
OL 'AeYJva~oL aYYEAAOVTaL vLK-,](J"avTE~. 
The Athenians are reported to have won 
or It is reported that the Athenians won. 
direct 
E7fLPovAElJOjJ.EV T0 pa(J"LAE~. 
We are plotting against the king. 

\ 210 
UNIT TWENTY -EIGHT 
indirect 
cpavEpoL ry}J.EV E7TLPOVAdJOVTH T0 paCTLAEL. 
It was obvious that we were plotting against the king. 
[Lit.: We were obvious, plotting against the king.] 
3. Supplementary Participle with Verbs of Perception. Verbs meaning 
see, hear, learn of, or the like may take either a supplementary participle 
expressing actual perception or a supplementary participle of indirect dis-
course. When the physical act of perception is denoted, the English translation 
cannot accurately use a that-clause, and some of the verbs of perception 
(a.Kovw, 7Tvv8avo}J.aL, and sometimes aLG'8avo}J.aL) take a genitive rather than 
accusative object. 
EtOOV TOV G'TpaT1JYov a7To8vr7G'KOVTa. 
They saw (with their own eyes) the general dying. 
ryKovG'aTE E}J.OV AEyOVTO~ TaVTa. 
You heard (with your own ears) me saying this. 
When indirect discourse is denoted, it is the proposition rather than the action 
that is perceived: the English translation is then a that-clause, and the verbs 
aKovw and 7Tvv8avo}J.aL take an accusative object. 
ryKovG'aTE aVTov EL7TOVTa TaVTa. 
You heard (via the report of others) thfl1. he said this. 
aKovo}J.EV TOV ~wKpaT1JV G'ocpov DVTa. 
We hear that Socrates is wise. 
E7TV8oVTO TOV~ 7TAdG'TOV~ a7TocpvyoVTa~. 
They learned that most had escaped. 
4. Negation of Supplementary Participles. The principle described in 
U27.7 applies to supplementary participles as well. Most supplementary parti-
ciples refer to an actual event and use the negative oV. Thus ov is used with 
supplementary participles expressing indirect discourse and with those accom-
panying verbs of emotion, where the participle may be considered to express 
cause. 
5. Predicate Nouns and Adjectives after Participles. Since the participle 
is a verb form, it may have any of the complements found with the other forms 
of the verb, including (for the copula and verbs of similar meaning) predicate 
noun or predicate adjecti",e. As usual, the predicate noun or adjective must 
agree with its "subject" noun, and in a participial phrase this "subject" may be 
in any case. 

Uses of the Participle 1/; oiba 
OUK ayvow xaAt7To~ wv. 
I am not unllware that I am obstinate. 
[suppl. part. indo disc. with same subject as main verb: nom.] 
oi 7T At LO"TOL TWV OOKOlJVTWV O"o<pwv t tvaL 
the mlljority (if those who seem to be wise 
[attrib. part. as substantive: gen. I 
7TtLOOVTaL T~ 61]}J.00"eEVH W~ o"TpaT1]y~ ovn. 
They obey Demosthenes because he is general. 
[circumstantial part.: dat.I 
211 
6. The Verb oloa. From the same root as the aorist tloov there exists the 
irregular verb otoa. which is perfect in form but present in meaning (know). 
The stem appears in several forms. including OLO-. tLO- (augmented ?Jo-), LO"-, 
and augmented ?JO"-' The infinitive is tLOEvaL, the participle t LOW~.1 The plu-
perfect is equivalent to an imperfect in meaning. Here is the conjugation in the 
indicative: 
perfect 
plllperfect 
sing. 
1st 
oioa 
"0 
?1 1] 
(fjOEW) 
2nd 
oirTea 
fjo1]rTea (fjom) 
3rd 
oLodv) 
fjOH(V) 
(dllal 
2nd 
(rTTOll 
fjOETOV) 
(3rd 
(rTTOV 
~OEr1]V ) 
1st 
fjOE/J.EV 
'. 
(rT}J.W 
or ?1rT}J.EV 
plllr. 
2nd 
fjOETE 
'. 
(rTTE 
or ?1rTTE 
3rd 
l(T(lrT(v) 
fjoErTaV 
" 
or ?1rTav 
The two singular pluperfect forms in parentheses are found in Attic from about 
350 B.C.E. on. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Study the uses of the supplementary participle. 
2. Study the conjugation of oloa. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
I. Declension of perfect participles to be learned later. in U37. 

212 
UNIT TWENTY -EIGHT 
VOCABULARY 
verb 
E7TL(30VA.EVW (hrd 
plot against (+ dat.) 
verbs that sometimes take a supplementary participle 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
ayvoEw. ayvorww. 1)yvorWa 
ajJ.apTavw. ajJ.apT~IJojJ.aL. 
" 
1)jJ.apTov 
CWEXW (<iva) 
OWjJ.EVW (ow) 
OWTEA.EW. OWTEA.EW. 
OLETliA.ElJa (ow) 
EA.EyXW. EA.EytW. ~A.EYta 
EtEA.EyXW 
E7riIJTajJ.aL. E7rLIJT~IJojJ.aL (a 
deponent jJ.L-verb)I 
~oojJ.aL 
A.avGavw. A.~IJw. EA.aeOV 
oloa (inf. EioEvad. fut. EtIJojJ.aL 
opyi(ojJ.aL. 0pYLEojJ.aL 
(rare) opyi(w. (no fut. 
act.), wpyLIJa 
7ravw, 7ravIJw. E7raVIJa 
7rEpWpaw. 7rEpLotojJ.aL. 
7rEPLELOOV2 (7rEpd 
Tvyxavw. TEvtojJ.aL. ETVXOV 
cpeavw. cpG~IJojJ.aL. EcpeaIJa 
or Ecpe1)V3 
adjective 
" 
" 
~ 
aKpo,. aKpa. aKpov 
not perceive, be ignorant, be unaware of 
[agnostic] 
miss the mark, fail of hitting or having (+ gen.); err, 
make a mistake (+ part.) 
[hamartia] 
hold up; (intrans.) rise up; (mid.) bear up, endure, put 
up with (+ part.) 
continue, persist, last 
continue; persevere, live 
cross-examine; put to the test; prove; refute 
[elenchus] 
prove; convict, refute 
know how to (+ inf.); know, understand 
[epistemology] 
enjoy, take pleasure (+ dat. or + part.) 
escape notice, be unobserved 
[Lethe] 
know 
grow angry, be (made) angry (sometimes + dat. of 
person or thing) 
make angry 
stop (someone else or something); (mid.) stop 
(oneself), cease 
[pause] 
look over; overlook; look on while doing nothing, 
permit 
happen to be (+ part.); happen (of events); succeed; 
meet with, hit upon (+ gen.); obtain (+ gen.) 
anticipate, be ahead of (+ part.) 
topmost, outmost, inmost; highest 
[acrostics, 
acrophobia] 
I. Conjugated in present system like OVVaf1.aL (cf. Appendix 3: Paradigms). 
2. Conjugation of the present system will be learned in the next unit. 
3. Conjugated like f(3Y/V. f(TTy/V. In this verb there is no difference in meaning between the 
strong and the weak aorists. 

Uses a/the Participle II; ol:ba 
TO aKpOV 
clKp07TOt..t,. 
clKP07TOt..EWS. f. 
EXERCISES 
I. Sentences for reading. 
peak, summit; farthest point 
upper city, citadel, acropolis 
213 
1. KaKw, E7rOO]rTaTE 7TEPL'iOOVTE, mvm') {J7TO TWV aAAwv yvvaLKwv aOLKov-
, 
fJ.Eva'). 
2. TIS </>07}aUaL TOV') (3ap(3apov') avaj3a') E7Tt T~V aKpo7ToAW; 
3. mum Et7TwV OVK afJ.apT7}rT'[l. 
4. 6 vEavia') KaKW') EXH' OV7TOTE yap aVEXETaL OEVTEPO') wv. 
5. mum TO. xp7}fJ.am Kpv"'avm aVTOV PCfoiw') EAEytW. 
6. ETVXE YVfJ.Va(OfJ.EVo') EKEivT/ Tfl r,fJ.EPCf. 
7. OVK oi(JOa TOV OavaTov 7TaV(Jovm Kat TOV') KaAW') 7TpaTTOVTa') Kat TOV') 
, 
fJ.rJ; 
II. Reading: Lysias, in praise of Athenians who died in war, cites examples of 
just and brave behavior from legendary history (adapted passage). 
'Aopa(JTov Kat nOAVVEiKOV') TaL') 0ri3aL,) E7TLOEfJ.EVWV Kat OV KaAW') 
7TpatavTWV EV Tfl fJ.aXT/, TWV 0.JJi:1g.ijJJ~ KWAVOVTWV Oa7TTEW TOV') VEKPOV'), O[ 
'AOYJvaLOL, r,YYJ(JafJ.EVOL EKEiVOV') fJ.EV a7TOOaVOVTa') OiKYJV [Kavizv OouvaL, 
TOVTOV') 0' EtagaPTaVHV El') TOV') OEOV'), 7TpWTOV fJ.EV 7TEfJ."'aVTE') aYYEAOV') 
EOEOVTO aVTWV OouvaL TWV VEKPWV ~vaipE(JW' OV OVVafJ.EVOL OE TOVTWV 
TVXELV E(JTpaTEV(Jav E7T' aVTOV'), OVOEfJ.LaS owcpopn') 7TPOTEPOV 7TPO,) 0YJf3ai-
ov') OV(JYJ'), r,YOVfJ.EVOL OELV TOV') a7ToOavovm') TWV VOgL(OgEVWV TVXELV. TO OE 
OiKaWV EXOVTE') (JVfJ.fJ.axOV ~iKWV fJ.axOfJ.EVOL Kat 7Tn(JL T~V EaVTWV apET~V 
E7TEoEitavTO. 
V(JTEP<t> OE xpO V<t> , L7TEt 'HpaKA1]') a7TEOavEV, O[ TOVTOV 7TaLOE,) </>EVYOV-
TE,) EvpV(JOEa EWaVVOVTO V7TO 7TaVTWV TWV 'EAA7}VWV, at(JxvvogEVWV fJ.EV 
TOL') EPYOL'), </>0(30VfJ.EVWV OE T~V EVPV(JOEW') OVvafJ.w. aqnKOfJ.EVWV TWV 
7TaiOwv El') T7}VOE T~V 7TOAW Kat EtaLTOVfJ.EVOV alJTov') EVPV(JOEW'), o[ 
'AOYJvaLoL OVK ryOEAYJ(Jav 7Tapaoouvat. ~7TI.(JTpaTEvovTwV OE TWV '~~~frYEiwv, 
OVK l)l.l/~i2l TWV OEWWV YEVOfJ.EVOL gFEyvw(Jav, aAAG.. T~V aVT~v yvwfJ.YJv 
Eixov Kat OEVTEPOV EviKWV fJ.axOfJ.EVOL. 

214 
Underlined Words 
"AOpa(TTOr;, -OV, m. = Adrastus, 
king of Argos who helped his son-
in-law Polynices (son of Oedipus) 
mount the campaign of "the Seven 
against Thebes" against P.' s 
brother Eteocles 
aicrxvVO/laL = feel ashamed at (+ 
dat.) 
Q.vatpEG"Lr;, -EM, f. = pickinR up (of 
bodies) 
'ApyELOL, -WV, m. = Argive.l· 
owcpopa, -iir;, f. = disagreement 
Eyyvr; = (adv.) near, close to (+ gen.) 
EVtKwV = they were victorious (3rd 
pl. imperfect act. of vLKaw) 
Eta/lapTaVw = commit a sin 
EtEAavvw = drive out 
hTEt = when, after 
E7TL(JTpaTEVW =!?O on campaiRn 
a!?ainst 
UNIT TWENTY -EIGHT 
Evpv0"8Evr;, -Ewr;, m. = Eurystheus, 
king of Tiryns and Argos, who 
persecuted Heracles and H.'s 
children 
iKavc)r;, -ry, -av = sufficient (here 
with OtKYJV = penalty) 
8a7!"Tw = bury 
0iJpaL, -wv, f. = Thebes 
8YJpaLOL, -wv, m. = Thebans 
/lETa yL yVWo"KW = chan!?e one's mind 
vEKpar;, -oi!, m. = dead body 
VO/lL(O/lEVWV (neut. part. as 
substantive) = the customary 
(funeral) rites 
OOAvvEiKYJr;, -ovr;, m. = Polynices 
(JTpaTEVW = RO on a military 
campai!?n 

UNIT TWENTY -NINE 
Contract Verbs in -aw and -ow; 
Further Uses of the Genitive and 
Dative 
1. Verbs in -aw. Recall that in Attic there are three kinds of w-verbs that 
show contraction in the present system (U 13.1). Verbs in -aw and -ow are less 
common than those in -EW, which the student learned in U 13. The Attic con-
tractions which are relevant to the present system of verbs in -O.w are: 
a + E->a 
a + H (gen.) -> q. 
a + H (sp.) -> a 
a+o->w 
a+ov(sp.)->w 
a +w->w 
Fuller general schemes for contraction are set out in Appendix 1. The dis-
tinction between "genuine" and "spurious" H is based on linguistic history 
(explained in Unit 1, page 10, footnote 2): the H of the 2nd and 3rd singular 
active ending is "genuine" (and so the iota continues to appear in the 
contracted form); the H of the active infinitive ending is "spurious" (the result 
of contraction), and so the iota does not appear in the contraction with a. I 
In the paradigm of opaw (= see: stem opa- + 0/ E) shown on the next page, 
the uncontracted form is illustrated in parentheses next to the contracted form 
which results from it in Attic. The augmented stem for the imperfect of opaw 
is unusual in that it has double augmentation: both the addition of initial E and 
lengthening of 0 to w, yielding the imperfect stem Ewpa- + 0/ E. Other verbs in 
-aw have normal augmentation (e.g., imperfect stem EHJ.la- from HJ.law). To 
understand the accentuation, review the rule given in U 13.2 for accentuation 
of contracted verbs. 
I. In the sequence a + E + E, contraction takes place first between a and the first t. producing a 
+ E, which yields 0.. 
215 

216 
UNIT TWENTY -NINE 
PRESENT SYSTEM OF VERBS IN -O.w 
pres. active indo 
pres. middle/passive indo 
sing. 
1st 
(opaw) 
opw 
(opao}J.ad 
opw}J.aL 
2nd 
(opam) 
op~c; 
(opan) 
op~ 
3rd 
(opaEd 
op~ 
(opanad 
OpUTaL 
[dual 
2nd 
(opanov) 
°PUTOV 
(opaw'8ov) 
0pu(T8ov] 
[3rd 
(opanov) 
°PUTOV 
(opaE(T8ov) 
0pu(T8ov] 
plur. 
1st 
(opao}J.w) 
opw}J.w 
(opao}J.E8a) 
opw}J.E8a 
2nd 
(opaEH) 
opun 
(opaw8E) 
opuaBE 
3rd 
(opaov(n) 
opwaL(v) 
(opaovTad 
OPWVTaL 
present act. info opuv; present mlp inf. opuaBaL 
present act. participle opwv. opw(Ta. opwv, mIn stem OPWVT- [dat. pI. 0PW(TL(V)] 
present mJp participle OpwjJ.Evo<; 
imperJ active indo 
imperJ middle/passive indo 
sing. 
1st 
(Ewpaov) 
EWPWV 
(Ewpao}J.7]v) 
, 
, 
EWpW}J.7]V 
2nd 
(EwpaE<;) 
Ewpac; 
(Ewpaov) 
EWPW 
3rd 
(EwpaE) 
Ewpa 
(Ewpano) 
EWPUTO 
[dual 
2nd 
(Ewpanov) 
EWPUTOV 
(EwpaE(T8ov) 
Ewpua8ov] 
[3rd 
(EwpaEr7]v) 
, 
, 
(EwpaE(T87]v) 
Ewpa(T87]v] 
EwpaT7]v 
plur. 
1st 
(Ewpao}J.w) 
EWPWjJ.EV 
(Ewpao}J.E8a) 
Ewpw}J.E8a 
2nd 
(EwpaEH) 
Ewpun 
(EwpaE(T8d 
Ewpu(T8E 
3rd 
(Ewpaov) 
, , 
(EwpaovTo) 
EWPWVTO 
EWpWV 
2. Verbs in -Ow. The Attic contractions which are relevant to the present 
system of verbs in -Ow are as follows: 
O+E->OV(Sp.) 
0+ EL (gen.) -> O~ 
o + EL (sp.) -> OV (sp.) 
O+O->OV(sp.) 
o + OV (sp.) -> OV (sp.) 
o +w->w 
O+[l->O~ 
Fuller general schemes for contraction are set out in Appendix 1. The 
distinction between "genuine" and "spurious" ov is based on linguistic history 
(explained Unit 1, page 11, footnote 2): the ov of the 3rd plural active ending 
is "spurious" (the result of compensatory lengthening), as is that of the 2nd 
singular middle (the result of contraction). In the case of genuine and spurious 
EL, the iota again appears in the contraction only when the EL is genuine (2nd 

Verbs in -aw and -ow; Further Uses afthe Genitive and Dative 
217 
and 3rd sing. active; not in the infinitive).l In the following paradigm of ~r"'Aow 
(= reveal: stem ~r"'Ao-
+ olE), the uncontracted form is illustrated 10 
parentheses next to the contracted form which results from it in Attic. 
PRESENT SYSTEM OF VERBS IN -Ow 
pres. active indo 
pres. middle/passive indo 
sing. 
1st 
(c)'T/Aow) 
cJ'T/Aw 
(oT]Aoo}J.ad 
oT]Aov}J.aL 
2nd 
(OT]AOELS') 
oT]Ao'iS' 
(OT]AoTl) 
OT]AOL 
3rd 
(OT]AOEL) 
OT]AOL 
(oT]AonaL) 
OT]AOVTaL 
[dual 
2nd 
(oT]Aonov) 
OT]AOVTOV 
(oT]AoHJ"80v) 
oT]Aov(]"80v] 
[3rd 
(oT]Aonov) 
OT]AOVTOV 
(oT]Aof.(]"80v) 
oT]Aov(]"80v] 
plur. 
1st 
(OT] AOo}J.w ) 
OT]AOV}J.EV 
(OT]Aoo}J.f.8a) 
oT]Aov}J.E8a 
2nd 
(oT]Aonf.) 
oT]Aovn 
(oT]Aow8f.) 
oT]Aov(]"8f. 
3rd 
(OT]Aoov(]"d 
OT]Aov(]"L(v) 
(OT]AoovTad 
OT]AOVVTaL 
present act. info OT]AOVV; present mJp inf. oT]Aov(]"8aL 
present act. participle OT]AWV, oT]Aov(]"a, OT]AOVV, min stem OT]AOVVT- [dat. pI. 
OT]Aov(]"L(v) I 
present mJp participle OT]AOV}J.EvoS' 
imperJ active indo 
imperJ middle/passive indo 
sing. 
1st 
(Eo~Aoov) 
EO~Aovv 
(EOT]Aoo}J.T]v) 
EOT]Aov}J.T]V 
2nd 
(Eo~AOf.S') 
EO~AovS' 
(EOT]Aoov) 
EOT]AOV 
3rd 
(Eo~AOf.) 
EO~Aov 
(EoT]Aono) 
EOT]AOVTO 
[dual 2nd 
(EoT]Aonov) 
EOT]AOVTOV 
(EoT]Aow8ov) 
EOT]Aov(]"80v] 
[3rd 
(EOT]AOf.TT]v) 
EOT]AOVTT]V 
(EoT]AoE(]"8T]v) 
EOT]Aov(]"8T]v] 
plur. 
1st 
(ioT]Aoo}J.w) 
EOT]Aov}J.w 
(EOT]Aoo}J.f.8a) 
EOT]Aov}J.f.8a 
2nd 
(ioT]Aonf.) 
EOT]Aovn 
(EoT]Aow8f.) 
EOT]Aov(]"8f. 
3rd 
(Eo~Aoov) 
EO~Aovv 
(EOT]AoovTo) 
EOT]AOVVTO 
3. Futures in -aw. A few verbs whose stems end in a lose the suffix (]" in 
the future and have a-contraction in the future conjugation, with endings and 
accentuation exactly like those of presents such as opaw. Like the futures in 
-EW (VO}J.LEW, KaAEw), these futures in -aware called "Attic futures" (U 18.6). 
Futures \'/ith a-contraction are found for EAavvw (fut. indo EAW, EA~S', etc.; fut. 
info EAUV, fut. part. EAWV, EAw(]"a, EAWV) and for all verbs in -avvv}J-L (e.g., 
I. In the sequence a + f + f, contraction takes place first between a and the first f, producing av 
(sp.) + f, which yields av (sp.). 

218 
UNIT TWENTY -NINE 
(J"KEoaVVVjJ.t = scatter, fut. indo (J"KEOW, fut. info (J"KEOUV, fut. part. (J"KEOWV; like-
wise for KpEjJ.avvvjJ.t = hang, 7rETavvvjJ.t = spread). 
4. Further Uses of the Genitive Case (Review U 10.5 for basic uses of 
the genitive.) 
a. Genitive Limiting Nouns (cf. possessive, partitive, subjective, ob-
jective) 
(I) Genitive of Quality or Description. A genitive phrase in the pred-
icate may describe, or denote the quality of, the subject. 
mvm 7roAAwv 7rOVWV E(J"Tiv. 
These things require much toil. 
[Lit.: These things are of much toil.] 
6 yEpwV xaAE7rOV TP07rOV WV ... 
the old man, being of a harsh disposition, ... 
(2) Genitive of Material. The genitive may denote the material or con-
tents of which a noun is composed. 
KprWr] ~OEO,) voaTo') 
a spring of sweet water 
(3) Genitive of Measure. The genitive may denote the size or degree of 
a thing. 
OKTW (J"moiwv TELXO') 
a wall eight stades long, a wall of eight stades [in length] 
7rEVTE ~jJ.EPWV (J"tTia 
food for five days 
b. Genitive with Verbs 
(I) The partitive genitive is used with verbs when the action affects only 
a part of the object. The partitive genitive is especially common with 
verbs of sharing (often compounds of jJ.ETa-): 
jJ.ETaOtOOVat TWV (J"t Tiwv 
to give a share of the food 
jJ.ETEXEW Try') TtjJ.ry') 
to have a share of the honor 
verbs of touching or holding: 
fXE(J"8at Try') XEtPO,) a1JTOV 
to hold on to his hand 

Verbs in -aw and -ow; Further Uses of the Genitive and Dative 
verbs of filling: 
OVK Ej.l.7TA7}(J"ETE T7JV eaAaTTav TPL7}pWV; 
Will you not fill the sea with ships? 
verbs of aiming at or desiring: 
E7TLeVj.l.ELV TWV ayaewv 
to desire what is good 
verbs of reaching or obtaining: 
(J"7TOVOWV hvxov. 
They obtained a truce. 
verbs of remembering,jorgetting, or neglecting: 
pOVAOj.l.aL vj.l.ur;; avaj.l.VfwaL TWV 7TapovTwv 7Tpayj.l.aTwv. 
I want to remind you of the difficulties at hand. 
verbs of ruling or being leader of 
6 'E.Epf,.,r;; TWV pappapwv pa(J"LAEvH. 
Xerxes is king of the foreigners. 
219 
(2) Genitive of Separation. With verbs meaning cease, release,fail, be 
distant from, lack, be in need oj, and the like, the genitive denotes 
separation. 
a7TEX0j.l.EV T~r;; 7ToAEwr;; OVO (J"Taoia. 
We are two stades distant from the city. 
7Tav(J"avTEr;; aVTov T~r;; (J"TpaTYlyiar;; 
having removed him from the office of general 
, 
" 
1 
xpYlj.l.aTWV OVK a7TopYl(J"Oj.l.EV. 
We shall not be at a loss for money 
or We shall not lack money. 
(3) The genitive may express price or value. 
a7TEooTo T7]V L7T7TOV ovo TaAaVTwv. 
He sold the mare for two talents. 
(4) The genitive of cause is used with many verbs of emotion, especially 
those meaning wonder at, admire, praise, blame, or the like. 
CYlAW aiJTov T~r;; apET~r;;. 
I admire him for (because of) his virtue. 
(5) The genitive of distinction or comparison is used with verbs meaning 
differ, surpass, be inferior as well as with comparative adjectives and 
adverbs (to be learned in the next unit). 
OWCPEPH TWV UAAWV. 
He differs from (is superior to) the others. 

220 
UNIT TWENTY-NINE 
(6) Genitive with Compound Verbs. The genitive is used with com-
pounds of a7To-. 7TpO-. V7TEP-, E7TL-. and KaTa- when the compound 
verb has the meaning of the simple verb plus the preposition sepa-
rated from it: for instance, Ka TryyOpEw = speak against + gen., 
iJ7TEpjJ.aX0jJ.a~ = fight on behalf of + gen. 
c. Genitive with Adjectives. The genitive may also depend on various 
adjectives corresponding in meaning to verbs which take the genitive. 
xwpa 6rypiwv 7TA~pry, 
~vr,}1WV TWV 7TOVWV 
a land full of wild beasts 
mindful of the toil 
d. Genitive of Time Within Which. The genitive denotes the time within 
which an action takes place. 
, , 
ryjJ.Epa, 
during daytime, by day 
mum otw·6E y~yvojJ.f.Va oEKa -ryjJ.EPWV. 
You will see these things happening within ten days. 
The distinctions between the three time constructions in Greek may be clari-
fied by thinking of a time line: the dative identifies a single point on the line 
(or else views a stretch of the line as a single unit); the accusative identifies a 
particular stretch of the line and emphasizes its extent from a beginning to an 
end; the genitive identifies a stretch of the line but refers indefinitely to some 
point or points between the indicated limits. 
5. Further Uses of the Dative (For basic uses of the dative case, review 
UIO.6). 
a. The dative is used with a wide variety of verbs and adjectives having 
meanings of the following kinds: 
(I) Help, injure. please, displease. be friend!.v, be hostile, and the like: 
mum apE(J"KH T0 7TA~6H. 
These things please the multitude. 
EjJ.Ot opyi(ovm~. 
They are angry at me. 
<pD\Lo~ T0 pa(J"~AEL 
friendly to the king 
(2) Meet, approach, yield: 
a7T~vTry(J"av aiJTOL, OL (J"TpaTryyo[. 
The generals came up to them (met them face to face). 
(3) Obey. serve, trust: 
7TEiOE(J"6a~ T0 apxovTL 
T0 pa(J"~AEL OOVAEVHV 
to obe.v the ruler 
to be a slave to the king 

Verbs in -aw and -ow; Further Uses of the Genitive and Dative 
221 
-------------- --
(4) Be like, be equal: 
(JTpaTEvjJ.a rCTOV T0 TWV 'AeYJvaiwv 
an army equal to that of the Athenians 
b. The instrumental dative is used with expressions of comparison (in-
cluding comparative adjectives) to denote the degree of difference (by how 
much?). 
OAi YO? CTOcpWTEpO) EyEVETO. 
He became a little wiser (wiser by a little). 
c. The instrumental dative of an abstract substantive may express manner 
or accompanying circumstance (dative of manner). 
7rOAAfi t30fi 
Tfi aA YJeEiq. 
CT7rOVOfi 
EPYO? AOYO? 
with loud shouting 
in truth 
in haste or zealously 
in deed, in word 
d. The comitative dative is used to denote the persons or things which ac-
company or take part in an action. 
( I) Dative of ( Friendly or Hostile) Association 
cnaAEyt:CTeaL aAA1]AOL) 
to converse with each other 
to fight with (against) many 
(2) Dative of Military Accompaniment 
Ef,t:AavvH T0 CTTpaTEvjJ.an 7ravTi. 
He marches forth with his entire army. 
e. Locative Dative. Place or position is normally denoted in prose by the 
dative with a preposition; in poetry the dative alone may be used. In prose the 
dative (or surviving locative case) of a proper name may be used without a 
preposition to indicate place. 
'AOYJVYJCTL. nveo'i. LaAajJ.'ivL 
at Athens. at P.vtho (= Delphi). at Salamis 
f. Dative with Compound Verbs. The dative is often used with verbs 
compounded in CTVV-. EV-. f.7rL-. 7rapa-, 7rt:PL-. 7rPOCT-. or imo- when the 
preposition in the compound conveys a sense which normally governs the 
dative. 
E7rL Tiet:CTeaL TO'i) 7roAt:jJ.ioL) 
to attack the enem ...... (to place oneself upon. against the enemy) 

222 
UNIT TWENTY -NINE 
--------------
-
-----
a-vvaCnKEI.V TOI.') aAAO~,) 
to commit wrong together with the others 
g. Dative of Agent. This use is confined to passives of the perfect stem 
or the passive verbal adjective, both to be learned later (U37.7, U42.6). 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Learn the inflection of verbs in -aw and -ow. 
2. Study the uses of the genitive and dative. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
Vocabulary-building Hints. Note that many verbs in -aw and -aware de-
nominatives, that is, formed from noun or adjective roots. Thus TLjJ.aw from 
the a-stem noun TLjJ.r" 
v~Kaw from ViKYJ, TEAEVTaw from TEAEVTr,; OYJAOW from 
the o-stem adjective oflA.o'), (YJAOW from the o-stem noun (flAO,). 
Also note that in forming the future and aorist (and other) principal parts 
of such verbs, the vowel of the stem is lengthened before the tense suffix (as 
was true of most verbs in -EW): TLj.J.r,a-w (Attic YJ for ii in TLjJ.aa-w), Eor,Awa-a. 
nouns 
KprWf} , KP~VY/', f. 
well, spring 
[Hippocrenej 
aho" (JLTOV, m. (sing. only); 
grain; bread; food, provisions 
[parasite j 
pI. (Jim, (JLTWV, n. 
, 
, 
(JtTWV. (JlTWV, n. 
(J7TOVO~. (J7TOVO~" f. 
TuAavTov, TaAuvTov,n. 
adjectives 
., 
" 
" 
l(JO" l(Jy/. l(JOV 
l(JW, 
}1V~}1WV, }1V~}10V (gen. 
}1V~ }1ovo,) 
grain, bread; food. provisions 
drink-offering; (pl.) truce. treaty 
balance. weighing scale; unit of weight (talent), and 
hence a sum of money (gold or silver)1 
equal 
[isosceles, isobar] 
equally; probably, perhaps 
mindful. remembering. unforgetting 
[mnemonic I 
I. The standards of weight and monetary units in ancient Greece varied according to locale. In 
classical Athens. weight and money were measured in obols (opo'\oi). drachmas (opaX}lai: the 
drachma is the unit of modern Greek currency). minae (j.Lva'il. and talents (Ta'\aVTa). with 6 
obols = I drachma; 100 drachmas = Imina; 60 minae = I talent. The Attic drachma was 4.37 
grams. 

Verbs in -aw and -OW; Further Uses of the Genitive and Dative 
223 
-
-
-
-
~-
-
-
~--------
-------~ 
verbs 
, 
1 
~ 
I 
• 
I 
U7r0PEW, U7rOprWW, YJ7roprwu 
pucnAcuw, j3urnAEl)O"w, 
EpuO"iAEVO"U 
oYJAow, oYJAwO"w, Eo~AwO"u 
(YJAow, (YJAwO"w, E(~AwO"u 
j1ETEXW (j1ETa) 
j1Lj1ViJO"KW or j1LI.W~o"KW, 
j1V~o"w, Ej1VYJO"U (poetic in 
active) 
, 
, 
, 
, 
UVUj1Lj1VYJO"KW or V7r0j1Lj1VYJ-
O"KW (used in prose instead 
of simple verb) 
vLKaw, VtK~o"W, EviKYJO"U [L I 
opaw, O"'Oj1UL, ELoov 
7rij17rAYJJ1L or Ej17rij17rAYJj1L, 
Ej17rA~O"w, EVE7rAYJO"u I 
o"KEoaVVVj1L, -O"KEoaw, 
-EO"KEoaO"a2 
TEAEvTaw, TEAEVT~o"W, 
ETEAclJTYJO"u 
Ttj1aw, TLj1~O"W, hij1YJO"u I L I 
cpuivw, CPUVEW, ECPYJVU 
CPEPW + adverb 
xuAmw> CPEPW 
EXERCISES 
be without means or resources; be at a loss, be in 
doubt; lack 
[aporia, aporetic] 
be king; (inceptive aor.) became king 
render manifest; reveal, disclose, show 
vie with, emulate; admire, praise (+ acc. of person + 
gen. of cause) 
[zealot] 
partake of, have a share of or in (+ gen.) 
remind, call to mind (+ acc. of person + gen. of 
thing); (mid./pass.) remember (+ gen. or + acc.), 
make mention of (+ gen.) 
[amnesia, amnesty] 
Win; conquer 
see 
[panorama] 
fill (+ gen. of thing) 
scatter, disperse 
accomplish; bring to an end; end one's life, die; 
(pres. act. part. agreeing with subject of sentence, 
as if an adverb) finally 
honor, esteem 
bring to light, reveal; show forth, display; (pass.) 
come to light, appear; (with inf.) appear (seem) to 
be doing X; (with suppl. part.) be clearly, 
obviously, openly doing X 
[phenomenon] 
bear, endure in a certain manner 
bear with difficulty, be annoyed (+ suppl. part.) 
I. 
Identify completely and translate precisely each fonn. 
1. 
ETEAEVTW}J.EV 
4. EWPW}J.EV 
7. 
, 
~E~aO"XYJ(TEw 
2. 
E(y]AOVVTO 
5. ax E oav vvacn 
8. 
aVE}J.vY]O"a~ 
3. 
6. 
, 
9. 
' 
, 
H}J.WVTaL 
H}J.W(}aLC;; 
ava}J.vY]O"ac;; 
---~--
I. Outside the present, the compound is preferred in prose; conjugated in the present system 
like tUTryj.l.L. 
2. Outside the present. compounds such as DWrTKEOO.VVVj.l.L are preferred in prose. 

224 
10. ' , 
20. U7TOPOVVH 
EVLKa 
11. opa,aBaL 
21. TEAEvTw)J.EVov 
12. E)J. 7Ti)J. 7T A '1(J"L 
22. ' , 
EH)J.WV 
13. (J"KEOWV 
23. EO'lAOV 
14. EACf'; 
24. ' 
, 
ap7Ta(J"T1 
15. EVE7Ti)J.7T A 'I'; 
25. f.7ri(J"Ta(J"eaL 
16. " 
26. O'IAOL 
L(J")J.EV 
17. <pavEL 
27. H)J.a,V 
18. 7TEpLotweE 
28. 
' 
, 
'17TOpH 
19. ('1Aov(J"eaL 
29. ('1Aov)J.EvoL 
II. Write in Greek. 
1. to emulate (pres. & aor.) 
2. to bring to an end (pres. & aor.) 
3. masc. dat. pI. pres. act. part. of "win" 
4. the things being made manifest (nom.) 
5. they used to fill 
6. we are being emulated 
7. you (s.) were seeing 
8. gen. s. fern. pres. mJp part. of "honor" 
9. to scatter (pres. & aor.) 
10. acc. pI. masc. fut. act. part. of "have a share of" 
11. you (pI.) remembered 
12. they were emulating 
13. to be conquered 
14. you (s.) used to see 
15. we are being honored 
16. we'll march 
17. she gave a share of 
18. I had a share of 
19. about to suffer 
20. to drink (pres. & aor.) 
III. Reading. 
UNIT TWENTY -NINE 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
VLKa,TE 
opw 
EVE7Ti)J.7T Aa)J.EV 
(J"KEOW)J.EV 
TEAEVT77(J"EW 
<pr,vaL 
" 
H(J"OVTaL 
{(J"ovTaL 
opywv)J.EvaL'; 
E7Tav(J"aTo 
1. TPL(J"L o· 1])J.EpaL'; V(J"TEPOV TrJV EavTwv UPETr]V aVeL'; EoryAw(J"av w<pE-
AOVVTE<; TOU'; U7TopovvTa,; (J"LTiwv. 
2. OU )J.Vry)J.OVE'; OVTE';, (J; avopE<; (J"TpaHWTaL, <paivE(J"eE OVTE TWV TOTE yEVO-
)J.EVWV OVTE TWV VVV )J.EAAovTWV YEVry(J"WeaL. 
3. OVTW OEWO'; AEYHv 17v OiJTO'; 0 7TOV'IPO'; W(J"TE <paivE(J"eaL atw,; ELvaL 
upXr,,;· 
4. 7TpWTOV )J.f.V 1](J"vxiav 17YEv 0 yEpwV TaVTa opwv 7TpaTTo)J.EVa imo TWV 
E7TL{3ovAEvovTwv TOL'; apxov(J"w, TEAEVTwv of. TOL'; 7TOAiTaL'; 7TQ.VTa U7TE-
OHtEV £.0,; 7Tav(J"wv Tr]V (J"TQ.(J"W. 

Verbs in -aw and -ow; Further Uses of the Genitive and Dative 
225 
5. TWV GIJf3aiwv OVK E;EPXO/lEVWV 1 d5> /laXlJv. Ot 'A8IJvaLo~ CJLETEAOVV 
TfLX05> /laKpwV Ai8wv nowvvTf5>. TETTapa (TTaOLa anEXov TWV TOV 
aOTEW5> TfLXWV. 
6. Ot TOV j3aCTLAEW5> CTTpaTLWTa~ TO /lEV nAT/805> rITo~ ELITt TOL5> "EAAIJIT~. T~V 
0' apf.T~v ov. 2 
7. OU pq.oiw5> ijVEyKw 6 OW8EV5> aKOl)WV naITa5> TOS yvvaLKa5> TOV ano Tr,5> 
Avoia5> [Lydia (a country in Asia Minor)] EMoVTa 8EOV TL/lwITa5>. 
8. npoTfpov /lEV EVO/l~(ov E;ELva~ Tip POVAO/lEV<{J. iwvxiav aYOVTL. /l~Tf 
OiKa5> EXEW /l~Tf npaY/laTa' vvv OE naVTa ITV/lf3aivH nap' EAnioa Kat d5> 
OfLVOV aywva Ka8iITTa/lat. 
9. ayvow Tiv~ nOTE 3 yvw/lTl xpw/lWO~ [making use of, + dat.] Ot AaKE-
oa~/lovw~ KaW/lEVIJV T~V 'EAAaoa nEpWpWITW. iJYE/lOVE5> OVTH TWV 
'EAA~VWV OVK aOiKW5> Kat o~a T~V EJlCPVTOV [inborn] apf.T~v Kat o~a T~V 
TWV np05> TOV nOAE/lOV En~ITT~/lIJV [knowledge, expertise]. 
1. Compound of hi 
E~; guess the meaning. 
2. Note that a proc1itic receives an acute accent when it precedes a pause at a mark of 
punctuation, as here. 
3 When ?Ton is attached to an interrogative. it adds emphasis: Ti~!Ti ?Ton; = who/what in the 
world? 

UNIT THIRTY 
Comparison of Adjectives and 
Adverbs 
1. Comparison of Adjectives. Recall that adjectives have three degrees 
(U7, Prelim. A): the positive, the comparative, and the superlative. The Greek 
comparative adjective may be translated in English as "more X" or simply 
"rather X" or "quite X." The Greek superlative may be translated in English as 
"most X" or simply "very X." 
There are two methods of forming comparatives and superlatives in 
Greek, as in English. One is to modify the positive form of an adjective with 
the comparative and superlative adverbs flaAAOV = more or flaAuTTa = most. 
These adverbs must be used with most participles and may be used with other 
adjectives: 
</nAWV 
loving 
EVEA7n~ 
hopeful 
flaAAOV CP~AWV 
more loving 
flaAAOV EVEA7n~ 
more hopeful 
flaAUTTa CP~AWV 
most loving 
flaA~(TTa EVEA7n~ 
most hopeful 
2. Comparison with Suffixes. The second method of forming compar-
atives and superlatives is by adding suffixes to the adjective stem (just as is 
done in English with -er and -est). There are two sets of suffixes in Greek. 
a. 
-TEpO~ and -TaTO~. Most vowel-declension adjectives and many con-
sonant-declension adjectives use the comparative suffix -TEpO~ and the super-
lative suffix -TaTO~. For vowel-declension adjectives, the suffix is usually 
added to the stem plus masc.!neut. stem vowel o. If the previous syllable is 
metrically light (contains a short vowel followed by no consonant or by only 
one consonant), then the stem vowel is lengthened to w before the suffix. (This 
occurs because Greek tends to avoid a long succession of short or light 
syllables.) For consonant-declension adjectives, the suffix is usually added to 
the masc.!neut. stem. The comparative and superlative are declined like 
normal three-ending vowel-declension adjectives (fern. sing. in a for com-
226 

Comparison of Adjectives and Adverbs 
227 
parative, in 1] for superlative). The accent of comparative and superlative is 
persistent on the syllable preceding the suffix. 
7TOV1]PO,) 
7TOV1]POTEPO,) 
7TOV1]pOTa TO') 
(long vowel 1]: omicron retained) 
7TLKPO,) 
7TLKPOTEPO,) 
7TLKpOTa TO') 
(short vowel L, but two consonants: omicron retained) 
a~w') 
G.~U;)TEPO,) 
G.~U;JTaTO,) 
(short vowel L, no consonant: omega as link vowel) 
xaAE7To') 
xaAE7TwTEpO') 
xaAE7TWTaTO') 
(short vowel E, one consonant: omega as link vowel) 
G.A1]8~') (stem G.A1]8HT-) 
(3apv') (stem (3apv-) 
G.A1]8ECTTEPO,) 
(3apvTEpo,) 
G.A1]8ECTTaTO,) 
(3apVTaTO') 
Some adjectives form comparative and superlative from a modified stem: for 
instance, YEpaLo') = aged produces YEpaiTEpo'), YEpaiTaTo'); and EvoaijJ.wv pro-
duces EvoaLjJ.ovECTTEPO'), EvoaLjJ.ovECTTaTO'). The student will become familiar 
with such irregularities only through experience in reading Greek texts and 
through use of a good lexicon. 
b. -LWV and -LCTTO'). Some adjectives of both declensions and many ad-
jectives with irregular comparison (due to use of different roots or different 
forms of a root in the different degrees) use the comparative suffix -[WV 
(neuter -Lov, gen. sing. -Lovo'); no separate fern.) and the superlative suffix 
-LCTTO,), -1], -ov. An alternative form of -LWV features semivocalic iota instead 
of vowel I.: thus the suffix is -ywv, which produces phonetic changes that 
eliminate the semi vocalic iota. The adjective stem used with these suffixes 
often loses its final vowel or an adjectival suffix like -po-. The accent falls as 
far back as the length of U permits: thus masc. KaAAiwv, EAaTTwv, but neuter 
KaAAwv, (AaTTov. 
Here are the major adjectives using these suffixes: 
positive 
comparative 
superlative 
~ov> (~o-) 
~o[wv, ~owv 
~OLCTTO>. -1/. -ov 
TaXv> (TaX-) 
8aTTwv. 8aTTOV 1 
TaXW"To> 
aiG)(po> (aitTX-) 
" 
" 
aLaxwTo> 
aWXLwv. aLtTXwv 
EX8po> (EX8-) 
EX8[wv. EX8wv 
EX8HTTO> 
I. Non-Attic ()urrrrwv. ()urrrrov. Note that the T ofmxv> is due to dissimilation by Grassmann's 
law (just as in TpEtJ>W vS. ()pE"Ij;W). ()UTTWV derives from a form of the root in which initial () 
remains and phonetic changes produce TT and compensatory lengthening of a. 

228 
UNIT THIRTY 
positive 
comparative 
superlative 
ayaeoS' = good. brave. 
a}J.tLvwv. UJlEWOV 
UPWTOS'I 
capable. excellent 
a yaeoS' = good. virtuous 
{3EfI.TLWV. {3EATWV 
{3EA TL(TTOS' 
ayaeoS' = good. mighty. 
KpELTTWV. KPELTTOV 2 
KpaTL(TToS' 
strong 
KaKOS' = bad 
KaKLwv. KaKwv 
, 
KaKl(TTOS' 
KaKOS' = bad. lowly. mean 
XELpWV. XELPOV 
, 
XElPl(TTOS' 
KaKOS' = bad 
ijTTWV. r,TTOV 3 = inferior. 
(ijKl(TTOS' [ rare]) 
weaker; less,fewer 
KaAOS' 
KaAALwv. KaAAwv 
KaAAl(TToS' 
}J.EyaS' (}J.Ey-) 
WL(WV. }J.E'i.(OV 
, 
JlEYl(TTOS' 
}J.lKP0S' = small 
}J.lKpOTEP°S' 
, 
}J.lKpoTaToS' 
}J.lKP0S' = small. few 
f.AaTTwv. EAaTTov4 
f.AaXl(TToS' 
OALyOS' 
OAEL(WV. OAEl(OV 
OAL Yl(TTQS' 
7rOAVS' 
7rAELWV or 7rAEWV. 7rAEOV5 
7rAEL(TTOS' 
/J4owS' (Prt- or pa.-) 
/J4wv. pq.ov 
' 
A 
Prt(TTOS' 
3. Declension of Comparatives in -twV or -wv. These are declined like 
normal nu-stems, such as (J'wcppwv (U22.1 b), but in the acc. sing. masc.lfem. 
and the nom. and acc. pI. of all genders there are alternative forms. These 
shorter forms are based on a stem that lacks the v (as in the dative plural), and 
the 0 of the stem contracts with the case ending (the acc. pI. m.lf. form is 
borrowed from the nom.). The shorter forms are more colloquial than the 
regular forms. Here is the declension of Kar..r..iwv as an example: 
masc.ljem. 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
KaAALwv 
KaAAwv 
gen. 
KaAALovoS' 
KaAALovoS' 
dat. 
KaAALovl 
KaAALovl 
acc. 
KaAALova or KaAALw 
KaAAwv 
voc. 
KaAAwv 
KaAAwv 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
KaAALovE 
KaAALovE) 
(g. d. 
KaAAlovoW 
KaAAlovoW) 
I. The superlative is from the same root seen in a.pH~. 
2. Non-Attic KPEI.(]'(]'WV; the root is a byform of KpaT-. as in KpaTos and KpaTfw; again phonetic 
changes produce TT and compensatory lengthening (H). 
3. Non-Attic 7juuwv. 
4. Non-Attic f.haUuwv. 
5. There is an alternative form 7ThElV for the neut. sing. nom. acc. 7ThfOV. 

Comparison of Adjectives and Adverbs 
229 
plur. 
n. v. 
gen. 
dat. 
ace. 
masc.lfem. 
KuA.A.iovE'> or KuA.A.iov<; 
KUA.A.lOVWV 
KuA.A.ioUl(V) 
KuA.A.iovu<; or KuA.A.iov<; 
neuter 
KuA.A.iovu or KuA.A.iw 
KUA.A.lOVWV 
KuA.A.ioUl(V) 
KuA.A.iovu or KuA.A.iw 
4. Comparison of Adverbs. As we have seen in U 12.1 and U22.4, the 
positive degree of most adverbs has the ending -WS'. The comparative adverb is 
supplied by the neuter singular accusative of the comparative adjective (an in-
stance of the adverbial accusative: U 17 .3e). The superlative adverb is supplied 
by the neuter plural accusative of the superlative adjective. 
positive 
comparative 
superlative 
7rtKPW<;, bitterly 
/JCfoiw<;, easily 
7roA.v, much 
7rtKpOTEPOV, more bitterly 
Mov, more easily 
7rA.EOV, to a greater 
7rtKPOTaTa, most bitterly 
MUTa, most easily 
7rA.ELUTa, to the highest 
degree, more 
degree, most 
JJ.cJ.A.u, very 
JJ.Q.A.A.ov, more 
JJ.cJ.A.lUTU, most 
5. Comparative Expressions 
a. With 11 = than. The Greek equivalent of English than is 11. Like than, 
~ introduces (in theory) a comparative clause, most of which may be sup-
pressed, leaving the items compared in the same construction (that is, in the 
same case). 
Ex. 
6 ~1Jp..O(J"8EV1JS' KpEiTTwV 7] 6 ~wKpaT1JS'. 
Demosthenes is stronger than Socrates (is) [strong]. 
6 (J"TpaT1JYO,) 8aTTOV ECPVYEV 7] o[ aA.A.oL. 
The general fled more quickly than the others (fled). 
Vp..LV PCfoV 7TL(J"TEl)(J"OV(J"w 7] T]p..LV. 
They will trust you more readily than (they will trust) us. 
Vp..LV /Jifov 7TL(J"TEV(J"OV(J"W EKELVOL 7] T]p..EL'). 
They will trust you more readily than we (will) [trust you]. 
b. With the genitive of comparison (cf. U29.4b5). The second element 
of comparison may, in most cases, be expressed in the genitive case without 11. 
Ex. 
6 Li1Jp..O(J"8EV1J') KpEiTTwv TOV ~wKpaTov,). 
Demosthenes is stronger than Socrates (is) [strong]. 
6 (J"TpaT1JYO,) 8aTTOV TWV aA.A.wv ECPVYEV. 
The general fled more quickly than the others (fled). 

230 
UNIT THIRTY 
TOV Ol.KaWV jJ.UAAOV T01) aOl.KOV hraww. 
I praise the just man more than the unjust man. 
The genitive of comparison is on the whole more common than the use of 17, 
but it is avoided in contexts where the presence of other genitives would cause 
ambiguity or an unpleasant piling up of genitive forms: 
oi OVCTTVXEl:~ 7rAw5vwv E1JEPYECTLWV 17 oi EljTVXEl:~ OEOVTaL. 
The unfortunate need more benefactions than the fortunate. 
[ElJEPYECTLWV is gen. with OEOVTaL, so gen. of compo is avoided] 
TWV xpy/jJ.aTwv jJ.UAAOV 17 Tr,~ njJ.f]~ E7rL8vjJ.El:. 
He craves money more than honor. 
[xpy/jJ.aTwv is gen. with E7rL8vjJ.El:, so gen. of compo is avoided] 
6. Degree of Difference. Recall (from U29.5b) that the degree of differ-
ence with a comparative expression may be expressed by the dative. 
7rOAA<{J CTOCPWTEPO~ 
wiser by far (by much) 
6 f3aCTLAEv~ TPLCTLV ~jJ.EpaL~ VCTTEpOV T01) aYYEAov acpl.KETo. 
The king arrived three days later (later by three days) than the 
messenger. 
Some common adverbial modifiers of comparatives are, however, adverbial 
accusatives of neuter adjectives or pronouns: 
7rOAV CTOCPWTEpO~ much wiser (wiser by far) 
OVOEV KaAALWV 
no more beautiful, not at all more beautiful 
7. Partitive Genitive with Superlatives. The partitive genitive (UlO.5b) 
is often used with a superlative to express the class among which the noun 
excels: 
OEWOTaTO~ AEYEW TWV 'A8Y/val.wv 
most clever at speaking among (of) the Athenians 
8. Strengthened Superlative. A superlative may be strengthened by plac-
ing W~ or on in front of it, producing the meaning "as X as possible." This 
usage results from ellipsis of the verb "is possible" in a clause introduced by 
W~ or on. (The same function is occasionally served by relative adverb n, or in 
poetry by OCTOV or 07rW~.) 
on TaXLCTTa 
as swiftly as possible 
(3ovAojJ.E8a W~ apLCTToL ywECT8aL. 
We want to prove ourselves to be as brave as possible. 
9. Identification of Comparative or Superlative. To identify a compar-
ative or superlative adjective fully, give its gender, number, and case, its 

Comparison of Adjectives and Adverbs 
231 
nominative forms, the word comparative or superlative as appropriate, and the 
nom. sing. masc. of the positive adjective from which it comes, and tell what 
noun it modifies. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the comparison of adjectives and adverbs. 
2. Study the inflection of comparatives in -LWV or -wv. 
3. Learn as vocabulary for this unit both the comparatives and superlatives 
presented in 2b above and the remaining words listed below. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
adjectives 
yEpa~o<;, yEpaUl., yEpa~ov 
(comp. YEpaLTEp0<;, sup. 
YEpaLTaTo<;) 
dJEA7T~<;, dJEA7TL 
(stem EVEA7TLO-, m.lf. acc. 
sing. EVEA7TLV) 
EXepO<;, Exepa, EXepOV 
6 EXepO<; 
7TaAa~o<;, 7TaAa~a, 7TaAa~ov 
(comp. 7TaAaLTEp0<;, sup. 
7TaAaLTaTo<; [less often 
7TaAa~oTEpo<;, -OTaTO<;]) 
TO 7TaAa~ov 
7TaAa~ 
TaXV<;, TaXELa, TaXV 
Taxa 
xpry~TO<;, xpry~T~, xpry~TOV 
adverb 
}laAa; compo }laAAOV, sup. 
}laA~~Ta 
conjunction 
" 
ry 
" 
" 
ry ... ry •.. 
old, aged; revered 
hopeful, cheerful 
hated, hateful; hostile 
enemy (in personal or interstate relations) 
old, ancient 
[palaeontology, palaeolithic] 
(adv. acc.) in the old days, formerly 
(adv.) long ago 
swift, quick 
[tachygraphy] 
(adv.) quickly; perhaps 
useful, serviceable; good, honest, worthy 
[chrestomathy] 
very; more; most 
or; than 
either ... or ... 

232 
verbs 
OOVAElJW, OOVAElJUW, 
EOOVAEVUU 
7rlUTEVW, 7rlUTEVUW, 
E7TLUTEVUU 
UTPUTEVW, UTPUTEVUW, 
, 
, 
EUTPUTEVUU 
xpG.w, xprww, ExpYJUU I 
xpG.OP.UL, XP~UOP.UL, 
EXPYJUG.P. YJV 
EXERCISES 
I. Write in Greek. 
1. with better judgment 
2. in the worst manner 
3. more easily 
4. the uppermost parts (dat.) 
5. from the truer account 
6. to the worthiest women 
7. the safer way (acc.) 
UNIT THIRTY 
be a slave or servant; serve (+ dat.) 
trust, put faith in (+ dat.) 
carry out a military campaign, wage war; (mid.) carry 
out a campaign, march (on campaign) 
(of a god) proclaim an oracle; (mid.) (of a person) 
consult an oracle 
use, employ (+ dat.); experience (a condition) (+ 
dat.) 
9. of the wisest teacher 
10. of a certain wealthier man 
11. most clearly 
12. more money (nom.) 
13. the largest city (dat.) 
14. as useful as possible (neut. n. s.) 
15. the sweetest thing (acc.) of all 
8. the most unjust (acc.) ofeyrus's 
16. more shamefully, most 
soldiers 
shamefully 
II. Render into Greek. 
1. We are not unaware that young men are swifter than old men. 
2. It is reported that you are angry at many of the orators, but most of all at 
Demosthenes. 
3. The thieves did not notice that the ship they had snatched was becoming 
filled with water. 
4. Upon deliberation, it seemed better to the Greeks to send the strongest part 
of their army toward the sea so as to conceal their number [= multitude] 
from the foreigners for as long a time as possible. 
I. Despite the dictionary form, this verb is actually treated in Attic as a contract verb with TJ in 
place of a (and n in place of Cf). For example, the present active is conjugated xpw, xp8'>, xp8, 
etc.; the middle (which is far more common, in the sense use) is xpwp.al, xp8, xpTJTal, 
xpwjlEOa, XPTJITOE, XPWVTaL For a full paradigm of the present system, see Appendix 3: 
Paradigms. 

Comparison of Adjectives and Adverbs 
233 
III. Reading: Xenophon, Anabasis 5.5.7-10 (slightly adapted): Having 
escaped from the midst of the Persian king's territory and reached the coast of 
the Black Sea, the army of Greek mercenaries is still having difficulties and 
uses force in order to obtain food and supplies. Representatives of the natives 
come to protest. 
EV TOlm{J EPxovTaL EK ~LVW7Tnl) 7TPErT3ELI), cj>0j30Vj1.EVOL 7TEpt TWV 
KOTVWPLTWV Ti)l) TE 7TO'\EWI)1 (7]V yap EKEtVWV Kat cj>opOV EKEtVOLI) Ecj>EPOV oi 
KOTVWptTad Kat 7TEpt Ti]l) xwpal) (~KOVOV yap aiJT~v 0'[l0VgEVy/V). Kat 
EMOVTEI) ELI) TO rTTpaT07TEOOV E,\EYOV (7TPOy/YOPEL OE 'EKaTwVVj1.0l) OEWOl) 
VOj1.L(Oj1.EVOl) EivaL '\EYEW)' "E7TEj1.tEV T,j1.U I) , ~ avopEl) rTTpanWTaL, T, TWV 
~LVW7TEWV 7TO'\LI) E7TaWErTOVTClS TE Vj1.UI) on VLKUTE "E'\'\1JVEI) OVTEI) 
j3apj3apovI), E7TELTa oE Kat 2 rTvvy/rTey/rTogEvovI) on OLa 7TO'\'\WV TE Kat OEWWV, 
wI) T,j1.Etl) ~KOVrTaj1.EV, 7TpaYj1.aTWV rTErTCfrTgEVOL 7TapErTTE. atwvgEV OE, 
"E'\'\1JVEI) OVTEI) Kat ailToL. vcj>' Vj1.WV OVTWV 'E'\'\~vwv ayaeov j1.EV n 
7TarrxELV, KaKOV OE j1.1JOEV· OVOE yap T,j1.Etl) Vj1.UI) OVOEV 7TW7TOTE v7TriptagEV 
KaKWI) 7TOWVVTEI). KOTVwptTaL OE OVTOt ELrTW T,j1.ETEPOL ~7rOLKOL, Kat TrJV 
xwpav T,j1.Etl) aVTOtl) TaVT1JV 7TapEOOj1.EV j3apj3apovI) ackE,\ogEVoL. " 
Underlined Words 
atL()w = think proper, expect (+ 
complem. inf.) 
G.7TOLKOL = colonists, emigrants from a 
mother city 
acjJfAOJ.l.fVOL = a7To- compound (of 
what verb?); here take away (+ 
double acc.) 
rt[low = plunder 
KOTVWPLTaL, -WV, m. = inhabitants of 
Kotyora (a subject colony of Sinope) 
on (here) = because 
7Tpf.a/3H>, -fWV, m. = ambassadors 
7TP01]YOpf.W = be spokesman 
7TW7TOTf = ever yet 
(Tf(T<tJ(TJ.l.f.VOL = perf. mid. part. having 
saved yourselves, having safely come 
through 
~LVW7TfL>, --f.WV, m. = people of Sinope 
~LVW7T1], -1]>, f. = Sinope, a Greek city 
on the Black Sea 
(Tvv1](Te1](TOJ.l.f.Vov> = fut. pass. 
(deponent) part. rejoice with (+ dat. 
of person, you, understood) 
iJ7Tapxw = take the initiative, begin (+ 
suppl. part.) 
, 
w> =as 
I. 7I'OAEW, is the object of 7I'Ept and KOTVwptTwV is possessive gen. with 7I'OAfW,; as H shows, 
xwpa, is also the object of 7I'fPt. but the preposition is redundantly repeated before it because of 
the intervening parenthetic clause. 
2. Note that f7l'HTa DE: Kat answers the H after f7l'aWfaOVTa,; this is less formal, but more 
expressive than H ... H ... or H ... Kat . .. 

UNIT THIRTY -ONE 
The Subjunctive 
I. The Subjunctive Mood. Recall (from U8 Prelim.) that Greek has four 
finite moods. So far, we have dealt exclusively with the indicative mood, 
which is for assertions of fact and appears in most independent clauses and in 
some dependent clauses. In this and the next two units, the two subordinate 
moods, the subjunctive and optative, are presented. The subjunctive expresses 
mere assumption or possibility (as opposed to assertion) and is more often 
used in subordinate-clause constructions than in independent clauses (hence its 
name in Greek, lJ7rOTaKTLKry, and Latin, subiunctivus, "subjoined"). The Greek 
subjunctive occurs in the three tense systems which express aspect (the 
present, the aorist, and the perfect) and always has aspect meaning rather than 
time meaning. In all its tenses the subjunctive has the same primary personal 
endings (like those seen in the present and future indicative), but in Attic it is 
distinguished from the indicative by the use of lengthened theme vowel w/ TJ 
(in place of 0/ E of the indicative). When the primary endings are added to the 
lengthened theme vowel, the following subjunctive endings are produced: 
active 
middle/passive 
----~ 
sing. 
1st 
-w 
-wjla~ 
2nd 
-[I'> 
-?1 
[from -l1(CT )a~ 1 
3rd 
-'[I 
-l1Ta~ 
(dual 
2nd 
-l1TOV 
-l1a-8oV) 
(3rd 
-l1TOV 
-l1a-8oV) 
plur. 
1st 
-WjlEV 
-wjlE8a 
2nd 
-l1TE 
-l1CT8E 
3rd 
-WCT~(V ) 
-WVTa~ 
2. Conjugation of the Subjunctive 
a. Present Active Subjunctive. The active personal endings are added to 
the present stem (e.g., ay-). If the present stem ends in E (e.g., 7rOLEW or 
Ti8TJ!J.L), the E disappears in contraction, but the accent falls on the resulting 
234 

The Subjunctive 
235 
contracted vowel. If the present stem ends in a (e.g., opaw), the contractions of 
a with the lengthened theme vowel turn out to be the same as those in the 
indicative (so -aw verbs look the same in indicative and subjunctive). If the 
present stem ends in 0 (e.g., 01JAOW), the resulting contractions are 0 + w - > 
w, 0 + 1J -> w, 0 + n -> O~ (so -Ow verbs look the same in the singular only 
of indo and subj.). The contractions found in o{owJ.l.~ are similar, but 0 +!l -> 
, 
'P. In all the subjunctives involving contraction, the contracted vowel has the 
circumflex accent. Here are six examples showing the five possible patterns: 
Tt.eYJ}.J.L 
' , 
OYJAOW 
Ot.OW}.J.L 
ayw 
7roLEW 
opaw 
stem ay-
stem 7roLE-
stem neE-
stem opa-
stem OYJAO-
stem OLOO-
---------
ayw 
7roLW 
new 
opw 
OYJAw 
OLOW 
aY[l' 
7ro LfJ , 
nefJ' 
op~, 
OYJAOL, 
OL00, 
aY[l 
71'OLfJ 
nefJ 
op~ 
OYJAOL 
OL00 
(aYYJTov 
71'0 LT] TOV 
neT]TOV 
Opo.TOV 
OYJAWTOV 
OLOWTOV) 
(ayYJTov 
71'OLT]TOV 
neT]TOV 
Opo.TOV 
OYJAWTOV 
OLOWTOV) 
" 
71'OLW}.J.EV 
neW}.J.EV 
OpW}.J.EV 
OYJAw}.J.EV 
OLOW}.J.EV 
ayw}.J.Ev 
" 
71'OL T]TE 
neT]TE 
Opo.TE 
OYJAWTE 
OLOWTE 
aYYJTE 
aywcn(v) 
71'OLwcn(v) 
newcn(v) 
opwcn(v) 
0YJAwcn(v) 
oLowcn(v) 
Other present active SUbjunctives: L1JJ.I.~ - > tw, L(J'T1JJ.I.~ - > t(J'TW, <P1JJ.I.{ - > 
<pw (all three like new); EiJ.l.{ ->~, -n", -n, (ryTOV, ryTOV,) ~J.l.EV, ryTE, ~(J'~(v); 
and (both without any contraction) EZJ.l.~ -> tw, OEiKVVJ.l.~ -> OHKV1JW. 
b. Present Middle/Passive Subjunctive. The primary middle/passive 
endings are added to the present stem. Contractions, if any, occur in the same 
way as in the active. Here are examples showing the five possible patterns: 
" 
, 
OYJAow 
Ot.OW}.J.L 
ayw 
71'OLEW 
opaw 
---
" 
71'OLw}.J.aL 
opw}.J.aL 
oYJAw}.J.aL 
oLow}.J.aL 
ayW}.J.aL 
" 
71'OL fJ 
op~ 
OYJAOL 
OL00 
aY[l 
" 
71'OLT]TaL 
Opo.TaL 
OYJAwTaL 
OLOWTaL 
aYYJTaL 
(aYYJaBov 
71'OL T]aBov 
opo.(J'eov 
0YJAw(J'eOV 
OLOW(J'eOV) 
(aYYJ(J'eov 
71'OLT](J'eOV 
opo.(J'eov 
0YJAw(J'eOV 
OLOW(J'eOV) 
ayw}.J.Eea 
71'0 LW}.J.EOa 
opw}.J.E8a 
OYJAw}.J.E8a 
OLow}.J.E8a 
aYYJ(J'8E 
71'OL T](J'8E 
Opo.(J'8E 
OYJAw(J'eE 
OLOW(J'eE 
" 
71'OLWVTaL 
OPWVTaL 
oYJAwvTaL 
OLOWVTaL 
aYWVTaL 
Other present mid/pass. SUbjunctives: T{e1JJ.I.~ -> HeWJ.l.a~, L1JJ.l.L -> tWJ.l.aL, 
L(J'T1JJ.I.~ -> t(J'TwJ.l.a~ (all three like 71'o~wJ.l.a~); OE{KVVJ.I.~ -> OELKVVwJ.l.a~ 
(without any contraction); ovvaJ.l.a~ -> oVvwJ.l.aL, E71'{(J'TaJ.l.a~ -> E71'{(J'TwJ.l.a~ 
(both without contraction). 

236 
UNIT THIRTY -ONE 
c. Aorist Active Subjunctive. The active endings are added to the aorist 
stem (whether strong or weak aorist). Athematic aorists feature contractions 
which are the same as seen in the present of the same verbs. Here are examples 
showing the four possible patterns: 
7rpaTTW 
AEi7rW 
Ti87J1.1.t 
oiowjJ.t 
stem 7rpa~-
stem At7r-
stem 8E-
stem 00-
7rpa~w 
Ai7rw 
8w 
Ow 
7rpa~"[IS 
Ai7r"[ls 
8fis 
00s 
7rpa~"[I 
Ai7r"[l 
8~ 
"[I 
00 
( 7rpa{T/TOV 
Ai7r7JTOV 
8ryTOV 
OWTOV) 
(7rpa~7JTOV 
Ai7r7JTOV 
8ryTOV 
OWTOV) 
7rpa~wjJ.Ev 
Ai7rwjJ.f.V 
8wjJ.f.V 
oWjJ.f.V 
7rpa~7JTf. 
Ai7r7JTf. 
8ryTf. 
OWTf. 
7rpa~w(n(v) 
Ai 7rW(Tt (v) 
8wcn(v) 
OWo-t(v) 
Other aorist active subjunctives: Lr1/J.L -> -~ (compounds only), Lo-TYJfJ.L - > 
o-TW, {3aivw -> {3w, cp8avw -> cp8w (all four like 8w); YLYVW(]"KW -> yvw, 
G.Ai(]"KoJJ.aL -> G.Aw (both like ow); ovw -> ovw (without contraction). 
d. Aorist Middle Subjunctive. The middle/passive endings are added to 
the aorist stem (whether strong or weak aorist). For athematic aorists the con-
tractions are the same as in the aorist active. Here are examples showing the 
four possible patterns: 
7rpaTTW 
AEi7rw 
Ti87J1.u 
oiowjJ.t 
7rpa~wjJ.at 
AL7rwjJ.at 
8wjJ.aL 
oWjJ.aL 
7rpa~"[I 
Ai7r!l 
8~ 
!I 
00 
7rpa~7JTat 
Ai7r7JTaL 
8ryTaL 
OWTat 
(7rpa~7J0-80v 
Ai 7r7J0-80v 
8ry0-80v 
ow0-8ov) 
( 7rpa~7J0-8ov 
Ai 7r7J0-80v 
8ry0-80v 
ow0-8ov) 
7rpa~wjJ.E8a 
At7rwjJ.f.8a 
8wjJ.f.8a 
oWjJ.f.8a 
7rpa~7J0-8f. 
Ai7r7J0-8f. 
8ry0-8f. 
ow0-8f. 
7rpa~wvTat 
Ai7rwVTat 
8WVTaL 
OWVTaL 
Other aorist middle subjunctives: LYJJJ.L -> -~JJ.aL (compounds only, like 
8wJJ.aL). 
3. Independent Uses of the Subjunctive. Although the subjunctive is pre-
dominantly used in subordinate clauses, it does have several uses in 
independent clauses. These uses may be classified broadly as either "imper-
atival" (issuing a command or recommendation for future action: uses a and b 

The Subjunctive 
237 
below) or "prospective" (looking to an action that might take place in the 
future or to a proposition that might be ascertained as true in the future: uses c 
and d below). Since the sUbjunctive expresses assumption or possibility or 
command rather than assertion, the negative is normally jJ.7} rather than ov. The 
choice of tense depends on the aspect of the action. 
a. Hortatory Subjunctive. The first person plural (and less often the first 
person singular) subjunctive may express a proposal of action or an exhor-
tation: 
vvv rWjJ.EV Kat. aK01)(J"wjJ.EV TOV avop6~. 
Let us go now and hear the man. 
jJ.ry cpopwjJ.E8a. 
Let us not be afraid. 
b. Prohibitions. The second or third person subjunctive (normally aorist) 
with jJ.7} may express a prohibition, that is, a negative command. (A negative 
command with present aspect usually is expressed instead with the imperative: 
U40.) 
jJ.ry 7TOt7}(J"Y]TE TaVTa. 
Do not do this. 
jJ.Y]od~ r,y7}(J"Y]TW TOV <l>tAt7T7TOV CPtAOV. 
Let no one consider Philip a friend. 
c. Doubtful Assertions and Emphatic Denials. The subjunctive with jJ.7} 
may express a doubtful assertion ("Perhaps ... " or "I suspect ... ") or, with jJ.ry 
OV, a doubtful denial ("Perhaps ... not ... "). On the other hand, the aorist 
subjunctive with ov jJ.7} (note the order) expresses a strong denial. 
jJ.ry TOVTO n 0 i(y]TOVjJ.EV. 
Perhaps this is what we were seeking. 
jJ.ry OVK op8w~ EXYI TaVTa. 
I suspect that these things are not correct. 
ov jJ.ry OEttYl avatno~ wv TWV KaKwv. 
He will never show that he is free of blame for the bad things. 
d. Deliberative Subjunctive. The subjunctive may be used in questions 
in which one is asking what one is to do or wondering what is to happen. 
Er7TWjJ.EV 17 (J"tyWjJ.EV; 
Shall we speak or keep silent? 
Tt 7Ta8w; 
What is to happen to me? [Lit.: What am I to experience?] 

238 
UNIT THIRTY -ONE 
4. Dependent Uses of the Subjunctive. Again in these uses the subjunc-
tive has a prospective or imperatival or generalizing force that differs from the 
force of assertion carried by the indicative. The principal dependent uses are: 
a. Purpose clauses (see §6 below). 
b. Object clauses with verbs of fearing (see §7 below). 
c. Present general conditions and relative clauses with present general 
conditional force (to be presented in U34). 
d. Future more vivid conditions and relative clauses with future more 
vivid conditional force (to be presented in U34). 
e. Temporal clauses introduced by conjunctions meaning before or until 
(to be presented in U39). 
5. Sequence of Moods. In a complex sentence, the tense or mood of the 
verb in the subordinate clause is often influenced by the tense of the verb in 
the main clause. For instance, in English one says He sa)'s the man will come 
but He said the man would come: the modal would is used in place of will 
because the leading verb (the verb of the main clause) is in a past tense, This 
change reflects a regular sequence of tenses in English.' Ancient Greek has a 
similar sequence of moods, depending again on the tense of the leading verb. 
A primary tense tends to be accompanied by an indicative or subjunctive 
(which has primary personal endings) in subordinate clauses of certain kinds, 
while a secondary tense instead tends to be accompanied by an optative in the 
same kinds of subordinate clause (as the student will see in the next unit, the 
optative has secondary personal endings). Put in its most general form, the rule 
for the sequence of moods may be stated thus: 
In a complex sentence in which the subordinate clause is a purpose 
clause, an object clause of fearing, an indirect-statement noun clause 
with on or wS', an indirect question, or the protasis of a general 
condition (or relative clause with general conditional force), (l) if 
the leading verb is in a primary tense (primary sequence), then the 
verb of the subordinate clause must be in the subjunctive or 
indicative (as the particular construction requires), but (2) if the 
leading verb is in a secondary tense (secondary sequence), then the 
verb of the subordinate clause may be instead in the optative. 
Note that the sequence of moods in Greek is for most constructions a tendency 
or option rather than a rigid rule. 
I. For students who know Latin, the relatively strict sequence of tenses which applies to the use 
of the Latin subjunctive is a comparable phenomenon: iubet ut abeat, but iussit ut abiret. 

The Subjunctive 
239 
6. Purpose Clauses. Clauses denoting purpose (that, in order that, so 
that; also in English translation in order to with infinitive; negative also lest 
[somewhat archaic]) contain the sUbjunctive in primary sequence and either 
the optative or the sUbjunctive in secondary sequence. In Attic prose the fol-
lowing conjunctions may introduce a purpose clause (also sometimes called a 
final clause): (positive) Lva, 07TW~, W~; (negative) Lva P.?], 07TW~ P.?], W~ P.?], 
p.?].l 
primary sequence: subjunctive mandatory 
TOV~ (J"ocpov~ OOKO'VVTa~ ELvaL E~EAfYXH Lva gaveavy/ n. 
He cross-examines those who seem to be wise in order to learn some-
thing. 
secondary sequence: optative optional (to be learned in U32) 
cpvAaKa~ (J"vvf7TEp.'irEV 07TW~ p.~ A6.eOLEV a7TEM6vTE~ 
or cpvAaKa~ (J"vvf7TEp.'irEV 07TW~ p.~ AaeW(J"W a7TEMovTE~. 
He sent along guards in order that they not go away secretly. 
7. Object Clauses with Verbs of Fearing 
a. Clauses denoting a fear about a future event or about a present event 
the occurrence of which is unascertained contain the subjunctive in primary 
sequence, the optative or SUbjunctive in secondary sequence. Such clauses are 
introduced by P.?] when positive, by p.~ ov when negative. 2 
primary sequence: SUbjunctive mandatory 
cpo;3ovJJ.Eea p.~ 6 ;3a(J"LAEv~ ryp.'iv E7TLer,TaL. 
We are afraid that the king may attack us. 
cpo(3oVP.Eea p.~ Ot (J"vp.p.axoL OVK 'EMw(J"w Ei~ KaLpov. 
We fear that the allies may not come in time. 
secondary sequence: optative optional 
Ecpo;3ovVTO p.~ 6 ;3a(J"LAEv~ EmeE'iTO. 
or ECP0(30VVTO p.~ 6 (3a(J"LAEv~ E7TLOr,TaL. 
They were afraid that the king might attack. 
b. Clauses denoting afear referring to a past event or to a present, ascer-
tained event contain the indicative, introduced by P.?] or p.~ oV. This is a rare 
idiom in Greek, though the corresponding English idiom is fairly common as 
an apologetic or polite form of expression. 
I. In poetry and a few prose writers the modal particile av is sometimes used with the sub-
junctive (and rarely the optative) in purpose clauses with w> or 07rw>. 
2. The dependent (hypotactic) fear-clause derives from an original coordinate (paratactic) 
construction: We are aji·aid. Let the king not allack liS. -> We are afraid that the king may 
allack liS. 

240 
UNIT THIRTY -ONE 
<pOp01JjJ.Eea jJ.ry Q.jJ.<pOTEpWV Q.jJ.a ryjJ.apnlKajJ.Ev. (perfect ind.) 
We fear that we have (actually) failed of both objects at once. 
Note that verbs of fearing may also take a complementary infinitive when the 
sense is fear to do X. 
OU <pOj3ELTaL T0 j3a(rtAEL E7TLj3oVAElJEW. 
He is not afraid to plot against the king. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Learn the patterns of subjunctive conjugation. 
2. Study the independent and dependent uses of the SUbjunctive. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
verbs 
~TTaOJ.i.al, ~TTrlO"OJ.i.al (no 
aor. mid.)1 
o"lyaw, O"lyrlO"OJ.i.al, EO"iyrwa 
nouns 
aeAo" aeAov, m. 
aeAov, aeAov, n. 
yaJ.i.o" yaJ.i.ov, m. 
OEL7rVOV, oEi7rVOV, n. 
oovAo" oovAov, m. 
001.111.1), 001.111.1)" f. 
ETaLpo" ETaipov, m. 
ETaipa, {Taipa" f. 
Kalp(k Kalpov, m. 
0PYrl' opyTj" f. 
7riO"Tl" 7riO"TEW" f. 
Tp07raWV, Tpo7raiov, n. 2 
adjectives 
aJ.i.cpoTEpo" aJ.i.cpoTEpa, 
aJ.i.cpoTEpoV 
, 
I 
, 
I '  
I 
avalTW>, aValTla, avalTWV 
eTjAv" eriAEla, eTjAv 
I. Non-Attic TwuaoP.UL 
2. In older Attic also Tp07ru'iov. 
be less, be inferior; be defeated, be defeated by (+ 
gen. of person) 
be silent; (transitive) keep secret 
contest (of war or sports) 
[athletics, decathlon] 
prize (of a contest) 
wedding, wedding feast; marriage 
[polygamy] 
meal 
slave (male) 
[hieroduleJ 
slave (female) 
comrade, companion 
woman companion; courtesan 
right measure, right degree; time, season, 
opportunity; critical moment, crisis 
mood, temperament; anger, wrath 
[orgasm] 
trust, faith; assurance, pledge 
trophy, victory monument 
each of two, both 
guiltless, without blame or responsibility 
female; soft, delicate 
[thelitis, epithelium] 

The Subjunctive 
241 
op8o<;, op8~, op8ov 
7T Lin 0 <;, 7T Lln~, TTL (n 0 v 
straight; upright; correct 
[orthodox, orthogonal] 
trustworthy, faithful 
conjunctions 
,," 
, 
tva, 07Tw<;, or w<; 
in order that (+ subj. or opt. of purpose) 
EXERCISES 
I. Write in Greek the following subjunctive fonns. 
I. 3rd s. aor. act. "be silent" 
11. 
2. 2nd pI. pres. pass. "be defeated" 
12. 
3. 2nd s. aor. act. "be a slave" 
13. 
4. 3rd s. pres. act. "be at a loss" 
14. 
5. 3rd pI. pres. m/p "cross-examine" 
15. 
6. 1 st s. aor. mid. "attack" 
16. 
7. 2nd s. pres. mJp "revolt from" 
17. 
8. 1 st pI. aor. act. "long for" 
18. 
9. 1 st s. pres. m/p "prevent" 
19. 
10. 1 st pI. pres. mid. "carry out a 
20. 
campaign" 
II. Identify each fonn completely. 
, 
1. 
~apacrxw,crt 
2. ava yt yvwcrK1]Tat 
11. OVVWVTat 
12. Etat n]cr1]cr8E 
3. a7Tflr; 
13. 7Tapa(3r,TE 
4. EAWVTat 
, 
14. KPV7TT(I 
5. acpflr; 
6. (3acrtAEvcr1]TE 
15. 
KP~Tfl 
16. JJ.EWW 
7. OEtKVVWJJ.EV 
, 
17. 7Tapa ya Y(I 
8. 01]Awcrn 
9. OtaJJ.Ev~crt 
18. ryTTWVTat 
19. ayyEiAwJJ.EV 
10. OtwKl/ 
20. aLpr,Tat 
III. Render into Greek. 
1. Do not betray your city, men of Athens. 
2nd s. pres. act. "go" 
3rd pI. aor. mid. "arrive" 
1st s. aor. mid. "call" 
2nd s. aor. act. "lead away" 
3rd s. pres. act. "be ill" 
3rd s. aor. act. "go up" 
2nd pI. pres. mJp "be able" 
3rd pI. aor. act. "make" 
1 st pI. pres. act. "be willing" 
1 st pI. pres. m/p "make a 
truce" 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
, 
, 
aKOV1]TE 
, 
, 
V7TOJJ.tJJ.v1]crKl/r; 
, , 
a7Ttwcrw 
ap7Ta( W 
JJ.E ea 
aptl/ 
acptcrTwcrt 
oEit1]creE 
ryyr,Tat 
E7Tt TPEt1]TE 
7TVeWJJ.at 
2. They fear that the children may not trust the slaves. 
3. It is better to fill the sea with triremes in order to prevent the enemy ships 
from attacking the city. 
4. Let no one ever remind us of those critical times. 
5. Never will you (s.) demonstrate that you are more just than the others. 
6. How am I to praise this man in the manner he deserves [= worthily l? 
IV. Sentences for reading 
I. Tivar; OtKatOTEpov j3Aatw 1] Tovr; EJJ.E aOtKrycraVTar;: 

242 
UNIT THIRTY -ONE 
2. oi "E'\'\1]VES' 7Tav(]"(l)J.EVOt o.,\.\?j'\OtS' 7TO'\E)J.OVVTES' EiP~V1]V (JvvTi8EVTat 
07TWS' (; {:3a(Jt'\EvS' )J.1] pq.'OiwS' KpaT~(JV a7TIJ.vTwv. 
3. 
)J.~7TOTE ryTTw)J.f.8a T0V 8~'\EOS' yEVOVS'. av'OpES' QVTES'. 
4. Kai7TEp 7Ti(JTtv OOVTES' TE KaL '\apovTES'. cpopov)J.E8a )J.1] oi 01](:3aLOt ov 
7Tt(JTOL ~(Jw. 
5. Tr,S' 7TO'\EWS' )J.1] Ka'\wS' 7TpaTTov(J1]S'. )J.1] OOt1]TE opyi(w8at TOLS' o.vatTiotS'. 
0.'\'\0. TOLS' )J.1] op8wS' POV'\EVO)J.EVOtS'. 
6. 'OtwKOVTWV TWV i7T7TEWV TOVS' CPEVYOVTaS'. (; (JTpaT1]Y0S' TOUS' (;7T'\iTaS' EXWV 
Tpo7Tawv E(JT1](JEV Zva 7TQ(JW E7Tt'OEitv TO Eav70V (JTpo.TEV)J.a KpELTTOV TOV 
7TO'\E)J.iov Qv. 
V. Reading: Xenophon, Memorabilia 1.1.l8-l9 (slightly adapted): an ex-
ample of Socrates' justice and courage. 
E7Tt8v)J.~(JavToS' 7TOTE TOV 'Or/gov 7Tapa 7OVS' vO)J.ovS' )J.t~ "'~cpcr TOVS' ~ 
0po.(Jv'\'\ov KaL 'Epa(Jwi'01]v o.7TOKTELVat 7To.VTaS'. ~WKpo.T1]S'. /1g]J'\EVTllS' wv 
KaL TOTE E7Tt(JTo.TYlS' EV T0 'O~)J.cr YEVO)J.EVOS'. OVK ~8E'\1](JEV E7Tttncpi(Jat. 
Kai7TEp opyt(O)J.EVOV )J.EV aVT0 TOV 'O~)J.ov. 7TO'\'\WV 'OE KaL 'OvvaTwv o.7TEt-
'\OVVTWV' 0.'\'\0. 7TEpt 7T'\EiovoS' E7TOtri(JaTo EVOPKELV 17 xapi(Ja(J8a~ T0 'O~)J.cr 
7Tapa TO OI.Kawv Kat cpv'\o.ta(J8at 7OVS' o.7TEt'\OVVTaS'. KaL yap E7TtgE'\EL(J8at 
8EOVS' EVO)J.t(EV o.V8pW7TWV. oVX QV TP07TOV oi 7TO'\'\OL vO)J.i(ov(Jw· OlJTOt )J.Ev 
yap OLOVTat 7OVS' 8EOVS' TO. )J.Ev EL'OEVat. TO. '0' OVK EL'OEVat· 
~WKpo.T1]S' 'OE 
7To.VTa )J.EV ryYELTO 8EOVS' EL'OEVat. TO. TE '\qO)J.Eva Kat 7TpaTTO)J.Eva KaL TO. ([0'iL 
POV'\EVO)J.EVa. 7TaVTaXOV 'OE 7TapELVat Kat (JngaivEw TOLS' o.V8pw7TOtS' 7TEpL TWV 
o.V8pW7TEiwv 7To.VTWV. 
Underlined Words 
Q,llcpi = (prep. with acc.) associated with 
[Thrasyllus and Erasinides were two 
members of the Board of Generals 
accused of failing to take adequate 
steps to rescue the Athenians whose 
ships had sunk during the victorious 
sea battle at Arginusae in 406] 
Q,v8pw7rEto<;, -a, -ov = human 
Q,7rEtAEW = threaten 
(3ovAEVT~'>, -ov, m. = member of the 
Council (of 500 at Athens) 
or,jJ.o,>, O~1l0V, m. = (common) people, 
Assembly (of all adult male Athenian 
citi::.ens) 
ovvaT<)'>, -~. -Ov = powerful 
E7rtIlEAEOllaL = have concern for (+ gen.) 
E7rt(JT(lTT/'>, -ov, m. = chairman, 
presiding officer (of a meeting of the 
Assembly) 
E7rttT/cpi(w = put (a measure) to a vote 
EVOPKEW = abide by one's oath [to abide 
by lawful procedures) 
Kat yap = and in fact, for indeed 
DV TpeJ7rOV = adv. acc. in the way in 
which 
7raVTaxOv = everywhere 
7rEpt 7rAEiovo,> 7rOLELIT8aL = consider to 
be of greater importance [+ inf. or 
noun object] 
ITT/Ilaivw = xive signs 
ITLy~. -r,'>. f. = silence 
Xapi(ollaL = oblige (+ dat.) 

UNIT THIRTY-TWO 
The Optative 
1. The Optative Mood. The third of the four finite moods of Greek to be 
learned is the optative (Latin optativus, Greek EVKTLK~, "of wishing"), which 
occurs in the three tense systems which express aspect (present, aorist, and 
perfect) and also (rarely, and only for indirect-discourse transformations) in 
the future and future perfect. The optative may be used both independently to 
express a wish or a potentiality (as opposed to a fact or assertion conveyed by 
the indicative) and in a variety of subordinate constructions. 
2. Conjugation of the Optative. The mark of the optative mood is the 
mood vowel iota, which is added to the theme vowel (0) or to the tense vowel 
(e.g., a in the weak aorist act. and mid.). An alternative form of the mood 
suffix is -L1]-, used in athematic inflection. The optative has secondary per-
sonal endings, except for first person singular forms in -OLP.L and -aLp.L, where 
-P.L is the primary ending used with athematic verbs; the third plural active 
ending has the variant form -EV. 
a. Optative in OL: this pattern is found in uncontracted presents, uncon-
tracted futures, and strong aorists. 
Ex. 
ayw, stem ay- + 0 + L -> ayoL-
present active opt. 
" aYOLJlL 
aYOLS' 
" aYaL 
(ayoLTov 
(ayoLT7]V 
" 
aYOLTE 
aYOLEV 
243 
present mlp opt. 
, 
, 
aYOLJl7]V 
ayow 
layoL((T)ol 
ayoLTo 
ayoL(TeOV) 
a YOL(Te7]V) 
ayoLJlEea 
ayoL(TeE 
" aYOWTO 

244 
UNIT THIRTY -TWO 
Conjugated with the same endings are the future active opt. a~OLIJ.L, future 
middle opt. a~o(.fJ 
.. YJv, strong aor. act. opt. aya:YOLfH, strong aor. mid. opt. aya-
, 
YOLfJ..YJV. 
Accentuation: note that the final OL of the 3rd sing. act. opt. counts as long 
for the purpose of accentuation. Hence, optative KTELVOL with acute on P as 
opposed to nom. pI. noun olKoL with circumflex on P. 
b. Optative in aL: this pattern is found in weak aorists, and is basically 
like the above but with aL for OL In Attic, however, the alternative forms of the 
2nd and 3rd sing. and 3rd pI. act. are usually used instead of the forms in aL 
Ex. 
A.'VW, stem AVCT- + a + L - -> AVCTaL-
aorist active opt. 
AVa"ULfJ..L 
AVrTEW, 
or AVrTaL, 
AVrTHdv) 
or AVrTaL 
(AVrTaLTOV 
(AvrTai TrW 
AVrTaLfJ..EV 
AVrTaLTE 
AVrTHaV 
or AVrTaLEV 
aorist middle opt. 
AVrTaiww 
AVrTaW IAVrTaL(rT)o I 
AVrTaLTO 
AVrTaLrT8ov) 
AVrTairT8Ylv) 
AVrTaifJ..E8a 
AVrTaLrT8E 
AVrTaWTO 
Accentuation: note that the final aL of the 3rd sing. act. opt. counts as long for 
the purpose of accentuation. Hence, aor. optative KTELvaL with acute on P as 
opposed to aor. info KTELvaL with circumflex on P. 
c. Optative of fJ..L-verbs. The present optative and strong aorist optative of 
athematic verbs have the mood vowel iota added directly to the tense stem, 
forming a diphthong (EL, aL, or OL) with the final vowel of that stem. The 
alternative mood suffix -LYJ- is found instead of simple iota in the singular 
forms of the present active and aorist active. Forms with -LYJ- occur occasion-
ally in other active forms (e.g., neELYJfJ..EV for neELfJ..EV), and such forms are 
more common than iota-forms in the 2nd and 3rd pI. active of monosyllabic 
stems (athematic aorists, and present of ElfJ..L and CPYJfJ..{). The regular secondary 
personal endings are used (-v for the 1 st sing. active; 3rd plur. in its variant 
form -EV). 
The paradigms on the next page show the three possible patterns for the 
present. The aorists are similar except for the 2nd and 3rd pI. active 
(commonly -ELYJfJ..EV for -ELfJ..EV, -ELYJTE for -ELTE, -aLYJfJ..EV for -aLfJ..EV, etc.). For 
full paradigms of the aorists of these verbs and of the present or aorist of other 
fJ..L-verbs, see Appendix 3: Paradigms. 

The Optative 
245 
OPTATIVE OF MI-VERBS 
present active 
present middle/passive 
n8Ei7]v 
' 
, 
CItOOL7]V 
n8EL}l7]V 
' 
, 
OtOOL}l7]V 
tUTUt7]V 
tUTUt}l7]V 
n8EL7]'> 
tUTUt7]'> 
OtOOL7]'> 
n8ELo i 
LUTalO 
OtOOLO 
n8EL7] 
, 
, 
OtOOL7] 
n8ElTo 
LUTaLTO 
OtOOlTO 
tUTUt7] 
(n8ElTov 
LUTUlTOV 
OtOOlTOV 
n8Elu8ov 
LUTaLU80v 
OtOOLu8ov) 
( n8EiT7]V 
' 
, 
OtOOLT7]V 
n8Eiu87]v 
LUTaLU87]v 
OtOOLu87]v) 
tUTUtT7]V 
n8El}lEV 
LUTal}lEV 
OtOOL}lW 
n8Ei}lE8u 
LUTaL}lE8u 
OtOOL}lE8u 
n8Eln 
LUTaln 
OtOOln 
n8ELu8E 
LUTaLU8E 
OtOOLu8E 
n8Elw 
LUTalW 
OtOOlW 
n8ELvTo 
LUTaLVTO 
OtOOlVTO 
Like neEirJV (neEi}J-ryv) are inflected present LEiryv (LEi}J-ryV) and aorists 
eEir/V (eEi}J-ryv) and (acp)EirJV ([acpJEi}J-ryv) (compounds only).2 
The optative of Ei}J-i is similar to that of Tiery}J-t, but the plural forms often 
have stem Eiry-. The inflection is EtryV. Etry~. Etry. (EtryTOV or ELTOV. EiryTryvor 
EtTryV.) Etry}J-EV or EL}J-EV. EtryTE or ELTE. Etry(TaV or ELEV. 
Like L(Hai ryv are inflected present cpai ryv and aorists (Hai ryv. f3ai ryv. and 
cpeairyv; and like L(Hai}J-ryv, presents ovvai}J-ryv and E1wHai}J-ryv (except that 
these have regular recessive accentuation, e.g., ovvaw. i7ri(J"TatTo). 
Like otooiryv are inflected aorists ooiryv, yvoiryv, and aAoiryv. And like 
oLooi}J-ryv is inflected aorist middle ooi}J-ryv. 
The present optative of verbs in -VV}J-L and of EL}J-L and the aorist optative 
of ovw follow the w-verb pattern: OELKV1JOL}J-L. tOL}J-L. OVOL}J-t. (For the 1st sing. 
of EL}J-L the alternative athematic form ioiryv is occasionally found.) 
Accentuation: note that the accent of athematic-verb optatives normally 
does not precede the diphthong containing the mood vowel iota. 3 
d. Optatives of contract verbs are presented in the next unit. 
3. Independent Uses of the Optative. There are two independent con-
structions using the optative. 
a. Optative of wish, using the optative without modal particle (further 
details in §4). 
I. As usual, this is from *ne€L(er)o. 
2. By analogy with w-verbs, there are variant forms which show theme vowel 0 in place of the 
root vowel E: e.g., neOLTO for ne€LTO. f.7TLeOLVTO for E7rle€LVTO. 7fpOOLere€ for 7fpO€Lere€ (from 
7fpo(;rllll), a.1>iOtEV for a.1>l€LEV, a.1>iOlH for a.1>l€LH. 
3. This is the teaching of ancient grammarians. confirmed by modem experts. But for terTy/lll 
the medieval manuscripts normally and printed editions often present forms with regular 
recessive accentuation like terTal TO. 

246 
UNIT THIRTY -TWO 
b. Potential Optative. The optative accompanied by the modal particle 
av expresses a possibility, probability, or any softened form of assertion or 
opinion. The negative is oV. Appropriate English translations use modal help-
ers like may, might, would, etc. The potential optative may also be used in 
subordinate clauses of various kinds. 
-ryOEW) av ViJ.LV AEYOLiJ.L. 
I would gladly tell you. 
OVOEL) av T1JV nOAw npooo{YJ. 
No one would betray the city. 
[the speaker views the act as improbable or impossible] 
OVTW) acppwv E(TTLV W(TTE nos Tt) aVTov Pq.o{w) av AaeOL aOLKwv. 
He is so foolish that anyone at all would easily wrong him without his 
reali::.ing it. 
[potential optative used in a result clause] 
4. Expressions of Wish. In Attic Greek the construction with which a 
wish is expressed depends on whether (a) the wish is for some future object or 
event (or an event in the present which is viewed as still attainable) or (b) the 
wish is for some object or event unattainable in the present or unattained in the 
past. 
a. Future or possible wishes are expressed either by the optative alone or 
by the optative introduced by deE or Ei yap, and the negative is iJ.Y,. 
, 
, 
iJ. YJ YEVOL TO. 
May it not (now or in the future J happen! 
EreE TO (HpaTEViJ.a acp{KoLTO. 
May the army arrive! 
Ei yap 6 naL) (J'WCPPOVELV iJ.aVeaVOL. 
May the boy learn to be temperate! 
b. Unattainable or unattained wishes (wishes impossible of realization) 
are expressed by the imperfect or aorist indicative introduced by EreE or Ei yap, 
and the negative is iJ.Y,. The imperfect refers to what is wished for but is not 
now the case: 
EreE napfJv 6 b.YJiJ.0(J'eEVYJ). 
Would that Demosthenes were present now (but he isn't). 
The aorist refers to a past wished-for occurrence that was not the case or did 
not occur: 
Ei yap 6 naL) (J'WCPPOVELV EiJ.aeEV. 
Would that the boy had learned to be temperate (but he didn't J. 
An alternative method of expressing an unattainable wish is the use of strong 
aorist WCPEAOV (from 0cpE{AW = owe) with a complementary infinitive (present 
info for present wish, aorist info for past wish): 
WCPEAE napELvaL 6 b. YJiJ.0(J'eEVYJ). 
Would that Demosthenes were present now (but he isn't). 

The Optative 
247 
WCPEAOV (J"WCPpOVE~V gaeE~V. 
I wish I had learned to be temperate (hut I didn't). 
5. Dependent Uses of the Optative. Many of the dependent uses of the 
optative correspond to those of the subjunctive, with the optative replacing the 
subjunctive after a secondary-tense leading verb by the sequence of moods 
(U31.5). The major dependent uses are: 
a. The optative may replace the subjunctive in purpose clauses in 
secondary sequence (U31.6). 
b. The optative may replace the subjunctive in object clauses with verbs 
of fearing in secondary sequence (U31. 7). 
c. Past general conditions and relative clauses with past general condi-
tional force (U34.4b). 
d. Future less vivid conditions and relative clauses with future less vivid 
conditional force (U34.5c). 
e. Temporal clauses introduced by before or until (U39). 
f. Indirect-discourse noun clauses introduced by on or wS' in secondary 
sequence (U33). 
g. Indirect questions in secondary sequence (U33). 
h. Subordinate clauses in indirect discourse in secondary sequence 
(U38.2). 
Remember that (outside of the indirect-discourse uses) the tenses of the opta-
tive have aspect meaning, not time meaning. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the patterns of optative conjugation. 
2. Study the potential optative and constructions expressing wish. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
compounds of verbs previously learned 
G.valpEw (ava) 
G.noKpivw (ano) 
owj:3aA.A.w (ow) 
take up, pick up; make away with, destroy, kill 
separate, set apart; (mid.) answer, reply 
throw or carry across; set at variance; discredit, 
attack the character of, slander [diabolical, devil J 
(passive deponent) converse with (+ dat.) 
[dialectic [ 

248 
f:mAuv8clVOfJ,Ut (hTd 
KUTaAEl7TW (KaTa) 
7TUPUWEW (7TUpU) 
ITvyytYVWITKW (ITvv) 
ITVfJ,rpEPEt 
tmuKO'vw (iJ7To) 
lJ7ToAufJ,pclvw (iJ7To) 
V7TOfJ,EVW (V7TO) 
new verbs 
a7ToAoyEOfJ,Ut. a7ToAoyr1ITofJ,ut. 
a7TEAoyrWclfJ,7)V 
OfJ,OAOyEW. ofJ,oAoy~ITw. 
wfJ,oAoy7)ITu 
OrpElAw. orpEtA~lTw. 
wrpEiA7)ITU and wrpEAov 
ITWrpPOVEW. ITwrppOV~ITw. 
EITWrppOV7)ITU 
adverbs 
" uv 
uyuv 
alet, 
UfJ,U 
, 
, 
EyyV' 
Aiuv 
7TclAw 
ITXEOOV 
" 
UVptoV 
T~fJ,EPOV (non-Attic IT~fJ,EPOV) 
X8E, 
UNIT THIRTY -TWO 
(middle deponent) forget, lose thought of (+ gen.) 
leave behind, abandon 
exhort, advise (+ dat. of person + inf.) 
[paraeneticl 
agree with; acknowledge; excuse, pardon (+ dat. of 
person + acc. or dat. of thing) 
advise, counsel (+ dat. of person); (mid.) consult with 
(+ dat. of person) 
bring together; (more commonly intrans.) be 
advantageous, beneficial, or useful 
(impersonal) it is expedient, advantageous (+ inf.) 
listen to, heed, obey (+ gen.); reply to (+ dat.) 
take up; understand, interpret; assume; reply. rejoin 
await; endure, stand up under 
speak in defense, defend oneself 
[apology] 
agree with, say the same thing as (+ dat.) 
[homologous 1 
owe; be obliged to (+ inf.); (strong aor. only, with 
complem. inf.) would that ... (to express 
unattainable wish) 
be of sound mind; be temperate, moderate, etc. 
(postpositive modal particle used with the 
subjunctive in certain dependent constructions and 
with the potential optative and potential indicative 
in independent or dependent constructions) 
very much; too much 
sufficiently, enough 
at once, at the same time; (+ dat.) at the same time 
with 
[hamadryad, hamacratic 1 
near; (+ gen.) next to. near 
very, exceedingly 
back, backwards; again 
[palindrome] 
roughly speaking, about, almost 
tomorrow 
today 
yesterday 

The Optative 
249 
EXERCISES 
I. Give a complete identification of each fonn. 
1. ow(3airyv 
11. CTVVEVEYKOLCT8E 
21. E7TLA.77CTOVTaL 
2. CTwcppoV11CTW(TL 
12. f:m8wvTaL 
22. Ka TaA.E i 7TOVCTaL 
3. ojJ.0A.oywjJ.E8a 
13. o.7TOOOLTO 
23. 
, 
7TapaWECTELar;; 
4. 
' 
, 
14. 
' 
, 
V7T0jJ.E waLjJ.EV 
a7TwLjJ.EV 
24. CTVyyVWVaL 
5. iJ7TOA.a{:3oL 
15. a 7TOA.0yovjJ.Evryr;; 
25. o L'llv t::yK 10 
6. 
, 
16. o.VEA.OLTO 
YVOLryTE 
26. o.cpEiYJ 
7. 
' 
, 
17. 
' 
, 
V7TaKOVCTaL 
a 7ToKpwaLjJ. ryv 
27. jJ.ETaOOLEV 
8. v7TaKovCTaL 
18. owj3aA.A.!]r;; 
, 
28. CP8WjJ.EV 
9. OOVA.EVryTE 
19. ovvaw 
29. TEVtOLCT8E 
10. CTVjJ.(3oVA.EVCTELar;; 
20. OLEA.EYETO 
30. 8pbVaL 
II. Render into Greek. (By convention, may is used to render subordinate 
Greek subjunctives and might is used to render subordinate optatives. In this 
exercise, therefore, in subordinate clauses treat may as subj. and might as opt.) 
1. in order that he may use 
6. in order that I might reply 
2. lest they might go on campaign 
7. Let us take counsel together. 
3. Let him not become silent. 
8. lest she might not be graceful 
4. May you (s.) never forget. 
9. May the gods grant this. 
5. Am I to go or to stay? 
10. Do not promise anything. 
III. Render into Greek. 
1. Let us be silent in order that the poet may surpass his accusers by 
defending himself as well as possible. 
2. The king was afraid that Cyrus might plot against the other generals. And 
so he exhorted them to be on their guard. 
3. Would that the anny were present! May it arrive tomorrow! 
IV. Reading sentences. 
1. nV80LI 0 'A7TOA.A.WV [Apollo] EXPry TOLr;; "EA.A.ryCTW" "jJ.ryoEv ayav." 
2. TOLr;; 7Tapa TOV KpoiCTOV [Croesus] xpwjJ.EvOLr;; o.7TEKpivaTO 0 8Eor;; ~OE' 
"o.VaYKry Tip KpoiCTI{l TOV "AA.vV [Halys] 7TOTajJ.OV owj3avTL KaTaA.VELV 
[destroy] jJ.EyaA.ryv o.pX-r,v." Ka~ TaVTa o.KOVCTar;; 0 KpoLCTor;; KpaT/7CTEW 
aiJTor;; TWV 7TOA.EjJ.iwv crETO, ou KaA.Wr;; iJ7ToA.aj3wv. Ka~ ou cpoj3ovjJ.Evor;; jJ.~ 
G.jJ.apTavoL Tf7 EavTov yvwjJ.T/ 7TLCTTEVWV, ECTTpaTEvCTaTo E7T~ Tovr;; nEpCTar;; 
[Persians] Zva TovTOvr;; VLK?}CTar;; G.7TaCTryr;; Tryr;; 'ACTiar;; [Asia] apx0L. o.A.A.· 
aA.A.w; CTVVE{:3ry' -ryTTWVTai TE yap ot A voo~ [Lydians] Ka~ G.A.iCTKOVTaL 0 TE 
KpoLCTor;; Ka~ -ry YVV~ Kat TO. 7TaLOia. G.A.ovr;; OE TaOt 7Tpor;; EaVTOV ECPry' "ELeE 
1. Cf. U29.5e. 

250 
UNIT THIRTY -TWO 
)J.ry7rOTE CJLEP?]V TOV "AAVV. Kat VVV Ti 7raOw)J.EV; OOVAEVW)J.EV TOL~ 
nEpITaL~; ov OEWOV TOL~ OVITTVXEITW (J.7rOOaVELv. aAA' ELeE )J.ry OL nEpITaL 
TryV KHpaAryv a7rOTE)J.OLEV. "I 
V. Reading: Plato, Protagoras 324d-325a (adapted): Protagoras the sophist is 
trying to explain to Socrates how political virtue differs from other arts but can 
nevertheless be taught. 
"ETJ. AEi7rETaL ~ a7rQjJia ryv a7rOpEL~ 7rEpt TWV avopwv TWV ayaOwv. Ti 
O_~7rOTf OL avopH OL ayaOot TO. )J.EV aAAa TOV~ aiJTwv VEL~ OtOaQ"KOVITW a 
OLOaITKaAWV 0(ETaL Kat ITOCPOV~ 7rOWVITW. EKEiV?]V OE TryV apETryv ryv aiJToi 
ELITW ayaOot OVOEVO~ f:3EATiov~ 7rOWVITW. Kat 7rEPL TOVTOV. dJ ~WKpaTE~. 
OYKEH )J.vOQ~ ITOL EPW aAAa AOyOV. ~OE yap OEL VO)J.i(HV· EITTW H {'V 17 OVK 
EITTW. OV avaYK?] 7raVTa~ TOV~ 7rOAiTa~ )J.ETEXEW. fL7rEP )J.EAAH 7rOAL~ ELvaL; 
EV TOVTl.P yap aUT?] AVETaL ~ a7ropia ryv lTV a7rOpEL~ 17 aAAj)OL ovoagov. U. )J.EV 
yap EITTW. TOVTO TO EV EITTW OV TEKTOVLK1r OVOE xaA_KEia OVOE ~EpajJ.Eia. 
aAAa OLKWOITVVn Kat ITwckpOITlJ~ll Kat TO OITWV Et'VaL Kat Q"VAAri(:30JJ! {'VaVTO 
7Ij20ITaYOPEVW ELVW avopo~ apETryv. 
Underlined Words 
aAAo8L ovoa}J.ov = nowhere else. in no 
other place 
anopia. -a,. f. = difficulty, pu-:::.lement 
o-,jnoH = (emphatic adverb intensifying 
interrogative) (why) in the world 
OLOQ.UKW = teach (+ dir. object of person 
+ internal acc. of the thing taught) 
OLKawuvvy/, -y/" f. = justice, 
riRhteousness 
Et = if 
ilnEp = if in fact 
ETL = (adv.) still 
EXtTaL = attaches to, falls within the 
realm of(+ gen.) 
I. Compound of ar.o-: guess the meaning. 
KEpa}J.Eia. -a" f. = art of ceramics 
}J.v8o,. -ov. m. = tale. story,Jahle 
OVKETL = no lonRer 
npouayopEvw = call (hy a certain 
name) [avTlJ is the object, 
UVAA-,jpOy/V f'V may be taken in 
apposition to it, and apET-,jv is 
predicate noun I 
UVAA-,jpOy/V = taken all loR ether 
uwcppouvvy/. -y/" f. = moderation, self-
control 
TtKTOVLK-,j, -y/" f. = carpentry 
xaAKEia. -a" f. = hron::.eworkinR 

UNIT THIRTY-THREE 
Optative of Contract Verbs; Indirect 
Discourse with OTL; Indirect Questions 
and Indirect Interrogative 
1. Optative of Contract Verbs. Tense stems in -aw. -EW. -ow feature 
contraction of the stem vowel with the -o~- of the optative: a + o~ -> cr. E + o~ 
-> o~. ° + o~ -> OL Thus verbs in -EW and -ow have the same endings in the 
optative. In addition the optative active has two possible forms, those based on 
-O~fH conjugation and those based on suffix -~'l- (as seen in f.t~-verb optatives, 
U32.2c). The -~'l- suffix is more usual in the singular; the standard suffix is 
more usual in the dual and plural. In the following paradigm of the active, the 
common form is given first and the rarer form is shown beside it in brackets. 
verbs in -EW 
cfH A 0 [:'1 v 
cfH 11.0 i'l > 
cf>LAoi 7) 
Icf>LAOL,uL 1 
Icf>LAoL> 1 
[cf>LAoL 1 
PRESENT ACTIVE OPTATIVE 
verbs in -ow 
(7)Aoi7)V 
(7)Aoi7» 
(7)Aoi7) 
[(7)AOL,uL 1 
[(7)AoL>1 
1(7)AoLi 
verbs in -O.W 
. , 
OP'P7)v 
OP'P7» 
OP'P7) 
[op0,ud 
[op0>[ 
lop01 
(cf>LAoLTOV 
[cf>LAoi 7)TOV 1 
(7)AOLTOV 
1(7)Aoi 7)TOV 1 
oP'PTOV 
lop07)TOV [) 
(cf>LAoiT7)v 
[cf>LAoL ~T7)V 1 
(7)Aoi T7)V 
1(7)AOL ~T7)V 1 
Op0T7)V 
IOp'p~T7)V [) 
cf>LAoL,uw 
[cf>LAoi 7),uw 1 
07)AoL,uw 
1(7)Aoi 7),uw 1 
op0,uw 
lop0ww 1 
cfHAoLTE 
[cf>LAoi7)Tt 1 
(7)AOLTE 
1(7)Aoi7)Tt 1 
oP'PTt 
lop07)Tt 1 
cf>LAoLw 
[cf>LAoi 7)UQV 1 
07)AOLW 
1(7)Aot 7)uQvI 
op0w 
[op07)uQvl 
Like 0pcP'lv is inflected the optative of futures in -aw, such as fut. act. 
opt. EAcP'lV from EAavvw. (JXE0cP'lv from (J"KEoaVVVf.t~. etc. 
Likf, cp~Aoi'lv is inflected the optative of futures in -EW. such as fut. act. 
opt. aYYEAoi'lv from ayyEAAw. v0f.twi'lv from v0f.ti(w, etc. 
The optative in -oi'lv as seen in CPLAOi'lv is also the normal Attic form of 
the aorist active optative of the simple verb txw: (J"xoi'lv, (J"xoi'l'" etc .. like CPL-
Aoi'lv. except that the 3rd pI. is always (J"XOLEV. On the other hand, the aorist 
251 

252 
UNIT THIRTY -THREE 
active optative in compounds of EXW has the regular conjugation -axoLfu, 
--(TXOL~, etc. (e.g., 7TapaaxoLjJ.L). 
PRESENT MIDDLE/PASSIVE OPTATIVE 
verbs in -EW 
verbs in -Ow 
verbs in -O.w 
cpLAOip.1/v 
01/Aoip.1/v 
' , 
°Pc.rp.1/V 
CPLAOLO 
01/AOLO 
opij>o 
CPLAOLTO 
01/AOLTO 
Opij>TO 
cpLll.OLa8ov 
0l1AoLa8ov 
opij>a8ov 
cpLAoia81/v 
ol1Aoia81/v 
op0a8rfV 
CPLAOtp.E8a 
01/AOtp.E8a 
op0p.E8a 
cpLAoLa8E 
ol1AoLa8E 
opij>a8E 
CPLAOLVTO 
01/AOLVTO 
Opij>VTO 
Like CPLAOijJ.YJv is inflected the optative of futures in -EojJ.aL, such as fut. 
mid. opt. 7THTOijJ.YJv from 7Ti7TTW. 
2. Indirect Discourse with on or w~. The third of the three indirect-dis-
course constructions of Greek is the use of a noun clause introduced by on or 
W~ = that, the fact that (cf. U20.6-7, U28.2). This construction is common 
with verbs of saying (AEYW, EL7TOV regularly; only occasionally <j>YJjJ.i), an-
nouncing (aYYEAAw), knowing (YLYVW(JKW, OLea), intellectual perception 
(aKovw, ai(JeavojJ.aL, jJ.aveavw, etc.), and emotion (eavjJ.a(w, opyi(ojJ.aL), and 
with impersonal expressions like efJAov E(JTW on, <j>avEpov on, etc. Many of 
these verbs and expressions may also take the supplementary participle of 
indirect discourse. The noun-clause construction is rare with verbs of thinking 
or believing, which (like <j>YJjJ.i) usually take the infinitive of indirect discourse. 
Indirect-discourse noun clauses follow the general rule for the sequence 
of moods (U31.5). After a main verb in a primary tense, the verb of the 
indirect statement retains the mood and voice and tense it had in the direct 
form (but the person of the verb may be changed): 
direct: 
6 f3a(JLAfv~ OVK Ei~ KaLpov a<j>iKETo. 
The king didn't arrive in time. 
indirect: 
AEYW on 6 J3a(JLAEv~ OUK Ei~ KaLpov a<j>iKETo. 
I say that the king didn't arrive in time. 
direct: 
ad njJ.~(JojJ.EV TOV 7TOLYJT~V. 
We'll always honor the poet. 
indirect: 
AEYOV(JW on TOV 7TOLYJT1JV aft njJ.~(Jov(JW. 
They say they'll always honor the poet. 

Optative o/Contract Verbs; Indirect Discourse; Indirect Questions 
253 
After a main verb in a secondary tense, the verb of the indirect statement may 
either (a) be left unchanged in mood or (b) be changed to the same tense and 
voice of the optative. Note, however, that imperfects and pluperfects of direct 
discourse are usually left in the indicative and only rarely changed to the 
optative of the same tense stem (present or perfect). Furthermore, indicatives 
denoting unreality (to be learned in U36) are left unchanged. 
direct: 
6 j3a(J"LAEv"> Ei"> KaLpov acpi~ETaL. 
The king will come in time. 
indirect: 
E[7rOV on 6 i3aCTLAEv"> Ei"> KaLpov acpi~ETaL (or acpi~oLTO). 
I said that the king would arrive in time. 
direct: 
ECTTpaTEv(J"avTo E7r~ TOV"> 'A81]vaiov,,>. 
They went on campaign against the Athenians. 
indirect: 
ryKov(J"aTE W"> E(J"TpaTEv(J"avTo (or (J"TpaTEv(J"awTo) E7r~ TOV"> 
'A81]vaiov,,>. 
You heard that they went (or had gone) on campaign against 
the Athenians. 
direct: 
a[ yvva'iKE"> 0PXOVVTaL. 
The women are dancing. 
indirect: 
E7rv8op.E8a on a[ yvva'iKE"> 0PxovvTaL (or OPX0'ivTO). 
We learned that the women were dancing. 
direct: 
aL yvva'iKE"> WPXOVVTO. 
The women were dancing. 
indirect: 
E7rv8op.E8a on a[ yvva'iKE"> WPXOVVTO. 
We learned that the women were dancing (when something or 
other happened). 
Note that the present optative would be ambiguous in the final example above, 
just as the English were dancing is ambiguous unless some addition is made to 
indicate that an imperfect is intended. 
3. Indirect Questions. Noun clauses introduced by interrogatives (such 
as who, which, what, when, why, how) are used in the same sorts of contexts as 
indirect statements and are called indirect questions. 
I know what you did. 
noun clause as object of know 
(direct: What did you do?) 
Why this happened is unclear. 
noun clause as subject of is 
(direct: Why did this happen?) 
The verb in a Greek indirect question follows the general rule for the sequence 
of moods (U31.5). After a main verb in a primary tense, the verb of the in-
direct question retains the mood and voice and tense it had in the direct form 
(but the person of the verb may be changed). After a main verb in a secondary 

254 
UNIT THIRTY -THREE 
tense, the verb of the indirect question may either (a) be left unchanged in 
mood or, more commonly, (b) be changed to the same tense and voice of the 
optative. (Again, unreal indicatives [U36] are left unchanged.) In Greek, 
indirect questions also differ from direct questions in that the interrogative 
word may either be in the same form found in a direct question or appear in a 
modified form, the indirect interrogative. The indirect interrogative pronoun 
OOTL) is presented in §4 below; other indirect interrogatives will be learned in 
U36. 
direct: 
T[) (J"E aOLKEL; 
Who wrongs you? 
indirect: 
OVK oioa T[) (or o(J"TL) (J"E aOLKEL. (primary) 
I don't know who is wronging you. 
OVK i10rwea T[) (or o(J"TL)) (J"E aOLKo[YJ (or aOLKEL). (secondary) 
You didn't know who was wronging you. 
direct 
nOTE ryMEV 6 aYYEAo); 
When did the messenger come? 
indirect: 
nOTE ryMEV 6 aYYEAo) EPWTq.. (primary) 
He asks when the messenger came. 
nOTE EMoL (or ryMEV) 6 aYYEAo) rypWTYJ(J"EV. (secondary) 
He asked when the messenger came. 
direct: 
7f(J)) CPVYWjJ.EV; [deliberative subj.] 
How are we to escape? 
indirect: 
anopovjJ.EV 7f(J)) CPVYWjJ.EV. (primary) 
We are at a loss how we are to escape. 
rynopovjJ.EV nw) CPVYOLjJ.EV (or CPVYWjJ.EV). (secondary) 
We were at a loss how we were to escape. 
4. Indefinite Relative and Indirect Interrogative. The pronoun o(J"TL), 
1]TL), 0 TL is a combination of the relative pronoun and the indefinite pronoun, 
both elements of which are declined (see paradigm, next page). By origin, 
o(J"TL) is an indefinite relative pronoun (or adjective), whoever, whichever, 
whatever; but like other indefinite relative words in Greek, it has a second 
function as well, as indirect interrogative introducing an indirect question. 
The short forms given in parentheses are common in poetry and in 
inscriptions, but rare in formal prose: in these only the second element is 
declined. Note that the neuter pI. nom. acc. aTTa differs from the alternative 
indefinite pronoun form aTTa (UI7.1) only in its breathing. It is a modern 
printing convention to show the neut. sing. nom. acc. as two separate words to 
distinguish it from OTL = that (which is in fact a frozen adverbial acc. of o(J"TL). 
In some texts this convention is not followed, and the two uses must be 
distinguished by the interpretation of the context. 

Optative o/Contract Verbs; Indirect Discourse; Indirect Questions 
255 
INDEFINITE RELATIVE / INDIRECT INTERROGATIVE 
------_. 
mase. 
fern. 
neuter 
sin~. 
" 
OTL 
nom. 
OO'TL, 
1)TL, 
',' 
(OTOV) 
'i' 
'i' 
~en. 
OVTWO, 
1)O'TWO, 
OVTWO, 
dat. 
',' 
(onp) 
'i' 
'i' 
'(ITWL 
?lTWL 
'(ITWL 
ace. 
OVTwa 
1)VTwa 
OTL 
(dual 
" 
WTLvE) 
n. a. 
WTWE 
WTWE 
(~. d. 
'i' 
'i' 
oivTLvow) 
OWTWOW 
OWTWOW 
plur. 
" 
110m. 
OLTWE, 
aLTWE, 
aTLva 
'i' 
(OTWV) 
'i' 
'i' 
~en. 
WVTWWV 
WVTWWV 
WVTLVWV 
dat. 
OtO'TLO'L(V) 
(OTOL<;) 
aiO'TLO'L(V) 
OiO'TLO'L(V) 
oVO'TLva<; 
" 
ace. 
aO'Twa<; 
aTLva 
(OTOV) 
(OT'(I) 
UiTTa) 
(OTWV) 
(OTOL<;) 
UITTa) 
Accentuation: like OOE, oO'TL) is a combination of an accented element and an 
enclitic element; this explains the peculiarities of accent (1]TL), not ryTL); 
(;jVTWWV with circumflex on apparent A). The accentuation is the same as that 
of the simple relative pronoun. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the conjugational patterns of contract-verb optatives and the inflec-
tion of oO'TL). 
2. Study indirect discourse with OTL and indirect questions. 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
contract verbs 
ai TLaojJ.aL, ai TLaO'ojJ.aL I a. I, 
, 
-
, 
'[IT wO'ajJ.1)v 
UtLOW, UtLWO'W, ~tiwO'a 
u7TavTaw, u7TavT~O'ojJ.aL, 
U7T~vT1)O'a (U7TO) 
UO'$EVEW, UO'$EV~O'W, 
~O'$Ev1)O'a 
uTLjJ.a(w, uTLjJ.aO'w, ~TI.jJ.Q(J'a 
p01)$EW, p01)$~O'w, EpO~e1)O'a 
accuse, censure; allege as a cause 
think worthy, think proper; expect, claim 
[axiom] 
meet, encounter (+ dat.) 
be weak, be ill 
fail to honor; slight; dishonor 
come to the aid of (+ dat.); come to the rescue 

256 
UNIT THIRTY-THREE 
------_.--------------------
I 
I" 
ya~EW. ya~EW. Ey~~a 
YEAaw. yEAa(JO~aL. EYEAa(Ja 
lei I 
Oa7TaVaW. Oa7TaV~(JW. 
EOa7TaV~(m 
EaW. Ea(JW I ei I. ErMa 
(imperf. aug. ELWV) 
Epaw [no act. or mid. in fut. 
or aor.] 
[Ionic ErpO~aL].1 Ep~(JO~aL. 
, , 
~po~~v 
, 
, 
, 
I 
, 
I 
EpwTaw. EpWT~(JW. ~pwT~(Ja 
, 
I 
, 
, 
EVEpyETEW. EVEpyET~(JW. 
~VEpyET~(Ja 2 
(w. (~(Jw, (non-Attic E(~(Ja)3 
~;:(JEW. ~;:(J~(Jw. E~i(J7wa I ;: I 
, 
, 
, 
, 
" 
op~aw. op~~(Jw. wp~7wa 
7TOAWpKEW. 7TOAWPK~(JW. 
E7TOALCJpK7Wa 
TEAEW. TEAEW (or rarely 
TEAE(JW), ETEAE(Ja 
noun 
(JwT~pia. (JwT~piar;, f. 
(act.) take as wife, marry a woman; (mid.) (of male 
relative of bride) give in marriage, (of bride) give 
self in marriage, marry a man 
laugh; laugh at (+ prep. phrase or + dat.); deride (+ 
acc.) 
spend; consume, use up 
permit, allow (+ acc. + inf.); let go, dismiss 
be in love with. desire (+ gen.) 
[Eros. Erasmus I 
ask, inquire 
ask, inquire (sometimes + acc. of person + acc. of 
thing) 
benefit, show kindness toward (+ acc.) 
be alive, live 
[zoology] 
hate; (ingressive aor.) conceived a hatred for 
[misogynist, misanthrope] 
set in motion; (intrans. act. or mid.) start off. go; rush 
[hormone] 
besiege 
[poliorcetics] 
fulfill, accomplish, bring to an end; pay (taxes); 
initiate (into religious rites); perform rites 
saftey, means of saftey, preservation; salvation 
indefinite relative/indirect interrogative 
conjunctions 
whoever. whatever, whichever; who, what 
that (introducing a noun clause); because 
that (introducing a noun clause); as, because 
I. In Attic f.PWTaW is used for the present system. 
2. Fourth-century texts have aorist ElJEPYfrT]r:rU (because T]V had by then become the same as €V 
in pronunciation). 
3. Conjugated as if from *(aw. but T] or!7 appears instead of a. or q.. just as with xpaw. Present 
indo and subj. (w. 07>. (fl. (WflEV. 07TE. {wr:rdv); opt. (0T]v. info (f}v. part. (wv. Imperfect E(wv. 
E(T]>. E(T]. i.(WflEV. ~07TE. E(wv. 
4. Never elided; OT' = OTE. when. 

Optative of Contract Verbs; Indirect Discourse; Indirect Questions 
257 
prepositions 
" aVEV 
" EVEKa 
EXERCISES 
(+ gen.) without 
(usually placed after its noun; + gen.) on account of, 
as far as regards 
(+ gen.) except; (also used as conjunction) except 
I. Give a complete identification of each form. 
1. . , 
8. oa7Tav0EV 
15. EpE()eW 
oPJJ."?YJv 
2. JJ.L()OLVTO 
9. (w()a 
16. 
" 
ELa 
3. !30YJeOVvTa 
10. r,n JJ.o.( 0 JJ.EV 
17. 
' 
, 
EVEPYETYJ(JYJTE 
4. yaJJ.r,TaL 
11. YEAa()aL 
18. 
' 
, 
EVEPYETYJ(JETE 
5. 7TOAWPKOi YJ~ 
12. atwLJJ.EV 
19. 
, 
()VvEyvW()aV 
6. a()eEVELV 
13. ainu(JeaL 
20. 
' 
, 
avaLpoLJJ. YJV 
7. EpwTqS 
14. EPW()W 
21. 
' 
, 
a7TYJVTWV 
II. Write the optative in the designated form for each of the following: 
1. 3rd pI. aor. act. of JJ.L()EW 
6. 2nd s. pres. mJp of 0PW1.W 
2. 1st s. fut. mid. ofYEAaw 
7. 3rd s. aor. mid. ofTEAEw 
3. 2nd pI. pres. mJp of yaJJ.Ew 
8. 1 st pI. aor. act. of ai TEW 
4. 3rd pI. pres. act. of a7TavTaw 
9. 3rd s. pres. act. of Epaw 
5. 1st pI. aor. mid. of ainaoJJ.aL 
10. 2nd s. pres. act. of anJJ.a(w 
III. Render the following sentences into Greek, producing as many versions 
as possible by choice of different indirect-discourse constructions and by 
choice of sequence of moods. 
1. And when he arrived, he reported that the Athenians had conceived a 
hatred for those who were not coming to the aid of the weak. 
2. Tomorrow we shallieam where we shall encounter our allies. 
3. At daybreak [= at the same time with day] just about all the cavalrymen 
started off toward the sea, it being obvious that no one thought it proper to 
permit the enemy to perceive what preparations the citizens had made. 
IV. Reading sentences. 
1. TOV vwviov EPOJJ.EVOV ryvnva TWV TpLWV evyaTEpwv ()VJJ.cpEPOL yr,JJ.aL, 
yEAWVTE~ a7TEKpwaJJ.Eea on ayvooLJJ.EV. 
2. EWJJ.EV TOV /3a()LAEa 7TOAWPKOVVTa TO a()TV OLaJJ.EVEW. ry !30YJery()WJJ.EV; 
3. r,PWTWV oi ()TpanWTaL 7TW~ EUEPYETOl.EV TOV Kvpov. OUK EtOV ()TpaTEV-
WeaL aVEV XPYJJJ.aTWV· OU yap r,tiovv 7TEieE()eaL ()TpaTYJy0 EAanov ry 
lJ7TE()XETO Oa7TaVWVTL. 

258 
UNIT THIRTY -THREE 
IV. Reading: Xenophon, Anabasis 6.1.26--29 (abridged, but unaltered except 
for last sentence): Xenophon advises the army not to appoint him as its sole 
commander. 
EYW, (J; avopE~, 1jooJJ.aL JJ.EV vcj>' vJJ.wv nJJ.wJJ.Evo~, Et7rEP av8pw7ro~ EiJJ.L, 
Ka~ xapw EXW Ka~ EVxoJJ.aL oovvai JJ.OL TOV~ 8EOV~ atnov TWO~ vJJ.~v aya80v 
YEVEaBaL' TO gEVTOL EJJ.E 7rPOKpL8fivaL vcj>' vJJ.wv apxovTa AaKEoaLJJ.oviov 
avopo~ 7rapOVTO~ OVTE vJJ.~v JJ.OL OOKE~ O"VJJ.cj>EpOV dvaL, a A. A. • ryTTOV av OLa 
TOVTO TvyxaVELv, Et n OEOL0"8E 7rap' aiJTwv' EJJ.oi TE au OV 7ravv n vOJJ.i(w 
aO"cj>aA.E~ ELvaL TOVTO. opw yap on Ka~ TV 7raTpioL JJ.ov OV 7rP00"8EV 
E7ravO"avTO 
7rOA.EJJ.OVVTE~ 7rP~V E7roinO"av 7rQ.O"av T~V 7rOA.W OJJ.OA.0YE~V 
AaKEOaLJJ.oviov~ Ka~ aVTwv i]yEJJ.Ova~ ELVaL. ... 8 OE VgE~~ EVVOELTE, on 
ryTTOV av o"Tao"L~ d1J EVO~ apxovTo~ ~ 7rOA.A.WV, EU to"TE on aA.A.ov JJ.EV 
EA.OJJ.EVOL OVX EVpryo"ETE EJJ.E O"TaO"La(oVTa' vOJJ.i(w yap oO"n~ EV 7rOA.EJJ.c.r wv 
O"Tao"La(H 7rPO~ apxovTa, TOVTOV 7rPO~ Trw EaVTOV O"wT1Jpiav O"Tao"La(Hv' EJJ.E 
OE EA.OJJ.EVOL, to"w~ av Twa EiJpOLTE Ka~ vJJ.~V Ka~ EJJ.O~ 0PYL(0JJ.EVOV. 
Underlined Words 
Q.v here adds modal (potential) force to 
the infinitive TVYXavEw (which 
depends on an understood OOKEl.TE = 
it seems to me that you . .. ) 
EL TL oEowBE = if you should ask for 
anything (optative in a condition) 
EL-rrEp = if in fact 
LaTE = 2nd pI. imperative from oIoa 
JJ.EVTO~ = (postpositive particle) however 
o oE ... EVVOEI.TE = and as for the 
notion which you have in mind 
7Tavv TL = very much at all, really 
7TO~EW = (here) cause, compel 
7Tpiv = before 
7TpoKp~efJva~ = (aor. pass. inf.) to be 
selected (as X) in preference to (+ 
gen. of person) 
O"Talna(w = engage in strife or 
dissension 

UNIT THIRTY -FOUR 
Simple, General, and Future 
Conditions 
1. Conditional Sentences. One of the most common fonns of complex 
sentence is the conditional sentence, that is, one in which the subordinate 
clause (the if-clause; the protasis in the traditional tenninology of Greek gram-
mar) expresses a condition and the main clause (then-clause,1 or apodosis in 
traditional tenninology) expresses the consequence of that condition's fulfill-
ment. In many languages, including Greek, conditional sentences have a 
variety of schemes of moods (or modal auxiliaries) and tenses in the if-clause 
and then-clause in order to express different notions of the possibility or prob-
ability of the condition's being fulfilled and different degrees of assertiveness 
in the main clause. In Greek, the conditional schemes apply not only to 
sentences containing Ei = if, but also to various relative and temporal clauses 
that have a force akin to that of a condition. In this unit and in U36 the most 
important regular patterns of Greek conditions will be presented. In actual 
Greek texts the student will later occasionally find irregular or "mixed" 
conditions, but these need not concern the beginner. The negative nonnally 
used in the protasis of all kinds of conditional sentences is jJ.?]. 
2. Simple Conditions. Grammatically most obvious as well as relatively 
uncommon are the conditions called simple. In these the protasis implies no-
thing about the reality or probability of the apodosis. The scheme is: 
protasis 
apodosis 
Ei + indicative 
indicative or any independent-clause construction 
Ex. 
simple present condition 
Ei jJ.av$6.vw; T1]V 'EAAY]VLK1]V YAwTTav, KaAW'7fOLEL,. 
If you are learning Greek, you are doing the right thing. 
1. Although the word then is not in fact always used in an English condition, it may always be 
added without changing the sense; and in an artificial programming language like Pascal, the 
syntax requires that every ifbe followed by a then. 
259 

260 
UNIT THIRTY -FOUR 
simple past condition 
EL E~ aPxiJ<; Ta xaAE7ra !n7jJ.aTa EjJ.av8avE<; (EjJ.a8E<;), KaAw<; hro{Et<; 
(hro{rwa<;). 
If you were learning (learned) the difficult verbs from the beginning, you 
were doing (did) the right thing. 
Simple Relative and Temporal Clauses. Clauses introduced by a relative 
pronoun, relative adverb, or temporal conjunction contain the indicative when 
they refer to present or past action that is asserted as a fact applying to a 
specific occasion. 
OTE ryMw, owpa ~VEYKW. 
When he came (on one particular occasion), he brought gifts. 
Ot (TTpanWTaL oi.' vvv 7TapEt(H 7TLcrTfJTaTo{ Eicrw. 
The soldiers who are present now are very trustworthy. 
E7Td 6 ~apE'io<; ETEAEtJT1'/crE, Ef3acr{AEVcrw 6 EEp~1'/<;. 
After Darius died, Xerxes became king. 
3. General Conditions. General conditions refer indefinitely to general 
truths in the present or past or to repeated or customary actions in the present 
or past. (For actions that lie in the future, on the other hand, the distinction be-
tween specificity and generality is syntactically unimportant, and other distinc-
tions are significant instead, as §4 will show.) General conditions do not assert 
the occurrence of one definite act at one definite time. To express generality, 
Greek uses a dependent mood in the protasis (rather than the indicative, which 
asserts fact) and the present stem (present or imperfect indicative) in the apo-
dosis to convey repeated action or general truth (the typical aspect of the 
present stem). The scheme for a present general condition is: 
prolasis 
apodosis 
Eav (EL + Q.v) + subjunctive 
present indicative 
Ex. 
Eav EMn, owpa <pEpEt. 
If he (ever) comes, he brings gifts (on each occasion). 
Eav jJ.~ vocrfl, Ta 7TaLo{a OLoacrKEt. 
He teaches the children (every day) unless he is ill (at any time). 
Note that one can determine whether a condition is simple or general by trying 
to add adverbial phrases like on one particular occasion. at that time (for 
simple) or ever, on each or any occasion (for general) to clarify the sense. 
The scheme for a past general condition is: 
protasis 
apodosis 
Ei + optative 
imperfect indicative 

Simple, General, and Future Conditions 
261 
Ex. 
Ei }J-ry vO(J"oiy/, TO. 7faLoia Eoioa(J"KEV. 
He used to teach the children (every day) unless he was ill (at any time). 
Ei TO. OiKaLa 7fpaTTOLEV, ETL}J-W}J-EV aVT01k 
If they (ever) did what was right, we (always) used to honor them. 
Relative or Temporal Clauses with General Conditional Force. Clauses 
of these types may also follow the general conditional patterns shown above 
when they are indefinite or generic or refer to repeated or customary action. 
Relative clauses with general force are often introduced by the indefinite rela-
tive (U33.4, U36), but the simple relative may also be used. The modal parti-
cle av is often combined with a conjunction: OTaV = OTE + av, E7fELOaV = 
E7fELO~ + av, etc. 
Ex. 
present general force 
OTaV (07fOTaV) 'EAeTl, owpa <pEPEL. 
Whenever he comes, he brings gifts (on each occasion). 
01. (J"TpaTLWTaL OZTLVE~ av 7fapw(J"L xp~}J-aTa Aa}J-pavov(J"w. 
Whichever soldiers are present (on any occasion) receive money. 
past general force 
OTE (07fOTE) 'EAeOL, owpa 'E<pEpEV. 
Whenever he came, he brought gifts (on each occasion). 
01. 'ABy/vaLoL E~EpaAAov oVTLva 7fovy/pew VO}J-i(OLEV. 
The Athenians used to expel any man (whom, whomsoever) they consid-
ered wicked. 
4. Future Conditions. Future conditions express suppositions (either 
general or particular) about the future. The supposition is considered by the 
speaker to be possible, but the question of fulfillment vs. non-fulfillment is not 
yet decided. The moods used in the protasis and apodosis depend on the speak-
er's attitude toward the probability of fulfillment. 
a. Future Most Vivid. This pattern conveys strong emotion or certainty. 
It is a rather rare construction in prose (and should not be used in the English-
Greek exercises of this book), but is found in drama and colloquial contexts. 
The scheme is: 
protasis 
Ei + future indicative 
Ex. 
Ei TafJTa 7f0L17(J"EL~, KTEVW (J"E. 
If you do that, I'll kill you! 
apodosis 
future indicative 

262 
UNIT THIRTY -FOUR 
b. Future More Vivid. In this pattern the speaker views fulfillment as 
relatively probable, and so the indicative is used in the apodosis; but since the 
occurrence of the condition is unascertained, the protasis has the sUbjunctive. 
The scheme is: 
protasis 
apodosis 
Eav + subjunctive 
future indicative) 
Ex. 
Eav TOV paCHA.Ea EA.I1~' aptEL~ aVT' EKEivov. 
If you capture the king. you will rule in his place. 
Eav TUUTU yEVY]TUt, xaA.E7rW~ oLanE. 
If that (ever) happens. you will be upset. 
c. Future Less Vivid. In this construction the speaker views fulfillment 
as relatively less probable, and so the apodosis contains the potential optative 
(optative + av) to make a cautious or softened assertion. By assimilation of 
mood, the protasis also contains the optative, expressing a more remote possi-
bility than the subjunctive + av in the future more vivid pattern. The English 
equivalent of the future less vivid pattern is usually should-would (also were to 
X-would). The scheme is: 
protasis 
Ei + optative 
Ex. 
apodosis 
optative + av 
Ei TOV (3arHA.Ea EA.Ot~, aptEw~ uv aVT' EKEivov. 
If you should capture the king. )lOU would rule in his place. 
A.EyOt}J.' av v}J.I.V Ei E8EA.OtTE aK01JELv. 
I would tell you if.vou should be willing to listen. 
Relative or Temporal Clauses with Future Conditional Force. Clauses of 
these types may also follow the future more vivid or less vivid conditional pat-
terns shown above when they are indefinite or generic, or refer to the future 
and the apodosis also refers to the future. 
Ex. 
future more vivid force 
a7rOKTEVOUO"W ot:nVE~ UV T0 (3ao"tA.EI. E7rt(30VA.E'lJwO"w. 
They will put to death anyone who plots (may in the future plot) against 
the king. 
1. One may also find other constructions implying future time, such as an imperative or Xpri 
(DEL) + infinitive. 

Simple, General, and Future Conditions 
omv E/\BTl' owpa OLO"EL. 
When( ever) he comes, he will bring gifts. 
future less vivid force 
OVK o.v E)J.(3aivoLIU TO. 7fA.o~a a KvpoS' iJ)J.~v ooi1}. 
I would not board the ships which Cyrus might give us. 
07fOV TO vowp ~ov EL1} E8EA.OL)J.EV o.v OiKELV. 
Wherever the water might be sweet, we would be willing to settle. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Study the conditional patterns presented above. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
nouns 
aOEA<po~, aOEA<p0v, m. 
aOEA<Pr], aOEA<pr,~, f. 
apL8}J.o~. apL8}J.ov, m. 
f.O"7T'f.pa. f.G"7T'f.pa~, f. 
8av}J.a. 8av}J.aTo~, n. 
Kivovvo>. KWOVVOV, m. 
vV~. VVKTOS, f. 
OLKO~. OLKOV, m. 
oiKia. oiKias, f. 
07T'AOV, 07T'AOV, n. 
" 
" 
opOS. opOVS, n. 
brother 
[Philadelphia] 
sister 
number 
[arithmetic] 
evening; the west 
[Hesperides] 
wonder, marvel; astonishment 
[thaumaturgy] 
danger, risk 
night 
house, dwelling place; household 
[ecology, 
ecosystem) 
building, house 
tool, implement; (pI.) arms; ship's tackle 
mountain, hill 
ship. boat 
263 
7T'AO'iOV. 7T'Aoiov, n. 
7T'pf.G"(3v~. 7T'pf.O"(:3Ew~, m. 
old man; elder; ambassador (plural rare except in this 
last sense) 
[presbyopia. presbyterian] 
7T'pEG"(:3VTEpOS. -a. -ov 
7T'PW(:3VTaTOS. -1). -ov 
7T'PEG"(:3VT1)S. 7T'PW-
(3VTOV, m. 
verbs 
OLoa.G"KW. OLoa.~W. Eoioa~a 
E}J.f3aivw (EV) 
~KW. ~~w 
older. elder 
oldest, eldest 
old man, ambassador 
instruct. teach; train (a chorus), produce (a dance or 
play) 
[didactic] 
step in or upon; board (a ship) 
have come, be present (pres. with meaning of perfect) 

264 
eaV/lo.(w, eav/lQ.(J"O/laL, 
EeaV/la(J"a 
KAETrTW, KAE..yW, EKAE..ya 
Tr0PEVW, Tr0PEV(J"W, 
, , 
ETrOpEv(J"a 
TPEXW, Opa/lEO/laL (or rarely 
epEfo/laL), EOpa/lOV 
conjunctions 
UNIT THIRTY-FOUR 
wonder at, marvel at; admire 
steal; behave stealthily 
[kleptomania] 
make to go, convey; (more commonly middle 
deponent Tr0pEVO/laL) go, walk, march 
run 
[trochaic, hippodrome, aerodrome] 
EL 
if (with indo or opt.); whether (in indirect question) 
EQ.V, contracted av' or 
if (with subj.) 
" 
YJV 
Et7TEP 
if in fact, if indeed; since 
Et }.J.~ 
(without an expressed verb) if not, except 
ETrEl 
since, whereas; when, after 
ETrElTE 
when, since 
ETrELOry (ETrELory + av 
when, after; since, whereas 
= ETrELoaV) 
aTE (elided aT'; aTE + av = 
when (relative adverb) 
OTav) 
OTrOTE (OTrOTE + av = 
(indef. rel.lindirect interrogative) whenever, when 
OTrOTav) 
EXERCISES 
I. Render into Greek. 
l. The men whom(ever) Socrates examined by conversing with (them) ap-
peared to those present to know nothing, with the result that they were 
angry with him. 
2. If we accuse them, they will not agree with us readily. 
3. When the ambassador has come, will you ask this question or not? 
4. If they should leave behind their weapons and boats and flee during the 
night, it would be no surprise (wonder). 
II. Reading sentences. 
1. o(J"TLI) Q.v 7TPE(J"j3HI) aOtKil, Ei}J.1] a1JTiKa aAAo. TEAOI) OiK77V oiow(J"w, 
2, Eo.V oi TpELr; aOEAcpoL AaGw(J"t KAEtavTEr; TO. 07TAa a aVEGE(J"av oi 077-
j3aLOt, 7TAOV(J"Wt YW7}(J"ovTat Kai7TEp avo(J"w 7Tpa~aVTEI). 
I. This fonn has long alpha; it can be distinguished from the modal particle av by the length of 
the alpha (which is apparent in verse) and by its position in its clause (av = if is nonnaIly first in 
its clause, modal av is postpositive and cannot be first). 

Simple, General, and Future Conditions 
265 
3. 
'Ae~VYJ(J"L I TO 7To.ll.aWV EeaVjJ.o.(OVTO Ot OLKa(J"Tat. OLTWES' aKOV(J"aVTES' 
aWPOTEpWV TOVS' lI.oYOVS' T~V tr,cj>OV eEt.VTO KaTa TO oiKawv Kat. KaTa 
, 
, 
TOVS'VOjJ.ovS'. 
4. Ei To.XL(J"Ta Opo.jJ.OLS', L(J"WS' av TOV Kivovvov cj>VYOLS'. 
5. aVTt. TOVTWV, aTwa vvv d)EpyET~(J"EWV, a7TOlI.o.j3OLEV av Xo.pw Kat. (WVTES' 
Kat. jJ.ETa T~V TEII.EVT~V [= end] TOV f3iov. 
6. EaV EPWV Tr,S' ETaipaS' oa7Tav~(J"71 7TOlI.lI.a a vEaviaS', ov (J"VVOi(J"H T0 OLK~ 
wS' l]oYJ XPYJjJ.o.TWV a7Topovvn. 
7. 7TpE7TH aEt. 7TOLEt.V 0 n av 7TapawE(J"w(J"w Ot (J"ocj>oi. 
8. [Cephalus narrates:] E7THO~ EiS' 'Ae~vaS' [Athens] acj>LK()jJ.YJv, KaT' ayopav 
a7T~VTYJ(J"a 'AOHjJ.o.VT~ Kat. fll.aVKwVL· Kai jJ.ov lI.af3ojJ.EVoS' [mid. = take 
hold of, + gen.] Tr,S' XHPOS' a 'AOEijJ.avToS', "Xat.PE [greetings]," Ecj>YJ, "~ 
KEcj>aIl.E, Kat. EL TOV OE!] TWV EVeo.OE a. ~jJ.Et.S' OVVo.jJ.Eea 7TOLEt.V, cj>po.(E [tell 
(us)]." "a 11.11.0., " Et7TOV iyw, "7To.PHjJ.L E7T' aVTO TOVTO, OEYJ(J"OjJ.EVOS' VjJ.Wv. " 
III. Reading: Aristophanes, Wealth 489-504: the goddess of Poverty has 
argued in favor of the status quo (in which the god of Wealth is blind), but 
Chremylos justifies his proposal to restore Wealth's sight as follows. 2 
Chremylos 
cj>avEpov jJ.Ev EYWy' otjJ.aL yvwvaL TOVT' EtVaL 7Ta.(J"W ogoiwS', 
489 
on TOVS' XPYJ(J"TOVS' TWV aVepW7TWV EV 7Tpo.TTEW E(J"Tt. oiKawv, 
490 
TOVS' oE 7TOVYJpOVS' Kat. TOVS' aeEO'lJi TOVTWV TavavTig QR7TOV. 
TOVT' OVV ~jJ.Et.S' E7TLeVjJ.OVVTES' gOIl.LS' YJVpOjJ.EV W(J"TE YEVE(J"eaL 
f3oVII.EVjJ.a Kall.OV Kat. YEVvat.ov Kat. XPfl(J"LgOV EiS' a7Tav EPYOV. 
lJV yap a flIl.OVTOS' vvvt. /3I1.EtV Kat. jJ.~ 'LVCPII.OS' wv 7JEPWO(J"Ti1, 
wS' TOVS' ayaeovS' TWV aVepW7TWV paOLEt.TaL KOVK a7TOII.EitH, 
495 
TOVS' oE 7TOVYJpOVS' Kat. TOVS' aeEOVS' cj>EV~Et.TaL· K~Ta 7TOfl(J"H 
7To.VTaS' XPYJ(J"TOVS' Kat. 7TII.OVTOVVTaS' O~7TOV TO. TE eEt.a rLEiJOVTaS'. 
KaiTOL TOVTOV TOtS' aVepW7TOLS' TiS' av E~EVpOL 7TOT' ajJ.Ewov; 
498 
Blepsidemos 
ovoEiS" TOVTOV go.pTVS' EYW (J"OL' jJ.YJoEv TavTYJv y' ~vEpwTa. 
499 
I. See U29.5e. 
2. The speech is written in a meter called anapaestic tetrameter catalectic. Greek meter is 
quantitative (based on length of syllables). The Greek anapaest is ~ ~ -
~ ~ - , but each pair of 
shorts can be replaced by a long, and a long can be replaced by two shorts (within certain 
limits). Thus an anapaestic metron can also appear as - - _. - or as -
~ ~ - - or the like. The 
tetrameter consists of four metra, with word-end at the end of each of the first two and with the 
fourth metron shortened to ~ ~ - - (with no substitutions allowed). So the first two lines are 
scanned: 
~~-~~-I----I----
~~--II 
~~---I----I----
~~--II 

266 
UNIT THIRTY -FOUR 
Chremylos 
OJ, jJ.EV yap vvv r,jJ.tV 0 (3io, TOt, aVepW7fOL, CnD.KHTaL, 
500 
Ti, av OVX r,YOtT' E~vaL gaviav KaKOoaLgoviav T' En jJ.QAAOV; 
7fOAAOL jJ.EV yap TWV aVepW7fWV OVTH 7fAOVTOV(n 7fovYJpoi, 
aoiKW, aVTa tVAAEtD.gEVOL· 7fOAAOL O· OVTH 7fD.VV XPYJ(J"TOL 
7fpD.TTOV(J"L KaKW, KaL 7fEWW(J"W jJ.ETa (J"OV TE TO. 7fAEt(J"Ta (J"VVH(J"W. 
504 
Underlined Words 
489: EywyE = emphatic fonn of Eyw 
489: yvwvaL = epexegetic (explanatory 
result) infinitive with cpavEpov, clear 
to understand 
489: oP.Ol.w> = equally 
491: new>, -av = godless, wicked 
491: TG..vaVTl.a = TO. EVaVTl.a, the 
opposite 
491: O~7TOV = surely, you'll agree 
492: take TOlJTO as object of 1]VPOP.EV, 
further explained by WCTTE = a way so 
that 
492: ovv = so then 
492: P.OAL> = with difficulty 
493: YEVvaLo>, -a, -ov = noble, 
excellent 
493: xp~cnp.o>, -1], -av = useful 
494: VVVI. = emphatic fonn of vvv 
494: !3AE7Tw, aor. E!3Anva = have sight, 
see 
494: TVCPAO>, -~, -av = blind 
494: 7TEPLVOCTTEW = go around 
495: w> (+ acc. of person) = 
(preposition) to, to the house of 
495: f3aol.(w, fut. f3aoLEop.aL = walk, go 
495: KOUK = Kat. OUK 
495: G..7TOAEI.",EL = G..7TO- compound; 
guess the meaning 
496: K4Ta = Kat. E~Ta 
496: 7TO~(J"EL = 7TOL~(J"EL (metrical 
shortening of diphthong OL from 
popular speech) 
497: 7TAOVTEW = be wealthy, be rich 
497: eELO>, -a, -av = divine 
497: (J"Ef3w = revere, respect 
498: Kal.TOL = and yet 
498: E~d)pOL = EK- compound; guess the 
meaning 
499: P.aPTV> = witness 
499: y' (elided YE) = enclitic adding 
emphasis to TaVT1]V (i.e., Poverty) 
499: G..VEpWTa (2nd sing. imperative) = 
ask 
500: OLaKELP.aL (deponent p.L-verb) = be 
disposed, be arranged 
501: p.avl.a = madness 
50 I: KaKooaLp.oVl.a = accursed 
mi!>fortune 
501: ETL = still, even 
503: aUTO. = their possessions 
503: (J"VAAEYW, aor. (J"vvEAE~a = gather 
({v v is the old Attic fonn of (J"vv) 
503: 7TaVV = (adv.) altogether, 
exceedingly 
504: 7TELVaW = starve 
504: (J"ov refers to Poverty 
504: TO. 7TAEL(J"Ta (adv. acc.) = for the 
most part 
504: (J"VVELP.L = be with 

UNIT THIRTY -FIVE 
Aorist Passive and Future Passive 
I. The Last Three Principal Parts. Up to this point the student has dealt 
with the first three principal parts of the Greek verb: the first person singular 
forms of the present active (or middle/passive for deponent), future active (or 
middle), and aorist active (or middle) indicative. In the traditional order of 
principal parts, the fourth is the first person singular perfect active indicative, 
the fifth is the first person singular perfect middle/passive indicative, and the 
sixth is the first person singular aorist passive indicative. In this book the aorist 
passive will be learned first (since the aorist is more commonly used than the 
perfect), and the perfect will soon follow in U37. From this unit on, new verbs 
will be presented with all six principal parts, or as many as a particular verb 
actually has (since deponents and some other verbs lack some tense systems). 
As part of the work of this and the next two units, the student should also 
study the remaining principal parts of the verbs learned in previous units, 
using the compiled list of principal parts in Appendix 2. 
2. Formation of Aorist Passive Stem. In origin, the aorist passive devel-
oped from an intransitive "active" form, similar in formation to intransitive 
athematic aorists like E(}TryV or EpryV. The more primitive aorist passive stems 
(called "second" aorist passive) consist of a form of the verb stem plus tense 
vowel ry (shortened to E in the participle, subjunctive, and optative): 
ypacpw 
stem ypacpry-
princ. part Eypacpryv 
pAa7rTW 
stem pAapry-
prine. part EpAa(3ryv 
The more recent aorist passive stems (called "first" aorist passive) add a tense 
suffix Ory (or OE) to the verb stem: 
AVW , 
7rO~EW 
TiOry}J-~ 
stem AVOry-
stem 7rO~ryOry­
stem TEOry-
princ. part EAVOryV 
prine. part E7rOnjeryv 
princ. part ETEOryV' 
I. Note the effect of Grassmann's law: when suffix e.,., is added to the verb stem e(, the result is 
nO.,.,- rather than 0(0.,.,- by dissimilation of the initial aspiration. 
267 

268 
UNIT THIRTY-FIVE 
It is necessary to learn the principal parts because the form of the aorist stem 
cannot always be predicted from the first principal part; but there are certain 
patterns that make learning the principal parts somewhat easier: 
a. Insertion of (J' before the suffix 8Y/ (verbs in dentals or (w, some verbs 
in -EW): 
7TEi8w 
E7TE L(J'8y/v 
vO~L(w 
Evo~L(J'8y/v 
TEAEW 
ETEAE(J'8y/v 
b. Labial or velar plosive aspirated before 8Y/ (by assimilation): 
AEL7Tw 
EAELcp8y/v 
7TpaTTw (7Tpay-) E7TpaX8Y/V 
c. v dropped before 8y/: 
, 
KPWW 
EKpL8Y/v 
3. Inflection of Aorist Passive. The inflection is the same for "first" and 
"second" aorist passive, so these terms are only of historical interest (unlike 
the case of first and second aorist active or middle). Every part of the aorist 
passive inflection is the same as some inflectional pattern that the student has 
already learned. The indicative has augment and has athematic conjugation 
using the appropriate secondary active personal endings (-v. -'>. -, -TOV, 
-Ty/V. -~EV, -TE. -(J'av): cf. E(J'Ty/V. Ej3y/V. The infinitive has the ending -vaL 
with the (circumflex) accent on the tense vowel Y/. The participle has the active 
participial suffix -VT-, producing the endings -(8)EL'>, -Wki(J'a, -(e)EV; the 
declension is like that of neEt'>, n8EL(J'a. n8Ev. The subjunctive has the usual 
active subjunctive personal endings, which contract with the tense vowel E, so 
that the conjugation is like that of subj. 7TOLW or n8w. The optative has the 
mood suffix -Ly/- or -L- (optional in dual and plural) added to the tense vowel E, 
so that the conjugation is like that of optative n8ELy/v. 
Ex. 
aorist passive of AVW, stem Av8y/- (or Av8E-) 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
Er.:v8r/V 
Av8w 
Av8dYJv 
EAV8YJ<; 
Av8fl<; 
Av8EiYJ<; 
EAV8YJ 
Av8fl 
Av8EiYJ 
(EAV8YJTOV 
Av8r,TOV 
Av8dYJTOV 
or 
Av8EtTOV) 
(EAV8~TYJV 
Av8r,TOV 
Av8EL~TYJV 
or 
Av8EiTYJV) 
EAV8YJ}J.EV 
Av8w}J.EV 
Av8EiYJ}J.EV 
or 
Av8Et}J.EV 
EAV8YJTE 
Av8r,TE 
Av8EiYJTE 
or 
Av8EtTE 
EAv8wmv 
Av8wO'L(V) 
Av8EiYJO'av 
or 
Av8EtEV 

Aorist Passive and Future Passive 
infinitive: Av8fwaL 
participle: Av8Ei'i. Av8ELeTa. Av8EV; m.ln. stem Av8EVT-, 
dat. pI. Av8ELI]'L(V) 
269 
4. Future Passive System. The sixth principal part also provides the 
basis for the formation of the future passive system. Recall (from VI8.7) that 
the future middle of many verbs can have a passive meaning, but some verbs 
have only a future passive (e.g., ryoop.aL. iweYwop.aL from aor. pass. ry0'8'7v) 
and others can use either form to express a future passive meaning. 
The future passive stem is formed by adding -O'op.aL (= future suffix 0' + 
theme vowel olE + primary middle/passive personal endings) to the aorist 
passive stem with vowel '7. 1 The indicative, infinitive, participle, and optative 
are inflected just like a regular future middle in -(J'op.aL. 
Ex. 
future passive of AVW, stem Av8'70'- + olE 
indicative 
AVe.,jO'OJlaL 
Ave.,jeJ'"[I 
AVe.,jouaL 
(Ave.,jlJ'wBov 
(AVe.,jIJ'Weov 
AVerwo JlE ea 
AVe.,jIJ'ElJ'eE 
AVe.,jIJ'OVTaL 
infinitive: Av8~O'EO'8at 
participle: Av8'7(J'()P.EVO'i. -'7. -ov 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
optative 
AVerwo[wJV 
AVe.,jIJ'OLO 
AVe.,jIJ'OLTO 
AVe.,jIJ'OLlJ'eOV) 
AVerwo[lJ'erJV ) 
AVerwo[JlEea 
AVe.,jIJ'OLlJ'eE 
AVe.,jIJ'OLVTO 
1. Study the aorist passive and future passive systems. 
2. Study the principal parts of verbs learned to date (compiled in Appendix 
2). Begin to learn the perfect principal parts now as well. You may wish to 
read "Advice on Learning Principal Parts," which precedes the list of prin-
cipal parts). 
3. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
I. A future passive from a "first" aorist passive (r.v8.ryCToflaL) is called a "first" future passive. 
and one from a "second" aorist passive (,3r.a,3.ryCToflaL) is called a "second" future passive, but 
the distinction is insignificant. 

270 
UNIT THIRTY -FIVE 
VOCABULARY 
nouns related to words learned previously 
injustice, wrongdoing 
acnKia, aOLKia" f. 
aiaxvvT/, aiaxvvT/" f. 
aLTia, aiTia" f. 
apxwv, apxovTo" m. 
shame, dishonor; sense of shame 
responsibility, blame; accusation; cause 
acr8EVELa, acr8EVEia<;, f. 
130.80" pa80v" n. 
papo" papov" n. 
oLKawcrvVT/, oLKawcrvVT/" f. 
ovcrTvxia, ovcrTvxia" f. 
E1.JTvxia, E1.JTvxia" f. 
Ex8pa, Ex8pa" f. 
CiJr..o" 
(~r..ov, m. 
KaKia, KaKia" f. 
Kar..r..O" Kar..r..OV>, n. 
7TPOOOTT/" 7TPOOOTOV, m. 
crwcppocrVVT/, crwcppocrVVT/" f. 
TaXO" TaXOV" n. 
TaXO, 
TEr..EVT~, TEr..EVTr", f. 
cpvya" cpvyaoo" m. or f. 
EXERCISES 
I. Write in Greek. 
ruler; archon (an Athenian magistrate, one of a group 
of nine chosen annually) 
weakness, illness 
depth 
weight 
righteousness, justice 
ill luck, ill fortune 
good luck, success 
hatred, enmity 
eager rivalry, emulation; (less commonly) jealousy 
[zeal] 
badness; cowardice; vice 
beauty 
[calliope] 
traitor, betrayer 
prudence; moderation, temperance 
speed, swiftness 
[tachometer] 
(adv. acc.) swiftly 
accomplishment; end, finish; death 
exile; runaway, fugitive 
1. 3rd pI. aor. pass. indo of eav}J.a(w 
2. dat. pI. masc. fut. pass. part. of (YJAow 
3. 2nd sing. fut. pass. indo of (TKEoavvVfJ.L 
4. 3rd sing. fut. pass. opt. of ytYVW(TKW 
5. 2nd pI. aor. pass. subj. of 7TpaTTw 
6. acc. sing. fern. aor. pass. part. of /nlyvv}J.t 
7. 1st pI. aor. pass. subj. of }J.L}J.V?7(TKW 
8. 1st sing. aor. pass. opt. of opaw 
9. aor. pass. info of TE}J.VW 
10. 3rd sing. aor. pass. indo of cpatvw 
11. fut. pass. info of E7TawEw 
12. nom. sing. neut. aor. pass. part. of j3aAAw 
13. aor. act. info of EXW 

Aorist Passive and Future Passive 
271 
14. neut. s. acc. pres. act. part. of VLKaW 
15. 2nd s. aor. mid. opt. of a:7rOOioWjJ.L 
16. 1 st pI. aor. act. subj. of AajJ.{3avw 
17. 3rd pI. fut. pass. indo of aipEw 
18. 2nd pI. fut. act. indo ofEA7Ti(w 
19. 3rd S. aor. pass. opt. of OLWKW 
20. masc. S. nom. aor. pass. part. of ryoojJ.aL 
II. Identify each form completely. 
1. A rJep8f]vaL 
15. KpaTrJ8Ei(F[1 
29. 
aYYEM~a-ETaL 
2. 7TOL rJ8~a-ETaL 
16. 7TELa-8wa-L 
30. aVETE8rJ 
3. ow{3aAovjJ.EV 
17. Kpvep8EV 
31. aVETi8EL 
4. KWAv8~a-ojJ.aL 
18. 
opjJ.~a-awTo 
32. a7Tax8wjJ.EV 
5. 
I 
19. ap7Taa-8rJa-ojJ.EVOV 
33. 
a7TopoirJ~ 
a-VVEyvwTE 
6. 
EvojJ.ia-8rJ~ 
20. EAa8EirJ 
34. a7TEovTE 
7. ETa x8rJa-av 
21. 
Eepo{3~8rJjJ.EV 
35. yvwa-8f]vaL 
8. yf]jJ.aL 
22. 
Epp~8rJ 
36. OELX8ELCTaL 
9. ai TLa8f]vaL 
23. 
iw8~a-E(T8aL 
37. EOLOaX8rJ 
10. atLw8EvTWV 
24. 
EVE7TA~a-8rJv 
38. ovvrJ8EVTa 
11. 7Tpax8fJ 
25. 
EVPE8~a-oVTaL 
39. wpyia-8rJTE 
12. E(rJ 
26. (rJTrJ8ELjJ.EV 
40. opYLa-8f]TE 
13. E7TL8ELO 
27. 
i]TTrJ8EVTO~ 
41. 
E{3A~8rJ~ 
14. rypaa-8rJv 
28. jJ.vrJa-8f]vaL 
42. 
orJAw8~a-Ea-8E 
III. Reading: Plato, Gorgias 456a-c: the sophist Gorgias explains to Socrates 
the primacy of the art of rhetoric. 
[Socrates:] TaVTa Ka~ 8avjJ.a(wv. ~ fopyia. 7TaAaL EPWTW Ti~ 7TOTE i] 
ovvajJ.i~ Ea-TLV Tf]~ imIopLKn~. oaLgovia yap n~ EgOLYE KaTacpaivETaL TO 
gEYE8o~ OVTW a-K07TOVVTL. 
[Gorgias:] Ei 7TaVTa yE EiOEi!)~. ~ LWKpaTE~. on W~ E7TO~ Ei7TELV a7Taa-a~ 
Ta~ OVvajJ.EL~ a-VAAa(3ova-a vep' aVTfJ EXEL. jJ.E}a OE a-OL TEKgnpwv Epw' 
7TOAAaKL~ yap ~OrJ EyWyE jJ.ETa TOV aOEAepOV Ka~ jJ.ETa TWV aAAWV iaTpwv 
Eia-EMwv 7Tapa Twa TWV KagvovTwv OVX~ E8EAOVTa 77 cpapgaKOV 7TLELV. 77 
TEjJ.ELV 77 Kava-aL 7Tapaa-XELV Tip iaTpip. ov OvvajJ.Evov TOV iaTpov 7TELa-aL. EYw 
E7TELCTa. OVK aAATI ~ 
77 TfJ prJTOPLKfJ. eprJjJ.~ oE Ka~ Ei~ 7TOAW 07TOL {30VATI 
EA80VTa iJ?]TOPLKOV avopa Ka~ iaTpov. Ei OEOL AOY'P OLaywvi(w8aL EV 
EKKA!Wig 77 EV aAA'P nv~ a-VAAOY'P 07TOTEPOV OEt aipE8f]vaL iaTpov. ovoagov 
av epavf]vaL TOV iaTpov. aAA' aipE8f]vaL av TOV Ei7TEtV ovvaTov. EL {3ovAOLTO. 
Ka~ Ei 7TPO~ aAAov yE orzgwvpyov oVTLvaovv aywvi(oLTO. 7TEia"ELEV av aVTov 
EAEa-8aL 0 PrJTOPLKO~ jJ.UAAOV 77 aAAo~ oa-TLa-ovV' OV yap Ea-nv 7TEP~ OTOV OVK 
av 7TL8aVWTEpov EL7TOL 0 PrJTOPLKO~ 77 aAAo~ oa-na-ovv TWV OrJjJ.wvPYwv EV 
7TA~8EL. 

272 
Underlined Words 
aywvi(op..UL = contend. compete 
av here makes the indirect-discourse 
infs. cpUVr,VUL and UlpEer,VUL 
potential in meaning 
OULp..OVW>. -a. -av = miraculous. 
marvelous 
07]p..wvpyo>. -ov. m. = skilled craftsman 
owywVi(Op..UL = contend. compete 
OVVUTO>. --rJ. -av = able 
EywyE = emphatic form of Eyw 
EL 7ravTa yE ELOEi7]>: the particle yE 
marks agreement in this elliptical 
sentence: .. Yes. <you certainly would 
call it marvelous> if ... "; ELOEi7]> is 
optative of oiou 
EKKA7]IJiu. -a>. f. = public assembly 
Ep..oLyE = emphatic form of Ep..oi 
LUTPO>. -av. m. = physician 
Kui is here adverbial, indeed. infact 
Kap..vw = be ill 
KUTacpuivw = (pass.) appear 
(understood subject is r, P7]TOPLK-rJ) 
p..EYEeO>. -av>, n. = si:e. greatness (here 
acc. of respect) 
a7rOL = to wherever 
(mOTE po>. -a. -av = which of the two 
OIJTLIJOVV = any at all (strengthened 
indefinite pronoun made of aIJTL> + 
ovv) 
UNIT THIRTY -FIVE 
OVOUp..OV = nowhere; here would appear 
nowhere is a metaphor from racing 
(would make no showing at all) 
ovXi = emphatic form of ov 
7raAUL is used idiomatically with the 
present indicative to convey I have 
been Xing for a long time now 
7rUpU~EI.V = (here) permit. allow (+ dat. 
of person + inf. [here governing 
TEp..EI.V ~ KUVIJULj) 
meuvo>. --rJ. -av = persuasive 
P7]TOPLKO>. --rJ. -ov = (of a person) 
rhetorically skilled; (of things) 
pertaining to rhetoric (so fern. with 
noun TEXV7] understood = art of 
rhetoric) 
IJK07rEW = examine 
IJVAAup..pavw = take together. 
encompass 
IJVAAOYO>. -av, m. = gathering 
TEKp..-rJpWV. -av, n. = indication. piece of 
evidence 
TEXV7]. -7]>, f. = art. skill 
TL> added to an adj. may either soften its 
force (sort of . .. ) or strengthen it, as 
here (quite . .. ) 
cpapp..uKov. -ov, n. = drug 
£0> E7ro> EL7rEI.V = so to ,Ipeak (idiomatic 
epexegetic or result infinitive) 

UNIT THIRTY -SIX 
Contrary-to-Fact Conditions; 
Indicative with o.v; Correlatives 
~~~-.-------- -----------------
I. Contrary-to-Fact Conditions. Three major classes of Greek condi-
tional sentences were presented in U34. The fourth major class is that in which 
the protasis expresses a supposition which the speaker knows is not or was not 
true and the apodosis expresses what would be or would have been the 
consequence (usually with the implication that the consequence did not occur). 
Such conditions are called contrary-to-fact or unreal. Just as secondary tenses 
of the indicative are used to express impossible wishes, so the secondary 
tenses are used in both clauses of unreal conditions, with the modal particle av 
added in the apodosis to mark the unreality. The scheme for a contrary-to-fact 
condition in present time (English equivalent: were (subj.)-would) is: 
protasis 
. apodosis 
EL + imperfect indicative 
imperfect indicative + av 
Ex. 
EL 7Tapryv 6 K vpo}, fJ-o.xw·8aL r,fJ-LV uv 7TapEKEAE1JETO. 
If Cyrus were present [and he is not], he would exhort us to fight. 
EL TaAry8ry EAqEV, E7TLCTTEVOfJ-EV avo 
Ifhe spoke (were speaking) the truth [and he is not], we would trust him. 
The scheme for a contrary-to-fact condition in past time (English equivalent: 
had-would have) is: 
protasis 
apodosis 
EL + aorist indicative 
aorist indicative + av 
Ex. 
EL OL (:3o.p(:3apm E7TE8EVTO, fJ-o.xw8aL r,fJ-LV uv 7TapEKEAEvCTaTo. 
If the Persians had attacked [but they didn't], he would have exhorted us 
to fight. 
EL fJ-1J TaAry8ry EAE~EV, 7To.VTE,) uV a7TE8avov. [Note fJ-1J as negative.] 
If he had not spoken the truth [but he did], all would have died. 
273 

274 
UNIT THIRTY-SIX 
-
-
-
------------
In English, the apodosis of an unreal condition may look similar to one of the 
future less vivid type, but the protasis will look different in correct English. If 
necessary, the student can remove doubts by considering the time implications 
of the sentence (future as opposed to present or past) and by trying to spell out 
the unreality of the protasis. Contrast If Cyrus were to be present (i.e., at the 
peace conference tomorrow) and If Cyrus were present (i.e., now, but he isn't). 
2. Indicative with avo In Attic the secondary tenses of the indicative are 
sometimes used with the modal particle av outside of conditional sentences to 
express a potentiality or probability in the past (whereas the optative with av 
expresses a potentiality in the present or future). This use is called the past 
potential indicative. Sometimes, but not always, there appears to be ellipsis 
(omission) of a condition. Sometimes there is the implication that the event ex-
pressed by the indicative with av is not or was not the case (unreal indicative). 
Ti" yap uv ryP7eTaTO Tafna YEVE(J-ea~; 
Who would have thought that this would happen? 
eUTTOV 1] W'i n" UV tfJETO 
more swiftly than [as] one would think (would have thought) 
n 
, 
I 
" 
OVTW" EV~KrwaTE avo 
In that way you would have won [but in fact you didn't]. 
(unreal) 
In a purely potential indicative, both the imperfect and the aorist commonly 
refer to past time; but the imperfect may refer to present time in certain idioms 
like EPOV,,-Op..T/V av = I should like, I should wish. In the unreal indicative (as in 
contrary-to-fact conditions and impossible wishes), the imperfect usually re-
fers to present time, the aorist to past time. Note that, in order to avoid ambi-
guity, if an unreal indicative of direct discourse is put into an indirect-
discourse on-clause in secondary sequence, the indicative is not changed to 
the optative. 
A further development of the past potential indicative with av is the 
iterative indicative ("iterative" = "of repeated action"): 
7rO,,-,,-aK~" ryK01)(Tap..EV av n KaKw" vp..u" pOV"-EVeTap..Evov". 
We often used to hear that you had planned something bad!.\'. 
3. Imperfect of Unfulfilled Obligation. The imperfect of an impersonal 
expression of obligation, propriety, necessity, or the like may be used without 
av to denote an action that was not carried out. This usage, called the imper-
fect of unfulfilled obligation, is often found in the apodosis of a contrary-to-
fact condition instead of the imperfect or aorist indicative with av. In this 
construction the infinitive is present if it refers to an action unfulfilled in 

Contrary-to-Fact Conditions; Indicative with av; Correlatives 
275 
present time, normally aorist (occasionally present) if it refers to an action 
unfulfilled in past time. I 
EOn (JE TafJTa 7TOLELV. 
You ought to be doing this (now) [but you aren't]. 
Ei EV{KrWE, o{KaWV ryv E7TawE(JaL alm)v. 
If he had won, it would have been just to praise him. 
EOn (JE TaVTa 7TOLYwaL. 
You ought to have done this (then). 
4. Correlatives. Certain pronouns, pronominal adjectives, and adverbs 
correspond to each other in form and/or meaning and are called correlatives 
because of their occasional use in pairs in main and subordinate (relative) 
clauses. For instance, the English pairs where-there and when-then are cor-
relatives: 
Where there is smoke, there there is fire. 
When there is victory, then there is celebration. 
The table on the next page presents some Greek correlatives in organized 
sequences. Some of the words you have already learned; others are new. Note 
various patterns in the table, such as the element -ow- denoting quality; -O(JO-
denoting quantity; the identity of interrogatives and indefinites except for 
accentuation (indefinites being enclitic); 7T- as first letter of many interrog-
atives; rough breathing as initial sound of many relatives; 07T- as beginning of 
indefinite relatives. 
Of the new adjectives and pronouns shown in the table, most have normal 
three-ending vowel-declension inflection: e.g., 7TOtO), -a, -ov; 07TOTEpO), -a, 
-ov. In TO(TO(JOE, TomjoE, TO(JOVOE, where the final syllable is the enclitic suf-
fix -OE, the accent it treated as in DOE, 7jOE, TOOE. The declension of TOLOVTO) 
and TO(JOVTO), however, is irregular: as in OVTO), the diphthong of the stem is 
assimilated to that of the ending, and the neuter sing. nom. acc. may have 
pronominal ending -0 or adjectival ending -ov (paradigm on page 277). 
I. The impersonal verb expresses the obligation in the past; the infinitive which is its subject 
expresses the action without asserting its occurrence; and the context helps the reader or listener 
infer that the action did not occur. The combination of imperfect tense and infinitive renders uv 
superfluous. 

276 
UNIT THIRTY -SIX 
CORRELATIVES 
indef rel.! 
indefinite 
indirect 
interrog. 
(enclitic) 
demonstr. 
relative 
interrog. 
TL~, TL 
TL~, TL 
001', OVTO~, or 
O~t ij, 0 
OCTTL~ 
who? 
anyone 
EKE!.VO~ 
who, which 
whoever 
this, that 
7TO!,O~ 
, 
TOLOCTOE or 
~ 
07TO!,O~ 
7TOLO~ 
OLO~ 
what sort? 
of some sort 
TOLOfJTo~ 
(such) as, the 
of whatever 
such 
sort which 
sort 
, 
7TOCTO~ 
TOCTOCTOE or 
" 
07TO(TO~ 
7TOCTO~ 
OCTO~ 
how much? 
of some 
TOCTOfJTO~ 
as much as, as 
however much 
how many? 
quantity 
so much, so 
many as 
or many 
many 
7TOTEpO~ 
7TOTEPO~ 
~TEPO~ 
07TOTEPM 
which of two? 
anyone of two 
the other (of two) 
whichever of 
two 
7TOV 
7TOV 
EVeaoE, 
OV, Evea 
07TOV 
where? 
somewhere 
EvmVea, EKE!. 
where 
wherever 
here, there 
7TOeW 
7TOeW 
EVeEVOE, EVTEV-
oew 
07TOeEV 
from where? 
from some 
ew, EKE!.eW 
whence 
whencesoever 
place 
from here, from 
there 
7TO!. 
EVeaoE, EV-
~ 
07TOL 
7TOL 
OL 
whither? to 
to some place 
mvea, EKE!.CTE 
whither 
whithersoever 
what place? 
to this place, 
to that place 
7TW~ 
(;;01', OVTW, 
. 
07TW~ 
7Tw~ 
W~ 
how? 
somehow 
' 
, 
as, how 
how, however 
EKELVW~ 
in this way, 
in that way 
, 
OTE 
' 
, 
7TOTE 
7TOTE 
TOTE 
07TOTE 
when? 
at some time, 
then 
when 
whenever 
ever 
7Tfl 
TflOE, miJT?) 
~ 
07T?) 
7T?) 
?) 
by which way? 
in some way 
in this way. 
in which way, 
in which way. 
where? 
by this way 
as 
as 

Contrary-to-Fact Conditions; Indicative with all; Correlatives 
277 
DECLENSION OF TOW1JTo,> 
masculine 
feminine 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
TOWVTO, 
TOWVTI) 
TOW1JTOV or TOW1JTO 
TOWVTOV 
, 
TOWVTOV 
gen. 
TOWVTI), 
dat. 
, 
TOWVT'tl 
TOWVT'tl 
TOWVT?1 
acc. 
TOW1JTOV 
TOWVTI)V 
TOW1JTOV or TOW1JTO 
(dual 
n. a. 
TOWVTW 
TOWVTW 
TOWVTW) 
(g. d. 
TOWVTOW 
TOWVTOW 
TOWVTOW) 
plur. 
nom. 
TOWVTOL 
TowvTaL 
TowvTa 
, 
, 
TOWVTWV 
gen. 
TOWVTWV 
TOWVTWV 
dat. 
, 
, 
, 
TOWVTOL, 
TOWVTaL, 
TOWVTOL, 
, 
, 
TOwvTa 
acc. 
TOWVTOV, 
TOWVTa, 
The declension OfToo-OVTO'>, TOo-a1JTry, TOo-OVTO(V) follows the same pattern. 
5. Some Adverbs of Place. Several adverbs of place are formed from 
basic roots with similar suffixes (e.g., -8w for place from which, -o-E for place 
to which). Here is a table of some common adverbs: 
root 
meaning 
place where 
place to which 
place from which 
------ -- --_.-
other 
aAAOeL, aMaxov 
G.MO(TE, aMaxolIE 
G.AAOeW, aMa-
elsewhere 
in another direction 
xo8w 
from elsewhere 
hoth 
a/11>oTEpweL 
a/11>oTEpwIIE 
a/11>oTEpoeW 
on hoth sides 
in hoth directions 
from hoth sides 
all 
7TaVTaXOV, 7TavTaxfl 
7TaVTaXOIIE, 7TaVTaX°'i 
7TaVTaXOeW 
everywhere 
in all directions 
from all sides 
this, 
aVTov 
' 
, 
aVTOeW 
aVTOIIE 
the very 
in this very place 
in the same direction 
from the same place 
home 
" 
OtKaOE 
OtKOeW 
OLKOL 
at home 
to home 
from home 
Also derived from the root o.AA - = other are the adverb aAAoTE, at another 
time, and the adjective o.AAOLO'>, of another kind. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the indicative with av and the imperfect of unfulfilled obligation. 
2. Study the declension of TOWlJTO,> and TOo-OVTO,>. 

278 
UNIT THIRTY -SIX 
3. Learn as the vocabulary of this unit any new words presented in §§4-5 
above. 
4. Continue to study the principal parts of the verbs learned to date, using 
Appendix 2. 
5. Do the exercises of this unit. 
EXERCISES 
I. Render into Greek. 
1. You ought not to be betraying the laws [as you are], gentlemen of the jury. 
2. Twenty hoplites would have been captured on that day if the exiles had not 
come to the rescue. 
3. If the guards were not present at the shrine during the night, those who lack 
money would quickly steal everything. 
II. Reading sentences 
1. 7TCWTa) fJ-aXEcTa(JBaL xpf]v KaL 1J7TEP TWV e'!paLwv EL OL pappapoL Tryv 
7r(JAW TryV EKELVWV E7TOALOpKWTaV. 
2. TOTE fJ-EV OVOEL) av 7Tapa TWV 7TOAEfJ-LWV owpa EAaj3EV, VVV oE 7Ta) TL) 
('!TEL 7TPOOOT'!) YEVECT8aL. 
3. aL yvvaLKE) TO. 7TaLOLa KaL TOU) avopa) OrKOL AL7TOVCTaL EL) TO opO) aAAaL 
aAAo8EV hpEXOV. 
4. ~ CPLAE <PaLopE, 7TOL ory [particle adds lively tone to question] KaL 7To8EV; 
-
7Tapa AVCTLOV, ~ ~WKpaTE), TOV KEcpaAov, 7TOPEl)OfJ-aL oE 7TpO) 
7TEpL7TaTov [walk] Etw [outside, + gen.] TELXOV). 
5. 7TEPL 7TavTo), ~ 7TaL, fJ-La apxry TOL) fJ-EAAOVCTL KaAW) j3oVAEl)CTECT8aL' 
~Lo~vaL OEL 7TEPL ov av -n ~ f30VA?] [deliberation], ~ 7TavTo) afJ-apTaVEw 
avaYK'!. 
6. ov KEAEVCT8EL) ov8' 1J7T0 EEVOcpWVTO) ov8' 1m' aAAov TLVO) TOVTO 
E7ToL'!CTa' LOOVTL OE fJ-OL avopa aya80v aYOfJ-EVOV TWV EfJ-WV CTTpaTLWTWV 
[partitive gen. with avopa] imo b..EtL7T7TOV, QV VfJ-EL) E7TLCTTaCT8E vfJ-a) 
7TPOOOVTa, OEWOV EOOtEV EivaL' KaL acpHAOfJ-'!V [took away (by force)] TOV 
avopa, DfJ-OAoyw. 
III. Reading: Lysias, Oration 1.1-3: Euphiletus is on trial for murder, having 
killed the adulterer Eratosthenes upon discovering him in bed with his wife. 
7TEPL 7TOAAOV av 7TOL!/CTaLgrzv, ~ avopE), TO TOLOVTOV) VfJ-a) EfJ-OL 
OLKaCTTa) 7TEPL TOVTOV TOV 7TpaYfJ-aTO) YEVECT8aL, OrOL7TEp av VfJ-LV aVTOL) Er,!TE 
TOLaVTa 7TE7Tov8oTE)' EV yap oioa OTt, Ei Tryv aVTryv yvwfJ-,!v 7TEPL TWV aAAWV 
EXOLTE, ryv7TEP 7TEPL vfJ-WV aVTWV, OVK av Er,! OCTTt) OUK E7TL TOL) YEYEVrzgEVOL) 
ayaVaKTOLrz, aAAa 7TaVTE) av 7TEPL TWV TO. TOLaVTa E7TL TrzOEVOVTWV TO.) 
(rzgLa) fJ-LKpa) ~yOLCT8E. KaL TaVTa OVK av Er,! govov 7Tap' VfJ-LV 01JTW) 

Contrary-to-Fact Conditions; Indicative with av; Correlatives 
279 
EYVW(J"gEva, a A.. A.. , EV a:rra(J"'[I Tn 'EA..A..aOL· 7rEpt TOVTOV yap jJ.OVOV TOV 
aOI.A?jE~IQ~ Kat EV 01JjJ.OKpaTiq. Kat OA..1YJlWCf i] aiJT~ nMwpia TOL~ 
a(J"8EVE(J"Ta TOL~ 7rpa~ TOV~ TO. jJ.EyL(J"Ta OvvajJ.Evov~ a 7rOOEOOTaL, W(J"TE Tav 
XEipL(J"TOV TWV aiJTwv TvyxavEw T0 PEA..Ti(J"TqJ· OVTW~, ~ avopE~, TaVT1JV 
T~V vj3pw a7raVTE~ aV8pW7rOL OEWOTaT1JV i]YOVVTaL 7rEpt MEV OVV TOV 
gEYE8ov~ TiJ~ (1JjJ.ia~ a7ravTa~ vjJ.os vOjJ.i(w T~V aiJT~v OLaVOLaV EXEW, Kat 
OVOEva OVTW~ OA..LYWPW~ OLaK_EL(J"8aL, O(J"H~ OrETaL OELV (J"VYYVWM!]~ TvyxaVELV 
1] jJ.LKpa~ (1JjJ.ia~ atiov~ i]YELTaL TOV~ TWV TOWVTWV EPYWV aiTiov~. 
Underlined Words 
ayaVaKTEW = be vexed at (here with 
hrl-phrase); here used in the 
potential optative without av (special 
idiom in indefinite relative clause) 
aOiK!]jJ.a, -aTO" n. = crime 
a7rOOEOOTaL = (perf. mid./pass. ind.) has 
been granted 
yEyW!]jJ.EVOL' = (perf. part. yiyvojJ.aL) 
things that happened 
OLaVOLa, -Q" f. = notion, idea 
Eyvw(J"jJ.Eva = (perf. part. YLyvwaxw) 
judged, determined 
E7rLT!]OElJW = practice, pursue (a form 
of behavior) 
(!]jJ.ia, -Q" f. = penalty 
jJ.EYEeO" -om, n. = si~e, greatness 
jJ.f.V ovv = (transitional particles) now 
then 
jJ.()VO" -!], -av = alone; (neut. acc. as 
adverb) only 
Ofl.Lyapxia, -Q" f. = oligarchy (form of 
government in which a small class, 
defined by wealth, holds political 
power) 
OfI.L ywpw, OLaKEL(J"eaL = be of a careless 
or neglectful disposition 
7rE7rOVeOTE, = (perf. part. act. 7raaxw) 
having suffered 
-7rEP = intensifying suffix added to 
relative words, adding notion the very 
one which, exactly the one which 
7rEPl 7rOAAOV 7rOLEL(J"eaL = consider to be 
of great importance (here with 
articular inf. as its object) 
(J"vyyvwjJ.!], -!]" f. = forgiveness, pardon 
HjJ.wpia, -Q" f. = retribution. right to 
vengeance 

UNIT THIRTY -SEVEN 
Perfect System 
------- ----
I. The Aspect of the Perfect Tense. The perfect stem of a Greek verb 
conveys the aspect of completed action with a continuing or permanent result. 
The Greek perfect indicative thus refers to a continuing present state and is a 
primary tense: it lacks augment, and it governs the subjunctive in primary 
sequence. The aspect of the perfect is especially clear in verbs whose perfects 
are best translated by an English present: 
a7TOevrWKW, I am dying 
, 
tCTTY]jJ.L, I cause to stand 
(ava)jJ.LjJ.vryCTKW, I call to 
mind 
OjJ.VVjJ.L, I swear an oath 
TEeVy]Ka, I have died and am now dead = 
I am dead 
ECTTY]Ka (intransitive perfect act.), I have 
adopted a stance and am now standing 
= I stand 
jJ.EjJ.vY]jJ.aL (perfect middle), I have called 
to my own mind and am now remem-
bering = I remember 
ojJ.wjJ.oKa, I have sworn an oath and am 
now bound by it = I am under oath 
The aspect of the perfect is also clear in certain legalistic uses of the supple-
mentary participle: 
oEitw TOVTOV 7ToAAa T' aAAa rycnKY]KOTa KaL TaAavTov KEKAO¢OTa. 
I'll prove that this man is guilty of doing many other wrongs and of 
stealing a talent. [literally, is in the state of having done wrongs and of 
having stolen] 
The close association of the perfect stem with states and conditions helps ex-
plain the existence of many intransitive perfects that correspond in meaning to 
middle/passive present forms and intransitive aorists: 
tCTTajJ.aL, I am placing myself, I am standing 
ECTTY]V (intransitive strong aor.), I stood; ECTTY]Ka (intransitive perfect 
act.), I stand 
7TEieojJ.aL, I obey, trust 
7TE7TOLea (intransitive perfect), I have placed my trust in and now trust 
= I trust 

Perfect System 
281 
--
. __ ._----- ------------
G..7TOAAVjJ.aL. I am being ruined. destroyed 
G..7ToAwAa (intransitive perfect), I have been ruined and am now ruined 
= I am ruined. destroyed 
In early Greek the perfect referred principally to the continuing state brought 
about in the subject of the action: for instance, jJ.EjJ.a81]Ka, I have learned and 
now know (the lesson). In classical Attic, however, the use of the perfect was 
extended so that it could also express a pennanent result affecting the object: 
e.g., TE81]Ka, I have placed something (and it remains in position), OEOWKa, I 
have given something (and it remains given). 
2. Reduplication. Reduplication is a modification of a verb stem in 
which the initial consonant (or occasionally the initial vowel plus consonant) 
is repeated. Reduplication with iota is found in a limited number of present 
stems (cf. U19.7b). Reduplication with epsilon is the regular marker of a per-
fect stem, but reduplication may be effected in other ways as well. (By 
learning the principal parts, the student need not detennine in each case which 
variety of reduplication is relevant to each verb.) 
a. If the initial sound of the verb stem is a single consonant (other than 
rho) or a plosive followed by nasal or liquid, the initial sound is repeated with 
epsilon. In accordance with Grassmann's law (U 19.5), an initial aspirated 
plosive is reduplicated with the corresponding unaspirated voiceless plosive. 
present 
perfect active 
----------- ._----
AEi7TW 
TPECPW 
CPEVYW 
AEAoma 
Thpocpa 
7TEcpEvya 
perfect mid./pass. 
AEAELjJ.jJ.aL 
TEepajJ.jJ.aL 1 
b. If the initial sound of the verb stem is a double consonant or rho, 
reduplication looks no different than syllabic augment. As with augment, an 
initial rho is doubled. 
present 
, 
yLyvwaxw 
(root yvw-) 
perfect active 
((~TYJKa 
EppLcpa 
perfect mid./pass. 
" EYvwapaL 
1. Grassmann's law applies doubly to the perfect of Tpicpw: the root is in fact OPECP-, but 
Grassmann's law makes this appear as Tpicpw in the present and TErpocpa in the perfect active; 
in the perfect middle/passive, however. the aspiration at the end of the stem is lost because of 
other euphonic changes and so the aspirate at the beginning of the verb stem is retained (but the 
reduplication is still TE -). 

282 
UNIT THIRTY -SEVEN 
c. If the initial sound of the verb stem is a vowel, reduplication normally 
looks no different than temporal augment. Since the reduplication is a pre verb 
element, the accent cannot precede it (cf. U\6.5): in short stems a circumflex 
will appear on the reduplicated/augmented vowel when U is short. 
present 
perfect act. 
perfect mid./pass. 
v 
" 
" 
ayw 
YJxa 
YJYfJ.at 
napayw 
napfJxa 
napfJYfJ.at 
, , 
" 
tVpt(J"KW 
YJvpYJKa 
YJvpWat 
acptKVEOfJ.at 
acp'iYfJ.at 
d. A few verbs beginning with a vowel reduplicate the initial vowel and 
consonant and lengthen the vowel that follows reduplication. This was called 
"Attic reduplication" by ancient grammarians (though it occurred in other 
dialects as well). 
present 
perfect(s) 
from root 
, 
, 
, , 
, 
aKOVw 
aKYJKoa 
aKO-
OfJ.VVfJ.t 
' 
, 
OfJ.WfJ.OKa 
OfJ.O-
EAEYXW 
EA~AtYfJ.at 
EAfYX-
CPEPW 
Ev~voxa. 
*EVOK-. *EVtK-
WYJVEYfJ.at 
e. A few verbs have odd reduplication because of the disappearance of a 
consonant at the beginning of the root. For instance, A.aJJ.j3o.vw produces 
perfects ELA.rycpa and ELA.ryJJ.JJ.aL (from root *(J"A.ry7T-),1 and A.ayxo.vw produces 
ELA.ryXa .2 
3. Perfect Active System. The fourth principal part of the Greek verb is 
the first person singular perfect active indicative. This form provides the stem 
used in generating the perfect active indicative, subjunctive, optative, imper-
ative, infinitive, and participle, the pluperfect active indicative, and the future 
perfect active indicative, optative, infinitive, and participle. Many of these 
forms, however, are rarely or never found for any given verb. 
Perfect stems may be classed in two groups. The more primitive stems 
have no tense suffix. and some plosive stems of this kind have their final 
consonant aspirated in the perfect. These perfects are called "second" perfects: 
I. The perfect is thus derived from *UWt.:ry7T- -> *{UAT/7T- (loss of initial sigma) -> *(LAT/7T-
(loss of aspiration and loss of internal sigma with initial vowel lengthened in compensation). 
2. The unusual form of reduplication in this verb is due to analogy with Aallf3avw; so too 
perfect cMLAf.Yllal from OtaAEyollal. 

Perfect System 
283 
for example, 7THPEVY-. A.EA.Om-; (aspirated) pEpA.acp-. 7TECPVA.aX-. oEfJLoax-. 
The more recent stems have the tense suffix K and are called "first" perfects: 
for example, A.EA.VK-. mcptA.1]K-. }J.E}J.a81]K- (for the addition of 1], cf. future }J.a-
8~(J"o}J.at), 7TE7TEtK- (from 7TEL8w; for the loss of the dental before the suffix, cf. 
aor. E7Twm). Note that in verbs which show a variation of vowel grade in the 
different tense stems the perfect has a strong-grade form (e.g., A.EL7TW. EA.mov. 
A.EA.Oma; CPEVyW. ECPVYOV. 7TEcpEvya). 
The distinction between first and second perfects is not relevant to in-
flection, since the same endings are used; but many of the most primitive 
second perfects and those second perfects which coexist with first perfects are 
semantically different in that they have intransitive (or sometimes virtually 
passive) force: for instance, transitive first perfect 7TE7TEtKa = I have persuaded 
vs. intransitive second perfect 7TE7TOt8a = I trust, trans. first perf. a7TOA.WA.EKa 
= I have ruined vs. intrans. (quasi-passive) second perf. a7TOA.WA.a = I am 
ruined (destroyed); intrans. (quasi-passive) second perf. Eppwya = I am broken 
from p~yvv}J.t. 
4. Inflection of Perfect Active 
a. The perfect active indicative has tense vowel a and (basically) pri-
mary personal endings: -a. -as'. -E. (-aTOV. -aTOV.) -a}J.EV. -aTE. -(un (the 
first sing. has no ending; the third sing. has vowel E instead of a and no 
ending; the third plural is -(un, as for }J.t-verbs, from --O.vn). 
Ex. 
2nd perfect 
1st perfect 
(AEi7TW) 
(f30VAEVW) 
sin/? 
1st 
AEAoma 
f3Ef3ovAEVKa 
2nd 
AEAoma, 
PEf3ovAEVKa, 
3rd 
AEAomd v) 
PEPOVAEVKE(V) 
(dual 2nd 
AEAOi 7Ta TOV 
PEpovAEvKaTov) 
(3rd 
AEAOi 7Ta TOV 
PEpovAEvKaTov) 
plur. 
ist 
AE Aoi 7Ta}1EV 
PEpovAEVKa}1EV 
2nd 
AE Aoi 7Ta TE 
PEPOVAEVKaTE 
3rd 
AEAoi7TQ.(n(v) 
PEPOVAEvKQ.(n(v) 
b. The perfect active infinitive has the ending -EVat (accent, as usual, on 
the syllable preceding -vat): for example, A.EA.OmEVat. A.EA.VKEVat. 
c. The perfect active participle has masc.!neuter T-stem (suffix -aT -) with 
nominatives in -wS'. -OS' (recall that all other active participles are vT-stems); 
the short-vowel fern. has suffix -via. The accent is persistent on the vowel of 
the participial suffix. The full declension is shown on the next page. 

284 
UNIT THIRTY -SEVEN 
DECLENSION OF PERFECT ACTIVE PARTICIPLE 
masculine 
feminine 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
AEAVKW> 
AEAvKv'ia 
AEAVKO> 
gen. 
AEAVKOTO> 
AEAVKvia> 
AEAVKOTO> 
dat. 
AEAVKon 
AEAVKViq. 
i\EAvKon 
ace. 
AEAVKom 
AEAvKv'iav 
i\EAVKO> 
(dual 
n. a. 
AEAVKOTE 
AEAVKvia 
AEAVKOTE) 
(g. d. 
AEAVKOTOW 
AEAVKviaw 
AEAVKOTOW) 
plur. 
nom. 
AEAVKOTE> 
AEAvKv'iat 
AEAVKom 
gen. 
AEAVKOTWV 
AEAVKVtwV 
AEAVKOTWV 
dat. 
AEAVKO(J"t(V) 
AEAVKViat> 
AEAVKOCTt(V) 
ace. 
AEAVKom> 
AEAVKvia> 
AEAVKom 
d. The perfect active subjunctive is found in two fonns. 
(1) The nonnal SUbjunctive endings -w, -Yl>, etc., may be added to the 
perfect active stem: thus, AEAOt7Tw, AEAOt7TYI>, etc. 
(2) More commonly, a periphrastic ("compound-phrase") fonn of the 
subjunctive is created by using the nominative of the perfect active 
participle and the present SUbjunctive of ELP.t: thus, AEAomw, ~, 
plur. AEAomoTE, ~P.EV, etc. (the participle will agree in gender with 
the subject, so with a fern. pI. subject the periphrastic fonn would be, 
e.g., 3rd pI. AEAomVZat ~()t). 
e. The perfect active optative is found in two fonns. 
(1) The nonnal w-verb optative endings -Otp.t, -Ot" etc., may be added 
to the perfect active stem: thus, AEAOt7TOtP.t, AEAOt7TOt" etc. 
(2) More commonly, a periphrastic fonn of the optative is created by 
using the nominative of the perfect active participle and the present 
optative of ELP.t: thus, AEAomw, ErrlV, plur. AEAomoTE, tLYjP.EV, etc. 
(the participle will agree in gender with the subject, so with a fern. 
sing. subject the periphrastic fonn would be, e.g., 3rd S. AEAomvZa 
E rYj). 
5. Perfect Subjunctive and Optative of oLoa. The irregular perfect oLoa 
(U28.6) has an e-grade alternative stem: ELOE- or tLO-. You have already 
learned the infinitive ELOEVaL. The participle is ELOW" ELovZa, ELM,; this has 
masc.!neut. stem ELOOT- and normal perfect active participle declension. Also 
from stem ELOE- is the subjunctive ELOW, ELOn" etc. (the epsilon contracts with 
the subj. personal endings, as in subj. of 7TOtEW). Likewise, the optative is 
conjugated like n$EtYjv: ELOEtYjV, ELOdYj" ELOEtYj, (ELOEZTOV, EiOEtTYjV,) ELOEZP.EV 
or ELOEtYjP.EV, ELOEZTE or ELOEtYjTE, EiOEZEV or ELOEtYj()av. 

• Perfect System 
285 
6. The Perfect Middle/Passive System. The fifth principal part of the 
Greek verb is the first person singular perfect mid./pass. indicative. This form 
provides the stem used in generating the perfect mid./pass. indicative, imper-
ative, infinitive, and participle (from which periphrastic subjunctive and 
optative are made), the pluperfect mid./pass. indicative, and the future perfect 
mid./pass. indicative, optative, infinitive, and participle. Many of these forms, 
however, are rarely or never found for any given verb. 
The perfect middle/passive stem is a reduplicated stem and usually very 
similar to the perfect active stem: for example, AEAoL7Ta. AEAELJJ.JJ.aL (stem 
Af.AH7r-: note change of vowel grade); EppLcf>a. 
EppLJJ.JJ.aL (stem EPPL7T-). 
Sometimes it is the same as that stem without active tense-suffix K, as in vowel 
stems such as THiJJ.YJKa. THiJJ.YJJJ.aL; 7rf.7roAiTf.vKa. 7rf.7roAiTf.vJJ.aL 
7. Inflection of Perfect Middle/Passive. The perfect middle/passive has 
inflectional endings added directly to the stem without intervening vowel. This 
leads to euphonic changes in the final consonant of many stems as well as in 
some inflectional endings. The paradigm is shown on page 287. 
a. The perfect middle/passive indicative has primary middle endings 
-JJ.aL. -O""aL. -TaL, etc. Because of euphonic changes, there are several patterns 
of inflection (illustrated in the paradigms following this section): 
(I) Stems ending in a vowel have the endings added without changes: for 
example, AEAvJJ.aL. (3f.(3ovAEUJJ.aL. 
(2) Stems with inserted 0"": verbs with present in ( or with dental plosive 
stem (T. o. e) and certain vowel-stem verbs have perfect mid./pass. 
stem in 0"" « or dental is dropped): vOJJ.i(w. Vf.VoJJ.LO""JJ.aL; 7rf.iew. 
7rE7rELO""JJ.aL; Tf.AEw. THEAf.O""JJ.aL In conjugation, if an ending begins 
with 0"", the resulting double 0"" is reduced to a single 0"" (thus 2nd pI. 
indo VEVOJJ.LO""ef., inf. Tf.Tf.AEO""eaL). 
(3) Stems ending in labial (7r. /3. cf» or velar (K. y. X) plosive (e.g., AE-
AELJJ.J.LaL. 7rE7rpaYJJ.aL) undergo euphonic assimilation (of sound or of 
aspiration) in most forms: 
before JJ., labial becomes JJ. ( - > JJ.JJ.), velar becomes y ( - > YJJ.) 
before O""e, 0"" drops out and labial becomes cf> (-> cf>e), velar becomes 
X(->Xe) 
before T, labial becomes 7r ( - > 7rT), velar becomes K ( - > KT) 
with 0"". labial combines to produce t. velar combines to produce t 
(4) Stems ending in A (e.g., 7jYYf.AJJ.aL) have the endings added directly, 
but endings beginning with O""e lose the 0"" (as in 2nd pI. 7jYYf.Aef.). 

286 
UNIT THIRTY -SEVEN 
- - -
-
--- ---------------
(5) Stems ending in v have endings beginning with T or O"e added 
directly (but the 0" of O"e disappears), but the v is replaced by 0" before 
endings beginning with jJ... The 2nd sing. form is not found. Cf. 
7TEcpaO"jJ..aL, 3rd sing. 7TEcpaVTaL 
Only vowel-stem perfects (type 1 above) normally form a third plural with the 
ending -VTaL. For all other types of verb, the third plural is formed peri-
phrastically with plural participle plus ELO"i (or EO"Ti for neuters): for example, 
7TE7THO"jJ..EVOL ELO"i. TETEAEO"jJ..Eva EO"Ti.' 
b. The perfect middle/passive infinitive has the middle infinitive ending 
-O"eaL (or -eaL after a consonant, where 0" drops out) and is accented on the fi-
nal syllable of the stem (acute on short vowel, circumflex on long vowel): 
thus, vEVojJ..iO"eaL. 7TE7TodweaL 
c. The perfect middle/passive participle has the middle participle ending 
-jJ..EVO'). -1]. -ov added to the stem (with, where needed, the same euphonic 
changes as for indicative endings -jJ..aL or -jJ..Eea). The accent of the perfect 
middle/passive participle is persistent on the participial suffix -jJ..EV-, a feature 
which distinguishes the perfect participle from all other middle participles in 
-jJ..EVO,): for example, 7TE7TaLoEVjJ..EvO'). 7TEcpvAaYjJ..Evo'). 
d. The perfect middle/passive subjunctive is normally formed periphras-
tically with the perfect middle/passive participle plus subjunctive of ELjJ..i: thus, 
AEAHjJ..jJ..EVO,) ~, etc. A very few verbs with stem in 1] whose perfects are 
especially common sometimes show a simple form of subjunctive: for exam-
ple, from jJ..EjJ..V1]jJ..aL = I remember, jJ..EjJ..vwjJ..aL, jJ..EjJ..VfJ. jJ..EjJ..Vr,TaL, etc.; from 
KEKT1]jJ..aL = I possess, KEKTwjJ..aL, etc. 
e. The perfect middle/passive optative is normally formed periphras-
tically with the perfect middle/passive participle plus optative of ELjJ..i: thus, 
AEAHjJ..jJ..EVO,) Er1]V, etc. A very few verbs with stem in 1] whose perfects are 
especially common sometimes show a simple form of optative: for example, 
from jJ..EjJ..V1]jJ..aL, jJ..EjJ..VyljJ..1]V or jJ..EjJ..VcPjJ..1]V; from KEKT1]jJ..aL, KEKTyljJ..1]V or KEKTcP-
jJ..1]V. 
1. In poetry and a few times in early Attic prose a simple 3rd pI. form is formed with the ending 
-UTU( (an alternative development of the ending that usually appears as -VTUt): HTclXUTU( = 
HTaYllfVO( Ei(]"t. 

Perfect System 
287 
PERFECT MIDDLE/PASSIVE INDICATIVE, INFINITIVE, PARTICIPLE 
vowel stem 
dental plosive stem 
labial plosive stem 
AVw 
7rd8w 
ypacpw 
stem: Af.AV-
stem: 7rE7rH(J-
stem: yqpa7r-
sing. 
1st 
Af.AVj1.aL 
7rE7rE L(Jj1.aL 
yf.ypaj1.j1.aL 
2nd 
Af.Av(JaL 
, 
yf.ypataL 
7rE7rH(JaL 
3rd 
Af.AVTaL 
, 
yf.ypa7rTaL 
7rE7rE L(JTaL 
(dual 
2nd 
Af.AV(J8ov 
7rf.7rH(J8ov 
yf.ypacp8ov) 
(3rd 
Af.AV(J8ov 
7rf.7rH(J8ov 
yf.ypacp8ov) 
plur. 
Ist 
AEAVj1.E8a 
7rE7rd(Jj1.E8a 
yEypaj1.j1.E8a 
2nd 
Af.AV(J8E 
7rf.7rH(J8f. 
yf.ypacp8E 
3rd 
Af.AVVTaL 
' 
" 
, 
" 
7rE7rH(Jj1.EVOL H(JL 
yEypaj1.j1.EVoL H(JL 
infinitive 
AEAv(J8aL 
7rE7rE t(J8aL 
yEypacp8aL 
participle 
AEAVj1.f.VO~ 
, 
7rE7rH(Jj1.EVO~ 
yqpaj1.j1.EVo> 
velar plosive stem 
stem in A 
stem in v 
7rpaTTW 
ayyf.AAW 
cpaivw 
stem: 7rE7rpay-
stem: ~yYEA-
stem: 7rEcpav-, 
7rEcpa(J-
sing. 
1st 
7rf.7rpaYJlaL 
17YYEAj1.aL 
7rf.cpa(Jj1.aL 
2nd 
7rf.7rpataL 
17YYEA(JaL 
3rd 
, 
17YYEATaL 
7rf.cpaVTaL 
7rE7rpaKTaL 
(dual 
2nd 
7rf.7rpax8ov 
17YYEMov 
7rf.cpav8ov) 
(3rd 
7rf.7rpax8ov 
17YYf.Mov 
7rf.cpav8ov) 
plur. 
1st 
7rE7rpayj1.E8a 
~yyf.Aj1.f.8a 
mcpa(Jj1.E8a 
2nd 
7rf.7rpax8E 
17YYEME 
7rf.cpav8E 
3rd 
7rf.7rpaYj1.f.VOL 
~yyEAj1.f.VOL 
7rEcpa(Jj1.f.VOL Ei(Ji 
, , 
H(JL 
H(JL 
infinitive 
7rE7rpUx8aL 
~yyf.MaL 
7rEcpav8aL 
participle 
, 
~yYEAj1.f.VO> 
7rE cpa(Jj1.f.vo > 
7rE7rpa yj1.EVO> 
8. Dative of Agent. The personal agent with a perfect or pluperfect pas-
sive verb fonn is nonnally expressed by the dative of agent (a fonn of the 
dative of interest) rather than by imo + gen. (as is usual with other passives): 
for example, TO. TOVTOL~ 71"E7rpaYJJ.Eva = the things done by these men. 

288 
UNIT THIRTY -SEVEN 
9. Synopsis of Verb Forms. Now that the student has learned so many 
verb forms, an effective way to practice and review verbal conjugation without 
writing out over a hundred forms is to give a synopsis of a verb in a particular 
person and number. This consists of the finite forms of that person and number 
in all possible tenses, voices, and moods, plus the infinitives and participles 
from each tense stem. Here is an almost complete synopsis of A.Ei TTW in the 
third person singular (it does not include the imperative or the pluperfect or 
future perfect, which are yet to be learned). 
present system 
future system 
aorist system 
perfect system 
active 
active 
active 
active 
indo 
AEL7TEL 
AELtEL 
fAL7TE 
AEAOL7TE 
subj. 
AEL7T"[I 
AL7T"[I 
AEAoL7T"[Ior 
AEAOL7TW~ n 
opt. 
AEL7TOL 
AELtOL 
AL7TOL 
AEAOL7TOL or 
AEAOL7TW~ EL7] 
in! 
AEL7TELV 
AELtELV 
AL7TELV 
AEAOL7TEVaL 
part. 
AEL7TWV 
AELtwV 
AL7TWV 
AEAOL7TW~ 
imp. indo 
fAEL7TE 
present system 
future system 
aorist system 
perfect system 
mid./pass. 
middle 
middle 
mid./pass. 
indo 
AEL7TETaL 
AELtETaL 
EAL7TETO 
AEAEL7TTaL 
subj. 
AEL7T7]TaL 
AL7T7]TaL 
AEAELJlJlEVO~ iT 
opt. 
AEL7TOLTO 
AELtOLTO 
AL7TOLTO 
AEAELJlJlEVO~ EL7] 
in! 
AEL7THJ'8aL 
AEL twBa L 
AL7TE aBaL 
AEAELcp8aL 
part. 
AEL7T6JlEVO~ 
AELt6JlEVO~ 
AL7T6JlEvo~ 
AEAELJlJlEVM 
imp. indo 
EAEL7TETO 
future system 
aorist system 
passive 
passive 
indo 
AELcp8~aHaL 
EAELcp87] 
subj. 
AELcp8fJ 
opt. 
AE Lcp8~(J'OL TO 
AELcp8EL7] 
in! 
AELcp8~(J'E(J'8aL 
AELcp8fjvaL 
part. 
AELcp87](J'6JlEVO~ 
AELcp8EL~ 

Perfect System 
289 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Learn the conjugational patterns of the perfect system. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Continue to study the principal parts of the verbs learned to date. 
4. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
verbs 
OAAVIU (poetic) = a:rroAAVJ.i.L 
(prose) (a7To), a7ToAEw, 
(trans. aor. ) a7TwAwa and 
(intrans. aor.) a7TwA0J.i.7]V, 
destroy, kill; lose; (mid. and intrans. aor. and perf.) 
perish, die 
(trans. perf.) a7ToAwAEKa 
and (intrans. perf.) a7To-
AWAa 
OJ.i.VVJ.i.L, 0J.i.E0J.i.aL, WJ.i.0lTa, 
0J.i.wJ.i.0Ka, 0J.i.wJ.i.0J.i.aL or 
0J.i.wJ.i.0ITJ.i.aL, wJ.i.o87]v or 
swear; swear to, swear by; swear that (+ inf.) 
wJ.i.0IT87]v 
jJi7TTW, jJi"ljlw, EppL"ljla, 
EppLcpa, EPPLJ.i.J.i.aL, 
Eppicp87]v or Eppicp7]v 
[i: in all stems except 
Eppicp7]v I 
throw, hurl 
verbs whose perfects have present meaning 
KTll0J.i.aL, KTrJIT0J.i.aL, 
acquire, get; (perfect system) possess, hold, have 
, 
, 
, 
EKT7]ITaJ.i.7]v, KEKT7]J.i.aL, 
EKTrJ87]v 
J.i.LJ.i.VrJITKW (already learned in 
(perfect system) remember 
U29); perfect J.i.EJ.i.V7]J.i.aL 
KaAEw (already learned in 
(perf. mid./pass. system) have been named, be called 
U 18), perfect mid./pass. 
KEKA7]J.i.aL 
EXERCISES 
I. Identify each form completely. 
1. 
o}J.w}J.oKa(]"L 
3. jJ.EjJ.VYJjJ.EVOt 
5. 'lff:CPVAUKTUt 
2. 
EpptCPEVUt 
4. KEKpV7rTat 
6. (J"VjJ.PEPYJKOS 

290 
UNIT THIRTY -SEVEN 
7. (JLEiAEX8E 
19. 
KEKAi7(T8a~ 
3l. E(T7TEW8E 
8. aKYjKOaTE 
20. TE8pajJ..jJ..E8a 
32. 7TEcpYjva) 
9. ° 
ECjoyjJ..Eva 
2l. TETpacp8a~ 
33. 
7TE7TojJ..cpEva~ 
10. 
, 
22. 
TE8~Ka(T~ 
34. 7TE7Tov8ajJ..EV 
KEKTYjVTa~ 
1l. a7TOAwAOTa 
23. jJ..EjJ..a8YjKo) 
35. KEKTc{JVTO 
12. a7ToAwAEKVl.aV 
24. 
, 
36. 
TETjJ..i7(T8a~ 
7TE7TpayEVa~ 
13. pE{3AacpajJ..Ev 
25. 
, 
37. 
ryTT~jJ..E8a 
7TE7TwKO(T~ 
14. 
TETata~ 
26. EOYjOOKVLWV 
38. 
, 
vEVojJ..~Ka 
15. 7TECPEVYE 
27. 7TE7TV(TjJ..E8a 
39. TE 8a v jJ..aKa(T ~ 
16. TETtjJ..YjjJ..EVOV) 
28. 
' 
, 
40. 
" 
wpy~(TjJ..EVOV 
ELpYjKa 
17. AEAYj80n 
29. EAYjAv8VLWV 
18. 
TETaXEva~ 
30. 
, 
'i' 
7TE7T~(TTEVjJ..EVaL W(TW 
II. Write in Greek. 
1. 2nd s. perf. act. indo of "throw" 
2. 1 st pl. perf. m/p indo of "honor" 
3. perf. act. info of "hate" 
4. 3rd pl. perf. act. indo of "think proper" 
5. 3rd pl. perf. rnJp subj. of "snatch" 
6. perf. m/p info of "be afraid" 
7. 3rd S. perf. rnJp indo of "be called" 
8. masc. nom. pl. perf. act. part. of "find" 
9. 3rd S. perf. act. opt. of "learn" 
10. fern. dat. pl. perf. m/p part. of "betray" 
11. 1 st S. fern. perf. act. opt. of "prevent" 
12. acc. pl. neut. perf. m/p part. of "become" 
III. 
Write synopses of the following in all the tenses and moods you know, 
including infinitives and participles: 
1. aLpEw in 3rd sing. 
3. pi7TTW in 3rd pl. 
2. 
Ti8YjjJ..~ in 2nd pl. 
4. (3oVAEvw in 1 st pl. 
IV. Reading: Lysias, Oration 1.4-6 (continuation of U36, Ex. III). 
ryyovjJ..a~ OE. 
~ avopE). TOVTO jJ..E OEI.V 
E7T~OEl.ta~. OJ) WiXEVEV 
'EQa:[o(T8&1li T1JV yvval.Ka T1JV EjJ..1JV Kat EKEivYjV TE OlEct8E.!jJ( Kat TOV) 
7TaLoa) TOV) EjJ..OV~ n(TxVVE Kat EjJ..E aiJTov iiPB(TEV d) T1JV oLKiav T1JV EjJ..1JV 
Ei(T~Wv. Kat OVTE Ex8pa EjJ..Ot Kat EKEiv,,? ovoEjJ..ia 1]v 7TAryv TaVTYj). OVTE 
xpYjjJ..aTwv EVEKa E7Tpata TaVTa. tva 7TAOV(Tw) EK 7JE~YjT.9) yEvwjJ..a~. OVTE 
aAAov !SipOOV5. OVOEVO) 7TAryv Ti7~ KaTa TOV) vOjJ..ov~ ngwpia~. Eyw LoivvR Et 
apXi7) VjJ..LV a7TavTa E7TLOEitw TO. EjJ..aVTOV 7TpaYjJ..aTa. OVOEV 7rSljJaAEi7T~V. 
aAAa AEYWV TO. aAYj8i7' TaVTYjV yap EjJ..avTip jJ..jVllV ryyovjJ..a~ (TwTYjpiav. EaV 
VjJ..LV EL7TELV a7TaVTa ovvYj8w TO. 7TE7TpayjJ..Eva. EyW yap. ~ 'A8YjvaLo~. E7TELOry 
EOOtE jJ..o~ Yi7jJ..a~ Kat yvvaLKa r,yayojJ..Yjv EL) TryV oLKiav. TOV jJ..EV aAAov 

Perfect System 
291 
XJ)()VOV OVTW Q!'~~lj;.Y]1J W(JTE }J.r7TE ~V.7rELV }J.r7TE ALaV iJJ' EKELVJI ElvaL 0 TL av 
EeEA[1 7rOLELV, EcpVAanaV TE W} olav TE ryv, Kal. 7rPO(TELXOV TOV VOVV W(T7rEP 
EiKO} ryv. E7rELO~ OE }J.OL 7raLOLOV YLyvETaL, E7rL(TTEVOV ryOT/ Kal. 7r<lVTa TO. 
E}J.aVTOV EKELV[1 7rapEOWKa, i]YOV}J.EVO} TaVTT/V OLI5HQTYlTa }J.qL(TTT/V ElvaL. 
Underlined Words 
aiaxvvw, aor. iiaxvva = dishonor, 
brinx shame upon 
OWcp8Etpw, aor. OLEcp8Etpa = corrupt, 
seduce 
oLG.KEtjJ.aL = be di~posed (+ adv. of 
manner) 
ELKO, = (neut. adj., nom. s.) reasonable 
EL(TLWV = compound of EL,: guess the 
meaning 
E7r' EKEtVT/ /ZvaL = to be in her own 
power (impersonal, + inf. 7TOLElV as 
subject) 
'EpaTo0'8Ev71'. -ov" m. = Eratosthenes 
(the man who was killed by 
Euphiletus, the speaker) 
KEPOO', -ov" n. = profit, financial xain 
A.V7TEW = vex, cause pain or annoyance 
jJ.OLXEVW = commit adultery with (a 
woman) 
jJ.ovo" -71. -ov = sole, only 
OiKEtOT71', -OT71TO', f. = (bond of) 
intimacy or friendship 
orov TE = (neut. s. nom.) possible 
7TapaA.Et7Tw = omit 
7TEV71', 7TEVY/TO" m. = poor man (the 
idiom YEVE0'8aL EK conveys be 
chanxed from X into Y) 
7TP0O'EXW TOV vovv = apply one's mind, 
pay attention 
TLjJ.wpta, -a,. f. = retribution, venxeance 
TOtVVV = (postpositive particle) well then 
Vppt(w = commit an outrage axainst. 
insult 

UNIT THIRTY-EIGHT 
Object Clauses with Verbs of Effort; 
Subordinate Clauses in Indirect 
Discourse; Attraction 
-------- ------ -
-- - - - - - -
- -- -------
1. Object Clauses with Verbs of Effort. Verbs of effort govern object 
clauses introduced by 07fw<; (negative 07fw<; I_oj) and usually containing the 
future indicative in both primary and secondary sequence. Verbs of effort 
include those meaning to strive or to bring about (7fpaTTw. IT7fovM(w. 7fapa-
ITKEva(ojJ.aL), to plan (j3ovAE1JojJ.aL). to take care or to take pains (E7fLjJ.EAE-
ojJ.aL. E7fLjJ.EAojJ.aL, impersonal jJ.EAEL), to see to it that (opaw. ITK07fEW), or to 
be on one's guard (EvAapEojJ.aL. cpvAaTTojJ.aL). 
Ex. 
oi 'A8y/va'ioL 7fpaTTOVITW 07fw<; jJ.~ a <I> iA L7f7f 0<; TWV UKPWV KpanjITEL. 
The Athenians are bringing it about that Philip will not get control of the 
heights. 
7fapEITKEVaITaVTO 07fw<; ITLTia EtOVITW. 
They made preparations so that they would have provisions. 
ITK07fEL limperative] 07fw<; w<; p~ITTa U7fLjJ.w. I 
Consider how (see to it that) we'll depart as easily as possible. 
Occasionally the future optative is used in place of the future indicative in 
secondary sequence: 
E7fEjJ.EAETO 07fw<; jJ.Y,TE UITLTOL jJ.Y,TE u7foToi 7fOTE EITOWTO. 
He took care that they would never be without food or water. 
Sometimes a purpose clause with the sUbjunctive (or optative in secondary 
sequence) is used with verbs of effort instead of an object clause: 
opa [imperative] 07fW'> jJ.Y, ITE Q.7faTy,ITTl. 
See to it that he doesn't deceive you. 
I. Remember that the present indo of ELJ.l.i is treated as a future in Attic. 
292 

Object Clauses; Subordinate Clauses in Indirect Discourse; Attraction 
293 
Special idiom: sometimes a o7TwS'-clause with the future indicative is used 
without an introductory verb (that is, in ellipsis) to express an urgent warning: 
07TWS' j.l.T/OEVt TafJTa AEtHS'. 
Make sure you don't tell this to anyone! 
2. Subordinate Clauses in Indirect Discourse. When a complex sentence 
is transformed into an indirect statement, the main clause of the statement is 
expressed by whichever of the three indirect-discourse constructions (inf., 
part., on-clause) is appropriate with the governing verb, but the verbs of the 
subordinate clause(s) normally remain in finite form and are treated according 
to the following rules: 
a. After a primary-tense governing verb, the subordinate-clause verbs 
remain unchanged in tense and mood. 
direct: 
EG.V mvm 7T0L'/7(r[lS', j.l.L(J'~(J'w (J'E. 
lfut. more vivid condition] 
If you do this, I'll hate you. 
indirect: 
(inf.) EG.V mvm 7TOL~(J'T/S', j.l.L(J'~(J'EW (J'E cj>T/(J'w. 
(on-clause) AEYH on EG.V mvm 7roL~(J'T/S" j.l.L(J'~(J'H (J'E. 
(part.) O,K01JOj.l.EV alJTov j.l.L(J'~(J'ovTa (J'E EG.V mvm 7TOL~(J'T/S" 
He says (we hear) that he will hate you if you do this. 
b. After a secondary-tense governing verb, primary-tense indicatives and 
SUbjunctives are usually changed to the same tense of the optative (a direct 
subj. with Q.v becomes an indirect opt. without Q.v), but are sometimes left 
unchanged. 
indirect: 
(inf.) EL mvm 7TOL~(J'EWS', j.l.L(J'~(J'EW (J'E Ecj>T/. 
(on-clause) E(7TEV on EL mvm 7TOL~(J'EWS' IJ.L(J'~(J'OL (J'E. 
(part.) ryKov(J'aj.l.EV alJTov j.l.L(J'~(J'ovTa (J'E Ei mvm 7ToLry(J'HaS'. 
He said (we heard) that he would hate you if you did (were to 
do, should do) this. 
direct: 
6 (J'TpanwTT/S' QV 1] haipa cj>LAEL 0'7TE8avEV EV Tfl j.l.aXT/· 
The soldier whom the courtesan loves died in the battle. 
indirect: 
77YYHAav TOV (J'TpanwTT/V QV 1] haipa cj>LAOiT/ 0,7T08o.vQvm 
EV Tfl j.l.aXT/· 
They announced that the soldier whom the courtesan loves 
died in the battle. 
c. After a secondary-tense governing verb, secondary-tense indicatives 
(including indicative with Q.v) and optatives remain unchanged. 
direct: 
o(J'nS' EMoL TOV7O rypwm. lpast gen. reI. clause] 
Whoever came always asked this question. 

294 
UNIT THIRTY -EIGHT 
indirect: 
E'[7rOV on o(J"ns> EMol TOVTO rypWTa. 
I said that whoever came always asked this question. 
direct: 
TaVTa a E7rOlEtTE ov mAa ryv. [simple reI. clause] 
These things you were doing were not good. 
indirect: 
OVK EVOj1l(OV TaVTa a E7rOlEtTE KaAa E'[val. 
They didn't consider these things you were doing to be good. 
3. Atttraction. It is characteristic of Greek that words referring to the 
same person are sometimes all expressed in the same case even though some 
of the words might be expected, according to strict grammar, to differ in case. 
This phenomenon is called attraction, because the case expected according to 
syntactic function is attracted into another case. The student has already 
learned some constructions which feature attraction. 
a. Attraction of predicate nouns or adjectives with the infinitive. The 
subject of an infinitive, when expressed, is normally in the accusative, and so 
predicate nouns or adjectives are accusative in agreement (cf. U9A, lOA, 
20.8). But when the subject of the infinitive is the same as the (nominative) 
subject of the governing verb, the subject of the infinitive is unexpressed and 
predicate nouns or adjectives are in the nominative by attraction: ECPll ciya8os> 
E'[vaL Likewise, when the subject of the infinitive is the same as a person or 
thing mentioned in the genitive or dative in close proximity to the infinitive 
(usually as gen. or dat. object of the main verb), the subject of the infinitive is 
usually unexpressed and predicate nouns or adjectives may either appear in the 
acc. or be attracted into the gen. or dat. 
It is in your power (for you) to be virtuous. 
E'twn Vj1tV ciya8ovs> E7vaL 
[no attraction, vj10S understood] 
Etwn Vj1tV ciya8ots> E7vaL 
[dative by attraction to vj1tvJ 
He exhorted the soldiers not to prove themselves cowards. 
7rapEKEAE1JETO TOtS> (J"TpanWTalS> j11J KaKOt~ YEVE(J"8al. 
They asked Cyrus to show himself as enthusiastic as possible. 
EOEOVTO TOV Kvpov WS> 7IfH)8vMQJ"aTo'Q YEVE(J"8w. 
I beseech you to prepare yourselves, since you see that Philip is strong 
and you see that your allies are despondent. 
OEOj1al vj1WV 7rapa(J"KEva(w8al, Qpii1v~as> j1EV TOV <l>iAl7r7rOV i(J"Xvpov. 
OpWVTaS> oE TOVS> (J"vj1j1axovs> ci8vj1ovs> QVTaS>. 
[no attraction: OPWVTaS> is acc. pI. masc. agreeing with the unexpressed 
subject of inf., Vj1QS>] 
Similarly. as already learned in U28.5. when an infinitive copula depends on a 
participle, a predicate noun or adjective agrees in case with the participle: 

Object Clauses; Subordinate Clauses in Indirect Discourse; Attraction 
295 
TOL~ cpaa-KOVa-L (>LOaa-KaAOL~ ElvaL 
to those who claim they are teachers 
b. Attraction of the Relative Pronoun. A relative pronoun nonnally takes 
its case from its construction in its own clause. But sometimes a relative is 
attracted into the case of its adjacent antecedent, especially when the relative 
would have been accusative and the antecedent is genitive or dative: 
a~wL T'i]~ EAEVeEpia~ 'lli KEKT1]a-eE 
worthy of the freedom which you possess 
[unattracted relative would be ~v, direct object of KEKT1]a-eE] 
a-vv TOL~ e1]a-avpoL~ o[~ 6 7raT~p KaTEAL7rW 
together with the treasure which his father had left him 
[unattracted relative would be ov~, direct object of KaTEAL7rw] 
Attraction is especially frequent when the antecedent is a (relatively unem-
phatic) neuter demonstrative. Indeed, the usual idiom in Greek is to omit such 
an antecedent and have the relative pronoun in the case which the antecedent 
would have had: 
He gave everyone a share of the things he had received [or of what he 
had received]. 
idiomatic fonn: ~v EAa(3E 7ram fJ.f.TEOWKE. 
fuller fonn: I®Ti.J)Y a EAa(3E 7rUa-L fJ.f.TEOWKE. 
[partitive gen. antecedent and acc. relative as direct object] 
I provide witnesses of whatever things I sa.v. 
idiomatic fonn: fJ.apTVpa~ ~v Q.v AEyw 7rapExw. [instead OfTOVTwV a] 
He wrongs the city in these respects in addition to the ways he wrongs 
individuals. 
idiomatic fonn: TalJTa aOLKEL T~V 7rOAW 7rpO~ or~ TOV~ iOu.oTa~ aOLKEL. 
[instead of 7rPO~ TOVTOL~ a ... aOLKEL] 
c. Inverse Attraction with Relative Pronoun. An antecedent in the nomi-
native (or, less often, the accusative) is sometimes attracted to the case of the 
relative pronoun: 
EAEyovon J\.aKEOaLfJ.0VWL ~V OEOVTaL 7rgL'T_WV 7rE7rpayOTf.~ Elw. 
They said that the Lacedaemonians had accomplished everything the.v 
needed. 
[instead of 7ravTa 7rE7rpayOTf.~ Elw] 
To~avopa TOVTOV, QV 7raAaL (1]Tf.L~ . .. OVTO~ Ea-nv EvOaoE. 
(Sophocles) This man, whom .'lou have long been seeking, ... is here. 
[instead of 6 av~p OVTO~ ... Ea-Tiv: note repetition of the 
demonstrative after the intervening clause] 

296 
UNIT THIRTY -EIGHT 
A special idiom which displays inverse attraction is the use of oblique cases of 
ovoEls O(TTL~ ov = everyone, deriving from ovoEls E(TTW O(TTL~ OV + verb of rel-
ative clause. 
ovoEva Kivovvov oVTLva OVX iJ7TEjJ.Ewav. 
They endured every (possible) danger. 
[instead of fuller form ovoEi~ E(TTL Kivovvo~ oVTLva OVX lJ7TEjJ.Ewav, 
There is no danger which they did not endure.] 
d. Incorporation of the Antecedent. A stylistic variation related to attrac-
tion is the incorporation of the antecedent word into the relative clause, so that 
it has the same case as the relative and the relative functions as adjective in-
stead of pronoun. Again, this is more common when the antecedent would 
have been nominative or accusative (in the main clause) than when it would 
have been genitive or dative. 
EL E(TTW, ~v (TV 7rPOTEpOV EAEYH apETYv, aAy/e~~ ... 
if the virtue of which you were speaking before is true . .. 
[instead of EL E(TTW ~ apET~, ~v EAEYE~ ... ] 
OVK E(TTW ~TL~ TOrJT' G.v 'EAAy/VL~ yvviz ETAy/ 
(Euripides) There is no Greek woman who would have dared to do this. 
[instead of OVK E(TTW 'EAAy/VL~ yvv~ ~TL~ G.v ETAy/] 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the grammatical constructions presented above. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
nouns 
$vIl6~. $VIlOV, m. 
llaPTV'>. llaPTVP0'>, m. or f. 
(dat. pI. llapTV(n) 
IlL(]"$ck IlL(]"$ov, m. 
TEXVTJ, TEXVTJ'>, f. 
T6~ov, T6~ov, n. 
TO~6TTJ'>, To~6TOV, 
m. 
spirit; seat of courage, anger, emotion, etc. 
[enthymeme, thymus] 
private person (i.e., not an official or professional), 
individual; layman 
[idiot] 
witness 
[martyr] 
hire; pay, wages 
art, skill, craft 
[technical, technology] 
bow 
[toxic] 
bowman, archer 

Object Clauses; Subordinate Clauses in Indirect Discourse; Attraction 
297 
some alpha-privative and related adjectives 
a01]AO~, a01]AOV 
aOVVaTO~, aOVVaTOV 
OVVaTO~, OVVaT~, 
OVVaTOV 
a8vjJ.o~, a8vjJ.ov 
7rpo8vjJ.o~, 
7rpo8vjJ.ov 
pa8vjJ.o~, pa8vjJ.ov 
aKWV, aKOV~a, aKOV 
(masc.lneut. stem clKOVT -) 
EKWV, EKov~a, EKOV 
(masc.lneut. stem 
EKOVT-)I 
ava~LO~, ava~LOV 
aVOjJ.M, avojJ.ov 
VOjJ.LjJ.O~, VOjJ.I.jJ.1], 
, 
VOjJ.LjJ.OV 
a7rOTO~, a7rOTOV 
a~acp~~, a~acpf.~ 
a~LTO~, a~LTOV 
aTLjJ.o~, aTLjJ.ov 
acp8ovo~, acp8ovov 
verbs 
cp80VEPO~, cp80VEpa, 
cp80VEPOV 
unseen; unknown, obscure, uncertain 
unable. weak; impossible 
[adynaton] 
strong. able; possible 
discouraged. spiritless 
ready. willing. eager; bearing good will 
easygoing. indifferent 
unwilling. under constraint (when used in predicate 
position agreeing with subject. may be translated 
in English as adverb unwillingly) 
willing (when used in predicate position agreeing 
with subject. may be translated in English as 
adverb willinRly) 
unworthy 
lawless. impious 
[anomie. anomophyllous] 
customary; lawful; legitimate 
not drinkable; not drinking. without water or drink 
indistinct. uncertain 
without food 
without honor; deprived of citizen rights 
free from envy; (more commonly) plentiful 
envious. jealous 
a8pol.(w, a8pol.~w, ~8poL~a, 
gather together 
~8poLKa. ~8poL~jJ.aL, 
~8pol.~81]v 
a7raTaW, a7raT~~w. ~7raT1]~a, cheat. deceive 
~7raT1]Ka. ~7raT1]jJ.aL. 
~7raT~81]v 
E~a7raTaW (f.~) 
deceive. trick 
EVAapf.ojJ.aL. EVAap~~ojJ.aL, 
beware. take care. take precautions 
1]vAaf3~81]v 
evw, ev~w. {8v~a, Tf.8vKa. 
offer by burning. sacrifice 
Tf.8vjJ.aL. ETv81]v2 
I. 
~K~JV is in fact a strong aorist participle of a verb which survived only in this form. The non-
Attic form of aKwv is uncontracted ciiKWV. an alpha-privative compound derived from ~K~JV. 
2. v in the first three principal parts, v in the last three. 

298 
Kfl.ivw. Kfl.WEW. EKfl.WU. 
KEKfl.tJ1.Ut. EKfl.i8rJV or 
(compounds) -f.Kfl.ivYJv I 
KOJ1.i(w. KOJ1.tEW. EKOJ1.trTa. 
, 
, 
KEKOJ1.tKU. KEKOJ1.WpUt. 
EKOJ1.iaBYJv 
J1.Efl.W. J1.Efl.rww. EJ1.Efl.YJ(JU. 
J1.EJ1.Efl.YJKU 
J1.Efl.H 
hT'tJ1.Efl.OJ1.Ut or E7f't-
J1.Efl.EOJ1.Ut. hT'tJ1.EfI.-
rwoJ1.ut. hT'tJ1.EJ1.E-
fl.YJJ1.Ut. E7TEJ1.EfI.~8YJv 
(JKE7TTOJ1.Ut. (JKE'/JOJ1.at. 
E(JKE'/JG.J1.YJV. E(JKEJ1.J1.Ut 2 
(JK07TEW or (JK07TEOJ1.Ut 
(J"7TEVOW. (J7TEV(JW. E(J7TEV(JU 
(J7TOVoa.(W. (J7TOVOG.(J0J1.Ut. 
E(J7TOVOU(JU. E(J7TOVOUKU. 
E(J7TOVOU(JJ1.Ut. E(J7TOVoa.(J8YJv 
EXERCISES 
I. Render into Greek . .1 
UNIT THIRTY-EIGHT 
cause to lean. slope. or lie down; (pass.) lie down. 
recline 
lheteroclite. clinic] 
take care of; carry. convey; (mid.) acquire 
(poetic) be a concern to (+ dat. of person); (poetic) 
take care of. care for (+ gen.) 
(impersonal. used in prose and verse) it concerns, 
it is an object of concern to ( + dat. of person + inf. 
or + gen. of thing) 
take care of, have charge of (+ gen.) 
view, examine, consider 
[sceptic] 
look at; examine, consider 
[telescope] 
seek eagerly, strive (+ inf.); (intrans.) rush, hasten 
be serious, be earnest; be eager (+ inf.) 
( 1) And let no one of you believe that we Greeks are in a worse condition 
because the soldiers of Cyrus, though formerly positioned with us, have now 
revolted. (2) For these men are still more cowardly than the ones we have 
defeated. (3) For they abandoned us and fled from those men. (4) And it is 
much better to see those who are willing to begin a flight stationed with the 
enemy than (to see them) in our ranks [use sing. of TCitLS'. TatEwS', f.]. (5) And 
do not be afraid of the cavalrymen of the enemy, though they are numerous. 
I. The t is short by etymology and short in fut., perf., and aor. pass .. but long in pres. and aor. 
act. (both because of compensatory lengthening in the development of the form). 
2. The present is used only in poetry (prose uses (J"Komiw); the other tenses serve as the remain-
ing tenses of ITKOTrEW. 
3. Note to instructor: loosely based on Anab. 3.2.17-18. 

Object Clauses; Subordinate Clauses in Indirect Discourse; Attraction 
299 
II. Reading: Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, 1.1-2 (two lines 
omitted): the proem to his work. 
00VKVO/.(Yr]S 'Ae1]val.os CTVVEypatE TOV 7fOAEjJ.OV TWV flEA07fOVV?]CT[WV 
Kat. 'Ae1]va[wv, 
~~ E7fOAEjJ.1]CTaV 7fPOS aAA~AOVS, aptajJ.EVOS EVeVS 
KaeLCTTagEvov Kat. EA7fLCTas jJ.Eyav TE ECTweaL Kat. atwAOYWTaTOV TWV 
7fPOYEYEV'UgEVWV . ... KiV?]CTLS yap aih1] jJ.qLCTT1] Qiz TOl.s "EAA1]CTW EYEVETO 
Kat. }J-EPEL TLVt. TWV (3ap(3apwv, £.Os OE Ei7fEl.v Kat. E7ft. 7fAEI.CTTOV aVepW7fWV. TO. 
yap 7fpO aVTWV Kat. TO. ETL 7faAa[TEpa CTa<pws jJ.Ev dJpEI.V OLa xpovov 7fAr,eOS 
aovvaTa ryv, EK oE TEKJj.?]PLWV (;;v E7ft. jJ.aKp0TaTOV CTK07fOVVTi jJ.OL 7fLCTTEVCTaL 
CTvjJ.(3aLvH ov jJ.qaAa vOjJ.[(w YEVECTeaL OVTE KaTa TOVS 7fOAE}J-OVS OVTE Eis TO. 
aAAa. <pa[VETaL yap r, vvv 'EAAaS KaAovgEVYJ OV 7faAaL BEf3aLws oiKovjJ.EV1], 
aAAa gETavaCTTaCTHS TE OVCTaL TO. 7fpOTEpa Kat. Pq.O[ws EKaCTTOL TrW EaVTWV 
, 
\.' 
.Q 
f.' 
" 
" 
\. 
I 
a7fO/\~L7fO~!ES jJLa~OgEVOL V7fO TWWV aLH 7f/\EWVWV. 
Underlined Words 
aOVvaTa: to be translated as if singular 
(aovvaTov ryv EVPEtV); this use of the 
plural neuter predicate adj. is archaic. 
Note that the phrase TO. yap . .. 
7rall.ainpa is thus acc., serving first 
as object of EVPEtV, then as subject of 
indirect-discourse info YEvEIT8aL. 
aiEi = (here) on each occasion 
a~LOlI.oyO', -ov = noteworthy 
a7roIl.Ei7rw: compound of a7ro-; guess 
the meaning 
f3Ef3aw" -a, -ov = secure, firm, fixed 
f3La(o}J.aL = be forced, be constrained 
o~ = (adv.) indeed (emphasizes 
preceding adj.) 
flTElTeaL: indirect-discourse inf. with 
subject TOV 7rOIl.E}J.OV understood 
from context 
fTL = (adv.) still, even 
EVeV, = (adv.) immediately, straightaway 
~ vvv 'EII.II.QS KaIl.Ov}J.Ev17: understand 
xwpa or yi1 = land (the land that is 
now called Hellas) 
KaeLITTa}J.EVOV: temporal genitive 
absolute, with noun TOV 7rOIl.E}J.OV 
understood from the context 
KiVW)L" -EW" f. = movement, unrest 
}J.ETaVaITTW)L', -EW" f. = migration 
(with this noun and with EKaITTOL in 
the next phrase, understand the verb 
cpaiVOVTaL to govern the 
supplementary participles) 
nEII.07rOVV~ITWL, -wv, m. = 
Peloponnesians (that is, the 
Lacedaemonians and their allies, most 
of whom were located in the 
Peloponnese [southern Greece]) 
7rIl.EtITTOV: supply a noun like extent or 
portion in translating this word 
7rpoyiyvo}J.aL = happen before 
ITvyypacpw = compose (an account of) 
TO. 7rponpa = (adv. acc.) previously 
nK}J.~pwv, -ov, n. = indication, piece of 
evidence 
Tr/V i.avn'vv: understand xwpa or yi1 = 
land 
W, = (here) how 
w> Et7rEtV = so to speak (frozen idiom; 
epexegetic [result) infinitive) 

UNIT THIRTY -NINE 
Temporal Clauses with EWs and the 
Like; 7Tpiv; Assimilation of Mood 
1. Temporal Clauses with EW~ and the Like. The conjunctions EW~, 
faTE, jJ.EXPL, jJ.EXPL OV, axpL, and axpL ov mean so long as, while (introducing 
temporal clauses expressing time the same as that of the main verb) or until 
(introducing temporal clauses expressing time after that of the main verb). 
Many clauses introduced by these words have the same contructions as other 
temporal clauses (with simple, general, and future conditional force: U34), but 
there are also special patterns for certain types of until-clause. 
a. Temporal clauses with EW~, etc., referring to definite action in the 
present or past have the indicative (cf. simple conditions and simple temporal 
clauses with OTE, E7TEi, etc.): 
EM EZp~VY'/ ryv, T0 pa(HAEL E7TEieoVTO. 
So long as there was peace [during one specific period of time 1. they 
obeyed the king. 
EKEiV!1 Tn r,jJ.Epq. EjJ.aXOVTO jJ.EXPL oi 'AeY'/vaLoL (J.7TE1rAEV(Jav. 
On that day they fought until the Athenians sailed away. 
b. Temporal clauses with EW~, etc., referring to customary or repeated 
action in the present or past follow the pattern of general conditions (cf. 
general conditional temporal clauses with OTE, E7TEi, etc.): 
present time 
EW~ av Eip~vY'/ n, T0 j3a(HAEL 7TEieoVTaL 
So long as there is peace [during any number of periods of time], they 
obey the king. 
EKa(J"ToTE jJ.aXOVTaL jJ.EXPL av 61jAw~ OV!1' 
They fight on each occasion until the sun sets. 
past time [not found with meaning so long as] 
EKa(J"ToTE EjJ.axovTo jJ.EXPL 61jAw~ OVat. 
They used to fight on each occasion until the sun set. 
300 

Temporal Clauses with tWf and the Like; 7TPt'V; Assimilation of Mood 
301 
c. Temporal clauses with EW~, etc., referring to action in the future 
usually take the construction of a future more vivid protasis, that is, subjunc-
tive with Q.v. The main clause may have either a future indicative or, if the 
temporal clause expresses an anticipated action (until), a present indicative. 
main clause future 
EW~ av EipryvYJ ii, T0 /3a(TLA.EL 7rEL(TOVTaL. 
So long as there is peace, they will obey the king. 
jJ.axovvTaL jJ.f.XPL av 01. 'AeYJvaLoL C).7f'07rA.E1)(TW(TLV. 
They will fight until the Athenians sail away. 
main clause present 
jJ.f.VOjJ.EV EW~ av EMn 6 Q.YYEA.O~. 
We are waiting until the messenger comes (in expectation that he will 
come, in anticipation that he may come). 
If the main clause contains the potential optative, the temporal clause with EW~, 
etc., referring to action in the future contains the optative (without Q.v: cf. 
future less vivid condition). This is a rare construction. 
Kat. vvv jJ.axoLVTo av jJ.f.xpL 01. 'AeYJvaLoL C).7f'07rA.EV(TELav. 
And now they wouldfight (on) until the Athenians (should) sail away. 
d. Temporal clauses with EW~, etc., referring to an action that was anti-
cipated in the past contain the optative (without Q.v); the main verb may be 
imperfect or aorist. This pattern does not correspond to any of the conditional 
patterns, but may be viewed as a transposition into past time of the construc-
tion illustrated under §c above (main clause present, temporal clause subj. + 
av), with a corresponding shift of subordinate mood because of the sequence 
of moods. I 
EjJ.EVOV EW~ EMoL. 
They remained, waiting for him to come or 
They waited in expectation that he would (might) come. 
Contrast the more factual form (as in §a above): 
EjJ.EVOV EW~ r,MEV. 
They waited until he (actually) arrived. 
2. 7rpLV. The use of 7rPLV as a conjunction (= before, until) developed 
from early uses of the adverb 7fPLV = before. The usage of this word is in part 
1. Grammarians speak of this kind of subordinate-clause optative as due to implied indirect 
discourse: that is, the writer or speaker retains the sense of expectation and non-fulfillment that 
is felt by those who experience the action as present; with the shift to a secondary-tense main 
verb, the sequence of moods applies, as for indirect discourse. 

302 
UNIT THIRTY -NINE 
parallel to that of EWIJ, etc., but is somewhat more complicated because 7Tpiv 
often introduces an infinitive rather than a finite verb. 
a. 7Tpiv with Finite Verbs. In these constructions, the main clause is nor-
mally negative and a temporal adverb meaning before (7Tpo(JBw or 7Tponpov) 
is often present in it. The patterns are similar to those illustrated in § 1 a-d 
above: 
definite action: indicative 
ov 7TpoCJ8w E7TavCJavTo 7TPLV T1JV 7TOAW EiAOV. 
They didn't stop until they (had) captured the city. 
present general: subjunctive with Q.v 
ov 7TpoCJ8w 7TaVOVTaL 7TPLV Q.v mJ.vTaIJ 7TEiCJwCJw. 
They don't stop [on each occasion] until they convince everyone. 
future more vivid: subjunctive with Q.v 
ov 7Tponpov 7TavCJoVTaL 7TPLV Q.v T~V 7TOAW EAWCJW. 
They will not stop until they capture the city. 
depending on clause containing optative: optative without Q.v 
d nlJ JJ.~ aVEL1J aVTov 7TpLV E~EAKVCJELW EZIJ TO TOV 1]Aiov CPWIJ 
if one should not let him go until one had dragged him into the light of 
the sun 
anticipated action in past time: optative without Q.v 
E7TEL8ov aVTOVIJ JJ.~ 7ToLELCJ8aL JJ.aX1Jv 7TPLV o~ 'A81JvaLOL 7TapayEvowTO. 
They urged them not to fight (but to wait) until the Athenians should 
have arrived. 
b. 7Tpiv with Infinitive. In this construction, the main verb is normally 
affirmative, but the infinitive is sometimes found with a negative main verb; 
again a temporal adverb meaning before (7TpoCJ8w or 7Tponpov) often accom-
panies the main verb. The infinitive construction must be used instead of a 
finite-verb construction in any case where a before-after contrast is empha-
sized (that is, where in English translation before cannot be replaced by until 
without altering the meaning). The infinitive expresses the action absolutely 
and implies nothing about anticipation or actual occurrence. The infinitive 
with 7Tpiv is usually aorist, but the present is used for continuing, repeated, or 
attempted action. The subject of the infinitive is unexpressed when it is the 
same as that of the main verb, accusative otherwise. 
EJJ.axovTo 7TPLV TOVIJ 'A81JvaiovlJ 7TapaywECJ8aL. 
They fought (at some time) before the Athenians arrived. 
[not the same as They fought until (the moment when) the Athenians 
arrived.] 

Temporal Clauses with lWf and the Like; 7Tp/V; Assimilation of Mood 
303 
a7TUpa7roVTO lOtI) T1JV 7TOAW 7TpLV v7TEp(3aivEtv. 
They turned back toward the city before attempting to scale (the wall). 
[until impossible since the action scale never occurred; present info to 
express attempt] 
<pop,ovjJ.aL jJ.ry 7TPOTEPOV TL 7TaeVl) 7TPLV TEAOl) E7TLeELVaL TOLl) 7TpaTTo-
jJ.EVOLI). 
I fear that something may happen to you before you complete what you 
are doing. 
3. Assimilation of Mood. The mood of a subordinate clause is sometimes 
assimilated to the mood of the clause on which it depends if the subordinate 
clause is an integral part of the entire thought. The most important examples of 
assimilation of mood involve the optative. 
a. The future less vivid conditional scheme may be interpreted as an 
instance of assimilation. Under the influence of the potential optative in the 
apodosis, the unfulfilled future action expressed in the protasis is normally in 
the optative (instead of subj. + Q.v as in future more vivid). 
b. The optative in a EWI)-c1ause or 7Tpiv-c1ause referring to a possible 
future action and dependent on an optative verb is also an instance of assimi-
lation. So in the final example under § I c the subordinate verb is assimilated in 
mood to the potential optative on which it depends, and in the fourth example 
under §2a it is assimilated to the optative of the lOt-clause, which is a future 
less vivid protasis. 
C. Likewise, a future condition that depends on a dependent optative is 
assimilated to the optative, and is more properly explained as "optative in a 
future condition by assimilation of mood" than as "optative in a future less 
vivid condition": 
E7TEtDry Kvp0l) EKaAEt. Aa(3wv vjJ.al) E7TOPEVOjJ.Y/v. Lva Ei'TL DEOLTO w<pE-
Aoir/V alJTov ave' ~v EV E7TaeOV V7T' EKEivov. 
When Cyrus summoned me. I came, taking you along. in order that. if he 
should have any need. I might aid him in return for the favors I had 
received from him. 
[future condition dependent on optative of purpose clause] 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the constructions presented above. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 

304 
VOCABULARY 
nouns 
eEpO,. eEpOV,. n. 
7rUeo,. 7rUeoV'>, n. 
(TTpan)" (TTpaTOV, m. 
cpvAaK~. cpVAaKr", f. 
XEL/1-wv. XEL/1-WVO" m. 
'fEVOO,. 'fE1JOOV" n. 
wpa. wpa" f. 
verbs 
E7rtXELpEW. E7rtXELP~CTW. E7rE-
XE ip1JCTa• E7rtKEXE ip1JKa• 
, 
, 
E7rtKEXELp1J/1-aL. 
E7rEXELp~e1JV (E7rd 
7rELpuw. 7rELPUCTW [ a I. 
E7rE ipaCTa. 7rE7rdpaKa. 7rE-
7rEipa/1-aL. E7rELPUe1JV [ a 1 
7rAEW. 7rAE1)CTO/1-aL or 
7rAEVCTEO/1-aL. E7rAEVCTa. 
7rE7rAEVKa. 7rE7rAEVCT/1-aL I 
a7r07rAEW (a7ro) 
7rpOCT~KW (7rpo,) 
7rpOCT~KEL 
pEW. pV~CTO/1-aL. EppV1JV. 
EPPV1JKa2 
CTVAAEyW. CTVAAE~W. CTVVE-
AE~a. CTVvEiAoxa. CTvvd-
AEYJ1.UL. CTVVEAEY1JV or 
CTVVEAEXe1JV (CTVV) 
CTci{w. CTWCTW (or CT~CTW), ECTW-
CTa (ECT't1CTa). CTECTwKa. CTE-
CTW/1-aL kECT't1CT/1-ad. ECTWe1JV 
UNIT THIRTY -NINE 
summer; summer harvest 
incident; experience; suffering, state, condition 
[pathos, pathology] 
army, host 
watching, guarding; garrison 
winter; storm, stormy weather 
falsehood, lie 
period, season; time of day; the fitting time 
[hour] 
put one's hand to, attempt ( + dat. or + inf.) 
(more frequently used in middle in same sense as 
active) make trial of(+ gen.); try (+ inf.) 
[pirate] 
sail, go by sea 
[pleopod] 
sail away 
have come; belong to, be related to (+ dat.) 
(impersonal) it belongs to, it concerns, it is fitting 
(+ dat. + inf.) 
flow 
[rheostat, rheumatism] 
gather, bring together, collect 
[syllogism] 
save, keep alive; preserve; bring safely; (pass.) reach 
safely, arrive safely 
I. Recall that monosyllabic verbs in -EW have contraction in present and imperfect only when 
the ending begins with E OrEt: cf. U 13 Vocabulary, footnote 2. 
2. Present and imperfect treated like oEw. 7rAEW (see previous note); the future principal part of 
this verb is actually its future passive. and the aorist principal part is its aorist passive (no middle 
or active forms exist in these tenses, but these passive forms have intransitive "active" 
translation in English). 

Temporal Clauses with fWf and the Like; 7Tp/V; Assimilation of Mood 
305 
iJ7T07l'TEVW. iJ7T07l'TEV(J"W. 
lJ7Tw7I'TEv(J"a. V7I'W7I'TEVeT/V 
be suspicious; suspect, hold in suspicion 
cpeEipw. cpeEpEW. {cpenpa. 
destroy; corrupt, bribe; seduce 
{cpeapKa. {cpeap}J.aL. EcpeapT]V 
clLacpeEipw (ow) 
(also has intrans. 2nd 
perf. OLEcpeOpa) 
cppatw. cppa(J"w. {cppa(J"a. 
71'EcppaKa. 71'Ecppa(J"}J.aL, 
Ecppa(J"8T]v [ii in all stems] 
adverbs, etc. 
yE 
Kat yap 
, 
}J.T]V 
{TL 
71'EAa<; 
xwpi<; 
Kat O~ Kai 
, 
, 
KaL }J.T]V 
, , 
, 
OVKETL. }J.T]KETL 
temporal conjunctions 
" 
EW<; 
" 
E(J"TE 
}J.EXPL or }J.EXPL ov 
G.XPL or G.XPL ov 
71'piv 
destroy utterly; corrupt, bribe; seduce; (intrans. 
2nd perf.) have been ruined, destroyed 
point out, show; tell, declare, explain 
periphrastic J 
[phrase, 
(enclitic particle adding emphasis to previous word 
or to whole clause; sometimes untranslatable in 
English) at least, at any rate 
(postpositive particle adding emphasis to preceding 
word, esp. to conjunctions and pronouns) in fact, 
of course, certainly 
and in fact, and in particular 
for indeed, for in fact, and in fact 
(postpositive particle adding strength to declarations) 
truly, surely 
and what is more (introducing something new or 
esp. important) 
(preposition) (+ gen., poetic) about, for the sake of; 
(+ dat., poetic) on both sides of, for the sake of; (+ 
acc.) around, associated with (a person), occupied 
with (a task) 
[amphitheater] 
yet, still 
no longer 
immediately, forthwith 
[euthynterion, euthytropic] 
with toil; scarcely, hardly 
behind; hereafter, in future; (sometimes + gen.) 
behind 
[opisthodomos] 
near; (sometimes + gen.) near 
separately, apart; (+ gen.) without, separate from 
until; so long as, while 
(rare in prose) until; so long as, while 
until; (also adv. or prep. + gen.) as far as, up to 
until; (also adv. or prep. + gen.) as far as, up to 
before (+ clause or + inf.); (adverb) before, formerly 

306 
UNIT THIRTY -NINE 
EXERCISES 
I. Render into Greek. 
I. Cyrus continued to gather soldiers and money until the king suspected I that 
his brother was plotting something. 
2. As long as the rivers flow into the sea, mankind will try to preserve itself. 
3. May I die before any such thing happens! 
4. Those who sail during the winter ought to beware that the winds do not 
deceive them. 
5. Philip was not allowing the ambassadors to meet him until his friends 
should utterly ruin [= corrupt] the affairs of the city. 
II. Reading: Lysias, Oration 12.13-15: Lysias, just arrested by order of the 
Thirty, has been brought to the house of Damnippus, where Theognis is guard-
ing various detainees. 
EV TOW1JTCfl 0' Qvn P.OL KWOVVEVEW EOOKH. W'i' TOV yE a7To8avE~v 
v7TCIPXOVTO'i' ~ory. KaA.ECTa'i' oE D.ap.VL7T7TOV A.Eyw 7TPO'i' aiJTov TaoE. "E7TL-
nlOHO'i' P.EV P.OL TVYXaVH'i' wv. 17Kw 0' EL'i' TrJV CTr]V oLKiav. aOLKw 0' OVOEV. 
xpryp.aTwv 0' EVEKa a7TOA.A.vp.aL. CTV ovv TaVTa 7TaCTxovTi P.OL 7Tpo8vp.ov 
7TapaCTXOV TrW CTWVTOV ovvap.w EL'i' TryV EP.ryV CTwTrypiav." 6 0' V7TECTXETO 
TavTa 7T0L17CTHV. EOOKH 0' aVT0 {3EA.nOV ElvaL 7TPO'i' 8EOYVW p.vryCT8r,vaL· 
r,YE~TO yap a7Tav 7T0L17CTHV aVTOV. EL n'i' apyvpwv oLooiry. EKEivov OE 
OWA.EYOP.EVOV 8EOYVLOL (Eg7THP0'i' yap WV ETVYXavov Tr,'i' OLKia'i'. KaL nOEW 
on agpi8vpo'i' ELry) EOOKH P.OL TaVT[l 7THpo.CT8aL CTw8r,vaL. Ev8vgoVgEVCfl on, 
EaV p.Ev A.a8w. CTwerwop.aL. EaV OE A.rycjl8w. r,YOVp.ryv P.EV. EL 8EOyVL'i' ELry 
7TE7THCTP.EVO'i' V7TO TOV D.ap.vi7T7TOV xpryp.aTa A.a{3E~V. OVOEv rynov acjlE8ry-
CTECT8aL. EL OE p.ry. ogoiw'i' a7To8avE~CT8aL 
Underlined Words 
a}J.cpievpo'>, -ov =with doors on both ends 
apyvpwv. -OV. n. = (silver) money 
E}J.7TELPO'>, -ov = experienced in, 
knowledgeable about (+ gen.) 
EVeV}J.Eo}J.aL = ponder, consider 
E7TL T~OELO' = (here) close acquaintance 
0EOYVL'>, -LOO'>. m., dat. -LOL. acc. -LV = 
Theognis 
KLVOVVElJW = take a risk 
o}J.oiw'> = all the same, just the same 
ovv = therefore 
7Tap(J.(rxov = aor. mid. imperative of 
7TapExw. here furnish me your power 
eagerly disposed [pred. adj.] toward 
my salvation. or apply your influence 
with ;:eal to save me 
iJ7Tapxw = be ready at hand 
I. V7r07rTflJW takes the info construction for indirect discourse. 

Temporal Clauses with E'wf and the Like; 7Tp/V; Assimilation of Mood 
307 
III. Reading: Plato, Gorgias 484c-e: Callicles explains to Socrates the danger 
of attributing too much importance to philosophy. 
TO p.Ev ovv aAYj8E~ OVTW~ EXEt, yvwO"Tl OE, Q.v hTt TO. p.d(w EMTl~ EaO"a~ 
ryoYj CPLAoO"opiaL!.. q>LAoO"ocj>ia yap TOi EO"TLV, ;;; ~WKpaTE~, xapiEV, av TL~ 
aiJTov g£Ef2iw~ (1.j!Jl~a_L EV TV iAl_KiCf' EaV OE 7T-ti2J1.L2EpW TOV OEOVTO~ 
EVOLaTpitTl, OLacp8opa TWV av8pW7TWV. EaV yap Kat 7Tavv EVCPVr,~ :;, Kat 
7TOppW T1J~ r,ALKia~ CPLAOO"OCPfz, avaYKYj 7TaVTWV a7TEtpOV YEYOVEvaL EO"TtV ~V 
XP1] Eg7TELPOV ElvaL TOV P.EAAOVTa KaAOV Kaya80~ Kat (YOOKLj.J..QQ EO"w8aL 
avopa. Kat yap TWV VOP.WV a7TEtpOL yiYVOVTaL TWV KaTa T1]V 7TOAW, Kat TWV 
AOYWV or~ Mi XPWP.EVOV OIJ,.LAE'iV EV TO'i~ O"vg3oAaioL~ TO'i~ av8pw7TOL~ Kat 
~Qfu Kat ~k, Kat TWV r,OOVWV TE Kat E7TL8vP.LWv TWV aV8pW7T(iwv, Kat 
O"VAAri30T]V TWV iz8wv 7TavTa7TaO"w a7TEtpOL yiyvOVTaL. E7TELOaV OVV EMwO"w 
E;:~ Twa ioiav 17 7TOALTLKr,V 7Tpatw, KaTaYEAaO"ToL yiYVOVTaL, WO"7TEP yE olp.aL 
oi. 7TOALTLKOi, E7TEtOaV av Ei~ Ta~ vp.ETEpa~ OLaTptJi~'i EMwO"w Kat TOV~ 
AOyOV~, KaTaYEAaO"Toi EiO"w. 
Underlined Words 
av8pW7THO<;, -a, -ov = human 
G.7THPO<;, -ov = inexperienced (+ gen.) 
a7TTw, aor. ~..ya = join, (mid.) touch (+ 
gen.) 
OT]}J.olTiq. = (idiomatic fern. dat. s. adv. 
of manner) publicly, in public life 
OtaTPLj3~, -f]<;, f. = pastime, pursuit 
Otacp80pa, ..Q.<;, f. = ruination 
E}J.7THPO<;, -ov = experienced in (+ gen.) 
EVOtaTpif3w, aor. EVOLETpL..ya = spend 
one's time in 
EVOOKL}J.O<;, -ov = of good repute,jamous 
EVCPV~<;, -E<; = innately gifted 
7180<;, -ov<;, n. = (in pI.) human 
character, human behavior 
~ALKia, -a<;, f. = prime of one '.I' youth 
tOw<;, -a, -ov = private; (fern. dat. sing. 
as adverb) privately, in private life 
Kaya80v = Kat aya80v (crasis) 
KaTaYEAaITTo<;, -ov = ridiculous 
}J.ETpW<;, -a, -ov = moderate 
O}J.LAEW = associate with (+ dat.) 
o~v = (postpositive) therefore; (com-
bined with }J.EV, in transitions) now 
then 
7TaVTa7TaITLV = (adv.) completely 
7Tavv = (adv.) very much, exceedingly 
7TEpaLTEpw = (compar. adv.)farther 
along 
7TOALTLK(k -~, -Ov = political 
7TOppW = (adv.)far along in (+ gen.) 
7TpatL<;, -EW<;, f. = activity, action 
ITVA.A.~;3OT]v = (adv.) taken all together, 
to put it in a nutshell 
ITv}J.poAawv, -av, n. = contractual 
transaction 
TOL = (enclitic particle) surely, you know 
CPLAOITOCPEW = engage in philosophical 
pursuits 
CPLAOlTocpia, -a<;, f. = philosophy 

UNIT FORTY 
Imperative Mood 
I. Imperative Mood. The fourth of the finite moods of ancient Greek is 
the imperative (Latin imperativus, Greek 7TPOcrTaKTLKry, "of command"). The 
imperative is used to express commands in the second and third persons (for 
the first person, the hortatory subjunctive is available), and is found mainly in 
the present and aorist tenses to express the contrasting aspects associated with 
these stems of the verb (see §6 below). In Attic Greek no perfect active 
imperative forms are found, and the perfect middle/passive imperative is rare, 
found mainly in verbs whose perfects are common as present-tense equivalents 
and in third person passive imperatives in certain fixed expressions. 
The English imperative of the second person is simply the present 
principal part of the verb with no pronoun subject expressed: go, eat, read, 
study, be. The Greek third person imperative may be translated with the 
English phrase let him (her, it, them) do X. 
2. Formation of Imperative 
a. Thematic Verbs. Imperatival personal endings (mainly distinct from 
those of the other moods) are added to the present stem plus theme vowel 0/ E 
and to the strong aorist stem plus theme vowel 0/ E or to the weak aorist stem 
plus tense vowel a (and for a few verbs directly to the middle/passive perfect 
stem with no intervening vowel). For the active the imper2.tival personal end-
ings are: -, -TW, (-TOV, -TWV,) -TE, -VTWV; for the middle/passive, -(cr)o, 
-crew, (-creov, -crew V ,) -creE, -crew V . The second person singular weak aorist 
forms have anomalous endings: -ov in the active, -at in the middle. The 
accentuation of the imperative is normally recessive, but strong aorist middle 
-ov from -E(cr)O (with accent on theme vowel) is an exception (cf. accentuation 
of strong aorist info and part.: UI9.4a, U26.1a). 
Note that the third plural active imperatives happen to be identical in 
form to the masc.lneuter gen. pI. of the active participle. Note the difference in 
accent and meaning between (3ovAEVcrOV (2nd sing. aor. act. imper.) and (3ov-
AEVcrOV (neuter nom.lacc. sing. fut. act. part.); also between (3ovAEvcrat (2nd 
308 

Imperative Mood 
309 
sing. aor. mid. imper.), povAE'i)rrat (aor. act. inf.), and j3ovAd)rrat (3rd sing. 
aor. act. opt.). 1 
PRESENT ACTIVE IMPERATIVE 
f3ovlv::uw 
7roLEw 
. , 
071t..OW 
opaw 
sing. 
2nd 
{30VAEVE 
, 
opa 
O~AOV 
7TOLH 
3rd 
f30VAEVETw 
7TOLtLTW 
OpQ.TW 
071AOVTW 
(dual 
2nd 
(30VAEVETOV 
7TOLELTOV 
. 
~ 
°71A01ITOV) 
opaTov 
(3rd 
(30VAEVETWV 
7TOLEiTWV 
OpQ.TWV 
°71AOVTWV) 
plur. 
2nd 
{30VAEVEH 
7TOLELH 
OPQH 
°71AOVH 
3rd 
{30VAEVOVTWV 
7TOWVVTWV 
OPWVTWV 
°71AOVVTwv 
PRESENT MIDDLE/PASSIVE IMPERATIVE 
{30VAEvw 
7TOLEW 
opQ.w 
°71AOW 
sing. 
2nd 
{30VAEVOV2 
7TOWV 
opw 
°71AOV 
3rd 
{3ovAEVEa-ew 
7TOLtLrr()w 
0pQ.rr()w 
°71Aovrr()w 
(dual 
2nd 
(3ovAEvErr()ov 
7ToLELrr()ov 
°PQrr()ov 
°71Aovrr()ov) 
(3rd 
(3ovAEvErr()wv 
7TOLE irr()wv 
0pQ.rr()wv 
°71Aovrr()wv) 
plur. 
2nd 
{3ovAEvErr()E 
7ToLELrr()E 
°PQrr()E 
°71Aovrr()E 
3rd 
{3ovAEVErr()wv 
7TOLE irr()wv 
0pQ.rr()wv 
°71Aovrr()wv 
STRONG AND WEAK AORIST IMPERATIVES 
AEi7TW 
{30VAEvw 
active 
middle 
active 
middle 
sing. 
2nd 
Ai7TE 
AL7TOV 
{3ovAEVrrov 
{3ovAEVrraL 
3rd 
AL7TETW 
AL7TErr()w 
{3ovAEVrrQ.Tw 
{3ovAEVrrQ.rr()w 
(dual 2nd 
Ai7TETOV 
Ai 7TEIT()OV 
(3ovAEvrraTov 
(3ovAEvrrarr()ov) 
(3rd 
AL7TETWV 
AL7TErr()wv 
(3ovAEVrrQ.Twv 
povAEVrrQ.rr()wv) 
plur. 
2nd 
Ai7TEH 
Ai 7Tf.(r()E 
{3ovAEvrraH 
{3ovAEvrrarr()E 
3rd 
AL7TOVTWV 
AL7TErr()wv 
{3ovAEVrrQ.vTwv 
{3ovAEVrrQ.rr()wv 
1. In a verb with monosyllabic stem, these distinctions may be partially or totally lost: e.g., 
7rEJl"'aL (imper., inf., and opt.); AVCTaL (imper. and inf.) vs. AVCTaL (opt.). 
2. The 2nd sing. middle forms are based on POVAf:Vf:CTO, 7rOLEfCTO, Opaf:CTO, lrqAOfCTo. 

310 
UNIT FORTY 
Perfect imperatives: the only simple perfect imperative forms found in 
Attic l are the second and third singular middle/passive (e.g., p..~p..v.,.,a-o. 
p..Ep..vrya-eW) and the second plural middle/passive (e.g., p..~p..v.,.,a-eE). But peri-
phrastic perfect imperatives may be formed in both active and middle/passive 
by using the perfect participle with the present imperative of ELp..i (presented in 
§4 below): e.g., AEAVKW') La-et. f3E(:30VAEVp..~VO') La-et. 
b. Athematic Verbs. Imperatival personal endings (the same as for the-
matic verbs except in the second singular active) are added directly to the tense 
stem, which normally displays its short-vowel form. The second singular 
active in some verbs has the personal ending -et, in some verbs has -,), and in 
the present of the major p..t-verbs is formed by the addition of E, which 
contracts with the stem vowel (the E is a borrowing from the w-verbs, as in the 
sing. act. imperfect forms). 
PRESENT IMPERATIVES (MI-VERBS) 
~- --------
TiOY/}J-L 
OiOW}J-L 
active 
mid./pass. 
active 
mid./pa.l's. 
-------~ 
sing. 
2nd 
TiOEt 
TiOHTO 
oioov 
oioolJ"o 
3rd 
nOETw 
nOEIJ"OW 
OLOOTW 
OLOOIJ"OW 
(dual 
2nd 
TiOnov 
TiOEIJ"OOV 
OiOOTOV 
oioolJ"Oov) 
(3rd 
nOi.Twv 
nOEIJ"OWV 
OLOOTWV 
OLOOIJ"8wv) 
plur. 
2nd 
Ti8ETE 
Ti8EIJ"8E 
OiOOTE 
oioolJ"8E 
3rd 
nOEvTwv 
n8EIJ"8wv 
OLOOVTWV 
OLOOlJ"8wv 
-----
LIJ"Ty/}.I.L 
active 
mid./pass. 
sing. 
2nd 
" 
" 
LIJ"Ty/ 
LIJ"TalJ"O 
3rd 
LIJ"TaTW 
LIJ"TalJ"8w 
(dual 
2nd 
LIJ"TaTOV 
LIJ"TaIJ"80v) 
(3rd 
LIJ"TaTWV 
LIJ"Ta1J"8wv) 
plur. 
2nd 
" 
LIJ"TalJ"8E 
LIJ"Tan 
3rd 
LIJ"TaVTWV 
LIJ"TalJ"OWV 
I. Outside of Attic one finds. very rarely. perfect active forms like AiAvKE. AEAvKfTW. 
AEAvKETE. 

Imperative Mood 
311 
AORIST IMPERATIVES (MI-VERBS) 
----------
Tt()TJIlL 
OtOwllL 
" LITTTJIlL 
active 
middle 
active 
middle 
active 
s. 
2nd 
()E, 
()ov 
00, 
oov 
ITTfj()L 
3rd 
()hw 
()EIT()W 
OOTW 
OOIT()w 
, 
ITTTJTW 
(d. 
2nd 
()hov 
()EIT()OV 
OOTOV 
OOIT()ov 
ITTfjTOV) 
(3rd 
()hwv 
()EIT()WV 
OOTWV 
OOIT()wv 
ITT~TWV) 
pI. 
2nd 
()ETf. 
()EIT()f. 
00Tf. 
OOIT()f. 
ITTfjTf. 
3rd 
()EVTWV 
()EIT()WV 
OOVTWV 
OOIT()wv 
, 
ITTaVTWV 
The aorist passive, being an athematic tense, is treated in the same way as the 
J.lt-verbs; the second singular active has the ending -Ot, which is changed to -Tt 
after tense suffix -81]- in first (weak) aorist passives (by Grassmann's law). 
AORIST PASSIVE IMPERATIVE 
~------ ---------
- -
-
cpatvw 
AVW 
strong aor. pass. 
weak aor. pass. 
sing. 
2nd 
cpaVTJ()L 
AV()TJTL 
3rd 
cpav~Tw 
AV()~TW 
(dual 
2nd 
cpavTJTOv 
AV()TJTOV) 
(3rd 
cpav~Twv 
AV()~TWV ) 
plur. 
2nd 
cpavTJTf. 
AV()TJTf. 
3rd 
cpavEvTwv 
AV()i.VTwV 
3. Other J.lt-Verb Imperatives and Irregular Imperatives. Other J.lt-verbs 
are treated similarly, but again there is variation in the second singular active 
ending. In addition, the third plural active ending is reduced to -TwV when 
added to a stem ending in sigma (f./pi and oLoa). 
EiJ.li: La-Ot, EITTW. (EITTOV. EITTWV.) EITTE. EITTWV 
ELJ.lt: Let. LTW. (LTOV. LTWV.) LTE. iOVTWV 
L1]J.lt: (like Ti01]J.lt) pres. act. LEt. LETw, etc.; pres. mid./pass. LEITo. LEITOW, 
etc.; aor. act. (in prose, compounds only) a<jlE~. Q.<jlETw, etc.; aor. mid. 
Q.<jlov. Q.<jlEITOW, etc. 
<jl1]J.li: <jlaOt or <jlaOi. <jlaTw. (<jlaTOv. <jlaTwv,) <jlaTE. <jlavTwv 
OELKVVJ.lt: act. oEiKVV. OEtKV1JTw, etc.; mid./pass. OEiKVVITO. OEtKV1)ITOW, 
etc. 
yt YVWITKW: (aor.) yvwOt, YVWTW, (YVWTOV, YVWTWV.) YVWTE. YVOVTWV 
ovw: (aor.) oV8t, OliTW, (OVTOV, OVTWV,) OVTE, OVVTWV 

312 
UNIT FORTY 
(3ULVW: (aor.) i:3i}8t (in compounds also -(30.), j3ryTw, ((3~TOV, j3ryTWV,) 
j3~TE, j3avTwv 
hrL(JTajlut: 2nd s. both E7TL(JTa(Jo and E7TL(JTw, otherwise like mid./pass. 
of Z(JT1)jlL 
olou: L(Jet, I L(JTW, (L(JTOV, L(JTWV,) L(JTE, L(JTWV 
Two other verbs have irregular second singular aorist active imperative forms: 
EXW (E(JXOV) yields (JXEs, and 7TLVW (E7TtOV) yields 7T'ieL 
Five strong aorists show exceptional accentuation in the second singular 
active. Instead of the usual recessive accentuation, the theme vowel E is 
accented (as in 2nd aor. inf., part., and 2nd sing. mid./pass. imper.): thus, Ei7TE, 
iOE (from Eloov), EME, EVPE, AUj3E. 
4. Accentuation of Imperatives of Compounds 
a. Compounds of the five strong aorists with non-recessive accentuation 
do have recessive accentuation: e.g., KaTH7TE, a7TEAeE. 
b. Since the accent of a verb cannot precede the first preverb element, a 
double compound form of a monosyllabic imperative is accented on P 
even if U is short (e.g., (JVVEKOO~ from (JVV-EK-l!iOWjlt). 
c. When a prepositional prefix is disyllabic, the compound form of a 
monosyllabic imperative is accented on P even if U is short: e.g., 
7TEpLeE~, a7Tooo~. 
d. The accentuation of the second singular strong aorist middle imper-
ative of thematic verbs is retained in compounds: e.g., (3UAOV, 7TUpU-
(3UAOV. But in the case of monosyllabic second singular aorist middle 
imperatives of the major jlt-verbs, the simple-verb accent is retained with 
a monosyllabic prepositional prefix, but recessive accent is found with a 
disyllabic prepositional prefix: thus, from oov (oiowjld 7TPOOOV but 
a7Tooov; from -ov (ZY]}ld acpov but from eov (Tie1)jlt) 7TEpLeOV. 
5. Aspect in the Imperative. As for the other non-indicative moods, the 
tense stems in the imperative convey distinctions of aspect rather than of time. 
The present refers to an action viewed as attempted, continuous, repeated, or 
customary. The aorist refers to an action viewed as unique or instantaneous. 
The perfect, which is rare, refers to an action viewed as having a permanent 
result. 
Ex. 
Tijlu TOV 7TUTEPU (Jov. 
Honor thy father. 
[stated as a general principle] 
(3aAE TOV 7TOV1)pOV. 
Stone the wretch (right now). 
I. 2nd sing. imper. of ELIlL and o('oa are identical; the context makes clear which is meant. 

Imperative Mood 
313 
ELp1]jJ.EVOV E(J"TW. 
Let it be said. 
[implying that the statement is permanently available as public 
knowledge] 
6. Negation of the Imperative. The negative with the imperative mood is 
jJ..,]. But the aorist imperative is very rarely negated (in prose the third person is 
found negated a few times, and the second person is found negated only a few 
times in poetry). A negative command (prohibition) with aorist aspect is nor-
mally expressed by the aorist subjunctive of prohibition (U31.3b); one with 
present aspect is expressed by the imperative. 
Ex. 
" 
, 
I 
Don't (ever) strike your father! 
Don't (ever) tel/lies. 
jJ.1] TV7rTE TOV 7raTEpa. 
jJ.~ 'f!EVOfj AEYE. 
, 
I 
, 
I 
Don't (right now) strike your father! 
Don't (on this occasion) tel/lies. 
jJ.1] 7ra~(J"Tl'> TOV 7raTEpa. 
jJ. ~ d7rTl'> 'f!EVOfj. 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
I. Study the conjugational patterns of the imperative mood. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
number adjectives 
OtaKC)(TtOt, OtaKOITtat, 
OtaKOITta 
TptaKOITWt, -at, -a 
HTpaKOITWt, -at, -a 
7rEVTaKOITWt, -at, -a 
f.taKOITWt, -at, -a 
f.7rTaKOITWt, -at, -a 
OKTaKOITWt, -at, -a 
, 
, 
EVaKOITWt, -at, -a 
Xit...Wt, Xit...tat, Xit...ta 
otITXit...Wt, 
TPtITXit...Wt, etc. 
Xtt...t(is-, Xtt...taoo" f. 
, 
, 
, 
jJ.vpw<;, jJ.vpta, jJ.vpWV 
jJ.vPWt, -at, -a (note 
different position of 
accent) 
jJ.vpta" jJ.vptaoo" f. 
two hundred 
three hundred 
four hundred 
five hundred 
six hundred 
seven hundred 
eight hundred 
nine hundred 
a thousand 
[kilometer, kilobyte I 
two thousand, 
three thousand, etc. 
a group of 1,000; a large number 
numberless, countless 
ten thousand 
a group of 10,000; a countless number 
[myriad] 

314 
other adjectives 
aA.A.c)TpWC;, aA.AoTpLa, 
aA.A.c)TpWV 
avopELoC;, avopELa, avopELoV 
YVIlVOC;, YVIlV~, YVilVOV 
OELA.OC;, OELA.~, OELA.OV 
EA.EVeEpOC;, EA.EVeEpa, 
EA.EVeEpOV 
dJpvc;, EvpELa, EVPV 
'" 
" 
EVP0C;, EVPOVC;, n. 
EVCTEj3~C;, EVCTEj3EC; 
aCTEj3~c;, aCTEj3E'> 
OVCTCTEj3~,>, OVCTCTEj3E'> 
epaCTv,>, epaCTELa, epaCTv 
LOW'>, iOLa, LOWV 
iKavo'>, iKav~, iKavov 
IlECTO'>, IlECTy/, IlECTOV 
IlOVO'>, IlOVy/, IlOVOV 
IlOVOV 
VEO'>, vEa, VEOV 
tEVO'>, tEVy/, tEVOV 
tEVO'>, -ov, m. 
oLo'> TE, OLa TE, oLov TE 
011.0'>, OA.y/, OA.OV 
0llOW'>, oiloLa, 0llOWV 
7Taxv,>, 7TaXELa, 7Taxv 
Tpaxv'>, TpaXELa, Tpaxv 
verbs 
EPya.(ollaL, EPya.CTollaL, 
, 
, 
" 
Y/pyaCTaily/v, ELpyaCTIlaL, 
~pya.CTey/V 1 
7TaLW, 7Ta LCTW , E7TaLCTa, 
7TE7TaLKa, (E7TaLCTey/V rare) 
CTEj30llaL (active CTEPW 
mainly poetic) 
UNIT FORTY 
belonging to another; foreign; hostile, ill-disposed 
manly, courageous 
[Andrew] 
naked; unarmed 
[gymnosperm, gymnosophist] 
cowardly; miserable, wretched 
free; characteristic of a freeman 
wide, broad 
[eurygnathous] 
width, breadth 
pious, dutiful (toward the gods or one's elders); holy 
ungodly, unholy 
(mainly poetic) impious, unholy 
bold, rash, audacious 
pertaining to oneself; private, personal; separate, 
distinct 
[idiom, idiograph] 
sufficient, competent; suitable, adequate 
middle, in the middle; moderate 
[mesolithic] 
alone; only, single (used in predicate position) 
[monotone, monarchy] 
(adv. acc.) only, solely 
young; new; unexpected, strange 
[neolithic, 
neologism] 
foreign; strange, unusual 
[xenophobia] 
foreigner; guest-friend; host of guest-friend 
fit, able, possible (+ inf.) 
whole, entire 
[holography] 
like, similar, resembling (+ dat.) 
[homeopathy] 
thick, stout 
[pachyderm) 
rugged, rough 
[trachodon, trachyte] 
work; work at, make; do, perform 
strike, beat 
feel awe (before the gods); revere, worship, honor 
I. The augment of this verb is sometimes found in the spell ing dpy- rather than ~py-. 

Imperative Mood 
Ei)(J"E P EW 
QIYEPEW 
, 
, t. 
" 
TtKTW, TEC;O}.J.aL, ETEKOV, 
, 
TETOKa 
, 
, 
o TEKWV 
CPVW, CPVIYW, EcpVIYa, intrans. 
aor. ECPVV, 7l"EcpVKa I 
xaipW, xaLp~IYW, KEXapy/Ka, 
EXapy/V [intrans.] 
EXERCISES 
live or act piously 
live or act impiously; sin against 
(of father) beget, sire; (of mother) bring into the 
world, give birth to; (in general) bear, produce, 
generate 
[tocodynamometer] 
father, parent 
315 
(pres., fut., weak aor. active) produce, make grow; 
beget; (pres. passive, intrans. strong aor., intrans. 
perfect) grow, be begotten, be born; (perfect with 
present meaning) be by nature, be by nature prone 
to (+ inf.) 
[physics, physiology] 
rejoice, be glad, delight in (+ dat. or + suppl. 
participle) 
I. Identify completely the following verb forms. 
1. TEeEta"UL 
12. KEKTwvTaL 
23. f3 OVAE f)(J"UL 
2. 
~a-eiWE(J-eE 
13. Aaew 
24. 7fE7fELpaKaCTL 
3. 7fat(Jov 
14. 
' 
, 
25. 
VLK-r](TELa~ 
Eppvrwav 
4. 
paYEiY}~ 
15. POVAE1)(JE(JeE 
26. c1.yayov 
5. 
KpLeY}(J()}J-EVO~ 
16. }J-v-r](JeY}TL 
27. c1.7faTWVTWv 
6. opa}J-o'iTo 
17. oLwtaTw 
28. KaTaAL7fE 
7. O}J-OAOyy}eEV 
18. (JK07fELTE 
29. (JKEta(JeE 
8. 
' 
, 
19. XatpE 
30. 7fE7faVKOTL 
ELpya(J}J-wa 
9. c1.7fOAapE 
20. El)(JEPEL 
31. EAY}AEY}J-EvaL Ei(Ji 
10. TEKov(Ja 
21. " 
32. 
KaTaeE~ 
L(JTE 
11. c1.7fO(JXELV 
22. 
w}J-OAOYY}KOTE~ 
33. TETEAE(J}J-EVOV 
" 
" 
E(JTWV 
E(JTW 
II. Give the 2nd and 3rd pers. sing. and pI. imperatives of the following: 
1. aor. act. of 7fE}J-7fW 
4. aor. pass. of (J0(w 
2. pres. m/p of yi yvo}J-aL 
5. aor. mid. of 7fapEXW 
3. pres. mJp of E7fLTieYf}J-L 
6. aor. act. of c1.VaYLyvw(JKW 
I. The strong aorist Ecf>VV is conjugated like EOVV. The v of the stem is generally long, but in the 
present may be long or short. 

316 
UNIT FORTY 
III. Reading: Plato, Protagoras 320c-321c (abridged): Prot agoras uses a 
myth to explain to Socrates why all men are allowed to participate in political 
decisions, whereas technical decisions related to skilled crafts are made only 
by experts in those crafts. 
ryv yap 7rOTE x.povo,,> OTE eEO~ JJ.Ev ryo-av. eV1)To. OE yEVYJ OVK ryv. E7rHO~ OE 
Ka~ T01JTOL"> x.povo,,> ryA.eEV ELgapgEVO'i, }'EV&"@">. TV7rOVo-W aVTo. eEO~ yili 
EVOOV EK YIJ"> Ka~ 7rVp0"> gE LtavTE"> Ka~ TWV oo-a 7rVP~ Ka~ yfl KEpaVVVTaL 
E7rELO~ o· G.yEW aVTo. 7rp0"> <pw"> EJJ.EAAOV. 7rpoo-Eratav npog?]eEL Ka~ 
'f,7rJY.YLeEl K~o-jJ.~ai TE Ka~ vELgaL OVVaJJ.H"> EKao-TOL"> OJ"> 7rPE7rEL npOJJ.YJeEa 
oE 7rapaLTELTaL 'E7rLJJ.YJeEV,,> aVTo,,> vELJJ.aL. "vELJJ.avTo,,> OE JJ.0v," E<PYJ, 
"E7rLo-Kn/IUL. " Ka~ OVTW 7rELo-a"> VEJJ.H. VEJJ.WV oE TO'i,,> JJ.Ev io-xvv G.VEV TaXOV,,> 
7rJ20rLfuITDJ, TOV"> o· ao-eEVEO"TEpOV"> TO. xH EKOo-JJ.H· ... a 
TE~1r QVV OV 7La~lJ 
H o-o<p0"> WV 6 'E7rLJJ.YJeEV,,> EAaeEV allTov KaTavaAwo-a,,> TO.,,> OVvaJJ.EL"> Ei"> TO. 
G.Aoya· AOL7rOV O~ aKoo-g?]TOV EH aVT0 ryv TO aVepW7rWV YEVO">, Kat ry7rOPH 0 
H x.prio-aLTO. a7rOpOVVH OE aVT0 EPXETaL np0JJ.YJeEV,,> E7rLo-Kn/toJJ.EVo"> T~V 
vogriv. Ka~ 6p~ TO. JJ.Ev G.AAa (0a EggEAW"> 7raVTWV EXOVTa, TOV oE G.vepW7rOV 
YVJJ.vov TE Ka~ aVV7rOO?]TOV Ka~ G.o-TPWTOV Ka~ G.07rAOV· 
~oYJ oE Ka~ 7] 
ELJJ.apJJ.EvYJ 7]JJ.Epa 7rapf]v, EV f, EOH Kat G.vepW7rOV EtLEvaL fK YIJ"> Ei"> <pW,,>. 
Underlined Words 
aKOUfl1]TO, -OV = unadorned, 
unequipped 
0.1..01'0" -OV = without reason (neut. pI. 
as substantive = brute animals) 
aVV7rOD1]TO" -av = without coverin!: for 
the feet 
o.07rAO" -ov = without armor 
o.UTPWTO" -ov = without beddin!: 
aTE Dry = particles marking the 
participle wv as causal 
YEVWt" -EW" f. = birth 
yry, yry" f. = earth (declension: U42) 
ELflUPflEVO" -1], -ov = fated, destined 
(perf. pass. part. of flELPOflUt) 
EflflEAw, EXHV + gen. = be in a suitable 
condition with re!:ard to, be suitably 
provided with 
EVDOV = (adv.) inside (+ gen.) 
'E7rtfl1]8d)" -EW" m. = Epimetheus 
(Afterthought), brother of Prometheus 
E7rtUKE7rTOflUt (E7rd = investi!:ate, 
inspect 
C4'JOv, -OV, n. = animal 
8V1]TO" -ry, --av = mortal 
KUTUVUALUKw, aor. KUTuvryAwuu = 
expend completely 
KEpavVVflt = mix, blend 
KOUflEW = adorn, equip 
AOt7rO" -ry, --av = remainin!: 
flELYVVflt, aor. EflHtU = mix, combine 
VEflw, aor. EVEtflU = distribute, apportion 
vOflry, -r", f. = distribution 
ovv = (particle) then, therefore, so then 
7ravv Tt = (adv.) very much at all 
7rUpUt TEOflUt = ask as a favor (+ acc. of 
person + complementary inf.) 

Imperative Mood 
np0J.lYJ8EV,. -f.W" m. = Prometheus 
(Forethought), a cunning Titan who 
functioned as a sort of "patron saint" 
of mankind 
7Tpo(J"a71"TW (7TpO,) = fasten to. bestow 
7Tpo(J"TaTTw (7TpO,) = order, assign a 
task 
7TVp. 7TVPO" n. = fire 
TV7TOW = form, mold 
317 
TWV o(J"a = of those things, however 
many are . .. (TWV here is pronominal) 
xprwatTO with internal acc. 0 Tt = what 
produces the idiom what use he could 
make of (a situation), how could he 
cope with (a situation); the opt. here 
represents Epimetheus' s direct 
deliberative question Tt xp~(J"wJ.lat: 

UNIT FORTY -ONE 
Pluperfect and Future Perfect; 
Irregular Perfects 
I. The Greek Pluperfect. The Greek pluperfect indicative corresponds to 
the Greek perfect as the Greek imperfect indicative corresponds to the Greek 
present: the perfect expresses an action completed in the past with permanent 
results in the present, while the pluperfect expresses an action completed in the 
deeper past with permanent results over a period of time in the more recent 
past. Like the imperfect, the pluperfect has only indicative forms. The Greek 
pluperfect is not at all common, except in those verbs whose perfects are 
regularly used with a present meaning. The English pluperfect had Xed has a 
different meaning (expressing an action antecedent to another action expressed 
in a past tense) and is more common. Note that in many cases the English 
pluperfect is equivalent to a Greek aorist: 
When they had arrived, we performed the sacrifices. 
End acpiKovTO, E8vIJufJ.w. 
2. Conjugation of the Pluperfect. The pluperfect active and middle/ 
passive indicative are formed from the perfect active and perfect middle/pas-
sive stems with augment added at the beginning of the stem and with secon-
dary personal endings. 
a. Pluperfect Active Indicative. In the active the endings are mainly 
based on a tense vowel E plus secondary active personal endings. In the first 
and second person singular, however, the endings were originally -Ea, -Ea~, 
and these endings, along with the third singular -EE, suffered contraction in 
Attic. Pluperfects may be termed "first" or "second" depending on the form of 
the perfect stem (with or without suffix K), but this distinction has no relevance 
to the conjugation. 
On the facing page are shown the pluperfect active of AVW (perfect stem 
AEAVK-, augmented EAEAvK-), ayw (perfect stem T,X-, augment not apparent), 
and aKovw (perfect stem aK1]KO-, augmented T,K1]KO-). 
318 

Pluperfect and Future Perfect; Irregular Perfects 
319 
PLUPERFECT ACTIVE INDICATIVE 
AVW 
" 
aKOVW 
ayw 
1st 
{AEAVKTJ 
' 
, 
TJXTJ 
l"/KTJKOl"/ 
sing. 
2nd 
(AEAVKTJ'> 
17XTJ'> 
' 
, 
l"/KTJKOTJ,> 
3rd 
(AEAVKf.L(V) 
17Xf.L(v) 
ryKTJKOf.L(V) 
(dual 
2nd 
(AEAVKETOV 
17XETov 
ryKTJKOETOV) 
(3rd 
EAEAVKfTTJV 
' , 
ryKTJKOfTTJV) 
TJXETTJV 
plur. 
1st 
EAEAVKE}.I.f.V 
17XE}.I.f.V 
ryKTJKOE}.I.f.V 
2nd 
EAEAVKETf. 
17XETE 
' 
, 
TJKTJKOETf. 
3rd 
EAEAvKmav 
17XEITav 
ryKTJKOmaV 
After about 350 S.C.E. the 1st and 2nd sing. take the form EAEAVKEW, EAEAV-
KEL~ (and to avoid ambiguity the 3rd sing. no longer takes nu-movable).' 
b. Pluperfect Middle/Passive Indicative. In the middle/passive, the per-
sonal endings are added directly to the stem, and the same euphonic changes 
observed in the perfect middle/passive (U37.6) appear in the pluperfect as 
well. For all consonant stems the 3rd pI. form is periphrastic (perfect 
mid./pass. part. plus imperfect of d}1i).2 
PLUPERFECT MIDDLE/PASSIVE INDICATIVE 
vowel stem 
dental plosive stem 
lahial plosive stem 
AVW 
7TELOW 
ypacpw 
stem: AEAV-
stem: 7TE7THIT-
stem: ycypa7T-
1st 
EAEAV}.I.TJV 
' 
, 
E7TE7THIT}.I.TJV 
Eycypa}.l.}.I.TJv 
sing. 
2nd 
EAEAVITO 
E7TE7Tf.LITO 
EyEypa"'o 
3rd 
EAEAVTO 
E7TE7Tf.LITTO 
EyEypa7TTo 
(dual 
2nd 
EAEAVITOOV 
E7TE7TwrOov 
EyEypacpOov) 
(3rd 
EAEAVITOTJV 
E7TE7TELITOTJV 
EycypacpOTJv) 
plur. 
1st 
EAEAV}.I.EOa 
E7TE7TELIT}.I.EOa 
Eycypa}.l.}.I.f.Oa 
2nd 
EAEAVITOE 
E7TE7Tf.LITOE 
EyEypacpOE 
3rd 
EAEAVVTO 
, 
, 
7TE7TE tIT}.I.E VOt 
ycypa}.l.}.I.f.VOt 
9 
" 
TJITav 
TJITav 
I. In postc1assical Greek. the complete conjugation uses H as tense vowel. so that the endings 
are -HV. -H>. -H. -H}.I.EV. -HTE. -{LlTav. 
2. Occasionally a simple 3rd pI. form is found. such as fTETUxaTO = TEmY}.I.EVOL J]lTav. 

320 
UNIT FORTY -ONE 
velar plosive stem 
stem in A 
stem in v 
, 
o.yyEAAw 
cpaivw 
7TpaTTw 
stem: 7TE7Tpay-
stem: ~yyEA-
stem: 7TEcpav-, 
7TEcpau-
sing. 
1st 
f.7TE7TpaYJlYJv 
~yyEAJlYJv 
E7TEcpaUJlYJv 
2nd 
f.7TE7Tpato 
~yYEAuO 
3rd 
f.7TE7TpaKTo 
~yYEATo 
f.7TEcpavTo 
(dual 
2nd 
f.7TE7TpaX$OV 
~yyEMov 
E7TEcpav$ov) 
(3rd 
E7TE7Tpax8YJv 
~yyEMYJv 
E7TEcpav$YJv) 
plur. 
1st 
E7TE7TpaYJlE8a 
~yYEAJlE8a 
E7TEcpaUJlE8a 
2nd 
E7TE7Tpax8E 
~yyEME 
E7TEcpav8E 
3rd 
7TE7TpaYJlEVOL 
~yyEAJlEVOL 
7TEcpaUJlEVOL 
" 
" 
" 
YJCTav 
YJuav 
YJuav 
3. The Future Perfect. In English the future perfect is used to refer to an 
action that will be completed prior to some point in time in the future (will 
have Xed). The Greek future perfect is formed from the perfect stem and 
normally refers to a future state which will be the permanent result of an action 
completed at an earlier point in the future. 
4. Conjugation of the Future Perfect 
a. Active. The future perfect active indicative (subj., opt., etc.) is nor-
mally formed periphrastically, from perfect active participle plus future 
indicative (subj., opt., etc.) of Eip.L: thus, AEAVKW~ {(J"op.aL, / will have released 
(strictly, / will be in the state of having released). In Attic, there are three 
verbs that form a simple future perfect active, and they are all perfects 
commonly used with a present meaning (so that the Greek speakers felt as if 
they were forming a plain future, with -(J"w): from TEeV1]Ka, / am dead, fut. 
perf. indo TEeV7}~W, I'll be dead (/ will have died); from E(J"T1]Ka, / stand, fut. 
perf. opt. E(J"T7}~OL (once in Plato), and from {OLKa, / am like, fut. perf. indo 
Er~W, I'll be like (once in Aristophanes).' 
b. Middle/Passive. These forms too may be formed periphrastically, 
from the perfect middle/passive participle plus the future of Eip.i: thus, AEAV-
p.Evo'.) {(J"op.aL, J'II have ransomed or J'II have been released (the future 
perfect is more often passive in meaning than middle). But simple forms are 
also found, more commonly than for the active. The suffix -(J"op.aL (inflected 
I. Also, in epic KfXap-q(]"w fromxaipw and in the Syracusan dialect OfOOLK1)UW from oEooLKa. 

Pluperfect and Future Perfect; Irregular Perfects 
321 
just like future middle indicative) is added to the perfect middle stem, with 
lengthening of preceding vowel if the stem ends in a short vowel or with 
combination of the sigma with a final consonant of the stem. 
Ex. 
A:VW, perfect middle stem AEAv-, future perfect middle/passive 
indicative AEAV(JOjJ.W [ v I 
ypacpw, perfect middle stem YEYpa7T-, future perfect middle/ 
passive indicative YEYpa"'ojJ.aL 
The future perfect mid./pass. infinitive ends in -(Jw8aL, with accent on A. The 
most frequent infinitive of this type is jJ.EjJ.v~(JE(J8aL (= will remember, corres-
ponding to present meaning of jJ.fjJ.V1]jJ.aL = I remember). Only one instance of 
a future perfect mid./pass. participle is extant (l'na7TE7ToAEjJ.1](}()jJ.EVOV in Thucy-
dides).' The future perfect mid./pass. optative is extant once in Plato (KEKA~­
(JOLTO, from KfKA1]jJ.aL, a perfect with present meaning). 
5. Athematic Perfects. t(JT1]jJ.L and a few other verbs (in Attic 8Vy7(JKW 
and OfOOLKa) form a perfect active athematically, that is, by adding personal 
endings directly to a reduplicated stem without tense suffix or tense vowel. 
The athematic forms are found mainly in the dual and plural numbers, coex-
isting with regular perfect forms; in the singular the regular perfect forms are 
normal, and athematic forms are found only for ofooLKa. The athematic per-
fects are called "second," while the regular forms with K-suffix are called 
"first" perfects. 
a. The perfect active system Oft(JT1]jJ.L is as follows: 2 
1 st perf indo 
2nd perf indo 
1st pluperf 
2ndpluperf 
sing. 
1st 
" 
Eiu"T~K7] 
EU"T7]Ka 
2nd 
" 
, 
, 
EU"T7]Ka" 
Etu"T7]K7]" 
3rd 
Eu"T7]Kdv) 
, 
, 
Etu"T7]KEL 
(dual 2nd 
' 
, 
, 
, 
EU"TaTov) 
EU"T7]KaTOV 
EU"TaTOV 
EtU"T7]KETOV 
(3rd 
' 
, 
EU"TClT7]V) 
Eu"T7]KaT7]V 
EU"TaTOV 
Etu"T7]KET7]V 
plur. 
1st 
' 
, 
" 
, 
, 
" 
Eu"T7]KajlEV 
Eu"TajlEV 
Etu"T7]KEjlEV 
Eu"TajlEV 
2nd 
Eu"T~KaTE 
" 
, 
, 
" 
EU"TaTE 
Etu"T7]KETE 
EU"TaTE 
3rd 
Eu"T~Kam(v) 
EU"TGm(v) 
Eiu"T~KEU"av 
" 
EU"TaU"av 
The infinitive is usually E(JTavaL (late classical E(JT1]KfvaL), the participle usu-
ally EU"TW'>, E(JTw(Ja, EU"TO'> (masc./neut. stem E(JTWT-),3 less commonly E(JT1]-
I. There are a couple of other examples in non-Attic and postclassicaI Greek. 
2. There is no augment in the 2nd pluperfect ofZ(J'TTJIlL; this is a very archaic feature. 
3. For declension of f(J'TWS (and H8vfWS), see Appendix 3: Paradigms. 

322 
UNIT FORTY -ONE 
------- -------
KW'.;, -VLa, -0'.;. In the sUbjunctive ErrT17Kw is more common than ErrTw, -fl'.;, etc. 
Optative may be ErrT17Ko~/U or ErrTYJKw'.; EL'YJV (in poetry also ErrTaiYJv). Also 
poetic are 2nd perfect imperative ErrTa8~, ErrT(hw, etc. 
b. 8vvrrKw has first perfect stem TE8vYJK- and second perfect stem TE8va-. 
In addition to the regular first perfect forms, the following second perfect 
forms are found in Attic: 
indicative: (dual TE8vaTov, TE8vaTov,) pI. TE8vafJ.EV, TE8vaTE, TE8vu-
rr~(v); pluperfect 3rd pI. ETE8varrav 
infinitive: TE8vava~ 
participle: TE8vEW'.;, TE8vEwrra, TE8vEO'.; (masc./neut. stem TE8vEWT-) 
optative: TE8vaiYJv, etc. 
imperative: (poetic TE8va8~), TE8vaTw 
c. oEoo~Ka (a perfect with present meaning, I fear) has second perfect 
forms from stem OEO~-. 
indicative: first perfect common in singular, rare in plural; second perfect 
rare in singular (OEOW, OEOW'.;, 
OEO~E), common in dual and plural 
(OEO~TOV, OEO~TOV, OEO~fJ.EV, OEO~TE, oEoiarrdv]) 
pluperfect: sing. EOEOOLKYJ, -YJ'.;, -EL common, pI. EOEOoiKErrav less com-
mon; sing. (late classical) EOEOiEW, -EL'.;, -EL; plural EOEO~fJ.EV, EOEO~TE, 
EOEoiErrav or EOEo~rrav 
infinitive: oEo~Eva~ more common than OEoo~KEva~ 
participle: OEO~W'.;, OEOwLa, OEO~O'.; more common than OEOO~KW'.;, -vLa, -0'.; 
subjunctive: normally oEooiKW (oEoiw rare) 
optative: not found 
imperative: (rare) oEo~8~ 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the conjugations presented above. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
nouns 
o.vopa:rrooov, o.vopa7T()oov, n. 
war captive sold into slavery; slave 
OEM, oEov" n. 
fear 
message, order sent by messenger; letter 
[epistle I 

Pluperfect and Future Perfect; Irregular Perfects 
323 
()r,pa, ()r,pa'>, f. 
KVKAO'>, KVKAOV, m. 
KVKACfJ 
KVWV, KVVO'>, m. or f. 1 
IlfjKO'>, Ilr,KOV'>, n. 
vfja-o,>, vr,a-ov, f. 
ovpavo,>, ovpavov, m. 
ova-La, ova-La,>, f. 
o~()aAllo,>, o~()aAllov,m. 
7TVP, 7TVPO'>, n.2 
a-7TOVOr" a-7TOVOfj,>, f. 
crxOAr" crxOAfj,>, f. 
crxOAfi 
a-wlla, a-wllaTo'>, n. 
Tvpavvo,>, Tvpavvov, m. 
adjectives 
apLa-TEpo'>, apLa-TEpa, 
apLa-TEpoV 
apLa-TEpa, -a,>, f. 
Of:tLO'>, Of:tLa, Of:tLOV 
Of:tLa, -a,>, f. 
EvavTLo,>, EvavTLa, EvavTLov 
oi EvavTLoL 
E7TL Tr,OHO'>, E7TL T1]Of: La, 
E7TLTr,OHOV 
TO. E7TL Tr,OHa 
fcrxaTO'>, EcrxaT1], fa-XaTOv 
ETOLIlO'>, ETOLIl1], ETOLIlOV 
()avllaa-w,>, ()avllaa-La, 
()avllG.a-wv 
()avllaa-To,>, ()avllaa-Tr" 
()avlla(J"TOV 
, 
I 
, 
1 
VyL 1]'>, vyLf:'> 
V",1]AO'>, V",1]Ar" V",1]AOV 
~o!3f:PO'>, ~o!3f:PG., ~of3f:pOV 
I. Vocative KVOV, dat. pI. KVIT[(V). 
hunting, the chase 
ring, circle; wheel 
[cycle) 
(adv.) in a circle, all around 
dog; shameless creature 
[cynic, cynosure) 
length; size, greatness 
island 
[Peloponnese) 
heaven, the heavens, sky 
[Uranus] 
property; (philosophy) being, essence, reality 
eye 
[ophthalmologist) 
fire 
[pyromaniac, pyrite, empyrean] 
haste, speed; trouble, effort; regard, esteem, good 
will 
leisure, rest; talk which occupies one's leisure, 
learned discussion 
[school, scholastic] 
(adv.) in a leisurely way; scarcely, not at all 
body; person 
[psychosomatic, chromosome I 
absolute ruler, tyrant 
[tyrannosaurus] 
on the left, left; ominous 
left hand 
on the right; fortunate; dexterous, skillful, clever 
right hand 
opposite, opposing 
the adversary, the enemy 
made for a purpose, suitable; useful, necessary 
provisions 
farthest, extreme, utmost, last 
[eschatology] 
ready, prepared 
wonderful, marvelous, admirable 
wonderful, marvelous, admirable 
healthy, sound; (of statements or persons) wise, good 
high, lofty 
[hypsography, hypsicephalic) 
causing fear, fearful; regarded with fear or dread 
2. This word is not found in the plural. 

324 
UNIT FORTY -ONE 
verbs 
aAAaTTW, aAAa~W, ij'\'\a~a, 
ijAAaxa, ij'\'\aY}J-aL, 
~'\'\aXe1JV and ~AAaY1JV 1 
change, alter; exchange (+ gen. of thing received in 
return); (mid.) take in exchange (+ gen. of thing 
given in return) 
[allagitel 
OEOOLKa or OEOLa (perfects 
with present meaning). 
(poetic fut. OELU"o}J-aL). 
(oELU"a 
fear 
(OLKa (perf. with present 
meaning). fut. (perf.) Er~w2 
u"TEAAW. (poetic u"TEAEW). 
(U"TELAa, -Eu"TQAKa, 
(U"TQA}J-aL, EU"TaA1JV 
E7TLU"TEAAW (hTd 
be like, look like (+ dat.); seem likely, seem probable 
(+ inf.) 
make ready. fit out; send. dispatch 
send a message; order. command (+ dat. or acc. + 
inf.) 
EXERCISES 
I. Identify each fonn completely. 
1. r,8poiKHTaV 
8. EOEOELtO 
2. . 
, 
9. OEooLKEvaL 
W}J.W}J.OKEL 
3. aAAatrw8E 
10. E7wTTaAKvLav 
4. 
, 
11. acpELvaL 
7rE7ravU"o}J.aL 
5. 
" 
12. ' 
, 
ELpyau"To 
a7rLWaL 
6. 
, 
13. TE8va}J.Ev 
YEYpajJ.}J.Eva 
7. 1]A Y,AEyKTO 
14. aq)E(TTaVaL 
II. Write the following Greek fonns. 
1. masc. s. gen. pres. act. part. of cpaivw 
2. 2nd s. aor. mid. subj. of iJ7rLU"xvEo}J.aL 
3. perf. mJp info of opaw 
4. fern. dat. pI. perf. mJp part. of TE}J.VW 
5. 1 st pI. pres. act. opt. of TEAEW 
6. 3rd S. pluperf. act. indo of O"VVTif317}J.L 
7. 
f " 
neut. S. nom. aor. pass. part. 0 pL7rTW 
8. 2nd pI. fut. act. opt. of OLQo"KEOQ.VVV}J.L 
I. Non-Attic ciMQ.uuw. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
YVwf3L 
Ef3Ef3ryK17 
EA17Avf3EvaL 
" 
EOLKa~ 
KEKAryO"ETaL , 
YEYv}J.vaU"}J.waL 
EO"ovTaL 
2. In poetry an athematic I st pI. fonn EOtY/lW is found, and in poetry and prose the 3rd pI. is 
sometimes ELtaUt, sometimes EoLKaut. The infinitive is EOtKfVat or rarely ELKfVat; the participle 
EOtKW> or EiKW>, -via, -0>. For the pluperfect one finds both fonns from EcPK1) and the 3rd S. 
1/KHV. 

Pluperfect and Future Perfect; Irregular Perfects 
325 
9. aor. pass. info of TrpooiowJ1.~ 
10. masc. pI. acc. fut. act. part. of TrOAEJ1.EW 
11. 1st S. aor. act. opt. ofEJ1.TriJ1.TrA1]J1.~ 
12. fern. S. dat. pres. mJp part. of OpxEOJ1.a~ 
13. 2nd S. pluperf. act. indo of aJ1.apTCww 
14. 1 st pI. fut. perf. mJp indo of J1.~J1.Vry(J"KW 
15. 3rd pI. pluperf. act. indo of oEoo~Ka 
16. 2nd pI. pluperf. mJp indo of paAAw 
17. 1st S. pluperf. m/p indo of apTra(w 
18. 3rd S. pres. act. imperat. of E7I"L(J"TEAAW 
19. 3rd pI. neuter pluperf. m/p indo of a yyEAAw 
20. aor. mid. inf. of KOTrTW 
III. Render into Greek. l 
(l) In response to [= with regard to] these things Xenophon stood up and 
spoke on behalf of the soldiers: (2) "We have come, gentlemen of the 
embassy, having with difficulty saved our bodies and our arms. (3) For it was 
not possible to carry our possessions and to fight the enemy at the same time. 
(4) And wherever we go and do not have a marketplace, we take what is 
necessary, not in arrogance [use dat. of manner] but by necessity." 
IV. Reading: Plato, Protagoras 32 1 c-322b (abridged; continued from U40). 
a Tr-02_ig. ovv CLX.O}J.Q'9~ 0 npOJ1.1]eEV~ ryvTLva (J"wT1]piav T0 avepw7I"<-,? 
EVPO~, KAETrTH 'Hpai(J"Tov Kat. 'Aevva~ Tr]V EVTEXVOV (J"o</>iav (J"vv Trvpi-
aMuxavov yap -ryv avEV TrVPO~ alJTr]V KTVTUV T'{J ~ XP'I](J"iMVV YEVE(J"ea~-Kat. 
OVTW o~ ~WPELTa.l aVepWTr'{J. T~V J1.EV ovv TrEPt. TOV f3iov (J"o</>iav aVepWTrO~ 
TaVT'[1 E(J"XEV, T~V OE TrOA~TLK!7V OUK ElXEV' -ryv yap Trap a T0 t:.Li . ... ETrHO~ 
OE 0 aVepWTrO~ eE ia~ J1.ETE(J"XE 
J1.oipa~, TrpWTOV J1.EV o~a T~V TOV eEOV 
1L'lln.fIJELaV Gi(~JV J1.0VOV eEOV~ EVOJ1.~(J"EV, Kat. ETrEXEipH !3wMov~ TE iOpVE(J"ea~ 
Kat. ayaAMam eEWV' ETrHTa </>WV~V Kat. OVOJ1.am Taxv O~npepW(J"aTO Tfl 
TEXVTI, Kat. OiKU(J"H~ Kat. E(J"eilTa~ Kat. iJ7l"OOE(J"H~ Kat. (J"TPWMVa~ Kat. Ta~ EK yfu 
~£ 
1]VPETO. OVTW O~ TrapE(J"KEva(J"J1.EVO~ KaT' apXa~ aVepWTrO~ 0KOVV 
(J"TrOpaOnV, TrOAH~ OE OUK -ry(J"av' aTrWAAVVTO OVV 1mo TWV e1]piwv O~a TO 
TraVTaxfl aUTWV a(J"eEVE(J"TEpO~ Elva~, Kat. iJ OrzMWVpy~Kr, TEXV1] aUTOL~ TrpO~ 
J1.EV TPO</>~V tKaV~ QQ1JeO~ ryv. TrPO~ OE TOV TWV e1]piwv TrOAEJ1.0V h;OEU~­
TrOA~TLK~V yap TEXvrW OVTrW Elxov. ~~ J1.EpO~ TrOAE}J.LKU -
E(ryTOVV 
O~ 
aepOi(E(J"ea~ Kat. (J"0(E(J"ea~ KTi(OVTE~ TrOAE~~' OT' OVV aepOWeELEV. -ryOiKOVV 
aAAryAov~ ~TE OUK EXOVTE~ T~V TrOA~TLK~V TEXV1]V. W(J"TE TraAW (J"KEOav-
VVJ1.EVO~ O~E</>eEipoVTO. 
I. Note to instructor: loosely based on Allah. 5.5.13 and 16. 

326 
Underlined Words 
ayailp.a, -flaTo~, n. = statue, image 
'A8r/Vu, -a~, f. = Athena, goddess of 
wisdom and crafts (declension: U42) 
aflr]XaVO~, -av = impossible 
a7ropia, -a~, f. = pu-;.-;.lement, 
uncertainty what to do 
aTE = particle marking the participle 
EXOVTfS as causal 
(3oy/8o~, -ov = (adj. as substantive) 
assistant, helper 
(3wflo~, -av, m. = altar 
yr" 
yi7~, f. = earth (declension: U42) 
oy/flWVPYLKO~, -r], -Ov = pertaining to 
the crafts 
owp8pow (ow) = divide up by joints, 
articulate 
6.Li = dat. of Zd)~, 6.LO~, m., Zeus, the 
chief god 
owpEoflaL = make a gift, give a gift 
EVOEr]~, -E~ = lacking, deficient 
EVTEXVO~, -av = artistic, relating to 
craftsmanship 
E(JBr]~, f.(JBi7TO~, f. = clothing 
(<tJOv, -av, n. = animal 
UNIT FORTY -ONE 
"H<paw"To~, -av, m. = Hephaestus, god 
of fire and metallurgy 
8ELO~, -a, -ov = divine, godly 
tOpvw = establish; (mid.)found, dedicate 
KTy/TO~, -r], -Ov = capable of being 
acquired or possessed 
KTi(w = found, establish 
O;:KYJ(J"L~, -EW~, f. = dwelling 
ovv = (postpositive particle) therefore, 
then 
OV7rW = not yet 
7rOAEflLKO~, -r], -ov = related to war 
7rOALHKO~, -r], -ov = political 
(J"7ropaoy/v = (adv.) scattered here and 
there 
(J"TpwflVr], -i7~, f. = bedding 
(J"VYYEVEW, -a~, f. = kinship 
(J"XOflEVO~: recall that EXW is the only 
verb in Attic prose whose aorist 
"middle" form can be used as a 
passive (UI9.6) 
TP0<Pr], -i7~, f. = nourishment 
iJ7rOOE(J"L~, -EW~, f. = footwear 
XPr](J"LflO~, -71, -ov = useful 

UNIT FORTY-TWO 
Contract-Vowel Declension; Attic 
Declension; Verbal Adjectives in -T6~ 
and -TEO~ 
1. O-Declension Nouns with Contraction. A few o-declension nouns 
have stems ending in -00- or -W-, and these suffer contraction in Attic. The 
relevant contractions are as follows: 
0+0 -> OV (sp.) 
0+ OV (sp.) -> OV (sp.) 
o+w ->w 
o+'r ->'r 
0+ E -> OV (sp.) 
0+ OL 
->OL 
E+O -> OV (sp.) 
E + OV -> OV (sp.) 
E+W ->w 
E+'r ->'r 
E + OL 
->OL 
E+a ->ii 
The accentuation is in general in accordance with the rule given in U 13.2. But 
compounds retain the accentuation of the nominative throughout (e.g., 7TEpi-
7TAOV despite uncontracted 7TEPL7TAOOV), and the nom. acc. voc. dual of uncom-
pounded words has acute (e.g., vw instead of vw from vow). 
Ex. 
, 
voos 
uncontracted: 
7rEpi 7r I\oOS 
KavEOv 
"mind" 
"voyage around" 
"basket" 
sing. 
nom. 
vovs 
7rEpi 7r AOvS 
Kavovv 
!?en. 
vov 
7rEpi 7r Aov 
Kavov 
dat. 
vijJ 
7rEpi 7r Acp 
KavijJ 
acc. 
vovv 
7rEpi 7r Aovv 
Kavovv 
voc. 
vov 
7rEpi 7r AOv 
Kavovv 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
vw 
7rEpi7rAw 
Kavw) 
(g. d. 
VOLV 
7rEpi 7r AOw 
KavoLv) 
plur. 
n. v. 
VOL 
7rEpi 7r Aot 
Kava. 
gen. 
vwv 
7rEpi 7r Awv 
Kavwv 
dat. 
VOLS 
7rEpi 7r AotS 
KavoLS 
acc. 
vovs 
7rEpi 7r AOvs 
Kava. 
327 

328 
UNIT FORTY -TWO 
2. A-Declension Nouns with Contraction. A few a-declension nouns 
have stems ending in -Ea- or -aa-, and these suffer contraction in Attic. In all 
of the contractions in these nouns, the E or a is simply absorbed in the 
following vowel, and the endings turn out to be exactly the same as for 
uncontracted a-declension nouns, except that all forms have circumflex accent 
on the ending. Some contract nouns are also exceptions to the general rule 
about the treatment of original long alpha in Attic (e.g., (}VKE1] has 1] after E, 
p..vaa has a after a). 
Ex. 
, 
, 
'EpP.ET/' 
(}VKET/ 
p.vaa 
uncontracted: 
"earth" 
"fig tree" 
"mina" 
"Hermes" 
sing. 
nom. 
yf] 
(}VKf] 
p.vu 
'Epp.f], 
gen. 
yf], 
(J"VKf], 
p.vu, 
'Epp.ov 
dat. 
yfJ 
(J"VKfJ 
p.vq. 
'Epp.fJ 
acc. 
yf]v 
(J"VKf]V 
p.vuv 
'Epp.f]v 
voc. 
yf] 
(J"VKf] 
p.vu 
'Epp.f] 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
(J"VKU 
p.vu 
'Epp.u) 
(g. d. 
(J"vKa'iv 
p.va'iv 
'Epp.a'iv) 
plUTo 
n. v. 
(J"vKa'i 
p.va'i 
'Epp.a'i 
gen. 
(J"VKWV 
p.vwv 
'Epp.wv 
dat. 
(J"vKa'i, 
p.va'i, 
'Epp.a'i, 
acc. 
(J"VKU, 
p.vu, 
'Epp.u, 
3. Contract Adjectives. Most vowel-declension adjectives with mascu-
line stem in -EO- or -00- have contracted inflection. The masculine and neuter 
are like contract o-declension nouns, and the fern. is like contract a-declension 
nouns (stems in -00- form the feminine from a stem in -Ea- rather than from 
the expected -oa-). Regardless of the accentuation of the uncontracted form of 
the adjective, the contracted forms of a simple adjective have circumflex on U 
in all cases and numbers (except acute on nom. acc. voc. dual masc. and 
neuter); contracted forms of compound adjectives retain the accentuation of 
the nom. sing. throughout (e.g., EVVOV" EVVOV, etc.). 
As an example, the declension of x.pV(}OV" golden (uncontracted x.pV(}E-
0" x.pV(}Ea, x.pV(}EOV) is shown at the top of the next page. The same pattern 
applies to apyvpEO" "of silver," contracted apyvpov" apyvpu, apyvpovv, 
except that the fern. singular has alpha instead of eta (apyvpu, apyvpu" 
apyvpq, apyvpuv). Note also that in compound adjectives, the neuter plural 
nom. acc. ends in -oa without contraction (e.g., Evvoa, a:rrA-Oa). 

Contract and Attic Declensions; Verbal Adjectives in -TOS' and -TEOS' 
329 
CONTRACT-DECLENSION ADJECTIVE 
masc. 
fern. 
neuter 
sing. 
n. v. 
xpv(J"ov> 
xpv(J"TJ 
xpv(J"ovv 
gen. 
xpv(J"ov 
xpv(J"TJ> 
xpv(J"ov 
dat. 
xpv(J"ip 
xpv(J"Tl 
xpv(J"ip 
acc. 
xpv(J"ovv 
xpv(J"TJV 
xpv(J"ovv 
(dual 
, 
xpv(J"u 
xpv(J"w) 
n. a. v. 
XPV(J"W 
(g. d. 
xpv(J"OI.V 
xpv(J"al.v 
xpv(J"Ol.v) 
plur. 
n. v. 
xpv(J"OI. 
xpv(J"al. 
xpv(J"u 
gen. 
xpv(J"wv 
xpv(J"wv 
xpv(J"wv 
dat. 
xpv(J"OI.> 
xpv(J"al.> 
xpv(J"OI.> 
acc. 
xpv(J"ov> 
xpv(J"u> 
xpv(J"u 
4. Attic Declension. A few nouns in Attic have nom. sing. in -Ewe;; and 
have the vowel omega in all endings, replacing the 0 or ov found in regular 0-
declension nouns. The -Ewe;; ending is the product of quantitative metathesis (as 
seen in Attic also in 7ToAEwe;; for 7TOAYfOe;; and vEwe;; for vYfoe;; [from vave;;]). 
Declension of this kind was termed "Attic" because in Koine such nouns took 
a non-Attic/Ionic form, ending in -aoe;;. The term was also applied to other 
nouns showing omega in the case endings, even though these nouns are of 
different origin. In both kinds of w-nouns the accent of the nominative singular 
is retained in all other cases (including acute on gen. and dat. for a noun 
accented on U). A paradigm showing the most common nouns of the Attic 
declension is shown on the upper half of the next page . 
5. Other Nouns in -we;;. There are a few other nouns which have nomi-
native in -we;;. (l) aLowe;; is a consonant-declension sigma-stem with strong-
grade vowel in nom. and normal-grade vowel in the other cases, which also 
lose intervocalic sigma. No other common noun in Attic has this pattern, but it 
is found in some feminine proper names, such as ~a7TCpw. AYfTW, which have 
nom. in -w but are otherwise declined like aLowe;;. (2) 1Jpwe;; is also a consonant-
declension noun,l but the consonant which has disappeared is vau instead of 
sigma and the long vowel omega is found throughout the declension. Among 
the few other nouns declined in this way are 7T{lTpWe;; = paternal uncle and 
J1~Tpwe;; = maternal uncle. 
The paradigm for aLowe;; and 1Jpwe;; is shown on the lower half of the next 
page. 
I. The alternative gen. fonn ~pw is by assimilation to the Attic-declension pattern. 

330 
UNIT FORTY -TWO 
A TIIC DECLENSION NOUNS 
"temple" 
"people" 
"dawn") 
"hare" 
(Doric vaoS', 
(Doric AaoS', 
(Ionic r,wS'. 
(epic AaywoS'. 
Ionic VlIoS') 
Ionic AlIOS') 
gen. r,ovS') 
gen. Aaywov) 
sing. 
, 
AEwS' 
" 
AaywS' 
nom. 
VEWS' 
EWS' 
gen. 
VEW 
AEw 
EW 
Aayw 
dat. 
AE0 
" 
Aay0 
VE<tJ 
E<tJ 
AEwv 
" 
Aaywv 
aec. 
VEWV 
EW 
or Aayw 
(dual n. a. v. 
VEW 
Aayw) 
(g. d. 
, 
Aay0v) 
VE<tJV 
plur. 
, 
AE0 
Aay0 
n. v. 
VE<tJ , 
AEwV 
Aaywv 
gen. 
VEWV 
dat. 
, 
AE0S' 
Aay0S' 
VE<tJS' 
, 
AEwS' 
AaywS' 
aec. 
VEWS' 
NOUNS IN -{OS' 
"shame" 
"hero" 
sing. 
aLOwS' 
" 
n. v. 
lIpwS' 
aLOovS' 
" 
or~pw 
gen. 
lIpwOS' 
dat. 
aLooL 
~PWL 
or ~P<tJ 
aLow 
" 
" 
acc. 
lIpwa 
orllpw 
(dual 
n. a. v. 
~pwf.) 
(g. d. 
~pWOLV) 
plur. 
" 
or~pwS' 
n. v. 
lIpwES' 
gen. 
~pwwv 
dat. 
~pw(n(v) 
~pwaS' 
" 
ace. 
or lIpwS' 
6. Adjectives of the Attic Declension. A few adjectives in Attic have 
masc. and neuter forms in -EM" -EWV following the pattern of the Attic-declen-
sion nouns. Again, quantitative metathesis or contraction lies behind the Attic 
I. The noun "dawn" is in origin a consonant-declension (T-stem, with sigma lost between 
vowels in cases other than the nom. (e.g., *~6(T0~ -> ~oi)~): but in Attic it is partly assimilated 
to the omega-stem pattern. The accusative has the original consonant-declension ending (cf. 
Ionic ~w from *~6a) and has not been assimilated to the w-declension ending -wv, based on 0-
declension -av. The Attic version of the noun "hare" may be viewed as a contraction of the epic 
version, but the alternative accusative sing. form shows assimilation to the pattern of EW~. 

Contract and Attic Declensions; Verbal Adjectives in -ro> and -rEor 
331 
forms. Two important examples are ZAEW" (epic ZAa.O"), propitious, and 7TAEw" 
(epic 7TAEi.o,,),jull. Note retention of the original acute on A despite the long U 
in the Attic form (as in 7TOAEW"). 
"propitious" 
"full" 
masc./fem. 
neuter 
masc. 
fem. 
neuter 
s. 
nom. 
ZAEWS' 
ZAEWV 
7TAEWS' 
7TAEii 
7TAEWV 
gen. 
ZAEW 
/.'AEW 
7TAEW 
7TAEiiS' 
7TAEW 
dat. 
ZAE<r 
ZAE<r 
7T AE<r 
7TAEq. 
7TAE<r 
acc. 
ZAEWV 
ZAEWV 
7TAEWV 
7TAEiiv 
7TAEWV 
(d. 
n. a. v. 
ZAEW 
ZAEW 
7TAEW 
7T AEii 
7TAEW) 
(g. d. 
ZAE<rV 
ZII.E<rV 
7TII.E<rV 
7TII.EaW 
7TAE<rV) 
pl. 
n. v. 
ZAE<r 
ZAW 
7TAE<r 
7T AEat 
7TAEii 
gen. 
ZAEWV 
ZII.EWV 
7TAEWV 
7TII.EWV 
7TAEWV 
dat. 
ZAE<rS' 
ZAE<rS' 
7T II.E<rS' 
7TAEatS' 
7T AE<rS' 
ace. 
ZAEWS' 
ZAW 
7TAEWS' 
7T AEiiS' 
7TAEa 
7. Verbal Adjectives in -T()" and -TEO". In addition to the very frequently 
used participle, many Greek verbs also possess one or two less commonly 
used verbal adjectives formed by the addition of the suffixes -TO", -71}, -TOV 
and -TEO", -TEa., -TEov to a form of the verb stem (often the form apparent in 
the aorist passive). To ascertain whether one or both of these verbal adjectives 
exist for a given verb, one must consult a good Greek dictionary. 
The verbal adjectives in -TO" denote possibility or are equivalent to a 
perfect passive participle. I 
Ex. 
, 
KPV7TTW 
-> 
, , 
opaw 
-> 
</HAEw 
-> 
KPV7TTO", hidden 
Opa. TO", visible 
</>LA1]TO", loved, capable of being loved 
Verbal adjectives in -TEO", on the other hand, denote necessity. 
Ex. 
AEyw 
- > 
AEKTEO", to be said, that must be said 
7TpaTTw 
-> 
7Tpa.KTEO", to be done, that must be done 
The verbal adjective in -TEO" is only rarely used as an attributive or predicate 
adjective agreeing with a noun (and then only when the corresponding verb is 
transitive and governs the acc.). Its most common use is in the neuter singular 
nominative (occasionally in early Attic neut. pI. nom.) in combination with 
E(JTi (or with E(TTi understood) to express obligation or necessity. In this con-
1. Note that the suffix is etymologically the same as the standard suffix -(us used in the 
formation of Latin past passive participles. 

332 
UNIT FORTY -TWO 
struction the verbal adjective may govern an object in the acc., gen., or dat. 
(whichever is appropriate to the corresponding verb). In either usage, the 
agent, if expressed, must be put in the dative of agent without a preposition 
(cf. U37.7). 
personal constuction: 
6 7fOTaiJ.O~ r,iJ.LV EaTL (JLaf3aTEo~. 
The river is to be crossed by us. 
= We must cross the river. 
TO. 7fpaKTEa, the things which must be done 
impersonal construction: 
Tcf1 aOLKOVVTL OOTEOV OLKTlV. 
The wrongdoer must pay the penalty. 
[OLKTlV is acc. obj. of the verbal adj.] 
r,iJ.LV (rviJ.iJ.aXOL ayaeOL. ov~ ov 7fapaOOTEa TO'i~ 'AeYJvaLoL~. 
We have good allies. whom we must not surrender to the 
Athenians. 
TWV 7faLOLWV E7fLiJ.EATlTEOV. 
One must take care of the children. 
[7faLOLWV gen. obj. of the verbal adj.] 
WHAT TO STUDY AND DO 
1. Study the declensional patterns presented above and the use of verbal 
adjectives. 
2. Learn the vocabulary of this unit. 
3. Do the exercises of this unit. 
VOCABULARY 
nouns 
aiow,>. aioov'>, f. 
apyvpo,>. apyupov, m. 
yf/. yi)'>, f. 
'EpJ.Lr,,>. 'EpJ.Lov. m. 
EW~, €W, f. 
ZElJ'>, gen. ~LO'> (dat. ~Li. 
acc. ~ia. voc. ZfV). m. 
awe; sense of shame; respect for others 
silver 
[argyrocephalous] 
earth. land, country 
[geology] 
the god Hermes (Roman Mercury); herm (pillar sur-
mounted by a bust, usually with male genitals on 
the pillar, set up by the door to ward off evil) 
dawn; the east 
[Eohippus] 
Zeus (chief god of the Hellenic pantheon; Roman 
Jupiter) 

Contract and Attic Declensions; Verbal Adjectives in -n)f and -TfOf 
333 
fI 
ff 
TJPW'. TJPWO" m. 
KavoVv. Kavov, n.1 
Aayw,. Aayw, m. 
j1vu. j1VU" f. 
, 
, 
3 
VC:W,. vc:w, m. 
vov,. vov, m.4 
vovv EXC:W 
7rP0(TEXC:W Tav vovv 
7rAov,. 7rAOV, m. 
7rc:pL7rAov,. 
7rC:PL7rAOV, m. 
(TL'OTJPO'. (TL'Or/POV, m. 
(TVKOV. (TVKOV, n. 
(TVKi]. (TVKi]" f.5 
XaAK()" xaAKov, m. 
adjectives 
o.7rAov,. o.7rAOVV [o.7rAoo,1 
U7rAov,. U7rAi]. U7rAOVV 
IU7rAoo,1 
'OL7rAov,. 'OL7rAi]. 
'OL7r AOVV ['OL7r 11.00, I 
apyvpov,. apyvpu. 
apyvpovv lapyvpw,l 
c:vvov,. c:vvovv Ic:vvoo>l 
OV(Tvov,. OV(TVOVV 
lov(Tvoo,1 
LAc:w,. LAc:wv6 
7rAEw,. 7rAEa. 7rAEWV 
xaAKov,. xaAKi]. xaAKovv 
[XaAKw>l 
I. Non-Attic Kavwv. 
2. See U29 Vocabulary. 
3. Non-Attic vao~. 
4. Non-Attic voo~. 
5. Non-Attic (J"VKf.a.. (J"VKf.TJ. 
6. Non-Attic Z'\a.o~. 
hero, i.e., an epic warrior from the Age of Heroes 
and/or a cult figure with powers for good and evil 
worshipped at a hero shrine or tomb 
basket 
hare 
[lagophthalmus,lagopodous] 
mina (a unit of weight and currency, = 100 drachmai 
= 1/60 talent)2 
temple; inner shrine of a temple 
[pronaos] 
mind; sense; intellect 
[noumenal] 
be sensible, be reasonable 
pay attention to (+ dat.) 
voyage 
circumnavigation 
[peri plus ] 
iron 
fig 
[sycophant] 
fig tree 
copper, bronze; weapon made of bronze 
[ chalcograph] 
gold 
[chryselephantine] 
not navigable; (ships) not seaworthy 
single; simple, straightforward 
[haplography] 
double, twofold 
[diploma] 
of silver 
well-disposed, friendly 
ill-disposed, disaffected 
(esp. of gods) propitious, gracious; kindly 
[hilarity] 
full, filled (+ gen.) 
of copper, of bronze 

334 
xpv~OV', xpv~~, xpV~OVV 
IXPV~EO,I 
verbs 
UNIT FORTY-TWO 
of gold 
, 
I 
" 
, 
VOEW, VOYWW, 
EV01/~a, VEVO-
1/Ka, VEV01/~al, EVO~e1/V 
OtaVOEo~al 
perceive; apprehend; think, deem (+ inf. of indo 
disc.); intend (+ inf.) 
[noetic 1 
intend, be minded to (+ inf.); think, suppose (+ inf. 
of indo disc.); be disposed 
adverb/particle 
" 
ovv 
EXERCISES 
(postpositive) therefore, then 
I. Identify each form completely. 
1. EOECJlJ.l.EV 
8. opaJ.l.0VVTaL 
2. 
a</>E~Ta~av 
9. 
, 
(J"L yrwa Tf. 
3. TETP°</>OTf.S 
10. W</>EAELV 
4. 
Tf.V~HJ-eaL 
11. O</>EAELV 
5. </>avEL YlV 
12. TETEAEVTYlJ.l.EVa ryv 
6. 
~(Evx~aL 
13. EAEY~OV 
7. EpWT'{JYl 
14. </>vAaKTEOS 
II. Write the following forms in Greek. 
I. 3rd pI. pres. m/p subj. of 0pyL(0J.l.aL 
2. pres. act. info of OJ.l.VVJ.l.L 
3. neut. pI. gen. perf. act. part. of J.l.UTEW 
4. 2nd S. aor. pass. subj. of KAE1rTw 
5. 1st pI. perf. m/p indo of KaTaAEL7Tw 
6. masc. S. acc. aor. act. part. of (EVyvVJ.l.L 
7. 3rd S. pres. act. subj. of E7noELKvvJ.l.L 
8. fut. pass. info of OL<.oKW 
9. fern. pI. acc. fut. pass. part. of OLOa<TKW 
10. 2nd pI. aor. pass. opt. of OLaj3aAAw 
II. I st sing. fut. mid. indo of a</>L<TTYlJ.l.L 
12. 3rd pI. (masc.) pJuperf. m/p indo of ayvoEw 
15. <TVyyvw8L 
16. ' 
, 
0J.l.wJ.l.0KEVaL 
17. ' 
, 
E7TE7TaVKYl 
18. 7TOPEV8E L<TL 
19. VEVLKyw8aL 
20. Eiof}Tf. 
21. OLaVOfi 

Contract and Attic Declensions; Verbal Adjectives in -nl) and -7(0) 
335 
III. Render into Greek. I 
(1) And now, when we came to Hellenic cities, in that one, on the one 
hand, (for they provided us a marketplace) we had what was necessary and, in 
return for the ways in which they honored us, we aided them. (2) We hanned 
their enemies, as much as we were able to, whichever enemies they themselves 
led us against. (3) But these people, who you say are yours, are themselves to 
blame if we have taken anything from them. (4) For they were not friendly to 
us, neither receiving [deponent bfX0J.lad us within [Ero-wl nor sending a 
marketplace outside [Etw I. 
IV. Reading: Plato, Protagoras 322c-323a (continued from U41). 
ZEV~ ovv bEio-a~ 7rEpt T0 'If VEL ~J.lC;JV J.l17 a7rOAOLTO 7rUV, 'Ep}J.'r,v 7rfJ.l7rEL 
ayovTa E;S av8pw7rov~ aibw TE Kat biK1]V, Zv' ELEV 7rOAEWV KOo-gOL TE Kat 
bwgot cpLAia~ o-vva~. EPWT~ ovv 'EpJ.lr,~ tlia Tiva ovv TP07rOV ooi1] 
biK1]V Kat aibw aV8pW7rOL~' "7rOTEPOV W~ aL TfxvaL VEVfgrzVTaL, OVTW Kat 
TaVTa~ VEiJ.lW; VEVfJ.l1]VTaL bE ~bE' Et~ EXWV iaTpLKTzv 7rOAAOL~ LKaVO~ 
ibLwTaL~. Kat OL aAAOL brzgwvpyoi· Kat biK1]V 017 Kat dbw OVTW ew EV TOL~ 
aV8pW7rOL~. i7 E7rt 7ravTa~ vEiJ.lw;" "E7rt 7ravTa~. " Ecp1] 6 ZEV~. "Kat 7f(:LVTE~ 
J.lETEXOVTWV· ov yap o.v YfVOWTO 7rOAEL~. Ei oAiyOL aVTwv J.lETEXOLEV Wo-7rEP 
aAAwv TEXVWV' Kat VOJ.lOV 'IE 8E~ 7rap' EJ.lOV TOV J.l17 bvvaJ.lEVov aibov~ Kat 
biK1]~ J.lETfXEW KTEivEW W~ VOO-OV 7rOAEW~." OVTW 01]. ~ ~WKpaTH. Kat OLa 
TaVTa oZ TE aAAOL Kat' A81]vaLOL. OTaV J.lEV 7rEpt apETr,~ TEKTOVLKij~ n 
AOyo~ i7 
aAA1]~ nvo~ Q-rw.lQ]JjlJ/JKfu. OAiyOL~ OrOVTaL gETELvaL fLVjJ.{3ovAfu. Kat Eav n~ 
EKTO) WV TWV oAiywv o-VJ.lPOvAEVT!. OVK aVfXOVTaL, w) o-v CPV)-EiKOTW). w) 
Eyw cp1]J.lL-OTaV bE Ei) o-VJ.lPOvA17v 7rOALHKij) apETr,) rwo-w. 1}V bEL bLa 
bLKawo-vvT/) 7ruo-av ifvaL Kat o-wCPPOo-VV1]). 
EiKOTW~ G.7raVTO) avopo) 
aVfXOVTaL. w) 7raVTt 7rpOo-r,KOV TaVT1]) 'IE J.lETfXELV Tr,) apETr,) i7 J.l17 ELvaL 
7rOAEL~. 
Underlined Words 
G.VOP().;: gen. depending on G.viXOVTat = 
put up with (listening to) 
Of.apl)" OtlJ")J.ov, m. = bond 
01])J.WVPYtKO,>, -1], -Ov = relating to the 
crafts 
01])J.wvPY(J." -OV, m. = craftsman 
Ota OtKaWIJ"l)V1]'>. . . ii vat Kat 
IJ"wCPPOIJ"l)V1]'> = involve justice and 
moderation (idiomatic phrase with 
Our + gen. of abstract noun with verb 
of motion) 
I. Note to instructor: loosely based on Anah. 5.5.14 and 19. 

336 
ELKOTW'> = reasonably (adv. fonned 
from participle of EOLKa) 
EKTO'> = (adv. + gen.) outside of 
LaTpLK-,j, -77'>, f. = physician's skill 
KOO"}-tO'>, -OV, m. = arrangement, 
organization 
KTELVW = simple fonn of G.7rOKTELVW, 
kill 
}-tETELVaL = info of impersonal }-tETEo"TL, 
there is a share of{+ partitive gen. 
and dat. of possession) 
VE}-tW, aor. EVEL}-ta, perf. mJp vEVE}-tY/}-taL 
= distribute 
UNIT FORTY -TWO 
7rOA.LTLKO,>, --,j, -ov = political 
7rOTEPOV = (adv. acc.) whether 
(introduces an alternative question; 
often, as here, not to be translated 
into English; here the alternative "or 
some other way" is implied but not 
expressed) 
o"v}-t/30vA.-,j, -77'>, f. = deliberation, 
debate 
O"vvaywyo,>, -av = unifying, bringing 
together 
TEKTOVLKO'>, --,j, -av = related to 
carpentry or building 

APPENDIX ONE 
Table of Contractions 
This is a guide to the most frequent vowel contractions in Attic Greek, 
applicable to contract verbs and contract nouns and adjectives. 
For the distinction between "genuine" and "spurious" EL or av, see page 
10, note 2, and page 11, note 2. 
a+a 
} 
E+a 
} 
1/ + t 
} 
a+a 
a 
E+a 
1/ 
1/ + at 
a+a 
E+1/ 
1/ + H gen 
!l 
a + t 
} 
E +at 
} 
1/+!l 
at 
!l 
a + at 
E+!l 
1/+1/ 
} 
a + t 
} 
E + E 
} 
1/ + E 
1/ 
q. 
H sp 
1/ + EL sp 
a+q. 
E + EL sp 
a + E 
} 
E + t 
} 
1/ + Ot 
} 
'P 
a 
EL gen 
a+1/ 
E + EL gen 
O+E 
} 
a + EL sp 
E+O 
} ov sp 
0+ EL sp 
OV sp 
a + EL gen } 
} 
0+0 
q. 
E + Ot 
Ot 
a+!l 
} 
0+ OV sp 
E+V 
EV 
a+o 
} 
} 
0+ EL gen } 
a + ov sp 
W 
E+W 
W 
0+ Ot 
OL* 
a+w 
} 
o+!l 
E+'P 
'P 
a + Ot 
} 
'P 
0+1/ 
} W 
O+W 
0+'P 
} 
'P 
*NOTE: in the present and aorist subjunctive of OtOw/.I.L, 0 + !l -> 'P instead of Ot (as 
if from W +!l: cf. the aorist subjunctive of ytYVWG"KW and aAtG"Kop..at). 
337 

APPENDIX TWO 
Verb List 
Advice on Learning Principal Parts. Although some Greek verbs exhibit 
such irregularity in the formation of their principal parts that ad hoc memori-
zation is the only reliable method of mastery, there are several patterns of 
formation that do apply to a large number of verbs. Awareness of these pat-
terns may assist students in learning the principal parts of verbs presented in 
this book and in recognizing the dictionary forms of new verbs they meet in 
reading. In addition to the endings shown in the following patterns, remember 
that the 3rd and 6th principal parts (aorist) will of course have augment and the 
4th and 5th principal parts (perfect) will of course have reduplication. 
I. 
Vowel verbs. 
Pattern: -(I), -uw, -ua, -lCa, -",a" -8T/V 
Examples: 
(regular) $vw, KWAVW, AVW; 7ravw; POVAEVW, 7rt(JHVW, 7rOAtHVw 
(some parts lacking) pa(JtAEVw, OOVAEVW, 7r0PEVW, (JTpaHvw, lJ7r07rHVW, cpvw 
Cf. also aKovw (fut. mid.; -(J$rw in aor. pass.; irreg. perfect); Kaiw (parts other than 
present based on Kav-); KEAEVW (-(JJ.l.at, -(J$TfV in perf. mJp and aor. pass.); 7raiw 
(-a-8Tfv in aor. pass.) 
II. 
Verbs in -EW. 
Pattern: -EW, -~(Jw, -T/(Ja, -T/lCa, -T/",a" 
-~OT/V 
Examples: 
(regular) ayvoEw, aOtKEw, aLTEw, a7r0pEW, E7rtXEtPEW, ElJEPYETEW, KaTTfYOPEW, 
KpaTEw, J.l.t(JEW, VOEW, OLKEW, 0J.l.0AOyEW, 7rOtEw, 7rOAEJ.l.EW, cptAEw, WCPEAEW 
(some parts lacking) a7rOAoyE0J.l.at, a(J$EvEw, POTf$EW, E7rt$VJ.l.EW, EVAapE0J.l.at, 
(TfTEW, ~yEOJ.l.at, VO(JEW, 0PxE0J.l.at, 7rOAWPKEW, (JWCPPOVEW, CPOPEW 
Cf. aipEw (2nd aor. ELAOV, aor. pass. -E$TfV); also verbs in which E of stem is not 
lengthened to Tf: E7raWEW (Tf in perf. m/p; -E(J$TfV in aor. pass.), KaAEw (some 
parts from KATf-), HAEW (-wJ.l.at, -E(J$TfV in perf. m/p and aor. pass.) 
III. Verbs in -aw. 
Pattern: -aw, -~(Jw, -T/CTa, -T/lCa, -T/",a" 
-~OT/V 
or after stem ending in E, t, p: 
-aw, -o'CTW lal, -aCTa, alCa, -a",a" -aOT/V la] 
338 

Verb List 
Examples: 
(regular) a7TaTClw. oa7Tavaw. EpwTaw. vLKaw. opp.aw. TEAwTaw. np.aw 
Cf. cTLyaw (future middle) 
(with ii for 7]) ainaop.aL. Eaw. 7THpaw 
(some parts lacking) a7TavTaw. ~TTaop.aL. KTaop.aL. x.paw/x.paop.aL 
IV. Verbs in -Ow. 
Pattern: -Ow. -WCTW. -WCTa. -wlea. -wJ.LaL. -wOrw 
Examples: atu)w. 07]AOW. (7]AOW 
V. Verbs in -<i(w. 
Pattern: -cl(w. -«CTW. -aCTa. -alea, -aCTJ.LaL. -clCTOT/V [ii in all stems] 
Examples: 
(regular) anp.a(w. yvp.va(w. oLKa(w. cf>pa(w 
(with future middle -<iuop.aL) ap7Ta(w. Oavp.a(w. U7TOVoa(W 
(perf. act. lacking) 7TapauKwa(w 
VI. Verbs in -i(w. 
~ 
, 
'0 
Pattern: -L~W. -LEW. -LCTa. -Llea. -LCTJ.LaL. -LU 71v 
Examples: 
(regular) Kop.i(w. vop.i(w 
(some parts lacking) EA7Ti(w. opyi(w/opyi(op.aL 
Cf. aOpoi(w (future aOpoiuw) 
VII. Labial plosive verbs. 
Pattern: -7rTwl -'TrW I -</>w. -'/Iw. -'/10.. -</>0.. -1-LJ.LaL. -</>071V or 2nd aorist 
-7rI7v I -~71V I -</>71V 
Examples: 
(regular) j3Aa7TTw. KAf.7TTW. K07TTW. jJi7TTW; 7Tf.P.7TW. Tpf.7TW; ypacf>w. TPf.cf>w 
(some parts lacking) Kp1J7TTw. UKf.7TTOp.aL. UTPf.cf>W 
Cf. AEi7TW (2nd aorist; no aspiration in perfect) 
VIII. Velar plosive verbs. 
Pattern: -TTWI -ywi -xwi -leW. -fw. -fa, -xal -yo.. -YJ.LaL. -X071V I -Y71v 
Examples: 
(regular) aAAaTTw. 7TA~TTW. 7TpaTTw. TaTTw. cf>VAaTTW; UVAAEyw; apxw 
(some parts lacking) OLWKW. ryKw; OtaAf.yop.aL. Af.yW. cf>ElJYw; f.Af.yXW. Evxop.aL 
Cf. ayw (2nd aorist); also (with additional present-stem suffixes) acf>LKVf.op.aL. 
oEiKVVP.L. OLoaUKW. OOKEW. (ElJYVVP.L. jJ~yVVP.L 
IX. Dental plosive verbs. 
Pattern: -Owl ~w. -(TW. -(To.. -lea. -(TJ.LaL, -(TOT/V 
Examples: 
(regular) 7TEiOw 
(some parts missing) U7TElJOW 
Cf. ryoop.aL. U7TEVOW 
339 

340 
APPENDIX TWO 
X. Liquid verbs. In these verbs, present-tense suffix produces double lambda or 
compensatory lengthening of vowel (to aL or H or L ) before rho or nu; future has 
normal vowel but epsilon-contract conjugation without sigma; aorist lacks sigma 
but has compensatory lengthening (to aL or EL or L ). 
Patterns: -AAW, -AEw, -'Aa, -AICa, -Ap.a" -A(}r/V 
-Lvw, -vEw, -,va, -ICa, -'p.a,1 -erp.a,. -v()TJVI -VTJV 
-Lpw, -PEw, -'pa, -pICa, -pp.a" -p()TJV I -pTJV 
Examples (most with various irregularities): ayyEAAw. anoKTEivw. (:3aAAw (some 
parts from stem (:3AYJ-), KAivw. Kpivw. jJ.EVW. (TTEAAW. cpaivw. cp8Eipw 
This is an alphabetical list of the verbs learned in all the unit vocabularies 
with all their principal parts. The number preceding each verb indicates the 
unit in which the verb is learned; refer to that unit for full definitions. Principal 
parts that occur only in compounds in Attic prose are preceded by a hyphen. 
Principal parts that are unattested in Attic prose but are found in poetry are 
shown in parentheses. Compound verbs are cross-referenced to the simple 
verb: remember that E - augment in the aorist or E - reduplication in the perfect 
may cause elision of the final vowel of a disyllabic prepositional prefix, and 
any change in aspiration may also affect the prefix (e.g., a:TrOOLoWj.J.L, a:TrEOWICa; 
E7ruTTEAAw. f.'TrE(TTaAKa; a7rExw. acpEtw or a7roo-x~O"w). 
19 
ayyf.AAw 
aYYEAf.w 
28 
ayvof.w 
ayvo7]lTw 
8 
ayw 
atw 
13 
aOLKf.W 
aOLK1]ITW 
38 
a8pol.(w 
a8p0l.lTw 
13 
aLpEw 
aip1]ITw 
11 
aiIT8avOflaL 
aiIT81]ITOflaL 
16 
aLTEW 
atT1]ITW 
33 
aLTwoflaL 
at nalTOflaL 
[ii ) 
11 
aKOVW 
aKovlToflaL 
24 
aAl.lTKOflaL 
aAwlTOflaL 
41 
aAAaTTw 
aAAatw 
flaL 
24 
ava;3al.vw: see ;3al.vw 
24 
avayLyvwlTKW: see yLyVWITKW 
32 
aVaLpf.w: see aipf.w 
71YYELAa 
~yvoTwa 
71yayov 
~OI.K7]lTa 
ry8poLITa 
ELAov 
(stem f.A-) 
iW8ofl7]V 
iiT7]lTa 
nniilTafl7]V 
7]KOVlTa 
f.aAwvor 
ryAwv 
(stem aAw-) 
71AAata 
71YYEAKa 
~yv07]Ka 
• 
7]Xa 
~OI.K7]Ka 
ry8poLKa 
jip7]Ka 
W7]Ka 
aK7]Koa 
f.aAWKa 
or 
ryAwKa 
71AAaxa 
71YYEAflaL 
~yv07]flaL 
.;jYflaL 
~OiK7]flaL 
ry8pOLITflaL 
jiP7]flaL 
iilT87]flaL 
~T~flaL 
!lTwflaL 
~yyf.A87]v 
~yvo1]87]v 
71X87]v 
~OLK1]87]v 
i}8p01.1T87]v 
Vpf.87]v 
r,T1]87]v 
~na87]v 
, [ii ) 
~KO"vIT87]v 
~AA.ax87]v 
and 
~AAay7]v 
i}flapnje7]v 

Verb List 
29 
G.va}lL}lV~(]"KW: see }lL}lV~o"KW 
23 
G.va T i8T/}lL: see T i8T/}lL 
28 
G.VEXW: see EXW 
33 
G.~LOW 
G.~LWO"W 
ry~iwO"a 
16 
G.7Tayw: see ayw 
33 
G.7TavTaw 
G.7TavT~o"o-
G.7T~VTT/O"a 
}laL 
38 
G.7TaTaw 
G.7TaT~o"w 
T/7TaTT/O"a 
27 
a7TEL}lL: see €l}li 
23 
a7TEL}lL: see EL}lL 
16 
G.7TEXW: see EXW 
23 
G.7TOOEiKVV}lL: see OEiKVV}lL 
23 
G.7Tooiow}lL: see OiOW}lL 
24 
G.7TOOVW: see ovw 
8 
G.7To8vVO"KW 
G.7To8avEo-
G.7TE8avov 
32 
G.7TOKpivw: see Kpivw 
II 
G.7TOKTEivw 
G.7TOKTEVEW 
G.7TOAEW 
37 
G.7TOAAV}lL 
32 
39 
29 
26 
8 
40 
33 
33 
23 
13 
23 
24 
IO 
29 
9 
O}laL 
O"o}laL 
G.7T07TAEW: see 7TAEW 
G.7TOpEW 
ap7Ta(w 
apxw 
G.O"Ej3Ew 
a7TOpT/O"W 
ap7TaO"O}laL 
ap~w 
G.0"8EVEW 
G.0"8EV~o"W 
G.TL}la(w 
G.TL}laO"w 
G.cpiT/}lL: see IT/}lL 
G.CPLKVEO}laL 
G.cpi~O}laL 
G.cpio"T7)JlL: see lo"TT/}lL 
j3aivw 
-,3~O"O}laL 
j3aAAw 
,3aAEw 
,3aO"LAEvw 
,3aO"LAEvO"W 
,3Aa7TTw 
,3Aatw 
,3OVA~o"O­
}laL 
ya}lEw 
a7TEKTEwa 
G.7TwAEO"a 
and 
G. 7TWAO}l T/V 
G.7TEAOYT/-
O"a}lT/v 
ry7TOpT/O"a 
~p7TatTa 
ryp~a 
ry0"8EVT/O"a 
T/TL}laO"a 
-EPT/V 
EpaAov 
€j3aO"iAEVO"a 
Ej3Aat a 
G.7T~VTT/Ka 
G.7TEKTova 
G.7ToAwAEKa 
and 
G.7ToAwAa 
T/7TopT/Ka 
T/p7TaKa 
ryPxa 
ry0"8EVT/Ka 
ryTi}laKa 
,3Ej3T/Ka 
,3Ej3AT/Ka 
ry~iW}laL 
ry7TOpT/}laL 
T/p7TaO"}laL 
, 
T/pYJlaL 
-j3Epa}laL 
,3EPA T/}laL 
pEpo~8T/Ka 
pEpo~8T/-
}laL 
PEPOVAEV-
}laL 
,3EPOVAT/-
341 
ry7Top~8T/V 
ryp7Ta0"8T/v 
~pX8T/v 
-Epa8T/v 
€pA~8T/v 
€pAapT/V 
and 
€pAacp8T/v 
€POVAEV-
8T/v 
f.poVA~8T/v 
I. In postcIassical Attic, this verb often has "double augmentation," that is, imperfect 
ry,3ovAO}lT/V,aoristry,3ovA~8T/v. 

342 
II 
ytyvoJJ.at 
YEAaa-OJJ.at 
[ a I 
yw~a-oJJ.at 
yvwa-oJJ.at 
19 
ytyVWa-KW 
8 
ypacj>w 
ypatw 
YVJJ.vaa-w 
II 
YVJJ.va(w 
33 
oa7Tavaw 
41 
[oEOOtKa]l 
23 
13 
9 
29 
24 
32 
24 
25 
32 
OEiKVVJJ.t 
oEi~w 
OEW 
oda-w 
oEL 
Oda-H 
01}AOW 
01}AWa-W 
oLapaivw: see paivw 
OtapaAAw: see paAAw 
OLaytyvWa-KW: see ytyvWa-KW 
OLaoiowJJ.L: see oiowJJ.t 
OLaAEyoJJ.at 
OLaAE~oJJ.at 
Icf. AEywl 
28 
OLaJJ.EVW: see JJ.EVW 
42 
OLaVOE0JJ.at: see VOEW 
28 
OLaHAEW: see HAEW 
17 
OLacj>EPW: see cj>EPW 
39 
OLacj>OEipw: see cj>OEipw 
34 
OtOaa-Kw 
OtOU~w 
23 
oiowJJ.t 
owa-w 
II 
OtKa(w 
OtKaa-w 
27 
OtwKw 
otw~oJJ.at 
or rarely 
Otw~w 
13 
OOKEW 
oo~w 
9 
oOKEL 
OO~H 
30 
OOVA(1)W 
OOVA(1)a-W 
25 
ovvaJJ.at2 
ovv~a-oJJ.at 
24 
ovw [ v I 
-Ova-w [ v I 
33 
~aw 
~aa-w [ a I 
8 
~OEAW 
EOEA~a-W 
19 
E~OOV: see opaw 
HJJ.t 
Ea-OJJ.at 
EyEAaa-a 
~ywOJJ.1}V 
EyvwV 
(U24) 
€ypata 
qVJJ.vaa-a 
€OH~a 
EOE1}a-a 
EOE1}a-E 
EO~Awa-a 
Eoioa~a 
€OWKa 
EOLKaa-a 
Eoiw~a 
€Oo~a 
€OO~E 
foovAwa-a 
-Eova-a and 
€OVV 
Haa-a 
r,OEA1}a-a 
YEypacj>a 
yqvJJ.vaKa 
OEOa7TaV1}-
Ka 
oEOOtKa or 
OEOLa 
OEOHXa 
OEOf1}Ka 
otoioaxa 
OEOWKa 
otoiKaKa 
oEoiwxa 
10 
23 
19 
€LJ.LL 
(for other tenses parts of EpX0}J.aL are used) 
E~7TOV: see EPEW 
I. Perfect with present meaning; no present in Attic. 
APPENDIX TWO 
yqw1}JJ.at 
€yvwa-JJ.at 
ytypaJJ.JJ.at 
ytyvJJ.vaa--
JJ.at 
OtOa7TaV1}-
JJ.at 
OEOHYJJ.at 
OEOf1}JJ.at 
oEoioaYJJ.at 
oEooJJ.at 
OEOLKaa-JJ.at 
OEOOYJJ.at 
OEOOKTat 
OEOVV1}JJ.at 
-oEovJJ.at 
ELaJJ.at 
EyW~01}V 
EyVWa-01}V 
fypacj>1}V 
qVJJ.vaa--
01}V 
foa7Tav~-
01}V 
EOEiX01}V 
Eod01}v 
OtEAEX01}V 
and 
OtEAEY1}V 
EOLOUX01}V 
fOOO1}V 
fOLKaa-01}V 
fOLWX01}V 
EOVV~01}V 
-EOV01}V 
I v I 
tia01}v I a I 
2. In late classical or postclassical Attic, this verb often has "double augmentation," that is, 
imperfect r,ovvaJJ.1}v, aorist r,ovv~01}v. 

Verb List 
343 
33 
IEi'poJ.taL! 
Epy/lToJ.taL 
Y/p0J.ty/v 
(Ionic) 
8 
f.AaVVW 
f.AUW (U29) 
7)AalTa 
-tAr,AaKa 
EAr,AaJ.taL 
~AUGy/V 
28 
f.A~yXW 
f.A~ytw 
7)Atyta 
EAr,AtyJ.taL 
~AEYXGy/V 
(stem 
EAy/AEYX-) 
19 
EA7ri(w 
EA7rLEW 
7)A7rLlTa 
~A7riITGy/v 
34 
EJ.tpaivw: see (3aivw 
29 
f.J.t7riJ.t7rAY/-
EJ.t7rAr,ITW 
EVE7rAy/lTa 
f.J.t7rE7rAY/Ka 
f.J.t7rE7rAY/IT-
EVE7rAr,IT-
J.tL 
J.taL 
Gy/v 
27 
EtaLT~w: see aiTEw 
38 
Eta7raTClw: see cl7raTUW 
23 
EtELJ.tL: see ELJ.tL 
28 
f.tEAEyXW: see EAEYXW 
9 
EtEITTL 
EtEITTaL 
41 
EOLKa I 
Ei'tw 
16 
E7raW~W 
f.7raWEITW 
f.7rnVElTa 
f.7rnVEKa 
E7rT/VY/J.taL 
E7r[1VEITGy/V 
28 
f.7rLPOVAEVW: see POVAEVW 
23 
E7rLOEiKVVJ.tL: see oEiKVVJ.tL 
16 
f.7rLGvJ.t~w 
f.7rLGvJ.tr,ITW 
f.7rEGvJ.ty/lTa 
f.7rLTEGVJ.tY/-
I v I 
Ka I v I 
32 
f.7rLAavGuvoJ.taL: see AavGuvw 
38 
E7rLJ.t~AoJ.taL 
f.7rLJ.tEAr,-
E7rLJ.tEJ.tE -
f.7rEJ.tEAr,-
or 
lToJ.tat 
Ay/J.tat 
Gy/v 
f.7rtJ.tEAEoJ.tat 
28 
hrilTTaJ.tat 
E7rtITTy/ITO-
~7rtITTr,Gy/V 
J.taL 
41 
f.7rtITTEAAW: see ITTEAAW 
23 
E7rLTieY/J.tL: see TiGY/J.tt 
8 
f.7rLTpE7rW: see TPE7rW 
39 
f.7rLXHpEW 
E7rLXEtpr,ITW 
E7rEXEipy/lTa 
f.7rtKEXEi-
E7rLKEXEi-
f.7rEXHPr,-
Py/Ka 
pY/J.tat 
Gy/v 
33 
f.pUW 
(f. paITG~lTo-
~pUITGy/v 
J.tat) 
40 
f.pyu(oJ.taL 
EpyalToJ.tat 
~pyalTuJ.tY/v . 
Ei'pyalTJ.taL 
~pyuITGy/v 
19 
[no present 
, 
f.ppr,Gy/v 
EpEW 
H7rOV 
Hpy/Ka 
HpY/J.tat 
in Attic] 
(stem tl7r-) 
II 
EpxoJ.tat 
EAEVIT0J.tat 
~AGov 
f.Ar,AvGa 
(stem EAO-) 
33 
EPWTUW 
EPWTr,ITW 
~pwTY/lTa 
Y/pWTy/Ka 
Y/pwTY/J.tat 
~PWTr,Gy/V 
26 
EITGiw 
EOoJ.tat 
Ecpayov 
f.or,OOKa 
-Eor,oEITJ.tat 
~OEITGy/V 
33 
EVEpyETEw 
EVEPYETy/-
y/VEPYETy/-
y/VEPYETy/-
y/VEPYETy/-
Y/VEpyETr,-
ITW 
ITa 2 
Ka 
J.tat 
Gy/v 
38 
EVAapEo-
EVAapr,ITO-
y/vAapr,Gy/v 
J.tat 
J.tat 
I. Perfect with present meaning; no present in Attic. 
2. Verbs in EV-, like EVEpyET~w and EvpiITKW~ will be found in some texts without the aug-
mentation or reduplication to y/V-: e.g., aorist EVPOV, perfect EVEpyETy/Ka. This is a reflection of 
4th-century Attic spelling, the result of the loss of distinction between the sounds EV and y/V. 

344 
APPENDIX TWO 
10 
€VpUJ"KW 
d)p~lJ"w 
71VPOV1 
71VP71Ka 
71Vp71!J.aL 
71VpEe71V 
40 
El)IJ"€PEW 
17 
€Vxo!J.aL 
€Vfo!J.aL 
71iJfD.!J.71v 
, 
71vY!J.aL 
23 
EcjJl71!J.L: see (71!J.L 
23 
EcjJlIJ"T71!J.L: see (IJ"T71!J.L 
8 
EXW 
Efwand 
EIJ"XOV 
El1"X71Ka 
-EIJ"X71!J.aL 
11"X~IJ"W 
23 
(€1JYVV!J.L 
(€1Jfw 
E(wfa 
E(WWaL 
E(VY71V I v I 
and 
E(€VXe71v 
29 
(71AOW 
(71AWIJ"W 
E(~AWlJ"a 
E(~AwKa 
E(~Aw!J.aL 
E(71AWe71V 
16 
(71TEW 
(71T~IJ"W 
E(~T71lJ"a 
E(~T71Ka 
E(71T~e71V 
33 
(w 
(~IJ"W 
[non-Attic 
E(71lJ"aj 
16 
i}yEo!J.aL 
71Y71IJ"°!J.aL 
71Y71lJ"a!J.71v 
77Y71!J.aL 
-71y~e71V 
28 
77ooJ.!.aL 
i}lJ"e~lJ"oJ.!.aL 
77lJ"e71V 
34 
77KW 
77fw 
31 
71TTaoJ.!.aL 
i}TT~lJ"oJ.!.aL 
71TT71J.!.aL 
i}TT~e71V 
34 
eavJ.!.D.(w 
eavJ.!.D.lJ"o-
EeavJ.!.alJ"a 
neavJ.!.aKa 
nOavJ.!.alJ"-
EeavJ.!.D.IJ"-
J.!.aL 
!J.aL 
e71V 
38 
8vw [v I 
eVlJ"w [ v I 
E8vIJ"a 
TEeVKa 
TE8vJ.!.aL 
ETVe71V [ v I 
23 
77lJ"w 
~ 
~ 
~ 
-€t:e71V 
L 71J.!.L 
-71Ka 
-HKa 
-€ LJ.!.aL 
23 
LIJ"T71J.!.L 
IJ"T71IJ"W 
EIJ"T71lJ"a and 
€IJ"T71Ka 
EIJ"Ta!J.aL 
EIJ"TD.071V 
EIJ"T71V 
(cf. U41) 
23 
KaOlIJ"T71J.!.L: see (IJ"T71J.!.L 
26 
Kalwor 
KaVIJ"W 
EKaVIJ"a2 
-K€KaVKa 
K€KaVJ.!.aL 
EKaVe71V 
KD.W 
18 
KaAEw 
KaAEw 
EKD.A€lJ"a 
KEKA71Ka 
KEKA71J.!.aL 
EKA~071V 
24 
KaTapalvw: see palvw 
24 
KaTaOvw: see ovw 
32 
KaTaAEl7rw: see A€l7rW 
23 
KaTaTl071J.!.L: see TlO71J.!.L 
17 
KaT71yopEW 
KaT71Yop+ 
KaT71YOP71-
KaT71yop71-
KaT71YOP71-
KaT71YOP71-
IJ"W 
IJ"a 
Ka 
J.!.aL 
e71V 
9 
K€AEVW 
KEAEVIJ"W 
f.KEAWlJ"a 
KEKEAwKa 
KEKEAWIJ"-
EKEA€VIJ"071V 
J.!.aL 
34 
KAE7rTW 
KAE"'W 
EKAE"'a 
KEKAocjJa 
KEKAE!J.J.!.aL 
f.KAD.7r71V 
38 
KAlVW I;; I 
KALVEW 
EKMva 
KEKALJ.!.aL 
f.KAlO71VOr 
-€KAlV71V 
ILl 
38 
KOJ.!.l(W 
KOJ.!.LEW 
f.Ko!J.LlJ"a 
K€KOJ.!.LKa 
K€KO!J.LIJ"J.!.aL 
EKOJ.!.llJ"e71V 
9 
K07rTW 
KO"'W 
EKo"'a 
-KEKocjJa 
KEKo!J.J.!.aL 
-€K07r71V 
13 
Kpanw 
KpaT71lJ"W 
EKpD.T71lJ"a 
KEKpD.T71Ka 
K€KpD.T71J.!.aL 
EKpaT~871v 
26 
Kpivw I i I 
KpivEW 
EKpwa 
K€KpLKa 
K€KpL!J.aL 
EKpie71v I i J 
17 
KPV7rTW 
KPV"'W 
EKpv"'a 
KEKpvJ.!.J.!.aL 
EKpvcjJe71V 
37 
KTaoJ.!.aL 
KT71lJ"oJ.!.aL 
EKT71lJ"aJ.!.71v 
KEKT71!J.aL 
EKT~071V 
I. See previous note. 
2. Aorist participle also KEa,. 

Verb List 
345 
16 
KWAVW [v 1 
KWAVUW 
EKWAVUa 
KEKWAVKa 
KEKwAV/laL 
€KWAV07}V 
[ v 1 
[ v 1 
8 
Aa/lpaVw 
A 7)tO/laL 
fAaJ30v 
ELA7}cpa 
E LA 7J}l/laL 
€A7)cp07}V 
28 
AavOavw 
A7)UW 
fAaOov 
AEA7}Oa 
-AEA7}U/laL 
8 
AEYW 
AEtw 
fAEta 
AEAEY/laL 
€AEX07}V 
8 
AEI:rrw 
AELtw 
fAL7TOV 
AEAoma 
AEAEL/l/laL 
€AELCP07}V 
8 
AVW [ v 1 
AVUW [V 1 
fAvua 
AEAVKa 
AEAV/laL 
€AV07}V [ v 1 
18 
/lavOavw 
/la07)UO/laL 
f/laOOV 
/lE/la07}Ka 
II 
/laXO/laL 
/laXEO/laL 
€/laXEUa-
/lE/laX7}/laL 
/l7}V 
18 
/lEAAWI 
/lEAA7)UW 
€ /lE AA 7}ua 
38 
/lEAW 
/lEA7)UW 
€/lEA7}ua 
/lE/lEA 7}Ka 
8 
/lWW 
/lWEW 
E/lEwa 
/lE/lEV7}Ka 
23 
/lETaOLOW/lL: see OLOW/lL 
29 
/lETEXW: see fXW 
29 
/lL/lVy/UKW 
/lV7}UW 
f/lV7}Ua 
/lE/lV7}/laL 
€/lv7)u07}V 
or 
(poetic in 
/lL/lV7)UKW 
act.) 
33 
/lLUEW 
/lLU7}UW 
E /lLU7}ua 
JlE /liu7} Ka 
/lE/lLU7}/laL 
€/lL(7)07}V 
[ L 1 
I L I 
[ L 1 
29 
vLKaw 
VLK7)UW 
€VLK7}Ua 
vWLK7}Ka 
VWLK7}/laL 
€ViK7)07}V 
ILl 
I L I 
ILl 
42 
VOEW 
V07}UW 
€vo7}ua 
vW07}Ka 
VW07}/laL 
€vo7)07}V 
18 
VO/lL(W 
VO/lLEW 
€VO/lLUa 
VWO/lLKa 
VWO/lLU/laL 
€VO/lLU07}V 
13 
VOUEW 
VO(7)uw 
€vou7}ua 
VWOU7}Ka 
28 
oloa 
ELUO/laL 
13 
OLKEW 
OiK7)UW 
~K7}ua 
~K7}Ka 
~K7}/laL 
0K7)07}V 
II 
OLO/laL or 
oi 7)UO/laL 
07)07}v 
• 
oL/laL 
37 
OAAV/lL (poetic): see a7TOAAV/lL (prose) 
37 
O/lVV/lL 
O/lEO/laL 
w/loua 
o/lw/lOKa 
o/lW/lO/laL 
w/lo07}vor 
or 
w/lou07}V 
O/lw/lOU/laL 
32 
O/lOAOYEW 
O/lOAOY7)UW 
W/lOAOY7}-
W/lOAOY7}Ka 
W/lOAOY7}-
W/lOAOy7j-
ua 
/laL 
07}v 
29 
opaw 
otO/laL 
EtOOV 
EOpaKa 
Ewpa/laL or 
wcp07}v 
(stem io-) 
• 
or 
W/l/laL 
EWpaKa 
(stem W7T-) 
28 
opyi(O/laL 
°pYLEO/laL 
wpYLU/laL 
wpyiu07}v 
28 
opyi(w 
wpyLua 
33 
0p/law 
°P/l7)uw 
wp/l7}ua 
wp/l7}Ka 
wp/l7}/laL 
wP/l7)07}V 
27 
°PXEO/laL 
°PX7)UO/laL 
wpX7}ua-
/l7}V 
32 
ocpEiAW 
OCPELA7)UW 
WCPE iA 7}ua 
wcpEiA7}Ka 
WCPELA 7)07}V 
and 
WCPEAOV 
40 
7Taiw 
7Taiuw 
f7TaLua 
7TE7TaLKa 
E7TaLU07}V 
I. This verb sometimes shows "double augmentation," that is, imperfect 7i/lEAAOV, aorist 
7J/lEAA7}Ua. 

346 
APPENDIX TWO 
24 
7fupu(3uivw: see (3uivw 
16 
' 
" 
7fUpuyw: see uyw 
23 
7fupuoiowJ.l.t: see OiOWJ.l.L 
32 
7fUPUWEW: see (f7f)UWEW 
11 
7fUPUKEAElJ0J.l.UL: see KEAElJW (middle fonns) 
II 
7fUPU(JKEV-
7fUPUCTKEV-
7fUPECTKEV-
7fUPECTKEV-
7fUPECTKEV-
a(w 
UCTW 
UCTU 
UCTJ.l.UL 
aCT01)V 
27 
7fapELJ.l.t: see E iJ.l.i 
16 
7fUPEXW: see f.XW 
\0 
7fUCTXW 
7fELCTOJ.l.UL 
'f.7ruOov 
7fE7fOVOU 
28 
7fUVW 
7fUVCTW 
E7fUVCTU 
7fE7fUVKU 
7fE7fUVJ.l.UL 
E7fU(01)V 
8 
7fEiOw 
7fELCTW 
E7fELCTU 
7fE7fELKU 
7fE7fELCTJ.l.UL 
E7fE iCT01)V 
and 
7fE7fOLOU 
39 
7fELpUW 
7fELpaCTW 
E7fEipaCTU 
7fE 7fE LPUKU 
7fE7fE iPUJ.l.UL 
E7fELpa01)v 
[ ii I 
[ ii I 
8 
7fEJ.l.7fW 
7fEJ.I.'/IW 
f.7fEJ.I.'/IU 
7fE7fOWPU 
7fE7fEJ.l.J.l.UL 
fnEWp01)V 
28 
7fEpWpaW 
7fEPLO'/IO-
7fEPLELOOV 
J.l.UL 
29 
7fiJ.l.7fA1)J.l.L: see EjJ.7fijJ.7fA1)jJ.L 
26 
7fivw [ L I 
7fiOjJ.UL or 
f.7ftOV 
7fE7fWKU 
-7fE7fOjJ.UL 
-E7fo01)V 
7fLEOjJ.UL [ t I 
18 
7fi7fTW 
7fECTEOjJ.UL 
E7fECTOV 
7fE7fTWKU 
30 
7fLCTTEVW 
7fLCTTEVCTW 
f.7fiCTTEVCTU 
7fE7fLCTTEV-
7fE7fLCTTEV-
E7fLCTTEV-
KU 
jJ.UL 
01)V 
39 
7fAEW 
7fAEVCTOjJ.UL 
f.7fAEVCTU 
7fE7fAEVKU 
7fE7fAEVCT-
or 
J.l.UL 
7fAEVCTEOJ.l.UI 
17 
-7fAr,TTW 
-7fAr,tw 
-E7fA1)tu 
7fE7fA1)yu 
7fE 7f A 1)YJJ.UL 
f7fAr,Y1)V 
and 
-E7fAD.Y1)V 
13 
7fOLEW 
7fO(1)CTW 
E7fO(1)CTU 
7fE7foi 1)KU 
7fE7foi1)jJ.UL 
E7fOL r,01)V 
27 
7fOAEjJ.EW 
7fOAEJ.l.r,CTW 
E7fOAEjJ.1)CTU 
7fE7fOAEJ.l.1)-
7fE7fOAEJ.l.1)-
fnOAEjJ.r,-
KU 
J.l.UL 
01)V 
33 
7fOAWPKEW 
7fOAWPKr,-
E7fOALOPK1) -
-7fE7fOALOP-
f7fOALOPKT,-
CTW 
CTU 
KT/jJ.UL 
01)V 
II 
7fOALTEVW 
7fOALTE VCTW 
E7fOAiTEV-
7fE7fOAiTEV-
7fE7fOAiTEV-
f7fOALTEV-
CTU [ i I 
KU [i I 
J.l.uL[il 
01)v 
34 
7fOPEVW 
7fOPEVCTW 
E7fOPEVCTU 
7fE7fOpEVjJ.UL 
f7fOPE(01)V 
\0 
7fPUTTW 
7fpatw [u I 
f.7fpiitu 
7fE7fpiiyu 
7fE7fpiiYjJ.UL 
f7fpaxOT/v 
[a I 
and 
[u I 
7fE7fpiixu 
9 
7fPE7fEL 
23 
7fpooiowjJ.t: see OiOWjJ.L 
39 
7fPOCTr,KW: see 1)KW 
23 
7fpoCTiT/jJ.t: see LT/jJ.L 
II 
7fvvOavojJ.uL 
7fEVCTOjJ.UL 
f7fVOOjJ.T/V 
7fE7fVCTJ.l.UL 
39 
pEW 
PVT/CT0J.l.UL 
EPPVT/KU 
EPPVT/V 
23 
PT/YVVjJ.L 
pr,tw 
f.PPT/tu 
-EPPWYU 
EppUy1)V 
[ ii I 

Verb List 
347 
37 
PL7rTW I L I 
#twlll 
fpplta 
fpplcpa 
fppL}l}lal 
EPPLcp87]v 
or 
EPPLcp7]V Ii" I 
40 
o"Et30}lal 
31 
O"lyaw 
O"l y7]O"O}.tal 
fO"l y7]O"a 
O"E(]"L y7]Ka 
O"fO"lY7]J-taL 
Eo"ly~87]v 
29 
O"KfoavvvJ-tl 
-O"Kfoaw 
-fO"KfoaO"a 
EO"KfoaO"}laL 
EO"KfOclO"-
87]v 
38 
O"KE7rToJ-tal 
O"KftoJ-tal 
EO"Kft aJ-t7]V 
fO"KfJ-tJ-taL 
38 
O"K07rEW or O"K07rEoJ-taL 
(for other tenses, parts of O"KE7rToJ-tal are used) 
II 
O"7rEVOW 
O"7rfLO"W 
fO"7rHO"a 
fO"7rHO"J-taL 
38 
O"7rfVOW 
O"7rfVO"W 
fO"7rfvO"a 
38 
O"7rovoa(w 
O"7rOVOclO"O-
EO"7rOVoaO"a 
EO"7rOVOaKa 
EO"7rOVoaO"-
EO"7rOVOclO" -
J-tal 
J-taL 
87]v 
41 
O"Tff..f..W 
(O"Tff..EW) 
fO"Tflf..a 
-feo"Taf..Ka 
fO"TaAJ-tal 
Eo"TaA7]V 
30 
O"TpaTfVW 
O"TpaTfvO"w 
EO"TpaTfV-
fO"TpaTfVKa 
fO"TpaTfV-
O"a 
J-tal 
26 
O"TpECPW 
o"TPEtw 
fO"Tpf'/Fa 
EO"Tpa}lJ-tal 
Eo"TPEcp87]v 
or 
Eo"Tpacp7]V 
32 
o"VyylyVWo"KW: see ylyVWo"KW 
39 
o"Vf..AEyw 
o"VAAE(W 
O"vVEf..f(a 
O"VVfLf..°Xa 
O"VVfLAty-
O"VVff..EY7]V 
J-taL 
or 
O"VVff..EX&,v 
24 
O"vJ-tpaLvw: see paLvw 
32 
O"VJ-tPOVf..fVW: see pOVf..fVW 
32 
O"VJ-tCPEPW: see CPEPW 
23 
O"vvTL07]J-tL: see TL87]J-tl 
39 
0"0(w 
O"wO"wor 
fO"wO"a or 
O"fO"WKa 
O"EO"wJ-talor 
EO"w87]v 
(]"({iO"w 
fO"<{IO"a 
O"fO"<{IO"J-taL 
32 
O"WCPPOVEW 
O"wcppov~-
Eo"WCPpOV7]-
o"fo"WCPPO-
o"fo"WCPPO-
O"w 
O"a 
V7]Ka 
V7]J-taL 
9 
TaTTW 
Ta(W 
ha(a 
TETaxa 
TfTayJ-taL 
haX87]v 
29 
TfAfVTaW 
Tff..fVT~o"W 
f.Tff..fVT7]-
TfTfAfVT7]-
TfTff..fVT7]-
ETff..fVT~-
O"a 
Ka 
J-tal 
87]v 
33 
Tff..EW 
TfAfeW 
hEf..fO"a 
TfTEf..fKa 
TfTEf..fO"J-taL 
ETff..E0"87]v 
(or rarely 
Tff..EO"W) 
26 
TfJ-tvw 
TfJ-tfW 
fTfJ-tovor 
-TETJ-t7]Ka 
TETJ-t7]J-tal 
hJ-t~87]v 
(fTaJ-t0v) 
23 
TL87]J-tl 
8~O"w 
f07]Ka 
TE87]Ka 
TE8HJ-tal 
hE87]v 
40 
HKTW 
TE(oJ-tal 
fTfKOV 
TEToKa 
29 
TLJ-taw 
TL}l~O"W 
fHJ-t7]O"a 
TfHJ-t7]Ka 
TfTLJ-t7]J-tal 
hLJ-t~87]v 
Il I 
I i I 
I L I 
16 
TPE7rW 
TpNw 
hpt'/Fa 
TETpocpa 
TfTpaJ-tJ-tal 
hPEcp87]v 
and 
and 
hpa7rov i 
fTpa7r7]v 
I. The second aorist is poetic and intransitive in sense; in prose the second aorist middle is used 
with the intransitive meaning "fled." 

348 
APPENDIX TWO 
26 
TPfCPW 
8Pf'ljlW 
E8pf'ljla 
TfTpocpa 
Tf8pa}J.}J.aL 
hpacpy/v 
(rarely 
hPfCP°Y/V) 
34 
TPfXW 
opa}J.fo}J.aL 
Eopa}J.ov 
-ofopa}J.y/Ka 
-ofopa}J.Y/-
(or rarely 
}J.aL 
8pffo}J.ad 
28 
Tvyxavw 
Hvfo}J.aL 
ETVXOV 
HTvXy/Ka 
12 
TV7rTW 
TV7rT~(JW 
32 
iJ7raKovw: see cl.KOVW 
26 
V7rLCTXVf-
V7rOCTX~(JO -
V7rf(JX°}J.Y/V 
V7rf(JXY/}J.aL 
o}J.aL 
}J.aL 
32 
V7rOAa}J.f3avw: see Aa}J.f3avw 
32 
V7rO}J.fVW: see }J.fVW 
29 
V7rO}J.L}J.Vr/(JKW: see }J.L}J.V~(JKW 
39 
V7r07rHVW 
V7r07rHV(JW 
V7rW7rHv(Ja 
V7rW7rHV-
OY/v 
29 
cpaivw 
cpavfw 
Ecpy/va 
7rfcpy/va 
7rfcpa(J}J.aL 
Ecpavy/v 
(or rarely 
Ecpav8y/v) 
8 
CPfPW 
OL(JW 
~VfyKOV 
Ev~voxa 
wy/vq}J.aL 
~vtX8y/v 
and 
y/vfYKa 
(stem EVfYK-) 
8 
cpfVyw 
cpfvfo}J.aL 
ECPVYOV 
rrtcpwya 
and 
cpwffo}J.aL 
20 
cpY/}J.i 
Cp~(Jw 
Ecpy/(Ja 
28 
cp8avw 
cp8~(Jo}J.aL 
Ecp8a(Ja or 
Ecp8y/v 
39 
cpOfipw 
cpOfptw 
Ecp8ELpa 
Ecp8apKa 
Ecp8ap}J.aL 
Ecp8apy/v 
and 
-fcp8opa 
13 
CPLAfW 
CPLAr/(JW 
EcpiAy/(Ja 
7rfcpiA y/Ka 
rrfcpiAY/}J.aL 
ECPLA~8y/v 
13 
CPOPfW 
cpof3~(Jw 
Ecpof3y/(Ja 
rrfcpof3Y/}J.aL 
Ecpo,3~8y/v 
39 
cppa(w 
cppa(Jw 
Ecppa(Ja 
7rtcppaKa 
rrfcppa(J}J.aL 
Ecppa(J8y/v 
16 
cpvAaTTw 
cpvAafw 
EcpvAafa 
7rfcpvAaxa 
rrfcpvAay-
EcpvAciX8Y/v 
}J.aL 
40 
cpvw 
cpv(Jw I v I 
Ecpv(Ja and 
7rfcpvKa 
I v orv I 
ECPVV 
40 
xaipw 
xaLp~(Jw 
Kfxapy/Ka 
EXapy/V 
30 
xpao}J.aL 
xpy/(Jo}J.aL 
Expy/(Ja}J. Y/V 
KfxpY/}J.aL 
Exp~(J8y/v 
30 
xpaw 
Xpy/(Jw 
Expy/(Ja 
Exp~(J8y/v 
9 
xp~ 
xp~(JTaLI 
13 
WCPfAEW 
WCPfA~(JW 
wcpfAy/(Ja 
wcpfAY/Ka 
wcpfAy/}J.aL 
WCPEAr/Oy/V 
I. Contraction of XP7] E(JTaL. Cf. present infinitive xpr,vaL (= XPYT ftvaL), imperfect xpr,v (= XPYT 
~v) or Expr,V. 

APPENDIX THREE 
Paradigms 
NOUNS 
O-DECLENSION (U3)' 
rnase./fem. 
neuter 
sing. 
nom. 
av8pw7To<; 
~pyov 
gen. 
av8pw7ToV 
~pyov 
dat. 
av8pw7TCp 
~py~ 
acc. 
av8pw7ToV 
~pyov 
voc 
aV8pW7T{ 
~pyov 
dual 
n. a. v. 
av8poJ7Tw 
~pyw 
g.d. 
av8pw7ToW 
~pyow 
plur. 
n. V. 
av8pW7TOt 
~pyu 
gen. 
av8pw7TwV 
~pywv 
dat. 
av8pw7TOt<; 
~pyOt<; 
acc. 
av8pw7ToV<; 
~pyu 
A-DECLENSION (U4-U5) 
long-vowel fern. 
short-vowel fern. 
rnase. 
xwpii 
yVWIl1/ 
VyiHU 
8aAaTTU 
vwviii<; 
aTpanwT1/<; 
xwpii<; 
yvwll1/<; 
vyt{iii<; 
8aAaTT1/<; 
vwviov 
aTpanWTOv 
XWpcf 
yvwllI1 
vytdq. 
8aAaTTI1 
VWVtq. 
aTpanwTI1 
xwpiiv 
yvwll1/V 
vytHaV 
8aAaTTUV 
vwviiiv 
aT pa nWT1/V 
xwpii 
yvwll1/ 
vytHa 
8aAaTTU 
v{avta 
aT pa nWTU 
xwpii 
yvw/lii 
vytdii 
8aAaTTii 
vwviii 
aT pa nWTii 
xwpaw 
yvwllaw 
vyt{iaw 
8aAaTTaW 
vwviaw 
aTpanwTaw 
xwpat 
yvw/lat 
vyiHat 
8aAaTTat 
v{avtat 
aTpanWTat 
Xwpwv 
yvwllwv 
VytHWV 
8aAaTTWV 
VWVtWV 
aTpanWTWV 
xwpat<; 
yvwllat<; 
vyt{iat<; 
8aAaTTat<; 
vwvtat<; 
aTpanwTat<; 
xwpii<; 
yvwllii<; 
vyt{iii<; 
8aAaTTii<; 
vwviii<; 
aTpanwTii<; 
I. The cases in all noun, adjective, and participle paradigms will be in the order of this table; the 
markings of number and case will not be repeated. 
349 

350 
APPENDIX THREE 
CONSONANT DECLENSION (Ul4-15, U21) 
plosive stems (U 14) 
KAW..y 
cpvAa~ 
XaPl<; 
arT'm<; 
'EAAa<; 
KAW7flJ<; 
cpvAaKo<; 
XaPlTO<; 
(unTioo<; 
'EAAaoo<; 
KAW7Ti 
cpvAaKl 
xapm 
a(J"7Tie)t 
'EAAclOl 
KAi;17TU 
cpvAaKu 
xapw 
armiou 
'EAAclOU 
KAW..y 
cpvAa~ 
XaPl 
a(J"7Ti 
'EAAa<; 
KAW7TE 
cpvAaKE 
XaPlTE 
a(J"7TioE 
'EAAaoE 
KAW7TOtV 
cpvAaKow 
XapiTow 
a(J"7Tioow 
'EAAaoow 
KAW7TE<; 
cpvAaKE<; 
XaPlTE<; 
a(J"7TioE<; 
'EAAaoE<; 
KAW7TWV 
cpvAaKwv 
XapiTwv 
a(J"7Tiowv 
'EAAaowv 
KAW..yi(v) 
cpvAatl(v) 
XaPl(J"l(V) 
a(J"7Ti(J"l(V) 
'EAAa(J"t{v) 
KAW7TU<; 
cpvAaKu<; 
XaPlTU<; 
a(J"7Tiou<; 
'EAAcllia<; 
VT-stems (U 14) 
neuter T -stems (U 14) 
yEpwV 
yiyii<; 
doov<; 
7Tpayp.a 
TEpa<; 
YEPOVTO<; 
yiyavTo<; 
dOOVTO<; 
7TpaYJ.l.aTo<; 
TEpaTo<; 
yEpOVTl 
yiyavTl 
dooVTl 
1TpaYJ.l.aTl 
TEpaTl 
YEPOVTU 
ylyavm 
dOOVTU 
1TpaYJ.l.a 
TEpa<; 
yEpOV 
yiyuv 
doov<; 
7Tpayp.a 
TEpa<; 
yEpOVTE 
yiyavTE 
dOOVTE 
1TpaYJ.l.aTE 
TEpaTE 
YEPOVTOW 
YlyavTow 
dOOVTOW 
7TpaYJ.l.aTOW 
TEpaTow 
YEPOVTE<; 
yiyavTE<; 
dOOVTE<; 
1TpaYJ.l.am 
TEpam 
yEpovTwV 
ylyavTwv 
dOOVTWV 
1TpaYJ.l.aTwV 
TEpaTWV 
YEPOV(J"l(V) 
yiyii(J"l(V) 
OOOV(J"l(V) 
7Tpayp.a(J"l(v) 
TEpa(J"l(v) 
YEPOVTU<; 
YlyavTa<; 
OOOVTU<; 
1TpaYJ.l.am 
TEpam 
liquid and nasal stems (U 15) 
iYr/TWP 
oaiJ.l.wv 
aywv 
aA<; 
p-r,TOPO<; 
oaiJ.l.ovo<; 
aywvo<; 
aAo<; 
p-r,TOPl 
OaiJ.l.OVl 
aywvl 
aAi 
p-r,TOpU 
oaiJ.l.ovu 
aywvu 
aAu 
PTJTOP 
oatJ.l.ov 
aywv 
p-r,TOPE 
OaiJ.l.OVE 
aywvE 
aAE 
PTJTOPOW 
OalJ.l.OVOW 
aywvow 
aAOtV 
p-r,TOPE<; 
oaiJ.l.ovE> 
aywvE<; 
aAE<; 
P7JTOPWV 
OalJ.l.OVwV 
aywvwv 
aAwv 
p-r,TOP(J"l(V) 
oa iJ.l.O(J"l (v) 
ayw(J"l(v) 
aAa"i(v) 
p-r,TOPU<; 
oaiJ.l.ovu<; 
aywvu<; 
aAu<; 

Paradigms: Nouns 
irregular p-stems (V / 5) 
7raT17P 
7raTpo> 
7raTpi 
7raTEpa 
7raHp 
7raTEpE 
7raTEpOLV 
7raTEpE> 
7raTEpWV 
7raTpa(T((v) 
7raTEpa> 
(I-stems (V/5) 
YEVO> 
YEVOV> 
J.I.~TT/P 
J.l.T/TPO> 
J.l.T/Tpi 
J.l.T/TEpa 
J.l.r,HP 
J.l.T/TEPE 
J.l.T/TEpOLV 
J.l.TJTEPE> 
J.l.TJTEpWV 
J.l.TJTpCUT((V) 
J.l.TJTEpa> 
yEpa> 
yEPW> 
351 
8vyaTT/p 
av~p 
8vyaTpo> 
avopo> 
8vyaTpi 
avopi 
8vyaTEpa 
Q.vopa 
8vyaHp 
aVEp 
8vyaTEpE 
Q.VOPE 
8vyaTEpoLV 
avopoLv 
8vyaTEpE> 
Q.VOPE> 
8vyaTEpwv 
avopwv 
8vyaTpa(T((v) 
avopa(T((v) 
8vyaTEpa> 
Q.vopa> 
-------
irregular (V2 /) 
yVVTJ 
XEip 
yvvaLKo> 
XELpo> 
TPL~PTJ> 
TPL~POV> 
TPL~PH 
TPL~PTJ 
TPLr,PE> 
YEVEL 
yEpaL or yEPc!: 
yvvaLKL 
XELpi 
TPL~PH 
TPL~POLV 
TPL~PH> 
TPL~PWV 
TPL~PE(J"L(V) 
TPL~PH> 
YEVO> 
YEpa> 
YEVO> 
yEpa> 
yEVEL 
yEpa 
YEVO'iV 
yEpijw 
YEVTJ 
yEpa 
yEVwV 
yEpWV 
YEVHT((V) 
YEpa(T((v) 
yEVTJ 
yEpa 
stems in L or v (V2 / ) 
7rOAL> 
7rr,xv> 
7rOAEWS' 
7r~XEWS' 
7rOAH 
7r~XH 
7rOALV 
7r7)XVV 
7rOAL 
7r7)XV 
7rOAH 
7r~XH 
7rOAEOLV 
7rTJXEOLV 
7rOAH, 
7r~XH> 
7rOAEWV 
7r~XEWV 
7rOAE(J"L(V) 
7r~XE(J"L(V ) 
7rOAH> 
7r~XH> 
yvvaLKii 
XE'ipii 
yvvaL 
XEip 
yvva'iKE 
XE'ipE 
yvvaLKo'iv 
XEP°'iV 
yvva'iKE> 
XE'iPE> 
yvvaLKwv 
XHPWV 
yvvaLfi(v) 
XEp(J"i(v) 
yvva'iKii> 
XE'ipiis 
a(J"TV 
iX8v> or -vS' 
a(J"TEW> 
iX8vo> 
Q.(J"HL 
iX8vL 
Q.(J"TV 
iX8vv 
a(J"TV 
iX8v 
a(J"TH 
iX8vE 
a(J"TEOLV 
iX8vOLV 
a(J"TTJ 
iX8vES' 
a(J"HWV 
iX8vwv 
Q.(J"H(J"L(V) 
iX8v(J"L(V) 
Q.(J"TTJ 
iX8v> 

352 
APPENDIX THREE 
stems in EV. avo ov (U2 J ) 
L7r7rEV, 
ypav, 
vav, 
pov, 
L7r7rEW, 
ypao, 
VEW, 
poo, 
L 7r7rEt 
-.< 
.< 
f30t 
ypat 
V7Jt 
L7r7rEa 
ypavv 
vf]a 
f30vv 
L7r7rEV 
ypav 
vav 
f30v 
L 7r7rf] 
ypaE 
Vf]E 
(30E 
L7r7rEOW 
ypaotv 
VEOtV 
(300tV 
L7r7rf], or -ct, 
ypaE, 
vf]H 
POE, 
L7r7rEWV 
ypawv 
VEWV 
pOWV 
L7r7rEV(n(v) 
ypavrrl.(v) 
vavrrl.(v) 
povrrl.(v) 
L7r7rEa, 
ypav, 
vav, 
(3ov, 
NOUNS WITH CONTRACTION (U42) 
o-declension 
a-declension 
vov, 
7rEPI. 7r AOV, 
Kavovv 
yf] 
rrvKf] 
JlVa 
'EpJlf], 
vov 
7rEpl.7rAOV 
Kavov 
yf], 
rrvKf], 
JlVa, 
'EpJloV 
vip 
7rEpl.7rA'{l 
Kav0 
YV 
rrvKV 
JlV~ 
'EpJlV 
vovv 
7rEpi 7r AOvv 
Kavovv 
yf]v 
rrvKf]v 
Jlvav 
'EpJlf]v 
vov 
7rEpl.7rAOV 
Kavovv 
yf] 
rTVKf] 
Jlva 
'EpJlf] 
vw 
mpl.7rAw 
Kavw 
rrVKa 
JlVa 
'EpJla 
VOtV 
7rEpl.7rAOW 
KaVOtV 
rrVKatV 
Jlvatv 
'EpJlatv 
VOt 
7rEpl.7rAOt 
KaVa 
rrVKat 
Jlvat 
'EpJlat 
vwv 
7rEpl.7rAWV 
Kavwv 
rTVKWV 
Jlvwv 
'EpJlwV 
VOt, 
7rEpl.7rAOt, 
KaVOt, 
rTVKat, 
Jlvat, 
'EpJlat, 
vov, 
7rEpi7rAOV, 
KaVa 
rrVKa, 
JlVa, 
'EpJla, 
A TIIC DECLENSION AND NOUNS IN -WS· (U42) 
Attic declension 
nouns in -w, 
VEW, 
AEw, 
EW, 
Aayw, 
aibw, 
~pw, 
VEW 
AEw 
EW 
Aayw 
aibov, 
~pwo, or~pw 
VE'{l 
AE0 
E'{l 
Aay0 
aibot 
~pw;: 
or~p'{l 
VEWV 
AEwv 
EW 
Aaywv or Aayw 
aibw 
~pwii 
or~pw 
VEW 
Aayw 
~PWE 
VE'{lV 
Aay0v 
~pwow 
VE0 
AE0 
Aay0 
~PWE' or ~pw, 
VEWV 
AEwv 
Aaywv 
~pwwv 
VE'{l' 
AE0, 
Aay0, 
~pwrrt(v) 
VEW, 
AEw, 
Aayw, 
~pwa, or~pw, 

Paradigms: Adjectives 
353 
ADJECTIVES 
VOWEL-DECLENSION ADJECTIVES WITH THREE ENDINGS (U7) 
with fem. in -0. 
withfem. in -1) 
masc. 
fem. 
neuter 
masc. 
fem. 
neuter 
atw~ 
atin 
atwv 
aya8o, 
aya8~ 
aya80v 
atiov 
atin, 
atiov 
aya80v 
aya87j~ 
aya80v 
aticr 
atiCf 
aticr 
aya80 
aya8f1 
aya80 
atwv 
atinv 
atwv 
aya80v 
aya8~v 
aya80v 
attE 
atin 
atwv 
aya8f. 
aya8~ 
aya80v 
atiw 
atin 
atiw 
aya8w 
aya8a 
aya8w 
atiow 
atiaw 
atiow 
aya80Lv 
aya8aLv 
aya80Lv 
atwt 
attat 
attii 
aya80i 
aya8aL 
aya8a 
atLwv 
atiwv 
atLwv 
aya8wv 
aya8wv 
aya8wv 
atiot~ 
atiat~ 
atLOt, 
aya8oL~ 
aya8aL~ 
aya8oL~ 
atiov~ 
atin~ 
attii 
aya8ov~ 
aya8a~ 
aya8a 
VOWEL-DECLENSION ADJECTIVES WITH TWO ENDINGS (U9) 
masc./fem. 
neuter 
aOtKO~ 
aOtKOV 
aOLKov 
aOLKov 
aOLKcr 
aOLKcr 
aOtKOV 
aOtKOV 
aOtKf 
aOtKOV 
aOLKw 
aoiKw 
aOLKow 
aOLKow 
aOtKOt 
aOtKii 
aoiKwv 
aOLKwv 
aoiKOt~ 
aOLKOt~ 
aOLKov~ 
aOtKii 
CONSONANT-DECLENSION ADJECTIVES (U22) 
with two endings 
masc.lfem. 
neuter 
masc.lfem. 
neuter 
aAT/8~, 
aAT/8f.~ 
(Twcppwv 
(Twcppov 
aAT/8ov~ 
aAT/8ov~ 
(Twcppovo~ 
(Twcppovo~ 
aAT/8EL 
aAT/M 
(TwCPPOVt 
(TwCPPOVt 
aAT/87j 
aAT/8f., 
(Twcppovii 
(Twcppov 
aAT/8f.~ 
aAT/8f.~ 
(Twcppov 
(Twcppov 

354 
APPENDIX THREE 
mase./fem. 
neuter 
mase.lfem. 
neuter 
ar..:rJM; 
aA7]$f:t 
ITwCPPOVf: 
ITwCPPOVf: 
aA7]8otv 
aA7]$OtV 
ITwCPpovow 
ITwCPpovow 
aA7]$f:t, 
aA7]$f] 
ITwCPpovc> 
ITwcPpovii 
aA7]8wv 
aA7]$wv 
ITwCPpovwv 
ITwCPpovwv 
aA7]8flTt(V) 
aA 7]$f.lTt (v) 
ITwCPPOlTt(v) 
ITwcppolTd v) 
aA7]8f:t, 
aA7]$f] 
ITwcppovii, 
ITwcPpovii 
with three endings 
stems in v 
stems in v 
mase. 
fem. 
neuter 
mase. 
fem. 
neuter 
hov, 
hMii 
hov 
JJ.EAU, 
JJ.EAuwii 
JJ.EAUV 
hOEO, 
hOf:/ii, 
hOEO, 
JJ.EAUVO, 
JJ.f:Auiv7]' 
JJ.EAUVO, 
hM 
hOf:iq, 
hM 
JJ.EAUVt 
WAuivTI 
JJ.EAUVt 
hovv 
hMiiv 
hov 
JJ.EAuvii 
JJ.fAuwiiv 
JJ.fAUV 
hov 
hMii 
hov 
JJ.EAUV 
JJ.EAuwii 
JJ.fAUV 
hOEf: 
hOf:iii 
hoh 
JJ.EAUVf: 
JJ.f:Auivii 
JJ.EAUVf: 
hOEOW 
hOf:iuw 
hOEOW 
JJ.f:AclVOW 
JJ.f:Auivuw 
JJ.f:AclVOW 
hOf:L, 
hOf:tut 
hof.u 
JJ.EAUVH 
JJ.EAUWUt 
JJ.f.Auvii 
hOEWV 
hOHWV 
hof.wV 
JJ.f:AclVWV 
JJ.f:AUWWV 
JJ.€AclVWV 
hOElTt(V) 
hOf:iut, 
hOElTt(V) 
JJ.Er...UlTt(V) 
JJ.€r...uivut' 
JJ.fr...UlTt(V) 
hM, 
hOf:iu, 
hOEU 
JJ.Er...uvii, 
JJ.€r...uivii' 
JJ.fr...uvii 
stems in VT 
mase. 
fem. 
neuter 
mase. 
fem. 
neuter 
XUpiH' 
xupi€lTlTii 
XUptW 
7Tn, 
7TnlTii 
7Tnv 
XUpiWTO, 
XUPtEITIT7], 
XUpiWTO, 
7TUVTO, 
7TcllT7]' 
7TUVTO, 
xupiwTt 
XUptElT1TTJ 
xupiwTt 
7TUVTi 
7TclITTI 
7TUVTi 
XUpiWTii 
xupif:lTlTiiv 
xupiw 
7TclVTii 
7TnlTiiv 
7Tnv 
xupiw 
xupi€lTlTii 
xupiw 
7Tn, 
7TnlTii 
7Tnv 
XUpiWTE 
xuptf.lTlTii 
XUpiWTE 
XUptEVTOW 
xuptilTlTUW 
XUptWTOW 
XUpiWTE' 
Xapi€lTlTut 
XUptWTa 
7TclVTE, 
7TnlTat 
7TUVTa 
XaptEVTWV 
XUpt€ITITWV 
XUptEVTWV 
7TaVTWV 
7TUITWV 
7TclVTWV 
Xapi€lTt(v) 
Xaptf.ITITUt, 
xupi€lTt(v) 
7TnlTdv) 
7TUlTat, 
7TnlTt(v) 
XUpiWTii, 
xuptf.lTlTii' 
XUpiWTii 
7TclVTii, 
7TcllTii, 
7TclVTii 

Paradigms: Adjectives 
355 
VOWEL-DECLENSION ADJS. WITH CONTRACTION (U42) 
masc. 
fem. 
neuter 
xpvuovs 
xpvufj 
xpVUOVV 
xpvuov 
xpvufjs 
xpvuov 
xpvUCf 
xpvuv 
xpvUCf 
xpVUOVV 
xpvufjv 
xpVUOVV 
xpvuw 
xpvun 
xpvuw 
xpVUOI.V 
xpvual.v 
xpVUOI.V 
XPVUOI. 
xpvua'i 
xpvun 
xpVUWV 
xpVUWV 
xpVUWV 
XPVUOI.S 
xpvua'is 
XPVUOI.S 
xpvuovs 
xpvuns 
xpvun 
masc. 
fem. 
neuter 
masc./fem. 
neuter 
apyvpovs 
apyvpn 
apyvpovv 
EVVOVS 
EVVOVV 
apyvpov 
apyvpns 
apyvpov 
Eiivov 
EVVOV 
apyvPCf 
apyvp,+ 
apyvPCf 
EVV~ 
EVV~ 
apyvpovv 
apyvpnv 
apyvpovv 
EVVOVV 
EVVOVV 
apyvpw 
apyvpn 
apyvpw 
EVVW 
EVVW 
apyvpo'iv 
apyvpa'iv 
apyvpo'iv 
EVVOW 
EVVOW 
apyvpo'i 
apyvpa'i 
apyvpn 
EVVOL 
EVVOa 
apyvpwv 
apyvpwv 
apyvpwv 
EVVWV 
EVVWV 
apyvpo'is 
apyvpa'is 
apyvpol.s 
EVVOLS 
EVVOLS 
apyvpovs 
apyvpns 
apyvpn 
EVVOVS 
EVVOa 
ADJECTIVES WITH A TIIC DECLENSION (U42) 
masc./fem. 
neuter 
masc. 
fem. 
neuter 
tA.EWS 
tA.EWV 
-rrA.€WS 
-rrA.€Q. 
-rrA.€WV 
tA.EW 
tA.EW 
-rrA.€W 
-rrA.€Q.s 
-rrA.€W 
tA.E~ 
tA.E~ 
-rrA.€~ 
-rr A.€f!: 
-rrA.€~ 
tA.EWV 
tA.EWV 
-rrA.€WV 
-rr A.€Q.v 
-rrA.€WV 
tA.EW 
tA.EW 
-rrA.€W 
-rr A.€Q. 
-rrA.€W 
tA.E~V 
tA.E~V 
-rrA.€~V 
-rrA.€aw 
-rrA.€~V 
tA.E~ 
tA.Ea 
-rrA.€~ 
-rrA.€aL 
-rr A.€a 
tA.EWV 
tA.EWV 
-rrA.€WV 
-rrA.€WV 
-rrA.€WV 
tA.E~S 
tA.E~S 
-rrA.€~S 
-rrA.€aLS 
-rrA.€~S 
tA.EWS 
tA.Ea 
-rrA.€WS 
-rrA.€Q.s 
-rrA.€a 

356 
APPENDIX THREE 
PRONOUNS AND PRONOUN/ADJECTIVES 
ARTICLE (U6) 
masc. 
fem. 
6 
T/ 
TOV 
T1], 
T~ 
Tff 
TOV 
n/v 
TW 
TW 
(orTa) 
TOLV 
TOLV 
(or TaLV) 
Ot 
a! 
TWV 
TWV 
TOL, 
TaL, 
TOV, 
Ta, 
PERSONAL PRONOUNS (U22) 
(unem-
(unem-
neut. 
Tel 
TOU 
Tep 
TO 
TW 
TOLV 
Ta 
TWV 
TOL, 
Ta 
I st sing. phatic) 
J st dual 
J st plur. 
2nd sing. phatic) 
2nd dual 2nd plur. 
EyW 
vw 
r,!J.{L, 
(TV 
(Tcf>w 
V!J.{L, 
E!J.OV 
!J.OV 
viiJV 
r,!J.wv 
(TOU 
(TOV 
(Tcf>ej;v 
v!J.wv 
E!J.oL 
!J.O! 
r,!J.LV 
(TO! 
(TO! 
V!J.LV 
{!J.{ 
!J.{ 
r,!J.Q., 
(TE 
(T{ 
v!J.Q., 
THIRD PERSON (OBLIQUE CASES) AND INTENSIVE (ALL CASES) (U21) 
aUTO, 
aVTT/ 
aUTO 
aUTOV 
aUT1]' 
aUTOV 
aUTej; 
aUTff 
aUTej; 
aUTOV 
aun7v 
aUTO 
aVTW 
aVTW 
aUTW 
aUTOLV 
aUTOLV 
aUTOLV 
aUToL 
aUTaL 
aura 
aUTwv 
aUTwv 
aUTwv 
aUToL, 
au TaL, 
aUToL, 
aUTO V, 
aUTa, 
aUTa 
DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS (Ul3) 
OO{ 
~O{ 
TOO{ 
~ 
aVTT/ 
TOUTO 
OVTO, 
TOVO{ 
T1](TO{ 
TOVO{ 
TOVTOV 
TaVTT/, 
TOVTOV 
Tej;O{ 
TffO{ 
Tej;O{ 
TOVTcp 
TavTT/ 
TOVTCP 
TOVO{ 
T~VO{ 
TOO{ 
TOVTOV 
TaVTT/V 
TOUTO 

Paradigms: Pronouns 
357 
demonstrative pronouns (dual and plural) 
TWOf 
TOtVOf 
OLOf 
TWVOf 
TOtUOf 
TOVUOf 
TWOf 
TOtVOf 
aLof 
TWVOf 
TatUOf 
TCluof 
€KftVO~ 
€KfI.VOV 
hdv'll 
€KftVOV 
hdvw 
€KfI.VOW 
€KftVOL 
€Kdvwv 
€KdvOL~ 
€Kdvov~ 
TWOf 
TOtVOf 
TCiof 
TWVOf 
TOtUOf 
TG.Of 
€KfI.VTJ 
€KdvTJ~ 
€KfI.VT/ 
€KfI.VTJV 
fKHVW 
EKdvow 
€KftVaL 
€KfI.VWV 
fKfwaL~ 
EKdva~ 
~ 
OVTOL 
TOVTWV 
TOVTOL~ 
TOVTOV~ 
TOVTW 
TOVTOW 
aVTaL 
TOVTWV 
TavTaL~ 
TaVTa~ 
€KftVO 
EKdvov 
€KfI.VW 
EKdvow 
€KftVa 
€Kdvwv 
EKdvot> 
€KftVa 
TailTa 
TOVTWV 
TOVTOL~ 
TailTa 
INTERROGATIVE AND INDEFINITE PRONOUN/ADJECTIVE (UI5, UI7) 
TI.~ 
TI. 
TL~ 
n 
TI.VO~ 
( Toil) 
TI.VO~ 
( Toil) 
nvo~ 
(TOV) 
TWO~ 
(TOV) 
TI.VL 
(np) 
nVL 
(np) 
nvi. 
( T'll) 
nvi. 
(T'll) 
TI.Va 
TI. 
nvG. 
n 
TI.Vf 
TWf 
nVE 
TWf 
TI.VOW 
TI.VOW 
nVotv 
nVotv 
TI.Vf~ 
TLva 
nVE~ 
nva 
(aTTa) 
TI.VWV 
TWWV 
nvwv 
nvwv 
TI.UL(V) 
TI.UL(V) 
TLUI.(v) 
nul.(v) 
TI.Va~ 
TLva 
nvG.~ 
nvG. 
«(17Ta) 
RELATIVE AND INDEFINITE RELATIVE PRONOUNS (UI2, U33) 
os 
~ 
0 
OUTL~ 
~n~ 
on 
~ 
? 
? 
? 
(OTOV) 
? 
? 
(OTOV) 
ov 
TJ~ 
ov 
ovnvo~ 
TJUTWO~ 
OVTWO~ 
~ 
~ 
? 
? 
(OT'll) 
? 
? 
(OT'll) 
'll 
T/ 
'll 
WTWL 
T/TWL 
WTWL 
OV 
~v 
0 
ovnva 
~vnva 
on 
.. 
.. 
wTtVE 
wnvf 
wnvf 
W 
W 
W 
? 
? 
~ 
~ 
? 
? 
ow 
ow 
ow 
ownvow 
ownvow 
OWTWOW 
Ot 
aL 
a 
OLnVf~ 
aLnvf~ 
aTLVa 
(aTTa) 
~ 
? 
? 
? 
(OTWV) 
? 
? 
(ihwv) 
wv 
wv 
wv 
WVTWWV 
WVTWWV 
WVTWWV 
? 
? 
~ 
O[UTLUL(V) 
(OTOt» 
a[UTLuL(V) 
o[unuL(v) 
(OTOL~) 
OL~ 
at> 
OL~ 
ov~ 
as 
a 
ovuTLva~ 
aUTwa~ 
aTLVa 
(aTTa) 

358 
REFLEXIVE PRONOUNS (U25) 
J st pers. rnasc. 
fJ.LaVTOV 
fJ.LavT0 
(J.LaVTOV 
~J.LC:;JV aVTwv 
~J.LlV aVTOl, 
~J.LU, avwv, 
J st pers.fern. 
fJ.LavTry, 
fJ.LaVTfi 
(J.LaVT~V 
~J.LWV aVTwv 
~J.LlV aVTal, 
~J.LU, avnls 
3rd pers. rnasc. 
faVTOV (avTOv) 
favT0 (avT0) 
favHlv (avn)v) 
EavTwv (avTwv) 
EavTol, (avTol,) 
EavTOv, (avTov,) 
2nd pers. rnasc. 
O"WVTOV (O"avTOv) 
O"wVT0 (O"avT0) 
O"wvn)v (O"avn)v) 
VJ.LwVaVTwv 
VJ.LlVaVTOl, 
VJ.LU, avwv, 
3rd pers.fern. 
EavTry, (avTry,) 
EavTfi (avTfi) 
EavT~v (avT~v) 
EavTwv (avTwv) 
EaVTal, (aVTal,) 
Eavni, (avn}s) 
APPENDIX THREE 
2nd pers. fern. 
O"WVTry, (O"avTry,) 
O"wVTfi (O"avTfi) 
o"WVT~V (O"avT~v) 
VJ.LwVaVTwv 
VJ.LlVaVTal, 
VJ.LU, avnl, 
3rd pers. neuter. 
faVTOV (avTov) 
favT0 (avT0) 
favTo (avTo) 
favTwv (avTwv) 
EavTol, (avTOl,) 
Eavni (avni) 
INDIRECT REFLEXIVE (3RD PERSON) (U25) 
gen. 
dat. 
acc. 
sing. 
, 
(OV) 
ov , 
(oD 
Ot 
( 
W 
dual 
gen. dat. 
acc. 
plur. 
gen. 
dat. 
acc. 
TOtOVTO, 
TOtOVTOV 
TOtOvnr 
TOtOVTOV 
plur. rnasc.lfern. 
O"epWV 
O"epiO"t(v) 
O"epa, 
(O"eptO"dv D 
kepa,) 
RECIPROCAL PRONOUN (U25) 
rnasc. 
fern. 
aAA~AOtv 
aM~Aatv 
aAA~AW 
aM~Aa 
aAA~AWV 
aM~AWV 
aM~AOt, 
aM~Aat, 
aM~AOV' 
aM~Aa, 
TOwfJTO, (TOO-aUTO,) (U36) 
TOtavT1) 
TOtOVTOV 
TOtaVT1)' 
TOtOVTOV 
TOtavTY 
TOtOVnr 
TOWVT1)V 
TOtOVTOV 
plur. neuter 
O"epWV 
O"epiO"t(v) (O"eptO"dvD 
O"epia 
(O"epw) 
neuter 
aAA~AOtv 
aM~AW 
aM~AWV 
aAA~AOt, 
UAA1)Aa 
or TOtOVTO 
or TOtOVTO 

Paradigms: Pronouns 
359 
TOWVTW 
TOWVTW 
TOWVTW 
TOWVTOW 
TOWVTOW 
TOWVTOW 
TOWVTOL 
TOLaVTUL 
TOLaVTU 
TOWVTWV 
TOWVTWV 
TOWVTWV 
TOWVTOL, 
TOLUVTUL, 
TOWVTOL, 
TOWVTOV, 
TOLaVTU, 
TOLaVTU 
VERBS 
il-VERBS: PRESENT SYSTEM ACTIVE] 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj indo 
~OVAf.VW 
~OVAf.VW 
~OVAf.VOLJ..(L 
Ej3OVAWOV 
~OVAf.VCL' 
~OVAf.VT/' 
~OVAf.VOL' 
j30VAWf. 
Ej3OVAWf.> 
~OVAf.VCL 
j30VAf.VT/ 
j30VAf.VOL 
j30vAwhw 
Ej3OVAWdv) 
j30VAf.Vf.TOV 
~OVAf.V71TOV 
j30VAEVOLTOV 
j3ovAEVf.TOV 
i.j3OVAEVf.TOV 
~OVAf.Vf.TOV 
j3ovAEV71TOV 
j3oVAwOL T71V 
j30vAwhwv 
i.j3ovAwh71v 
~OVAEVOJ..LEV 
j30VAEVWJ..LEV 
j3ovAEVOLJ..LEV 
i.j30VAEV0J..LEV 
~OVAEVETE 
j30VAEV71TE 
j30VAEVOLTE 
j30VAEVETE 
i.j30VAEVf.TE 
j30VAEVOVCTL(V) 
j30VAEVW(TL(V) 
j30VAEVOLEV 
j3oVAWOVTWV 
i.j30VAwov 
infinitive: 
j30VAEVCLV 
participle: 
j3ovAEVWV. j30VAf.VOVIJ'U. j3oVAEVOV 
il-VERBS: PRESENT SYSTEM MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj indo 
j3OVAf.V0J..LUL 
j3OVAEVWJ..LUL 
j3oVAWOLJ..L71V 
i.~OVAWOJ..L71V 
j3OVAf.VT/ (or -f. L) 
j3OVAEVT/ 
j30VAf.VOW 
j30VAEVOV 
i.~OVAEVOV 
j3OVAf.Vf.TUL 
j3OVAf.V71TaL 
j30VAf.VOLTO 
j30VAWf.IJ'OW 
i.j30VAEVETO 
j3oVAf.vf.1J'8ov 
j3oVAf.v711J'8ov 
j30VAf.VOLIJ'8ov 
j30VAf.VEIJ'8ov 
i.~oVAf.vf.1J'8ov 
j3oVAf.vf.1J'8ov 
j3oVAf.v711J'8ov 
j30VAWOLIJ'871v 
j3ovAwf.1J'8wv 
i.~oVAwf.1J'871v 
j3ovAw0J..Lf.8u 
j3ovAwww8u 
j3OVAWOLJ..Lf.8u 
i. j3 ov A WO J..Lf. 8u 
j3oVAf.vf.1J'8f. 
j3oVAf.v711J'8f. 
j3OVAf.VOLIJ'8f. 
j3oVAf.vf.1J'8f. 
i.j3oVAf.vf.1J'8f. 
j3OVAf.VOVTaL 
j3OVAf.VWVTaL 
j3OVAf.VOWTO 
j3ovAwf.1J'8wv 
i.j30VAf.VOVTO 
infinitive: 
j3oVAf.vf.1J'8uL 
participle: 
POVAW0J..LEVO,. -71. -av 
I. For finite forms of verbs. the listing is consistently in the order I st. 2nd, 3rd singular; 2nd, 3rd 
dual; 1st, 2nd, 3rd plural; but person/number labels are omitted. 

360 
FUTURE SYSTEM 
active indicative 
j30VA£1)UW 
j30VAEVUHS 
j30VAEVUH 
j30VAEVUETOV 
j30VAEVUETOV 
j3ovAEvuOIlW 
j30VAEVUETE 
j3ovAEVUOVUL(V) 
active optative 
j3ovAEVUOLIlL 
j30VAEVUOLS 
j3oVAEVUOL 
j3ovAEVUOLTOV 
j3ovAEVuoi T7]V 
j3ovAEvuOLIlW 
j3ovAEVUOL H 
j3ovAEvuOLW 
j30VAEVUE LV 
j30vAEvuEUeaL 
middle indicative 
j3oVAEvuOllaL 
j30vAEVUTI (or -EL) 
j30vAEvuETaL 
j3ovAEvuEUeOV 
j3ovAEvuEUeOV 
j3ovAEVuollEea 
j30vAEvuEUeE 
j30VAEVUOVTaL 
active infinitive: 
middle infinitive: 
active participle: 
middle participle: 
j3ovAEVUWV. j3ovAEvuovua. j3ovAEVUOV 
j30vAEVuOIlWOS. -7]. -{)v 
passive indicative 
j3ovAEVe~UOllaL 
j3ovAEVe~un (or -EL) 
j3ovAEVe~UETaL 
j3ovAEVe~UEUeOV 
j3ovAEVe~UEUeOV 
j3ovAEVe7]UOIlEea 
j3ovAEVe~UEUeE 
j3ovAEVe~UOVTaL 
passive infinitive: 
j3ovAEVe~UEUeaL 
passive optative 
j3ovAEVe7]UOill7]V 
j3ovAEVe~UOLO 
j30VAEVe~UOL TO 
j30VAEVe~UOLUeOV 
j30VAEVe7]uoiue7]V 
j3ovAEVe7]UOiIlEea 
j3ovAEVe~UOLUeE 
j3ovAEVe~UOLVTO 
passive participle: 
j3ovAEVe7]UOIlWOS. -7]. -{)v 
APPENDIX THREE 
middle optative 
j3ovAEVUoill7]V 
j3oVAEVUOLO 
j3ovAEVUOLTO 
j3ovAEvuOLUeOV 
j3ovA€Vuoiue7]v 
j3ovAEVuoillEea 
j3ovAEvuOLUeE 
j3ovAEVUOLVTO 
STRONG (2ND) AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
~yayov 
ayayw 
~yaYEs 
ayaYTls 
~yaydv) 
ayaYTl 
~yaYETov 
ayaY7]TOV 
~yayi.T7]v 
ayaY7]TOV 
~yayollw 
ayaywllw 
~yaym 
ayaY7]H 
~yayov 
ayaywuL(v) 
infinitive: 
ayaYELv 
participle: 
ayaywv. ayayovua. ayayov 
optative 
ayayoLIlL 
ayayoLs 
ayayoL 
ayayoLTov 
ayayoiT7]V 
ayayoLIlEv 
ayayoLH 
ayayoLw 
imperative 
ayaYE 
ayayi.Tw 
ayaYETov 
ayaYETwv 
ayaYETE 
ayayovTwv 

Paradigms: .f2-Verbs 
STRONG (2ND) AORIST SYSTEM MIDDLE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
~yayO}l77V 
ayo.yW}laL 
a ya yOL}l77V 
~yo.yov 
ayo.YTl 
ayo.yOLO 
~yo.y€TO 
ayo.Y77TaL 
ayo.YOLTO 
~yo.y€(]·eOV 
ayo.Y77tTeOV 
ayo.YOLCreOV 
~yayEtTe77V 
ayo.Y77tTeOV 
ayaYOLtTe77V 
~yayO}l€ea 
ayayw}l€ea 
a ya yOL}l€ea 
~yo.y€tTe€ 
a yo. Y77tTe€ 
ayo.YOLtTe€ 
~yo.yOVTO 
ayo.YWVTaL 
ayo.YOLVTO 
infinitive: 
ayaYEtTeaL 
participle: 
ayayO}lEVos. -77. -ov 
WEAK (lST) AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
E{3ovA€VtTa 
{3ovA€VtTW 
{3oVA€VtTaL}lL 
E{3ovA€VtTas 
{3oVA€VtTT/S 
{30VA€vtTELaS 
or (3oVA€VtTaLS 
E{30VA€VtTdv) 
{30VA€vtTT/ 
(30VA€VtT€L{(v) 
or {3ovA€vtTaL 
E{3ovA€vtTaTOV 
{30VA€VtT77TOV 
{3oVA€VtTaL TOV 
E{3oVA€VtTo. T77V 
{30VA€VtT77TOV 
{3oVA€VtTaL T77V 
E{3oVA€vtTa}lEV 
{30VA€VtTW}lEV 
{3oVA€VtTaL}lEV 
E{3ovA€vtTaTE 
{30VA€VtT77TE 
{3oVA€VtTaLTE 
E{3ovA€VtTaV 
(3oVA€VtTWtTL(V) 
{30VA€VtTELaV 
or {3ovA€vtTaLEV 
infinitive: 
{3ovA€vtTaL 
participle: 
{3ovA€vtTas. {3oVA€VtTatTa. {3ovA€vtTaV 
WEAK (lST) AORIST SYSTEM MIDDLE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
E{30VA€VtTo.}l77V 
{3oVA€VtTw}laL 
{3ovA€VtTaL}l77V 
E{30VA€VtTW 
{3oVA€vtTT/ 
{3oVA€vtTaLO 
E{3oVA€vtTaTO 
{3oVA€VtT1/TaL 
{3oVA€VtTaLTO 
E{3ovA€vtTatTeOV 
{30VA€VtT1/tTeOV 
{3ovAEVtTaLtTeOV 
E{30VA€VtTo.tTe77V 
{3oVA€VtT1/tTeOV 
{3oVA€VtTaLtTe77V 
E{30VA€VtTo.}l€ea 
{30VA€VtTw}l€ea 
{3ovA€VtTaL}l€ea 
E{3ovA€vtTatTe€ 
{30VA€VtT1/tTe€ 
{3oVA€VtTaLtTe€ 
E{3ovA€vtTaVTO 
{3oVA€VtTWVTaL 
{3ovA€vtTaLVTO 
infinitive: 
{3ovA€VtTatTeaL 
participle: 
{30vA€VtTo.}lEVOS. -77. -OV 
imperative 
ayayov 
ayaYEtTeW 
ayo.y€tTeOV 
ayaYEtTeWV 
ayo.y€tTe€ 
ayaYEtTeWV 
imperative 
{30VA€VtTOV 
{30VA€VtTo.TW 
361 
{3ovA€vtTaTOV 
{3oVA€VtTo.TWV 
(3oVA€VtTaTE 
{3oVA€VtTo.VTWV 
imperative 
{3ovA€VtTaL 
{30VA€VtTo.tTeW 
{3oVA€vtTatTeOV 
{30vA€VtTo.tTewV 
{3ovA€vtTatTe€ 
{3oVA€VtTo.tTeWV 

362 
indicative 
i.j30VAEV07)V 
i.j30VAEV07)' 
i.j30VAEV07) 
i.POVAEV07)TOV 
i.j30VAWO~T7)V 
i.j30VAEV07)J.'EV 
i.j3ovAEvO.,.,n 
i.j3ovAEV07)ITaV 
infinitive: 
participle: 
J st perf indo 
AEAvKa 
AEAvKa, 
AEAVKE 
AEAVKaTOV 
AEAvKaTov 
AEAvKaJ.'EV 
AEAvKan 
AEAVKaut(V} 
opt. (simple form) 
AEAOi7TOtJ.'t 
AEAOi7TOt, 
AEAOi7TOt 
AEAOi7TOtTOV 
AEAOmOLT7)V 
AEAOi7TOtJ.'EV 
AEAoi7TOtn 
AEAOi7TOtEV 
APPENDIX THREE 
AORIST SYSTEM PASSIVE 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
j30VAWOw 
j30VAWOE i.,.,v 
j3ovAwOff, 
j30VAWOE i 7), 
j3ovAEV07)Tt 
j3ovAwOff 
j30VAWOE i 7) 
j30VAWO~TW 
POVAWOr,TOV 
j30VAWOE(7)TOV or -8ELTOV 
j30VAEV07)TOV 
POVAWOr,TOV 
j30VAWOEL~T7)V or -8EiT7)V 
j30VAWO~TWV 
j3ovAWOWJ.'EV 
j30VAWOE(7)J.'EV or -8E'iJ.'EV 
j3ovAwOr,n 
j30VAWOE i 7)n or -8E 'i n 
POvAEvO.,.,n 
POVAwOwITdv} 
POVAWOE(7)ITav or -8E'iEV 
POVAWOEVTWV 
POVAwOr,vat 
j30VAWOEi" j3ovAwOE'iITa, j3ovAwOEV 
PERFECT SYSTEM ACTIVE 
2nd perf indo 
sub}. (simple) 
AEAoma 
AEAOi7TW 
AEAOt7Ta, 
AEAOi7T!/, 
AEAomdv} 
AEAOi7T!/ 
AEAoi7TaTov 
AE Aoi 7T7)TOV 
AEAoi7TaTov 
AE Aoi 7T7)TOV 
AEAOi 7TaJ.'EV 
AEAOi7TWJ.'EV 
AEAoi7Tan 
AEAOi 7T7)n 
AEAOi 7TaITt(v} 
AEAOi7TWITdv} 
opt. (periphrastic form) 
AEAomw, (-v'ia) E(7)V 
AEAomw, (-v'ia) EL.,." 
AEAomw, (-v'ia, -O,) Et.,., 
AEAoman (-via) E(7)TOV 
AEAoman (-via) Ei~T7)V 
AEAoman, (-v'iat) Ei}lEv 
AEAoman, (-v'iat) Ein 
AEAoman, (-v'iad ELEV 
subj. (periphrastic form) 
AEAomw, ;;; or AEAomv'ia ;;; 
AEAomw, (-v'ia) 77' 
AEAomw, (-v'ia, ~,) 77 
AEAoman (-via) 77TOv 
AEAoman (-via) 77TOv 
AEAoman, (-v'iat) ;;;J.'EV 
AEAoman, (-v'iad 77n 
AEAoman, (-v'iad ;;;ITt(v) 
or AEAomam i1 
imperative 
AEAOt7TW, (-v'ia) tITOt 
AEAomw, (-v'ia, -O,) €ITTW 
AEAoman (-via) €ITTOV 
AEAoman (-via) €ITTWV 
AEAoman, (-v'iad €ITn 
AEAoman, (-v'iat) €ITTWV 
or AEAomom EL.,., 
or AEAomom €ITTW 
perfect active infinitive: 
AEAomEVat 
perfect active participle: 
AEAomw" AEAomv'ia, AEAomo, 

Paradigms: .f2-Verbs 
363 
PERFECT SYSTEM: M/P INDICATIVE, INFINITIVE, PARTICIPLE 
vowel stem 
dental plosive stem 
labial plosive stem 
indo 
A€Av!J.at 
7I"(7I"H(Jpat 
y€ypa!J.!J.at 
A€AVlTat 
7I"€7I"HlTat 
y€ypatat 
A€AVTat 
7I"€7I"HITTat 
yEypa7l"Tat 
AEAVIT()OV 
7I"E7I"HlTeOV 
yEypacpeOv 
AEAVlTeOV 
7I"E7I"HlTeOV 
yEypacp()ov 
A(AV!J.(ea 
7I"(7I"( LIT!J.(ea 
y(ypa!J.!J.(()a 
AEAVlTe( 
7I"E7I"HlTe( 
yEypacp()( 
AEAVVTat 
7I"mHIT!J.EVOt (-ad dlTL 
yqpa!J.!J.EVOt (-at) (iITL 
or 7I"(7I"HIT!J.Eva flTTL 
or yqpa!J.!J.Eva flTTL 
in! 
A(AVlTeat 
7I"(7I"(tlTeat 
yqpacpeat 
part. 
A(AV!J.EVOS. -7/. -ov 
7I"(7I"HIT!J.EVOS. -7/. -ov 
y(ypa!J.!J.Evos. -7/.-ov 
velar plosive stem 
stem in A 
stem in v 
indo 
7I"E7I"paY!J.at 
17yy(A!J.at 
7I"EcpalT!J.at 
7r€7I"patat 
17YY(AlTat 
7rE7I"paKTat 
17YY(ATat 
7I"EcpaVTat 
7rE7I"paxeOV 
17yy(ABov 
7I"EcpaVeOV 
7I"E7I"paxeOV 
17yy(ABov 
7I"EcpaVeOV 
7I"(7I"paY!J.(()a 
i}yyEA}J.(ea 
7I"(cpalTw()a 
7I"E7I"pa X()( 
17YYEAe( 
7I"Ecpav()E 
7I"(7I"paY!J.EVOt (-at) (iITL 
i}yYEA!J.EVOt (-at) E(ITL 
7I"(cpalT!J.EVOt (-ad ((ITL 
or 7I"mpaY!J.Eva flTTL 
or i}yy(A!J.Eva flTTL 
or 7I"EcpalT!J.Eva E(nL 
in! 
7r(7I"pnXeat 
i}yYEABat 
7I"(cpaveat 
part. 
7I"E7I"pay!J.EVos. -7/.-ov 
i}yy(A!J.EVOS. -7/.-ov 
7I"(cpalT!J.Evos. -7/. -ov 
PERFECT SYSTEM: M/P SUBJUNCTIVE, OPTATIVE, IMPERATIVE 
subjunctive 
AEAV!J.€VOS (-7/) ~ 
A(AV!J.€VOS (-7/) ~s 
A(AV!J.EVOS (-7/. -OV) ~ 
A(AV!J.€VW (-a) ~TOV 
AEAV!J.€VW (-a) ~TOV 
AEAV!J.€VOt (-at) ~!J.EV 
A(AV!J.€VOt (-ad ~n 
A(AV!J.€VOt (-at) ~lTt(v) 
or AEAv!J.€Va ~ 
optative 
A(AV!J.€VOS (-7/) E(7/V 
A(AV!J.€VOS (-7/) E(7/S 
A(AV!J.EVOS (-7/. -OV) ((7/ 
A(AV!J.EVW (-a) ((7/TOV 
A(AV!J.EVW (-a) (irjT7/V 
A(AV!J.EVOt (-ad EL!J.EV 
A(AV!J.EVOt (-at) ELn 
AEAV!J.EVOt (-at) (LEV 
or A(Av!J.Eva ((7/ 
imperative 
A(AV!J.EVOS (-7/) (lTet 
A(AV!J.€VOS (-7/. -OV) EITTW 
AEAV!J.EVW (-a) EITTOV 
A(AV!J.€VW (-a) EITTWV 
A(AV!J.EVOt (-at) ElTn 
AEAV!J.EVOt (-ad EITTWV 
or A(Av!J.€Va EITTW 

364 
APPENDIX THREE 
PERFECT SYSTEM: M/P SUBJ., OPT., IMPER. (RARE SIMPLE FORM) 
subjunctive 
optative 
JJ.EJJ.vwJJ.at 
JJ.EJJ.Vy/JJ.T/V 
JJ.EJJ.vfi 
JJ.EJJ.vfio 
JJ.EJJ.Vr,Tat 
JJ.EJJ.VfiTO 
JJ.EJJ.Vr,UeOv 
JJ.EJJ.vfiueov 
JJ.EJJ.Vr,UeOv 
JJ.EJJ.Vy/UeT/V 
JJ.EJJ.VWJJ.Eea 
JJ.EJJ.Vy/JJ.Eea 
JJ.EJJ.Vr,UeE 
JJ.EJJ.vfiueE 
JJ.EJJ.VWVTat 
JJ.EJJ.vfivTO 
or 
JJ.EJJ.VlIlWIV 
JJ.EJJ.v0 o 
JJ.EJJ.v0 TO 
JJ.EJJ.v0ueov 
JJ.EJJ.v0UeT/V 
JJ.EJJ.v0JJ.Eea 
JJ.EJJ.v0 ueE 
JJ.EJJ.v0 vTO 
imperative 
JJ.f.JJ.VT/UO 
JJ.EJJ.V~UeW 
PLUPERFECT ACTIVE AND MIDDLE/PASSIVE INDICATIVE 
active 
middle-passive 
vowel stem 
dental plosive stem 
EAEAVKT/ 
EAEAVKT/> 
EAEAVKH(V) 
EAEAVKETOV 
EAEAVKf.rT/V 
EAEAVKEJJ.W 
EAEAVKETE 
EAEAvKEuav 
EAEAVJJ.T/V 
EAf.AVUO 
EAf.AVTO 
EAf.AVUeOV 
EAEAVUeT/V 
EAEAVJJ.Eea 
EAf.AVUeE 
EAf.AVVTO 
middle-passive 
velar plosive stem 
E7fE7TpaYJJ.T/V 
E7ff.7fpa~o 
E7ff.7fpaKTO 
E7ff.7fpaxeOV 
E7fE7TpaxeT/V 
E7fE7Tpay}J.Eea 
E7ff.7fpaXeE 
7fE7fpaYJJ.f.vot (-{ltl ~uav 
or 7fE7TpaYJJ.f.Va ~v 
E7fE7TE i,uJJ. T/V 
E7ff.7fHUO 
E7ff.7fHUTO 
E7ff.7fHUeOV 
E 7fE 7fti.ueT/V 
E7fE7TEi,UJJ.Eea 
E7ff.7fHUeE 
7fE7fHUJJ.f.VOt (-{It) ~uav 
, 
~ 
or 7fE7fHUJJ.wa T/V 
stem in A 
~yyf.AJJ.T/V 
~yyEMo 
~yyEATO 
~yYEAeov 
~yyf.AeT/V 
~yyf.AJJ.Eea 
~yyEAeE 
~yYEAJJ.f.VOt (-{It) ~uav 
or ~yyEAJJ.f.Va ~v 
labial plosive stem 
EYEYpaJJ.JJ.T/V 
Eyf.ypa"'o 
Eyf.ypa7fTO 
Eyf.ypacpeov 
EYEYpacpeT/V 
EYEYpaJJ.JJ.Eea 
Eyf.ypacpeE 
YEYpaJJ.JJ.f.vot (-{It)~uav 
, 
~ 
or YEypaJJ.JJ.wa T/V 
stem in v 
E7f€cpaVTO 
E7f€cpaVeov 
E7fEcpaVeT/V 
E7fEcpauJJ.Eea 
E7ff.cpaVeE 
7fEcpauJJ.f.Vot (-{It) ~uav 
or 7fEcpauJJ.f.Va ~v 

Paradigms: .f2-Verbs 
365 
FUTURE PERFECT INDICATIVE 
active 
AEAVKW, (-vta) ~IJ'O/laL 
AEAVKW, (-vta) ~1J''[1 
AEAVKW, (-vta. -0,) ~IJ'TaL 
AEAvKon (-via) ~IJ'EIJ'Bov 
AEAvKon (-via) ~IJ'EIJ'Bov 
AEAvKon, (-VtaL) EIJ'O/lEBa 
AEAvKon, (-VtaL) ~IJ'EIJ'BE 
AEAvKon, (-VtaL) ~IJ'OVTaL 
or AEAVKOTa ~lJ'TaL 
middle-passive 
AEAVIJ'O/laL 
AEAVIJ''[1 
AEAVIJ'ETaL 
AEAVIJ'EIJ'Bov 
AEAVIJ'EIJ'Bov 
AEAVIJ'O/lEBa 
AEAVIJ'EIJ'BE 
AEAVIJ'OVTaL 
future perfect middle-passive infinitive: 
future perfect middle-passive participle: 
or 
AEAV/lfVO, (-1) 
~IJ'O/laL 
AEAV/lfVO, (-1) 
~1J''[1 
AEAV/lfVO, (-1). -OV) ~IJ'TaL 
AEAV/lfVW ~IJ'EIJ'Bov 
AEAV/lfVW ~IJ'EIJ'Bov 
AEAV/lfVOL (-aL) EIJ'O/lEBa 
AEAV/lfVOL (-aL) ~IJ'EIJ'BE 
AEAV/lfVOL (-ad ~IJ'OVTaL 
or AEAV/lfVa ~IJ'TaL 
AEAVIJ'EIJ'BaL 
AEAVIJ'O/lEVO,. -1). -ov 
ATHEMATIC PERFECTS (U41) 
LIJ"T1]}.H (in addition to forms from EIJ"T1]KU) 
indicative 
subjunctive 
opt. (poetic) 
flJ'TaTOV 
flJ'TaTOV 
flJ'Ta/lEV 
flJ'Tan 
€IJ'TQ.IJ'L(V) 
infinitive: 
participle: 
€IJ'TW 
€lJ'TiI' 
€lJ'Tii 
€1J'T7]TOV 
€1J'T7]TOV 
€IJ'TW/lEV 
€1J'T7]n 
€IJ'TWIJ'L(V) 
€IJ'TCWaL 
€lJ'Ta(1)v 
EIJ"TaL1), 
EIJ'TaL1) 
€IJ'TatTOV 
€ IJ'T ai TrW 
€IJ'Tat/lEV 
€IJ'Tatn 
€IJ'TatEV 
()ViWKW (in addition to forms from TE()V1]KU) 
indicative 
subjunctive 
opt. (poetic) 
TfBvaTOV 
TfBvaTOv 
TfBva/lEV 
TfBvan 
nBVaIJ'L(V) 
infinitive: 
participle: 
not found 
nBvavaL 
nBva(1)v 
nBva(1), 
nBva(1) 
nBva'iTov 
nBvaiT1)V 
nBVat/lEV 
nBvatn 
nBVatEV 
nBvEw,. nBvEwlJ'a. nBvEo, 
imper. (poetic) 
flJ'TaBL 
EIJ'TaTW 
flJ'TaTOV 
€1J'T(lTWV 
flJ'Tan 
€IJ'TllVTWV 
imperative 
TfBvaBL (poetic) 
nBvaTw 
pluperfect 
flJ'TaTOV 
€lJ'TaT1)V 
flJ'Ta/lEV 
flJ'Tan 
flJ'TalJ'aV 
pluperfect 
(masc./neut. stem nBvEwT-) 

366 
OEOLa (in addition to forms from oEooLKa) 
indicative 
OEOLa 
OEOLa, 
OEOL.(V) 
OEOLTOV 
OEOLTOV 
OEOLJ.l.EV 
OEOLH 
OEOLQ.ITL(V) 
infinitive: 
participle: 
subj. (rare) 
OEOLW 
OEOLV' 
OEOLV 
OEOLT/TOV 
OEOLT/TOV 
OEoiwJ.l.EV 
OEoiT/H 
OEoiwITL(V) 
OEOLEvaL 
optative 
not found 
OE(iLW" oEoLVLa, OEOLO, 
APPENDIX THREE 
imperative 
OEOL6L 
pluperfect 
~----
EOEOLHV 
EOEoLm 
EOEOLH 
EOEOLJ.l.EV 
EOEOLH 
EOEOiEITaV 
or EOEOLITaV 
PRESENT SYSTEM OF CONTRACT U-VERBS' 
VERBS IN -EW: ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optatiw? 
7rOLW 
7rOLW 
(7roWLJ.l.d or 7rOWLT/V 
7rOLEL, 
7rOL fT, 
(7rOWL,) 
7rOWLT/, 
7rOLEL 
7rOL fT 
(7rOWL) 
7rOWLT/ 
7rOLELTOV 
7rOLijTOv 
7rOWLTOV 
(7rOWL T/TOV) 
7rOLELTOV 
7rOLijTOv 
7rOWLTT/V 
(7rOWn)TT/v) 
7rOWVJ.l.EV 
7rOLWJ.l.EV 
7rOWLJ.l.EV 
(7rOWL T/J.l.EV) 
7rOLELH 
7rOLijH 
7rOWLH 
( 7rOWL T/H) 
7rowvcn(v) 
7rOLwcn(v) 
7rOWLEV 
(7rOWL T/ITav) 
7rOLELV 
infinitive: 
participle: 
7rOLWV, 7rowvITa, 7rOWVV 
imperative 
7rOLH 
7rOLHTW 
7rOLELTOV 
7rOLEtTWV 
7rOLELH 
7rOWVVTWV 
VERBS IN -EW WITH MONOSYLLABIC STEM: ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
7rhEW 
7rhEW 
7r hEOLJ.l.L 
7rhEL, 
7r hEV' 
7rhEOL, 
7rhEL 
7rhEL 
7r hEV 
7r hEOL 
7rhEiTW 
~.----
imperJ indo 
E7roiovv 
E7roiH, 
E7roiH 
E7rOLELTOV 
E7rOLEiTT/V 
E7rOWVJ.l.EV 
E7rOLELn 
E7roiovv 
imperJ 
f7rhWV 
f7rhH, 
f7rhH 
I. Future system with contract conjugation (such as -EW contraction in VOJ.l.LW, aYYEhw, and -aw 
contraction in EhW, ITKEOW) has the same endings for indicative, optative, infinitive, and 
participle (no subjunctive or imperative in the future). 
2. Less common forms in parentheses. 

Paradigms: Contract Verbs 
367 
active a/verbs in -EW with monosyllabic stem (dual and plural) 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj 
7rA~LTOV 
7rAE-T)TOV 
7rAEOtTOV 
7rA~LTOV 
E7rA~LTOV 
7rA~LTOV 
7rAETJTOV 
7r AWL TTJV 
7rAfLTWV 
E7r Af L TTJV 
7rAEOjlfV 
7rAEWjlfV 
7rAEOtjlfV 
E7r AEOjlfV 
7rA~LTf 
7rAETJTf 
7rAEOtTf 
7rAf(Tf 
E7rAf(Tf 
7rAEOvln(v) 
7rAEwcn(v) 
7rAEOtfV 
7r AH)VTWV 
E7rAWV 
infinitive: 
7rA~(V 
participle: 
7rAEWV. 7rAEOVITa. 7rAEOV 
VERBS IN -EW: MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj indo 
7rowvjlat 
7rotwjlat 
7rOWLjlTJV 
f7rOWVjlTJV 
7rOt f1 
7rOt f1 
7rOW(O 
7rOWV 
E7rOWV 
7rOt~LTat 
7rOtr,Tat 
7rOWLTO 
7rotELIT8w 
E7rOtfLTO 
7rOtfL178ov 
7rotr,IT8ov 
7roWL178ov 
7rOtfLIT8ov 
E7rOtf LIT80v 
7rot~L178ov 
7rotr,IT8ov 
7roWL178TJv 
7rot~LIT8wv 
E7rOtf LIT8TJv 
7rowvjl~8a 
7rotwjlf8a 
7rOWLjlf8a 
E7rOWVjlf8a 
7rOt~L178~ 
7rOtr,IT8f 
7rOW(178f 
7rot~(IT8~ 
E7rOtfLIT8f 
7rOWVVTat 
7rOtwVTat 
7rOWLVTO 
7rot~LIT8wv 
E7rOWVVTO 
infinitive: 
7rotE(IT8at 
participle: 
7rOWVjlfVO). -TJ. -OV 
VERBS IN -EW WITH MONOSYLLABIC STEM: MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj indo 
OEOjlat 
OEwjlat 
OW LjlTJV 
EOEOjlTJV 
OEn 
oEn 
OEOW 
OEOV 
EOEOV 
O~LTat 
OETJTat 
OEOtTO 
o~LIT8w 
EOE(TO 
o~L178ov 
OETJIT8ov 
OEotIT8ov 
OE(IT80V 
EOf(178ov 
o~(IT8ov 
OETJIT8ov 
OWL178TJv 
OELIT8wv 
EOEL178TJv 
OfOjlf8a 
Ofwjlf8a 
OWLjlf8a 
EOfOjlf8a 
OfL178f 
OETJ178E 
OEot178f 
OE(IT8f 
EOf(IT8E 
OEOVTat 
OEWVTat 
OEOWTO 
OELIT8wv 
EOEOVTO 
infinitive: 
of(IT8at 
participle: 
OfOjlfVO). -TJ. -OV 

368 
APPENDIX THREE 
VERBS IN -aw: ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj 
opw 
opw 
(OP0P.l) 
or 
oPcP1/V 
f.WpWV 
op~c; 
op~c; 
(op0c;) 
°PcP1/C; 
opa 
Ewpac; 
op~ 
op~ 
(op0) 
oPcP1/ 
opaTw 
f.wpa 
opnTov 
opnTov 
op0TOV 
(OPcP1/TOV) 
opnTov 
f.WpnTOV 
opnTov 
opnTov 
oPcPT1/V 
(Opcp~T1/V ) 
opaTwv 
f.WpaT1/V 
opwp.w 
opwp.w 
°P0p.w 
(opcP1/p.w) 
f.Wpwp.w 
opnn 
opnn 
op0n 
(oPcP1/Td 
opnn 
f.wpnn 
opwcn(v) 
opw(n(v) 
op0w 
(oPcPWTav) 
OPWVTWV 
f.WpWV 
infinitive: 
opnv 
participle: 
opwv. opwua. opwv 
VERBS IN -aw WITH TJ IN CONTRACTION: ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj 
xpw 
xpw 
XPcP1/V 
£xpwv 
xpnc; 
xpnc; 
XPcP1/C; 
XpT, 
£XP1/C; 
xpn 
xpn 
XPcP1/ 
xp~TW 
£XP1/ 
XpT,TOV 
XpT,TOV 
xp0TOV 
XpT,TOV 
fXPT,TOV 
XpT,TOV 
XpT,TOV 
XPcPT1/V 
xp~TWV 
fXP~T1/V 
xpwp.w 
xpwp.w 
xp0p.w 
fXPWP.EV 
xpT,n 
xpT,n 
xp0n 
xpT,n 
fxpT,n 
xpw(n(v) 
xpw(n(v) 
xp0w 
XPWVTWV 
£xpwv 
infinitive: 
xpT,V 
participle: 
xpwv. xpwua. xpwv 
VERBS IN -aw: MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj 
opwp.al 
opwp.al 
°pcPp.1/V 
f.Wpwp.1/V 
op~ 
op~ 
op0o 
opw 
f.WpW 
OpnTal 
OpnTal 
op0TO 
opau8w 
f.WpnTO 
opnu8ov 
opnu8ov 
op0u8ov 
opnu8ov 
f.wpnu8ov 
opnu8ov 
opnu8ov 
oPcPu81/v 
opau8wv 
f.wpau81/v 
opwp.E8a 
opwp.E8a 
oPcP}lE8a 
f.wpwp.E8a 
opnu8E 
opnu8E 
Op0u8E 
opnu8E 
f.WpnU8E 
OpWVTal 
OPWVTal 
op0VTO 
opau8wv 
f.WpWVTO 
infinitive: 
opnu8al 
participle: 
opwp.woc;. -1/. -{JV 

Paradigms: Contract Verbs 
369 
VERBS IN -aw WITH 1/ IN CONTRACTION: MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
xpWjJ.aL 
xpwjJ.aL 
XPtfjJ.1JV 
xpfi 
xpfi 
xp00 
xpw 
XPTJTaL 
XPTJTaL 
xp0TO 
Wr/(jOw 
XPTJ(jOov 
XPTJ(jOov 
xp0(jOov 
XPTJ(jOov 
XPTJ(jOov 
XPTJ(jOov 
XPtf(jOrJV 
XPr](jOwv 
xpwjJ.EOa 
xpwjJ.EOa 
xptfjJ.EOa 
XPTJ(jOE 
XPTJ(jOE 
XP0(jOE 
XPTJ(jOE 
xpwvTaL 
XPWVTaL 
xp0VTO 
XPr](jOwv 
infinitive: 
XPTJ(jOaL 
participle: 
xpWjJ.EVO,. -1). -ov 
VERBS IN -ow: ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
(1)Aw 
(1)Aw 
(o1)AoLjJ.d or 
(1)11.01. 1)V 
(1)AOL, 
(1)AOL, 
(01)AOL,) 
(1)11.01.1), 
or]Aov 
(1)AOL 
(1)A.o'i 
(o1)A.o'i) 
(1)Ao/' 1) 
(1)A01JTW 
(1)AofJTOV 
(1)AwTOV 
(1)AOLTOV 
(01)Ao/.1)Tov) 
(1)AOVTOV 
(1)AOVTOV 
(1)AwTOV 
(1)AOLT1)V 
(01)AOL r]T1)V) 
(1)AOVTWV 
(1)AovjJ.Ev 
(1)AwjJ.EV 
(1)AoLjJ.EV 
(01)Ao/' 1)jJ.EV) 
(1)AOVH 
(1)AwH 
(1)AOLH 
(01)Ao/.1)H) 
(1)AOVH 
(1)Aov(jL(v) 
(1)Aw(jL(v) 
(1)AOLEV 
(01)Ao/' 1)(jav) 
(1)AOVVTwv 
(1)AOVV 
infinitive: 
participle: 
(1)Awv. (1)Aov(ja. (1)AOVV 
VERBS IN -ow: MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
(1)AovjJ.aL 
(1)AwjJ.aL 
(1)Ao/.jJ.1)V 
(1)AOL 
(1)AOL 
(1)AOlO 
(1)AOV 
(1)AOVTaL 
(1)AWTaL 
(1)AOlTO 
(1)Aov(jOw 
(1)Aov(jOov 
(1)Aw(jOov 
(1)AoL(jOov 
(1)Aov(jOov 
(1)Aov(jOov 
(1)Aw(jOov 
(1)Ao/'(j01)V 
(1)Aov(jOwv 
(1)AovjJ.EOa 
(1)AwwOa 
(1)AoLjJ.EOa 
(1)Aov(jOE 
(1)Aw(jOE 
(1)Aol(jOE 
(1)Aov(jOE 
(1)AOVVTaL 
(1)AWVTaL 
(1)AOlVTO 
(1)Aov(jOwv 
infinitive: 
(1)Aov(jOaL 
participle: 
(1)AovjJ.EVo,. -1). -ov 
imperJ 
fxpWjJ.1)V 
fXPW 
fXPTJTO 
fXPTJ(jOOV 
fXPr](j01)V 
fxpwjJ.EOa 
fXPTJ(jOE 
fXPWVTO 
imperJ 
fOr]AOVV 
fOr]Aov, 
fOr]Aov 
f(1)AOVTOV 
f(1)AOVT1)V 
f(1)AovjJ.EV 
f(1)AovH 
fOr]Aovv 
imperJ 
f(1)AOVjJ.1)V 
f(1)Aov 
f(1)AOVTO 
f(1)Aov(jOov 
f(1)Aov(j01)V 
f(1)AovjJ.EOa 
f(1)Aov(jOE 
f(1)AOVVTO 

370 
APPENDIX THREE 
MI-VERBS 
Ti8T]}J.t: PRESENT SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperJ 
Ti87]llt 
n8w 
n8fi7]v 
hi87]v 
Ti87]'> 
n8ff,> 
n8d7]'> 
Ti8H 
hi8m 
Ti87](TL(v) 
n8ff 
n8fi7] 
n8hw 
hi8H 
Ti8nov 
n8r,TOv 
n8fLTov 
Ti8nov 
hi8nov 
Ti8nov 
n8r,TOv 
n8fiT7]V 
n8hwv 
fn8h7]v 
Ti8fJlW 
n8w}J.w 
n8fLJlW 
hi8fJlW 
Ti8fH 
n8r,H 
n8fLH 
Ti8nf 
hi8nf 
n8EQ.a-t{v) 
n8w(TL(v) 
n8fLw 
n8EvTwv 
hi8HTaV 
infinitive: 
n8EvaL 
participle: 
n8fi,>. TL8fLa-a. n8Ev 
Ti8T]}J.L: PRESENT SYSTEM MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperJ 
Ti8fJlaL 
n8wJlaL 
n8fiJl7]v 
fn8EJl7]V 
Ti8fa-aL 
n8ff 
n8fLo 
Ti8fa-O 
hi8fa-O 
Ti8naL 
n8r,TaL 
n8fLTo 
n8Ea-8w 
hi8no 
Ti8fa-8ov 
n8r,a-8ov 
n8fLa-8ov 
Ti8fa-8ov 
hi8fa-8ov 
Ti8fa-8ov 
n8r,a-8ov 
n8da-87]v 
n8Ea-8wv 
fn8Ea-87]v 
n8EJlf8a 
TL8WJlf8a 
n8dJlf8a 
fn8EJlf8a 
Ti8fa-8f 
n8r,IT8f 
n8fLa-8f 
Ti8fa-8f 
hiOfa-8f 
Ti8wTaL 
n8wvTaL 
n8fLvTo 
n8Ea-8wv 
hiOwTO 
infinitive: 
Ti8fa-8aL 
participle: 
n8EJlWo,>. -7]. -ov 
Ti8T]}J.t: AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
f87]Ka 
8w 
8fi7]v 
f87]Ka'> 
8ff,> 
8fi 7]'> 
8E'> 
f87]Kdv) 
8' 
?1 
8fi7] 
8hw 
f8nov 
8r,TOV 
8fLTOV 
8hov 
f8h7]v 
8r,TOV 
8dT7]V 
(}hwv 
f(}fJlW 
8wJlw 
(}fL7]JlW or (}fLJlW 
f(}nf 
8r,H 
8fi7]H or (}fLH 
(}EH 
f8fa-av 
(}Wa-L(V) 
(}fLW 
(}EVTWV 
infinitive: 
8fLvaL 
participle: 
8fi,>. (}fLa-a. (}EV 

Paradigms: MI-Verbs 
371 
Ti8r7l.I.L: AORIST SYSTEM MIDDLE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
EOf./lryv 
{OOV 
{OETO 
{Om-Oov 
EOf.(J"Oryv 
EOf./lEOa 
{OE(J"OE 
{OEVTO 
infinitive: 
participle: 
indicative 
-----
L ry/lL 
Lry, 
Lry(J"L(V) 
LETOV 
LETOV 
LE/lEV 
LETE 
in(J"dv) 
infinitive: 
participle: 
indicative 
LE/laL 
LE(J"aL 
LETaL 
LE(J"OOV 
LE(J"OOV 
if./lEOa 
LE(J"OE 
LEVTaL 
infinitive: 
participle: 
OW/laL 
O~ 
'[I 
efjTaL 
MwOov 
Of wOo v 
OW/lEOa 
MwOE 
OWVTaL 
Of.(J"OaL 
Of./lEVO,. -ry. -ov 
OEt/lryV 
OELO 
OELTO 
OELa-eov 
OEt(J"OryV 
OEi/lEOa 
OEL(J"OE 
OELVTO 
Oof; 
Of.(J"Ow 
Of.(J"Oov 
Of.(J"Owv 
t"Y/J.l.t: PRESENT SYSTEM ACTIVE 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
iw 
iEtryV 
i~, 
LEL ry, 
LEL 
i~ 
LELry 
LETW 
ii]TOV 
iELTOV 
LETOV 
ii]TOV 
iEtTryV 
LETWV 
iW/lEV 
iEL/lEV 
ii]TE 
iELTE 
LETE 
iW(J"L(V) 
iELEV 
LEVTWV 
if.VaL 
iEt,. iEL(J"a. if.v 
t"Y/J.l.t: PRESENT SYSTEM MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
iW/laL 
iE t/lryv 
i~ 
iELO 
LE(J"O 
ii]TaL 
iELTO 
if.(J"Ow 
ii](J"Oov 
iEL(J"OOV 
LE(J"OOV 
ii](J"Oov 
iE t(J"Oryv 
if.(J"Owv 
iW/lEOa 
iEt/lEOa 
i i](J"OE 
iEL(J"OE 
(E(J"OE 
iWVTaL 
iELVTO 
if.(J"Owv 
LE(J"OaL 
if./lEVO,. -ry. -ov 
imperfect ind_ 
Lryv 
LEL, 
LEL 
LETOV 
ihryv 
(E/lEV 
(ETE 
LEuav 
imperfect indo 
LE/lryV 
LE(J"O 
tETO 
LE(J"OOV 
if.(J"Oryv 
if./lEOa 
(E(J"OE 
(EVTO 

372 
indicative 
(acpH]Ka 
(acpH]Ka> 
(acp)i]Kdv) 
(acpkiTOv 
(acp)ELT1)V 
(acpki}J.EV 
(acpkiTE 
(acpki(}"av 
infinitive: 
participle: 
indicative 
(acp)EL}J.1/V 
(acpki(}"o 
(acpkiTO 
(acp)EL(}"OOV 
(acp)EL(}"01/V 
(acp)EL}J.EOa 
(acpki(}"OE 
(acp)ELvTO 
infinitive: 
participle: 
tr/llL: AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
subjunctive 
(acp)w 
(acp)ff> 
(acp)ff 
(acp)i]Tov 
(acp)i]Tov 
(acp)w}J.EV 
(acp)i]TE 
(acp)w(}"L(V) 
(acpkivaL 
optative 
(acp)ELT)V 
(acp)EL1/> 
(acp)EL1/ 
(acplE'iTov 
(acp)ELT1/V 
(acplE'i}J.EV 
(acplE'iTE or (acp)EL1/TE 
(acplE'iEV or (acp)EL1/(}"av 
(acp)EL>. (acpki(}"a. (acp)(v 
tT/J.LL: AORIST SYSTEM MIDDLE 
subjunctive 
optative 
(acp)w}J.aL 
(acp)EL}J.1/V 
(acp)ff 
(acp)ELo 
(acp)i]TaL 
(acp)ELTO 
(acp)i](}"Oov 
(acp)E'i.(}"Oov 
(acp)i](}"Oov 
(acp)d(}"01/v 
(acp)w}J.EOa 
(acp)EL}J.EOa 
(acp)i](}"OE 
(acp)EL(}"OE 
(acp)wVTaL 
(acp)ELvTO 
(acp)((}"OaL 
(acp)(}J.EVo>. -1/. -ov 
OtOw/.u: PRESENT SYSTEM ACTIVE 
APPENDIX THREE 
imperative 
(acp)(> 
(acp)hw 
(acp)hov 
(acp)hwv 
(acp)(TE 
(acp)(VTWV 
imperative 
(acp)ov 
(acp)((}"Ow 
(acp)E(}"OoV 
(acp)((}"Owv 
(acp)E(}"OE 
(acp)((}"Owv 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperJ indo 
OLOW}J.L 
OLOW 
OLOOL1/V 
f.oioovv 
oiow> 
M0> 
OLooi1/> 
oioov 
f.oioov> 
OiOW(}"L(V) 
M0 
OLooi1/ 
OLOOTW 
f.oioov 
OiOOTOV 
OLOWTOV 
OLOOLTOV 
OLOOTOV 
f.OiOOTOV 
OiOOTOV 
OLOWTOV 
OLOOLT1/V 
OLOOTWV 
f.OLOOT1/V 
oiooJ.I.Ev 
OLOW}J.EV 
OLOOL}J.EV 
f.OiOO}J.EV 
OiOOTE 
OLOWTE 
OLOOLTE 
OiOOTE 
f.OiOOTE 
oLooom(v) 
OLOW(}"L(V) 
OLOOLEV 
OLOOVTWV 
f.oioo(}"av 
infinitive: 
oLoovaL 
participle: 
OLOOV>. oLoov(}"a. OLOOV 

Paradigms: MI-Verbs 
373 
OLOWjJ.L: PRESENT SYSTEM MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperJ indo 
OLOOJ.Lat 
OtOwJ.LaL 
OLOOLJ.L71V 
OLOoO"aL 
OL00 
OtOOLO 
OLOOO"O 
OLooTaL 
OLOWTaL 
OLOOLTO 
oLoo0"8w 
oLoo0"80v 
oLow0"80v 
OLOOL0"80v 
oLoo0"80v 
oLoo0"80v 
oLow0"80v 
OLOOL0"871v 
otoo0"8wv 
oLooJ.L€8a 
oLowJ.L€8a 
OLOOLJ.L€8a 
oLoo0"8€ 
oLow0"8€ 
OLOOL0"8€ 
oLoo0"8E 
OLOOVTat 
OLOwvTaL 
OtOOLVTO 
oLoo0"8wv 
infinitive: 
oLoo0"8aL 
participle: 
OLOOJ.LEVO>. -71. -{IV 
OiOWjJ.L: AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
EOwKa 
Ow 
OOL71V 
EOWKa> 
00> 
OOL71> 
EOWKdv) 
00 
OOL71 
EOOTOV 
OWTOV 
OOLTOV 
€OOT71V 
OWTOV 
OOLT71V 
EOOJ.LEV 
OWJ.LEV 
OOL 71J.LEV or OOLJ.LEV 
EOOTE 
OWTE 
OOL71TE 
EooO"av 
OWO"L(V) 
OOLEV or OOL71O"av 
infinitive: 
oovvaL 
participle: 
oov>. oovO"a. oov 
OiOWjJ.L: AORIST SYSTEM MIDDLE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
€OOJ.L71V 
oWJ.Lat 
OOLJ.L71V 
EOOV 
00 
OOLO 
EOOTO 
OWTat 
OOLTO 
Eoo0"80v 
ow0"80v 
00L0"80v 
€oo0"871v 
ow0"80v 
00i0"871v 
€ooJ.LE8a 
oWJ.LE8a 
00LJ.LE8a 
EOo0"8E 
OW0"8E 
00L0"8E 
EOOVTO 
OWVTat 
OOLVTO 
infinitive: 
oo0"8aL 
participle: 
OOJ.LEVO>. -71. -{IV 
€OtOOJ.L71V 
€OLOOO"O 
€OLOOTO 
€oLoo0"80v 
€oLoo0"871v 
€oLooJ.L€8a 
€oLoo0"8€ 
€OLOOVTO 
imperative 
OOTE 
OOVTWV 
imperative 
oov 
oo0"8w 
oo0"80v 
oo0"8wv 
OO0"8E 
oo0"8wv 

374 
APPENDIX THREE 
L(TTy//U: PRESENT SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperJ indo 
LCTT1}/ .. U 
iCTTW 
LCTTaL1}V 
LCTT1}V [ i I 
LCTT1}~ 
iCTTff~ 
LCTTaL 1}~ 
LCTT1} 
LCTT1}~ 
LCTT1}CTL(V) 
iCTTff 
iCTTai1} 
iCTTaTw 
LCTT1} 
LCTTaTOV 
iCTT'ryTOV 
iCTTatTOV 
LCTTaTOV 
LCTTaTov 
LCTTaTov 
iCTT'ryTOV 
iCTTaiT1}V 
LCTTaTWV 
LCTTaT1}V 
LCTTafJ.W 
iCTTWfJ.W 
iCTTaLfJ.W 
LCTTafJ.W 
LCTTan 
iCTT'ryn 
iCTTaLn 
LCTTan 
LCTTan 
iCTTUCTL(V) 
iCTTWCTL(V) 
iCTTatW 
LCTTaVTWV 
LCTTaCTav 
infinitive: 
iCTTavaL 
participle: 
iCTTa~. iCTTuua. iCTTav 
L(TTT/J.U: PRESENT SYSTEM MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperJ indo 
LCTTafJ.aL 
iCTTwfJ.aL 
iCTTaifJ.1}V 
iCTTafJ.1}V [ t I 
LCTTaCTaL 
iCTTff 
iCTTatO 
LCTTaCTo 
LCTTaCTo 
LCTTaTaL 
iCTTT;TaL 
iCTTatTO 
iCTTaCT8w 
LCTTaTo 
LCTTaCT80v 
iCTTT;CT8ov 
iCTTaLCT80v 
LCTTaCT80v 
LCTTaCT80v 
LCTTaCT80v 
iCTTT;CT8ov 
iCTTaiCT81}v 
iCTTaCT8wv 
iCTTaCT81}v 
iCTTafJ.E8a 
iCTTwfJ.E8a 
iCTTaifJ.E8a 
iCTTafJ.E8a 
LCTTaCT8E 
iCTTrw8E 
iCTTatCT8€ 
LCTTaCT8E 
LCTTaCT8E 
LCTTaVTaL 
iCTTwvTaL 
iCTTatVTO 
iCTTaCT8wv 
LCTTavTo 
infinitive: 
LCTTaCT8aL 
participle: 
iCTTafJ.Wo~. -1}. -ov 
L(TTy//.U: STRONG (INTRANSITIVE) AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
{CTT1}V 
CTTW 
CTTai1}v 
{CTT1}'> 
CTTff~ 
CTTai1}'> 
CTTT;8L 
{CTT1} 
CTTff 
CTTai1} 
CTT-qTW 
{CTT1}TOV 
CTTT;TOV 
CTTaiTov 
CTTT;TOV 
€CTT1}T1}V 
CTT'ryTOV 
CTTaLT1}V 
CTT-qTWV 
ECTT1}fJ.W 
CTTWfJ.W 
CTTai1}fJ.w 
ECTT1}n 
CTTT;n 
CTTaL1}n 
CTTT;n 
(CTT1}CTaV 
CTTWCTL(V) 
CTTaLW 
CTTaVTWV 
infinitive: 
CTTT;vaL 
participle: 
CTTa~. CTTuCTa. CTTav 

Paradigms: MI-Verbs 
375 
ovvap.aL (hri(TTap.ad: PRESENT SYSTEM MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj indo 
lnlvaj.l.aL 
lnlvwj.l.aL 
OVVaLj.l.71V 
EOVVQ.j.l.71V 
ovvauaL. lnlvCf. or 
lnlv77 
lnlvaw 
E1rLUTaUO or 
Elnlvw 
ovv77 
E1rLuTw 
(~7TLUTW or 
(E7TLurauaL or E7TLUTCf) 
~7TLurauo) 
OVVaTaL 
lnlv71TaL 
lnlvaLTo 
E7TLUTQ.UOW 
EovvaTo 
lnlvauOov 
lnlv71uOov 
lnlvaLuOov 
E7TLurauOov 
ElnlvauOov 
lnlvauOov 
lnlv71uOov 
ovvaLu071v 
E7TLUTQ.UOWV 
EOVVQ.U071V 
OvvQ.j.l.fOa 
OVVwj.l.fOa 
OVVaLj.l.fOa 
EOvvQ.j.l.fOa 
ovvauOf 
lnlv71u8f 
lnlvaLuOf 
E7TLUTaUOf 
ElnlvauOf 
ovvavTaL 
lnlvwvTaL 
ovvawTo 
E7TLUTQ.UOWV 
ElnlvavTo 
infinitive: 
lnlvauOaL (E7TLUTaUOaL) 
participle: 
ovvQ.j.l.wo~. -71. -ov (E7TLUTQ.j.l.WO~. -71. -OV) 
OELKVVP.L: PRESENT SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj indo 
OdKVVj.l.L 
OELKVVW 
OHKVVOLj.l.L 
EOfLKVVV 
OfLKVV~ 
OHKvv77~ 
OHKVVOL~ 
OfLKVV 
EOfLKVV~ 
OfLKVVUL(V) 
OHKvv77 
OHKVVOL 
OHKVVTW 
EOfLKVV 
OfLKVVTOV 
OHKVV71TOV 
OHKVVOLTOV 
OfLKVVTOV 
EOELKVVTOV 
OfLKVVTOV 
OHKVVT/TOV 
oHKVVOLT71V 
OHKVVTWV 
EOHKVVT71V 
OfLKVVj.l.W 
OHKVVWj.l.W 
OHKVVOLj.l.W 
EOfLKVVj.l.W 
OfLKVVH 
OHKVV71H 
OHKVVOLH 
OfLKVVH 
EodKVVH 
OHKVV(iUL(V) 
OHKVVWUL(V) 
OHKVVOLW 
OHKVVVTWV 
EOfLKvvuav 
infinitive: 
oHKvvvaL 
participle: 
OHKVV~. oHKvvua. OHKVVV 
oEiKVVP.L: PRESENT SYSTEM MIDDLE-PASSIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
imperj indo 
OfLKVVj.l.aL 
OHKVVwj.l.aL 
oHKVVOLj.l.71V 
EOHKVVj.l.71V 
OfLKvvuaL 
OHKvv77 
OHKVVOW 
OfLKVVUO 
EOfLKVVUO 
OfLKVVTaL 
OHKvv71TaL 
OHKVVOLTO 
OHKVVUOW 
EOfLKVVTO 
OfLKVVUOOV 
OHKVV71UOOV 
OHKVVOLUOOV 
OfLKVVUOOV 
EOfLKVVUOOV 
OfLKVVUOOV 
OHKVV71UOOV 
oHKVVOLU071V 
OHKVVUOWV 
EOHKVVU071v 
OHKVVj.l.fOa 
OHKVVwj.l.fOa 
OHKVVOLj.l.fOa 
EOHKVVj.l.fOa 
OELKVVUOE 
OHKVV71UOf 
OHKVVOLUOf 
OfLKVVUOf 
EOfLKVVUOf 
OfLKvvvTaL 
OHKvvwvTaL 
OHKVVOWTO 
OfLKVVUOWV 
EOfLKVVVTO 
infinitive: 
OfLKvvuOaL 
participle: 
OHKVVj.l.WO~. -71. -OV 

376 
APPENDIX THREE 
t:i!J.L (BE): PRESENT SYSTEM AND FUTURE 
pres. indo 
pres. subj. pres. optative 
imperat. 
imperJ 
Jut. 
ELfJ-i 
~ 
EL1/V 
~ 
~ 
(uofJ-at 
W 
1/ or 1/V 
~ 
~ 
EL1/~ 
Lu8t 
.;ju8a 
(uTI 
H 
n~ 
~(]"Ti(v) 
~ 
(UTW 
~ 
((]"Tat 
TI 
H1/ 
1/V 
~(]"TOV 
~ 
~ 
EL1/TOV 
(UTOV 
~ 
(uEu8ov 
1/TOV 
HTOV 
or 
1/(]"TOV 
~(]"TOV 
~ 
ELT1/V 
(UTWV 
7](]"T1/V 
(uEu8ov 
1/TOV 
H1/T1/V 
~ 
~ 
EL1/fJ-W 
~ 
~uofJ-E8a 
EUfJ-W 
WfJ-W 
HfJ-W 
1/fJ-W 
~(]"Tf. 
~ 
~ 
((]"TE 
~ 
~ 
(uEuBE 
1/H 
HH 
H1/H 
1/H or 1/(]"TE 
ELUi(v) 
~Ut(v) 
~ 
Ei'1/uav 
EtTTWL' 
~ 
(UOVTat 
HEV 
1/uav 
infinitives: 
Eivat, (Jut.) (uEu8at 
participles: 
wv. owa. OV, (Jut.) ~UOfJ-wo~. -1/. -ov 
t:LJ.LL (GO): PRESENT SYSTEM 
indo 
subj. 
opt. 
imperat. 
imperfect 
~ 
.. 
LOLfJ-L or Loi 1/V 
~ 
HfJ-t 
tw 
Tla 
or 
~ 
LTI~ 
LOt~ 
L8t 
1/Hu8a 
H 
Eiut(v) 
tTl 
tOL 
tTW 
nHV 
LTOV 
LOLTOV 
LTOV 
~ 
t1/TOV 
T/TOV 
LTOV 
L1/TOV 
LoiT1/V 
LTWV 
nT1/V 
LWfJ-W 
LOLfJ-W 
~ 
tfJ-W 
TlfJ-w 
LOtH 
~ 
tH 
t1/H 
tH 
TlH 
La.ITL(v) 
LwuL(v) 
LOLt:V 
LOVTWV 
~ 
Tluav 
infinitive: 
Lf.VaL 
participle: 
LWV. Lovua. LOV 
CP'1J.LL: PRESENT SYSTEM 
indo 
subj. 
opt. 
imperat. 
imperJ 
CP1/fJ-i 
cpw 
cpai1/v 
(cp1/V 
CPIi~ 
CPff~ 
cpai1/~ 
cpa8t or cpa8i 
(cp1/u8a or (CP1/~ 
cp1/ui(v) 
CPff 
cpai1/ 
cpaTw 
(cp1/ 
cpaTov 
CPr,TOV 
cpa'irov 
cpaTov 
(cpaTov 
cpaTov 
CPr,TOV 
cpaiT1/V 
cpaTwv 
~cpaT1/V 
cpafJ-f.v 
cpwfJ-W 
cpa'ifJ-w 
(cpafJ-w 
or cpai1/fJ-w 
cpaTf. 
CPr,H 
cpai1/H 
cpaH 
(cpaH 
cpa.ui(v) 
CPWUL(V) 
cpa'iw 
cpavTwv 
(cpauav 
or cpai 1/uav 
infinitive: 
cpavaL 
participle: 
(poetic) cpa~. cpaua. cpav 

Paradigms: MI-Verbs 
377 
indicative 
t'.f3TfV 
t'.f3Tf~ 
t'.f3Tf 
t'.f3TfTOV 
if3r/TTfV 
t'.f3TfjJ.w 
t'.f3TfH 
t'.f3Tfuav 
infinitive: 
participle: 
indicative 
~YVWV 
~YVW~ 
t'.yvw 
t'.YVWTOV 
iyvOJTTfv 
t'.yvw/lW 
t'.yvwH 
t'.yvwuav 
infinitive: 
participle: 
indicative 
EaAwv 
or 
EaAw~ 
EaAw 
EaAwTov 
EaAwTTfV 
EaAw/lW 
EaAwH 
EaAwuav 
infinitive: 
participle: 
(3aivw: AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
subjunctive 
optative 
f3w 
f3aiTfv 
f3fis 
f3aiTf~ 
f3fi 
f3aiTf 
f3fiTOV 
f3ai TfTOV or f3aL TOV 
f3fiTOV 
f3aL r/TTfV or f3ai TTfV 
f3w/lW 
f3ai TfjJ.W or f3aL/lw 
f3fiH 
f3aiTfH 
f3wUL(V) 
f3aLw 
f3fivaL 
f3as. f3uua. f3av 
ytYVWO"KW: AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
subjunctive 
optative 
yvw 
YVOLTfV 
yvip~ 
yVOLTf~ 
yvip 
yvoiTf 
YVWTOV 
YVOiTfTOV or YVOLTOV 
YVWTOV 
YVOLr/TTfV or YVOiTTfV 
yvw/lW 
yvoiTf/lw or YVOL/lW 
yvwH 
YVOLTfH 
YVWUL(V) 
YVOLW 
yvwvaL 
yvov~. yvovua. yvov 
aAio"KOllaL: AORIST SYSTEM 
subjunctive 
optative 
7jAwv 
aAw 
aAoiTfv 
7jAw~ 
aAip~ 
aAoiTf~ 
7jAw 
aAip 
aAoiTf 
7jAwTov 
aAwTOv 
dual not found 
r,AWTTfV 
aAwTov 
imperative 
f3fi8L or -f3ii 
f3r/TW 
f3fiTOV 
f3r/TWV 
f3fiH 
f3avTwv 
imperative 
yvw8L 
YVOJTW 
YVWTOV 
yvwTwv 
yvwH 
YVOVTWV 
imperative 
not found 
7jAwjJ.W 
aAw/lw 
plural not found 
7jAwH 
aAwH 
7jAwuav 
aAwuL(v) 
aAwvaL 
aAov~. aAovua. aAov 

378 
APPENDIX THREE 
ovw: AORIST SYSTEM ACTIVE 
indicative 
subjunctive 
optative 
imperative 
fOVV 
ovw 
OVOLJ.l.L 
fOVS 
olr[1s 
OVOLS 
OVeL 
fOV 
olr[1 
OVOL 
OVTW 
fOVTOV 
olrT/Tov 
OVOLTOV 
OVTOV 
Eovn/V 
OVYJTOV 
ovoiTYJv 
OVTWV 
fOVJ.l.fV 
OVWJ.l.fV 
OVOLJ.l.fV 
fOVTE 
OVYJTE 
OVOLTE 
OVTE 
fOVrmv 
ovwcn(v) 
OVOLfV 
OVVTWV 
infinitive: 
ovvaL 
participle: 
ovs. oVeTa. ovv 
olba: PERFECT SYSTEM 
indo 
subj. 
optative 
impero 
pluperfect indo 
oloa 
ELOW 
dod. YJV 
"0 
?J YJ 
or 
fjOELV 
oleTea 
dOj}s 
dod. YJS 
LeTeL 
fjoYJeTea 
fjom 
olo.(v) 
ELOj} 
dOELYJ 
LeTTW 
fjOELV 
fjOEL 
LeTTOV 
ELOfjTOV 
dOELTOV 
LeTTOV 
fjOETOV 
LeTTOV 
ELOfjTOV 
dOELTYJV 
LCTTWV 
iJOET7)V 
ELOWJ.l.fV 
ELOELJ.l.fV 
or dOELYJJ.l.fV 
fjOEJ.l.fV 
~ 
LeTJ.l.fV 
?JeTJ.l.fV 
raTE 
dofjTE 
dOELTE 
dOELYJTE 
fjOETE 
~ 
LeTTE 
TJeTTE 
LeTCiCTL(V) 
ELOweTL(V) 
ELOELfV 
dOEL-T/eTav 
LcrTwv 
fjoEeTaV 
~ 
TJeTav 
future (perfect) indicative: 
ELeTOJ.l.aL 
infinitive: 
ELOEvaL 
participle: 
ELOWS. dOvLa. ELMs 

Paradigms: Participles in -lJT-
379 
DECLENSION OF PARTICIPLES IN -VT-
PARTICIPLES IN -wv. -oV<Ta. -ov 
PARTICIPLES IN -wv. -ov<Ta. -ovv 
(present and future. -EW or-Ow 
(present and future. uncontracted) 
contraction) 
rnasc. 
fern. 
neuter 
masc. 
fern. 
neuter 
aywv 
ayovlTa 
ayov 
j.l.WOlV 
j.l.WOVlTa 
j.l.WOVV 
ayovToe; 
ayovlT7/e; 
ayovToe; 
j.l.WOVVTOe; 
j.l.W01)IT1/e; 
j.l.WOVVTOe; 
ayovTL 
ayovlT'{I 
ayovTL 
j.l.WOVVTL 
j.l.WOVITT! 
j.l.WOVVTL 
ayovTa 
ayovlTav 
ayov 
j.l.WoVVTa 
j.l.WOVlTav 
j.l.WOVV 
ayovH 
ayovlTa 
ayovn 
j.l.woVvn 
j.l.wovlTa 
j.l.WOVvn 
ayovToLV 
ayovITaLV 
ayovToLV 
j.l.WOVVTOLV 
j.l.f.VOVlTaLV 
j.l.WOVVTOLV 
ayovHe; 
ayovlTaL 
ayovTa 
j.l.f.VOVvne; 
j.l.WOVlTaL 
j.l.WOVVTa 
ayovTwv 
ayovITOlv 
ayovTwv 
j.l.WOVVTWV 
j.l.woV(rOlv 
j.l.WOVVTWV 
ayovITL(V) 
ayovlTaLe; 
ayovITL(V) 
j.l.WOVITL(V) 
j.l.WOVlTaLe; 
j.l.WOVITL(V) 
ayovTae; 
ayovITae; 
ayovTa 
j.l.WOVVTae; 
j.l.wovlTae; 
j.l.WOVVTa 
PARTICIPLES IN -wv. -wlTa. -wv 
PARTICIPLES IN -wv. -ovlTa. -ov 
(present andfuture active. -aw 
(strong aorist active [thematic verbs] and 
contraction) 
present active of dJ.l.{ and ELJ.l.L) 
opOlv 
opOllTa 
opOlv 
AL71'WV 
AL7rOVlTa 
AL71'OV 
opOlvToe; 
0pwIT1/e; 
opOlvToe; 
AL71'OVTOe; 
AL71'OVIT1/e; 
AL71'OVTOe; 
OPOlVTL 
OPWITT! 
OpOlVTL 
AL71'OVTL 
AL71'OVITT! 
AL71'OVTL 
OPOlVTa 
opOllTav 
opOlv 
AL71'OVTa 
AL7rOVlTaV 
AL71'OV 
opOlvn 
opwlTa 
opOlvn 
AL71'OVn 
AL71'OVlTa 
AL71'OVn 
OPWVTOLV 
opwITaLV 
OPWVTOLV 
AL71'OVTOLV 
AL71'OVITaLV 
AL71'OVTOLV 
opOlvne; 
OpOllTaL 
OpOlVTa 
AL71'OVHe; 
AL7rOVlTaL 
AL71'OVTa 
OPWVTWV 
OpWITOlV 
OpWVTWV 
AL71'OVTWV 
AL7rOVITOlV 
AL71'OVTWV 
°POlITL(V) 
OpWlTaLe; 
°POlITL(V) 
AL71'OVITL(V) 
AL71'OVlTaL e; 
AL71'OVITL(V) 
opOlvTae; 
0pwITae; 
OPOlVTa 
AL71'OVTae; 
AL71'OVITae; 
AL71'OVTa 















































